Monthly Report
May 2021
Vol. 73  
No 5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 3512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 16 a.m. on 19 May 2021.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
The macroeconomic implications of the American Rescue Plan  ..........................................  16
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  26
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  27
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  41
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  51
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  62
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  62
Public finances in the euro area and the European Union  ..................................................  74Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
5

Overview
Light at the end of the 
tunnel 
The pandemic maintained a firm grip on the 
global economy in the first quarter of 2021 as 
well. In many places, new waves of infections 
and tighter containment measures set the re -
covery back. Services were once again particu -
larly affected. Towards the end of the reporting 
period, supply shortages were a drag on indus -
try, which had initially experienced a lively ex -
pansion. This also drove industrial producer 
prices up. On the whole, the global economy 
continued its recovery in the first quarter, yet at 
a distinctly reduced pace. In the euro area, 
gross domestic product (GDP) was even down 
by 0.6% from an already weak preceding quar -
ter. Japan and the United Kingdom likewise ex -
perienced a marked drop in activity. By con -
trast, the economic recovery took off again in 
the United States, where many restrictions 
were already lifted over the course of the first 
quarter and extensive stimulus packages gave 
the economy an additional boost. In China, 
where the pandemic has already been under 
control for quite some time now, the economy 
continued to recover, whereas some other 
emerging market economies suffered from the 
economic fallout caused by new waves of in -
fections.
The industrial sector was one of the main rea -
sons why the global economy remained on a 
path of expansion in the final quarter of 2020 
and first quarter of 2021, despite new waves of 
infections. It benefited considerably from the 
pandemic- induced shifts in demand. Since its 
drastic slump in the spring of last year, global 
industrial production had already grown sub -
stantially, surpassing its pre- crisis level in De -
cember 2020. At last report, however, the up -
turn in manufacturing was running into supply- 
side bottlenecks. Purchasing managers the 
world over complained about rising delivery 
times. In addition, the strong demand for in -dustrial goods caused commodity prices to in -
crease considerably, and transport costs rose 
steeply. This cost surge most recently affected 
industrial producer prices perceptibly and will 
probably have an impact on consumer prices, 
too.
In the meantime, vaccination campaigns have 
taken off in many places, and in a great num -
ber of advanced economies infection rates 
have flattened markedly. It appears that, as 
from the third quarter if not beforehand, it will 
be possible to open the economy in those 
places on a broad scale, which would lend sig -
nificant momentum to the global economic 
recovery  .
The international financial markets reflected 
this outlook for an economic recovery. Market 
participants’ confidence was boosted by pro -
gress in vaccinations, positive business cycle 
signals and an accommodative monetary policy 
stance. Given simultaneous fiscal policy stimu -
lus – particularly in the United States – yields on 
benchmark government bonds rose world -
wide, at times distinctly, via the interest rate 
linkage with the United States. This rise in yields 
occurred in a setting of calm markets and high 
liquidity. A key factor behind the increase in 
risk- free interest rates was mounting inflation 
expectations, which continued to pick up from 
their low in March 2020 on both sides of the 
Atlantic. Real interest rates therefore rose less 
strongly, on the whole, than nominal govern -
ment bond yields. In January 2021, yields on 
euro area corporate bonds initially hit all- time 
lows before then rebounding as well. They 
nonetheless continued to reflect very favour -
able financing conditions as this report went to 
press. The upbeat setting led to strong price 
gains in the equity markets. Alongside the 
aforementioned factors, this also reflected 
enter prises’ higher profit expectations and in -
vestors’ high risk appetite, which dampened 
demand in the foreign exchange markets for Subdued start to 
year for global 
economy
Supply- side 
bottlenecks a 
drag on global 
industrial upturnVaccination 
progress  holds 
out hope for 
opening
Financial 
markets  reflect -
ing more favour -
able economic 
outlookDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
6

some currencies regarded as relatively safe. 
Consequently, the yen and Swiss franc lost 
value in effective terms. The euro also depreci -
ated on a weighted average, though its losses 
were small by comparison. Given rising yields 
on US Treasuries, the effective exchange rate of 
the US dollar, which also often depreciates 
when risk appetites rise, remained virtually un -
changed. By contrast, the pound sterling bene -
fited from the trade and cooperation agree -
ment with the EU reached at the end of 2020 
and the United Kingdom’s successes in its vac -
cination campaign.
Following its March and April monetary policy 
meetings, the Governing Council of the Euro -
pean Central Bank (ECB) expected purchases 
under the pandemic emergency purchase pro -
gramme (PEPP) over the second quarter to be 
conducted at a significantly higher pace than 
during the first few months of the year. This 
position was based on an assessment of devel -
opments in financing conditions since the be -
ginning of the year, especially of the rise in 
market rates over this period. At the same time, 
the Governing Council reaffirmed its decision 
taken in December 2020 to continue to con -
duct net purchases under the PEPP with a total 
envelope of €1,850 billion until at least the end 
of March 2022 and, in any case, until it judges 
that the coronavirus crisis phase is over. If 
favour  able finan cing conditions can be main -
tained with smaller asset purchase flows over -
all, the envelope of €1,850 billion need not be 
used in full. Equally, the envelope can also be 
increased if required.
In the first quarter of 2021, the broad monetary 
aggregate M3 once again went up steeply on 
account of the impact of the coronavirus pan -
demic and the economic policy responses. Al -
though monetary dynamics slowed down con -
siderably compared with the situation at the 
outbreak of the coronavirus crisis a year ago, 
the annual growth rate of the broad monetary 
aggregate M3, at 10.1% at the end of March, 
remained high. Precautionary considerations 
on the part of households and enterprises and the persistently low level of interest rates en -
couraged these sectors to continue to accumu -
late, in particular, highly liquid overnight de -
posits. On the counterparts side, the Eurosys -
tem’s continued asset purchases boosted mon -
etary growth. Moreover, banks’ lending to the 
domestic private sector once again registered 
significant inflows on balance. It was particu -
larly loans to non- financial corporations which 
picked up substantially in some Member States 
during the quarter under review; households’ 
demand for loans for house purchase also re -
mained lively. At the same time, the banks par -
ticipating in the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) re -
ported mostly tightening their credit standards 
due to elevated risk related to the pandemic.
Aggregate output in Germany fell strongly in 
the first quarter of 2021. According to the Fed -
eral Statistical Office’s flash estimate, real GDP 
was 1.7% down on the quarter after seasonal 
and calendar adjustment. This meant that eco -
nomic activity again fell short of the pre- crisis 
level of the fourth quarter of 2019 by almost 
5%. The setback can be attributed in large part 
to the stricter and more prolonged measures to 
protect against coronavirus compared with the 
preceding quarter. In particular, this hit a num -
ber of services sectors hard. Moreover, indus -
trial output stagnated, and construction output 
even declined, after both sectors had provided 
considerable support to the economy in the 
previous quarter. Various factors were at work 
here. In the construction sector, the return of 
the VAT rates to their higher levels at the start 
of the year and the unfavourable weather con -
ditions in January and February had a dampen -
ing effect. In industry, bottlenecks in the supply 
of intermediate goods led to the recovery stall -
ing, despite a further increase in demand. The 
automotive sector experienced delays in pro -
duction owing to a lack of semiconductors.
On the demand side, it was probably, above all, 
private consumption which declined strongly in 
the first quarter. A host of opportunities for 
consumption of services were either partially or 
entirely unavailable owing to the coronavirus Monetary 
policy : ECB Gov -
erning Council 
expecting higher 
monthly PEPP 
purchases in Q2
Monetary 
dynamics still 
strong on 
account of 
coronavirus 
pandemicGerman eco -
nomic output 
down strongly 
in Q1 2021
Strong signs of 
slowdown, 
mainly in private 
consumptionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
7

mitigation measures. In addition, the return of 
VAT rates to their higher level dampened de -
mand for consumer durables such as motor 
vehicles . Purchases of such goods had been 
brought forward to the second half of the pre -
vious year. Businesses probably reduced invest -
ment in new machinery and equipment in the 
first quarter as well, albeit on a much smaller 
scale. On the other hand, German enterprises 
continued to benefit from dynamic foreign de -
mand and significantly increased their exports.
The depressed level of private consumer ex -
penditure also dampened demand for con -
sumer credit. Nonetheless, the lending business 
of banks in Germany grew dynamically on the 
whole, for two reasons. One was that house -
hold demand for loans for house purchase re -
mained consistently strong. The other was that 
loans to non- financial corporations gained sig -
nificant momentum compared with the two 
preceding quarters. This was caused by a grow -
ing need for funding on the part of those en -
terprises not directly impacted negatively by 
the coronavirus crisis, such as enterprises in the 
construction and real estate sectors and service 
providers operating in the field of digitalisation 
and research and development activities. The 
upswing in global industry has also acted to 
stimulate investment by export- oriented sec -
tors. In addition, some banks had a heightened 
interest in lending business as well. They were 
still trying to reach, by the end- March reference 
date, their lending performance threshold set 
as the condition for the particularly attractive 
interest rate on TLTRO- III operations. On the 
whole, however, respondents to the BLS once 
again somewhat tightened their credit stand -
ards for loans to enterprises in the first quarter.
The labour market responded robustly to the 
prolonged mitigation measures in the first 
quarter. Both employment and unemployment 
held nearly steady at the level of the fourth 
quarter of last year. The effects of the lower 
economic output were largely cushioned by 
short- time work, which was again taken up on 
a much larger scale after the decline in the second half of 2020. As the mitigation meas -
ures first began to be eased in March and pro -
gress on vaccinations advanced, the labour 
market also saw a return of confidence in de -
velopments over the next few months.
Negotiated wages recorded only a moderate 
rise in the first three months of 2021. Including 
additional benefits, they were up by just 1.4% 
on the year in the first quarter. The increase in 
the fourth quarter of 2020 had still stood at 
2.6%. The most recently concluded new agree -
ments were a key factor behind this weaken -
ing. They initially provide for pay freezes of sev -
eral months at the start of the contracts, fol -
lowed by low wage increases only around one 
year into the contracts. In addition, one- off 
coronavirus special payments had been made 
in a number of sectors in the fourth quarter of 
last year. Wage bargainers restricted agreed 
wage increases in order to protect jobs. With 
short- time work having gone back up in the 
first quarter, actual earnings may even have 
fallen. As in the previous three quarters, wage 
drift is likely to have been clearly negative.
Consumer prices as measured by the Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) rose ex -
ceptionally strongly at the beginning of the 
year. On average for the months of January to 
March 2021, they increased by a seasonally ad -
justed 2.1% on the quarter, after having previ -
ously stagnated. The main reasons for this were 
the reversal on 1 January of the temporary VAT 
cut, but also measures contained in the climate 
package and the higher oil price. Overall, prices 
for all the main components of the HICP basket 
rose strongly, with the higher VAT rates in Janu -
ary 2021 being passed on in a more or less in -
verse manner to their reduction in July 2020. 
While the inflationary pressures for food, non- 
energy industrial goods and services normal -
ised again by March, energy prices continued 
to rise significantly, tracking crude oil prices.
The return to the higher VAT rates also had a 
clear impact on the annual increase in the HICP , 
with inflation up from -0.6% in the fourth quar -Fresh uptick in 
German banks’ 
loans to domes -
tic private sector
Labour market 
robustNegotiated 
wages up only 
moderately due 
to pandemic; 
actual earnings 
probably even 
down
Due primarily to 
return of higher 
VAT rates, con -
sumer prices at 
start of year up 
sharply on the 
quarter …
… and on the 
yearDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
8

ter of 2020 to 1.7% in the first quarter of 2021. 
Excluding energy and food, inflation increased 
from -0.1% to 1.8%. A statistical effect in con -
nection with the more extensive pandemic-  
related updates to the expenditure weights 
underlying the HICP , particularly in the case of 
package holiday prices, also played a role here.
The annual rate of inflation rose again slightly 
in April to 2.1%, compared with 2.0% in March. 
Energy inflation in particular increased sharply 
of late, but food inflation also picked up signifi -
cantly. By contrast, the core inflation rate ex -
cluding energy and food fell from 1.6% in 
March to 1.1%. However, a decisive factor here 
was the reduced contribution of the statistical 
effect for package holidays, which had pushed 
up the HICP rate significantly in the previous 
months.
In the coming months the rate of inflation is 
likely to continue on a slow upward trajectory 
at first. While the recent strong rise in the prices 
of non- energy commodities and transport costs 
is already having a very significant impact on 
input prices at the producer level, this develop -
ment is not feeding through directly to con -
sumer prices. Consumer prices are correlated 
more closely to producer prices for non- food 
consumer goods, which have thus far risen 
rather  moderately. Furthermore, distribution 
costs and margins are also major determinants 
of consumer prices. The upward pressure on 
prices in the earlier input stages is therefore 
likely to have merely a weakened and delayed 
impact on consumer prices. As far as headline 
HICP inflation is concerned, a significant factor 
is that the base effect resulting from the tem -
porary VAT cut will raise the annual rate as of 
July. However, this is likely to be almost com -
pletely obscured at first due to the statistical 
effect  for package holidays simultaneously hav -
ing a dampening impact for several months. At 
the end of the current year, however, this one- 
off effect will once again intensify inflationary 
pressures. As a result, the inflation rate could 
temporarily rise to 4%.German economic output is likely to grow 
again significantly in the second quarter of 
2021. The extent of this growth will depend 
largely on how heavily the containment meas -
ures weigh on the economy in comparison to 
the first quarter. As soon as the measures to 
protect against the coronavirus are successively 
loosened, activity in the affected services sec -
tors should pick up again considerably. The in -
dustrial sector is benefiting from strong de -
mand, with industrial orders recently seeing a 
further strong rise from their already elevated 
levels. Manufacturing firms have recently as -
sessed the business situation as having im -
proved again and have once more raised their 
production and export expectations. However, 
industrial output will probably continue to be 
subdued in the near future owing to bottle -
necks in the supply of intermediate goods. 
Output in the construction sector is likely to re -
bound once dampening one- off effects cease 
to apply. Business expectations brightened on a 
broad cross- sectoral basis. Rapid progress in 
the vaccination campaign opens the prospect 
of a considerable loosening of containment 
measures in the coming months. GDP could 
then grow strongly in the third quarter and ex -
ceed its pre- crisis level as early as the fourth 
quarter.
To date, the fiscal policy response in Germany 
has been flexible and, overall, targeted to the 
difficult crisis situation. Although, in some cases, 
the specific design and implementation of indi -
vidual measures are less than convincing, it 
should be borne in mind that action sometimes 
had to be taken fairly swiftly and subsequently 
fine- tuned as the pandemic unfolded, for ex -
ample.
Public finances have continued to significantly 
support the economy in 2021. The dedicated 
coronavirus assistance measures and the regu -
lar social systems are continuing to mitigate the 
economic fallout from the coronavirus crisis. To 
combat the pandemic, sizeable funds are being 
channelled into healthcare, for example for 
vaccinations and tests. Above and beyond that, Inflation rate in 
April up further 
due to energy 
and food
Inflation rate set 
to rise further 
and could tem -
porarily reach 
4% at end of 
yearEconomic 
output  likely to 
grow consider -
ably in second 
quarter
Targeted fiscal 
policy for the 
most part
Public finances 
again providing 
strong support 
to the economy 
in 2021Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
9

various structural measures are providing relief 
for households in particular; for example, the 
solidarity surcharge has been partially abol -
ished and child benefits have been raised sig -
nificantly.
Germany’s general government deficit could 
therefore approach around 6% of GDP this 
year, up from just over 4% in 2020. The bulk of 
the fiscal burdens presented by the crisis are 
being borne at the central government level. As 
things currently stand, however, it seems that 
the buffers in the Federal budget are very 
ample and far from being exhausted. Net bor -
rowing by central government in 2021 would 
therefore again be considerably lower than the 
very high budgeted figure.
As long as the pandemic-  related restrictions 
continue, targeted fiscal assistance will remain 
important. However, it is currently anticipated 
that the restrictions will increasingly be lifted as 
the year progresses. In 2022 it is likely that the 
deficit will then shrink considerably. The burden 
on public sector budgets will be relieved by the 
ongoing recovery in the German economy and 
the fact that numerous support measures will 
no longer be necessary and will be phased out; 
the fiscal policy stance is in this respect not re -
strictive.
With regard to the fiscal rules, there is much to 
be said for putting off a decision on whether 
the escape clauses should also remain activated 
in 2022 until later in the year. This applies in 
equal measure to the EU rules and the debt 
brake. This is because as the year progresses it 
will become much easier to assess whether the given escape clause is still necessary to over -
come the crisis. Due to the German general 
election, the 2022 Federal budget probably will 
not be adopted until next year in any case. Be -
sides, even without the exemptions, the fiscal 
rules provide scope for reducing deficits in a 
cyclically appropriate manner. For example, 
under the debt brake reserves can be used to 
comply with the ceilings. Under EU rules, expir -
ing assistance measures will be deemed to con -
stitute consolidation. It should therefore be 
possible for other Member States to meet the 
standard requirements as well. At least on the 
basis of the European Commission’s most re -
cent projection, use of the escape clause in 
2022 does not seem convincing.
The debt brake is sometimes criticised for hav -
ing excessively restricted government activities 
and spending in recent years. However, this is 
belied by the dynamic expenditure growth 
under the debt brake regime. For the coming 
years it even appears that non- interest expend -
iture as a share of GDP will reach new struc -
tural highs. The fiscal rules are not in any case 
designed to limit government spending. Rather, 
the rules are meant to keep the government 
budget in an agreed state of balance or to re -
vert it to such a state. This means matching 
revenue and expenditure and setting priorities. 
If funds for important future tasks are con -
sidered to be insufficient, various courses of ac -
tion are available. If the fiscal burden is not to 
be increased, say due to negative impacts on 
growth, the political priorities or adopted 
spending programmes would have to be re -
adjusted.Deficit likely to 
continue rising 
in 2021
Deficit expected 
to shrink consid -
erably in 2022
Decision on 
necessity of 
escape clause in 
2022 should 
wait until later 
this yearFiscal rules do 
not prevent add -
itional spending 
for future tasksDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
10

Global and European setting
Global economic 
developments 
The pandemic maintained a firm grip on the 
global economy in the first quarter of 2021 as 
well. In many places, new waves of infections 
and tighter containment measures set the re -
covery back. Services were once again particu -
larly affected. Towards the end of the reporting 
period, supply shortages were a drag on indus -
try, which had initially experienced a lively ex -
pansion. This also drove industrial producer 
prices up. On the whole, the global economy 
continued its recovery in the first quarter, yet at 
a distinctly reduced pace. In the euro area, 
gross domestic product (GDP) was even down 
by 0.6% from an already weak preceding quar -
ter. Japan likewise recorded a marked drop in 
activity, as did the United Kingdom: in spite of 
the rapid progress with its vaccination cam -
paign, infection counts were initially high, to 
which it responded by resorting to strict con -
tainment measures which were eased only in 
the last few weeks. By contrast, the economic 
recovery took off again in the United States, 
where many restrictions were already lifted 
over the course of the first quarter and exten -
sive stimulus packages gave the economy an 
additional boost. In China, where the pan -
demic has already been under control for quite 
some time now, the economy continued to re -
cover, whereas some other emerging market 
economies suffered from the economic fallout 
caused by new waves of infections.
On a global scale, the industrial sector con -
tinued to benefit considerably from the 
pandemic- induced shifts in demand. Since its 
drastic slump in the spring of last year, global 
industrial production had grown substantially, 
surpassing its pre- crisis level in December 2020. 
The recovery went particularly quickly in the 
Asian emerging market economies. Industrial 
production in China has even risen far above its 
old growth path. However, in the advanced economies as well, production at the close of 
the first quarter was only slightly below its end- 
2019 pre- crisis level. At last report, however, 
the upturn in manufacturing was running into 
supply- side bottlenecks. Purchasing managers 
the world over reported rising delivery times. 
Similar complaints were already being voiced in 
April 2020, when delays in deliveries of spare 
parts were attributable to containment meas -
ures and disruptions in international supply 
chains. This time, the reason seems to lie in the 
exceptionally high demand for specific inter -
mediate inputs such as, for instance, industrial 
commodities and semiconductors. Capacity 
constraints in maritime transport, which are 
also reflected in soaring freight rates, contrib -
uted to further delays.
On the back of strong demand for industrial 
goods, commodity prices picked up strongly Subdued start to 
year for global 
economy
Supply- side con -
straints a drag 
on global indus -
trial upturnIndicators of global industrial activity
Sources: CPB, IHS Markit, national data, Haver Analytics and 
Bundesbank calculations. 1 Bundesbank extrapolation of CPB 
data at the current end. 2 According to the global Purchasing 
Managers’  Index  for  manufacturing.  Inverted  scale;  values 
below  50  indicate  longer  delivery  times  compared  with  the 
previous period.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 202180859095100105110Seasonally adjusted
35
40
45
50Diffusion index, lin scale
Suppliers’ delivery times 2December 2019 = 100, log scale
Global industrial production1
Total
Advanced
economies
Emerging market
economiesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
11

following their pandemic- induced slump in the 
second quarter of 2020. On average, industrial 
commodities even cost around 80% more than 
prior to the outbreak of the pandemic. As this 
report went to press, oil prices, at US$68 per 
barrel of Brent crude oil, were roughly at the 
same level as prior to the crisis. In the last 
weeks of the reporting period, however, crude 
oil prices rose only slightly, as price- supporting 
and price- dampening factors broadly balanced 
each other out. Temporary production losses in 
some oil- producing countries and the brief 
blockage of the Suez Canal created upward 
price pressures. At the same time, the resur -
gence of the pandemic in some regions of the 
world curbed demand for crude oil, which 
dampened an upsurge of prices somewhat. 
However, vaccination progress caused the 
medium- term outlook for global oil demand to 
continue to brighten. Against this background, 
OPEC and its partners jointly decided to expand 
production moderately beginning in May 2021.The broadly based increase in commodity 
prices and the steep rise in transport costs 
manifested themselves in industrial producer 
prices, too, towards the end of the reporting 
period. The prices of intermediate products, in 
particular, rose considerably. It stands to reason 
that the cost surge will also have an impact on 
producer prices for final goods and then, fur -
ther downstream, on the final consumption 
stage. In the industrial countries as a group, 
the annual growth rate of consumer prices al -
ready strengthened significantly from 0.7% in 
December 2020 to 2% in March. Base effects 
in energy prices have been one of the main 
reasons for this to date. However, over the 
same period, even core inflation, which strips 
out energy and food, picked up by 0.3 percent -
age point to 1.4%. Consumer price inflation is 
likely to have continued to accelerate in April. 
The exceptional degree of fiscal expansion in 
some regions and the, in most cases, highly ac -
commodative stance of monetary policy are 
likely to keep price pressures pointing upwards 
over the longer term, too. However, once the 
current supply bottlenecks have been over -
come, more moderate inflation rates are ex -
pected to ensue.
How fast the global economy, especially ser -
vices, continues to recover will depend in key 
measure on the trajectory of the pandemic 
going forward and thus, in particular, on the 
success of the vaccination campaigns. In the 
United States and the United Kingdom, where 
roughly half the population has already re -
ceived at least one dose of the vaccine, many 
contact- intensive services have been reopened 
since March. The immediate strong rise in res -
taurant visits in these countries is a harbinger 
of a rapid recovery of economic activity in these 
sectors. As the vaccination campaigns make 
growing progress, other countries will probably 
follow their example, too. A broad opening- up 
of the euro area economy is expected as from 
the third quarter, if not sooner. For many emer -
ging market economies, however, the short-  
term outlook is not that rosy. Some countries 
are currently being overwhelmed by new, Commodity 
prices up 
strongly follow -
ing pandemic- 
induced slumpSigns of growing 
upward pressure 
on prices
Continued 
path of global 
recovery  
depends on 
vaccination  
progress World market prices for crude oil,
industrial commodities and
food and beverages
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., HWWI and Bundesbank cal-
culations. • Latest figures: average of 1 to 14 May 2021, or 
1 to 18 May 2021 for crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2125304050607080Monthly averages, log scale
80100120140160200240
801001201402016 = 100, US dollar basis
Industrial commoditiesCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
Food and beveragesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
12

severe  waves of infections. In addition, the 
scarcity of vaccines is stunting the progress of 
vaccination campaigns in many places. Accord -
ing to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), 
the majority of the population in the emerging 
market economies will not be vaccinated prior 
to 2022, which is also likely to put a perceptible 
dent in their countries’ growth outlook.1
Against this background, in its latest World 
Economic Outlook, the IMF has warned of the 
challenges potentially associated with inter -
nationally highly divergent paths of recovery. 
Although the IMF now expects strong global 
GDP growth of 6% this year and 4.4% next 
year, the upward revision of its global growth 
forecast is, however, attributable primarily to 
the improved outlook for industrial countries, 
especially the United States, whose GDP in 
2022 could already return to levels expected 
prior to the pandemic for that point in time. 
Most emerging market economies, however, 
are facing the prospect of sizeable drops in 
activity  over the same period. There are risks 
associated with such internationally highly 
diver  gent economic developments. For in -
stance, if growing overutilisation of capacity 
and rising inflation rates were to provoke a 
sudden spike in US yields, this could entail a 
global rise in yields. This could pose challenges 
particularly to highly indebted emerging mar -
ket economies where the recovery is lagging.2
China
The Chinese economy continued to ride high in 
the first quarter of 2021. According to an offi -
cial, seasonally adjusted estimate, real GDP was 
up by 0.6% on the quarter.3 Although this rep -
resented a marked weakening in the pace of 
economic activity, this is likely to have been due 
primarily to a merely temporary bout of con -
sumer restraint on the part of households out 
of renewed concerns that the pandemic could 
flare up again. In particular, many Chinese did 
not travel home for this year’s Chinese New 
Year’s festival, as they might have done other -wise, and also eschewed other consumer 
spending. Some services sectors therefore suf -
fered a marked damper in the quarter just 
ended.
Industry, however, continued its strong expan -
sion, driven by persistently buoyant foreign de -
mand. In the quarter just ended, revenues from 
goods exports (denominated in US dollars) 
were roughly 30% higher than their level im -
mediately preceding the outbreak of the 
coronavirus pandemic. Chinese export growth 
thus outpaced global trade growth by a con -
siderable margin. China’s export range – which 
includes, above all, IT equipment, consumer 
electronics and furnishings  – has apparently 
been a good fit to the needs of many people 
during the pandemic. In the aftermath of the IMF warns of 
challenges of 
internationally 
asynchronous 
recovery
Precautionary 
consumer 
restraint was 
a drag on 
expansion, …… yet industrial 
and export 
activity remain 
extremely livelyReal GDP in selected major economies
Sources: National Bureau of Statistics of China, Bureau of Eco-
nomic  Analysis,  Eurostat,  Office  for  National  Statistics  and 
Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021859095100Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
United KingdomUnited States
90951009095100105110
Euro areaChina
80859095100
1 See International Monetary Fund (2021a).
2 See International Monetary Fund (2021b).
3 The annual growth rate was an exceptionally high +18% 
since the Chinese economy had been massively impaired 
by the pandemic in the same period a year earlier.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
13

steep rise in capacity utilisation in industry and 
the massive increase in commodity prices, pro -
ducer prices in China increased markedly. Con -
sumer prices, on the other hand, more or less 
stayed put at their previous year’s level in the 
quarter just ended.
Other selected emerging 
market  economies
The economic recovery in India was probably 
continuing to firm in the first quarter when, 
over the last weeks of the reporting period, the 
country was struck by a second, severe wave of 
the pandemic. The regional authorities im -
posed extensive containment measures in re -
sponse to the rapidly escalating health crisis. In 
some cases, even industrial firms were shut 
down. On the whole, it is to be feared that the 
Indian economy’s recovery will suffer a severe 
setback. Although the vaccination campaign is 
being vigorously pursued, it is likely to drag on 
for some months to come owing to the size of 
the population. At its last meeting in mid-  April, 
the central bank kept its policy rates unchanged 
and also announced a government bond pur -
chase programme. At 4.3% in April 2021, the 
inflation rate remained within the monetary 
policy target band of 2% to 6%.The economic recovery in Brazil is likely to have 
made only little progress at the beginning of 
the year. Adjusted for seasonal effects, indus -
trial production even fell slightly short of its 
level in the final quarter of 2020. However, re -
cord agricultural harvests and higher commod -
ity prices caused export revenues to surge. As 
regards services, the available indicators are 
pointing to only moderate growth. One pos -
sible factor is that sharply rising infection 
counts led some states to expand restrictions 
on public life once again. Despite the progress 
being made in the vaccination campaign, the 
pandemic situation remained tense in the last 
few weeks of the reporting period. In response 
to rapidly accelerating consumer price inflation, 
which climbed to 6.8% in April, the central 
bank hiked its policy rate in two increments of 
75 basis points each to 3.5%.
The Russian economy continued to recover at a 
measured pace. Having contracted in the final 
quarter of 2020 by as much as 1¾% compared 
to a year earlier, real GDP was down by 1% on 
the year in the quarter just ended, according to 
a preliminary official estimate. Manufacturing 
output continued to rise, whereas, under the 
agreements with OPEC, a lid was kept on oil 
production. However, the sharp rise in oil prices 
reduced the export revenue shortfalls. Activity 
in the services sectors picked up substantially in 
the past few months amidst reduced infection 
counts yet continued to fall, in some cases, 
perceptibly short of the previous year’s level. 
Consumer price inflation strengthened to 5.5% 
on the year in the first quarter. Since the begin -
ning of the year, the central bank has hiked its 
policy rate by 75 basis points to 5%.
United States
Whereas the recovery process in many econ -
omies suffered a setback in the first quarter, the 
upswing persisted in the United States. Accord -
ing to the preliminary estimate, real GDP in -
creased by 1.6% after seasonal adjustment 
compared with the final quarter of 2020. But Indian economy 
likely to suffer 
severe setback 
owing to new 
pandemic waveDamper on 
recovery in 
Brazil 
Russian 
economy  
continuing  
to recover
Strong growth 
thanks to fiscal 
stimulus, 
amongst other 
factorsChina’s goods exports*
Sources: China’s General Administration of Customs, CPB and 
Bundesbank calculations.* On the basis of revenues in US dol-
lars. 1 Volume index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2150607080901001101201301402019 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
Memo item:
Global goods exports
excluding China1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
14

for the severe winter weather which led to 
considerable cutbacks in production in parts of 
the southern United States, growth would 
probably have been even stronger. The US 
economy benefited, for one thing, from suc -
cesses in the fight against the pandemic which 
encouraged many states to ease their contain -
ment measures. For another, the strong eco -
nomic growth also reflected the effects of US 
fiscal policy. The economic stimulus programme 
which had already been adopted at the end of 
2020 was topped by the passage in March by 
the new administration of an even larger pack -
age (see box on pp. 16 ff.). The measures ex -
panded households’ spending scope; new one- 
off payments caused their disposable income 
to spike in January and March. Private con -
sumption rose accordingly strongly in the first 
quarter. Government demand likewise picked 
up considerably. In addition, business invest -
ment was once again stepped up distinctly. 
However, production was not quite able to 
keep pace with the lively domestic final de -
mand. Firms therefore destocked their inven -
tories and increased their imports markedly. 
Given that the economies of many US trading 
partners were more on the sluggish side, for -
eign business provided no impetus. On the 
whole, the US economy has thus nearly re -
turned to pre- crisis levels.
According to the latest economic indicators, 
the US economy remained on a growth track at 
the change of quarter. Purchasing managers at 
services and manufacturing firms continued to 
report strong increases in production, and the 
situation in the labour market likewise im -
proved further in April. In the coming months, 
the extraordinary fiscal policy expansion is set 
to support economic activity, as is the large-  
scale reopening of the economy which has 
been promised for the beginning of the third 
quarter, if not sooner. The growing utilisation 
of aggregate production capacity is also likely 
to push up headline inflation, especially since 
the profit margins of many producers have 
probably recently been placed under consider -
able pressure by rising costs of intermediate in -puts. In the period up to April, the inflation rate 
as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) 
climbed to 4.2%, and the core inflation rate ex -
cluding energy and food prices to 3.0%. Fac -
tors here included not only base effects and 
price normalisations but also steep increases in 
prices for some services in the aftermath of the 
easing of restrictions. In addition, the prices of 
used cars rose sharply, which may be associ -
ated with production stoppages at car manu -
facturers. This means that the currently high in -
flation rates are due primarily to temporary fac -
tors. The extremely expansionary stance of US 
fiscal policy, however, is set to keep supporting 
inflation. The US Federal Reserve, classifying 
the strengthening of inflation at the end of 
April as temporary, announced that it would 
maintain its accommodative monetary policy 
stance for the foreseeable future.
Japan
As a result of pandemic- induced restrictions, 
Japan’s economy got the new year off to a 
weak start. According to the initial official esti -
mate, real GDP in the first quarter fell by a sea -
sonally adjusted 1.3% on the previous quarter, 
in which it had grown by 2.8%. The main fac -
tor behind the GDP contraction was private 
consumption: households cut back on their Outlook likewise 
favourable
Considerable 
contraction 
of economic 
outputPrivate consumption and income
in the United States
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis and Haver Analytics.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 202111121314151617181920In trillion 2012 US$, chain-linked, seasonally adjusted, monthly, 
annualised
Private consumptionDisposable incomeDisbursements of one-off transfers
to householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
15

The macroeconomic implications of the 
American Rescue Plan
US fi  scal policy has remained extremely ac-
commodative under the new Biden Admin-
istration. Less than two months after Presi-
dent Biden took offi   ce, a new stimulus 
package, the American Rescue Plan, was 
passed. Its scope even dwarfs that of the 
last fi  scal package just adopted at the end 
of 2020.1 According to estimates by the 
nonpartisan Congressional Budget Offi   ce 
(CBO), the additional burdens on public 
fi  nan ces could amount to nearly US$1.9 tril-
lion, or just under 9% of US annual GDP .2 
The spending will be on the following 
items, in particular: new direct payments to 
households, a temporary increase in un-
employment benefi  ts and tax relief for fam-
ilies, but also funds for state and local gov-
ernments, for schools, and for combatting 
the virus. Owing to the short- term nature of 
many of the provisions, the lion’s share of 
the funds are likely to be disbursed this year 
already.3 The US administration hopes that 
these measures will cushion the fi  nancial 
impact of the pandemic and simultaneously 
pave the way for a sustainable economic 
recovery. Critics, however, are pointing to 
the risks of an overheating of the US econ-
omy, rising infl  ation and higher interest 
rates.4 The international spillover effects of 
the US fi  scal package are also controversial.
This box analyses the likely macroeconomic 
effects of the fi  scal package using simula-
tion studies. The simulations are performed 
using not only NiGEM, the semi- structural 
model of the National Institute of Economic 
and Social Research (NIESR), but also EAGLE, 
the dynamic stochastic general equilibrium 
model developed by Eurosystem experts.5 
Both models enable a fairly detailed repre-
sentation of the measures.6 Since they take 
into account multiple countries and regions 
of the world, inferences about the inter-national spillover effects can also be drawn 
on the basis of the simulations.
The simulation results consistently show 
that the new fi  scal package is likely to de-
liver a considerable stimulus to the US econ-
omy in the short term. This year, real GDP 
could be between 2½% and just under 3% 
higher than if fi  scal policy remained un-
changed. This would more than close the 
US output gap.7 Domestic infl  ationary pres-
sures therefore increase markedly in the 
simulations because, amongst other things, 
a US monetary policy response to accelerat-
ing infl  ation is ruled out until 2022.8 Over-
all, in both simulations, annual US con-
1 Estimates put the fi  scal costs of the stimulus package 
introduced in December 2020 to extend or renew 
major crisis response measures in the short term at just 
over 4% of gross domestic product (GDP).
2 The estimates refer to the federal budget. The model 
calculations provide for slightly weaker stimulus since it 
is assumed that the transfers will only be partially dis-
bursed to state and local governments. The CBO has 
also applied similar assumptions in the recent past. For 
more information, see Seliski et al. (2020).
3 The CBO expects 63% of the outlays to occur this fi  s-
cal year (i.e. in the second or third quarter of 2021). 
See Congressional Budget Offi   ce (2021a).
4 For more information, see Blanchard (2021), for ex-
ample.
5 For more information about the models used, see 
https://nimodel.niesr.ac.uk and Gomes et al. (2012).
6 In the simulations, higher payments to households 
were modelled as government transfers. The EAGLE 
model assumes that a disproportionately large share of 
these payments will fl  ow to households that do not 
have access to the capital markets and that therefore 
have a high propensity to consume out of disposable 
income. Tax relief for families was incorporated 
through calibrated reductions of the effective income 
tax rates. In the simulations, the other measures in-
crease either government consumption or public in-
vestment.
7 Before the most recent fi  scal package was approved, 
the CBO anticipated an output gap of 1.8% of poten-
tial output for 2021 as a whole. See Congressional 
Budget Offi   ce (2021b).
8 In NiGEM, expectations of future policy tightening 
lead immediately to a rise in long- term interest rates 
and an effective appreciation of the US dollar with a 
dampening effect on infl  ation. By contrast, in the 
EAGLE simulations, the US dollar even depreciates 
slightly.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
16

sumer price infl  ation rises by an average of 
almost one percentage point between 2021 
and 2023. When the fi  rst measures expire 
and endogenous adjustment responses kick 
in, the model calculations suggest that the 
real economic effects will diminish rapidly. 
Most of the stimulus effect is likely to have 
already worn off by 2023.
Macroeconomic developments in the 
United States spill over to other economies 
through various channels. According to the 
simulations, German exporters, like other 
trading partners of the United States, are 
likely to derive short- term benefi  t from the 
sharp upturn in demand there. At the same 
time, yields on the long- term government 
bonds of other countries could also rise as a 
result of the interest rate linkage with the 
United States.9 The results of the simulation 
indicate that, all in all, the growth- stimulating 
effects of the US fi  scal package will prob-
ably prevail to a small degree in other re-
gions, too. According to the model calcula-
tions, the level of GDP in the euro area 
could rise by between 0.1% and 0.3% this 
year.
Although the different models produce very 
similar assessments of the macroeconomic 
implications of the American Rescue Plan,10 
it should not be forgotten that simulations 
performed for such extensive packages of 
measures are subject to a high degree of 
uncertainty, particularly in the current set-
ting. One question this raises is whether, 
given that some pandemic- related restric-
tions remain in effect in the United States, 
too, the fi  scal stimulus provided by these 
measures will be weaker in the short term 
but potentially last longer.11 Past experience 
also suggests that the relationship between 
macroeconomic capacity utilisation and in-
fl  ation has weakened over time. The infl  a-
tionary and interest rate- increasing effect of 
the stimulus might therefore be overesti-mated.12 On the other hand, the analyses 
do not take into account that, over the last 
few weeks, the US government has already 
forged ahead with plans for additional 
spending programmes aimed at strength-
ening the public infrastructure and provid-
ing fi  nancial support to families. These pro-
jects will probably further increase the de-
gree of fi  scal expansion in the United States 
9 In the simulations using NiGEM, for instance, ten- 
year government bond yields rise directly by 0.4 per-
centage point in the United States and by just under 
0.2 percentage point in the euro area. Similar move-
ments have also been observed in the fi  nancial mar-
kets since the beginning of February.
10 Moreover, the GDP effects identifi  ed for the United 
States are largely in keeping with the estimations by 
other institutions; see European Central Bank (2021), 
OECD (2021) and German Council of Economic Experts 
(2021).
11 Last year, the CBO, for instance, made similar as-
sumptions for its assessment of fi  scal measures; see 
Seliski et al. (2020).
12 In studies which assume a much fl  atter Phillips 
curve, ECB economists calculate an increase of just 0.2 
to 0.4 percentage point in core US consumer price in-
fl  ation, for example; see European Central Bank (2021).Macroeconomic effects of the American 
Rescue Plan in the United States*
Sources:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  CBO’s  cost  esti-
mates.  * Results  of  Bundesbank  simulations  assuming  that 
monetary policy rates remain unchanged until the end of 2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank2021 2022 20230.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
–+++++++Deviations from the baseline or the long-term 
growth equilibrium
–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5+2.0Real GDP
Deviations in %
Consumer price inflation
Deviations in ppNiGEM EAGLESimulations 
performed usingDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
17

consumption of services. Following a strong in -
crease, business investment fell perceptibly as 
well. In addition, government demand dropped 
steeply as some stimulus measures expired. 
Moreover, export growth diminished consider -
ably in the first quarter, which was probably at -
tributable, amongst other factors, to the global 
shortage of semiconductors, which weighed 
on car exports.4 The labour market situation, 
however, remained robust, with the unemploy -
ment rate dropping slightly in the first quarter 
of 2021 to 2.8%. The annual growth rate of 
the CPI in March remained in deflationary terri -
tory. Against this backdrop, the Japanese cen -
tral bank maintained its expansionary monetary 
policy stance.
United Kingdom
In the first quarter of 2021, the UK economy 
took a considerable hit. GDP was down by 
1.5% from the fourth quarter after seasonal and price adjustment. The tightening of con -
tainment measures at the beginning of the year 
constrained, in particular, many services indus -
tries sharply. The new barriers to trade with the 
EU since the beginning of the year have 
weighed on economic life as well.5 They damp -
ened manufacturing production, in particular, 
which contracted perceptibly following a sub -
stantial recovery which had begun in the third 
quarter. Exports of goods to the EU were down 
by 22% from the final quarter of 2020, whereas 
those to non- EU countries decreased only mar -
ginally. The situation on the labour market con -
tinued to dip in line with the contraction of 
economic activity. Although the unemploy ment 
rate remained unchanged at around 5%, the 
number of staff on furlough rose from its 
fourth- quarter mark to over 4½ million in Feb -
ruary. Following successes in fighting the pan -
demic, and thanks to the quick progress made Strict contain -
ment measures 
and new bar -
riers to trade 
with EU cause 
GDP contraction– at least in the short term.13 If the growing 
overutilisation causes US yields to rise fur-
ther than they have until now, this could 
entail a global rise in yields, which is likely 
to pose a challenge to emerging market 
economies with high levels of external debt, 
in particular.14 However, such risk scenarios 
can only be hinted at in the macroeco-
nomic models used here.
13 Funding for the US$2.3 trillion earmarked for the 
country’s physical and digital infrastructure and for 
promoting industry under the American Jobs Plan is to 
be covered in the long term through higher corporate 
taxes. The similarly large additional expenditure for 
families under the forthcoming American Families Plan 
will be funded by increases in taxes on the highest 
earners. Overall, however, over the next few years, the 
additional spending is likely to initially markedly exceed 
revenue.
14 See International Monetary Fund (2021b).
4 See Bank of Japan (2021).
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
18

in the vaccination campaign, reopening meas -
ures were introduced in the past few weeks. 
Against this background, sentiment amongst 
enterprises brightened considerably. In March, 
the Composite Purchasing Managers’ Index 
rose above the expansion threshold; in April, it 
picked up even further. With inflation still mod -
erate, at the beginning of May the Bank of 
England maintained its accommodative monet -
ary policy stance.
Poland
In Poland, the easing of containment measures 
initially boosted the economic recovery in the 
first quarter. However, new infection counts 
subsequently rose so steeply that stricter con -
tainment measures were re- imposed nation -
wide in March, which weighed perceptibly on 
economic activity. Nonetheless, thanks to the 
good start to the quarter, real GDP picked up 
by 0.9% in the first quarter after seasonal ad -
justment, having contracted as late as the 
fourth quarter of the previous year. A key fac -
tor here was industrial production, which grew 
strongly in the first quarter and, as the report -
ing period came to a close, was even far above 
its pre- crisis growth path. Retail sales, too, 
were up distinctly compared with a weak pre -
ceding quarter after price adjustment, owing 
to the temporary opening of shops. Owing to 
government support measures, the labour mar -
ket so far appears to be largely unfazed by the 
crisis. The average unemployment rate for the 
first quarter, at 3.1%, was a mere 0.2 percent -
age point up on the year. The annual consumer 
price inflation rate increased in April once 
again, reaching 4.3%. The core inflation rate 
excluding energy and food remained elevated 
at 3.9%. However, the Polish central bank held 
its policy rate steady at a historically low level 
of 0.1%.Macroeconomic trends 
in the euro area
As a consequence of the pandemic and the 
measures taken to contain it, economic output 
in the euro area saw another slight decrease in 
the first quarter of 2021. According to Euro -
stat’s flash estimate, seasonally adjusted real 
GDP fell by 0.6% in the first quarter of 2021 
compared with the fourth quarter of 2020. The 
amount by which it lagged behind its pre- crisis 
level thus grew to 5.5%. In view of rising infec -
tion rates, numerous Member States had re -
introduced stricter measures to contain the 
pandemic. Various services sectors suffered as 
a result. By contrast, other sectors less affected 
by the measures maintained their level of activ -
ity or even stepped it up. The main winner in 
this regard was industry, which benefited from 
the global shift in demand towards goods. This 
kept the GDP loss in the euro area within nar -
row bounds.
In large parts of the euro area, the pandemic 
situation remained fraught well into the second 
quarter. It was only more recently that signs of 
improvement could be seen. The way in which 
the pandemic progressed differed from region 
to region, however – in some cases signifi -
cantly. In some countries, COVID-  19 cases had 
already reached a peak at the start of the first 
quarter, with the curve then flattening, whereas 
in others the situation worsened over the 
course of the quarter. This was related in part 
to the emergence of new virus variants. Con -
tainment measures were largely tightened and 
eased in line with the spread of the virus. Over -
all, the restrictions are likely to have had a 
slightly stronger impact than in the fourth quar -
ter, which explains the further hit to GDP . In 
this context, it was primarily the length of time 
for which individual measures were in place, 
and less so their severity, that played a role. The 
containment measures continued to focus pri -
marily on reducing contact between individ -
uals. In particular, they affected the provision of 
certain services. In addition, face- to- face teach -
ing in educational institutions was temporarily New wave of 
pandemic was 
a drag on recov -
ery in MarchRenewed 
decrease in GDP 
in Q1
Pandemic situ -
ation after start 
of year still 
fraught; regional 
adjustments to 
containment 
measuresDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
19

suspended in some Member States, and in 
some cases non- essential shops were closed or 
restrictions on movement imposed. In compari -
son, the restrictions placed on industry and 
construction were minimal.
The COVID-  19 vaccination campaign got off to 
a slow start in the euro area and therefore had 
barely any influence on the course of the pan -
demic in the first quarter. One key reason for 
this was the limited availability of vaccines, 
which were initially reserved for certain age 
groups and medical staff. By the end of the first 
quarter, the percentage of the population that 
had received at least one vaccine dose was no more than just over 10%, with the pace of vac -
cination varying slightly across the Member 
States. It is only in more recent weeks that the 
speed of the vaccine rollout accelerated signifi -
cantly.
On the expenditure side, the decline in aggre -
gate output in the first quarter was again due 
to private consumption. Above all in accom -
modation and food services, in the arts, enter -
tainment and recreation and in personal ser -
vices, consumption options were severely 
limited throughout the entire quarter. Accord -
ingly, money was not spent in these areas, with 
only some of this money then being spent else -
where. Due to the closure of many retail out -
lets, there was a clear quarter- on- quarter fall in 
retail sales. The number of new vehicle registra -
tions even fell sharply at the start of the year, 
which was partly attributable to various fiscal 
incentives expiring at the end of 2020. Con -
sumer willingness to spend remained high, 
however, as shown by strong sales growth 
after the easing of restrictions. For example, re -
tail sales rose in February by no less than 4.0% 
month on month in price and seasonally ad -
justed terms, and by 3.2% in March.6 One fac -
tor at play here is the fact that, due in part to 
continued fiscal support, the income situation 
of the household sector as a whole is likely to 
have deteriorated only slightly. As a result, the 
household saving ratio is expected to have 
risen again.
Gross fixed capital formation probably ex -
panded again in the first quarter, reflecting the 
significantly improved economic sentiment. Ex -
penditure on machinery and equipment was 
presumably increased, albeit from a low level. 
Although capital goods manufacturers’ sales in 
the euro area declined in January and February, 
imports of capital goods rose again. In add -
ition, the initial country data available indicate 
that investment in machinery and equipment Slow start to 
vaccination 
campaignStill major 
constraints  
on private 
consumption 
Slight increase 
in investment 
presumedAggregate output in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021Real GDP, Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
80859095100
758085909510080859095100
Italy
SpainEuro area
France859095100
of which:
6 Excluding motor vehicles and automotive fuel. At the 
country level, there were in some cases significantly higher 
monthly rates of increase.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
20

continued to recover. Investment in intellectual 
property was probably also ramped up as a re -
sult of the push towards digitalisation.7 By con -
trast, construction investment is unlikely to 
have exceeded the level seen in the previous 
quarter. Although investment in housing con -
struction continued to go up, the same could 
not be said for commercial construction. This 
could be a reflection of the increased uncer -
tainty surrounding future demand for office 
and retail space.
Foreign trade continued to expand despite the 
impact of the United Kingdom leaving the Sin -
gle Market.8 Whilst exports to the United King -
dom plunged, they were more than offset by 
flourishing trade with other regions. Exports of 
goods to China, but also to several European 
countries such as Switzerland, the EU countries 
outside the euro area and Russia, saw a marked 
increase. According to balance of payments 
data, exports of services from the euro area to 
third countries also rose slightly in the first two 
months of the year but still fell significantly 
short of pre- crisis levels as tourism continued to 
flounder. Imports to the euro area from third 
countries went up markedly on the back of 
overall upbeat industrial activity, especially in 
the case of intermediate goods. There was a 
significant increase in trade between euro area 
countries, especially in intermediate and capital 
goods.
The rebound in industry continued after the 
start of the year but lost considerable momen -
tum compared with previous months. On a 
quarterly average, industrial production rose by 
0.8% on the quarter, almost reaching the pre- 
crisis level recorded in the fourth quarter of 
2019. There was once again a very substantial 
rise in the manufacture of computer, electronic 
and optical products. The production of inter -
mediate inputs also expanded, especially in the 
metal- working industry. By contrast, vehicle 
production had to be cut. Vehicle manufactur -
ers reported a shortage of intermediate inputs, 
especially semiconductors. Consumer goods 
production stagnated in the first quarter. Over -all, however, industry was in good shape, as 
also evidenced by the level of capacity utilisa -
tion, which rose above the long- term average.
Service providers were far worse off. In some 
sectors, the situation remained highly fraught 
due to the pandemic. Activity in these is likely 
to have decreased again in the first quarter of 
the year. The hotel and restaurant sector, trade Trade in goods 
with third coun -
tries defies Brexit
Continued 
recovery for 
manufacturing
Some services 
still severely 
affected by 
pandemic 2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 219597100103106109112 Retail sales (price-adjusted)
2015 = 100
1,2001,5002,0002,5003,000
New vehicle  
registrations
(quarterly totals)Reduced scaleNumber
(thousands)
85951051152015 = 100
Goods exports1
Goods imports1Seasonally adjusted, log scaleEconomic indicators for the euro area
Sources: Eurostat, ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Nomin-
al export and import data according to foreign trade statistics 
(intra and extra trade). Price-adjusted using the producer price 
index (exports) or the import price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank8090100110
Industrial production
7 In the euro area excluding Ireland. For several years now, 
the statistical recording of intellectual property investment 
in the euro area has been strongly influenced by the stra -
tegic planning of multinational enterprises domiciled in Ire -
land; see Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).
8 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
21

fairs and travel agencies largely remained closed 
for several months. In many places, art and cul -
tural activities were not yet able to resume, 
either  . The tightening of containment measures 
also had a negative impact on personal service 
providers. The situation was more favourable 
for some business- related services, financial ser -
vice providers and certain transport services. 
The ICT sector continued to benefit from the 
ongoing process of digital transformation and 
is likely to have upped its output again.
Economic developments across the Member 
States were fairly mixed in the first quarter. The 
main reason for this was differences in the pro -
gression of the pandemic and, related to this, 
in the nature of measures taken in response, as 
well as differences in economic structure. In 
most Member States, aggregate activity re -
mained significantly below pre-  pandemic 
levels, with these levels being reached again or 
even exceeded in only two countries, Luxem -
bourg and Lithuania.In France, economic output increased by 0.4% 
in the first quarter compared with the previous 
period, in which it had contracted by 1.4% due 
to strict containment measures. Investment ac -
tivity, which continued to be scarcely affected 
by the restrictions, was brisk, driven mainly by 
the strong recovery in construction output. 
Supported by the easing of strict containment 
measures at the start of the year, private con -
sumption edged upwards after suffering a 
sharp setback in the final quarter of 2020. Ex -
ports, on the other hand, recorded a distinct 
reversal of fortune after a strong year- end, due 
primarily to a slump in vehicle exports. Aggre -
gate output fell just over 4% short of its pre-  
crisis level in the first quarter. The gap remained 
considerable in the case of exports and private 
consumption, whereas investment only barely 
undershot its pre- crisis level.
In Italy, economic output dropped further in 
the first quarter, by 0.4%. This meant that real 
GDP remained around 7% down on its pre-  
pandemic level. The spread of the virus was 
fairly dynamic, with pronounced regional dif -
ferences at times. Containment measures were 
adjusted in line with the severity of the pan -
demic. As a result, private consumption and 
consumption- related services faced significant 
restrictions again. By contrast, activity picked 
up in other sectors of the economy. For ex -
ample, there was a significant increase in in -
dustrial production, particularly of intermediate 
but also consumer goods. Construction output 
likewise went up substantially, having already 
exceeded its pre- pandemic level in the third 
quarter of 2020. A slight uptick in exports was 
also recorded. At the same time, imports ex -
panded on the back of strengthening industrial 
activity.
In Spain, aggregate output in the first quarter 
was down by 0.5% on the quarter. Economic 
output thus remained around 9% below its 
pre- pandemic level. In particular, consumer 
spending was curbed again in the first quarter. 
One reason for this was that the measures 
taken to contain the spread of the virus were Diverging devel -
opments in indi -
vidual Member 
States according 
to progression 
of pandemicSlight rise in 
economic out -
put in France
GDP in Italy 
down further
Moderate GDP 
decline in Spain 
from already 
depressed level 
of activitySentiment indicators for the euro area*
Source: European Commission. * Deviations from the respect-
ive average since 2000.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 21–100+1050403020100102030
–––––+++
Consumer confidenceBusiness sectorBalance of positive and negative responses as a percentage 
of all responses, seasonally adjusted, monthly data
Services sector
Manufacturing industry
ConstructionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
22

only eased in the course of the quarter. Indus -
trial production declined due to a strong cut -
back in motor vehicle production. Construction 
activity decreased very sharply to well below its 
pre- crisis level again. The export volume was 
broadly unchanged, but at the same time there 
was a marked decline in imports in view of 
weak domestic  economic activity.
The picture was also mixed in the smaller Mem -
ber States. In some countries, such as Lithu -
ania, economic output actually increased sig -
nificantly despite the fraught pandemic situ -
ation. In a number of other countries, such as 
Belgium, Austria and Finland, economic output 
expanded moderately, with fairly robust indus -
trial activity making a significant contribution to 
this. In the Netherlands, Portugal and Latvia, 
on the other hand, it decreased, in some cases 
significantly. These countries were for a time 
very badly affected by the pandemic and re -
sorted to imposing relatively strict, longer-  
lasting measures to contain it.
The labour market situation remained com -
paratively stable. The number of persons em -
ployed fell in seasonally adjusted terms by 
0.3% in the first quarter. It thus fell just over 
2% short of its pre- crisis level. The number of 
unemployed persons decreased markedly up to 
March. On a quarterly average, the unemploy -
ment rate was thus 8.2%. However, this still 
left it 0.9 percentage point higher than in the 
first quarter of 2020. When interpreting the 
labour   market figures, however, it should be 
taken into account that extensive government 
support measures are continuing to benefit the 
labour market. Although the use of short- time 
working schemes has already been scaled back 
significantly in most euro area countries, it re -
mains to be seen – especially in sectors particu -
larly badly affected by the pandemic and con -
tainment measures until recently – how quickly 
and to what extent firms will find their way 
back to profitable business models and protect 
jobs without external assistance.In the first quarter of 2021, the Harmonised 
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) rose sharply 
on the quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. 
The headline annual inflation rate increased 
from -0.3% in the fourth quarter of 2020 to 
1.1%. The rate excluding energy and food also 
jumped considerably from 0.2% to 1.2%. Vari -
ous factors were at play here. First, energy 
prices rose sharply. Second, prices of other 
non- energy industrial goods, which had still 
been in decline in the fourth quarter of 2020, 
rose, with a weaker end- of- season sales effect 
in individual countries being significant. Dur -
ables also became markedly more expensive. 
Third, the fact that the temporary lowering of 
VAT rates in Germany expired at the end of 
2020 contributed to the upward pressure on 
prices. Lastly, the annual rate of HICP inflation 
was still being driven up by a statistical effect in 
connection with adjustments to the weighting Economic devel -
opments also 
varied in smaller 
Member States
Little change on 
labour market – 
however, it will 
only be possible 
to assess situ -
ation after 
government  pro -
grammes have 
come to an endConsumer prices 
in euro area 
soared in Q1; 
annual inflation 
rate clearly posi -
tive againBreakdown of the annual HICP rate 
in the euro area*
Sources:  Eurostat  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Due  to 
rounding, there may be slight differences between the annual 
HICP rate and the sum of the components.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 20211.00.500.51.01.52.02.53.0
––++++++Quarterly averages
Travel services
Services excluding travelComponents in percentage points
HICP (%)Clothing and footwear
Energy
Industrial goods excluding 
energy, clothing and footwearFoodDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
23

scheme.9 The rate excluding energy, food, 
travel and clothing, which is generally less af -
fected by one- off effects, rose by just 0.3 per -
centage point to 1.1% in the first quarter, of 
which an estimated 0.2 percentage point was 
due to the VAT effect in Germany.
In April, the annual rate of HICP inflation rose 
to 1.6%. By contrast, the rate excluding energy 
and food slipped slightly to 0.7%, which was 
largely attributable to the reduced contribution 
of the one- off statistical effect. The annual 
headline rate of HICP inflation is likely to hover 
around 1½% over the next few months before, 
due in part to base effects, rising temporarily to 
well above 2% up to the end of the year. The 
global rise in intermediate goods prices is likely 
to have a delayed effect on the consumer 
prices of individual products, but this will be 
particularly pronounced for energy and food. 
As things currently stand, the impact on the 
core rate of HICP inflation is likely to be rather 
low. However, the greater price pressures at 
the upstream stages of the production value 
chain present a certain upside risk to the price 
outlook.
The state of the euro area economy is expected 
to improve markedly in the course of the 
second quarter. In many places, the contain -
ment measures were not only extended at the start of the second quarter but in some cases 
even tightened in response to rising cases of 
infection  . However, the vaccination rollout 
gathered considerable steam and there were 
also growing signs as this report went to press 
that the pandemic was slowing down. Exten -
sive steps for reopening the economy were 
therefore set out in a number of Member 
States. These are expected to enable various 
economic sectors to expand their activity sig -
nificantly. However, the full effect of this is not 
likely to be felt until the third quarter. The 
underlying upward trend for the global econ -
omy will also have a propping- up effect. In any 
case, economic sentiment continued to 
brighten in April. A significant improvement in 
business prospects and, in some cases, in busi -
ness conditions was reported across all sectors. 
Once again, various confidence indicators even 
exceeded their respective long- term averages. 
The key to how strong the macroeconomic re -
covery will be in the months to come will prob -
ably be how quickly contact- intensive services 
and tourism normalise and how quickly the 
shortages of important intermediate inputs can 
be overcome.Further rise in 
inflation rate 
in AprilSignificant 
improvement 
in state of 
economy  to be 
expected in 
current  quarter
List of references
Bank of Japan (2021), Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, April 2021, pp. 21f.
Blanchard, O. (2021), In defense of concerns over the $1.9 trillion relief plan, Peterson Institute for 
International Economics, Realtime Economic Issues Watch, February 2021.
Congressional Budget Office (2021a), Estimated Budgetary Effects of H.R. 1319, American Rescue 
Plan Act of 2021, 10 March 2021.
Congressional Budget Office (2021b), The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2021 to 2031, February 
2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), How will economic relations between the United Kingdom and the 
European Union be governed going forward?, Monthly Report, February 2021, pp. 16 f.9 This effect temporarily increases the annual rate of HICP 
inflation without being based on a corresponding increase 
in prices. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
24

Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), One- off effects relating to COVID-  19 in the HICP in 2021, Monthly 
Report, February 2021, pp. 63 ff.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national economic 
statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65-78.
European Central Bank (2021), Risks to the US and euro area outlook related to the American 
Rescue  Plan, ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, March 2021.
German Council of Economic Experts (2021), The economic impact of the latest fiscal stimulus in 
the United States, March 2021, Economic Outlook 2021 and 2022, pp. 13 f.
Gomes, S., P . Jacquinot and M. Pisani (2012), The EAGLE. A model for policy analysis of macro -
economic interdependence in the euro area, Economic Modelling, Vol. 29(5), pp. 1686-1714.
International Monetary Fund (2021a), World Economic Outlook: Managing Divergent Recoveries, 
April 2021.
International Monetary Fund (2021b), Global Financial Stability Report: Preempting a Legacy of 
Vulnerabilities, April 2021.
OECD (2021), The potential impact of the American Rescue Plan, OECD Economic Outlook, Interim 
Report, March 2021, pp. 9 f.
Seliski, J., A. Betz, Y. G. Chen, U. D. Demirel, J. Lee and J. Nelson (2020), Key Methods That CBO 
Used to Estimate the Effects of Pandemic- Related Legislation on Output, CBO Working Paper 
2020-07, October 2020.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
25

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
At its monetary policy meeting in March, the 
ECB Governing Council reaffirmed its decision 
taken in December 2020 to continue to con -
duct net asset purchases under the pandemic 
emergency purchase programme (PEPP) with a 
total envelope of €1,850 billion until at least 
the end of March 2022 and, in any case, until 
it judges that the coronavirus crisis phase is 
over. Purchases will continue to be conducted 
flexibly according to market conditions and 
with a view to preventing a tightening of finan -
cing conditions that is inconsistent with coun -
tering the downward impact of the pandemic 
on the projected path of inflation. If favourable 
financing conditions can be maintained with 
lower overall purchase volumes, the envelope 
of €1,850 billion need not be used in full. Equally, the total envelope can also be in -
creased if necessary. In March, based on a joint 
assessment of financing conditions and the in -
flation outlook, the Governing Council ex -
pected purchases under the PEPP to be con -
ducted at a significantly higher pace over the 
next quarter than during the first months of the 
year. It also confirmed this assessment follow -
ing its monetary policy meeting in April.
While the macroeconomic projections pub -
lished by the ECB in March envisaged a gradual 
increase in underlying inflation pressures, they 
confirmed that the medium- term inflation out -
look was broadly unchanged compared with 
December 2020 and remained below the Euro -
system’s inflation aim. In this context, the ECB 
Governing Council is of the view that preserv -
ing favourable financing conditions over the 
pandemic period remains essential. At the 
same time, it believes that the rise in market 
rates observed since the start of the year posed 
a risk to wider financing conditions.
The ECB Governing Council left the asset pur -
chase programme (APP) and the key interest 
rates unchanged. Net purchases under the APP 
will continue at a pace of €20 billion per 
month. The main refinancing rate remains at 
0%, while the rate on the marginal lending 
facility  stands at 0.25% and the deposit facility 
rate at -0.5%. The Governing Council reaffirmed 
its decisions on its other monetary policy meas -
ures from December and left them unchanged.
APP holdings recorded on the balance sheet 
rose by €59.7 billion during the reporting 
period. On 14 May 2021, the Eurosystem as a 
whole held assets totalling €2,999.7 billion as 
part of the APP (see the box on pp. 27 ff. for a 
breakdown of the holdings by individual pro -
gramme). The holdings are furthermore being 
influenced by the smoothing over time of re -
investments in line with the technical param -
eters agreed upon in December 2018 and by ECB Governing 
Council expects 
higher monthly 
PEPP purchases 
for the second 
quarter
Preserving 
favourable 
financing condi -
tions essential
APP and key 
interest rates 
unchanged
Continued 
increase in APP 
and PEPP secur -
ities holdingsMoney market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources:  ECB  and  Bloomberg.  1 Monthly  averages.  2 From 
1 October 2019, EONIA calculated as €STR + 8.5 basis points. 
3 Three-month EURIBOR less three-month EONIA swap rate. 
• Average 1 to 18 May 2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 2020 20210.60.50.40.30.20.100.10.20.3
––––––+++
–100+10+20 Money market risk premium:
EURIBOR-OIS spread 1,3Basis
points% p. a.
EONIA1,2Three-month EURIBOR 1
Deposit facility rateMain refinancing rateMarginal lending rate
€STR 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
26

Money market management and liquidity needs
In the two reserve maintenance periods under 
review running from 27  January 2021 to 
27 April 2021, liquidity needs stemming from 
autonomous factors rose in the euro area by a 
total of €19.4 billion to €1,909 billion (see the 
table below).1 This was mainly attributable to 
the rise in government deposits and growth in 
banknote demand (see the chart on p. 28). 
Government deposits totalled €644.5 billion 
on average for the March- April 2021 period, 
an increase of €114.2 billion on the average 
for the December 2020- January 2021 period. 
The Bundesbank accounted for €187.4 billion 
of these deposits in the March- April 2021 
period. The volume of banknotes in circula-
tion rose in the two reserve maintenance 
periods under review, climbing during the on-
going pandemic situation by €18.3 billion to 
an average of €1,447.7 billion in the March- 
April 2021 period. Net banknote demand at 
the Bundesbank rose by €10.4 billion, raising 
cumulative net banknote issuance in Germany 
to an average of €829.9 billion in the March- April 2021 period. The combined total of net 
foreign assets and other factors, which are 
considered together owing to liquidity- neutral 
valuation effects, saw a signifi  cant increase of 
€113.1 billion and reduced liquidity needs 
accord ingly. The main reason for this develop-
ment was a considerable decline in liabilities 
to non- euro area residents denominated in 
euro. This came about largely due to a reduc-
tion in deposits from foreign central banks, 
which had previously increased sharply up to 
the end of 2020. The minimum reserve re-
quirement in the March- April 2021 reserve 
period stood at €147.4 billion, its increase of 
€2.0 billion adding to the calculated liquidity 
needs of the banking system in the Eurosys-
tem.
1 Average of the second reserve maintenance period 
of 2021 (March- April 2021) compared with the aver-
age of the eighth reserve maintenance period of 2020 
(December 2020- January 2021), which was covered in 
the February 2021 issue of the Monthly Report.
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2021
27 January
to
16 March17 March
to
27 April
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –   4.0 –  14.3
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) –  65.5 –  48.7
3. Net foreign assets 1 –  13.7 –  18.2
4. Other factors 1 + 110.5 +  34.5
Total +  27.3 –  46.7
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations +   0.1 –   0.1
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –   0.2 + 262.2
c) Other operations + 112.2 + 126.3
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility +   0.0 +   0.0
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  11.1 –  78.4
Total + 101.0 + 310.0
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) + 128.3 + 263.4
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –   1.0 –   1.0
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
27

In the period under review, additional central 
bank liquidity was provided both by purchase 
programmes, in particular the pandemic 
emergency purchase programme (PEPP), and 
by refi  nancing operations (see the chart on 
p. 30). Bids in the seventh operation of the 
third series of targeted longer- term refi  nan-
cing operations (TLTRO- III) came in at a high 
€330.5 billion, probably because the TLTRO- III 
modalities were adjusted in December 2020, 
which made participation, particularly in the 
March 2021 operation, attractive for banks. 
Relative to the other operations still outstand-
ing under the third TLTRO programme, the 
March operation allows participating banks to 
benefi  t longest from the special interest rate conditions of as low as -1.0% (one year and 
three months). On balance, the seventh 
TLTRO- III operation and maturities from the 
fi  nal TLTRO- II operation on 24 March 2021 re-
sulted in a net liquidity injection of €314.8 bil-
lion. At €0.4 billion in total, there was hardly 
any demand for the eighth pandemic emer-
gency longer-term refi  nancing operation 
(PELTRO). Uptake of the regular main refi  nan-
cing operations and three- month tenders like-
wise remained subdued. Total tender volume 
in the Eurosystem amounted to an average of 
€2,055 billion in the March- April 2021 period. 
In Germany, the outstanding volume of 
longer- term operations –  which include 
TLTROs, PELTROs and three- month tenders – 
rose by €66 billion to an average of €407.3 
billion in the period under review, which rep-
resented a share of around 20% of the out-
standing volume of long- term tenders in the 
Eurosystem.
At an average of €3,951 billion, balance sheet 
holdings of the asset purchase programmes in 
the March- April 2021 period were around 
€239 billion above the average for the period 
under comparison (see the adjacent table).
In net terms, there was a considerable in-
crease of €479 billion overall in excess liquid-
ity in the period under review to an average of 
€3,950 billion. Excess liquidity rose by €138 
billion in the January- March 2021 period and 
increased by a further €341 billion in the 
subsequent  March- April 2021 period. The 
stronger increase in the second period was 
primarily due to the TLTRO- III allotment and 
increased purchase volumes in monetary pol-
icy programmes. The higher government de-
posits in particular had an absorbing effect 
and prevented excess liquidity from rising 
even more strongly.
At 99.1%, Eurosystem banks made roughly 
the same use of the exemption allowances 
under the two- tier system for remunerating 
excess reserve holdings in the March- April 
2021 period as in the December 2020- January 
2021 period (98.9%). In Germany, utilisation 
of the exemption allowances was very close Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as at
14 May 2021
Active programmes 1
PSPP +  36.8 2,404.3
CBPP3 +   2.2 291.6
CSPP +  15.1 275.0
ABSPP –   0.2 28.8
PEPP + 206.0 1,053.1
Completed programmes 
SMP –   5.2 17.1
CBPP1 0 0.4
CBPP2 –   0.3 2.4
1 Changes due to net purchases, maturities, reinvestments 
and amortisation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankAutonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing  (liquidity-absorbing)  factors  are  preceded  by  a  positive 
(negative)  sign.  1 Including  end-of-quarter  liquidity-neutral 
valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 20211,5001,20090060030003006009001,200
–––––++++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
28

to the Eurosystem average at 99.0%. The in-
crease in the minimum reserve requirement 
caused absolute exemption allowances to 
rise; however, given the much stronger 
growth in excess liquidity, excess reserves re-
munerated at -0.50% grew once again (see 
the adjacent chart). This meant that, on aver-
age, around 22% of excess liquidity in the Eu-
rosystem was exempted from remuneration at 
negative interest rates in the March- April 2021 
period, compared to around 24% in the 
January- March 2021 period, and 25% in the 
December 2020- January 2021 period (in Ger-
many: 21%, 22% and around 23%, respect-
ively).
In the money market, interest rates remained 
stable during the period under review, with 
the exception of the usual volatility around 
and at the end of the month and quarter in 
March 2021. As a result, the continued in-
crease in excess liquidity did not lead to any 
notable downward pressure on overnight 
interest rates (see the adjacent chart). In the 
secured market, overnight rates in GC Pooling 
for the ECB basket were -0.55% on average, 
dipping to -0.71% for a time at the end of the 
quarter in March 2021. The rate for the ECB 
EXTended basket, which contains an ex-
tended pool of collateral, was higher, at 
-0.51% on average, though fl  uctuations 
around the reporting dates were milder than 
they were for the ECB basket. The decline in 
rates for the ECB basket left the spread be-
tween the two rates at 5 basis points on aver-
age during the period under review, com-
pared to 3 basis points in the preceding 
period under review. The backdrop to this 
was a slight reduction in turnover on the GC 
Pooling platform for secured transactions 
with maturities of one day (ON, TN, SN; com-
bined in the Deferred Funding Rate). While 
turnover after allotment of the seventh 
TLTRO- III operation at the end of March 2021 
mostly hovered below €8 billion, it had gen-
erally been above that fi  gure previously. The 
unsecured euro short- term rate (€STR) stood 
mostly at -0.57% after allotment of the TLTRO 
operation, slightly lower than in February and 
March 2021. €STR turnover remained broadly stable, averaging €44 billion in the period 
under review.Central bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Central 
bank balance minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the 
deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche BundesbankDec. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May
2020 20210.80.70.60.50.40.30.20.10
––––––––Daily data
€ bn% p.a.
4,500
4,000
3,500
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0Excess liquidity1Main refinancing rate
Mean value for the 
reserve maintenance period 2Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basketSTOXX GC Pooling Overnight€STR
GermanyEuro areaTheoretical allowances– 1.146Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
29

the use of amortised cost accounting.1 On 
14 May, the securities holdings reported under 
the PEPP amounted to €1,053.1 billion, up by 
€215.7 billion.
On 24 March 2021, the seventh operation of 
the third series of targeted longer- term refinan -
cing operations (TLTRO- III) was settled. In total, 
425 banks were allotted €330.5 billion, which 
significantly exceeded the two preceding oper -
ations and represented the second- highest 
level of demand seen for a TLTRO- III operation. 
Overall, a combined volume of €2,079.8 billion 
is currently outstanding for all TLTRO- III oper -
ations. The changes to the TLTRO-III conditions 
in December are likely to be the main reason 
behind the distinct increase in demand. The 
ECB Governing Council extended the particu -
larly favourable interest rate terms by one year 
and raised the maximum amount that TLTRO-III 
counterparties are entitled to borrow from 
50% to 55% of their stock of eligible loans. At 
€0.4 billion, demand for pandemic emergency longer- term refinan cing operations (PELTROs) 
remained very subdued for the operation that 
was settled on 25 March 2021.
The trend increase in excess liquidity continued 
on account of the ongoing net asset purchases 
and the allotment of the seventh TLTRO- III op -
eration. As this report went to press, the vol -
ume of excess liquidity had exceeded €4 trillion 
for the first time and stood at €4,146.6 billion, 
which corresponds to an increase of around 
€571.1 billion (see the box on pp. 27 ff.).
Short- term money market rates largely moved 
sideways over the past few months. At the end 
of the reporting period, the unsecured euro 
overnight index average rate (EONIA), which is 
computed by applying a fixed spread to the 
euro short- term rate (€STR), was virtually un -Seventh TLTRO- III 
sees banks 
take up 
€330.5 billionExcess liquidity 
exceeds 
€4 trillion  for 
the first time
Short- term 
money market 
rates move 
sideways Outstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 202105001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,0005,5006,0006,500€ billion
Mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
Purchase programmesFirst series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-I)Third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-III)
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-II)Pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs)
Additional longer-term refinancing operations
1 In particular, the difference between the acquisition and 
redemption value is amortised over the security’s residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and measured 
at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
30

changed at -0.48%. The three- month EURIBOR 
also registered only very limited movements, 
closing the period at -0.53%.
Money market forward rates have increased 
slightly since the ECB Governing Council’s mon -
etary policy meeting in March. On balance, 
however, the rise remained limited when com -
pared with the significant increases seen in the 
first few months of 2021, particularly in the 
short- term and medium- term maturity seg -
ments. As this report went to press, the for -
ward curve was virtually flat and only very mar -
ginally inverted in these maturity segments, 
meaning that further interest rate cuts are no 
longer priced in. A very large majority of re -
spondents to surveys conducted in March and 
April ahead of the Governing Council’s monet -
ary policy meetings likewise do not expect to 
see any further cut in interest rates. There was 
a somewhat stronger increase in forward rates 
with longer maturities, which was probably 
mainly due to a further improvement in market 
participants’ assessment of the medium- term 
economic outlook. At the same time, the cur -
rent slope of the money market forward curve 
indicates that an increase in the Eurosystem’s 
deposit facility rate by 10 basis points is not 
priced in before mid- 2023.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
In the first quarter of 2021, the broad monetary 
aggregate M3 once again went up steeply on 
account of the impact of the coronavirus pan -
demic. However, growth momentum slowed 
significantly overall compared with the situ -
ation at the outbreak of the coronavirus crisis a 
year ago. As a result, the annual growth rate of 
M3 declined markedly during the quarter, but 
still stood at 10.1% at the end of March. Pre -
cautionary considerations on the part of house -
holds and enterprises as well as the persistently 
low level of interest rates were the main factors 
behind this monetary growth, which led to 
both sectors continuing to accumulate highly liquid deposits in particular. On the counter -
parts side, the Eurosystem’s continued asset 
purchases boosted monetary growth. More -
over, banks’ lending to the domestic private 
sector once again registered significant inflows 
on balance. It was loans to non- financial cor -
porations which picked up substantially in 
some member countries in the quarter under 
review. Loans to households remained on an 
upward path due to households’ persistently 
brisk demand for housing loans. At the same 
time, however, the banks participating in the 
Bank Lending Survey (BLS) reported mostly 
tightening their credit standards due to ele -
vated risk relating to the pandemic.
Among the components of M3, overnight de -
posits once again made by far the largest con -
tribution to monetary growth. The strong 
growth in household deposits observed in the 
previous quarters picked up slightly further in 
the first quarter of 2021; non- financial corpor -
ations also increasingly accumulated overnight 
deposits again. In addition, increased inflows 
of currency were recorded compared with the 
pre- pandemic period. This means that house -
holds and non- financial corporations continue 
to exhibit a strong preference for liquidity. In 
the case of households, the high inflows to 
short- term deposits are an expression of 
“forced saving”, as the measures taken to com -
bat the pandemic markedly restricted their con -
sumption opportunities across the euro area. 
Inflows to non- financial corporations’ deposits 
were distributed more heterogeneously among 
the member countries, depending on the li -
quidity and income situation of enterprises and 
the scope of government support measures in 
each country.
The continued strong inflow to M3 in the first 
quarter of 2021 was considerably smaller than 
in the preceding quarters, and that was be -
cause financial corporations and other general 
government did not accumulate any more 
overnight deposits on balance. Furthermore, 
non- banks reduced their short- term time de -
posits and marketable instruments, especially Slight rise in 
money market 
forward rates
Monetary 
dynamics still 
strong due to 
coronavirus 
pandemicMonetary 
inflows still 
mainly driven 
by overnight 
depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
31

money market fund shares, to a greater extent 
during the reporting period. The search for 
yield in conjunction with the upbeat sentiment 
in the international financial markets is likely to 
have reinforced this tendency.
On the counterparts side, monetary growth 
was once again driven primarily by domestic 
lending. Though this item, like others, was 
down again on previous quarters, it remained 
significantly above pre- pandemic levels, with 
loans to general government and the private 
sector increasing in roughly equal measure. 
Loans to general government were mainly 
buoyed by the Eurosystem’s ongoing net pur -
chases under the APP and PEPP . These loans 
may have diminished since the onset of the 
coronavirus pandemic, but, in a persistently 
challenging environment, they are continuing 
to help preserve favourable liquidity and fund -
ing conditions in the euro area. Credit institu -
tions likewise purchased government bonds in 
net terms in the first quarter of 2021. Further -
more, they again added to their holdings of 
corporate bonds and shares on balance, 
though net growth was significantly weaker 
than in the previous quarters. Loans to the pri -
vate sector accounted for the bulk of their ex -
posure, however.
Loans to non- financial corporations in the euro 
area registered significant inflows in the first 
quarter, with longer- term loans in particular 
posting sizeable gains. Another factor was that 
the previously high net redemptions of short-  
term loans weakened significantly. Taken to -
gether, net inflows significantly exceeded those 
seen in the previous two quarters but fell short 
of the high figures registered in the first two 
quarters of 2020. The high overall rate of net 
growth was attributable to a heterogeneous 
set of developments at the country level. Net 
lending was up strongly on the two weak pre -
vious quarters in Germany and other core 
countries but lagged behind earlier growth 
rates in most other countries. One major rea -
son for this is likely to have been the dampen -
ing effect on credit demand for investment Build- up of 
securitised 
lending  mainly 
driven by 
Eurosystem  net 
purchases
Loans to non- 
financial corpor -
ations continue 
to grow at a 
decelerated 
paceMonetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 212024681012
–++++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14
20246
–+++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial liabilities1
Net external assets
Credit to the private sector 2
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations 4
Households5Contribution of components 
in percentage points
Securities-based lending to 
general governmentPercentage change
in M3
Percentage change
in M3Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
32

purposes that resulted from the third wave of 
the pandemic and the sluggish rollout of vac -
cinations. Another is that government grants 
and reduced- rate loans had caused stocks of 
short- term bank deposits to swell in the cor -
porate sector over the course of 2020, which 
also softened demand for further funding over -
all. There are a number of reasons why de -
mand for bank loans in Germany (and other 
core countries) increased strongly in the first 
quarter in spite of these adverse factors. One is 
the robust growth observed in the construction 
and real estate sector. Another is that the up -
swing in global industry has had a positive im -
pact on the propensity to invest amongst 
export- oriented sectors. In addition, the end of 
March 2021 saw the expiry of a reference 
period that determined whether the banks par -
ticipating in the TLTRO- III operations met the 
credit growth targets and thus qualified for 
very favourable funding conditions. This led to 
a situation where banks located mainly in Ger -
many, Austria and the Netherlands offered 
loans at very favourable conditions and thus 
managed to partially make up for their weaker 
lending activity, by country standards, in the 
second half of 2020.
The bank managers interviewed as part of the 
BLS reported a net decline in credit demand 
amongst euro area non- financial corporations in the first quarter, attributing it primarily to en -
terprises’ persistent reluctance to invest. At the 
same time, the surveyed banks reported a fur -
ther tightening of their corporate credit stand -
ards overall in the first quarter, though they 
had stated in the previous round of the survey 
that far more severe restrictions had been 
planned for the first quarter. Furthermore, this 
tightening was significantly milder than that 
implemented in the previous two quarters. As 
before, banks mainly attributed their more re -
strictive policies to a downturn in their risk as -
sessments. First, euro area banks were more 
pessimistic about the situations of individual 
sectors and enterprises and about borrowers’ 
creditworthiness than they had been one quar -
ter earlier. Second, they reported tightening 
their standards on the basis of the depressed 
economic situation and general economic out -
look at present, and also in response to a de -
cline in the underlying value of collateral and 
their lower risk tolerance. By contrast, the com -
petitive situation, particularly competition from 
other banks, had an easing effect on stand -
ards. Overall terms and conditions in the euro 
area remained unchanged in the first quarter of 
the year.
Lending business with households saw euro 
area banks once again register significant net 
inflows in the first quarter of 2021. While these BLS banks 
report drop in 
corporate credit 
demand and 
tighten 
standards Consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q4 2020 Q1 2021
Holdings against central government 2 – 57.1 – 50.2
Monetary aggregate M3 377.8 208.9
of which components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 324.3 267.0
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) – 11.0 – 18.3
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 64.5 – 39.8
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 1.2 – 28.0
of which:
Capital and reserves 51.1 26.7
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 50.0 – 54.8Assets Q4 2020 Q1 2021
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 191.4 138.0
of which:
Loans 1 120.1 117.0
Securities 71.3 21.0
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 176.4 173.6
of which:
Loans –  1.9 –   1.7
Securities 178.3 175.3
Net external assets – 95.3 –   8.4
Other counterparts of M3 49.4 – 172.5
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
33

were somewhat lower overall than in the two 
very strong previous quarters, inflows to loans 
for house purchase, which account for the bulk 
of activity in this credit segment, continued to 
grow at above pre- pandemic rates. At the end 
of the quarter, their annual growth rate in -
creased to 5%, the highest rate seen since 
2008. The most significant contributions came 
from banks in Germany and France, which had 
already been recording the strongest growth 
prior to the outbreak of the pandemic. Con -
sumer credit business, on the other hand, con -
tracted significantly in the first quarter owing 
to the limited opportunities for consumption. 
However, the decline in this market segment was again smaller than it had been during the 
first phase of pandemic- related restrictions in 
the spring of 2020. Other lending, which 
mainly comprises loans to self- employed per -
sons, showed essentially no change.
Data provided by banks responding to the BLS 
reveal that the first quarter of 2021 saw a net 
decline in demand for loans for house purchase 
in the euro area, following the fairly strong in -
creases registered in the previous two quarters. 
Respondents mainly put this down to the de -
crease in consumer confidence. The bank man -
agers surveyed by the BLS also identified house -
holds’ use of their own savings and lending by 
other banks as additional factors that dampened 
demand for loans. On the supply side, the banks 
participating in the survey reported marginally 
easing their standards for housing loans for the 
first time again in the first quarter of the year, 
after tightening them in the previous four quar -
ters. They mainly cited the intense competition 
as the reason for easing their standards. Banks’ 
poorer assessment of borrowers’ creditworthi -
ness as well as their lower risk tolerance, mean -
while, led standards to be made more restrictive.
For the second time during the coronavirus cri -
sis, the banks surveyed by the BLS reported a 
considerable decrease in household demand 
for consumer credit and other lending. Like in 
the second quarter of 2020, the current decline 
in demand can be attributed in particular to a 
significant deterioration in consumer confi -
dence and a sharp fall in the need for funds to 
finance durable consumer goods. This reflects 
the limited opportunities for consumption and 
the precautionary saving due to the measures 
taken to contain the pandemic as well as the 
uncertainty surrounding its economic fallout. 
Compared to the second quarter of 2020, the 
banks also highlighted the increased signifi -
cance of households making use of their own 
savings. The surveyed banks continued to 
tighten their credit standards on balance in the 
first quarter of 2021. The rejection rate rose yet 
again and is likely to be relatively high at 
present.Loans to 
households  on 
upward path, 
but lose 
momentumBLS banks report 
decline in 
demand for 
housing loans 
against marginal  
easing of 
standards 
BLS banks report 
considerable 
decrease in 
demand for 
consumer credit 
and other 
lending MFI loans to the non-financial private 
sector in the euro area*
20020406080100120140
–+++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 21
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
–200+20+40+60+80 To households 3To non-financial corporations1
Total 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
34

The net external position of the MFI sector did 
not noticeably influence monetary growth in 
the first quarter of 2021. Non- seasonally ad -
justed balance of payments data, which are 
currently only available for January and Febru -
ary, indicate that the euro area’s persistent cur -
rent account surplus buoyed the net external 
position as usual. However, a countervailing ef -
fect –  one that led to capital exports  – was 
generated by the negative balance of cross-  
border securities transactions: in an upbeat set -
ting and with the US economy picking up pace, 
domestic investors showed perceptibly brisker 
demand on balance for foreign securities than 
non- resident investors did for equivalent do -
mestic assets. Unlike in the fourth quarter of 
2020, when non- resident investors offloaded 
government bonds on a large scale, the first 
quarter of 2021 saw investors, including for -
eign ones, purchase domestic securities in net 
terms, focusing their attention on equity shares 
and investment fund shares.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic customers
German banks significantly expanded their de -
posit business with domestic customers in the 
first quarter of 2021 as resident money holding 
sectors once again showed a very strong pref -
erence for overnight bank deposits. This coin -
cided with these sectors making further distinct 
reductions to their short- term time deposits 
and all of their long- term deposits. The on -
going accumulation of overnight deposits at an 
even brisker pace should also be seen against 
the backdrop of the persistently high uncer -
tainty surrounding the path of economic recov -
ery given the renewed uptick in the number of 
coronavirus infections. The low general level of 
interest rates and the narrow spread between 
short- term and long- term deposits provided 
additional tailwinds for this development (see 
the chart on p. 36).Alongside households, it was mainly non-  
financial corporations that added significantly 
to their holdings of overnight deposits. There 
are two aspects to this development. First, it 
was a reflection of the high level of corporate 
borrowing in the reporting quarter. Second, 
the disbursement of the government corona -
virus assistance funds, some of which had been 
agreed upon back in the autumn, also picked 
up significantly in the reporting quarter. An -
other factor fuelling the substantial accumula -
tion of overnight deposits by households was 
the absence of major consumption expend -
iture, including on items such as travel, due to 
the coronavirus- related restrictions. Moreover, 
the expiry of the VAT rate reductions at the end 
of 2020 gave households an incentive to make 
any planned major purchases before the end of 
the year.
Lending business conducted by banks in Ger -
many with domestic non- banks in the first 
quarter of 2021 was as lively as their deposit 
business, with loans to non- financial corpor -
ations in particular gaining significant momen -
tum compared with the third and fourth quar -
ters of last year. Household demand for loans 
for house purchase remained consistently 
strong as well. In addition to stepping up their 
loan volumes, banks in Germany also signifi -
cantly expanded their holdings of securities Net external 
position has no 
noticeable 
influence  on 
monetary 
growth
Overnight 
deposits cause 
huge increase in 
deposit businessHouseholds and 
non- financial 
corporations 
behind biggest 
build- up of 
deposits
Lending business 
with non- banks 
very dynamicSecurities-based lending to general 
government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2120002004006008001,0001,200
–++++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
Eurosystem
Other MFIsof which:By the euro area MFI sectorDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
35

issued  by the private sector, focusing their pur -
chases primarily on shares issued by domestic 
enterprises. By contrast, their lending business 
with the public sector increased only marginally 
overall, with the perceptible increase in securi -
tised lending to general government offsetting 
a similarly sized reduction in loans.
Loans to households once again saw the larg -
est net inflows in the first quarter of 2021. In 
net terms, current lending business with this 
sector was driven by housing loans alone, the 
growth of which fell just short of the strong in -
crease observed in the previous quarter. This is 
consistent with data reported by banks sur -
veyed as part of the BLS, which indicate that 
demand for housing loans remained consist -
ently high in the first quarter. As before, the 
BLS banks cited the low general level of interest 
rates, the positive outlook on the residential 
real estate market and the prospective rise in 
prices for residential real estate as the main fac -
tors propelling demand. The expiry of the home buyers’ child benefit programme, for which 
house purchasers could apply if they purchased 
a home on or before 31 March 2021, and refi -
nancing, debt restructuring and renegotiation 
were also reported to have stimulated demand. 
On balance, the growth rate of loans taken out 
for house purchase rose to 6.7% on the year, 
representing its highest value since 2000.
Credit standards for housing loans remained 
unchanged on balance in the first quarter of 
the year for the second time in succession. Un -
like the first wave of the pandemic, the second 
and third waves have therefore not yet had a 
material impact on housing loan standards. The 
rejection rate remained unchanged on the 
quarter after increasing over the each of three 
previous quarters, leaving it still at what is likely 
to be an elevated level at present. Terms and 
conditions agreed in loan contracts likewise re -
mained unchanged overall after being persist -
ently tightened since spring 2019.
Unlike loans for house purchase, the supply of 
consumer credit to households was scaled back 
discernibly in the first quarter of 2021, though 
the decline was considerably smaller than it 
had been in spring 2020. This probably comes 
mainly as a result of the ongoing restrictions 
that are still curbing many forms of economic 
and social activity. That observation is largely 
supported by the BLS survey data, with bank 
managers highlighting the lower level of con -
sumer confidence and the reduced expenditure 
on durable consumer goods as having negative 
effects on demand. They also reported that 
consumers utilising their savings as a source of 
equity finance was another factor that damp -
ened demand for bank loans.
Credit standards in the consumer credit seg -
ment were eased marginally on balance in the 
first quarter. The rejection rate remained steady 
in the reporting quarter after rising significantly 
in the second and third quarters of 2020 and 
declining in the final three months of that year. 
Terms and conditions agreed in loan contracts Households 
register 
strongest  inflow, 
driven by loans 
for house 
purchase BLS standards, 
terms and 
conditions  
unchanged 
overall
Coronavirus 
restrictions lead 
to consumer 
credit being 
scaled back
Lending policies 
eased in con -
sumer credit 
businessInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 202101234% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
36

were unchanged in this credit segment for the 
second time in succession.
Besides registering robust growth in their lend -
ing business with households, banks in Ger -
many also significantly expanded their supply 
of loans to non- financial corporations in the 
first quarter of 2021. After two weak previous 
quarters, demand for bank funding among 
non- financial corporations bounced back 
strongly and was broadly distributed across the 
different maturity segments. Medium- term and 
long- term loans met with lively interest from in -
vestors, while loans with agreed maturities of 
up to one year saw demand pick up again for 
the first time since March 2020.
Much of the stronger demand for loans was 
accounted for by enterprises from the con -
struction and real estate sector, service pro -
viders operating in the field of digitalisation 
and research and development activities, and 
export- oriented industry. Their well- filled order 
books and the favourable outlook suggest that 
their funding requirements have probably in -
creased. By contrast, the financing needs of 
sectors particularly affected by the coronavirus- 
related restrictions during the reporting quarter 
were covered at least in part by the disburse -
ment of government grants, which grew sub -
stantially in size on the quarter.
At the same time, the current supply of loans 
to non- financial corporations was given an 
additional boost by bank motives. In an effort 
to meet their net lending benchmarks before 
the TLTRO-  III reference period expired at the 
end of March, some banks participating in 
these refinancing operations granted loans at 
very favourable conditions.
Evidence of further factors can be found in the 
latest BLS data. Reporting banks once again 
identified refinancing, debt restructuring and 
renegotiation and increased financing needs 
for inventories and working capital as major 
factors driving the observed increase in credit 
demand. The delivery bottlenecks that materi -alised during the reporting quarter and the 
price increases for intermediate goods are also 
likely to have contributed to this development. 
According to the BLS data, funding require -
ments for fixed investment also added margin -
ally to the livelier demand for the first time 
since the fourth quarter of 2019. Meanwhile, 
enterprises’ scope for internal financing com -
bined with the uncertainty triggered by COVID- 
19 over the prospects for the economy damp -
ened demand for loans, all other things being 
equal.
At the same time, BLS banks reported that they 
had again made their lending policies in cor -Sharp uptick in 
demand for 
bank loans 
among non- 
financial 
corporations 
Rising funding 
requirements 
amongst enter -
prises not dir -
ectly negatively 
impacted by 
COVID-  19
Credit supply 
given an add -
itional boost by 
bank motives
BLS data con -
sistent with 
aggregate 
developments2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 21–10+1+2+3+4+5Year-on-year change, end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic 
non-financial private sector
210123456
––++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchase
Total,
percentage changeLoan contributions in percentage pointsTotal,
percentage changeUp to 1 yearMaturity contributions in percentage points
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 yearsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
37

porate banking more restrictive in response to 
the economic fallout from the coronavirus pan -
demic, tightening their credit standards for cor -
porate financing somewhat on balance in the 
first quarter of 2021. This marked a continu -
ation of the steady tightening of lending stand -
ards since COVID-  19 first emerged in Germany 
in the first quarter of 2020, albeit to a lesser ex -
tent than during the financial crisis. Institutions 
attributed the tightening of standards to their 
more pessimistic assessments of both the situ -
ations of individual sectors and enterprises as 
well as of borrowers’ creditworthiness, and 
cited the depressed general economic situation 
and the economic outlook as similarly import -
ant factors. In addition, the decline in the 
underlying value of collateral and in banks’ risk 
tolerance had a slightly restrictive effect on 
standards. Marginally expansionary effects, on 
the other hand, were produced by competition 
with other banks and by an improved funding 
situation in the money and bond market. The 
proportion of rejected loan applications re -mained unchanged over the previous quarter 
during the reporting period. Following the rises 
observed last year, the rejection rate is probably 
still at an elevated level. In the case of borrow -
ers from sectors particularly affected by the 
pandemic (such as hotel and restaurant ser -
vices, tourism and retail), BLS banks reported 
that some did not even go as far as to submit 
formal loan applications because their informal 
enquiries had already been rejected out of 
hand. Unlike credit standards, overall terms and 
conditions were not tightened further on bal -
ance.
Against the backdrop of the situation in the fi -
nancial markets, German banks, in response to 
the ad hoc questions in the April BLS, reported 
little change overall in their funding situation in 
the first quarter compared with the previous 
quarter. Only as regards funding through 
medium- term to long- term debt instruments 
did the positive development observed in the 
two previous quarters persist into the reporting 
period.
Over the past six months, the Eurosystem pur -
chase programmes (APP and PEPP) helped im -
prove the liquidity position of commercial 
banks and their market funding conditions, but 
continued to impact negatively on bank profit -
ability through net interest income. The pur -
chase programmes did not contribute to credit 
growth over the past six months.
In addition, the negative interest rate on the 
deposit facility squeezed banks’ net interest in -
come once again, depressing lending and de -
posit rates and pushing up fees for deposits. 
Banks singled out loans for house purchase as 
the only category in which the negative deposit 
facility interest rate had increased volumes to 
any notable degree. The two- tier system for re -
munerating excess liquidity holdings did, how -
ever, soften the adverse impact on profitability.
Twelve banks from the German sample took 
part in the TLTRO- III operation in December 
2020, while 17 participated in the March 2021 Credit lines 
in corporate 
banking  more 
restrictive overallVirtually no 
change in 
German  banks’ 
funding 
environment 
Eurosystem 
purchase  pro -
grammes 
improve banks’ 
liquidity position 
and market 
funding 
conditions 
Two- tier system 
for excess 
liquidity  softens 
adverse impact 
on profitabilityMFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2020 2021
Q4 Q1
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 54.9 88.4
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years – 20.9 – 21.2
over 2 years –  5.9 –  8.1
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months –  0.9 4.1
over 3 months –  0.9 –  1.1
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans –  3.0 –  3.7
Securities –  9.0 4.4
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 34.0 38.7
of which: to households 3 24.7 20.2
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 5.7 16.3
Securities 0.2 9.3
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. Data adjusted for statis-
tical changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, households and 
general government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted 
for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 4  Non- fi  nancial corporations and 
quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
38

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q2 2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 20211.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2013 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 2100.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
30030
–+
3003060
–++Credit to non-financial corporations
% p. a. % p. a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
0.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
39

operation, mainly on account of the attractive 
conditions of these operations. Banks reported 
using the uptake in funds primarily for lending 
to the private non- financial sector and as a 
substitute for TLTRO- II funds and maturing debt instruments. They stated that they would 
also be participating in future operations mainly 
because of the TLTRO- III operations’ attractive 
conditions. The TLTRO- III operations had barely 
any impact on banks’ lending policies.TLTRO- III funds 
used primarily 
for loans and as 
a substitute for 
TLTRO- II fundsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
40

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Since the beginning of 2021, international 
finan cial markets have reflected strengthening 
prospects of economic recovery over the course 
of the year. While new waves of infections and 
tighter containment measures in many places 
temporarily held back this recovery somewhat, 
these were outweighed on the whole by pro -
gress in vaccinations and positive business cycle 
signals. Moreover, an accommodative monet -
ary policy stance boosted the confidence of 
market participants. Given simultaneous fiscal 
policy stimulus –  particularly in the United 
States  – yields on benchmark government 
bonds rose worldwide, at times distinctly, via 
the interest rate linkage with the United States. 
This rise in yields occurred in a setting of calm 
markets and high liquidity. A key factor behind 
the increase in risk- free interest rates was rising 
inflation expectations, which continued to pick 
up from their lows in March 2020 on both 
sides of the Atlantic. Real interest rates there -
fore rose less strongly, on the whole, than 
nominal government bond yields. In January 
2021, yields on euro area corporate bonds ini -
tially hit all- time lows before rebounding as 
well. They nonetheless continued to reflect 
very favour  able financing conditions as this re -
port went to press. The upbeat setting led to 
strong price gains in the equity markets. Along -
side the aforementioned factors, this also re -
flected enterprises’ higher earnings expect -
ations and investors’ high risk appetite, which 
dampened demand in the foreign exchange 
markets for some currencies regarded as rela -
tively safe. Consequently, the yen and Swiss 
franc lost value in effective terms. The euro also 
depreciated on a weighted average, though its 
losses were small by comparison. Given rising 
yields on US Treasuries, the effective exchange 
rate of the US dollar, which often depreciates 
when risk appetites rise, remained virtually un -
changed. By contrast, the pound sterling bene -
fited from the trade and cooperation agree -ment reached with the EU at the end of 2020 
and the United Kingdom’s successes in its vac -
cination campaign.
Exchange rates
Since the beginning of 2021, the price of the 
euro against the US dollar has been influenced 
by various restrictions implemented to contain 
the coronavirus, the respective availability of 
vaccines in the two currency areas and the 
accom panying economic policy measures to 
stimulate economic activity. On balance, the 
euro has remained virtually unchanged against 
the US dollar since the start of the current year 
(-0.4%). However, this development has been 
dichotomous this year so far. A strong depreci -
ation of the euro vis- à- vis the US dollar in the 
first quarter later gave way to a marked coun -
termovement.
Rapid progress in administering vaccinations, 
surprisingly upbeat US economic data and the 
comprehensive fiscal measures passed by the 
new US administration boosted the US dollar 
over the first quarter. This raised confidence 
among market participants in the United States’ 
economic outlook and provided tailwinds for 
inflation expectations, which, in turn, was ac -
companied by rising yields on US Treasury 
bonds and net inflows of capital into the United 
States. These developments were mirrored by a 
broad-  based appreciation of the US dollar. By 
contrast, euro area countries initially faced an 
uptick in infection numbers, sluggish inocula -
tion of their populations and the associated 
containment measures that slowed the eco -
nomic recovery and therefore weighed on the 
euro. By the end of the first quarter, the ex -
change rate of the euro against the US dollar 
stood at US$1.17, down 5.0% since the start of 
the year.Financial 
markets  reflect -
ing more favour -
able economic 
outlook
Euro virtually 
unchanged 
against the 
US dollar, …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
41

Since the beginning of April, the euro has re -
couped a large portion of its earlier losses 
against the US dollar. One reason for this is a 
surge in vaccinations on this side of the Atlan -
tic and an unexpectedly strong improvement in 
euro area sentiment. Another is the distinct 
slowdown in the pace of vaccinations in the 
United States owing to reservations about vac -
cines and the trend increase in US Treasury 
yields weakening markedly. This caused the 
yield spread between the United States and the 
euro area to narrow somewhat since the start 
of April. The euro closed the reporting period 
at US$1.22, up 4.2% since the beginning of 
April.The euro has appreciated distinctly vis- à- vis the 
yen since the start of the year. At last count, 
the exchange rate reached its highest level 
since the first quarter of 2018, at ¥133.1, up 
5.2% since the turn of the year. On the one 
hand, this is attributable to the rising infection 
numbers, which were originally low, and the 
late and sluggish rollout of vaccinations in 
Japan. The country also extended its corona -
virus state of emergency recently. On the other 
hand, the yen came under pressure after the 
Bank of Japan signalled its willingness to loosen 
its monetary policy should the high level of un -
certainty driven by the pandemic weigh mark -
edly on the economic recovery. At the same 
time, the prospects of an upturn in the global 
economy also dampened demand for curren -
cies perceived to be relatively safe, such as the 
yen, in the foreign exchange markets. Past ex -
perience has shown that investors withdraw 
some of their assets from Japan when their ap -
petite for risk increases.
The euro has depreciated by 4.3% against the 
pound sterling since the start of the year, ini -
tially losing value against the UK currency in 
the first three months of the year before re -
bounding slightly. This left the single currency 
at £0.85 at the end of the first quarter, 5.3% 
weaker than at the end of 2020. Up to that 
point, the British pound had been on the in -
crease primarily owing to the trade and co -
operation agreement that had been reached 
with the European Union just before the end of 
2020. The rapid rollout of vaccinations and the 
announcement that coronavirus restrictions 
would phase out by the end of June also pro -
vided tailwinds for the UK currency. It did ex -
perience a bout of distinct downward pressure 
at the start of April, however, when UK vaccin -
ation numbers declined markedly after an age 
restriction was recommended for the adminis -
tration of one of the available vaccines due to 
potential risks. Concerns about an outcome of 
the parliamentary elections in Scotland that 
might herald an independence referendum also 
briefly cast a shadow over the pound sterling. 
Furthermore, the Bank of England’s latest deci -… but saw 
gains against 
the yen …
… and losses 
against the 
pound sterlingExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 As calculated by the ECB against the currencies 
of 19 countries. A rise in values indicates an appreciation of 
the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankJ A S OND J FMAM
2020 20211.101.151.201.25
120125130135
0.850.880.910.94
97100103Daily data, log scale
¥US$
£against the ...
... US dollar
... yen
... pound sterling
Nominal effective exchange rate1
Q1 1999 = 100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
42

sion to slow the weekly pace of its asset pur -
chases to contain the economic fallout from 
the coronavirus pandemic was unable to buoy 
up the pound sterling. As a result, the euro was 
able to recoup some of its losses from the first 
quarter, appreciating by 0.9% since the begin -
ning of April.
On a weighted average against the currencies 
of 19 major trading partners, the euro was 
down by 1.1% on balance compared to the end 
of last year, losing value not just against the 
pound sterling but also declining against the 
renminbi. Its losses were also notable against 
the Norwegian krone and Canadian dollar, 
which – being currencies of oil- exporting coun -
tries – were given a broad- based boost by the 
rise in oil prices. Furthermore, the Canadian 
dollar responded with marked gains to the sur -
prising announcement by the Bank of Canada 
to reduce its asset purchases and thus slow the 
pace of its quantitative easing. By comparison, 
the euro has gained ground against the Swiss 
franc since the start of 2021, thanks to a grow -
ing appetite for risk in the foreign exchange 
markets. On balance, the price competitiveness 
of euro area suppliers improved somewhat 
over the period under review; looking at the 
long- term average, their competitive position 
can currently still be classified as neutral.
Securities markets and 
portfolio  investment
Bond market
Yields on government bonds in the major cur -
rency areas rose significantly in most cases 
from the beginning of the year. This is espe -
cially true for the United States, where yields 
on ten- year US Treasuries climbed 72 basis 
points to 1.6% on balance. The pronounced in -
crease in US yields reflects the confidence of 
market participants regarding future economic 
activity. This confidence was mainly based on 
the progress made in the vaccination campaign 
and the fiscal policy measures taken. The latter are likely to give the US economy a huge boost 
in the short term and could lead to an over -
utilisation of capacity, at least for a time.1 The 
associated higher inflation expectations coin -
cided with an uptick in market participants’ un -
certainty about future interest rate movements, 
which was reflected in a much higher nominal 
term premium. Market participants’ risk- neutral 
expectations regarding the path of monetary 
policy short- term interest rates, when viewed in 
isolation, fell slightly by contrast. This was in 
line with the US Federal Reserve Bank’s an -
nouncement under its new strategy that it 
would wait to lower the degree of monetary 
policy accommodation. These factors also 
drove real yields on US Treasuries somewhat 
higher (+18 basis points to -92 basis points).
Yields on ten- year Bunds have climbed by 47 
basis points on balance to -0.1% since the be -
ginning of 2021, putting them at around the Euro somewhat 
weaker in 
effective  terms
Ten- year US 
Treasury yields 
up significantly
Yield on 
ten- year Bunds 
also upBond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual ma-
turity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 20210.90.60.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.0
–––++++++++++% p. a., daily data
United StatesEuro area
Japan
United KingdomGermany
1 See the box on pp. 16 ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
43

level at the start of 2020 as this report went to 
press. Hopes of the economic recovery con -
tinuing also played a role in the Federal bonds 
market, though yields there only partly mir -
rored the rise in US yields via international inter -
est rate linkages during the reporting period. 
This was mainly due to expectations of eco -
nomic recovery in the euro area being pushed 
back after the pandemic flared up again in the 
second quarter and various euro area govern -
ments introduced stricter and more prolonged 
containment measures. Real yields on ten- year 
inflation- linked Federal bonds hovered close to 
their record low from the end of 2020. The 
spread between ten- year nominal US Treasuries 
and ten- year Bunds widened on balance by 25 
basis points to 174 basis points, though it re -
mained below the five- year average of 198 
basis points. The real interest rate gap between 
the two currency areas widened slightly, too.
The change in the economic outlook for the 
euro area was reflected in the yield curve de -rived from Federal securities yields, which was 
much steeper at the end of the period under 
review than at the start of 2021. The spread be -
tween ten- year and two- year maturities rose by 
38 basis points to 56 basis points, taking it to a 
level similar to the one last seen in mid- 2019. 
At the end of the reporting period, yields on 
Federal securities were no longer negative as of 
around the 13- year mark. A model breakdown 
indicates that distinctly higher term premia are 
the main reason for the steeper yield curve. 
This would suggest that market participants are 
noticeably less worried about unexpectedly low 
interest rates. Implied expectations for short-  
term interest rates remained virtually un -
changed.
The spread between ten- year Bunds and 
matched- maturity government bonds issued by 
other euro area countries (GDP- weighted aver -
age excluding Germany) has been moving 
within a fairly narrow range around the 50 
basis point mark since the beginning of 2021, a 
level last observed in mid- 2008. Spreads 
widened slightly towards the end of the report -
ing period, increasing by 11 basis points to 61 
basis points. Like other country- specific risks, 
rising infection numbers impacted only margin -
ally on yield spreads. Various indicators of mar -
ket stress and market liquidity show that euro 
area government bond markets are calm by 
historical standards, especially so compared to 
the episode of significantly heightened market 
stress in March 2020 (see the chart on p. 45). 
One reason for the weak market responses to 
stress factors is likely to have been the ECB 
Governing Council decisions in January, which 
emphasised that the pace of purchases could 
be temporarily adjusted upwards in order to 
preserve favourable financing conditions even 
if the envelope of the pandemic emergency 
purchase programme remains unchanged. Fur -
thermore, the risk appetite of market players is 
currently quite high, which will probably keep 
spreads in check as well.
Compared to the beginning of the year, yields 
on ten- year UK bonds (gilts) were up by 67 Steeper yield 
curve for Federal 
securities
Yield spreads 
on euro area 
government 
bonds up 
slightly
Yields up in UK 
and JapanSpreads of ten-year government bonds 
over Federal bonds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021050100150200250300350400450Basis points, daily data
Italy
Spain
Ireland FranceGreece
PortugalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
44

basis points at 0.9% owing to international 
interest rate linkages. First and foremost, this 
development reflects a rapid vaccination rollout 
campaign by international standards and the 
associated prospects of a strong cyclical re -
bound this year. While it is true that the Bank 
of England slowed the weekly pace of its asset 
purchases, as outlined above, it left the base 
rate unchanged at the all- time low of 0.1%. In 
Japan, meanwhile, yields on ten- year govern -
ment bonds stood at 0.1% at the end of the re -
porting period, and were thus likewise some -
what higher than at the start of the year (+6 
basis points). Yields thus remained within the 
range in which market participants assume that 
the Bank of Japan wishes to keep interest rates. 
The relatively slow vaccination campaign, like 
other macroeconomic shocks, did not have any 
noticeable impact on Japanese yields, as hitherto.
Euro area forward inflation rates derived from 
inflation swaps for a period of five years start -
ing in five years’ time most recently stood at 1.6% and were thus 38 basis points higher 
than at the beginning of the year. Forward in -
flation rates were consequently clearly above 
their pre- pandemic level (beginning of 2020: 
1.3%) and at a two- year high. At the beginning 
of the pandemic in March 2020, this indicator 
had recorded a low of 0.7%. The risk- neutral 
probability of inflation rates lower than 1% on 
average over the next five years declined from 
55% to 20% during the reporting period. 
Meanwhile, market participants do not see a 
high risk of inflation rapidly rising to above 2% 
in the euro area; the risk- neutral probability of 
inflation rates above this level was 17% at last 
count. Inflation expectations for the euro area 
six to ten years ahead, as calculated by Con -
sensus Economics on the basis of surveys, were 
most recently 1.8%, as at the beginning of the 
year; they consequently exceeded market- based 
measures. The gap between market and survey- 
based expectations can be attributed mainly to 
inflation risk and liquidity premia. In the United 
States, market- based five- year forward inflation Forward infla -
tion rate in the 
euro area has 
risenMarket stress indicators for the euro area*
Sources: Bloomberg, Eurex, Markit, Refinitiv and Bundesbank calculations. * All indicators have been standardised across the available 
observations since the beginning of 2017 (except for order book illiquidity: April 2019). Values above 6 are shown as 6. 1 Quotient of 
the average bid-ask spread and cumulative volume of the first 15 bids in the order book of Eurex Deutschland for futures on ten-year 
government bonds of the four largest euro area countries by economic output, GDP-weighted. 2 GDP-weighted yield spread of ten-
year euro area government bonds over Federal bonds. 3 CDS contracts with maturities of five years for the twelve largest euro area 
countries by economic output, GDP-weighted. 4 Standard deviation of the yields of ten-year government bonds of the twelve largest 
euro area countries by economic output (excluding DE). 5 Markit iTraxx 125 Europe CDS contracts with a maturity of five years. 6 BBB 
iBoxx index compared to Federal securities, which each have a residual maturity of between seven and ten years. 7 Implied volatility of 
the EURO STOXX 50 calculated using the prices of index options with a maturity of 30 days.
Deutsche BundesbankVSTOXX 7
Spread of 
corporate bonds 6
CDS premiums of
corporate bonds 5Dispersion of
government bond yields 4CDS premiums of
government bonds 3Spread of 
government bonds 2Order book illiquidity1
30 December 201918 March 202030 December 202018 May 2021
4
026Standard deviations relative to the mean valueDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
45

rates in five years also registered a perceptible 
increase, advancing by 22 basis points to 2.5%. 
This put them at the same level as the survey- 
based data.
Yields on European corporate bonds have risen 
from a very low level in the year to date. Bonds 
issued by BBB- rated financial corporations with 
a residual maturity of between seven and ten 
years were yielding 1.2% as this report went to 
press, 34 basis points higher than at the end of 
last year. Yields on non- financial corporate 
bonds rose by a similar amount, adding 31 
basis points to reach 0.8%. The main reason 
why corporate bond yields picked up after fall -ing to historical lows in January, in some cases, 
was the increase in risk- free interest rates. As 
Bund yields went up more strongly, however, 
yield spreads over Bunds with the same matur -
ity narrowed, by 7 basis points and 10 basis 
points respectively for financial and non-  
financial corporations. Most recently, yield 
spreads on BBB- rated bonds were lower than 
before the onset of the coronavirus pandemic. 
They were consequently well below their five-  
year average and only slightly higher than be -
fore the financial crisis hit in July 2007. In the 
high- yield segment, both bond yields and yield 
spreads over Bunds dropped significantly. Nar -
rower corporate bond spreads are a reflection 
of comparatively low compensation for default 
risk. Contributory factors are likely to have 
been falling stock market uncertainty (see p. 48) 
and investors’ high appetite for risk. Taken to -
gether, this suggests that valuations in the cor -
porate bond market are high.
Gross issuance in the German bond market in 
the first quarter of 2021 was significantly higher 
than in the preceding three- month period. 
Overall, German borrowers issued paper to the 
tune of €472½ billion, after €333 billion in the 
final quarter of 2020. Net of redemptions and 
changes in issuers’ own holdings, domestic is -
suers ramped up their capital market borrow -
ing by €87 billion. The outstanding volume of 
foreign debt securities in the German market 
rose by €61½ billion in the first quarter. On bal -
ance, the total outstanding volume of bonds in 
Germany thus climbed by €148½ billion in the 
quarter under review.
In the first quarter of 2021, the public sector is -
sued bonds to the tune of €56 billion net, fol -
lowing €9½ billion in the previous quarter. 
Central government (including the resolution 
agency that is classified as part of it) issued 
mainly Treasury discount paper (Bubills: €23½ 
billion), but also five- year Federal notes (Bobls: 
€12 billion) and Federal bonds, predominantly 
with a maturity of 30 years (€7 billion). State 
and local governments issued bonds worth €13 
billion net.Corporate bond 
yields higherHigh net 
issuance  of 
German  debt 
securities
Higher public 
sector capital 
market 
borrowing Forward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Derived  from  the  fixed  cash 
flow arising from inflation swaps which is swapped for the ac-
tual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro 
area and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised 
over the next five or ten years. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 20211.41.82.22.6Weekly averages
00.40.81.2% p. a.
Five-year forward 
inflation rate in 
five years derived from swapsConsensus Economics inflation
expectations in six to ten years
United StatesEuro area
Difference between the forward inflation 
rates in the United States and the euro areaPercentage 
points0.81.21.62.0
% p. a.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
46

In the quarter under review, domestic credit in -
stitutions upped their capital market debt by 
€29½ billion, following net redemptions of 
€29 billion in the previous quarter. There was 
net issuance, in particular, of debt securities by 
specialised credit institutions (€19½ billion). In 
addition, the outstanding volume of other 
bank debt securities that can be structured flex -
ibly (€5½ billion), mortgage Pfandbriefe (€4 bil -
lion) and public Pfandbriefe (€1 billion) also 
rose.
The quarter under review saw domestic enter -
prises issue a net €1½ billion worth of bonds, 
following unusually high net redemptions 
amounting to €30 billion in the previous quar -
ter, which were largely attributable to one- off 
factors.2 Overall, non- financial corporations 
were the only issuers of bonds (€2½ billion), 
while other financial intermediaries made re -
demptions (€1 billion).
In the first quarter of 2021, debt securities 
were, on balance, acquired predominantly by 
domestic non-  banks (€60½ billion), which 
were interested primarily in foreign paper. The 
Bundesbank increased its bond holdings by 
€54½ billion net, mainly under the Eurosys -
tem’s monetary policy asset purchase pro -
grammes. Foreign investors, meanwhile, ac -
quired €22½ billion worth net of German 
bonds. Foreign purchases also reflected pri -
mary market activity by central government, 
which uses tender procedures to issue bonds 
to credit institutions and investment firms, 
some of which are domiciled outside Germany. 
Domestic credit institutions purchased debt 
securities  for €11 billion in net terms; on bal -
ance, they exclusively purchased domestic in -
struments.
Equity market
The international stock markets, too, were 
shaped mainly by brighter growth prospects, a Net issuance 
by credit 
institutions 
Slight rise in 
enterprises’ 
capital  market 
debt
Purchase of debt 
securitiesYield spreads of corporate bonds
in the euro area*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBoxx indices with a residual maturity of seven 
to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 20210100200300400500600700800900
100200300400High yield1
BBB2
AA2
By sector
BBB financial 
corporations2
BBB non-financial corporations2By rating categoryBasis points, daily data
Investment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2020 2021
Q1 Q4 Q1
Debt securities
Residents 26.0 70.6 126.2
Credit institutions 30.3 –  14.4 10.9
of which:
Foreign debt securities 19.3 2.0 – 4.2
Deutsche Bundesbank 11.9 70.5 54.6
Other sectors – 16.2 14.5 60.7
of which:
Domestic debt securities – 11.8 2.1 – 5.8
Non-residents 61.4 – 105.7 22.3
Shares
Residents 14.1 30.2 18.6
Credit institutions –  8.7 5.2 3.6
of which:
Domestic shares –  4.5 1.8 2.6
Non-banks 22.8 25.0 14.9
of which:
Domestic shares 12.5 3.0 6.6
Non-residents –  6.2 –   0.6 4.0
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 33.4 43.3 23.9
Investment in retail funds –  1.2 8.0 9.4
of which:
Equity funds –  5.8 4.3 4.3
Deutsche Bundesbank2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
47

stimulative fiscal policy, particularly in the 
United States, and a predominantly expansion -
ary monetary policy worldwide. Overall, share 
prices continued the previous quarter’s upward 
trajectory and booked significant gains. On 
both sides of the Atlantic, a positive corporate 
reporting season further bolstered optimism. 
This was reflected in noticeably higher earnings 
expectations. Price developments were damp -
ened somewhat by higher risk- free interest 
rates, which raise the discount factor used to 
value future profits, and thus lower enterprises’ 
present value. On the whole, however, this 
dampening effect on prices was limited. This 
was undoubtedly attributable, in part, to mar -
ket participants’ hopes that monetary policy 
will remain expansionary on both sides of the 
Atlantic. Moreover, market players displayed a 
pronounced appetite for risk. Both factors were 
evident, amongst others, in the fact that prices 
proved very robust to several negative factors – 
the persistent uncertainty surrounding future 
infection rates and geopolitical tensions, to name just two. Overall, European stocks, as 
measured by the EURO STOXX, have recorded 
significant gains in the year to date (+11.8%). 
US and German shares, as measured by the 
S&P 500 and CDAX, temporarily hit historical 
highs, climbing by 9.9% and 8.9% respectively. 
The UK’s FTSE All-  Share index and Japan’s Nik -
kei 225 rose by 9.1% and 3.5% respectively 
overall.
As in the preceding quarter, bank shares on 
both sides of the Atlantic outperformed their 
respective overall markets in the reporting 
period. US and European bank stocks climbed 
by 34.0% and 32.4% respectively. Their above- 
average performance was driven, in particular, 
by improved earnings expectations as a result, 
amongst other things, of steeper yield curves 
and a good climate for corporate bond issues. 
In addition, some unexpectedly good quarterly 
results fuelled stock prices in the banking sec -
tor. Given the positive economic indicators, 
market participants appear to take a more fa -
vourable view of the risk of credit defaults.
Price uncertainty in the equity market –  as 
measured by the implied volatility of equity in -
dices calculated from options – has decreased 
in the year to date. Relatively pronounced fluc -
tuations in the prices of individual stocks at the 
end of January, rising risk- free interest rates and 
unexpectedly high US inflation in April only 
caused temporary spikes in volatility in the end. 
Equity market uncertainty for both US and 
European stock markets was recently slightly 
above its respective five- year averages.
Equity valuation levels on either side of the At -
lantic moved in different directions during the 
reporting period. Despite the reduced uncer -
tainty, the equity risk premium market partici -
pants demand for the EURO STOXX, which can 
be calculated as a residual using a dividend dis -
count model, rose. Given the higher risk- free 
interest rates, the implied cost of capital conse -
quently also climbed and is now roughly in line 
with its five- year average. Nonetheless, the 
earnings yield remains below its long- term International 
equity markets 
with clear gainsBank shares 
outperform  
overall market
Stock market 
volatility down
Valuation down 
somewhat but 
still high in a 
long- term 
comparison Equity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankBank indicesBeginning of 2019 = 100, log scale, daily data
Total market indices
8090100110120130140150160170
160
5560708090100110120130140150
2019 2020 2021Euro area
(EURO STOXX)Japan
(Nikkei 225)United States
(S&P 500)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
48

average, suggesting a relatively high valuation. 
For the S&P 500, meanwhile, the equity risk 
premium fell, while the cost of capital was vir -
tually unchanged. Given that the cost of capital 
and earnings yields are low in a long- term com -
parison, US enterprises’ valuations also appear 
high.
On balance, funding in the German stock mar -
ket totalled €13 billion in the reporting quarter, 
compared with €4 billion in the preceding 
quarter. The large issuance volume can be at -
tributed primarily to capital increases by exist -
ing companies. The volume of foreign shares in 
the German market rose by €9½ billion over 
the same period. On balance, domestic non-  
banks were the main buyers of equities (€15 
billion). Foreign investors and domestic credit 
institutions expanded their equity portfolios by 
€4 billion and €3½ billion net respectively.
In the first quarter of 2021, domestic invest -
ment companies posted inflows of €33½ bil -
lion, after relatively high inflows of €51½ billion 
in the previous quarter. On balance, the vast 
majority of the fresh funds were channelled to 
specialised funds reserved for institutional in -
vestors (€24 billion). Of the various asset 
classes, mixed securities funds, in particular, 
registered significant net inflows of capital (€15 
billion), followed by equity funds (€7½ billion), 
open- end real estate funds (€6 billion) and 
funds of funds (€2½ billion). The outstanding 
volume of foreign mutual fund shares in Ger -
many rose by €17 billion in the period under re -
view. Mutual fund shares were bought on bal -
ance almost exclusively by domestic non- banks, 
which added €47½ billion worth of fund shares 
to their portfolios. Most of this paper was is -
sued by domestic mutual funds. Domestic 
credit institutions expanded their fund port -
folios by €2½ billion net, while non- resident in -
vestors had only a marginal involvement in the 
German mutual fund market overall.Equity market 
funding
Sales and 
purchases  of 
mutual fund 
sharesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2020 2021
Q1 Q4 Q1p
I. Current account + 62.3 +  70.5 +  66.4
1. Goods + 52.5 +  53.9 +  55.9
2. Services –  2.7 +   4.1 +   3.6
3. Primary income + 26.9 +  30.4 +  27.5
4. Secondary income – 14.4 –  17.9 –  20.6
II. Capital account –  0.3 –   3.4 –   0.1
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) + 37.8 +  93.0 + 131.7
1. Direct investment + 20.2 +   3.2 +  29.7
Domestic investment 
abroad + 47.8 +  43.8 +  42.9
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country + 27.6 +  40.7 +  13.2
2. Portfolio investment – 40.9 + 172.5 +  60.9
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities + 13.6 +  67.7 +  87.2
Shares 1 +  5.2 +  22.9 +   8.9
Investment fund shares 2–  8.5 +  30.2 +  16.8
of which:
Money market fund 
shares –  3.1 +   8.4 –   8.7
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 +  1.5 –   1.9 +   3.1
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 + 15.4 +  16.5 +  58.4
of which:
Denominated in euro 5 + 12.0 +   7.7 +  40.2
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities + 54.4 – 104.8 +  26.3
Shares 1 –  6.2 –   1.0 +   3.9
Investment fund shares –  0.7 +   1.8 +   0.1
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 + 29.3 –  33.5 +  19.9
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 + 32.0 –  72.2 +   2.4
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 6 +  1.7 –  39.0 –   4.1
3. Financial derivatives 7 + 33.5 +   9.1 +  21.9
4. Other investment 8 + 24.9 –  92.7 +  18.8
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 9 – 77.6 +  23.7 – 105.8
Enterprises and 
 households 10 +  4.9 –   4.8 +  45.9
General government +  1.1 –   0.0 –   1.1
Bundesbank + 96.5 – 110.8 +  79.8
5. Reserve assets +  0.1 +   0.8 +   0.4
IV. Errors and omissions 11 – 24.1 +  25.8 +  65.4
1  Including participation certifi  cates. 2  Including reinvested 
earnings. 3  Short- term: original maturity of up to one year. 
4 Long- term: original maturity of more than one year or unlim-
ited. 5 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 6 Including 
bonds issued by the former Federal Railways, the former Federal 
Post Offi   ce and the former Treuhand agency. 7 Balance of trans-
actions arising from options and fi  nancial futures contracts as 
well as employee stock options. 8 Includes in particular fi  nancial 
and trade credits as well as currency and deposits. 9 Excluding 
the Bundesbank. 10   Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial 
corporations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well 
as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t insti-
tutions serving households. 11  Statistical errors and omissions 
resulting from the difference between the balance on the fi  nan-
cial account and the balances on the current account and the 
capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
49

Direct investment
Transactions in cross- border portfolio invest -
ment resulted in net capital exports of €61 bil -
lion in the first quarter of 2021. Direct invest -
ment, too, led to capital outflows, totalling 
€29½ billion.
Enterprises domiciled in Germany expanded 
their direct investment abroad by €43 billion in 
the first three months of 2021 (previous quar -
ter: €44 billion). Specifically, they provided for -
eign subsidiaries with €11 billion in additional 
equity capital. This was done almost exclusively 
in the form of reinvested earnings. Further -
more, German firms supplied €32 billion in 
additional funds via intra- group loans, the ma -
jority of which were financial loans. Loans from 
domestic subsidiaries to their foreign parent 
companies (reverse investments) were an im -
portant factor here; German firms also pro -
vided fellow enterprises abroad with additional 
funds. In the first quarter, German foreign dir -
ect investment flowed mainly to Spain (€28½ billion), the UK (€16½ billion) and China (€4½ 
billion). By contrast, German enterprises made 
net withdrawals of direct investment funds 
from the United States (€21½ billion) and the 
Netherlands (€7½ billion).
Foreign firms upped their direct investment in 
Germany by €13 billion between January and 
March; in the fourth quarter of 2020, the vol -
ume of such investment had amounted to 
€40½ billion. Foreign investors provided Ger -
man subsidiaries with additional equity capital 
of €4½ billion and injected €8½ billion into af -
filiates in Germany in the form of loans. All in 
all, most of them granted financial loans, par -
ticularly to German subsidiaries. In the main, 
direct investment funds originated from Spain 
(€19½ billion), the United Kingdom (€19 bil -
lion) and Switzerland (€3½ billion). As in the 
opposite direction, direct investment transac -
tions from the United States (€23 billion) and 
the Netherlands (€10½ billion) resulted in a 
negative balance.Direct invest -
ment sees net 
capital exports
German direct 
investment 
abroad results in 
capital exportsForeign direct 
investment in 
Germany yields 
capital inflows
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), Financial markets, Monthly Report, February 2021, pp. 40 ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
50

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
Aggregate output in Germany fell strongly in 
the first quarter of 2021. According to the Fed -
eral Statistical Office’s flash estimate, real gross 
domestic product (GDP) was 1.7% down on 
the quarter after seasonal and calendar adjust -
ment. This meant that economic activity again 
fell short of the pre- crisis level of the fourth 
quarter of 2019 by almost 5%. The setback can 
be attributed in large part to the stricter and 
more prolonged measures to protect against 
coronavirus compared with the preceding 
quarter. In particular, this hit a number of ser -
vices sectors hard. Moreover, industrial output 
stagnated, and construction output even de -
clined, after both sectors had provided consid -
erable support to the economy in the previous 
quarter. Various factors were at work here. In 
the construction sector, the return of the VAT 
rates to their higher levels at the start of the 
year and the unfavourable weather conditions 
in January and February had a dampening ef -
fect. In industry, bottlenecks in the supply of 
intermediate goods led to the recovery stalling, 
despite a further increase in demand. The auto -
motive sector experienced delays in production 
owing to a lack of semiconductors. In the 
second quarter of 2021, GDP could pick up 
again significantly, in spite of potentially even 
tighter bottlenecks in the supply of intermedi -
ate goods for industry. The extent of the in -
crease largely hinges on how quickly and sus -
tainably the pandemic can be quashed and 
containment measures eased.
On the demand side, it was probably, above all, 
private consumption which declined strongly in 
the first quarter. A host of opportunities for 
consumption of services were either partially or 
entirely unavailable owing to the coronavirus 
mitigation measures. In addition, the return of 
VAT rates to their higher level dampened de -
mand for consumer durables such as motor 
vehicles . Purchases of such goods had been brought forward to the second half of the pre -
vious year. Businesses probably reduced invest -
ment in new machinery and equipment in the 
first quarter as well, albeit on a much smaller 
scale. On the other hand, German enterprises 
continued to benefit from dynamic foreign de -
mand and significantly increased their exports.
German enterprises’ exports of goods rose 
steeply in real terms in the first quarter of 2021. 
In a regional breakdown, exports to non- euro 
area countries saw stronger growth than ex -
ports to euro area countries. In geographical 
terms, the value of exports increased across the 
board. Deliveries to the United Kingdom were 
one exception, with quite a considerable 
quarter- on- quarter fall recorded after the end 
of the transition period ensuring reciprocal 
market access under EU Single Market rules. 
Broken down by category of goods, price-  German eco -
nomic output 
down strongly 
in Q1 2021
Strong signs 
of slowdown, 
mainly in private 
consumptionExports of 
goods up 
steeply
Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Price 
and calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 21949698100102104106108
–12–9–6–30+3+6Price and seasonally adjusted
2015 = 100, log scale
GDP
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
51

adjusted exports of intermediate goods re -
corded a significant increase, according to the 
figures available up to February. Exports of cap -
ital goods still rose markedly, despite a de -
crease in motor vehicle exports. Exports of con -
sumer goods were also distinctly higher.
Business investment in machinery and equip -
ment is likely to have fallen distinctly in the first 
quarter of 2021, as signalled by the value of 
capital goods imports, which saw a sharp 
quarter- on- quarter decrease averaged across 
January and February. In addition, manufactur -
ers of capital goods experienced a steep drop 
in domestic sales in the first quarter. This was due chiefly to the automotive sector. Enter -
prises probably distinctly scaled back invest -
ment in their fleets of vehicles, as indicated by 
the substantial decline in new registrations of 
commercial passenger vehicles. Manufacturers’ 
delivery difficulties are likely to have played a 
part in this. New registrations of commercial 
vehicles were also down markedly. Excluding 
motor vehicles, however, domestic sales in -
creased significantly. Other transport equip -
ment experienced a particularly strong rise in 
turnover, though producers of computer, elec -
tronic and optical products as well as mechan -
ical engineering firms also saw significant sales 
growth.
Construction investment is likely to have fallen 
in the first quarter of 2021. Turnover in the 
main construction sector, the figures for which 
are available up to February, fell considerably 
short of the average of the previous quarter, 
implying a strong decrease in both housing in -
vestment and commercial construction activity. 
The downturn in construction investment is 
likely to be attributable primarily to the VAT 
rates going back up to their previous level at 
the start of the year and the exceptionally poor 
weather conditions in January and February. A 
countermovement can therefore be expected 
in March, but the quarter as a whole will prob -
ably remain under strain.
In the first quarter of 2021, private consump -
tion suffered quite considerably from the 
second wave of the pandemic and went down 
substantially. Compared with the preceding 
quarter, the coronavirus mitigation measures 
were even stricter and, above all, were more 
prolonged. This led to sharply depressed sales, 
particularly in the hotel and restaurant sector, 
for which statistics are available up to February. 
Bricks- and- mortar retail outlets were also hit 
hard by the measures, despite initial easing in 
March, with sales of textiles, clothing and foot -
wear in the quarter under review dropping dra -
matically compared with the previous quarter. 
Sales of furniture, furnishings, household appli -
ances and home improvement materials as well Probable 
marked reduc -
tion in business 
investment in 
machinery and 
equipmentConstruction 
investment 
probably down
Private 
consumption  
probably  down 
steeply in Q1708090100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 21758090100110
90100110120Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
to euro area countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted 1758090100110
€ bnto non-euro area countriesof which:MonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
52

as information and communication technology 
devices also slumped. Food retailers generated 
a major increase in sales, however. As was the 
case during the first wave of the pandemic, 
they benefited from the restrictions placed on 
restaurants and canteens. Online and mail 
order trade likewise posted further sizeable 
growth in sales. Nonetheless, retail sales 
dropped sharply overall. In the motor vehicle 
trade, in particular, the return to the higher VAT 
rates had a significant impact, alongside man -
datory closures of sales floors and supply 
bottlenecks. New private passenger car regis -
trations were down sharply in the first quarter 
of 2021, for example.
In price- adjusted terms, German imports of 
goods fell distinctly in the first quarter of 2021. 
Imports from euro area countries and from 
non- euro area countries decreased on roughly 
the same scale. In nominal terms, however, im -
ports of goods were up substantially. A key rea -
son for the strong disparity between develop -
ments in nominal and price- adjusted terms is 
the extremely sharp increase in energy prices. 
This also contributed to the steep rise in nom -
inal imports of goods from OPEC countries and 
Russia. The value of imports from China, newly 
industrialised Asian countries and Switzerland 
likewise went up. By contrast, imports from the 
United Kingdom, much like exports, fell consid -
erably after the end of the transition period. 
Broken down by category of goods, price-  
adjusted imports of capital goods and of con -
sumer goods declined steeply, according to the 
figures available up to February. The volume of 
imported intermediate goods decreased signifi -
cantly.
Sectoral trends
The industrial recovery stalled in the first quar -
ter of 2021 owing to bottlenecks in the supply 
of intermediate goods, primarily in the auto -
motive sector. This situation arose, on the one 
hand, because of strong global demand for 
some industrial raw materials and hence large quantities purchased. On the other hand, 
supply- side factors also played a role. There 
were, for instance, bottlenecks with cargo 
ships and containers.1 Moreover, there were 
quantitative restrictions on a number of indus -
trial raw materials and semiconductor prod -
ucts. The latter caused problems chiefly for 
motor vehicle manufacturers. Besides tempor -
ary disruptions at some production sites, the 
shortage of semiconductors is also likely to be 
connected with the fact that motor vehicle 
manufacturers had significantly cut their orders 
in the second quarter of 2020 and other sec -
tors had absorbed the capacity created. On top 
of this, setting up new production capacities in 
this area takes a certain amount of time, and 
motor vehicle manufacturers had not adjusted 
their orders in time for the subsequent strong 
resurgence in demand. Overall, despite brisk 
demand, seasonally adjusted German industrial Price- adjusted 
goods imports 
distinctly lower
Recovery in 
industrial output 
stalled due to 
supply bottle -
necksOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 21707580859095100105110
951001051101151201251301351401452015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data, log scale
MonthlyIndustry
Main constructionIndustry excluding
automotive
Construction1
1 See Association for Supply Chain Management, Procure -
ment and Logistics (BME) (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
53

output in the first quarter of 2021 failed to sur -
pass the level of the previous quarter, in which 
it had risen steeply. This was mainly due to a 
sizeable decrease in the production of capital 
goods, caused by the automotive sector. Given 
the prominent role of the automotive sector in 
Germany’s economy, this distinctly depressed 
aggregate output. Excluding motor vehicles, in -
dustrial output was clearly above the previous 
quarter’s level. Manufacturers of machinery 
and equipment and of computer, electronic 
and optical products saw a major increase in 
production. The pharmaceutical industry like -
wise ramped up production sharply, which is 
likely to have been helped by a rise in vaccine 
manufacture. Even so, production of consumer 
goods was markedly lower overall, whereas 
output of intermediate goods grew signifi -
cantly.
According to the ifo Institute, capacity utilisa -
tion of tangible fixed assets in the manufactur -
ing sector has continued to rise considerably in 
seasonally adjusted terms since the start of the 
year and in April exceeded its long- term aver -
age again for the first time in two years. There 
is a certain disparity between this and the virtu -
ally unchanged level of production in the first 
quarter, especially given that producers of cap -
ital goods, whose output had actually clearly 
contracted, are reporting a particularly high in -
crease in capacity utilisation. Capacity utilisa -
tion in the intermediate goods and consumer 
goods sectors also picked up significantly.
Construction output in the first quarter of 2021 
fell sharply on the quarter in seasonally ad -
justed terms. This was mainly down to one- off 
factors. The temporary VAT cut in the second 
half of 2020 had produced anticipatory effects 
in the construction sector, which depressed 
construction output at the start of this year. In 
addition, the weather was unconducive to con -
struction activity because of the exceptional 
amount of rain in January and unusually high 
number of ice days in February. Output dropped 
substantially in the finishing trades, in particu -
lar, while stagnating in the main construction sector. Output in building construction in -
creased somewhat, whereas it declined mark -
edly in civil engineering. Overall, however, con -
struction activity is still intact. This is indicated, 
for example, by the exceptionally steep growth 
in construction output in March, following de -
clines in January and February. Moreover, ac -
cording to the ifo Institute, the level of equip -
ment utilisation in the main construction sector 
was well above its long- term average in the re -
porting period.
Economic activity in some areas of the services 
sector was severely affected by the measures 
to contain the pandemic. Hotel and restaurant 
services were hit especially hard, with sales ex -
periencing an exceptionally sharp drop, accord -
ing to the seasonally adjusted data available up 
to February. Trade in motor vehicles was also 
affected by the mandatory closures of sales 
floors. In addition, unit sales of passenger cars 
were dampened by the return to the higher 
VAT rates and probably also by manufacturers’ 
delivery difficulties. The motor vehicle trade is 
thus likely to have recorded a considerable 
drop in sales, as also indicated by new passen -
ger car registrations, which were appreciably 
lower. Sales were likewise down significantly in 
the retail trade and – according to the figures 
available up to February  – in the wholesale 
trade. By contrast, activity in business and sup -
port services is likely to have risen, with the ifo 
Institute’s survey results indicating a slight im -
provement in the situation in the reporting 
period.
Labour market
The labour market responded robustly to the 
prolonged mitigation measures in the first 
quarter. Both employment and unemployment 
held nearly steady at the level of the fourth 
quarter of last year. The effects of the lower 
level of economic output were largely cush -
ioned by short-  time work, which was again 
taken up on a much larger scale after the de -
cline in the second half of 2020. As the mitiga -Much greater 
capacity utilisa -
tion in the 
industrial sector
Construction 
output down 
sharply, mainly 
due to one- off 
effectsServices sectors 
severely affected
Labour market 
robustDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
54

tion measures first began to be eased in March 
and progress on vaccinations advanced, the la -
bour market also saw a return of confidence in 
developments over the next few months.
On account of declining economic activity in 
the first quarter of 2021, there was a major in -
crease in short- time work for economic rea -
sons. According to the initial estimate by the 
Federal Employment Agency, 3.27 million 
people received short- time working benefits to 
compensate for economic difficulties in Febru -
ary of this year. This equates to almost one in 
ten employees subject to social security contri -
butions in Germany. Compared with October 
2020, the provisional low point after the recov -
ery last summer, the number of persons af -
fected thus rose again by more than three-  
fifths. The volume of labour lost through short- 
time work saw an even larger increase (+164%). 
This is because the average working hours lost 
per short- time worker were also much higher 
in February than in October of last year. In the 
main, this is connected with mandatory clos -
ures in services sectors, affecting wholesale 
and retail trade, hotel and restaurant services 
and other services including arts, entertain -
ment and recreation as well as other personal 
service activities. In October, these sectors em -
ployed one in four of the then two million 
short- time workers, while in January – the sec -
toral data do not yet extend beyond that 
point  – it was one in two. By contrast, the 
number of short- time workers in the manufac -
turing sector decreased over this period, albeit 
at a slower pace than in the summer.
The intensive take- up of short- time work stabil -
ised the level of employment in the first quar -
ter. On average in the first three months of 
2021, overall employment was only around 
48,000 persons – or 0.1% – lower, after sea -
sonal adjustment, than the level of the preced -
ing quarter. This decrease can be almost fully 
ascribed to the reduced number of self-  
employed persons, while the number of em -
ployees remained stable. In the first two 
months of the reporting period (the latest data Major increase 
in short- time 
work up to 
February 
Overall employ -
ment virtually 
unchanged, 
employment 
subject to 
social security 
contributions 
up further Labour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 21Apr.42.543.043.544.044.545.045.5
30.030.531.031.532.032.533.033.534.0–1,000–5000+500+1,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–2000+200+400+600Apr.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Apr.Million
Million
Million400600800Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered
unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployment
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies 2EmployedJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Jan./
Feb.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
55

from the Federal Employment Agency do not 
yet go beyond that) there were actually more 
jobs subject to social security contributions 
than in the fourth quarter of 2020 (+0.3%). 
Additional positions were filled mainly in busi -
ness and support services (including temporary 
agency work), health and social services, public 
administration, the IT sector and in construc -
tion. By contrast, the ongoing closures in res -
taurants and hotels and other services led to 
job cuts, despite increasing take- up of short-  
time work. In the manufacturing sector, too, 
the number of filled jobs subject to social se -
curity contributions continued to fall. In this 
case, staffing adjustments do not appear to be 
complete, in spite of the relatively favourable 
pattern of industrial activity and declining use 
of short- time work. The level of employment 
remained broadly constant in the wholesale 
and retail trade. Exclusively low-  paid part-  time 
employment saw another considerable con -
traction up to February owing to the ongoing 
restrictions on catering and accommodation 
services and in retail.
Registered unemployment was down by 
65,000 persons in the first quarter after adjust -
ment for seasonal variations. The unemploy -
ment rate fell by 0.1 percentage point. Over the 
course of the reporting quarter as well as in 
April, however, it remained virtually unchanged 
at 6.0%. Unemployment covered by the statu -
tory insurance scheme, which is susceptible to 
cyclical changes, continued to exhibit a down -
ward tendency. By contrast, the fact that the 
coronavirus crisis has been dragging on for 
more than a year now is impacting unemploy -
ment covered by the basic welfare allowance. 
Increasingly now, unemployed people are see -
ing their entitlement to unemployment insur -
ance benefits lapse, forcing them to switch to 
the basic welfare allowance.
The labour supply has remained virtually con -
stant during the pandemic to date. The preced -
ing years had seen it increase due to growing 
labour force participation and quite substantial 
immigration. Labour force participation is also likely to have risen during the past year, albeit 
at a slower pace than before. Despite the eco -
nomic slump, the number of persons with -
drawing from the labour market has probably 
been only limited. Self- employed persons or 
those working in low- paid part- time jobs who 
have had to give up their employment are 
probably still most likely to be affected, since 
these groups generally have no entitlement to 
unemployment insurance benefits. Neverthe -
less, the labour supply in the domestic popula -
tion sank for demographic reasons. This was 
offset by significant immigration. Although 
border closures were in force for a time and la -
bour force mobility was reduced, Germany 
counted a net 209,000 new migrants in 2020 
according to the migration statistics published 
by the Federal Statistical Office. While just over 
one- third lower than the previous year, the fig -
ures are nevertheless striking given the sub -
stantial encumbrances that have arisen from 
the pandemic. Over the past year, net immigra -
tion in the period from March to June had 
fallen to just 15% of the level seen a year earl -
ier. In the second half of 2020, however, it was 
already close to the level seen in the same 
period of 2019, with the regions of origin shift -
ing away from third countries towards immi -
gration from other EU Member States to Ger -
many.
As the mitigation measures first began to be 
eased in March and with progress on vaccin -
ations clearly picking up pace of late, the lead -
ing indicators for the labour market paint an 
optimistic picture for the coming months, des -
pite the pandemic still initially going strong. 
From January to April of this year, the number 
of registrations for short- time work halved 
each month, leaving them at a very moderate 
level as this report went to press. It is likely that 
less use was being made of short- time working 
arrangements as early as March. On the basis 
of its own surveys, the ifo Institute estimates 
there to have been half a million fewer people 
in short- time work in April than in February. 
The ifo employment barometer, which reflects 
recruitment plans in trade and industry for the Slight decline in 
unemploymentLabour supply 
stable in 2020 
due to robust 
labour force 
participation 
and only moder -
ate decline in 
immigration
Leading indica -
tors for labour 
market signal -
ling optimismDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
56

next three months, climbed significantly across 
all sectors of late. The employment barometer 
of the Institute for Employment Research (IAB) 
moved into positive territory. The number of 
vacancies is also gradually rising. Conversely, 
unemployment is likely to fall in the coming 
months. The IAB’s unemployment barometer is 
firmly in positive territory.
Wages and prices
Negotiated wages recorded only a moderate 
rise in the first three months of 2021, up by just 
1.4% on the year when additional benefits are 
included. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the 
increase  had still stood at 2.6%. The most 
recently  concluded new agreements were a 
key factor behind this weakening. In addition, 
one- off coronavirus special payments had been 
made in a number of sectors last autumn. 
Wage bargainers restricted agreed wage in -
creases in order to protect jobs. With short-  
time work having gone back up in the first 
quarter, actual earnings may even have fallen. 
As in the previous three quarters, wage drift is 
likely to have been clearly negative.
In the current wage round, the social partners 
have so far settled on rather moderate wage 
agreements in return for provisions for safe -
guarding jobs. As a result, the annualised wage 
increases contained in the new agreements for 
the metal and electronics industry (1%), the 
steel industry (1.9%) and the textile and cloth -
ing industry (1.1%) are distinctly smaller than in 
the two years prior to the pandemic. The struc -
ture of the remuneration laid down in the most 
recent collective wage agreements is striking: 
the contractual terms often begin with pay 
freezes of several months and long- term in -
creases in scheduled rates of pay are not pro -
vided for until much later. In addition, there will 
be one- off coronavirus bonuses this year, plus 
new and sizeable special payments which can 
be converted into additional days off. In the 
metal and electronics industry, for instance, it is 
possible –  by forgoing the special payments and through the interplay of several wage 
regulations – to cut the working week to 32 
hours for up to three years. The idea is to help 
ensure that qualified core staff are retained 
during the transformation process taking place 
in the automotive industry. In a number of sec -
tors, firms experiencing financial difficulty are 
also being given the chance to postpone regu -
lar salary increases or new special payments to 
a later date.
Wage negotiations are currently under way in 
the retail sector, in wholesale and foreign trade, 
in the automobile trade and service sector and 
in the construction industry. Here, too, the 
wage demands brought to the table by unions 
have been lower than in previous years.
Consumer prices as measured by the Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) rose ex -
ceptionally strongly at the beginning of the 
year. On average for the months of January to 
March 2021, they increased by a seasonally ad -Negotiated 
wages up only 
moderately due 
to pandemic; 
actual earnings 
possibly even 
down
Decidedly mod -
erate wage 
agreements in 
2021 pay round 
to date
Ongoing negoti -
ations also with 
lower wage 
proposals  than 
before the 
coronavirus 
crisis 
Strong increase 
in consumer 
prices at start of 
year, chiefly due 
to return of 
higher VAT rates2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 20210.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
–+++++++Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Per-
centage
points
–4–20+2%
Wage drift1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 Wage drift 
is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual earn-
ings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
57

justed 2.1% on the quarter, after having previ -
ously stagnated. The main reasons for this were 
the reversal on 1 January of the temporary VAT 
cut, but also measures contained in the climate 
package and the higher oil price. Overall, prices 
for all the main components of the HICP basket 
rose strongly, with the higher VAT rates in Janu -
ary 2021 being passed on in a more or less in -
verse manner to their reduction in July 2020.2 
While the inflationary pressures for food, non- 
energy industrial goods and services normal -
ised again by March, energy prices continued 
to rise significantly, tracking crude oil prices.
The return to the higher VAT rates also had a 
clear impact on the annual increase in the HICP , 
with inflation up from -0.6% in the fourth quar -
ter of 2020 to 1.7% in the first quarter of 2021. 
Excluding energy and food, inflation increased 
from -0.1% to 1.8%. A statistical effect in con -
nection with the more extensive pandemic-  
related updates to the expenditure weights underlying the HICP , particularly in the case of 
package holiday prices, also played a role here.3
The annual rate of inflation rose again slightly 
in April to 2.1%, compared with 2.0% in March. 
Energy inflation in particular increased sharply 
of late, but food inflation also picked up signifi -
cantly, with the latter reflecting higher prices 
for certain agricultural products. Prices for to -
bacco products –  which are included in the 
food aggregate – were also raised. By contrast, 
the core inflation rate –  the annual inflation 
rate excluding energy and food  – fell from 
1.6% in March to 1.1%. However, a decisive 
factor here was the reduced contribution of 
the statistical effect for package holidays, 
which had pushed up the HICP rate signifi -Inflation rate in 
April up further 
due to energy 
and foodPrice developments at economic stages as classified for HICP purposes
–80–400+40+80+120+160Year-on-year percentage change
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
1 Bundesbank calculations based on daily prices in USD as quoted by Bloomberg Finance L.P. 2 ECB calculations of DG AGRI prices 
based on the European Commission’s farm gate and wholesale prices. 3 Analogous to HICP classification “Non-energy industrial 
goods”; Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.
Deutsche Bundesbank10505101520
––++++
3036
–++
–200+20+40Crude oil price1 (€, right-hand scale)
HICP – food Producer prices for food in the euro area2 (right-hand scale)HICP – energy
21012
––++
–2–10+1+2HICP – non-energy industrial goods Industrial producer prices 3Apr.
Apr.
Apr.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), p. 49. Restrictions in 
connection with the coronavirus pandemic meant that 
around one-  fifth of all prices had to be estimated in the 
first quarter of 2021, however.
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
58

cantly in the previous months.4 The rate exclud -
ing energy, food, travel and clothing thus re -
mained unchanged at 1.4% in April.
In the coming months the rate of inflation is 
likely to continue on a slow upward trajectory 
at first. While the recent strong rise in the prices 
of non- energy commodities and the increase in 
transport costs is already having a very signifi -
cant impact on input prices at the producer 
level, this development is not feeding through 
directly to consumer prices, especially those for 
industrial goods. Consumer prices are more 
closely related to producer prices for non- food 
consumer goods, which have thus far risen ra -
ther moderately. Furthermore, distribution 
costs and margins are also major determinants 
of consumer prices.5 The upward pressure on 
prices in the earlier input stages is therefore 
likely to have merely a weakened and delayed 
impact on consumer prices.6 As far as headline 
HICP inflation is concerned, a significant factor 
is that the base effect resulting from the tem -
porary VAT cut will raise the annual rate as of 
July. However, this is likely to be almost com -
pletely obscured at first due to the statistical 
effect  for package holidays simultaneously hav -
ing a dampening impact for several months. At 
the end of the current year, however, this one- 
off effect will once again intensify inflationary 
pressures. As a result, the inflation rate could 
temporarily rise to 4%, before a distinct nor -
malisation sets in at the start of 2022.
Order books and outlook
German economic output is likely to grow 
again significantly in the second quarter of 
2021. The extent of this growth will depend 
largely on how heavily the containment meas -
ures weigh on the economy in comparison to 
the first quarter. As soon as the measures to 
protect against the coronavirus are successively 
loosened, activity in the affected services sec -
tors should pick up again considerably. The in -
dustrial sector is benefiting from strong de -
mand, with industrial orders recently seeing a further strong rise from their already elevated 
levels. Manufacturing firms have recently as -
sessed the business situation as having im -
proved again and have once more raised their 
production and export expectations. However, 
industrial output will probably continue to be 
subdued in the near future owing to bottle -
necks in the supply of intermediate goods. 
Output in the construction sector is likely to re -
bound once dampening one- off effects cease 
to apply. Business expectations brightened on a 
broad cross- sectoral basis. Rapid progress in 
the vaccination campaign opens the prospect 
of a considerable loosening of containment 
measures in the coming months. GDP could 
then grow strongly in the third quarter and ex -
ceed its pre- crisis level as early as the fourth 
quarter.
According to ifo Institute surveys, the business 
climate brightened significantly again in the 
past few months following a temporary low at 
the start of the year. Enterprises broadly gauged 
their business situation in April as better than 
the average of the first quarter, although levels 
vary considerably between different areas of 
the economy. While industrial enterprises and 
construction predominantly judge the situation 
positively, the retail sector is tending towards a 
negative assessment. Enterprises in the services 
sector (excluding trade) are leaning towards a 
favourable assessment of the situation overall. 
However there are significant disparities be -
tween different sectors, with the situation in 
the hotel and restaurant industry and business 
and support services being classed as very poor. 
Business expectations in April exceeded the 
first- quarter average in almost all sectors. Pro -
duction plans and export expectations in indus -
try also improved, far outstripping their re -
spective long-  term averages. With almost half 
of industrial enterprises recently complaining of Inflation rate set 
to rise further 
and could reach 
4% at end of 
year
Economic out -
put likely to 
grow consider -
ably in Q2Sentiment 
among busi -
nesses much 
improved
4 April’s prices for package holidays were again largely ex -
trapolated on the basis of the corresponding monthly infla -
tion rates for 2019. See Federal Statistical Office (2021).
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019).
6 Exceptions here are the energy and food sectors, in 
which cost surges are usually passed on to consumers 
without much delay.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
59

difficulties procuring intermediate goods,7 the 
extent to which these plans can actually be 
realised over the short term remains to be seen.
New orders received by German industrial en -
terprises in the first quarter of 2021 were again 
up very substantially on the already strong fig -
ures for the previous quarter. Disregarding 
large orders, which are typically prone to fluc -
tuation, the seasonally adjusted increase was 
even more pronounced. Broken down by re -
gion, orders from non- euro area countries rose 
particularly steeply, reflecting the economic re -
covery taking place in key partner countries. 
Orders from the euro area and from Germany 
also climbed significantly, however. Manufac -
turers of machinery, the pharmaceuticals indus -
try, producers of electrical products and manu -
facturers of computer, electronic and optical 
products posted the strongest order growth. 
Furthermore, the results of surveys by the ifo 
Institute on order books in the manufacturing 
sector indicate that they are in extremely posi -
tive shape. According to data available up to 
February from the Federal Statistical Office, in -
dustrial orders significantly exceeded the aver -
age of the final quarter of 2020.
Construction output is likely to rise again in the 
second quarter of 2021. After having been held 
back by exceptionally poor weather conditions 
at the start of the year, the spring months will 
probably see further catch- up in output. In 
addition, the return to the higher VAT rates is 
unlikely to still have any notable dampening 
effect  in the second quarter. Economic indica -
tors also point towards growth in construction 
output: on an average of January and February 
– the most recent months for which statistics 
are available – new orders received by the main 
construction sector showed a steep increase 
compared with the previous quarter in season -
ally adjusted terms. The reach of the order 
books rose from an already high level. Further -Orders situation 
in industry still 
buoyant
Construction 
output probably 
set to rise again 
in Q2Demand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2165708090100110120
–30–20–100+10
65708090100110120
65708090100110
90100110120130140
–100+10+20Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
DomesticInternationalLog scale
of which:Log scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Main construction orders
%%Total
Monthly
7 Ifo business surveys found 45% of enterprises in the 
manufacturing sector reporting bottlenecks in the supply 
of intermediate goods in April.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
60

more, according to the ifo Institute, equipment 
utilisation still stood significantly higher than its 
long- term average in April. Enterprises in the 
construction sector also reported serious 
bottlenecks in materials supplies of late, how -
ever.8
Private consumption is likely to partially recover 
in the second quarter of 2021 from its excep -
tional decline earlier. However, this is contin -
gent on a continued improvement in case num -
bers allowing for easing of the containment 
measures and increased uptake of consump -
tion opportunities that were previously closed. 
The dampening effect stemming from the re -
turn of higher VAT rates at the start of the year 
is likely to gradually wear off. While new pri -
vate passenger car registrations fell again 
slightly and were still at a very low level in April, 
consumers’ propensity to purchase rose con -
tinuously again in the period from February to April, according to survey results gathered by 
the market research institution Gesellschaft für 
Konsumforschung  (GfK). The downturn in the 
GfK consumer index forecast for May might 
have something to do with the tightened con -
tainment measures coinciding with the time 
when the survey was carried out and may 
prove to be an outlier. The results of the Bun -
desbank Online Panel Households from March 
2021 suggest that consumers will take con -
sumption opportunities that were previously 
closed as soon as they reopen. As in the third 
quarter of 2020, private consumption is there -
fore likely to recover swiftly once restrictions 
are rolled back on a large- scale and permanent 
basis. In the medium term, private consump -
tion may receive an additional boost as people 
use some of the savings which they involuntar -
ily built up during the COVID-  19 pandemic.Upturn in pri -
vate consump -
tion expected 
once corona -
virus precautions 
are eased
List of references
Association for Supply Chain Management, Procure ment and Logistics (BME) (2021), Corona- Krise 
führt zu Mangelwirtschaft, published online on 17 March 2021, https://www.bme.de/corona-  
krise- fuehrt- zu-mangelwirtschaft-3796 /
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), Firms’ price adjustments over the course of the temporary VAT cut 
in 2020, Monthly Report, April 2021, pp. 47-49.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), One- off effects relating to COVID-  19 in the HICP in 2021, Monthly 
Report, February 2021, pp. 63-66.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), The impact of wages on prices in Germany: evidence from selected 
empirical analyses, Monthly Report, September 2019, pp. 15-37.
Federal Statistical Office (2021), Impact of the corona crisis on the CPI/  HICP price collection, 
method report of 12  May 2021, https://www.destatis.de/EN/Themes/Economy/Prices/
Consumer-Price-Index/Methods/corona-cpi-hicp.pdf?__blob=publicationFile
ifo Institute (2021), Material shortage has hit the German construction industry, press release of 
17 May 2021, https://www.ifo.de/en/node/633178 See ifo Institute (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
61

Public finances
Public finances in Germany1
General government budget
Public finances are continuing to provide sig -
nificant support to the economy in 2021. The 
dedicated assistance measures and the regular 
social systems are still mitigating the economic 
fallout from the coronavirus crisis. To combat 
the pandemic, sizeable funds are being chan -
nelled into healthcare; for example, for vac -
cines and tests. Beyond the coronavirus response 
measures, various structural measures are pro -
viding relief to households in particular; for ex -
ample, the solidarity surcharge has been par -
tially abolished and child benefits have been 
raised significantly.
As a result, the general government deficit is 
likely to continue rising in 2021 (in 2020 it 
stood at 4.2% of gross domestic product 
(GDP)). Germany’s April stability programme 
envisages a very high deficit of 9% of GDP (see 
the table on p. 63). This figure fully includes all 
of the buffers in the central government 
budget. As things stand, they will probably be 
far from exhausted. Last year, too, the final def -
icit was significantly below the figure budgeted 
for by the government. All in all, the deficit 
ratio could approach around 6% this year. The 
debt ratio could also be lower than the 74½% 
budgeted in the stability programme (just 
under 70% at the end of 2020). However, un -
certainty remains very high.
To date, the fiscal policy response in Germany 
has been flexible and, overall, targeted to the 
difficult crisis situation. Although, in some 
cases, the specific design and implementation 
of individual measures are not entirely convin -
cing,2 it should be borne in mind that action 
sometimes had to be taken fairly swiftly and 
subsequently fine- tuned as the pandemic un -
folded, for example. As long as the restrictions 
continue, targeted fiscal assistance will remain important. As restrictions ease, however, it 
should be phased out. Where necessary, it will 
still be possible to fine- tune fiscal stabilisation 
measures at a later point in time. There is suffi -
cient fiscal leeway for such adjustments, par -
ticularly given the favourable state of Germa -
ny’s public finances before the crisis.
If the pandemic- related restrictions are increas -
ingly lifted as the year progresses, the deficit is 
likely to shrink considerably in 2022. The bur -
den on public finances will then be relieved by 
the ongoing recovery in the German economy 
and the fact that numerous support measures 
will no longer be necessary and will be phased 
out; in this respect, the fiscal policy stance is 
not restrictive.
Looking at the fiscal rules, there are already in -
dications that the escape clauses should remain 
active in 2022. This applies to both the EU rules 
and the debt brake. However, there is much to 
be said for putting off that decision until later 
this year. It will then be much easier to assess 
whether an elevated deficit is actually still 
neces sary in order to overcome the crisis – not 
least because there will be more information 
on further developments in the pandemic and 
in the economy as a whole. In addition, na -
tional budgets are not usually passed until the 
end of the year anyway; in view of Germany’s 
upcoming general election, the central govern -
ment budget probably will not be adopted 
until next year. Moreover, even without the 
escape  clause, the fiscal rules provide scope for Public finances 
again providing 
strong support 
to the economy 
in 2021 …
… deficit likely 
to continue 
rising 
Fiscal policy sup -
port still needed 
in the crisis; 
fiscal  leeway 
available  for 
stabilisationDeficit expected 
to shrink consid -
erably in 2022
Decision on 
necessity of 
escape clauses 
should wait until 
later this year
1 The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed report -
ing on budgetary developments (government finance stat -
istics). No data for the first quarter of 2021 are yet available 
for local government or the statutory health and public 
long- term care insurance schemes. These will be analysed 
in the short commentaries in upcoming issues of the 
Monthly Report.
2 For example, in some cases it took a long time for busi -
ness aid to be paid out. As a particularly targeted measure, 
tax loss carrybacks could also have been expanded further.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
62

reducing deficits in a cyclically appropriate 
manner. More specifically, under the debt 
brake, the available reserves can be used to 
comply with the ceilings. The EU rules normally 
require structural consolidation of 0.5% of GDP 
per year. This should be easily achievable be -
cause of the many assistance measures that are 
likely to expire, which will count as consolida -
tion (see pp. 76 ff.).
The debt brake is sometimes accused of having 
excessively restricted government activities in 
recent years. However, primary expenditure 
(total expenditure excluding interest expend -
iture) has also increased significantly under the 
debt brake regime. After the crisis, the struc -
tural ratio of primary expenditure to GDP could 
reach a new high. Its previous peak since the 
reunification of Germany, at around 46%, was 
recorded at the beginning of the 1990s; before 
the crisis, in 2019, it stood at around 45%.3 The 
fiscal rules are not intended to limit govern -
ment spending. Rather, the rules are meant to keep the government budget in an agreed 
state of balance or to revert it to such a state. 
This means matching revenue and expenditure. 
In view of the dynamic expenditure growth, 
the fiscal rules cannot be blamed for the fact 
that more funds were not used to address 
important  future challenges. Instead, it seems 
that this was largely the result of constraints in 
planning and approval processes, or prioritisa -
tion of other issues. When budget limits have 
been exhausted, there are various possible 
courses of action to boost funds. If the fiscal 
burden is not to be increased, e.g. due to nega -
tive impacts on growth, political priorities or 
adopted spending programmes would have to 
be readjusted.Fiscal rules do 
not prevent add -
itional spending 
on future 
challenges Key fi  gures of the Federal Government’s stability programmes*
 
Item 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Real GDP growth (%)
April 2021 0.6 – 4.9 3.0 2.6 1.2 1.2 1.2
April 2020 0.6 – 6.0 . . . . .
April 2019 1.0 1.6 1.1 1.1 1.1 . .
General government fi  scal balance (% of GDP)
April 2021 1.5 – 4.2 – 9 – 3 – 1½ – ½ 0
April 2020 1.4 – 7¼ . . . . .
April 2019 ¾ ¾ ½ ½ ½ . .
Structural fi  scal balance (% of GDP)
April 2021 0.9 – 2.0 – 7¾ – 2¾ – 1¼ – ½ 0
April 2020 1.3 . . . . . .
April 2019 ¾ ½ ½ ¼ ½ . .
Debt level (% of GDP)
April 2021 59.7 69.8 74½ 74 73¼ 72 69¼
April 2020 59.8 75¼ . . . . .
April 2019 58¾ 56½ 54¾ 53 51¼ . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Offi   ce, Bundesbank calculations. * The stability programmes are based on the Fed-
eral Government’s macroeconomic projection from January of the same year.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3 In the case of the structural ratio, specific temporary 
effects  (such as the temporary coronavirus response meas -
ures) and cyclical effects are disregarded (data based on 
the Bundesbank’s estimation framework).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
63

Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government 
Tax revenue
In the first three months of 2021, tax revenue4 
continued to fall significantly on the year (-5%; 
see the adjacent chart and table). One reason 
for this was that tax revenue had not yet been 
much affected by the incipient coronavirus crisis 
in the first quarter of 2020. A very substantial 
role was played by tax measures, particularly 
those affecting VAT. As VAT is paid with a lag of 
up to two months, the temporary VAT cut in 
2020 still had a perceptible effect. In addition, 
import VAT now falls due one and a half months 
later than before. However, other substantial 
legal changes also drove down revenue. Since 
the beginning of the year, most taxpayers have 
no longer had to pay the solidarity surcharge. 
Furthermore, the income tax allowances and the 
income tax scale were, as usual, adjusted to de -
velopments in the minimum subsistence level 
and the inflation previously expected for the pre -
ceding year.5 As specified in the coalition agree -
ment, child benefits were raised significantly. As 
these are deducted from wage tax revenue, this 
increase further reduced receipts.
Owing, amongst other things, to the afore -
mentioned legal changes, wage tax revenue 
fell by 4½%. In addition, short- time working 
continued to dampen revenue significantly.6 By Legislation 
changes and 
weak economy 
reduced Q1 rev -
enue
Sharp reduction 
in VAT and 
wage tax 
revenue Tax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Comprises joint taxes as 
well as central government taxes and state government taxes. 
Including EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs 
duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021201510505
––––+Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figures
Tax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 Estimate 
for 
2021 1 2020 2021
€ billionYear-
on-year 
change 
%Year-
on-year 
change 
%
Tax revenue, total 2 181.4 171.9 –  5.2 +  4.3
of which:
Wage tax 53.4 50.9 –  4.7 +  1.0
Profi  t-related taxes 34.6 35.5 +  2.6 +  6.0
Assessed income 
tax3 18.7 17.8 –  4.7 +  3.7
Corporation tax 8.5 10.2 + 20.1 + 16.0
Non- assessed 
taxes on earnings 4.9 4.3 – 13.8 –  0.5
Withholding tax 
on interest 
income  and 
capital  gains 2.5 3.2 + 31.0 + 10.9
VAT4 60.1 54.8 –  8.8 + 11.8
Other 
consumption-related 
taxes 5 20.5 19.5 –  5.0 +  2.0
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Working Party on Tax Revenue  
Estimates and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial 
tax estimate of May 2021. 2 Comprises joint taxes as well as 
central government taxes and state government taxes. Including 
EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs duties, but 
excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3  Employee 
refunds deducted from revenue. 4 VAT and import VAT. 5 Taxes 
on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alco-
hol, air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alco-
pops, betting and lotteries, beer, and fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank4 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.
5 Income tax brackets were shifted 1.52% to the right. This 
measure was intended to ensure that income growth in 
line with consumer price inflation for households in 2020 
would not be subject to higher tax rates. However, actual 
inflation (0.7%) was considerably below the figure origin -
ally estimated. Nonetheless, this estimation error will prob -
ably be broadly offset by an opposing estimation error this 
year with the tax scale adjustment at the beginning of 
2022, which has already been set.
6 As a result of short- time working arrangements, wages 
are lower, and short- time working benefits themselves are 
not taxed. However, for the purposes of income tax assess -
ment, short- time working benefits are factored in when 
the tax rate is determined (Progressionsvorbehalt), resulting 
in a moderate increase in assessed income tax revenue in 
the following year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
64

contrast, receipts from profit- related taxes rose 
by a total of 2½%. Corporation tax saw strong 
growth of 20% because of a large increase in 
net payments for past years. By contrast, there 
was a fall in advance payments for the current 
year, a major revenue item. Receipts from as -
sessed income tax declined by 4½%; here, ad -
vance payments for the current year were 
almost  unchanged. Withholding tax on interest 
income and capital gains saw a strong rise in 
revenue. This is likely to have been caused 
mainly by capital gains – probably also in con -
nection with higher stock market prices. Rev -
enue from non- assessed taxes on earnings fell 
considerably. This chiefly comprises investment 
income tax on dividends, which was adversely 
affected by significantly lower profits. VAT rev -
enue dropped by 9% – probably primarily as a 
result of the aforementioned tax measures.
According to the latest official tax estimate, tax 
revenue will rise by 4½% on the year in 2021. 
This is due to the pick- up in economic activity. 
On balance, tax measures are significantly re -
ducing the growth rate. New tax relief meas -
ures (losses) outweigh the expiry of crisis re -
sponse measures (additional revenue). Revenue 
losses are primarily due to the partial abolition 
of the solidarity surcharge and the aforemen -
tioned adjustments to the income tax scale. 
Furthermore, firms are allowed to write off capital equipment faster, thus reducing rev -
enue from taxes on earnings. In addition, the 
rise in child benefits is still more somewhat 
more substantial than the de facto halving of 
the child bonus. The corresponding deductions 
from wage tax are thus slightly higher on bal -
ance. The (mostly temporary) VAT revenue 
losses remain close to the high level recorded 
in 2020. A revenue- increasing factor is the as -
sumption that the majority of the tax payments 
deferred in 2020 will now be made.
In 2022, revenue growth is expected to be 
somewhat stronger still, at 5%. Once more, 
this hinges on growth in the macroeconomic 
reference variables. Progressive taxation will 
support growth somewhat more strongly 
again. The various tax measures will continue 
to place a significant dampener on the rise in 
revenue: tax relief measures will cause further 
losses in revenue from wage tax and taxes on 
earnings (faster write- offs and the further ad -
justment to the income tax scale). Furthermore, 
to a large extent, the back- payments of de -
ferred taxes will cease to affect the year- on- 
year figures. By contrast, there will be add -
itional receipts from VAT as a result of the sup -
port measures largely expiring. In the subse -
quent years up to 2025, revenue is projected to 
rise by an average of 4%. The tax estimate is 
based on the legal status quo, and legislation Significant rise 
in tax revenue 
expected for 
year as a wholeDynamic growth 
forecast to con -
tinue in the 
coming yearsOﬃ   cial tax estimate fi  gures and the Federal Government’s macroeconomic projections
Item 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Tax revenue1
€ billion 739.7 773.5 812.1 848.4 885.4 917.5
% of GDP 22.2 22.1 22.0 22.4 22.8 23.0
Year-on-year change (%) – 7.5 4.6 5.0 4.5 4.4 3.6
Revision of previous tax estimate (€ billion) 11.4 – 2.7 – 3.9 1.1 6.4 9.1
Real GDP growth (%)
Spring projection (April 2021) – 4.9 3.5 3.6 1.1 1.1 1.1
Autumn projection (October 2020) – 5.5 4.4 2.5 1.0 1.0 1.0
Nominal GDP growth (%)
Spring projection (April 2021) – 3.4 5.3 5.2 2.6 2.6 2.6
Autumn projection (October 2020) – 3.8 6.0 4.3 2.6 2.6 2.6
Sources: Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates and Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy. 1 Including EU shares in German 
tax revenue, including customs duties, including receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
65

changes play hardly any role on balance. The 
forecast is therefore largely based on assump -
tions regarding macroeconomic developments 
and progressive taxation.
Compared with the previous estimate in Novem -
ber 2020, the downward revision amounts to 
€2½ billion in 2021. Tax measures that were 
not yet taken into account then are signifi -
cantly reducing revenue. First and foremost, 
these are lower income tax rates, higher child 
benefits and the Third Coronavirus Tax Assis -
tance Act (Drittes Corona-  Steuerhilfegesetz) (in-
cluding the 2021 child bonus). By contrast, the 
surprisingly favourable revenue developments 
recorded in the 2020 budget outturn are, in 
part, continuing into 2021. Furthermore, the 
macroeconomic assumptions are conducive to 
somewhat higher revenue, even though GDP 
growth was revised downwards. The Working 
Group has reduced its estimate for 2022 some -
what more significantly, by €4 billion, as losses 
generated by new legislation changes are even 
more substantial. Above all, these comprise 
faster tax write- offs for information technology 
and the additional income tax relief. Under the 
third Coronavirus Tax Assistance Act, restaurant 
meals will be subject to a reduced tax rate in 
2022 too. By contrast, revised macroeconomic 
assumptions will lead to significantly higher re -
ceipts – including in the years that follow. Pri -marily for this reason, the Working Group has 
raised the estimates for the subsequent years 
(by as much as €9 billion in 2025). Although le -
gislation changes made in the intervening 
period will continue to reduce revenue in the 
medium term, their effect will wane over time. 
This is mainly because losses caused by faster 
write- downs will tail off.
Compared with the pre- crisis estimate of au -
tumn 2019, there are still considerable revenue 
losses (see the adjacent chart): the downward 
revision for this year amounts to just over €70 
billion (2% of GDP). The revision for the subse -
quent period is significantly lower but is still just 
under €50 billion in 2024 (1½% of GDP). Legis -
lation changes and revisions to macroeconomic 
assumptions each account for roughly half of 
the revenue losses in 2024. Most of the legisla -
tion changes are unrelated to the coronavirus 
pandemic. These include, in particular, the par -
tial abolition of the solidarity surcharge, wage 
and income tax relief and the increase in child 
benefits.
Central government budget
In the first quarter of 2021, the central govern -
ment budget was almost €53 billion in deficit 
after having posted a surplus of €2 billion a 
year earlier. Revenue fell by €17 billion (19%). 
Most of this decline is attributable to the con -
siderable decrease in tax receipts (-€11 billion). 
These losses were driven, first, by the corona -
virus response measures, particularly those af -
fecting VAT. Second, they reflected the €4 bil -
lion in additional transfers made to the EU 
budget, which are deducted from tax revenue; 
around half of this sum was due to Brexit. In 
addition, there was no profit distribution from 
the Bundesbank, which had amounted to €6 
billion a year earlier. Expenditure soared by €37 
billion (41%), with current transfers accounting 
for €23 billion. Of this sum, an additional €11 
billion was transferred to the social security 
funds alone. This included, not least, special 
coronavirus- related transfers to the Federal Em -
ployment Agency and the health fund. Bridg -Downward 
revision  for 2021 
and 2022, 
upward revisions 
for medium 
termCompared with 
pre- coronavirus 
outlook, macro -
economic losses 
and tax cuts 
weighing con -
siderably on 
revenue 
Very high deficit 
in Q1 2021Tax estimates: revisions made in the 
wake of the coronavirus pandemic*
Sources: Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates. * General 
government tax revenue according to the official tax estimates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025700750800850900950€ billion, log scale
October 2019
November 2020
May 2021Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
66

ing aid and compensation for lost turnover to -
talling €11 billion also led to a strong rise in 
current transfers (to enterprises). In other ex -
penditure, transfers to general government 
rose by just over €6 billion: additional expend -
iture of €4 billion to state governments mainly 
comprised compensation for empty hospital 
beds. In addition, the energy and climate fund 
received its annual transfer of €2½ billion earl -
ier than usual. Investment recorded growth of 
€9 billion, which was fully attributable to a loan 
to the Federal Employment Agency. By con -
trast, interest expenditure fell again (-€1½ bil -
lion), mainly as a result of higher premiums on 
securities issued.
The 2021 central government budget passed 
last December envisaged a deficit of €180 bil -
lion. It contained global (still unspecified) add -
itional expenditure of €35 billion, as well as 
€40 billion in business aid (which reached a 
total of €18 billion last year). The budget thus 
opened up ample room for manoeuvre. How -
ever, the pandemic caused a greater reduction 
in economic activity at the start of the year 
than had been expected and also created sig -
nificant additional requirements in the health -
care system. In February, the government there -
fore decided to provide additional assistance to 
households and enterprises. It passed a supple -
mentary budget encompassing, not least, the 
expected budget burdens generated by this 
assis tance. Above all, it substantially increased 
bridging aid for enterprises (+€26 billion). All in 
all, exceptionally high net borrowing of €240 
billion is now planned for 2021.
It is the structural budgetary position that is 
relevant for the debt brake (for more details, 
see the table on p. 68). This figure is calculated 
by deducting the cyclical effect and financial 
transactions and factoring in the balance of 
various off- budget entities. After taking ac -
count of the supplementary budget, borrowing 
is set to exceed the standard limit by €216 bil -
lion. While this has been covered by activating 
the escape clause, corresponding repayments 
will be required going forward. The Bundestag thus agreed annual repayments of just under 
€13 billion between 2026 and 2042 for the 
planned exceptional borrowing in 2021. There 
are also repayment obligations stemming from 
borrowing in the previous year amounting to 
€2 billion per year from 2023 to 2042.
As things currently stand, the supplementary 
budget appears to be extremely generous. 
Most of the anticipated coronavirus burdens 
have been assigned to a specific budgetary 
item with a concrete amount and are no longer 
contained in the high general provision (global 
additional spending). The general provision has 
nevertheless been expanded slightly to €36 bil -
lion compared with the original budget. More -
over, the various amounts budgeted for busi -
ness aid may well prove to be an additional 
buffer of a similar size to the general provision. 
The latest tax estimate also foresees additional 
revenue of €8½ billion. Furthermore, guaran -
tees (including public loan guarantees) and 
debt servicing may place less of a strain on the 2021 supple -
mentary budget: 
borrowing 
authorisation 
increased to 
€240 billion
Supplementary 
budget exceeds 
standard limit 
under debt 
brake by €216 
billionBudget esti -
mates appear 
very cautious, 
outturn could 
again be much 
more favourableCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fe-
deral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-
fects. 
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4755025025
–––+
–125–100–75–50–250+25
2019
20212019Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20202020€ billion
2021Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
67

budget than planned. It is therefore possible 
that the additional scope for borrowing 
planned into the supplementary budget may 
not be needed (as was the case with the scope 
planned into the second supplementary budget 
last year). This would also significantly reduce 
the repayments due as of 2026.
At the end of March, the Federal government 
adopted the benchmark figures for the 2022 
budget and for the medium- term fiscal plan up 
to 2025. In a departure from last autumn’s 
plans, it is envisaged that the debt brake escape  
clause will be activated again for 2022. Net 
borrowing of €81½ billion is planned for 2022, €70 billion more than in the previous fiscal 
plan. Of this amount, €28 billion is attributable 
to the decision not to withdraw funds from the 
reserves. Consequently, this does not constitute 
an actual additional burden; the reserves – built 
up out of surpluses recorded since 2015 – are 
simply to be used at a later date. An additional 
lump sum of €10 billion has been set aside for 
domestic expenditure related to the pandemic. 
A further €10 billion is due to the decision not 
to implement the unspecified consolidation 
measures that were in the pipeline last autumn. 
Additional central government grants are envis -
aged to prevent social contribution rates from 
rising above 40% overall. As things currently Benchmark fig -
ures up to 2025: 
recourse to 
escape clause 
in 2022 plus 
reserves create 
leewayBudget data and benchmark fi  gures from the Federal Government’s fi  scal planning up 
to 2025* and the result for the debt brake
€ billion
ItemActual 
2020Supple-
mentary 
budget 
2021Bench-
mark 
fi  gures 
2022Benchmark fi  gures, fi  scal plan
2023 2024 2025
Core budget fi  gures
 1. Expenditure 1 441.8 547.7 419.8 397.5 402.7 403.4
Year-on-year change (%) 28.7 24.0 – 23.4 –  5.3 1.3 0.2
of which:
1.a Investment 50.3 59.3 50.0 50.0 50.0 50.0
1.b Net global spending increases/ cuts
(from 2022: less 1.5% of expenditure) – 27.3 s 5 s –  6 s –  6 s –  6
 2. Revenue 1,2 311.1 307.3 338.1 356.8 375.0 393.2
of which:
2.a Tax revenue 1 283.3 284.0 308.2 322.8 335.0 347.4
2.b Global shortfall; from 2024: need for action 3 – –   3.0 . . 4.9 15.2
 3. Fiscal balance (2.–1.) – 130.7 – 240.4 – 81.7 – 40.7 – 27.7 – 10.2
 4. Coin seigniorage 0.2 0.2 s 0.2 s 0.2 s 0.2 s 0.2
 5. Transfer to (–)/ withdrawal from (+) reserves – – – 32.2 16.0 –
 6. Net borrowing (–)/ repayment (+) (3.+4.+5.) – 130.5 – 240.2 – 81.5 –  8.3 – 11.5 – 10.0
Supplementary fi  gures for the debt brake
 7. Cyclical component in the budget procedure –  44.6 –  24.0 –  6.1 –  4.7 –  2.7 0.0
 8. Balance of fi  nancial transactions –   6.6 –   5.4 . . . .
 9. Balance of incorporated off- budget entities 27.7 –  17.6 . . . .
9.a Energy and Climate Fund
(from 2022: based on autumn 2020 fi  scal plan) 25.3 –  13.8 – 10.2 –  4.3 –  1.5 .
9.b Flood Assistance Fund –   0.4 –   0.5 . . . .
9.c Fund to Promote Municipal Investment –   1.0 –   1.5 . . . .
9.d Digitalisation Fund 1.3 –   1.8 . . . .
9.e Fund for Primary School- Age Childcare Provision 2.5 – . . . .
 10. Structural net borrowing (–)/repayment (+) (6.–7.–8.+9.) –  51.5 – 228.4 . . . .
 11. Amount exceeding ceiling (14.–13.–10.) 39.8 216.4 4 71 – – –
 12. Outstanding repayment amount, escape clause 39.8 256.2 327 325 323 321
 13. Repayment amount due 5 – – – 2.0 2.0 2.0
 14. Regular ceiling: structural net borrowing of 0.35% of GDP 6 –  11.7 –  12.1 – 11.7 – 12.2 – 12.7 – 13.0
Memo items:
Relief from global items, withdrawal from reserves, 
need for action (2.b–1.b+5.) . . . 38.2 26.9 21.2
* For methodological notes, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2016). 1 After deduction of supplementary central government grants, shares of 
energy tax revenue, compensation under the 2009 reform of motor vehicle tax and consolidation/ budgetary recovery assistance to fed-
eral states, excluding transfers to/ withdrawals from reserves. 2  Excluding coin seigniorage (fi  gures estimated from 2022 onwards). 
3 Shown here on the revenue side. May partly have been booked as reducing expenditure. 4 Derived from fi  gure for annual repayment 
requirement of €18.9 billion from 2026 onwards. 5 Repayment plan for the amount from 11. (a) 2020: 1 ⁄20 per year from 2023 to 2042; 
(b) 2021 and 2022: 1 ⁄17 per year from 2026 to 2042. 6 This refers to GDP in the year before the budget is prepared (GDP based on 2021 
Annual Economic Report).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
68

stand, there will be no such assurance as of 
2023. The expenditure framework is likely to 
scarcely be expanded as of 2024. The reserves 
(€48 billion) are to be fully depleted in 2023 
and 2024. This will initially enable compliance 
with the debt brake rules largely without con -
solidation. The need for consolidation will be 
still be limited in 2024 (€5 billion), going up to 
€15 billion in 2025, the final year of the plan -
ning period.
The years following the medium- term fiscal 
planning period will be particularly challenging 
for budgetary policymakers. Repayments for 
borrowing in 2021 and 2022 will be due as of 
2026. Even if these prove to be lower than cur -
rently estimated, they are still likely to have a 
considerable impact. In addition, the strain 
from demographic developments will intensify: 
central government will be confronted with a 
weaker growth trend in the various sources of 
tax revenue and a sharp rise in grants to the 
statutory pension insurance scheme. It is also 
not apparent how the government will deliver 
on commitments – for instance, for NATO de -
fence expenditure and development aid (which 
already applies to the benchmark figures up to 
2025). The new government should step up to 
the budgetary policy challenges in good time. 
It would, however, be critical if the debt brake 
escape clause were misused for promises to 
provide additional benefits after the election 
that would put a permanent strain on central 
government.
The central government budget will be af -
fected by the Next Generation EU (NGEU) pro -
gramme, too (see also the information on 
pp.  76 ff.). Under this European programme, 
the EU borrows, inter alia, in order to fund size -
able grants to its Member States.7 By 2026, the 
German central government budget is set to 
receive a total of around €30 billion; around €5 
billion per year on average. These grants are 
also relevant in terms of the debt brake, as the 
incoming funds are classified as regular income 
and thus increase budgetary scope. However, 
this classification obscures the fact that the European debt incurred for the NGEU will need 
to be serviced by the Member States at some 
point in the future, and therefore out of the 
German central government budget, too.8 In 
line with Germany’s current share in the EU’s 
economic output, central government will have 
to shoulder €100 billion in debt plus the corres -
ponding interest charges. The Member States’ 
funding contributions for repayment are to 
start in 2028 and be spread over three dec -
ades.
Economically speaking, EU debt to be serviced 
by Germany is very similar to central govern -
ment borrowing. The debt brake stipulates bor -
rowing limits to ensure that future budgets are 
not overburdened. In addition to recording 
Germany’s revenue from the NGEU in its entir -
ety (as is currently planned), it would thus ap -
pear logical to take account of Germany’s share 
in EU debt in the debt brake as well: consistent 
treatment of this item would mean including 
debt- financed EU grants in the amount of Ger -
many’s financing share in the debt brake at the 
time of payment. This would ultimately corres -
pond to Germany’s share in deficit at the EU 
level over the period from 2021 to 2026.9 Im-
mediately after the escape clause period, 
budgetary scope would be considerably nar -
rower as a result. However, in return, central 
government’s redemption payments for EU 
debt as of 2028 would then be neutralised in After 2025 con -
siderable chal -
lenges ahead 
for budgetary 
policymakers
NGEU borrow -
ing for grants 
will place strain 
on future central 
government 
budgetsEconomically 
speaking, 
German  share in 
EU debt similar 
to central gov -
ernment debt; 
theoretically 
belongs under 
debt brake
7 The following considerations refer to the portion of EU 
debt used to finance grants. Member States are also 
granted loans. However, Germany is not planning on tak -
ing out such loans. If debtor Member States service these 
loans routinely, no financing requirements will arise for 
Germany. Borrowing funds to lend them to third parties is 
not counted under the debt brake, as such use of funds is 
classified as a financial transaction.
8 With the Act on Own Resources (Gesetz zum Eigenmittel -
beschluss)  Germany commits to providing financial contri -
butions for debt servicing. Central government will service 
loans for grants (interest and repayments) in line with the 
German share of financing in the EU budget and in accord -
ance with the repayment plan. This share broadly corres -
ponds to relative economic output. Even if parts of the 
debt were to be repaid from new EU taxes, it would ultim -
ately be taxpayers in the Member States who would foot 
the bill, thus eating into the fiscal scope for national 
budgets.
9 The deficit at EU level is likely to be broadly synchronised 
with the EU debt to be incurred for this purpose.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
69

the debt brake, as is the case for financial trans -
actions. By then, this approach would create 
more budgetary leeway than the procedure 
currently planned.
All in all, it would seem appropriate to include 
the national shares in EU debt in the debt 
brake. This would ensure that it is not possible 
to use such debt to undermine the debt brake. 
Effective and credible fiscal rules are essential 
for the entire European Union. They create 
confidence in sound public finances and pro -
tect monetary policy – one of the prime rea -
sons they are anchored in agreements and con -
stitutions. Far- reaching reforms of fiscal rules 
are currently the subject of debate in Germany 
and in the European Union. Decisions ultim -
ately lie in the hands of policymakers. However, 
for a stable monetary union it is essential that 
reformed rules also safeguard the soundness of 
public finances. Fundamental adjustments 
should be discussed transparently and an -
chored at an institutional level. Rules will lose 
their credibility and binding force if they are 
simply bypassed or undermined.
Central government’s off- budget entities con -
cluded the first quarter of 2021 with a deficit of 
€4½ billion (excluding the Financial Market Sta -
bilisation Fund (SoFFin), bad banks and other 
entities that use commercial double- entry 
bookkeeping),10 up from a deficit of just over 
€1½ billion in the same quarter a year earlier. 
Relatively high payments were made by the En -
ergy and Climate Fund (ECF) at the start of this 
year. These payments stabilise the electricity 
levy to finance renewable energy (EEG levy). 
Particularly as electricity prices were lower last 
year as a result of the coronavirus crisis, there is 
a need for considerable grants. Revenue from 
the central government budget and from the 
sale of CO 2 certificates was not sufficient to 
balance this out. The Economic Stabilisation 
Fund (ESF) financed coronavirus aid for enter -
prises (in particular guaranteed assistance loans 
provided via the KfW). €1½ billion of new assis-
tance was granted in the first quarter of 2021. No repayments on assistance granted last year 
have been recorded so far.
The ECF’s expenditure is likely to be consider -
ably higher than its revenue for the rest of the 
year, too. The inflow of revenue from both 
European and national CO 2 certificates will in -
crease in the following quarters; however, cen -
tral government will not provide any more 
funding. The deficit for the year as a whole 
may still come in under the planned amount of 
€14 billion as there may be a delay in outflows 
from some programmes, as in previous years. 
Furthermore, the prices for European CO 2 cer-
tificates have risen sharply. The debt brake in -
cludes other off-  budget entities in addition to 
the ECF, and these also have reserves. How -
ever, the total deficit of these other funds is 
likely to be much lower than that of the ECF. 
The ESF may even generate a surplus. When 
the expected economic recovery materialises, 
enterprises can be expected to pay back aid on 
balance. Surpluses are also anticipated for pre -
cautionary off- budget entities for pension bur -
dens. Overall, the off- budget entities’ annual 
deficit may be similar to last year.
State government budgets11
The federal states’ core budgets finished the 
first quarter of 2021 with a deficit of just under 
€3 billion. A year earlier they had recorded a 
surplus of €5 billion, but the coronavirus crisis 
was yet to make an impact back then. Overall, 
revenue went up sharply (+10%). While tax re -
ceipts declined significantly (-6½%, or -€5 bil -
lion), revenue from public administrations 
doubled. This is attributable in large part to 
central government aid for enterprises and hos -Uphold binding 
effect of fiscal 
rules
Central 
 government’s 
off- budget 
entities record 
higher deficit in 
Q1 2021 due to 
stabilisation of 
renewable 
energy (EEG) 
levyFor year as 
a whole, off- 
budget entities’ 
deficit may be 
similar to last 
year
Deficit in 
Q1 2021: clear 
rise in revenue 
due to trans -
fers …
10 According to figures from the Federal Ministry of 
Finance . The Ministry does not publish quarterly data for 
off- budget entities that keep commercial accounts, such as 
the bad bank FMS Wertmanagement. The deficit gener -
ated by SoFFin, which uses a single- entry accounting sys -
tem, has also been excluded. It is largely a result of the 
loans passed on to FMS Wertmanagement. Overall, there -
fore, SoFFin’s deficit does not increase central govern -
ment’s consolidated debt level.
11 The quarterly data on state government budgets are 
based on the monthly cash statistics for the core budgets.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
70

pitals but also for local government (e.g. a 
sharp rise in central government’s contributions 
to the accommodation costs of those receiving 
unemployment benefit II). The fact that revenue 
from public administrations varied greatly from 
state to state also points to transfers of funds 
from pandemic- related special funds. Many 
states set up such funds in 2020. These take 
vastly different forms, with funds either being 
injected up front or borrowing authorisations 
being granted.
At 19%, expenditure growth was much 
stronger than growth in revenue. Spending on 
personnel, a particularly large expenditure item, 
rose at a much slower pace (+3½%). The very 
strong growth rates were instead attributable 
to the fact that large transfer inflows were dis -
bursed. For instance, state government trans -
fers to public administrations, especially to local 
government, went up by 18% overall. Growth 
in other operating expenditure was even 
stronger (+39%), chiefly driven by develop -
ments in North Rhine-  Westphalia. In this state, 
in particular, it was apparent that parts of busi -
ness aid had been recorded as other operating 
expenditure (as during the latter part of 2020). 
By contrast, the monthly statistics usually re -
cord business aid provided by central govern -
ment – a major item – under other expenditure 
(+50%).
It would be helpful if state governments would 
harmonise their recording of the various 
coronavirus measures and provide detailed re -
ports in a timely manner. For this, state govern -
ments’ coronavirus off-  budget entities would 
need to present comparable monthly data. As 
a result, reliable figures would be available rela -
tively quickly. It would then be possible to ad -
just monthly balances by taking account of in -
terlinkages with such special funds, thus ren -
dering the underlying financial development 
more transparent. For instance, transfers from 
these special funds alleviate the strain on core 
budgets, yet – by the same token – providing 
advance financing for these funds places a 
strain on core budgets.For 2021 as a whole, state governments’ core 
budget deficit is likely to be much lower than 
last year (2020: €39 billion). Expenditure will re -
main elevated as a result of the pandemic. 
Funds passed on from central government have 
a particular role to play here, but these do not 
strain state government budgets on balance. 
State governments are paying for coronavirus 
tests in schools, some of the costs for operat -
ing vaccination centres and compensation 
under the Protection against Infection Act (In-
fektionsschutzgesetz) . They are also absorbing 
some of their local governments’ crisis- induced 
costs: in particular, by stabilising transfers 
within the municipal revenue- sharing scheme 
to limit local governments’ revenue shortfalls 
resulting from the pandemic. According to the 
current tax estimate, state governments’ tax 
receipts  are set to rise moderately this year. 
Together  with compensation for the child 
bonus pledged by central government, tax rev -
enue is set to be €1½ billion higher than last 
autumn’s expectations, but still almost €20 bil -… but expend -
iture growth 
very high
Harmonised 
recording and 
inclusion of 
coronavirus off- 
budget entities 
preferableFor year as a 
whole, deficit 
expected to be 
high but declin -
ing on 2020, 
then recoveryState government fiscal balance*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from 
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states' core budgets 
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q430201001020
–––++
–40–30–20–100+10+20+30
2019
20212019Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
202020212020€ billionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
71

lion below the level anticipated prior to the cri -
sis. Once the pandemic subsides and the econ -
omy starts to pick up again, tax revenue will re -
cover further and temporary support and 
health measures will come to an end. State 
governments’ deficits are thus likely to decline 
going forward. However, consolidation meas -
ures may become necessary in some cases in 
order to comply with the requirements of the 
states’ debt brakes, including repayment condi -
tions. Yet some reserves will probably be avail -
able, enabling the adjustment to be spread 
over a longer period.12Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme re -
corded a deficit of €3 billion in the first quarter 
of 2021. This constitutes a year- on- year deteri -
oration of €1 billion. Overall, revenue went up 
by 3%. Contribution receipts rose by 2½%, 
driven by contributions on short- time working 
benefits and unemployment benefits. Further -
more, last year contributions were deferred at 
the beginning of the pandemic, depressing the 
revenue level. Central government funds rose 
by just over 3½% in line with adjustment rules. 
In addition, additional tax funds were granted 
for the basic pension which was introduced at 
the start of the year.
At 4%, the rise in spending was much higher. 
The July 2020 annual pension adjustment ac -
counted for 3½% of this rise and was accom -
panied by a slight rise in the number of pen -
sions. So far the only strain emanating from the 
new basic pension is higher administrative 
costs; no increased pensions have yet been 
paid out. Supplementary contribution rates to 
the statutory health insurance scheme rose by 
around 0.3 percentage point (pp) at the begin -
ning of the year. The pension insurance scheme 
is responsible for half of this, which is pushing 
up its expenditure accordingly. However, the 
pension contribution payments were first ad -
justed in March in line with the adjustment 
rules.
No general annual pension adjustment is 
scheduled for 2021. The pension adjustment 
formula would even have resulted in a cut due, 
inter alia, to the crisis.13 However, the safe -
guard clause prevents this. Pensions in eastern 
Germany will nevertheless rise by 0.7 pp in July 
to ensure that they reach the level in western 
Germany by 2024, as planned. On an average Marked rise in 
deficit in Q1: 
sound rise in 
revenue …
… outpaced by 
sharp rise in 
spending
Growth in 
spending for 
year as a whole 
restrained as 
pensions will 
generally remain 
unchanged at 
mid- yearFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary quarterly figures as the latter are not subsequently re-
vised.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q442024
––++
–8–6–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202120202019
2019
202120202019 2020 202102468
2019 2020 202102468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
€ billion
12 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a).
13 For more information on pension adjustments, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
72

for 2021, pensions will thus go up by a total of 
2%, driven by last year’s sharp mid- year adjust -
ment. The number of pensioners is likely to in -
crease by a little more than last year (2020: 
+½%) and higher additional contributions to 
the health insurance scheme will make them -
selves felt. Furthermore, the first payments of 
the new basic pension are due as of the second 
half of the year. The coronavirus crisis will con -
tinue to weigh on the revenue side throughout 
2021.
All in all, a significant deficit is thus to be ex -
pected for 2021 as a whole, but it may be only 
slightly higher than that of last year (2020: just 
under €4½ billion, according to preliminary 
data). Deficits are set to rise more sharply in the 
years thereafter due, inter alia, to demographic 
trends.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency was hard hit 
by the coronavirus crisis in the first quarter of 
2021, too, recording a deficit of €10 billion in 
its core budget.14 This represented a deterior -
ation of €9 billion compared with the same 
period last year, which was yet to be affected 
by the crisis.
Overall, the Federal Employment Agency’s rev -
enue recorded only a small increase. Contribu -
tion receipts declined slightly due to the crisis. 
However, in contrast to other branches of so -
cial security, at the Federal Employment Agency 
contributions paid for recipients of short- time 
working and unemployment benefits do not al -
leviate crisis- induced contribution shortfalls. Yet 
contributions for insolvency benefit payments 
rose sharply. At the start of the year, the legally 
stipulated contribution rate doubled to 0.12%. 
However, it is still far below the peak experi -
enced during the financial and economic crisis 
(2010: 0.41%).
Spending has doubled vis- à- vis the first quarter 
of 2020 (+€9 billion). Payments for unemploy -
ment benefit were up by roughly one- third (+€1½ billion). Spending on short- time working 
benefits amounted to €8 billion (2020: €½ bil -
lion). Social contributions paid by the Federal 
Employment Agency on behalf of enterprises 
as an exceptional crisis measure accounted for 
around €3 billion of this. Insolvency benefits, 
which had stood at a low level in the first quar -
ter, fell a little further still. However, given the 
suspension of the obligation to file for insolv -Significant 
deficit  expected 
for 2021 as a 
whole
Deficit very high 
at start of year
Revenue up 
overall due to 
higher contribu -
tions for insolv -
ency benefit 
payments
Steep rise in 
spending, chiefly 
due to short- 
time workFinances of the 
Federal Employment Agency*
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants' 
pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410505
––+
–30–25–20–15–10–50+5+10Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202120202019
2021202020192019 2020 2021–200+20+40+60+80+100+120+140
2019 2020 202120020406080100120140
–+++++++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
14 Excluding the civil servants’ pension fund. Transfers to 
the fund are thus recorded as expenditure here, lowering 
the core budget balance. These transfers have been sus -
pended from the second quarter of 2020 until the end of 
2021 because of the coronavirus crisis. Transfers amounted 
to €170 million one year earlier.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
73

ency until the end of April, there were crisis-  
induced exceptions in this area.
The Federal Employment Agency’s budget plan 
envisages a deficit of €9 billion in its core 
budget for the current year as a whole. Finan -
cing is to come from the reserves of €6 billion 
remaining at the end of 2020 and an additional 
central government grant of €3 billion. With 
the first quarter of the year at an end, it is 
already  clear that the Federal Employment 
Agency will require additional liquidity loans 
from central government. The finances of the 
former are likely to greatly improve once meas -
ures to contain the pandemic gradually come 
to an end. However, given the significant 
strains that are on the cards for the first half of 
the year, the deficit could be roughly twice as 
high as currently envisaged. According to cur -
rent forecasts, the economic situation is set to 
continue improving considerably next year. 
Additional crisis assistance funds from central 
government may no longer be required.
Public finances in the euro 
area and the European Union
Developments in the euro area
Last year, the deficit ratio in the euro area shot 
up by 6½ pps to 7.2% (see the table on p. 75), 
in large part due to the sharp economic down -
turn. Fiscal policy made a substantial contribu -
tion to macroeconomic stabilisation via the op -
eration of automatic stabilisers. In addition, ex -
tensive measures were taken to mitigate the 
fallout from the pandemic. Not least for these 
reasons, the cyclically adjusted deficit ratio in -
creased by 2½ pps. The debt- to- GDP ratio rose 
by over 14 pps to 100%.15 Besides the high 
deficit, the decreased GDP in the ratio’s de -
nominator also accounted for this. Additionally, 
fiscal measures, which are reflected in the debt 
level but not in the deficit, had a role to play 
(2¼ pps). These include, for example, govern -
ment or government- mandated assistance loans 
to enterprises.The European Commission expects the euro 
area deficit ratio to climb further (to 8%) in the 
current year. Sizeable additional fiscal stabilisa -
tion measures will account for 2½ pps, while 
solid economic growth will curb the increase in 
the deficit through the operation of automatic 
stabilisers. The debt- to- GDP ratio is projected 
to rise by 2½ pps to 102½% this year. In the 
denominator, the expansion of economic activ -
ity will counteract the impact of the high def -
icit, pushing down the ratio.
Government finances are then expected to re -
bound significantly in 2022. The unwinding 
and expiry of sizeable temporary stabilisation 
measures will bring the deficit down by 2½ pps. 
The economy will also continue to recover rap -
idly, which will take pressure off general gov -
ernment budgets. As a result, the deficit ratio 
will decline by just over 4 pps to 3.8%, which is 
still just over 3 pps higher than it was prior to 
the crisis (in 2019). According to data from the 
Commission, however, coronavirus crisis relief 
measures are still factored into the forecast, 
possibly to the tune of around 1% of GDP .16 
Adjusted for these measures, the structural def -
icit ratio will be around 1½% pps higher in 
2022 than in 2019.17 The debt- to- GDP ratio will 
see a moderate decrease of 1¾ pps in 2022. 
However, that still leaves it at over 100%, and 
15 pps higher than it was before the pandemic.
The balances of individual euro area countries 
varied widely prior to the crisis. For example, 
Luxembourg and the Netherlands recorded sig -
nificant surpluses in 2019 (+2.4% and +1.8% of Deficit for year 
as a whole 
much higher 
than planned; 
financing should 
subsequently be 
possible without 
government 
support
Deficit ratio 
rose to over 7% 
in 2020 …… and is likely 
to climb further 
in 2021
Significant 
rebound in 2022
Deficit ratio 
grew consider -
ably in all coun -
tries last year …
15 Here and in the remainder of the article, the figures re -
ferred to are those published by the European Commission 
in its most recent forecast. It publishes euro area aggre -
gates for general government debt on a non- consolidated 
basis, i.e. not corrected for intergovernmental loans. See 
European Commission (2021).
16 The European Commission calculates these at 1% of 
GDP for the European Union as a whole but provides no in -
formation for the euro area.
17 The structural deficit ratio is one of the indicators that is 
relevant for the fiscal rules. It is calculated by taking the un -
adjusted deficit and subtracting the influence of the eco -
nomic cycle and the effects of temporary measures. As de -
fined by the Commission, the latter played no major role 
for the most part during the period under review.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
74

GDP , respectively), whereas Spain and France 
reported marked deficits (around -3% in each 
case). Balances then took a significant turn for 
the worse in all euro area countries last year. In 
many countries, the magnitude of the deficit-  
increasing measures was greater than the 
negative influence of the economic cycle. As a 
result, deficit ratios stood at between 4% 
(Luxem bourg) and 11% (Spain). Debt- to- GDP 
ratios rose the most in those countries that 
already  had high levels of general government 
debt.18 At over 200%, the debt ratio in Greece 
was the highest, followed by those of Italy 
(over 150%) and Portugal (over 130%). In Bel -
gium, Spain, France and Cyprus, too, debt had 
at that point risen to levels exceeding annual 
GDP .
The European Commission expects around half 
of countries to see a further increase in their 
deficit ratios this year – at 3 pps, Germany will 
see the greatest increase. The highest ratios, 
around 12%, are then expected for Italy and  Malta. On balance, additional (deficit-  
increasing) measures will be adopted in almost 
all countries. However, this will be outweighed 
by the positive influence of the economic cycle 
in a number of countries, meaning that their 
deficit ratios will nevertheless decrease.
All Member States’ deficit ratios are set to 
shrink next year. A continued economic up -
swing and the expiry of numerous stabilisation 
measures are expected in nearly all countries. 
At this point, 11 out of 19 countries will then 
have a deficit ratio of below or close to 3% 
again. By contrast, Member States such as the 
high- debt countries of Belgium, Spain, France 
and Italy will still have ratios of around 5%. On 
the back of favourable financing with very low 
interest rates, nearly all countries will benefit 
from shrinking interest expenditure ratios. Des - … and is likely 
to also rise in 
around half of 
countries this 
yearShrinking deficits 
in all countries 
in 2022Public fi  nances in euro area countries
European Commission Spring Economic Forecast, May 2021
CountryGeneral government balance 
as a percentage of GDPGeneral government gross debt 
as a percentage of GDPStructural budget balance  as a 
percentage of potential  GDP
2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022
Austria –  8.9 –  7.6 – 3.0 83.9 87.2 85.0 – 5.7 – 5.8 – 2.9
Belgium –  9.4 –  7.6 – 4.9 114.1 115.3 115.5 – 5.6 – 5.8 – 4.4
Cyprus –  5.7 –  5.1 – 2.0 118.2 112.2 106.6 – 4.7 – 4.7 – 2.4
Estonia –  4.9 –  5.6 – 3.3 18.2 21.3 24.0 – 2.8 – 4.2 – 2.1
Finland –  5.4 –  4.6 – 2.1 69.2 71.0 70.1 – 3.4 – 3.3 – 1.5
France –  9.2 –  8.5 – 4.7 115.7 117.4 116.4 – 4.7 – 6.7 – 4.7
Germany –  4.2 –  7.5 – 2.5 69.8 73.1 72.2 – 1.8 – 6.2 – 2.5
Greece –  9.7 – 10.0 – 3.2 205.6 208.8 201.5 – 4.7 – 6.6 – 2.2
Ireland –  5.0 –  5.0 – 2.9 59.5 61.4 59.7 – 4.6 – 4.7 – 2.9
Italy –  9.5 – 11.7 – 5.8 155.8 159.8 156.6 – 4.9 – 9.3 – 5.1
Latvia –  4.5 –  7.3 – 2.0 43.5 47.3 46.4 – 3.3 – 6.2 – 1.9
Lithuania –  7.4 –  8.2 – 6.0 47.3 51.9 54.1 – 6.7 – 7.0 – 5.0
Luxembourg –  4.1 –  0.3 – 0.1 24.9 27.0 26.8 – 1.9 1.1 1.1
Malta – 10.1 – 11.8 – 5.5 54.3 64.7 65.5 – 7.5 – 9.7 – 4.5
Netherlands –  4.3 –  5.0 – 1.8 54.5 58.0 56.8 – 2.0 – 3.4 – 1.7
Portugal –  5.7 –  4.7 – 3.4 133.6 127.2 122.3 – 2.0 – 3.2 – 3.2
Slovakia –  6.2 –  6.5 – 4.1 60.6 59.5 59.0 – 4.7 – 6.0 – 4.4
Slovenia –  8.4 –  8.5 – 4.7 80.8 79.0 76.7 – 6.7 – 7.7 – 4.7
Spain – 11.0 –  7.6 – 5.2 120.0 119.6 116.9 – 4.2 – 4.9 – 5.2
Euro area –  7.2 –  8.0 – 3.8 100.0 102.4 100.8 – 3.6 – 6.2 – 3.6
Source: European Commission (AMECO).
Deutsche Bundesbank
18 The way in which an identical GDP decrease (in the de -
nominator) pushes up the ratio more for higher debt ratios 
than for lower debt ratios can also be observed here.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
75

pite the significant increase in debt, interest ex -
penditure in relation to GDP will be ½ pp lower 
than in 2019 in some countries – particularly 
high- debt countries. Based on the Commis -
sion’s forecast, most countries’ debt- to- GDP 
ratios will shrink next year. They will decrease 
most sharply in Greece, Cyprus and Portugal. 
However, they will still remain markedly over 
100% in these countries as well as in Belgium, 
Spain, France and Italy. By contrast, they will 
stay below 60% in seven countries.
Detailed information on NGEU 
important for fiscal analysis
The Statistical Office of the European Commu -
nities (Eurostat) and the European Commission 
provide key information on government finances. 
This serves as an essential foundation for ana -
lysing fiscal policy in the European Union. Data 
on deficit and debt levels for past years and on 
projected changes are especially important. 
The sizeable amount of borrowing to finance 
the EU budget and, in particular, to finance the 
grants to the Member States have given rise to 
an entirely new fiscal instrument. For the pur -
poses of proper fiscal analysis, it is crucial that 
the payment flows in connection with this are 
made transparent in both actual and projected 
figures.19 Looking at the information provided 
by the Commission to date, this is not the case. 
The extent to which Eurostat will publish cor -
responding data for budget outcomes in future 
is currently unclear. It would be a point of criti -
cism if government sector data at the EU level 
were not recorded according to national ac -
counts standards (i.e. in the same way as the 
national indicators).
Due to the European Union’s COVID-  19 recov -
ery package, the EU level is running sizeable 
deficits for the first time. These stem from the 
European Union incurring NGEU debt through 
its provision of credit- financed grants to Mem -
ber States. Unlike in the conventional EU 
budget, this EU expenditure is not matched by 
EU revenue in the same year.The European Commission appears to have in -
corporated the expected grants for 2021 and 
2022 into its projected figures for Member 
States’ government finances. Taken in isolation, 
they will reduce the Member States’ deficits in 
these years. However, the Commission does 
not record the inversely associated deficits at 
the EU level; nor does it factor these into the 
EU or euro area deficit aggregates. As a result, 
the aggregates are not depicted in full. Based 
on rough calculations, a deficit of just over ½% 
of GDP should actually be factored in for the 
EU level in 2021 and 2022, respectively.20
Debt at the EU level is likewise neither covered 
by the Commission’s forecast nor factored into 
the EU and euro area aggregates for the debt- 
to- GDP ratio. In line with deficits, EU debt aris -
ing from NGEU grants is set to increase by just 
over ½% of GDP annually. Furthermore, the 
European Union is potentially taking on debt in 
order to supply countries with concessional 
NGEU loans. The Commission does not specify 
what assumptions it has made regarding these 
in its forecast, either. Rough calculations put EU 
debt at approximately 1% of GDP in 2020.21 It 
could increase steadily to reach around 6% of 
GDP by 2026.
It is important that additional data be made 
available not only for the EU aggregate, but 
also to be able to properly and comprehen -
sively analyse the government finances of the 
individual Member States. Required data in -
clude the aforementioned data for deficits and 
debt at the EU level, but also information on 
payment flows between the European Union 
and the Member States.Eurostat and 
Commission 
should provide 
complete infor -
mation about 
EU level
Deficits at EU 
level for first 
time due to 
coronavirus aidFiscal indicators 
for EU aggre -
gate only reflect 
NGEU as deficit- 
reducing 
revenue  for 
Member States
EU debt likewise 
omitted
Comprehensive 
fiscal analysis 
for Member 
States requires 
additional 
information  
on EU level
19 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020c).
20 With the exception of one graph (see footnote 26), the 
Commission merely states that it has factored in €140 bil -
lion in grants from the Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF) 
over the forecast horizon (2021 and 2022). This amount is 
40% of the total RRF financing that it assumes will be 
spent, with the remaining RRF grants being allocated be -
tween 2023 and 2026. It provides no breakdown by coun -
try, nor is information on other NGEU grants supplied.
21 It is assumed here that NGEU loans were also taken up 
in full. In addition, the calculations include EU debt for as -
sistance loans from the SURE programme and older debt 
(excluding ESM).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
76

With this additional information about the EU 
level, it would be possible to expand on individ -
ual Member States’ regular disclosures on their 
government finances. This information could 
be used to provide a more comprehensive pic -
ture of the impact of fiscal policy decisions on 
Member States, amongst other things. After 
all, European debt is very similar to national 
debt, and it will need to be serviced by the 
same group of taxpayers as national debt. 
However, the usual national indicators do not 
capture the burden arising from European 
debt. For this reason, deficits and debts at the 
EU level should be allocated to individual coun -
tries for analytical and information purposes. 
EU deficits and EU debt should be taken into 
account in future, especially in the fiscal rules. 
If not, the purpose of these rules, which have 
so far been purely national in scope, will be at 
least partially negated, becoming increasingly 
ineffective as more debt is shifted from the 
national  level to the European level (see pp. 69 f. 
for information on how EU debt is accounted 
for in the German debt brake).
For the additional indicators, it would seem ap -
propriate to allocate EU deficits and EU debt to 
countries according to their share of EU gross 
national income (GNI). In principle, this share 
reflects a country’s contribution to the EU 
budget, out of which EU debt will be serviced 
in future. Based on the above- mentioned rough 
calculations of EU deficits, ½ pp would thus be 
allocated to the deficit ratios of all EU countries 
over the forecast horizon in 2021 and 2022, re -
spectively (see p. 76). EU debt for grants would 
result in the debt- to- GDP ratios of all countries 
being ½ pp higher in 2021, and just over 1 pp 
higher in 2022, than reported in the Commis -
sion’s forecast.22
Both this allocation key and allocation as a 
whole have been criticised. One objection is 
that countries’ GNI shares may shift before the 
debt is finally repaid. To date, however, they 
have been rather stable over time. In addition, 
the relative changes could be taken into ac -
count by making regular, commensurate ad -justments to the allocation key.23 Allocation 
would also have to be adjusted if the countries’ 
shares of financing in the EU budget were to 
change significantly. This could happen if, for 
instance, new European taxes (or levies) were 
introduced. The load could be spread across 
the Member States according to a key based 
on something other than GNI share. However, 
some manner of allocation is nevertheless ne -
cessary as the financial burden would still rest 
on national debtors’ shoulders, and national 
fiscal policymakers’ scope for levying taxes 
would remain limited as a result.
NGEU grants also need to be handled in a par -
ticular manner when analysing the fiscal stance. 
This is interpreted as, inter alia, the impact of 
fiscal policy on macroeconomic outcomes. 
Changes in the cyclically adjusted primary def -
icit ratio (as defined in the national accounts)24 
are often taken as an indicator of this. This is 
the part of the change in the deficit that is not 
the result of the cyclical component or interest 
expenditure. If this ratio rises, the fiscal stance 
is described as expansionary – government ac -
tivity is supporting economic activity. In order 
for this indicator to retain its informative value, 
it would need to be adjusted for financial flows 
with the European Union. This means that it 
would be necessary to correct the national 
ratios for NGEU grants received, as this NGEU 
revenue does not have any restrictive effect on 
a Member State’s national economic activity. 
Unlike in the case of most other forms of rev -
enue, such as taxes, no domestic resources are 
withdrawn by general government. Instead, 
NGEU revenue flows in from abroad (from the Additional 
indicators  for 
Member States 
important for 
analysis
Allocation of 
deficits and debt 
according to 
GNI share
Adjustments 
over time 
possible Fiscal stance 
should also be 
measured more 
accurately
22 As the Commission does not provide any information 
on assistance loans, their inclusion in debt- to- GDP ratios is 
not discussed here. Their treatment could deviate from that 
of grant- related debt, as the countries receiving assistance 
loans include these in their national debt.
23 A national debt instrument linked to a country’s GDP 
share of EU GDP would also be treated this way. An instru -
ment of this kind does not currently exist. However, com -
parable debt instruments that are dependent on economic 
developments already exist and are part of the debt ratio, 
e.g. in the form of inflation- linked bonds.
24 This definition does not include the allocation of EU def -
icits and debt to the Member States described above. The 
fiscal stance indicator should also omit this.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
77

credit- financed EU off- budget entity). Not ad -
justing for this, the fiscal stance would be 
assessed  as too restrictive in the case of rising 
NGEU revenue. For countries receiving large 
NGEU grants, this can make a significant differ -
ence to the analysis. While the European Com -
mission has not disclosed any detailed data on 
this, it notes that, for Spain in 2021 and 2022, 
NGEU revenue totalling around 3% of GDP is 
included in the forecast.25 Of this, inflows are 
expected to amount to just over 1% of GDP in 
2021. Spain is thus adopting an expansionary 
fiscal stance this year, whereas the indicator 
not adjusted for NGEU revenue indicates a re -
strictive fiscal stance (+¾ pp).26
No compelling case for general  
escape clause in 2022 as things 
stand today, but decision at 
a later date based on a more 
certain outlook prudent
Government measures have been a major fac -
tor in addressing this exceptional crisis. The 
high deficit and debt ratios that these are bring -
ing about do not contravene European fiscal 
rules. Activation of the general escape clause 
suspended the rules of the Stability and Growth 
Pact (SGP) for 2020. The suspension of these 
rules was extended in October 2020 so that 
they would not be reimposed this year, either.
At the start of March 2021, the Commission 
proposed already deciding on the continued 
application of the general escape clause in 
2022 in June 2021. In the Commission’s view, 
the decision should be made following an over -
all assessment of the state of the economy by 
the Council, particularly of the real GDP level of 
the European Union and the euro area in 2022 
compared with pre-  crisis levels. At that time, 
the Commission concluded that the general es -
cape clause should remain in place in 2022.
The Commission revised its expectations up -
wards in its latest forecast. Real GDP is set to return to the level recorded in the final quarter 
of 2019 in the fourth quarter of 2021 already, 
and to exceed it from the first quarter of 2022. 
Viewed from this perspective, one apparently 
essential reason in the view of the Commission 
for the continued application of the general es -
cape clause is nullified. Another argument 
against continued application is that the Com -
mission is forecasting strong growth overall for 
2022. The EU output gap is projected to nar -
row in 2022, shrinking by 2.7 pps compared 
with 2021, and production capacity is expected 
to be more or less fully utilised on an annual 
average (output gap: -0.4%). While the assess -
ment of this unobservable indicator is subject 
to relative uncertainty and susceptible to revi -
sion, the macroeconomic forecast nevertheless 
shows that 2022 will not be a crisis year. It also 
shows that the fiscal policy envisaged will not 
hinder a strong economic upswing.
Moreover, economic growth would likely not 
be impeded by the deactivation of the general 
escape clause in 2022. Under the SGP , Member 
States are generally required to lower their 
structural deficit by 0.5% of GDP per year until 
their medium- term budgetary objective (MTO) 
is achieved.27 Depending on a country’s specific 
situation, this target can be adjusted. For ex -
ample, the level of correction required could be General escape 
clause provides 
room for man -
oeuvre during 
crisis
In March, Com -
mission recom -
mended con -
tinued applica -
tion of clause in 
2022More favourable 
economic 
development  
expected
Compliance with 
rules would not 
place any strain 
on economic 
growth
25 The Commission has stated that around half of the total 
amount of €70 billion in RRF grants made available to 
Spain will be absorbed over the forecast horizon.
26 For other countries, the effect appears to be greater in 
2022 than in 2021. The key factor here is the year- on- year 
change in NGEU grants. However, there is a lack of precise 
information about the time profile. The Commission only 
goes so far as to present expenditure and other costs (per 
country) financed by RRF grants, as incorporated into the 
forecast, in a graph. The level of other NGEU grants is nei -
ther depicted nor specified.
27 Compliance with the debt criterion (corrective arm) re -
quires that the part of the debt ratio above the 60% 
threshold be reduced by an average of 1⁄ 20th per year. Vio -
lation of this rule has never resulted in an excessive deficit 
procedure (EDP) being launched. Even where debt ratios 
have been very high, non- compliance has so far been ex -
cused as long as a country has not significantly deviated 
from its adjustment path towards its MTO.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
78

reduced in adverse economic times.28 How -
ever, there is something to be said for an ambi -
tious fiscal stance in an unfavourable fiscal situ -
ation when deficit and debt levels are far in ex -
cess of SGP limits.
According to the Commission’s forecast, al -
most all Member States will comply with the 
rules. Owing to the extensive measures taken 
in response to the coronavirus crisis, one par -
ticular point needs to be noted: in a departure 
from normal practice, the Commission has in -
cluded these mostly temporary and crisis-  
related measures in the structural budget bal -
ance, meaning that they are increasing the 
structural deficit. This will thus improve auto -
matically once said measures become less sig -
nificant – as is largely expected in 2022. The re -
sulting contraction of the structural deficit will 
not hinder economic growth. Instead, it will be 
possible to discontinue measures due, for ex -
ample, to employment opportunities opening 
up again and enterprises resuming business. In 
line with this, the Commission expects a strong 
economic upswing in 2022, despite the struc -
tural deficit shrinking by around 2½ pps. The 
structural budget balances of 19 EU countries 
will go so far as to improve by significantly 
more than 0.5% of GDP . Improvement will 
amount to less than this in three countries 
(Denmark, Luxembourg, Portugal), with the 
structural deficit worsening slightly in only two 
countries (Spain, Croatia). However, 2022 will 
see both of these countries experience excep -
tionally strong economic growth and their out -
put gaps close.
All in all, as things currently stand – based on 
the Commission’s forecast – deactivation of the general escape clause would not require a 
change in fiscal course in 2022 that could jeop -
ardise economic growth.29 In high- deficit coun -
tries, the necessary gradual process of consoli -
dation would be accompanied by an EDP . This 
would involve closer monitoring, which, given 
very high deficit and debt levels, is by all means 
desirable.
The outlook heading into next year remains 
highly uncertain, though. With that in mind, it 
would make sense to hold off on making a de -
cision about the general escape clause until 
autumn . At that point, it should be far easier to 
gauge the extent to which economic activity is 
returning to normal. Should the situation turn 
out to be significantly less favourable than cur -
rently expected, application of the general es -
cape clause could be continued. If, on the 
other hand, there is no change in the current 
favourable forecast, the fiscal rules that nor -
mally apply ought to be reimposed.Consolidation 
unnecessary in 
most casesAs things cur -
rently stand, no 
compelling case 
for general 
escape clause 
in 2022
Hold off on 
decision about 
general escape 
clause until 
autumn
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), The future requirements of state- specific debt brakes on state gov -
ernments’ budgets, Monthly Report, October 2020, pp. 102-105.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), Public finances, Annual pension adjustments in need of reform, 
Monthly Report, November 2020, pp. 72-73.28 Under the preventive arm, quantitative targets are set 
out in what is known as the matrix of requirements. Under 
the corrective arm (i.e. in an EDP , primarily when the 3% 
threshold is breached), it is possible, especially where cor -
rection deadlines span multiple years, to deviate in individ -
ual years from the minimum improvement of 0.5% of GDP . 
In other words, requirements can also become country-  
specific in this way. Where this happens, it should be kept 
in mind that the aim is to bring down high debt ratios rap -
idly.
29 For example, the Commission projects a ¾ pp decrease 
in Spain’s cyclically adjusted primary balance in 2022. As 
this is calculated, the expansionary effect would largely dis -
appear with consolidation of ½ pp. However, this fiscal 
stance indicator includes NGEU grants, which will be higher 
again in 2022 than in 2021 – although they have no re -
strictive effect. Corrected for this, even with a rule-  
compliant fiscal adjustment of 0.5 pp, a fiscal impulse to 
the economy of ¾ pp would remain (more precise infor -
mation cannot be given, as no details are provided in the 
Commission’s forecast).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
79

Deutsche Bundesbank (2020c), The informative value of national fiscal indicators in respect of debt 
at the European level, Monthly Report, December 2020, pp. 37-47.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Key central government budget data in connection with the debt 
brake, Monthly Report, February 2016, pp. 68-69.
European Commission (2021), European Economic Forecast Spring 2021, Institutional Paper 149, 
May 2021.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
80

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates/base rates  ........................................................................................  43 •
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
3•

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
13. General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
14. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78 •
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81 •
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 EONIA  5,73 month
EURIBOR  6,7Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  8
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2019 Aug. 8.4 6.1 5.8 5.5 2.3 3.3 1.7 – 0.36 – 0.41 – 0.1
Sep. 8.0 5.9 5.7 5.7 2.2 3.3 1.8 – 0.40 – 0.42 – 0.1
Oct. 8.3 6.0 5.7 5.6 2.4 3.7 1.6 – 0.46 – 0.41 – 0.0
Nov. 8.3 5.9 5.6 5.4 2.1 3.4 1.8 – 0.45 – 0.40 0.1
Dec. 8.0 5.7 4.9 5.2 2.0 3.3 1.6 – 0.46 – 0.40 0.2
2020 Jan. 8.0 5.6 5.2 5.2 1.9 3.2 1.2 – 0.45 – 0.39 0.2
Feb. 8.1 5.6 5.5 6.1 1.9 3.2 0.9 – 0.45 – 0.41 – 0.0
Mar. 10.4 7.4 7.5 7.1 3.6 4.2 0.3 – 0.45 – 0.42 0.2
Apr. 11.8 8.3 8.2 8.2 4.8 4.3 0.0 – 0.45 – 0.25 0.3
May 12.5 9.1 9.0 8.8 6.1 4.9 0.2 – 0.46 – 0.27 0.2
June 12.7 9.3 9.3 9.5 6.9 4.6 – 0.4 – 0.46 – 0.38 0.2
July 13.5 10.0 10.1 9.7 7.4 4.7 – 0.5 – 0.46 – 0.44 0.0
Aug. 13.3 9.6 9.5 10.0 7.7 4.7 – 0.0 – 0.47 – 0.48 – 0.0
Sep. 13.8 10.3 10.4 10.2 8.1 4.5 – 0.4 – 0.47 – 0.49 – 0.1
Oct. 13.8 10.3 10.5 10.7 8.3 4.2 – 0.5 – 0.47 – 0.51 – 0.2
Nov. 14.5 10.8 11.0 11.3 8.6 4.4 – 0.7 – 0.47 – 0.52 – 0.2
Dec. 15.6 11.7 12.4 12.0 9.2 4.9 – 0.5 – 0.47 – 0.54 – 0.2
2021 Jan. 16.4 12.2 12.5 12.4 9.4 4.8 – 0.9 – 0.48 – 0.55 – 0.2
Feb. 16.4 12.2 12.2 11.6 9.6 4.6 – 0.9 – 0.48 – 0.54 – 0.1
Mar. 13.6 10.2 10.1 ... 8.7 4.1 – 0.2 – 0.48 – 0.54 0.0
Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... – 0.48 – 0.54 0.1
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 Euroovernight index average.  6 Euro interbank offered rate.  7 See also footnotes to Table
VI.4, p. 43●. 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT, GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2019 Aug. +32,846 +22,335 +12,990 +38,762 –17,798 – 5,741 – 2,862 + 629 1.1126 98.9 94.0
Sep. +38,986 +27,654 +41,617 +13,614 –16,744 – 4,785 +55,472 – 5,939 1.1004 98.2 93.1
Oct. +29,057 +35,910 +43,427 +22,805 +38,268 + 6,109 –24,650 + 894 1.1053 98.1 92.9
Nov. +23,005 +29,324 + 3,062 –58,166 +27,740 + 539 +36,819 – 3,870 1.1051 97.5 92.2
Dec. +31,974 +30,463 + 8,077 –62,814 +66,773 –13,749 +17,409 + 458 1.1113 97.4 92.1
2020 Jan. – 6,790 + 9,358 –20,902 + 1,241 –53,162 + 7,318 +22,206 + 1,495 1.1100 97.0 91.5
Feb. +14,145 +28,900 – 1,930 + 5,601 –31,336 + 7,458 +16,831 – 484 1.0905 96.3 90.7
Mar. +24,581 +37,827 +26,001 – 1,024 –100,777 – 3,723 +127,948 + 3,578 1.1063 99.0 93.1
Apr. +12,136 +11,236 –20,332 –39,855 +153,863 +11,913 –147,947 + 1,694 1.0862 98.2 92.6
May – 966 +16,493 + 6,442 –38,296 +40,397 + 9,335 – 6,657 + 1,662 1.0902 98.4 92.7
June +21,156 +27,863 +40,976 –31,324 –14,090 +19,594 +66,965 – 169 1.1255 99.8 94.0
July +24,908 +35,387 – 3,038 +45,429 –34,352 – 8,500 – 5,057 – 558 1.1463 100.5 94.6
Aug. +22,789 +24,282 +54,642 + 9,680 +45,973 –15,540 +13,225 + 1,304 1.1828 101.6 95.1
Sep. +36,673 +35,007 +47,318 –30,628 + 9,856 – 7,762 +73,213 + 2,640 1.1792 101.6 95.0
Oct. +29,556 +38,981 +51,773 +58,295 +86,067 + 2,439 –97,945 + 2,917 1.1775 101.4 94.9
Nov. +26,117 +35,241 – 1,950 –115,101 +197,656 + 8,892 –90,800 – 2,597 1.1838 100.7 94.4
Dec. +46,083 +39,668 +72,865 –66,214 +318,359 –30,492 –150,536 + 1,749 1.2170 101.9 p 95.4
2021 Jan. + 5,567 +17,154 +11,909 +13,617 +30,187 + 5,495 –36,444 – 947 1.2171 101.4 p 95.6
Feb. +13,276 +29,845 +43,128 +11,509 +92,042 + 5,415 –64,241 – 1,597 1.2098 100.8 p 94.8
Mar. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1899 100.4 p 94.3
Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1979 100.7 p 94.6
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also TablesXII.10 and 12, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Against the
currencies of the EER-19 group.  4 Based on consumer price indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2018 1.9 1.8 1.3 4.4 1.3 1.8 1.6 8.5 0.9 4.0
2019 1.3 1.8 0.6 5.0 1.3 1.5 1.9 5.6 0.3 2.0
2020 –6.6 –6.3 –4.8 –2.9 –2.8 –8.1 –8.2 3.4 –8.9 –3.6
2019 Q4 1.0 1.7 0.2 5.3 1.0 0.7 1.2 5.9 –0.2 0.7
2020 Q1 –3.3 –1.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.9 –5.3 –1.5 5.8 –6.0 –1.1
Q2 –14.6 –13.8 –11.3 –7.0 –6.5 –18.6 –15.6 –2.6 –18.3 –8.9
Q3 –4.1 –4.2 –3.7 –2.5 –2.8 –4.2 –9.4 8.7 –5.1 –2.8
Q4 –4.9 –5.0 –2.3 –1.2 –0.8 –4.1 –5.9 1.5 –6.0 –1.5
2021 Q1 –1.8 ... –3.3 ... ... 1.8 ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2018 0.8 1.2 1.0 4.8 3.4 0.6 1.8 –5.0 0.9 2.0
2019 –1.3 4.8 –4.3 6.9 1.6 0.5 –0.7 2.8 –1.1 0.8
2020 –8.6 –3.8 r –10.2 –6.0 –3.0 –11.0 –2.2 4.3 –11.4 –1.8
2019 Q4 –2.1 5.9 –5.1 1.7 0.9 –0.7 –5.0 4.7 –2.2 –0.0
2020 Q1 –6.0 –0.3 r –6.3 –8.0 –0.2 –7.9 –1.2 6.8 –11.6 –2.6
Q2 –20.1 –11.7 r –21.6 –13.3 –5.3 –23.8 –8.2 –1.6 –25.5 –5.1
Q3 –6.8 –3.5 r –10.0 –2.2 –4.8 –7.9 –2.0 –2.2 –5.2 –1.8
Q4 –1.6 0.6 r –2.9 –0.1 –1.9 –4.4 2.9 12.9 –2.5 2.2
2021 Q1 e 3.1 3.3 p –1.4 –0.1 0.1 2.1 4.6 p 21.6 9.7 3.6
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2018 83.8 81.0 87.7 74.4 84.1 85.9 70.8 76.2 78.1 76.4
2019 82.3 81.2 84.5 72.8 81.1 84.5 71.5 77.3 77.4 76.3
2020 74.4 75.5 77.0 67.4 76.8 73.5 70.8 68.5 53.1 71.8
2020 Q1 80.9 79.7 82.9 70.7 78.4 82.6 72.3 75.5 76.5 74.7
Q2 68.4 72.8 71.4 63.3 77.2 62.4 67.3 56.7 – 69.1
Q3 72.1 73.4 74.4 66.0 76.0 72.9 70.3 69.6 64.5 70.8
Q4 76.3 75.9 79.1 69.6 75.4 76.0 73.2 72.0 71.4 72.7
2021 Q1 77.5 77.4 80.4 71.6 78.1 77.1 72.5 74.5 72.8 73.1
Q2 82.5 80.2 86.7 76.5 81.0 83.2 74.7 77.2 75.7 75.0
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2018 8.2 6.0 3.4 5.4 7.4 8.7 19.3 5.8 10.6 7.5
2019 7.5 5.4 3.2 4.5 6.7 8.2 17.3 5.0 10.0 6.3
2020 7.8 5.6 e 4.2 6.8 7.8 7.8 16.3 5.7 9.2 8.1
2020 Nov. 8.3 5.8 e 4.5 7.3 8.1 8.1 16.2 6.0 p 9.6 8.1
Dec. 8.2 5.7 e 4.5 6.7 8.2 7.8 15.8 5.8 p 9.8 8.2
2021 Jan. 8.2 5.6 e 4.4 7.1 8.2 7.9 ... 5.8 p 10.3 8.5
Feb. 8.2 5.7 e 4.3 6.8 7.9 8.0 ... 5.7 p 10.2 8.7
Mar. 8.1 5.8 e 4.4 6.8 7.7 7.9 ... 5.8 p 10.1 8.7
Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5.8 ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2018 1.8 2.3 1.9 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.8 0.7 1.2 2.6
2019 1.2 1.2 1.4 2.3 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.9 0.6 2.7
2020 0.3 0.4 5 0.4 –0.6 0.4 0.5 –1.3 –0.5 –0.1 0.1
2020 Nov. –0.3 0.2 5 –0.7 –1.2 0.2 0.2 –2.1 –1.0 –0.3 –0.7
Dec. –0.3 0.4 5 –0.7 –0.9 0.2 –0.0 –2.4 –1.0 –0.3 –0.5
2021 Jan. 0.9 0.6 1.6 0.3 1.0 0.8 –2.4 –0.1 0.7 –0.5
Feb. 0.9 0.3 1.6 0.5 0.9 0.8 –1.9 –0.4 1.0 –0.2
Mar. 1.3 1.6 2.0 0.9 1.4 1.4 –2.0 0.1 0.6 0.3
Apr. e 1.6 e 2.1 2.1 e 1.6 e 2.2 1.6 –1.1 e 1.1 e 1.0 1.7
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
2018 –0.5 –0.8 1.8 –0.6 –0.9 –2.3 0.9 0.1 –2.2 –0.8
2019 –0.6 –1.9 1.5 0.1 –0.9 –3.1 1.1 0.5 –1.6 –0.6
2020 –7.2 –9.4 –4.2 –4.9 –5.4 –9.2 –9.7 –5.0 –9.5 –4.5
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
2018 85.7 99.8 61.8 8.2 59.7 98.0 186.2 63.0 134.4 37.1
2019 83.9 98.1 59.7 8.4 59.5 97.6 180.5 57.4 134.6 37.0
2020 98.0 114.1 69.8 18.2 69.2 115.7 205.6 59.5 155.8 43.5
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally adjusted.  2 Manufacturing, mining
and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing: quarterly data

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
3.9 3.1 5.2 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.7 4.4 2.4 5.2 2018
4.3 2.3 5.5 1.7 1.4 2.5 2.5 3.2 2.0 3.1 2019
–0.9 –1.3 –7.0 –3.7 –6.6 –7.6 –4.8 –5.5 –10.8 –5.1 2020
4.2 2.8 5.8 1.6 0.4 2.7 2.2 2.0 1.6 3.7 2019 Q4
2.4 1.3 2.2 –0.2 –3.6 –2.2 –3.5 –2.3 –4.0 1.0 2020 Q1
–4.6 –7.7 –14.6 –9.3 –13.5 –16.2 –10.9 –12.9 –21.6 –12.4 Q2
0.1 –0.0 –8.8 –2.4 –3.7 –5.5 –2.5 –2.4 –8.6 –4.3 Q3
–1.2 1.3 –6.2 –2.8 –5.6 –6.2 –2.1 –4.5 –8.9 –4.5 Q4
... ... ... ... ... ... 0.3 ... –4.6 ... 2021 Q1
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
5.2 –1.1 1.5 0.6 4.9 0.1 4.3 5.3 0.4 6.9 2018
3.4 –3.1 1.1 –0.9 0.0 –2.2 0.5 2.8 0.5 4.0 2019
–2.4 –10.7 –0.3 –4.2 –6.3 –7.3 –9.1 –6.2 –9.8 –7.2 2020
0.1 –8.7 1.7 –0.9 –4.5 0.5 –4.8 1.7 0.3 2.9 2019 Q4
–2.5 –10.0 11.3 –1.0 –5.8 –0.9 –7.4 –2.9 –6.6 –2.1 2020 Q1
–7.5 –22.3 –7.2 –8.5 –16.8 –24.5 –28.2 –17.3 –24.6 –19.9 Q2
–0.3 –7.8 –2.9 –5.2 –3.1 –1.4 –1.5 –3.6 –5.2 –4.8 Q3
0.6 –2.1 –1.3 –2.4 0.6 –2.0 1.8 –0.8 –2.0 –1.7 Q4
12.4 p 2.0 p –7.3 p –1.1 ... –0.9 6.5 p 3.0 p 2.6 ... 2021 Q1
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
77.5 81.2 80.3 84.0 88.7 81.6 85.4 85.3 79.5 61.4 2018
77.3 79.8 77.3 84.2 86.6 78.7 87.7 84.4 80.3 63.8 2019
72.9 72.2 70.4 78.2 79.2 75.5 79.3 78.2 74.3 51.7 2020
76.4 83.4 78.8 83.2 84.8 80.6 82.2 83.0 80.0 63.3 2020 Q1
70.0 53.8 61.1 75.2 73.9 71.7 77.1 71.9 70.9 47.4 Q2
71.9 76.3 68.0 76.3 77.2 71.9 78.3 76.1 71.5 49.2 Q3
73.4 75.3 73.5 78.0 80.8 77.8 79.7 81.6 74.8 46.7 Q4
72.4 75.6 73.7 79.2 82.2 78.4 81.4 80.9 75.7 48.6 2021 Q1
77.0 88.2 81.1 82.2 87.1 80.7 83.2 85.8 78.1 49.5 Q2
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
6.2 5.6 3.7 3.9 4.9 7.1 6.6 5.1 15.3 8.4 2018
6.3 5.6 3.6 3.4 4.5 6.5 5.8 4.5 14.1 7.1 2019
8.6 6.8 4.3 3.9 5.4 6.9 6.7 5.0 15.5 7.6 2020
9.2 6.6 4.4 4.0 5.5 p 7.2 6.9 5.3 16.1 7.7 2020 Nov.
9.2 6.7 4.4 3.9 5.8 p 6.9 6.9 5.2 16.1 7.3 Dec.
9.6 6.8 4.3 3.6 e 5.7 p 6.9 7.2 5.1 15.7 6.8 2021 Jan.
9.6 6.7 4.2 3.6 e 5.7 p 6.8 7.3 4.9 15.5 6.8 Feb.
8.9 6.6 4.1 3.5 e 5.6 p 6.5 7.4 4.8 15.3 7.1 Mar.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Apr.
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2.5 2.0 1.7 1.6 2.1 1.2 2.5 1.9 1.7 0.8 2018
2.2 1.6 1.5 2.7 1.5 0.3 2.8 1.7 0.8 0.5 2019
1.1 0.0 0.8 1.1 1.4 –0.1 2.0 –0.3 –0.3 –1.1 2020
0.4 –0.7 0.2 0.7 1.1 –0.4 1.6 –1.1 –0.8 –1.1 2020 Nov.
–0.1 –0.3 0.2 0.9 1.0 –0.3 1.6 –1.2 –0.6 –0.8 Dec.
0.2 1.1 0.2 1.6 1.1 0.2 0.7 –0.9 0.4 –0.8 2021 Jan.
0.4 –0.5 0.1 1.9 1.4 0.3 0.9 –1.1 –0.1 –0.9 Feb.
1.6 2.5 0.1 1.9 2.0 0.1 1.5 0.1 1.2 0.3 Mar.
2.4 3.3 e 0.1 1.7 e 1.9 –0.1 e 1.7 2.2 2.0 e 1.2 Apr.
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
0.6 3.0 1.9 1.4 0.2 –0.3 –1.0 0.7 –2.5 –3.5 2018
0.5 2.4 0.4 1.8 0.6 0.1 –1.3 0.4 –2.9 1.5 2019
–7.4 –4.1 –10.1 –4.3 –8.9 –5.7 –6.2 –8.4 –11.0 –5.7 2020
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
33.7 21.0 44.8 52.4 74.0 121.5 49.6 70.3 97.4 99.2 2018
35.9 22.0 42.0 48.7 70.5 116.8 48.2 65.6 95.5 94.0 2019
47.3 24.9 54.3 54.5 83.9 133.6 60.6 80.8 120.0 118.2 2020
seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.  4 Monthly data
seasonally adjusted. Germany: Bundesbank calculation based on unadjusted data fromthe Federal Statistical Office.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value added tax.
6 According to Maastricht Treaty definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2019 Aug. 25.2 19.2 –7.9 5.9 5.7 – 3.9 26.6 30.5 –16.2 –15.5 –0.4 –7.3 7.0
Sep. 6.6 26.5 25.9 –19.9 –13.7 41.8 –45.7 –87.5 36.1 25.1 –1.1 –1.4 13.6
Oct. 43.6 63.2 –9.2 –19.7 –25.7 17.3 16.2 –1.1 –11.0 –1.9 –1.8 –19.8 12.5
Nov. 54.4 54.9 30.8 –0.5 3.3 10.4 –21.5 –31.9 19.4 1.0 –0.8 4.7 14.5
Dec. –118.6 –79.9 –25.2 –38.7 –20.6 –21.8 –299.1 –277.3 –6.7 7.0 –1.4 –6.1 –6.2
2020 Jan. 101.9 51.7 1.7 50.2 28.0 24.6 295.6 271.0 –5.2 –6.3 –1.0 13.1 –11.0
Feb. 60.7 50.0 20.1 10.7 22.1 42.1 93.3 51.2 –2.6 –3.0 –0.7 –3.3 4.4
Mar. 322.7 180.6 –21.1 142.1 127.8 – 4.9 101.6 106.5 –32.2 1.3 –1.0 –42.9 10.5
Apr. 293.2 101.3 54.4 191.9 180.9 –99.9 14.6 114.6 –34.2 –9.4 –1.1 –4.1 –19.7
May 293.8 121.4 32.2 172.4 177.1 8.8 –42.3 –51.2 21.2 5.5 –0.8 –0.8 17.4
June 137.5 –14.7 16.3 152.2 160.5 72.6 –146.0 –218.7 –0.7 –6.2 –1.2 –8.4 15.1
July 155.6 72.5 25.4 83.1 82.5 –35.2 89.5 124.6 0.3 1.5 –0.1 –7.1 6.1
Aug. 84.4 25.7 17.3 58.7 66.7 1.4 –18.2 –19.6 13.2 9.6 –0.4 –11.5 15.5
Sep. 83.8 –3.1 –3.2 86.9 86.1 47.4 –25.7 –73.1 10.6 –11.0 –0.2 19.4 2.5
Oct. 70.2 31.0 –5.2 39.3 33.3 –22.5 91.4 113.9 –16.9 –4.3 –0.4 –29.4 17.2
Nov. 117.6 73.0 29.3 44.6 45.3 –32.1 90.9 122.9 4.8 13.2 –0.5 –10.7 2.8
Dec. – 6.0 –3.1 28.0 –3.0 5.8 –32.5 –194.4 –161.9 9.3 –6.6 –0.5 –13.1 29.6
2021 Jan. 136.8 33.2 6.1 103.6 94.6 4.1 158.1 154.0 –36.6 –8.3 0.1 –17.3 –11.1
Feb. 97.3 31.2 10.1 66.1 72.7 –16.8 28.1 44.9 –1.5 –5.7 –0.5 –2.5 7.3
Mar. 187.8 112.0 15.3 75.8 74.4 1.3 –3.5 –4.8 14.9 –8.3 –0.3 1.5 22.0
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2019 Aug. 25.2 19.9 1.0 5.2 5.5 –13.6 2.4 16.0 –6.2 –4.4 –0.3 –3.7 2.3
Sep. 5.7 11.8 –0.8 –6.1 –1.3 – 2.8 –24.3 –21.5 4.3 –0.7 –0.6 0.0 5.6
Oct. 10.2 11.0 1.2 –0.8 –4.2 56.3 2.4 –53.9 –2.6 –0.7 –0.8 –3.6 2.5
Nov. 25.3 20.4 5.2 4.9 3.9 –23.5 –17.6 5.9 3.0 –1.9 –0.9 1.6 4.2
Dec. – 4.4 1.5 0.8 –5.9 –1.1 –38.9 –47.5 –8.6 –4.4 –0.3 –1.1 –5.8 2.7
2020 Jan. 16.3 9.5 1.9 6.8 2.6 74.7 37.7 –37.0 –9.0 –2.6 –1.5 3.8 –8.6
Feb. 24.5 25.4 4.3 –0.9 1.2 – 4.3 14.1 18.4 –4.6 –1.2 –0.6 4.8 –7.6
Mar. 47.3 31.4 –6.1 15.9 14.3 –34.3 18.5 52.8 –8.3 –3.7 –0.7 –8.2 4.3
Apr. 33.0 16.0 1.3 16.9 14.8 –28.8 8.9 37.6 –23.8 –5.1 –0.8 –2.1 –15.8
May 58.3 27.1 10.0 31.2 32.7 11.7 –22.1 –33.8 2.3 –1.5 –0.4 –1.2 5.4
June 26.4 2.6 3.5 23.7 25.9 –45.6 –20.9 24.7 –7.9 –7.1 –1.0 –7.9 8.1
July 25.9 13.8 0.3 12.2 10.3 9.4 –9.7 –19.1 –3.0 –6.9 –0.6 1.2 3.3
Aug. 9.3 7.5 1.9 1.8 7.9 5.6 –8.1 –13.7 –5.2 –2.2 –0.4 –4.4 1.8
Sep. 22.6 4.6 1.3 18.1 15.8 –34.8 22.9 57.8 10.4 –3.4 –0.4 5.1 9.1
Oct. 48.7 22.1 6.6 26.7 23.9 30.1 –16.6 –46.8 –2.0 –0.5 –0.4 –4.5 3.4
Nov. 44.0 19.6 4.5 24.5 26.0 –15.1 7.4 22.5 0.6 –1.5 –0.4 0.2 2.3
Dec. – 0.9 7.5 3.6 –8.4 –4.6 –107.2 –35.1 72.1 –7.5 –1.3 –0.3 –7.1 1.2
2021 Jan. 30.1 12.1 3.1 18.1 18.1 41.7 79.7 38.0 –11.4 –2.9 –0.6 –1.6 –6.4
Feb. 29.8 18.8 4.6 11.1 13.4 26.3 7.0 –19.3 0.8 –1.8 –0.3 4.3 –1.4
Mar. 54.6 36.2 1.8 18.3 19.5 –62.8 1.5 64.3 3.6 –3.5 –0.3 7.2 0.2
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
6.3 –81.9 0.0 113.1 110.1 86.1 1.3 84.7 19.1 4.9 4.7 18.0 –13.5 2019 Aug.
5.8 42.9 0.0 –36.5 –18.4 – 1.0 3.3 – 4.3 –15.6 – 1.8 –17.9 –13.9 – 0.4 Sep.
–37.7 51.2 0.0 58.3 45.6 60.1 2.8 57.3 –10.1 – 4.5 42.1 1.4 6.5 Oct.
– 1.1 –54.0 0.0 100.5 103.2 122.4 6.9 115.5 –17.7 – 1.5 –14.7 3.1 – 0.7 Nov.
–66.5 –27.1 0.0 –40.2 1.5 8.2 16.3 – 8.1 –9.7 2.9 –33.6 –22.6 –18.3 Dec.
84.6 41.8 0.0 5.3 –44.2 –52.0 –7.3 –44.7 0.2 7.6 – 7.1 34.8 14.0 2020 Jan.
43.7 –34.1 0.0 95.8 82.6 84.1 5.2 79.0 –1.2 – 0.3 19.7 –4.7 4.9 Feb.
4.7 –4.5 0.0 349.7 321.2 300.5 23.8 276.8 16.2 4.5 30.0 –18.4 22.8 Mar.
72.1 –17.1 0.0 172.5 174.9 175.2 20.4 154.8 –15.0 14.7 – 4.6 23.1 –16.9 Apr.
100.9 –37.1 0.0 217.5 226.3 189.5 20.1 169.5 16.8 19.9 9.6 –0.4 – 9.1 May
123.4 1.0 0.0 86.4 79.0 88.5 13.1 75.4 –20.5 10.9 –42.7 14.4 – 1.5 June
– 4.6 –59.3 0.0 184.0 149.3 123.5 14.3 109.2 20.1 5.8 18.1 29.9 –10.1 July
40.5 13.9 0.0 18.3 35.5 45.0 5.9 39.1 –18.6 9.1 – 4.8 –0.1 – 4.3 Aug.
20.2 11.5 0.0 88.9 82.3 63.7 3.5 60.1 16.7 1.9 –29.5 8.2 – 2.5 Sep.
–17.2 –30.2 0.0 112.0 86.0 101.4 7.8 93.7 –17.9 2.5 5.3 14.3 15.3 Oct.
–98.4 50.7 0.0 128.5 125.4 151.8 11.8 140.1 –34.5 8.1 – 0.7 0.7 2.5 Nov.
–128.1 –54.6 0.0 134.9 127.6 116.5 20.8 95.6 10.6 0.6 –24.7 20.1 – 6.1 Dec.
78.9 45.7 0.0 53.0 32.3 44.1 2.6 41.5 –30.2 18.4 30.0 3.6 4.5 2021 Jan.
30.3 0.2 0.0 51.4 65.5 71.2 7.3 63.9 –17.4 11.6 2.8 –31.6 12.8 Feb.
18.8 69.9 0.0 85.5 101.4 81.8 10.4 71.3 8.0 11.6 –18.6 –1.0 –14.3 Mar.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
10.7 – 26.8 5.8 – 0.7 33.9 26.1 5.7 – 1.2 3.1 0.0 0.3 2019 Aug.
9.9 – 6.6 4.9 0.8 – 4.7 0.1 – 4.8 – 0.7 – 1.1 0.1 1.7 Sep.
– 19.8 74.2 4.3 0.2 14.7 18.7 – 0.4 – 1.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.3 Oct.
8.2 – 29.5 4.5 0.7 20.0 24.1 – 3.4 – 0.7 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 Nov.
– 2.0 – 32.4 4.9 3.4 – 4.5 – 0.4 – 6.6 0.6 1.8 – 0.1 0.0 Dec.
– 5.6 108.0 2.1 – 0.6 – 2.5 – 7.8 5.9 – 3.0 – 1.0 – 0.1 3.4 2020 Jan.
24.4 – 14.0 4.9 0.1 14.5 17.7 1.2 – 1.7 – 0.6 0.1 – 2.2 Feb.
7.5 – 71.9 12.2 0.9 85.7 93.3 – 0.4 – 3.4 – 0.3 0.4 – 3.8 Mar.
17.9 8.6 3.2 4.3 1.5 9.9 – 8.1 0.1 1.7 – 0.1 – 1.9 Apr.
28.6 – 9.3 0.3 5.3 48.4 43.4 6.2 0.3 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 0.4 May
57.8 – 69.3 – 0.4 4.7 0.1 9.9 – 7.7 – 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.2 – 0.3 June
14.2 – 11.1 2.4 3.9 35.2 27.4 8.6 – 1.1 1.3 – 0.2 – 0.8 July
21.0 – 14.2 3.8 0.9 13.3 18.6 – 4.9 0.2 – 0.4 0.3 – 0.3 Aug.
15.3 – 58.3 2.7 0.6 20.4 26.2 – 5.2 – 0.1 – 0.4 0.2 – 0.2 Sep.
– 20.0 70.5 2.4 1.7 30.3 30.6 – 0.1 – 0.0 0.2 0.6 – 1.0 Oct.
– 12.7 3.6 1.3 3.0 37.4 49.3 – 14.3 0.3 3.3 – 0.3 – 0.9 Nov.
– 22.9 – 73.4 2.4 5.6 – 4.3 – 5.8 – 1.7 1.3 3.1 0.1 – 1.3 Dec.
– 40.3 95.7 1.1 0.9 27.8 45.9 – 14.8 1.6 – 3.8 – 0.0 – 1.1 2021 Jan.
15.4 29.1 2.3 1.5 10.8 20.3 – 8.5 1.2 – 2.4 – 0.0 0.3 Feb.
– 2.3 – 38.4 2.5 2.7 28.9 24.3 – 0.6 0.1 5.0 0.4 – 0.3 Mar.
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2019 Feb. 27,436.4 18,354.8 13,683.9 11,368.3 1,528.3 787.3 4,670.9 1,001.2 3,669.7 5,763.8 3,317.9
Mar. 27,733.7 18,397.2 13,735.5 11,413.7 1,526.2 795.7 4,661.7 1,001.4 3,660.3 5,841.6 3,494.9
Apr. 27,886.9 18,468.4 13,828.8 11,472.8 1,529.8 826.1 4,639.6 1,001.1 3,638.6 5,942.4 3,476.2
May 28,185.6 18,497.0 13,854.0 11,494.6 1,549.1 810.4 4,643.0 1,000.3 3,642.7 6,027.7 3,660.8
June 28,305.8 18,522.0 13,874.9 11,521.2 1,552.5 801.2 4,647.1 1,000.0 3,647.1 5,991.7 3,792.1
July 28,772.3 18,601.9 13,939.3 11,583.7 1,550.8 804.7 4,662.6 1,002.8 3,659.8 6,208.8 3,961.7
Aug. 29,374.0 18,658.9 13,961.4 11,612.7 1,549.4 799.3 4,697.5 1,003.1 3,694.4 6,311.5 4,403.7
Sep. 29,193.7 18,651.6 13,971.2 11,595.9 1,566.6 808.7 4,680.4 996.7 3,683.7 6,300.2 4,241.9
Oct. 28,966.0 18,689.2 14,042.6 11,660.4 1,550.6 831.6 4,646.7 1,002.4 3,644.3 6,259.5 4,017.2
Nov. 29,017.5 18,729.4 14,099.5 11,684.5 1,569.3 845.7 4,629.9 998.5 3,631.4 6,270.8 4,017.3
Dec. 28,326.0 18,591.5 14,008.6 11,617.0 1,543.9 847.8 4,582.9 981.0 3,601.9 5,930.7 3,803.8
2020 Jan. 29,019.0 18,722.5 14,062.6 11,668.8 1,542.8 851.0 4,659.9 1,003.4 3,656.5 6,302.1 3,994.4
Feb. 29,486.8 18,766.9 14,101.4 11,697.3 1,562.7 841.4 4,665.5 992.3 3,673.3 6,414.8 4,305.1
Mar. 30,021.0 19,013.2 14,239.0 11,884.9 1,556.9 797.2 4,774.1 1,006.7 3,767.4 6,486.8 4,521.1
Apr. 30,449.7 19,308.0 14,348.5 11,933.4 1,612.6 802.5 4,959.4 1,018.1 3,941.4 6,585.1 4,556.7
May 30,500.6 19,609.7 14,468.3 12,020.6 1,644.9 802.8 5,141.4 1,013.8 4,127.6 6,465.5 4,425.4
June 30,406.6 19,761.1 14,451.1 11,982.0 1,653.0 816.1 5,310.0 1,005.3 4,304.7 6,298.0 4,347.6
July 30,599.0 19,912.0 14,334.0 12,013.7 1,505.9 814.4 5,578.0 1,006.0 4,572.1 6,291.5 4,395.5
Aug. 30,435.3 19,984.9 14,355.0 12,019.1 1,524.9 811.0 5,629.9 997.8 4,632.1 6,242.1 4,208.3
Sep. 30,523.7 20,084.3 14,349.1 12,019.2 1,520.0 809.9 5,735.2 998.7 4,736.5 6,239.3 4,200.1
Oct. 30,691.3 20,161.6 14,375.7 12,054.9 1,519.6 801.3 5,785.9 1,004.2 4,781.7 6,342.3 4,187.3
Nov. 30,752.9 20,291.3 14,456.9 12,090.4 1,541.5 825.0 5,834.4 1,003.4 4,831.0 6,334.9 4,126.7
Dec. 30,440.4 20,262.9 14,435.5 12,042.9 1,530.3 862.4 5,827.4 990.2 4,837.2 6,112.7 4,064.7
2021 Jan. 30,643.9 20,388.1 14,466.5 12,069.2 1,535.6 861.7 5,921.6 999.4 4,922.2 6,299.2 3,956.6
Feb. 30,542.8 20,461.3 14,498.1 12,087.7 1,541.1 869.4 5,963.2 992.5 4,970.7 6,299.1 3,782.4
Mar. 30,839.7 20,656.8 14,579.1 12,188.2 1,511.8 879.1 6,077.7 993.3 5,084.4 6,360.1 3,822.8
German contribution (€ billion)
2019 Feb. 6,243.9 4,343.3 3,382.0 2,932.6 189.2 260.2 961.3 296.6 664.7 1,221.0 679.6
Mar. 6,392.0 4,373.9 3,414.7 2,963.7 189.7 261.3 959.2 293.9 665.3 1,265.4 752.8
Apr. 6,408.7 4,379.3 3,427.3 2,976.4 189.1 261.9 951.9 294.8 657.1 1,278.2 751.2
May 6,524.8 4,402.6 3,446.8 2,995.6 190.0 261.1 955.8 293.1 662.8 1,284.5 837.7
June 6,619.8 4,431.8 3,473.1 3,017.0 194.4 261.7 958.6 291.2 667.5 1,294.2 893.7
July 6,698.2 4,445.3 3,481.1 3,024.8 194.0 262.3 964.2 293.7 670.5 1,312.3 940.7
Aug. 6,973.5 4,478.6 3,501.8 3,044.3 196.5 261.0 976.8 293.5 683.3 1,330.9 1,163.9
Sep. 6,872.6 4,462.9 3,497.0 3,040.4 196.0 260.5 965.9 288.3 677.6 1,311.9 1,097.8
Oct. 6,769.9 4,466.0 3,506.4 3,049.0 195.9 261.4 959.5 291.6 667.9 1,303.7 1,000.3
Nov. 6,785.4 4,490.1 3,527.4 3,064.8 199.7 262.9 962.6 292.6 670.0 1,289.6 1,005.8
Dec. 6,716.1 4,480.4 3,527.3 3,064.0 197.9 265.4 953.1 288.5 664.6 1,236.4 999.3
2020 Jan. 6,847.7 4,503.3 3,537.5 3,071.5 198.2 267.8 965.8 292.8 673.0 1,290.1 1,054.4
Feb. 7,028.5 4,531.0 3,562.2 3,092.6 203.2 266.4 968.8 290.8 678.0 1,306.1 1,191.4
Mar. 7,148.1 4,567.1 3,589.0 3,128.9 202.1 258.0 978.1 292.4 685.7 1,321.3 1,259.6
Apr. 7,258.0 4,605.2 3,606.5 3,143.8 206.5 256.1 998.7 294.8 703.9 1,346.6 1,306.2
May 7,230.4 4,666.4 3,640.1 3,167.2 215.9 257.1 1,026.2 293.8 732.5 1,326.0 1,238.1
June 7,225.3 4,692.6 3,641.6 3,164.7 220.4 256.6 1,051.0 291.5 759.6 1,304.2 1,228.5
July 7,267.6 4,718.8 3,634.9 3,175.5 202.7 256.7 1,083.9 293.4 790.5 1,282.9 1,265.8
Aug. 7,167.3 4,723.0 3,642.2 3,180.7 202.9 258.6 1,080.8 287.4 793.3 1,268.8 1,175.5
Sep. 7,236.4 4,749.2 3,647.1 3,184.0 204.9 258.1 1,102.1 289.7 812.4 1,293.8 1,193.4
Oct. 7,257.1 4,801.4 3,670.3 3,200.4 210.7 259.3 1,131.1 292.0 839.1 1,278.8 1,176.8
Nov. 7,240.5 4,841.7 3,688.6 3,213.7 214.3 260.6 1,153.1 290.2 862.9 1,261.9 1,136.9
Dec. 7,172.5 4,839.4 3,695.5 3,216.4 214.7 264.5 1,143.9 286.4 857.4 1,224.1 1,109.1
2021 Jan. 7,220.7 4,865.5 3,705.9 3,224.4 216.4 265.1 1,159.6 286.5 873.1 1,307.6 1,047.6
Feb. 7,182.0 4,885.0 3,724.3 3,238.8 217.4 268.1 1,160.7 283.8 877.0 1,305.0 991.9
Mar. 7,233.3 4,940.3 3,761.6 3,273.9 217.3 270.4 1,178.7 282.6 896.1 1,314.9 978.1
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,165.6 12,833.0 11,959.7 12,005.4 6,805.1 795.7 196.8 1,887.9 2,268.8 51.2 2019 Feb.
1,171.7 12,947.7 12,078.5 12,135.0 6,930.4 786.3 199.5 1,886.3 2,281.3 51.3 Mar.
1,179.1 12,958.0 12,120.9 12,180.6 6,969.3 788.9 201.8 1,880.4 2,288.5 51.5 Apr.
1,184.2 13,059.3 12,198.6 12,257.0 7,048.4 776.2 201.4 1,876.7 2,302.3 52.1 May
1,191.7 13,181.6 12,288.1 12,335.7 7,121.7 762.8 198.3 1,894.2 2,305.5 53.2 June
1,200.7 13,178.8 12,300.1 12,350.5 7,146.8 767.8 198.9 1,873.6 2,309.7 53.7 July
1,202.0 13,283.3 12,388.8 12,438.4 7,226.4 782.5 201.0 1,860.5 2,314.5 53.4 Aug.
1,205.4 13,298.4 12,383.2 12,446.2 7,221.7 769.3 200.8 1,886.9 2,314.4 53.0 Sep.
1,208.2 13,292.6 12,422.6 12,487.1 7,283.5 758.7 201.3 1,883.2 2,311.1 49.4 Oct.
1,215.1 13,389.0 12,520.8 12,572.5 7,386.6 740.9 200.6 1,885.5 2,310.4 48.6 Nov.
1,231.5 13,311.4 12,508.3 12,583.4 7,391.7 738.4 200.1 1,892.8 2,314.1 46.2 Dec.
1,224.1 13,359.6 12,460.6 12,555.5 7,362.8 734.5 200.1 1,891.0 2,322.3 44.7 2020 Jan.
1,229.3 13,477.0 12,528.5 12,615.6 7,430.6 731.6 198.6 1,888.7 2,322.0 44.1 Feb.
1,253.1 13,775.3 12,782.4 12,903.7 7,698.1 759.4 192.1 1,883.4 2,327.6 43.1 Mar.
1,273.5 13,996.0 12,953.0 13,065.1 7,852.4 762.3 188.2 1,876.7 2,343.4 42.1 Apr.
1,293.5 14,302.8 13,164.0 13,264.9 8,009.7 779.7 188.4 1,881.9 2,363.7 41.4 May
1,306.6 14,478.4 13,208.9 13,310.8 8,066.5 763.6 186.8 1,877.8 2,375.5 40.6 June
1,320.9 14,593.1 13,276.4 13,363.7 8,090.1 783.2 186.3 1,882.5 2,381.1 40.4 July
1,326.8 14,668.3 13,304.3 13,391.2 8,117.1 767.8 184.4 1,892.0 2,390.0 40.0 Aug.
1,330.3 14,758.7 13,361.0 13,467.6 8,175.8 781.0 195.4 1,883.6 2,392.0 39.8 Sep.
1,338.1 14,815.0 13,431.7 13,545.6 8,266.7 782.6 181.9 1,880.4 2,394.6 39.4 Oct.
1,349.9 14,813.5 13,527.3 13,621.8 8,358.4 756.5 179.6 1,885.7 2,402.5 39.0 Nov.
1,370.7 14,771.6 13,618.8 13,727.3 8,459.3 772.0 176.9 1,876.4 2,404.2 38.5 Dec.
1,373.3 14,874.2 13,630.6 13,753.0 8,505.0 744.5 173.9 1,870.6 2,421.0 38.1 2021 Jan.
1,380.6 14,958.1 13,678.1 13,808.0 8,568.6 734.8 169.3 1,865.1 2,432.5 37.7 Feb.
1,391.1 15,074.6 13,753.3 13,912.4 8,651.1 755.6 164.1 1,859.5 2,444.7 37.4 Mar.
German contribution (€ billion)
268.0 3,747.2 3,634.2 3,474.2 2,117.5 153.9 33.2 591.0 541.8 36.7 2019 Feb.
269.1 3,785.8 3,652.3 3,490.2 2,136.2 152.2 33.0 587.7 544.0 37.1 Mar.
271.3 3,782.3 3,667.4 3,506.4 2,156.4 151.2 32.8 584.8 544.1 37.2 Apr.
272.1 3,824.2 3,689.1 3,523.2 2,176.6 149.4 32.7 582.9 543.7 37.9 May
274.2 3,837.7 3,697.8 3,528.6 2,183.2 147.8 32.3 583.5 543.3 38.4 June
277.3 3,812.4 3,701.4 3,532.6 2,191.7 147.0 31.6 581.4 542.7 38.1 July
276.6 3,849.7 3,730.3 3,550.9 2,213.2 149.7 31.7 576.9 541.5 37.8 Aug.
277.4 3,853.5 3,722.1 3,546.0 2,213.9 146.4 31.5 576.1 540.8 37.2 Sep.
277.6 3,848.5 3,734.8 3,571.5 2,240.3 148.6 31.2 575.2 539.9 36.4 Oct.
278.4 3,874.7 3,753.7 3,580.0 2,257.7 143.0 30.8 573.7 539.2 35.6 Nov.
281.8 3,863.9 3,744.4 3,574.3 2,250.5 144.8 31.0 573.5 540.0 34.5 Dec.
281.2 3,850.4 3,733.8 3,572.3 2,255.2 145.3 31.0 570.6 537.2 33.0 2020 Jan.
281.3 3,890.4 3,750.4 3,576.3 2,265.3 142.0 31.3 569.8 535.4 32.5 Feb.
282.2 3,982.8 3,830.4 3,655.2 2,346.4 147.3 30.5 567.2 532.0 31.8 Mar.
286.5 3,997.3 3,828.9 3,665.7 2,359.6 149.2 30.0 563.6 532.2 31.1 Apr.
291.8 4,080.7 3,885.8 3,710.9 2,396.9 158.3 29.0 563.6 532.5 30.7 May
296.5 4,132.2 3,873.6 3,711.6 2,408.7 152.1 29.6 559.0 532.6 29.7 June
300.4 4,170.7 3,880.3 3,716.8 2,409.9 163.5 30.0 552.8 531.5 29.2 July
301.3 4,202.4 3,889.9 3,720.2 2,419.2 159.3 30.1 551.3 531.6 28.8 Aug.
301.9 4,235.6 3,905.7 3,745.0 2,445.3 160.3 30.3 549.2 531.5 28.4 Sep.
303.6 4,245.3 3,935.3 3,781.4 2,476.4 165.4 30.5 549.7 531.5 28.0 Oct.
306.6 4,260.2 3,961.8 3,804.4 2,507.7 157.7 30.6 549.0 531.8 27.6 Nov.
312.2 4,228.5 3,954.1 3,801.5 2,500.9 160.3 31.0 548.8 533.1 27.3 Dec.
313.1 4,218.7 3,980.7 3,829.7 2,541.7 147.0 31.0 548.5 534.8 26.8 2021 Jan.
314.6 4,245.1 3,990.0 3,837.4 2,555.8 141.0 31.1 547.0 536.0 26.4 Feb.
317.3 4,264.3 4,011.8 3,863.3 2,579.7 145.1 31.7 544.6 536.1 26.1 Mar.
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2019 Feb. 407.9 419.6 207.3 92.2 34.2 56.3 25.1 4.5 270.5 269.7 516.3 2,205.0 1,506.2
Mar. 386.0 426.7 212.1 92.6 35.4 56.7 25.5 4.4 272.7 272.3 520.2 2,185.7 1,489.6
Apr. 352.9 424.6 212.2 91.4 34.5 56.9 25.3 4.4 295.0 294.6 532.3 2,174.9 1,488.0
May 370.7 431.6 216.9 94.9 33.4 57.0 25.1 4.3 287.4 287.0 522.6 2,191.0 1,497.2
June 404.2 441.8 224.4 94.6 35.1 58.1 25.2 4.4 266.0 265.7 510.6 2,182.2 1,493.8
July 391.2 437.1 221.5 93.8 34.1 58.2 25.2 4.4 284.1 283.8 533.0 2,189.1 1,492.7
Aug. 397.4 447.4 228.3 97.2 34.1 58.3 25.3 4.3 289.0 288.5 550.9 2,173.6 1,484.1
Sep. 402.9 449.3 231.4 98.0 31.7 58.9 25.0 4.2 257.0 256.5 537.1 2,181.1 1,484.7
Oct. 365.0 440.5 224.5 95.5 32.3 59.1 25.2 3.9 298.8 298.3 538.6 2,174.6 1,488.4
Nov. 363.9 452.6 235.7 95.5 33.8 59.1 24.8 3.8 284.3 283.7 541.6 2,187.8 1,493.0
Dec. 297.5 430.4 224.7 85.9 33.7 59.1 23.6 3.6 250.3 249.8 520.3 2,153.8 1,486.7
2020 Jan. 381.8 422.3 209.6 92.7 33.2 59.5 23.2 4.1 243.4 242.9 555.1 2,187.7 1,500.2
Feb. 425.5 436.0 219.8 96.8 32.8 59.2 23.3 4.0 263.2 262.7 550.5 2,191.4 1,497.8
Mar. 430.2 441.4 232.8 93.3 31.0 58.2 22.3 3.9 293.2 292.6 529.8 2,175.2 1,484.3
Apr. 502.3 428.6 233.9 84.0 29.4 56.4 21.1 3.8 289.0 288.6 552.9 2,159.1 1,472.6
May 603.1 434.8 245.9 81.7 28.4 54.7 20.3 3.8 297.8 297.5 552.4 2,134.1 1,470.7
June 726.5 441.1 259.5 82.4 24.6 51.8 19.3 3.4 254.8 254.6 566.9 2,109.6 1,455.2
July 788.0 441.4 264.1 80.1 23.2 51.0 19.4 3.5 271.8 271.6 596.8 2,059.9 1,436.2
Aug. 828.6 448.5 273.6 79.5 22.1 50.3 19.6 3.5 266.9 266.7 597.4 2,041.3 1,427.0
Sep. 849.0 442.1 274.8 74.4 20.8 49.1 19.5 3.4 237.7 237.5 605.6 2,065.3 1,432.8
Oct. 831.8 437.6 277.4 69.5 20.8 47.0 19.5 3.4 243.1 242.9 619.8 2,052.0 1,420.2
Nov. 733.3 458.4 307.1 64.6 17.8 46.1 19.4 3.3 246.4 246.4 620.4 2,033.2 1,408.3
Dec. 605.2 439.1 294.6 60.3 17.2 44.8 18.9 3.3 221.4 221.3 636.1 2,002.0 1,387.9
2021 Jan. 684.2 437.0 294.3 58.8 17.3 43.9 19.0 3.8 251.7 251.6 639.6 1,994.9 1,371.2
Feb. 714.5 435.6 296.2 54.3 18.9 43.7 18.9 3.7 254.6 254.5 608.0 2,007.9 1,370.9
Mar. 733.3 428.8 295.0 52.1 16.3 43.0 18.8 3.7 236.7 236.5 606.9 2,008.0 1,358.1
German contribution (€ billion)
2019 Feb. 38.8 234.3 71.8 80.3 29.3 49.1 3.1 0.6 2.0 2.0 2.2 560.4 302.9
Mar. 56.4 239.2 75.9 80.0 30.3 49.4 3.1 0.6 11.4 11.4 2.0 557.3 298.2
Apr. 41.2 234.7 73.6 78.4 29.4 49.6 3.1 0.6 12.5 12.5 1.9 552.8 293.5
May 60.3 240.7 77.4 81.7 28.3 49.6 3.2 0.5 11.2 11.2 2.0 560.1 300.1
June 64.0 245.1 80.4 81.5 29.0 50.6 3.1 0.5 12.9 12.9 2.0 558.0 301.8
July 36.9 242.9 79.6 80.7 28.2 50.8 3.1 0.5 13.9 13.9 2.0 559.4 296.9
Aug. 47.6 251.2 84.7 83.8 28.1 50.9 3.2 0.5 16.9 16.7 2.0 557.3 295.0
Sep. 57.3 250.3 84.6 85.0 25.8 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.5 1.3 2.2 563.5 297.7
Oct. 37.4 239.6 76.3 82.4 26.1 51.3 3.1 0.5 1.2 1.0 2.1 555.2 299.2
Nov. 45.4 249.3 83.4 83.9 27.4 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.7 1.5 1.9 560.4 302.2
Dec. 43.4 246.2 89.5 75.4 27.0 51.0 2.9 0.4 3.5 3.4 1.8 551.4 301.6
2020 Jan. 37.8 240.2 77.8 81.4 26.6 51.3 2.7 0.4 2.5 2.4 1.8 560.9 306.5
Feb. 62.2 251.9 85.5 86.0 26.3 50.9 2.8 0.4 2.0 1.8 1.8 563.9 310.3
Mar. 69.7 257.9 97.6 82.5 24.7 49.8 2.8 0.4 1.7 1.6 2.2 553.0 310.7
Apr. 87.5 244.0 94.7 74.4 23.7 48.3 2.7 0.4 3.4 3.3 2.1 550.6 306.2
May 116.2 253.6 108.0 72.9 22.9 46.7 2.8 0.3 2.4 2.3 1.9 543.1 305.4
June 174.0 246.5 106.1 74.1 19.5 44.0 2.5 0.3 0.9 0.7 1.8 532.8 297.2
July 208.5 245.3 109.6 71.4 18.3 43.2 2.5 0.3 2.1 2.0 1.6 523.3 293.3
Aug. 229.5 252.8 118.7 71.3 17.4 42.4 2.6 0.3 1.7 1.5 1.9 517.9 291.1
Sep. 244.7 245.8 119.4 66.0 16.5 41.1 2.5 0.3 1.3 1.1 2.0 525.3 296.1
Oct. 224.8 239.1 119.1 61.7 16.6 39.0 2.5 0.3 1.4 1.3 2.7 519.9 296.2
Nov. 212.1 243.7 131.6 57.3 14.0 38.0 2.5 0.2 9.1 9.1 2.4 515.5 296.1
Dec. 189.2 237.8 131.9 52.8 13.5 36.8 2.5 0.2 12.2 12.2 2.5 503.3 290.1
2021 Jan. 148.9 240.1 136.5 51.6 13.5 35.8 2.4 0.2 8.4 8.4 2.4 503.3 284.6
Feb. 164.3 243.4 142.8 47.3 15.2 35.5 2.5 0.2 6.0 6.0 2.4 510.0 288.4
Mar. 161.9 239.0 144.4 44.9 12.7 34.5 2.4 0.2 11.0 11.0 2.8 523.2 289.8
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
33.2 26.1 2,145.8 4,661.2 2,740.4 15.1 3,029.3 0.0 8,303.9 11,741.1 12,389.0 6,886.1 150.4 2019 Feb.
16.0 22.5 2,147.2 4,647.4 2,766.7 23.2 3,198.4 0.0 8,441.7 11,886.7 12,519.2 6,912.6 151.9 Mar.
17.0 21.4 2,136.5 4,770.1 2,760.9 14.1 3,202.5 0.0 8,487.7 11,942.4 12,591.3 6,890.6 151.5 Apr.
23.4 22.1 2,145.4 4,776.2 2,774.6 26.3 3,364.1 0.0 8,575.0 12,032.4 12,675.1 6,910.1 149.7 May
20.0 21.6 2,140.6 4,640.6 2,830.3 33.6 3,469.1 0.0 8,669.1 12,114.5 12,741.2 6,980.7 155.2 June
16.1 21.3 2,151.6 4,796.8 2,878.9 25.7 3,685.3 0.0 8,697.8 12,150.2 12,798.2 7,020.3 151.7 July
2.7 20.7 2,150.1 4,854.7 2,940.4 – 2.9 4,083.0 0.0 8,786.7 12,264.2 12,915.0 7,066.9 152.7 Aug.
3.2 19.0 2,158.9 4,803.5 2,942.8 25.4 3,943.1 0.0 8,788.8 12,251.2 12,883.3 7,104.7 153.4 Sep.
7.5 19.8 2,147.2 4,768.1 2,935.0 34.1 3,716.0 0.0 8,846.0 12,293.2 12,936.5 7,077.7 152.9 Oct.
6.8 19.5 2,161.5 4,770.3 2,922.7 31.1 3,675.5 0.0 8,971.7 12,401.3 13,041.7 7,081.1 157.9 Nov.
– 11.3 19.2 2,145.9 4,452.2 2,912.4 25.0 3,469.1 0.0 8,975.3 12,395.7 12,995.3 7,060.0 152.0 Dec.
– 0.4 21.9 2,166.2 4,759.3 2,949.8 24.3 3,715.6 0.0 8,927.4 12,357.5 13,006.4 7,115.3 154.9 2020 Jan.
3.6 23.4 2,164.4 4,817.2 2,966.7 26.4 3,965.0 0.0 9,012.7 12,441.8 13,104.6 7,127.1 156.9 Feb.
29.9 21.7 2,123.7 4,907.3 2,930.7 11.6 4,144.8 0.0 9,312.6 12,762.0 13,453.0 7,043.0 152.5 Mar.
12.8 21.5 2,124.8 5,048.8 2,947.0 – 25.4 4,209.0 0.0 9,490.6 12,941.2 13,629.7 7,050.8 153.0 Apr.
3.8 22.3 2,108.0 4,946.7 2,952.7 – 33.1 4,053.6 0.0 9,682.0 13,166.2 13,846.0 7,042.6 154.7 May
3.3 21.6 2,084.7 4,708.0 2,977.4 – 4.2 4,009.1 0.0 9,768.9 13,242.8 13,930.3 7,035.8 158.0 June
– 7.9 20.6 2,047.1 4,729.4 3,017.5 – 54.6 4,064.3 0.0 9,812.9 13,307.9 14,026.9 7,042.1 159.4 July
– 11.3 19.7 2,032.9 4,696.1 3,014.5 – 38.8 3,862.7 0.0 9,856.0 13,340.6 14,043.0 7,033.2 160.0 Aug.
– 9.4 16.0 2,058.7 4,651.4 3,011.2 – 15.9 3,879.4 0.0 9,923.5 13,428.0 14,138.0 7,045.9 163.9 Sep.
2.9 18.6 2,030.4 4,773.9 3,038.2 – 47.9 3,859.1 0.0 10,026.0 13,516.4 14,252.2 7,038.9 165.3 Oct.
3.5 20.1 2,009.5 4,852.9 2,995.9 – 44.4 3,885.1 0.0 10,167.7 13,629.9 14,372.2 6,979.5 174.0 Nov.
– 0.4 17.6 1,984.7 4,642.0 3,020.5 4.0 3,772.1 0.0 10,278.5 13,750.1 14,494.7 6,968.2 176.0 Dec.
5.0 16.4 1,973.6 4,822.1 2,999.0 – 10.3 3,699.4 0.0 10,325.6 13,784.5 14,549.8 6,928.9 177.5 2021 Jan.
16.6 17.0 1,974.3 4,874.9 2,953.6 – 11.0 3,515.9 0.0 10,397.6 13,850.9 14,601.7 6,878.1 176.8 Feb.
1.2 17.5 1,989.3 4,940.3 2,969.9 20.0 3,592.3 0.0 10,488.2 13,964.0 14,699.0 6,902.7 175.2 Mar.
German contribution (€ billion)
19.1 8.2 533.2 882.8 684.4 –966.0 1,330.9 394.4 2,189.4 3,030.9 3,062.3 1,895.1 0.0 2019 Feb.
19.2 8.3 529.8 958.7 695.9 –1,031.3 1,412.2 396.9 2,212.1 3,054.7 3,095.5 1,900.4 0.0 Mar.
18.6 8.2 525.9 953.9 692.7 –985.8 1,398.5 400.8 2,230.0 3,069.0 3,110.2 1,890.7 0.0 Apr.
18.9 8.4 532.9 944.9 702.5 –1,016.3 1,496.1 404.8 2,254.0 3,093.0 3,133.5 1,906.3 0.0 May
19.7 7.6 530.7 957.2 722.3 –1,013.1 1,542.9 407.8 2,263.6 3,100.7 3,142.8 1,926.0 0.0 June
19.7 7.9 531.9 925.0 735.6 –950.3 1,600.3 411.4 2,271.3 3,104.7 3,148.2 1,938.3 0.0 July
20.3 7.6 529.4 944.3 757.0 –980.7 1,826.9 417.2 2,297.9 3,135.9 3,182.8 1,952.6 0.0 Aug.
22.3 7.4 533.8 927.2 755.6 –992.1 1,761.2 422.1 2,298.5 3,131.2 3,164.7 1,954.3 0.0 Sep.
20.7 6.7 527.8 867.4 750.0 –918.5 1,664.0 426.3 2,316.5 3,147.7 3,178.4 1,941.3 0.0 Oct.
21.4 5.8 533.1 877.7 749.1 –951.9 1,671.9 430.8 2,341.2 3,168.5 3,199.3 1,943.1 0.0 Nov.
21.0 6.1 524.3 863.5 750.1 –999.8 1,681.4 435.8 2,340.1 3,161.1 3,193.6 1,933.9 0.0 Dec.
23.9 6.7 530.2 831.0 757.2 –900.5 1,744.6 437.9 2,333.0 3,157.1 3,192.1 1,942.8 0.0 2020 Jan.
21.7 6.8 535.4 850.2 764.8 –912.0 1,867.4 442.7 2,350.9 3,174.6 3,207.0 1,953.8 0.0 Feb.
18.4 6.3 528.3 901.4 757.6 –990.7 1,940.1 455.0 2,444.0 3,263.9 3,292.5 1,935.1 0.0 Mar.
15.9 6.9 527.8 942.0 759.1 –1,003.6 2,007.1 458.2 2,454.3 3,266.4 3,294.7 1,930.3 0.0 Apr.
14.9 7.3 520.8 917.3 756.1 –1,003.8 1,932.8 458.5 2,505.0 3,323.2 3,349.8 1,918.3 0.0 May
14.8 7.1 510.9 939.7 769.1 –1,074.1 1,923.1 458.1 2,514.8 3,325.2 3,349.7 1,913.0 0.0 June
12.8 6.7 503.7 907.0 784.6 –1,089.1 1,967.5 460.5 2,519.5 3,336.8 3,360.1 1,913.6 0.0 July
12.0 7.2 498.7 891.2 778.4 –1,114.7 1,888.5 464.3 2,537.9 3,350.2 3,372.9 1,899.9 0.0 Aug.
12.4 6.7 506.2 952.4 787.3 –1,172.8 1,905.3 467.0 2,564.6 3,371.8 3,394.2 1,912.5 0.0 Sep.
11.1 7.0 501.8 906.4 794.7 –1,107.6 1,894.1 469.4 2,595.4 3,403.6 3,425.7 1,913.5 0.0 Oct.
10.0 7.1 498.4 923.3 780.2 –1,109.5 1,859.4 470.7 2,639.3 3,433.2 3,461.8 1,893.5 0.0 Nov.
9.0 6.6 487.7 985.7 787.5 –1,192.0 1,844.9 473.1 2,632.8 3,426.1 3,456.4 1,888.4 0.0 Dec.
7.8 6.8 488.7 1,026.4 778.3 –1,113.3 1,796.5 474.2 2,678.2 3,458.5 3,483.9 1,878.3 0.0 2021 Jan.
7.4 7.5 495.1 1,007.6 756.3 –1,095.7 1,750.3 476.5 2,698.6 3,471.7 3,494.9 1,860.6 0.0 Feb.
8.0 6.8 508.4 1,080.2 754.4 –1,144.6 1,741.9 479.0 2,724.1 3,496.9 3,525.5 1,868.3 0.0 Mar.
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
May 2021
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3.  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
   Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2019         Apr. 678.6 5.7 720.3 0.1 2,635.9 619.6 0.0 1,215.8 270.5 555.6 1,379.0 3,214.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 689.7 5.5 718.6 0.4 2,630.6 601.9 0.0 1,228.2 248.2 561.9 1,404.6 3,234.7
         July 710.3 4.6 700.1 0.0 2,620.4 570.8 0.0 1,240.8 295.9 592.2 1,335.7 3,147.4
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 720.2 3.0 692.5 0.0 2,612.4 555.7 0.0 1,251.1 268.5 621.2 1,331.5 3,138.3
         Oct. 758.5 2.0 668.5 0.0 2,608.7 456.6 0.0 1,252.7 298.6 641.3 1,388.5 3,097.8
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 773.3 1.8 663.7 0.0 2,618.8 257.9 0.0 1,262.9 226.6 648.1 1,662.1 3,182.9
2020         Jan. 768.6 2.9 616.1 0.0 2,639.1 254.6 0.0 1,282.2 211.8 654.3 1,623.7 3,160.6
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 767.1 1.4 615.9 0.0 2,666.7 244.6 0.0 1,277.1 268.6 618.4 1,642.3 3,164.1
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 926.3 0.6 865.7 0.0 2,784.2 271.8 0.0 1,321.9 374.4 788.6 1,820.2 3,413.8
         June 950.4 0.3 984.2 0.0 2,986.9 299.9 0.0 1,347.9 477.1 830.5 1,966.5 3,614.4
         July 871.3 0.8 1,401.5 0.0 3,168.2 356.0 0.0 1,365.7 671.2 703.1 2,345.9 4,067.5
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 865.9 1.3 1,593.2 0.0 3,323.6 413.2 0.0 1,381.2 712.9 651.0 2,625.7 4,420.1
         Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Nov. 864.4 1.3 1,707.8 0.0 3,475.8 460.7 0.0 1,389.1 749.0 653.5 2,797.0 4,646.8
         Dec. 865.1 0.5 1,754.4 0.0 3,614.7 535.4 0.0 1,403.9 647.0 687.7 2,960.7 4,900.0
2021         Jan. 848.6 0.3 1,792.6 0.0 3,712.9 586.9 0.0 1,429.4 530.3 778.4 3,029.4 5,045.7
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 834.9 0.4 1,792.4 0.0 3,825.1 598.0 0.0 1,433.4 595.8 667.9 3,157.7 5,189.1
         Apr. 816.7 0.3 2,054.6 0.0 3,951.4 676.4 0.0 1,447.7 644.5 633.4 3,421.1 5,545.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
2019         Apr. 160.8 0.6 86.7 0.0 563.7 172.5 0.0 296.1 61.2 − 199.4 481.6 950.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 163.6 0.6 86.1 0.0 565.2 166.3 0.0 299.6 58.0 − 213.6 505.3 971.1
         July 169.4 0.7 85.3 0.0 563.1 150.1 0.0 303.0 65.7 − 175.0 474.5 927.7
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 172.5 0.5 84.9 0.0 562.7 150.1 0.0 305.6 57.6 − 157.6 464.9 920.6
         Oct. 182.8 0.4 82.8 0.0 560.0 151.5 0.0 306.5 70.8 − 159.4 456.6 914.7
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 186.9 0.4 82.4 0.0 566.1 82.2 0.0 307.6 55.9 − 135.3 525.4 915.3
2020         Jan. 186.0 0.9 74.0 0.0 567.9 73.6 0.0 311.7 52.7 − 95.7 486.5 871.8
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 185.0 0.4 74.0 0.0 573.7 65.4 0.0 311.2 64.4 − 125.0 517.1 893.7
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 238.0 0.2 106.8 0.0 585.3 76.3 0.0 324.1 102.0 − 174.5 602.8 1,003.2
         June 248.7 0.1 122.5 0.0 623.1 85.0 0.0 326.4 137.6 − 172.6 618.1 1,029.5
         July 222.1 0.5 235.2 0.0 655.9 108.2 0.0 331.5 205.0 − 238.1 707.1 1,146.8
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 212.1 0.8 284.0 0.0 692.0 136.0 0.0 336.4 239.6 − 298.0 774.8 1,247.3
         Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Nov. 212.1 0.7 319.5 0.0 729.0 145.5 0.0 338.1 254.7 − 302.9 826.0 1,309.6
         Dec. 213.0 0.3 333.9 0.0 768.7 166.6 0.0 341.2 217.9 − 294.5 884.7 1,392.5
2021         Jan. 208.3 0.1 341.1 0.0 791.3 178.9 0.0 347.3 189.4 − 252.8 878.0 1,404.2
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 205.3 0.1 341.0 0.0 816.9 177.5 0.0 348.3 172.7 − 298.0 962.8 1,488.6
         Apr. 198.0 0.0 407.3 0.0 845.8 203.0 0.0 351.7 187.4 − 300.4 1,008.9 1,563.5
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes. 4From August 2009 includes liquidity
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap oper ations. 5From
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation . In accordance with
the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of e uro banknotes,
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
May 2021
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 13.1 − 0.3 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 9.9 − 18.0 + 0.0 + 6.6 + 13.2 − 15.8 + 14.2 + 2.7 2019          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 11.1 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 5.3 − 17.7 + 0.0 + 12.4 − 22.3 + 6.3 + 25.6 + 20.3          June
+ 20.6 − 0.9 − 18.5 − 0.4 − 10.2 − 31.1 + 0.0 + 12.6 + 47.7 + 30.3 − 68.9 − 87.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 9.9 − 1.6 − 7.6 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 15.1 + 0.0 + 10.3 − 27.4 + 29.0 − 4.2 − 9.1          Sep.
+ 38.3 − 1.0 − 24.0 + 0.0 − 3.7 − 99.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 30.1 + 20.1 + 57.0 − 40.5          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
+ 14.8 − 0.2 − 4.8 + 0.0 + 10.1 −198.7 + 0.0 + 10.2 − 72.0 + 6.8 + 273.6 + 85.1          Dec.
− 4.7 + 1.1 − 47.6 + 0.0 + 20.3 − 3.3 + 0.0 + 19.3 − 14.8 + 6.2 − 38.4 − 22.3 2020          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 27.6 − 10.0 + 0.0 − 5.1 + 56.8 − 35.9 + 18.6 + 3.5          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
+ 159.2 − 0.8 + 249.8 + 0.0 + 117.5 + 27.2 + 0.0 + 44.8 + 105.8 +170.2 + 177.9 + 249.7          May
+ 24.1 − 0.3 + 118.5 + 0.0 + 202.7 + 28.1 + 0.0 + 26.0 + 102.7 + 41.9 + 146.3 + 200.6          June
− 79.1 + 0.5 + 417.3 + 0.0 + 181.3 + 56.1 + 0.0 + 17.8 + 194.1 −127.4 + 379.4 + 453.1          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
− 5.4 + 0.5 + 191.7 + 0.0 + 155.4 + 57.2 + 0.0 + 15.5 + 41.7 − 52.1 + 279.8 + 352.6          Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Oct.
− 1.5 + 0.0 + 114.6 + 0.0 + 152.2 + 47.5 + 0.0 + 7.9 + 36.1 + 2.5 + 171.3 + 226.7          Nov.
+ 0.7 − 0.8 + 46.6 + 0.0 + 138.9 + 74.7 + 0.0 + 14.8 − 102.0 + 34.2 + 163.7 + 253.2          Dec.
− 16.5 − 0.2 + 38.2 + 0.0 + 98.2 + 51.5 + 0.0 + 25.5 − 116.7 + 90.7 + 68.7 + 145.7 2021          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 13.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 112.2 + 11.1 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 65.5 −110.5 + 128.3 + 143.4          Mar.
− 18.2 − 0.1 + 262.2 + 0.0 + 126.3 + 78.4 + 0.0 + 14.3 + 48.7 − 34.5 + 263.4 + 356.1          Apr.
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 5.8 + 9.1 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 12.0 − 42.5 + 15.6 + 26.5 2019          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.4 − 6.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.2 − 14.2 + 23.7 + 21.0          June
+ 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.1 − 16.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 7.6 + 38.6 − 30.7 − 43.5          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 3.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 8.1 + 17.4 − 9.6 − 7.1          Sep.
+ 10.3 − 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 13.2 − 1.8 − 8.3 − 5.9          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
+ 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.1 − 69.3 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 14.9 + 24.1 + 68.8 + 0.6          Dec.
− 0.9 + 0.4 − 8.5 + 0.0 + 1.8 − 8.6 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 3.2 + 39.6 − 38.9 − 43.5 2020          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.8 − 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 11.7 − 29.3 + 30.7 + 21.9          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
+ 53.0 − 0.2 + 32.9 − 0.0 + 11.6 + 10.9 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 37.6 − 49.6 + 85.6 + 109.5          May
+ 10.7 − 0.1 + 15.7 + 0.0 + 37.8 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 35.6 + 2.0 + 15.3 + 26.3          June
− 26.6 + 0.4 + 112.6 − 0.0 + 32.8 + 23.2 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 67.5 − 65.5 + 89.0 + 117.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
− 10.0 + 0.3 + 48.9 + 0.0 + 36.1 + 27.9 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 34.6 − 59.9 + 67.6 + 100.5          Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Oct.
+ 0.0 − 0.1 + 35.5 − 0.0 + 37.0 + 9.5 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 15.0 − 5.0 + 51.2 + 62.3          Nov.
+ 0.9 − 0.4 + 14.4 + 0.0 + 39.8 + 21.1 + 0.0 + 3.1 − 36.8 + 8.4 + 58.7 + 82.9          Dec.
− 4.7 − 0.2 + 7.1 + 0.0 + 22.6 + 12.3 + 0.0 + 6.1 − 28.5 + 41.7 − 6.7 + 11.7 2021          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 25.6 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 16.7 − 45.2 + 84.8 + 84.4          Mar.
− 7.3 − 0.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 28.8 + 25.5 + 0.0 + 3.4 + 14.7 − 2.4 + 46.0 + 74.9          Apr.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the consolidated
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of thebanknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit inst itutions’ current account
value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro balances”. banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2020 Oct. 16 6,743.5 559.3 351.8 84.7 267.1 21.1 13.0 13.0 –
23 6,781.8 559.3 352.6 84.8 267.8 20.9 12.1 12.1 –
30 6,775.8 559.3 353.4 84.9 268.6 20.2 11.9 11.9 –
Nov. 6 6,796.9 559.3 353.1 84.8 268.2 20.8 12.3 12.3 –
13 6,833.5 559.3 352.7 84.8 267.8 20.4 13.1 13.1 –
20 6,867.8 559.3 352.6 84.8 267.8 20.4 13.1 13.1 –
27 6,883.4 559.3 351.5 84.8 266.7 21.2 13.2 13.2 –
Dec. 4 6,923.1 559.3 353.4 86.2 267.2 22.0 12.8 12.8 –
11 6,949.6 559.3 353.3 86.2 267.1 22.3 12.8 12.8 –
18 7,008.9 559.3 354.7 86.2 268.4 25.2 12.2 12.2 –
25 7,014.7 559.3 356.7 87.1 269.7 24.5 13.0 13.0 –
2021 Jan. 1 6,979.3 536.5 347.2 85.4 261.8 23.4 14.3 14.3 –
8 6,984.7 536.5 344.3 85.1 259.2 20.1 10.8 10.8 –
15 7,015.6 536.5 343.0 85.3 257.6 21.2 10.9 10.9 –
22 7,024.2 536.5 342.9 85.3 257.6 21.8 11.1 11.1 –
29 7,033.3 536.5 342.3 85.2 257.0 22.9 10.7 10.7 –
Feb. 5 7,054.5 536.5 339.9 85.2 254.7 25.4 10.9 10.9 –
12 7,079.1 536.5 339.7 85.2 254.4 25.8 11.5 11.5 –
19 7,101.2 536.5 338.8 85.2 253.6 26.7 11.1 11.1 –
26 7,110.5 536.5 341.0 85.2 255.8 24.8 10.9 10.9 –
Mar. 5 7,120.3 536.5 342.6 85.2 257.4 25.4 11.2 11.2 –
12 7,137.5 536.5 340.7 85.2 255.6 25.8 11.2 11.2 –
19 7,162.2 536.5 338.9 84.4 254.5 26.8 11.5 11.5 –
26 7,505.0 536.5 340.0 84.4 255.6 25.9 12.1 12.1 –
Apr. 2 7,494.1 499.3 350.7 86.6 264.2 26.6 11.5 11.5 –
9 7,514.3 499.3 350.7 86.6 264.1 26.8 10.9 10.9 –
16 7,522.2 499.3 350.7 86.5 264.1 26.8 11.1 11.1 –
23 7,558.3 499.3 351.2 86.5 264.7 27.1 10.9 10.9 –
30 7,567.9 499.3 352.0 86.5 265.4 26.5 10.6 10.6 –
May 7 7,588.8 499.3 352.6 86.5 266.0 25.7 10.8 10.8 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2020 Oct. 16 2,382.2 174.0 53.3 21.9 31.4 0.1 1.7 1.7 –
23 2,401.0 174.0 53.4 21.9 31.5 0.1 0.8 0.8 –
30 2,394.5 174.0 53.3 21.9 31.4 0.1 0.8 0.8 –
Nov. 6 2,373.1 174.0 53.3 21.9 31.4 0.1 1.3 1.3 –
13 2,406.2 174.0 53.2 21.9 31.3 0.1 1.9 1.9 –
20 2,409.1 174.0 53.6 21.9 31.7 0.1 1.7 1.7 –
27 2,450.9 174.0 53.4 21.9 31.5 0.1 1.4 1.4 –
Dec. 4 2,465.1 174.0 54.2 22.6 31.6 0.1 1.7 1.7 –
11 2,451.1 174.0 54.0 22.6 31.4 0.2 1.5 1.5 –
18 2,458.9 174.0 53.9 22.6 31.3 0.5 0.8 0.8 –
25 2,485.2 174.0 54.0 22.6 31.4 0.5 0.4 0.4 –
2021 Jan. 1 2,526.9 166.9 52.2 22.2 30.1 0.5 1.5 1.5 –
8 2,474.3 166.9 52.0 22.1 30.0 0.1 – – –
15 2,481.2 166.9 52.3 22.1 30.3 0.1 – – –
22 2,460.5 166.9 52.9 22.1 30.8 0.1 0.2 0.2 –
29 2,464.6 166.9 53.0 22.0 31.0 0.2 – – –
Feb. 5 2,460.7 166.9 52.9 22.0 30.9 0.1 0.2 0.2 –
12 2,487.4 166.9 52.9 22.0 30.9 0.1 0.3 0.3 –
19 2,480.1 166.9 53.1 22.0 31.1 0.1 – – –
26 2,472.3 166.9 53.1 22.0 31.1 0.1 – – –
Mar. 5 2,468.0 166.9 53.0 22.0 31.0 0.1 – – –
12 2,469.3 166.9 53.3 22.0 31.3 0.1 – – –
19 2,465.0 166.9 52.9 21.8 31.1 0.1 – – –
26 2,551.4 166.9 52.8 21.8 31.0 0.1 – – –
Apr. 2 2,556.4 155.3 53.9 22.3 31.6 0.2 – – –
9 2,558.7 155.3 53.9 22.3 31.6 0.1 – – –
16 2,548.1 155.3 53.8 22.3 31.5 0.1 – – –
23 2,554.0 155.3 53.8 22.3 31.5 0.1 – – –
30 2,562.0 155.3 53.8 22.3 31.5 0.1 – – –
May 7 2,568.4 155.3 53.6 22.3 31.4 0.1 – – –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
1,754.1 1.0 1,753.1 – – – – 33.2 3,693.6 3,494.9 198.7 22.7 294.7 2020 Oct. 16
1,754.1 1.0 1,753.1 – – 0.0 – 35.7 3,717.5 3,519.1 198.3 22.7 306.8 23
1,754.1 1.0 1,753.1 – – 0.0 – 26.0 3,723.9 3,529.9 194.0 22.7 304.0 30
1,754.7 0.9 1,753.8 – – 0.0 – 36.6 3,738.7 3,546.2 192.6 22.7 298.7 Nov. 6
1,754.4 0.6 1,753.8 – – – – 40.0 3,769.3 3,576.0 193.2 22.7 301.6 13
1,754.3 0.5 1,753.8 – – – – 42.1 3,801.0 3,607.8 193.2 22.7 302.2 20
1,754.5 0.6 1,753.9 – – – – 41.6 3,816.6 3,622.5 194.1 22.7 303.0 27
1,756.0 0.3 1,755.7 – – 0.0 – 41.8 3,848.8 3,654.4 194.4 22.7 306.4 Dec. 4
1,756.0 0.2 1,755.7 – – – – 38.4 3,875.5 3,681.1 194.5 22.7 309.3 11
1,792.9 0.3 1,792.6 – – 0.0 – 36.7 3,895.6 3,700.0 195.6 22.7 309.6 18
1,792.8 0.3 1,792.6 – – 0.0 – 31.9 3,900.9 3,704.9 196.0 22.7 312.8 25
1,793.2 0.5 1,792.6 – – 0.2 – 25.3 3,890.9 3,694.6 196.3 22.7 325.7 2021 Jan. 1
1,792.8 0.2 1,792.6 – – – – 38.9 3,899.8 3,703.4 196.3 22.7 318.9 8
1,793.1 0.5 1,792.6 – – – – 36.6 3,925.9 3,729.4 196.5 22.7 325.8 15
1,792.8 0.2 1,792.6 – – – – 40.6 3,942.6 3,746.1 196.4 22.7 313.2 22
1,792.7 0.2 1,792.5 – – – – 35.6 3,960.7 3,765.3 195.3 22.7 309.1 29
1,792.6 0.2 1,792.5 – – – – 37.9 3,979.5 3,784.1 195.3 22.6 309.2 Feb. 5
1,792.9 0.4 1,792.5 – – – – 45.5 4,004.6 3,809.1 195.5 22.6 300.0 12
1,792.9 0.5 1,792.5 – – – – 42.3 4,028.3 3,832.4 195.9 22.6 301.8 19
1,792.8 0.6 1,792.2 – – – – 43.8 4,042.1 3,846.1 196.0 22.6 296.0 26
1,792.7 0.5 1,792.2 – – 0.0 – 41.2 4,053.5 3,858.5 195.1 22.6 294.5 Mar. 5
1,792.9 0.7 1,792.2 – – – – 38.3 4,072.1 3,877.8 194.3 22.6 297.4 12
1,792.8 0.6 1,792.2 – – – – 41.0 4,100.6 3,906.4 194.1 22.6 291.6 19
2,107.6 0.3 2,107.4 – – 0.0 – 40.7 4,125.7 3,930.4 195.3 22.6 293.7 26
2,107.4 0.5 2,107.0 – – – – 39.0 4,132.8 3,936.7 196.1 22.6 304.0 Apr. 2
2,107.2 0.2 2,107.0 – – 0.0 – 37.0 4,153.4 3,956.8 196.5 22.6 306.4 9
2,107.1 0.1 2,107.0 – – – – 31.9 4,167.9 3,973.1 194.8 22.6 304.8 16
2,107.1 0.1 2,107.0 – – – – 34.3 4,199.5 4,005.1 194.4 22.6 306.2 23
2,107.2 0.3 2,107.0 – – – – 37.5 4,208.0 4,019.9 188.1 22.6 304.2 30
2,107.1 0.1 2,107.0 – – 0.0 – 35.7 4,230.0 4,044.1 186.0 22.6 305.0 May 7
Deutsche Bundesbank
334.5 0.7 333.8 – – 0.0 – 5.8 732.9 732.9 – 4.4 1,075.5 2020 Oct. 16
334.5 0.7 333.8 – – 0.0 – 9.1 740.2 740.2 – 4.4 1,084.5 23
334.5 0.7 333.8 – – 0.0 – 5.0 745.2 745.2 – 4.4 1,077.3 30
334.5 0.7 333.8 – – 0.0 – 8.1 750.0 750.0 – 4.4 1,047.4 Nov. 6
334.2 0.4 333.8 – – 0.0 – 9.3 757.7 757.7 – 4.4 1,071.4 13
334.1 0.2 333.8 – – 0.0 – 11.3 765.4 765.4 – 4.4 1,064.6 20
334.2 0.3 333.8 – – 0.0 – 10.5 772.2 772.2 – 4.4 1,100.8 27
334.4 0.1 334.2 – – 0.0 – 10.8 781.2 781.2 – 4.4 1,104.4 Dec. 4
334.3 0.0 334.2 – – 0.0 – 10.7 785.6 785.6 – 4.4 1,086.6 11
341.2 0.1 341.1 – – 0.0 – 9.6 790.8 790.8 – 4.4 1,083.7 18
341.2 0.1 341.1 – – 0.0 – 7.4 791.3 791.3 – 4.4 1,112.1 25
341.4 0.2 341.1 – – 0.2 – 2.4 789.2 789.2 – 4.4 1,168.4 2021 Jan. 1
341.2 0.1 341.1 – – 0.0 – 9.6 787.9 787.9 – 4.4 1,112.1 8
341.2 0.1 341.1 – – 0.0 – 9.7 794.4 794.4 – 4.4 1,112.1 15
341.2 0.1 341.1 – – 0.0 – 10.5 796.1 796.1 – 4.4 1,088.2 22
341.0 0.0 341.0 – – 0.0 – 8.4 802.9 802.9 – 4.4 1,087.7 29
341.1 0.1 341.0 – – 0.0 – 9.0 806.2 806.2 – 4.4 1,079.9 Feb. 5
341.2 0.2 341.0 – – 0.0 – 8.6 813.3 813.3 – 4.4 1,099.6 12
341.1 0.1 341.0 – – 0.0 – 9.0 818.4 818.4 – 4.4 1,086.9 19
341.0 0.1 340.9 – – – – 9.2 823.6 823.6 – 4.4 1,073.9 26
341.0 0.1 340.9 – – 0.0 – 5.6 824.9 824.9 – 4.4 1,072.0 Mar. 5
341.1 0.2 340.9 – – 0.0 – 8.4 827.3 827.3 – 4.4 1,067.8 12
341.0 0.1 340.9 – – 0.0 – 6.2 834.3 834.3 – 4.4 1,059.1 19
420.7 0.0 420.7 – – 0.0 – 4.8 841.4 841.4 – 4.4 1,060.1 26
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 5.2 844.9 844.9 – 4.4 1,071.9 Apr. 2
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 7.3 844.2 844.2 – 4.4 1,072.9 9
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 5.0 848.5 848.5 – 4.4 1,060.5 16
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 6.5 858.4 858.4 – 4.4 1,055.0 23
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 5.0 866.6 866.6 – 4.4 1,056.2 30
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 7.6 870.9 870.9 – 4.4 1,055.9 May 7

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2020 Oct. 16 6,743.5 1,390.3 3,322.9 2,788.9 534.0 – – – 7.0 – 797.6 737.6 60.0
23 6,781.8 1,391.6 3,360.6 3,242.3 118.3 – – 0.0 6.1 – 806.5 747.1 59.4
30 6,775.8 1,394.0 3,370.2 2,750.0 620.2 – – 0.0 6.3 – 787.8 721.9 65.9
Nov. 6 6,796.9 1,396.7 3,456.3 3,015.2 441.0 – – – 9.2 – 713.9 645.8 68.1
13 6,833.5 1,397.7 3,470.1 2,999.2 470.9 – – – 10.9 – 723.4 654.8 68.6
20 6,867.8 1,399.7 3,429.7 2,884.4 545.3 – – – 12.3 – 788.9 721.1 67.8
27 6,883.4 1,403.2 3,463.8 2,896.1 567.7 – – – 11.5 – 753.3 684.4 68.8
Dec. 4 6,923.1 1,410.9 3,559.1 2,962.3 596.7 – – 0.2 14.8 – 674.5 601.7 72.8
11 6,949.6 1,417.2 3,610.4 3,038.5 571.8 – – 0.1 12.7 – 627.1 557.8 69.3
18 7,008.9 1,424.7 3,600.6 3,036.8 563.7 – – – 15.6 – 643.3 560.5 82.8
25 7,014.7 1,433.6 3,570.9 2,979.4 591.4 – – – 17.8 – 621.3 540.1 81.2
2021 Jan. 1 6,979.3 1,434.5 3,489.2 2,805.3 683.9 – – – 23.6 – 611.3 516.2 95.1
8 6,984.7 1,430.1 3,637.3 3,089.9 547.3 – – 0.0 14.2 – 559.1 474.8 84.3
15 7,015.6 1,427.4 3,688.6 3,130.1 558.5 – – 0.0 13.6 – 604.8 522.2 82.6
22 7,024.2 1,426.8 3,702.7 3,082.0 620.7 – – 0.0 14.1 – 646.1 559.7 86.5
29 7,033.3 1,427.6 3,688.0 3,231.6 456.4 – – – 9.0 – 681.7 593.3 88.4
Feb. 5 7,054.5 1,429.5 3,735.4 3,209.6 525.8 – – – 11.6 – 653.9 566.6 87.3
12 7,079.1 1,431.6 3,740.0 3,116.3 623.7 – – – 11.2 – 685.5 600.4 85.2
19 7,101.2 1,432.8 3,703.8 3,086.0 617.7 – – 0.0 14.6 – 755.1 667.2 87.9
26 7,110.5 1,434.9 3,739.6 3,094.0 645.6 – – 0.0 14.3 – 722.0 630.5 91.5
Mar. 5 7,120.3 1,438.3 3,843.0 3,187.7 655.3 – – – 18.7 – 621.3 538.7 82.6
12 7,137.5 1,440.7 3,840.5 3,183.7 656.8 – – – 14.6 – 653.9 567.2 86.7
19 7,162.2 1,441.5 3,785.4 3,249.3 536.1 – – – 17.8 – 734.0 648.5 85.5
26 7,505.0 1,443.9 4,089.1 3,445.2 643.9 – – – 16.5 – 772.7 683.6 89.1
Apr. 2 7,494.1 1,450.1 4,134.3 3,400.2 734.0 – – – 16.8 – 722.4 634.8 87.7
9 7,514.3 1,449.5 4,213.7 3,470.2 743.5 – – – 19.2 – 678.0 597.4 80.6
16 7,522.2 1,449.8 4,183.5 3,478.4 703.4 – – 1.6 17.0 – 715.0 632.8 82.2
23 7,558.3 1,452.1 4,183.6 3,465.6 716.3 – – 1.7 17.4 – 748.0 670.3 77.7
30 7,567.9 1,455.1 4,237.2 3,633.7 601.8 – – 1.7 17.4 – 687.2 605.9 81.3
May 7 7,588.8 1,459.4 4,321.4 3,654.5 665.2 – – 1.7 18.0 – 619.6 540.0 79.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
2020 Oct. 16 2,382.2 338.7 975.6 796.8 178.7 – – – 2.8 – 264.5 257.4 7.1
23 2,401.0 339.1 1,016.1 1,010.1 6.1 – – – 2.0 – 252.8 245.5 7.3
30 2,394.5 338.1 1,030.5 812.5 218.0 – – – 1.1 – 230.2 223.1 7.1
Nov. 6 2,373.1 339.3 1,027.6 918.1 109.4 – – – 3.8 – 213.0 206.0 7.0
13 2,406.2 339.8 1,039.2 912.8 126.4 – – – 5.1 – 231.2 224.1 7.1
20 2,409.1 340.0 1,031.8 854.6 177.1 – – 0.0 6.9 – 240.3 233.0 7.3
27 2,450.9 341.4 1,051.7 866.4 185.2 – – – 5.8 – 250.9 243.1 7.8
Dec. 4 2,465.1 343.0 1,080.5 882.3 198.0 – – 0.2 7.8 – 223.0 215.3 7.7
11 2,451.1 345.2 1,075.2 883.1 192.0 – – 0.1 4.9 – 200.4 192.6 7.8
18 2,458.9 347.4 1,034.5 839.9 194.6 – – – 3.2 – 216.1 208.0 8.2
25 2,485.2 349.9 1,029.4 814.6 214.8 – – – 3.2 – 217.5 208.8 8.6
2021 Jan. 1 2,526.9 347.9 1,018.8 793.8 225.0 – – – 7.5 – 209.7 196.0 13.7
8 2,474.3 346.2 1,055.3 918.6 136.7 – – – 6.1 – 184.8 172.8 12.0
15 2,481.2 346.0 1,086.5 942.3 144.2 – – 0.0 5.8 – 207.3 193.7 13.6
22 2,460.5 346.2 1,106.8 913.9 193.0 – – 0.0 6.7 – 181.8 168.1 13.7
29 2,464.6 346.2 1,128.9 1,010.1 118.8 – – – 4.0 – 176.4 162.9 13.5
Feb. 5 2,460.7 347.0 1,140.2 1,009.0 131.1 – – – 4.8 – 163.8 151.1 12.7
12 2,487.4 347.8 1,151.9 955.0 196.9 – – – 4.3 – 189.9 176.1 13.8
19 2,480.1 348.4 1,137.5 949.3 188.2 – – 0.0 6.6 – 206.7 192.6 14.1
26 2,472.3 348.0 1,139.3 931.1 208.2 – – 0.0 7.0 – 193.0 180.6 12.4
Mar. 5 2,468.0 349.5 1,158.3 948.8 209.5 – – – 10.6 – 170.5 158.5 12.0
12 2,469.3 350.8 1,153.2 948.3 204.8 – – – 8.4 – 183.6 169.3 14.3
19 2,465.0 350.9 1,125.2 983.0 142.2 – – – 10.2 – 211.0 198.0 13.0
26 2,551.4 351.9 1,206.0 1,043.7 162.3 – – – 8.5 – 218.9 205.1 13.8
Apr. 2 2,556.4 351.9 1,232.6 1,003.1 229.5 – – – 7.8 – 196.3 182.9 13.4
9 2,558.7 351.6 1,254.8 1,012.5 242.4 – – – 10.2 – 181.8 169.4 12.4
16 2,548.1 351.9 1,231.4 1,013.3 216.4 – – 1.6 8.0 – 191.1 179.9 11.1
23 2,554.0 352.2 1,228.3 1,003.3 223.4 – – 1.7 9.2 – 200.5 187.9 12.6
30 2,562.0 352.9 1,247.3 1,061.8 183.8 – – 1.7 8.3 – 185.3 172.3 12.9
May 7 2,568.4 354.7 1,259.9 1,103.0 155.2 – – 1.7 9.1 – 175.4 162.3 13.1
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
224.4 5.9 6.4 6.4 – 55.9 280.7 – 543.5 108.9 2020 Oct. 16
212.5 6.1 6.3 6.3 – 55.9 284.0 – 543.5 108.9 23
212.0 6.1 6.3 6.3 – 55.9 284.8 – 543.5 108.9 30
209.7 6.3 6.1 6.1 – 55.9 290.6 – 543.5 108.8 Nov. 6
214.8 6.3 5.9 5.9 – 55.9 296.0 – 543.5 108.8 13
218.3 6.5 6.1 6.1 – 55.9 298.1 – 543.5 108.8 20
231.2 7.0 5.2 5.2 – 55.9 299.9 – 543.5 108.8 27
241.4 7.2 5.0 5.0 – 55.9 301.9 – 543.5 108.8 Dec. 4
260.5 8.0 4.2 4.2 – 55.9 301.5 – 543.5 108.8 11
300.3 8.4 3.8 3.8 – 55.9 304.2 – 543.5 108.8 18
349.2 8.0 4.1 4.1 – 55.9 301.7 – 543.5 108.8 25
431.1 7.8 3.9 3.9 – 54.8 301.4 – 512.9 108.8 2021 Jan. 1
355.5 8.0 3.9 3.9 – 54.8 300.6 – 512.5 108.6 8
285.9 7.9 3.7 3.7 – 54.8 307.8 – 512.5 108.6 15
249.6 8.3 3.8 3.8 – 54.8 297.0 – 512.5 108.6 22
241.6 8.2 4.1 4.1 – 54.8 297.2 – 512.5 108.6 29
233.8 8.3 4.0 4.0 – 54.8 302.3 – 512.5 108.3 Feb. 5
222.1 8.6 3.7 3.7 – 54.8 300.7 – 512.5 108.3 12
209.0 8.4 4.1 4.1 – 54.8 297.8 – 512.5 108.3 19
214.2 8.2 4.3 4.3 – 54.8 297.1 – 512.5 108.5 26
208.8 10.3 4.5 4.5 – 54.8 299.5 – 512.5 108.5 Mar. 5
199.3 8.5 4.6 4.6 – 54.8 298.5 – 512.5 109.6 12
194.4 8.9 3.9 3.9 – 54.8 299.4 – 512.5 109.6 19
193.1 9.4 3.4 3.4 – 54.8 299.8 – 512.5 109.7 26
207.5 9.7 3.4 3.4 – 56.2 298.2 – 485.4 110.1 Apr. 2
198.5 9.8 3.3 3.3 – 56.2 290.7 – 485.4 110.1 9
202.3 9.8 3.2 3.2 – 56.2 289.9 – 485.4 110.1 16
199.8 9.8 3.2 3.2 – 56.2 292.7 – 485.4 110.1 23
208.0 10.0 3.0 3.0 – 56.2 298.4 – 485.4 110.0 30
206.6 10.0 2.8 2.8 – 56.2 299.1 – 485.4 110.2 May 7
Deutsche Bundesbank
112.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.5 30.8 467.0 170.4 5.7 2020 Oct. 16
101.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.5 31.9 467.0 170.4 5.7 23
103.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.5 30.9 469.4 170.4 5.7 30
98.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.5 31.3 469.4 170.4 5.7 Nov. 6
99.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 14.5 31.3 469.4 170.4 5.7 13
98.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 14.5 31.3 469.4 170.4 5.7 20
109.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.5 31.3 469.4 170.4 5.7 27
117.9 0.0 0.3 0.3 – 14.5 31.4 470.7 170.4 5.7 Dec. 4
132.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 – 14.5 31.5 470.7 170.4 5.7 11
164.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 14.5 31.9 470.7 170.4 5.7 18
192.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 14.5 31.9 470.7 170.4 5.7 25
256.8 0.0 – – – 14.2 31.5 473.1 161.8 5.7 2021 Jan. 1
194.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 14.2 32.1 473.1 161.8 5.7 8
148.5 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 14.2 32.3 473.1 161.8 5.7 15
130.7 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 14.2 33.0 473.1 161.8 5.7 22
119.9 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 14.2 32.9 474.2 161.8 5.7 29
115.5 0.4 0.1 0.1 – 14.2 33.0 474.2 161.8 5.7 Feb. 5
104.1 0.4 0.1 0.1 – 14.2 33.0 474.2 161.8 5.7 12
91.1 0.4 0.2 0.2 – 14.2 33.2 474.2 161.8 5.7 19
93.0 0.4 0.2 0.2 – 14.2 33.2 476.5 161.8 5.7 26
87.2 0.4 0.2 0.2 – 14.2 33.1 476.5 161.8 5.7 Mar. 5
81.1 0.4 0.4 0.4 – 14.2 33.3 476.5 161.8 5.7 12
75.1 0.3 0.4 0.4 – 14.2 33.7 476.5 161.8 5.7 19
73.6 0.3 0.3 0.3 – 14.2 33.6 476.5 161.8 5.7 26
84.5 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 32.7 479.0 151.2 5.7 Apr. 2
76.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.6 33.0 479.0 151.2 5.7 9
82.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.6 32.9 479.0 151.2 5.7 16
80.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.6 33.0 479.0 151.2 5.7 23
83.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.6 33.4 479.7 151.2 5.7 30
84.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 33.5 479.7 151.2 5.7 May 7
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2019 June 8,321.9 37.9 2,332.5 1,869.9 1,600.4 269.6 462.6 321.6 141.0 3,972.1 3,530.5 3,108.0 2,809.6
July 8,372.1 37.4 2,311.4 1,845.2 1,575.0 270.2 466.2 324.2 142.0 3,984.9 3,539.6 3,114.5 2,815.1
Aug. 8,645.5 38.3 2,327.7 1,857.2 1,589.6 267.6 470.5 327.6 142.9 4,009.7 3,554.6 3,127.0 2,827.3
Sep. 8,550.4 38.0 2,323.6 1,835.8 1,569.4 266.4 487.8 344.3 143.5 4,001.0 3,562.6 3,139.5 2,839.7
Oct. 8,445.6 39.3 2,312.0 1,810.4 1,543.9 266.5 501.6 358.5 143.1 4,008.1 3,569.7 3,149.2 2,847.6
Nov. 8,509.2 40.1 2,361.5 1,860.2 1,590.2 270.0 501.3 358.1 143.2 4,027.4 3,586.5 3,166.8 2,863.7
Dec. 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 Jan. 8,482.2 39.4 2,293.1 1,800.7 1,531.5 269.2 492.4 348.1 144.3 4,033.9 3,591.5 3,173.1 2,867.5
Feb. 8,666.7 40.3 2,308.1 1,815.4 1,545.5 269.9 492.7 348.9 143.8 4,055.3 3,606.4 3,190.1 2,885.8
Mar. 8,912.6 48.1 2,421.0 1,920.7 1,651.9 268.8 500.4 357.5 142.8 4,096.9 3,641.9 3,215.5 2,915.9
Apr. 9,014.6 48.6 2,442.9 1,943.2 1,674.0 269.2 499.7 355.0 144.8 4,115.5 3,656.4 3,225.2 2,926.3
May 8,915.3 48.1 2,395.2 1,896.4 1,631.8 264.6 498.8 355.2 143.6 4,149.8 3,682.9 3,247.5 2,946.1
June 9,026.9 46.0 2,542.6 2,056.2 1,788.0 268.2 486.4 343.6 142.8 4,153.0 3,683.1 3,249.8 2,949.1
July 9,069.0 45.5 2,574.4 2,099.6 1,830.7 268.9 474.8 333.3 141.5 4,153.7 3,688.0 3,258.4 2,958.3
Aug. 8,985.5 46.0 2,595.4 2,127.5 1,858.5 269.0 467.9 328.0 139.9 4,148.3 3,691.9 3,266.7 2,966.1
Sep. 9,097.4 46.1 2,657.2 2,196.9 1,926.4 270.6 460.3 320.7 139.5 4,153.9 3,696.5 3,269.8 2,968.7
Oct. 9,124.3 46.3 2,686.7 2,226.8 1,957.0 269.8 459.9 320.9 139.0 4,181.8 3,713.6 3,283.1 2,980.6
Nov. 9,096.0 45.7 2,684.1 2,232.1 1,965.3 266.9 452.0 313.9 138.1 4,198.6 3,723.7 3,293.3 2,991.0
Dec. 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 Jan. 9,150.4 44.9 2,793.5 2,309.4 2,042.2 267.2 484.1 348.8 135.3 4,195.0 3,716.6 3,302.6 2,997.8
Feb. 9,148.1 45.5 2,824.0 2,328.8 2,060.6 268.2 495.2 361.1 134.1 4,210.4 3,731.9 3,318.5 3,011.4
Mar. 9,261.7 45.7 2,904.6 2,419.9 2,145.1 274.8 484.7 351.2 133.6 4,246.3 3,762.0 3,347.6 3,038.5
Changes 3
2012 –129.2 2.9 –81.9 –28.4 3.0 –31.4 –53.5 – 39.7 –13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 –703.6 – 0.5 –257.1 –249.2 –216.5 –32.7 – 7.9 1.6 – 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 –126.2 –128.6 –95.3 –33.4 2.4 7.2 – 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2019 July 49.8 – 0.5 –23.0 –25.4 –26.0 0.6 2.4 1.5 0.9 12.1 9.1 6.8 5.6
Aug. 265.9 0.8 14.8 11.4 14.2 – 2.8 3.4 2.7 0.7 23.9 14.6 12.3 11.9
Sep. –100.4 – 0.3 –19.8 –19.0 –18.0 – 1.0 – 0.7 – 1.3 0.6 7.9 8.2 12.1 12.1
Oct. –93.5 1.2 – 9.8 –24.8 –25.0 0.2 15.0 15.3 – 0.3 8.8 8.1 10.5 8.8
Nov. 55.4 0.8 48.2 49.3 45.9 3.3 – 1.1 – 1.2 0.1 18.6 16.6 17.3 15.8
Dec. –187.4 3.3 –129.3 –99.6 –96.3 – 3.3 –29.7 – 29.4 – 0.3 – 6.1 – 1.2 2.2 1.6
2020 Jan. 162.1 – 4.0 61.4 40.5 37.7 2.8 21.0 19.6 1.4 13.0 6.8 4.7 3.1
Feb. 193.8 0.8 20.5 18.6 13.8 4.8 1.9 0.5 1.3 21.8 15.0 17.2 18.3
Mar. 251.0 7.9 113.4 105.3 106.1 – 0.9 8.2 8.8 – 0.6 44.3 36.8 26.5 31.0
Apr. 96.1 0.5 20.8 21.8 21.5 0.3 – 1.1 – 3.0 1.9 18.2 14.2 9.8 10.5
May –40.6 – 0.6 22.6 22.4 19.3 3.1 0.2 1.3 – 1.1 27.3 24.9 20.5 18.0
June 118.6 – 2.1 149.4 161.5 157.8 3.7 –12.1 – 11.2 – 0.9 5.0 1.7 3.6 4.3
July 67.5 – 0.5 36.5 45.1 44.3 0.8 – 8.6 – 7.5 – 1.1 3.1 6.6 10.2 10.8
Aug. –79.5 0.5 21.7 28.2 28.0 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.9 – 1.5 – 4.9 4.3 8.7 8.1
Sep. 104.9 0.1 60.5 69.0 67.5 1.5 – 8.5 – 8.0 – 0.4 5.2 4.5 3.0 2.6
Oct. 25.2 0.2 29.1 29.7 30.5 – 0.8 – 0.6 0.1 – 0.7 27.6 17.3 12.9 11.3
Nov. 12.0 – 0.6 29.0 35.8 37.2 – 1.4 – 6.8 – 6.1 – 0.8 18.6 11.3 11.2 11.5
Dec. –141.5 1.8 –59.5 –53.6 –51.2 – 2.4 – 5.9 – 5.8 – 0.2 –18.3 –13.3 4.2 2.7
2021 Jan. 201.4 – 2.6 169.3 131.0 128.3 2.8 38.2 40.5 – 2.3 16.8 7.7 6.6 5.1
Feb. – 2.3 0.7 30.3 19.2 18.2 1.1 11.0 12.2 – 1.2 15.9 15.5 15.7 13.4
Mar. 115.2 0.2 80.9 91.1 84.5 6.5 –10.2 – 9.7 – 0.5 36.2 30.2 29.3 27.4
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011
259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
298.5 422.5 257.7 164.7 441.6 320.9 207.2 120.7 29.0 91.7 1,103.8 841.8 875.6 2019 June
299.4 425.0 260.2 164.8 445.3 322.2 209.5 123.1 29.0 94.1 1,114.6 851.7 923.8 July
299.7 427.6 260.2 167.4 455.1 330.1 216.8 125.0 28.9 96.1 1,122.3 857.7 1,147.5 Aug.
299.8 423.2 255.1 168.1 438.3 313.4 200.6 124.9 28.8 96.1 1,106.8 841.9 1,081.1 Sep.
301.6 420.5 257.1 163.4 438.4 313.1 201.3 125.3 30.1 95.2 1,102.8 842.5 983.5 Oct.
303.1 419.8 257.7 162.0 440.8 315.2 201.0 125.6 30.5 95.1 1,091.3 828.7 989.0 Nov.
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 Dec.
305.6 418.3 258.6 159.8 442.4 316.4 203.8 126.0 29.8 96.2 1,078.6 819.6 1,037.1 2020 Jan.
304.3 416.3 256.5 159.8 448.9 322.8 206.6 126.2 29.9 96.3 1,088.6 829.3 1,174.5 Feb.
299.6 426.4 258.5 167.9 455.0 325.2 212.8 129.8 29.5 100.3 1,104.4 838.8 1,242.1 Mar.
298.8 431.2 259.2 172.0 459.1 329.0 217.4 130.2 31.1 99.1 1,119.2 852.3 1,288.4 Apr.
301.4 435.4 258.3 177.1 466.9 334.5 220.6 132.3 31.0 101.3 1,102.1 840.8 1,220.2 May
300.7 433.3 257.8 175.5 469.9 331.1 215.4 138.8 29.2 109.6 1,075.8 816.4 1,209.5 June
300.1 429.6 259.1 170.5 465.7 313.2 217.1 152.5 29.9 122.6 1,047.3 792.5 1,248.1 July
300.7 425.1 253.7 171.4 456.5 311.1 214.5 145.4 29.2 116.1 1,037.6 784.0 1,158.2 Aug.
301.1 426.7 256.0 170.8 457.4 311.0 215.2 146.4 29.3 117.0 1,063.9 808.9 1,176.3 Sep.
302.5 430.5 257.3 173.2 468.2 318.6 219.6 149.5 30.2 119.3 1,049.9 793.4 1,159.6 Oct.
302.2 430.5 256.7 173.8 474.8 325.6 222.5 149.2 29.1 120.1 1,048.0 792.3 1,119.7 Nov.
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 Dec.
304.9 414.0 253.3 160.7 478.4 330.8 224.5 147.6 28.7 118.9 1,087.5 834.6 1,029.5 2021 Jan.
307.1 413.4 250.6 162.9 478.5 334.5 227.0 144.0 28.8 115.2 1,093.8 843.9 974.4 Feb.
309.1 414.3 249.3 165.1 484.3 340.0 232.8 144.4 28.9 115.5 1,105.2 855.0 959.8 Mar.
Changes 3
–11.8 10.7 –10.5 21.2 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.5 0.5 – 2.2 2.7 –15.5 –17.7 –62.2 2012
2.0 – 7.0 –10.9 3.9 – 3.0 – 3.4 – 9.3 0.5 – 2.6 3.1 –38.8 –47.2 –420.8 2013
15.5 –12.3 –15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 – 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
1.2 2.2 2.5 – 0.2 3.0 1.3 2.1 1.7 – 0.0 1.8 4.4 4.1 56.8 2019 July
0.4 2.3 – 0.2 2.5 9.3 7.5 7.0 1.8 – 0.1 1.9 2.6 1.2 223.7 Aug.
0.0 – 4.0 – 4.7 0.8 – 0.3 – 0.1 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 –21.9 –21.7 –66.4 Sep.
1.7 – 2.4 2.1 – 4.6 0.8 0.2 1.0 0.5 1.3 – 0.8 3.9 7.7 –97.7 Oct.
1.5 – 0.8 0.6 – 1.4 2.1 1.7 – 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.0 –17.6 –19.3 5.3 Nov.
0.7 – 3.4 – 3.0 – 0.4 – 4.9 – 1.4 – 0.9 – 3.5 – 1.8 – 1.7 –47.9 –44.3 – 7.5 Dec.
1.6 2.1 3.9 – 1.8 6.2 3.2 4.5 3.0 0.4 2.6 36.0 35.9 55.6 2020 Jan.
– 1.1 – 2.2 – 2.1 – 0.1 6.8 6.7 2.8 0.1 0.1 – 0.0 13.5 12.5 137.3 Feb.
– 4.5 10.2 2.0 8.3 7.5 3.3 6.5 4.2 – 0.4 4.6 17.8 11.2 67.6 Mar.
– 0.7 4.5 0.6 3.9 4.0 3.7 4.3 0.3 1.6 – 1.3 10.4 9.3 46.3 Apr.
2.5 4.4 – 0.9 5.3 2.5 0.8 – 1.2 1.6 – 0.6 2.2 –23.0 –18.2 –67.0 May
– 0.7 – 1.9 – 0.3 – 1.6 3.3 – 3.2 – 4.9 6.4 – 1.8 8.2 –22.9 –21.2 –10.8 June
– 0.6 – 3.6 1.3 – 4.9 – 3.5 1.6 2.7 – 5.1 0.6 – 5.7 –10.3 – 7.1 38.7 July
0.6 – 4.4 – 5.4 0.9 – 9.2 – 2.3 – 2.5 – 6.9 – 0.7 – 6.2 – 7.0 – 6.0 –89.8 Aug.
0.4 1.5 2.2 – 0.7 0.7 – 0.1 0.7 0.9 0.1 0.7 21.1 20.0 18.0 Sep.
1.6 4.4 2.0 2.5 10.4 7.3 4.2 3.0 0.9 2.1 –15.3 –16.7 –16.4 Oct.
– 0.3 0.2 – 0.5 0.7 7.3 7.6 3.6 – 0.3 – 1.1 0.8 6.4 6.6 –41.4 Nov.
1.5 –17.5 – 4.4 –13.2 – 4.9 1.9 0.3 – 6.9 0.6 – 7.4 –36.3 –34.4 –29.3 Dec.
1.5 1.1 0.9 0.2 9.1 3.8 2.9 5.3 – 0.9 6.2 80.2 79.8 –62.3 2021 Jan.
2.3 – 0.2 – 2.4 2.3 0.3 3.7 2.4 – 3.4 0.1 – 3.4 6.3 8.9 –55.4 Feb.
1.9 0.9 – 1.3 2.2 6.0 5.6 6.2 0.4 0.1 0.3 13.4 13.0 –15.5 Mar.
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2019 June 8,321.9 1,292.1 1,048.3 243.8 3,728.4 3,595.5 2,144.7 868.1 274.5 582.6 544.0 116.0 56.6
July 8,372.1 1,291.9 1,055.1 236.8 3,728.8 3,605.7 2,160.6 863.3 271.9 581.8 543.4 110.3 51.1
Aug. 8,645.5 1,306.3 1,062.2 244.1 3,754.1 3,626.8 2,182.9 863.7 276.0 580.2 542.2 114.6 54.3
Sep. 8,550.4 1,299.7 1,038.3 261.4 3,745.4 3,618.0 2,179.8 859.2 273.5 579.0 541.5 115.2 55.7
Oct. 8,445.6 1,313.5 1,050.3 263.2 3,761.4 3,633.5 2,201.7 854.6 270.4 577.2 540.6 114.1 51.4
Nov. 8,509.2 1,326.4 1,057.3 269.1 3,791.3 3,663.8 2,238.9 849.3 266.7 575.6 539.9 115.8 52.6
Dec. 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 Jan. 8,482.2 1,293.2 1,033.0 260.2 3,775.6 3,647.0 2,229.5 846.8 267.2 570.7 537.5 116.3 54.3
Feb. 8,666.7 1,313.5 1,047.8 265.7 3,794.5 3,664.6 2,249.1 847.1 270.3 568.4 535.8 117.0 55.2
Mar. 8,912.6 1,418.4 1,135.8 282.6 3,853.2 3,705.0 2,299.1 841.5 268.6 564.4 532.5 135.5 72.3
Apr. 9,014.6 1,426.3 1,156.6 269.6 3,872.7 3,729.4 2,339.0 826.7 259.6 563.8 532.6 130.3 65.2
May 8,915.3 1,386.1 1,112.0 274.0 3,913.5 3,764.4 2,370.9 829.9 266.6 563.6 532.9 136.6 70.6
June 9,026.9 1,503.5 1,230.4 273.1 3,906.1 3,754.5 2,379.1 812.8 256.1 562.5 532.8 139.2 71.1
July 9,069.0 1,488.7 1,209.5 279.2 3,937.1 3,783.3 2,408.1 814.3 263.0 560.9 531.7 132.9 65.5
Aug. 8,985.5 1,489.8 1,213.2 276.6 3,951.0 3,790.7 2,421.8 808.3 258.8 560.6 531.8 129.7 63.6
Sep. 9,097.4 1,523.9 1,252.4 271.5 3,975.9 3,795.1 2,436.7 798.3 251.4 560.1 531.7 140.6 72.8
Oct. 9,124.3 1,536.3 1,264.9 271.4 4,015.2 3,827.0 2,473.1 794.2 249.1 559.7 531.7 140.8 69.6
Nov. 9,096.0 1,515.4 1,245.5 269.9 4,035.0 3,846.2 2,508.7 778.0 235.3 559.6 532.0 140.2 69.0
Dec. 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 Jan. 9,150.4 1,560.0 1,262.3 297.7 4,044.0 3,855.8 2,536.8 757.4 219.4 561.6 534.8 138.4 65.8
Feb. 9,148.1 1,584.4 1,261.7 322.7 4,053.2 3,865.2 2,552.4 750.1 214.1 562.6 536.1 137.7 68.2
Mar. 9,261.7 1,634.1 1,336.5 297.6 4,068.3 3,876.2 2,569.1 744.8 212.3 562.3 536.2 142.2 71.0
Changes 4
2012 –129.2 –68.7 –70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 –90.4 –50.2 1.5 14.1 – 1.4 5.4
2013 –703.6 –106.2 –73.9 –32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 –56.3 –26.6 – 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 –28.4 –32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 –32.1 3.1 – 2.4 – 2.4 – 2.5 – 0.0
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2019 July 49.8 – 1.3 6.3 – 7.6 – 0.7 9.3 15.4 – 5.2 – 2.8 – 0.9 – 0.6 – 5.8 – 5.6
Aug. 265.9 13.7 6.8 6.9 24.7 20.5 21.9 0.2 4.0 – 1.5 – 1.2 4.2 3.1
Sep. –100.4 –19.2 –21.7 2.5 – 9.5 – 9.5 – 3.5 – 4.7 – 2.7 – 1.2 – 0.7 0.5 1.3
Oct. –93.5 15.0 12.5 2.5 17.1 16.2 22.5 – 4.5 – 3.1 – 1.8 – 1.0 – 0.9 – 4.2
Nov. 55.4 11.9 6.6 5.3 29.1 29.5 36.7 – 5.7 – 3.8 – 1.6 – 0.7 1.5 1.1
Dec. –187.4 –82.4 –46.4 –36.0 –12.2 –13.2 – 7.3 – 5.4 – 4.9 – 0.5 0.6 0.7 2.2
2020 Jan. 162.1 49.3 22.2 27.2 – 3.4 – 3.5 – 2.0 2.9 5.3 – 4.5 – 3.0 – 0.1 – 0.4
Feb. 193.8 20.0 14.6 5.4 18.5 17.3 19.4 0.2 3.0 – 2.2 – 1.7 0.6 0.9
Mar. 251.0 104.6 87.7 16.9 58.9 40.4 50.1 – 5.6 – 1.7 – 4.0 – 3.4 18.5 17.1
Apr. 96.1 7.0 20.3 –13.3 18.8 24.0 39.6 –15.0 – 9.2 – 0.7 0.1 – 5.3 – 7.1
May –40.6 22.0 16.8 5.2 34.0 33.3 29.9 3.6 7.3 – 0.2 0.3 1.2 0.1
June 118.6 118.2 118.9 – 0.7 – 7.0 – 9.6 8.3 –16.8 –10.5 – 1.1 – 0.1 2.6 0.6
July 67.5 –11.0 –19.0 8.1 34.1 31.5 31.0 2.1 7.4 – 1.6 – 1.1 – 5.7 – 5.4
Aug. –79.5 1.6 4.0 – 2.4 14.4 7.7 13.8 – 5.9 – 4.1 – 0.2 0.2 – 3.2 – 1.9
Sep. 104.9 33.1 38.7 – 5.7 24.1 3.7 14.4 –10.2 – 7.6 – 0.5 – 0.1 10.7 9.1
Oct. 25.2 12.3 12.4 – 0.1 39.1 32.1 36.4 – 3.9 – 3.3 – 0.4 – 0.0 0.1 – 3.3
Nov. 12.0 8.2 8.4 – 0.1 25.6 20.2 36.4 –16.0 –13.6 – 0.1 0.3 4.1 3.9
Dec. –141.5 –25.2 – 7.9 –17.3 –12.3 – 8.7 0.3 –10.0 – 8.0 1.0 1.3 – 4.8 –11.8
2021 Jan. 201.4 65.4 25.0 40.4 21.0 18.6 28.1 –10.6 – 7.8 1.1 1.6 2.6 9.7
Feb. – 2.3 24.4 – 0.7 25.1 9.0 9.2 15.5 – 7.3 – 5.3 1.0 1.3 – 0.7 2.4
Mar. 115.2 49.6 74.5 –24.8 15.2 11.0 16.7 – 5.4 – 1.8 – 0.3 0.1 4.5 2.8
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 2011
42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 2012
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
56.6 16.1 2.8 2.5 17.0 14.0 12.9 2.0 1,071.1 33.1 676.3 706.6 832.5 2019 June
56.4 15.6 2.8 2.5 12.8 11.2 13.9 2.1 1,075.3 33.4 667.9 709.9 882.4 July
57.5 17.4 2.8 2.5 12.8 11.2 16.9 2.2 1,072.7 33.9 676.2 713.0 1,103.9 Aug.
56.8 15.2 2.7 2.4 12.2 10.9 1.5 2.3 1,077.8 35.7 671.4 719.2 1,033.2 Sep.
60.1 17.8 2.7 2.4 13.8 10.6 1.2 2.2 1,067.5 33.4 657.4 711.0 931.3 Oct.
60.6 18.3 2.7 2.4 11.7 10.6 1.7 2.0 1,076.7 33.7 653.6 723.6 933.9 Nov.
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 Dec.
59.4 17.1 2.7 2.4 12.3 10.8 2.5 1.8 1,078.0 36.0 622.5 712.5 996.0 2020 Jan.
59.2 15.3 2.6 2.4 12.9 11.2 2.0 1.9 1,087.4 34.6 638.8 714.0 1,114.6 Feb.
60.6 16.5 2.6 2.4 12.8 11.2 1.7 2.5 1,074.1 30.8 674.1 713.4 1,175.2 Mar.
62.4 17.6 2.6 2.4 13.0 11.1 3.4 2.4 1,078.1 29.6 704.0 693.5 1,234.2 Apr.
63.4 16.4 2.6 2.4 12.5 10.8 2.2 2.2 1,076.9 28.8 693.7 686.4 1,154.4 May
65.4 19.2 2.6 2.4 12.5 11.8 0.9 2.1 1,074.0 28.6 696.8 702.1 1,141.4 June
64.8 20.2 2.6 2.3 20.8 20.1 2.1 1.9 1,067.4 25.9 698.3 694.7 1,178.9 July
63.6 19.3 2.6 2.3 30.6 29.8 1.7 1.9 1,063.9 25.5 682.1 699.9 1,095.2 Aug.
65.2 21.8 2.6 2.3 40.2 39.0 1.2 2.6 1,077.3 25.6 687.1 720.4 1,108.9 Sep.
68.6 25.0 2.6 2.3 47.3 46.6 1.4 2.7 1,075.1 24.6 687.8 712.4 1,093.3 Oct.
68.7 24.3 2.6 2.3 48.5 47.6 9.1 2.5 1,070.0 23.3 696.7 713.1 1,054.3 Nov.
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 Dec.
70.0 23.7 2.6 2.3 49.7 48.3 6.3 2.5 1,058.8 19.7 790.8 708.3 979.7 2021 Jan.
67.0 20.5 2.5 2.3 50.3 48.2 4.5 2.5 1,068.3 19.6 803.5 702.4 929.4 Feb.
68.7 22.0 2.5 2.3 49.9 48.9 6.7 2.9 1,090.3 21.4 833.7 712.1 913.7 Mar.
Changes 4
– 7.2 – 3.6 0.5 0.3 – 7.9 – 9.2 –19.6 1.2 –107.0 –18.6 54.2 21.0 –68.5 2012
– 0.5 2.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 –11.3 –10.0 4.1 – 3.2 –104.9 –17.6 –134.1 18.9 –417.1 2013
– 2.3 – 1.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.8 – 3.4 – 0.6 –63.7 – 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
– 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.0 – 4.2 – 2.8 1.0 0.1 1.0 0.2 –11.7 2.2 59.2 2019 July
1.1 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 3.1 0.1 – 5.4 0.4 5.8 2.3 221.7 Aug.
– 0.8 – 2.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 1.1 0.1 1.3 1.7 – 8.3 5.3 –69.0 Sep.
3.4 2.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.8 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 6.5 – 2.1 – 9.7 – 6.9 –102.1 Oct.
0.4 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 0.2 0.4 – 0.2 5.6 0.2 – 7.2 11.5 4.2 Nov.
– 1.5 – 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.3 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 9.2 – 1.3 –90.5 6.4 0.7 Dec.
0.3 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.3 – 0.5 1.1 – 0.1 11.0 3.5 59.9 –17.2 61.4 2020 Jan.
– 0.3 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 0.4 – 0.6 0.1 8.6 – 1.4 15.5 1.3 130.4 Feb.
1.4 1.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.3 0.6 –11.9 – 3.8 36.2 – 0.3 63.2 Mar.
1.8 1.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 1.7 – 0.1 1.6 – 1.3 27.6 –20.7 60.3 Apr.
1.1 – 1.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 1.2 – 0.1 5.1 – 0.6 –21.9 3.5 –82.0 May
2.0 2.8 – 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 – 1.3 – 0.2 – 1.3 – 0.1 4.6 16.4 –10.8 June
– 0.3 1.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 8.3 8.3 1.3 – 0.2 3.3 – 1.2 10.9 – 4.3 33.3 July
– 1.3 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.8 9.8 – 0.5 0.0 – 2.2 – 0.4 –14.9 5.7 –83.7 Aug.
1.6 2.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.6 9.2 – 0.5 0.7 10.5 0.0 2.6 19.6 14.9 Sep.
3.4 3.2 – 0.0 0.0 7.0 7.5 0.3 0.1 – 2.9 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 8.2 –15.5 Oct.
0.2 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.2 1.0 3.3 – 0.2 – 0.9 – 1.2 12.6 3.3 –39.9 Nov.
7.0 6.3 0.0 0.0 1.3 1.0 0.3 – 0.0 – 9.0 – 1.9 –71.4 – 0.7 –23.2 Dec.
– 7.1 – 6.9 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 3.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 – 1.5 171.3 – 3.7 –49.0 2021 Jan.
– 3.1 – 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.2 – 1.8 – 0.0 8.9 – 0.1 12.2 – 6.2 –48.9 Feb.
1.7 1.5 – 0.0 0.0 – 0.4 0.8 2.2 0.4 24.5 4.2 30.2 7.2 –14.1 Mar.
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
May 2021
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which: of which:
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total  1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2020         Oct. 1,511 9,183.4 859.7 2,462.0 1,968.1 489.5 4,490.9 389.4 3,387.4 0.3 688.4 98.6 1,272.1
         Nov. 1,501 9,154.5 911.6 2,407.9 1,917.0 486.5 4,506.7 390.6 3,396.3 0.3 697.9 97.3 1,231.0
         Dec. 1,501 9,002.1 843.3 2,392.1 1,904.5 484.2 4,469.8 364.3 3,403.7 0.3 686.2 95.6 1,201.2
2021         Jan. 1,495 9,209.2 1,054.7 2,418.2 1,929.9 485.0 4,500.9 383.5 3,405.8 0.3 690.6 94.9 1,140.6
         Feb. 1,494 9,207.5 975.3 2,528.6 2,042.8 482.6 4,522.9 392.2 3,417.5 0.3 690.7 94.9 1,085.7
         Mar. 1,494 9,321.1 1,029.8 2,559.8 2,068.8 487.7 4,563.9 407.6 3,439.2 0.3 698.9 95.1 1,072.6
Commercial banks 6
2021         Feb. 254 3,895.1 558.1 1,063.1 981.1 81.4 1,417.0 251.8 937.8 0.3 213.3 32.8 824.2
         Mar. 255 3,944.6 576.6 1,088.8 1,001.3 86.9 1,431.0 256.7 945.6 0.2 218.9 32.8 815.4
   Big banks 7
2021         Feb. 3 2,135.3 196.0 507.4 472.7 34.7 668.4 123.7 428.7 0.1 106.8 26.8 736.7
         Mar. 3 2,122.8 184.0 510.6 475.0 35.6 676.9 128.4 432.2 0.1 110.8 26.8 724.4
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2021         Feb. 143 1,315.8 225.1 370.9 325.5 45.2 635.4 91.9 439.2 0.1 100.4 5.2 79.2
         Mar. 143 1,364.4 255.6 378.8 328.9 49.7 641.8 93.5 442.6 0.1 102.0 5.2 83.0
   Branches of foreign banks
2021         Feb. 108 444.0 137.0 184.9 182.9 1.6 113.2 36.3 70.0 0.1 6.1 0.7 8.3
         Mar. 109 457.4 137.0 199.4 197.4 1.5 112.4 34.7 70.8 0.1 6.1 0.7 8.0
Landesbanken
2021         Feb. 6 832.9 96.7 237.5 184.0 53.2 394.9 37.9 312.5 0.0 41.6 8.4 95.4
         Mar. 6 845.3 97.1 239.4 187.6 51.3 407.3 49.0 314.6 0.0 41.5 8.4 93.1
Savings banks
2021         Feb. 373 1,476.6 148.9 177.4 59.9 117.3 1,112.2 46.8 890.9 0.0 172.3 14.9 23.2
         Mar. 372 1,488.3 157.8 175.4 57.1 118.1 1,117.5 46.9 894.4 − 173.9 14.9 22.7
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2021         Feb. 815 1,079.8 50.1 199.7 87.0 112.6 787.5 32.9 635.1 0.0 119.5 18.4 24.2
         Mar. 815 1,087.4 54.7 198.1 84.4 113.6 791.9 32.7 639.1 0.0 120.0 18.5 24.2
Mortgage banks
2021         Feb. 10 242.4 8.9 21.3 11.8 9.1 204.0 3.2 181.4 − 19.3 0.2 8.0
         Mar. 10 244.1 9.8 20.7 11.3 9.1 205.7 3.1 183.4 − 19.2 0.2 7.7
Building and loan associations
2021         Feb. 18 244.5 1.9 44.3 28.5 15.8 194.5 0.9 168.1 . 25.5 0.3 3.6
         Mar. 18 246.0 2.1 44.7 28.8 15.9 195.4 0.9 169.0 . 25.5 0.3 3.5
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2021         Feb. 18 1,436.2 110.7 785.4 690.6 93.2 412.8 18.7 291.7 0.0 99.3 20.1 107.2
         Mar. 18 1,465.4 131.7 792.7 698.3 92.8 415.0 18.3 293.1 0.0 99.9 20.1 106.0
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2021         Feb. 141 1,559.0 288.6 569.5 530.7 38.2 561.0 109.0 352.8 0.2 95.0 3.7 136.2
         Mar. 142 1,598.1 305.1 580.3 540.9 38.8 569.9 109.4 357.8 0.2 98.8 3.7 139.2
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2021         Feb. 33 1,115.0 151.6 384.6 347.9 36.7 447.8 72.8 282.8 0.1 88.9 3.0 127.9
         Mar. 33 1,140.7 168.0 380.9 343.5 37.3 457.5 74.7 287.1 0.1 92.8 3.0 131.2
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with Section 35(1) number 1a of the Credit
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified Institution Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kredit-
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective institute) are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting reporting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in Statistical
Law(Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report − Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the building and loan associations: including deposits und er savings and loan contracts
meaning of Section 340e(3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels- (see Table IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
May 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
for for of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At 3 Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
2,096.9 618.8 1,478.0 4,143.6 2,624.0 270.4 652.5 33.0 566.0 537.4 30.7 1,175.0 546.6 1,221.3 2020          Oct.
2,081.7 625.9 1,455.7 4,174.3 2,669.5 256.7 651.8 40.3 565.9 537.7 30.4 1,169.2 545.9 1,183.4          Nov.1,997.9 553.8 1,444.1 4,143.7 2,646.4 248.7 651.6 32.6 566.8 539.0 30.2 1,153.8 548.4 1,158.3          Dec.
2,216.6 648.3 1,568.2 4,184.3 2,687.0 245.3 654.4 39.6 567.9 540.6 29.7 1,159.9 548.2 1,100.3 2021          Jan.
2,248.4 658.1 1,590.3 4,197.1 2,702.6 240.5 656.3 42.7 568.8 541.8 28.9 1,164.6 547.0 1,050.4          Feb.2,327.6 655.7 1,671.9 4,214.7 2,722.9 243.4 651.8 42.9 568.5 541.9 28.0 1,195.6 548.9 1,034.4          Mar.
Commercial banks 6
1,161.7 478.3 683.3 1,655.4 1,148.8 155.6 239.6 40.7 99.4 95.2 12.1 165.3 181.4 731.3 2021          Feb.
1,209.5 489.7 719.7 1,666.4 1,161.9 155.2 237.9 40.9 99.5 95.4 12.0 164.8 182.3 721.6          Mar.
Big banks 7
458.1 187.5 270.5 818.9 573.5 76.5 83.1 31.5 84.2 80.8 1.5 122.7 78.7 656.9 2021          Feb.
457.2 173.2 283.9 819.2 573.3 78.2 81.8 32.4 84.4 81.0 1.5 122.2 78.9 645.4          Mar.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
453.5 144.4 309.0 663.1 457.8 47.6 132.6 9.2 14.7 14.0 10.5 42.1 91.7 65.4 2021          Feb.
484.2 155.5 328.7 678.1 472.0 48.8 132.2 8.5 14.7 13.9 10.4 42.3 92.6 67.3          Mar.
Branches of foreign banks
250.1 146.3 103.8 173.4 117.5 31.6 23.9 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.5 10.9 9.0 2021          Feb.
268.1 161.0 107.0 169.2 116.7 28.2 23.8 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.4 10.9 8.9          Mar.
Landesbanken
280.7 62.7 218.0 242.2 139.5 23.9 72.6 1.8 6.2 6.1 0.0 175.7 42.7 91.5 2021          Feb.
282.8 50.7 232.1 246.6 141.9 28.4 70.1 1.8 6.1 6.1 0.0 181.8 43.3 90.8          Mar.
Savings banks
173.4 3.9 169.5 1,110.0 795.7 10.8 13.6 − 278.2 260.6 11.7 17.2 127.9 48.1 2021          Feb.
182.2 4.2 178.0 1,112.4 798.1 11.2 13.5 − 278.1 260.6 11.5 17.1 128.0 48.5          Mar.
 
Credit cooperatives
 
150.8 1.4 149.5 795.5 565.6 28.4 13.0 − 184.6 179.5 4.0 9.8 89.7 34.0 2021          Feb.
154.9 1.3 153.6 797.9 568.1 28.5 13.2 − 184.3 179.3 3.9 9.7 89.9 34.9          Mar.
Mortgage banks
61.7 2.9 58.8 63.4 2.1 4.8 56.5 − − − . 99.4 10.8 7.0 2021          Feb.
63.1 2.9 60.2 62.7 2.2 4.4 56.1 − − − . 100.6 10.7 7.1          Mar.
Building and loan associations
27.6 1.7 25.9 191.4 3.4 1.2 186.3 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 2.8 12.2 10.5 2021          Feb.
28.8 1.7 27.1 191.6 3.5 1.2 186.4 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 2.8 12.3 10.6          Mar.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
392.4 107.2 285.2 139.1 47.6 15.7 74.7 0.3 − − . 694.5 82.2 128.0 2021          Feb.
406.3 105.2 301.1 137.1 47.2 14.6 74.7 0.3 − − . 718.8 82.4 120.9          Mar.
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
687.9 304.6 383.2 634.8 473.8 58.6 79.7 6.6 19.1 18.8 3.5 35.8 70.1 130.4 2021          Feb.
728.2 330.3 397.8 627.4 467.0 57.8 79.9 8.7 19.2 18.8 3.5 35.9 70.6 136.0          Mar.
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
437.8 158.3 279.4 461.3 356.4 27.0 55.8 6.6 18.7 18.4 3.5 35.3 59.2 121.4 2021          Feb.
460.1 169.3 290.8 458.2 350.4 29.6 56.1 8.7 18.7 18.4 3.4 35.4 59.8 127.1          Mar.
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to Ap ril 2018)
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, Table
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks I.3, banking group ”Big banks”). 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Br anches (with
and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking cat egories. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
May 2021
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item: ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2019         Oct. 39.0 529.1 1,252.1 1,013.6 0.0 0.9 237.6 4.6 3,506.7 3,104.5 0.2 3.4 398.6
         Nov. 39.9 529.6 1,301.7 1,059.6 0.0 1.1 241.0 4.6 3,523.5 3,121.1 0.2 3.3 398.9
         Dec. 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020         Jan. 39.2 515.2 1,256.9 1,015.4 0.0 0.8 240.7 4.6 3,528.4 3,125.8 0.3 3.3 399.1
         Feb. 40.0 509.4 1,280.0 1,035.2 0.0 0.9 243.8 5.0 3,544.7 3,141.9 0.3 4.6 397.8
         Mar. 47.9 621.7 1,273.0 1,029.4 0.0 1.0 242.6 5.1 3,580.0 3,174.1 0.2 5.1 400.6
         Apr. 48.4 582.3 1,334.6 1,090.6 0.0 1.2 242.8 5.0 3,594.3 3,185.3 0.2 7.2 401.6
         May 47.8 586.2 1,291.8 1,044.7 0.0 1.1 246.0 6.0 3,620.9 3,204.2 0.1 10.1 406.4
         June 45.7 767.6 1,270.4 1,019.6 0.0 1.1 249.6 6.9 3,621.1 3,206.6 0.2 8.0 406.2
         July 45.2 810.5 1,270.5 1,019.2 0.0 1.2 250.0 7.5 3,625.7 3,217.2 0.2 8.0 400.3
         Aug. 45.7 760.8 1,348.1 1,096.7 0.0 1.1 250.3 7.8 3,629.7 3,219.6 0.2 9.4 400.5
         Sep. 45.8 884.4 1,293.9 1,041.1 0.0 1.0 251.8 8.3 3,634.2 3,224.4 0.2 8.4 401.3
         Oct. 46.1 811.0 1,397.3 1,145.2 0.0 0.8 251.2 8.6 3,651.1 3,237.6 0.2 9.0 404.3
         Nov. 45.4 863.2 1,351.9 1,101.3 0.0 0.8 249.8 8.6 3,661.1 3,247.4 0.2 7.6 405.8
         Dec. 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021         Jan. 44.6 1,009.1 1,283.1 1,032.1 0.0 0.7 250.2 9.2 3,654.0 3,250.7 0.3 6.6 396.3
         Feb. 45.0 929.2 1,382.3 1,130.2 0.0 1.0 251.1 9.6 3,669.3 3,261.7 0.2 7.4 400.0
         Mar. 45.5 983.4 1,419.4 1,160.8 0.0 0.9 257.7 9.8 3,699.1 3,287.5 0.2 6.0 405.4
Changes *
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 + 129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.9
2017 + 6.1 + 108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 20.1 − 0.1 + 57.0 + 70.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 13.6
2018 + 8.5 + 24.0 − 81.0 − 76.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 3.8 + 71.5 + 105.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 33.2
2019 + 2.8 + 59.7 − 63.0 − 61.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 1.4 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 5.5
2020 + 4.1 + 316.4 + 201.2 + 191.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 4.3 + 123.2 + 123.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.1
2019         Oct. + 1.2 + 76.4 − 102.1 − 102.2 − + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 6.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.8
         Nov. + 0.9 + 0.4 + 49.6 + 46.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 16.8 + 16.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3
         Dec. + 3.3 − 53.0 − 46.9 − 43.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
2020         Jan. − 4.0 + 38.6 + 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 6.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 0.8 − 5.9 + 23.1 + 19.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 16.3 + 16.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 1.3
         Mar. + 7.8 + 112.4 − 7.0 − 5.9 − + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 35.3 + 32.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 2.8
         Apr. + 0.5 − 39.4 + 61.6 + 61.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 14.4 + 11.2 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 1.0
         May − 0.6 + 3.9 + 16.9 + 13.7 − − 0.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 + 24.1 + 16.4 − 0.0 + 2.9 + 4.8
         June − 2.1 + 181.4 − 21.4 − 25.0 − − 0.0 + 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.2
         July − 0.5 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 4.6 + 10.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 5.9
         Aug. + 0.5 − 49.7 + 77.6 + 77.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.2
         Sep. + 0.1 + 123.6 − 54.2 − 55.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 4.6 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.7
         Oct. + 0.2 − 73.5 + 103.4 + 104.2 − − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 16.5 + 12.9 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 3.0
         Nov. − 0.6 + 52.3 − 17.1 − 15.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.6 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 1.6
         Dec. + 1.8 − 70.3 + 16.0 + 18.4 − − 0.1 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 14.1 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 8.1
2021         Jan. − 2.6 + 216.2 − 84.9 − 87.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.4 + 6.6 + 5.3 + 0.0 + 2.6 − 1.4
         Feb. + 0.3 − 79.9 + 98.9 + 97.8 − + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 15.3 + 11.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 3.6
         Mar. + 0.6 + 54.3 + 37.2 + 30.6 − − 0.1 + 6.6 + 0.2 + 29.6 + 25.6 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 5.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exchange of equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer de bt securities;
specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
May 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time Redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits  7 bonds  8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017− 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018− 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
− 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
− 17.1 90.1 1,049.3 129.3 920.0 0.0 4.5 3,644.4 2,207.1 826.0 577.2 34.1 32.5 2019          Oct.
− 17.1 90.2 1,055.9 126.6 929.4 0.0 4.5 3,674.8 2,244.5 820.9 575.7 33.8 32.5          Nov.− 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5          Dec.
− 16.9 90.0 1,031.4 125.4 906.0 0.0 4.4 3,658.2 2,235.1 819.7 570.7 32.6 32.3 2020          Jan.
− 16.9 86.1 1,046.8 133.2 913.6 0.0 4.4 3,675.9 2,254.4 820.8 568.5 32.2 32.8          Feb.− 16.9 86.3 1,134.7 147.5 987.2 0.0 4.3 3,716.6 2,304.9 815.5 564.5 31.8 32.5          Mar.
− 17.1 86.4 1,154.9 141.2 1,013.6 0.0 4.3 3,741.9 2,345.4 801.6 563.8 31.1 32.8          Apr.
− 19.4 78.8 1,110.9 131.6 979.3 0.0 7.1 3,775.3 2,376.3 804.7 563.6 30.7 33.3          May− 20.8 78.8 1,229.5 131.4 1,098.1 0.0 9.4 3,766.3 2,385.3 788.2 562.6 30.3 33.4          June
− 22.2 79.3 1,207.9 125.0 1,082.8 0.0 11.1 3,803.4 2,414.0 798.6 560.9 29.9 33.8          July
− 22.5 79.2 1,211.5 126.2 1,085.3 0.0 11.5 3,820.8 2,427.7 802.9 560.6 29.6 34.0          Aug.− 22.7 79.2 1,251.5 123.8 1,127.8 0.0 12.0 3,834.2 2,442.8 802.0 560.1 29.3 34.3          Sep.
− 22.8 79.4 1,263.7 131.5 1,132.2 0.0 12.3 3,874.1 2,481.4 804.1 559.7 28.9 34.6          Oct.
− 22.9 78.1 1,244.8 134.6 1,110.2 0.0 12.5 3,894.3 2,515.3 790.9 559.6 28.5 34.4          Nov.− 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4          Dec.
− 23.7 78.2 1,261.6 140.5 1,121.2 0.0 13.6 3,904.5 2,542.0 773.1 561.6 27.9 34.3 2021          Jan.
− 24.0 78.2 1,260.6 138.0 1,122.5 0.0 14.2 3,913.7 2,557.5 766.1 562.6 27.5 34.3          Feb.− 24.3 78.3 1,336.0 135.4 1,200.6 0.0 14.7 3,925.9 2,575.2 761.3 562.3 27.1 34.4          Mar.
Changes *
− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016− − 0.0 − 1.6 + 11.0 − 18.4 + 29.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 2017− − 1.0 + 3.1 − 25.0 − 3.1 − 21.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 2018− − 0.7 + 0.1 − 8.6 + 1.6 − 10.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 122.5 + 155.8 − 25.7 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 1.4 2019
− + 5.7 − 3.3 + 313.4 + 23.2 + 290.2 − 0.0 + 8.2 + 221.6 + 273.7 − 32.7 − 14.5 − 4.9 + 1.9 2020
− + 0.1 + 0.2 + 11.8 + 7.8 + 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 15.3 + 21.7 − 4.3 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 2019          Oct.
− − 0.0 + 0.1 + 6.7 − 2.7 + 9.4 − + 0.0 + 30.4 + 37.4 − 5.1 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.0          Nov.− + 0.1 + 0.2 − 45.8 − 19.3 − 26.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 13.8 − 8.2 − 4.6 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0          Dec.
− − 0.3 − 0.4 + 21.2 + 18.2 + 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.3 + 3.5 − 4.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 2020          Jan.
− − 0.0 − 3.9 + 15.4 + 7.8 + 7.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 17.7 + 19.3 + 1.1 − 2.2 − 0.4 + 0.4          Feb.− − 0.1 + 0.2 + 87.9 + 14.3 + 73.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 40.7 + 50.5 − 5.3 − 4.0 − 0.4 − 0.2          Mar.
− + 0.3 + 0.1 + 20.2 − 6.2 + 26.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 25.3 + 40.7 − 14.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.2          Apr.
− + 2.2 − 0.2 + 15.6 − 4.6 + 20.3 − 0.0 + 2.7 + 30.5 + 27.9 + 3.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6          May− + 1.5 + 0.0 + 118.6 − 0.2 + 118.8 − 0.0 + 2.3 − 9.0 + 8.8 − 16.4 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.1          June
− + 0.9 + 0.5 − 21.7 − 6.4 − 15.2 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 37.1 + 28.7 + 10.5 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.4          July
− + 0.3 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 17.4 + 13.6 + 4.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2          Aug.− + 0.2 + 0.0 + 40.0 − 2.5 + 42.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 13.4 + 15.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.3          Sep.
− + 0.1 + 0.2 + 12.2 + 7.7 + 4.4 − + 0.2 + 40.0 + 38.6 + 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.3          Oct.
− + 0.2 + 0.1 + 8.3 + 3.5 + 4.8 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 20.5 + 34.1 − 13.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2          Nov.− + 0.6 + 0.1 − 8.1 − 9.6 + 1.5 − + 0.5 − 9.2 − 2.3 − 7.6 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.0          Dec.
− + 0.2 − 0.1 + 24.9 + 15.7 + 9.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 19.2 + 28.9 − 10.3 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 2021          Jan.
− + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 2.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 9.1 + 15.4 − 7.0 + 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.0          Feb.− + 0.3 + 0.1 + 75.1 − 2.6 + 77.7 − + 0.5 + 12.2 + 17.7 − 4.8 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1          Mar.
including subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding
operations with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities
outstanding. 6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
May 2021
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper Securities item: and paper Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2019         Oct. 0.2 1,132.8 880.2 590.3 289.9 3.8 248.8 3.9 826.5 544.3 140.7 403.7 9.2 273.0
         Nov. 0.2 1,122.8 870.5 585.6 284.9 3.4 248.9 3.8 828.1 541.1 136.8 404.3 9.9 277.1
         Dec. 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020         Jan. 0.2 1,111.1 859.7 578.2 281.5 2.7 248.7 3.8 821.5 536.9 133.0 403.8 7.7 277.0
         Feb. 0.2 1,119.0 865.9 590.7 275.2 2.9 250.2 3.8 832.3 543.7 136.8 406.9 8.6 279.9
         Mar. 0.3 1,145.4 889.8 615.5 274.4 3.0 252.5 3.5 834.1 543.2 135.7 407.5 11.7 279.2
         Apr. 0.3 1,156.2 899.6 626.2 273.4 2.8 253.8 3.5 843.1 552.5 142.6 410.0 11.4 279.2
         May 0.3 1,139.4 884.7 613.2 271.5 3.3 251.4 3.7 849.7 559.2 152.6 406.5 12.1 278.4
         June 0.3 1,113.8 860.8 592.4 268.5 3.7 249.3 3.8 838.4 538.2 134.7 403.5 15.8 284.5
         July 0.3 1,083.1 834.0 574.4 259.6 3.4 245.7 3.9 829.1 536.3 138.8 397.5 15.1 277.6
         Aug. 0.3 1,066.8 821.2 563.3 257.9 3.5 242.1 4.1 819.9 531.3 133.7 397.6 15.6 272.9
         Sep. 0.2 1,084.3 841.3 583.4 257.9 3.6 239.4 4.1 821.9 530.4 130.3 400.2 15.2 276.3
         Oct. 0.3 1,064.7 822.9 564.5 258.5 3.5 238.3 4.1 839.8 539.3 137.7 401.6 16.5 284.1
         Nov. 0.2 1,056.0 815.8 563.4 252.4 3.5 236.7 4.0 845.6 539.5 139.8 399.7 14.0 292.1
         Dec. 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021         Jan. 0.2 1,135.1 897.8 645.6 252.2 2.6 234.7 3.8 846.9 538.6 142.7 395.8 14.0 294.3
         Feb. 0.6 1,146.4 912.7 659.6 253.1 2.2 231.5 3.8 853.6 548.2 150.4 397.7 14.7 290.7
         Mar. 0.2 1,140.4 908.0 646.7 261.3 2.3 230.1 3.8 864.8 559.3 153.3 406.1 11.9 293.5
Changes *
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.5
2017 + 0.0 − 57.2 − 48.7 − 61.5 + 12.8 + 0.0 − 8.5 + 0.6 − 4.7 + 13.0 + 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 18.4
2018 + 0.0 + 49.6 + 34.0 + 57.7 − 23.7 + 0.2 + 15.3 + 0.7 + 18.3 + 28.3 + 3.2 + 25.2 − 0.4 − 9.7
2019 − 0.0 − 4.1 − 11.3 − 21.9 + 10.7 + 0.8 + 6.3 + 0.7 + 26.8 + 19.9 + 12.7 + 7.3 + 3.0 + 3.8
2020 − 0.0 − 32.0 − 22.4 − 6.6 − 15.8 + 0.9 − 10.5 + 0.3 + 34.4 + 14.7 + 9.0 + 5.7 + 3.6 + 16.1
2019         Oct. + 0.0 + 18.1 + 18.9 + 9.8 + 9.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 7.5 + 10.1 − 2.6 + 0.7 − 5.2
         Nov. − 0.0 − 14.2 − 13.8 − 6.7 − 7.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 6.1 − 4.7 − 1.4 + 0.7 + 3.7
         Dec. + 0.0 − 53.1 − 51.2 − 50.3 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 29.1 − 24.9 − 24.9 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 1.9
2020         Jan. − 0.0 + 42.2 + 41.2 + 43.2 − 1.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 23.1 + 21.1 + 21.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.9
         Feb. + 0.0 + 6.5 + 4.7 + 11.5 − 6.8 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.1 + 6.4 + 3.7 + 2.7 + 0.9 + 2.8
         Mar. + 0.0 + 27.5 + 24.9 + 25.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 0.7 + 1.7 + 3.1 − 0.6
         Apr. + 0.0 + 7.4 + 6.5 + 5.5 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 6.5 + 7.2 + 6.3 + 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.4
         May − 0.0 − 22.7 − 21.4 − 22.6 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.8 + 0.2 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1
         June + 0.0 − 23.5 − 21.8 − 19.6 − 2.2 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 9.8 − 19.7 − 17.5 − 2.2 + 3.7 + 6.2
         July − 0.0 − 17.9 − 14.4 − 11.2 − 3.2 − 0.2 − 3.3 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 5.3 + 5.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 5.4
         Aug. − 0.0 − 14.4 − 11.1 − 10.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 4.2 − 4.8 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 4.7
         Sep. − 0.0 + 13.9 + 16.6 + 18.2 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 3.8 + 1.3 − 0.4 + 3.0
         Oct. + 0.0 − 20.8 − 19.5 − 19.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 16.7 + 7.8 + 6.9 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 7.6
         Nov. − 0.0 − 3.4 − 1.9 + 1.8 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.1 + 9.7 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 8.6
         Dec. − 0.0 − 26.9 − 26.3 − 28.9 + 2.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 19.3 − 13.7 − 13.6 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 3.0
2021         Jan. − 0.0 + 106.1 + 108.3 + 110.3 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 22.5 + 14.5 + 17.8 − 3.3 + 2.7 + 5.3
         Feb. + 0.3 + 11.1 + 14.7 + 14.0 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 3.2 − 0.1 + 6.3 + 9.0 + 7.5 + 1.5 + 0.7 − 3.5
         Mar. − 0.3 − 11.7 − 10.1 − 15.8 + 5.6 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 3.9 + 4.9 + 0.7 + 4.1 − 2.8 + 1.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
May 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 201612.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 201711.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 201811.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 − 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 − 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
12.6 21.8 787.8 430.9 356.9 259.3 97.6 1.1 251.8 119.9 131.9 73.3 58.6 0.1 2019          Oct.
12.6 21.6 790.4 452.4 338.0 239.5 98.5 1.1 251.6 120.5 131.1 72.4 58.7 0.1          Nov.11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 − 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1          Dec.
11.4 21.4 756.2 433.4 322.8 223.1 99.8 − 247.8 121.8 126.0 68.1 57.8 0.1 2020          Jan.
11.4 19.0 770.5 433.8 336.7 230.1 106.6 − 255.3 129.1 126.2 66.5 59.6 0.1          Feb.11.4 19.0 826.9 463.3 363.6 250.9 112.6 − 269.0 146.3 122.7 62.8 60.0 0.1          Mar.
11.4 19.0 835.3 438.6 396.7 288.0 108.7 − 274.1 143.0 131.1 69.9 61.2 0.1          Apr.
11.4 19.0 828.1 459.2 368.9 260.8 108.0 − 280.8 150.9 129.9 67.9 62.0 0.1          May11.3 19.1 835.5 472.5 363.0 247.2 115.9 − 275.7 145.2 130.5 69.5 61.1 0.1          June
11.2 19.0 843.9 489.3 354.7 238.8 115.8 − 270.6 139.4 131.3 72.5 58.8 0.1          July
11.2 19.0 828.9 474.8 354.1 238.8 115.2 − 263.2 134.8 128.3 69.9 58.5 0.1          Aug.11.4 19.0 832.4 486.5 345.9 226.4 119.6 − 269.6 145.5 124.1 66.0 58.1 0.1          Sep.
11.5 19.0 833.2 487.3 345.9 224.6 121.3 − 269.5 142.6 127.0 68.5 58.4 0.1          Oct.
11.5 19.0 836.8 491.3 345.5 219.0 126.5 − 279.9 154.2 125.8 66.0 59.7 0.1          Nov.11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 − 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1          Dec.
11.3 16.5 954.9 507.8 447.0 298.5 148.5 − 279.8 145.0 134.8 69.4 65.3 0.1 2021          Jan.
11.3 16.5 987.8 520.0 467.7 318.0 149.7 − 283.4 145.2 138.3 71.5 66.8 0.1          Feb.11.3 16.6 991.5 520.2 471.3 319.5 151.8 − 288.8 147.8 141.0 73.7 67.3 0.1          Mar.
Changes *
− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016− 1.0 − 4.1 − 15.5 + 25.3 − 40.8 − 43.2 + 2.4
+ 0.0 + 31.8 + 11.0 + 20.8 + 15.6 + 5.2 − 0.4 2017
− 0.2 − 2.2 − 23.9 − 23.4 − 0.4 + 2.1 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 11.9 − 0.2 − 11.8 − 5.7 − 6.0 − 0.2 2018− 0.3 − 0.9 − 9.5 − 49.4 + 39.8 + 28.0 + 11.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.1 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.0 2019
− 0.2 − 3.9 + 83.8 + 87.8 − 4.1 − 34.7 + 30.6 − + 23.6 + 13.8 + 9.8 + 7.1 + 2.8 + 0.0 2020
− 0.2 − 0.3 − 14.6 − 8.1 − 6.5 − 8.2 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 8.3 − 2.7 + 10.9 + 10.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 2019          Oct.
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 20.3 − 20.9 − 21.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.0          Nov.− 1.1 − 0.2 − 106.0 −111.5 + 5.5 + 5.5 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 20.7 − 7.7 − 12.9 − 11.4 − 1.6 − 0.0          Dec.
− 0.1 + 0.0 + 73.0 + 92.9 − 19.8 − 21.6 + 1.7 − + 16.7 + 9.2 + 7.6 + 7.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 2020          Jan.
− 0.0 − 2.4 + 13.3 + 5.0 + 8.4 + 5.9 + 2.5 − + 7.3 + 7.2 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 1.8 − 0.0          Feb.+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 57.2 + 29.9 + 27.3 + 21.1 + 6.2 − + 14.2 + 17.4 − 3.2 − 3.5 + 0.4 + 0.0          Mar.
− 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.0 − 25.9 + 31.9 + 33.0 − 1.1 − + 4.4 − 3.7 + 8.1 + 6.9 + 1.2 − 0.0          Apr.
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 15.3 + 9.3 − 24.6 − 24.6 + 0.0 − − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.0          May− 0.2 + 0.1 + 8.8 + 13.9 − 5.1 − 13.1 + 8.0 − − 4.7 − 5.6 + 0.9 + 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.0          June
− 0.1 + 0.0 + 17.6 + 20.7 − 3.1 − 4.1 + 1.0 − − 2.7 − 4.7 + 2.0 + 4.0 − 2.0 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 − 0.0 − 13.9 − 13.8 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.5 − − 7.2 − 4.4 − 2.7 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.0          Aug.+ 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 10.4 − 9.5 − 13.5 + 4.0 − + 5.8 + 10.4 − 4.6 − 4.1 − 0.5 + 0.0          Sep.
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 2.0 + 1.6 − − 0.6 − 3.2 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.0          Oct.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.9 + 5.9 + 2.0 − 3.7 + 5.7 − + 11.6 + 12.2 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 1.5 − 0.0          Nov.− 0.2 − 1.7 − 72.1 − 60.9 − 11.2 − 12.6 + 1.4 − − 20.3 − 20.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0          Dec.
− 0.0 − 0.8 + 191.3 + 78.5 + 112.9 + 92.4 + 20.5 − + 20.1 + 12.3 + 7.8 + 3.6 + 4.2 − 0.0 2021          Jan.
− 0.0 − 0.0 + 32.7 + 12.2 + 20.5 + 19.3 + 1.2 − + 3.4 + 0.0 + 3.4 + 2.0 + 1.4 − 0.0          Feb.+ 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.8 − 2.6 + 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.9 − + 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 0.0          Mar.

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
May 2021
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2019         Oct. 3,506.7 3,104.7 261.6 237.1 236.5 0.6 24.5 21.6 2.8 3,245.1 2,849.5
         Nov. 3,523.5 3,121.3 262.6 239.8 239.2 0.6 22.8 20.1 2.7 3,260.9 2,864.3
         Dec. 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020         Jan. 3,528.4 3,126.0 261.5 236.3 235.7 0.6 25.2 22.6 2.6 3,266.9 2,874.2
         Feb. 3,544.7 3,142.3 264.8 240.0 239.3 0.7 24.8 20.8 4.0 3,279.9 2,888.9
         Mar. 3,580.0 3,174.3 288.4 261.9 261.1 0.8 26.4 22.2 4.2 3,291.6 2,892.2
         Apr. 3,594.3 3,185.5 285.0 255.6 254.9 0.7 29.4 22.9 6.5 3,309.3 2,908.0
         May 3,620.9 3,204.4 285.3 254.3 253.2 1.1 31.1 22.0 9.1 3,335.6 2,931.7
         June 3,621.1 3,206.8 278.9 248.5 247.6 0.8 30.4 23.3 7.2 3,342.2 2,939.8
         July 3,625.7 3,217.4 274.8 243.4 242.6 0.8 31.5 24.2 7.3 3,350.9 2,953.2
         Aug. 3,629.7 3,219.7 265.6 237.7 236.9 0.8 28.0 19.4 8.6 3,364.0 2,967.3
         Sep. 3,634.2 3,224.6 261.9 232.0 231.3 0.7 29.9 22.3 7.7 3,372.3 2,976.0
         Oct. 3,651.1 3,237.8 261.0 229.5 228.7 0.7 31.6 23.3 8.2 3,390.1 2,991.5
         Nov. 3,661.1 3,247.6 258.7 229.3 228.7 0.6 29.4 22.4 7.0 3,402.4 3,001.7
         Dec. 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021         Jan. 3,654.0 3,251.0 247.7 221.9 221.3 0.6 25.8 19.7 6.1 3,406.3 3,018.4
         Feb. 3,669.3 3,261.9 249.5 224.2 223.6 0.6 25.3 18.5 6.8 3,419.7 3,031.9
         Mar. 3,699.1 3,287.7 260.6 236.6 236.0 0.6 24.0 18.6 5.4 3,438.5 3,048.5
Changes *
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 − 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 12.1 − 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 − 9.2 − 8.6 − 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 − 19.6 − 19.8 − 19.8 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2019         Oct. + 6.9 + 10.0 − 7.4 − 8.8 − 8.8 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 14.4 + 18.4
         Nov. + 16.8 + 16.7 + 0.9 + 2.6 + 2.6 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 1.5 − 0.2 + 15.9 + 14.9
         Dec. − 1.9 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.5
2020         Jan. + 6.8 + 6.5 + 1.1 − 2.5 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 3.6 + 3.8 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 7.2
         Feb. + 16.3 + 16.2 + 3.3 + 3.7 + 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.7 + 1.3 + 13.0 + 14.7
         Mar. + 35.3 + 32.1 + 23.6 + 21.9 + 21.8 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 11.7 + 3.3
         Apr. + 14.4 + 11.2 − 3.3 − 6.3 − 6.2 − 0.1 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 2.3 + 17.7 + 15.9
         May + 24.1 + 16.4 − 2.2 − 3.9 − 4.2 + 0.4 + 1.7 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 26.3 + 23.7
         June + 0.2 + 2.5 − 6.4 − 5.8 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 1.3 − 1.9 + 6.6 + 7.9
         July + 4.6 + 10.5 − 5.9 − 6.9 − 6.8 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 10.5 + 15.2
         Aug. + 4.0 + 2.4 − 7.5 − 4.1 − 4.1 − 0.0 − 3.5 − 4.9 + 1.4 + 11.5 + 12.6
         Sep. + 4.6 + 4.9 − 3.7 − 5.6 − 5.6 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 2.9 − 0.9 + 8.3 + 8.6
         Oct. + 16.5 + 12.9 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 17.4 + 14.6
         Nov. + 10.6 + 10.4 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 1.2 + 12.7 + 10.6
         Dec. − 14.1 − 2.3 − 15.5 − 7.7 − 7.5 − 0.2 − 7.8 − 4.4 − 3.4 + 1.4 + 11.2
2021         Jan. + 6.6 + 5.3 + 4.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 4.2 + 1.7 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 5.2
         Feb. + 15.3 + 10.9 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.7 + 13.5 + 13.3
         Mar. + 29.6 + 25.6 + 11.2 + 12.5 + 12.5 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 18.5 + 16.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not exchange of equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
May 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
lendingprises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities  
1 claims  2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 20162,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 20172,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4 20182,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 − 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 − 1.1 2020
2,611.0 299.7 2,311.3 238.5 15.9 395.6 235.5 16.9 218.6 160.1 − 1.2 2019          Oct.
2,624.4 301.6 2,322.8 240.0 15.9 396.5 237.6 17.6 220.0 158.9 − 1.2          Nov.2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 − 1.5          Dec.
2,631.8 300.0 2,331.8 242.4 15.7 392.7 236.0 17.0 219.0 156.7 − 1.2 2020          Jan.
2,646.4 302.5 2,344.0 242.5 15.7 391.0 235.7 17.2 218.5 155.3 − 1.2          Feb.2,654.8 304.5 2,350.2 237.5 15.6 399.4 236.3 17.2 219.1 163.1 − 1.2          Mar.
2,671.3 307.2 2,364.1 236.7 15.9 401.3 236.4 17.3 219.1 164.9 − 1.3          Apr.
2,692.9 310.7 2,382.2 238.9 18.1 403.9 236.3 17.4 218.9 167.6 − 1.3          May2,701.4 310.8 2,390.6 238.4 19.6 402.4 234.5 17.1 217.4 167.9 − 1.2          June
2,715.7 312.5 2,403.2 237.5 21.0 397.7 234.9 16.7 218.1 162.8 − 1.2          July
2,729.1 313.1 2,416.0 238.2 21.3 396.7 234.4 16.7 217.7 162.3 − 1.2          Aug.2,737.4 313.1 2,424.2 238.6 21.5 396.3 233.7 16.2 217.5 162.6 − 1.2          Sep.
2,751.8 313.2 2,438.6 239.7 21.6 398.6 234.0 15.9 218.1 164.6 − 1.2          Oct.
2,762.3 311.5 2,450.8 239.4 21.8 400.7 234.2 15.7 218.6 166.4 − 1.2          Nov.2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 − 1.1          Dec.
2,776.4 307.8 2,468.6 242.0 22.5 387.9 233.6 15.3 218.3 154.3 − 1.2 2021          Jan.
2,787.7 309.7 2,478.1 244.2 22.8 387.8 232.0 15.4 216.6 155.8 − 1.1          Feb.2,802.4 314.5 2,487.9 246.1 23.1 390.0 230.7 15.2 215.5 159.3 − 1.1          Mar.
Changes *
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 + 15.8 + 0.1 − 39.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 − 9.3 − 29.4 − − 0.1 2017+ 108.7 + 19.3 + 89.4 − 6.7 − 0.9 − 37.1 − 10.5 − 2.7 − 7.8 − 26.6 − − 0.0 2018+ 126.0 + 18.9 + 107.2 + 6.8 − 0.8 − 17.8 − 5.5 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 12.3 − + 0.1 2019
+ 145.0 + 9.4 + 135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 1.7 − − 0.4 2020
+ 16.8 + 2.4 + 14.4 + 1.6 + 0.1 − 4.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 4.3 − − 0.0 2019          Oct.
+ 13.4 + 1.9 + 11.6 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 − 1.2 − − 0.0          Nov.+ 1.9 − 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.7 − + 0.3          Dec.
+ 5.3 − 1.4 + 6.7 + 1.9 − 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 − − 0.3 2020          Jan.
+ 14.6 + 2.4 + 12.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.3 − + 0.0          Feb.+ 8.3 + 2.1 + 6.3 − 5.0 − 0.1 + 8.4 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 7.8 − − 0.0          Mar.
+ 16.7 + 2.7 + 14.0 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.8 − + 0.0          Apr.
+ 21.5 + 3.5 + 18.0 + 2.2 + 2.2 + 2.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.7 − + 0.0          May+ 8.4 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 0.5 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.3 − − 0.1          June
+ 16.1 + 1.6 + 14.5 − 0.9 + 0.9 − 4.7 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 5.1 − + 0.0          July
+ 11.9 + 0.7 + 11.2 + 0.7 + 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.5 − − 0.0          Aug.+ 8.2 − 0.0 + 8.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.0          Sep.
+ 13.5 + 0.1 + 13.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 0.9 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.9 − + 0.0          Oct.
+ 10.9 − 1.2 + 12.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 1.8 − − 0.0          Nov.+ 9.5 − 1.0 + 10.5 + 1.7 + 0.7 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 9.9 − − 0.1          Dec.
+ 4.3 − 2.7 + 7.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 2.3 − + 0.1 2021          Jan.
+ 11.1 + 1.8 + 9.3 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 1.5 − − 0.0          Feb.+ 14.4 + 4.7 + 9.7 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 1.2 + 3.5 − − 0.0          Mar.

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
May 2021
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2019 2,864.8 1,512.1 1,470.4 1,213.0 257.4 1,560.5 416.1 146.6 119.0 77.1 141.6 54.2 50.3 168.2
2020         Mar. 2,915.9 1,533.2 1,488.6 1,225.8 262.8 1,598.9 421.9 155.8 120.1 79.4 143.5 54.5 52.5 176.4
         June 2,949.0 1,558.5 1,510.6 1,246.6 263.9 1,613.5 423.2 164.5 120.6 80.8 138.1 55.4 56.6 175.2
         Sep. 2,968.6 1,580.1 1,537.3 1,265.4 272.0 1,616.8 434.6 157.2 121.1 82.2 135.9 55.5 57.7 173.7
         Dec. 2,993.0 1,601.8 1,565.6 1,285.1 280.5 1,623.4 443.3 146.7 123.4 82.7 135.8 55.3 59.8 176.0
2021         Mar. 3,038.4 1,618.9 1,587.9 1,302.4 285.4 1,657.2 451.2 149.2 123.0 84.6 139.1 55.4 60.1 182.5
 Short-term lending
2019 238.4 − 8.1 − 8.1 206.2 4.7 35.9 5.6 15.7 48.6 3.8 4.6 27.0
2020         Mar. 261.1 − 8.3 − 8.3 230.3 4.9 43.4 6.7 17.1 49.5 4.1 6.1 34.6
         June 247.6 − 8.2 − 8.2 217.9 4.7 44.5 6.1 16.9 41.8 4.2 5.4 33.4
         Sep. 231.3 − 8.5 − 8.5 201.4 5.0 36.9 6.5 16.9 38.4 4.2 5.3 30.0
         Dec. 221.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 192.1 4.6 29.0 6.9 16.0 37.0 3.6 6.1 31.6
2021         Mar. 236.0 − 8.0 − 8.0 207.4 4.7 33.4 6.4 16.7 38.9 3.9 6.1 34.2
 Medium-term lending
2019 301.3 − 36.6 − 36.6 219.5 16.6 28.5 4.9 13.9 19.7 4.6 10.2 52.0
2020         Mar. 304.5 − 36.9 − 36.9 222.8 17.0 29.7 5.1 13.9 20.4 4.5 10.4 51.3
         June 310.8 − 37.7 − 37.7 229.8 17.6 33.6 5.2 14.2 19.6 4.5 13.4 50.2
         Sep. 313.1 − 38.0 − 38.0 232.1 17.9 33.1 5.3 14.6 19.2 4.6 14.3 51.4
         Dec. 310.5 − 38.5 − 38.5 230.4 18.5 30.2 5.4 14.8 19.3 4.8 15.0 51.4
2021         Mar. 314.5 − 38.9 − 38.9 236.4 19.1 29.2 5.1 15.3 19.7 4.5 14.7 52.9
 Long-term lending
2019 2,325.1 1,512.1 1,425.7 1,213.0 212.7 1,134.9 394.8 82.2 108.6 47.6 73.3 45.8 35.5 89.2
2020         Mar. 2,350.2 1,533.2 1,443.4 1,225.8 217.6 1,145.7 400.0 82.7 108.4 48.4 73.6 45.9 36.0 90.6
         June 2,390.6 1,558.5 1,464.7 1,246.6 218.1 1,165.8 400.8 86.4 109.3 49.7 76.7 46.6 37.8 91.6
         Sep. 2,424.2 1,580.1 1,490.9 1,265.4 225.5 1,183.3 411.6 87.2 109.3 50.7 78.2 46.7 38.2 92.2
         Dec. 2,461.4 1,601.8 1,519.1 1,285.1 234.0 1,201.0 420.2 87.5 111.2 51.8 79.4 47.0 38.7 93.0
2021         Mar. 2,487.9 1,618.9 1,540.9 1,302.4 238.5 1,213.5 427.4 86.6 111.5 52.6 80.5 47.1 39.3 95.4
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2020         Q1 + 51.0 + 15.6 + 17.8 + 12.4 + 5.4 + 38.2 + 5.4 + 9.2 + 1.1 + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 8.2
         Q2 + 30.6 + 17.8 + 21.0 + 13.7 + 7.3 + 17.1 + 5.2 + 8.8 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 4.4 + 0.9 + 4.1 − 4.0
         Q3 + 19.7 + 21.7 + 26.5 + 18.8 + 7.7 − 1.9 + 6.4 − 7.4 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 2.1
         Q4 + 23.9 + 21.3 + 27.7 + 19.3 + 8.4 + 6.1 + 8.4 − 10.3 + 2.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.2 + 2.4
2021         Q1 + 44.8 + 17.1 + 22.2 + 17.3 + 4.9 + 33.0 + 7.5 + 2.5 − 0.7 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 6.2
 Short-term lending
2020         Q1 + 22.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 24.2 + 0.2 + 7.5 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 7.6
         Q2 − 16.0 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 14.9 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 7.1 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 4.2
         Q3 − 16.5 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 − 16.7 + 0.3 − 7.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.4
         Q4 − 10.0 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 9.3 − 0.4 − 8.0 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 1.4 − 0.6 + 0.8 + 1.6
2021         Q1 + 14.9 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 15.4 + 0.1 + 4.4 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 2.6
 Medium-term lending
2020         Q1 + 3.1 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.7
         Q2 + 6.2 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 + 7.4 + 0.7 + 3.9 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.0
         Q3 + 2.3 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.6
         Q4 − 2.2 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 − 1.6 + 0.6 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.2
2021         Q1 + 3.8 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 5.9 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.5
 Long-term lending
2020         Q1 + 25.1 + 15.6 + 17.3 + 12.4 + 4.9 + 10.7 + 4.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.4
         Q2 + 40.4 + 17.8 + 20.4 + 13.7 + 6.8 + 24.6 + 4.6 + 3.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 3.5 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.2
         Q3 + 33.9 + 21.7 + 26.0 + 18.8 + 7.2 + 12.7 + 6.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.7
         Q4 + 36.1 + 21.3 + 27.7 + 19.3 + 8.4 + 16.9 + 8.2 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 1.0
2021         Q1 + 26.1 + 17.1 + 21.7 + 17.3 + 4.5 + 11.7 + 6.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 2.2
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
May 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
803.6 264.5 51.1 193.9 447.5 47.6 1,288.4 1,050.4 238.0 176.5 7.9 15.9 3.9 2019
816.6 273.2 54.2 196.6 450.6 48.0 1,301.0 1,062.8 238.2 178.0 7.9 16.0 3.9 2020          Mar.
822.2 277.8 55.9 198.5 447.1 48.1 1,319.4 1,083.5 235.9 176.9 7.3 16.2 3.9          June833.5 281.7 55.1 201.9 458.9 48.1 1,335.9 1,098.8 237.0 178.3 7.5 16.0 3.9          Sep.843.7 286.6 53.8 204.1 464.0 47.9 1,353.4 1,118.3 235.2 177.4 6.7 16.2 4.0          Dec.
863.3 293.7 59.2 204.3 467.7 48.3 1,364.8 1,132.6 232.2 175.4 6.6 16.4 4.1 2021          Mar.
Short-term lending
65.0 14.4 9.7 10.2 23.9 4.9 31.6 3.3 28.2 1.3 7.9 0.7 0.0 201969.0 14.8 12.2 11.1 23.8 5.2 30.0 3.4 26.6 1.4 7.9 0.7 0.0 2020          Mar.
65.5 14.8 11.9 11.4 21.8 4.7 29.0 3.4 25.6 1.4 7.3 0.7 0.0          June63.1 15.6 10.7 10.9 21.7 4.3 29.3 3.5 25.8 1.3 7.5 0.6 0.0          Sep.61.9 15.7 9.6 10.5 20.9 3.7 28.6 3.4 25.2 1.3 6.7 0.6 0.0          Dec.
67.9 16.5 12.3 10.2 20.5 3.9 27.9 3.4 24.6 1.3 6.6 0.7 0.0 2021          Mar.
Medium-term lending
85.7 18.1 11.0 22.9 31.9 3.5 81.4 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0 201987.4 19.1 11.6 23.3 31.9 3.6 81.2 19.8 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0 2020          Mar.
89.0 19.7 12.6 23.5 31.6 3.5 80.4 20.0 60.4 56.9 − 0.6 0.0          June89.6 20.0 12.6 24.1 31.9 3.6 80.6 20.0 60.6 57.2 − 0.5 0.0          Sep.89.6 20.4 11.8 24.5 32.0 3.5 79.6 20.0 59.6 56.1 − 0.5 0.0          Dec.
94.9 21.9 14.4 25.2 31.5 3.6 77.6 19.8 57.8 54.2 − 0.5 0.0 2021          Mar.
Long-term lending
652.9 232.0 30.4 160.9 391.7 39.1 1,175.5 1,027.1 148.3 117.1 − 14.7 3.8 2019660.2 239.3 30.5 162.3 394.9 39.3 1,189.8 1,039.5 150.2 118.6 − 14.8 3.8 2020          Mar.
667.7 243.3 31.4 163.6 393.7 39.9 1,210.0 1,060.1 149.9 118.5 − 14.9 3.8          June680.8 246.1 31.8 166.9 405.3 40.1 1,226.0 1,075.4 150.7 119.8 − 15.0 3.9          Sep.692.3 250.5 32.4 169.1 411.1 40.7 1,245.3 1,094.9 150.4 120.0 − 15.1 4.0          Dec.
700.5 255.3 32.5 168.9 415.7 40.8 1,259.3 1,109.5 149.8 119.9 − 15.2 4.1 2021          Mar.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 13.0 + 4.9 + 3.1 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 0.5 + 12.6 + 12.3 + 0.2 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 2020          Q1
+ 10.0 + 4.6 + 1.7 + 2.1 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 13.4 + 15.8 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 7.0 + 3.9 − 0.8 + 3.2 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 21.7 + 20.0 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3+ 9.6 + 5.2 − 1.5 + 1.8 + 4.4 − 0.2 + 17.6 + 19.3 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.1          Q4
+ 19.6 + 7.0 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 + 14.5 − 2.9 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 2021          Q1
Short-term lending
+ 4.0 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2020          Q1
− 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 −          Q2− 2.6 + 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3− 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
+ 6.0 + 0.7 + 2.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2021          Q1
Medium-term lending
+ 1.8 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2020          Q1
+ 1.8 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2+ 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3− 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 5.6 + 1.5 + 2.6 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.9 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2021          Q1
Long-term lending
+ 7.3 + 3.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 3.2 + 0.2 + 14.3 + 12.4 + 1.9 + 1.8 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2020          Q1
+ 11.6 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 5.7 + 0.6 + 15.7 + 15.8 − 0.2 + 0.2 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 8.6 + 2.8 + 0.4 + 3.0 + 5.4 + 0.2 + 21.1 + 20.0 + 1.1 + 1.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3+ 10.8 + 4.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 4.9 + 0.5 + 19.0 + 19.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − + 0.2 + 0.1          Q4
+ 8.0 + 4.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 4.1 + 0.1 + 14.3 + 14.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 2021          Q1
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
May 2021
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2018 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 203.4 638.2 56.8 581.4 578.6 37.3 33.9 14.9 0.5
2019 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 202.7 613.5 52.7 560.8 575.2 33.2 32.5 14.7 0.2
2020 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2020         Apr. 3,741.9 2,345.4 801.6 206.0 595.6 48.5 547.1 563.8 31.1 32.8 14.4 1.5
         May 3,775.3 2,376.3 804.7 214.1 590.6 47.1 543.5 563.6 30.7 33.3 14.4 0.3
         June 3,766.3 2,385.3 788.2 206.7 581.5 44.3 537.2 562.6 30.3 33.4 14.3 0.2
         July 3,803.4 2,414.0 798.6 215.6 583.1 46.6 536.5 560.9 29.9 33.8 14.3 0.2
         Aug. 3,820.8 2,427.7 802.9 215.0 587.9 45.8 542.0 560.6 29.6 34.0 14.4 0.5
         Sep. 3,834.2 2,442.8 802.0 210.1 591.9 48.1 543.8 560.1 29.3 34.3 14.3 0.4
         Oct. 3,874.1 2,481.4 804.1 207.6 596.5 50.7 545.8 559.7 28.9 34.6 14.3 0.6
         Nov. 3,894.3 2,515.3 790.9 196.4 594.5 48.1 546.4 559.6 28.5 34.4 14.3 0.7
         Dec. 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2021         Jan. 3,904.5 2,542.0 773.1 181.6 591.5 47.4 544.2 561.6 27.9 34.3 14.3 0.5
         Feb. 3,913.7 2,557.5 766.1 174.7 591.4 49.0 542.4 562.6 27.5 34.3 14.4 0.5
         Mar. 3,925.9 2,575.2 761.3 175.4 585.9 46.9 539.0 562.3 27.1 34.4 14.4 0.9
Changes*
2019 + 122.5 + 155.8 − 25.7 − 0.8 − 24.9 − 4.1 − 20.7 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.3
2020 + 221.6 + 273.7 − 32.7 − 15.0 − 17.7 − 4.8 − 12.9 − 14.5 − 4.9 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.1
2020         Apr. + 25.3 + 40.7 − 14.0 − 6.8 − 7.2 − 1.6 − 5.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.9
         May + 30.5 + 27.9 + 3.2 + 8.1 − 4.9 − 1.3 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.2
         June − 9.0 + 8.8 − 16.4 − 7.4 − 9.0 − 2.8 − 6.1 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1
         July + 37.1 + 28.7 + 10.5 + 8.9 + 1.6 + 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug. + 17.4 + 13.6 + 4.3 − 0.6 + 4.9 − 0.7 + 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Sep. + 13.4 + 15.1 − 0.9 − 4.9 + 4.0 + 2.3 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Oct. + 40.0 + 38.6 + 2.2 − 3.5 + 5.7 + 2.5 + 3.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3
         Nov. + 20.5 + 34.1 − 13.2 − 11.2 − 2.0 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1
         Dec. − 9.2 − 2.3 − 7.6 − 7.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.6
2021         Jan. + 19.2 + 28.9 − 10.3 − 7.3 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 2.5 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4
         Feb. + 9.1 + 15.4 − 7.0 − 6.9 − 0.1 + 1.7 − 1.8 + 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Mar. + 12.2 + 17.7 − 4.8 + 0.7 − 5.5 − 2.2 − 3.4 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
Domestic government End of year or month*
2018 218.9 62.7 148.2 67.9 80.3 28.5 51.8 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
2019 237.1 74.7 154.9 76.0 78.9 26.1 52.8 3.4 4.1 24.7 2.2 0.2
2020 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 −
2020         Apr. 228.7 73.9 147.8 75.1 72.7 22.8 50.0 3.1 4.0 25.3 2.1 0.2
         May 232.1 81.1 143.9 73.5 70.4 22.0 48.4 3.1 4.0 26.0 2.1 0.2
         June 221.4 75.4 139.1 75.0 64.1 18.5 45.5 2.9 3.9 25.8 2.1 0.2
         July 226.5 76.7 143.0 73.4 69.6 20.3 49.3 2.8 3.9 25.9 2.1 0.2
         Aug. 237.6 79.4 151.3 76.1 75.2 19.4 55.8 2.9 3.9 26.0 2.1 0.2
         Sep. 236.6 77.4 152.6 72.4 80.2 21.5 58.7 2.8 3.8 26.1 2.1 0.2
         Oct. 240.1 81.5 152.0 68.0 84.0 24.0 60.1 2.8 3.7 26.1 2.1 0.2
         Nov. 237.2 83.9 146.8 63.7 83.1 21.3 61.8 2.8 3.7 25.6 2.1 −
         Dec. 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 −
2021         Jan. 224.1 77.5 140.3 57.8 82.5 20.8 61.7 2.7 3.7 25.3 2.1 −
         Feb. 224.4 80.7 137.3 53.6 83.8 22.4 61.3 2.7 3.6 25.3 2.1 −
         Mar. 214.4 76.8 131.4 51.2 80.2 19.9 60.3 2.6 3.5 25.3 2.0 −
Changes*
2019 + 17.1 + 11.8 + 5.8 + 7.8 − 2.0 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.2
2020 − 6.9 + 5.7 − 11.6 − 16.5 + 4.8 − 5.3 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2
2020         Apr. − 9.9 + 1.2 − 10.8 − 8.0 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 −
         May + 3.3 + 7.2 − 3.9 − 1.6 − 2.4 − 0.8 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 −
         June − 10.7 − 5.7 − 4.8 + 1.5 − 6.3 − 3.4 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         July + 5.1 + 1.3 + 3.9 − 1.6 + 5.5 + 1.8 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Aug. + 11.1 + 2.8 + 8.3 + 2.7 + 5.6 − 0.9 + 6.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Sep. − 0.8 − 2.1 + 1.4 − 3.7 + 5.1 + 2.1 + 3.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Oct. + 3.7 + 4.2 − 0.4 − 4.5 + 4.0 + 2.4 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Nov. − 2.7 + 2.6 − 5.2 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − − 0.2
         Dec. − 7.7 − 3.8 − 3.8 − 4.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
2021         Jan. − 5.5 − 2.6 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Feb. + 0.3 + 3.3 − 3.0 − 4.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Mar. − 10.0 − 4.0 − 5.9 − 2.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
May 2021
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2018 3,318.7 2,017.4 693.3 135.4 557.9 28.3 529.6 574.9 33.1 8.6 12.7 0.52019 3,423.9 2,161.6 661.4 126.7 534.7 26.6 508.0 571.8 29.1 7.8 12.6 0.02020 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2020         Apr. 3,513.1 2,271.6 653.8 130.9 522.8 25.7 497.1 560.7 27.1 7.4 12.3 1.4
         May 3,543.3 2,295.2 660.9 140.6 520.2 25.2 495.1 560.5 26.7 7.4 12.3 0.2         June 3,545.0 2,309.9 649.1 131.7 517.4 25.8 491.6 559.7 26.3 7.5 12.3 0.1
         July 3,577.0 2,337.3 655.6 142.1 513.5 26.3 487.2 558.1 26.0 7.9 12.2 0.1
         Aug. 3,583.2 2,348.2 651.6 138.8 512.7 26.4 486.3 557.8 25.7 8.0 12.3 0.3         Sep. 3,597.6 2,365.4 649.4 137.7 511.7 26.6 485.1 557.3 25.5 8.2 12.2 0.2
         Oct. 3,634.0 2,399.9 652.1 139.7 512.4 26.7 485.7 556.9 25.1 8.5 12.2 0.5
         Nov. 3,657.1 2,431.4 644.1 132.7 511.4 26.7 484.7 556.8 24.8 8.8 12.2 0.7         Dec. 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2021         Jan. 3,680.4 2,464.5 632.8 123.8 509.0 26.6 482.5 558.9 24.2 9.0 12.3 0.5
         Feb. 3,689.2 2,476.7 628.8 121.1 507.7 26.6 481.1 559.9 23.9 9.0 12.3 0.5         Mar. 3,711.5 2,498.4 629.8 124.1 505.7 27.0 478.7 559.7 23.5 9.1 12.3 0.9
Changes*
2019 + 105.4 + 144.0 − 31.5 − 8.6 − 22.9 − 1.5 − 21.4 − 3.1 − 4.0 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.42020 + 228.5 + 268.0 − 21.1 + 1.5 − 22.6 + 0.5 − 23.0 − 13.9 − 4.6 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.1
2020         Apr. + 35.2 + 39.5 − 3.2 + 1.2 − 4.4 − 0.5 − 3.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.9
         May + 27.1 + 20.6 + 7.1 + 9.7 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.2         June + 1.7 + 14.5 − 11.6 − 8.9 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 3.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
         July + 32.0 + 27.4 + 6.5 + 10.4 − 3.9 + 0.5 − 4.4 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug. + 6.3 + 10.8 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2         Sep. + 14.2 + 17.2 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Oct. + 36.3 + 34.4 + 2.6 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3
         Nov. + 23.1 + 31.5 − 8.0 − 6.9 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2         Dec. − 1.5 + 1.5 − 3.8 − 3.4 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.6
2021         Jan. + 24.6 + 31.5 − 7.6 − 5.6 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4
         Feb. + 8.8 + 12.1 − 4.0 − 2.6 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0         Mar. + 22.2 + 21.7 + 1.0 + 3.0 − 2.0 + 0.4 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2018 1,035.4 584.0 432.9 86.0 346.9 17.2 329.7 7.0 11.4 2.8 10.3 0.52019 1,031.5 614.4 399.7 81.1 318.6 15.5 303.1 6.7 10.7 2.4 10.1 0.02020 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2020         Apr. 1,087.9 674.4 397.0 89.9 307.2 15.1 292.0 6.2 10.2 2.3 9.8 1.4
         May 1,095.7 676.0 403.5 99.2 304.2 14.5 289.7 6.2 10.1 2.4 9.9 0.2         June 1,090.9 683.7 391.2 90.0 301.2 14.5 286.6 6.2 9.9 2.4 9.8 0.1
         July 1,108.0 694.4 397.6 100.6 297.1 14.5 282.6 6.1 9.8 2.4 9.8 0.1
         Aug. 1,108.0 698.2 393.8 97.5 296.3 14.6 281.6 6.1 9.9 2.3 9.8 0.3         Sep. 1,114.5 707.3 391.4 96.5 294.9 14.7 280.2 6.0 9.8 2.3 9.7 0.2
         Oct. 1,129.9 720.0 394.2 98.6 295.6 14.7 280.9 6.0 9.6 2.3 9.7 0.5
         Nov. 1,132.1 729.2 387.4 92.7 294.8 14.8 279.9 5.9 9.5 2.3 9.6 0.7         Dec. 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2021         Jan. 1,122.7 732.9 374.7 84.2 290.5 14.8 275.7 5.8 9.3 2.3 9.6 0.5
         Feb. 1,109.4 723.5 370.9 82.0 288.9 14.9 274.0 5.8 9.1 2.3 9.6 0.5         Mar. 1,134.9 748.2 371.9 85.1 286.8 15.2 271.6 5.8 9.0 2.2 9.6 0.9
Changes*
2019 − 3.4 + 30.4 − 32.8 − 4.8 − 28.0 − 1.6 − 26.4 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.42020 + 81.0 + 101.2 − 18.0 + 7.0 − 25.0 − 0.4 − 24.6 − 0.8 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1
2020         Apr. + 7.6 + 9.2 − 1.2 + 2.5 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 3.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.9
         May + 4.8 − 1.4 + 6.4 + 9.4 − 2.9 − 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.2         June − 4.8 + 7.5 − 12.1 − 9.2 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         July + 17.0 + 10.7 + 6.4 + 10.5 − 4.1 − 0.0 − 4.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Aug. − 1.7 + 2.1 − 3.9 − 3.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2         Sep. + 7.7 + 10.4 − 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Oct. + 15.2 + 12.6 + 2.8 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3
         Nov. + 2.2 + 9.2 − 6.8 − 6.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2         Dec. − 15.9 − 10.1 − 5.7 − 3.4 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.6
2021         Jan. + 6.5 + 13.8 − 7.0 − 5.0 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.4
         Feb. − 13.4 − 9.4 − 3.8 − 2.2 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0         Mar. + 25.6 + 24.8 + 0.9 + 3.1 − 2.2 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
May 2021
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2018 2,283.4 1,433.5 1,396.1 248.4 991.3 156.4 37.4 260.4 246.7 21.3 188.6 36.7
2019 2,392.4 1,547.2 1,507.9 266.3 1,081.6 160.1 39.3 261.7 248.3 20.8 190.2 37.3
2020 2,539.5 1,713.8 1,672.7 291.1 1,215.4 166.2 41.1 258.6 245.1 19.3 190.5 35.2
2020         Oct. 2,504.2 1,679.9 1,638.7 289.7 1,184.0 165.0 41.2 257.8 244.3 19.6 190.6 34.0
         Nov. 2,525.1 1,702.2 1,661.3 290.0 1,205.7 165.6 40.9 256.7 243.7 19.4 189.4 34.9
         Dec. 2,539.5 1,713.8 1,672.7 291.1 1,215.4 166.2 41.1 258.6 245.1 19.3 190.5 35.2
2021         Jan. 2,557.7 1,731.6 1,690.6 295.1 1,228.7 166.8 41.0 258.1 244.8 19.2 190.4 35.2
         Feb. 2,579.9 1,753.2 1,711.1 297.6 1,245.8 167.7 42.1 257.8 244.6 19.0 190.4 35.2
         Mar. 2,576.5 1,750.1 1,707.1 294.1 1,246.0 166.9 43.1 258.0 244.8 19.2 190.6 35.1
Changes*
2019 + 108.8 + 113.6 + 111.8 + 18.5 + 88.7 + 4.6 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.7
2020 + 147.5 + 166.9 + 165.0 + 26.0 + 131.5 + 7.5 + 1.8 − 3.1 − 3.2 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.2
2020         Oct. + 21.0 + 21.8 + 22.0 + 6.6 + 14.3 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Nov. + 20.9 + 22.3 + 22.6 + 0.3 + 21.4 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.9
         Dec. + 14.5 + 11.6 + 11.4 + 1.0 + 9.7 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.3
2021         Jan. + 18.1 + 17.8 + 17.9 + 4.0 + 13.3 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0
         Feb. + 22.1 + 21.6 + 20.5 + 2.3 + 17.3 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Mar. − 3.4 − 3.1 − 4.1 − 3.5 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
 
 
 
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2018 218.9 10.5 4.7 1.7 4.1 0.1 12.2 39.0 13.4 11.5 13.0 1.2 13.0
2019 237.1 11.2 5.4 1.5 4.2 0.1 11.6 53.8 21.1 17.1 14.5 1.0 13.1
2020 229.5 48.6 4.8 7.2 36.5 0.0 11.3 46.5 21.2 11.4 13.2 0.7 14.1
2020         Oct. 240.1 46.6 7.9 6.8 31.8 0.0 11.5 57.6 23.1 19.5 14.3 0.7 14.7
         Nov. 237.2 47.6 6.1 6.9 34.5 0.0 11.6 52.4 24.8 13.5 13.4 0.7 14.1
         Dec. 229.5 48.6 4.8 7.2 36.5 0.0 11.3 46.5 21.2 11.4 13.2 0.7 14.1
2021         Jan. 224.1 48.3 5.1 6.7 36.5 0.0 11.4 48.4 22.4 13.1 12.2 0.7 13.9
         Feb. 224.4 48.2 5.0 6.7 36.4 0.0 11.4 46.1 22.0 11.3 12.1 0.7 13.9
         Mar. 214.4 48.9 5.8 6.7 36.4 0.0 11.4 43.1 19.4 11.2 11.9 0.6 13.9
Changes*
2019 + 17.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 13.8 + 7.7 + 5.2 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.0
2020 − 6.9 + 37.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 + 32.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 7.0 + 0.2 − 5.7 − 1.3 − 0.2 + 1.0
2020         Oct. + 3.7 + 7.5 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 5.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Nov. − 2.7 + 1.0 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 2.7 − + 0.1 − 5.1 + 1.8 − 5.9 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.6
         Dec. − 7.7 + 1.0 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 5.9 − 3.6 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0
2021         Jan. − 5.5 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2
         Feb. + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Mar. − 10.0 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”En terprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The fi gures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, wh ich appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
May 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item:
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Subordinated
 of which: liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
13.7 49.4 211.0 11.1 199.9 567.9 560.6 7.2 21.7 5.8 2.4 − 201813.3 45.6 216.1 11.2 204.9 565.1 558.1 7.0 18.4 5.4 2.4 − 201913.5 40.1 218.5 12.0 206.5 552.0 545.7 6.3 15.1 6.7 2.7 − 2020
13.6 41.0 216.8 12.0 204.8 550.9 544.5 6.5 15.5 6.2 2.6 − 2020          Oct.
13.0 40.0 216.6 11.9 204.7 550.9 544.5 6.4 15.3 6.5 2.6 −          Nov.13.5 40.1 218.5 12.0 206.5 552.0 545.7 6.3 15.1 6.7 2.7 −          Dec.
13.3 39.5 218.6 11.8 206.8 553.1 546.9 6.3 14.9 6.7 2.7 − 2021          Jan.
13.2 39.1 218.8 11.7 207.0 554.1 547.8 6.3 14.7 6.8 2.7 −          Feb.13.2 39.0 219.0 11.8 207.2 553.9 547.6 6.3 14.6 6.8 2.7 −          Mar.
Changes*
− 0.4 − 3.8 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 5.0 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 2019+ 0.2 − 5.5 + 2.4 + 0.9 + 1.6 − 13.0 − 12.3 − 0.7 − 3.3 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 2020
− 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 2020          Oct.
− 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 −          Nov.+ 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          Dec.
− 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2021          Jan.
− 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Feb.− 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Mar.
registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see footnote 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memoto and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
65.4 35.1 9.8 14.9 5.7 0.0 103.9 9.5 45.0 48.4 1.0 − 201865.3 37.4 8.6 14.0 5.4 0.0 106.8 10.8 48.8 46.2 1.1 − 201968.5 43.2 8.0 12.4 4.9 0.0 66.0 10.9 32.9 21.4 0.8 − 2020
59.6 34.0 8.3 12.5 4.9 0.0 76.2 16.5 33.4 25.5 0.8 − 2020          Oct.
62.2 36.4 8.4 12.5 5.0 0.0 75.1 16.7 34.9 22.8 0.8 −          Nov.68.5 43.2 8.0 12.4 4.9 0.0 66.0 10.9 32.9 21.4 0.8 −          Dec.
59.9 35.6 6.8 12.6 4.9 0.0 67.5 14.3 31.3 21.2 0.8 − 2021          Jan.
62.1 38.1 6.3 12.8 4.9 0.0 68.1 15.7 29.2 22.5 0.8 −          Feb.60.1 37.1 5.7 12.5 4.7 0.0 62.3 14.5 27.6 19.4 0.8 −          Mar.
Changes*
− 0.8 + 2.1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 2019+ 3.5 + 5.9 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 40.8 + 0.2 − 15.9 − 24.8 − 0.3 − 2020
+ 3.1 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − − 4.5 + 0.6 − 3.7 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 2020          Oct.
+ 2.5 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 1.1 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 2.7 − 0.0 −          Nov.+ 6.3 + 6.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 9.1 − 5.7 − 2.0 − 1.4 + 0.0 −          Dec.
− 8.6 − 7.5 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 1.5 + 3.3 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 2021          Jan.
+ 2.2 + 2.5 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 1.4 − 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.0 −          Feb.− 2.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 − − 5.9 − 1.1 − 1.7 − 3.1 − 0.0 −          Mar.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
May 2021
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months’ at more than 3 Memo
notice months’ notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturities
Special Special At 3 on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2018 585.6 578.6 541.1 333.4 37.5 27.2 7.0 6.2 2.3 41.2 37.3 27.9 3.9
2019 581.8 575.2 540.5 313.2 34.7 24.7 6.6 5.9 2.0 35.9 33.2 25.1 2.6
2020 566.8 560.6 533.3 288.0 27.3 18.0 6.3 5.7 1.8 30.2 28.3 22.1 1.9
2020         Nov. 565.9 559.6 532.0 287.4 27.6 18.3 6.3 5.7 0.1 30.4 28.5 22.2 1.9
         Dec. 566.8 560.6 533.3 288.0 27.3 18.0 6.3 5.7 0.8 30.2 28.3 22.1 1.9
2021         Jan. 567.9 561.6 534.9 279.1 26.8 17.7 6.3 5.7 0.1 29.7 27.9 21.8 1.9
         Feb. 568.8 562.6 536.2 278.1 26.4 17.4 6.2 5.7 0.1 28.9 27.5 21.6 1.4
         Mar. 568.5 562.3 536.2 277.1 26.1 17.1 6.2 5.6 0.1 28.0 27.1 21.3 0.9
Changes*
2019 − 3.9 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 21.3 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 . − 5.3 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 1.2
2020 − 14.8 − 14.5 − 7.2 − 24.6 − 7.3 − 6.7 − 0.3 − 0.2 . − 5.7 − 4.9 − 3.0 − 0.7
2020         Nov. − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0
         Dec. + 1.0 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0
2021         Jan. + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.6 − 8.6 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0
         Feb. + 0.9 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.5
         Mar. − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the classified as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exceeds the minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
specially marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are
 
 
 
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which: securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year and including 2 years of which:
with
Certifi- of which: of which: non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2018 1,099.7 139.4 27.5 355.9 88.3 106.2 3.1 22.0 6.1 971.5 0.6 0.1 30.6 0.4
2019 1,140.7 123.5 28.6 367.7 96.7 117.7 2.6 23.6 4.2 999.4 0.9 0.7 31.5 0.4
2020 1,119.0 117.1 12.7 313.6 89.4 94.3 1.5 23.8 3.1 1,000.9 1.1 0.9 34.8 0.4
2020         Nov. 1,134.2 119.3 12.7 322.1 92.3 97.0 1.7 25.5 3.2 1,011.7 1.0 0.8 35.0 0.4
         Dec. 1,119.0 117.1 12.7 313.6 89.4 94.3 1.5 23.8 3.1 1,000.9 1.1 0.9 34.8 0.4
2021         Jan. 1,125.2 114.9 12.4 323.8 92.1 97.2 1.6 23.6 3.3 1,004.3 1.1 0.9 34.7 0.4
         Feb. 1,129.9 113.1 11.9 321.9 88.4 93.2 1.7 22.7 3.6 1,013.9 1.1 0.9 34.7 0.4
         Mar. 1,161.9 114.8 11.9 342.4 100.9 105.6 1.7 21.1 3.5 1,035.3 1.2 0.9 33.6 0.3
Changes*
2019 + 40.6 − 15.9 + 1.1 + 11.8 + 8.4 + 11.5 − 0.5 + 1.6 − 1.9 + 27.4 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.3
2020 − 20.5 − 5.2 − 0.8 − 54.1 − 22.3 − 22.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 − 0.0
2020         Nov. − 5.6 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 5.0 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 3.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 −
         Dec. − 15.2 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 8.5 − 2.9 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 10.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 −
2021         Jan. + 6.2 − 2.2 − 0.3 + 10.2 + 2.7 + 3.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Feb. + 4.7 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 1.9 − 3.6 − 4.0 + 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 9.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Mar. + 32.0 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 20.5 + 12.4 + 12.3 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.1 + 21.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable bearer debt
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, footnote
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
May 2021
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memobal- item: ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total 13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2019 19 237.9 34.0 0.0 16.2 11.4 117.6 28.0 25.9 2.9 21.0 179.7 9.8 1.8 12.0 88.7
2020 18 244.9 31.9 0.0 16.1 10.8 125.1 31.7 25.5 2.9 26.7 181.4 8.4 2.8 12.3 76.5
2021         Jan. 18 244.3 30.9 0.0 15.9 10.7 125.5 32.3 25.4 2.9 24.6 182.6 8.7 2.8 12.2 5.5
         Feb. 18 244.5 30.4 0.0 15.8 10.6 125.7 32.7 25.5 2.9 24.7 182.8 8.6 2.8 12.2 5.9         Mar. 18 246.0 30.9 0.0 15.9 10.5 126.5 33.0 25.5 2.9 25.9 182.9 8.7 2.8 12.3 6.5
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2021         Jan. 10 169.7 15.2 − 7.0 7.9 98.0 27.6 11.3 1.7 22.4 118.6 8.4 2.8 8.4 3.5
         Feb. 10 169.8 14.9 − 6.9 7.8 98.2 27.9 11.3 1.7 22.5 118.7 8.3 2.8 8.4 3.8         Mar. 10 171.3 15.5 − 7.0 7.7 98.9 28.1 11.3 1.7 23.7 118.7 8.4 2.8 8.4 4.2
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2021         Jan. 8 74.6 15.7 0.0 8.9 2.8 27.5 4.6 14.1 1.2 2.3 64.0 0.3 − 3.8 2.0
         Feb. 8 74.6 15.5 0.0 8.8 2.8 27.6 4.8 14.2 1.2 2.2 64.2 0.3 − 3.8 2.1         Mar. 8 74.7 15.4 0.0 8.9 2.8 27.6 4.9 14.1 1.2 2.2 64.2 0.3 − 3.9 2.4
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited deposits interim of which: of which:
on under Applied Applied and of
Amounts deposits bridging which: of Memo cancelled to settle- to settle-
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item: paid into
savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions 11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2019 27.3 2.1 7.5 49.2 25.8 42.9 16.4 4.2 4.6 3.6 21.9 18.1 6.5 7.2 5.4 0.2
2020 26.6 2.1 8.2 53.8 29.0 48.0 18.8 4.2 4.4 3.5 24.8 18.3 6.3 6.7 5.2 0.2
2021         Jan. 2.3 0.0 0.6 4.0 2.1 3.5 1.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.9 18.5 6.5 0.5 0.0
         Feb. 2.3 0.0 0.6 4.4 2.3 3.6 1.5 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.8 18.9 6.6 0.5 0.0         Mar. 2.3 0.0 0.7 5.1 2.4 4.2 1.6 0.3 0.3 0.3 2.3 19.3 6.5 0.5 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2021         Jan. 1.5 0.0 0.3 3.0 1.5 2.7 1.0 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.5 14.0 3.6 0.4 0.0
         Feb. 1.5 0.0 0.3 3.2 1.6 2.8 1.1 0.3 0.2 0.2 1.5 14.3 3.6 0.4 0.0         Mar. 1.5 0.0 0.3 3.8 1.6 3.3 1.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.9 14.6 3.6 0.4 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2021         Jan. 0.9 0.0 0.3 0.9 0.6 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.5 2.8 0.1 0.0
         Feb. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.8 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.0 0.1 0.0         Mar. 0.8 0.0 0.4 1.3 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.7 3.0 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum con tracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2018 49 183 1,401.2 403.8 392.8 192.1 200.7 11.0 516.8 427.7 20.0 407.7 89.1 480.5 309.0
2019 52 198 1,453.0 407.3 389.2 216.0 173.2 18.1 534.3 436.1 19.7 416.4 98.2 511.5 361.7
2020 50 206 1,552.2 376.7 364.0 213.2 150.8 12.7 504.8 409.6 14.3 395.3 95.2 670.7 523.6
2020 May 52 198 1,823.5 442.7 425.6 248.0 177.6 17.2 571.6 475.7 19.6 456.1 95.9 809.2 632.1
June 52 198 1,780.3 440.7 426.2 250.4 175.8 14.5 559.5 463.9 19.6 444.3 95.6 780.1 608.1
July 51 206 1,774.6 438.1 424.1 264.7 159.4 14.0 546.4 452.9 19.7 433.3 93.5 790.1 625.7
Aug. 51 206 1,684.1 419.5 405.5 250.8 154.8 14.0 535.1 437.8 19.2 418.6 97.2 729.5 563.8
Sep. 51 206 1,672.4 407.7 393.3 242.2 151.1 14.4 544.2 447.5 18.9 428.7 96.7 720.5 543.7
Oct. 51 207 1,638.9 409.7 395.6 243.0 152.6 14.1 537.6 438.4 18.2 420.2 99.2 691.5 524.4
Nov. 51 208 1,622.5 411.6 398.0 236.5 161.4 13.6 523.7 427.3 14.5 412.8 96.5 687.2 519.5
Dec. 50 206 1,552.2 376.7 364.0 213.2 150.8 12.7 504.8 409.6 14.3 395.3 95.2 670.7 523.6
2021 Jan. 49 205 1,524.5 414.2 401.5 247.6 153.8 12.7 502.1 408.7 13.9 394.8 93.4 608.3 473.6
Feb. 49 203 1,487.0 429.1 416.7 258.4 158.3 12.4 492.2 402.6 13.6 389.1 89.6 565.6 431.8
Changes *
2019 +3 +15 +51.5 –4.7 –7.7 +23.9 –31.6 +2.9 +12.6 +0.9 –0.3 +1.2 +11.7 + 30.6 +49.6
2020 –2 +9 +104.2 –20.3 –15.5 –2.8 –12.7 –4.8 +0.2 –1.0 –5.4 +4.4 +1.2 +164.2 +179.6
2020 June – – –42.8 –1.2 +1.4 +2.4 –1.0 –2.7 –9.8 –9.9 +0.0 –9.9 +0.1 – 28.7 –22.8
July –1 +9 –3.1 +2.4 +2.6 +14.3 –11.7 –0.2 +0.7 +0.8 +0.1 +0.7 –0.1 + 12.6 +26.8
Aug. – – –90.2 –17.9 –17.9 –13.9 –4.0 –0.1 –9.5 –13.5 –0.4 –13.1 +4.1 – 60.2 –60.6
Sep. – – –12.5 –13.1 –13.5 –8.6 –4.9 +0.4 +5.2 +6.5 –0.4 +6.9 –1.2 – 9.8 –22.9
Oct. – +1 –33.6 +1.7 +2.0 +0.8 +1.2 –0.3 –7.6 –10.0 –0.7 –9.3 +2.4 – 29.1 –19.6
Nov. – +1 –15.3 +3.6 +4.1 –6.4 +10.5 –0.5 –8.3 –6.5 –3.7 –2.8 –1.9 – 3.3 – 1.7
Dec. –1 –2 –69.3 –33.0 –32.2 –23.4 –8.9 –0.8 –13.2 –12.9 –0.2 –12.7 –0.3 – 15.6 + 7.3
2021 Jan. –1 –1 –26.5 +37.7 +37.9 +35.7 +2.2 –0.1 –5.8 –3.4 –0.3 –3.1 –2.3 – 62.7 –51.7
Feb. – –2 –37.6 +14.7 +15.0 +10.8 +4.2 –0.3 –10.7 –6.8 –0.4 –6.4 –3.9 – 42.7 –42.1
Foreign subsidiaries                                           End of year or month *
2018 17 43 237.2 51.2 45.4 20.1 25.3 5.8 136.4 111.7 13.8 97.8 24.7 49.6 0.0
2019 15 41 235.2 52.5 46.7 18.3 28.4 5.7 139.0 116.1 14.4 101.7 22.9 43.7 0.0
2020 12 36 229.5 44.8 39.9 17.4 22.5 4.9 139.7 114.4 13.1 101.4 25.3 44.9 0.0
2020 May 14 39 245.7 52.1 45.9 19.4 26.5 6.2 142.9 119.2 15.6 103.6 23.7 50.8 0.0
June 13 38 247.4 53.5 47.2 20.9 26.3 6.4 143.1 118.3 15.1 103.2 24.8 50.7 0.0
July 13 37 238.4 46.0 40.3 19.9 20.4 5.7 141.2 115.8 14.8 101.1 25.4 51.2 0.0
Aug. 12 36 237.6 46.8 41.2 19.6 21.6 5.6 140.9 115.9 14.6 101.3 25.0 49.8 0.0
Sep. 12 36 237.1 49.5 44.2 18.8 25.4 5.3 142.6 117.2 14.2 103.0 25.4 45.1 0.0
Oct. 12 36 235.7 44.4 39.2 18.4 20.8 5.2 142.5 116.9 14.2 102.7 25.6 48.9 0.0
Nov. 12 36 234.8 43.2 38.2 17.0 21.1 5.1 142.2 116.4 13.9 102.5 25.8 49.3 0.0
Dec. 12 36 229.5 44.8 39.9 17.4 22.5 4.9 139.7 114.4 13.1 101.4 25.3 44.9 0.0
2021 Jan. 12 36 228.9 43.9 39.1 16.9 22.2 4.8 139.0 114.0 12.6 101.4 25.0 46.1 0.0
Feb. 12 36 231.6 42.2 37.2 19.0 18.3 5.0 137.9 113.4 12.7 100.7 24.5 51.5 0.0
Changes *
2019 –2 –2 –7.2 +0.4 +0.5 –1.8 +2.3 –0.2 +1.6 +3.5 +0.5 +3.0 –1.9 – 9.1 ± 0.0
2020 –3 –5 –0.8 –5.3 –5.0 –1.0 –4.0 –0.3 +3.3 +0.8 –1.3 +2.1 +2.4 + 1.2 ± 0.0
2020 June –1 –1 +2.0 +1.6 +1.4 +1.5 –0.1 +0.2 +0.4 –0.7 –0.5 –0.2 +1.2 – 0.1 ± 0.0
July – –1 –5.8 –5.9 –5.5 –0.9 –4.6 –0.3 –0.5 –1.0 –0.3 –0.7 +0.5 + 0.6 ± 0.0
Aug. –1 –1 –0.5 +1.0 +1.0 –0.3 +1.4 –0.0 –0.1 +0.2 –0.2 +0.4 –0.3 – 1.4 ± 0.0
Sep. – – –1.3 +2.2 +2.6 –0.9 +3.5 –0.4 +1.3 +0.9 –0.4 +1.3 +0.4 – 4.8 ± 0.0
Oct. – – –1.6 –5.2 –5.0 –0.4 –4.7 –0.1 –0.2 –0.4 +0.0 –0.4 +0.1 + 3.8 ± 0.0
Nov. – – +0.3 –0.5 –0.6 –1.4 +0.8 +0.1 +0.4 +0.2 –0.3 +0.5 +0.3 + 0.4 ± 0.0
Dec. – – –4.1 +2.2 +2.2 +0.4 +1.8 –0.0 –1.9 –1.4 –0.8 –0.6 –0.5 – 4.4 ± 0.0
2021 Jan. – – –1.2 –1.2 –1.1 –0.5 –0.6 –0.2 –1.1 –0.8 –0.4 –0.3 –0.3 + 1.1 ± 0.0
Feb. – – +2.7 –1.6 –1.8 +2.1 –3.9 +0.2 –1.1 –0.6 +0.1 –0.7 –0.5 + 5.4 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated fromthe flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always
to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
897.1 607.2 428.8 178.4 290.0 11.4 9.7 1.8 278.5 91.2 54.0 358.9 302.6 2018
894.1 613.6 453.2 160.4 280.5 12.7 10.1 2.7 267.8 94.6 53.4 410.9 361.1 2019
872.2 588.5 431.8 156.7 283.7 11.7 10.2 1.5 272.0 61.5 49.9 568.6 523.1 2020
994.0 695.4 484.1 211.3 298.7 15.3 13.1 2.2 283.3 93.5 54.7 681.2 630.2 2020 May
979.1 680.0 484.2 195.8 299.1 14.5 12.6 1.9 284.6 85.7 54.3 661.3 607.6 June
959.1 661.2 468.6 192.6 297.9 17.3 15.6 1.8 280.6 80.2 53.5 681.8 624.2 July
943.2 655.1 460.9 194.2 288.1 14.4 12.7 1.7 273.7 74.9 52.4 613.6 563.1 Aug.
945.7 650.5 473.7 176.8 295.2 15.4 13.8 1.7 279.8 76.8 52.6 597.4 544.0 Sep.
932.4 632.6 451.1 181.5 299.9 14.0 12.3 1.7 285.9 76.7 50.9 578.9 523.9 Oct.
926.8 625.3 444.3 181.0 301.5 12.3 10.9 1.5 289.1 74.8 50.5 570.4 518.9 Nov.
872.2 588.5 431.8 156.7 283.7 11.7 10.2 1.5 272.0 61.5 49.9 568.6 523.1 Dec.
898.0 596.5 421.1 175.5 301.5 10.4 8.9 1.5 291.1 71.0 50.2 505.3 472.3 2021 Jan.
906.9 600.1 421.4 178.6 306.8 9.9 8.4 1.5 296.9 68.0 50.1 462.1 430.8 Feb.
Changes *
– 7.2 + 2.4 +24.4 –22.0 – 9.6 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 –10.9 + 3.0 – 0.6 + 52.0 + 58.5 2019
– 9.2 –13.3 –21.4 + 8.1 + 4.1 – 1.0 + 0.3 – 1.4 + 5.1 –28.1 – 3.5 +157.6 + 162.0 2020
–14.0 –14.5 +0.1 –14.6 + 0.5 – 0.9 – 0.5 – 0.4 + 1.4 – 7.4 –0.5 – 20.0 – 22.6 2020 June
–13.9 –13.2 –15.6 +2.4 – 0.7 + 2.9 + 3.0 – 0.1 – 3.6 – 2.8 –0.8 + 20.5 + 16.6 July
–15.0 –5.1 –7.7 +2.5 – 9.8 – 2.9 – 2.9 – 0.0 – 6.9 – 5.0 –1.1 – 68.2 – 61.1 Aug.
+ 0.4 –6.7 +12.8 –19.5 + 7.1 + 1.0 + 1.1 – 0.1 + 6.0 + 1.1 +0.1 – 16.2 – 19.1 Sep.
–13.6 –18.3 –22.6 +4.4 + 4.6 – 1.4 – 1.5 + 0.0 + 6.1 – 0.2 –1.7 – 18.5 – 20.1 Oct.
– 3.2 –4.9 –6.7 +1.8 + 1.7 – 1.7 – 1.4 – 0.2 + 3.4 – 0.9 –0.3 – 8.4 – 5.0 Nov.
–52.1 –34.5 –12.5 –21.9 –17.6 – 0.6 – 0.7 + 0.0 –17.0 –12.3 –0.7 – 1.9 + 4.1 Dec.
+26.1 +7.7 –10.6 +18.3 +18.4 – 1.3 – 1.3 – 0.0 +19.7 + 9.2 +0.3 – 63.3 – 50.8 2021 Jan.
+ 8.9 +3.6 +0.7 +2.9 + 5.3 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 + 5.8 – 3.1 –0.1 – 43.5 – 41.5 Feb.
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
171.5 71.6 36.1 35.5 100.0 9.1 6.4 2.7 90.8 14.3 22.4 29.0 0.0 2018
165.7 68.7 36.6 32.1 97.0 6.6 3.9 2.7 90.4 16.0 22.1 31.4 0.0 2019
163.4 59.6 34.1 25.5 103.8 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.1 16.6 20.3 29.2 0.0 2020
177.7 76.5 42.2 34.3 101.2 7.1 4.5 2.5 94.2 15.5 20.8 31.7 0.0 2020 May
178.8 74.8 41.0 33.7 104.1 6.8 4.3 2.5 97.3 16.4 20.8 31.4 0.0 June
171.1 67.2 38.9 28.3 103.9 7.3 4.8 2.5 96.6 16.6 20.7 30.1 0.0 July
171.1 66.1 38.1 28.0 105.0 7.1 4.6 2.5 97.9 16.5 20.6 29.4 0.0 Aug.
170.3 66.5 37.1 29.4 103.7 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.0 16.8 20.5 29.5 0.0 Sep.
167.9 63.5 35.3 28.3 104.4 7.4 4.9 2.5 96.9 17.7 20.5 29.6 0.0 Oct.
168.4 62.8 33.8 29.0 105.6 7.2 4.8 2.5 98.3 16.5 20.7 29.2 0.0 Nov.
163.4 59.6 34.1 25.5 103.8 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.1 16.6 20.3 29.2 0.0 Dec.
163.1 58.1 32.7 25.4 105.0 6.7 4.3 2.5 98.3 16.8 20.4 28.6 0.0 2021 Jan.
166.8 60.2 34.8 25.4 106.5 6.4 3.9 2.5 100.1 16.6 20.3 27.9 0.0 Feb.
Changes *
– 6.7 – 3.2 + 0.5 – 3.8 – 3.5 – 2.5 – 2.5 + 0.0 – 1.0 + 1.7 – 0.4 – 1.8 ± 0.0 2019
+ 1.4 – 7.3 – 2.5 – 4.8 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.3 + 8.7 + 0.6 – 1.8 – 1.0 ± 0.0 2020
+ 1.4 –1.6 –1.1 –0.5 + 3.0 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.9 –0.0 – 0.2 ± 0.0 2020 June
– 5.4 –6.4 –2.1 –4.3 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 – 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.2 –0.1 – 0.5 ± 0.0 July
+ 0.2 –1.0 –0.8 –0.2 + 1.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.5 – 0.1 –0.1 – 0.6 ± 0.0 Aug.
– 1.5 +0.2 –1.0 +1.1 – 1.7 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 1.3 + 0.3 –0.1 – 0.1 ± 0.0 Sep.
– 2.5 –3.0 –1.9 –1.2 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.9 –0.0 – 0.1 ± 0.0 Oct.
+ 1.4 –0.4 –1.5 +1.1 + 1.7 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.9 – 1.2 +0.2 – 0.0 ± 0.0 Nov.
– 4.1 –2.8 +0.3 –3.1 – 1.3 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.7 + 0.1 –0.4 + 0.3 ± 0.0 Dec.
– 0.8 –1.8 –1.4 –0.3 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 +0.1 – 0.7 ± 0.0 2021 Jan.
+ 3.6 +2.1 +2.2 –0.0 + 1.5 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 1.8 – 0.3 –0.0 – 0.7 ± 0.0 Feb.
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and
other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.  4 Excluding
subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of negotiable andnon-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Including subordinated
liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
May 2021
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base  2 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 
2014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021         Mar.  p 14,784.7 147.8 147.5 3,421.1 3,273.7 ...
         Apr.  p ... ... 147.7 ... ... ...
         May . . . . . .
 
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro area reserve base
Reserve base  2 as a percentage Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021         Mar.  p 4,091,496 27.7 40,915 40,770 1,008,852 968,082 0
         Apr.  p 4,100,141 ... 41,001 40,856 ... ... ...
         May . . . . . . .
 
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in  1 
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,312
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021         Mar. 8,557 6,477 3,051 13,015 7,666 121 1,882
         Apr. 8,636 6,474 3,005 13,076 7,722 119 1,850
         May . . . . . . .
 
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after dedu ction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in  1 banks in non-euro area countries
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021         Mar. 2,950,577 6,993 467,896 563,003 103,034
         Apr. 2,964,359 9,211 466,345 563,974 98,817
         May . . . . .
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of stood at 1%. 4Article 5(2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
pursuant to Article 4(1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve lump-sum allowance. 
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / base rates
% per annum
ECB interest rates Base rates
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBase
rate
as  per
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBase
rate
as  per
Civil
Code  1
2005 Dec. 6 1.25 – 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr. 13 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 2002 Jan. 1 2.57 2009 Jan. 1 1.62
July 13 0.75 1.50 – 2.25 July 1 2.47 July 1 0.12
2006 Mar. 8 1.50 – 2.50 3.50 Nov. 9 0.50 1.25 – 2.00
June 15 1.75 – 2.75 3.75 Dec. 14 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2003 Jan. 1 1.97 2011 July 1 0.37
Aug. 9 2.00 – 3.00 4.00 July 1 1.22
Oct. 11 2.25 – 3.25 4.25 2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 2012 Jan. 1 0.12
Dec. 13 2.50 – 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan. 1 1.14
2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 July 1 1.13 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
2007 Mar. 14 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 July 1 – 0.38
June 13 3.00 – 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan. 1 1.21
2014 June 11 -0.10 0.15 – 0.40 July 1 1.17 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
2008 July 9 3.25 – 4.25 5.25 Sep. 10 -0.20 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 – 0.73
Oct. 8 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan. 1 1.37
Oct. 9 3.25 3.75 – 4.25 2015 Dec. 9 -0.30 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 1.95 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Nov. 12 2.75 3.25 – 3.75
Dec. 10 2.00 2.50 – 3.00 2016 Mar. 16 -0.40 0.00 – 0.25 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2016 July 1 – 0.88
July 1 3.19
2009 Jan. 21 1.00 2.00 – 3.00 2019 Sep. 18 -0.50 0.00 – 0.25
Mar. 11 0.50 1.50 – 2.50 2008 Jan. 1 3.32
Apr. 8 0.25 1.25 – 2.25 July 1 3.19
May 13 0.25 1.00 – 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2021 Apr. 14 137 137 0,00 - - - 7
Apr. 21 126 126 0,00 - - - 7
Apr. 28 252 252 0,00 - - - 7
May 5 72 72 0,00 - - - 7
May 12 111 111 0,00 - - - 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2021 Mar. 24 330,501 330,501 2      … - - - 1,099
Mar. 25 421 421 2      … - - - 371
Apr. 1 93 93 2      … - - - 91
Apr. 29 25 25 2      … - - - 91
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month *
% per annum
EURIBOR  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 EONIA  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2020 Oct. – 0.554 – 0.47 – 0.54 – 0.54 – 0.51 – 0.49 – 0.47
Nov. – 0.556 – 0.47 – 0.55 – 0.54 – 0.52 – 0.51 – 0.48
Dec. – 0.557 – 0.47 – 0.56 – 0.56 – 0.54 – 0.52 – 0.50
2021 Jan. – 0.563 – 0.48 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.55 – 0.53 – 0.50
Feb. – 0.564 – 0.48 – 0.57 – 0.55 – 0.54 – 0.52 – 0.50
Mar. – 0.564 – 0.48 – 0.56 – 0.55 – 0.54 – 0.52 – 0.49
Apr. – 0.566 – 0.48 – 0.56 – 0.56 – 0.54 – 0.52 – 0.48
* Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor anyone
else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the EURIBOR.
1 Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank
operations; calculated by the European Central Bank from January 4th 1999 until
September 30th 2019 based on real turnover according to the act/360 method. SinceOctober 1st 2019 calculated as Euro Short-Term Rate (€STR) + 8.5 basis points spread.
2 Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters since 30
December 1998 according to the act/360 method. Administrator for EONIA and
EURIBOR: European Money Markets Institute (EMMI)

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 Mar. 0.24 54,034 1.10 219,797 – 0.07 68,925 0.82 26,158
Apr. 0.24 52,567 1.09 219,117 – 0.07 71,964 0.82 25,694
May 0.24 53,093 1.08 219,267 – 0.08 80,523 0.83 24,937
June 0.25 53,752 1.07 218,668 – 0.05 77,282 0.85 24,172
July 0.26 53,945 1.06 218,177 – 0.08 86,703 0.90 22,652
Aug. 0.26 53,971 1.03 218,020 – 0.08 82,164 0.89 22,508
Sep. 0.26 54,068 1.02 218,212 – 0.10 82,957 0.92 23,504
Oct. 0.26 53,982 1.01 218,002 – 0.11 84,498 0.89 22,350
Nov. 0.26 52,719 1.00 217,758 – 0.11 80,549 0.85 22,254
Dec. 0.25 53,079 1.00 219,376 – 0.17 79,340 0.84 22,256
2021 Jan. 0.25 51,896 0.99 220,299 – 0.16 74,531 0.85 21,979
Feb. 0.26 51,369 0.98 220,419 – 0.16 72,894 0.85 22,242
Mar. 0.25 51,417 0.98 220,406 – 0.18 77,336 0.83 21,860
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 Mar. 2.04 4,755 1.68 26,516 2.14 1,284,212 7.33 49,209 3.42 87,284 3.61 318,802
Apr. 1.99 4,673 1.66 26,483 2.12 1,291,221 7.17 45,827 3.41 86,755 3.59 319,658
May 1.97 4,752 1.66 26,603 2.10 1,299,073 7.03 44,605 3.41 86,303 3.57 320,868
June 1.98 4,628 1.65 26,702 2.09 1,303,405 7.05 46,438 3.41 86,046 3.57 319,461
July 1.99 4,720 1.65 26,707 2.06 1,312,369 7.02 45,560 3.41 86,188 3.55 321,139
Aug. 1.98 4,727 1.64 26,690 2.05 1,315,489 6.98 45,609 3.40 86,216 3.53 321,757
Sep. 1.95 4,705 1.62 26,940 2.03 1,329,087 6.96 46,438 3.39 86,231 3.50 322,100
Oct. 1.92 4,792 1.62 26,962 2.00 1,337,259 6.86 45,325 3.38 85,849 3.48 323,886
Nov. 1.92 4,616 1.60 27,072 1.99 1,345,468 6.83 44,787 3.38 85,328 3.46 324,149
Dec. 1.92 4,557 1.60 27,024 1.97 1,353,793 6.80 45,013 3.37 85,416 3.45 323,181
2021 Jan. 1.90 4,663 1.59 26,903 1.95 1,357,733 6.90 43,164 3.36 84,363 3.42 323,164
Feb. 1.89 4,642 1.57 26,790 1.93 1,363,884 6.76 43,200 3.36 83,522 3.41 323,393
Mar. 1.89 4,544 1.56 26,785 1.91 1,372,940 6.72 44,264 3.34 83,117 3.40 322,678
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 Mar. 2.05 182,434 1.62 174,636 1.84 746,742
Apr. 1.98 185,780 1.63 177,975 1.83 752,025
May 1.95 181,594 1.62 182,819 1.82 761,686
June 2.02 172,708 1.66 184,793 1.81 766,896
July 1.96 169,944 1.66 186,433 1.80 769,953
Aug. 1.98 165,184 1.66 187,678 1.79 779,570
Sep. 2.07 160,014 1.68 186,700 1.77 774,045
Oct. 2.04 157,761 1.68 187,240 1.76 779,595
Nov. 2.06 154,555 1.69 187,341 1.75 784,308
Dec. 2.03 150,278 1.71 186,798 1.73 787,188
2021 Jan. 2.06 149,911 1.71 186,599 1.71 790,534
Feb. 2.02 152,425 1.71 189,130 1.70 793,839
Mar. 1.78 164,298 1.67 194,734 1.69 794,339
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 Mar. 0.00 1,567,320 0.12 2,538 0.40 286 0.60 658 0.11 531,723 0.18 31,794
Apr. 0.00 1,597,323 0.14 3,086 0.49 308 0.69 601 0.11 531,921 0.18 31,083
May 0.00 1,619,447 0.19 3,300 0.59 1,117 0.60 629 0.11 532,140 0.17 30,662
June 0.00 1,626,420 0.17 3,283 0.78 1,455 0.69 854 0.11 532,292 0.18 29,671
July 0.00 1,643,393 0.15 3,296 0.60 1,161 0.74 750 0.10 531,191 0.18 29,168
Aug. 0.00 1,650,273 0.16 2,643 0.59 563 0.64 555 0.10 531,277 0.18 28,764
Sep. 0.00 1,658,764 0.10 3,027 0.51 501 0.61 590 0.10 531,223 0.18 28,417
Oct. 0.00 1,680,565 0.10 3,014 0.44 509 0.60 805 0.10 531,245 0.18 28,001
Nov. 0.00 1,703,473 0.11 2,483 0.49 404 0.61 747 0.10 531,537 0.18 27,578
Dec. 0.00 1,715,292 – 0.01 3,214 0.40 394 0.59 794 0.10 532,793 0.18 27,312
2021 Jan. 0.00 1,732,961 0.03 3,036 0.38 357 0.55 734 0.10 534,458 0.17 26,749
Feb. – 0.00 1,754,413 0.07 2,793 0.36 385 0.50 741 0.09 535,684 0.17 26,435
Mar. – 0.00 1,750,977 0.06 3,073 0.32 342 0.41 834 0.09 535,782 0.17 26,115
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2020 Mar. – 0.07 482,538 – 0.27 20,845 0.04 235 x .x .
Apr. – 0.08 495,710 – 0.17 33,483 0.48 288 0.18 78
May – 0.08 501,848 – 0.24 37,552 0.55 707 0.30 259
June – 0.08 508,658 – 0.33 31,980 0.37 633 0.38 313
July – 0.08 520,954 – 0.33 40,301 0.36 592 0.26 208
Aug. – 0.08 528,905 – 0.34 35,771 – 0.02 170 0.20 164
Sep. – 0.08 532,597 – 0.36 37,956 – 0.01 112 0.43 275
Oct. – 0.09 548,227 – 0.36 38,781 0.10 237 0.33 548
Nov. – 0.09 549,032 – 0.37 30,418 0.03 220 0.35 533
Dec. – 0.09 546,575 – 0.42 34,321 – 0.12 556 0.26 970
2021 Jan. – 0.10 545,028 – 0.23 35,220 – 0.05 126 0.19 129
Feb. – 0.10 539,935 – 0.26 32,726 – 0.01 113 0.37 537
Mar. – 0.11 570,851 – 0.12 54,987 0.07 363 0.24 919
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2020 Mar. 5.84 5.81 9,742 6.35 1,982 8.46 483 4.57 3,209 6.26 6,050
Apr. 6.31 6.21 7,843 6.08 1,482 8.11 361 5.06 2,291 6.59 5,190
May 5.93 5.80 7,945 6.23 1,620 7.79 494 4.49 2,843 6.39 4,608
June 5.87 5.72 8,758 6.41 1,841 8.62 401 4.39 3,258 6.34 5,099
July 5.74 5.63 9,986 6.52 2,114 8.75 439 4.26 3,744 6.29 5,804
Aug. 5.74 5.62 8,340 6.43 1,738 8.79 391 4.33 3,050 6.18 4,899
Sep. 5.56 5.52 8,638 6.42 1,726 8.53 417 4.12 3,286 6.19 4,936
Oct. 5.73 5.62 8,265 6.36 1,739 8.39 436 4.32 2,905 6.14 4,924
Nov. 5.71 5.62 7,778 6.24 1,560 8.90 566 4.26 2,797 6.06 4,416
Dec. 5.53 5.48 6,652 6.08 1,193 8.08 551 4.24 2,544 5.97 3,556
2021 Jan. 5.88 5.85 6,836 6.43 1,655 7.99 439 4.45 1,973 6.26 4,423
Feb. 5.65 5.65 7,077 6.34 1,630 7.76 379 4.33 2,194 6.11 4,503
Mar. 5.35 5.27 9,299 6.17 1,786 6.23 384 4.05 3,296 5.92 5,619
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2020 Mar. 1.73 5,746 1.76 1,425 1.70 2,347 2.44 821 1.53 2,578
Apr. 1.71 6,505 1.95 2,109 1.73 2,042 2.04 944 1.60 3,519
May 1.80 6,580 1.96 2,043 1.98 2,118 2.07 833 1.63 3,629
June 1.83 6,513 1.95 2,438 1.82 2,252 2.43 1,070 1.63 3,191
July 1.78 5,293 1.61 1,536 1.84 2,241 2.32 774 1.53 2,278
Aug. 1.88 4,210 1.60 1,055 1.94 1,710 2.55 773 1.51 1,727
Sep. 1.83 4,517 1.60 1,170 1.98 1,997 2.37 612 1.51 1,908
Oct. 1.80 4,279 1.60 1,214 1.95 1,832 2.47 578 1.44 1,869
Nov. 1.84 4,026 1.61 930 1.96 1,731 2.44 585 1.51 1,710
Dec. 1.77 5,473 1.56 1,254 1.81 2,404 2.30 772 1.54 2,297
2021 Jan. 1.79 4,530 1.66 1,532 1.93 1,958 2.17 572 1.55 2,000
Feb. 1.71 4,265 1.69 1,000 1.74 1,680 2.08 578 1.58 2,007
Mar. 1.68 5,715 1.59 1,331 1.69 2,358 2.20 691 1.53 2,666
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2020 Mar. 1.83 3,818 . . 1.89 1,544 2.48 636 1.52 1,638
Apr. 1.75 4,582 . . 1.88 1,402 2.02 752 1.60 2,428
May 1.81 5,056 . . 2.03 1,460 2.14 633 1.64 2,963
June 1.86 4,702 . . 1.83 1,501 2.46 806 1.68 2,395
July 1.81 3,472 . . 1.87 1,355 2.30 600 1.57 1,517
Aug. 1.76 2,755 . . 1.70 1,135 2.47 462 1.55 1,158
Sep. 1.85 3,019 . . 1.89 1,357 2.53 431 1.55 1,231
Oct. 1.78 2,888 . . 1.81 1,226 2.50 451 1.47 1,211
Nov. 1.83 2,743 . . 1.85 1,118 2.53 438 1.55 1,187
Dec. 1.85 3,793 . . 1.87 1,629 2.47 523 1.63 1,641
2021 Jan. 1.77 3,041 . . 1.76 1,281 2.34 402 1.62 1,358
Feb. 1.86 2,843 . . 1.89 1,058 2.40 390 1.70 1,395
Mar. 1.79 3,836 . . 1.83 1,496 2.26 535 1.60 1,805
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2020 Mar. 1.27 1.22 25,314 1.38 3,761 1.83 2,503 1.32 1,872 1.07 8,045 1.18 12,894
Apr. 1.29 1.25 24,541 1.51 5,102 1.78 2,525 1.32 1,822 1.11 7,769 1.22 12,425
May 1.37 1.33 22,361 1.65 5,153 1.93 3,000 1.47 1,643 1.12 6,872 1.27 10,845
June 1.38 1.34 22,793 1.63 5,171 1.94 2,235 1.59 1,947 1.17 7,983 1.28 10,628
July 1.32 1.27 24,349 1.44 4,233 1.81 2,518 1.39 1,847 1.12 8,036 1.24 11,949
Aug. 1.28 1.23 21,280 1.41 3,135 1.80 2,209 1.44 1,500 1.07 7,032 1.20 10,539
Sep. 1.26 1.21 21,782 1.35 3,121 1.77 2,213 1.35 1,542 1.07 6,957 1.17 11,070
Oct. 1.24 1.19 23,217 1.24 3,834 1.75 2,362 1.32 1,554 1.03 7,579 1.17 11,722
Nov. 1.22 1.17 23,185 1.28 3,113 1.72 2,372 1.28 1,708 1.03 7,413 1.14 11,692
Dec. 1.21 1.16 22,148 1.29 3,033 1.75 2,195 1.31 1,698 1.02 7,733 1.11 10,522
2021 Jan. 1.23 1.19 21,721 1.32 3,866 1.79 2,124 1.34 1,615 1.03 7,316 1.15 10,666
Feb. 1.22 1.17 22,145 1.30 3,246 1.73 2,098 1.28 1,563 1.04 7,547 1.14 10,938
Mar. 1.22 1.18 28,601 1.26 4,248 1.74 2,695 1.25 1,958 1.02 10,007 1.17 13,942
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2020 Mar. . 1.13 11,461 . . 1.76 828 1.15 925 0.98 3,673 1.13 6,035
Apr. . 1.16 11,495 . . 1.70 951 1.21 939 1.03 3,594 1.14 6,011
May . 1.24 10,084 . . 1.86 1,046 1.31 835 1.05 3,065 1.22 5,138
June . 1.26 10,090 . . 1.84 803 1.41 935 1.10 3,656 1.25 4,696
July . 1.22 10,687 . . 1.76 951 1.23 876 1.05 3,621 1.23 5,239
Aug. . 1.16 9,074 . . 1.77 748 1.17 673 0.98 3,137 1.17 4,516
Sep. . 1.14 9,865 . . 1.75 795 1.14 753 1.00 3,201 1.14 5,116
Oct. . 1.14 10,142 . . 1.73 806 1.12 748 1.00 3,239 1.14 5,349
Nov. . 1.10 10,137 . . 1.61 819 1.10 823 0.96 3,182 1.11 5,313
Dec. . 1.08 9,592 . . 1.63 796 1.12 781 0.95 3,355 1.07 4,660
2021 Jan. . 1.13 9,731 . . 1.71 814 1.11 780 0.97 3,226 1.14 4,911
Feb. . 1.11 9,659 . . 1.60 752 1.08 773 0.96 3,228 1.14 4,906
Mar. . 1.11 12,755 . . 1.69 929 1.08 884 0.95 4,590 1.14 6,352
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 Mar. 7.89 40,211 7.64 32,857 15.19 4,364 2.77 88,805 2.78 88,517
Apr. 7.73 36,930 7.35 30,063 15.19 4,262 2.71 85,888 2.72 85,702
May 7.60 35,719 7.23 28,731 15.24 4,194 2.66 83,133 2.67 82,928
June 7.63 37,486 7.39 30,074 15.22 4,183 2.86 81,829 2.87 81,584
July 7.54 36,402 7.35 28,738 15.19 4,170 2.84 77,749 2.84 77,478
Aug. 7.51 36,716 7.31 29,015 15.08 4,204 2.77 76,935 2.78 76,674
Sep. 7.51 37,568 7.33 30,004 15.04 4,147 2.84 76,376 2.85 76,092
Oct. 7.42 36,256 7.19 28,750 15.03 4,144 2.75 76,056 2.76 75,773
Nov. 7.41 35,700 7.17 28,273 15.06 4,108 2.74 75,596 2.75 75,326
Dec. 7.32 36,062 7.11 28,411 15.15 4,101 2.70 73,441 2.71 73,178
2021 Jan. 7.51 34,191 7.08 27,635 15.28 4,011 2.77 71,756 2.78 71,526
Feb. 7.40 34,121 7.03 27,298 15.38 3,944 2.76 73,589 2.77 73,354
Mar. 7.41 34,973 7.11 27,993 15.45 3,910 2.77 72,640 2.78 72,367
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2020 Mar. 1.20 96,389 1.44 24,539 1.88 10,920 2.34 1,666 1.47 2,503 1.06 69,385 1.31 3,884 1.14 9,067
Apr. 1.35 80,293 1.53 22,726 1.90 8,269 2.05 1,460 1.76 2,525 1.25 53,150 1.27 3,999 1.15 9,620
May 1.38 70,416 1.50 19,086 1.83 8,544 2.23 1,466 2.03 3,000 1.20 41,644 1.27 3,723 1.25 9,345
June 1.36 86,295 1.45 30,002 1.93 10,537 2.35 1,714 1.81 2,235 1.18 53,115 1.69 4,895 1.26 12,072
July 1.43 72,399 1.41 23,407 1.94 10,302 2.35 1,419 1.66 2,518 1.29 44,151 1.55 4,770 1.25 9,141
Aug. 1.52 55,855 1.36 16,568 1.78 8,324 2.39 1,235 1.51 2,209 1.46 35,797 1.62 3,186 1.22 5,659
Sep. 1.37 71,553 1.49 21,841 2.00 10,506 2.42 1,308 1.55 2,213 1.22 45,047 1.42 3,107 1.18 10,041
Oct. 1.37 66,721 1.36 20,690 1.99 10,358 2.38 1,354 1.49 2,362 1.17 42,053 1.73 4,238 1.18 7,163
Nov. 1.39 62,811 1.39 18,016 1.96 9,897 2.25 1,343 1.53 2,372 1.25 37,080 1.47 4,017 1.13 8,827
Dec. 1.33 87,725 1.37 26,272 2.01 9,615 2.31 1,615 1.56 2,195 1.23 56,078 1.36 4,945 1.11 13,362
2021 Jan. 1.36 55,365 1.52 17,883 1.99 8,828 2.30 1,183 1.56 2,124 1.22 35,711 1.45 2,185 1.03 5,906
Feb. 1.37 54,516 1.55 14,708 2.00 8,851 2.23 1,084 1.57 2,098 1.22 32,922 1.37 2,679 1.09 7,447
Mar. 1.09 93,452 1.59 21,946 1.90 10,691 2.16 1,432 1.54 2,695 0.89 62,737 1.17 6,173 1.20 10,577
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2020 Mar. 1.28 11,702 . . 1.74 548 2.34 132 1.20 411 1.29 7,469 1.88 522 1.02 2,620
Apr. 1.34 9,734 . . 1.72 492 1.56 243 1.22 556 1.39 5,375 1.44 513 1.15 2,555
May 1.48 7,873 . . 2.02 471 1.73 171 1.90 865 1.43 4,286 1.72 336 1.16 1,744
June 1.39 13,750 . . 1.81 558 2.05 224 1.71 776 1.31 8,391 1.64 1,048 1.28 2,753
July 1.37 10,021 . . 1.80 504 1.96 133 1.31 478 1.42 5,085 1.59 1,108 1.10 2,713
Aug. 1.47 7,045 . . 1.85 362 2.14 123 1.26 369 1.52 4,544 1.79 458 1.05 1,189
Sep. 1.37 11,059 . . 1.72 508 2.08 105 1.22 353 1.41 7,417 1.85 535 1.03 2,141
Oct. 1.23 8,346 . . 1.73 480 1.74 111 1.14 374 1.26 4,696 1.11 672 1.08 2,013
Nov. 1.54 9,630 . . 1.86 375 1.67 98 1.20 367 1.64 5,414 2.01 807 1.18 2,569
Dec. 1.33 15,369 . . 1.68 494 1.68 134 1.16 452 1.41 8,979 1.39 1,222 1.11 4,088
2021 Jan. 1.25 7,702 . . 1.73 430 1.65 99 1.32 374 1.26 4,614 1.69 574 0.88 1,611
Feb. 1.42 6,642 . . 1.83 339 1.67 89 1.07 331 1.61 3,930 1.31 383 0.96 1,570
Mar. 1.19 13,896 . . 1.64 481 1.81 106 1.17 399 1.12 8,540 1.33 825 1.23 3,545
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets *
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesInsurance
technical
reservesNon-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations
2018 Q2 2,226.3 346.8 400.1 319.6 346.3 669.9 2.2 53.6 34.1 53.6
Q3 2,224.8 326.3 401.1 327.9 349.4 677.8 2.0 52.9 35.7 51.6
Q4 2,213.5 318.3 400.5 330.4 349.7 665.8 2.0 55.4 36.8 54.6
2019 Q1 2,344.4 332.3 432.0 330.0 380.9 708.8 2.6 59.3 37.1 61.4
Q2 2,407.9 336.8 449.5 339.3 387.8 735.7 3.6 57.9 37.1 60.3
Q3 2,493.0 333.0 469.2 357.2 398.1 768.2 4.6 58.7 38.0 66.0
Q4 2,474.4 317.1 449.3 355.8 407.1 778.2 3.6 64.9 39.8 58.7
2020 Q1 2,431.1 316.8 453.1 365.9 384.8 739.3 4.5 68.3 39.0 59.5
Q2 2,522.1 318.3 460.9 372.0 411.7 789.1 4.3 68.4 39.0 58.6
Q3 2,553.6 312.3 473.9 374.0 414.6 809.9 4.4 67.1 39.3 58.2
Q4 2,594.5 304.3 479.3 370.7 426.7 841.7 4.7 68.2 38.3 60.6
    Life insurance
2018 Q2 1,195.2 215.3 201.6 200.5 46.3 487.9 1.1 8.8 19.5 14.2
Q3 1,194.1 199.7 201.6 209.0 47.3 493.9 1.0 8.8 19.3 13.4
Q4 1,185.3 194.5 200.1 208.4 50.4 484.7 1.0 11.6 20.3 14.3
2019 Q1 1,239.7 202.9 213.7 206.1 52.8 517.7 1.6 10.4 20.3 14.1
Q2 1,291.9 205.8 227.6 214.1 55.4 538.9 2.4 10.0 20.3 17.4
Q3 1,350.0 205.3 242.5 225.2 57.9 563.6 3.1 10.4 20.9 21.0
Q4 1,325.0 194.5 227.6 217.8 61.0 570.4 2.4 13.7 21.1 16.5
2020 Q1 1,296.5 190.6 230.6 221.4 62.0 538.8 2.2 13.7 20.7 16.4
Q2 1,348.1 193.0 234.5 223.6 64.1 577.3 2.8 13.6 20.7 18.6
Q3 1,370.6 188.6 242.3 225.9 65.7 593.0 3.0 13.6 20.9 17.7
Q4 1,399.2 184.8 242.7 230.1 69.5 617.1 3.3 14.4 21.0 16.4
    Non-life insurance
2018 Q2 621.6 120.1 115.7 72.9 72.9 167.4 0.3 35.6 9.8 27.0
Q3 617.9 116.3 116.1 72.8 73.7 168.9 0.2 34.9 9.8 25.1
Q4 616.2 113.8 117.4 73.7 73.8 167.4 0.2 33.5 10.8 25.6
2019 Q1 655.3 119.1 127.7 74.4 76.1 177.1 0.3 38.1 11.0 31.4
Q2 665.9 119.8 131.6 76.1 78.1 182.4 0.4 37.6 11.0 29.0
Q3 683.1 116.9 136.0 79.9 80.6 189.3 0.4 38.8 11.3 30.0
Q4 674.2 111.1 131.4 79.7 83.5 193.2 0.4 36.1 12.2 26.6
2020 Q1 673.1 110.6 132.8 80.9 81.8 187.1 0.3 38.6 11.9 29.1
Q2 689.3 112.5 134.8 82.6 83.6 197.2 0.4 39.5 12.1 26.7
Q3 698.4 110.4 138.0 83.3 86.2 203.2 0.4 38.5 12.1 26.3
Q4 708.2 107.3 140.0 84.5 88.4 210.3 0.5 37.5 12.7 27.0
    Reinsurance 3
2018 Q2 409.5 11.5 82.9 46.1 227.1 14.6 0.8 9.1 4.8 12.4
Q3 412.7 10.2 83.4 46.0 228.4 15.0 0.8 9.3 6.6 13.1
Q4 412.0 10.1 82.9 48.2 225.5 13.7 0.7 10.3 5.7 14.8
2019 Q1 449.4 10.2 90.6 49.5 252.0 14.0 0.7 10.8 5.8 15.9
Q2 450.1 11.1 90.4 49.0 254.3 14.4 0.8 10.2 5.8 13.9
Q3 459.9 10.8 90.7 52.1 259.6 15.3 1.0 9.6 5.9 15.0
Q4 475.2 11.5 90.2 58.4 262.6 14.5 0.8 15.1 6.6 15.6
2020 Q1 461.5 15.7 89.7 63.6 241.1 13.3 1.9 15.9 6.3 14.1
Q2 484.7 12.8 91.6 65.8 264.0 14.6 1.1 15.2 6.3 13.3
Q3 484.6 13.3 93.6 64.8 262.6 13.7 1.0 15.0 6.3 14.2
Q4 487.0 12.2 96.5 56.1 268.7 14.3 1.0 16.3 4.7 17.3
Pension funds 4
2018 Q2 658.7 94.8 65.7 30.4 28.1 368.2 – 7.6 42.2 21.7
Q3 666.0 92.1 66.3 30.5 29.6 375.1 – 7.9 42.8 21.8
Q4 672.2 91.5 67.5 30.7 30.6 378.0 – 8.1 43.8 22.1
2019 Q1 689.2 89.4 72.0 30.7 31.5 389.8 – 8.3 44.9 22.6
Q2 703.0 87.4 75.6 31.3 32.1 399.3 – 8.5 45.4 23.5
Q3 718.3 85.3 79.2 31.5 33.1 410.9 – 8.6 45.7 23.9
Q4 726.8 84.9 77.8 31.9 33.4 417.2 – 8.8 47.6 25.1
2020 Q1 709.2 81.1 75.2 31.7 33.2 405.1 – 8.9 48.4 25.5
Q2 729.3 80.0 79.5 31.9 33.4 420.4 – 9.0 48.7 26.5
Q3 732.1 80.2 81.1 31.9 33.5 420.3 – 9.0 49.2 27.0
Q4 755.4 78.5 82.6 32.6 35.1 438.8 – 9.2 50.2 28.4
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I super-
visory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  * Valuation of
listed securities at the corresponding consistent price from the ESCB's securities data-
base. 1 Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered
bonds, borrowers' note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including deposits retainedon assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrowers' note loans and regis-
tered Pfandbriefe.  3 Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insur-
ers, which is included there.  4 The term "pension funds" refers to the institutional sec-
tor "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise
company pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed.
Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Insurance technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity TotalLife/
claims on
pension fund
reserves  2 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  5
Insurance corporations
2018 Q2 2,226.3 27.7 64.0 456.8 1,553.7 1,348.0 205.7 1.9 122.2 –
Q3 2,224.8 27.5 65.1 462.3 1,545.4 1,344.1 201.4 2.0 122.4 –
Q4 2,213.5 29.3 64.6 463.1 1,530.3 1,332.4 197.9 1.6 124.6 –
2019 Q1 2,344.4 31.6 68.3 488.3 1,625.8 1,403.7 222.0 1.5 128.9 –
Q2 2,407.9 31.9 69.4 489.6 1,687.3 1,465.9 221.4 1.8 128.0 –
Q3 2,493.0 31.7 69.3 488.4 1,769.2 1,542.9 226.3 2.2 132.2 –
Q4 2,474.4 31.7 75.8 515.2 1,714.7 1,499.5 215.2 1.9 135.2 –
2020 Q1 2,431.1 31.8 82.4 466.7 1,721.4 1,482.7 238.7 2.4 126.4 –
Q2 2,522.1 33.1 82.3 508.2 1,767.6 1,527.7 240.0 1.9 129.0 –
Q3 2,553.6 34.3 80.0 519.9 1,786.1 1,549.5 236.6 1.7 131.6 –
Q4 2,594.5 36.5 79.6 541.5 1,802.7 1,581.5 221.2 1.6 132.5 –
    Life insurance
2018 Q2 1,195.2 4.1 13.0 119.3 1,017.4 1,017.4 – 0.8 40.6 –
Q3 1,194.1 4.1 12.6 121.0 1,013.7 1,013.7 – 0.9 41.9 –
Q4 1,185.3 4.1 15.2 122.7 1,000.7 1,000.7 – 0.5 42.2 –
2019 Q1 1,239.7 4.1 14.4 120.9 1,058.9 1,058.9 – 0.4 41.1 –
Q2 1,291.9 4.1 14.5 121.8 1,108.6 1,108.6 – 0.4 42.4 –
Q3 1,350.0 3.7 15.6 116.0 1,171.8 1,171.8 – 0.6 42.4 –
Q4 1,325.0 3.6 19.1 127.6 1,129.6 1,129.6 – 0.5 44.6 –
2020 Q1 1,296.5 3.6 19.3 114.4 1,117.6 1,117.6 – 0.6 41.0 –
Q2 1,348.1 3.8 19.2 130.0 1,150.6 1,150.6 – 0.5 43.9 –
Q3 1,370.6 3.9 19.5 137.2 1,165.4 1,165.4 – 0.5 44.1 –
Q4 1,399.2 3.9 20.7 142.3 1,188.3 1,188.3 – 0.5 43.5 –
    Non-life insurance
2018 Q2 621.6 1.1 8.1 140.6 424.5 314.3 110.2 0.1 47.2 –
Q3 617.9 1.1 8.0 141.7 420.7 314.0 106.7 0.0 46.4 –
Q4 616.2 1.0 8.3 140.3 416.6 315.5 101.1 0.0 50.0 –
2019 Q1 655.3 1.1 9.3 144.1 448.4 328.9 119.6 0.0 52.4 –
Q2 665.9 1.1 8.8 146.9 459.3 341.5 117.8 0.1 49.7 –
Q3 683.1 1.2 9.1 149.5 471.8 354.8 117.0 0.1 51.4 –
Q4 674.2 1.2 9.3 153.5 457.1 349.4 107.7 0.1 53.0 –
2020 Q1 673.1 1.3 9.8 144.5 468.6 344.4 124.2 0.1 48.9 –
Q2 689.3 1.2 9.5 152.4 478.5 355.6 123.0 0.1 47.6 –
Q3 698.4 1.2 9.6 156.2 482.7 362.3 120.4 0.1 48.6 –
Q4 708.2 1.2 9.6 161.9 484.0 368.7 115.3 0.0 51.4 –
    Reinsurance 3
2018 Q2 409.5 22.5 43.0 196.9 111.7 16.2 95.5 1.1 34.3 –
Q3 412.7 22.4 44.4 199.7 111.0 16.4 94.7 1.1 34.1 –
Q4 412.0 24.1 41.2 200.1 113.0 16.2 96.8 1.1 32.5 –
2019 Q1 449.4 26.5 44.6 223.4 118.4 15.9 102.5 1.1 35.5 –
Q2 450.1 26.6 46.1 220.8 119.4 15.8 103.6 1.3 35.9 –
Q3 459.9 26.8 44.7 222.8 125.6 16.3 109.3 1.5 38.5 –
Q4 475.2 26.9 47.4 234.0 128.0 20.6 107.5 1.3 37.7 –
2020 Q1 461.5 26.9 53.3 207.8 135.3 20.8 114.5 1.7 36.5 –
Q2 484.7 28.1 53.5 225.8 138.5 21.5 117.0 1.3 37.6 –
Q3 484.6 29.2 50.9 226.6 138.0 21.8 116.2 1.0 38.9 –
Q4 487.0 31.4 49.3 237.3 130.4 24.5 105.9 1.0 37.6 –
Pension funds 4
2018 Q2 658.7 – 7.5 7.7 588.1 588.1 – – 2.8 52.5
Q3 666.0 – 7.7 7.8 595.2 595.2 – – 2.9 52.4
Q4 672.2 – 7.9 8.0 605.8 605.8 – – 2.8 47.6
2019 Q1 689.2 – 8.1 8.1 613.9 613.9 – – 2.9 56.3
Q2 703.0 – 8.1 8.3 619.8 619.8 – – 2.9 64.0
Q3 718.3 – 8.2 8.4 626.8 626.8 – – 2.9 72.1
Q4 726.8 – 8.4 8.6 637.5 637.5 – – 2.9 69.4
2020 Q1 709.2 – 8.6 8.7 639.4 639.4 – – 3.0 49.6
Q2 729.3 – 8.5 8.8 645.9 645.9 – – 3.0 63.1
Q3 732.1 – 8.5 8.8 643.2 643.2 – – 3.0 68.5
Q4 755.4 – 8.9 9.0 658.5 658.5 – – 3.1 75.8
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I super-
visory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  1 Including de-
posits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers' note loans
and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Insurance technical reserves "life" taking account of tran-
sitional measures. Health insurance is also included in the "non-life insurance" sector.3 Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which is in-
cluded there.  4 The term "pension funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension
funds" of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company
pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. Social secu-
rity funds are not included.  5 Own funds correspond to the sum of net worth and the
liability item "Shares and other equity".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2009 70,208 – 538 –114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 68,536 – 19,945
2010 146,620 – 1,212 – 7,621 24,044 –17,635 147,831 92,682 –103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 –46,796 850 59,521 20,075 – 23,876 – 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 64,775 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,408 – 12,124 – 11,951 74,483 14,366
2015 33,024 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 69,034 116,493 – 66,330 121,164 61,659 – 83,471
2016 71,380 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 43,951 164,148 – 58,012 187,500 34,660 – 92,768
2017 54,840 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 43,277 137,907 – 71,454 161,012 48,349 – 83,067
2018 61,661 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 45,031 95,902 – 24,417 67,328 52,991 – 34,241
2019 137,356 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 68,820 62,915 8,059 2,408 52,448 74,441
2020 436,043 379,893 13,948 87,616 278,328 56,150 276,355 18,955 226,887 30,513 159,688
2020 May 83,230 81,066 – 1,787 17,145 65,708 2,163 41,207 9,749 35,151 – 3,693 42,022
June 69,059 51,243 6,698 8,431 36,114 17,816 42,995 9,099 25,469 8,427 26,064
July 53,590 53,878 – 2,043 19,174 36,746 – 288 24,222 – 15,536 25,721 14,037 29,369
Aug. 66,958 71,370 1,689 19,737 49,943 – 4,411 11,518 – 7,604 18,004 1,118 55,440
Sep. 73,380 70,210 23,528 26,322 20,360 3,170 23,183 1,689 22,121 – 627 50,197
Oct. – 18,992 –37,537 –16,297 –18,370 – 2,870 18,545 28,450 9,298 24,556 – 5,405 – 47,441
Nov. 20,571 26,232 – 1,002 184 27,050 – 5,661 26,637 1,513 27,659 – 2,535 – 6,066
Dec. – 36,662 –38,404 –11,728 –11,953 –14,723 1,742 15,500 – 25,221 18,290 22,431 – 52,162
2021 Jan. 56,680 27,544 4,005 3,591 19,948 29,136 43,753 8,455 13,518 21,780 12,927
Feb. 42,555 19,574 3,411 – 2,569 18,732 22,980 43,479 – 3,738 20,397 26,821 – 925
Mar. 49,216 39,762 22,046 551 17,165 9,454 38,924 6,152 20,708 12,065 10,292
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 – 8,335 38,831 5,485
2010 37,767 20,049 17,718 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,360
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 – 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 – 449
2015 44,165 7,668 36,497 34,437 – 5,421 39,858 9,728
2016 30,896 4,409 26,487 31,037 – 5,143 36,180 – 141
2017 51,571 15,570 36,001 49,913 7,031 42,882 1,658
2018 55,729 16,188 39,541 83,036 – 11,184 94,220 – 27,307
2019 47,115 9,076 38,039 33,573 – 1,119 34,692 13,542
2020 101,155 33,973 67,182 133,015 27 132,988 – 31,860
2020 May 7,503 1,370 6,133 9,368 371 8,997 – 1,865
June 5,168 685 4,483 6,518 2,509 4,009 – 1,350
July 9,175 2,144 7,031 26,530 676 25,854 – 17,355
Aug. 9,463 2,900 6,562 8,730 1,020 7,710 732
Sep. 27,422 20,689 6,734 26,795 161 26,634 628
Oct. 5,092 1,057 4,036 5,325 342 4,983 – 233
Nov. 9,988 220 9,769 10,221 1,919 8,302 – 233
Dec. 14,530 2,898 11,633 14,692 2,970 11,722 – 161
2021 Jan. – 7,264 1,441 – 8,705 – 10,433 863 – 11,296 3,169
Feb. 9,412 2,729 6,683 11,010 1,501 9,509 – 1,598
Mar. 20,411 8,964 11,447 18,019 1,285 16,734 2,392
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,653 563,730
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,614 592,375
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,737,330 776,665 38,948 17,527 643,029 77,161 183,136 777,529
2020 July 171,029 61,677 1,366 20 55,809 4,483 21,028 88,323
Aug. 144,829 56,957 16 13 53,343 3,585 8,574 79,298
Sep. 178,482 75,616 3,186 250 65,309 6,872 14,767 88,098
Oct. 128,029 61,836 2,174 265 55,991 3,406 10,079 56,114
Nov. 119,066 61,562 648 300 53,206 7,408 10,625 46,879
Dec. 82,963 49,157 389 250 46,188 2,329 8,119 25,687
2021 Jan. 158,047 75,939 3,011 590 67,225 5,113 11,902 70,206
Feb. 129,424 67,263 3,158 504 52,753 10,847 9,658 52,503
Mar. 181,134 105,656 11,531 9,511 75,888 8,725 11,202 64,277
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 534,753 165,040 28,500 7,427 90,778 38,335 76,856 292,857
2020 July 61,157 14,073 1,366 20 11,330 1,356 13,246 33,838
Aug. 42,392 6,750 16 13 5,299 1,422 1,600 34,043
Sep. 62,522 18,442 3,036 250 9,713 5,443 7,430 36,649
Oct. 39,312 11,516 1,620 15 7,838 2,042 5,411 22,386
Nov. 34,273 10,829 548 50 4,838 5,394 5,877 17,567
Dec. 10,703 4,447 389 – 2,870 1,188 2,213 4,043
2021 Jan. 51,930 21,586 2,250 40 16,275 3,021 5,919 24,425
Feb. 41,268 18,138 2,658 4 7,789 7,686 3,654 19,477
Mar. 59,198 27,751 6,371 3,161 13,661 4,558 5,800 25,647
Net sales 5
2010 21,566 – 87,646 – 3,754 – 63,368 28,296 – 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 – 54,582 1,657 – 44,290 32,904 – 44,852 – 3,189 80,289
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 340,891 26,201 7,861 8,016 21,716 – 11,393 48,466 266,225
2020 July 38,568 – 4,680 – 1,443 – 714 239 – 2,762 12,126 31,122
Aug. 61,291 1,724 – 1,512 – 136 4,496 – 1,124 498 59,069
Sep. 45,105 19,271 – 1,493 – 45 20,898 – 90 3,350 22,485
Oct. – 12,771 – 14,240 – 1,656 – 608 – 10,488 – 1,488 – 741 2,210
Nov. 13,940 190 – 1,049 – 907 – 910 3,056 – 234 13,984
Dec. – 36,561 – 13,347 – 1,598 – 1,303 – 6,493 – 3,953 – 2,526 – 20,688
2021 Jan. 25,583 2,557 1,094 – 922 3,747 – 1,362 4,467 18,559
Feb. 19,957 3,080 – 478 – 190 – 712 4,460 782 16,094
Mar. 61,035 37,121 10,737 8,754 15,779 1,850 2,689 21,225
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201 1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,409,827 2 1,173,366 183,261 55,192 687,697 2 247,216 2 377,012 1,859,448
2020 July 3,348,626 1,186,901 190,615 58,228 685,892 252,167 380,489 1,781,237
Aug. 2 3,406,903 1,187,547 189,114 58,097 689,291 251,046 2 379,910 1,839,445
Sep. 3,455,949 1,209,937 187,644 58,079 713,012 251,202 383,450 1,862,562
Oct. 2 3,445,108 2 1,195,893 186,057 57,474 703,564 2 248,798 382,877 1,866,338
Nov. 3,454,393 1,191,679 184,910 56,543 698,703 251,522 382,493 1,880,221
Dec. 2 3,409,827 1,173,366 183,261 55,192 687,697 247,216 2 377,012 1,859,448
2021 Jan. 3,436,220 1,179,145 184,416 54,254 694,279 246,197 381,760 1,875,315
Feb. 3,458,054 1,183,338 183,909 54,073 694,713 250,643 383,040 1,891,676
Mar. 3,533,114 1,230,283 194,832 62,865 719,386 253,200 386,356 1,916,474
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-March 2021
bis unter 2   1 147 049   437 850   54 830   21 508   293 808   67 704   64 859   644 339 
 2 bis unter 4    676 084   294 700   53 132   17 902   167 872   55 794   63 892   317 491 
 4 bis unter 6    502 073   198 629   32 572   10 789   101 879   53 389   63 121   240 323 
6 bis unter 8    380 784   136 809   29 332   5 887   73 556   28 035   42 610   201 366 
 8 bis unter 10    285 705   74 986   14 155   3 251   39 187   18 393   29 115   181 603 
 10 bis unter 15    148 170   41 729   6 864   2 553   18 916   13 396   32 059   74 382 
 15 bis unter 20    118 913   21 115   2 875    813   15 528   1 900   10 300   87 499 
 20 und darüber    274 337   24 466   1 072    163   8 640   14 590   80 399   169 472 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 – 3,741 – 1,269 – 974 927,256
2010 174,596 – 1,096 3,265 497 178 – 486 – 993 – 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 – 552 – 762 – 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,700 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,747 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,146 2,604 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,636 1,963,588
2020 July 180,473 431 470 19 –– 3 – 6 – 48 1,799,062
Aug. 180,820 409 434 36 –– 23 22 – 61 1,887,713
Sep. 182,039 604 896 10 60 – 3 – 23 – 335 1,870,873
Oct. 182,165 36 82 18 –– 5 – 9 – 50 1,727,080
Nov. 181,879 – 340 47 – 1 – 219 – 11 – 158 1,884,308
Dec. 181,881 2 181 – 90 – 87 – 64 – 118 1,963,588
2021 Jan. 181,437 – 445 102 260 4 – 74 – 300 – 437 1,961,051
Feb. 182,149 705 331 – 0 – 9 443 – 59 1,994,901
Mar. 182,362 213 411 – 0 – 1 – 34 – 164 2,174,997
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields and indices on German securities
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  4 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-
MFIs)German
bond
index
(REX)iBoxx
€ Germany 
price indexCDAX
share price
indexGerman
share
index
(DAX)
Period % per annumAverage
daily rateEnd-1998
= 100End-1987
= 100End-1987
= 1,000
2009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 2.9 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2019 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2020 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7 146.15 113.14 586.72 13,718.78
2020 Nov. – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.9 146.22 113.19 564.23 13,291.16
Dec. – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.8 146.15 113.14 586.72 13,718.78
2021 Jan. – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.8 146.06 112.19 582.62 13,432.87
Feb. – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.1 0.9 144.36 109.90 592.88 13,786.29
Mar. – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.1 0.9 144.70 109.88 633.92 15,008.34
Apr. – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.1 0.2 0.9 144.29 109.11 638.17 15,135.91
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 End of year or month.  3 Source: Deutsche Börse
AG. 4 Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for futures contracts;
calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 –5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 –14,995 –8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 – 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 –1,340 – 379 –2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 –7,576 – 694 47,050 1,984 7,035
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,521 144,075 819 –1,745 143,256 44,266 –3,840
2015 181,889 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,753 174,018 7,362 494 166,656 35,259 7,871
2016 156,985 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 37,615 163,934 2,877 –3,172 161,057 40,787 –6,947
2017 153,756 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 58,834 156,282 4,938 1,048 151,344 57,786 –2,526
2018 132,060 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 28,366 138,424 2,979 –2,306 135,445 30,672 –6,364
2019 176,465 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 53,919 181,388 2,719 – 812 178,669 54,731 –4,923
2020 180,462 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 64,435 179,529 336 –1,656 179,193 66,091 933
2020 Sep. 15,707 10,083 1,146 112 – 18 1,052 8,937 5,624 16,986 – 705 250 17,691 5,374 –1,278
Oct. 14,938 11,677 713 33 – 99 853 10,964 3,261 15,318 939 – 90 14,379 3,351 – 380
Nov. 17,027 7,541 3,796 – 107 3,297 630 3,745 9,486 16,187 – 121 457 16,308 9,029 839
Dec. 49,571 32,118 3,506 – 122 3,094 476 28,613 17,453 48,195 1,712 125 46,483 17,328 1,376
2021 Jan. 19,672 12,231 1,832 – 46 1,159 776 10,399 7,441 19,706 615 257 19,091 7,184 – 34
Feb. 14,398 7,295 2,852 – 27 1,926 946 4,443 7,102 15,065 1,442 395 13,623 6,707 – 667
Mar. 15,966 13,745 4,699 631 3,335 827 9,046 2,221 15,173 552 – 526 14,621 2,747 794
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2019 2020
 Item 2018 2019 2020 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 25.63 18.26 100.01 34.28 12.06 0.73 46.79 45.71 6.78
   Debt securities 5.24 –2.23 1.56 –0.59 –0.94 0.15 1.36 0.24 –0.19
     Short-term debt securities 1.42 –1.31 1.49 0.33 –0.31 –0.32 0.48 1.52 –0.18
     Long-term debt securities 3.82 –0.91 0.07 –0.92 –0.63 0.47 0.88 –1.28 –0.01
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 0.65 –0.47 0.57 –0.46 –0.31 –0.04 1.48 –0.97 0.10
         Non-financial corporations 0.59 0.51 –0.17 0.31 –0.25 –0.02 0.19 0.15 –0.48
         Financial corporations 1.40 –0.56 –0.08 –0.71 0.18 –0.16 0.38 –0.39 0.09
         General government –1.34 –0.41 0.82 –0.05 –0.24 0.14 0.91 –0.73 0.49
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 4.60 –1.76 0.99 –0.13 –0.63 0.19 –0.11 1.21 –0.29
   Loans –0.87 –2.77 –19.33 –22.33 22.98 –8.06 –3.19 –7.81 –0.28
     Short-term loans 24.05 12.37 –8.52 –17.31 26.90 –9.40 –2.83 0.49 3.22
     Long-term loans –24.92 –15.14 –10.81 –5.03 –3.92 1.33 –0.35 –8.30 –3.50
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 6.25 –25.01 0.29 –17.30 10.77 –7.83 6.99 –3.13 4.24
         Non-financial corporations 4.52 –28.14 –12.27 –19.35 12.60 –9.25 5.75 –3.86 –4.90
         Financial corporations 1.36 2.90 11.99 2.00 –1.89 1.29 1.11 0.59 9.00
         General government 0.36 0.22 0.56 0.06 0.06 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.14
       Loans to the rest of the world –7.12 22.24 –19.61 –5.04 12.21 –0.24 –10.18 –4.68 –4.52
   Equity and investment fund shares 130.07 91.38 76.50 40.37 21.32 57.08 –14.57 20.45 13.54
     Equity 128.06 82.38 63.69 37.16 19.78 56.22 –15.60 15.45 7.62
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 18.82 6.18 –76.31 15.19 –7.49 –1.51 –17.07 10.02 –67.75
         Non-financial corporations 18.27 4.62 –76.40 15.24 –9.14 –1.32 –16.89 10.15 –68.34
         Financial corporations 0.55 1.55 0.09 –0.05 1.65 –0.19 –0.18 –0.14 0.60
       Listed shares of the rest of the world –3.84 5.55 6.53 2.80 0.55 0.74 –1.44 3.44 3.79
       Other equity  1 113.08 70.65 133.48 19.16 26.72 57.00 2.91 2.00 71.58
     Investment fund shares 2.01 9.00 12.81 3.21 1.54 0.85 1.03 5.00 5.92
       Money market fund shares –0.53 1.78 3.83 –0.03 1.61 –1.80 0.98 3.31 1.34
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 2.54 7.22 8.98 3.24 –0.08 2.65 0.06 1.69 4.58
   Insurance technical reserves 0.39 1.68 2.08 0.39 0.33 0.56 0.54 0.50 0.48
   Financial derivatives 2.15 0.54 –17.07 –4.36 11.22 –0.93 –10.35 0.44 –6.24
   Other accounts receivable 41.42 –67.06 54.17 –4.15 –63.19 10.15 –54.09 47.63 50.48
   Total 204.03 39.79 197.92 43.61 3.78 59.67 –33.49 107.16 64.58
 External financing
   Debt securities 0.47 20.52 36.25 7.04 0.72 6.69 23.36 10.22 –4.03
     Short-term securities 3.38 4.88 –4.40 1.45 –3.52 2.17 2.76 –3.91 –5.42
       Long-term securities –2.91 15.64 40.65 5.59 4.24 4.53 20.60 14.13 1.39
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 3.48 6.77 18.07 2.21 0.80 1.54 11.44 5.05 0.04
           Non-financial corporations 0.59 0.51 –0.17 0.31 –0.25 –0.02 0.19 0.15 –0.48
           Financial corporations 2.89 5.46 19.80 1.92 0.63 2.04 11.17 5.43 1.16
           General government 0.01 0.47 –0.22 –0.04 0.42 –0.10 –0.19 0.05 0.01
           Households –0.01 0.34 –1.35 0.03 –0.01 –0.39 0.26 –0.57 –0.65
         Debt securities of the rest of the world –3.01 13.75 18.18 4.83 –0.08 5.15 11.93 5.17 –4.07
   Loans 157.71 77.15 70.03 1.58 16.41 33.59 28.79 1.08 6.58
     Short-term loans 72.92 23.58 –20.17 –8.09 9.68 14.36 –26.96 –0.18 –7.39
     Long-term loans 84.78 53.57 90.20 9.67 6.73 19.23 55.74 1.26 13.97
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 86.80 33.41 32.06 –16.79 26.25 9.97 23.78 –3.13 1.43
         Non-financial corporations 4.52 –28.14 –12.27 –19.35 12.60 –9.25 5.75 –3.86 –4.90
         Financial corporations 80.88 60.35 10.72 2.58 9.58 23.59 2.07 –9.61 –5.33
         General government 1.40 1.20 33.60 –0.02 4.07 –4.37 15.97 10.35 11.66
       Loans from the rest of the world 70.91 43.74 37.97 18.38 –9.84 23.62 5.00 4.20 5.14
   Equity 16.08 17.96 72.69 3.36 5.18 6.07 9.74 37.78 19.10
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 73.22 –24.49 –60.05 15.17 –9.38 7.20 –11.55 10.81 –66.51
       Non-financial corporations 18.27 4.62 –76.40 15.24 –9.14 –1.32 –16.89 10.15 –68.34
       Financial corporations 46.75 –33.13 3.96 –0.68 0.61 1.65 1.72 –1.00 1.59
       General government 0.53 –0.01 0.26 0.04 –0.05 0.20 0.09 –0.01 –0.01
       Households 7.67 4.03 12.13 0.57 –0.80 6.66 3.54 1.68 0.25
     Listed shares of the rest of the world –31.95 –1.59 26.70 –14.41 14.28 –5.95 16.41 14.87 1.37
     Other equity  1 –25.20 44.04 106.03 2.60 0.28 4.82 4.87 12.10 84.24
   Insurance technical reserves 6.08 2.81 2.81 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options –0.49 –1.38 –2.50 2.69 –3.21 1.49 –2.26 –1.49 –0.24
   Other accounts payable 54.18 5.79 14.22 20.75 –21.04 –2.75 –45.46 39.43 22.99
   Total 234.01 122.86 193.50 36.14 –1.24 45.80 14.87 87.72 45.11
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2019 2020
 Item 2018 2019 2020 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 583.6 578.4 720.7 583.4 578.4 599.9 631.3 703.4 720.7
   Debt securities 50.8 49.6 51.5 51.1 49.6 48.2 51.5 51.5 51.5
     Short-term debt securities 4.9 3.7 4.8 3.9 3.7 3.4 3.8 5.1 4.8
     Long-term debt securities 45.9 45.9 46.7 47.1 45.9 44.9 47.7 46.3 46.7
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 21.3 21.1 22.1 21.7 21.1 20.3 22.3 21.9 22.1
         Non-financial corporations 4.5 5.0 4.7 5.3 5.0 4.7 5.0 5.1 4.7
         Financial corporations 13.8 13.6 13.4 13.6 13.6 12.9 13.6 13.2 13.4
         General government 3.0 2.6 4.0 2.9 2.6 2.7 3.7 3.5 4.0
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 29.5 28.4 29.4 29.3 28.4 28.0 29.2 29.6 29.4
   Loans 733.8 733.4 717.0 711.3 733.4 724.2 728.7 718.4 717.0
     Short-term loans 555.6 569.4 565.8 542.8 569.4 559.1 564.4 563.2 565.8
     Long-term loans 178.2 164.0 151.2 168.5 164.0 165.1 164.3 155.2 151.2
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 440.2 415.2 415.5 404.5 415.2 407.4 414.4 411.3 415.5
         Non-financial corporations 368.0 339.9 327.6 327.3 339.9 330.6 336.4 332.5 327.6
         Financial corporations 65.2 68.1 80.1 70.0 68.1 69.4 70.5 71.1 80.1
         General government 7.1 7.3 7.9 7.2 7.3 7.4 7.6 7.7 7.9
       Loans to the rest of the world 293.6 318.1 301.5 306.8 318.1 316.8 314.3 307.2 301.5
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,164.6 2,426.7 2,426.4 2,316.5 2,426.7 2,218.4 2,379.1 2,412.6 2,426.4
     Equity 1,998.2 2,236.7 2,221.7 2,129.9 2,236.7 2,042.6 2,192.6 2,219.2 2,221.7
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 302.6 342.0 307.0 328.8 342.0 288.4 337.2 352.5 307.0
         Non-financial corporations 296.0 332.9 298.9 321.4 332.9 281.4 329.6 346.0 298.9
         Financial corporations 6.6 9.0 8.1 7.3 9.0 7.0 7.6 6.5 8.1
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 40.2 50.7 66.5 47.8 50.7 45.3 47.4 55.2 66.5
       Other equity  1 1,655.5 1,844.0 1,848.2 1,753.3 1,844.0 1,708.9 1,808.0 1,811.5 1,848.2
     Investment fund shares 166.4 190.0 204.7 186.6 190.0 175.8 186.6 193.5 204.7
       Money market fund shares 1.0 3.2 7.0 1.2 3.2 1.4 2.4 5.7 7.0
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 165.4 186.8 197.8 185.4 186.8 174.4 184.2 187.8 197.8
   Insurance technical reserves 56.3 59.1 62.2 58.4 59.1 59.9 60.6 61.4 62.2
   Financial derivatives 33.3 31.6 30.2 32.1 31.6 44.6 34.8 29.7 30.2
   Other accounts receivable 1,171.0 1,244.8 1,225.3 1,239.5 1,244.8 1,210.9 1,123.4 1,183.9 1,225.3
   Total 4,793.4 5,123.6 5,233.2 4,992.3 5,123.6 4,906.1 5,009.7 5,160.9 5,233.2
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 181.3 204.7 249.2 208.0 204.7 202.9 238.6 251.4 249.2
     Short-term securities 6.8 11.9 7.1 15.5 11.9 13.9 16.6 12.6 7.1
     Long-term securities 174.5 192.9 242.1 192.5 192.9 189.0 222.0 238.9 242.1
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 70.1 77.7 95.9 77.8 77.7 74.3 88.7 94.8 95.9
         Non-financial corporations 4.5 5.0 4.7 5.3 5.0 4.7 5.0 5.1 4.7
         Financial corporations 51.5 57.7 78.1 57.9 57.7 56.4 69.7 76.0 78.1
         General government 0.1 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.6 0.5 0.3 0.4 0.4
         Households 14.0 14.4 12.8 14.5 14.4 12.8 13.8 13.3 12.8
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 111.1 127.1 153.3 130.1 127.1 128.6 149.9 156.6 153.3
   Loans 2,049.5 2,127.5 2,188.9 2,114.1 2,127.5 2,160.9 2,190.8 2,186.0 2,188.9
     Short-term loans 793.5 820.3 794.4 811.9 820.3 834.9 806.2 803.5 794.4
     Long-term loans 1,256.0 1,307.2 1,394.5 1,302.3 1,307.2 1,326.1 1,384.6 1,382.5 1,394.5
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,325.2 1,358.6 1,390.0 1,333.5 1,358.6 1,368.6 1,394.3 1,389.4 1,390.0
         Non-financial corporations 368.0 339.9 327.6 327.3 339.9 330.6 336.4 332.5 327.6
         Financial corporations 906.8 966.8 975.6 958.4 966.8 989.8 993.5 981.9 975.6
         General government 50.5 51.9 86.8 47.9 51.9 48.1 64.5 75.0 86.8
       Loans from the rest of the world 724.3 768.9 798.9 780.6 768.9 792.4 796.5 796.6 798.9
   Equity 2,701.1 3,102.2 3,191.3 2,894.0 3,102.2 2,572.7 2,950.1 3,092.2 3,191.3
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 659.1 733.2 739.2 692.2 733.2 594.9 710.7 746.7 739.2
       Non-financial corporations 296.0 332.9 298.9 321.4 332.9 281.4 329.6 346.0 298.9
       Financial corporations 161.7 157.2 171.2 145.4 157.2 126.0 149.8 155.4 171.2
       General government 41.6 51.8 56.3 47.9 51.8 41.8 50.5 53.3 56.3
       Households 159.8 191.3 212.8 177.4 191.3 145.7 180.8 192.0 212.8
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 765.0 959.4 996.3 857.9 959.4 689.5 856.5 924.2 996.3
     Other equity  1 1,277.0 1,409.6 1,455.9 1,344.0 1,409.6 1,288.3 1,382.9 1,421.3 1,455.9
   Insurance technical reserves 269.8 272.6 275.4 271.9 272.6 273.3 274.0 274.7 275.4
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 65.4 67.0 86.8 85.6 67.0 87.4 90.4 84.5 86.8
   Other accounts payable 1,188.7 1,317.0 1,320.9 1,293.3 1,317.0 1,276.4 1,238.8 1,289.0 1,320.9
   Total 6,455.7 7,091.0 7,312.5 6,866.9 7,091.0 6,573.6 6,982.7 7,177.8 7,312.5
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2019 2020
 Item 2018 2019 2020 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 137.95 142.38 209.52 23.45 51.88 20.88 72.99 41.41 74.25
     Currency 29.92 35.37 61.14 10.16 12.99 16.28 16.90 11.87 16.09
     Deposits 108.03 107.01 148.38 13.29 38.90 4.60 56.10 29.53 58.15
       Transferable deposits 109.88 111.01 165.34 17.27 42.16 18.74 58.64 31.76 56.20
       Time deposits 6.78 1.47 –1.70 –0.30 0.71 –3.11 –0.85 0.41 1.85
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –8.63 –5.47 –15.26 –3.68 –3.97 –11.04 –1.70 –2.63 0.10
   Debt securities 1.62 –1.85 –6.11 –1.35 –1.61 –1.47 0.29 –1.75 –3.18
     Short-term debt securities –0.13 –0.53 0.08 –0.19 0.02 –0.03 0.16 0.11 –0.16
     Long-term debt securities 1.74 –1.32 –6.19 –1.16 –1.63 –1.44 0.13 –1.86 –3.03
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 2.24 –2.93 –2.62 –1.52 –2.38 –0.14 0.51 –1.19 –1.79
         Non-financial corporations –0.10 0.21 –1.32 –0.04 –0.04 –0.32 0.19 –0.56 –0.62
         Financial corporations 2.81 –2.22 –1.31 –1.31 –1.75 –0.35 0.44 –0.37 –1.02
         General government –0.46 –0.92 0.02 –0.18 –0.58 0.53 –0.11 –0.25 –0.15
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –0.63 1.08 –3.50 0.18 0.77 –1.32 –0.22 –0.57 –1.39
   Equity and investment fund shares 38.44 49.78 90.10 11.96 16.20 19.39 29.12 20.13 21.46
     Equity 18.84 18.94 49.28 4.40 3.43 13.62 15.86 12.08 7.72
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 9.44 6.61 16.09 1.11 –0.24 8.07 6.43 1.94 –0.35
         Non-financial corporations 6.28 3.52 11.97 0.88 –1.19 6.47 3.45 1.72 0.33
         Financial corporations 3.16 3.09 4.12 0.23 0.95 1.61 2.97 0.22 –0.68
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 4.37 7.46 23.89 2.19 2.58 3.02 6.57 7.87 6.43
       Other equity  1 5.03 4.86 9.30 1.10 1.08 2.53 2.86 2.27 1.64
     Investment fund shares 19.60 30.84 40.82 7.57 12.78 5.76 13.26 8.05 13.74
       Money market fund shares –0.22 –0.32 –0.02 0.18 –0.37 0.38 –0.13 0.03 –0.29
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 19.81 31.16 40.84 7.39 13.14 5.38 13.40 8.02 14.03
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 15.80 17.93 20.04 4.46 6.57 5.29 5.62 5.55 3.57
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 28.22 34.85 26.52 7.77 8.66 10.63 3.80 6.19 5.91
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 37.28 27.51 37.78 4.98 4.75 11.53 7.55 7.04 11.66
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 –9.28 –2.74 10.61 8.29 –27.13 24.15 –9.20 7.60 –11.93
   Total 250.02 267.85 388.45 59.56 59.33 90.39 110.18 86.16 101.72
 External financing
   Loans 68.41 81.16 83.07 24.85 16.59 13.13 17.63 27.55 24.77
     Short-term loans 2.44 0.92 –5.51 –0.62 0.20 –1.58 –2.29 –0.52 –1.12
     Long-term loans 65.97 80.23 88.58 25.47 16.39 14.71 19.91 28.08 25.89
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 57.42 67.17 84.85 21.66 19.79 15.69 18.47 25.56 25.13
       Consumer loans 11.14 14.42 –4.29 3.67 –1.96 –2.67 –2.05 1.08 –0.66
       Entrepreneurial loans –0.14 –0.43 2.51 –0.49 –1.25 0.10 1.21 0.91 0.29
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 61.72 73.41 83.17 21.09 18.60 15.52 17.96 27.32 22.37
       Loans from other financial institutions 6.69 7.74 –0.10 3.76 –2.01 –2.39 –0.34 0.24 2.40
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.80 0.31 0.47 0.20 –0.50 –0.17 0.25 0.31 0.07
   Total 69.21 81.46 83.54 25.04 16.09 12.96 17.88 27.87 24.84
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2019 2020
 Item 2018 2019 2020 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 2,457.4 2,599.8 2,809.0 2,547.9 2,599.8 2,620.7 2,693.7 2,734.7 2,809.0
     Currency 227.3 262.7 323.8 249.7 262.7 279.0 295.9 307.7 323.8
     Deposits 2,230.1 2,337.1 2,485.2 2,298.2 2,337.1 2,341.7 2,397.8 2,427.0 2,485.2
       Transferable deposits 1,398.0 1,509.1 1,674.1 1,466.9 1,509.1 1,527.8 1,586.4 1,617.9 1,674.1
       Time deposits 252.4 253.9 252.1 253.2 253.9 250.8 249.9 250.3 252.1
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 579.7 574.2 558.9 578.2 574.2 563.2 561.5 558.8 558.9
     Debt securities 117.6 121.4 113.7 122.6 121.4 108.9 114.5 113.7 113.7
       Short-term debt securities 2.1 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.5 1.7 1.8 1.6
       Long-term debt securities 115.5 119.7 112.0 121.0 119.7 107.4 112.7 111.9 112.0
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 80.2 81.4 76.7 83.4 81.4 72.3 76.7 76.1 76.7
           Non-financial corporations 12.1 12.4 10.9 12.5 12.4 11.0 11.8 11.3 10.9
           Financial corporations 64.6 66.6 63.3 67.7 66.6 58.2 62.0 62.1 63.3
           General government 3.4 2.5 2.6 3.2 2.5 3.1 3.0 2.7 2.6
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 37.5 39.9 36.9 39.3 39.9 36.6 37.8 37.6 36.9
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,162.2 1,386.4 1,539.0 1,323.2 1,386.4 1,220.7 1,374.2 1,423.6 1,539.0
     Equity 588.8 706.1 804.5 673.2 706.1 618.9 708.4 735.9 804.5
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 184.1 223.9 243.3 209.3 223.9 171.7 209.2 217.3 243.3
         Non-financial corporations 151.9 182.3 204.0 169.3 182.3 138.7 172.3 183.6 204.0
         Financial corporations 32.2 41.6 39.2 40.0 41.6 33.0 36.9 33.7 39.2
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 100.2 136.3 180.5 126.2 136.3 116.9 144.7 156.1 180.5
       Other equity  1 304.5 345.9 380.7 337.7 345.9 330.3 354.5 362.5 380.7
     Investment fund shares 573.4 680.2 734.5 650.0 680.2 601.9 665.9 687.7 734.5
       Money market fund shares 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.5 2.3 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.3
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 571.1 678.0 732.2 647.5 678.0 599.2 663.2 684.9 732.2
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 375.9 393.8 413.8 387.2 393.8 399.1 404.7 410.3 413.8
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,011.1 1,069.1 1,094.9 1,054.7 1,069.1 1,079.6 1,083.2 1,089.2 1,094.9
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 883.8 911.4 949.1 899.6 911.4 922.9 930.4 937.5 949.1
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 29.6 29.6 30.5 32.3 29.6 29.0 29.6 30.0 30.5
   Total 6,037.7 6,511.5 6,950.0 6,367.5 6,511.5 6,380.9 6,630.4 6,739.0 6,950.0
 Liabilities
   Loans 1,775.6 1,857.8 1,940.8 1,841.1 1,857.8 1,871.0 1,886.6 1,915.3 1,940.8
     Short-term loans 58.1 58.8 53.1 58.8 58.8 57.2 54.9 54.2 53.1
     Long-term loans 1,717.5 1,799.0 1,887.7 1,782.4 1,799.0 1,813.8 1,831.7 1,861.1 1,887.7
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,307.9 1,378.6 1,464.4 1,359.0 1,378.6 1,394.4 1,412.5 1,438.8 1,464.4
       Consumer loans 218.1 231.4 226.1 233.3 231.4 228.8 226.0 227.0 226.1
       Entrepreneurial loans 249.7 247.7 250.2 248.8 247.7 247.8 248.1 249.5 250.2
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,667.2 1,741.6 1,824.6 1,722.9 1,741.6 1,757.2 1,773.2 1,801.6 1,824.6
       Loans from other financial institutions 108.5 116.2 116.1 118.2 116.2 113.8 113.5 113.7 116.1
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 18.3 19.2 19.3 20.8 19.2 20.7 21.0 20.6 19.3
   Total 1,793.9 1,877.0 1,960.0 1,862.0 1,877.0 1,891.7 1,907.7 1,935.9 1,960.0
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
May 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2014 + 17.0 + 15.5 + 2.0 − 3.9 + 3.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1
2015 + 29.1 + 17.6 + 4.6 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 + 36.4 + 13.7 + 7.7 + 6.3 + 8.7 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3
2017 p + 44.4 + 7.8 + 13.9 + 11.4 + 11.2 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.3
2018 p + 61.6 + 20.8 + 12.1 + 12.8 + 16.0 + 1.8 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.5
2019 p + 52.5 + 22.7 + 16.0 + 5.1 + 8.7 + 1.5 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.3
2020 pe − 139.6 − 86.6 − 18.0 − 1.3 − 33.7 − 4.2 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 1.0
2019         H1  p + 46.5 + 19.0 + 13.0 + 6.4 + 8.1 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5
         H2  p + 6.0 + 3.7 + 3.0 − 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0
2020         H1  pe − 54.3 − 29.4 − 12.9 + 1.0 − 13.1 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.8
         H2  pe − 85.3 − 57.2 − 5.1 − 2.3 − 20.6 − 5.0 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.2
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2014 2,216.2 1,398.5 658.2 176.1 1.5 75.7 47.8 22.5 6.0 0.1
2015 2,189.1 1,372.3 658.2 176.3 1.5 72.3 45.3 21.8 5.8 0.0
2016 2,172.3 1,365.9 640.9 178.0 1.2 69.3 43.6 20.4 5.7 0.0
2017 p 2,122.9 1,350.3 613.6 175.2 0.8 65.1 41.4 18.8 5.4 0.0
2018 p 2,074.1 1,323.1 599.8 167.4 0.7 61.8 39.4 17.9 5.0 0.0
2019 p 2,057.6 1,299.8 609.4 165.1 0.7 59.7 37.7 17.7 4.8 0.0
2020 p 2,325.5 1,513.2 662.5 163.6 7.4 69.8 45.4 19.9 4.9 0.2
2019         Q1  p 2,084.4 1,324.5 611.7 165.7 0.7 61.6 39.2 18.1 4.9 0.0
         Q2  p 2,074.8 1,320.4 609.9 164.3 0.7 61.1 38.9 18.0 4.8 0.0
         Q3  p 2,091.7 1,328.1 619.9 163.7 0.6 61.0 38.8 18.1 4.8 0.0
         Q4  p 2,057.6 1,299.8 609.4 165.1 0.7 59.7 37.7 17.7 4.8 0.0
2020         Q1  p 2,103.2 1,327.7 624.4 165.1 0.8 60.9 38.4 18.1 4.8 0.0
         Q2  p 2,272.3 1,473.9 645.9 165.3 1.0 67.3 43.7 19.1 4.9 0.0
         Q3  p 2,344.8 1,536.9 655.5 166.5 4.6 70.0 45.9 19.6 5.0 0.1
         Q4  p 2,325.5 1,513.2 662.5 163.6 7.4 69.8 45.4 19.9 4.9 0.2
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus   
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly  
GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2014 1,313.9 673.0 482.3 158.5 1,296.9 691.3 227.5 147.1 60.5 47.1 123.4 + 17.0 1,160.0
2015 1,364.9 705.1 501.2 158.6 1,335.8 721.9 233.0 153.0 64.5 42.2 121.2 + 29.1 1,213.3
2016 1,426.7 739.2 524.3 163.3 1,390.4 754.5 240.7 162.5 68.1 37.3 127.2 + 36.4 1,270.4
2017 p 1,485.2 773.1 549.5 162.5 1,440.8 783.9 250.1 168.4 71.6 33.7 133.0 + 44.4 1,329.4
2018 p 1,553.8 808.0 572.6 173.2 1,492.2 806.0 259.6 173.4 78.7 31.1 143.5 + 61.6 1,387.6
2019 p 1,610.6 834.1 597.5 179.0 1,558.1 845.9 271.5 181.9 86.2 27.5 145.1 + 52.5 1,438.7
2020 pe 1,563.0 782.0 607.9 173.1 1,702.6 904.9 283.4 202.6 92.5 21.8 197.3 − 139.6 1,397.0
As a percentage of GDP
2014 44.9 23.0 16.5 5.4 44.3 23.6 7.8 5.0 2.1 1.6 4.2 + 0.6 39.6
2015 45.1 23.3 16.6 5.2 44.1 23.9 7.7 5.1 2.1 1.4 4.0 + 1.0 40.1
2016 45.5 23.6 16.7 5.2 44.4 24.1 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.2 4.1 + 1.2 40.5
2017 p 45.6 23.7 16.9 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 + 1.4 40.8
2018 p 46.3 24.1 17.1 5.2 44.5 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.3 + 1.8 41.3
2019 p 46.7 24.2 17.3 5.2 45.2 24.5 7.9 5.3 2.5 0.8 4.2 + 1.5 41.7
2020 pe 46.9 23.5 18.2 5.2 51.1 27.2 8.5 6.1 2.8 0.7 5.9 − 4.2 41.9
Percentage growth rates
2014 + 3.9 + 3.4 + 3.6 + 6.9 + 2.6 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 3.7 − 0.8 − 8.4 + 1.0 . + 3.5
2015 + 3.9 + 4.8 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 3.0 + 4.4 + 2.4 + 4.0 + 6.6 − 10.5 − 1.8 . + 4.6
2016 + 4.5 + 4.8 + 4.6 + 2.9 + 4.1 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 6.2 + 5.6 − 11.7 + 4.9 . + 4.7
2017 p + 4.1 + 4.6 + 4.8 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 3.9 + 3.9 + 3.6 + 5.1 − 9.5 + 4.6 . + 4.6
2018 p + 4.6 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 6.6 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 9.8 − 7.8 + 7.8 . + 4.4
2019 p + 3.6 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 3.3 + 4.4 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 4.9 + 9.6 − 11.6 + 1.1 . + 3.7
2020 pe − 3.0 − 6.2 + 1.7 − 3.3 + 9.3 + 7.0 + 4.4 + 11.4 + 7.4 − 20.7 + 36.0 . − 2.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and   
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution  
Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
May 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 788.9 236.0 295.1 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 2.9 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.2 1,238.8 + 6.4
2015 p 829.8 673.3 10.4 804.3 244.1 302.7 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,301.1 1,273.6 + 27.4
2016 p 862.3 705.8 9.0 844.5 251.3 321.6 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 17.8 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.1 1,330.2 + 24.9
2017 p 900.3 734.5 7.9 869.4 261.6 327.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 30.8 631.5 622.0 + 9.5 1,417.5 1,377.2 + 40.3
2018 p 951.8 776.3 6.2 905.6 272.5 338.0 39.2 55.8 16.1 + 46.2 656.2 642.5 + 13.6 1,490.7 1,430.9 + 59.8
2019 p 1,010.4 799.4 11.2 975.4 285.9 349.7 33.6 62.9 16.8 + 35.0 684.7 676.6 + 8.0 1,573.7 1,530.6 + 43.1
2018         Q1  p 225.7 189.1 1.1 210.0 66.0 81.7 14.6 9.1 2.5 + 15.7 156.1 160.8 − 4.7 352.7 341.7 + 11.0
         Q2  p 239.9 194.7 1.0 206.2 65.9 80.9 5.8 11.4 2.1 + 33.7 162.4 160.1 + 2.3 373.3 337.3 + 36.1
         Q3  p 228.8 189.0 1.8 223.6 67.0 84.6 13.4 14.4 1.9 + 5.2 161.8 161.1 + 0.7 361.3 355.5 + 5.9
         Q4  p 255.2 203.9 2.2 262.1 73.1 89.7 6.2 20.3 9.6 − 6.9 174.6 163.4 + 11.2 400.7 396.4 + 4.3
2019         Q1  p 240.9 192.7 2.5 230.4 71.0 88.5 11.5 10.2 3.3 + 10.5 163.3 166.4 − 3.1 374.3 366.8 + 7.5
         Q2  p 256.3 201.7 2.0 233.4 67.5 87.0 12.2 13.0 2.6 + 22.8 169.9 168.4 + 1.5 396.1 371.9 + 24.3
         Q3  p 245.3 194.7 3.4 236.7 70.9 86.2 4.5 16.4 3.1 + 8.6 168.8 170.3 − 1.5 384.0 376.9 + 7.1
         Q4  p 269.3 210.6 3.2 272.1 76.1 87.5 5.1 22.5 7.7 − 2.8 181.9 172.6 + 9.3 420.9 414.4 + 6.5
2020         Q1  p 244.8 197.4 2.5 239.1 75.6 90.5 11.9 12.0 2.6 + 5.7 168.3 175.7 − 7.4 380.0 381.7 − 1.7
         Q2  p 212.1 158.0 2.7 269.2 69.5 119.2 8.6 15.4 3.4 − 57.1 175.9 187.0 − 11.1 354.6 422.9 − 68.2
         Q3  p 227.7 181.5 4.0 282.2 72.4 101.9 1.4 18.3 34.3 − 54.5 181.1 195.0 − 13.9 370.0 438.4 − 68.4
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans grant ed.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2018 p 374.4 363.5 + 10.9 420.5 400.1 + 20.4 271.8 261.5 + 10.2
2019 p 382.5 369.2 + 13.3 437.3 419.5 + 17.9 284.2 278.1 + 6.1
2020 p 341.4 472.1 − 130.7 458.8 488.9 − 30.1 297.0 294.6 + 2.4
2018         Q1  p 87.9 83.9 + 4.0 100.0 92.7 + 7.3 54.9 60.3 − 5.3
         Q2  p 94.5 79.8 + 14.6 104.3 91.8 + 12.5 68.5 62.4 + 6.1
         Q3  p 91.7 95.9 − 4.2 100.7 95.4 + 5.3 66.0 64.3 + 1.7
         Q4  p 100.4 103.9 − 3.5 113.4 118.5 − 5.1 80.4 73.1 + 7.3
2019         Q1  p 84.7 86.1 − 1.4 105.7 99.4 + 6.2 58.2 63.2 − 4.9
         Q2  p 97.7 90.3 + 7.4 106.0 97.5 + 8.5 70.6 65.9 + 4.7
         Q3  p 93.2 91.3 + 1.9 107.9 102.6 + 5.2 69.1 69.2 − 0.1
         Q4  p 106.9 101.5 + 5.4 115.6 118.2 − 2.6 84.5 78.4 + 6.0
2020         Q1  p 92.3 90.4 + 1.9 105.6 102.4 + 3.2 57.9 67.7 − 9.8
         Q2  p 70.8 114.8 − 44.0 108.2 125.3 − 17.1 69.4 69.4 + 0.1
         Q3  p 83.8 105.5 − 21.7 112.9 113.7 − 0.8 67.5 72.6 − 5.1
         Q4  p 94.5 161.5 − 67.0 129.8 145.8 − 16.0 100.3 83.5 + 16.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any assigned to the general government sector. Annual figures up to and including 2011:
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special-purpose
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistica l Office. For the follow-
cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city states Berlin, Bremen and ing years: Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 
Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
May 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,836
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,880 632,237 313,381 286,065 32,791 107,916 − 274 30,266
2019         Q1 193,054 162,696 79,669 71,578 11,450 19,816 + 10,541 6,270
         Q2 202,383 172,563 90,883 75,455 6,224 29,784 + 37 6,179
         Q3 193,918 166,676 86,117 72,677 7,882 27,569 − 327 7,402
         Q4 210,062 182,556 98,381 78,809 5,365 37,733 − 10,227 6,146
2020         Q1 198,351 168,099 83,086 75,420 9,593 18,875 + 11,377 6,855
         Q2 158,161 135,185 68,653 59,557 6,974 25,107 − 2,131 6,997
         Q3 182,202 156,397 78,502 72,613 5,282 25,234 + 571 9,705
         Q4 201,167 172,557 83,140 78,475 10,942 38,700 − 10,090 6,709
2021         Q1 ... 159,178 73,312 72,639 13,227 ... ... 6,887
2020         Mar. . 63,979 33,419 28,891 1,670 . . 2,285
2021         Mar. . 64,816 32,172 30,140 2,504 . . 2,296
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget. 2Customs footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  5 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Domestic Import trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total VAT VAT fers  6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,345 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,703 50,107
2019         Q1 175,216 82,996 50,923 17,453 9,194 5,426 60,402 46,018 14,384 121 23,968 6,531 1,197 12,519
         Q2 185,333 90,134 54,437 16,069 8,085 11,543 59,101 43,943 15,158 2,113 26,625 6,087 1,273 12,770
         Q3 179,020 81,267 53,668 13,614 7,607 6,379 61,057 45,976 15,081 2,221 26,654 6,485 1,336 12,344
         Q4 196,300 89,619 60,632 16,575 7,128 5,284 62,696 47,175 15,520 3,660 32,301 6,746 1,279 13,745
2020         Q1 181,350 88,009 53,389 18,711 8,495 7,415 60,060 46,038 14,022 244 24,517 7,406 1,114 13,251
         Q2 146,360 69,928 50,760 10,633 2,348 6,187 44,262 31,625 12,638 1,170 23,525 6,326 1,149 11,175
         Q3 168,308 73,766 47,470 13,492 5,411 7,392 59,819 47,933 11,886 796 25,930 6,784 1,212 11,910
         Q4 186,327 89,094 57,667 16,146 8,014 7,268 55,343 43,105 12,238 1,744 31,660 7,259 1,227 13,770
2021         Q1 171,881 86,381 50,854 17,826 10,203 7,498 54,795 45,403 9,392 252 21,712 7,757 983 12,703
2020         Mar. 69,635 42,951 16,616 16,420 7,412 2,503 14,461 10,234 4,228 6 9,233 2,652 331 5,655
2021         Mar. 70,284 41,745 15,951 15,443 7,581 2,770 17,616 10,557 7,058 11 7,506 2,993 414 5,468
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in Se ction 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2020: 43.0:52.9:4.1. The EU share is deducted from c entral
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2020: 39.8:60.2. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
May 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,9662018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,2032019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,651 14,553 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2019         Q1 4,848 4,679 2,495 6,542 2,594 1,646 579 586 3,976 1,705 499 351 17,959 14,139 3,350
         Q2 9,937 5,257 3,588 2,543 2,491 1,659 485 665 3,667 1,660 513 247 19,163 14,869 3,881         Q3 10,519 4,624 3,667 2,770 2,251 1,639 515 668 3,923 1,824 474 264 17,118 12,659 4,019         Q4 15,379 5,086 4,507 2,281 2,035 1,745 538 730 4,223 1,798 488 237 17,422 13,861 3,190
2020         Q1 4,966 4,930 2,413 6,766 2,634 1,708 562 537 4,525 1,981 542 358 17,245 13,391 3,403
         Q2 8,117 4,235 3,772 2,606 2,426 1,585 455 328 3,566 2,154 425 181 12,971 8,842 3,895         Q3 9,985 4,365 3,978 2,817 2,366 1,499 506 414 3,730 2,262 509 283 14,690 10,242 4,095         Q4 14,566 5,145 4,487 2,365 2,101 1,768 715 513 4,234 2,203 567 254 16,584 12,997 3,283
2021         Q1 4,126 3,171 2,585 6,776 2,567 1,692 395 400 4,716 2,110 578 353 ... ... ...
2020         Mar. 3,144 2,367 1,152 833 922 532 142 140 1,515 747 177 213 . . .
2021         Mar. 2,286 1,384 1,121 866 896 695 121 138 1,759 822 201 212 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  
3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,0322018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,0082019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 + 1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 303 56 3,974
2020 
p 334,343 235,999 97,679 338,599 289,651 21,859 − 4,256 39,847 38,186 1,286 321 55 3,916
2018         Q1 74,368 51,726 22,489 75,482 64,885 4,569 − 1,114 34,219 32,775 1,146 240 58 4,029
         Q2 77,824 55,186 22,451 75,747 64,742 4,557 + 2,077 36,244 34,963 983 241 57 4,033         Q3 76,831 54,085 22,575 78,284 67,017 4,727 − 1,453 35,344 34,104 936 248 57 4,019         Q4 82,953 60,561 22,185 78,432 67,042 4,729 + 4,521 40,353 38,332 1,713 252 56 4,018
2019         Q1 77,984 54,393 23,426 78,630 67,328 5,087 − 646 39,432 37,637 1,474 263 57 4,001
         Q2 81,410 57,837 23,408 80,804 69,011 5,205 + 605 40,232 38,639 1,272 264 57 3,996         Q3 80,305 56,637 23,481 82,716 70,633 5,330 − 2,411 38,386 36,876 1,183 271 56 3,995         Q4 86,756 63,133 23,413 82,849 70,674 5,333 + 3,907 42,945 40,539 2,074 276 56 3,987
2020         Q1 80,578 55,999 24,436 82,622 70,829 5,346 − 2,045 40,840 38,636 1,848 300 56 3,966
         Q2 82,098 57,515 24,413 82,875 70,889 5,346 − 777 39,779 37,975 1,446 304 55 3,949         Q3 82,689 58,109 24,418 86,497 74,054 5,591 − 3,808 36,898 35,197 1,333 313 55 3,925         Q4 88,978 64,375 24,412 86,605 73,879 5,576 + 2,373 39,847 38,186 1,286 321 55 3,916
2021         Q1 83,066 57,351 25,542 86,048 73,799 5,600 − 2,982 36,888 35,326 1,166 342 54 3,887
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
May 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment  5 payment iture  6 surplus ment
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −
2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −
2018 39,335 34,172 622 − 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 . 588 8,129 + 6,228 −
2019 35,285 29,851 638 − 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 . 842 6,252 + 2,131 −
2020 33,678 28,236 630 − 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 . 1,214 6,076 − 27,335 −
2018         Q1 9,167 7,926 151 − 9,546 3,826 415 1,742 . 174 2,625 − 379 −
         Q2 9,713 8,523 152 − 8,471 3,431 245 1,752 . 161 2,209 + 1,243 −
         Q3 9,515 8,355 152 − 7,288 3,296 50 1,623 . 114 1,514 + 2,227 −
         Q4 10,940 9,367 167 − 7,802 3,204 51 1,834 . 139 1,781 + 3,138 −
2019         Q1 8,369 7,027 148 − 8,597 3,969 403 1,818 . 179 1,450 − 228 −
         Q2 8,685 7,440 156 − 8,136 3,673 204 1,832 . 243 1,475 + 549 −
         Q3 8,650 7,263 162 − 7,829 3,682 68 1,711 . 190 1,510 + 821 −
         Q4 9,581 8,121 172 − 8,592 3,685 98 1,941 . 230 1,816 + 989 −
2020         Q1 8,123 6,851 153 − 9,301 4,469 392 1,934 . 235 1,470 − 1,179 −
         Q2 7,906 6,691 151 − 17,005 4,869 7,977 1,793 . 254 1,407 − 9,099 −
         Q3 8,350 6,934 153 − 18,619 5,737 8,637 1,701 . 472 1,414 − 10,269 −
         Q4 9,299 7,760 174 − 16,088 5,543 5,712 1,957 . 251 1,785 − 6,789 −
2021         Q1 8,228 6,747 289 − 18,260 5,956 8,006 1,935 . 184 1,391 − 10,033 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other social security funds , excluding ad-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- ministrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for job seekers. 
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which: of which:
Central Remedies Adminis-
govern- and trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental therapeutic Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 appliances benefits iture  5 surplus
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 757
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 + 2,654
2019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 − 1,145
2020 p 268,832 237,590 27,940 274,975 78,523 42,874 44,376 14,859 18,033 15,952 11,805 − 6,143
2018         Q1 57,788 53,670 3,625 59,854 19,028 9,569 10,045 3,656 3,763 3,370 2,614 − 2,067
         Q2 59,796 55,571 3,625 60,060 18,677 9,591 10,049 3,639 3,904 3,294 2,821 − 264
         Q3 60,138 55,778 3,625 59,204 18,302 9,600 9,862 3,481 4,070 3,155 2,810 + 934
         Q4 64,645 59,893 3,625 60,689 18,537 9,806 10,067 3,677 4,157 3,272 3,236 + 3,956
2019         Q1 59,809 55,622 3,625 62,485 19,586 9,947 10,386 3,738 4,106 3,649 2,707 − 2,676
         Q2 62,121 57,858 3,625 62,858 19,210 10,127 10,421 3,821 4,289 3,535 2,774 − 736
         Q3 62,143 57,763 3,625 62,716 19,109 10,229 10,278 3,630 4,467 3,558 2,804 − 573
         Q4 67,094 61,884 3,625 64,075 19,497 10,353 10,455 3,821 4,713 3,659 2,975 + 3,019
2020         Q1 61,949 57,419 3,625 66,438 20,049 11,086 10,806 3,804 4,470 4,061 2,816 − 4,489
         Q2 68,108 58,096 9,359 69,487 17,674 10,492 10,908 3,389 3,986 4,143 2,980 − 1,378
         Q3 70,130 59,403 10,151 71,063 20,913 10,567 11,642 3,774 4,852 3,829 2,970 − 934
         Q4 68,645 62,672 4,805 67,987 19,887 10,729 11,019 3,891 4,725 3,920 3,039 + 658
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, i.e. after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social security funds. 
sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
May 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1 
of which:
Inpatient Contributions to
of which: Non-cash care Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits  3 total 4 benefit ance scheme  5 expenditure surplus
2014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 3,846 10,918 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,5572018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 − 3,3152019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 
p 50,616 47,889 49,077 8,805 16,492 12,892 2,695 1,938 + 1,539
2018         Q1 8,961 8,948 10,146 1,907 4,025 2,603 496 424 − 1,185
         Q2 9,338 9,322 10,118 1,854 4,016 2,658 509 389 − 780         Q3 9,349 9,334 10,428 1,928 4,073 2,781 515 397 − 1,079         Q4 10,071 10,050 10,581 1,972 4,091 2,835 561 384 − 510
2019         Q1 11,123 10,938 10,728 2,060 4,082 2,833 547 437 + 396
         Q2 11,795 11,620 10,812 2,012 4,132 2,868 588 449 + 983         Q3 11,734 11,557 11,159 2,098 4,234 2,972 598 450 + 576         Q4 12,592 12,413 11,252 2,062 4,243 3,064 626 433 + 1,339
2020         Q1 11,693 11,473 11,444 2,186 4,214 3,067 633 489 + 249
         Q2 11,921 11,732 11,816 2,051 4,015 3,173 664 468 + 105         Q3 13,924 11,938 12,890 2,263 4,087 3,249 682 500 + 1,033         Q4 13,079 12,746 12,927 2,306 4,177 3,403 716 481 + 152
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *The final annual figures generally differ from the ance contributions). 3Data revision in 2017. Comparability with previous values is
total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- therefore very limited. 4Until 2016 only full inpatient nursing care. From 2017, also
sequently. 1Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund. 2Since 2005 in- includes benefits for short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter
cluding special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur- alia. 5 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
 market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,216,204 12,774 635,562 190,130 44,640 1,333,098
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,189,119 85,952 622,130 186,661 48,583 1,245,794
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,172,331 205,391 599,211 179,755 45,046 1,142,9292017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017 2,122,863 319,159 553,119 175,617 42,121 1,032,8472018 + 167,231 − 16,248 − 91 − 1,670 2018 2,074,126 364,731 509,310 181,077 42,009 976,9992019 + 185,070 + 63 − 8,044 − 914 2019  
p 2,057,627 366,562 476,418 177,601 49,707 987,340
2020 + 456,828 + 217,904 + 24,181 − 3,399 2020  p 2,325,463 522,392 509,440 184,701 52,392 1,056,539
2018         Q1 + 42,934 − 4,946 − 5,138 + 3,569 2018          Q1 2,100,909 329,387 530,483 176,495 42,221 1,022,323
         Q2 + 43,602 − 5,954 − 166 − 6,139          Q2 2,086,389 344,279 514,817 179,856 41,938 1,005,498         Q3 + 46,500 + 4,856 + 1,688 + 1,871          Q3 2,086,851 356,899 503,066 180,464 42,726 1,003,696         Q4 + 34,195 − 10,205 + 3,525 − 971          Q4 2,074,126 364,731 509,310 181,077 42,009 976,999
2019         Q1 + 56,654 + 3,281 − 2,172 − 1,199 2019          Q1  
p 2,084,397 359,884 499,217 179,512 42,186 1,003,596
         Q2 + 48,545 + 5,491 − 279 + 7,227          Q2  p 2,074,778 361,032 492,533 179,168 41,438 1,000,607
         Q3 + 48,053 + 4,030 + 176 − 5,093          Q3  p 2,091,734 358,813 490,314 179,228 47,831 1,015,548
         Q4 + 31,817 − 12,738 − 5,768 − 1,849          Q4  p 2,057,627 366,562 476,418 177,601 49,707 987,340
2020         Q1 + 65,656 + 31,296 + 9,236 + 1,698 2020          Q1  p 2,103,218 371,076 497,181 180,477 48,790 1,005,694
         Q2 + 185,560 + 126,585 + 31,212 − 7,314          Q2  p 2,272,296 424,141 562,304 181,288 48,488 1,056,075
         Q3 + 159,067 + 80,783 − 6,080 + 588          Q3  p 2,344,818 468,723 533,949 184,051 49,675 1,108,421
         Q4 + 46,545 − 20,760 − 10,187 + 1,629          Q4  p 2,325,463 522,392 509,440 184,701 52,392 1,056,539
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
May 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
 
 
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other government
or quarter) Total and deposits  1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2014 2,216,204 12,150 72,618 1,501,494 95,896 534,046 . .
2015 2,189,119 14,303 65,676 1,499,010 89,074 521,055 . .
2016 2,172,331 15,845 69,715 1,483,871 94,976 507,924 . .
2017 2,122,863 14,651 48,789 1,484,462 86,513 488,448 . .
2018         Q1 2,100,909 12,472 48,431 1,479,513 76,260 484,233 . .
         Q2 2,086,389 12,636 54,933 1,465,727 73,256 479,837 . .
         Q3 2,086,851 15,607 59,989 1,465,852 68,923 476,479 . .
         Q4 2,074,126 14,833 52,572 1,456,543 75,999 474,180 . .
2019         Q1  p 2,084,397 15,663 64,218 1,460,634 71,234 472,647 . .
         Q2  p 2,074,778 12,868 56,256 1,463,027 74,511 468,115 . .
         Q3  p 2,091,734 17,586 62,602 1,465,529 79,144 466,873 . .
         Q4  p 2,057,627 14,595 49,180 1,459,128 68,519 466,204 . .
2020         Q1  p 2,103,218 11,590 70,930 1,472,976 84,528 463,195 . .
         Q2  p 2,272,296 13,333 122,238 1,534,559 142,298 459,867 . .
         Q3  p 2,344,818 12,134 180,449 1,582,940 110,399 458,896 . .
         Q4  p 2,325,463 14,768 163,408 1,593,572 95,780 457,934 . .
Central government
2014 1,398,475 12,150 64,230 1,141,973 54,388 125,735 1,202 12,926
2015 1,372,287 14,303 49,512 1,138,951 45,256 124,265 1,062 13,667
2016 1,365,933 15,845 55,208 1,123,853 50,004 121,022 556 8,567
2017 1,350,298 14,651 36,297 1,131,896 47,761 119,693 1,131 10,618
2018         Q1 1,337,700 12,472 35,923 1,132,746 37,211 119,348 1,065 9,902
         Q2 1,329,290 12,636 42,888 1,119,893 35,048 118,825 1,036 10,708
         Q3 1,335,530 15,607 46,614 1,118,470 36,633 118,207 817 10,275
         Q4 1,323,058 14,833 42,246 1,107,140 42,057 116,782 933 9,975
2019         Q1  p 1,324,528 15,663 50,032 1,102,604 39,185 117,044 809 11,583
         Q2  p 1,320,389 12,868 42,752 1,109,057 38,950 116,761 835 13,862
         Q3  p 1,328,106 17,586 48,934 1,105,439 39,067 117,080 704 13,849
         Q4  p 1,299,848 14,595 38,480 1,101,866 28,592 116,315 605 10,302
2020         Q1  p 1,327,699 11,590 56,680 1,103,935 38,708 116,785 546 8,245
         Q2  p 1,473,910 13,333 109,221 1,139,513 95,511 116,332 510 7,278
         Q3  p 1,536,930 12,134 166,564 1,178,717 62,993 116,522 555 12,092
         Q4  p 1,513,212 14,768 154,505 1,180,714 46,895 116,330 545 15,021
State government
2014 658,164 − 8,391 361,916 19,245 268,612 14,825 2,297
2015 658,234 − 16,169 362,376 22,133 257,557 15,867 2,348
2016 640,887 − 14,515 361,996 19,266 245,110 11,273 1,694
2017 613,601 − 12,543 354,688 18,412 227,958 14,038 2,046
2018         Q1 604,075 − 12,548 349,682 17,372 224,473 12,997 1,882
         Q2 600,595 − 12,073 348,833 17,668 222,020 13,952 2,018
         Q3 599,864 − 13,392 350,399 15,235 220,838 13,674 1,936
         Q4 599,845 − 10,332 352,376 17,647 219,490 14,035 1,891
2019         Q1  p 611,666 − 14,190 361,293 18,657 217,525 15,229 2,004
         Q2  p 609,889 − 13,508 357,571 24,068 214,743 17,631 1,887
         Q3  p 619,883 − 13,671 363,723 29,048 213,440 17,755 1,957
         Q4  p 609,428 − 10,703 361,084 25,049 212,593 14,934 1,831
2020         Q1  p 624,364 − 14,252 372,596 29,567 207,949 12,233 1,815
         Q2  p 645,947 − 13,020 398,890 29,269 204,767 11,073 2,183
         Q3  p 655,524 − 13,888 408,581 30,216 202,839 11,940 2,263
         Q4  p 662,523 − 8,905 417,432 33,717 202,469 12,226 1,553
Local government
2014 176,120 − − 1,297 26,009 148,814 1,959 734
2015 176,259 − − 2,047 27,414 146,798 2,143 463
2016 178,016 − − 2,404 26,941 148,671 1,819 431
2017 175,220 − − 3,082 24,503 147,636 1,881 466
2018         Q1 173,997 − − 2,426 24,662 146,909 1,777 460
         Q2 172,519 − − 2,561 24,467 145,490 1,909 465
         Q3 167,189 − 1 2,703 20,543 143,943 2,031 485
         Q4 167,403 − 1 3,046 20,344 144,012 1,884 497
2019         Q1  p 165,673 − 1 2,960 18,801 143,911 2,139 498
         Q2  p 164,257 − − 2,961 18,757 142,538 2,016 525
         Q3  p 163,691 − − 3,016 18,517 142,158 2,065 555
         Q4  p 165,057 − − 2,996 19,052 143,009 1,862 532
2020         Q1  p 165,068 − − 3,128 18,125 143,816 1,893 528
         Q2  p 165,279 − − 3,094 18,306 143,879 2,221 367
         Q3  p 166,525 − − 2,961 18,913 144,651 2,312 398
         Q4  p 163,614 − − 3,101 16,186 144,327 1,595 317
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
May 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2014 1,524 − − − 481 1,043 94 2,122
2015 1,502 − − − 537 965 91 2,6852016 1,232 − − − 562 670 89 3,0442017 807 − − − 262 545 15 3,934
2018         Q1 990 − − − 439 551 15 3,610
         Q2 898 − − − 398 500 15 3,721         Q3 805 − − − 415 390 15 3,841         Q4 690 − − − 388 302 16 4,506
2019         Q1  
p 723 − − − 453 270 16 4,110
         Q2  p 742 − − − 557 185 16 4,224
         Q3  p 594 − − − 391 203 16 4,179
         Q4  p 712 − − − 376 336 16 4,753
2020         Q1  p 775 − − − 287 488 16 4,100
         Q2  p 980 − − − 581 399 16 3,993
         Q3  p 4,602 − − − 4,210 392 3,956 4,011
         Q4  p 7,409 − − − 7,098 311 6,929 4,404
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3 
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 day bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 987,909 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 63,650
2008 1,019,905 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 78,6852009 1,086,173 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 63,121
2010 1,337,160 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 242,251
2011 1,346,869 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 215,1092012 1,390,377 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 203,4672013 1,392,745 10,592 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 190,1272014 1,398,475 12,150 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 180,123
2015 1,372,287 14,303 1,070 1,188,463 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,521
2016 1,365,933 15,845 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,0262017 1,350,298 14,651 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,4552018 1,323,058 14,833 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,8392019 
p 1,299,848 14,595 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,906
2020 p 1,513,212 14,768 . 1,335,219 808,300 183,046 58,279 − 3,692 98,543 113,141 . 163,225
2018         Q1 1,337,700 12,472 951 1,168,669 699,638 193,811 60,778 14,455 4,421 94,282 9,031 219 156,559
         Q2 1,329,290 12,636 941 1,162,780 710,784 185,042 62,863 − 4,276 92,639 15,049 141 153,873         Q3 1,335,530 15,607 932 1,165,084 703,682 194,356 64,304 − 4,548 90,575 17,340 75 154,840         Q4 1,323,058 14,833 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,839
2019         Q1  
p 1,324,528 15,663 902 1,152,636 709,008 178,900 66,531 − 4,191 89,782 18,288 31 156,229
         Q2  p 1,320,389 12,868 852 1,151,809 720,904 173,313 68,110 − 5,691 91,024 15,042 19 155,711
         Q3  p 1,328,106 17,586 822 1,154,373 711,482 183,268 69,088 − 5,639 90,416 18,100 − 156,147
         Q4  p 1,299,848 14,595 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,906
2020         Q1  p 1,327,699 11,590 . 1,160,616 721,343 182,095 71,028 − 5,310 91,084 23,572 . 155,493
         Q2  p 1,473,910 13,333 . 1,248,734 774,587 178,329 56,061 − 3,752 95,622 79,987 . 211,843
         Q3  p 1,536,930 12,134 . 1,345,281 796,338 191,388 57,144 − 3,737 99,276 127,478 . 179,515
         Q4  p 1,513,212 14,768 . 1,335,219 808,300 183,046 58,279 − 3,692 98,543 113,141 . 163,225
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by the
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
off-budget entities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
May 2021
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2019   2020
  2018   2019   2020   2018   2019   2020   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4
Item Index 2015 = 100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
  I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 109.3 105.4 95.1 0.7 − 3.6 − 9.7 − 5.1 − 2.9 − 4.3 − 6.0 − 21.2 − 10.0 − 1.8
Construction 103.7 107.3 110.3 1.7 3.5 2.8 2.3 4.7 1.4 6.2 2.0 − 1.8 5.3
Wholesale/retail trade, transport
and storage, hotel and restaurant
services 107.5 109.7 103.0 2.3 2.1 − 6.1 1.1 3.4 1.7 0.1 − 14.3 − 3.5 − 6.3
Information and communication 115.8 120.2 119.1 7.0 3.8 − 0.9 3.7 4.2 2.8 0.5 − 2.9 − 0.8 − 0.6
Financial and insurance
activities 97.1 99.1 98.9 − 3.6 2.0 − 0.2 2.4 3.6 1.9 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.4
Real estate activities 100.8 101.8 101.3 0.3 1.0 − 0.5 0.7 1.2 1.5 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.9
Business services  1 109.8 110.8 101.9 2.4 0.9 − 8.1 0.3 1.0 0.7 − 1.6 − 13.0 − 8.8 − 9.1
Public services, education and
health 105.7 107.4 104.2 1.4 1.6 − 3.0 1.3 1.9 1.5 − 0.5 − 8.3 − 0.0 − 3.2
Other services 101.0 102.1 90.5 1.6 1.1 − 11.4 1.0 1.6 0.7 − 2.3 − 19.7 − 5.8 − 18.2
Gross value added 106.4 106.9 101.3 1.3 0.4 − 5.2 − 0.3 1.1 0.0 − 1.5 − 11.5 − 4.4 − 3.6
Gross domestic product  2 106.2 106.8 101.6 1.3 0.6 − 4.9 − 0.3 1.2 0.2 − 1.8 − 11.3 − 3.9 − 2.7
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 105.6 107.2 100.7 1.5 1.6 − 6.1 1.7 2.2 1.0 − 1.3 − 12.8 − 3.6 − 6.5
Government consumption 107.0 109.9 113.5 1.2 2.7 3.3 1.7 3.6 3.2 2.6 4.4 3.6 2.6
Machinery and equipment 112.1 112.7 99.0 4.4 0.5 − 12.1 1.1 1.7 − 2.7 − 9.2 − 23.6 − 10.0 − 6.0
Premises 107.4 111.5 113.5 2.6 3.8 1.9 2.5 4.1 2.2 5.3 0.6 − 0.7 3.0
Other investment  4 114.2 117.3 116.0 4.5 2.7 − 1.1 2.5 2.9 2.6 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 1.0
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.4
Domestic demand 107.7 109.0 104.4 1.8 1.2 − 4.2 1.6 0.9 0.2 − 1.0 − 8.4 − 3.9 − 3.7
Net exports  6 . . . − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 1.7 0.4 0.0 − 0.9 − 3.5 − 0.2 0.8
Exports 109.8 110.8 100.5 2.3 1.0 − 9.4 − 1.3 2.7 0.8 − 3.2 − 22.3 − 9.2 − 2.9
Imports 114.1 117.0 107.1 3.6 2.6 − 8.5 2.7 2.0 0.9 − 1.6 − 17.2 − 9.9 − 5.1
Gross domestic product  2 106.2 106.8 101.6 1.3 0.6 − 4.9 − 0.3 1.2 0.2 − 1.8 − 11.3 − 3.9 − 2.7
At current prices ( € billion)
III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,755.4 1,806.9 1,709.3 3.0 2.9 − 5.4 3.3 3.6 2.3 0.4 − 11.6 − 3.8 − 6.3
Government consumption 670.3 704.5 750.8 3.4 5.1 6.6 4.2 6.0 5.4 5.6 8.0 6.9 5.9
Machinery and equipment 235.6 240.1 213.9 5.0 1.9 − 10.9 2.4 3.3 − 1.2 − 7.8 − 22.6 − 8.8 − 4.9
Premises 344.9 373.7 387.0 7.4 8.4 3.6 7.4 8.3 6.0 8.7 3.4 − 0.3 3.3
Other investment  4 128.8 134.2 134.6 6.9 4.2 0.4 3.9 4.3 4.1 0.3 0.1 0.7 0.4
Changes in inventories  5 15.0 − 10.3 − 57.4 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,150.0 3,249.1 3,138.3 3.9 3.1 − 3.4 3.8 2.7 2.0 1.0 − 7.6 − 3.7 − 3.2
Net exports 206.4 199.9 194.0 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,590.0 1,617.4 1,460.1 3.3 1.7 − 9.7 − 0.4 3.0 1.2 − 2.9 − 22.6 − 9.9 − 3.6
Imports 1,383.6 1,417.4 1,266.1 5.6 2.4 − 10.7 3.4 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 20.9 − 12.2 − 7.0
Gross domestic product  2 3,356.4 3,449.1 3,332.2 3.0 2.8 − 3.4 1.9 3.6 2.5 0.6 − 9.2 − 3.1 − 1.9
IV. Prices (2015 = 100)
Private consumption 103.7 105.1 105.9 1.5 1.3 0.7 1.6 1.4 1.3 1.7 1.4 − 0.2 0.2
Gross domestic product 104.4 106.7 108.4 1.7 2.2 1.6 2.2 2.4 2.3 2.5 2.3 0.8 0.8
Terms of trade 100.1 100.9 103.0 − 0.8 0.9 2.1 0.2 1.4 1.5 1.4 4.2 1.8 1.2
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,771.8 1,845.9 1,841.4 4.5 4.2 − 0.2 4.4 4.5 3.5 3.0 − 3.2 − 0.6 − 0.1
Entrepreneurial and property
income 738.3 718.2 651.3 − 0.5 − 2.7 − 9.3 − 6.1 0.1 − 3.4 − 3.7 − 22.8 − 7.4 − 4.9
National income 2,510.1 2,564.1 2,492.7 3.0 2.2 − 2.8 1.4 3.1 1.7 0.9 − 8.4 − 2.6 − 1.3
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,447.4 3,542.8 3,427.1 3.3 2.8 − 3.3 2.2 3.5 2.3 0.7 − 8.8 − 3.2 − 1.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2021. 1Professional, stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
scientific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy TotalInter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2015 = 100
% of total  1   100      14,04      6,37      79,59      29,45      36,98 2.27      10,89      10,31      9,95      12,73      14,16
Period
2017 104.9 108.7 98.9 104.7 104.9 105.0 106.9 103.0 106.2 107.0 104.1 105.3
2018 2 105.9 2 109.1 97.4 106.0 105.5 106.0 106.2 106.9 107.3 109.0 106.5 103.5
2019 102.5 112.8 90.4 101.6 101.8 101.4 106.2 101.0 102.8 106.5 103.4 92.0
r 2020 94.1 116.1 84.4 91.0 94.9 85.7 97.6 97.2 90.5 98.5 89.5 69.4
r 2020 Q1 96.6 99.4 94.2 96.3 101.2 91.1 101.6 99.9 98.2 103.4 91.4 80.1
r Q2 84.3 115.8 72.8 79.6 85.6 70.9 84.3 92.0 78.8 88.3 81.3 44.1
r Q3 93.7 118.5 78.8 90.5 94.4 84.8 97.9 98.0 89.7 97.0 86.6 71.7
r Q4 101.8 130.7 91.8 97.5 98.3 95.9 106.5 99.0 95.4 105.3 98.5 81.4
x,p 2021 Q1 94.9 95.1 92.9 95.0 103.9 87.6 101.6 94.7 100.5 107.2 91.6 73.9
r 2020 Mar. 100.5 117.2 90.9 98.3 104.0 91.9 102.1 104.0 100.8 107.8 100.4 67.2
r Apr. 76.4 112.5 72.8 70.3 82.9 54.5 70.5 89.6 73.2 83.8 70.0 14.7
r May 82.6 113.2 71.7 78.1 84.0 69.6 85.3 89.5 77.3 86.6 77.5 45.6
r June 93.8 121.7 74.0 90.5 89.9 88.6 97.2 96.8 86.0 94.5 96.5 72.1
r July 93.7 119.9 75.7 90.5 93.3 86.0 92.7 97.5 86.5 94.3 86.4 76.1
r Aug. 88.0 113.7 80.7 84.1 91.1 75.3 91.6 93.6 85.7 93.7 78.8 57.2
r Sep. 99.4 121.8 79.9 97.0 98.8 93.0 109.5 102.8 96.9 103.1 94.6 81.9
r Oct. 101.7 124.7 91.3 98.5 102.7 93.3 108.7 102.8 99.0 104.5 90.3 85.6
r Nov. 106.0 130.4 91.8 102.8 104.2 101.4 114.4 101.6 103.1 111.1 98.8 92.5
r Dec. 97.6 137.1 92.2 91.1 87.9 92.9 96.5 92.5 84.2 100.3 106.5 66.1
x 2021 Jan. 88.4 76.7 97.8 89.7 100.2 80.6 96.2 91.0 94.7 100.3 82.5 69.3
x Feb. 90.7 88.3 86.7 91.4 99.4 85.3 99.8 88.6 97.3 104.2 88.7 72.5
x,p Mar. 105.6 120.4 94.1 103.9 112.0 97.0 108.8 104.5 109.4 117.1 103.7 80.0
Annual percentage change
2017 + 3.3 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.1 + 3.7 + 4.2 + 2.1 + 4.5 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 3.2
2018 2+ 1.0 2+ 0.4 – 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 – 0.7 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 2.3 – 1.7
2019 – 3.2 + 3.4 – 7.2 – 4.2 – 3.5 – 4.3 ± 0.0 – 5.5 – 4.2 – 2.3 – 2.9 –11.1
r 2020 – 8.2 + 2.9 – 6.6 –10.4 – 6.8 –15.5 – 8.1 – 3.8 –12.0 – 7.5 –13.4 –24.6
r 2020 Q1 – 4.8 + 6.0 – 8.0 – 6.2 – 3.4 –10.2 – 6.2 – 0.6 – 7.8 – 3.9 – 9.1 –18.5
r Q2 –18.0 + 1.8 –12.9 –22.2 –17.2 –30.6 –18.2 – 7.7 –24.9 –15.8 –20.8 –53.8
r Q3 – 8.4 – 0.5 – 2.9 –10.4 – 7.5 –15.3 – 6.1 – 3.1 –12.7 – 9.7 –15.1 –19.5
r Q4 – 1.7 + 5.0 – 2.7 – 3.0 + 1.1 – 6.0 – 2.5 – 3.7 – 1.9 – 0.7 – 9.2 – 4.2
x,p 2021 Q1 – 1.8 – 4.3 – 1.5 – 1.4 + 2.6 – 3.8 ± 0.0 – 5.2 + 2.3 + 3.7 + 0.3 – 7.7
r 2020 Mar. –10.5 + 3.9 –10.1 –13.1 – 7.5 –20.1 –14.1 – 3.3 –12.7 – 9.9 –13.6 –38.7
r Apr. –25.0 – 0.2 –17.4 –30.3 –20.1 –44.9 –30.1 –10.1 –30.3 –18.4 –29.5 –84.2
r May –18.8 + 1.7 –14.9 –23.0 –18.5 –30.8 –16.1 –10.3 –25.5 –16.4 –22.1 –52.7
r June –10.5 + 3.7 – 5.6 –13.5 –13.1 –17.2 – 8.8 – 2.6 –18.9 –12.7 –11.6 –26.0
r July – 9.5 – 1.6 – 7.0 –11.3 –10.0 –14.9 – 7.0 – 3.9 –17.1 –10.6 –16.0 –16.4
r Aug. – 9.0 – 0.1 + 0.5 –11.5 – 7.4 –17.4 – 4.4 – 5.1 –11.8 – 9.1 –16.2 –25.5
r Sep. – 6.9 + 0.3 – 2.2 – 8.7 – 4.9 –14.0 – 6.6 – 0.3 – 9.0 – 9.5 –13.2 –17.8
r Oct. – 3.1 + 2.4 – 0.7 – 4.4 – 2.1 – 6.3 – 4.6 – 4.0 – 5.2 – 3.9 –10.1 – 4.8
r Nov. – 2.5 + 3.1 – 3.6 – 3.6 + 0.9 – 6.5 – 1.6 – 5.4 – 1.9 ± 0.0 – 9.0 – 5.5
r Dec. + 0.8 + 9.4 – 3.8 – 0.8 + 5.5 – 4.9 – 0.9 – 1.3 + 2.3 + 2.1 – 8.5 – 1.5
x 2021 Jan. – 3.9 – 9.4 – 2.3 – 3.2 + 1.6 – 6.4 – 2.8 – 7.1 – 0.4 + 0.7 – 0.1 –14.4
x Feb. – 6.8 – 8.2 – 5.5 – 6.7 – 1.6 –10.5 – 3.8 – 9.3 – 1.4 + 1.5 – 2.7 –21.4
x,p Mar. + 5.1 + 2.7 + 3.5 + 5.7 + 7.7 + 5.5 + 6.6 + 0.5 + 8.5 + 8.6 + 3.3 +19.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2015.  2 As of January 2018 weights in structural and civilengineering work corrected by the Federal Statistical Office.  x Provisional; estimated
and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the Quarterly
Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry,
respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2017 108.6 + 7.8 109.4 +10.6 108.5 + 6.5 105.7 + 5.1 116.5 +10.6 102.2 + 3.2
2018 110.5 + 1.7 111.5 + 1.9 110.0 + 1.4 110.0 + 4.1 118.9 + 2.1 107.1 + 4.8
2019 104.9 – 5.1 103.5 – 7.2 105.4 – 4.2 107.0 – 2.7 123.4 + 3.8 101.7 – 5.0
2020 97.2 – 7.3 97.9 – 5.4 95.6 – 9.3 105.8 – 1.1 124.4 + 0.8 99.6 – 2.1
2020 Mar. 98.5 –15.7 108.3 – 5.1 90.6 –23.7 113.8 – 1.2 122.9 – 4.4 110.7 – 0.2
Apr. 64.1 –38.5 76.8 –26.9 52.7 –49.1 91.4 –13.4 87.7 –23.7 92.5 – 9.8
May 71.3 –29.8 76.7 –25.4 64.9 –35.3 95.1 – 8.4 111.0 – 1.9 89.9 –10.8
June 96.1 –11.4 86.0 –18.3 102.0 – 7.9 98.9 – 6.2 115.0 – 5.1 93.6 – 6.6
July 96.4 – 6.9 94.5 – 8.1 96.5 – 6.3 105.5 – 4.6 120.3 – 1.2 100.6 – 5.9
Aug. 91.2 – 2.0 89.8 – 6.5 90.4 + 0.6 104.3 + 0.6 124.2 + 2.6 97.8 – 0.3
Sep. 104.2 – 1.2 101.7 + 1.6 104.8 – 3.3 111.6 + 3.0 146.4 + 4.7 100.1 + 2.1
Oct. 109.2 + 2.9 108.3 + 4.1 109.4 + 2.4 111.4 – 0.1 145.0 +13.2 100.4 – 5.4
Nov. 113.7 + 7.1 114.0 +10.5 113.9 + 6.2 110.2 – 1.3 138.2 + 0.1 101.0 – 1.8
Dec. 108.6 + 6.3 101.7 + 9.8 113.7 + 4.2 102.7 + 9.6 131.3 + 9.0 93.2 + 9.9
2021 Jan. 110.2 + 1.7 119.6 + 7.7 104.2 – 2.2 111.0 + 0.9 140.1 + 8.4 101.5 – 2.0
Feb. 111.4 + 6.6 116.8 +10.4 108.0 + 5.6 111.2 – 2.8 128.5 + 6.1 105.4 – 6.1
p Mar. 127.7 +29.6 132.8 +22.6 125.1 +38.1 123.7 + 8.7 147.0 +19.6 116.0 + 4.8
From the domestic market
2017 107.0 + 7.3 107.1 + 9.7 107.8 + 5.9 101.6 + 3.7 108.7 + 5.4 99.3 + 3.1
2018 107.2 + 0.2 108.6 + 1.4 106.6 – 1.1 102.9 + 1.3 114.7 + 5.5 98.9 – 0.4
2019 101.2 – 5.6 99.1 – 8.7 103.0 – 3.4 101.2 – 1.7 116.2 + 1.3 96.2 – 2.7
2020 94.9 – 6.2 94.1 – 5.0 95.2 – 7.6 98.0 – 3.2 105.5 – 9.2 95.4 – 0.8
2020 Mar. 96.5 –14.1 102.5 – 6.3 89.6 –22.5 108.8 + 0.9 103.7 –18.6 110.5 + 9.2
Apr. 65.6 –34.5 73.5 –26.5 56.7 –43.7 80.2 –16.6 65.6 –39.6 85.1 – 7.5
May 74.7 –24.8 74.8 –25.0 72.6 –26.9 88.1 – 8.6 99.8 – 5.8 84.1 – 9.7
June 104.3 + 3.5 81.3 –18.0 125.9 +22.5 91.2 – 5.2 100.4 – 5.0 88.1 – 5.3
July 95.3 – 6.9 93.6 – 7.1 96.1 – 7.2 99.1 – 4.5 104.5 – 8.8 97.3 – 2.9
Aug. 88.5 – 2.7 88.3 – 3.1 86.9 – 3.4 100.0 + 2.5 111.3 + 3.0 96.2 + 2.2
Sep. 99.5 – 0.9 95.3 ± 0.0 102.7 – 1.4 101.7 – 1.8 125.4 – 4.6 93.7 – 0.4
Oct. 104.6 + 5.7 106.8 + 8.5 102.7 + 4.4 104.5 – 2.3 119.6 – 9.3 99.4 + 0.8
Nov. 109.2 + 6.2 113.3 +12.5 106.3 + 2.7 104.6 – 4.6 124.3 – 8.4 97.9 – 2.9
Dec. 98.2 + 4.8 95.0 +12.8 102.1 – 0.3 91.0 + 2.0 104.1 – 3.1 86.5 + 4.1
2021 Jan. 102.9 + 1.5 112.6 + 6.8 95.3 – 2.8 98.0 – 3.2 111.0 + 6.3 93.6 – 6.5
Feb. 107.8 + 6.2 111.9 +12.1 105.3 + 2.9 101.2 – 3.9 108.4 + 5.7 98.7 – 7.1
p Mar. 124.7 +29.2 128.4 +25.3 123.9 +38.3 109.3 + 0.5 130.5 +25.8 102.1 – 7.6
From abroad
2017 109.8 + 8.2 111.9 +11.5 108.9 + 6.9 108.9 + 6.1 122.8 +14.7 104.5 + 3.4
2018 113.0 + 2.9 114.6 + 2.4 112.0 + 2.8 115.5 + 6.1 122.2 – 0.5 113.4 + 8.5
2019 107.7 – 4.7 108.3 – 5.5 106.9 – 4.6 111.5 – 3.5 129.1 + 5.6 105.9 – 6.6
2020 98.9 – 8.2 101.9 – 5.9 95.9 –10.3 111.8 + 0.3 139.6 + 8.1 102.9 – 2.8
2020 Mar. 100.1 –16.8 114.5 – 3.9 91.2 –24.5 117.6 – 2.8 138.4 + 7.0 110.9 – 6.3
Apr. 62.9 –41.5 80.3 –27.5 50.3 –52.2 100.0 –11.4 105.5 –12.2 98.2 –11.2
May 68.8 –33.3 78.7 –25.9 60.3 –40.2 100.6 – 8.2 120.1 + 1.1 94.3 –11.6
June 89.8 –21.4 91.0 –18.6 87.6 –24.3 104.8 – 6.8 126.7 – 5.2 97.8 – 7.5
July 97.3 – 6.7 95.4 – 9.2 96.7 – 5.8 110.4 – 4.7 133.0 + 4.2 103.1 – 8.0
Aug. 93.3 – 1.5 91.5 – 9.6 92.5 + 2.9 107.7 – 0.7 134.5 + 2.2 99.1 – 2.0
Sep. 107.8 – 1.4 108.6 + 3.1 106.1 – 4.3 119.2 + 6.3 163.3 +11.5 105.0 + 4.0
Oct. 112.7 + 1.1 110.0 ± 0.0 113.5 + 1.5 116.8 + 1.6 165.4 +32.2 101.1 – 9.6
Nov. 117.1 + 7.6 114.8 + 8.4 118.5 + 8.1 114.5 + 1.1 149.4 + 6.6 103.3 – 1.1
Dec. 116.5 + 7.3 108.9 + 7.1 120.7 + 6.6 111.8 +15.1 153.2 +16.9 98.4 +14.3
2021 Jan. 115.7 + 1.8 127.2 + 8.5 109.5 – 1.9 121.1 + 3.7 163.6 + 9.7 107.5 + 1.1
Feb. 114.1 + 6.9 122.1 + 8.7 109.7 + 7.2 118.9 – 2.1 144.7 + 6.5 110.6 – 5.3
p Mar. 129.9 +29.8 137.5 +20.1 125.8 +37.9 134.9 +14.7 160.3 +15.8 126.7 +14.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2017 122.4 +7.0 123.1 +7.0 123.1 +5.3 123.4 +7.4 121.9 +12.0 121.6 +6.9 119.8 +7.3 125.0 +7.8
2018 134.7 +10.0 131.1 +6.5 136.6 +11.0 127.9 +3.6 125.2 +2.7 138.8 +14.1 135.6 +13.2 132.4 +5.9
2019 146.0 +8.4 145.0 +10.6 150.1 +9.9 142.2 +11.2 138.9 +10.9 147.1 +6.0 147.9 +9.1 141.2 +6.6
2020 145.7 –0.2 144.3 –0.5 160.9 +7.2 130.5 –8.2 141.5 +1.9 147.3 +0.1 139.7 –5.5 143.4 +1.6
2020 Feb. 134.5 +1.2 143.0 +10.4 148.3 +24.6 140.9 +4.8 133.2 –8.3 124.5 –9.1 139.2 +5.1 120.6 –15.0
Mar. 158.8 –7.4 154.0 –5.8 169.6 –0.4 141.2 –10.5 150.6 –7.7 164.4 –9.1 155.3 –6.3 156.4 –12.5
Apr. 149.6 –2.3 134.1 –10.1 131.6 –12.1 137.3 –9.5 130.1 –4.9 167.7 +6.2 140.4 –3.6 171.1 +4.4
May 138.8 –6.2 124.0 –14.5 146.7 –0.1 102.9 –31.2 128.0 +5.3 156.1 +3.0 121.3 –18.5 154.1 +4.3
June 167.7 +3.7 153.1 –5.0 165.0 +4.2 139.5 –14.2 164.8 +0.4 184.6 +13.7 144.3 –12.4 196.1 +22.4
July 149.1 –3.2 151.8 +2.6 157.9 +2.1 137.2 –3.6 185.9 +25.7 145.9 –9.3 136.8 –10.4 157.7 +1.7
Aug. 136.7 +1.6 135.4 –0.1 159.6 +14.6 114.0 –13.1 135.5 –2.7 138.3 +3.5 130.1 –5.1 130.5 +1.2
Sep. 151.5 +2.5 157.0 +7.2 173.4 +10.5 141.1 +8.3 162.1 –6.4 145.2 –2.7 146.2 +2.0 144.4 –2.1
Oct. 142.4 +4.0 150.8 +9.7 181.5 +17.2 127.1 +2.2 137.8 +6.3 132.6 –2.6 141.5 +4.6 119.6 –6.5
Nov. 139.6 –3.9 146.9 –5.0 167.7 +12.0 132.2 –20.6 133.4 +4.9 131.0 –2.5 143.8 –14.2 117.6 +0.4
Dec. 150.5 +1.6 147.8 –0.8 191.9 +7.7 117.9 –10.1 113.7 –4.6 153.7 +4.4 136.6 –11.4 141.3 +15.0
2021 Jan. 134.0 +3.6 140.5 +4.8 147.3 +7.2 146.0 +8.7 97.7 –20.4 126.5 +2.0 150.7 +6.8 106.8 –4.0
Feb. 143.2 +6.5 148.8 +4.1 161.1 +8.6 147.2 +4.5 114.1 –14.3 136.7 +9.8 143.4 +3.0 132.1 +9.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2017 107.6 +5.0 105.8 +3.6 105.9 +4.1 108.1 +7.0 106.2 +6.3 103.0 +1.5 107.7 +3.7 120.5 +10.0
2018 110.7 +2.9 107.5 +1.6 109.6 +3.5 105.6 –2.3 107.1 +0.8 103.1 +0.1 112.5 +4.5 127.7 +6.0
2019 114.9 +3.8 111.0 +3.3 112.1 +2.3 106.7 +1.0 108.9 +1.7 107.1 +3.9 118.7 +5.5 138.4 +8.4
3 2020 121.0 +5.3 115.6 +4.1 120.9 +7.9 81.5 –23.6 105.9 –2.8 116.7 +9.0 124.4 +4.8 168.4 +21.7
2020 Mar. 118.5 +2.2 113.3 +0.8 130.6 +14.7 49.6 –53.7 83.8 –21.2 107.4 –6.4 137.8 +16.6 154.0 +15.1
Apr. 111.1 –3.9 105.7 –5.0 125.0 +10.2 29.2 –74.5 54.8 –40.8 100.8 –12.4 114.4 –2.1 172.9 +27.8
May 123.3 +8.7 117.5 +7.9 127.4 +14.0 78.1 –23.8 94.9 +2.0 127.7 +16.3 113.3 –2.5 168.6 +32.1
June 121.0 +5.1 115.7 +4.2 119.1 +3.0 95.1 –17.2 101.9 +3.7 121.9 +14.4 119.5 +3.6 162.3 +23.2
July 122.7 +6.2 117.3 +4.9 119.1 +4.5 97.5 –6.3 108.4 +14.1 125.3 +15.6 123.0 +1.9 156.2 +13.8
Aug. 120.4 +8.4 115.0 +6.9 120.9 +9.0 91.2 –7.6 103.6 +1.3 117.0 +15.7 119.1 +3.7 155.1 +24.8
Sep. 119.2 +6.3 113.5 +5.1 113.7 +6.8 100.5 –8.7 103.5 –6.6 117.5 +13.5 122.1 +3.5 160.4 +15.2
Oct. 129.1 +10.2 122.7 +9.0 122.3 +8.4 109.1 –6.4 120.2 +8.8 129.6 +16.8 128.9 +5.7 182.2 +28.7
Nov. 136.3 +10.3 130.0 +9.4 123.4 +7.4 90.3 –22.1 153.5 +15.3 140.1 +20.8 133.3 +7.2 226.2 +37.4
Dec. 137.2 +3.0 130.8 +1.9 137.7 +7.6 69.0 –42.0 133.5 –16.1 119.0 +5.0 141.9 +6.4 217.5 +26.5
2021 Jan. 103.8 –3.6 98.6 –5.1 115.9 +12.0 19.4 –78.0 64.6 –43.6 59.3 –38.5 127.2 +3.9 185.7 +34.2
Feb. 104.6 –1.0 98.8 –2.5 114.4 +5.7 22.7 –71.8 64.2 –34.4 70.1 –27.8 125.6 +7.7 177.1 +39.9
Mar. 127.4 +7.5 120.2 +6.1 131.8 +0.9 58.1 +17.1 87.3 +4.2 118.5 +10.3 129.9 –5.7 202.7 +31.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2020 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2016 43,661 +1.2 31,508 +2.2 9,028 21,407 834 4,804 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 655
2017 44,262 +1.4 32,234 +2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 114 24 2,533 7 855 5.7 731
2018 44,868 +1.4 32,964 +2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2019 45,268 +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 82,267 827 8 5.0 774
2020 r44,818 r –1.0 933,579 9+0.2 99,395 923,278 9 660 94,289 ... 9 2,849 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2018 Q1 44,398 +1.5 32,563 +2.4 9,214 22,279 843 4,664 325 24 2,525 909 5.7 760
Q2 44,790 +1.4 32,802 +2.3 9,296 22,414 843 4,701 23 14 2,325 760 5.1 794
Q3 45,028 +1.3 33,040 +2.2 9,387 22,546 855 4,694 35 27 2,311 784 5.1 828
Q4 45,257 +1.2 33,452 +2.1 9,498 22,890 819 4,627 88 35 2,200 755 4.9 804
2019 Q1 44,920 +1.2 33,214 +2.0 9,419 22,803 761 4,581 303 34 2,360 892 5.2 780
Q2 45,240 +1.0 33,388 +1.8 9,455 22,932 750 4,615 51 43 82,227 778 8 4.9 795
Q3 45,376 +0.8 33,548 +1.5 9,491 23,049 753 4,598 66 58 2,276 827 5.0 794
Q4 45,538 +0.6 33,924 +1.4 9,551 23,388 738 4,522 161 105 2,204 811 4.8 729
2020 Q1 r45,068 r +0.3 33,642 +1.3 9,439 23,284 686 4,458 1,219 949 2,385 960 5.2 683
Q2 r44,634 r –1.3 33,415 +0.1 9,387 23,137 640 4,235 5,399 5,388 2,770 1,154 10 6.0 593
Q3 r44,695 r –1.5 33,424 –0.4 9,359 23,171 640 4,273 2,705 2,691 2,904 1,266 6.3 583
Q4 r44,874 r –1.5 933,837 9–0.3 99,395 923,519 9 676 94,190 ... 9 2,369 2,722 1,167 5.9 595
2021 Q1 1144,361 11 –1.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,878 1,248 6.3 586
2017 Dec. 44,640 +1.4 32,609 +2.4 9,202 22,319 867 4,722 194 12 2,385 796 5.3 761
2018 Jan. 44,345 +1.6 32,504 +2.5 9,191 22,249 841 4,660 287 23 2,570 941 5.8 736
Feb. 44,376 +1.5 32,551 +2.4 9,223 22,262 838 4,642 359 23 2,546 927 5.7 764
Mar. 44,472 +1.4 32,660 +2.3 9,253 22,334 837 4,656 327 27 2,458 859 5.5 778
Apr. 44,646 +1.4 32,782 +2.4 9,291 22,404 840 4,686 23 13 2,384 796 5.3 784
May 44,826 +1.5 32,857 +2.3 9,310 22,450 845 4,718 21 12 2,315 751 5.1 793
June 44,898 +1.3 32,870 +2.2 9,325 22,439 853 4,742 25 16 2,276 735 5.0 805
July 44,930 +1.3 32,844 +2.2 9,339 22,396 860 4,736 22 14 2,325 788 5.1 823
Aug. 44,981 +1.3 33,131 +2.3 9,412 22,609 856 4,664 41 33 2,351 804 5.2 828
Sep. 45,173 +1.2 33,422 +2.1 9,496 22,827 842 4,619 42 34 2,256 759 5.0 834
Oct. 45,262 +1.3 33,488 +2.2 9,515 22,895 827 4,616 46 37 2,204 742 4.9 824
Nov. 45,325 +1.3 33,513 +2.1 9,513 22,934 822 4,638 51 43 2,186 745 4.8 807
Dec. 45,184 +1.2 33,286 +2.1 9,434 22,854 773 4,637 166 26 2,210 777 4.9 781
2019 Jan. 44,866 +1.2 33,156 +2.0 9,405 22,762 763 4,574 354 42 2,406 919 5.3 758
Feb. 44,908 +1.2 33,199 +2.0 9,416 22,794 758 4,564 310 29 2,373 908 5.3 784
Mar. 44,985 +1.2 33,286 +1.9 9,442 22,855 749 4,574 246 32 2,301 850 5.1 797
Apr. 45,146 +1.1 33,383 +1.8 9,457 22,925 753 4,607 49 40 2,229 795 4.9 796
May 45,269 +1.0 33,433 +1.8 9,462 22,968 749 4,627 53 45 82,236 772 8 4.9 792
June 45,304 +0.9 33,407 +1.6 9,455 22,948 750 4,646 51 43 2,216 766 4.9 798
July 45,315 +0.9 33,360 +1.6 9,450 22,901 757 4,644 55 47 2,275 825 5.0 799
Aug. 45,305 +0.7 33,610 +1.4 9,505 23,101 750 4,568 60 51 2,319 848 5.1 795
Sep. 45,509 +0.7 33,938 +1.5 9,583 23,341 754 4,517 84 75 2,234 808 4.9 787
Oct. 45,578 +0.7 33,966 +1.4 9,567 23,398 748 4,510 111 102 2,204 795 4.8 764
Nov. 45,601 +0.6 33,968 +1.4 9,559 23,423 742 4,532 124 115 2,180 800 4.8 736
Dec. 45,434 +0.6 33,740 +1.4 9,474 23,344 694 4,531 247 97 2,227 838 4.9 687
2020 Jan. r45,096 r +0.5 33,608 +1.4 9,432 23,255 689 4,471 382 133 2,426 985 5.3 668
Feb. r45,106 r +0.4 33,624 +1.3 9,427 23,278 683 4,461 439 134 2,396 971 5.3 690
Mar. r45,003 r ±0.0 33,648 +1.1 9,440 23,290 675 4,350 2,834 2,580 2,335 925 5.1 691
Apr. r44,728 r –0.9 33,430 +0.1 9,396 23,141 643 4,194 6,007 5,995 2,644 1,093 5.8 626
May r44,583 r –1.5 33,328 –0.3 9,367 23,083 624 4,206 5,726 5,715 2,813 1,172 10 6.1 584
June r44,590 r –1.6 33,323 –0.3 9,355 23,084 629 4,260 4,464 4,452 2,853 1,197 6.2 570
July r44,590 r –1.6 33,233 –0.4 9,322 23,024 635 4,302 3,319 3,306 2,910 1,258 6.3 573
Aug. r44,620 r –1.5 33,482 –0.4 9,367 23,218 642 4,266 2,551 2,537 2,955 1,302 6.4 584
Sep. r44,875 r –1.4 33,792 –0.4 9,421 23,454 656 4,240 2,244 2,229 2,847 1,238 6.2 591
Oct. r44,951 r –1.4 33,862 –0.3 9,410 23,530 671 4,229 2,037 2,021 2,760 1,183 6.0 602
Nov. r44,923 r –1.5 933,901 9–0.2 99,401 923,561 9 695 94,160 ... 9 2,390 2,699 1,152 5.9 601
Dec. r44,747 r –1.5 933,703 9–0.1 99,330 923,479 9 666 94,124 ... 9 2,695 2,707 1,166 5.9 581
2021 Jan. r44,358 r –1.6 933,519 9–0.3 99,284 923,350 9 657 94,045 ... 9 3,189 2,901 1,298 6.3 566
Feb. r44,355 r –1.7 933,517 9–0.3 99,282 923,341 9 660 94,024 ... 9 3,274 2,904 1,270 6.3 583
Mar. 1144,371 11 –1.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,827 1,177 6.2 609
Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,771 1,091 6.0 629
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 From January 2017 persons receiving additional
income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at the same
time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book of the Social SecurityCode (SGB III).  8 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed persons in the
legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).  9 Unadjusted
figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2018 and 2019, the estimated
values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1% for employees
subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.7% for persons solely in jobs
exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 55.3% for cyclically induced
short-time work.  10 From May 2020, calculated on the basis of new labour force fig-
ures. 11 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which:  1Indices of
foreign trade pricesHWWI
Index of World Market
Prices of Raw Materials  7
of which:
Total  2 Food  3Non-
energy
industrial
goods  4Energy
4,5Services
2,4Actual
rents
for
housingMemo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  6Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  6Exports Imports Energy  8Other raw
materials  9
Period 2015 = 100
Index level
2017 102.1 104.0 102.2 97.5 102.5 102.9 102.0 105.3 101.1 108.6 100.7 100.1 99.6 107.1
2018 104.0 106.7 103.0 102.3 104.2 104.6 103.8 110.2 103.7 109.0 101.9 102.7 124.6 106.2
2019 105.5 108.4 104.2 103.7 105.7 106.1 105.3 115.3 104.8 r111.6 102.4 101.7 110.0 108.1
2020 10 105.8 10110.9 10104.1 1099.0 10106.9 10 107.6 10 105.8 10117.0 103.8 11107.9 101.7 97.3 73.4 111.6
2019 June 106.0 108.4 104.1 104.9 106.6 106.1 105.7 104.9 115.1 102.3 101.3 102.8 108.6
July 106.4 108.7 103.3 104.7 107.9 106.2 106.2 105.0 114.3 102.4 101.1 105.7 113.0
Aug. 106.3 108.8 103.4 103.8 107.8 106.3 106.0 115.8 104.5 112.5 102.3 100.5 100.2 106.0
Sep. 106.2 108.8 104.7 103.8 106.9 106.4 106.0 104.6 109.9 102.4 101.1 105.9 107.5
Oct. 106.3 108.6 105.0 103.8 106.9 106.6 106.1 104.4 r110.4 102.4 101.0 105.7 107.1
Nov. 105.4 109.0 105.2 103.7 104.9 106.7 105.3 116.4 104.4 112.1 102.4 101.5 110.5 106.9
Dec. 106.0 109.2 105.1 103.6 106.1 106.8 105.8 104.5 114.5 102.5 101.7 112.5 110.4
2020 Jan. 105.1 110.1 104.0 104.9 104.3 107.0 105.2 105.3 113.3 102.7 101.3 107.4 112.2
Feb. 105.7 111.2 104.3 103.9 105.2 107.1 105.6 117.8 104.9 r114.3 102.6 100.4 94.3 108.7
Mar. 105.8 111.0 105.2 101.6 105.5 107.3 105.7 104.1 113.8 101.9 96.9 61.3 104.9
Apr. 106.2 112.2 105.4 98.6 106.7 107.4 106.1 103.4 r112.8 101.5 95.2 49.7 101.0
May 106.2 112.5 105.4 97.4 106.7 107.5 106.0 118.3 103.0 109.2 101.3 95.5 55.5 102.1
June 106.9 112.7 104.8 98.7 108.1 107.6 106.6 103.0 r110.1 101.3 96.1 65.2 105.1
July 10 106.4 10110.2 10102.5 1098.0 10109.4 10 107.7 10 106.1 103.2 r107.6 101.3 96.4 68.3 107.5
Aug. 10 106.2 10110.1 10102.6 1097.6 10109.0 10 107.8 10 106.0 10115.7 103.2 r104.9 101.2 96.5 71.2 111.7
Sep. 10 105.8 10109.9 10103.6 1096.9 10108.0 10 107.8 10 105.8 103.6 11103.4 101.3 96.8 70.4 117.9
Oct. 10 105.8 10110.2 10103.9 1097.0 10107.6 10 108.0 10 105.9 103.7 103.8 101.4 97.1 73.4 118.9
Nov. 10 104.7 10110.3 10104.0 1096.0 10105.5 10 108.1 10 105.0 10116.0 103.9 103.9 101.8 97.6 77.8 120.4
Dec. 10 105.3 10109.9 10103.4 1097.4 10106.9 10 108.2 10 105.5 104.7 104.2 101.9 98.2 86.6 128.9
2021 Jan. 106.8 112.3 105.1 102.6 106.9 108.4 106.3 106.2 106.7 102.8 100.1 99.1 140.0
Feb. 107.4 113.0 105.5 104.1 107.3 108.5 107.0 121.2 106.9 109.0 103.3 101.8 104.7 143.4
Mar. 107.9 113.1 105.7 106.2 107.6 108.6 107.5 107.9 114.0 104.1 103.6 109.1 150.1
Apr. 108.4 114.5 105.8 106.1 108.3 108.7 108.2 ... ... ... ... 110.8 154.5
Annual percentage change
2017 +1.7 +2.7 +1.2 +3.1 +1.4 +1.7 +1.5 +3.3 +2.7 +10.0 +1.7 +3.5 +19.7 +8.8
2018 +1.9 +2.6 +0.8 +4.9 +1.6 +1.6 +1.8 +4.7 +2.6 +0.4 +1.2 +2.6 +25.1 –0.8
2019 +1.4 +1.6 +1.1 +1.4 +1.5 +1.5 +1.4 +4.7 +1.1 r+2.4 +0.5 –1.0 –11.7 +1.8
2020 10 +0.4 10+2.3 10–0.1 10–4.5 10+1.2 10+1.4 10 +0.5 10+1.4 –1.0 11–3.3 –0.7 –4.3 –33.3 +3.2
2019 June +1.5 +1.4 +1.3 +2.4 +1.6 +1.5 +1.6 +1.2 r+10.1 +0.2 –2.0 –21.2 –2.4
July +1.1 +2.0 +1.6 +2.3 +0.5 +1.4 +1.7 +1.1 +6.7 +0.2 –2.1 –18.6 +6.8
Aug. +1.0 +2.3 +1.1 +0.7 +0.7 +1.4 +1.4 +4.3 +0.3 r+1.9 –0.1 –2.7 –23.2 +0.3
Sep. +0.9 +1.6 +0.9 –1.2 +1.2 +1.4 +1.2 –0.1 –1.5 ±0.0 –2.5 –24.8 +4.7
Oct. +0.9 +1.4 +0.9 –2.2 +1.3 +1.5 +1.1 –0.6 r–0.8 –0.2 –3.5 –27.0 +1.5
Nov. +1.2 +1.9 +1.1 –4.0 +2.4 +1.5 +1.1 +3.9 –0.7 +0.4 –0.1 –2.1 –10.7 +1.6
Dec. +1.5 +2.1 +1.3 +0.1 +2.0 +1.5 +1.5 –0.2 r+2.7 +0.4 –0.7 +1.0 +7.0
2020 Jan. +1.6 +2.5 +1.1 +3.3 +1.4 +1.5 +1.7 +0.2 r+1.7 +0.5 –0.9 –4.4 +7.5
Feb. +1.7 +3.1 +0.9 +2.2 +1.5 +1.4 +1.7 +3.3 –0.1 r+2.1 +0.3 –2.0 –17.5 –0.6
Mar. +1.3 +3.1 +1.3 –0.8 +1.3 +1.5 +1.4 –0.8 r+0.4 –0.5 –5.5 –46.8 –3.1
Apr. +0.8 +4.0 +0.8 –5.6 +1.3 +1.5 +0.9 –1.9 r–2.5 –1.1 –7.4 –58.3 –7.2
May +0.5 +3.9 +0.8 –8.2 +1.3 +1.5 +0.6 +2.9 –2.2 –5.6 –1.2 –7.0 –52.4 –4.2
June +0.8 +4.0 +0.7 –5.9 +1.4 +1.4 +0.9 –1.8 r–4.3 –1.0 –5.1 –36.6 –3.2
July 10 ±0.0 10+1.4 10–0.8 10–6.4 10+1.4 10+1.4 10 –0.1 –1.7 –5.9 –1.1 –4.6 –35.4 –4.9
Aug. 10 –0.1 10+1.2 10–0.8 10–6.0 10+1.1 10+1.4 10 ±0.0 10–0.1 –1.2 –6.8 –1.1 –4.0 –28.9 +5.4
Sep. 10 –0.4 10+1.0 10–1.1 10–6.6 10+1.0 10+1.3 10 –0.2 –1.0 11–5.9 –1.1 –4.3 –33.5 +9.7
Oct. 10 –0.5 10+1.5 10–1.0 10–6.6 10+0.7 10+1.3 10 –0.2 –0.7 –6.0 –1.0 –3.9 –30.6 +11.0
Nov. 10 –0.7 10+1.2 10–1.1 10–7.4 10+0.6 10+1.3 10 –0.3 10–0.3 –0.5 –7.3 –0.6 –3.8 –29.6 +12.6
Dec. 10 –0.7 10+0.6 10–1.6 10–6.0 10+0.8 10+1.3 10 –0.3 +0.2 –9.0 –0.6 –3.4 –23.0 +16.8
2021 Jan. +1.6 +2.0 +1.1 –2.2 +2.5 +1.3 +1.0 +0.9 –5.8 +0.1 –1.2 –7.7 +24.8
Feb. +1.6 +1.6 +1.2 +0.2 +2.0 +1.3 +1.3 +2.9 +1.9 –4.6 +0.7 +1.4 +11.0 +31.9
Mar. +2.0 +1.9 +0.5 +4.5 +2.0 +1.2 +1.7 +3.7 +0.2 +2.2 +6.9 +78.0 +43.1
Apr. +2.1 +2.0 +0.4 +7.6 +1.5 +1.2 +2.0 ... ... ... ... +122.9 +53.0
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw Materi-
als: HWWI.  1 Deviations from the official figures are due to rounding.  2 With effect
from 2015, methodological changes to the collection of data on the prices of package
holidays, impacting until the beginning of the series.  3 Including alcoholic beverages
and tobacco.  4 Modified procedure as of 2017 due to calculations on the basis of thefive digit structure set out in the European Classification of Individual Consumption ac-
cording to Purpose (ECOICOP).  5 Electricity, gas and other fuels as well as transport fu-
els and lubricants, from January 2017 excluding lubricants.  6 Excluding value added tax.
7 For the euro area, in euro.  8 Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas.  9 Food, bever-
ages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials.  10 Influenced by a temporary re-
duction of value added tax.  11 From September 2020 onwards provisional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
May 2021
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
8. Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio 7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- As
age age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2012 1,150.0 4.2 776.1 4.0 376.8 1.5 1,152.9 3.2 1,668.4 2.5 161.0 − 1.3 9.7
2013 1,186.3 3.2 799.4 3.0 383.9 1.9 1,183.2 2.6 1,690.8 1.3 157.1 − 2.5 9.3
2014 1,234.2 4.0 830.5 3.9 394.0 2.6 1,224.5 3.5 1,734.5 2.6 170.6 8.6 9.8
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.5 4.2 1,273.8 4.0 1,782.3 2.8 179.4 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.2
2017 1,394.1 4.2 931.6 3.9 440.9 3.4 1,372.5 3.8 1,905.9 3.5 201.9 7.5 10.6
2018 1,461.3 4.8 975.2 4.7 452.8 2.7 1,428.0 4.0 1,970.8 3.4 215.4 6.7 10.9
2019 1,521.6 4.1 1,020.3 4.6 470.8 4.0 1,491.1 4.4 2,027.1 2.9 220.3 2.2 10.9
2020 1,509.4 − 0.8 1,017.2 − 0.3 513.0 9.0 1,530.2 2.6 2,040.4 0.7 331.1 50.3 16.2
2019         Q3 378.1 4.5 259.1 5.1 118.9 4.4 378.0 4.9 506.1 3.5 46.6 2.1 9.2
         Q4 416.6 3.3 278.4 3.6 117.8 4.3 396.2 3.8 512.5 2.4 49.7 2.6 9.7
2020         Q1 365.6 2.9 245.7 2.8 124.2 5.5 370.0 3.7 521.3 2.6 84.5 15.8 16.2
         Q2 355.0 − 4.5 234.2 − 3.9 129.3 11.1 363.6 0.9 496.0 − 0.9 99.0 94.1 20.0
         Q3 374.1 − 1.1 258.3 − 0.3 130.6 9.9 388.9 2.9 509.0 0.6 67.1 43.9 13.2
         Q4 414.7 − 0.5 278.9 0.2 128.8 9.4 407.7 2.9 514.0 0.3 80.5 62.2 15.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2021. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage ta x and
contributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
  
  
  
Index of negotiated wages  1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
2012 92.5 2.6 92.7 2.5 92.7 2.8 92.7 2.8 92.4 2.9
2013 94.8 2.5 95.0 2.5 95.0 2.5 95.0 2.5 94.4 2.2
2014 97.7 3.1 97.8 2.9 97.7 2.8 97.7 2.8 97.2 2.9
2015 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.2 2.2 102.5 2.5
2017 104.2 2.1 104.2 2.0 104.3 2.1 104.5 2.3 105.1 2.5
2018 107.1 2.8 107.1 2.8 107.0 2.7 107.3 2.7 108.4 3.2
2019 110.2 2.9 110.2 2.9 109.7 2.5 110.0 2.5 111.6 2.9
2020 112.6 2.2 112.6 2.2 111.9 2.0 112.2 2.0 111.6 − 0.1
2019         Q4 121.8 2.4 121.8 2.3 121.8 2.3 110.7 2.3 121.3 2.4
2020         Q1 104.2 2.4 104.2 2.4 104.2 2.4 111.6 2.4 107.4 2.2
         Q2 105.0 2.0 104.9 1.9 105.1 2.2 112.1 2.1 105.4 − 3.4
         Q3 116.2 1.8 116.2 1.8 114.4 1.8 112.5 1.8 111.0 0.2
         Q4 125.0 2.6 125.0 2.6 123.9 1.8 112.6 1.7 122.3 0.8
2021         Q1 105.7 1.4 105.7 1.4 105.8 1.5 113.3 1.4 . .
2020         Sep. 104.9 1.7 104.9 1.7 105.0 1.7 112.5 1.7 . .
         Oct. 105.1 1.8 105.0 1.8 105.1 1.7 112.6 1.7 . .
         Nov. 160.4 2.1 160.3 2.1 159.7 1.8 112.6 1.7 . .
         Dec. 109.5 4.2 109.5 4.2 107.0 1.8 112.6 1.8 . .
2021         Jan. 105.7 1.5 105.7 1.4 105.8 1.6 113.2 1.5 . .
         Feb. 105.7 1.4 105.7 1.4 105.8 1.5 113.2 1.5 . .
         Mar. 105.8 1.4 105.7 1.4 105.8 1.4 113.3 1.3 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such February 2021. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2016 2,364.3 1,476.7 492.3 595.8 288.9 887.5 226.8 217.4 149.0 670.7 1,693.6 888.6 482.0 805.0 249.0 192.8
2017 2,396.3 1,488.2 498.6 602.8 295.9 908.0 230.6 225.1 156.2 757.2 1,639.1 866.4 495.7 772.7 236.1 195.6
3 2018 2,589.6 1,537.1 540.8 611.1 288.5 1,052.5 249.5 234.9 172.6 790.3 1,799.3 925.8 558.7 873.5 257.5 205.1
2019 2,801.3 1,770.1 586.3 737.5 333.4 1,031.2 257.6 237.8 168.5 821.5 1,979.8 1,091.3 676.3 888.5 289.8 207.7
2018 H2 2,589.6 1,537.1 540.8 611.1 288.5 1,052.5 249.5 234.9 172.6 790.3 1,799.3 925.8 558.7 873.5 257.5 205.1
2019 H1 2,702.6 1,657.9 549.7 682.9 314.5 1,044.7 269.2 240.5 140.5 777.5 1,925.1 1,024.3 613.9 900.8 301.7 210.8
H2 2,801.3 1,770.1 586.3 737.5 333.4 1,031.2 257.6 237.8 168.5 821.5 1,979.8 1,091.3 676.3 888.5 289.8 207.7
p 2020 H1 2,892.2 1,801.3 625.0 734.3 319.7 1,090.9 257.6 216.6 220.8 794.2 2,097.9 1,183.9 754.2 914.0 335.6 179.8
As a percentage of total assets
2016 100.0 62.5 20.8 25.2 12.2 37.5 9.6 9.2 6.3 28.4 71.6 37.6 20.4 34.1 10.5 8.2
2017 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.2 12.4 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.5 31.6 68.4 36.2 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
3 2018 100.0 59.4 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.6 9.6 9.1 6.7 30.5 69.5 35.8 21.6 33.7 9.9 7.9
2019 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.1 31.7 10.3 7.4
2018 H2 100.0 59.4 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.6 9.6 9.1 6.7 30.5 69.5 35.8 21.6 33.7 9.9 7.9
2019 H1 100.0 61.4 20.3 25.3 11.6 38.7 10.0 8.9 5.2 28.8 71.2 37.9 22.7 33.3 11.2 7.8
H2 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.1 31.7 10.3 7.4
p 2020 H1 100.0 62.3 21.6 25.4 11.1 37.7 8.9 7.5 7.6 27.5 72.5 40.9 26.1 31.6 11.6 6.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2016 1,956.8 1,182.2 347.2 482.0 271.6 774.7 212.9 175.0 117.1 535.3 1,421.5 732.7 383.2 688.8 225.1 142.2
2017 1,989.4 1,190.8 351.5 484.0 281.8 798.6 215.8 181.4 128.6 609.9 1,379.5 719.1 397.8 660.3 218.4 150.1
3 2018 2,149.9 1,215.7 388.2 473.3 277.5 934.2 234.6 188.7 139.3 637.2 1,512.7 760.3 442.4 752.4 236.2 152.6
2019 2,303.6 1,396.8 419.6 565.7 319.7 906.8 243.8 188.7 136.9 662.7 1,640.9 887.5 523.8 753.4 257.5 158.1
2018 H2 2,149.9 1,215.7 388.2 473.3 277.5 934.2 234.6 188.7 139.3 637.2 1,512.7 760.3 442.4 752.4 236.2 152.6
2019 H1 2,229.7 1,297.6 388.9 517.9 302.7 932.0 255.6 194.2 115.8 629.6 1,600.0 831.4 473.9 768.6 265.8 164.3
H2 2,303.6 1,396.8 419.6 565.7 319.7 906.8 243.8 188.7 136.9 662.7 1,640.9 887.5 523.8 753.4 257.5 158.1
p 2020 H1 2,305.5 1,352.3 406.4 547.5 303.4 953.3 244.0 171.8 171.4 615.2 1,690.4 912.2 548.5 778.2 294.6 137.1
As a percentage of total assets
2016 100.0 60.4 17.7 24.6 13.9 39.6 10.9 8.9 6.0 27.4 72.6 37.4 19.6 35.2 11.5 7.3
2017 100.0 59.9 17.7 24.3 14.2 40.1 10.9 9.1 6.5 30.7 69.3 36.2 20.0 33.2 11.0 7.5
3 2018 100.0 56.6 18.1 22.0 12.9 43.5 10.9 8.8 6.5 29.6 70.4 35.4 20.6 35.0 11.0 7.1
2019 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.2 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
2018 H2 100.0 56.6 18.1 22.0 12.9 43.5 10.9 8.8 6.5 29.6 70.4 35.4 20.6 35.0 11.0 7.1
2019 H1 100.0 58.2 17.4 23.2 13.6 41.8 11.5 8.7 5.2 28.2 71.8 37.3 21.3 34.5 11.9 7.4
H2 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.2 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
p 2020 H1 100.0 58.7 17.6 23.8 13.2 41.4 10.6 7.5 7.4 26.7 73.3 39.6 23.8 33.8 12.8 6.0
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2016 407.4 294.6 145.1 113.8 17.3 112.8 13.9 42.4 31.9 135.4 272.1 155.9 98.8 116.1 24.0 50.5
2017 406.9 297.4 147.1 118.8 14.1 109.5 14.8 43.6 27.6 147.2 259.6 147.3 97.9 112.4 17.6 45.5
3 2018 439.7 321.3 152.7 137.9 11.0 118.3 14.9 46.1 33.3 153.1 286.6 165.5 116.3 121.1 21.3 52.5
2019 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
2018 H2 439.7 321.3 152.7 137.9 11.0 118.3 14.9 46.1 33.3 153.1 286.6 165.5 116.3 121.1 21.3 52.5
2019 H1 472.9 360.3 160.8 165.1 11.8 112.6 13.7 46.3 24.7 147.9 325.0 192.8 140.0 132.2 35.9 46.5
H2 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
p 2020 H1 586.6 449.0 218.7 186.8 16.3 137.6 13.7 44.9 49.4 179.1 407.6 271.7 205.7 135.9 40.9 42.6
As a percentage of total assets
2016 100.0 72.3 35.6 27.9 4.3 27.7 3.4 10.4 7.8 33.2 66.8 38.3 24.3 28.5 5.9 12.4
2017 100.0 73.1 36.2 29.2 3.5 26.9 3.7 10.7 6.8 36.2 63.8 36.2 24.1 27.6 4.3 11.2
3 2018 100.0 73.1 34.7 31.4 2.5 26.9 3.4 10.5 7.6 34.8 65.2 37.6 26.5 27.6 4.8 11.9
2019 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
2018 H2 100.0 73.1 34.7 31.4 2.5 26.9 3.4 10.5 7.6 34.8 65.2 37.6 26.5 27.6 4.8 11.9
2019 H1 100.0 76.2 34.0 34.9 2.5 23.8 2.9 9.8 5.2 31.3 68.7 40.8 29.6 28.0 7.6 9.8
H2 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
p 2020 H1 100.0 76.5 37.3 31.9 2.8 23.5 2.3 7.7 8.4 30.5 69.5 46.3 35.1 23.2 7.0 7.3
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.  3 From H1 2018 or 2018 onwards: significant
changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  2 Distribution  2
RevenuesOperating income
before depreciation
and amortisation
(EBITDA  1 )Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartileOperating
income (EBIT)Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4€ billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % % € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % %
Total
2012 1,532.5 6.6 188.7 3.2 12.3 – 0.4 5.4 10.2 17.4 95.6 – 7.7 6.2 – 0.9 2.0 6.1 10.9
2013 1,540.6 – 0.6 187.0 – 2.8 12.1 – 0.3 5.2 10.3 18.4 99.4 5.5 6.5 0.4 1.9 5.9 11.0
2014 1,565.1 1.0 198.7 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.4 109.2 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.1 11.1
2015 1,634.6 6.9 196.0 – 1.1 12.0 – 1.0 6.1 10.6 17.8 91.5 – 16.4 5.6 – 1.5 1.7 6.6 11.3
2016 1,625.0 – 0.4 214.5 7.9 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.8 9.1 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,720.2 5.1 243.5 14.6 14.2 1.2 6.8 11.0 18.0 142.0 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.0
6 2018 1,707.6 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.7 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,765.5 2.6 233.7 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.1 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.5 5.8 11.7
2015 H2 830.9 5.1 93.4 – 7.6 11.2 – 1.5 6.3 11.5 18.1 32.6 – 36.7 3.9 – 2.6 2.3 7.1 11.7
2016 H1 782.3 – 1.9 111.6 6.2 14.3 1.1 5.9 10.4 17.7 65.5 2.7 8.4 0.3 1.6 6.4 11.3
H2 842.8 1.1 102.9 9.8 12.2 1.0 6.9 11.9 19.0 46.3 20.9 5.5 0.8 3.0 7.5 12.5
2017 H1 844.4 6.8 125.7 14.6 14.9 1.0 5.7 10.1 17.2 78.5 29.6 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.6
H2 879.0 3.5 117.5 14.6 13.4 1.3 6.9 12.0 19.1 63.0 38.2 7.2 1.8 3.0 7.4 12.4
6 2018 H1 848.6 – 0.1 120.8 – 2.2 14.2 – 0.3 5.1 10.5 18.0 72.7 – 5.3 8.6 – 0.5 1.7 6.3 12.4
H2 869.8 1.4 114.5 0.5 13.2 – 0.1 6.3 11.1 17.7 58.0 – 7.7 6.7 – 0.6 2.1 6.7 12.2
2019 H1 861.7 2.7 112.4 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.5 11.6 18.5 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 904.2 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.5 11.8 19.9 52.1 – 11.3 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.4
p 2020 H1 744.9 – 14.4 78.3 – 34.5 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.6 7.9 – 88.8 1.1 – 5.4 – 2.2 3.5 8.9
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2012 1,193.3 7.8 144.5 5.3 12.1 – 0.3 5.8 10.3 16.5 84.7 2.3 7.1 – 0.4 1.9 6.2 10.0
2013 1,199.6 – 0.8 142.6 – 2.6 11.9 – 0.2 5.1 10.3 16.0 77.5 – 5.8 6.5 – 0.3 1.6 5.9 10.5
2014 1,220.9 1.0 152.2 5.9 12.5 0.6 5.7 10.0 15.5 85.2 9.7 7.0 0.6 1.6 6.0 10.5
2015 1,310.5 7.0 149.1 – 2.6 11.4 – 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.3 69.1 – 19.7 5.3 – 1.7 2.1 6.6 10.4
2016 1,296.6 – 0.8 162.1 6.4 12.5 0.8 6.6 10.7 16.2 84.9 4.3 6.6 0.3 2.9 6.4 10.7
2017 1,396.8 5.5 187.6 16.6 13.4 1.3 6.8 11.0 15.8 112.6 40.5 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.5
6 2018 1,368.5 1.0 175.8 – 1.6 12.8 – 0.3 6.8 10.6 15.8 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.7 6.8 11.3
2019 1,411.8 2.0 168.2 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.6 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.7 5.4 – 1.8 1.2 5.7 10.1
2015 H2 661.1 5.3 66.6 – 13.1 10.1 – 2.1 5.3 11.2 15.9 18.6 – 52.4 2.8 – 3.3 1.8 7.0 10.7
2016 H1 625.5 – 2.3 86.6 1.8 13.8 0.5 6.7 10.6 15.9 52.7 – 6.4 8.4 – 0.3 2.9 6.4 10.1
H2 671.2 0.7 75.5 12.0 11.3 1.1 6.2 11.3 16.6 32.2 34.3 4.8 0.9 2.6 6.6 10.7
2017 H1 695.6 7.3 101.6 18.7 14.6 1.4 6.1 10.2 16.1 66.4 37.3 9.5 2.1 2.4 5.9 11.0
H2 701.8 3.7 86.0 14.2 12.3 1.1 6.9 11.7 16.9 46.2 45.5 6.6 1.9 3.4 7.2 10.8
6 2018 H1 682.3 – 0.1 95.0 – 3.4 13.9 – 0.5 6.5 10.8 16.7 60.0 – 6.0 8.8 – 0.6 2.9 6.6 11.5
H2 695.8 2.0 83.2 0.6 12.0 – 0.2 6.2 11.1 16.1 42.1 – 8.8 6.1 – 0.7 1.9 6.4 11.2
2019 H1 690.3 2.4 83.4 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.7 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.7 5.8 9.5
H2 721.5 1.7 84.9 0.4 11.8 – 0.2 5.9 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.6 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.2
p 2020 H1 581.0 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.9 8.4 – 3.9 4.4 8.8 15.0 0.2 – 102.6 0.0 – 6.3 – 2.2 3.1 7.9
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2012 339.2 2.8 44.1 – 3.4 13.0 – 0.8 5.1 9.7 22.7 10.9 – 46.8 3.2 – 3.0 2.1 5.7 12.3
2013 341.0 – 0.1 44.4 – 3.5 13.0 – 0.5 5.2 9.3 20.7 21.9 82.2 6.4 2.9 2.4 5.9 11.8
2014 344.2 0.8 46.5 1.8 13.5 0.1 6.0 12.3 22.6 24.1 4.3 7.0 0.2 2.6 6.3 13.7
2015 324.1 6.1 46.9 4.0 14.5 – 0.3 5.9 11.1 22.1 22.3 – 3.8 6.9 – 0.7 1.3 6.7 13.9
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2015 H2 169.9 4.5 26.8 9.9 15.8 0.8 6.6 11.8 23.5 14.1 9.0 8.3 0.4 2.4 7.6 15.0
2016 H1 156.8 – 0.4 25.0 24.0 16.0 3.1 5.1 10.2 23.4 12.8 61.2 8.2 3.1 1.0 6.2 14.6
H2 171.6 2.9 27.4 4.2 16.0 0.2 7.4 13.3 24.3 14.1 3.0 8.2 0.0 4.0 8.9 17.1
2017 H1 148.8 4.6 24.2 0.4 16.2 – 0.6 5.2 9.8 21.0 12.1 0.3 8.2 – 0.3 1.2 5.6 14.5
H2 177.1 2.5 31.5 15.6 17.8 2.0 6.6 12.5 24.6 16.8 21.6 9.5 1.5 2.9 7.8 17.9
6 2018 H1 166.3 0.2 25.9 2.8 15.6 0.4 3.8 9.5 22.7 12.6 – 1.9 7.6 – 0.2 – 0.9 4.7 15.3
H2 174.0 – 1.3 31.3 – 0.0 18.0 0.2 6.7 11.3 25.6 15.9 – 4.6 9.1 – 0.3 2.2 7.0 17.8
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
p 2020 H1 163.9 – 8.0 29.2 – 9.5 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.8 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted re-
turn on sales.  3 Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year fig-ures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  4 Adjusted
for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and in the
reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical Series Seasonally adjusted
business statistics.  5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.  6 From this point on-
wards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous pe-
riods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2020 2021
Item 2018 2019 2020 Q2 Q3 Q4 Dec. Jan. Feb.  p
I.Current Account +343,469 +279,972 +250,388 +32,326 +84,370 +101,756 +46,083 + 5,567 +13,276
1.Goods
Receipts 2,331,261 2,406,272 2,190,063 463,178 547,019 601,932 196,953 170,671 189,567
Expenditure  2,046,195 2,083,480 1,849,818 407,585 452,343 488,041 157,285 153,517 159,723
Balance +285,066 +322,790 +340,243 +55,592 +94,676 +113,890 +39,668 +17,154 +29,845
2.Services
Receipts 945,396 1,001,965 844,322 191,655 201,620 228,772 83,408 71,010 67,028
Expenditure  829,638 942,349 813,490 178,994 181,994 215,101 76,971 62,285 59,690
Balance +115,759 +59,616 +30,834 +12,661 +19,625 +13,672 + 6,438 + 8,725 + 7,339
3.Primary income
Receipts 855,176 855,060 754,575 193,575 178,195 186,262 72,160 55,669 51,887
Expenditure  760,462 805,054 713,623 193,922 177,690 164,022 56,803 57,458 53,957
Balance +94,714 +50,006 +40,950 – 347 + 503 +22,241 +15,357 – 1,789 – 2,070
4.Secondary income
Receipts 110,540 114,172 113,758 28,894 26,462 30,220 11,744 8,687 9,548
Expenditure  262,612 266,610 275,396 64,475 56,896 78,266 27,124 27,211 31,385
Balance –152,067 –152,437 –161,637 –35,581 –30,434 –48,046 –15,380 –18,523 –21,837
II.Capital account –37,293 –26,291 – 3,368 – 4,663 + 1,084 – 980 + 1,499 + 36 + 447
III.Financial account  1 +303,809 +201,807 +251,865 +27,086 +98,922 +122,688 +72,865 +11,909 +43,128
1.Direct investment +143,293 –62,440 –202,196 –109,475 +24,481 –123,020 –66,214 +13,617 +11,509
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  –253,233 +28,997 –87,062 +68,873 +23,751 –119,185 –119,047 +51,135 +17,781
By non-resident units of
the euro area  –396,524 +91,439 +115,134 +178,347 – 731 + 3,835 –52,832 +37,518 + 6,272
2.Portfolio investment +199,835 –70,794 +618,454 +180,170 +21,477 +602,082 +318,359 +30,187 +92,042
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +191,537 +442,487 +685,409 +380,529 +96,209 +342,491 +167,013 +107,057 +92,680
Equity and
investment fund shares +32,962 +68,761 +296,731 +95,344 +77,409 +177,041 +76,957 +50,244 +41,427
Short-term
debt securities  –51,969 +10,491 +126,294 +155,584 –19,657 +37,548 +36,351 +20,284 + 2,698
Long-term
debt securities  +210,543 +363,233 +262,386 +129,601 +38,458 +127,903 +53,705 +36,529 +48,555
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  – 8,298 +513,282 +66,954 +200,358 +74,732 –259,591 –151,346 +76,870 + 637
Equity and
investment fund shares +112,338 +254,243 +96,629 +112,793 +41,275 +24,236 +54,105 +38,627 +14,963
Short-term
debt securities  –63,961 +11,722 +121,499 +99,644 +28,208 –85,980 –83,282 +67,077 – 4,109
Long-term
debt securities  –56,677 +247,318 –151,174 –12,079 + 5,249 –197,847 –122,169 –28,835 –10,217
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options +39,860 – 3,930 + 932 +40,842 –31,802 –19,161 –30,492 + 5,495 + 5,415
4.Other investment –104,261 +335,740 –178,554 –87,639 +81,381 –339,281 –150,536 –36,444 –64,241
Eurosystem –134,123 +142,624 –203,677 +44,030 + 7,420 –196,368 –197,734 +169,442 + 9,020
General government – 4,860 – 815 –19,733 – 7,641 +16,506 –33,818 + 734 + 4,932 –15,006
MFIs  2 +107,972 +182,318 +13,044 –135,707 +53,337 –34,615 +105,898 –224,603 –63,949
Enterprises and households –73,252 +11,615 +31,807 +11,679 + 4,116 –74,481 –59,433 +13,785 + 5,694
5.Reserve assets +25,080 + 3,230 +13,231 + 3,187 + 3,386 + 2,069 + 1,749 – 947 – 1,597
IV.Net errors and omissions – 2,370 –51,873 + 4,843 – 577 +13,469 +21,911 +25,282 + 6,306 +29,405
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 increase: + / decrease: -.
2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Period Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2006 + 137,674 + 160,965 – 4,687 – 31,777 + 40,499 – 32,014 – 1,328 + 157,142 – 2,934 + 20,796
2007 + 171,493 + 201,728 – 1,183 – 32,465 + 35,620 – 33,390 – 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 13,273
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 – 3,947 – 29,122 + 24,063 – 34,147 – 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 – 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 – 6,605 – 17,642 + 54,524 – 34,764 – 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 – 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 – 6,209 – 25,255 + 51,306 – 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 – 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 – 9,357 – 29,930 + 69,087 – 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 – 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 – 11,388 – 30,774 + 65,658 – 38,703 – 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 – 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 – 12,523 – 39,321 + 63,284 – 43,413 – 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 210,906 + 219,629 – 14,296 – 25,303 + 57,752 – 41,172 + 2,936 + 240,258 – 2,564 + 26,416
2015 + 260,286 + 248,394 – 15,405 – 18,516 + 69,262 – 38,854 – 48 + 234,392 – 2,213 – 25,845
2016 + 266,689 + 252,409 – 19,921 – 20,987 + 76,199 – 40,931 + 2,142 + 261,123 + 1,686 – 7,708
2017 + 254,936 + 255,077 – 13,613 – 23,994 + 74,629 – 50,776 – 2,936 + 276,709 – 1,269 + 24,710
2018 + 264,156 + 224,584 – 22,682 – 17,410 + 105,694 – 48,713 + 676 + 246,544 + 392 – 18,288
2019 + 258,627 + 216,523 – 31,760 – 20,653 + 111,191 – 48,434 – 526 + 203,799 – 544 – 54,302
2020 + 232,078 + 189,532 – 8,907 + 1,631 + 92,497 – 51,582 – 4,771 + 227,639 – 51 + 332
2018 Q2 + 68,219 + 64,694 – 3,544 – 2,536 + 11,430 – 5,369 – 442 + 66,100 – 374 – 1,677
Q3 + 56,223 + 50,524 – 5,011 – 12,014 + 29,919 – 12,206 – 1,587 + 42,895 – 493 – 11,741
Q4 + 65,027 + 44,532 – 12,500 – 871 + 38,033 – 16,667 – 609 + 61,806 + 560 – 2,612
2019 Q1 + 70,210 + 56,391 – 4,760 – 1,290 + 31,863 – 16,753 + 900 + 44,999 – 63 – 26,111
Q2 + 57,800 + 52,295 – 7,867 – 2,849 + 14,629 – 6,274 – 374 + 47,570 + 444 – 9,856
Q3 + 62,831 + 57,801 – 7,757 – 12,518 + 29,954 – 12,405 + 265 + 18,301 – 349 – 44,796
Q4 + 67,786 + 50,037 – 11,376 – 3,995 + 34,746 – 13,003 – 1,317 + 92,930 – 576 + 26,460
2020 Q1 + 62,299 + 52,500 – 2,696 – 2,670 + 26,874 – 14,404 – 348 + 37,818 + 133 – 24,133
Q2 + 37,296 + 27,533 – 1,960 + 5,625 + 13,060 – 8,922 + 188 + 28,568 + 243 – 8,916
Q3 + 61,954 + 55,641 – 1,106 – 5,461 + 22,142 – 10,369 – 1,206 + 68,302 – 1,276 + 7,554
Q4 + 70,529 + 53,857 – 3,145 + 4,137 + 30,421 – 17,886 – 3,405 + 92,951 + 848 + 25,827
p 2021 Q1 + 66,432 + 55,908 – 1,748 + 3,615 + 27,464 – 20,556 – 135 + 131,700 + 385 + 65,403
2018 Oct. + 20,416 + 18,210 – 2,069 – 3,992 + 10,593 – 4,394 – 923 + 4,443 + 700 – 15,050
Nov. + 22,287 + 16,276 – 5,119 + 703 + 10,873 – 5,565 – 567 + 23,695 – 124 + 1,974
Dec. + 22,324 + 10,046 – 5,312 + 2,419 + 16,567 – 6,708 + 880 + 33,667 – 17 + 10,464
2019 Jan. + 20,071 + 14,600 – 2,196 – 997 + 11,534 – 5,066 + 2,133 + 19,763 + 158 – 2,441
Feb. + 17,750 + 17,446 – 1,727 – 154 + 8,499 – 8,041 + 166 + 16,326 + 112 – 1,590
Mar. + 32,389 + 24,345 – 837 – 140 + 11,830 – 3,646 – 1,399 + 8,909 – 333 – 22,080
Apr. + 22,256 + 17,081 – 2,686 – 312 + 9,185 – 3,697 – 47 + 23,703 + 547 + 1,494
May + 15,432 + 19,137 – 3,090 + 131 – 4,604 + 767 – 52 + 6,277 + 182 – 9,103
June + 20,112 + 16,077 – 2,092 – 2,668 + 10,048 – 3,344 – 276 + 17,589 – 285 – 2,247
July + 20,611 + 20,555 – 3,036 – 4,819 + 9,538 – 4,664 + 171 + 11,234 + 348 – 9,548
Aug. + 17,334 + 16,559 – 1,639 – 5,218 + 10,219 – 4,226 + 788 – 1,942 + 755 – 20,065
Sep. + 24,886 + 20,687 – 3,083 – 2,482 + 10,197 – 3,516 – 694 + 9,009 – 1,452 – 15,183
Oct. + 19,690 + 20,550 – 3,285 – 5,948 + 9,775 – 4,687 – 823 + 44,140 – 107 + 25,273
Nov. + 23,695 + 17,228 – 3,055 + 392 + 9,744 – 3,669 – 491 + 20,116 – 356 – 3,088
Dec. + 24,401 + 12,259 – 5,035 + 1,562 + 15,227 – 4,647 – 3 + 28,674 – 113 + 4,275
2020 Jan. + 15,895 + 14,116 – 769 – 1,055 + 10,156 – 7,321 + 267 + 3,235 + 898 – 12,927
Feb. + 21,618 + 20,218 – 1,768 – 1,319 + 7,014 – 4,294 + 48 + 17,898 + 750 – 3,768
Mar. + 24,786 + 18,167 – 159 – 296 + 9,704 – 2,789 – 663 + 16,684 – 1,514 – 7,439
Apr. + 9,952 + 3,711 – 617 + 1,696 + 8,859 – 4,315 + 88 + 10,215 + 950 + 174
May + 7,076 + 8,995 + 768 + 1,550 – 14 – 3,454 + 8 + 115 + 33 – 6,969
June + 20,268 + 14,827 – 2,111 + 2,379 + 4,215 – 1,154 + 91 + 18,238 – 740 – 2,122
July + 20,162 + 19,766 – 430 – 2,688 + 6,782 – 3,698 – 928 + 18,341 – 611 – 893
Aug. + 16,657 + 13,915 – 226 – 2,319 + 8,416 – 3,355 + 486 + 32,997 – 611 + 15,854
Sep. + 25,135 + 21,961 – 450 – 454 + 6,944 – 3,315 – 764 + 16,964 – 53 – 7,407
Oct. + 23,342 + 20,733 – 513 – 185 + 7,236 – 4,442 – 1,320 + 25,945 + 140 + 3,924
Nov. + 21,182 + 18,376 + 122 + 1,858 + 8,537 – 7,589 – 2,090 + 13,530 + 89 – 5,561
Dec. + 26,006 + 14,748 – 2,754 + 2,465 + 14,648 – 5,855 + 5 + 53,476 + 618 + 27,465
2021 Jan. + 17,625 + 14,226 – 440 + 943 + 9,795 – 7,340 – 395 + 25,928 + 743 + 8,698
Feb. + 18,629 + 18,391 – 728 + 1,335 + 7,636 – 8,733 – 1,448 + 51,103 + 102 + 33,922
p Mar. + 30,178 + 23,291 – 581 + 1,337 + 10,033 – 4,483 + 1,708 + 54,669 – 460 + 22,783
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: +/net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2020 2021
Group of countries/country 
2018 2019 
2020 Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar.  p
All countries  1 Exports 1,317,440 1,328,152 1,205,281 112,191 111,969 100,984 98,228 107,898 126,470
Imports 1,088,720 1,104,141 1,025,344 92,531 95,280 85,655 84,383 89,709 105,924
Balance +228,720 +224,010 +179,937 +19,659 +16,688 +15,329 +13,845 +18,190 +20,546
   I. European countries Exports 900,141 902,831 823,328 77,567 77,081 65,934 68,173 74,068 86,215
Imports 744,575 747,692 683,179 62,555 64,359 57,255 55,421 61,678 72,115
Balance +155,566 +155,140 +140,150 +15,012 +12,722 + 8,680 +12,753 +12,391 +14,100
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 696,480 698,257 634,730 59,760 59,632 51,744 54,619 58,355 67,467
Imports 586,433 593,251 547,483 50,356 51,970 46,073 44,323 49,726 57,719
Balance +110,047 +105,006 +87,247 + 9,403 + 7,662 + 5,671 +10,296 + 8,628 + 9,747
          Euro area (19)       Exports 492,469 492,308 440,989 41,147 41,265 35,900 38,178 40,423 47,020
          countries Imports 405,810 409,863 372,507 33,683 34,469 31,036 29,746 33,675 39,414
Balance +86,659 +82,445 +68,481 + 7,464 + 6,796 + 4,864 + 8,432 + 6,748 + 7,606
          of which:
               Austria Exports 65,027 66,076 60,057 5,655 5,558 4,580 4,861 5,473 6,412
  Imports 42,994 44,059 40,428 3,705 3,795 3,313 3,357 3,674 4,300
Balance +22,033 +22,017 +19,629 + 1,949 + 1,763 + 1,267 + 1,504 + 1,798 + 2,112
               Belgium and Exports 50,389 52,006 48,779 4,702 4,508 4,104 4,292 4,408 4,974
               Luxembourg Imports 49,315 46,322 39,809 3,659 3,641 3,213 3,361 3,538 4,522
Balance + 1,074 + 5,683 + 8,970 + 1,043 + 867 + 891 + 931 + 870 + 452
               France Exports 105,359 106,564 90,840 8,464 8,374 7,270 7,859 8,151 9,505
  Imports 65,024 66,199 56,540 5,155 5,703 4,660 4,457 4,983 5,886
Balance +40,335 +40,364 +34,300 + 3,309 + 2,670 + 2,610 + 3,402 + 3,168 + 3,619
               Italy Exports 69,813 67,887 60,339 5,873 5,880 4,790 5,407 5,918 6,820
  Imports 60,223 57,100 54,012 5,088 5,379 4,385 4,426 5,168 5,868
Balance + 9,591 +10,786 + 6,327 + 785 + 501 + 405 + 981 + 750 + 952
               Netherlands Exports 91,061 91,528 84,535 7,293 7,738 7,380 7,396 7,796 9,101
  Imports 97,709 97,816 87,999 7,695 7,576 7,685 7,111 7,866 9,075
Balance – 6,649 – 6,288 – 3,464 – 402 + 162 – 305 + 285 – 70 + 26
               Spain  Exports 44,184 44,218 37,484 3,623 3,597 2,994 3,362 3,462 3,976
  Imports 32,399 33,126 31,276 2,880 3,020 2,521 2,561 2,804 3,343
Balance +11,785 +11,092 + 6,209 + 743 + 577 + 473 + 801 + 658 + 633
          Other EU Member  Exports 204,011 205,949 193,742 18,612 18,367 15,845 16,440 17,931 20,447
          States  Imports 180,623 183,387 174,976 16,673 17,501 15,037 14,577 16,051 18,305
Balance +23,388 +22,561 +18,765 + 1,940 + 866 + 808 + 1,863 + 1,880 + 2,142
      2. Other European Exports 203,661 204,575 188,598 17,808 17,449 14,190 13,555 15,714 18,748
          countries Imports 158,142 154,441 135,695 12,198 12,389 11,182 11,098 11,951 14,396
Balance +45,519 +50,134 +52,903 + 5,609 + 5,060 + 3,008 + 2,457 + 3,763 + 4,353
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 54,021 56,345 56,280 4,910 5,079 4,005 4,602 4,697 5,427
  Imports 45,913 45,824 45,450 4,232 4,055 3,369 3,527 3,859 4,470
Balance + 8,108 +10,521 +10,830 + 678 + 1,024 + 637 + 1,075 + 838 + 957
               United Kingdom Exports 82,164 79,166 66,813 6,490 6,433 4,990 4,303 5,457 6,462
  Imports 37,025 38,397 34,789 2,947 3,144 2,847 1,734 2,697 3,139
Balance +45,139 +40,770 +32,024 + 3,543 + 3,289 + 2,142 + 2,569 + 2,760 + 3,323
   II. Non-European  Exports 413,483 421,728 380,223 34,510 34,592 34,932 29,936 33,712 40,100
       countries Imports 342,980 355,390 341,264 29,872 30,797 28,418 28,851 27,908 33,665
Balance +70,503 +66,338 +38,960 + 4,638 + 3,794 + 6,515 + 1,086 + 5,804 + 6,435
       1. Africa Exports 22,524 23,627 20,043 1,749 1,755 1,760 1,654 1,745 2,230
Imports 22,542 24,475 18,696 1,564 1,877 1,778 1,913 1,810 2,237
Balance – 18 – 848 + 1,347 + 185 – 122 – 18 – 260 – 65 – 8
       2. America Exports 158,952 165,602 141,759 13,365 12,879 12,309 11,563 13,132 15,276
  Imports 92,444 100,007 93,890 8,456 8,367 7,628 6,950 7,228 9,056
Balance +66,508 +65,595 +47,869 + 4,908 + 4,513 + 4,681 + 4,613 + 5,904 + 6,221
           of which:
               United States  Exports 113,341 118,680 103,838 9,913 9,574 9,157 8,477 9,480 11,117
  Imports 64,493 71,334 67,714 5,793 5,843 5,611 4,741 5,140 6,657
Balance +48,847 +47,346 +36,124 + 4,120 + 3,731 + 3,546 + 3,736 + 4,340 + 4,460
       3. Asia Exports 219,716 221,278 207,769 18,467 19,099 19,929 15,980 17,947 21,498
  Imports 224,355 227,036 224,799 19,603 20,214 18,702 19,661 18,606 22,032
Balance – 4,639 – 5,759 –17,030 – 1,136 – 1,115 + 1,227 – 3,682 – 659 – 534
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 29,144 28,663 25,437 2,161 2,069 3,327 1,656 1,971 2,293
  Imports 8,156 7,460 5,928 508 412 530 450 402 495
Balance +20,989 +21,202 +19,509 + 1,653 + 1,657 + 2,797 + 1,207 + 1,569 + 1,797
               Japan  Exports 20,436 20,662 17,381 1,474 1,594 1,518 1,469 1,434 1,665
Imports 23,710 23,904 21,254 1,919 1,972 1,720 1,755 1,671 1,903
Balance – 3,275 – 3,243 – 3,872 – 445 – 378 – 202 – 287 – 237 – 238
               People's Republic  Exports 93,004 95,984 95,866 8,646 9,341 9,256 7,525 8,476 10,307
               of China  2 Imports 106,065 110,054 116,711 10,243 10,858 10,073 10,541 9,869 11,668
Balance –13,061 –14,070 –20,845 – 1,598 – 1,517 – 817 – 3,016 – 1,393 – 1,361
               New industrial countries Exports 54,995 54,164 50,570 4,391 4,282 4,049 4,067 4,261 5,118
               and emerging markets  Imports 52,945 51,748 48,109 4,001 4,156 3,999 4,076 3,789 4,684
               of Asia  3 Balance + 2,050 + 2,416 + 2,461 + 389 + 126 + 49 – 9+ 472 + 435
       4. Oceania and Exports 12,291 11,221 10,653 930 859 934 740 887 1,096
           polar regions Imports 3,639 3,872 3,879 249 339 311 326 263 340
Balance + 8,652 + 7,349 + 6,774 + 681 + 519 + 624 + 414 + 624 + 756
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. EU excl. UK.  1 Including fuel and other supplies for ships andaircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.  3 Brunei
Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Period Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2016 – 20,987 – 5,950 – 38,247 8,612 15,790 – 7,156 – 1,520 3,092 474 76,800 – 1,076
2017 – 23,994 – 3,679 – 43,558 9,613 14,903 – 8,188 – 1,065 2,177 – 637 76,669 – 1,403
2018 – 17,410 – 2,003 – 44,543 9,535 17,398 – 7,206 580 3,325 – 1,208 107,902 – 1,001
2019 – 20,653 2 – 45,947 10,392 17,728 – 9,561 – 2,933 3,493 373 111,763 – 945
2020 1,631 – 6,095 – 16,538 9,461 17,392 – 6,822 – 4,775 3,347 2,307 91,586 – 1,396
2019 Q3 – 12,518 265 – 18,530 2,844 3,220 – 2,149 – 528 927 – 662 31,853 – 1,237
Q4 – 3,995 68 – 10,513 2,839 5,362 – 3,165 – 805 725 459 30,866 3,421
2020 Q1 – 2,670 – 1,220 – 7,394 2,464 4,344 – 2,164 – 963 881 917 26,953 – 996
Q2 5,625 – 1,534 237 2,332 4,794 – 1,524 – 1,125 879 384 15,200 – 2,524
Q3 – 5,461 – 1,863 – 7,488 2,206 3,353 – 1,993 – 1,645 892 97 23,168 – 1,123
Q4 4,137 – 1,478 – 1,893 2,458 4,902 – 1,140 – 1,042 695 909 26,265 3,247
p 2021 Q1 3,615 – 1,013 – 378 2,433 4,430 – 2,259 – 1,434 785 1,003 27,477 – 1,016
2020 May 1,550 – 619 301 713 1,403 – 679 – 423 238 139 1,383 – 1,537
June 2,379 – 479 – 399 740 1,750 – 23 – 19 375 145 4,488 – 418
July – 2,688 – 574 – 2,313 957 623 – 833 – 953 269 2 7,234 – 453
Aug. – 2,319 – 520 – 3,024 533 1,335 – 878 – 396 254 45 8,679 – 308
Sep. – 454 – 769 – 2,151 716 1,395 – 283 – 296 369 51 7,255 – 362
Oct. – 185 – 620 – 1,756 961 1,341 – 700 – 93 259 257 7,413 – 434
Nov. 1,858 – 457 – 22 497 1,712 – 611 – 82 192 266 8,741 – 470
Dec. 2,465 – 401 – 114 1,001 1,849 170 – 867 244 386 10,111 4,151
2021 Jan. 943 – 460 – 133 1,013 1,086 – 869 – 347 256 343 9,806 – 354
Feb. 1,335 – 356 – 62 797 1,467 – 733 – 260 262 359 7,576 – 299
p Mar. 1,337 – 197 – 183 623 1,876 – 658 – 826 267 301 10,096 – 363
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Period Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2016 – 40,931 – 25,417 – 11,516 10,739 – 15,514 4,214 4,196 2,142 3,219 – 1,077
2017 – 50,776 – 23,191 – 9,851 9,665 – 27,584 4,632 4,613 – 2,936 926 – 3,863
2018 – 48,713 – 28,645 – 10,186 10,237 – 20,067 5,152 5,142 676 3,444 – 2,768
2019 – 48,434 – 28,956 – 10,728 11,745 – 19,479 5,445 5,431 – 526 2,754 – 3,280
2020 – 51,582 – 34,268 – 12,211 10,877 – 17,313 5,925 5,908 – 4,771 469 – 5,240
2019 Q3 – 12,405 – 7,741 – 1,890 1,601 – 4,664 1,363 1,358 265 1,277 – 1,011
Q4 – 13,003 – 8,266 – 4,687 1,342 – 4,737 1,363 1,358 – 1,317 854 – 2,171
2020 Q1 – 14,404 – 9,565 – 2,315 2,514 – 4,839 1,482 1,477 – 348 – 444 95
Q2 – 8,922 – 4,819 – 2,270 4,506 – 4,104 1,480 1,477 188 504 – 316
Q3 – 10,369 – 6,422 – 3,249 2,144 – 3,947 1,481 1,477 – 1,206 – 54 – 1,151
Q4 – 17,886 – 13,463 – 4,378 1,713 – 4,423 1,482 1,477 – 3,405 464 – 3,869
p 2021 Q1 – 20,556 – 14,646 – 3,294 2,315 – 5,910 1,547 1,543 – 135 – 20 – 116
2020 May – 3,454 – 2,156 – 693 2,327 – 1,298 493 492 8 – 56 64
June – 1,154 236 – 1,091 1,917 – 1,389 494 492 91 366 – 275
July – 3,698 – 2,117 – 1,086 752 – 1,582 493 492 – 928 – 450 – 478
Aug. – 3,355 – 2,312 – 1,149 176 – 1,043 495 492 486 696 – 209
Sep. – 3,315 – 1,993 – 1,015 1,215 – 1,322 493 492 – 764 – 300 – 465
Oct. – 4,442 – 2,998 – 962 525 – 1,444 494 492 – 1,320 – 782 – 538
Nov. – 7,589 – 5,989 – 1,390 256 – 1,601 494 492 – 2,090 – 393 – 1,697
Dec. – 5,855 – 4,476 – 2,026 931 – 1,379 493 492 5 1,639 – 1,634
2021 Jan. – 7,340 – 5,854 – 1,803 399 – 1,486 516 514 – 395 – 373 – 22
Feb. – 8,733 – 6,458 – 661 923 – 2,275 515 514 – 1,448 – 1,236 – 212
p Mar. – 4,483 – 2,334 – 831 993 – 2,150 516 514 1,708 1,589 119
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2020 2021
Item 2018 2019 2020 Q3 Q4 Q1 p Jan. Feb. Mar.  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +398,714 +247,406 +703,655 +228,598 +73,736 +290,161 +129,339 +65,277 +95,545
1.Direct investment +156,050 +136,291 +96,602 +15,075 +43,818 +42,904 +23,141 + 7,505 +12,259
Equity +154,766 +116,375 +79,229 +10,404 +13,948 +10,920 + 6,252 + 6,045 – 1,377
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +37,276 +37,654 +16,648 + 7,274 – 3,967 +14,417 + 5,784 + 6,098 + 2,534
Debt instruments + 1,285 +19,916 +17,373 + 4,671 +29,871 +31,984 +16,889 + 1,459 +13,635
2.Portfolio investment +82,648 +136,850 +186,532 +44,665 +67,717 +87,192 +27,523 +37,017 +22,653
Shares  2 + 9,251 +14,111 +65,947 +18,839 +22,891 + 8,858 – 9,054 + 6,934 +10,979
Investment fund shares  3 +28,366 +53,919 +64,435 +27,355 +30,200 +16,764 + 7,441 + 7,102 + 2,221
Short-term  4
debt securities + 1,973 + 8,599 + 2,019 – 885 – 1,898 + 3,129 + 4,003 + 1,346 – 2,219
Long-term   5
debt securities +43,058 +60,221 +54,131 – 644 +16,524 +58,441 +25,134 +21,635 +11,673
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +22,539 +24,532 +99,097 +25,245 + 9,121 +21,885 + 5,876 + 7,965 + 8,045
4.Other investment  7 +137,085 –49,723 +321,475 +144,889 –47,768 +137,794 +72,056 +12,689 +53,049
MFIs  8 +49,862 + 9,276 – 4,494 –12,449 –49,332 +142,557 +122,090 +23,792 – 3,324
Short-term +45,400 – 8,901 + 3,526 – 8,459 –50,666 +135,399 +127,108 +21,557 –13,266
Long-term + 4,462 +18,177 – 8,020 – 3,990 + 1,333 + 7,158 – 5,018 + 2,235 + 9,942
Enterprises and
households  9 +39,124 +16,241 +81,740 +37,093 –13,607 +54,315 +30,788 + 5,111 +18,417
Short-term +20,489 + 4,510 +40,464 – 5,614 + 961 +52,110 +29,531 + 4,628 +17,950
Long-term +18,635 +11,730 +41,276 +42,706 –14,568 + 2,206 + 1,256 + 483 + 466
General government – 8,696 – 4,325 + 1,118 + 1,542 – 5,900 – 4,807 – 204 – 4,451 – 152
Short-term – 7,706 – 1,139 + 2,399 + 2,070 – 5,513 – 4,591 + 90 – 4,573 – 108
Long-term – 990 – 3,186 – 1,281 – 528 – 387 – 216 – 294 + 122 – 44
Bundesbank +56,795 –70,915 +243,112 +118,704 +21,071 –54,271 –80,617 –11,762 +38,108
5.Reserve assets + 392 – 544 – 51 – 1,276 + 848 + 385 + 743 + 102 – 460
II.Net foreign investment
in the reporting country
(increase: +) +152,171 +43,607 +476,016 +160,296 –19,215 +158,461 +103,411 +14,174 +40,876
1. Direct investment +135,583 +60,170 +97,216 +26,495 +40,655 +13,158 +20,553 + 580 – 7,975
Equity +48,790 +30,250 +31,079 + 3,352 +15,740 + 4,672 + 2,177 + 907 + 1,588
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 4,331 + 1,031 + 2,152 + 1,786 – 1,337 + 1,087 + 1,193 – 36 – 71
Debt instruments +86,793 +29,920 +66,136 +23,144 +24,915 + 8,486 +18,376 – 327 – 9,563
2.Portfolio investment –70,988 +63,443 +143,783 +134,064 –104,819 +26,322 +16,058 – 3,191 +13,455
Shares  2 –30,383 – 6,075 –16,838 – 561 – 985 + 3,936 + 3,166 – 1,600 + 2,369
Investment fund shares  3 – 6,364 – 4,923 + 933 – 382 + 1,835 + 93 – 34 – 667 + 794
Short-term  4
debt securities + 5,128 +15,902 +80,193 +49,024 –33,494 +19,909 +14,265 – 8,524 +14,168
Long-term   5
debt securities –39,370 +58,539 +79,494 +85,982 –72,175 + 2,385 – 1,338 + 7,599 – 3,876
3.Other investment  7 +87,576 –80,006 +235,017 – 263 +44,949 +118,981 +66,800 +16,785 +35,396
MFIs  8 –35,902 –10,214 +108,397 + 1,339 –73,056 +248,354 +210,810 +35,501 + 2,043
Short-term –27,469 –20,978 +74,805 – 632 –83,596 +218,851 +186,193 +32,858 – 200
Long-term – 8,433 +10,764 +33,591 + 1,971 +10,539 +29,503 +24,617 + 2,643 + 2,243
Enterprises and
households  9 +18,949 +29,501 +26,267 –22,556 – 8,854 + 8,440 + 5,905 – 2,861 + 5,396
Short-term + 7,132 + 9,988 +18,062 –27,132 – 6,779 +11,458 + 7,487 – 1,523 + 5,495
Long-term +11,816 +19,513 + 8,206 + 4,575 – 2,075 – 3,018 – 1,582 – 1,338 – 99
General government + 2,906 + 262 –10,521 –10,345 – 4,993 – 3,756 – 6,515 + 5,718 – 2,958
Short-term + 2,230 + 124 –10,306 –10,232 – 4,456 – 1,044 – 3,834 + 5,744 – 2,954
Long-term + 677 + 138 – 216 – 113 – 537 – 2,712 – 2,682 – 26 – 4
Bundesbank +101,623 –99,554 +110,874 +31,300 +131,853 –134,057 –143,400 –21,572 +30,915
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +246,544 +203,799 +227,639 +68,302 +92,951 +131,700 +25,928 +51,103 +54,669
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see 'Statistical series Direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities  3 , 4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 – 17,068 – 30,857 – 10,477 65,670
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,670
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 671,202 489,769
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2018 Nov. 1,184,703 168,198 116,409 14,405 5,244 32,140 960,478 941,130 56,026 674,283 510,420
Dec. 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 Jan. 1,123,169 176,720 124,811 14,424 5,486 31,999 890,410 868,142 56,039 648,419 474,750
Feb. 1,127,455 178,016 125,793 14,496 5,510 32,217 894,226 872,698 55,214 633,884 493,572
Mar. 1,190,416 178,088 125,302 14,629 5,561 32,596 958,243 941,310 54,086 655,445 534,971
Apr. 1,167,188 177,378 124,046 14,622 6,228 32,482 935,563 919,696 54,247 627,089 540,098
May 1,186,394 180,073 126,092 14,637 6,150 33,193 952,038 934,640 54,283 618,639 567,754
June 1,201,041 187,401 134,470 14,473 6,081 32,377 960,158 942,319 53,482 649,792 551,249
July 1,134,349 193,244 139,163 14,613 6,391 33,077 888,584 870,903 52,521 621,971 512,378
Aug. 1,173,640 205,331 149,696 14,703 6,379 34,553 915,546 897,901 52,763 638,733 534,907
Sep. 1,185,142 202,285 147,611 14,831 6,396 33,447 930,892 915,342 51,965 626,236 558,906
Oct. 1,103,094 199,858 146,284 14,663 6,287 32,624 852,754 837,377 50,482 596,696 506,398
Nov. 1,134,129 197,047 143,253 14,799 6,116 32,879 885,524 870,520 51,558 590,333 543,797
Dec. 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 671,202 489,769
2020 Jan. 1,090,725 209,432 154,867 14,785 6,110 33,671 828,120 811,435 53,173 580,910 509,814
Feb. 1,106,033 215,748 159,889 14,857 5,989 35,014 836,782 821,562 53,503 577,033 529,000
Mar. 1,218,815 213,722 158,677 14,812 5,965 34,268 952,781 935,126 52,312 617,919 600,896
Apr. 1,214,851 226,903 170,359 14,935 6,857 34,753 934,333 918,814 53,615 616,319 598,532
May 1,209,328 223,125 167,780 14,650 6,787 33,908 931,521 916,145 54,682 612,403 596,925
June 1,294,167 226,135 170,728 14,603 6,955 33,849 1,012,982 995,083 55,050 618,825 675,342
July 1,323,691 233,547 180,400 14,179 7,465 31,503 1,034,282 1,019,214 55,862 599,189 724,503
Aug. 1,358,137 230,309 177,973 14,129 7,423 30,784 1,071,521 1,056,231 56,307 600,390 757,747
Sep. 1,414,933 227,150 173,979 14,293 7,632 31,246 1,131,686 1,115,189 56,097 649,781 765,151
Oct. 1,346,367 227,767 174,433 14,346 7,656 31,332 1,061,498 1,047,327 57,102 619,445 726,922
Nov. 1,347,202 212,286 159,737 14,193 7,535 30,820 1,078,270 1,060,263 56,647 625,921 721,282
Dec. 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 Jan. 1,348,921 219,860 166,494 14,115 8,061 31,190 1,072,140 1,054,994 56,921 638,042 710,879
Feb. 1,328,303 210,619 157,313 14,119 8,047 31,140 1,060,378 1,043,746 57,306 616,473 711,830
Mar. 1,364,046 209,400 155,323 14,367 7,966 31,744 1,098,486 1,081,989 56,160 647,647 716,400
Apr. 1,307,161 210,799 158,143 14,085 7,836 30,735 1,041,472 1,024,734 54,890 604,863 702,299
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2017 901,267 218,110 683,156 457,369 225,788 211,769 14,018 1,115,680 143,928 971,752 770,140 201,612 131,034 70,579
2018 934,837 234,595 700,241 468,418 231,823 217,561 14,262 1,225,989 146,105 1,079,884 873,977 205,907 134,897 71,010
2019 959,708 226,949 732,759 499,322 233,437 217,768 15,669 1,281,332 165,199 1,116,133 908,374 207,759 133,704 74,055
2020 1,007,574 250,320 757,254 529,154 228,099 211,800 16,300 1,360,348 167,766 1,192,582 984,663 207,919 129,171 78,748
2020 Oct. 1,005,740 268,740 737,000 507,705 229,295 212,916 16,379 1,344,943 173,671 1,171,273 959,775 211,498 132,348 79,150
Nov. 1,041,274 269,412 771,862 538,966 232,896 216,316 16,580 1,389,159 176,910 1,212,249 995,840 216,409 136,587 79,822
Dec. 1,007,574 250,320 757,254 529,154 228,099 211,800 16,300 1,360,348 167,766 1,192,582 984,663 207,919 129,171 78,748
2021 Jan. 1,051,501 253,575 797,927 577,275 220,652 204,064 16,588 1,392,392 160,885 1,231,507 1,027,859 203,649 122,983 80,665
Feb. 1,058,227 258,375 799,851 572,749 227,102 210,489 16,614 1,390,051 165,241 1,224,810 1,015,649 209,161 127,888 81,273
Mar. 1,095,623 272,079 823,544 580,183 243,361 226,514 16,847 1,390,829 165,469 1,225,360 1,004,947 220,414 138,147 82,267
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2017 522,279 166,645 355,634 263,631 92,003 83,509 8,494 720,770 93,932 626,838 544,462 82,376 62,137 20,239
2018 545,146 176,529 368,617 276,091 92,525 84,214 8,312 796,793 87,930 708,863 626,713 82,150 61,561 20,589
2019 569,888 176,258 393,630 302,654 90,976 82,454 8,522 824,390 89,604 734,787 650,172 84,615 62,534 22,081
2020 599,741 188,300 411,440 322,386 89,054 80,200 8,854 866,365 92,592 773,773 687,613 86,160 62,357 23,803
2020 Oct. 608,309 204,360 403,949 310,305 93,645 84,796 8,848 878,405 102,304 776,101 687,970 88,131 64,042 24,089
Nov. 619,924 205,052 414,872 319,248 95,624 86,583 9,041 884,991 96,349 788,641 695,211 93,431 69,031 24,400
Dec. 599,741 188,300 411,440 322,386 89,054 80,200 8,854 866,365 92,592 773,773 687,613 86,160 62,357 23,803
2021 Jan. 628,181 198,366 429,815 340,941 88,874 79,796 9,078 878,082 89,439 788,643 702,825 85,819 60,519 25,300
Feb. 634,002 201,694 432,308 339,621 92,687 83,659 9,028 878,026 88,866 789,159 698,276 90,883 65,255 25,629
Mar. 678,912 210,538 468,374 370,940 97,434 88,413 9,021 888,847 91,507 797,340 703,753 93,587 67,891 25,696
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2017 378,987 51,465 327,522 193,738 133,784 128,260 5,524 394,910 49,996 344,914 225,677 119,236 68,897 50,340
2018 389,691 58,066 331,625 192,327 139,298 133,347 5,950 429,197 58,175 371,021 247,265 123,757 73,335 50,422
2019 389,820 50,692 339,129 196,668 142,461 135,314 7,146 456,942 75,595 381,347 258,203 123,144 71,171 51,974
2020 407,833 62,020 345,814 206,768 139,046 131,600 7,445 493,983 75,175 418,809 297,050 121,758 66,813 54,945
2020 Oct. 397,431 64,380 333,051 197,401 135,650 128,120 7,530 466,538 71,367 395,171 271,805 123,366 68,305 55,061
Nov. 421,350 64,359 356,991 219,718 137,273 129,733 7,539 504,169 80,561 423,608 300,630 122,978 67,556 55,422
Dec. 407,833 62,020 345,814 206,768 139,046 131,600 7,445 493,983 75,175 418,809 297,050 121,758 66,813 54,945
2021 Jan. 423,321 55,209 368,112 236,334 131,778 124,267 7,511 514,310 71,446 442,864 325,034 117,830 62,465 55,365
Feb. 424,225 56,681 367,544 233,128 134,415 126,829 7,586 512,025 76,375 435,650 317,373 118,278 62,634 55,644
Mar. 416,711 61,541 355,170 209,243 145,927 138,101 7,826 501,982 73,962 428,021 301,194 126,827 70,256 56,570
Euro area (19)
2017 454,033 149,685 304,348 232,178 72,170 64,683 7,487 654,278 75,669 578,609 512,786 65,823 50,442 15,381
2018 468,699 156,351 312,348 240,676 71,672 64,427 7,245 730,553 68,747 661,806 596,496 65,310 49,555 15,755
2019 492,090 157,829 334,261 263,830 70,431 62,939 7,492 751,076 69,464 681,612 615,369 66,243 49,609 16,634
2020 515,425 167,497 347,928 279,213 68,715 61,150 7,565 783,041 71,423 711,617 645,409 66,208 48,316 17,891
2020 Oct. 527,309 185,453 341,856 270,695 71,161 63,447 7,714 801,386 82,693 718,693 651,833 66,859 48,969 17,890
Nov. 533,187 181,425 351,763 279,009 72,754 64,973 7,780 804,820 76,828 727,992 657,289 70,703 52,565 18,138
Dec. 515,425 167,497 347,928 279,213 68,715 61,150 7,565 783,041 71,423 711,617 645,409 66,208 48,316 17,891
2021 Jan. 541,180 179,279 361,901 293,469 68,431 60,704 7,727 794,556 69,462 725,094 659,052 66,043 46,851 19,191
Feb. 545,961 183,136 362,825 291,685 71,141 63,485 7,656 791,694 69,618 722,076 652,594 69,482 50,143 19,339
Mar. 581,419 188,079 393,341 319,163 74,177 66,562 7,615 804,890 72,133 732,757 661,913 70,845 51,477 19,368
Extra-Euro area (19)
2017 447,234 68,425 378,809 225,191 153,618 147,087 6,531 461,402 68,259 393,143 257,354 135,789 80,592 55,197
2018 466,138 78,244 387,894 227,743 160,151 153,134 7,017 495,436 77,358 418,078 277,482 140,597 85,342 55,255
2019 467,618 69,120 398,498 235,492 163,006 154,829 8,176 530,256 95,735 434,521 293,005 141,516 84,095 57,421
2020 492,149 82,823 409,326 249,941 159,385 150,650 8,735 577,307 96,343 480,965 339,254 141,711 80,854 60,856
2020 Oct. 478,431 83,287 395,145 237,011 158,134 149,469 8,665 543,558 90,978 452,580 307,941 144,638 83,379 61,260
Nov. 508,087 87,987 420,100 259,957 160,143 151,343 8,800 584,339 100,082 484,257 338,551 145,706 84,021 61,684
Dec. 492,149 82,823 409,326 249,941 159,385 150,650 8,735 577,307 96,343 480,965 339,254 141,711 80,854 60,856
2021 Jan. 510,322 74,296 436,026 283,806 152,220 143,359 8,861 597,836 91,424 506,413 368,807 137,606 76,132 61,474
Feb. 512,266 75,240 437,026 281,064 155,962 147,004 8,958 598,357 95,623 502,733 363,054 139,679 77,745 61,934
Mar. 514,204 84,000 430,204 261,020 169,184 159,952 9,232 585,939 93,336 492,603 343,034 149,569 86,670 62,899
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2019 Dec. 1.6154 1.4640 7.7974 7.4720 121.24 10.0429 10.4827 1.0925 0.84731 1.1113
2020 Jan. 1.6189 1.4523 7.6832 7.4729 121.36 9.9384 10.5544 1.0765 0.84927 1.1100
Feb. 1.6356 1.4485 7.6302 7.4713 120.03 10.1327 10.5679 1.0648 0.84095 1.0905
Mar. 1.7788 1.5417 7.7675 7.4703 118.90 11.2943 10.8751 1.0591 0.89460 1.1063
Apr. 1.7271 1.5287 7.6858 7.4617 116.97 11.3365 10.8845 1.0545 0.87547 1.0862
May 1.6724 1.5219 7.7482 7.4577 116.87 10.9862 10.5970 1.0574 0.88685 1.0902
June 1.6322 1.5254 7.9734 7.4548 121.12 10.7298 10.4869 1.0712 0.89878 1.1255
July 1.6304 1.5481 8.0352 7.4467 122.38 10.6544 10.3538 1.0711 0.90467 1.1463
Aug. 1.6433 1.5654 8.1954 7.4460 125.40 10.5797 10.3087 1.0767 0.90081 1.1828
Sep. 1.6307 1.5586 8.0333 7.4418 124.50 10.7769 10.4279 1.0786 0.90947 1.1792
Oct. 1.6521 1.5559 7.9225 7.4424 123.89 10.9220 10.3967 1.0739 0.90741 1.1775
Nov. 1.6266 1.5472 7.8152 7.4459 123.61 10.7453 10.2311 1.0785 0.89605 1.1838
Dec. 1.6166 1.5595 7.9602 7.4412 126.28 10.6008 10.1736 1.0814 0.90624 1.2170
2021 Jan. 1.5764 1.5494 7.8730 7.4387 126.31 10.3661 10.0952 1.0794 0.89267 1.2171
Feb. 1.5605 1.5354 7.8136 7.4367 127.49 10.2791 10.0887 1.0858 0.87268 1.2098
Mar. 1.5444 1.4970 7.7465 7.4363 129.38 10.1469 10.1692 1.1065 0.85873 1.1899
Apr. 1.5544 1.4975 7.8051 7.4367 130.49 10.0376 10.1620 1.1031 0.86527 1.1979
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603      
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399      
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573    
France French franc FRF 6.55957    
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583    
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564  
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27          
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399      
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371    
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482        
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386        
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750        
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640        
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274  
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300  
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260      
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466      
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804  
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280    

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2021
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-42  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
26 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  526 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.3 96.1 96.0 96.1 96.5 95.9 97.9 99.5 95.9 97.7 98.2 98.1 97.8
2000 87.2 86.8 86.1 85.7 88.1 86.1 91.9 97.4 85.5 91.1 93.0 92.2 91.2
2001 87.6 87.1 86.7 86.7 90.2 86.9 91.7 96.5 86.1 90.5 92.9 91.6 91.0
2002 89.9 90.2 89.8 90.4 94.5 90.5 92.4 95.6 88.6 91.1 93.4 92.1 91.9
2003 100.5 101.3 101.0 101.7 106.4 101.5 95.9 94.7 97.7 95.3 97.0 96.6 96.8
2004 104.3 105.2 104.0 105.0 110.8 105.3 96.2 93.5 100.2 95.6 98.4 98.1 98.4
2005 102.9 103.9 102.0 103.2 109.0 102.9 94.8 91.9 99.0 93.3 98.4 97.1 96.8
2006 102.9 103.9 101.4 102.1 109.1 102.3 93.6 90.3 98.4 91.6 98.5 96.7 96.0
2007 106.4 106.9 103.6 104.4 112.7 104.5 94.5 89.5 102.2 92.0 100.9 98.2 97.4
2008 110.2 109.8 105.8 108.8 117.4 106.9 94.9 88.3 105.3 91.3 102.3 98.4 97.6
2009 111.7 110.6 107.0 114.5 120.5 108.0 95.2 89.1 104.8 92.0 101.9 98.5 98.0
2010 104.5 102.9 98.8 106.5 111.9 99.0 92.6 88.7 98.3 88.2 98.8 94.2 92.5
2011 104.3 102.0 96.9 105.1 112.7 98.6 92.2 88.5 97.7 87.4 98.2 93.4 91.9
2012 98.6 96.8 91.4 99.0 107.5 93.8 90.1 88.3 92.6 84.8 95.9 90.5 89.0
2013 102.2 99.9 94.3 102.0 112.2 96.8 92.4 88.8 97.6 86.7 98.2 92.3 90.9
2014 102.4 99.3 94.2 102.7 114.6 97.2 92.9 89.6 97.8 87.4 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.6 89.6 85.8 92.4 106.1 88.7 89.8 90.3 88.9 83.6 94.4 87.8 87.0
2016 95.3 91.6 88.0 p 93.6 110.1 90.7 90.6 90.7 90.4 84.9 95.1 88.8 88.2
2017 97.5 93.5 89.1 p 94.3 112.4 91.9 91.8 90.7 93.2 85.6 96.4 89.9 89.0
2018 100.0 95.7 90.5 p 95.8 117.3 95.1 92.8 90.7 96.0 86.4 97.7 91.2 90.9
2019 98.2 93.3 88.7 p 93.1 115.5 92.4 91.9 91.0 93.2 85.6 96.4 89.9 89.5
2020 99.7 p 93.7 p 89.1 p 93.9 119.4 p 94.0 92.0 91.2 92.9 86.1 p96.5 p 90.1 p 90.3
2018 May 99.4 95.1 90.2 p 95.6 116.2 94.4 92.9 90.7 96.2 86.2 97.8 90.8 90.5
June 99.1 94.9 116.1 94.2 97.5 90.7 90.4
July 100.2 95.9 117.4 95.2 97.4 91.1 90.8
Aug. 99.9 95.5 90.4 p 96.1 117.8 95.4 92.7 90.6 95.6 86.4 97.3 91.0 91.0
Sep. 100.4 96.0 119.1 96.4 97.7 91.4 91.7
Oct. 99.7 95.5 117.8 95.3 97.3 91.1 91.1
Nov. 99.2 95.0 89.9 p 95.0 116.8 94.5 92.5 90.9 94.7 86.3 97.4 91.1 90.9
Dec. 99.3 94.8 117.0 94.3 97.2 90.8 90.6
2019 Jan. 98.8 94.4 116.3 93.8 96.9 90.5 90.1
Feb. 98.4 93.8 88.9 p 93.5 115.6 93.1 92.0 90.6 93.8 85.6 96.6 90.1 89.6
Mar. 97.9 93.2 115.2 92.5 96.4 89.7 89.4
Apr. 97.7 93.0 115.0 92.3 96.5 89.8 89.4
May 98.2 93.4 88.6 p 93.2 115.7 92.8 92.1 90.9 93.6 85.5 96.6 90.0 89.7
June 98.8 93.9 116.2 93.1 96.7 90.2 89.8
July 98.4 93.4 115.4 92.3 96.7 90.1 89.4
Aug. 98.9 94.0 89.1 p 93.4 116.2 93.0 92.0 91.1 93.1 85.8 96.5 90.3 89.8
Sep. 98.2 93.1 115.3 92.1 96.2 89.9 89.3
Oct. 98.1 92.9 115.3 91.9 96.2 89.8 89.2
Nov. 97.5 92.2 88.4 p 92.1 114.6 91.3 91.7 91.3 92.1 85.5 96.0 89.5 88.9
Dec. 97.4 92.1 114.7 91.2 96.0 89.5 88.9
2020 Jan. 97.0 91.5 114.2 90.5 96.0 89.2 88.5
Feb. 96.3 90.7 87.9 p 93.1 113.5 89.9 91.5 91.4 91.6 85.4 95.7 88.9 88.2
Mar. 99.0 93.1 117.8 93.2 96.5 90.1 90.1
Apr. 98.2 92.6 117.5 93.0 96.2 90.1 90.3
May 98.4 92.7 88.5 p 94.0 117.6 93.0 91.4 91.3 91.2 85.8 96.2 90.0 90.2
June 99.8 94.0 119.1 94.1 96.9 90.7 90.8
July 100.5 94.6 120.3 94.9 96.0 89.9 90.2
Aug. 101.6 95.1 90.0 p 94.4 122.4 96.0 92.4 91.2 94.1 86.7 97.0 90.8 91.3
Sep. 101.6 95.0 122.5 95.9 96.8 90.6 91.2
Oct. 101.4 94.9 122.4 95.8 96.6 90.5 91.0
Nov. 100.7 94.4 p 90.1 p 94.0 121.6 95.2 92.6 91.0 94.8 86.6 96.6 90.1 90.6
Dec. 101.9 p 95.4 123.0 p 96.1 p97.1 p 90.6 p 91.1
2021 Jan. 101.4 p 95.6 122.4 p 96.2 p98.1 p 91.5 p 91.9
Feb. 100.8 p 94.8 ... ... 121.5 p 95.3 … … … … p98.1 p 91.3 p 91.6
Mar. 100.4 p 94.3 121.3 p 94.9 p97.9 p 91.3 p 91.6
Apr. 100.7 p 94.6 121.9 p 95.4 p98.1 p 91.4 p 91.9
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's
price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to compute the
effective exchange rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in
competitiveness. The weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services.
For more detailed information on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of
the Deutsche Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 ECB
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral
exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Australia,
Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan,
Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United
Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and wage indices were not avai-lable, estimates were used.  2 ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the
group EER-19 and additionally Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Peru, Philippines, the
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and
United Arab Emirates.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from
2001 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and
Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including
Latvia, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.  5 Euro area countries
(current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-19.  6 Euro area
countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-42.

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website. In addition, the new Statistical Series 
provide a new basic structure and advanced options for using data and are also available 
on the Bundesbank’s website.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
A list of the articles published in the period from 
2010 to 2020 is available on the Bundesbank’s 
website.
Monthly Report articles
June 2020
– Outlook for the German economy for 2020 
to 2022
– Cash withdrawals and payments in urban 
and rural areas
July 2020
– The German current account surplus through 
the lens of macroeconomic models
– Cash hoarding by German households – how 
much cash do they store and why?
August 2020
– The current economic situation in GermanySeptember 2020
– The impact of monetary policy on the euro’s 
exchange rate
– Global financial interconnectedness and spill -
overs between the G20 countries
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2019
October 2020
– Developments in the German banking sys -
tem during the negative interest rate policy 
period
– Patterns of international business cycles
– The protracted rise in residential property 
prices in Germany from a macroeconomic 
perspective: transmission channels and fun -
damental determinants
– State government budgets: results for 2019
November 2020
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2020
– Outlook for the German economy for 2021 
to 2023
– The informative value of national fiscal indi -
cators in respect of debt at the European 
levelDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
85•

– Risk Reduction Act – the national implemen -
tation of the European banking package
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2019
January 2021
– The slowdown in euro area productivity 
growth
– Methodology and analytical options for the 
expanded statistics on banking groups’ secur -
ities holdings
– The two- tier system for reserve remuneration  
and its impact on banks and financial mar -
kets
February 2021
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2021
– German balance of payments in 2020
– A new European prudential framework for 
investment firms
April 2021
– The impact of monetary policy depending on 
the debt situation in the non- financial private 
sector: Evidence for the euro area
– Assessments and expectations of firms in the 
pandemic: findings from the  Bundesbank 
Online Panel Firms
– Digital money: options for payments
May 2021
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, July 20202
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
July 20202
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131
Discussion Paperso
65/2020  
US business cycle dynamics at the zero lower 
bound66/2020  
“The devil is in the details, but so is salvation” – 
Different approaches in money market meas -
urement
67/2020  
Global value chain participation and exchange 
rate pass- through
01/2021  
A structural investigation of quantitative easing
02/2021  
A note of caution on quantifying banks’ recap -
italization effects
03/2021  
Re-allocating taxing rights and minimum tax 
rates in international profit taxation
04/2021  
Real estate transaction taxes and credit supply
05/ 2021  
Toothless tiger with claws? Financial stability 
communication, expectations, and risk- taking
06/ 2021  
Quantifying bias and inaccuracy of upper- level 
aggregation in HICPs for Germany and the euro 
area
07/ 2021  
The role of information and experience for 
households‘ inflation expectations
08/ 2021  
Liquidity in the German corporate bond market: 
has the CSPP made a difference?
09/ 2021  
Synthetic leverage and fund risk- taking
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
87•

10/ 2021  
Inter- cohort risk sharing with long- term guaran -
tees: Evidence from German participating con -
tracts
11/ 2021  
Precision- based sampling with missing observa -
tions: A factor model application
12/ 2021  
What drives the German TARGET balances? Evi -
dence from a BVAR approach
13/ 2021  
Do exchange rates absorb demand shocks at 
the ZLB?
14/ 2021  
Banks’ complexity- risk nexus and the role of 
regulation
15/ 2021  
Contagious zombiesBanking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, January 
20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2021  
88•

