Monthly Report
August 2021
Vol. 73  
No 8

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 3512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 a.m. on 20 August 2021.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
The central and eastern European EU Member States  during the coronavirus crisis  ............  19
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  28
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  29
Developments in the real portfolio returns of households in Germany  ................................  39
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  46
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  56
Estimating real monthly gross domestic product for Germany and applying it in the 
short- term economic forecast  .............................................................................................  66
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  71Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
5

Overview
Strong economic recovery 
in second quarter
The global economic recovery gained momen -
tum in the second quarter of 2021. Growth 
picked up mainly in the advanced economies 
which made progress in combating the pan -
demic. As vaccination campaigns progressed, 
many European countries eased containment 
measures that had been tightened in the last 
quarter of 2020 and first quarter of 2021. In 
the United States, real gross domestic product 
(GDP) grew fairly substantially, boosted by the 
economic stimulus package from March. The 
Chinese economy continued to pick up, despite 
a slowdown in the export boom. Meanwhile, 
the pandemic is maintaining its grip on other 
regions of the world. Fresh outbreaks in a num -
ber of emerging market economies set the 
stage for economic declines. Even in countries 
with relatively successful vaccination cam -
paigns, there are risks to normalising social life, 
as the past few weeks have shown. Owing to 
the rapid spread of the Delta variant of the 
coronavirus, renewed restrictions and setbacks 
in the recovery process cannot be ruled out for 
advanced economies either. These will prob -
ably be less extensive, however, in view of the 
progress made on vaccinations. It is therefore 
important to push ahead with vaccination cam -
paigns in order to contain new waves and limit 
their economic fallout.
Providers of high- contact services, in particular, 
benefited from the reopening measures of the 
past few months. There was brisk demand for 
reopened food and beverage services. Signs 
pointed to a recovery in the travel sector as 
well. Global industry took a blow, however. 
This seems to have been because demand for 
certain goods, which had risen sharply during 
the pandemic, began to normalise. Addition -
ally, there was a tightening of bottlenecks in 
the supply of various intermediate goods, par -ticularly semiconductor components, which 
had already existed for some time.
Industrial producer prices continued to rise in 
many places given the bottlenecks in a number 
of industrial and supply sectors. This was partly 
down to the dramatic increase in transport 
costs, which continued apace in container ship -
ping at least. The situation similarly remained 
strained in the commodity markets. Consumer 
price inflation also picked up considerably in 
many parts of the world. In the advanced econ -
omies, this was largely due to the reopening of 
services sectors which had previously been 
closed due to the pandemic; this was accom -
panied by a normalisation of prices in some 
cases and additional price rises in others. How -
ever, there are some signs that consumer price 
inflation will abate again in several months’ 
time. Once the restrictions on economic life are 
largely rolled back, the price effects of reopen -
ing should fade out, and base effects owing to 
depressed prices at the trough of the crisis will 
gradually dissipate. The extent to which the 
strong rise in producer prices over the past few 
months will be passed on to consumers is still 
unclear though. This will depend on how much 
added pressure is put on corporate margins by 
broader-based increases in costs and wages.
International financial markets were caught be -
tween the economic recovery and current as -
sessments of how the pandemic will evolve. At 
the start of the quarter, the prospect of 
pandemic- related restrictions being eased, plus 
progress on vaccinations and positive business 
cycle signals, initially boosted market partici -
pants’ confidence. This led to rising govern -
ment bond yields around the world. Since the 
end of June, however, this development has re -
versed in view of uncertainty about the eco -
nomic repercussions of the increasing spread of 
the Delta variant. Confidence that the end of 
the pandemic might soon be in sight, which 
was widespread in the second quarter, flagged Global eco -
nomic upturn 
strengthened
Recovery in 
high- contact 
services a major 
factorStronger 
inflation 
Financial 
markets  caught 
between eco -
nomic recovery 
and evolution of 
pandemicDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
6

again. As a result, yields dropped as against the 
end of March. In the international equity mar -
kets, falling discount factors, a good start to 
the reporting season for companies, and higher 
profit expectations among analysts led to price 
rises on both sides of the Atlantic. But here, 
too, the prevailing uncertainty about how the 
pandemic will evolve left its mark and was re -
flected in higher equity risk premia. Corporate 
bond yields in the euro area fell over the entire 
reporting period against the backdrop of the 
ongoing purchase programmes. Overall, capital 
market financing conditions for euro area 
enterprises  thus remained favourable. At the 
same time, the unexpectedly sharp rise in infla -
tion drew the attention of participants in inter -
national financial markets. Market data, con -
sistent with survey results, signalled temporarily 
high inflation rates up to the end of the year. 
Longer-  term market expectations of inflation, 
meanwhile, moved towards the 2% mark on 
balance – from different directions – on both 
sides of the Atlantic. Inflation figures also 
played a key role in foreign exchange markets 
and influenced the expectations of market par -
ticipants about future central bank policy in the 
specific currency areas. Compared with the 
euro area, the monetary policy outlook in the 
United States and United Kingdom shifted 
slightly towards a somewhat less accommoda -
tive stance. This strengthened the US dollar 
and pound sterling against the euro, which had 
previously benefited from the euro area’s pro -
gress on vaccinations. On balance, however, 
price changes in the foreign exchange market 
remained within tight limits over the entire re -
porting period.
After its June monetary policy meeting, the 
Governing Council of the ECB stressed that, 
based on a joint assessment of financing condi -
tions and the inflation outlook, it expects net 
purchases under the pandemic emergency pur -
chase programme (PEPP) over the third quarter 
to continue to be conducted at a significantly 
higher pace than during the first months of the 
year. It confirmed this assessment at its July 
monetary policy meeting. Net asset purchases will continue with an unchanged total envel -
ope of €1,850 billion until at least the end of 
March 2022 and, in any case, until the Govern -
ing Council judges that the coronavirus crisis 
phase is over. If favourable financing conditions 
can be maintained with smaller asset purchase 
flows overall, the envelope of €1,850 billion 
need not be used in full. Equally, the total en -
velope can also be increased if necessary.
In July, the Governing Council of the ECB also 
adopted its new monetary policy strategy, 
which includes an adjusted symmetric inflation 
target of 2% over the medium term. In this 
context, symmetry means that negative and 
positive deviations of inflation from the target 
are equally undesirable to the Governing Coun -
cil. At the subsequent monetary policy meeting 
in July, the Governing Council revised its for -
ward guidance on interest rates in support of 
its new inflation target. It now expects the key 
ECB interest rates to remain at their present or 
lower levels until it sees inflation reaching 2% 
well ahead of the end of its projection horizon 
and durably for the rest of the projection hori -
zon. It must also judge that realised progress in 
underlying inflation is sufficiently advanced to 
be consistent with inflation stabilising at 2% 
over the medium term. This may also imply a 
transitory period in which inflation is moder -
ately above target, according to the Governing 
Council.
The broad monetary aggregate M3 grew sig -
nificantly in the second quarter of 2021 as well. 
However, compared with the high net inflows 
at the start of the pandemic, the momentum of 
the expansion tailed off distinctly. This meant 
that the normalisation of monetary growth al -
ready seen in the previous quarter continued. 
On the counterparts side, loans to non- banks 
in the euro area again made the largest contri -
bution to monetary growth. The majority of 
this was securitised lending to general govern -
ment, driven by the Eurosystem’s ongoing 
asset purchases. However, notable impetus 
also came from loans to the private sector, al -
most exclusively for house purchase. Non-  Monetary pol -
icy: continued 
higher pace of 
PEPP purchases 
in Q3ECB Governing 
Council com -
pletes strategy 
review and 
adjusts forward 
guidance on key 
interest rates
Monetary 
growth still 
driven by Euro -
system asset 
purchases, as 
enterprises’ 
demand for 
loans subsidesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
7

financial corporations, by contrast, reduced 
their borrowing from banks on balance. One 
reason for this was that the strong economic 
recovery improved their income situation. 
There was also a partial shift in financing 
sources in favour of the capital market, as al -
ready seen in previous quarters. At the same 
time, the banks participating in the Bank Lend -
ing Survey (BLS) reported that they had not 
tightened their corporate credit standards in 
the second quarter, counter to their own previ -
ous expectations.
German GDP saw a fairly substantial recovery 
in the second quarter of 2021. According to 
the Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, 
real GDP was 1.5% up on the quarter after sea -
sonal adjustment. This did not entirely make up 
for the decline in the first quarter, however, 
and nor was the Bundesbank’s June projection 
fully matched. The main reason for the increase 
in the second quarter is that measures to con -
tain the pandemic were loosened considerably 
after the incidence of COVID-  19 infections 
started falling sharply as of May. This benefited 
services sectors in particular, such as hotel and 
restaurant services and parts of the bricks- and- 
mortar retail sector. Industry, on the other 
hand, was unable to tap the healthy order 
books because bottlenecks in the supply of 
some intermediate goods tightened once 
again. Industrial output even dropped mark -
edly. By contrast, the construction sector grew, 
although here, too, there were increasing re -
ports of bottlenecks in the supply of various 
building materials. Overall, GDP still fell short of 
its pre- crisis level (of the fourth quarter of 2019) 
by almost 3½%.
On the demand side, private consumption was 
the mainstay of the economic recovery in the 
second quarter. This reflects the fact that, as re -
strictions were loosened, it was possible again 
to take advantage of consumption opportun -
ities that had previously been unavailable. Gov -
ernment consumption is also likely to have 
risen sharply in view of spending on COVID-  19 
testing and vaccination efforts. By contrast, supply bottlenecks made a more or less signifi -
cant dent in investment and exports. Business 
investment in new machinery and equipment is 
unlikely to have seen a quarter- on- quarter in -
crease, whilst exports (including exports of ser -
vices) were probably also up only slightly des -
pite the continued high level of demand from 
abroad.
The lending business of banks in Germany was 
less dynamic than in previous quarters. This 
comparatively weak lending activity was attrib -
utable to a significant net reduction in loans to 
non- financial corporations. In particular, firms 
repaid short- term loans that they had taken out 
– in some cases for precautionary reasons – in 
previous quarters. In addition, the financing 
needs of those firms hit especially hard by the 
coronavirus pandemic were curbed by the pro -
vision of sizeable government transfers. At the 
same time, banks further expanded their lend -
ing to households on the back of persistently 
high demand for loans for house purchase, 
which are attractive due to the low general 
level of interest rates. Furthermore, according 
to the banks participating in the BLS, credit 
standards for housing loans were eased for the 
first time since the outbreak of the coronavirus 
pandemic.
The real economic recovery that got under way 
in the second quarter was initially reflected in 
the labour market by means of an uptick in 
hours worked. The main reason for this was 
that short- time working, which was highly 
prevalent in the first quarter due to the crisis, 
decreased. It was only towards the end of the 
quarter under review that employment began 
to see stronger growth and unemployment 
started to rapidly decline. Leading indicators 
suggest that that this favourable development 
will continue over the coming months.
At 2.2%, the year- on- year increase in negoti -
ated wages was stronger than in the first three 
months of 2021. This was chiefly due to large 
special coronavirus payments being made in a 
number of sectors. However, there was once Fairly steep 
growth in 
German  GDP 
in Q2
Consumption up 
sharply, invest -
ment and 
exports throttled 
by supply 
bottlenecks Firms’ financing 
needs down in 
net terms, 
demand for 
loans for house 
purchase still 
high
Labour market 
started to 
bounce back 
strongly towards 
end of Q2
Negotiated 
wage growth 
stronger in Q2 
than in Q1; 
actual earnings 
growth possibly 
even strongerDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
8

again only moderate growth in basic pay in the 
second quarter. By contrast, actual earnings 
probably went up by more than negotiated 
wages due to a substantial reduction in short- 
time working and a corresponding increase in 
the number of hours worked per employed 
person. Wage negotiations have been under 
way for some time between Deutsche Bahn 
and train drivers’ union GDL, in the retail sec -
tor, in wholesale and foreign trade, at public 
and private banks and in the main construction 
sector. Here, too, the wage demands brought 
to the table by unions have been lower than in 
previous years. Even so, the dispute between 
Deutsche Bahn and GDL culminated in nation -
wide strikes.
In the second quarter of 2021, consumer price 
inflation (HICP) increased markedly as a general 
trend. At 1% in seasonally adjusted terms, the 
inflation surge was not as strong as in the pre -
vious year. However, the reversal of the tem -
porary VAT reduction and the newly introduced 
carbon prices as part of the climate package 
placed strong upward pressure on prices at the 
start of the year. Disregarding these effects, in -
flation rose in the second quarter. Prices went 
up in all major components of the HICP . In the 
case of prices for non- energy industrial goods, 
it appears that price increases at earlier stages 
of the pricing chain, which were caused not 
only by robust demand but also by bottlenecks 
along supply chains, were passed on to con -
sumers to a considerable and greater than ex -
pected extent. Another potential factor here is 
that, after reopening, businesses charged 
higher prices in an attempt to recoup some of 
the losses they incurred as a result of having to 
close due to the pandemic. This is also likely to 
have contributed to the likewise fairly sharp rise 
in services prices.
Annual inflation increased overall from 1.7% in 
the first quarter to 2.2% in the second – and 
this was in spite of a one- off statistical effect 
no longer pushing up inflation as it had in the 
first quarter. This effect resulted from the sig -
nificant change made to the weight used for package holidays in the HICP basket at the turn 
of 2020-21. Taking the volatile components, 
i.e. energy, food, travel- related items and cloth -
ing, out of the equation, the rate stayed virtu -
ally constant at 1.5% on a quarterly average. 
However, it increased from 1.4% to 1.7% be -
tween April and June.
Inflation rose further in July. Annual inflation 
surged overall from 2.1% to 3.1%, as price 
levels in the same month of the previous year 
were down markedly due to the temporary re -
duction in VAT rates. However, this price-  
driving base effect was counteracted by the 
aforementioned one- off statistical effect. An -
nual inflation as measured by the national con -
sumer price index (CPI), which is unaffected by 
the statistical effect, went from 2.3% to as high 
as 3.8% overall.
The reported rate of inflation will increase fur -
ther as the year goes on. This is partly because 
the one- off statistical effect will gradually turn 
positive up to November before finally ceasing 
to apply in December. As things currently stand, 
inflation rates of between 4% and 5% are pos -
sible at the end of the year. Inflation is likely to 
stabilise again, to a marked extent, in early 
2022.
Economic output in Germany is set for strong 
expansion in the third quarter, at a rate that 
will far surpass the growth recorded in the pre -
vious three months. The main reason for this is 
the considerable easing of containment meas -
ures from mid- May, which is having a stronger 
and, in particular, more prolonged impact in 
the current quarter than in the previous one. 
The main sectors to benefit from the loosening 
of restrictions are services sectors that were hit 
especially hard, such as hotel and restaurant 
services, travel services and parts of the bricks-  
and- mortar retail sector. In industry and the 
main construction sector, order books are well 
filled. There are initial signs that the supply 
bottlenecks for certain intermediate goods and 
commodities are at least not worsening as sig -
nificantly as they were in the second quarter. Consumer prices 
in Q2 see sharp 
quarter- on- 
quarter 
growth …
… and are also 
higher than last 
yearInflation rose 
further in July 
due to VAT base 
effect
Very high 
inflation  rates 
expected for a 
time at year- end
Economic 
output  set for 
strong expan -
sion in Q3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
9

The infrastructure and production capacity 
destroyed in the areas affected by the flood 
disaster represent an additional, but from a 
macroeconomic perspective probably manage -
able, drag on the economy. All in all, it remains 
to be seen whether GDP will reach its pre- crisis 
level in the third quarter already or whether 
this will be a fourth quarter event. There is un -
certainty surrounding the further economic 
impact of the pandemic. For example, the 
Delta variant and vaccination slowdown could 
result in tighter restrictions being reimposed. 
However, this could then be expected to weigh 
more heavily on the economy in the fourth 
quarter. In view of lower than expected growth 
in the first half of 2021, too, economic growth 
could, as things currently stand, be slightly 
lower on average for the year than foreseen in 
the June projection.
Government finances are continuing to provide 
a high level of support to the economy in 2021. 
However, the economic upturn will have an in -
creasingly positive knock- on effect on govern -
ment finances as the year progresses, and sup -
port measures will become less significant. In 
2021 as a whole, the deficit is likely to grow 
further and exceed 5% of GDP (2020: 4.5%). It 
should be noted, though, that this will be 
driven largely by measures not connected to 
the coronavirus crisis, e.g. the partial abolition 
of the solidarity surcharge.
Assuming that the economic recovery con -
tinues, it will be possible to phase out 
coronavirus- related spending (such as govern -
ment bridging aid to enterprises). Additionally, 
wage replacement benefits will play a smaller 
role, whilst inflows of taxes and social contribu -
tions will increase. In this respect, government 
finances will recover automatically. With that in 
mind, a sharp decline in the deficit can be ex -
pected in 2022 as things stand today. Provided 
the fiscal stance currently envisaged is not loos -
ened, the deficit ratio could decrease to around 
1½%.In structural terms, the general government 
deficit could stand at a similar level. The devi -
ation from the medium- term budgetary object -
ive of 0.5% of GDP under EU rules would there -
fore not be too significant, even compared 
with previous years. There is therefore no need 
for Germany to pursue an overly ambitious fis -
cal policy in the next legislative period. In par -
ticular, the process of structural consolidation 
can take place gradually and, based on current 
expectations, in a favourable economic setting.
The Federal Government has been assuming 
the lion’s share of the costs of the coronavirus 
crisis. A large Federal deficit can be therefore 
expected for this year, too. However, 
coronavirus- related spending is likely to be sig -
nificantly lower than budgeted for. This is un -
likely to be anywhere near offset by additional 
expenditure in connection with the floods in 
July 2021. All in all, as things currently stand, 
the Federal Government’s net borrowing will 
be far lower than planned in the supplemen -
tary budget (€240 billion). It may even remain 
under the €180 billion estimated in the original 
budget.
The 2022 Federal budget will be passed by the 
new Bundestag. By then, it should be possible 
to get a more reliable gauge of the economic 
developments and budgetary burdens stem -
ming from the pandemic in the year to come. 
From the present perspective, there will be no 
reason for any renewed recourse to the escape 
clause. Use can be made of the sizeable re -
serves. Furthermore, there is much to suggest 
that the clause will no longer be needed next 
year to address the coronavirus crisis. The debt 
brake rules permit spending and the expansion 
of expenditure deemed sensible or even neces -
sary, e.g. in connection with climate change or 
digitalisation. However, its objective is to keep 
revenue and expenditure in a pre- agreed state 
of balance. What this ultimately means for the 
Federal Government and the Bundestag is that 
they need to clearly and transparently convey to 
the public which areas of spending have priority 
and, if necessary, why taxes need to be raised.Government 
finances con -
tinue to provide 
high level of 
support to econ -
omy in 2021
2022: assuming 
continued eco -
nomic recovery 
and end of 
coronavirus aid, 
sharp decline in 
deficit to be 
expectedEU fiscal rules 
in need of 
straightforward 
consolidation
Federal budget 
spending prob -
ably significantly 
lower than 
envisaged this 
year, too
Fiscal rules not 
at odds with 
prudent meas -
ures, but priori -
tisation requiredDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
10

Global and European setting
Global economic 
 developments
The global economic recovery gained momen -
tum in the second quarter of 2021. However, 
developments were quite heterogeneous 
across countries. Growth picked up mainly in 
the advanced economies, which made pro -
gress in combating the coronavirus pandemic. 
In Europe, the measures to contain the pan -
demic, which had been tightened in the fourth 
quarter of 2020 and first quarter of 2021, were 
rolled back in light of the progress made in vac -
cination programmes. Economic activity accel -
erated accordingly, growing especially sharply 
in the United Kingdom but also quite consider -
ably in the euro area and the other EU coun -
tries. In the United States, the restrictions im -
posed on businesses and consumers had al -
ready been less stringent, so there was also less 
scope for opening up the economy any further. 
Nevertheless, US real gross domestic product 
(GDP), additionally boosted by the stimulus 
package approved in March, saw fairly strong 
growth and exceeded its pre- crisis level for the 
first time. The Chinese economy continued to 
pick up, despite a slowdown in its exceptional 
export boom. Meanwhile, the pandemic main -
tained its grip on other regions of the world in 
light of their low vaccination rates. For ex -
ample, GDP growth in Japan was subdued par -
ticularly due to the fact that many pandemic 
containment measures remained in effect. 
Fresh outbreaks even led to economic declines 
in a number of emerging market economies. 
This was the case, for instance, in India.
Economic developments in the second quarter 
were uneven across sectors as well. Providers 
of high- contact services benefited greatly from 
the steps taken towards opening up the econ -
omy. In particular, there was brisk demand for 
reopened food and beverage services. By the 
end of the second quarter, the number of res -
taurant visits around the world had almost re -attained its pre- crisis level for the first time. In 
the travel sector, which had been hit hard by 
the pandemic, signs pointed to a recovery as 
well. Capacity utilisation in passenger air travel 
and the hotel and accommodation sector went 
back up in both Europe and North America. In -
dustry took a blow, however. The reason for 
this seems to have been twofold: first, demand 
for certain goods, which had risen sharply dur -
ing the pandemic, began to normalise. Second, 
supply- side bottlenecks intensified further. 
Throughout the reporting period, enterprises in 
the manufacturing sector were complaining of 
sharp rises in delivery times for intermediate in -
puts. Alongside logistical problems resulting 
from limited transport capacity, especially for 
maritime transport, production was throttled 
by global shortages of various intermediate 
goods. This had a particular impact on the 
motor vehicle industry, in which production de -Global eco -
nomic upturn 
strengthened
Recovery in 
high- contact 
services a major 
factorDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
11
Global economic indicators
Sources: IATA Passenger Traffic Report, national figures, Haver 
Analytics,  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Ratio  of  revenue 
passenger-kilometres  to  available  seat-kilometres.  2 Bundes-
bank aggregate of national data, unadjusted figures in thou-
sands of units, most recent data points partially estimated.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021405060708090Seasonally adjusted
405060708090100110120130
Global passenger 
car production 2
Q4 2019 = 100, 
log scaleAir transport 
passenger load factor1 
%

clined considerably due to a lack of semicon -
ductor products.
Industrial producer prices continued to rise 
sharply in many places given the bottlenecks in 
a number of industrial and supply sectors. This 
was partly down to the dramatic increase in 
transport costs, which continued apace 
throughout the reporting period in container 
shipping at least. The situation likewise re -
mained strained in the commodity markets. 
Crude oil prices increased perceptibly again in 
May and June. This rise was dampened only by 
the agreement among the OPEC countries and 
their partners to markedly expand supply, the 
slight growth in oil production in the United 
States, and the concerns surrounding future 
demand due to the spread of the Delta variant 
of the coronavirus. As this report went to press, 
the price of a barrel of Brent crude oil stood at 
US$66. The prices of many industrial commod -
ities also continued to rise strongly over the 
course of the second quarter. As this report 
went to press, however, there were consider -
able drops in the prices of iron ore and scrap 
steel as well as of some agricultural products, 
such as construction timber.
The rise in consumer prices accelerated consid -
erably in many parts of the world. In the ad -
vanced economies, the key factors here were 
the reopening of services sector that had previ -
ously been closed due to the pandemic as well 
as shortages of individual goods.1 These short -
ages caused prices to rise not only as a result of 
higher production costs being passed through 
to consumers, but also because they had 
knock- on effects on related products. For ex -
ample, in light of the delivery problems in the 
passenger car markets in many areas, the prices 
of used vehicles and rental cars also rose to an 
unusually large extent alongside those of new 
vehicles. Particularly in the United States, the 
prices of air travel and hotel accommodation 
also increased considerably. There, the stand -Strong rise in 
producer prices, 
partly due to 
high transport 
and commodity 
prices
Rise in consumer 
prices acceler -
ates consider -
ably …
1 In a number of emerging market economies, strong rises 
in food prices additionally played a major role.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
12
World market prices for crude oil,
industrial commodities and
food and beverages
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., HWWI and Bundesbank cal-
culations. • Latest figures: Average of 1 to 13 August 2021, or 
1 to 19 August 2021 for crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 202125304050607080Monthly averages, log scale
80100120140160200240
801001201402016 = 100, US dollar basis
Industrial commoditiesCrude oil (Brent)
US$ per barrel
Food and beverages
Sources: IHS Markit and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Consumer 
prices excluding energy and food, additionally excluding alcohol-
ic  beverages  and  tobacco  products  for  the  EU27,  Norway, 
Switzerland and the United Kingdom. 2  EU27, Canada, Japan, 
Norway,  Switzerland,  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United 
States.
Deutsche BundesbankConsumer prices in industrial countries
01234
0123456Year-on-year percentage change
2019 2020 2021Industrial countries 2
of which:
United StatesTotal Core rate1

ard year- on- year comparison shows that sig -
nificant rebates were being provided for these 
services during the first wave of the pandemic. 
Base effects of this kind were even more pro -
nounced for energy products. By contrast, the 
prices of most of the other products that make 
up the majority of the basket of consumer 
goods did not exhibit any noteworthy behav -
iour. However, the year- on- year rate of change 
in consumer prices in the advanced economies 
as a whole increased from 2% in March to 
3.6% in July.2 The core rate excluding energy 
and food also picked up by 1.6  percentage 
points over the same period to 3.0%, thus hit -
ting a 20- year high. However, in July, it de -
clined slightly to 2.8%.
There are some signs that consumer price infla -
tion will soon abate again. Following the far-  
reaching rollback of pandemic- related restric -
tions on economic life, the price effects result -
ing from reopening the economy should also 
peter out. In addition, the production losses in 
the motor vehicle industry are likely to be grad -
ually overcome and prices will probably fall 
again as the supply of new vehicles rises. The 
base effects will also gradually become less sig -
nificant over the coming months.3 However, 
the extent to which the strong rise in producer 
prices over the past few months will be passed 
through to consumers is still unclear.4 In this re -
gard, a key factor will be how much added 
pressure is put on corporate margins by broad- 
based increases in costs and wages.
Looking ahead, in the regular July update to its 
World Economic Outlook, the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) is also projecting that the 
advanced economies will return to moderate 
rates of inflation.5 In fact, the IMF’s outlook for 
real economic developments among this group 
of countries is now more favourable than it 
was in April. In anticipation of further fiscal 
stimulus measures, the IMF revised its growth 
forecast for the United States significantly up -
wards for this and next year. By contrast, its 
2021 projections for some emerging market 
economies were revised downwards –  to a considerable degree in some cases – in light of 
new waves of coronavirus infections. Overall, 
the IMF is still expecting global GDP growth of 
6.0% this year. For 2022, it revised its projec -
tion upwards to 4.9%.
However, these forecasts may prove to be too 
optimistic, not only due to the possibility that 
the IMF may have overly high expectations of 
the fiscal package in the United States – which 
has not yet been approved – but also primarily 
because many emerging market economies 
have only made limited progress in their vaccin -
ation programmes thus far. Even in countries 
with relatively successful vaccination cam -
paigns, there are risks to normalising social life, 
as the past few weeks have shown. Given the 
rapid spread of new variants of the corona -
virus, renewed restrictions and setbacks in the 
recovery process cannot be ruled out for ad -
vanced economies either. These will probably 
be less extensive, however, in view of the pro -
gress made in administering vaccines. It is 
therefore important to push ahead with vaccin -
ation programmes in order to contain new 
waves of infection and limit their economic fall -
out.
China
The Chinese economy regained distinct mo -
mentum over the past quarter. According to of -
ficial estimates, real GDP grew by 1.3% in sea -
sonally adjusted terms over the previous quar -… but probably 
largely due to 
temporary 
effects
IMF has favour -
able growth 
outlook …… but risks 
tilted to the 
downside
Overall eco -
nomic expan -
sion regains 
distinct  momen -
tum …
2 When calculating the consumer price index for the ag -
gregate of advanced economies, the consumer price index 
determined on the basis of weights from 2015 was used 
for Japan.
3 This development had already been anticipated on the 
market for crude oil. As the strong recovery in oil prices al -
ready began in the second quarter of 2020, the year- on- 
year change in crude oil prices has fallen by almost two-  
thirds since April, standing most recently at around 60%.
4 Estimates for the United States and the euro area suggest 
that the rise in freight rates could still be reflected in con -
sumer prices next year. This will hold especially true if the 
strains on the maritime shipping sector persist for a longer 
period of time. For more information on the underlying re -
lationship between these factors, see Herriford et al. 
(2016).
5 See International Monetary Fund (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
13

ter, which had seen growth of just 0.4%.6 The 
main reason for this was that there was an up -
turn in some consumer- related services sectors 
that had suffered setbacks at the start of the 
year due to a regional outbreak of coronavirus. 
Most recently, however, concerns of a resur -
gence of the pandemic in China have been 
mounting again. Several parts of the country 
reported rising numbers of new infections with 
the Delta variant. The Chinese authorities re -
sponded by imposing stringent containment 
measures. This could put a marked damper on 
services sector activity in the current quarter. In 
the meantime, major progress has been made 
in China’s vaccination programme. According 
to official figures, more than 1.8 billion vaccine 
doses had been administered by mid-  August.
Unlike the services sector, Chinese industry lost 
momentum over the past quarter. This was 
chiefly attributable to a slowdown in export ac -
tivity, which had previously received a large 
boost from a global shift in demand towards certain goods. Although export revenue in -
creased again on a US dollar basis compared 
with the previous quarter – with higher prices 
likely playing a key role here, however – the 
Chinese producer price index suggested that 
the prices of industrial products rose by just 
over 8% on the year, which was the highest 
rate since 2008. By contrast, annual consumer 
price inflation remained moderate at 1.2%.
Other selected emerging 
 market economies
India was hit by a second severe wave of the 
pandemic in April and May. Regional author -
ities imposed extensive containment measures 
in response to the rapidly escalating health cri -
sis. As a result, the situation eased and many 
restrictions were rolled back. Mobility data sug -
gest that economic activity has since largely 
normalised. Nevertheless, a considerable drop 
in real GDP is expected for the second quarter 
overall. This decline is likely to be significantly 
milder than that seen in the first wave of the 
pandemic, during which economic output fell 
by one- quarter. In light of the rather sluggish 
progress in India’s vaccination programme, 
there is still the danger that the pandemic 
could see a resurgence. The risks to the eco -
nomic outlook are likely to have been a factor 
that motivated the Reserve Bank of India to 
maintain its accommodative monetary policy 
stance despite the acceleration of the rise in 
consumer prices in the second quarter to 5.6% 
on the year.
Despite persistently high numbers of infections, 
economic output in Brazil had already climbed 
back to its pre- crisis level during the first quar -
ter. In the second quarter, however, the recov -
ery may have come to a standstill. In any case, 
industrial output fell by 2.5% in seasonally ad -
… but notice -
able slowdown 
in industryEconomic set -
back in India 
due to new and 
severe wave of 
infections
Sputtering 
recovery in   Brazil
6 During the past quarter, Chinese GDP grew by 7.9% on 
the year. In the first quarter, year- on- year growth had 
amounted to 18.3% as a result of the highly depressed 
level of economic activity at the time of the outbreak of the 
pandemic.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
14
Real GDP in selected major 
emerging market economies
Sources: National Bureau of Statistics of China, Central Statist-
ics Office of India, Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statist-
ics, Rosstat – Federal State Statistics Service, and Bundesbank 
calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 20219095100Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
RussiaIndia
75808590951001059095100105110
BrazilChina
9095100

justed terms compared with the previous quar -
ter. In Brazil, too, the passenger car sector spe -
cifically appears to have been impacted by 
shortages of intermediate goods. By contrast, 
commodity exports, particularly of iron ore and 
soy, continued at record levels. The increase in 
consumer prices accelerated considerably in re -
cent months. In July, the year- on- year rate of 
the consumer price index (CPI) stood at 9.0%. 
Against this background, the Central Bank of 
Brazil sharply increased its policy rate multiple 
times, most recently to 5.25%.
In Russia, the economic recovery continued in 
the second quarter. According to Rosstat fig -
ures, real GDP exceeded the previous year’s 
level – which was down significantly due to the 
coronavirus pandemic – by 10.3% and, in sea -
sonally adjusted terms, it was probably also 
slightly above its pre- crisis level. Manufacturing 
output continued to rise in the second quarter. 
Oil production also saw further growth, which 
was based on an agreement with OPEC to 
gradually roll back part of its earlier production 
cuts. At the end of the quarter, Russia was hit 
by a third wave of coronavirus infections. As a 
result, restrictions were reimposed in some 
parts of the country, meaning that high- contact 
services are likely to have suffered a renewed 
setback. Consumer price inflation rose in the 
second quarter to 6.0% on the year. Not least 
for this reason, the Bank of Russia has in -
creased its policy rate by a total of 200 basis 
points to 6.5% since the beginning of April.
United States
In the United States, the strong economic up -
turn continued virtually unabated in the second 
quarter. According to the initial official esti -
mate, GDP expanded by 1.6% on the quarter 
after seasonal and price adjustment and 
thereby exceeded its pre- pandemic level for the 
first time. Growth was driven by the large- scale 
reopening of economic life. This allowed US 
consumers to utilise their spending options, 
which were much expanded mainly by the March economic stimulus package.7 Alongside 
private consumption, industrial investment also 
continued to rise sharply in the second quarter. 
At the same time, exports picked up noticeably 
as the global economic situation brightened. In 
the wake of lively demand, growth of US im -
ports slightly outpaced growth of exports, 
however. Meanwhile, government demand 
was somewhat weaker after the support pro -
gramme for small and medium-  sized enter -
prises was phased out.
As the buoyant recovery has unfolded, bottle -
necks have emerged in various areas in recent 
months. Domestic economic activity again 
failed to keep up with demand, causing de -
stocking to continue. In the real estate market, 
shortages and rising property prices dampened 
activity.8 Finally, many firms appear to be hav -
ing problems filling the numerous vacancies. As 
this report went to press, labour force partici -
pation and employment remained subdued 
relative to their pre- crisis levels, while wages 
were picking up.
Against the backdrop of these developments, 
the increase in consumer prices strengthened 
further. In the period up to June, the year- on- 
year rate of the CPI climbed to 5.4%, and the 
core inflation rate excluding energy and food 
prices rose to 4.5%. However, the slight drop in 
the core rate to 4.3% in July is likely to confirm 
the US Federal Reserve in its view that the surge 
in inflation has, to date, mainly been due to 
temporary factors such as base effects and 
price normalisations. At the end of July, the 
Federal Open Market Committee reaffirmed its 
accommodative stance of monetary policy.Recovery in 
Russia  continues 
through end of 
reporting period
Continued buoy -
ant economic 
growth …… meets 
supply- side 
bottlenecks
Strong upward 
pressure on con -
sumer prices
7 For more on the macroeconomic implications of the 
American Rescue Plan, see also Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2021a). Fiscal policy is likely to continue to support eco -
nomic activity going forward. The US Senate recently 
passed a public infrastructure programme with a bipartisan 
majority, and the governing party has been pursuing fur -
ther legislative initiatives.
8 The weaker sales figures in the real estate market were 
also reflected in estate agent revenues in the second quar -
ter and consequently had a significant influence on the 
drop in investment in private housing construction.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
15

United Kingdom
As most of the measures to contain the pan -
demic were eased following a successful vac -
cination campaign, the UK economy entered 
onto a lively recovery path in the second quar -
ter. According to the initial official estimate, 
real GDP after seasonal adjustment was up by 
4.8% from the first quarter, in which economic 
output had fallen noticeably. The sharp rise in 
GDP was mainly the result of the strong expan -
sion in private consumption, while gross fixed 
capital formation fell slightly. Food and bever -
age service activities and other providers of 
high- contact services, in particular, benefited 
from the large- scale easing of restrictions. 
Manufacturing expanded its output perceptibly 
despite production losses in the automotive in -
dustry. The fact that lessons have been learned 
on how to deal with the new frictions in trade 
with the EU is likely to have played an import -
ant role in this.9 In any case, exports of goods to the EU recovered from their slump at the be -
ginning of the year. Overall, gross value added 
in June was down by only just around 2% on 
its pre- pandemic level of February 2020. The 
situation in the labour market also improved. 
The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate fell 
slightly to 4.7%. In addition, the number of fur -
loughed staff receiving continued wage pay -
ments from the government fell significantly. In 
recent weeks, firms have, however, increasingly 
been complaining of high levels of absences 
due to a renewed surge in infections. The UK 
government has, however, refrained from im -
posing new restrictions, pointing to progress 
on vaccinations and the fact that the health 
system is under little strain. The Purchasing 
Managers’ Indices for the services sector and 
manufacturing consequently only fell slightly 
and continued to signal ongoing growth at the 
end of the quarter. Against the backdrop of the 
economic improvement and the higher prices 
of important intermediate inputs, the increase 
in consumer prices strengthened considerably. 
The year- on- year rate of the CPI rose to 2.4% 
by June, and then fell to 2.1% in July as a result 
of base effects. The Bank of England said at the 
beginning of August that it expected a further 
temporary strengthening of the rise in con -
sumer prices over the next few months, but 
maintained its accommodative monetary policy 
stance.
Japan
As the vaccination campaign got off to a slow 
start and with the increasing spread of the 
Delta variant of the coronavirus, many contain -
ment measures remained in place or were ac -
tually tightened again in Japan as this report 
went to press. This was one reason why eco -
nomic growth in the second quarter was 
muted. According to the initial official estimate, 
real GDP after seasonal adjustment was up by 
just 0.3% from the first quarter, in which it had 
fallen by 0.9%. Despite the state of emergency, Strong GDP 
growth given 
large- scale re- 
opening of the 
economy
Measures to 
contain the pan -
demic weighing 
on economic 
growth
9 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
16
Real GDP in selected industrial countries
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Office for National Stat-
istics, Cabinet Office of Japan, Statistics Poland and Bundes-
bank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 20219095100Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
United KingdomUnited States
9095100105
9095100105
PolandJapan80859095100

households upped their consumption expend -
iture and enterprises increased their investment 
spending. Foreign business, meanwhile, bene -
fited from the upswing of the global economy. 
Imports expanded significantly more sharply 
still, however. Weak overall economic develop -
ment had little impact on the labour market. 
The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate 
rose only slightly to 2.9% in the second quar -
ter. A sharp reduction in mobile phone 
charges10 was one reason why the significant 
rise in producer prices has, to date, hardly been 
reflected in developments in consumer prices, 
which fell by 0.3% on the year in July.11 Against 
this backdrop, the Bank of Japan maintained its 
accommodative monetary policy stance.
Poland
In Poland, the economic recovery gained mo -
mentum after restrictions to contain the pan -
demic were eased at the end of April. As a con -
sequence, real GDP expanded sharply by 1.9% 
in the second quarter after seasonal adjust -
ment, bringing it back up to its pre- crisis level. 
In this regard, Poland – like some other central 
and eastern European EU Member States  – 
weathered the crisis better than the remainder 
of the EU (see also the box on pp.19 ff.). One 
key factor here was that industrial production 
remained buoyant. Construction output like -
wise rose sharply in the second quarter. How -
ever, retail sales remained virtually unchanged 
on the quarter after seasonal and price adjust -
ment. The labour market benefited from the 
economic recovery. The standardised un -
employment rate fell slightly again to 3.6% at 
the end of the period under review, a mere 
0.6 percentage point above its level before the 
crisis. The rise in consumer prices accelerated 
to 5.0% on the year in July, and the rate ex -
cluding energy and food picked up slightly, to 
3.7%. The rise in consumer prices consequently 
distinctly exceeded the National Bank of Po -
land’s inflation target, which rated the over -
shooting as temporary, however, and left the 
policy rate at its all-time low of 0.1%.Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
In the euro area, economic activity picked up 
noticeably in the second quarter of 2021. Ac -
cording to Eurostat’s flash estimate, seasonally 
adjusted real GDP rose by 2.0% on the quarter, 
reducing the gap versus the pre- crisis level to 
3.0%. Here, too, the surge in growth was 
mainly the result of the easing of pandemic-  
related restrictions in the course of the quarter, 
made possible by success in containing infec -
tions and progress in the vaccination cam -
paign. In particular, high- contact services, 
which were particularly hard hit by the restric -
tions, picked up again. In addition, construc -
tion activity remained lively. In manufacturing, 
by contrast, ongoing supply bottlenecks for 
some intermediate goods prevented an expan -
sion of production.
At the beginning of the quarter, several Mem -
ber States had tightened containment meas -
ures in response to the fraught pandemic situ -
ation. Infections did not ease off, nor was there 
much progress in the vaccination campaign, 
until the course of the second quarter.12 From 
May onwards, the restrictions were then loos -
ened distinctly. Initially, retailers were the main 
beneficiaries. In June, restrictions for hotels and 
restaurants were eased considerably. As travel 
restrictions were relaxed, tourism picked up 
again. At the end of the quarter, the spread of 
new virus variants sent new infections up Strong recovery 
amid clearly 
strengthened 
rise in consumer 
pricesLively economic 
recovery
Pandemic situ -
ation improves 
significantly over 
the quarter, 
measures eased 
considerably
10 Following a reform, mobile phone charges in Japan fell 
by 38% on the year in April, according to revised data from 
the Japanese Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communica -
tions. In July, this one- off effect lowered the year- on- year 
rate of the CPI by 1.1 percentage points.
11 One novelty when consumer prices for July were pub -
lished was a switch in the weighting scheme to the new 
base year 2020.
12 By the end of June, more than 50% of the euro area 
population had received at least one dose of the vaccine, 
with differences in vaccination progress between Member 
States low, unlike in the EU as a whole. As this report went 
to press, it was becoming evident that the speed of vaccin -
ations was tailing off significantly in many places despite a 
sufficient supply of vaccine and although large parts of the 
population are not fully vaccinated yet. Several Member 
States have therefore upped their efforts to increase the 
willingness of the population to be vaccinated.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
17

again, in some cases sharply, and measures 
were tightened in some regions. As before, the 
main aim of these measures was to reduce so -
cial interaction in the private sphere and in leis -
ure activities.
The most important driver of the economic re -
covery was private consumption. Demand for 
high- contact services, in accommodation and 
food service activities and arts, entertainment 
and recreation rose noticeably after many con -
tainment measures were lifted. However, as 
not all restrictions were lifted and customers re -
mained somewhat cautious, the recovery was 
likely not complete, even at the end of the quarter. Retailers, too, benefited from the re -
laxation of restrictions. Although many sales 
outlets were closed at the beginning of the 
quarter in some countries, and retail sales con -
sequently dropped again perceptibly in April, 
there was strong growth thereafter, and retail 
sales significantly exceeded their pre- crisis 
levels again. However, new vehicle registrations 
fell considerably short of their pre- crisis level, 
not least because of the supply shortages in 
the automotive industry. Households’ income 
situation remained favourable, and their sav -
ings rate probably normalised somewhat in the 
second quarter.
Gross fixed capital formation likely rose again in 
the euro area in the second quarter.13 This was 
probably mainly due to a perceptible expansion 
in construction investment. In any case, con -
struction output once again grew perceptibly. 
Investment in intellectual property also likely 
rose further. Meanwhile, expenditure on ma -
chinery and equipment does not appear to 
have been expanded and remained consider -
ably short of its pre- crisis levels despite good 
capacity utilisation in industry and favourable 
financing conditions. However, surveys show 
that firms view their growth prospects slightly 
more unfavourably again of late.
Foreign trade continued to expand in the 
second quarter. Trade among euro area Mem -
ber States rose distinctly again, especially in 
intermediate goods. This was also true when 
taking into account sharply higher prices. Ex -
ports of goods to non- euro area countries also 
continued to rise in value terms, though growth 
was less strong than in the preceding quarter, 
and the gain was probably small in price-  
adjusted terms. Exports of intermediate goods, 
in particular, proved weak, while exports of 
consumer and capital goods likely expanded 
somewhat again. In regional terms, a signifi -Private con -
sumption main 
driver of the 
recoveryInvestment 
remains on 
an upward 
trajectory 
Slower growth 
in trade in 
goods with 
non-euro  area 
countries
13 Excluding Ireland. For several years now, the statistical 
recording of investment as a whole, and of investment in 
intellectual property in particular, has been strongly influ -
enced by the strategic planning of multinational enterprises 
there (see Deutsche Bundesbank (2018)).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
18
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 2190100110120
Retail sales (price adjusted)
2015 = 100
1.31.52.02.53.0
New vehicle registrations
(quarterly totals, reduced scale)
8090100110120
Exports of goods1
Imports of goods1Seasonally adjusted, log scaleEconomic indicators for the euro area
Number 
in millions
Sources: Eurostat, ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Export 
and import data according to foreign trade statistics (intra and 
extra trade), price adjusted using the producer price index (ex-
ports) or the import price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 = 100
8090100110
Industrial production

The central and eastern European EU Member States 
 during the coronavirus crisis
The economies of the central and eastern 
European EU Member States1 fared better 
than widely expected during the corona-
virus crisis. The real gross domestic product 
(GDP) of this group of countries fell by just 
4% in 2020, a decline that was considerably 
less sharp than the 6% drop recorded for 
the EU as a whole. However, economic 
growth in these countries, averaging just 
over 4% in the fi  ve preceding years, was 
also noticeably stronger than growth in the 
EU, which came in at just under 2%. All the 
same, it was striking that the central and 
eastern European EU Member States were 
able to retain their lead despite potentially 
greater vulnerabilities.
The comparatively good performance of 
the central and eastern European EU Mem-
ber States was probably down to factors 
such as differences in the way the pan-
demic developed and how the countries re-
sponded to it. These countries were less se-
verely affected by the fi  rst wave of the pan-
demic in the second quarter of 2020, prob-
ably helped by fairly strict preventive 
measures to contain its spread. Nonethe-
less, the fi  nal quarter of 2020 and the fi  rst 
quarter of 2021 saw more severe outbreaks 
with high infection rates, which over-whelmed the healthcare systems in some 
cases. Even so, the containment measures 
remained largely limited to the services sec-
tor, whereas in the second quarter of 2020 
– owing also to measures in other EU coun-
tries – cross- border transportation had been 
disrupted and plants had been closed. Over-
all, the infection protection measures do 
not seem to have been any stricter than in 
Germany, say; in fact, they have tended to 
be somewhat less strict than the average in 
other EU countries. Some countries also 
benefi  ted from the depreciation of their na-
tional currency against the euro.2
Another reason for this relatively good per-
formance was the rapid recovery of the in-
dustrial sector, which plays a more signifi  -
cant role in most central and eastern Euro-
pean EU countries than in the EU as a 
whole, not least owing to capacity increases 
over the last few years and closer integra-
tion into cross- border value- added chains.3 
In addition, Poland benefi  ted from a 
strongly diversifi  ed economic structure. In 
Lithuania, sharp growth in pharmaceutical 
production as a result of the pandemic 
helped to ensure that GDP fell only slightly. 
1 This group of countries includes fi  ve EU Member 
States belonging to the euro area (Estonia, Latvia, 
Lithuania, Slovakia, Slovenia), and six other EU Mem-
ber States (Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, 
Poland and Romania).
2 For instance, currencies that depreciated against the 
euro in 2020 were the Hungarian forint (by 8%), the 
Polish zloty (by 3.4%), and the Czech koruna (by 3.1%). 
The Croatian kuna and the Romanian leu depreciated 
by just 1.6% and 1.9% respectively. The Bulgarian lev 
remained unchanged owing to the country’s currency 
board arrangement. The Croatian kuna and the Bul-
garian lev have been included in the European Monet-
ary System’s exchange rate mechanism II (ERM II) since 
13 July 2020.
3 See Oesterreichische Nationalbank (2020, 2021). In 
2019, industry accounted for one- quarter of aggregate 
gross value added in the central and eastern European 
EU countries and for one- fi  fth in the rest of the EU.Stringency of government containment 
measures
Source: Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND J FMAM J J A
2020 2021020406080100Index values, daily
Central and eastern European 
EU countriesGermany
of which:
PolandDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
19

In Estonia, the main factor limiting the de-
cline in GDP was the positive performance 
of the IT sector. By contrast, the automotive 
industry, which was hit especially hard 
by  the crisis, held back developments in 
Slovakia , the Czech Republic and Hungary, 
where it plays a key role, while Croatia’s 
heavy dependence on tourism had a nega-
tive impact. This was also true of Bulgaria, 
Hungary and Slovenia, albeit to a slightly 
lesser extent.4
Because the central and eastern European 
EU economies held up comparatively well 
during the coronavirus crisis, the gap com-
pared to the EU average (which has now 
decreased, however), measured in terms of 
per capita GDP adjusted for purchasing 
power parity (PPP), narrowed further from 
24.9% in 2019 to 22.8% in 2020.5 The 
Czech Republic remained in the lead in 
terms of convergence, with 94.3% of the 
average GDP per capita fi  gure for the EU. It 
was followed  by Slovenia with 88.6%, 
Lithuania with 86.8% and Estonia with 
86.2%. Poland  (76.2%), Hungary (74.2%), 
Latvia (71.8%), Slovakia (71.3%),6 and in 
the meantime also Romania (71.5%), re-
ported GDP levels exceeding 70% of the EU 
average, followed by Croatia with 64.1% 
and Bulgaria with 54.6%.The European Commission is expecting the 
central and eastern European EU Member 
States to recover rapidly this year.7 Eco-
nomic growth in this group of countries is 
likely to be signifi  cantly stronger than in the 
rest of the EU in 2021, which should help to 
limit any longer- lasting economic damage. 
Another encouraging sign is that the un-
employment rate in these countries, which 
was 4.6% in June 2021, was not a great 
deal higher than just before the coronavirus 
crisis in February 2020, when it stood at 
3.7%. One reason for this will undoubtedly 
have been the various national short- time 
work schemes, supported by the EU loan Per capita GDP in the central and eastern European EU countries
As a percentage of the average per capita GDP in the EU27, adjusted for purchasing power parity
50 60 70 80 90
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankCzech RepublicSloveniaPolandHungary
Estonia
LithuaniaLatvia
AverageSlovakiaCroatia
RomaniaBulgaria2020 2019
4 See European Commission (2021a, 2021b).
5 Because per capita income in the United Kingdom 
was higher than average, the EU average fell slightly 
after the UK left the European Union, thus narrowing 
the gap to this average for countries with lower eco-
nomic output. As a result, the ratios that appear in this 
box are not directly comparable to those from last 
year’s report (Deutsche Bundesbank (2020)). The recal-
culations also take into account new statistical infor-
mation.
6 In the wake of the general revisions to the national 
accounts in 2019, the percentage of the costs of hous-
ing in Slovakia’s GDP went up. Because the price level 
for this component was above average, PPP- adjusted 
per capita GDP in Slovakia was signifi  cantly lower than 
before. This also affects the convergence ranking list. It 
is worth noting here that, in 2020, nominal per capita 
GDP in Slovakia, at €16,800, was considerably higher 
than in Romania, for example, where it stood at 
€11,300.
7 See European Commission (2021a, 2021b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
20

programme SURE.8 At the same time, 
wages have continued to grow, albeit at a 
distinctly more moderate pace, which 
should benefi  t private consumption.
Higher energy prices and increased wage 
costs saw consumer price infl  ation in the 
central and eastern European EU countries 
rise to 3.9% in July 2021. The infl  ation rate 
exceeded the upper limit of the monetary 
policy target range in April in Poland and 
Hungary, in May in Romania, and in July in 
the Czech Republic.9 Policy rates were raised 
by a total of 40 basis points to 0.75% in the 
Czech Republic in June and August, and by 
60 basis points altogether to 1.2% in Hun-
gary in June and July. The central banks in 
Poland and Romania, on the other hand, 
have thus far taken a wait- and- see approach 
as they assume that the surge in infl  ation 
will be temporary and that the infl  ation rate 
will soon return to the target range.
The sustainability of the economic upswing 
in the central and eastern European coun-
tries will depend on whether the spread of 
the coronavirus can be kept under control. 
A key factor here will be the success of the 
vaccination campaigns. While considerable 
progress has already been made in a few 
countries such as Hungary, Poland and the Czech Republic, vaccination rates in Bul-
garia and Romania are still low and are ris-
ing only slowly.10
Over the next two years, the central and 
eastern European EU economies are likely to 
benefi  t particularly strongly from the EU’s 
debt- fi  nanced recovery fund.11 To date, the 
European Commission has approved the na-
tional implementation plans submitted by 
Croatia, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovakia and the 
Czech Republic,12 and the Economic and Fi-
nancial Affairs Council has approved the im-
plementing decisions for the plans submitted 
by Latvia and Slovakia.13 This means that 
these countries can now start drawing on 
the funds. Measures to promote climate ac-
tion and digitalisation are a focal point in 
particular. This should pave the way for sus-
8 SURE: Support to mitigate Unemployment Risks in an 
Emergency. So far, loans amounting to €18.5 billion 
(just over one- fi  fth of the total funds available) have 
been channelled to the central and eastern European 
EU Member States under this programme.
9 The various infl  ation targets are based on national 
consumer price indices whose rates of change can vary 
slightly from the rates calculated according to the Har-
monised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP).
10 See European Centre for Disease Prevention and 
Control (2021).
11 Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF) as part of the 
Next Generation EU (NGEU) instrument.
12 See European Commission (2021c).
13 See Council of the European Union (2021).GDP in the central and eastern European EU Member States
Sources: Eurostat and European Commission – European Economic Forecast Summer 2021 (Interim), July 2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank– 8 – 7 – 6 – 5 – 4 – 3 – 2 – 1 0 + 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 + 8Year-on-year percentage change
Bulgaria
Estonia
Croatia
Latvia
Lithuania
Poland
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Czech Republic
Hungary
Memo item: EU272020 2021Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
21

cant factor was that exports to the United 
Kingdom continued to recover, having fallen 
sharply as trade relations were reorganised at 
the beginning of the year.14 Exports of goods 
to China and the United States, as well as to 
Switzerland and Russia, also expanded in value 
terms. Meanwhile, exports of services from the 
euro area to non- euro area countries hardly 
rose at all according to balance of payments 
data and fell far short of their pre- crisis level, in 
part because of the continued restrictions on 
travel. Imports to the euro area from third 
countries rose sharply despite the very strong 
rise in prices, especially of intermediate inputs.
The recovery of the manufacturing sector 
stalled in recent months. Industrial production 
did not increase any further compared with the 
first quarter and remained just under its pre-  
 crisis level. This was primarily due to the diffi -
culties experienced by automobile manufactur -
ers, who were affected by shortages of inter -
mediate goods, chiefly semiconductor com -ponents. The situation was more favourable in 
many other industrial sectors. Consumer goods 
production recorded another significant in -
crease in the second quarter. In the light of 
strong demand, production of intermediate 
goods also continued to rise, especially in the 
wood processing, metal processing and chem -
ical industries. The considerable climbs in prices 
for raw materials and intermediate inputs were 
a growing cause of concern. Nevertheless, cap -
acity utilisation has remained above its long-  
term average since the start of the year and 
even went up further between April and July.
There was a sharp uptick in service providers’ 
economic activity in the second quarter. This 
was particularly true of those sectors which 
had previously been severely hit by the meas -
ures introduced to contain the pandemic. That 
said, restrictions still in place and consumer 
caution inhibited the rebound, meaning that Recovery in 
manufacturing 
checked by 
automotive 
sector Easing of meas -
ures provides 
boost for service 
providerstainable economic development in the period 
after the pandemic. Central and eastern 
European EU countries will benefi  t from this 
in the long term because the fi  nancial assis-
tance paid out to them will probably signifi  -
cantly exceed their future repayment shares.
Just as important as these measures will be 
ongoing efforts to develop institutional 
quality in the central and eastern European 
EU countries.14 According to the World 
Bank’s governance indicators, this has de-
teriorated over the last fi  ve years owing, in 
particular, to setbacks in a number of large 
countries.15 In most cases, there were con-
siderable gaps compared to the average of 
the other EU countries, especially in com-
parison to the top- ranking countries. Given 
these developments, the recovery fund 
should also be used to improve institutional 
quality.16 Moreover, the EU has introduced 
procedures to strengthen the rule of law in 
the Member States.1714 The link between institutional quality and economic 
prosperity has already been the subject of a large body 
of research. See, for example, Góes (2016).
15 In the majority of the smaller countries, by contrast, 
it improved over the same period. See World Bank 
(2021). The World Bank’s worldwide governance indi-
cators encompass six individual indicators which are 
used to compute a simple average. Cross- country aver-
ages were calculated based on population shares.
16 See Regulation of the European Parliament and of 
the Council establishing a Recovery and Resilience 
Facility , especially Recital 15 – European Parliament 
and EU Council (2021). The rule of law, enshrined in 
Article 2 of the TEU as a shared value of the EU Mem-
ber States, is the cornerstone of a properly functioning 
community and the confi  dence of citizens and enter-
prises in public institutions. Because the effi   ciency, 
quality and independence of justice systems therefore 
play a key role in the economic recovery of the Mem-
ber States, the European Commission is supporting the 
implementation of appropriate reforms suggested as 
part of the European Semester’s country- specifi  c rec-
ommendations through the Recovery and Resilience 
Facility and through technical and fi  nancial assistance 
for structural reform.
17 The EU Justice Scoreboard and the Rule of Law Re-
port, which are both published annually, form part of 
a comprehensive, preventive “European Rule of Law 
Mechanism”, which has been added to the EU’s exist-
ing toolkit. See European Commission (2021d, 2021e).
14 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
22

these areas are still likely to fall short of their 
pre- crisis level come the end of the quarter. In 
the sectors less heavily affected by the contain -
ment measures, such as transport and business- 
related services, economic activity continued to 
recover in the second quarter, albeit  at a mark -
edly slower pace. The upswing in information 
and communication services, which has per -
sisted over a number of quarters, continued 
unabated.
Economic conditions improved markedly in all 
Member States in the second quarter, although 
the range of GDP growth rates recorded was 
broad. Differences between the countries in 
terms of how the pandemic evolved, when and 
for how long containment measures were en -
forced and the way their national economies 
are structured were a crucial factor here.
At 0.9%, France recorded below- average GDP 
growth in the second quarter. That followed a 
first quarter in which the country’s economic 
output had not fallen, however. In addition, 
stringent containment measures hampered the 
economy’s recovery into May. As the second 
quarter progressed, economic activity strength -
ened distinctly, primarily on the back of the 
revival  in private consumption. Construction in -
vestment also rose considerably. On a quarterly 
average, GDP was only slightly more than 3% 
short of its pre- crisis level, with the shortfall 
likely to be yet smaller at quarter- end.
According to preliminary data from Italy’s stat -
istical office, the second quarter saw the coun -
try’s real GDP grow very steeply, by 2.7%. Des -
pite this, average economic output for the 
quarter still fell just under 4% short of its pre- 
crisis level, partly because of the renewed sub -
stantial contraction it had undergone at the 
end of 2020 due to the pandemic. The recov -
ery in the second quarter was broadly based. 
The services sectors in particular, including 
tourism, benefited considerably from the eas -
ing of the containment measures. Growth in 
construction remained brisk, with output ex -
ceeding its pre- crisis level by 13% in the first two months of the quarter. Major impetus 
came in the form of public infrastructure pro -
jects and the tax bonus applying to renovation 
work with a view to improving the energy effi -
ciency and earthquake- proofing of buildings. 
Moreover, manufacturing continued to re -
bound in spite of impediments on the supply 
side in automotive manufacturing.
In Spain, aggregate output rose strongly in the 
second quarter by 2.8% on the quarter, but 
economic output still trailed its pre- crisis level 
by around 7%. In no other euro area country 
was GDP in the second quarter so far behind its 
pre- crisis level, a situation caused not by an Upwards trend 
in all Member 
States
Moderate rise in 
economic out -
put in France
Steep rise in 
Italy’s  real GDP
Spanish econ -
omy strongly 
recovered of 
late, though still 
far below pre- 
crisis levelDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
23
Aggregate output in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021Real GDP, Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
80859095100
758085909510080859095100
Italy
SpainEuro area
France859095100
of which:

additional setback in the fourth quarter of 2020 
and first quarter of 2021 but rather by the 
magnitude of the initial slump and the com -
paratively lacklustre recovery seen in the third 
quarter of 2020. Both factors were related to 
the country’s particularly high dependence on 
tourism. The increase in economic output in 
the second quarter was primarily due to the re -
vival in private consumption. Economic activity 
in consumption- related services increased 
steeply as restrictions were eased. Manufactur -
ing output also saw a slight increase. The per -
sistently weak investment activity was striking. 
Construction investment once again fell mark -
edly, staying well below its pre- crisis level.
Economic output also rose in the other Mem -
ber States in the second quarter. In countries 
where the containment measures had still been 
very tight in the first quarter, including Austria 
and Portugal, aggregate output rose very 
strongly following the easing of those meas -
ures. Elsewhere – in the Netherlands, Belgium 
and Finland, for example  – expansion was 
more moderate. In some of the smaller euro 
area countries, where a favourable economic 
structure and robust trend growth had already 
pushed figures beyond pre- crisis levels, such as 
in Lithuania, the margin by which they were ex -
ceeded widened further. Most euro area coun -
tries had not yet returned to their pre- crisis 
levels, however, with countries heavily depend -
ent on tourism tending to lag the furthest be -
hind.
The situation in the labour market also im -
proved in the second quarter. The number of 
persons in employment rose considerably in 
seasonally adjusted terms, by 0.5% compared 
with the first quarter, in which it had still fallen. 
It still undershot its pre- crisis level distinctly, by 
1.6%, however. Measured in terms of hours 
worked, there is likely to have been a more 
pronounced recovery. At any rate, there was a 
marked drop- off in short- time work in several 
euro area countries in the second quarter. The 
standardised unemployment rate fell to 7.7% in 
the period to June, leaving it just 0.3 percent -age point higher than before the crisis began. 
Given that government support measures are 
still being widely deployed, the labour market 
may look somewhat more favourable than it is 
in reality, however. In the second quarter, gross 
wages and salaries per employee probably 
climbed sharply compared with the same 
period last year, when they took a tumble as a 
result of coronavirus restrictions. The nascent 
rebound experienced by service providers is 
likely to have had a slightly negative impact on 
wage growth via compositional effects, how -
ever.
Consumer prices once again increased strongly 
in the second quarter of 2021. As measured by 
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
(HICP), their increase on the previous quarter 
– a seasonally adjusted 0.5% – was less strong 
than it had been in the first quarter as a num -
ber of one- off effects expired. Energy prices 
continued to track upwards. Food prices rose 
moderately and those for services slightly, while 
prices for non- energy industrial goods even 
went down somewhat. The year- on- year rate 
of the HICP rose further from 1.1% in the first 
quarter to 1.8% in the second quarter. The 
pandemic- induced slump in crude oil prices in 
the second quarter of 2020 was a significant 
factor behind this considerable increase. The 
rate excluding energy and food fell from 1.2% 
to 0.9%, however. Developments in the ser -
vices sector had a particular bearing here: in 
Germany, the one- off statistical effect applying 
to travel services did not serve to push the HICP 
any higher.15 In other countries, most notably 
Spain, prices for travel- related services actually 
even fell further. Price trends in housing, recre -
ation and other services (which include health, 
education and financial services) have remained 
unremarkable. In the case of non- energy indus -
trial goods, the year- on- year rate persisted at 
the high level of the previous quarter. Strong 
rises in the prices for consumer durables, which 
were likely due to rising costs for intermediate 
goods and transport services, were the key fac -Recovery in the 
smaller Member 
States too, but 
at varying paces
Improved labour 
market situationConsumer prices 
increase strongly 
again in Q2
15 See p. 64 of this report.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
24

tor here. Overall, core inflation excluding en -
ergy and food has hovered roughly around its 
pre- crisis level since the beginning of the year, 
however.
In July, the year- on- year rate of the HICP rose 
to 2.2%. The rate excluding energy and food 
recorded a slight decrease on June, however, 
dropping to 0.7%. While the rise in prices of 
services increased slightly in year- on- year terms, 
it slackened distinctly in the case of non- energy 
industrial goods. The fact that the rate in July 
2020 had been especially high because sea -
sonal summer sales had been postponed due 
to the pandemic played a part here.
GDP in the euro area is likely to post strong 
growth in the third quarter, too. This is prob -
able in part even just on the back of carry- over 
effects; economic activity picked up consider -
ably as pandemic containment measures were 
eased over the course of the second quarter. 
Since then, rising infection numbers have 
prompted a degree of tightening in such meas -
ures on a localised basis and the postponement 
of further easing in some cases. Overall, 
though, the measures in the current quarter 
will be milder than they were on average in the 
second quarter, and consumers are also actu -
ally using the additional consumption oppor -
tunities now open to them. There have been 
some indications pointing towards a slowdown 
in the recovery of late, however. Consumer 
confidence dimmed slightly in July for the first 
time since the start of the year, mainly because 
of less favourable assessments of the future fi -
nancial situation and of labour market develop -
ments. Expectations among service providers 
with regard to the future development of activ -
ity and employment also cooled slightly from 
their previously high level. This could be partly 
because more contagious virus variants and in -
complete protection via vaccination mean that 
containment measures are likely to remain in place to a certain extent and may even be par -
tially re- tightened. In industry, production ex -
pectations remained well above their longer-  
term average but have still dimmed somewhat 
since June. Hindrances caused by materials 
shortages and climbing prices for raw materials 
and other intermediate inputs were probably 
key factors behind the somewhat gloomier 
outlook in spite of full order books. Whilst all of 
this is unlikely to jeopardise the recovery, it 
could be a drag on growth.Inflation rate 
increases further 
in July
Strong GDP 
growth in Q3, 
but indications 
that rebound is 
slowingDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
25
Composition of selected HICP 
components in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The sum of 
the contributions may differ from the year-on-year rate due to 
rounding.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 2020 20210.500.51.01.52.0
–++++Year-on-year percentage change
–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5+2.0+2.5Semi-durablesNon-durables
DurablesNon-energy industrial goods
Contributions1 
in percentage points
Contributions1 in percentage pointsServices
Other
Travel
TransportCommunication
Housing
Recreation

List of references
Council of the European Union (2021), Economic and Financial Affairs Council, 13 July 2021, Main 
results, https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/meetings/ecofin/2021/07/13 /
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2021a), The macroeconomic implications of the American Rescue Plan, 
Monthly Report, May 2021, pp. 16 ff.
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2021b), How will economic relations between the United Kingdom and the 
European Union be governed going forward?, Monthly Report, February 2021, pp. 16 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2020), How the coronavirus pandemic has impacted on the convergence 
process of the central and eastern European EU Member States, Monthly Report, August 2020, 
pp. 22 ff.
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2018), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national economic 
statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65-78.
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (2021), Covid-  19 Vaccine Tracker, https://
vaccinetracker.ecdc.europa.eu/public/extensions/COVID-19/vaccine-tracker.html
European Commission (2021a), European Economic Forecast Summer 2021 (Interim), July 2021.
European Commission (2021b), European Economic Forecast Spring 2021, May 2021.
European Commission (2021c), The Recovery and Resilience Facility, https://ec.europa.eu/info/
business-economy-euro/recovery-coronavirus/recovery-and-resilience-facility_en
European Commission (2021d), 2021 Rule of law report – the rule of law situation in the European 
Union, July 2021.
European Commission (2021e), EU Justice Scoreboard, July 2021.
European Parliament and Council of the European Union (2021), Regulation (EU) 2021/ 241 estab -
lishing the Recovery and Resilience Facility, February 2021.
Góes, C. (2016), Institutions and growth: A GMM/ IV Panel VAR approach, Economics letters, 
Vol. 138, pp. 85-91.
Herriford, T., E. M. Johnson, N. Sly and A. Lee Smith (2016), How Does A Rise in International Ship -
ping Costs Affect U. S. Inflation?, The Macro Bulletin, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Decem -
ber 2016.
International Monetary Fund (2021), World Economic Outlook Update: Fault Lines Widen in the 
Global Recovery, July 2021.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
26

Oesterreichische Nationalbank (2021), EU- Mitgliedstaaten in Zentral-, Ost- und Südosteuropa: 
Konjunkturerholung setzt sich im ersten Quartal fort, Konjunktur aktuell: Berichte und Analysen 
zur wirtschaftlichen Lage , June 2021, pp. 11ff.
Oesterreichische Nationalbank  (2020), Automotive industry and global value chain integration in 
CESEE in COVID- times and beyond, Konjunktur aktuell: Berichte und Analysen zur wirtschaftlichen 
Lage, December 2020, pp. 57-64.
World Bank (2021), Worldwide Governance Indicators, https://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgiDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
27

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
In June 2021, based on a joint assessment of fi -
nancing conditions and the inflation outlook, 
the Governing Council of the ECB expected 
that net purchases under the pandemic emer -
gency purchase programme (PEPP) would con -
tinue to be conducted over the third quarter at 
a significantly faster pace than during the first 
months of the year. Net asset purchases will 
continue with an unchanged total envelope of 
€1,850 billion until at least the end of March 
2022 and, in any case, until the Governing 
Council judges that the coronavirus crisis phase 
is over. If favourable financing conditions can 
be maintained with lower overall purchase vol -
umes, the envelope of €1,850 billion need not 
be used in full. Equally, the total envelope can 
also be increased if necessary. The Governing Council left the asset purchase programme 
(APP) and the key interest rates unchanged. 
Net purchases under the APP will continue at a 
pace of €20 billion per month. The main refi -
nancing rate remains at 0%, while the rate on 
the marginal lending facility stands at 0.25% 
and the deposit facility rate at -0.5%.
The new Eurosystem staff macroeconomic pro -
jections published in June indicate that under -
lying inflation pressures will gradually pick up 
over the entire projection horizon until the end 
of 2023. Given that there is still considerable 
economic slack that is only gradually being 
taken up, however, this pressure is set to re -
main subdued, though the ECB Governing 
Council has discussed a number of upside risks. 
Nevertheless, in the baseline scenario, headline 
inflation remains short of the Governing Coun -
cil’s target through to the end of the projection 
horizon. The Governing Council therefore con -
tinues to consider it essential to maintain fa -
vourable financing conditions for enterprises 
and households. These conditions have re -
mained largely unchanged since the monetary 
policy meeting of March 2021, though market 
interest rates continued to rise. Although partly 
an expression of an improved economic out -
look, the Governing Council believes a sus -
tained rise in market interest rates could lead to 
a deterioration in financing conditions in the 
broader sense, which are important for the 
economy as a whole.
In July, following the conclusion of its strategy 
review, the ECB Governing Council adopted its 
new monetary policy strategy. One of the key 
outcomes of the strategy review was a change 
to the inflation target.1 The Governing Council 
considers that price stability is best maintained 
by aiming for a 2% inflation target over the ECB Governing 
Council expects 
higher monthly 
net purchases 
under PEPP to 
continue in third 
quarter
Maintaining 
favourable 
financing condi -
tions remains 
essential
ECB Governing 
Council 
announces 
outcome  of 
strategy review
1 For the ECB Governing Council’s statement on the mon -
etary policy strategy, including more precise details and in -
formation on additional results of the strategy review, see 
European Central Bank (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
28
Money market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources:  ECB  and  Bloomberg.  1 Monthly  averages.  2 From 
1 October 2019, EONIA calculated as €STR + 8.5 basis points. 
3 Three-month EURIBOR less three-month EONIA swap rate. 
• Average of 1 to 19 August 2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 20210.60.50.40.30.20.100.10.20.3
––––––+++
–100+10+20Money market
risk premium:
EURIBOR-OIS spread 1,3Basis
points% p. a.
EONIA1,2Three-month EURIBOR 1
Deposit facility
rateMain refinancing rateMarginal lending rate
€STR 1

Money market management and liquidity needs
Between the March- April 2021 reserve main-
tenance period and the June- July 2021 reserve 
maintenance period, liquidity needs stemming 
from autonomous factors saw a strong rise of 
€142.0 billion to €2,050.8 billion (see the 
table below).1 This was chiefl  y attributable to 
another signifi  cant uptick in the volume of 
banknotes in circulation in the Eurosystem, 
which increased by €38.1 billion to €1,485.8 
billion. Of this, Germany accounted for a rise 
of €10.3 billion, putting cumulative net bank-
note issuance at €847.8 billion. Cash demand 
probably remained brisk due to the ongoing 
pandemic and the negative interest rate envir-
onment. Government deposits with the Euro-
system rose slightly by an average of €7.8 bil-
lion, reaching €652.3 billion on average in the 
June- July 2021 reserve maintenance period 
(see the chart on p. 30). This fi  gure includes 
€206.8 billion in deposits with the Bundes-
bank. The combined total of net foreign assets 
and other factors, which are considered to-
gether owing to liquidity- neutral valuation ef-fects, also had a liquidity- absorbing effect, de-
clining by €96.1 billion on aggregate mainly 
because of an increase in non- monetary pol-
icy deposits such as deposits by foreign cen-
tral banks. Over the reporting period, the min-
imum reserve requirement climbed by €2.0 
billion to €149.3 billion in the June- July 2021 
reserve period, which led to an additional 
need for central bank liquidity. In Germany the 
reserve requirement went up by €0.5 billion to 
€41.3 billion.
In the period under review, additional central 
bank liquidity was provided both by purchase 
programmes –  in particular the pandemic 
emergency purchase programme (PEPP) – and 
by refi  nancing operations (see the chart on 
p.  32). Bids in the eighth operation of the 
1 Average of the fourth reserve maintenance period of 
2021 (June- July 2021) as compared to the average of 
the second reserve maintenance period of 2021 
(March- April 2021), which was covered in the May 
2021 issue of the Monthly Report.
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2021
28 Apr.
to
15 June16 June
to
27 July
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  18.1 –  20.0
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  57.8 –  65.6
3. Net foreign assets 1 –   6.9 +  11.9
4. Other factors 1 –  25.7 –  75.4
Total +   7.1 – 149.1
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations –   0.1 –   0.1
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations +  52.4 +  89.0
c) Other operations + 141.3 + 151.8
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility +   0.0 +   0.0
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  30.1 –  30.1
Total + 163.5 + 210.6
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) + 170.6 +  61.4
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –   0.4 –   1.6
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
29

third series of targeted longer- term refi  nan-
cing operations (TLTRO- III) in June were rela-
tively high at €109.8 billion, despite the re-
maining period subject to attractive special 
interest rate conditions of as low as -1.0% 
being three months shorter than in the sev-
enth TLTRO- III in March 2021 (which reached 
€330.5 billion). At €0.5 billion in total, there 
was hardly any demand for the ninth pan-
demic emergency longer- term refi  nancing op-
eration (PELTRO) in June (previous operation in 
March 2021: €0.4 billion). Uptake of the regu-
lar main refi  nancing operations and three- 
month tenders likewise remained very sub-
dued. Total tender volume in the Eurosystem 
amounted to an average of €2,196 billion in 
the June- July 2021 period. In Germany, the outstanding volume of longer- term oper-
ations – which include TLTROs, PELTROs and 
three- month tenders – rose by €27.0 billion to 
an average of €434.3 billion in the period 
under review, which represented a share of 
around 20% of the outstanding volume of 
long- term tenders in the Eurosystem, just as it 
did in the previous period under review.
At an average of €4,244.5 billion, balance 
sheet holdings of the asset purchase pro-
grammes in the June- July 2021 period were 
around €293.0 billion above the average for 
the period under comparison (see the adja-
cent table).
Excess liquidity rose by a net €290.3 billion 
overall in the period under review to €4,240.3 
billion on average, increasing by €200.4 bil-
lion in the April- June 2021 period and again 
by €89.9 billion in the subsequent June- July 
2021 period. The stronger increase in the fi  rst 
period was primarily a result of the marked 
drop in government deposits with the Euro-
system observed initially in this period, which 
had a liquidity- providing effect on this au-
tonomous factor.
At 99.3%, Eurosystem banks made slightly 
greater use of the exemption allowances 
under the two- tier system for remunerating 
excess reserve holdings in the June- July 2021 
period than in the March- April 2021 period 
(99.1%). In Germany, utilisation of the exemp-
tion allowances was very close to the Eurosys-
tem average at 99.2%. The increase in the 
minimum reserve requirement caused abso-
lute exemption allowances to rise; however, 
given the stronger growth in excess liquidity, 
excess reserves remunerated at -0.50% grew 
once again (see the chart on p. 31). This meant 
that, on average, 21.1% of excess liquidity in 
the Eurosystem was exempted from remuner-
ation at negative interest rates in the June- July 
2021 period, compared with 22.4% in the 
March- April 2021 period (in Germany: 20.5% 
and 20.9%, respectively).
The secured money market saw interest rates 
drop slightly during the period under review. Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as at
13 Aug. 2021
Active programmes 1
PSPP +  44.6 2,437.3
CBPP3 +   4.4 294.5
CSPP +  16.1 289.3
ABSPP –   0.1 28.4
PEPP + 255.3 1,296.9
Completed programmes 
SMP –   6.4 14.7
CBPP1 0.0 0.4
CBPP2 +   0.0 2.4
1 Changes due to net purchases, maturities, reinvestments 
and amortisation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankAutonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing  (liquidity-absorbing)  factors  are  preceded  by  a  positive 
(negative)  sign.  1 Including  end-of-quarter  liquidity-neutral 
valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 20211,5001,20090060030003006009001,200
–––––++++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
30

Including the outliers at the end of the fi  rst 
quarter and the half- year period, which were 
somewhat larger in June than in March, over-
night rates in the secured market in GC Pool-
ing fell by 0.7 basis point for the ECB basket 
and 1.5 basis points for the ECB EXTended 
basket. This resulted in average rates of 
-0.56% and -0.52%, respectively (see the ad-
jacent chart), though rates did dip to -0.95% 
and -0.86%, respectively, at the end of the 
half- year period in June 2021. The somewhat 
stronger decline in rates for the ECB EXTended 
basket left the spread between the two rates 
at 4 basis points on average, compared with 5 
in the preceding period under review. The 
backdrop to this was a reduction in turnover 
on the GC Pooling platform for secured trans-
actions with maturities of one day (ON, TN, 
SN; combined in the Deferred Funding Rate). 
This turnover fell to €5.5 billion in the current 
period under review, down from an average 
of €7.6 billion in the preceding period under 
review. The unsecured euro short- term rate 
(€STR) remained almost unchanged for the 
most part at -0.57%. €STR turnover also 
stayed broadly stable, averaging €44 billion in 
the period under review, though it did pick up 
somewhat after the allotment of the TLTRO- III 
in June.Central bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Central 
bank balance minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the 
deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche BundesbankMar. Apr. May June July Aug.
20211.00.80.60.40.20
–––––Daily data
€ bn% p.a.
Excess liquidity1
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0Main refinancing rate
Mean value for the 
reserve maintenance period 2Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basket€STR
STOXX GC Pooling Overnight
GermanyEuro areaTheoretical allowancesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
31

medium term. This target is symmetric, mean -
ing negative and positive deviations of inflation 
from the target are equally undesirable. When 
the economy is operating close to the lower 
bound on nominal interest rates, it requires es -
pecially forceful or persistent monetary policy 
action to avoid negative deviations from the in -
flation target becoming entrenched. This may 
also imply a transitory period in which inflation 
is moderately above target.
Following its July monetary policy meeting, the 
Governing Council of the ECB confirmed its 
June assessment of financing conditions and 
the inflation outlook. Although it once again 
discussed potential upside risks, it assesses the 
baseline for the medium- term inflation outlook 
as remaining considerably below its target. 
Against this background, the Governing Coun -
cil amended its forward guidance on the key 
ECB interest rates in line with its monetary pol -
icy strategy in order to support its new sym -
metric inflation target of 2%. It expects the key interest rates to remain at their present or 
lower levels until it sees inflation reaching 2% 
well ahead of the end of its projection horizon 
and durably for the rest of the projection hori -
zon. It must also judge that realised progress in 
underlying inflation is sufficiently advanced to 
be consistent with inflation stabilising at 2% 
over the medium term. This may also imply a 
transitory period in which inflation is moder -
ately above target, according to the Governing 
Council.
APP holdings recorded on the balance sheet 
have risen by €49.8 billion since mid- May. On 
13  August 2021, the Eurosystem as a whole 
held assets totalling €3,049.5 billion as part of 
the APP (see the box on pp. 29 ff. for a break -
down of the holdings by individual pro -
gramme). The holdings continue to be influ -
enced by the smoothing over time of reinvest -
ments in line with the technical parameters 
agreed upon in December 2018 and by the use ECB Governing 
Council amends 
forward guid -
ance on key 
interest ratesAPP and PEPP 
securities hold -
ings recorded 
on balance 
sheet see further 
expansionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
32
Outstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 202105001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,0005,5006,0006,500€ billion
Mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
Purchase programmesFirst series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-I)Third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-III)
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-II)Pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs)
Additional longer-term refinancing operations

of amortised cost accounting.2 On 13 August 
2021, the securities holdings reported under 
the PEPP amounted to €1,296.9 billion, up by 
€243.8 billion.
On 24 June 2021, the eighth operation of the 
third series of targeted longer- term refinancing 
operations (TLTRO- III) was settled, with 224 
banks taking up a total of €109.8 billion. Over -
all, a combined volume of €2,189.1 billion is 
currently outstanding for all TLTRO- III oper -
ations. Uptake of the pandemic emergency 
longer- term refinancing operation (PELTRO) 
concluded on the same day, at €0.5 billion, 
was once again very low. A total of €24.8 bil -
lion are currently outstanding in the PELTROs.
The trend increase in excess liquidity continued 
on account of the ongoing net asset purchases 
and the allotment of the eighth TLTRO- III oper -
ation. As this report went to press, the volume 
of excess liquidity stood at €4,335.1 billion, up 
by around €189 billion compared with mid-  
May (see the box on pp. 29 ff.).
Short- term money market rates once again 
largely moved sideways. The unsecured euro 
overnight index average rate (EONIA), which is 
computed by applying a fixed spread to the 
euro short- term rate (€STR), was virtually un -
changed at -0.48%. As this report went to 
press, the three- month EURIBOR was slightly 
lower at -0.54%; on the whole, there was very 
little movement here as well.
Money market forward rates have declined 
since the ECB Governing Council’s monetary 
policy meeting in June. Part of the decline had 
already been apparent in mid-  July, coinciding 
with the announcement of initial information 
on the outcome of the Governing Council’s 
strategy review. Forward rates’ response to the 
official publication of the outcome of the strat -
egy review was then muted. Following the ad -
justment of forward guidance at the Governing 
Council’s July meeting, short- term forward rates 
continued to fall. All in all, market participants 
are now no longer pricing in an increase in interest rates of 10 basis points before the end 
of 2024. According to surveys conducted be -
fore the Governing Council’s monetary policy 
meetings, an overwhelming majority of re -
spondents were not expecting any initial inter -
est rate moves before mid- 2024. Other factors 
alongside the outcome of the strategy review 
are likely to have contributed to the flattening 
of the forward curve, especially at the current 
end. These include, amongst other things, 
growing concerns about the spread of the Delta 
variant of the coronavirus and the potential for 
subsequent restrictions to economic activity.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 showed 
considerable growth in the second quarter of 
2021, too, driven as before by highly liquid 
overnight deposits. However, compared with 
the high pandemic-  induced net inflows a year 
ago, the momentum of this expansion has 
tailed off considerably. This meant that the nor -
malisation of monetary growth already seen in 
the previous quarter continued, as was also 
demonstrated by the decline in the annual 
growth rate of M3 of just under two percent -
age points over the course of the quarter to 
8.3% at the end of June.
On the counterparts side, loans again made the 
largest contribution to monetary growth. The 
majority of this was securities- based lending to 
general government, driven by the Eurosys -
tem’s ongoing asset purchases. However, not -
able impetus also came from loans to the pri -
vate sector, which were almost exclusively for 
house purchase. Non- financial corporations, by 
contrast, reduced their outstanding loans from 
banks. One reason for this was that the strong 
economic recovery improved their income situ -
ation. Another was that, as was already hap -Eighth TLTRO- III 
sees banks take 
up €109.8 billion
Excess liquidity 
continues to rise
Short- term 
money market 
rates continue 
to show little 
change
Money market 
forward rates 
decliningGradual normal -
isation of mon -
etary dynamics
2 In particular, the difference between the acquisition and 
redemption value is amortised over the security’s residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and measured 
at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
33

pening in the previous quarters, funding was 
being shifted to the capital market. In addition, 
some firms that are now considerably more 
leveraged  are likely to have exercised greater 
restraint with regard to further borrowing. At 
the same time, the banks participating in the 
Bank Lending Survey (BLS) reported that they 
had not tightened their corporate credit stand -
ards in the second quarter, counter to their 
own prior expectations.
Overnight deposits were once again the M3 
component that made the most significant 
contribution to annual growth. As before, 
households accounted for the largest net in -
flows. However, inflows decreased significantly 
in volume and have now returned to pre-  
pandemic levels for the first time. The back -
ground behind this development is that house -
holds have had increasingly greater opportun -
ities for consumption thanks to the gradual lift -
ing of pandemic- related restrictions in the 
second quarter. The build- up of short- term sav -
ings deposits also decelerated perceptibly on 
the heels of this development.
Non- financial corporations likewise saw inflows 
to their overnight deposits continue to move 
back towards their pre- pandemic levels. For 
one thing, the more positive business climate 
for enterprises reduced their need to build up 
additional liquidity reserves. For another, im -
proved earnings and optimistic business ex -
pectations in many areas boosted enterprises’ 
propensity to invest. This aggregate picture, 
however, masks fairly heterogeneous develop -
ments in the individual euro area countries 
brought about by differences in the degree to 
which they have been affected by the pan -
demic.
On the counterparts side, monetary growth 
was once again driven primarily by domestic 
lending, which continued to fall relative to the 
strong previous quarters yet remained above its 
level prior to the outbreak of the coronavirus 
pandemic. This was due to securities- based 
lending to general government, which re -Monetary 
expansion still 
driven by over -
night deposits
Build- up of 
securitised 
lending  mainly 
shaped by 
Eurosystem  
net purchasesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
34
Monetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 212024681012
–++++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14
20246
–+++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial liabilities1
Net external assets
Credit to the private sector 2
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations 4
Households5Contribution of components 
in percentage points
Securities-based lending to 
general governmentPercentage change
in M3
Percentage change
in M3Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2Contribution of sectors in percentage points

mained elevated. While the Eurosystem mark -
edly upped its net monthly purchases of gov -
ernment bonds under the APP and PEPP in the 
reporting quarter, commercial banks reduced 
their government bond holdings in net terms. 
At the same time, they expanded their lending 
to the domestic private sector, although to a 
significantly lesser extent compared with the 
preceding quarters. This decline affected both 
securities- based lending and, in particular, 
loans to the private sector, the annual growth 
rate of which dropped to 3% by the end of the 
quarter.
Banks’ holdings of loans to non- financial cor -
porations declined in the second quarter for 
the first time since 2015. One reason was a 
countermovement to the strong first quarter: 
as reported, some banks brought forward their 
short- term loans, in particular, ahead of 
31 March in order to meet the credit growth 
targets applicable under TLTRO- III and thus 
qualify for very favourable funding conditions.3 
Moreover, the very high volume of lending in 
the second quarter of 2020 dampened short-  
term loans: one- year loans granted at that 
time, including a large number of bridging 
loans, matured in the reporting quarter. The 
high outflows in the short- term and medium-  term maturity  segments, however, contrasted 
with strong inflows in long-  term maturities. 
This suggests that part of the loans previously 
granted as short- term loans have been either 
substituted by or converted into long- term 
loans.
Overall, non- financial corporations continued 
to take out loans in the first and second quar -
ters of the year on balance, albeit to a lesser 
extent than in the preceding quarters. There 
are various reasons behind the weaker demand 
for loans. For instance, some enterprises con -
tinue to have large holdings of bank deposits; 
Net reduction in 
loans to non- 
financial corpor -
ations currently 
exaggerated by 
one- off effect …… but signs of 
weaker demand 
for loans overallConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q1 2021 Q2 2021
Holdings against central government 2 – 49.4 – 42.8
Monetary aggregate M3 207.1 211.1
of which components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 268.1 238.6
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) – 20.1 – 42.7
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 40.8 15.2
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities – 32.0 – 18.8
of which:
Capital and reserves 25.1 32.7
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 57.1 – 51.5Assets Q1 2021 Q2 2021
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 126.6 41.5
of which:
Loans 1 114.7 36.5
Securities 11.9 5.0
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 172.6 107.2
of which:
Loans –   1.7 11.8
Securities 174.4 95.4
Net external assets 3.8 40.1
Other counterparts of M3 – 177.3 – 39.4
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
35
Securities-based lending to general 
government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2120002004006008001,0001,200
–++++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
Eurosystem
Other MFIsof which:By the euro area MFI sector

these were accumulated last year for precau -
tionary purposes and are now having a damp -
ening effect on demand for further loans. This 
build- up of deposits was supported by the fa -
vourable conditions for bank loans, but also for 
alternative financing sources. For larger enter -
prises, this included obtaining funding directly 
on the capital market, in particular – mainly 
through the issuance of bonds last year and in -
creasingly through the issuance of shares in the 
reporting quarter. By contrast, the muted credit 
demand amongst enterprises in the sectors hit 
especially hard by the pandemic is more likely 
to be attributable to the fact that these enter -
prises already have high levels of indebtedness in some cases and have become more reluctant 
to take out additional loans. Furthermore, par -
ticularly in Germany, extensive payments of 
government assistance to enterprises affected 
by the pandemic provided financial relief in the 
reporting quarter and also made loan repay -
ments possible.
The fact that there was additional borrowing 
mainly in the form of long- term loans is indica -
tive of a shift in the motives behind credit de -
mand away from the primary safeguarding of 
liquidity and towards investment purposes. This 
is consistent with the view expressed by the 
bank managers responding to the BLS that de -
mand for loans was bolstered by financing 
needs for fixed investment for the first time in 
six quarters. In addition, the surveyed banks 
observed an increase in other funding needs, 
generated by refinancing, restructuring and re -
negotiating, amongst other things.
At the same time, the surveyed banks stated 
that, on balance, they left their corporate credit 
standards virtually unchanged in the second 
quarter. In the previous survey, banks had re -
ported that they planned to tighten credit 
standards for the current quarter. The fact that 
there was little change in standards is the result 
of contrasting factors: the general economic 
situation and the economic outlook encour -
aged more lenient standards, as did the com -
petition with other banks and non- banks, as 
well as enterprises’ ability to raise funds on the 
capital market at favourable terms. By contrast, 
sector-  specific and firm-  specific factors as well 
as a decline in borrowers’ creditworthiness 
continued to have a restrictive effect.
Unlike in corporate banking business, banks in 
the euro area significantly increased their lend -
ing to households once again in the second 
quarter of 2021. In particular, loans for house 
purchase, which account for the bulk of activ -
ity in this credit segment, again grew at an 
even greater rate than during the strong second 
half of 2020. Their annual growth rate rose to 
5.6% by the end of June, thus standing just Increased finan -
cing needs for 
fixed investment
BLS banks 
refrained from 
tightening 
standards 
further 
Further signifi -
cant increase in 
loans to house -
holdsMFI loans to the non-financial private 
sector in the euro area*
4020020406080100120140
––+++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 21
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
–200+20+40+60+80To households 3To non-financial corporations1
Total 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
36

over ½  percentage point higher than at the 
end of March. The most significant contribu -
tions to the quarterly inflow were again made 
by banks in Germany and France, but relatively 
strong stimulus also came from Italy in com -
parison with the pre- pandemic period. Banks in 
Spain recorded a significant quarterly net in -
crease in this credit segment for the first time in 
just over ten years.
Accordingly, the banks surveyed by the BLS 
registered an increase in demand for loans to 
households for house purchase, reporting that 
consumer confidence strengthened demand 
for the first time since the onset of the corona -
virus pandemic. Positive stimuli were also pro -
vided by the favourable outlook on the housing 
market and the low general level of interest 
rates. On the supply side, the banks participat -
ing in the survey left their standards for loans 
for house purchase virtually unchanged in the 
second quarter.
Consumer credit and other lending to house -
holds also increased markedly in the second 
quarter. BLS banks reported that this was pri -
marily due to improved consumer confidence 
and households’ greater propensity to acquire 
durable consumer goods. The low general level 
of interest rates also boosted demand. The sur -
veyed banks left their credit standards for con -
sumer credit and other loans to households un -
changed, following considerable tightening in 
some quarters during the previous year. In add -
ition, the rejection rate remained almost un -
changed compared with the previous quarter, 
after having increased in the five preceding 
quarters. It is therefore currently likely to persist 
at a relatively high level.
Alongside lending to non- banks in the euro 
area, the net external position of the monetary 
financial institutions (MFI) sector4 also sup -
ported monetary growth markedly in the 
second quarter of 2021. As usual, this was 
largely attributable to the persistent euro area 
current account surplus (according to non-  
seasonally adjusted balance of payments data, which are currently only available for April and 
May). A countervailing effect – one that led to 
capital exports – was generated by the nega -
tive balance of cross-  border securities transac -
tions: in view of the persistent difference in 
yield between bonds issued by other currency 
areas and those issued by the euro area, do -
mestic non- banks continued to expand their 
holdings of foreign securities in net terms. By 
contrast, non- residents sold long- term bonds 
issued by domestic non- banks on balance, but, 
at the same time, purchased shares and invest -
ment fund shares on a larger scale, just as they 
had done in the previous quarter.
German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business with domestic 
customers lost a significant amount of momen -
tum in the second quarter of 2021, after re -
cording extraordinarily sharp growth in some 
of the previous quarters against the backdrop 
of the coronavirus pandemic. The current de -
velopments first reflect the fact that house -
holds increased their consumer spending after 
the pandemic- related restrictions had been 
gradually eased. Second, given the economic 
recovery and improved economic outlook, en -
terprises had less need to safeguard their li -
quidity by building up short- term bank de -
posits. Furthermore, confidence in the econ -
omy led investors to search for yield by shifting 
funds from M3 deposit types into riskier and 
less liquid assets not included under M3. This 
development was also encouraged by the inter -
est rates on M3 deposits, which were low and, 
in some cases, had fallen further into negative 
territory (see the chart on p. 38).
The current increase in bank deposits was 
driven entirely by households, which markedly BLS banks report 
rise in demand 
for housing 
loans with 
essentially no 
change in credit 
standards
Recovery also 
seen in con -
sumer credit 
and other lend -
ing to house -
holds
Net external 
position pro -
vides marked 
support to mon -
etary growth 
due to persistent 
current account 
surplusDeposit business 
positive once 
again, momen -
tum waning
4 Alongside credit institutions, the MFI sector comprises 
electronic money institutions, money market funds and 
central banks.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
37

topped up their overnight deposits once again, 
although the latest build- up was considerably 
weaker than it had been in the previous quar -
ters in their case, too (for potential reasons be -
hind this, see the box on pp.  39 ff.). Non-  
financial corporations, by contrast, slightly re -
duced their holdings of overnight deposits in the 
second quarter on balance, after having signifi -
cantly increased them in some of the preceding 
quarters. As a result, the sustained accumulation 
of liquidity reserves in this sector that began at 
the onset of the coronavirus pandemic did not 
continue in the second quarter of 2021. Finan -
cial corporations, which traditionally have a dis -
tinct appetite for yield, markedly reduced their 
bank deposits again in favour of higher- yielding 
forms of investment in the second quarter.
German banks’ credit business with domestic 
customers, which had been remarkably strong 
in the preceding quarter, expanded only slightly 
in the second quarter and to a considerably 
lesser extent than before the outbreak of the 
coronavirus pandemic. On the one hand, banks 
noticeably reduced their holdings of govern -
ment bonds in net terms. At the same time, the 
increase in lending to the private sector was 
relatively weak.
The weak lending in the second quarter was at -
tributable to a significant net reduction in loans 
to non- financial corporations. This reduction, 
amongst other things, represented a counter -
movement to the increase in loans to corporate 
customers in the preceding quarter, which 
– influenced  by various factors – had been par -
ticularly high.5 At the same time, demand for 
bank loans amongst enterprises was also 
dampened owing to the fact that the financing 
needs of enterprises particularly affected by the 
coronavirus pandemic were covered in part by 
the disbursement of government loans. The 
volume of these grants grew further in the 
second quarter and, in total, even exceeded 
the volume of emergency aid granted in the 
second quarter of 2020.Noticeable 
increase in 
households’ 
bank deposits 
again, consider -
able reduction 
seen in other 
sectors’ deposits 
in some cases
Only slight 
expansion in 
credit business 
with non- banks
Decline in loans 
to non- financial 
corporations, 
also due to 
countermove -
ment to previ -
ous quarterInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 202101234% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight deposits
MFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2021
Q1 Q2
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 89.4 22.1
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years – 21.1 –  9.9
over 2 years –  8.1 –  7.3
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months 3.1 1.5
over 3 months –  1.1 –  0.8
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans –  3.8 0.7
Securities 4.3 – 13.0
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 38.7 14.6
of which: to households 3 20.3 24.4
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 16.0 – 12.9
Securities 6.7 2.5
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. Data adjusted for statis-
tical changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, households and 
general government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted 
for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 4   Non- fi  nancial corporations and 
quasi- corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
38

Developments in the real portfolio returns of households 
in Germany
This box outlines how the returns on the 
various types of fi  nancial asset and the total 
return on households’ fi  nancial assets in 
Germany have evolved up until the fi  rst 
quarter of 2021.1
The total portfolio return of households is 
calculated based on their main sources of 
income. While interest payments are the 
only source of income a bank deposit can 
generate, for other types of fi  nancial asset, 
such as shares, debt securities, investment 
fund shares and claims on insurance corpor-
ations, income fl  ows also depend on price 
effects. In addition, shares and investment 
funds that invest in equities commonly pay 
out dividends, too. Any attempt to calculate 
households’ total portfolio return therefore 
needs to consider not just interest payments 
but these other components as well.Consideration should also be given to the 
fact that the purchasing power of nominal 
returns fl  uctuates due to infl  ation, which is 
why all the returns are analysed in real 
terms.2
The chart below depicts the evolution of 
real returns on the main types of fi  nancial 
asset in the portfolio of households in Ger-
many between 1991 and the fi  rst quarter of 
2021. Currency and deposits remain the 
most important asset class in household 
portfolios, with a current share of around 
40%. For much of the period, they have 
generally yielded a low real return that has 
Real returns on various types of financial asset held by households in Germany*
504030201001020304050
–––––+++++Annual return at end of year/end of quarter, % p.a.
1991 95 00 05 10 15 20
Sources: Assekurata, German Insurance Association (Gesamtverband der Deutschen Versicherungswirtschaft) and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. * Adjusted for inflation using the consumer price index (CPI). 1 Data on the annual return on investment fund shares are only 
available as from Q4 1995. 2 Data on nominal deposit interest rates are based on the Bundesbank's interest rate statistics until 2002 
and on the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics as from 2003. The period prior to 2003 and the years from 2003 onwards can there-
fore only be compared to a limited degree.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 21–20–100+10+20+30+40+50+60Enlarged scale
Claims on insurance corporationsInvestment fund shares1Debt securities
Currency and deposits 2Shares1 The following is an updated version of the box from 
the August 2020 edition of the Bundesbank’s Monthly 
Report; see Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b).
2 A detailed account of how real returns are calculated 
can be found in Deutsche Bundesbank (2015).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
39

also been relatively immune to volatility. 
While there have also been instances in the 
past where the real return dropped below 
zero, since mid- 2016 it has been clearly and 
almost exclusively negative. The situation is 
similar for debt securities, which, since mid- 
2015, have likewise yielded an almost con-
sistently negative average real return, largely 
against the backdrop of the Eurosystem’s 
asset purchase programme (APP) and pan-
demic emergency purchase programme 
(PEPP). The real return on insurance claims 
was given a boost by the temporary drop in 
the infl  ation rate brought about by the pan-demic, but was heading back towards his-
torical lows as this report went to press. Re-
turns on shares and investment fund shares 
were, as usual, infl  uenced strongly by cap-
ital markets. The onset of the COVID- 19 
pandemic and uncertainty surrounding its 
economic fallout initially sent prices tum-
bling in capital markets in the fi  rst quarter 
of 2020. Before long, however, the strong 
economic recovery in the summer of 2020 
combined with monetary policy and fi  scal 
support measures and a brighter economic 
outlook among market participants made 
themselves felt in capital markets, sending Contributions of individual types of financial asset* to the real total return of households 
in Germany
* Weighted according to share of total financial assets. Adjusted for inflation using the consumer price index (CPI).
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 21–4–20+2+4+6+8+10Annual return at end of year/end of quarter
Claims on insurance corporationsInvestment fund sharesShares Contributions in percentage points
Debt securities
Currency and deposits
1991 95 00 05 10 15 20420246810
––+++++
Real total return (% p.a.)
Contributions to the real total return of households in Germany
642024681012
–––++++++Annual return at end of year/end of quarter
1992 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 21–4–20+2+4+6+8+10Contributions in percentage points
Real total return (% p.a.)Inflation componentPortfolio componentNominal return componentEnlarged scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
40

returns on shares and investment fund 
shares perceptibly higher. It is particularly 
worth noting that, in annual terms, the fi  rst 
quarter of 2021 saw the real return on 
shares reach its highest value since records 
began in 1991.3
The real total portfolio return (see the upper 
chart on p. 40) is calculated by weighting 
the returns on the various asset types ac-
cording to their share of the total house-
hold portfolio and adjusting the fi  gures for 
consumer price infl  ation. Thus calculated, 
the real total return rose from -1.9% in the 
fi  rst quarter of 2020 to roughly 7.2% in the 
fi  rst quarter of 2021. This is the strongest 
recovery in the real total return within the 
space of a single year since records began.
Viewed in multiyear terms, the contribution 
made by bank deposits, which has been 
predominantly negative since the end of 
2010, has mostly dragged down the real total return overall. The contribution made 
by securities returns, meanwhile, has been 
fairly volatile, weighing on the total return 
in the fi  nal quarter of 2018 and at the be-
ginning of 2020 in particular and turning 
clearly positive at the beginning of 2021. 
The only consistently positive contribution 
– albeit a minor one – stemmed from claims 
on insurance corporations.
The real total return can be presented not 
just in terms of the different types of fi  nan-
cial asset but also as a stylised breakdown 
by nominal return, portfolio and infl  ation 
component (see the lower chart on p. 40). 
The nominal return component approxi-
mates the extent to which the (given) nom-
inal return path of the different fi  nancial 
asset types – i.e. interest payments, price ef-
3 For more information about capital market develop-
ments in the fi  rst quarter of 2021, see Deutsche Bun-
desbank (2021b).
Structure of German households' financial assets
1 Besides other accounts receivable, this also comprises other equity.
Deutsche Bundesbank%, end-of-quarter data
Other depositsClaims on insurance corporations
Investment fund sharesOther1
Debt securities
Shares
Currency and transferable deposits
1991 95 00 05 10 15 20 210102030405060708090100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
41

In terms of maturity, the latest decline in loans 
to non- financial corporations was attributable 
to substantial net repayments of short- term 
and medium-  term loans. It appears that the 
improved   income situation and the well-  filled 
order books prompted some enterprises not to 
extend the loans they had taken out – for pre -
cautionary reasons in some cases – but rather 
to repay them. By contrast, long- term loans to 
non- financial corporations saw another in -
crease in the second quarter of 2021, suggest -
ing ongoing financing needs for investment 
purposes. However, quarterly inflows remained 
below the level of the preceding quarter for the 
second consecutive quarter. It should, how -
ever, be taken into consideration that enter -
prises made increasing use of alternative fund -
ing options in the second quarter, such as in -
ternal funding and/ or capital market funding.
The results of the BLS largely support this view. 
Contrary to their expectations in the previous 
quarter, BLS banks reported no further increase in corporate customers’ financing needs on 
balance in the reporting quarter. Enterprises’ 
use of internal financing and borrowing from 
other banks had a dampening effect on de -
mand. By contrast, financing needs for fixed in -
vestment drove up demand for loans. BLS 
banks also cited refinancing, restructuring and 
renegotiating as factors that boosted demand 
when viewed in isolation. However, they had 
less of an impact than in the preceding quar -
ters.
At the same time, the surveyed banks eased 
their corporate credit standards marginally in 
net terms in the second quarter of 2021. Credit 
standards were therefore not tightened on bal -
ance for the first time since COVID-  19 emerged 
in Germany in the first quarter of 2020. The 
second quarter of 2021 saw a net easing of 
credit terms and conditions as a whole for the 
time since 2019. Institutions cited several rea -
sons that all marginally influenced this easing. 
These included increased risk tolerance, greater Sharp reduction 
in short- term 
and medium- 
term loans to 
enterprises, only 
slight increase in 
long- term loansBLS indicates 
that internal 
financing and 
borrowing from 
other banks 
dampened 
demand
Supply- side pol -
icy eased some -
what overallfects and dividend payouts – contributes to 
the total return. The portfolio component, 
meanwhile, is a rough proxy for moves in 
the nominal total return that can be attrib-
uted to changes in the composition of the 
total portfolio of fi  nancial assets; therefore, 
even if both nominal returns on individual 
components and the infl  ation rate remain 
constant, a shift into higher- yielding types 
of fi  nancial asset can boost the total return. 
Lastly, the infl  ation component stands for 
the contribution of the infl  ation rate (meas-
ured by the consumer price index – CPI).
The nominal return component was gener-
ally the key determinant of the real total re-
turn throughout the reporting period. While 
its contribution was mostly positive in re-
cent years, it turned negative at the end of 
2018 and at the beginning of 2020, mainly 
owing to bouts of sluggishness in capital 
markets. At the same time, the infl  ation component had a primarily negative effect 
in the period under review, as the infl  ation 
rate was above zero. Its contribution only 
turned positive for a time during 2020, 
when the infl  ation rate fell due to the pan-
demic. By and large, the portfolio compon-
ent had only a small impact on the total re-
turn. This is because the portfolio structure 
changes only gradually (see the chart on 
p. 41).4
Overall, the aggregate rise in the nominal 
return component over the course of 2020 
signifi  cantly boosted the real total return. At 
the beginning of 2021, the real total return 
was at a level last seen at the beginning of 
the millennium, in no small measure due to 
price gains in the capital market.
4 For more information about changes in the structure 
of fi  nancial assets and developments in returns, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
42

optimism about the situations of individual sec -
tors and enterprises as well as borrowers’ 
creditworthiness, and a more positive assess -
ment of the general economic situation and 
outlook. In the previous quarter, these factors 
had still had a restrictive effect on standards.
Unlike the corporate customer segment, loans 
to households registered substantial inflows 
again in the second quarter. This was primarily 
due to households’ high demand for loans for 
house purchase, which saw a marked increase 
again in the second quarter. The sharp rise in 
prices for construction work and residential 
property was probably also another determin -
ant alongside households’ sound income and 
asset situation and favourable financing condi -
tions. On balance, the growth rate of loans 
taken out for house purchase rose further to 
7.1% on the year, reaching its highest level 
since 2000. According to MFI interest rate stat -
istics, the interest rate on long- term loans for 
house purchase was 1.3% in the second quar -
ter of 2021 and thus only slightly above the his -
torical low of 1.1% recorded at the end of De -
cember 2020 (see the chart on p. 44).
The latest BLS suggests that other factors were 
at play as well. The surveyed banks cited im -
proved consumer confidence as a key reason 
for the increase in demand currently observed 
in this credit segment. This factor therefore 
contributed to an increase in demand for the 
first time since the start of the pandemic. Banks 
cited the low general level of interest rates as a 
second key factor.
Credit standards for loans to households for 
house purchase were eased for the first time 
since the outbreak of the coronavirus pan -
demic – and to a somewhat greater extent 
than banks had planned in the previous quar -
ter. Despite the easing of standards, the rejec -
tion rate was slightly up on the quarter. Follow -
ing the increases observed in the second, third 
and fourth quarters of 2020, this rate is cur -
rently likely to remain at an elevated level com -
pared with the rate immediately before the outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic. Further -
more, credit terms and conditions were eased 
again for the first time since the second quarter 
of 2019. As a result, banks narrowed the mar -
gins on average loans for the first time in two 
years, while the margins on riskier loans were 
not widened for the first time. The BLS banks 
were also accommodative to borrowers with 
regard to their loan- to- value ratios.
In response to the ad hoc questions in the July 
survey, German BLS banks reported that their 
funding conditions had remained largely un -
changed compared with the previous quarter. 
According to the banks, the share of non-  Further increase 
in loans to 
households, 
driven exclu -
sively by loans 
for house 
purchase 
Demand for 
housing loans 
supported by 
consumer confi -
dence and low 
interest rate 
environment
Lending policies 
for loans for 
house purchase 
eased for first 
time since out -
break of corona -
virus pandemic
NPL ratio had 
no impact on 
German banks’ 
lending policy in 
first half of 20212016 2017 2018 2019 2020 21–10+1+2+3+4+5Year-on-year change, end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic 
non-financial private sector
210123456
––++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchase
Total,
percentage changeLoan contributions in percentage pointsTotal,
percentage changeUp to 1 yearMaturity contributions in percentage points
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 yearsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
43

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q3 2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 20211.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2013 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 2100.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
30030
–+
3003060
–++Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
0.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
44

performing loans (NPLs) in the gross book value 
of loans – i.e. the NPL ratio – had no impact on 
changes to their lending policies for loans to 
enterprises or households in the first half of 
2021. For the second half of 2021, banks are 
expecting to see a marginally restrictive effect 
on credit standards and terms and conditions 
for loans to enterprises.Banks reported a significant decline in cor -
porate demand for government- guaranteed 
coronavirus assistance loans in the first half of 
2021. One reason for this was that large enter -
prises, in particular, had shown less demand for 
funding to cover acute liquidity needs.Significant 
de cline in cor -
porate demand 
for government- 
guaranteed 
coronavirus 
assistance loans 
in first half of 
2021
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), Monetary policy and banking business, Monthly Report, May 2021, 
pp. 26-40.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), Financial markets, Monthly Report, February 2021, pp. 40-51.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), Acquisition of financial assets and the search for yield in Germany, 
Monthly Report, May 2020, pp. 38-41.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), Developments in the real portfolio returns of households in Ger -
many, Monthly Report, August 2020, pp. 40-43.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2015), German households’ saving and investment behaviour in light of 
the low- interest- rate environment, Monthly Report, October 2015, pp. 13-31.
European Central Bank (2021), The ECB’s monetary policy strategy statement, available at https://
www.ecb.europa.eu/home/search/review/html/ecb.strategyreview_monpol_strategy_statement.
en.htmlDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
45

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Since the beginning of the second quarter of 
2021, international financial markets have been 
caught between the economic recovery and 
current assessments of how the pandemic will 
evolve. At the start of the quarter, the prospect 
of pandemic- related restrictions being eased, 
plus progress on vaccinations and positive busi -
ness cycle signals, boosted market participants’ 
confidence. This led to rising government bond 
yields around the world. Since the end of June, 
however, this development has reversed in 
view of uncertainty about the economic reper -
cussions of the increasing spread of the Delta 
variant. Confidence that the end of the pan -
demic might soon be in sight, which was wide -
spread in the second quarter, flagged again. As 
a result, yields dropped compared with their 
levels at the end of March. In the international 
equity markets, lower discount factors, a good 
start to the reporting season, and higher profit 
expectations amongst analysts led to higher 
equity prices on both sides of the Atlantic. But 
here, too, the prevailing uncertainty about how 
the pandemic might evolve left its mark and 
was reflected in higher equity risk premia. Cor -
porate bond yields in the euro area fell over the 
entire reporting period against the backdrop of 
the ongoing purchase programmes. Overall, 
capital market financing conditions for euro 
area enterprises thus remained favourable. At 
the same time, the unexpectedly sharp rise in 
inflation drew the attention of international fi -
nancial market participants. Market data, con -
sistent with survey results, signalled temporarily 
high inflation rates. Longer- term market ex -
pectations of inflation, meanwhile, moved to -
wards the 2% target on balance – from differ -
ent directions – on both sides of the Atlantic. 
Inflation figures also played a key role in for -
eign exchange markets and influenced financial 
market expectations about the future monetary 
policy stance in the specific currency areas. 
Compared with the euro area, the monetary policy outlook in the United States and United 
Kingdom shifted slightly towards a somewhat 
less accommodative stance. This strengthened 
the US dollar and pound sterling against the 
euro, which had previously benefited from the 
euro area’s progress on vaccinations. On bal -
ance, however, price changes in the foreign ex -
change market remained within tight limits 
over the entire reporting period.
Exchange rates
From the start of the second quarter of 2021, 
the euro’s exchange rate against the US dollar 
remained almost unchanged on balance. The 
euro gradually appreciated from the start of 
the quarter up until the end of May. Accelerat -
ing progress on the vaccination front made for 
a brighter economic outlook in the euro area 
during this period, whereas the pace of vaccin -
ation was stalling in the United States. The US 
Federal Reserve also contributed to the euro’s 
initial strength against the US dollar. This is be -
cause, at the end of April, the Federal Open 
Market Committee (FOMC) gave no indication 
that the Fed would soon end its asset purchase 
programme, or even raise the federal funds 
rate, in response to expanding economic activ -
ity in the United States. This perception was 
further reinforced by the publication at the 
start of May of unexpectedly weak US labour 
market figures, with the Fed previously stating 
that any shift in monetary policy would be con -
ditional upon a labour market improvement.
However, the US dollar was then bolstered by 
surprisingly high inflation figures in the United 
States. Rising inflation rates generally reduce a 
currency’s purchasing power and thus tend to 
exert downward pressure on it. On the foreign 
exchange markets, however, the unexpectedly 
high figures were taken as a sign that a tight -
ening of monetary policy by the Fed was now 
more likely after all. This impression was solidi -Financial mar -
kets caught 
between eco -
nomic recovery 
and progression 
of pandemic
Euro almost 
unchanged 
against US 
dollar  …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
46

fied following the FOMC meeting in mid-  June. 
The FOMC members projected that the condi -
tions for tightening monetary policy could po -
tentially be reached earlier than previously 
thought. Conversely, ECB officials stated that it 
was still too soon to talk about unwinding 
monetary policy support in the euro area. There 
was thus a shift in the relative monetary policy 
outlook for market participants, and the euro 
quickly lost most of the ground it had gained 
against the US dollar. In July, the euro moved 
within a narrow range around US$1.18 without 
any major fluctuations. It was trading at 
US$1.17 at the end of the reporting period, 
which was 0.2% lower than at the start of April 
2021.
At the beginning of the second quarter, the 
euro appreciated markedly against the pound 
sterling due to vaccination rates in the euro 
area catching up. As May started, however, the 
euro lost some ground again. As in the case of 
the US dollar, the pound sterling appreciated 
following the publication of surprisingly high 
inflation figures in the United Kingdom, as 
these were also taken as a sign that monetary 
policy tightening was to be expected soon. In -
deed, based on interest rate derivatives, the 
conclusion can be drawn that market partici -
pants expect the United Kingdom’s Bank Rate 
to rise far earlier than the euro area’s policy 
rate. These expectations were dampened by 
the Bank of England, which stressed more of a 
wait- and- see attitude until July and thus tem -
porarily put pressure on the pound. In the min -
utes of its meeting at the start of August, how -
ever, the Bank of England stated for the first 
time since the beginning of the pandemic that 
some modest tightening of monetary policy 
might be necessary in the medium term, and 
the euro fell to its lowest level against the 
pound in almost a year and a half. At the end 
of the reporting period, it was trading at £0.86, 
down 0.4% on its level at the end of March.
In net terms, the euro depreciated against the 
yen. Here, too, the euro posted gains up until 
the end of May. The increasing spread of the virus amid the slow vaccine rollout in Japan 
was putting the yen under pressure. The tight -
ening of containment measures also placed 
constraints on economic activity, with the state 
of emergency in several of the country’s major 
prefectures being extended for a time and ex -
panded to further regions. However, from 
June, these factors were increasingly obscured 
by the fact that, given the worldwide spread of 
the Delta variant, the yen repeatedly benefited 
from temporary uncertainty among financial 
market participants about the state of the 
global economic recovery. Such an exchange 
rate response is consistent with the frequently 
made observation that a declining risk appetite … with slight 
gains against 
pound 
sterling  …
… but losses 
against yenDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
47
Exchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 As calculated by the ECB against the currencies 
of 19 countries. A rise in values indicates an appreciation of 
the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankOND J FMAM J J A
2020 20211.151.201.25
120125130135
0.850.880.910.94
97100103Daily data, log scale
¥US$
£against the ...
... US dollar
... yen
... pound sterling
Nominal effective exchange rate1
Q1 1999 = 100

amongst investors promotes capital inflows 
into Japan and thus strengthens the yen. At the 
end of the period under review, the euro stood 
at ¥128, which was 1.3% lower than at the 
end of the first quarter.
On a weighted average against the currencies 
of 19 major trading partners, the euro depreci -
ated by -0.5% on balance. In particular, the 
euro depreciated against the currencies of 
some central and eastern European countries 
such as the Czech koruna (-2.5%) and the złoty 
(-1.5%), which prospered thanks to the suc -
cessful containment of the virus in those places. 
By contrast, the euro recorded gains against 
the Australian dollar (+5.9%) and the Norwe -
gian krone (+5.5%). These were weighed 
down, inter alia, by the emerging uncertainty 
about the future course of the global economic 
recovery and the implications that this may 
have for the demand for commodities from 
these countries.Securities markets and 
 portfolio investment
Bond market
Yields on government bonds in the major cur -
rency areas were down compared with their 
levels at the end of the first quarter of 2021. 
The decline was especially considerable in the 
United States. The yield on US Treasuries moved 
50 basis points lower to 1.3% compared with 
its level at the end of March. There was little 
change in the survey and market- based infla -
tion expectations concerning average inflation 
over the next ten years. As a result, ten- year ex -
pected real interest rates in the United States 
therefore ventured far deeper into negative ter -
ritory than previously. One major reason for this 
movement was the growing concern that, even 
as vaccination rates continue to rise, the pan -
demic will not come fully under control in the 
short term. Overall, the high level of confi -
dence that the economy would continue to 
pick up rapidly, which had still shaped financial 
market developments in the second quarter, di -
minished modestly.
Forward inflation rates derived from US infla -
tion swaps for a period of five years starting in 
five years’ time stood at 2.3% at the end of the 
reporting period and were thus 15 basis points 
below their value at the end of March. It is 
noteworthy that short- term swap- based infla -
tion expectations increased. One reason for the 
decline in forward inflation rates amid rising 
short- term spot inflation rates could have been 
the publication of the June press release by the 
FOMC. Its content made it clear for market par -
ticipants that the Fed would still be unwilling to 
tolerate high inflation rates in the long term 
under its new monetary policy strategy. In any 
case, market participants revised their expect -
ations about the path of expected short-  term 
US interest rates upwards immediately after the 
FOMC’s public statement. Shrinking forward 
inflation rates amid rising spot inflation rates 
supported the widespread market view that 
currently high inflation rates are of a more tem -In effective 
terms, too, euro 
slightly weaker 
on balanceTen- year govern -
ment bond 
yields down 
globally
Shrinking for -
ward inflation 
rates in United 
States as spot 
inflation rates 
riseDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
48
Bond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual ma-
turity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 20210.90.60.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.0
–––++++++++++% p. a., daily data
Euro area
Germany
United States
Japan
United Kingdom

porary nature and that the Fed is in a position 
to take effective countermeasures should they 
remain high in the long term. This impression 
was reinforced by the fact that, in early August, 
some Fed officials were open to bringing for -
ward the timetable for tightening monetary 
policy, given the positive economic outlook.
At the end of the period under review, the yield 
on ten- year Federal bonds stood at -0.5%, 20 
basis points lower than at the end of March. It 
thus fell at a slightly stronger pace than the 
GDP- weighted euro area (excluding Germany) 
yield, which dropped by 13 basis points to 
0.1%. The euro area yields thus mirrored the 
decline in US interest rates to some extent, 
though they were already significantly lower 
beforehand.1 As in the United States, the accel -
erated spread of the Delta variant dampened 
expectations of a rapid economic recovery in 
the euro area.
The yield curve derived from the yields of Fed -
eral securities shifted downwards under these 
conditions and flattened out. The decline in 
longer- term yields was due to falling term pre -
mia, which can be shown using a yield curve 
model in which the changes in interest rates 
can be broken down into the components 
“term premium” and “expected monetary pol -
icy path”. This decline was primarily due to 
spillover effects of falling term premia in the 
United States, as the market- based probability 
of euro area inflation falling below 1% on aver -
age over the next five years continued to de -
crease during the reporting period. Implicitly 
expected short-  term interest rates, which re -
flect the expected interest rate stance, re -
mained virtually unchanged and did not move 
in response to the publication of the Eurosys -
tem’s new monetary policy strategy. The pre -
mium that market participants pay for the par -
ticularly high liquidity and scarcity of Federal se -
curities increased in the reporting period. Fed -
eral securities with a residual maturity of up to 
ten years were trading below the deposit facil -
ity rate of -0.5% throughout the quarter. In 
addition, the yield spread between Federal se -curities and maturity- matched bonds issued by 
the KfW widened, reflecting a liquidity pre -
mium. Lastly, interest rates in the repo markets 
pointed to a liquidity and scarcity premium on 
Federal securities.
Yield spreads between ten- year Federal bonds 
and government bonds from other euro area 
countries (GDP- weighted average excluding 
Germany) widened slightly by 7 basis points to 
55 basis points. Bucking the trend, the yield 
spreads between Greek government bonds 
and German government bonds narrowed 
somewhat and are now at a level comparable 
to the spreads on Italian government bonds. Yields in euro 
area fall due to 
interest rate link -
age with United 
States
German yield 
curve shifted 
downwards and 
flattened out
Widening of 
yield spreads in 
euro area
1 The narrowing of the yield spread between the United 
States and the euro area associated with changes in yields 
in the ten- year range may come as a surprise in view of in -
creased inflationary pressures and the prospect of monet -
ary policy tightening in the United States. This was mainly 
due to the greater decline in term premia across the Atlan -
tic. By contrast, the interest rate differential between two- 
year bonds widened, which more strongly reflects expect -
ations concerning the future orientation of monetary pol -
icy.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
49
Spreads of ten-year government bonds 
over Federal bonds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021050100150200250300350400450Basis points, daily data
Italy
Spain
Ireland FranceGreece
Portugal

Although one rating agency upgraded Greece’s 
credit rating by one notch, there was no strong 
immediate market response to this – in line 
with previous upgrades. Fundamental factors, 
such as a change in debt sustainability, had lit -
tle effect on interest rate differentials at the 
end of the period under review. One reason for 
this could have been the decisions made by the 
ECB Governing Council in January 2021, in 
which it was reiterated that the ECB would pur -
chase flexibly under the pandemic emergency 
purchase programme. Market stress indicators, 
which include liquidity indicators, also pointed 
to a relaxed market situation for government 
bonds in the euro area.
Over the course of the reporting period, yields 
on ten- year UK government bonds were down 
by 31 basis points at 0.5%. This was largely at -
tributable to the international comovement of 
interest rates, which is currently closely related 
to the pandemic situation. The Bank of Eng -
land’s decision in April to slow its pace of bond 
purchases only caused interest rates to rise 
temporarily. It left its Bank Rate at an all- time 
low of 0.1%. In Japan, ten- year government 
bond yields were within the range in which 
market observers believe the Bank of Japan 
would like to keep yields, 8 basis points lower 
at 0%. Fundamental factors have hardly had 
any impact on interest rates in Japan for some 
time.
The five- year forward inflation rates derived 
from inflation swaps starting in five years’ time 
rose to 1.7% in the euro area, 11 basis points 
higher than at the end of the first quarter. The 
announcement of the Eurosystem’s new mon -
etary policy strategy with a symmetrical infla -
tion target of 2% did not have any immediate 
impact on longer- term market- based inflation 
expectations. The inflation expectations for the 
euro area six to ten years ahead, as calculated 
by Consensus Economics in July on the basis of 
surveys, remained unchanged on balance. The 
inflation risk premium, which can more or less 
be calculated as the difference between 
market- based and survey- based expectations, Yields signifi -
cantly down in 
United Kingdom
Forward infla -
tion rates in 
euro area have 
risenDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
50
Forward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Derived  from  the  fixed  cash 
flow arising from inflation swaps which is swapped for the ac-
tual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro 
area and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised 
over the next five or ten years. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 20211.41.82.22.6Weekly averages
% p. a.
Five-year forward 
inflation rate in 
five years derived from swapsConsensus Economics inflation
expectations in six to ten years
United StatesEuro area
0.81.21.62.0
% p. a.
Short-term HICP paths for the euro area
1.00.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
––+++++++% p.a.
2020 2021 2022 2023
Sources: Fenics Market Data, Consensus Economics, Eurostat 
and Bundesbank calculations. 1 HICP excluding tobacco.
Deutsche BundesbankSurvey averages from 
Consensus EconomicsForward inflation rates
derived from inflation swapsActual
annual HICP 1
8 March 2021
9 August 2021
19 August 2021
8 March 2021
9 August 2021

remained negative, but decreased in absolute 
size. This indicates that market participants es -
timate the risk of surprisingly low inflation in 
the longer term to be lower than before.
By contrast, in the shorter term, market data 
indicated temporary further rises in inflation 
rates. According to these data, the expected 
annual rate of change in the Harmonised Index 
of Consumer Prices (HICP) in the euro area as a 
whole is set to rise to nearly 3½% by the fourth 
quarter of this year, before subsequently falling 
to under 2% by the middle of next year (see 
the lower chart on p. 50). The market- based 
patterns are thus similar to the patterns of the 
survey expectations for the euro area and the 
projection for Germany (see also p. 65); they 
reflect the same influencing factors, such as the 
base effect of the reversal of the temporary 
VAT rate reduction in Germany. It is noteworthy 
that both survey respondents and inflation 
swap traders revised their expectations up -
wards to a significant extent in recent months. 
Furthermore, for the period up to mid- 2022, 
market expectations were higher than survey 
expectations. The inflation risk premium was 
thus positive – a rare occurrence in the euro 
area in recent years, with market participants 
presumably hedging against upward risks from 
unexpectedly high future inflation. Both the 
upward revisions of market expectations and 
the current pattern of inflation rates discernible 
from market data suggest there is a risk that 
the initial surge in prices could continue and 
that inflation could rise in the medium term.
Against the backdrop of the Eurosystem’s on -
going purchase programmes, the yields on 
European corporate bonds fell significantly 
compared with the end of the first quarter of 
2021, in some cases recording new historical 
lows. Bonds issued by BBB-  rated financial cor -
porations with residual maturities of between 
seven and ten years yielded 0.8% as this report 
went to press, down 31 basis points from the 
end of March. Yields on non- financial corpor -
ate bonds also declined, falling by 20 basis 
points to 0.5%. The main driver of this devel -opment was the decline in risk- free interest 
rates. However, as the yields on maturity-  
matched Federal securities declined less 
strongly on balance, the yield spreads of Euro -
pean financial corporations over Federal bonds 
narrowed by 9 basis points. By contrast, the 
yield spreads of non- financial corporations re -
mained virtually unchanged. In line with these 
lower risk premia, the credit default premia for 
European corporations also declined compared 
with the end of the first quarter (ten- year iTraxx 
125 down 5 basis points). The financing condi -
tions of European corporations in the bond 
market therefore remained highly favourable.
At €434½ billion, gross issuance in the German 
bond market in the second quarter of 2021 
was down slightly compared with the previous 
quarter’s figure (€472½ billion). After deduct -
ing redemptions and taking into account 
changes in issuers’ holdings of their own 
bonds, net sales came to €59 billion, which 
was relatively high compared with the figures Market expect -
ation of tempor -
ary further rise 
in inflation rates 
towards end of 
2021
Corporate bond 
yields down
Continuing high 
net sales in 
bond marketDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
51
Yield spreads of corporate bonds
in the euro area*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBoxx indices with a residual maturity of seven 
to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 20210100200300400500600700800900
100200300400High yield1
BBB2
AA2
By sector
BBB financial 
corporations2
BBB non-financial corporations2By rating
categoryBasis points, daily data

prior to the coronavirus pandemic. In addition, 
foreign borrowers placed debt securities worth 
€30½ billion in the German market. Thus, 
funds totalling a net €89½ billion were raised 
in the German bond market in the period under 
review.
The public sector issued own debt securities in 
the amount of €51 billion net in the quarter 
under review. The Federal Government pre -
dominantly issued Federal bonds with a matur -
ity of ten years (€28½ billion), but also those 
with maturities of 15 years (€11 billion), 30 
years (€11 billion) and seven years (€7 billion). 
This included the first issuance of a 30- year 
green Federal bond in May, which expanded 
the maturity spectrum covered by the Federal 
Government in the green segment. In addition, 
the Federal Government issued Treasury dis -
count paper for €5 billion net and two- year 
Federal Treasury notes for €1½ billion net. State 
and local government issued debt securities 
worth €2 billion net.In the course of the second quarter, domestic 
enterprises increased their capital market bor -
rowing by €12½ billion on balance (previous 
quarter: €1½ billion). New debt securities were 
issued by non- financial corporations and other 
financial intermediaries.
By contrast, domestic credit institutions re -
deemed their own bonds to the tune of 
€4½ billion net in the quarter under review. On 
balance, the bulk of redemptions were attribut -
able to debt securities issued by specialised 
credit institutions (€8 billion). At the same time, 
the outstanding volume of bank debt securities 
and mortgage Pfandbriefe increased by 
€2½ billion net and €1½ billion net, respect -
ively.
In the second quarter of 2021, the Bundesbank 
was the main buyer in the domestic bond mar -
ket, acquiring debt securities amounting to 
€72 billion net, predominantly under the Euro -
system’s asset purchase programmes. Domes -
tic non- banks expanded their bond portfolios 
by €44 billion in net terms, with their focus on 
foreign debt securities (€36 billion). By con -
trast, domestic credit institutions and non-  
resident investors sold bonds worth €20½ bil -
lion net and €6 billion net, respectively.
Equity market
The international equity markets were also 
caught between the economic recovery, on the 
one hand, and uncertainty surrounding the 
continued spread of the Delta variant of the 
coronavirus, on the other. One factor that sup -
ported equity prices was the continued decline 
in risk- free interest rates. These reduce the dis -
count factor, which is used to value future 
profits, and thus inflate the present value of 
companies. Furthermore, optimism was gener -
ated by a positive reporting season on both 
sides of the Atlantic, with significantly higher 
than expected profits in some cases. In add -
ition, analysts once again made upward revi -
sions to their future earnings expectations. By High net public 
sector issuanceRise in enter -
prises’ capital 
market debt
Net redemptions 
by credit institu -
tions
Purchases of 
debt securities
Equity markets 
record price 
gains on both 
sides of AtlanticInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2020 2021
Q2 Q1 Q2
Debt securities
Residents 120.8 111.8 95.7
Credit institutions 24.5 10.9 – 20.4
of which:
Foreign debt securities 8.5 –  4.2 –  5.8
Deutsche Bundesbank 78.6 54.6 72.2
Other sectors 17.7 46.3 43.9
of which:
Domestic debt securities 1.7 – 10.3 7.8
Non-residents 69.0 26.6 –  6.2
Shares
Residents 26.6 18.6 34.9
Credit institutions 1.6 3.6 1.5
of which:
Domestic shares 1.7 2.6 1.5
Non-banks 25.0 14.9 33.4
of which:
Domestic shares 9.6 6.4 6.8
Non-residents – 9.0 4.2 –  1.1
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 1.2 23.9 21.4
Investment in retail funds 7.5 9.4 9.9
of which:
Equity funds 4.8 4.3 4.3
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
52

contrast, the uncertainty surrounding the con -
tinued spread of the Delta variant weighed on 
prices. The widespread confidence in the finan -
cial markets at the beginning of the second 
quarter that the end of the pandemic might 
soon be in sight gave way to worries that a 
fourth wave could materialise in the fourth 
quarter. In this regard, in Japan the relatively 
modest progress made in rolling out its corona -
virus vaccination programme and the high 
strain on the healthcare system weighed on 
equity prices. Overall, euro area stocks, as 
measured by the EURO STOXX, recorded sig -
nificant gains amounting to 7.4% compared 
with the end of March. US and German shares, 
as measured by the S&P 500 and the CDAX, 
temporarily hit historical highs, climbing by 
10.9% and 4.0% in the period under review, 
respectively. The UK’s FTSE All-  Share Index also 
recorded gains, ending 6.1% higher. By con -
trast, the Japanese Nikkei 225 fell somewhat, 
posting losses of -6.5%.
In the period under review, price changes in in -
dividual sectors deviated fairly considerably in 
some cases from those in the respective overall 
market. A typical pattern emerged that has 
been seen since the onset of the coronavirus 
crises whenever worries about the spread of 
the pandemic come back to the fore. For ex -
ample, share prices of European companies in 
the travel and leisure sector in particular, such 
as airlines and hotels, recorded significant 
losses compared with their prices at end of 
March, while shares in the IT sector outper -
formed the rest of the market. Despite a posi -
tive reporting season, US financial stocks also 
performed weakly, with shares in US banks 
posting gains of 3.0% and thus underperform -
ing the market as a whole. By contrast, shares 
in European banks posted gains of 7.4% in line 
with the overall market, not least against the 
backdrop of a successful stress test by the Euro -
pean Banking Authority.
Price uncertainty in the equity market –  as 
measured by the implied volatility of equity in -
dices calculated from options – did not change much in the period under review. While worries 
about the spread of the Delta variant tempor -
arily led to significantly greater volatility in mid- 
July, equity market uncertainty for both US and 
European stock markets was latterly only mar -
ginally higher than its respective five- year aver -
ages.
The EURO STOXX earnings yield, calculated on 
the basis of earnings forecasts for the next 12 
months, i.e. the inverse price/ earnings ratio, 
rose on its level at the end of March, indicating 
a lower relative valuation than at the end of 
the first quarter. Given the uncertainty about 
the further course of the pandemic, financial 
market participants were again demanding 
higher risk compensation (e.g. as reflected by 
the EURO STOXX) at the end of the period 
under review than at the end of March. The 
equity risk premium, which compensates in -
vestors for holding risky equities instead of safe 
Federal securities, thus remained well above its 
multi- year average. However, the lower risk-  Uneven develop -
ments across 
sectors
Stock market 
volatility virtu -
ally unchangedValuation some -
what lowerDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
53
Equity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankBank indicesBeginning of 2019 = 100, log scale, daily data
Total market indices
8090100110120130140150160170180
160
5560708090100110120130140150
2019 2020 2021Euro area
(EURO STOXX)Japan
(Nikkei 225)United States
(S&P 500)

free interest rates also need to be taken into 
account in this analysis. In recent years, falling 
safe interest rates have typically been accom -
panied by rising equity risk premia, a residual of 
the dividend discount model. Even so, the im -
plied costs of equity, i.e. the sum of safe inter -
est rates and the equity risk premium, rose in 
the period under review. Overall, the valuation 
level in the European equity market therefore 
declined somewhat. Despite the S&P 500 post -
ing considerable gains, its valuation saw a simi -
lar development, albeit one that was less pro -
nounced with regard to most indicators.
In the second quarter of 2021, domestic enter -
prises placed new shares worth €7 billion net in 
the German equity market, following €13 bil -
lion in the first three months of the year. The 
outstanding volume of foreign shares in the 
German market rose by €26½ billion net over 
the same period. On balance, equities were ac -
quired almost exclusively by German non- banks 
(€33½ billion), which also include investment 
funds. Domestic credit institutions bought such 
paper for €1½ billion net, while foreign invest -
ors reduced their equity exposure in Germany 
by €1 billion net.
Mutual funds
During the reporting period, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded inflows of €31½ bil -
lion, after raising funds totalling €33½ billion in 
the first quarter. The vast majority of the fresh 
funds were channelled to specialised funds re -
served for institutional investors (€21½ billion). 
Among the various asset classes, mixed secur -
ities funds in particular were the chief sellers of 
new fund shares (€26 billion), but equity funds 
and open- end real estate funds also placed 
new shares in the market, albeit to a lesser ex -
tent (€4½ billion and €3½ billion, respectively). 
By contrast, bond- based funds redeemed their 
own shares to the tune of €2 billion. Foreign 
funds traded in the German market attracted 
inflows totalling €25 billion net in the second 
quarter of 2021. Domestic non- banks were the Stock market 
funding and 
stock purchases
Sales and 
purchases  of 
mutual fund 
sharesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2020 2021
Q2 Q1 Q2p
I. Current account +37.3 + 66.7 +56.5 
1. Goods +27.5 + 56.0 +45.6 
2. Services + 5.6 +  3.6 + 5.0 
3. Primary income +13.1 + 27.7 +14.5 
4. Secondary income – 8.9 – 20.6 – 8.5 
II. Capital account + 0.2 –  0.2 – 1.9 
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) +28.6 +127.5 +61.8 
1. Direct investment –12.5 + 31.2 + 0.5 
Domestic investment 
abroad –10.1 + 45.5 +14.3 
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country + 2.4 + 14.3 +13.9 
2. Portfolio investment + 0.5 + 46.8 +75.7 
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities +60.6 + 77.7 +65.4 
Shares 1 +19.1 +  9.1 +10.1 
Investment fund shares 2 +15.4 + 16.8 +24.9 
of which:
Money market fund 
shares + 1.7 –  8.7 – 1.3 
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 + 3.3 +  3.6 – 5.7 
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 +22.8 + 48.2 +36.1 
of which:
Denominated in euro 5 +17.9 + 37.4 +25.6 
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities +60.1 + 30.9 –10.3 
Shares 1 – 9.0 +  4.2 – 5.2 
Investment fund shares + 0.2 +  0.1 + 1.1 
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 +35.3 + 19.5 + 0.2 
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 +33.6 +  7.1 – 6.3 
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 6 +20.8 –  1.4 –12.2 
3. Financial derivatives 7 +31.3 + 22.3 +13.5 
4. Other investment 8 + 9.1 + 26.8 –27.9 
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 9 –45.2 –105.8 –11.2 
Enterprises and 
 households 10 – 4.3 + 54.0 – 6.3 
General government – 0.4 –  1.1 – 4.4 
Bundesbank +59.1 + 79.8 – 6.1 
5. Reserve assets + 0.2 +  0.4 + 0.1 
IV. Errors and omissions 11 – 8.9 + 61.1 + 7.1 
1  Including participation certifi  cates. 2  Including reinvested 
earnings. 3  Short- term: original maturity of up to one year. 
4 Long- term: original maturity of more than one year or unlim-
ited. 5  Including outstanding foreign Deutsche  Mark bonds. 
6 Including bonds issued by the former Federal Railways, the 
former Federal Post Offi   ce and the former Treuhand agency. 
7  Balance of transactions arising from options and fi  nancial 
futures  contracts as well as employee stock options. 8 Includes 
in particular fi  nancial and trade credits as well as currency and 
deposits. 9 Excluding the Bundesbank. 10  Includes the follow-
ing sectors: fi  nancial corporations (excluding monetary fi  nancial 
institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households 
and non- profi  t institutions serving households. 11   Statistical 
errors and omissions resulting from the difference between the 
balance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the cur-
rent account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
54

main buyers, adding mutual fund shares worth 
€51½ billion to their portfolios. Domestic credit 
institutions and non- resident investors in -
creased their fund portfolios by €3½ billion net 
and €1 billion net, respectively.
Direct investment
Transactions in cross- border portfolio invest -
ment resulted in net capital exports of €75½ bil -
lion in the second quarter of 2021. Direct in -
vestment resulted in only minor capital out -
flows of €½ billion.
Direct investment abroad by enterprises domi -
ciled in Germany came to €14½ billion in the 
reporting period (previous quarter: €45½ bil -
lion). These enterprises boosted their equity capital in non- resident subsidiaries (€31 billion); 
roughly one- quarter of this amount was ac -
counted for by reinvested earnings. By con -
trast, funds flowed back to Germany via intra- 
group credit transactions (€16½ billion). The 
bulk of this was attributable to redemptions of 
financial credits by affiliated enterprises abroad 
(€15½ billion).
Foreign enterprises increased their direct invest -
ment in Germany by €14 billion in the reporting 
period, following an increase of €14½ billion in 
the first quarter. They provided, in particular, 
additional equity capital to German enterprises 
(€9½ billion), but also issued intra- group loans 
(€4½ billion). The majority of these loans were 
financial credits provided by foreign parent 
companies to their German subsidiaries.Direct invest -
ment sees low 
net capital 
exports
German direct 
investment 
abroad results in 
capital exportsForeign direct 
investment in 
Germany gener -
ates capital 
inflowsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
55

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
German gross domestic product (GDP) saw a 
fairly substantial recovery in the second quarter 
of 2021. According to the Federal Statistical 
Office’s  flash estimate, real GDP was 1.5% up 
on the quarter after seasonal adjustment. This 
did not entirely make up for the decline in the 
first quarter, however, and nor was the Bundes -
bank’s June projection fully matched. The main 
reason for the increase in the second quarter is 
that measures to contain the coronavirus pan -
demic were loosened considerably after the in -
cidence of COVID-  19 infections started falling 
sharply as of May. This benefited services sec -
tors in particular, such as hotel and restaurant 
services and parts of the bricks- and- mortar 
retail  sector. Industry, on the other hand, was 
unable to tap the healthy order books because 
bottlenecks in the supply of some intermediate goods tightened once again. Industrial output 
even dropped markedly. By contrast, the con -
struction sector grew, although here, too, there 
were increasing reports of bottlenecks in the 
supply of various building materials. Overall, 
GDP still fell short of its pre- crisis level (of the 
fourth quarter of 2019) by almost 3½%. It re -
mains to be seen whether GDP will return to its 
pre- crisis level in the third quarter already. Al -
though business in the services sectors is likely 
to expand strongly, bottlenecks in the supply of 
intermediate goods continue to represent a 
source of uncertainty, particularly for industrial 
output. To the extent that risks stemming from 
the pandemic do materialise, they are likely to 
have a greater impact only as of the fourth 
quarter. For example, the Delta variant and the 
considerable slowdown in the pace of vaccin -
ation could result in tighter restrictions being 
reimposed.
On the demand side, private consumption was 
the mainstay of the economic recovery in the 
second quarter. This reflects the fact that, as re -
strictions were loosened, it was possible again 
to take advantage of consumption opportun -
ities that had previously been unavailable. Gov -
ernment consumption is also likely to have 
risen sharply in view of spending on COVID-  19 
tests and vaccination efforts. By contrast, sup -
ply bottlenecks made a more or less significant 
dent in investment and exports. Business in -
vestment in new machinery and equipment is 
unlikely to have seen a quarter- on- quarter in -
crease, whilst exports (including exports of ser -
vices) probably likewise rose only slightly des -
pite the continued high level of demand from 
abroad.
Exports of goods stagnated in the second quar -
ter. Although exports of goods to euro area 
countries saw an increase after price and sea -
sonal adjustment, this was matched by a 
similar-sized decrease in exports to non-euro 
area countries. In terms of value, substantial Fairly steep 
growth in Ger -
man GDP in Q2
Consumption up 
sharply; invest -
ment and 
exports throttled 
by supply bottle -
necks
Exports of 
goods stagnant 
overall, but 
picture  mixedDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
56
Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Price 
and calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 21949698100102104106108
–12–9–6–30+3+6+9Price and seasonally adjusted
2015 = 100, log scale
GDP
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1

declines on the first quarter were recorded in 
particular for exports to India and other emer -
ging market economies in South and East Asia, 
and there was at least a marked decline in the 
value of exports to China. By contrast, exports 
to the United States, whose economy con -
tinued to grow strongly on account of the eas -
ing of containment measures and expansionary 
fiscal policy, remained at a high level. The value 
of exports to the United Kingdom also rose 
again somewhat, having fallen sharply at the 
beginning of the year. The transitional arrange -
ments for cross- border transactions in goods 
put in place after the United Kingdom’s with -
drawal from the EU expired at the turn of the 
year. Broken down by category of goods, there 
was a decline in exports of capital goods, par -
ticularly in the automotive sector, according to 
the value- based figures available up to May. 
However, exports of intermediate and con -
sumer goods saw an increase once again. In 
the breakdown by sector, the strong growth in 
exports of pharmaceutical products is particu -
larly striking. Coronavirus vaccines produced in 
Germany for export are also likely to have had 
an impact here.
Business investment in machinery and equip -
ment is likely to have declined in the second 
quarter. Less machinery and equipment was 
sourced from both Germany and abroad. In 
seasonally adjusted terms, the value of capital 
goods imports therefore decreased again on an 
average of April and May compared with the 
first quarter. In addition, manufacturers of cap -
ital goods also experienced a drop in domestic 
sales, with the German automotive industry, in 
particular, again recording huge losses in some 
cases. There was also a sharp decline in turn -
over in other transport equipment. By contrast, 
manufacturers of computers, electronic and 
optical products as well as manufacturers of 
machinery recorded significant sales growth.
Construction investment is likely to have grown 
only slightly in the second quarter. On an aver -
age of April and May, turnover figures in the 
main construction sector available up to May were considerably higher than in the previous 
quarter after seasonal adjustment. This is true 
of both housing construction and commercial 
and industrial construction. However, the re -
turn of the VAT rates to their higher levels and 
the exceptionally poor weather conditions in 
January and February had been a heavy burden 
on the construction sector in the first quarter, 
meaning a strong countermovement was 
therefore to be expected. That said, ifo Insti -
tute surveys show that the construction sector 
is beset by materials shortages. These short -
ages contributed to part of the increase in sales 
being negated by sharply rising construction 
prices. Furthermore, turnover in the main con -Probable 
decrease in busi -
ness investment 
in machinery 
and equipment
Construction 
investment likely 
to have risen 
only marginallyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
57
708090100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 21758090100110
90100110120Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
to euro area countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted 1758090100110
€ bnto non-euro area countriesof which:Monthly

struction sector has fluctuated relatively 
strongly since May 2020. Turnover figures are 
less suitable as an indicator of real construction 
investment during such phases.1
Private consumption made a swift recovery 
owing to the falling incidence of COVID-  19 in -
fections as of May and the subsequent easing 
of many protective measures. For instance, real 
turnover in the hotel and restaurant industry 
saw a month-on-month increase of around 
one-sixth in May, after seasonal adjustment, 
followed by another increase of over 60% in 
June. It had positively plummeted in the first 
quarter due to the strict and prolonged meas -
ures to protect against the coronavirus. Retail 
also flourished as restrictions were relaxed, 
with real turnover in June almost reaching the 
record level seen in November 2020. According 
to data provided by the German Association of 
the Automotive Industry (VDA), the number of 
new private passenger car registrations climbed 
only slightly.
Imports of goods to Germany recorded robust 
growth in the second quarter in price- adjusted 
terms. They were mainly buoyed by imports 
from non- euro area countries. By contrast, im -
ports from the euro area stagnated. In terms of 
value, total imports grew even more steeply. As 
in the first quarter, import prices rose consider -
ably, particularly on account of higher energy 
prices. This also had a noticeable effect on the 
value of imports from the Organization of the 
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), which 
recorded a very sizeable increase. Imports from 
the United Kingdom also rebounded strongly. 
They broadly reached the level recorded in the 
fourth quarter of 2020 following the slump at 
the beginning of this year when transitional 
arrange ments for cross- border transactions in 
goods put in place after the United Kingdom 
left the EU came to an end. Broken down by 
category of goods, intermediate and consumer 
goods were responsible for the particularly 
steep rise in imports in terms of value. Pharma -
ceutical products recorded steep growth, an 
area that includes, for example, imported coronavirus vaccines. But imports of chemical 
products and metals and fabricated metal 
products also saw a sharp increase. By contrast, 
imports of capital goods fell due to declining 
motor vehicle imports.
Sectoral trends
The bottlenecks in the supply of intermediate 
goods and some commodities made a signifi -
cant dent in German industry in the second 
quarter of 2021. The previous swift recovery of 
the industrial sector had already been stalled by 
bottlenecks in the first quarter. Despite persist -
ently high demand, industrial output actually 
declined in the second quarter. According to an 
ifo Institute survey, in July almost two- thirds of 
industrial enterprises reported that their pro -
duction was being hampered due to materials 
shortages, considerably exceeding the record 
high seen in April again. Suppliers’ delivery 
times recorded by IHS Markit also indicate that 
there was a further severe worsening of supply 
bottlenecks compared with the first quarter. In 
fact, delivery times saw the greatest increase 
since the survey began in 1996. The automo -
tive sector was particularly hard hit as a result, 
with output falling again considerably in com -
parison with the already weak first quarter. This 
was chiefly due to the shortage of semicon -
ductors. Excluding the automotive industry, 
industrial  production remained at the level of 
the previous quarter. However, many other 
branches of the capital goods sector were also 
unable to maintain their production level. 
Manufactures of computer, electronic and op -
tical products were an exception in this regard. 
Producers of intermediate and consumer 
goods, on the other hand, recorded marked 
growth in some cases. As far as intermediate 
goods are concerned, this mainly included Sharp rise in 
private  con -
sumption in 
second quarter
Imports of 
goods also up 
substantiallyIndustrial output 
still subdued on 
account of sup -
ply bottlenecks
1 In the national accounts, construction investment is de -
fined as gross fixed capital formation in construction works 
for new buildings, conversions and extensions. The main 
construction sector only accounted for just over one- third 
of construction investment in 2020. See Hauptverband der 
Deutschen Bauindustrie  (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
58

manufacturers of paper and paper products as 
well as manufacturers of electrical equipment. 
In the consumer goods sector, growth in out -
put was broadly spread amongst its various 
segments.
According to the ifo Institute, capacity utilisa -
tion of tangible fixed assets in manufacturing 
rose quite strongly again between the surveys 
in April and July. In July it almost reached its 
historical maximum seen in April 2008. Only 
manufacturers of capital goods recorded a sig -
nificant decline in capacity utilisation in line 
with the drop in their production figures. How -
ever, overall the high utilisation of tangible 
fixed assets is somewhat at odds with the weak 
level of industrial output. In this context, the 
question arises as to what extent slightly re -
duced capacities at present – even compared 
with before the pandemic – are keeping cap -
acity utilisation high. It is possible that moth -
balled equipment has not been put back into 
full operation and that investment has been 
postponed in some cases. Furthermore, ac -
cording to the ifo Institute, an increasing num -
ber of enterprises are complaining of produc -
tion hold- ups caused by a lack of skilled labour.
In the second quarter, construction output rose 
considerably compared with the first quarter in 
seasonally adjusted terms. Although a certain 
countermovement was to be expected follow -
ing the previous quarter, which was depressed 
by one- off effects, the extent of this growth is 
striking as, according to ifo Institute surveys, 
construction activity was increasingly hindered 
by materials shortages. Nonetheless, according 
to the ifo Institute, the level of equipment util -
isation in the main construction sector was 
persistently  high. Overall, construction activity 
therefore remained intact despite shortages of 
various building materials. This applies to all 
segments of the construction sector. In particu -
lar, strong output growth was seen in the main 
construction sector and its sub- sectors – build -
ing construction and civil engineering  – but 
also in the finishing trades.Many services sectors benefited considerably 
from the easing of measures to protect against 
the coronavirus. Economic activity picked up 
rapidly from May, after the protective measures 
linked to the local incidence of COVID-  19 infec -
tions were eased relatively quickly. The hotel 
and restaurant services sector saw a particularly 
substantial recovery, but significant growth was 
also seen in the wholesale trade and, in par -
ticular, in the retail sector. Some retail segments 
that were previously affected by the measures 
to protect against the coronavirus expanded 
strongly. For example, in seasonally and 
calendar- adjusted terms, sales at bricks- and- 
mortar clothing stores almost doubled com -
pared with the first quarter. By contrast, other 
parts of the retail sector that had previously 
benefited were unable to increase sales further. 
This included online and mail order trade, as 
was the case when measures were eased a 
year ago. A similar pattern was seen for trade 
in food, beverages and tobacco products, 
where sales actually declined significantly in the Capacity 
utilisation  in the 
industrial sector 
at a high level
Significant 
increase in con -
struction outputConsiderable 
increase in 
activity  in ser -
vices sectorsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
59
Output in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 21707580859095100105110
951001051101151201251301351401452015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data, log scale
MonthlyIndustry
Main constructionIndustry excluding
automotive
Construction1

second quarter. Wholesale trade saw robust 
sales growth in April and in May (the most re -
cent month for which statistics are available). 
ifo Institute surveys assessing the situation at 
wholesalers indicate uninterrupted good busi -
ness in June. Even the motor vehicle industry, 
which was hard hit by supply bottlenecks (and 
for which statistics are available up to May) is 
likely to have regained some ground in terms 
of turnover relative to the particularly bad first 
quarter. While many potential buyers of new 
vehicles refrained from making such purchases 
on account of long delivery times, they increas -
ingly showed an interest in the used car mar -
ket. According to data provided by the German 
Association of the Automotive Industry (VDA), 
the number of vehicle title transfers rose signifi -
cantly. Motor vehicle dealers are also likely to 
have benefited from the flourishing used car 
market. Sales of new vehicles, by contrast, re -
mained exceptionally low. VDA data indicate 
that new car registrations by private and com -
mercial owners in the second quarter were only 
marginally higher than in the previous quarter. 
Economic output in other services is likely to 
have increased. According to the ifo Institute’s 
survey results, the situation here thus improved 
substantially in the second quarter.
Labour market
The economic recovery that got under way in 
the second quarter of 2021 was initially re -
flected in the labour market by an uptick in 
hours worked. The main reason for this was 
that short- time work, which was highly preva -
lent in the first quarter due to the crisis, de -
creased. It was only towards the end of the 
quarter under review that employment began 
to see stronger growth and unemployment 
started to rapidly decline. Leading indicators 
suggest that this favourable development will 
continue over the coming months.
There was a steep decline in the number of 
employees in short- time work for economic 
reasons. According to an initial estimate by the Federal Employment Agency, this figure de -
clined by one- third from a peak in February of 
this year, dropping to 2.23 million people by 
May. As the average loss of working hours per 
short- time worker also decreased somewhat, 
the volume of work lost contracted by as much 
as 40% within the space of three months. Be -
cause many pandemic- related protective meas -
ures have since been relaxed, it is likely that 
enterprises  made significantly less use of short- 
time work schemes in the months that fol -
lowed as well. Based on its own economic sur -
veys amongst enterprises, the ifo Institute esti -
mates that the number of short-  time workers 
had decreased to 1.06 million by July. Further -
more, the number of registrations for short-  
time work has fallen to a very moderate level 
overall over the past few months. That said, ac -
cording to the data up to 25 July, registrations 
in the manufacturing sector have edged up re -
cently. The persistent shortage of specific inter -
mediate goods, which has hindered produc -
tion, is likely to have had an impact  here.
The number of persons employed initially rose 
only slightly, as the economic recovery seen 
since March chiefly resulted in short- time work 
at firms being scaled back. Only in June did em -
ployment begin to experience stronger growth. 
Overall employment on an average of the 
second quarter of 2021 stood at a compara -
tively moderate 75,000 persons above the level 
of the previous quarter in seasonally adjusted 
terms, representing an increase of just under 
0.2%. The long- standing negative trend in self- 
employment eased at least slightly in the 
second quarter. Data for persons in exclusively 
low- paid part- time employment and employ -
ment subject to social security contributions 
are only available up to May, and therefore do 
not capture the substantial rise in employment 
seen in June. While the number of persons 
solely in mini- jobs declined up to May, employ -
ment subject to social security contributions 
saw further slight growth.
Employment subject to social security contribu -
tions had already begun to rise again –  bol -Labour market 
started to 
bounce back 
strongly towards 
end of Q2Substantial 
decline in short- 
time work since 
February; supply 
bottlenecks 
potentially 
behind recent 
increase in 
notifications  of 
short- time work 
in manufactur -
ing sector
Stronger growth 
in employment 
only as of JuneDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
60

stered by short- time work – after the first wave 
of the pandemic, almost reaching its pre-  crisis 
level by May 2021. However, this masks signifi -
cant sectoral shifts resulting from the pan -
demic. The hotel and restaurant sector has 
been by far the hardest hit, with one in six jobs 
being lost on account of long- term closures 
over the past 15 months.2 Here, there are also 
reports of labour shortages as establishments 
attempt to reopen.3 A portion of existing staff 
but also potential new staff are likely to have 
shifted to other sectors less significantly af -
fected by the crisis.4 The same applies to the 
arts, entertainment, recreation and other per -
sonal services, in which the share of jobs with 
full social security is even lower than in the 
hotel and restaurant sector. In the production 
sector (excluding construction), the absolute 
number of jobs declined to a similar extent as 
in the hotel and restaurant sector (-2½%). Em -
ployment had already declined in this area due 
to weak industrial activity in 2019. The crisis 
only exacerbated this. Despite the early recov -
ery seen in industry, employment does not ap -
pear to have reached its lowest point until the 
second quarter of 2021. By contrast, the tem -
porary employment sector had already started 
hiring again in the third quarter of last year. 
Staff in this sector, which is particularly affected 
by cyclical fluctuations, are frequently em -
ployed in manufacturing. The pandemic had a 
widely varying impact on the retail sector. Over -
all, employment in this area saw relatively little 
change during the crisis, and latterly stood only 
slightly below its pre- crisis levels. Sectors con -
cerned with the provision of basic public ser -
vices recorded a substantial rise in employ -
ment: 3% in health and social services and 
more than 4% in public administration since 
the start of 2020. Demand for IT professionals 
and construction staff was also consistently Employment 
subject to social 
security contri -
butions almost 
back to pre- 
crisis levels, but 
large differences 
in recovery 
process  across 
sectors
2 In the hotel and restaurant sector, low- paid part- time 
work also plays a prominent role. Here, job losses have 
been much greater still.
3 For example, the ifo Institute has reported considerable 
shortages of skilled labour at hotels and guesthouses. See 
ifo Institute (2021).
4 See German Hotel and Catering Association (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
61
Labour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021July43.043.544.044.545.045.5
30.531.031.532.032.533.033.534.0–1,000–5000+500+1,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–400–2000+200+400+600JulySeasonally adjusted, quarterly data
JulyMillion
Million
Million400600800Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered
unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployment
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies 2EmployedJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Apr./
May

high. In these sectors, employment increased 
by around 4% and 2% respectively.
Registered unemployment has recently fallen 
significantly. In the second quarter of 2021, it 
declined by 26,000 people in seasonally ad -
justed terms, or 0.1  percentage point. Un -
employment only began to decline significantly 
in June and then fell very sharply in July, de -
creasing by 0.2 percentage point to its present 
level of 5.7%. This was chiefly attributable to a 
contraction in the cyclically sensitive statutory 
unemployment insurance system. By contrast, 
unemployment covered by the basic welfare 
allowance  remained close to its crisis peak.
The leading indicators for the labour market 
currently suggest that employment will con -
tinue to recover over the next few months. The 
ifo employment barometer, which reflects re -
cruitment plans in trade and industry for the 
next three months, is well into expansionary 
territory, as is the employment barometer of the Institute for Employment Research (IAB). 
Yet in July, expectations regarding the speed of 
recovery were scaled back somewhat on the 
previous month. Both the freshly subdued ex -
pectations regarding the incidence of infec -
tions owing to the Delta variant and persistent 
delivery problems for some intermediate goods 
may have contributed to this. However, the 
number of vacancies has recently seen fairly 
reliable  growth, already returning to its level of 
the fourth quarter of 2019, which had, how -
ever, been subdued by the economic slow -
down. The IAB’s unemployment barometer is 
currently at its most favourable level ever. This 
reflects the fact that aside from a cyclically in -
duced decrease in unemployment, there is also 
the potential for greater implementation of 
labour  market policy measures. It became ne -
cessary to significantly restrict the latter in the 
wake of the pandemic, meaning that partici -
pants ended up in open unemployment at that 
time.
Wages and prices
In the second quarter, the increase in negoti -
ated wages was stronger than in the previous 
quarter. Taking into account additional bene -
fits, negotiated wages were up by 2.2% on the 
year in the second quarter of 2021, compared 
with only 1.4% previously. This was chiefly due 
to large special coronavirus payments being 
made in a number of sectors.5 However, basic 
rates of pay again grew only moderately in the 
second quarter. Here, a particular impact could 
be seen from the months without a pay rise in 
larger sectors governed by wage agreements 
from the current year and from previous years. 
On the other hand, actual earnings probably 
went up by more than negotiated wages over -
all in the second quarter due to a substantial Significant 
decline in 
unemployment 
of late
Leading indica -
tors indicate 
strong confi -
denceNegotiated 
wage growth 
stronger in Q2 
than in Q1; 
actual earnings 
growth possibly 
even stronger
5 The Federal Ministry of Finance initially extended the tax 
and social security contribution- free status of coronavirus 
special payments for employees made in 2020 until the 
end of June 2021, and then once more until the end of 
March 2022. The ceiling for tax and social security contri -
bution exemption was restricted to €1,500 per employee.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
62
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 20210.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
–+++++++Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Per-
centage
points
–4–20+2%
Q1Wage drift1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 Wage drift 
is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual earn-
ings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche BundesbankQuarterly
data

reduction in short- time work and a correspond -
ing increase in the number of hours worked 
per employed person. Wage drift is therefore 
also likely to have left negative territory again 
for the first time since the start of the pan -
demic.
Only a few wage agreements were made in the 
reporting quarter, and these were moderate. A 
relatively high number of months without a 
pay rise has initially been agreed for Volkswa -
gen and the automobile trade and service sec -
tor. In return, substantial special coronavirus 
payments have been arranged in both cases. 
This will dampen scheduled increases in rates 
of pay but will still lead to a pay rise for em -
ployees. The focus of the social partners’ atten -
tion was on preserving jobs. Furthermore, ex -
panded options to convert additional remuner -
ation or wage increases into extra days off also 
played a role.
Wage negotiations have been under way for 
some time between Deutsche Bahn and train 
drivers’ union GDL, in the retail sector, in 
wholesale and foreign trade, at public and pri -
vate banks and in the main construction sector. 
Here, too, the wage demands brought to the 
table by unions have been lower than in previ -
ous years. Even so, the dispute between Deut-
sche Bahn  and GDL has led to nationwide 
strikes. Furthermore, negotiations in the retail 
sector in particular are proving complex due to 
the sector’s extremely heterogeneous situation. 
While food retailers benefited from the pan -
demic and some large food retailers have al -
ready pre- empted future wage increases with -
out further consultations with wage bargain -
ers, the economic situation of textile and fash -
ion retailers, for example, is much more 
strained.
The general statutory minimum wage stood at 
€9.50 per hour at the end of the second quar -
ter and was raised by 1.1% to €9.60 per hour 
on 1 July 2021. The gap between it and the 
nearest generally binding sector- specific min -
imum wage level in waste management (€10.25) and in temporary employment 
(€10.45) thus narrowed slightly.
In the second quarter of 2021, consumer price 
inflation (Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
(HICP)) increased markedly as a general trend. 
At 1% on the quarter in seasonally adjusted 
terms, the inflation surge was not as strong as 
in the first quarter. However, the reversal of the 
temporary VAT reduction and the newly intro -
duced carbon prices as part of the climate 
package placed strong upward pressure on 
prices at the start of the year. Disregarding 
these one- off effects in the first quarter, the 
seasonally adjusted rate of change in the Few and moder -
ate wage agree -
ments in Q2
Current wage 
negotiations 
complicated in 
some cases
Rise in general 
minimum wage 
to €9.60 per 
hourConsumer prices 
in Q2 see sharp 
quarter- on- 
quarter growthDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
63
Consumer prices*
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. * Har-
monised Index of Consumer Prices.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021981001021041061081102015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data, log scale
%98100102104106108
9698100102104106108110
–10+1+2+3Lin scale
Total
Year-on-year change
(not seasonally adjusted)Total
ServicesNon-energy industrial goods
July

second quarter saw its sharpest increase since 
the second quarter of 2019.
Prices went up in all major components of the 
HICP . In the case of energy, the price dynamics 
resulted from higher crude oil prices, which 
again surpassed pre-  crisis levels on average 
over the quarter. Consumer prices for food 
were similarly affected by agricultural producer 
prices, which had risen significantly, probably 
partly due to unfavourable weather conditions. 
Prices for non- energy industrial goods went up 
surprisingly strongly as of May. It appears that 
price increases at the earlier stages of the pri -
cing chain, which were caused not only by 
robust  demand but also by bottlenecks along 
supply chains, were passed on to consumers to 
a considerable extent. Another potential factor 
here is that, after reopening, businesses 
charged higher prices in an attempt to recoup 
some of the losses they incurred as a result of 
having to close due to the pandemic. This has 
probably been the case for clothing and shoes in particular. Prices of services likewise went up 
quite substantially. The aim of compensating 
for losses suffered during the shutdown is likely 
to have had an impact here, too. In addition, it 
was relatively easy to push through higher 
prices due to the pent- up demand on the part 
of consumers. Prices for accommodation ser -
vices in Germany or for restaurant visits went 
up markedly in June, for example. However, 
price increases for services were also driven by 
air travel and package holidays, for which 
prices still had to be largely estimated (im -
puted) due to the restrictions that continued to 
be in force at the time.6
Annual inflation increased overall from 1.7% in 
the first quarter to 2.2% in the second quarter 
– and this was in spite of a one- off statistical 
effect no longer pushing up inflation as it had 
in the first quarter. This effect resulted from the 
significant change made to the weight used for 
package holidays in the HICP basket at the turn 
of 2020-21.7 As this one- off effect had no im -
pact in the second quarter, core inflation ex -
cluding food and energy declined from 1.8% to 
1.3%. If the volatile components of travel and 
clothing are also removed from the equation, 
the rate stayed virtually constant at 1.5% on a 
quarterly average. However, from April to June 
it increased from 1.4% to 1.7%.
Inflation rose further in July. After seasonal ad -
justment, HICP inflation was up by 0.6% com -
pared with June, with prices in all major sub-  
components distinctly higher again. Annual in -
flation surged overall from 2.1% to 3.1%, as 
price levels in the same month of the previous 
year were down markedly due to the tempor -
ary reduction in VAT rates. However, this price- 
driving base effect was counteracted by the 
aforementioned one- off statistical effect. In 
contrast to the first quarter, it did not push the 
headline rate up in July but dampened it by 
¾ percentage point. The weakening effect had 
an even stronger impact on the core rate and Increase in 
prices broadly 
basedInflation rate 
higher
Stronger infla -
tion in July, 
annual rate 
higher too due 
to VAT base 
effect
6 See Federal Statistical Office (2021).
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
64
Impact of selected one-off effects on the 
inflation rate
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 
1 Change in the contribution of the HICP sub-index for pack-
age holidays owing to a change in the weighting of this sub-
component in 2021 compared to 2020.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND
20211.00.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
––+++++++
Contributions of the one-off effects 
in percentage pointsYear-on-year percentage change
HICP
HICP excluding one-off effects
Change to weighting of package holidays1
VAT base effect

more or less offset the VAT base effect. The 
core rate rose from 1.2% to 1.8% as a result of 
the recent greater price momentum. Annual in -
flation as measured by the national consumer 
price index (CPI), which is unaffected by the 
statistical effect, went from 2.3% to 3.8% 
overall.
The reported rate of inflation is set to increase 
further as the year goes on. This is partly be -
cause the one- off statistical effect, which in the 
current month still has a similarly strong damp -
ening effect as in July, will weaken distinctly in 
September and October, then become slightly 
positive in November before finally ceasing to 
apply in December. As things currently stand, 
inflation rates of between 4% and 5% are pos -
sible at the end of the year. At the beginning of 
2022, inflation is likely to stabilise again mark -
edly, mainly because the price- driving base ef -
fect caused by the temporary reduction in the 
VAT rates will be eliminated. Nonetheless, infla -
tion of above 2% could persist up to the mid -
dle of 2022.
Order books and outlook
Economic output in Germany is set for strong 
expansion in the third quarter of 2021, at a rate 
that will far surpass the growth recorded in the 
second quarter (see the box on pp. 66 f.). The 
main reason for this is the considerable easing 
of containment measures as of mid- May, which 
is having a stronger and, in particular, more 
prolonged impact in the current quarter than in 
the second quarter. The main sectors to benefit 
from the loosening of restrictions are especially 
hard- hit services sectors such as hotel and res -
taurant services, travel services and parts of the 
bricks-  and- mortar retail sector. In industry and 
the main construction sector, order books are 
well filled. There are initial signs that the supply 
bottlenecks for certain intermediate goods and 
commodities are at least not worsening as sig -
nificantly as they were in the second quarter. 
The infrastructure and production capacity des -
troyed in areas affected by the flood disaster Very high 
inflation  rates 
expected for a 
time at year- end
Economic 
output  set for 
strong expan -
sion in Q3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
65
Demand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2165708090100110120
–30–20–100+10+20+30+40+50
60708090100110120
120
65708090100110
90100110120130140
–100+10+20Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
DomesticInternationalLog scale
of which:Log scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Main construction orders
%%Total
Monthly

Estimating real monthly gross domestic product for Germany  
and applying it in the short- term economic forecast
Since March 2020, economic activity in Ger-
many has to a large extent been deter-
mined by the coronavirus pandemic and 
the measures taken to contain it. This has 
led to sharp fl  uctuations in aggregate out-
put even within individual quarters. For this 
reason, high- frequency and timely observa-
tions of economic activity have since taken 
on particular signifi  cance. However, real 
gross domestic product (GDP) for Germany 
is only published as a quarterly aggregate, 
and with a considerable time lag at that. In 
order to get a better picture of macroeco-
nomic developments within a specifi  c quar-
ter without a long time lag, monthly GDP is 
estimated using monthly economic indica-
tors. In a fi  rst step, the already published 
seasonally adjusted quarterly GDP data are 
broken down (interpolated) into monthly 
data using seasonally adjusted indicator 
variables.1 In a second step, the monthly 
GDP path is extrapolated using the same in-
dicators. This is done using the forecast 
models2 already established in the business 
cycle analysis and expert assessments. The 
indicator variables used are comprised of 
fi  ve economic indicators closely linked to GDP or its individual components: industrial 
output, price- adjusted retail sales, price- 
adjusted goods exports, output in the main 
construction sector and price- adjusted turn-
over in the hotel and restaurant industry.3
An advantage of this procedure over the 
weekly activity index (WAI),4 which also 
provides a timely picture of developments 
in aggregate economic output, is thus that 
it is additionally suitable for forecasting.5 
Furthermore, the estimated monthly GDP is 
easier to interpret than the WAI, which pro-
vides a rolling 13- week growth rate of eco-
nomic activity. Quarter- on- quarter growth, 
which is frequently the main focus of inter-
est, therefore only becomes apparent at the 
end of a given quarter. For the same rea-
son, the WAI reacts relatively sluggishly to 
abrupt changes. By contrast, as a weekly 
index, the WAI has the advantage of allow-
ing an even earlier estimation of current 
economic developments. Furthermore, the 
indicators that feed into it do not have to 
be extrapolated.
1 The interpolation method used is that developed by 
Chow and Lin (1971). An unobserved monthly GDP 
series (the state variable) is estimated based on 
monthly indicator variables using a state space model. 
Here, the observation equation of the state space 
model ensures that the quarterly average of estimated 
monthly GDP corresponds to quarterly GDP . The model 
is estimated using the Kalman fi  lter. For the application 
of the procedure to the euro area, see Mönch and Uh-
lig (2005), and regarding the beginning of the corona-
virus crisis, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a).
2 For a description of the established models, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).
3 In choosing the indicator variables, account was 
taken of their explanatory power with regard to the 
estimation of monthly GDP , the sign and stability of 
the estimated parameters and the quality of the ex-
trapolation.
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b) and www.
bundesbank.de/wai
5 However, it is fairly simple to use the WAI to gener-
ate “nowcasts” for GDP , i.e. estimates for the current 
quarter. See Eraslan and Götz (202 1).Estimated monthly GDP
80859095100105Q4 2019 =100, price and seasonally adjusted, log scale
J FMAM J J A S OND J FMAM J J A S
2020 2021
Source: Bundesbank calculations using Federal Statistical Office 
data. From July 2021, Bundesbank projection.
Deutsche BundesbankQuarterly average
Quarter-on-quarter
percentage change + 3.3
 + 1.5
Projection – 2.1 + 0.7 + 9.0 – 1.8
 – 10.0Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
66

represent an additional, but from a macroeco -
nomic perspective probably manageable, drag 
on the economy.8 All in all, it remains to be 
seen whether GDP will reach its pre- crisis level 
in the third quarter already or whether this will 
be a fourth-quarter event. There is uncertainty 
surrounding the further economic impact of 
the pandemic. For example, the Delta variant 
and vaccination slowdown could result in 
tighter restrictions being reimposed. However, 
this could then be expected to weigh more 
heavily on the economy in the fourth quarter. 
Not least in view of lower than expected 
growth in the first half of 2021, economic 
growth could, as things now stand, be slightly 
lower on average for the year than foreseen in 
the June projection.
The sentiment prevailing in the German econ -
omy is favourable. However, somewhat less 
optimistic expectations resulted in the ifo busi -
ness climate index falling slightly in July from a 
high level. That said, the somewhat subdued expectations also have to be seen against the 
broad- based improvement in the assessment of 
the current situation during recent months. 
This somewhat mixed development overall is 
mirrored in most sectors. Only in the retail 
trade sector (including motor vehicle trade) 
was there also a deterioration in the assess -
ment of the current situation. By contrast, in 
the main construction sector, both the assess -
ment of the current situation and expectations 
continued to improve in July. The rating of the 
current situation improved sharply in the hotel 
and restaurant sector and in retail, owing to 
the easing of restrictions in June and July, and 
recently surpassed the assessment made in the 
third quarter of 2020. Expectations in the hotel 
and restaurant sector, in particular, deteriorated 
significantly, however, with the spread of the 
Delta variant possibly sparking fears of a fourth Business climate 
in German econ -
omy favourable, 
but no further 
improvement 
of late due to 
somewhat less 
optimistic 
expectationsEstimated monthly GDP fell by 7% in March 
2020 compared with February of the same 
year. In April it dropped again, this time by 
more than 11%. These declines were attrib-
utable to the fi  rst wave of the coronavirus 
pandemic and the measures taken to con-
tain it. After these measures were eased, 
GDP grew continuously in the months that 
followed. However, due to the resurgence 
of the pandemic and the gradual tightening 
of containment measures, it contracted 
again in November and December 2020, as 
well as in January 2021. It then recovered 
somewhat in the remainder of the fi  rst 
quarter of 2021. In April, i.e. at the begin-
ning of the second quarter, the economy 
suffered a further signifi  cant setback as the 
third wave of the pandemic took hold. 
Nevertheless, the containment measures 
were swiftly loosened again as of about 
mid- May, after which economic activity re-
corded strong growth. In June, GDP was es-timated to be just over 2% higher than the 
average for the second quarter. This statis-
tical carry- over effect shows how high 
quarter- on- quarter GDP growth would be 
in the third quarter if the activity level 
reached in June were to remain unchanged 
until September.
Alongside other information sources, such 
as the results of the established models and 
the WAI, this model has been used at the 
Bundesbank for some time now to create a 
short- term forecast for German GDP . Ac-
cording to the model, GDP in the third 
quarter could grow by just over 3% on the 
quarter, thus seeing it return to its pre- crisis 
level even before the summer is out.
8 By contrast, the positive effects for economic activity re -
sulting from the measures for rebuilding are likely to be 
spread out over a longer period.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
67

wave of the pandemic with new restrictions. 
On the one hand, in July almost two-  thirds of 
enterprises in industry complained of disrup -
tions due to supply bottlenecks,9 and produc -
tion plans were somewhat less optimistic, too. 
On the other, the assessment of the current 
situation improved and the dampening impact 
of suppliers’ delivery times declined slightly ac -
cording to surveys conducted by IHS Markit in 
June and July.
Industrial orders rose again fairly steeply in 
price and seasonally adjusted terms from the 
already very high level posted in the first quar -
ter. Seeing as output flagged at the same time 
on the back of bottlenecks in the supply of 
some intermediate goods, the stock of orders 
that have not yet been processed continued to 
grow. According to information provided by 
the Federal Statistical Office, the level of orders 
in the second quarter considerably surpassed 
the already high level of the first quarter. The 
results of surveys by the ifo Institute on order books confirm this finding. Broken down by re -
gion, orders from the euro area partner coun -
tries were up particularly steeply this time, in 
contrast to the first quarter. Economic activity 
in this area picked up markedly during the 
second quarter, not least on account of the 
easing of measures to protect against the 
coronavirus. Demand for German goods also 
benefited from this. New orders from non- euro 
area countries declined slightly, however. The 
strongest growth in new orders was recorded 
for consumer and capital goods, with manu -
facturers of other transport equipment, ma -
chinery and electronic equipment benefiting in 
particular. Shipbuilding, which is included 
under other transport equipment, recently re -
ceived a large domestic order of considerable 
size. In addition, motor vehicle manufacturers 
also enjoyed more new orders. By contrast, 
manufacturers of chemical and pharmaceutical 
products saw a fall in new orders compared 
with the first quarter.
The construction sector is also likely to grow in 
the third quarter. New orders were down again 
in the main construction sector, with a rise re -
corded only in housing construction and public 
building construction after a weak first quarter. 
Nevertheless, construction activity remains in -
tact. According to the ifo Institute’s survey, the 
reach of existing orders even expanded some -
what in the past few months. Equipment util -
isation likewise remained high in July and was 
well above its long- term average. The pro -
nounced materials shortages pose a risk. Ac -
cording to the ifo Institute, however, the dis -
ruptions they caused were at least not exacer -
bated in July, but tailed off slightly for the first 
time in a long while.
Private consumption will also remain the most 
important pillar of the exceptionally steep eco -
nomic growth expected in the third quarter. 
The easing of containment measures are a key Situation in 
industry still 
very positiveIncoming orders 
in construction 
down, but con -
struction activity 
still intact and 
on an upward 
trajectory
9 Association of German Chambers of Commerce and In -
dustry (DIHK) also reported widespread materials short -
ages. See Association of German Chambers of Industry and 
Commerce (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
68
Supply-side bottlenecks
Sources: ifo Institute and IHS Markit. 1 Percentage of enter-
prises in manufacturing and the main construction sector re-
porting that their production / activity was experiencing disrup-
tions due to materials shortages. 2 Inverted scale; values lower 
than 50 are indicative of longer delivery times.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21010203040506070
10
20
30
40
50
60
70PMI – delivery times 2
in manufacturing
(seasonally adjusted, 50 = no change)ifo – disruptions to production/
construction activity – 
material shortages1Monthly data
%
Manufacturing (quarterly data)
Construction

factor, mainly because the consumption oppor -
tunities thus freed up again will have a much 
longer-lasting impact in the current than in the 
previous quarter. The consumer sentiment indi -
cator forecast by the market research institu -
tion Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung (GfK)  
for the month of August is significantly higher 
than the average of the second quarter. Con -
sumers’ propensity to consume, as surveyed by 
the GfK, has also risen steadily since the easing of measures in May. By contrast, the current 
sharper rise in prices is having a negative im -
pact.10 Private consumption would also be 
dampened if containment measures have to be 
tightened again due to a strong fourth wave of 
the pandemic. However, it is likely this would 
primarily affect the fourth quarter.Private con -
sumption likely 
to remain most 
important pillar 
of economic 
growth in third 
quarter
List of references
Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce (2021), Engpässe treffen die  
deutsche Wirtschaft in ganzer Breite, DIHK- Blitzumfrage zeigt Rohstoffmangel in fast allen Be -
reichen , 19  August 2021, https://www.dihk.de/de/themen-und-positionen/wirtschaftspolitik/
konjunktur-und-wachstum/blitzumfrage-lieferengpaesse/kernaussagen-56744  
Chow, G. C. and A. Lin (1971), Best Linear Unbiased Interpolation, Distribution, and Extrapolation 
of Time Series by Related Series, The Review of Economics and Statistics 53 (4), pp. 372-375.
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2021), One- off effects relating to COVID-  19 in the HICP in 2021, Monthly 
Report, February 2021, pp. 63-66.
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2020a), The monthly development of aggregate output in the euro area, 
Monthly Report, May 2020, p. 21.
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2020b), A weekly activity index for the German economy, Monthly Report, 
May 2020, pp. 68-70.
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2018), Models for short- term economic forecasts: an update, Monthly 
 Report, September 2018, pp. 15-28.
Eraslan, S. and T. Götz (2021), An unconventional weekly economic activity index for Germany, 
Economics Letters Vol. 204, 109881.
Federal Statistical Office (2021), Impact of the corona crisis on the CPI/  HICP price collection, 
method report of 29  June 2021, https://www.destatis.de/EN/Themes/Economy/Prices/
Consumer-Price-Index/notification-corona.html
German Hotel and Catering Association (2021), Neustart im Gastgewerbe mit großen Herausfor -
derungen – Fast jeder zweite Betrieb bangt weiter um seine Existenz , press release of 7 June 2021, 
https://www.dehoga-bundesverband.de/presse-news/pressemitteilungen/detail/news/dehoga-  
umfrage-neustart-im-gastgewerbe-mit-grossen-herausforderungen-fast-jeder-zweite-betrieb-  
bangt-weiter-um-seine-existenz10 See Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
69

Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung  (2021), Germany: Consumer sentiment stagnating in July, press 
release of 28 July 2021, https://www.gfk.com/press/germany-consumer-sentiment-stagnating-in-  
july
Hauptverband der Deutschen Bauindustrie (2021), Bauwirtschaft im Zahlenbild , May 2021 edition, 
https://www.bauindustrie.de/zahlen-fakten/bauwirtschaft-im-zahlenbild
ifo Institute (2021), More and More Companies Lament Lack of Skilled Workers, press release of 
12 August 2021, https://www.ifo.de/en/node/64602
Mönch, E. and H. Uhlig (2005), Towards a Monthly Business Cycle Chronology for the Euro Area, 
Journal of Business Cycle Measurement and Analysis 2(1) pp. 43-69.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
70

Public finances*
General government budget
Public finances continued to provide significant 
support to the economy in the first half of 
2021. Since then, however, the economy has 
rebounded strongly. Assuming that the eco -
nomic recovery continues, the role played by 
government crisis measures such as transfers to 
enterprises and wage replacement benefits will 
gradually become smaller. Furthermore, tax 
and social contribution inflows will become 
stronger again. In this respect, government fi -
nances will recover automatically.
For 2021 as a whole, however, a large deficit is 
expected once again. As things stand today, 
this is set to rise to over 5% of gross domestic 
product (GDP), having stood at 4.5% a year 
earlier. It should be noted, though, that this in -
crease will be driven largely by measures not 
connected to the coronavirus crisis. These in -
clude the partial abolition of the solidarity sur -
charge, higher child benefits and government 
grants to finance climate action. Temporary 
coronavirus response measures coupled with 
the unfavourable economic situation could re -
sult in budgetary burdens reaching roughly the 
same heights this year as last year (see the 
upper chart on p. 72). In the wake of the floods 
in July, both central government and state gov -
ernments passed emergency aid and recovery 
measures. A fund of up to €30 billion (0.8% of 
GDP) is set to be established for the latter. The 
deficit will not be affected when transfers are 
made to the fund, but rather when funds are 
withdrawn from it. Such withdrawals are likely 
to be spread over a number of years. The debt 
ratio rose further in the first quarter of 2021 to 
71.1% (end- 2020: 69.7%). This puts it much 
lower than its peak of 82.5%, reached in 2010 
during the last crisis. It is relatively low by inter -
national standards, too (euro area in 2020: 
around 98%).Public finances are currently being placed under 
significant strain by cyclical and other tempor -
ary effects. The structural situation can be de -
termined by filtering out these effects (see the 
lower chart on p.  72).1 As things currently 
stand, the structural deficit ratio for 2021 as a 
whole is expected to stand at around 1½% 
once the temporary coronavirus response 
measures are also factored out.2 The deviation 
from the medium- term budgetary objective of 
0.5% of GDP under EU rules will therefore not 
be too significant, even compared with previ -
ous years. At around 47%, the structural ex -
penditure ratio excluding interest expenditure 
will likely reach a historically high level (see the 
lower chart on p. 72). By contrast, due to per -
sistently low interest rates, interest burdens will 
be very low despite the relatively high debt 
ratio. In the current year, the calculated aver -
age interest rate on government debt could de -
cline further to ¾%. The structural tax and so -
cial contributions ratio will undershoot the 
peak it reached at the turn of the millennium. 
Even so, it will be rather high again by historical 
standards.Given economic 
recovery, public 
finances will 
also start to 
improve again
Another large 
deficit expected 
in 2021, how -
everSubstantial 
structural deficit, 
but deviation 
from medium- 
term budgetary 
objective not 
too significant
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed report -
ing on budgetary developments (government finance stat -
istics). No data are yet available for local government or the 
statutory health and public long- term care insurance 
schemes for the reporting quarter. These will be analysed in 
the short commentaries in upcoming issues of the Monthly 
Report.
1 For an analysis of structural ratios, see also Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2021a).
2 EU budgetary surveillance generally does not factor 
coronavirus response measures out of the structural deficit. 
However, the need for fiscal policy action currently seems 
less urgent when these temporary measures are also ex -
cluded. The Federal Government appears to take a similar 
view of the situation: according to the April stability pro -
gramme, it envisages a structural deficit ratio of 7¾% for 
2021. However, 6¼ percentage points of this are attribut -
able to coronavirus response measures and other meas -
ures. Such effects are set to decrease strongly from as early 
as 2022 (to 1½% of GDP), virtually vanishing by 2025.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
71

The general escape clause will continue to 
apply to the EU budget rules next year.3 This 
has also been announced for central govern -
ment’s debt brake. Additional central govern -
ment grants towards social security funds, 
amongst other measures, are anticipated in 
order to prevent contribution rates from in -
creasing. Furthermore, central government and 
some state governments are incorporating 
additional buffers and reserves for any further 
coronavirus aid into their budgets. It appears 
that a portion of these funds is also set to be 
used for measures unrelated to the coronavirus 
pandemic. This is in the context of the econ -
omy being expected to continue on its path of 
recovery in the year ahead. Budgetary burdens 
brought about by the coronavirus crisis via, for 
instance, bridging aid to enterprises and short- 
time working will subsequently be able to auto -
matically expire. In the absence of new deficit- 
increasing measures, the deficit ratio could thus 
fall to around 1½% in 2022. From the current 
perspective, there is no apparent need to acti -
vate the escape clause again in either the EU 
budget rules or the debt brake in the coming 
year (for more information on central govern -
ment fiscal planning, see pp. 76 f.).
Given this starting situation, it would seem that 
only a relatively manageable amount of con -
solidation has to be achieved in the upcoming 
legislative period. That said, new financing 
needs have been identified in a number of 
areas, including social policy, investment in in -
frastructure and tax cuts. The fiscal rules are 
not at odds with new measures that are 
deemed prudent, even if the escape clauses are 
not activated. Rather, the objective of these 
rules is to keep revenue and expenditure in a 
pre- agreed state of balance. However, the eas -
iest means of financing (in political terms), i.e. 
through acquiring additional debt, is not an 
option. Instead, priorities need to be set with 
regard to expenditure and the revenue required 
for such spending.2022: assuming 
continued eco -
nomic recovery 
and end of 
coronavirus aid, 
sharp decline in 
deficit to be 
expected
Fiscal rules not 
at odds with 
prudent meas -
ures, but priori -
tisation required
3 For a critical analysis, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), 
pp. 78 ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
72
General government structural fiscal 
ratios*
Sources: Federal Statistical Office as well as Bundesbank calcula-
tions and projections from June 2021 (see Deutsche Bundes-
bank,  Outlook  for  the  German  economy  for  2021  to  2023, 
Monthly Report, June 2021, pp. 15-38). * General government 
budget as defined in the national accounts. Structural figures 
are obtained by deducting cyclical and specific temporary ef-
fects. In 2020 and 2021, the latter largely relate to the measures 
implemented in response to the coronavirus crisis. 1 As a per-
centage of GDP. 2  Total expenditure less interest expenditure.
Deutsche Bundesbank1997 00 05 10 15 21654321012
––––––++As a percentage of trend GDP
414243444546474849
38394041424344454647Fiscal balance
Structural
Unadjusted1
Structural expenditure
Primary expenditure2Total
Interest
Structural revenue
Total
Taxes and social contributionsGeneral government fiscal balance*
Sources: Federal Statistical Office as well as Bundesbank calcu-
lations and projections from June 2021 (see Deutsche Bundes-
bank,  Outlook  for  the  German  economy  for  2021  to  2023, 
Monthly Report, June 2021, pp. 15-38). * General government 
budget as defined in the national accounts. 1 As a percentage 
of trend GDP.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021654321012
––––––++As a percentage of GDP
ProjectionTotalTemporary effects
(primarily coronavirus 
measures)Cyclical component
Structural balance1

Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue4 increased sharply in the second 
quarter of 2021 (by 20% on the year; see the 
adjacent chart and the table on p. 74). This is 
chiefly due to the fact that revenue losses from 
the previous year were recouped. The corona -
virus crisis weighed significantly more heavily 
on the second quarter of 2020, particularly on 
account of reduced or repaid advance pay -
ments and deferrals of profit- related taxes and 
VAT.
The types of tax that slumped last year were 
thus the main ones to contribute to revenue 
growth. In the case of VAT, significant sums 
were deferred from the second quarter of 
2020. In addition, special advance VAT pay -
ments were reimbursed to enterprises that had 
previously made them. Deferrals were signifi -
cantly lower in the second quarter of this year, 
and there was no reimbursement effect. This 
was why VAT rose strongly on the year, though 
this was counteracted by the fact that tax-  
relevant sales in the second quarter of 2020 
had up to then only been relatively mildly af -
fected by the crisis. The reason for this is that 
VAT is paid with a lag of up to two months in 
most cases. The fact that a significant portion 
of import VAT payments were received with 
a  delay also had a dampening effect in the 
previous  quarter. These payments will now 
strengthen the third quarter.
Profit- related taxes also saw strong growth. 
Corporation tax increased particularly steeply 
after having slumped in the previous year. One 
year ago, advance payments from the first 
quarter were partially reimbursed, ongoing ad -
vance payments reduced and tax payments de -
ferred. These burdens largely dissipated in the 
second quarter of 2021. However, advance 
payments for the current year were still some -
what below their 2019 level. On the whole, it was a similar story for assessed income tax, 
though its development was less volatile. Ad -
vance payments of this tax type for the current 
year slightly exceeded their 2019 level. Non-  
assessed taxes on earnings – chiefly investment 
income tax on dividends  – rose very sharply. 
Their development is generally very volatile 
over the course of the year. Intra- year shifts in 
dividend payments throughout the year have a 
role to play in this, which was particularly the 
case during the crisis. To wit, many sharehold -
ers’ meetings and dividend payments that 
should have taken place in the second quarter 
of 2020 were postponed to subsequent quar -
ters.
Wage tax revenue stagnated. Reduced short-  
time working is likely to have resulted in a 
marked increase in revenue.5 However, child 
benefits were raised significantly at the start of 
the year. As these are deducted from wage tax 
receipts, this had a dampening effect on over -
all revenue. Furthermore, a bonus child benefit 
payment was made in the second quarter. With 
a financial impact of just under €3 billion, this 
alone pushed revenue down by 5½%. Adjust -Tax revenue 
increased 
sharply in Q2 
following crisis- 
driven slump in 
same quarter of 
previous year
Strong recovery, 
above all, in VAT 
and …
… profit- related 
taxesStagnation in 
wage tax rev -
enue: additional 
receipts due to 
reduced short- 
time working; 
shortfalls pri -
marily due to 
bonus child 
benefit payment
4 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.
5 Short- time working reduces wages, and short- time work -
ing benefits are not taxed.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
73
Tax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Comprises joint taxes as 
well as central government taxes and state government taxes. 
Including EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs 
duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021201510505101520
––––++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figures

ments to income tax allowances and the in -
come tax scale resulted in additional shortfalls 
at the start of the year.6
The official tax estimate made in May projected 
a rise in tax revenue of 4½% for the year as a 
whole. From the current perspective, the out -
come could be more favourable. For instance, 
revenue rose more quickly up to mid- year than 
had been anticipated at the start of May. As -
sessed profit- related taxes, in particular, may 
therefore perform better than estimated.
Central government budget
The central government budget posted a large 
deficit of €37 billion in the second quarter. 
However, this was €7 billion smaller than in the 
same quarter last year. Revenue rose sharply by 
22% (€16 billion), mainly because of a €12 bil -
lion increase in tax revenue. In addition, nega -
tive revenue had been recorded a year earlier: €3½ billion of the Bundesbank profit received 
in the first quarter was paid out again in the 
second quarter to the Investment and Repay -
ment Fund. Expenditure rose by 7½% (€8½ bil -
lion), primarily as a result of higher transfers 
and loans to the social security funds (€4 billion 
and €5 billion respectively). Total expenditure 
on the basic allowance for job seekers also 
grew by a considerable €1½ billion. This was 
mainly due to central government covering a 
larger share of accommodation costs and pay -
ing out a one- off bonus of €150 per person 
(for those not entitled to child benefits). Inter -
est expenditure saw a sharp rise of €2 billion, 
as fewer premia were received when new debt 
instruments were issued. These premia are de -Significant rise 
in revenue 
expected for 
year as a whole
Central govern -
ment budget 
posts another 
large deficit in 
Q2 due to 
pandemic Tax revenue
 
Type of taxH 1Estimate 
for 2021 1Q2
2020 2021 2020 2021
Year- on- year changeYear- on- 
year 
change %Year- on- year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total 2 327.7 347.1 +19.4 +  5.9 +  4.3 146.4 175.2 +28.9 +  19.7
of which:
Wage tax 3 104.1 101.6 –  2.5 –  2.4 +  1.0 50.8 50.8 +  0.0 +   0.0
Profi  t- related taxes 53.8 69.2 +15.5 +28.7 +  6.0 19.2 33.7 +14.6 +  75.9
Assessed income tax 4 29.3 32.2 +  2.8 +  9.6 +  3.7 10.6 14.3 +  3.7 +  34.9
Corporation tax 5 10.8 19.1 +  8.2 +75.8 +16.0 2.3 8.9 +  6.5 +277.3
Non- assessed taxes 
on earnings 9.9 12.7 +  2.8 +27.9 –  0.5 5.0 8.5 +  3.5 +  69.2
Withholding tax on 
interest income and 
capital gains 3.7 5.3 +  1.6 +44.6 +10.9 1.2 2.1 +  0.9 +  73.2
VAT6 104.3 112.4 +  8.1 +  7.8 +11.8 44.3 57.6 +13.4 +  30.2
Other consumption- 
related taxes 7 40.4 40.9 +  0.5 +  1.4 +  2.0 19.9 21.5 +  1.6 +   7.8
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax 
estimate of May 2021. 2 Comprises joint taxes as well as central government taxes and state government taxes. Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue, including customs duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Child benefi  ts and subsidies for 
supplementary private pension plans deducted from revenue. 4 Employee refunds and research grants deducted from revenue. 5 Re-
search grants deducted from revenue. 6 VAT and import VAT. 7 Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, 
air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lottery, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), pp. 64 f.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
74

ducted from interest expenditure.7 By contrast, 
bridging aid for enterprises (in 2020: emer -
gency aid) fell by €3 billion.
Up to mid- year, the deficit in the central gov -
ernment budget thus came to €90 billion. In 
the spring supplementary budget, the whole-  
year deficit of €180 billion originally estimated 
in the 2021 budget was increased to €240 bil -
lion. Unlike in 2020, however, the burdens on 
the central government budget should tend to 
ease in the second half of the year. Although, 
in particular, transfers to enterprises with high 
revenue losses were extended beyond mid- year 
and further expanded, pandemic- related ex -
penditure should gradually come to an end as 
long as restrictions are not substantially tight -
ened again. As things stand, the estimated 
reserves , e.g. in the form of global spending in -
creases, appear very generous. The same is true 
of the allocated amount for bridging aid for en -
terprises, with only €23 billion of the budgeted 
€65 billion being paid out in the first half of 
2021.
Given the extensive damage caused by the 
floods in July, central government and state 
governments are planning to set up a relief 
fund. The fund is still under parliamentary dis -
cussion. It will receive up to €30 billion, just 
under half of which is to be funded by the state 
governments. Central government is planning 
to transfer €16 billion to this special fund in 
2021. Net borrowing in the core budget would 
be increased by close to this amount (the state 
governments’ funding contribution of €7 bil -
lion will span around 30 years, from 2021 to 
2050). Subsequently, central government in -
tends to inject up to €14 billion more into the 
fund if necessary – with the state governments 
contributing half of this amount. The budget 
balances of such special funds are factored into 
the debt brake calculations, which means that 
transfers from the core budget to the fund will 
not have any impact on the debt brake in and 
of themselves. Only special fund expenditure 
that will affect the deficit will count towards 
the structural new borrowing limit under the debt brake.8 The total size and timing of out -
flows from the fund cannot yet be reliably esti -
mated. Notable amounts may already be paid 
out this year. However, a large portion of the 
payments are likely to be made over the com -
ing years.
All in all, as things stand, net borrowing will be 
far lower than planned in the supplementary 
budget (€240 billion). It may even remain under 
the €180 billion estimated in the original Spending likely 
to be substan -
tially below 
planned figures 
in year as a 
whole
Flood assistance 
entails add -
itional spending
Outturn for year 
as a whole likely 
to be much bet -
ter than planned
7 The premia referred to here are those paid by investors to 
central government when a security’s coupon exceeds the 
market rate. As these premia are booked in full as negative 
interest expenditure in the same period, they significantly 
increase the volatility of interest expenditure. For a pro -
posal on recording premia on an accruals basis, thus elim -
inating this source of volatility, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2021c).
8 If, for example, a fund initially only receives money from 
the core budget and no money leaves the fund, the associ -
ated deficit in the core budget is offset by a surplus of the 
same size in the fund’s budget. Consolidated structural net 
borrowing then amounts to zero. If the fund subsequently 
records a deficit, this counts as consolidated structural net 
borrowing. Only this is relevant to the debt brake.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
75
Central government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fe-
deral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-
fects. 
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4755025025
–––+
–125–100–75–50–250+25
2019
20212019Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20202020€ billion
2021

budget. The regular borrowing limit under the 
debt brake could thus be overshot by less than 
€150 billion in 2021. The resulting annual re -
payments due from 2026 onwards would then 
be below €9 billion, rather than the projected 
€13 billion.
The draft budget for 2022 was passed by cen -
tral government at the end of June. It is in -
tended to activate the debt brake escape clause 
again next year. The justification given for this 
is that the budgetary burdens caused by the 
pandemic are ongoing and the overall eco -
nomic recovery needs to be further stabilised.The draft budget envisages net borrowing of 
almost €100 billion. The debt brake borrowing 
limit is to be exceeded by almost the same 
amount. New borrowing is to be more than 
halved compared with this year because it is as -
sumed that the economy will be much stronger 
and because significantly fewer pandemic-  
related support measures have been budgeted 
for. However, the draft budget still includes 
€25 billion in expenditure directly related to the 
pandemic – e.g. for lagging business aid, costs 
from guarantees, vaccines and, above all, in 
the form of a general provision item. It also al -
locates funds for additional assistance not dir -
ectly connected to the pandemic, e.g. for Draft budget for 
2022: renewed 
recourse to 
escape clause 
intendedNet borrowing 
of €100 billion 
budgeted forCentral government’s fi  scal planning up to 2025 and the result for the debt brake*
€ billion
ItemActual 
2020Supple-
mentary 
budget 
2021Draft 
budget 
2022Fiscal plan
2023 2024 2025
 1.Expenditure 1 443.4 547.7 443.0 403.4 407.6 408.3
of which:
 1.a Investment 50.3 59.3 51.8 50.9 50.8 50.8
 1.b Global spending increases/ cuts 0.0 27.3 3.8 – 6.0 – 6.0 – 6.4
 2. Revenue 1,2 312.7 307.3 342.6 367.2 378.9 395.1
of which:
 2.a Tax revenue 1 283.3 284.0 315.2 332.9 346.4 359.2
 2.b Global revenue increases/shortfalls – –  3.0 –  1.1 1.6 1.7 7.7
 3. Fiscal balance (2.–1.) –130.7 –240.4 –100.4 –36.2 –28.7 –13.2
 4. Coin seigniorage 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
 5. Transfer to (–)/ withdrawal from (+) reserves 0.0 0.0 0.5 30.6 16.5 1.2
 6. Net borrowing (–)/ repayment (+) (3.+4.+5.) –130.5 –240.2 – 99.7 – 5.4 –12.0 –11.8
 7. Cyclical component in the budget procedure 3 – 42.6 – 24.0 –  1.7 – 1.8 – 1.3 0.0
 8. Balance of fi  nancial transactions –  6.6 –  5.4 –  1.8 – 1.2 – 0.6 0.4
 9. Balance of incorporated off- budget entities (from 2023: e) 4 27.7 – 17.6 – 13.8 –12.0 – 0.8 1.1
 9.a Energy and Climate Fund 25.3 – 13.8 – 11.3 – 4.9 0.0 1.4
 9.b Flood Assistance Fund –  0.4 –  0.5 –  0.3 . . .
 9.c Fund to Promote Municipal Investment –  1.0 –  1.5 –  1.4 . . .
 9.d Digitalisation Fund 1.3 –  1.8 –  0.3 . . .
 9.e Fund for Primary School- Age Childcare Provision 2.5 –  0.5 . . .
10.  Structural net borrowing (–)/repayment (+) (6.–7.–8.+9.) – 53.6 –228.4 –110.1 –14.4 –10.8 –11.2
11. Amount exceeding ceiling 5 (16.–13.–10.) 41.9 216.4 98.4 – – –
12. Outstanding repayment amount, escape clause 41.9 258.3 356.7 356.7 354.6 352.5
13. Repayment amount due – – – 2.1 2.1 2.1
Memo items:
14. Need for action 6.2
15. Relief from global spending cuts, global revenue increases and 
withdrawal from reserves (2.b–1.b+5.) . . . 38.2 24.2 21.5
16. Regular ceiling: structural net borrowing (0.35% of GDP) 6 – 11.7 – 12.1 – 11.7 –12.3 –12.9 –13.3
17. Structural fi  scal balance (3.–7.–8.+9.) – 53.9 –228.7 –110.8 –45.2 –27.5 –12.6
17.a As above, with potential output estimate according to 
fi  scal  plan – 62.9 –233.6 . . . .
* For methodological notes, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Key central government budget data in connection with the debt brake, Monthly 
Report, February 2016, pp. 68 f. 1 After deduction of supplementary central government grants, shares of energy tax revenue, compen-
sation under the 2009 reform of motor vehicle tax and consolidation/ budgetary recovery assistance to federal states, excluding transfers 
to/ withdrawals from reserves. 2 Excluding coin seigniorage. 3 With GDP fi  gures from July 2021 for 2020. 4 Estimated amount makes full 
use of the scope remaining under the debt brake. 5 Repayment plan for the amount from (a) 2020: 1 ⁄20 per year from 2023 to 2042; (b) 
2021 and 2022: 1 ⁄17 per year from 2026 to 2042. 6 This refers to gross domestic product in the year before the budget is prepared.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
76

switching to climate- friendly heating or build -
ing up a charging network for electric vehicles. 
Once again, the social security funds are to re -
ceive ad hoc additional central government 
grants (of €9 billion). The aim is to ensure that 
the overall contribution rate remains below 
40%. However, most of this money is to be 
used to offset deficits unrelated to COVID-  19.
As things stand, it appears quite likely that next 
year’s central government budget outturn will 
again be much more favourable than projected 
in the draft budget as long as no additional 
cost- increasing measures are adopted. Tax rev -
enue could exceed the estimates – also in struc -
tural terms. In addition, it currently seems likely 
that pandemic- related expenditure will remain 
lower than projected. The outflows from the 
new relief fund are very difficult to gauge. 
However, they are likely to play a fairly minor 
role in the annual outturn as defined under the 
debt brake.
It will be for the newly elected Bundestag to 
decide whether the escape clause will be acti -
vated again next year in order to manage the 
coronavirus crisis. By then, it should be possible 
to get a more reliable gauge of the economic 
developments and budgetary burdens stem -
ming from the pandemic in 2022. The Federal 
Government is assuming that the economy will 
be operating at near- normal capacity. A num -
ber of projections by other institutions are even 
more favourable. In its June outlook, the Bun -
desbank expects much stronger GDP growth 
and above average overall capacity utilisation 
in 2022. A sizeable reserve of €48 billion is also 
available to bridge gaps in the central govern -
ment budget without activating the escape 
clause. Should the need for adjustment go be -
yond this, the necessary consolidation appears 
manageable in the expected economic setting.
As things stand, overall it does not look as 
though it will be necessary to activate the es -
cape clause again in 2022 in order to manage 
the coronavirus crisis.9 Even if the escape clause 
is not activated, the debt brake rules permit spending and the expansion of expenditure 
deemed sensible or even necessary, e.g. in con -
nection with climate change or digitalisation. 
However, this must be funded by reducing 
other expenditure or from regular revenue, 
such as taxes. What this ultimately means for 
the Federal Government and the Bundestag is 
that they need to clearly and transparently con -
vey to the public which areas of spending have 
priority or why taxes need to be raised.
The new multi- year fiscal plan envisages that 
the regular debt brake requirements will be 
met again from 2023 onwards. The reserve, 
unused in 2022, is to be drawn on from 2023 
to 2025. In 2025, the final year, the plan also 
includes unspecified consolidation of €6 billion. 
If the reserve were to be tapped in 2022 al -
ready, a markedly larger need for adjustment 
would arise in these years. Furthermore, it ap -
pears that additional needs have not yet been 
fully accounted for – e.g. in connection with 
international commitments regarding defence 
expenditure or development aid. From 2026 
onwards, extensive repayments of coronavirus- 
related debt accrued in 2021 will also be due. 
Should the escape clause be activated in 2022, 
the amounts to be repaid will be correspond -
ingly higher. Before the end of this decade, 
moreover, repayments of EU debt stemming 
from the Next Generation EU (NGEU) pro -
gramme will be due. Central government will 
contribute to these repayments in line with 
Germany’s share of financing in the EU budget. 
In addition, the demographic burdens facing 
central government look set to increase signifi -
cantly from the middle of the decade. As baby 
boomers increasingly reach retirement age, 
central government grants are likely to rise 
sharply.10 At the same time, the decline in the 
number of persons in work will dampen tax 
revenue. All in all, this means there are sub -Budgetary 
burden  should 
remain much 
smaller
Activating the 
escape clause 
again in 2022 
to manage the 
pandemic …
… not necessary 
as things standFiscal plan up to 
2025 does not 
address part of 
upcoming fiscal 
challenges
9 Regarding the overall assessment, see, in particular, Inde -
pendent Advisory Board to the Stability Council (2021).
10 According to the Federal Government’s Financial Report 
and its Pension Insurance Report, a sharp rise in the pen -
sion contribution rate is to be expected. Central govern -
ment grants will then also grow strongly as they are tied to 
the pension contribution rate.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
77

stantial challenges involved in future budgetary 
and fiscal planning. These provide a further ar -
gument against activating the escape clause 
again in 2022 – provided that the coronavirus 
crisis does not escalate again. The need for 
consolidation would then arise earlier than en -
visaged in the government plans, but central 
government would not then face any repay -
ment burdens due to borrowing above the 
standard limit in 2022 in the more difficult en -
vironment later on.
Central government’s off- budget entities re -
corded a balanced budget in the second quar -
ter of 2021, following a surplus of €4½ billion 
in the same period last year.11 In the second 
quarter of 2020, the Investment and Repay -
ment Fund had received €3½ billion from the 
Bundesbank’s large profit distribution. This 
year, outflows from the Energy and Climate 
Fund had a negative impact on the balance. 
Despite relatively high selling prices for Euro -
pean CO 2 emissions certificates, it recorded a 
deficit of €3½ billion, compared with only €½ 
billion a year earlier. By contrast, the Economic 
Stabilisation Fund received revenue from loan 
repayments for the first time. These exceeded 
expenditure on new aid by €1 billion.
The Energy and Climate Fund is likely to post a 
significant deficit for the year as a whole, too. 
By contrast, provided that the economic recov -
ery continues as expected, the Economic Stabil -
isation Fund will probably record a surplus due 
to net repayments. All in all, the off- budget en -
tities covered here so far may close the year in 
deficit again. However, this deficit could be 
somewhat smaller than in 2020 (€6 billion). 
Later in the year, the relief fund for flood assis -
tance will be set up as a new off- budget entity. 
The planned advance financing of this fund 
means that its inflows are likely to be higher 
than its outflows in 2021. The relief fund will 
then initially record a surplus. As money is with -
drawn in the coming years, it will post deficits 
at that time.State government budgets
Assessing state government budget outturns is 
very difficult at present. Only monthly data for 
the core budgets are available without delay. 
Figures for state government off- budget en -
tities are published later, together with the 
quarterly statistics for the core budgets. Since 
the outbreak of the coronavirus crisis, however, 
the informative value of core budgets alone 
has been limited. In 2020, many state govern -
ments set up sizeable pandemic- related off-  
budget entities. Some of these received ad -
vance financing from the core budgets, which 
(when taken in isolation) initially results in a 
deficit in the core budget and a surplus in the 
corresponding off- budget entity. Other off-  
budget entities have their own credit authorisa -
tions enabling them to support the core 
budgets, inter alia, by transferring funds. The 
transfer then yields a deficit for the off- budget 
entity and a surplus in the core budget. In some 
cases, off- budget entities also appear to be 
serving to take pressure off the core budget 
beyond the acute phase of the crisis and thus 
to ease debt brake requirements. Given this 
situation, for a meaningful analysis of state 
governments’ financial situation, it is essential 
to have the outturns of both the core budgets 
and the off- budget entities.
The core budgets closed the second quarter 
with a deficit of €1½ billion (according to the 
monthly cash statistics), down from the excep -
tionally high level of €26 billion in the same 
quarter of the previous year. However, last 
year’s deficit was partly offset by off- budget en -
tities recording a surplus of €6 billion following 
advance financing in the form of transfers from 
the core budgets. In the current reporting quar -
ter, by contrast, off- budget entities may also 
post a deficit – in some cases possibly because Budget of cen -
tral government 
off- budget 
entities bal -
anced overall 
in Q2
In 2021 as a 
whole, signifi -
cant deficit 
planned for 
Energy and Cli -
mate Fund but 
repayments of 
Economic Stabil -
isation Fund aid 
and advance 
financing of 
planned relief 
fundDifficult to inter -
pret state gov -
ernment budget 
outturns at 
present as fig -
ures for off- 
budget entities 
not yet available
Sharp drop in 
core budgets’ 
deficit in Q2 – 
but off- budget 
entities likely to 
post deficit
11 According to data from the Federal Ministry of Finance, 
i.e. excluding bad banks and other entities that use com -
mercial double- entry bookkeeping. SoFFin’s deficit is also 
factored out. It is based on funds transferred to refinance 
the bad bank FMSW. In return, the direct debt of FMSW, 
which is attributable to central government, is repaid ac -
cordingly.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
78

they have transferred funds to core budgets to 
relieve the pressure building up there.12 In spite 
of this, the coronavirus crisis is likely to be have 
placed much less of a strain on state govern -
ment finances overall in the second quarter of 
2021 than it did a year earlier. Tax revenue, for 
instance, was up by 31% (€19 billion) and thus 
already slightly higher than the pre- crisis level 
from the second quarter of 2019. The tax rev -
enue figures for the first half of 2021 were like -
wise just above those from prior to the crisis.
A large deficit is again expected this year for 
the core budgets and off- budget entities over -
all. However, this is likely to be much lower 
than last year (2020: €34 billion). According to 
the May tax estimate, state governments’ tax 
revenue is forecast to grow by 2½% this year 
and thus return to its 2019 level. The latest tax 
figures suggest that growth might actually be 
somewhat higher. Furthermore, as payments of 
€5 billion for offsetting local governments’ 
local business tax shortfalls were discontinued, 
this should alleviate the strain on state govern -
ment budgets in comparison with 2020.13 
However, the federal states are providing other 
funds to stabilise their municipalities. For in -
stance, they are, inter alia, stepping up trans -
fers within their local government financial 
equalisation schemes instead of passing on 
part of their tax shortfalls to their municipalities 
in line with the regular rules. They are also con -
tinuing to come under pressure from bearing 
half of the operating costs for vaccination 
centres and the costs of coronavirus testing at 
schools.
Additional expenditure following the flooding 
in July 2021 will probably be financed mainly 
via the planned relief fund to compensate 
households, enterprises and public entities for 
damage sustained. Central government will ini -
tially provide the fund with €16 billion. State 
governments will transfer a total of €7 billion 
(around €230 million per year) in shares in VAT 
revenue for this purpose from 2021 to 2050. If 
required, central government will inject a fur -
ther amount of up to €14 billion into the fund, whereby state governments will provide half of 
this via the distribution of VAT revenue.
Next year, the state government budget deficit 
is likely to fall further. Based on the current out -
look, as fiscal support and health measures 
come to an end, pressure on expenditure will 
then ease. At the same time, tax revenue is ex -
pected to return to stronger growth. It is cur -
rently still unclear when the federal states’ re -
spective debt brakes will again apply in full. The 
extent of consolidation required will then vary 
considerably from state to state.14 In addition 
to the various budgets having widely divergent 
structural starting positions and available re -Large deficit 
again expected 
for year as a 
whole, but 
improvement on 
previous year
State govern -
ments contrib -
ute to relief fund 
after July flood -
ingClear improve -
ment in state 
government 
budgets 
expected 
next year
12 Results including off- budget entities are available for 
the first quarter of 2021. The core budgets’ deficit 
amounted to €3 billion, and that of the off- budget entities 
to €4 billion.
13 Local governments received €11 billion in compensation 
from central government and state governments in 2020 
for local business tax shortfalls as a result of the corona -
virus crisis.
14 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
79
State government fiscal balance
Sources: Federal Statistical Office, Federal Ministry of Finance 
and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Figures based on monthly data 
from the Federal Ministry of Finance, quarterly data are not yet 
available. 2 Core budgets and off-budget entities together.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q430201001020
–––++
2019Quarterly figures
20212020€ billion
Cumulated from start of year 2
2020Off-budget entitiesCore budgets
1
–40–30–20–100+10+20+30
2019
2021

serves, the rules are established on a state-  
specific basis.
Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
In the second quarter of 2021, the pension in -
surance scheme had a largely balanced budget. 
In the same period last year, it had posted a 
deficit of almost €1 billion. Total receipts were 
up by 5%, with contribution receipts rising 
sharply (+5½%). This was partly because crisis- 
related burdens were lower than in the same period last year: in the second quarter of 2020, 
losses of earnings were even greater and con -
tribution payments were deferred. Central gov -
ernment funds increased by just over 4½%. 
These include additional grants of €½ billion 
(year as a whole: €1½ billion) for the basic pen -
sion.15
At 4½%, growth in expenditure was somewhat 
weaker than growth in revenue, but still signifi -
cant. This was chiefly due to the July 2020 an -
nual pension adjustment of 3½% on average 
across Germany but also to another only mod -
erate rise in the number of pensions. Higher 
supplementary contribution rates to the statu -
tory health insurance scheme constituted a fur -
ther –  albeit less pronounced  – contributory 
factor.
Pensions in western Germany were not raised 
in mid- 2021. In eastern Germany, they were 
raised by 0.7%: larger adjustments to eastern 
German pensions are to ensure that they grad -
ually align with the levels in western Germany 
by 2024. This constitutes a rise of 0.2% on 
average across Germany and should rein in ex -
penditure growth in the second half of the year 
compared with the same period last year.
All in all, the deficit for 2021 as a whole is likely 
to be lower than last year (2020: €4 billion). At 
the end of the year, the sustainability reserve is 
set to fall below its upper limit of 1.5 times the 
scheme’s monthly expenditure for the first time 
since 2011. However, financial pressure on the 
pension scheme is likely to increase consider -
ably in the coming years. In its current fiscal 
plan, the Federal Government assumes that the 
reserve will undershoot the statutory minimum 
of 0.2 times the scheme’s monthly expenditure 
for the first time in 2023. To meet the min -
Quarterly results 
balanced; rev -
enue recovered 
from crisis- 
related bur -
dens; …… expenditure 
growth dynamic 
due to higher 
annual pension 
adjustment in 
mid- 2020
Relief in second 
half of year due 
to no general 
annual pension 
adjustment
Deficit for 2021 
as a whole 
lower than last 
year, but initially 
buffer in 
reserves
15 The basic pension was introduced for the first time at 
the start of the year. While entitlement to the pension 
started in January, the actual disbursement of first pay -
ments (including back payments) did not begin until the 
middle of the year. Payments of the basic pension for 2021 
are expected to extend into next year. Central government 
is thus advancing funds because, despite the delay in pay -
ments, it is still extending the full annual grant this year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
80
Finances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary quarterly figures as the latter are not subsequently re-
vised.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q442024
––++
–8–6–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202120202019
2019
202120202019 2020 202102468
2019 2020 202102468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
€ billion

imum, it will thus have to raise the contribution 
rate, slightly at first but considerably going for -
ward. Once the baby boomer generation starts 
entering retirement in the mid- 2020s, funding 
pressure will mount in the medium to long 
term.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency was hard hit 
by the coronavirus crisis in the second quarter 
of 2021, too, recording a deficit of €8 billion in 
its core budget.16 This nevertheless constitutes 
a year- on- year improvement of just over €1 bil -
lion.
Revenue increased very steeply, by 12% overall, 
with contribution receipts going up by 9%. In 
the previous year, receipts fell considerably as a 
result of the crisis (-6½%, after adjustment for 
the 0.1 percentage point cut in the contribu -
tion rate in 2020). Furthermore, revenue from 
insolvency benefit contributions grew sharply 
because the contribution rate was doubled to 
0.12% at the start of the year. The current con -
tribution rate is now on par with the average 
level since 2010.
Expenditure was 1½% down on the year. In the 
second quarter of 2020, expenditure had more 
than doubled on account of the crisis. The de -
cline is due to somewhat lower payments for 
short- time working: in the second quarter of 
2021, €7½ billion was paid out compared with 
€8 billion in the same period last year. When 
comparing 2021 figures with those from last 
year, it is essential to note that the Federal Em -
ployment Agency’s payments for short- time 
working are made with a time lag of around 
half a quarter. This means that last year the full 
impact of the pandemic was not yet shown in 
the payments for the second quarter. By the 
same token, the results for the second quarter 
of 2021 do not fully reflect the declining short- 
time working figures. Social contributions paid 
by the Federal Employment Agency on behalf 
of enterprises as an exceptional crisis response measure accounted for around €3 billion of the 
payments for short- time working. There was 
practically no change in expenditure on un -
employment benefits.
The Federal Employment Agency’s finances are 
set to improve greatly in the second half of the 
year. In addition to short- time working, un -
employment is expected to fall and revenue 
should continue to develop favourably. Never -Deficit again 
very large
Very steep rise in 
revenue mainly 
due to lower 
crisis- related 
burdens and 
higher contribu -
tions for insolv -
ency benefit 
payments
Expenditure 
declining, chiefly 
due to lower 
payments for 
short- time work -
ing
Very large deficit 
for year as a 
whole, but 
widespread eas -
ing expected in 
2022
16 Excluding the civil servants’ pension fund. Transfers to 
the fund are thus recorded as expenditure here, lowering 
the core budget balance. These transfers have been sus -
pended from the second quarter of 2020 until the end of 
2021 because of the coronavirus crisis.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
81
Finances of the 
Federal Employment Agency*
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants' 
pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410505
––+
–30–25–20–15–10–50+5+10Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202120202019
2021202020192019 2020 2021–200+20+40+60+80+100+120+140
2019 2020 202120020406080100120140
–+++++++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change

theless, financing needs are forecast to be ex -
tremely high overall for the year as a whole. 
They may even be around twice as high as ori -
ginally estimated (draft budget: €9 billion). The 
remaining reserves (€6 billion) and central gov -
ernment funds of €3 billion are available to 
plug this gap. Additional funds will be required 
from central government. At the end of 2021, the liquidity loans from central government still 
outstanding at that time are then to be con -
verted into a government transfer. The eco -
nomic situation is set to be much better overall 
in 2022. Central government’s draft budget 
also includes a special transfer of €1 billion. 
This sum appears appropriate as things cur -
rently stand.
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2021a), Public finances in 2020: automatic stabilisers and temporary meas -
ures strongly supported the economy, Monthly Report, February 2021, pp. 70-72.
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2021b), Public finances, Monthly Report, May 2021, pp. 62-80.
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2021c), Federal debt: allocate premia on accruals basis in budgetary inter -
est expenditure, Monthly Report, June 2021, pp. 47-51.
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2020), The future requirements of state- specific debt brakes on state gov -
ernments’ budgets, Monthly Report, October 2020, pp. 102-105.
Independent Advisory Board to the Stability Council (2021), 16. Stellungnahme zur Einhaltung der 
Obergrenze für das strukturelle gesamtstaatliche Finanzierungsdefizit nach § 51 Absatz 2 HGrG .Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
82

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43 •
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
3•

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
13. General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
14. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78 •
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81 •
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 EONIA  5,73 month
EURIBOR  6,7Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  8
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2019 Nov. 8.3 5.9 5.6 5.4 2.1 3.4 1.8 – 0.45 – 0.40 0.1
Dec. 8.0 5.7 4.9 5.2 2.0 3.3 1.6 – 0.46 – 0.40 0.2
2020 Jan. 8.0 5.6 5.2 5.2 1.9 3.2 1.2 – 0.45 – 0.39 0.2
Feb. 8.1 5.6 5.5 6.1 1.9 3.2 0.9 – 0.45 – 0.41 – 0.0
Mar. 10.4 7.4 7.5 7.1 3.6 4.2 0.3 – 0.45 – 0.42 0.2
Apr. 11.8 8.3 8.2 8.2 4.8 4.3 0.0 – 0.45 – 0.25 0.3
May 12.5 9.1 9.0 8.8 6.1 4.9 0.2 – 0.46 – 0.27 0.2
June 12.7 9.3 9.3 9.5 6.9 4.6 – 0.4 – 0.46 – 0.38 0.2
July 13.5 10.0 10.1 9.7 7.4 4.7 – 0.5 – 0.46 – 0.44 0.0
Aug. 13.3 9.6 9.5 10.0 7.7 4.7 – 0.0 – 0.47 – 0.48 – 0.0
Sep. 13.8 10.3 10.4 10.2 8.1 4.5 – 0.4 – 0.47 – 0.49 – 0.1
Oct. 13.8 10.3 10.5 10.7 8.3 4.2 – 0.5 – 0.47 – 0.51 – 0.2
Nov. 14.5 10.8 11.0 11.3 8.6 4.4 – 0.7 – 0.47 – 0.52 – 0.2
Dec. 15.6 11.7 12.4 12.0 9.3 4.9 – 0.4 – 0.47 – 0.54 – 0.2
2021 Jan. 16.5 12.2 12.5 12.4 9.4 4.8 – 0.9 – 0.48 – 0.55 – 0.2
Feb. 16.4 12.2 12.3 11.6 9.6 4.7 – 0.9 – 0.48 – 0.54 – 0.1
Mar. 13.7 10.2 10.1 10.5 8.6 4.0 – 0.3 – 0.48 – 0.54 0.0
Apr. 12.4 9.1 9.2 9.2 7.3 3.4 – 0.3 – 0.48 – 0.54 0.1
May 11.6 8.3 8.5 8.7 6.3 2.9 – 1.0 – 0.48 – 0.54 0.2
June 11.7 8.3 8.3 ... 6.0 3.2 – 0.6 – 0.48 – 0.54 0.2
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... – 0.48 – 0.54 0.0
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 Euroovernight index average.  6 Euro interbank offered rate.  7 See also footnotes to Table
VI.4, p. 43●. 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT, GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2019 Nov. +23,070 +28,715 + 8,970 –59,845 +35,760 + 540 +36,385 – 3,870 1.1051 97.4 92.0
Dec. +30,571 +28,977 + 1,600 –88,670 +61,011 – 8,754 +37,555 + 458 1.1113 97.3 91.9
2020 Jan. – 6,355 + 9,492 –12,397 + 3,240 –42,356 + 7,318 +17,906 + 1,495 1.1100 96.9 91.2
Feb. +15,530 +29,118 + 1,840 + 7,360 –29,022 + 7,458 +16,528 – 484 1.0905 96.2 90.5
Mar. +25,901 +37,829 +19,582 + 761 –110,668 – 3,723 +129,634 + 3,578 1.1063 98.8 92.9
Apr. +12,008 +11,712 –12,357 –39,556 +162,069 +11,913 –148,477 + 1,694 1.0862 98.1 92.5
May – 669 +16,887 + 5,646 –38,001 +42,795 + 9,336 –10,146 + 1,662 1.0902 98.3 92.5
June +18,353 +27,963 +30,552 –31,008 –30,296 +19,593 +72,433 – 169 1.1255 99.7 93.8
July +26,099 +35,448 + 7,370 +46,062 –23,752 – 8,500 – 5,881 – 558 1.1463 100.4 94.3
Aug. +22,807 +24,423 +46,877 +10,638 +38,054 –15,540 +12,419 + 1,304 1.1828 101.5 94.9
Sep. +35,808 +34,790 +43,723 –29,682 + 3,127 – 7,762 +75,401 + 2,640 1.1792 101.5 94.8
Oct. +28,981 +38,817 +42,698 +39,710 +106,355 + 2,297 –108,580 + 2,917 1.1775 101.3 94.6
Nov. +25,269 +34,898 +33,155 –47,379 +188,190 + 8,737 –113,795 – 2,597 1.1838 100.6 94.1
Dec. +43,925 +39,424 +49,992 –103,709 +300,359 –30,604 –117,803 + 1,749 1.2170 101.8 95.1
2021 Jan. +15,982 +21,780 +45,229 +42,086 + 3,936 +13,703 –13,605 – 891 1.2171 101.3 95.3
Feb. +20,962 +33,965 +18,832 +16,584 +86,916 – 967 –82,102 – 1,597 1.2098 100.6 94.6
Mar. +35,649 +37,153 +20,775 + 4,164 + 3,451 – 5,575 +19,228 – 494 1.1899 100.3 94.1
Apr. +30,626 +24,592 + 668 +24,684 +16,205 + 4,643 –45,613 + 748 1.1979 100.6 94.2
May + 4,305 +22,486 +33,937 + 2,247 +70,421 – 2,373 –37,805 + 1,447 1.2146 100.8 p 94.2
June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2047 100.2 p 93.6
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1822 99.7 p 93.4
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also TablesXII.10 and 12, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Against the
currencies of the EER-19 group.  4 Based on consumer price indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2018 1.9 1.8 1.1 4.4 1.1 1.9 1.6 9.0 0.9 4.0
2019 1.4 1.8 1.1 5.0 1.3 1.8 1.9 4.9 0.3 2.0
2020 –6.4 –6.3 –4.6 –2.9 –2.9 –7.9 –8.2 5.9 –8.9 –3.6
2020 Q1 –3.2 –1.9 –1.5 –1.1 –0.2 –5.3 –1.5 6.5 –5.9 –1.1
Q2 –14.4 –13.8 –11.3 –7.0 –7.3 –18.9 –15.6 1.4 –18.2 –8.9
Q3 –4.0 –4.2 –3.6 –2.5 –2.9 –3.7 –9.4 10.8 –5.2 –2.8
Q4 –4.6 –5.0 –1.9 –1.2 –1.1 –3.5 –5.9 4.5 –6.1 –1.5
2021 Q1 –1.3 –0.4 –3.4 5.4 –1.8 1.8 –1.4 10.7 0.1 –1.3
Q2 13.6 ... 9.6 ... ... 19.1 ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2018 0.8 1.2 1.0 4.8 3.4 0.6 1.8 –5.0 0.9 2.0
2019 –1.3 4.8 –4.3 6.9 1.6 0.5 –0.7 2.8 –1.1 0.8
2020 –8.6 –3.8 –10.2 –6.0 –3.2 –11.0 –2.1 4.3 –11.4 –1.8
2020 Q1 –5.9 –0.3 –6.3 –8.0 –0.3 –7.9 –1.2 6.8 –11.6 –2.6
Q2 –20.1 –11.7 –21.6 –13.3 –5.4 –23.8 –8.2 –1.6 –25.5 –5.1
Q3 –6.8 –3.5 –10.0 –2.2 –5.1 –7.9 –2.0 –2.2 –5.2 –1.8
Q4 –1.5 0.6 –2.9 –0.1 –2.0 –4.3 3.1 12.9 –2.5 2.2
2021 Q1 3.5 8.4 –1.2 –0.3 0.1 2.3 4.7 21.6 9.9 3.6
Q2 e 22.1 25.5 p 19.0 14.4 4.7 22.3 15.4 p 23.0 32.0 12.6
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2018 83.8 81.0 87.7 74.4 84.1 85.9 70.8 76.2 78.1 76.4
2019 82.3 81.2 84.5 72.8 81.1 84.5 71.5 77.3 77.4 76.3
2020 74.4 75.5 77.0 67.4 76.8 73.5 70.8 68.5 53.1 71.8
2020 Q2 68.4 72.8 71.4 63.3 77.2 62.4 67.3 56.7 – 69.1
Q3 72.1 73.4 74.4 66.0 76.0 72.9 70.3 69.6 64.5 70.8
Q4 76.3 75.9 79.1 69.6 75.4 76.0 73.2 72.0 71.4 72.7
2021 Q1 77.5 77.4 80.4 71.6 78.1 77.1 72.5 74.5 72.8 73.1
Q2 82.5 80.2 86.7 76.5 81.0 82.8 74.7 77.2 75.7 75.0
Q3 82.9 81.3 87.0 78.8 82.5 81.6 77.8 79.7 78.8 75.4
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2018 8.2 6.0 3.4 5.4 7.4 8.7 19.3 5.8 10.6 7.5
2019 7.5 5.4 3.2 4.5 6.7 8.2 17.3 5.0 10.0 6.3
2020 7.8 5.6 e 3.8 6.8 7.8 7.8 16.3 5.6 9.2 8.1
2021 Feb. 8.2 6.7 3.9 6.8 8.0 8.1 16.5 7.5 p 10.3 7.7
Mar. 8.1 6.8 3.8 6.8 7.5 8.1 16.5 7.7 p 10.2 7.7
Apr. 8.1 6.7 p 3.8 6.4 8.5 7.8 p 16.9 7.4 p 10.4 7.8
May 8.0 6.5 p 3.7 6.7 8.2 7.5 p 15.7 7.0 p 10.2 7.9
June 7.7 6.2 p 3.7 6.7 7.7 7.3 15.1 6.7 p 9.7 8.0
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6.5 ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2018 1.8 2.3 1.9 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.8 0.7 1.2 2.6
2019 1.2 1.2 1.4 2.3 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.9 0.6 2.7
2020 0.3 0.4 5 0.4 –0.6 0.4 0.5 –1.3 –0.5 –0.1 0.1
2021 Feb. 0.9 0.3 1.6 0.5 0.9 0.8 –1.9 –0.4 1.0 –0.2
Mar. 1.3 1.6 2.0 0.9 1.4 1.4 –2.0 0.1 0.6 0.3
Apr. 1.6 2.1 2.1 1.6 2.2 1.6 –1.1 1.1 1.0 1.7
May 2.0 2.5 2.4 3.2 2.3 1.8 –1.2 1.9 1.2 2.6
June 1.9 2.6 2.1 3.7 1.9 1.9 0.6 1.6 1.3 2.7
July 2.2 1.4 5 3.1 4.9 1.8 1.5 0.7 2.2 1.0 2.8
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
2018 –0.5 –0.8 1.8 –0.6 –0.9 –2.3 0.9 0.1 –2.2 –0.8
2019 –0.6 –1.9 1.5 0.1 –0.9 –3.1 1.1 0.5 –1.6 –0.6
2020 –7.2 –9.4 –4.5 –4.9 –5.4 –9.2 –9.7 –5.0 –9.5 –4.5
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
2018 85.7 99.8 61.8 8.2 59.7 98.0 186.2 63.0 134.4 37.1
2019 83.9 98.1 59.7 8.4 59.5 97.6 180.5 57.4 134.6 37.0
2020 98.0 114.1 69.7 18.2 69.2 115.7 205.6 59.5 155.8 43.5
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally adjusted.  2 Manufacturing, mining
and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing: quarterly data

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
3.9 3.1 5.2 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.7 4.4 2.4 5.2 2018
4.3 2.3 5.5 2.0 1.4 2.5 2.5 3.2 2.0 3.1 2019
–0.9 –1.3 –7.8 –3.8 –6.3 –7.6 –4.8 –5.5 –10.8 –5.1 2020
2.4 1.2 1.9 –0.2 –3.3 –2.2 –3.5 –2.3 –4.0 1.0 2020 Q1
–4.6 –7.8 –14.7 –9.2 –13.0 –16.5 –10.9 –12.9 –21.6 –12.4 Q2
0.1 –0.2 –9.8 –2.6 –3.2 –5.7 –2.5 –2.4 –8.6 –4.3 Q3
–1.2 1.6 –7.8 –2.9 –5.6 –5.8 –2.1 –4.5 –8.9 –4.5 Q4
1.5 5.0 –1.8 –2.4 –5.5 –5.2 0.2 1.6 –4.5 –1.6 2021 Q1
6.9 ... ... 9.7 ... ... 9.6 ... 19.9 ... Q2
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
5.2 –1.1 1.5 0.6 4.9 0.1 4.3 5.3 0.4 6.9 2018
3.4 –3.1 1.1 –0.9 –0.0 –2.2 0.5 2.8 0.5 4.0 2019
–2.4 –10.7 –0.2 –3.9 –5.9 –7.3 –9.1 –6.3 –9.8 –7.2 2020
–2.5 –10.0 11.3 –0.8 –5.0 –0.9 –7.4 –3.0 –6.6 –2.1 2020 Q1
–7.5 –22.3 –7.1 –8.2 –16.4 –24.5 –28.2 –17.4 –24.6 –19.9 Q2
–0.3 –7.8 –2.9 –4.7 –3.3 –1.4 –1.5 –3.6 –5.2 –4.8 Q3
0.6 –2.0 –1.3 –1.9 0.9 –2.0 1.7 –1.0 –2.0 –1.7 Q4
12.4 4.6 –8.2 –0.6 3.2 –0.6 6.5 3.9 2.7 –0.0 2021 Q1
23.6 p 21.8 p 13.0 p 10.1 p 23.2 24.1 35.9 p 24.9 p 27.2 ... Q2
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
77.5 81.2 80.3 84.0 88.7 81.6 85.4 85.3 79.5 61.4 2018
77.3 79.8 77.3 84.2 86.6 78.7 87.7 84.4 80.3 63.8 2019
72.9 72.2 70.4 78.2 79.2 75.5 79.3 78.2 74.3 51.7 2020
70.0 53.8 61.1 75.2 73.9 71.7 77.1 71.9 70.9 47.4 2020 Q2
71.9 76.3 68.0 76.3 77.2 71.9 78.3 76.1 71.5 49.2 Q3
73.4 75.3 73.5 78.0 80.8 77.8 79.7 81.6 74.8 46.7 Q4
72.4 75.6 73.7 79.2 82.2 78.4 81.4 80.9 75.7 48.6 2021 Q1
77.0 88.2 81.1 82.2 87.1 80.7 83.2 85.8 78.1 49.5 Q2
78.0 82.1 78.3 83.6 89.7 79.1 82.7 86.6 77.6 49.4 Q3
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
6.2 5.6 3.7 3.9 4.9 7.1 6.6 5.1 15.3 8.4 2018
6.3 5.6 3.6 3.4 4.5 6.5 5.8 4.5 14.1 7.1 2019
8.6 6.8 4.3 3.9 5.4 6.9 6.7 5.0 15.5 7.6 2020
6.8 6.4 3.8 3.6 p 7.0 6.9 7.1 5.2 15.7 7.4 2021 Feb.
6.5 6.4 3.8 3.5 p 6.8 6.6 7.2 5.2 15.4 8.0 Mar.
7.0 6.4 3.7 3.4 p 7.3 7.0 7.0 5.2 15.6 9.2 Apr.
6.9 6.2 3.6 3.3 p 6.9 7.0 6.9 5.0 15.4 9.8 May
6.4 5.9 3.6 ... p 6.4 p 6.9 6.8 4.8 15.1 7.9 June
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... July
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2.5 2.0 1.7 1.6 2.1 1.2 2.5 1.9 1.7 0.8 2018
2.2 1.6 1.5 2.7 1.5 0.3 2.8 1.7 0.8 0.5 2019
1.1 0.0 0.8 1.1 1.4 –0.1 2.0 –0.3 –0.3 –1.1 2020
0.4 –0.5 0.1 1.9 1.4 0.3 0.9 –1.1 –0.1 –0.9 2021 Feb.
1.6 2.5 0.1 1.9 2.0 0.1 1.5 0.1 1.2 0.3 Mar.
2.4 3.3 0.1 1.7 1.9 –0.1 1.7 2.2 2.0 1.2 Apr.
3.5 4.0 0.2 2.0 3.0 0.5 2.0 2.2 2.4 1.5 May
3.5 3.4 0.2 1.7 2.8 –0.6 2.5 1.7 2.5 2.2 June
4.3 3.3 0.3 1.4 2.8 1.1 2.9 2.0 2.9 2.7 July
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
0.6 3.0 1.9 1.4 0.2 –0.3 –1.0 0.7 –2.5 –3.5 2018
0.5 2.4 0.4 1.8 0.6 0.1 –1.3 0.4 –2.9 1.5 2019
–7.4 –4.1 –10.1 –4.3 –8.9 –5.7 –6.2 –8.4 –11.0 –5.7 2020
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
33.7 21.0 44.8 52.4 74.0 121.5 49.6 70.3 97.4 99.2 2018
35.9 22.0 42.0 48.7 70.5 116.8 48.2 65.6 95.5 94.0 2019
47.3 24.9 54.3 54.5 83.9 133.6 60.6 80.8 120.0 118.2 2020
seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.  4 Monthly data
seasonally adjusted. Germany:  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value addedtax between July and December 2020.  6 According to Maastricht Treaty definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2019 Nov. 54.4 54.9 30.8 –0.5 3.3 10.4 –21.5 –31.9 19.4 1.0 –0.8 4.7 14.5
Dec. –118.6 –79.9 –25.2 –38.7 –20.6 –21.8 –299.1 –277.3 –6.7 7.0 –1.4 –6.1 –6.2
2020 Jan. 101.9 51.7 1.7 50.2 28.0 24.6 295.6 271.0 –5.2 –6.3 –1.0 13.1 –11.0
Feb. 60.7 50.0 20.1 10.7 22.1 42.1 93.3 51.2 –2.6 –3.0 –0.7 –3.3 4.4
Mar. 322.7 180.6 –21.1 142.1 127.8 – 4.9 101.6 106.5 –32.2 1.3 –1.0 –42.9 10.5
Apr. 293.3 101.3 54.4 192.0 180.9 –100.0 14.6 114.6 –34.2 –9.4 –1.1 –4.1 –19.7
May 293.8 121.4 32.2 172.4 177.1 8.8 –42.3 –51.2 21.3 5.5 –0.8 –0.8 17.4
June 137.5 –14.7 16.3 152.2 160.5 72.7 –146.0 –218.7 –0.7 –6.2 –1.2 –8.4 15.1
July 155.6 72.5 25.4 83.1 82.5 –35.2 89.5 124.6 0.3 1.5 –0.1 –7.1 6.1
Aug. 84.4 25.7 17.3 58.7 66.7 1.4 –18.2 –19.6 13.2 9.6 –0.4 –11.5 15.5
Sep. 83.8 –3.1 –3.2 86.9 86.1 47.4 –25.7 –73.1 10.6 –11.0 –0.2 19.4 2.5
Oct. 70.2 30.9 –5.3 39.3 33.3 –22.6 91.4 114.0 –17.0 –4.3 –0.4 –29.4 17.1
Nov. 117.6 73.0 29.3 44.6 45.3 –31.9 90.9 122.8 4.8 13.2 –0.5 –10.7 2.7
Dec. – 3.7 –1.1 29.9 –2.6 6.2 –48.2 –195.1 –146.9 10.4 –5.5 –0.5 –13.1 29.5
2021 Jan. 134.0 30.8 4.9 103.2 94.1 20.6 159.5 138.9 –37.8 –9.4 0.1 –17.3 –11.2
Feb. 99.9 33.9 9.1 66.0 72.7 –15.0 28.7 43.8 –1.4 –5.7 –0.5 –2.5 7.3
Mar. 175.9 100.6 8.5 75.3 74.0 – 4.8 –6.9 –2.1 12.0 –9.0 –0.3 1.1 20.3
Apr. 55.3 12.9 8.6 42.5 28.9 –13.2 106.0 119.2 –36.7 –24.0 –0.1 –7.2 –5.4
May 124.5 48.1 15.3 76.3 77.3 3.2 24.2 20.9 –24.3 –1.1 –0.2 –16.1 –7.0
June 85.9 30.5 –2.9 55.4 56.4 58.7 –71.1 –129.8 28.1 –5.4 –0.4 –6.5 40.3
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2019 Nov. 25.3 20.4 5.2 4.9 3.9 –23.5 –17.6 5.9 3.0 –1.9 –0.9 1.6 4.2
Dec. – 4.4 1.5 0.8 –5.9 –1.1 –38.9 –47.5 –8.6 –4.4 –0.3 –1.1 –5.8 2.7
2020 Jan. 16.3 9.5 1.9 6.8 2.6 74.7 37.7 –37.0 –9.0 –2.6 –1.5 3.8 –8.6
Feb. 24.5 25.4 4.3 –0.9 1.2 – 4.3 14.1 18.4 –4.6 –1.2 –0.6 4.8 –7.6
Mar. 47.3 31.4 –6.1 15.9 14.3 –34.3 18.5 52.8 –8.3 –3.7 –0.7 –8.2 4.3
Apr. 33.0 16.0 1.3 16.9 14.8 –28.8 8.9 37.6 –23.8 –5.1 –0.8 –2.1 –15.8
May 58.3 27.1 10.0 31.2 32.7 11.7 –22.1 –33.8 2.3 –1.5 –0.4 –1.2 5.4
June 26.4 2.6 3.5 23.7 25.9 –45.6 –20.9 24.7 –7.9 –7.1 –1.0 –7.9 8.1
July 25.9 13.8 0.3 12.2 10.3 9.4 –9.7 –19.1 –3.0 –6.9 –0.6 1.2 3.3
Aug. 9.3 7.5 1.9 1.8 7.9 5.6 –8.1 –13.7 –5.2 –2.2 –0.4 –4.4 1.8
Sep. 22.6 4.6 1.3 18.1 15.8 –34.8 22.9 57.8 10.4 –3.4 –0.4 5.1 9.1
Oct. 48.7 22.1 6.6 26.7 23.9 30.1 –16.6 –46.8 –2.0 –0.5 –0.4 –4.5 3.4
Nov. 44.0 19.6 4.5 24.5 26.0 –15.1 7.4 22.5 0.6 –1.5 –0.4 0.2 2.3
Dec. – 0.9 7.5 3.6 –8.4 –4.6 –107.2 –35.1 72.1 –7.5 –1.3 –0.3 –7.1 1.2
2021 Jan. 30.1 12.1 3.1 18.1 18.1 41.7 79.7 38.0 –11.4 –2.9 –0.6 –1.6 –6.4
Feb. 29.8 18.8 4.6 11.1 13.4 26.3 7.0 –19.3 0.8 –1.8 –0.3 4.3 –1.4
Mar. 54.1 35.8 1.8 18.3 19.5 –61.9 1.9 63.9 3.5 –3.5 –0.3 7.1 0.2
Apr. 11.4 0.5 2.4 10.8 7.0 67.3 25.3 –42.0 9.3 –2.4 –0.3 6.4 5.6
May 33.4 16.8 3.2 16.6 18.9 –35.0 –10.9 24.1 –10.3 –2.8 –0.1 –7.3 0.0
June 29.3 7.9 1.9 21.4 22.3 –36.3 –5.4 30.9 2.6 –3.4 –0.2 –7.3 13.6
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
– 1.1 –54.0 0.0 100.5 103.2 122.4 6.9 115.5 –17.7 – 1.5 –14.7 3.1 – 0.7 2019 Nov.
–66.5 –27.1 0.0 –40.2 1.5 8.2 16.3 – 8.1 –9.7 2.9 –33.6 –22.6 –18.3 Dec.
84.6 41.8 0.0 5.3 –44.2 –52.0 –7.3 –44.7 0.2 7.6 – 7.1 34.8 14.0 2020 Jan.
43.7 –34.1 0.0 95.8 82.6 84.1 5.2 79.0 –1.2 – 0.3 19.7 –4.7 4.9 Feb.
4.7 –4.5 0.0 349.7 321.2 300.5 23.8 276.8 16.2 4.5 30.0 –18.4 22.8 Mar.
72.1 –17.1 0.0 172.5 174.9 175.2 20.4 154.8 –15.0 14.7 – 4.6 23.1 –16.9 Apr.
100.9 –37.1 0.0 217.5 226.3 189.5 20.1 169.5 16.8 19.9 9.6 –0.4 – 9.1 May
123.4 1.0 0.0 86.4 79.0 88.5 13.1 75.4 –20.5 10.9 –42.7 14.4 – 1.5 June
– 4.8 –59.3 0.0 184.2 149.5 123.6 14.3 109.3 20.1 5.8 18.1 29.9 –10.1 July
40.7 13.9 0.0 18.1 35.3 44.8 5.9 38.9 –18.6 9.1 – 4.8 –0.1 – 4.3 Aug.
20.2 11.5 0.0 88.9 82.3 63.7 3.5 60.1 16.7 1.9 –29.5 8.2 – 2.5 Sep.
–17.2 –30.5 0.0 112.2 85.9 101.4 7.8 93.7 –17.9 2.5 5.3 14.3 15.5 Oct.
–98.4 51.2 0.0 128.1 125.2 151.7 11.8 139.9 –34.5 8.1 – 0.7 0.7 2.3 Nov.
–128.1 –69.7 0.0 135.6 128.3 117.1 20.8 96.2 10.6 0.6 –24.7 20.1 – 6.1 Dec.
78.9 60.9 0.0 52.7 32.0 44.4 2.6 41.9 –30.8 18.3 30.0 3.5 4.5 2021 Jan.
30.3 3.3 0.0 52.7 65.5 71.8 7.3 64.5 –17.9 11.6 2.8 –30.4 12.8 Feb.
19.6 56.6 0.0 82.8 100.8 81.9 10.4 71.5 7.3 11.7 –18.5 –4.8 –12.8 Mar.
–32.3 18.4 0.0 92.7 69.5 89.0 8.5 80.5 –27.6 8.1 15.3 7.6 5.9 Apr.
– 9.0 48.2 0.0 112.8 116.0 116.4 13.2 103.2 –11.3 10.8 – 4.1 –8.3 9.8 May
16.3 24.4 0.0 75.8 83.4 112.7 10.1 102.7 –31.4 2.2 –10.4 –8.9 – 4.6 June
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
8.2 – 29.5 4.5 0.7 20.0 24.1 – 3.4 – 0.7 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 2019 Nov.
– 2.0 – 32.4 4.9 3.4 – 4.5 – 0.4 – 6.6 0.6 1.8 – 0.1 0.0 Dec.
– 5.6 108.0 2.1 – 0.6 – 2.5 – 7.8 5.9 – 3.0 – 1.0 – 0.1 3.4 2020 Jan.
24.4 – 14.0 4.9 0.1 14.5 17.7 1.2 – 1.7 – 0.6 0.1 – 2.2 Feb.
7.5 – 71.9 12.2 0.9 85.7 93.3 – 0.4 – 3.4 – 0.3 0.4 – 3.8 Mar.
17.9 8.6 3.2 4.3 1.5 9.9 – 8.1 0.1 1.7 – 0.1 – 1.9 Apr.
28.6 – 9.3 0.3 5.3 48.4 43.4 6.2 0.3 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 0.4 May
57.8 – 69.3 – 0.4 4.7 0.1 9.9 – 7.7 – 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.2 – 0.3 June
14.2 – 11.1 2.4 3.9 35.2 27.4 8.6 – 1.1 1.3 – 0.2 – 0.8 July
21.0 – 14.2 3.8 0.9 13.3 18.6 – 4.9 0.2 – 0.4 0.3 – 0.3 Aug.
15.3 – 58.3 2.7 0.6 20.4 26.2 – 5.2 – 0.1 – 0.4 0.2 – 0.2 Sep.
– 20.0 70.5 2.4 1.7 30.3 30.6 – 0.1 – 0.0 0.2 0.6 – 1.0 Oct.
– 12.7 3.6 1.3 3.0 37.4 49.3 – 14.3 0.3 3.3 – 0.3 – 0.9 Nov.
– 22.9 – 73.4 2.4 5.6 – 4.3 – 5.8 – 1.7 1.3 3.1 0.1 – 1.3 Dec.
– 40.3 95.7 1.1 0.9 27.8 45.9 – 14.8 1.6 – 3.8 – 0.0 – 1.1 2021 Jan.
15.4 29.1 2.3 1.5 10.8 20.3 – 8.5 1.2 – 2.4 – 0.0 0.3 Feb.
– 2.3 – 38.0 2.5 2.7 29.1 24.3 – 0.6 0.1 5.0 0.5 – 0.1 Mar.
– 7.4 71.2 0.7 2.6 5.5 13.9 – 5.2 0.7 – 3.4 – 0.1 – 0.4 Apr.
18.8 – 44.9 3.0 2.9 34.8 27.8 2.8 0.6 1.7 – 0.1 2.0 May
5.6 – 14.2 3.1 2.3 – 1.0 6.4 – 7.4 – 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.3 June
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2019 May 28,185.6 18,497.1 13,854.0 11,494.6 1,549.1 810.4 4,643.0 1,000.3 3,642.7 6,027.7 3,660.8
June 28,305.8 18,522.0 13,874.9 11,521.2 1,552.5 801.2 4,647.1 1,000.0 3,647.1 5,991.7 3,792.1
July 28,772.3 18,601.9 13,939.3 11,583.7 1,550.8 804.7 4,662.6 1,002.8 3,659.8 6,208.8 3,961.7
Aug. 29,374.0 18,658.9 13,961.4 11,612.7 1,549.4 799.3 4,697.5 1,003.1 3,694.4 6,311.5 4,403.7
Sep. 29,193.7 18,651.6 13,971.2 11,595.9 1,566.6 808.7 4,680.4 996.7 3,683.7 6,300.2 4,241.9
Oct. 28,965.9 18,689.2 14,042.6 11,660.4 1,550.6 831.6 4,646.7 1,002.4 3,644.3 6,259.5 4,017.2
Nov. 29,017.5 18,729.4 14,099.5 11,684.5 1,569.3 845.7 4,629.9 998.5 3,631.4 6,270.8 4,017.3
Dec. 28,326.0 18,591.5 14,008.6 11,617.0 1,543.9 847.8 4,582.9 981.0 3,601.9 5,930.7 3,803.8
2020 Jan. 29,019.0 18,722.5 14,062.6 11,668.8 1,542.8 851.0 4,659.9 1,003.4 3,656.5 6,302.1 3,994.4
Feb. 29,486.8 18,766.9 14,101.4 11,697.3 1,562.7 841.4 4,665.5 992.3 3,673.3 6,414.8 4,305.1
Mar. 30,021.0 19,013.2 14,239.0 11,884.9 1,556.9 797.2 4,774.1 1,006.7 3,767.4 6,486.8 4,521.1
Apr. 30,449.7 19,308.0 14,348.5 11,933.4 1,612.6 802.5 4,959.5 1,018.1 3,941.4 6,585.0 4,556.7
May 30,500.6 19,609.7 14,468.3 12,020.6 1,644.9 802.8 5,141.4 1,013.8 4,127.7 6,465.5 4,425.4
June 30,406.6 19,761.1 14,451.1 11,982.0 1,653.0 816.1 5,310.0 1,005.3 4,304.7 6,298.0 4,347.6
July 30,599.0 19,912.0 14,334.0 12,013.7 1,505.9 814.4 5,578.0 1,006.0 4,572.1 6,291.5 4,395.5
Aug. 30,435.3 19,984.9 14,355.0 12,019.1 1,524.9 811.0 5,629.9 997.8 4,632.1 6,242.1 4,208.3
Sep. 30,523.7 20,084.3 14,349.1 12,019.2 1,520.0 809.9 5,735.2 998.7 4,736.5 6,239.3 4,200.1
Oct. 30,691.3 20,161.6 14,375.7 12,054.9 1,519.6 801.3 5,785.9 1,004.2 4,781.7 6,342.3 4,187.3
Nov. 30,752.9 20,291.3 14,456.9 12,090.4 1,541.5 825.0 5,834.4 1,003.4 4,831.0 6,334.9 4,126.7
Dec. 30,441.6 20,265.3 14,437.5 12,042.9 1,531.4 863.2 5,827.8 990.2 4,837.6 6,112.1 4,064.2
2021 Jan. 30,644.4 20,387.7 14,466.1 12,067.9 1,535.6 862.6 5,921.6 999.4 4,922.2 6,300.1 3,956.6
Feb. 30,546.9 20,463.6 14,500.5 12,090.2 1,541.1 869.2 5,963.1 992.4 4,970.7 6,300.8 3,782.5
Mar. 30,827.5 20,653.7 14,576.8 12,185.3 1,512.4 879.0 6,076.9 993.3 5,083.6 6,360.6 3,813.2
Apr. 30,754.3 20,666.6 14,566.2 12,168.9 1,509.6 887.7 6,100.4 1,007.1 5,093.3 6,397.7 3,690.0
May 30,890.8 20,787.2 14,612.2 12,198.1 1,521.5 892.6 6,175.0 1,006.2 5,168.9 6,435.0 3,668.6
June 30,982.9 20,882.1 14,646.0 12,231.0 1,530.0 885.0 6,236.1 1,005.2 5,231.0 6,405.0 3,695.8
German contribution (€ billion)
2019 May 6,524.8 4,402.6 3,446.8 2,995.6 190.0 261.1 955.8 293.1 662.8 1,284.5 837.7
June 6,619.8 4,431.8 3,473.1 3,017.0 194.4 261.7 958.6 291.2 667.5 1,294.2 893.7
July 6,698.2 4,445.3 3,481.1 3,024.8 194.0 262.3 964.2 293.7 670.5 1,312.3 940.7
Aug. 6,973.5 4,478.6 3,501.8 3,044.3 196.5 261.0 976.8 293.5 683.3 1,330.9 1,163.9
Sep. 6,872.6 4,462.9 3,497.0 3,040.4 196.0 260.5 965.9 288.3 677.6 1,311.9 1,097.8
Oct. 6,769.9 4,466.0 3,506.4 3,049.0 195.9 261.4 959.5 291.6 667.9 1,303.7 1,000.3
Nov. 6,785.4 4,490.1 3,527.4 3,064.8 199.7 262.9 962.6 292.6 670.0 1,289.6 1,005.8
Dec. 6,716.1 4,480.4 3,527.3 3,064.0 197.9 265.4 953.1 288.5 664.6 1,236.4 999.3
2020 Jan. 6,847.7 4,503.3 3,537.5 3,071.5 198.2 267.8 965.8 292.8 673.0 1,290.1 1,054.4
Feb. 7,028.5 4,531.0 3,562.2 3,092.6 203.2 266.4 968.8 290.8 678.0 1,306.1 1,191.4
Mar. 7,148.1 4,567.1 3,589.0 3,128.9 202.1 258.0 978.1 292.4 685.7 1,321.3 1,259.6
Apr. 7,258.0 4,605.2 3,606.5 3,143.8 206.5 256.1 998.7 294.8 703.9 1,346.6 1,306.2
May 7,230.4 4,666.4 3,640.1 3,167.2 215.9 257.1 1,026.2 293.8 732.5 1,326.0 1,238.1
June 7,225.3 4,692.6 3,641.6 3,164.7 220.4 256.6 1,051.0 291.5 759.6 1,304.2 1,228.5
July 7,267.6 4,718.8 3,634.9 3,175.5 202.7 256.7 1,083.9 293.4 790.5 1,282.9 1,265.8
Aug. 7,167.3 4,723.0 3,642.2 3,180.7 202.9 258.6 1,080.8 287.4 793.3 1,268.8 1,175.5
Sep. 7,236.4 4,749.2 3,647.1 3,184.0 204.9 258.1 1,102.1 289.7 812.4 1,293.8 1,193.4
Oct. 7,257.1 4,801.4 3,670.3 3,200.4 210.7 259.3 1,131.1 292.0 839.1 1,278.8 1,176.8
Nov. 7,240.5 4,841.7 3,688.6 3,213.7 214.3 260.6 1,153.1 290.2 862.9 1,261.9 1,136.9
Dec. 7,172.5 4,839.4 3,695.5 3,216.4 214.7 264.5 1,143.9 286.4 857.4 1,224.1 1,109.1
2021 Jan. 7,220.7 4,865.5 3,705.9 3,224.4 216.4 265.1 1,159.6 286.5 873.1 1,307.6 1,047.6
Feb. 7,182.0 4,885.0 3,724.3 3,238.8 217.4 268.1 1,160.7 283.8 877.0 1,305.0 991.9
Mar. 7,233.5 4,939.8 3,761.1 3,273.4 217.3 270.4 1,178.7 282.6 896.1 1,315.4 978.3
Apr. 7,228.4 4,946.1 3,760.5 3,270.3 217.6 272.6 1,185.6 285.7 899.9 1,333.6 948.6
May 7,228.0 4,977.5 3,777.2 3,283.3 219.5 274.4 1,200.3 283.4 916.9 1,329.8 920.7
June 7,276.3 5,009.6 3,786.0 3,290.0 220.8 275.2 1,223.6 282.5 941.1 1,325.1 941.6
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,184.2 13,059.3 12,198.6 12,257.0 7,048.4 776.2 201.4 1,876.7 2,302.3 52.1 2019 May
1,191.7 13,181.6 12,288.1 12,335.7 7,121.7 762.8 198.3 1,894.2 2,305.5 53.2 June
1,200.7 13,178.8 12,300.1 12,350.5 7,146.8 767.8 198.9 1,873.6 2,309.7 53.7 July
1,202.0 13,283.3 12,388.8 12,438.4 7,226.4 782.5 201.0 1,860.5 2,314.5 53.4 Aug.
1,205.4 13,298.4 12,383.2 12,446.2 7,221.7 769.3 200.8 1,886.9 2,314.4 53.0 Sep.
1,208.2 13,292.6 12,422.6 12,487.1 7,283.5 758.7 201.3 1,883.2 2,311.1 49.4 Oct.
1,215.1 13,389.0 12,520.8 12,572.5 7,386.6 740.9 200.6 1,885.5 2,310.4 48.6 Nov.
1,231.5 13,311.4 12,508.3 12,583.4 7,391.7 738.4 200.1 1,892.8 2,314.1 46.2 Dec.
1,224.1 13,359.6 12,460.6 12,555.5 7,362.8 734.5 200.1 1,891.0 2,322.3 44.7 2020 Jan.
1,229.3 13,477.0 12,528.5 12,615.6 7,430.6 731.6 198.6 1,888.7 2,322.0 44.1 Feb.
1,253.1 13,775.3 12,782.4 12,903.7 7,698.1 759.4 192.1 1,883.4 2,327.6 43.1 Mar.
1,273.5 13,996.0 12,953.0 13,065.1 7,852.4 762.3 188.2 1,876.7 2,343.4 42.1 Apr.
1,293.5 14,302.8 13,164.0 13,264.9 8,009.7 779.7 188.4 1,881.9 2,363.7 41.4 May
1,306.6 14,478.4 13,208.9 13,310.8 8,066.5 763.6 186.8 1,877.8 2,375.5 40.6 June
1,320.9 14,593.1 13,276.6 13,363.7 8,090.1 783.2 186.3 1,882.5 2,381.1 40.4 July
1,326.8 14,668.3 13,304.3 13,391.2 8,117.1 767.8 184.4 1,892.0 2,390.0 40.0 Aug.
1,330.3 14,758.7 13,361.0 13,467.6 8,175.8 781.0 195.4 1,883.6 2,392.0 39.8 Sep.
1,338.1 14,815.0 13,431.7 13,545.6 8,266.7 782.6 181.9 1,880.4 2,394.6 39.4 Oct.
1,349.9 14,813.3 13,527.2 13,621.6 8,358.3 756.5 179.6 1,885.7 2,402.5 39.0 Nov.
1,370.7 14,773.2 13,620.6 13,728.8 8,459.6 772.0 176.9 1,877.6 2,404.2 38.5 Dec.
1,373.3 14,874.2 13,630.7 13,752.9 8,505.4 743.9 173.9 1,870.6 2,421.0 38.1 2021 Jan.
1,380.6 14,958.1 13,678.1 13,807.9 8,569.5 733.7 169.3 1,865.1 2,432.5 37.7 Feb.
1,391.1 15,075.9 13,755.8 13,913.0 8,654.2 753.5 164.3 1,858.8 2,444.8 37.4 Mar.
1,399.6 15,060.9 13,774.5 13,935.8 8,726.4 732.1 159.5 1,827.5 2,453.0 37.3 Apr.
1,412.8 15,147.3 13,870.4 14,017.8 8,810.2 725.1 155.6 1,826.1 2,463.6 37.1 May
1,422.9 15,240.6 13,942.3 14,090.5 8,913.2 701.4 150.3 1,822.7 2,466.0 36.8 June
German contribution (€ billion)
272.1 3,824.2 3,689.1 3,523.2 2,176.6 149.4 32.7 582.9 543.7 37.9 2019 May
274.2 3,837.7 3,697.8 3,528.6 2,183.2 147.8 32.3 583.5 543.3 38.4 June
277.3 3,812.4 3,701.4 3,532.6 2,191.7 147.0 31.6 581.4 542.7 38.1 July
276.6 3,849.7 3,730.3 3,550.9 2,213.2 149.7 31.7 576.9 541.5 37.8 Aug.
277.4 3,853.5 3,722.1 3,546.0 2,213.9 146.4 31.5 576.1 540.8 37.2 Sep.
277.6 3,848.5 3,734.8 3,571.5 2,240.3 148.6 31.2 575.2 539.9 36.4 Oct.
278.4 3,874.7 3,753.7 3,580.0 2,257.7 143.0 30.8 573.7 539.2 35.6 Nov.
281.8 3,863.9 3,744.4 3,574.3 2,250.5 144.8 31.0 573.5 540.0 34.5 Dec.
281.2 3,850.4 3,733.8 3,572.3 2,255.2 145.3 31.0 570.6 537.2 33.0 2020 Jan.
281.3 3,890.4 3,750.4 3,576.3 2,265.3 142.0 31.3 569.8 535.4 32.5 Feb.
282.2 3,982.8 3,830.4 3,655.2 2,346.4 147.3 30.5 567.2 532.0 31.8 Mar.
286.5 3,997.3 3,828.9 3,665.7 2,359.6 149.2 30.0 563.6 532.2 31.1 Apr.
291.8 4,080.7 3,885.8 3,710.9 2,396.9 158.3 29.0 563.6 532.5 30.7 May
296.5 4,132.2 3,873.6 3,711.6 2,408.7 152.1 29.6 559.0 532.6 29.7 June
300.4 4,170.7 3,880.3 3,716.8 2,409.9 163.5 30.0 552.8 531.5 29.2 July
301.3 4,202.4 3,889.9 3,720.2 2,419.2 159.3 30.1 551.3 531.6 28.8 Aug.
301.9 4,235.6 3,905.7 3,745.0 2,445.3 160.3 30.3 549.2 531.5 28.4 Sep.
303.6 4,245.3 3,935.3 3,781.4 2,476.4 165.4 30.5 549.7 531.5 28.0 Oct.
306.6 4,260.2 3,961.8 3,804.4 2,507.7 157.7 30.6 549.0 531.8 27.6 Nov.
312.2 4,228.5 3,954.1 3,801.5 2,500.9 160.3 31.0 548.8 533.1 27.3 Dec.
313.1 4,218.7 3,980.7 3,829.7 2,541.7 147.0 31.0 548.5 534.8 26.8 2021 Jan.
314.6 4,245.1 3,990.0 3,837.4 2,555.8 141.0 31.1 547.0 536.0 26.4 Feb.
317.3 4,264.3 4,011.8 3,863.4 2,579.8 145.1 31.7 544.6 536.1 26.1 Mar.
319.9 4,262.2 4,013.0 3,874.5 2,594.4 143.0 31.9 542.5 536.8 25.8 Apr.
322.8 4,308.8 4,040.3 3,895.1 2,613.5 146.0 32.2 540.4 537.4 25.7 May
325.1 4,310.7 4,035.3 3,890.5 2,618.7 139.8 31.9 537.5 537.0 25.5 June
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2019 May 370.7 431.6 216.9 94.9 33.4 57.0 25.1 4.3 287.4 287.0 522.6 2,191.0 1,497.2
June 404.2 441.8 224.4 94.6 35.1 58.1 25.2 4.4 266.0 265.7 510.6 2,182.2 1,493.8
July 391.2 437.1 221.5 93.8 34.1 58.2 25.2 4.4 284.1 283.8 533.0 2,189.1 1,492.7
Aug. 397.4 447.4 228.3 97.2 34.1 58.3 25.3 4.3 289.0 288.5 550.9 2,173.6 1,484.1
Sep. 402.9 449.3 231.4 98.0 31.7 58.9 25.0 4.2 257.0 256.5 537.1 2,181.1 1,484.7
Oct. 365.0 440.5 224.5 95.5 32.3 59.1 25.2 3.9 298.8 298.3 538.6 2,174.6 1,488.4
Nov. 363.9 452.6 235.7 95.5 33.8 59.1 24.8 3.8 284.3 283.7 541.6 2,187.8 1,493.0
Dec. 297.5 430.4 224.7 85.9 33.7 59.1 23.6 3.6 250.3 249.8 520.3 2,153.8 1,486.7
2020 Jan. 381.8 422.3 209.6 92.7 33.2 59.5 23.2 4.1 243.4 242.9 555.1 2,187.7 1,500.2
Feb. 425.5 436.0 219.8 96.8 32.8 59.2 23.3 4.0 263.2 262.7 550.5 2,191.4 1,497.8
Mar. 430.2 441.4 232.8 93.3 31.0 58.2 22.3 3.9 293.2 292.6 529.8 2,175.2 1,484.3
Apr. 502.3 428.6 233.9 84.0 29.4 56.4 21.1 3.8 289.0 288.6 552.9 2,159.1 1,472.6
May 603.1 434.8 245.9 81.7 28.4 54.7 20.3 3.8 297.8 297.5 552.4 2,134.1 1,470.7
June 726.5 441.1 259.5 82.4 24.6 51.8 19.3 3.4 254.8 254.6 566.9 2,109.6 1,455.2
July 787.8 441.5 264.3 80.1 23.2 51.0 19.4 3.5 271.8 271.6 596.8 2,059.9 1,436.2
Aug. 828.6 448.5 273.6 79.5 22.1 50.3 19.6 3.5 266.9 266.7 597.4 2,041.3 1,427.0
Sep. 849.0 442.1 274.8 74.4 20.8 49.1 19.5 3.4 237.7 237.5 605.6 2,065.3 1,432.8
Oct. 831.8 437.6 277.4 69.5 20.8 47.0 19.5 3.4 243.1 242.9 619.8 2,052.2 1,420.4
Nov. 733.3 458.4 307.1 64.6 17.8 46.1 19.4 3.3 246.4 246.4 620.5 2,033.1 1,408.3
Dec. 605.1 439.3 294.7 60.3 17.2 44.8 19.0 3.3 221.4 221.3 636.2 2,001.9 1,387.9
2021 Jan. 684.1 437.2 294.4 58.8 17.3 43.9 19.1 3.8 251.7 251.6 639.7 1,994.9 1,371.2
Feb. 714.4 435.9 296.3 54.3 18.9 43.7 19.0 3.7 254.6 254.5 609.2 2,008.0 1,371.0
Mar. 733.8 429.1 295.3 52.1 16.3 42.9 18.8 3.7 236.6 236.6 604.4 2,009.6 1,359.2
Apr. 701.6 423.5 293.9 48.5 16.1 42.6 18.7 3.6 251.2 251.1 612.0 1,994.9 1,351.7
May 692.6 436.8 308.2 47.7 15.9 42.4 19.1 3.5 246.8 246.8 603.2 1,984.8 1,340.6
June 709.0 441.2 313.8 46.6 16.3 42.1 18.8 3.5 237.0 236.9 594.2 1,986.0 1,331.7
German contribution (€ billion)
2019 May 60.3 240.7 77.4 81.7 28.3 49.6 3.2 0.5 11.2 11.2 2.0 560.1 300.1
June 64.0 245.1 80.4 81.5 29.0 50.6 3.1 0.5 12.9 12.9 2.0 558.0 301.8
July 36.9 242.9 79.6 80.7 28.2 50.8 3.1 0.5 13.9 13.9 2.0 559.4 296.9
Aug. 47.6 251.2 84.7 83.8 28.1 50.9 3.2 0.5 16.9 16.7 2.0 557.3 295.0
Sep. 57.3 250.3 84.6 85.0 25.8 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.5 1.3 2.2 563.5 297.7
Oct. 37.4 239.6 76.3 82.4 26.1 51.3 3.1 0.5 1.2 1.0 2.1 555.2 299.2
Nov. 45.4 249.3 83.4 83.9 27.4 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.7 1.5 1.9 560.4 302.2
Dec. 43.4 246.2 89.5 75.4 27.0 51.0 2.9 0.4 3.5 3.4 1.8 551.4 301.6
2020 Jan. 37.8 240.2 77.8 81.4 26.6 51.3 2.7 0.4 2.5 2.4 1.8 560.9 306.5
Feb. 62.2 251.9 85.5 86.0 26.3 50.9 2.8 0.4 2.0 1.8 1.8 563.9 310.3
Mar. 69.7 257.9 97.6 82.5 24.7 49.8 2.8 0.4 1.7 1.6 2.2 553.0 310.7
Apr. 87.5 244.0 94.7 74.4 23.7 48.3 2.7 0.4 3.4 3.3 2.1 550.6 306.2
May 116.2 253.6 108.0 72.9 22.9 46.7 2.8 0.3 2.4 2.3 1.9 543.1 305.4
June 174.0 246.5 106.1 74.1 19.5 44.0 2.5 0.3 0.9 0.7 1.8 532.8 297.2
July 208.5 245.3 109.6 71.4 18.3 43.2 2.5 0.3 2.1 2.0 1.6 523.3 293.3
Aug. 229.5 252.8 118.7 71.3 17.4 42.4 2.6 0.3 1.7 1.5 1.9 517.9 291.1
Sep. 244.7 245.8 119.4 66.0 16.5 41.1 2.5 0.3 1.3 1.1 2.0 525.3 296.1
Oct. 224.8 239.1 119.1 61.7 16.6 39.0 2.5 0.3 1.4 1.3 2.7 519.9 296.2
Nov. 212.1 243.7 131.6 57.3 14.0 38.0 2.5 0.2 9.1 9.1 2.4 515.5 296.1
Dec. 189.2 237.8 131.9 52.8 13.5 36.8 2.5 0.2 12.2 12.2 2.5 503.3 290.1
2021 Jan. 148.9 240.1 136.5 51.6 13.5 35.8 2.4 0.2 8.4 8.4 2.4 503.3 284.6
Feb. 164.3 243.4 142.8 47.3 15.2 35.5 2.5 0.2 6.0 6.0 2.4 510.0 288.4
Mar. 161.9 239.0 144.4 44.9 12.7 34.4 2.4 0.2 11.0 11.0 2.9 523.3 289.8
Apr. 154.6 233.1 142.4 41.5 12.5 34.1 2.4 0.2 7.6 7.6 2.8 524.3 296.2
May 173.3 240.3 150.8 41.0 12.5 33.4 2.4 0.2 9.2 9.2 2.2 518.0 293.2
June 179.0 241.2 152.8 39.9 13.0 32.9 2.4 0.2 9.4 9.3 2.2 515.4 294.6
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
23.4 22.1 2,145.4 4,776.3 2,774.6 26.3 3,364.1 0.0 8,575.0 12,032.4 12,675.1 6,910.2 149.7 2019 May
20.0 21.6 2,140.6 4,640.6 2,830.3 33.6 3,469.1 0.0 8,669.1 12,114.5 12,741.2 6,980.7 155.2 June
16.1 21.3 2,151.6 4,796.8 2,878.9 25.7 3,685.3 0.0 8,697.8 12,150.2 12,798.2 7,020.3 151.7 July
2.7 20.7 2,150.1 4,854.7 2,940.4 – 2.9 4,083.0 0.0 8,786.7 12,264.2 12,915.0 7,066.9 152.7 Aug.
3.2 19.0 2,158.9 4,803.5 2,942.7 25.4 3,943.1 0.0 8,788.8 12,251.2 12,883.3 7,104.7 153.4 Sep.
7.5 19.8 2,147.2 4,768.1 2,935.0 34.1 3,716.0 0.0 8,846.0 12,293.2 12,936.5 7,077.7 152.9 Oct.
6.8 19.5 2,161.5 4,770.3 2,922.7 31.1 3,675.5 0.0 8,971.7 12,401.3 13,041.7 7,081.1 157.9 Nov.
– 11.3 19.2 2,145.9 4,452.2 2,912.4 25.0 3,469.1 0.0 8,975.3 12,395.7 12,995.3 7,060.0 152.0 Dec.
– 0.4 21.9 2,166.2 4,759.3 2,949.8 24.3 3,715.6 0.0 8,927.4 12,357.5 13,006.4 7,115.3 154.9 2020 Jan.
3.6 23.4 2,164.4 4,817.2 2,966.7 26.4 3,965.0 0.0 9,012.7 12,441.8 13,104.6 7,127.1 156.9 Feb.
29.9 21.7 2,123.7 4,907.3 2,930.7 11.6 4,144.8 0.0 9,312.6 12,762.0 13,453.0 7,043.0 152.5 Mar.
12.8 21.5 2,124.8 5,048.8 2,947.0 – 25.4 4,209.0 0.0 9,490.6 12,941.2 13,629.7 7,050.8 153.0 Apr.
3.8 22.3 2,108.0 4,946.7 2,952.7 – 33.1 4,053.6 0.0 9,682.0 13,166.2 13,846.0 7,042.6 154.7 May
3.3 21.6 2,084.7 4,708.0 2,977.4 – 4.2 4,009.1 0.0 9,768.9 13,242.8 13,930.3 7,035.8 158.0 June
– 7.9 20.6 2,047.1 4,729.4 3,017.5 – 54.6 4,064.3 0.0 9,813.1 13,308.1 14,027.1 7,042.1 159.4 July
– 11.3 19.7 2,032.9 4,696.1 3,014.5 – 38.8 3,862.7 0.0 9,856.0 13,340.6 14,043.0 7,033.2 160.0 Aug.
– 9.4 16.0 2,058.7 4,651.4 3,011.2 – 15.9 3,879.4 0.0 9,923.5 13,428.0 14,138.0 7,045.9 163.9 Sep.
3.1 18.6 2,030.4 4,774.0 3,038.2 – 47.9 3,858.8 0.0 10,026.0 13,516.4 14,252.4 7,038.9 165.3 Oct.
3.5 20.1 2,009.5 4,853.0 2,995.8 – 44.2 3,885.1 0.0 10,167.5 13,629.7 14,372.0 6,979.5 174.0 Nov.
– 0.4 17.6 1,984.7 4,657.1 3,020.4 – 11.2 3,771.9 0.0 10,278.9 13,750.6 14,495.3 6,969.3 176.0 Dec.
5.0 16.4 1,973.6 4,822.2 2,998.2 – 10.3 3,700.6 0.0 10,326.1 13,784.6 14,549.9 6,928.1 177.5 2021 Jan.
16.6 17.0 1,974.3 4,873.8 2,952.7 – 10.9 3,520.7 0.0 10,398.6 13,851.0 14,603.1 6,877.2 176.8 Feb.
2.7 17.6 1,989.3 4,943.8 2,967.4 16.8 3,582.0 0.0 10,489.4 13,963.4 14,697.4 6,899.6 173.1 Mar.
8.9 17.2 1,968.8 4,992.1 2,947.9 11.4 3,484.3 0.0 10,569.3 14,021.3 14,777.7 6,827.7 173.5 Apr.
17.9 17.6 1,949.3 4,997.7 2,968.3 53.3 3,476.7 0.0 10,683.4 14,134.3 14,886.4 6,826.7 176.1 May
13.6 17.9 1,954.6 4,920.1 2,983.1 53.8 3,545.2 0.0 10,803.2 14,226.8 14,972.1 6,842.7 177.3 June
German contribution (€ billion)
18.9 8.4 532.9 944.9 702.5 –1,016.3 1,496.1 404.8 2,254.0 3,093.0 3,133.5 1,906.3 0.0 2019 May
19.7 7.6 530.7 957.2 722.3 –1,013.1 1,542.9 407.8 2,263.6 3,100.7 3,142.8 1,926.0 0.0 June
19.7 7.9 531.9 925.0 735.6 –950.3 1,600.3 411.4 2,271.3 3,104.7 3,148.2 1,938.3 0.0 July
20.3 7.6 529.4 944.3 757.0 –980.7 1,826.9 417.2 2,297.9 3,135.9 3,182.8 1,952.6 0.0 Aug.
22.3 7.4 533.8 927.2 755.6 –992.1 1,761.2 422.1 2,298.5 3,131.2 3,164.7 1,954.3 0.0 Sep.
20.7 6.7 527.8 867.4 750.0 –918.5 1,664.0 426.3 2,316.5 3,147.7 3,178.4 1,941.3 0.0 Oct.
21.4 5.8 533.1 877.7 749.1 –951.9 1,671.9 430.8 2,341.2 3,168.5 3,199.3 1,943.1 0.0 Nov.
21.0 6.1 524.3 863.5 750.1 –999.8 1,681.4 435.8 2,340.1 3,161.1 3,193.6 1,933.9 0.0 Dec.
23.9 6.7 530.2 831.0 757.2 –900.5 1,744.6 437.9 2,333.0 3,157.1 3,192.1 1,942.8 0.0 2020 Jan.
21.7 6.8 535.4 850.2 764.8 –912.0 1,867.4 442.7 2,350.9 3,174.6 3,207.0 1,953.8 0.0 Feb.
18.4 6.3 528.3 901.4 757.6 –990.7 1,940.1 455.0 2,444.0 3,263.9 3,292.5 1,935.1 0.0 Mar.
15.9 6.9 527.8 942.0 759.1 –1,003.6 2,007.1 458.2 2,454.3 3,266.4 3,294.7 1,930.3 0.0 Apr.
14.9 7.3 520.8 917.3 756.1 –1,003.8 1,932.8 458.5 2,505.0 3,323.2 3,349.8 1,918.3 0.0 May
14.8 7.1 510.9 939.7 769.1 –1,074.1 1,923.1 458.1 2,514.8 3,325.2 3,349.7 1,913.0 0.0 June
12.8 6.7 503.7 907.0 784.6 –1,089.1 1,967.5 460.5 2,519.5 3,336.8 3,360.1 1,913.6 0.0 July
12.0 7.2 498.7 891.2 778.4 –1,114.7 1,888.5 464.3 2,537.9 3,350.2 3,372.9 1,899.9 0.0 Aug.
12.4 6.7 506.2 952.4 787.3 –1,172.8 1,905.3 467.0 2,564.6 3,371.8 3,394.2 1,912.5 0.0 Sep.
11.1 7.0 501.8 906.4 794.7 –1,107.6 1,894.1 469.4 2,595.4 3,403.6 3,425.7 1,913.5 0.0 Oct.
10.0 7.1 498.4 923.3 780.2 –1,109.5 1,859.4 470.7 2,639.3 3,433.2 3,461.8 1,893.5 0.0 Nov.
9.0 6.6 487.7 985.7 787.5 –1,192.0 1,844.9 473.1 2,632.8 3,426.1 3,456.4 1,888.4 0.0 Dec.
7.8 6.8 488.7 1,026.4 778.3 –1,113.3 1,796.5 474.2 2,678.2 3,458.5 3,483.9 1,878.3 0.0 2021 Jan.
7.4 7.5 495.1 1,007.6 756.3 –1,095.7 1,750.3 476.5 2,698.6 3,471.7 3,494.9 1,860.6 0.0 Feb.
8.1 6.8 508.4 1,080.1 754.4 –1,144.4 1,742.0 479.0 2,724.1 3,497.0 3,525.7 1,868.2 0.0 Mar.
7.8 6.6 510.0 1,029.5 759.2 –1,074.2 1,717.0 479.7 2,736.8 3,505.0 3,529.7 1,871.8 0.0 Apr.
9.6 6.7 501.7 1,051.5 768.2 –1,126.5 1,696.6 482.8 2,764.3 3,535.8 3,563.5 1,869.6 0.0 May
9.8 6.9 498.8 1,088.8 775.3 –1,149.9 1,724.4 485.9 2,771.6 3,535.6 3,563.9 1,870.3 0.0 June
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2019 July 710.3 4.6 700.1 0.0 2,620.4 570.8 0.0 1,240.8 295.9 592.2 1,335.7 3,147.4
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 720.2 3.0 692.5 0.0 2,612.4 555.7 0.0 1,251.1 268.5 621.2 1,331.5 3,138.3
Oct. 758.5 2.0 668.5 0.0 2,608.7 456.6 0.0 1,252.7 298.6 641.3 1,388.5 3,097.8
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 773.3 1.8 663.7 0.0 2,618.8 257.9 0.0 1,262.9 226.6 648.1 1,662.1 3,182.9
2020 Jan. 768.6 2.9 616.1 0.0 2,639.1 254.6 0.0 1,282.2 211.8 654.3 1,623.7 3,160.6
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 767.1 1.4 615.9 0.0 2,666.7 244.6 0.0 1,277.1 268.6 618.4 1,642.3 3,164.1
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 926.3 0.6 865.7 0.0 2,784.2 271.8 0.0 1,321.9 374.4 788.6 1,820.2 3,413.8
June 950.4 0.3 984.2 0.0 2,986.9 299.9 0.0 1,347.9 477.1 830.5 1,966.5 3,614.4
July 871.3 0.8 1,401.5 0.0 3,168.2 356.0 0.0 1,365.7 671.2 703.1 2,345.9 4,067.5
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 865.9 1.3 1,593.2 0.0 3,323.6 413.2 0.0 1,381.2 712.9 651.0 2,625.7 4,420.1
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 864.4 1.3 1,707.8 0.0 3,475.8 460.7 0.0 1,389.1 749.0 653.5 2,797.0 4,646.8
Dec. 865.1 0.5 1,754.4 0.0 3,614.7 535.4 0.0 1,403.9 647.0 687.7 2,960.7 4,900.0
2021 Jan. 848.6 0.3 1,792.6 0.0 3,712.9 586.9 0.0 1,429.4 530.3 778.4 3,029.4 5,045.7
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 834.9 0.4 1,792.4 0.0 3,825.1 598.0 0.0 1,433.4 595.8 667.9 3,157.7 5,189.1
Apr. 816.7 0.3 2,054.6 0.0 3,951.4 676.4 0.0 1,447.7 644.5 633.4 3,421.1 5,545.2
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 809.8 0.2 2,107.0 0.0 4,092.7 706.5 0.0 1,465.8 586.7 659.1 3,591.7 5,763.9
July 821.7 0.1 2,196.0 0.0 4,244.5 736.6 0.0 1,485.8 652.3 734.5 3,653.1 5,875.5
Deutsche Bundesbank
2019 July 169.4 0.7 85.3 0.0 563.1 150.1 0.0 303.0 65.7 – 175.0 474.5 927.7
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 172.5 0.5 84.9 0.0 562.7 150.1 0.0 305.6 57.6 – 157.6 464.9 920.6
Oct. 182.8 0.4 82.8 0.0 560.0 151.5 0.0 306.5 70.8 – 159.4 456.6 914.7
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 186.9 0.4 82.4 0.0 566.1 82.2 0.0 307.6 55.9 – 135.3 525.4 915.3
2020 Jan. 186.0 0.9 74.0 0.0 567.9 73.6 0.0 311.7 52.7 – 95.7 486.5 871.8
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 185.0 0.4 74.0 0.0 573.7 65.4 0.0 311.2 64.4 – 125.0 517.1 893.7
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 238.0 0.2 106.8 0.0 585.3 76.3 0.0 324.1 102.0 – 174.5 602.8 1,003.2
June 248.7 0.1 122.5 0.0 623.1 85.0 0.0 326.4 137.6 – 172.6 618.1 1,029.5
July 222.1 0.5 235.2 0.0 655.9 108.2 0.0 331.5 205.0 – 238.1 707.1 1,146.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 212.1 0.8 284.0 0.0 692.0 136.0 0.0 336.4 239.6 – 298.0 774.8 1,247.3
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 212.1 0.7 319.5 0.0 729.0 145.5 0.0 338.1 254.7 – 302.9 826.0 1,309.6
Dec. 213.0 0.3 333.9 0.0 768.7 166.6 0.0 341.2 217.9 – 294.5 884.7 1,392.5
2021 Jan. 208.3 0.1 341.1 0.0 791.3 178.9 0.0 347.3 189.4 – 252.8 878.0 1,404.2
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 205.3 0.1 341.0 0.0 816.9 177.5 0.0 348.3 172.7 – 298.0 962.8 1,488.6
Apr. 198.0 0.0 407.3 0.0 845.8 203.0 0.0 351.7 187.4 – 300.4 1,008.9 1,563.5
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 194.3 0.0 420.5 0.0 884.3 208.5 0.0 356.8 187.3 – 301.9 1,046.7 1,612.0
July 197.4 0.0 434.3 0.0 918.5 204.2 0.0 362.0 206.8 – 270.8 1,046.2 1,612.4
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
+20.6 – 0.9 –18.5 – 0.4 –10.2 –31.1 ± 0.0 +12.6 +47.7 +30.3 –68.9 –87.3 2019 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 9.9 – 1.6 – 7.6 ± 0.0 – 8.0 –15.1 ± 0.0 +10.3 –27.4 +29.0 – 4.2 – 9.1 Sep.
+38.3 – 1.0 –24.0 ± 0.0 – 3.7 –99.1 ± 0.0 + 1.6 +30.1 +20.1 +57.0 –40.5 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+14.8 – 0.2 – 4.8 ± 0.0 +10.1 –198.7 ± 0.0 +10.2 –72.0 + 6.8 +273.6 +85.1 Dec.
– 4.7 + 1.1 –47.6 ± 0.0 +20.3 – 3.3 ± 0.0 +19.3 –14.8 + 6.2 –38.4 –22.3 2020 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
– 1.5 – 1.5 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +27.6 –10.0 ± 0.0 – 5.1 +56.8 –35.9 +18.6 + 3.5 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+159.2 – 0.8 +249.8 ± 0.0 +117.5 +27.2 ± 0.0 +44.8 +105.8 +170.2 +177.9 +249.7 May
+24.1 – 0.3 +118.5 ± 0.0 +202.7 +28.1 ± 0.0 +26.0 +102.7 +41.9 +146.3 +200.6 June
–79.1 + 0.5 +417.3 ± 0.0 +181.3 +56.1 ± 0.0 +17.8 +194.1 –127.4 +379.4 +453.1 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
– 5.4 + 0.5 +191.7 ± 0.0 +155.4 +57.2 ± 0.0 +15.5 +41.7 –52.1 +279.8 +352.6 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
– 1.5 ± 0.0 +114.6 ± 0.0 +152.2 +47.5 ± 0.0 + 7.9 +36.1 + 2.5 +171.3 +226.7 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.8 +46.6 ± 0.0 +138.9 +74.7 ± 0.0 +14.8 –102.0 +34.2 +163.7 +253.2 Dec.
–16.5 – 0.2 +38.2 ± 0.0 +98.2 +51.5 ± 0.0 +25.5 –116.7 +90.7 +68.7 +145.7 2021 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
–13.7 + 0.1 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +112.2 +11.1 ± 0.0 + 4.0 +65.5 –110.5 +128.3 +143.4 Mar.
–18.2 – 0.1 +262.2 ± 0.0 +126.3 +78.4 ± 0.0 +14.3 +48.7 –34.5 +263.4 +356.1 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
– 6.9 – 0.1 +52.4 ± 0.0 +141.3 +30.1 ± 0.0 +18.1 –57.8 +25.7 +170.6 +218.7 June
+11.9 – 0.1 +89.0 ± 0.0 +151.8 +30.1 ± 0.0 +20.0 +65.6 +75.4 +61.4 +111.6 July
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 5.7 + 0.0 – 0.9 + 0.0 – 2.1 –16.2 ± 0.0 + 3.5 +7.6 +38.6 –30.7 –43.5 2019 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 3.2 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.4 + 0.0 ± 0.0 + 2.5 –8.1 +17.4 – 9.6 – 7.1 Sep.
+10.3 – 0.1 – 2.1 + 0.0 – 2.7 + 1.4 ± 0.0 + 1.0 +13.2 – 1.8 – 8.3 – 5.9 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 4.1 + 0.0 – 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.1 –69.3 ± 0.0 + 1.1 –14.9 +24.1 +68.8 + 0.6 Dec.
– 0.9 + 0.4 – 8.5 + 0.0 + 1.8 – 8.6 ± 0.0 + 4.1 –3.2 +39.6 –38.9 –43.5 2020 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
– 1.0 – 0.5 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 5.8 – 8.2 ± 0.0 – 0.5 +11.7 –29.3 +30.7 +21.9 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+53.0 – 0.2 +32.9 – 0.0 +11.6 +10.9 ± 0.0 +12.9 +37.6 –49.6 +85.6 +109.5 May
+10.7 – 0.1 +15.7 + 0.0 +37.8 + 8.7 ± 0.0 + 2.3 +35.6 + 2.0 +15.3 +26.3 June
–26.6 + 0.4 +112.6 – 0.0 +32.8 +23.2 ± 0.0 + 5.1 +67.5 –65.5 +89.0 +117.3 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
–10.0 + 0.3 +48.9 + 0.0 +36.1 +27.9 ± 0.0 + 5.0 +34.6 –59.9 +67.6 +100.5 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 0.0 – 0.1 +35.5 – 0.0 +37.0 + 9.5 ± 0.0 + 1.7 +15.0 – 5.0 +51.2 +62.3 Nov.
+ 0.9 – 0.4 +14.4 + 0.0 +39.8 +21.1 ± 0.0 + 3.1 –36.8 + 8.4 +58.7 +82.9 Dec.
– 4.7 – 0.2 + 7.1 + 0.0 +22.6 +12.3 ± 0.0 + 6.1 –28.5 +41.7 – 6.7 +11.7 2021 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
– 3.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 +25.6 – 1.4 ± 0.0 + 1.0 –16.7 –45.2 +84.8 +84.4 Mar.
– 7.3 – 0.1 +66.3 + 0.0 +28.8 +25.5 ± 0.0 + 3.4 +14.7 – 2.4 +46.0 +74.9 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
– 3.7 + 0.0 +13.2 + 0.0 +38.6 + 5.5 ± 0.0 + 5.1 –0.1 – 1.5 +37.9 +48.5 June
+ 3.1 – 0.0 +13.8 – 0.0 +34.2 – 4.3 ± 0.0 + 5.2 +19.4 +31.1 – 0.5 + 0.4 July
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2021 Jan. 15 7,015.6 536.5 343.0 85.3 257.6 21.2 10.9 10.9 –
22 7,024.2 536.5 342.9 85.3 257.6 21.8 11.1 11.1 –
29 7,033.3 536.5 342.3 85.2 257.0 22.9 10.7 10.7 –
Feb. 5 7,054.5 536.5 339.9 85.2 254.7 25.4 10.9 10.9 –
12 7,079.1 536.5 339.7 85.2 254.4 25.8 11.5 11.5 –
19 7,101.2 536.5 338.8 85.2 253.6 26.7 11.1 11.1 –
26 7,110.5 536.5 341.0 85.2 255.8 24.8 10.9 10.9 –
Mar. 5 7,120.3 536.5 342.6 85.2 257.4 25.4 11.2 11.2 –
12 7,137.5 536.5 340.7 85.2 255.6 25.8 11.2 11.2 –
19 7,162.2 536.5 338.9 84.4 254.5 26.8 11.5 11.5 –
26 7,505.0 536.5 340.0 84.4 255.6 25.9 12.1 12.1 –
Apr. 2 7,494.1 499.3 350.7 86.6 264.2 26.6 11.5 11.5 –
9 7,514.3 499.3 350.7 86.6 264.1 26.8 10.9 10.9 –
16 7,522.2 499.3 350.7 86.5 264.1 26.8 11.1 11.1 –
23 7,558.3 499.3 351.2 86.5 264.7 27.1 10.9 10.9 –
30 7,567.9 499.3 352.0 86.5 265.4 26.5 10.6 10.6 –
May 7 7,588.8 499.3 352.6 86.5 266.0 25.7 10.8 10.8 –
14 7,615.7 499.3 352.1 86.5 265.5 27.0 11.4 11.4 –
21 7,643.2 499.3 353.9 86.5 267.4 25.6 11.1 11.1 –
28 7,657.6 499.2 353.9 86.5 267.4 25.8 11.2 11.2 –
June 4 7,680.1 499.2 354.2 86.5 267.7 26.7 10.3 10.3 –
11 7,700.9 499.2 354.7 87.1 267.6 27.6 10.7 10.7 –
18 7,736.5 499.2 358.8 87.1 271.8 24.7 10.6 10.6 –
25 7,877.1 499.2 359.9 87.0 272.9 23.8 13.5 13.5 –
July 2 7,907.8 514.7 354.5 87.1 267.5 25.6 13.1 13.1 –
9 7,926.6 514.7 355.1 87.1 268.0 24.8 10.7 10.7 –
16 7,950.7 514.7 354.9 87.1 267.9 25.4 10.3 10.3 –
23 7,988.0 514.7 354.0 87.2 266.7 26.6 10.9 10.9 –
30 7,987.4 514.7 354.8 87.2 267.5 25.3 10.3 10.3 –
Aug. 6 8,009.7 514.7 354.8 87.3 267.4 25.4 10.5 10.5 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2021 Jan. 15 2,481.2 166.9 52.3 22.1 30.3 0.1 – – –
22 2,460.5 166.9 52.9 22.1 30.8 0.1 0.2 0.2 –
29 2,464.6 166.9 53.0 22.0 31.0 0.2 – – –
Feb. 5 2,460.7 166.9 52.9 22.0 30.9 0.1 0.2 0.2 –
12 2,487.4 166.9 52.9 22.0 30.9 0.1 0.3 0.3 –
19 2,480.1 166.9 53.1 22.0 31.1 0.1 – – –
26 2,472.3 166.9 53.1 22.0 31.1 0.1 – – –
Mar. 5 2,468.0 166.9 53.0 22.0 31.0 0.1 – – –
12 2,469.3 166.9 53.3 22.0 31.3 0.1 – – –
19 2,465.0 166.9 52.9 21.8 31.1 0.1 – – –
26 2,551.4 166.9 52.8 21.8 31.0 0.1 – – –
Apr. 2 2,556.4 155.3 53.9 22.3 31.6 0.2 – – –
9 2,558.7 155.3 53.9 22.3 31.6 0.1 – – –
16 2,548.1 155.3 53.8 22.3 31.5 0.1 – – –
23 2,554.0 155.3 53.8 22.3 31.5 0.1 – – –
30 2,562.0 155.3 53.8 22.3 31.5 0.1 – – –
May 7 2,568.4 155.3 53.6 22.3 31.4 0.1 – – –
14 2,592.5 155.3 54.0 22.3 31.7 0.1 – – –
21 2,617.3 155.3 54.0 22.3 31.7 0.1 – – –
28 2,639.3 155.2 54.0 22.3 31.8 0.1 – – –
June 4 2,634.5 155.2 54.0 22.3 31.8 0.0 – – –
11 2,605.1 155.2 54.0 22.4 31.6 0.0 – – –
18 2,608.1 155.2 54.0 22.4 31.6 0.0 – – –
25 2,648.6 155.2 54.0 22.3 31.7 0.0 – – –
July 2 2,679.7 160.0 53.8 22.4 31.4 0.0 – – –
9 2,640.1 160.0 53.8 22.4 31.3 0.0 – – –
16 2,668.1 160.0 53.8 22.4 31.3 0.0 – – –
23 2,665.0 160.0 53.8 22.4 31.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
30 2,659.0 160.0 53.7 22.4 31.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
Aug. 6 2,687.1 160.0 53.7 22.5 31.2 0.0 – – –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
1,793.1 0.5 1,792.6 – – – – 36.6 3,925.9 3,729.4 196.5 22.7 325.8 2021 Jan. 15
1,792.8 0.2 1,792.6 – – – – 40.6 3,942.6 3,746.1 196.4 22.7 313.2 22
1,792.7 0.2 1,792.5 – – – – 35.6 3,960.7 3,765.3 195.3 22.7 309.1 29
1,792.6 0.2 1,792.5 – – – – 37.9 3,979.5 3,784.1 195.3 22.6 309.2 Feb. 5
1,792.9 0.4 1,792.5 – – – – 45.5 4,004.6 3,809.1 195.5 22.6 300.0 12
1,792.9 0.5 1,792.5 – – – – 42.3 4,028.3 3,832.4 195.9 22.6 301.8 19
1,792.8 0.6 1,792.2 – – – – 43.8 4,042.1 3,846.1 196.0 22.6 296.0 26
1,792.7 0.5 1,792.2 – – 0.0 – 41.2 4,053.5 3,858.5 195.1 22.6 294.5 Mar. 5
1,792.9 0.7 1,792.2 – – – – 38.3 4,072.1 3,877.8 194.3 22.6 297.4 12
1,792.8 0.6 1,792.2 – – – – 41.0 4,100.6 3,906.4 194.1 22.6 291.6 19
2,107.6 0.3 2,107.4 – – 0.0 – 40.7 4,125.7 3,930.4 195.3 22.6 293.7 26
2,107.4 0.5 2,107.0 – – – – 39.0 4,132.8 3,936.7 196.1 22.6 304.0 Apr. 2
2,107.2 0.2 2,107.0 – – 0.0 – 37.0 4,153.4 3,956.8 196.5 22.6 306.4 9
2,107.1 0.1 2,107.0 – – – – 31.9 4,167.9 3,973.1 194.8 22.6 304.8 16
2,107.1 0.1 2,107.0 – – – – 34.3 4,199.5 4,005.1 194.4 22.6 306.2 23
2,107.2 0.3 2,107.0 – – – – 37.5 4,208.0 4,019.9 188.1 22.6 304.2 30
2,107.1 0.1 2,107.0 – – 0.0 – 35.7 4,230.0 4,044.1 186.0 22.6 305.0 May 7
2,107.1 0.1 2,107.0 – – – – 29.1 4,258.5 4,072.7 185.8 22.6 308.7 14
2,107.1 0.1 2,107.0 – – – – 28.2 4,287.4 4,101.2 186.3 22.6 307.9 21
2,107.4 0.4 2,107.0 – – – – 29.4 4,302.9 4,116.5 186.4 22.6 305.3 28
2,107.2 0.2 2,107.0 – – 0.0 – 28.4 4,327.0 4,140.5 186.6 22.6 304.5 June 4
2,107.2 0.2 2,107.0 – – – – 33.9 4,339.8 4,154.0 185.8 22.6 305.1 11
2,107.1 0.1 2,107.0 – – – – 35.4 4,368.4 4,182.6 185.8 22.6 309.7 18
2,217.3 0.1 2,217.2 – – 0.0 – 33.7 4,400.5 4,214.5 186.0 22.6 306.6 25
2,217.3 0.1 2,217.2 – – 0.0 – 35.1 4,414.5 4,228.2 186.2 22.1 311.0 July 2
2,216.8 0.1 2,216.7 – – – – 32.9 4,438.5 4,252.3 186.2 22.1 310.9 9
2,216.8 0.0 2,216.7 – – – – 31.7 4,466.7 4,280.2 186.6 22.1 308.1 16
2,216.8 0.1 2,216.7 – – – – 31.2 4,499.4 4,313.0 186.4 22.1 312.3 23
2,214.3 0.1 2,214.1 – – 0.1 – 34.2 4,509.0 4,322.0 187.1 22.1 302.6 30
2,214.2 0.1 2,214.1 – – – – 32.3 4,526.9 4,341.1 185.8 22.1 308.8 Aug. 6
Deutsche Bundesbank
341.2 0.1 341.1 – – 0.0 – 9.7 794.4 794.4 – 4.4 1,112.1 2021 Jan. 15
341.2 0.1 341.1 – – 0.0 – 10.5 796.1 796.1 – 4.4 1,088.2 22
341.0 0.0 341.0 – – 0.0 – 8.4 802.9 802.9 – 4.4 1,087.7 29
341.1 0.1 341.0 – – 0.0 – 9.0 806.2 806.2 – 4.4 1,079.9 Feb. 5
341.2 0.2 341.0 – – 0.0 – 8.6 813.3 813.3 – 4.4 1,099.6 12
341.1 0.1 341.0 – – 0.0 – 9.0 818.4 818.4 – 4.4 1,086.9 19
341.0 0.1 340.9 – – – – 9.2 823.6 823.6 – 4.4 1,073.9 26
341.0 0.1 340.9 – – 0.0 – 5.6 824.9 824.9 – 4.4 1,072.0 Mar. 5
341.1 0.2 340.9 – – 0.0 – 8.4 827.3 827.3 – 4.4 1,067.8 12
341.0 0.1 340.9 – – 0.0 – 6.2 834.3 834.3 – 4.4 1,059.1 19
420.7 0.0 420.7 – – 0.0 – 4.8 841.4 841.4 – 4.4 1,060.1 26
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 5.2 844.9 844.9 – 4.4 1,071.9 Apr. 2
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 7.3 844.2 844.2 – 4.4 1,072.9 9
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 5.0 848.5 848.5 – 4.4 1,060.5 16
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 6.5 858.4 858.4 – 4.4 1,055.0 23
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 5.0 866.6 866.6 – 4.4 1,056.2 30
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 7.6 870.9 870.9 – 4.4 1,055.9 May 7
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 5.7 879.5 879.5 – 4.4 1,073.0 14
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 6.7 886.6 886.6 – 4.4 1,089.7 21
420.6 0.1 420.5 – – 0.0 – 6.0 891.4 891.4 – 4.4 1,107.6 28
420.6 0.1 420.5 – – 0.0 – 7.1 899.3 899.3 – 4.4 1,093.9 June 4
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 5.9 895.5 895.5 – 4.4 1,069.5 11
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 6.9 903.4 903.4 – 4.4 1,063.7 18
437.6 0.0 437.6 – – 0.0 – 5.1 912.4 912.4 – 4.4 1,079.9 25
437.5 – 437.5 – – 0.0 – 5.8 917.1 917.1 – 4.4 1,101.0 July 2
437.5 0.0 437.5 – – 0.0 – 4.6 917.1 917.1 – 4.4 1,062.6 9
437.5 0.0 437.5 – – – – 6.3 927.1 927.1 – 4.4 1,078.9 16
437.6 0.0 437.5 – – 0.0 – 7.1 935.9 935.9 – 4.4 1,065.9 23
437.2 0.1 437.1 – – 0.1 – 8.3 938.4 938.4 – 4.4 1,056.9 30
437.1 0.0 437.1 – – 0.0 – 8.7 943.1 943.1 – 4.4 1,080.0 Aug. 6

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2021 Jan. 15 7,015.6 1,427.4 3,688.6 3,130.1 558.5 – – 0.0 13.6 – 604.8 522.2 82.6
22 7,024.2 1,426.8 3,702.7 3,082.0 620.7 – – 0.0 14.1 – 646.1 559.7 86.5
29 7,033.3 1,427.6 3,688.0 3,231.6 456.4 – – – 9.0 – 681.7 593.3 88.4
Feb. 5 7,054.5 1,429.5 3,735.4 3,209.6 525.8 – – – 11.6 – 653.9 566.6 87.3
12 7,079.1 1,431.6 3,740.0 3,116.3 623.7 – – – 11.2 – 685.5 600.4 85.2
19 7,101.2 1,432.8 3,703.8 3,086.0 617.7 – – 0.0 14.6 – 755.1 667.2 87.9
26 7,110.5 1,434.9 3,739.6 3,094.0 645.6 – – 0.0 14.3 – 722.0 630.5 91.5
Mar. 5 7,120.3 1,438.3 3,843.0 3,187.7 655.3 – – – 18.7 – 621.3 538.7 82.6
12 7,137.5 1,440.7 3,840.5 3,183.7 656.8 – – – 14.6 – 653.9 567.2 86.7
19 7,162.2 1,441.5 3,785.4 3,249.3 536.1 – – – 17.8 – 734.0 648.5 85.5
26 7,505.0 1,443.9 4,089.1 3,445.2 643.9 – – – 16.5 – 772.7 683.6 89.1
Apr. 2 7,494.1 1,450.1 4,134.3 3,400.2 734.0 – – – 16.8 – 722.4 634.8 87.7
9 7,514.3 1,449.5 4,213.7 3,470.2 743.5 – – – 19.2 – 678.0 597.4 80.6
16 7,522.2 1,449.8 4,183.5 3,478.4 703.4 – – 1.6 17.0 – 715.0 632.8 82.2
23 7,558.3 1,452.1 4,183.6 3,465.6 716.3 – – 1.7 17.4 – 748.0 670.3 77.7
30 7,567.9 1,455.1 4,237.2 3,633.7 601.8 – – 1.7 17.4 – 687.2 605.9 81.3
May 7 7,588.8 1,459.4 4,321.4 3,654.5 665.2 – – 1.7 18.0 – 619.6 540.0 79.6
14 7,615.7 1,463.1 4,305.6 3,573.8 730.1 – – 1.7 18.5 – 652.7 572.3 80.4
21 7,643.2 1,467.3 4,281.3 3,541.3 738.2 – – 1.7 19.3 – 698.8 612.8 86.0
28 7,657.6 1,469.4 4,264.4 3,503.7 758.9 – – 1.7 19.7 – 717.8 627.7 90.1
June 4 7,680.1 1,473.0 4,350.1 3,611.8 736.6 – – 1.7 25.8 – 656.9 565.5 91.3
11 7,700.9 1,474.8 4,361.3 3,614.8 744.8 – – 1.7 18.6 – 657.0 559.4 97.6
18 7,736.5 1,477.4 4,271.6 3,739.2 530.7 – – 1.7 18.7 – 775.8 668.9 106.9
25 7,877.1 1,479.6 4,377.8 3,691.7 684.3 – – 1.8 21.7 – 780.5 683.2 97.3
July 2 7,907.8 1,484.5 4,441.8 3,653.2 786.8 – – 1.8 22.3 – 712.6 616.0 96.6
9 7,926.6 1,488.7 4,465.0 3,671.5 791.6 – – 1.8 18.1 – 693.5 600.2 93.4
16 7,950.7 1,491.7 4,430.6 3,610.6 818.1 – – 1.9 20.8 – 752.2 650.5 101.8
23 7,988.0 1,494.0 4,391.4 3,605.7 783.9 – – 1.8 23.1 – 807.7 702.5 105.2
30 7,987.4 1,497.9 4,440.0 3,756.8 681.0 – – 2.3 25.8 – 732.8 618.6 114.2
Aug. 6 8,009.7 1,499.6 4,492.6 3,758.1 732.2 – – 2.3 23.1 – 699.2 584.6 114.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
2021 Jan. 15 2,481.2 346.0 1,086.5 942.3 144.2 – – 0.0 5.8 – 207.3 193.7 13.6
22 2,460.5 346.2 1,106.8 913.9 193.0 – – 0.0 6.7 – 181.8 168.1 13.7
29 2,464.6 346.2 1,128.9 1,010.1 118.8 – – – 4.0 – 176.4 162.9 13.5
Feb. 5 2,460.7 347.0 1,140.2 1,009.0 131.1 – – – 4.8 – 163.8 151.1 12.7
12 2,487.4 347.8 1,151.9 955.0 196.9 – – – 4.3 – 189.9 176.1 13.8
19 2,480.1 348.4 1,137.5 949.3 188.2 – – 0.0 6.6 – 206.7 192.6 14.1
26 2,472.3 348.0 1,139.3 931.1 208.2 – – 0.0 7.0 – 193.0 180.6 12.4
Mar. 5 2,468.0 349.5 1,158.3 948.8 209.5 – – – 10.6 – 170.5 158.5 12.0
12 2,469.3 350.8 1,153.2 948.3 204.8 – – – 8.4 – 183.6 169.3 14.3
19 2,465.0 350.9 1,125.2 983.0 142.2 – – – 10.2 – 211.0 198.0 13.0
26 2,551.4 351.9 1,206.0 1,043.7 162.3 – – – 8.5 – 218.9 205.1 13.8
Apr. 2 2,556.4 351.9 1,232.6 1,003.1 229.5 – – – 7.8 – 196.3 182.9 13.4
9 2,558.7 351.6 1,254.8 1,012.5 242.4 – – – 10.2 – 181.8 169.4 12.4
16 2,548.1 351.9 1,231.4 1,013.3 216.4 – – 1.6 8.0 – 191.1 179.9 11.1
23 2,554.0 352.2 1,228.3 1,003.3 223.4 – – 1.7 9.2 – 200.5 187.9 12.6
30 2,562.0 352.9 1,247.3 1,061.8 183.8 – – 1.7 8.3 – 185.3 172.3 12.9
May 7 2,568.4 354.7 1,259.9 1,103.0 155.2 – – 1.7 9.1 – 175.4 162.3 13.1
14 2,592.5 356.5 1,254.7 1,035.4 217.6 – – 1.7 8.9 – 198.6 185.6 12.9
21 2,617.3 358.4 1,265.1 1,046.0 217.4 – – 1.7 10.0 – 210.5 196.4 14.1
28 2,639.3 359.2 1,257.5 1,028.2 227.6 – – 1.7 10.6 – 232.6 218.0 14.6
June 4 2,634.5 358.0 1,271.5 1,035.8 234.0 – – 1.7 13.3 – 212.5 197.0 15.6
11 2,605.1 359.1 1,259.4 1,028.8 228.9 – – 1.7 9.4 – 192.5 179.3 13.2
18 2,608.1 360.2 1,224.5 1,085.7 137.0 – – 1.7 7.9 – 230.2 215.5 14.8
25 2,648.6 361.1 1,249.1 1,086.0 161.4 – – 1.8 10.1 – 241.3 226.9 14.4
July 2 2,679.7 360.3 1,280.8 1,050.0 229.1 – – 1.8 9.8 – 220.9 204.6 16.3
9 2,640.1 362.1 1,265.0 1,042.1 221.1 – – 1.8 7.0 – 194.4 178.7 15.7
16 2,668.1 363.6 1,253.6 1,022.7 229.1 – – 1.8 9.1 – 227.6 212.5 15.1
23 2,665.0 364.7 1,243.3 1,010.4 231.1 – – 1.8 11.4 – 230.8 215.5 15.3
30 2,659.0 363.3 1,249.8 1,055.6 192.0 – – 2.2 12.7 – 206.4 189.2 17.2
Aug. 6 2,687.1 364.3 1,278.2 1,117.5 158.5 – – 2.2 11.4 – 203.9 188.3 15.6
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
285.9 7.9 3.7 3.7 – 54.8 307.8 – 512.5 108.6 2021 Jan. 15
249.6 8.3 3.8 3.8 – 54.8 297.0 – 512.5 108.6 22
241.6 8.2 4.1 4.1 – 54.8 297.2 – 512.5 108.6 29
233.8 8.3 4.0 4.0 – 54.8 302.3 – 512.5 108.3 Feb. 5
222.1 8.6 3.7 3.7 – 54.8 300.7 – 512.5 108.3 12
209.0 8.4 4.1 4.1 – 54.8 297.8 – 512.5 108.3 19
214.2 8.2 4.3 4.3 – 54.8 297.1 – 512.5 108.5 26
208.8 10.3 4.5 4.5 – 54.8 299.5 – 512.5 108.5 Mar. 5
199.3 8.5 4.6 4.6 – 54.8 298.5 – 512.5 109.6 12
194.4 8.9 3.9 3.9 – 54.8 299.4 – 512.5 109.6 19
193.1 9.4 3.4 3.4 – 54.8 299.8 – 512.5 109.7 26
207.5 9.7 3.4 3.4 – 56.2 298.2 – 485.4 110.1 Apr. 2
198.5 9.8 3.3 3.3 – 56.2 290.7 – 485.4 110.1 9
202.3 9.8 3.2 3.2 – 56.2 289.9 – 485.4 110.1 16
199.8 9.8 3.2 3.2 – 56.2 292.7 – 485.4 110.1 23
208.0 10.0 3.0 3.0 – 56.2 298.4 – 485.4 110.0 30
206.6 10.0 2.8 2.8 – 56.2 299.1 – 485.4 110.2 May 7
210.5 10.3 2.7 2.7 – 56.2 300.3 – 485.4 110.2 14
211.4 10.7 2.4 2.4 – 56.2 300.2 – 485.4 110.2 21
219.4 10.6 2.1 2.1 – 56.2 302.4 – 485.4 110.2 28
211.5 11.0 2.1 2.1 – 56.2 298.7 – 485.4 109.5 June 4
220.2 11.3 2.1 2.1 – 56.2 304.6 – 485.4 109.5 11
218.2 11.4 2.5 2.5 – 56.2 309.9 – 485.4 109.5 18
242.2 11.1 2.9 2.9 – 56.2 310.2 – 485.4 109.5 25
264.5 10.4 2.7 2.7 – 55.8 306.1 – 497.6 109.5 July 2
278.5 10.3 2.7 2.7 – 55.8 306.9 – 497.6 109.5 9
277.6 10.3 2.5 2.5 – 55.8 302.1 – 497.6 109.5 16
292.9 10.2 2.4 2.4 – 55.8 303.4 – 497.6 109.5 23
312.3 9.9 2.7 2.7 – 55.8 303.1 – 497.6 109.4 30
312.4 9.9 2.7 2.7 – 55.8 307.3 – 497.6 109.4 Aug. 6
Deutsche Bundesbank
148.5 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 14.2 32.3 473.1 161.8 5.7 2021 Jan. 15
130.7 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 14.2 33.0 473.1 161.8 5.7 22
119.9 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 14.2 32.9 474.2 161.8 5.7 29
115.5 0.4 0.1 0.1 – 14.2 33.0 474.2 161.8 5.7 Feb. 5
104.1 0.4 0.1 0.1 – 14.2 33.0 474.2 161.8 5.7 12
91.1 0.4 0.2 0.2 – 14.2 33.2 474.2 161.8 5.7 19
93.0 0.4 0.2 0.2 – 14.2 33.2 476.5 161.8 5.7 26
87.2 0.4 0.2 0.2 – 14.2 33.1 476.5 161.8 5.7 Mar. 5
81.1 0.4 0.4 0.4 – 14.2 33.3 476.5 161.8 5.7 12
75.1 0.3 0.4 0.4 – 14.2 33.7 476.5 161.8 5.7 19
73.6 0.3 0.3 0.3 – 14.2 33.6 476.5 161.8 5.7 26
84.5 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 32.7 479.0 151.2 5.7 Apr. 2
76.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.6 33.0 479.0 151.2 5.7 9
82.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.6 32.9 479.0 151.2 5.7 16
80.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.6 33.0 479.0 151.2 5.7 23
83.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.6 33.4 479.7 151.2 5.7 30
84.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 33.5 479.7 151.2 5.7 May 7
88.5 0.4 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 33.6 479.7 151.2 5.7 14
87.8 0.4 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 33.7 479.7 151.2 5.7 21
93.9 0.4 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 33.8 479.7 151.2 5.7 28
90.6 0.4 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 33.9 482.8 151.2 5.7 June 4
96.2 0.3 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 33.9 482.8 151.2 5.7 11
96.2 0.3 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 34.5 482.8 151.2 5.7 18
97.5 0.2 0.2 0.2 – 14.6 34.8 482.8 151.2 5.7 25
112.0 0.4 – – – 14.5 33.9 485.9 155.5 5.7 July 2
113.8 0.4 – – – 14.5 35.6 485.9 155.5 5.7 9
116.6 0.4 – – – 14.5 35.6 485.9 155.5 5.7 16
117.1 0.4 – – – 14.5 35.7 485.9 155.5 5.7 23
124.6 0.4 – – – 14.5 36.2 490.0 155.5 5.7 30
127.1 0.3 – – – 14.5 36.1 490.0 155.5 5.7 Aug. 6
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2019 Sep. 8,550.4 38.0 2,323.6 1,835.8 1,569.4 266.4 487.8 344.3 143.5 4,001.0 3,562.6 3,139.5 2,839.7
Oct. 8,445.6 39.3 2,312.0 1,810.4 1,543.9 266.5 501.6 358.5 143.1 4,008.1 3,569.7 3,149.2 2,847.6
Nov. 8,509.2 40.1 2,361.5 1,860.2 1,590.2 270.0 501.3 358.1 143.2 4,027.4 3,586.5 3,166.8 2,863.7
Dec. 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 Jan. 8,482.2 39.4 2,293.1 1,800.7 1,531.5 269.2 492.4 348.1 144.3 4,033.9 3,591.5 3,173.1 2,867.5
Feb. 8,666.7 40.3 2,308.1 1,815.4 1,545.5 269.9 492.7 348.9 143.8 4,055.3 3,606.4 3,190.1 2,885.8
Mar. 8,912.6 48.1 2,421.0 1,920.7 1,651.9 268.8 500.4 357.5 142.8 4,096.9 3,641.9 3,215.5 2,915.9
Apr. 9,014.6 48.6 2,442.9 1,943.2 1,674.0 269.2 499.7 355.0 144.8 4,115.5 3,656.4 3,225.2 2,926.3
May 8,915.3 48.1 2,395.2 1,896.4 1,631.8 264.6 498.8 355.2 143.6 4,149.8 3,682.9 3,247.5 2,946.1
June 9,026.9 46.0 2,542.6 2,056.2 1,788.0 268.2 486.4 343.6 142.8 4,153.0 3,683.1 3,249.8 2,949.1
July 9,069.0 45.5 2,574.4 2,099.6 1,830.7 268.9 474.8 333.3 141.5 4,153.7 3,688.0 3,258.4 2,958.3
Aug. 8,985.5 46.0 2,595.4 2,127.5 1,858.5 269.0 467.9 328.0 139.9 4,148.3 3,691.9 3,266.7 2,966.1
Sep. 9,097.4 46.1 2,657.2 2,196.9 1,926.4 270.6 460.3 320.7 139.5 4,153.9 3,696.5 3,269.8 2,968.7
Oct. 9,124.3 46.3 2,686.7 2,226.8 1,957.0 269.8 459.9 320.9 139.0 4,181.8 3,713.6 3,283.1 2,980.6
Nov. 9,096.0 45.7 2,684.1 2,232.1 1,965.3 266.9 452.0 313.9 138.1 4,198.6 3,723.7 3,293.3 2,991.0
Dec. 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 Jan. 9,150.4 44.9 2,793.5 2,309.4 2,042.2 267.2 484.1 348.8 135.3 4,195.0 3,716.6 3,302.6 2,997.8
Feb. 9,148.1 45.5 2,824.0 2,328.8 2,060.6 268.2 495.2 361.1 134.1 4,210.4 3,731.9 3,318.5 3,011.4
Mar. 9,261.9 45.7 2,904.5 2,419.8 2,145.0 274.8 484.8 351.2 133.6 4,245.8 3,762.0 3,347.6 3,038.5
Apr. 9,269.2 44.9 2,935.1 2,441.4 2,168.7 272.8 493.7 360.0 133.7 4,236.4 3,756.9 3,347.0 3,036.8
May 9,277.1 45.7 2,974.7 2,485.3 2,212.9 272.4 489.4 355.6 133.9 4,246.1 3,772.8 3,363.3 3,049.8
June 9,293.1 46.5 2,960.1 2,470.1 2,197.6 272.5 490.0 356.7 133.3 4,253.4 3,771.8 3,370.3 3,056.5
Changes 3
2012 –129.2 2.9 –81.9 –28.4 3.0 –31.4 –53.5 – 39.7 –13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 –703.6 – 0.5 –257.1 –249.2 –216.5 –32.7 – 7.9 1.6 – 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 –126.2 –128.6 –95.3 –33.4 2.4 7.2 – 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2019 Oct. –93.5 1.2 – 9.8 –24.8 –25.0 0.2 15.0 15.3 – 0.3 8.8 8.1 10.5 8.8
Nov. 55.4 0.8 48.2 49.3 45.9 3.3 – 1.1 – 1.2 0.1 18.6 16.6 17.3 15.8
Dec. –187.4 3.3 –129.3 –99.6 –96.3 – 3.3 –29.7 – 29.4 – 0.3 – 6.1 – 1.2 2.2 1.6
2020 Jan. 162.1 – 4.0 61.4 40.5 37.7 2.8 21.0 19.6 1.4 13.0 6.8 4.7 3.1
Feb. 193.8 0.8 20.5 18.6 13.8 4.8 1.9 0.5 1.3 21.8 15.0 17.2 18.3
Mar. 251.0 7.9 113.4 105.3 106.1 – 0.9 8.2 8.8 – 0.6 44.3 36.8 26.5 31.0
Apr. 96.1 0.5 20.8 21.8 21.5 0.3 – 1.1 – 3.0 1.9 18.2 14.2 9.8 10.5
May –40.6 – 0.6 22.6 22.4 19.3 3.1 0.2 1.3 – 1.1 27.3 24.9 20.5 18.0
June 118.6 – 2.1 149.4 161.5 157.8 3.7 –12.1 – 11.2 – 0.9 5.0 1.7 3.6 4.3
July 67.5 – 0.5 36.5 45.1 44.3 0.8 – 8.6 – 7.5 – 1.1 3.1 6.6 10.2 10.8
Aug. –79.5 0.5 21.7 28.2 28.0 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.9 – 1.5 – 4.9 4.3 8.7 8.1
Sep. 104.9 0.1 60.5 69.0 67.5 1.5 – 8.5 – 8.0 – 0.4 5.2 4.5 3.0 2.6
Oct. 25.2 0.2 29.1 29.7 30.5 – 0.8 – 0.6 0.1 – 0.7 27.6 17.3 12.9 11.3
Nov. 12.0 – 0.6 29.0 35.8 37.2 – 1.4 – 6.8 – 6.1 – 0.8 18.6 11.3 11.2 11.5
Dec. –141.5 1.8 –59.5 –53.6 –51.2 – 2.4 – 5.9 – 5.8 – 0.2 –18.3 –13.3 4.2 2.7
2021 Jan. 201.4 – 2.6 169.3 131.0 128.3 2.8 38.2 40.5 – 2.3 16.8 7.7 6.6 5.1
Feb. – 2.3 0.7 30.3 19.2 18.2 1.1 11.0 12.2 – 1.2 15.9 15.5 15.7 13.4
Mar. 100.0 0.2 78.0 90.0 83.7 6.3 –12.0 – 11.5 – 0.5 34.3 29.7 28.8 27.0
Apr. 21.2 – 0.8 33.6 23.0 24.6 – 1.6 10.6 10.5 0.2 – 8.8 – 5.2 – 0.1 – 1.1
May 10.7 0.8 38.9 44.1 44.4 – 0.3 – 5.2 – 5.5 0.3 10.4 16.0 15.7 13.0
June 16.0 0.9 –14.4 –14.9 –15.1 0.2 0.6 1.1 – 0.5 7.5 – 0.8 7.2 6.8
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011
259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
299.8 423.2 255.1 168.1 438.3 313.4 200.6 124.9 28.8 96.1 1,106.8 841.9 1,081.1 2019 Sep.
301.6 420.5 257.1 163.4 438.4 313.1 201.3 125.3 30.1 95.2 1,102.8 842.5 983.5 Oct.
303.1 419.8 257.7 162.0 440.8 315.2 201.0 125.6 30.5 95.1 1,091.3 828.7 989.0 Nov.
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 Dec.
305.6 418.3 258.6 159.8 442.4 316.4 203.8 126.0 29.8 96.2 1,078.6 819.6 1,037.1 2020 Jan.
304.3 416.3 256.5 159.8 448.9 322.8 206.6 126.2 29.9 96.3 1,088.6 829.3 1,174.5 Feb.
299.6 426.4 258.5 167.9 455.0 325.2 212.8 129.8 29.5 100.3 1,104.4 838.8 1,242.1 Mar.
298.8 431.2 259.2 172.0 459.1 329.0 217.4 130.2 31.1 99.1 1,119.2 852.3 1,288.4 Apr.
301.4 435.4 258.3 177.1 466.9 334.5 220.6 132.3 31.0 101.3 1,102.1 840.8 1,220.2 May
300.7 433.3 257.8 175.5 469.9 331.1 215.4 138.8 29.2 109.6 1,075.8 816.4 1,209.5 June
300.1 429.6 259.1 170.5 465.7 313.2 217.1 152.5 29.9 122.6 1,047.3 792.5 1,248.1 July
300.7 425.1 253.7 171.4 456.5 311.1 214.5 145.4 29.2 116.1 1,037.6 784.0 1,158.2 Aug.
301.1 426.7 256.0 170.8 457.4 311.0 215.2 146.4 29.3 117.0 1,063.9 808.9 1,176.3 Sep.
302.5 430.5 257.3 173.2 468.2 318.6 219.6 149.5 30.2 119.3 1,049.9 793.4 1,159.6 Oct.
302.2 430.5 256.7 173.8 474.8 325.6 222.5 149.2 29.1 120.1 1,048.0 792.3 1,119.7 Nov.
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 Dec.
304.9 414.0 253.3 160.7 478.4 330.8 224.5 147.6 28.7 118.9 1,087.5 834.6 1,029.5 2021 Jan.
307.1 413.4 250.6 162.9 478.5 334.5 227.0 144.0 28.8 115.2 1,093.8 843.9 974.4 Feb.
309.1 414.4 249.3 165.1 483.8 339.4 232.3 144.4 28.9 115.5 1,105.7 855.5 960.1 Mar.
310.2 409.9 251.0 158.9 479.5 339.8 232.3 139.7 30.3 109.4 1,122.5 876.2 930.3 Apr.
313.5 409.5 250.6 158.9 473.2 339.1 231.9 134.1 28.4 105.7 1,108.3 862.4 902.3 May
313.8 401.5 249.2 152.3 481.6 339.3 231.8 142.3 28.8 113.5 1,111.0 864.8 922.0 June
Changes 3
–11.8 10.7 –10.5 21.2 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.5 0.5 – 2.2 2.7 –15.5 –17.7 –62.2 2012
2.0 – 7.0 –10.9 3.9 – 3.0 – 3.4 – 9.3 0.5 – 2.6 3.1 –38.8 –47.2 –420.8 2013
15.5 –12.3 –15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 – 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
1.7 – 2.4 2.1 – 4.6 0.8 0.2 1.0 0.5 1.3 – 0.8 3.9 7.7 –97.7 2019 Oct.
1.5 – 0.8 0.6 – 1.4 2.1 1.7 – 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.0 –17.6 –19.3 5.3 Nov.
0.7 – 3.4 – 3.0 – 0.4 – 4.9 – 1.4 – 0.9 – 3.5 – 1.8 – 1.7 –47.9 –44.3 – 7.5 Dec.
1.6 2.1 3.9 – 1.8 6.2 3.2 4.5 3.0 0.4 2.6 36.0 35.9 55.6 2020 Jan.
– 1.1 – 2.2 – 2.1 – 0.1 6.8 6.7 2.8 0.1 0.1 – 0.0 13.5 12.5 137.3 Feb.
– 4.5 10.2 2.0 8.3 7.5 3.3 6.5 4.2 – 0.4 4.6 17.8 11.2 67.6 Mar.
– 0.7 4.5 0.6 3.9 4.0 3.7 4.3 0.3 1.6 – 1.3 10.4 9.3 46.3 Apr.
2.5 4.4 – 0.9 5.3 2.5 0.8 – 1.2 1.6 – 0.6 2.2 –23.0 –18.2 –67.0 May
– 0.7 – 1.9 – 0.3 – 1.6 3.3 – 3.2 – 4.9 6.4 – 1.8 8.2 –22.9 –21.2 –10.8 June
– 0.6 – 3.6 1.3 – 4.9 – 3.5 1.6 2.7 – 5.1 0.6 – 5.7 –10.3 – 7.1 38.7 July
0.6 – 4.4 – 5.4 0.9 – 9.2 – 2.3 – 2.5 – 6.9 – 0.7 – 6.2 – 7.0 – 6.0 –89.8 Aug.
0.4 1.5 2.2 – 0.7 0.7 – 0.1 0.7 0.9 0.1 0.7 21.1 20.0 18.0 Sep.
1.6 4.4 2.0 2.5 10.4 7.3 4.2 3.0 0.9 2.1 –15.3 –16.7 –16.4 Oct.
– 0.3 0.2 – 0.5 0.7 7.3 7.6 3.6 – 0.3 – 1.1 0.8 6.4 6.6 –41.4 Nov.
1.5 –17.5 – 4.4 –13.2 – 4.9 1.9 0.3 – 6.9 0.6 – 7.4 –36.3 –34.4 –29.3 Dec.
1.5 1.1 0.9 0.2 9.1 3.8 2.9 5.3 – 0.9 6.2 80.2 79.8 –62.3 2021 Jan.
2.3 – 0.2 – 2.4 2.3 0.3 3.7 2.4 – 3.4 0.1 – 3.4 6.3 8.9 –55.4 Feb.
1.9 0.9 – 1.3 2.2 4.6 4.2 4.9 0.4 0.1 0.3 2.8 3.3 –15.3 Mar.
1.0 – 5.0 1.7 – 6.7 – 3.6 0.9 0.7 – 4.5 1.5 – 6.0 26.0 29.0 –28.8 Apr.
2.7 0.4 – 0.3 0.7 – 5.6 – 0.1 0.3 – 5.5 – 1.9 – 3.6 –11.4 –11.4 –28.0 May
0.3 – 8.0 – 1.4 – 6.6 8.3 0.1 – 0.1 8.2 0.4 7.7 2.7 2.4 19.4 June
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2019 Sep. 8,550.4 1,299.7 1,038.3 261.4 3,745.4 3,618.0 2,179.8 859.2 273.5 579.0 541.5 115.2 55.7
Oct. 8,445.6 1,313.5 1,050.3 263.2 3,761.4 3,633.5 2,201.7 854.6 270.4 577.2 540.6 114.1 51.4
Nov. 8,509.2 1,326.4 1,057.3 269.1 3,791.3 3,663.8 2,238.9 849.3 266.7 575.6 539.9 115.8 52.6
Dec. 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 Jan. 8,482.2 1,293.2 1,033.0 260.2 3,775.6 3,647.0 2,229.5 846.8 267.2 570.7 537.5 116.3 54.3
Feb. 8,666.7 1,313.5 1,047.8 265.7 3,794.5 3,664.6 2,249.1 847.1 270.3 568.4 535.8 117.0 55.2
Mar. 8,912.6 1,418.4 1,135.8 282.6 3,853.2 3,705.0 2,299.1 841.5 268.6 564.4 532.5 135.5 72.3
Apr. 9,014.6 1,426.3 1,156.6 269.6 3,872.7 3,729.4 2,339.0 826.7 259.6 563.8 532.6 130.3 65.2
May 8,915.3 1,386.1 1,112.0 274.0 3,913.5 3,764.4 2,370.9 829.9 266.6 563.6 532.9 136.6 70.6
June 9,026.9 1,503.5 1,230.4 273.1 3,906.1 3,754.5 2,379.1 812.8 256.1 562.5 532.8 139.2 71.1
July 9,069.0 1,488.7 1,209.5 279.2 3,937.1 3,783.3 2,408.1 814.3 263.0 560.9 531.7 132.9 65.5
Aug. 8,985.5 1,489.8 1,213.2 276.6 3,951.0 3,790.7 2,421.8 808.3 258.8 560.6 531.8 129.7 63.6
Sep. 9,097.4 1,523.9 1,252.4 271.5 3,975.9 3,795.1 2,436.7 798.3 251.4 560.1 531.7 140.6 72.8
Oct. 9,124.3 1,536.3 1,264.9 271.4 4,015.2 3,827.0 2,473.1 794.2 249.1 559.7 531.7 140.8 69.6
Nov. 9,096.0 1,515.4 1,245.5 269.9 4,035.0 3,846.2 2,508.7 778.0 235.3 559.6 532.0 140.2 69.0
Dec. 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 Jan. 9,150.4 1,560.0 1,262.3 297.7 4,044.0 3,855.8 2,536.8 757.4 219.4 561.6 534.8 138.4 65.8
Feb. 9,148.1 1,584.4 1,261.7 322.7 4,053.2 3,865.2 2,552.4 750.1 214.1 562.6 536.1 137.7 68.2
Mar. 9,261.9 1,634.1 1,336.6 297.6 4,068.3 3,876.2 2,569.2 744.7 212.3 562.3 536.2 142.2 71.0
Apr. 9,269.2 1,659.9 1,344.1 315.8 4,079.3 3,886.3 2,588.3 735.3 205.8 562.7 536.9 143.0 70.2
May 9,277.1 1,661.1 1,353.0 308.1 4,103.8 3,909.2 2,614.0 732.0 205.0 563.2 537.5 146.4 70.4
June 9,293.1 1,670.5 1,357.1 313.4 4,088.1 3,890.2 2,604.7 722.9 198.7 562.6 537.1 151.3 76.6
Changes 4
2012 –129.2 –68.7 –70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 –90.4 –50.2 1.5 14.1 – 1.4 5.4
2013 –703.6 –106.2 –73.9 –32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 –56.3 –26.6 – 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 –28.4 –32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 –32.1 3.1 – 2.4 – 2.4 – 2.5 – 0.0
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2019 Oct. –93.5 15.0 12.5 2.5 17.1 16.2 22.5 – 4.5 – 3.1 – 1.8 – 1.0 – 0.9 – 4.2
Nov. 55.4 11.9 6.6 5.3 29.1 29.5 36.7 – 5.7 – 3.8 – 1.6 – 0.7 1.5 1.1
Dec. –187.4 –82.4 –46.4 –36.0 –12.2 –13.2 – 7.3 – 5.4 – 4.9 – 0.5 0.6 0.7 2.2
2020 Jan. 162.1 49.3 22.2 27.2 – 3.4 – 3.5 – 2.0 2.9 5.3 – 4.5 – 3.0 – 0.1 – 0.4
Feb. 193.8 20.0 14.6 5.4 18.5 17.3 19.4 0.2 3.0 – 2.2 – 1.7 0.6 0.9
Mar. 251.0 104.6 87.7 16.9 58.9 40.4 50.1 – 5.6 – 1.7 – 4.0 – 3.4 18.5 17.1
Apr. 96.1 7.0 20.3 –13.3 18.8 24.0 39.6 –15.0 – 9.2 – 0.7 0.1 – 5.3 – 7.1
May –40.6 22.0 16.8 5.2 34.0 33.3 29.9 3.6 7.3 – 0.2 0.3 1.2 0.1
June 118.6 118.2 118.9 – 0.7 – 7.0 – 9.6 8.3 –16.8 –10.5 – 1.1 – 0.1 2.6 0.6
July 67.5 –11.0 –19.0 8.1 34.1 31.5 31.0 2.1 7.4 – 1.6 – 1.1 – 5.7 – 5.4
Aug. –79.5 1.6 4.0 – 2.4 14.4 7.7 13.8 – 5.9 – 4.1 – 0.2 0.2 – 3.2 – 1.9
Sep. 104.9 33.1 38.7 – 5.7 24.1 3.7 14.4 –10.2 – 7.6 – 0.5 – 0.1 10.7 9.1
Oct. 25.2 12.3 12.4 – 0.1 39.1 32.1 36.4 – 3.9 – 3.3 – 0.4 – 0.0 0.1 – 3.3
Nov. 12.0 8.2 8.4 – 0.1 25.6 20.2 36.4 –16.0 –13.6 – 0.1 0.3 4.1 3.9
Dec. –141.5 –25.2 – 7.9 –17.3 –12.3 – 8.7 0.3 –10.0 – 8.0 1.0 1.3 – 4.8 –11.8
2021 Jan. 201.4 65.4 25.0 40.4 21.0 18.6 28.1 –10.6 – 7.8 1.1 1.6 2.6 9.7
Feb. – 2.3 24.4 – 0.7 25.1 9.0 9.2 15.5 – 7.3 – 5.3 1.0 1.3 – 0.7 2.4
Mar. 100.0 47.8 73.8 –26.0 13.6 9.9 15.8 – 5.6 – 1.9 – 0.3 0.1 4.0 2.5
Apr. 21.2 27.6 8.3 19.3 12.5 11.2 20.1 – 9.4 – 6.5 0.4 0.7 1.2 – 0.6
May 10.7 0.6 9.1 – 8.5 24.9 23.2 26.0 – 3.2 – 0.7 0.5 0.6 3.5 0.3
June 16.0 9.4 4.1 5.3 –15.8 –19.0 – 9.2 – 9.1 – 6.3 – 0.6 – 0.4 4.8 6.2
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 2011
42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 2012
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
56.8 15.2 2.7 2.4 12.2 10.9 1.5 2.3 1,077.8 35.7 671.4 719.2 1,033.2 2019 Sep.
60.1 17.8 2.7 2.4 13.8 10.6 1.2 2.2 1,067.5 33.4 657.4 711.0 931.3 Oct.
60.6 18.3 2.7 2.4 11.7 10.6 1.7 2.0 1,076.7 33.7 653.6 723.6 933.9 Nov.
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 Dec.
59.4 17.1 2.7 2.4 12.3 10.8 2.5 1.8 1,078.0 36.0 622.5 712.5 996.0 2020 Jan.
59.2 15.3 2.6 2.4 12.9 11.2 2.0 1.9 1,087.4 34.6 638.8 714.0 1,114.6 Feb.
60.6 16.5 2.6 2.4 12.8 11.2 1.7 2.5 1,074.1 30.8 674.1 713.4 1,175.2 Mar.
62.4 17.6 2.6 2.4 13.0 11.1 3.4 2.4 1,078.1 29.6 704.0 693.5 1,234.2 Apr.
63.4 16.4 2.6 2.4 12.5 10.8 2.2 2.2 1,076.9 28.8 693.7 686.4 1,154.4 May
65.4 19.2 2.6 2.4 12.5 11.8 0.9 2.1 1,074.0 28.6 696.8 702.1 1,141.4 June
64.8 20.2 2.6 2.3 20.8 20.1 2.1 1.9 1,067.4 25.9 698.3 694.7 1,178.9 July
63.6 19.3 2.6 2.3 30.6 29.8 1.7 1.9 1,063.9 25.5 682.1 699.9 1,095.2 Aug.
65.2 21.8 2.6 2.3 40.2 39.0 1.2 2.6 1,077.3 25.6 687.1 720.4 1,108.9 Sep.
68.6 25.0 2.6 2.3 47.3 46.6 1.4 2.7 1,075.1 24.6 687.8 712.4 1,093.3 Oct.
68.7 24.3 2.6 2.3 48.5 47.6 9.1 2.5 1,070.0 23.3 696.7 713.1 1,054.3 Nov.
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 Dec.
70.0 23.7 2.6 2.3 49.7 48.3 6.3 2.5 1,058.8 19.7 790.8 708.3 979.7 2021 Jan.
67.0 20.5 2.5 2.3 50.3 48.2 4.5 2.5 1,068.3 19.6 803.5 702.4 929.4 Feb.
68.7 22.0 2.5 2.3 49.9 48.9 6.7 2.9 1,090.4 21.5 833.7 712.0 913.8 Mar.
70.3 23.2 2.5 2.3 50.0 48.6 5.1 2.9 1,091.8 21.0 839.1 705.9 885.3 Apr.
73.5 26.7 2.5 2.3 48.2 46.6 6.0 2.3 1,087.7 23.5 854.7 702.7 858.8 May
72.1 26.0 2.5 2.3 46.6 45.4 4.8 2.3 1,084.5 23.7 836.8 725.4 880.6 June
Changes 4
– 7.2 – 3.6 0.5 0.3 – 7.9 – 9.2 –19.6 1.2 –107.0 –18.6 54.2 21.0 –68.5 2012
– 0.5 2.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 –11.3 –10.0 4.1 – 3.2 –104.9 –17.6 –134.1 18.9 –417.1 2013
– 2.3 – 1.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.8 – 3.4 – 0.6 –63.7 – 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
3.4 2.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.8 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 6.5 – 2.1 – 9.7 – 6.9 –102.1 2019 Oct.
0.4 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 0.2 0.4 – 0.2 5.6 0.2 – 7.2 11.5 4.2 Nov.
– 1.5 – 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.3 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 9.2 – 1.3 –90.5 6.4 0.7 Dec.
0.3 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.3 – 0.5 1.1 – 0.1 11.0 3.5 59.9 –17.2 61.4 2020 Jan.
– 0.3 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 0.4 – 0.6 0.1 8.6 – 1.4 15.5 1.3 130.4 Feb.
1.4 1.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.3 0.6 –11.9 – 3.8 36.2 – 0.3 63.2 Mar.
1.8 1.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 1.7 – 0.1 1.6 – 1.3 27.6 –20.7 60.3 Apr.
1.1 – 1.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 1.2 – 0.1 5.1 – 0.6 –21.9 3.5 –82.0 May
2.0 2.8 – 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 – 1.3 – 0.2 – 1.3 – 0.1 4.6 16.4 –10.8 June
– 0.3 1.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 8.3 8.3 1.3 – 0.2 3.3 – 1.2 10.9 – 4.3 33.3 July
– 1.3 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.8 9.8 – 0.5 0.0 – 2.2 – 0.4 –14.9 5.7 –83.7 Aug.
1.6 2.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.6 9.2 – 0.5 0.7 10.5 0.0 2.6 19.6 14.9 Sep.
3.4 3.2 – 0.0 0.0 7.0 7.5 0.3 0.1 – 2.9 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 8.2 –15.5 Oct.
0.2 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.2 1.0 3.3 – 0.2 – 0.9 – 1.2 12.6 3.3 –39.9 Nov.
7.0 6.3 0.0 0.0 1.3 1.0 0.3 – 0.0 – 9.0 – 1.9 –71.4 – 0.7 –23.2 Dec.
– 7.1 – 6.9 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 3.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 – 1.5 171.3 – 3.7 –49.0 2021 Jan.
– 3.1 – 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.2 – 1.8 – 0.0 8.9 – 0.1 12.2 – 6.2 –48.9 Feb.
1.5 1.3 – 0.0 0.0 – 0.4 0.8 2.1 0.5 15.7 1.7 24.0 7.1 –10.8 Mar.
1.8 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 2.2 – 0.1 7.3 – 0.4 11.1 – 3.7 –31.3 Apr.
3.2 3.5 – 0.0 0.0 – 1.8 – 1.9 0.9 – 0.1 – 2.7 2.5 17.0 – 2.8 –27.1 May
– 1.3 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.6 – 1.3 – 1.2 0.1 – 1.4 2.0 –17.9 20.9 21.9 June
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
August 2021
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
  
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which: of which: 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total  
1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2021         Jan. 1,495 9,209.2 1,054.7 2,418.2 1,929.9 485.0 4,500.9 383.5 3,405.8 0.3 690.6 94.9 1,140.6
         Feb. 1,494 9,207.5 975.3 2,528.6 2,042.8 482.6 4,522.9 392.2 3,417.5 0.3 690.7 94.9 1,085.7         Mar. 1,494 9,321.2 1,029.8 2,559.8 2,068.8 487.7 4,563.9 407.6 3,439.2 0.3 698.3 95.1 1,072.7
         Apr. 1,494 9,329.3 1,107.6 2,534.6 2,048.7 482.7 4,549.4 395.3 3,447.6 0.3 687.5 95.1 1,042.7
         May 1,492 9,338.4 1,090.9 2,580.8 2,095.4 482.1 4,555.7 391.2 3,459.0 0.2 688.8 95.3 1,015.6         June 1,487 9,355.1 1,089.7 2,569.4 2,084.5 481.5 4,564.1 391.3 3,465.6 0.3 691.0 95.4 1,036.5
Commercial banks 6
2021         May 253 3,920.1 616.6 1,106.0 1,020.8 84.2 1,410.1 249.4 946.0 0.2 205.2 32.8 754.7
         June 253 3,950.4 618.5 1,099.4 1,014.1 84.0 1,417.1 251.2 947.2 0.2 209.2 32.8 782.5
   Big banks 7
2021         May 3 2,093.3 219.6 517.3 484.1 33.3 661.2 122.4 433.4 0.1 100.8 26.8 668.3
         June 3 2,110.4 203.4 510.8 477.9 32.9 670.8 124.1 435.8 0.1 105.7 26.8 698.6
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2021         May 143 1,366.4 254.4 388.2 338.3 49.4 639.3 94.1 442.7 0.1 98.4 5.3 79.2
         June 143 1,389.6 270.8 401.0 350.7 49.5 636.1 93.3 441.8 0.1 97.5 5.3 76.3
   Branches of foreign banks
2021         May 107 460.4 142.5 200.4 198.4 1.5 109.6 32.9 69.9 0.0 6.1 0.7 7.2
         June 107 450.3 144.3 187.6 185.5 1.5 110.2 33.8 69.7 0.0 6.0 0.7 7.5
Landesbanken
2021         May 6 862.0 122.6 232.8 182.8 49.8 399.3 41.4 314.4 0.0 41.2 8.5 98.7
         June 6 831.6 100.4 237.7 187.3 50.1 393.7 39.0 312.5 0.0 40.3 8.5 91.3
Savings banks
2021         May 372 1,506.4 166.1 175.1 56.8 118.2 1,127.2 46.1 904.2 − 175.7 14.9 23.1
         June 372 1,515.9 175.4 171.4 53.1 118.2 1,131.5 46.7 907.3 − 175.8 14.9 22.6
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2021         May 815 1,100.6 55.5 200.4 86.8 113.4 801.2 32.5 647.4 0.0 121.2 18.5 25.0
         June 810 1,106.9 59.9 196.9 82.8 113.9 805.9 33.0 651.1 0.0 121.8 18.6 25.5
Mortgage banks
2021         May 10 243.4 9.4 20.4 11.1 8.9 205.9 3.0 184.0 − 18.8 0.2 7.5
         June 10 245.6 11.6 19.5 10.4 8.9 206.2 3.1 184.4 − 18.7 0.1 8.1
Building and loan associations
2021         May 18 246.9 2.2 44.2 28.5 15.7 196.8 1.0 170.3 . 25.5 0.3 3.5
         June 18 248.2 2.2 44.3 28.5 15.8 198.0 1.0 171.4 . 25.6 0.3 3.5
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2021         May 18 1,459.0 118.5 801.9 708.6 91.9 415.2 17.7 292.7 0.0 101.2 20.1 103.2
         June 18 1,456.6 121.6 800.1 708.3 90.6 411.7 17.4 291.7 0.0 99.7 20.1 103.0
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2021         May 140 1,607.2 303.7 598.9 561.0 37.0 561.6 106.0 356.8 0.1 94.5 3.7 139.3
         June 140 1,645.8 324.2 599.8 561.0 37.6 564.3 108.4 356.6 0.1 95.3 3.7 153.8
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2021         May 33 1,146.8 161.2 398.6 362.6 35.5 452.0 73.0 286.9 0.1 88.5 3.0 132.1
         June 33 1,195.5 179.9 412.2 375.4 36.0 454.1 74.6 286.9 0.1 89.3 3.0 146.3
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with Section 35(1) number 1a of the Credit
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified Institution Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kredit-
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective institute) are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting reporting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in Statistical
Law(Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report − Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the building and loan associations: including deposits und er savings and loan contracts
meaning of Section 340e(3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels- (see Table IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
August 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
for for of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At 3 Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
2,216.6 648.3 1,568.2 4,184.3 2,687.0 245.3 654.4 39.6 567.9 540.6 29.7 1,159.9 548.2 1,100.3 2021          Jan.
2,248.4 658.1 1,590.3 4,197.1 2,702.6 240.5 656.3 42.7 568.8 541.8 28.9 1,164.6 547.0 1,050.4          Feb.2,327.6 655.7 1,671.9 4,214.7 2,722.9 243.4 651.8 42.9 568.5 541.9 28.0 1,195.6 548.9 1,034.5          Mar.
2,351.7 658.3 1,693.4 4,231.4 2,745.3 244.2 645.4 49.7 568.9 542.5 27.6 1,184.0 555.0 1,007.1          Apr.
2,365.0 653.9 1,711.1 4,260.3 2,768.9 248.3 646.9 50.8 569.4 543.1 26.8 1,176.6 550.7 985.8          May2,373.3 672.3 1,700.9 4,227.3 2,760.2 232.7 639.4 41.7 568.7 542.7 26.2 1,184.3 560.1 1,010.2          June
Commercial banks 6
1,222.5 491.9 730.6 1,682.2 1,175.2 159.3 235.8 49.2 100.2 96.2 11.7 162.7 180.2 672.5 2021          May
1,236.9 504.7 732.1 1,656.3 1,165.7 149.7 229.2 40.2 100.5 96.6 11.3 163.5 185.1 708.6          June
Big banks 7
473.1 182.7 290.4 834.6 585.8 82.0 80.3 37.7 85.0 81.7 1.5 120.0 72.2 593.3 2021          May
463.9 181.4 282.5 821.7 578.4 77.0 79.8 30.8 85.3 82.0 1.2 122.2 72.2 630.4          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
481.4 144.4 337.0 676.1 470.6 49.0 131.7 11.6 14.8 14.1 10.1 42.4 96.4 70.1 2021          May
510.2 164.6 345.6 667.2 471.0 45.8 125.6 9.4 14.8 14.1 10.0 40.9 101.3 70.1          June
Branches of foreign banks
268.0 164.7 103.2 171.4 118.8 28.2 23.8 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.3 11.6 9.1 2021          May
262.8 158.8 104.0 167.4 116.2 26.9 23.8 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.5 11.5 8.1          June
Landesbanken
304.1 55.2 248.8 245.5 146.4 24.8 68.2 1.6 6.2 6.1 0.0 179.7 43.3 89.3 2021          May
283.0 55.4 227.5 238.3 140.6 24.0 67.5 1.5 6.2 6.1 0.0 181.3 43.2 85.8          June
Savings banks
182.9 3.5 179.4 1,128.6 815.3 10.4 13.3 − 278.5 261.2 11.0 17.2 128.8 49.0 2021          May
192.4 4.0 188.4 1,128.1 816.0 9.8 13.3 − 278.2 261.0 10.9 17.1 131.3 47.0          June
 
Credit cooperatives
 
156.0 1.2 154.8 809.8 579.7 28.8 13.5 − 184.1 179.2 3.8 9.6 91.2 34.0 2021          May
159.7 1.4 158.3 811.7 582.2 28.3 14.0 − 183.4 178.6 3.8 9.7 93.3 32.5          June
Mortgage banks
62.4 2.9 59.5 60.7 2.1 3.5 55.1 − − − . 103.0 10.8 6.4 2021          May
64.3 2.2 62.1 61.0 2.4 3.9 54.6 − − − . 102.9 10.8 6.6          June
Building and loan associations
29.0 1.9 27.0 191.8 3.4 1.3 186.6 − 0.5 0.5 0.1 3.3 12.3 10.6 2021          May
29.9 2.2 27.7 191.9 3.6 1.4 186.4 − 0.5 0.5 0.1 3.3 12.3 10.9          June
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
408.2 97.3 310.9 141.7 46.9 20.3 74.4 0.0 − − . 701.2 84.0 123.9 2021          May
407.2 102.4 304.8 139.9 49.7 15.7 74.3 0.0 − − . 706.6 84.1 118.8          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
722.5 326.7 395.8 633.3 477.1 54.4 79.0 6.6 19.4 19.1 3.3 36.1 75.5 139.8 2021          May
741.0 335.0 405.9 629.7 475.7 52.7 78.4 7.0 19.6 19.3 3.3 37.0 78.7 159.4          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
454.5 161.9 292.6 461.9 358.2 26.2 55.2 6.6 19.0 18.7 3.3 35.8 63.9 130.7 2021          May
478.2 176.3 301.9 462.2 359.5 25.8 54.6 7.0 19.1 18.8 3.2 36.6 67.1 151.3          June
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to Ap ril 2018)
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, Table
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks I.3, banking group ”Big banks”). 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Br anches (with
and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking cat egories. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
August 2021
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
  
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills andhand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item: ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  
1 
End of year or month *
 
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.92012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.12013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.22014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.82017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.52018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.92019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2020         Jan. 39.2 515.2 1,256.9 1,015.4 0.0 0.8 240.7 4.6 3,528.4 3,125.8 0.3 3.3 399.1
         Feb. 40.0 509.4 1,280.0 1,035.2 0.0 0.9 243.8 5.0 3,544.7 3,141.9 0.3 4.6 397.8         Mar. 47.9 621.7 1,273.0 1,029.4 0.0 1.0 242.6 5.1 3,580.0 3,174.1 0.2 5.1 400.6
         Apr. 48.4 582.3 1,334.6 1,090.6 0.0 1.2 242.8 5.0 3,594.3 3,185.3 0.2 7.2 401.6
         May 47.8 586.2 1,291.8 1,044.7 0.0 1.1 246.0 6.0 3,620.9 3,204.2 0.1 10.1 406.4         June 45.7 767.6 1,270.4 1,019.6 0.0 1.1 249.6 6.9 3,621.1 3,206.6 0.2 8.0 406.2
         July 45.2 810.5 1,270.5 1,019.2 0.0 1.2 250.0 7.5 3,625.7 3,217.2 0.2 8.0 400.3
         Aug. 45.7 760.8 1,348.1 1,096.7 0.0 1.1 250.3 7.8 3,629.7 3,219.6 0.2 9.4 400.5         Sep. 45.8 884.4 1,293.9 1,041.1 0.0 1.0 251.8 8.3 3,634.2 3,224.4 0.2 8.4 401.3
         Oct. 46.1 811.0 1,397.3 1,145.2 0.0 0.8 251.2 8.6 3,651.1 3,237.6 0.2 9.0 404.3
         Nov. 45.4 863.2 1,351.9 1,101.3 0.0 0.8 249.8 8.6 3,661.1 3,247.4 0.2 7.6 405.8         Dec. 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021         Jan. 44.6 1,009.1 1,283.1 1,032.1 0.0 0.7 250.2 9.2 3,654.0 3,250.7 0.3 6.6 396.3
         Feb. 45.0 929.2 1,382.3 1,130.2 0.0 1.0 251.1 9.6 3,669.3 3,261.7 0.2 7.4 400.0         Mar. 45.5 983.4 1,419.4 1,160.8 0.0 0.9 257.7 9.8 3,699.1 3,287.5 0.2 6.7 404.7
         Apr. 44.7 1,062.1 1,362.4 1,105.7 0.0 0.9 255.8 9.8 3,693.9 3,287.5 0.2 5.6 400.5
         May 45.4 1,044.7 1,423.6 1,167.3 0.0 0.9 255.4 10.1 3,709.6 3,300.2 0.1 4.6 404.7         June 46.1 1,042.8 1,410.1 1,154.2 0.0 0.8 255.1 10.3 3,709.0 3,305.4 0.2 5.6 397.9
Changes *
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.72013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.82014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 + 129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.92017 + 6.1 + 108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 20.1 − 0.1 + 57.0 + 70.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 13.62018 + 8.5 + 24.0 − 81.0 − 76.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 3.8 + 71.5 + 105.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 33.22019 + 2.8 + 59.7 − 63.0 − 61.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 1.4 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 5.5
2020 + 4.1 + 316.4 + 201.2 + 191.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 4.3 + 123.2 + 123.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.1
2020         Jan. − 4.0 + 38.6 + 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 6.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 0.8 − 5.9 + 23.1 + 19.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 16.3 + 16.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 1.3         Mar. + 7.8 + 112.4 − 7.0 − 5.9 − + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 35.3 + 32.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 2.8
         Apr. + 0.5 − 39.4 + 61.6 + 61.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 14.4 + 11.2 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 1.0
         May − 0.6 + 3.9 + 16.9 + 13.7 − − 0.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 + 24.1 + 16.4 − 0.0 + 2.9 + 4.8         June − 2.1 + 181.4 − 21.4 − 25.0 − − 0.0 + 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.2
         July − 0.5 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 4.6 + 10.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 5.9
         Aug. + 0.5 − 49.7 + 77.6 + 77.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.2         Sep. + 0.1 + 123.6 − 54.2 − 55.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 4.6 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.7
         Oct. + 0.2 − 73.5 + 103.4 + 104.2 − − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 16.5 + 12.9 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 3.0
         Nov. − 0.6 + 52.3 − 17.1 − 15.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.6 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 1.6         Dec. + 1.8 − 70.3 + 16.0 + 18.4 − − 0.1 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 14.1 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 8.1
2021         Jan. − 2.6 + 216.2 − 84.9 − 87.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.4 + 6.6 + 5.3 + 0.0 + 2.6 − 1.4
         Feb. + 0.3 − 79.9 + 98.9 + 97.8 − + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 15.3 + 11.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 3.6         Mar. + 0.6 + 54.3 + 37.1 + 30.6 − − 0.1 + 6.6 + 0.2 + 29.7 + 25.6 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 5.4
         Apr. − 0.8 + 78.7 − 56.7 − 54.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 5.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 4.1
         May + 0.8 − 17.5 + 61.2 + 61.6 − + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 15.6 + 12.5 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 4.2         June + 0.6 − 1.9 − 13.2 − 12.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 5.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 6.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exchange of equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer de bt securities;
specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
August 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time Redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits  7 bonds  8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017− 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018− 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
− 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
− 16.9 90.0 1,031.4 125.4 906.0 0.0 4.4 3,658.2 2,235.1 819.7 570.7 32.6 32.3 2020          Jan.
− 16.9 86.1 1,046.8 133.2 913.6 0.0 4.4 3,675.9 2,254.4 820.8 568.5 32.2 32.8          Feb.− 16.9 86.3 1,134.7 147.5 987.2 0.0 4.3 3,716.6 2,304.9 815.5 564.5 31.8 32.5          Mar.
− 17.1 86.4 1,154.9 141.2 1,013.6 0.0 4.3 3,741.9 2,345.4 801.6 563.8 31.1 32.8          Apr.
− 19.4 78.8 1,110.9 131.6 979.3 0.0 7.1 3,775.3 2,376.3 804.7 563.6 30.7 33.3          May− 20.8 78.8 1,229.5 131.4 1,098.1 0.0 9.4 3,766.3 2,385.3 788.2 562.6 30.3 33.4          June
− 22.2 79.3 1,207.9 125.0 1,082.8 0.0 11.1 3,803.4 2,414.0 798.6 560.9 29.9 33.8          July
− 22.5 79.2 1,211.5 126.2 1,085.3 0.0 11.5 3,820.8 2,427.7 802.9 560.6 29.6 34.0          Aug.− 22.7 79.2 1,251.5 123.8 1,127.8 0.0 12.0 3,834.2 2,442.8 802.0 560.1 29.3 34.3          Sep.
− 22.8 79.4 1,263.7 131.5 1,132.2 0.0 12.3 3,874.1 2,481.4 804.1 559.7 28.9 34.6          Oct.
− 22.9 78.1 1,244.8 134.6 1,110.2 0.0 12.5 3,894.3 2,515.3 790.9 559.6 28.5 34.4          Nov.− 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4          Dec.
− 23.7 78.2 1,261.6 140.5 1,121.2 0.0 13.6 3,904.5 2,542.0 773.1 561.6 27.9 34.3 2021          Jan.
− 24.0 78.2 1,260.6 138.0 1,122.5 0.0 14.2 3,913.7 2,557.5 766.1 562.6 27.5 34.3          Feb.− 24.3 78.3 1,336.0 135.4 1,200.6 0.0 14.7 3,925.8 2,575.2 761.2 562.3 27.1 34.4          Mar.
− 24.5 77.7 1,343.0 136.2 1,206.8 0.0 15.1 3,935.7 2,594.6 751.6 562.8 26.8 34.4          Apr.
− 24.7 78.6 1,351.9 140.0 1,211.9 0.0 15.5 3,956.3 2,620.5 746.2 563.2 26.3 34.6          May− 25.0 78.7 1,357.0 132.8 1,224.2 0.0 15.8 3,936.5 2,611.8 736.0 562.6 26.1 34.6          June
Changes *
− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016− − 0.0 − 1.6 + 11.0 − 18.4 + 29.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 2017− − 1.0 + 3.1 − 25.0 − 3.1 − 21.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 2018− − 0.7 + 0.1 − 8.6 + 1.6 − 10.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 122.5 + 155.8 − 25.7 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 1.4 2019
− + 5.7 − 3.3 + 313.4 + 23.2 + 290.2 − 0.0 + 8.2 + 221.6 + 273.7 − 32.7 − 14.5 − 4.9 + 1.9 2020
− − 0.3 − 0.4 + 21.2 + 18.2 + 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.3 + 3.5 − 4.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 2020          Jan.
− − 0.0 − 3.9 + 15.4 + 7.8 + 7.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 17.7 + 19.3 + 1.1 − 2.2 − 0.4 + 0.4          Feb.− − 0.1 + 0.2 + 87.9 + 14.3 + 73.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 40.7 + 50.5 − 5.3 − 4.0 − 0.4 − 0.2          Mar.
− + 0.3 + 0.1 + 20.2 − 6.2 + 26.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 25.3 + 40.7 − 14.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.2          Apr.
− + 2.2 − 0.2 + 15.6 − 4.6 + 20.3 − 0.0 + 2.7 + 30.5 + 27.9 + 3.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6          May− + 1.5 + 0.0 + 118.6 − 0.2 + 118.8 − 0.0 + 2.3 − 9.0 + 8.8 − 16.4 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.1          June
− + 0.9 + 0.5 − 21.7 − 6.4 − 15.2 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 37.1 + 28.7 + 10.5 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.4          July
− + 0.3 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 17.4 + 13.6 + 4.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2          Aug.− + 0.2 + 0.0 + 40.0 − 2.5 + 42.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 13.4 + 15.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.3          Sep.
− + 0.1 + 0.2 + 12.2 + 7.7 + 4.4 − + 0.2 + 40.0 + 38.6 + 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.3          Oct.
− + 0.2 + 0.1 + 8.3 + 3.5 + 4.8 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 20.5 + 34.1 − 13.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2          Nov.− + 0.6 + 0.1 − 8.1 − 9.6 + 1.5 − + 0.5 − 9.2 − 2.3 − 7.6 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.0          Dec.
− + 0.2 − 0.1 + 24.9 + 15.7 + 9.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 19.2 + 28.9 − 10.3 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 2021          Jan.
− + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 2.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 9.1 + 15.4 − 7.0 + 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.0          Feb.− + 0.3 + 0.1 + 75.1 − 2.6 + 77.7 − + 0.5 + 12.2 + 17.7 − 4.8 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1          Mar.
− + 0.2 − 0.6 + 7.1 + 0.8 + 6.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 9.8 + 19.6 − 9.8 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0          Apr.
− + 0.3 + 0.3 + 8.9 + 3.9 + 5.0 − + 0.5 + 20.6 + 26.0 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.2          May− + 0.2 + 0.1 + 5.1 − 7.2 + 12.4 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 19.9 − 8.7 − 10.3 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0          June
including subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding
operations with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities
outstanding. 6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
August 2021
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
  
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro area Medium market Memo Medium marketbanknotes and paper Securities item: and paper Securitiesand Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.12012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.82013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.82014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.62017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.52018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.12019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2020         Jan. 0.2 1,111.1 859.7 578.2 281.5 2.7 248.7 3.8 821.5 536.9 133.0 403.8 7.7 277.0
         Feb. 0.2 1,119.0 865.9 590.7 275.2 2.9 250.2 3.8 832.3 543.7 136.8 406.9 8.6 279.9         Mar. 0.3 1,145.4 889.8 615.5 274.4 3.0 252.5 3.5 834.1 543.2 135.7 407.5 11.7 279.2
         Apr. 0.3 1,156.2 899.6 626.2 273.4 2.8 253.8 3.5 843.1 552.5 142.6 410.0 11.4 279.2
         May 0.3 1,139.4 884.7 613.2 271.5 3.3 251.4 3.7 849.7 559.2 152.6 406.5 12.1 278.4         June 0.3 1,113.8 860.8 592.4 268.5 3.7 249.3 3.8 838.4 538.2 134.7 403.5 15.8 284.5
         July 0.3 1,083.1 834.0 574.4 259.6 3.4 245.7 3.9 829.1 536.3 138.8 397.5 15.1 277.6
         Aug. 0.3 1,066.8 821.2 563.3 257.9 3.5 242.1 4.1 819.9 531.3 133.7 397.6 15.6 272.9         Sep. 0.2 1,084.3 841.3 583.4 257.9 3.6 239.4 4.1 821.9 530.4 130.3 400.2 15.2 276.3
         Oct. 0.3 1,064.7 822.9 564.5 258.5 3.5 238.3 4.1 839.8 539.3 137.7 401.6 16.5 284.1
         Nov. 0.2 1,056.0 815.8 563.4 252.4 3.5 236.7 4.0 845.6 539.5 139.8 399.7 14.0 292.1         Dec. 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021         Jan. 0.2 1,135.1 897.8 645.6 252.2 2.6 234.7 3.8 846.9 538.6 142.7 395.8 14.0 294.3
         Feb. 0.6 1,146.4 912.7 659.6 253.1 2.2 231.5 3.8 853.6 548.2 150.4 397.7 14.7 290.7         Mar. 0.2 1,140.4 908.0 646.7 261.3 2.3 230.1 3.8 864.8 559.3 153.3 406.1 11.9 293.5
         Apr. 0.2 1,172.3 943.1 680.7 262.3 2.3 227.0 3.9 855.5 555.5 152.6 402.9 13.0 287.0
         May 0.2 1,157.2 928.1 669.8 258.3 2.4 226.8 3.9 846.1 550.1 147.3 402.8 11.9 284.2         June 0.4 1,159.3 930.3 666.6 263.7 2.5 226.4 3.9 855.1 551.6 146.7 404.9 10.4 293.2
Changes *
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.52013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.62014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.52017 + 0.0 − 57.2 − 48.7 − 61.5 + 12.8 + 0.0 − 8.5 + 0.6 − 4.7 + 13.0 + 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 18.42018 + 0.0 + 49.6 + 34.0 + 57.7 − 23.7 + 0.2 + 15.3 + 0.7 + 18.3 + 28.3 + 3.2 + 25.2 − 0.4 − 9.72019 − 0.0 − 4.1 − 11.3 − 21.9 + 10.7 + 0.8 + 6.3 + 0.7 + 26.8 + 19.9 + 12.7 + 7.3 + 3.0 + 3.8
2020 − 0.0 − 32.0 − 22.4 − 6.6 − 15.8 + 0.9 − 10.5 + 0.3 + 34.4 + 14.7 + 9.0 + 5.7 + 3.6 + 16.1
2020         Jan. − 0.0 + 42.2 + 41.2 + 43.2 − 1.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 23.1 + 21.1 + 21.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.9
         Feb. + 0.0 + 6.5 + 4.7 + 11.5 − 6.8 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.1 + 6.4 + 3.7 + 2.7 + 0.9 + 2.8         Mar. + 0.0 + 27.5 + 24.9 + 25.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 0.7 + 1.7 + 3.1 − 0.6
         Apr. + 0.0 + 7.4 + 6.5 + 5.5 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 6.5 + 7.2 + 6.3 + 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.4
         May − 0.0 − 22.7 − 21.4 − 22.6 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.8 + 0.2 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1         June + 0.0 − 23.5 − 21.8 − 19.6 − 2.2 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 9.8 − 19.7 − 17.5 − 2.2 + 3.7 + 6.2
         July − 0.0 − 17.9 − 14.4 − 11.2 − 3.2 − 0.2 − 3.3 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 5.3 + 5.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 5.4
         Aug. − 0.0 − 14.4 − 11.1 − 10.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 4.2 − 4.8 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 4.7         Sep. − 0.0 + 13.9 + 16.6 + 18.2 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 3.8 + 1.3 − 0.4 + 3.0
         Oct. + 0.0 − 20.8 − 19.5 − 19.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 16.7 + 7.8 + 6.9 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 7.6
         Nov. − 0.0 − 3.4 − 1.9 + 1.8 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.1 + 9.7 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 8.6         Dec. − 0.0 − 26.9 − 26.3 − 28.9 + 2.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 19.3 − 13.7 − 13.6 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 3.0
2021         Jan. − 0.0 + 106.1 + 108.3 + 110.3 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 22.5 + 14.5 + 17.8 − 3.3 + 2.7 + 5.3
         Feb. + 0.3 + 11.1 + 14.7 + 14.0 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 3.2 − 0.1 + 6.3 + 9.0 + 7.5 + 1.5 + 0.7 − 3.5         Mar. − 0.3 − 11.7 − 10.1 − 15.8 + 5.6 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 3.9 + 4.9 + 0.7 + 4.1 − 2.8 + 1.8
         Apr. − 0.0 + 37.7 + 40.7 + 36.8 + 3.9 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 4.0 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 1.1 − 5.6
         May + 0.0 − 14.9 − 14.6 − 11.5 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 7.7 − 4.2 − 4.4 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 2.6         June + 0.2 − 4.1 − 3.7 − 6.3 + 2.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 4.9 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 1.6 + 8.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
August 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 201612.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 201711.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 201811.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 − 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 − 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.4 21.4 756.2 433.4 322.8 223.1 99.8 − 247.8 121.8 126.0 68.1 57.8 0.1 2020          Jan.
11.4 19.0 770.5 433.8 336.7 230.1 106.6 − 255.3 129.1 126.2 66.5 59.6 0.1          Feb.11.4 19.0 826.9 463.3 363.6 250.9 112.6 − 269.0 146.3 122.7 62.8 60.0 0.1          Mar.
11.4 19.0 835.3 438.6 396.7 288.0 108.7 − 274.1 143.0 131.1 69.9 61.2 0.1          Apr.
11.4 19.0 828.1 459.2 368.9 260.8 108.0 − 280.8 150.9 129.9 67.9 62.0 0.1          May11.3 19.1 835.5 472.5 363.0 247.2 115.9 − 275.7 145.2 130.5 69.5 61.1 0.1          June
11.2 19.0 843.9 489.3 354.7 238.8 115.8 − 270.6 139.4 131.3 72.5 58.8 0.1          July
11.2 19.0 828.9 474.8 354.1 238.8 115.2 − 263.2 134.8 128.3 69.9 58.5 0.1          Aug.11.4 19.0 832.4 486.5 345.9 226.4 119.6 − 269.6 145.5 124.1 66.0 58.1 0.1          Sep.
11.5 19.0 833.2 487.3 345.9 224.6 121.3 − 269.5 142.6 127.0 68.5 58.4 0.1          Oct.
11.5 19.0 836.8 491.3 345.5 219.0 126.5 − 279.9 154.2 125.8 66.0 59.7 0.1          Nov.11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 − 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1          Dec.
11.3 16.5 954.9 507.8 447.0 298.5 148.5 − 279.8 145.0 134.8 69.4 65.3 0.1 2021          Jan.
11.3 16.5 987.8 520.0 467.7 318.0 149.7 − 283.4 145.2 138.3 71.5 66.8 0.1          Feb.11.3 16.6 991.5 520.2 471.3 319.5 151.8 − 288.9 147.8 141.1 73.7 67.4 0.1          Mar.
11.3 16.5 1,008.7 522.1 486.6 343.1 143.5 − 295.8 150.7 145.0 81.0 64.1 0.1          Apr.
11.3 16.5 1,013.1 513.9 499.2 360.2 139.0 − 304.0 148.4 155.6 88.0 67.6 0.1          May11.3 16.5 1,016.2 539.5 476.7 335.5 141.3 − 290.8 148.3 142.5 79.9 62.6 0.1          June
Changes *
− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016− 1.0 − 4.1 − 15.5 + 25.3 − 40.8 − 43.2 + 2.4
+ 0.0 + 31.8 + 11.0 + 20.8 + 15.6 + 5.2 − 0.4 2017
− 0.2 − 2.2 − 23.9 − 23.4 − 0.4 + 2.1 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 11.9 − 0.2 − 11.8 − 5.7 − 6.0 − 0.2 2018− 0.3 − 0.9 − 9.5 − 49.4 + 39.8 + 28.0 + 11.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.1 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.0 2019
− 0.2 − 3.9 + 83.8 + 87.8 − 4.1 − 34.7 + 30.6 − + 23.6 + 13.8 + 9.8 + 7.1 + 2.8 + 0.0 2020
− 0.1 + 0.0 + 73.0 + 92.9 − 19.8 − 21.6 + 1.7 − + 16.7 + 9.2 + 7.6 + 7.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 2020          Jan.
− 0.0 − 2.4 + 13.3 + 5.0 + 8.4 + 5.9 + 2.5 − + 7.3 + 7.2 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 1.8 − 0.0          Feb.+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 57.2 + 29.9 + 27.3 + 21.1 + 6.2 − + 14.2 + 17.4 − 3.2 − 3.5 + 0.4 + 0.0          Mar.
− 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.0 − 25.9 + 31.9 + 33.0 − 1.1 − + 4.4 − 3.7 + 8.1 + 6.9 + 1.2 − 0.0          Apr.
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 15.3 + 9.3 − 24.6 − 24.6 + 0.0 − − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.0          May− 0.2 + 0.1 + 8.8 + 13.9 − 5.1 − 13.1 + 8.0 − − 4.7 − 5.6 + 0.9 + 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.0          June
− 0.1 + 0.0 + 17.6 + 20.7 − 3.1 − 4.1 + 1.0 − − 2.7 − 4.7 + 2.0 + 4.0 − 2.0 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 − 0.0 − 13.9 − 13.8 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.5 − − 7.2 − 4.4 − 2.7 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.0          Aug.+ 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 10.4 − 9.5 − 13.5 + 4.0 − + 5.8 + 10.4 − 4.6 − 4.1 − 0.5 + 0.0          Sep.
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 2.0 + 1.6 − − 0.6 − 3.2 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.0          Oct.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.9 + 5.9 + 2.0 − 3.7 + 5.7 − + 11.6 + 12.2 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 1.5 − 0.0          Nov.− 0.2 − 1.7 − 72.1 − 60.9 − 11.2 − 12.6 + 1.4 − − 20.3 − 20.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0          Dec.
− 0.0 − 0.8 + 191.3 + 78.5 + 112.9 + 92.4 + 20.5 − + 20.1 + 12.3 + 7.8 + 3.6 + 4.2 − 0.0 2021          Jan.
− 0.0 − 0.0 + 32.7 + 12.2 + 20.5 + 19.3 + 1.2 − + 3.4 + 0.0 + 3.4 + 2.0 + 1.4 − 0.0          Feb.+ 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.8 − 2.6 + 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.9 − + 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 0.0          Mar.
− 0.0 + 0.0 + 23.2 + 4.3 + 19.0 + 26.8 − 7.8 − + 7.9 + 3.7 + 4.2 + 7.3 − 3.0 + 0.0          Apr.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.9 − 7.4 + 12.2 + 16.6 − 4.4 − + 8.6 − 2.2 + 10.8 + 7.2 + 3.5 − 0.0          May− 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 23.7 − 25.6 − 27.4 + 1.8 − − 14.8 − 0.6 − 14.2 − 9.0 − 5.2 − 0.0          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
August 2021
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.92012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.92013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.62014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.02017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.02018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.82019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2020         Jan. 3,528.4 3,126.0 261.5 236.3 235.7 0.6 25.2 22.6 2.6 3,266.9 2,874.2
         Feb. 3,544.7 3,142.3 264.8 240.0 239.3 0.7 24.8 20.8 4.0 3,279.9 2,888.9         Mar. 3,580.0 3,174.3 288.4 261.9 261.1 0.8 26.4 22.2 4.2 3,291.6 2,892.2
         Apr. 3,594.3 3,185.5 285.0 255.6 254.9 0.7 29.4 22.9 6.5 3,309.3 2,908.0
         May 3,620.9 3,204.4 285.3 254.3 253.2 1.1 31.1 22.0 9.1 3,335.6 2,931.7         June 3,621.1 3,206.8 278.9 248.5 247.6 0.8 30.4 23.3 7.2 3,342.2 2,939.8
         July 3,625.7 3,217.4 274.8 243.4 242.6 0.8 31.5 24.2 7.3 3,350.9 2,953.2
         Aug. 3,629.7 3,219.7 265.6 237.7 236.9 0.8 28.0 19.4 8.6 3,364.0 2,967.3         Sep. 3,634.2 3,224.6 261.9 232.0 231.3 0.7 29.9 22.3 7.7 3,372.3 2,976.0
         Oct. 3,651.1 3,237.8 261.0 229.5 228.7 0.7 31.6 23.3 8.2 3,390.1 2,991.5
         Nov. 3,661.1 3,247.6 258.7 229.3 228.7 0.6 29.4 22.4 7.0 3,402.4 3,001.7         Dec. 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021         Jan. 3,654.0 3,251.0 247.7 221.9 221.3 0.6 25.8 19.7 6.1 3,406.3 3,018.4
         Feb. 3,669.3 3,261.9 249.5 224.2 223.6 0.6 25.3 18.5 6.8 3,419.7 3,031.9         Mar. 3,699.1 3,287.7 261.3 236.6 236.0 0.6 24.7 18.6 6.1 3,437.8 3,048.6
         Apr. 3,693.9 3,287.7 248.6 223.5 222.8 0.7 25.1 20.2 4.9 3,445.2 3,061.5
         May 3,709.6 3,300.4 248.7 225.4 224.6 0.8 23.3 19.5 3.8 3,460.9 3,075.1         June 3,709.0 3,305.6 250.4 225.7 225.0 0.8 24.7 19.9 4.8 3,458.6 3,082.1
Changes *
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.92013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.62014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.82017 + 57.0 + 70.2 − 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 12.1 − 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.42018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 − 9.2 − 8.6 − 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.02019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 − 19.6 − 19.8 − 19.8 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2020         Jan. + 6.8 + 6.5 + 1.1 − 2.5 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 3.6 + 3.8 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 7.2
         Feb. + 16.3 + 16.2 + 3.3 + 3.7 + 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.7 + 1.3 + 13.0 + 14.7         Mar. + 35.3 + 32.1 + 23.6 + 21.9 + 21.8 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 11.7 + 3.3
         Apr. + 14.4 + 11.2 − 3.3 − 6.3 − 6.2 − 0.1 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 2.3 + 17.7 + 15.9
         May + 24.1 + 16.4 − 2.2 − 3.9 − 4.2 + 0.4 + 1.7 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 26.3 + 23.7         June + 0.2 + 2.5 − 6.4 − 5.8 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 1.3 − 1.9 + 6.6 + 7.9
         July + 4.6 + 10.5 − 5.9 − 6.9 − 6.8 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 10.5 + 15.2
         Aug. + 4.0 + 2.4 − 7.5 − 4.1 − 4.1 − 0.0 − 3.5 − 4.9 + 1.4 + 11.5 + 12.6         Sep. + 4.6 + 4.9 − 3.7 − 5.6 − 5.6 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 2.9 − 0.9 + 8.3 + 8.6
         Oct. + 16.5 + 12.9 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 17.4 + 14.6
         Nov. + 10.6 + 10.4 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 1.2 + 12.7 + 10.6         Dec. − 14.1 − 2.3 − 15.5 − 7.7 − 7.5 − 0.2 − 7.8 − 4.4 − 3.4 + 1.4 + 11.2
2021         Jan. + 6.6 + 5.3 + 4.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 4.2 + 1.7 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 5.2
         Feb. + 15.3 + 10.9 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.7 + 13.5 + 13.3         Mar. + 29.7 + 25.6 + 11.2 + 12.5 + 12.5 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 18.5 + 16.3
         Apr. − 5.2 − 0.0 − 12.8 − 13.1 − 13.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.6 − 1.2 + 7.5 + 13.0
         May + 15.6 + 12.5 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 15.5 + 13.4         June − 0.6 + 5.2 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 2.4 + 7.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not exchange of equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
August 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
lendingprises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities  
1 claims  2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 20162,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 20172,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4 20182,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 − 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 − 1.1 2020
2,631.8 300.0 2,331.8 242.4 15.7 392.7 236.0 17.0 219.0 156.7 − 1.2 2020          Jan.
2,646.4 302.5 2,344.0 242.5 15.7 391.0 235.7 17.2 218.5 155.3 − 1.2          Feb.2,654.8 304.5 2,350.2 237.5 15.6 399.4 236.3 17.2 219.1 163.1 − 1.2          Mar.
2,671.3 307.2 2,364.1 236.7 15.9 401.3 236.4 17.3 219.1 164.9 − 1.3          Apr.
2,692.9 310.7 2,382.2 238.9 18.1 403.9 236.3 17.4 218.9 167.6 − 1.3          May2,701.4 310.8 2,390.6 238.4 19.6 402.4 234.5 17.1 217.4 167.9 − 1.2          June
2,715.7 312.5 2,403.2 237.5 21.0 397.7 234.9 16.7 218.1 162.8 − 1.2          July
2,729.1 313.1 2,416.0 238.2 21.3 396.7 234.4 16.7 217.7 162.3 − 1.2          Aug.2,737.4 313.1 2,424.2 238.6 21.5 396.3 233.7 16.2 217.5 162.6 − 1.2          Sep.
2,751.8 313.2 2,438.6 239.7 21.6 398.6 234.0 15.9 218.1 164.6 − 1.2          Oct.
2,762.3 311.5 2,450.8 239.4 21.8 400.7 234.2 15.7 218.6 166.4 − 1.2          Nov.2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 − 1.1          Dec.
2,776.4 307.8 2,468.6 242.0 22.5 387.9 233.6 15.3 218.3 154.3 − 1.2 2021          Jan.
2,787.7 309.7 2,478.1 244.2 22.8 387.8 232.0 15.4 216.6 155.8 − 1.1          Feb.2,802.4 314.5 2,487.9 246.1 23.1 389.3 230.7 15.2 215.5 158.6 − 1.1          Mar.
2,813.9 313.6 2,500.3 247.6 23.4 383.7 230.8 15.0 215.8 153.0 − 1.1          Apr.
2,825.1 311.7 2,513.5 249.9 23.6 385.9 231.1 14.9 216.2 154.8 − 1.1          May2,831.4 309.9 2,521.5 250.7 23.9 376.5 229.3 14.7 214.7 147.1 − 1.1          June
Changes *
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 + 15.8 + 0.1 − 39.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 − 9.3 − 29.4 − − 0.1 2017+ 108.7 + 19.3 + 89.4 − 6.7 − 0.9 − 37.1 − 10.5 − 2.7 − 7.8 − 26.6 − − 0.0 2018+ 126.0 + 18.9 + 107.2 + 6.8 − 0.8 − 17.8 − 5.5 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 12.3 − + 0.1 2019
+ 145.0 + 9.4 + 135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 1.7 − − 0.4 2020
+ 5.3 − 1.4 + 6.7 + 1.9 − 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 − − 0.3 2020          Jan.
+ 14.6 + 2.4 + 12.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.3 − + 0.0          Feb.+ 8.3 + 2.1 + 6.3 − 5.0 − 0.1 + 8.4 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 7.8 − − 0.0          Mar.
+ 16.7 + 2.7 + 14.0 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.8 − + 0.0          Apr.
+ 21.5 + 3.5 + 18.0 + 2.2 + 2.2 + 2.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.7 − + 0.0          May+ 8.4 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 0.5 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.3 − − 0.1          June
+ 16.1 + 1.6 + 14.5 − 0.9 + 0.9 − 4.7 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 5.1 − + 0.0          July
+ 11.9 + 0.7 + 11.2 + 0.7 + 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.5 − − 0.0          Aug.+ 8.2 − 0.0 + 8.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.0          Sep.
+ 13.5 + 0.1 + 13.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 0.9 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.9 − + 0.0          Oct.
+ 10.9 − 1.2 + 12.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 1.8 − − 0.0          Nov.+ 9.5 − 1.0 + 10.5 + 1.7 + 0.7 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 9.9 − − 0.1          Dec.
+ 4.3 − 2.7 + 7.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 2.3 − + 0.1 2021          Jan.
+ 11.1 + 1.8 + 9.3 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 1.5 − − 0.0          Feb.+ 14.4 + 4.7 + 9.7 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 1.2 + 3.5 − − 0.0          Mar.
+ 11.5 − 0.9 + 12.4 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 5.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 5.6 − − 0.0          Apr.
+ 11.0 − 1.9 + 13.0 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 1.8 − + 0.0          May+ 6.2 − 1.8 + 8.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 9.4 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 7.6 − − 0.0          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
August 2021
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insuranceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2019 2,864.8 1,512.1 1,470.4 1,213.0 257.4 1,560.5 416.1 146.6 119.0 77.1 141.6 54.2 50.3 168.2
2020         June 2,949.0 1,558.5 1,510.6 1,246.6 263.9 1,613.5 423.2 164.5 120.6 80.8 138.1 55.4 56.6 175.2
         Sep. 2,968.6 1,580.1 1,537.3 1,265.4 272.0 1,616.8 434.6 157.2 121.1 82.2 135.9 55.5 57.7 173.7         Dec. 2,993.0 1,601.8 1,565.6 1,285.1 280.5 1,623.4 443.3 146.7 123.4 82.7 135.8 55.3 59.8 176.0
2021         Mar. 3,038.4 1,618.9 1,587.9 1,302.5 285.4 1,657.2 451.2 149.2 123.0 84.6 139.1 55.4 60.1 182.5
         June 3,056.4 1,634.3 1,619.4 1,316.7 302.7 1,653.9 461.3 142.5 122.2 85.7 135.4 56.0 57.9 182.3
 Short-term lending
2019 238.4 − 8.1 − 8.1 206.2 4.7 35.9 5.6 15.7 48.6 3.8 4.6 27.02020         June 247.6 − 8.2 − 8.2 217.9 4.7 44.5 6.1 16.9 41.8 4.2 5.4 33.4
         Sep. 231.3 − 8.5 − 8.5 201.4 5.0 36.9 6.5 16.9 38.4 4.2 5.3 30.0         Dec. 221.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 192.1 4.6 29.0 6.9 16.0 37.0 3.6 6.1 31.6
2021         Mar. 236.0 − 8.0 − 8.0 207.4 4.7 33.4 6.4 16.7 38.9 3.9 6.1 34.2
         June 225.0 − 7.8 − 7.8 195.9 4.4 28.8 5.5 16.7 34.7 4.2 4.4 34.4
 Medium-term lending
2019 301.3 − 36.6 − 36.6 219.5 16.6 28.5 4.9 13.9 19.7 4.6 10.2 52.02020         June 310.8 − 37.7 − 37.7 229.8 17.6 33.6 5.2 14.2 19.6 4.5 13.4 50.2
         Sep. 313.1 − 38.0 − 38.0 232.1 17.9 33.1 5.3 14.6 19.2 4.6 14.3 51.4         Dec. 310.5 − 38.5 − 38.5 230.4 18.5 30.2 5.4 14.8 19.3 4.8 15.0 51.4
2021         Mar. 314.5 − 38.9 − 38.9 236.4 19.1 29.2 5.1 15.3 19.7 4.5 14.7 52.9
         June 309.9 − 39.7 − 39.7 232.7 19.8 27.7 5.0 15.3 19.4 4.5 14.1 51.2
 Long-term lending
2019 2,325.1 1,512.1 1,425.7 1,213.0 212.7 1,134.9 394.8 82.2 108.6 47.6 73.3 45.8 35.5 89.22020         June 2,390.6 1,558.5 1,464.7 1,246.6 218.1 1,165.8 400.8 86.4 109.3 49.7 76.7 46.6 37.8 91.6
         Sep. 2,424.2 1,580.1 1,490.9 1,265.4 225.5 1,183.3 411.6 87.2 109.3 50.7 78.2 46.7 38.2 92.2         Dec. 2,461.4 1,601.8 1,519.1 1,285.1 234.0 1,201.0 420.2 87.5 111.2 51.8 79.4 47.0 38.7 93.0
2021         Mar. 2,487.9 1,618.9 1,541.0 1,302.5 238.5 1,213.5 427.4 86.6 111.5 52.6 80.5 47.1 39.3 95.4
         June 2,521.5 1,634.3 1,571.9 1,316.7 255.2 1,225.3 437.1 86.0 111.7 53.7 81.3 47.3 39.4 96.8
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2020         Q2 + 30.6 + 17.8 + 21.0 + 13.7 + 7.3 + 17.1 + 5.2 + 8.8 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 4.4 + 0.9 + 4.1 − 4.0
         Q3 + 19.7 + 21.7 + 26.5 + 18.8 + 7.7 − 1.9 + 6.4 − 7.4 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 2.1         Q4 + 23.9 + 21.3 + 27.7 + 19.3 + 8.4 + 6.1 + 8.4 − 10.3 + 2.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.2 + 2.4
2021         Q1 + 44.8 + 17.1 + 22.2 + 17.3 + 4.9 + 33.0 + 7.6 + 2.5 − 0.7 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 6.2
         Q2 + 17.7 + 20.7 + 30.6 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 3.3 + 9.5 − 6.7 − 0.8 + 1.1 − 3.8 + 0.6 − 2.2 − 0.2
 Short-term lending
2020         Q2 − 16.0 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 14.9 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 7.1 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 4.2
         Q3 − 16.5 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 − 16.7 + 0.3 − 7.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.4         Q4 − 10.0 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 9.3 − 0.4 − 8.0 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 1.4 − 0.6 + 0.8 + 1.6
2021         Q1 + 14.9 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 15.4 + 0.1 + 4.4 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 2.6
         Q2 − 11.1 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 11.6 − 0.2 − 4.6 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 4.2 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 0.2
 Medium-term lending
2020         Q2 + 6.2 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 + 7.4 + 0.7 + 3.9 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.0
         Q3 + 2.3 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.6         Q4 − 2.2 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 − 1.6 + 0.6 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.2
2021         Q1 + 3.8 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 5.9 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.5
         Q2 − 4.6 − + 0.8 − + 0.8 − 3.6 + 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.8
 Long-term lending
2020         Q2 + 40.4 + 17.8 + 20.4 + 13.7 + 6.8 + 24.6 + 4.6 + 3.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 3.5 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.2
         Q3 + 33.9 + 21.7 + 26.0 + 18.8 + 7.2 + 12.7 + 6.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.7         Q4 + 36.1 + 21.3 + 27.7 + 19.3 + 8.4 + 16.9 + 8.2 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 1.0
2021         Q1 + 26.1 + 17.1 + 21.8 + 17.3 + 4.5 + 11.7 + 6.9 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 2.2
         Q2 + 33.4 + 20.7 + 30.0 + 21.0 + 9.1 + 11.9 + 9.0 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.4
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
August 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
803.6 264.5 51.1 193.9 447.5 47.6 1,288.4 1,050.4 238.0 176.5 7.9 15.9 3.9 2019
822.2 277.8 55.9 198.5 447.1 48.1 1,319.4 1,083.5 235.9 176.9 7.3 16.2 3.9 2020          June
833.5 281.7 55.1 201.9 458.9 48.1 1,335.9 1,098.8 237.0 178.3 7.5 16.0 3.9          Sep.843.7 286.6 53.8 204.1 464.0 47.9 1,353.4 1,118.3 235.2 177.4 6.7 16.2 4.0          Dec.
863.3 293.7 59.2 204.3 467.7 48.3 1,364.8 1,132.6 232.2 175.4 6.6 16.4 4.1 2021          Mar.
871.9 296.9 58.2 208.6 473.4 48.7 1,386.3 1,153.9 232.4 174.7 6.6 16.2 4.1          June
Short-term lending
65.0 14.4 9.7 10.2 23.9 4.9 31.6 3.3 28.2 1.3 7.9 0.7 0.0 201965.5 14.8 11.9 11.4 21.8 4.7 29.0 3.4 25.6 1.4 7.3 0.7 0.0 2020          June
63.1 15.6 10.7 10.9 21.7 4.3 29.3 3.5 25.8 1.3 7.5 0.6 0.0          Sep.61.9 15.7 9.6 10.5 20.9 3.7 28.6 3.4 25.2 1.3 6.7 0.6 0.0          Dec.
67.9 16.5 12.3 10.2 20.5 3.9 27.9 3.4 24.6 1.3 6.6 0.7 0.0 2021          Mar.
67.1 16.0 11.5 10.4 21.0 4.1 28.6 3.4 25.2 1.4 6.6 0.5 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
85.7 18.1 11.0 22.9 31.9 3.5 81.4 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0 201989.0 19.7 12.6 23.5 31.6 3.5 80.4 20.0 60.4 56.9 − 0.6 0.0 2020          June
89.6 20.0 12.6 24.1 31.9 3.6 80.6 20.0 60.6 57.2 − 0.5 0.0          Sep.89.6 20.4 11.8 24.5 32.0 3.5 79.6 20.0 59.6 56.1 − 0.5 0.0          Dec.
94.9 21.9 14.4 25.2 31.5 3.6 77.6 19.8 57.8 54.2 − 0.5 0.0 2021          Mar.
95.7 22.2 14.4 26.4 31.3 3.4 76.7 19.8 56.9 53.1 − 0.5 0.0          June
Long-term lending
652.9 232.0 30.4 160.9 391.7 39.1 1,175.5 1,027.1 148.3 117.1 − 14.7 3.8 2019667.7 243.3 31.4 163.6 393.7 39.9 1,210.0 1,060.1 149.9 118.5 − 14.9 3.8 2020          June
680.8 246.1 31.8 166.9 405.3 40.1 1,226.0 1,075.4 150.7 119.8 − 15.0 3.9          Sep.692.3 250.5 32.4 169.1 411.1 40.7 1,245.3 1,094.9 150.4 120.0 − 15.1 4.0          Dec.
700.5 255.3 32.5 168.9 415.7 40.8 1,259.3 1,109.5 149.8 119.9 − 15.2 4.1 2021          Mar.
709.1 258.7 32.3 171.8 421.1 41.1 1,281.0 1,130.7 150.3 120.3 − 15.2 4.1          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 10.0 + 4.6 + 1.7 + 2.1 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 13.4 + 15.8 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 2020          Q2
+ 7.0 + 3.9 − 0.8 + 3.2 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 21.7 + 20.0 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3+ 9.6 + 5.2 − 1.5 + 1.8 + 4.4 − 0.2 + 17.6 + 19.3 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.1          Q4
+ 19.6 + 7.0 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 + 14.6 − 2.9 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 2021          Q1
+ 8.7 + 3.2 − 0.9 + 4.3 + 5.6 + 0.4 + 21.3 + 21.0 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0          Q2
Short-term lending
− 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 2020          Q2
− 2.6 + 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3− 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
+ 6.0 + 0.7 + 2.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2021          Q1
− 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 1.8 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2020          Q2
+ 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3− 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 5.6 + 1.5 + 2.6 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.9 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2021          Q1
+ 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.1 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 11.6 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 5.7 + 0.6 + 15.7 + 15.8 − 0.2 + 0.2 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2020          Q2
+ 8.6 + 2.8 + 0.4 + 3.0 + 5.4 + 0.2 + 21.1 + 20.0 + 1.1 + 1.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3+ 10.8 + 4.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 4.9 + 0.5 + 19.0 + 19.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − + 0.2 + 0.1          Q4
+ 8.0 + 4.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 4.1 + 0.1 + 14.3 + 14.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 2021          Q1
+ 8.7 + 3.4 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 21.5 + 21.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
August 2021
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2018 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 203.4 638.2 56.8 581.4 578.6 37.3 33.9 14.9 0.52019 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 202.7 613.5 52.7 560.8 575.2 33.2 32.5 14.7 0.22020 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2020         July 3,803.4 2,414.0 798.6 215.6 583.1 46.6 536.5 560.9 29.9 33.8 14.3 0.2
         Aug. 3,820.8 2,427.7 802.9 215.0 587.9 45.8 542.0 560.6 29.6 34.0 14.4 0.5         Sep. 3,834.2 2,442.8 802.0 210.1 591.9 48.1 543.8 560.1 29.3 34.3 14.3 0.4
         Oct. 3,874.1 2,481.4 804.1 207.6 596.5 50.7 545.8 559.7 28.9 34.6 14.3 0.6
         Nov. 3,894.3 2,515.3 790.9 196.4 594.5 48.1 546.4 559.6 28.5 34.4 14.3 0.7         Dec. 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2021         Jan. 3,904.5 2,542.0 773.1 181.6 591.5 47.4 544.2 561.6 27.9 34.3 14.3 0.5
         Feb. 3,913.7 2,557.5 766.1 174.7 591.4 49.0 542.4 562.6 27.5 34.3 14.4 0.5         Mar. 3,925.8 2,575.2 761.2 175.4 585.9 46.9 539.0 562.3 27.1 34.4 14.4 0.9
         Apr. 3,935.7 2,594.6 751.6 168.9 582.7 46.8 535.9 562.8 26.8 34.4 14.4 1.0
         May 3,956.3 2,620.5 746.2 165.9 580.3 47.3 533.1 563.2 26.3 34.6 14.4 0.7         June 3,936.5 2,611.8 736.0 158.5 577.5 47.4 530.1 562.6 26.1 34.6 14.4 1.0
Changes*
2019 + 122.5 + 155.8 − 25.7 − 0.8 − 24.9 − 4.1 − 20.7 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.32020 + 221.6 + 273.7 − 32.7 − 15.0 − 17.7 − 4.8 − 12.9 − 14.5 − 4.9 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.1
2020         July + 37.1 + 28.7 + 10.5 + 8.9 + 1.6 + 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug. + 17.4 + 13.6 + 4.3 − 0.6 + 4.9 − 0.7 + 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2         Sep. + 13.4 + 15.1 − 0.9 − 4.9 + 4.0 + 2.3 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Oct. + 40.0 + 38.6 + 2.2 − 3.5 + 5.7 + 2.5 + 3.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3
         Nov. + 20.5 + 34.1 − 13.2 − 11.2 − 2.0 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1         Dec. − 9.2 − 2.3 − 7.6 − 7.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.6
2021         Jan. + 19.2 + 28.9 − 10.3 − 7.3 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 2.5 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4
         Feb. + 9.1 + 15.4 − 7.0 − 6.9 − 0.1 + 1.7 − 1.8 + 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0         Mar. + 12.2 + 17.7 − 4.8 + 0.7 − 5.5 − 2.2 − 3.4 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Apr. + 9.8 + 19.6 − 9.8 − 6.6 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 3.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1
         May + 20.6 + 26.0 − 5.3 − 3.0 − 2.4 + 0.4 − 2.8 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3         June − 19.9 − 8.7 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 2.8 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
Domestic government End of year or month*
2018 218.9 62.7 148.2 67.9 80.3 28.5 51.8 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
2019 237.1 74.7 154.9 76.0 78.9 26.1 52.8 3.4 4.1 24.7 2.2 0.22020 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 −
2020         July 226.5 76.7 143.0 73.4 69.6 20.3 49.3 2.8 3.9 25.9 2.1 0.2
         Aug. 237.6 79.4 151.3 76.1 75.2 19.4 55.8 2.9 3.9 26.0 2.1 0.2         Sep. 236.6 77.4 152.6 72.4 80.2 21.5 58.7 2.8 3.8 26.1 2.1 0.2
         Oct. 240.1 81.5 152.0 68.0 84.0 24.0 60.1 2.8 3.7 26.1 2.1 0.2
         Nov. 237.2 83.9 146.8 63.7 83.1 21.3 61.8 2.8 3.7 25.6 2.1 −         Dec. 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 −
2021         Jan. 224.1 77.5 140.3 57.8 82.5 20.8 61.7 2.7 3.7 25.3 2.1 −
         Feb. 224.4 80.7 137.3 53.6 83.8 22.4 61.3 2.7 3.6 25.3 2.1 −         Mar. 214.4 76.8 131.4 51.2 80.2 19.9 60.3 2.6 3.5 25.3 2.0 −
         Apr. 213.7 80.5 127.0 47.8 79.3 19.8 59.5 2.6 3.5 25.4 2.0 −
         May 218.4 88.4 123.8 45.8 78.0 19.8 58.2 2.6 3.5 25.3 2.0 −         June 209.1 81.5 121.5 43.8 77.6 20.3 57.3 2.6 3.4 25.2 2.0 0.2
Changes*
2019 + 17.1 + 11.8 + 5.8 + 7.8 − 2.0 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.22020 − 6.9 + 5.7 − 11.6 − 16.5 + 4.8 − 5.3 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2
2020         July + 5.1 + 1.3 + 3.9 − 1.6 + 5.5 + 1.8 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Aug. + 11.1 + 2.8 + 8.3 + 2.7 + 5.6 − 0.9 + 6.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 −         Sep. − 0.8 − 2.1 + 1.4 − 3.7 + 5.1 + 2.1 + 3.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Oct. + 3.7 + 4.2 − 0.4 − 4.5 + 4.0 + 2.4 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Nov. − 2.7 + 2.6 − 5.2 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − − 0.2         Dec. − 7.7 − 3.8 − 3.8 − 4.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
2021         Jan. − 5.5 − 2.6 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Feb. + 0.3 + 3.3 − 3.0 − 4.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Mar. − 10.0 − 4.0 − 5.9 − 2.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Apr. − 0.7 + 3.7 − 4.4 − 3.5 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − −
         May + 4.7 + 7.9 − 3.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −         June − 9.3 − 6.9 − 2.3 − 2.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
August 2021
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2018 3,318.7 2,017.4 693.3 135.4 557.9 28.3 529.6 574.9 33.1 8.6 12.7 0.52019 3,423.9 2,161.6 661.4 126.7 534.7 26.6 508.0 571.8 29.1 7.8 12.6 0.02020 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2020         July 3,577.0 2,337.3 655.6 142.1 513.5 26.3 487.2 558.1 26.0 7.9 12.2 0.1
         Aug. 3,583.2 2,348.2 651.6 138.8 512.7 26.4 486.3 557.8 25.7 8.0 12.3 0.3         Sep. 3,597.6 2,365.4 649.4 137.7 511.7 26.6 485.1 557.3 25.5 8.2 12.2 0.2
         Oct. 3,634.0 2,399.9 652.1 139.7 512.4 26.7 485.7 556.9 25.1 8.5 12.2 0.5
         Nov. 3,657.1 2,431.4 644.1 132.7 511.4 26.7 484.7 556.8 24.8 8.8 12.2 0.7         Dec. 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2021         Jan. 3,680.4 2,464.5 632.8 123.8 509.0 26.6 482.5 558.9 24.2 9.0 12.3 0.5
         Feb. 3,689.2 2,476.7 628.8 121.1 507.7 26.6 481.1 559.9 23.9 9.0 12.3 0.5         Mar. 3,711.4 2,498.4 629.8 124.1 505.7 27.0 478.7 559.7 23.5 9.1 12.3 0.9
         Apr. 3,721.9 2,514.1 624.5 121.1 503.4 27.1 476.4 560.1 23.2 9.0 12.3 1.0
         May 3,737.9 2,532.1 622.4 120.1 502.3 27.5 474.9 560.6 22.8 9.2 12.3 0.7         June 3,727.4 2,530.3 614.5 114.6 499.9 27.1 472.7 560.0 22.6 9.3 12.4 0.7
Changes*
2019 + 105.4 + 144.0 − 31.5 − 8.6 − 22.9 − 1.5 − 21.4 − 3.1 − 4.0 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.42020 + 228.5 + 268.0 − 21.1 + 1.5 − 22.6 + 0.5 − 23.0 − 13.9 − 4.6 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.1
2020         July + 32.0 + 27.4 + 6.5 + 10.4 − 3.9 + 0.5 − 4.4 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug. + 6.3 + 10.8 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2         Sep. + 14.2 + 17.2 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Oct. + 36.3 + 34.4 + 2.6 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3
         Nov. + 23.1 + 31.5 − 8.0 − 6.9 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2         Dec. − 1.5 + 1.5 − 3.8 − 3.4 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.6
2021         Jan. + 24.6 + 31.5 − 7.6 − 5.6 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4
         Feb. + 8.8 + 12.1 − 4.0 − 2.6 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0         Mar. + 22.2 + 21.7 + 1.0 + 3.0 − 2.0 + 0.4 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4
         Apr. + 10.5 + 15.8 − 5.4 − 3.2 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 2.3 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
         May + 16.0 + 18.1 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3         June − 10.6 − 1.8 − 8.0 − 5.5 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2018 1,035.4 584.0 432.9 86.0 346.9 17.2 329.7 7.0 11.4 2.8 10.3 0.52019 1,031.5 614.4 399.7 81.1 318.6 15.5 303.1 6.7 10.7 2.4 10.1 0.02020 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2020         July 1,108.0 694.4 397.6 100.6 297.1 14.5 282.6 6.1 9.8 2.4 9.8 0.1
         Aug. 1,108.0 698.2 393.8 97.5 296.3 14.6 281.6 6.1 9.9 2.3 9.8 0.3         Sep. 1,114.5 707.3 391.4 96.5 294.9 14.7 280.2 6.0 9.8 2.3 9.7 0.2
         Oct. 1,129.9 720.0 394.2 98.6 295.6 14.7 280.9 6.0 9.6 2.3 9.7 0.5
         Nov. 1,132.1 729.2 387.4 92.7 294.8 14.8 279.9 5.9 9.5 2.3 9.6 0.7         Dec. 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2021         Jan. 1,122.7 732.9 374.7 84.2 290.5 14.8 275.7 5.8 9.3 2.3 9.6 0.5
         Feb. 1,109.4 723.5 370.9 82.0 288.9 14.9 274.0 5.8 9.1 2.3 9.6 0.5         Mar. 1,134.9 748.2 371.8 85.1 286.7 15.2 271.5 5.8 9.0 2.2 9.6 0.9
         Apr. 1,124.8 742.4 367.7 83.4 284.3 15.2 269.2 5.8 8.9 2.2 9.6 1.0
         May 1,128.0 746.8 366.7 83.6 283.1 15.7 267.4 5.8 8.7 2.2 9.6 0.7         June 1,115.6 742.4 358.8 77.9 280.9 15.4 265.5 5.8 8.6 2.3 9.6 0.7
Changes*
2019 − 3.4 + 30.4 − 32.8 − 4.8 − 28.0 − 1.6 − 26.4 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.42020 + 81.0 + 101.2 − 18.0 + 7.0 − 25.0 − 0.4 − 24.6 − 0.8 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1
2020         July + 17.0 + 10.7 + 6.4 + 10.5 − 4.1 − 0.0 − 4.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Aug. − 1.7 + 2.1 − 3.9 − 3.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2         Sep. + 7.7 + 10.4 − 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Oct. + 15.2 + 12.6 + 2.8 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3
         Nov. + 2.2 + 9.2 − 6.8 − 6.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2         Dec. − 15.9 − 10.1 − 5.7 − 3.4 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.6
2021         Jan. + 6.5 + 13.8 − 7.0 − 5.0 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.4
         Feb. − 13.4 − 9.4 − 3.8 − 2.2 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0         Mar. + 25.6 + 24.8 + 0.9 + 3.1 − 2.2 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Apr. − 10.0 − 5.7 − 4.2 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1
         May + 3.2 + 4.4 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.5 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3         June − 12.4 − 4.4 − 7.9 − 5.7 − 2.2 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
August 2021
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
  
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2018 2,283.4 1,433.5 1,396.1 248.4 991.3 156.4 37.4 260.4 246.7 21.3 188.6 36.72019 2,392.4 1,547.2 1,507.9 266.3 1,081.6 160.1 39.3 261.7 248.3 20.8 190.2 37.32020 2,539.5 1,713.8 1,672.7 291.1 1,215.4 166.2 41.1 258.6 245.1 19.3 190.5 35.2
2021         Jan. 2,557.7 1,731.6 1,690.6 295.1 1,228.7 166.8 41.0 258.1 244.8 19.2 190.4 35.2
         Feb. 2,579.9 1,753.2 1,711.1 297.6 1,245.8 167.7 42.1 257.8 244.6 19.0 190.4 35.2         Mar. 2,576.5 1,750.1 1,707.1 294.1 1,246.0 166.9 43.1 258.0 244.8 19.2 190.6 35.1
         Apr. 2,597.1 1,771.6 1,729.4 299.9 1,261.2 168.3 42.2 256.8 244.0 19.0 190.1 34.9
         May 2,610.0 1,785.3 1,742.1 300.8 1,272.0 169.2 43.2 255.8 242.8 18.9 189.3 34.7         June 2,611.8 1,787.9 1,744.7 298.7 1,277.2 168.7 43.2 255.7 242.3 18.7 189.0 34.5
Changes*
2019 + 108.8 + 113.6 + 111.8 + 18.5 + 88.7 + 4.6 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.72020 + 147.5 + 166.9 + 165.0 + 26.0 + 131.5 + 7.5 + 1.8 − 3.1 − 3.2 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.2
2021         Jan. + 18.1 + 17.8 + 17.9 + 4.0 + 13.3 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0
         Feb. + 22.1 + 21.6 + 20.5 + 2.3 + 17.3 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0         Mar. − 3.4 − 3.1 − 4.1 − 3.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1
         Apr. + 20.6 + 21.5 + 22.3 + 5.8 + 15.2 + 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.2
         May + 12.8 + 13.6 + 12.7 + 1.0 + 10.7 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.2         June + 1.8 + 2.6 + 2.6 − 2.1 + 5.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
 
  
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2018 218.9 10.5 4.7 1.7 4.1 0.1 12.2 39.0 13.4 11.5 13.0 1.2 13.02019 237.1 11.2 5.4 1.5 4.2 0.1 11.6 53.8 21.1 17.1 14.5 1.0 13.12020 229.5 48.6 4.8 7.2 36.5 0.0 11.3 46.5 21.2 11.4 13.2 0.7 14.1
2021         Jan. 224.1 48.3 5.1 6.7 36.5 0.0 11.4 48.4 22.4 13.1 12.2 0.7 13.9
         Feb. 224.4 48.2 5.0 6.7 36.4 0.0 11.4 46.1 22.0 11.3 12.1 0.7 13.9         Mar. 214.4 48.9 5.8 6.7 36.4 0.0 11.4 43.1 19.4 11.2 11.9 0.6 13.9
         Apr. 213.7 48.6 6.0 6.6 35.9 0.0 11.5 43.7 20.6 10.6 11.9 0.6 13.9
         May 218.4 46.6 6.1 5.1 35.3 0.0 11.5 45.3 22.3 10.4 12.0 0.6 13.8         June 209.1 45.6 6.3 4.3 35.0 0.0 11.4 43.0 19.8 10.6 12.1 0.6 13.8
Changes*
2019 + 17.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 13.8 + 7.7 + 5.2 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.02020 − 6.9 + 37.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 + 32.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 7.0 + 0.2 − 5.7 − 1.3 − 0.2 + 1.0
2021         Jan. − 5.5 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2
         Feb. + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0         Mar. − 10.0 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Apr. − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         May + 4.7 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.6 − + 0.0 + 1.6 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0         June − 9.3 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 − − 0.1 − 2.2 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”En terprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The fi gures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, wh ich appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
August 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item:
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Subordinated
 of which: liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
13.7 49.4 211.0 11.1 199.9 567.9 560.6 7.2 21.7 5.8 2.4 − 201813.3 45.6 216.1 11.2 204.9 565.1 558.1 7.0 18.4 5.4 2.4 − 201913.5 40.1 218.5 12.0 206.5 552.0 545.7 6.3 15.1 6.7 2.7 − 2020
13.3 39.5 218.6 11.8 206.8 553.1 546.9 6.3 14.9 6.7 2.7 − 2021          Jan.
13.2 39.1 218.8 11.7 207.0 554.1 547.8 6.3 14.7 6.8 2.7 −          Feb.13.2 39.0 219.0 11.8 207.2 553.8 547.6 6.3 14.6 6.8 2.7 −          Mar.
12.8 37.7 219.1 11.9 207.2 554.3 548.0 6.3 14.4 6.8 2.7 −          Apr.
13.0 36.5 219.3 11.8 207.5 554.8 548.4 6.3 14.1 7.0 2.7 −          May13.4 36.7 218.9 11.7 207.2 554.2 547.9 6.3 14.0 7.0 2.8 −          June
Changes*
− 0.4 − 3.8 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 5.0 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 2019+ 0.2 − 5.5 + 2.4 + 0.9 + 1.6 − 13.0 − 12.3 − 0.7 − 3.3 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 2020
− 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2021          Jan.
− 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Feb.− 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Mar.
− 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Apr.
+ 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          May+ 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          June
registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see footnote 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memoto and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
65.4 35.1 9.8 14.9 5.7 0.0 103.9 9.5 45.0 48.4 1.0 − 201865.3 37.4 8.6 14.0 5.4 0.0 106.8 10.8 48.8 46.2 1.1 − 201968.5 43.2 8.0 12.4 4.9 0.0 66.0 10.9 32.9 21.4 0.8 − 2020
59.9 35.6 6.8 12.6 4.9 0.0 67.5 14.3 31.3 21.2 0.8 − 2021          Jan.
62.1 38.1 6.3 12.8 4.9 0.0 68.1 15.7 29.2 22.5 0.8 −          Feb.60.1 37.1 5.7 12.5 4.7 0.0 62.3 14.5 27.6 19.4 0.8 −          Mar.
61.3 37.6 6.5 12.5 4.7 0.0 60.2 16.3 24.1 18.9 0.8 −          Apr.
65.1 41.7 6.5 12.2 4.7 0.0 61.4 18.3 23.8 18.4 0.8 −          May62.5 39.6 6.0 12.3 4.6 0.0 57.9 15.9 23.0 18.3 0.8 −          June
Changes*
− 0.8 + 2.1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 2019+ 3.5 + 5.9 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 40.8 + 0.2 − 15.9 − 24.8 − 0.3 − 2020
− 8.6 − 7.5 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 1.5 + 3.3 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 2021          Jan.
+ 2.2 + 2.5 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 1.4 − 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.0 −          Feb.− 2.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 − − 5.9 − 1.1 − 1.7 − 3.1 − 0.0 −          Mar.
+ 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − − 2.1 + 1.8 − 3.4 − 0.5 + 0.0 −          Apr.
+ 3.8 + 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − + 1.2 + 2.0 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 −          May− 2.6 − 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 3.5 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          June
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
August 2021
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
  
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months’ at more than 3 Memo
notice months’ notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturitiesSpecial Special At 3 on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2018 585.6 578.6 541.1 333.4 37.5 27.2 7.0 6.2 2.3 41.2 37.3 27.9 3.92019 581.8 575.2 540.5 313.2 34.7 24.7 6.6 5.9 2.0 35.9 33.2 25.1 2.62020 566.8 560.6 533.3 288.0 27.3 18.0 6.3 5.7 1.8 30.2 28.3 22.1 1.9
2021         Feb. 568.8 562.6 536.2 278.1 26.4 17.4 6.2 5.7 0.1 28.9 27.5 21.6 1.4
         Mar. 568.5 562.3 536.2 277.1 26.1 17.1 6.2 5.6 0.1 28.0 27.1 21.3 0.9
         Apr. 568.9 562.8 536.9 275.6 25.8 16.8 6.2 5.6 0.1 27.6 26.8 21.1 0.8
         May 569.4 563.2 537.5 276.4 25.7 16.5 6.1 5.6 0.1 26.8 26.3 20.8 0.5         June 568.7 562.6 537.1 274.7 25.5 16.3 6.1 5.6 0.1 26.2 26.1 20.6 0.2
Changes*
2019 − 3.9 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 21.3 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 . − 5.3 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 1.22020 − 14.8 − 14.5 − 7.2 − 24.6 − 7.3 − 6.7 − 0.3 − 0.2 . − 5.7 − 4.9 − 3.0 − 0.7
2021         Feb. + 0.9 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.5
         Mar. − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.4
         Apr. + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1
         May + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.4         June − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the classified as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exceeds the minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not non-negotiable bearer debt securities. specially marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are
 
  
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which: securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year and including 2 years of which:
with
Certifi- of which: of which: non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiablerate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  
1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2018 1,099.7 139.4 27.5 355.9 88.3 106.2 3.1 22.0 6.1 971.5 0.6 0.1 30.6 0.42019 1,140.7 123.5 28.6 367.7 96.7 117.7 2.6 23.6 4.2 999.4 0.9 0.7 31.5 0.42020 1,119.0 117.1 12.7 313.6 89.4 94.3 1.5 23.8 3.1 1,000.9 1.1 0.9 34.8 0.4
2021         Feb. 1,129.9 113.1 11.9 321.9 88.4 93.2 1.7 22.7 3.6 1,013.9 1.1 0.9 34.7 0.4
         Mar. 1,161.9 114.8 11.9 342.4 100.9 105.6 1.7 21.1 3.5 1,035.3 1.2 0.9 33.6 0.3
         Apr. 1,150.6 114.7 11.6 324.2 88.1 92.8 1.9 20.4 3.7 1,037.4 1.5 1.0 33.4 0.2
         May 1,143.7 112.1 11.3 317.4 86.6 91.5 2.0 20.9 3.8 1,031.3 1.6 0.9 32.9 0.1         June 1,150.2 111.3 11.3 324.1 97.6 102.4 2.0 21.1 3.9 1,026.7 1.8 1.0 34.1 0.1
Changes*
2019 + 40.6 − 15.9 + 1.1 + 11.8 + 8.4 + 11.5 − 0.5 + 1.6 − 1.9 + 27.4 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.32020 − 20.5 − 5.2 − 0.8 − 54.1 − 22.3 − 22.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 − 0.0
2021         Feb. + 4.7 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 1.9 − 3.6 − 4.0 + 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 9.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Mar. + 32.0 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 20.5 + 12.4 + 12.3 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.1 + 21.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.1
         Apr. − 11.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 18.1 − 12.8 − 12.8 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1
         May − 6.9 − 2.6 − 0.3 − 6.8 − 1.5 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 6.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.1         June + 6.5 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 6.7 + 11.1 + 11.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 4.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.2 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable bearer debt
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, footnote
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
August 2021
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memobal- item: ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total 13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2019 19 237.9 34.0 0.0 16.2 11.4 117.6 28.0 25.9 2.9 21.0 179.7 9.8 1.8 12.0 88.7
2020 18 244.9 31.9 0.0 16.1 10.8 125.1 31.7 25.5 2.9 26.7 181.4 8.4 2.8 12.3 76.5
2021         Apr. 18 245.9 30.1 0.0 15.8 10.4 126.9 33.4 25.5 2.9 25.3 182.9 8.6 3.3 12.3 6.3
         May 18 246.9 30.7 0.0 15.7 10.4 127.1 33.8 25.5 2.9 26.0 183.2 8.7 3.3 12.3 6.9         June 18 248.2 30.7 0.0 15.8 10.3 127.7 34.3 25.6 2.9 26.9 183.0 8.9 3.3 12.3 6.3
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2021         Apr. 10 171.1 14.7 − 6.9 7.6 99.2 28.5 11.4 1.7 23.2 118.6 8.4 3.3 8.5 4.1
         May 10 172.0 15.3 − 6.9 7.6 99.3 28.8 11.3 1.7 23.7 118.9 8.4 3.3 8.4 4.6         June 10 173.1 15.3 − 6.9 7.6 99.8 29.2 11.4 1.7 24.4 118.9 8.6 3.3 8.4 4.2
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2021         Apr. 8 74.8 15.4 0.0 8.8 2.8 27.7 5.0 14.1 1.2 2.1 64.3 0.3 − 3.9 2.1
         May 8 75.0 15.4 0.0 8.9 2.7 27.8 5.0 14.2 1.2 2.3 64.2 0.3 − 3.9 2.3         June 8 75.2 15.4 0.0 8.9 2.7 27.9 5.1 14.2 1.2 2.5 64.1 0.3 − 3.9 2.1
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited deposits interim of which: of which:
on under Applied Applied and of
Amounts deposits bridging which: of Memo cancelled to settle- to settle-
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item: paid into
savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions 11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2019 27.3 2.1 7.5 49.2 25.8 42.9 16.4 4.2 4.6 3.6 21.9 18.1 6.5 7.2 5.4 0.2
2020 26.6 2.1 8.2 53.8 29.0 48.0 18.8 4.2 4.4 3.5 24.8 18.3 6.3 6.7 5.2 0.2
2021         Apr. 2.2 0.0 0.7 4.4 2.3 3.9 1.6 0.3 0.3 0.3 2.0 19.5 6.5 0.5 0.0
         May 2.6 0.0 0.8 4.6 2.6 4.0 1.7 0.4 0.4 0.3 2.0 19.7 6.6 0.5 0.0         June 2.3 0.0 0.7 4.5 2.5 4.3 1.7 0.3 0.3 0.3 2.2 19.4 6.5 0.5 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2021         Apr. 1.4 0.0 0.4 3.2 1.5 3.0 1.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.6 14.7 3.5 0.4 0.0
         May 1.7 0.0 0.3 3.1 1.6 2.9 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.6 14.7 3.5 0.4 0.0         June 1.5 0.0 0.3 3.5 1.9 3.2 1.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.8 14.6 3.6 0.4 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2021         Apr. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.2 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.8 3.0 0.1 0.0
         May 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.5 1.0 1.1 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 5.0 3.1 0.1 0.0         June 0.8 0.0 0.4 1.1 0.6 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.8 2.9 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum con tracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2018 49 183 1,401.2 403.8 392.8 192.1 200.7 11.0 516.8 427.7 20.0 407.7 89.1 480.5 309.0
2019 52 198 1,453.0 407.3 389.2 216.0 173.2 18.1 534.3 436.1 19.7 416.4 98.2 511.5 361.7
2020 50 206 1,552.2 376.7 364.0 213.2 150.8 12.7 504.8 409.6 14.3 395.3 95.2 670.7 523.6
2020 Aug. 51 206 1,684.1 419.5 405.5 250.8 154.8 14.0 535.1 437.8 19.2 418.6 97.2 729.5 563.8
Sep. 51 206 1,672.4 407.7 393.3 242.2 151.1 14.4 544.2 447.5 18.9 428.7 96.7 720.5 543.7
Oct. 51 207 1,638.9 409.7 395.6 243.0 152.6 14.1 537.6 438.4 18.2 420.2 99.2 691.5 524.4
Nov. 51 208 1,622.5 411.6 398.0 236.5 161.4 13.6 523.7 427.3 14.5 412.8 96.5 687.2 519.5
Dec. 50 206 1,552.2 376.7 364.0 213.2 150.8 12.7 504.8 409.6 14.3 395.3 95.2 670.7 523.6
2021 Jan. 49 205 1,524.5 414.2 401.5 247.6 153.8 12.7 502.1 408.7 13.9 394.8 93.4 608.3 473.6
Feb. 49 203 1,487.0 429.1 416.7 258.4 158.3 12.4 492.2 402.6 13.6 389.1 89.6 565.6 431.8
Mar. 49 203 1,492.8 417.4 404.9 238.9 166.0 12.5 492.9 403.9 13.3 390.6 89.0 582.5 430.8
Apr. 49 202 1,478.2 432.8 420.7 266.5 154.2 12.1 488.7 401.7 13.3 388.3 87.0 556.7 413.3
May 49 203 1,476.1 430.6 417.9 257.9 160.0 12.6 493.8 405.2 13.1 392.2 88.6 551.7 415.5
Changes *
2019 +3 +15 +51.5 –4.7 –7.7 +23.9 –31.6 +2.9 +12.6 +0.9 –0.3 +1.2 +11.7 + 30.6 +49.6
2020 –2 +9 +104.2 –20.3 –15.5 –2.8 –12.7 –4.8 +0.2 –1.0 –5.4 +4.4 +1.2 +164.2 +179.6
2020 Sep. – – –12.5 –13.1 –13.5 –8.6 –4.9 +0.4 +5.2 +6.5 –0.4 +6.9 –1.2 – 9.8 –22.9
Oct. – +1 –33.6 +1.7 +2.0 +0.8 +1.2 –0.3 –7.6 –10.0 –0.7 –9.3 +2.4 – 29.1 –19.6
Nov. – +1 –15.3 +3.6 +4.1 –6.4 +10.5 –0.5 –8.3 –6.5 –3.7 –2.8 –1.9 – 3.3 – 1.7
Dec. –1 –2 –69.3 –33.0 –32.2 –23.4 –8.9 –0.8 –13.2 –12.9 –0.2 –12.7 –0.3 – 15.6 + 7.3
2021 Jan. –1 –1 –26.5 +37.7 +37.9 +35.7 +2.2 –0.1 –5.8 –3.4 –0.3 –3.1 –2.3 – 62.7 –51.7
Feb. – –2 –37.6 +14.7 +15.0 +10.8 +4.2 –0.3 –10.7 –6.8 –0.4 –6.4 –3.9 – 42.7 –42.1
Mar. – – +4.5 –14.7 –14.6 –19.5 +4.9 –0.1 –7.5 –5.7 –0.3 –5.5 –1.8 + 15.6 – 4.7
Apr. – –1 –13.3 +18.2 +18.4 +27.6 –9.2 –0.2 +3.2 +4.0 +0.0 +4.0 –0.9 – 24.5 –14.4
May – +1 –1.6 –2.8 –3.3 –9.8 +6.5 +0.5 +7.0 +5.0 –0.3 +5.3 +1.9 – 3.4 + 3.1
Foreign subsidiaries                                           End of year or month *
2018 17 43 237.2 51.2 45.4 20.1 25.3 5.8 136.4 111.7 13.8 97.8 24.7 49.6 0.0
2019 15 41 235.2 52.5 46.7 18.3 28.4 5.7 139.0 116.1 14.4 101.7 22.9 43.7 0.0
2020 12 36 229.5 44.8 39.9 17.4 22.5 4.9 139.7 114.4 13.1 101.4 25.3 44.9 0.0
2020 Aug. 12 36 237.6 46.8 41.2 19.6 21.6 5.6 140.9 115.9 14.6 101.3 25.0 49.8 0.0
Sep. 12 36 237.1 49.5 44.2 18.8 25.4 5.3 142.6 117.2 14.2 103.0 25.4 45.1 0.0
Oct. 12 36 235.7 44.4 39.2 18.4 20.8 5.2 142.5 116.9 14.2 102.7 25.6 48.9 0.0
Nov. 12 36 234.8 43.2 38.2 17.0 21.1 5.1 142.2 116.4 13.9 102.5 25.8 49.3 0.0
Dec. 12 36 229.5 44.8 39.9 17.4 22.5 4.9 139.7 114.4 13.1 101.4 25.3 44.9 0.0
2021 Jan. 12 36 228.9 43.9 39.1 16.9 22.2 4.8 139.0 114.0 12.6 101.4 25.0 46.1 0.0
Feb. 12 36 231.6 42.2 37.2 19.0 18.3 5.0 137.9 113.4 12.7 100.7 24.5 51.5 0.0
Mar. 12 36 228.7 43.3 38.4 19.0 19.4 4.9 137.7 113.1 12.7 100.4 24.5 47.7 0.0
Apr. 12 36 230.8 42.7 37.4 19.0 18.4 5.3 136.5 112.7 12.6 100.1 23.8 51.6 0.0
May 12 36 230.8 41.9 37.0 18.5 18.5 4.9 136.8 112.7 12.3 100.4 24.2 52.2 0.0
Changes *
2019 –2 –2 –7.2 +0.4 +0.5 –1.8 +2.3 –0.2 +1.6 +3.5 +0.5 +3.0 –1.9 – 9.1 ± 0.0
2020 –3 –5 –0.8 –5.3 –5.0 –1.0 –4.0 –0.3 +3.3 +0.8 –1.3 +2.1 +2.4 + 1.2 ± 0.0
2020 Sep. – – –1.3 +2.2 +2.6 –0.9 +3.5 –0.4 +1.3 +0.9 –0.4 +1.3 +0.4 – 4.8 ± 0.0
Oct. – – –1.6 –5.2 –5.0 –0.4 –4.7 –0.1 –0.2 –0.4 +0.0 –0.4 +0.1 + 3.8 ± 0.0
Nov. – – +0.3 –0.5 –0.6 –1.4 +0.8 +0.1 +0.4 +0.2 –0.3 +0.5 +0.3 + 0.4 ± 0.0
Dec. – – –4.1 +2.2 +2.2 +0.4 +1.8 –0.0 –1.9 –1.4 –0.8 –0.6 –0.5 – 4.4 ± 0.0
2021 Jan. – – –1.2 –1.2 –1.1 –0.5 –0.6 –0.2 –1.1 –0.8 –0.4 –0.3 –0.3 + 1.1 ± 0.0
Feb. – – +2.7 –1.6 –1.8 +2.1 –3.9 +0.2 –1.1 –0.6 +0.1 –0.7 –0.5 + 5.4 ± 0.0
Mar. – – –4.5 +0.3 +0.5 +0.0 +0.5 –0.2 –1.1 –1.1 +0.0 –1.1 +0.0 – 3.8 ± 0.0
Apr. – – +3.5 +0.0 –0.5 –0.0 –0.5 +0.5 –0.4 +0.3 –0.1 +0.5 –0.7 + 3.9 ± 0.0
May – – +0.4 –0.6 –0.2 –0.5 +0.3 –0.4 +0.5 +0.1 –0.3 +0.4 +0.4 + 0.5 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated fromthe flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always
to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
897.1 607.2 428.8 178.4 290.0 11.4 9.7 1.8 278.5 91.2 54.0 358.9 302.6 2018
894.1 613.6 453.2 160.4 280.5 12.7 10.1 2.7 267.8 94.6 53.4 410.9 361.1 2019
872.2 588.5 431.8 156.7 283.7 11.7 10.2 1.5 272.0 61.5 49.9 568.6 523.1 2020
943.2 655.1 460.9 194.2 288.1 14.4 12.7 1.7 273.7 74.9 52.4 613.6 563.1 2020 Aug.
945.7 650.5 473.7 176.8 295.2 15.4 13.8 1.7 279.8 76.8 52.6 597.4 544.0 Sep.
932.4 632.6 451.1 181.5 299.9 14.0 12.3 1.7 285.9 76.7 50.9 578.9 523.9 Oct.
926.8 625.3 444.3 181.0 301.5 12.3 10.9 1.5 289.1 74.8 50.5 570.4 518.9 Nov.
872.2 588.5 431.8 156.7 283.7 11.7 10.2 1.5 272.0 61.5 49.9 568.6 523.1 Dec.
898.0 596.5 421.1 175.5 301.5 10.4 8.9 1.5 291.1 71.0 50.2 505.3 472.3 2021 Jan.
906.9 600.1 421.4 178.6 306.8 9.9 8.4 1.5 296.9 68.0 50.1 462.1 430.8 Feb.
907.4 606.9 435.0 172.0 300.4 9.5 8.0 1.5 290.9 72.1 50.7 462.7 429.7 Mar.
911.4 612.3 438.3 174.0 299.1 9.0 7.5 1.5 290.1 73.1 50.3 443.4 412.2 Apr.
907.0 604.3 431.2 173.1 302.7 8.6 7.1 1.5 294.0 74.9 50.2 444.0 414.5 May
Changes *
– 7.2 + 2.4 +24.4 –22.0 – 9.6 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 –10.9 + 3.0 – 0.6 + 52.0 + 58.5 2019
– 9.2 –13.3 –21.4 + 8.1 + 4.1 – 1.0 + 0.3 – 1.4 + 5.1 –28.1 – 3.5 +157.6 + 162.0 2020
+ 0.4 –6.7 +12.8 –19.5 + 7.1 + 1.0 + 1.1 – 0.1 + 6.0 + 1.1 +0.1 – 16.2 – 19.1 2020 Sep.
–13.6 –18.3 –22.6 +4.4 + 4.6 – 1.4 – 1.5 + 0.0 + 6.1 – 0.2 –1.7 – 18.5 – 20.1 Oct.
– 3.2 –4.9 –6.7 +1.8 + 1.7 – 1.7 – 1.4 – 0.2 + 3.4 – 0.9 –0.3 – 8.4 – 5.0 Nov.
–52.1 –34.5 –12.5 –21.9 –17.6 – 0.6 – 0.7 + 0.0 –17.0 –12.3 –0.7 – 1.9 + 4.1 Dec.
+26.1 +7.7 –10.6 +18.3 +18.4 – 1.3 – 1.3 – 0.0 +19.7 + 9.2 +0.3 – 63.3 – 50.8 2021 Jan.
+ 8.9 +3.6 +0.7 +2.9 + 5.3 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 + 5.8 – 3.1 –0.1 – 43.5 – 41.5 Feb.
– 2.5 +4.2 +14.4 –10.2 – 6.7 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 6.3 + 2.8 +0.6 – 0.3 – 1.1 Mar.
+ 6.2 +7.3 +2.2 +5.1 – 1.1 – 0.6 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.5 + 2.3 –0.4 – 18.1 – 17.5 Apr.
– 3.4 –7.0 –7.1 +0.1 + 3.6 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 4.0 + 2.3 –0.1 + 0.5 + 2.3 May
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
171.5 71.6 36.1 35.5 100.0 9.1 6.4 2.7 90.8 14.3 22.4 29.0 0.0 2018
165.7 68.7 36.6 32.1 97.0 6.6 3.9 2.7 90.4 16.0 22.1 31.4 0.0 2019
163.4 59.6 34.1 25.5 103.8 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.1 16.6 20.3 29.2 0.0 2020
171.1 66.1 38.1 28.0 105.0 7.1 4.6 2.5 97.9 16.5 20.6 29.4 0.0 2020 Aug.
170.3 66.5 37.1 29.4 103.7 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.0 16.8 20.5 29.5 0.0 Sep.
167.9 63.5 35.3 28.3 104.4 7.4 4.9 2.5 96.9 17.7 20.5 29.6 0.0 Oct.
168.4 62.8 33.8 29.0 105.6 7.2 4.8 2.5 98.3 16.5 20.7 29.2 0.0 Nov.
163.4 59.6 34.1 25.5 103.8 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.1 16.6 20.3 29.2 0.0 Dec.
163.1 58.1 32.7 25.4 105.0 6.7 4.3 2.5 98.3 16.8 20.4 28.6 0.0 2021 Jan.
166.8 60.2 34.8 25.4 106.5 6.4 3.9 2.5 100.1 16.6 20.3 27.9 0.0 Feb.
164.5 59.2 34.3 25.0 105.2 6.4 4.0 2.5 98.8 16.9 20.4 27.0 0.0 Mar.
166.1 59.0 33.4 25.7 107.0 6.4 4.0 2.5 100.6 17.3 20.4 27.0 0.0 Apr.
165.8 57.0 32.1 24.9 108.9 6.5 4.0 2.4 102.4 17.3 20.4 27.3 0.0 May
Changes *
– 6.7 – 3.2 + 0.5 – 3.8 – 3.5 – 2.5 – 2.5 + 0.0 – 1.0 + 1.7 – 0.4 – 1.8 ± 0.0 2019
+ 1.4 – 7.3 – 2.5 – 4.8 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.3 + 8.7 + 0.6 – 1.8 – 1.0 ± 0.0 2020
– 1.5 +0.2 –1.0 +1.1 – 1.7 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 1.3 + 0.3 –0.1 – 0.1 ± 0.0 2020 Sep.
– 2.5 –3.0 –1.9 –1.2 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.9 –0.0 – 0.1 ± 0.0 Oct.
+ 1.4 –0.4 –1.5 +1.1 + 1.7 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.9 – 1.2 +0.2 – 0.0 ± 0.0 Nov.
– 4.1 –2.8 +0.3 –3.1 – 1.3 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.7 + 0.1 –0.4 + 0.3 ± 0.0 Dec.
– 0.8 –1.8 –1.4 –0.3 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 +0.1 – 0.7 ± 0.0 2021 Jan.
+ 3.6 +2.1 +2.2 –0.0 + 1.5 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 1.8 – 0.3 –0.0 – 0.7 ± 0.0 Feb.
– 3.5 –1.5 –0.6 –1.0 – 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 + 0.3 +0.0 – 1.4 ± 0.0 Mar.
+ 2.6 +0.3 –0.9 +1.2 + 2.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.4 +0.0 + 0.5 ± 0.0 Apr.
+ 0.0 –1.9 –1.3 –0.6 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.0 +0.0 + 0.4 ± 0.0 May
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and
other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.  4 Excluding
subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of negotiable andnon-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Including subordinated
liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7
2014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 June 15,057.2 150.6 150.2 3,653.1 3,502.9 0.0
p July 15,129.4 151.3 150.9 ... ... ...
Aug. . . . . . .
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 June 4,144,805 27.5 41,448 41,303 1,046,220 1,004,917 0
p July 4,171,984 27.6 41,720 41,576 ... ... ...
Aug. . . . . . . .
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,312
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 June 8,793 6,431 3,065 13,261 7,820 109 1,825
July . . . . . . .
Aug. . . . . . . .
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 June 2,995,123 7,712 480,960 564,183 96,831
July . . . . .
Aug. . . . . .
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 3 of the
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum reserves
(excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4(1)).
3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve base. The reserve ratio forliabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2% between 1 January 1999
and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at 1%.  4 Article 5(2) of the
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum reserves.
5 Average credit balances of credit institutions at national central banks.  6 Average
credit balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.
7 Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2005 Dec. 6 1.25 – 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr. 13 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 2002 Jan. 1 2.57 2009 Jan. 1 1.62
July 13 0.75 1.50 – 2.25 July 1 2.47 July 1 0.12
2006 Mar. 8 1.50 – 2.50 3.50 Nov. 9 0.50 1.25 – 2.00
June 15 1.75 – 2.75 3.75 Dec. 14 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2003 Jan. 1 1.97 2011 July 1 0.37
Aug. 9 2.00 – 3.00 4.00 July 1 1.22
Oct. 11 2.25 – 3.25 4.25 2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 2012 Jan. 1 0.12
Dec. 13 2.50 – 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan. 1 1.14
2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 July 1 1.13 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
2007 Mar. 14 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 July 1 – 0.38
June 13 3.00 – 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan. 1 1.21
2014 June 11 -0.10 0.15 – 0.40 July 1 1.17 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
2008 July 9 3.25 – 4.25 5.25 Sep. 10 -0.20 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 – 0.73
Oct. 8 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan. 1 1.37
Oct. 9 3.25 3.75 – 4.25 2015 Dec. 9 -0.30 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 1.95 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Nov. 12 2.75 3.25 – 3.75
Dec. 10 2.00 2.50 – 3.00 2016 Mar. 16 -0.40 0.00 – 0.25 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2016 July 1 – 0.88
July 1 3.19
2009 Jan. 21 1.00 2.00 – 3.00 2019 Sep. 18 -0.50 0.00 – 0.25
Mar. 11 0.50 1.50 – 2.50 2008 Jan. 1 3.32
Apr. 8 0.25 1.25 – 2.25 July 1 3.19
May 13 0.25 1.00 – 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2021 July 21 55 55 0.00 - - - 7
July 28 96 96 0.00 - - - 7
Aug. 4 145 145 0.00 - - - 7
Aug. 11 180 180 0.00 - - - 7
Aug. 18 197 197 0.00 - - - 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2021 June 24 109,829 109,829 2      … - - - 1,098
June 24 520 520 2      … - - - 371
July 1 3 3 2      … - - - 91
July 29 25 25 2      … - - - 91
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month *
% per annum
EURIBOR  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 EONIA  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2021 Jan. – 0.563 – 0.48 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.55 – 0.53 – 0.50
Feb. – 0.564 – 0.48 – 0.57 – 0.55 – 0.54 – 0.52 – 0.50
Mar. – 0.564 – 0.48 – 0.56 – 0.55 – 0.54 – 0.52 – 0.49
Apr. – 0.566 – 0.48 – 0.56 – 0.56 – 0.54 – 0.52 – 0.48
May – 0.565 – 0.48 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.54 – 0.51 – 0.48
June – 0.565 – 0.48 – 0.57 – 0.55 – 0.54 – 0.51 – 0.48
July – 0.566 – 0.48 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.54 – 0.52 – 0.49
* Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor anyone
else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the EURIBOR.
1 Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank
operations; calculated by the European Central Bank from January 4th 1999 until
September 30th 2019 based on real turnover according to the act/360 method. SinceOctober 1st 2019 calculated as Euro Short-Term Rate (€STR) + 8.5 basis points spread.
2 Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters since 30
December 1998 according to the act/360 method. Administrator for EONIA and
EURIBOR: European Money Markets Institute (EMMI)

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 June 0.25 53,752 1.07 218,668 – 0.05 77,282 0.85 24,172
July 0.26 53,945 1.06 218,177 – 0.08 86,703 0.90 22,652
Aug. 0.26 53,971 1.03 218,020 – 0.08 82,164 0.89 22,508
Sep. 0.26 54,068 1.02 218,212 – 0.10 82,957 0.92 23,504
Oct. 0.26 53,982 1.01 218,002 – 0.11 84,498 0.89 22,350
Nov. 0.26 52,719 1.00 217,758 – 0.11 80,549 0.85 22,254
Dec. 0.25 53,079 1.00 219,376 – 0.17 79,340 0.84 22,256
2021 Jan. 0.25 51,896 0.99 220,299 – 0.16 74,531 0.85 21,979
Feb. 0.26 51,369 0.98 220,419 – 0.16 72,894 0.85 22,242
Mar. 0.25 51,417 0.98 220,406 – 0.18 77,326 0.83 21,860
Apr. 0.25 50,078 0.97 220,310 – 0.19 74,026 0.84 21,529
May 0.24 48,897 0.96 220,455 – 0.21 74,080 0.83 21,455
June 0.23 48,834 0.95 220,154 – 0.22 71,496 0.88 21,383
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 June 1.98 4,628 1.65 26,702 2.09 1,303,405 7.05 46,438 3.41 86,046 3.57 319,461
July 1.99 4,720 1.65 26,707 2.06 1,312,369 7.02 45,560 3.41 86,188 3.55 321,139
Aug. 1.98 4,727 1.64 26,690 2.05 1,315,489 6.98 45,609 3.40 86,216 3.53 321,757
Sep. 1.95 4,705 1.62 26,940 2.03 1,329,087 6.96 46,438 3.39 86,231 3.50 322,100
Oct. 1.92 4,792 1.62 26,962 2.00 1,337,259 6.86 45,325 3.38 85,849 3.48 323,886
Nov. 1.92 4,616 1.60 27,072 1.99 1,345,468 6.83 44,787 3.38 85,328 3.46 324,149
Dec. 1.92 4,557 1.60 27,024 1.97 1,353,793 6.80 45,013 3.37 85,416 3.45 323,181
2021 Jan. 1.90 4,663 1.59 26,903 1.95 1,357,733 6.90 43,164 3.36 84,363 3.42 323,164
Feb. 1.89 4,642 1.57 26,790 1.93 1,363,884 6.76 43,200 3.36 83,522 3.41 323,393
Mar. 1.89 4,545 1.56 26,788 1.91 1,373,003 6.72 44,263 3.34 83,114 3.40 322,618
Apr. 1.86 4,496 1.56 26,870 1.88 1,381,533 6.65 43,462 3.34 82,596 3.38 323,494
May 1.94 4,575 1.55 26,759 1.87 1,390,096 6.63 43,692 3.33 82,120 3.36 323,923
June 1.90 4,484 1.54 26,945 1.85 1,399,388 6.60 45,359 3.33 81,846 3.35 323,432
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 June 2.02 172,708 1.66 184,793 1.81 766,896
July 1.96 169,944 1.66 186,433 1.80 769,953
Aug. 1.98 165,184 1.66 187,678 1.79 779,570
Sep. 2.07 160,014 1.68 186,700 1.77 774,045
Oct. 2.04 157,761 1.68 187,240 1.76 779,595
Nov. 2.06 154,555 1.69 187,341 1.75 784,308
Dec. 2.03 150,278 1.71 186,798 1.73 787,188
2021 Jan. 2.06 149,911 1.71 186,599 1.71 790,534
Feb. 2.02 152,425 1.71 189,130 1.70 793,839
Mar. 1.78 163,745 1.67 194,734 1.69 794,245
Apr. 1.96 151,270 1.67 195,027 1.68 798,088
May 1.93 153,129 1.65 194,737 1.68 802,212
June 2.00 149,531 1.65 193,788 1.67 801,454
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 June 0.00 1,626,420 0.17 3,283 0.78 1,455 0.69 854 0.11 532,292 0.18 29,671
July 0.00 1,643,393 0.15 3,296 0.60 1,161 0.74 750 0.10 531,191 0.18 29,168
Aug. 0.00 1,650,273 0.16 2,643 0.59 563 0.64 555 0.10 531,277 0.18 28,764
Sep. 0.00 1,658,764 0.10 3,027 0.51 501 0.61 590 0.10 531,223 0.18 28,417
Oct. 0.00 1,680,565 0.10 3,014 0.44 509 0.60 805 0.10 531,245 0.18 28,001
Nov. 0.00 1,703,473 0.11 2,483 0.49 404 0.61 747 0.10 531,537 0.18 27,578
Dec. 0.00 1,715,292 – 0.01 3,214 0.40 394 0.59 794 0.10 532,793 0.18 27,312
2021 Jan. 0.00 1,732,961 0.03 3,036 0.38 357 0.55 734 0.10 534,458 0.17 26,749
Feb. – 0.00 1,754,413 0.07 2,793 0.36 385 0.50 741 0.09 535,684 0.17 26,435
Mar. – 0.00 1,750,971 0.06 3,073 0.32 342 0.41 834 0.09 535,778 0.17 26,115
Apr. – 0.00 1,772,803 0.06 2,465 0.28 379 0.32 591 0.09 536,476 0.17 25,840
May – 0.01 1,786,469 0.01 2,399 0.37 307 0.32 529 0.09 537,061 0.16 25,715
June – 0.01 1,788,644 – 0.04 2,957 0.23 310 0.28 566 0.09 536,728 0.16 25,503
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2020 June – 0.08 508,658 – 0.33 31,980 0.37 633 0.38 313
July – 0.08 520,954 – 0.33 40,301 0.36 592 0.26 208
Aug. – 0.08 528,905 – 0.34 35,771 – 0.02 170 0.20 164
Sep. – 0.08 532,597 – 0.36 37,956 – 0.01 112 0.43 275
Oct. – 0.09 548,227 – 0.36 38,781 0.10 237 0.33 548
Nov. – 0.09 549,032 – 0.37 30,418 0.03 220 0.35 533
Dec. – 0.09 546,575 – 0.42 34,321 – 0.12 556 0.26 970
2021 Jan. – 0.10 545,028 – 0.23 35,220 – 0.05 126 0.19 129
Feb. – 0.10 539,935 – 0.26 32,726 – 0.01 113 0.37 537
Mar. – 0.11 571,025 – 0.12 54,987 0.07 363 0.24 919
Apr. – 0.10 559,616 – 0.25 52,411 – 0.10 113 0.23 87
May – 0.11 564,627 – 0.34 53,947 – 0.04 194 0.37 231
June – 0.12 569,448 – 0.49 64,543 – 0.14 278 0.20 200
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2020 June 5.87 5.72 8,758 6.41 1,841 8.62 401 4.39 3,258 6.34 5,099
July 5.74 5.63 9,986 6.52 2,114 8.75 439 4.26 3,744 6.29 5,804
Aug. 5.74 5.62 8,340 6.43 1,738 8.79 391 4.33 3,050 6.18 4,899
Sep. 5.56 5.52 8,638 6.42 1,726 8.53 417 4.12 3,286 6.19 4,936
Oct. 5.73 5.62 8,265 6.36 1,739 8.39 436 4.32 2,905 6.14 4,924
Nov. 5.71 5.62 7,778 6.24 1,560 8.90 566 4.26 2,797 6.06 4,416
Dec. 5.53 5.48 6,652 6.08 1,193 8.08 551 4.24 2,544 5.97 3,556
2021 Jan. 5.88 5.85 6,836 6.43 1,655 7.99 439 4.45 1,973 6.26 4,423
Feb. 5.65 5.65 7,077 6.34 1,630 7.76 379 4.33 2,194 6.11 4,503
Mar. 5.35 5.27 9,298 6.17 1,786 6.23 384 4.05 3,296 5.92 5,619
Apr. 5.51 5.38 7,926 6.17 1,482 6.76 325 4.25 2,731 5.92 4,871
May 5.49 5.37 7,573 6.21 1,400 7.01 301 4.24 2,605 5.90 4,667
June 5.52 5.40 8,983 6.25 1,741 7.14 363 4.23 3,090 5.94 5,530
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2020 June 1.83 6,513 1.95 2,438 1.82 2,252 2.43 1,070 1.63 3,191
July 1.78 5,293 1.61 1,536 1.84 2,241 2.32 774 1.53 2,278
Aug. 1.88 4,210 1.60 1,055 1.94 1,710 2.55 773 1.51 1,727
Sep. 1.83 4,517 1.60 1,170 1.98 1,997 2.37 612 1.51 1,908
Oct. 1.80 4,279 1.60 1,214 1.95 1,832 2.47 578 1.44 1,869
Nov. 1.84 4,026 1.61 930 1.96 1,731 2.44 585 1.51 1,710
Dec. 1.77 5,473 1.56 1,254 1.81 2,404 2.30 772 1.54 2,297
2021 Jan. 1.79 4,530 1.66 1,532 1.93 1,958 2.17 572 1.55 2,000
Feb. 1.71 4,265 1.69 1,000 1.74 1,680 2.08 578 1.58 2,007
Mar. 1.68 5,715 1.59 1,331 1.69 2,358 2.20 691 1.53 2,666
Apr. 1.65 4,662 1.52 1,263 1.58 1,956 2.08 724 1.55 1,982
May 1.74 3,877 1.51 909 1.79 1,589 2.32 550 1.51 1,738
June 1.63 5,168 1.53 1,119 1.55 2,196 2.26 702 1.51 2,270
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2020 June 1.86 4,702 . . 1.83 1,501 2.46 806 1.68 2,395
July 1.81 3,472 . . 1.87 1,355 2.30 600 1.57 1,517
Aug. 1.76 2,755 . . 1.70 1,135 2.47 462 1.55 1,158
Sep. 1.85 3,019 . . 1.89 1,357 2.53 431 1.55 1,231
Oct. 1.78 2,888 . . 1.81 1,226 2.50 451 1.47 1,211
Nov. 1.83 2,743 . . 1.85 1,118 2.53 438 1.55 1,187
Dec. 1.85 3,793 . . 1.87 1,629 2.47 523 1.63 1,641
2021 Jan. 1.77 3,041 . . 1.76 1,281 2.34 402 1.62 1,358
Feb. 1.86 2,843 . . 1.89 1,058 2.40 390 1.70 1,395
Mar. 1.78 3,846 . . 1.83 1,507 2.26 535 1.60 1,804
Apr. 1.73 3,212 . . 1.65 1,316 2.17 555 1.62 1,341
May 1.85 2,624 . . 1.93 1,052 2.29 451 1.59 1,121
June 1.70 3,578 . . 1.64 1,513 2.38 508 1.52 1,557
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2020 June 1.38 1.34 22,793 1.63 5,171 1.94 2,235 1.59 1,947 1.17 7,983 1.28 10,628
July 1.32 1.27 24,349 1.44 4,233 1.81 2,518 1.39 1,847 1.12 8,036 1.24 11,949
Aug. 1.28 1.23 21,280 1.41 3,135 1.80 2,209 1.44 1,500 1.07 7,032 1.20 10,539
Sep. 1.26 1.21 21,782 1.35 3,121 1.77 2,213 1.35 1,542 1.07 6,957 1.17 11,070
Oct. 1.24 1.19 23,217 1.24 3,834 1.75 2,362 1.32 1,554 1.03 7,579 1.17 11,722
Nov. 1.22 1.17 23,185 1.28 3,113 1.72 2,372 1.28 1,708 1.03 7,413 1.14 11,692
Dec. 1.21 1.16 22,148 1.29 3,033 1.75 2,195 1.31 1,698 1.02 7,733 1.11 10,522
2021 Jan. 1.23 1.19 21,721 1.32 3,866 1.79 2,124 1.34 1,615 1.03 7,316 1.15 10,666
Feb. 1.22 1.17 22,145 1.30 3,246 1.73 2,098 1.28 1,563 1.04 7,547 1.14 10,938
Mar. 1.22 1.18 28,589 1.26 4,248 1.75 2,684 1.25 1,958 1.02 10,006 1.17 13,941
Apr. 1.27 1.23 24,541 1.30 3,804 1.79 2,343 1.28 1,725 1.06 8,741 1.23 11,732
May 1.31 1.27 22,786 1.35 3,379 1.83 2,064 1.30 1,568 1.09 8,416 1.29 10,738
June 1.34 1.29 25,162 1.34 3,327 1.75 2,374 1.33 1,775 1.12 9,197 1.33 11,816
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2020 June . 1.26 10,090 . . 1.84 803 1.41 935 1.10 3,656 1.25 4,696
July . 1.22 10,687 . . 1.76 951 1.23 876 1.05 3,621 1.23 5,239
Aug. . 1.16 9,074 . . 1.77 748 1.17 673 0.98 3,137 1.17 4,516
Sep. . 1.14 9,865 . . 1.75 795 1.14 753 1.00 3,201 1.14 5,116
Oct. . 1.14 10,142 . . 1.73 806 1.12 748 1.00 3,239 1.14 5,349
Nov. . 1.10 10,137 . . 1.61 819 1.10 823 0.96 3,182 1.11 5,313
Dec. . 1.08 9,592 . . 1.63 796 1.12 781 0.95 3,355 1.07 4,660
2021 Jan. . 1.13 9,731 . . 1.71 814 1.11 780 0.97 3,226 1.14 4,911
Feb. . 1.11 9,659 . . 1.60 752 1.08 773 0.96 3,228 1.14 4,906
Mar. . 1.11 12,754 . . 1.69 929 1.08 884 0.95 4,589 1.14 6,352
Apr. . 1.15 10,483 . . 1.71 801 1.10 822 1.00 3,834 1.18 5,026
May . 1.19 9,797 . . 1.74 747 1.09 725 1.01 3,738 1.25 4,587
June . 1.23 10,630 . . 1.69 836 1.14 793 1.06 4,071 1.29 4,930
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 June 7.63 37,486 7.39 30,074 15.22 4,183 2.86 81,829 2.87 81,584
July 7.54 36,402 7.35 28,738 15.19 4,170 2.84 77,749 2.84 77,478
Aug. 7.51 36,716 7.31 29,015 15.08 4,204 2.77 76,935 2.78 76,674
Sep. 7.51 37,568 7.33 30,004 15.04 4,147 2.84 76,376 2.85 76,092
Oct. 7.42 36,256 7.19 28,750 15.03 4,144 2.75 76,056 2.76 75,773
Nov. 7.41 35,700 7.17 28,273 15.06 4,108 2.74 75,596 2.75 75,326
Dec. 7.32 36,062 7.11 28,411 15.15 4,101 2.70 73,441 2.71 73,178
2021 Jan. 7.51 34,191 7.08 27,635 15.28 4,011 2.77 71,756 2.78 71,526
Feb. 7.40 34,121 7.03 27,298 15.38 3,944 2.76 73,589 2.77 73,354
Mar. 7.41 34,973 7.11 27,993 15.45 3,910 2.77 72,139 2.78 71,866
Apr. 7.37 34,035 7.02 27,152 15.48 3,899 2.84 70,358 2.85 70,106
May 7.28 34,454 7.01 27,148 15.51 3,905 2.79 72,023 2.80 71,766
June 7.23 35,815 7.05 28,056 15.55 3,938 2.86 72,478 2.87 72,174
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2020 June 1.36 86,295 1.45 30,002 1.93 10,537 2.35 1,714 1.81 2,235 1.18 53,115 1.69 4,895 1.26 12,072
July 1.43 72,399 1.41 23,407 1.94 10,302 2.35 1,419 1.66 2,518 1.29 44,151 1.55 4,770 1.25 9,141
Aug. 1.52 55,855 1.36 16,568 1.78 8,324 2.39 1,235 1.51 2,209 1.46 35,797 1.62 3,186 1.22 5,659
Sep. 1.37 71,553 1.49 21,841 2.00 10,506 2.42 1,308 1.55 2,213 1.22 45,047 1.42 3,107 1.18 10,041
Oct. 1.37 66,721 1.36 20,690 1.99 10,358 2.38 1,354 1.49 2,362 1.17 42,053 1.73 4,238 1.18 7,163
Nov. 1.39 62,811 1.39 18,016 1.96 9,897 2.25 1,343 1.53 2,372 1.25 37,080 1.47 4,017 1.13 8,827
Dec. 1.33 87,725 1.37 26,272 2.01 9,615 2.31 1,615 1.56 2,195 1.23 56,078 1.36 4,945 1.11 13,362
2021 Jan. 1.36 55,365 1.52 17,883 1.99 8,828 2.30 1,183 1.56 2,124 1.22 35,711 1.45 2,185 1.03 5,906
Feb. 1.37 54,516 1.55 14,708 2.00 8,851 2.23 1,084 1.57 2,098 1.22 32,922 1.37 2,679 1.09 7,447
Mar. 1.09 93,353 1.59 21,948 1.90 10,691 2.16 1,432 1.54 2,684 0.89 62,746 1.17 6,173 1.20 10,469
Apr. 1.52 56,777 1.55 18,920 1.90 9,318 2.23 1,385 1.55 2,343 1.46 35,109 1.43 3,022 1.15 6,390
May 1.32 58,626 1.53 16,038 1.89 8,462 2.33 1,179 1.56 2,064 1.20 36,993 1.42 2,491 1.06 7,923
June 1.28 83,087 1.29 27,899 1.93 9,510 2.37 1,409 1.54 2,374 1.19 52,650 0.76 6,801 1.28 10,983
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2020 June 1.39 13,750 . . 1.81 558 2.05 224 1.71 776 1.31 8,391 1.64 1,048 1.28 2,753
July 1.37 10,021 . . 1.80 504 1.96 133 1.31 478 1.42 5,085 1.59 1,108 1.10 2,713
Aug. 1.47 7,045 . . 1.85 362 2.14 123 1.26 369 1.52 4,544 1.79 458 1.05 1,189
Sep. 1.37 11,059 . . 1.72 508 2.08 105 1.22 353 1.41 7,417 1.85 535 1.03 2,141
Oct. 1.23 8,346 . . 1.73 480 1.74 111 1.14 374 1.26 4,696 1.11 672 1.08 2,013
Nov. 1.54 9,630 . . 1.86 375 1.67 98 1.20 367 1.64 5,414 2.01 807 1.18 2,569
Dec. 1.33 15,369 . . 1.68 494 1.68 134 1.16 452 1.41 8,979 1.39 1,222 1.11 4,088
2021 Jan. 1.25 7,702 . . 1.73 430 1.65 99 1.32 374 1.26 4,614 1.69 574 0.88 1,611
Feb. 1.42 6,642 . . 1.83 339 1.67 89 1.07 331 1.61 3,930 1.31 383 0.96 1,570
Mar. 1.19 13,787 . . 1.64 481 1.81 106 1.17 399 1.12 8,540 1.33 825 1.23 3,436
Apr. 1.44 7,883 . . 1.79 377 1.68 117 1.15 359 1.55 4,450 1.51 967 1.07 1,613
May 1.46 7,097 . . 1.76 340 1.73 75 1.21 404 1.68 3,830 1.15 439 1.11 2,009
June 1.36 13,766 . . 1.79 410 1.84 109 1.20 444 1.35 8,370 1.38 1,110 1.35 3,323
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 4
2018 Q3 2,224.8 326.3 401.1 327.9 349.4 677.8 2.0 52.9 35.7 51.6
Q4 2,213.5 318.3 400.5 330.4 349.7 665.8 2.0 55.4 36.8 54.6
2019 Q1 2,343.3 332.1 431.8 329.8 380.9 708.9 2.6 58.7 37.1 61.4
Q2 2,407.6 336.8 449.0 339.3 387.9 735.8 3.6 57.9 37.1 60.3
Q3 2,492.5 333.0 468.5 357.2 398.2 768.3 4.6 58.8 38.0 66.0
Q4 2,473.9 317.6 448.2 355.5 407.3 778.3 3.6 64.9 39.8 58.8
2020 Q1 2,426.9 318.3 452.1 364.0 383.0 738.4 4.5 68.5 38.6 59.6
Q2 2,517.7 317.1 460.6 371.9 409.2 789.0 4.3 68.5 38.7 58.5
Q3 2,547.5 311.1 472.9 373.9 411.0 809.9 4.4 67.1 39.0 58.1
Q4 2,587.9 301.8 479.0 370.6 425.0 841.7 4.7 68.2 38.2 58.7
2021 Q1 2,574.5 292.5 466.7 362.1 437.1 845.0 3.9 71.8 38.4 57.0
    Life insurance
2018 Q3 1,194.1 199.7 201.6 209.0 47.3 493.9 1.0 8.8 19.3 13.4
Q4 1,185.3 194.5 200.1 208.4 50.4 484.7 1.0 11.6 20.3 14.3
2019 Q1 1,239.7 202.9 213.7 206.1 52.8 517.7 1.6 10.4 20.3 14.1
Q2 1,291.9 205.8 227.6 214.2 55.4 538.9 2.4 10.0 20.3 17.4
Q3 1,350.1 205.3 242.5 225.2 57.9 563.6 3.1 10.4 20.9 21.0
Q4 1,325.2 194.9 227.6 217.6 61.1 570.4 2.4 13.7 21.1 16.5
2020 Q1 1,295.8 191.5 231.0 220.6 61.9 538.2 2.2 13.9 20.3 16.3
Q2 1,347.1 192.4 234.4 223.6 64.1 577.3 2.8 13.7 20.3 18.5
Q3 1,369.2 188.4 241.6 225.7 65.7 593.0 3.0 13.6 20.6 17.6
Q4 1,395.9 183.6 242.8 229.9 69.7 617.1 3.3 14.3 20.8 14.5
2021 Q1 1,361.6 170.5 231.7 219.9 74.2 614.8 2.1 14.3 21.0 13.1
    Non-life insurance
2018 Q3 617.9 116.3 116.1 72.8 73.7 168.9 0.2 34.9 9.8 25.1
Q4 616.2 113.8 117.4 73.7 73.8 167.4 0.2 33.5 10.8 25.6
2019 Q1 655.2 119.1 127.5 74.4 76.2 177.1 0.3 38.2 11.0 31.4
Q2 665.6 119.8 131.1 76.1 78.2 182.4 0.4 37.7 11.0 29.1
Q3 682.6 116.9 135.3 79.9 80.6 189.4 0.4 38.8 11.3 30.0
Q4 673.5 111.3 130.4 79.6 83.6 193.3 0.4 36.2 12.2 26.7
2020 Q1 669.4 111.1 131.3 79.8 80.0 186.9 0.3 38.7 12.0 29.3
Q2 685.6 111.9 134.4 82.4 81.1 197.1 0.4 39.5 12.1 26.7
Q3 693.3 109.3 137.6 83.3 82.7 203.2 0.4 38.5 12.1 26.3
Q4 703.5 105.9 139.5 84.5 85.2 210.3 0.5 37.6 12.7 27.3
2021 Q1 715.5 108.0 139.2 83.7 88.2 214.8 0.4 39.8 12.7 28.6
    Reinsurance 5
2018 Q3 412.7 10.2 83.4 46.0 228.4 15.0 0.8 9.3 6.6 13.1
Q4 412.0 10.1 82.9 48.2 225.5 13.7 0.7 10.3 5.7 14.8
2019 Q1 448.4 10.1 90.6 49.3 251.9 14.0 0.7 10.2 5.8 15.9
Q2 450.1 11.1 90.4 49.0 254.3 14.4 0.8 10.2 5.8 13.9
Q3 459.9 10.8 90.7 52.1 259.6 15.3 1.0 9.6 5.9 15.0
Q4 475.2 11.5 90.2 58.3 262.6 14.5 0.8 15.1 6.6 15.6
2020 Q1 461.7 15.7 89.8 63.7 241.0 13.3 1.9 15.9 6.3 14.1
Q2 485.0 12.9 91.7 65.9 264.0 14.6 1.1 15.2 6.3 13.3
Q3 485.0 13.5 93.7 64.9 262.6 13.7 1.0 15.0 6.3 14.2
Q4 488.5 12.3 96.7 56.3 270.2 14.3 1.0 16.3 4.7 16.9
2021 Q1 497.3 13.9 95.8 58.5 274.7 15.4 1.4 17.7 4.7 15.3
Pension funds 6
2018 Q3 666.0 92.1 66.3 30.5 29.6 375.1 – 7.9 42.8 21.8
Q4 672.2 91.5 67.5 30.7 30.6 378.0 – 8.1 43.8 22.1
2019 Q1 689.2 89.4 72.0 30.7 31.5 389.8 – 8.3 44.9 22.6
Q2 703.0 87.4 75.6 31.3 32.1 399.3 – 8.5 45.4 23.5
Q3 718.3 85.3 79.2 31.5 33.1 410.9 – 8.6 45.7 23.9
Q4 726.8 84.9 77.8 31.9 33.4 417.2 – 8.8 47.6 25.1
7 2020 Q1 599.1 92.2 57.0 48.5 9.3 361.3 0.1 10.4 17.5 2.7
Q2 623.3 92.2 58.8 49.1 9.7 382.1 0.1 10.4 18.1 2.8
Q3 635.9 90.8 59.6 50.2 10.1 392.8 0.2 11.6 18.2 2.5
Q4 647.7 85.8 59.7 47.4 10.1 412.2 0.2 11.9 17.3 3.2
2021 Q1 646.0 83.0 58.9 46.4 10.6 415.5 0.1 12.4 16.6 2.3
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections as of 2020 Q1. Until 2019 Q4 these are compiled using Solvency I
supervisory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  1 Accounts
receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered bonds, borrowers'
note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. For pension funds as of 2020 Q1 fair values,
previously book values.  2 Including deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as
registered bonds, borrowers' note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. For pension fundsas of 2020 Q1 fair values, previously book values.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables
and claims of pension funds on pension managers.  4 Valuation of listed securities at the
corresponding consistent price from the ESCB's securities database.  5 Not including the
reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  6 The term
"pension funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European
System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and
occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not
included.  7 Change in data sources.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  4
Insurance corporations
2018 Q3 2,224.8 27.5 65.1 462.3 1,545.4 1,344.1 201.4 2.0 122.4 –
Q4 2,213.5 29.3 64.6 463.1 1,530.3 1,332.4 197.9 1.6 124.6 –
2019 Q1 2,343.3 31.6 68.2 487.9 1,624.8 1,403.6 221.2 1.5 129.2 –
Q2 2,407.6 31.9 69.4 489.7 1,687.4 1,466.0 221.4 1.8 127.5 –
Q3 2,492.5 31.7 69.3 488.5 1,769.4 1,543.0 226.4 2.2 131.5 –
Q4 2,473.9 31.7 75.8 515.3 1,714.9 1,499.6 215.3 1.9 134.3 –
2020 Q1 2,426.9 31.8 82.4 464.3 1,721.9 1,483.2 238.7 2.4 124.1 –
Q2 2,517.7 33.1 82.2 505.4 1,767.7 1,527.7 240.0 1.9 127.4 –
Q3 2,547.5 34.3 80.0 515.9 1,785.7 1,549.2 236.5 1.7 129.9 –
Q4 2,587.9 36.6 79.7 540.5 1,799.2 1,579.3 219.9 1.6 130.3 –
2021 Q1 2,574.5 34.8 81.4 550.4 1,777.7 1,540.9 236.8 2.5 127.6 –
    Life insurance
2018 Q3 1,194.1 4.1 12.6 121.0 1,013.7 1,013.7 – 0.9 41.9 –
Q4 1,185.3 4.1 15.2 122.7 1,000.7 1,000.7 – 0.5 42.2 –
2019 Q1 1,239.7 4.1 14.4 120.9 1,058.9 1,058.9 – 0.4 41.1 –
Q2 1,291.9 4.1 14.5 121.8 1,108.6 1,108.6 – 0.4 42.4 –
Q3 1,350.1 3.7 15.6 116.0 1,171.9 1,171.9 – 0.6 42.4 –
Q4 1,325.2 3.6 19.1 127.6 1,129.6 1,129.6 – 0.5 44.7 –
2020 Q1 1,295.8 3.6 19.3 114.3 1,117.8 1,117.8 – 0.6 40.3 –
Q2 1,347.1 3.8 19.2 129.8 1,150.3 1,150.3 – 0.5 43.4 –
Q3 1,369.2 3.9 19.5 136.8 1,164.8 1,164.8 – 0.5 43.7 –
Q4 1,395.9 3.9 20.7 142.9 1,185.7 1,185.7 – 0.5 42.3 –
2021 Q1 1,361.6 3.3 19.9 143.2 1,154.2 1,154.2 – 1.0 40.1 –
    Non-life insurance
2018 Q3 617.9 1.1 8.0 141.7 420.7 314.0 106.7 0.0 46.4 –
Q4 616.2 1.0 8.3 140.3 416.6 315.5 101.1 0.0 50.0 –
2019 Q1 655.2 1.1 9.3 144.1 448.5 328.9 119.6 0.0 52.2 –
Q2 665.6 1.1 8.8 147.0 459.4 341.5 117.8 0.1 49.3 –
Q3 682.6 1.2 9.1 149.7 471.9 354.8 117.1 0.1 50.6 –
Q4 673.5 1.2 9.3 153.7 457.2 349.4 107.8 0.1 52.0 –
2020 Q1 669.4 1.3 9.8 142.0 468.2 344.4 123.8 0.1 48.0 –
Q2 685.6 1.3 9.5 149.4 478.2 355.6 122.6 0.1 47.1 –
Q3 693.3 1.2 9.6 152.0 482.3 362.4 119.9 0.1 48.1 –
Q4 703.5 1.3 9.7 158.1 483.1 368.7 114.4 0.0 51.3 –
2021 Q1 715.5 1.2 10.6 161.8 491.2 362.5 128.7 0.1 50.5 –
    Reinsurance 5
2018 Q3 412.7 22.4 44.4 199.7 111.0 16.4 94.7 1.1 34.1 –
Q4 412.0 24.1 41.2 200.1 113.0 16.2 96.8 1.1 32.5 –
2019 Q1 448.4 26.5 44.5 222.9 117.4 15.8 101.6 1.1 36.0 –
Q2 450.1 26.6 46.1 220.8 119.4 15.8 103.6 1.3 35.9 –
Q3 459.9 26.8 44.7 222.8 125.6 16.3 109.3 1.5 38.5 –
Q4 475.2 26.9 47.4 234.0 128.0 20.6 107.5 1.3 37.7 –
2020 Q1 461.7 26.9 53.3 208.1 135.9 21.0 114.9 1.7 35.8 –
Q2 485.0 28.1 53.5 226.2 139.1 21.8 117.4 1.3 36.8 –
Q3 485.0 29.2 50.9 227.0 138.7 22.1 116.6 1.0 38.1 –
Q4 488.5 31.4 49.3 239.6 130.4 24.8 105.6 1.0 36.7 –
2021 Q1 497.3 30.2 50.9 245.5 132.4 24.2 108.1 1.4 37.0 –
Pension funds 6
2018 Q3 666.0 – 7.7 7.8 595.2 595.2 – – 2.9 52.4
Q4 672.2 – 7.9 8.0 605.8 605.8 – – 2.8 47.6
2019 Q1 689.2 – 8.1 8.1 613.9 613.9 – – 2.9 56.3
Q2 703.0 – 8.1 8.3 619.8 619.8 – – 2.9 64.0
Q3 718.3 – 8.2 8.4 626.8 626.8 – – 2.9 72.1
Q4 726.8 – 8.4 8.6 637.5 637.5 – – 2.9 69.4
7 2020 Q1 599.1 – 1.6 19.4 497.3 496.7 – 0.3 8.1 72.4
Q2 623.3 – 1.6 21.6 506.4 505.8 – 0.3 8.3 85.0
Q3 635.9 – 1.6 22.4 510.0 509.3 – 0.3 8.7 92.9
Q4 647.7 – 1.6 21.8 516.3 515.6 – 0.3 8.9 98.8
2021 Q1 646.0 – 1.6 22.6 510.0 509.4 – 0.4 8.6 102.8
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections as of 2020 Q1. Until 2019 Q4 these are compiled using Solvency I
supervisory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  1 Including
deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers' note loans
and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension funds on pension managers
and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical reserves "life" taking account oftransitional measures. Health insurance is also included in the "non-life insurance"
sector.  4 Own funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth" and "Shares and other
equity".  5 Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which
is included there.  6 Valuation at book values. The term "pension funds" refers to the
institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds
thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the
self-employed. Social security funds are not included.  7 Change in data sources.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2009 70,208 – 538 –114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 68,536 – 19,945
2010 146,620 – 1,212 – 7,621 24,044 –17,635 147,831 92,682 –103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 –46,796 850 59,521 20,075 – 23,876 – 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 64,775 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,408 – 12,124 – 11,951 74,483 14,366
2015 33,024 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 69,034 116,493 – 66,330 121,164 61,659 – 83,471
2016 71,380 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 43,951 164,148 – 58,012 187,500 34,660 – 92,768
2017 54,840 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 43,277 137,907 – 71,454 161,012 48,349 – 83,067
2018 61,661 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 45,031 95,902 – 24,417 67,328 52,991 – 34,241
2019 137,356 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 68,820 62,915 8,059 2,408 52,448 74,441
2020 436,043 379,893 13,948 87,616 278,328 56,150 276,355 18,955 226,887 30,513 159,688
2020 Aug. 66,958 71,370 1,689 19,737 49,943 – 4,411 11,518 – 7,604 18,004 1,118 55,440
Sep. 73,380 70,210 23,528 26,322 20,360 3,170 23,183 1,689 22,121 – 627 50,197
Oct. – 18,992 –37,537 –16,297 –18,370 – 2,870 18,545 28,450 9,298 24,556 – 5,405 – 47,441
Nov. 20,571 26,232 – 1,002 184 27,050 – 5,661 26,637 1,513 27,659 – 2,535 – 6,066
Dec. – 36,662 –38,404 –11,728 –11,953 –14,723 1,742 15,500 – 25,221 18,290 22,431 – 52,162
2021 Jan. 56,680 27,544 4,005 3,591 19,948 29,136 43,753 8,455 13,518 21,780 12,927
Feb. 42,555 19,574 3,411 – 2,569 18,732 22,980 43,479 – 3,738 20,397 26,821 – 925
Mar. 39,158 39,492 21,776 551 17,165 – 334 24,605 6,152 20,708 – 2,255 14,553
Apr. 17,262 12,392 – 2,704 6,063 9,032 4,870 25,929 – 17,641 24,095 19,475 – 8,668
May 36,674 31,755 – 3,450 6,930 28,274 4,919 31,885 – 2,194 25,538 8,541 4,789
June 35,616 14,974 1,738 – 295 13,531 20,642 37,911 – 583 22,605 15,889 – 2,295
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 – 8,335 38,831 5,485
2010 37,767 20,049 17,718 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,360
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 – 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 – 449
2015 44,165 7,668 36,497 34,437 – 5,421 39,858 9,728
2016 30,896 4,409 26,487 31,037 – 5,143 36,180 – 141
2017 51,571 15,570 36,001 49,913 7,031 42,882 1,658
2018 55,729 16,188 39,541 83,036 – 11,184 94,220 – 27,307
2019 47,115 9,076 38,039 33,573 – 1,119 34,692 13,542
2020 101,155 17,771 67,182 133,015 27 132,988 – 31,860
2020 Aug. 9,463 2,900 6,562 8,730 1,020 7,710 732
Sep. 27,422 4,487 6,734 26,795 161 26,634 628
Oct. 5,092 1,057 4,036 5,325 342 4,983 – 233
Nov. 9,988 220 9,769 10,221 1,919 8,302 – 233
Dec. 14,530 2,898 11,633 14,692 2,970 11,722 – 161
2021 Jan. – 7,264 1,441 – 8,705 – 10,433 863 – 11,296 3,169
Feb. 9,412 2,729 6,683 11,010 1,501 9,509 – 1,598
Mar. 20,639 8,964 11,676 17,986 1,285 16,701 2,653
Apr. 17,279 882 16,397 15,913 1,816 14,097 1,366
May 4,781 1,170 3,612 3,907 – 387 4,294 875
June 11,701 5,166 6,535 15,032 36 14,996 – 3,331
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,653 563,730
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,614 592,375
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,737,330 776,665 38,948 17,527 643,029 77,161 183,136 777,529
2020 Oct. 128,029 61,836 2,174 265 55,991 3,406 10,079 56,114
Nov. 119,066 61,562 648 300 53,206 7,408 10,625 46,879
Dec. 82,963 49,157 389 250 46,188 2,329 8,119 25,687
2021 Jan. 158,047 75,939 3,011 590 67,225 5,113 11,902 70,206
Feb. 129,424 67,263 3,158 504 52,753 10,847 9,658 52,503
Mar. 181,139 105,661 11,531 9,511 75,893 8,725 11,202 64,277
Apr. 145,418 62,631 4,441 1,000 50,889 6,301 11,673 71,113
May 138,542 58,587 2,131 250 50,439 5,766 15,226 64,729
June 147,712 67,532 1,236 – 57,098 9,199 13,550 66,630
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 534,753 165,040 28,500 7,427 90,778 38,335 76,856 292,857
2020 Oct. 39,312 11,516 1,620 15 7,838 2,042 5,411 22,386
Nov. 34,273 10,829 548 50 4,838 5,394 5,877 17,567
Dec. 10,703 4,447 389 – 2,870 1,188 2,213 4,043
2021 Jan. 51,930 21,586 2,250 40 16,275 3,021 5,919 24,425
Feb. 41,268 18,138 2,658 4 7,789 7,686 3,654 19,477
Mar. 59,203 27,756 6,371 3,161 13,666 4,558 5,800 25,647
Apr. 48,999 12,414 3,051 250 7,001 2,111 7,640 28,945
May 45,002 11,672 2,131 250 6,132 3,159 5,758 27,572
June 47,048 10,460 908 – 5,981 3,571 6,767 29,821
Net sales 5
2010 21,566 – 87,646 – 3,754 – 63,368 28,296 – 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 – 54,582 1,657 – 44,290 32,904 – 44,852 – 3,189 80,289
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 340,891 26,201 7,861 8,016 21,716 – 11,393 48,466 266,225
2020 Oct. – 12,771 – 14,240 – 1,656 – 608 – 10,488 – 1,488 – 741 2,210
Nov. 13,940 190 – 1,049 – 907 – 910 3,056 – 234 13,984
Dec. – 36,561 – 13,347 – 1,598 – 1,303 – 6,493 – 3,953 – 2,526 – 20,688
2021 Jan. 25,583 2,557 1,094 – 922 3,747 – 1,362 4,467 18,559
Feb. 19,957 3,080 – 478 – 190 – 712 4,460 782 16,094
Mar. 61,040 37,126 10,737 8,754 15,784 1,850 2,689 21,225
Apr. 9,029 – 2,148 1,114 968 – 4,362 132 4,506 6,671
May 30,949 – 4,344 1,076 – 907 – 3,822 – 691 6,932 28,362
June 15,589 2,642 821 – 84 – 588 2,493 1,974 10,973
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201 1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,409,827 2 1,173,366 183,261 55,192 687,697 2 247,216 2 377,012 1,859,448
2020 Oct. 2 3,445,108 2 1,195,893 186,057 57,474 703,564 2 248,798 382,877 1,866,338
Nov. 3,454,393 1,191,679 184,910 56,543 698,703 251,522 382,493 1,880,221
Dec. 2 3,409,827 1,173,366 183,261 55,192 687,697 247,216 2 377,012 1,859,448
2021 Jan. 3,436,220 1,179,145 184,416 54,254 694,279 246,197 381,760 1,875,315
Feb. 3,458,054 1,183,338 183,909 54,073 694,713 250,643 383,040 1,891,676
Mar. 3,533,113 1,230,284 194,832 62,865 719,391 253,196 386,356 1,916,474
Apr. 3,531,760 1,219,498 195,766 63,790 707,460 252,482 390,359 1,921,902
May 3,560,326 1,212,643 196,849 62,878 701,731 251,186 397,350 1,950,333
June 3,584,929 1,221,300 197,719 62,815 706,439 254,327 399,734 1,963,895
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-June 2021
bis unter 2   1 176 562   431 831   56 497   23 631   283 385   68 317   70 093   674 637 
 2 bis unter 4    648 952   296 759   51 907   16 553   172 307   55 992   66 777   285 416 
 4 bis unter 6    492 419   189 274   33 507   9 503   94 473   51 792   65 148   237 996 
6 bis unter 8    389 343   134 046   30 594   5 932   69 537   27 983   46 002   209 295 
 8 bis unter 10    295 754   75 297   13 173   3 807   38 482   19 836   27 047   193 410 
 10 bis unter 15    178 341   48 069   8 034   2 413   25 207   12 415   35 264   95 008 
 15 bis unter 20    119 162   19 953   2 886    814   14 300   1 953   13 742   85 468 
 20 und darüber    284 396   26 070   1 121    163   8 748   16 038   75 662   182 664 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 – 3,741 – 1,269 – 974 927,256
2010 174,596 – 1,096 3,265 497 178 – 486 – 993 – 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 – 552 – 762 – 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,700 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,747 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,871 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,634 1,963,588
2020 Oct. 182,165 36 82 18 –– 5 – 9 – 50 1,727,080
Nov. 181,879 – 340 47 – 1 – 219 – 11 – 158 1,884,308
Dec. 181,881 2 181 – 90 – 87 – 64 – 118 1,963,588
2021 Jan. 181,437 – 445 102 260 4 – 74 – 300 – 437 1,961,051
Feb. 182,149 705 331 – 0 – 9 443 – 59 1,994,901
Mar. 182,362 213 411 – 0 – 1 – 34 – 164 2,174,997
Apr. 182,665 106 116 73 1 – 0 – 1 – 84 2,194,286
May 182,152 – 514 205 26 –– 0 – 92 – 653 2,228,053
June 182,226 75 275 73 –– 87 – 70 – 116 2,262,394
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields and indices on German securities
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  4 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-
MFIs)German
bond
index
(REX)iBoxx
€ Germany 
price indexCDAX
share price
indexGerman
share
index
(DAX)
Period % per annumAverage
daily rateEnd-1998
= 100End-1987
= 100End-1987
= 1,000
2009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 2.9 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2019 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2020 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7 146.15 113.14 586.72 13,718.78
2021 Feb. – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.1 0.9 144.36 109.90 592.88 13,786.29
Mar. – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.1 0.9 144.70 109.88 633.92 15,008.34
Apr. – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.1 0.2 0.9 144.29 109.11 638.17 15,135.91
May – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 0.3 0.9 144.19 108.88 642.41 15,421.13
June – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 0.2 1.0 144.74 109.42 648.99 15,531.04
July – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.1 0.1 0.9 146.34 111.03 650.36 15,544.39
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 End of year or month.  3 Source: Deutsche Börse
AG. 4 Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for futures contracts;
calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 –5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 –14,995 –8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 – 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 –1,340 – 379 –2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 –7,576 – 694 47,050 1,984 7,035
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,521 144,075 819 –1,745 143,256 44,266 –3,840
2015 181,889 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,753 174,018 7,362 494 166,656 35,259 7,871
2016 156,985 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 37,615 163,934 2,877 –3,172 161,057 40,787 –6,947
2017 153,756 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 58,834 156,282 4,938 1,048 151,344 57,786 –2,526
2018 132,060 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 28,366 138,424 2,979 –2,306 135,445 30,672 –6,364
2019 176,465 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 53,919 181,388 2,719 – 812 178,669 54,731 –4,923
2020 180,462 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 64,435 179,529 336 –1,656 179,193 66,091 933
2020 Dec. 49,571 32,118 3,506 – 122 3,094 476 28,613 17,453 48,195 1,712 125 46,483 17,328 1,376
2021 Jan. 19,672 12,231 1,832 – 46 1,159 776 10,399 7,441 19,706 615 257 19,091 7,184 – 34
Feb. 14,398 7,295 2,852 – 27 1,926 946 4,443 7,102 15,065 1,442 395 13,623 6,707 – 667
Mar. 15,995 13,745 4,699 631 3,335 827 9,046 2,250 15,184 552 – 526 14,632 2,776 811
Apr. 20,214 10,938 3,205 – 55 2,782 383 7,733 9,276 18,680 1,314 468 17,366 8,808 1,534
May 12,788 7,912 3,416 – 19 2,585 679 4,496 4,875 12,496 1,460 5 11,036 4,870 292
June 23,123 12,411 3,231 78 2,252 757 9,181 10,711 23,891 733 450 23,158 10,261 – 768
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2019 2020 2021
 Item 2018 2019 2020 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 25.63 18.26 100.01 12.06 0.73 46.79 45.71 6.78 19.79
   Debt securities 5.24 –2.23 3.01 –0.94 0.15 2.47 0.57 –0.19 –1.53
     Short-term debt securities 1.42 –1.31 1.27 –0.31 –0.32 0.53 1.25 –0.18 0.12
     Long-term debt securities 3.82 –0.91 1.74 –0.63 0.47 1.94 –0.68 –0.01 –1.65
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 0.65 –0.47 1.38 –0.31 –0.04 1.80 –0.48 0.10 –0.64
         Non-financial corporations 0.59 0.51 –0.17 –0.25 –0.02 0.20 0.13 –0.48 0.10
         Financial corporations 1.40 –0.56 0.12 0.18 –0.16 0.60 –0.41 0.09 –0.55
         General government –1.34 –0.41 1.44 –0.24 0.14 1.00 –0.20 0.49 –0.20
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 4.60 –1.76 1.62 –0.63 0.19 0.67 1.05 –0.29 –0.89
   Loans –0.87 –2.77 –19.33 22.98 –8.06 –3.19 –7.81 –0.28 3.96
     Short-term loans 24.05 12.37 –8.52 26.90 –9.40 –2.83 0.49 3.22 –0.20
     Long-term loans –24.92 –15.14 –10.81 –3.92 1.33 –0.35 –8.30 –3.50 4.16
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 6.25 –25.01 0.28 10.77 –7.83 6.99 –3.13 4.24 –5.83
         Non-financial corporations 4.52 –28.14 –12.27 12.60 –9.25 5.75 –3.86 –4.90 –1.66
         Financial corporations 1.36 2.90 11.99 –1.89 1.29 1.11 0.59 9.00 –4.17
         General government 0.36 0.22 0.56 0.06 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.00
       Loans to the rest of the world –7.12 22.24 –19.61 12.21 –0.24 –10.18 –4.68 –4.52 9.79
   Equity and investment fund shares 130.07 91.38 74.98 21.32 57.08 –15.94 20.83 13.02 19.59
     Equity 128.06 82.38 62.19 19.78 56.22 –17.09 15.96 7.10 15.77
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 18.82 6.18 –77.97 –7.49 –1.51 –18.72 10.02 –67.75 12.08
         Non-financial corporations 18.27 4.62 –78.06 –9.14 –1.32 –18.55 10.15 –68.34 12.08
         Financial corporations 0.55 1.55 0.09 1.65 –0.19 –0.18 –0.14 0.60 0.01
       Listed shares of the rest of the world –3.84 5.55 6.54 0.56 0.73 –1.42 3.43 3.79 0.71
       Other equity  1 113.08 70.65 133.62 26.72 57.00 3.05 2.51 71.06 2.98
     Investment fund shares 2.01 9.00 12.79 1.54 0.85 1.15 4.87 5.92 3.82
       Money market fund shares –0.53 1.78 3.79 1.61 –1.80 0.98 3.27 1.34 –0.47
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 2.54 7.22 9.00 –0.08 2.65 0.17 1.60 4.58 4.30
   Insurance technical reserves 0.39 1.68 2.08 0.33 0.56 0.54 0.50 0.48 0.48
   Financial derivatives 2.15 0.54 –25.09 11.22 –0.93 –10.35 –3.49 –10.33 21.57
   Other accounts receivable 41.43 –67.06 54.23 –63.19 10.11 –54.12 47.51 50.73 21.91
   Total 204.03 39.79 189.87 3.78 59.63 –33.79 103.82 60.22 85.78
 External financing
   Debt securities 0.47 20.52 36.25 0.72 6.69 23.36 10.22 –4.03 2.67
     Short-term securities 3.38 4.88 –4.40 –3.52 2.17 2.76 –3.91 –5.42 –1.19
       Long-term securities –2.91 15.64 40.65 4.24 4.53 20.60 14.13 1.39 3.86
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 3.48 6.62 18.12 0.63 1.55 11.47 5.05 0.06 1.94
           Non-financial corporations 0.59 0.51 –0.17 –0.25 –0.02 0.20 0.13 –0.48 0.10
           Financial corporations 2.89 5.31 19.86 0.46 2.05 11.20 5.44 1.18 1.96
           General government 0.01 0.47 –0.22 0.42 –0.10 –0.19 0.05 0.01 0.14
           Households –0.01 0.34 –1.35 –0.01 –0.39 0.26 –0.57 –0.65 –0.26
         Debt securities of the rest of the world –3.01 13.90 18.13 0.09 5.15 11.89 5.17 –4.08 0.73
   Loans 157.71 77.15 68.70 16.41 33.60 28.80 1.05 5.25 19.52
     Short-term loans 72.92 23.58 –20.17 9.68 14.36 –26.96 –0.18 –7.39 24.71
     Long-term loans 84.78 53.57 88.88 6.73 19.24 55.76 1.23 12.65 –5.18
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 86.80 33.41 30.73 26.24 9.98 23.80 –3.15 0.11 26.47
         Non-financial corporations 4.52 –28.14 –12.27 12.60 –9.25 5.75 –3.86 –4.90 –1.66
         Financial corporations 80.88 60.35 9.46 9.57 23.59 2.07 –9.65 –6.55 27.18
         General government 1.40 1.20 33.54 4.07 –4.36 15.99 10.36 11.56 0.94
       Loans from the rest of the world 70.91 43.74 37.97 –9.84 23.62 5.00 4.20 5.14 –6.94
   Equity 16.08 17.96 56.49 5.18 6.07 9.74 21.58 19.10 14.52
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 73.22 –24.49 –62.04 –9.38 7.20 –13.53 10.80 –66.51 14.77
       Non-financial corporations 18.27 4.62 –78.06 –9.14 –1.32 –18.55 10.15 –68.34 12.08
       Financial corporations 46.75 –33.13 3.68 0.61 1.65 1.44 –1.00 1.59 –0.49
       General government 0.53 –0.01 0.26 –0.05 0.20 0.09 –0.01 –0.01 –0.07
       Households 7.67 4.03 12.08 –0.80 6.66 3.50 1.67 0.25 3.25
     Listed shares of the rest of the world –31.95 –1.59 12.49 14.28 –5.95 18.40 –1.32 1.37 –4.52
     Other equity  1 –25.20 44.04 106.03 0.28 4.82 4.87 12.10 84.24 4.27
   Insurance technical reserves 6.08 2.81 2.81 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options –0.49 –1.38 0.54 –3.21 1.49 –2.26 0.06 1.26 –0.94
   Other accounts payable 54.18 5.79 13.65 –21.04 –2.69 –45.17 39.43 22.08 53.58
   Total 234.01 122.85 178.44 –1.24 45.87 15.18 73.04 44.36 90.05
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2019 2020 2021
 Item 2018 2019 2020 Q4 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 583.6 578.4 720.7 578.4 599.9 631.3 703.4 720.7 714.6
   Debt securities 50.8 49.6 51.5 49.6 48.2 51.5 51.5 51.5 49.9
     Short-term debt securities 4.9 3.7 4.8 3.7 3.4 3.8 5.1 4.8 5.0
     Long-term debt securities 45.9 45.9 46.7 45.9 44.9 47.7 46.3 46.7 44.9
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 21.3 21.1 22.1 21.1 20.3 22.3 21.9 22.1 21.4
         Non-financial corporations 4.5 5.0 4.7 5.0 4.7 5.0 5.1 4.7 4.7
         Financial corporations 13.8 13.6 13.4 13.6 12.9 13.6 13.2 13.4 12.9
         General government 3.0 2.6 4.0 2.6 2.7 3.7 3.5 4.0 3.8
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 29.5 28.4 29.4 28.4 28.0 29.2 29.6 29.4 28.5
   Loans 733.8 733.4 717.0 733.4 724.2 728.7 718.4 717.0 722.4
     Short-term loans 555.6 569.4 565.8 569.4 559.1 564.4 563.2 565.8 565.9
     Long-term loans 178.2 164.0 151.2 164.0 165.1 164.3 155.2 151.2 156.4
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 440.2 415.2 415.5 415.2 407.4 414.4 411.3 415.5 409.7
         Non-financial corporations 368.0 339.9 327.6 339.9 330.6 336.4 332.5 327.6 325.9
         Financial corporations 65.2 68.1 80.1 68.1 69.4 70.5 71.1 80.1 75.9
         General government 7.1 7.3 7.9 7.3 7.4 7.6 7.7 7.9 7.9
       Loans to the rest of the world 293.6 318.1 301.5 318.1 316.8 314.3 307.2 301.5 312.7
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,164.5 2,425.8 2,495.2 2,425.8 2,218.7 2,380.0 2,413.5 2,495.2 2,653.1
     Equity 1,998.1 2,235.8 2,290.4 2,235.8 2,042.9 2,193.4 2,220.0 2,290.4 2,440.7
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 302.6 342.0 307.0 342.0 288.4 337.2 352.5 307.0 359.4
         Non-financial corporations 296.0 332.9 298.9 332.9 281.4 329.6 346.0 298.9 350.9
         Financial corporations 6.6 9.0 8.1 9.0 7.0 7.6 6.5 8.1 8.5
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 40.2 50.7 66.6 50.7 45.3 47.4 55.3 66.6 71.0
       Other equity  1 1,655.4 1,843.1 1,916.9 1,843.1 1,709.2 1,808.8 1,812.3 1,916.9 2,010.4
     Investment fund shares 166.4 190.0 204.7 190.0 175.8 186.6 193.5 204.7 212.4
       Money market fund shares 1.0 3.2 7.0 3.2 1.4 2.4 5.7 7.0 6.5
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 165.4 186.8 197.8 186.8 174.4 184.2 187.8 197.8 205.9
   Insurance technical reserves 56.3 59.1 62.2 59.1 59.9 60.6 61.4 62.2 62.9
   Financial derivatives 33.3 31.6 31.1 31.6 44.6 34.8 29.7 31.1 31.0
   Other accounts receivable 1,171.0 1,244.8 1,225.6 1,244.8 1,210.8 1,123.1 1,183.3 1,225.6 1,331.0
   Total 4,793.4 5,122.6 5,303.2 5,122.6 4,906.3 5,010.1 5,161.2 5,303.2 5,564.9
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 181.3 204.7 249.2 204.7 202.9 238.6 251.4 249.2 251.1
     Short-term securities 6.8 11.9 7.1 11.9 13.9 16.6 12.6 7.1 5.9
     Long-term securities 174.5 192.9 242.1 192.9 189.0 222.0 238.9 242.1 245.1
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 70.1 77.7 96.0 77.7 74.3 88.8 94.9 96.0 95.6
         Non-financial corporations 4.5 5.0 4.7 5.0 4.7 5.0 5.1 4.7 4.7
         Financial corporations 51.5 57.8 78.1 57.8 56.4 69.7 76.1 78.1 78.0
         General government 0.1 0.6 0.4 0.6 0.5 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5
         Households 14.0 14.4 12.8 14.4 12.8 13.8 13.3 12.8 12.5
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 111.1 127.0 153.2 127.0 128.5 149.9 156.6 153.2 155.5
   Loans 2,049.5 2,127.5 2,187.5 2,127.5 2,161.0 2,190.8 2,186.0 2,187.5 2,208.1
     Short-term loans 793.5 820.3 794.4 820.3 834.9 806.2 803.5 794.4 821.6
     Long-term loans 1,256.0 1,307.2 1,393.2 1,307.2 1,326.1 1,384.6 1,382.5 1,393.2 1,386.5
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,325.2 1,358.6 1,388.7 1,358.6 1,368.6 1,394.4 1,389.4 1,388.7 1,417.1
         Non-financial corporations 368.0 339.9 327.6 339.9 330.6 336.4 332.5 327.6 325.9
         Financial corporations 906.8 966.8 974.3 966.8 989.8 993.5 981.9 974.3 1,003.9
         General government 50.5 51.9 86.7 51.9 48.1 64.5 75.0 86.7 87.2
       Loans from the rest of the world 724.3 768.9 798.9 768.9 792.4 796.5 796.6 798.9 791.0
   Equity 2,701.1 3,102.2 3,259.8 3,102.2 2,572.7 2,950.1 3,092.2 3,259.8 3,516.9
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 659.1 733.2 739.2 733.2 594.9 710.7 746.7 739.2 847.5
       Non-financial corporations 296.0 332.9 298.9 332.9 281.4 329.6 346.0 298.9 350.9
       Financial corporations 161.7 157.2 171.2 157.2 126.0 149.8 155.4 171.2 191.7
       General government 41.6 51.8 56.3 51.8 41.8 50.5 53.3 56.3 67.3
       Households 159.8 191.3 212.8 191.3 145.7 180.8 192.0 212.8 237.6
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 765.0 959.4 996.3 959.4 689.5 856.5 924.2 996.3 1,082.8
     Other equity  1 1,277.0 1,409.6 1,524.3 1,409.6 1,288.3 1,382.9 1,421.3 1,524.3 1,586.6
   Insurance technical reserves 269.8 272.6 275.4 272.6 273.3 274.0 274.7 275.4 276.1
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 65.4 67.0 88.1 67.0 87.4 90.4 84.5 88.1 73.0
   Other accounts payable 1,188.7 1,317.0 1,305.3 1,317.0 1,276.1 1,240.8 1,289.3 1,305.3 1,409.1
   Total 6,455.7 7,091.0 7,365.3 7,091.0 6,573.3 6,984.7 7,178.1 7,365.3 7,734.2
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2019 2020 2021
 Item 2018 2019 2020 Q4 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 137.95 142.38 209.95 51.88 20.98 73.07 41.48 74.43 48.74
     Currency 29.92 35.37 61.57 12.99 16.38 16.97 11.95 16.27 12.96
     Deposits 108.03 107.01 148.38 38.90 4.60 56.10 29.53 58.15 35.78
       Transferable deposits 109.88 111.01 165.34 42.16 18.74 58.64 31.76 56.20 34.31
       Time deposits 6.78 1.47 –1.70 0.71 –3.11 –0.85 0.41 1.85 –0.01
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –8.63 –5.47 –15.26 –3.97 –11.04 –1.70 –2.63 0.10 1.48
   Debt securities 1.62 –1.85 –5.94 –1.61 –1.47 0.38 –1.67 –3.18 –2.66
     Short-term debt securities –0.13 –0.53 0.08 0.02 –0.03 0.16 0.10 –0.16 0.16
     Long-term debt securities 1.74 –1.32 –6.02 –1.63 –1.44 0.22 –1.77 –3.03 –2.82
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 2.24 –2.93 –2.56 –2.38 –0.14 0.55 –1.17 –1.79 –1.07
         Non-financial corporations –0.10 0.21 –1.32 –0.04 –0.32 0.19 –0.56 –0.62 –0.28
         Financial corporations 2.81 –2.22 –1.26 –1.75 –0.35 0.47 –0.36 –1.02 –0.67
         General government –0.46 –0.92 0.02 –0.58 0.53 –0.11 –0.24 –0.15 –0.12
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –0.62 1.08 –3.38 0.77 –1.32 –0.17 –0.50 –1.39 –1.59
   Equity and investment fund shares 38.44 49.78 90.16 16.20 19.39 28.96 20.35 21.46 28.06
     Equity 18.84 18.94 48.52 3.43 13.62 15.57 11.60 7.72 2.57
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 9.44 6.61 16.06 –0.24 8.07 6.35 1.98 –0.35 3.39
         Non-financial corporations 6.28 3.52 11.92 –1.19 6.47 3.41 1.71 0.33 3.12
         Financial corporations 3.16 3.09 4.14 0.95 1.61 2.94 0.27 –0.68 0.27
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 4.37 7.46 23.27 2.58 3.02 6.40 7.43 6.43 –1.74
       Other equity  1 5.03 4.86 9.18 1.08 2.53 2.82 2.20 1.64 0.92
     Investment fund shares 19.60 30.84 41.64 12.78 5.76 13.39 8.75 13.74 25.50
       Money market fund shares –0.22 –0.32 0.09 –0.37 0.38 –0.10 0.10 –0.29 0.09
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 19.81 31.16 41.55 13.14 5.38 13.49 8.65 14.03 25.41
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 15.80 17.93 20.04 6.57 5.28 5.63 5.55 3.58 5.43
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 28.22 34.85 25.89 8.66 10.64 3.79 6.19 5.27 11.65
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 37.28 27.51 38.49 4.75 11.53 7.55 7.04 12.36 9.49
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 –9.28 –2.74 7.67 –27.13 24.04 –9.72 7.23 –13.88 28.05
   Total 250.02 267.85 386.26 59.33 90.39 109.67 86.18 100.03 128.76
 External financing
   Loans 68.41 81.16 82.39 16.59 13.13 17.63 27.53 24.10 16.55
     Short-term loans 2.44 0.92 –5.51 0.20 –1.58 –2.29 –0.52 –1.12 0.48
     Long-term loans 65.97 80.23 87.89 16.39 14.71 19.91 28.05 25.22 16.08
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 57.42 67.17 84.16 19.79 15.69 18.47 25.54 24.47 18.52
       Consumer loans 11.14 14.42 –4.29 –1.96 –2.67 –2.05 1.08 –0.66 –1.14
       Entrepreneurial loans –0.14 –0.43 2.51 –1.25 0.10 1.21 0.91 0.29 –0.82
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 61.72 73.41 83.17 18.60 15.52 17.96 27.32 22.37 14.85
       Loans from other financial institutions 6.69 7.74 –0.78 –2.01 –2.39 –0.34 0.21 1.73 1.71
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.80 0.31 0.40 –0.50 –0.17 0.25 0.31 0.01 0.01
   Total 69.21 81.46 82.79 16.09 12.96 17.88 27.84 24.11 16.56
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2019 2020 2021
 Item 2018 2019 2020 Q4 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 2,457.4 2,599.8 2,809.4 2,599.8 2,620.8 2,693.9 2,735.0 2,809.4 2,858.1
     Currency 227.3 262.7 324.3 262.7 279.1 296.0 308.0 324.3 337.2
     Deposits 2,230.1 2,337.1 2,485.2 2,337.1 2,341.7 2,397.8 2,427.0 2,485.2 2,520.9
       Transferable deposits 1,398.0 1,509.1 1,674.1 1,509.1 1,527.8 1,586.4 1,617.9 1,674.1 1,708.3
       Time deposits 252.4 253.9 252.1 253.9 250.8 249.9 250.3 252.1 252.2
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 579.7 574.2 558.9 574.2 563.2 561.5 558.8 558.9 560.4
     Debt securities 117.5 121.4 113.7 121.4 108.9 114.5 113.7 113.7 112.8
       Short-term debt securities 2.1 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.5 1.7 1.8 1.6 1.7
       Long-term debt securities 115.4 119.7 112.0 119.7 107.4 112.7 111.9 112.0 111.0
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 80.2 81.4 76.7 81.4 72.3 76.7 76.1 76.7 77.3
           Non-financial corporations 12.1 12.4 10.9 12.4 11.0 11.8 11.3 10.9 10.5
           Financial corporations 64.6 66.6 63.3 66.6 58.2 62.0 62.1 63.3 64.4
           General government 3.4 2.5 2.6 2.5 3.1 3.0 2.7 2.6 2.4
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 37.4 39.9 36.9 39.9 36.6 37.8 37.6 36.9 35.4
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,162.2 1,386.4 1,539.0 1,386.4 1,220.7 1,374.3 1,423.6 1,539.0 1,656.8
     Equity 588.8 706.1 804.5 706.1 618.9 708.4 735.9 804.5 866.1
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 184.1 223.9 243.3 223.9 171.7 209.2 217.3 243.3 271.7
         Non-financial corporations 151.9 182.3 204.0 182.3 138.7 172.3 183.6 204.0 228.2
         Financial corporations 32.2 41.6 39.2 41.6 33.0 36.9 33.7 39.2 43.4
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 100.2 136.3 180.5 136.3 116.9 144.7 156.1 180.5 199.5
       Other equity  1 304.5 345.9 380.7 345.9 330.3 354.5 362.5 380.7 395.0
     Investment fund shares 573.4 680.2 734.5 680.2 601.9 665.9 687.7 734.5 790.7
       Money market fund shares 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.3 2.4
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 571.1 678.0 732.2 678.0 599.2 663.2 684.9 732.2 788.3
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 375.9 393.8 413.9 393.8 399.1 404.7 410.3 413.9 419.3
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,011.1 1,069.1 1,094.3 1,069.1 1,079.6 1,083.2 1,089.2 1,094.3 1,106.0
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 883.8 911.4 949.8 911.4 922.9 930.4 937.5 949.8 959.3
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 29.6 29.6 30.4 29.6 29.0 29.6 30.0 30.4 30.3
   Total 6,037.6 6,511.5 6,950.5 6,511.5 6,381.0 6,630.5 6,739.2 6,950.5 7,142.5
 Liabilities
   Loans 1,775.6 1,857.8 1,940.1 1,857.8 1,871.0 1,886.6 1,915.3 1,940.1 1,957.0
     Short-term loans 58.1 58.8 53.1 58.8 57.2 54.9 54.2 53.1 53.5
     Long-term loans 1,717.5 1,799.0 1,887.0 1,799.0 1,813.8 1,831.7 1,861.1 1,887.0 1,903.5
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,307.9 1,378.6 1,463.7 1,378.6 1,394.4 1,412.5 1,438.8 1,463.7 1,482.2
       Consumer loans 218.1 231.4 226.1 231.4 228.8 226.0 227.0 226.1 224.6
       Entrepreneurial loans 249.7 247.7 250.2 247.7 247.8 248.1 249.5 250.2 250.2
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,667.2 1,741.6 1,824.6 1,741.6 1,757.2 1,773.2 1,801.6 1,824.6 1,839.8
       Loans from other financial institutions 108.5 116.2 115.4 116.2 113.8 113.5 113.7 115.4 117.1
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 18.3 19.2 19.3 19.2 20.7 21.0 20.6 19.3 21.0
   Total 1,793.9 1,877.0 1,959.4 1,877.0 1,891.7 1,907.7 1,935.9 1,959.4 1,977.9
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
August 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
  
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local securitygovernment government government government funds government government government government funds
Period
€ billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2015 + 29.1 + 17.6 + 4.6 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 + 36.4 + 13.7 + 7.7 + 6.3 + 8.7 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.32017 
p + 44.4 + 7.8 + 13.9 + 11.4 + 11.2 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.3
2018 p + 61.6 + 20.8 + 12.1 + 12.8 + 16.0 + 1.8 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.5
2019 p + 52.5 + 22.7 + 16.0 + 5.1 + 8.7 + 1.5 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.3
2020 pe − 149.2 − 88.4 − 31.9 + 5.3 − 34.2 − 4.5 − 2.7 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 1.0
2019         H1  p + 46.5 + 19.0 + 13.0 + 6.4 + 8.1 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5
         H2  p + 6.0 + 3.7 + 3.0 − 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0
2020         H1  pe − 52.1 − 29.2 − 10.2 + 0.2 − 12.9 − 3.2 − 1.8 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.8
         H2  pe − 97.1 − 59.2 − 21.7 + 5.1 − 21.3 − 5.7 − 3.4 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 1.2
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2015 2,189.1 1,372.3 658.2 176.3 1.5 72.3 45.3 21.8 5.8 0.0
2016 2,172.3 1,365.9 640.9 178.0 1.2 69.3 43.6 20.4 5.7 0.02017 
p 2,122.9 1,350.3 613.6 175.2 0.8 65.1 41.4 18.8 5.4 0.0
2018 p 2,074.1 1,323.1 599.8 167.4 0.7 61.8 39.4 17.9 5.0 0.0
2019 p 2,057.6 1,299.8 609.4 165.1 0.7 59.7 37.7 17.7 4.8 0.0
2020 p 2,325.5 1,513.2 662.5 163.6 7.4 69.7 45.4 19.9 4.9 0.2
2019         Q1  p 2,084.4 1,324.5 611.7 165.7 0.7 61.6 39.2 18.1 4.9 0.0
         Q2  p 2,074.8 1,320.4 609.9 164.3 0.7 61.1 38.9 18.0 4.8 0.0
         Q3  p 2,091.7 1,328.1 619.9 163.7 0.6 61.0 38.8 18.1 4.8 0.0
         Q4  p 2,057.6 1,299.8 609.4 165.1 0.7 59.7 37.7 17.7 4.8 0.0
2020         Q1  p 2,103.2 1,327.7 624.4 165.1 0.8 60.9 38.4 18.1 4.8 0.0
         Q2  p 2,272.3 1,473.9 645.9 165.3 1.0 67.3 43.7 19.1 4.9 0.0
         Q3  p 2,344.8 1,536.9 655.5 166.5 4.6 70.0 45.9 19.6 5.0 0.1
         Q4  p 2,325.5 1,513.2 662.5 163.6 7.4 69.7 45.4 19.9 4.9 0.2
2021         Q1  p 2,366.7 1,538.8 673.9 167.9 16.2 71.1 46.3 20.3 5.0 0.5
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus   
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly  
GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2015 1,364.9 705.1 501.2 158.6 1,335.8 721.9 233.0 153.0 64.5 42.2 121.2 + 29.1 1,213.3
2016 1,426.7 739.2 524.3 163.3 1,390.4 754.5 240.7 162.5 68.1 37.3 127.2 + 36.4 1,270.42017 
p 1,485.2 773.1 549.5 162.5 1,440.8 783.9 250.1 168.4 71.6 33.7 133.0 + 44.4 1,329.4
2018 p 1,553.8 808.0 572.6 173.2 1,492.2 806.0 259.6 173.4 78.7 31.1 143.5 + 61.6 1,387.6
2019 p 1,610.6 834.1 597.5 179.0 1,558.1 845.9 271.5 181.9 86.2 27.5 145.1 + 52.5 1,438.7
2020 pe 1,563.1 780.0 607.1 176.0 1,712.3 904.3 283.7 209.3 92.3 22.2 200.4 − 149.2 1,394.1
As a percentage of GDP
2015 45.1 23.3 16.6 5.2 44.1 23.9 7.7 5.1 2.1 1.4 4.0 + 1.0 40.1
2016 45.5 23.6 16.7 5.2 44.4 24.1 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.2 4.1 + 1.2 40.52017 
p 45.6 23.7 16.9 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 + 1.4 40.8
2018 p 46.3 24.1 17.1 5.2 44.5 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.3 + 1.8 41.3
2019 p 46.7 24.2 17.3 5.2 45.2 24.5 7.9 5.3 2.5 0.8 4.2 + 1.5 41.7
2020 pe 46.9 23.4 18.2 5.3 51.3 27.1 8.5 6.3 2.8 0.7 6.0 − 4.5 41.8
Percentage growth rates
2015 + 3.9 + 4.8 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 3.0 + 4.4 + 2.4 + 4.0 + 6.6 − 10.5 − 1.8 . + 4.6
2016 + 4.5 + 4.8 + 4.6 + 2.9 + 4.1 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 6.2 + 5.6 − 11.7 + 4.9 . + 4.72017 
p + 4.1 + 4.6 + 4.8 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 3.9 + 3.9 + 3.6 + 5.1 − 9.5 + 4.6 . + 4.6
2018 p + 4.6 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 6.6 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 9.8 − 7.8 + 7.8 . + 4.4
2019 p + 3.6 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 3.3 + 4.4 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 4.9 + 9.6 − 11.6 + 1.1 . + 3.7
2020 pe − 2.9 − 6.5 + 1.6 − 1.6 + 9.9 + 6.9 + 4.5 + 15.1 + 7.2 − 19.0 + 38.1 . − 3.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and   
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution  Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
August 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 788.9 236.0 295.1 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 2.9 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.2 1,238.8 + 6.4
2015 p 829.8 673.3 10.4 804.3 244.1 302.7 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,301.1 1,273.6 + 27.4
2016 p 862.3 705.8 9.0 844.5 251.3 321.6 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 17.8 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.1 1,330.2 + 24.9
2017 p 900.3 734.5 7.9 869.4 261.6 327.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 30.8 631.5 622.0 + 9.5 1,417.5 1,377.2 + 40.3
2018 p 951.8 776.3 6.2 905.6 272.5 338.0 39.2 55.8 16.1 + 46.2 656.2 642.5 + 13.6 1,490.7 1,430.9 + 59.8
2019 p 1,010.3 799.4 11.2 975.5 285.9 349.7 33.6 62.9 16.8 + 34.8 684.7 676.7 + 8.0 1,573.5 1,530.7 + 42.8
2020 p 947.0 739.9 13.9 1,111.9 299.5 422.2 25.9 69.2 60.1 − 164.9 719.1 746.3 − 27.2 1,518.5 1,710.7 − 192.1
2018         Q1  p 225.7 189.1 1.1 210.0 66.0 81.7 14.6 9.1 2.5 + 15.7 156.1 160.8 − 4.7 352.7 341.7 + 11.0
         Q2  p 239.9 194.7 1.0 206.2 65.9 80.9 5.8 11.4 2.1 + 33.7 162.4 160.1 + 2.3 373.3 337.3 + 36.1
         Q3  p 228.8 189.0 1.8 223.6 67.0 84.6 13.4 14.4 1.9 + 5.2 161.8 161.1 + 0.7 361.3 355.5 + 5.9
         Q4  p 255.2 203.9 2.2 262.1 73.1 89.7 6.2 20.3 9.6 − 6.9 174.6 163.4 + 11.2 400.7 396.4 + 4.3
2019         Q1  p 240.9 192.7 2.5 227.7 68.3 88.5 11.5 10.2 3.3 + 13.2 163.3 166.4 − 3.1 374.3 364.1 + 10.2
         Q2  p 256.3 201.7 2.0 236.1 70.1 87.0 12.2 13.0 2.6 + 20.1 169.9 168.4 + 1.5 396.1 374.5 + 21.6
         Q3  p 245.3 194.7 3.4 236.7 70.9 86.2 4.5 16.4 3.1 + 8.6 168.8 170.3 − 1.5 384.0 376.9 + 7.1
         Q4  p 269.1 210.6 3.2 272.2 76.1 87.5 5.1 22.5 7.7 − 3.1 181.9 172.6 + 9.3 420.7 414.5 + 6.2
2020         Q1  p 244.8 197.4 2.5 236.4 72.9 90.5 11.9 12.0 2.6 + 8.4 168.3 175.7 − 7.4 380.0 379.1 + 0.9
         Q2  p 211.9 158.1 2.7 271.8 72.2 119.1 8.6 15.4 3.4 − 59.8 175.9 187.0 − 11.1 354.5 425.4 − 70.9
         Q3  p 227.8 181.4 4.0 282.3 72.4 102.0 1.4 18.3 34.3 − 54.5 181.1 195.0 − 13.9 370.1 438.5 − 68.4
         Q4  p 259.3 201.9 4.5 315.4 81.4 109.1 5.9 22.8 19.6 − 56.1 186.0 189.5 − 3.5 408.2 467.9 − 59.6
2021         Q1  p 240.7 185.2 4.3 300.6 75.5 134.4 7.3 11.1 14.6 − 59.9 182.4 196.3 − 13.9 385.2 459.0 − 73.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans grant ed.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2018 p 374.4 363.5 + 10.9 420.5 400.1 + 20.4 271.8 261.5 + 10.2
2019 p 382.5 369.2 + 13.3 437.2 419.6 + 17.6 284.2 278.1 + 6.1
2020 p 341.4 472.1 − 130.7 456.4 489.4 − 33.0 297.0 294.6 + 2.4
2018         Q1  p 87.9 83.9 + 4.0 100.0 92.7 + 7.3 54.9 60.3 − 5.3
         Q2  p 94.5 79.8 + 14.6 104.3 91.8 + 12.5 68.5 62.4 + 6.1
         Q3  p 91.7 95.9 − 4.2 100.7 95.4 + 5.3 66.0 64.3 + 1.7
         Q4  p 100.4 103.9 − 3.5 113.4 118.5 − 5.1 80.4 73.1 + 7.3
2019         Q1  p 84.7 86.1 − 1.4 105.7 96.7 + 8.9 58.2 63.2 − 4.9
         Q2  p 97.7 90.3 + 7.4 106.0 100.2 + 5.8 70.6 65.9 + 4.7
         Q3  p 93.2 91.3 + 1.9 107.9 102.6 + 5.2 69.1 69.2 − 0.1
         Q4  p 106.9 101.5 + 5.4 115.5 118.4 − 2.9 84.5 78.4 + 6.0
2020         Q1  p 92.3 90.4 + 1.9 105.6 99.7 + 5.9 57.9 67.7 − 9.8
         Q2  p 70.8 114.8 − 44.0 108.2 128.0 − 19.8 69.4 69.4 + 0.1
         Q3  p 83.7 105.4 − 21.7 112.9 113.7 − 0.8 67.5 72.6 − 5.1
         Q4  p 94.5 161.5 − 67.0 127.4 146.3 − 18.9 100.3 83.5 + 16.8
2021         Q1  p 75.0 127.5 − 52.5 113.7 120.7 − 7.1 61.1 69.7 − 8.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city states Berlin, Bremen and
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- assigned to the general government sector. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
August 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
  
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,8362017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,3682018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,7752019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,880 632,237 313,381 286,065 32,791 107,916 − 274 30,266
2019         Q1 193,054 162,696 79,669 71,578 11,450 19,816 + 10,541 6,270
         Q2 202,383 172,563 90,883 75,455 6,224 29,784 + 37 6,179         Q3 193,918 166,676 86,117 72,677 7,882 27,569 − 327 7,402         Q4 210,062 182,556 98,381 78,809 5,365 37,733 − 10,227 6,146
2020         Q1 198,351 168,099 83,086 75,420 9,593 18,875 + 11,377 6,855
         Q2 158,161 135,185 68,653 59,557 6,974 25,107 − 2,131 6,997         Q3 182,202 156,397 78,502 72,613 5,282 25,234 + 571 9,705         Q4 201,167 172,557 83,140 78,475 10,942 38,700 − 10,090 6,709
2021         Q1 189,223 159,178 72,814 73,137 13,227 19,882 + 10,163 6,887
         Q2 ... 163,158 81,129 74,024 8,005 ... ... 7,438
2020         June . 60,105 32,457 27,069 580 . . 2,320
2021         June . 68,159 34,809 31,309 2,041 . . 2,479
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget. 2Customs footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Domestic Import trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax 4 tion tax  5 tax 6 Total VAT VAT fers  8 taxes 9 taxes 9 duties taxes
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,3452017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,1412018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,5712019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,345 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,703 50,107
2019         Q1 175,216 82,996 50,923 17,453 9,194 5,426 60,402 46,018 14,384 121 23,968 6,531 1,197 12,519
         Q2 185,333 90,134 54,437 16,069 8,085 11,543 59,101 43,943 15,158 2,113 26,625 6,087 1,273 12,770         Q3 179,020 81,267 53,668 13,614 7,607 6,379 61,057 45,976 15,081 2,221 26,654 6,485 1,336 12,344         Q4 196,300 89,619 60,632 16,575 7,128 5,284 62,696 47,175 15,520 3,660 32,301 6,746 1,279 13,745
2020         Q1 181,350 88,009 53,389 18,711 8,495 7,415 60,060 46,038 14,022 244 24,517 7,406 1,114 13,251
         Q2 146,360 69,928 50,760 10,633 2,348 6,187 44,262 31,625 12,638 1,170 23,525 6,326 1,149 11,175         Q3 168,308 73,766 47,470 13,492 5,411 7,392 59,819 47,933 11,886 796 25,930 6,784 1,212 11,910         Q4 186,327 89,094 57,667 16,146 8,014 7,268 55,343 43,105 12,238 1,744 31,660 7,259 1,227 13,770
2021         Q1 171,881 86,381 50,854 17,826 10,203 7,498 54,795 45,403 9,392 252 21,712 7,757 983 12,703
         Q2 175,242 84,505 50,783 14,347 8,860 10,515 57,634 43,399 14,235 1,215 23,210 7,398 1,281 12,085
2020         June 65,343 38,170 18,083 12,345 5,054 2,688 16,334 12,402 3,932 − 2 8,331 2,154 357 5,238
2021         June 73,759 45,695 18,426 14,247 7,632 5,391 16,578 13,615 2,962 3 8,515 2,575 393 5,600
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike plans. 4After deducting employee refunds and tax allowance for research. 5After
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens deducting tax allowance for research. 6Final withholding tax on interest income and
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 7The allocation of revenue to central,
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular interv als, is regulated
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local in Section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central,
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- state and local government in revenue for 2020: 43.0:52.9:4.1. The EU s hare is
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- deducted from central government’s share. 8Respective percentage share of central
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After and state government for 2020: 39.8:60.2. 9 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 
deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
August 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,9662018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,2032019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,651 14,553 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2019         Q1 4,848 4,679 2,495 6,542 2,594 1,646 579 586 3,976 1,705 499 351 17,959 14,139 3,350
         Q2 9,937 5,257 3,588 2,543 2,491 1,659 485 665 3,667 1,660 513 247 19,163 14,869 3,881         Q3 10,519 4,624 3,667 2,770 2,251 1,639 515 668 3,923 1,824 474 264 17,118 12,659 4,019         Q4 15,379 5,086 4,507 2,281 2,035 1,745 538 730 4,223 1,798 488 237 17,422 13,861 3,190
2020         Q1 4,966 4,930 2,413 6,766 2,634 1,708 562 537 4,525 1,981 542 358 17,245 13,391 3,403
         Q2 8,117 4,235 3,772 2,606 2,426 1,585 455 328 3,566 2,154 425 181 12,971 8,842 3,895         Q3 9,985 4,365 3,978 2,817 2,366 1,499 506 414 3,730 2,262 509 283 14,690 10,242 4,095         Q4 14,566 5,145 4,487 2,365 2,101 1,768 715 513 4,234 2,203 567 254 16,584 12,997 3,283
2021         Q1 4,126 3,171 2,585 6,776 2,567 1,692 395 400 4,716 2,110 578 353 17,594 13,798 3,503
         Q2 8,717 2,546 4,053 2,843 2,469 1,640 528 413 4,231 2,374 538 255 ... ... ...
2020         June 2,663 2,202 1,106 713 782 611 156 98 1,199 742 148 65 . . .
2021         June 3,180 1,559 1,336 760 881 521 145 132 1,445 847 196 87 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  
3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,0322018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,0082019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 + 1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 303 56 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 − 3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 344 55 3,901
2018         Q1 74,368 51,726 22,489 75,482 64,885 4,569 − 1,114 34,219 32,775 1,146 240 58 4,029
         Q2 77,824 55,186 22,451 75,747 64,742 4,557 + 2,077 36,244 34,963 983 241 57 4,033         Q3 76,831 54,085 22,575 78,284 67,017 4,727 − 1,453 35,344 34,104 936 248 57 4,019         Q4 82,953 60,561 22,185 78,432 67,042 4,729 + 4,521 40,353 38,332 1,713 252 56 4,018
2019         Q1 77,984 54,393 23,426 78,630 67,328 5,087 − 646 39,432 37,637 1,474 263 57 4,001
         Q2 81,410 57,837 23,408 80,804 69,011 5,205 + 605 40,232 38,639 1,272 264 57 3,996         Q3 80,305 56,637 23,481 82,716 70,633 5,330 − 2,411 38,386 36,876 1,183 271 56 3,995         Q4 86,756 63,133 23,413 82,849 70,674 5,333 + 3,907 42,945 40,539 2,074 276 56 3,987
2020         Q1 80,578 55,999 24,436 82,622 70,829 5,346 − 2,045 40,840 38,636 1,848 300 56 3,966
         Q2 82,098 57,515 24,413 82,875 70,889 5,346 − 777 39,779 37,975 1,446 304 55 3,949         Q3 82,689 58,109 24,418 86,497 74,054 5,591 − 3,808 36,898 35,197 1,333 313 55 3,925         Q4 88,978 64,375 24,412 86,605 73,879 5,576 + 2,373 39,847 38,186 1,286 321 55 3,916
2021         Q1 83,066 57,351 25,542 86,048 73,799 5,600 − 2,982 36,888 35,326 1,166 342 54 3,887
         Q2 86,386 60,666 25,545 86,486 73,905 5,679 − 100 36,941 35,554 988 345 53 3,871
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
August 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- Government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy funds Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment payment iture  5 surplus ment
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −2018 39,335 34,172 622 − 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 . 588 8,129 + 6,228 −2019 35,285 29,851 638 − 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 . 842 6,252 + 2,131 −
2020 33,678 28,236 630 − 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 . 1,214 6,076 − 27,335 −
2018         Q1 9,167 7,926 151 − 9,546 3,826 415 1,742 . 174 2,625 − 379 −
         Q2 9,713 8,523 152 − 8,471 3,431 245 1,752 . 161 2,209 + 1,243 −         Q3 9,515 8,355 152 − 7,288 3,296 50 1,623 . 114 1,514 + 2,227 −         Q4 10,940 9,367 167 − 7,802 3,204 51 1,834 . 139 1,781 + 3,138 −
2019         Q1 8,369 7,027 148 − 8,597 3,969 403 1,818 . 179 1,450 − 228 −
         Q2 8,685 7,440 156 − 8,136 3,673 204 1,832 . 243 1,475 + 549 −         Q3 8,650 7,263 162 − 7,829 3,682 68 1,711 . 190 1,510 + 821 −         Q4 9,581 8,121 172 − 8,592 3,685 98 1,941 . 230 1,816 + 989 −
2020         Q1 8,123 6,851 153 − 9,301 4,469 392 1,934 . 235 1,470 − 1,179 −
         Q2 7,906 6,691 151 − 17,005 4,869 7,977 1,793 . 254 1,407 − 9,099 −         Q3 8,350 6,934 153 − 18,619 5,737 8,637 1,701 . 472 1,414 − 10,269 −         Q4 9,299 7,760 174 − 16,088 5,543 5,712 1,957 . 251 1,785 − 6,789 −
2021         Q1 8,228 6,747 289 − 18,260 5,956 8,006 1,935 . 184 1,391 − 10,033 −
         Q2 8,830 7,301 324 − 16,720 5,029 7,495 1,912 . 108 1,452 − 7,890 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- courage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promotion
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- of business start-ups. 5Including collection charges to other social security funds , ex-
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring meas- job seekers. ures and refunds of social contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to en-
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which: of which:
Central Remedies Adminis-
govern- and trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental therapeutic Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 appliances benefits iture  5 surplus
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 7572017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,0412018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 + 2,6542019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 − 1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 − 6,110
2018         Q1 57,788 53,670 3,625 59,854 19,028 9,569 10,045 3,656 3,763 3,370 2,614 − 2,067
         Q2 59,796 55,571 3,625 60,060 18,677 9,591 10,049 3,639 3,904 3,294 2,821 − 264         Q3 60,138 55,778 3,625 59,204 18,302 9,600 9,862 3,481 4,070 3,155 2,810 + 934         Q4 64,645 59,893 3,625 60,689 18,537 9,806 10,067 3,677 4,157 3,272 3,236 + 3,956
2019         Q1 59,809 55,622 3,625 62,485 19,586 9,947 10,386 3,738 4,106 3,649 2,707 − 2,676
         Q2 62,121 57,858 3,625 62,858 19,210 10,127 10,421 3,821 4,289 3,535 2,774 − 736         Q3 62,143 57,763 3,625 62,716 19,109 10,229 10,278 3,630 4,467 3,558 2,804 − 573         Q4 67,094 61,884 3,625 64,075 19,497 10,353 10,455 3,821 4,713 3,659 2,975 + 3,019
2020         Q1 61,949 57,419 3,625 66,438 20,049 11,086 10,806 3,804 4,470 4,061 2,816 − 4,489
         Q2 68,108 58,096 9,359 69,487 17,674 10,492 10,908 3,389 3,986 4,143 2,980 − 1,378         Q3 70,130 59,403 10,151 71,063 20,913 10,567 11,642 3,774 4,852 3,829 2,970 − 934         Q4 68,645 62,672 4,805 67,987 19,887 10,729 11,019 3,891 4,725 3,920 3,039 + 658
2021         Q1 72,970 59,338 13,303 72,660 19,631 11,175 11,564 4,069 4,564 4,287 2,967 + 310
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, i.e. after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social security funds. sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
August 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1 
of which:
Inpatient Contributions to
of which: Non-cash care Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits  3 total 4 benefit ance scheme  5 expenditure surplus
2014 25,974 25,893 25,457 4,260 11,892 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 4,626 13,003 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 4,904 13,539 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,5572018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 − 3,3152019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2018         Q1 8,961 8,948 10,146 1,907 4,025 2,603 496 424 − 1,185
         Q2 9,338 9,322 10,118 1,854 4,016 2,658 509 389 − 780         Q3 9,349 9,334 10,428 1,928 4,073 2,781 515 397 − 1,079         Q4 10,071 10,050 10,581 1,972 4,091 2,835 561 384 − 510
2019         Q1 11,123 10,938 10,728 2,060 4,082 2,833 547 437 + 396
         Q2 11,795 11,620 10,812 2,012 4,132 2,868 588 449 + 983         Q3 11,734 11,557 11,159 2,098 4,234 2,972 598 450 + 576         Q4 12,592 12,413 11,252 2,062 4,243 3,064 626 433 + 1,339
2020         Q1 11,693 11,473 11,444 2,186 4,214 3,067 633 489 + 249
         Q2 11,921 11,732 11,816 2,051 4,015 3,173 664 468 + 105         Q3 13,924 11,938 12,890 2,263 4,087 3,249 682 500 + 1,033         Q4 13,079 12,746 12,927 2,306 4,177 3,403 716 481 + 152
2021         Q1 12,093 11,831 13,344 2,355 3,971 3,387 725 512 − 1,251
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *The final annual figures generally differ from the ance contributions). 3Data revision in 2014. 4From 2014, also including benefits for
total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter al ia.5For non-pro-
sequently. 1Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund. 2Since 2005, fessional carers. 
including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
 market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,216,204 12,774 635,562 190,130 44,640 1,333,098
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,189,119 85,952 622,130 186,661 48,583 1,245,794
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,172,331 205,391 599,211 179,755 45,046 1,142,9292017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017 2,122,863 319,159 553,119 175,617 42,121 1,032,8472018 + 167,231 − 16,248 − 91 − 1,670 2018 2,074,126 364,731 509,310 181,077 42,009 976,9992019 + 185,070 + 63 − 8,044 − 914 2019  
p 2,057,627 366,562 476,418 177,601 49,707 987,340
2020 + 456,828 + 217,904 + 24,181 − 3,399 2020  p 2,325,463 522,392 509,440 184,701 52,392 1,056,539
2018         Q1 + 42,934 − 4,946 − 5,138 + 3,569 2018          Q1 2,100,909 329,387 530,483 176,495 42,221 1,022,323
         Q2 + 43,602 − 5,954 − 166 − 6,139          Q2 2,086,389 344,279 514,817 179,856 41,938 1,005,498         Q3 + 46,500 + 4,856 + 1,688 + 1,871          Q3 2,086,851 356,899 503,066 180,464 42,726 1,003,696         Q4 + 34,195 − 10,205 + 3,525 − 971          Q4 2,074,126 364,731 509,310 181,077 42,009 976,999
2019         Q1 + 56,654 + 3,281 − 2,172 − 1,199 2019          Q1  
p 2,084,397 359,884 499,217 179,512 42,186 1,003,596
         Q2 + 48,545 + 5,491 − 279 + 7,227          Q2  p 2,074,778 361,032 492,533 179,168 41,438 1,000,607
         Q3 + 48,053 + 4,030 + 176 − 5,093          Q3  p 2,091,734 358,813 490,314 179,228 47,831 1,015,548
         Q4 + 31,817 − 12,738 − 5,768 − 1,849          Q4  p 2,057,627 366,562 476,418 177,601 49,707 987,340
2020         Q1 + 65,656 + 31,296 + 9,236 + 1,698 2020          Q1  p 2,103,218 371,076 497,181 180,477 48,790 1,005,694
         Q2 + 185,560 + 126,585 + 31,212 − 7,314          Q2  p 2,272,296 424,141 562,304 181,288 48,488 1,056,075
         Q3 + 159,067 + 80,783 − 6,080 + 588          Q3  p 2,344,818 468,723 533,949 184,051 49,675 1,108,421
         Q4 + 46,545 − 20,760 − 10,187 + 1,629          Q4  p 2,325,463 522,392 509,440 184,701 52,392 1,056,539
2021         Q1 + 109,953 + 42,045 − 11,737 − 4,708 2021          Q1  p 2,366,746 561,443 490,853 182,756 61,467 1,070,227
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
August 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2014 2,216,204 12,150 72,618 1,501,494 95,896 534,046 . .
2015 2,189,119 14,303 65,676 1,499,010 89,074 521,055 . .2016 2,172,331 15,845 69,715 1,483,871 94,976 507,924 . .2017 2,122,863 14,651 48,789 1,484,462 86,513 488,448 . .
2018         Q1 2,100,909 12,472 48,431 1,479,513 76,260 484,233 . .
         Q2 2,086,389 12,636 54,933 1,465,727 73,256 479,837 . .         Q3 2,086,851 15,607 59,989 1,465,852 68,923 476,479 . .         Q4 2,074,126 14,833 52,572 1,456,543 75,999 474,180 . .
2019         Q1  
p 2,084,397 15,663 64,218 1,460,634 71,234 472,647 . .
         Q2  p 2,074,778 12,868 56,256 1,463,027 74,511 468,115 . .
         Q3  p 2,091,734 17,586 62,602 1,465,529 79,144 466,873 . .
         Q4  p 2,057,627 14,595 49,180 1,459,128 68,519 466,204 . .
2020         Q1  p 2,103,218 11,590 70,930 1,472,976 84,528 463,195 . .
         Q2  p 2,272,296 13,333 122,238 1,534,559 142,298 459,867 . .
         Q3  p 2,344,818 12,134 180,449 1,582,940 110,399 458,896 . .
         Q4  p 2,325,463 14,768 163,408 1,593,572 95,780 457,934 . .
2021         Q1  p 2,366,746 12,482 180,796 1,638,203 80,743 454,523 . .
Central government
2014 1,398,475 12,150 64,230 1,141,973 54,388 125,735 1,202 12,926
2015 1,372,287 14,303 49,512 1,138,951 45,256 124,265 1,062 13,6672016 1,365,933 15,845 55,208 1,123,853 50,004 121,022 556 8,5672017 1,350,298 14,651 36,297 1,131,896 47,761 119,693 1,131 10,618
2018         Q1 1,337,700 12,472 35,923 1,132,746 37,211 119,348 1,065 9,902
         Q2 1,329,290 12,636 42,888 1,119,893 35,048 118,825 1,036 10,708         Q3 1,335,530 15,607 46,614 1,118,470 36,633 118,207 817 10,275         Q4 1,323,058 14,833 42,246 1,107,140 42,057 116,782 933 9,975
2019         Q1  
p 1,324,528 15,663 50,032 1,102,604 39,185 117,044 809 11,583
         Q2  p 1,320,389 12,868 42,752 1,109,057 38,950 116,761 835 13,862
         Q3  p 1,328,106 17,586 48,934 1,105,439 39,067 117,080 704 13,849
         Q4  p 1,299,848 14,595 38,480 1,101,866 28,592 116,315 605 10,302
2020         Q1  p 1,327,699 11,590 56,680 1,103,935 38,708 116,785 546 8,245
         Q2  p 1,473,910 13,333 109,221 1,139,513 95,511 116,332 510 7,278
         Q3  p 1,536,930 12,134 166,564 1,178,717 62,993 116,522 555 12,092
         Q4  p 1,513,212 14,768 154,505 1,180,714 46,895 116,330 545 15,021
2021         Q1  p 1,538,824 12,482 167,492 1,212,526 29,945 116,379 598 23,438
State government
2014 658,164 − 8,391 361,916 19,245 268,612 14,825 2,297
2015 658,234 − 16,169 362,376 22,133 257,557 15,867 2,3482016 640,887 − 14,515 361,996 19,266 245,110 11,273 1,6942017 613,601 − 12,543 354,688 18,412 227,958 14,038 2,046
2018         Q1 604,075 − 12,548 349,682 17,372 224,473 12,997 1,882
         Q2 600,595 − 12,073 348,833 17,668 222,020 13,952 2,018         Q3 599,864 − 13,392 350,399 15,235 220,838 13,674 1,936         Q4 599,845 − 10,332 352,376 17,647 219,490 14,035 1,891
2019         Q1  
p 611,666 − 14,190 361,293 18,657 217,525 15,229 2,004
         Q2  p 609,889 − 13,508 357,571 24,068 214,743 17,631 1,887
         Q3  p 619,883 − 13,671 363,723 29,048 213,440 17,755 1,957
         Q4  p 609,428 − 10,703 361,084 25,049 212,593 14,934 1,831
2020         Q1  p 624,364 − 14,252 372,596 29,567 207,949 12,233 1,815
         Q2  p 645,947 − 13,020 398,890 29,269 204,767 11,073 2,183
         Q3  p 655,524 − 13,888 408,581 30,216 202,839 11,940 2,263
         Q4  p 662,523 − 8,905 417,432 33,717 202,469 12,226 1,553
2021         Q1  p 673,903 − 13,306 430,276 32,683 197,638 11,303 2,276
Local government
2014 176,120 − − 1,297 26,009 148,814 1,959 734
2015 176,259 − − 2,047 27,414 146,798 2,143 4632016 178,016 − − 2,404 26,941 148,671 1,819 4312017 175,220 − − 3,082 24,503 147,636 1,881 466
2018         Q1 173,997 − − 2,426 24,662 146,909 1,777 460
         Q2 172,519 − − 2,561 24,467 145,490 1,909 465         Q3 167,189 − 1 2,703 20,543 143,943 2,031 485         Q4 167,403 − 1 3,046 20,344 144,012 1,884 497
2019         Q1  
p 165,673 − 1 2,960 18,801 143,911 2,139 498
         Q2  p 164,257 − − 2,961 18,757 142,538 2,016 525
         Q3  p 163,691 − − 3,016 18,517 142,158 2,065 555
         Q4  p 165,057 − − 2,996 19,052 143,009 1,862 532
2020         Q1  p 165,068 − − 3,128 18,125 143,816 1,893 528
         Q2  p 165,279 − − 3,094 18,306 143,879 2,221 367
         Q3  p 166,525 − − 2,961 18,913 144,651 2,312 398
         Q4  p 163,614 − − 3,101 16,186 144,327 1,595 317
2021         Q1  p 167,876 − − 3,121 19,076 145,679 2,293 340
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
August 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2014 1,524 − − − 481 1,043 94 2,122
2015 1,502 − − − 537 965 91 2,6852016 1,232 − − − 562 670 89 3,0442017 807 − − − 262 545 15 3,934
2018         Q1 990 − − − 439 551 15 3,610
         Q2 898 − − − 398 500 15 3,721         Q3 805 − − − 415 390 15 3,841         Q4 690 − − − 388 302 16 4,506
2019         Q1  
p 723 − − − 453 270 16 4,110
         Q2  p 742 − − − 557 185 16 4,224
         Q3  p 594 − − − 391 203 16 4,179
         Q4  p 712 − − − 376 336 16 4,753
2020         Q1  p 775 − − − 287 488 16 4,100
         Q2  p 980 − − − 581 399 16 3,993
         Q3  p 4,602 − − − 4,210 392 3,956 4,011
         Q4  p 7,409 − − − 7,098 311 6,929 4,404
2021         Q1  p 16,191 − − − 15,997 194 15,853 3,995
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3 
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 day bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 987,909 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 63,650
2008 1,019,905 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 78,6852009 1,086,173 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 63,121
2010 1,337,160 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 242,251
2011 1,346,869 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 215,1092012 1,390,377 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 203,4672013 1,392,745 10,592 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 190,1272014 1,398,475 12,150 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 180,123
2015 1,372,287 14,303 1,070 1,188,463 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,521
2016 1,365,933 15,845 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,0262017 1,350,298 14,651 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,4552018 1,323,058 14,833 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,8392019 
p 1,299,848 14,595 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,906
2020 p 1,513,212 14,768 . 1,335,219 808,300 183,046 58,279 − 3,692 98,543 113,141 . 163,225
2018         Q1 1,337,700 12,472 951 1,168,669 699,638 193,811 60,778 14,455 4,421 94,282 9,031 219 156,559
         Q2 1,329,290 12,636 941 1,162,780 710,784 185,042 62,863 − 4,276 92,639 15,049 141 153,873         Q3 1,335,530 15,607 932 1,165,084 703,682 194,356 64,304 − 4,548 90,575 17,340 75 154,840         Q4 1,323,058 14,833 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,839
2019         Q1  
p 1,324,528 15,663 902 1,152,636 709,008 178,900 66,531 − 4,191 89,782 18,288 31 156,229
         Q2  p 1,320,389 12,868 852 1,151,809 720,904 173,313 68,110 − 5,691 91,024 15,042 19 155,711
         Q3  p 1,328,106 17,586 822 1,154,373 711,482 183,268 69,088 − 5,639 90,416 18,100 − 156,147
         Q4  p 1,299,848 14,595 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,906
2020         Q1  p 1,327,699 11,590 . 1,160,616 721,343 182,095 71,028 − 5,310 91,084 23,572 . 155,493
         Q2  p 1,473,910 13,333 . 1,248,734 774,587 178,329 56,061 − 3,752 95,622 79,987 . 211,843
         Q3  p 1,536,930 12,134 . 1,345,281 796,338 191,388 57,144 − 3,737 99,276 127,478 . 179,515
         Q4  p 1,513,212 14,768 . 1,335,219 808,300 183,046 58,279 − 3,692 98,543 113,141 . 163,225
2021         Q1  p 1,538,824 12,482 . 1,380,018 821,254 194,571 60,687 − 3,857 103,910 134,800 . 146,324
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by the
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
off-budget entities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
August 2021
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
    
  
  2019   2020   2021
  2018   2019   2020   2018   2019   2020   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2015 = 100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
  I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector(excluding construction) 109.3 105.4 95.3 0.7 − 3.6 − 9.6 − 2.9 − 4.3 − 5.7 − 21.3 − 9.6 − 1.8 − 1.2Construction 103.7 107.3 111.3 1.7 3.5 3.8 4.7 1.4 6.1 2.0 − 1.7 8.8 − 3.6Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 107.5 109.7 103.8 2.3 2.1 − 5.4 3.4 1.7 − 0.1 − 14.2 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 8.2Information and communication 115.8 120.2 119.2 7.0 3.8 − 0.8 4.2 2.8 0.3 − 3.4 − 0.7 0.4 0.7Financial and insuranceactivities 97.1 99.1 98.7 − 3.6 2.0 − 0.4 3.6 1.9 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 0.4Real estate activities 100.8 101.8 101.4 0.3 1.0 − 0.4 1.2 1.5 0.6 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.0 0.2Business services  
1 109.8 110.8 102.5 2.4 0.9 − 7.4 1.0 0.7 − 1.7 − 12.6 − 8.7 − 7.1 − 5.7
Public services, education andhealth 105.7 107.4 104.1 1.4 1.6 − 3.1 1.9 1.5 − 0.6 − 8.2 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.0Other services 101.0 102.1 90.5 1.6 1.1 − 11.4 1.6 0.7 − 2.4 − 20.3 − 6.0 − 17.1 − 13.9
Gross value added 106.4 106.9 101.6 1.3 0.4 − 4.9 1.1 0.0 − 1.5 − 11.5 − 4.2 − 2.7 − 3.5Gross domestic product  
2 106.2 106.8 101.7 1.3 0.6 − 4.8 1.2 0.2 − 1.8 − 11.3 − 3.7 − 2.3 − 3.4
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 105.6 107.2 100.9 1.5 1.6 − 6.0 2.2 1.0 − 1.3 − 13.3 − 3.7 − 5.5 − 9.1
Government consumption 107.0 109.9 114.0 1.2 2.7 3.7 3.6 3.2 2.7 4.4 4.2 3.5 2.5Machinery and equipment 112.1 112.7 99.6 4.4 0.5 − 11.6 1.7 − 2.7 − 9.2 − 23.6 − 10.0 − 4.1 − 0.7Premises 107.4 111.5 114.1 2.6 3.8 2.3 4.1 2.2 5.3 0.6 − 0.8 4.9 − 1.6Other investment  
4 114.2 117.3 116.0 4.5 2.7 − 1.1 2.9 2.6 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.7
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.8 − 1.2 0.0
Domestic demand 107.7 109.0 104.6 1.8 1.2 − 4.1 0.9 0.2 − 0.6 − 8.5 − 3.8 − 3.4 − 4.6
Net exports  6 . . . − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.9 0.4 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.1 0.9 0.9
Exports 109.8 110.8 100.5 2.3 1.0 − 9.4 2.7 0.8 − 3.2 − 22.2 − 9.2 − 3.1 − 0.6Imports 114.1 117.0 107.1 3.6 2.6 − 8.4 2.0 0.9 − 0.8 − 17.4 − 10.0 − 5.6 − 3.0
Gross domestic product  
2 106.2 106.8 101.7 1.3 0.6 − 4.8 1.2 0.2 − 1.8 − 11.3 − 3.7 − 2.3 − 3.4
At current prices ( € billion)
III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,755.4 1,806.9 1,711.6 3.0 2.9 − 5.3 3.6 2.3 0.4 − 12.1 − 3.9 − 5.4 − 7.3
Government consumption 670.3 704.5 754.4 3.4 5.1 7.1 6.0 5.4 5.7 7.9 7.5 7.2 6.4Machinery and equipment 235.6 240.1 215.1 5.0 1.9 − 10.4 3.3 − 1.2 − 7.8 − 22.6 − 8.8 − 3.1 0.3Premises 344.9 373.7 388.8 7.4 8.4 4.0 8.3 6.0 8.7 3.4 − 0.3 5.3 0.2Other investment  
4 128.8 134.2 134.6 6.9 4.2 0.3 4.3 4.1 0.3 0.0 0.7 0.3 0.6
Changes in inventories  5 15.0 − 10.3 − 61.7 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,150.0 3,249.1 3,142.7 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 2.7 2.0 1.3 − 7.8 − 3.7 − 2.9 − 2.5
Net exports 206.4 199.9 193.5 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,590.0 1,617.4 1,460.1 3.3 1.7 − 9.7 3.0 1.2 − 2.9 − 22.5 − 9.9 − 3.8 0.3Imports 1,383.6 1,417.4 1,266.7 5.6 2.4 − 10.6 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.8 − 21.1 − 12.3 − 7.4 − 2.5
Gross domestic product  
2 3,356.4 3,449.1 3,336.2 3.0 2.8 − 3.3 3.6 2.5 0.6 − 9.2 − 3.0 − 1.6 − 1.1
IV. Prices (2015 = 100)
Private consumption 103.7 105.1 105.9 1.5 1.3 0.7 1.4 1.3 1.7 1.4 − 0.2 0.2 2.0Gross domestic product 104.4 106.7 108.4 1.7 2.2 1.6 2.4 2.3 2.5 2.3 0.7 0.8 2.3Terms of trade 100.1 100.9 103.0 − 0.8 0.9 2.1 1.4 1.5 1.4 4.2 1.8 1.1 0.5
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,771.8 1,845.9 1,843.6 4.5 4.2 − 0.1 4.5 3.5 3.0 − 3.2 − 0.5 0.4 − 0.4Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 738.3 718.2 657.5 − 0.5 − 2.7 − 8.4 0.1 − 3.4 − 3.7 − 24.3 − 6.8 − 0.5 4.0
National income 2,510.1 2,564.1 2,501.1 3.0 2.2 − 2.5 3.1 1.7 0.9 − 8.8 − 2.4 0.2 0.9
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,447.4 3,542.8 3,431.2 3.3 2.8 − 3.2 3.5 2.3 0.7 − 8.8 − 3.1 − 1.6 − 1.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2021. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy TotalInter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2015 = 100
% of total  1   100      14,04      6,37      79,59      29,45      36,98 2.27      10,89      10,31      9,95      12,73      14,16
Period
2017 104.9 108.7 98.9 104.7 104.9 105.0 106.9 103.0 106.2 107.0 104.1 105.3
2018 2 105.9 2 109.1 97.4 106.0 105.5 106.0 106.2 106.9 107.3 108.9 106.5 103.5
2019 102.5 112.8 90.4 101.6 101.8 101.4 106.2 101.0 102.8 106.5 103.4 92.0
2020 94.1 116.1 84.4 91.0 94.9 85.7 97.6 97.2 90.5 98.5 89.5 69.4
2020 Q2 84.3 115.8 72.8 79.6 85.6 70.9 84.3 92.0 78.8 88.3 81.3 44.1
Q3 93.7 118.5 78.8 90.5 94.4 84.8 97.9 98.0 89.7 97.1 86.6 71.7
Q4 101.8 130.7 91.8 97.5 98.3 95.9 106.5 99.0 95.4 105.3 98.5 81.4
2021 Q1 95.0 94.8 92.0 95.2 103.6 88.1 100.7 96.1 99.4 107.0 91.3 75.4
x,p Q2 97.5 117.7 81.7 95.1 104.3 86.6 102.8 97.8 99.9 108.1 94.2 66.8
2020 June 93.8 121.7 74.0 90.5 89.9 88.6 97.2 96.8 86.0 94.5 96.5 72.1
July 93.7 119.9 75.7 90.5 93.3 86.0 92.7 97.5 86.5 94.4 86.4 76.1
Aug. 88.0 113.7 80.7 84.1 91.1 75.3 91.6 93.6 85.7 93.7 78.8 57.2
Sep. 99.4 121.8 79.9 97.0 98.8 93.0 109.5 102.8 96.9 103.1 94.6 81.9
Oct. 101.7 124.7 91.3 98.5 102.7 93.3 108.7 102.8 99.0 104.5 90.3 85.6
Nov. 106.0 130.4 91.8 102.8 104.2 101.4 114.4 101.6 103.1 111.1 98.8 92.5
Dec. 97.6 137.1 92.2 91.1 87.9 92.9 96.5 92.5 84.2 100.3 106.5 66.1
2021 Jan. 88.6 76.3 97.5 90.0 100.2 80.9 95.6 92.4 94.1 100.4 82.1 70.8
Feb. 90.9 88.9 86.5 91.6 99.3 85.6 99.2 89.8 96.6 104.2 88.2 74.1
Mar. 105.4 119.2 92.1 104.1 111.2 97.7 107.3 106.2 107.6 116.5 103.6 81.2
x Apr. 97.5 117.0 86.4 94.9 103.8 87.8 101.6 93.4 99.8 107.0 93.9 71.3
x May 96.3 116.4 81.1 94.0 104.4 84.3 100.1 97.6 98.7 106.5 92.3 64.1
x,p June 98.6 119.7 77.7 96.5 104.8 87.6 106.6 102.3 101.3 110.8 96.3 65.1
Annual percentage change
2017 + 3.3 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.1 + 3.7 + 4.2 + 2.1 + 4.5 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 3.2
2018 2+ 1.0 2+ 0.4 – 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 – 0.7 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 2.3 – 1.7
2019 – 3.2 + 3.4 – 7.2 – 4.2 – 3.5 – 4.3 ± 0.0 – 5.5 – 4.2 – 2.2 – 2.9 –11.1
2020 – 8.2 + 2.9 – 6.6 –10.4 – 6.8 –15.5 – 8.1 – 3.8 –12.0 – 7.5 –13.4 –24.6
2020 Q2 –18.0 + 1.8 –12.9 –22.2 –17.2 –30.6 –18.2 – 7.7 –24.9 –15.8 –20.8 –53.8
Q3 – 8.4 – 0.5 – 2.9 –10.4 – 7.5 –15.3 – 6.1 – 3.1 –12.7 – 9.7 –15.1 –19.5
Q4 – 1.7 + 5.0 – 2.7 – 3.0 + 1.1 – 6.0 – 2.5 – 3.7 – 1.9 – 0.6 – 9.2 – 4.2
2021 Q1 – 1.7 – 4.6 – 2.3 – 1.1 + 2.3 – 3.3 – 0.9 – 3.8 + 1.3 + 3.5 – 0.1 – 5.9
x,p Q2 +15.7 + 1.6 +12.2 +19.5 +21.9 +22.1 +21.9 + 6.3 +26.8 +22.4 +15.8 +51.4
2020 June –10.5 + 3.7 – 5.6 –13.5 –13.1 –17.2 – 8.8 – 2.6 –18.9 –12.7 –11.6 –26.0
July – 9.5 – 1.6 – 7.0 –11.3 –10.0 –14.9 – 7.0 – 3.9 –17.1 –10.5 –16.0 –16.4
Aug. – 9.0 – 0.1 + 0.5 –11.5 – 7.4 –17.4 – 4.4 – 5.1 –11.8 – 9.1 –16.2 –25.5
Sep. – 6.9 + 0.3 – 2.2 – 8.7 – 4.9 –14.0 – 6.6 – 0.3 – 9.0 – 9.5 –13.2 –17.8
Oct. – 3.1 + 2.4 – 0.7 – 4.4 – 2.1 – 6.3 – 4.6 – 4.0 – 5.2 – 3.9 –10.1 – 4.8
Nov. – 2.5 + 3.1 – 3.6 – 3.6 + 0.9 – 6.5 – 1.6 – 5.4 – 1.9 + 0.1 – 9.0 – 5.5
Dec. + 0.8 + 9.4 – 3.8 – 0.8 + 5.5 – 4.9 – 0.9 – 1.3 + 2.3 + 2.1 – 8.5 – 1.5
2021 Jan. – 3.7 – 9.9 – 2.6 – 2.9 + 1.6 – 6.0 – 3.4 – 5.7 – 1.1 + 0.8 – 0.6 –12.6
Feb. – 6.6 – 7.6 – 5.7 – 6.5 – 1.7 –10.2 – 4.3 – 8.1 – 2.1 + 1.5 – 3.3 –19.6
Mar. + 4.9 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 5.9 + 6.9 + 6.3 + 5.1 + 2.1 + 6.7 + 8.1 + 3.2 +20.8
x Apr. +27.6 + 4.0 +18.7 +35.0 +25.2 +61.1 +44.1 + 4.2 +36.3 +27.7 +34.1 +385.0
x May +16.6 + 2.8 +13.1 +20.4 +24.3 +21.1 +17.4 + 9.1 +27.7 +23.0 +19.1 +40.6
x,p June + 5.1 – 1.6 + 5.0 + 6.6 +16.6 – 1.1 + 9.7 + 5.7 +17.8 +17.2 – 0.2 – 9.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2015.  2 As of January 2018 weights in structural and civilengineering work corrected by the Federal Statistical Office.  x Provisional; estimated
and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the Quarterly
Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry,
respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2017 108.6 + 7.8 109.4 +10.6 108.5 + 6.5 105.7 + 5.1 116.5 +10.6 102.2 + 3.2
2018 110.5 + 1.7 111.5 + 1.9 109.9 + 1.3 110.0 + 4.1 118.9 + 2.1 107.1 + 4.8
2019 104.9 – 5.1 103.5 – 7.2 105.4 – 4.1 107.0 – 2.7 123.3 + 3.7 101.6 – 5.1
2020 97.2 – 7.3 97.9 – 5.4 95.6 – 9.3 105.8 – 1.1 124.4 + 0.9 99.6 – 2.0
2020 June 96.1 –11.4 86.0 –18.3 102.0 – 8.0 98.9 – 6.2 115.0 – 5.0 93.6 – 6.6
July 96.4 – 6.8 94.4 – 8.2 96.4 – 6.3 105.5 – 4.6 120.3 – 1.2 100.6 – 5.9
Aug. 91.2 – 2.0 89.8 – 6.5 90.4 + 0.6 104.3 + 0.6 124.2 + 2.6 97.8 – 0.3
Sep. 104.2 – 1.2 101.7 + 1.6 104.8 – 3.3 111.6 + 3.0 146.4 + 4.7 100.1 + 2.1
Oct. 109.2 + 2.9 108.3 + 4.1 109.4 + 2.4 111.4 – 0.1 145.0 +13.2 100.3 – 5.4
Nov. 113.7 + 7.1 114.0 +10.4 113.9 + 6.2 110.2 – 1.3 138.2 + 0.1 101.0 – 1.8
Dec. 108.6 + 6.3 101.6 + 9.7 113.7 + 4.2 102.7 + 9.6 131.3 + 9.0 93.2 + 9.9
2021 Jan. 110.2 + 1.7 119.7 + 7.7 104.2 – 2.2 111.1 + 1.0 140.1 + 8.4 101.5 – 2.0
Feb. 111.4 + 6.6 116.8 +10.4 108.0 + 5.6 111.2 – 2.8 128.5 + 6.1 105.4 – 6.1
Mar. 129.0 +31.0 133.3 +23.1 127.0 +40.2 123.9 + 8.9 146.8 +19.4 116.3 + 5.1
Apr. 118.2 +84.4 126.2 +64.3 114.1 +116.5 111.4 +21.9 161.7 +84.4 94.8 + 2.5
May 114.3 +60.3 123.0 +60.4 109.0 +68.0 113.5 +19.3 157.0 +41.4 99.1 +10.2
p June 125.4 +30.5 127.7 +48.5 125.3 +22.8 116.0 +17.3 158.6 +37.9 102.0 + 9.0
From the domestic market
2017 107.0 + 7.2 107.1 + 9.7 107.8 + 5.9 101.6 + 3.7 108.7 + 5.4 99.3 + 3.1
2018 107.2 + 0.2 108.6 + 1.4 106.6 – 1.1 102.9 + 1.3 114.7 + 5.5 98.9 – 0.4
2019 101.2 – 5.6 99.1 – 8.7 102.9 – 3.5 101.2 – 1.7 116.2 + 1.3 96.1 – 2.8
2020 94.9 – 6.2 94.1 – 5.0 95.1 – 7.6 98.0 – 3.2 105.5 – 9.2 95.4 – 0.7
2020 June 104.3 + 3.4 81.3 –18.1 125.9 +22.4 91.2 – 5.2 100.4 – 5.0 88.1 – 5.3
July 95.2 – 6.9 93.5 – 7.1 96.0 – 7.2 99.1 – 4.5 104.5 – 8.8 97.3 – 2.9
Aug. 88.5 – 2.7 88.3 – 3.1 87.0 – 3.3 100.0 + 2.5 111.3 + 3.0 96.2 + 2.2
Sep. 99.5 – 0.9 95.3 ± 0.0 102.7 – 1.4 101.7 – 1.8 125.4 – 4.6 93.7 – 0.4
Oct. 104.5 + 5.6 106.8 + 8.5 102.6 + 4.3 104.4 – 2.3 119.6 – 9.3 99.3 + 0.8
Nov. 109.2 + 6.2 113.3 +12.4 106.3 + 2.7 104.6 – 4.6 124.3 – 8.4 97.9 – 2.9
Dec. 98.2 + 4.8 94.9 +12.7 102.1 – 0.3 91.0 + 1.9 104.1 – 3.0 86.5 + 4.0
2021 Jan. 103.0 + 1.6 112.7 + 6.9 95.4 – 2.7 98.1 – 3.1 111.0 + 6.3 93.7 – 6.4
Feb. 107.8 + 6.2 111.9 +12.1 105.3 + 2.9 101.2 – 3.9 108.4 + 5.7 98.7 – 7.1
Mar. 125.6 +30.2 128.8 +25.7 125.2 +39.7 109.8 + 0.9 130.5 +25.8 102.8 – 7.0
Apr. 110.9 +69.1 117.1 +59.3 107.0 +88.7 101.7 +26.8 126.9 +93.4 93.2 + 9.5
May 112.5 +50.6 118.5 +58.4 109.1 +50.3 100.9 +14.5 122.0 +22.2 93.8 +11.4
p June 126.2 +21.0 125.5 +54.4 130.2 + 3.4 103.7 +13.7 124.5 +24.0 96.7 + 9.8
From abroad
2017 109.8 + 8.2 111.9 +11.6 108.9 + 6.9 108.9 + 6.1 122.8 +14.7 104.5 + 3.4
2018 113.0 + 2.9 114.6 + 2.4 112.0 + 2.8 115.5 + 6.1 122.2 – 0.5 113.4 + 8.5
2019 107.7 – 4.7 108.3 – 5.5 106.9 – 4.6 111.5 – 3.5 129.1 + 5.6 105.9 – 6.6
2020 98.9 – 8.2 101.9 – 5.9 95.9 –10.3 111.8 + 0.3 139.6 + 8.1 102.9 – 2.8
2020 June 89.8 –21.4 91.0 –18.5 87.6 –24.3 104.8 – 6.8 126.7 – 5.1 97.8 – 7.5
July 97.3 – 6.7 95.4 – 9.2 96.7 – 5.8 110.4 – 4.7 133.0 + 4.2 103.1 – 8.0
Aug. 93.3 – 1.5 91.5 – 9.6 92.5 + 2.9 107.7 – 0.7 134.5 + 2.2 99.1 – 2.0
Sep. 107.8 – 1.4 108.6 + 3.1 106.1 – 4.3 119.2 + 6.3 163.3 +11.5 105.0 + 4.0
Oct. 112.7 + 1.1 110.0 ± 0.0 113.5 + 1.5 116.8 + 1.6 165.4 +32.2 101.1 – 9.6
Nov. 117.1 + 7.6 114.8 + 8.4 118.5 + 8.1 114.5 + 1.1 149.4 + 6.6 103.3 – 1.1
Dec. 116.5 + 7.3 108.9 + 7.1 120.7 + 6.6 111.8 +15.1 153.2 +16.9 98.4 +14.3
2021 Jan. 115.7 + 1.8 127.2 + 8.5 109.5 – 1.9 121.1 + 3.7 163.5 + 9.6 107.5 + 1.1
Feb. 114.1 + 6.9 122.1 + 8.7 109.7 + 7.2 118.9 – 2.1 144.7 + 6.5 110.6 – 5.3
Mar. 131.6 +31.5 138.1 +20.6 128.1 +40.5 134.8 +14.6 160.0 +15.6 126.6 +14.2
Apr. 123.7 +96.7 136.1 +69.5 118.4 +135.4 118.9 +18.9 189.7 +79.8 96.1 – 2.1
May 115.6 +68.0 127.9 +62.5 109.0 +80.8 123.2 +22.5 185.2 +54.2 103.2 + 9.4
p June 124.8 +39.0 130.0 +42.9 122.3 +39.6 125.6 +19.8 186.1 +46.9 106.1 + 8.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2017 122.4 +7.0 123.1 +7.0 123.1 +5.3 123.4 +7.4 121.9 +12.0 121.6 +6.9 119.8 +7.3 125.0 +7.8
2018 134.7 +10.0 131.1 +6.5 136.6 +11.0 127.9 +3.6 125.2 +2.7 138.8 +14.1 135.6 +13.2 132.4 +5.9
2019 146.0 +8.4 145.0 +10.6 150.1 +9.9 142.2 +11.2 138.9 +10.9 147.1 +6.0 147.9 +9.1 141.2 +6.6
2020 145.7 –0.2 144.3 –0.5 160.9 +7.2 130.5 –8.2 141.5 +1.9 147.3 +0.1 139.7 –5.5 143.4 +1.6
2020 May 138.8 –6.2 124.0 –14.5 146.7 –0.1 102.9 –31.2 128.0 +5.3 156.1 +3.0 121.3 –18.5 154.1 +4.3
June 167.7 +3.7 153.1 –5.0 165.0 +4.2 139.5 –14.2 164.8 +0.4 184.6 +13.7 144.3 –12.4 196.1 +22.4
July 149.1 –3.2 151.8 +2.6 157.9 +2.1 137.2 –3.6 185.9 +25.7 145.9 –9.3 136.8 –10.4 157.7 +1.7
Aug. 136.7 +1.6 135.4 –0.1 159.6 +14.6 114.0 –13.1 135.5 –2.7 138.3 +3.5 130.1 –5.1 130.5 +1.2
Sep. 151.5 +2.5 157.0 +7.2 173.4 +10.5 141.1 +8.3 162.1 –6.4 145.2 –2.7 146.2 +2.0 144.4 –2.1
Oct. 142.4 +4.0 150.8 +9.7 181.5 +17.2 127.1 +2.2 137.8 +6.3 132.6 –2.6 141.5 +4.6 119.6 –6.5
Nov. 139.6 –3.9 146.9 –5.0 167.7 +12.0 132.2 –20.6 133.4 +4.9 131.0 –2.5 143.8 –14.2 117.6 +0.4
Dec. 150.5 +1.6 147.8 –0.8 191.9 +7.7 117.9 –10.1 113.7 –4.6 153.7 +4.4 136.6 –11.4 141.3 +15.0
2021 Jan. 134.0 +3.6 140.5 +4.8 147.3 +7.2 146.0 +8.7 97.7 –20.4 126.5 +2.0 150.7 +6.8 106.8 –4.0
Feb. 143.2 +6.5 148.8 +4.1 161.1 +8.6 147.2 +4.5 114.1 –14.3 136.7 +9.8 143.4 +3.0 132.1 +9.5
Mar. 157.5 –0.8 156.3 +1.5 173.8 +2.5 141.4 +0.1 154.3 +2.5 159.0 –3.3 150.9 –2.8 155.2 –0.8
Apr. 160.1 +7.0 158.3 +18.0 185.1 +40.7 139.5 +1.6 139.8 +7.5 162.3 –3.2 148.1 +5.5 158.8 –7.2
May 159.2 +14.7 163.5 +31.9 185.1 +26.2 146.8 +42.7 154.3 +20.5 154.2 –1.2 150.8 +24.3 153.0 –0.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2017 107.6 +5.0 105.8 +3.6 105.9 +4.2 108.2 +7.2 106.2 +6.3 103.0 +1.5 107.7 +3.7 120.5 +10.0
2018 110.7 +2.9 107.5 +1.6 109.6 +3.5 105.6 –2.4 107.1 +0.8 103.1 +0.1 112.5 +4.5 127.7 +6.0
2019 114.9 +3.8 111.0 +3.3 112.1 +2.3 106.7 +1.0 108.9 +1.7 107.1 +3.9 118.7 +5.5 138.4 +8.4
3 2020 121.1 +5.4 115.6 +4.1 120.9 +7.9 81.6 –23.5 106.3 –2.4 116.8 +9.1 124.3 +4.7 168.5 +21.7
2020 June 121.0 +5.1 115.7 +4.2 119.1 +3.0 95.3 –17.1 102.4 +4.2 121.9 +14.5 119.6 +3.7 162.3 +23.2
July 122.8 +6.2 117.4 +4.9 119.1 +4.5 98.0 –5.8 108.6 +14.3 125.4 +15.7 122.9 +1.8 156.4 +14.0
Aug. 120.4 +8.4 115.0 +6.9 120.8 +8.9 91.3 –7.5 104.0 +1.7 116.9 +15.6 119.1 +3.7 155.2 +24.9
Sep. 119.2 +6.3 113.5 +5.1 113.7 +6.8 100.5 –8.7 103.9 –6.2 117.7 +13.7 122.2 +3.6 160.6 +15.4
Oct. 129.1 +10.2 122.7 +9.0 122.3 +8.4 109.1 –6.4 120.5 +9.0 129.8 +16.8 128.9 +5.7 182.4 +28.8
Nov. 136.4 +10.4 130.1 +9.6 123.4 +7.4 90.2 –22.2 154.3 +15.9 140.3 +20.9 133.3 +7.2 226.5 +37.6
Dec. 137.4 +3.2 131.0 +2.1 137.7 +7.6 69.3 –41.8 134.5 –15.5 119.4 +5.3 142.1 +6.5 217.8 +26.6
2021 Jan. 103.8 –3.7 98.7 –5.1 116.2 +12.3 19.3 –78.2 64.9 –43.4 59.4 –38.5 126.6 +3.5 186.1 +34.5
Feb. 104.9 –0.7 99.1 –2.1 114.5 +5.8 22.3 –72.2 64.7 –33.8 70.1 –27.8 127.3 +9.0 178.1 +40.7
Mar. 129.5 +9.2 122.3 +7.9 132.5 +1.5 58.6 +17.9 88.6 +5.2 119.7 +11.2 135.1 –2.0 206.1 +33.8
Apr. 121.1 +9.0 113.6 +7.6 124.9 +0.1 39.1 +32.5 69.1 +26.3 106.8 +6.0 130.7 +14.7 193.2 +11.6
May 125.5 +1.7 117.4 –0.2 127.6 +0.2 61.8 –21.0 72.7 –24.1 112.2 –12.2 127.8 +12.8 200.6 +18.9
June 129.4 +6.9 121.4 +4.9 122.4 +2.8 111.7 +17.2 96.0 –6.3 123.9 +1.6 128.7 +7.6 185.2 +14.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2020 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2016 43,661 +1.2 31,508 +2.2 9,028 21,407 834 4,804 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 655
2017 r44,251 r +1.4 32,234 +2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 114 24 2,533 7 855 5.7 731
2018 r44,858 r +1.4 32,964 +2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2019 r45,268 r +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 82,267 827 8 5.0 774
2020 r44,898 r –0.8 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2018 Q2 r44,781 r +1.4 32,802 +2.3 9,296 22,414 843 4,701 23 14 2,325 760 5.1 794
Q3 r45,019 r +1.3 33,040 +2.2 9,387 22,546 855 4,694 35 27 2,311 784 5.1 828
Q4 r45,245 r +1.2 33,452 +2.1 9,498 22,890 819 4,627 88 35 2,200 755 4.9 804
2019 Q1 r44,906 r +1.2 33,214 +2.0 9,419 22,803 761 4,581 303 34 2,360 892 5.2 780
Q2 r45,230 r +1.0 33,388 +1.8 9,455 22,932 750 4,615 51 43 82,227 778 8 4.9 795
Q3 r45,378 r +0.8 33,548 +1.5 9,491 23,049 753 4,598 66 58 2,276 827 5.0 794
Q4 r45,559 r +0.7 33,924 +1.4 9,551 23,388 738 4,522 161 105 2,204 811 4.8 729
2020 Q1 r45,122 r +0.5 33,642 +1.3 9,439 23,284 686 4,458 1,219 949 2,385 960 5.2 683
Q2 r44,712 r –1.1 33,415 +0.1 9,387 23,137 640 4,235 5,399 5,388 2,770 1,154 6.0 593
Q3 r44,794 r –1.3 33,424 –0.4 9,359 23,171 640 4,273 2,705 2,691 2,904 1,266 6.3 583
Q4 r44,965 r –1.3 33,836 –0.3 9,395 23,518 676 4,194 2,433 2,361 2,722 1,167 5.9 595
2021 Q1 r44,448 r –1.5 933,565 9–0.2 99,293 923,374 9 664 94,048 ... 9 3,139 2,878 1,248 6.3 586
Q2 1044,716 10 +0.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,691 1,024 11 5.9 658
2018 Mar. r44,463 r +1.4 32,660 +2.3 9,253 22,334 837 4,656 327 27 2,458 859 5.5 778
Apr. r44,638 r +1.4 32,782 +2.4 9,291 22,404 840 4,686 23 13 2,384 796 5.3 784
May r44,817 r +1.5 32,857 +2.3 9,310 22,450 845 4,718 21 12 2,315 751 5.1 793
June r44,889 r +1.3 32,870 +2.2 9,325 22,439 853 4,742 25 16 2,276 735 5.0 805
July r44,922 r +1.3 32,844 +2.2 9,339 22,396 860 4,736 22 14 2,325 788 5.1 823
Aug. r44,972 r +1.3 33,131 +2.3 9,412 22,609 856 4,664 41 33 2,351 804 5.2 828
Sep. r45,164 r +1.2 33,422 +2.1 9,496 22,827 842 4,619 42 34 2,256 759 5.0 834
Oct. r45,251 r +1.3 33,488 +2.2 9,515 22,895 827 4,616 46 37 2,204 742 4.9 824
Nov. r45,314 r +1.3 33,513 +2.1 9,513 22,934 822 4,638 51 43 2,186 745 4.8 807
Dec. r45,171 r +1.2 33,286 +2.1 9,434 22,854 773 4,637 166 26 2,210 777 4.9 781
2019 Jan. r44,852 r +1.2 33,156 +2.0 9,405 22,762 763 4,574 354 42 2,406 919 5.3 758
Feb. r44,894 r +1.2 33,199 +2.0 9,416 22,794 758 4,564 310 29 2,373 908 5.3 784
Mar. r44,971 r +1.1 33,286 +1.9 9,442 22,855 749 4,574 246 32 2,301 850 5.1 797
Apr. r45,134 r +1.1 33,383 +1.8 9,457 22,925 753 4,607 49 40 2,229 795 4.9 796
May r45,259 r +1.0 33,433 +1.8 9,462 22,968 749 4,627 53 45 82,236 772 8 4.9 792
June r45,297 r +0.9 33,407 +1.6 9,455 22,948 750 4,646 51 43 2,216 766 4.9 798
July r45,312 r +0.9 33,360 +1.6 9,450 22,901 757 4,644 55 47 2,275 825 5.0 799
Aug. r45,307 r +0.7 33,610 +1.4 9,505 23,101 750 4,568 60 51 2,319 848 5.1 795
Sep. r45,516 r +0.8 33,938 +1.5 9,583 23,341 754 4,517 84 75 2,234 808 4.9 787
Oct. r45,592 r +0.8 33,966 +1.4 9,567 23,398 748 4,510 111 102 2,204 795 4.8 764
Nov. r45,622 r +0.7 33,968 +1.4 9,559 23,423 742 4,532 124 115 2,180 800 4.8 736
Dec. r45,463 r +0.6 33,740 +1.4 9,474 23,344 694 4,531 247 97 2,227 838 4.9 687
2020 Jan. r45,140 r +0.6 33,608 +1.4 9,432 23,255 689 4,471 382 133 2,426 985 5.3 668
Feb. r45,160 r +0.6 33,624 +1.3 9,427 23,278 683 4,461 439 134 2,396 971 5.3 690
Mar. r45,066 r +0.2 33,648 +1.1 9,440 23,290 675 4,350 2,834 2,580 2,335 925 5.1 691
Apr. r44,798 r –0.7 33,430 +0.1 9,396 23,141 643 4,194 6,007 5,995 2,644 1,093 5.8 626
May r44,662 r –1.3 33,328 –0.3 9,367 23,083 624 4,206 5,726 5,715 2,813 1,172 6.1 584
June r44,676 r –1.4 33,323 –0.3 9,355 23,084 629 4,260 4,464 4,452 2,853 1,197 6.2 570
July r44,687 r –1.4 33,233 –0.4 9,322 23,024 635 4,302 3,319 3,306 2,910 1,258 6.3 573
Aug. r44,722 r –1.3 33,482 –0.4 9,367 23,218 642 4,266 2,551 2,537 2,955 1,302 6.4 584
Sep. r44,972 r –1.2 33,792 –0.4 9,421 23,454 656 4,240 2,244 2,229 2,847 1,238 6.2 591
Oct. r45,054 r –1.2 33,862 –0.3 9,410 23,530 671 4,229 2,037 2,021 2,760 1,183 6.0 602
Nov. r45,002 r –1.4 33,899 –0.2 9,400 23,559 696 4,166 2,405 2,386 2,699 1,152 5.9 601
Dec. r44,838 r –1.4 33,700 –0.1 9,327 23,478 666 4,134 2,856 2,676 2,707 1,166 5.9 581
2021 Jan. r44,429 r –1.6 33,515 –0.3 9,282 23,347 657 4,045 3,638 3,294 2,901 1,298 6.3 566
Feb. r44,425 r –1.6 933,516 9–0.3 99,280 923,342 9 661 94,018 ... 9 3,353 2,904 1,270 6.3 583
Mar. r44,490 r –1.3 933,624 9–0.1 99,306 923,391 9 683 94,026 ... 9 2,770 2,827 1,177 6.2 609
Apr. r44,597 r –0.4 933,676 9+0.7 99,321 923,420 9 684 94,029 ... 9 2,471 2,771 1,091 6.0 629
May r44,713 r +0.1 933,730 9+1.2 99,323 923,451 9 701 94,047 ... 9 2,226 2,687 1,020 11 5.9 654
June 1044,838 10 +0.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,614 961 5.7 693
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,590 956 5.6 744
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 From January 2017 persons receiving additional
income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at the same
time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book of the Social SecurityCode (SGB III).  8 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed persons in the
legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).  9 Unadjusted
figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2019 and 2020, the estimated
values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1% for employees
subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.9% for persons solely in jobs
exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 55.3% for cyclically induced
short-time work.  10 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office.
11 From May 2021, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which:  1Indices of
foreign trade pricesHWWI
Index of World Market
Prices of Raw Materials  7
of which:
Total  2 Food  3Non-
energy
industrial
goods  4Energy
4,5Services
2,4Actual
rents
for
housingMemo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  6Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  6Exports Imports Energy  8Other raw
materials  9
Period 2015 = 100
Index level
2017 102.1 104.0 102.2 97.5 102.5 102.9 102.0 105.3 101.1 108.6 100.7 100.1 99.6 107.1
2018 104.0 106.7 103.0 102.3 104.2 104.6 103.8 110.2 103.7 109.0 101.9 102.7 124.6 106.2
2019 105.5 108.4 104.2 103.7 105.7 106.1 105.3 115.3 104.8 111.5 102.4 101.7 110.0 108.1
2020 10 105.8 10110.9 10104.1 1099.0 10106.9 107.6 10 105.8 10117.0 103.8 11107.8 101.7 97.3 73.4 111.6
2019 Sep. 106.2 108.8 104.7 103.8 106.9 106.4 106.0 104.6 109.9 102.4 101.1 105.9 107.5
Oct. 106.3 108.6 105.0 103.8 106.9 106.6 106.1 104.4 110.3 102.4 101.0 105.7 107.1
Nov. 105.4 109.0 105.2 103.7 104.9 106.7 105.3 116.4 104.4 112.0 102.4 101.5 110.5 106.9
Dec. 106.0 109.2 105.1 103.6 106.1 106.8 105.8 104.5 114.4 102.5 101.7 112.5 110.4
2020 Jan. 105.1 110.1 104.0 104.9 104.3 107.0 105.2 105.3 113.2 102.7 101.3 107.4 112.2
Feb. 105.7 111.2 104.3 103.9 105.2 107.1 105.6 117.8 104.9 114.2 102.6 100.4 94.3 108.7
Mar. 105.8 111.0 105.2 101.6 105.5 107.3 105.7 104.1 113.7 101.9 96.9 61.3 104.9
Apr. 106.2 112.2 105.4 98.6 106.7 107.4 106.1 103.4 112.7 101.5 95.2 49.7 101.0
May 106.2 112.5 105.4 97.4 106.7 107.5 106.0 118.3 103.0 109.2 101.3 95.5 55.5 102.1
June 106.9 112.7 104.8 98.7 108.1 107.6 106.6 103.0 110.0 101.3 96.1 65.2 105.1
July 10 106.4 10110.2 10102.5 1098.0 10109.4 107.7 10 106.1 103.2 107.5 101.3 96.4 68.3 107.5
Aug. 10 106.2 10110.1 10102.6 1097.6 10109.0 107.8 10 106.0 10115.7 103.2 104.8 101.2 96.5 71.2 111.7
Sep. 10 105.8 10109.9 10103.6 1096.9 10108.0 107.8 10 105.8 103.6 11103.3 101.3 96.8 70.4 117.9
Oct. 10 105.8 10110.2 10103.9 1097.0 10107.6 108.0 10 105.9 103.7 103.7 101.4 97.1 73.4 118.9
Nov. 10 104.7 10110.3 10104.0 1096.0 10105.5 108.1 10 105.0 10116.0 103.9 103.8 101.8 97.6 77.8 120.4
Dec. 10 105.3 10109.9 10103.4 1097.4 10106.9 108.2 10 105.5 104.7 104.0 101.9 98.2 86.6 128.9
2021 Jan. 106.8 112.3 105.1 102.6 106.9 108.4 106.3 106.2 106.5 102.8 100.1 99.1 140.0
Feb. 107.4 113.0 105.5 104.1 107.3 108.5 107.0 121.2 106.9 108.8 103.3 101.8 104.7 143.4
Mar. 107.9 113.1 105.7 106.2 107.6 108.6 107.5 107.9 113.8 104.1 103.6 109.1 150.1
Apr. 108.4 114.5 105.8 106.1 108.3 108.7 108.2 108.8 115.7 104.9 105.0 110.8 154.5
May 108.7 114.2 106.3 106.7 108.7 108.9 108.7 125.1 110.4 118.3 105.6 106.8 118.9 169.0
June 109.1 114.1 106.5 107.6 109.1 108.9 109.1 111.8 117.5 106.4 108.5 129.4 166.3
July 10 109.7 10114.4 10106.4 10109.0 10110.2 109.1 10 110.1 ... ... ... ... 141.9 165.9
Annual percentage change
2017 +1.7 +2.7 +1.2 +3.1 +1.4 +1.7 +1.5 +3.3 +2.7 +10.0 +1.7 +3.5 +19.7 +8.8
2018 +1.9 +2.6 +0.8 +4.9 +1.6 +1.6 +1.8 +4.7 +2.6 +0.4 +1.2 +2.6 +25.1 –0.8
2019 +1.4 +1.6 +1.1 +1.4 +1.5 +1.5 +1.4 +4.7 +1.1 +2.3 +0.5 –1.0 –11.7 +1.8
2020 10 +0.4 10+2.3 10–0.1 10–4.5 10+1.2 +1.4 10 +0.5 10+1.4 –1.0 11–3.3 –0.7 –4.3 –33.3 +3.2
2019 Sep. +0.9 +1.6 +0.9 –1.2 +1.2 +1.4 +1.2 –0.1 –1.5 ±0.0 –2.5 –24.8 +4.7
Oct. +0.9 +1.4 +0.9 –2.2 +1.3 +1.5 +1.1 –0.6 –0.9 –0.2 –3.5 –27.0 +1.5
Nov. +1.2 +1.9 +1.1 –4.0 +2.4 +1.5 +1.1 +3.9 –0.7 +0.4 –0.1 –2.1 –10.7 +1.6
Dec. +1.5 +2.1 +1.3 +0.1 +2.0 +1.5 +1.5 –0.2 +2.6 +0.4 –0.7 +1.0 +7.0
2020 Jan. +1.6 +2.5 +1.1 +3.3 +1.4 +1.5 +1.7 +0.2 +1.6 +0.5 –0.9 –4.4 +7.5
Feb. +1.7 +3.1 +0.9 +2.2 +1.5 +1.4 +1.7 +3.3 –0.1 +2.0 +0.3 –2.0 –17.5 –0.6
Mar. +1.3 +3.1 +1.3 –0.8 +1.3 +1.5 +1.4 –0.8 +0.4 –0.5 –5.5 –46.8 –3.1
Apr. +0.8 +4.0 +0.8 –5.6 +1.3 +1.5 +0.9 –1.9 –2.5 –1.1 –7.4 –58.3 –7.2
May +0.5 +3.9 +0.8 –8.2 +1.3 +1.5 +0.6 +2.9 –2.2 –5.6 –1.2 –7.0 –52.4 –4.2
June +0.8 +4.0 +0.7 –5.9 +1.4 +1.4 +0.9 –1.8 –4.4 –1.0 –5.1 –36.6 –3.2
July 10 ±0.0 10+1.4 10–0.8 10–6.4 10+1.4 +1.4 10 –0.1 –1.7 –5.9 –1.1 –4.6 –35.4 –4.9
Aug. 10 –0.1 10+1.2 10–0.8 10–6.0 10+1.1 +1.4 10 ±0.0 10–0.1 –1.2 –6.8 –1.1 –4.0 –28.9 +5.4
Sep. 10 –0.4 10+1.0 10–1.1 10–6.6 10+1.0 +1.3 10 –0.2 –1.0 11–6.0 –1.1 –4.3 –33.5 +9.7
Oct. 10 –0.5 10+1.5 10–1.0 10–6.6 10+0.7 +1.3 10 –0.2 –0.7 –6.0 –1.0 –3.9 –30.6 +11.0
Nov. 10 –0.7 10+1.2 10–1.1 10–7.4 10+0.6 +1.3 10 –0.3 10–0.3 –0.5 –7.3 –0.6 –3.8 –29.6 +12.6
Dec. 10 –0.7 10+0.6 10–1.6 10–6.0 10+0.8 +1.3 10 –0.3 +0.2 –9.1 –0.6 –3.4 –23.0 +16.8
2021 Jan. +1.6 +2.0 +1.1 –2.2 +2.5 +1.3 +1.0 +0.9 –5.9 +0.1 –1.2 –7.7 +24.8
Feb. +1.6 +1.6 +1.2 +0.2 +2.0 +1.3 +1.3 +2.9 +1.9 –4.7 +0.7 +1.4 +11.0 +31.9
Mar. +2.0 +1.9 +0.5 +4.5 +2.0 +1.2 +1.7 +3.7 +0.1 +2.2 +6.9 +78.0 +43.1
Apr. +2.1 +2.0 +0.4 +7.6 +1.5 +1.2 +2.0 +5.2 +2.7 +3.3 +10.3 +122.9 +53.0
May +2.4 +1.5 +0.9 +9.5 +1.9 +1.3 +2.5 +5.7 +7.2 +8.3 +4.2 +11.8 +114.2 +65.5
June +2.1 +1.2 +1.6 +9.0 +0.9 +1.2 +2.3 +8.5 +6.8 +5.0 +12.9 +98.5 +58.2
July 10 +3.1 10+3.8 10+3.8 10+11.2 10+0.7 +1.3 10 +3.8 ... ... ... ... +107.8 +54.3
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw Materi-
als: HWWI.  1 Deviations from the official figures are due to rounding.  2 With effect
from 2015, methodological changes to the collection of data on the prices of package
holidays, impacting until the beginning of the series.  3 Including alcoholic beverages
and tobacco.  4 Modified procedure as of 2017 due to calculations on the basis of the
five digit structure set out in the European Classification of Individual Consumption ac-cording to Purpose (ECOICOP).  5 Electricity, gas and other fuels as well as transport fu-
els and lubricants, from January 2017 excluding lubricants.  6 Excluding value added tax.
7 For the euro area, in euro.  8 Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas.  9 Food, bever-
ages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials.  10 Influenced by a temporary re-
duction of value added tax between July and December 2020.  11 From September
2020 onwards provisional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
August 2021
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
8. Households’ income *
    
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio 7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age
€ billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2012 1,150.0 4.2 776.1 4.0 376.8 1.5 1,152.9 3.2 1,668.4 2.5 161.0 − 1.3 9.7
2013 1,186.3 3.2 799.4 3.0 383.9 1.9 1,183.2 2.6 1,690.8 1.3 157.1 − 2.5 9.32014 1,234.2 4.0 830.5 3.9 394.0 2.6 1,224.5 3.5 1,734.5 2.6 170.6 8.6 9.8
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.5 4.2 1,273.8 4.0 1,782.3 2.8 179.4 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.22017 1,394.1 4.2 931.6 3.9 440.9 3.4 1,372.5 3.8 1,905.9 3.5 201.9 7.5 10.62018 1,461.3 4.8 975.2 4.7 452.8 2.7 1,428.0 4.0 1,970.8 3.4 215.4 6.7 10.92019 1,521.6 4.1 1,020.3 4.6 470.8 4.0 1,491.1 4.4 2,027.1 2.9 220.3 2.2 10.9
2020 1,511.5 − 0.7 1,019.5 − 0.1 514.1 9.2 1,533.6 2.8 2,041.3 0.7 329.7 49.7 16.2
2019         Q4 416.6 3.3 278.4 3.6 117.8 4.3 396.2 3.8 512.5 2.4 49.7 2.6 9.7
2020         Q1 365.6 2.9 245.8 2.8 124.3 5.5 370.1 3.7 521.9 2.7 84.8 16.2 16.3
         Q2 355.0 − 4.4 234.2 − 3.9 129.3 11.0 363.5 0.9 493.6 − 1.3 98.5 93.1 20.0         Q3 374.2 − 1.0 258.5 − 0.3 130.7 10.0 389.2 3.0 508.5 0.5 66.9 43.6 13.2         Q4 416.6 0.0 281.0 0.9 129.8 10.2 410.8 3.7 517.4 1.0 79.5 60.2 15.4
2021         Q1 361.7 − 1.1 245.0 − 0.3 134.9 8.6 380.0 2.7 527.7 1.1 122.3 44.2 23.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2021. *Households includ- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
ing non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage ta x and
contributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages  1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
2012 92.5 2.6 92.7 2.5 92.7 2.8 92.7 2.8 92.4 2.9
2013 94.8 2.5 95.0 2.5 95.0 2.5 95.0 2.5 94.4 2.22014 97.7 3.1 97.8 2.9 97.7 2.8 97.7 2.8 97.2 2.9
2015 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.2 2.2 102.5 2.52017 104.2 2.1 104.2 2.0 104.3 2.1 104.5 2.3 105.1 2.52018 107.1 2.8 107.1 2.8 107.0 2.6 107.3 2.7 108.4 3.22019 110.2 2.9 110.2 2.9 109.7 2.5 110.0 2.5 111.6 2.9
2020 112.6 2.2 112.6 2.2 111.9 2.0 112.2 2.0 111.7 0.0
2020         Q1 104.2 2.4 104.2 2.4 104.2 2.4 111.6 2.4 107.5 2.2
         Q2 105.0 2.0 104.9 1.9 105.1 2.2 112.1 2.1 105.4 − 3.4         Q3 116.2 1.8 116.2 1.8 114.4 1.8 112.5 1.8 111.0 0.1         Q4 125.0 2.6 124.9 2.6 123.9 1.8 112.6 1.7 122.7 1.2
2021         Q1 105.7 1.4 105.7 1.4 105.8 1.5 113.3 1.5 107.7 0.2
         Q2 107.3 2.3 107.3 2.2 106.5 1.3 113.7 1.5 . .
2020         Dec. 109.5 4.2 109.5 4.2 107.0 1.8 112.6 1.8 . .
2021         Jan. 105.7 1.5 105.7 1.4 105.8 1.6 113.2 1.5 . .
         Feb. 105.7 1.4 105.7 1.4 105.8 1.5 113.2 1.5 . .         Mar. 105.8 1.4 105.7 1.4 105.8 1.4 113.3 1.4 . .
         Apr. 106.8 1.8 106.8 1.8 106.7 1.6 113.7 1.6 . .
         May 106.4 1.1 106.3 1.0 106.4 1.0 113.7 1.4 . .         June 108.8 3.9 108.8 3.9 106.3 1.4 113.8 1.4 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such May 2021. as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2017 2,396.2 1,488.2 498.6 602.8 295.9 908.0 230.6 225.1 156.2 757.1 1,639.1 866.4 495.7 772.7 236.1 195.6
3 2018 2,589.6 1,537.1 540.8 611.1 288.5 1,052.5 249.5 234.9 172.6 790.2 1,799.3 925.8 558.7 873.5 257.5 205.1
2019 2,801.2 1,770.0 586.3 737.5 333.4 1,031.2 257.6 237.8 168.5 821.5 1,979.8 1,091.3 676.3 888.5 289.8 207.7
p 2020 2,850.7 1,797.6 607.6 733.4 335.1 1,053.1 243.7 226.2 240.5 812.1 2,038.7 1,181.5 746.4 857.1 304.4 196.2
2019 H1 2,702.6 1,657.9 549.7 682.9 314.5 1,044.6 269.2 240.5 140.5 777.5 1,925.1 1,024.3 613.9 900.8 301.7 210.8
H2 2,801.2 1,770.0 586.3 737.5 333.4 1,031.2 257.6 237.8 168.5 821.5 1,979.8 1,091.3 676.3 888.5 289.8 207.7
2020 H1 2,892.1 1,801.3 625.0 734.3 319.7 1,090.9 257.6 216.6 220.8 794.2 2,097.9 1,183.9 754.2 914.0 335.5 179.7
pH2 2,850.7 1,797.6 607.6 733.4 335.1 1,053.1 243.7 226.2 240.5 812.1 2,038.7 1,181.5 746.4 857.1 304.4 196.2
As a percentage of total assets
2017 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.2 12.4 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.5 31.6 68.4 36.2 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
3 2018 100.0 59.4 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.6 9.6 9.1 6.7 30.5 69.5 35.8 21.6 33.7 9.9 7.9
2019 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.1 31.7 10.3 7.4
p 2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2019 H1 100.0 61.4 20.3 25.3 11.6 38.7 10.0 8.9 5.2 28.8 71.2 37.9 22.7 33.3 11.2 7.8
H2 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.1 31.7 10.3 7.4
2020 H1 100.0 62.3 21.6 25.4 11.1 37.7 8.9 7.5 7.6 27.5 72.5 40.9 26.1 31.6 11.6 6.2
pH2 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2017 1,989.3 1,190.8 351.5 484.0 281.8 798.5 215.8 181.4 128.5 609.9 1,379.4 719.1 397.8 660.3 218.4 150.1
3 2018 2,149.9 1,215.7 388.2 473.3 277.5 934.1 234.6 188.7 139.2 637.2 1,512.7 760.3 442.4 752.4 236.2 152.6
2019 2,303.5 1,396.8 419.6 565.7 319.7 906.8 243.8 188.7 136.9 662.7 1,640.9 887.5 523.8 753.4 257.5 158.1
p 2020 2,265.7 1,355.2 399.1 543.9 320.0 910.5 228.8 179.8 188.0 636.8 1,628.9 904.8 537.0 724.1 267.3 149.9
2019 H1 2,229.6 1,297.6 388.9 517.9 302.7 932.0 255.6 194.2 115.8 629.6 1,600.0 831.4 473.9 768.6 265.8 164.3
H2 2,303.5 1,396.8 419.6 565.7 319.7 906.8 243.8 188.7 136.9 662.7 1,640.9 887.5 523.8 753.4 257.5 158.1
2020 H1 2,305.5 1,352.3 406.4 547.5 303.4 953.2 244.0 171.8 171.4 615.1 1,690.4 912.2 548.5 778.1 294.6 137.1
pH2 2,265.7 1,355.2 399.1 543.9 320.0 910.5 228.8 179.8 188.0 636.8 1,628.9 904.8 537.0 724.1 267.3 149.9
As a percentage of total assets
2017 100.0 59.9 17.7 24.3 14.2 40.1 10.9 9.1 6.5 30.7 69.3 36.2 20.0 33.2 11.0 7.6
3 2018 100.0 56.6 18.1 22.0 12.9 43.5 10.9 8.8 6.5 29.6 70.4 35.4 20.6 35.0 11.0 7.1
2019 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.2 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
p 2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2019 H1 100.0 58.2 17.4 23.2 13.6 41.8 11.5 8.7 5.2 28.2 71.8 37.3 21.3 34.5 11.9 7.4
H2 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.2 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
2020 H1 100.0 58.7 17.6 23.8 13.2 41.4 10.6 7.5 7.4 26.7 73.3 39.6 23.8 33.8 12.8 6.0
pH2 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2017 406.9 297.4 147.1 118.8 14.1 109.5 14.8 43.6 27.6 147.2 259.6 147.3 97.9 112.4 17.6 45.5
3 2018 439.7 321.3 152.7 137.9 11.0 118.3 14.9 46.1 33.3 153.1 286.6 165.5 116.3 121.1 21.3 52.5
2019 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
p 2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2019 H1 472.9 360.3 160.8 165.1 11.8 112.6 13.7 46.3 24.7 147.9 325.0 192.8 140.0 132.2 35.9 46.5
H2 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
2020 H1 586.6 449.0 218.7 186.8 16.3 137.6 13.7 44.9 49.4 179.1 407.6 271.7 205.7 135.9 40.9 42.6
pH2 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
As a percentage of total assets
2017 100.0 73.1 36.2 29.2 3.5 26.9 3.7 10.7 6.8 36.2 63.8 36.2 24.1 27.6 4.3 11.2
3 2018 100.0 73.1 34.7 31.4 2.5 26.9 3.4 10.5 7.6 34.8 65.2 37.6 26.5 27.6 4.8 11.9
2019 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
p 2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2019 H1 100.0 76.2 34.0 34.9 2.5 23.8 2.9 9.8 5.2 31.3 68.7 40.8 29.6 28.0 7.6 9.8
H2 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
2020 H1 100.0 76.5 37.3 31.9 2.8 23.5 2.3 7.7 8.4 30.5 69.5 46.3 35.1 23.2 7.0 7.3
pH2 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.  3 From H1 2018 or 2018 onwards: significant
changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  2 Distribution  2
RevenuesOperating income
before depreciation
and amortisation
(EBITDA  1 )Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartileOperating
income (EBIT)Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4€ billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % % € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % %
Total
2013 1,540.6 – 0.6 187.0 – 2.8 12.1 – 0.3 5.2 10.3 18.4 99.4 5.5 6.5 0.4 1.9 5.9 11.0
2014 1,565.1 1.0 198.7 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.4 109.2 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.1 11.1
2015 1,634.6 6.9 196.0 – 1.1 12.0 – 1.0 6.1 10.6 17.8 91.5 – 16.4 5.6 – 1.5 1.7 6.6 11.3
2016 1,625.0 – 0.4 214.5 7.9 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.8 9.1 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,720.2 5.1 243.5 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.1 11.0 18.0 142.0 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.9 12.0
6 2018 1,707.6 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.2 10.6 17.7 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.2 6.5 11.9
2019 1,765.5 2.6 233.7 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.1 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.7 5.8 11.7
p 2020 1,633.6 – 8.8 213.8 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 18.0 52.3 – 40.9 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 5.0 10.7
2016 H1 782.3 – 1.9 111.6 6.2 14.3 1.1 5.9 10.4 17.7 65.5 2.7 8.4 0.3 1.6 6.4 11.3
H2 842.8 1.1 102.9 9.8 12.2 1.0 6.9 11.9 19.0 46.3 20.9 5.5 0.8 3.0 7.5 12.5
2017 H1 844.4 6.8 125.7 14.6 14.9 1.0 5.7 10.1 17.2 78.5 29.6 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.6
H2 879.0 3.5 117.5 14.6 13.4 1.3 6.9 12.0 19.1 63.0 38.2 7.2 1.8 3.3 7.5 12.4
6 2018 H1 848.6 – 0.1 120.8 – 2.2 14.2 – 0.3 5.1 10.6 18.1 72.7 – 5.3 8.6 – 0.5 1.8 6.4 12.4
H2 869.8 1.4 114.5 0.5 13.2 – 0.1 6.4 11.2 17.8 58.0 – 7.7 6.7 – 0.6 2.1 6.7 12.3
2019 H1 861.7 2.7 112.4 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.6 11.7 18.6 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 904.2 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.8 11.9 19.9 52.1 – 11.3 5.8 – 0.9 0.9 6.1 12.4
2020 H1 744.9 – 14.4 78.3 – 34.0 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 9.0
pH2 888.8 – 3.3 135.5 17.2 15.3 2.8 7.7 13.2 19.8 44.3 8.8 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.7
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2013 1,199.6 – 0.8 142.6 – 2.6 11.9 – 0.2 5.1 10.3 16.0 77.5 – 5.8 6.5 – 0.3 1.6 5.9 10.5
2014 1,220.9 1.0 152.2 5.9 12.5 0.6 5.7 10.0 15.5 85.2 9.7 7.0 0.6 1.6 6.0 10.5
2015 1,310.5 7.0 149.1 – 2.6 11.4 – 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.3 69.1 – 19.7 5.3 – 1.7 2.1 6.6 10.4
2016 1,296.6 – 0.8 162.1 6.4 12.5 0.8 6.6 10.7 16.2 84.9 4.3 6.6 0.3 2.9 6.4 10.7
2017 1,396.8 5.5 187.6 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.6 40.5 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.8 10.5
6 2018 1,368.5 1.0 175.8 – 1.6 12.8 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 15.8 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.9 6.8 11.3
2019 1,411.8 2.0 168.3 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.4 16.6 76.3 – 23.7 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.8 10.1
p 2020 1,286.0 – 9.4 143.8 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 6.4 10.6 16.5 29.3 – 47.9 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.4 9.8
2016 H1 625.5 – 2.3 86.6 1.8 13.8 0.5 6.7 10.6 15.9 52.7 – 6.4 8.4 – 0.3 2.9 6.4 10.1
H2 671.2 0.7 75.5 12.0 11.3 1.1 6.2 11.3 16.6 32.2 34.3 4.8 0.9 2.6 6.6 10.7
2017 H1 695.6 7.3 101.6 18.7 14.6 1.4 6.1 10.2 16.1 66.4 37.3 9.5 2.1 2.4 5.9 11.0
H2 701.8 3.7 86.0 14.2 12.3 1.1 7.0 11.8 16.9 46.2 45.5 6.6 1.9 3.6 7.3 10.8
6 2018 H1 682.3 – 0.1 95.0 – 3.4 13.9 – 0.5 7.0 10.9 16.7 60.0 – 6.0 8.8 – 0.6 2.9 6.7 11.5
H2 695.8 2.0 83.2 0.6 12.0 – 0.2 6.3 11.1 16.1 42.1 – 8.8 6.1 – 0.7 2.0 6.4 11.2
2019 H1 690.3 2.4 83.4 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.8 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.8 5.9 9.5
H2 721.5 1.7 84.9 0.4 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.9 16.9 34.4 – 19.6 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.3 11.2
2020 H1 581.0 – 15.9 49.1 – 42.3 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 15.1 0.2 – 101.6 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.2 8.0
pH2 705.0 – 3.0 94.7 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.3 12.3 18.6 29.0 19.8 4.1 1.1 1.1 6.1 10.7
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2013 341.0 – 0.1 44.4 – 3.5 13.0 – 0.5 5.2 9.3 20.7 21.9 82.2 6.4 2.9 2.4 5.9 11.8
2014 344.2 0.8 46.5 1.8 13.5 0.1 6.0 12.3 22.6 24.1 4.3 7.0 0.2 2.6 6.3 13.7
2015 324.1 6.1 46.9 4.0 14.5 – 0.3 5.9 11.1 22.1 22.3 – 3.8 6.9 – 0.7 1.3 6.7 13.9
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
p 2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.2 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.4 12.2
2016 H1 156.8 – 0.4 25.0 24.0 16.0 3.1 5.1 10.2 23.4 12.8 61.2 8.2 3.1 1.0 6.2 14.6
H2 171.6 2.9 27.4 4.2 16.0 0.2 7.4 13.3 24.3 14.1 3.0 8.2 0.0 4.0 8.9 17.1
2017 H1 148.8 4.6 24.2 0.4 16.2 – 0.6 5.2 9.8 21.0 12.1 0.3 8.2 – 0.3 1.2 5.6 14.5
H2 177.1 2.5 31.5 15.6 17.8 2.0 6.6 12.5 24.6 16.8 21.6 9.5 1.5 2.9 7.8 17.9
6 2018 H1 166.3 0.2 25.9 2.8 15.6 0.4 3.8 9.5 22.7 12.6 – 1.9 7.6 – 0.2 – 0.9 4.7 15.3
H2 174.0 – 1.3 31.3 – 0.0 18.0 0.2 6.7 11.3 25.6 15.9 – 4.6 9.1 – 0.3 2.2 7.0 17.8
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
pH2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.2 13.3
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted re-
turn on sales.  3 Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year fig-ures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  4 Adjusted
for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and in the
reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical Series Seasonally adjusted
business statistics.  5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.  6 From this point on-
wards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous pe-
riods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2020 2021
Item 2018 2019 2020 Q3 Q4 Q1  Mar.  Apr.  May  p
I.Current Account +346,207 +282,215 +247,657 +84,714 +98,175 +72,593 +35,649 +30,626 + 4,305
1.Goods
Receipts 2,333,597 2,397,441 2,190,887 547,127 601,457 592,794 227,547 203,880 200,273
Expenditure  2,045,057 2,082,702 1,850,089 452,467 488,318 499,896 190,394 179,287 177,787
Balance +288,541 +314,738 +340,801 +94,661 +113,139 +92,898 +37,153 +24,592 +22,486
2.Services
Receipts 946,766 1,003,052 847,982 203,151 228,769 206,132 73,315 71,941 71,218
Expenditure  828,987 939,122 811,361 182,615 213,669 190,057 67,423 60,740 63,797
Balance +117,778 +63,930 +36,618 +20,534 +15,100 +16,075 + 5,892 +11,201 + 7,421
3.Primary income
Receipts 853,727 858,902 749,639 177,114 184,241 185,879 64,623 60,735 55,417
Expenditure  761,362 802,408 716,955 177,062 165,763 165,098 57,171 54,511 70,657
Balance +92,367 +56,494 +32,684 + 52 +18,477 +20,780 + 7,452 + 6,224 –15,240
4.Secondary income
Receipts 110,262 113,869 115,999 26,801 30,577 28,126 9,880 9,936 10,765
Expenditure  262,742 266,817 278,444 57,333 79,118 85,287 24,728 21,327 21,127
Balance –152,478 –152,946 –162,448 –30,533 –48,542 –57,160 –14,847 –11,391 –10,362
II.Capital account –37,290 –26,213 – 3,267 + 1,084 – 904 + 3,447 + 2,819 + 1,027 + 1,986
III.Financial account  1 +303,530 +200,276 +256,681 +97,970 +125,845 +84,836 +20,775 + 668 +33,937
1.Direct investment +137,128 –95,424 –181,564 +27,018 –111,378 +62,834 + 4,164 +24,684 + 2,247
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  –257,807 + 9,077 –62,195 +24,670 –97,901 +70,565 –12,546 +38,529 +41,176
By non-resident units of
the euro area  –394,935 +104,503 +119,369 – 2,348 +13,477 + 7,731 –16,710 +13,846 +38,929
2.Portfolio investment +206,809 –41,724 +604,855 +17,429 +594,904 +94,303 + 3,451 +16,205 +70,421
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +190,785 +433,966 +699,768 +96,180 +354,957 +259,711 +79,617 +62,208 +63,359
Equity and
investment fund shares +33,921 +70,792 +307,687 +79,006 +183,913 +157,494 +50,247 +45,967 +15,965
Short-term
debt securities  –52,159 + 4,757 +130,434 –18,360 +41,489 +24,043 +18,043 –12,628 – 1,833
Long-term
debt securities  +209,024 +358,417 +261,646 +35,534 +129,555 +78,174 +11,326 +28,869 +49,227
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  –16,022 +475,688 +94,914 +78,751 –239,946 +165,407 +76,165 +46,003 – 7,063
Equity and
investment fund shares +103,841 +240,139 +91,364 +44,849 +22,713 +87,467 +24,111 +41,710 +30,456
Short-term
debt securities  –60,005 – 6,481 +141,365 +21,300 –68,042 +86,672 +38,011 + 7,160 + 505
Long-term
debt securities  –59,855 +242,035 –137,816 +12,602 –194,617 – 8,732 +14,044 – 2,867 –38,023
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options +39,860 + 1,071 + 523 –31,802 –19,570 + 7,161 – 5,575 + 4,643 – 2,373
4.Other investment –105,349 +333,124 –180,361 +81,939 –340,178 –76,479 +19,228 –45,613 –37,805
Eurosystem –134,123 +142,624 –203,671 + 7,420 –196,362 +146,780 –31,545 +42,567 –13,894
General government – 4,857 + 120 –19,485 +16,571 –33,841 –21,287 – 9,761 + 3,890 –12,303
MFIs  2 +102,018 +185,876 +13,037 +53,359 –34,707 –274,462 +23,486 –91,124 –19,969
Enterprises and households –68,384 + 4,504 +29,755 + 4,588 –75,267 +72,490 +37,048 – 946 + 8,360
5.Reserve assets +25,080 + 3,230 +13,231 + 3,386 + 2,069 – 2,982 – 494 + 748 + 1,447
IV.Net errors and omissions – 5,387 –55,724 +12,295 +12,172 +28,575 + 8,798 –17,692 –30,986 +27,646
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 increase: + / decrease: -.
2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Period Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2006 + 137,674 + 160,965 – 4,687 – 31,777 + 40,499 – 32,014 – 1,328 + 157,142 – 2,934 + 20,796
2007 + 171,493 + 201,728 – 1,183 – 32,465 + 35,620 – 33,390 – 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 13,273
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 – 3,947 – 29,122 + 24,063 – 34,147 – 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 – 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 – 6,605 – 17,642 + 54,524 – 34,764 – 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 – 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 – 6,209 – 25,255 + 51,306 – 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 – 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 – 9,357 – 29,930 + 69,087 – 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 – 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 – 11,388 – 30,774 + 65,658 – 38,703 – 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 – 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 – 12,523 – 39,321 + 63,284 – 43,413 – 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 210,906 + 219,629 – 14,296 – 25,303 + 57,752 – 41,172 + 2,936 + 240,258 – 2,564 + 26,416
2015 + 260,286 + 248,394 – 15,405 – 18,516 + 69,262 – 38,854 – 48 + 234,392 – 2,213 – 25,845
2016 + 266,689 + 252,409 – 19,921 – 20,987 + 76,199 – 40,931 + 2,142 + 261,123 + 1,686 – 7,708
2017 + 254,936 + 255,077 – 13,613 – 23,994 + 74,629 – 50,776 – 2,936 + 276,709 – 1,269 + 24,710
2018 + 264,156 + 224,584 – 22,682 – 17,410 + 105,694 – 48,713 + 676 + 246,544 + 392 – 18,288
2019 + 258,627 + 216,523 – 31,760 – 20,653 + 111,191 – 48,434 – 526 + 203,799 – 544 – 54,302
2020 + 233,918 + 189,532 – 8,907 + 3,471 + 92,497 – 51,582 – 4,771 + 231,103 – 51 + 1,956
2018 Q3 + 56,223 + 50,524 – 5,011 – 12,014 + 29,919 – 12,206 – 1,587 + 42,895 – 493 – 11,741
Q4 + 65,027 + 44,532 – 12,500 – 871 + 38,033 – 16,667 – 609 + 61,806 + 560 – 2,612
2019 Q1 + 70,210 + 56,391 – 4,760 – 1,290 + 31,863 – 16,753 + 900 + 44,999 – 63 – 26,111
Q2 + 57,800 + 52,295 – 7,867 – 2,849 + 14,629 – 6,274 – 374 + 47,570 + 444 – 9,856
Q3 + 62,831 + 57,801 – 7,757 – 12,518 + 29,954 – 12,405 + 265 + 18,301 – 349 – 44,796
Q4 + 67,786 + 50,037 – 11,376 – 3,995 + 34,746 – 13,003 – 1,317 + 92,930 – 576 + 26,460
2020 Q1 + 62,196 + 52,500 – 2,696 – 2,773 + 26,874 – 14,404 – 348 + 37,818 + 133 – 24,030
Q2 + 37,318 + 27,533 – 1,960 + 5,647 + 13,060 – 8,922 + 188 + 28,568 + 243 – 8,938
Q3 + 62,013 + 55,641 – 1,106 – 5,402 + 22,142 – 10,369 – 1,206 + 68,302 – 1,276 + 7,495
Q4 + 72,391 + 53,857 – 3,145 + 5,999 + 30,421 – 17,886 – 3,405 + 96,416 + 848 + 27,430
2021 Q1 + 66,650 + 55,972 – 1,223 + 3,603 + 27,693 – 20,618 – 215 + 127,511 + 385 + 61,075
p Q2 + 56,541 + 45,622 – 2,492 + 4,988 + 14,471 – 8,541 – 1,886 + 61,797 + 58 + 7,143
2019 Jan. + 20,071 + 14,600 – 2,196 – 997 + 11,534 – 5,066 + 2,133 + 19,763 + 158 – 2,441
Feb. + 17,750 + 17,446 – 1,727 – 154 + 8,499 – 8,041 + 166 + 16,326 + 112 – 1,590
Mar. + 32,389 + 24,345 – 837 – 140 + 11,830 – 3,646 – 1,399 + 8,909 – 333 – 22,080
Apr. + 22,256 + 17,081 – 2,686 – 312 + 9,185 – 3,697 – 47 + 23,703 + 547 + 1,494
May + 15,432 + 19,137 – 3,090 + 131 – 4,604 + 767 – 52 + 6,277 + 182 – 9,103
June + 20,112 + 16,077 – 2,092 – 2,668 + 10,048 – 3,344 – 276 + 17,589 – 285 – 2,247
July + 20,611 + 20,555 – 3,036 – 4,819 + 9,538 – 4,664 + 171 + 11,234 + 348 – 9,548
Aug. + 17,334 + 16,559 – 1,639 – 5,218 + 10,219 – 4,226 + 788 – 1,942 + 755 – 20,065
Sep. + 24,886 + 20,687 – 3,083 – 2,482 + 10,197 – 3,516 – 694 + 9,009 – 1,452 – 15,183
Oct. + 19,690 + 20,550 – 3,285 – 5,948 + 9,775 – 4,687 – 823 + 44,140 – 107 + 25,273
Nov. + 23,695 + 17,228 – 3,055 + 392 + 9,744 – 3,669 – 491 + 20,116 – 356 – 3,088
Dec. + 24,401 + 12,259 – 5,035 + 1,562 + 15,227 – 4,647 – 3 + 28,674 – 113 + 4,275
2020 Jan. + 15,860 + 14,116 – 769 – 1,090 + 10,156 – 7,321 + 267 + 3,235 + 898 – 12,892
Feb. + 21,578 + 20,218 – 1,768 – 1,359 + 7,014 – 4,294 + 48 + 17,898 + 750 – 3,728
Mar. + 24,758 + 18,167 – 159 – 324 + 9,704 – 2,789 – 663 + 16,684 – 1,514 – 7,411
Apr. + 9,965 + 3,711 – 617 + 1,710 + 8,859 – 4,315 + 88 + 10,215 + 950 + 161
May + 7,079 + 8,995 + 768 + 1,553 – 14 – 3,454 + 8 + 115 + 33 – 6,972
June + 20,273 + 14,827 – 2,111 + 2,384 + 4,215 – 1,154 + 91 + 18,238 – 740 – 2,127
July + 20,204 + 19,766 – 430 – 2,646 + 6,782 – 3,698 – 928 + 18,341 – 611 – 935
Aug. + 16,668 + 13,915 – 226 – 2,308 + 8,416 – 3,355 + 486 + 32,997 – 611 + 15,843
Sep. + 25,142 + 21,961 – 450 – 448 + 6,944 – 3,315 – 764 + 16,964 – 53 – 7,413
Oct. + 24,370 + 20,733 – 513 + 843 + 7,236 – 4,442 – 1,320 + 27,100 + 140 + 4,050
Nov. + 21,562 + 18,376 + 122 + 2,239 + 8,537 – 7,589 – 2,090 + 14,685 + 89 – 4,788
Dec. + 26,459 + 14,748 – 2,754 + 2,917 + 14,648 – 5,855 + 5 + 54,631 + 618 + 28,167
2021 Jan. + 17,931 + 14,532 – 440 + 943 + 9,795 – 7,340 – 395 + 28,522 + 743 + 10,986
Feb. + 18,326 + 18,088 – 728 + 1,335 + 7,636 – 8,733 – 1,448 + 53,697 + 102 + 36,819
Mar. + 30,394 + 23,352 – 56 + 1,324 + 10,262 – 4,545 + 1,628 + 45,293 – 460 + 13,271
Apr. + 20,965 + 15,470 – 662 + 2,809 + 6,508 – 3,822 – 984 + 21,070 – 251 + 1,089
May + 13,111 + 13,924 – 778 + 1,665 – 642 – 1,837 – 271 + 11,368 + 211 – 1,471
p June + 22,465 + 16,228 – 1,052 + 513 + 8,605 – 2,881 – 631 + 29,359 + 98 + 7,525
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: +/net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2021
Group of countries/country 
2018 2019 
2020 Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June  p
All countries  1 Exports 1,317,440 1,328,152 1,205,281 98,381 107,756 126,910 111,802 109,544 118,660
Imports 1,088,720 1,104,141 1,025,344 84,230 89,869 106,341 96,557 97,051 102,375
Balance +228,720 +224,010 +179,937 +14,151 +17,887 +20,569 +15,245 +12,493 +16,285
   I. European countries Exports 900,141 902,831 823,346 68,238 74,048 86,415 77,097 76,243 81,239
Imports 744,575 747,692 682,563 55,089 61,780 72,697 64,272 65,709 68,148
Balance +155,566 +155,140 +140,784 +13,150 +12,267 +13,718 +12,825 +10,534 +13,091
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 696,480 698,257 634,766 54,622 58,358 67,648 60,622 60,774 64,529
Imports 586,433 593,251 547,170 44,232 49,713 58,238 51,003 52,870 54,890
Balance +110,047 +105,006 +87,596 +10,389 + 8,645 + 9,410 + 9,619 + 7,904 + 9,639
          Euro area (19)       Exports 492,469 492,308 440,955 38,169 40,370 47,153 42,303 42,048 45,032
          countries Imports 405,810 409,863 372,129 29,684 33,594 39,796 34,761 36,389 37,938
Balance +86,659 +82,445 +68,826 + 8,485 + 6,777 + 7,357 + 7,541 + 5,658 + 7,094
          of which:
               Austria Exports 65,027 66,076 60,079 4,862 5,508 6,475 5,901 5,802 6,132
  Imports 42,994 44,059 40,410 3,327 3,678 4,301 3,775 3,853 4,171
Balance +22,033 +22,017 +19,668 + 1,535 + 1,830 + 2,173 + 2,125 + 1,950 + 1,961
               Belgium and Exports 50,389 52,006 48,798 4,295 4,408 5,026 4,754 4,631 4,873
               Luxembourg Imports 49,315 46,322 39,753 3,361 3,555 4,558 4,700 4,561 5,312
Balance + 1,074 + 5,683 + 9,044 + 934 + 853 + 467 + 53 + 70 – 439
               France Exports 105,359 106,564 90,802 7,859 8,140 9,466 8,461 8,366 9,182
  Imports 65,024 66,199 56,518 4,442 4,961 5,860 5,011 4,821 5,486
Balance +40,335 +40,364 +34,284 + 3,417 + 3,179 + 3,606 + 3,450 + 3,544 + 3,696
               Italy Exports 69,813 67,887 60,375 5,397 5,904 6,846 6,092 6,150 6,529
  Imports 60,223 57,100 54,002 4,437 5,239 5,935 5,211 5,482 5,558
Balance + 9,591 +10,786 + 6,373 + 961 + 665 + 910 + 881 + 669 + 971
               Netherlands Exports 91,061 91,528 84,481 7,352 7,732 9,113 7,763 7,941 8,420
  Imports 97,709 97,816 87,662 7,050 7,864 9,133 8,042 8,499 8,569
Balance – 6,649 – 6,288 – 3,181 + 302 – 132 – 20 – 279 – 558 – 150
               Spain  Exports 44,184 44,218 37,471 3,367 3,452 3,970 3,749 3,709 3,884
  Imports 32,399 33,126 31,301 2,562 2,642 3,337 2,860 2,912 2,812
Balance +11,785 +11,092 + 6,170 + 805 + 810 + 633 + 889 + 797 + 1,073
          Other EU Member  Exports 204,011 205,949 193,811 16,453 17,987 20,495 18,319 18,726 19,496
          States  Imports 180,623 183,387 175,042 14,549 16,119 18,442 16,242 16,481 16,951
Balance +23,388 +22,561 +18,770 + 1,905 + 1,868 + 2,053 + 2,077 + 2,245 + 2,545
      2. Other European Exports 203,661 204,575 188,580 13,617 15,690 18,767 16,475 15,469 16,711
          countries Imports 158,142 154,441 135,392 10,856 12,067 14,459 13,268 12,839 13,259
Balance +45,519 +50,134 +53,188 + 2,761 + 3,623 + 4,308 + 3,206 + 2,630 + 3,452
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 54,021 56,345 56,287 4,633 4,703 5,427 4,950 4,670 4,982
  Imports 45,913 45,824 45,475 3,530 3,879 4,466 4,056 4,342 4,169
Balance + 8,108 +10,521 +10,812 + 1,103 + 825 + 961 + 894 + 328 + 813
               United Kingdom Exports 82,164 79,166 66,776 4,331 5,421 6,481 5,326 5,012 5,537
  Imports 37,025 38,397 34,806 1,719 2,732 3,174 3,052 2,702 2,705
Balance +45,139 +40,770 +31,971 + 2,612 + 2,689 + 3,306 + 2,274 + 2,310 + 2,832
   II. Non-European  Exports 413,483 421,728 380,214 30,025 33,590 40,123 34,563 33,151 37,249
       countries Imports 342,980 355,390 341,826 29,064 27,991 33,734 32,158 31,210 34,088
Balance +70,503 +66,338 +38,387 + 961 + 5,600 + 6,388 + 2,405 + 1,941 + 3,161
       1. Africa Exports 22,524 23,627 20,037 1,679 1,749 2,226 1,766 1,723 1,928
Imports 22,542 24,475 18,710 1,933 1,818 2,240 1,987 2,155 2,415
Balance – 18 – 848 + 1,328 – 254 – 69 – 14 – 221 – 432 – 487
       2. America Exports 158,952 165,602 141,740 11,545 13,147 15,284 13,751 12,597 14,598
  Imports 92,444 100,007 93,943 6,979 7,243 9,066 8,654 8,039 9,697
Balance +66,508 +65,595 +47,797 + 4,567 + 5,904 + 6,218 + 5,097 + 4,558 + 4,901
           of which:
               United States  Exports 113,341 118,680 103,821 8,454 9,488 11,123 10,066 9,095 10,253
  Imports 64,493 71,334 67,684 4,744 5,130 6,658 6,161 5,850 6,931
Balance +48,847 +47,346 +36,137 + 3,710 + 4,358 + 4,465 + 3,905 + 3,245 + 3,322
       3. Asia Exports 219,716 221,278 207,780 16,062 17,808 21,512 18,171 17,906 19,717
  Imports 224,355 227,036 225,301 19,820 18,660 22,087 21,130 20,635 21,548
Balance – 4,639 – 5,759 –17,522 – 3,758 – 851 – 574 – 2,959 – 2,729 – 1,831
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 29,144 28,663 25,445 1,676 1,982 2,299 2,023 2,222 2,455
  Imports 8,156 7,460 5,921 446 423 511 531 664 900
Balance +20,989 +21,202 +19,523 + 1,230 + 1,559 + 1,788 + 1,492 + 1,559 + 1,555
               Japan  Exports 20,436 20,662 17,382 1,470 1,437 1,665 1,551 1,308 1,393
Imports 23,710 23,904 21,346 1,805 1,680 1,895 2,081 1,958 2,035
Balance – 3,275 – 3,243 – 3,964 – 334 – 243 – 230 – 530 – 651 – 643
               People's Republic  Exports 93,004 95,984 95,860 7,552 8,326 10,315 8,376 8,405 9,531
               of China  2 Imports 106,065 110,054 117,004 10,651 9,863 11,717 10,729 10,354 10,893
Balance –13,061 –14,070 –21,144 – 3,099 – 1,537 – 1,402 – 2,353 – 1,949 – 1,362
               New industrial countries Exports 54,995 54,164 50,585 4,085 4,258 5,118 4,484 4,522 4,499
               and emerging markets  Imports 52,945 51,748 48,229 4,081 3,819 4,683 4,529 4,559 4,719
               of Asia  3 Balance + 2,050 + 2,416 + 2,356 + 4+ 439 + 436 – 44 – 37 – 219
       4. Oceania and Exports 12,291 11,221 10,657 739 886 1,101 875 926 1,005
           polar regions Imports 3,639 3,872 3,872 333 270 342 388 381 429
Balance + 8,652 + 7,349 + 6,785 + 407 + 616 + 759 + 488 + 545 + 577
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. EU excl. UK.  1 Including fuel and other supplies for ships andaircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.  3 Brunei
Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Period Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2016 – 20,987 – 5,950 – 38,247 8,612 15,790 – 7,156 – 1,520 3,092 474 76,800 – 1,076
2017 – 23,994 – 3,679 – 43,558 9,613 14,903 – 8,188 – 1,065 2,177 – 637 76,669 – 1,403
2018 – 17,410 – 2,003 – 44,543 9,535 17,398 – 7,206 580 3,325 – 1,208 107,902 – 1,001
2019 – 20,653 2 – 45,947 10,392 17,728 – 9,561 – 2,933 3,493 373 111,763 – 945
2020 3,471 – 6,095 – 14,698 9,461 17,392 – 6,822 – 4,775 3,347 2,307 91,586 – 1,396
2019 Q4 – 3,995 68 – 10,513 2,839 5,362 – 3,165 – 805 725 459 30,866 3,421
2020 Q1 – 2,773 – 1,220 – 7,497 2,464 4,344 – 2,164 – 963 881 917 26,953 – 996
Q2 5,647 – 1,534 259 2,332 4,794 – 1,524 – 1,125 879 384 15,200 – 2,524
Q3 – 5,402 – 1,863 – 7,428 2,206 3,353 – 1,993 – 1,645 892 97 23,168 – 1,123
Q4 5,999 – 1,478 – 32 2,458 4,902 – 1,140 – 1,042 695 909 26,265 3,247
2021 Q1 3,603 – 1,036 – 378 2,614 4,422 – 2,501 – 1,418 785 999 27,710 – 1,016
p Q2 4,988 – 24 – 1,723 2,465 4,823 – 1,229 – 1,317 824 467 16,874 – 2,869
2020 Aug. – 2,308 – 520 – 3,012 533 1,335 – 878 – 396 254 45 8,679 – 308
Sep. – 448 – 769 – 2,144 716 1,395 – 283 – 296 369 51 7,255 – 362
Oct. 843 – 620 – 728 961 1,341 – 700 – 93 259 257 7,413 – 434
Nov. 2,239 – 457 358 497 1,712 – 611 – 82 192 266 8,741 – 470
Dec. 2,917 – 401 338 1,001 1,849 170 – 867 244 386 10,111 4,151
2021 Jan. 943 – 460 – 133 1,013 1,086 – 869 – 347 256 343 9,806 – 354
Feb. 1,335 – 356 – 62 797 1,467 – 733 – 260 262 359 7,576 – 299
Mar. 1,324 – 220 – 183 803 1,868 – 900 – 811 267 297 10,328 – 363
Apr. 2,809 192 – 155 1,204 1,859 – 673 – 153 265 138 6,694 – 323
May 1,665 – 190 – 144 847 1,355 – 477 – 495 289 171 1,278 – 2,091
p June 513 – 26 – 1,425 415 1,609 – 79 – 669 271 158 8,902 – 455
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Period Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2016 – 40,931 – 25,417 – 11,516 10,739 – 15,514 4,214 4,196 2,142 3,219 – 1,077
2017 – 50,776 – 23,191 – 9,851 9,665 – 27,584 4,632 4,613 – 2,936 926 – 3,863
2018 – 48,713 – 28,645 – 10,186 10,237 – 20,067 5,152 5,142 676 3,444 – 2,768
2019 – 48,434 – 28,956 – 10,728 11,745 – 19,479 5,445 5,431 – 526 2,754 – 3,280
2020 – 51,582 – 34,268 – 12,211 10,877 – 17,313 5,925 5,908 – 4,771 469 – 5,240
2019 Q4 – 13,003 – 8,266 – 4,687 1,342 – 4,737 1,363 1,358 – 1,317 854 – 2,171
2020 Q1 – 14,404 – 9,565 – 2,315 2,514 – 4,839 1,482 1,477 – 348 – 444 95
Q2 – 8,922 – 4,819 – 2,270 4,506 – 4,104 1,480 1,477 188 504 – 316
Q3 – 10,369 – 6,422 – 3,249 2,144 – 3,947 1,481 1,477 – 1,206 – 54 – 1,151
Q4 – 17,886 – 13,463 – 4,378 1,713 – 4,423 1,482 1,477 – 3,405 464 – 3,869
2021 Q1 – 20,618 – 14,676 – 3,294 2,276 – 5,942 1,547 1,543 – 215 – 25 – 190
p Q2 – 8,541 – 4,297 – 1,584 5,287 – 4,244 1,547 1,543 – 1,886 – 1,700 – 186
2020 Aug. – 3,355 – 2,312 – 1,149 176 – 1,043 495 492 486 696 – 209
Sep. – 3,315 – 1,993 – 1,015 1,215 – 1,322 493 492 – 764 – 300 – 465
Oct. – 4,442 – 2,998 – 962 525 – 1,444 494 492 – 1,320 – 782 – 538
Nov. – 7,589 – 5,989 – 1,390 256 – 1,601 494 492 – 2,090 – 393 – 1,697
Dec. – 5,855 – 4,476 – 2,026 931 – 1,379 493 492 5 1,639 – 1,634
2021 Jan. – 7,340 – 5,854 – 1,803 399 – 1,486 516 514 – 395 – 373 – 22
Feb. – 8,733 – 6,458 – 661 923 – 2,275 515 514 – 1,448 – 1,236 – 212
Mar. – 4,545 – 2,364 – 830 955 – 2,181 516 514 1,628 1,584 44
Apr. – 3,822 – 2,165 – 641 1,332 – 1,658 516 514 – 984 – 857 – 127
May – 1,837 – 734 – 409 2,799 – 1,103 516 514 – 271 – 250 – 21
p June – 2,881 – 1,399 – 535 1,155 – 1,483 515 514 – 631 – 594 – 38
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2020 2021
Item 2018 2019 2020 Q4 Q1 Q2 p Apr. May  June  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +398,714 +247,406 +707,119 +77,200 +291,719 +115,174 +17,665 +28,423 +69,086
1.Direct investment +156,050 +136,291 +96,602 +43,818 +45,517 +14,349 +18,246 –21,922 +18,025
Equity +154,766 +116,375 +79,229 +13,948 +12,105 +30,857 +18,553 + 5,326 + 6,978
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +37,276 +37,654 +16,648 – 3,967 +14,233 + 8,039 + 3,093 + 1,433 + 3,513
Debt instruments + 1,285 +19,916 +17,373 +29,871 +33,412 –16,508 – 307 –27,249 +11,047
2.Portfolio investment +82,648 +136,850 +186,532 +67,717 +77,652 +65,391 +16,114 +11,355 +37,922
Shares  2 + 9,251 +14,111 +65,947 +22,891 + 9,077 +10,096 + 1,968 + 1,561 + 6,568
Investment fund shares  3 +28,366 +53,919 +64,435 +30,200 +16,793 +24,862 + 9,276 + 4,875 +10,711
Short-term  4
debt securities + 1,973 + 8,599 + 2,019 – 1,898 + 3,628 – 5,695 + 87 – 3,291 – 2,490
Long-term   5
debt securities +43,058 +60,221 +54,131 +16,524 +48,154 +36,127 + 4,783 + 8,211 +23,133
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +22,539 +24,532 +99,097 + 9,121 +22,346 +13,483 + 4,699 + 3,621 + 5,162
4.Other investment  7 +137,085 –49,723 +324,940 –44,304 +145,819 +21,893 –21,143 +35,157 + 7,879
MFIs  8 +49,862 + 9,276 – 4,494 –49,332 +142,555 +17,352 +41,287 –18,744 – 5,191
Short-term +45,400 – 8,901 + 3,526 –50,666 +135,399 +13,907 +37,339 –15,839 – 7,593
Long-term + 4,462 +18,177 – 8,020 + 1,333 + 7,157 + 3,444 + 3,947 – 2,905 + 2,402
Enterprises and
households  9 +39,124 +16,241 +85,204 –10,143 +62,426 –11,697 – 4,357 + 1,421 – 8,761
Short-term +20,489 + 4,510 +43,928 + 4,426 +60,016 –14,155 – 4,855 + 96 – 9,396
Long-term +18,635 +11,730 +41,276 –14,568 + 2,410 + 2,458 + 498 + 1,325 + 635
General government – 8,696 – 4,325 + 1,118 – 5,900 – 4,891 – 723 – 1,058 + 231 + 104
Short-term – 7,706 – 1,139 + 2,399 – 5,513 – 4,591 – 695 – 1,139 + 280 + 164
Long-term – 990 – 3,186 – 1,281 – 387 – 300 – 28 + 81 – 49 – 60
Bundesbank +56,795 –70,915 +243,112 +21,071 –54,271 +16,961 –57,014 +52,249 +21,726
5.Reserve assets + 392 – 544 – 51 + 848 + 385 + 58 – 251 + 211 + 98
II.Net foreign investment
in the reporting country
(increase: +) +152,171 +43,607 +476,016 –19,215 +164,208 +53,377 – 3,405 +17,055 +39,727
1. Direct investment +135,583 +60,170 +97,216 +40,655 +14,345 +13,857 +18,386 –21,850 +17,321
Equity +48,790 +30,250 +31,079 +15,740 + 5,664 + 9,542 + 5,424 + 100 + 4,018
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 4,331 + 1,031 + 2,152 – 1,337 + 1,039 + 166 + 664 – 619 + 122
Debt instruments +86,793 +29,920 +66,136 +24,915 + 8,681 + 4,315 +12,962 –21,949 +13,303
2.Portfolio investment –70,988 +63,443 +143,783 –104,819 +30,853 –10,313 – 9,820 + 5,902 – 6,396
Shares  2 –30,383 – 6,075 –16,838 – 985 + 4,188 – 5,197 – 2,686 + 821 – 3,332
Investment fund shares  3 – 6,364 – 4,923 + 933 + 1,835 + 110 + 1,058 + 1,534 + 292 – 768
Short-term  4
debt securities + 5,128 +15,902 +80,193 –33,494 +19,476 + 165 – 3,373 + 2,977 + 561
Long-term   5
debt securities –39,370 +58,539 +79,494 –72,175 + 7,079 – 6,339 – 5,295 + 1,812 – 2,856
3.Other investment  7 +87,576 –80,006 +235,017 +44,949 +119,010 +49,833 –11,971 +33,002 +28,802
MFIs  8 –35,902 –10,214 +108,397 –73,056 +248,352 +28,522 +30,973 +13,364 –15,815
Short-term –27,469 –20,978 +74,805 –83,596 +218,851 +43,378 +41,696 +14,094 –12,412
Long-term – 8,433 +10,764 +33,591 +10,539 +29,501 –14,856 –10,723 – 730 – 3,403
Enterprises and
households  9 +18,949 +29,501 +26,267 – 8,854 + 8,474 – 5,415 – 1,997 + 752 – 4,170
Short-term + 7,132 + 9,988 +18,062 – 6,779 +11,480 – 861 – 147 + 1,427 – 2,141
Long-term +11,816 +19,513 + 8,206 – 2,075 – 3,006 – 4,554 – 1,850 – 675 – 2,030
General government + 2,906 + 262 –10,521 – 4,993 – 3,760 + 3,639 + 1,569 + 1,901 + 168
Short-term + 2,230 + 124 –10,306 – 4,456 – 1,044 + 3,624 + 1,565 + 1,896 + 164
Long-term + 677 + 138 – 216 – 537 – 2,716 + 14 + 5+ 5+ 4
Bundesbank +101,623 –99,554 +110,874 +131,853 –134,057 +23,087 –42,516 +16,985 +48,619
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +246,544 +203,799 +231,103 +96,416 +127,511 +61,797 +21,070 +11,368 +29,359
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see 'Statistical series Direct investment
statistics').  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities  3 , 4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 – 17,068 – 30,857 – 10,477 65,670
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,670
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 671,202 489,769
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2019 Feb. 1,127,455 178,016 125,793 14,496 5,510 32,217 894,226 872,698 55,214 633,884 493,572
Mar. 1,190,416 178,088 125,302 14,629 5,561 32,596 958,243 941,310 54,086 655,445 534,971
Apr. 1,167,188 177,378 124,046 14,622 6,228 32,482 935,563 919,696 54,247 627,089 540,098
May 1,186,394 180,073 126,092 14,637 6,150 33,193 952,038 934,640 54,283 618,639 567,754
June 1,201,041 187,401 134,470 14,473 6,081 32,377 960,158 942,319 53,482 649,792 551,249
July 1,134,349 193,244 139,163 14,613 6,391 33,077 888,584 870,903 52,521 621,971 512,378
Aug. 1,173,640 205,331 149,696 14,703 6,379 34,553 915,546 897,901 52,763 638,733 534,907
Sep. 1,185,142 202,285 147,611 14,831 6,396 33,447 930,892 915,342 51,965 626,236 558,906
Oct. 1,103,094 199,858 146,284 14,663 6,287 32,624 852,754 837,377 50,482 596,696 506,398
Nov. 1,134,129 197,047 143,253 14,799 6,116 32,879 885,524 870,520 51,558 590,333 543,797
Dec. 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 671,202 489,769
2020 Jan. 1,090,725 209,432 154,867 14,785 6,110 33,671 828,120 811,435 53,173 580,910 509,814
Feb. 1,106,033 215,748 159,889 14,857 5,989 35,014 836,782 821,562 53,503 577,033 529,000
Mar. 1,218,815 213,722 158,677 14,812 5,965 34,268 952,781 935,126 52,312 617,919 600,896
Apr. 1,214,851 226,903 170,359 14,935 6,857 34,753 934,333 918,814 53,615 616,319 598,532
May 1,209,328 223,125 167,780 14,650 6,787 33,908 931,521 916,145 54,682 612,403 596,925
June 1,294,167 226,135 170,728 14,603 6,955 33,849 1,012,982 995,083 55,050 618,825 675,342
July 1,323,691 233,547 180,400 14,179 7,465 31,503 1,034,282 1,019,214 55,862 599,189 724,503
Aug. 1,358,137 230,309 177,973 14,129 7,423 30,784 1,071,521 1,056,231 56,307 600,390 757,747
Sep. 1,414,933 227,150 173,979 14,293 7,632 31,246 1,131,686 1,115,189 56,097 649,781 765,151
Oct. 1,346,367 227,767 174,433 14,346 7,656 31,332 1,061,498 1,047,327 57,102 619,445 726,922
Nov. 1,347,202 212,286 159,737 14,193 7,535 30,820 1,078,270 1,060,263 56,647 625,921 721,282
Dec. 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 Jan. 1,348,921 219,860 166,494 14,115 8,061 31,190 1,072,140 1,054,994 56,921 638,042 710,879
Feb. 1,328,303 210,619 157,313 14,119 8,047 31,140 1,060,378 1,043,746 57,306 616,473 711,830
Mar. 1,364,046 209,400 155,323 14,367 7,966 31,744 1,098,486 1,081,989 56,160 647,647 716,400
Apr. 1,307,161 210,799 158,143 14,085 7,836 30,735 1,041,472 1,024,734 54,890 604,863 702,299
May 1,370,231 221,201 168,678 14,037 7,809 30,677 1,093,721 1,076,918 55,309 621,827 748,404
June 1,384,834 213,600 159,995 14,326 8,094 31,184 1,115,447 1,101,897 55,787 670,632 714,202
July 1,319,694 219,775 165,984 14,345 8,104 31,343 1,042,015 1,024,970 57,903 657,905 661,789
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2017 901,267 218,110 683,156 457,369 225,788 211,769 14,018 1,115,680 143,928 971,752 770,140 201,612 131,034 70,579
2018 934,837 234,595 700,241 468,418 231,823 217,561 14,262 1,225,989 146,105 1,079,884 873,977 205,907 134,897 71,010
2019 959,708 226,949 732,759 499,322 233,437 217,768 15,669 1,281,332 165,199 1,116,133 908,374 207,759 133,704 74,055
2020 1,007,574 250,320 757,254 529,154 228,099 211,800 16,300 1,360,348 167,766 1,192,582 984,663 207,919 129,171 78,748
2021 Jan. 1,051,501 253,575 797,927 577,275 220,652 204,064 16,588 1,392,392 160,885 1,231,507 1,027,859 203,649 122,983 80,665
Feb. 1,058,227 258,375 799,851 572,749 227,102 210,489 16,614 1,390,051 165,241 1,224,810 1,015,649 209,161 127,888 81,273
Mar. 1,095,969 272,111 823,858 580,283 243,575 226,725 16,850 1,392,419 165,522 1,226,897 1,006,373 220,524 138,236 82,288
Apr. 1,086,960 269,905 817,055 577,596 239,459 222,468 16,991 1,409,569 170,664 1,238,906 1,023,103 215,803 133,961 81,842
May 1,057,714 270,395 787,319 553,608 233,711 216,984 16,727 1,389,444 171,979 1,217,465 1,006,408 211,056 129,367 81,689
June 1,062,483 249,317 813,166 567,578 245,588 228,712 16,876 1,401,295 163,777 1,237,518 1,014,998 222,520 139,800 82,720
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2017 522,279 166,645 355,634 263,631 92,003 83,509 8,494 720,770 93,932 626,838 544,462 82,376 62,137 20,239
2018 545,146 176,529 368,617 276,091 92,525 84,214 8,312 796,793 87,930 708,863 626,713 82,150 61,561 20,589
2019 569,888 176,258 393,630 302,654 90,976 82,454 8,522 824,390 89,604 734,787 650,172 84,615 62,534 22,081
2020 599,741 188,300 411,440 322,386 89,054 80,200 8,854 866,365 92,592 773,773 687,613 86,160 62,357 23,803
2021 Jan. 628,181 198,366 429,815 340,941 88,874 79,796 9,078 878,082 89,439 788,643 702,825 85,819 60,519 25,300
Feb. 634,002 201,694 432,308 339,621 92,687 83,659 9,028 878,026 88,866 789,159 698,276 90,883 65,255 25,629
Mar. 679,382 210,531 468,851 371,295 97,555 88,533 9,023 890,190 91,447 798,743 705,125 93,618 67,927 25,692
Apr. 676,258 211,565 464,692 368,731 95,961 86,771 9,190 912,592 90,962 821,630 730,073 91,557 65,794 25,763
May 640,806 211,913 428,894 335,464 93,430 84,441 8,990 890,189 96,512 793,677 704,853 88,824 63,274 25,550
June 632,656 195,612 437,044 340,801 96,243 87,169 9,074 893,203 92,845 800,358 707,201 93,157 67,492 25,665
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2017 378,987 51,465 327,522 193,738 133,784 128,260 5,524 394,910 49,996 344,914 225,677 119,236 68,897 50,340
2018 389,691 58,066 331,625 192,327 139,298 133,347 5,950 429,197 58,175 371,021 247,265 123,757 73,335 50,422
2019 389,820 50,692 339,129 196,668 142,461 135,314 7,146 456,942 75,595 381,347 258,203 123,144 71,171 51,974
2020 407,833 62,020 345,814 206,768 139,046 131,600 7,445 493,983 75,175 418,809 297,050 121,758 66,813 54,945
2021 Jan. 423,321 55,209 368,112 236,334 131,778 124,267 7,511 514,310 71,446 442,864 325,034 117,830 62,465 55,365
Feb. 424,225 56,681 367,544 233,128 134,415 126,829 7,586 512,025 76,375 435,650 317,373 118,278 62,634 55,644
Mar. 416,587 61,579 355,007 208,987 146,020 138,193 7,827 502,229 74,075 428,154 301,249 126,906 70,309 56,596
Apr. 410,703 58,340 352,363 208,865 143,498 135,697 7,801 496,977 79,702 417,275 293,030 124,246 68,167 56,078
May 416,908 58,483 358,425 218,144 140,280 132,543 7,737 499,255 75,467 423,788 301,555 122,232 66,093 56,140
June 429,827 53,705 376,123 226,778 149,345 141,543 7,802 508,092 70,932 437,160 307,798 129,363 72,309 57,054
Euro area (19)
2017 454,033 149,685 304,348 232,178 72,170 64,683 7,487 654,278 75,669 578,609 512,786 65,823 50,442 15,381
2018 468,699 156,351 312,348 240,676 71,672 64,427 7,245 730,553 68,747 661,806 596,496 65,310 49,555 15,755
2019 492,090 157,829 334,261 263,830 70,431 62,939 7,492 751,076 69,464 681,612 615,369 66,243 49,609 16,634
2020 515,425 167,497 347,928 279,213 68,715 61,150 7,565 783,041 71,423 711,617 645,409 66,208 48,316 17,891
2021 Jan. 541,180 179,279 361,901 293,469 68,431 60,704 7,727 794,556 69,462 725,094 659,052 66,043 46,851 19,191
Feb. 545,961 183,136 362,825 291,685 71,141 63,485 7,656 791,694 69,618 722,076 652,594 69,482 50,143 19,339
Mar. 581,812 188,072 393,740 319,435 74,305 66,689 7,616 805,118 71,996 733,122 662,265 70,858 51,489 19,369
Apr. 574,874 188,396 386,478 313,279 73,199 65,469 7,730 823,642 71,163 752,479 682,989 69,490 50,038 19,452
May 549,188 192,018 357,170 286,041 71,129 63,482 7,647 809,765 76,299 733,466 664,788 68,679 48,960 19,718
June 535,267 171,564 363,702 290,684 73,018 65,326 7,693 813,769 73,615 740,153 668,241 71,912 52,041 19,871
Extra-Euro area (19)
2017 447,234 68,425 378,809 225,191 153,618 147,087 6,531 461,402 68,259 393,143 257,354 135,789 80,592 55,197
2018 466,138 78,244 387,894 227,743 160,151 153,134 7,017 495,436 77,358 418,078 277,482 140,597 85,342 55,255
2019 467,618 69,120 398,498 235,492 163,006 154,829 8,176 530,256 95,735 434,521 293,005 141,516 84,095 57,421
2020 492,149 82,823 409,326 249,941 159,385 150,650 8,735 577,307 96,343 480,965 339,254 141,711 80,854 60,856
2021 Jan. 510,322 74,296 436,026 283,806 152,220 143,359 8,861 597,836 91,424 506,413 368,807 137,606 76,132 61,474
Feb. 512,266 75,240 437,026 281,064 155,962 147,004 8,958 598,357 95,623 502,733 363,054 139,679 77,745 61,934
Mar. 514,157 84,039 430,118 260,848 169,270 160,036 9,234 587,301 93,526 493,775 344,109 149,666 86,747 62,919
Apr. 512,086 81,509 430,577 264,317 166,260 156,999 9,261 585,927 99,501 486,426 340,113 146,313 83,923 62,390
May 508,526 78,377 430,148 267,567 162,582 153,502 9,080 579,679 95,680 483,998 341,621 142,378 80,407 61,971
June 527,217 77,753 449,464 276,894 172,570 163,386 9,183 587,527 90,161 497,365 346,757 150,608 87,759 62,849
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2020 Mar. 1.7788 1.5417 7.7675 7.4703 118.90 11.2943 10.8751 1.0591 0.89460 1.1063
Apr. 1.7271 1.5287 7.6858 7.4617 116.97 11.3365 10.8845 1.0545 0.87547 1.0862
May 1.6724 1.5219 7.7482 7.4577 116.87 10.9862 10.5970 1.0574 0.88685 1.0902
June 1.6322 1.5254 7.9734 7.4548 121.12 10.7298 10.4869 1.0712 0.89878 1.1255
July 1.6304 1.5481 8.0352 7.4467 122.38 10.6544 10.3538 1.0711 0.90467 1.1463
Aug. 1.6433 1.5654 8.1954 7.4460 125.40 10.5797 10.3087 1.0767 0.90081 1.1828
Sep. 1.6307 1.5586 8.0333 7.4418 124.50 10.7769 10.4279 1.0786 0.90947 1.1792
Oct. 1.6521 1.5559 7.9225 7.4424 123.89 10.9220 10.3967 1.0739 0.90741 1.1775
Nov. 1.6266 1.5472 7.8152 7.4459 123.61 10.7453 10.2311 1.0785 0.89605 1.1838
Dec. 1.6166 1.5595 7.9602 7.4412 126.28 10.6008 10.1736 1.0814 0.90624 1.2170
2021 Jan. 1.5764 1.5494 7.8730 7.4387 126.31 10.3661 10.0952 1.0794 0.89267 1.2171
Feb. 1.5605 1.5354 7.8136 7.4367 127.49 10.2791 10.0887 1.0858 0.87268 1.2098
Mar. 1.5444 1.4970 7.7465 7.4363 129.38 10.1469 10.1692 1.1065 0.85873 1.1899
Apr. 1.5544 1.4975 7.8051 7.4367 130.49 10.0376 10.1620 1.1031 0.86527 1.1979
May 1.5653 1.4732 7.8109 7.4362 132.57 10.0931 10.1471 1.0968 0.86258 1.2146
June 1.5761 1.4713 7.7391 7.4364 132.63 10.1444 10.1172 1.0940 0.85872 1.2047
July 1.5926 1.4806 7.6536 7.4373 130.35 10.3767 10.1979 1.0856 0.85613 1.1822
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2021
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-42  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
26 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  526 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.1 96.1 96.1 96.6 96.0 97.9 99.6 95.9 97.7 98.2 98.1 97.8
2000 87.1 86.8 86.1 85.5 88.1 86.1 91.9 97.4 85.5 91.1 93.0 92.2 91.2
2001 87.6 87.1 86.8 84.5 90.2 86.9 91.7 96.5 86.1 90.5 92.9 91.6 91.0
2002 89.8 90.2 89.9 88.0 94.5 90.5 92.4 95.6 88.5 91.1 93.4 92.1 91.9
2003 100.4 101.3 101.1 99.1 106.4 101.5 95.9 94.7 97.7 95.3 97.0 96.6 96.8
2004 104.2 105.2 104.1 102.3 110.9 105.3 96.2 93.5 100.1 95.6 98.4 98.1 98.4
2005 102.8 103.9 102.1 100.6 109.0 102.9 94.8 91.9 98.9 93.3 98.4 97.0 96.7
2006 102.8 103.8 101.5 99.5 109.1 102.2 93.5 90.3 98.3 91.6 98.5 96.6 96.0
2007 106.3 106.8 103.7 101.1 112.7 104.4 94.5 89.6 102.1 92.0 100.8 98.2 97.3
2008 110.1 109.7 105.9 104.9 117.4 106.9 94.9 88.3 105.2 91.3 102.3 98.3 97.6
2009 111.6 110.5 107.0 108.6 120.5 107.9 95.2 89.1 104.7 92.0 101.8 98.5 97.9
2010 104.4 102.8 98.8 100.9 111.9 99.0 92.5 88.7 98.3 88.2 98.7 94.2 92.5
2011 104.2 101.9 97.0 99.2 112.7 98.5 92.1 88.5 97.6 87.4 98.1 93.4 91.9
2012 98.5 96.7 91.4 93.5 107.5 93.7 90.1 88.3 92.5 84.7 95.8 90.5 88.9
2013 102.0 99.7 94.5 96.5 112.2 96.7 92.3 88.8 97.5 86.7 98.1 92.2 90.9
2014 102.3 99.1 94.4 96.5 114.5 97.1 92.9 89.6 97.7 87.4 98.1 92.4 91.5
2015 92.5 89.4 85.8 85.9 106.1 88.6 89.8 90.3 88.9 83.6 94.3 87.7 86.9
2016 95.2 91.4 88.1 p 87.1 110.1 90.6 90.7 90.7 90.4 84.9 94.9 88.7 88.1
2017 97.4 93.3 89.2 p 87.7 112.4 91.8 91.8 90.8 93.2 85.6 96.3 89.8 88.9
2018 99.9 95.5 90.6 p 89.2 117.3 94.9 92.8 90.7 95.9 86.4 97.6 91.1 90.8
2019 98.1 93.1 88.8 p 86.6 115.4 92.3 91.8 90.9 93.1 85.5 96.3 89.9 89.4
2020 99.6 93.5 p 89.2 p 87.5 119.4 93.8 91.9 91.1 92.9 86.0 96.4 90.0 90.2
2018 Aug. 99.8 95.3 90.5 p 89.4 117.8 95.3 92.6 90.6 95.6 86.4 97.1 90.9 90.9
Sep. 100.2 95.8 119.1 96.2 97.6 91.3 91.7
Oct. 99.6 95.3 117.8 95.1 97.2 91.0 91.0
Nov. 99.1 94.7 90.0 p 88.4 116.8 94.3 92.4 90.8 94.7 86.2 97.2 91.0 90.8
Dec. 99.2 94.6 116.9 94.2 97.1 90.7 90.5
2019 Jan. 98.7 94.1 116.3 93.6 96.8 90.4 90.1
Feb. 98.3 93.6 89.0 p 87.1 115.6 92.9 91.9 90.6 93.7 85.5 96.5 90.0 89.6
Mar. 97.7 93.0 115.2 92.4 96.3 89.7 89.3
Apr. 97.6 92.8 115.0 92.2 96.4 89.7 89.3
May 98.1 93.2 88.7 p 86.7 115.7 92.6 92.0 90.9 93.6 85.5 96.6 90.0 89.7
June 98.7 93.7 116.2 93.0 96.7 90.2 89.8
July 98.3 93.2 115.3 92.2 96.5 89.9 89.3
Aug. 98.8 93.7 89.2 p 87.0 116.2 92.9 91.9 91.1 93.1 85.8 96.3 90.1 89.6
Sep. 98.1 92.9 115.3 92.0 96.0 89.8 89.2
Oct. 98.0 92.6 115.2 91.7 96.0 89.6 89.1
Nov. 97.4 92.0 88.5 p 85.8 114.6 91.1 91.5 91.0 92.1 85.4 95.9 89.3 88.8
Dec. 97.3 91.9 114.6 91.0 95.9 89.4 88.8
2020 Jan. 96.9 91.2 114.1 90.4 95.9 89.1 88.4
Feb. 96.2 90.5 88.0 p 86.7 113.5 89.7 91.5 91.3 91.6 85.4 95.6 88.8 88.2
Mar. 98.8 92.9 117.8 93.0 96.5 90.1 90.1
Apr. 98.1 92.5 117.5 93.0 96.2 90.0 90.3
May 98.3 92.5 88.6 p 87.5 117.5 92.8 91.3 91.2 91.2 85.7 96.2 90.0 90.2
June 99.7 93.8 119.1 93.9 96.8 90.6 90.7
July 100.4 94.3 120.3 94.7 95.8 89.8 90.1
Aug. 101.5 94.9 90.0 p 87.9 122.4 95.9 92.3 91.1 94.0 86.6 96.8 90.6 91.2
Sep. 101.5 94.8 122.4 95.7 96.7 90.5 91.1
Oct. 101.3 94.6 122.4 95.6 96.5 90.3 90.9
Nov. 100.6 94.1 p 90.2 p 87.8 121.6 95.0 92.4 90.8 94.7 86.3 96.4 90.0 90.5
Dec. 101.8 95.1 122.9 95.9 97.0 90.5 91.0
2021 Jan. 101.3 95.3 122.4 96.0 98.0 91.4 91.8
Feb. 100.6 94.6 p 89.8 p 87.5 121.5 95.2 93.2 91.7 95.4 86.9 98.0 91.2 91.6
Mar. 100.3 94.1 121.2 p 94.8 97.8 91.1 p 91.5
Apr. 100.6 94.2 121.9 p 95.1 97.9 91.2 p 91.7
May 100.8 p 94.2 ... ... 122.3 p 95.2 … … … … 98.0 91.2 p 91.7
June 100.2 p 93.6 121.5 p 94.4 p97.8 p 90.9 p 91.3
July 99.7 p 93.4 120.8 p 94.2 p97.8 p 91.1 p 91.4
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's
price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective
exchange rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitive-
ness. The weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more
detailed information on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the
Deutsche Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1  The
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral
exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Australia,
Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan,
Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United
Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and wage indices were not avai-lable, estimates were used.  2 ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the
group EER-19 and additionally Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Peru, Philippines, the
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and
United Arab Emirates.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from
2001 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and
Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including
Latvia, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.  5 Euro area countries
(current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-19.  6 Euro area
countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-42.

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website. In addition, the new Statistical Series 
provide a new basic structure and advanced options for using data and are also available 
on the Bundesbank’s website.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
A list of the articles published in the period from 
2010 to 2020 is available on the Bundesbank’s 
website.
Monthly Report articles
October 2020
– Developments in the German banking sys -
tem during the negative interest rate policy 
period
– Patterns of international business cycles
– The protracted rise in residential property 
prices in Germany from a macroeconomic 
perspective: transmission channels and fun -
damental determinants
– State government budgets: results for 2019
November 2020
– The current economic situation in GermanyDecember 2020
– Outlook for the German economy for 2021 
to 2023
– The informative value of national fiscal indi -
cators in respect of debt at the European 
level
– Risk Reduction Act – the national implemen -
tation of the European banking package
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2019
January 2021
– The slowdown in euro area productivity 
growth
– Methodology and analytical options for the 
expanded statistics on banking groups’ secur -
ities holdings
– The two- tier system for reserve remuneration  
and its impact on banks and financial mar -
kets
February 2021
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2021
– German balance of payments in 2020
– A new European prudential framework for 
investment firmsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
85•

April 2021
– The impact of monetary policy depending on 
the debt situation in the non- financial private 
sector: Evidence for the euro area
– Assessments and expectations of firms in the 
pandemic: findings from the  Bundesbank 
Online Panel Firms
– Digital money: options for payments
May 2021
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2021
– Outlook for the German economy for 2021 
to 2023
– Government finances: Central bank bond 
purchases increase sensitivity to interest rate 
changes
– Federal debt: allocate premia on accruals 
basis in budgetary interest expenditure
– Local government finances: how cash ad -
vances can be limited and budget  imbalances 
avoided
July 2021
– Cross-border corporate takeovers: the im -
pact of internationalisation on enterprises in 
Germany
– Crypto tokens and decentralised financial 
applica tions
– Digital risks in the banking sector
– Macroprudential policy and growth-at-risk
August 2021
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, January 20212
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
January 20212
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131
Discussion Paperso
11/ 2021  
Precision- based sampling with missing observa -
tions: A factor model application12/ 2021  
What drives the German TARGET balances? Evi -
dence from a BVAR approach
13/ 2021  
Do exchange rates absorb demand shocks at 
the ZLB?
14/ 2021  
Banks’ complexity- risk nexus and the role of 
regulation
15/ 2021  
Contagious zombies
16/2021  
Banks fearing the drought? Liquidity hoarding 
as a response to idiosyncratic interbank funding 
dry-ups
17/2021  
Covid-19 and capital flows: The responses of in -
vestors to the responses of governments
18/2021  
The effect of unemployment insurance benefits 
on (self-)employment: Two sides of the same 
coin?
19/2021  
System-wide and banks’ internal stress tests: 
Regulatory requirements and literature review
20/2021  
The impact of borrower- based instruments on 
household vulnerability in Germany
21/2021  
Lighting up the dark: Liquidity in the German 
corporate bond market
22/ 2021  
Labor adjustment and productivity in the OECD
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
87•

23/ 2021  
German banks‘ behavior in the low interest rate 
environment
24/ 2021  
Reversal interest rate and macroprudential policy
25/ 2021  
Equity premium predictability over the business 
cycle
26/ 2021  
The case for a positive euro area inflation tar -
get: Evidence from France, Germany and Italy
27/ 2021  
Decomposing the yield curve with linear regres -
sions and survey information
28/ 2021  
Return differences between DAX ETFs and the 
benchmark DAXBanking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, 
January  20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2021  
88•

