Monthly Report
November 2021
Vol. 73  
No 11

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 3512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 a.m. on 19 November 2021.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
The potential effects of a sharp downturn on the Chinese real estate market  .....................  14
The economic effects of the planned longer- term fiscal packages in the United States  ....... 17
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  28
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  29
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  42
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  51
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  63
EU fiscal rules: current debate on reform  ............................................................................  75Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
5

Overview
Shortages dampen economic 
upswing and result in 
stronger price increases
The global economic recovery lost significant 
momentum in the third quarter. Severe short -
ages of intermediate goods hindered economic 
activity in many regions. As the delta variant of 
the coronavirus spread, pandemic- induced bur -
dens in some countries were also exacerbated 
again – a situation compounded yet further at 
times by other inhibiting factors. For instance, 
economic growth in China also slowed due to 
problems on the real estate market. In the 
United States, weather- induced production 
losses and the expiry of fiscal transfer payments 
were partly responsible for weaker growth. Re -
covery in the United Kingdom also continued 
at a markedly reduced pace. In the euro area, 
meanwhile, gross domestic product (GDP) saw 
renewed robust growth, but here, too, the re -
covery lost significant momentum over the 
course of the quarter.
The manufacturing sector, above all, suffered 
from shortages of important primary products. 
For months, enterprises in all manner of sectors 
had already been complaining of increasing de -
livery times. These delays now had an ever-  
growing impact on downstream production 
stages. In spite of well- filled order books, global 
industrial production sank markedly over the 
course of the third quarter, and global trade re -
mained listless.
The rise in global consumer price inflation ac -
celerated further over the last few months. 
One reason for this was that a high demand for 
fossil fuels was met with low market supply. As 
a result, market prices increased significantly. 
Natural gas prices, in particular, reached new 
record highs. Furthermore, some enterprises in 
sectors that had been especially hard hit by 
pandemic- induced restrictions increased their 
prices substantially. Ultimately, producers seem to be passing on cost pressures, which have 
persisted for some time now, to the end cus -
tomer to an increasing extent. For industrial 
countries as a whole, consumer price inflation 
had increased to 4.8% on the year by October 
(3.4% excluding energy and food.) Further 
price pass- through to consumers can be ex -
pected over the next few months, too, on ac -
count of the persistent inflationary pressure on 
industrial producer prices. However, as supply 
bottlenecks are gradually overcome, the associ -
ated price surges should abate. That said, there 
is a risk of accelerated price increases becom -
ing entrenched due to higher inflation expect -
ations. Against this backdrop, the first central 
banks in the industrial countries have initiated a 
reversal of their very accommodative monetary 
policy. Many emerging market economies have 
already been substantially tightening their 
monetary policy for quite some time.
The international financial markets have been 
influenced by surprisingly high inflation rates 
and increasing inflation expectations during the 
second half of the year to date. Market partici -
pants ratcheted up their inflation expectations, 
primarily for the next two years. Recently, 
therefore, the market- based expectations of 
average annual inflation rates for 2022 lay sig -
nificantly over 2% in many currency areas and 
at 3% in the euro area. Rising inflation expect -
ations also led to the view that the central 
banks’ monetary policy response would poten -
tially be swifter than previously indicated. 
Against this backdrop, nominal interest rates 
rose until the end of October worldwide, 
chiefly for short- term maturities. The decision 
of the US Federal Reserve to taper net pur -
chases in several stages had been widely ex -
pected. Of late, however, the major central 
banks have moved to counter expectations of 
faster monetary policy tightening. This has con -
tributed to declining yields over the entire ma -
turity range in many places. On balance, ten-  
year government bond yields increased mark -Significant loss 
in momentum 
of economic 
recovery 
Global industry 
increasingly 
suffering  from 
shortage of 
materials
Further rise in 
global consumer 
price inflationFinancial 
markets  shaped 
by high inflation 
and anticipated 
monetary policy 
responseDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
6

edly on their end-  June levels in the United 
States and the United Kingdom, while remain -
ing virtually unchanged in the euro area. Over -
all, yields on bonds of BBB- rated European en -
terprises rose slightly. On the whole, though, 
financing terms on the European bond market 
thus remain very favourable. The stock markets 
recorded price gains worldwide, boosted by a 
good reporting season and higher corporate 
earnings expectations. Market participants’ 
concerns regarding the further course of the 
pandemic initially took somewhat of a back 
seat, but have recently returned to the fore. 
The aforementioned expectations about infla -
tion developments and future monetary policy 
in the individual currency areas also shaped de -
velopments in the foreign exchange markets. 
On balance, the US dollar appreciated on a 
broad basis, while the euro depreciated in 
effect ive terms.
In September, the ECB Governing Council 
judged that favourable financing conditions 
could be maintained with moderately lower 
net asset purchases under the pandemic emer -
gency purchase programme (PEPP) than in the 
previous two quarters. It then confirmed this 
assessment at its October monetary policy 
meeting. Net asset purchases will continue 
with an unchanged anticipated total envelope 
of €1,850 billion until at least the end of March 
2022 and, in any case, until the Governing 
Council judges that the coronavirus crisis phase 
is over. If favourable financing conditions can 
be maintained with smaller asset purchase 
flows overall, the envelope of €1,850 billion 
need not be used in full. Equally, the total en -
velope can also be increased if necessary.
The broad monetary aggregate M3 recorded a 
significant expansion in the third quarter of 
2021 as well. However, net inflows remained 
substantially lower than those seen at the out -
set of the pandemic, signalling a continued 
normalisation of monetary growth. On the 
counterparts side, the Eurosystem’s continued 
asset purchases boosted monetary growth. 
Banks’ domestic lending also saw a significant increase: for one thing, non-  financial corpor -
ations’ loan demand picked up momentum on 
the back of their funding needs for investment 
purposes. For another, household demand for 
loans for house purchase remained consistently 
strong. At the same time, the banks participat -
ing in the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) reported 
that they had only tightened their credit stand -
ards in the third quarter for loans for house 
purchase.
German economic activity continued to see a 
substantial recovery in the third quarter of 
2021. According to the Federal Statistical 
 Office’s flash estimate, real gross domestic 
product (GDP) was up 1.8% on the quarter 
after seasonal adjustment, which is still 1.1% 
short of its pre- crisis level in the fourth quarter 
of 2019. This recovery was buoyed by strong 
growth in the services sector. The easing of 
measures to protect against the coronavirus in 
some areas brought about robust catch- up 
effects , although these waned considerably 
over the summer months. By contrast, indus -
trial output continued to decline, chiefly due to 
the worsening shortages in intermediate goods 
and commodities in the third quarter. Once 
again, this hit the automotive industry particu -
larly hard. The construction sector also suffered 
from materials shortages. Furthermore, there 
was a particularly sharp increase in the extent 
to which output in this sector was hampered 
by a lack of labour. Overall, although the econ -
omy exited the second quarter with consider -
able momentum, it is unlikely to have picked 
up any more speed over the third quarter.
On the demand side, private consumption was 
the main driver of growth for the recovery in 
the third quarter, just as it had been in the pre -
ceding quarter. Strong catch- up effects associ -
ated with the easing of most of the contain -
ment measures had an impact here in particu -
lar. By contrast, investment and exports were 
severely impaired by supply problems in the in -
dustrial sector. Business investment in new ma -
chinery and equipment is therefore likely to 
have gone down significantly. Exports of goods Monetary 
policy : mild 
reduction in 
PEPP purchases 
compared with 
the preceding 
two quarters
Gradual normal -
isation of mon -
etary growthSteep rise in 
German eco -
nomic output 
in Q3 2021
Private con -
sumption main 
driver of growthDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
7

fell considerably despite continuing high de -
mand from abroad. The exports of services, 
however, are likely to have risen sharply. That 
said, they constitute only a relatively small 
share of total German exports.
Banks’ lending in Germany saw dynamic 
growth in the third quarter. Lending to house -
holds increased once again, which was due to 
renewed high demand for housing loans 
boosted by the ongoing exceptionally favour -
able financing conditions. Credit standards for 
loans to households for house purchase were 
tightened slightly in net terms. Loans to non-  
financial corporations also picked up strongly, 
especially in the long- term maturity segment. 
This was mainly thanks to the continued recov -
ery in economic activity associated with an in -
crease in financing needs, especially in domes -
tically oriented sectors such as the construction 
and real estate sectors.
The labour market saw a very substantial recov -
ery in the months of June and July. This mo -
mentum lost steam over the third quarter, 
however, mainly as a result of the sustained 
supply difficulties in the industrial sector and 
the fading boost from the easing of pandemic- 
related restrictions in the services sector. Even 
so, the level of employment increased quite 
considerably on the quarter, unemployment fell 
substantially, and the use of short- time work 
could be scaled back significantly. Nevertheless, 
the situation on the labour market is not ex -
pected to continue improving to the same ex -
tent over the next few months.
Negotiated wage growth was only modest in 
the third quarter, driven partly by a baseline ef -
fect in the metal and electrical engineering in -
dustry. Actual earnings are likely to have risen 
to a markedly greater extent than negotiated 
wages over the same period. The main reason 
for this is the decrease in short- time working. 
The employees concerned extended their 
working hours again and thereby saw their 
earnings rise considerably on the level of the 
previous year, which had been pushed down by short-  time work. The recovery of the Ger -
man economy was reflected in the higher vol -
ume of new agreements in the third quarter 
compared with 2020. The influence of higher 
inflation rates and signs of resurgent labour 
market tightness also played a role. The under -
lying macroeconomic conditions likewise point 
to stronger wage growth for collective wage 
agreements coming up for renewal.
In the ongoing coalition talks to form a new 
Federal Government, the idea of raising the 
minimum wage to €12 by the end of 2022 is 
being considered. Such a political objective 
threatens to undermine the independent Min -
imum Wage Commission. The significant min -
imum wage increase planned would affect the 
lower wage brackets markedly and would have 
non- negligible spillover effects on the wage 
brackets higher up. It is also likely to amplify 
wage pressures in future.
Consumer prices saw an exceptionally steep 
rise in the third quarter of 2021. The Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) was up by 
1.1% after seasonal adjustment and thus some -
what more strongly than in the preceding quar -
ter. Industrial goods excluding energy in par -
ticular became markedly more expensive in 
light of the exacerbated shortage of materials 
and further rises in shipping costs. The prices of 
services were also raised somewhat more 
sharply than in the second quarter. Significant 
price adjustments for rental cars, inter alia, 
played a role in this regard. Yet even services 
affected by temporary business closures in the 
first half of the year, such as the catering sec -
tor, continued to see distinct mark- ups.
Inflation rates expanded substantially in year-  
on- year terms. Overall, consumer prices rose by 
3.5% in the third quarter, and by 2.1% when 
energy and food are excluded. On the one 
hand, headline inflation is likely to have been 
pushed up by 1¼ percentage points owing to 
the baseline effect from the VAT rates that had 
been temporarily lowered in the second half of 
2020. On the other hand, the typical seasonal Robust uptick in 
German banks’ 
loans to domes -
tic private sector
Substantial 
recovery in 
labour market in 
Q3, but momen -
tum losing 
steam recently
Negotiated 
wages up only 
slightly in Q3, 
actual earnings 
continue to rise 
markedlyPolitical object -
ive of minimum 
wage of €12 an 
hour question -
able
Another 
extremely sharp 
climb in con -
sumer prices 
in Q3
Inflation rate at 
high level even 
excluding one- 
off effectsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
8

high in package holiday prices in the summer 
–  especially in July and August  – was much 
lower than last year because the weighting of 
package holidays in the HICP fell. This reduced 
the inflation rate by just over one percentage 
point. Even without these one-  off effects, the 
headline rate is likely to have stood at almost 
3% in the third quarter, and the rate excluding 
energy and food at around 2%.
Prices saw a further substantial rise in October. 
Annual headline inflation rose from 4.1% in 
September to 4.6%. This month it could even 
reach just under 6%, of which just over 1½ per -
centage points would be attributable to the 
two one- off effects. The statistical one- off effect   
is now working in the opposite direction, in -
creasing the inflation rate by just over ¼ per -
centage point. This effect will come to an end 
in December, and the VAT base effect will do 
so in January. The inflation rate should then 
decline  perceptibly, although the bulk of the 
major increases in market prices for natural gas 
will probably only be passed on to consumers 
after the turn of the year. While, as things 
stand, headline inflation is likely to gradually 
continue falling in the following months, it 
could remain significantly above 3% for an ex -
tended period of time. It is conceivable that 
core inflation will be substantially over 2%.
Initially, there will probably be a brief pause in 
the economic recovery. From today’s perspec -
tive, GDP could broadly stagnate in the final 
quarter of 2021, after economic output already 
stopped rising over the course of the third 
quarter. The surge in growth coming from the 
services sector has probably largely come to an 
end for the time being, having mainly been due 
to a certain degree of normalisation after 
coronavirus response measures were eased. 
However, some containment measures have al -
ready been tightened again. The industrial sec -
tor will probably continue to dampen macro -
economic growth in the fourth quarter. While 
demand for industrial products remains high, 
supply problems in the industrial sector are 
likely to continue weighing on growth. The construction sector will probably contribute 
positively to growth despite an increasing 
shortage of labour in this area, in particular. 
Throughout the final quarter of 2021 and the 
first quarter of 2022, developments will be sub -
ject to risks associated with an intensification 
of the pandemic. As things stand, however, the 
macroeconomic effects will probably be less se -
vere than in previous waves of the pandemic. 
The exceptionally high order backlogs in indus -
try and construction suggest that substantial 
backlog and catch- up effects will emerge once 
supply bottlenecks perceptibly ease.
The coronavirus crisis is still having a major im -
pact on Germany’s public finances in 2021. The 
general government deficit could therefore 
reach a similar size to that recorded last year 
(2020: 4.3% of GDP). As central government is 
shouldering the vast majority of the budgetary 
burdens caused by the crisis, it will account for 
most of the deficit. However, the budget out -
turn stands to be much more favourable than 
the very high figures projected in the draft 
budget.
Next year, government deficits are likely to fall 
back again sharply as the expected economic 
recovery will also ease the burden on govern -
ment budgets. Under the legal status quo, 
moreover, the coronavirus measures creating 
these budget pressures will gradually come to 
an end. Factoring out possible new measures 
from the incoming Federal Government, the 
general government deficit ratio could there -
fore fall back towards 1%. The consolidation 
required following the crisis would thus be 
limited and on a much smaller scale than ini -
tially expected. According to the latest tax esti -
mate, for example, it is likely that tax revenue 
will even be above the trajectory projected be -
fore the crisis – after adjustment for tax cuts 
implemented in the meantime.
A moderate structural deficit is expected for 
2022, following the structural surpluses posted 
in the pre- crisis years. This reflects the funda -
mental loosening of the fiscal stance during the Further substan -
tial rise in 
October 
Economic recov -
ery could see a 
brief pause in 
Q4 2021Coronavirus 
crisis  still having 
strong negative 
impact on public  
finances in 2021
Easing in 2022 
due to cyclical 
recovery and 
expiring 
measures Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
9

coronavirus crisis. Above all, various expend -
iture categories saw dynamic growth, also in 
structural terms. This is true of social expend -
iture in particular, but also of spending in areas 
such as education, infrastructure and climate 
policy. The structural expenditure ratio exclud -
ing interest expenditure is thus close to historic 
highs.
The outlook for public finances depends, not 
least, on the fiscal policy of the incoming Fed -
eral Government. The incumbent government 
was intending to invoke the debt brake escape 
clause again in 2022. There are currently no 
signs that the new government will do other -
wise. However, there is good reason to believe 
that 2022 will not be a crisis year. This means 
that there should be comparatively little need 
for pandemic- related government expenditure. 
Moreover, there is a general expectation – also 
reflected in the latest government estimate – of 
normal economic conditions. After adjustment 
for changes in tax law (the majority of which 
were already planned before the crisis), tax rev -
enue is exceeding pre- crisis expectations. All in 
all, invoking the escape clause therefore does 
not appear warranted as things stand. At all 
events, it would be extremely difficult to justify 
financing non- crisis- related budgetary burdens 
through borrowing made possible by the es -
cape clause.
Fundamental financing pressures are building 
up in the health, pension and long- term care 
insurance schemes. Their expenditure is tend -ing to grow faster than their revenue base. To 
alleviate these pressures, slower spending 
growth, higher contribution rates and/ or per -
manent increases in grants from central gov -
ernment are needed. So far, there is no indica -
tion that the incoming Federal Government will 
address this by lowering expenditure. There is 
probably no leeway in the central government 
budget for additional grants without budget-  
alleviating measures elsewhere. Significant rises 
in contribution rates would therefore appear 
likely.
Central and state government have to ensure 
their finances comply with the debt brake. In 
addition, they are jointly responsible for adher -
ing to the European fiscal rules. Some consider 
the fiscal rules to be overly strict, and reforms 
are under discussion. Another current debate 
in Germany centres on how to formally fund 
certain projects beyond the reach of the debt 
brake via off- budget constructs. This threatens 
to at least partially undermine the restrictions 
on government borrowing. Moreover, Germa -
ny’s effective compliance with the European 
rules might no longer be ensured by the debt 
brake. The debt brake has proved its worth so 
far, and adjustments do not appear urgently 
necessary. If changes are considered appropri -
ate, these should be discussed openly and, 
where necessary, given a new legal grounding. 
The rules would need to remain binding, and 
sound public finances still ensured. That would, 
in any case, be preferable to hollowing out and 
circumventing the debt brake.Fiscal loosening 
in coronavirus 
crisis mainly via 
comparatively 
high expenditure 
growth
Invoking escape 
clause in 2022 
does not appear 
warranted
Social security 
funds: funda -
mental need 
for actionBinding fiscal 
rules importantDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
10

Global and European setting
Global economic 
developments 
The global economic recovery lost significant 
momentum in the third quarter of 2021. Severe 
shortages of intermediate goods hindered eco -
nomic activity in many regions. As the Delta 
variant of the coronavirus spread, pandemic-  
induced burdens in some countries were also 
exacerbated again, including in China, Japan 
and the United States as well as parts of Europe 
– a situation compounded at times by add -
itional inhibiting factors. For instance, eco -
nomic growth in China also slowed due to 
problems on the real estate market. In the 
United States, weather- induced production 
losses and the expiry of fiscal transfer payments 
were partly responsible for weaker growth. Re -
covery in the United Kingdom likewise con -
tinued at a markedly reduced pace. In the euro 
area, meanwhile, price- adjusted gross domes -
tic product (GDP) saw renewed robust growth, 
but here, too, the recovery lost significant mo -
mentum over the course of the quarter.
The manufacturing sector, above all, suffered 
from shortages of important input products. 
For months, enterprises in all manner of sectors 
had already been complaining of increasing 
suppliers’ delivery times. These delays have 
now begun to have an ever- growing impact on 
downstream production stages. In spite of 
well- filled order books, global industrial pro -
duction sank markedly over the course of the 
third quarter, and global trade remained list -
less. The problems were particularly pro -
nounced in the automotive industry, with pro -
duction lines coming to a standstill in many 
places in the third quarter owing to a shortage 
of semiconductor components. Compared with 
the already depressed level of the previous quarter, the number of passenger cars pro -
duced worldwide was again down by more 
than 10%. According to industry estimates, for 
the first nine months of the year production 
losses already amounted to around 7½ million 
vehicles.1 In value terms, the direct losses in this 
period are likely to have amounted to almost 
0.5% of global economic output.2
A high demand for fossil fuels in the third quar -
ter was also met with market scarcity, which 
caused prices to increase sharply. The natural 
gas price, in particular, reached new record 
highs in recent months. According to the 
HWWI index, it doubled at times compared 
with August and nearly quadrupled on the 
year. In Europe, prices rose even more dramat -
ically as the natural gas reservoirs were at un -
usually low levels before the onset of cold wea -
ther. One reason for this was reduced delivery Significant loss 
in momentum of 
global economic 
recovery
Global industry 
increasingly 
suffering  from 
shortages of 
materialsEnergy price 
growth robust 
of late
Global economic indicators*
Sources: CPB, national data, Haver Analytics and Bundesbank 
calculations. * Groups of countries vary due to differences in 
data  availability.  1 Bundesbank  aggregate  of  national  data, 
based on the number of units.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021859095100105110Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
405060708090100110120130
Reduced scale
Passenger car 
production1Industrial output
e
e
1 See IHS Markit (2021).
2 This calculation is based on the assumption that an aver -
age passenger car costs US$37,000.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
11

quantities from Russia – Europe’s most import -
ant source of natural gas. There is no indication 
that prices on the futures markets will drop 
anytime soon. Only longer- term futures are 
trading at significant discounts. Alongside nat -
ural gas, coal likewise rose in price in the re -
porting period, at times quite significantly. 
Crude oil prices were also up markedly in re -
cent months. A barrel of Brent crude oil cost 
around US$83 in November to date – more 
than twice as much as one year previously. This 
was partly due to a significant pick- up in global 
demand, also as a result of gas being substi -
tuted by oil. Global supply failed to keep pace 
on account of isolated production shortfalls 
and the decision by OPEC and its partners to 
expand their own production only slightly. Stra -
tegic considerations by oil- producing countries 
also speak against an ample market supply 
looking ahead, too. Nonetheless, contracts for 
crude oil deliveries in the medium and longer 
term were trading at distinct discounts.The significant increase in energy prices was a 
distinct factor behind the rise in consumer 
prices strengthening once again worldwide 
over the last few months. Furthermore, some 
enterprises in sectors that had been especially 
hard hit by pandemic- induced restrictions in -
creased their prices substantially. Lastly, produ -
cers seem to be passing on cost pressures, 
which have persisted for some time now, to 
the end customer to an increasing extent. In 
the industrial countries, the increase in con -
sumer prices strengthened to 4.8% on the year 
by October, or 3.3% excluding energy and 
food. This was the sharpest rise for more than 
15 years. Further price pass- through to con -
sumers can be expected over the coming 
months, too, on account of the persistent infla -
tionary pressure on industrial producer prices. 
However, as supply bottlenecks are gradually 
overcome, the associated price surges should 
abate. That said, there is a risk of accelerated 
price increases becoming entrenched due to 
higher inflation expectations, for instance. 
Against this backdrop, the first central banks in 
the industrial countries have initiated an exit 
from their very accommodative monetary pol -
icy. Many emerging market economies have al -
ready been substantially tightening their mon -
etary policy for quite some time.
In its most recent World Economic Outlook, 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) is still 
projecting a return to moderate rates of infla -
tion soon. However, IMF staff underline the 
high level of uncertainty surrounding the infla -
tion outlook and emphasise upside risks. The 
IMF lowered its global economic growth pro -
jection for the current year marginally to 5.9%. 
It thus took account of the rather disappointing 
economic developments in a number of indus -
trial countries over the course of the third quar -
ter. The IMF left its projection for global GDP 
growth in 2022 unchanged at 4.9%. This fore -
cast rests on the assumption that the US econ -
omy, in particular, will continue to be massively 
supported by accommodative fiscal policy. The 
scope of the infrastructure programme that has 
now been adopted, as well as of the imminent Rise in consumer 
prices strength -
ening again 
worldwide
IMF emphasises 
upside risks to 
inflation outlookWorld market prices for energy 
commodities
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and HWWI. • Latest figures: 
average of 1 to 12 November 2021, or 1 to 18 November 2021 
for crude oil. 1 According to HWWI commodity price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021243040507090Monthly averages, log scale
50100150200300400
Natural gas12016 = 100, US$ basisCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
70100150200300400
Coal1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
12

compromise in the dispute over future social 
policy, has fallen short of expectations, how -
ever (see the box on pp. 17 f.). IMF staff also 
maintained their favourable outlook for China.3
China
The expansion in the Chinese economy, which 
had already distinctly lost momentum in the 
first half of 2021, slowed further in the third 
quarter. According to official estimates, real 
GDP grew by just 0.2% on the previous quarter 
in seasonally adjusted terms.4 A number of fac -
tors played a role in the particularly weak pace 
of growth. First, there were coronavirus out -
breaks in several regions in the third quarter, 
which the authorities again countered with rig -
orous containment measures. This hampered 
activity in consumption- related services sectors. 
Shortages in energy supply and of key inter -
mediate goods constrained industrial produc -
tion. Lastly, the macroeconomically important 
real estate market also weakened markedly. If 
the slump on the housing market intensifies in 
the coming months, this would not only signifi -
cantly dampen economic growth in China but 
could also spill over to other economies (see 
the box on pp. 14 f.).
Despite the slowdown in global economic ac -
tivity and the supply- side problems in industry, 
revenues from goods exports (on a US dollar 
basis) increased further in the quarter just 
ended. The level of the third quarter of 2020, 
already elevated by pandemic- induced shifts in 
demand, was exceeded by one- quarter.5 How -
ever, this was largely attributable not least to 
price increases. According to the average value 
index, export prices in September were up by 
almost 17% on the year. Producer prices (on a 
renminbi basis) went up by 10.7% over the 
same period. By contrast, consumer price infla -
tion remained extremely subdued according to 
official figures. The consumer price index in -
creased by just 0.7% on the year in September. 
Even excluding food, which became signifi -cantly cheaper, the rise in prices was moderate 
at 2%.
Other selected emerging 
market  economies
The Indian economy is likely to have largely re -
covered in recent months from the conse -
quences of the severe coronavirus wave in April 
and May. It is, however, unclear whether eco -
nomic output already returned to its pre-  
pandemic level in the third quarter. In any case, 
industrial production picked up significantly 
and exceeded its pre- crisis level. One key rea -
son for this is likely to have been the boom in Economic 
expansion 
significantly  
weakened, …
… but, at the 
same time, price 
rises for indus -
trial goods 
accelerated 
further Recovery in 
India after GDP 
slump in Q2Sources: IHS Markit and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Consumer 
prices excluding energy and food; additionally excluding alco-
holic  beverages  and  tobacco  products  for  the  EU,  Norway, 
Switzerland  and  the  United  Kingdom.  2 EU,  Japan,  Canada, 
Norway, Switzerland, the United States and the United King-
dom. 3 Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Russia, Saudi 
Arabia, South Africa and Turkey.
Deutsche BundesbankConsumer prices in industrial countries 
and emerging market economies
012345
012345Year-on-year percentage change
2019 2020 2021Industrial countries 2
Emerging market economies3Total Core rate1
3 See International Monetary Fund (2021).
4 The year- on- year growth rate decreased from 7.9% in 
the second quarter to 4.9%. As this report went to press, 
the pre- crisis level was exceeded by just over 8% in season -
ally adjusted terms.
5 Chinese export growth in the past year was attributable 
inter alia to pandemic-  related medical products and con -
sumer goods. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
13

The potential effects of a sharp downturn on the Chinese 
real estate market
The debt crisis surrounding the real estate 
group China Evergrande has shaken the 
entire  Chinese residential real estate mar-
ket. Additional real estate enterprises in 
that country have already encountered 
fi  nancial distress, and a number of major 
building projects have been put on ice. 
Chinese  home- buyers, who generally have 
to pay in advance, have been taking a wait- 
and- see attitude in this environment. In Oc-
tober, housing transactions (based on fl  oor 
space sold) were down by one- quarter from 
the previous year. This further worsened 
property developers’ liquidity situation.
The current problems represent a potential 
tipping point for the Chinese real estate 
market, which had experienced a virtually 
uninterrupted upswing since the early 
1990s, giving this sector very large weight 
in the economy as a whole by international 
standards. In 2020, housing investment was 
estimated to have made up around 8% of 
gross domestic product (GDP).1
A long and severe housing market down-
turn would thus be a considerable drag on 
economic activity in China. That, in turn, 
would spill over to other economies owing 
to China’s importance in the global econ-
omy. In order to analyse these effects more 
closely, we will perform a simulation below 
using the macroeconomic multi- country 
model NiGEM.2
The scenario of a strong real estate market 
downturn in China is oriented to develop-
ments in the United States during the real 
estate crisis of 2006-09. Our primary as-
sumption is of a temporary halving of hous-
ing investment in China.3 We also assume a 
decline in Chinese house prices by one- fi  fth. 
Major losses in the value of real estate that is also used to secure loans could lead to 
losses among Chinese commercial banks, 
which would respond by constraining their 
supply of credit or tightening their credit 
standards. Such turmoil in the credit mar-
kets is modelled in the simulation by a rise 
in the investment risk premium (a mark- up 
over long- run interest rates on government 
bonds).4 This raises the cost of the fi  nancing 
of the corporate sector.
According to the NiGEM simulation, the 
slump in construction investment and the 
higher investment risk premium dampen 
overall investment in China considerably. 
The drop in house prices erodes house-
holds’ wealth; they respond by cutting back 
their consumption signifi  cantly.5 These fac-
tors push China’s real GDP around 7% 
below the baseline in the fi  rst year.6 The 
1 Since these fi  gures are not published in the Chinese 
national accounts, the calculation was based on data 
from Chinese construction statistics. For more on the 
methodology, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2014). Other 
studies often rank the signifi  cance of the Chinese real 
estate market considerably higher (at up to 30% of 
GDP). However, their calculations generally then con-
tain commercial and infrastructure construction in 
addition to housing construction. Multiplier effects for 
aggregate demand are occasionally also incorporated 
into the calculation; see, for instance, Rogoff and Yang 
(2021).
2 NiGEM models economic interconnectedness be-
tween 60 economies and regions via foreign trade and 
the interest rate- exchange rate nexus. The model has 
New Keynesian features, especially forward- looking 
elements on the fi  nancial and labour markets. For fur-
ther information, see https://nimodel.niesr.ac.uk
3 All shocks are fed into the model such that they 
occur immediately and at full intensity. After one year, 
the relevant variables gradually return to their original 
path.
4 Specifi  cally, a temporary fi  ve percentage point in-
crease in the investment risk premium in China is as-
sumed.
5 This channel is signifi  cant in China because of the 
high rate of home ownership. Around 70% of total 
household net wealth in China is held in the form of 
real estate.
6 Assuming that the Chinese economy would have 
grown by about 5% on the year absent the shock, 
GDP in the scenario being studied here would thus 
contract by around 2%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
14

monetary policy response to this crisis 
causes the Chinese renminbi to depreciate 
considerably.7 This depreciation and the 
drop in demand cause Chinese imports to 
fall by around one- fi  fth.8 This has implica-
tions for China’s trading partners: in Ger-
many, GDP falls in the fi  rst year by 0.6% 
relative to the baseline owing, above all, to 
a decline in exports. For some economies 
that are more heavily dependent on trade 
with China, the GDP losses are even greater.
All things considered, the simulation shows 
that a severe crisis in the Chinese real estate 
market could have perceptible effects on 
the real economies of Germany and other 
countries. The model may well even under-
state the impact. For instance, NiGEM does 
not account for the major global uncer-
tainty that could be unleashed by an eco-
nomic crisis in China. Nor does it allow for 
the possibility of such a crisis triggering sig-
nifi  cant falls in commodity prices. It is con-
ceivable, in particular, that prices of indus-
trial metals could drop sharply owing to 
cutbacks in construction activity in China. 
This would dampen economic activity in the 
relevant exporting countries.
7 In NiGEM, imports are affected by a country’s total 
demand. It therefore makes no difference whether a 
shock affects certain demand components to different 
degrees. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018a).
8 The assumption of Chinese monetary policy auton-
omy represents a departure from the standard confi  g-
uration of NiGEM, in which Chinese monetary policy 
shadows that of the United States and the renminbi is 
pegged to the US dollar.Impact of a severe crisis on the Chinese 
real estate market according to a NiGEM 
simulation*
2.52.01.51.00.50
–––––Percentage deviations from the baseline in the first year
Source: Bundesbank calculations using NiGEM. * All variables 
price adjusted.
Deutsche BundesbankUS ES DE FR IT AU KR JP201612840
–––––Impact on China
Impact on other countries' GDPGDP Exports Imports Invest-
mentPrivate 
consump-
tionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
15

goods exports. Export revenue was almost 
two- fifths higher in the quarter just ended 
compared with the same period of the previous 
year. Import expenditure rose considerably 
more sharply due to the increased commodity 
prices, however, causing the trade deficit to 
widen. The rate of consumer price inflation de -
clined slightly in the third quarter to 5.1%. The 
core inflation rate (from which energy and food 
prices are stripped out) likewise fell marginally 
to 5.8%. The Reserve Bank of India left its pol -
icy rate at 4%.
Brazil’s economic output had already returned 
to its pre- crisis level at the beginning of the 
year. It stagnated at this level in the second 
quarter, and real GDP is not likely to have re -
corded any notable growth in the third quarter, 
either. Although exporters continued to benefit 
from the high international commodity prices, 
particularly for industrial metals and agricultural 
goods, households suffered on account of a 
strong increase in consumer prices, which rose to 10.7% on the year by October. One reason 
for the price surge was the severe drought in 
the third quarter, which was a major factor in 
the steep rise in food and energy prices.6 The 
Central Bank of Brazil raised its policy rate fur -
ther to 7.75%. It has already raised its policy 
rate by a total of 575 basis points since com -
mencing monetary policy tightening in March.
The Russian economy already returned to its 
pre- crisis level in the second quarter of 2021. In 
the quarter just ended, however, economic ac -
tivity appears to have slowed down. Manufac -
turing output declined, driven in part by disrup -
tions to supply chains. By contrast, receipts 
from energy exports increased further in the 
light of the sharp rises in oil and gas prices. The 
pandemic situation has been worsening again 
considerably since the end of September. New 
containment measures, including the an -
nouncement of a “non- working week” from 
late October to early November, are likely to 
weigh on economic activity in the current quar -
ter. The rate of consumer price inflation has 
grown significantly since mid- 2021, reaching a 
level of 8.1% on the year in October. For this 
reason, the Bank of Russia has increased its 
policy rate in three steps by a total of 200 basis 
points since the beginning of July to 7.5% as 
this report went to press.
United States
The economic upswing in the United States lost 
significant pace over the third quarter. Accord -
ing to the preliminary estimate, real GDP in -
creased by just 0.5% after seasonal adjustment 
compared with the second quarter. This was 
the lowest quarterly rate since the end of the 
pandemic-  induced recession. Recovery was 
stalled by various factors limiting production, 
including the sluggish recovery of the labour 
supply and shortages of industrial intermediate Economic 
stagnation  and 
growing price 
pressures in 
Brazil Slowdown in 
Russian eco -
nomic activity
Upswing stalled 
by bottlenecksReal GDP in selected major 
emerging market economies
Sources: National Bureau of Statistics of China, Central Statistics 
Office of India, Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics, 
Rosstat  –  Federal  State  Statistics  Service,  and  Bundesbank 
calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 20219095100Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, log scale
RussiaIndia
75808590951001059095100105110
BrazilChina
105
9095100
6 The drought played a role in the sharp rise in energy 
prices as it resulted in failures in hydroelectric power gener -
ation and output losses for ethanol, which is used as a fuel 
in Brazil.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
16

The economic effects of the planned longer- term fi  scal 
packages in the United States
Many experts had expected that US Presi-
dent Joe Biden’s plans to renew public in-
frastructure and expand the social security 
network would be implemented quickly 
and generate considerable growth effects.1 
The reality, however, is that even fi  nding a 
Congressional majority has proven a diffi   -
cult task. No budget has been adopted yet 
for the current fi  scal year, and negotiations 
on the social policy agenda are also still in 
progress.
The US administration was able to notch a 
success in early November 2021 with the 
passage of a large investment package. 
Known as the Infrastructure Investment and 
Jobs Act, its envisaged measures include 
higher spending on transport infrastructure, 
water supply and broadband network ex-
pansion, as well as various climate action 
initiatives. Estimates put the costs at around 
US$570 billion over a ten- year period. Sav-
ings elsewhere would lessen the fi  scal im-
pact of the package somewhat.2
President Biden is banking on the package 
of measures creating millions of new jobs, 
amongst other effects. However, there is 
palpable doubt concerning these optimistic 
expectations. The non- partisan Congres-
sional Budget Offi   ce (CBO) has come to the 
conclusion that the maximum boost that a 
comparably- sized public infrastructure pro-
gramme would give to real GDP would 
barely exceed 0.1%. The long- term effects 
on potential output would be negligible.3 
Bundesbank calculations using the NiGEM 
global economic model paint a somewhat 
more favourable picture.4 The adopted 
package could lead to US GDP being just 
under ¼% higher in 2030 than under cur-
rent fi  scal policy.5 The fact that the expan-
sion of the public capital stock in NiGEM stimulates private sector investment and 
employment has a role to play here. How-
ever, the effects will be largely non- existent 
over the short term because, amongst other 
things, it will probably take some time be-
fore the available budgetary funds are 
drawn upon and begin to impact on de-
mand. In addition, in the simulation calcula-
tions, long- term interest rates pick up im-
mediately in anticipation of higher demand 
going forward, which is a drag on invest-
ment and private consumption. Owing to 
the initially dampened demand response, 
the package is not likely to have a major im-
pact on consumer prices, either.
The fi  scal stance of the United States in the 
next few years is therefore likely to be 
shaped in key measure by the fate of the 
Biden Administration’s second major fi  scal 
policy project. The Build Back Better Act 
proposes tax relief, especially for families 
and low- income households; an expansion 
of free pre- schooling and healthcare; and 
investment in housing and environmentally 
friendly technologies. In earlier planning 
phases, US$3.5 trillion had been earmarked 
1 To wit, in early July 2021 economists at the Inter-
national Monetary Fund (IMF) were expecting the vari-
ous long- term initiatives to add just over 5¼% cumula-
tively to US GDP over the 2022-24 period. A similar as-
sessment is likely to have underpinned the projection 
by IMF staff, published in the October World Economic 
Outlook, that real GDP in 2024 would be nearly 3% 
higher than had been expected prior to the pandemic. 
See Hodge and Lin (2021) and International Monetary 
Fund (2021).
2 See Congressional Budget Offi   ce (2021a) and Com-
mittee for a Responsible Federal Budget (2021a).
3 See Congressional Budget Offi   ce (2021b).
4 For more information on the model used, see https://
nimodel.niesr.ac.uk
5 The time paths for public investment and govern-
ment consumption assumed in the simulations are de-
rived from the cost estimates produced by the Con-
gressional Budget Offi   ce (2021a). In the simulations, 
central bank interest rates follow the monetary policy 
rules implemented in the model.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
17

for these initiatives over a ten- year period. 
Despite marked cutbacks, the legislative 
package that is likely to make it to a House 
vote is still considerable. According to provi-
sional estimates, the US$2.4 billion price 
tag will be offset by savings of nearly the 
same amount and revenue increases that 
would have to be funded primarily by the 
corporate sector and high earners.6 In the 
short term, however, the measures could 
distinctly increase the general government 
defi  cit.7 This is predicated on the bill passing 
both houses of Congress in this form. Given 
the slim Democratic majority in the Senate 
and the persistent resistance on the part of 
individual US senators from the majority 
party, the possibility of certain items being 
struck or the initiative being postponed or 
even failing to pass Congress cannot be 
ruled out, either.
Even if, alongside the public investment 
package, the rest of the agenda were to be 
implemented, US fi  scal policy on the whole 
is not likely to further boost economic 
growth in the coming year. This is because 
the programmes launched in response to 
the COVID- 19 crisis are gradually expiring.8 
Indeed, it would appear quite appropriate 
to scale back the degree of fi  scal expansion in the United States given the advanced 
state of economic recovery and mounting 
signs that at least some sectors of the US 
economy are encountering capacity con-
straints.
6 New government borrowing would accordingly in-
crease by only around US$160 billion in total over a 
ten- year period. See Committee for a Responsible Fed-
eral Budget (2021b).
7 The US Congressional Budget Offi   ce estimates that 
the various measures could add US$155 billion net to 
the defi  cit during the current fi  scal year, which would 
work out to just over 0.6% of annual GDP . See Con-
gressional Budget Offi   ce (2021c).
8 According to earlier simulations using NiGEM and 
the dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) 
model EAGLE, the wearing- off of the effects of the 
American Rescue Plan could reduce US GDP growth by 
between ½  percentage point and 1¾  percentage 
points in the coming year. See Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2021b).Macroeconomic effects of the 
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act in 
the United States
Source: Bundesbank calculations using the NiGEM global mac-
roeconometric model based on CBO cost estimates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 203000.050.100.150.200.25Percentage deviations of real US GDP from the baselineDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
18

inputs. The automotive industry was especially 
hard hit, with a number of plants having to halt 
production at times owing to a lack of semi -
conductor components.7 Other sectors, too, 
lamented delivery delays. Further GDP losses 
occurred after Hurricane Ida hit the East Coast 
of the United States in August and September, 
leaving some areas absolutely devastated.8
Given the already limited inventory levels, at 
the end of the reporting period production 
losses were able to be cushioned only to a 
limited extent by destocking.9 Investment in 
machinery and equipment as well as private 
goods consumption thus sank fairly steeply. In 
this context, the financial conditions for many 
households were also no longer as favourable 
as they had been recently; their disposable in -
come fell significantly in price- adjusted terms. 
Alongside strong inflationary pressure, the ex -
piry of fiscal transfer payments was a factor. 
Despite another wave of new coronavirus in -
fections, the consumption of services con -
tinued its recovery in the third quarter.
The scaling back of wage replacement benefits 
that had been expanded during the crisis 
might, however, give the recovery in the US la -
bour market a new boost. Over the past few 
months, the still subdued labour force partici -
pation, in particular, has stood in the way of 
larger employment gains. The strong demand 
for labour has therefore been reflected not 
least in accelerated wage growth. This also in -
creases the risk of rising production costs con -
tinuing to be passed through to consumers and 
of accelerated price increases becoming en -
trenched. In October, the year- on- year rate of 
the consumer price index (CPI) increased to 
6.2% – its highest rate in over 30 years. Core 
inflation (from which energy and food prices 
are stripped out) rose to 4.6%. Against this 
background, the US Federal Reserve announced 
a gradual tapering of its asset purchases in 
mid- November.Japan
In Japan, the economic recovery encountered a 
setback in the third quarter. According to the 
initial official estimate, real GDP fell by a sea -
sonally adjusted 0.8% from the previous quar -
ter, in which it had grown slightly. It was par -
ticularly social distancing measures taken to 
contain the worst wave of COVID-  19 infections 
so far which had a dampening effect. The Damper on 
investment in 
machinery and 
equipment as 
well as goods 
consumption
Persistently 
strong upward 
pressure on 
prices
Economic out -
put contracted 
owing to meas -
ures to contain 
pandemic and 
slump in motor 
vehicle produc -
tionReal GDP in selected industrial countries
Sources:  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis,  Office  for  National 
Statistics,  Cabinet  Office  of  Japan,  Statistics  Poland  and 
Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 20219095100105Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, log scale
United KingdomUnited States
9095100105
9095100105
PolandJapan80859095100
7 Against this backdrop, motor vehicle production fell by 
12½% in the third quarter. Excluding the direct contribu -
tion of this slump, real GDP growth would have been 
0.4 percentage point higher over the same period.
8 According to estimates by the US Federal Reserve, the 
hurricane might have curbed industrial production growth 
by around 0.6 percentage point in September alone. How -
ever, in the past, production has normalised again rapidly 
after similar damage. See Board of Governors of the Fed -
eral Reserve System (2021) and Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2017).
9 Price- adjusted aggregate inventories no longer fell quite 
as steeply in the third quarter as they did in the second 
quarter. In arithmetical terms, changes in inventory thus 
supported GDP growth markedly.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
19

slump in motor vehicle production as a result of 
the semiconductor shortage also took its toll 
on the Japanese economy. Private consump -
tion declined markedly in this environment, 
after expanding in the previous quarter. Busi -
ness investment was not able to maintain the 
upward path on which it had embarked in the 
second quarter either, contracting significantly. 
In the light of the production losses in the 
automotive industry, exports fell distinctly. Im -
ports were also down in line with domestic de -
mand, and inventory levels rose. Even so, the 
labour market remained quite robust. The sea -
sonally adjusted unemployment rate even de -
creased slightly in the third quarter to 2.8%. 
Only in the new quarter did the pandemic-  
related burdens become less important. In Oc -
tober, the Japanese government introduced 
far- reaching steps to open up the economy in 
view of the receding wave of infections and 
successful vaccination campaign. Owing to the 
sharp reduction in mobile phone charges, the 
significant rise in producer prices has, to date, 
not been reflected in developments in con -
sumer prices.10 The year- on- year increase in the 
CPI amounted to 0.1% in October. Against this 
backdrop, the Bank of Japan maintained its ac -
commodative monetary policy stance.
United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, economic recovery 
continued in the third quarter, albeit at a mark -
edly slower pace. According to the preliminary 
estimate, real GDP increased by a seasonally 
adjusted 1.3% on the quarter. High- contact 
services such as hotel and restaurant services or 
the recreation and entertainment sector, which 
benefited from the far- reaching easing of many 
containment measures, saw especially robust 
growth. Value added in the services sector 
overall had nearly returned to its pre- crisis level 
by the end of the quarter. But, unlike in the 
second quarter, the upswing was no longer 
broadly based of late. The construction and 
manufacturing sectors sustained distinct losses. 
Intensifying bottlenecks, in particular, were probably a factor in this, with the most recent 
Purchasing Managers’ Index pointing to prob -
lems stemming from a shortage of materials 
and higher prices for input products, as well as 
to difficulties in recruiting employees. Along -
side global tensions in various markets and 
one- off effects owing to the pandemic- related 
recovery, Brexit is likely to have played a key 
role as the UK economy now faces many new 
hurdles in trade with the EU and in terms of la -
bour migration.11 On the labour market, the 
high demand was reflected in a somewhat 
lower unemployment rate once again and in 
robust wage growth. Employees’ purchasing 
power gains remained within narrow bounds, 
however, as the increase in consumer prices ac -
celerated further. The year- on- year rate of the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) 
rose to 4.2% recently. Nevertheless, at the be -
ginning of November, the Bank of England 
maintained its accommodative monetary policy 
stance.
Poland
Poland’s economic upswing continued in the 
summer months. According to the flash esti -
mate, real GDP grew by 2.1% in the third quar -
ter after adjustment for seasonal variations. 
Economic activity had already returned to pre- 
crisis levels in the second quarter, despite the 
gradual relaxation of pandemic containment 
measures not having started until late April. 
While private consumption continued to ex -
pand in an environment of sharply rising wages 
and an overall good labour market situation 
– in quarter- on- quarter terms, retail sales grew 
by nearly 4% after seasonal and price adjust -
ment – the previous sharp rise in industrial pro -
duction levelled off. One factor behind this 
change was that a shortage of semiconductor 
components had stalled motor vehicle produc -Recent slow -
down in recov -
ery against 
backdrop of 
persistent  
bottlenecks Continued eco -
nomic upswing, 
rise in consumer 
prices intensified 
once again
10 Since a reform of mobile phone charges in April, they 
have declined by 53% by October. In October, this one- off 
effect pushed down the year-  on- year rate of the CPI by 
1.5 percentage points.
11 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021c).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
20

tion in Poland and its European neighbours, 
which also depressed demand for motor ve -
hicle parts made in Poland. This was also re -
flected in exports. The standardised unemploy -
ment rate fell to 3.4% in the third quarter, a 
mere 0.2 percentage point above its level be -
fore the crisis. The rate of consumer price in -
crease accelerated to 6.8% on the year up until 
October; excluding energy and food, it was 
4.5%. The rise in consumer prices thus signifi -
cantly overshot the National Bank of Poland’s 
inflation target. The bank changed its assess -
ment of this overshooting of the inflation rate, 
no longer categorising it as temporary. It raised 
its policy rate in two stages – by 40 basis points 
in October and by 75 basis points in Novem -
ber – to 1.25%.
Macroeconomic trends in the 
euro area
The euro area’s economic recovery continued 
in the third quarter of 2021. According to Euro -
stat’s flash estimate, seasonally and price-  
adjusted GDP rose by 2.2% on the quarter, re -
ducing the gap versus the pre- crisis level to 
0.5%. However, the quarterly rate is likely to 
overstate the general pace of economic growth 
thanks to the progress that had already been 
made at the end of the second quarter. In June 
in particular, economic activity rose substan -
tially once many of the pandemic containment 
measures had been lifted. The high- contact 
service sectors continued to recover in the third 
quarter and at the start of the fourth quarter, 
although, as economic activity has normalised, 
the pace of said recovery has begun to slacken. 
During the third quarter, the industrial sector 
faced worsened supply bottlenecks and high 
– in some cases rising – prices for intermediate 
goods, commodities and international trans -
port services. The aggregate economic recov -
ery saw a marked loss of momentum during 
the quarter as a result.12
The pandemic situation initially improved mark -
edly in the third quarter. This was largely attrib -utable –  alongside seasonal effects  – to the 
progress made in the vaccination campaigns. 
Given the generally improved provision of vac -
cines, prioritisation rules were lifted. Even so, 
there were major regional differences in levels 
of vaccine campaign success. Whilst almost 
90% of the population in Portugal had received 
at least one dose of the vaccine by mid-  
November, only a little over 45% of the popu -
lation in Slovakia had done the same. In the 
European Union on average, around 70% were 
at least partially vaccinated, in comparison to 
nearly 75% in the United Kingdom and just 
under 70% in the United States. In some re -
gions, the number of new infections has begun 
to rise since the end of the third quarter in par -
ticular, which has in some cases led to a return 
to more stringent containment measures. The 
restrictions remained, however, comparatively 
mild, due to the exceptions made for those 
vaccinated against or who have recently re -
covered from COVID-  19, or who present a valid 
negative test result. To improve the level of 
protection for the general population, several 
countries have introduced a vaccine mandate 
for certain occupational groups and begun Strong GDP 
growth in Q3Pandemic 
situation  signifi -
cantly improved, 
measures eased 
considerablyEstimated monthly path for aggregate 
output in the euro area
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Eurostat data.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND J FMAM J J A S
2020 202180859095100Q4 2019 = 100, price, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
log scale
Quarterly average
Quarter-on-quarter 
percentage change+ 2.2
+ 2.1
– 0.3– 0.4+ 12.6
– 11.7– 3.5Real GDP
12 As indicated by the estimate of the monthly aggregate 
economic activity level. As the index for euro area service 
output has not yet been made available, however, this esti -
mate is subject to major uncertainty. For details on the 
basic methodology, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
21

providing booster vaccinations for at- risk 
groups.
In the third quarter, major progress was made 
towards the normalisation of private consump -
tion. The increasing relaxation of protective 
measures allowed greater utilisation of the ser -
vices provided by the arts, entertainment and 
recreation sectors and the hospitality sector. 
Domestic tourism thrived and, once most of 
the requirements had been lifted, more tourists 
began to travel abroad. The retail trade sector, 
major sections of which had benefited signifi -
cantly from the shift to consumption of goods 
prompted by the pandemic, nevertheless barely 
poked its head above the quarterly growth 
rate. The decline in new motor vehicle registra -
tions continued due to supply issues in the 
motor vehicle industry. However, European 
Commission surveys indicate that consumers’ 
propensity to purchase has generally remained 
high.
Investment activity remained listless in the third 
quarter.13 Although investment in intellectual 
property is likely to have increased further 
– driven by research and development and by 
digitalisation  – spending on machinery and 
equipment probably decreased slightly in price- 
adjusted terms. One reason for this may be the 
supply issues in parts of the industry. Construc -
tion investment only generated very little stimu -
lus, if at all. Despite healthy order books, ma -
terials shortages and rising costs made them -
selves felt here too.
Although euro area export revenue in the third 
quarter once again rose significantly, this was 
solely due to the continuing sharp rise in prices, 
especially of intermediate goods. After price 
adjustment, it was likely actually in decline. The 
same is true of imports of goods. The tourism 
sector made a sizeable contribution to a signifi -
cant recovery in exports of services. In regional 
terms, the value of goods exports to the United 
States rose somewhat more quickly than in the 
previous quarter, and the recovery in exports to 
the United Kingdom continued, albeit more slowly.14 Exports to China declined steeply in 
the wake of its weakening economic activity.
Manufacturing output stagnated despite 
healthy order books in the third quarter, and 
capacity utilisation even dropped slightly be -
tween July and October. This was mainly due 
to supply bottlenecks and high – in some cases 
rising – prices of key intermediate goods and 
transport services. The worst hit were motor 
vehicle manufacturers, who had to at times 
halt production in some factories due to a 
shortage of semiconductors. Consumer goods 
producers were less affected, especially in the 
pharmaceutical industry.
On the other hand, various services sectors 
grew substantially in the third quarter. The hos -
pitality and cultural sectors in particular greatly 
expanded their activities. The tourism and 
transport sectors recovered much more strongly 
during the summer holiday season than in the 
previous year. Business- related service providers 
also increased their activity.
Economic activity increased in the third quarter 
in most euro area Member States, albeit to 
varying degrees. This remained due primarily to 
each country’s individual pandemic situation 
and economic structure, especially the import -
ance of tourism and the motor vehicle industry.
In France, quarter- on- quarter GDP growth ac -
celerated to 3.0% in the third quarter, accord -
ing to the initial estimate, meaning economic 
activity had nearly returned to pre- crisis levels. 
A major driver of this robust growth was the 
sharp rise in services consumption. The hospi -
tality sector reduced the disparity between its 
current and pre- crisis levels from nearly 40% in 
the second quarter to just over 4%. This was Marked pick- up 
in private 
consumption 
Subdued invest -
ment activity
Price- adjusted 
trade in goods 
with non- euro 
area countries 
likely shrinkingVarious 
obstacles  
stalling  
manufacturing 
Service providers 
bouncing back 
strongly
Regionally 
broadly- based 
recovery in euro 
area
Economic out -
put in France at 
pre- crisis levels
13 Excluding Ireland where, for several years now, the stat -
istical recording of investment, and of investment in intel -
lectual property in particular, has been strongly influenced 
by the strategic planning of multinational enterprises. See 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018b).
14 Exports to the United Kingdom had dropped sharply at 
the beginning of the year as a result of trade relations 
being reorganised. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021c).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
22

helped along by the major increase in exports 
of services in the wake of rising cross- border 
tourism, although goods consumption also 
rose again after a setback in the previous quar -
ter.
In Italy, the recovery in economic activity con -
tinued at a similar pace to the previous quarter. 
Preliminary figures show its GDP rose by a 
strong 2.6%, putting it 1.4% below pre- crisis 
levels. Italian industry appeared less badly af -
fected by materials shortages than the euro 
area average. Exports and investment in ma -
chinery and equipment may have risen even 
further. The services sector continued to re -
cover, which was also due to tourism having 
taken a significant step towards normalisation. 
Private consumer spending probably fell dis -
tinctly short of pre- crisis levels, however.
In Spain, aggregate economic output rose 
somewhat more strongly at 2.0% in the third 
quarter than in the second, but economic ac -
tivity remained around 6.5% below pre- crisis 
levels. No other euro area country had such a 
large disparity between current and pre-  
pandemic levels in the third quarter. One key 
reason for this was that – while there was a 
marked revival in tourism – the number of over -
night stays was still nearly one- third lower than 
in the corresponding period in 2019. The value 
added in those sectors most affected by tour -
ism (trade, transport and hospitality) was 15% 
below pre- crisis levels. In fact, private con -
sumption even dropped slightly in the third 
quarter after price adjustment. This may have 
been due to the particularly sharp rise in con -
sumer prices for energy products, which 
squeezed consumer purchasing power.15 The 
situation in the industrial sector looked rosier in 
the third quarter. Value added in the manufac -
turing sector rose markedly, alongside exports 
of goods.
The third quarter saw continued growth in eco -
nomic activity in most of the other Member 
States as well. Those countries with a large 
tourism sector, including Austria and Portugal, saw particularly robust growth. Elsewhere – in 
Belgium, Finland and the Netherlands, for ex -
ample  – the recovery continued at a more 
moderate pace. In some of the smaller Mem -
ber States which had already returned to their 
pre- crisis levels, such as Latvia and Lithuania, 
aggregate economic output only increased a 
little in the third quarter.
The labour market continued to improve in the 
third quarter. The standardised unemployment Renewed steep 
rise in Italy’s real 
GDP
Subdued 
recovery  
in Spain
Smaller Member 
States also saw 
GDP increases, 
but with signifi -
cant variationFactors limiting production in 
manufacturing and services
Source: European Commission.
Deutsche BundesbankQ4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
2019 2020 20211020304050Percentage of enterprises surveyed, 
multiple responses possible
0102030405060
0102030Materials
Labour forceDemandManufacturing sector
0102030Labour force20304050
DemandService providers
15 The rise in energy prices in Spain was considerably 
higher than in the euro area as a whole (+24.5% on the 
year in the third quarter in comparison to +15.8% in the 
euro area).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
23

rate had already returned to pre- crisis levels by 
September 2021 (7.4%). Despite a substantial 
increase of 0.9%, however, the number of per -
sons in employment remained 0.3% below pre- 
pandemic levels. This was caused by a decline 
in the labour force. The number of inactive per -
sons is still higher in the euro area than it was 
before the coronavirus pandemic. In addition, 
some employees from non- euro area countries 
who had returned to their home countries dur -
ing the pandemic seem to have remained 
there. In any case, the number of non- resident 
EU citizens working in the euro area was still 
more than 5% below pre- crisis levels in the 
second quarter.Wages and salaries, which had already reached 
pre- crisis levels, are likely to have gone up fur -
ther in the third quarter. There are still no indi -
cations of a surge in wage costs, despite grow -
ing evidence of labour shortages. Looking 
ahead, this will strengthen employees’ bargain -
ing position as they seek a way to balance their 
loss of purchasing power.
The rise in consumer prices intensified signifi -
cantly in the euro area in the third quarter of 
2021. As measured by the HICP , seasonally ad -
justed prices showed an increase of 1.1% on 
the quarter. This strengthening of the rise in 
consumer prices was equally visible in non-  
energy industrial goods and in services. Energy 
prices continued to rise sharply, while food 
products saw another marked price increase. 
This resulted in the year- on- year rate of the 
HICP jumping from 1.8% in the second quarter 
to 2.8% in the third quarter. The inflation rate 
excluding energy and food rose from 0.9% to 
1.4%. Price increases for high- contact services 
played a particularly important role here. These 
include hospitality, domestic flights and passen -
ger rail transport, to list some examples. Rental 
costs for parking spaces and motor vehicles 
and the prices of telephone services also rose. 
The inflation rate for non- energy industrial 
goods doubled to 1.8%. In particular, new and 
used cars, furniture, clothing and hygiene and 
wellness products increased steeply in price. 
Besides the sharp increase in prices for inter -
mediate goods, this was probably also caused 
by the significant increase in international 
transport costs and the ongoing supply bottle -
necks.
In October, the year- on- year rate of the HICP 
accelerated from 3.4% in September to 4.1%. 
This surprisingly sharp increase was attributable 
to a large degree to natural gas prices. In some 
Member States, utilities passed the surge in 
procurement costs more or less directly through 
to consumers. The rate excluding energy and 
food picked up slightly from 1.9% to 2.0%. 
While the rise in prices for services intensified 
markedly, it decreased somewhat for industrial Unemployment 
back to pre- 
crisis levels, 
employment 
still belowNo indications 
so far of a wage 
cost surge
Increase in con -
sumer prices in 
third quarter 
significantly  
strengthened
Inflation rate 
continued to rise 
in OctoberAggregate output in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021Real GDP, Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
log scale
80859095100
758085909510080859095100
Italy
SpainEuro area
France859095100
of which:Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
24

goods excluding energy. In November, the 
year- on- year rate of the HICP is likely to initially 
increase slightly before going back down some -
what at the start of next year, when the base 
effects regarding the energy component and 
the temporary cut to value added tax in Ger -
many expire. Nevertheless, the headline rate of 
the HICP is likely to initially remain over 3%, as 
cost increases at upstream stages of the pro -
duction chain are expected to continue to feed 
through to consumer prices.
The economic recovery is likely to continue 
only at a considerably slower pace in the cur -
rent quarter. The pandemic situation is worsen -
ing again in several Member States, some of 
which have reinstated extensive containment 
measures. Consumers are also likely to return 
to exercising caution. Although some may 
bring forward purchases in anticipation of 
prices continuing to rise, shortages of certain 
goods may stymie these plans, and some 
households may be increasingly financially 
strapped as a result of the sharp increase in 
consumer prices, especially energy prices. No 
major stimulus is thus to be expected from pri -
vate consumption in the current quarter. The 
difficulties arising from materials shortages and 
the high price of intermediate goods and trans -
port services are unlikely to be resolved in the 
near future, especially not in the industrial sec -
tor. At the same time, order books and overall 
sentiment have been very good. Sentiment has 
remained at a very high level in the construc -
tion sector, too, and at an above- average level 
in the services sector. All in all, this indicates 
that aggregate economic output in the fourth quarter may increase only slightly. Only once 
the obstacles have been dealt with is economic 
growth likely to strengthen markedly.Marked slow -
down in the 
current  quarter
List of references
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021), Industrial Production and Capacity Utili -
zation, statistical release of 15 September 2021.
Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget (2021a), Infrastructure Plan Will Add $400 Billion 
to the Deficit, CBO Finds, blog entry of 5 August 2021, https://www.crfb.org/blogs/infrastructure- 
plan-will-add-400-billion-deficit-cbo-findsSelected HICP components 
in the euro area
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 20210.500.51.01.52.0
–++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14HICP non-energy industrial goods
Reduced scale
Producer prices
at intermediate stages
420246
––+++ Selected services
Restaurants
Accommodation
TransportIntermediate 
goodsConsumer 
goodsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
25

Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget (2021b), Full Estimates of the House Build Back Better  
Act, blog entry of 18  November 2021, https://www.crfb.org/blogs/full-estimates- house- build-  
back-better-act
Congressional Budget Office (2021a), Senate Amendment 2137 to H. R. 3684, the Infrastructure 
Investment and Jobs Act, cost estimate of 9 August 2021.
Congressional Budget Office (2021b), Effects of Physical Infrastructure Spending on the Economy 
and the Budget Under Two Illustrative Scenarios, August 2021.
Congressional Budget Office (2021c), Estimated Budgetary Effects of H.R. 5376, the Build Back 
Better Act, cost estimate of 18 November 2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), The reasons for the Chinese economy’s comparatively good per -
formance in the pandemic, Monthly Report, October 2021, pp. 46-47.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), The macroeconomic implications of the American Rescue Plan, 
Monthly Report, May 2021, pp. 16-18.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021c), How will economic relations between the United Kingdom and the 
European Union be governed going forward?, Monthly Report, February 2021, pp. 16-17.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020), The monthly development of aggregate output in the euro area, 
Monthly Report, May 2020, p. 21.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018a), The international spillover effects of a sharp economic downturn 
in China, Monthly Report, July 2018, pp. 53-54.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018b), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national eco -
nomic statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65-78.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), The impact of hurricanes on economic activity in the United States, 
Monthly Report, November 2017, pp. 14-15.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2014), The potential effects of a downturn in the Chinese housing market 
on the real economy, Monthly Report, August 2014, pp. 17-19.
Hodge, A. and L. Lin (2021), Boosting the Economy: The Impact of US Government Spending 
Plans, IMF News, Country Focus, 1 July 2021.
IHS Markit (2021), Chips still squeezing: YTD 7.4 mn units and -10% growth impact, Automotive 
Research & Analysis, 5 October 2021, https://ihsmarkit.com/research-analysis/chips-still-squeezing- 
ytd- 74mn-units-and-10-growth-impact.html
International Monetary Fund (2021), World Economic Outlook: Recovery During a Pandemic – 
Health Concerns, Supply Disruptions, and Price Pressures, October 2021.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
26

Rogoff, K. and Y. Yang (2021), Has China’s Housing Production Peaked?, China & World Economy, 
Vol. 29, No 1, pp. 1-31.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
27

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
In September 2021, based on a joint assess -
ment of financing conditions and the inflation 
outlook, the Governing Council of the ECB 
judged that favourable financing conditions 
could be maintained with a moderately lower 
pace of net asset purchases under the pan -
demic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) 
than in the previous two quarters. Moreover, 
net asset purchases will continue with an un -
changed anticipated total envelope of €1,850 
billion until at least the end of March 2022 
and, in any case, until the Governing Council 
judges that the coronavirus crisis phase is over. 
If favourable financing conditions can be main -
tained with smaller asset purchase flows over -
all, the envelope of €1,850 billion need not be 
used in full. Equally, the total envelope can also be increased if necessary. The Governing Coun -
cil also confirmed its other measures, namely 
the level of the key ECB interest rates, its for -
ward guidance on their likely future evolution, 
and its purchases under the asset purchase 
programme (APP) at a monthly pace of €20 bil -
lion.
At the beginning of September, compared to 
the last quarterly assessment in June, the ECB 
Governing Council judged that financing condi -
tions for firms, households and the public sec -
tor had remained favourable. Moreover, the in -
flation outlook in the new macroeconomic pro -
jections has been revised upwards again. The 
ECB staff projections expect the current rise in 
inflation to be largely temporary, however, and 
for inflation to remain well below 2% over the 
medium term. Against this backdrop, the Gov -
erning Council remains of the opinion that fa -
vourable financing conditions are essential for 
the economy to continue its recovery and to 
offset the negative impact of the pandemic on 
inflation. However, it also sees upside risks to 
inflation. If supply bottlenecks last longer and 
feed through into higher than anticipated 
wage rises, price pressures could be more per -
sistent.
In October, the Governing Council of the ECB 
confirmed its September assessment of finan -
cing conditions. Despite a rise in market inter -
est rates since its meeting in early September, 
overall financing conditions remained favour -
able for firms, households and the public sec -
tor. In terms of inflation, the Governing Council 
noted that, while the current phase of higher 
inflation will last longer than originally antici -
pated, it still expects inflation to decline in the 
course of next year. At the same time, if persist -
ent supply bottlenecks feed through into higher 
than anticipated wage rises or if the economy 
returns more quickly to full capacity, price pres -
sures could become stronger.ECB Governing 
Council 
announces 
moderately 
lower pace for 
PEPP purchases 
compared with 
the preceding 
two quartersRecovery of 
growth and 
inflation still 
depends on 
favourable 
financing 
conditions 
ECB Governing 
Council confirms 
assessment of 
financing condi -
tions in OctoberMoney market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources:  ECB  and  Bloomberg.  1 Monthly  averages.  2 From 
1 October 2019, EONIA calculated as €STR + 8,5 basis points. 
3 Three-month EURIBOR less three-month EONIA swap rate. 
• Average 1 to 18 November 2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 20210.60.50.40.30.20.100.10.20.3
––––––+++
–100+10+20Money market
risk premium:
EURIBOR-OIS spread 1,3Basis
points% p.a.
EONIA1,2Three-month EURIBOR 1
Deposit facility
rateMain refinancing rateMarginal lending rate
€STR 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
28

Money market management and liquidity needs
In the period under review from July to No-
vember 2021,1 excess liquidity in the Euro-
system rose by a total of €151.9 billion to an 
average of €4,391.3 billion. Of this overall 
rise in excess liquidity, €101.6 billion was at-
tributable to the fi  fth reserve maintenance 
period of 2021 (July- September) and €50.3 
billion was attributable to the sixth reserve 
maintenance period of 2021 (September- 
November), even though similarly large 
volumes  were purchased as part of the 
liquidity- providing purchase programmes in 
both of these reserve maintenance periods. 
Developments in the liquidity- absorbing au-
tonomous factors were the main reason for 
this difference.
In the period under review, additional cen-
tral bank liquidity was provided primarily 
through a total of €267.8 billion worth of 
net asset purchases conducted as part of the purchase programmes. The majority of 
these purchases were attributable to the 
pandemic emergency purchase programme 
(PEPP). As at 12 November 2021, the bal-
ance sheet holdings of the asset purchase 
programmes amounted to €4,611.2 billion 
(see the table on p. 30). During the period 
under review, the average outstanding ten-
der volume in the euro area also grew by 
€14.0 billion to €2,210.0 billion. The allot-
ment volume of €97.6 billon for the ninth 
targeted longer- term refi  nancing operation 
(TLTRO- III) in September exceeded the fi  rst 
voluntary repayments for the fi  rst to fi  fth 
TLTRO- III operations, which resulted in a net 
provision of liquidity overall. At €1.3 billion 
in total, there was little demand for the 
1 Here, the averages of the sixth reserve maintenance 
period of 2021 (September- November) are compared 
with the averages of the fourth reserve maintenance 
period of 2021 (June- July).
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2021
28 July
to
14 Sep.15 Sep.
to
2 Nov.
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  14.1 –   7.5
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  16.6 –  35.6
3. Net foreign assets 1 +   5.0 +   8.4
4. Other factors 1 –  55.9 –  43.3
Total –  48.4 –  78.0
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations +   0.1 +   0.0
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations +  17.2 –   3.3
c) Other operations + 134.4 + 133.4
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility +   0.0 +   0.0
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  30.0 +  28.1
Total + 121.7 + 158.2
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) +  73.1 +  80.3
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –   0.7 –   1.9
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
29

tenth pandemic emergency longer- term re-
fi  nancing operation (PELTRO) in September 
(previous operation in June 2021: €0.5 bil-
lion). At the same time, three PELTROs 
amounting to €22.1 billion were repaid, 
leading to a net absorption of liquidity from 
the PELTROs. Uptake of the regular main re-
fi  nancing operations and three- month ten-
ders likewise remained very subdued. In 
Germany, the outstanding volume of all re-
fi  nancing operations rose by €4.9 billion to 
an average of €439.3 billion. As a result, 
Germany’s share of the outstanding tender 
volume in the Eurosystem remained un-
changed at around 20%.In the sixth reserve maintenance period of 
2021, liquidity needs stemming from au-
tonomous factors rose by €126.4 billion 
compared to the fourth reserve mainten-
ance period of 2021 (June- July), reaching a 
new record high of €2,177.4 billion (see the 
table on p.  29).2 The main driver of this 
growth was the combined total of net for-
eign assets and other factors, which are 
considered together owing to liquidity- 
neutral valuation effects. The resulting 
liquidity needs rose by €85.8 billion, which 
was attributable chiefl  y to increased non- 
monetary policy deposits, such as deposits 
of foreign central banks. Other major 
liquidity- absorbing effects originated from 
the sharp rise in banknotes in circulation, 
which grew by €21.6 billion to €1,507.4 bil-
lion, and the increase in government de-
posits, which rose by €19.0 billion to €671.3 
billion. In Germany, net banknote issuance 
went up by €17.0 billion to €863.8 billion, 
and government deposits grew by €10.9 
billion to €217.7 billion. Over the reporting 
period, the minimum reserve requirement 
climbed by an average of €2.6 billion to 
€152.8 billion in the sixth reserve mainten-
ance period of 2021, which led to an add-
itional need for central bank liquidity. In 
Germany, the reserve requirement went up 
by €0.3 billion to €41.6 billion.
The use of exemption allowances under the 
two- tier system for remunerating excess re-
serve holdings increased over the reporting 
period from 99.2% to 99.3%. In Germany, 
use of these exemption allowances re-
mained steady at 99.2%. The increase in 
the minimum reserve requirement caused 
absolute exemption allowances to rise. 
However, given the stronger growth in ex-
cess liquidity, excess liquidity holdings re-
2 Average of the sixth reserve maintenance period of 
2021 (September- November 2021) compared with the 
average of the fourth reserve maintenance period of 
2021 (June- July 2021).Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as at
12 Nov. 2021
Active programmes 1
PSPP +  34.7 2,470.4
CBPP3 +   4.6 296.5
CSPP +  15.3 305.4
ABSPP –   1.7 28.2
PEPP + 225.6 1,501.4
Completed programmes 
SMP –  10.6 6.5
CBPP1 +   0.0 0.4
CBPP2 +   0.0 2.4
1 Changes due to net purchases, maturities, reinvestments 
and amortisation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankAutonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing  (liquidity-absorbing)  factors  are  preceded  by  a  positive 
(negative)  sign.  1 Including  end-of-quarter  liquidity-neutral 
valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 20211,5001,20090060030003006009001,200
–––––++++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
30

munerated at -0.50% grew once again (see 
the adjacent chart). As a result, an average 
of 20.7% (as in the previous period) of ex-
cess liquidity in the Eurosystem was ex-
empted from negative remuneration during 
the sixth reserve maintenance period of 
2021 (Germany: 20.2%; previous period: 
20.4%).
During the reporting period, overnight 
interest rates on the euro money market 
continued to move in line with the deposit 
facility rate (see the adjacent chart). In this 
context, the unsecured euro short- term rate 
(€STR) was set at -0.57% on average during 
the sixth reserve maintenance period of 
2021 and thus stood 7 basis points below 
the deposit facility rate, as it had in the pre-
ceding period. On average, turnovers re-
mained essentially unchanged in both of 
the periods under review, at €48.5 billion 
and €48.6 billion respectively. During the 
sixth reserve maintenance period of 2021, 
secured overnight money on the GC Pool-
ing trading platform was traded at -0.55% 
on average in the ECB basket, which was 
5  basis points below the deposit facility 
rate; the spread thus remained almost un-
changed compared with the previous 
period. In the ECB EXTended basket, with 
its larger pool of securities, overnight 
money transactions were conducted at an 
average rate of -0.52% in both periods. By 
contrast, overnight rates in both baskets 
were around 1 basis point lower on average 
during the fourth reserve maintenance 
period of 2021. The aggregate overnight 
volume of the ECB and ECB EXTended bas-
kets declined from an average of €3.6 bil-
lion per day in the fi  fth reserve maintenance 
period of 2021 to €3.0 billion in the subse-
quent period. Rates were lower at end- 
September 2021, as is typical for the end of 
a quarter. The €STR fell by just under 1 basis 
point to -0.58% compared with the previ-
ous day. For a period of time on this day, the price of secured overnight money in the 
ECB basket decreased signifi  cantly for very 
low volumes, falling by around 27 basis 
points to -0.79%. In the ECB EXTended bas-
ket, the overnight rate dropped by 14 basis 
points to -0.64%. On the whole over the 
reporting period, GC Pooling overnight 
interest rates remained considerably more 
volatile than the €STR. For example, the 
overnight rate in the ECB EXTended basket 
also exceeded the deposit facility rate for a 
short period of time in October 2021.Deposit facility rate, money market rates 
and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Central 
bank balance minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the 
deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche BundesbankJune July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov.
20211.00.90.80.70.60.5
––––––Daily data
€ bn% p.a.
Excess liquidity1
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0Mean value for the 
reserve maintenance period 2ECB basket
ECB EXTended basket€STR
STOXX GC Pooling Overnight
GermanyEuro areaAllowances (two-tier system)Deposit facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
31

The APP holdings recorded on the balance 
sheet have risen by €50.9 billion since mid-  
August. On 12 November, the Eurosystem held 
assets totalling €3,100.4 billion as part of the 
APP (see the box on pp. 29 ff. for a breakdown 
of the holdings by individual programme). The 
reported holdings continue to be influenced by 
the smoothing over time of reinvestments in 
line with the technical parameters agreed upon 
in December 2018 and by the use of amortised 
cost accounting.1 Secur ities holdings reported 
under the PEPP amounted to €1,501.4 billion 
on 12 November, up by €204.5 billion.
On 29 September 2021, the ninth operation of 
the third series of targeted longer- term refinan -
cing operations (TLTRO-  III) was settled, with 
152 banks taking up a total of €97.6 billion. At 
the same time, there were voluntary repay -
ments of funds provided under earlier TLTRO- III 
operations in the amount of €79.2 billion. 
Overall, a combined volume of €2,206.3 billion 
is thus outstanding for all TLTRO- III operations. Uptake of the pandemic emergency longer-  
term refinancing operation (PELTRO) concluded 
one day later, at €1.3 billion, was once again 
very low. A total of just €2.3 billion is currently 
outstanding in the PELTROs.
The trend increase in excess liquidity continued 
on the back of the Eurosystem’s ongoing net 
asset purchases under the APP and the PEPP . As 
this report went to press, the volume of excess 
liquidity stood at €4,448.5 billion, which cor -
responds to an increase of around €113.4 bil -
lion since mid-  August (see the box on pp. 29 ff.).
Short-  term money market rates have moved 
within a narrow corridor since August, but 
have fallen slightly at the current end. At the 
end of the reporting period, the unsecured 
euro overnight index average rate (EONIA), APP and PEPP 
securities hold -
ings recorded 
on balance 
sheet see further 
expansion
Ninth TLTRO- III 
sees banks take 
up €97.6 billionExcess liquidity 
continues to rise
Short- term 
money market 
interest rates 
down slightlyOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 202105001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,0005,5006,0006,5007,000€ billion
Mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
Purchase programmesFirst series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-I)Third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-III)
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-II)Pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs)
Additional longer-term refinancing operations
1 In particular, the difference between the acquisition and 
redemption value is amortised over the security’s residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and measured 
at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
32

which is computed by applying a fixed spread 
to the euro short- term rate (€STR), was down 
by one basis point to -0.49%. The three- month 
EURIBOR fell somewhat more sharply com -
pared to August, standing most recently at 
-0.57%.
Money market forward rates have risen signifi -
cantly since the ECB Governing Council’s mon -
etary policy meeting in September, with market 
participants increasingly pricing in an earlier 
date for the first Eurosystem interest rate hike. 
On the one hand, this was due to the percep -
tion of rising inflation risks in light of unex -
pected upside developments and more persist -
ent inflation trends. On the other hand, devel -
opments in the international environment are 
also likely to have played a role, with several 
major central banks signalling an upcoming 
tightening of monetary policy. An initial interest 
rate increase at the end of 2022 is therefore al -
ready priced into the money market forward 
rates at present. However, this is probably 
mainly due to risk premia, which distort the in -
formative content of the forward rates with re -
gard to the expected interest rate path. The 
ECB Survey of Monetary Analysts prior to the 
October meeting also lends weight to this in -
terpretation. Although the time at which sur -
vey participants are expecting the first interest 
rate hike also shifted forward slightly in com -
parison to the September survey round, re -
spondents still anticipate that it will take place 
in the second quarter of 2024.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 showed 
considerable growth in the third quarter of 
2021, too, driven as before by highly liquid 
overnight deposits. Although inflows were 
slightly more extensive than in the previous 
quarter, they were still considerably lower than 
last year’s high coronavirus- related net inflows. 
In this context, the annual growth rate of M3 sank by just over 1 percentage point to 7.4%. 
However, the pace of normalisation slackened.
On the counterparts side, the Eurosystem’s 
continued asset purchases boosted monetary 
growth. Banks’ lending to the domestic private 
sector also saw a significant increase. For one 
thing, non-  financial corporations’ demand for 
loans picked up momentum on the back of 
their increased funding needs for investment 
purposes. For another, household demand for 
loans for house purchase remained consistently 
strong. At the same time, the banks participat -
ing in the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) reported 
that, in the third quarter, they had tightened 
their credit standards only for loans for house 
purchase.
Overnight deposits were once again the M3 
component that made the most significant 
contribution to annual growth. The low inter -
est rate level means that their opportunity costs 
remain low. As in the preceding quarters, 
households accounted for the largest net in -
flows. Although net inflows were slightly up on 
the quarter, they were considerably lower than 
the high inflows observed during the first three 
waves of the pandemic. Households’ short-  
term savings deposits followed a very similar 
pattern. There are thus signs that the accumu -
lation of deposits is normalising as households’ 
options for consumption have improved after 
pandemic- related containment measures were 
eased further.
Non- financial corporations also recorded rela -
tively large inflows to their overnight deposits. 
These inflows were somewhat more substantial 
compared to the previous quarter, which is 
likely also connected to the ongoing bottle -
necks in the supply of intermediate goods that 
is currently hampering production and invest -
ment in many sectors. This aggregate picture, 
however, masks fairly heterogeneous develop -
ments in the individual euro area countries 
brought about by differences in the degrees to 
which they have been affected by the pan -Money market 
forward rates 
significantly 
higher
Gradual normal -
isation of mon -
etary growthM3 growth still 
driven by over -
night depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
33

demic and the ways in which they are dealing 
with it.
On the counterparts side, monetary growth 
was once again driven by the expansion in 
lending to domestic non- banks, which, after a 
weaker preceding quarter, returned to the high 
level recorded in the first quarter of 2021. 
Again, securities- based lending to general gov -
ernment made the largest contribution (see the 
lower chart on p. 36). This is due to the persist -
ently high monthly net purchases of govern -
ment bonds by the Eurosystem under the APP 
and the PEPP . At the same time, commercial 
banks reduced their government bond hold -
ings to a lesser extent on balance than they 
had in the previous quarter. In addition, lending 
to the domestic private sector registered sub -
stantial growth, particularly in the area of 
loans. Securitised lending to the private sector 
recorded only moderate inflows, on balance.
Loans to non-  financial corporations increased 
perceptibly on balance in the third quarter, 
after having fluctuated strongly in the first half 
of the year as a result of efforts to meet the 
credit growth targets under TLTRO- III.2 The an -
nual growth rate rose to a moderate 2.1% by 
the end of September. Loans in the long-  term 
maturity segment, in particular, saw an in -
crease, but short- term loans also rose slightly 
on balance (see the upper chart on p.  36). 
Across Member States, lending to non- financial 
corporations was as heterogeneous as it had 
been before the outbreak of the coronavirus 
pandemic, with the bulk of the net inflows 
stemming from banks in Germany and France. 
By contrast, banks in Italy and Spain scaled 
back their loans to non- financial corporations 
slightly in net terms, as they had done in the 
previous quarter.
Lending was supported, on the one hand, by 
factors including the ongoing economic recov -
ery in the euro area and the associated increase 
in enterprises’ propensity to invest. On the Build- up of 
securitised 
lending  mainly 
driven by Euro -
system net 
purchases 
Marked recovery 
in lending to 
non- financial 
corporations …
… bolstered 
by economic 
recovery and 
low bank 
lending  ratesMonetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 20212024681012
–++++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14
20246
–+++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial liabilities1
Net external assets
Credit to the private sector 2
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations 4
Households5Contribution of components 
in percentage points
Securities-based lending to 
general governmentPercentage change
in M3
Percentage change
in M3Contribution of counterparts in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2Contribution of sectors in percentage points
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a, 2021b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
34

other, demand for credit was bolstered by bank 
lending rates that remained close to all- time 
lows. However, the dampening factors seen in 
the previous quarters continued to have an im -
pact. The generous liquidity buffers grew once 
again, for instance, due to the improved earn -
ings situations of many enterprises. This was 
accompanied by additional government grants 
to enterprises affected by the pandemic. More -
over, it is likely that some enterprises that were 
hit hard by the pandemic were already highly 
indebted, leading to a certain reluctance to 
take out new loans.
The bank managers surveyed as part of the BLS 
reported that demand for loans among non-  
financial corporations nonetheless rose margin -
ally overall compared with the previous quar -
ter; this was the second increase in succession. 
According to the survey, it was primarily large 
enterprises that required financing. The sur -
veyed banks cited financing needs for inventor -
ies and working capital as a factor boosting de -
mand again for the first time in 2021. Financing 
needs for fixed investment, which the BLS 
banks had reported as curbing demand for 
loans for several quarters, also contributed to 
the rise in demand, as in the previous quarter. 
However, a few bank managers noted that, 
viewed in isolation, supply constraints were 
dampening credit demand.At the same time, the banks surveyed as part of 
the BLS kept credit standards for loans to en -
terprises essentially unchanged on balance, as 
in the quarter before. According to the re -
sponses from the surveyed banks, this was the 
result of contrasting factors. The general eco -
nomic situation and the economic outlook 
were conducive to looser credit standards, as 
were the greater competitive pressure with 
other banks and the improved liquidity position 
of the banking industry. By contrast, sector-  
specific and firm- specific factors as well as a 
decline in borrowers’ creditworthiness con -
tinued to have a restrictive effect.
Loans to households showed further strong ex -
pansion in the third quarter of 2021. As with 
corporate loans, banks in Germany and France 
made the most significant contributions. A ra -
ther strong stimulus also came from Italy once 
again. Overall, net inflows to this segment are 
considerably higher than they were before the 
pandemic. These were predominantly driven by 
housing loans, which make up the most signifi -
cant portion of loans to households. Their an -
nual growth rate has increased steadily in re -
cent years, standing at 5.5% at the end of Sep -
tember. The dynamic developments over the 
last few quarters should also be viewed against 
the backdrop of material shortages and other 
supply- side bottlenecks driving up prices for BLS banks saw 
an increase in 
demand for 
loans to enter -
prises …… and kept 
credit standards 
essentially 
unchanged
Further sharp 
increase in 
housing loans to 
households …Consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q2 2021 Q3 2021
Holdings against central government 2 – 41.8 46.0
Monetary aggregate M3 208.7 251.9
of which components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 245.7 254.0
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) – 46.0 – 9.4
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 9.0 7.4
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities – 19.3 – 4.3
of which:
Capital and reserves 30.0 2.6
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 49.3 – 6.9Assets Q2 2021 Q3 2021
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 47.2 134.2
of which:
Loans 1 38.4 121.5
Securities 8.7 12.7
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 109.2 182.6
of which:
Loans 11.9 –  8.2
Securities 97.2 190.8
Net external assets – 7.3 – 49.0
Other counterparts of M3 – 1.4 25.8
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
35

construction work, which, taken by itself, fur -
ther increased the financing needs of house -
holds for house purchase.
Data from the BLS indicate the reasons behind 
the brisk demand for loans for house purchase. 
The banks surveyed repeatedly cited the low 
general interest rate level, the positive outlook 
on the residential real estate market and the re -
newed improvement in consumer confidence 
as key factors. On the supply side, banks par -
ticipating in the BLS were revealed to be more 
cautious, tightening their standards for housing 
loans in the third quarter following slight relax -
ations in the preceding two quarters. The pri -
mary reasons named by banks were lower risk 
tolerance as well as higher costs of funds and 
balance sheet constraints. Some banks expli -
citly cited restrictive macroprudential policy.
Consumer loans to households increased per -
ceptibly for the second quarter in succession. 
One of the reasons for this is likely to have 
been the lifting of coronavirus- related restric -
tions in the areas of transport, hospitality and 
culture. This was also accompanied by pandemic-  
related catch- up effects. Nevertheless, inflows 
in consumer credit remained far below their 
level prior to the outbreak of the pandemic. 
The banks responding to the BLS reported an -
other moderate rise in demand for consumer 
and other loans. The main reasons they gave 
for this increase were improved consumer con -
fidence and a greater propensity to purchase 
durable consumer goods. Furthermore, the 
banks surveyed as part of the BLS indicated 
that they had left their standards for consumer 
and other loans essentially unchanged, as they 
had in the preceding quarter.
Unlike lending, the net external position of the 
MFI sector had a noticeable dampening influ -
ence on monetary growth in the third quarter 
of 2021. While the euro area’s ongoing current 
account surplus resulted in inflows of funds as 
usual, this positive factor was offset by the 
negative balance in cross- border securities 
transactions according to the balance of pay -… credit stand -
ards tightened 
according to BLS
Perceptible 
inflows in con -
sumer credit as 
well
Net external 
position with 
noticeable 
dampening 
effect on monet -
ary growth due 
to negative bal -
ance in cross- 
border securities 
transactionsSecurities-based lending to general 
government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 202120002004006008001,0001,200
–++++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
Eurosystem
Other MFIsof which:By the euro area MFI sector
MFI loans to the non-financial private 
sector in the euro area*
4020020406080100120140
––+++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
–200+20+40+60+80To households 3To non-financial corporations1
Total 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
36

ments data available to date. The outflows in 
investment were attributable to the persistent 
differences in yield between bonds issued by 
other currency areas and those issued by the 
euro area. Against this backdrop, domestic 
non- banks continued to expand their holdings 
of foreign securities on balance, while non-  
residents sold bonds issued by domestic non-  
banks in net terms. Although they once again 
purchased larger volumes of shares and mutual 
fund shares issued in the euro area at the same 
time, this was, on the whole, far outweighed 
by the outflows of funds owing to bond trans -
actions.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic customers
Despite interest rates falling deeper into nega -
tive territory in some cases, domestic custom -
ers increased their overnight deposits signifi -
cantly again and continued to reduce all other 
deposits. Unlike in preceding quarters, the cor -
porate sector recorded the highest inflows into 
overnight deposits in the current quarter.
By contrast, domestic households built up their 
deposits to a limited extent in the third quarter 
of 2021. This development should be viewed 
against the background that the easing of 
pandemic- related restrictions has increased 
households’ propensity to consume. Catch- up 
effects are likely to have played a role here as 
well. Furthermore, survey data indicate that 
some households purchased durable consumer 
goods earlier than planned in anticipation of 
further price increases.
Unlike households, non- financial corporations’ 
accumulation of deposits in the third quarter of 
2021 was again slightly above the pre-  
pandemic level. One reason for this is likely to 
have been the improved income situation of 
the sectors that were hit especially hard by the 
pandemic. Financial enterprises also expanded 
their overnight deposits to a greater extent in the reporting quarter. It seems that the uncer -
tainty surrounding the path of economic recov -
ery has prompted enterprises in this sector to 
temporarily park their inflows of funds in over -
night deposits. This decision was obviously en -
couraged by the fact that the interest rate dis -
advantage of overnight deposits compared to 
other types of bank deposits continues to be 
minor (see the chart above).
Compared with the previous quarter, banks’ 
lending business with the domestic non- bank 
sector regained a considerable amount of mo -
mentum in the third quarter of 2021. This was 
mainly due to the sharp growth in lending to 
the domestic private sector. In addition, banks 
markedly increased their holdings of securities 
issued by the private sector once more, acquir -
ing mainly shares and other variable- yield 
securities. By contrast, their lending to the pub -
lic sector grew only marginally in net terms.Accumulation 
of overnight 
deposits con -
tinues to 
dominate  
deposit growth
High propensity 
to consume 
dampening 
households’ 
build- up of 
deposits
Credit business 
with non- banks 
regained 
momentum 
owing to loans 
to the private 
sectorInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 202101234% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
37

In terms of lending to the private sector, loans 
to households once again recorded the largest 
net inflows. This was again primarily due to 
households’ high demand for loans for house 
purchase, the growth rate of which initially 
picked up on the year and then stabilised at 
7.2% towards the end of the third quarter. In 
addition to loans for house purchase, the cur -
rent rise in loans to households was also attrib -
utable to consumer credit, which, unlike in the 
preceding three quarters, saw slightly positive 
growth again. Alongside the positive labour 
market and income situation, households’ 
overall high demand for bank loans in the third 
quarter was encouraged by financing terms 
that remain exceptionally favourable. Accord -
ing to MFI interest rate statistics, the interest 
rate on long- term loans for house purchase 
was 1.3% at the end of the third quarter and 
thus only slightly above the historical low of 
1.1% recorded at the end of December 2020.The latest results of the BLS suggest that other 
factors were at play as well. The banks re -
ported that the low general level of interest 
rates and improved consumer confidence as 
well as the good outlook for the residential real 
estate market and expected price develop -
ments were key factors driving the uptick in de -
mand for housing loans. Another explanatory 
factor provided by the surveyed banks regard -
ing the increase in demand for consumer credit 
was the increased propensity to purchase dur -
able consumer goods.
Credit standards for loans to households for 
house purchase were tightened marginally in 
net terms in the third quarter. After easing 
lending standards in the previous quarter, the 
phase of tightening these standards that began 
at the outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic in 
Germany in the first quarter of 2020 resumed. 
One of the reasons for tightening these stand -
ards was an elevated level of credit risk accord -
ing to banks’ assessments. Another reason was 
that banks exhibited a lower tolerance of risk. 
The rejection rate rose slightly compared with 
the previous quarter. After the increases in the 
second, third and fourth quarters of 2020, this 
rate is likely to persist at an elevated level.
Credit terms and conditions were also tight -
ened on balance, continuing the tightening 
that has been ongoing since the second quar -
ter of 2019, with a brief interruption in the 
second quarter of 2021. This tightening was re -
flected solely in an expansion of margins irre -
spective of credit ratings, which banks justified 
on the basis of balance sheet constraints and 
lower competitive pressure.
By contrast, standards for consumer and other 
loans to households were eased marginally by 
the surveyed banks in the third quarter of 2021.
In addition to lending to households, banks’ 
lending business was also boosted by loans to 
non- financial corporations, which picked up 
substantially in comparison to the overall weak 
first half of the year. This was mainly a result of Continuing high 
demand for 
housing loans 
among house -
holdsDemand 
boosted by 
improved 
consumer  
confidence  and 
good outlook, 
amongst other 
factors
Standards for 
housing loans 
tightened 
slightly owing to 
elevated credit 
risk and lower 
risk tolerance
Credit terms and 
conditions tight -
ened irrespective 
of credit ratings
Non- financial 
corporations 
exhibit high 
demand for 
credit …MFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2021
Q2 Q3
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 22.7 35.3
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years – 11.3 – 6.5
over 2 years –  7.2 – 5.8
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months 1.5 – 0.1
over 3 months –  0.8 – 0.8
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans 0.7 – 0.7
Securities – 13.1 1.7
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 14.8 38.8
of which: to households 3 24.6 23.5
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 – 13.0 14.9
Securities 2.6 3.8
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. Data adjusted for statis-
tical changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, households and 
general government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted 
for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 4   Non- fi  nancial corporations and 
quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
38

the continued recovery in economic activity in 
the third quarter, which was associated with an 
increase in financing needs, especially in do -
mestically oriented sectors such as the con -
struction and real estate sectors.
The current expansion covered all maturities. 
However, long- term loans recorded the most 
prominent gains. In addition to refinancing, re -
structuring and renegotiations, the banks sur -
veyed in the BLS listed the funding of fixed in -
vestment as the key reason for the rise in de -
mand. The latter funding is usually obtained 
through long- term loans. According to the BLS, 
other factors boosting demand stemmed from 
financial requirements for inventories and 
working capital, which non- financial corpor -
ations typically finance via short- term loans. 
The low general interest rate level also con -
tinued to boost demand. The MFI interest rate 
statistics show that, at the end of September, 
domestic enterprises paid interest amounting 
to 1.5% for small- volume loans and 1.1% for 
large- volume loans in the long- term segment, 
whilst interest rates on short- term loans most 
recently stood at 1.8% and 1.3%, respectively 
(see the chart on p. 40). By contrast, the results 
of the BLS suggest that enterprises’ internal 
financing options, when viewed in isolation, 
had a dampening effect on demand.
At the same time, the latest BLS results indicate 
that banks tightened their lending policies for 
corporate loans only marginally. Credit terms 
and conditions were not adjusted in their entir -
ety in the third quarter. Banks marginally ex -
panded their margins only for riskier loans and 
based this increase on lower competitive pres -
sure.
In response to the ad hoc questions in the 
Octo ber survey, German banks reported that 
their funding conditions had improved some -
what compared with the previous quarter.
According to the surveyed banks, the Eurosys -
tem purchase programmes (APP , PEPP) have 
helped to improve the liquidity position of com -mercial banks and their market funding condi -
tions over the past six months, but they were 
still having a negative impact on bank profit -
ability through net interest income. The pur -
chase programmes did not contribute to credit 
growth over the past six months.
Data from the BLS showed that the negative 
interest rate on the deposit facility depressed 
lending and deposit rates and also pushed up 
fees for deposits, squeezing banks’ net interest 
income overall once again. The two- tier system 
for remunerating excess liquidity holdings did, 
however, soften the adverse impact on earn -
ings.… across all 
maturities and 
driven by differ -
ent demand 
motives
Credit standards 
tightened only 
marginally in 
commercial 
banking
German banks’ 
funding environ -
ment somewhat 
improved …
… also helped 
by Eurosystem 
purchase pro -
grammesTwo- tier system 
for excess liquid -
ity softens 
adverse impact 
on profitability2017 2018 2019 2020 2021–10+1+2+3+4+5+6Year-on-year change, end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic 
non-financial private sector
3210123456
–––++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchaseTotal,
percentage changeLoan contributions 
in percentage pointsTotal,
percentage changeUp to 1 yearMaturity contributions in percentage points
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 yearsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
39

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q4 2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 20211.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2013 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 2100.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
30030
–+
3003060
–++Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
0.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
40

Twelve banks from the German sample took 
part in the TLTRO- III operations in June, and 
eight in September 2021, mainly on account of 
the attractive conditions. Banks reported using 
the obtained funds primarily for lending and as 
a substitute for maturing debt securities and 
interbank loans. The surveyed banks would participate in future TLTRO- III operations mainly 
due to the attractive conditions, provided that 
they had not yet reached their credit limits. The 
TLTRO- III operations caused banks to ease their 
lending policies and contributed to a rise in 
lending, particularly to enterprises.Use of TLTRO- III 
funds for lend -
ing, inter alia
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), Monetary policy and banking business, Monthly Report, May 2021, 
pp. 26-40.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), Monetary policy and banking business, Monthly Report, August 
2021, pp. 28-45.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
41

Financial markets
Financial market setting
The international financial markets were influ -
enced by surprisingly high inflation rates and 
increasing inflation expectations during the 
second half of 2021 to date. Market partici -
pants gradually revised their inflation expect -
ations upwards, primarily for the next two 
years. Recently, therefore, market- based ex -
pectations of average annual inflation rates for 
2022 were very significantly over 2% in many 
currency areas and at 3% in the euro area. 
Rising  inflation expectations also led to the 
view that the central banks’ monetary policy 
response would potentially be swifter than pre -
viously indicated. Against this backdrop, nom -
inal interest rates worldwide rose until the end 
of October, chiefly for short- term maturities. 
The decision by the US Federal Reserve (Fed) to 
taper net purchases in several stages had been 
widely expected. Of late, however, the major 
central banks have moved to counter expect -
ations of faster monetary policy tightening. 
This has contributed to yields across the matur -
ity range declining again in many places. On 
balance, ten- year government bond yields in -
creased markedly on their end-  June levels in 
the United States and the United Kingdom, 
while remaining virtually unchanged in the 
euro area. Overall, yields on BBB- rated Euro -
pean corporate bonds rose slightly. On the 
whole, though, financing terms in the Euro -
pean bond market remain very favourable. 
Stock markets recorded price gains worldwide, 
boosted by a good reporting season and higher 
corporate earnings forecasts. Market partici -
pants’ concerns regarding the further course of 
the pandemic initially took somewhat of a back 
seat, but have recently returned to the fore. 
The previously mentioned expectations about 
inflation developments and future monetary 
policy in the individual currency areas also 
shaped developments in the foreign exchange 
markets. On balance, the US dollar appreciated on a broad basis, while the euro depreciated in 
effective terms.
Exchange rates
On balance, the euro weakened against the US 
dollar compared with the start of the third 
quarter of 2021. This decline set in back at the 
beginning of August and was triggered by the 
publication of surprisingly high inflation rates in 
the United States and better than expected fig -
ures for the US labour market, the Federal Re -
serve having previously established the recov -
ery of the labour market as a prerequisite for 
monetary policy tightening. In the second half 
of August, however, there was a temporary 
shift in sentiment in favour of the euro after the 
publication of the minutes of the July meeting 
of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) 
made clear that there was disagreement 
among its members about the monetary policy 
stance. The closely watched speech by Fed 
Chair Jerome Powell in Jackson Hole also 
boosted the euro, as he explicitly dampened 
expectations of rising interest rates. By con -
trast, the annual consumer inflation rate in the 
euro area published at the end of the month 
was significantly higher than expected at 3%. 
This led to market expectations that the ECB 
Governing Council could discuss paring back its 
pandemic emergency purchase programme 
(PEPP) in the foreseeable future and that the 
differences in the monetary policy stances of 
the Eurosystem and the Fed would narrow. This 
provided the euro with additional buoyancy 
against the US dollar.
However, in the ensuing period, the euro was 
weakened once again by a series of worse than 
expected economic data for the euro area. Fur -
thermore, in mid-  September, the warning that 
Chinese real estate group Evergrande could de -
fault on payments temporarily unsettled the 
financial markets. The flight to safety this Financial 
markets  shaped 
by high inflation 
and anticipated 
monetary policy 
response
Euro down 
against the 
US dollar on 
balanceDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
42

sparked on the part of investors caused the US 
dollar to appreciate against the euro and a 
large number of other currencies. The FOMC 
also contributed to the strength of the US dol -
lar against the euro, signalling after its Septem -
ber meeting that a tapering of bond purchases 
could soon be justified, given the recent high 
inflation rates and the recovery of the labour 
market. Furthermore, the projections by FOMC 
members indicated that key policy rates could 
potentially be increased earlier than previously 
thought. An additional detrimental factor for 
the euro was that yields on US Treasuries rose 
markedly in this monetary policy environment, 
and the yield spread vis- à- vis the euro area 
widened. After the announcement of surpris -
ingly high consumer price inflation in the 
United States, the euro once again depreciated 
markedly against the US dollar in November, 
falling to its lowest level since July 2020. As this 
report went to press, the euro was trading at 
US$1.13, which is 4.5% lower than at the be -
ginning of July 2021.
Compared with the beginning of the third 
quarter, the euro depreciated on balance 
against the pound sterling. At the end of Sep -
tember, the sudden petrol shortages at British 
petrol stations, which were triggered by supply 
chain frictions and resulted in economic woes, 
induced a short- lived and marked depreciation 
of the pound sterling. However, as of the be -
ginning of October, these concerns faded into 
the background following the publication of 
surprisingly good economic figures. This firmed 
expectations of an imminent tightening of 
monetary policy in the United Kingdom, bol -
stering the pound. In November, a temporary 
countermovement set in after the Bank of Eng -
land decided to leave the base rate unchanged 
at its historical low, which took markets by sur -
prise. Despite this, at the end of the reporting 
period, the euro was trading at £0.84, down 
1.9% from its level at the end of June.
Looking at the period since the beginning of 
the third quarter, the euro suffered initial losses 
against the yen and then lacked any clearly dis -cernible trend for a long time. It then appreci -
ated markedly in the first half of October. This 
was attributable to market expectations that 
the Japanese central bank would maintain its 
accommodative monetary stance for several 
more years to come, given persistently low 
rates of inflation. By contrast, fledgling discus -
sions about unwinding monetary support in 
the euro area boosted the euro. That said, as 
this report went to press, it was trading lower 
again at ¥130, down 1.4% in value compared 
to the beginning of July 2021.
On a weighted average against the currencies 
of 19 major trading partners, the euro depreci -Euro also 
weaker 
against pound 
sterling …
… and against 
the yenExchange rate of the euro
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Calculated 
against the currencies of 19 countries. A rise in values indicates 
an appreciation of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankJ J A S OND J FMAM J J A SON
2020 20211.101.151.201.25
120125130135
0.840.870.900.93
97100103Daily data, log scale
¥US$
£against the ...
... US dollar
... yen
... pound sterling
Nominal effective exchange rate1
Q1 1999 = 100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
43

ated by 2.6% on balance. In addition to its fall 
in value against the currencies mentioned 
above, the euro depreciated markedly against 
the renminbi and the Swiss franc. The Swiss 
currency, which is often regarded as relatively 
safe, benefited from elevated demand in the 
wake of higher uncertainty in the global mar -
kets in September. Furthermore, the euro also 
recorded notable losses against the Norwegian 
krone and Canadian dollar, which – being cur -
rencies of oil- exporting countries – were given 
a broad- based boost by the rise in oil prices. By 
contrast, the euro appreciated against the cur -
rencies of some central and eastern European 
countries such as the zloty and the forint, 
which have faced downward pressure as a re -
sult of relatively high inflation rates and rising 
coronavirus infection rates.Securities markets and 
portfolio  investment
Bond market
The nominal yields on government bonds in 
the major currency areas presented a mixed 
picture on balance in the period under review, 
with some considerable shifts occurring in the 
components of the nominal yield. In analytical 
terms, the nominal yield can be broken down 
into the components of real interest, inflation 
expectations, the real term premium and the 
inflation risk premium. In the period under re -
view, market- based inflation expectations and 
inflation risk premia rose worldwide. Real inter -
est rates, by contrast, fell to close to their his -
torical lows.
In the United States, yields on ten-  year US 
Treasuries rose on balance by 12 basis points to 
1.6%. The aforementioned shifts in the com -
ponents of the ten- year US yield were very 
clearly in evidence here. For example, in the 
report ing period, expectations of average infla -
tion over the next ten years as derived from 
infla tion swaps rose (+44 basis points), as did 
expectations based on Consensus Economics 
surveys, though somewhat less sharply. The in -
flation risk premium, which roughly speaking is 
calculated as the difference between market-  
based and survey- based expectations, thus also 
increased. By contrast, the real yield on ten-  
year inflation- linked bonds fell to close to his -
torical lows in the reporting period, standing at 
-1.1% as this report went to press. The declin -
ing real ten- year yield also potentially reflected 
the recent resurgence in uncertainty about the 
possible economic impact of the pandemic in 
the final quarter of 2021 and the first quarter 
of 2022. In addition, the fiscal package adopted 
in the United States at the beginning of No -
vember was smaller than originally announced, 
and therefore so too was the amount of ex -
pected borrowing, which, when viewed in isol -
ation, also lowered the real yield and compen -
sated for movements in the opposite direction Euro depreciates 
in effective 
termsMixed develop -
ments in ten- 
year sovereign 
bond yields
Real yields on 
ten- year US 
Treasuries downBond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual ma-
turity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 20210.90.60.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.0
–––++++++++++% p. a., daily data
Euro area
Germany
United States
Japan
United KingdomDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
44

seen in the first quarter of 2021 (on the fiscal 
package see the box on pp. 17 f.).1
The forward inflation rate derived from US in -
flation swaps for a period of five years starting 
in five years’ time also rose in comparison to 
the end of June, latterly standing at 2.6%. At 
the end of October it had been higher still, at 
2.7%. One reason for the recent dip in the for -
ward inflation rate could be the FOMC’s deci -
sion at its early November meeting to gradually 
taper bond purchases as of mid- November. 
Given the current inflation developments, this 
tightening measure had largely been expected 
and increasingly priced in by market partici -
pants prior to the meeting.
Amid major fluctuations, the yield on ten- year 
Bunds dropped by 7 basis points from the end 
of June to -0.3%. The decline is attributable 
above all to lower real term premia, which po -
tentially reflected uncertainty about the busi -
ness cycle going forward. Alongside persistent 
supply bottlenecks for intermediate goods, 
which have been hampering industrial produc -
tion for some time now (see pp. 51ff.), con -
cerns about the economic impact of the pan -
demic grew again recently, also in Germany. By 
contrast, the inflation risk premium rose signifi -
cantly in recent months and was up roughly 
25 basis points in the ten- year maturity seg -
ment on its level at the end of June. Despite 
the higher inflation expectations and inflation 
risk premia, the implied risk- neutral expect -
ations for short- term interest rates exhibited 
volatility but rose only slightly on balance.
In the euro area, the rise in inflation expect -
ations and the inflation risk premium was par -
ticularly pronounced for shorter- term horizons. 
In the period under review, market participants 
revised their expectations upwards multiple 
times. The expected average inflation rate in 
the euro area for 2022 derived from inflation 
swaps rose to 3.0%, after having stood at 1.6% 
at the end of June and at 1.0% at the end of Forward infla -
tion rate up in 
United States
Yield on ten- 
year Bunds 
down
Market partici -
pants revised 
their inflation 
expectations 
upwards for the 
euro area in 
2022Spreads of ten-year government bonds 
over Federal bonds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021050100150200250300350400450Basis points, daily data
Italy
Spain
Ireland FranceGreece
Portugal
Forward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Derived  from  the  fixed  cash 
flow arising from inflation swaps which is swapped for the ac-
tual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro 
area and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised 
over the next five or ten years. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 20211.41.82.22.6Weekly averages
% p. a.
Five-year forward inflation rate in 
five years derived from swapsConsensus Economics inflation
expectations in six to ten years
United StatesEuro area
0.81.21.62.0
% p. a.
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
45

March of this year. Inflation expectations based 
on Consensus Economics surveys were also re -
vised upwards several times. It is noteworthy 
here that market expectations for inflation de -
velopments up to the end of 2022 were again 
higher than survey- based expectations.Market- based inflation expectations and the in -
flation risk premium also rose for longer- term 
horizons. The five- year forward inflation rates 
starting in five years’ time, as derived from in -
flation swaps, rose significantly in the euro area 
to 2.0%, some 36 basis points higher than at 
the end of June. At the end of October they 
briefly surpassed the 2% mark, thus reaching 
their highest level since 2014. In October, infla -
tion expectations for the euro area six to ten 
years ahead, as calculated by Consensus Eco -
nomics on the basis of surveys, remained virtu -
ally unchanged on the previous survey in July. 
The inflation risk premium was thus positive 
again in this long- term maturity segment for 
the first time in a long while.
At present, market participants appear to at -
tach greater importance to the upside risks to 
inflation, especially for short- term maturities, 
than to the downside risks. This can be attrib -
uted to market participants’ fear that inflation 
could prove less transitory than currently as -
sumed.
The GDP- weighted euro area yield (excluding 
Germany) remained virtually unchanged overall 
– up 1 basis point to -0.3%. As with Bunds, a 
steeper rise in yields given the perceived infla -
tion risk was partly offset by lower real term 
premia. The yield spread over ten- year Federal 
bonds therefore widened by 8 basis points to 
0.6%. There was slightly greater widening in 
the yield spreads of Italian and, in particular, 
Greek government bonds (+17 basis points and 
+43 basis points respectively). One reason why 
spreads widened could be that market partici -
pants revised down their expectations regard -
ing the volume of net asset purchases under 
the PEPP following the ECB Governing Coun -
cil’s monetary policy meeting in October. If ex -
pected Eurosystem purchase volumes are 
lower, the yields on government bonds issued 
by countries with high levels of public debt will 
probably react more strongly to fundamentals 
again. Under the influence of the PEPP , news 
proved to have only a very weak impact on 
yields. Since the end of June, market stress indi -Higher forward 
inflation rates in 
euro area
Market partici -
pants see upside 
risks to inflation
Slight widening 
of yield spreads 
in euro areaShort-term HICP paths for the euro area
0.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
–+++++++++%
2020 2021 2022 2023
Sources: Fenics Market Data, Consensus Economics, Eurostat 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Excluding  tobacco.  Year-on-
year change.
Deutsche BundesbankSurvey averages from 
Consensus EconomicsForward inflation rates
derived from inflation swaps
Actual
annual HICP 18 March 2021
11 October 2021
16 November 20218 March 2021
11 October 202112 July 2021 12 July 2021
Ten-year real interest rates in various 
currency areas*
432101
––––+% p.a., monthly data
2019 2020 2021
Sources:  Bloomberg  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Real  in-
terest rates based on ten-year nominal interest rates less con-
current  inflation  expectations  based  on  inflation  swaps.  For 
Germany, the inflation swaps of the euro area are used.
Deutsche BundesbankUnited StatesGermany Euro area
United
KingdomDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
46

cators, which include liquidity indicators, have 
consistently pointed to a relaxed market situ -
ation for government bonds in the euro area.
In Japan, meanwhile, yields on ten- year gov -
ernment bonds stood at 0.1% at the end of the 
reporting period and thus remained virtually 
unchanged compared with mid- 2021. Yields 
continued to move within the range in which 
market participants assume that the Bank of 
Japan wishes to keep interest rates.
In the United Kingdom, the yield on ten- year 
gilts recorded a strong increase on balance, ris -
ing by 21 basis points to 0.9%. This was mainly 
due to market- based inflation expectations and 
inflation risk premia rising even more signifi -
cantly in the United Kingdom than in the 
United States and the euro area. The expect -
ations concerning average inflation over the 
next ten years derived from inflation swaps in -
creased by more than 100 basis points. Never -
theless, the Bank of England refrained from 
raising the policy rate at its latest monetary pol -
icy meeting. Market participants had priced in 
such an interest rate move prior to the meet -
ing. The Bank also maintained the pace of its 
asset purchases. As a result, there was a con -
siderable drop in nominal interest rates imme -
diately following the decision.
The yields on European corporate bonds de -
veloped broadly in line with the yields on Euro -
pean government bonds. As this report went 
to press, both the yields on bonds issued by 
BBB- rated financial corporations with residual 
maturities of between seven and ten years and 
those on non- financial corporate bonds of 
equivalent maturity were slightly up compared 
with the end of June (1.2% and 0.8% respect -
ively). Since the yields on maturity- matched 
Federal securities declined on balance, yield 
spreads widened – by 16 basis points for finan -
cial corporations and 13 basis points for non-  
financial corporations. In line with these slightly 
higher risk premia, the credit default premia for 
European corporations also increased some -
what from the end of June (ten- year iTraxx  125 up 2 basis points). Nonetheless, the financing 
conditions for European corporations in the 
bond market remained highly favourable.
At €442½ billion, gross issuance in the German 
bond market in the third quarter of 2021 was 
up slightly compared with the previous quar -
ter’s figure (€435½ billion). After deducting 
redemp tions and taking account of changes in 
issuers’ holdings of their own bonds, net sales 
remained relatively high at €55 billion. In add -
ition, foreign borrowers placed debt securities 
worth €8 billion in the German market. Thus, 
funds totalling €62½ billion net were raised in 
the German bond market in the reporting 
period.
The public sector issued own debt securities in 
the amount of €31½ billion net in the quarter 
under review. The Federal Government pre -
dominantly issued Federal bonds with a matur -
ity of 30 years (€17 billion) as well as five- year 
Federal notes (Bobls: €11½ billion) and seven-  Yields in Japan 
unchanged
Yields up in the 
United Kingdom
Yields on cor -
porate bonds in 
line with gov -
ernment bond 
yieldsContinuing high 
net sales in 
bond market
High net public 
sector issuanceInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2020 2021
Q3 Q2 Q3
Debt securities
Residents 60.8 90.1 73.8
Credit institutions – 21.5 – 20.4 –  4.5
of which:
Foreign debt securities – 18.9 –  5.8 –  1.5
Deutsche Bundesbank 65.8 72.2 60.1
Other sectors 16.4 38.3 18.2
of which:
Domestic debt securities –  0.4 8.4 6.6
Non-residents 135.0 –  6.1 – 11.1
Shares
Residents 45.9 34.8 30.9
Credit institutions 1.9 1.5 3.5
of which:
Domestic shares 0.2 1.5 0.7
Non-banks 44.0 33.3 27.4
of which:
Domestic shares 25.3 6.4 9.1
Non-residents – 16.0 –  0.6 0.4
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 18.9 21.4 14.9
Investment in retail funds 4.9 9.9 10.2
of which:
Equity funds 3.4 4.3 2.4
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
47

year Federal bonds (€10½ billion). Meanwhile, 
there were net redemptions of ten- year Federal 
bonds (€16 billion). State and local government 
issued debt securities worth €3½ billion net.
Domestic enterprises raised their capital market 
debt by €13 billion on balance in the third 
quarter, which was on par with the increase 
seen in the previous quarter. The bulk of these 
issues was attributable to non- financial corpor -
ations (€10½ billion).
Domestic credit institutions issued their own 
bonds to the tune of €10 billion net in the 
quarter under review. On balance, mainly debt 
securities of specialised credit institutions were 
issued (€14½ billion). Meanwhile, issuance  of 
other bank debt securities and public Pfand -
briefe  declined (by €5½ billion and €1½ billion 
net respectively).
The Bundesbank was the biggest buyer in the 
domestic bond market in the third quarter of 2021, acquiring bonds amounting to €60 bil -
lion net, primarily under the Eurosystem’s asset 
purchase programmes. Domestic non- banks 
expanded their bond portfolios by €18 billion in 
net terms, with their focus on foreign debt 
securities (€11½ billion). By contrast, foreign in -
vestors and domestic credit institutions sold 
bonds for €11 billion and €4½ billion net re -
spectively.
Equity market
The international equity markets appeared rela -
tively unperturbed by developments in inflation 
and the debate on monetary policy tightening, 
recording significant gains, in some cases, at 
the end of the reporting period. Prices in the 
markets were driven by a positive corporate re -
porting season on both sides of the Atlantic 
and upward revisions to analysts’ earnings 
forecasts. Higher earnings expectations poten -
tially reflect, besides general economic opti -
mism, the view that price increases will raise 
profit margins.
Negative factors had only a temporary impact 
on prices. For instance, the tense financial situ -
ation at the Chinese real estate group Ever -
grande only led to short- lived losses. Market 
participants had been concerned about sys -
temic financial contagion for a time, but such 
effects were not observed during the reporting 
period. The same is true of potentially elevated 
uncertainty as to how hard a fourth wave of 
the coronavirus pandemic – which is currently 
building – will hit the economy. On balance, 
euro area stocks, as measured by the EURO 
STOXX, went up by 7.6%, while German shares, 
as measured by the CDAX, recorded an in -
crease of 3.8%. The US S&P 500 gained 9.5% 
and reached new historical highs during the re -
porting period, as did other indices. UK and 
Japanese equities also recorded gains – of 
3.4% and 2.8% respectively. Bank shares like -
wise rose significantly during the reporting 
period. Shares in US banks climbed by 8.1%, Higher capital 
market debt 
levels amongst 
enterprises
Net issuance by 
credit institu -
tions
Purchase of debt 
securitiesEquity markets 
with price gains 
despite inflation 
developments
Negative factors 
had only a tem -
porary impact 
on pricesEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankBank indicesBeginning of 2019 = 100, log scale, daily data
Total market indices
90
80100120140160180200
5570
6080100120140160180
2019 2020 2021Euro area
(EURO STOXX)Japan
(Nikkei 225)United States
(S&P 500)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
48

European banks gained 9.4% in value and UK 
banks ended the reporting period 6.8% higher.
Price uncertainty in the equity market –  as 
measured by the implied volatility of equity in -
dices calculated from options – remained rela -
tively stable at a low level during the reporting 
period. Only investors’ concerns about conta -
gion effects from the financially distressed Chi -
nese real estate group Evergrande caused a 
temporary surge in price uncertainty during the 
second half of September. Equity market uncer -
tainty for both US and European stocks was 
below its respective five- year averages at the 
end of the period under review.
A number of metrics indicate that European 
equity valuations are more favourable than 
they were at the end of June. For instance, the 
EURO STOXX earnings yield, calculated on the 
basis of earnings forecasts for the next 12 
months (the inverse price/ earnings ratio), rose 
in the period under review. According to a divi -
dend discount model, the equity risk premium, 
which compensates investors for holding risky 
equities instead of safe Federal securities, also 
rose slightly. The implied cost of equity, i.e. the 
sum of the equity risk premium and the risk-  
free interest rate, also went up during the re -
porting period. By historical standards, Euro -
pean equity valuations therefore remained sig -
nificantly below their long- term average. Dif -
ferent developments were observed in the 
United States. Looking at the US S&P 500, the 
expected earnings yield, the implied cost of 
equity and the equity risk premium remained 
roughly at their end-  June level, meaning that 
US equity valuations remained virtually un -
changed on balance in the period under re -
view.
Domestic enterprises placed new shares worth 
€10 billion net in the German equity market in 
the third quarter of 2021, following €7 billion 
in the previous quarter. The outstanding vol -
ume of foreign shares in the German market 
rose by €21 billion over the same period. On 
balance, equities were acquired almost exclu -Stock market 
volatility virtu -
ally unchanged
Slight decline in 
the valuation 
level
Stock market 
funding and 
stock purchasesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2020 r 2021
Q3 Q2 Q3p
I. Current account +  62.4 + 56.4 +  52.8
1. Goods +  56.0 + 45.5 +  45.7
2. Services –   5.4 +  4.9 –   8.7
3. Primary income +  22.1 + 14.6 +  29.0
4. Secondary income –  10.4 –  8.6 –  13.2
II. Capital account –   1.2 –  1.9 +   1.9
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) +  68.3 + 67.8 –   0.5
1. Direct investment –  11.4 +  3.7 +  21.4
Domestic investment 
abroad +  15.1 + 17.3 +  36.6
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country +  26.5 + 13.6 +  15.2
2. Portfolio investment –  89.4 + 69.5 +  61.2
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities +  44.7 + 59.2 +  49.4
Shares 1 +  18.8 + 10.1 +  19.4
Investment fund shares 2+  27.4 + 24.8 +  22.1
of which:
Money market fund 
shares +  12.0 –  1.3 –   2.3
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 –   0.9 –  5.8 +   5.4
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 –   0.6 + 30.1 +   2.4
of which:
Denominated in euro 5–  18.4 + 19.5 –   3.1
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities + 134.1 – 10.3 –  11.8
Shares 1 –   0.6 –  5.2 +   0.4
Investment fund shares –   0.4 +  1.0 –   1.1
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 +  49.0 +  0.2 +   8.3
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 +  86.0 –  6.3 –  19.4
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 6 +  17.7 – 12.1 –  28.6
3. Financial derivatives 7 +  25.2 + 13.5 –  11.4
4. Other investment 8 + 145.2 – 18.8 – 102.9
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 9 –  13.8 – 11.2 –  30.6
Enterprises and 
 households 10 +  59.6 +  2.8 –  11.8
General government +  11.9 –  4.4 –   0.6
Bundesbank +  87.4 –  6.1 –  60.0
5. Reserve assets –   1.3 +  0.1 +  31.2
IV. Errors and omissions 11 +   7.1 + 13.3 –  55.2
1  Including participation certifi  cates. 2  Including reinvested 
earnings. 3  Short- term: original maturity of up to one year. 
4 Long- term: original maturity of more than one year or unlim-
ited. 5  Including outstanding foreign Deutsche  Mark bonds. 
6 Including bonds issued by the former Federal Railways, the 
former Federal Post Offi   ce and the former Treuhand agency. 
7  Balance of transactions arising from options and fi  nancial 
futures  contracts as well as employee stock options. 8 Includes 
in particular fi  nancial and trade credits as well as currency and 
deposits. 9 Excluding the Bundesbank. 10  Includes the follow-
ing sectors: fi  nancial corporations (excluding monetary fi  nancial 
institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households 
and non- profi  t institutions serving households. 11   Statistical 
errors and omissions resulting from the difference between the 
balance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the cur-
rent account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
49

sively by German non- banks (€27½ billion), 
which also include mutual funds. Domestic 
credit institutions purchased equities worth 
€3½ billion net. Foreign investors increased 
their equity exposure in Germany by €½ billion 
net.2
Mutual funds
During the reporting period, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded inflows of €25 bil -
lion, after raising funds totalling €31½ billion in 
the second quarter. The majority of the fresh 
funds were channelled to specialised funds re -
served for institutional investors (€15 billion). 
Among the various asset classes, mixed secur -
ities funds in particular were the chief sellers of 
new fund shares (€9½ billion), but new shares 
were also placed in the market, albeit to a 
lesser extent, by open- end real estate funds 
(€5½ billion), bond funds (€4 billion) and equity 
funds (€2½ billion). Foreign funds distributed in 
the German market attracted inflows of €22 
billion net in the third quarter of 2021. Domes -
tic non- banks were the main buyers, adding 
mutual fund shares worth €46 billion to their 
portfolios. Domestic credit institutions bol -
stered their fund portfolios by €2½ billion net, 
while non- resident investors reduced their fund 
portfolio in Germany by €1 billion.
Direct investment
Transactions in cross- border portfolio invest -
ment resulted in net capital exports of €61 bil -lion in the third quarter of 2021.3 Direct invest -
ment, too, resulted in capital outflows (€21½ 
billion).
Enterprises domiciled in Germany expanded 
their direct investment abroad by €36½ billion 
between July and September (previous quarter: 
€17½ billion). Domestic enterprises primarily 
boosted their equity capital in non- resident 
subsidiaries (€25½ billion); roughly one- half of 
this amount was in the form of reinvested earn -
ings. Furthermore, they provided affiliated 
group entities with additional loans worth €11 
billion. The third quarter saw considerable vol -
umes of direct investment funds flowing from 
Germany to the Netherlands (€8½ billion), 
Sweden (€7 billion) and the United States (€5½ 
billion).
Conversely, foreign enterprises increased their 
direct investment in Germany by €15 billion, 
following €13½ billion in the second quarter. 
Intra- group loans accounted for just over two- 
thirds of these additional direct investment 
funds. A further third (€4½ billion) was attrib -
utable to equity capital. Particularly high in -
flows of direct investment were recorded from 
the Netherlands (€12 billion) and the United 
Kingdom (€3½ billion) in the third quarter.Sales and 
purchases  of 
mutual fund 
sharesDirect invest -
ment posts net 
capital exports
German direct 
investment 
abroad results in 
capital exports
Capital inflows 
through foreign 
direct invest -
ment in Ger -
many
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), Financial Markets, Monthly Report, May 2021, pp. 41-50.2 For further details, see the section entitled “Direct invest -
ment” on this page.
3 In addition to portfolio investment, the allocation of new 
special drawing rights was reflected in the German balance 
of payments in the third quarter. Germany’s reserve assets 
went up by €31 billion as a result of this measure alone. 
However, the corresponding counterpart item on the Bun -
desbank’s balance sheet, which is recorded as a liability to 
the International Monetary Fund, also increased by the 
same amount. See also the table on p. 49.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
50

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
German economic activity continued to see a 
substantial recovery in the third quarter of 
2021. According to the Federal Statistical Of -
fice’s flash estimate, real gross domestic prod -
uct (GDP) was up 1.8% on the quarter after 
seasonal adjustment,1 which was still 1.1% 
short of its pre- crisis level in the fourth quarter 
of 2019. This recovery was buoyed by strong 
growth in the services sector. The easing of 
measures to protect against the coronavirus in 
some parts of this sector brought about robust 
catch- up effects, although these waned con -
siderably over the summer months. By contrast, 
industrial output continued to decline, chiefly 
due to the worsening shortages of intermedi -
ate goods and raw materials in the third quar -
ter.2 Once again, this hit the automotive indus -
try particularly hard. The construction sector 
also suffered from materials shortages. Further -
more, there was a particularly sharp increase in 
the extent to which output in this sector was 
hampered by a lack of labour. Overall, although 
the economy exited the second quarter with 
considerable momentum, it is unlikely to have 
picked up any more speed over the third quar -
ter.3 It is possible that aggregate economic out -
put will merely stagnate in the current quarter, 
too. The recovery in the services sectors is likely 
to be significantly slower than the average of 
the previous quarter. In industry, bottlenecks in 
the supply of intermediate products are ex -
pected to continue to hamper production.
On the demand side, private consumption was 
the main driver of growth for the recovery in the third quarter, just as it had been in the pre -
ceding quarter. Strong catch- up effects associ -
ated with the easing of most containment 
measures had an impact here in particular. By 
contrast, investment and exports were severely 
impaired by supply problems in the industrial 
sector. Business investment in new machinery 
and equipment is therefore likely to have gone 
down significantly. Exports of goods fell consid -
erably despite continuing high demand from 
abroad. By contrast, exports of services are 
likely to have risen sharply, but these constitute 
only a relatively small share of total German ex -
ports.
Exports of goods in the third quarter of 2021 
declined significantly on the previous quarter in 
price- adjusted terms. Supply problems in the 
industrial sector are likely to have been the 
main contributor. Broken down by region, Steep rise in 
German eco -
nomic output 
in Q3 2021Private con -
sumption main 
driver of growth
Exports of 
goods and …
Aggregate output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Price 
and calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021949698100102104106108
–12–9–6–30+3+6+9Adjusted for price, seasonal and calendar effects
2015 = 100, log scale
Gross domestic output
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
1 Seasonal adjustment in this text also includes adjustment 
for calendar variations, provided they can be verified and 
quantified.
2 See ifo Institute (2021a).
3 This is implied by Bundesbank estimates of a monthly 
GDP path, which show estimated real GDP in May and 
June went up steeply on the month, but did not rise any 
further in July, August and September. For a description of 
the method used, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
51

there was a distinct fall in exports to euro area 
countries and significantly fewer exports to 
non- euro area countries. The value of exports 
to China, the newly industrialised economies in 
Asia and the OPEC countries experienced a par -
ticularly steep decrease. By contrast, the value 
of exports to the United States and the United 
Kingdom was higher. Broken down by category 
of goods, exports of capital goods were down 
strongly according to the price- adjusted data 
available up to August. This was mainly attrib -
utable to exports of motor vehicles, the manu -
facture of which is being impacted particularly 
strongly by problems in the supply of inter -
mediate products. Exports of consumer goods were down only slightly, with exports of pharma -
ceutical products showing a further steep rise. 
Exports of intermediate goods likewise fell.
Business investment in new machinery and 
equipment is likely to have gone down signifi -
cantly in the third quarter of 2021. This is indi -
cated not only by the value of capital goods 
imports, which declined distinctly on an aver -
age of July and August compared with the 
second quarter. Indeed, manufacturers of cap -
ital goods also experienced a steep drop in do -
mestic sales in the third quarter, with the auto -
motive sector recording the largest losses here. 
The fact that registrations of commercial pas -
senger cars and commercial vehicles were 
down strongly is consistent with this. Manufac -
turers of machinery likewise saw a marked de -
cline in revenue, and sales of computers and 
electronic and optical products were slightly 
lower. By contrast, domestic sales of other 
transport equipment increased steeply. Overall, 
business investment in machinery and equip -
ment is also likely to have been hit hard by the 
supply bottlenecks for intermediate goods.
Construction investment is likely to have 
dropped markedly in the third quarter of 2021. 
Nominal sales in the main construction sector 
– data for which are available up to August – 
were down slightly on the previous quarter in 
spite of considerable price increases. Revenue 
in commercial construction declined distinctly. 
Sales in private housing construction were 
clearly higher but after price adjustment private 
housing investment might have fallen as well.
Private consumption is likely to have under -
gone a substantial increase in the third quarter 
of 2021. The key factor in this was the easing 
of containment measures, which had lasted 
longer than in the second quarter. As a result, 
sales were up extremely sharply in the hotel 
and restaurant sector, in particular. Motor ve -
hicle trade is also likely to have bolstered pri -
vate consumption. According to data provided 
by the German Association of the Automotive 
Industry (VDA), the number of new private car … probably also 
business invest -
ment in new 
machinery and 
equipment sig -
nificantly lower 
due to supply 
bottlenecks
Probable 
marked drop in 
construction 
investment
Strong rise in 
private con -
sumption708090100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021758090100110
90100110120Seasonally and calendar adjusted, quarterly data
to euro area countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted 1758090100110
€ bnto non-euro area countriesof which:MonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
52

registrations was up significantly on the level of 
the second quarter, which had been very low, 
however. Bricks- and- mortar retailers of textiles, 
clothing and footwear, as well as of informa -
tion and communication technologies, also re -
ported robust sales growth. By contrast, online 
and mail order sales, which had previously 
benefited from the containment measures, de -
creased strongly. They were still up consider -
ably on their pre- crisis level, however. Retail 
sales of food, beverages and tobacco products 
saw a significant decline, too, which meant 
that retail sales remained virtually unchanged 
overall.
In real terms, German imports of goods de -
creased sharply in the third quarter of 2021, 
with supply bottlenecks probably playing a role 
here, too. Imports from non- euro area coun -
tries, in particular, declined substantially, but 
also significantly fewer goods were imported 
from the euro area than in the previous quar -
ter. Broken down by category of goods, im -
ports of intermediate goods decreased strongly 
according to the price- adjusted data available 
up to August. Consumer goods imports also 
fell steeply, with imports of pharmaceutical 
products considerably lower, probably in con -
nection with fewer coronavirus vaccinations 
and tests. These imports had surged in the pre -
vious quarter. Imports of capital goods went 
down strongly, largely on account of a consid -
erable decline in motor vehicle imports.
Sectoral trends
Industrial output continued its downward 
movement in the third quarter. After seasonal 
adjustment, it was distinctly lower compared 
with the previous quarter in spite of the high 
level of demand for industrial products (-2½%). 
As in the second quarter, the decline is prob -
ably due to renewed intensification of supply 
bottlenecks for intermediate goods and raw 
materials in the main. The automotive industry, 
where output once again dropped considerably 
(-13¾%), was hit particularly hard,4 which meant a sharp drop in the production of capital 
goods. The production of intermediate goods 
also declined substantially, contrasting with the 
steep increase in consumer goods output. The 
shortfall in industrial output against the pre-  
crisis level of the fourth quarter of 2019 
widened to 6¼%.
According to the ifo Institute, utilisation of tan -
gible fixed assets in manufacturing declined 
significantly between the surveys in July and 
October, which is consistent with the drop in 
industrial output. It continued to distinctly ex -
ceed its long- term average, however.
In the summer of 2021, construction output fell 
markedly on the quarter in seasonally adjusted 
terms (-2%). A strong decline in the finishing 
trades was one chief reason for this. By con -Sharp decrease 
in imports of 
goods
Industrial output 
down due 
to supply 
bottlenecks Decline in indus -
trial capacity 
utilisation
Marked fall in 
construction 
outputOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021707580859095100105110
1001051101151201251301351402015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data, log scale
MonthlyIndustry
Main constructionIndustry excluding
automotive
Construction1
4 According to the ifo Institute, 97% of enterprises in the 
automotive industry reported shortages of intermediate 
products in September. See ifo Institute (2021a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
53

trast, output in the main construction sector 
saw only a slight fall, with building construc -
tion and civil engineering decreasing at similar 
rates. Construction output had risen signifi -
cantly in the previous quarter, after a number 
of dampening special factors had disappeared. 
Similar to the situation in industry, supply- side 
constraints are likely to have been the main 
dampening factor for construction output in 
the third quarter. On average over the summer 
months, the percentage of enterprises in the 
main construction sector reporting a disruption 
to production due to materials shortages dis -
tinctly surpassed the already high level of the 
spring, according to surveys by the ifo Institute. 
In addition, labour shortages grew consider -
ably. Utilisation of equipment remained high on 
a multi- year average, however.
The services sector is likely to have expanded its 
economic output substantially in the third quar -
ter of 2021. The areas previously hit hard by 
containment measures registered extremely 
steep growth, reflecting the fact that the eas -
ing of protective measures had a longer impact 
than in the previous quarter. The hotel and res -
taurant sector, for example, saw a substantial 
rise in price- adjusted sales in seasonally ad -
justed terms. Business in other service activities 
is also expected to have seen strong growth. 
This is suggested by the substantially improved 
assessment of the business situation in this sec -
tor in the third quarter, according to the ifo In -
stitute. By contrast, real retail sales remained 
virtually stable overall in the third quarter, after 
having been well above pre-  crisis levels in the 
previous quarter. In addition, complaints about 
supply problems have recently been accumulat -
ing in the retail trade, too (including motor ve -
hicle trade).5 Car dealers reported a steep de -
cline in sales in July and August compared with 
the previous quarter. According to data pro -
vided by the German Association of the Auto -
motive Industry (VDA), new passenger car 
registrations were likewise down significantly 
on the second quarter. This was attributable to 
a strong decrease in commercial vehicle regis -
trations. Wholesale sales were slightly lower on an average of July and August – the latest 
months for which statistical data are available.
Labour market
The labour market saw a very substantial recov -
ery in the months of June and July. This mo -
mentum waned over the third quarter, how -
ever, mainly as a result of sustained supply dif -
ficulties in the industrial sector and the fading 
boost from the easing of pandemic- related re -
strictions in the services sector. Even so, the 
level of employment increased quite consider -
ably on the quarter, unemployment fell sub -
stantially and the use of short- time work was 
scaled back significantly. Nevertheless, the situ -
ation on the labour market is not expected to 
continue to improve to the same extent over 
the next few months.
On an average of the summer months, employ -
ment was up significantly on the second quar -
ter. Mainly as a result of the easing of restric -
tions for high- contact services, employment 
rose very steeply in June and July. It was already 
rising at a clearly more moderate pace again in 
August and September, however. On an aver -
age of the third quarter of 2021, overall em -
ployment was just under 170,000 persons 
higher than the level of the previous quarter, 
representing an increase of 0.4%. Nonetheless, 
this meant only around one- half of the jobs lost 
during the coronavirus crisis had been re-  
staffed by the third quarter. The situation for 
jobs subject to social security contributions 
looks much better. Not only did their numbers 
fall comparatively little during the crisis, sup -
ported considerably by the use of short- time 
work, but the jobs being filled during the cur -
rent recovery are primarily those subject to so -
cial security contributions. On an average of 
July and August – more recent data are not yet 
available – the number of these jobs therefore 
already surpassed the pre- crisis level by around Steep growth 
likely in services 
sectorSubstantial 
labour market 
recovery in Q3, 
but momentum 
waning recently
Significant 
increase in 
employment 
overall, but 
recovery still not 
complete
5 According to the ifo Institute, this affected 74% of enter -
prises in September. See ifo Institute (2021b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
54

¾%. This is not the case for exclusively low-  
paid part- time jobs. Numbers were up by 1.7% 
compared with the previous quarter (mainly in 
the hotel and restaurant sector and in the whole -
sale and retail trade) but one in ten of such jobs 
had been shed earlier in the course of the pan -
demic. Both exclusively low- paid part- time em -
ployment and self- employment already  showed 
a negative trend before the crisis  and a full re -
turn to the previous level is therefore unlikely 
for these two forms of employ  ment. Further -
more, the decline in self-  employment con -
tinued until recently, albeit at a slower pace.
The share of jobs subject to social security con -
tributions in total employment thus grew dur -
ing the pandemic as well. Developments across 
the economic sectors give an idea of the struc -
tural change during this period. Since the 
fourth quarter of 2019, the number of jobs in 
the IT sector and public administration went up 
the most in relative terms (5½% each). Other 
areas of the public services sector, such as 
health and social services as well as training 
and education, now register around 4% more 
jobs subject to social security contributions. Far 
above average growth was also recorded in 
construction (+3¼%), which was barely af -
fected by the pandemic, and in logistics 
(+2¼%), where more demand has been seen 
of late. In spite of the current recovery, more 
than one in ten jobs have been cut in the hotel 
and restaurant sector since the start of the pan -
demic. There were slightly fewer jobs in the 
arts, entertainment and recreation and in other 
personal service activities (-1½%). The manu -
facturing sector, due to its importance, re -
corded the most job cuts (-3%) in absolute 
terms during the past 18 months. Employment 
has barely recovered in this sector so far, which 
may well partly be due to the current supply 
bottlenecks for raw materials and intermediate 
goods.
The average working hours per employee went 
up considerably in the third quarter, as cyclical 
short- time working was scaled back massively. 
This also led to a sharp rise in total hours Clear sectoral 
shifts reflect 
structural 
change during 
pandemic
Short- time work -
ing scaled back 
massivelyLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021Oct.43.043.544.044.545.045.5
30.531.031.532.032.533.033.534.0–1,000–5000+500+1,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–400–2000+200+400+600Oct.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Oct.Million
Million
Million400600800Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered
unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployment
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies 2EmployedJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
July-
Aug.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
55

worked in the third quarter after seasonal ad -
justment. The number of short- time workers 
declined to 760,000 up to August – estimates 
by the Federal Employment Agency are cur -
rently available up to this month. This repre -
sents a decrease of more than two- thirds 
within only three months and is connected 
with the large- scale reopening of high- contact 
services. Some 2.2% of all employees subject 
to social security contributions were thus still in 
economically induced short- time work in Au -
gust. Due to supply bottlenecks, short- time 
working in the manufacturing sector receded 
at a considerably slower pace than in other 
areas. The number of short- time workers even 
increased again slightly in automotive manu -
facturing.
The official unemployment figure was in steep 
decline in the reporting quarter. It went down 
by 173,000 persons in seasonally adjusted 
terms, with the unemployment rate falling by 
0.4 percentage point. Unemployment con -
tinued to drop in October to a new total of 
2.47 million persons, or 5.4%. A large part of 
the unemployment brought on by the crisis has 
now receded again. The rate is only 0.4 per -
centage point above the level at the beginning 
of 2020. Unemployment covered by the statu -
tory insurance scheme already returned to the 
pre- pandemic level. The higher level of un -
employed persons receiving a basic welfare 
allow ance can partly be explained by the rela -
tively small scope of active labour market policy 
measures. Participants in such measures are 
not counted as unemployed. For some of those 
employees laid off during the crisis, however, 
there is the danger that their unemployment 
might become entrenched.
Enterprises’ willingness to recruit new staff re -
mains high. Both the ifo employment barom -
eter, which reflects recruitment plans in trade 
and industry for the next three months, and 
the labour market barometer of the Institute 
for Employment Research (IAB) largely held 
steady at the optimistic level reached in the 
spring. At the same time, employment growth recently ground to a halt. On the one hand, a 
rapidly rising number of firms are reporting in -
creasing labour shortages. One of the reasons 
for this is likely to be that suitably qualified per -
sonnel are not always available as a result of 
the acceleration in structural change brought 
about by the crisis. On the other hand, there 
are firms with full order books which are reluc -
tant to hire new staff or which are even reintro -
ducing short- time work arrangements due to 
the supply shortages for intermediate products. 
This is why the number of registrations for 
short- time work remains at a slightly elevated 
level. It is unlikely that the decline in short- time 
working will continue at the pace seen in the 
last few months. Furthermore, the IAB’s lead -
ing indicator for unemployment dropped 
sharply recently and is now only just in positive 
territory. It is therefore unlikely that unemploy -
ment will fall very much over the coming 
months.
Wages and prices
Negotiated wages recorded only a slight rise in 
the third quarter. Including additional benefits, 
they were up by 1.0% on the year, compared 
with 2.3% in the quarter before. One of the 
main factors behind this muted increase was 
the timing of the fixed special payment in the 
metal and electrical engineering industry, with 
the lump sum of approximately €400 being 
paid out in October this year, rather than July 
as it had been in 2020. This base effect de -
pressed the year- on- year rate for the third 
quarter. Added to this, there were several 
months with no pay rises in sectors such as the 
steel industry as well as the metal and electrical 
engineering industry. Basic rates of pay, which 
are less prone to fluctuation, were increased by 
1.4% on the previous year in the third quarter, 
compared with 1.5% in the second quarter. Ac -
tual earnings are likely to have risen to a mark -
edly greater extent than negotiated wages over 
the same period. The main reason for this is the 
decrease in short- time working. The employees 
concerned extended their working hours again Steep decline in 
unemployment
Leading indica -
tors show sub -
dued optimismNegotiated 
wages up only 
slightly in Q3, 
actual earnings 
continue to rise 
markedlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
56

and thereby saw their earnings rise consider -
ably from the level of the previous year, which 
had been pushed down by short- time work.
The recovery of the German economy was re -
flected in higher new wage agreements in the 
third quarter compared with the previous year. 
In addition to this, higher inflation rates and 
impetus from resurgent labour market tight -
ness had an effect. Most new collective wage 
agreements start with several zero months fol -
lowed by permanent pay rises implemented in 
two or three stages. With durations of 24 
months or more, the agreements are back to 
covering similar periods of time as before the 
pandemic. In some sectors, wage bargainers 
also agreed on large coronavirus special pay -
ments as a way of financially acknowledging 
employees’ exceptional efforts during the 
COVID-  19 crisis. Based on a notional duration 
of 12 months, the pay increase in the retail sec -
tor and wholesale and foreign trade is set to 
amount to 2.2%. In the main construction sec -
tor, employers and unions in western Germany 
agreed on a wage increase of 3.4% on a 12-  
month basis. The underlying macroeconomic 
conditions also point to stronger wage growth 
for collective wage agreements coming up for 
renewal.
The general statutory minimum wage has 
stood at €9.60 per hour since 1 July 2021; that 
is set to increase to €9.82 from 1 January 2022 
and then to €10.45 per hour from 1 July 2022. 
In the ongoing coalition talks to form a new 
Federal Government, the idea of raising the 
minimum wage to €12 by the end of 2022 is 
being considered. Such a political objective 
threatens to undermine the independent Min -
imum Wage Commission. The significant min -
imum wage increase that is planned would 
affect  the lower wage brackets markedly, caus -
ing knock- on effects for the higher wage 
brackets which could not be ignored. It is also 
likely to amplify wage pressures in future. The 
negative impact on employment was small 
when the general statutory minimum wage 
was introduced in 2015: effects were primarily limited to low- paid part- time jobs, some of 
which were converted into positions subject to 
social security contributions. The potential for a 
regrouping by form of employment is likely to 
be smaller this time around, however. This 
could mean that jobs subject to social security 
contributions could also be more negatively im -
pacted. That said, the planned intervention in 
the wage structure is on a smaller scale than 
that undertaken in 2015. Moreover, shortages 
in labour supply in the lower wage brackets 
could play a larger role than they did back then 
and help to stabilise employment. The fact that 
the pandemic may have wrought changes in 
the composition of employment in some cases 
makes it harder to be any more precise in esti -
mating the impact of the planned increase. 
There is still too little structural data available 
on such changes, however.
Consumer prices saw an exceptionally steep 
rise in the third quarter of 2021. The Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) was up by Somewhat 
higher wage 
agreements of 
late
Political object -
ive of minimum 
wage of €12 an 
hour question -
able2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 20210.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
–+++++++Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Per-
centage
points
–4–20+2%
H1
H1Wage drift1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 Wage drift 
is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual earn-
ings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche BundesbankQ3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
57

1.1% after seasonal adjustment and thus some -
what more strongly than in the preceding quar -
ter. Non- energy industrial goods in particular 
became markedly more expensive in light of 
the exacerbated shortage of materials and fur -
ther rises in freight costs. Prices for these prod -
ucts also went up again at the earlier stages of 
the pricing chain. The prices of services were 
also raised somewhat more sharply than in the 
second quarter. Substantial price adjustments 
for rental cars, inter alia, played a role in this re -
gard. Yet even services affected by temporary 
business closures in the first half of the year, 
such as the catering sector, continued to see 
distinct mark- ups. Consumer prices for energy rose to a similarly strong extent as they had 
done in the preceding quarter, as the increase 
in crude oil prices in euro terms that was seen 
in the second quarter continued relatively un -
abated. The high levels of market prices for 
natural gas, on the other hand, will probably 
not be passed on to consumers until the begin -
ning of next year for the most part. Food price 
inflation, meanwhile, slackened; this was partly 
due to prices for fruit and vegetables, which 
typically fluctuate strongly.
Inflation rates expanded substantially in year-  
on- year terms. Overall, consumer prices rose by 
3.5% in the third quarter (compared with 
2.2%), and by 2.1% when energy and food are 
excluded (after 1.3%). The inflation rate was in -
fluenced by two opposing one- off effects. On 
the one hand, it is likely to have been pushed 
up by 1¼ percentage points owing to the tem -
porary lowering of VAT rates in the second half 
of 2020, which had dampened price levels 
back then.6 On the other hand, the typical sea -
sonal high in package holiday prices in the 
summer – especially in July and August – was 
much lower than last year because the weight -
ing of package holidays in the HICP was scaled 
down.7 This reduced the inflation rate by just 
over ½ percentage point. Even without these 
one- off effects, the headline rate is likely to 
have stood at almost 3% in the third quarter, 
and the core rate, which strips out energy and 
food, at around 2%. The steeper price rises we 
are currently seeing are chiefly the product of 
bottlenecks in the supply of intermediate goods 
and raw materials (including energy) and higher 
freight costs. However, services previously af -
fected by temporary closures are also exhibiting 
above average rates of inflation.
Prices saw a further substantial rise in October, 
up by a seasonally adjusted 0.5% on the Another 
extremely sharp 
climb in con -
sumer prices 
in Q3Inflation rate at 
high level even 
excluding one- 
off effectsConsumer prices*
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. * Har-
monised Index of Consumer Prices.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021981001021041061081101122015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data, log scale
%98100102104106108
9698100102104106108110
–10+1+2+3+4+5
Lin scale
Total
Year-on-year change
(no seasonal or calendar adjustment)Total
ServicesNon-energy industrial goodsOct.
Oct.Oct.
Oct.
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020).
7 The weighting is based on the proportion of consump -
tion spending in the previous year. Owing to travel restric -
tions, the weight of package holidays in 2020 was signifi -
cantly lower than in 2019. See Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2021b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
58

month. Energy became considerably more ex -
pensive, with refined petroleum products the 
main driver of the increase. Furthermore, con -
sumer gas prices were raised moderately. Prices 
for services continued their marked upward 
trajectory. Although prices for non- energy in -
dustrial goods went up only slightly overall, the 
increase for goods excluding clothing remained 
significant. By contrast, food prices did not 
carry on climbing. Annual headline inflation 
rose from 4.1% in September to 4.6%, while 
core inflation increased from 2.5% to 2.8%. 
The statistical effect from the change in the 
package holiday weighting now dampened the 
headline rate by just ¼ percentage point. The 
counteracting VAT base effect remained at 
+1¼ percentage points, however. The net im -
pact of both one- off effects was to overstate 
the inflation rate by 1 percentage point. In No -
vember, inflation could even reach just under 
6%, of which just over 1½ percentage points 
would be attributable to the two one- off ef -
fects. The statistical one- off effect is now work -
ing in the opposite direction, increasing the in -
flation rate by just over ¼ percentage point. 
This effect will be eliminated in December, and 
the VAT base effect in January. The inflation 
rate should then decline perceptibly, although 
the bulk of the major increase in market prices 
for natural gas will probably only be passed on 
to consumers after the turn of the year. While, 
as things stand, inflation is likely to continue 
gradually falling in the following months, it 
could remain significantly above 3% for an ex -
tended period of time. It is conceivable that 
core inflation will be substantially over 2%.
Order books and outlook
Initially, there will probably be a brief pause in 
the economic recovery. From today’s perspec -
tive, GDP could broadly stagnate in the final 
quarter of 2021, after economic output already 
stopped rising over the course of the third 
quarter. The surge in growth coming from the 
services sector has probably largely come to an 
end for the time being, having mainly been due to a certain degree of normalisation after 
coronavirus response measures were eased. 
Some of the measures to contain the pandemic 
have already been tightened again, however. 
The industrial sector will probably continue to 
dampen aggregate growth in the fourth quar -
ter. While demand for industrial products re -
mains high, supply problems in the industrial 
sector are likely to continue weighing on 
growth. According to an ifo Institute survey, 
firms are anticipating that bottlenecks in inter -
mediate products and raw materials will only 
be resolved over the course of next year.8 The 
construction sector will probably contribute 
positively to growth despite an increasing 
shortage of labour in this area, in particular. 
Business expectations dimmed markedly across 
the board, with the construction sector alone 
bucking the trend. Throughout the final quarter 
of 2021 and the first quarter of 2022, develop -
ments will be subject to risks relating to an in -Energy- driven 
surge in prices in 
October
Economic recov -
ery could see a 
brief pause in 
Q4 2021Impact of selected one-off effects on the 
inflation rate
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 
1 Change in the contribution of the HICP sub-index for pack-
age holidays owing to a change in the weighting of this sub-
component in 2021 compared to 2020.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND
20211012345
–+++++
Contributions of the one-off effects 
in percentage pointsYear-on-year percentage change
HICP
HICP excluding one-off effects
Change to weighting of package holidays1
VAT base effect
8 See ifo Institute (2021c).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
59

tensification of the pandemic. As things stand, 
however, the macroeconomic effects will prob -
ably be less severe than in previous waves of 
the pandemic. The exceptionally high volumes 
of existing orders in industry and construction 
suggest that substantial backlog and catch- up 
effects will emerge once supply bottlenecks 
perceptibly ease.
Sentiment in the German economy has dipped 
again of late. The ifo business climate index fell 
in October for the fourth time in a row, with 
gloomier business expectations the key con -
tributor. The mood is likely to have been 
clouded by the supply-  side bottlenecks in par -
ticular. In manufacturing, the bottlenecks in the 
supply of intermediate goods eased only 
slightly in October from the all- time high re -
corded in the previous month. Along with busi -
ness expectations, the business situation in the 
manufacturing sector also deteriorated. Fur -
thermore, short- term export expectations and 
production plans fell significantly. The retail 
sector also saw its delivery problems recede to 
only a minor extent.9 Both the business situ -
ation and business expectations worsened con -
siderably in trade overall. The main construc -
tion sector is experiencing problems with ma -
terials shortages, too, but the proportion of 
companies affected has been declining steadily 
since peaking in June. Here, the shortage of 
labour  – which has worsened significantly – is 
likely to be acting as the main stumbling block. 
Despite this, the business situation in the main 
construction sector continued to brighten, and 
companies were less pessimistic about the fu -
ture. In the services sectors (excluding trade), 
where the impact of supply bottlenecks has 
been milder, assessments of the business situ -
ation held more or less steady at a level consid -
erably higher than they had been in the first 
half of the year. That said, the outlook did dim 
of late. According to the most recent autumn 
survey by the Association of German Chambers 
of Commerce and Industry (DIHK), firms per -
ceive the shortage of skilled labour and the Materials short -
ages weighing 
on business 
sentiment Demand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 202165708090100110120
–30–20–100+10+20+30+40+50
65708090100110120130
120
65708090100110
90100110120130140
–100+10+20Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data
DomesticInternationalLog scale
of which:Log scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Main construction orders
%%Total
Monthly
9 See ifo Institute (2021d).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
60

evolution of energy and commodity prices as 
particular risks to business in the coming 
months.10
The third quarter of 2021 saw industry receive 
only slightly more new orders than in the previ -
ous quarter. If large orders –  which typically 
come in at irregular intervals – are discounted, 
new industrial orders even went down sub -
stantially. Broken down by region, domestic 
and euro area demand fell significantly. There 
was a surge in orders from non- euro area coun -
tries, but these also dropped sharply if large 
orders are excluded. Broken down by sector, 
demand for capital goods grew steeply, with 
other transport equipment and machinery and 
equipment the main contributors. Manufactur -
ers of computers and electronic and optical 
products received considerably fewer orders, 
meanwhile. The automotive sector experienced 
a particularly strong decrease in new orders. 
Demand for consumer goods weakened some -
what. Orders for pharmaceutical products, 
which includes vaccines, rose steeply, however. 
Producers of intermediate goods saw a signifi -
cant decline in order intake.
Overall, demand for German industrial prod -
ucts remains robust. Order intakes overshot 
pre- crisis levels by just over 13%. Industrial out -
put recently fell even further short of its level in 
the fourth quarter of 2019, however. Supply-  
side bottlenecks prevented fulfilment of many 
orders, resulting in a large order backlog. At 
last count, the reach of the order books, as as -
certained by the Federal Statistical Office, was 
more than one and a half months longer than 
before the outbreak of the pandemic. Accord -
ing to the ifo Institute, the assessment of order 
books in the manufacturing sector also re -
mained only slightly shy of its highest level 
since German reunification, which had been 
reached in the third quarter. This suggests that 
substantial backlog and catch- up effects may 
come into play in industrial production once 
supply bottlenecks ease.Construction will likely be able to up its output 
by only a small margin in the fourth quarter. 
New orders were significantly higher in July and 
August – the latest months for which figures 
are available  – than they had been in the 
second quarter. And the reach of existing 
orders increased in October from an already 
elevated level, according to an ifo Institute 
survey  . But shortages of materials and a lack of 
labour  are likely to stand in the way of a signifi -
cant increase in construction output. According 
to the ifo Institute’s surveys, materials short -
ages in the main construction sector did dimin -
ish slightly of late, but remain at a high level 
from a long- term perspective. There was a size -
able jump in the proportion of firms reporting 
labour shortages.
Households’ consumption expenditure will 
probably only increase a little in the fourth 
quarter. The consumer sentiment indicator 
forecast by the market research institution 
Gesell schaft für Konsumforschung  (GfK) for the 
month of November was noticeably higher 
than the third- quarter level, there having been 
a distinct increase in propensity to purchase. 
However, several factors are likely to materially 
hold back growth in private consumption. The 
potential for further catch- up effects in con -
sumption of services is considerably smaller 
than in the third quarter. Rising infection rates 
are also likely to weigh on household con -
sumption, as containment measures are tight -
ened and consumers voluntarily adjust their be -
haviour. High inflation and the delivery prob -
lems represent additional encumbrances. The 
latter are likely one reason behind October’s 
marked drop in new passenger car registrations 
by private owners.Industrial orders 
up slightly only 
on the back of 
large orders
High stock of 
orders points to 
prospect of sub -
stantial backlog 
and catch- up 
effects in indus -
try once supply 
bottlenecks easeOrder situation 
and capacity 
utilisation still 
strong in con -
struction
Private con -
sumption likely 
to increase only 
slightly in Q4
10 See Association of German Chambers of Commerce 
and Industry (DIHK) (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
61

List of references
Association of German Chambers of Commerce and Industry (DIHK) (2021), DIHK economic survey  
for autumn 2021, available at https://www.dihk.de/de/themen-und-positionen/wirtschaftspolitik/
konjunktur-und-wachstum/die-konjunktur-im-herbst-2021
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), Estimating real monthly gross domestic product for Germany and 
applying it in the short- term economic forecast, Monthly Report, August 2021, pp. 66-67.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), One- off effects relating to COVID-  19 in the HICP in 2021, Monthly 
Report, February 2021, pp. 63-66.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020), Impact of the temporary reduction in VAT on consumer prices, 
Monthly Report, November 2020, pp. 56-58.
ifo Institute (2021a), Shortage of Materials Worsens Again in German Manufacturing, press release 
of 29 September 2021, https://www.ifo.de/en/node/65373
ifo Institute (2021b), Retail Sector Bemoans Delivery Problems, press release of 12 October 2021, 
https://www.ifo.de/en/node/65598
ifo Institute (2021c), Shortage of Materials Lessens Slightly in German Manufacturing, press release 
of 3 November 2021, https://www.ifo.de/en/node/65972
ifo Institute (2021d), German Retailers Expecting Supply Problems into the Summer of 2022, press 
release of 9 November 2021, https://www.ifo.de/en/node/66093Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
62

Public finances*
General government budget
The coronavirus crisis is still impacting on gov -
ernment finances in 2021. While the budget 
burdens resulting from both the unfavourable 
state of the economy and the coronavirus re -
sponse measures have already significantly di -
minished over the course of the year, they re -
main considerable when viewed in relation to 
the year as a whole. All in all, therefore, an -
other large deficit is on the cards. This could be 
similar in size to last year’s deficit (4.3% of 
gross domestic product (GDP)). The debt ratio 
is likely to edge further upwards still (2020: 
68.7%).
The deficit is likely to fall sharply next year, as 
the expected economic recovery will also auto -
matically ease the burden on government 
budgets. In particular, the latest tax estimate 
even puts tax revenue higher than projected 
before the crisis once adjusted for tax cuts im -
plemented in the meantime (see pp.  66 f.). 
Moreover, based on the current legal situation, 
the coronavirus response measures creating 
these budget pressures will gradually come to 
an end. Disregarding new measures from the 
incoming Federal Government, the deficit ratio 
could fall back towards 1%. The consolidation 
required following the crisis would therefore be 
limited.
A moderate structural1 deficit is expected for 
2022, following the structural surpluses posted 
in the years prior to the coronavirus crisis. This 
reflects the fact that the underlying fiscal stance 
has been loosened. In particular, expenditure in 
various areas has risen dynamically in structural 
terms – especially social spending, but also 
spending in areas such as education, infrastruc -
ture and climate policy. Expenditure in the last 
of these areas is partly offset by revenue from 
CO₂ emission certificates. The structural ex -
penditure ratio excluding interest expenditure 
is expected to be close to historic highs.2The outlook for government finances depends, 
not least, on the fiscal policy adopted by the in -
coming Federal Government (with regard to 
central government finances, see p. 69). The 
outgoing Federal Government had been in -
tending to continue application of the debt 
brake escape clause in 2022. The general es -
cape clause of the Stability and Growth Pact 
will also remain in force. Despite this, there is 
good reason to believe that 2022 will not be a 
crisis year. This means that there should be, at 
most, comparatively little need for pandemic-  
related government expenditure. Moreover, 
there is a general expectation – also reflected in 
the latest government estimate  – of normal 
economic conditions. As outlined above, after 
adjustment for changes in tax law, tax revenue 
will exceed pre- crisis expectations. All in all, 
therefore, recourse to the escape clause does 
not appear warranted as things currently stand. 
In any event, it would be extremely difficult to 
justify financing non- crisis- related budget bur -
dens through borrowing made possible by the 
escape clause.
Financing pressure is building up in the health, 
pension and long- term care insurance schemes. 
Their expenditure is tending to grow faster 
than their revenue base. In 2022, central gov -
ernment will pay special grants of €14 billion to 
the health insurance institutions, and the social Coronavirus 
crisis  still 
impacting on 
government 
finances in 2021
Easing in 2022 
due to eco -
nomic recovery 
and expiring 
coronavirus 
response 
measures 
Fiscal loosening 
mainly via com -
paratively high 
expenditure 
growthInvoking escape 
clause in 2022 
does not appear 
warranted
Need for action 
at social security 
funds
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed report -
ing on budgetary developments (government finance stat -
istics). No data are yet available for local government or the 
statutory health and public long- term care insurance 
schemes for the reporting quarter. These will be analysed in 
the short commentaries in upcoming issues of the Monthly 
Report.
1 Here, structural means excluding cyclical and special tem -
porary effects. At present, the temporary effects are pri -
marily the product of time- limited coronavirus response 
measures.
2 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), p. 71 . Expect -
ations for 2021 are unchanged in qualitative terms. That 
said, the current assessment is that government finances 
are in better shape (in particular, tax revenue growth is 
stronger, and expenditure growth might also be slightly 
weaker).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
63

security funds will still be able to tap reserves. 
To address this financing pressure at its source, 
slower spending growth, higher contribution 
rates and/ or continued higher grants from cen -
tral government are needed. So far, there is no 
indication that a new Federal Government 
plans to tackle the expenditure issue. There is 
probably no leeway in the central government 
budget for additional grants without budget-  
alleviating measures elsewhere. Significant rises 
in contribution rates would therefore appear 
likely.
Central government and state governments are 
subject to the debt brake (for more informa -
tion, see also pp. 69 f. and p. 72). In addition, 
they are jointly responsible for complying with 
the European fiscal rules. Reforms of EU rules 
are currently being discussed, and it is a highly 
contentious topic: opinions range from stricter 
rules through to proposals to do away with 
quantitative requirements completely. Any fur -
ther dilution of the binding effect of European 
rules would be a cause for concern, however. 
In addition to the fiscal rules, the Maastricht 
Treaty also relies on the disciplining effect of 
market reactions. Risk premia in the capital 
markets for governments independently bor -
rowing are intended to create incentives for 
sound government finances. Both pillars have 
been weakened, though. To strengthen the ef -fectiveness of the rules, reform is in order. Fol -
lowing a reform, the rules should then set out 
quantitative and binding upper limits defining 
the bounds within which national fiscal policy 
can operate. Compliance with these rules 
would need to be monitored in a transparent 
manner and, as a result, very high debt ratios, 
in particular, should fall reliably and markedly 
(for more details, see pp. 75ff.).
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government 
Tax revenue
Tax revenue3 continued to grow sharply in the 
third quarter of 2021 (by 15% on the year; see 
the adjacent chart and the table on p. 65). First 
and foremost, this reflects the economic recov -
ery: for instance, advance payments of corpor -
ation tax and assessed income tax, a significant 
source of revenue, for the current year saw a 
strong increase. In addition, enterprises made 
less use of tax deferrals. The revenue from 
these taxes was therefore already markedly in 
excess of its pre- crisis level (third quarter of 
2019). In the third quarter of 2021, wage tax 
benefited from the recovery of the labour mar -
ket – in particular, there was a marked decline 
in short- time working.4 Above all, however, the 
burdens stemming from the bonus child bene -
fit payment in 2020 (around €3½ billion; de -
ducted from tax revenue in the same way as 
regular child benefits) were absent from this 
year’s third quarter revenue. But this contrasted 
with revenue shortfalls totalling €4 billion from 
various legislative changes at the start of 2021, 
when income tax allowances and the income 
tax scale were adjusted, the solidarity surcharge 
partly abolished and child benefits raised.5 VAT Debate on 
reforming Euro -
pean fiscal rulesTax revenue 
grew sharply in 
Q3: economic 
recovery and 
discontinuation 
of support 
measuresTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Comprises joint taxes as 
well as central government taxes and state government taxes. 
Including EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs 
duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021201510505101520
––––++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figures
3 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes. These are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.
4 Short- time working reduces wages, and short- time work -
ing benefits themselves are not taxed.
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), pp. 64 f.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
64

revenue rose significantly. This was partly due 
to a base effect: the temporary rate cut in place 
in the second half of 2020 no longer applied, 
which is likely to have resulted in additional re -
ceipts of around €3 billion. Revenue shortfalls 
at the same time last year were essentially re -
corded in September only. As VAT is usually 
paid with a lag of two months, it appears that 
July was not yet affected and August only to a 
minor extent. The fact that import VAT from 
the second quarter was booked with a time lag 
had a positive impact in this regard.
According to the latest official tax estimate, 
general government tax revenue will rise by 
10% on the year in 2021 (see also the table on 
p. 66). It would therefore already slightly ex -
ceed the level recorded in the pre- crisis year of 
2019, despite sizeable tax cuts. There are two 
main reasons for this sharp increase. The first is 
dynamic growth in the nominal macroeco -
nomic reference variables for tax revenue, 
bringing with it a corresponding rise in receipts through channels such as progressive taxation. 
The second is the even greater increase in 
profit- related taxes. This expectation is based 
on the substantial receipts that these taxes have 
already brought in up to the end of October 
2021. Tax measures are dampening the in -
crease in total tax revenue. Revenue losses are 
primarily due to the partial abolition of the soli -
darity surcharge and adjustments to the in -
come tax scale. Furthermore, firms are allowed 
to write off capital equipment faster, thus redu -
cing revenue from profit- related taxes. In the 
case of VAT, tax measures will result in (for the 
most part, temporary) revenue shortfalls at a 
level comparable to the high shortfalls recorded 
in 2020. A strong revenue- increasing factor, on 
the other hand, is that the majority of the tax 
payments deferred in 2020 are now being 
made. This does not outweigh the aforemen -
tioned revenue- reducing effects, though.
In 2022, revenue growth is expected to amount 
to 4½%. The pace at which the macroeco -Tax revenue will 
see strong 
growth in 2021 
as a whole and 
exceed level 
prior to corona -
virus crisisTax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 to Q3Estimate 
for 2021 1Q3
2020 2021 2020 2021
€ billionYear- on- year changeYear- on- 
year 
change % € billionYear- on- year change
€ billion % € billion %
Tax revenue, total 2 496.0 541.0 + 45.0 +  9.1 +  9.1 168.3 193.9 + 25.6 + 15.2
of which:
Wage tax 3 151.6 155.5 +  3.9 +  2.6 +  4.1 47.5 53.9 +  6.4 + 13.5
Profi  t- related taxes 80.1 106.0 + 25.9 + 32.4 + 27.0 26.3 36.8 + 10.5 + 39.8
Assessed income tax 4 42.8 50.1 +  7.3 + 17.1 + 17.5 13.5 18.0 +  4.5 + 33.2
Corporation tax 5 16.3 28.9 + 12.7 + 77.9 + 60.3 5.4 9.9 +  4.4 + 82.1
Non- assessed taxes 
on earnings 15.9 19.5 +  3.6 + 22.8 + 11.4 5.9 6.8 +  0.8 + 14.2
Withholding tax on 
interest income and 
capital gains 5.1 7.5 +  2.3 + 45.6 + 40.5 1.5 2.2 +  0.7 + 48.0
VAT6 164.1 182.0 + 17.8 + 10.9 + 12.3 59.8 69.5 +  9.7 + 16.2
Other consumption- 
related taxes 7 62.7 62.8 +  0.1 +  0.2 +  0.1 22.4 21.9 –  0.4 –  2.0
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates and Bundesbank calculations. 1  According to offi   cial tax 
estimate of November 2021. 2 Comprises joint taxes as well as central government taxes and state government taxes. Including EU shares 
in German tax revenue, including customs duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Child benefi  ts and subsidies for 
supplementary private pension plans deducted from revenue. 4 Employee refunds and research grants deducted from revenue. 5 Re-
search grants deducted from revenue. 6 VAT and import VAT. 7 Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, 
air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lottery, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
65

nomic reference variables are rising will even 
pick up slightly, and progressive taxation will 
support growth somewhat more strongly than 
in 2021. However, the forecast indicates that 
profit- related taxes (before deducting shortfalls 
caused by legislative changes) will, starting 
from their high level in 2021, grow less sharply 
than macroeconomic profits. The recovery in 
employment will also bring with it higher em -
ployee refunds again. These are deducted from 
income tax revenue and thus dampen growth.
In addition, tax measures will curb the rise in rev -
enue generated by profit- related taxes and wage 
tax in 2022. The most notable factors in this con -
text are firms’ aforementioned accelerated write-  
offs and the further adjustment step in the in -
come tax scale. Furthermore, the back payments 
of deferred taxes will cease to affect the year- on- 
year figures. Meanwhile, significant additional 
revenue will be recorded in several other areas: 
the support measures in place for VAT will largely 
come to an end, tobacco tax rates will be raised 
and newer vaping products will be taxable for 
the first time. Following an order by the Federal 
Constitutional Court, some of interest payments 
to the tax authorities that had been temporarily 
suspended also now need to be made.6
In the subsequent years up to 2025, revenue is 
projected to rise by an average of 4%. The tax estimate is based on the legal status quo, and 
legislation changes do not play a major role on 
balance. The forecast is therefore a fairly direct 
reflection of the assumptions regarding macro -
economic developments and progressive tax -
ation. In actual fact, however, it stands to rea -
son that raising income tax allowances will be 
necessary after 2022 as well. Risks also exist in 
connection with the solidarity surcharge, the 
constitutionality of which has been called into 
question for various reasons. In addition, the 
guidelines set out by the Federal Constitutional 
Court to prevent the foreseeable double tax -
ation of future pensions need to be imple -
mented.
Compared with the May tax estimate, there 
will be additional revenue to the tune of 
€38½ billion (1% of GDP) in 2021. This is pri -
marily due to the fact that cash receipts up to 
October 2021 were very pleasantly surprising – 
especially with respect to profit- related taxes. 
That said, wage tax revenue growth has also Significant 
growth next 
year
Tax measures 
are a burden in 
net termsEconomic 
growth and pro -
gressive taxation 
will bring about 
significant 
growth in 
medium term, 
too
Strong upward 
revisions for all 
estimation yearsOﬃ   cial tax estimate fi  gures and the Federal Government’s macroeconomic projections
 
Item 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Tax revenue1
€ billion 812.0 848.9 882.1 919.0 953.8 987.5
% of GDP 22.8 22.4 22.6 22.9 23.2 23.4
Year-on-year change (%) 9.8 4.5 3.9 4.2 3.8 3.5
Revision of tax estimate (€ billion)
compared with May 2021 38.5 36.8 33.8 33.6 36.3 .
compared with November 2019 – 33.2 – 26.2 – 22.7 – 15.9 . .
adjusted for legislative changes 2 8.8 15.4 17.1 18.0 . .
Real GDP growth (%)
Autumn projection (October 2021) 2.6 4.1 1.6 0.8 0.8 0.8
Spring projection (April 2021) 3.5 3.6 1.1 1.1 1.1 .
Nominal GDP growth (%)
Autumn projection (October 2021) 5.6 6.4 3.3 2.6 2.6 2.6
Spring projection (April 2021) 5.3 5.2 2.6 2.6 2.6 .
Sources: Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates and Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy. 1 Including EU shares in German 
tax revenue, including customs duties, including receipts from local government taxes. 2 Interim changes in legislation as reported by the 
Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates in Annex 2 of its press release on the results of the estimates of May 2020, September 2020, 
November 2020, May 2021 and November 2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6 In decisions by the Federal Fiscal Court, there had been 
doubts since 2018 regarding the constitutionality of the 
interest rates for back taxes and tax refunds. The tax au -
thorities therefore granted a suspension of enforcement 
upon request. In an order published by the Federal Consti -
tutional Court, it held that an interest rate of 6% per an -
num is applicable for interest periods up to 2018. As a re -
sult, payments of back taxes for previous years are now ex -
pected in 2022.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
66

been stronger to date than indicated in the 
May tax estimate. In addition, the macroeco -
nomic assumptions are more upbeat. This is 
because the tax estimate looks at nominal de -
velopments. High additional revenue compared 
with the May estimate is expected next year as 
well. This is mainly due to significantly more 
favour  able overall economic development. In 
addition, the favourable cash balances will 
carry over in part into subsequent years. 
Growth will be bolstered by the court order on 
interest rates (in 2022 only) and the tobacco 
tax hike (also in the medium term). The Work -
ing Group is raising its projections for the fol -
lowing years to a similar extent and principally 
for the same reasons.
Tax developments are now estimated to be so 
favourable that their path adjusted for interim 
legislative changes even exceeds pre-  crisis ex -
pectations. Compared with the last forecast 
prior to the coronavirus crisis (autumn 2019), 
revenue is lower, and the downward revision 
for 2021 is still €33 billion (1% of GDP). There -
after, annual revenue shortfalls will decline to 
between €26 billion (2022) and €16 billion 
(2024). However, this reduction in revenue is 
solely due to sizeable shortfalls resulting from 
legislative changes made in the meantime. In 
2022, legislative changes alone will give rise to 
revenue shortfalls of €42 billion: adjusted for 
these, tax revenue would have been €15 billion 
higher than the level expected before the 
coronavirus crisis.
Looking at the individual government levels, 
the picture is mixed (see the adjacent chart). 
The latest tax estimate sees state governments 
back on the revenue trajectory plotted in au -
tumn 2019 this year already. Factoring out any 
legislative changes implemented in the mean -
time, their revenue trajectory would already 
markedly exceed their pre- pandemic trajectory. 
Meanwhile, the revenue trajectory for central 
government is still significantly below the one 
projected before the coronavirus crisis. Disre -
garding legislative changes, developments at 
the central government level would also be more favourable than expected before the cri -
sis: at this level, however, tax relief measures 
are leading to higher revenue shortfalls. For ex -
ample, the partial abolition of the solidarity sur -
charge is making itself felt. In addition, central 
government is ceding tax revenue to the state 
governments.
Central government budget
The central government budget recorded an -
other large deficit in the third quarter. At 
€35  billion, it went so far as to exceed the 
prior- year figure by €13 billion. Revenue rose Tax cuts push 
down revenue 
compared with 
pre- coronavirus 
outlook – but 
underlying trend 
is actually more 
favourable
From 2021 
onwards, state 
governments 
back on trajec -
tory previously 
expected – rev -
enue shortfalls 
at central gov -
ernment levelOfficial tax estimates:
currently and prior to the coronavirus 
crisis
Source:  Working  Party  on  Tax  Revenue  Estimates.  1 Adjust-
ment for interim changes in tax legislation pursuant to Annex 2 
of the press release on the results of the estimates of May 
2020,  September  2020,  November  2020,  May  2021  and 
November  2021.  2 Excluding  the  local  government  taxes  of 
the city states; after financial equalisation and supplementary 
grants.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022 2023 2024280300320340360380€ billion, log scale
320340360380400
100110120130140Autumn 2021Autumn 2019
Central government
State government2
Local governmentAutumn 2021 – adjusted for legislative changes1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
67

considerably, by 12% (+€10 billion). Tax rev -
enue rose by 15% (+€11 billion), although 
transfers from this to the EU budget were 
€3 billion higher. Overall expenditure growth 
was far greater still (up by 22%, or €23 billion). 
One major reason for this was that central gov -
ernment prefinanced the new Flood Relief Fund 
to the tune of €16 billion. Furthermore, trans -
fers to enterprises were €9½ billion higher than 
their prior- year figures, pushed up by bridging 
aid to compensate for lost revenue as a result 
of the pandemic. In quarter- on- quarter terms, 
however, the latter has already shrunk by 
€4 billion to €8 billion. Interest expenditure fell 
considerably on the year, by just under €1½ bil -
lion. This was primarily driven by higher premia 
on Federal securities. On balance, central gov -
ernment paid no interest in the reporting quar -
ter – instead, it received interest income of just 
under €4½ billion.7
After three quarters, the deficit in the central 
government budget now stands at €124 bil -lion. Last year, a very large deficit was recorded 
in the fourth quarter, with extensive burdens 
due to prefinancing of the Energy and Climate 
Fund, local government assistance, the VAT cut 
and assistance for the Federal Employment 
Agency. This year, the exceptional costs so far 
envisaged for the final quarter are considerably 
smaller. All in all, the deficit for the year as a 
whole could be far closer to the 2020 deficit of 
€131 billion than to the budget estimate (€240 
billion).
Although the deficit will be far smaller than 
estimated, structural net borrowing will be well 
above the regular limit imposed by the debt 
brake. Appropriate repayments therefore need 
to be budgeted for in the future. These had 
been estimated to reach €13 billion per year 
from 2026 to 2042, but they will now be sig -
nificantly lower due to more favourable budget -
ary performance. The following should be 
noted in this context:
– First, structural net borrowing in the core 
budget will be far lower than the amount 
budgeted. This borrowing includes the un -
budgeted transfer of €16 billion to the new 
Flood Relief Fund. Furthermore, additional 
funds of more than €10 billion will probably 
be needed to offset the Federal Employment 
Agency’s deficit, plus a smaller cyclical bur -
den will presumably also be deducted.8 
However, the substantial alleviating factors 
in budget implementation will outweigh 
these three negative factors quite consider -
ably.Significant 
increase in 
deficit  in Q3 
despite surge in 
tax receipts: pre -
financed flood 
relief and 
coronavirus aidDeficit in year as 
a whole consid -
erable smaller 
than planned
Future repay -
ment burden 
also far smaller 
than plannedCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fe-
deral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-
fects. 
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4755025025
–––+
–125–100–75–50–250+25
2019
20212019Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20202020€ billion
2021
7 When accounted for in the budget on a cash basis, pre -
mia are not recorded over the life of the relevant securities, 
which has various drawbacks. In particular, this makes 
interest expenditure highly volatile. For a proposal on re -
cording premia on an accruals basis, thus eliminating this 
source of volatility, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2021c).
8 According to the autumn projection, real GDP growth re -
mains well below the figure estimated in the supplemen -
tary budget. However, higher inflation is causing nominal 
GDP (the relevant value here) to rise significantly more than 
expected back at that time. Based on these assumptions, 
the cyclical burden will be €9 billion lower than the 
budgeted figure, which will push up structural net borrow -
ing accordingly.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
68

– Second, it stands to reason that the fiscal 
balance of the new Flood Relief Fund will be 
included in the debt brake (this is normal 
procedure for new special funds that do not 
have their own borrowing authorisation).9 
The Flood Relief Fund will post a large sur -
plus this year because most of the funds it is 
receiving from the core budget are unlikely 
to be released until a later date. In other 
words, the negative impact on the debt 
brake will ultimately not stem from central 
government’s net borrowing to finance the 
transfer to the fund – it is the outflows of 
aid from the fund, which will be spread over 
several years, that will count towards it.
– Third, the Energy and Climate Fund can ex -
pect its deficit to be significantly smaller 
than the €14 billion figure included in the 
central government budget. This fund’s fis -
cal balance is also included in the debt 
brake. The fund’s outturn is likely to be more 
favourable due to revenue being higher than 
estimated. One reason for this is that the 
prices of European emission allowances 
have risen unexpectedly sharply. On top of 
the more favourable outturn, only slightly 
more than half of the fund’s expenditure ap -
propriation of €26 billion has been used up 
after three quarters. Spending is thus likely 
to be far lower than the budget estimate for 
the year as a whole (as in the previous year).
It still appears unclear whether the aforemen -
tioned net borrowing to offset the Federal Em -
ployment Agency’s deficit will actually count 
towards repayment obligations. Until now, 
payments have been recorded as loans and 
thus as financial transactions outside the scope 
of the debt brake. The Budget Act (Haushalts -
gesetz)  stipulates that the loans should be con -
verted into grants if the Federal Employment 
Agency’s reserves are insufficient to cover the 
shortfall. Another condition is that, based on 
the figures, the remaining deficit is due to ex -
penditure on short- time working. In the case of 
debt forgiveness of this nature, however, it 
would then be appropriate to no longer record the loans as a financial transaction but to in -
stead classify them as a grant item. The debt 
forgiveness would then be recorded as expend -
iture recognised in the budget, as is the case 
under European budget rules. This also makes 
more sense from an economic perspective and 
is in the spirit of the debt brake. It appears that 
a different approach is being taken for the loan 
claim for 2020. In this case, the intention is to 
forgive debt after the books have been closed 
and hence to apparently avoid a repayment ob -
ligation under the debt brake.
The existing fiscal plans for 2022 and the me -
dium term will be taken up by the incoming 
government, but will then be revised in line 
with its own objectives. The main focus will be 
the funding of new projects. According to the 
exploratory paper, very extensive additional in -
vestments are planned for climate protection, 
amongst other things. Furthermore, the paper 
confirms the statutory pension level that is 
guaranteed at present and appears to rule out 
both cuts in benefits and a rise in the retire -
ment age. A central government grant in -
tended to partially fund the statutory pension 
insurance scheme was also announced. From 
2022 onwards, a pension policy such as this 
would bring with it significant challenges for 
the central government budget.10 If central 
government were to make a greater contribu -
tion to funding the statutory health and public 
long- term care insurance schemes in future, as 
has widely been encouraged of late, this would 
exacerbate the situation still further. Increases 
in joint taxes to cover additional burdens are 
ruled out. However, according to the latest tax 
estimate, significant additional tax revenue is to 
be expected (around +€13 billion each year 
from 2022 to 2025). It was also announced 
that environmentally harmful subsidies would 
be cut, but the timeframe and extent of these 
cuts remained unclear. All things considered, 
tax developments are making the budget plan -From an eco -
nomic perspec -
tive, debt for -
giveness for Fed -
eral Employment 
Agency should 
count towards 
debt brake as 
transferExploratory 
paper implies 
new burdens on 
central govern -
ment budget
9 See Federal Ministry of Finance (2021), p. 25.
10 For information on the challenges facing the statutory 
pension insurance scheme, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2019a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
69

ning process markedly easier. In view of the ex -
tensive projects the next government has in 
mind, though, it will still face considerable fis -
cal policy challenges.
The outgoing government had planned to 
make recourse to the escape clause of the debt 
brake once more in 2022. However, the as -
sumptions made regarding macroeconomic de -
velopments did not allude to any substantial re -
maining burdens from the pandemic. In its au -
tumn forecast, the incumbent Federal Govern -
ment assumes normal cyclical conditions. In 
2022, central government tax revenue should 
be approaching the level expected prior to the 
crisis (tax estimate of autumn 2019, adjusted 
for central government provisions for planned 
legislative changes). Making recourse to the es -
cape clause hardly seems justifiable, especially 
against the backdrop of very exhaustive re -
serves being available. Ultimately, the escape 
clause is based on a crisis situation outside the 
control of the state. If future expenditure were 
to be prefinanced by borrowing on the basis of 
the escape clause, this too would be incompat -
ible with the objectives of the debt brake. This 
applies in particular to non- crisis measures.11
It would also be a questionable move to fund 
expenses outside of the debt brake if these are 
separated from the central government budget 
in formal terms only. This would be the case if 
central government continues to be instrumen -
tal in determining these expenses and thus 
ends up coming under financial pressure. In 
such an event, the measures to be funded 
would also fall under the European fiscal rules. 
This is because in the national accounts rele -
vant for European budgetary surveillance, these 
items are counted as off- budget entities be -
longing to the government sector (accordingly, 
newly created special funds have also been in -
cluded in the debt brake up to now). Public 
sector enterprises are only counted towards 
the corporate sector if they operate as inde -
pendent economic entities. To qualify for this, 
they must have decision- making autonomy in 
respect of their principal function, in particu -lar.12 In addition, their goods or services must 
be supplied at economically significant prices; 
i.e. their prices should influence their supply. In 
concrete terms, at least one-  half of their pro -
duction and net interest costs must be covered 
by sales proceeds on the market. Equally, this 
output cannot primarily be sold to the govern -
ment (unless the contracts were previously put 
out to tender).13 Where public enterprises do 
not fulfil these criteria, they are attributed to 
general government in the national accounts.14 
Equally, specifically assigned business activities, 
such as the KfW banking group’s coronavirus 
assistance loans, are assigned to the govern -
ment sector, even if the enterprise belongs to 
the private sector.
The debt brake limits new projects that do not 
have counterfinancing. It is therefore essential 
to set priorities and to gain the general public’s 
support for these. If, conversely, the debt brake 
is bypassed to avoid having to secure counter -
financing, one of its key functions may be lost: 
that of securing trust in government finances. 
This trust enables government debt to be 
financed without incurring larger risk premia, 
amongst other things. The importance of the 
debt brake also extends beyond Germany; it 
serves to anchor the EU’s fiscal rules. These 
rules were passed with the particular aim of fa -
cilitating stability- oriented monetary policy. 
Against this backdrop, it is important that the 
binding effect of the debt brake, which has 
been strong up to now, is carefully guarded. 
This does not preclude a reform. However, to 
avoid violating the rules, any changes should 
be made transparently and with sufficient justi -
fication. In the same vein, it is essential that the 
rules continue to safeguard sound government 
finances, assure compliance with European 
provisions and clearly set new national bound -
aries.Recourse to 
escape clause in 
2022 seems 
questionable; 
topping- up of 
reserves particu -
larly critical
Central govern -
ment’s off- 
budget entities 
should count 
towards the 
debt brakeUphold binding 
effect of debt 
brake
11 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021d).
12 See Eurostat (2014), point 2.12.
13 See Eurostat (2014), points 20.19 ff.
14 For instance, it is currently being assessed whether the 
DB Netz subsidiary of Deutsche Bahn still fulfils the criteria 
of a public enterprise.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
70

Central government’s off- budget entities15 re-
corded a large surplus of €15 billion in the third 
quarter, compared with a high deficit of €29 
billion in the same period last year. At that 
time, the Economic Stabilisation Fund was pro -
viding very extensive funding for coronavirus 
assistance loans offered by the KfW banking 
group. This summer, return flows prevailed 
slightly, and the Economic Stabilisation Fund  
recorded a small surplus. Through extensive 
prefinancing, the Flood Relief Fund generated a 
surplus of €16 billion. This fund was started in 
September and recorded no outflows up to the 
end of the quarter. The Energy and Climate 
Fund, conversely, registered a deficit of €1 bil -
lion.
The Flood Relief Fund is also set to record a 
high surplus for the year as a whole. Limited 
recourse  is expected to be made to this fund 
up to the end of the year. In addition, the Eco -
nomic Stabilisation Fund could record a surplus 
for the year as a whole, as further coronavirus 
loans and capital assistance are being paid 
back. To date, the Energy and Climate Fund has 
run up a deficit of €8 billion. In the final quar -
ter, this is not set to rise substantially further, at 
least. Compared with earlier quarters, higher 
receipts from sales of emission allowances are 
foreseeable. Taken together, revenue and ex -
penditure in the other entities factored in here 
could more or less offset each other. All in all, 
central government’s off-  budget entities can 
be expected to close 2021 with a high surplus. 
Although deficits are envisaged for the new 
Flood Relief Fund and the Energy and Climate 
Fund next year, coronavirus aid repayments to 
the Economic Stabilisation Fund could substan -
tially outweigh these. Whether or not a surplus 
will be generated again also depends on how 
the incoming government deploys off- budget 
entities to carry out its projects.
State government budgets16
The federal states’ core budgets finished the 
third quarter of 2021 with a surplus of €6 bil -lion. At the same time last year, they had 
posted a slight deficit of €½ billion. Revenue 
rose steeply, by 8% (+€9 billion) due to a sharp 
rise in tax receipts (+13%). By contrast, revenue 
from public administrations declined (-6%) on 
account of lower central government pay -
ments. Expenditure climbed less sharply, by 2% 
(+€2 billion). Just under one- quarter of this in -
crease was attributable to immediate aid pay -
ments for flood damage. The results of the off- 
budget entities are also needed to assess the 
overall situation, as many federal states set up 
such entities and used them to group pandemic- 
related revenue and expenditure.17 The finan -
cial relationships between these off- budget en -
tities and the corresponding core budgets can -
not be identified in the monthly cash statistics.
After three quarters, the federal states have re -
corded a surplus of €2 billion in their core 
budgets. All things considered, it appears that 
the coronavirus crisis is affecting the federal 
states considerably less in 2021 than was the 
case a year ago. Tax revenue, for instance, is 
set to see a large increase of 10%, according to 
the latest estimate. This will already put it 
slightly above the level expected for 2021 prior 
to the crisis (tax estimate of autumn 2019); in -
deed, excluding interim tax cuts, it would even 
have been somewhat higher. Last year, the 
state government deficit, including its off-  
budget entities, amounted to €34 billion.18 This 
year, the deficit could decline to somewhere in 
the single- digit billions.
Next year, state government finances are ex -
pected to improve further. Tax revenue, for in -
stance, is set to rise by 2½% from a recovered Central govern -
ment’s off- 
budget entities 
record large sur -
plus in Q3 due 
to prefinancing 
of new Flood 
Relief Fund …
… and high 
surplus  also 
expected for 
2021 as a wholeSurplus in Q3 
due to strong 
upturn in tax 
revenue
Deficit for year 
as a whole con -
siderably below 
previous year’s 
figure
15 According to data from the Federal Ministry of Finance, 
i.e. excluding bad banks and other entities that use com -
mercial double- entry bookkeeping. SoFFin’s deficit is also 
factored out. It is based on funds transferred to refinance 
the bad bank FMSW.
16 The data on state government budgets in the reporting 
quarter are based on the monthly cash statistics for the 
core budgets. Results for the off- budget entities are not yet 
available.
17 For more on the role of off- budget entities, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), p. 78.
18 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021d), pp. 16-19.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
71

baseline, bringing it to around its pre- crisis 
level. Expenditure- side coronavirus measures 
are equally likely to expire to a large extent if 
the pandemic peters out as assumed in most 
forecasts. It should then be possible to cover 
the bulk of any remaining coronavirus- related 
burdens using reserves.19 In its autumn fore -
cast, Federal Government anticipates that the 
economy will return to operating at near-  
normal capacity. Overall, as for central govern -
ment, it would make sense for the federal 
states to stop using the escape clauses in their 
debt brakes, particularly if burdens remain 
manageable and reserves are available.20
It seems that in the wake of the coronavirus cri -
sis, the structural situation of the federal states 
as a whole is not unfavourable. However, each 
of them now faces different fiscal challenges. 
Their respective structural budgetary positions 
are not the only factor here. Their stocks of re -
serves from the pre- crisis period and the design of the state- specific debt brakes are just as rele -
vant.21
In October, the Constitutional Court of Hesse 
ruled on important parts of the federal state’s 
budgetary policy during the coronavirus crisis.22 
The Court deemed key areas of this policy to be 
incompatible with the state constitution and 
the debt brake enshrined within it. The newly 
created special fund, which is equipped with 
an exhaustive borrowing authorisation span -
ning several years, attracted particular criticism. 
This fund is thought to violate the principles of 
budgetary conformity and completeness, and 
to contravene the budgetary right of the state 
parliament. Although the ruling is based on 
constitutional rules that are specific to the state 
of Hesse, some key points could also be rele -
vant to central government and to the other 
federal states.23 The Constitutional Court ruled 
as follows:
– Having a borrowing authorisation spanning 
several years “just in case” does not comply 
with the objectives of the debt brake con -
cept.
– Should there be departures from the ban on 
new borrowing, the borrowing authorisa -
tion and any debt- financed measures must 
be suited to and necessary for combating 
the crisis, as well as being commensurate 
with the extent of the crisis. The legislator 
has not demonstrated this. Neither has it 
estab lished a link between the need for new 
borrowing and the crisis situation.
– Finally, the legislator did not set out why no 
further funds from the federal state’s gen -
eral reserves were deployed in the first in -
stance to combat the coronavirus pandemic.Pandemic- 
induced burden 
on federal states 
likely to expire 
to a large extent 
in 2022
Federal states’ 
structural situ -
ation as a whole 
not unfavour -
ableCourt ruling on 
Hesse’s corona -
virus special 
fund highlights 
limits for escape 
clausesState government fiscal balance
Sources: Federal Statistical Office, Federal Ministry of Finance 
and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Figures based on monthly data 
from the Federal Ministry of Finance, quarterly data are not yet 
available. 2 Core budgets and off-budget entities together.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q430201001020
–––++
2019Quarterly figures
20212020€ billion
Cumulated from start of year 2
2020Off-budget entitiesCore budgets
1
–40–30–20–100+10+20+30
2019
2021
19 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021d), pp. 33-35.
20 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021d), p. 38.
21 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a).
22 See Constitutional Court of Hesse (2021).
23 Other legal proceedings are already underway in Baden- 
Württemberg, Mecklenburg-  West Pomerania and Rhine-
land-Palatinate.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
72

Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme re -
corded a deficit of €1½ billion in the third quar -
ter. This constitutes a year- on- year improve -
ment of just over €2 billion. Total receipts in -
creased by 3½%, which was slightly stronger 
than the rise in contribution receipts (+3%). 
Central government funds rose by just over 
4½%; 1½ percentage points of this were at -
tributable to funds for the basic pension. On 
the expenditure side, however, the new pen -
sion top- ups were not yet noticeable.24 Ex-
penditure saw weak growth of just over ½%. 
This was due to the very low pension adjust -
ment of 0.2% on average across Germany 
(western Germany: 0.0%; eastern Germany: 
0.7%). The number of pension recipients, too, 
rose only moderately, by ½%.
Over the first three quarters of the year, the 
pension insurance scheme recorded a cumu -
lated deficit of €4½ billion. In the final quarter, 
it is expected to see higher contribution re -
ceipts, as is usual for the time of year. On the 
expenditure side, the low pension adjustment 
is slowing growth substantially. For the year as 
a whole, therefore, the budget could be 
broadly balanced (following a deficit of €4 bil -
lion the year before). The free reserves (sustain -
ability reserve) would then be around €32 bil -
lion over the lower limit of 0.2 times the 
scheme’s monthly expenditure.
Next year, however, a substantial deficit is likely 
to arise once more. On the expenditure side, 
higher pension benefits will have a burdening 
effect: by mid- 2022, the pension adjustment 
could be rather high.25 Compounding this are 
the current exhaustive basic pension top- ups 
for 2021, which are being paid out retroactively. Deficit in Q3 
considerably 
lower on the 
year due to sub -
dued expend -
iture growth
Broadly bal -
anced result 
possible for year 
as a whole
Deficit expected 
again in 2022Finances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary quarterly figures as the latter are not subsequently re-
vised.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q442024
––++
–8–6–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202120202019
2019
202120202019 2020 202102468
2019 2020 202102468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
€ billion
24 The new basic pension was introduced at the start of 
2021. Entitlements (estimated to be in the order of just 
over €100 million per month) have been accrued since 
January. However, those entitled to the new top- up pay -
ments only started to receive them in July (including back 
payments). The final basic pension payments from 2021 are 
not expected to be disbursed until the end of next year. 
Central government is therefore advancing funds, paying 
out the estimated higher pension amount in its entirety in 
the current year.
25 The mid- 2022 adjustment is based on wage growth for 
2021, which was bolstered by the decline in short- time 
working. There is also likely to be a rather strong positive 
retrospective correction for developments in 2020: the 
relevant earnings subject to compulsory contributions for 
2020 probably increased significantly more strongly than 
the wages that the 2021 pension adjustment was initially 
based on. The adjustment will be corrected accordingly. 
The weak wage growth seen in 2020 will also cause strong 
fluctuations in pension adjustments in 2023 and 2024 
through the sustainability factor. As things currently stand, 
another very high adjustment is forecast for mid- 2023 
(around 5%). In 2024, the safeguard clause, which pre -
vents a negative pension adjustment, could then be acti -
vated once more. Pensions are consequently only likely to 
rise slightly, at most. For more details, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2020b), p. 72 .Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
73

On the revenue side, central government funds 
are seeing only subdued growth. This is primar -
ily attributable to the weak wage development 
seen in 2020 – an item which is particularly im -
portant for forward projections.
In the coming years, increasing numbers of 
baby boomers will be approaching retirement 
age. Funding pressure in the pension insurance 
scheme will gradually mount and deficits will 
rise. To prevent the reserve from undershooting 
its statutory minimum level, the contribution 
rate will then have to be gradually increased by 
a significant amount. According to press re -
leases, the current Federal Government is ex -pecting the contribution rate to increase in 
2024 – the first time since 2007.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency finished the 
third quarter with a substantial deficit of just 
over €3 billion in the core area.26 This deficit 
was much higher last year, however, at €10 bil -
lion.
Revenue rose steeply, by almost 5½%. Further -
more, expenditure decreased significantly on 
the year (by 35%, or €6½ billion). However, it 
is still around 50% higher than in the third 
quarter of the pre- crisis year 2019. Payments 
for short- term work, in particular, have de -
creased sharply (-60%); in the third quarter, 
€3½ billion was disbursed (compared with 
€8½ billion a year earlier). In the quarter under 
review, €1½ billion of this was attributable to 
social contributions paid by the Federal Em -
ployment Agency to relieve enterprises during 
the pandemic. Expenditure on unemployment 
benefits also declined by almost €1½ billion on 
account of the improved labour market situ -
ation. Following an exceptional peak in the 
third quarter of 2020, insolvency benefit de -
creased very sharply, too, reaching its lowest 
quarterly level in over 20 years despite the fact 
that exemptions from the obligation to file for 
insolvency had expired by end-  April.
At the end of the third quarter, the Federal Em -
ployment Agency recorded a deficit of €21 bil -
lion. This figure is likely to remain virtually un -
changed up to the end of the year. Reserves of 
€6 billion and a central government grant of 
€3½ billion are earmarked for financing. Over 
the course of the year, central government 
plugs any remaining funding gaps with a loan, 
which is likely to be in the region of €13 billion 
at year’s end. However, central government Demographics 
exacerbate 
funding pressureSharp decrease 
in quarterly 
deficit 
Steep rise in 
revenue  and 
substantially 
lower expend -
iture due above 
all to sharp 
decline in short- 
time work
High deficit for 
year as a whole 
once moreFinances of the 
Federal Employment Agency*
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants' 
pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410505
––+
–30–25–20–15–10–50+5+10Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202120202019
2021202020192019 2020 2021–40–200+20+40+60+80+100+120+140
2019 2020 20214020020406080100120140
––+++++++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
26 Excluding the civil servants’ pension fund. Transfers to 
the fund are recorded as expenditure, lowering the core 
budget balance. Transfers have been suspended until the 
end of 2021 on account of the coronavirus crisis.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
74

EU fi  scal rules: current debate on reform
In February 2020, the European Commis-
sion opened a consultation process on re-
forming the fi  scal rules. After being sus-
pended on account of the coronavirus cri-
sis, the process was relaunched in October 
2021.
Current basic quantitative requirements 
well suited
It is essential that any reform of the Euro-
pean budget rules upholds their main ob-
jective – to safeguard sound government 
fi  nances. This includes, in particular, efforts 
to bring down high debt ratios. The basic 
quantitative requirements enshrined in the 
Stability and Growth Pact are well suited for 
this purpose.
De facto, the current rules base the reduc-
tion of the high debt ratios on the medium- 
term objective (MTO). The MTO is defi  ned 
as a budget that is structurally close to bal-
ance or in surplus. In specifi  c terms, this 
means that if the debt ratio is higher than 
60%, the structural defi  cit may not exceed 
0.5% of gross domestic product (GDP), and 
if the debt ratio is lower than 60%, the 
structural defi  cit may not exceed 1% of 
GDP . For the adjustment path towards the 
MTO, the benchmark for structural consoli-
dation is 0.5% of GDP per year. This does 
not constitute excessively high consolida-
tion.
For some time now, once a country has at-
tained its MTO or adjusts suffi   ciently to-
wards it, it has been regarded as complying 
with the debt criterion.1 In such cases, high 
debt ratios are expected to fall below the 
reference value of 60% over time. The asso-
ciated adjustment phases could well be very 
long. For instance, with an initial debt ratio of 150%, a structural defi  cit of 0.5% of GDP 
and nominal GDP growth of 3%, it would 
take almost 40 years to reach the reference 
value of 60%.
In the past, countries often failed to meet 
the quantitative requirements for the struc-
tural balance. Prior to the coronavirus crisis, 
even countries with high debt ratios were 
actually drifting further from their MTO 
rather  than approaching it. This was often 
largely due to the way in which the Euro-
pean Commission, in consultation with the 
European Council, interpreted the rules. Ex-
ceptions and scope for discretion enabled 
countries to deviate signifi  cantly from the 
basic quantitative requirements without 
being penalised. Furthermore, the imple-
mentation of the rules was complex, lack-
ing in transparency and diffi   cult to predict.
In the future, rules should defi  ne specifi  c 
quantitative targets and these should be 
used to determine whether a country is 
compliant. Problems arise when fi  scal limits 
are fl  exible and have no binding force. The 
fi  scal course and evaluation of adherence to 
the rules should not be subject to political 
negotiations. Otherwise, neither govern-
ments nor the public will see the rules as a 
binding fi  scal benchmark.
1 Consequently, the controversial ¹⁄₂₀ rule for the debt 
ratio has not yet been relevant in practice. Based on 
the debt criterion, an excessive defi  cit procedure (EDP) 
would ultimately only need to be launched if a country 
has a debt ratio of more than 60%, is in breach of the 
¹⁄₂₀ rule as well as the MTO and its adjustment path, 
and the European Commission and the European 
Council have not identifi  ed any other exonerating fac-
tors. In an EDP , the European Commission and the 
European Council issue correction recommendations 
for the country in question. The benchmark is that a 
country should reduce its structural defi  cit by 0.5% of 
GDP per year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
75

Approaches for moderate reform steps
The rules could be improved by making 
relatively moderate adjustments. The Bun-
desbank discussed such reform options in 
more detail in both the April 2019 and the 
December 2020 editions of its Monthly Re-
port.2 These proposals retain the MTO and 
its adjustment path as well as corrections of 
excessive defi  cits as a central anchor. How-
ever, the binding force of their basic quanti-
tative requirements should be strengthened 
going forward. At the same time, the rules 
could provide room for fi  scal stabilisation 
policy. It would also be possible to protect 
government investment. It would be essen-
tial to ensure that debt and defi  cits at the 
EU level feed into the rules. These key elem-
ents are summarised below.
Expenditure rule based on MTO to 
simplify  budgetary surveillance
A frequent proposal in the current debate 
on reform is the option of using expend-
iture rules. The suitability of such rules 
hinges on the underlying fi  scal target to be 
implemented via expenditure ceilings. Ex-
penditure rules based on insuffi   ciently am-
bitious or unspecifi  c targets are not appro-
priate. Nor is it advisable to set expenditure 
ceilings for multiple years. Projections sev-
eral years ahead are particularly uncertain 
and could routinely be overly optimistic. But 
if the underlying pace of revenue, for in-
stance, is overestimated, defi  cits may be 
too high. Furthermore, if expenditure ceil-
ings apply on average over several years, 
there is a risk that necessary consolidation 
may be postponed.
Basing an expenditure rule on the MTO 
would be a more appropriate option, enab-
ling an annual quantitative requirement for 
the structural balance to be converted into 
a more practical ceiling for expenditure growth.3 Both budget plans and their exe-
cution could then be measured in terms of 
this predefi  ned expenditure growth rate. 
Exceptions should only be made in times of 
crisis and no ad hoc discretionary scope 
should be granted. The rules would be much 
simpler if only this one indicator were used 
to determine compliance.
Control account to prevent any 
systematic  failures
Combining an expenditure rule (or any 
other type of rule) with a control account 
would be a sensible move. The control ac-
count would be used to record – positive 
and negative – entries showing the amount 
by which a country missed its target struc-
tural position despite being on schedule 
with its implementation (projection error) 
and by how far it missed its expenditure 
ceiling. This does not mean that a country 
would be expected to respond immediately. 
Positive and negative deviations may cancel 
each other out over time. However, if it falls 
below a negative threshold, this should be 
corrected.4
National rainy day funds to enable 
greater stabilisation
The quantitative requirements of the Euro-
pean fi  scal rules are sometimes criticised as 
being too narrow. There are often calls to 
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b, 2020c).
3 An estimate of potential output is essential to calcu-
late the corresponding maximum expenditure growth 
(as an alternative, the trend and trend growth could be 
determined using a fi  lter technique). Adjustment 
would need to be made for any measures on the rev-
enue side (such as tax cuts or tax rises): e.g. tax cuts 
would have to be offset by a correspondingly more 
ambitious spending stance.
4 The control account could also be used to record 
and, if necessary, correct situations where the cyclical 
components, calculated using the cyclical adjustment 
method, do not cancel each other out over the eco-
nomic cycle. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), 
pp. 81f.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
76

allow greater scope for an active stabilisa-
tion policy, for example. In order to have a 
buffer even where limits are strict, national 
rainy day funds could be created and util-
ised.5
The basic idea behind this type of fund is to 
build up a fi  nancial buffer in good times in 
order to prepare for “rainy days” ahead. 
This could be added to the European fi  scal 
rules without permitting additional debt 
over and above the target path. To this end, 
the rules would have to allow the fund to 
build up credit when the MTO is exceeded. 
This reserve would then free up room for 
manoeuvre: a country could fall short of its 
MTO by the amount that it has in credit in 
its reserve.
Capped golden rule if particular 
protection  for investment is desired
Critics often argue that countries neglect in-
vestment expenditure in order to comply 
with defi  cit ceilings. This is judged as being 
in confl  ict with other political goals and also 
standing in the way of long- term sustain-
ability. Golden rules give investment special 
treatment. They have both advantages and 
disadvantages.6 The disadvantages were 
seen fi  rst hand in the Federal budget when 
Germany previously had a golden rule prior 
to being replaced by today’s debt brake.7
In order to limit the risks associated with 
the disadvantages, it would be important to 
link the golden rule to net investment. This 
means that write- downs would have to be 
deducted from gross investment so that 
additional debt could only be run up for net 
investment. One acceptable and pragmatic 
approach would be to use net government 
investment as defi  ned in the national ac-
counts. This is comparable throughout the 
EU.It would also be wise to set a ceiling up to 
which net investment may be taken into ac-
count (capped golden rule). This would en-
sure that defi  cits and debt ratios remain 
limited, thus safeguarding the sustainability 
of government fi  nances and mitigating any 
problems associated with defi  ning and 
measuring net investment.
A capped golden rule could be integrated 
into the current MTO. For instance, a coun-
try with a debt ratio of over 60% could be 
required to provide a structural position 
that is at least balanced as a basis. Only if 
net investment was correspondingly high 
would it be possible to have a structural 
defi  cit of up to 0.5% of GDP . This would be 
in line with the current MTO but would also 
better protect net investment. The MTO of 
countries with less debt (debt ratio of below 
60%), too, could be graduated as follows: 
starting from a defi  cit ratio of 0.5%, net in-
vestment of a corresponding size would 
allow for an additional defi  cit of 0.5% of 
GDP . This would resemble those countries’ 
current MTO. Furthermore, net investment 
could accordingly be factored into the ad-
justment path towards the MTO and cor-
rections of excessive defi  cits. Protection 
would thus also be in place in the consoli-
dation process.8
For debt ratios below the reference value of 
60%, the option of easing the MTO could 
be considered. To this end, capped net in-
vestment could be taken into account in 
addition to the existing 1% limit. The overall 
structural defi  cit ceiling would then be 1.5% 
of GDP instead of 1% of GDP .
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), pp. 82 f.
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), pp. 83 f.
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2005).
8 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), pp. 85f.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
77

Incorporate European defi  cits and debt 
into the fi  scal rules
New common assistance was drawn up 
during the coronavirus crisis. The European 
level is to provide Member States with debt- 
fi  nanced funds up to 2026 (in addition to 
the regular contribution- funded EU budget), 
resulting in an accumulation of substantial 
debt at the European level. This debt is no 
longer funding just assistance loans but also 
extensive grants to Member States. As a 
consequence, notable defi  cits are being re-
corded at the European level for the fi  rst 
time.
Such EU debt and defi  cits mean that na-
tional debt and defi  cits are initially lower, as 
a Member State’s expenditure is funded not 
by national borrowing but by debt- fi  nanced 
EU grants. While this improves the national 
indicators, Member States’ fi  nancial pos-
itions are not any better overall. This is be-
cause European debt – on top of the na-
tional debt burden – will need to be ser-
viced by taxpayers in the Member States at 
some point in the future. Instead of interest 
and principal payments on national debt, 
there will be larger contributions or tax pay-
ments to the EU budget.9
This runs the risk of hollowing out the exist-
ing fi  scal rules that apply to offi   cial national 
budgetary indicators. The quantitative re-
quirements would be futile if defi  cits and 
debts were simply transferred to a greater 
extent to the European level. For the quan-
titative limits to retain their force, it is vital, 
fi  rst, for the European Commission to col-
lect statistics on government defi  cits and 
debt at the European level and disclose this 
information in a transparent manner. 
Second, this information should feed into 
the fi  scal rules. To this end, European debt 
and defi  cits should be allocated to the 
Member States (not in the offi   cial national accounts, but separately to ensure that the 
enhanced national indicators can be used in 
analyses and in the fi  scal rules). This would 
require a distribution key to be established. 
A country’s share of EU gross national in-
come would appear suitable for this pur-
pose, as this will probably continue to be 
the key metric for measuring a country’s 
share of fi  nancing in the EU budget.10
9 In passing the Act on Own Resources (Gesetz zum 
Eigenmittelbeschluss), Germany has committed to pro-
viding fi  nancial contributions for debt servicing. It is 
envisaged that central government will service loans 
for grants (interest and repayments) in line with the 
German share of fi  nancing in the EU budget. This 
share broadly corresponds to relative economic out-
put. Even if parts of the debt were to be repaid from 
new EU taxes, it would ultimately be taxpayers in the 
Member States who would foot the bill – or Member 
States would have to transfer sources of tax revenue to 
the EU. This would eat into the fi  scal scope for national 
budgets.
10 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020c), p. 42.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
78

loans for 2020 (€7 billion) and 2021 should 
then be waived.
The Federal Employment Agency’s finances are 
likely to continue their robust recovery next 
year. Based on the current Federal Govern -
ment’s macroeconomic forecast and excluding 
significantly higher expenditure on active la -bour market policy measures, a surplus is envis -
aged for the Federal Employment Agency’s 
budget. For insolvency benefit contributions, 
the current contribution rate (0.12%) is also ex -
pected to yield another large surplus. It would 
therefore make sense to reduce the contribu -
tion rate to its pre- crisis level of 0.06%.Greatly 
improved finan -
cial situation 
next year
List of references
Constitutional Court of Hesse (2021), Directives on the Constitutional Court’s decision of 27 October 
2021 – P.St. 2783, P.St. 2827 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), Public finances, Monthly Report, August 2021, pp. 71-82.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), Public finances, Monthly Report, May 2021, pp. 62-80.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021c), Federal debt: allocate premia on accruals basis in budgetary inter -
est expenditure, Monthly Report, June 2021, pp. 47-51.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021d), State government finances in 2020: deficit due to temporary 
effects  of pandemic, escape clauses also used to build reserves, Monthly Report, October 2021, 
pp. 15-42.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), The future requirements of state- specific debt brakes on state gov -
ernments’ budgets, Monthly Report, October 2020, pp. 102-105.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), Annual pension adjustments in need of reform, Monthly Report, 
November 2020, pp. 72-73.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020c), The informative value of national fiscal indicators in respect of debt 
at the European level, Monthly Report, December 2020, pp. 37-47.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), Long- term outlook for the statutory pension insurance scheme, 
Monthly Report, October 2019, pp. 53-81.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), European Stability and Growth Pact: individual reform options, 
Monthly Report, April 2019, pp. 77-90.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2005), Deficit- limiting budgetary rules and a national stability pact in 
Germany  , Monthly Report, April 2005, pp. 23-37.
Eurostat (2014), European System of Accounts: ESA 2010.
Federal Ministry of Finance (2021), Kompendium zur Schuldenregel des Bundes (Schuldenbremse) , 
31 March 2021 ( bundesfinanzministerium.de ).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
79

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
80

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43 •
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
3•

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
13. General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
14. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78 •
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81 •
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 EONIA  5,73 month
EURIBOR  6,7Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  8
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2020 Feb. 8.1 5.6 5.5 6.1 1.9 3.2 0.9 – 0.45 – 0.41 – 0.0
Mar. 10.4 7.4 7.5 7.1 3.6 4.2 0.3 – 0.45 – 0.42 0.1
Apr. 11.8 8.3 8.2 8.2 4.8 4.3 0.0 – 0.45 – 0.25 0.3
May 12.5 9.1 9.0 8.8 6.1 4.9 0.2 – 0.46 – 0.27 0.2
June 12.7 9.3 9.3 9.4 6.9 4.6 – 0.4 – 0.46 – 0.38 0.1
July 13.5 10.0 10.1 9.6 7.4 4.7 – 0.5 – 0.46 – 0.44 0.0
Aug. 13.3 9.6 9.5 10.0 7.7 4.7 – 0.0 – 0.47 – 0.48 – 0.0
Sep. 13.8 10.3 10.4 10.1 8.1 4.5 – 0.4 – 0.47 – 0.49 – 0.1
Oct. 13.8 10.3 10.5 10.6 8.3 4.2 – 0.5 – 0.47 – 0.51 – 0.2
Nov. 14.5 10.8 11.0 11.3 8.6 4.4 – 0.7 – 0.47 – 0.52 – 0.2
Dec. 15.6 11.7 12.3 11.9 9.3 4.9 – 0.4 – 0.47 – 0.54 – 0.2
2021 Jan. 16.5 12.2 12.5 12.4 9.4 4.8 – 0.9 – 0.48 – 0.55 – 0.2
Feb. 16.4 12.2 12.2 11.6 9.6 4.6 – 0.9 – 0.48 – 0.54 – 0.1
Mar. 13.7 10.2 10.0 10.5 8.6 4.0 – 0.3 – 0.48 – 0.54 0.0
Apr. 12.4 9.1 9.2 9.2 7.3 3.4 – 0.3 – 0.48 – 0.54 0.1
May 11.6 8.3 8.5 8.6 6.3 2.9 – 1.0 – 0.48 – 0.54 0.2
June 11.8 8.3 8.3 8.1 6.0 3.2 – 0.6 – 0.48 – 0.54 0.2
July 11.0 7.6 7.6 7.9 5.8 3.1 – 0.5 – 0.48 – 0.54 0.0
Aug. 11.0 7.8 7.9 7.6 5.5 2.8 – 0.8 – 0.48 – 0.55 – 0.1
Sep. 11.0 7.5 7.4 ... 5.6 3.4 – 0.8 – 0.49 – 0.55 0.1
Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... – 0.49 – 0.55 0.2
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 Euroovernight index average.  6 Euro interbank offered rate.  7 See also footnotes to Table
VI.4, p. 43●. 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT, GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2020 Feb. + 4,665 +29,696 – 8,449 + 1,684 –35,701 + 9,644 +16,408 – 484 1.0905 96.2 90.5
Mar. +16,276 +38,420 +19,887 + 9,187 –117,711 – 1,522 +126,354 + 3,578 1.1063 98.8 92.9
Apr. +11,381 +11,716 –18,917 –31,372 +152,422 +12,905 –154,567 + 1,694 1.0862 98.1 92.5
May – 1,392 +16,602 –11,139 –49,799 +33,541 + 8,840 – 5,383 + 1,662 1.0902 98.3 92.5
June +16,942 +27,772 +30,291 –40,288 –41,664 +20,438 +91,974 – 170 1.1255 99.7 93.8
July +27,921 +35,193 +16,478 +49,125 –29,375 – 5,833 + 3,118 – 558 1.1463 100.4 94.4
Aug. +24,890 +24,332 +53,783 +14,351 +35,481 –15,708 +18,355 + 1,304 1.1828 101.5 94.9
Sep. +37,771 +35,078 +50,114 –22,555 + 3,082 – 9,747 +76,745 + 2,589 1.1792 101.5 94.8
Oct. +30,981 +38,953 +46,608 +41,905 +101,009 + 4,317 –103,536 + 2,914 1.1775 101.3 94.7
Nov. +27,465 +34,873 +49,261 –37,813 +185,183 +11,041 –106,540 – 2,610 1.1838 100.6 94.2
Dec. +42,649 +39,010 +32,892 –108,628 +287,644 –29,887 –117,987 + 1,749 1.2170 101.8 95.1
2021 Jan. +15,805 +21,529 +45,324 +49,270 + 9,859 +12,530 –25,402 – 934 1.2171 101.3 95.3
Feb. +21,859 +33,450 +48,622 +39,341 +84,598 – 816 –72,877 – 1,623 1.2098 100.6 94.6
Mar. +37,794 +37,081 + 3,994 +19,226 – 6,881 – 5,306 – 2,507 – 538 1.1899 100.3 94.1
Apr. +27,084 +25,982 + 6,654 +24,646 +16,629 + 4,459 –39,807 + 727 1.1979 100.6 94.2
May +10,022 +25,680 +40,307 +13,760 +70,470 – 2,108 –43,250 + 1,435 1.2146 100.8 94.2
June +32,444 +33,438 +53,711 –37,543 +53,472 + 6,170 +26,294 + 5,318 1.2047 100.2 93.7
July +31,188 +30,982 +40,846 +33,761 –18,302 + 8,903 +16,825 – 342 1.1822 99.7 p 93.5
Aug. +17,636 +12,881 + 2,183 +12,802 +25,558 – 5,902 –152,357 +122,082 1.1772 99.3 p 93.2
Sep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1770 99.4 p 93.2
Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1601 98.4 p 92.2
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also Tables
XII.10 and 12, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Bundesbankcalculation. Against the currencies of the EER-19 group.  4 Based on consumer price
indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2018 1.8 1.8 1.1 4.1 1.1 1.9 1.7 9.0 0.9 4.0
2019 1.6 2.1 1.1 4.1 1.3 1.8 1.8 4.9 0.4 2.5
2020 –6.4 –5.7 –4.6 –3.0 –2.9 –7.9 –9.0 5.9 –8.9 –3.6
2020 Q2 –14.5 –13.2 –11.3 –7.3 –7.3 –18.7 –15.6 1.4 –18.3 –8.9
Q3 –4.0 –3.6 –3.6 –2.8 –2.9 –3.8 –9.4 10.8 –5.4 –2.4
Q4 –4.4 –4.3 –1.9 –1.5 –1.0 –3.7 –5.9 4.5 –6.2 –1.2
2021 Q1 –1.2 0.0 –3.2 4.1 –2.0 1.6 –1.4 11.2 0.1 –0.7
Q2 14.2 15.1 10.3 12.9 8.2 19.2 16.4 21.6 18.0 10.8
Q3 3.7 ... 2.5 ... ... 3.4 ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2018 0.8 1.2 1.0 4.8 3.4 0.6 1.8 –5.0 0.9 2.0
2019 –1.3 4.8 –4.3 6.9 1.6 0.5 –0.7 2.8 –1.1 0.8
2020 –8.6 –3.8 –10.2 –6.0 –3.1 –11.0 –2.1 4.3 –11.4 –1.8
2020 Q2 –20.1 –11.7 –21.6 –13.3 –5.4 –23.7 –8.2 –1.6 –25.6 –5.1
Q3 –6.8 –3.5 –10.0 –2.2 –4.8 –7.9 –2.0 –2.2 –5.2 –1.8
Q4 –1.6 0.6 –2.9 –0.1 –1.9 –4.4 3.1 12.9 –2.5 2.3
2021 Q1 3.6 8.4 –1.2 –0.4 0.2 2.5 4.7 21.5 9.9 3.6
Q2 22.4 29.8 19.2 14.4 4.6 22.3 15.6 22.5 32.0 12.6
Q3 e 6.0 21.4 p 2.7 7.5 4.9 3.2 9.5 p 29.6 4.4 6.3
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2019 82.3 81.2 84.5 72.8 81.1 84.5 71.5 77.3 77.4 76.3
2020 74.4 75.5 77.0 67.4 76.8 73.5 70.8 68.5 53.1 71.8
2021 81.3 79.9 84.8 77.9 81.2 80.8 75.6 78.0 76.2 75.0
2020 Q3 72.1 73.4 74.4 66.0 76.0 72.9 70.3 69.6 64.5 70.8
Q4 76.3 75.9 79.1 69.6 75.4 76.0 73.2 72.0 71.4 72.7
2021 Q1 77.5 77.4 80.4 71.6 78.1 77.1 72.5 74.5 72.8 73.1
Q2 82.5 80.2 86.7 76.5 81.0 82.8 74.7 77.2 75.7 75.0
Q3 83.0 81.3 87.0 78.8 82.5 82.0 77.8 79.7 78.8 75.4
Q4 82.1 80.7 85.1 84.6 83.0 81.2 77.3 80.4 77.3 76.6
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2018 8.2 6.0 3.4 5.4 7.4 8.7 19.3 5.8 10.6 7.5
2019 7.5 5.4 3.2 4.5 6.7 8.2 17.3 5.0 10.0 6.3
2020 7.8 5.6 3.8 6.8 7.8 7.8 16.3 5.6 9.2 8.1
2021 May 8.0 6.3 p 3.6 6.6 8.2 8.3 15.8 6.9 p 9.9 7.8
June 7.8 6.2 p 3.5 6.5 7.7 8.0 14.8 6.3 p 9.3 7.8
July 7.6 6.2 p 3.5 6.4 7.8 8.0 14.1 5.7 p 9.2 7.5
Aug. 7.5 6.4 p 3.4 6.0 7.2 8.0 13.8 5.4 p 9.3 7.1
Sep. 7.4 6.3 p 3.4 5.9 7.7 7.7 13.3 5.2 p 9.2 6.8
Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5.2 ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2018 1.8 2.3 1.9 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.8 0.7 1.2 2.6
2019 1.2 1.2 1.4 2.3 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.9 0.6 2.7
2020 0.3 0.4 5 0.4 –0.6 0.4 0.5 –1.3 –0.5 –0.1 0.1
2021 May 2.0 2.5 2.4 3.2 2.3 1.8 –1.2 1.9 1.2 2.6
June 1.9 2.6 2.1 3.7 1.9 1.9 0.6 1.6 1.3 2.7
July 2.2 1.4 5 3.1 4.9 1.8 1.5 0.7 2.2 1.0 2.8
Aug. 3.0 4.7 5 3.4 5.0 1.8 2.4 1.2 3.0 2.5 3.6
Sep. 3.4 3.8 5 4.1 6.4 2.1 2.7 1.9 3.8 2.9 4.7
Oct. 4.1 5.4 5 4.6 6.8 2.8 3.2 2.8 5.1 3.2 6.0
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
2018 –0.4 –0.8 1.9 –0.6 –0.9 –2.3 0.9 0.1 –2.2 –0.8
2019 –0.6 –1.9 1.5 0.1 –0.9 –3.1 1.1 0.5 –1.5 –0.6
2020 –7.2 –9.1 –4.3 –5.6 –5.5 –9.1 –10.1 –4.9 –9.6 –4.5
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
2018 85.5 99.9 61.3 8.2 59.8 97.8 186.4 63.1 134.4 37.1
2019 83.6 97.7 58.9 8.6 59.5 97.5 180.7 57.2 134.3 36.7
2020 97.3 112.8 68.7 19.0 69.5 115.0 206.3 58.4 155.6 43.2
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
4.0 2.0 6.1 2.4 2.5 2.9 3.8 4.4 2.3 5.7 2018
4.6 3.3 5.7 2.0 1.5 2.7 2.6 3.3 2.1 5.3 2019
–0.1 –1.8 –8.3 –3.8 –6.7 –8.4 –4.4 –4.2 –10.8 –5.2 2020
–4.5 –7.7 –15.0 –9.2 –13.5 –18.1 –10.6 –11.0 –21.5 –12.3 2020 Q2
0.9 –0.2 –11.0 –2.6 –4.4 –6.6 –2.0 –1.4 –8.6 –4.8 Q3
0.3 0.8 –8.0 –2.9 –5.7 –6.4 –1.8 –3.1 –8.8 –4.0 Q4
1.6 5.2 –1.3 –2.4 –5.1 –5.7 0.2 1.7 –4.6 –2.3 2021 Q1
8.3 11.8 13.4 10.4 12.8 16.5 9.6 16.3 17.6 13.1 Q2
4.8 ... ... 5.0 ... ... 1.3 ... 2.6 ... Q3
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
5.2 –1.1 1.5 0.6 4.9 0.1 4.4 5.4 0.4 6.9 2018
3.4 –3.1 1.1 –0.9 –0.0 –2.2 0.5 2.8 0.5 4.0 2019
–2.4 –10.7 –0.2 –3.9 –6.3 –7.3 –9.1 –6.3 –9.8 –7.2 2020
–7.5 –22.3 –7.3 –8.2 –16.8 –24.5 –28.1 –17.4 –24.6 –19.9 2020 Q2
–0.3 –7.8 –2.9 –4.7 –3.3 –1.4 –1.5 –3.6 –5.2 –4.8 Q3
0.6 –2.0 –0.9 –1.9 0.6 –2.0 1.8 –1.0 –2.0 –1.7 Q4
12.4 4.6 –8.4 –0.6 4.2 –0.6 6.6 3.9 2.7 1.0 2021 Q1
23.7 23.0 14.2 10.1 24.7 24.3 35.9 25.4 27.2 21.0 Q2
16.6 p 2.8 p 0.3 p 7.2 p 9.2 –3.9 0.8 p 8.2 p 2.2 ... Q3
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
77.3 79.8 77.3 84.2 86.6 78.7 87.7 84.4 80.3 63.8 2019
72.9 72.2 70.4 78.2 79.2 75.5 79.3 78.2 74.3 51.7 2020
76.5 81.9 76.8 82.1 86.9 79.8 82.1 84.5 77.6 50.6 2021
71.9 76.3 68.0 76.3 77.2 71.9 78.3 76.1 71.5 49.2 2020 Q3
73.4 75.3 73.5 78.0 80.8 77.8 79.7 81.6 74.8 46.7 Q4
72.4 75.6 73.7 79.2 82.2 78.4 81.4 80.9 75.7 48.6 2021 Q1
77.0 88.2 81.1 82.2 87.1 80.7 83.2 85.8 78.1 49.5 Q2
78.0 82.1 78.3 83.6 89.7 79.1 82.7 86.6 77.6 49.4 Q3
78.4 81.8 74.1 83.3 88.5 81.0 80.9 84.6 78.9 54.9 Q4
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
6.2 5.6 3.7 3.9 4.9 7.1 6.6 5.1 15.3 8.4 2018
6.3 5.6 3.6 3.4 4.5 6.5 5.8 4.5 14.1 7.1 2019
8.6 6.8 4.4 3.9 5.4 6.9 6.7 5.0 15.5 7.6 2020
7.7 6.0 3.4 3.3 p 6.7 7.0 7.0 4.5 15.4 10.4 2021 May
7.8 5.8 3.4 3.2 p 6.2 6.8 6.8 4.2 15.3 8.1 June
7.5 5.6 3.3 3.1 p 6.1 6.6 6.7 4.0 15.0 5.1 July
7.2 5.5 3.3 3.2 p 5.9 6.3 6.5 3.9 14.8 4.4 Aug.
6.7 5.4 3.2 3.1 p 5.2 6.4 6.3 3.9 14.6 3.6 Sep.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Oct.
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2.5 2.0 1.7 1.6 2.1 1.2 2.5 1.9 1.7 0.8 2018
2.2 1.6 1.5 2.7 1.5 0.3 2.8 1.7 0.8 0.5 2019
1.1 0.0 0.8 1.1 1.4 –0.1 2.0 –0.3 –0.3 –1.1 2020
3.5 4.0 0.2 2.0 3.0 0.5 2.0 2.2 2.4 1.5 2021 May
3.5 3.4 0.2 1.7 2.8 –0.6 2.5 1.7 2.5 2.2 June
4.3 3.3 0.3 1.4 2.8 1.1 2.9 2.0 2.9 2.7 July
5.0 3.5 0.4 2.7 3.2 1.3 3.3 2.1 3.3 3.3 Aug.
6.4 4.0 0.7 3.0 3.3 1.3 4.0 2.7 4.0 3.6 Sep.
8.2 5.3 1.4 3.7 3.7 1.8 4.4 3.5 5.4 4.4 Oct.
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
0.5 3.0 1.9 1.4 0.2 –0.3 –1.0 0.7 –2.5 –3.5 2018
0.5 2.3 0.5 1.7 0.6 0.1 –1.3 0.4 –2.9 1.3 2019
–7.2 –3.5 –9.7 –4.2 –8.3 –5.8 –5.5 –7.7 –11.0 –5.7 2020
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
33.7 20.8 43.6 52.4 74.0 121.5 49.6 70.3 97.5 98.4 2018
35.9 22.3 40.7 48.5 70.6 116.6 48.1 65.6 95.5 91.1 2019
46.6 24.8 53.4 54.3 83.2 135.2 59.7 79.8 120.0 115.3 2020
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of valueadded tax between July and December 2020.  6 According to Maastricht Treaty
definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2020 Feb. 60.7 50.0 20.1 10.7 22.1 42.1 93.3 51.2 –2.6 –3.0 –0.7 –3.3 4.4
Mar. 322.7 180.6 –21.1 142.1 127.8 – 4.9 101.6 106.5 –32.2 1.3 –1.0 –42.9 10.5
Apr. 293.3 101.3 54.4 192.0 180.9 –100.0 14.6 114.6 –34.2 –9.4 –1.1 –4.1 –19.7
May 293.8 121.4 32.2 172.4 177.1 8.8 –42.3 –51.2 21.3 5.5 –0.8 –0.8 17.4
June 137.5 –14.7 16.3 152.2 160.5 68.1 –146.0 –214.1 –0.7 –6.2 –1.2 –8.4 15.1
July 155.6 72.5 25.4 83.1 82.5 –35.2 89.5 124.7 0.3 1.5 –0.1 –7.1 6.1
Aug. 84.4 25.7 17.3 58.7 66.7 1.4 –18.2 –19.6 13.2 9.6 –0.4 –11.5 15.5
Sep. 83.8 –3.1 –3.2 86.9 86.1 47.0 –25.7 –72.6 10.6 –11.0 –0.2 19.4 2.5
Oct. 69.7 30.4 –5.3 39.3 33.3 –22.8 91.2 114.1 –17.0 –4.3 –0.4 –29.4 17.2
Nov. 117.6 73.0 29.3 44.6 45.3 –31.6 90.9 122.5 4.7 13.2 –0.5 –10.7 2.7
Dec. – 3.7 –1.2 29.9 –2.6 6.2 –47.8 –195.1 –147.3 10.3 –5.5 –0.5 –13.1 29.5
2021 Jan. 133.9 30.8 4.9 103.2 94.1 20.9 159.5 138.7 –37.5 –9.2 0.1 –17.3 –11.1
Feb. 99.9 33.9 9.1 66.0 72.7 –14.6 28.8 43.3 –1.4 –5.7 –0.5 –2.5 7.3
Mar. 175.9 100.6 8.5 75.3 74.0 – 6.5 –7.0 –0.5 12.0 –9.0 –0.3 1.1 20.3
Apr. 55.9 13.3 8.6 42.6 29.0 –10.9 104.9 115.8 –36.6 –23.9 –0.1 –7.2 –5.4
May 124.8 48.3 15.2 76.5 77.4 3.7 25.2 21.5 –23.4 –1.2 –0.2 –15.0 –6.9
June 94.4 37.4 0.9 57.1 58.0 8.6 –75.2 –83.8 26.6 –6.1 –0.4 –4.4 37.6
July 114.0 56.6 8.2 57.4 51.3 – 7.5 75.7 83.1 3.6 –4.9 –0.6 9.1 –0.1
Aug. 34.3 –17.4 –7.8 51.7 60.9 – 4.6 140.5 145.1 –7.5 –7.5 –0.4 –7.1 7.5
Sep. 106.6 73.4 4.9 33.2 42.0 –50.8 –56.4 –5.6 13.5 –4.6 –0.4 8.2 10.4
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2020 Feb. 24.5 25.4 4.3 –0.9 1.2 – 4.3 14.1 18.4 –4.6 –1.2 –0.6 4.8 –7.6
Mar. 47.3 31.4 –6.1 15.9 14.3 –34.3 18.5 52.8 –8.3 –3.7 –0.7 –8.2 4.3
Apr. 33.0 16.0 1.3 16.9 14.8 –28.8 8.9 37.6 –23.8 –5.1 –0.8 –2.1 –15.8
May 58.3 27.1 10.0 31.2 32.7 11.7 –22.1 –33.8 2.3 –1.5 –0.4 –1.2 5.4
June 26.4 2.6 3.5 23.7 25.9 –45.6 –20.9 24.7 –7.9 –7.1 –1.0 –7.9 8.1
July 25.9 13.8 0.3 12.2 10.3 9.4 –9.7 –19.1 –3.0 –6.9 –0.6 1.2 3.3
Aug. 9.3 7.5 1.9 1.8 7.9 5.6 –8.1 –13.7 –5.2 –2.2 –0.4 –4.4 1.8
Sep. 22.6 4.6 1.3 18.1 15.8 –34.8 22.9 57.8 10.4 –3.4 –0.4 5.1 9.1
Oct. 48.7 22.1 6.6 26.7 23.9 30.1 –16.6 –46.8 –2.0 –0.5 –0.4 –4.5 3.4
Nov. 44.0 19.6 4.5 24.5 26.0 –15.1 7.4 22.5 0.6 –1.5 –0.4 0.2 2.3
Dec. – 0.9 7.5 3.6 –8.4 –4.6 –107.2 –35.1 72.1 –7.5 –1.3 –0.3 –7.1 1.2
2021 Jan. 30.1 12.1 3.1 18.1 18.1 41.7 79.7 38.0 –11.4 –2.9 –0.6 –1.6 –6.4
Feb. 29.8 18.8 4.6 11.1 13.4 26.3 7.0 –19.3 0.8 –1.8 –0.3 4.3 –1.4
Mar. 54.1 35.8 1.8 18.3 19.5 –61.9 1.9 63.9 3.5 –3.5 –0.3 7.1 0.2
Apr. 11.4 0.5 2.4 10.8 7.0 67.3 25.3 –42.0 9.3 –2.4 –0.3 6.4 5.6
May 33.4 16.8 3.2 16.6 18.9 –35.0 –10.9 24.1 –10.3 –2.8 –0.1 –7.3 0.0
June 30.0 8.7 2.4 21.4 22.3 –36.1 –5.3 30.8 3.2 –3.4 –0.2 –7.3 14.1
July 42.9 22.4 2.2 20.4 18.4 42.8 –14.6 –57.4 5.1 –1.8 –0.3 4.3 2.8
Aug. 28.5 16.6 1.6 11.9 15.7 –18.0 18.2 36.2 2.0 –0.5 –0.2 0.9 1.9
Sep. 33.1 16.7 5.4 16.4 16.4 –94.8 –2.1 92.7 4.5 –2.5 –0.2 2.4 4.8
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
43.7 –34.1 0.0 95.8 82.6 84.1 5.2 79.0 –1.2 – 0.3 19.7 –4.7 4.9 2020 Feb.
4.7 –4.6 0.0 349.7 321.2 300.5 23.8 276.8 16.2 4.5 30.0 –18.4 22.8 Mar.
72.1 –17.1 0.0 172.5 174.9 175.2 20.4 154.8 –15.0 14.7 – 4.6 23.1 –16.9 Apr.
100.9 –37.1 0.0 217.5 226.3 189.5 20.1 169.5 16.8 19.9 9.6 –0.4 – 9.1 May
123.4 1.0 0.0 81.9 79.0 88.5 13.1 75.4 –20.5 10.9 –42.7 14.4 – 6.1 June
– 4.8 –59.3 0.0 184.1 149.5 123.6 14.3 109.3 20.1 5.8 18.1 29.9 –10.2 July
40.7 13.9 0.0 18.1 35.3 44.8 5.9 38.9 –18.6 9.1 – 4.8 –0.1 – 4.3 Aug.
20.2 11.5 0.0 88.5 82.3 63.7 3.5 60.1 16.7 1.9 –29.5 8.2 – 3.0 Sep.
–17.2 –31.2 0.0 112.1 85.9 101.4 7.8 93.7 –17.9 2.5 5.3 14.3 15.5 Oct.
–98.4 51.3 0.0 128.4 125.2 151.7 11.8 139.9 –34.5 8.1 – 0.7 0.7 2.5 Nov.
–128.4 –69.8 0.0 136.4 128.3 117.1 20.8 96.2 10.6 0.6 –24.7 20.1 – 5.4 Dec.
78.3 60.8 0.0 53.2 32.3 44.5 2.6 41.9 –30.6 18.4 30.0 3.5 4.7 2021 Jan.
30.4 3.3 0.0 53.0 65.4 71.8 7.3 64.5 –18.0 11.6 2.8 –30.4 13.2 Feb.
19.6 55.0 0.0 82.8 101.6 82.6 10.5 72.2 7.3 11.7 –18.6 –4.8 –13.6 Mar.
–32.3 19.3 0.0 94.5 68.9 88.7 8.5 80.2 –27.9 8.1 15.3 9.1 6.8 Apr.
– 8.5 49.3 0.0 111.0 115.8 116.9 13.2 103.7 –11.7 10.7 – 4.1 –8.9 8.8 May
16.8 –13.9 0.0 73.5 88.1 119.7 10.5 109.2 –33.9 2.3 –10.8 –9.1 – 4.4 June
0.4 –45.9 0.0 148.5 113.5 103.1 14.6 88.4 10.7 – 0.3 17.4 21.9 5.4 July
26.6 –18.0 0.0 28.6 33.3 32.1 1.7 30.4 –2.4 3.6 –12.4 5.6 – 6.0 Aug.
6.2 6.8 0.0 29.3 53.0 67.7 5.4 62.4 –15.1 0.4 12.6 –25.9 3.2 Sep.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
24.4 – 14.0 4.9 0.1 14.5 17.7 1.2 – 1.7 – 0.6 0.1 – 2.2 2020 Feb.
7.5 – 71.9 12.2 0.9 85.7 93.3 – 0.4 – 3.4 – 0.3 0.4 – 3.8 Mar.
17.9 8.6 3.2 4.3 1.5 9.9 – 8.1 0.1 1.7 – 0.1 – 1.9 Apr.
28.6 – 9.3 0.3 5.3 48.4 43.4 6.2 0.3 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 0.4 May
57.8 – 69.3 – 0.4 4.7 0.1 9.9 – 7.7 – 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.2 – 0.3 June
14.2 – 11.1 2.4 3.9 35.2 27.4 8.6 – 1.1 1.3 – 0.2 – 0.8 July
21.0 – 14.2 3.8 0.9 13.3 18.6 – 4.9 0.2 – 0.4 0.3 – 0.3 Aug.
15.3 – 58.3 2.7 0.6 20.4 26.2 – 5.2 – 0.1 – 0.4 0.2 – 0.2 Sep.
– 20.0 70.5 2.4 1.7 30.3 30.6 – 0.1 – 0.0 0.2 0.6 – 1.0 Oct.
– 12.7 3.6 1.3 3.0 37.4 49.3 – 14.3 0.3 3.3 – 0.3 – 0.9 Nov.
– 22.9 – 73.4 2.4 5.6 – 4.3 – 5.8 – 1.7 1.3 3.1 0.1 – 1.3 Dec.
– 40.3 95.7 1.1 0.9 27.8 45.9 – 14.8 1.6 – 3.8 – 0.0 – 1.1 2021 Jan.
15.4 29.1 2.3 1.5 10.8 20.3 – 8.5 1.2 – 2.4 – 0.0 0.3 Feb.
– 2.3 – 38.0 2.5 2.7 29.1 24.3 – 0.6 0.1 5.0 0.5 – 0.1 Mar.
– 7.4 71.2 0.7 2.6 5.5 13.9 – 5.2 0.7 – 3.4 – 0.1 – 0.4 Apr.
18.8 – 44.9 3.0 2.9 34.8 27.8 2.8 0.6 1.7 – 0.1 2.0 May
6.0 – 14.0 3.1 2.3 – 1.2 7.1 – 8.0 – 0.4 – 0.2 0.1 0.3 June
– 12.0 75.2 4.2 3.7 17.4 21.2 – 4.1 – 0.3 0.6 – 0.1 0.1 July
0.7 – 13.2 2.9 0.2 21.0 20.4 – 1.6 – 0.3 0.1 0.0 2.3 Aug.
7.1 – 79.2 4.6 0.8 5.9 7.1 – 1.9 – 0.6 1.5 – 0.0 – 0.1 Sep.
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2019 Aug. 29,374.0 18,658.9 13,961.4 11,612.7 1,549.4 799.3 4,697.5 1,003.1 3,694.4 6,311.5 4,403.6
Sep. 29,193.7 18,651.6 13,971.2 11,595.9 1,566.6 808.7 4,680.4 996.7 3,683.7 6,300.3 4,241.8
Oct. 28,965.9 18,689.2 14,042.6 11,660.4 1,550.6 831.6 4,646.7 1,002.4 3,644.3 6,259.5 4,017.2
Nov. 29,017.5 18,729.4 14,099.5 11,684.5 1,569.3 845.7 4,629.9 998.5 3,631.4 6,270.8 4,017.3
Dec. 28,326.0 18,591.5 14,008.6 11,617.0 1,543.9 847.8 4,582.9 981.0 3,601.9 5,930.7 3,803.7
2020 Jan. 29,019.0 18,722.5 14,062.6 11,668.8 1,542.8 851.0 4,659.9 1,003.4 3,656.5 6,302.2 3,994.3
Feb. 29,486.8 18,766.9 14,101.4 11,697.3 1,562.7 841.4 4,665.5 992.3 3,673.3 6,414.9 4,305.1
Mar. 30,021.0 19,013.2 14,239.0 11,884.9 1,556.9 797.2 4,774.1 1,006.7 3,767.4 6,486.8 4,521.1
Apr. 30,449.7 19,308.0 14,348.5 11,933.4 1,612.6 802.5 4,959.5 1,018.1 3,941.4 6,585.0 4,556.7
May 30,500.6 19,609.7 14,468.3 12,020.6 1,644.9 802.8 5,141.4 1,013.8 4,127.7 6,465.5 4,425.4
June 30,406.6 19,761.1 14,451.1 11,982.0 1,653.0 816.1 5,310.0 1,005.3 4,304.7 6,298.0 4,347.5
July 30,599.0 19,912.0 14,334.0 12,013.7 1,505.9 814.4 5,578.0 1,006.0 4,572.1 6,291.5 4,395.5
Aug. 30,435.3 19,984.9 14,355.0 12,019.1 1,524.9 811.0 5,629.9 997.8 4,632.1 6,242.1 4,208.3
Sep. 30,523.7 20,084.3 14,349.1 12,019.2 1,520.0 809.9 5,735.2 998.7 4,736.5 6,239.3 4,200.1
Oct. 30,691.3 20,161.6 14,375.7 12,054.8 1,519.6 801.3 5,785.9 1,004.2 4,781.7 6,342.4 4,187.3
Nov. 30,752.9 20,291.3 14,456.9 12,090.4 1,541.5 825.0 5,834.4 1,003.4 4,831.0 6,334.9 4,126.7
Dec. 30,441.6 20,265.3 14,437.5 12,042.9 1,531.4 863.2 5,827.8 990.2 4,837.6 6,112.1 4,064.1
2021 Jan. 30,644.4 20,387.7 14,466.0 12,067.8 1,535.6 862.6 5,921.6 999.4 4,922.2 6,300.2 3,956.5
Feb. 30,546.9 20,463.5 14,500.4 12,090.1 1,541.1 869.2 5,963.1 992.4 4,970.7 6,301.0 3,782.4
Mar. 30,827.3 20,653.5 14,576.6 12,185.2 1,512.4 879.0 6,076.9 993.3 5,083.6 6,360.7 3,813.1
Apr. 30,753.7 20,667.0 14,566.4 12,169.2 1,509.5 887.7 6,100.6 1,007.2 5,093.4 6,396.7 3,690.0
May 30,891.8 20,787.9 14,612.5 12,198.6 1,521.4 892.6 6,175.4 1,006.2 5,169.2 6,435.2 3,668.6
June 30,991.6 20,890.3 14,652.8 12,234.6 1,529.9 888.2 6,237.6 1,005.2 5,232.4 6,400.4 3,700.8
July 31,310.5 21,028.6 14,707.9 12,277.6 1,543.5 886.8 6,320.7 1,011.3 5,309.4 6,502.2 3,779.8
Aug. 31,430.9 21,047.1 14,683.7 12,260.1 1,533.4 890.3 6,363.4 1,002.3 5,361.1 6,651.1 3,732.7
Sep. 31,465.8 21,133.9 14,756.8 12,329.4 1,536.1 891.2 6,377.2 993.6 5,383.6 6,619.0 3,712.8
German contribution (€ billion)
2019 Aug. 6,973.5 4,478.6 3,501.8 3,044.3 196.5 261.0 976.8 293.5 683.3 1,330.9 1,163.9
Sep. 6,872.6 4,462.9 3,497.0 3,040.4 196.0 260.5 965.9 288.3 677.6 1,311.9 1,097.8
Oct. 6,769.9 4,466.0 3,506.4 3,049.0 195.9 261.4 959.5 291.6 667.9 1,303.7 1,000.3
Nov. 6,785.4 4,490.1 3,527.4 3,064.8 199.7 262.9 962.6 292.6 670.0 1,289.6 1,005.8
Dec. 6,716.1 4,480.4 3,527.3 3,064.0 197.9 265.4 953.1 288.5 664.6 1,236.4 999.3
2020 Jan. 6,847.7 4,503.3 3,537.5 3,071.5 198.2 267.8 965.8 292.8 673.0 1,290.1 1,054.4
Feb. 7,028.5 4,531.0 3,562.2 3,092.6 203.2 266.4 968.8 290.8 678.0 1,306.1 1,191.4
Mar. 7,148.1 4,567.1 3,589.0 3,128.9 202.1 258.0 978.1 292.4 685.7 1,321.3 1,259.6
Apr. 7,258.0 4,605.2 3,606.5 3,143.8 206.5 256.1 998.7 294.8 703.9 1,346.6 1,306.2
May 7,230.4 4,666.4 3,640.1 3,167.2 215.9 257.1 1,026.2 293.8 732.5 1,326.0 1,238.1
June 7,225.3 4,692.6 3,641.6 3,164.7 220.4 256.6 1,051.0 291.5 759.6 1,304.2 1,228.5
July 7,267.6 4,718.8 3,634.9 3,175.5 202.7 256.7 1,083.9 293.4 790.5 1,282.9 1,265.8
Aug. 7,167.3 4,723.0 3,642.2 3,180.7 202.9 258.6 1,080.8 287.4 793.3 1,268.8 1,175.5
Sep. 7,236.4 4,749.2 3,647.1 3,184.0 204.9 258.1 1,102.1 289.7 812.4 1,293.8 1,193.4
Oct. 7,257.1 4,801.4 3,670.3 3,200.4 210.7 259.3 1,131.1 292.0 839.1 1,278.8 1,176.8
Nov. 7,240.5 4,841.7 3,688.6 3,213.7 214.3 260.6 1,153.1 290.2 862.9 1,261.9 1,136.9
Dec. 7,172.5 4,839.4 3,695.5 3,216.4 214.7 264.5 1,143.9 286.4 857.4 1,224.1 1,109.1
2021 Jan. 7,220.7 4,865.5 3,705.9 3,224.4 216.4 265.1 1,159.6 286.5 873.1 1,307.6 1,047.6
Feb. 7,182.0 4,885.0 3,724.3 3,238.8 217.4 268.1 1,160.7 283.8 877.0 1,305.0 991.9
Mar. 7,233.5 4,939.8 3,761.1 3,273.4 217.3 270.4 1,178.7 282.6 896.1 1,315.4 978.3
Apr. 7,228.4 4,946.1 3,760.5 3,270.3 217.6 272.6 1,185.6 285.7 899.9 1,333.6 948.6
May 7,228.0 4,977.5 3,777.2 3,283.3 219.5 274.4 1,200.3 283.4 916.9 1,329.8 920.7
June 7,277.1 5,009.8 3,786.4 3,290.4 220.8 275.2 1,223.4 282.3 941.1 1,325.1 942.1
July 7,362.7 5,062.4 3,808.5 3,310.2 221.9 276.4 1,253.9 284.4 969.5 1,317.4 982.9
Aug. 7,395.2 5,087.3 3,824.6 3,325.1 221.4 278.1 1,262.8 280.8 982.0 1,336.0 971.9
Sep. 7,402.4 5,111.3 3,841.2 3,336.9 224.7 279.7 1,270.1 280.7 989.4 1,336.7 954.3
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,202.0 13,283.3 12,388.8 12,438.4 7,226.4 782.5 201.0 1,860.5 2,314.5 53.4 2019 Aug.
1,205.4 13,298.4 12,383.2 12,446.2 7,221.7 769.3 200.8 1,886.9 2,314.4 53.0 Sep.
1,208.2 13,292.6 12,422.6 12,487.1 7,283.5 758.7 201.3 1,883.2 2,311.1 49.4 Oct.
1,215.1 13,389.0 12,520.8 12,572.5 7,386.6 740.9 200.6 1,885.5 2,310.4 48.6 Nov.
1,231.5 13,311.4 12,508.3 12,583.4 7,391.7 738.4 200.1 1,892.8 2,314.1 46.2 Dec.
1,224.1 13,359.6 12,460.6 12,555.5 7,362.8 734.5 200.1 1,891.0 2,322.3 44.7 2020 Jan.
1,229.3 13,477.0 12,528.5 12,615.6 7,430.6 731.6 198.6 1,888.7 2,322.0 44.1 Feb.
1,253.1 13,775.3 12,782.4 12,903.7 7,698.1 759.4 192.1 1,883.4 2,327.6 43.1 Mar.
1,273.5 13,996.0 12,953.0 13,065.1 7,852.4 762.3 188.2 1,876.7 2,343.4 42.1 Apr.
1,293.5 14,302.8 13,164.0 13,264.9 8,009.7 779.7 188.4 1,881.9 2,363.7 41.4 May
1,306.6 14,478.4 13,208.9 13,310.8 8,066.5 763.6 186.8 1,877.8 2,375.5 40.6 June
1,320.9 14,593.1 13,276.6 13,363.7 8,090.1 783.2 186.3 1,882.5 2,381.1 40.4 July
1,326.8 14,668.3 13,304.3 13,391.2 8,117.1 767.8 184.4 1,892.0 2,390.0 40.0 Aug.
1,330.3 14,758.7 13,361.0 13,467.6 8,175.8 781.0 195.4 1,883.6 2,392.0 39.8 Sep.
1,338.1 14,815.0 13,431.7 13,545.6 8,266.7 782.6 181.9 1,880.4 2,394.6 39.4 Oct.
1,349.9 14,813.3 13,527.2 13,621.6 8,358.3 756.5 179.6 1,885.7 2,402.5 39.0 Nov.
1,370.7 14,772.9 13,620.6 13,728.8 8,459.6 772.0 176.9 1,877.6 2,404.2 38.5 Dec.
1,373.3 14,873.9 13,631.3 13,752.9 8,505.4 743.9 173.8 1,870.6 2,421.0 38.1 2021 Jan.
1,380.6 14,957.9 13,678.6 13,807.9 8,569.5 733.7 169.3 1,865.1 2,432.5 37.7 Feb.
1,391.1 15,076.4 13,757.0 13,913.8 8,654.9 753.5 164.3 1,858.8 2,444.8 37.4 Mar.
1,399.6 15,060.8 13,775.2 13,935.9 8,726.8 731.8 159.5 1,827.5 2,453.0 37.3 Apr.
1,412.8 15,147.4 13,870.8 14,018.1 8,811.1 724.4 155.6 1,826.2 2,463.6 37.1 May
1,423.2 15,241.8 13,943.4 14,091.4 8,917.7 698.2 150.5 1,822.0 2,466.2 36.8 June
1,437.6 15,335.3 14,017.2 14,185.6 9,006.6 706.0 153.7 1,816.9 2,466.2 36.3 July
1,439.2 15,386.1 14,039.0 14,196.5 9,029.7 707.5 151.4 1,809.7 2,462.4 35.9 Aug.
1,444.6 15,441.7 14,075.0 14,238.0 9,089.9 702.7 140.6 1,806.4 2,462.9 35.6 Sep.
German contribution (€ billion)
276.6 3,849.7 3,730.3 3,550.9 2,213.2 149.7 31.7 576.9 541.5 37.8 2019 Aug.
277.4 3,853.5 3,722.1 3,546.0 2,213.9 146.4 31.5 576.1 540.8 37.2 Sep.
277.6 3,848.5 3,734.8 3,571.5 2,240.3 148.6 31.2 575.2 539.9 36.4 Oct.
278.4 3,874.7 3,753.7 3,580.0 2,257.7 143.0 30.8 573.7 539.2 35.6 Nov.
281.8 3,863.9 3,744.4 3,574.3 2,250.5 144.8 31.0 573.5 540.0 34.5 Dec.
281.2 3,850.4 3,733.8 3,572.3 2,255.2 145.3 31.0 570.6 537.2 33.0 2020 Jan.
281.3 3,890.4 3,750.4 3,576.3 2,265.3 142.0 31.3 569.8 535.4 32.5 Feb.
282.2 3,982.8 3,830.4 3,655.2 2,346.4 147.3 30.5 567.2 532.0 31.8 Mar.
286.5 3,997.3 3,828.9 3,665.7 2,359.6 149.2 30.0 563.6 532.2 31.1 Apr.
291.8 4,080.7 3,885.8 3,710.9 2,396.9 158.3 29.0 563.6 532.5 30.7 May
296.5 4,132.2 3,873.6 3,711.6 2,408.7 152.1 29.6 559.0 532.6 29.7 June
300.4 4,170.7 3,880.3 3,716.8 2,409.9 163.5 30.0 552.8 531.5 29.2 July
301.3 4,202.4 3,889.9 3,720.2 2,419.2 159.3 30.1 551.3 531.6 28.8 Aug.
301.9 4,235.6 3,905.7 3,745.0 2,445.3 160.3 30.3 549.2 531.5 28.4 Sep.
303.6 4,245.3 3,935.3 3,781.4 2,476.4 165.4 30.5 549.7 531.5 28.0 Oct.
306.6 4,260.2 3,961.8 3,804.4 2,507.7 157.7 30.6 549.0 531.8 27.6 Nov.
312.2 4,228.5 3,954.1 3,801.5 2,500.9 160.3 31.0 548.8 533.1 27.3 Dec.
313.1 4,218.7 3,980.7 3,829.7 2,541.7 147.0 31.0 548.5 534.8 26.8 2021 Jan.
314.6 4,245.1 3,990.0 3,837.4 2,555.8 141.0 31.1 547.0 536.0 26.4 Feb.
317.3 4,264.3 4,011.8 3,863.4 2,579.8 145.1 31.7 544.6 536.1 26.1 Mar.
319.9 4,262.2 4,013.0 3,874.5 2,594.4 143.0 31.9 542.5 536.8 25.8 Apr.
322.8 4,308.8 4,040.3 3,895.1 2,613.5 146.0 32.2 540.4 537.4 25.7 May
325.1 4,311.0 4,035.3 3,890.5 2,619.4 139.3 31.9 537.5 537.0 25.5 June
328.8 4,313.9 4,047.3 3,911.3 2,645.8 136.0 31.4 536.0 536.7 25.2 July
329.0 4,333.1 4,065.2 3,923.1 2,659.1 135.6 31.3 535.7 536.4 25.0 Aug.
329.8 4,343.7 4,067.1 3,921.6 2,664.0 131.9 31.3 533.8 535.8 24.8 Sep.
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2019 Aug. 397.4 447.4 228.3 97.2 34.1 58.3 25.3 4.3 289.0 288.5 550.9 2,173.6 1,484.1
Sep. 402.9 449.3 231.4 98.0 31.7 58.9 25.0 4.2 257.0 256.5 537.1 2,181.1 1,484.7
Oct. 365.0 440.5 224.5 95.5 32.3 59.1 25.2 3.9 298.8 298.3 538.6 2,174.6 1,488.4
Nov. 363.9 452.6 235.7 95.5 33.8 59.1 24.8 3.8 284.3 283.7 541.6 2,187.8 1,493.0
Dec. 297.5 430.4 224.7 85.9 33.7 59.1 23.6 3.6 250.3 249.8 520.3 2,153.8 1,486.7
2020 Jan. 381.8 422.3 209.6 92.7 33.2 59.5 23.2 4.1 243.4 242.9 555.1 2,187.7 1,500.2
Feb. 425.5 436.0 219.8 96.8 32.8 59.2 23.3 4.0 263.2 262.7 550.5 2,191.4 1,497.8
Mar. 430.2 441.4 232.8 93.3 31.0 58.2 22.3 3.9 293.2 292.6 529.8 2,175.2 1,484.3
Apr. 502.3 428.6 233.9 84.0 29.4 56.4 21.1 3.8 289.0 288.6 552.9 2,159.1 1,472.6
May 603.1 434.8 245.9 81.7 28.4 54.7 20.3 3.8 297.8 297.5 552.4 2,134.1 1,470.7
June 726.5 441.1 259.5 82.4 24.6 51.8 19.3 3.4 254.8 254.6 566.9 2,105.1 1,453.7
July 787.8 441.5 264.3 80.1 23.2 51.0 19.4 3.5 271.8 271.6 596.8 2,055.4 1,434.5
Aug. 828.6 448.5 273.6 79.5 22.1 50.3 19.6 3.5 266.9 266.7 597.4 2,036.8 1,425.3
Sep. 849.0 442.1 274.8 74.4 20.8 49.1 19.5 3.4 237.7 237.5 605.6 2,060.3 1,431.0
Oct. 831.8 437.6 277.4 69.5 20.8 47.0 19.5 3.4 243.1 242.9 619.8 2,047.2 1,418.6
Nov. 733.3 458.4 307.1 64.6 17.8 46.1 19.4 3.3 246.4 246.4 620.5 2,028.4 1,406.4
Dec. 604.8 439.3 294.7 60.3 17.2 44.8 19.0 3.3 221.4 221.3 636.2 1,998.0 1,386.3
2021 Jan. 683.2 437.8 294.4 58.9 17.4 44.1 19.2 3.8 251.7 251.6 639.7 1,991.2 1,369.7
Feb. 713.6 436.4 296.4 54.3 19.0 43.9 19.2 3.7 254.6 254.5 609.2 2,004.6 1,369.6
Mar. 733.1 429.6 295.4 52.1 16.4 43.2 18.9 3.7 236.5 236.5 604.4 2,005.4 1,357.3
Apr. 700.9 424.0 293.9 48.5 16.2 42.9 18.9 3.6 251.1 251.0 613.4 1,991.8 1,350.5
May 692.4 436.9 308.3 47.7 15.9 42.4 19.1 3.5 246.7 246.7 604.0 1,981.7 1,339.4
June 709.3 441.2 314.0 46.6 16.3 42.0 18.8 3.5 236.5 236.5 594.9 1,985.1 1,332.4
July 709.6 440.1 313.9 45.6 16.6 42.0 18.6 3.5 253.9 253.8 616.9 1,998.2 1,333.6
Aug. 736.1 453.4 329.1 43.9 17.0 42.0 18.0 3.4 241.6 241.5 622.5 1,987.5 1,333.8
Sep. 742.5 461.2 335.8 46.2 16.5 41.3 18.1 3.3 257.1 257.1 596.7 2,009.6 1,342.2
German contribution (€ billion)
2019 Aug. 47.6 251.2 84.7 83.8 28.1 50.9 3.2 0.5 16.9 16.7 2.0 557.3 295.0
Sep. 57.3 250.3 84.6 85.0 25.8 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.5 1.3 2.2 563.5 297.7
Oct. 37.4 239.6 76.3 82.4 26.1 51.3 3.1 0.5 1.2 1.0 2.1 555.2 299.2
Nov. 45.4 249.3 83.4 83.9 27.4 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.7 1.5 1.9 560.4 302.2
Dec. 43.4 246.2 89.5 75.4 27.0 51.0 2.9 0.4 3.5 3.4 1.8 551.4 301.6
2020 Jan. 37.8 240.2 77.8 81.4 26.6 51.3 2.7 0.4 2.5 2.4 1.8 560.9 306.5
Feb. 62.2 251.9 85.5 86.0 26.3 50.9 2.8 0.4 2.0 1.8 1.8 563.9 310.3
Mar. 69.7 257.9 97.6 82.5 24.7 49.8 2.8 0.4 1.7 1.6 2.2 553.0 310.7
Apr. 87.5 244.0 94.7 74.4 23.7 48.3 2.7 0.4 3.4 3.3 2.1 550.6 306.2
May 116.2 253.6 108.0 72.9 22.9 46.7 2.8 0.3 2.4 2.3 1.9 543.1 305.4
June 174.0 246.5 106.1 74.1 19.5 44.0 2.5 0.3 0.9 0.7 1.8 532.8 297.2
July 208.5 245.3 109.6 71.4 18.3 43.2 2.5 0.3 2.1 2.0 1.6 523.3 293.3
Aug. 229.5 252.8 118.7 71.3 17.4 42.4 2.6 0.3 1.7 1.5 1.9 517.9 291.1
Sep. 244.7 245.8 119.4 66.0 16.5 41.1 2.5 0.3 1.3 1.1 2.0 525.3 296.1
Oct. 224.8 239.1 119.1 61.7 16.6 39.0 2.5 0.3 1.4 1.3 2.7 519.9 296.2
Nov. 212.1 243.7 131.6 57.3 14.0 38.0 2.5 0.2 9.1 9.1 2.4 515.5 296.1
Dec. 189.2 237.8 131.9 52.8 13.5 36.8 2.5 0.2 12.2 12.2 2.5 503.3 290.1
2021 Jan. 148.9 240.1 136.5 51.6 13.5 35.8 2.4 0.2 8.4 8.4 2.4 503.3 284.6
Feb. 164.3 243.4 142.8 47.3 15.2 35.5 2.5 0.2 6.0 6.0 2.4 510.0 288.4
Mar. 161.9 239.0 144.4 44.9 12.7 34.4 2.4 0.2 11.0 11.0 2.9 523.3 289.8
Apr. 154.6 233.1 142.4 41.5 12.5 34.1 2.4 0.2 7.6 7.6 2.8 524.3 296.2
May 173.3 240.3 150.8 41.0 12.5 33.4 2.4 0.2 9.2 9.2 2.2 518.0 293.2
June 179.3 241.2 152.9 39.9 13.0 32.8 2.4 0.2 9.0 9.0 2.3 515.5 294.6
July 167.3 235.3 148.0 38.9 13.3 32.5 2.4 0.2 9.6 9.6 2.2 518.3 295.1
Aug. 168.1 241.8 155.7 37.3 13.9 32.4 2.4 0.2 9.7 9.7 2.2 522.4 303.1
Sep. 175.3 246.8 159.5 39.8 13.3 31.7 2.3 0.2 11.2 11.2 2.2 529.7 305.5
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2.7 20.7 2,150.1 4,854.7 2,940.4 – 2.9 4,083.0 0.0 8,786.7 12,264.2 12,915.0 7,066.9 152.7 2019 Aug.
3.2 19.0 2,158.9 4,803.5 2,942.7 25.4 3,943.1 0.0 8,788.8 12,251.2 12,883.3 7,104.7 153.4 Sep.
7.5 19.8 2,147.2 4,768.1 2,935.0 34.1 3,716.0 0.0 8,846.0 12,293.2 12,936.5 7,077.7 152.9 Oct.
6.8 19.5 2,161.5 4,770.3 2,922.7 31.1 3,675.5 0.0 8,971.7 12,401.3 13,041.7 7,081.1 157.9 Nov.
– 11.3 19.2 2,145.9 4,452.2 2,912.4 25.0 3,469.1 0.0 8,975.3 12,395.7 12,995.3 7,060.0 152.0 Dec.
– 0.4 21.9 2,166.2 4,759.3 2,949.8 24.3 3,715.6 0.0 8,927.4 12,357.5 13,006.4 7,115.3 154.9 2020 Jan.
3.6 23.4 2,164.4 4,817.2 2,966.7 26.4 3,965.0 0.0 9,012.7 12,441.8 13,104.6 7,127.1 156.9 Feb.
29.9 21.7 2,123.7 4,907.3 2,930.7 11.6 4,144.8 0.0 9,312.6 12,762.0 13,453.0 7,043.0 152.5 Mar.
12.8 21.5 2,124.8 5,048.8 2,947.0 – 25.4 4,209.0 0.0 9,490.6 12,941.2 13,629.7 7,050.8 153.0 Apr.
3.8 22.3 2,108.0 4,946.7 2,952.7 – 33.1 4,053.6 0.0 9,682.0 13,166.2 13,846.0 7,042.6 154.7 May
– 0.7 21.1 2,084.7 4,712.6 2,977.4 – 4.2 4,009.1 0.0 9,768.9 13,242.8 13,925.7 7,035.8 158.0 June
– 11.9 20.2 2,047.1 4,733.9 3,017.5 – 54.6 4,064.3 0.0 9,813.1 13,308.1 14,022.6 7,042.1 159.4 July
– 15.3 19.2 2,032.9 4,700.6 3,014.5 – 38.8 3,862.7 0.0 9,856.0 13,340.6 14,038.5 7,033.2 160.0 Aug.
– 13.9 15.5 2,058.7 4,656.3 3,011.2 – 15.9 3,879.4 0.0 9,923.5 13,428.0 14,133.0 7,045.9 163.9 Sep.
– 1.5 18.2 2,030.5 4,779.0 3,038.2 – 47.9 3,858.8 0.0 10,026.0 13,516.4 14,247.4 7,038.9 165.3 Oct.
– 0.7 19.7 2,009.5 4,857.6 2,995.8 – 44.2 3,885.1 0.0 10,167.5 13,629.7 14,367.4 6,979.5 174.0 Nov.
– 3.6 16.9 1,984.7 4,661.4 3,020.4 – 11.2 3,771.8 0.0 10,278.9 13,750.6 14,491.4 6,969.3 176.0 Dec.
1.9 15.7 1,973.6 4,826.2 2,998.3 – 10.3 3,700.5 0.0 10,326.2 13,784.9 14,546.4 6,928.4 177.5 2021 Jan.
14.0 16.3 1,974.3 4,877.4 2,952.8 – 10.9 3,520.6 0.0 10,398.7 13,851.2 14,599.9 6,877.5 176.8 Feb.
– 0.8 16.9 1,989.3 4,949.0 2,967.4 15.8 3,581.3 0.0 10,490.2 13,964.5 14,694.3 6,899.7 173.1 Mar.
6.5 16.5 1,968.8 4,994.0 2,947.8 10.6 3,484.6 0.0 10,569.7 14,021.6 14,776.4 6,827.9 173.5 Apr.
15.5 15.9 1,950.3 5,000.2 2,968.3 53.4 3,477.2 0.0 10,684.4 14,134.6 14,883.3 6,828.0 176.1 May
11.4 16.0 1,957.7 4,968.6 2,979.7 57.5 3,504.2 0.0 10,811.2 14,231.7 14,966.8 6,841.6 180.3 June
16.0 16.8 1,965.4 5,055.4 3,024.5 38.8 3,550.0 0.0 10,914.8 14,345.5 15,115.6 6,888.6 180.9 July
11.1 16.0 1,960.4 5,204.8 3,022.9 28.6 3,497.6 0.0 10,956.3 14,380.6 15,146.4 6,874.2 182.3 Aug.
13.5 17.7 1,978.4 5,239.0 2,994.4 17.8 3,464.9 0.0 11,029.6 14,440.5 15,186.5 6,859.4 183.3 Sep.
German contribution (€ billion)
20.3 7.6 529.4 944.3 757.0 –980.7 1,826.9 417.2 2,297.9 3,135.9 3,182.8 1,952.6 0.0 2019 Aug.
22.3 7.4 533.8 927.2 755.6 –992.1 1,761.2 422.1 2,298.5 3,131.2 3,164.7 1,954.3 0.0 Sep.
20.7 6.7 527.8 867.4 750.0 –918.5 1,664.0 426.3 2,316.5 3,147.7 3,178.4 1,941.3 0.0 Oct.
21.4 5.8 533.1 877.7 749.1 –951.9 1,671.9 430.8 2,341.2 3,168.5 3,199.3 1,943.1 0.0 Nov.
21.0 6.1 524.3 863.5 750.1 –999.8 1,681.4 435.8 2,340.1 3,161.1 3,193.6 1,933.9 0.0 Dec.
23.9 6.7 530.2 831.0 757.2 –900.5 1,744.6 437.9 2,333.0 3,157.1 3,192.1 1,942.8 0.0 2020 Jan.
21.7 6.8 535.4 850.2 764.8 –912.0 1,867.4 442.7 2,350.9 3,174.6 3,207.0 1,953.8 0.0 Feb.
18.4 6.3 528.3 901.4 757.6 –990.7 1,940.1 455.0 2,444.0 3,263.9 3,292.5 1,935.1 0.0 Mar.
15.9 6.9 527.8 942.0 759.1 –1,003.6 2,007.1 458.2 2,454.3 3,266.4 3,294.7 1,930.3 0.0 Apr.
14.9 7.3 520.8 917.3 756.1 –1,003.8 1,932.8 458.5 2,505.0 3,323.2 3,349.8 1,918.3 0.0 May
14.8 7.1 510.9 939.7 769.1 –1,074.1 1,923.1 458.1 2,514.8 3,325.2 3,349.7 1,913.0 0.0 June
12.8 6.7 503.7 907.0 784.6 –1,089.1 1,967.5 460.5 2,519.5 3,336.8 3,360.1 1,913.6 0.0 July
12.0 7.2 498.7 891.2 778.4 –1,114.7 1,888.5 464.3 2,537.9 3,350.2 3,372.9 1,899.9 0.0 Aug.
12.4 6.7 506.2 952.4 787.3 –1,172.8 1,905.3 467.0 2,564.6 3,371.8 3,394.2 1,912.5 0.0 Sep.
11.1 7.0 501.8 906.4 794.7 –1,107.6 1,894.1 469.4 2,595.4 3,403.6 3,425.7 1,913.5 0.0 Oct.
10.0 7.1 498.4 923.3 780.2 –1,109.5 1,859.4 470.7 2,639.3 3,433.2 3,461.8 1,893.5 0.0 Nov.
9.0 6.6 487.7 985.7 787.5 –1,192.0 1,844.9 473.1 2,632.8 3,426.1 3,456.4 1,888.4 0.0 Dec.
7.8 6.8 488.7 1,026.4 778.3 –1,113.3 1,796.5 474.2 2,678.2 3,458.5 3,483.9 1,878.3 0.0 2021 Jan.
7.4 7.5 495.1 1,007.6 756.3 –1,095.7 1,750.3 476.5 2,698.6 3,471.7 3,494.9 1,860.6 0.0 Feb.
8.1 6.8 508.4 1,080.1 754.4 –1,144.4 1,742.0 479.0 2,724.1 3,497.0 3,525.7 1,868.2 0.0 Mar.
7.8 6.6 510.0 1,029.5 759.2 –1,074.2 1,717.0 479.7 2,736.8 3,505.0 3,529.7 1,871.8 0.0 Apr.
9.6 6.7 501.7 1,051.5 768.2 –1,126.5 1,696.6 482.8 2,764.3 3,535.8 3,563.5 1,869.6 0.0 May
9.8 6.9 498.8 1,088.8 775.4 –1,149.4 1,724.5 485.9 2,772.3 3,535.7 3,563.7 1,870.2 0.0 June
9.8 7.0 501.5 1,031.5 795.8 –1,075.6 1,767.0 490.0 2,793.9 3,552.6 3,581.2 1,891.2 0.0 July
12.7 6.5 503.2 1,068.1 793.5 –1,088.4 1,754.6 492.9 2,814.8 3,571.7 3,602.8 1,889.9 0.0 Aug.
12.6 6.9 510.1 1,166.3 782.1 –1,156.5 1,723.7 497.5 2,823.4 3,578.0 3,610.9 1,882.5 0.0 Sep.
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2019 Oct. 758.5 2.0 668.5 0.0 2,608.7 456.6 0.0 1,252.7 298.6 641.3 1,388.5 3,097.8
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 773.3 1.8 663.7 0.0 2,618.8 257.9 0.0 1,262.9 226.6 648.1 1,662.1 3,182.9
2020 Jan. 768.6 2.9 616.1 0.0 2,639.1 254.6 0.0 1,282.2 211.8 654.3 1,623.7 3,160.6
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 767.1 1.4 615.9 0.0 2,666.7 244.6 0.0 1,277.1 268.6 618.4 1,642.3 3,164.1
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 926.3 0.6 865.7 0.0 2,784.2 271.8 0.0 1,321.9 374.4 788.6 1,820.2 3,413.8
June 950.4 0.3 984.2 0.0 2,986.9 299.9 0.0 1,347.9 477.1 830.5 1,966.5 3,614.4
July 871.3 0.8 1,401.5 0.0 3,168.2 356.0 0.0 1,365.7 671.2 703.1 2,345.9 4,067.5
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 865.9 1.3 1,593.2 0.0 3,323.6 413.2 0.0 1,381.2 712.9 651.0 2,625.7 4,420.1
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 864.4 1.3 1,707.8 0.0 3,475.8 460.7 0.0 1,389.1 749.0 653.5 2,797.0 4,646.8
Dec. 865.1 0.5 1,754.4 0.0 3,614.7 535.4 0.0 1,403.9 647.0 687.7 2,960.7 4,900.0
2021 Jan. 848.6 0.3 1,792.6 0.0 3,712.9 586.9 0.0 1,429.4 530.3 778.4 3,029.4 5,045.7
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 834.9 0.4 1,792.4 0.0 3,825.1 598.0 0.0 1,433.4 595.8 667.9 3,157.7 5,189.1
Apr. 816.7 0.3 2,054.6 0.0 3,951.4 676.4 0.0 1,447.7 644.5 633.4 3,421.1 5,545.2
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 809.8 0.2 2,107.0 0.0 4,092.7 706.5 0.0 1,465.8 586.7 659.1 3,591.7 5,763.9
July 821.7 0.1 2,196.0 0.0 4,244.5 736.6 0.0 1,485.8 652.3 734.5 3,653.1 5,875.5
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 826.7 0.2 2,213.2 0.0 4,378.9 766.6 0.0 1,499.9 635.7 790.4 3,726.2 5,992.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deutsche Bundesbank
2019 Oct. 182.8 0.4 82.8 0.0 560.0 151.5 0.0 306.5 70.8 – 159.4 456.6 914.7
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 186.9 0.4 82.4 0.0 566.1 82.2 0.0 307.6 55.9 – 135.3 525.4 915.3
2020 Jan. 186.0 0.9 74.0 0.0 567.9 73.6 0.0 311.7 52.7 – 95.7 486.5 871.8
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 185.0 0.4 74.0 0.0 573.7 65.4 0.0 311.2 64.4 – 125.0 517.1 893.7
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 238.0 0.2 106.8 0.0 585.3 76.3 0.0 324.1 102.0 – 174.5 602.8 1,003.2
June 248.7 0.1 122.5 0.0 623.1 85.0 0.0 326.4 137.6 – 172.6 618.1 1,029.5
July 222.1 0.5 235.2 0.0 655.9 108.2 0.0 331.5 205.0 – 238.1 707.1 1,146.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 212.1 0.8 284.0 0.0 692.0 136.0 0.0 336.4 239.6 – 298.0 774.8 1,247.3
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 212.1 0.7 319.5 0.0 729.0 145.5 0.0 338.1 254.7 – 302.9 826.0 1,309.6
Dec. 213.0 0.3 333.9 0.0 768.7 166.6 0.0 341.2 217.9 – 294.5 884.7 1,392.5
2021 Jan. 208.3 0.1 341.1 0.0 791.3 178.9 0.0 347.3 189.4 – 252.8 878.0 1,404.2
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 205.3 0.1 341.0 0.0 816.9 177.5 0.0 348.3 172.7 – 298.0 962.8 1,488.6
Apr. 198.0 0.0 407.3 0.0 845.8 203.0 0.0 351.7 187.4 – 300.4 1,008.9 1,563.5
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 194.3 0.0 420.5 0.0 884.3 208.5 0.0 356.8 187.3 – 301.9 1,046.7 1,612.0
July 197.4 0.0 434.3 0.0 918.5 204.2 0.0 362.0 206.8 – 270.8 1,046.2 1,612.4
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 199.0 0.1 436.7 0.0 950.8 210.7 0.0 365.0 204.3 – 240.8 1,045.3 1,621.0
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
+38.3 – 1.0 –24.0 ± 0.0 – 3.7 –99.1 ± 0.0 + 1.6 +30.1 +20.1 +57.0 –40.5 2019 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+14.8 – 0.2 – 4.8 ± 0.0 +10.1 –198.7 ± 0.0 +10.2 –72.0 + 6.8 +273.6 +85.1 Dec.
– 4.7 + 1.1 –47.6 ± 0.0 +20.3 – 3.3 ± 0.0 +19.3 –14.8 + 6.2 –38.4 –22.3 2020 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
– 1.5 – 1.5 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +27.6 –10.0 ± 0.0 – 5.1 +56.8 –35.9 +18.6 + 3.5 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+159.2 – 0.8 +249.8 ± 0.0 +117.5 +27.2 ± 0.0 +44.8 +105.8 +170.2 +177.9 +249.7 May
+24.1 – 0.3 +118.5 ± 0.0 +202.7 +28.1 ± 0.0 +26.0 +102.7 +41.9 +146.3 +200.6 June
–79.1 + 0.5 +417.3 ± 0.0 +181.3 +56.1 ± 0.0 +17.8 +194.1 –127.4 +379.4 +453.1 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
– 5.4 + 0.5 +191.7 ± 0.0 +155.4 +57.2 ± 0.0 +15.5 +41.7 –52.1 +279.8 +352.6 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
– 1.5 ± 0.0 +114.6 ± 0.0 +152.2 +47.5 ± 0.0 + 7.9 +36.1 + 2.5 +171.3 +226.7 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.8 +46.6 ± 0.0 +138.9 +74.7 ± 0.0 +14.8 –102.0 +34.2 +163.7 +253.2 Dec.
–16.5 – 0.2 +38.2 ± 0.0 +98.2 +51.5 ± 0.0 +25.5 –116.7 +90.7 +68.7 +145.7 2021 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
–13.7 + 0.1 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +112.2 +11.1 ± 0.0 + 4.0 +65.5 –110.5 +128.3 +143.4 Mar.
–18.2 – 0.1 +262.2 ± 0.0 +126.3 +78.4 ± 0.0 +14.3 +48.7 –34.5 +263.4 +356.1 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
– 6.9 – 0.1 +52.4 ± 0.0 +141.3 +30.1 ± 0.0 +18.1 –57.8 +25.7 +170.6 +218.7 June
+11.9 – 0.1 +89.0 ± 0.0 +151.8 +30.1 ± 0.0 +20.0 +65.6 +75.4 +61.4 +111.6 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 5.0 + 0.1 +17.2 ± 0.0 +134.4 +30.0 ± 0.0 +14.1 –16.6 +55.9 +73.1 +117.3 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
Deutsche Bundesbank
+10.3 – 0.1 – 2.1 + 0.0 – 2.7 + 1.4 ± 0.0 + 1.0 +13.2 – 1.8 – 8.3 – 5.9 2019 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 4.1 + 0.0 – 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.1 –69.3 ± 0.0 + 1.1 –14.9 +24.1 +68.8 + 0.6 Dec.
– 0.9 + 0.4 – 8.5 + 0.0 + 1.8 – 8.6 ± 0.0 + 4.1 –3.2 +39.6 –38.9 –43.5 2020 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
– 1.0 – 0.5 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 5.8 – 8.2 ± 0.0 – 0.5 +11.7 –29.3 +30.7 +21.9 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+53.0 – 0.2 +32.9 – 0.0 +11.6 +10.9 ± 0.0 +12.9 +37.6 –49.6 +85.6 +109.5 May
+10.7 – 0.1 +15.7 + 0.0 +37.8 + 8.7 ± 0.0 + 2.3 +35.6 + 2.0 +15.3 +26.3 June
–26.6 + 0.4 +112.6 – 0.0 +32.8 +23.2 ± 0.0 + 5.1 +67.5 –65.5 +89.0 +117.3 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
–10.0 + 0.3 +48.9 + 0.0 +36.1 +27.9 ± 0.0 + 5.0 +34.6 –59.9 +67.6 +100.5 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 0.0 – 0.1 +35.5 – 0.0 +37.0 + 9.5 ± 0.0 + 1.7 +15.0 – 5.0 +51.2 +62.3 Nov.
+ 0.9 – 0.4 +14.4 + 0.0 +39.8 +21.1 ± 0.0 + 3.1 –36.8 + 8.4 +58.7 +82.9 Dec.
– 4.7 – 0.2 + 7.1 + 0.0 +22.6 +12.3 ± 0.0 + 6.1 –28.5 +41.7 – 6.7 +11.7 2021 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
– 3.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 +25.6 – 1.4 ± 0.0 + 1.0 –16.7 –45.2 +84.8 +84.4 Mar.
– 7.3 – 0.1 +66.3 + 0.0 +28.8 +25.5 ± 0.0 + 3.4 +14.7 – 2.4 +46.0 +74.9 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
– 3.7 + 0.0 +13.2 + 0.0 +38.6 + 5.5 ± 0.0 + 5.1 –0.1 – 1.5 +37.9 +48.5 June
+ 3.1 – 0.0 +13.8 – 0.0 +34.2 – 4.3 ± 0.0 + 5.2 +19.4 +31.1 – 0.5 + 0.4 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 1.6 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.0 +32.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 + 3.0 –2.5 +29.9 – 0.9 + 8.6 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2021 Apr. 16 7,522.2 499.3 350.7 86.5 264.1 26.8 11.1 11.1 –
23 7,558.3 499.3 351.2 86.5 264.7 27.1 10.9 10.9 –
30 7,567.9 499.3 352.0 86.5 265.4 26.5 10.6 10.6 –
May 7 7,588.8 499.3 352.6 86.5 266.0 25.7 10.8 10.8 –
14 7,615.7 499.3 352.1 86.5 265.5 27.0 11.4 11.4 –
21 7,643.2 499.3 353.9 86.5 267.4 25.6 11.1 11.1 –
28 7,657.6 499.2 353.9 86.5 267.4 25.8 11.2 11.2 –
June 4 7,680.1 499.2 354.2 86.5 267.7 26.7 10.3 10.3 –
11 7,700.9 499.2 354.7 87.1 267.6 27.6 10.7 10.7 –
18 7,736.5 499.2 358.8 87.1 271.8 24.7 10.6 10.6 –
25 7,877.1 499.2 359.9 87.0 272.9 23.8 13.5 13.5 –
July 2 7,907.8 514.7 354.5 87.1 267.5 25.6 13.1 13.1 –
9 7,926.6 514.7 355.1 87.1 268.0 24.8 10.7 10.7 –
16 7,950.7 514.7 354.9 87.1 267.9 25.4 10.3 10.3 –
23 7,988.0 514.7 354.0 87.2 266.7 26.6 10.9 10.9 –
30 7,987.4 514.7 354.8 87.2 267.5 25.3 10.3 10.3 –
Aug. 6 8,009.7 514.7 354.8 87.3 267.4 25.4 10.5 10.5 –
13 8,036.0 514.7 355.5 87.3 268.2 24.5 10.6 10.6 –
20 8,052.8 514.7 355.7 87.3 268.4 24.2 10.6 10.6 –
27 8,191.3 514.7 477.1 209.7 267.4 25.0 10.8 10.8 –
Sep. 3 8,207.5 514.7 477.3 209.7 267.6 24.8 11.1 11.1 –
10 8,222.7 514.7 477.6 210.1 267.5 24.9 10.6 10.6 –
17 8,244.6 514.7 475.3 210.9 264.4 27.6 11.8 11.8 –
24 8,273.2 514.7 475.6 211.2 264.4 27.6 13.7 13.7 –
Oct. 1 8,289.1 517.8 487.7 213.4 274.3 24.9 10.7 10.7 –
8 8,314.3 517.8 488.0 213.6 274.4 24.9 10.7 10.7 –
15 8,336.7 517.8 488.7 213.6 275.1 24.3 10.7 10.7 –
22 8,368.3 517.8 489.7 214.0 275.6 24.3 10.9 10.9 –
29 8,366.1 517.9 489.0 214.9 274.1 24.5 10.8 10.8 –
Nov. 5 8,382.7 517.9 489.9 215.1 274.8 24.1 10.5 10.5 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2021 Apr. 16 2,548.1 155.3 53.8 22.3 31.5 0.1 – – –
23 2,554.0 155.3 53.8 22.3 31.5 0.1 – – –
30 2,562.0 155.3 53.8 22.3 31.5 0.1 – – –
May 7 2,568.4 155.3 53.6 22.3 31.4 0.1 – – –
14 2,592.5 155.3 54.0 22.3 31.7 0.1 – – –
21 2,617.3 155.3 54.0 22.3 31.7 0.1 – – –
28 2,639.3 155.2 54.0 22.3 31.8 0.1 – – –
June 4 2,634.5 155.2 54.0 22.3 31.8 0.0 – – –
11 2,605.1 155.2 54.0 22.4 31.6 0.0 – – –
18 2,608.1 155.2 54.0 22.4 31.6 0.0 – – –
25 2,648.6 155.2 54.0 22.3 31.7 0.0 – – –
July 2 2,679.7 160.0 53.8 22.4 31.4 0.0 – – –
9 2,640.1 160.0 53.8 22.4 31.3 0.0 – – –
16 2,668.1 160.0 53.8 22.4 31.3 0.0 – – –
23 2,665.0 160.0 53.8 22.4 31.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
30 2,659.0 160.0 53.7 22.4 31.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
Aug. 6 2,687.1 160.0 53.7 22.5 31.2 0.0 – – –
13 2,696.2 160.0 53.6 22.5 31.2 0.0 – – –
20 2,694.4 160.0 53.7 22.5 31.2 0.0 – – –
27 2,724.3 160.0 84.7 53.4 31.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 –
Sep. 3 2,749.6 160.0 85.0 53.4 31.6 0.0 0.6 0.6 –
10 2,747.9 160.0 84.7 53.4 31.3 0.0 – – –
17 2,749.3 160.0 84.6 53.4 31.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
24 2,782.2 160.0 84.6 53.4 31.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
Oct. 1 2,794.1 160.9 86.0 53.9 32.1 0.0 – – –
8 2,793.0 160.9 86.2 53.9 32.3 0.0 – – –
15 2,797.4 160.9 86.5 53.9 32.6 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
22 2,780.9 160.9 86.7 54.1 32.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
29 2,788.5 160.9 86.2 54.3 32.0 0.0 – – –
Nov. 5 2,812.8 160.9 86.7 54.3 32.4 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
2,107.1 0.1 2,107.0 – – – – 31.9 4,167.9 3,973.1 194.8 22.6 304.8 2021 Apr. 16
2,107.1 0.1 2,107.0 – – – – 34.3 4,199.5 4,005.1 194.4 22.6 306.2 23
2,107.2 0.3 2,107.0 – – – – 37.5 4,208.0 4,019.9 188.1 22.6 304.2 30
2,107.1 0.1 2,107.0 – – 0.0 – 35.7 4,230.0 4,044.1 186.0 22.6 305.0 May 7
2,107.1 0.1 2,107.0 – – – – 29.1 4,258.5 4,072.7 185.8 22.6 308.7 14
2,107.1 0.1 2,107.0 – – – – 28.2 4,287.4 4,101.2 186.3 22.6 307.9 21
2,107.4 0.4 2,107.0 – – – – 29.4 4,302.9 4,116.5 186.4 22.6 305.3 28
2,107.2 0.2 2,107.0 – – 0.0 – 28.4 4,327.0 4,140.5 186.6 22.6 304.5 June 4
2,107.2 0.2 2,107.0 – – – – 33.9 4,339.8 4,154.0 185.8 22.6 305.1 11
2,107.1 0.1 2,107.0 – – – – 35.4 4,368.4 4,182.6 185.8 22.6 309.7 18
2,217.3 0.1 2,217.2 – – 0.0 – 33.7 4,400.5 4,214.5 186.0 22.6 306.6 25
2,217.3 0.1 2,217.2 – – 0.0 – 35.1 4,414.5 4,228.2 186.2 22.1 311.0 July 2
2,216.8 0.1 2,216.7 – – – – 32.9 4,438.5 4,252.3 186.2 22.1 310.9 9
2,216.8 0.0 2,216.7 – – – – 31.7 4,466.7 4,280.2 186.6 22.1 308.1 16
2,216.8 0.1 2,216.7 – – – – 31.2 4,499.4 4,313.0 186.4 22.1 312.3 23
2,214.3 0.1 2,214.1 – – 0.1 – 34.2 4,509.0 4,322.0 187.1 22.1 302.6 30
2,214.2 0.1 2,214.1 – – – – 32.3 4,526.9 4,341.1 185.8 22.1 308.8 Aug. 6
2,214.2 0.2 2,214.1 – – – – 33.2 4,549.7 4,363.9 185.8 22.1 311.3 13
2,214.3 0.2 2,214.1 – – – – 32.1 4,571.2 4,384.6 186.6 22.1 307.8 20
2,212.4 0.1 2,212.3 – – – – 34.6 4,584.6 4,398.5 186.1 22.1 310.0 27
2,211.5 0.0 2,211.4 – – – – 35.4 4,596.1 4,412.8 183.2 22.1 314.6 Sep. 3
2,211.8 0.3 2,211.4 – – 0.0 – 32.9 4,613.1 4,430.7 182.4 22.1 315.1 10
2,211.8 0.3 2,211.4 – – – – 35.0 4,633.9 4,452.2 181.6 22.1 312.4 17
2,211.3 0.0 2,211.3 – – 0.0 – 35.4 4,660.9 4,478.7 182.3 22.1 311.8 24
2,208.8 0.1 2,208.7 – – – – 33.1 4,666.5 4,484.2 182.3 22.2 317.5 Oct. 1
2,208.9 0.2 2,208.6 – – – – 29.8 4,689.7 4,507.6 182.1 22.2 322.4 8
2,208.8 0.2 2,208.6 – – 0.0 – 31.0 4,714.4 4,532.6 181.8 22.2 318.9 15
2,208.7 0.1 2,208.6 – – – – 30.2 4,743.0 4,560.7 182.3 22.2 321.4 22
2,208.8 0.1 2,208.7 – – 0.0 – 26.5 4,745.7 4,568.3 177.4 22.2 320.8 29
2,208.7 0.1 2,208.7 – – – – 26.1 4,764.8 4,586.6 178.2 22.2 318.5 Nov. 5
Deutsche Bundesbank
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 5.0 848.5 848.5 – 4.4 1,060.5 2021 Apr. 16
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 6.5 858.4 858.4 – 4.4 1,055.0 23
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 5.0 866.6 866.6 – 4.4 1,056.2 30
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 7.6 870.9 870.9 – 4.4 1,055.9 May 7
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 5.7 879.5 879.5 – 4.4 1,073.0 14
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 6.7 886.6 886.6 – 4.4 1,089.7 21
420.6 0.1 420.5 – – 0.0 – 6.0 891.4 891.4 – 4.4 1,107.6 28
420.6 0.1 420.5 – – 0.0 – 7.1 899.3 899.3 – 4.4 1,093.9 June 4
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 5.9 895.5 895.5 – 4.4 1,069.5 11
420.5 0.0 420.5 – – 0.0 – 6.9 903.4 903.4 – 4.4 1,063.7 18
437.6 0.0 437.6 – – 0.0 – 5.1 912.4 912.4 – 4.4 1,079.9 25
437.5 – 437.5 – – 0.0 – 5.8 917.1 917.1 – 4.4 1,101.0 July 2
437.5 0.0 437.5 – – 0.0 – 4.6 917.1 917.1 – 4.4 1,062.6 9
437.5 0.0 437.5 – – – – 6.3 927.1 927.1 – 4.4 1,078.9 16
437.6 0.0 437.5 – – 0.0 – 7.1 935.9 935.9 – 4.4 1,065.9 23
437.2 0.1 437.1 – – 0.1 – 8.3 938.4 938.4 – 4.4 1,056.9 30
437.1 0.0 437.1 – – 0.0 – 8.7 943.1 943.1 – 4.4 1,080.0 Aug. 6
437.2 0.1 437.1 – – 0.0 – 7.9 948.9 948.9 – 4.4 1,084.1 13
437.2 0.1 437.1 – – 0.0 – 7.6 954.9 954.9 – 4.4 1,076.5 20
436.3 0.0 436.3 – – 0.0 – 8.2 954.6 954.6 – 4.4 1,075.9 27
436.2 – 436.2 – – 0.0 – 10.8 960.0 960.0 – 4.4 1,092.6 Sep. 3
436.5 0.3 436.2 – – 0.0 – 8.6 957.0 957.0 – 4.4 1,096.6 10
436.5 0.3 436.2 – – 0.0 – 8.3 963.9 963.9 – 4.4 1,091.2 17
436.2 0.0 436.2 – – 0.0 – 7.6 972.9 972.9 – 4.4 1,116.2 24
440.4 0.1 440.3 – – 0.0 – 5.8 973.0 973.0 – 4.4 1,123.5 Oct. 1
440.4 0.2 440.3 – – 0.0 – 7.1 973.7 973.7 – 4.4 1,120.2 8
440.4 0.2 440.3 – – 0.0 – 6.2 981.9 981.9 – 4.4 1,116.7 15
440.3 0.1 440.3 – – 0.0 – 7.8 989.5 989.5 – 4.4 1,091.1 22
440.3 0.1 440.3 – – 0.0 – 6.4 992.1 992.1 – 4.4 1,097.9 29
440.3 0.0 440.3 – – 0.0 – 5.6 1,000.2 1,000.2 – 4.4 1,114.4 Nov. 5

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2021 Apr. 16 7,522.2 1,449.8 4,183.5 3,478.4 703.4 – – 1.6 17.0 – 715.0 632.8 82.2
23 7,558.3 1,452.1 4,183.6 3,465.6 716.3 – – 1.7 17.4 – 748.0 670.3 77.7
30 7,567.9 1,455.1 4,237.2 3,633.7 601.8 – – 1.7 17.4 – 687.2 605.9 81.3
May 7 7,588.8 1,459.4 4,321.4 3,654.5 665.2 – – 1.7 18.0 – 619.6 540.0 79.6
14 7,615.7 1,463.1 4,305.6 3,573.8 730.1 – – 1.7 18.5 – 652.7 572.3 80.4
21 7,643.2 1,467.3 4,281.3 3,541.3 738.2 – – 1.7 19.3 – 698.8 612.8 86.0
28 7,657.6 1,469.4 4,264.4 3,503.7 758.9 – – 1.7 19.7 – 717.8 627.7 90.1
June 4 7,680.1 1,473.0 4,350.1 3,611.8 736.6 – – 1.7 25.8 – 656.9 565.5 91.3
11 7,700.9 1,474.8 4,361.3 3,614.8 744.8 – – 1.7 18.6 – 657.0 559.4 97.6
18 7,736.5 1,477.4 4,271.6 3,739.2 530.7 – – 1.7 18.7 – 775.8 668.9 106.9
25 7,877.1 1,479.6 4,377.8 3,691.7 684.3 – – 1.8 21.7 – 780.5 683.2 97.3
July 2 7,907.8 1,484.5 4,441.8 3,653.2 786.8 – – 1.8 22.3 – 712.6 616.0 96.6
9 7,926.6 1,488.7 4,465.0 3,671.5 791.6 – – 1.8 18.1 – 693.5 600.2 93.4
16 7,950.7 1,491.7 4,430.6 3,610.6 818.1 – – 1.9 20.8 – 752.2 650.5 101.8
23 7,988.0 1,494.0 4,391.4 3,605.7 783.9 – – 1.8 23.1 – 807.7 702.5 105.2
30 7,987.4 1,497.9 4,440.0 3,756.8 681.0 – – 2.3 25.8 – 732.8 618.6 114.2
Aug. 6 8,009.7 1,499.6 4,492.6 3,758.1 732.2 – – 2.3 23.1 – 699.2 584.6 114.6
13 8,036.0 1,500.7 4,488.3 3,674.7 811.4 – – 2.2 23.7 – 751.3 635.3 116.0
20 8,052.8 1,499.9 4,471.8 3,665.0 804.7 – – 2.0 24.3 – 803.8 681.1 122.7
27 8,191.3 1,500.1 4,454.5 3,663.0 789.2 – – 2.3 23.2 – 828.0 703.6 124.3
Sep. 3 8,207.5 1,500.8 4,543.2 3,728.0 813.0 – – 2.3 30.5 – 736.3 617.5 118.8
10 8,222.7 1,502.0 4,567.5 3,744.0 821.4 – – 2.1 23.6 – 731.8 617.6 114.3
17 8,244.6 1,504.0 4,523.1 3,941.3 579.7 – – 2.0 23.6 – 792.0 671.0 120.9
24 8,273.2 1,504.3 4,476.0 3,787.8 686.2 – – 2.0 26.2 – 845.4 731.9 113.5
Oct. 1 8,289.1 1,505.5 4,534.9 3,761.3 771.1 – – 2.5 26.6 – 775.7 653.4 122.2
8 8,314.3 1,507.8 4,588.3 3,806.2 779.6 – – 2.5 25.7 – 749.4 626.2 123.2
15 8,336.7 1,509.0 4,564.0 3,786.5 775.1 – – 2.4 27.0 – 793.5 670.9 122.6
22 8,368.3 1,509.9 4,575.1 3,805.2 767.6 – – 2.4 26.3 – 799.8 679.3 120.6
29 8,366.1 1,513.3 4,567.8 3,759.9 805.6 – – 2.3 30.4 – 785.0 661.1 123.9
Nov. 5 8,382.7 1,514.6 4,642.7 4,023.0 617.5 – – 2.2 36.0 – 705.3 587.5 117.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
2021 Apr. 16 2,548.1 351.9 1,231.4 1,013.3 216.4 – – 1.6 8.0 – 191.1 179.9 11.1
23 2,554.0 352.2 1,228.3 1,003.3 223.4 – – 1.7 9.2 – 200.5 187.9 12.6
30 2,562.0 352.9 1,247.3 1,061.8 183.8 – – 1.7 8.3 – 185.3 172.3 12.9
May 7 2,568.4 354.7 1,259.9 1,103.0 155.2 – – 1.7 9.1 – 175.4 162.3 13.1
14 2,592.5 356.5 1,254.7 1,035.4 217.6 – – 1.7 8.9 – 198.6 185.6 12.9
21 2,617.3 358.4 1,265.1 1,046.0 217.4 – – 1.7 10.0 – 210.5 196.4 14.1
28 2,639.3 359.2 1,257.5 1,028.2 227.6 – – 1.7 10.6 – 232.6 218.0 14.6
June 4 2,634.5 358.0 1,271.5 1,035.8 234.0 – – 1.7 13.3 – 212.5 197.0 15.6
11 2,605.1 359.1 1,259.4 1,028.8 228.9 – – 1.7 9.4 – 192.5 179.3 13.2
18 2,608.1 360.2 1,224.5 1,085.7 137.0 – – 1.7 7.9 – 230.2 215.5 14.8
25 2,648.6 361.1 1,249.1 1,086.0 161.4 – – 1.8 10.1 – 241.3 226.9 14.4
July 2 2,679.7 360.3 1,280.8 1,050.0 229.1 – – 1.8 9.8 – 220.9 204.6 16.3
9 2,640.1 362.1 1,265.0 1,042.1 221.1 – – 1.8 7.0 – 194.4 178.7 15.7
16 2,668.1 363.6 1,253.6 1,022.7 229.1 – – 1.8 9.1 – 227.6 212.5 15.1
23 2,665.0 364.7 1,243.3 1,010.4 231.1 – – 1.8 11.4 – 230.8 215.5 15.3
30 2,659.0 363.3 1,249.8 1,055.6 192.0 – – 2.2 12.7 – 206.4 189.2 17.2
Aug. 6 2,687.1 364.3 1,278.2 1,117.5 158.5 – – 2.2 11.4 – 203.9 188.3 15.6
13 2,696.2 365.0 1,255.4 1,025.3 227.8 – – 2.2 11.6 – 233.1 216.0 17.1
20 2,694.4 365.2 1,246.9 1,024.4 220.4 – – 2.0 13.5 – 238.5 223.2 15.3
27 2,724.3 366.3 1,234.2 1,008.2 223.6 – – 2.3 11.9 – 244.1 227.6 16.4
Sep. 3 2,749.6 364.8 1,281.0 1,037.1 241.7 – – 2.3 17.8 – 213.1 196.5 16.6
10 2,747.9 366.0 1,273.8 1,031.0 240.7 – – 2.1 11.4 – 217.7 200.2 17.5
17 2,749.3 368.2 1,242.4 1,100.6 139.8 – – 2.0 11.7 – 252.3 233.1 19.2
24 2,782.2 368.6 1,257.9 1,096.0 159.9 – – 2.0 13.9 – 260.8 238.6 22.2
Oct. 1 2,794.1 365.4 1,281.8 1,055.8 223.5 – – 2.5 14.8 – 235.1 208.2 26.9
8 2,793.0 366.4 1,292.0 1,062.4 227.0 – – 2.5 14.6 – 225.8 194.2 31.6
15 2,797.4 367.4 1,262.9 1,041.7 218.9 – – 2.4 15.0 – 254.1 224.1 30.0
22 2,780.9 368.0 1,254.4 1,039.1 212.9 – – 2.3 15.7 – 247.2 218.8 28.4
29 2,788.5 367.0 1,281.6 1,046.1 233.2 – – 2.3 18.4 – 217.3 188.7 28.6
Nov. 5 2,812.8 367.7 1,304.3 1,158.7 143.4 – – 2.2 19.0 – 212.7 185.7 27.0
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
202.3 9.8 3.2 3.2 – 56.2 289.9 – 485.4 110.1 2021 Apr. 16
199.8 9.8 3.2 3.2 – 56.2 292.7 – 485.4 110.1 23
208.0 10.0 3.0 3.0 – 56.2 298.4 – 485.4 110.0 30
206.6 10.0 2.8 2.8 – 56.2 299.1 – 485.4 110.2 May 7
210.5 10.3 2.7 2.7 – 56.2 300.3 – 485.4 110.2 14
211.4 10.7 2.4 2.4 – 56.2 300.2 – 485.4 110.2 21
219.4 10.6 2.1 2.1 – 56.2 302.4 – 485.4 110.2 28
211.5 11.0 2.1 2.1 – 56.2 298.7 – 485.4 109.5 June 4
220.2 11.3 2.1 2.1 – 56.2 304.6 – 485.4 109.5 11
218.2 11.4 2.5 2.5 – 56.2 309.9 – 485.4 109.5 18
242.2 11.1 2.9 2.9 – 56.2 310.2 – 485.4 109.5 25
264.5 10.4 2.7 2.7 – 55.8 306.1 – 497.6 109.5 July 2
278.5 10.3 2.7 2.7 – 55.8 306.9 – 497.6 109.5 9
277.6 10.3 2.5 2.5 – 55.8 302.1 – 497.6 109.5 16
292.9 10.2 2.4 2.4 – 55.8 303.4 – 497.6 109.5 23
312.3 9.9 2.7 2.7 – 55.8 303.1 – 497.6 109.4 30
312.4 9.9 2.7 2.7 – 55.8 307.3 – 497.6 109.4 Aug. 6
286.1 9.8 2.6 2.6 – 55.8 310.6 – 497.6 109.4 13
270.4 9.4 2.8 2.8 – 55.8 307.7 – 497.6 109.4 20
279.4 12.4 3.0 3.0 – 174.7 309.0 – 497.6 109.4 27
286.0 12.3 2.9 2.9 – 174.7 313.9 – 497.6 109.4 Sep. 3
286.7 12.4 2.8 2.8 – 174.7 314.3 – 497.6 109.4 10
288.1 12.3 2.4 2.4 – 174.7 317.6 – 497.6 109.4 17
306.2 12.2 2.5 2.5 – 174.7 318.9 – 497.6 109.4 24
323.5 12.6 4.1 4.1 – 176.1 314.9 – 506.0 109.4 Oct. 1
319.5 12.5 4.3 4.3 – 176.1 315.4 – 506.0 109.4 8
318.7 12.3 4.5 4.5 – 176.1 316.2 – 506.0 109.4 15
331.7 12.4 4.9 4.9 – 176.1 316.7 – 506.0 109.4 22
344.3 13.1 3.5 3.5 – 176.1 317.3 – 506.0 109.4 29
353.6 13.0 3.2 3.2 – 176.1 322.9 – 506.0 109.3 Nov. 5
Deutsche Bundesbank
82.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.6 32.9 479.0 151.2 5.7 2021 Apr. 16
80.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.6 33.0 479.0 151.2 5.7 23
83.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.6 33.4 479.7 151.2 5.7 30
84.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 33.5 479.7 151.2 5.7 May 7
88.5 0.4 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 33.6 479.7 151.2 5.7 14
87.8 0.4 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 33.7 479.7 151.2 5.7 21
93.9 0.4 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 33.8 479.7 151.2 5.7 28
90.6 0.4 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 33.9 482.8 151.2 5.7 June 4
96.2 0.3 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 33.9 482.8 151.2 5.7 11
96.2 0.3 0.0 0.0 – 14.6 34.5 482.8 151.2 5.7 18
97.5 0.2 0.2 0.2 – 14.6 34.8 482.8 151.2 5.7 25
112.0 0.4 – – – 14.5 33.9 485.9 155.5 5.7 July 2
113.8 0.4 – – – 14.5 35.6 485.9 155.5 5.7 9
116.6 0.4 – – – 14.5 35.6 485.9 155.5 5.7 16
117.1 0.4 – – – 14.5 35.7 485.9 155.5 5.7 23
124.6 0.4 – – – 14.5 36.2 490.0 155.5 5.7 30
127.1 0.3 – – – 14.5 36.1 490.0 155.5 5.7 Aug. 6
128.9 0.3 – – – 14.5 36.1 490.0 155.5 5.7 13
128.0 0.3 – – – 14.5 36.3 490.0 155.5 5.7 20
134.4 0.3 – – – 45.4 36.4 490.0 155.5 5.7 27
136.6 0.3 0.2 0.2 – 45.4 36.2 492.9 155.5 5.7 Sep. 3
142.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 – 45.4 37.2 492.9 155.5 5.7 10
137.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 45.4 37.7 492.9 155.5 5.7 17
143.5 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 45.4 37.7 492.9 155.5 5.7 24
155.1 0.3 – – – 45.8 35.4 497.5 157.2 5.7 Oct. 1
151.9 0.3 0.2 0.2 – 45.8 35.6 497.5 157.2 5.7 8
155.4 0.3 0.5 0.5 – 45.8 35.6 497.5 157.2 5.7 15
152.7 0.3 0.5 0.5 – 45.8 35.7 497.5 157.2 5.7 22
157.9 0.3 0.3 0.3 – 45.8 36.1 500.8 157.2 5.7 29
162.7 0.3 0.4 0.4 – 45.8 36.2 500.8 157.2 5.7 Nov. 5
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2019 Dec. 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 Jan. 8,482.2 39.4 2,293.1 1,800.7 1,531.5 269.2 492.4 348.1 144.3 4,033.9 3,591.5 3,173.1 2,867.5
Feb. 8,666.7 40.3 2,308.1 1,815.4 1,545.5 269.9 492.7 348.9 143.8 4,055.3 3,606.4 3,190.1 2,885.8
Mar. 8,912.6 48.1 2,421.0 1,920.7 1,651.9 268.8 500.4 357.5 142.8 4,096.9 3,641.9 3,215.5 2,915.9
Apr. 9,014.6 48.6 2,442.9 1,943.2 1,674.0 269.2 499.7 355.0 144.8 4,115.5 3,656.4 3,225.2 2,926.3
May 8,915.3 48.1 2,395.2 1,896.4 1,631.8 264.6 498.8 355.2 143.6 4,149.8 3,682.9 3,247.5 2,946.1
June 9,026.9 46.0 2,542.6 2,056.2 1,788.0 268.2 486.4 343.6 142.8 4,153.0 3,683.1 3,249.8 2,949.1
July 9,069.0 45.5 2,574.4 2,099.6 1,830.7 268.9 474.8 333.3 141.5 4,153.7 3,688.0 3,258.4 2,958.3
Aug. 8,985.5 46.0 2,595.4 2,127.5 1,858.5 269.0 467.9 328.0 139.9 4,148.3 3,691.9 3,266.7 2,966.1
Sep. 9,097.4 46.1 2,657.2 2,196.9 1,926.4 270.6 460.3 320.7 139.5 4,153.9 3,696.5 3,269.8 2,968.7
Oct. 9,124.3 46.3 2,686.7 2,226.8 1,957.0 269.8 459.9 320.9 139.0 4,181.8 3,713.6 3,283.1 2,980.6
Nov. 9,096.0 45.7 2,684.1 2,232.1 1,965.3 266.9 452.0 313.9 138.1 4,198.6 3,723.7 3,293.3 2,991.0
Dec. 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 Jan. 9,150.4 44.9 2,793.5 2,309.4 2,042.2 267.2 484.1 348.8 135.3 4,195.0 3,716.6 3,302.6 2,997.8
Feb. 9,148.1 45.5 2,824.0 2,328.8 2,060.6 268.2 495.2 361.1 134.1 4,210.4 3,731.9 3,318.5 3,011.4
Mar. 9,261.9 45.7 2,904.5 2,419.8 2,145.0 274.8 484.8 351.2 133.6 4,245.8 3,762.0 3,347.6 3,038.5
Apr. 9,269.2 44.9 2,935.1 2,441.4 2,168.7 272.8 493.7 360.0 133.7 4,236.4 3,756.9 3,347.0 3,036.8
May 9,277.1 45.7 2,974.7 2,485.3 2,212.9 272.4 489.4 355.6 133.9 4,246.1 3,772.8 3,363.3 3,049.8
June 9,293.7 46.5 2,959.9 2,469.9 2,197.4 272.5 490.0 356.7 133.3 4,253.7 3,772.0 3,370.7 3,056.9
July 9,321.9 46.8 2,943.6 2,448.2 2,178.3 269.9 495.3 361.1 134.2 4,270.2 3,788.1 3,386.0 3,071.8
Aug. 9,319.3 46.9 2,950.1 2,457.4 2,188.5 268.8 492.8 359.5 133.3 4,283.3 3,799.4 3,400.4 3,085.0
Sep. 9,329.7 47.4 2,952.9 2,473.5 2,204.2 269.3 479.4 344.9 134.5 4,303.4 3,812.4 3,410.0 3,094.0
Changes 3
2012 –129.2 2.9 –81.9 –28.4 3.0 –31.4 –53.5 – 39.7 –13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 –703.6 – 0.5 –257.1 –249.2 –216.5 –32.7 – 7.9 1.6 – 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 –126.2 –128.6 –95.3 –33.4 2.4 7.2 – 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2020 Jan. 162.1 – 4.0 61.4 40.5 37.7 2.8 21.0 19.6 1.4 13.0 6.8 4.7 3.1
Feb. 193.8 0.8 20.5 18.6 13.8 4.8 1.9 0.5 1.3 21.8 15.0 17.2 18.3
Mar. 251.0 7.9 113.4 105.3 106.1 – 0.9 8.2 8.8 – 0.6 44.3 36.8 26.5 31.0
Apr. 96.1 0.5 20.8 21.8 21.5 0.3 – 1.1 – 3.0 1.9 18.2 14.2 9.8 10.5
May –40.6 – 0.6 22.6 22.4 19.3 3.1 0.2 1.3 – 1.1 27.3 24.9 20.5 18.0
June 118.6 – 2.1 149.4 161.5 157.8 3.7 –12.1 – 11.2 – 0.9 5.0 1.7 3.6 4.3
July 67.5 – 0.5 36.5 45.1 44.3 0.8 – 8.6 – 7.5 – 1.1 3.1 6.6 10.2 10.8
Aug. –79.5 0.5 21.7 28.2 28.0 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.9 – 1.5 – 4.9 4.3 8.7 8.1
Sep. 104.9 0.1 60.5 69.0 67.5 1.5 – 8.5 – 8.0 – 0.4 5.2 4.5 3.0 2.6
Oct. 25.2 0.2 29.1 29.7 30.5 – 0.8 – 0.6 0.1 – 0.7 27.6 17.3 12.9 11.3
Nov. 12.0 – 0.6 29.0 35.8 37.2 – 1.4 – 6.8 – 6.1 – 0.8 18.6 11.3 11.2 11.5
Dec. –141.5 1.8 –59.5 –53.6 –51.2 – 2.4 – 5.9 – 5.8 – 0.2 –18.3 –13.3 4.2 2.7
2021 Jan. 201.4 – 2.6 169.3 131.0 128.3 2.8 38.2 40.5 – 2.3 16.8 7.7 6.6 5.1
Feb. – 2.3 0.7 30.3 19.2 18.2 1.1 11.0 12.2 – 1.2 15.9 15.5 15.7 13.4
Mar. 100.0 0.2 78.0 90.0 83.7 6.3 –12.0 – 11.5 – 0.5 34.3 29.7 28.8 27.0
Apr. 21.2 – 0.8 33.6 23.0 24.6 – 1.6 10.6 10.5 0.2 – 8.8 – 5.2 – 0.1 – 1.1
May 10.7 0.8 38.9 44.1 44.4 – 0.3 – 5.2 – 5.5 0.3 10.4 16.0 15.7 13.0
June 5.3 0.9 –17.1 –16.3 –15.8 – 0.5 – 0.8 – 0.2 – 0.6 7.3 – 0.5 7.6 6.7
July 26.3 0.2 –15.0 –19.5 –17.5 – 2.0 4.5 4.4 0.1 17.3 16.4 15.6 15.3
Aug. – 3.9 0.2 6.7 9.3 10.3 – 1.0 – 2.6 – 1.7 – 0.9 13.2 11.2 14.7 13.4
Sep. 9.6 0.4 1.9 15.2 15.8 – 0.6 –13.3 – 14.6 1.3 20.6 13.3 9.7 9.1
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011
259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019 Dec.
305.6 418.3 258.6 159.8 442.4 316.4 203.8 126.0 29.8 96.2 1,078.6 819.6 1,037.1 2020 Jan.
304.3 416.3 256.5 159.8 448.9 322.8 206.6 126.2 29.9 96.3 1,088.6 829.3 1,174.5 Feb.
299.6 426.4 258.5 167.9 455.0 325.2 212.8 129.8 29.5 100.3 1,104.4 838.8 1,242.1 Mar.
298.8 431.2 259.2 172.0 459.1 329.0 217.4 130.2 31.1 99.1 1,119.2 852.3 1,288.4 Apr.
301.4 435.4 258.3 177.1 466.9 334.5 220.6 132.3 31.0 101.3 1,102.1 840.8 1,220.2 May
300.7 433.3 257.8 175.5 469.9 331.1 215.4 138.8 29.2 109.6 1,075.8 816.4 1,209.5 June
300.1 429.6 259.1 170.5 465.7 313.2 217.1 152.5 29.9 122.6 1,047.3 792.5 1,248.1 July
300.7 425.1 253.7 171.4 456.5 311.1 214.5 145.4 29.2 116.1 1,037.6 784.0 1,158.2 Aug.
301.1 426.7 256.0 170.8 457.4 311.0 215.2 146.4 29.3 117.0 1,063.9 808.9 1,176.3 Sep.
302.5 430.5 257.3 173.2 468.2 318.6 219.6 149.5 30.2 119.3 1,049.9 793.4 1,159.6 Oct.
302.2 430.5 256.7 173.8 474.8 325.6 222.5 149.2 29.1 120.1 1,048.0 792.3 1,119.7 Nov.
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 Dec.
304.9 414.0 253.3 160.7 478.4 330.8 224.5 147.6 28.7 118.9 1,087.5 834.6 1,029.5 2021 Jan.
307.1 413.4 250.6 162.9 478.5 334.5 227.0 144.0 28.8 115.2 1,093.8 843.9 974.4 Feb.
309.1 414.4 249.3 165.1 483.8 339.4 232.3 144.4 28.9 115.5 1,105.7 855.5 960.1 Mar.
310.2 409.9 251.0 158.9 479.5 339.8 232.3 139.7 30.3 109.4 1,122.5 876.2 930.3 Apr.
313.5 409.5 250.6 158.9 473.2 339.1 231.9 134.1 28.4 105.7 1,108.3 862.4 902.3 May
313.8 401.4 249.1 152.3 481.7 339.4 231.8 142.3 28.8 113.5 1,111.0 864.8 922.5 June
314.2 402.2 251.3 150.8 482.0 344.2 236.6 137.8 28.6 109.2 1,097.1 849.1 964.3 July
315.4 398.9 248.0 150.9 484.0 346.1 238.8 137.9 28.3 109.6 1,084.8 839.7 954.2 Aug.
316.0 402.4 248.3 154.1 491.0 352.8 242.0 138.2 27.9 110.3 1,089.5 842.5 936.4 Sep.
Changes 3
–11.8 10.7 –10.5 21.2 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.5 0.5 – 2.2 2.7 –15.5 –17.7 –62.2 2012
2.0 – 7.0 –10.9 3.9 – 3.0 – 3.4 – 9.3 0.5 – 2.6 3.1 –38.8 –47.2 –420.8 2013
15.5 –12.3 –15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 – 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
1.6 2.1 3.9 – 1.8 6.2 3.2 4.5 3.0 0.4 2.6 36.0 35.9 55.6 2020 Jan.
– 1.1 – 2.2 – 2.1 – 0.1 6.8 6.7 2.8 0.1 0.1 – 0.0 13.5 12.5 137.3 Feb.
– 4.5 10.2 2.0 8.3 7.5 3.3 6.5 4.2 – 0.4 4.6 17.8 11.2 67.6 Mar.
– 0.7 4.5 0.6 3.9 4.0 3.7 4.3 0.3 1.6 – 1.3 10.4 9.3 46.3 Apr.
2.5 4.4 – 0.9 5.3 2.5 0.8 – 1.2 1.6 – 0.6 2.2 –23.0 –18.2 –67.0 May
– 0.7 – 1.9 – 0.3 – 1.6 3.3 – 3.2 – 4.9 6.4 – 1.8 8.2 –22.9 –21.2 –10.8 June
– 0.6 – 3.6 1.3 – 4.9 – 3.5 1.6 2.7 – 5.1 0.6 – 5.7 –10.3 – 7.1 38.7 July
0.6 – 4.4 – 5.4 0.9 – 9.2 – 2.3 – 2.5 – 6.9 – 0.7 – 6.2 – 7.0 – 6.0 –89.8 Aug.
0.4 1.5 2.2 – 0.7 0.7 – 0.1 0.7 0.9 0.1 0.7 21.1 20.0 18.0 Sep.
1.6 4.4 2.0 2.5 10.4 7.3 4.2 3.0 0.9 2.1 –15.3 –16.7 –16.4 Oct.
– 0.3 0.2 – 0.5 0.7 7.3 7.6 3.6 – 0.3 – 1.1 0.8 6.4 6.6 –41.4 Nov.
1.5 –17.5 – 4.4 –13.2 – 4.9 1.9 0.3 – 6.9 0.6 – 7.4 –36.3 –34.4 –29.3 Dec.
1.5 1.1 0.9 0.2 9.1 3.8 2.9 5.3 – 0.9 6.2 80.2 79.8 –62.3 2021 Jan.
2.3 – 0.2 – 2.4 2.3 0.3 3.7 2.4 – 3.4 0.1 – 3.4 6.3 8.9 –55.4 Feb.
1.9 0.9 – 1.3 2.2 4.6 4.2 4.9 0.4 0.1 0.3 2.8 3.3 –15.3 Mar.
1.0 – 5.0 1.7 – 6.7 – 3.6 0.9 0.7 – 4.5 1.5 – 6.0 26.0 29.0 –28.8 Apr.
2.7 0.4 – 0.3 0.7 – 5.6 – 0.1 0.3 – 5.5 – 1.9 – 3.6 –11.4 –11.4 –28.0 May
0.8 – 8.1 – 1.4 – 6.7 7.8 – 0.4 – 0.6 8.2 0.4 7.7 – 5.7 – 5.3 19.9 June
0.4 0.7 2.3 – 1.5 1.0 5.6 4.8 – 4.7 – 0.2 – 4.5 –15.0 –16.5 38.7 July
1.2 – 3.4 – 3.5 0.1 1.9 1.8 2.2 0.1 – 0.3 0.4 –13.1 –10.0 –10.8 Aug.
0.6 3.6 0.3 3.3 7.2 6.7 3.3 0.5 – 0.4 0.9 4.9 2.7 –18.2 Sep.
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2019 Dec. 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 Jan. 8,482.2 1,293.2 1,033.0 260.2 3,775.6 3,647.0 2,229.5 846.8 267.2 570.7 537.5 116.3 54.3
Feb. 8,666.7 1,313.5 1,047.8 265.7 3,794.5 3,664.6 2,249.1 847.1 270.3 568.4 535.8 117.0 55.2
Mar. 8,912.6 1,418.4 1,135.8 282.6 3,853.2 3,705.0 2,299.1 841.5 268.6 564.4 532.5 135.5 72.3
Apr. 9,014.6 1,426.3 1,156.6 269.6 3,872.7 3,729.4 2,339.0 826.7 259.6 563.8 532.6 130.3 65.2
May 8,915.3 1,386.1 1,112.0 274.0 3,913.5 3,764.4 2,370.9 829.9 266.6 563.6 532.9 136.6 70.6
June 9,026.9 1,503.5 1,230.4 273.1 3,906.1 3,754.5 2,379.1 812.8 256.1 562.5 532.8 139.2 71.1
July 9,069.0 1,488.7 1,209.5 279.2 3,937.1 3,783.3 2,408.1 814.3 263.0 560.9 531.7 132.9 65.5
Aug. 8,985.5 1,489.8 1,213.2 276.6 3,951.0 3,790.7 2,421.8 808.3 258.8 560.6 531.8 129.7 63.6
Sep. 9,097.4 1,523.9 1,252.4 271.5 3,975.9 3,795.1 2,436.7 798.3 251.4 560.1 531.7 140.6 72.8
Oct. 9,124.3 1,536.3 1,264.9 271.4 4,015.2 3,827.0 2,473.1 794.2 249.1 559.7 531.7 140.8 69.6
Nov. 9,096.0 1,515.4 1,245.5 269.9 4,035.0 3,846.2 2,508.7 778.0 235.3 559.6 532.0 140.2 69.0
Dec. 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 Jan. 9,150.4 1,560.0 1,262.3 297.7 4,044.0 3,855.8 2,536.8 757.4 219.4 561.6 534.8 138.4 65.8
Feb. 9,148.1 1,584.4 1,261.7 322.7 4,053.2 3,865.2 2,552.4 750.1 214.1 562.6 536.1 137.7 68.2
Mar. 9,261.9 1,634.1 1,336.6 297.6 4,068.3 3,876.2 2,569.2 744.7 212.3 562.3 536.2 142.2 71.0
Apr. 9,269.2 1,659.9 1,344.1 315.8 4,079.3 3,886.3 2,588.3 735.3 205.8 562.7 536.9 143.0 70.2
May 9,277.1 1,661.1 1,353.0 308.1 4,103.8 3,909.2 2,614.0 732.0 205.0 563.2 537.5 146.4 70.4
June 9,293.7 1,670.8 1,357.4 313.4 4,088.4 3,890.3 2,605.4 722.3 198.1 562.6 537.1 151.3 76.7
July 9,321.9 1,682.5 1,362.0 320.4 4,110.8 3,918.9 2,638.6 718.3 196.7 562.0 536.8 146.4 74.0
Aug. 9,319.3 1,686.5 1,365.8 320.7 4,119.2 3,925.6 2,648.6 715.5 194.1 561.5 536.6 147.8 74.7
Sep. 9,329.7 1,668.2 1,354.5 313.6 4,112.0 3,916.6 2,643.4 712.5 193.9 560.7 535.9 148.8 77.1
Changes 4
2012 –129.2 –68.7 –70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 –90.4 –50.2 1.5 14.1 – 1.4 5.4
2013 –703.6 –106.2 –73.9 –32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 –56.3 –26.6 – 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 –28.4 –32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 –32.1 3.1 – 2.4 – 2.4 – 2.5 – 0.0
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2020 Jan. 162.1 49.3 22.2 27.2 – 3.4 – 3.5 – 2.0 2.9 5.3 – 4.5 – 3.0 – 0.1 – 0.4
Feb. 193.8 20.0 14.6 5.4 18.5 17.3 19.4 0.2 3.0 – 2.2 – 1.7 0.6 0.9
Mar. 251.0 104.6 87.7 16.9 58.9 40.4 50.1 – 5.6 – 1.7 – 4.0 – 3.4 18.5 17.1
Apr. 96.1 7.0 20.3 –13.3 18.8 24.0 39.6 –15.0 – 9.2 – 0.7 0.1 – 5.3 – 7.1
May –40.6 22.0 16.8 5.2 34.0 33.3 29.9 3.6 7.3 – 0.2 0.3 1.2 0.1
June 118.6 118.2 118.9 – 0.7 – 7.0 – 9.6 8.3 –16.8 –10.5 – 1.1 – 0.1 2.6 0.6
July 67.5 –11.0 –19.0 8.1 34.1 31.5 31.0 2.1 7.4 – 1.6 – 1.1 – 5.7 – 5.4
Aug. –79.5 1.6 4.0 – 2.4 14.4 7.7 13.8 – 5.9 – 4.1 – 0.2 0.2 – 3.2 – 1.9
Sep. 104.9 33.1 38.7 – 5.7 24.1 3.7 14.4 –10.2 – 7.6 – 0.5 – 0.1 10.7 9.1
Oct. 25.2 12.3 12.4 – 0.1 39.1 32.1 36.4 – 3.9 – 3.3 – 0.4 – 0.0 0.1 – 3.3
Nov. 12.0 8.2 8.4 – 0.1 25.6 20.2 36.4 –16.0 –13.6 – 0.1 0.3 4.1 3.9
Dec. –141.5 –25.2 – 7.9 –17.3 –12.3 – 8.7 0.3 –10.0 – 8.0 1.0 1.3 – 4.8 –11.8
2021 Jan. 201.4 65.4 25.0 40.4 21.0 18.6 28.1 –10.6 – 7.8 1.1 1.6 2.6 9.7
Feb. – 2.3 24.4 – 0.7 25.1 9.0 9.2 15.5 – 7.3 – 5.3 1.0 1.3 – 0.7 2.4
Mar. 100.0 47.8 73.8 –26.0 13.6 9.9 15.8 – 5.6 – 1.9 – 0.3 0.1 4.0 2.5
Apr. 21.2 27.6 8.3 19.3 12.5 11.2 20.1 – 9.4 – 6.5 0.4 0.7 1.2 – 0.6
May 10.7 0.6 9.1 – 8.5 24.9 23.2 26.0 – 3.2 – 0.7 0.5 0.6 3.5 0.3
June 5.3 8.2 3.7 4.4 –16.6 –19.8 – 9.4 – 9.8 – 7.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 4.5 6.1
July 26.3 14.4 7.4 7.0 22.3 28.6 33.2 – 4.1 – 1.4 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 4.9 – 3.1
Aug. – 3.9 3.9 3.7 0.2 7.8 6.5 9.9 – 2.8 – 2.6 – 0.5 – 0.3 0.9 0.2
Sep. 9.6 –18.4 –11.3 – 7.1 – 7.7 – 9.5 – 5.9 – 2.7 – 0.1 – 0.8 – 0.6 1.0 2.4
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 2011
42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 2012
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019 Dec.
59.4 17.1 2.7 2.4 12.3 10.8 2.5 1.8 1,078.0 36.0 622.5 712.5 996.0 2020 Jan.
59.2 15.3 2.6 2.4 12.9 11.2 2.0 1.9 1,087.4 34.6 638.8 714.0 1,114.6 Feb.
60.6 16.5 2.6 2.4 12.8 11.2 1.7 2.5 1,074.1 30.8 674.1 713.4 1,175.2 Mar.
62.4 17.6 2.6 2.4 13.0 11.1 3.4 2.4 1,078.1 29.6 704.0 693.5 1,234.2 Apr.
63.4 16.4 2.6 2.4 12.5 10.8 2.2 2.2 1,076.9 28.8 693.7 686.4 1,154.4 May
65.4 19.2 2.6 2.4 12.5 11.8 0.9 2.1 1,074.0 28.6 696.8 702.1 1,141.4 June
64.8 20.2 2.6 2.3 20.8 20.1 2.1 1.9 1,067.4 25.9 698.3 694.7 1,178.9 July
63.6 19.3 2.6 2.3 30.6 29.8 1.7 1.9 1,063.9 25.5 682.1 699.9 1,095.2 Aug.
65.2 21.8 2.6 2.3 40.2 39.0 1.2 2.6 1,077.3 25.6 687.1 720.4 1,108.9 Sep.
68.6 25.0 2.6 2.3 47.3 46.6 1.4 2.7 1,075.1 24.6 687.8 712.4 1,093.3 Oct.
68.7 24.3 2.6 2.3 48.5 47.6 9.1 2.5 1,070.0 23.3 696.7 713.1 1,054.3 Nov.
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 Dec.
70.0 23.7 2.6 2.3 49.7 48.3 6.3 2.5 1,058.8 19.7 790.8 708.3 979.7 2021 Jan.
67.0 20.5 2.5 2.3 50.3 48.2 4.5 2.5 1,068.3 19.6 803.5 702.4 929.4 Feb.
68.7 22.0 2.5 2.3 49.9 48.9 6.7 2.9 1,090.4 21.5 833.7 712.0 913.8 Mar.
70.3 23.2 2.5 2.3 50.0 48.6 5.1 2.9 1,091.8 21.0 839.1 705.9 885.3 Apr.
73.5 26.7 2.5 2.3 48.2 46.6 6.0 2.3 1,087.7 23.5 854.7 702.7 858.8 May
72.0 25.9 2.5 2.3 46.9 45.6 4.5 2.3 1,084.6 23.8 836.9 725.4 880.7 June
69.9 22.9 2.5 2.3 45.5 44.3 6.0 2.3 1,087.2 23.5 800.0 719.2 913.9 July
70.7 24.0 2.5 2.3 45.8 44.0 7.4 2.3 1,089.9 25.5 790.7 725.0 898.4 Aug.
69.3 22.4 2.5 2.2 46.7 45.3 7.3 2.2 1,100.1 24.7 840.5 736.8 862.6 Sep.
Changes 4
– 7.2 – 3.6 0.5 0.3 – 7.9 – 9.2 –19.6 1.2 –107.0 –18.6 54.2 21.0 –68.5 2012
– 0.5 2.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 –11.3 –10.0 4.1 – 3.2 –104.9 –17.6 –134.1 18.9 –417.1 2013
– 2.3 – 1.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.8 – 3.4 – 0.6 –63.7 – 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
0.3 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.3 – 0.5 1.1 – 0.1 11.0 3.5 59.9 –17.2 61.4 2020 Jan.
– 0.3 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 0.4 – 0.6 0.1 8.6 – 1.4 15.5 1.3 130.4 Feb.
1.4 1.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.3 0.6 –11.9 – 3.8 36.2 – 0.3 63.2 Mar.
1.8 1.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 1.7 – 0.1 1.6 – 1.3 27.6 –20.7 60.3 Apr.
1.1 – 1.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 1.2 – 0.1 5.1 – 0.6 –21.9 3.5 –82.0 May
2.0 2.8 – 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 – 1.3 – 0.2 – 1.3 – 0.1 4.6 16.4 –10.8 June
– 0.3 1.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 8.3 8.3 1.3 – 0.2 3.3 – 1.2 10.9 – 4.3 33.3 July
– 1.3 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.8 9.8 – 0.5 0.0 – 2.2 – 0.4 –14.9 5.7 –83.7 Aug.
1.6 2.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.6 9.2 – 0.5 0.7 10.5 0.0 2.6 19.6 14.9 Sep.
3.4 3.2 – 0.0 0.0 7.0 7.5 0.3 0.1 – 2.9 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 8.2 –15.5 Oct.
0.2 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.2 1.0 3.3 – 0.2 – 0.9 – 1.2 12.6 3.3 –39.9 Nov.
7.0 6.3 0.0 0.0 1.3 1.0 0.3 – 0.0 – 9.0 – 1.9 –71.4 – 0.7 –23.2 Dec.
– 7.1 – 6.9 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 3.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 – 1.5 171.3 – 3.7 –49.0 2021 Jan.
– 3.1 – 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.2 – 1.8 – 0.0 8.9 – 0.1 12.2 – 6.2 –48.9 Feb.
1.5 1.3 – 0.0 0.0 – 0.4 0.8 2.1 0.5 15.7 1.7 24.0 7.1 –10.8 Mar.
1.8 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 2.2 – 0.1 7.3 – 0.4 11.1 – 3.7 –31.3 Apr.
3.2 3.5 – 0.0 0.0 – 1.8 – 1.9 0.9 – 0.1 – 2.7 2.5 17.0 – 2.8 –27.1 May
– 1.6 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.3 – 1.0 – 1.5 0.1 – 7.7 0.2 –22.7 20.9 24.6 June
– 1.8 – 2.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.4 – 1.3 1.5 – 0.1 2.3 – 0.2 –37.2 – 5.4 28.5 July
0.7 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.3 – 0.2 1.4 – 0.0 2.2 2.0 – 9.9 5.6 –14.9 Aug.
– 1.4 – 1.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.8 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 11.5 0.6 49.9 10.4 –36.0 Sep.
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
November 2021
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
  
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which: of which: 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total  
1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2021         Apr. 1,494 9,329.3 1,107.6 2,534.6 2,048.7 482.7 4,549.4 395.3 3,447.6 0.3 687.5 95.1 1,042.7
         May 1,492 9,338.4 1,090.9 2,580.8 2,095.4 482.1 4,555.7 391.2 3,459.0 0.2 688.8 95.3 1,015.6         June 1,487 9,355.0 1,089.8 2,569.0 2,084.1 481.5 4,564.4 391.3 3,465.9 0.3 690.6 95.4 1,036.5
         July 1,484 9,383.6 1,106.7 2,511.3 2,028.4 480.2 4,592.5 400.2 3,487.5 0.3 685.3 94.3 1,078.9
         Aug. 1,483 9,380.8 1,062.6 2,551.1 2,072.1 476.5 4,603.9 397.8 3,501.6 0.2 683.3 94.6 1,068.6         Sep. 1,470 9,391.2 1,103.1 2,513.6 2,034.0 477.8 4,627.9 401.4 3,511.8 0.3 694.9 95.5 1,051.2
Commercial banks 6
2021         Aug. 257 3,918.9 577.6 1,074.1 991.1 82.0 1,431.0 255.3 954.4 0.2 205.7 32.6 803.6
         Sep. 257 3,920.4 599.5 1,055.2 970.5 84.0 1,443.4 258.1 955.5 0.2 215.9 32.5 789.9
   Big banks 7
2021         Aug. 3 2,142.2 196.4 524.3 492.1 32.2 678.0 131.5 437.6 0.0 101.2 27.0 716.5
         Sep. 3 2,112.0 189.7 515.6 482.9 32.7 679.2 127.5 438.5 0.1 107.0 26.9 700.5
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2021         Aug. 143 1,329.9 252.3 349.8 301.0 48.2 643.1 90.6 447.1 0.1 98.5 4.8 79.8
         Sep. 143 1,368.3 277.9 351.8 302.0 49.6 652.0 95.6 446.8 0.1 102.8 4.8 81.7
   Branches of foreign banks
2021         Aug. 111 446.8 129.0 200.1 198.0 1.6 109.8 33.2 69.7 0.0 6.1 0.7 7.2
         Sep. 111 440.1 131.9 187.7 185.6 1.7 112.1 35.0 70.2 0.0 6.2 0.7 7.7
Landesbanken
2021         Aug. 6 850.5 119.7 230.9 182.2 48.5 394.3 36.1 316.1 0.0 40.4 7.8 97.8
         Sep. 6 847.1 110.6 233.7 184.9 48.6 396.5 36.2 318.4 0.0 40.1 9.0 97.3
Savings banks
2021         Aug. 371 1,530.9 179.9 169.9 52.9 117.0 1,142.7 46.7 919.1 − 176.0 15.0 23.4
         Sep. 371 1,531.6 179.8 167.1 50.6 116.3 1,147.0 47.8 922.2 − 176.5 15.1 22.8
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2021         Aug. 803 1,120.1 60.7 199.2 85.7 113.3 815.6 32.4 661.0 0.0 121.9 18.7 25.9
         Sep. 790 1,121.1 63.5 193.5 80.3 113.0 819.4 33.1 664.0 0.0 122.1 18.7 26.0
Mortgage banks
2021         Aug. 10 246.1 10.7 19.7 10.7 8.6 207.3 2.7 185.8 − 18.7 0.2 8.2
         Sep. 10 246.0 11.3 19.3 10.6 8.4 207.6 2.7 186.1 − 18.8 0.2 7.7
Building and loan associations
2021         Aug. 18 250.0 2.6 44.1 28.3 15.7 199.5 1.0 172.9 . 25.7 0.3 3.5
         Sep. 18 250.1 2.6 43.2 27.5 15.7 200.4 1.0 173.8 . 25.6 0.3 3.6
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2021         Aug. 18 1,464.4 111.4 813.2 721.2 91.3 413.4 23.6 292.2 0.0 95.0 20.1 106.3
         Sep. 18 1,474.9 135.9 801.6 709.6 91.7 413.6 22.6 291.9 0.0 95.8 19.8 104.0
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2021         Aug. 144 1,576.9 278.2 565.8 528.8 36.1 569.3 105.1 358.4 0.1 98.3 3.7 159.8
         Sep. 144 1,604.9 302.6 555.5 517.3 37.5 579.9 110.1 359.7 0.2 102.8 3.6 163.3
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2021         Aug. 33 1,130.1 149.3 365.8 330.8 34.5 459.4 71.9 288.7 0.1 92.2 3.0 152.6
         Sep. 33 1,164.7 170.8 367.7 331.7 35.9 467.8 75.1 289.5 0.1 96.6 2.9 155.6
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with Section 35(1) number 1a of the Credit
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified Institution Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kredit-
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective institute) are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting reporting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in Statistical
Law(Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report − Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the building and loan associations: including deposits und er savings and loan contracts
meaning of Section 340e(3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels- (see Table IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
November 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
for for of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At 3 Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
2,351.7 658.3 1,693.4 4,231.4 2,745.3 244.2 645.4 49.7 568.9 542.5 27.6 1,184.0 555.0 1,007.1 2021          Apr.
2,365.0 653.9 1,711.1 4,260.3 2,768.9 248.3 646.9 50.8 569.4 543.1 26.8 1,176.6 550.7 985.8          May2,373.2 672.2 1,701.0 4,227.2 2,760.4 232.4 639.4 41.7 568.7 542.7 26.2 1,184.3 560.1 1,010.2          June
2,342.3 661.1 1,681.1 4,256.8 2,797.7 229.1 635.9 49.5 568.1 542.4 26.0 1,179.4 560.4 1,044.8          July
2,334.1 648.3 1,685.8 4,269.4 2,814.9 224.4 636.8 54.7 567.6 542.1 25.8 1,186.0 560.6 1,030.6          Aug.2,358.0 657.1 1,700.9 4,269.8 2,815.2 228.6 633.7 50.3 566.7 541.4 25.6 1,204.5 562.5 996.3          Sep.
Commercial banks 6
1,167.9 465.6 702.3 1,682.7 1,194.7 148.3 227.4 52.9 101.2 97.4 11.1 163.7 185.3 719.3 2021          Aug.
1,208.1 487.9 720.2 1,671.4 1,186.2 147.6 225.2 48.7 101.3 97.5 11.0 165.5 186.8 688.6          Sep.
Big banks 7
475.6 185.5 290.1 834.2 588.9 78.9 79.3 43.4 85.9 82.7 1.2 122.7 72.2 637.5 2021          Aug.
486.7 188.8 297.9 822.8 580.5 76.1 79.1 34.9 86.0 82.8 1.2 124.6 72.3 605.5          Sep.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
439.2 128.7 310.5 676.0 483.2 43.6 124.4 9.5 14.9 14.2 9.8 40.5 101.5 72.7 2021          Aug.
471.2 149.5 321.7 679.3 484.0 48.1 122.5 13.8 14.9 14.2 9.8 40.6 102.8 74.4          Sep.
Branches of foreign banks
253.1 151.5 101.7 172.6 122.6 25.8 23.7 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.4 11.6 9.1 2021          Aug.
250.1 149.6 100.5 169.3 121.7 23.4 23.6 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.3 11.7 8.7          Sep.
Landesbanken
300.0 64.2 235.7 240.8 146.3 21.7 66.7 0.6 6.1 6.0 0.0 178.7 43.2 87.9 2021          Aug.
288.3 55.7 232.6 250.4 153.3 24.7 66.3 0.5 6.0 6.0 0.0 180.1 43.2 85.2          Sep.
Savings banks
193.9 3.3 190.7 1,139.8 828.3 10.2 13.2 − 277.5 260.7 10.6 17.1 131.9 48.1 2021          Aug.
197.6 4.7 192.9 1,136.8 825.1 10.8 13.2 − 277.2 260.5 10.5 17.1 131.9 48.1          Sep.
 
Credit cooperatives
 
161.3 1.6 159.7 822.1 594.0 27.8 14.3 − 182.3 177.6 3.8 9.7 93.9 33.1 2021          Aug.
162.3 1.5 160.8 821.0 593.1 27.8 14.6 − 181.7 177.0 3.9 9.6 94.1 34.1          Sep.
Mortgage banks
62.0 2.3 59.7 60.2 2.0 3.9 54.3 − − − . 104.2 10.0 9.7 2021          Aug.
61.4 2.2 59.2 59.5 1.9 4.1 53.4 − − − . 103.2 10.0 11.9          Sep.
Building and loan associations
31.8 2.0 29.8 191.8 3.5 1.5 186.4 − 0.5 0.5 0.1 3.3 12.3 10.9 2021          Aug.
31.5 2.0 29.5 192.0 3.5 1.4 186.5 − 0.5 0.5 0.1 3.3 12.4 11.0          Sep.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
417.3 109.4 307.8 132.0 46.2 11.1 74.6 1.2 − − . 709.5 84.1 121.6 2021          Aug.
408.8 103.0 305.8 138.8 52.0 12.2 74.4 1.1 − − . 725.6 84.1 117.5          Sep.
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
654.2 290.3 363.8 642.3 486.2 53.5 79.4 9.3 20.0 19.7 3.2 37.4 78.7 164.3 2021          Aug.
681.1 309.0 372.0 641.3 487.7 51.5 78.9 9.7 20.1 19.8 3.1 38.6 78.9 165.0          Sep.
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
401.0 138.9 262.1 469.7 363.6 27.7 55.7 9.3 19.6 19.3 3.1 37.0 67.1 155.1 2021          Aug.
431.0 159.5 271.5 472.1 366.0 28.1 55.2 9.7 19.7 19.4 3.0 38.2 67.1 156.3          Sep.
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to Ap ril 2018)
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, Table
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks I.3, banking group ”Big banks”). 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Br anches (with
and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking cat egories. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
November 2021
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
  
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills andhand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item: ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  
1 
End of year or month *
 
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.92012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.12013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.22014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.82017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.52018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.92019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2020         Apr. 48.4 582.3 1,334.6 1,090.6 0.0 1.2 242.8 5.0 3,594.3 3,185.3 0.2 7.2 401.6
         May 47.8 586.2 1,291.8 1,044.7 0.0 1.1 246.0 6.0 3,620.9 3,204.2 0.1 10.1 406.4         June 45.7 767.6 1,270.4 1,019.6 0.0 1.1 249.6 6.9 3,621.1 3,206.6 0.2 8.0 406.2
         July 45.2 810.5 1,270.5 1,019.2 0.0 1.2 250.0 7.5 3,625.7 3,217.2 0.2 8.0 400.3
         Aug. 45.7 760.8 1,348.1 1,096.7 0.0 1.1 250.3 7.8 3,629.7 3,219.6 0.2 9.4 400.5         Sep. 45.8 884.4 1,293.9 1,041.1 0.0 1.0 251.8 8.3 3,634.2 3,224.4 0.2 8.4 401.3
         Oct. 46.1 811.0 1,397.3 1,145.2 0.0 0.8 251.2 8.6 3,651.1 3,237.6 0.2 9.0 404.3
         Nov. 45.4 863.2 1,351.9 1,101.3 0.0 0.8 249.8 8.6 3,661.1 3,247.4 0.2 7.6 405.8         Dec. 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021         Jan. 44.6 1,009.1 1,283.1 1,032.1 0.0 0.7 250.2 9.2 3,654.0 3,250.7 0.3 6.6 396.3
         Feb. 45.0 929.2 1,382.3 1,130.2 0.0 1.0 251.1 9.6 3,669.3 3,261.7 0.2 7.4 400.0         Mar. 45.5 983.4 1,419.4 1,160.8 0.0 0.9 257.7 9.8 3,699.1 3,287.5 0.2 6.7 404.7
         Apr. 44.7 1,062.1 1,362.4 1,105.7 0.0 0.9 255.8 9.8 3,693.9 3,287.5 0.2 5.6 400.5
         May 45.4 1,044.7 1,423.6 1,167.3 0.0 0.9 255.4 10.1 3,709.6 3,300.2 0.1 4.6 404.7         June 46.1 1,042.8 1,409.7 1,153.8 0.0 0.8 255.1 10.3 3,709.2 3,305.7 0.2 5.8 397.6
         July 46.3 1,059.2 1,372.0 1,118.1 0.0 0.8 253.2 10.3 3,725.3 3,322.9 0.2 6.1 396.2
         Aug. 46.5 1,015.2 1,425.2 1,172.4 0.0 0.8 252.1 10.3 3,736.4 3,332.8 0.1 5.7 397.8         Sep. 47.1 1,054.9 1,400.5 1,148.3 0.0 0.7 251.5 10.3 3,749.9 3,342.1 0.1 4.4 403.3
Changes *
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.72013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.82014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 + 129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.92017 + 6.1 + 108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 20.1 − 0.1 + 57.0 + 70.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 13.62018 + 8.5 + 24.0 − 81.0 − 76.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 3.8 + 71.5 + 105.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 33.22019 + 2.8 + 59.7 − 63.0 − 61.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 1.4 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 5.5
2020 + 4.1 + 316.4 + 201.2 + 191.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 4.3 + 123.2 + 123.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.1
2020         Apr. + 0.5 − 39.4 + 61.6 + 61.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 14.4 + 11.2 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 1.0
         May − 0.6 + 3.9 + 16.9 + 13.7 − − 0.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 + 24.1 + 16.4 − 0.0 + 2.9 + 4.8         June − 2.1 + 181.4 − 21.4 − 25.0 − − 0.0 + 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.2
         July − 0.5 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 4.6 + 10.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 5.9
         Aug. + 0.5 − 49.7 + 77.6 + 77.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.2         Sep. + 0.1 + 123.6 − 54.2 − 55.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 4.6 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.7
         Oct. + 0.2 − 73.5 + 103.4 + 104.2 − − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 16.5 + 12.9 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 3.0
         Nov. − 0.6 + 52.3 − 17.1 − 15.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.6 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 1.6         Dec. + 1.8 − 70.3 + 16.0 + 18.4 − − 0.1 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 14.1 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 8.1
2021         Jan. − 2.6 + 216.2 − 84.9 − 87.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.4 + 6.6 + 5.3 + 0.0 + 2.6 − 1.4
         Feb. + 0.3 − 79.9 + 98.9 + 97.8 − + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 15.3 + 11.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 3.6         Mar. + 0.6 + 54.3 + 37.1 + 30.6 − − 0.1 + 6.6 + 0.2 + 29.7 + 25.6 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 5.4
         Apr. − 0.8 + 78.7 − 56.7 − 54.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 5.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 4.1
         May + 0.8 − 17.5 + 61.2 + 61.6 − + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 15.6 + 12.5 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 4.2         June + 0.6 − 1.9 − 13.6 − 13.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 5.5 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 7.1
         July + 0.2 + 15.3 − 35.1 − 33.1 − − 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 16.1 + 17.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.4
         Aug. + 0.2 − 43.8 + 53.4 + 54.4 − + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 10.9 + 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 1.7         Sep. + 0.6 + 39.7 − 24.7 − 24.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.3 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 5.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exchange of equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer de bt securities;
specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
November 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time Redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits  7 bonds  8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017− 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018− 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
− 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
− 17.1 86.4 1,154.9 141.2 1,013.6 0.0 4.3 3,741.9 2,345.4 801.6 563.8 31.1 32.8 2020          Apr.
− 19.4 78.8 1,110.9 131.6 979.3 0.0 7.1 3,775.3 2,376.3 804.7 563.6 30.7 33.3          May− 20.8 78.8 1,229.5 131.4 1,098.1 0.0 9.4 3,766.3 2,385.3 788.2 562.6 30.3 33.4          June
− 22.2 79.3 1,207.9 125.0 1,082.8 0.0 11.1 3,803.4 2,414.0 798.6 560.9 29.9 33.8          July
− 22.5 79.2 1,211.5 126.2 1,085.3 0.0 11.5 3,820.8 2,427.7 802.9 560.6 29.6 34.0          Aug.− 22.7 79.2 1,251.5 123.8 1,127.8 0.0 12.0 3,834.2 2,442.8 802.0 560.1 29.3 34.3          Sep.
− 22.8 79.4 1,263.7 131.5 1,132.2 0.0 12.3 3,874.1 2,481.4 804.1 559.7 28.9 34.6          Oct.
− 22.9 78.1 1,244.8 134.6 1,110.2 0.0 12.5 3,894.3 2,515.3 790.9 559.6 28.5 34.4          Nov.− 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4          Dec.
− 23.7 78.2 1,261.6 140.5 1,121.2 0.0 13.6 3,904.5 2,542.0 773.1 561.6 27.9 34.3 2021          Jan.
− 24.0 78.2 1,260.6 138.0 1,122.5 0.0 14.2 3,913.7 2,557.5 766.1 562.6 27.5 34.3          Feb.− 24.3 78.3 1,336.0 135.4 1,200.6 0.0 14.7 3,925.8 2,575.2 761.2 562.3 27.1 34.4          Mar.
− 24.5 77.7 1,343.0 136.2 1,206.8 0.0 15.1 3,935.7 2,594.6 751.6 562.8 26.8 34.4          Apr.
− 24.7 78.6 1,351.9 140.0 1,211.9 0.0 15.5 3,956.3 2,620.5 746.2 563.2 26.3 34.6          May− 25.0 78.7 1,357.0 132.7 1,224.3 0.0 15.8 3,936.4 2,612.1 735.7 562.6 26.1 34.6          June
− 25.1 78.1 1,360.7 136.1 1,224.5 0.0 15.9 3,964.6 2,646.0 730.7 562.0 25.9 34.5          July
− 25.2 78.2 1,364.7 135.3 1,229.4 0.0 16.1 3,971.0 2,656.0 727.8 561.5 25.6 34.3          Aug.− 25.2 78.9 1,354.1 128.9 1,225.1 0.0 16.2 3,963.5 2,651.2 726.2 560.7 25.5 34.1          Sep.
Changes *
− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016− − 0.0 − 1.6 + 11.0 − 18.4 + 29.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 2017− − 1.0 + 3.1 − 25.0 − 3.1 − 21.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 2018− − 0.7 + 0.1 − 8.6 + 1.6 − 10.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 122.5 + 155.8 − 25.7 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 1.4 2019
− + 5.7 − 3.3 + 313.4 + 23.2 + 290.2 − 0.0 + 8.2 + 221.6 + 273.7 − 32.7 − 14.5 − 4.9 + 1.9 2020
− + 0.3 + 0.1 + 20.2 − 6.2 + 26.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 25.3 + 40.7 − 14.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.2 2020          Apr.
− + 2.2 − 0.2 + 15.6 − 4.6 + 20.3 − 0.0 + 2.7 + 30.5 + 27.9 + 3.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6          May− + 1.5 + 0.0 + 118.6 − 0.2 + 118.8 − 0.0 + 2.3 − 9.0 + 8.8 − 16.4 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.1          June
− + 0.9 + 0.5 − 21.7 − 6.4 − 15.2 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 37.1 + 28.7 + 10.5 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.4          July
− + 0.3 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 17.4 + 13.6 + 4.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2          Aug.− + 0.2 + 0.0 + 40.0 − 2.5 + 42.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 13.4 + 15.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.3          Sep.
− + 0.1 + 0.2 + 12.2 + 7.7 + 4.4 − + 0.2 + 40.0 + 38.6 + 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.3          Oct.
− + 0.2 + 0.1 + 8.3 + 3.5 + 4.8 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 20.5 + 34.1 − 13.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2          Nov.− + 0.6 + 0.1 − 8.1 − 9.6 + 1.5 − + 0.5 − 9.2 − 2.3 − 7.6 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.0          Dec.
− + 0.2 − 0.1 + 24.9 + 15.7 + 9.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 19.2 + 28.9 − 10.3 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 2021          Jan.
− + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 2.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 9.1 + 15.4 − 7.0 + 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.0          Feb.− + 0.3 + 0.1 + 75.1 − 2.6 + 77.7 − + 0.5 + 12.2 + 17.7 − 4.8 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1          Mar.
− + 0.2 − 0.6 + 7.1 + 0.8 + 6.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 9.8 + 19.6 − 9.8 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0          Apr.
− + 0.3 + 0.3 + 8.9 + 3.9 + 5.0 − + 0.5 + 20.6 + 26.0 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.2          May− + 0.2 + 0.1 + 5.0 − 7.3 + 12.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 19.8 − 8.5 − 10.5 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0          June
− + 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.6 + 3.5 + 3.1 − + 0.1 + 28.2 + 33.9 − 5.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1          July
− + 0.2 + 0.1 + 4.1 − 0.8 + 4.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 6.4 + 10.0 − 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2          Aug.− + 0.0 + 0.7 − 10.6 − 6.4 − 4.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 6.7 − 5.5 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.2          Sep.
including subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding
operations with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities
outstanding. 6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
November 2021
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
  
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro area Medium market Memo Medium marketbanknotes and paper Securities item: and paper Securitiesand Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.12012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.82013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.82014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.62017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.52018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.12019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2020         Apr. 0.3 1,156.2 899.6 626.2 273.4 2.8 253.8 3.5 843.1 552.5 142.6 410.0 11.4 279.2
         May 0.3 1,139.4 884.7 613.2 271.5 3.3 251.4 3.7 849.7 559.2 152.6 406.5 12.1 278.4         June 0.3 1,113.8 860.8 592.4 268.5 3.7 249.3 3.8 838.4 538.2 134.7 403.5 15.8 284.5
         July 0.3 1,083.1 834.0 574.4 259.6 3.4 245.7 3.9 829.1 536.3 138.8 397.5 15.1 277.6
         Aug. 0.3 1,066.8 821.2 563.3 257.9 3.5 242.1 4.1 819.9 531.3 133.7 397.6 15.6 272.9         Sep. 0.2 1,084.3 841.3 583.4 257.9 3.6 239.4 4.1 821.9 530.4 130.3 400.2 15.2 276.3
         Oct. 0.3 1,064.7 822.9 564.5 258.5 3.5 238.3 4.1 839.8 539.3 137.7 401.6 16.5 284.1
         Nov. 0.2 1,056.0 815.8 563.4 252.4 3.5 236.7 4.0 845.6 539.5 139.8 399.7 14.0 292.1         Dec. 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021         Jan. 0.2 1,135.1 897.8 645.6 252.2 2.6 234.7 3.8 846.9 538.6 142.7 395.8 14.0 294.3
         Feb. 0.6 1,146.4 912.7 659.6 253.1 2.2 231.5 3.8 853.6 548.2 150.4 397.7 14.7 290.7         Mar. 0.2 1,140.4 908.0 646.7 261.3 2.3 230.1 3.8 864.8 559.3 153.3 406.1 11.9 293.5
         Apr. 0.2 1,172.3 943.1 680.7 262.3 2.3 227.0 3.9 855.5 555.5 152.6 402.9 13.0 287.0
         May 0.2 1,157.2 928.1 669.8 258.3 2.4 226.8 3.9 846.1 550.1 147.3 402.8 11.9 284.2         June 0.4 1,159.3 930.3 666.6 263.7 2.5 226.4 3.9 855.1 551.6 146.7 404.9 10.5 293.0
         July 0.4 1,139.3 910.4 651.3 259.1 1.9 227.0 3.8 867.2 565.0 158.4 406.6 13.1 289.2
         Aug. 0.4 1,125.9 899.8 647.9 251.8 1.6 224.5 3.7 867.4 566.7 158.7 407.9 15.3 285.5         Sep. 0.3 1,113.1 885.8 634.6 251.1 1.1 226.3 3.6 877.9 571.2 158.1 413.2 15.1 291.6
Changes *
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.52013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.62014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.52017 + 0.0 − 57.2 − 48.7 − 61.5 + 12.8 + 0.0 − 8.5 + 0.6 − 4.7 + 13.0 + 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 18.42018 + 0.0 + 49.6 + 34.0 + 57.7 − 23.7 + 0.2 + 15.3 + 0.7 + 18.3 + 28.3 + 3.2 + 25.2 − 0.4 − 9.72019 − 0.0 − 4.1 − 11.3 − 21.9 + 10.7 + 0.8 + 6.3 + 0.7 + 26.8 + 19.9 + 12.7 + 7.3 + 3.0 + 3.8
2020 − 0.0 − 32.0 − 22.4 − 6.6 − 15.8 + 0.9 − 10.5 + 0.3 + 34.4 + 14.7 + 9.0 + 5.7 + 3.6 + 16.1
2020         Apr. + 0.0 + 7.4 + 6.5 + 5.5 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 6.5 + 7.2 + 6.3 + 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.4
         May − 0.0 − 22.7 − 21.4 − 22.6 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.8 + 0.2 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1         June + 0.0 − 23.5 − 21.8 − 19.6 − 2.2 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 9.8 − 19.7 − 17.5 − 2.2 + 3.7 + 6.2
         July − 0.0 − 17.9 − 14.4 − 11.2 − 3.2 − 0.2 − 3.3 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 5.3 + 5.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 5.4
         Aug. − 0.0 − 14.4 − 11.1 − 10.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 4.2 − 4.8 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 4.7         Sep. − 0.0 + 13.9 + 16.6 + 18.2 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 3.8 + 1.3 − 0.4 + 3.0
         Oct. + 0.0 − 20.8 − 19.5 − 19.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 16.7 + 7.8 + 6.9 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 7.6
         Nov. − 0.0 − 3.4 − 1.9 + 1.8 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.1 + 9.7 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 8.6         Dec. − 0.0 − 26.9 − 26.3 − 28.9 + 2.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 19.3 − 13.7 − 13.6 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 3.0
2021         Jan. − 0.0 + 106.1 + 108.3 + 110.3 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 22.5 + 14.5 + 17.8 − 3.3 + 2.7 + 5.3
         Feb. + 0.3 + 11.1 + 14.7 + 14.0 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 3.2 − 0.1 + 6.3 + 9.0 + 7.5 + 1.5 + 0.7 − 3.5         Mar. − 0.3 − 11.7 − 10.1 − 15.8 + 5.6 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.0 + 3.9 + 4.9 + 0.7 + 4.1 − 2.8 + 1.8
         Apr. − 0.0 + 37.7 + 40.7 + 36.8 + 3.9 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 4.0 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 1.1 − 5.6
         May + 0.0 − 14.9 − 14.6 − 11.5 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 7.7 − 4.2 − 4.4 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 2.6         June + 0.2 − 4.1 − 3.7 − 6.3 + 2.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 4.9 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 8.2
         July + 0.0 − 21.8 − 20.5 − 15.7 − 4.8 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 12.9 + 13.0 + 11.7 + 1.4 + 2.6 − 2.8
         Aug. − 0.0 − 13.9 − 11.2 − 3.6 − 7.6 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 2.2 − 3.8         Sep. − 0.1 − 17.4 − 18.6 − 15.7 − 2.9 − 0.6 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 7.3 + 1.9 − 1.5 + 3.4 − 0.2 + 5.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
November 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 201612.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 201711.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 201811.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 − 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 − 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.4 19.0 835.3 438.6 396.7 288.0 108.7 − 274.1 143.0 131.1 69.9 61.2 0.1 2020          Apr.
11.4 19.0 828.1 459.2 368.9 260.8 108.0 − 280.8 150.9 129.9 67.9 62.0 0.1          May11.3 19.1 835.5 472.5 363.0 247.2 115.9 − 275.7 145.2 130.5 69.5 61.1 0.1          June
11.2 19.0 843.9 489.3 354.7 238.8 115.8 − 270.6 139.4 131.3 72.5 58.8 0.1          July
11.2 19.0 828.9 474.8 354.1 238.8 115.2 − 263.2 134.8 128.3 69.9 58.5 0.1          Aug.11.4 19.0 832.4 486.5 345.9 226.4 119.6 − 269.6 145.5 124.1 66.0 58.1 0.1          Sep.
11.5 19.0 833.2 487.3 345.9 224.6 121.3 − 269.5 142.6 127.0 68.5 58.4 0.1          Oct.
11.5 19.0 836.8 491.3 345.5 219.0 126.5 − 279.9 154.2 125.8 66.0 59.7 0.1          Nov.11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 − 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1          Dec.
11.3 16.5 954.9 507.8 447.0 298.5 148.5 − 279.8 145.0 134.8 69.4 65.3 0.1 2021          Jan.
11.3 16.5 987.8 520.0 467.7 318.0 149.7 − 283.4 145.2 138.3 71.5 66.8 0.1          Feb.11.3 16.6 991.5 520.2 471.3 319.5 151.8 − 288.9 147.8 141.1 73.7 67.4 0.1          Mar.
11.3 16.5 1,008.7 522.1 486.6 343.1 143.5 − 295.8 150.7 145.0 81.0 64.1 0.1          Apr.
11.3 16.5 1,013.1 513.9 499.2 360.2 139.0 − 304.0 148.4 155.6 88.0 67.6 0.1          May11.3 16.5 1,016.2 539.5 476.7 335.5 141.3 − 290.8 148.4 142.5 79.9 62.6 0.1          June
11.2 16.0 981.6 525.0 456.6 304.9 151.7 − 292.2 151.7 140.5 79.3 61.2 0.1          July
11.2 16.3 969.4 513.0 456.4 293.0 163.5 0.0 298.4 158.9 139.6 78.8 60.8 0.1          Aug.11.2 16.3 1,003.9 528.2 475.8 315.7 160.1 − 306.3 164.0 142.2 81.5 60.7 0.1          Sep.
Changes *
− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016− 1.0 − 4.1 − 15.5 + 25.3 − 40.8 − 43.2 + 2.4
+ 0.0 + 31.8 + 11.0 + 20.8 + 15.6 + 5.2 − 0.4 2017
− 0.2 − 2.2 − 23.9 − 23.4 − 0.4 + 2.1 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 11.9 − 0.2 − 11.8 − 5.7 − 6.0 − 0.2 2018− 0.3 − 0.9 − 9.5 − 49.4 + 39.8 + 28.0 + 11.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.1 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.0 2019
− 0.2 − 3.9 + 83.8 + 87.8 − 4.1 − 34.7 + 30.6 − + 23.6 + 13.8 + 9.8 + 7.1 + 2.8 + 0.0 2020
− 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.0 − 25.9 + 31.9 + 33.0 − 1.1 − + 4.4 − 3.7 + 8.1 + 6.9 + 1.2 − 0.0 2020          Apr.
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 15.3 + 9.3 − 24.6 − 24.6 + 0.0 − − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.0          May− 0.2 + 0.1 + 8.8 + 13.9 − 5.1 − 13.1 + 8.0 − − 4.7 − 5.6 + 0.9 + 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.0          June
− 0.1 + 0.0 + 17.6 + 20.7 − 3.1 − 4.1 + 1.0 − − 2.7 − 4.7 + 2.0 + 4.0 − 2.0 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 − 0.0 − 13.9 − 13.8 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.5 − − 7.2 − 4.4 − 2.7 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.0          Aug.+ 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 10.4 − 9.5 − 13.5 + 4.0 − + 5.8 + 10.4 − 4.6 − 4.1 − 0.5 + 0.0          Sep.
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 2.0 + 1.6 − − 0.6 − 3.2 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.0          Oct.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.9 + 5.9 + 2.0 − 3.7 + 5.7 − + 11.6 + 12.2 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 1.5 − 0.0          Nov.− 0.2 − 1.7 − 72.1 − 60.9 − 11.2 − 12.6 + 1.4 − − 20.3 − 20.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0          Dec.
− 0.0 − 0.8 + 191.3 + 78.5 + 112.9 + 92.4 + 20.5 − + 20.1 + 12.3 + 7.8 + 3.6 + 4.2 − 0.0 2021          Jan.
− 0.0 − 0.0 + 32.7 + 12.2 + 20.5 + 19.3 + 1.2 − + 3.4 + 0.0 + 3.4 + 2.0 + 1.4 − 0.0          Feb.+ 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.8 − 2.6 + 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.9 − + 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 0.0          Mar.
− 0.0 + 0.0 + 23.2 + 4.3 + 19.0 + 26.8 − 7.8 − + 7.9 + 3.7 + 4.2 + 7.3 − 3.0 + 0.0          Apr.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.9 − 7.4 + 12.2 + 16.6 − 4.4 − + 8.6 − 2.2 + 10.8 + 7.2 + 3.5 − 0.0          May− 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 23.7 − 25.6 − 27.4 + 1.8 − − 14.8 − 0.6 − 14.2 − 9.0 − 5.2 − 0.0          June
− 0.1 − 0.5 − 34.8 − 14.6 − 20.2 − 30.6 + 10.4 − + 1.3 + 2.9 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − 12.8 − 12.3 − 0.5 − 12.2 + 11.7 + 0.0 + 5.7 + 6.7 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0          Aug.− 0.0 + 0.0 + 30.5 + 12.9 + 17.6 + 21.4 − 3.9 − 0.0 + 6.7 + 4.5 + 2.2 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 0.0          Sep.

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
November 2021
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.92012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.92013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.62014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.02017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.02018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.82019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2020         Apr. 3,594.3 3,185.5 285.0 255.6 254.9 0.7 29.4 22.9 6.5 3,309.3 2,908.0
         May 3,620.9 3,204.4 285.3 254.3 253.2 1.1 31.1 22.0 9.1 3,335.6 2,931.7         June 3,621.1 3,206.8 278.9 248.5 247.6 0.8 30.4 23.3 7.2 3,342.2 2,939.8
         July 3,625.7 3,217.4 274.8 243.4 242.6 0.8 31.5 24.2 7.3 3,350.9 2,953.2
         Aug. 3,629.7 3,219.7 265.6 237.7 236.9 0.8 28.0 19.4 8.6 3,364.0 2,967.3         Sep. 3,634.2 3,224.6 261.9 232.0 231.3 0.7 29.9 22.3 7.7 3,372.3 2,976.0
         Oct. 3,651.1 3,237.8 261.0 229.5 228.7 0.7 31.6 23.3 8.2 3,390.1 2,991.5
         Nov. 3,661.1 3,247.6 258.7 229.3 228.7 0.6 29.4 22.4 7.0 3,402.4 3,001.7         Dec. 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021         Jan. 3,654.0 3,251.0 247.7 221.9 221.3 0.6 25.8 19.7 6.1 3,406.3 3,018.4
         Feb. 3,669.3 3,261.9 249.5 224.2 223.6 0.6 25.3 18.5 6.8 3,419.7 3,031.9         Mar. 3,699.1 3,287.7 261.3 236.6 236.0 0.6 24.7 18.6 6.1 3,437.8 3,048.6
         Apr. 3,693.9 3,287.7 248.6 223.5 222.8 0.7 25.1 20.2 4.9 3,445.2 3,061.5
         May 3,709.6 3,300.4 248.7 225.4 224.6 0.8 23.3 19.5 3.8 3,460.9 3,075.1         June 3,709.2 3,305.8 250.7 225.8 225.0 0.8 24.9 19.9 5.1 3,458.5 3,082.5
         July 3,725.3 3,323.0 248.2 221.0 220.2 0.8 27.2 21.9 5.3 3,477.1 3,102.5
         Aug. 3,736.4 3,332.9 245.0 221.1 220.4 0.7 23.9 18.9 4.9 3,491.5 3,116.8         Sep. 3,749.9 3,342.2 248.0 224.6 223.9 0.7 23.4 19.6 3.7 3,501.9 3,123.2
Changes *
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.92013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.62014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.82017 + 57.0 + 70.2 − 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 12.1 − 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.42018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 − 9.2 − 8.6 − 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.02019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 − 19.6 − 19.8 − 19.8 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2020         Apr. + 14.4 + 11.2 − 3.3 − 6.3 − 6.2 − 0.1 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 2.3 + 17.7 + 15.9
         May + 24.1 + 16.4 − 2.2 − 3.9 − 4.2 + 0.4 + 1.7 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 26.3 + 23.7         June + 0.2 + 2.5 − 6.4 − 5.8 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 1.3 − 1.9 + 6.6 + 7.9
         July + 4.6 + 10.5 − 5.9 − 6.9 − 6.8 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 10.5 + 15.2
         Aug. + 4.0 + 2.4 − 7.5 − 4.1 − 4.1 − 0.0 − 3.5 − 4.9 + 1.4 + 11.5 + 12.6         Sep. + 4.6 + 4.9 − 3.7 − 5.6 − 5.6 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 2.9 − 0.9 + 8.3 + 8.6
         Oct. + 16.5 + 12.9 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 17.4 + 14.6
         Nov. + 10.6 + 10.4 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 1.2 + 12.7 + 10.6         Dec. − 14.1 − 2.3 − 15.5 − 7.7 − 7.5 − 0.2 − 7.8 − 4.4 − 3.4 + 1.4 + 11.2
2021         Jan. + 6.6 + 5.3 + 4.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 4.2 + 1.7 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 5.2
         Feb. + 15.3 + 10.9 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.7 + 13.5 + 13.3         Mar. + 29.7 + 25.6 + 11.2 + 12.5 + 12.5 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 18.5 + 16.3
         Apr. − 5.2 − 0.0 − 12.8 − 13.1 − 13.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.6 − 1.2 + 7.5 + 13.0
         May + 15.6 + 12.5 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 15.5 + 13.4         June − 0.4 + 5.5 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 − 2.4 + 7.3
         July + 16.1 + 17.2 − 2.0 − 4.2 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 18.1 + 19.5
         Aug. + 10.9 + 9.7 − 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.3 − 2.9 − 0.4 + 14.1 + 14.2         Sep. + 13.5 + 9.3 + 3.3 + 3.7 + 3.8 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 1.2 + 10.2 + 6.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not exchange of equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
November 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
lendingprises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities  
1 claims  2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 20162,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 20172,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4 20182,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 − 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 − 1.1 2020
2,671.3 307.2 2,364.1 236.7 15.9 401.3 236.4 17.3 219.1 164.9 − 1.3 2020          Apr.
2,692.9 310.7 2,382.2 238.9 18.1 403.9 236.3 17.4 218.9 167.6 − 1.3          May2,701.4 310.8 2,390.6 238.4 19.6 402.4 234.5 17.1 217.4 167.9 − 1.2          June
2,715.7 312.5 2,403.2 237.5 21.0 397.7 234.9 16.7 218.1 162.8 − 1.2          July
2,729.1 313.1 2,416.0 238.2 21.3 396.7 234.4 16.7 217.7 162.3 − 1.2          Aug.2,737.4 313.1 2,424.2 238.6 21.5 396.3 233.7 16.2 217.5 162.6 − 1.2          Sep.
2,751.8 313.2 2,438.6 239.7 21.6 398.6 234.0 15.9 218.1 164.6 − 1.2          Oct.
2,762.3 311.5 2,450.8 239.4 21.8 400.7 234.2 15.7 218.6 166.4 − 1.2          Nov.2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 − 1.1          Dec.
2,776.4 307.8 2,468.6 242.0 22.5 387.9 233.6 15.3 218.3 154.3 − 1.2 2021          Jan.
2,787.7 309.7 2,478.1 244.2 22.8 387.8 232.0 15.4 216.6 155.8 − 1.1          Feb.2,802.4 314.5 2,487.9 246.1 23.1 389.3 230.7 15.2 215.5 158.6 − 1.1          Mar.
2,813.9 313.6 2,500.3 247.6 23.4 383.7 230.8 15.0 215.8 153.0 − 1.1          Apr.
2,825.1 311.7 2,513.5 249.9 23.6 385.9 231.1 14.9 216.2 154.8 − 1.1          May2,831.8 310.0 2,521.8 250.7 23.9 376.0 229.2 14.7 214.5 146.8 − 1.1          June
2,851.4 310.7 2,540.8 251.0 24.0 374.6 229.5 14.9 214.6 145.1 − 1.1          July
2,864.5 311.5 2,553.1 252.2 24.2 374.7 229.1 14.7 214.4 145.6 − 1.1          Aug.2,870.0 310.1 2,559.9 253.2 24.2 378.7 228.7 14.3 214.4 150.1 − 1.0          Sep.
Changes *
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 + 15.8 + 0.1 − 39.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 − 9.3 − 29.4 − − 0.1 2017+ 108.7 + 19.3 + 89.4 − 6.7 − 0.9 − 37.1 − 10.5 − 2.7 − 7.8 − 26.6 − − 0.0 2018+ 126.0 + 18.9 + 107.2 + 6.8 − 0.8 − 17.8 − 5.5 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 12.3 − + 0.1 2019
+ 145.0 + 9.4 + 135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 1.7 − − 0.4 2020
+ 16.7 + 2.7 + 14.0 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.8 − + 0.0 2020          Apr.
+ 21.5 + 3.5 + 18.0 + 2.2 + 2.2 + 2.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.7 − + 0.0          May+ 8.4 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 0.5 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.3 − − 0.1          June
+ 16.1 + 1.6 + 14.5 − 0.9 + 0.9 − 4.7 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 5.1 − + 0.0          July
+ 11.9 + 0.7 + 11.2 + 0.7 + 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.5 − − 0.0          Aug.+ 8.2 − 0.0 + 8.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.0          Sep.
+ 13.5 + 0.1 + 13.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 0.9 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.9 − + 0.0          Oct.
+ 10.9 − 1.2 + 12.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 1.8 − − 0.0          Nov.+ 9.5 − 1.0 + 10.5 + 1.7 + 0.7 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 9.9 − − 0.1          Dec.
+ 4.3 − 2.7 + 7.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 2.3 − + 0.1 2021          Jan.
+ 11.1 + 1.8 + 9.3 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 1.5 − − 0.0          Feb.+ 14.4 + 4.7 + 9.7 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 1.2 + 3.5 − − 0.0          Mar.
+ 11.5 − 0.9 + 12.4 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 5.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 5.6 − − 0.0          Apr.
+ 11.0 − 1.9 + 13.0 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 1.8 − + 0.0          May+ 6.5 − 1.7 + 8.2 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 9.7 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 7.9 − − 0.0          June
+ 19.2 + 0.2 + 19.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.7 − − 0.0          July
+ 13.0 + 0.8 + 12.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.5 − − 0.0          Aug.+ 5.2 − 1.4 + 6.6 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 4.0 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 4.4 − + 0.0          Sep.

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
November 2021
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insuranceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2019 2,864.8 1,512.1 1,470.4 1,213.0 257.4 1,560.5 416.1 146.6 119.0 77.1 141.6 54.2 50.3 168.2
2020         Sep. 2,968.6 1,580.1 1,537.3 1,265.4 272.0 1,616.8 434.6 157.2 121.1 82.2 135.9 55.5 57.7 173.7
         Dec. 2,993.0 1,601.8 1,565.6 1,285.1 280.5 1,623.4 443.3 146.7 123.4 82.7 135.8 55.3 59.8 176.0
2021         Mar. 3,038.4 1,618.9 1,587.9 1,302.5 285.4 1,657.2 451.2 149.2 123.0 84.6 139.1 55.4 60.1 182.5
         June 3,056.8 1,634.6 1,619.5 1,316.7 302.8 1,654.3 461.4 142.5 122.1 85.7 135.5 56.0 57.9 182.6         Sep. 3,093.8 1,653.1 1,648.9 1,337.4 311.4 1,666.9 467.9 143.9 122.2 87.7 136.7 56.2 56.3 182.3
 Short-term lending
2019 238.4 − 8.1 − 8.1 206.2 4.7 35.9 5.6 15.7 48.6 3.8 4.6 27.02020         Sep. 231.3 − 8.5 − 8.5 201.4 5.0 36.9 6.5 16.9 38.4 4.2 5.3 30.0
         Dec. 221.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 192.1 4.6 29.0 6.9 16.0 37.0 3.6 6.1 31.6
2021         Mar. 236.0 − 8.0 − 8.0 207.4 4.7 33.4 6.4 16.7 38.9 3.9 6.1 34.2
         June 225.0 − 7.8 − 7.8 195.9 4.5 28.8 5.5 16.7 34.7 4.2 4.4 34.4         Sep. 223.8 − 7.8 − 7.8 193.7 4.4 30.4 5.1 17.1 35.6 4.0 4.1 34.1
 Medium-term lending
2019 301.3 − 36.6 − 36.6 219.5 16.6 28.5 4.9 13.9 19.7 4.6 10.2 52.02020         Sep. 313.1 − 38.0 − 38.0 232.1 17.9 33.1 5.3 14.6 19.2 4.6 14.3 51.4
         Dec. 310.5 − 38.5 − 38.5 230.4 18.5 30.2 5.4 14.8 19.3 4.8 15.0 51.4
2021         Mar. 314.5 − 38.9 − 38.9 236.4 19.1 29.2 5.1 15.3 19.7 4.5 14.7 52.9
         June 310.0 − 39.7 − 39.7 232.8 19.8 27.7 5.0 15.3 19.5 4.5 14.1 51.2         Sep. 310.1 − 40.2 − 40.2 233.3 20.2 27.8 5.2 15.8 19.3 4.5 12.3 51.4
 Long-term lending
2019 2,325.1 1,512.1 1,425.7 1,213.0 212.7 1,134.9 394.8 82.2 108.6 47.6 73.3 45.8 35.5 89.22020         Sep. 2,424.2 1,580.1 1,490.9 1,265.4 225.5 1,183.3 411.6 87.2 109.3 50.7 78.2 46.7 38.2 92.2
         Dec. 2,461.4 1,601.8 1,519.1 1,285.1 234.0 1,201.0 420.2 87.5 111.2 51.8 79.4 47.0 38.7 93.0
2021         Mar. 2,487.9 1,618.9 1,541.0 1,302.5 238.5 1,213.5 427.4 86.6 111.5 52.6 80.5 47.1 39.3 95.4
         June 2,521.8 1,634.6 1,572.0 1,316.7 255.3 1,225.5 437.2 86.0 111.6 53.7 81.3 47.3 39.4 97.0         Sep. 2,559.9 1,653.1 1,600.9 1,337.4 263.5 1,240.0 443.4 85.6 111.9 54.9 81.8 47.7 39.9 96.8
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2020         Q3 + 19.7 + 21.7 + 26.5 + 18.8 + 7.7 − 1.9 + 6.4 − 7.4 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 2.1
         Q4 + 23.9 + 21.3 + 27.7 + 19.3 + 8.4 + 6.1 + 8.4 − 10.3 + 2.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.2 + 2.4
2021         Q1 + 44.8 + 17.1 + 22.2 + 17.3 + 4.9 + 33.0 + 7.6 + 2.5 − 0.7 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 6.2
         Q2 + 17.9 + 20.9 + 30.7 + 21.0 + 9.7 − 3.2 + 9.6 − 6.7 − 0.9 + 1.1 − 3.7 + 0.6 − 2.2 − 0.0         Q3 + 36.9 + 18.5 + 29.1 + 19.7 + 9.4 + 12.6 + 6.3 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.7
 Short-term lending
2020         Q3 − 16.5 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 − 16.7 + 0.3 − 7.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.4
         Q4 − 10.0 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 9.3 − 0.4 − 8.0 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 1.4 − 0.6 + 0.8 + 1.6
2021         Q1 + 14.9 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 15.4 + 0.1 + 4.4 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 2.6
         Q2 − 11.1 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 11.6 − 0.2 − 4.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 4.2 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 0.2         Q3 − 0.5 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3
 Medium-term lending
2020         Q3 + 2.3 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.6
         Q4 − 2.2 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 − 1.6 + 0.6 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.2
2021         Q1 + 3.8 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 5.9 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.5
         Q2 − 4.5 − + 0.8 − + 0.8 − 3.5 + 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.8         Q3 − 0.4 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 + 0.4
 Long-term lending
2020         Q3 + 33.9 + 21.7 + 26.0 + 18.8 + 7.2 + 12.7 + 6.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.7
         Q4 + 36.1 + 21.3 + 27.7 + 19.3 + 8.4 + 16.9 + 8.2 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 1.0
2021         Q1 + 26.1 + 17.1 + 21.8 + 17.3 + 4.5 + 11.7 + 6.9 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 2.2
         Q2 + 33.6 + 20.9 + 30.2 + 21.0 + 9.1 + 12.0 + 9.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.5         Q3 + 37.8 + 18.5 + 28.6 + 19.7 + 8.9 + 14.1 + 6.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.6
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
November 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
803.6 264.5 51.1 193.9 447.5 47.6 1,288.4 1,050.4 238.0 176.5 7.9 15.9 3.9 2019
833.5 281.7 55.1 201.9 458.9 48.1 1,335.9 1,098.8 237.0 178.3 7.5 16.0 3.9 2020          Sep.
843.7 286.6 53.8 204.1 464.0 47.9 1,353.4 1,118.3 235.2 177.4 6.7 16.2 4.0          Dec.
863.3 293.7 59.2 204.3 467.7 48.3 1,364.8 1,132.6 232.2 175.4 6.6 16.4 4.1 2021          Mar.
872.0 296.9 58.2 208.6 473.6 48.7 1,386.3 1,154.0 232.4 174.8 6.6 16.2 4.1          June881.7 304.0 57.8 210.5 478.3 48.9 1,410.5 1,176.6 233.9 176.4 7.0 16.3 4.3          Sep.
Short-term lending
65.0 14.4 9.7 10.2 23.9 4.9 31.6 3.3 28.2 1.3 7.9 0.7 0.0 201963.1 15.6 10.7 10.9 21.7 4.3 29.3 3.5 25.8 1.3 7.5 0.6 0.0 2020          Sep.
61.9 15.7 9.6 10.5 20.9 3.7 28.6 3.4 25.2 1.3 6.7 0.6 0.0          Dec.
67.9 16.5 12.3 10.2 20.5 3.9 27.9 3.4 24.6 1.3 6.6 0.7 0.0 2021          Mar.
67.1 16.0 11.5 10.4 21.0 4.1 28.6 3.4 25.2 1.4 6.6 0.5 0.0          June63.3 16.9 10.3 9.8 20.5 4.3 29.6 3.4 26.2 1.5 7.0 0.5 0.0          Sep.
Medium-term lending
85.7 18.1 11.0 22.9 31.9 3.5 81.4 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0 201989.6 20.0 12.6 24.1 31.9 3.6 80.6 20.0 60.6 57.2 − 0.5 0.0 2020          Sep.
89.6 20.4 11.8 24.5 32.0 3.5 79.6 20.0 59.6 56.1 − 0.5 0.0          Dec.
94.9 21.9 14.4 25.2 31.5 3.6 77.6 19.8 57.8 54.2 − 0.5 0.0 2021          Mar.
95.7 22.2 14.4 26.4 31.3 3.4 76.7 19.8 56.9 53.1 − 0.5 0.0          June97.0 23.2 14.1 27.4 31.1 3.4 76.3 20.0 56.3 52.4 − 0.6 0.1          Sep.
Long-term lending
652.9 232.0 30.4 160.9 391.7 39.1 1,175.5 1,027.1 148.3 117.1 − 14.7 3.8 2019680.8 246.1 31.8 166.9 405.3 40.1 1,226.0 1,075.4 150.7 119.8 − 15.0 3.9 2020          Sep.
692.3 250.5 32.4 169.1 411.1 40.7 1,245.3 1,094.9 150.4 120.0 − 15.1 4.0          Dec.
700.5 255.3 32.5 168.9 415.7 40.8 1,259.3 1,109.5 149.8 119.9 − 15.2 4.1 2021          Mar.
709.2 258.7 32.3 171.8 421.3 41.1 1,281.1 1,130.8 150.3 120.3 − 15.2 4.1          June721.3 263.9 33.3 173.3 426.7 41.2 1,304.7 1,153.3 151.4 122.6 − 15.3 4.2          Sep.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 7.0 + 3.9 − 0.8 + 3.2 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 21.7 + 20.0 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 2020          Q3
+ 9.6 + 5.2 − 1.5 + 1.8 + 4.4 − 0.2 + 17.6 + 19.3 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.1          Q4
+ 19.6 + 7.0 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 + 14.6 − 2.9 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 2021          Q1
+ 8.7 + 3.2 − 0.9 + 4.3 + 5.8 + 0.4 + 21.3 + 21.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0          Q2+ 9.7 + 6.5 − 0.5 + 1.7 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 24.3 + 22.7 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1          Q3
Short-term lending
− 2.6 + 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 2020          Q3
− 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
+ 6.0 + 0.7 + 2.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2021          Q1
− 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2− 2.7 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 − − 0.1 + 0.0 2020          Q3
− 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 5.6 + 1.5 + 2.6 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.9 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2021          Q1
+ 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.1 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.7 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
+ 8.6 + 2.8 + 0.4 + 3.0 + 5.4 + 0.2 + 21.1 + 20.0 + 1.1 + 1.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2020          Q3
+ 10.8 + 4.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 4.9 + 0.5 + 19.0 + 19.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − + 0.2 + 0.1          Q4
+ 8.0 + 4.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 4.1 + 0.1 + 14.3 + 14.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 2021          Q1
+ 8.8 + 3.4 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 21.6 + 21.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 11.3 + 4.7 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 4.9 + 0.1 + 23.6 + 22.5 + 1.2 + 1.7 − + 0.1 + 0.1          Q3
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
November 2021
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2018 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 203.4 638.2 56.8 581.4 578.6 37.3 33.9 14.9 0.52019 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 202.7 613.5 52.7 560.8 575.2 33.2 32.5 14.7 0.22020 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2020         Oct. 3,874.1 2,481.4 804.1 207.6 596.5 50.7 545.8 559.7 28.9 34.6 14.3 0.6
         Nov. 3,894.3 2,515.3 790.9 196.4 594.5 48.1 546.4 559.6 28.5 34.4 14.3 0.7         Dec. 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2021         Jan. 3,904.5 2,542.0 773.1 181.6 591.5 47.4 544.2 561.6 27.9 34.3 14.3 0.5
         Feb. 3,913.7 2,557.5 766.1 174.7 591.4 49.0 542.4 562.6 27.5 34.3 14.4 0.5         Mar. 3,925.8 2,575.2 761.2 175.4 585.9 46.9 539.0 562.3 27.1 34.4 14.4 0.9
         Apr. 3,935.7 2,594.6 751.6 168.9 582.7 46.8 535.9 562.8 26.8 34.4 14.4 1.0
         May 3,956.3 2,620.5 746.2 165.9 580.3 47.3 533.1 563.2 26.3 34.6 14.4 0.7         June 3,936.4 2,612.1 735.7 158.1 577.5 47.4 530.1 562.6 26.1 34.6 14.4 1.0
         July 3,964.6 2,646.0 730.7 155.4 575.3 47.7 527.6 562.0 25.9 34.5 14.3 1.5
         Aug. 3,971.0 2,656.0 727.8 151.2 576.7 48.1 528.5 561.5 25.6 34.3 14.3 1.5         Sep. 3,963.5 2,651.2 726.2 152.5 573.6 47.8 525.9 560.7 25.5 34.1 14.4 1.6
Changes*
2019 + 122.5 + 155.8 − 25.7 − 0.8 − 24.9 − 4.1 − 20.7 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.32020 + 221.6 + 273.7 − 32.7 − 15.0 − 17.7 − 4.8 − 12.9 − 14.5 − 4.9 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.1
2020         Oct. + 40.0 + 38.6 + 2.2 − 3.5 + 5.7 + 2.5 + 3.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3
         Nov. + 20.5 + 34.1 − 13.2 − 11.2 − 2.0 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1         Dec. − 9.2 − 2.3 − 7.6 − 7.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.6
2021         Jan. + 19.2 + 28.9 − 10.3 − 7.3 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 2.5 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4
         Feb. + 9.1 + 15.4 − 7.0 − 6.9 − 0.1 + 1.7 − 1.8 + 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0         Mar. + 12.2 + 17.7 − 4.8 + 0.7 − 5.5 − 2.2 − 3.4 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Apr. + 9.8 + 19.6 − 9.8 − 6.6 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 3.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1
         May + 20.6 + 26.0 − 5.3 − 3.0 − 2.4 + 0.4 − 2.8 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3         June − 19.8 − 8.5 − 10.5 − 7.8 − 2.7 + 0.2 − 2.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
         July + 28.2 + 33.9 − 5.0 − 2.8 − 2.2 + 0.3 − 2.5 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.6
         Aug. + 6.4 + 10.0 − 2.9 − 4.2 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − − 0.0         Sep. − 6.7 − 5.5 − 0.2 + 2.0 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
Domestic government End of year or month*
2018 218.9 62.7 148.2 67.9 80.3 28.5 51.8 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
2019 237.1 74.7 154.9 76.0 78.9 26.1 52.8 3.4 4.1 24.7 2.2 0.22020 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 −
2020         Oct. 240.1 81.5 152.0 68.0 84.0 24.0 60.1 2.8 3.7 26.1 2.1 0.2
         Nov. 237.2 83.9 146.8 63.7 83.1 21.3 61.8 2.8 3.7 25.6 2.1 −         Dec. 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 −
2021         Jan. 224.1 77.5 140.3 57.8 82.5 20.8 61.7 2.7 3.7 25.3 2.1 −
         Feb. 224.4 80.7 137.3 53.6 83.8 22.4 61.3 2.7 3.6 25.3 2.1 −         Mar. 214.4 76.8 131.4 51.2 80.2 19.9 60.3 2.6 3.5 25.3 2.0 −
         Apr. 213.7 80.5 127.0 47.8 79.3 19.8 59.5 2.6 3.5 25.4 2.0 −
         May 218.4 88.4 123.8 45.8 78.0 19.8 58.2 2.6 3.5 25.3 2.0 −         June 209.0 81.5 121.5 43.8 77.6 20.3 57.3 2.6 3.4 25.2 2.0 0.2
         July 211.8 86.6 119.2 41.6 77.7 20.6 57.0 2.6 3.4 25.2 2.0 −
         Aug. 207.9 84.1 117.9 38.8 79.0 21.2 57.9 2.6 3.4 25.3 2.0 −         Sep. 212.1 86.2 120.0 42.2 77.9 20.7 57.2 2.5 3.4 25.2 2.0 −
Changes*
2019 + 17.1 + 11.8 + 5.8 + 7.8 − 2.0 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.22020 − 6.9 + 5.7 − 11.6 − 16.5 + 4.8 − 5.3 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2
2020         Oct. + 3.7 + 4.2 − 0.4 − 4.5 + 4.0 + 2.4 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Nov. − 2.7 + 2.6 − 5.2 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − − 0.2         Dec. − 7.7 − 3.8 − 3.8 − 4.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
2021         Jan. − 5.5 − 2.6 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Feb. + 0.3 + 3.3 − 3.0 − 4.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Mar. − 10.0 − 4.0 − 5.9 − 2.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Apr. − 0.7 + 3.7 − 4.4 − 3.5 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − −
         May + 4.7 + 7.9 − 3.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −         June − 9.3 − 6.9 − 2.3 − 2.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2
         July + 2.7 + 5.0 − 2.2 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
         Aug. − 3.9 − 2.5 − 1.4 − 2.8 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −         Sep. + 4.2 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 3.2 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
November 2021
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2018 3,318.7 2,017.4 693.3 135.4 557.9 28.3 529.6 574.9 33.1 8.6 12.7 0.52019 3,423.9 2,161.6 661.4 126.7 534.7 26.6 508.0 571.8 29.1 7.8 12.6 0.02020 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2020         Oct. 3,634.0 2,399.9 652.1 139.7 512.4 26.7 485.7 556.9 25.1 8.5 12.2 0.5
         Nov. 3,657.1 2,431.4 644.1 132.7 511.4 26.7 484.7 556.8 24.8 8.8 12.2 0.7         Dec. 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2021         Jan. 3,680.4 2,464.5 632.8 123.8 509.0 26.6 482.5 558.9 24.2 9.0 12.3 0.5
         Feb. 3,689.2 2,476.7 628.8 121.1 507.7 26.6 481.1 559.9 23.9 9.0 12.3 0.5         Mar. 3,711.4 2,498.4 629.8 124.1 505.7 27.0 478.7 559.7 23.5 9.1 12.3 0.9
         Apr. 3,721.9 2,514.1 624.5 121.1 503.4 27.1 476.4 560.1 23.2 9.0 12.3 1.0
         May 3,737.9 2,532.1 622.4 120.1 502.3 27.5 474.9 560.6 22.8 9.2 12.3 0.7         June 3,727.4 2,530.5 614.2 114.3 499.9 27.1 472.8 560.0 22.6 9.3 12.4 0.7
         July 3,752.8 2,559.4 611.4 113.8 497.7 27.1 470.6 559.5 22.4 9.3 12.3 1.5
         Aug. 3,763.1 2,571.9 610.0 112.3 497.6 27.0 470.7 559.0 22.3 9.1 12.3 1.5         Sep. 3,751.4 2,565.0 606.1 110.4 495.8 27.1 468.7 558.2 22.1 8.9 12.4 1.6
Changes*
2019 + 105.4 + 144.0 − 31.5 − 8.6 − 22.9 − 1.5 − 21.4 − 3.1 − 4.0 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.42020 + 228.5 + 268.0 − 21.1 + 1.5 − 22.6 + 0.5 − 23.0 − 13.9 − 4.6 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.1
2020         Oct. + 36.3 + 34.4 + 2.6 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3
         Nov. + 23.1 + 31.5 − 8.0 − 6.9 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2         Dec. − 1.5 + 1.5 − 3.8 − 3.4 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.6
2021         Jan. + 24.6 + 31.5 − 7.6 − 5.6 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4
         Feb. + 8.8 + 12.1 − 4.0 − 2.6 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0         Mar. + 22.2 + 21.7 + 1.0 + 3.0 − 2.0 + 0.4 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4
         Apr. + 10.5 + 15.8 − 5.4 − 3.2 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 2.3 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
         May + 16.0 + 18.1 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3         June − 10.5 − 1.6 − 8.2 − 5.8 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
         July + 25.4 + 28.9 − 2.7 − 0.5 − 2.2 + 0.0 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.8
         Aug. + 10.3 + 12.4 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0         Sep. − 10.9 − 7.3 − 2.6 − 1.2 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2018 1,035.4 584.0 432.9 86.0 346.9 17.2 329.7 7.0 11.4 2.8 10.3 0.52019 1,031.5 614.4 399.7 81.1 318.6 15.5 303.1 6.7 10.7 2.4 10.1 0.02020 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2020         Oct. 1,129.9 720.0 394.2 98.6 295.6 14.7 280.9 6.0 9.6 2.3 9.7 0.5
         Nov. 1,132.1 729.2 387.4 92.7 294.8 14.8 279.9 5.9 9.5 2.3 9.6 0.7         Dec. 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2021         Jan. 1,122.7 732.9 374.7 84.2 290.5 14.8 275.7 5.8 9.3 2.3 9.6 0.5
         Feb. 1,109.4 723.5 370.9 82.0 288.9 14.9 274.0 5.8 9.1 2.3 9.6 0.5         Mar. 1,134.9 748.2 371.8 85.1 286.7 15.2 271.5 5.8 9.0 2.2 9.6 0.9
         Apr. 1,124.8 742.4 367.7 83.4 284.3 15.2 269.2 5.8 8.9 2.2 9.6 1.0
         May 1,128.0 746.8 366.7 83.6 283.1 15.7 267.4 5.8 8.7 2.2 9.6 0.7         June 1,115.6 742.7 358.5 77.6 280.9 15.4 265.5 5.8 8.6 2.3 9.6 0.7
         July 1,133.9 760.0 359.6 80.7 278.9 15.4 263.6 5.7 8.5 2.3 9.6 1.5
         Aug. 1,148.4 775.4 358.9 79.9 279.0 15.3 263.7 5.7 8.5 2.3 9.5 1.5         Sep. 1,142.5 773.0 355.3 78.0 277.3 15.6 261.7 5.7 8.5 2.3 9.6 1.6
Changes*
2019 − 3.4 + 30.4 − 32.8 − 4.8 − 28.0 − 1.6 − 26.4 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.42020 + 81.0 + 101.2 − 18.0 + 7.0 − 25.0 − 0.4 − 24.6 − 0.8 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1
2020         Oct. + 15.2 + 12.6 + 2.8 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3
         Nov. + 2.2 + 9.2 − 6.8 − 6.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2         Dec. − 15.9 − 10.1 − 5.7 − 3.4 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.6
2021         Jan. + 6.5 + 13.8 − 7.0 − 5.0 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.4
         Feb. − 13.4 − 9.4 − 3.8 − 2.2 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0         Mar. + 25.6 + 24.8 + 0.9 + 3.1 − 2.2 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Apr. − 10.0 − 5.7 − 4.2 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1
         May + 3.2 + 4.4 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.5 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3         June − 12.3 − 4.2 − 8.0 − 6.0 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
         July + 18.3 + 17.4 + 1.1 + 3.1 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8
         Aug. + 14.6 + 15.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0         Sep. − 5.3 − 2.6 − 2.7 − 1.2 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
November 2021
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
  
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2018 2,283.4 1,433.5 1,396.1 248.4 991.3 156.4 37.4 260.4 246.7 21.3 188.6 36.72019 2,392.4 1,547.2 1,507.9 266.3 1,081.6 160.1 39.3 261.7 248.3 20.8 190.2 37.32020 2,539.5 1,713.8 1,672.7 291.1 1,215.4 166.2 41.1 258.6 245.1 19.3 190.5 35.2
2021         Apr. 2,597.1 1,771.6 1,729.4 299.9 1,261.2 168.3 42.2 256.8 244.0 19.0 190.1 34.9
         May 2,610.0 1,785.3 1,742.1 300.8 1,272.0 169.2 43.2 255.8 242.8 18.9 189.3 34.7         June 2,611.8 1,787.9 1,744.7 298.8 1,277.2 168.7 43.2 255.7 242.3 18.7 189.0 34.5
         July 2,618.9 1,799.4 1,755.5 306.6 1,280.3 168.5 44.0 251.8 238.7 18.3 186.4 34.0
         Aug. 2,614.6 1,796.5 1,751.9 310.0 1,275.1 166.8 44.6 251.1 238.1 17.8 186.5 33.8         Sep. 2,609.0 1,792.0 1,747.4 305.4 1,275.2 166.8 44.6 250.9 238.1 18.1 186.0 34.0
Changes*
2019 + 108.8 + 113.6 + 111.8 + 18.5 + 88.7 + 4.6 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.72020 + 147.5 + 166.9 + 165.0 + 26.0 + 131.5 + 7.5 + 1.8 − 3.1 − 3.2 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.2
2021         Apr. + 20.6 + 21.5 + 22.3 + 5.8 + 15.2 + 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.2
         May + 12.8 + 13.6 + 12.7 + 1.0 + 10.7 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.2         June + 1.8 + 2.6 + 2.6 − 2.1 + 5.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2
         July + 7.1 + 11.5 + 10.8 + 7.8 + 3.2 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 3.8 − 3.5 − 0.5 − 2.6 − 0.5
         Aug. − 4.3 − 3.0 − 3.6 + 3.3 − 5.3 − 1.6 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1         Sep. − 5.6 − 4.8 − 4.7 − 4.5 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
 
  
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2018 218.9 10.5 4.7 1.7 4.1 0.1 12.2 39.0 13.4 11.5 13.0 1.2 13.02019 237.1 11.2 5.4 1.5 4.2 0.1 11.6 53.8 21.1 17.1 14.5 1.0 13.12020 229.5 48.6 4.8 7.2 36.5 0.0 11.3 46.5 21.2 11.4 13.2 0.7 14.1
2021         Apr. 213.7 48.6 6.0 6.6 35.9 0.0 11.5 43.7 20.6 10.6 11.9 0.6 13.9
         May 218.4 46.6 6.1 5.1 35.3 0.0 11.5 45.3 22.3 10.4 12.0 0.6 13.8         June 209.0 45.6 6.3 4.3 35.0 0.0 11.4 43.0 19.8 10.6 12.1 0.6 13.8
         July 211.8 44.3 6.2 3.0 35.0 0.0 11.3 48.7 24.8 11.2 12.1 0.6 13.9
         Aug. 207.9 44.0 6.2 1.8 36.0 0.0 11.4 42.9 18.9 11.4 12.0 0.6 13.9         Sep. 212.1 45.3 6.5 2.7 36.1 0.0 11.4 49.1 24.1 13.0 11.4 0.6 13.8
Changes*
2019 + 17.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 13.8 + 7.7 + 5.2 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.02020 − 6.9 + 37.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 + 32.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 7.0 + 0.2 − 5.7 − 1.3 − 0.2 + 1.0
2021         Apr. − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         May + 4.7 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.6 − + 0.0 + 1.6 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0         June − 9.3 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 − − 0.1 − 2.2 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
         July + 2.7 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − − 0.1 + 5.6 + 5.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Aug. − 3.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 1.0 − + 0.0 − 5.8 − 5.9 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0         Sep. + 4.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.0 − − 0.0 + 6.2 + 5.3 + 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”En terprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The fi gures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, wh ich appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
November 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item:
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Subordinated
 of which: liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
13.7 49.4 211.0 11.1 199.9 567.9 560.6 7.2 21.7 5.8 2.4 − 201813.3 45.6 216.1 11.2 204.9 565.1 558.1 7.0 18.4 5.4 2.4 − 201913.5 40.1 218.5 12.0 206.5 552.0 545.7 6.3 15.1 6.7 2.7 − 2020
12.8 37.7 219.1 11.9 207.2 554.3 548.0 6.3 14.4 6.8 2.7 − 2021          Apr.
13.0 36.5 219.3 11.8 207.5 554.8 548.4 6.3 14.1 7.0 2.7 −          May13.4 36.7 218.9 11.7 207.2 554.2 547.9 6.3 14.0 7.0 2.8 −          June
13.1 33.1 218.7 11.7 207.0 553.7 547.5 6.2 13.9 7.0 2.8 −          July
13.0 32.4 218.7 11.7 207.0 553.2 547.1 6.2 13.8 6.8 2.8 −          Aug.12.7 32.4 218.5 11.5 207.0 552.4 546.3 6.2 13.7 6.6 2.8 −          Sep.
Changes*
− 0.4 − 3.8 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 5.0 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 2019+ 0.2 − 5.5 + 2.4 + 0.9 + 1.6 − 13.0 − 12.3 − 0.7 − 3.3 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 2020
− 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 2021          Apr.
+ 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          May+ 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          June
− 0.3 − 3.6 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          July
− 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 −          Aug.− 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 −          Sep.
registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see footnote 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memoto and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
65.4 35.1 9.8 14.9 5.7 0.0 103.9 9.5 45.0 48.4 1.0 − 201865.3 37.4 8.6 14.0 5.4 0.0 106.8 10.8 48.8 46.2 1.1 − 201968.5 43.2 8.0 12.4 4.9 0.0 66.0 10.9 32.9 21.4 0.8 − 2020
61.3 37.6 6.5 12.5 4.7 0.0 60.2 16.3 24.1 18.9 0.8 − 2021          Apr.
65.1 41.7 6.5 12.2 4.7 0.0 61.4 18.3 23.8 18.4 0.8 −          May62.5 39.6 6.0 12.2 4.6 0.0 57.9 15.9 22.9 18.3 0.8 −          June
62.0 39.3 5.9 12.2 4.6 0.0 56.8 16.2 21.5 18.4 0.8 −          July
65.5 43.1 5.6 12.2 4.5 0.0 55.5 15.9 20.0 18.8 0.8 −          Aug.62.6 40.5 5.6 12.0 4.5 0.0 55.1 15.0 20.9 18.4 0.8 −          Sep.
Changes*
− 0.8 + 2.1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 2019+ 3.5 + 5.9 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 40.8 + 0.2 − 15.9 − 24.8 − 0.3 − 2020
+ 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − − 2.1 + 1.8 − 3.4 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 2021          Apr.
+ 3.8 + 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − + 1.2 + 2.0 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 −          May− 2.6 − 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 3.5 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          June
− 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          July
+ 3.5 + 3.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − − 1.3 − 0.3 − 1.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 −          Aug.− 2.9 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.3 − 1.0 + 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 −          Sep.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
November 2021
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
  
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months’ at more than 3 Memo
notice months’ notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturitiesSpecial Special At 3 on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2018 585.6 578.6 541.1 333.4 37.5 27.2 7.0 6.2 2.3 41.2 37.3 27.9 3.92019 581.8 575.2 540.5 313.2 34.7 24.7 6.6 5.9 2.0 35.9 33.2 25.1 2.62020 566.8 560.6 533.3 288.0 27.3 18.0 6.3 5.7 1.8 30.2 28.3 22.1 1.9
2021         May 569.4 563.2 537.5 276.4 25.7 16.5 6.1 5.6 0.1 26.8 26.3 20.8 0.5
         June 568.7 562.6 537.1 274.7 25.5 16.3 6.1 5.6 0.1 26.2 26.1 20.6 0.2
         July 568.1 562.0 536.8 273.0 25.2 16.1 6.1 5.6 0.1 26.0 25.9 20.4 0.2
         Aug. 567.6 561.5 536.6 273.1 25.0 15.8 6.0 5.5 0.1 25.8 25.6 20.3 0.2         Sep. 566.7 560.7 536.0 270.2 24.8 15.6 6.0 5.5 0.1 25.6 25.5 20.2 0.2
Changes*
2019 − 3.9 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 21.3 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 . − 5.3 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 1.22020 − 14.8 − 14.5 − 7.2 − 24.6 − 7.3 − 6.7 − 0.3 − 0.2 . − 5.7 − 4.9 − 3.0 − 0.7
2021         May + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.4
         June − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3
         July − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0
         Aug. − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0         Sep. − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the classified as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exceeds the minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not non-negotiable bearer debt securities. specially marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are
 
  
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which: securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year and including 2 years of which:
with
Certifi- of which: of which: non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiablerate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  
1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2018 1,099.7 139.4 27.5 355.9 88.3 106.2 3.1 22.0 6.1 971.5 0.6 0.1 30.6 0.42019 1,140.7 123.5 28.6 367.7 96.7 117.7 2.6 23.6 4.2 999.4 0.9 0.7 31.5 0.42020 1,119.0 117.1 12.7 313.6 89.4 94.3 1.5 23.8 3.1 1,000.9 1.1 0.9 34.8 0.4
2021         May 1,143.7 112.1 11.3 317.4 86.6 91.5 2.0 20.9 3.8 1,031.3 1.6 0.9 32.9 0.1
         June 1,150.2 111.3 11.3 324.1 97.6 102.4 2.0 21.1 3.9 1,026.7 1.8 1.0 34.1 0.1
         July 1,145.3 111.6 11.5 318.8 89.5 94.3 2.0 21.4 4.1 1,029.5 1.7 1.0 34.1 0.1
         Aug. 1,152.1 110.4 11.9 318.6 95.9 101.6 2.1 20.0 4.2 1,030.5 1.5 1.0 33.9 0.1         Sep. 1,169.7 108.6 12.5 331.6 104.4 110.2 2.1 18.9 4.3 1,040.6 1.2 1.0 34.7 0.1
Changes*
2019 + 40.6 − 15.9 + 1.1 + 11.8 + 8.4 + 11.5 − 0.5 + 1.6 − 1.9 + 27.4 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.32020 − 20.5 − 5.2 − 0.8 − 54.1 − 22.3 − 22.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 − 0.0
2021         May − 6.9 − 2.6 − 0.3 − 6.8 − 1.5 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 6.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.1
         June + 6.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 6.7 + 11.1 + 11.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 4.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.2 −
         July − 4.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 5.3 − 8.2 − 8.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.8 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Aug. + 6.8 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 6.5 + 7.3 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 −         Sep. + 17.6 − 1.8 + 0.5 + 13.0 + 8.5 + 8.6 + 0.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 10.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.8 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable bearer debt
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, footnote
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
November 2021
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memobal- item: ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total 13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2019 19 237.9 34.0 0.0 16.2 11.4 117.6 28.0 25.9 2.9 21.0 179.7 9.8 1.8 12.0 88.7
2020 18 244.9 31.9 0.0 16.1 10.8 125.1 31.7 25.5 2.9 26.7 181.4 8.4 2.8 12.3 76.5
2021         July 18 248.9 30.6 0.0 15.7 10.3 128.0 34.8 25.6 2.9 27.8 182.8 8.9 3.3 12.3 6.1
         Aug. 18 250.0 30.9 0.0 15.7 10.3 128.3 35.3 25.7 2.9 28.8 182.9 8.9 3.3 12.3 5.4         Sep. 18 250.1 30.2 0.0 15.7 10.3 128.9 35.6 25.6 2.9 28.6 183.1 8.9 3.3 12.4 5.5
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2021         July 10 173.8 15.4 − 6.9 7.6 100.0 29.7 11.4 1.7 25.4 118.7 8.6 3.3 8.4 4.0
         Aug. 10 174.9 15.8 − 6.9 7.6 100.2 30.1 11.5 1.7 26.5 118.7 8.6 3.3 8.4 3.4         Sep. 10 174.9 15.2 − 6.9 7.5 100.6 30.4 11.5 1.7 26.2 119.0 8.6 3.3 8.5 3.3
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2021         July 8 75.1 15.3 0.0 8.9 2.7 28.0 5.1 14.2 1.2 2.4 64.1 0.3 − 3.9 2.1
         Aug. 8 75.1 15.1 0.0 8.9 2.7 28.2 5.1 14.2 1.2 2.3 64.2 0.3 − 3.9 2.0         Sep. 8 75.2 15.0 0.0 8.8 2.7 28.3 5.2 14.2 1.2 2.4 64.1 0.3 − 3.9 2.1
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited deposits interim of which: of which:
on under Applied Applied and of
Amounts deposits bridging which: of Memo cancelled to settle- to settle-
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item: paid into
savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions 11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2019 27.3 2.1 7.5 49.2 25.8 42.9 16.4 4.2 4.6 3.6 21.9 18.1 6.5 7.2 5.4 0.2
2020 26.6 2.1 8.2 53.8 29.0 48.0 18.8 4.2 4.4 3.5 24.8 18.3 6.3 6.7 5.2 0.2
2021         July 2.3 0.0 0.8 4.4 2.5 4.3 1.8 0.4 0.4 0.3 2.1 19.0 6.4 0.5 0.0
         Aug. 2.2 0.0 0.7 4.1 2.3 3.8 1.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 2.0 19.0 6.4 0.5 0.0         Sep. 2.3 0.0 0.8 4.0 2.1 3.8 1.3 0.4 0.4 0.3 2.0 18.9 6.4 0.5 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2021         July 1.5 0.0 0.4 3.2 1.8 3.3 1.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.7 14.3 3.5 0.4 0.0
         Aug. 1.4 0.0 0.4 3.0 1.6 2.9 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.6 14.1 3.5 0.4 0.0         Sep. 1.5 0.0 0.4 2.9 1.5 2.9 1.0 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.6 14.1 3.4 0.4 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2021         July 0.8 0.0 0.4 1.2 0.7 1.0 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.8 2.9 0.1 0.0
         Aug. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.8 3.0 0.1 0.0         Sep. 0.8 0.0 0.4 1.1 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.8 2.9 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum con tracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2018 49 183 1,401.2 403.8 392.8 192.1 200.7 11.0 516.8 427.7 20.0 407.7 89.1 480.5 309.0
2019 52 198 1,453.0 407.3 389.2 216.0 173.2 18.1 534.3 436.1 19.7 416.4 98.2 511.5 361.7
2020 50 206 1,552.2 376.7 364.0 213.2 150.8 12.7 504.8 409.6 14.3 395.3 95.2 670.7 523.6
2020 Nov. 51 208 1,622.5 411.6 398.0 236.5 161.4 13.6 523.7 427.3 14.5 412.8 96.5 687.2 519.5
Dec. 50 206 1,552.2 376.7 364.0 213.2 150.8 12.7 504.8 409.6 14.3 395.3 95.2 670.7 523.6
2021 Jan. 49 205 1,524.5 414.2 401.5 247.6 153.8 12.7 502.1 408.7 13.9 394.8 93.4 608.3 473.6
Feb. 49 203 1,487.0 429.1 416.7 258.4 158.3 12.4 492.2 402.6 13.6 389.1 89.6 565.6 431.8
Mar. 49 203 1,492.8 417.4 404.9 238.9 166.0 12.5 492.9 403.9 13.3 390.6 89.0 582.5 430.8
Apr. 49 202 1,478.2 432.8 420.7 266.5 154.2 12.1 488.7 401.7 13.3 388.3 87.0 556.7 413.3
May 49 203 1,476.1 430.6 417.9 257.9 160.0 12.6 493.8 405.2 13.1 392.2 88.6 551.7 415.5
June 49 203 1,475.7 421.2 407.8 242.9 164.9 13.4 492.9 407.5 13.0 394.5 85.5 561.6 417.1
July 50 204 1,524.4 444.9 431.0 266.8 164.2 13.8 494.0 410.8 13.2 397.6 83.2 585.5 436.6
Aug. 50 204 1,537.2 448.2 434.3 273.1 161.2 13.9 489.2 407.3 13.2 394.1 81.9 599.8 437.4
Changes *
2019 +3 +15 +51.5 –4.7 –7.7 +23.9 –31.6 +2.9 +12.6 +0.9 –0.3 +1.2 +11.7 + 30.6 +49.6
2020 –2 +9 +104.2 –20.3 –15.5 –2.8 –12.7 –4.8 +0.2 –1.0 –5.4 +4.4 +1.2 +164.2 +179.6
2020 Dec. –1 –2 –69.3 –33.0 –32.2 –23.4 –8.9 –0.8 –13.2 –12.9 –0.2 –12.7 –0.3 – 15.6 + 7.3
2021 Jan. –1 –1 –26.5 +37.7 +37.9 +35.7 +2.2 –0.1 –5.8 –3.4 –0.3 –3.1 –2.3 – 62.7 –51.7
Feb. – –2 –37.6 +14.7 +15.0 +10.8 +4.2 –0.3 –10.7 –6.8 –0.4 –6.4 –3.9 – 42.7 –42.1
Mar. – – +4.5 –14.7 –14.6 –19.5 +4.9 –0.1 –7.5 –5.7 –0.3 –5.5 –1.8 + 15.6 – 4.7
Apr. – –1 –13.3 +18.2 +18.4 +27.6 –9.2 –0.2 +3.2 +4.0 +0.0 +4.0 –0.9 – 24.5 –14.4
May – +1 –1.6 –2.8 –3.3 –9.8 +6.5 +0.5 +7.0 +5.0 –0.3 +5.3 +1.9 – 3.4 + 3.1
June – – –1.6 –11.5 –12.2 –15.0 +2.8 +0.7 –7.0 –2.9 –0.1 –2.8 –4.1 + 8.6 – 1.1
July +1 +1 +48.7 +23.4 +23.0 +24.0 –0.9 +0.4 +0.7 +3.1 +0.2 +2.9 –2.4 + 24.0 +19.5
Aug. – – +12.6 +3.1 +3.0 +6.3 –3.2 +0.0 –5.5 –4.1 +0.0 –4.1 –1.4 + 14.1 + 0.3
Foreign subsidiaries                                           End of year or month *
2018 17 43 237.2 51.2 45.4 20.1 25.3 5.8 136.4 111.7 13.8 97.8 24.7 49.6 0.0
2019 15 41 235.2 52.5 46.7 18.3 28.4 5.7 139.0 116.1 14.4 101.7 22.9 43.7 0.0
2020 12 36 229.5 44.8 39.9 17.4 22.5 4.9 139.7 114.4 13.1 101.4 25.3 44.9 0.0
2020 Nov. 12 36 234.8 43.2 38.2 17.0 21.1 5.1 142.2 116.4 13.9 102.5 25.8 49.3 0.0
Dec. 12 36 229.5 44.8 39.9 17.4 22.5 4.9 139.7 114.4 13.1 101.4 25.3 44.9 0.0
2021 Jan. 12 36 228.9 43.9 39.1 16.9 22.2 4.8 139.0 114.0 12.6 101.4 25.0 46.1 0.0
Feb. 12 36 231.6 42.2 37.2 19.0 18.3 5.0 137.9 113.4 12.7 100.7 24.5 51.5 0.0
Mar. 12 36 228.7 43.3 38.4 19.0 19.4 4.9 137.7 113.1 12.7 100.4 24.5 47.7 0.0
Apr. 12 36 230.8 42.7 37.4 19.0 18.4 5.3 136.5 112.7 12.6 100.1 23.8 51.6 0.0
May 12 36 230.8 41.9 37.0 18.5 18.5 4.9 136.8 112.7 12.3 100.4 24.2 52.2 0.0
June 12 36 235.5 43.6 38.9 19.9 19.0 4.7 136.8 112.5 12.0 100.4 24.3 55.1 0.0
July 12 35 236.5 44.7 39.6 20.1 19.5 5.1 136.4 112.6 12.0 100.6 23.8 55.4 0.0
Aug. 12 35 236.6 44.0 39.1 18.9 20.2 5.0 137.7 113.5 12.1 101.5 24.2 54.8 0.0
Changes *
2019 –2 –2 –7.2 +0.4 +0.5 –1.8 +2.3 –0.2 +1.6 +3.5 +0.5 +3.0 –1.9 – 9.1 ± 0.0
2020 –3 –5 –0.8 –5.3 –5.0 –1.0 –4.0 –0.3 +3.3 +0.8 –1.3 +2.1 +2.4 + 1.2 ± 0.0
2020 Dec. – – –4.1 +2.2 +2.2 +0.4 +1.8 –0.0 –1.9 –1.4 –0.8 –0.6 –0.5 – 4.4 ± 0.0
2021 Jan. – – –1.2 –1.2 –1.1 –0.5 –0.6 –0.2 –1.1 –0.8 –0.4 –0.3 –0.3 + 1.1 ± 0.0
Feb. – – +2.7 –1.6 –1.8 +2.1 –3.9 +0.2 –1.1 –0.6 +0.1 –0.7 –0.5 + 5.4 ± 0.0
Mar. – – –4.5 +0.3 +0.5 +0.0 +0.5 –0.2 –1.1 –1.1 +0.0 –1.1 +0.0 – 3.8 ± 0.0
Apr. – – +3.5 +0.0 –0.5 –0.0 –0.5 +0.5 –0.4 +0.3 –0.1 +0.5 –0.7 + 3.9 ± 0.0
May – – +0.4 –0.6 –0.2 –0.5 +0.3 –0.4 +0.5 +0.1 –0.3 +0.4 +0.4 + 0.5 ± 0.0
June – – +3.5 +1.1 +1.4 +1.4 +0.1 –0.3 –0.6 –0.8 –0.3 –0.5 +0.2 + 2.9 ± 0.0
July – –1 +0.8 +1.1 +0.7 +0.2 +0.4 +0.4 –0.5 +0.1 –0.0 +0.1 –0.6 + 0.3 ± 0.0
Aug. – – –0.0 –0.7 –0.6 –1.3 +0.7 –0.1 +1.2 +0.8 +0.0 +0.8 +0.4 – 0.5 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated fromthe flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always
to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
897.1 607.2 428.8 178.4 290.0 11.4 9.7 1.8 278.5 91.2 54.0 358.9 302.6 2018
894.1 613.6 453.2 160.4 280.5 12.7 10.1 2.7 267.8 94.6 53.4 410.9 361.1 2019
872.2 588.5 431.8 156.7 283.7 11.7 10.2 1.5 272.0 61.5 49.9 568.6 523.1 2020
926.8 625.3 444.3 181.0 301.5 12.3 10.9 1.5 289.1 74.8 50.5 570.4 518.9 2020 Nov.
872.2 588.5 431.8 156.7 283.7 11.7 10.2 1.5 272.0 61.5 49.9 568.6 523.1 Dec.
898.0 596.5 421.1 175.5 301.5 10.4 8.9 1.5 291.1 71.0 50.2 505.3 472.3 2021 Jan.
906.9 600.1 421.4 178.6 306.8 9.9 8.4 1.5 296.9 68.0 50.1 462.1 430.8 Feb.
907.4 606.9 435.0 172.0 300.4 9.5 8.0 1.5 290.9 72.1 50.7 462.7 429.7 Mar.
911.4 612.3 438.3 174.0 299.1 9.0 7.5 1.5 290.1 73.1 50.3 443.4 412.2 Apr.
907.0 604.3 431.2 173.1 302.7 8.6 7.1 1.5 294.0 74.9 50.2 444.0 414.5 May
904.8 607.4 438.0 169.4 297.4 8.3 6.8 1.5 289.0 72.1 51.0 447.9 415.9 June
930.2 622.8 444.9 177.9 307.3 8.7 7.2 1.5 298.7 74.7 51.2 468.4 435.5 July
932.9 624.6 438.7 185.9 308.3 8.5 7.0 1.5 299.8 81.6 51.3 471.3 436.0 Aug.
Changes *
– 7.2 + 2.4 +24.4 –22.0 – 9.6 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 –10.9 + 3.0 – 0.6 + 52.0 + 58.5 2019
– 9.2 –13.3 –21.4 + 8.1 + 4.1 – 1.0 + 0.3 – 1.4 + 5.1 –28.1 – 3.5 +157.6 + 162.0 2020
–52.1 –34.5 –12.5 –21.9 –17.6 – 0.6 – 0.7 + 0.0 –17.0 –12.3 –0.7 – 1.9 + 4.1 2020 Dec.
+26.1 +7.7 –10.6 +18.3 +18.4 – 1.3 – 1.3 – 0.0 +19.7 + 9.2 +0.3 – 63.3 – 50.8 2021 Jan.
+ 8.9 +3.6 +0.7 +2.9 + 5.3 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 + 5.8 – 3.1 –0.1 – 43.5 – 41.5 Feb.
– 2.5 +4.2 +14.4 –10.2 – 6.7 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 6.3 + 2.8 +0.6 – 0.3 – 1.1 Mar.
+ 6.2 +7.3 +2.2 +5.1 – 1.1 – 0.6 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.5 + 2.3 –0.4 – 18.1 – 17.5 Apr.
– 3.4 –7.0 –7.1 +0.1 + 3.6 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 4.0 + 2.3 –0.1 + 0.5 + 2.3 May
– 5.2 +0.3 +6.7 –6.5 – 5.5 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.0 – 5.2 – 4.1 +0.8 + 3.9 + 1.4 June
+25.3 +15.3 +6.9 +8.3 +10.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 9.7 + 2.6 +0.2 + 20.5 + 19.5 July
+ 2.3 +1.4 –6.2 +7.5 + 0.9 – 0.2 – 0.2 – + 1.1 + 6.6 +0.2 + 3.0 + 0.6 Aug.
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
171.5 71.6 36.1 35.5 100.0 9.1 6.4 2.7 90.8 14.3 22.4 29.0 0.0 2018
165.7 68.7 36.6 32.1 97.0 6.6 3.9 2.7 90.4 16.0 22.1 31.4 0.0 2019
163.4 59.6 34.1 25.5 103.8 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.1 16.6 20.3 29.2 0.0 2020
168.4 62.8 33.8 29.0 105.6 7.2 4.8 2.5 98.3 16.5 20.7 29.2 0.0 2020 Nov.
163.4 59.6 34.1 25.5 103.8 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.1 16.6 20.3 29.2 0.0 Dec.
163.1 58.1 32.7 25.4 105.0 6.7 4.3 2.5 98.3 16.8 20.4 28.6 0.0 2021 Jan.
166.8 60.2 34.8 25.4 106.5 6.4 3.9 2.5 100.1 16.6 20.3 27.9 0.0 Feb.
164.5 59.2 34.3 25.0 105.2 6.4 4.0 2.5 98.8 16.9 20.4 27.0 0.0 Mar.
166.1 59.0 33.4 25.7 107.0 6.4 4.0 2.5 100.6 17.3 20.4 27.0 0.0 Apr.
165.8 57.0 32.1 24.9 108.9 6.5 4.0 2.4 102.4 17.3 20.4 27.3 0.0 May
167.8 58.5 32.2 26.3 109.3 6.6 4.2 2.4 102.7 17.6 20.5 29.6 0.0 June
169.7 58.6 32.4 26.3 111.1 6.6 4.2 2.4 104.5 17.7 20.5 28.6 0.0 July
169.8 58.2 31.1 27.1 111.6 6.6 4.2 2.4 105.0 17.5 20.8 28.6 0.0 Aug.
Changes *
– 6.7 – 3.2 + 0.5 – 3.8 – 3.5 – 2.5 – 2.5 + 0.0 – 1.0 + 1.7 – 0.4 – 1.8 ± 0.0 2019
+ 1.4 – 7.3 – 2.5 – 4.8 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.3 + 8.7 + 0.6 – 1.8 – 1.0 ± 0.0 2020
– 4.1 –2.8 +0.3 –3.1 – 1.3 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.7 + 0.1 –0.4 + 0.3 ± 0.0 2020 Dec.
– 0.8 –1.8 –1.4 –0.3 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 +0.1 – 0.7 ± 0.0 2021 Jan.
+ 3.6 +2.1 +2.2 –0.0 + 1.5 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 1.8 – 0.3 –0.0 – 0.7 ± 0.0 Feb.
– 3.5 –1.5 –0.6 –1.0 – 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 + 0.3 +0.0 – 1.4 ± 0.0 Mar.
+ 2.6 +0.3 –0.9 +1.2 + 2.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.4 +0.0 + 0.5 ± 0.0 Apr.
+ 0.0 –1.9 –1.3 –0.6 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.0 +0.0 + 0.4 ± 0.0 May
+ 1.2 +1.2 +0.1 +1.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.3 +0.1 + 1.9 ± 0.0 June
+ 1.8 +0.1 +0.2 –0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.1 –0.1 – 1.1 ± 0.0 July
– 0.1 –0.5 –1.3 +0.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 – 0.2 +0.3 – 0.1 ± 0.0 Aug.
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and
other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.  4 Excluding
subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of negotiable andnon-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Including subordinated
liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7
2014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 Sep. 15,318.5 153.2 152.8 3,806.5 3,652.9 0.0
Oct. . . . . . .
p Nov. 15,459.3 154.6 154.2 ... ... ...
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 Sep. 4,176,662 27.3 41,767 41,624 1,061,557 1,019,933 0
Oct. . . . . . . .
p Nov. 4,230,453 27.4 42,305 42,164 ... ... ...
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,312
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 Sep. 8,667 6,499 3,143 13,468 7,946 107 1,793
Oct. . . . . . . .
Nov. . . . . . . .
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 Sep. 3,031,068 9,868 473,288 563,495 98,946
Oct. . . . . .
Nov. . . . . .
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 3 of the
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum reserves
(excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4(1)).
3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve base. The reserve ratio forliabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2% between 1 January 1999
and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at 1%.  4 Article 5(2) of the
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum reserves.
5 Average credit balances of credit institutions at national central banks.  6 Average
credit balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.
7 Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2005 Dec. 6 1.25 – 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr. 13 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 2002 Jan. 1 2.57 2009 Jan. 1 1.62
July 13 0.75 1.50 – 2.25 July 1 2.47 July 1 0.12
2006 Mar. 8 1.50 – 2.50 3.50 Nov. 9 0.50 1.25 – 2.00
June 15 1.75 – 2.75 3.75 Dec. 14 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2003 Jan. 1 1.97 2011 July 1 0.37
Aug. 9 2.00 – 3.00 4.00 July 1 1.22
Oct. 11 2.25 – 3.25 4.25 2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 2012 Jan. 1 0.12
Dec. 13 2.50 – 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan. 1 1.14
2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 July 1 1.13 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
2007 Mar. 14 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 July 1 – 0.38
June 13 3.00 – 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan. 1 1.21
2014 June 11 -0.10 0.15 – 0.40 July 1 1.17 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
2008 July 9 3.25 – 4.25 5.25 Sep. 10 -0.20 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 – 0.73
Oct. 8 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan. 1 1.37
Oct. 9 3.25 3.75 – 4.25 2015 Dec. 9 -0.30 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 1.95 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Nov. 12 2.75 3.25 – 3.75
Dec. 10 2.00 2.50 – 3.00 2016 Mar. 16 -0.40 0.00 – 0.25 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2016 July 1 – 0.88
July 1 3.19
2009 Jan. 21 1.00 2.00 – 3.00 2019 Sep. 18 -0.50 0.00 – 0.25
Mar. 11 0.50 1.50 – 2.50 2008 Jan. 1 3.32
Apr. 8 0.25 1.25 – 2.25 July 1 3.19
May 13 0.25 1.00 – 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2021 Oct. 20 63 63 0.00 - - - 7
Oct. 27 103 103 0.00 - - - 7
Nov. 3 68 68 0.00 - - - 7
Nov. 10 254 254 0.00 - - - 7
Nov. 17 172 172 0.00 - - - 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2021 Aug. 26 48 48 2      … - - - 91
Sep. 30 2 2 2      … - - - 84
Sep. 30 1339 1339 2      … - - - 364
Oct. 28 40 40 2      … - - - 91
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month *
% per annum
EURIBOR  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 EONIA  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2021 Apr. – 0.566 – 0.48 – 0.56 – 0.56 – 0.54 – 0.52 – 0.48
May – 0.565 – 0.48 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.54 – 0.51 – 0.48
June – 0.565 – 0.48 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.54 – 0.52 – 0.48
July – 0.566 – 0.48 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.55 – 0.52 – 0.49
Aug. – 0.568 – 0.48 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.55 – 0.53 – 0.50
Sep. – 0.570 – 0.49 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.55 – 0.52 – 0.49
Oct. – 0.571 – 0.49 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.55 – 0.53 – 0.48
* Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor anyone
else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the EURIBOR.
1 Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank
operations; calculated by the European Central Bank from January 4th 1999 until
September 30th 2019 based on real turnover according to the act/360 method. SinceOctober 1st 2019 calculated as Euro Short-Term Rate (€STR) + 8.5 basis points spread.
2 Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters since 30
December 1998 according to the act/360 method. Administrator for EONIA and
EURIBOR: European Money Markets Institute (EMMI)

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 Sep. 0.26 54,068 1.02 218,212 – 0.10 82,957 0.92 23,504
Oct. 0.26 53,982 1.01 218,002 – 0.11 84,498 0.89 22,350
Nov. 0.26 52,719 1.00 217,758 – 0.11 80,549 0.85 22,254
Dec. 0.25 53,079 1.00 219,376 – 0.17 79,340 0.84 22,256
2021 Jan. 0.25 51,896 0.99 220,299 – 0.16 74,531 0.85 21,979
Feb. 0.26 51,369 0.98 220,419 – 0.16 72,894 0.85 22,242
Mar. 0.25 51,417 0.98 220,406 – 0.18 77,326 0.83 21,860
Apr. 0.25 50,078 0.97 220,310 – 0.19 74,026 0.84 21,529
May 0.24 48,897 0.96 220,455 – 0.21 74,080 0.83 21,455
June 0.23 48,834 0.95 220,118 – 0.23 71,148 0.88 21,464
July 0.23 45,300 0.94 219,790 – 0.23 69,514 0.82 20,964
Aug. 0.22 44,901 0.93 219,708 – 0.26 68,741 0.81 21,058
Sep. 0.23 44,268 0.93 219,590 – 0.28 69,255 0.79 21,397
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 Sep. 1.95 4,705 1.62 26,940 2.03 1,329,087 6.96 46,438 3.39 86,231 3.50 322,100
Oct. 1.92 4,792 1.62 26,962 2.00 1,337,259 6.86 45,325 3.38 85,849 3.48 323,886
Nov. 1.92 4,616 1.60 27,072 1.99 1,345,468 6.83 44,787 3.38 85,328 3.46 324,149
Dec. 1.92 4,557 1.60 27,024 1.97 1,353,793 6.80 45,013 3.37 85,416 3.45 323,181
2021 Jan. 1.90 4,663 1.59 26,903 1.95 1,357,733 6.90 43,164 3.36 84,363 3.42 323,164
Feb. 1.89 4,642 1.57 26,790 1.93 1,363,884 6.76 43,200 3.36 83,522 3.41 323,393
Mar. 1.89 4,545 1.56 26,788 1.91 1,373,003 6.72 44,263 3.34 83,114 3.40 322,618
Apr. 1.86 4,496 1.56 26,870 1.88 1,381,533 6.65 43,462 3.34 82,596 3.38 323,494
May 1.94 4,575 1.55 26,759 1.87 1,390,096 6.63 43,692 3.33 82,120 3.36 323,923
June 1.91 4,485 1.54 26,949 1.85 1,399,549 6.60 45,343 3.33 81,846 3.35 323,511
July 1.92 4,642 1.53 26,996 1.83 1,410,004 6.53 44,338 3.33 81,734 3.34 325,291
Aug. 1.94 4,581 1.52 27,041 1.82 1,418,884 6.60 44,785 3.33 81,447 3.32 325,890
Sep. 1.94 4,521 1.52 27,117 1.80 1,427,269 6.67 45,751 3.32 81,133 3.32 325,267
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 Sep. 2.07 160,014 1.68 186,700 1.77 774,045
Oct. 2.04 157,761 1.68 187,240 1.76 779,595
Nov. 2.06 154,555 1.69 187,341 1.75 784,308
Dec. 2.03 150,278 1.71 186,798 1.73 787,188
2021 Jan. 2.06 149,911 1.71 186,599 1.71 790,534
Feb. 2.02 152,425 1.71 189,130 1.70 793,839
Mar. 1.78 163,745 1.67 194,734 1.69 794,245
Apr. 1.96 151,270 1.67 195,027 1.68 798,088
May 1.93 153,129 1.65 194,737 1.68 802,212
June 2.01 149,474 1.65 193,910 1.67 801,420
July 1.94 148,978 1.64 194,327 1.65 808,937
Aug. 1.94 148,766 1.63 196,065 1.64 811,706
Sep. 1.97 150,161 1.64 195,121 1.63 811,203
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 Sep. 0.00 1,658,764 0.10 3,027 0.51 501 0.61 590 0.10 531,223 0.18 28,417
Oct. 0.00 1,680,565 0.10 3,014 0.44 509 0.60 805 0.10 531,245 0.18 28,001
Nov. 0.00 1,703,473 0.11 2,483 0.49 404 0.61 747 0.10 531,537 0.18 27,578
Dec. 0.00 1,715,292 – 0.01 3,214 0.40 394 0.59 794 0.10 532,793 0.18 27,312
2021 Jan. 0.00 1,732,961 0.03 3,036 0.38 357 0.55 734 0.10 534,458 0.17 26,749
Feb. – 0.00 1,754,413 0.07 2,793 0.36 385 0.50 741 0.09 535,684 0.17 26,435
Mar. – 0.00 1,750,971 0.06 3,073 0.32 342 0.41 834 0.09 535,778 0.17 26,115
Apr. – 0.00 1,772,803 0.06 2,465 0.28 379 0.32 591 0.09 536,476 0.17 25,840
May – 0.01 1,786,469 0.01 2,399 0.37 307 0.32 529 0.09 537,061 0.16 25,715
June – 0.01 1,788,689 – 0.04 2,957 0.23 310 0.28 566 0.09 536,727 0.16 25,503
July – 0.01 1,800,235 0.02 2,414 0.28 401 0.29 695 0.08 536,463 0.16 25,216
Aug. – 0.01 1,797,331 0.02 2,315 0.25 278 0.34 558 0.08 536,145 0.16 24,993
Sep. – 0.01 1,792,777 – 0.01 2,254 0.26 241 0.34 513 0.08 535,555 0.15 24,780
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2020 Sep. – 0.08 532,597 – 0.36 37,956 – 0.01 112 0.43 275
Oct. – 0.09 548,227 – 0.36 38,781 0.10 237 0.33 548
Nov. – 0.09 549,032 – 0.37 30,418 0.03 220 0.35 533
Dec. – 0.09 546,575 – 0.42 34,321 – 0.12 556 0.26 970
2021 Jan. – 0.10 545,028 – 0.23 35,220 – 0.05 126 0.19 129
Feb. – 0.10 539,935 – 0.26 32,726 – 0.01 113 0.37 537
Mar. – 0.11 571,025 – 0.12 54,987 0.07 363 0.24 919
Apr. – 0.10 559,616 – 0.25 52,411 – 0.10 113 0.23 87
May – 0.11 564,627 – 0.34 53,947 – 0.04 194 0.37 231
June – 0.12 569,903 – 0.50 64,520 – 0.14 278 0.20 200
July – 0.12 581,879 – 0.48 57,334 – 0.22 322 0.09 168
Aug. – 0.13 589,698 – 0.50 47,074 – 0.17 174 0.07 699
Sep. – 0.12 591,253 – 0.50 48,528 x .x . 0.11 333
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2020 Sep. 5.56 5.52 8,638 6.42 1,726 8.53 417 4.12 3,286 6.19 4,936
Oct. 5.73 5.62 8,265 6.36 1,739 8.39 436 4.32 2,905 6.14 4,924
Nov. 5.71 5.62 7,778 6.24 1,560 8.90 566 4.26 2,797 6.06 4,416
Dec. 5.53 5.48 6,652 6.08 1,193 8.08 551 4.24 2,544 5.97 3,556
2021 Jan. 5.88 5.85 6,836 6.43 1,655 7.99 439 4.45 1,973 6.26 4,423
Feb. 5.65 5.65 7,077 6.34 1,630 7.76 379 4.33 2,194 6.11 4,503
Mar. 5.35 5.27 9,298 6.17 1,786 6.23 384 4.05 3,296 5.92 5,619
Apr. 5.51 5.38 7,926 6.17 1,482 6.76 325 4.25 2,731 5.92 4,871
May 5.49 5.37 7,573 6.21 1,400 7.01 301 4.24 2,605 5.90 4,667
June 5.52 5.40 8,979 6.25 1,741 7.20 359 4.23 3,090 5.94 5,530
July 5.55 5.47 9,279 6.30 1,924 7.15 386 4.26 3,014 5.98 5,880
Aug. 5.54 5.44 8,696 6.29 1,747 7.54 340 4.30 2,828 5.89 5,528
Sep. 5.54 5.46 8,475 6.28 1,669 7.59 323 4.29 2,784 5.94 5,368
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2020 Sep. 1.83 4,517 1.60 1,170 1.98 1,997 2.37 612 1.51 1,908
Oct. 1.80 4,279 1.60 1,214 1.95 1,832 2.47 578 1.44 1,869
Nov. 1.84 4,026 1.61 930 1.96 1,731 2.44 585 1.51 1,710
Dec. 1.77 5,473 1.56 1,254 1.81 2,404 2.30 772 1.54 2,297
2021 Jan. 1.79 4,530 1.66 1,532 1.93 1,958 2.17 572 1.55 2,000
Feb. 1.71 4,265 1.69 1,000 1.74 1,680 2.08 578 1.58 2,007
Mar. 1.68 5,715 1.59 1,331 1.69 2,358 2.20 691 1.53 2,666
Apr. 1.65 4,662 1.52 1,263 1.58 1,956 2.08 724 1.55 1,982
May 1.74 3,877 1.51 909 1.79 1,589 2.32 550 1.51 1,738
June 1.63 5,170 1.53 1,119 1.55 2,198 2.26 702 1.51 2,270
July 1.68 4,950 1.50 1,428 1.71 1,920 2.09 732 1.52 2,298
Aug. 1.74 4,101 1.60 806 1.88 1,594 2.17 612 1.48 1,895
Sep. 1.65 4,401 1.47 941 1.72 1,950 1.99 626 1.47 1,825
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2020 Sep. 1.85 3,019 . . 1.89 1,357 2.53 431 1.55 1,231
Oct. 1.78 2,888 . . 1.81 1,226 2.50 451 1.47 1,211
Nov. 1.83 2,743 . . 1.85 1,118 2.53 438 1.55 1,187
Dec. 1.85 3,793 . . 1.87 1,629 2.47 523 1.63 1,641
2021 Jan. 1.77 3,041 . . 1.76 1,281 2.34 402 1.62 1,358
Feb. 1.86 2,843 . . 1.89 1,058 2.40 390 1.70 1,395
Mar. 1.78 3,846 . . 1.83 1,507 2.26 535 1.60 1,804
Apr. 1.73 3,212 . . 1.65 1,316 2.17 555 1.62 1,341
May 1.85 2,624 . . 1.93 1,052 2.29 451 1.59 1,121
June 1.70 3,581 . . 1.64 1,516 2.38 508 1.52 1,557
July 1.71 3,514 . . 1.75 1,339 2.10 587 1.53 1,588
Aug. 1.89 2,666 . . 2.05 1,045 2.35 441 1.57 1,180
Sep. 1.72 2,878 . . 1.76 1,259 2.21 443 1.49 1,176
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2020 Sep. 1.26 1.21 21,782 1.35 3,121 1.77 2,213 1.35 1,542 1.07 6,957 1.17 11,070
Oct. 1.24 1.19 23,217 1.24 3,834 1.75 2,362 1.32 1,554 1.03 7,579 1.17 11,722
Nov. 1.22 1.17 23,185 1.28 3,113 1.72 2,372 1.28 1,708 1.03 7,413 1.14 11,692
Dec. 1.21 1.16 22,148 1.29 3,033 1.75 2,195 1.31 1,698 1.02 7,733 1.11 10,522
2021 Jan. 1.23 1.19 21,721 1.32 3,866 1.79 2,124 1.34 1,615 1.03 7,316 1.15 10,666
Feb. 1.22 1.17 22,145 1.30 3,246 1.73 2,098 1.28 1,563 1.04 7,547 1.14 10,938
Mar. 1.22 1.18 28,589 1.26 4,248 1.75 2,684 1.25 1,958 1.02 10,006 1.17 13,941
Apr. 1.27 1.23 24,541 1.30 3,804 1.79 2,343 1.28 1,725 1.06 8,741 1.23 11,732
May 1.31 1.27 22,786 1.35 3,379 1.83 2,064 1.30 1,568 1.09 8,416 1.29 10,738
June 1.34 1.29 25,161 1.34 3,327 1.74 2,374 1.33 1,775 1.12 9,196 1.33 11,815
July 1.36 1.31 25,121 1.36 3,808 1.76 2,686 1.32 1,649 1.14 9,216 1.34 11,570
Aug. 1.31 1.27 22,735 1.32 3,095 1.78 2,324 1.37 1,514 1.10 7,975 1.28 10,922
Sep. 1.31 1.26 22,232 1.33 2,986 1.80 2,204 1.33 1,451 1.09 7,631 1.27 10,946
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2020 Sep. . 1.14 9,865 . . 1.75 795 1.14 753 1.00 3,201 1.14 5,116
Oct. . 1.14 10,142 . . 1.73 806 1.12 748 1.00 3,239 1.14 5,349
Nov. . 1.10 10,137 . . 1.61 819 1.10 823 0.96 3,182 1.11 5,313
Dec. . 1.08 9,592 . . 1.63 796 1.12 781 0.95 3,355 1.07 4,660
2021 Jan. . 1.13 9,731 . . 1.71 814 1.11 780 0.97 3,226 1.14 4,911
Feb. . 1.11 9,659 . . 1.60 752 1.08 773 0.96 3,228 1.14 4,906
Mar. . 1.11 12,754 . . 1.69 929 1.08 884 0.95 4,589 1.14 6,352
Apr. . 1.15 10,483 . . 1.71 801 1.10 822 1.00 3,834 1.18 5,026
May . 1.19 9,797 . . 1.74 747 1.09 725 1.01 3,738 1.25 4,587
June . 1.23 10,630 . . 1.69 836 1.14 793 1.06 4,071 1.29 4,930
July . 1.25 10,467 . . 1.66 934 1.15 749 1.08 3,906 1.33 4,878
Aug. . 1.21 9,407 . . 1.67 821 1.21 665 1.03 3,442 1.25 4,479
Sep. . 1.20 9,471 . . 1.67 802 1.13 664 1.03 3,299 1.24 4,706
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 Sep. 7.51 37,568 7.33 30,004 15.04 4,147 2.84 76,376 2.85 76,092
Oct. 7.42 36,256 7.19 28,750 15.03 4,144 2.75 76,056 2.76 75,773
Nov. 7.41 35,700 7.17 28,273 15.06 4,108 2.74 75,596 2.75 75,326
Dec. 7.32 36,062 7.11 28,411 15.15 4,101 2.70 73,441 2.71 73,178
2021 Jan. 7.51 34,191 7.08 27,635 15.28 4,011 2.77 71,756 2.78 71,526
Feb. 7.40 34,121 7.03 27,298 15.38 3,944 2.76 73,589 2.77 73,354
Mar. 7.41 34,973 7.11 27,993 15.45 3,910 2.77 72,139 2.78 71,866
Apr. 7.37 34,035 7.02 27,152 15.48 3,899 2.84 70,358 2.85 70,106
May 7.28 34,454 7.01 27,148 15.51 3,905 2.79 72,023 2.80 71,766
June 7.23 35,815 7.05 28,056 15.55 3,938 2.86 72,488 2.87 72,184
July 7.11 35,046 6.90 27,102 15.54 3,987 2.75 73,098 2.76 72,788
Aug. 7.12 35,662 6.99 27,343 15.58 4,039 2.79 72,942 2.80 72,622
Sep. 7.19 36,720 7.06 28,404 15.53 4,098 2.79 74,758 2.81 74,397
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2020 Sep. 1.37 71,553 1.49 21,841 2.00 10,506 2.42 1,308 1.55 1,544 1.22 45,047 1.42 3,107 1.18 10,041
Oct. 1.37 66,721 1.36 20,690 1.99 10,358 2.38 1,354 1.49 1,555 1.17 42,053 1.73 4,238 1.18 7,163
Nov. 1.39 62,811 1.39 18,016 1.96 9,897 2.25 1,343 1.53 1,647 1.25 37,080 1.47 4,017 1.13 8,827
Dec. 1.33 87,725 1.37 26,272 2.01 9,615 2.31 1,615 1.56 2,110 1.23 56,078 1.36 4,945 1.11 13,362
2021 Jan. 1.36 55,365 1.52 17,883 1.99 8,828 2.30 1,183 1.56 1,552 1.22 35,711 1.45 2,185 1.03 5,906
Feb. 1.37 54,516 1.55 14,708 2.00 8,851 2.23 1,084 1.57 1,533 1.22 32,922 1.37 2,679 1.09 7,447
Mar. 1.09 93,353 1.59 21,948 1.90 10,691 2.16 1,432 1.54 1,842 0.89 62,746 1.17 6,173 1.20 10,469
Apr. 1.52 56,777 1.55 18,920 1.90 9,318 2.23 1,385 1.55 1,553 1.46 35,109 1.43 3,022 1.15 6,390
May 1.32 58,626 1.53 16,038 1.89 8,462 2.33 1,179 1.56 1,578 1.20 36,993 1.42 2,491 1.06 7,923
June 1.28 83,129 1.29 27,883 1.93 9,481 2.37 1,409 1.54 1,734 1.19 52,578 0.78 6,948 1.28 10,979
July 1.35 70,171 1.42 20,858 1.84 9,608 2.26 1,403 1.52 1,753 1.30 41,858 1.29 3,934 1.00 11,615
Aug. 1.33 54,047 1.58 14,739 1.79 7,827 2.31 1,094 1.44 1,308 1.25 33,740 1.14 3,001 1.08 7,077
Sep. 1.35 69,682 1.31 23,726 1.83 9,326 2.39 1,201 1.48 1,245 1.27 45,627 1.44 4,340 1.06 7,943
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2020 Sep. 1.37 11,059 . . 1.72 508 2.08 105 1.22 353 1.41 7,417 1.85 535 1.03 2,141
Oct. 1.23 8,346 . . 1.73 480 1.74 111 1.14 374 1.26 4,696 1.11 672 1.08 2,013
Nov. 1.54 9,630 . . 1.86 375 1.67 98 1.20 367 1.64 5,414 2.01 807 1.18 2,569
Dec. 1.33 15,369 . . 1.68 494 1.68 134 1.16 452 1.41 8,979 1.39 1,222 1.11 4,088
2021 Jan. 1.25 7,702 . . 1.73 430 1.65 99 1.32 374 1.26 4,614 1.69 574 0.88 1,611
Feb. 1.42 6,642 . . 1.83 339 1.67 89 1.07 331 1.61 3,930 1.31 383 0.96 1,570
Mar. 1.19 13,787 . . 1.64 481 1.81 106 1.17 399 1.12 8,540 1.33 825 1.23 3,436
Apr. 1.44 7,883 . . 1.79 377 1.68 117 1.15 359 1.55 4,450 1.51 967 1.07 1,613
May 1.46 7,097 . . 1.76 340 1.73 75 1.21 404 1.68 3,830 1.15 439 1.11 2,009
June 1.36 13,761 . . 1.79 410 1.84 109 1.20 444 1.35 8,365 1.38 1,110 1.35 3,323
July 1.41 10,857 . . 1.68 445 1.57 117 1.24 404 1.56 6,539 1.30 933 1.02 2,419
Aug. 1.45 7,709 . . 1.81 328 1.76 85 1.18 308 1.55 4,191 1.69 819 1.09 1,978
Sep. 1.35 11,639 . . 1.71 405 2.14 61 1.17 284 1.35 7,761 1.92 827 1.06 2,301
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 4
2018 Q4 2,213.5 318.3 400.5 330.4 349.7 665.8 2.0 55.4 36.8 54.6
2019 Q1 2,343.3 332.1 431.8 329.8 380.9 708.9 2.6 58.7 37.1 61.4
Q2 2,407.6 336.8 449.0 339.3 387.9 735.8 3.6 57.9 37.1 60.3
Q3 2,492.5 333.0 468.5 357.2 398.2 768.3 4.6 58.8 38.0 66.0
Q4 2,473.9 317.6 448.2 355.5 407.3 778.3 3.6 64.9 39.8 58.8
2020 Q1 2,426.9 318.3 452.1 364.0 383.0 738.4 4.5 68.5 38.6 59.6
Q2 2,517.7 317.1 460.6 371.9 409.2 789.0 4.3 68.5 38.7 58.5
Q3 2,547.5 311.1 472.9 373.9 411.0 809.9 4.4 67.1 39.0 58.1
Q4 2,587.9 301.8 479.0 370.6 425.0 841.7 4.7 68.2 38.2 58.7
2021 Q1 2,574.8 292.8 466.8 361.9 437.0 845.0 3.9 71.9 38.4 57.0
Q2 2,603.8 281.8 479.9 360.9 448.0 864.6 3.5 72.4 38.5 54.1
    Life insurance
2018 Q4 1,185.3 194.5 200.1 208.4 50.4 484.7 1.0 11.6 20.3 14.3
2019 Q1 1,239.7 202.9 213.7 206.1 52.8 517.7 1.6 10.4 20.3 14.1
Q2 1,291.9 205.8 227.6 214.2 55.4 538.9 2.4 10.0 20.3 17.4
Q3 1,350.1 205.3 242.5 225.2 57.9 563.6 3.1 10.4 20.9 21.0
Q4 1,325.2 194.9 227.6 217.6 61.1 570.4 2.4 13.7 21.1 16.5
2020 Q1 1,295.8 191.5 231.0 220.6 61.9 538.2 2.2 13.9 20.3 16.3
Q2 1,347.1 192.4 234.4 223.6 64.1 577.3 2.8 13.7 20.3 18.5
Q3 1,369.2 188.4 241.6 225.7 65.7 593.0 3.0 13.6 20.6 17.6
Q4 1,395.9 183.6 242.8 229.9 69.7 617.1 3.3 14.3 20.8 14.5
2021 Q1 1,361.7 170.7 231.7 219.7 74.2 614.8 2.1 14.3 21.0 13.1
Q2 1,373.1 165.3 231.7 219.4 77.9 627.7 2.0 14.2 21.2 13.7
    Non-life insurance
2018 Q4 616.2 113.8 117.4 73.7 73.8 167.4 0.2 33.5 10.8 25.6
2019 Q1 655.2 119.1 127.5 74.4 76.2 177.1 0.3 38.2 11.0 31.4
Q2 665.6 119.8 131.1 76.1 78.2 182.4 0.4 37.7 11.0 29.1
Q3 682.6 116.9 135.3 79.9 80.6 189.4 0.4 38.8 11.3 30.0
Q4 673.5 111.3 130.4 79.6 83.6 193.3 0.4 36.2 12.2 26.7
2020 Q1 669.4 111.1 131.3 79.8 80.0 186.9 0.3 38.7 12.0 29.3
Q2 685.6 111.9 134.4 82.4 81.1 197.1 0.4 39.5 12.1 26.7
Q3 693.3 109.3 137.6 83.3 82.7 203.2 0.4 38.5 12.1 26.3
Q4 703.5 105.9 139.5 84.5 85.2 210.3 0.5 37.6 12.7 27.3
2021 Q1 715.8 108.2 139.3 83.7 88.1 214.8 0.4 39.9 12.8 28.6
Q2 719.5 103.8 141.6 83.2 89.2 221.2 0.4 40.1 12.7 27.2
    Reinsurance 5
2018 Q4 412.0 10.1 82.9 48.2 225.5 13.7 0.7 10.3 5.7 14.8
2019 Q1 448.4 10.1 90.6 49.3 251.9 14.0 0.7 10.2 5.8 15.9
Q2 450.1 11.1 90.4 49.0 254.3 14.4 0.8 10.2 5.8 13.9
Q3 459.9 10.8 90.7 52.1 259.6 15.3 1.0 9.6 5.9 15.0
Q4 475.2 11.5 90.2 58.3 262.6 14.5 0.8 15.1 6.6 15.6
2020 Q1 461.7 15.7 89.8 63.7 241.0 13.3 1.9 15.9 6.3 14.1
Q2 485.0 12.9 91.7 65.9 264.0 14.6 1.1 15.2 6.3 13.3
Q3 485.0 13.5 93.7 64.9 262.6 13.7 1.0 15.0 6.3 14.2
Q4 488.5 12.3 96.7 56.3 270.2 14.3 1.0 16.3 4.7 16.9
2021 Q1 497.3 13.9 95.8 58.5 274.7 15.4 1.4 17.7 4.7 15.3
Q2 511.2 12.8 106.6 58.4 280.9 15.6 1.0 18.1 4.6 13.1
Pension funds 6
2018 Q4 672.2 91.5 67.5 30.7 30.6 378.0 – 8.1 43.8 22.1
2019 Q1 691.3 89.6 72.4 30.5 32.4 390.9 – 8.3 45.2 22.0
Q2 707.9 87.6 76.5 31.0 34.1 402.0 – 8.5 46.0 22.2
Q3 726.5 85.6 80.7 31.0 36.5 415.5 – 8.6 46.7 22.0
Q4 735.8 85.2 79.6 31.1 38.7 421.1 – 8.8 48.9 22.3
7 2020 Q1 599.1 92.2 57.0 48.5 9.3 361.3 0.1 10.4 17.5 2.7
Q2 623.3 92.2 58.8 49.1 9.7 382.1 0.1 10.4 18.1 2.8
Q3 635.9 90.8 59.6 50.2 10.1 392.8 0.2 11.6 18.2 2.5
Q4 647.7 85.8 59.7 47.4 10.1 412.2 0.2 11.9 17.3 3.2
2021 Q1 661.5 86.9 59.2 48.6 10.9 423.9 0.2 12.3 17.3 2.3
Q2 680.9 87.1 61.3 49.1 11.5 439.4 0.1 12.5 17.7 2.3
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections as of 2020 Q1. Until 2019 Q4 these are compiled using Solvency I
supervisory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  1 Accounts
receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered bonds, borrowers'
note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. For pension funds as of 2020 Q1 fair values,
previously book values.  2 Including deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as
registered bonds, borrowers' note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. For pension fundsas of 2020 Q1 fair values, previously book values.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables
and claims of pension funds on pension managers.  4 Valuation of listed securities at the
corresponding consistent price from the ESCB's securities database.  5 Not including the
reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  6 The term
"pension funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European
System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and
occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not
included.  7 Change in data sources.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  4
Insurance corporations
2018 Q4 2,213.5 29.3 64.6 463.1 1,530.3 1,332.4 197.9 1.6 124.6 –
2019 Q1 2,343.3 31.6 68.2 487.9 1,624.8 1,403.6 221.2 1.5 129.2 –
Q2 2,407.6 31.9 69.4 489.7 1,687.4 1,466.0 221.4 1.8 127.5 –
Q3 2,492.5 31.7 69.3 488.5 1,769.4 1,543.0 226.4 2.2 131.5 –
Q4 2,473.9 31.7 75.8 515.3 1,714.9 1,499.6 215.3 1.9 134.3 –
2020 Q1 2,426.9 31.8 82.4 464.3 1,721.9 1,483.2 238.7 2.4 124.1 –
Q2 2,517.7 33.1 82.2 505.4 1,767.7 1,527.7 240.0 1.9 127.4 –
Q3 2,547.5 34.3 80.0 515.9 1,785.7 1,549.2 236.5 1.7 129.9 –
Q4 2,587.9 36.6 79.7 540.5 1,799.2 1,579.3 219.9 1.6 130.3 –
2021 Q1 2,574.8 34.8 81.4 550.5 1,778.0 1,541.0 237.0 2.5 127.7 –
Q2 2,603.8 33.0 81.3 556.5 1,792.9 1,556.3 236.6 2.2 137.7 –
    Life insurance
2018 Q4 1,185.3 4.1 15.2 122.7 1,000.7 1,000.7 – 0.5 42.2 –
2019 Q1 1,239.7 4.1 14.4 120.9 1,058.9 1,058.9 – 0.4 41.1 –
Q2 1,291.9 4.1 14.5 121.8 1,108.6 1,108.6 – 0.4 42.4 –
Q3 1,350.1 3.7 15.6 116.0 1,171.9 1,171.9 – 0.6 42.4 –
Q4 1,325.2 3.6 19.1 127.6 1,129.6 1,129.6 – 0.5 44.7 –
2020 Q1 1,295.8 3.6 19.3 114.3 1,117.8 1,117.8 – 0.6 40.3 –
Q2 1,347.1 3.8 19.2 129.8 1,150.3 1,150.3 – 0.5 43.4 –
Q3 1,369.2 3.9 19.5 136.8 1,164.8 1,164.8 – 0.5 43.7 –
Q4 1,395.9 3.9 20.7 142.9 1,185.7 1,185.7 – 0.5 42.3 –
2021 Q1 1,361.7 3.3 19.9 143.2 1,154.2 1,154.2 – 1.0 40.1 –
Q2 1,373.1 3.3 20.4 144.3 1,165.1 1,165.1 – 1.0 38.9 –
    Non-life insurance
2018 Q4 616.2 1.0 8.3 140.3 416.6 315.5 101.1 0.0 50.0 –
2019 Q1 655.2 1.1 9.3 144.1 448.5 328.9 119.6 0.0 52.2 –
Q2 665.6 1.1 8.8 147.0 459.4 341.5 117.8 0.1 49.3 –
Q3 682.6 1.2 9.1 149.7 471.9 354.8 117.1 0.1 50.6 –
Q4 673.5 1.2 9.3 153.7 457.2 349.4 107.8 0.1 52.0 –
2020 Q1 669.4 1.3 9.8 142.0 468.2 344.4 123.8 0.1 48.0 –
Q2 685.6 1.3 9.5 149.4 478.2 355.6 122.6 0.1 47.1 –
Q3 693.3 1.2 9.6 152.0 482.3 362.4 119.9 0.1 48.1 –
Q4 703.5 1.3 9.7 158.1 483.1 368.7 114.4 0.0 51.3 –
2021 Q1 715.8 1.2 10.6 161.8 491.4 362.5 128.9 0.1 50.6 –
Q2 719.5 1.2 10.5 164.3 493.1 366.2 126.9 0.1 50.2 –
    Reinsurance 5
2018 Q4 412.0 24.1 41.2 200.1 113.0 16.2 96.8 1.1 32.5 –
2019 Q1 448.4 26.5 44.5 222.9 117.4 15.8 101.6 1.1 36.0 –
Q2 450.1 26.6 46.1 220.8 119.4 15.8 103.6 1.3 35.9 –
Q3 459.9 26.8 44.7 222.8 125.6 16.3 109.3 1.5 38.5 –
Q4 475.2 26.9 47.4 234.0 128.0 20.6 107.5 1.3 37.7 –
2020 Q1 461.7 26.9 53.3 208.1 135.9 21.0 114.9 1.7 35.8 –
Q2 485.0 28.1 53.5 226.2 139.1 21.8 117.4 1.3 36.8 –
Q3 485.0 29.2 50.9 227.0 138.7 22.1 116.6 1.0 38.1 –
Q4 488.5 31.4 49.3 239.6 130.4 24.8 105.6 1.0 36.7 –
2021 Q1 497.3 30.2 50.9 245.5 132.4 24.2 108.1 1.4 37.0 –
Q2 511.2 28.5 50.4 247.9 134.7 25.0 109.7 1.1 48.6 –
Pension funds 6
2018 Q4 672.2 – 7.9 8.0 605.8 605.8 – – 2.8 47.6
2019 Q1 691.3 – 8.1 8.1 613.8 613.8 – – 2.9 58.4
Q2 707.9 – 8.1 8.3 620.3 620.3 – – 2.8 68.4
Q3 726.5 – 8.2 8.4 628.2 628.2 – – 2.9 78.9
Q4 735.8 – 8.4 8.6 638.0 638.0 – – 3.7 77.1
7 2020 Q1 599.1 – 1.6 19.4 497.3 496.7 – 0.3 8.1 72.4
Q2 623.3 – 1.6 21.6 506.4 505.8 – 0.3 8.3 85.0
Q3 635.9 – 1.6 22.4 510.0 509.3 – 0.3 8.7 92.9
Q4 647.7 – 1.6 21.8 516.3 515.6 – 0.3 8.9 98.8
2021 Q1 661.5 – 1.5 23.6 526.8 526.1 – 0.3 8.6 100.7
Q2 680.9 – 1.6 26.5 532.4 531.7 – 0.4 9.2 110.9
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections as of 2020 Q1. Until 2019 Q4 these are compiled using Solvency I
supervisory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  1 Including
deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers' note loans
and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension funds on pension managers
and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical reserves "life" taking account oftransitional measures. Health insurance is also included in the "non-life insurance"
sector.  4 Own funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth" and "Shares and other
equity".  5 Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which
is included there.  6 Valuation at book values. The term "pension funds" refers to the
institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds
thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the
self-employed. Social security funds are not included.  7 Change in data sources.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2009 70,208 – 538 –114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 68,536 – 19,945
2010 146,620 – 1,212 – 7,621 24,044 –17,635 147,831 92,682 –103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 –46,796 850 59,521 20,075 – 23,876 – 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 64,775 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,408 – 12,124 – 11,951 74,483 14,366
2015 33,024 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 69,034 116,493 – 66,330 121,164 61,659 – 83,471
2016 71,380 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 43,951 164,148 – 58,012 187,500 34,660 – 92,768
2017 54,840 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 43,277 137,907 – 71,454 161,012 48,349 – 83,067
2018 61,661 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 45,031 95,902 – 24,417 67,328 52,991 – 34,241
2019 137,356 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 68,820 62,915 8,059 2,408 52,448 74,441
2020 438,208 382,059 14,257 89,473 278,328 56,150 278,521 18,955 226,887 32,679 159,688
2020 Nov. 20,565 26,226 – 1,008 184 27,050 – 5,661 26,631 1,513 27,659 – 2,541 – 6,066
Dec. – 36,340 –38,083 –11,407 –11,953 –14,723 1,742 15,822 – 25,221 18,290 22,753 – 52,162
2021 Jan. 56,876 27,740 3,995 3,797 19,948 29,136 43,949 8,455 13,518 21,976 12,927
Feb. 42,555 19,574 3,411 – 2,569 18,732 22,980 43,479 – 3,738 20,397 26,821 – 925
Mar. 39,153 39,488 21,772 551 17,165 – 334 24,601 6,152 20,708 – 2,259 14,553
Apr. 17,262 12,392 – 2,704 6,063 9,032 4,870 25,929 – 17,641 24,095 19,475 – 8,668
May 37,055 32,136 – 3,450 7,311 28,274 4,919 32,266 – 2,194 25,538 8,922 4,789
June 29,666 15,241 1,998 – 288 13,531 14,426 31,901 – 583 22,605 9,879 – 2,235
July 13,429 6,113 – 9,235 3,717 11,631 7,316 31,061 – 5,500 25,087 11,474 – 17,632
Aug. 25,703 33,565 6,870 1,245 25,449 – 7,862 10,463 – 5,337 17,312 – 1,511 15,239
Sep. 23,582 15,210 12,559 8,212 – 5,561 8,372 32,272 6,387 17,663 8,223 – 8,690
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 – 8,335 38,831 5,485
2010 37,767 20,049 17,718 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,360
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 – 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 – 449
2015 44,165 7,668 36,497 34,437 – 5,421 39,858 9,728
2016 30,896 4,409 26,487 31,037 – 5,143 36,180 – 141
2017 51,571 15,570 36,001 49,913 7,031 42,882 1,658
2018 55,729 16,188 39,541 83,036 – 11,184 94,220 – 27,307
2019 47,115 9,076 38,039 33,573 – 1,119 34,692 13,542
2020 84,953 17,771 67,182 116,813 27 116,786 – 31,860
2020 Nov. 9,988 220 9,769 10,221 1,919 8,302 – 233
Dec. 14,530 2,898 11,633 14,692 2,970 11,722 – 161
2021 Jan. – 7,264 1,441 – 8,705 – 10,433 863 – 11,296 3,169
Feb. 9,412 2,729 6,683 11,010 1,501 9,509 – 1,598
Mar. 20,639 8,964 11,676 17,986 1,285 16,701 2,653
Apr. 17,279 882 16,397 15,913 1,816 14,097 1,366
May 4,781 1,170 3,612 3,907 – 387 4,294 875
June 12,085 5,166 6,919 14,962 36 14,926 – 2,878
July 5,793 825 4,968 3,502 – 74 3,576 2,291
Aug. 11,833 4,667 7,166 12,131 204 11,927 – 297
Sep. 13,654 4,660 8,994 15,229 3,374 11,855 – 1,575
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,653 563,730
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,614 592,375
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,739,485 776,970 38,948 17,527 643,340 77,155 184,986 777,529
2021 Jan. 158,237 75,929 3,011 590 67,215 5,113 12,102 70,206
Feb. 129,424 67,263 3,158 504 52,753 10,847 9,658 52,503
Mar. 181,139 105,661 11,531 9,511 75,893 8,725 11,202 64,277
Apr. 145,418 62,631 4,441 1,000 50,889 6,301 11,673 71,113
May 138,917 58,587 2,131 250 50,439 5,766 15,601 64,729
June 148,673 68,494 1,236 700 57,098 9,460 13,550 66,630
July 144,450 62,560 1,211 250 54,160 6,939 8,872 73,018
Aug. 136,725 67,235 1,340 0 59,379 6,516 11,940 57,550
Sep. 154,954 67,871 4,272 1,250 55,355 6,993 20,916 66,168
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 536,359 165,146 28,500 7,427 90,889 38,329 78,356 292,857
2021 Jan. 52,120 21,576 2,250 40 16,265 3,021 6,119 24,425
Feb. 41,268 18,138 2,658 4 7,789 7,686 3,654 19,477
Mar. 59,203 27,756 6,371 3,161 13,666 4,558 5,800 25,647
Apr. 48,999 12,414 3,051 250 7,001 2,111 7,640 28,945
May 45,302 11,672 2,131 250 6,132 3,159 6,058 27,572
June 47,884 11,296 908 700 5,981 3,707 6,767 29,821
July 37,975 8,800 800 250 5,424 2,326 3,202 25,973
Aug. 33,381 10,632 1,340 0 8,165 1,127 3,457 19,292
Sep. 60,953 17,484 3,900 0 10,365 3,218 12,400 31,068
Net sales 5
2010 21,566 – 87,646 – 3,754 – 63,368 28,296 – 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 – 54,582 1,657 – 44,290 32,904 – 44,852 – 3,189 80,289
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 343,046 26,505 7,861 8,016 22,026 – 11,399 50,316 266,225
2021 Jan. 25,773 2,547 1,094 – 922 3,737 – 1,362 4,667 18,559
Feb. 19,957 3,080 – 478 – 190 – 712 4,460 782 16,094
Mar. 61,040 37,126 10,737 8,754 15,784 1,850 2,689 21,225
Apr. 9,029 – 2,148 1,114 968 – 4,362 132 4,506 6,671
May 31,324 – 4,344 1,076 – 907 – 3,822 – 691 7,307 28,362
June 16,508 3,561 821 616 – 588 2,712 1,974 10,973
July 6,100 – 5,782 – 41 – 327 – 5,169 – 245 2,088 9,795
Aug. 33,226 6,654 – 1,096 – 92 7,304 539 1,014 25,557
Sep. 18,708 11,134 1,974 65 11,719 – 2,625 10,431 – 2,857
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201 1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,411,642 2 1,173,329 183,261 55,192 687,670 2 247,206 2 378,864 1,859,449
2021 Jan. 3,438,239 1,179,112 184,416 54,254 694,250 246,193 383,812 1,875,315
Feb. 3,459,727 1,183,313 183,909 54,073 694,692 250,639 384,738 1,891,675
Mar. 3,534,797 1,230,263 194,832 62,865 719,370 253,196 388,060 1,916,474
Apr. 3,533,432 1,219,467 195,766 63,790 707,428 252,482 392,063 1,921,902
May 3,562,200 1,212,645 196,850 62,878 701,731 251,186 399,222 1,950,333
June 3,587,728 1,222,221 197,721 63,515 706,439 254,546 401,612 1,963,895
July 3,586,593 1,216,275 197,729 63,186 700,892 254,468 401,308 1,969,010
Aug. 3,620,354 1,223,751 196,656 63,103 708,770 255,222 402,779 1,993,824
Sep. 3,646,235 1,240,171 198,715 63,175 725,195 253,087 413,618 1,992,446
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-September 2021
bis unter 2   1 179 372   450 193   57 089   25 000   296 220   71 883   71 449   657 730 
 2 bis unter 4    663 471   293 699   51 118   16 955   175 931   49 695   73 729   296 043 
 4 bis unter 6    520 229   188 227   38 157   8 528   90 131   51 411   62 534   269 468 
6 bis unter 8    383 844   133 708   26 317   6 870   71 884   28 637   45 226   204 909 
 8 bis unter 10    297 424   81 062   13 968   2 542   44 118   20 434   29 409   186 953 
 10 bis unter 15    182 720   49 349   8 132   2 300   26 659   12 258   34 739   98 632 
 15 bis unter 20    116 126   17 083   3 018    815   11 345   1 905   14 098   84 945 
 20 und darüber    303 050   26 851    915    163   8 907   16 865   82 433   193 766 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 – 3,741 – 1,269 – 974 927,256
2010 174,596 – 1,096 3,265 497 178 – 486 – 993 – 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 – 552 – 762 – 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,700 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,747 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,871 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,634 1,963,588
2021 Jan. 181,437 – 445 102 260 4 – 74 – 300 – 437 1,961,051
Feb. 182,149 705 331 – 0 – 9 443 – 59 1,994,901
Mar. 182,362 213 411 – 0 – 1 – 34 – 164 2,174,997
Apr. 182,665 106 116 73 1 – 0 – 1 – 84 2,194,286
May 182,152 – 514 205 26 –– 0 – 92 – 653 2,228,053
June 182,226 75 275 73 –– 87 – 70 – 116 2,262,394
July 181,614 – 65 74 31 2 – 1 – 2 – 169 2,266,494
Aug. 186,083 4,425 4,593 171 11 70 – 4 – 416 2,323,588
Sep. 186,316 230 678 6 11 – 14 – 9 – 443 2,238,994
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields and indices on German securities
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  4 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-
MFIs)German
bond
index
(REX)iBoxx
€ Germany 
price indexCDAX
share price
indexGerman
share
index
(DAX)
Period % per annumAverage
daily rateEnd-1998
= 100End-1987
= 100End-1987
= 1,000
2009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 2.9 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2019 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2020 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7 146.15 113.14 586.72 13,718.78
2021 May – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 0.3 0.9 144.19 108.88 642.41 15,421.13
June – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 0.2 1.0 144.74 109.42 648.99 15,531.04
July – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.1 0.1 0.9 146.34 111.03 650.36 15,544.39
Aug. – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.0 0.7 145.90 110.25 662.93 15,835.09
Sep. – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9 144.41 108.60 638.37 15,260.69
Oct. 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 0.1 0.3 1.0 143.52 108.60 653.37 15,688.77
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 End of year or month.  3 Source: Deutsche Börse
AG. 4 Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for futures contracts;
calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 –5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 –14,995 –8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 – 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 –1,340 – 379 –2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 –7,576 – 694 47,050 1,984 7,035
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,521 144,075 819 –1,745 143,256 44,266 –3,840
2015 181,889 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,753 174,018 7,362 494 166,656 35,259 7,871
2016 156,985 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 37,615 163,934 2,877 –3,172 161,057 40,787 –6,947
2017 153,756 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 58,834 156,282 4,938 1,048 151,344 57,786 –2,526
2018 132,060 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 28,366 138,424 2,979 –2,306 135,445 30,672 –6,364
2019 176,465 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 53,919 181,388 2,719 – 812 178,669 54,731 –4,923
2020 180,462 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 64,435 179,529 336 –1,656 179,193 66,091 933
2021 Mar. 15,995 13,745 4,699 631 3,335 827 9,046 2,250 15,184 552 – 526 14,632 2,776 811
Apr. 20,214 10,938 3,205 – 55 2,782 383 7,733 9,276 18,680 1,314 468 17,366 8,808 1,534
May 12,788 7,912 3,416 – 19 2,585 679 4,496 4,875 12,496 1,460 5 11,036 4,870 292
June 23,101 12,411 3,231 78 2,252 757 9,181 10,690 23,929 733 446 23,196 10,244 – 827
July 16,945 11,842 4,098 – 82 3,506 503 7,744 5,103 17,731 1,051 – 477 16,680 5,580 – 786
Aug. 16,774 8,078 3,673 – 6 3,086 445 4,405 8,695 17,239 1,024 – 68 16,215 8,763 – 466
Sep. 13,494 5,145 2,414 – 52 1,696 673 2,731 8,349 13,365 265 9 13,100 8,340 129
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2020 2021
 Item 2018 2019 2020 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 25.63 18.26 100.01 0.73 46.79 45.71 6.78 19.68 –24.65
   Debt securities 5.24 –2.18 2.99 0.15 2.47 0.57 –0.20 –1.53 1.90
     Short-term debt securities 1.42 –1.31 1.27 –0.32 0.53 1.25 –0.18 0.12 0.77
     Long-term debt securities 3.82 –0.87 1.72 0.47 1.94 –0.68 –0.02 –1.65 1.13
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 0.65 –0.47 1.38 –0.04 1.80 –0.48 0.10 –0.64 0.87
         Non-financial corporations 0.59 0.51 –0.17 –0.02 0.20 0.13 –0.48 0.10 0.62
         Financial corporations 1.40 –0.56 0.12 –0.16 0.60 –0.41 0.09 –0.55 0.48
         General government –1.34 –0.41 1.44 0.14 1.00 –0.20 0.49 –0.20 –0.24
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 4.60 –1.71 1.61 0.19 0.67 1.05 –0.31 –0.88 1.03
   Loans –0.87 –2.76 –19.33 –8.06 –3.19 –7.81 –0.27 3.96 8.72
     Short-term loans 24.05 12.37 –8.52 –9.40 –2.83 0.49 3.22 –0.20 11.24
     Long-term loans –24.92 –15.13 –10.82 1.33 –0.35 –8.30 –3.50 4.16 –2.52
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 6.25 –25.00 0.28 –7.83 6.99 –3.13 4.24 –5.83 0.43
         Non-financial corporations 4.52 –28.14 –12.27 –9.25 5.75 –3.86 –4.90 –1.66 –3.40
         Financial corporations 1.36 2.90 11.99 1.29 1.11 0.59 9.00 –4.17 3.84
         General government 0.36 0.24 0.55 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.00 0.00
       Loans to the rest of the world –7.12 22.24 –19.61 –0.24 –10.18 –4.68 –4.52 9.79 8.28
   Equity and investment fund shares 130.42 89.24 73.97 56.50 –15.87 20.30 13.05 18.35 19.22
     Equity 128.41 80.24 61.20 55.64 –17.02 15.43 7.14 14.52 12.30
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 18.82 6.18 –77.97 –1.51 –18.72 10.02 –67.75 12.08 4.92
         Non-financial corporations 18.27 4.62 –78.06 –1.32 –18.55 10.15 –68.34 12.08 5.32
         Financial corporations 0.55 1.55 0.09 –0.19 –0.18 –0.14 0.60 0.01 –0.41
       Listed shares of the rest of the world –4.08 7.26 6.63 0.26 –1.28 3.56 4.09 0.72 12.10
       Other equity  1 113.68 66.80 132.53 56.89 2.98 1.86 70.80 1.72 –4.72
     Investment fund shares 2.01 9.00 12.78 0.85 1.15 4.87 5.91 3.83 6.93
       Money market fund shares –0.53 1.78 3.79 –1.80 0.98 3.27 1.34 –0.47 –0.19
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 2.54 7.22 8.99 2.65 0.17 1.60 4.57 4.31 7.11
   Insurance technical reserves 0.39 1.68 2.02 0.51 0.50 0.45 0.55 0.43 0.61
   Financial derivatives 2.15 0.54 –25.41 –0.93 –10.35 –3.49 –10.64 21.57 6.78
   Other accounts receivable 37.94 –58.43 48.12 9.63 –54.64 46.91 46.22 26.00 –4.60
   Total 200.90 46.34 182.37 58.52 –34.29 102.65 55.49 88.47 7.97
 External financing
   Debt securities 0.47 20.52 36.63 6.69 23.36 10.58 –4.01 2.67 8.92
     Short-term securities 3.38 4.88 –4.40 2.17 2.76 –3.91 –5.42 –1.19 1.23
       Long-term securities –2.91 15.64 41.02 4.53 20.60 14.49 1.41 3.86 7.69
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 3.48 6.62 18.12 1.54 11.47 5.05 0.06 1.96 3.28
           Non-financial corporations 0.59 0.51 –0.17 –0.02 0.20 0.13 –0.48 0.10 0.62
           Financial corporations 2.89 5.31 19.86 2.05 11.20 5.44 1.18 1.98 2.74
           General government 0.01 0.47 –0.22 –0.10 –0.19 0.05 0.01 0.14 0.03
           Households –0.01 0.34 –1.35 –0.39 0.26 –0.57 –0.65 –0.26 –0.12
         Debt securities of the rest of the world –3.01 13.90 18.51 5.15 11.89 5.53 –4.06 0.71 5.64
   Loans 146.39 71.34 68.31 34.75 30.27 –0.36 3.66 31.45 8.83
     Short-term loans 72.93 24.16 –17.34 14.71 –26.59 –0.69 –4.78 34.30 –2.03
     Long-term loans 73.45 47.17 85.65 20.03 56.85 0.33 8.44 –2.85 10.87
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 75.48 27.59 30.34 11.12 25.27 –4.56 –1.49 38.39 –9.65
         Non-financial corporations 4.52 –28.14 –12.27 –9.25 5.75 –3.86 –4.90 –1.66 –3.40
         Financial corporations 69.55 55.16 6.95 23.85 3.07 –11.66 –8.31 37.06 –11.63
         General government 1.41 0.57 35.66 –3.47 16.45 10.96 11.72 2.99 5.39
       Loans from the rest of the world 70.91 43.74 37.97 23.62 5.00 4.20 5.14 –6.94 18.48
   Equity 16.08 17.96 56.49 6.07 9.74 21.58 19.10 14.52 8.00
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 73.22 –24.49 –62.04 7.20 –13.53 10.80 –66.51 14.77 8.01
       Non-financial corporations 18.27 4.62 –78.06 –1.32 –18.55 10.15 –68.34 12.08 5.32
       Financial corporations 46.75 –33.13 3.68 1.65 1.44 –1.00 1.59 –0.49 1.51
       General government 0.53 –0.01 0.26 0.20 0.09 –0.01 –0.01 –0.07 –0.07
       Households 7.67 4.03 12.08 6.66 3.50 1.67 0.25 3.25 1.25
     Listed shares of the rest of the world –31.95 –1.59 12.49 –5.95 18.40 –1.32 1.37 –4.52 –0.66
     Other equity  1 –25.20 44.04 106.03 4.82 4.87 12.10 84.24 4.27 0.65
   Insurance technical reserves 6.08 7.55 5.84 1.46 1.46 1.46 1.46 1.46 1.46
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options –0.49 –1.38 0.54 1.49 –2.26 0.06 1.26 –0.94 6.19
   Other accounts payable 55.00 7.43 15.62 –2.30 –44.73 39.91 22.74 53.92 10.82
   Total 223.51 123.42 183.42 48.15 17.84 73.22 44.21 103.07 44.22
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2020 2021
 Item 2018 2019 2020 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 582.4 573.7 715.2 595.0 626.2 698.1 715.2 709.2 689.7
   Debt securities 50.8 49.6 51.5 48.2 51.5 51.5 51.5 49.9 51.9
     Short-term debt securities 4.9 3.7 4.8 3.4 3.8 5.1 4.8 5.0 5.9
     Long-term debt securities 45.9 45.9 46.7 44.9 47.7 46.3 46.7 44.9 46.0
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 21.3 21.1 22.1 20.3 22.3 21.9 22.1 21.4 22.3
         Non-financial corporations 4.5 5.0 4.7 4.7 5.0 5.1 4.7 4.7 5.3
         Financial corporations 13.8 13.6 13.4 12.9 13.6 13.2 13.4 12.9 13.4
         General government 3.0 2.6 4.0 2.7 3.7 3.5 4.0 3.8 3.6
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 29.5 28.4 29.4 28.0 29.2 29.6 29.4 28.5 29.6
   Loans 733.8 733.4 717.0 724.2 728.7 718.5 717.0 722.4 730.8
     Short-term loans 555.6 569.4 565.8 559.1 564.4 563.2 565.8 565.9 577.1
     Long-term loans 178.2 164.0 151.2 165.1 164.4 155.2 151.2 156.5 153.7
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 440.3 415.3 415.6 407.4 414.4 411.3 415.6 409.7 410.2
         Non-financial corporations 368.0 339.9 327.6 330.6 336.4 332.5 327.6 325.9 322.5
         Financial corporations 65.2 68.1 80.1 69.4 70.5 71.1 80.1 75.9 79.7
         General government 7.1 7.3 7.9 7.5 7.6 7.7 7.9 7.9 7.9
       Loans to the rest of the world 293.6 318.1 301.5 316.8 314.3 307.2 301.5 312.7 320.7
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,215.0 2,464.0 2,522.7 2,249.2 2,410.3 2,438.7 2,522.7 2,680.1 2,748.1
     Equity 2,048.6 2,274.0 2,318.0 2,073.4 2,223.7 2,245.3 2,318.0 2,467.7 2,524.0
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 302.6 342.0 307.0 288.4 337.2 352.5 307.0 359.4 383.5
         Non-financial corporations 296.0 332.9 298.9 281.4 329.6 346.0 298.9 350.9 375.0
         Financial corporations 6.6 9.0 8.1 7.0 7.6 6.5 8.1 8.5 8.5
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 39.9 52.2 68.1 46.3 48.5 56.5 68.1 72.5 83.9
       Other equity  1 1,706.1 1,879.8 1,942.9 1,738.7 1,838.0 1,836.3 1,942.9 2,035.8 2,056.6
     Investment fund shares 166.4 190.0 204.7 175.8 186.6 193.5 204.7 212.4 224.1
       Money market fund shares 1.0 3.2 7.0 1.4 2.4 5.7 7.0 6.5 6.3
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 165.4 186.8 197.7 174.4 184.2 187.8 197.7 205.9 217.8
   Insurance technical reserves 56.3 59.2 62.1 59.9 60.6 61.3 62.1 62.8 63.6
   Financial derivatives 33.3 31.6 31.1 44.6 34.8 29.7 31.1 31.4 52.7
   Other accounts receivable 1,171.1 1,246.2 1,227.3 1,212.5 1,125.0 1,185.4 1,227.3 1,335.1 1,326.0
   Total 4,842.8 5,157.5 5,326.9 4,933.6 5,037.2 5,183.1 5,326.9 5,590.9 5,662.7
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 181.3 204.7 249.6 202.9 238.6 251.8 249.6 251.1 261.0
     Short-term securities 6.8 11.9 7.1 13.9 16.6 12.6 7.1 5.9 7.2
     Long-term securities 174.5 192.9 242.5 189.0 222.0 239.2 242.5 245.2 253.8
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 70.1 77.7 96.0 74.3 88.8 94.9 96.0 95.6 99.5
         Non-financial corporations 4.5 5.0 4.7 4.7 5.0 5.1 4.7 4.7 5.3
         Financial corporations 51.5 57.8 78.1 56.4 69.7 76.1 78.1 78.0 81.2
         General government 0.1 0.6 0.4 0.5 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5
         Households 14.0 14.4 12.8 12.8 13.8 13.3 12.8 12.5 12.5
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 111.1 127.0 153.6 128.5 149.9 156.9 153.6 155.5 161.4
   Loans 2,045.3 2,129.1 2,186.0 2,161.6 2,191.4 2,187.1 2,186.0 2,220.4 2,224.6
     Short-term loans 792.6 819.9 796.7 834.9 806.5 803.3 796.7 833.6 831.0
     Long-term loans 1,252.8 1,309.2 1,389.3 1,326.6 1,384.9 1,383.9 1,389.3 1,386.8 1,393.6
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,321.1 1,360.2 1,387.2 1,369.2 1,394.9 1,390.5 1,387.2 1,429.4 1,417.3
         Non-financial corporations 368.0 339.9 327.6 330.6 336.4 332.5 327.6 325.9 322.5
         Financial corporations 903.6 970.1 972.3 991.1 994.3 982.6 972.3 1,013.7 999.6
         General government 49.5 50.3 87.3 47.5 64.3 75.4 87.3 89.8 95.2
       Loans from the rest of the world 724.3 768.9 798.9 792.4 796.5 796.6 798.9 791.0 807.3
   Equity 2,701.1 3,102.2 3,259.8 2,572.7 2,950.1 3,092.2 3,259.8 3,521.3 3,638.1
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 659.1 733.2 739.2 594.9 710.7 746.7 739.2 847.5 894.7
       Non-financial corporations 296.0 332.9 298.9 281.4 329.6 346.0 298.9 350.9 375.0
       Financial corporations 161.7 157.2 171.2 126.0 149.8 155.4 171.2 191.7 201.6
       General government 41.6 51.8 56.3 41.8 50.5 53.3 56.3 67.3 71.8
       Households 159.8 191.3 212.8 145.7 180.8 192.0 212.8 237.6 246.3
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 765.0 959.4 996.3 689.5 856.5 924.2 996.3 1,082.8 1,127.1
     Other equity  1 1,277.0 1,409.6 1,524.3 1,288.3 1,382.9 1,421.3 1,524.3 1,591.1 1,616.3
   Insurance technical reserves 269.8 277.3 283.1 278.8 280.2 281.7 283.1 284.6 286.1
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 65.4 67.0 79.4 85.2 86.0 78.0 79.4 63.8 72.4
   Other accounts payable 1,189.4 1,298.5 1,277.7 1,255.2 1,221.3 1,267.8 1,277.7 1,371.8 1,354.9
   Total 6,452.2 7,078.8 7,335.7 6,556.4 6,967.7 7,158.6 7,335.7 7,713.0 7,837.1
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2020 2021
 Item 2018 2019 2020 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 137.95 142.20 210.03 21.00 73.09 41.50 74.44 48.52 52.42
     Currency 29.92 35.19 61.65 16.40 16.99 11.97 16.29 12.96 17.10
     Deposits 108.03 107.01 148.38 4.60 56.10 29.53 58.15 35.57 35.32
       Transferable deposits 109.88 111.01 165.34 18.74 58.64 31.76 56.20 34.10 37.70
       Time deposits 6.78 1.47 –1.70 –3.11 –0.85 0.41 1.85 –0.01 –2.37
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –8.63 –5.47 –15.26 –11.04 –1.70 –2.63 0.10 1.48 –0.01
   Debt securities 1.62 –1.85 –5.94 –1.47 0.38 –1.67 –3.18 –2.66 –1.31
     Short-term debt securities –0.13 –0.53 0.08 –0.03 0.16 0.10 –0.16 0.16 0.22
     Long-term debt securities 1.74 –1.33 –6.02 –1.44 0.22 –1.77 –3.03 –2.82 –1.52
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 2.24 –2.93 –2.56 –0.14 0.55 –1.17 –1.79 –1.07 –1.26
         Non-financial corporations –0.10 0.21 –1.32 –0.32 0.19 –0.56 –0.62 –0.28 –0.13
         Financial corporations 2.81 –2.22 –1.26 –0.35 0.47 –0.36 –1.02 –0.67 –1.02
         General government –0.46 –0.92 0.02 0.53 –0.11 –0.24 –0.15 –0.12 –0.11
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –0.62 1.08 –3.38 –1.32 –0.17 –0.50 –1.39 –1.59 –0.05
   Equity and investment fund shares 38.42 49.75 90.18 19.39 28.96 20.35 21.48 28.09 31.70
     Equity 18.84 18.90 48.53 13.62 15.57 11.60 7.73 2.60 7.32
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 9.44 6.60 16.05 8.07 6.35 1.98 –0.35 3.39 2.20
         Non-financial corporations 6.28 3.52 11.92 6.47 3.41 1.71 0.33 3.12 1.58
         Financial corporations 3.16 3.08 4.14 1.61 2.94 0.27 –0.68 0.27 0.62
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 4.37 7.45 23.28 3.02 6.40 7.43 6.43 –1.72 3.57
       Other equity  1 5.03 4.86 9.19 2.53 2.82 2.20 1.64 0.92 1.54
     Investment fund shares 19.58 30.84 41.65 5.76 13.39 8.75 13.75 25.50 24.38
       Money market fund shares –0.22 –0.32 0.09 0.38 –0.10 0.10 –0.29 0.09 –0.08
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 19.80 31.17 41.56 5.38 13.49 8.65 14.04 25.41 24.45
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 15.80 17.95 18.34 5.51 5.54 5.57 1.73 5.40 5.58
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 28.22 37.85 47.96 16.52 8.83 9.49 13.12 15.86 10.46
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 37.28 37.31 33.75 9.67 7.12 7.18 9.79 6.01 4.34
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 –12.81 –10.38 –7.48 18.85 –13.31 3.65 –16.68 21.98 –1.77
   Total 246.48 272.82 386.84 89.47 110.61 86.07 100.69 123.21 101.42
 External financing
   Loans 64.87 82.50 83.95 12.82 18.57 27.42 25.15 16.79 27.55
     Short-term loans 2.45 0.95 –5.50 –1.57 –2.29 –0.53 –1.11 0.48 0.79
     Long-term loans 62.43 81.55 89.45 14.39 20.86 27.94 26.26 16.31 26.76
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 53.88 68.51 85.73 15.38 19.41 25.43 25.51 18.75 26.56
       Consumer loans 11.14 14.42 –4.29 –2.67 –2.05 1.08 –0.66 –1.14 –0.09
       Entrepreneurial loans –0.14 –0.43 2.51 0.10 1.21 0.91 0.29 –0.82 1.08
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 61.72 73.41 83.17 15.52 17.96 27.32 22.37 14.85 27.19
       Loans from other financial institutions 3.14 9.06 0.78 –2.71 0.61 0.10 2.77 1.94 0.36
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.80 0.73 0.01 –0.18 0.25 0.32 –0.38 0.01 0.01
   Total 65.67 83.23 83.97 12.64 18.82 27.73 24.77 16.80 27.56
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2020 2021
 Item 2018 2019 2020 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 2,457.4 2,599.6 2,809.3 2,620.6 2,693.7 2,734.9 2,809.3 2,858.0 2,910.4
     Currency 227.3 262.5 324.2 278.9 295.9 307.9 324.2 337.1 354.2
     Deposits 2,230.1 2,337.1 2,485.2 2,341.7 2,397.8 2,427.0 2,485.2 2,520.9 2,556.2
       Transferable deposits 1,398.0 1,509.1 1,674.1 1,527.8 1,586.4 1,617.9 1,674.1 1,708.3 1,746.0
       Time deposits 252.4 253.9 252.1 250.8 249.9 250.3 252.1 252.2 249.8
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 579.7 574.2 558.9 563.2 561.5 558.8 558.9 560.4 560.4
     Debt securities 117.5 121.4 113.3 108.9 114.5 113.7 113.3 112.8 111.6
       Short-term debt securities 2.1 1.6 1.6 1.5 1.7 1.8 1.6 1.7 1.9
       Long-term debt securities 115.4 119.8 111.7 107.4 112.8 111.9 111.7 111.0 109.6
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 80.2 81.5 76.7 72.3 76.7 76.1 76.7 77.3 76.5
           Non-financial corporations 12.1 12.4 10.9 11.0 11.8 11.3 10.9 10.5 10.5
           Financial corporations 64.6 66.6 63.3 58.3 62.0 62.1 63.3 64.4 63.7
           General government 3.4 2.5 2.6 3.1 3.0 2.7 2.6 2.4 2.3
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 37.4 39.9 36.5 36.6 37.8 37.6 36.5 35.4 35.1
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,164.0 1,388.3 1,541.0 1,222.7 1,376.2 1,425.4 1,541.0 1,659.4 1,746.0
     Equity 590.6 708.0 806.4 620.8 710.3 737.8 806.4 868.6 904.7
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 184.1 223.9 243.3 171.7 209.2 217.3 243.3 271.7 280.0
         Non-financial corporations 151.9 182.3 204.0 138.7 172.3 183.6 204.0 228.2 236.9
         Financial corporations 32.2 41.6 39.2 33.0 36.9 33.7 39.2 43.4 43.1
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 100.2 136.3 180.6 116.9 144.7 156.1 180.6 199.5 216.4
       Other equity  1 306.3 347.8 382.6 332.2 356.4 364.4 382.6 397.4 408.2
     Investment fund shares 573.4 680.2 734.6 601.9 665.9 687.7 734.6 790.7 841.4
       Money market fund shares 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.3 2.4 2.3
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 571.1 678.0 732.2 599.2 663.2 684.9 732.2 788.3 839.0
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 375.9 393.8 412.2 399.3 404.9 410.5 412.2 417.6 423.2
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,011.1 1,069.1 1,112.1 1,082.8 1,091.6 1,101.2 1,112.1 1,128.0 1,138.7
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 883.8 924.5 956.8 936.9 945.3 953.2 956.8 962.8 967.2
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 29.6 29.6 27.9 29.0 29.6 30.0 27.9 27.8 28.2
   Total 6,039.4 6,526.4 6,972.6 6,400.2 6,655.8 6,768.9 6,972.6 7,166.4 7,325.3
 Liabilities
   Loans 1,754.8 1,837.9 1,924.6 1,853.2 1,870.3 1,899.0 1,924.6 1,939.7 1,969.5
     Short-term loans 58.3 59.0 53.2 57.3 55.1 54.3 53.2 53.6 54.4
     Long-term loans 1,696.5 1,778.9 1,871.3 1,795.9 1,815.3 1,844.7 1,871.3 1,886.1 1,915.1
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,287.0 1,358.7 1,448.2 1,376.6 1,396.2 1,422.6 1,448.2 1,464.9 1,493.9
       Consumer loans 218.1 231.4 226.1 228.8 226.0 227.0 226.1 224.6 224.4
       Entrepreneurial loans 249.7 247.7 250.2 247.8 248.1 249.5 250.2 250.2 251.2
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,667.2 1,741.6 1,824.6 1,757.2 1,773.2 1,801.6 1,824.6 1,839.8 1,867.3
       Loans from other financial institutions 87.5 96.1 99.8 95.9 97.1 97.3 99.8 99.7 102.1
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 18.3 19.7 19.2 21.2 21.6 21.2 19.2 20.5 19.8
   Total 1,773.1 1,857.6 1,943.8 1,874.4 1,891.9 1,920.2 1,943.8 1,960.2 1,989.3
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
November 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
  
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local securitygovernment government government government funds government government government government funds
Period
€ billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2015 + 29.1 + 17.6 + 4.6 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 + 36.4 + 13.7 + 7.7 + 6.3 + 8.7 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.32017 + 43.7 + 7.9 + 13.9 + 10.7 + 11.1 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.32018 
p + 64.4 + 21.1 + 11.7 + 15.6 + 16.0 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.5
2019 p + 51.1 + 22.0 + 13.8 + 6.1 + 9.1 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3
2020 p − 145.2 − 86.4 − 30.1 + 6.3 − 35.0 − 4.3 − 2.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 1.0
2019         H1  p + 47.0 + 18.9 + 12.8 + 6.8 + 8.4 + 2.8 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5
         H2  p + 4.1 + 3.1 + 1.0 − 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
2020         H1  p − 47.8 − 26.9 − 9.2 + 0.8 − 12.5 − 2.9 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.8
         H2  p − 97.4 − 59.5 − 20.9 + 5.5 − 22.5 − 5.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 + 0.3 − 1.3
2021         H1  pe − 80.9 − 67.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 10.2 − 4.7 − 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2015 2,178.1 1,372.2 659.5 164.0 1.5 72.0 45.3 21.8 5.4 0.0
2016 2,162.7 1,365.9 642.3 166.9 1.2 69.0 43.6 20.5 5.3 0.02017 2,112.5 1,350.3 614.9 163.5 0.8 64.7 41.3 18.8 5.0 0.02018 
p 2,063.5 1,323.1 600.8 155.9 0.7 61.3 39.3 17.8 4.6 0.0
2019 p 2,046.7 1,299.9 609.8 153.7 0.7 58.9 37.4 17.6 4.4 0.0
2020 p 2,314.3 1,513.2 660.6 154.2 7.4 68.7 44.9 19.6 4.6 0.2
2019         Q1  p 2,073.7 1,324.5 612.5 154.2 0.7 61.1 39.0 18.0 4.5 0.0
         Q2  p 2,064.1 1,320.4 610.7 152.8 0.7 60.5 38.7 17.9 4.5 0.0
         Q3  p 2,081.1 1,328.1 620.7 152.3 0.6 60.4 38.5 18.0 4.4 0.0
         Q4  p 2,046.7 1,299.9 609.8 153.7 0.7 58.9 37.4 17.6 4.4 0.0
2020         Q1  p 2,090.4 1,327.7 623.1 153.6 0.8 60.1 38.1 17.9 4.4 0.0
         Q2  p 2,259.9 1,473.9 645.1 153.7 1.0 66.4 43.3 19.0 4.5 0.0
         Q3  p 2,333.4 1,536.9 655.6 154.8 4.6 69.1 45.5 19.4 4.6 0.1
         Q4  p 2,314.3 1,513.2 660.6 154.2 7.4 68.7 44.9 19.6 4.6 0.2
2021         Q1  p 2,345.1 1,538.9 665.6 154.2 16.2 69.9 45.9 19.8 4.6 0.5
         Q2  p 2,398.3 1,589.2 668.7 155.5 21.2 69.7 46.2 19.4 4.5 0.6
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus   
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly  
GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2015 1,364.9 705.1 501.2 158.6 1,335.8 721.9 233.0 153.0 64.5 42.2 121.2 + 29.1 1,213.3
2016 1,426.7 739.2 524.3 163.3 1,390.4 754.5 240.7 162.5 68.1 37.3 127.2 + 36.4 1,270.42017 1,486.9 773.3 549.5 164.2 1,443.3 784.8 250.6 169.5 71.6 33.8 132.9 + 43.7 1,329.52018 
p 1,557.3 808.2 572.6 176.5 1,492.8 805.6 260.3 176.2 78.4 31.1 141.3 + 64.4 1,387.8
2019 p 1,613.8 834.4 598.2 181.2 1,562.7 846.6 272.7 184.2 83.7 27.3 148.3 + 51.1 1,439.7
2020 p 1,566.9 782.1 607.9 176.9 1,712.1 905.2 284.1 209.8 90.9 21.0 201.2 − 145.2 1,397.0
As a percentage of GDP
2015 45.1 23.3 16.6 5.2 44.1 23.9 7.7 5.1 2.1 1.4 4.0 + 1.0 40.1
2016 45.5 23.6 16.7 5.2 44.4 24.1 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.2 4.1 + 1.2 40.52017 45.5 23.7 16.8 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 + 1.3 40.72018 
p 46.2 24.0 17.0 5.2 44.3 23.9 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.2 + 1.9 41.2
2019 p 46.5 24.0 17.2 5.2 45.0 24.4 7.9 5.3 2.4 0.8 4.3 + 1.5 41.5
2020 p 46.5 23.2 18.1 5.3 50.8 26.9 8.4 6.2 2.7 0.6 6.0 − 4.3 41.5
Percentage growth rates
2015 + 3.9 + 4.8 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 3.0 + 4.4 + 2.4 + 4.0 + 6.6 − 10.5 − 1.8 . + 4.6
2016 + 4.5 + 4.8 + 4.6 + 2.9 + 4.1 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 6.2 + 5.6 − 11.7 + 4.9 . + 4.72017 + 4.2 + 4.6 + 4.8 + 0.5 + 3.8 + 4.0 + 4.1 + 4.3 + 5.1 − 9.3 + 4.5 . + 4.72018 
p + 4.7 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 7.5 + 3.4 + 2.7 + 3.9 + 3.9 + 9.5 − 8.0 + 6.3 . + 4.4
2019 p + 3.6 + 3.2 + 4.5 + 2.7 + 4.7 + 5.1 + 4.8 + 4.5 + 6.8 − 12.2 + 5.0 . + 3.7
2020 p − 2.9 − 6.3 + 1.6 − 2.4 + 9.6 + 6.9 + 4.2 + 13.9 + 8.7 − 23.4 + 35.7 . − 3.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and   
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution  Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
November 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 788.9 236.0 295.1 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 2.9 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.2 1,238.8 + 6.4
2015 p 829.8 673.3 10.4 804.3 244.1 302.7 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,301.1 1,273.6 + 27.4
2016 p 862.3 705.8 9.0 844.5 251.3 321.6 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 17.8 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.1 1,330.2 + 24.9
2017 p 900.3 734.5 7.9 869.4 261.6 327.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 30.8 631.5 622.0 + 9.5 1,417.5 1,377.2 + 40.3
2018 p 951.8 776.3 6.2 905.6 272.5 338.0 39.2 55.8 16.1 + 46.2 656.2 642.5 + 13.6 1,490.7 1,430.9 + 59.8
2019 p 1,010.3 799.4 11.2 975.5 285.9 349.7 33.6 62.9 16.8 + 34.8 685.0 676.7 + 8.3 1,573.8 1,530.8 + 43.0
2020 p 947.0 739.9 13.9 1,112.4 299.5 422.8 25.9 69.2 60.1 − 165.5 719.5 747.4 − 27.9 1,518.9 1,712.3 − 193.4
2019         Q1  p 240.9 192.7 2.5 227.7 68.3 88.5 11.5 10.2 3.3 + 13.2 163.3 166.4 − 3.1 374.3 364.1 + 10.2
         Q2  p 256.3 201.7 2.0 236.1 70.1 87.0 12.2 13.0 2.6 + 20.1 169.9 168.4 + 1.5 396.1 374.5 + 21.6
         Q3  p 245.3 194.7 3.4 236.7 70.9 86.2 4.5 16.4 3.1 + 8.6 168.8 170.3 − 1.5 384.0 376.9 + 7.1
         Q4  p 269.1 210.6 3.2 272.2 76.1 87.5 5.1 22.5 7.7 − 3.1 181.9 172.6 + 9.3 420.7 414.5 + 6.2
2020         Q1  p 244.8 197.4 2.5 236.4 72.9 90.5 11.9 12.0 2.6 + 8.4 168.3 175.7 − 7.4 380.0 379.1 + 0.9
         Q2  p 211.9 158.1 2.7 271.8 72.2 119.1 8.6 15.4 3.4 − 59.8 175.9 187.0 − 11.1 354.5 425.4 − 70.9
         Q3  p 227.8 181.4 4.0 282.3 72.4 102.0 1.4 18.3 34.3 − 54.5 181.1 195.0 − 13.9 370.1 438.5 − 68.4
         Q4  p 259.3 201.9 4.5 315.4 81.4 109.1 5.9 22.8 19.6 − 56.1 186.0 189.5 − 3.5 408.2 467.9 − 59.6
2021         Q1  p 240.7 185.2 4.3 300.6 75.5 134.4 7.3 11.1 14.6 − 59.9 182.4 196.3 − 13.9 385.2 458.9 − 73.8
         Q2  p 267.0 195.8 7.5 297.2 74.8 123.2 10.7 15.2 10.5 − 30.2 185.9 197.0 − 11.1 414.1 455.3 − 41.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans grant ed.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2018 p 374.4 363.5 + 10.9 420.5 400.1 + 20.4 271.8 261.5 + 10.2
2019 p 382.5 369.2 + 13.3 437.2 419.6 + 17.6 284.2 278.1 + 6.1
2020 p 341.4 472.1 − 130.7 456.4 489.4 − 33.0 297.0 294.6 + 2.4
2019         Q1  p 84.7 86.1 − 1.4 105.7 96.7 + 8.9 58.2 63.2 − 4.9
         Q2  p 97.7 90.3 + 7.4 106.0 100.2 + 5.8 70.6 65.9 + 4.7
         Q3  p 93.2 91.3 + 1.9 107.9 102.6 + 5.2 69.1 69.2 − 0.1
         Q4  p 106.9 101.5 + 5.4 115.5 118.4 − 2.9 84.5 78.4 + 6.0
2020         Q1  p 92.3 90.4 + 1.9 105.6 99.7 + 5.9 57.9 67.7 − 9.8
         Q2  p 70.8 114.8 − 44.0 108.2 128.0 − 19.8 69.4 69.4 + 0.1
         Q3  p 83.7 105.4 − 21.7 112.9 113.7 − 0.8 67.5 72.6 − 5.1
         Q4  p 94.5 161.5 − 67.0 127.4 146.3 − 18.9 100.3 83.5 + 16.8
2021         Q1  p 75.0 127.5 − 52.5 113.7 120.7 − 7.1 61.1 69.7 − 8.6
         Q2  p 86.4 123.5 − 37.1 122.8 122.0 + 0.8 74.6 71.7 + 2.9
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city states Berlin, Bremen and
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- assigned to the general government sector. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
November 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
  
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,8362017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,3682018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,7752019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,880 632,237 313,381 286,065 32,791 107,916 − 274 30,266
2019         Q1 193,054 162,696 79,669 71,578 11,450 19,816 + 10,541 6,270
         Q2 202,383 172,563 90,883 75,455 6,224 29,784 + 37 6,179         Q3 193,918 166,676 86,117 72,677 7,882 27,569 − 327 7,402         Q4 210,062 182,556 98,381 78,809 5,365 37,733 − 10,227 6,146
2020         Q1 198,351 168,099 83,086 75,420 9,593 18,875 + 11,377 6,855
         Q2 158,161 135,185 68,653 59,557 6,974 25,107 − 2,131 6,997         Q3 182,202 156,397 78,502 72,613 5,282 25,234 + 571 9,705         Q4 201,167 172,557 83,140 78,475 10,942 38,700 − 10,090 6,709
2021         Q1 189,223 159,178 72,814 73,137 13,227 19,882 + 10,163 6,887
         Q2 191,915 163,158 81,129 74,024 8,005 29,598 − 841 7,438         Q3 ... 180,378 87,603 84,312 8,464 ... ... 7,823
2020         Sep. . 58,657 29,021 27,468 2,167 . . 2,046
2021         Sep. . 72,231 34,690 34,158 3,382 . . 2,341
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget. 2Customs footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Domestic Import trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax 4 tion tax  5 tax 6 Total VAT VAT fers  8 taxes 9 taxes 9 duties taxes
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,3452017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,1412018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,5712019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,345 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,703 50,107
2019         Q1 175,216 82,996 50,923 17,453 9,194 5,426 60,402 46,018 14,384 121 23,968 6,531 1,197 12,519
         Q2 185,333 90,134 54,437 16,069 8,085 11,543 59,101 43,943 15,158 2,113 26,625 6,087 1,273 12,770         Q3 179,020 81,267 53,668 13,614 7,607 6,379 61,057 45,976 15,081 2,221 26,654 6,485 1,336 12,344         Q4 196,300 89,619 60,632 16,575 7,128 5,284 62,696 47,175 15,520 3,660 32,301 6,746 1,279 13,745
2020         Q1 181,350 88,009 53,389 18,711 8,495 7,415 60,060 46,038 14,022 244 24,517 7,406 1,114 13,251
         Q2 146,360 69,928 50,760 10,633 2,348 6,187 44,262 31,625 12,638 1,170 23,525 6,326 1,149 11,175         Q3 168,308 73,766 47,470 13,492 5,411 7,392 59,819 47,933 11,886 796 25,930 6,784 1,212 11,910         Q4 186,327 89,094 57,667 16,146 8,014 7,268 55,343 43,105 12,238 1,744 31,660 7,259 1,227 13,770
2021         Q1 171,881 86,381 50,854 17,826 10,203 7,498 54,795 45,403 9,392 252 21,712 7,757 983 12,703
         Q2 175,242 84,505 50,783 14,347 8,860 10,515 57,634 43,399 14,235 1,215 23,210 7,398 1,281 12,085         Q3 193,910 90,619 53,857 17,973 9,853 8,936 69,528 49,052 20,476 1,189 23,469 7,813 1,292 13,532
2020         Sep. 63,521 33,650 12,521 14,001 5,664 1,464 18,229 14,668 3,562 1 8,853 2,388 399 4,864
2021         Sep. 78,211 44,626 16,727 16,876 8,745 2,279 22,117 16,343 5,774 2 8,477 2,561 429 5,980
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike plans. 4After deducting employee refunds and research grants. 5After deducting re-
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens search grants. 6Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains,
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- non-assessed taxes on earnings. 7The allocation of revenue to central, state and
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- local government, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is re gulated in Section
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- local government in revenue for 2020: 43.0:52.9:4.1. The EU share is de ducted from
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- central government’s share. 8Respective percentage share of central and state
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After government for 2020: 39.8:60.2. 9 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 
deducting child benefits and subsidies for supplementary private pension

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
November 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,9662018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,2032019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,651 14,553 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2019         Q1 4,848 4,679 2,495 6,542 2,594 1,646 579 586 3,976 1,705 499 351 17,959 14,139 3,350
         Q2 9,937 5,257 3,588 2,543 2,491 1,659 485 665 3,667 1,660 513 247 19,163 14,869 3,881         Q3 10,519 4,624 3,667 2,770 2,251 1,639 515 668 3,923 1,824 474 264 17,118 12,659 4,019         Q4 15,379 5,086 4,507 2,281 2,035 1,745 538 730 4,223 1,798 488 237 17,422 13,861 3,190
2020         Q1 4,966 4,930 2,413 6,766 2,634 1,708 562 537 4,525 1,981 542 358 17,245 13,391 3,403
         Q2 8,117 4,235 3,772 2,606 2,426 1,585 455 328 3,566 2,154 425 181 12,971 8,842 3,895         Q3 9,985 4,365 3,978 2,817 2,366 1,499 506 414 3,730 2,262 509 283 14,690 10,242 4,095         Q4 14,566 5,145 4,487 2,365 2,101 1,768 715 513 4,234 2,203 567 254 16,584 12,997 3,283
2021         Q1 4,126 3,171 2,585 6,776 2,567 1,692 395 400 4,716 2,110 578 353 17,594 13,798 3,503
         Q2 8,717 2,546 4,053 2,843 2,469 1,640 528 413 4,231 2,374 538 255 17,888 13,674 4,033         Q3 9,532 2,338 3,636 2,911 2,381 1,618 514 538 4,571 2,457 516 269 ... ... ...
2020         Sep. 3,497 2,064 1,035 700 773 453 188 143 1,268 837 171 111 . . .
2021         Sep. 3,434 1,473 1,145 743 747 555 182 198 1,551 730 187 93 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  
3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,0322018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,0082019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 + 1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 303 56 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 − 3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 344 55 3,901
2019         Q1 77,984 54,393 23,426 78,630 67,328 5,087 − 646 39,432 37,637 1,474 263 57 4,001
         Q2 81,410 57,837 23,408 80,804 69,011 5,205 + 605 40,232 38,639 1,272 264 57 3,996         Q3 80,305 56,637 23,481 82,716 70,633 5,330 − 2,411 38,386 36,876 1,183 271 56 3,995         Q4 86,756 63,133 23,413 82,849 70,674 5,333 + 3,907 42,945 40,539 2,074 276 56 3,987
2020         Q1 80,578 55,999 24,436 82,622 70,829 5,346 − 2,045 40,840 38,636 1,848 300 56 3,966
         Q2 82,098 57,515 24,413 82,875 70,889 5,346 − 777 39,779 37,975 1,446 304 55 3,949         Q3 82,689 58,109 24,418 86,497 74,054 5,591 − 3,808 36,898 35,197 1,333 313 55 3,925         Q4 88,978 64,375 24,412 86,605 73,879 5,576 + 2,373 39,847 38,186 1,286 321 55 3,916
2021         Q1 83,066 57,351 25,542 86,048 73,799 5,600 − 2,982 36,888 35,326 1,166 342 54 3,887
         Q2 86,386 60,666 25,545 86,486 73,905 5,679 − 100 36,941 35,554 988 345 53 3,871         Q3 85,535 59,941 25,468 87,123 74,453 5,718 − 1,588 36,041 34,670 973 345 53 3,840
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
November 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- Government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy funds Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment payment iture  5 surplus ment
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −2018 39,335 34,172 622 − 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 . 588 8,129 + 6,228 −2019 35,285 29,851 638 − 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 . 842 6,252 + 2,131 −
2020 33,678 28,236 630 − 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 . 1,214 6,076 − 27,335 −
2019         Q1 8,369 7,027 148 − 8,597 3,969 403 1,818 . 179 1,450 − 228 −
         Q2 8,685 7,440 156 − 8,136 3,673 204 1,832 . 243 1,475 + 549 −         Q3 8,650 7,263 162 − 7,829 3,682 68 1,711 . 190 1,510 + 821 −         Q4 9,581 8,121 172 − 8,592 3,685 98 1,941 . 230 1,816 + 989 −
2020         Q1 8,123 6,851 153 − 9,301 4,469 392 1,934 . 235 1,470 − 1,179 −
         Q2 7,906 6,691 151 − 17,005 4,869 7,977 1,793 . 254 1,407 − 9,099 −         Q3 8,350 6,934 153 − 18,619 5,737 8,637 1,701 . 472 1,414 − 10,269 −         Q4 9,299 7,760 174 − 16,088 5,543 5,712 1,957 . 251 1,785 − 6,789 −
2021         Q1 8,228 6,747 289 − 18,260 5,956 8,006 1,935 . 184 1,391 − 10,033 −
         Q2 8,830 7,301 324 − 16,720 5,029 7,495 1,912 . 108 1,452 − 7,890 −         Q3 8,791 7,290 330 − 12,042 4,447 3,631 1,744 . 91 1,452 − 3,251 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- courage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promotion
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- of business start-ups. 5Including collection charges to other social security funds , ex-
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring meas- job seekers. ures and refunds of social contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to en-
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which: of which:
Central Remedies Adminis-
govern- and trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental therapeutic Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 appliances benefits iture  5 surplus
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 7572017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,0412018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 + 2,6542019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 − 1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 − 6,110
2019         Q1 59,809 55,622 3,625 62,485 19,586 9,947 10,386 3,738 4,106 3,649 2,707 − 2,676
         Q2 62,121 57,858 3,625 62,858 19,210 10,127 10,421 3,821 4,289 3,535 2,774 − 736         Q3 62,143 57,763 3,625 62,716 19,109 10,229 10,278 3,630 4,467 3,558 2,804 − 573         Q4 67,094 61,884 3,625 64,075 19,497 10,353 10,455 3,821 4,713 3,659 2,975 + 3,019
2020         Q1 61,949 57,419 3,625 66,438 20,049 11,086 10,806 3,804 4,470 4,061 2,816 − 4,489
         Q2 68,108 58,096 9,359 69,487 17,674 10,492 10,908 3,389 3,986 4,143 2,980 − 1,378         Q3 70,130 59,403 10,151 71,063 20,913 10,567 11,642 3,774 4,852 3,829 2,970 − 934         Q4 68,645 62,672 4,805 67,987 19,887 10,729 11,019 3,891 4,725 3,920 3,039 + 658
2021         Q1 72,970 59,338 13,303 72,660 19,631 11,175 11,564 4,069 4,564 4,287 2,967 + 310
         Q2 71,964 61,819 9,965 74,492 20,287 11,275 11,536 4,219 5,085 4,120 2,850 − 2,529
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, i.e. after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social security funds. sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
November 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1 
of which:
Inpatient Contributions to
of which: Non-cash care Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits  3 total 4 benefit ance scheme  5 expenditure surplus
2014 25,974 25,893 25,457 4,260 11,892 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 4,626 13,003 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 4,904 13,539 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,5572018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 − 3,3152019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2019         Q1 11,123 10,938 10,728 2,060 4,082 2,833 547 437 + 396
         Q2 11,795 11,620 10,812 2,012 4,132 2,868 588 449 + 983         Q3 11,734 11,557 11,159 2,098 4,234 2,972 598 450 + 576         Q4 12,592 12,413 11,252 2,062 4,243 3,064 626 433 + 1,339
2020         Q1 11,693 11,473 11,444 2,186 4,214 3,067 633 489 + 249
         Q2 11,921 11,732 11,816 2,051 4,015 3,173 664 468 + 105         Q3 13,924 11,938 12,890 2,263 4,087 3,249 682 500 + 1,033         Q4 13,079 12,746 12,927 2,306 4,177 3,403 716 481 + 152
2021         Q1 12,093 11,831 13,344 2,355 3,971 3,387 725 512 − 1,251
         Q2 12,933 12,329 13,521 2,287 4,030 3,421 745 510 − 587
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *The final annual figures generally differ from the ance contributions). 3Data revision in 2014. 4From 2014, also including benefits for
total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter al ia.5For non-pro-
sequently. 1Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund. 2Since 2005, fessional carers. 
including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
 market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,203,723 12,774 622,537 190,130 44,748 1,333,534
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,178,094 85,952 609,112 186,661 49,906 1,246,463
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,162,650 205,391 587,212 179,755 46,342 1,143,9492017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017 2,112,469 319,159 540,524 175,617 43,442 1,033,7292018 + 167,231 − 16,248 − 91 − 1,670 2018 2,063,538 364,731 497,051 181,077 43,453 977,2262019 + 185,070 + 63 − 8,044 − 914 2019 2,046,671 366,562 466,695 177,601 48,340 987,475
2020 + 456,828 + 217,904 + 24,181 − 3,399 2020  
p 2,314,330 522,392 496,607 184,701 53,450 1,057,180
2019         Q1 + 56,654 + 3,281 − 2,172 − 1,199 2019          Q1 2,073,704 359,884 486,480 179,512 43,594 1,004,234
         Q2 + 48,545 + 5,491 − 279 + 7,227          Q2 2,064,129 361,032 479,817 179,168 42,838 1,001,274         Q3 + 48,053 + 4,030 + 176 − 5,093          Q3 2,081,124 358,813 477,620 179,228 49,221 1,016,243         Q4 + 31,817 − 12,738 − 5,768 − 1,849          Q4 2,046,671 366,562 466,695 177,601 48,340 987,475
2020         Q1 + 65,656 + 31,296 + 9,236 + 1,698 2020          Q1  
p 2,090,390 371,076 483,786 180,477 49,428 1,005,624
         Q2 + 185,560 + 126,585 + 31,212 − 7,314          Q2  p 2,259,854 424,141 548,756 181,288 49,629 1,056,039
         Q3 + 159,067 + 80,783 − 6,080 + 588          Q3  p 2,333,413 468,723 520,248 184,051 51,683 1,108,707
         Q4 + 46,545 − 20,760 − 10,187 + 1,629          Q4  p 2,314,330 522,392 496,607 184,701 53,450 1,057,180
2021         Q1 + 109,953 + 42,045 − 11,737 − 4,708 2021          Q1  p 2,345,138 561,443 478,289 182,756 52,095 1,070,554
         Q2 + 146,852 + 57,601 + 3,463 + 1,576          Q2  p 2,398,303 620,472 476,638 182,868 44,182 1,074,142
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
November 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2014 2,203,723 12,150 72,618 1,501,494 95,952 521,508 . .
2015 2,178,094 14,303 65,676 1,498,922 90,350 508,842 . .2016 2,162,650 15,845 69,715 1,483,871 96,254 496,965 . .2017 2,112,469 14,651 48,789 1,484,462 87,799 476,769 . .2018 2,063,538 14,833 52,572 1,456,160 77,296 462,676 . .
2019         Q1 2,073,704 15,663 64,218 1,460,634 72,005 461,184 . .
         Q2 2,064,129 12,868 56,256 1,463,027 75,284 456,693 . .         Q3 2,081,124 17,586 62,602 1,465,529 79,918 455,491 . .         Q4 2,046,671 14,595 49,180 1,458,540 69,289 455,068 . .
2020         Q1  
p 2,090,390 11,590 70,912 1,472,174 85,137 450,577 . .
         Q2  p 2,259,854 13,333 122,225 1,533,762 142,708 447,826 . .
         Q3  p 2,333,413 12,134 180,445 1,582,430 111,480 446,923 . .
         Q4  p 2,314,330 14,768 163,401 1,593,394 94,288 448,479 . .
2021         Q1  p 2,345,138 12,482 180,788 1,637,711 69,668 444,488 . .
         Q2  p 2,398,303 13,183 175,436 1,690,447 76,559 442,679 . .
Central government
2014 1,398,475 12,150 64,230 1,141,973 54,388 125,735 1,202 12,926
2015 1,372,199 14,303 49,512 1,138,862 45,256 124,265 1,062 13,6672016 1,365,933 15,845 55,208 1,123,853 50,004 121,022 556 8,5672017 1,350,298 14,651 36,297 1,131,896 47,761 119,693 1,131 10,6182018 1,323,058 14,833 42,246 1,107,140 42,057 116,782 933 9,975
2019         Q1 1,324,528 15,663 50,032 1,102,604 39,185 117,044 809 11,583
         Q2 1,320,388 12,868 42,752 1,109,057 38,950 116,761 835 13,862         Q3 1,328,106 17,586 48,934 1,105,439 39,067 117,080 704 13,849         Q4 1,299,872 14,595 38,480 1,101,866 28,617 116,314 605 10,301
2020         Q1  
p 1,327,729 11,590 56,680 1,103,935 38,714 116,809 605 8,174
         Q2  p 1,473,936 13,333 109,221 1,139,513 95,489 116,381 585 7,136
         Q3  p 1,536,918 12,134 166,564 1,178,691 62,933 116,596 605 11,878
         Q4  p 1,513,204 14,768 154,498 1,180,688 46,811 116,439 609 14,741
2021         Q1  p 1,538,857 12,482 167,484 1,212,500 29,837 116,553 632 23,153
         Q2  p 1,589,181 13,183 165,373 1,259,211 35,006 116,408 631 29,675
State government
2014 658,164 − 8,391 361,916 19,245 268,612 14,825 2,297
2015 659,521 − 16,169 362,376 23,349 257,627 15,867 2,3482016 642,291 − 14,515 361,996 20,482 245,298 11,273 1,6942017 614,926 − 12,543 354,688 19,628 228,067 14,038 2,0462018 600,776 − 10,332 351,994 18,864 219,587 14,035 1,891
2019         Q1 612,478 − 14,190 361,293 19,374 217,621 15,229 2,004
         Q2 610,700 − 13,508 357,571 24,784 214,838 17,631 1,887         Q3 620,694 − 13,671 363,723 29,765 213,535 17,755 1,957         Q4 609,828 − 10,703 360,495 25,768 212,862 14,934 1,826
2020         Q1  
p 623,096 − 14,234 372,021 28,582 208,260 12,346 1,783
         Q2  p 645,075 − 13,006 398,404 28,298 205,368 11,168 2,085
         Q3  p 655,581 − 13,882 408,310 29,662 203,728 11,864 2,090
         Q4  p 660,572 − 8,904 417,307 30,371 203,990 12,143 1,411
2021         Q1  p 665,624 − 13,305 430,103 23,404 198,812 11,219 2,018
         Q2  p 668,722 − 10,064 436,434 25,371 196,853 12,702 2,083
Local government
2014 163,639 − − 1,297 26,065 136,276 1,959 734
2015 164,036 − − 2,047 27,474 134,515 2,143 4632016 166,931 − − 2,404 27,002 137,524 1,819 4312017 163,501 − − 3,082 24,572 135,848 1,881 4662018 155,884 − 1 3,046 20,425 132,412 1,884 497
2019         Q1 154,169 − 1 2,960 18,857 132,351 2,139 498
         Q2 152,796 − − 2,961 18,814 131,021 2,016 525         Q3 152,271 − − 3,016 18,574 130,681 2,065 555         Q4 153,673 − − 2,996 19,079 131,598 1,856 532
2020         Q1  
p 153,582 − − 3,128 19,734 130,720 1,825 508
         Q2  p 153,716 − − 3,094 19,718 130,903 2,085 350
         Q3  p 154,845 − − 2,961 20,596 131,288 2,107 339
         Q4  p 154,203 − − 3,366 18,137 132,700 1,406 330
2021         Q1  p 154,202 − − 3,121 17,357 133,723 2,020 345
         Q2  p 155,500 − − 3,121 18,424 133,956 2,100 348
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
November 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2014 1,524 − − − 481 1,043 94 2,122
2015 1,502 − − − 537 965 91 2,6852016 1,232 − − − 562 670 89 3,0442017 807 − − − 262 545 15 3,9342018 690 − − − 388 302 16 4,506
2019         Q1 723 − − − 453 270 16 4,110
         Q2 742 − − − 557 185 16 4,224         Q3 594 − − − 391 203 16 4,179         Q4 711 − − − 375 336 16 4,753
2020         Q1  
p 775 − − − 287 488 16 4,328
         Q2  p 980 − − − 581 399 16 4,284
         Q3  p 4,602 − − − 4,210 392 3,956 4,226
         Q4  p 7,439 − − − 7,128 311 6,931 4,606
2021         Q1  p 16,179 − − − 15,985 194 15,853 4,209
         Q2  p 21,194 − − − 20,995 199 20,860 4,187
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3 
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 day bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 987,909 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 63,650
2008 1,019,905 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 78,6852009 1,086,173 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 63,121
2010 1,337,160 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 242,251
2011 1,346,869 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 215,1092012 1,390,377 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 203,4672013 1,392,745 10,592 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 190,1272014 1,398,475 12,150 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 180,123
2015 1,372,199 14,303 1,070 1,188,375 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,521
2016 1,365,933 15,845 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,0262017 1,350,298 14,651 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,4552018 1,323,058 14,833 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,8392019 1,299,872 14,595 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,931
2020 
p 1,513,204 14,768 . 1,335,186 808,300 183,046 58,279 − 3,692 98,543 113,141 . 163,250
2019         Q1 1,324,528 15,663 902 1,152,636 709,008 178,900 66,531 − 4,191 89,782 18,288 31 156,229
         Q2 1,320,388 12,868 852 1,151,809 720,904 173,313 68,110 − 5,691 91,024 15,042 19 155,711         Q3 1,328,106 17,586 822 1,154,373 711,482 183,268 69,088 − 5,639 90,416 18,100 − 156,147         Q4 1,299,872 14,595 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,931
2020         Q1  
p 1,327,729 11,590 . 1,160,616 721,343 182,095 71,028 − 5,310 91,084 23,572 . 155,524
         Q2  p 1,473,936 13,333 . 1,248,734 774,587 178,329 56,061 − 3,752 95,622 79,987 . 211,869
         Q3  p 1,536,918 12,134 . 1,345,255 796,338 191,388 57,144 − 3,737 99,276 127,478 . 179,529
         Q4  p 1,513,204 14,768 . 1,335,186 808,300 183,046 58,279 − 3,692 98,543 113,141 . 163,250
2021         Q1  p 1,538,857 12,482 . 1,379,984 821,254 194,571 60,687 − 3,857 103,910 134,800 . 146,390
         Q2  p 1,589,181 13,183 . 1,424,584 873,345 189,048 62,569 − 5,056 104,997 139,451 . 151,415
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by the
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
off-budget entities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2019 2020 2021
2018 2019 2020 2018 2019 2020 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Item Index 2015=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 109.7 108.8 98.7 1.0 –0.8 –9.3 –1.6 –5.1 –21.3 –9.5 –1.3 –1.9 19.8
Construction 103.8 103.9 107.8 1.9 0.1 3.8 –1.7 6.1 1.9 –1.8 9.0 –5.0 0.5
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 105.6 108.7 103.1 1.5 3.0 –5.2 1.9 0.3 –14.9 –2.7 –2.9 –7.8 11.0
Information and communication 116.4 120.4 119.1 7.5 3.4 –1.0 2.6 0.7 –4.4 –1.1 0.5 0.7 7.9
Financial and insurance activities 94.1 95.3 95.8 –6.9 1.3 0.5 2.1 0.4 0.8 1.3 –0.4 –0.8 –0.2
Real estate activities 101.8 102.4 101.9 0.7 0.6 –0.4 1.0 0.0 –1.6 0.2 –0.4 –0.3 1.6
Business services  1 110.6 110.3 102.2 3.2 –0.2 –7.4 –0.0 –1.4 –13.4 –8.2 –6.9 –6.1 9.6
Public services, education and health 105.1 106.9 103.4 0.6 1.7 –3.2 1.8 –0.5 –8.9 0.0 –3.8 –3.1 10.2
Other services 101.4 103.1 92.3 1.6 1.7 –10.5 1.6 –2.7 –19.7 –3.9 –16.0 –10.5 8.1
Gross value added 106.3 107.3 102.1 1.1 1.0 –4.9 0.6 –1.3 –11.9 –3.9 –2.4 –3.7 10.0
Gross domestic product  2 106.1 107.2 102.3 1.1 1.1 –4.6 0.7 –1.5 –11.3 –3.6 –1.9 –3.3 9.8
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 105.4 107.0 100.8 1.4 1.6 –5.9 1.1 –1.1 –13.2 –3.4 –5.7 –9.1 6.0
Government consumption 106.8 110.0 113.9 1.0 3.0 3.5 3.6 2.5 3.5 4.0 4.2 2.5 3.7
Machinery and equipment 112.0 113.1 100.5 4.4 1.0 –11.2 –2.4 –9.4 –23.6 –9.5 –2.9 0.5 20.4
Premises 107.6 108.7 111.4 2.6 1.1 2.5 –0.4 5.4 0.7 –0.6 5.1 –2.1 2.9
Other investment  4 113.7 119.9 121.1 3.8 5.5 1.0 5.4 3.8 –1.3 0.3 1.3 –2.2 2.6
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . –0.1 –0.1 –0.9 –0.3 –0.3 –0.2 –1.9 –1.3 0.1 0.8
Domestic demand 107.6 109.5 105.2 1.7 1.8 –4.0 1.1 –0.3 –8.5 –3.7 –3.3 –4.5 6.7
Net exports  6 . . . –0.5 –0.7 –0.8 –0.3 –1.2 –3.3 –0.1 1.2 0.9 3.3
     Exports 110.0 111.2 100.8 2.3 1.1 –9.3 0.9 –3.1 –22.1 –9.1 –3.1 –0.5 26.5
     Imports 114.2 117.5 107.4 3.9 2.9 –8.6 1.7 –0.6 –17.3 –10.1 –6.4 –2.8 20.1
Gross domestic product  2 106.1 107.2 102.3 1.1 1.1 –4.6 0.7 –1.5 –11.3 –3.6 –1.9 –3.3 9.8
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,752.1 1,802.9 1,708.0 2.9 2.9 –5.3 2.4 0.5 –12.1 –3.7 –5.6 –7.4 8.0
Government consumption 670.4 705.2 754.6 3.4 5.2 7.0 5.5 5.4 7.6 7.3 7.7 6.7 4.4
Machinery and equipment 235.5 241.1 216.9 4.9 2.4 –10.0 –0.8 –8.0 –22.5 –8.3 –1.9 1.9 22.3
Premises 345.5 364.1 380.1 7.4 5.4 4.4 3.2 9.0 3.7 0.0 5.7 –0.3 7.9
Other investment  4 128.2 137.0 138.9 6.2 6.9 1.4 6.8 4.3 –1.0 0.6 1.7 –1.0 3.8
Changes in inventories  5 28.5 26.8 –23.7 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,160.1 3,277.1 3,174.8 4.1 3.7 –3.1 2.8 1.6 –7.7 –3.4 –3.0 –2.8 9.1
Net exports 207.7 196.2 192.8 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,593.0 1,619.4 1,462.1 3.4 1.7 –9.7 1.0 –2.8 –22.5 –9.9 –3.8 0.6 31.7
     Imports 1,385.3 1,423.2 1,269.3 5.8 2.7 –10.8 0.5 –1.6 –21.0 –12.5 –8.1 –2.2 29.1
Gross domestic product  2 3,367.9 3,473.4 3,367.6 3.1 3.1 –3.0 2.9 0.8 –9.2 –2.7 –1.3 –1.5 11.0
 IV. Prices (2015=100)
Private consumption 103.7 105.1 105.8 1.5 1.3 0.6 1.3 1.6 1.3 –0.3 0.1 1.8 1.8
Gross domestic product 104.9 107.0 108.8 2.0 2.1 1.6 2.1 2.4 2.4 1.0 0.6 1.9 1.1
Terms of trade 100.1 100.8 102.9 –0.8 0.7 2.0 1.3 1.3 4.2 1.8 1.2 0.5 –3.2
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,773.7 1,855.5 1,852.1 4.6 4.6 –0.2 3.9 2.9 –3.2 –0.7 0.4 –0.4 4.9
Entrepreneurial and property income 763.8 752.7 676.1 2.1 –1.5 –10.2 –4.0 –5.6 –27.2 –7.4 –2.2 2.0 40.6
National income 2,537.5 2,608.2 2,528.2 3.8 2.8 –3.1 1.7 0.1 –9.8 –2.8 –0.3 0.3 12.8
Memo item: Gross national income 3,476.2 3,586.0 3,461.3 3.9 3.2 –3.5 2.3 0.3 –9.2 –3.4 –1.7 –1.3 10.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2021.  1 Professional, sci-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added plus
taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit institu-tions serving households.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware
and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net in-
crease in valuables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy TotalInter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2015 = 100
% of total  1   100      14,04      6,37      79,59      29,45      36,98 2.27      10,89      10,31      9,95      12,73      14,16
Period
2017 104.9 108.7 98.9 104.7 104.9 105.0 106.9 103.0 106.2 107.0 104.1 105.3
2018 2 105.9 2 109.1 97.4 106.0 105.5 106.0 106.2 106.9 107.3 108.9 106.5 103.5
2019 102.5 112.8 90.4 101.6 101.8 101.4 106.2 101.0 102.8 106.5 103.4 92.0
2020 94.1 116.1 84.4 91.0 94.9 85.7 97.6 97.2 90.5 98.5 89.5 69.4
2020 Q3 93.7 118.5 78.8 90.5 94.4 84.8 97.9 98.0 89.7 97.1 86.6 71.7
Q4 101.8 130.7 91.8 97.5 98.3 95.9 106.5 99.0 95.4 105.3 98.5 81.4
2021 Q1 95.0 94.7 92.0 95.2 103.6 88.1 100.7 96.1 99.4 107.0 91.3 75.4
r Q2 97.7 118.2 81.5 95.3 104.8 87.1 103.0 96.4 101.1 108.2 95.3 66.7
x Q3 95.9 119.7 79.7 93.0 101.9 82.2 102.2 103.3 96.8 109.5 94.0 55.2
2020 Sep. 99.4 121.8 79.9 97.0 98.8 93.0 109.5 102.8 96.9 103.1 94.6 81.9
Oct. 101.7 124.6 91.3 98.5 102.7 93.3 108.7 102.8 99.0 104.5 90.3 85.6
Nov. 106.0 130.4 91.8 102.8 104.2 101.4 114.4 101.6 103.1 111.1 98.8 92.5
Dec. 97.6 137.0 92.2 91.1 87.9 92.9 96.5 92.5 84.2 100.3 106.5 66.1
2021 Jan. 88.6 76.3 97.5 90.0 100.2 80.9 95.6 92.4 94.1 100.4 82.1 70.8
Feb. 90.9 88.9 86.5 91.6 99.3 85.6 99.2 89.8 96.6 104.2 88.2 74.1
Mar. 105.4 119.0 92.1 104.1 111.2 97.7 107.3 106.2 107.6 116.5 103.6 81.2
r Apr. 97.4 116.1 86.5 95.0 104.2 88.1 101.9 92.0 100.9 106.9 94.5 71.2
r May 96.5 117.6 81.2 94.0 104.7 84.6 100.4 95.8 99.7 106.4 93.0 64.1
r June 99.1 120.8 76.9 97.0 105.4 88.5 106.7 101.4 102.7 111.2 98.4 64.8
3,x July 99.3 123.8 77.5 96.7 105.2 87.6 102.9 103.4 100.4 110.4 98.1 64.7
3,x Aug. 89.9 113.5 79.9 86.6 97.8 73.2 92.9 100.1 90.4 105.8 86.3 42.8
x,p Sep. 98.4 121.9 81.6 95.6 102.6 85.9 110.9 106.4 99.6 112.2 97.7 58.2
Annual percentage change
2017 + 3.3 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.1 + 3.7 + 4.2 + 2.1 + 4.5 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 3.2
2018 2+ 1.0 2+ 0.4 – 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 – 0.7 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 2.3 – 1.7
2019 – 3.2 + 3.4 – 7.2 – 4.2 – 3.5 – 4.3 ± 0.0 – 5.5 – 4.2 – 2.2 – 2.9 –11.1
2020 – 8.2 + 2.9 – 6.6 –10.4 – 6.8 –15.5 – 8.1 – 3.8 –12.0 – 7.5 –13.4 –24.6
2020 Q3 – 8.4 – 0.5 – 2.9 –10.4 – 7.5 –15.3 – 6.1 – 3.1 –12.7 – 9.7 –15.1 –19.5
Q4 – 1.6 + 5.0 – 2.7 – 3.0 + 1.1 – 6.0 – 2.5 – 3.7 – 1.9 – 0.6 – 9.2 – 4.2
2021 Q1 – 1.7 – 4.7 – 2.3 – 1.1 + 2.3 – 3.3 – 0.9 – 3.8 + 1.3 + 3.5 – 0.1 – 5.9
r Q2 +15.9 + 2.0 +11.9 +19.7 +22.4 +22.8 +22.1 + 4.8 +28.2 +22.5 +17.2 +51.1
x Q3 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 2.7 + 7.9 – 3.0 + 4.4 + 5.4 + 7.9 +12.8 + 8.6 –23.0
2020 Sep. – 6.9 + 0.2 – 2.2 – 8.7 – 4.9 –14.0 – 6.6 – 0.3 – 9.0 – 9.5 –13.2 –17.8
Oct. – 3.1 + 2.4 – 0.7 – 4.4 – 2.1 – 6.3 – 4.6 – 4.0 – 5.2 – 3.9 –10.1 – 4.8
Nov. – 2.5 + 3.1 – 3.6 – 3.6 + 0.9 – 6.5 – 1.6 – 5.4 – 1.9 + 0.1 – 9.0 – 5.5
Dec. + 0.8 + 9.3 – 3.8 – 0.8 + 5.5 – 4.9 – 0.9 – 1.3 + 2.3 + 2.1 – 8.5 – 1.5
2021 Jan. – 3.7 – 9.9 – 2.6 – 2.9 + 1.6 – 6.0 – 3.4 – 5.7 – 1.1 + 0.8 – 0.6 –12.6
Feb. – 6.6 – 7.6 – 5.7 – 6.5 – 1.7 –10.2 – 4.3 – 8.1 – 2.1 + 1.5 – 3.3 –19.6
Mar. + 4.9 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 5.9 + 6.9 + 6.3 + 5.1 + 2.1 + 6.7 + 8.1 + 3.2 +20.8
r Apr. +27.5 + 3.2 +18.8 +35.1 +25.7 +61.7 +44.5 + 2.7 +37.8 +27.6 +35.0 +384.4
r May +16.8 + 3.8 +13.2 +20.4 +24.6 +21.6 +17.7 + 7.0 +29.0 +22.9 +20.0 +40.6
r June + 5.7 – 0.7 + 3.9 + 7.2 +17.2 – 0.1 + 9.8 + 4.8 +19.4 +17.7 + 2.0 –10.1
3,x July + 6.0 + 3.3 + 2.4 + 6.9 +12.8 + 1.9 +11.0 + 6.1 +16.1 +16.9 +13.5 –15.0
3,x Aug. + 2.2 – 0.3 – 1.0 + 3.0 + 7.4 – 2.8 + 1.4 + 6.9 + 5.5 +12.9 + 9.5 –25.2
x,p Sep. – 1.0 + 0.1 + 2.1 – 1.4 + 3.8 – 7.6 + 1.3 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 8.8 + 3.3 –28.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2015.  2 As of January 2018 weights in structural and civilengineering work corrected by the Federal Statistical Office.  3 Influenced by a change
in holiday dates.  x Provisional; estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal
Statistical Office to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly
Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2017 108.6 + 7.8 109.4 +10.6 108.5 + 6.5 105.7 + 5.1 116.5 +10.6 102.2 + 3.2
2018 110.5 + 1.7 111.5 + 1.9 109.9 + 1.3 110.0 + 4.1 118.9 + 2.1 107.1 + 4.8
2019 104.9 – 5.1 103.5 – 7.2 105.4 – 4.1 107.0 – 2.7 123.3 + 3.7 101.6 – 5.1
2020 97.2 – 7.3 97.9 – 5.4 95.6 – 9.3 105.8 – 1.1 124.4 + 0.9 99.6 – 2.0
2020 Sep. 104.2 – 1.1 101.7 + 1.6 104.8 – 3.3 111.6 + 3.0 146.4 + 4.7 100.1 + 2.1
Oct. 109.2 + 2.8 108.3 + 4.1 109.4 + 2.4 111.4 – 0.1 145.0 +13.2 100.3 – 5.4
Nov. 113.7 + 7.1 114.0 +10.5 113.9 + 6.2 110.2 – 1.3 138.2 + 0.1 101.0 – 1.8
Dec. 108.6 + 6.3 101.7 + 9.8 113.7 + 4.2 102.7 + 9.6 131.3 + 9.0 93.2 + 9.9
2021 Jan. 110.2 + 1.7 119.6 + 7.7 104.2 – 2.2 111.1 + 1.0 140.1 + 8.4 101.5 – 2.0
Feb. 111.4 + 6.6 116.8 +10.4 108.0 + 5.6 111.2 – 2.8 128.5 + 6.1 105.4 – 6.1
Mar. 129.0 +30.8 133.4 +23.2 127.0 +40.2 123.9 + 8.9 146.8 +19.4 116.3 + 5.1
Apr. 118.2 +84.4 126.2 +64.3 114.1 +116.5 111.4 +21.9 161.7 +84.4 94.8 + 2.5
May 114.3 +60.3 123.0 +60.4 109.0 +68.0 113.5 +19.3 157.0 +41.4 99.1 +10.2
June 125.7 +30.8 127.7 +48.5 126.0 +23.5 114.1 +15.4 151.2 +31.5 101.8 + 8.8
July 127.6 +32.4 128.1 +35.6 127.4 +32.2 127.8 +21.1 150.1 +24.8 120.4 +19.7
Aug. 106.5 +16.8 115.8 +29.0 100.1 +10.7 111.2 + 6.6 132.0 + 6.3 104.3 + 6.6
p Sep. 121.4 +16.5 121.8 +19.8 122.2 +16.6 113.4 + 1.6 136.8 – 6.6 105.7 + 5.6
From the domestic market
2017 107.0 + 7.3 107.1 + 9.7 107.8 + 5.9 101.6 + 3.7 108.7 + 5.4 99.3 + 3.1
2018 107.2 + 0.2 108.6 + 1.4 106.6 – 1.1 102.9 + 1.3 114.7 + 5.5 98.9 – 0.4
2019 101.2 – 5.6 99.1 – 8.7 102.9 – 3.5 101.2 – 1.7 116.2 + 1.3 96.1 – 2.8
2020 94.9 – 6.2 94.1 – 5.0 95.1 – 7.6 98.0 – 3.2 105.5 – 9.2 95.4 – 0.7
2020 Sep. 99.5 – 0.8 95.4 + 0.2 102.7 – 1.4 101.7 – 1.8 125.4 – 4.6 93.7 – 0.4
Oct. 104.5 + 5.4 106.8 + 8.4 102.6 + 4.3 104.4 – 2.3 119.6 – 9.3 99.3 + 0.8
Nov. 109.2 + 6.2 113.3 +12.5 106.3 + 2.7 104.6 – 4.6 124.3 – 8.4 97.9 – 2.9
Dec. 98.2 + 4.8 95.0 +12.8 102.1 – 0.3 91.0 + 1.9 104.1 – 3.0 86.5 + 4.0
2021 Jan. 102.9 + 1.5 112.6 + 6.8 95.4 – 2.7 98.1 – 3.1 111.0 + 6.3 93.7 – 6.4
Feb. 107.8 + 6.2 111.9 +12.1 105.3 + 2.9 101.2 – 3.9 108.4 + 5.7 98.7 – 7.1
Mar. 125.6 +30.0 128.9 +25.6 125.2 +39.7 109.8 + 0.9 130.5 +25.8 102.8 – 7.0
Apr. 110.9 +69.1 117.1 +59.3 107.0 +88.7 101.7 +26.8 126.9 +93.4 93.2 + 9.5
May 112.5 +50.6 118.5 +58.4 109.1 +50.3 100.9 +14.5 122.0 +22.2 93.8 +11.4
June 126.3 +21.1 125.6 +54.5 130.6 + 3.7 102.0 +11.8 118.5 +18.0 96.4 + 9.4
July 126.1 +32.5 125.8 +34.4 127.1 +32.4 121.8 +22.9 115.4 +10.4 124.0 +27.4
Aug. 105.0 +18.6 111.3 +26.0 99.3 +14.1 106.6 + 6.6 111.0 – 0.3 105.1 + 9.3
p Sep. 109.1 + 9.6 117.8 +23.5 102.8 + 0.1 101.5 – 0.2 101.1 –19.4 101.7 + 8.5
From abroad
2017 109.8 + 8.2 111.9 +11.5 108.9 + 6.9 108.9 + 6.1 122.8 +14.7 104.5 + 3.4
2018 113.0 + 2.9 114.6 + 2.4 112.0 + 2.8 115.5 + 6.1 122.2 – 0.5 113.4 + 8.5
2019 107.7 – 4.7 108.3 – 5.5 106.9 – 4.6 111.5 – 3.5 129.1 + 5.6 105.9 – 6.6
2020 98.9 – 8.2 101.9 – 5.9 95.9 –10.3 111.8 + 0.3 139.6 + 8.1 102.9 – 2.8
2020 Sep. 107.8 – 1.4 108.6 + 3.1 106.1 – 4.3 119.2 + 6.3 163.3 +11.5 105.0 + 4.0
Oct. 112.7 + 1.1 110.0 ± 0.0 113.5 + 1.5 116.8 + 1.6 165.4 +32.2 101.1 – 9.6
Nov. 117.1 + 7.6 114.8 + 8.4 118.5 + 8.1 114.5 + 1.1 149.4 + 6.6 103.3 – 1.1
Dec. 116.5 + 7.3 108.9 + 7.1 120.7 + 6.6 111.8 +15.1 153.2 +16.9 98.4 +14.3
2021 Jan. 115.7 + 1.8 127.2 + 8.5 109.5 – 1.9 121.1 + 3.7 163.5 + 9.6 107.5 + 1.1
Feb. 114.1 + 6.9 122.1 + 8.7 109.7 + 7.2 118.9 – 2.1 144.7 + 6.5 110.6 – 5.3
Mar. 131.6 +31.5 138.2 +20.7 128.1 +40.5 134.8 +14.6 160.0 +15.6 126.6 +14.2
Apr. 123.7 +96.7 136.1 +69.5 118.4 +135.4 118.9 +18.9 189.7 +79.8 96.1 – 2.1
May 115.6 +68.0 127.9 +62.5 109.0 +80.8 123.2 +22.5 185.2 +54.2 103.2 + 9.4
June 125.3 +39.5 130.0 +42.9 123.3 +40.8 123.5 +17.8 177.6 +40.2 106.0 + 8.4
July 128.8 +32.4 130.6 +36.9 127.6 +32.0 132.4 +19.9 178.1 +33.9 117.7 +14.2
Aug. 107.6 +15.3 120.6 +31.8 100.6 + 8.8 114.8 + 6.6 148.9 +10.7 103.7 + 4.6
p Sep. 130.8 +21.3 126.2 +16.2 133.9 +26.2 122.6 + 2.9 165.6 + 1.4 108.7 + 3.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2017 122.4 +7.0 123.1 +7.0 123.1 +5.3 123.4 +7.4 121.9 +12.0 121.6 +6.9 119.8 +7.3 125.0 +7.8
2018 134.7 +10.0 131.1 +6.5 136.6 +11.0 127.9 +3.6 125.2 +2.7 138.8 +14.1 135.6 +13.2 132.4 +5.9
2019 146.0 +8.4 145.0 +10.6 150.1 +9.9 142.2 +11.2 138.9 +10.9 147.1 +6.0 147.9 +9.1 141.2 +6.6
2020 145.7 –0.2 144.3 –0.5 160.9 +7.2 130.5 –8.2 141.5 +1.9 147.3 +0.1 139.7 –5.5 143.4 +1.6
2020 Aug. 136.7 +1.6 135.4 –0.1 159.6 +14.6 114.0 –13.1 135.5 –2.7 138.3 +3.5 130.1 –5.1 130.5 +1.2
Sep. 151.5 +2.5 157.0 +7.2 173.4 +10.5 141.1 +8.3 162.1 –6.4 145.2 –2.7 146.2 +2.0 144.4 –2.1
Oct. 142.4 +4.0 150.8 +9.7 181.5 +17.2 127.1 +2.2 137.8 +6.3 132.6 –2.6 141.5 +4.6 119.6 –6.5
Nov. 139.6 –3.9 146.9 –5.0 167.7 +12.0 132.2 –20.6 133.4 +4.9 131.0 –2.5 143.8 –14.2 117.6 +0.4
Dec. 150.5 +1.6 147.8 –0.8 191.9 +7.7 117.9 –10.1 113.7 –4.6 153.7 +4.4 136.6 –11.4 141.3 +15.0
2021 Jan. 134.0 +3.6 140.5 +4.8 147.3 +7.2 146.0 +8.7 97.7 –20.4 126.5 +2.0 150.7 +6.8 106.8 –4.0
Feb. 143.2 +6.5 148.8 +4.1 161.1 +8.6 147.2 +4.5 114.1 –14.3 136.7 +9.8 143.4 +3.0 132.1 +9.5
Mar. 157.5 –0.8 156.3 +1.5 173.8 +2.5 141.4 +0.1 154.3 +2.5 159.0 –3.3 150.9 –2.8 155.2 –0.8
Apr. 160.1 +7.0 158.3 +18.0 185.1 +40.7 139.5 +1.6 139.8 +7.5 162.3 –3.2 148.1 +5.5 158.8 –7.2
May 159.2 +14.7 163.5 +31.9 185.1 +26.2 146.8 +42.7 154.3 +20.5 154.2 –1.2 150.8 +24.3 153.0 –0.7
June 164.4 –2.0 164.7 +7.6 176.5 +7.0 160.3 +14.9 142.4 –13.6 164.0 –11.2 166.7 +15.5 154.4 –21.3
July 160.0 +7.3 168.5 +11.0 179.3 +13.6 163.7 +19.3 150.6 –19.0 150.2 +2.9 158.6 +15.9 150.0 –4.9
Aug. 158.9 +16.2 162.4 +19.9 167.0 +4.6 163.3 +43.2 144.0 +6.3 154.8 +11.9 158.5 +21.8 154.4 +18.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2017 107.6 +5.0 105.8 +3.6 105.9 +4.1 108.2 +7.2 106.2 +6.3 103.0 +1.5 107.7 +3.7 120.5 +10.0
2018 110.7 +2.9 107.5 +1.6 109.6 +3.5 105.6 –2.4 107.2 +0.9 103.1 +0.1 112.5 +4.5 127.7 +6.0
2019 114.9 +3.8 111.0 +3.3 112.1 +2.3 106.7 +1.0 108.9 +1.6 107.1 +3.9 118.7 +5.5 138.4 +8.4
3 2020 121.1 +5.4 115.6 +4.1 120.9 +7.9 81.7 –23.4 106.3 –2.4 116.8 +9.1 124.3 +4.7 168.5 +21.7
2020 Sep. 119.2 +6.3 113.5 +5.1 113.7 +6.8 100.3 –8.9 103.9 –6.1 117.7 +13.7 122.1 +3.5 161.0 +15.7
Oct. 129.1 +10.2 122.7 +9.0 122.3 +8.4 108.9 –6.6 120.5 +9.0 129.8 +16.9 128.9 +5.7 182.4 +28.8
Nov. 136.6 +10.6 130.3 +9.8 123.5 +7.5 90.4 –22.0 154.0 +15.7 140.3 +20.9 133.2 +7.2 226.8 +37.7
Dec. 137.6 +3.3 131.2 +2.3 137.9 +7.8 69.6 –41.5 134.4 –15.5 119.6 +5.5 141.9 +6.4 218.1 +26.9
2021 Jan. 103.8 –3.8 98.7 –5.2 116.3 +12.2 19.5 –78.0 62.4 –45.6 59.6 –38.3 126.6 +3.3 186.3 +34.6
Feb. 105.0 –0.6 99.1 –2.2 114.5 +5.6 22.5 –72.0 62.9 –35.8 70.5 –27.5 127.1 +8.7 178.2 +40.6
Mar. 129.5 +9.2 122.3 +7.9 132.7 +1.5 58.7 +17.6 87.7 +4.0 120.1 +11.7 134.4 –2.5 206.0 +33.9
Apr. 121.2 +9.1 113.6 +7.5 125.0 ±0.0 39.2 +32.4 69.1 +25.9 106.4 +5.3 130.0 +14.1 193.0 +11.6
May 125.6 +1.8 117.6 +0.1 127.7 +0.2 62.2 –20.6 73.6 –23.2 112.7 –11.7 127.4 +12.6 200.0 +18.6
June 129.9 +7.4 121.9 +5.4 122.4 +2.9 112.5 +18.3 97.1 –5.3 124.5 +2.1 130.9 +9.7 184.3 +13.6
July 125.8 +2.6 117.9 +0.6 120.7 +1.7 102.3 +4.8 101.3 –6.5 120.9 –3.5 134.8 +9.6 161.7 +3.5
Aug. 123.1 +2.4 115.4 +0.5 115.5 –4.1 99.8 +9.8 100.9 –2.6 116.4 –0.6 131.2 +10.4 169.3 +9.1
Sep. 120.7 +1.3 112.4 –1.0 113.1 –0.5 99.5 –0.8 98.9 –4.8 112.1 –4.8 128.2 +5.0 171.4 +6.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2020 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2016 43,661 +1.2 31,508 +2.2 9,028 21,407 834 4,804 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 655
2017 44,251 +1.4 32,234 +2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 114 24 2,533 7 855 5.7 731
2018 44,858 +1.4 32,964 +2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2019 45,268 +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 82,267 827 8 5.0 774
2020 44,898 –0.8 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2018 Q3 45,019 +1.3 33,040 +2.2 9,387 22,546 855 4,694 35 27 2,311 784 5.1 828
Q4 45,245 +1.2 33,452 +2.1 9,498 22,890 819 4,627 88 35 2,200 755 4.9 804
2019 Q1 44,906 +1.2 33,214 +2.0 9,419 22,803 761 4,581 303 34 2,360 892 5.2 780
Q2 45,230 +1.0 33,388 +1.8 9,455 22,932 750 4,615 51 43 82,227 778 8 4.9 795
Q3 45,378 +0.8 33,548 +1.5 9,491 23,049 753 4,598 66 58 2,276 827 5.0 794
Q4 45,559 +0.7 33,924 +1.4 9,551 23,388 738 4,522 161 105 2,204 811 4.8 729
2020 Q1 45,122 +0.5 33,642 +1.3 9,439 23,284 686 4,458 1,219 949 2,385 960 5.2 683
Q2 44,712 –1.1 33,415 +0.1 9,387 23,137 640 4,235 5,399 5,388 2,770 1,154 6.0 593
Q3 44,794 –1.3 33,424 –0.4 9,359 23,171 640 4,273 2,705 2,691 2,904 1,266 6.3 583
Q4 44,965 –1.3 33,836 –0.3 9,395 23,518 676 4,194 2,433 2,361 2,722 1,167 5.9 595
2021 Q1 r44,451 r –1.5 33,568 –0.2 9,294 23,376 665 4,051 3,473 3,157 2,878 1,248 6.3 586
Q2 r44,734 r +0.0 933,716 9+0.9 99,321 923,445 9 696 94,066 ... 9 2,143 2,691 1,024 10 5.9 658
Q3 1145,061 11 +0.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,545 920 5.5 774
2018 June 44,889 +1.3 32,870 +2.2 9,325 22,439 853 4,742 25 16 2,276 735 5.0 805
July 44,922 +1.3 32,844 +2.2 9,339 22,396 860 4,736 22 14 2,325 788 5.1 823
Aug. 44,972 +1.3 33,131 +2.3 9,412 22,609 856 4,664 41 33 2,351 804 5.2 828
Sep. 45,164 +1.2 33,422 +2.1 9,496 22,827 842 4,619 42 34 2,256 759 5.0 834
Oct. 45,251 +1.3 33,488 +2.2 9,515 22,895 827 4,616 46 37 2,204 742 4.9 824
Nov. 45,314 +1.3 33,513 +2.1 9,513 22,934 822 4,638 51 43 2,186 745 4.8 807
Dec. 45,171 +1.2 33,286 +2.1 9,434 22,854 773 4,637 166 26 2,210 777 4.9 781
2019 Jan. 44,852 +1.2 33,156 +2.0 9,405 22,762 763 4,574 354 42 2,406 919 5.3 758
Feb. 44,894 +1.2 33,199 +2.0 9,416 22,794 758 4,564 310 29 2,373 908 5.3 784
Mar. 44,971 +1.1 33,286 +1.9 9,442 22,855 749 4,574 246 32 2,301 850 5.1 797
Apr. 45,134 +1.1 33,383 +1.8 9,457 22,925 753 4,607 49 40 2,229 795 4.9 796
May 45,259 +1.0 33,433 +1.8 9,462 22,968 749 4,627 53 45 82,236 772 8 4.9 792
June 45,297 +0.9 33,407 +1.6 9,455 22,948 750 4,646 51 43 2,216 766 4.9 798
July 45,312 +0.9 33,360 +1.6 9,450 22,901 757 4,644 55 47 2,275 825 5.0 799
Aug. 45,307 +0.7 33,610 +1.4 9,505 23,101 750 4,568 60 51 2,319 848 5.1 795
Sep. 45,516 +0.8 33,938 +1.5 9,583 23,341 754 4,517 84 75 2,234 808 4.9 787
Oct. 45,592 +0.8 33,966 +1.4 9,567 23,398 748 4,510 111 102 2,204 795 4.8 764
Nov. 45,622 +0.7 33,968 +1.4 9,559 23,423 742 4,532 124 115 2,180 800 4.8 736
Dec. 45,463 +0.6 33,740 +1.4 9,474 23,344 694 4,531 247 97 2,227 838 4.9 687
2020 Jan. 45,140 +0.6 33,608 +1.4 9,432 23,255 689 4,471 382 133 2,426 985 5.3 668
Feb. 45,160 +0.6 33,624 +1.3 9,427 23,278 683 4,461 439 134 2,396 971 5.3 690
Mar. 45,066 +0.2 33,648 +1.1 9,440 23,290 675 4,350 2,834 2,580 2,335 925 5.1 691
Apr. 44,798 –0.7 33,430 +0.1 9,396 23,141 643 4,194 6,007 5,995 2,644 1,093 5.8 626
May 44,662 –1.3 33,328 –0.3 9,367 23,083 624 4,206 5,726 5,715 2,813 1,172 6.1 584
June 44,676 –1.4 33,323 –0.3 9,355 23,084 629 4,260 4,464 4,452 2,853 1,197 6.2 570
July 44,687 –1.4 33,233 –0.4 9,322 23,024 635 4,302 3,319 3,306 2,910 1,258 6.3 573
Aug. 44,722 –1.3 33,482 –0.4 9,367 23,218 642 4,266 2,551 2,537 2,955 1,302 6.4 584
Sep. 44,972 –1.2 33,792 –0.4 9,421 23,454 656 4,240 2,244 2,229 2,847 1,238 6.2 591
Oct. 45,054 –1.2 33,862 –0.3 9,410 23,530 671 4,229 2,037 2,021 2,760 1,183 6.0 602
Nov. 45,002 –1.4 33,899 –0.2 9,400 23,559 696 4,166 2,405 2,386 2,699 1,152 5.9 601
Dec. 44,838 –1.4 33,700 –0.1 9,327 23,478 666 4,134 2,856 2,676 2,707 1,166 5.9 581
2021 Jan. r44,430 r –1.6 33,515 –0.3 9,282 23,347 657 4,045 3,638 3,294 2,901 1,298 6.3 566
Feb. r44,423 r –1.6 33,521 –0.3 9,281 23,343 662 4,026 3,766 3,358 2,904 1,270 6.3 583
Mar. r44,499 r –1.3 33,636 –0.0 9,309 23,397 685 4,032 3,016 2,818 2,827 1,177 6.2 609
Apr. r44,606 r –0.4 33,689 +0.8 9,324 23,427 687 4,039 2,583 2,560 2,771 1,091 6.0 629
May r44,723 r +0.1 933,742 9+1.2 99,324 923,460 9 702 94,069 ... 9 2,328 2,687 1,020 10 5.9 654
June r44,873 r +0.4 933,795 9+1.4 99,322 923,500 9 716 94,147 ... 9 1,540 2,614 961 5.7 693
July r44,946 r +0.6 933,721 9+1.5 99,302 923,451 9 715 94,190 ... 9 1,022 2,590 956 5.6 744
Aug. r44,997 r +0.6 933,973 9+1.5 99,353 923,643 9 722 94,153 ... 9 760 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. 1145,239 11 +0.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,377 814 5.2 809
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 From January 2017 persons receiving additional
income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at the same
time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book of the Social SecurityCode (SGB III).  8 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed persons in the
legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).  9 Unadjusted
figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2019 and 2020, the estimated
values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1% for employees
subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.9% for persons solely in jobs
exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 55.3% for cyclically induced
short-time work.  10 From May 2021, calculated on the basis of new labour force fig-
ures. 11 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which:  1Indices of
foreign trade pricesHWWI
Index of World Market
Prices of Raw Materials  7
of which:
Total  2 Food  3Non-
energy
industrial
goods  4Energy
4,5Services
2,4Actual
rents
for
housingMemo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  6Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  6Exports Imports Energy  8Other raw
materials  9
Period 2015 = 100
Index level
2017 102.1 104.0 102.2 97.5 102.5 102.9 102.0 105.3 101.1 108.6 100.7 100.1 99.6 107.1
2018 104.0 106.7 103.0 102.3 104.2 104.6 103.8 110.2 103.7 109.0 101.9 102.7 124.6 106.2
2019 105.5 108.4 104.2 103.7 105.7 106.1 105.3 115.3 104.8 111.5 102.4 101.7 110.0 108.1
2020 10 105.8 10110.9 10104.1 1099.0 10106.9 107.6 10 105.8 10117.0 103.8 108.0 101.7 97.3 73.4 111.6
2019 Dec. 106.0 109.2 105.1 103.6 106.1 106.8 105.8 104.5 114.4 102.5 101.7 112.5 110.4
2020 Jan. 105.1 110.1 104.0 104.9 104.3 107.0 105.2 105.3 113.2 102.7 101.3 107.4 112.2
Feb. 105.7 111.2 104.3 103.9 105.2 107.1 105.6 117.8 104.9 114.1 102.6 100.4 94.3 108.7
Mar. 105.8 111.0 105.2 101.6 105.5 107.3 105.7 104.1 113.7 101.9 96.9 61.3 104.9
Apr. 106.2 112.2 105.4 98.6 106.7 107.4 106.1 103.4 112.7 101.5 95.2 49.7 101.0
May 106.2 112.5 105.4 97.4 106.7 107.5 106.0 118.3 103.0 109.1 101.3 95.5 55.5 102.1
June 106.9 112.7 104.8 98.7 108.1 107.6 106.6 103.0 110.0 101.3 96.1 65.2 105.1
July 10 106.4 10110.2 10102.5 1098.0 10109.4 107.7 10 106.1 103.2 107.5 101.3 96.4 68.3 107.5
Aug. 10 106.2 10110.1 10102.6 1097.6 10109.0 107.8 10 106.0 10115.7 103.2 104.8 101.2 96.5 71.2 111.7
Sep. 10 105.8 10109.9 10103.6 1096.9 10108.0 107.8 10 105.8 103.6 103.5 101.3 96.8 70.4 117.9
Oct. 10 105.8 10110.2 10103.9 1097.0 10107.6 108.0 10 105.9 103.7 103.8 101.4 97.1 73.4 118.9
Nov. 10 104.7 10110.3 10104.0 1096.0 10105.5 108.1 10 105.0 10116.0 103.9 103.9 101.8 97.6 77.8 120.4
Dec. 10 105.3 10109.9 10103.4 1097.4 10106.9 108.2 10 105.5 104.7 104.2 101.9 98.2 86.6 128.9
2021 Jan. 106.8 112.3 105.1 102.6 106.9 108.4 106.3 106.2 11106.7 102.8 100.1 99.1 140.0
Feb. 107.4 113.0 105.5 104.1 107.3 108.5 107.0 121.2 106.9 108.9 103.3 101.8 104.7 143.4
Mar. 107.9 113.1 105.7 106.2 107.6 108.6 107.5 107.9 114.0 104.1 103.6 109.1 150.1
Apr. 108.4 114.5 105.8 106.1 108.3 108.7 108.2 108.8 115.9 104.9 105.0 110.8 154.5
May 108.7 114.2 106.3 106.7 108.7 108.9 108.7 125.1 110.4 118.5 105.6 106.8 118.9 169.0
June 109.1 114.1 106.5 107.6 109.1 108.9 109.1 111.8 117.7 106.4 108.5 129.4 166.3
July 10 109.7 10114.4 10106.4 10109.0 10110.2 109.1 10 110.1 113.9 117.3 107.7 110.9 141.9 165.9
Aug. 10 109.8 10114.4 10106.5 10109.4 10110.3 109.2 10 110.1 10129.4 115.6 118.8 108.5 112.4 147.1 156.7
Sep. 10 110.1 10114.4 10107.6 10110.1 10109.9 109.3 10 110.1 118.3 117.3 109.5 113.9 169.1 149.1
Oct. 10 110.7 10114.5 10108.0 10114.6 10110.0 109.5 10 110.7 ... ... ... ... 223.9 155.6
Annual percentage change
2017 +1.7 +2.7 +1.2 +3.1 +1.4 +1.7 +1.5 +3.3 +2.7 +10.0 +1.7 +3.5 +19.7 +8.8
2018 +1.9 +2.6 +0.8 +4.9 +1.6 +1.6 +1.8 +4.7 +2.6 +0.4 +1.2 +2.6 +25.1 –0.8
2019 +1.4 +1.6 +1.1 +1.4 +1.5 +1.5 +1.4 +4.7 +1.1 +2.3 +0.5 –1.0 –11.7 +1.8
2020 10 +0.4 10+2.3 10–0.1 10–4.5 10+1.2 +1.4 10 +0.5 10+1.4 –1.0 –3.1 –0.7 –4.3 –33.3 +3.2
2019 Dec. +1.5 +2.1 +1.3 +0.1 +2.0 +1.5 +1.5 –0.2 +2.6 +0.4 –0.7 +1.0 +7.0
2020 Jan. +1.6 +2.5 +1.1 +3.3 +1.4 +1.5 +1.7 +0.2 +1.6 +0.5 –0.9 –4.4 +7.5
Feb. +1.7 +3.1 +0.9 +2.2 +1.5 +1.4 +1.7 +3.3 –0.1 +1.9 +0.3 –2.0 –17.5 –0.6
Mar. +1.3 +3.1 +1.3 –0.8 +1.3 +1.5 +1.4 –0.8 +0.4 –0.5 –5.5 –46.8 –3.1
Apr. +0.8 +4.0 +0.8 –5.6 +1.3 +1.5 +0.9 –1.9 –2.5 –1.1 –7.4 –58.3 –7.2
May +0.5 +3.9 +0.8 –8.2 +1.3 +1.5 +0.6 +2.9 –2.2 –5.7 –1.2 –7.0 –52.4 –4.2
June +0.8 +4.0 +0.7 –5.9 +1.4 +1.4 +0.9 –1.8 –4.4 –1.0 –5.1 –36.6 –3.2
July 10 ±0.0 10+1.4 10–0.8 10–6.4 10+1.4 +1.4 10 –0.1 –1.7 –5.9 –1.1 –4.6 –35.4 –4.9
Aug. 10 –0.1 10+1.2 10–0.8 10–6.0 10+1.1 +1.4 10 ±0.0 10–0.1 –1.2 –6.8 –1.1 –4.0 –28.9 +5.4
Sep. 10 –0.4 10+1.0 10–1.1 10–6.6 10+1.0 +1.3 10 –0.2 –1.0 –5.8 –1.1 –4.3 –33.5 +9.7
Oct. 10 –0.5 10+1.5 10–1.0 10–6.6 10+0.7 +1.3 10 –0.2 –0.7 –5.9 –1.0 –3.9 –30.6 +11.0
Nov. 10 –0.7 10+1.2 10–1.1 10–7.4 10+0.6 +1.3 10 –0.3 10–0.3 –0.5 –7.2 –0.6 –3.8 –29.6 +12.6
Dec. 10 –0.7 10+0.6 10–1.6 10–6.0 10+0.8 +1.3 10 –0.3 +0.2 –8.9 –0.6 –3.4 –23.0 +16.8
2021 Jan. +1.6 +2.0 +1.1 –2.2 +2.5 +1.3 +1.0 +0.9 11–5.7 +0.1 –1.2 –7.7 +24.8
Feb. +1.6 +1.6 +1.2 +0.2 +2.0 +1.3 +1.3 +2.9 +1.9 –4.6 +0.7 +1.4 +11.0 +31.9
Mar. +2.0 +1.9 +0.5 +4.5 +2.0 +1.2 +1.7 +3.7 +0.3 +2.2 +6.9 +78.0 +43.1
Apr. +2.1 +2.0 +0.4 +7.6 +1.5 +1.2 +2.0 +5.2 +2.8 +3.3 +10.3 +122.9 +53.0
May +2.4 +1.5 +0.9 +9.5 +1.9 +1.3 +2.5 +5.7 +7.2 +8.6 +4.2 +11.8 +114.2 +65.5
June +2.1 +1.2 +1.6 +9.0 +0.9 +1.2 +2.3 +8.5 +7.0 +5.0 +12.9 +98.5 +58.2
July 10 +3.1 10+3.8 10+3.8 10+11.2 10+0.7 +1.3 10 +3.8 +10.4 +9.1 +6.3 +15.0 +107.8 +54.3
Aug. 10 +3.4 10+3.9 10+3.8 10+12.1 10+1.2 +1.3 10 +3.9 10+11.8 +12.0 +13.4 +7.2 +16.5 +106.6 +40.3
Sep. 10 +4.1 10+4.1 10+3.9 10+13.6 10+1.8 +1.4 10 +4.1 +14.2 +13.3 +8.1 +17.7 +140.2 +26.5
Oct. 10 +4.6 10+3.9 10+3.9 10+18.1 10+2.2 +1.4 10 +4.5 ... ... ... ... +205.0 +30.9
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw Materi-
als: HWWI.  1 Deviations from the official figures are due to rounding.  2 With effect
from 2015, methodological changes to the collection of data on the prices of package
holidays, impacting until the beginning of the series.  3 Including alcoholic beverages
and tobacco.  4 Modified procedure as of 2017 due to calculations on the basis of the
five digit structure set out in the European Classification of Individual Consumption ac-cording to Purpose (ECOICOP).  5 Electricity, gas and other fuels as well as transport fu-
els and lubricants, from January 2017 excluding lubricants.  6 Excluding value added tax.
7 For the euro area, in euro.  8 Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas.  9 Food, bever-
ages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials.  10 Influenced by a temporary re-
duction of value added tax between July and December 2020.  11 From January 2021
onwards provisional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2013 1,186.3 3.2 799.4 3.0 383.9 1.9 1,183.2 2.6 1,690.8 1.3 157.1 – 2.5 9.3
2014 1,234.2 4.0 830.5 3.9 394.0 2.6 1,224.5 3.5 1,734.5 2.6 170.6 8.6 9.8
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.5 4.2 1,273.8 4.0 1,782.3 2.8 179.4 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.2
2017 1,395.4 4.3 932.5 4.0 441.8 3.6 1,374.3 3.9 1,905.2 3.5 202.8 8.0 10.6
2018 1,462.6 4.8 976.3 4.7 454.3 2.8 1,430.6 4.1 1,975.8 3.7 223.7 10.3 11.3
2019 1,524.1 4.2 1,022.0 4.7 474.4 4.4 1,496.4 4.6 2,021.6 2.3 218.7 – 2.2 10.8
2020 1,514.1 – 0.7 1,021.3 – 0.1 518.8 9.4 1,540.1 2.9 2,035.1 0.7 327.1 49.6 16.1
2020 Q1 366.2 2.9 246.4 2.9 125.0 5.5 371.4 3.8 520.4 2.7 84.2 15.7 16.2
Q2 355.9 – 4.4 234.8 – 3.8 130.4 11.3 365.2 1.1 491.7 – 1.5 97.4 92.3 19.8
Q3 374.1 – 1.2 258.1 – 0.6 132.0 10.2 390.1 2.8 508.1 0.7 66.5 44.4 13.1
Q4 417.9 0.1 282.1 1.1 131.3 10.4 413.3 3.9 514.9 0.7 78.9 60.6 15.3
2021 Q1 362.0 – 1.1 245.1 – 0.5 136.7 9.4 381.8 2.8 517.5 – 0.6 113.7 35.1 22.0
Q2 375.2 5.4 250.0 6.5 135.2 3.6 385.1 5.5 508.3 3.4 82.6 –15.2 16.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2021.  * Households in-
cluding non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees'
contributions to the social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension
payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social
benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plusmonetary social benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed
income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit
institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related
taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company
pension funds.  6 Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving
as a percentage of disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change
2013 94.8 2.5 95.0 2.5 95.0 2.5 95.0 2.5 94.4 2.2
2014 97.7 3.1 97.8 2.9 97.7 2.8 97.7 2.8 97.2 2.9
2015 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.2 2.2 102.5 2.5
2017 104.2 2.1 104.2 2.0 104.3 2.1 104.5 2.3 105.1 2.6
2018 107.1 2.8 107.1 2.8 107.0 2.6 107.3 2.7 108.5 3.2
2019 110.2 2.9 110.2 2.9 109.7 2.5 110.0 2.5 111.7 3.0
2020 112.6 2.2 112.6 2.2 111.9 2.0 112.2 2.0 111.5 – 0.1
2020 Q2 105.0 2.0 105.0 1.9 105.1 2.2 112.1 2.1 105.4 – 3.5
Q3 116.2 1.8 116.2 1.8 114.5 1.8 112.5 1.8 110.7 – 0.2
Q4 125.0 2.7 125.0 2.7 123.9 1.8 112.6 1.8 122.8 1.2
2021 Q1 105.8 1.5 105.7 1.5 105.8 1.5 113.3 1.5 107.5 0.1
Q2 107.4 2.3 107.4 2.3 106.5 1.4 113.8 1.5 110.8 5.2
Q3 117.4 1.0 117.4 1.0 116.1 1.4 114.1 1.4 . .
2021 Mar. 105.8 1.4 105.8 1.5 105.9 1.4 113.4 1.4 . .
Apr. 106.9 1.8 106.9 1.8 106.8 1.6 113.8 1.6 . .
May 106.4 1.1 106.4 1.1 106.5 1.1 113.8 1.5 . .
June 108.9 4.0 108.9 4.0 106.3 1.5 113.9 1.4 . .
July 138.5 – 0.0 138.5 – 0.0 135.0 1.2 114.0 1.3 . .
Aug. 107.0 1.7 107.0 1.7 106.6 1.5 114.1 1.4 . .
Sep. 106.7 1.7 106.7 1.7 106.8 1.6 114.3 1.6 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August
2021.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2017 2,396.2 1,488.2 498.6 602.8 295.9 908.0 230.6 225.1 156.2 757.1 1,639.1 866.4 495.7 772.7 236.1 195.6
3 2018 2,589.6 1,537.1 540.8 611.1 288.5 1,052.5 249.5 234.9 172.6 790.2 1,799.3 925.8 558.7 873.5 257.5 205.1
2019 2,801.2 1,770.0 586.3 737.5 333.4 1,031.2 257.6 237.8 168.5 821.5 1,979.8 1,091.3 676.3 888.5 289.8 207.7
p 2020 2,850.7 1,797.6 607.6 733.4 335.1 1,053.1 243.7 226.2 240.5 812.1 2,038.7 1,181.5 746.4 857.1 304.4 196.2
2019 H1 2,702.6 1,657.9 549.7 682.9 314.5 1,044.6 269.2 240.5 140.5 777.5 1,925.1 1,024.3 613.9 900.8 301.7 210.8
H2 2,801.2 1,770.0 586.3 737.5 333.4 1,031.2 257.6 237.8 168.5 821.5 1,979.8 1,091.3 676.3 888.5 289.8 207.7
2020 H1 2,892.1 1,801.3 625.0 734.3 319.7 1,090.9 257.6 216.6 220.8 794.2 2,097.9 1,183.9 754.2 914.0 335.5 179.7
pH2 2,850.7 1,797.6 607.6 733.4 335.1 1,053.1 243.7 226.2 240.5 812.1 2,038.7 1,181.5 746.4 857.1 304.4 196.2
As a percentage of total assets
2017 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.2 12.4 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.5 31.6 68.4 36.2 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
3 2018 100.0 59.4 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.6 9.6 9.1 6.7 30.5 69.5 35.8 21.6 33.7 9.9 7.9
2019 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.1 31.7 10.3 7.4
p 2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2019 H1 100.0 61.4 20.3 25.3 11.6 38.7 10.0 8.9 5.2 28.8 71.2 37.9 22.7 33.3 11.2 7.8
H2 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.1 31.7 10.3 7.4
2020 H1 100.0 62.3 21.6 25.4 11.1 37.7 8.9 7.5 7.6 27.5 72.5 40.9 26.1 31.6 11.6 6.2
pH2 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2017 1,989.3 1,190.8 351.5 484.0 281.8 798.5 215.8 181.4 128.5 609.9 1,379.4 719.1 397.8 660.3 218.4 150.1
3 2018 2,149.9 1,215.7 388.2 473.3 277.5 934.1 234.6 188.7 139.2 637.2 1,512.7 760.3 442.4 752.4 236.2 152.6
2019 2,303.5 1,396.8 419.6 565.7 319.7 906.8 243.8 188.7 136.9 662.7 1,640.9 887.5 523.8 753.4 257.5 158.1
p 2020 2,265.7 1,355.2 399.1 543.9 320.0 910.5 228.8 179.8 188.0 636.8 1,628.9 904.8 537.0 724.1 267.3 149.9
2019 H1 2,229.6 1,297.6 388.9 517.9 302.7 932.0 255.6 194.2 115.8 629.6 1,600.0 831.4 473.9 768.6 265.8 164.3
H2 2,303.5 1,396.8 419.6 565.7 319.7 906.8 243.8 188.7 136.9 662.7 1,640.9 887.5 523.8 753.4 257.5 158.1
2020 H1 2,305.5 1,352.3 406.4 547.5 303.4 953.2 244.0 171.8 171.4 615.1 1,690.4 912.2 548.5 778.1 294.6 137.1
pH2 2,265.7 1,355.2 399.1 543.9 320.0 910.5 228.8 179.8 188.0 636.8 1,628.9 904.8 537.0 724.1 267.3 149.9
As a percentage of total assets
2017 100.0 59.9 17.7 24.3 14.2 40.1 10.9 9.1 6.5 30.7 69.3 36.2 20.0 33.2 11.0 7.6
3 2018 100.0 56.6 18.1 22.0 12.9 43.5 10.9 8.8 6.5 29.6 70.4 35.4 20.6 35.0 11.0 7.1
2019 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.2 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
p 2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2019 H1 100.0 58.2 17.4 23.2 13.6 41.8 11.5 8.7 5.2 28.2 71.8 37.3 21.3 34.5 11.9 7.4
H2 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.2 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
2020 H1 100.0 58.7 17.6 23.8 13.2 41.4 10.6 7.5 7.4 26.7 73.3 39.6 23.8 33.8 12.8 6.0
pH2 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2017 406.9 297.4 147.1 118.8 14.1 109.5 14.8 43.6 27.6 147.2 259.6 147.3 97.9 112.4 17.6 45.5
3 2018 439.7 321.3 152.7 137.9 11.0 118.3 14.9 46.1 33.3 153.1 286.6 165.5 116.3 121.1 21.3 52.5
2019 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
p 2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2019 H1 472.9 360.3 160.8 165.1 11.8 112.6 13.7 46.3 24.7 147.9 325.0 192.8 140.0 132.2 35.9 46.5
H2 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
2020 H1 586.6 449.0 218.7 186.8 16.3 137.6 13.7 44.9 49.4 179.1 407.6 271.7 205.7 135.9 40.9 42.6
pH2 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
As a percentage of total assets
2017 100.0 73.1 36.2 29.2 3.5 26.9 3.7 10.7 6.8 36.2 63.8 36.2 24.1 27.6 4.3 11.2
3 2018 100.0 73.1 34.7 31.4 2.5 26.9 3.4 10.5 7.6 34.8 65.2 37.6 26.5 27.6 4.8 11.9
2019 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
p 2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2019 H1 100.0 76.2 34.0 34.9 2.5 23.8 2.9 9.8 5.2 31.3 68.7 40.8 29.6 28.0 7.6 9.8
H2 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
2020 H1 100.0 76.5 37.3 31.9 2.8 23.5 2.3 7.7 8.4 30.5 69.5 46.3 35.1 23.2 7.0 7.3
pH2 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.  3 From H1 2018 or 2018 onwards: significant
changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  2 Distribution  2
RevenuesOperating income
before depreciation
and amortisation
(EBITDA  1 )Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartileOperating
income (EBIT)Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4€ billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % % € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % %
Total
2013 1,540.6 – 0.6 187.0 – 2.8 12.1 – 0.3 5.2 10.3 18.4 99.4 5.5 6.5 0.4 1.9 5.9 11.0
2014 1,565.1 1.0 198.7 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.4 109.2 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.1 11.1
2015 1,634.6 6.9 196.0 – 1.1 12.0 – 1.0 6.1 10.6 17.8 91.5 – 16.4 5.6 – 1.5 1.7 6.6 11.3
2016 1,625.0 – 0.4 214.5 7.9 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.8 9.1 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,720.2 5.1 243.5 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.1 11.0 18.0 142.0 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.9 12.0
6 2018 1,707.6 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.2 10.6 17.7 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.2 6.5 11.9
2019 1,765.5 2.6 233.7 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.1 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.7 5.8 11.7
p 2020 1,633.6 – 8.8 213.8 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 18.0 52.3 – 40.9 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 5.0 10.7
2016 H1 782.3 – 1.9 111.6 6.2 14.3 1.1 5.9 10.4 17.7 65.5 2.7 8.4 0.3 1.6 6.4 11.3
H2 842.8 1.1 102.9 9.8 12.2 1.0 6.9 11.9 19.0 46.3 20.9 5.5 0.8 3.0 7.5 12.5
2017 H1 844.4 6.8 125.7 14.6 14.9 1.0 5.7 10.1 17.2 78.5 29.6 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.6
H2 879.0 3.5 117.5 14.6 13.4 1.3 6.9 12.0 19.1 63.0 38.2 7.2 1.8 3.3 7.5 12.4
6 2018 H1 848.6 – 0.1 120.8 – 2.2 14.2 – 0.3 5.1 10.6 18.1 72.7 – 5.3 8.6 – 0.5 1.8 6.4 12.4
H2 869.8 1.4 114.5 0.5 13.2 – 0.1 6.4 11.2 17.8 58.0 – 7.7 6.7 – 0.6 2.1 6.7 12.3
2019 H1 861.7 2.7 112.4 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.6 11.7 18.6 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 904.2 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.8 11.9 19.9 52.1 – 11.3 5.8 – 0.9 0.9 6.1 12.4
2020 H1 744.9 – 14.4 78.3 – 34.0 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 9.0
pH2 888.8 – 3.3 135.5 17.2 15.3 2.8 7.7 13.2 19.8 44.3 8.8 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.7
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2013 1,199.6 – 0.8 142.6 – 2.6 11.9 – 0.2 5.1 10.3 16.0 77.5 – 5.8 6.5 – 0.3 1.6 5.9 10.5
2014 1,220.9 1.0 152.2 5.9 12.5 0.6 5.7 10.0 15.5 85.2 9.7 7.0 0.6 1.6 6.0 10.5
2015 1,310.5 7.0 149.1 – 2.6 11.4 – 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.3 69.1 – 19.7 5.3 – 1.7 2.1 6.6 10.4
2016 1,296.6 – 0.8 162.1 6.4 12.5 0.8 6.6 10.7 16.2 84.9 4.3 6.6 0.3 2.9 6.4 10.7
2017 1,396.8 5.5 187.6 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.6 40.5 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.8 10.5
6 2018 1,368.5 1.0 175.8 – 1.6 12.8 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 15.8 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.9 6.8 11.3
2019 1,411.8 2.0 168.3 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.4 16.6 76.3 – 23.7 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.8 10.1
p 2020 1,286.0 – 9.4 143.8 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 6.4 10.6 16.5 29.3 – 47.9 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.4 9.8
2016 H1 625.5 – 2.3 86.6 1.8 13.8 0.5 6.7 10.6 15.9 52.7 – 6.4 8.4 – 0.3 2.9 6.4 10.1
H2 671.2 0.7 75.5 12.0 11.3 1.1 6.2 11.3 16.6 32.2 34.3 4.8 0.9 2.6 6.6 10.7
2017 H1 695.6 7.3 101.6 18.7 14.6 1.4 6.1 10.2 16.1 66.4 37.3 9.5 2.1 2.4 5.9 11.0
H2 701.8 3.7 86.0 14.2 12.3 1.1 7.0 11.8 16.9 46.2 45.5 6.6 1.9 3.6 7.3 10.8
6 2018 H1 682.3 – 0.1 95.0 – 3.4 13.9 – 0.5 7.0 10.9 16.7 60.0 – 6.0 8.8 – 0.6 2.9 6.7 11.5
H2 695.8 2.0 83.2 0.6 12.0 – 0.2 6.3 11.1 16.1 42.1 – 8.8 6.1 – 0.7 2.0 6.4 11.2
2019 H1 690.3 2.4 83.4 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.8 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.8 5.9 9.5
H2 721.5 1.7 84.9 0.4 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.9 16.9 34.4 – 19.6 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.3 11.2
2020 H1 581.0 – 15.9 49.1 – 42.3 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 15.1 0.2 – 101.6 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.2 8.0
pH2 705.0 – 3.0 94.7 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.3 12.3 18.6 29.0 19.8 4.1 1.1 1.1 6.1 10.7
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2013 341.0 – 0.1 44.4 – 3.5 13.0 – 0.5 5.2 9.3 20.7 21.9 82.2 6.4 2.9 2.4 5.9 11.8
2014 344.2 0.8 46.5 1.8 13.5 0.1 6.0 12.3 22.6 24.1 4.3 7.0 0.2 2.6 6.3 13.7
2015 324.1 6.1 46.9 4.0 14.5 – 0.3 5.9 11.1 22.1 22.3 – 3.8 6.9 – 0.7 1.3 6.7 13.9
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
p 2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.2 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.4 12.2
2016 H1 156.8 – 0.4 25.0 24.0 16.0 3.1 5.1 10.2 23.4 12.8 61.2 8.2 3.1 1.0 6.2 14.6
H2 171.6 2.9 27.4 4.2 16.0 0.2 7.4 13.3 24.3 14.1 3.0 8.2 0.0 4.0 8.9 17.1
2017 H1 148.8 4.6 24.2 0.4 16.2 – 0.6 5.2 9.8 21.0 12.1 0.3 8.2 – 0.3 1.2 5.6 14.5
H2 177.1 2.5 31.5 15.6 17.8 2.0 6.6 12.5 24.6 16.8 21.6 9.5 1.5 2.9 7.8 17.9
6 2018 H1 166.3 0.2 25.9 2.8 15.6 0.4 3.8 9.5 22.7 12.6 – 1.9 7.6 – 0.2 – 0.9 4.7 15.3
H2 174.0 – 1.3 31.3 – 0.0 18.0 0.2 6.7 11.3 25.6 15.9 – 4.6 9.1 – 0.3 2.2 7.0 17.8
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
pH2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.2 13.3
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted re-
turn on sales.  3 Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year fig-ures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  4 Adjusted
for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and in the
reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical Series Seasonally adjusted
business statistics.  5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.  6 From this point on-
wards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous pe-
riods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2020 2021
Item 2018 2019 2020 Q4 Q1 Q2 June July August  p
I.Current Account +341,015 +277,304 +222,710 +101,095 +75,458 +69,550 +32,444 +31,188 +17,636
1.Goods
Receipts 2,332,341 2,393,803 2,191,346 601,795 591,499 620,571 217,935 213,077 189,886
Expenditure  2,046,711 2,083,694 1,849,289 488,960 499,440 535,471 184,498 182,095 177,005
Balance +285,627 +310,107 +342,058 +112,836 +92,060 +85,100 +33,438 +30,982 +12,881
2.Services
Receipts 949,227 1,017,589 865,196 234,496 208,361 231,763 83,417 85,326 82,318
Expenditure  832,048 984,222 858,198 218,457 191,599 208,562 74,426 73,008 76,945
Balance +117,180 +33,365 + 6,994 +16,038 +16,762 +23,200 + 8,991 +12,319 + 5,373
3.Primary income
Receipts 856,509 859,347 756,083 186,321 183,553 202,552 70,660 56,509 54,872
Expenditure  765,793 772,643 720,532 166,049 160,039 207,480 69,488 56,312 48,491
Balance +90,714 +86,703 +35,551 +20,272 +23,514 – 4,927 + 1,172 + 197 + 6,381
4.Secondary income
Receipts 109,968 115,363 117,362 31,846 29,076 31,712 10,777 9,492 14,594
Expenditure  262,477 268,233 279,256 79,897 85,955 65,535 21,933 21,803 21,593
Balance –152,505 –152,870 –161,894 –48,050 –56,880 –33,822 –11,156 –12,311 – 7,000
II.Capital account –35,859 –26,273 – 1,735 – 772 + 2,938 + 5,659 + 2,432 + 1,825 + 4,332
III.Financial account  1 +305,695 +255,894 +240,943 +128,761 +97,940 +100,672 +53,711 +40,846 + 2,183
1.Direct investment +117,161 +89,419 –174,915 –104,536 +107,837 + 863 –37,543 +33,761 +12,802
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  –302,648 +15,678 –14,851 –59,143 +100,732 –37,186 –15,950 +23,099 + 5,935
By non-resident units of
the euro area  –419,811 –73,740 +160,065 +45,394 – 7,105 –38,047 +21,593 –10,662 – 6,867
2.Portfolio investment +230,508 –71,491 +539,298 +573,836 +87,576 +140,571 +53,472 –18,302 +25,558
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +206,506 +426,592 +673,578 +348,739 +266,341 +227,582 +96,042 +22,644 +45,220
Equity and
investment fund shares +48,248 +59,339 +305,625 +183,892 +166,958 +114,549 +52,800 +15,455 + 8,152
Short-term
debt securities  –52,661 + 142 +126,361 +40,430 +26,607 +13,925 +24,916 –37,481 +14,183
Long-term
debt securities  +210,923 +367,114 +241,591 +124,417 +72,777 +99,109 +18,326 +44,670 +22,885
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  –23,999 +498,086 +134,281 –225,096 +178,765 +87,009 +42,569 +40,946 +19,662
Equity and
investment fund shares +90,816 +272,765 +117,659 +37,829 +96,328 +143,387 +51,679 +46,981 +50,933
Short-term
debt securities  –60,212 –26,924 +138,223 –69,164 +84,832 +10,277 +13,577 –13,157 –12,669
Long-term
debt securities  –54,604 +252,244 –121,600 –193,761 – 2,395 –66,655 –22,686 + 7,122 –18,602
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options +39,699 + 6,609 +14,002 –14,529 + 6,408 + 8,521 + 6,170 + 8,903 – 5,902
4.Other investment –106,928 +225,060 –150,609 –328,063 –100,786 –56,763 +26,294 +16,825 –152,357
Eurosystem –133,865 +144,266 –205,190 –197,110 +146,557 –64,041 –92,678 –17,284 –97,620
General government – 4,921 + 554 –18,857 –33,545 –25,378 – 8,810 + 1,160 + 2,462 –41,843
MFIs  2 +99,938 +186,932 +17,452 –33,454 –275,978 –10,008 +108,211 +55,391 –28,201
Enterprises and households –68,084 –106,686 +55,986 –63,954 +54,013 +26,095 + 9,601 –23,744 +15,307
5.Reserve assets +25,252 + 6,297 +13,163 + 2,053 – 3,095 + 7,480 + 5,318 – 342 +122,082
IV.Net errors and omissions + 535 + 4,862 +19,969 +28,437 +19,546 +25,463 +18,835 + 7,833 –19,785
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 increase: + / decrease: -.
2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Period Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2006 + 137,674 + 160,965 – 4,687 – 31,777 + 40,499 – 32,014 – 1,328 + 157,142 – 2,934 + 20,796
2007 + 171,493 + 201,728 – 1,183 – 32,465 + 35,620 – 33,390 – 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 13,273
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 – 3,947 – 29,122 + 24,063 – 34,147 – 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 – 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 – 6,605 – 17,642 + 54,524 – 34,764 – 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 – 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 – 6,209 – 25,255 + 51,306 – 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 – 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 – 9,357 – 29,930 + 69,087 – 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 – 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 – 11,388 – 30,774 + 65,658 – 38,703 – 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 – 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 – 12,523 – 39,321 + 63,284 – 43,413 – 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 210,906 + 219,629 – 14,296 – 25,303 + 57,752 – 41,172 + 2,936 + 240,258 – 2,564 + 26,416
2015 + 260,286 + 248,394 – 15,405 – 18,516 + 69,262 – 38,854 – 48 + 234,392 – 2,213 – 25,845
2016 + 266,689 + 252,409 – 19,921 – 20,987 + 76,199 – 40,931 + 2,142 + 261,123 + 1,686 – 7,708
2017 + 254,936 + 255,077 – 13,613 – 23,994 + 74,629 – 50,776 – 2,936 + 276,709 – 1,269 + 24,710
2018 + 264,156 + 224,584 – 22,682 – 17,410 + 105,694 – 48,713 + 676 + 246,544 + 392 – 18,288
2019 + 258,627 + 216,523 – 31,760 – 20,653 + 111,191 – 48,434 – 526 + 203,799 – 544 – 54,302
r 2020 + 234,408 + 190,022 – 8,907 + 3,471 + 92,497 – 51,582 – 4,771 + 231,103 – 51 + 1,466
2018 Q4 + 65,027 + 44,532 – 12,500 – 871 + 38,033 – 16,667 – 609 + 61,806 + 560 – 2,612
2019 Q1 + 70,210 + 56,391 – 4,760 – 1,290 + 31,863 – 16,753 + 900 + 44,999 – 63 – 26,111
Q2 + 57,800 + 52,295 – 7,867 – 2,849 + 14,629 – 6,274 – 374 + 47,570 + 444 – 9,856
Q3 + 62,831 + 57,801 – 7,757 – 12,518 + 29,954 – 12,405 + 265 + 18,301 – 349 – 44,796
Q4 + 67,786 + 50,037 – 11,376 – 3,995 + 34,746 – 13,003 – 1,317 + 92,930 – 576 + 26,460
r 2020 Q1 + 61,990 + 52,294 – 2,696 – 2,773 + 26,874 – 14,404 – 348 + 37,818 + 133 – 23,824
r Q2 + 37,780 + 27,995 – 1,960 + 5,647 + 13,060 – 8,922 + 188 + 28,568 + 243 – 9,400
r Q3 + 62,371 + 56,000 – 1,106 – 5,402 + 22,142 – 10,369 – 1,206 + 68,302 – 1,276 + 7,136
r Q4 + 72,266 + 53,732 – 3,145 + 5,999 + 30,421 – 17,886 – 3,405 + 96,416 + 848 + 27,555
r 2021 Q1 + 66,650 + 55,972 – 1,223 + 3,603 + 27,693 – 20,618 – 215 + 123,063 + 385 + 56,627
r Q2 + 56,394 + 45,470 – 2,141 + 4,894 + 14,602 – 8,572 – 1,887 + 67,793 + 58 + 13,287
p Q3 + 52,808 + 45,691 – 3,357 – 8,683 + 28,995 – 13,195 + 1,900 – 485 + 31,199 – 55,194
2019 Apr. + 22,256 + 17,081 – 2,686 – 312 + 9,185 – 3,697 – 47 + 23,703 + 547 + 1,494
May + 15,432 + 19,137 – 3,090 + 131 – 4,604 + 767 – 52 + 6,277 + 182 – 9,103
June + 20,112 + 16,077 – 2,092 – 2,668 + 10,048 – 3,344 – 276 + 17,589 – 285 – 2,247
July + 20,611 + 20,555 – 3,036 – 4,819 + 9,538 – 4,664 + 171 + 11,234 + 348 – 9,548
Aug. + 17,334 + 16,559 – 1,639 – 5,218 + 10,219 – 4,226 + 788 – 1,942 + 755 – 20,065
Sep. + 24,886 + 20,687 – 3,083 – 2,482 + 10,197 – 3,516 – 694 + 9,009 – 1,452 – 15,183
Oct. + 19,690 + 20,550 – 3,285 – 5,948 + 9,775 – 4,687 – 823 + 44,140 – 107 + 25,273
Nov. + 23,695 + 17,228 – 3,055 + 392 + 9,744 – 3,669 – 491 + 20,116 – 356 – 3,088
Dec. + 24,401 + 12,259 – 5,035 + 1,562 + 15,227 – 4,647 – 3 + 28,674 – 113 + 4,275
r 2020 Jan. + 15,759 + 14,015 – 769 – 1,090 + 10,156 – 7,321 + 267 + 3,235 + 898 – 12,791
r Feb. + 21,548 + 20,188 – 1,768 – 1,359 + 7,014 – 4,294 + 48 + 17,898 + 750 – 3,698
r Mar. + 24,683 + 18,092 – 159 – 324 + 9,704 – 2,789 – 663 + 16,684 – 1,514 – 7,336
r Apr. + 10,184 + 3,930 – 617 + 1,710 + 8,859 – 4,315 + 88 + 10,215 + 950 – 58
r May + 7,411 + 9,326 + 768 + 1,553 – 14 – 3,454 + 8 + 115 + 33 – 7,304
r June + 20,185 + 14,739 – 2,111 + 2,384 + 4,215 – 1,154 + 91 + 18,238 – 740 – 2,039
r July + 20,644 + 20,206 – 430 – 2,646 + 6,782 – 3,698 – 928 + 18,341 – 611 – 1,375
r Aug. + 16,758 + 14,005 – 226 – 2,308 + 8,416 – 3,355 + 486 + 32,997 – 611 + 15,753
r Sep. + 24,969 + 21,788 – 450 – 448 + 6,944 – 3,315 – 764 + 16,964 – 53 – 7,241
r Oct. + 24,361 + 20,723 – 513 + 843 + 7,236 – 4,442 – 1,320 + 27,100 + 140 + 4,060
r Nov. + 21,660 + 18,474 + 122 + 2,239 + 8,537 – 7,589 – 2,090 + 14,685 + 89 – 4,885
r Dec. + 26,245 + 14,535 – 2,754 + 2,917 + 14,648 – 5,855 + 5 + 54,631 + 618 + 28,380
r 2021 Jan. + 17,931 + 14,532 – 440 + 943 + 9,795 – 7,340 – 395 + 27,039 + 743 + 9,503
r Feb. + 18,326 + 18,088 – 728 + 1,335 + 7,636 – 8,733 – 1,448 + 52,214 + 102 + 35,336
r Mar. + 30,393 + 23,352 – 56 + 1,324 + 10,262 – 4,545 + 1,628 + 43,810 – 460 + 11,788
r Apr. + 21,034 + 15,539 – 662 + 2,809 + 6,508 – 3,822 – 984 + 24,124 – 251 + 4,074
r May + 12,982 + 13,796 – 778 + 1,665 – 642 – 1,837 – 271 + 14,423 + 211 + 1,711
r June + 22,377 + 16,135 – 701 + 419 + 8,735 – 2,913 – 632 + 29,246 + 98 + 7,501
r July + 17,850 + 17,506 – 1,487 – 2,195 + 8,292 – 5,752 – 574 – 2,676 + 102 – 19,952
r Aug. + 15,364 + 12,148 – 426 – 4,554 + 10,287 – 2,518 + 586 + 7,516 + 31,254 – 8,434
p Sep. + 19,594 + 16,037 – 1,444 – 1,934 + 10,416 – 4,925 + 1,888 – 5,326 – 158 – 26,807
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: +/net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2021
Group of countries/country 
2018 2019 
2020 Apr. May June July Aug. Sep.  p
All countries  1 Exports 1,317,440 1,328,152 1,206,928 111,889 109,537 118,682 115,076 104,506 117,802
Imports 1,088,720 1,104,141 1,026,502 96,575 97,172 102,743 97,172 92,805 101,564
Balance +228,720 +224,010 +180,427 +15,314 +12,365 +15,939 +17,904 +11,702 +16,238
   I. European countries Exports 900,141 902,831 824,921 77,138 76,250 81,399 78,589 71,402 81,723
Imports 744,575 747,692 682,477 64,276 65,787 68,540 65,904 59,947 67,048
Balance +155,566 +155,140 +142,444 +12,861 +10,462 +12,859 +12,685 +11,455 +14,675
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 696,480 698,257 635,741 60,630 60,781 64,686 61,648 55,736 64,626
Imports 586,433 593,251 546,655 50,957 52,858 55,260 52,899 47,070 53,459
Balance +110,047 +105,006 +89,087 + 9,673 + 7,924 + 9,427 + 8,749 + 8,666 +11,167
          Euro area (19)       Exports 492,469 492,308 441,853 42,279 42,016 45,153 43,308 37,805 44,968
          countries Imports 405,810 409,863 371,211 34,713 36,400 38,141 36,794 32,452 36,422
Balance +86,659 +82,445 +70,643 + 7,566 + 5,616 + 7,012 + 6,514 + 5,353 + 8,546
          of which:
               Austria Exports 65,027 66,076 60,118 5,912 5,797 6,126 6,065 5,554 6,356
  Imports 42,994 44,059 40,454 3,762 3,851 4,151 4,126 3,456 4,253
Balance +22,033 +22,017 +19,663 + 2,150 + 1,946 + 1,975 + 1,939 + 2,098 + 2,103
               Belgium and Exports 50,389 52,006 48,824 4,803 4,631 4,922 4,495 4,322 4,953
               Luxembourg Imports 49,315 46,322 39,584 4,723 4,564 5,374 4,756 4,481 4,641
Balance + 1,074 + 5,683 + 9,240 + 80 + 67 – 453 – 262 – 158 + 312
               France Exports 105,359 106,564 90,910 8,415 8,340 9,169 8,457 7,131 8,717
  Imports 65,024 66,199 56,364 4,932 4,775 5,505 5,257 4,491 5,247
Balance +40,335 +40,364 +34,546 + 3,483 + 3,565 + 3,663 + 3,200 + 2,639 + 3,470
               Italy Exports 69,813 67,887 60,634 6,099 6,127 6,535 6,630 4,736 6,549
  Imports 60,223 57,100 53,906 5,287 5,592 5,643 5,687 4,573 5,376
Balance + 9,591 +10,786 + 6,728 + 812 + 535 + 892 + 943 + 163 + 1,172
               Netherlands Exports 91,061 91,528 84,579 7,719 7,947 8,477 8,250 7,946 8,862
  Imports 97,709 97,816 87,024 7,959 8,424 8,563 8,722 8,272 9,004
Balance – 6,649 – 6,288 – 2,445 – 240 – 477 – 86 – 473 – 326 – 142
               Spain  Exports 44,184 44,218 37,618 3,727 3,711 3,890 3,658 3,053 3,647
  Imports 32,399 33,126 31,281 2,884 2,941 2,855 2,800 2,197 2,541
Balance +11,785 +11,092 + 6,337 + 843 + 771 + 1,035 + 858 + 857 + 1,106
          Other EU Member  Exports 204,011 205,949 193,888 18,351 18,766 19,533 18,340 17,931 19,658
          States  Imports 180,623 183,387 175,444 16,244 16,458 17,118 16,105 14,617 17,037
Balance +23,388 +22,561 +18,444 + 2,106 + 2,308 + 2,415 + 2,235 + 3,313 + 2,621
      2. Other European Exports 203,661 204,575 189,180 16,508 15,468 16,713 16,942 15,666 17,097
          countries Imports 158,142 154,441 135,822 13,319 12,930 13,280 13,006 12,878 13,589
Balance +45,519 +50,134 +53,358 + 3,189 + 2,539 + 3,432 + 3,936 + 2,788 + 3,508
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 54,021 56,345 56,265 4,967 4,668 4,983 4,832 4,927 5,010
  Imports 45,913 45,824 45,556 4,061 4,366 4,158 3,882 3,772 4,072
Balance + 8,108 +10,521 +10,708 + 907 + 303 + 825 + 949 + 1,155 + 938
               United Kingdom Exports 82,164 79,166 67,086 5,334 5,009 5,541 5,922 4,797 5,738
  Imports 37,025 38,397 35,018 3,075 2,727 2,713 2,836 2,280 2,288
Balance +45,139 +40,770 +32,068 + 2,258 + 2,282 + 2,828 + 3,086 + 2,517 + 3,450
   II. Non-European  Exports 413,483 421,728 380,292 34,610 33,138 37,092 36,281 32,900 35,878
       countries Imports 342,980 355,390 343,270 32,217 31,287 33,841 31,135 32,738 34,381
Balance +70,503 +66,338 +37,022 + 2,392 + 1,850 + 3,251 + 5,146 + 162 + 1,497
       1. Africa Exports 22,524 23,627 20,086 1,768 1,723 1,908 2,295 1,863 2,053
Imports 22,542 24,475 18,758 1,995 2,165 2,423 2,068 1,971 2,253
Balance – 18 – 848 + 1,328 – 226 – 443 – 516 + 226 – 108 – 200
       2. America Exports 158,952 165,602 141,375 13,760 12,602 14,592 14,794 13,046 14,402
  Imports 92,444 100,007 94,005 8,671 8,076 9,639 7,734 8,721 8,765
Balance +66,508 +65,595 +47,370 + 5,089 + 4,525 + 4,953 + 7,061 + 4,325 + 5,637
           of which:
               United States  Exports 113,341 118,680 103,476 10,061 9,090 10,247 10,832 9,406 10,753
  Imports 64,493 71,334 67,694 6,148 5,868 6,848 5,434 6,253 6,267
Balance +48,847 +47,346 +35,782 + 3,913 + 3,223 + 3,399 + 5,398 + 3,153 + 4,486
       3. Asia Exports 219,716 221,278 208,146 18,206 17,894 19,587 18,120 17,160 18,462
  Imports 224,355 227,036 226,646 21,303 20,654 21,343 20,980 21,757 23,068
Balance – 4,639 – 5,759 –18,500 – 3,096 – 2,761 – 1,756 – 2,860 – 4,597 – 4,606
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 29,144 28,663 25,882 2,032 2,228 2,326 2,014 2,112 2,153
  Imports 8,156 7,460 6,721 589 670 636 669 617 658
Balance +20,989 +21,202 +19,161 + 1,442 + 1,558 + 1,690 + 1,345 + 1,495 + 1,495
               Japan  Exports 20,436 20,662 17,396 1,551 1,310 1,393 1,442 1,557 1,640
Imports 23,710 23,904 21,427 2,077 1,957 2,034 1,948 1,929 2,114
Balance – 3,275 – 3,243 – 4,032 – 526 – 647 – 641 – 507 – 372 – 474
               People's Republic  Exports 93,004 95,984 95,840 8,379 8,384 9,530 8,357 7,631 8,457
               of China  2 Imports 106,065 110,054 117,373 10,747 10,358 10,924 10,773 11,368 12,300
Balance –13,061 –14,070 –21,533 – 2,368 – 1,974 – 1,394 – 2,417 – 3,737 – 3,843
               New industrial countries Exports 54,995 54,164 50,590 4,510 4,525 4,501 4,634 4,074 4,384
               and emerging markets  Imports 52,945 51,748 48,222 4,635 4,572 4,750 4,289 4,696 4,746
               of Asia  3 Balance + 2,050 + 2,416 + 2,368 – 124 – 47 – 249 + 345 – 621 – 363
       4. Oceania and Exports 12,291 11,221 10,685 875 920 1,005 1,072 831 961
           polar regions Imports 3,639 3,872 3,861 249 392 437 353 289 295
Balance + 8,652 + 7,349 + 6,824 + 626 + 528 + 568 + 719 + 542 + 666
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. EU excl. UK.  1 Including fuel and other supplies for ships andaircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.  3 Brunei
Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Period Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2016 – 20,987 – 5,950 – 38,247 + 8,612 + 15,790 – 7,156 – 1,520 + 3,092 + 474 + 76,800 – 1,076
2017 – 23,994 – 3,679 – 43,558 + 9,613 + 14,903 – 8,188 – 1,065 + 2,177 – 637 + 76,669 – 1,403
2018 – 17,410 – 2,003 – 44,543 + 9,535 + 17,398 – 7,206 + 580 + 3,325 – 1,208 +107,902 – 1,001
2019 – 20,653 + 2 – 45,947 + 10,392 + 17,728 – 9,561 – 2,933 + 3,493 + 373 +111,763 – 945
2020 + 3,471 – 6,095 – 14,698 + 9,461 + 17,392 – 6,822 – 4,775 + 3,347 + 2,307 + 91,586 – 1,396
2020 Q1 – 2,773 – 1,220 – 7,497 + 2,464 + 4,344 – 2,164 – 963 + 881 + 917 + 26,953 – 996
Q2 + 5,647 – 1,534 + 259 + 2,332 + 4,794 – 1,524 – 1,125 + 879 + 384 + 15,200 – 2,524
Q3 – 5,402 – 1,863 – 7,428 + 2,206 + 3,353 – 1,993 – 1,645 + 892 + 97 + 23,168 – 1,123
Q4 + 5,999 – 1,478 – 32 + 2,458 + 4,902 – 1,140 – 1,042 + 695 + 909 + 26,265 + 3,247
2021 Q1 + 3,603 – 1,036 – 378 + 2,614 + 4,422 – 2,501 – 1,418 + 785 + 999 + 27,710 – 1,016
Q2 + 4,894 – 223 – 1,723 + 2,522 + 4,779 – 1,254 – 1,241 + 824 + 464 + 17,003 – 2,865
p Q3 – 8,683 + 760 – 12,797 + 835 + 3,511 – 1,987 – 869 + 856 + 101 + 30,126 – 1,233
2020 Nov. + 2,239 – 457 + 358 + 497 + 1,712 – 611 – 82 + 192 + 266 + 8,741 – 470
Dec. + 2,917 – 401 + 338 + 1,001 + 1,849 + 170 – 867 + 244 + 386 + 10,111 + 4,151
2021 Jan. + 943 – 460 – 133 + 1,013 + 1,086 – 869 – 347 + 256 + 343 + 9,806 – 354
Feb. + 1,335 – 356 – 62 + 797 + 1,467 – 733 – 260 + 262 + 359 + 7,576 – 299
Mar. + 1,324 – 220 – 183 + 803 + 1,868 – 900 – 811 + 267 + 297 + 10,328 – 363
Apr. + 2,809 + 192 – 155 + 1,204 + 1,859 – 673 – 153 + 265 + 138 + 6,694 – 323
May + 1,665 – 190 – 144 + 847 + 1,355 – 477 – 495 + 289 + 171 + 1,278 – 2,091
June + 419 – 224 – 1,425 + 472 + 1,564 – 104 – 592 + 271 + 155 + 9,031 – 451
July – 2,195 – 87 – 3,328 + 761 + 1,112 – 1,178 + 24 + 293 + 26 + 8,675 – 410
Aug. – 4,554 + 465 – 5,126 – 557 + 930 – 350 – 526 + 305 + 43 + 10,652 – 408
p Sep. – 1,934 + 382 – 4,344 + 631 + 1,469 – 459 – 368 + 257 + 32 + 10,799 – 415
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Period Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2016 – 40,931 – 25,417 – 11,516 + 10,739 – 15,514 + 4,214 + 4,196 + 2,142 + 3,219 – 1,077
2017 – 50,776 – 23,191 – 9,851 + 9,665 – 27,584 + 4,632 + 4,613 – 2,936 + 926 – 3,863
2018 – 48,713 – 28,645 – 10,186 + 10,237 – 20,067 + 5,152 + 5,142 + 676 + 3,444 – 2,768
2019 – 48,434 – 28,956 – 10,728 + 11,745 – 19,479 + 5,445 + 5,431 – 526 + 2,754 – 3,280
2020 – 51,582 – 34,268 – 12,211 + 10,877 – 17,313 + 5,925 + 5,908 – 4,771 + 469 – 5,240
2020 Q1 – 14,404 – 9,565 – 2,315 + 2,514 – 4,839 + 1,482 + 1,477 – 348 – 444 + 95
Q2 – 8,922 – 4,819 – 2,270 + 4,506 – 4,104 + 1,480 + 1,477 + 188 + 504 – 316
Q3 – 10,369 – 6,422 – 3,249 + 2,144 – 3,947 + 1,481 + 1,477 – 1,206 – 54 – 1,151
Q4 – 17,886 – 13,463 – 4,378 + 1,713 – 4,423 + 1,482 + 1,477 – 3,405 + 464 – 3,869
2021 Q1 – 20,618 – 14,676 – 3,294 + 2,276 – 5,942 + 1,547 + 1,543 – 215 – 25 – 190
Q2 – 8,572 – 4,303 – 1,584 + 5,280 – 4,269 + 1,547 + 1,543 – 1,887 – 1,702 – 184
p Q3 – 13,195 – 8,057 – 1,848 + 2,115 – 5,138 .+ 1,543 + 1,900 + 2,818 – 918
2020 Nov. – 7,589 – 5,989 – 1,390 + 256 – 1,601 + 494 + 492 – 2,090 – 393 – 1,697
Dec. – 5,855 – 4,476 – 2,026 + 931 – 1,379 + 493 + 492 + 5 + 1,639 – 1,634
2021 Jan. – 7,340 – 5,854 – 1,803 + 399 – 1,486 + 516 + 514 – 395 – 373 – 22
Feb. – 8,733 – 6,458 – 661 + 923 – 2,275 + 515 + 514 – 1,448 – 1,236 – 212
Mar. – 4,545 – 2,364 – 830 + 955 – 2,181 + 516 + 514 + 1,628 + 1,584 + 44
Apr. – 3,822 – 2,165 – 641 + 1,332 – 1,658 + 516 + 514 – 984 – 857 – 127
May – 1,837 – 734 – 409 + 2,799 – 1,103 + 516 + 514 – 271 – 250 – 21
June – 2,913 – 1,405 – 535 + 1,149 – 1,508 + 515 + 514 – 632 – 596 – 36
July – 5,752 – 3,968 – 2,738 + 686 – 1,784 + 516 + 514 – 574 – 242 – 332
Aug. – 2,518 – 1,072 + 1,552 + 379 – 1,446 + 515 + 514 + 586 + 679 – 93
p Sep. – 4,925 – 3,017 – 662 + 1,050 – 1,908 .+ 514 + 1,888 + 2,381 – 494
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2021
Item 2018 2019 2020 Q1 Q2 Q3 p July August Sept.  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +398,714 +247,406 +707,119 +287,271 +122,108 +102,774 –57,261 +55,968 +104,066
1.Direct investment +156,050 +136,291 +96,602 +45,517 +17,302 +36,601 + 5,805 + 4,587 +26,209
Equity +154,766 +116,375 +79,229 +12,105 +31,115 +25,359 + 7,733 + 8,717 + 8,908
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +37,276 +37,654 +16,648 +14,233 + 7,491 +13,041 + 3,027 + 5,494 + 4,520
Debt instruments + 1,285 +19,916 +17,373 +33,412 –13,813 +11,242 – 1,928 – 4,131 +17,301
2.Portfolio investment +82,648 +136,850 +186,532 +77,652 +59,175 +49,408 +16,831 + 7,827 +24,750
Shares  2 + 9,251 +14,111 +65,947 + 9,077 +10,119 +19,435 + 4,412 + 6,994 + 8,029
Investment fund shares  3 +28,366 +53,919 +64,435 +16,793 +24,841 +22,148 + 5,103 + 8,695 + 8,349
Short-term  4
debt securities + 1,973 + 8,599 + 2,019 + 3,628 – 5,848 + 5,422 + 2,595 + 163 + 2,664
Long-term   5
debt securities +43,058 +60,221 +54,131 +48,154 +30,063 + 2,403 + 4,721 – 8,026 + 5,708
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +22,539 +24,532 +99,097 +22,346 +13,451 –11,369 + 2,098 – 6,576 – 6,891
4.Other investment  7 +137,085 –49,723 +324,940 +141,371 +32,121 – 3,064 –82,097 +18,876 +60,157
MFIs  8 +49,862 + 9,276 – 4,494 +142,555 +17,351 –33,428 – 7,301 – 9,974 –16,154
Short-term +45,400 – 8,901 + 3,526 +135,399 +13,907 –24,494 – 4,014 – 3,553 –16,927
Long-term + 4,462 +18,177 – 8,020 + 7,157 + 3,444 – 8,934 – 3,287 – 6,421 + 774
Enterprises and
households  9 +39,124 +16,241 +85,204 +57,978 – 1,468 +15,943 – 1,292 +15,606 + 1,629
Short-term +20,489 + 4,510 +43,928 +55,568 – 4,798 +10,271 – 3,418 +14,098 – 409
Long-term +18,635 +11,730 +41,276 + 2,410 + 3,330 + 5,672 + 2,126 + 1,508 + 2,038
General government – 8,696 – 4,325 + 1,118 – 4,891 – 723 – 689 – 72 + 1,607 – 2,224
Short-term – 7,706 – 1,139 + 2,399 – 4,591 – 695 – 442 + 194 + 1,566 – 2,202
Long-term – 990 – 3,186 – 1,281 – 300 – 28 – 247 – 266 + 41 – 22
Bundesbank +56,795 –70,915 +243,112 –54,271 +16,961 +15,111 –73,432 +11,637 +76,906
5.Reserve assets + 392 – 544 – 51 + 385 + 58 +31,199 + 102 +31,254 – 158
II.Net foreign investment
in the reporting country
(increase: +) +152,171 +43,607 +476,016 +164,208 +54,315 +103,259 –54,585 +48,452 +109,392
1. Direct investment +135,583 +60,170 +97,216 +14,345 +13,647 +15,208 – 3,854 + 868 +18,193
Equity +48,790 +30,250 +31,079 + 5,664 + 8,759 + 4,742 + 2,074 + 1,866 + 802
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 4,331 + 1,031 + 2,152 + 1,039 – 1,921 + 2,739 + 560 + 1,242 + 937
Debt instruments +86,793 +29,920 +66,136 + 8,681 + 4,888 +10,466 – 5,928 – 998 +17,392
2.Portfolio investment –70,988 +63,443 +143,783 +30,853 –10,289 –11,795 –16,133 +14,478 –10,139
Shares  2 –30,383 – 6,075 –16,838 + 4,188 – 5,174 + 412 + 2,285 – 296 – 1,577
Investment fund shares  3 – 6,364 – 4,923 + 933 + 110 + 999 – 1,123 – 786 – 466 + 129
Short-term  4
debt securities + 5,128 +15,902 +80,193 +19,476 + 216 + 8,296 – 3,534 +10,704 + 1,126
Long-term   5
debt securities –39,370 +58,539 +79,494 + 7,079 – 6,330 –19,380 –14,098 + 4,535 – 9,816
3.Other investment  7 +87,576 –80,006 +235,017 +119,010 +50,957 +99,846 –34,597 +33,106 +101,338
MFIs  8 –35,902 –10,214 +108,397 +248,352 +28,522 – 2,853 –33,997 – 6,669 +37,813
Short-term –27,469 –20,978 +74,805 +218,851 +43,378 –19,511 –43,178 –18,028 +41,695
Long-term – 8,433 +10,764 +33,591 +29,501 –14,856 +16,658 + 9,181 +11,359 – 3,882
Enterprises and
households  9 +18,949 +29,501 +26,267 + 8,474 – 4,287 +27,713 +11,957 – 398 +16,154
Short-term + 7,132 + 9,988 +18,062 +11,480 – 781 +27,239 +10,373 – 628 +17,494
Long-term +11,816 +19,513 + 8,206 – 3,006 – 3,505 + 474 + 1,584 + 229 – 1,339
General government + 2,906 + 262 –10,521 – 3,760 + 3,635 – 131 + 188 – 1,878 + 1,558
Short-term + 2,230 + 124 –10,306 – 1,044 + 3,624 – 156 + 208 – 1,874 + 1,511
Long-term + 677 + 138 – 216 – 2,716 + 10 + 24 – 20 – 3+ 48
Bundesbank +101,623 –99,554 +110,874 –134,057 +23,087 +75,117 –12,746 +42,051 +45,812
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +246,544 +203,799 +231,103 +123,063 +67,793 – 485 – 2,676 + 7,516 – 5,326
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see 'Statistical series Direct investment
statistics').  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities  3 , 4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 – 17,068 – 30,857 – 10,477 65,670
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,670
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 671,202 489,769
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2019 May 1,186,394 180,073 126,092 14,637 6,150 33,193 952,038 934,640 54,283 618,639 567,754
June 1,201,041 187,401 134,470 14,473 6,081 32,377 960,158 942,319 53,482 649,792 551,249
July 1,134,349 193,244 139,163 14,613 6,391 33,077 888,584 870,903 52,521 621,971 512,378
Aug. 1,173,640 205,331 149,696 14,703 6,379 34,553 915,546 897,901 52,763 638,733 534,907
Sep. 1,185,142 202,285 147,611 14,831 6,396 33,447 930,892 915,342 51,965 626,236 558,906
Oct. 1,103,094 199,858 146,284 14,663 6,287 32,624 852,754 837,377 50,482 596,696 506,398
Nov. 1,134,129 197,047 143,253 14,799 6,116 32,879 885,524 870,520 51,558 590,333 543,797
Dec. 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 671,202 489,769
2020 Jan. 1,090,725 209,432 154,867 14,785 6,110 33,671 828,120 811,435 53,173 580,910 509,814
Feb. 1,106,033 215,748 159,889 14,857 5,989 35,014 836,782 821,562 53,503 577,033 529,000
Mar. 1,218,815 213,722 158,677 14,812 5,965 34,268 952,781 935,126 52,312 617,919 600,896
Apr. 1,214,851 226,903 170,359 14,935 6,857 34,753 934,333 918,814 53,615 616,319 598,532
May 1,209,328 223,125 167,780 14,650 6,787 33,908 931,521 916,145 54,682 612,403 596,925
June 1,294,167 226,135 170,728 14,603 6,955 33,849 1,012,982 995,083 55,050 618,825 675,342
July 1,323,691 233,547 180,400 14,179 7,465 31,503 1,034,282 1,019,214 55,862 599,189 724,503
Aug. 1,358,137 230,309 177,973 14,129 7,423 30,784 1,071,521 1,056,231 56,307 600,390 757,747
Sep. 1,414,933 227,150 173,979 14,293 7,632 31,246 1,131,686 1,115,189 56,097 649,781 765,151
Oct. 1,346,367 227,767 174,433 14,346 7,656 31,332 1,061,498 1,047,327 57,102 619,445 726,922
Nov. 1,347,202 212,286 159,737 14,193 7,535 30,820 1,078,270 1,060,263 56,647 625,921 721,282
Dec. 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 Jan. 1,348,921 219,860 166,494 14,115 8,061 31,190 1,072,140 1,054,994 56,921 638,042 710,879
Feb. 1,328,303 210,619 157,313 14,119 8,047 31,140 1,060,378 1,043,746 57,306 616,473 711,830
Mar. 1,364,046 209,400 155,323 14,367 7,966 31,744 1,098,486 1,081,989 56,160 647,647 716,400
Apr. 1,307,161 210,799 158,143 14,085 7,836 30,735 1,041,472 1,024,734 54,890 604,863 702,299
May 1,370,231 221,201 168,678 14,037 7,809 30,677 1,093,721 1,076,918 55,309 621,827 748,404
June 1,384,834 213,600 159,995 14,326 8,094 31,184 1,115,447 1,101,897 55,787 670,632 714,202
July 1,319,694 219,775 165,984 14,345 8,104 31,343 1,042,015 1,024,970 57,903 657,905 661,789
Aug. 1,360,722 250,742 165,757 45,091 8,174 31,720 1,053,653 1,037,259 56,327 699,773 660,949
Sep. 1,431,909 246,908 160,943 45,606 8,267 32,092 1,130,558 1,115,126 54,443 746,128 685,781
Oct. 1,388,160 250,340 164,602 45,719 8,449 31,570 1,083,141 1,066,604 54,678 735,595 652,564
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2017 901,267 218,110 683,156 457,369 225,788 211,769 14,018 1,115,680 143,928 971,752 770,140 201,612 131,034 70,579
2018 934,837 234,595 700,241 468,418 231,823 217,561 14,262 1,225,989 146,105 1,079,884 873,977 205,907 134,897 71,010
2019 959,708 226,949 732,759 499,322 233,437 217,768 15,669 1,281,332 165,199 1,116,133 908,374 207,759 133,704 74,055
2020 1,007,574 250,320 757,254 529,154 228,099 211,800 16,300 1,360,348 167,766 1,192,582 984,663 207,919 129,171 78,748
2021 Apr. 1,086,960 269,905 817,055 577,596 239,459 222,468 16,991 1,409,569 170,664 1,238,906 1,023,103 215,803 133,961 81,842
May 1,057,714 270,395 787,319 553,608 233,711 216,984 16,727 1,389,444 171,979 1,217,465 1,006,408 211,056 129,367 81,689
June 1,064,620 249,361 815,259 569,374 245,885 228,928 16,957 1,405,317 164,780 1,240,537 1,016,612 223,925 140,022 83,903
July 1,066,535 253,859 812,676 569,944 242,732 225,820 16,912 1,412,766 176,627 1,236,138 1,016,188 219,950 135,566 84,384
Aug. 1,077,379 260,534 816,844 579,112 237,732 220,894 16,839 1,412,471 175,411 1,237,061 1,022,017 215,044 129,822 85,222
Sep. 1,098,237 252,396 845,841 597,574 248,267 231,250 17,017 1,448,705 180,078 1,268,627 1,037,114 231,514 146,216 85,297
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2017 522,279 166,645 355,634 263,631 92,003 83,509 8,494 720,770 93,932 626,838 544,462 82,376 62,137 20,239
2018 545,146 176,529 368,617 276,091 92,525 84,214 8,312 796,793 87,930 708,863 626,713 82,150 61,561 20,589
2019 569,888 176,258 393,630 302,654 90,976 82,454 8,522 824,390 89,604 734,787 650,172 84,615 62,534 22,081
2020 599,741 188,300 411,440 322,386 89,054 80,200 8,854 866,365 92,592 773,773 687,613 86,160 62,357 23,803
2021 Apr. 676,258 211,565 464,692 368,731 95,961 86,771 9,190 912,592 90,962 821,630 730,073 91,557 65,794 25,763
May 640,806 211,913 428,894 335,464 93,430 84,441 8,990 890,189 96,512 793,677 704,853 88,824 63,274 25,550
June 634,306 195,636 438,670 342,302 96,368 87,237 9,130 895,230 93,766 801,465 708,232 93,233 67,553 25,680
July 634,744 198,458 436,285 341,574 94,712 85,629 9,083 895,013 92,773 802,240 711,618 90,622 65,103 25,519
Aug. 645,244 207,098 438,146 346,930 91,215 82,131 9,084 894,407 93,977 800,430 713,628 86,802 61,163 25,639
Sep. 653,111 199,566 453,545 355,514 98,031 88,826 9,204 923,746 110,857 812,890 720,175 92,714 67,264 25,450
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2017 378,987 51,465 327,522 193,738 133,784 128,260 5,524 394,910 49,996 344,914 225,677 119,236 68,897 50,340
2018 389,691 58,066 331,625 192,327 139,298 133,347 5,950 429,197 58,175 371,021 247,265 123,757 73,335 50,422
2019 389,820 50,692 339,129 196,668 142,461 135,314 7,146 456,942 75,595 381,347 258,203 123,144 71,171 51,974
2020 407,833 62,020 345,814 206,768 139,046 131,600 7,445 493,983 75,175 418,809 297,050 121,758 66,813 54,945
2021 Apr. 410,703 58,340 352,363 208,865 143,498 135,697 7,801 496,977 79,702 417,275 293,030 124,246 68,167 56,078
May 416,908 58,483 358,425 218,144 140,280 132,543 7,737 499,255 75,467 423,788 301,555 122,232 66,093 56,140
June 430,314 53,725 376,590 227,072 149,517 141,691 7,826 510,087 71,014 439,073 308,380 130,692 72,470 58,222
July 431,792 55,401 376,391 228,370 148,020 140,191 7,829 517,753 83,854 433,899 304,570 129,328 70,464 58,864
Aug. 432,135 53,436 378,699 232,181 146,517 138,763 7,754 518,064 81,434 436,630 308,388 128,242 68,659 59,583
Sep. 445,126 52,830 392,297 242,060 150,236 142,423 7,813 524,959 69,221 455,738 316,939 138,799 78,952 59,847
Euro area (19)
2017 454,033 149,685 304,348 232,178 72,170 64,683 7,487 654,278 75,669 578,609 512,786 65,823 50,442 15,381
2018 468,699 156,351 312,348 240,676 71,672 64,427 7,245 730,553 68,747 661,806 596,496 65,310 49,555 15,755
2019 492,090 157,829 334,261 263,830 70,431 62,939 7,492 751,076 69,464 681,612 615,369 66,243 49,609 16,634
2020 515,425 167,497 347,928 279,213 68,715 61,150 7,565 783,041 71,423 711,617 645,409 66,208 48,316 17,891
2021 Apr. 574,874 188,396 386,478 313,279 73,199 65,469 7,730 823,642 71,163 752,479 682,989 69,490 50,038 19,452
May 549,188 192,018 357,170 286,041 71,129 63,482 7,647 809,765 76,299 733,466 664,788 68,679 48,960 19,718
June 536,631 171,581 365,050 291,933 73,117 65,369 7,749 814,593 74,426 740,167 668,245 71,922 52,035 19,887
July 541,433 180,967 360,466 287,849 72,617 64,790 7,827 814,810 73,730 741,080 670,829 70,251 50,514 19,737
Aug. 548,489 187,471 361,018 291,497 69,521 61,737 7,783 816,982 75,912 741,070 674,183 66,887 47,226 19,661
Sep. 552,770 179,900 372,870 297,471 75,399 67,443 7,955 843,846 91,051 752,795 680,758 72,036 52,387 19,650
Extra-Euro area (19)
2017 447,234 68,425 378,809 225,191 153,618 147,087 6,531 461,402 68,259 393,143 257,354 135,789 80,592 55,197
2018 466,138 78,244 387,894 227,743 160,151 153,134 7,017 495,436 77,358 418,078 277,482 140,597 85,342 55,255
2019 467,618 69,120 398,498 235,492 163,006 154,829 8,176 530,256 95,735 434,521 293,005 141,516 84,095 57,421
2020 492,149 82,823 409,326 249,941 159,385 150,650 8,735 577,307 96,343 480,965 339,254 141,711 80,854 60,856
2021 Apr. 512,086 81,509 430,577 264,317 166,260 156,999 9,261 585,927 99,501 486,426 340,113 146,313 83,923 62,390
May 508,526 78,377 430,148 267,567 162,582 153,502 9,080 579,679 95,680 483,998 341,621 142,378 80,407 61,971
June 527,989 77,780 450,209 277,442 172,768 163,560 9,208 590,724 90,354 500,370 348,367 152,003 87,987 64,016
July 525,102 72,892 452,210 282,095 170,115 161,030 9,086 597,955 102,897 495,058 345,359 149,699 85,052 64,647
Aug. 528,890 73,063 455,826 287,615 168,212 159,156 9,055 595,489 99,499 495,991 347,833 148,157 82,596 65,561
Sep. 545,467 72,495 472,972 300,104 172,868 163,806 9,062 604,859 89,026 515,833 356,355 159,477 93,829 65,648
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2020 June 1.6322 1.5254 7.9734 7.4548 121.12 10.7298 10.4869 1.0712 0.89878 1.1255
July 1.6304 1.5481 8.0352 7.4467 122.38 10.6544 10.3538 1.0711 0.90467 1.1463
Aug. 1.6433 1.5654 8.1954 7.4460 125.40 10.5797 10.3087 1.0767 0.90081 1.1828
Sep. 1.6307 1.5586 8.0333 7.4418 124.50 10.7769 10.4279 1.0786 0.90947 1.1792
Oct. 1.6521 1.5559 7.9225 7.4424 123.89 10.9220 10.3967 1.0739 0.90741 1.1775
Nov. 1.6266 1.5472 7.8152 7.4459 123.61 10.7453 10.2311 1.0785 0.89605 1.1838
Dec. 1.6166 1.5595 7.9602 7.4412 126.28 10.6008 10.1736 1.0814 0.90624 1.2170
2021 Jan. 1.5764 1.5494 7.8730 7.4387 126.31 10.3661 10.0952 1.0794 0.89267 1.2171
Feb. 1.5605 1.5354 7.8136 7.4367 127.49 10.2791 10.0887 1.0858 0.87268 1.2098
Mar. 1.5444 1.4970 7.7465 7.4363 129.38 10.1469 10.1692 1.1065 0.85873 1.1899
Apr. 1.5544 1.4975 7.8051 7.4367 130.49 10.0376 10.1620 1.1031 0.86527 1.1979
May 1.5653 1.4732 7.8109 7.4362 132.57 10.0931 10.1471 1.0968 0.86258 1.2146
June 1.5761 1.4713 7.7391 7.4364 132.63 10.1444 10.1172 1.0940 0.85872 1.2047
July 1.5926 1.4806 7.6536 7.4373 130.35 10.3767 10.1979 1.0856 0.85613 1.1822
Aug. 1.6118 1.4827 7.6237 7.4369 129.28 10.4195 10.2157 1.0762 0.85287 1.1772
Sep. 1.6087 1.4910 7.6007 7.4361 129.66 10.1861 10.1710 1.0857 0.85683 1.1770
Oct. 1.5669 1.4436 7.4500 7.4398 131.21 9.8143 10.0557 1.0708 0.84694 1.1601
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2021
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-42  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
26 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  526 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.2 96.1 96.1 96.6 96.0 97.9 99.6 95.9 97.7 98.3 98.1 97.8
2000 87.1 86.8 86.1 85.5 88.1 86.1 92.0 97.4 85.5 91.1 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.6 87.1 86.8 84.5 90.2 86.9 91.7 96.5 86.0 90.5 93.0 91.7 91.1
2002 89.8 90.2 89.9 88.0 94.5 90.5 92.3 95.6 88.5 91.0 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.4 101.3 101.0 99.1 106.4 101.5 95.8 94.7 97.6 95.3 97.0 96.7 96.9
2004 104.2 105.2 104.0 102.3 110.9 105.3 96.1 93.5 100.0 95.6 98.5 98.2 98.5
2005 102.8 103.8 102.0 100.6 109.0 102.9 94.7 91.9 98.8 93.2 98.4 97.1 96.8
2006 102.8 103.8 101.5 99.5 109.1 102.2 93.5 90.3 98.2 91.6 98.6 96.7 96.1
2007 106.3 106.8 103.7 101.2 112.7 104.4 94.5 89.5 102.0 91.9 100.9 98.3 97.4
2008 110.1 109.7 105.8 104.9 117.4 106.9 94.8 88.2 105.1 91.2 102.4 98.4 97.6
2009 111.6 110.5 107.0 108.6 120.5 107.9 95.2 89.1 104.7 92.0 101.9 98.6 98.0
2010 104.4 102.8 98.8 101.0 111.9 99.0 92.5 88.7 98.2 88.1 98.8 94.3 92.6
2011 104.2 101.9 97.0 99.3 112.7 98.5 92.1 88.4 97.6 87.3 98.2 93.5 92.0
2012 98.5 96.7 91.4 93.7 107.5 93.7 90.1 88.3 92.5 84.7 95.9 90.5 89.0
2013 102.0 99.7 94.5 96.6 112.2 96.7 92.3 88.7 97.5 86.6 98.1 92.3 91.0
2014 102.3 99.1 94.4 96.7 114.5 97.1 92.9 89.6 97.7 87.3 98.2 92.5 91.6
2015 92.5 89.4 85.8 86.2 106.1 88.6 89.7 90.2 88.9 83.6 94.4 87.8 87.0
2016 95.2 91.4 88.1 p 87.4 110.1 90.6 90.6 90.7 90.5 84.9 95.0 88.8 88.2
2017 97.4 93.3 89.2 p 88.1 112.4 91.8 91.9 90.8 93.3 85.7 96.3 89.9 89.0
2018 99.9 95.5 90.7 p 89.6 117.3 94.9 93.1 90.9 96.4 86.6 97.7 91.2 90.9
2019 98.1 93.1 88.9 p 87.2 115.4 92.3 92.1 91.0 93.5 85.7 96.4 89.9 89.5
2020 99.6 93.5 p 89.3 p 87.8 119.4 93.8 92.0 91.2 93.2 86.2 96.4 90.1 90.3
2018 Nov. 99.1 94.7 90.1 p 88.9 116.8 94.3 92.8 91.1 95.2 86.5 97.3 91.1 90.9
Dec. 99.2 94.6 116.9 94.2 97.2 90.8 90.6
2019 Jan. 98.7 94.1 116.3 93.6 96.8 90.4 90.1
Feb. 98.3 93.6 89.0 p 87.5 115.6 92.9 92.1 90.8 94.1 85.7 96.5 90.0 89.5
Mar. 97.7 93.0 115.2 92.4 96.2 89.6 89.2
Apr. 97.6 92.8 115.0 92.2 96.5 89.8 89.4
May 98.1 93.2 88.7 p 87.2 115.7 92.6 92.2 91.0 93.9 85.7 96.7 90.2 89.8
June 98.7 93.7 116.2 93.0 96.8 90.3 89.9
July 98.3 93.3 115.3 92.2 96.7 90.1 89.5
Aug. 98.8 93.7 89.2 p 87.4 116.2 92.8 92.2 91.2 93.5 85.9 96.5 90.3 89.8
Sep. 98.1 92.9 115.3 92.0 96.2 90.0 89.4
Oct. 98.0 92.6 115.2 91.7 96.2 89.8 89.2
Nov. 97.4 92.0 88.6 p 86.4 114.6 91.1 91.8 91.2 92.6 85.6 95.9 89.4 88.8
Dec. 97.3 91.9 114.6 91.0 95.9 89.5 88.9
2020 Jan. 96.9 91.2 114.1 90.4 95.9 89.0 88.4
Feb. 96.2 90.5 88.0 p 87.0 113.5 89.7 91.7 91.4 91.9 85.5 95.5 88.7 88.1
Mar. 98.8 92.9 117.8 93.0 96.4 90.0 90.1
Apr. 98.1 92.5 117.5 92.9 96.2 90.1 90.3
May 98.3 92.5 88.9 p 87.5 117.5 92.8 91.3 91.2 91.3 85.9 96.3 90.2 90.3
June 99.7 93.8 119.1 93.9 97.0 90.8 90.9
July 100.4 94.4 120.3 94.7 96.0 90.0 90.3
Aug. 101.5 94.9 90.1 p 88.6 122.4 95.8 92.6 91.2 94.5 86.8 97.0 90.8 91.4
Sep. 101.5 94.8 122.4 95.7 96.9 90.7 91.2
Oct. 101.3 94.7 122.4 95.6 96.6 90.5 91.1
Nov. 100.6 94.2 p 90.3 p 88.2 121.6 95.0 92.6 90.9 95.1 86.5 96.5 90.1 90.6
Dec. 101.8 95.1 122.9 95.9 97.0 90.6 91.0
2021 Jan. 101.3 95.3 122.4 96.0 97.9 91.4 91.8
Feb. 100.6 94.6 p 90.0 p 87.8 121.5 95.2 93.1 91.6 95.3 86.8 97.9 91.2 91.5
Mar. 100.3 94.1 121.2 94.8 97.7 91.1 91.4
Apr. 100.6 94.2 121.9 95.1 98.0 91.3 91.8
May 100.8 94.2 p 88.8 p 85.9 122.3 95.2 93.0 91.2 95.5 86.5 98.1 91.4 91.9
June 100.2 93.7 121.5 94.5 97.9 91.1 91.5
July 99.7 p 93.5 120.8 p 94.2 97.7 p 91.0 p 91.4
Aug. 99.3 p 93.2 ... ... 120.4 p 93.9 … … … … 97.4 p 90.8 p 91.1
Sep. 99.4 p 93.2 120.4 p 93.8 p97.4 p 90.7 p 91.0
Oct. 98.4 p 92.2 119.5 p 92.9 p97.3 p 90.5 p 90.9
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's
price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective
exchange rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitive-
ness. The weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more
detailed information on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the
Deutsche Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1  The
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral
exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Australia,
Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan,
Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United
Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and wage indices were not avai-lable, estimates were used.  2 ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the
group EER-19 and additionally Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Peru, Philippines, the
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and
United Arab Emirates.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from
2001 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and
Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including
Latvia, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.  5 Euro area countries
(current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-19.  6 Euro area
countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-42.

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website. In addition, the new Statistical Series 
provide a new basic structure and advanced options for using data and are also available 
on the Bundesbank’s website.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
A list of the articles published in the period from 
2010 to 2020 is available on the Bundesbank’s 
website.
Monthly Report articles
January 2021
– The slowdown in euro area productivity 
growth
– Methodology and analytical options for the 
expanded statistics on banking groups’ secur -
ities holdings
– The two- tier system for reserve remuneration  
and its impact on banks and financial mar -
kets
February 2021
– The current economic situation in GermanyMarch 2021
– German balance of payments in 2020
– A new European prudential framework for 
investment firms
April 2021
– The impact of monetary policy depending on 
the debt situation in the non- financial private 
sector: Evidence for the euro area
– Assessments and expectations of firms in the 
pandemic: findings from the  Bundesbank 
Online Panel Firms
– Digital money: options for payments
May 2021
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2021
– Outlook for the German economy for 2021 
to 2023
– Government finances: Central bank bond 
purchases increase sensitivity to interest rate 
changes
– Federal debt: allocate premia on accruals 
basis in budgetary interest expenditure
– Local government finances: how cash ad -
vances can be limited and budget  imbalances 
avoidedDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
85•

July 2021
– Cross-border corporate takeovers: the im -
pact of internationalisation on enterprises in 
Germany
– Crypto tokens and decentralised financial 
applica tions
– Digital risks in the banking sector
– Macroprudential policy and growth-at-risk
August 2021
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2021
– The Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy
– The impact of the Eurosystem’s monetary 
policy on Bitcoin and other crypto tokens
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2020
October 2021
– State government finances in 2020: deficit 
due to temporary effects of pandemic, es -
cape clauses also used to build reserves
– The global economy during the coronavirus 
pandemic
– What do households in Germany think about 
the digital euro? First results from surveys 
and interviews
– The regulation of remuneration at credit in -
stitutions
November 2021
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, January 20212
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
January 20212
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131
Discussion Paperso
24/ 2021  
Reversal interest rate and macroprudential policy25/ 2021  
Equity premium predictability over the business 
cycle
26/ 2021  
The case for a positive euro area inflation tar -
get: Evidence from France, Germany and Italy
27/ 2021  
Decomposing the yield curve with linear regres -
sions and survey information
28/ 2021  
Return differences between DAX ETFs and the 
benchmark DAX
29/ 2021  
On the importance of fiscal space: Evidence 
from short sellers during the COVID-  19 pan -
demic
30/ 2021  
Better be careful: The replenishment of ABS 
backed by SME loans
31/ 2021  
The leverage effect of bank disclosures
32/ 2021  
Macroprudential policy and the sovereign- bank 
nexus in the euro area
33/2021  
Benefits of internationalisation for acquirers and 
targets – but unevenly distributed
34/2021  
Pandemic recessions and contact tracing
35/2021  
Quantitative easing, safe asset scarcity and 
bank lending
36/2021  
Banks’ credit losses and lending dynamics
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
87•

37/2021  
Financial integration and the co-movement of 
economic activity: Evidence from U.S. states
38/2021  
Structural change revisited: The rise of manu -
facturing jobs in the service sector
39/2021  
Safe asset shortage and collateral reuse
40/2021  
Hitting the elusive inflation target
41/2021  
Monetary policy and Bitcoin
42/2021  
Bank risk- taking and impaired monetary policy 
transmissionBanking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, 
January  20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2021  
88•

