Monthly Report
August 2022
Vol. 74  
No 8

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 33512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 a.m. on 19 August 2022.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  7
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  12
High inflation rates in the euro area and the United States: similarities and differences ...... 14
The central and eastern European EU Member States between the coronavirus crisis and 
the war in Ukraine  ..............................................................................................................  20
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  28
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  29
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  42
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  51
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  62
The typical impact of inflation on government finances  ......................................................  63Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
6

Overview
Continued sharp rise 
in prices, clouded  
macro economic outlook
A number of stress factors put the global econ -
omy under pressure in the second quarter of 
2022. In China, the strict restrictions imposed 
to combat the pandemic considerably damp -
ened economic activity. In the United States, 
aggregate output fell again somewhat against 
the backdrop of high inflation rates and con -
tinued monetary policy tightening. The persist -
ently high level of consumer price inflation also 
weighed on private consumption in a large 
number of other countries. At the same time, 
sentiment deteriorated markedly around the 
world. The global economy is currently facing 
unusually high uncertainty.
Although demand for services picked up again 
significantly across the globe after the exten -
sive lifting of pandemic- related restrictions, this 
did not fully offset the weak demand for indus -
trial goods. According to surveys of purchasing 
managers, weak demand was the main drag 
on global industry in the meantime. Disruptions 
caused by supply- side bottlenecks therefore 
also became less important. Accordingly, deliv -
ery times increased only slightly, and price pres -
sures eased somewhat in industry. Many com -
modity prices, including crude oil prices, also 
fell markedly. By contrast, European gas prices 
rose sharply. This was mainly due to Russia’s 
decision to deliver less gas to Europe via the 
Nord Stream 1 pipeline and concerns about a 
sweeping suspension of Russian deliveries.
Consumer price inflation rose again worldwide. 
Annual consumer price inflation in the indus -
trial countries increased to 8.3% by July. In the 
euro area, in particular, energy prices went up 
dramatically. Moreover, upward pressure on 
prices is now broadly based. In the narrow def -
inition, excluding energy and food, the infla -
tion rate remained at a high 5% in the indus -trial countries. Looking ahead, the rise in prices 
at the upstream stages should gradually mod -
erate in the light of the slowdown in global 
economic activity and, in some cases, deterior -
ating commodity prices. However, the upside 
risks to inflation are high. Further price surges 
would be expected for energy, especially if Rus -
sian gas deliveries were to be suspended al -
together. Moreover, owing to the tight labour 
market situation in some industrial countries, 
robust wage growth could lead to undesirable 
second- round effects.
High inflationary pressures 
driving rising yields in the 
 capital markets
In the reporting period, the international finan -
cial markets were also influenced by increasing 
inflation rates and growing economic con -
cerns. With inflation still surprisingly high in 
many economies, government bond yields rose 
significantly around the world until mid-  June. 
Against this backdrop, market participants 
priced in an increasingly contractionary monet -
ary policy stance by key central banks, amongst 
other things. The UK and US central banks 
tightened their monetary policy by repeatedly 
raising their policy rates: in August, the Bank of 
England carried out its sixth policy rate hike 
since December of last year to the new level of 
1.75%, and the US Federal Reserve System in -
creased its policy rate in June and July by 75 
basis points, respectively, to a new target range 
of 2.25% to 2.5%. In addition, following on 
from the Bank of England, the Federal Reserve 
System also began to reduce the securities 
holdings it had acquired under monetary policy 
purchase programmes. By comparison, the Euro -
system adopted more of a wait- and- see ap -
proach, but with the end of net purchases 
under its asset purchase programme (APP) and 
a subsequent first key interest rate hike, it has 
now taken major steps in the process of mon -Global economy 
contracted in Q2 
2022
Industrial activ -
ity: delivery 
times increasing 
only slightly, 
price pressures 
easing at 
upstream 
stages, but gas 
prices rising 
sharply
Renewed rise in 
consumer price 
inflation, uncer -
tain outlookFinancial mar -
kets influenced 
by high inflation 
rates and a 
clouded eco -
nomic outlookDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
7

etary policy normalisation. At the same time, 
however, economic concerns became more 
entrenched  in the reporting period. In Europe, 
they were fuelled by restrictions on natural gas 
deliveries from Russia, amongst other things. 
From around mid-  June, market participants 
gradually lowered their expectations of monet -
ary policy tightening in the current cycle, which 
dampened the preceding increase in yields. In 
this environment, price developments in the 
equity markets remained negative, like in the 
first quarter. In addition to the net rise in risk-  
free interest rates, a decline in the medium-  
term earnings growth outlook had a dampen -
ing effect on equity prices. Monetary policy 
also played an important role in the foreign ex -
change markets. The brisker pace of US monet -
ary policy normalisation, coupled with the 
Euro system’s comparative wait- and- see stance, 
caused the euro to depreciate, especially 
against the US dollar. On top of this, a declin -
ing risk appetite among foreign exchange mar -
ket participants weighed on the single currency 
relative to the US dollar.
ECB Governing Council takes 
significant monetary policy 
 decisions
In June, the Governing Council of the ECB de -
cided to end net purchases under the asset 
purchase programme (APP) as of 1 July 2022. 
In July, it decided on a first key interest rate hike 
of 50 basis points in the light of renewed up -
side surprises in price developments. At its up -
coming meetings, further normalisation of 
interest rates will be appropriate in view of in -
flationary risks tilted to the upside.
Moreover, the Governing Council approved a 
new Transmission Protection Instrument (TPI) in 
July. Particularly while monetary policy is nor -
malised, the TPI is intended to ensure that the 
monetary policy stance is transmitted smoothly 
across all euro area countries. Under the TPI, 
the Eurosystem is able to make secondary mar -
ket purchases of securities issued in jurisdic -tions experiencing a deterioration in financing 
conditions not warranted by country- specific 
fundamentals. Any decision by the Governing 
Council to activate the TPI will be based on a 
comprehensive assessment of market and 
transmission indicators. In particular, the Gov -
erning Council will consider several criteria to 
assess whether the jurisdictions in which the 
Eurosystem may conduct purchases under the 
TPI pursue sound and sustainable fiscal and 
macroeconomic policies.
The scheduled reduction in net asset purchases 
also further weakened growth in the broad 
monetary aggregate M3. By contrast, loans to 
non- financial corporations and households in 
the euro area rose steeply. In the case of enter -
prises, it was especially the massive trade re -
strictions and the increased purchase prices 
that drove demand for credit. In this context, 
banks tightened their standards for loans to en -
terprises and housing loans significantly. They 
justified this on the grounds of a perceived in -
crease in credit risk and a decrease in their risk 
tolerance.
German economic output 
stagnates: war in Ukraine and 
major purchasing power losses
Economic growth in Germany for the first quar -
ter of 2022 was recently revised significantly 
upwards, to 0.8%. Economic output thus re -
turned to roughly pre- pandemic levels. In the 
second quarter, however, seasonally adjusted 
real gross domestic product (GDP) stagnated 
compared with the previous quarter (according 
to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate). 
The economy was caught between opposing 
forces in the second quarter. Although the 
elimination of most coronavirus mitigation 
measures lent a strong boost to previously be -
leaguered service providers, surging prices and 
uncertainty associated with the war in Ukraine 
put pressure on households and enterprises. In -
dustry was also confronted with weaker de -
mand and the persistence of marked supply Monetary policy: 
ECB Governing 
Council ends net 
asset purchases 
under the APP, 
raises key inter -
est rates and …
… approves 
new Transmis -
sion Protection 
InstrumentMonetary 
growth in the 
euro area flag -
ging further
German eco -
nomic output 
stagnated in Q2 
2022Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
8

bottlenecks. Shortages of materials weighed 
on the construction sector, too, on top of a 
lack of labour. Furthermore, construction activ -
ity had expanded sharply in the first quarter 
owing to favourable weather conditions, which 
was followed by a countermovement in the 
second quarter.
On the demand side, the economy was buoyed 
mainly by private consumption in the second 
quarter. The elimination of coronavirus mitiga -
tion measures went hand in hand with a strong 
increase in consumer spending on services to 
which access had previously been restricted. 
Exports also provided a boost. Business invest -
ment in new machinery and equipment is likely 
to have risen only marginally owing to the high 
level of uncertainty and supply bottlenecks. 
Construction investment is likely to have fallen 
sharply, though.
Credit growth remained robust, however, with 
banks in Germany once again strongly expand -
ing their lending to non- financial corporations 
and households in the second quarter. The 
funds borrowed by enterprises were mainly 
used to cover short- term financing needs for 
inventories and working capital. Securing bank 
lending rates, which were still relatively favour -
able compared with bond yields, also played a 
role. In addition, households’ demand for loans 
for house purchase, in particular, remained ele -
vated despite higher lending rates and signifi -
cantly tighter credit standards and terms and 
conditions.
The labour market’s rapid catch- up process lost 
considerable momentum following the lifting 
of pandemic restrictions. Nevertheless, employ -
ment continued to rise in the reporting quarter. 
Employers made use of short- time working to 
only a relatively small extent. Whilst unemploy -
ment increased considerably starting in early 
June 2022, this was due solely to the fact that 
Ukrainian refugees were included in Germany’s 
social security system. Positive expectations re -
garding future developments were down -
graded slightly.Negotiated wage growth in the second quarter 
of 2022 was weaker than in the preceding 
quarter, during which high bonus payments in 
industry and coronavirus bonuses temporarily 
caused the growth rate to soar. However, ad -
justing for these bonus payments, negotiated 
wages rose more sharply in the second quarter 
than in the first, climbing by 2.1%. Actual earn -
ings are likely to have once again risen more 
strongly than negotiated wages in the second 
quarter, with growth being hardly any smaller 
than in the first quarter. This was due primarily 
to the significantly higher number of hours 
worked in a year- on- year comparison owing to 
the massive drop in short- time working in 
2022.
At present, growth in negotiated wages is still 
being driven by old collective agreements, 
which were concluded in an environment of 
lower inflation rates and pandemic- related 
challenges. That said, some new pay deals con -
cluded in the second quarter, in which inflation 
had risen sharply, were slightly higher than pre -
viously. Despite this, they fell well short of the 
annual consumer inflation rate. The still high 
level of uncertainty, stemming first and fore -
most from the effects of the war in Ukraine, 
as well as the sometimes high cost burden on 
enterprises, stood in the way of higher pay 
deals. These dampening factors still apply, and 
the scope for pay increases is being narrowed 
by rising energy import prices. However, the 
ongoing loss of purchasing power due to high 
inflation is likely to play an increasingly import -
ant role in upcoming wage negotiations. Wage 
pressures are also likely to be higher than in the 
second quarter owing to growing labour mar -
ket shortages.
Inflation rate likely to reach 
new highs in Q4
The exceptionally strong rise in seasonally ad -
justed harmonised consumer prices (HICP) con -
tinued into the second quarter, too. Energy 
prices went up as crude oil prices continued to Private con -
sumption and 
exports buoyed 
economy
Continued 
robust credit 
growth
Economic strains 
destroying 
momentum of 
labour market 
catch- upNegotiated 
wages excluding 
bonus payments 
still up moder -
ately in Q2
Recent wage 
agreements con -
tain higher rates
Inflation in Q2 
still extremely 
dynamicDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
9

increase. This development obscured the tem -
porary reduction in fuel taxes (fuel rebate). Fur -
thermore, electricity and gas tariffs were again 
raised significantly in the second quarter. Prices 
for food and non- energy industrial goods were 
somewhat higher again than in the previous 
quarter. For the latter, rising commodity costs 
and supply bottlenecks are likely to have been 
the main factors playing a role. The cost of ser -
vices continued to rise markedly up to May. In 
June, however, prices fell distinctly. This was 
due to the introduction of the €9 ticket for 
local public transport. Like the fuel rebate, it is 
part of the June relief package and is available 
for three months. In annual terms, average 
HICP inflation rose to 8.3% in the second quar -
ter of 2022, while the rate excluding energy 
and food hit 3.7%.
In July, prices surged again on the month in 
seasonally adjusted terms. Food prices, in par -
ticular, continued to rise very sharply. Energy 
prices did not fall, despite the renewable en -
ergy (EEG) levy being abolished and crude oil 
prices declining. This was offset mainly by 
higher gas prices. Overall, annual inflation 
climbed from 8.2% to 8.5%. Another marked 
rise in the inflation rate is expected once the 
measures contained in the relief package expire 
in September. The increase in the general statu -
tory minimum wage and the depreciation of 
the euro will push it up further in the coming 
months. In addition, a levy on gas tariffs is set 
to be introduced in October and the VAT rate 
on gas reduced at the same time. In total, the 
inflation rate could reach a level of 10% in the 
fourth quarter. However, the inflation outlook 
remains extremely uncertain, especially due to 
the unclear situation on the commodity mar -
kets.
Declining economic output 
now much more likely 
in Q4 2022 and Q1 2023
Economic developments in Germany will be 
impaired in the third quarter and beyond by unfavourable developments in the gas market. 
According to the current assessment, German 
economic output in the third quarter is likely to 
stagnate again more or less. The high level of 
uncertainty surrounding the supply of gas over 
the coming winter and the sharp increases in 
prices are likely to place a considerable strain 
on households and enterprises. The market re -
search institute GfK established that consumer 
sentiment is poor, and firms’ business expect -
ations fell to very low levels. According to ifo 
Institute surveys, supply bottlenecks in industry 
and construction are still a major problem. 
Moreover, the shortage of skilled workers 
reached an all- time high of late. In addition to 
supply- side strains, demand is flagging in in -
dustry and construction. By contrast, the elim -
ination of coronavirus protection measures 
continues to provide positive stimuli for previ -
ously beleaguered service providers and related 
private consumption. In addition, the latest 
data suggest that industry and foreign trade 
have been able to withstand adverse factors 
until recently. However, the probability of GDP 
declining in the approaching fourth quarter of 
2022 and the first quarter of 2023 has in -
creased considerably owing to unfavourable 
developments in the gas market.
Government deficit down 
this year
Fiscal policy continues to stabilise macroeco -
nomic developments, supporting households 
and enterprises with numerous measures this 
year as well. Nevertheless, the deficit is pro -
jected to be significantly lower than in 2021 
(3.7% of GDP) as the fiscal burden caused by 
the coronavirus crisis eases. In the first half of 
the year, this was reflected in the sharp rise in 
tax revenue and the fall in pandemic expend -
iture. Accordingly, the budget outturns of cen -
tral government, state governments and the 
Federal Employment Agency improved consid -
erably in the financial statistics. As things cur -
rently stand, new burdens from the war in New records for 
inflation rate 
likely in Q4Economic 
 output likely to 
stagnate in Q3, 
decline much 
more probable 
in Q4 2022 and 
Q1 2023  
Supportive fiscal 
policy will con -
tinue this year, 
but deficit likely 
to declineDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
10

Ukraine and measures to offset high prices will 
not outweigh this recovery.
Clear structural deficits 
 expected in coming years
At present, the deficit looks set to decline fur -
ther in the coming years. However, a significant 
structural deficit is to be expected due to cen -
tral government in particular. The Federal Gov -
ernment is planning to resume compliance 
with the standard limit under the debt brake 
from 2023, but this will be compounded by 
deficits generated by the use of existing re -
serves and in special funds. Altogether, this 
provides scope for structural central govern -
ment deficits of just over 1½% of GDP on aver -
age between 2023 and 2026.
Nonetheless, the outlook for this year and the 
coming years is uncertain. The plans for the 
2022 and 2023 Federal budgets still contain 
buffers, yet fiscal risks remain, especially as a 
result of the war in Ukraine and a potential en -
ergy shortage, and new fiscal measures are 
under discussion. Moreover, there is little trans -
parency regarding how exactly the extensive 
leeway for deficits in the special funds is to be 
used.
Fiscal policy in a difficult 
macroeconomic environment
German public finances are still well positioned 
to stabilise the economy even in the event of 
less favourable developments. Should the 
economy weaken further, the government will 
first prop up income and demand automatically 
via the tax and social security systems. It is im -
portant that new supplementary support meas -
ures do not undermine price signals for supply 
and demand. High energy prices, for example, 
are a key incentive to reduce energy consump -
tion. Ultimately, the government is only able to redistribute higher energy costs, which are re -
flected in rising prices – it is not able to provide 
enterprises and households with comprehen -
sive relief, as the procurement of energy sources 
from abroad is now absorbing a larger share of 
economic output.
From today’s perspective, a broader deficit-  
financed fiscal stimulus is still not warranted. 
This is because price pressures are high, and 
supply- side disruptions persist. Additional gov -
ernment stimulus to demand is therefore likely 
to have relatively little impact in real terms and 
may threaten to amplify price pressures further. 
Any new measures deemed to be necessary 
would have to be counterfinanced elsewhere.
As things currently stand, a return to compli -
ance with the standard limit under the debt 
brake next year remains advisable. Incidentally, 
this will not require slamming the brakes on fis -
cal policy, which would choke economic devel -
opment. First, the deficit will shrink automatic -
ally, as it were, as coronavirus support meas -
ures that are no longer needed expire. Second, 
there is considerable scope for deficits beyond 
the debt brake’s net credit limit from reserves 
and special funds.
Trust in sound public finances is important to 
ensure that, amongst other things, the govern -
ment can provide stability in crisis situations. 
Fiscal rules can safeguard sound public finances 
and thus establish confidence, which, in turn, 
also helps to ensure a stability- oriented monet -
ary policy. To achieve this, however, the regular 
limits of the rules must be binding and must 
not be undermined. This applies to the German 
debt brake, but also to the European rules in 
particular. Emergency clauses have their place 
in crisis situations, but their use should remain 
an exception and plausible explanations should 
be given for their use. Measures financed by 
contingency borrowing should also be suited 
to counteracting the specific emergency situ -
ation.From 2023, 
significant  struc -
tural debt likely 
for some years
Uncertainty 
remains high
Government 
assistance to 
households and 
enterprises 
should not 
impede price 
signalsBroader deficit- 
financed fiscal 
stimulus is still 
not called for
Return to 
 regular fiscal 
rules next year 
remains 
 advisable …
… in order to 
strengthen 
confidence  in 
reliable public 
finances as wellDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
11

Global and European setting
Global economic 
 developments
A number of stress factors put the global econ -
omy under pressure in the second quarter of 
2022. As a result, global economic output 
shrank markedly. In China, the strict restrictions 
imposed to combat the pandemic considerably 
dampened economic output. Moreover, per -
sistently high consumer price inflation in nu -
merous countries dragged on consumption. 
Aggregate output in the United States declined 
somewhat, also owing to high inflation rates 
and monetary policy tightening. Much the 
same was true of the United Kingdom. In the 
euro area, economic output increased, but for 
the most part this was thanks to the extensive 
rollback of pandemic- related restrictions and 
the subsequent recovery in high- contact ser -
vices sectors. In Japan, too, the economy bene -fited from relaxed containment measures. At 
the same time, global sentiment has deterior -
ated significantly in recent months. The global 
economy is now on a fragile path, and uncer -
tainty about future developments is exception -
ally high.
Global industrial output declined markedly in 
the second quarter. The measures taken by 
China to contain the Omicron wave of COVID- 
19 placed a massive strain on the Chinese 
economy at the start of the quarter. This also 
had a knock-  on effect on other countries. In 
the euro area, the war in Ukraine was an add -
itional drag on industrial activity. In the early 
days of the war, in particular, supply chain dis -
ruptions led to production losses. More re -
cently, higher energy prices and uncertainty 
about energy supply have had a dampening ef -
fect on demand. In advanced economies, con -
sumption preferences also shifted again. De -
mand for services has been picking up signifi -
cantly ever since pandemic- related restrictions 
were largely lifted. This also comes at the ex -
pense of demand for industrial goods. Accord -
ing to surveys among purchasing managers, 
weak demand is now a key drag on global in -
dustry. Enterprises reported a drop in new 
orders for the first time since mid- 2020. By 
contrast, supply- side bottlenecks have become 
somewhat less of an issue. Accordingly, deliv -
ery times barely increased, and price pressures 
eased somewhat.
Many commodity prices have fallen markedly 
in recent weeks owing to weaker global de -
mand. This was also the case for crude oil and 
mineral oil products. Despite low inventories 
and declining production capacities, prices 
have dropped distinctly since June. A barrel of 
Brent crude oil has only cost just under US$100 
in August so far, almost the same as when the 
war in Ukraine started. Prices of industrial raw 
materials and food had already declined signifi -
cantly across the board in June and July.Global economy 
contracted in Q2 
2022
Strict lockdowns 
in China, wan -
ing demand and 
war in Ukraine 
weighed on 
industry
Commodity 
prices down 
across the 
board, …Global economic indicators
Sources: CPB, IATA Passenger Traffic Report, national data, Ha-
ver Analytics and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Bundesbank ex-
trapolation  of  CPB  data.  2 Ratio  of  passenger  kilometres  to 
available seat kilometres.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 202280859095100105110Seasonally adjusted
30405060708090Industrial production1
Q4 2019 = 100
Memo item:
World excl. China
Air transport passenger load factor2
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
12

By contrast, European gas prices have recently 
risen sharply. This was mainly due to Russia’s 
decision to deliver less gas to Europe via the 
Nord Stream 1 pipeline and concerns about a 
complete suspension of deliveries.1 As a result, 
European gas prices have doubled in recent 
months, reaching just over €200 per megawatt 
hour in the first half of August and thus ex -
ceeding their long- term average by more than 
800%. Consumer energy prices therefore rose 
much more strongly in the euro area than in 
the United States, for example (see the box on 
pp. 14 ff.). Forward prices for future gas deliver -
ies indicate that prices can be expected to re -
main high this coming winter.
The further increase in natural gas prices con -
tributed to another rise in consumer price infla -
tion in advanced economies. Year- on- year con -
sumer price inflation reached 8.3% in July. 
However, even for the narrow definition of in -
flation which excludes energy and food, the 
rate has stood at just over 5% for a few months 
now. Large portions of the basket of goods are 
currently seeing exceptionally strong price rises. 
This is due, not least, to the high cost pressure. 
Looking ahead, the rise in prices at the up -
stream stages should gradually moderate in the 
light of the slowdown in global economic ac -
tivity and, in some cases, deteriorating com -
modity prices. The upside risks are high, how -
ever. Further price surges would be expected 
for energy, especially if Russian gas deliveries 
were to be suspended altogether.2 Moreover, 
owing to the tight labour market situation 
in  some advanced economies, robust wage 
growth could lead to undesirable second- round 
effects.
The staff of the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) also once again stressed the upside risks … but further 
surge in Euro -
pean gas prices
Increased 
consumer  price 
inflationCommodity prices
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Haver Analytics and HWWI. 
• Latest figures: Average of 1 to 18 August 2022 for  crude oil, 
1 to 17 August 2022 for natural gas and 1 to 12 August 2022 
for commodity prices excluding energy.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 2022203040507090120Monthly averages, log scale
51020305070100150200
Natural gas (TTF)
in euro per MWh
2020 = 100, US$ basisCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
80100120140160180 Commodity prices excl. energy
Sources:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  national  data. 
* EU, Canada, Japan, Norway, Switzerland, the United King-
dom and the United States. 1 Consumer prices excluding en-
ergy and food; additionally excluding alcoholic beverages and 
tobacco  products  for  the  EU,  Norway,  Switzerland  and  the 
United Kingdom.
Deutsche BundesbankConsumer prices in industrial countries*
0123456789
+++++++++Year-on-year percentage change
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022Headline Core rate1
1 The shutdown of a US liquefied natural gas terminal due 
to a fire also played a role.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a) for a description of 
possible developments in the German economy in the 
scenario of a worsening of the Russia- Ukraine conflict, 
which also includes a complete permanent suspension of 
Russian energy exports to the EU. Outcomes for the euro 
area can be found in European Central Bank (2022a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
13

High infl  ation rates in the euro area and the United States: 
similarities and differences
The past few months have seen infl  ation rates 
in the euro area reach new highs. During this 
time, price increases have spread to an ever- 
growing number of product groups.1 The indi-
cators of underlying infl  ation are thus clearly 
pointing upwards.2 In this respect, infl  ation 
developments in the euro area increasingly re-
semble those in the United States. The causes 
behind the increased rates of infl  ation are also 
likely to be similar. These include the steep rise 
in the prices of many commodities, pandemic- 
related supply disruptions and the long- 
standing, strong global demand for goods.
However, there are clear differences between 
the two currency areas in terms of the signifi  -
cance of the various drivers. For instance, the 
war in Ukraine and the resulting price surges 
in key commodities are playing a much greater 
role in the euro area. The rise in consumer en-
ergy prices has been distinctly stronger here than in the United States, largely due to Eur-
ope’s heavier dependence on supply from 
Russia. In addition, the euro’s depreciation 
has also made imports more expensive. Ex-
cluding energy and food, consumer prices in 
the euro area have so far risen much less 
sharply than in the United States. It is a similar 
story when looking at the GDP defl  ator as a 
measure of domestic infl  ation.3
An analysis using a structural vector autore-
gression (SVAR) model underscores these dif-
ferences.4 In the United States, domestic fac-
tors were the dominant drivers of the rise in 
infl  ation. In the euro area, just over half of 
that rise is explained by external factors.
One reason for this was the difference in the 
way fi  scal and labour market policy in the two 
currency areas responded to the pandemic- 
induced economic slump in the spring of 
2020. The United States relied predominantly 
on extensive fi  scal support measures for 
1 In July, around three- quarters of the 94 HICP com-
ponents rose at annual rates of more than 2%, with 
just over half actually rising at over 4%. Up to mid- 
2021, infl  ationary pressures had still been far less 
broad- based. That is part of the reason why ECB ex-
perts long ascribed the high rates of infl  ation in the 
euro area and the United States to temporary special 
factors to a large extent; see European Central Bank 
(2021).
2 These include, for example, trimmed HICP means, 
which exclude components with particularly high or 
low infl  ation rates. See European Central Bank (2018).
3 European Central Bank (2022b) reaches a similar 
conclusion.
4 Separate models are estimated for the two currency 
areas. Each model comprises six indicators for the 
period from Q1 1995 to Q1 2022: real GDP , the con-
sumer price index, hourly wages, the unemployment 
rate, oil prices and the index of global economic con-
ditions devised by Baumeister et al. (2022). A combin-
ation of sign and magnitude restrictions is employed 
to identify two demand shocks (domestic, global) and 
four supply shocks (productivity, labour supply, wage 
mark- up and oil). The quarterly models are set up in 
levels with four lags. The analysis is based on Bayesian 
estimations with standard Normal- Wishart priors. We 
apply the method suggested by Lenza and Primiceri 
(2022) to prevent the extraordinary fl  uctuations seen 
in 2020 from showing up unbridled in the coeffi   cients.Consumer prices and trend measures
0369Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Sources: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Eurostat, ECB and 
Haver Analytics. 1 Mean trimmed by 16% (United States) and 
15% (Euro area), respectively. 2  Excluding energy and food.
Deutsche BundesbankUnited States Euro area
0369
0369
0369
GDP deflatorsCore rate 2 (excl. E+F)Trim1CPI/HICP
JulyJulyJulyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
14

households.5 Meanwhile, barely any action 
was taken to stabilise employment. As a re-
sult, unemployment rose strongly at fi  rst, and 
some of the labour force even withdrew from 
the labour market. This meant that, as the 
economy rebounded, there were widespread 
labour shortages, and wage growth intensi-
fi  ed. In the euro area, by contrast, the focus 
was on protecting jobs and fi  rms, for example 
through the use of short- time work schemes. 
Consequently, there was barely any change in 
unemployment and labour force participa-
tion.6 Unlike in the United States, however, 
households had to bear income losses.
In the estimation, these developments are re-
fl  ected in the sizeable contributions made by 
domestic demand and the labour market- 
specifi  c shocks for the United States. They ac-
count for around four- fi  fths of the rise in infl  a-
tion there but just under half of the increase 
in infl  ation in the euro area. By contrast, exter-
nal shocks, especially the global demand 
shocks, played a much greater role in the euro 
area.7 According to the estimation, domestic 
demand shocks only started making a notable 
contribution to consumer price infl  ation from 
the second half of 2021. In 2021, oil supply 
shocks were not yet a major factor. This 
changed in the fi  rst quarter of 2022, particu-
larly in the euro area.8
Over the medium term, infl  ation rates are gen-
erally expected to return to more moderate 
levels.9 In the United States, fi  scal and monet-
ary policy tightening will curb growth in de-
mand. This is also likely to have an impact on 
the euro area. The normalisation of monetary 
policy now under way there too should also 
have a dampening infl  uence. In addition, the 
infl  ationary effects of the energy price shocks 
should gradually subside. This infl  ation outlook 
is subject to considerable upside risks, how-
ever. For the euro area in particular, there is 
the looming prospect of further supply shocks 
given its reliance on gas from Russia. More-
over, if infl  ation stays above target for a pro-
longed period of time, higher wage settle-
ments become more likely. Second- round ef-
fects of this nature would signifi  cantly hamper 
infl  ation’s return to target. This makes it all the more important to stop bolstering infl  ation on 
the demand side. Monetary policy normalisa-
tion should therefore be pursued swiftly.
5 Direct payments and a temporary, generous expan-
sion of benefi  ts for the unemployed were among such 
measures.
6 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b).
7 Impulses from last year are also playing a role at 
present, as the infl  ationary effects of global demand 
shocks are comparatively slow to unfold.
8 Gas supply shocks cannot be separately identifi  ed in 
the models.
9 At the moment, Eurosystem experts are working on 
the assumption that infl  ation will be roughly back in 
line with the target come 2024. The members of the 
Federal Reserve System’s Federal Open Market Com-
mittee expect similar for the United States. See Euro-
pean Central Bank (2022a) and Federal Open Market 
Committee (2022).Historical decomposition of consumer 
price inflation*
* Contributions of identified shocks derived from a structural 
VAR model with sign and magnitude restrictions.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
2021 20220.500.51.01.52.0
–++++
–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5+2.0+2.5
Euro areaUnited StatesDomestic factorsContributions of shocks to deviation
in percentage point terms
Global factors
Wage mark-up
Domestic demand
ProductivityDeviation from unconditional forecast;
quarter-on-quarter percentage change
Labour supplyGlobal demand
Oil supplyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
15

to the global inflation outlook, which it raised 
again significantly in its regular July update.3 
The IMF staff now expect a rate of 8.3% for 
this year. At the same time, they reduced their 
global growth forecast for 2022 to 3.2%. This 
was mainly due to the significantly reduced 
growth forecasts for the two largest economies 
in the world. For the United States, the down -
ward revision was explained by the erosion of 
purchasing power and the impact of a swifter 
tightening of monetary policy. For China, the 
key reason was the economic consequences of 
the strict lockdown in the spring. The IMF also 
assessed the outlook for some euro area coun -
tries to be gloomier again in view of the throt -
tled energy supply and tighter financing condi -
tions.
China
In China, the extensive restrictions imposed to 
contain the Omicron wave had a significant im -
pact on economic output in the second quarter. 
Seasonally adjusted real gross domestic product 
(GDP) fell 2.6% below the level of the previous 
quarter. This was the first decline since the 
slump in early 2020, also caused by the pan -
demic. Private consumption was particularly af -
fected. Retail sales were down 4.6% year on 
year. By contrast, investment and exports held 
up relatively well, partly because the govern -
ment strove to minimise disruptions in produc -
tion facilities and in the operation of ports.
With many containment measures having been 
lifted, a recovery is expected in the current 
quarter. However, a number of risks could de -
liver a painful hit to the outlook for the future. 
Given China’s adherence to the zero- COVID 
policy, even a localised resurgence of the pan -
demic is likely to lead to extensive lockdowns 
being imposed once more. The number of re -
gions affected by restrictions has already risen 
again of late. Another strain is the downturn in 
the housing market, which has already led to 
liquidity shortages at some real estate com -
panies and entails financial stability risks. In addition, local administrative authorities no 
longer have land sales as a key source of rev -
enue. This reduces the scope for measures to 
support the economy. Consumer price inflation 
in China remains within relatively tight limits. 
The annual rate of inflation in July was the 
highest in two years, but was still low by inter -
national standards at 2.7%. Excluding energy 
and food, it was even lower at just 0.8%.
Other selected emerging 
 market economies
In India, the economic recovery is likely to have 
strengthened again in the second quarter fol -
lowing the period of weakness at the begin -
ning of the year. Industrial production increased 
more strongly in the spring, especially automo -
tive manufacturing. Exports of goods in US dol -
lar terms were also significantly higher on the 
quarter. However, imports rose even more 
steeply. On balance, the trade deficit grew 
markedly. Consumer price inflation picked up 
again in the second quarter, particularly in view 
of higher food prices, reaching 7.3% year on 
year. The Indian central bank therefore raised 
its policy rate further to 5.4% in August.
In Brazil, economic activity is likely to have 
picked up slightly in the second quarter. Indus -
trial output rose by just under 1% on the quar -
ter in seasonally adjusted terms. The manufac -
turing sector saw distinct growth, particularly 
in automotive and mechanical engineering. By 
contrast, mining suffered from falling com -
modity prices. Retail sales were up again mark -
edly in price- adjusted terms, despite persist -
ently strong inflation. Consumer price inflation 
climbed further to 11.9% in the second quarter 
of 2022. The central bank has therefore con -
tinued to tighten its monetary policy. The policy 
rate recently rose to 13.75%.
In Russia, the far- reaching sanctions imposed 
by western countries are increasingly being felt. IMF again raised 
inflation forecast 
significantly
Economic 
growth halted 
by lockdowns 
in Q2
Obstacles to a 
smooth recoveryStronger recov -
ery in India
Economic activ -
ity somewhat 
more lively in 
Brazil
3 See International Monetary Fund (2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
16

According to data from the national statistical 
office, real GDP fell by 4.0% year on year in the 
second quarter. Manufacturing output de -
creased significantly. Private consumption was 
hit even harder. Investment activity was likely 
also impaired by Russia’s access to foreign 
technologies being cut off by the sanctions and 
the increased outflow of capital. By contrast, 
revenue from energy exports was still consider -
able given the high oil and gas prices. How -
ever, the EU’s tightening of the oil embargo is 
likely to make Russian oil exports much more 
difficult in the coming months. The increase in 
consumer price inflation in the first few months 
of the war recently weakened markedly in view 
of the stabilisation of the rouble. The annual 
rate fell from 17.8% in April to 15.1% in July. 
With inflationary pressures easing, the central 
bank has cut the policy rate from 20% to 8% in 
five steps since April. It was thus actually 150 
basis points lower than the level at the begin -
ning of the war in Ukraine.
United States
In the United States, economic activity weak -
ened further in the second quarter. According 
to the initial estimate, after adjustment for 
price and seasonal factors, GDP was down 
0.2% on the previous quarter, in which it had 
already dropped by 0.4%. The sharply reduced 
build- up of inventories and waning housing in -
vestment were the main factors behind the re -
newed decline. Private non- residential invest -
ment stagnated. One reason for this weakness 
in investment is likely to have been the tighten -
ing of monetary policy by the US Federal Re -
serve System, which rapidly raised its federal 
funds rate recently to combat high inflation. At 
the same time, continued strong price rises 
weighed on consumer sentiment. Household 
consumption expenditure in price- adjusted 
terms rose only slightly in the second quarter. 
In addition, the decline in public demand 
dampened economic output. With domestic 
demand weakening, imports barely increased, 
whereas exports expanded strongly.The US labour market has so far been defying 
the slackening of domestic activity. In July, the 
unemployment rate fell to its pre- pandemic 
level. Employment in the high- contact services 
sectors, in particular, recently picked up more 
strongly. Given the high demand for labour, 
wages have seen a persistent, steep rise. Con -
sumer prices continued to increase even more 
strongly. The rate of inflation, as measured by 
the consumer price index (CPI), dipped only 
slightly in July, to 8.5%. Against this backdrop, 
the Federal Reserve raised its federal funds rate 
by 75 basis points in June and again in July, and 
indicated that combating inflation is its number 
one priority.
Japan
The Japanese economy continued on its recov -
ery path following the first- quarter stagnation. 
According to the first official estimate, real GDP 
in the second quarter grew by a seasonally ad -Russian econ -
omy increasingly 
affected 
by western 
sanctions
Renewed decline 
in GDP in Q2Labour market 
still extremely 
tight
Slight economic 
growthReal GDP in selected major 
emerging market economies
Sources: National Bureau of Statistics of China, Central Statistics 
Office of India, Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics, 
Rosstat  –  Federal  State  Statistics  Service,  and  Bundesbank 
calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 228894100106Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, log scale
RussiaIndia
768288941001061128894100106112
BrazilChina
8894100106Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
17

justed 0.5% on the previous quarter. This was 
the first time that the pre- crisis level had been 
exceeded. The most important driver of the 
economic recovery was private consumption. 
Households spent significantly more on high-  
contact services once pandemic- related restric -
tions were rolled back. Business investment 
also went up fairly substantially. Disruptions 
caused by supply bottlenecks as a result of 
lockdowns in China were only short- lived. La -
bour market conditions continued to improve 
in line with the macroeconomic recovery. The 
unemployment rate fell slightly in the second 
quarter to a seasonally adjusted 2.6%. Annual 
CPI inflation climbed to 2.6% in July, with the 
increase in fuel prices being dampened by sub -
sidised wholesale prices, amongst other things. 
The Japanese central bank maintained its ex -
pansionary stance as it considered the increase 
in inflation to be temporary.United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, economic output fell 
slightly in the second quarter. According to the 
initial estimate, price and seasonally adjusted 
GDP was down 0.1% on the quarter. Sectoral 
developments varied quite considerably. While 
construction activity picked up, manufacturing 
output stagnated. The services sector, which is 
particularly important for the economy as a 
whole, even suffered losses. Whereas the re -
covery in hotel and restaurant services con -
tinued at a brisk pace after pandemic- related 
restrictions were largely rolled back, activity in 
the health sector decreased as COVID-  19 test -
ing was scaled back. Owing to the steep rise in 
prices, consumer confidence fell to a new low. 
In keeping with this, private consumption de -
clined slightly and trade output contracted. 
However, the labour market situation remained 
favourable. The unemployment rate rose mar -
ginally to 3.9%. Wage growth slowed some -
what and continued to lag behind consumer 
price inflation. The year- on- year rate of the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) 
rose to 10.1% recently. Against this backdrop, 
the Bank of England continued to tighten its 
monetary policy and stressed the possibility of 
further interest rate hikes in the coming 
months.
Poland
In Poland, as in other central and eastern Euro -
pean EU Member States, the robust economic 
upturn was abruptly halted by Russia’s attack 
on Ukraine (see the box on pp. 20 ff.). In the 
second quarter, real GDP declined by no less 
than 2.3% in seasonally adjusted terms. Senti -
ment had already become increasingly sub -
dued since March, and industrial output and 
price- adjusted retail sales have fallen since 
April. Even so, industrial output still exceeded 
the previous year’s level by just over 10% in 
June, indicating the strength of the preceding 
upturn. This was also one reason why the un -
employment rate hit a new low of 2.7% in June Economic 
output  down 
slightly in Q2
Upswing halted 
by war in 
UkraineReal GDP in selected industrial countries
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Cabinet Office of Japan, 
Office for National Statistics, Statistics Poland and Bundesbank 
calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 229095100105110Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, log scale
United KingdomUnited States
9095100105
9095100105
PolandJapan
80859095100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
18

after seasonal adjustment and why gross aver -
age wages in the corporate sector rose by 13% 
on the year this month. Despite various gov -
ernment measures to keep prices down, con -
sumer price inflation continued to climb to 
15.6% in July, mainly owing to sharply rising 
energy and food prices. However, even the 
core rate rose to 9.3%. With that in mind, the 
Polish central bank raised its policy rate in two 
further increments in June and July, by a total 
of 125 basis points to 6.5%.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
In the euro area, economic output continued 
to grow in the second quarter of 2022, despite 
the strain from the war on Ukraine and high in -
flation rates. According to Eurostat’s flash esti -
mate, GDP rose by 0.6% on the quarter after 
price and seasonal adjustment, thereby ex -
ceeding its pre- pandemic level by 1.4%. This 
growth was probably largely attributable to a 
marked increase in activity in various services 
sectors. The hotel and restaurant services sec -
tor, in particular, benefited considerably from 
reopening effects and the resurgence of tour -
ism following the flattening of the pandemic 
wave in the winter. Overall, however, private 
consumption suffered from the sharp rise in 
prices. The disruptions caused by the war on 
Ukraine and the uncertain outlook also slowed 
the recovery in industry. The adverse effects of 
the war and the sharp price increases are likely 
to be felt more strongly in the second half of 
the year. According to surveys, both current 
business conditions and the outlook deterior -
ated markedly around the middle of the year in 
most economic sectors.
In terms of the consequences of the Russian in -
vasion, the sharp rise in energy prices is prob -
ably the largest current source of stress in the 
euro area. The associated loss of purchasing 
power is significantly restricting households’ 
financial leeway, while, at the same time, en -
terprises are experiencing a massive rise in costs. In addition, uncertainty over energy sup -
ply in some Member States is making produc -
tion planning more difficult, especially in 
energy- intensive industries. The return of tem -
porary disruptions in international supply chains 
as a result of China’s zero- COVID strategy was 
a further stress factor. Moreover, global de -
mand weakened over the course of the quar -
ter, which is likely to also be due to the tighten -
ing of monetary policy in many countries. The 
economic impact of the coronavirus pandemic 
in the euro area in the second quarter was 
limited to loss of working hours due to sickness 
and quarantining.
Private consumption is likely to have increased 
only slightly overall in the second quarter. The 
increase was largely attributable to the hotel 
and restaurant services sector, which benefited 
from the lifting of pandemic- related restrictions 
and the recovery in domestic tourism. By con -
trast, retail sales declined markedly in price-  
adjusted terms, while the slump in new car 
registrations also persisted. After falling in real 
terms in the first quarter, disposable incomes 
probably continued to decline in the second 
quarter as a result of high inflation rates, des -
pite the fiscal relief measures in some Member 
States. Moreover, uncertainty about house -
holds’ future financial situations increased. This 
is clearly evident, for example, in the slump in 
consumer confidence revealed in the European 
Commission’s surveys.
Growth in gross fixed capital formation is likely 
to have slowed in the second quarter.4 Con -
struction investment probably did not maintain 
its high pace of growth from the previous quar -
ter. Investment in machinery and equipment is 
also likely to have lost momentum. At any rate, 
capital goods producers’ domestic sales 
showed no increase in price- adjusted terms of 
late. In fact, expenditure on transport equip -Economic out -
put grew again 
in Q2
Variety of stress 
factorsOnly moderate 
recovery in 
private  con -
sumption
Investment 
remains on 
an upward 
trajectory 
4 Excluding Ireland. For several years now, the statistical re -
cording of investment as a whole, and of investment in in -
tellectual property in particular, has been strongly influ -
enced by the strategic planning of multinational enterprises 
in that country. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
19

The central and eastern European EU Member States 
between the coronavirus crisis and the war in Ukraine
Russia’s attack on Ukraine abruptly halted 
the successful economic development seen 
over a number of years in the central and 
eastern European EU Member States.1 This 
phase of expansion had driven the conver-
gence process forward, cleared the labour 
markets and created scope for steep wage 
increases. The central and eastern European 
EU Member States had also weathered the 
coronavirus crisis better than widely ex-
pected.2 Over the course of 2021 already, 
economic output in most of these countries 
returned to pre- crisis levels and the recovery 
appeared to be leading to a strong upturn 
in some cases. The positive trend in export 
activity was a key driver here, but private 
consumption was buoyant, too. There were 
even signs that the economy was overheat-
ing. Labour shortages were recorded and 
wages and consumer prices increased at a 
faster pace.
Owing to the favourable economic devel-
opments, the gap between the economies 
of the central and eastern European EU 
countries and the EU average – measured 
as per capita gross domestic product (GDP) 
adjusted for purchasing power parity (PPP) – 
narrowed further to 22.4% in 2021. This 
fi  gure had stood at 29.4% fi  ve years earlier. 
Only Slovakia and the Czech Republic, 
which are particularly heavily involved in the 
automotive sector, recorded a slight decline 
on the year. The Czech Republic was the 
frontrunner in terms of convergence, fol-
lowed closely by Slovenia, Lithuania and 
Estonia . Poland and Hungary, as well as 
Romania , Latvia, Croatia and Slovakia, were 
slightly further behind.3 Bulgaria was the 
country with the largest lag in terms of con-
vergence.
During the recovery from the economic 
downturn triggered by the pandemic, infl  a-
tion in the central and eastern European EU 
countries already went up considerably, averaging over 8% on the year by early 
2022. Infl  ation had still tended to be rather 
subdued in this group of countries in the 
preceding years. A key factor in the marked 
surge in infl  ation was the dramatic rise in 
commodity prices and in the prices of other 
imported goods. Domestic economic fac-
tors also contributed to this, however. On 
account of the favourable economic devel-
opments, aggregate capacity utilisation was 
strong and the unemployment rate quickly 
returned to its previous low level following 
the coronavirus crisis. Wages had already 
risen considerably before the crisis, and this 
development continued during the recovery 
phase. In 2021, gross wages per employee 
increased by no less than 6.8%. Against this 
backdrop, the central banks of the non- 
euro area EU Member States in this region 
already commenced monetary policy tight-
ening over the course of last year.
There was a renewed sharp rise in energy 
and agricultural commodity prices as a re-
sult of Russia’s attack on Ukraine, causing 
infl  ation to climb further in the central and 
eastern European EU countries. Annual 
consumer price infl  ation reached 14.6% on 
average across these countries in July. Ex-
cluding energy and food, this fi  gure stood 
at 9.6%. In addition, the currencies of some 
countries have come under increased 
downward pressure. Geopolitical risks, but 
also rising external imbalances in a number 
of countries, played a role here. Monetary 
1 This group of countries comprises fi  ve euro area EU 
Member States (Slovenia, Slovakia, Estonia, Latvia and 
Lithuania) and six other EU Member States (Poland, 
the Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria and 
Croatia).
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021).
3 Eurostat data on Slovakia continue to raise ques-
tions. Measured at current prices and in euro, GDP per 
capita in Slovakia in 2021 clearly exceeded the average 
for the group of countries under review. It is only 
through the adjustment for purchasing power parity 
that Slovakia falls far behind in the convergence rank-
ing. See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), p. 20.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
20

policymakers have responded with further 
substantial tightening. Since the end of 
February, the Czech central bank has raised 
its policy rates to 7.00%, the Polish central 
bank to 6.50%, the Romanian central bank 
to 5.50% and the Hungarian central bank 
has even raised its policy rates to 10.75%. 
Furthermore, the Czech and Polish central 
banks have intervened in the foreign ex-
change market.
In the convergence assessment that has to 
be conducted by the ECB and the European 
Commission every two years, only Croatia 
fulfi  lled the price stability criterion this year. 
At 4.7% in the 12- month period up to April 
2022, the average infl  ation rate in Croatia 
remained just below the reference value4 of 
4.9%. Croatia also fulfi  lled the other con-
vergence criteria.5 Following a decision by 
the EU Council, Croatia will join the euro 
area on 1 January 2023.
The growth and convergence outlook for 
the central and eastern European EU Mem-
ber States deteriorated signifi  cantly of late. 
The direct trigger for this was Russia’s at-
tack on Ukraine and the sanctions subse-
quently imposed on Russia, as well as the 
countermeasures adopted by Russia. For his-
torical and geographical reasons, the cen-
tral and eastern European EU countries 
have had comparatively strong economic ties with Russia until now. Several of these 
countries have hitherto largely purchased 
their energy commodities from Russia. Rus-
sia has now halted its gas deliveries to 
Bulgaria  and Poland. The Baltic States are 
refraining from making further purchases 
of gas from Russia on their own initiative. 
Other countries are still highly dependent 
on Russian energy supplies. Although tran-
sitional rules regarding the EU ban on Rus-
sian oil imports, which is scheduled to take 
effect at the end of the year, apply in some 
cases, there are considerable risks in the 
short term owing to potential bottlenecks 
and rationing of gas supplies.
The extensive stoppage in other foreign 
trade with Russia is also weighing on the 
economic outlook of these countries. Rus-
sia’s importance as a sales market for the 
central and eastern European EU Member 
States has waned since the occupation of 
Crimea in 2014. In 2021, Russia accounted 
for only 2.5% of goods exports. However, 
in some countries, such as Latvia and Lithu-
ania, this share is still more than 10%. Fur-
thermore, economic activity slowed down 
4 The reference value is calculated using the average 
of the countries with the lowest infl  ation rates in this 
period (France, Finland and Greece) plus a margin of 
1.5 percentage points.
5 See European Central Bank (2022c) and European 
Commission (2022).Per capita GDP in the central and eastern European EU countries
As a percentage of the average per capita GDP in the EU27, adjusted for purchasing power parity
50 60 70 80 90
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The 2016 data for Slovakia are not included since they are not comparable owing to 
the recalculation of purchasing power parities in 2019.
Deutsche BundesbankCzech RepublicSloveniaPolandHungary
Estonia
LithuaniaLatvia
AverageSlovakia1
Croatia
RomaniaBulgaria 2016 2021 2020Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
21

considerably in most European countries as 
a result of the war against Ukraine, leading 
to a signifi  cant deterioration in the export 
prospects of the central and eastern Euro-
pean EU Member States overall.
In the short term, reducing high infl  ation is 
the most important challenge facing the 
central and eastern European EU Member 
States. The tightening of monetary policy, 
which is already very advanced in some 
cases, is likely to place an additional strain 
on economic activity. However, the slow-
down in economic activity should also help 
to calm the very tight labour markets in a 
number of countries, limit external imbal-
ances and thus lay the foundations for sus-
tainable growth. This is helped by the fact 
that investment may continue to grow des-
pite the tightening of monetary policy, par-
ticularly owing to the currently accelerated 
efforts to reorganise the energy infrastruc-
ture, the increase in defence spending and 
the promised substantial payments from 
the Next Generation EU programme, which are to be channelled into digitalisation and 
climate  protection projects. However, dis-
bursements of EU funds are subject to con-
ditions, in particular the “rule of law” 
clause. In the case of Poland and Hungary, 
the examination of compliance with these 
conditions is still ongoing.6
In the medium term, demographic develop-
ments are probably the greatest challenge 
facing the central and eastern European EU 
Member States. Emigration and the aging 
of the population are having an adverse ef-
fect on the labour supply and are driving up 
social spending. At the same time, further 
progress towards convergence will require 
enhanced locational quality, especially for 
technology and knowledge- based eco-
nomic activities. This could then attract 
greater investment in sectors with high 
value added. Compliance with climate pol-
icy objectives is likely to present additional 
challenges for the central and eastern Euro-
pean EU Member States. According to Eu-
rostat, per capita greenhouse gas emissions 
in the Czech Republic, Estonia and Poland 
were still above the EU average in 2020, 
and the share of renewable energy sources 
was still well below the EU average in Hun-
gary, Poland, the Czech Republic and Slo-
vakia in particular. The basis for addressing 
the various challenges is to be created not 
least using funds from the EU Recovery and 
Resilience Facility. However, this will neces-
sitate effi   cient use of these funds, which 
also depends on the quality of the institu-
tions involved. Further reforms are needed 
in this area.7
6 In June, the EU Council approved Poland’s national 
implementation plan, but made potential payments 
dependent on further reform of the judiciary. In Hun-
gary’s case, the national implementation plan has not 
yet been examined by the European Commission, and 
the EU’s new rule of law procedure was triggered for 
the fi  rst time in April, which could lead to fi  nancial 
sanctions.
7 See, for example, World Bank (2021).Unemployment and consumer prices in 
the central and eastern European EU 
Member States
Sources:  Eurostat  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 ILO  defini-
tion, seasonally adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 2022024681012
–50+5+10+15+20+25Unemployment rate1
Range of the highest and 
lowest inflation rates considered
in the analysisHICP
Year-on-year changeAs a percentageDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
22

ment probably declined. At the very least, the 
number of commercial vehicle registrations fell 
very steeply again, likely due in part to supply 
bottlenecks. By contrast, investment in infor -
mation and communication technologies and 
intellectual property is likely to have expanded 
markedly again.
Euro area countries’ exports of goods to third 
countries continued to increase in the second 
quarter after price adjustment. The depreci -
ation of the euro, not to mention the lessening 
of supply problems, are likely to have played a 
role here. In terms of value, exports of goods 
continued to rise sharply in response to the 
very steep increase in prices. This was especially 
true of exports to the United States and the 
United Kingdom. Over the course of the quar -
ter, exports to China recovered following the 
slump caused by pandemic- related contain -
ment measures. By contrast, sanctions resulted 
in exports to Russia declining by almost half in 
nominal terms in the second quarter compared 
with the previous quarter. International tourism 
was the main reason for the marked increase in 
exports of services to third countries. Imports 
of goods also rose significantly in the second 
quarter after price adjustment. Capital goods 
saw marked growth in line with robust invest -
ment activity, but imports of intermediate and 
consumer goods also remained dynamic. Over -
all expenditure on imports rose very sharply 
once again in view of the considerable price in -
creases.
Production in the manufacturing sector in -
creased markedly in the second quarter despite 
the aforementioned stress factors. In fact, out -
put grew significantly over the course of the 
quarter. Two of the main drivers of this growth 
were probably the dwindling significance of 
supply bottlenecks and lost production being 
made up for. As a result, capacity utilisation 
rose again slightly between April and July, con -
tinuing to exceed the long- term average. The 
sharp rise in industrial producer prices weak -
ened somewhat over the course of the quarter.Services activity was fairly buoyant in the 
second quarter. The hotel and restaurant ser -
vices sector, in particular, saw a sharp rise in 
economic output, exceeding the last quarter of 
2019 for the first time in May. In fact, most 
commercial services sectors markedly expanded 
their business activities again, having in many 
cases surpassed their pre- crisis levels some time 
ago. The information and communication in -
dustry increased its activity during the corona -
virus pandemic almost without interruption. 
Accordingly, information service providers re -
corded an increase of just under 40% in May 
compared with the pre- pandemic level.
While economic output increased markedly in 
almost all euro area Member States in the first 
quarter, the second quarter painted a mixed 
picture. This was down to differences between 
individual Member States concerning the im -
portance of tourism, the security of their en -
ergy supply and the extent of price- related 
losses in purchasing power. Moreover, the tim -Goods trade 
with third coun -
tries sees strong 
growth given 
surging prices
Increase in 
manufacturing 
activityStrong growth 
for most service 
providers
Growth in indi -
vidual Member 
States more 
heterogeneous  
again recentlyEuro area services production
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022405060708090100110120130140Q4 2019 =100, quarterly averages, log scale
Transport, storage
Food service activities
Information and communication
Of which: Information services
Professional, scientific and 
technical servicesApril-
MayDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
23

ing of the last wave of Omicron and the asso -
ciated containment measures and subsequent 
opening- up steps was not simultaneous across 
Member States.
In France, economic output expanded by 0.5% 
in the second quarter, following a contraction 
of 0.2% in the first quarter. The main driver of 
growth was consumption of services. The hotel 
and restaurant services sector, in particular, 
benefited from the rebound in tourism busi -
ness. As a result, exports of services also rose 
sharply, while exports of goods declined. In -
vestment continued to increase, mainly in intel -
lectual property and construction. By contrast, expenditure on machinery and equipment stag -
nated. There was a sharp decline in the con -
sumption of goods. This was due to the loss of 
purchasing power as a result of increased price 
inflation.
In Italy, the overall economic upturn continued 
in the second quarter, with GDP growth of 1%. 
However, this is likely to be largely down to the 
rapid recovery in the course of the first quarter 
following the abatement of the Omicron wave. 
Over the course of the second quarter, the 
pace of growth slowed significantly, with in -
dustrial production even declining. This is likely 
to have been due not only to material and la -
bour shortages but also the massive increases 
in energy costs. Cross-  border trade in goods 
also suffered as a result. By contrast, private 
consumption expanded. One likely key factor 
for this growth is the continued recovery in do -
mestic tourism. Retail sales only saw marginal 
growth.
According to preliminary estimates, aggregate 
output in Spain in the second quarter rose by 
1.1% on the quarter. Even so, Spain was the 
only country in the euro area to remain signifi -
cantly below its pre- crisis level, falling short by 
2.5%. Tourism – and thus the hotel and res -
taurant services sector – experienced a signifi -
cant revival. Private consumption also rose 
sharply, despite the growing burden on house -
holds as a result of increasing consumer prices. 
Although the Spanish economy is only margin -
ally directly dependent on Russian gas supplies, 
energy prices rose sharply there, too. Invest -
ment remained buoyant. The massive expan -
sion of construction investment more than off -
set the decline in expenditure on machinery 
and equipment and intellectual property. For -
eign trade also expanded, although imports in -
creased significantly more strongly than ex -
ports.
In Austria and Belgium, economic output in -
creased moderately in the second quarter. In 
Portugal, by contrast, there was a slight set -
back following the strong start to the year. Eco -French economy 
showing marked 
growth follow -
ing decline at 
start of yearItalian economic 
recovery 
continues 
Considerable 
rise in Spain’s 
real GDP
Marked differ -
ences in the 
smaller Member 
StatesAggregate output in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 2022Real GDP, Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
log scale
80859095100
758085909510080859095100
Italy
SpainEuro area
France859095100
of which:Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
24

nomic activity in Lithuania and Latvia declined, 
probably mainly as a result of the considerable 
stress caused by the war on Ukraine.
The labour market situation in the euro area is 
still very favourable. The unemployment rate 
held steady through to June at the low of 6.6% 
that it had reached in April, despite the number 
of unemployed persons rising slightly for the 
first time in more than a year. However, em -
ployment also increased slightly again in the 
second quarter. The job vacancy rate continued 
to rise from its already high level, resulting in 
pronounced labour market tightness overall. In 
the services sector, staff shortages reached a 
new peak in July; they do not appear to have 
intensified any further in the industrial sector. In 
light of labour market tensions and losses in 
purchasing power, wage growth picked up 
markedly, but remained well below inflation.
Euro area consumer prices rose very steeply 
again in the second quarter of 2022, reaching 
2.3% on the quarter after seasonal adjustment. 
Food prices rose more strongly than ever in the 
euro area owing to the further rise in agricul -
tural prices, and services inflation was excep -
tionally strong, as in the fourth quarter of last 
year. Energy prices continued to rise very 
steeply, but somewhat less sharply than in the 
previous quarter. The same applies to con -
sumer prices for other industrial goods. As a re -
sult, the year-  on- year increase in the Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) in the 
second quarter recorded another jump, from 
6.1% to 8.0%. The rate excluding energy and 
food also rose significantly (from 2.7% to 
3.7%).
Price increases now extend to large portions of 
the basket of goods. Of 94 categories of goods 
and services in the HICP ,5 more than half saw 
their corresponding sub- indices rise by more 
than 4% on the year. Common measures of 
underlying inflation, such as trimmed means or 
differently defined core rates, continued to in -
crease and reached rates above 3%. The main 
driver of this was the high cost pressure at the upstream stages, also owing to supply bottle -
necks. Although overall inflation at the indus -
trial producer level declined somewhat, produ -
cer prices for consumer goods excluding food 
remained high. Supply bottlenecks also pushed 
prices upwards in the services sector, especially 
for travel and other leisure services. Without 
the €9 ticket, which was introduced in Ger -
many as part of a relief package, price inflation 
would have been even stronger here.6Labour market 
situation 
remains very 
favourable
Very steep rise in 
consumer prices 
continues
Price surge 
broadly basedHICP components in the euro area
105051015202530354045
––+++++++++Year-on-year percentage change, monthly data
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank–20+2+4+6
Non-energy
industrial goodsEnergy
(reduced scale)
0246810
+++++
0+2+4 ServicesFood
5 The four- digit level was chosen for the breakdown of the 
HICP basket of goods.
6 For more information on the effects of the relief package 
in Germany, see pp. 57 f.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
25

Consumer prices continued to rise in July, by 
0.7% on the month after seasonal adjustment. 
Food prices rose at a similar pace to June, while 
non- energy industrial goods prices rose mark -
edly faster. The cost of services also rose con -
siderably again after the introduction of the €9 
ticket in Germany dampened the increase in 
June. By contrast, energy prices continued to 
rise only moderately. Annual HICP inflation 
climbed significantly once again to 8.9%. The 
rate excluding energy and food rose to 4.0%, 
representing a new peak. Uncertainty about 
future  price developments is high and is very 
much tied to developments in natural gas 
prices and possible compensatory measures. 
Overall, upside risks remain dominant in the in -
flation outlook.Economic output in the euro area is likely to in -
crease slightly in the current quarter, if at all, as 
the disruptions caused by the war on Ukraine 
increasingly make themselves felt. In particular, 
concerns about energy security and strong in -
flation are weighing on sentiment, which con -
tinued to deteriorate in all sectors of the econ -
omy in July. Sentiment indicators for the manu -
facturing sector even suggest that a decline in 
activity is on the cards. Surveys indicate that 
the volume of new orders and the order back -
log have declined significantly in recent months. 
The outlook is somewhat more favourable for 
consumer- related services in particular. How -
ever, they, too, are likely to feel the marked de -
terioration in consumer confidence. In particu -
lar, the erosion of purchasing power associated 
with high consumer price inflation has pushed 
consumer confidence to a new low while un -
certainty has risen to its highest level so far.7 
Nevertheless, the outlook for the labour market 
is still seen as quite favourable, and savings ac -
cumulated during the coronavirus pandemic 
are likely to help maintain private consumption. 
On the whole, however, downside risks pre -
dominate, particularly as a result of the risk of 
a complete interruption of gas supplies from 
Russia.Strong price 
inflation con -
tinues in JulyDistinct negative 
effects in the 
current quarter 
due to rising 
costs and 
heightened 
uncertainty
List of references
Baumeister, C., D. Korobilis and T. K. Lee (2022), Energy Markets and Global Economic Conditions, 
The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 104 (4), pp. 828-844.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), Possible development of the German economy in an adverse risk 
scenario, Monthly Report, June 2022, pp. 35-41.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b), The current situation in euro area and US labour markets, Monthly 
Report, February 2022, pp. 15-16.Sentiment indicators for the euro area*
Sources: European Commission and Bundesbank calculations. 
* Deviations from the respective average since 2000.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 20226050403020100102030
––––––+++Balance of positive and negative responses as a percentage 
of all responses, seasonally adjusted
Manufacturing
Services sectorConstruction
Consumer
7 The European Commission’s uncertainty indicator is de -
rived from its consumer survey, specifically from the ques -
tion of how difficult it was for respondents to assess their 
expected financial situation over the next 12 months. The 
indicator is available starting from April 2019.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
26

Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), The central and eastern European EU Member States during the 
coronavirus crisis, Monthly Report, August 2021, pp. 19-22.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national economic 
statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65-78.
European Central Bank (2022a), Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, 
June 2022.
European Central Bank (2022b), Recent inflation developments in the United States and the euro 
area – an update, Economic Bulletin, Issue 1/ 2022, pp. 29-35.
European Central Bank (2022c), Convergence Report 2022.
European Central Bank (2021), Comparing recent inflation developments in the United States and 
the euro area, Economic Bulletin, Issue 6/ 2021, pp. 49-56.
European Central Bank (2018), Measures of underlying inflation for the euro area, Economic 
Bulletin , Issue 4/ 2018, pp. 94-115.
European Commission (2022), Convergence Report 2022, June 2022.
Federal Open Market Committee (2022), Summary of Economic Projections, Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System, FOMC Projections materials, accessible version, 15 June 2022.
International Monetary Fund (2022), World Economic Outlook Update: Gloomy and More Uncer -
tain, July 2022.
Lenza, M. and G. E. Primiceri (2022), How to estimate a vector autoregression after March 2020, 
Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 37 (4), pp. 688-699.
World Bank (2021), Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI), http://info.worldbank.org/
governance/wgi /Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
27

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
In June, the ECB Governing Council decided, 
on the basis of its updated assessment of the 
inflation outlook, to take further steps in nor -
malising its monetary policy. It decided to end 
net asset purchases under the asset purchase 
programme (APP) as of 1 July 2022. In addition, 
the Governing Council concluded that the con -
ditions formulated in the previous year for rais -
ing the key ECB interest rates had now been 
satisfied. Accordingly, and in line with the ECB’s 
policy sequencing, the Governing Council ex -
pressed its intention to increase the key ECB 
interest rates by 25 basis points at its July mon -
etary policy meeting. The Governing Council 
also communicated the expectation that it 
would raise the key ECB interest rates again in 
September and possibly by a larger increment. 
It furthermore anticipated a gradual but sus -
tained path of further increases in interest rates 
beyond September.
On 15 June, the Governing Council held an ad 
hoc meeting to exchange views on the current 
market situation. It assessed that the pandemic 
had left lasting vulnerabilities in the euro area economy which, in the Governing Council’s 
view, were contributing to the uneven trans -
mission of the normalisation of monetary pol -
icy across jurisdictions. Based on this assess -
ment, the Governing Council decided that it 
would apply flexibility in reinvesting redemp -
tions coming due in the pandemic emergency 
purchase programme (PEPP) portfolio. This spe -
cifically means that PEPP redemptions will no 
longer necessarily be reinvested in the jurisdic -
tions in which they fall due. Instead, those re -
demptions can, as appropriate, be reinvested in 
jurisdictions in which the Governing Council 
considers orderly transmission to be at risk, 
with a view to preserving the functioning of 
the monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
The Governing Council considers this a precon -
dition for it to be able to deliver on its price sta -
bility mandate. It decided to apply this flexibil -
ity as of 1 July. The Governing Council also de -
cided on 15 June to mandate the relevant Euro -
system Committees together with the ECB 
services to accelerate the completion of the de -
sign of a new anti- fragmentation instrument.
The Governing Council took further key steps 
in July to make sure inflation returns to its 2% 
target over the medium term. It judged that, in 
light of the further increase in inflation risks, it 
was appropriate to take a larger first step on its 
policy rate normalisation path than signalled at 
the June meeting. The Governing Council 
therefore decided to raise the three key ECB 
interest rates by 50 basis points. Accordingly, 
the interest rate on the deposit facility now 
stands at 0%, while the interest rate on the 
main refinancing operations is 0.5% and the 
interest rate on the marginal lending facility is 
0.75%. The Governing Council furthermore re -
affirmed its view that further normalisation of 
interest rates would be appropriate. In the Gov -
erning Council’s view, the frontloading of the 
exit from negative interest rates allows it to 
make a transition to a meeting- by- meeting ap -
proach to interest rate decisions. The future ECB Governing 
Council decides 
to end APP net 
asset purchases 
as of 1 July
Flexibility in 
PEPP reinvest -
ments applied 
in JuneECB Governing 
Council raises 
key ECB interest 
rates by 50 basis 
points in July
Money market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. • Average 
1 to 18 August 2022.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 20220.750.500.2500.250.500.75
–––+++
Three-month EURIBOR1
Deposit 
facility rateMain refinancing rateMarginal lending rate% p.a.
€STR1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
28

Money market management and liquidity needs
In the period under review from April to July 
2022,1 excess liquidity in the Eurosystem 
declined by a total of €24.2 billion to an 
average of €4,461.1 billion. It initially in-
creased by €84.3 billion to €4,569.7 billion 
in the third reserve maintenance period of 
2022 (April- June). The subsequent decline 
of €108.5 billion in the fourth reserve main-
tenance period of 2022 (June- July) was due, 
fi  rst, to early repayments of longer- term re-
fi  nancing operations as at 29  June 2022. 
Second, liquidity- absorbing autonomous 
factors increased in the fourth reserve main-
tenance period of the year compared with 
the second reserve maintenance period.
In the period under review, additional cen-
tral bank liquidity was provided through a 
total of €69.6 billion worth of net asset pur-
chases conducted as part of the asset pur-
chase programme (APP). Net purchases 
under the APP were discontinued as of 
1 July 2022. As at 12 August 2022, the bal-ance sheet holdings of the asset purchase 
programmes amounted to €4,953.4 billion 
(see the table below). Meanwhile, the aver-
age outstanding tender volume in the euro 
area fell by €49.8 billion to €2,150.3 billion 
in the period under review, resulting in net 
liquidity absorption. On 29  June 2022, a 
total of €74.1 billion out of all the targeted 
longer- term refi  nancing operations of the 
third series (TLTRO- III) was voluntarily repaid 
ahead of schedule. Moreover, during the 
period under review, liquidity amounting to 
€0.5 billion was repaid at maturity under 
the pandemic emergency longer- term refi  -
nancing operations (PELTROs). Although the 
volume in the regular main refi  nancing op-
erations and three- month tenders remained 
at a very low level, demand increased 
1 The averages of the fourth reserve maintenance 
period of 2022 (June- July 2022) are compared here 
with the averages of the second reserve maintenance 
period of 2022 (March- April 2022).
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2022
20 Apr.
to
14 June15 June
to
26 July
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  15.6 –  12.5
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  43.7 –  43.5
3. Net foreign assets 1 +  21.0 +   9.5
4. Other factors 1 –  12.4 –  28.9
Total +  36.7 –  75.4
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations +   0.1 +   0.5
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –   1.0 –  49.4
c) Other operations +  49.9 +  19.7
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility +   0.0 +   0.0
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) +  33.6 +   2.6
Total +  82.6 –  26.6
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) + 118.8 – 102.8
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –   1.0 –   3.1
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
29

slightly in both, particularly in the context of 
early TLTRO- III repayments. In Germany, the 
outstanding volume of all refi  nancing oper-
ations fell by €11.4 billion to an average of 
€409.4 billion. As a result, German banks’ 
share of the outstanding volume of refi  nan-
cing operations in the Eurosystem came to 
around 19.0%.
In the fourth reserve maintenance period of 
2022, liquidity needs in the euro area stem-
ming from autonomous factors rose by 
€40.0 billion compared with the second re-
serve maintenance period of 2022, reach-
ing a new average record high of €2,487.2 
billion. This was mainly due to an increase in the value of banknotes in circulation by 
€28.1 billion to €1,604.0 billion. Net bank-
note issuance, which absorbs liquidity, went 
up markedly in Germany, by €17.1 billion to 
€919.5 billion. In the last week of the fourth 
reserve maintenance period of 2022, net 
banknote issuance declined owing to bank-
note inpayments from banks’ cash hold-
ings, inter alia, that were higher than usual 
for the time of year. By contrast, the decline 
in the balances of non- euro area central 
banks, which is included under “other fac-
tors”, had a liquidity- providing effect. Gov-
ernment deposits remained virtually un-
changed and therefore had no notable im-
pact on central bank liquidity. Over the re-
porting period, the minimum reserve 
requirement in the Eurosystem climbed sig-
nifi  cantly, by €4.1 billion to €160.9 billion, 
thus further increasing the need for central 
bank liquidity. In Germany, the reserve re-
quirement only went up by €0.7 billion to 
€43.9 billion.
At 98% and 99%, respectively, banks’ util-
isation of exemption allowances under the 
two- tier system for remuneration of excess 
reserve holdings remained virtually un-
changed for both the euro area and Ger-
many in the period under review. As excess 
liquidity fell by €24.2 billion, the share of 
excess liquidity exempted from the negative 
interest rate increased (see the chart on 
p. 31). As a result, on average in the fourth 
reserve maintenance period of 2022, 21.3% 
of the excess liquidity in the Eurosystem 
was exempt from negative remuneration, 
which was 0.5 percentage point more than 
in the previous reserve maintenance period 
(in Germany: 20.8% compared with 20.2% 
in the second reserve maintenance period 
of 2022).
Overnight rates in the euro money market 
were moved towards the deposit facility 
rate of -0.50% in the third and fourth re-
serve maintenance periods of 2022 (see the 
chart on p.  31). The downward trend in 
overnight rates did not continue, with ex-Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as at
12 Aug. 2022
Active programmes 1
PSPP + 56.4 2,590.2
CBPP3 +  5.5 301.1
CSPP + 13.6 344.4
ABSPP –  1.6 24.6
PEPP –  3.6 1,689.6
Completed programmes 
SMP +  0.0 3.4
CBPP1 +  0.0 0.0
CBPP2 –  0.7 0.1
1 Changes due to net purchases, maturities, reinvestments 
and amortisation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankAutonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing  (liquidity-absorbing)  factors  are  preceded  by  a  positive 
(negative)  sign.  1 Including  end-of-quarter  liquidity-neutral 
valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 20221,8001,5001,20090060030003006009001,200
––––––++++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
30

cess liquidity remaining high, but stagnat-
ing. In both the third and fourth reserve 
maintenance periods of 2022, the un-
secured euro short- term rate (€STR) aver-
aged -0.58%. At €48.5 billion in the third 
reserve maintenance period of 2022, turn-
over was lower on average than in previous 
periods (-€3.2 billion compared with the 
second reserve maintenance period of 
2022). This was also attributable to public 
holidays. The average rose again to €53.2 
billion in the subsequent reserve mainten-
ance period. On the GC Pooling trading 
platform, overnight transactions in the ECB 
basket took place at an average of -0.58% 
in the third and fourth reserve maintenance 
periods of 2022, compared with the previ-
ous fi  gure of -0.59% in the second reserve 
maintenance period of 2022. By contrast, in 
the ECB EXTended basket, which has a 
broader selection of securities with lower 
rating requirements for concluding repo 
transactions, overnight trading took place 
at a rate of -0.53% in the reporting period 
– unchanged from the second reserve main-
tenance period of 2022. End dates con-
tinued to have an impact on interest rates 
and transaction volumes in overnight trad-
ing. At the end of the fi  rst half of the year, 
the €STR was down by more than 1 basis 
point at -0.59%, much like at previous 
quarter- end dates. The effects of end dates 
were also observable in secured overnight 
trading on the GC Pooling platform, though 
greater differences were in evidence here 
between the two aforementioned collateral 
baskets as well as between the individual 
months. One reason for this could be the 
low trading volumes, which declined again 
at the end dates. However, higher transac-
tion volumes were already in evidence in 
secured overnight trading in the fourth re-
serve maintenance period of 2022 com-
pared with the previous period. This devel-
opment has continued to date.
With the start of the fi  fth reserve mainten-
ance period of 2022 (July- September) on 
27 July 2022, overnight rates were moved towards the new deposit facility rate of 0%, 
increasing signifi  cantly. €STR climbed by 
49.6 basis points on the day to -0.09% 
compared with the previous day. In secured 
overnight trading, the rates for the ECB bas-
ket and the ECB EXTended basket rose to 
-0.16% and -0.09%, respectively. This was 
equivalent to a rise of just 41 basis points 
and 46 basis points, respectively, on the 
previous day. In both collateral baskets, the 
rise in key interest rates was only fully 
passed through after the end of the month.Deposit facility rate, money market rates 
and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Central 
bank balance minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the 
deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche BundesbankDec. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May
2021 20220.90.80.70.60.50.4
––––––Daily data
% p.a.
€ bn
01,0002,0003,0004,0005,000Excess liquidity1
Mean value for the 
reserve maintenance period2ECB EXTended basket
€STRSTOXX GC Pooling Overnight
GermanyEuro areaAllowances (two-tier system)– 1.93ECB BasketDeposit 
facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
31

policy rate path will continue to be data-  
dependent. In the context of its policy normal -
isation, the Governing Council will furthermore 
evaluate options for remunerating excess 
liquidity holdings.
Moreover, the Governing Council approved a 
new instrument, the Transmission Protection 
Instrument (TPI). As the Governing Council 
continues normalising monetary policy, the TPI 
will ensure that the monetary policy stance is 
transmitted smoothly across all euro area coun -
tries. This will allow the Governing Council to 
more effectively deliver on its price stability 
mandate. This instrument can be activated to 
counter unwarranted, disorderly market dy -
namics that, in the Governing Council’s view, 
pose a serious threat to the transmission of 
monetary policy across the euro area. Under 
the TPI, the Eurosystem will be able to make 
secondary market purchases of securities is -
sued in jurisdictions experiencing a deterior -
ation in financing conditions not warranted by country- specific fundamentals. TPI purchases 
would be focused on public sector securities 
with a remaining maturity of between one and 
ten years. Purchases of private sector securities 
could be considered, if appropriate. The scale 
of TPI purchases would depend on the severity 
of the risks facing monetary policy transmis -
sion. Purchases are not restricted ex ante.
Any decision by the Governing Council to acti -
vate the TPI will be based on a comprehensive 
assessment of market and transmission indica -
tors and an evaluation of the eligibility criteria. 
The Governing Council will consider a list of cri -
teria to assess whether the jurisdictions in 
which the Eurosystem may conduct purchases 
under the TPI pursue sound and sustainable fis -
cal and macroeconomic policies.1 The decision 
will also be based on a judgement that the ac -
tivation of purchases under the TPI is propor -New Transmis -
sion Protection 
Instrument
TPI activation 
based on a 
comprehensive 
assessmentOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 202205001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,0005,5006,0006,5007,0007,500€ billion
Mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
Purchase programmesFirst series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-I)Third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-III)
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-II)Pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs)
Additional longer-term refinancing operations
1 For more details on these criteria, see European Central 
Bank (2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
32

tionate to the achievement of the ECB’s pri -
mary objective of price stability. Purchases 
would be terminated either upon a durable im -
provement in transmission, or based on an as -
sessment that persistent tensions are due to 
country fundamentals.
The decisions in June and July took place 
against the backdrop of inflation pressures that 
are becoming increasingly broad and intense, 
as reflected by considerable rises in the prices 
of many goods and services. Furthermore, Eu -
rosystem staff once again revised their baseline 
inflation projections up significantly in their 
June projections compared with March, raising 
them to 6.8% in 2022, 3.5% in 2023 and 2.1% 
in 2024. The projections thus indicated yet 
again that inflation will remain undesirably ele -
vated for some time and still be above target 
even at the end of the projection horizon. 
Moreover, this outlook remains subject to up -
side risks. These have increased, especially over 
the short term.
Closing the period under review at -0.09%, the 
euro short- term rate (€STR) was around 50 
basis points higher than it was before the key 
ECB interest rate hike, which means it increased 
more or less in step with the policy rate. The 
three-  month EURIBOR continued to rise as 
well, closing the period at 0.26%, which was 
around 68 basis points up on its level in mid-  
May. The three- month EURIBOR is thus already 
reflecting expectations of further key interest 
rate hikes in the coming months.
Money market forward rates are likewise sig -
nalling expectations of further key interest rate 
hikes for 2022 following the first interest rate 
step in July. Market participants are almost fully 
pricing in an interest rate step of a further 50 
basis points at the current end for September 
2022. Moreover, the shape of the money mar -
ket forward curve is currently suggesting that 
market participants are expecting an additional 
50 basis points of interest rate hikes for 2022 
beyond September. At the current end, how -
ever, money market forward rates as of 2023 are markedly flatter than they had been in 
June. This would indicate that market partici -
pants are pricing in the Eurosystem raising its 
key interest rates in the coming year less 
strongly than had been expected as recently as 
June. Overall, the forward curve has been 
highly volatile in recent months, reflecting the 
exceptionally high uncertainty surrounding the 
inflation and growth outlook. The rounds of 
the ECB Survey of Monetary Analysts con -
ducted ahead of the June and July meetings 
confirmed expectations of further interest rate 
hikes. Ahead of the July meeting, survey re -
spondents were likewise expecting a median of 
a 50 basis point interest rate hike in September 
and further interest rate steps over the remain -
der of the year. However, as the survey had al -
ready been completed before the July deci -
sions, survey participants were not yet able to 
factor July’s  higher- than- expected interest rate 
step into their considerations.
APP holdings recorded on the balance sheet 
have risen by €25 billion since mid- May. On 
12 August, the Eurosystem was holding assets 
totalling €3,260.3 billion under the APP (see 
the box on pp. 29 ff. for a breakdown of the 
holdings by individual programme). Net asset 
purchases under the APP were ended as of 
1 July, in line with the Governing Council’s de -
cision in June. Securities holdings reported 
under the PEPP amounted to €1,689.6 billion 
on 12 August, down by €11.5 billion. Following 
the end of net asset purchases, the holdings re -
ported under both purchase programmes con -
tinue to be influenced by the smoothing over 
time of reinvestments and by the use of amort -
ised cost accounting.2
Excess liquidity has declined slightly overall 
since mid- May. As this report went to press, it 
came to a volume of €4,479.1 billion, down by 
around €90 billion (see the box on pp. 29 ff.). 
The voluntary repayment of the third series of Inflation pres -
sures increas -
ingly broad and 
intense
€STR increase 
matches key ECB 
interest rate hike
Money market 
forward rates 
signalling 
expectations of 
further interest 
rate stepsAPP net asset 
purchases ended 
as of 1 July
Excess liquidity 
down slightly
2 In particular, the difference between the acquisition and 
redemption value is amortised over the security’s residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and measured 
at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
33

targeted longer-  term refinancing operations 
(TLTRO- III) in June is likely to have been a key 
factor in this decline. In total, banks repaid 
€74.0 billion on 29  June, which means that 
€2,121.7 billion is still outstanding under the 
third series of TLTROs.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
In the second quarter of 2022, the expansion 
of the broad monetary aggregate M3 was 
again smaller than it had been in the previous 
quarters. The annual rate fell further to 5.7%, 
leaving it only slightly above its level prior to 
the coronavirus pandemic. The continued mod -
eration of monetary growth was the result of 
the scheduled reduction of net asset purchases 
by the Eurosystem. Loans to non- financial cor -
porations and households in the euro area, 
meanwhile, posted yet another steep rise in the 
second quarter. For enterprises, it was notably 
the massive trade restrictions and the increased 
purchase prices that drove demand for loans. 
The banks surveyed in the Bank Lending Survey 
(BLS) reported tightening credit standards for 
loans to enterprises and to households for 
house purchase to roughly the same extent as 
they had done two years ago in the first year of 
the coronavirus pandemic. They put this down 
to what they saw as an increase in credit risk 
and a decrease in their risk tolerance.
Overnight deposits were still the M3 compon -
ent that contributed most to the build- up in 
the monetary aggregate in the second quarter. 
However, their growth declined noticeably 
again on what had already been a weaker pre -
vious quarter. This was mainly because the in -
creased prices meant that households and en -
terprises alike were only able to form new sav -
ings to a small extent. Households, which are 
generally less sensitive to interest rates than en -
terprises, continued to mainly accumulate over -
night deposits. Non- financial corporations, 
meanwhile, stepped up their accumulation of 
time deposits, the interest rate on which had Monetary 
growth moder -
ating further
Accumulation 
of overnight 
deposits tailed 
off furtherMonetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 222024681012
–++++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14
20246
–+++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial
liabilities1
Net external assets
Credit to the private
sector2
Financial corporations3
Non-financial corporations4
Households5Contribution of components 
in percentage points
Securities-based lending to general governmentPercentage change
in M3
Percentage change in M3
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector2Contribution of counterparts in percentage points
Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
34

risen markedly in the second quarter, while the 
increase in their overnight deposits came to a 
halt. Overall, however, growth in short- term 
time and savings deposits was significantly 
smaller than the slowdown in overnight de -
posits. Demand for currency, which had been 
far above average in the previous quarter, also 
shrank again significantly. The decline in de -
mand for currency indicated that the prefer -
ence for liquidity has tailed off, to a degree, 
after having picked up sharply initially when 
hostilities broke out against Ukraine.
On the counterparts side, monetary growth in 
the second quarter was driven primarily by 
loans to the euro area private sector. The bulk 
of this was accounted for by loans to non-  
financial corporations (see the chart on p. 36). 
Inflows were spread across all maturity bands 
but particularly high, relative to the average 
take- up in recent years, for short- term loans. 
The AnaCredit credit microdata statistics for 
April and May reveal that this was mainly due 
to large enterprises stepping up their short-  
term loans. This observation is backed up by 
findings from the BLS: the surveyed banks ob -
served an increase in credit demand in the 
second quarter, attributing the rise primarily to 
enterprises’ increased financing needs for in -
ventories and working capital. These needs 
were stronger among large enterprises, which appear to be particularly exposed to current 
disruptions in supply chains and mounting pur -
chase prices on account of their international 
ties.
Medium and long- term loans to non- financial 
corporations were another segment in which 
banks registered robust inflows in the second 
quarter. BLS respondents reported that borrow -
ers also used the borrowed funds for debt refi -
nancing, restructuring and renegotiation as 
well as for the redemption of debt securities. 
This may have something to do with the fact 
that bank lending rates have so far increased Strong build- up 
of loans to non- 
financial corpor -
ations, mainly 
due to increased 
inventory and 
working capital 
costs, …… while finan -
cing needs for 
fixed investment 
have receded
Securities-based lending to general 
government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2220002004006008001,0001,200
–++++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
Eurosystem
Other MFIsBy the euro area MFI sectorConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q1 2022 Q2 2022
Holdings against central government 2 – 53.2 15.3
Monetary aggregate M3 178.8 151.3
Components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 194.7 84.3
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) 22.0 39.1
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 37.9 27.9
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities – 37.3 28.6
Capital and reserves 10.6 53.0
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 47.9 – 24.4Assets Q1 2022 Q2 2022
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 193.6 202.6
Loans 186.5 218.4
Loans, adjusted 1 168.6 242.7
Securities 7.1 – 15.8
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 94.0 78.7
Loans 4.8 3.3
Securities 89.2 74.7
Net external assets –  23.5 – 51.5
Other counterparts of M3 – 175.7 – 33.9
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
35

less rapidly than corporate bond yields, which 
created favourable conditions for replacing 
securities- based loans with traditional loans. By 
contrast, BLS reporting banks judged that en -
terprises’ financing requirements for fixed in -
vestment fell for the first time in five quarters. 
This could be a reflection of uncertainty stem -
ming from supply chain problems and the re -
percussions of the Ukraine war.
The sharp increase in lending during the report -
ing quarter combined with the unusually weak 
second quarter of 2021 meant that there was a 
robust uptick in the annual growth rate of 
loans to non- financial corporations, which stood at 6.8% at the end of June.3 Aggregate 
growth figures obscure mixed loan dynamics at 
the country level, however. While banks in Ger -
many and France continued to lend briskly, the 
impulses from Spain and Italy were significantly 
smaller, above all for medium and long- term 
loans. One likely reason for this is that Spanish 
and Italian enterprises currently still have funds 
left over from the government- guaranteed 
loans they were able to take out at favourable 
conditions and with long maturities at the 
onset of the coronavirus pandemic.4 Country-  
specific differences are also evident in the in -
creases in lending rates observed in the year to 
date. However, these differences can be readily 
explained so far by the regularities observed in 
the past.
The strong growth in lending occurred against 
the backdrop of more restrictive lending pol -
icies among banks. At the aggregate level, the 
banks surveyed by the BLS significantly tight -
ened their corporate credit standards in the 
second quarter. The main reasons cited were 
the perceived deteriorations in both the eco -
nomic situation and outlook as well as in 
sector- specific and firm- specific factors. Lower 
risk tolerance also contributed to tighter stand -
ards. In addition, banks reported that the war 
against Ukraine had a restrictive effect.
There was brisk demand for loans among 
households, too. This was particularly true of 
loans for house purchase as the most import -
ant sub- component. In the balance sheet stat -
istics, the banks reported renewed large in -
flows to this credit segment in net terms. The 
data refer to loans for house purchase that are 
recorded on the balance sheet, i.e. that have 
already been disbursed. Their annual growth 
Loan dynamics 
mixed at the 
country levelBLS reporting 
banks noticeably 
tightened credit 
standards in 
corporate 
lending 
Further substan -
tial rise in loans 
to households 
for house pur -
chase, …MFI loans to the non-financial private 
sector in the euro area*
20020406080100120140
–+++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 22
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
–200+20+40+60+80 To households3To non-financial corporations1
Total2
3 Lending to non- financial corporations was on the decline 
in the second quarter of 2021. This related to the interest 
rate conditions for the TLTRO- III: in order to meet the lend -
ing performance thresholds at the end of March 2021 and 
thus benefit from very favourable refinancing conditions for 
2020-21, some banks frontloaded their lending in the first 
quarter.
4 See Banco de España (2022) and Banca d’Italia (2022a, 
2022b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
36

rate remained virtually unchanged at 5.3% at 
the end of June. However, the BLS responses 
indicate that this momentum is likely to wane 
in the coming months. Based on incoming loan 
requests, the BLS reporting banks observed a 
decline in demand for housing loans in the 
second quarter. They expect a further decrease 
in the third quarter. The surveyed banks attrib -
uted the decline observed in the reporting 
quarter to lower consumer confidence, in par -
ticular. In addition, according to BLS data, the 
rise in the general level of interest rates pushed 
down demand for the first time since the be -
ginning of 2015, when data on this factor was 
first collected.
There were also adjustments to lending policy 
– the banks responding to the BLS stated that 
credit standards for housing loans were tight -
ened to an extent last seen in 2020, the first 
year of the coronavirus pandemic. From the 
banks’ perspective, this was triggered by in -
creased credit risk. This was caused in part by a 
downturn in the general economic situation 
and the gloomier outlook on the residential 
real estate market, as well as the decline in 
creditworthiness among borrowers. In addition 
to their reduced risk tolerance, some banks 
cited restrictions or costs related to their capital 
positions.
While lending for house purchase moved side -
ways at a high level, banks recorded higher 
growth in consumer credit than in the previous 
quarter. This is consistent with the data pro -
vided by the banks surveyed by the BLS, which 
reported a further increase in demand for con -
sumer credit and other lending in the second 
quarter. They attributed this almost exclusively 
to greater funding needs among households 
for the purchase of durable consumer goods. 
Furthermore, the banks responding to the BLS 
indicated that they had moderately tightened 
their credit standards for consumer credit and 
other lending in the second quarter.
Inflows to securitised lending to general gov -
ernment supported monetary growth to a lesser extent than it had in the previous two 
years. Following the end of net asset purchases 
under the PEPP at the end of March, the APP 
was also discontinued at the end of June. As a 
result, the Eurosystem significantly reduced its 
net purchases of government bonds on bal -
ance in the second quarter. However, as net 
bond issuance by euro area countries was rela -
tively low in the reporting quarter due to sea -
sonal factors, the Eurosystem’s reduced expos -
ure did not, in purely accounting terms, create 
any major gap in demand. In addition, com -
mercial banks also purchased a moderate vol -
ume of government bonds on balance after 
having reduced their holdings over the past 
two years.
As in the preceding quarters, the MFI sector’s 
net external asset position had a dampening 
effect on monetary growth. First, this was 
partly due to the fact that, on balance, non-  
residents sold mainly shares and investment 
fund shares, but also short- term euro area gov -
ernment bonds. The driving factor behind this 
is likely to be the reduced attractiveness of in -
vesting in the euro area at present due to its 
geographical proximity to Russia as well as the 
higher yields abroad, especially in the United 
States and United Kingdom. While domestic 
non- banks also sold equity and long- term 
bonds from non-  resident issuers in net terms, 
the euro area financial account balance vis- à- 
vis the rest of the world remained negative 
overall. Second, the current account balance, 
which usually has a supportive effect, con -
tinued to shrink due to trade barriers and in -
creased costs of imports; based on the figures 
for April and May available thus far, it was also 
negative.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business with domestic 
customers lost considerable momentum in the 
second quarter of 2022. Against the backdrop … credit stand -
ards tightened 
considerably 
according to BLS
Perceptible 
inflows in 
consumer  
credit, tooDeclining Euro -
system net asset 
purchases 
dampened 
inflows 
to securitised 
lending
Net external 
asset position 
had further 
dampening 
effect on monet -
ary growth
Deposit business 
clearly lost 
momentumDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
37

of the rising interest rate level and the steeper 
yield curve, holders hardly added to their over -
night deposits on balance. Deposit business 
was driven solely by short- term time deposits 
remunerating at close- to- market rates, which 
grew perceptibly once again. Alongside in -
creased expenditure for consumer and inter -
mediate goods, the search for yield is also likely 
to have subdued growth in deposits. In an en -
vironment with significantly higher rates of in -
flation and rising interest rates, market partici -
pants are likely to have become more aware of 
the high opportunity costs of money holdings, 
which continue to be remunerated at very low 
rates (see the upper left- hand chart).
Unlike in the preceding quarters, only house -
holds continued to build up their overnight de -
posits during the reporting quarter. However, 
this build- up was offset, on aggregate, by the 
fact that all other money- holding sectors mark -
edly reduced their holdings of overnight de -
posits. As in the preceding quarter, the inflows 
to short- term time deposits were attributable 
to general government, which invested its sur -
pluses in this form. As previously, the reduction 
in long- term time deposits was a result of port -
folio shifts by financial corporations.
Banks’ lending business with domestic non-  
banks maintained its extraordinary momentum 
in the second quarter of 2022. Loans to the do -
mestic private sector, which grew steeply once 
again, were the main factor in this develop -
ment. By contrast, lending to general govern -
ment declined for the fifth quarter in succes -
sion.
Looking at the growth in lending business, 
lending to households and non- financial cor -
porations rose to almost the same extent. Both 
of these sectors sharply increased their stocks 
of loans despite sometimes considerable rises 
in lending rates. Part of the growth in corpor -
ate banking business was attributable to the 
Federal Government’s new assistance loans for 
enterprises particularly affected by the war Inflows to 
deposits only for 
households and 
general govern -
ment
Renewed very 
strong momen -
tum in lending 
business with 
non- banks
Financing needs 
of non- financial 
sectors 
remained highInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 2022101234
–++++% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight deposits
MFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, seasonally adjusted
Item2022
Q1 Q2
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 56.6 0.4
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years 18.5 13.1
over 2 years – 3.1 – 6.6
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months – 1.0 – 2.9
over 3 months – 1.1 – 0.7
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 0.2 – 0.1
Securities – 1.9 – 9.4
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 57.6 58.9
of which: to households 3 27.6 26.0
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 25.0 24.7
Securities 2.6 – 2.4
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter data, 
adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, 
households and general government excluding central govern-
ment. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including 
non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4 Non- fi  nancial cor-
porations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
38

against Ukraine, which were disbursed directly 
by the KfW Group.
Loans to non- financial corporations grew for all 
maturities once again, with long- term loans re -
cording the largest inflows. At present, there 
are various drivers for the high demand for 
loans among domestic enterprises. First, for en -
terprises with existing longer- term funding re -
quirements, the desire to lock in interest rates is 
likely to still be playing a role. Second, short-  
term funding needs are currently elevated for 
many enterprises, in part due to the consider -
able increases in prices for some intermediate 
goods and working capital.
The responses to the most recent BLS suggest 
that other factors were at play as well. German 
banks cited funding needs for inventories and 
working capital as a major reason for the in -
creased demand for loans to enterprises. Ac -
cording to the bank managers, it also rose due 
to the fact that many enterprises expanded 
their inventories in light of the unstable supply 
chains and elevated uncertainty resulting from 
the war against Ukraine.
At the same time, the German banks respond -
ing to the BLS marginally tightened their cor -
porate lending policies on balance and, for the 
first time in six quarters, also tightened their 
credit terms and conditions. They pointed to 
the rise in credit risk as the main reason for this. 
In particular, they cited the deteriorations in the 
general economic situation and economic out -
look, partly due to the war against Ukraine, as 
well as sector- specific and firm- specific factors. 
According to the BLS reporting banks, the sub -
dued financing environment on the money and 
bond markets had a marginally restrictive ef -
fect.
The largest contribution to growth in lending 
business among German banks continued to 
be made by lending to households. The key 
factor was again the sharp expansion in hous -
ing loans, which once again slightly exceeded 
their level from the previous quarter despite lending rates going up considerably. According 
to the MFI interest rate statistics, the interest 
rate on long- term loans for house purchase 
stood at 2.6% at the end of the second quarter 
and was thus significantly higher than at the 
end of the first quarter (1.7%). However, the 
annual growth rate of loans taken out for 
house purchase remained virtually unchanged 
at just under 7.0%.
During the second quarter, credit standards for 
loans to households for house purchase were 
tightened, on balance, to the greatest extent 
recorded since the BLS was launched. Accord -
ing to the banks, credit terms and conditions Heterogeneous 
drivers of 
demand among 
non- financial 
corporations
Loan demand 
driven partly by 
higher need for 
funds for inven -
tories and work -
ing capital
More restrictive 
lending policy in 
the corporate 
segment
Demand for 
housing loans 
remained brisk 
despite signifi -
cantly higher 
interest rates …… and consider -
ably more 
restrictive lend -
ing policies2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 22–10+1+2+3+4+5+6Year-on-year change, end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic 
non-financial private sector
21012345678910
––++++++++++ Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchaseTotal,
percentage changeLoan contributions 
in percentage pointsTotal,
percentage changeUp to 1 yearMaturity contributions in percentage points
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 yearsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
39

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q3 2022.
Deutsche Bundesbank14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 20221.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2014 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 2200.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
30030
–+
3003060
–++Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
0.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
40

were also made considerably more restrictive. 
In addition, the rejection rate rose significantly 
compared with the previous quarter. The banks 
likewise justified these instances of tightening 
primarily on the grounds of a perceived in -
crease in credit risk. This was caused in part by 
a downturn in the general economic situation 
and the gloomier outlook on the residential 
real estate market, as well as the decline in 
creditworthiness among borrowers. In add -
ition, some banks also cited restrictions or costs 
related to their capital position.
According to the BLS, the standards and terms 
and conditions for consumer credit and other 
lending to households were also tightened in 
the second quarter of 2022. However, as in the 
previous quarter, net lending in the consumer 
credit segment saw slight inflows. BLS report -
ing banks judged that this was, in particular, a 
result of increased funding needs for the pur -
chase of durable consumer goods.
In response to the ad hoc questions in the July 
survey, German banks reported that their fund -
ing conditions had deteriorated somewhat 
compared with the previous quarter. This ap -
plies especially to funding via the short- term 
unsecured money market, funding via large-  
volume debt instruments, and the off- balance- 
sheet transfer of risks.The surveyed banks reported that the level of 
the NPL ratio (percentage ratio of (gross) non- 
performing loans to the gross book value of 
the loans) resulted in no changes to their lend -
ing policies in the first half of 2022. For the 
second half of 2022, too, banks are not expect -
ing the NPL ratio to exert any meaningful influ -
ence on their lending policies.
In the first half of 2022, German banks left 
credit standards largely unchanged in nearly all 
surveyed sectors of the economy. Only in the 
residential real estate sector did they report a 
discernible tightening. By contrast, they tight -
ened their credit terms and conditions in all 
sectors. Banks are planning to tighten their 
standards and terms and conditions across sec -
tors in the second half of the year. According 
to the banks, demand for credit increased in al -
most all sectors of the economy in the first half 
of the year, with the wholesale and retail trade 
being the only sector to see barely any uptick. 
Banks are more pessimistic overall about the 
second half of 2022. In particular, they are ex -
pecting a significant decline in the financial re -
quirements of enterprises in the commercial 
and residential real estate sectors.Supply policy 
more restrictive 
in the consumer 
credit segment, 
too
Funding environ -
ment deterior -
ated somewhat 
for German 
banksLevel of NPL 
ratio had no 
noteworthy 
impact on 
changes in 
German  banks’ 
lending policies 
in H1 2022
Credit standards 
for residential 
real estate tight -
ened in H1 2022
List of references
Banca d’Italia (2022a), Economic Bulletin, 2/ 2022, p. 42 and p. 44.
Banca d’Italia (2022b), Financial Stability Report, 1/ 2022, p. 25.
Banco de España (2022), Financial Stability Report, Spring 2022, pp. 74 f.
European Central Bank (2022), Press release of 21 July 2022, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/
date/2022/html/ecb.pr220721~973e6e7273.en.htmlDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
41

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Global financial markets were influenced by ris -
ing inflation numbers and mounting economic 
concerns in the reporting period. With inflation 
still surprisingly high in many economies, gov -
ernment bond yields rose significantly around 
the world until mid-  June. Against this back -
drop, market participants priced in an increas -
ingly contractionary monetary policy stance by 
key central banks, amongst other things. The 
UK and US central banks tightened their mon -
etary policy by repeatedly raising their policy 
rates: August saw the Bank of England lift its 
base rate to 1.75%, its sixth policy rate hike 
since last December, and the US Federal Re -
serve increased its policy rate with two straight 
75- basis- point hikes in June and July to a new 
target range of 2.25% to 2.5%. In addition, fol -
lowing on from the Bank of England, the Fed -
eral Reserve also began to reduce its holdings 
of securities acquired under monetary policy 
purchase programmes. By comparison, the Eu -
rosystem adopted more of a wait-  and- see ap -
proach, but with the end of net purchases 
under the asset purchase programme (APP) 
and a subsequent first key interest rate hike, it 
has now taken major steps in the process of 
monetary policy normalisation. At the same 
time, however, economic concerns became 
more entrenched in the reporting period. In 
Europe, they were fuelled by restrictions on 
natural gas deliveries from Russia, amongst 
other things. From around mid-  June, market 
participants gradually rowed back on their ex -
pectations of monetary policy tightening in the 
current cycle, which dampened the preceding 
increase in yields. In this environment, price de -
velopments in equity markets remained nega -
tive, like in the first quarter. In addition to the 
net rise in risk- free interest rates, the bleaker 
medium- term earnings growth outlook had a 
dampening effect on prices. Monetary policy 
played an important role in foreign exchange 
markets, too. The brisker pace of US monetary policy normalisation, coupled with the Eurosys -
tem’s comparatively cautious stance, caused 
the euro to depreciate, especially against the 
US dollar. On top of this, a declining risk appe -
tite among foreign exchange market partici -
pants weighed on the single currency relative 
to the US dollar.
Exchange rates
From the start of the second quarter of 2022, 
the euro’s exchange rate against the US dollar 
depreciated markedly on balance. One major 
reason for this was the continued acceleration 
of the inflationary process in the United States, 
which prompted the Federal Reserve to press 
ahead forcefully on its monetary policy path. 
Furthermore, it signalled that by making further 
interest rate moves it was also willing to accept 
a marked weakening of economic activity in 
order to keep inflation pressures under control. 
Inflation dynamics gained momentum in the 
euro area, too, and the ECB Governing Council 
consequently ended the zero interest rate pol -
icy of recent years. However, overall, the pace 
of monetary policy normalisation in the euro 
area lagged noticeably behind that of the Fed -
eral Reserve, thus weakening the euro against 
the US dollar.
In addition, the euro experienced downward 
pressure as a result of a diminishing risk appe -
tite in financial markets. It is often the case that 
bouts of heightened global uncertainty lead to 
growing capital flows to the United States and 
strengthen the external value of the US dollar. 
Over the summer, the focus was initially on the 
possible consequences of extended pandemic 
containment measures in China. Increasingly, 
though, it was concerns surrounding the secur -
ity of European energy supplies and regarding 
the global growth outlook that weighed on in -
vestors’ risk appetite. Under these pressures, 
the euro depreciated repeatedly between early Financial mar -
kets influenced 
by high inflation 
rates and a 
gloomy eco -
nomic outlook
Euro down 
markedly 
against 
US dollar  , …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
42

and mid-  July, hitting a new 19- year low, during 
which it touched US$1.00 at times, and has 
since traded close to parity with the US cur -
rency. At the end of the reporting period, it was 
trading at US$1.02, down 8.3% on its level at 
the end of March.
There was little change in the euro’s exchange 
rate against the pound sterling. The Bank of 
England initiated rates lift- off in the United 
Kingdom back at the end of last year, making it 
one of the first major central banks to do so. 
Even so, inflation accelerated there, too. This 
fuelled market participants’ doubts as to 
whether central bankers in the United King -
dom would be able to effectively combat price 
increases without burdening the economic out -
look with further interest rate moves. This 
caused the euro to appreciate into June. July, 
however, saw the euro relinquish its gains 
against the pound sterling as concerns mounted 
over the energy supply in continental Europe, 
as mentioned above. At the end of the period 
under review, the euro stood at £0.84, which 
was 0.2% lower than at the end of the first 
quarter.
The euro was stronger against the yen. In 
Japan, inflation is relatively low by international 
standards. Against this backdrop, the central 
bank repeatedly ruled out an imminent policy 
rate rise, bucking the global trend. In addition, 
the Bank of Japan reaffirmed its intention of 
wanting to stabilise long- term government 
bond yields by offering unlimited bond buying 
at an unchanged low level. By further widening 
the spread relative to the rising bond interest 
rates in the euro area, this weakened the yen 
against the euro all the way into June. Early 
July, however, saw the yen benefit from emer -
ging uncertainty among financial market par -
ticipants about the global growth outlook and 
appreciate markedly again relative to the euro. 
Overall, the euro has recorded a gain of 1.5% 
since the end of March and was trading at 
¥137 at the end of the reporting period.Measured as a weighted average against the 
currencies of 19 major trading partners, the 
euro depreciated (-2.4%) on balance, largely 
due to the losses against the US dollar. The 
euro was also weaker against the Swiss franc 
(-5.7%) which, like the US dollar and the yen, 
often benefits from a decreasing risk appetite 
in foreign exchange markets. Meanwhile, the 
euro recorded gains against the currencies of 
some central and eastern European countries, 
such as the forint (+9.6%) and the złoty 
(+1.5%). The central banks of Hungary and Pol -
and raised their policy rates multiple times 
– sometimes sharply – during the period under 
review, but increasing burdens on the economy … almost 
unchanged 
against pound 
sterling, …
… but stronger 
against yen
In effective 
terms, euro 
weaker on 
balance Exchange rate of the euro
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Calculated 
against the currencies of 19 countries. A rise in values indicates 
an appreciation of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankMAM J J A S ON D J FMAM J J A
2021 20221.001.051.101.151.201.25
145
125130135140
0.820.850.88
919497100103Daily data, log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
... yen
... pound sterling
Nominal effective exchange rate1
Q1 1999 = 100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
43

and government finances resulting from Rus -
sia’s invasion of Ukraine weighed on their cur -
rencies.
Securities markets and 
 portfolio investment
Bond market
From the end of the first quarter of 2022, nom -
inal government bond yields rose on balance in 
the major currency areas. This was the govern -
ment bond markets’ response to inflation fig -
ures remaining high, market participants’ in -
creased inflation expectations and the rates lift- 
off initiated by monetary policymakers. More -
over, uncertainty in bond markets increased 
significantly in a reflection of the conflicting 
forces at play in bond markets. On the one 
side, market participants were expecting the 
high inflation pressures in the near term to 
prompt a correspondingly resolute monetary response. For instance, the Federal Reserve 
contributed significantly to higher yields, par -
ticularly in the US bond market, by repeatedly 
responding to inflation with considerable mon -
etary policy tightening measures. On the other 
side, there were growing concerns regarding 
the broader economic outlook. The ECB Gov -
erning Council’s ad hoc meeting and the Fed -
eral Reserve’s routine meeting in mid-  June 
marked a turning point for yields. The ECB Gov -
erning Council’s announcement that it would 
design an anti-  fragmentation instrument (the 
Transmission Protection Instrument, or TPI) had 
a dampening effect on European yields and 
spreads. The Federal Reserve meeting signalled 
that the US central bank could lower policy 
rates again at a potentially faster pace than 
previously expected in the medium term owing 
to the braking effect of previous interest rate 
hikes on the economy. Since then, interest 
rates have therefore responded particularly 
sensitively to US macro news regarding the US 
labour market, for instance, as this provides in -
dications of future economic developments 
and about the interest rate path. On balance, 
the yields on ten- year US Treasuries rose by 55 
basis points to 2.9%.
In the United Kingdom, the yields on ten-  year 
gilts also rose (+70 basis points to 2.3%). The 
Bank of England continued to tighten its mon -
etary policy in response to persistent surpris -
ingly high inflation rates. By contrast, the Bank 
of Japan stuck to its highly accommodative 
monetary policy stance and its ten- year govern -
ment bond yield target within a range of 25 
basis points either side of 0%. It ran counter to  
the international interest rate trend by announ -
cing the option of unlimited bond buying. 
Yields on ten- year Japanese bonds therefore re -
mained virtually unchanged at 0.2%, the upper 
end of the target range.
Yields on ten- year Bunds rose by 55 basis 
points to 1.1% on balance from the end of the 
first quarter. By mid-  June, they had even 
reached a value (1.8%) last seen in early 2014, 
i.e. before the launch of the APP . A model Ten- year govern -
ment bond 
yields up 
globally Government 
bond yields up 
in the United 
Kingdom, 
almost 
unchanged 
in Japan
Higher yield on 
ten- year Federal 
securitiesBond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual ma-
turity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 20220.90.60.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.03.3
–––+++++++++++% p. a., daily data
Euro area
Germany
United States
Japan
United KingdomDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
44

breakdown of the yield curve of Federal secur -
ities suggests that two factors contributed to 
the rise in yields. The first was an increase in 
the forward premia that investors demand as 
compensation for assuming price risks when 
purchasing long-  term bonds. To some extent, 
this is likely to have been a consequence of the 
Eurosystem’s discontinued net asset purchases. 
The second factor was that market participants 
were expecting higher policy rates in response 
to the further rise in inflation rates. However, 
amid mounting scepticism about the economy, 
they gradually rowed back on their expect -
ations that monetary policy would be tight -
ened in the current cycle from mid-  June, which 
reduced yields again somewhat following the 
preceding increase.
The yield spread between ten- year Bunds and 
ten- year government bonds of other euro area 
countries (GDP- weighted average) widened by 
29 basis points to 1.1 percentage point from 
the end of the first quarter. This left the spread 
above its five- year average (0.8  percentage 
point), this five- year analysis covering an entire 
period in which the Eurosystem was active in 
bond markets.1 The widened spread reflected 
the fact that, given the expected normalisation 
of monetary policy, the relative prices of bonds 
with different ratings also returned to normal. 
Hence, the yield spreads of euro area Member 
States with a poorer rating widened somewhat 
more substantially. Euro area spreads narrowed 
again when the ECB Governing Council an -
nounced the introduction of the TPI. This in -
strument is an addition to the Governing Coun -
cil’s toolkit. It can be activated during a period 
of monetary policy normalisation in particular 
to counter disorderly market dynamics that 
pose a threat to the transmission of monetary 
policy across the euro area and are not war -
ranted by country- specific fundamentals. 
Sound and sustainable fiscal and macro-  
economic policies are one of the criteria for 
intervening in the market process. The TPI can 
therefore only be used in exceptional circum -
stances and under strict conditionality. Market 
liquidity indicators did not point to any pro -nounced tightness in the market for euro area 
government bonds during the period under re -
view.
At the end of the reporting period, market-  
based short- term inflation expectations for the 
euro area derived from inflation swaps were 
still very significantly above the 2% definition 
of price stability over a two- year horizon. Mar -
ket participants were expecting inflation to 
peak at 10.2% in December 2022. The re -
newed rise in expectations in the second quar -
ter was probably driven primarily by the impact 
on prices of restrictions on natural gas deliver -
ies from Russia, which some fear may go as far 
as a gas embargo. Market participants are ex -
pecting inflation to decline again during the Widening of 
yield spreads in 
euro area
Market partici -
pants expect a 
sharp rise in 
inflation rates in 
the short termSpreads of ten-year government bonds 
over German Federal bonds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022050100150200250300350400450Basis points, daily data
Italy
Spain
Ireland FranceGreece
Portugal
1 In the environment of generally low interest rates this 
created, private investors were more willing to purchase 
bonds with low ratings in order to earn a somewhat higher 
interest rate (“search for yield”). Between January and Oc -
tober 2019, the Eurosystem did not make any net pur -
chases under the APP , though it did fully reinvest the prin -
cipal payments from maturing securities.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
45

course of 2023 from high levels at the end of 
2022 and to be close to 2% in mid- 2024. Eco -
nomic concerns are probably also reflected in 
the steeper downward trajectory of short- term 
inflation expectations compared with the end 
of March. As an annual average, market par -
ticipants are expecting an inflation rate of 8.5% 
for 2022 and of 6.9% for 2023. A period in 
which high inflation expectations become en -
trenched increases the risk that households and 
enterprises will align their wage and price-  
setting decisions with inflation expectations 
that are no longer oriented to the definition of 
price stability.
Longer- term inflation expectations have de -
clined since the end of the first quarter. The 
five- year forward inflation rate five years ahead, 
which is likewise derived from inflation swaps, 
stood at 2.1% at the end of the period under 
review, down 12 basis points. By contrast, the 
quarterly survey- based inflation expectations 
calculated by Consensus Economics for the 
euro area six to ten years ahead rose in July to 
2.0%, compared with 1.9% in April 2022.
Long- term market- based inflation expectations 
in the euro area thus remained above survey 
expectations and Eurosystem projections, albeit 
to a lesser extent than previously. The risk pre -
mium, i.e. the gap between market expect -
ations and survey data, continued to be posi -
tive, indicating that market participants are still 
anticipating upside risks to inflation. However, 
the risk premium was down on March, which 
points to a weakening of market participants’ 
concerns about very high inflation rates over 
the longer term. This is largely attributable to 
the monetary policy measures that have been 
implemented and growing apprehension about 
the economy.
Market-  based five- year US forward inflation 
rates five years ahead fell to a similar extent as 
those in the euro area (by 11 basis points to 
2.6%). This meant that market- based indicators 
were higher than survey expectations for the 
United States, too. According to Consensus Longer- term 
market- based 
inflation expect -
ations still above 
2%
Market- based 
inflation expect -
ations impacted 
by risk premia
Decline in 
longer- term 
inflation expect -
ations in the 
United StatesForward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Derived  from  the  fixed  cash 
flow arising from inflation swaps which is swapped for the ac-
tual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro 
area and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised 
over the next five or ten years. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 20221.41.82.22.63.0% p.a., weekly averages
Five-year forward inflation rate in 
five years derived from swapsConsensus Economics inflation
expectations in six to ten years
United StatesEuro area
0.81.21.62.02.4
Short-term HICP paths for the euro area
012345678910
++++++++++%
2021 2022 2023 2024
Sources: Fenics Market Data, Consensus Economics, Eurostat 
and Bundesbank calculations. 1 On 21 February 2022, Russia 
recognised  the  independence  of  parts  of  the  Donetsk  and 
Luhansk regions within Ukrainian territory. 2 HICP excluding 
tobacco.
Deutsche BundesbankSurvey averages from 
Consensus EconomicsForward inflation rates
derived from inflation swaps
Actual
annual HICP 231 March 2022
8 August 20228 August 2022 21 February 20221
18 August 2022 Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
46

Economics, survey- based US inflation expect -
ations in six to ten years stood at 2.2% in July.
Since the end of the first quarter, yields on 
European corporate bonds with a residual ma -
turity between seven and ten years have risen 
even more sharply than those on Federal secur -
ities with the same maturity. The close associ -
ation between the risk premia on corporate 
bonds and the interest rate level on Federal 
securities is striking here. On balance, the 
spreads of BBB- rated European financial and 
non- financial corporate bonds over Bunds 
widened by 101 and 56 basis points, respect -
ively. Yields and risk premia on high- yield bonds 
rose particularly sharply. In line with this, the 
credit default premia for debtors with poor 
creditworthiness increased substantially (iTraxx 
Crossover (five years), +154 basis points). By 
significantly marking down bond prices, espe -
cially those issued by highly indebted enter -
prises with a lower credit rating, investors were 
reacting primarily to the normalisation of mon -
etary policy. Market participants were con -
cerned about enterprises’ debt sustainability in 
the face of rising interest rates and a deterior -
ating economic outlook. Measured by yield 
spreads, funding conditions for European en -
terprises across all rating categories were sig -
nificantly above their five- year average. Spreads 
have narrowed again recently.
At €404 billion, gross issuance in the German 
bond market in the second quarter of 2022 
was down somewhat on the previous quarter’s 
figure (€427½ billion). Net of redemptions and 
changes in issuers’ holdings of their own debt 
securities, domestic issuers ramped up their 
capital market borrowing by €34½ billion. The 
outstanding volume of foreign debt securities 
in the German market fell slightly in the second 
quarter, down €5 billion. On balance, the total 
outstanding volume of bonds in Germany thus 
climbed by €29½ billion in the quarter under 
review.
In the second quarter of 2022, the public sec -
tor issued bonds to the tune of €24 billion net, Corporate bond 
yield spreads 
wider
Net issuance of 
German debt 
securities
Lower net public 
sector issuanceYield spreads of corporate bonds
in the euro area*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBoxx indices with a residual maturity of seven 
to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 20220100200300400500600700800900
100200300400High yield1
BBB2
AA2
By sector
BBB financial 
corporations2
BBB non-financial corporations2By rating categoryBasis points, daily data
Investment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2021 2022
Q2 Q1 Q2
Debt securities
Residents 88.2 112.4 40.8
Credit institutions – 20.4 12.0 –  3.0
of which:
Foreign debt securities –  5.8 12.3 6.8
Deutsche Bundesbank 72.2 40.5 25.2
Other sectors 36.4 59.9 18.6
of which:
Domestic debt securities 6.8 24.1 31.4
Non-residents –  4.9 32.7 – 11.3
Shares
Residents 30.3 19.4 13.9
Credit institutions 1.5 – 1.3 –  1.2
of which:
Domestic shares 1.5 – 0.7 –  0.2
Non-banks 28.8 20.6 15.1
of which:
Domestic shares 6.0 11.3 8.0
Non-residents –  0.3 – 9.2 –  5.3
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 21.4 31.8 15.6
Investment in retail funds 9.9 3.9 3.3
of which:
Equity funds 4.3 0.0 3.4
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
47

following €35 billion in the previous three-  
month period. The Federal Government (in -
cluding the resolution agency classified as part 
of central government) issued mainly ten- year 
and 30- year Federal bonds (Bunds) (€20½ bil -
lion and €16½ billion, respectively). This con -
trasted with net redemptions of five- year Fed -
eral notes (Bobls) totalling €6 billion and Treas -
ury discount paper (Bubills) amounting to €3½ 
billion. State and local governments redeemed 
debt securities worth €3 billion on balance.
The quarter under review saw domestic credit 
institutions slightly increase their capital market 
debt by €6½ billion, compared to €44 billion in 
the previous quarter. They primarily issued 
mortgage Pfandbriefe and other bank debt 
securities that can be structured flexibly (€3½ 
billion and €3 billion, respectively). By contrast, 
debt securities issued by specialised credit insti -
tutions were redeemed to the tune of €½ bil -
lion.In the quarter under review, domestic enter -
prises issued bonds worth €4 billion net, fol -
lowing net issuance amounting to €17½ billion 
in the previous quarter. On balance, the bulk of 
this was long- term paper. Non- financial corpor -
ations, which issued just under €4 billion worth 
of bonds, accounted for the largest share.
In the second quarter of 2022, domestic non-  
banks expanded their bond portfolios in the 
domestic bond market by €18½ billion on bal -
ance, purchasing exclusively domestic paper. 
The Bundesbank also acquired debt securities 
worth €25 billion net, largely under the Euro -
system’s asset purchase programmes, with the 
bulk of these purchases consisting of domestic 
paper issued by the public sector. By contrast, 
foreign investors and domestic credit institu -
tions sold debt securities amounting to €11½ 
billion and €3 billion net, respectively.
Equity market
Stock prices continued to decline in inter -
national equity markets. The higher interest 
rates, which reduce the present value of future 
profits via the discount factor effect, put prices 
under pressure, while the gloomier economic 
outlook weakened medium- term earnings 
growth expectations. Persistent material short -
ages and, above all, the high energy costs con -
tinued to rank among the key burdens for en -
terprises. As a result, energy-  intensive sectors 
such as the basic materials industry and enter -
prises that would be particularly affected by a 
halt to supplies of Russian natural gas recorded 
above- average price falls. By contrast, the share 
prices of enterprises in the energy sector proved 
to be relatively robust. Concerns about the sup -
ply of energy and gas as well as about eco -
nomic developments did not, however, trans -
late into a significant decline in risk appetite 
among equity market participants. This is indi -
cated, inter alia, by the relevant volatility in -
dices, which measure market participants’ un -
certainty about future price developments and 
for the most part moved sideways. Towards the Slight rise in 
credit institu -
tions’ capital 
market debtNet issuance of 
corporate bonds
Purchases of 
debt securities
Continued slump 
in international 
equity marketsEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankBank indicesBeginning of 2020 = 100, log scale, daily data
Total market indices
6580100120140160
506080100120
2020 2021 2022Euro area
(EURO STOXX)Japan
(Nikkei 225)United States
(S&P 500)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
48

end of the reporting period, some good quar -
terly results also caused a moderate upsurge. 
Nevertheless, on balance, the US S&P 500 
(-5.4%), the EURO STOXX (-4.3%) and the 
CDAX (-9.8%) were down significantly on the 
end of March. Over the same period, stock 
prices in the United Kingdom rose slightly 
(FTSE  100: +0.2%). The FTSE index includes 
many commodity- intensive enterprises, which 
tend to benefit from high energy and commod -
ity prices. The Japanese Nikkei also recorded 
gains (+4.0%).
Bank stocks registered heavier losses than the 
total market. Compared with the end of the 
first quarter, bank shares in the European EURO 
STOXX fell by 8.1%, while shares of US banks 
recorded a somewhat greater fall still (-8.4%). 
The decline in bank share prices was partly at -
tributable to the fact that some big banks re -
ported weaker than expected profits for the 
second quarter and had to recognise provi -
sions. In addition, European banking super -
visors recommended that credit institutions ex -
ercise restraint in their distribution policies and 
increase risk provisioning.
Measured in terms of the earnings yield based 
on earnings expectations for the next 12 
months, European and US equities (EURO 
STOXX and S&P 500, respectively) were valued 
more favourably at the end of the reporting 
period than at the end of March. This was 
mainly because, despite the slump in share 
prices, analysts actually raised the profit outlook 
for the year somewhat. The implied cost of 
equity, which can be calculated as the sum of 
the risk- free interest rate and the risk premium 
using a dividend discount model, showed a dif -
ferent picture, declining in both currency areas 
since the end of the first quarter. According to 
this indicator, the valuation level thus rose 
slightly, which was mainly due to the lower risk 
premium. The medium- term earnings prospects 
of European and US enterprises, which are fed 
into the calculation of the implied cost of equity, 
also declined significantly. However, this does 
not provide a clear signal of recession, as the Bank stocks in 
the euro area 
fell more than 
market as a 
whole
Indicators of 
valuation level 
present mixed 
pictureMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2021 2022
Q2 Q1 Q2p
I. Current account + 63.9 +  52.3 + 24.8
1. Goods + 47.1 +  34.3 + 27.4
2. Services +  6.4 –   2.5 –  7.1
3. Primary income + 18.6 +  36.9 + 16.2
4. Secondary income –  8.2 –  16.4 – 11.6
II. Capital account –  1.8 –   1.9 –  4.3
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) + 84.6 +  94.0 + 49.4
1. Direct investment + 12.6 +   4.7 + 38.1
Domestic investment 
abroad + 30.3 +  44.8 + 54.8
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country + 17.7 +  40.1 + 16.7
2. Portfolio investment + 67.9 +  38.4 + 17.1
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities + 59.0 +  59.7 +  1.5
Shares 1 + 10.3 +   7.2 +  5.2
Investment fund shares 2+ 24.7 +   4.0 +  1.2
of which:
Money market fund 
shares –  1.4 –   8.7 –  0.4
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 –  6.2 +   1.3 –  2.6
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 + 30.2 +  47.2 –  2.3
of which:
Denominated in euro 5 + 19.7 +  42.3 +  4.3
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities –  8.9 +  21.3 – 15.7
Shares 1 –  5.0 –   9.2 –  6.0
Investment fund shares +  1.0 –   2.2 +  1.6
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 +  1.9 –   5.2 –  7.1
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 –  6.8 +  37.9 –  4.2
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 6 – 12.2 +  16.8 –  3.1
3. Financial derivatives 7 + 11.5 +  10.6 + 13.9
4. Other investment 8 –  7.5 +  38.1 – 20.3
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 9 – 11.0 – 126.3 – 25.5
Enterprises and 
 households 10 + 11.8 +  60.0 – 16.0
General government –  2.1 –   5.2 – 10.1
Bundesbank –  6.1 + 109.5 + 31.3
5. Reserve assets +  0.1 +   2.2 +  0.6
IV. Errors and omissions 11 + 22.5 +  43.5 + 29.0
1  Including participation certifi  cates. 2  Including reinvested 
earnings. 3  Short- term: original maturity of up to one year. 
4 Long- term: original maturity of more than one year or unlim-
ited. 5  Including outstanding foreign Deutsche  Mark bonds. 
6 Including bonds issued by the former Federal Railways, the 
former Federal Post Offi   ce and the former Treuhand agency. 
7  Balance of transactions arising from options and fi  nancial 
futures  contracts as well as employee stock options. 8 Includes, 
in particular, loans and trade credits as well as currency and de-
posits. 9 Excluding the Bundesbank. 10  Includes the following 
sectors: fi  nancial corporations (excluding monetary fi  nancial in-
stitutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and 
non- profi  t institutions serving households. 11  Statistical errors 
and omissions resulting from the difference between the bal-
ance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current 
account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
49

medium-  term earnings expectations fell from 
record high levels and were still above the five-  
year average at the end of the period under re -
view. By historical standards, the implied cost of 
equity continues to point to a rather high valu -
ation of US equities and a rather low valuation 
of European equities.
German stock corporations raised €2½ billion 
in new funds on balance in the reporting quar -
ter (previous quarter: €1½ billion). The volume 
of foreign shares in the German market rose by 
€6 billion over the same period. On balance, 
equities were acquired by domestic non- banks 
(€15 billion). By contrast, foreign investors and 
domestic credit institutions pared back their 
equity portfolios by €5½ billion and €1 billion 
net, respectively.
Mutual funds
In the second quarter of 2022, domestic in -
vestment companies recorded inflows of €19 
billion, compared with €35½ billion in the pre -
vious quarter. On balance, specialised funds re -
served for institutional investors were by far 
the primary beneficiaries (€15½ billion). Of the 
various asset classes, mixed securities funds, in 
particular, registered significant inflows of cap -
ital (€7 billion), with open-  end real estate 
funds (€5 billion), equity funds (€3½ billion) 
and funds of funds (€2 billion) also attracting 
capital. The outstanding volume of foreign 
mutual fund shares in Germany rose by €1 bil -
lion in the period under review. Mutual fund 
shares were bought on balance almost exclu -
sively by domestic non- banks, which added 
fund shares worth €19½ billion net to their 
portfolios. These consisted almost entirely of 
domestic mutual fund shares. Non- resident in -
vestors expanded their fund portfolios by €1½ 
billion net.Direct investment
Transactions in cross- border portfolio invest -
ment resulted in net capital exports of €17 bil -
lion in the second quarter of 2022. Direct in -
vestment, too, led to net capital outflows (€38 
billion).
Enterprises domiciled in Germany expanded 
their foreign direct investment by €55 billion 
from April to June 2022 on balance, compared 
to €45 billion in the previous quarter. In the 
process, they boosted the equity capital they 
provided to foreign affiliates by €28½ billion, 
with reinvested profits accounting for roughly 
half of this figure. In addition, firms resident in 
Germany provided affiliated group entities 
abroad with additional credit worth €26 billion, 
relying, on balance, chiefly on loans to do so. 
The second quarter saw considerable volumes 
of direct investment flowing from Germany to 
the Netherlands (€10½ billion), Luxembourg 
(€8 billion), the United Kingdom (€5½ billion), 
Switzerland and the United States (€5 billion 
each). Flows of direct investment to Russia 
were extremely low in the period under review.
Foreign enterprises likewise increased their dir -
ect investment in Germany between April and 
June 2022 (€16½ billion, compared with €40 
billion in the first quarter of 2022). They 
boosted their equity capital in German subsid -
iaries by €6 billion, while €10½ billion flowed 
to German enterprises via intra- group lending. 
This was due exclusively to additional loans, as 
trade credits primarily saw redemptions on bal -
ance. Particularly high inflows of direct invest -
ment were recorded in the second quarter 
from the United States (€3½ billion), the Neth -
erlands and France (€3 billion each) and Switz -
erland (€2½ billion). By contrast, Belgium (€2½ 
billion) and the United Kingdom (€1½ billion) 
reduced their direct investment in Germany.Equity market 
funding
Sales and 
purchases  of 
mutual fund 
sharesDirect invest -
ment sees net 
capital exports
German direct 
investment 
abroad results in 
capital exports
Foreign direct 
investment in 
Germany pro -
duces capital 
inflowsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
50

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
Economic output in Germany stagnated in the 
second quarter of 2022. According to the Fed -
eral Statistical Office‘s flash estimate, seasonally 
adjusted real gross domestic product (GDP) 
stalled compared with the previous quarter.1 
Growth for the first quarter was revised signifi -
cantly upwards to 0.8% as against the previous 
publication.2 This meant that GDP was recently 
barely short of its level in the fourth quarter of 
2019, the quarter before the outbreak of the 
coronavirus crisis. The economy was caught 
between opposing forces in the second quar -
ter. Although the elimination of most corona -
virus mitigation measures lent a strong boost 
to previously beleaguered service providers, 
surging prices and uncertainty associated with 
the war in Ukraine put pressure on households 
and enterprises. Industry was also confronted 
with weaker demand and the persistence of 
marked supply bottlenecks. Shortages of ma -
terials weighed on the construction sector, too, 
which was already suffering from a labour mis -
match. Furthermore, construction activity had 
expanded sharply in the first quarter owing to 
favourable weather conditions, resulting in a 
countermovement in the second quarter. Un -
favourable developments in the gas market 
since mid-  June have been dampening the out -
look for economic activity. Overall, German 
economic output could more or less stagnate 
again in the third quarter, while at the same 
time the probability of GDP declining in the 
fourth quarter of 2022 and the first quarter of 
2023 has increased significantly.The economy was buoyed mainly by private 
consumption in the second quarter. The elimin -
ation of coronavirus mitigation measures went 
hand in hand with a strong increase in con -
sumer spending on services to which access 
had previously been restricted. Exports also 
provided a boost. Business investment in new 
machinery and equipment is likely to have risen 
only marginally owing to the high level of un -
certainty and supply bottlenecks. Construction 
investment is likely to have fallen sharply, how -
ever.
Price- adjusted exports of goods to both euro 
area and non- euro area countries increased sig -
nificantly in the second quarter. The value of 
exports to the United States rose particularly 
steeply. By contrast, exports to China fell 
sharply in April and May as a result of the lock -
downs there. Exports to Russia experienced a German eco -
nomic output 
stagnant in Q2 
2022Private con -
sumption and 
exports buoyed 
economy
Goods exports 
up significantly
Aggregate output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Price 
and calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 229698100102104106108
–12–9–6–30+3+6+9+12Adjusted for price, seasonal and calendar effects
2015 = 100, log scale
Gross domestic product
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
1 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this 
text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, pro -
vided they can be verified and quantified.
2 As usual at this release date for GDP statistics, the results 
published previously for the quarters and years from 2018 
onwards have been revised and new statistical information 
has been taken into account. The Federal Statistical Office 
attributed the strong revisions from 2020 onwards to the 
increased uncertainty in calculations for the years affected 
by the coronavirus pandemic (see Federal Statistical Office 
(2022)).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
51

very considerable decline due to sanctions. 
Broken down by category of goods, price-  
adjusted exports of consumer and capital 
goods were up substantially. Exports of inter -
mediate goods dropped slightly, however.
Business investment in machinery and equip -
ment is likely to have increased only marginally 
in the second quarter. Uncertainty surrounding 
the war in Ukraine had a negative impact on 
the propensity to invest. Supply bottlenecks 
and lower demand for industrial products are 
also likely to have been contributing factors. 
Although more machinery and equipment was 
imported from abroad, less was sourced from within Germany. Imports of capital goods, for 
example, rose sharply both in terms of value 
and after price adjustment. By contrast, manu -
facturers of capital goods experienced a dis -
tinct drop in nominal sales in Germany, even 
posting a strong decline after price adjustment.
Construction investment is likely to have fallen 
steeply in the second quarter. Part of the de -
cline can be explained by the fact that the first 
quarter had been bolstered by mild weather 
conditions and there was a countermovement 
in the second quarter. However, higher interest 
rates for building finance and construction 
costs are also expected to have dampened in -
vestment. Nominal sales in the main construc -
tion sector available up to May signal particu -
larly sharp declines in housing construction and 
public construction, but investment in commer -
cial buildings was probably lower as well.
Private consumption is likely to have risen sig -
nificantly in the second quarter of 2022. The 
elimination of most coronavirus mitigation 
measures lent a strong boost to previously be -
leaguered services. Price-  adjusted sales in the 
hotel and restaurant sector were considerably 
higher, for example. High inflation and uncer -
tainty about the future supply of energy 
weighed on households‘ purchasing power 
and willingness to spend, however. This was 
particularly noticeable when it came to the pur -
chase of new cars and in the retail sector. The 
number of new private car registrations went 
down considerably according to the German 
Association of the Automotive Industry (VDA). 
Price- adjusted retail sales likewise fell sharply.
Price- adjusted imports of goods increased 
strongly in the second quarter, with imports 
from non- euro area countries showing a 
steeper rise than imports from euro area coun -
tries. The value of imports from Russia declined 
considerably. By contrast, imports from OPEC 
countries were substantially higher, partly 
driven by a sizeable rise in import prices for en -
ergy. Price-  adjusted imports of intermediate 
and capital goods increased sharply, whereas Business invest -
ment in machin -
ery and equip -
ment likely to 
have risen only 
marginallySteep fall in 
construction  
investment
Private con -
sumption up 
significantly 
Strong increase 
in imports of 
goods8090100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 228090100110
90100110120Seasonally and calendar adjusted, quarterly data
to euro area countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted18090100110
€ bnto non-euro area countriesof which:MonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
52

imports of consumer goods were up only 
slightly. Energy imports were down strongly 
again.
Sectoral trends
After seasonal adjustment, second- quarter in -
dustrial output was slightly down on the previ -
ous quarter‘s level (-1%). The war against 
Ukraine led to new supply chain problems and 
burdens related to high inflation and uncer -
tainty also increased. Industrial output picked 
up again slightly following the steep decline in 
March. In June, however, it was still markedly 
below the February level, which was barely af -
fected by the Russian attack on Ukraine. Pro -
duction of intermediate goods fell distinctly in 
the second quarter compared with the previ -
ous quarter. The manufacture of chemical 
products and other non- metallic mineral prod -
ucts declined particularly sharply. The high en -
ergy intensity of these sectors, combined with 
the strong rise in energy prices, is likely to have 
been the key factor in this. Production of cap -
ital goods was down slightly. While production 
in the mechanical engineering sector flagged 
somewhat, significantly more motor vehicles 
and motor vehicle parts were manufactured. 
Production of consumer goods remained stable 
in the second quarter.
According to the ifo Institute, capacity utilisa -
tion of tangible fixed assets in manufacturing 
remained constant between the surveys in April 
and July. It thus continued to distinctly exceed 
its long- term average. Although the production 
of capital goods declined somewhat in the 
second quarter, manufacturers of capital goods 
reported a marked increase in capacity utilisa -
tion. By contrast, capacity utilisation decreased 
slightly among intermediate goods producers 
and remained virtually unchanged in the case 
of consumer goods. This is consistent with de -
velopments in the production of intermediate 
and consumer goods.In the second quarter, construction output fell 
steeply compared with the first quarter in sea -
sonally adjusted terms. A similarly strong de -
cline was recorded in the finishing trades and in 
main construction, as well as its subsectors of 
building construction and civil engineering. 
One reason was the previously high output due 
to the mild weather conditions in winter but 
other supply-  side factors also weighed on the 
construction sector. The percentage of enter -
prises in the main construction sector reporting 
disruption to their activity due to a lack of staff 
was significantly higher than in the previous 
quarter, according to surveys by the ifo Insti -
tute. There was also a considerable increase in 
the percentage of enterprises stating that pro -
duction is being impeded by a shortage of ma -
terials. In addition, the rise in interest rates on 
housing loans is likely to have put a strain on 
the construction sector. Utilisation of equip -
ment was down sharply in line with the decline 
in output; it remained high in a long- term com -
parison, however.Industrial pro -
duction bur -
dened by supply 
bottlenecks, 
high uncertainty 
and a sharp rise 
in prices
Industrial cap -
acity utilisation 
stableSteep decline in 
construction 
outputOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2280859095100105110
951001051101151201251301351402015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data, log scale
MonthlyIndustry
Main constructionIndustry excluding
automotive
Construction1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
53

Economic output in the services sector is likely 
to have risen noticeably in the second quarter. 
Growth was driven by those services which had 
previously been severely restricted by the 
coronavirus protective measures. Activity in the 
hotel and restaurant sector is expected to have 
increased substantially, for example. According 
to surveys conducted by the ifo Institute, busi -
ness conditions in the services sector (excluding 
trade) improved strongly. However, surging 
prices exerted considerable pressure on the re -
tail sector. Retail sales of food, beverages and 
tobacco products, as well as furniture, furnish -
ings, household appliances and home improve -
ment materials fell particularly sharply. The re -
laxation of containment measures also brought 
a significant drop in retail sales via mail order 
and via the internet. By contrast, strong growth 
was posted in retail sales of clothing, footwear 
and leather goods. Motor vehicle sales are also 
likely to have been affected by high inflation 
and uncertainty in connection with the war in 
Ukraine. According to data provided by the 
German Association of the Automotive Indus -
try, new passenger car registrations were down 
considerably. The price- adjusted data available 
up to May show that wholesale sales also 
dropped sharply.
Labour market
Economic strains also left their mark on the la -
bour market in the second quarter. The labour 
market‘s rapid catch- up process following the 
lifting of pandemic restrictions lost consider -
able momentum. Even so, employment con -
tinued to rise. Only relatively little use of short- 
time work was still being made. Whilst un -
employment increased considerably starting in 
early June 2022, this was due solely to the fact 
that Ukrainian refugees were included in Ger -
man social security legislation. Positive expect -
ations regarding future developments were 
pared back slightly.
In the second quarter of 2022, growth in the 
number of people in work was only around Distinct growth 
in services sector 
likely
Economic strains 
destroying 
momentum of 
labour market 
catch- upLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022Monthly43.544.044.545.045.5
31.031.532.032.533.033.534.034.5–1,000–5000+500+1,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–600–400–2000+200+400+600MonthlySeasonally adjusted, quarterly data
JulyMillion
Million
Million500700900Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployment
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies2EmployedJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
April-
MayDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
54

half as high as in the first quarter. Nevertheless, 
looking at the quarterly average, total employ -
ment still exceeded the first- quarter level on a 
seasonally adjusted basis by a considerable 
133,000 persons, or 0.3%, due to the statistical 
carry- over effect. The rise in employment has 
been largely attributable to the increasing num -
ber of jobs subject to social security contribu -
tions for some time now. Self- employment is 
still on the decline, and exclusively low- paid 
part- time employment is showing some degree 
of stabilisation. Both forms of employment are 
far from their pre- pandemic levels, quite in 
contrast to employment subject to social secur -
ity contributions.
The moderate employment growth is mainly 
due to jobs subject to social security contribu -
tions being filled at a slower pace, with almost 
all sectors being affected. In the production 
sector (excluding construction), supply bottle -
necks, logistical problems and uncertainty 
caused by the war in Ukraine are likely to delay 
the awaited recovery from losses sustained 
during the pandemic. In addition, this is the 
only sector in which short- time work continues 
to play a significant role. In almost all other sec -
tors of the economy, short- time work for eco -
nomic reasons has tailed off considerably in re -
cent months. At the same time, however, em -
ployment in those sectors increased only at a 
subdued pace. This is also partly due to the 
mild weather conditions in the first quarter. The 
subsequent comparatively muted pick- up in the 
second quarter is likely to explain, at least, the 
stagnation in seasonally adjusted terms in the 
construction sector, which had previously ex -
perienced strong employment growth. How -
ever, the shortage of qualified staff is also likely 
to put the brake on stronger employment 
growth in healthcare and social work, for ex -
ample. In recent months, the only exception 
seeing sustained robust employment growth 
has been the IT sector, which has benefited 
from structural change.
Developments in registered unemployment 
have been influenced by Ukrainian refugees re -ceiving basic social security payments. Un -
employment was in decline up to May, but rose 
steeply in June. After a three- month transi -
tional period, most refugees are now entitled 
to receive the basic welfare allowance (SGB II). 
According to the Federal Employment Agency, 
in July, the latest month for which data are 
available, around 168,000 more Ukrainians 
were registered as unemployed than in Febru -
ary, before the influx of refugees.3 Without the 
effect of refugees from Ukraine, unemploy -
ment would have been slightly below the pre -
vious quarter‘s level throughout the second 
quarter. After seasonal adjustment, a total of 
2.46 million persons were registered as un -
employed in July. The unemployment rate went 
up by 0.4 percentage point to 5.4% from May 
to July.
Ukrainian refugees registering as unemployed 
is also a first step towards labour market inte -
gration. However, data on developments in 
employment by nationality are not yet available 
for the period since the Russian attack on 
Ukraine. The Federal Statistical Office has al -
ready recorded a net influx of more than 
630,000 new arrivals in its migration statistics, 
which currently run up to April. Whether 
Ukrainian refugees, the majority of whom are 
women and children, have a notable impact on 
the supply of labour in the medium term is 
likely to depend on how the war progresses 
and how keen they are to return home – the 
desire to return will probably be great given the 
fact that many families have been separated.
Economic strains are increasingly causing en -
terprises to slightly scale back their employ -
ment plans, which have been very expansion -
ary to date. The employment barometer of the 
ifo Institute, which conducts surveys of enter -
prises to chart the recruitment plans of trade Employment 
increased more 
slowly in Q2 
than in Q1
Growth in 
employment 
subject to social 
security contri -
butions slower 
in almost all 
sectorsUnemployment 
up significantly 
by granting of 
basic welfare 
allowance to 
Ukrainian 
refugees 
Degree to which 
Ukrainian refu -
gees integrated 
into labour 
market  still 
uncertain
Employment 
plans somewhat 
more cautious
3 That being said, the Federal Employment Agency reports 
increased uncertainty in unemployment figures for Ukrain -
ians. In particular, availability on the labour market may be 
restricted by childcare duties or illness, which still needs to 
be examined in detail. Initially, the focus was on the grant -
ing of basic social security benefits. See Statistics provided 
by the Federal Employment Agency (2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
55

and industry over the coming three months, 
fell significantly across all sectors in June and 
July. The survey of developments in employ -
ment conducted by the Institute for Employ -
ment Research (IAB) among managers of the 
regional employment agencies remained some -
what more stable, but was also tilted to the 
downside. Nevertheless, enterprises intend to 
increase employment on balance. The reported 
number of vacancies subject to social security 
contributions has also fallen slightly in the past 
two months, but remains very high. The Fed -
eral Employment Agency‘s BA-  X job index also 
declined after rising robustly over a two- year 
period. The long and ever increasing time taken 
to fill vacancies reflects the ongoing shortage 
of staff in large parts of the economy. The sur -
vey on unemployment carried out by the IAB 
shows a further rise in unemployment over the 
next three months. Its informative value is im -
paired by the registration of refugees, however.Wages and prices
Negotiated wages grew more weakly in the 
second quarter of 2022 than in the first, rising 
by 1.9% on the year in Q2 compared with 
4.4% in Q1. In the first quarter, however, high 
bonus payments in industry and coronavirus 
bonuses had temporarily caused the growth 
rate to soar. By contrast, adjusting for these 
bonus payments, negotiated rates of basic pay 
rose more sharply in the second quarter than in 
the first, climbing by 2.1% as opposed to 1.6%. 
Actual earnings are likely to have once again 
risen more strongly than negotiated wages in 
the second quarter, with growth being hardly 
any smaller than in the first quarter. This was 
due primarily to the significantly higher number 
of hours worked in a year- on- year comparison 
owing to the massive drop in short- time work 
in 2022.
At present, the growth in negotiated wages is 
still being driven by old collective agreements, 
which were concluded in an environment of 
lower inflation rates and pandemic- related 
challenges. That said, some new pay deals con -
cluded in the second quarter, in which inflation 
had risen sharply, were slightly higher than pre -
viously. Despite this, they fell well short of the 
annual consumer inflation rate. The still high 
level of uncertainty, stemming first and fore -
most from the effects of the war in Ukraine, as 
well as the sometimes high cost burden on en -
terprises stood in the way of higher pay deals. 
Annualised wage growth in the latest wage 
agreements for Deutsche Telekom, the steel in -
dustry and office cleaning companies ranged 
from 3.1% to 6.1% for the middle pay groups. 
Agreements at cooperative banks and in the 
plastics processing industry were distinctly 
lower. In addition, some agreements concluded 
in the first half of the year already factored in 
the increase in the general statutory minimum 
wage to €10.45 per hour from 1 July 2022 as 
well as the decision to raise it further to €12 
from 1 October 2022. This benefited the lower 
pay groups, in particular.Negotiated 
wages excluding 
bonus payments 
still up moder -
ately in Q2
Recent wage 
agreements con -
tain higher rates2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 202210123456
–++++++Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Percentage
points
–2–10+1+2%
Q1Wage drift1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 Wage drift 
is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual ear-
nings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche BundesbankQuarterly
dataDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
56

The ongoing loss of purchasing power due to 
high inflation is likely to play an increasingly im -
portant role in upcoming wage negotiations. 
The trade unions‘ minimum demand is com -
pensation for the high inflation rates. In the 
metal- working and electrical engineering in -
dustry and at Volkswagen AG, the IG Metall 
trade union demanded a wage increase of 8% 
to apply for a 12- month period. Wage increases 
will be dampened somewhat by the ongoing 
high level of uncertainty, concerns about jobs 
and the limited scope for income distribution 
resulting from higher import prices. Nonethe -
less, wage settlements will probably be higher 
than in the second quarter because of growing 
labour market shortages, amongst other fac -
tors.
The exceptionally strong rise in seasonally ad -
justed consumer prices (as measured by the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices – HICP) 
continued into the second quarter, too. Energy 
prices went up as crude oil prices continued to increase. The latter rose even more sharply in 
euro terms as a result of the marked depreci -
ation against the US dollar. This development 
obscured the temporary reduction in fuel taxes 
(fuel rebate). The lower tax rates were intro -
duced for three months starting from June as 
part of the government‘s relief package and 
were probably also passed on to end custom -
ers for the most part. Furthermore, tariffs for 
electricity and gas, which had already been 
substantially increased at the beginning of 
2022, were again raised significantly in the 
second quarter. The main adjustments to the 
tariffs usually take place at the start of the year, 
with only minor changes being made through -
out the rest of the year. Food prices rose even 
more sharply as not only the prices of agricul -
tural products but also other costs, such as 
those for transport and packaging, went up 
markedly. Prices for non- energy industrial 
goods were likewise somewhat higher again 
than in the previous quarter. Rising commodity 
costs and supply bottlenecks are likely to have Potentially sub -
stantial wage 
agreements in 
the coming 
months
Inflation in Q2 
still extremely 
dynamicPrice developments at economic stages as classified for HICP purposes
–400+40+80+120+160Year-on-year percentage change
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
1 Bundesbank calculations (in euro) based on daily prices in USD as quoted by Bloomberg Finance L.P. 2 Including beverages and to-
bacco products.  3 ECB calculations of DG AGRI prices based on the European Commission’s farm gate and wholesale prices. 4 Analog-
ous to HICP classification “non-energy industrial goods”; Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.
Deutsche Bundesbank10010203040
–++++
3036
–++80+
0+20+40+60Crude oil price1 (right-hand scale)
HICP – food2Producer prices for food in the euro area3 (right-hand scale)HICP – energy
3036912
–++++
–30+3+6+9+12
HICP – non-energy industrial goods Industrial producer prices4JulyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
57

been the main factors at play here. Enterprises 
swiftly passed them on to consumers. By con -
trast, there will probably be a certain delay be -
fore the depreciation of the euro leaves its 
mark on retail prices for these products. The 
cost of services continued to rise markedly up 
to May. In June, however, prices fell distinctly 
as a result of the introduction of the €9 ticket 
for local/ regional public transport, which is also 
part of the relief package and is available for 
three months. Nonetheless, the underlying 
trend of marked price increases for services 
continued unabated in June, too.
In annual terms, the average HICP rate rose to 
8.3% in the second quarter. In May, it hit a new 
peak of 8.7%, but temporarily weakened again 
slightly in June in the wake of the relief pack -
age. The rate excluding energy and food 
climbed to 3.7% in the second quarter. In June, 
however, it likewise fell slightly again as a result 
of the temporary introduction of the €9 ticket.
In July, prices surged again on the month in 
seasonally adjusted terms. Food prices, in par -
ticular, continued to rise very sharply. Prices for 
some products even recorded significant 
double-  digit percentage increases. Energy 
prices did not fall, but remained constant. 
Crude oil prices declined and the government 
assumed the renewable energy levy (EEG levy), 
which had previously accounted for a consider -
able part of electricity tariffs.4 However, this 
was offset mainly by higher gas prices. Prices 
for non- energy industrial goods continued to 
rise very dynamically, and services also recorded 
significant price increases again after the relief 
provided by the introduction of the €9 ticket in 
June. Annual headline inflation climbed from 
8.2% to 8.5%.5 The rate excluding energy and 
food held steady at 3.2%.
Another marked rise in the inflation rate is ex -
pected once the measures contained in the re -
lief package expire in September. The increase 
in the general statutory minimum wage will 
create additional cost pressures.6 In the fourth 
quarter, prices will probably gradually start to reflect the depreciation of the euro, too. In 
addition, a levy on gas tariffs is set to be intro -
duced in October, while the VAT rate on gas is 
to be lowered from 19% to 7% at the same 
time.7 All in all, the inflation rate could reach a 
level of 10% in the fourth quarter. However, 
the inflation outlook remains extremely uncer -
tain, due notably to the unclear situation in the 
commodity markets, although price risks are 
still tilted more to the upside at present.
Order books and outlook
German economic output is likely to more or 
less stagnate again in the third quarter, with 
positive and negative factors remaining broadly 
balanced according to current estimates. The 
situation in the gas market is tight owing to the 
further reduction in gas deliveries from Russia 
at the end of July. The high level of uncertainty 
surrounding the supply of gas over the coming 
winter and the sharp increases in prices are 
likely to place a considerable strain on house -
holds and enterprises. The market research in -
stitute GfK found that consumer sentiment is 
poor, and firms‘ business expectations fell to 
very low levels. According to ifo Institute sur -
veys, supply bottlenecks in industry and con -
struction are still a major problem.8 Moreover, 
the shortage of skilled workers recently reached 
an all- time high.9 In addition to supply- side 
strains, demand is flagging in industry and con -
struction. By contrast, the elimination of 
coronavirus protection measures continues to 
provide positive stimuli for previously belea -Inflation rate still 
exceptionally 
high despite 
relief pack -
age, …
… even record -
ing a further rise 
in July and …
… likely to hit 
new highs in Q4Economic 
output  likely to 
stagnate again 
in Q3
4 Suppliers are legally obliged to pass on the relief provided 
by the government’s assumption of the EEG levy to their 
end customers. However, this appears to have been largely 
offset by the sharp rise in the costs of procuring electricity.
5 By comparison, the annual rate of inflation according to 
the national consumer price index (CPI) declined from 7.6% 
to 7.5%.
6 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a).
7 The levy will amount to just over 2.4 cents per kilowatt 
hour at first. In addition to this, a balancing neutrality 
charge and a storage neutrality charge are also to be intro -
duced.
8 In some areas, they could be reinforced by the fact that 
low water levels are increasingly affecting inland waterway 
transport.
9 See ifo Institute (2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
58

guered service providers and related private 
consumption. In addition, the latest data sug -
gest that industry and foreign trade have been 
able to withstand adverse factors until recently. 
According to data from the German Associ -
ation of the Automotive Industry, the number 
of passenger cars manufactured in July rose 
sharply in seasonally adjusted terms compared 
with the second quarter. This is consistent with 
enterprises‘ assessment of the business situ -
ation, which has deteriorated as per the latest 
ifo Institute survey results, although the bal -
ance values remain positive.
Economic developments will be affected in the 
third quarter and beyond by unfavourable de -
velopments in the gas market. To date, the gas 
supply from Russia has not been cut off al -
together as had been assumed in the adverse 
scenario outlined in the Bundesbank‘s June 
projection.10 However, gas deliveries from Rus -
sia did decline significantly from June on -
wards.11 Larger deliveries from other countries 
only partly compensated for this. In addition, 
the price of natural gas on the spot market and 
for natural gas futures rose sharply as a result 
of supply cuts from Russia. As things stand, the 
average spot price for July and August was 
closer to what had been assumed in the ad -
verse rather than the baseline scenario of the 
June projection. Industry and households con -
sumed less natural gas than in the previous 
year, which was mainly due to the sharp rise in 
gas prices and the mild temperatures in the 
spring, but savings in consumption had already 
been taken into account in the projection. The 
gas storage level was only slightly above the 
level assumed in the adverse scenario at the 
end of the period under review. The Federal 
Network Agency, too, currently sees a high risk 
of a gas shortage in the fourth quarter of 2022 
and first quarter of 2023 unless industry and 
households make substantial additional sav -Future economic 
developments 
hampered by 
unfavourable 
developments in 
the gas marketDemand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 22708090100110120
–30–20–100+10+20+30+40+50
708090100110120130
8090100110120
90100110120130140
–100+10+20Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data
DomesticInternationalLog scale
of which:Log scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Main construction orders
%%TotalMonthly
10 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b).
11 For information on gas deliveries and gas storage levels, 
see Federal Network Agency (2022a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
59

ings.12 The risk that economic output will de -
cline in the coming winter has therefore in -
creased significantly.
High energy prices and concerns about a gas 
shortage are having an impact on business sen -
timent. The ifo business climate index declined 
significantly in July compared with the second 
quarter. Business expectations saw a particu -
larly steep fall, hitting their lowest levels since 
April 2020. They were negative in all sectors 
and only showed a slight improvement in the 
main construction sector. In addition, produc -
tion plans and export expectations also 
worsened significantly in the manufacturing 
sector. The assessment of the business situation 
likewise deteriorated broadly, although not as 
strongly as expectations did. The hotel and res -
taurant industry and business and support ser -
vices were an exception in this regard. The indi -
cator here was still considerably higher than on 
average during the second quarter.
Industrial new orders decreased substantially in 
the second quarter. Much of the decline is at -
tributable to large orders, but even factoring 
these out, the volume of new orders fell signifi -
cantly. There were considerably fewer orders 
from non- euro area countries, but demand 
from euro area countries and from within Ger -
many likewise showed a distinct decline. 
Broken down by sector, the volume of orders 
received by manufacturers of capital and inter -
mediate goods dropped steeply. By contrast, 
demand for consumer goods continued to rise 
sharply, although orders for pharmaceutical 
products declined markedly. Despite the re -
duced demand, the stock of unprocessed 
orders continued to grow. According to Federal 
Statistical Office data, the order backlog was 
significantly higher in the second quarter than 
in the first. The reach of the order books 
climbed to a new peak. The ifo Institute, how -
ever, reports that manufacturing firms rated 
their order books even more negatively than in 
the first quarter.Supply- side factors are currently weighing on 
construction activity. For example, the share of 
firms in the main construction sector whose 
construction activity is affected by a shortage 
of labour according to ifo surveys has risen 
sharply again of late. The percentage of firms 
citing material shortages declined, but none -
theless remained high. Higher mortgage rates 
and construction prices are dragging on de -
mand for construction services. In April and 
May – the period up to which data are avail -
able – new orders in the main construction sec -
tor dropped sharply. According to the ifo Insti -
tute‘s survey, however, the reach of order 
books in July was only slightly lower than its 
peak in February 2022, indicating that orders 
are still at a healthy level. In month- on- month 
terms, equipment utilisation fell for the fifth 
time in a row, yet continued to significantly ex -
ceed its long- term average.
Catch- up and backlog effects in the use of pre -
viously restricted services will probably bolster 
private consumption in the third quarter as 
well. However, high price increases are further 
reducing households‘ purchasing power and 
concerns about a looming shortage of gas in 
the winter are weighing on consumer senti -
ment. For example, the consumer climate index 
calculated by the market research institute GfK 
recently dropped again from what had previ -
ously been its all- time low, with a clear deteri -
oration being seen once again in income and 
economic expectations, in particular.Business 
sentiment  
deteriorated 
Substantial drop 
in industrial new 
ordersConstruction 
sector burdened 
by supply- side 
factors as well 
as higher mort -
gage rates and 
construction 
prices
High inflation 
and concerns 
about energy 
supply weighing 
on private 
consumption 
12 See also the scenarios of the Federal Network Agency 
(2022b) regarding possible gas supply developments be -
tween July 2022 and June 2023. In the worst case scen -
ario, the special report produced by the research project 
group “Gemeinschaftsdiagnose” on the risk of a gap in the 
gas supply in Germany predicts a gas deficit of 70 TWh for 
the period from August 2022 to December 2023. This 
would not lead to gas shortages until April, May and De -
cember 2023. According to this report, a shortage can only 
be prevented by making considerable cutbacks (see Pro-
jektgruppe Gemeinschaftsdiagnose  (2022)).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
60

List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), The macroeconomic impact of the planned increase in the general 
statutory minimum wage to €12 per hour, Monthly Report, February 2022, pp. 54-55.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b), Outlook for the German economy for 2022 to 2024, Monthly 
Report , June 2022, pp. 13-45.
Federal Network Agency (2022a), Current status of gas supply in Germany, https://www.
bundesnetzagentur.de/EN/Areas/Energy/Companies/SecurityOfSupply/GasSupply/start.html; jsessionid
=A0F2DAB4565DA652D54FA709D3A15A50 , accessed on 18 August 2022.
Federal Network Agency (2022b), Gas-  Szenarien von Juli 22 bis Juni 23, 8. August 2022, https://
www.bundesnetzagentur.de/DE/Fachthemen/ElektrizitaetundGas/Versorgungssicherheit/aktuelle_
gasversorgung/HintergrundFAQ/Gas_Szenarien.pdf
Federal Statistical Office (2022), Gross domestic product stagnant in 2nd quarter of 2022, press 
release  No 322 of 29 July 2022, https://www.destatis.de/EN/Press/2022/07/PE22_322_811.html;  
jsessionid=03F69F06988D6F8BD4F7BAB72FD76775.live741
ifo Institute (2022), Shortage of Skilled Workers in Germany Reaches an All-  Time High, press re -
lease of 2 August 2022, https://www.ifo.de/en/press-release/2022-08-02/shortage-skilled- workers- 
germany-reaches-all-time-high
Projektgruppe Gemeinschaftsdiagnose (2022), Zur Gefahr einer Gaslücke in Deutschland bei einer 
Drosselung russischer Lieferungen auf 20% – Sonderauswertung Juli 2022.
Statistics provided by the Federal Employment Agency (2022), Berichte: Blickpunkt Arbeitsmarkt – 
Monatsbericht zum Arbeits- und Ausbildungsmarkt, Auswirkungen der Fluchtmigration aus der 
Ukraine auf den deutschen Arbeitsmarkt und die Grundsicherung für Arbeitsuchende, Nuremberg, 
July 2022, p. 12.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
61

Public finances*
General government budget
Outlook for 2022
Fiscal policy continues to stabilise macroeco -
nomic developments, supporting households 
and enterprises with numerous measures this 
year as well. Nevertheless, the deficit is pro -
jected to decline significantly this year as the 
fiscal burden caused by the coronavirus crisis 
eases. Tax revenue rose sharply in the first half 
of the year, also in the wake of the economic 
recovery from the pandemic. In addition, some 
pandemic- related expenditure came to an end. 
Overall, the budget outturns of central govern -
ment, state governments and the Federal Em -
ployment Agency improved considerably (see 
the following sections for more details). As 
things currently stand, new burdens from the 
war in Ukraine and measures to offset high 
prices will not outweigh the recovery from the 
coronavirus crisis (see the chart on key fiscal 
measures below). So far, the debt ratio also 
looks likely to fall (2021: 69.3%; first quarter of 
2022: 68.2%).Further outlook and risks
At present, the deficit looks set to decline fur -
ther in the coming years. Unlike before the 
coronavirus crisis, however, a significant struc -
tural deficit is likely. Although the Federal Gov -
ernment is planning to resume compliance 
with the standard limit under the debt brake 
from 2023, together with its special funds cen -
tral government could report annual average 
structural deficits of just over 1½% of gross 
domestic  product (GDP) in the years from 2023 
to 2026 (see also the table on p. 69):
– The Federal Government plans to fully ex -
haust its standard structural net borrowing 
limit of 0.35% of GDP through deficits.
– In addition, it will tap the reserve in the cen -
tral government budget, which can be used 
to finance deficits without increasing the net 
borrowing relevant to the debt brake. The 
pre- financed special funds are likely to re -
cord additional deficits. In particular, ex -
penditure by the Climate and Transform -
ation Fund and the Armed Forces Special 
Fund is to be financed from deficits. All in 
all, the scope for deficits for the coming 
years owing to the reserves and special 
funds amounts to 6½% of this year’s GDP .
The other levels of government have signifi -
cantly lower reserves. Overall, they could post a 
more or less balanced budget for the remain -
der of the year.Supportive fiscal 
policy will con -
tinue this year 
but deficit likely 
to declineFrom 2023, 
significant  
structural  deficit 
likely for some 
years
Measures affecting the deficit that are 
directly linked to the COVID-19 pandemic, 
high energy costs and the Ukraine war*
* Bundesbank estimate. For information on the measures, see 
also  Deutsche  Bundesbank  (2022a,  p.  19  f.)  and  Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2022b).
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 202201234As a percentage of GDP
Ukraine war
Energy price compensationCOVID-19 measures
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed report -
ing on budgetary developments (government finance stat -
istics). No data are yet available for local government or the 
statutory health and public long- term care insurance 
schemes for the reporting quarter. These will be analysed in 
the short commentaries in upcoming issues of the Monthly 
Report .Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
62

The typical impact of infl  ation on government fi  nances
Higher infl  ation usually pushes up both 
nominal government revenue and nominal 
government expenditure. When and to 
what extent this occurs depends, in particu-
lar, on how it affects the various macro-
economic aggregates. Another contributory 
factor is the extent to which policymakers 
take fi  scal measures, say, to offset price ef-
fects for households and enterprises.
Revenue
On the revenue side, infl  ation affects taxes 
and social contributions, as they are largely 
calculated on the basis of nominal refer-
ence variables. As a rule, VAT is particularly 
quick to show the impact of infl  ation, as 
this type of tax is levied on private con-
sumption and construction investment. 
Revenue from wage tax and social contri-
butions rises if infl  ation causes wages to in-
crease at a stronger pace. Wage- dependent 
taxes and levies account for an especially 
large share of government revenue. Where 
profi  ts are higher – a potential consequence 
of infl  ation  – revenue from profi  t- related 
taxes rises. The progressive scale for income 
tax amplifi  es the impact of infl  ation, above 
all for wage tax. Additional revenue from 
bracket creep also depends critically on the 
magnitude and speed of compensatory 
shifts in the tax scale.1
Primary expenditure
On the other hand, higher infl  ation leads to 
higher government spending, as govern-
ment purchases and investment usually be-
come more expensive, too. If public sector 
wages also rise more sharply, this affects 
government personnel expenditure. Gov-
ernment transfers are linked to price devel-
opments, partly directly and partly indirectly via wages. However, as a rule, there is a 
delay before benefi  ts are adjusted. Pension 
expenditure, a large- volume item, is of par-
ticular signifi  cance here; there is a lag be-
fore pensions are adjusted to wage devel-
opments.
Interest expenditure
Interest expenditure, too, can increase as a 
result of infl  ation because interest rates 
tend to rise when infl  ation is higher and 
higher infl  ation usually leads to a tightening 
of monetary policy – especially if infl  ation 
rates are expected to persist at high levels. 
One point to bear in mind is that the aver-
age interest rate on government debt reacts 
only gradually to changes in interest rates. 
This is because the current rates are initially 
only relevant for a relatively small part of 
the debt. Their effect on net new borrow-
ing and the refi  nancing of maturing secur-
ities, in particular, is rapid. For infl  ation- 
indexed debt securities, price developments 
have a direct impact on interest expend-
iture.2 At around 3%, however, these secur-
ities account for only a small share of Ger-
man government debt. The discounts or 
premia incurred when securities are issued 
– which are sometimes considerable – are 
of minor importance in the national ac-
counts, as they are generally allocated as 
1 For more information on bracket creep, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2022c).
2 For infl  ation- indexed German government debt, 
annual  coupon payments and nominal repayment 
amounts increase with infl  ation. Infl  ation- induced add-
itional expenditure at the time of repayment is the 
most signifi  cant in quantitative terms. In the national 
accounts, this is booked as interest expenditure in the 
year when the infl  ation was recorded. In the year in 
question, a payment is made from the central govern-
ment budget to its special fund for infl  ation- indexed 
bonds.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
63

interest expenditure on an accruals basis 
over the term of the security.3
As there is a delay before the average inter-
est rate adjusts to (unexpectedly) higher in-
fl  ation, the government’s real interest bur-
den initially falls.4 However, it rises again 
later once higher nominal interest rates are 
increasingly refl  ected in the average interest 
rate. The interest burden ultimately de-
pends on the combination of infl  ation and 
nominal interest rates, and thus also on 
monetary policy. The initial easing effect of 
infl  ation on the real interest burden can 
also go into reverse. Government fi  nances 
come under particular pressure, for ex-
ample, if infl  ation expectations exceed the 
monetary policy infl  ation target and fi  rst 
need to be “reined in” again by a restrictive 
monetary policy stance. Even if infl  ation risk 
premia rise as a result of the growing un-
certainty, the real interest burden increases.
Profi  t distributions by the central bank5
In addition to the direct impact via interest 
expenditure, an interest rate reversal due to 
infl  ation also affects government fi  nances 
via central bank profi  t distributions. In the 
current constellation involving extensive 
monetary policy bond holdings, rising inter-
est rates will initially weigh relatively heavily 
on central bank profi  ts. As things currently 
stand, the Bundesbank is therefore not ex-
pected to make any profi  t distributions for 
some time.
Euro area central banks are holding a larger 
share of domestic government bonds in 
their monetary policy bond holdings. Their 
profi  t distributions thus ultimately return 
government interest payments to govern-
ment coffers. De facto, the government 
thus pays the central bank’s short- term, 
risk- free deposit rate on these bonds rather 
than the government bond interest rate. This has the same effect as signifi  cantly 
shorter interest rate fi  xation periods for 
government debt and makes government 
fi  nances more sensitive to changes in cen-
tral bank interest rates.
3 For discounts and premia, the budget account re-
cords the payment fl  ow – resulting, in some cases, in 
very volatile interest expenditure. For a proposed re-
form of the accounting method used in the central 
government budget, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2021a).
4 The initially lower burden from existing government 
debt is illustrated by the fact that, ceteris paribus, 
higher infl  ation pushes up nominal gross domestic 
product (GDP) and the debt ratio therefore falls at fi  rst. 
The GDP defl  ator may develop differently from the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), which 
the Eurosystem uses as the basis for its target. At 
present, the divergence is particularly large because 
steeply rising import prices (primarily for energy) are 
sharply driving up the HICP , but these are not included 
in the GDP defl  ator. The Bundesbank’s June projection 
for 2022, for example, forecast an HICP rate of 7.1% 
and an increase of 3.8% in the GDP defl  ator. See 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), p. 25.
5 For more details on the effects of rising interest rates 
on the central bank balance sheet and government 
fi  nances, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b). For more 
information on the creditor structure and, in particular, 
on government bonds held by national central banks, 
see Deutsche Bundesbank (2022d).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
64

However, the outlook for public finances for 
this and the coming years is highly uncertain, 
with macroeconomic risks being transmitted 
directly to public finances, mainly via automatic 
stabilisers. Furthermore, new deficit- financed 
fiscal measures are being discussed. To fund 
them, there have also been calls in some quar -
ters to activate the debt brake escape clause 
again in 2023 and increase borrowing. There is 
likewise uncertainty surrounding the reserves 
of central government’s off- budget entities. It 
is therefore difficult to predict when extensive 
outflows could take place. In addition, the Fed -
eral Constitutional Court is to decide whether 
the Federal Government’s allocation of emer -
gency borrowing authorisations from 2021 to 
the Climate and Transformation Fund was per -
missible. If not, the scope for deficits outlined 
above will be narrower.
Fiscal policy in a difficult 
macroeconomic environment
German public finances are still well positioned 
to stabilise the economy even in the event of 
less favourable developments. Should the 
economy weaken further, the government will 
first prop up income and demand automatically 
via the tax and social security system.
In the event of very high prices or gas short -
ages, supplementary assistance may be desir -
able for the hardest hit households or enter -
prises. Means- tested transfers, such as the 
basic allowance, usually take price develop -
ments into account with a time lag. If, faced 
with high inflation rates, a certain replacement 
rate in real terms is to be ensured in the short 
run, too, adjustments would have to be 
brought forward as necessary. However, gov -
ernment assistance should allow price signals 
for supply and demand to take effect largely 
unimpeded. High energy prices, for example, 
are a key incentive to reduce energy consump -
tion. Ultimately, the government is only able to 
redistribute higher energy costs, which are re -
flected in rising prices – it is not able to provide enterprises and households with comprehen -
sive relief, as the procurement of energy sources 
from abroad is now absorbing a larger share of 
economic output.
From today’s perspective, a broader deficit-  
financed fiscal stimulus is not warranted. This is 
because price pressures are high, and supply-  
side disruptions persist. Additional government 
stimulus to demand is therefore likely to have 
relatively little impact in real terms and may 
threaten to amplify price pressures further. Any 
new measures deemed to be necessary would 
have to be counterfinanced elsewhere.
As things currently stand, a return to compli -
ance with the standard limit under the debt 
brake next year remains advisable. Incidentally, 
this will not require slamming the brakes on fis -
cal policy, which would choke economic devel -
opment. First, the deficit will shrink automatic -
ally, as it were, as coronavirus support meas -
ures that are no longer needed come to an 
end. Second, although the debt brake limits 
net borrowing in the core budget, there is also 
considerable scope for deficits from reserves 
and special funds (see above).
Trust in sound public finances is important to 
ensure that, amongst other things, the govern -
ment can provide stability in crisis situations. Fis -
cal rules can safeguard sound public finances 
and thus establish confidence, which, in turn, 
also helps to ensure a stability- oriented monet -
ary policy. To achieve this, however, the regular 
limits of the rules must be binding and must not 
be undermined. This applies to the German 
debt brake, but also to the European rules in 
particular.1 Emergency clauses have their place 
in crisis situations, but their use should remain 
an exception and plausible explanations should 
be given for their use. Measures financed by 
contingency borrowing should also be suited to 
counteracting the specific emergency situation.Uncertainty still 
high
Public finances 
supporting the 
economy as a 
whole via the 
tax and social 
security system
Supplementary 
assistance 
should not 
impede price 
signalsBroader deficit- 
financed fiscal 
stimulus not 
warranted
Return to regu -
lar fiscal rules 
next year 
remains 
advisable  …
… in order to 
strengthen 
confidence  in 
reliable public 
finances as well
1 For details on the current application of the EU rules and 
the need for reform, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2022e), 
pp. 78 ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
65

Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Q2 2022
Tax revenue2 increased by 17% on the year in 
the second quarter of 2022. This growth was 
similarly strong to that recorded in the first 
quarter and was broadly based (see the chart 
above and the table on p. 67): revenue from 
wage tax went up by 19%. This reflects a sig -
nificant increase in nominal gross wages and 
salaries, partly as a result of the decline in 
short- time work. The progressive tax scale led 
to a disproportionately large rise in tax rev -
enue. Another factor was that the child bonus 
of €150 per child had been deducted from 
wage tax in the second quarter of last year. 
Without the revenue shortfalls caused by the 
2021 bonus, the growth rate would have been 
6 percentage points lower. Looking at profit-  
related taxes, receipts from corporation tax and 
assessed income tax rose sharply. Advance pay -
ments for profits in the current year also con -
tinued to grow, especially in the case of corpor -
ation tax. VAT receipts likewise increased sig -
nificantly (+18%).2022 as a whole
The official tax estimate in May projected a rise 
in tax revenue of 7½% for the year as a whole 
in the definition excluding local government 
taxes. Tax cuts decided in the intervening 
period will reduce this growth to 4½%: for ex -
ample, all employed persons are to receive an 
energy price allowance of €300 – at the ex -
pense of wage tax, above all in September. 
From June to the end of August, energy tax has 
also been cut to the level of the European min -
imum rate. Looking at wage and income tax, 
moreover, the basic income tax allowance and 
the standard allowance for employees, amongst 
other things, have been raised retroactively 
with effect from the beginning of 2022.
As things currently stand, however, the annual 
result is likely to be noticeably more favourable: 
at +17½%, the cash results in the first half of 
the year were considerably higher than ex -
pected. In order to match the annual result in 
the adjusted tax estimate, revenue in the 
second half of the year would now have to fall 
significantly on the year. This is not likely as 
things currently stand. Nevertheless, the year-  
on- year rate is likely to be far less favourable in 
the second half of the year than in the first half. 
This is because most of the above- mentioned 
tax cuts will cluster in the second half of 2022. 
In addition, year- on- year figures will then 
hardly be affected by the absence of corona -
virus special burdens any more. Furthermore, 
there are plans to temporarily lower the VAT 
rate on gas consumption from 19% to 7%.
Central government budget
Q2 2022
The central government budget finished the 
second quarter of 2022 in a better position Very strong tax 
revenue growth 
continued in Q2Tax estimate 
shows signifi -
cant revenue 
rise in 2022 – 
even including 
new tax cuts
Developments 
to date suggest 
a more favour -
able resultTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Comprises joint taxes as 
well as central government taxes and state government taxes. 
Including EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs 
duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022201510505101520
––––++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figures
2 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
66

than one year earlier. However, it was still €24 
billion in deficit (second quarter of 2021: €37 
billion). Revenue saw a very steep rise of almost 
16%, which was attributable to tax revenue 
develop ments. Expenditure was virtually un -
changed. Reduced coronavirus bridging aid 
(-€9 billion) and lower payments to offset the 
deficit of the Federal Employment Agency (-€5 
billion) had an alleviating effect. By contrast, 
other payments to the social security funds 
soared (+€9½ billion). This was due, in particu -
lar, to higher refunds to the health fund for 
pandemic- related special expenditure (e.g. 
public coronavirus tests). In addition, the health 
insurance institutions are receiving special pay -
ments this year to stabilise supplementary con -
tribution rates. Transfers to state governments 
also rose sharply (+€3½ billion), especially for 
the temporary €9 ticket for local public trans -
port. Interest expenditure grew only marginally 
owing to a one- off effect. Although central 
government posted additional expenditure of 
€4 billion on inflation- indexed debt instruments and of €3½ billion due to discounts, it did not 
already record the interest expenditure due at 
the beginning of July in June, as it had in the 
preceding years.
2022 as a whole
From today’s perspective, the central govern -
ment budget deficit for the year as a whole will 
probably be significantly lower than planned. 
The 2022 budget envisages a deficit of €139 
billion. Developments up to the middle of the 
year have been considerably more favourable, 
with the deficit coming to €43 billion. How -
ever, a number of factors are leading to a 
gloomier outlook for the second half of the 
year. For example, tax revenue growth is likely 
to be considerably weaker. This is due, not 
least, to the two energy price relief packages 
(see also p. 66 for details on tax developments). 
The rise in interest rates is also likely to result in 
further additional expenditure due to dis -
counts. The deferred interest bookings men -Deficit down 
significantly in 
Q2 but still high
Deficit for 2022 
as a whole 
probably signifi -
cantly lower 
than estimatedTax revenue
 
Type of taxH1Estimate 
for 2022 1Q2
2021 2022 2021 2022
Year- on- year changeYear- on- 
year 
change %Year- on- year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total 2 347.2 407.9 + 60.7 + 17.5 +  7.4 175.2 204.7 + 29.5 + 16.8
of which:
Wage tax 3 101.6 116.6 + 14.9 + 14.7 +  8.1 50.8 60.4 +  9.6 + 18.9
Profi  t- related taxes 69.2 81.5 + 12.2 + 17.7 +  0.5 33.7 41.5 +  7.7 + 22.9
Assessed income tax 4 32.2 38.1 +  5.9 + 18.4 –  3.1 14.3 17.2 +  2.8 + 19.8
Corporation tax 5 19.1 22.4 +  3.4 + 17.6 –  0.9 8.9 11.2 +  2.4 + 26.9
Non- assessed taxes 
on earnings 12.7 16.7 +  4.0 + 31.5 + 17.7 8.5 11.6 +  3.1 + 36.8
Withholding tax on 
interest income and 
capital gains 5.3 4.2 –  1.1 – 20.0 – 14.3 2.1 1.4 –  0.6 – 30.0
VAT6 112.4 141.3 + 28.9 + 25.7 + 12.9 57.6 67.8 + 10.1 + 17.6
Other consumption- 
related taxes 7 40.9 42.3 +  1.4 +  3.5 +  3.0 21.5 21.8 +  0.4 +  1.8
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates and Bundesbank calculations. 1  According to offi   cial tax 
estimate of May 2022. 2 Comprises joint taxes as well as central government taxes and state government taxes. Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue, including customs duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Child benefi  ts and subsidies for 
supplementary private pension plans deducted from revenue. 4 Employee refunds and research grants deducted from revenue. 5 Re-
search grants deducted from revenue. 6 VAT and import VAT. 7 Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, 
air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lottery, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
67

tioned above will likewise have a burdening ef -
fect. In addition, enterprises are able to apply 
for transfers in the event of high energy cost in -
creases.3 By contrast, the gradual end to 
coronavirus-  related additional expenditure, 
such as transfers to enterprises in response to 
the coronavirus pandemic and hospital com -
pensation for vacant beds, will probably have 
an alleviating effect. Furthermore, spending on 
coronavirus tests is likely to decline, partly be -
cause central government is now only covering 
the costs in full in certain cases. Overall, the 
outlook therefore remains uncertain – partly 
because the government may consider new 
purposes for any unused borrowing authorisa -
tions. However, using emergency loans to fund 
non- crisis spending would be questionable. 
The Federal Constitutional Court is currently 
examining whether the advance financing of 
climate protection measures in the second 
supple mentary budget for 2021 was constitu -
tional.Draft budget for 2023
The Federal Government intends to resume 
compliance with the standard limit under the 
debt brake next year. Net borrowing of €17 bil -
lion is planned. In addition, it will cover a re -
maining funding gap of €41 billion by drawing 
on reserves. In total, the deficit in the draft 
budget for 2023 comes to €58 billion, which is 
€82 billion lower than the target figure for this 
year. However, the falling deficit is not likely to 
place an excessive strain on macroeconomic 
developments. For example, the fact that pan -
demic spending is coming to an end will not 
weigh on economic developments provided 
that such support is no longer needed. More -
over, the significant rise in tax revenue is largely 
a reflection of the growing economy rather 
than changes in tax law. In addition, higher net 
outflows from off- budget entities (resulting in 
deficits there) are likely to provide a counter -
weight. Finally, the Federal Government’s plans 
for this year are partly on the generous side.
The draft central government budget for 2023 
contains provisions for burdens that have not 
yet been specified.
– The draft budget estimates a global revenue 
shortfall of €9 billion. The government is 
likely to need €2½ billion of this because, 
from today’s perspective, the Bundesbank’s 
profit distribution is not likely to be as pro -
jected. Furthermore, revenue shortfalls will 
result from the announced cut to the VAT 
rate on gas consumption. The remaining 
buffer could, for example, partly offset the 
bracket creep experienced in 2022.
– Interest expenditure is estimated at €30 bil -
lion (compared with €16 billion planned for 
2022 and an actual figure of €4 billion last Draft budget for 
2023 complies 
with standard 
debt brake limit, 
not least by 
drawing on 
reserves
Risk provisions in 
draft budget for 
2023 …Central government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fe-
deral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-
fects. 
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410050050
––+
–250–200–150–100–500+50
2022
20212020Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20202021€ billion
2022
3 The Federal Government also committed to capital de -
posits of up to €8 billion with an energy supply company. 
It is apparently allocating this to the Kreditanstalt für Wied -
eraufbau (KfW), thus initially avoiding any related burden 
on its own budget. See Federal Ministry for Economic Af -
fairs and Climate Action (2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
68

Key central government budget data*
€ billion
ItemActual 
2021Target 
2022Draft 
2023Fiscal plan
2024 2025 2026
1. Expenditure 1 556.6 495.8 445.2 423.7 428.6 436.3
of which:
 1.a Investment 45.8 51.5 58.4 51.7 52.1 51.9
 1.b Global spending increases/ cuts – –   6.5 –  3.7 –  5.7 –  6.2 –  5.7
 2. Revenue 1,2 341.0 356.2 387.2 403.4 415.6 422.3
of which:
 2.a Tax revenue 3 313.5 328.4 362.3 374.5 388.1 402.3
 2.b Global revenue increases/ shortfalls – –   1.0 –  9.1 –  3.7 –  2.8 – 10.9
 3. Fiscal balance (2.-1.) – 215.6 – 139.6 – 58.0 – 20.3 – 13.0 – 14.1
 4. Coin seigniorage 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.3
 5. Withdrawal from reserves (+) 0.5 40.5 7.7
 6. Net borrowing (–) (3.+4.+5.) – 215.4 – 138.9 – 17.2 – 12.3 – 12.8 – 13.8
 7. Cyclical component in the budget procedure 4 –  12.5 –   7.9 2.9 1.5 0.8 0.0
 8. Balance of fi  nancial transactions 3.0 –   2.8 –  7.7 –  0.6 0.5 0.5
 9. Structural net borrowing (–) (6.-7.-8.) – 205.9 – 128.2 – 12.5 – 13.3 – 14.0 – 14.3
10. Amount exceeding limit (12.-9.) 193.8 115.7 – – – –
11. Memo item: Including previously relevant special 
funds (10.-14.) 124.8 127.8 12.7 27.4 22.6 19.0
12. Standard upper limit: structural net borrowing 
(0.35% of GDP) 5 –  12.1 –  12.5 – 12.5 – 13.3 – 14.0 – 14.4
13. Structural balance (3.-7.-8.) – 206.1 – 128.9 – 53.2 – 21.3 – 14.2 – 14.6
13.a  As above, with estimate of potential output acc. to 
spring 2022 economic forecast – 202.6 – 128.9 – 53.2 – 21.3 – 14.2 – 14.6
14. Balance of off- budget entities included in the debt 
brake before 2022 6 69.0 –  12.0 – 17.1 – 27.4 – 22.6 – 19.0
14.a Climate and Transformation Fund 53.9 –   6.5 –  9.9 – 27.4 – 22.6 – 19.0
14.b Relief Fund (2013 fl  ood) –   0.2 –   0.5 –  0.2 . . .
14.c Fund to Promote Municipal Investment –   1.0 –   1.2 –  0.9 . . .
14.d Digitalisation Fund 0.2 –   0.2 –  2.7 . . .
14.e Fund for Primary School- Age Childcare Provision 0.5 –   0.4 –  0.4 . . .
14.f 2021 Relief Fund (2021 fl  ood) 15.6 –   3.2 –  3.0 . . .
15. Balance of the Armed Forces Special Fund (from 
2024: e)7 . –   0.1 –  8.5 – 26.0 – 28.0 – 31.0
16. Balance of central government budget and special 
funds (3.+14.+15.) – 146.6 – 151.7 – 83.5 – 74.0 – 64.0 – 64.0
17. Reserves of special funds for 14. 112.2 100.2 83.1 . . .
18. Borrowing authorisation remaining thereafter . 99.9 91.4 65.0 37.0 6.0
19. Central government assets in pension reserves and 
civil servants’ pension fund 8 28.1 . . . . .
20. Level of general reserves 48.2 48.2 7.7 – – –
21. Balance on control account 47.7 47.7 47.7 47.7 47.7 47.7
22. Total outstanding repayment amount including 
Armed Forces Special Fund (from 10. and 15.) 263.4 379.3 387.8 414 442 473
23. Total outstanding repayment amount from NGEU 
transfers e,9 14 36 54 71 89 107
* Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. For methodological notes, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2016). 1 Ex-
cluding transfers to/withdrawals from reserves and including net tax revenue (see footnote 3). 2 Excluding coin seigniorage. 3 After de-
duction of supplementary central government transfers, shares of energy tax revenue, compensation under the 2009 reform of motor 
vehicle tax and budgetary recovery assistance to federal states. 4 For 2021 provisional settlement, for 2022 according to budget plan, for 
the following years according to fi  scal plan. 5 Based on gross domestic product (GDP) in the year before the (comprehensive) budget is 
prepared. 6 Budgeted fi  gures for 2022 from borrowing plan, for 2023 ff. from Bundestags-Drucksache 20/3100. 7  Armed Forces Special 
Fund. Figures from 2024: estimated amount required to fulfi  l the NATO agreement of expenditure amounting to 2% of GDP . 8 Market 
values according to central government balance sheet for 2021. Continuous infl  ows; withdrawals from the fund planned from 2030, from 
reserves from 2032. 9  Actual NGEU fi  gure for 2021 as well as budgeted fi  gures and estimates, each multiplied by Germany’s share of 
25½% in EU gross national income. 
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
69

year). The government is expecting higher 
burdens primarily from discounts, but also 
from inflation- indexed Federal securities.4
– Almost €10 billion is attributable to claims 
from guarantees, with guarantees relating 
to the gas supply accounting for a particu -
larly large share.
– A global additional expenditure item of €6 
billion is available for any further needs aris -
ing from the pandemic or the war in Ukraine. 
This is offset by a global expenditure cut, 
which is to be achieved by budget outturn 
at the latest. However, it seems realistic that 
the government will succeed in making the 
estimated savings.
Nonetheless, there are also considerable 
budgetary risks at play. These are mainly due to 
potential energy shortages. The government 
and the opposition are already discussing fur -
ther support measures that would require add -
itional funds. The provisions made in the draft 
budget are therefore understandable. There are 
also risks in view of pending decisions by the 
Federal Constitutional Court. In addition to the 
matter of the emergency loans, the court is 
also examining the solidarity surcharge. It is 
possible that the Federal Government will have 
to find other means of funding its plans.
Fiscal plan up to 2026 and further outlook
In the medium- term fiscal plan up to 2026, 
too, the government intends to comply with 
the standard limit under the debt brake. That 
said, the budget seems to have been set rather 
tight. This concerns, in the first instance, global 
revenue shortfalls. It appears that insufficient 
provisions have been made in this area to com -
pensate for bracket creep.5 Furthermore, the 
fiscal plan includes the Bundesbank’s annual 
profit distribution (€2½ billion). As things cur -
rently stand, though, the Bundesbank is not ex -
pected to make any such transfers for some 
time (see p. 64). Increased spending is essen -
tially only planned in the departmental budget of the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs. 
These increases primarily reflect higher grants 
to the statutory pension insurance scheme. For 
the other government departments, total ex -
penditure has largely been frozen. In an envir -
onment of initially steeply rising prices, this 
ultimately   means that real expenditure will 
decline  considerably. However, there is consid -
erable scope for expenditure in central govern -
ment’s off- budget entities.
Central government’s financial situation is set 
to be significantly more challenging in the years 
following the medium- term fiscal plan. For ex -
ample, considerable additional burdens will 
arise over the longer term if the government 
implements its pension policy plans (see p. 74). 
Furthermore, the repayment obligations for 
emergency loans taken out between 2020 and 
2022 will apply from 2028 onwards. Repay -
ments of European debt from the Next Gener -
ation EU (NGEU) programme will also be due 
then (see the table on p. 69). Taken in isolation, 
this will result in higher central government 
transfers to the EU budget. Including the 
Armed Forces Special Fund, repayment obliga -
tions will amount to €19 billion per year over a 
period of 31 years as from 2028. This will nar -
row future budgetary leeway accordingly. In 
addition, the extensive scope of the special 
funds is expected to expire after 2026 (see 
below for information on the special funds). If 
the government subsequently wishes to spend 
comparable amounts, it will have to finance 
these in the core budget. If defence spending is 
to total 2% of GDP , it will have to be over €30 
billion higher per year in the core budget. A 
further €20 billion per year will be needed if 
the expenditure of the Climate and Transform -… given larger 
budgetary risks
Fiscal plan up to 
2026 tightly cal -
culated: signifi -
cant risks on 
both the rev -
enue and 
expenditure 
sidesCentral govern -
ment’s financial 
situation signifi -
cantly more 
challenging 
after 2026
4 For a proposal on how the volatility of interest expend -
iture could be alleviated by accrual accounting of premia 
(and discounts) when issuing securities, see Deutsche Bun -
desbank (2021a).
5 For an estimate of the associated shortfalls at the time of 
the official tax estimate of May, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2022f), p. 74. The share of the general government short -
falls reported that accrue to central government is around 
45%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
70

ation Fund (formerly the Energy and Climate 
Fund) is to be stabilised beyond 2026.
Central government’s off- budget entities: 
Q2 2022 and outlook
Central government’s off- budget entities re -
corded a surplus of €6 billion in the second 
quarter of 2022, following a balanced result at 
the same time a year earlier.6 The current sur -
plus was driven by the fund for inflation-  
indexed securities. Owing to higher inflation, 
central government made transfers of €4½ bil -
lion despite the fund incurring no expenditure. 
At €1½ billion, the surplus in the Economic Sta -
bilisation Fund was somewhat higher than in 
the previous year. Enterprises’ net repayments 
of coronavirus assistance loans virtually stag -
nated in spite of the fact that their profitability 
had, for the most part, improved. This could be 
due to the relatively favourable interest rate 
terms or the fact that enterprises are continu -
ing to hold more liquidity on account of on -
going risks. The Climate Fund, by contrast, 
posted a deficit of €½ billion.
For the year as a whole, the deficits and sur -
pluses of the special funds could be broadly 
balanced in net terms. The Climate Fund and 
the 2021 Flood Relief Fund are facing deficits 
after transfers from central government gener -
ated a very high surplus in 2021. By contrast, 
the Economic Stabilisation Fund and the fund 
for inflation- indexed securities are likely to gen -
erate surpluses for the year as a whole, too. 
The debt- financed Armed Forces Fund, which 
was set up in June, is likely to have very limited 
spending this year. The government intends to 
use this fund to procure equipment for the 
Federal Armed Forces. However, such pur -
chases will probably require a longer lead time.
In future, the deficits of the off- budget entities 
are expected to account for a significant share 
of general government deficits (see the table 
on p. 69). Central government has largely used 
the emergency loans of 2020 and 2021 to pre- 
finance extensive off- budget entities. A recent addition was the Armed Forces Fund, which 
has a credit facility of €100 billion. Overall, the 
special funds shown will have a cumulative 
scope for deficits of around €200 billion from 
next year onwards. In addition, the pension re -Considerable 
surplus overall 
for central gov -
ernment’s off- 
budget entities 
in Q2
Broadly bal -
anced result 
possible for year 
as a whole
Off- budget 
entities key 
drivers of gen -
eral government 
deficit in the 
medium term 
on account of 
scope for bor -
rowing and 
pre-funding Fiscal balances of central government's 
off-budget entities*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Only entities using a single-entry ac-
counting  system,  i.e.  excluding,  in  particular,  the  bad  bank 
FMS Wertmanagement and also SoFFin, which uses a single-
entry accounting system and which refinances FMS Wertman-
agement. 1 Precautionary fund for final payments of inflation-
indexed Federal securities. 2 Climate and Transformation Fund. 
3 Relief fund for 2021 flood.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 20224020020406080
––++++€ billion, quarterly figures
OtherFund for inflation-indexed securities1
Economic Stabilisation Fund
Flood Relief Fund 3Climate Fund 2
Total
–40–200+20+40+60+80 Cumulated from start of year
6 According to data from the Federal Ministry of Finance, 
i.e. excluding bad banks and other entities that use com -
mercial double- entry bookkeeping. SoFFin’s deficit is also 
factored out. It is based on funds transferred to refinance 
the bad bank FMS Wertmanagement. In return, the direct 
debt of FMS Wertmanagement, which is attributable to 
central government, is omitted accordingly. The names of 
the off- budget entities have been shortened below as fol -
lows: Climate and Transformation Fund to Climate Fund; 
Armed Forces Special Fund to Armed Forces Fund; precau -
tionary fund for final payments of inflation- indexed secur -
ities to fund for inflation- indexed securities; and Relief Fund 
for 2021 Flood to 2021 Flood Relief Fund.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
71

serve and the pension fund have holdings 
amounting to almost €30 billion. Thus far, the 
law has made provisions for the longer- term 
use of these holdings as from the next decade.
Next year, the deficit of the off- budget entities 
is likely to remain well below that of the core 
budget, however. The Climate Fund is not yet 
required to grant any subsidies for low- emission 
electricity. Instead, the large balance from the 
previous renewable energy (EEG) levy, which is 
separate from both the Climate Fund and the 
general government sector, is set to cover this 
expense. However, extensive aid payments are 
envisaged, particularly for the purposes of re -
ducing heating energy needs and for e- mobility. 
This is expected to result in a deficit of €10 bil -
lion. A deficit of €3 billion is envisaged in the 
2021 Flood Relief Fund for spending on recon -
struction aid. Meanwhile, a deficit of €8½ bil -
lion is planned for next year in the Armed 
Forces Fund, matching its level of spending. By 
contrast, surpluses can be expected in the case 
of both the special funds for pension provisions 
and the fund for inflation- indexed securities. In 
addition, repayments of coronavirus assistance 
to the Economic Stabilisation Fund should re -
sult in a surplus.
The deficits of the off- budget entities are set to 
be significantly higher in the years to come. For 
example, the Climate Fund will begin granting 
subsidies in 2024 to compensate for the fact 
that the EEG levy on the price of electricity has 
expired. These are initially estimated at €10 bil -
lion. As other programme expenditure will also 
rise, the deficit planned in the Climate Fund will 
then reach €27 billion and subsequently fall to -
ward €20 billion. If, in addition, the Armed 
Forces Fund intends to secure NATO defence 
spending of 2% of GDP , its deficit will have to 
increase to around €30 billion by 2026. How -
ever, there are no medium- term fiscal plans in 
place for this major off- budget entity or most 
other off- budget entities. It is crucial that cen -
tral government increases transparency in this 
regard.State government budgets7
Core budgets in Q2 2022
The core budgets of the federal states recorded 
a surplus of €9½ billion in the second quarter 
of 2022, following a deficit of €1½ billion in 
spring 2021 when the strain from the corona -
virus pandemic was even greater.
Revenue saw a steep rise of 9%. This was 
mainly due to strong tax growth (+12%, or 
+€9½ billion). Receipts from public administra -
tions remained virtually unchanged. Central 
government spent less on ongoing coronavirus 
aid for enterprises but more on regional trans -
port, particularly for the €9 ticket.
Expenditure fell slightly (-½%), while current 
transfers to local government rose by a steep 
8% (+€2 billion). In addition, personnel ex -
penditure saw a modest increase (+1½%). In 
the first quarter, it had risen steeply owing to 
tax- subsidised one- off payments. Other ex -
penditure either recorded declines (some of 
which were substantial) or stagnated. North 
Rhine-  Westphalia did not pay the annual grants 
to its universities until the second quarter. How -
ever, on aggregate, spending shortfalls pre -
dominated, especially for business aid from 
central government.
Core and off- budget entities: the year so 
far and 2022 as a whole
The situation of the core budgets and off-  
budget entities of the federal states as a whole 
is improving considerably. There was a surplus 
of €12 billion in the first quarter, representing a 
€19 billion increase on the previous year. The 
further strong improvement in core budgets in 
the second quarter is unlikely to be primarily 
due to net inflows from off- budget entities. 
Thus the combined result of the core and off- Although only 
moderate deficit 
initially in net 
terms next 
year, …
… very high def -
icits in the Cli -
mate Fund and 
Armed Forces 
Fund thereafterHigh surplus 
in Q2
Strong tax 
growth
Slight decline in 
expenditure
So far, signifi -
cant improve -
ment in core 
budgets and off- 
budget entities 
this year
7 The quarterly data on state government budgets are 
based on the monthly cash statistics for the core budgets. 
Information on the off- budget entities is only available at 
the end of the following quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
72

budget entities probably also picked up consid -
erably in the spring.
For the year as a whole, then, the budget out -
turn currently stands to be much more favour -
able than was expected last year (2021: +€½ 
billion). However, the state government budgets 
are likely to see more moderate growth in the 
second half of the year than has been the case 
to date, with tax revenue growth expected to 
tail off significantly (see p. 66). Moreover, add -
itional expenditure resulting from higher prices 
is having a burdening effect. Transfers to local 
government are likely to gain momentum as 
the federal states pass on central government 
funds for the €9 ticket.
Recourse to debt brake escape clauses
At present, there is nothing to indicate that the 
coronavirus pandemic this year warrants fur -
ther exemption from the state government 
debt brakes. For one, tax revenue is well above 
the level expected in the last pre- crisis tax esti -
mate for 2022. On the expenditure side, it is 
central government that is bearing the brunt of 
the coronavirus- related strains. While national 
assistance for enterprises and hospitals, for in -
stance, passes through state government 
budgets, it does not burden them on balance. 
State governments do have to pay for corona -
virus tests in schools, in particular. However, 
overall, these payments are likely to chiefly af -
fect the first half of the year, which the federal 
states nonetheless closed very favourably. The 
individual federal states should therefore care -
fully consider whether the planned recourse to 
emergency loans is in fact required.
Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
Q2 2022
The statutory pension insurance scheme 
achieved a high surplus of €3 billion in the second quarter of 2022. The financial result 
thus improved by €3 billion on the previous 
year. Total revenue increased by just over 4%. 
At 5½%, contribution receipts continued to rise 
strongly, bolstered once more by the decline in 
short- time work. Central government funds 
grew by only 1%, as they are tied to the weak 
wage developments of 2020.
At just under 1%, the increase in expenditure 
was relatively minimal. This was due to the fact 
that pensions were not raised in western Ger -
many in mid- 2021 (whereas eastern Germany 
saw a rise of +0.7%). Thus far, it does not ap -
pear that (back)payments of the basic pension 
that was introduced in 2021 or rising pension 
numbers have had a marked impact.
2022 as a whole
The highly favourable financial developments 
seen in the first half of the year will not con -
tinue over the remainder of the year. Expend -Surplus could 
increase in 2022 
as a whole, but 
risks could arise 
given potential 
energy short -
ages
High surplus in 
first half of the 
year raises 
doubts about 
need for emer -
gency loans
High quarterly 
surplus amid 
steep growth in 
contribution 
receipts …
… and relatively 
low expenditure 
growth follow -
ing small pen -
sion adjustment 
in mid- 2021State government fiscal balance
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 
1 Figure calculated using monthly data from the Federal Minis-
try of Finance; quarterly data are not yet available. 2 Core bud-
gets and off-budget entities together.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q430201001020
–––++
2020Quarterly figures
2022
2021€ billion
Cumulated from start of year 2
20201
–40–30–20–100+10+20
20212022Off-budget entitiesCore budgetsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
73

iture growth in the second half of the year will 
be much stronger than it has been thus far. 
First, towards the middle of the year, pensions 
will rise by a sharp 5½%, averaged across Ger -
many (+5.35% in western Germany and 
+6.12% in eastern Germany). This reflects the 
relatively high growth in actual earnings in 
2021, which was accelerated by the decline in 
short-  time work, amongst other things. Here, 
the reactivated catch-  up factor dampened the 
pension adjustment by just over 1 percentage 
point. This factor is intended to compensate for 
the fact that the safeguard clause prevented a 
pension cut in 2021. Second, expenditure on 
the basic pension is expected to rise. On the revenue side, growth in contribution receipts is 
currently also likely to be somewhat weaker 
than before.
Overall, the pension insurance scheme could 
thus close 2022 as a whole with a broadly bal -
anced budget (2021: surplus of almost €1 bil -
lion). Yet, there are macroeconomic risks that 
could weigh on the revenue side.
Medium and long- term outlook
A deficit is projected for 2023 as a result of the 
strong latest pension increase. In the medium 
to long term, demographic trends will increas -
ingly weigh on the pension insurance scheme’s 
finances. The Federal Government’s plans will 
further exacerbate funding pressure; it intends 
to permanently stabilise the pension level at 
48% from 2026 onwards and not to raise the 
statutory retirement age further after 2031. The 
contribution rate and central government 
grants would thus have to rise more sharply 
than already envisaged in the legal status quo.8
Federal Employment Agency
Q2 2022
The Federal Employment Agency reported an 
almost balanced result for the second quarter 
of 2022.9 Back in the spring of 2021, the im -
pact of the coronavirus crisis was still much 
stronger, resulting in a deficit of €8 billion.
Revenue rose substantially, by 5½% overall. At 
7½%, growth in contribution receipts was 
stronger still. The decline in short- time work 
had a far greater impact here than in the pen -
sion insurance scheme.Large pension 
adjustment 
accelerates 
expenditure 
growthBalanced result 
possible follow -
ing favourable 
first half of the 
year
In the medium 
to long term, 
demographic 
developments 
will put pressure 
on pension 
finances
Significantly 
improved result: 
budget almost 
balanced in 
spring 2022
Steep rise in 
contribution 
receiptsFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung  Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary quarterly figures as the latter are not subsequently revised.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4420246
––+++
–8–6–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202220212020
2022
202020212020 2021 20220246
2020 2021 20220246 Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
8 For more information on longer- term developments and 
reform options, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2022g).
9 In the core budget, i.e. excluding the civil servants’ pen -
sion fund. Transfers to the fund have been suspended since 
spring 2020 due to the coronavirus crisis.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
74

Expenditure continued to decline very sharply 
on the year (-43%), only slightly exceeding its 
pre- crisis level of spring 2019 if it is updated to 
reflect the increase in compensation for em -
ployees since then. In a year- on- year compari -
son, expenditure on unemployment benefits 
decreased by 19% (-€1 billion), while spending 
on short- time work fell by as much as 84% 
(-€6½ billion). Here, the continued recovery of 
the labour market from the effects of the 
coronavirus pandemic had an easing effect.
2022 as a whole
From the current perspective, the finances of 
the Federal Employment Agency are expected 
to improve over the remainder of the year. 
Spending on short- time working benefits is 
also set to decline sharply in the second half of 
2022, compared with the same period last 
year. Alongside the decrease in short- time 
work, the phasing- out of benefits that were 
previously extended by legislators on account 
of the pandemic will also provide relief. Ex -
penditure on unemployment benefit I is likely to 
decline further on the year, too, albeit less 
sharply than before. As things stand today, the 
contribution receipts of the Federal Employ -
ment Agency should grow significantly. Overall, 
then, a surplus is possible for the year as a 
whole, assuming there are no new crisis- related 
burdens.Expenditure 
still declining 
sharply, espe -
cially in the case 
of short- time 
working benefits
Surplus possible 
for 2022
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), Outlook for the German economy for 2022 to 2024, Monthly 
Report , June 2022, pp. 13-45.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b), German government budget still heavily shaped by coronavirus 
pandemic in 2021, Monthly Report, February 2022, pp. 63-65.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c), Inflation- induced bracket creep in the income tax scale, Monthly 
Report, June 2022, pp. 63-73.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022d), Government debt in the euro area: developments in creditor struc -
ture, Monthly Report, July 2022, pp. 77-89.Finances of the 
Federal Employment Agency*
Source: Federal Employment Agency. * Including transfers to 
the civil servants' pension fund and before payment of central 
government grants.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410505
––+
–30–25–20–15–10–50+5Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202220212020
2021202020222020 2021 2022–60–300+30+60+90+120+150
2020 2021 202260300306090120150
––+++++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
75

Deutsche Bundesbank (2022e), Public finances in the euro area: current developments and chal -
lenges, Monthly Report, June 2022, pp. 75-81.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022f), Public finances, Monthly Report, May 2022, pp. 70-84.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022g), Pension insurance scheme: long- term scenarios and reform 
 options, Monthly Report, June 2022, pp. 47-61.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), Federal debt: allocate premia on accruals basis in budgetary inter -
est expenditure, Monthly Report, June 2021, pp. 47-51.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), Government finances: Central bank bond purchases increase 
sensitivity  to interest rate changes, Monthly Report, June 2021, pp. 39-45.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Key central government budget data in connection with the debt 
brake, Monthly Report, February 2016, pp. 68-69.
Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action (2022), Federal Government adopts 
protective  shield for companies affected by the war, Press Release, 8 April 2022.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
76

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43 •
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
3•

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
13. General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
14. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78 •
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81 •
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 €STR  5,73 month
EURIBOR  6,7Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  8
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2020 Nov. 14.5 10.8 10.9 11.2 8.6 4.4 – 0.7 – 0.56 – 0.52 – 0.2
Dec. 15.6 11.7 12.2 11.9 9.3 5.0 – 0.5 – 0.56 – 0.54 – 0.2
2021 Jan. 16.4 12.2 12.5 12.3 9.4 4.8 – 0.9 – 0.56 – 0.55 – 0.2
Feb. 16.4 12.1 12.3 11.6 9.6 4.7 – 0.9 – 0.56 – 0.54 – 0.1
Mar. 13.7 10.2 10.1 10.6 8.6 4.0 – 0.3 – 0.56 – 0.54 0.0
Apr. 12.4 9.2 9.4 9.4 7.3 3.4 – 0.3 – 0.57 – 0.54 0.1
May 11.7 8.4 8.6 8.8 6.3 2.9 – 1.0 – 0.56 – 0.54 0.2
June 11.8 8.3 8.4 8.3 6.0 3.3 – 0.6 – 0.56 – 0.54 0.2
July 11.0 7.6 7.8 8.1 5.8 3.1 – 0.5 – 0.57 – 0.55 0.0
Aug. 11.1 7.8 8.0 7.8 5.5 2.8 – 0.8 – 0.57 – 0.55 – 0.1
Sep. 11.1 7.6 7.6 7.7 5.6 3.3 – 0.7 – 0.57 – 0.55 0.1
Oct. 10.7 7.5 7.7 7.5 5.6 3.6 – 0.3 – 0.57 – 0.55 0.2
Nov. 10.0 7.1 7.3 7.3 5.8 3.7 – 0.5 – 0.57 – 0.57 0.2
Dec. 9.8 7.0 6.9 6.9 6.1 3.9 – 0.5 – 0.58 – 0.58 0.1
2022 Jan. 9.2 6.8 6.5 6.6 6.2 4.3 – 0.3 – 0.58 – 0.56 0.4
Feb. 9.1 6.8 6.4 6.4 6.2 4.4 – 0.4 – 0.58 – 0.53 0.8
Mar. 8.8 6.6 6.2 6.2 6.1 4.5 – 0.7 – 0.58 – 0.50 0.9
Apr. 8.2 6.3 6.1 6.0 6.4 5.0 – 0.1 – 0.58 – 0.45 1.4
May 7.9 6.1 5.8 5.9 6.3 5.1 0.1 – 0.59 – 0.39 1.7
June 7.2 5.9 5.7 ... 6.3 5.4 0.0 – 0.58 – 0.24 2.2
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... – 0.51 0.04 1.9
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 EuroShort-Term Rate.  6 Euro interbank offered rate.  7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p.
43●. 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries included: DE,
FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT, GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2020 Nov. +29,820 +35,704 +37,485 –56,374 +196,739 +11,770 –112,040 – 2,610 1.1838 100.6 94.3
Dec. +45,453 +39,773 +44,573 –101,234 +280,114 –28,792 –107,264 + 1,749 1.2170 101.8 95.2
2021 Jan. +20,686 +21,755 +50,974 +54,448 +34,832 +11,070 –48,422 – 954 1.2171 101.3 95.3
Feb. +26,148 +33,478 +52,787 +30,274 +110,154 – 1,765 –84,303 – 1,573 1.2098 100.6 94.5
Mar. +38,660 +37,500 + 7,643 +40,948 –63,199 – 6,046 +36,383 – 443 1.1899 100.3 94.1
Apr. +37,478 +28,077 +14,052 – 2,853 +39,700 + 6,969 –30,357 + 593 1.1979 100.6 94.3
May +15,929 +26,704 +42,495 +14,517 +90,512 – 6,940 –56,916 + 1,323 1.2146 100.8 94.3
June +27,633 +31,414 +63,577 – 4,840 +41,067 – 2,298 +24,449 + 5,199 1.2047 100.2 93.7
July +36,848 +33,476 +40,749 +42,833 + 5,012 +18,311 –25,069 – 338 1.1822 99.7 93.4
Aug. +21,055 +15,432 +37,205 +42,728 +34,827 + 1,635 –164,067 +122,082 1.1772 99.3 93.1
Sep. +32,820 +20,817 + 5,229 +21,333 +16,126 + 4,116 –37,749 + 1,404 1.1770 99.4 93.3
Oct. + 8,547 +11,924 +30,483 +21,667 +34,957 +13,983 –43,313 + 3,190 1.1601 98.4 92.4
Nov. +10,026 +14,562 – 2,990 + 3,659 +60,386 +26,205 –93,744 + 504 1.1414 97.6 91.7
Dec. +25,718 +10,434 – 264 +27,308 +22,896 + 4,427 –54,088 – 807 1.1304 97.1 91.2
2022 Jan. – 6,787 – 9,073 +29,082 – 1,174 +73,618 + 2,743 –43,960 – 2,144 1.1314 96.6 91.2
Feb. + 407 + 3,722 – 44 +31,466 –33,167 – 3,777 + 3,731 + 1,703 1.1342 96.9 91.7
Mar. + 7,376 + 5,113 –15,106 – 4,310 –73,063 – 4,280 +66,465 + 82 1.1019 95.9 91.3
Apr. – 3,602 – 1,952 –39,165 +31,086 +12,718 +12,256 –94,558 – 667 1.0819 95.2 p 89.9
May –15,395 + 575 +13,699 +40,921 +53,600 – 2,512 –79,498 + 1,188 1.0579 95.6 p 90.3
June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0566 95.9 p 90.5
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0179 94.1 p 89.0
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also Tables
XII.10 and 11, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Bundesbankcalculation. Against the currencies of the EER-19 group.  4 Based on consumer price
indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2019 1.6 2.1 1.1 4.1 1.2 1.8 1.8 5.4 0.5 2.5
2020 –6.3 –5.7 –3.7 –3.0 –2.2 –7.8 –9.0 6.2 –9.0 –3.8
2021 5.3 6.2 2.6 8.3 3.0 6.8 8.3 13.6 6.6 4.5
2021 Q1 –0.9 0.0 –2.3 3.7 –1.5 1.6 –0.8 11.4 0.3 –0.9
Q2 14.6 15.1 10.6 12.7 7.5 19.0 15.0 19.5 17.9 10.6
Q3 3.9 5.0 1.8 8.3 3.1 3.7 11.8 10.4 3.8 5.0
Q4 4.8 5.6 1.2 8.6 3.1 4.7 7.4 13.8 5.8 3.1
2022 Q1 5.4 4.8 3.9 4.3 4.1 4.9 7.9 10.7 5.9 6.7
Q2 3.9 ... 1.5 ... ... 4.1 ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2019 –0.7 4.8 –3.2 7.1 1.6 0.5 –0.7 7.0 –1.1 0.8
2020 –7.7 –3.8 –9.6 –2.8 –3.2 –10.9 –2.1 14.5 –11.4 –1.8
2021 8.0 16.8 4.7 6.8 4.1 5.9 10.2 16.4 12.2 6.5
2021 Q1 5.0 8.4 –0.3 –0.2 –0.1 2.1 4.7 40.6 10.4 3.7
Q2 23.7 29.8 20.3 15.1 4.3 22.4 15.6 33.2 32.6 12.6
Q3 5.9 19.4 2.5 7.1 4.5 2.6 9.7 27.6 4.9 6.3
Q4 0.2 11.2 –1.2 5.7 7.3 –0.3 11.3 –18.2 4.6 3.6
2022 Q1 –0.3 6.4 –1.2 4.2 3.1 0.1 4.4 –15.0 1.4 4.0
Q2 0.5 –5.4 p –1.4 3.1 6.9 0.3 2.5 p –5.7 2.0 3.6
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2019 82.2 81.2 84.6 72.6 81.0 84.5 71.5 77.3 77.4 76.3
2020 74.5 75.6 77.3 67.6 76.9 73.8 71.0 68.7 53.4 72.0
2021 81.4 80.1 84.8 78.1 81.2 81.1 75.6 78.2 76.4 75.2
2021 Q2 80.8 79.5 85.0 77.2 82.1 80.2 74.3 73.5 75.4 74.5
Q3 83.0 80.9 86.1 78.2 81.8 82.9 77.8 80.8 77.5 76.1
Q4 82.7 81.1 85.8 83.0 82.5 82.0 77.4 81.6 77.7 77.1
2022 Q1 82.4 80.0 85.9 72.5 81.3 82.7 76.8 78.9 78.6 74.6
Q2 82.5 80.1 85.1 70.6 80.7 82.2 76.6 82.6 78.6 75.4
Q3 82.4 79.0 85.0 74.9 81.2 82.2 74.6 79.7 78.7 76.4
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2019 7.5 5.4 3.0 4.5 6.7 8.2 17.3 5.0 10.0 6.3
2020 7.8 5.6 3.6 7.0 7.8 7.8 16.3 5.6 9.2 8.1
2021 e 7.7 e 6.3 3.6 e 6.2 e 7.7 e 7.9 e 14.8 e 6.3 e 9.5 e 7.6
2022 Feb. 6.8 5.3 3.0 5.5 6.5 7.3 13.0 4.7 8.5 6.9
Mar. 6.7 5.2 2.9 5.5 6.4 7.3 12.6 5.0 8.3 6.7
Apr. 6.6 5.3 2.9 5.5 6.2 7.2 12.6 4.6 8.3 6.6
May 6.6 5.5 2.9 5.8 6.2 7.2 12.5 4.2 8.2 6.5
June 6.6 5.5 2.8 5.7 6.7 7.2 12.3 4.3 8.1 6.4
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.2 ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2019 1.2 1.2 1.4 2.3 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.9 0.6 2.7
2020 0.3 0.4 5 0.4 –0.6 0.4 0.5 –1.3 –0.5 –0.1 0.1
2021 2.6 3.2 5 3.2 4.5 2.1 2.1 0.6 2.4 1.9 3.2
2022 Feb. 5.9 9.5 5.5 11.6 4.4 4.2 6.3 5.7 6.2 8.8
Mar. 7.4 9.3 7.6 14.8 5.8 5.1 8.0 6.9 6.8 11.5
Apr. 7.4 9.3 7.8 19.1 5.8 5.4 9.1 7.3 6.3 13.1
May 8.1 9.9 8.7 20.1 7.1 5.8 10.5 8.3 7.3 16.8
June 8.6 10.5 8.2 22.0 8.1 6.5 11.6 9.6 8.5 19.2
July 8.9 10.4 8.5 23.2 8.0 6.8 11.3 9.6 8.4 21.3
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
2019 –0.7 –2.0 1.5 0.1 –0.9 –3.1 1.1 0.5 –1.5 –0.6
2020 –7.1 –9.0 –4.3 –5.6 –5.5 –8.9 –10.2 –5.1 –9.6 –4.5
2021 –5.1 –5.5 –3.7 –2.4 –2.6 –6.5 –7.4 –1.9 –7.2 –7.3
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
2019 83.8 97.7 58.9 8.6 59.6 97.4 180.7 57.2 134.1 36.7
2020 97.2 112.8 68.7 19.0 69.0 114.6 206.3 58.4 155.3 43.3
2021 95.6 108.2 69.3 18.1 65.8 112.9 193.3 56.0 150.8 44.8
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
4.6 3.3 5.9 2.0 1.5 2.7 2.6 3.3 2.1 5.3 2019
–0.1 –1.8 –8.3 –3.9 –6.7 –8.4 –4.4 –4.2 –10.8 –5.0 2020
5.0 6.9 10.4 4.9 4.8 4.9 3.0 8.1 5.1 5.5 2021
1.6 5.2 0.1 –2.2 –5.0 –5.3 0.2 1.5 –4.5 –2.1 2021 Q1
8.3 12.9 16.4 10.2 13.1 16.0 9.6 16.1 17.8 13.0 Q2
4.8 5.1 14.1 5.4 5.4 4.5 1.3 5.0 3.4 5.3 Q3
5.2 4.8 11.8 6.2 6.3 5.8 1.4 10.4 5.5 6.4 Q4
4.8 4.1 7.6 6.7 9.5 11.1 3.1 9.6 6.4 5.9 2022 Q1
2.0 ... ... ... ... ... 1.7 8.2 6.0 ... Q2
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2.9 –3.1 1.1 –0.9 –0.1 –2.2 0.5 2.8 0.5 4.4 2019
–1.7 –10.8 –0.2 –3.9 –5.9 –7.3 –9.1 –6.4 –9.8 –7.3 2020
20.0 8.4 –0.2 5.0 11.2 3.5 10.4 9.9 7.5 6.4 2021
13.3 5.1 –8.5 –0.8 3.2 –0.6 6.5 3.4 2.5 1.2 2021 Q1
25.0 24.0 14.3 10.0 24.1 24.3 35.8 24.2 27.2 21.2 Q2
17.8 3.6 –0.0 6.8 9.7 –3.8 0.9 6.3 1.9 4.5 Q3
23.9 2.9 –5.4 4.4 9.6 –1.7 4.0 7.7 1.8 1.0 Q4
23.5 0.2 –2.0 1.9 11.1 –2.9 –1.7 4.0 1.7 3.8 2022 Q1
8.7 p –1.4 p –4.4 p 4.8 p 9.5 1.8 –4.8 p 1.8 p 5.1 ... Q2
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
77.3 80.0 77.4 84.1 86.6 78.0 87.2 84.3 80.3 63.7 2019
73.0 72.5 70.7 78.3 79.5 74.9 79.5 78.5 74.4 51.5 2020
76.7 82.0 76.8 82.4 87.1 79.2 82.2 84.5 77.8 51.3 2021
76.7 83.6 77.9 81.8 86.3 78.7 82.5 84.2 77.4 48.8 2021 Q2
77.6 83.7 78.4 83.8 89.6 78.9 81.9 85.9 77.5 50.1 Q3
78.3 81.8 75.2 83.6 88.5 80.2 82.1 85.3 79.2 55.6 Q4
77.9 81.9 62.9 84.0 88.4 81.8 82.8 86.1 78.8 55.4 2022 Q1
77.7 79.9 64.6 84.3 88.9 82.5 83.9 85.3 80.0 58.2 Q2
78.8 81.4 67.6 83.9 87.9 81.6 83.5 84.7 78.9 58.2 Q3
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
6.3 5.6 3.6 3.4 4.5 6.5 5.8 4.5 14.1 7.1 2019
8.6 6.8 4.4 3.9 5.4 6.9 6.7 5.0 15.5 7.6 2020
e 7.1 e 5.4 e 3.6 e 4.2 e 6.2 e 6.6 e 6.9 e 4.8 e 14.8 e 7.5 2021
6.2 4.5 3.3 3.4 4.8 5.8 6.4 4.0 13.3 6.0 2022 Feb.
6.1 4.3 3.2 3.3 4.3 5.9 6.3 3.9 13.2 5.6 Mar.
6.2 4.2 3.2 3.2 4.3 5.9 6.2 4.0 12.8 5.2 Apr.
6.0 4.2 3.1 3.3 4.8 6.0 6.1 3.9 12.6 4.9 May
5.8 4.2 3.0 3.4 4.3 6.1 6.0 3.8 12.6 5.1 June
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... July
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2.2 1.6 1.5 2.7 1.5 0.3 2.8 1.7 0.8 0.5 2019
1.1 0.0 0.8 1.1 1.4 –0.1 2.0 –0.3 –0.3 –1.1 2020
4.6 3.5 0.7 2.8 2.8 0.9 2.8 2.0 3.0 2.3 2021
14.0 7.8 4.2 7.3 5.5 4.4 8.3 7.0 7.6 5.8 2022 Feb.
15.6 7.9 4.5 11.7 6.6 5.5 9.6 6.0 9.8 6.2 Mar.
16.6 9.0 5.4 11.2 7.1 7.4 10.9 7.4 8.3 8.6 Apr.
18.5 9.1 5.8 10.2 7.7 8.1 11.8 8.7 8.5 8.8 May
20.5 10.3 6.1 9.9 8.7 9.0 12.6 10.8 10.0 9.0 June
20.9 9.3 6.8 11.6 9.4 9.4 12.8 11.7 10.7 10.6 July
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
0.5 2.3 0.6 1.7 0.6 0.1 –1.3 0.4 –3.1 1.3 2019
–7.3 –3.4 –9.5 –3.7 –8.0 –5.8 –5.5 –7.8 –10.3 –5.8 2020
–1.0 0.9 –8.0 –2.5 –5.9 –2.8 –6.2 –5.2 –6.9 –1.7 2021
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
35.9 22.3 40.7 48.5 70.6 116.6 48.1 65.6 98.3 91.1 2019
46.6 24.8 53.4 54.3 83.3 135.2 59.7 79.8 120.0 115.0 2020
44.3 24.4 57.0 52.1 82.8 127.4 63.1 74.7 118.4 103.6 2021
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of valueadded tax between July and December 2020.  6 According to Maastricht Treaty
definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2020 Nov. 117.4 72.8 29.0 44.6 45.3 –30.4 91.8 122.2 4.7 13.2 –0.5 –10.7 2.7
Dec. – 3.6 –1.0 30.0 –2.6 6.2 –46.9 –194.4 –147.5 9.3 –5.5 –0.5 –14.3 29.7
2021 Jan. 133.3 30.1 4.3 103.2 94.1 38.8 162.4 123.6 –36.2 –9.2 0.1 –16.0 –11.1
Feb. 99.8 33.8 9.0 66.0 72.7 –14.7 28.9 43.6 –1.2 –5.7 –0.5 –2.4 7.4
Mar. 176.0 100.7 8.5 75.3 74.0 – 5.9 –6.7 –0.7 12.2 –9.0 –0.3 1.2 20.3
Apr. 55.9 13.3 8.6 42.6 29.0 –11.4 104.5 115.9 –36.9 –23.9 –0.1 –7.5 –5.4
May 124.9 48.3 15.2 76.6 77.6 2.6 24.5 21.8 –23.5 –1.2 –0.2 –15.1 –6.9
June 94.5 37.2 0.8 57.3 58.6 9.2 –74.4 –83.6 26.8 –6.1 –0.4 –4.2 37.6
July 112.9 56.0 8.1 56.8 50.3 – 4.2 74.3 78.6 3.1 –4.7 –0.6 9.3 –0.9
Aug. 35.0 –16.6 –7.8 51.7 60.9 – 4.7 141.2 146.0 –5.9 –7.3 –0.4 –7.0 8.9
Sep. 107.4 72.9 3.7 34.4 43.2 –40.1 –58.2 –18.1 16.6 –4.5 –0.4 8.3 13.2
Oct. 80.6 68.3 21.3 12.3 18.5 –16.4 192.3 208.7 11.4 –10.7 –0.7 16.8 6.0
Nov. 156.1 89.3 –3.6 66.8 67.5 –26.3 15.0 41.3 –7.0 –10.6 –0.7 1.8 2.5
Dec. 53.0 27.9 20.3 25.1 22.6 –51.4 –203.4 –151.9 4.5 18.0 –0.8 –25.0 12.3
2022 Jan. 166.4 91.4 –10.3 75.0 64.7 – 1.6 136.3 137.9 –18.3 –14.7 –0.1 9.6 –13.0
Feb. 113.2 46.7 2.0 66.5 73.8 –14.0 83.0 97.1 –12.3 –8.9 –0.4 1.6 –4.7
Mar. 157.5 112.2 26.4 45.3 36.0 3.5 –21.1 –24.6 –4.2 2.8 –0.7 –27.2 20.8
Apr. 110.9 96.2 20.4 14.7 4.7 –81.2 –57.6 23.6 5.6 –10.7 –0.1 –1.3 17.7
May 108.0 65.6 –19.3 42.4 49.8 –56.2 39.1 95.3 –13.6 3.0 –3.2 –18.7 5.4
June 111.8 77.5 –0.6 34.3 31.2 102.1 –5.7 –107.8 22.3 –4.4 –0.3 –0.1 27.2
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2020 Nov. 44.0 19.6 4.5 24.5 26.0 –15.1 7.4 22.5 0.6 –1.5 –0.4 0.2 2.3
Dec. – 0.9 7.5 3.6 –8.4 –4.6 –107.2 –35.1 72.1 –7.5 –1.3 –0.3 –7.1 1.2
2021 Jan. 30.1 12.1 3.1 18.1 18.1 41.7 79.7 38.0 –11.4 –2.9 –0.6 –1.6 –6.4
Feb. 29.8 18.8 4.6 11.1 13.4 26.3 7.0 –19.3 0.8 –1.8 –0.3 4.3 –1.4
Mar. 54.1 35.8 1.8 18.3 19.5 –61.9 1.9 63.9 3.5 –3.5 –0.3 7.1 0.2
Apr. 11.4 0.5 2.4 10.8 7.0 67.3 25.3 –42.0 9.3 –2.4 –0.3 6.4 5.6
May 33.4 16.8 3.2 16.6 18.9 –35.0 –10.9 24.1 –10.3 –2.8 –0.1 –7.3 0.0
June 30.0 8.7 2.4 21.4 22.3 –36.1 –5.3 30.8 3.2 –3.4 –0.2 –7.3 14.1
July 42.9 22.4 2.2 20.4 18.4 42.8 –14.6 –57.4 5.1 –1.8 –0.3 4.3 2.8
Aug. 28.5 16.6 1.6 11.9 15.7 –18.0 18.2 36.2 2.0 –0.5 –0.2 0.9 1.9
Sep. 33.1 16.7 5.4 16.4 16.5 –92.2 –0.7 91.5 3.8 –2.2 –0.2 2.6 3.6
Oct. 37.8 34.7 7.2 3.0 –0.6 47.0 47.6 0.7 18.6 1.4 –0.2 15.6 1.8
Nov. 54.0 28.5 3.4 25.4 28.0 –59.0 –4.2 54.8 5.0 –0.6 –0.2 4.7 1.1
Dec. 12.8 10.9 6.8 2.0 4.7 –122.9 –47.1 75.8 –2.3 9.1 –0.2 –13.2 2.0
2022 Jan. 40.4 31.0 1.4 9.4 7.5 111.9 72.2 –39.7 –4.0 –1.1 –0.8 12.6 –14.8
Feb. 32.7 27.6 3.4 5.2 7.2 16.0 21.9 5.9 5.1 –1.3 –0.2 7.0 –0.4
Mar. 37.0 23.3 4.1 13.7 12.9 –44.2 –22.2 22.0 6.1 –2.0 –0.2 4.1 4.2
Apr. 19.0 18.9 2.7 0.1 –4.5 19.1 –13.0 –32.1 4.4 –2.7 –0.2 3.2 4.1
May 39.1 28.5 3.5 10.6 13.5 –29.8 –0.9 28.9 2.0 –2.4 –0.1 2.0 2.5
June 29.3 23.3 –4.6 6.0 3.6 –23.7 –10.2 13.6 4.7 –2.8 –0.2 –3.3 10.9
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
–98.5 52.3 0.0 129.4 125.2 152.4 11.8 140.6 –35.2 8.1 – 0.7 1.1 3.2 2020 Nov.
–128.1 –52.0 0.0 138.2 128.3 117.1 20.8 96.2 10.6 0.6 –24.7 20.1 – 3.5 Dec.
78.3 33.2 0.0 69.1 32.3 44.5 2.6 41.9 –30.6 18.4 29.9 18.5 5.7 2021 Jan.
30.4 5.2 0.0 52.6 65.4 71.8 7.3 64.5 –18.0 11.6 2.8 –30.7 13.1 Feb.
19.6 73.2 0.0 83.2 101.6 82.6 10.5 72.2 7.3 11.7 –18.6 –4.7 –13.3 Mar.
–32.3 14.2 0.0 94.5 69.1 88.9 8.5 80.4 –27.9 8.1 15.3 8.9 6.8 Apr.
– 8.5 48.9 0.0 110.1 115.6 116.7 13.2 103.5 –11.7 10.7 – 4.1 –8.9 8.1 May
16.8 –4.3 0.0 74.0 88.1 119.7 10.5 109.2 –33.9 2.3 –10.8 –8.4 – 4.6 June
0.4 –55.8 0.0 151.2 113.5 103.3 14.6 88.6 10.5 – 0.3 17.4 22.6 7.4 July
26.6 –10.6 0.0 28.3 33.4 32.4 1.7 30.7 –2.5 3.6 –12.3 5.3 – 6.2 Aug.
6.5 –0.8 0.0 31.1 60.4 76.0 5.3 70.8 –16.5 0.8 12.7 –31.1 2.9 Sep.
– 2.4 –75.0 0.0 129.3 84.7 70.5 6.8 63.7 19.2 – 5.0 13.2 31.5 0.8 Oct.
–48.5 84.9 0.0 95.9 83.7 102.7 6.0 96.7 –19.7 0.7 – 4.4 26.2 – 5.0 Nov.
–44.5 –20.1 0.0 87.6 114.4 104.0 20.6 83.3 6.9 3.6 –41.8 –6.7 – 4.0 Dec.
68.1 91.2 0.0 –23.8 –23.9 –51.4 1.0 –52.3 14.9 12.6 63.5 –23.2 6.2 2022 Jan.
44.6 26.5 0.0 39.8 70.2 77.1 9.1 68.0 –14.9 8.0 9.4 –37.2 – 2.1 Feb.
13.7 55.1 0.0 104.1 112.8 92.7 22.5 70.1 16.1 4.0 –21.8 –1.8 2.0 Mar.
–22.1 –71.4 0.0 91.3 57.0 52.3 11.2 41.1 2.7 2.1 28.8 20.2 12.9 Apr.
–28.9 45.0 0.0 55.3 65.4 71.2 7.8 63.4 –18.1 12.3 5.5 –11.5 – 4.1 May
67.7 73.0 0.0 73.4 75.5 47.0 6.6 40.3 23.6 4.9 –39.1 0.5 14.0 June
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
– 12.7 3.6 1.3 3.0 37.4 49.3 – 14.3 0.3 3.3 – 0.3 – 0.9 2020 Nov.
– 22.9 – 73.4 2.4 5.6 – 4.3 – 5.8 – 1.7 1.3 3.1 0.1 – 1.3 Dec.
– 40.3 95.7 1.1 0.9 27.8 45.9 – 14.8 1.6 – 3.8 – 0.0 – 1.1 2021 Jan.
15.4 29.1 2.3 1.5 10.8 20.3 – 8.5 1.2 – 2.4 – 0.0 0.3 Feb.
– 2.3 – 38.0 2.5 2.7 29.1 24.3 – 0.6 0.1 5.0 0.5 – 0.1 Mar.
– 7.4 71.2 0.7 2.6 5.5 13.9 – 5.2 0.7 – 3.4 – 0.1 – 0.4 Apr.
18.8 – 44.9 3.0 2.9 34.8 27.8 2.8 0.6 1.7 – 0.1 2.0 May
6.0 – 14.0 3.1 2.3 – 1.2 7.1 – 8.0 – 0.4 – 0.2 0.1 0.3 June
– 12.0 75.2 4.2 3.7 17.4 21.2 – 4.1 – 0.3 0.6 – 0.1 0.1 July
0.7 – 13.2 2.9 0.2 21.0 20.4 – 1.6 – 0.3 0.1 0.0 2.3 Aug.
7.1 – 77.3 4.6 0.8 7.3 7.6 – 1.3 – 0.6 1.5 – 0.0 0.1 Sep.
– 3.9 53.7 3.3 1.6 16.4 3.9 13.0 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.4 Oct.
7.2 – 42.3 3.7 1.2 25.0 40.9 – 12.3 – 0.1 – 4.7 – 0.3 1.4 Nov.
27.8 –135.3 5.3 4.5 – 0.4 – 12.8 9.1 1.6 – 0.3 0.3 1.7 Dec.
– 38.1 166.0 1.3 0.8 28.4 22.4 9.3 0.3 – 1.2 0.0 – 2.4 2022 Jan.
2.5 14.4 3.0 2.2 26.8 23.3 1.1 0.3 1.1 0.1 0.8 Feb.
– 0.1 – 13.2 5.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 7.4 8.4 – 1.6 0.5 0.2 – 0.1 Mar.
– 3.0 32.9 3.4 2.3 3.7 – 3.4 10.4 – 0.4 – 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.6 Apr.
22.5 – 30.3 3.4 2.7 15.1 22.5 – 7.4 – 1.2 0.4 0.2 0.7 May
14.9 – 42.7 3.7 0.5 28.7 19.5 7.4 – 1.6 0.6 – 0.0 2.9 June
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2020 May 30,500.5 19,611.5 14,470.1 12,020.6 1,646.6 802.8 5,141.4 1,013.8 4,127.7 6,464.0 4,425.1
June 30,406.4 19,761.9 14,451.9 11,982.0 1,653.7 816.1 5,310.0 1,005.3 4,304.7 6,297.2 4,347.3
July 30,598.6 19,912.2 14,334.1 12,013.7 1,506.0 814.5 5,578.1 1,006.0 4,572.1 6,291.1 4,395.3
Aug. 30,434.9 19,985.0 14,355.1 12,019.1 1,525.0 811.0 5,629.9 997.8 4,632.1 6,241.9 4,208.0
Sep. 30,522.8 20,084.9 14,349.5 12,019.2 1,520.4 809.9 5,735.4 998.7 4,736.8 6,238.1 4,199.8
Oct. 30,687.0 20,162.5 14,376.6 12,054.8 1,520.5 801.3 5,785.9 1,004.2 4,781.7 6,337.4 4,187.0
Nov. 30,749.4 20,292.0 14,457.7 12,090.4 1,542.2 825.0 5,834.4 1,003.4 4,831.0 6,331.0 4,126.4
Dec. 30,438.8 20,266.1 14,438.3 12,042.9 1,532.2 863.2 5,827.8 990.2 4,837.6 6,108.9 4,063.8
2021 Jan. 30,643.8 20,387.8 14,466.2 12,067.8 1,535.8 862.6 5,921.6 999.4 4,922.1 6,299.8 3,956.2
Feb. 30,546.3 20,463.6 14,500.5 12,090.1 1,541.1 869.3 5,963.1 992.4 4,970.6 6,300.7 3,782.0
Mar. 30,827.0 20,653.7 14,576.8 12,185.3 1,512.6 879.0 6,076.9 993.3 5,083.5 6,360.7 3,812.6
Apr. 30,752.9 20,667.2 14,566.6 12,169.2 1,509.7 887.7 6,100.6 1,007.2 5,093.4 6,396.3 3,689.5
May 30,890.4 20,788.2 14,612.8 12,198.6 1,521.6 892.6 6,175.5 1,006.2 5,169.2 6,434.1 3,668.1
June 30,991.0 20,890.7 14,652.8 12,234.6 1,530.0 888.3 6,237.8 1,004.8 5,233.1 6,400.0 3,700.3
July 31,313.8 21,028.7 14,708.3 12,278.0 1,543.6 886.7 6,320.4 1,011.3 5,309.1 6,504.2 3,781.0
Aug. 31,438.1 21,047.9 14,684.9 12,261.1 1,533.4 890.4 6,363.1 1,002.3 5,360.8 6,653.5 3,736.6
Sep. 31,473.8 21,133.9 14,757.6 12,331.3 1,534.9 891.4 6,376.3 993.6 5,382.7 6,620.6 3,719.3
Oct. 31,776.6 21,201.6 14,817.7 12,379.4 1,548.1 890.2 6,384.0 987.7 5,396.3 6,823.1 3,751.9
Nov. 32,190.9 21,381.2 14,911.2 12,478.0 1,542.2 890.9 6,470.0 985.8 5,484.2 6,915.2 3,894.5
Dec. 31,777.4 21,384.3 14,917.1 12,462.9 1,567.2 887.0 6,467.3 988.5 5,478.8 6,738.8 3,654.3
2022 Jan. 32,392.9 21,552.3 15,027.3 12,590.2 1,553.2 884.0 6,524.9 999.2 5,525.8 6,909.7 3,931.0
Feb. 32,581.1 21,611.7 15,058.4 12,628.8 1,553.6 876.0 6,553.3 991.8 5,561.5 7,007.7 3,961.7
Mar. 32,935.4 21,735.8 15,174.8 12,721.3 1,587.4 866.1 6,561.0 1,001.4 5,559.6 6,994.9 4,204.8
Apr. 33,587.6 21,761.4 15,251.9 12,803.6 1,597.8 850.5 6,509.5 1,011.3 5,498.2 7,082.8 4,743.4
May 33,502.2 21,816.0 15,304.6 12,879.1 1,568.0 857.5 6,511.4 1,003.9 5,507.5 7,032.3 4,653.9
June 33,917.7 21,882.0 15,368.2 12,959.8 1,577.9 830.5 6,513.8 1,007.0 5,506.8 7,102.6 4,933.1
German contribution (€ billion)
2020 May 7,230.4 4,666.4 3,640.1 3,167.2 215.9 257.1 1,026.2 293.8 732.5 1,326.0 1,238.1
June 7,225.3 4,692.6 3,641.6 3,164.7 220.4 256.6 1,051.0 291.5 759.6 1,304.2 1,228.5
July 7,267.6 4,718.8 3,634.9 3,175.5 202.7 256.7 1,083.9 293.4 790.5 1,282.9 1,265.8
Aug. 7,167.3 4,723.0 3,642.2 3,180.7 202.9 258.6 1,080.8 287.4 793.3 1,268.8 1,175.5
Sep. 7,236.4 4,749.2 3,647.1 3,184.0 204.9 258.1 1,102.1 289.7 812.4 1,293.8 1,193.4
Oct. 7,257.1 4,801.4 3,670.3 3,200.4 210.7 259.3 1,131.1 292.0 839.1 1,278.8 1,176.8
Nov. 7,240.5 4,841.7 3,688.6 3,213.7 214.3 260.6 1,153.1 290.2 862.9 1,261.9 1,136.9
Dec. 7,172.5 4,839.4 3,695.5 3,216.4 214.7 264.5 1,143.9 286.4 857.4 1,224.1 1,109.1
2021 Jan. 7,220.7 4,865.5 3,705.9 3,224.4 216.4 265.1 1,159.6 286.5 873.1 1,307.6 1,047.6
Feb. 7,182.0 4,885.0 3,724.3 3,238.8 217.4 268.1 1,160.7 283.8 877.0 1,305.0 991.9
Mar. 7,233.5 4,939.8 3,761.1 3,273.4 217.3 270.4 1,178.7 282.6 896.1 1,315.4 978.3
Apr. 7,228.4 4,946.1 3,760.5 3,270.3 217.6 272.6 1,185.6 285.7 899.9 1,333.6 948.6
May 7,228.0 4,977.5 3,777.2 3,283.3 219.5 274.4 1,200.3 283.4 916.9 1,329.8 920.7
June 7,277.1 5,009.8 3,786.4 3,290.4 220.8 275.2 1,223.4 282.3 941.1 1,325.1 942.1
July 7,362.7 5,062.4 3,808.5 3,310.2 221.9 276.4 1,253.9 284.4 969.5 1,317.4 982.9
Aug. 7,395.2 5,087.3 3,824.6 3,325.1 221.4 278.1 1,262.8 280.8 982.0 1,336.0 971.9
Sep. 7,398.6 5,110.8 3,840.8 3,336.4 224.7 279.7 1,270.1 280.7 989.4 1,335.1 952.6
Oct. 7,461.0 5,147.0 3,874.5 3,363.5 228.6 282.4 1,272.5 284.4 988.0 1,385.2 928.8
Nov. 7,575.0 5,210.7 3,904.2 3,389.9 229.0 285.3 1,306.4 280.7 1,025.7 1,396.4 967.9
Dec. 7,475.8 5,212.1 3,914.7 3,393.2 237.0 284.5 1,297.4 278.0 1,019.5 1,355.9 907.8
2022 Jan. 7,787.0 5,243.9 3,944.7 3,422.9 235.8 286.0 1,299.2 279.9 1,019.3 1,433.6 1,109.5
Feb. 7,871.3 5,262.9 3,968.5 3,445.2 238.0 285.3 1,294.3 277.8 1,016.5 1,464.4 1,144.0
Mar. 7,997.7 5,280.7 3,990.2 3,464.4 240.6 285.2 1,290.6 278.6 1,012.0 1,447.5 1,269.5
Apr. 8,259.4 5,278.9 4,008.0 3,481.9 240.1 286.1 1,270.9 283.2 987.7 1,464.0 1,516.5
May 8,228.4 5,304.5 4,034.5 3,506.0 240.8 287.7 1,270.0 280.3 989.7 1,445.0 1,479.0
June 8,413.5 5,320.0 4,057.2 3,535.9 237.8 283.5 1,262.8 282.5 980.3 1,466.0 1,627.5
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,293.5 14,302.8 13,164.0 13,264.9 8,009.7 779.7 188.4 1,881.9 2,363.7 41.4 2020 May
1,306.6 14,478.2 13,208.9 13,310.8 8,066.5 763.6 186.8 1,877.8 2,375.5 40.6 June
1,320.9 14,592.9 13,276.6 13,363.7 8,090.1 783.2 186.3 1,882.5 2,381.1 40.4 July
1,326.8 14,668.1 13,304.3 13,391.2 8,117.1 767.8 184.4 1,892.0 2,390.0 40.0 Aug.
1,330.3 14,758.4 13,361.0 13,467.6 8,175.8 781.0 195.4 1,883.6 2,392.0 39.8 Sep.
1,338.1 14,814.8 13,431.7 13,545.6 8,266.0 783.3 181.9 1,880.4 2,394.6 39.4 Oct.
1,349.9 14,813.0 13,527.2 13,621.6 8,358.3 756.5 179.6 1,885.7 2,402.5 39.0 Nov.
1,370.7 14,772.9 13,620.6 13,728.8 8,459.6 772.0 176.9 1,877.6 2,404.2 38.5 Dec.
1,373.3 14,873.9 13,631.3 13,752.9 8,505.4 743.9 173.8 1,870.6 2,421.0 38.1 2021 Jan.
1,380.6 14,957.8 13,678.6 13,807.8 8,569.6 733.7 169.2 1,865.1 2,432.5 37.7 Feb.
1,391.1 15,076.4 13,757.0 13,913.7 8,654.9 753.5 164.3 1,858.8 2,444.8 37.4 Mar.
1,399.6 15,061.0 13,775.3 13,936.1 8,727.0 731.8 159.5 1,827.5 2,453.0 37.3 Apr.
1,412.8 15,147.4 13,870.8 14,018.1 8,811.1 724.4 155.5 1,826.2 2,463.6 37.1 May
1,423.2 15,241.8 13,943.4 14,091.3 8,917.7 698.2 150.4 1,822.0 2,466.2 36.8 June
1,437.6 15,335.4 14,017.2 14,185.7 9,006.7 705.9 153.6 1,817.0 2,466.2 36.3 July
1,439.2 15,386.3 14,039.3 14,196.7 9,030.0 707.3 151.2 1,809.9 2,462.4 35.9 Aug.
1,444.5 15,442.5 14,075.3 14,239.7 9,092.9 701.1 140.0 1,806.7 2,463.3 35.6 Sep.
1,450.3 15,504.6 14,139.4 14,312.3 9,166.1 709.0 148.0 1,795.5 2,458.8 34.9 Oct.
1,456.3 15,518.4 14,188.5 14,345.4 9,224.1 697.5 143.3 1,786.3 2,459.8 34.3 Nov.
1,477.0 15,579.6 14,310.0 14,464.4 9,316.4 714.5 131.3 1,805.2 2,463.5 33.6 Dec.
1,477.9 15,624.9 14,265.1 14,457.1 9,294.6 707.9 135.3 1,808.3 2,478.2 32.9 2022 Jan.
1,487.0 15,723.9 14,315.8 14,498.4 9,357.2 688.6 134.3 1,799.5 2,486.2 32.7 Feb.
1,509.6 15,840.4 14,415.6 14,599.9 9,439.8 703.7 123.5 1,809.7 2,491.1 32.2 Mar.
1,520.7 15,875.2 14,463.4 14,653.1 9,493.4 709.3 123.4 1,801.8 2,493.0 32.1 Apr.
1,528.5 15,893.3 14,510.6 14,683.8 9,539.3 686.6 120.3 1,803.0 2,505.6 29.0 May
1,535.1 16,039.2 14,574.7 14,751.0 9,581.2 705.9 123.6 1,800.4 2,511.2 28.7 June
German contribution (€ billion)
291.8 4,080.7 3,885.8 3,710.9 2,396.9 158.3 29.0 563.6 532.5 30.7 2020 May
296.5 4,132.2 3,873.6 3,711.6 2,408.7 152.1 29.6 559.0 532.6 29.7 June
300.4 4,170.7 3,880.3 3,716.8 2,409.9 163.5 30.0 552.8 531.5 29.2 July
301.3 4,202.4 3,889.9 3,720.2 2,419.2 159.3 30.1 551.3 531.6 28.8 Aug.
301.9 4,235.6 3,905.7 3,745.0 2,445.3 160.3 30.3 549.2 531.5 28.4 Sep.
303.6 4,245.3 3,935.3 3,781.4 2,476.4 165.4 30.5 549.7 531.5 28.0 Oct.
306.6 4,260.2 3,961.8 3,804.4 2,507.7 157.7 30.6 549.0 531.8 27.6 Nov.
312.2 4,228.5 3,954.1 3,801.5 2,500.9 160.3 31.0 548.8 533.1 27.3 Dec.
313.1 4,218.7 3,980.7 3,829.7 2,541.7 147.0 31.0 548.5 534.8 26.8 2021 Jan.
314.6 4,245.1 3,990.0 3,837.4 2,555.8 141.0 31.1 547.0 536.0 26.4 Feb.
317.3 4,264.3 4,011.8 3,863.4 2,579.8 145.1 31.7 544.6 536.1 26.1 Mar.
319.9 4,262.2 4,013.0 3,874.5 2,594.4 143.0 31.9 542.5 536.8 25.8 Apr.
322.8 4,308.8 4,040.3 3,895.1 2,613.5 146.0 32.2 540.4 537.4 25.7 May
325.1 4,311.0 4,035.3 3,890.5 2,619.4 139.3 31.9 537.5 537.0 25.5 June
328.8 4,313.9 4,047.3 3,911.3 2,645.8 136.0 31.4 536.0 536.7 25.2 July
329.0 4,333.1 4,065.2 3,923.1 2,659.1 135.6 31.3 535.7 536.4 25.0 Aug.
329.8 4,340.5 4,064.1 3,919.8 2,662.1 132.2 31.2 533.6 535.8 24.8 Sep.
331.4 4,354.3 4,080.9 3,950.3 2,681.4 143.0 31.1 534.8 535.5 24.6 Oct.
332.6 4,390.5 4,107.1 3,968.0 2,710.9 132.5 30.3 534.6 535.5 24.3 Nov.
337.1 4,425.2 4,113.0 3,968.5 2,691.5 141.2 30.1 544.6 537.0 24.1 Dec.
337.9 4,418.1 4,139.2 4,006.8 2,737.3 135.4 29.7 543.6 537.4 23.4 2022 Jan.
340.1 4,444.1 4,161.0 4,017.1 2,752.3 132.4 29.4 542.3 537.7 23.1 Feb.
344.3 4,441.6 4,159.0 4,014.6 2,755.3 130.7 29.3 540.4 536.0 22.9 Mar.
346.7 4,445.6 4,158.1 4,019.8 2,754.8 140.0 29.4 537.7 535.1 22.7 Apr.
349.4 4,478.3 4,170.7 4,016.7 2,769.9 125.8 29.7 534.8 533.9 22.6 May
349.9 4,517.2 4,194.5 4,031.8 2,787.1 127.8 30.1 532.1 532.3 22.4 June
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2020 May 603.1 434.8 245.9 81.7 28.4 54.7 20.3 3.8 297.8 297.5 542.3 2,134.3 1,470.7
June 726.2 441.1 259.5 82.4 24.6 51.8 19.3 3.4 254.8 254.6 556.6 2,105.0 1,453.7
July 787.6 441.5 264.3 80.1 23.2 51.0 19.4 3.5 271.8 271.6 586.4 2,055.1 1,434.5
Aug. 828.4 448.5 273.6 79.5 22.1 50.3 19.6 3.5 266.9 266.7 587.0 2,036.6 1,425.3
Sep. 848.8 442.1 274.8 74.4 20.8 49.1 19.5 3.4 237.7 237.5 595.2 2,059.6 1,431.0
Oct. 831.5 437.6 277.4 69.6 20.8 47.0 19.5 3.4 243.1 242.9 609.3 2,043.2 1,418.6
Nov. 733.0 458.4 307.1 64.6 17.8 46.1 19.4 3.3 246.4 246.4 610.3 2,025.2 1,406.4
Dec. 604.8 439.3 294.7 60.3 17.2 44.8 19.0 3.3 221.4 221.3 625.9 1,995.5 1,386.3
2021 Jan. 683.2 437.8 294.4 58.9 17.4 44.1 19.2 3.8 251.6 251.5 644.4 1,990.9 1,369.7
Feb. 713.6 436.4 296.4 54.3 19.0 43.9 19.2 3.7 254.6 254.5 613.7 2,004.4 1,369.6
Mar. 733.1 429.6 295.4 52.1 16.4 43.2 18.9 3.7 236.5 236.5 609.1 2,005.5 1,357.4
Apr. 700.9 424.0 293.9 48.5 16.2 42.9 18.9 3.6 251.1 251.0 617.9 1,991.6 1,350.5
May 692.4 436.9 308.3 47.7 15.9 42.4 19.1 3.5 246.7 246.7 608.4 1,980.7 1,339.4
June 709.3 441.2 314.0 46.6 16.3 42.0 18.8 3.5 236.5 236.5 600.0 1,984.2 1,332.5
July 709.7 440.1 313.9 45.6 16.6 42.0 18.6 3.5 253.9 253.9 622.6 1,999.3 1,334.0
Aug. 736.1 453.5 329.1 43.9 17.0 42.0 18.0 3.4 241.7 241.7 627.9 1,988.5 1,334.0
Sep. 742.7 460.1 334.6 46.3 16.6 41.3 18.1 3.3 257.3 257.2 596.8 2,011.7 1,343.3
Oct. 740.3 451.9 323.3 48.1 18.0 41.6 17.7 3.3 270.3 270.3 628.3 2,031.7 1,353.1
Nov. 691.5 481.6 349.8 50.3 19.1 41.7 17.5 3.3 266.4 266.4 654.5 2,040.2 1,352.7
Dec. 646.7 468.4 337.4 49.7 19.4 41.1 17.6 3.2 224.7 223.5 647.7 2,016.3 1,345.8
2022 Jan. 710.9 456.9 307.3 67.4 19.6 41.2 17.6 3.8 288.5 288.3 624.5 2,043.3 1,348.9
Feb. 755.5 469.9 314.1 73.5 19.8 41.3 17.6 3.7 297.9 297.7 587.2 2,042.3 1,357.4
Mar. 769.6 470.9 304.7 82.5 20.5 42.4 17.3 3.4 276.2 276.0 585.4 2,023.1 1,356.9
Apr. 747.6 474.5 306.7 83.4 21.2 42.6 17.2 3.4 306.2 306.0 605.8 2,063.7 1,358.2
May 718.7 490.8 316.7 88.4 22.3 43.3 16.8 3.3 311.2 311.1 594.4 2,031.6 1,334.5
June 786.5 501.7 325.2 90.7 22.9 43.3 16.2 3.2 272.7 272.6 594.9 2,063.5 1,359.5
German contribution (€ billion)
2020 May 116.2 253.6 108.0 72.9 22.9 46.7 2.8 0.3 2.4 2.3 1.9 543.1 305.4
June 174.0 246.5 106.1 74.1 19.5 44.0 2.5 0.3 0.9 0.7 1.8 532.8 297.2
July 208.5 245.3 109.6 71.4 18.3 43.2 2.5 0.3 2.1 2.0 1.6 523.3 293.3
Aug. 229.5 252.8 118.7 71.3 17.4 42.4 2.6 0.3 1.7 1.5 1.9 517.9 291.1
Sep. 244.7 245.8 119.4 66.0 16.5 41.1 2.5 0.3 1.3 1.1 2.0 525.3 296.1
Oct. 224.8 239.1 119.1 61.7 16.6 39.0 2.5 0.3 1.4 1.3 2.7 519.9 296.2
Nov. 212.1 243.7 131.6 57.3 14.0 38.0 2.5 0.2 9.1 9.1 2.4 515.5 296.1
Dec. 189.2 237.8 131.9 52.8 13.5 36.8 2.5 0.2 12.2 12.2 2.5 503.3 290.1
2021 Jan. 148.9 240.1 136.5 51.6 13.5 35.8 2.4 0.2 8.4 8.4 2.4 503.3 284.6
Feb. 164.3 243.4 142.8 47.3 15.2 35.5 2.5 0.2 6.0 6.0 2.4 510.0 288.4
Mar. 161.9 239.0 144.4 44.9 12.7 34.4 2.4 0.2 11.0 11.0 2.9 523.3 289.8
Apr. 154.6 233.1 142.4 41.5 12.5 34.1 2.4 0.2 7.6 7.6 2.8 524.3 296.2
May 173.3 240.3 150.8 41.0 12.5 33.4 2.4 0.2 9.2 9.2 2.2 518.0 293.2
June 179.3 241.2 152.9 39.9 13.0 32.8 2.4 0.2 9.0 9.0 2.3 515.5 294.6
July 167.3 235.3 148.0 38.9 13.3 32.5 2.4 0.2 9.6 9.6 2.2 518.3 295.1
Aug. 168.1 241.8 155.7 37.3 13.9 32.4 2.4 0.2 9.7 9.7 2.2 522.4 303.1
Sep. 175.2 245.6 158.2 39.8 13.4 31.7 2.3 0.2 11.2 11.2 2.2 530.1 305.5
Oct. 171.3 232.7 142.7 40.9 14.8 31.8 2.3 0.2 10.8 10.8 2.1 547.9 316.4
Nov. 178.4 244.1 155.2 38.8 16.1 31.6 2.2 0.2 6.1 6.1 1.8 556.5 324.8
Dec. 206.2 250.5 161.9 39.1 16.4 30.7 2.3 0.2 5.8 4.8 2.1 547.6 316.3
2022 Jan. 168.1 243.3 139.1 54.6 16.5 30.7 2.2 0.2 4.7 4.7 2.2 562.8 325.1
Feb. 170.6 256.3 147.8 59.2 16.3 30.6 2.2 0.2 5.8 5.8 2.3 572.5 338.8
Mar. 170.6 256.4 137.6 68.8 17.0 30.7 2.2 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.4 581.5 354.8
Apr. 167.6 258.2 137.6 70.0 17.6 30.6 2.2 0.2 4.4 4.4 2.2 596.5 357.3
May 190.1 271.4 144.2 75.3 18.5 31.1 2.2 0.2 4.8 4.8 2.4 596.8 359.0
June 205.0 280.4 147.7 80.4 19.0 31.0 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.3 604.1 362.6
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
4.1 22.2 2,108.0 4,956.8 2,952.8 – 33.1 4,053.3 0.0 9,682.0 13,166.2 13,836.0 7,042.6 154.7 2020 May
– 0.3 20.6 2,084.7 4,723.1 2,977.4 – 4.2 4,008.9 0.0 9,768.9 13,242.8 13,915.4 7,035.8 158.0 June
– 11.9 19.9 2,047.1 4,744.5 3,017.5 – 54.6 4,064.1 0.0 9,813.1 13,308.1 14,012.0 7,042.1 159.4 July
– 15.4 19.2 2,032.9 4,711.2 3,014.5 – 38.8 3,862.5 0.0 9,856.0 13,340.6 14,027.9 7,033.2 160.0 Aug.
– 14.4 15.3 2,058.7 4,666.9 3,011.2 – 15.9 3,879.2 0.0 9,923.5 13,428.0 14,122.0 7,045.9 163.9 Sep.
– 2.2 15.2 2,030.1 4,789.8 3,038.2 – 47.9 3,858.5 0.0 10,025.3 13,516.4 14,233.1 7,038.6 165.3 Oct.
– 1.5 17.4 2,009.2 4,868.1 2,995.8 – 44.2 3,884.8 0.0 10,167.5 13,629.7 14,354.2 6,979.2 174.0 Nov.
– 4.6 16.9 1,983.2 4,671.6 3,020.5 – 11.3 3,771.5 0.0 10,278.9 13,750.6 14,480.1 6,967.9 176.0 Dec.
1.9 15.7 1,973.3 4,821.4 2,998.4 – 10.2 3,700.0 0.0 10,326.2 13,784.9 14,551.1 6,928.3 177.5 2021 Jan.
13.8 16.4 1,974.2 4,872.9 2,953.0 – 10.8 3,520.1 0.0 10,398.7 13,851.2 14,604.3 6,877.6 176.8 Feb.
– 0.7 16.9 1,989.3 4,944.3 2,967.6 15.9 3,580.6 0.0 10,490.2 13,964.4 14,699.0 6,899.9 173.1 Mar.
6.5 16.6 1,968.5 4,989.3 2,948.0 10.5 3,484.0 0.0 10,569.9 14,021.8 14,781.1 6,827.9 173.5 Apr.
14.8 15.9 1,950.0 4,995.9 2,968.5 53.4 3,476.5 0.0 10,684.4 14,134.5 14,887.0 6,827.9 176.1 May
10.6 16.1 1,957.6 4,964.4 2,979.9 57.4 3,503.6 0.0 10,811.2 14,231.7 14,971.1 6,841.7 180.3 June
16.9 17.1 1,965.4 5,051.0 3,024.8 38.9 3,550.3 0.0 10,914.9 14,345.4 15,122.6 6,888.9 180.9 July
11.9 16.3 1,960.4 5,201.1 3,024.5 29.8 3,499.0 0.0 10,956.6 14,380.5 15,152.9 6,876.1 182.3 Aug.
14.0 17.9 1,979.8 5,226.5 2,997.6 16.1 3,480.9 0.0 11,035.4 14,444.8 15,191.7 6,864.3 187.4 Sep.
14.5 17.8 1,999.5 5,433.0 2,999.7 – 22.8 3,481.5 0.0 11,103.9 14,527.5 15,318.4 6,874.5 188.2 Oct.
12.8 17.8 2,009.6 5,516.9 3,037.4 21.6 3,679.1 0.0 11,196.0 14,607.5 15,414.5 6,912.5 189.7 Nov.
8.9 18.0 1,989.4 5,379.3 3,024.0 54.1 3,374.7 0.0 11,299.6 14,721.8 15,502.3 6,896.4 195.0 Dec.
16.0 18.2 2,009.1 5,554.2 2,999.4 62.3 3,717.9 0.0 11,252.2 14,701.7 15,483.6 6,894.6 196.0 2022 Jan.
25.6 5.6 2,011.2 5,642.2 2,995.0 55.3 3,750.3 0.0 11,331.6 14,773.3 15,523.6 6,883.3 195.0 Feb.
27.4 5.7 1,990.0 5,626.3 3,007.8 80.7 3,985.9 0.0 11,425.6 14,887.8 15,629.5 6,885.5 195.1 Mar.
32.1 15.7 2,015.9 5,764.9 2,987.4 67.3 4,396.5 0.0 11,494.1 14,965.6 15,744.6 6,883.2 197.2 Apr.
28.1 15.2 1,988.3 5,815.1 2,925.8 81.2 4,321.0 0.0 11,559.6 15,023.5 15,791.8 6,792.7 199.0 May
44.0 14.3 2,005.1 5,757.0 2,917.3 95.0 4,643.0 0.0 11,615.1 15,110.2 15,878.1 6,798.1 198.0 June
German contribution (€ billion)
14.9 7.3 520.8 917.3 756.1 –1,003.8 1,932.8 458.5 2,505.0 3,323.2 3,349.8 1,918.3 0.0 2020 May
14.8 7.1 510.9 939.7 769.1 –1,074.1 1,923.1 458.1 2,514.8 3,325.2 3,349.7 1,913.0 0.0 June
12.8 6.7 503.7 907.0 784.6 –1,089.1 1,967.5 460.5 2,519.5 3,336.8 3,360.1 1,913.6 0.0 July
12.0 7.2 498.7 891.2 778.4 –1,114.7 1,888.5 464.3 2,537.9 3,350.2 3,372.9 1,899.9 0.0 Aug.
12.4 6.7 506.2 952.4 787.3 –1,172.8 1,905.3 467.0 2,564.6 3,371.8 3,394.2 1,912.5 0.0 Sep.
11.1 7.0 501.8 906.4 794.7 –1,107.6 1,894.1 469.4 2,595.4 3,403.6 3,425.7 1,913.5 0.0 Oct.
10.0 7.1 498.4 923.3 780.2 –1,109.5 1,859.4 470.7 2,639.3 3,433.2 3,461.8 1,893.5 0.0 Nov.
9.0 6.6 487.7 985.7 787.5 –1,192.0 1,844.9 473.1 2,632.8 3,426.1 3,456.4 1,888.4 0.0 Dec.
7.8 6.8 488.7 1,026.4 778.3 –1,113.3 1,796.5 474.2 2,678.2 3,458.5 3,483.9 1,878.3 0.0 2021 Jan.
7.4 7.5 495.1 1,007.6 756.3 –1,095.7 1,750.3 476.5 2,698.6 3,471.7 3,494.9 1,860.6 0.0 Feb.
8.1 6.8 508.4 1,080.1 754.4 –1,144.4 1,742.0 479.0 2,724.1 3,497.0 3,525.7 1,868.2 0.0 Mar.
7.8 6.6 510.0 1,029.5 759.2 –1,074.2 1,717.0 479.7 2,736.8 3,505.0 3,529.7 1,871.8 0.0 Apr.
9.6 6.7 501.7 1,051.5 768.2 –1,126.5 1,696.6 482.8 2,764.3 3,535.8 3,563.5 1,869.6 0.0 May
9.8 6.9 498.8 1,088.8 775.4 –1,149.4 1,724.5 485.9 2,772.3 3,535.7 3,563.7 1,870.2 0.0 June
9.8 7.0 501.5 1,031.5 795.8 –1,075.6 1,767.0 490.0 2,793.9 3,552.6 3,581.2 1,891.2 0.0 July
12.7 6.5 503.2 1,068.1 793.5 –1,088.4 1,754.6 492.9 2,814.8 3,571.7 3,602.8 1,889.9 0.0 Aug.
13.1 7.0 510.1 1,165.5 781.6 –1,156.2 1,723.6 497.5 2,820.3 3,575.1 3,608.5 1,881.9 0.0 Sep.
13.3 7.2 527.5 1,165.8 783.9 –1,110.5 1,706.6 500.8 2,824.1 3,591.6 3,625.0 1,902.8 0.0 Oct.
14.5 7.4 534.6 1,227.7 803.0 –1,154.8 1,744.2 504.5 2,866.1 3,621.4 3,651.2 1,928.3 0.0 Nov.
16.1 7.5 524.0 1,305.6 796.1 –1,297.0 1,690.3 509.8 2,853.4 3,619.4 3,651.0 1,919.7 0.0 Dec.
13.6 7.7 541.5 1,271.1 778.4 –1,169.6 1,919.3 511.1 2,876.4 3,652.3 3,680.4 1,917.7 0.0 2022 Jan.
14.7 7.5 550.4 1,275.8 774.8 –1,172.9 1,969.0 514.2 2,900.0 3,677.2 3,707.4 1,921.4 0.0 Feb.
14.8 7.3 559.5 1,299.3 781.2 –1,190.8 2,076.2 520.0 2,892.9 3,677.0 3,707.8 1,934.7 0.0 Mar.
14.6 7.1 574.8 1,284.0 769.2 –1,168.1 2,325.6 523.3 2,892.4 3,686.8 3,715.1 1,935.2 0.0 Apr.
14.9 7.3 574.6 1,307.0 748.6 –1,199.2 2,289.8 526.8 2,914.0 3,699.5 3,728.9 1,911.8 0.0 May
18.7 6.6 578.9 1,317.2 743.1 –1,255.6 2,479.8 530.5 2,934.7 3,726.5 3,759.5 1,907.7 0.0 June
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2020 July 871.3 0.8 1,401.5 0.0 3,168.2 356.0 0.0 1,365.7 671.2 703.1 2,345.9 4,067.5
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 865.9 1.3 1,593.2 0.0 3,323.6 413.2 0.0 1,381.2 712.9 651.0 2,625.7 4,420.1
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 864.4 1.3 1,707.8 0.0 3,475.8 460.7 0.0 1,389.1 749.0 653.5 2,797.0 4,646.8
Dec. 865.1 0.5 1,754.4 0.0 3,614.7 535.4 0.0 1,403.9 647.0 687.7 2,960.7 4,900.0
2021 Jan. 848.6 0.3 1,792.6 0.0 3,712.9 586.9 0.0 1,429.4 530.3 778.4 3,029.4 5,045.7
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 834.9 0.4 1,792.4 0.0 3,825.1 598.0 0.0 1,433.4 595.8 667.9 3,157.7 5,189.1
Apr. 816.7 0.3 2,054.6 0.0 3,951.4 676.4 0.0 1,447.7 644.5 633.4 3,421.1 5,545.2
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 809.8 0.2 2,107.0 0.0 4,092.7 706.5 0.0 1,465.8 586.7 659.1 3,591.7 5,763.9
July 821.7 0.1 2,196.0 0.0 4,244.5 736.6 0.0 1,485.8 652.3 734.5 3,653.1 5,875.5
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 826.7 0.2 2,213.2 0.0 4,378.9 766.6 0.0 1,499.9 635.7 790.4 3,726.2 5,992.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 835.1 0.2 2,209.9 0.0 4,512.3 738.5 0.0 1,507.4 671.3 833.7 3,806.5 6,052.4
Dec. 839.2 0.2 2,208.8 0.0 4,655.6 745.0 0.0 1,521.4 628.3 965.7 3,843.3 6,109.7
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 877.7 0.3 2,201.5 0.0 4,750.2 734.2 0.0 1,540.6 582.0 1,160.5 3,812.3 6,087.1
Mar. 887.2 0.3 2,201.3 0.0 4,842.0 746.0 0.0 1,550.6 642.6 1,091.1 3,900.8 6,197.3
Apr. 913.2 0.4 2,199.8 0.0 4,889.2 714.9 0.0 1,575.9 667.8 1,116.7 3,927.3 6,218.1
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 934.2 0.5 2,198.8 0.0 4,939.1 681.3 0.0 1,591.5 624.1 1,129.1 4,046.1 6,319.0
July 943.7 1.0 2,149.4 0.0 4,958.8 678.7 0.0 1,604.0 667.6 1,158.0 3,943.3 6,226.0
Deutsche Bundesbank
2020 July 222.1 0.5 235.2 0.0 655.9 108.2 0.0 331.5 205.0 – 238.1 707.1 1,146.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 212.1 0.8 284.0 0.0 692.0 136.0 0.0 336.4 239.6 – 298.0 774.8 1,247.3
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 212.1 0.7 319.5 0.0 729.0 145.5 0.0 338.1 254.7 – 302.9 826.0 1,309.6
Dec. 213.0 0.3 333.9 0.0 768.7 166.6 0.0 341.2 217.9 – 294.5 884.7 1,392.5
2021 Jan. 208.3 0.1 341.1 0.0 791.3 178.9 0.0 347.3 189.4 – 252.8 878.0 1,404.2
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 205.3 0.1 341.0 0.0 816.9 177.5 0.0 348.3 172.7 – 298.0 962.8 1,488.6
Apr. 198.0 0.0 407.3 0.0 845.8 203.0 0.0 351.7 187.4 – 300.4 1,008.9 1,563.5
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 194.3 0.0 420.5 0.0 884.3 208.5 0.0 356.8 187.3 – 301.9 1,046.7 1,612.0
July 197.4 0.0 434.3 0.0 918.5 204.2 0.0 362.0 206.8 – 270.8 1,046.2 1,612.4
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 199.0 0.1 436.7 0.0 950.8 210.7 0.0 365.0 204.3 – 240.8 1,045.3 1,621.0
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 200.3 0.1 439.1 0.0 978.5 204.4 0.0 367.4 217.7 – 235.2 1,061.6 1,633.3
Dec. 201.3 0.0 440.3 0.0 1,015.8 206.4 0.0 370.9 220.4 – 219.4 1,077.1 1,654.4
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 212.4 0.3 421.7 0.0 1,034.0 204.5 0.0 374.6 205.6 – 165.1 1,048.8 1,627.9
Mar. 215.6 0.1 421.7 0.0 1,057.9 211.8 0.0 378.1 191.1 – 193.7 1,108.0 1,698.0
Apr. 223.9 0.1 420.8 0.0 1,068.7 197.7 0.0 384.9 196.7 – 189.1 1,123.3 1,705.9
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 230.4 0.1 420.2 0.0 1,087.4 189.9 0.0 388.0 196.9 – 183.1 1,147.4 1,725.3
July 231.7 0.3 409.1 0.0 1,084.3 185.8 0.0 390.3 214.9 – 175.4 1,109.7 1,685.8
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
–79.1 + 0.5 +417.3 ± 0.0 +181.3 +56.1 ± 0.0 +17.8 +194.1 –127.4 +379.4 +453.1 2020 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
– 5.4 + 0.5 +191.7 ± 0.0 +155.4 +57.2 ± 0.0 +15.5 +41.7 –52.1 +279.8 +352.6 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
– 1.5 ± 0.0 +114.6 ± 0.0 +152.2 +47.5 ± 0.0 + 7.9 +36.1 + 2.5 +171.3 +226.7 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.8 +46.6 ± 0.0 +138.9 +74.7 ± 0.0 +14.8 –102.0 +34.2 +163.7 +253.2 Dec.
–16.5 – 0.2 +38.2 ± 0.0 +98.2 +51.5 ± 0.0 +25.5 –116.7 +90.7 +68.7 +145.7 2021 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
–13.7 + 0.1 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +112.2 +11.1 ± 0.0 + 4.0 +65.5 –110.5 +128.3 +143.4 Mar.
–18.2 – 0.1 +262.2 ± 0.0 +126.3 +78.4 ± 0.0 +14.3 +48.7 –34.5 +263.4 +356.1 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
– 6.9 – 0.1 +52.4 ± 0.0 +141.3 +30.1 ± 0.0 +18.1 –57.8 +25.7 +170.6 +218.7 June
+11.9 – 0.1 +89.0 ± 0.0 +151.8 +30.1 ± 0.0 +20.0 +65.6 +75.4 +61.4 +111.6 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 5.0 + 0.1 +17.2 ± 0.0 +134.4 +30.0 ± 0.0 +14.1 –16.6 +55.9 +73.1 +117.3 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 8.4 ± 0.0 – 3.3 ± 0.0 +133.4 –28.1 ± 0.0 + 7.5 +35.6 +43.3 +80.3 +59.6 Nov.
+ 4.1 ± 0.0 – 1.1 ± 0.0 +143.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 +14.0 –43.0 +132.0 +36.8 +57.3 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+38.5 + 0.1 – 7.3 ± 0.0 +94.6 –10.8 ± 0.0 +19.2 –46.3 +194.8 –31.0 –22.6 Feb.
+ 9.5 ± 0.0 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +91.8 +11.8 ± 0.0 +10.0 +60.6 –69.4 +88.5 +110.2 Mar.
+26.0 + 0.1 – 1.5 ± 0.0 +47.2 –31.1 ± 0.0 +25.3 +25.2 +25.6 +26.5 +20.8 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+21.0 + 0.1 – 1.0 ± 0.0 +49.9 –33.6 ± 0.0 +15.6 –43.7 +12.4 +118.8 +100.9 June
+ 9.5 + 0.5 –49.4 ± 0.0 +19.7 – 2.6 ± 0.0 +12.5 +43.5 +28.9 –102.8 –93.0 July
Deutsche Bundesbank
–26.6 + 0.4 +112.6 – 0.0 +32.8 +23.2 ± 0.0 + 5.1 +67.5 –65.5 +89.0 +117.3 2020 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
–10.0 + 0.3 +48.9 + 0.0 +36.1 +27.9 ± 0.0 + 5.0 +34.6 –59.9 +67.6 +100.5 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 0.0 – 0.1 +35.5 – 0.0 +37.0 + 9.5 ± 0.0 + 1.7 +15.0 – 5.0 +51.2 +62.3 Nov.
+ 0.9 – 0.4 +14.4 + 0.0 +39.8 +21.1 ± 0.0 + 3.1 –36.8 + 8.4 +58.7 +82.9 Dec.
– 4.7 – 0.2 + 7.1 + 0.0 +22.6 +12.3 ± 0.0 + 6.1 –28.5 +41.7 – 6.7 +11.7 2021 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
– 3.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 +25.6 – 1.4 ± 0.0 + 1.0 –16.7 –45.2 +84.8 +84.4 Mar.
– 7.3 – 0.1 +66.3 + 0.0 +28.8 +25.5 ± 0.0 + 3.4 +14.7 – 2.4 +46.0 +74.9 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
– 3.7 + 0.0 +13.2 + 0.0 +38.6 + 5.5 ± 0.0 + 5.1 –0.1 – 1.5 +37.9 +48.5 June
+ 3.1 – 0.0 +13.8 – 0.0 +34.2 – 4.3 ± 0.0 + 5.2 +19.4 +31.1 – 0.5 + 0.4 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 1.6 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.0 +32.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 + 3.0 –2.5 +29.9 – 0.9 + 8.6 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.4 – 0.0 +27.8 – 6.4 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +13.4 + 5.7 +16.3 +12.3 Nov.
+ 1.0 – 0.1 + 1.2 – 0.0 +37.3 + 2.1 ± 0.0 + 3.5 +2.7 +15.7 +15.6 +21.1 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+11.1 + 0.2 –18.6 + 0.0 +18.2 – 2.0 ± 0.0 + 3.7 –14.7 +54.3 –28.3 –26.6 Feb.
+ 3.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 +23.9 + 7.4 ± 0.0 + 3.5 –14.5 –28.6 +59.2 +70.1 Mar.
+ 8.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.0 +10.8 –14.2 ± 0.0 + 6.8 +5.6 + 4.6 +15.2 + 7.9 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+ 6.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 – 0.0 +18.7 – 7.7 ± 0.0 + 3.0 +0.2 + 6.0 +24.1 +19.4 June
+ 1.3 + 0.2 –11.1 – 0.0 – 3.1 – 4.1 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +18.0 + 7.7 –37.7 –39.5 July
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2022 Jan. 14 8,594.0 559.4 496.2 218.9 277.3 26.6 10.5 10.5 –
21 8,600.3 559.4 495.6 218.9 276.7 26.7 10.4 10.4 –
28 8,622.6 559.4 496.7 219.0 277.7 26.7 10.2 10.2 –
Feb. 4 8,630.1 559.4 496.8 219.3 277.5 25.6 10.0 10.0 –
11 8,651.8 559.4 497.1 219.3 277.8 25.8 10.1 10.1 –
18 8,667.9 559.4 498.9 219.3 279.5 24.1 10.0 10.0 –
25 8,671.3 559.4 499.2 219.3 279.8 24.0 10.2 10.2 –
Mar. 4 8,673.0 559.4 498.2 219.3 278.9 25.4 10.4 10.4 –
11 8,687.0 559.4 498.9 219.4 279.5 24.7 10.4 10.4 –
18 8,700.0 559.5 498.4 219.3 279.0 24.6 10.6 10.6 –
25 8,710.6 559.5 498.7 220.4 278.4 24.9 12.4 12.4 –
Apr. 1 8,754.0 604.5 500.2 222.0 278.1 26.4 11.3 11.3 –
8 8,763.7 604.5 498.6 220.2 278.4 25.8 10.0 10.0 –
15 8,787.9 604.5 500.0 220.2 279.8 25.3 10.0 10.0 –
22 8,790.9 604.5 499.3 220.3 279.0 26.6 10.1 10.1 –
29 8,783.6 604.5 499.3 220.2 279.0 27.1 10.4 10.4 –
May 6 8,796.1 604.5 501.1 220.3 280.8 25.9 10.1 10.1 –
13 8,810.3 604.5 500.2 220.2 279.9 27.2 10.2 10.2 –
20 8,814.0 604.3 500.4 220.2 280.1 27.1 10.4 10.4 –
27 8,813.8 604.3 500.3 220.2 280.0 26.7 10.6 10.6 –
June 3 8,817.9 604.3 500.8 220.2 280.6 26.2 10.1 10.1 –
10 8,820.9 604.3 501.3 220.2 281.1 26.8 10.8 10.8 –
17 8,827.9 604.3 503.8 220.2 283.6 25.0 11.2 11.2 –
24 8,836.0 604.3 502.6 220.2 282.4 26.6 12.1 12.1 –
July 1 8,788.8 604.3 519.3 225.9 293.4 26.9 11.6 11.6 –
8 8,774.4 604.3 519.0 226.6 292.4 27.5 10.3 10.3 –
15 8,765.7 604.3 519.5 226.6 292.9 27.0 10.3 10.3 –
22 8,768.3 604.3 520.3 226.6 293.7 26.3 10.2 10.2 –
29 8,764.5 604.3 521.1 226.6 294.5 25.7 10.3 10.3 –
Aug. 5 8,746.0 604.3 520.5 226.6 293.9 26.8 9.8 9.8 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2022 Jan. 14 2,946.1 173.8 87.9 54.9 32.9 0.0 – – –
21 2,912.1 173.8 87.8 54.9 32.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
28 2,922.8 173.8 88.1 54.9 33.2 0.0 – – –
Feb. 4 2,921.6 173.8 88.4 55.1 33.3 0.0 – – –
11 2,934.4 173.8 88.9 55.1 33.7 0.0 – – –
18 2,932.3 173.8 89.0 55.1 33.9 0.0 – – –
25 2,923.7 173.8 89.0 55.1 33.9 0.0 – – –
Mar. 4 2,939.9 173.8 89.0 55.1 33.9 0.1 – – –
11 2,933.8 173.8 88.5 55.1 33.3 0.0 – – –
18 2,961.2 173.8 88.4 55.1 33.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 –
25 2,925.4 173.8 89.4 55.6 33.7 0.0 – – –
Apr. 1 2,972.8 187.8 90.0 56.0 34.0 0.0 – – –
8 2,950.8 187.8 89.8 56.0 33.7 0.0 – – –
15 2,952.6 187.8 89.8 56.0 33.7 0.0 – – –
22 2,945.6 187.7 89.9 56.1 33.8 0.0 – – –
29 2,952.6 187.7 90.1 56.1 34.0 0.0 – – –
May 6 2,991.6 187.7 90.3 56.1 34.2 0.0 – – –
13 2,998.1 187.7 90.3 56.1 34.2 0.0 – – –
20 2,975.2 187.6 90.3 56.1 34.2 0.0 – – –
27 2,992.4 187.6 90.3 56.1 34.3 0.0 – – –
June 3 2,992.8 187.6 90.2 56.1 34.1 0.0 – – –
10 2,975.2 187.6 90.5 56.1 34.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
17 2,999.7 187.6 90.9 56.1 34.8 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
24 2,968.5 187.6 91.1 56.1 35.1 0.0 1.8 1.8 –
July 1 3,013.1 187.6 93.6 57.7 35.9 0.0 1.5 1.5 –
8 2,950.0 187.6 93.4 57.7 35.8 0.0 – – –
15 2,946.9 187.6 93.3 57.7 35.7 0.0 – – –
22 2,941.3 187.6 93.4 57.7 35.7 0.0 – – –
29 2,964.1 187.6 93.1 57.6 35.5 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
Aug. 5 2,998.7 187.6 93.1 57.6 35.5 0.0 – – –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
2,201.9 0.4 2,201.5 – – – – 31.7 4,921.5 4,748.7 172.8 22.2 324.0 2022 Jan. 14
2,201.9 0.4 2,201.5 – – – – 30.5 4,934.5 4,761.3 173.2 22.2 319.0 21
2,201.7 0.2 2,201.5 – – – – 32.0 4,955.7 4,783.4 172.3 22.2 318.0 28
2,201.7 0.2 2,201.5 – – – – 32.6 4,970.1 4,800.3 169.8 22.1 311.9 Feb. 4
2,201.8 0.2 2,201.5 – – 0.1 – 27.9 4,990.8 4,820.2 170.7 22.1 316.8 11
2,201.8 0.3 2,201.5 – – – – 27.3 5,008.3 4,836.9 171.5 22.1 316.0 18
2,201.9 0.4 2,201.5 – – – – 27.6 5,011.1 4,839.4 171.6 22.1 315.7 25
2,201.3 0.2 2,201.1 – – – – 30.1 5,018.0 4,848.7 169.2 22.1 308.0 Mar. 4
2,201.4 0.3 2,201.1 – – – – 25.6 5,031.9 4,862.4 169.5 22.1 312.6 11
2,201.3 0.2 2,201.0 – – – – 28.4 5,042.8 4,873.1 169.7 22.1 312.4 18
2,201.3 0.2 2,201.0 – – – – 33.5 5,054.1 4,883.7 170.4 22.1 304.2 25
2,199.5 0.4 2,198.9 – – 0.3 – 34.1 5,045.7 4,877.5 168.2 22.1 310.2 Apr. 1
2,199.3 0.4 2,198.9 – – 0.0 – 32.4 5,061.2 4,892.6 168.6 22.1 309.9 8
2,199.4 0.5 2,198.9 – – 0.0 – 32.8 5,082.8 4,914.1 168.6 22.1 311.0 15
2,199.3 0.5 2,198.8 – – 0.0 – 32.0 5,082.1 4,915.3 166.8 22.1 314.9 22
2,199.6 0.7 2,198.8 – – – – 28.0 5,084.0 4,919.2 164.8 22.1 308.7 29
2,199.4 0.5 2,198.8 – – 0.0 – 30.7 5,092.8 4,927.8 165.0 22.1 309.5 May 6
2,199.3 0.5 2,198.8 – – – – 29.5 5,105.9 4,940.6 165.3 22.1 311.4 13
2,199.2 0.3 2,198.8 – – – – 29.9 5,114.7 4,949.4 165.3 22.1 306.0 20
2,199.5 0.7 2,198.9 – – – – 28.3 5,117.1 4,952.7 164.4 22.1 305.0 27
2,199.3 0.4 2,198.9 – – – – 30.7 5,119.4 4,954.5 165.0 22.1 304.9 June 3
2,199.3 0.4 2,198.8 – – – – 31.9 5,121.4 4,956.1 165.3 22.1 303.0 10
2,199.5 0.7 2,198.8 – – – – 36.4 5,125.1 4,959.2 165.9 22.1 300.5 17
2,199.5 0.7 2,198.8 – – – – 32.2 5,130.7 4,963.7 167.0 22.1 305.9 24
2,126.1 1.5 2,124.6 – – – – 34.5 5,129.1 4,963.5 165.6 21.7 315.4 July 1
2,125.6 1.0 2,124.6 – – 0.0 – 28.4 5,123.0 4,956.9 166.1 21.7 314.6 8
2,125.5 0.9 2,124.6 – – – – 28.8 5,119.3 4,953.9 165.4 21.7 309.4 15
2,125.6 1.0 2,124.6 – – 0.0 – 27.6 5,123.3 4,956.7 166.6 21.7 309.1 22
2,125.8 1.1 2,124.7 – – 0.0 – 30.8 5,125.6 4,958.9 166.8 21.7 299.2 29
2,125.6 0.9 2,124.7 – – – – 15.2 5,117.9 4,952.2 165.7 21.7 304.2 Aug. 5
Deutsche Bundesbank
422.0 0.3 421.7 – – 0.0 – 3.4 1,031.6 1,031.6 – 4.4 1,222.9 2022 Jan. 14
422.1 0.4 421.7 – – 0.0 – 3.1 1,034.7 1,034.7 – 4.4 1,186.0 21
421.8 0.2 421.7 – – 0.0 – 3.3 1,041.9 1,041.9 – 4.4 1,189.4 28
421.8 0.2 421.7 – – 0.0 – 4.3 1,048.9 1,048.9 – 4.4 1,179.8 Feb. 4
421.9 0.2 421.7 – – 0.1 – 4.6 1,053.7 1,053.7 – 4.4 1,187.1 11
421.8 0.2 421.7 – – 0.0 – 4.3 1,057.5 1,057.5 – 4.4 1,181.4 18
421.8 0.2 421.7 – – 0.0 – 4.8 1,057.2 1,057.2 – 4.4 1,172.7 25
421.7 0.0 421.7 – – 0.0 – 4.4 1,059.6 1,059.6 – 4.4 1,186.9 Mar. 4
421.7 0.0 421.7 – – 0.0 – 4.0 1,060.1 1,060.1 – 4.4 1,181.2 11
421.7 0.0 421.7 – – 0.0 – 7.0 1,065.6 1,065.6 – 4.4 1,200.2 18
421.7 0.0 421.7 – – 0.0 – 5.2 1,065.9 1,065.9 – 4.4 1,165.0 25
420.3 0.1 420.2 – – 0.0 – 5.2 1,068.4 1,068.4 – 4.4 1,196.6 Apr. 1
420.2 0.0 420.2 – – 0.0 – 4.4 1,067.3 1,067.3 – 4.4 1,176.9 8
420.3 0.1 420.2 – – 0.0 – 4.8 1,074.1 1,074.1 – 4.4 1,171.5 15
420.3 0.1 420.2 – – 0.0 – 6.1 1,075.6 1,075.6 – 4.4 1,161.6 22
420.4 0.3 420.2 – – 0.0 – 3.8 1,079.5 1,079.5 – 4.4 1,166.6 29
420.2 0.0 420.2 – – 0.0 – 4.3 1,084.4 1,084.4 – 4.4 1,200.2 May 6
420.2 0.0 420.2 – – 0.0 – 3.9 1,089.0 1,089.0 – 4.4 1,202.4 13
420.2 0.1 420.2 – – 0.0 – 4.0 1,088.4 1,088.4 – 4.4 1,180.2 20
420.5 0.3 420.2 – – 0.0 – 4.3 1,093.3 1,093.3 – 4.4 1,191.9 27
420.2 0.0 420.2 – – 0.0 – 5.9 1,095.3 1,095.3 – 4.4 1,189.1 June 3
420.2 0.1 420.2 – – 0.0 – 5.4 1,091.2 1,091.2 – 4.4 1,175.5 10
420.2 0.1 420.2 – – 0.0 – 6.3 1,093.9 1,093.9 – 4.4 1,195.4 17
420.3 0.1 420.2 – – 0.0 – 5.3 1,091.2 1,091.2 – 4.4 1,166.7 24
404.2 0.7 403.6 – – 0.0 – 4.2 1,091.1 1,091.1 – 4.4 1,226.4 July 1
403.8 0.3 403.6 – – 0.0 – 4.2 1,078.6 1,078.6 – 4.4 1,178.0 8
403.8 0.3 403.6 – – 0.0 – 5.6 1,079.4 1,079.4 – 4.4 1,172.7 15
403.9 0.4 403.6 – – 0.0 – 5.2 1,075.7 1,075.7 – 4.4 1,171.1 22
404.0 0.4 403.6 – – 0.0 – 0.6 1,077.2 1,077.2 – 4.4 1,197.1 29
403.7 0.1 403.6 – – 0.0 – 0.3 1,077.7 1,077.7 – 4.4 1,231.8 Aug. 5

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2022 Jan. 14 8,594.0 1,538.8 4,599.8 3,891.5 705.4 – – 2.8 46.9 – 720.2 574.0 146.2
21 8,600.3 1,538.5 4,623.8 3,838.8 782.4 – – 2.7 49.3 – 739.9 588.7 151.3
28 8,622.6 1,539.1 4,598.2 3,819.0 776.8 – – 2.4 45.6 – 818.1 656.8 161.3
Feb. 4 8,630.1 1,540.4 4,700.5 3,897.7 800.7 – – 2.2 51.2 – 710.7 567.7 143.0
11 8,651.8 1,542.3 4,679.4 4,069.3 607.4 – – 2.8 50.2 – 765.1 616.4 148.7
18 8,667.9 1,543.5 4,637.1 3,876.6 757.9 – – 2.6 49.4 – 832.0 690.4 141.6
25 8,671.3 1,546.5 4,636.9 3,875.5 759.0 – – 2.5 46.3 – 842.8 667.9 174.9
Mar. 4 8,673.0 1,556.2 4,656.7 3,855.9 798.6 – – 2.2 56.3 – 770.1 601.2 169.0
11 8,687.0 1,565.2 4,648.0 3,836.6 809.2 – – 2.2 49.4 – 793.6 629.0 164.6
18 8,700.0 1,569.1 4,582.1 3,992.4 587.0 – – 2.7 48.4 – 854.2 699.4 154.7
25 8,710.6 1,571.3 4,605.9 3,839.6 763.7 – – 2.7 52.7 – 866.3 708.2 158.2
Apr. 1 8,754.0 1,575.1 4,646.7 3,886.3 758.2 – – 2.3 60.6 – 787.0 628.7 158.3
8 8,763.7 1,578.5 4,722.9 3,987.1 733.3 – – 2.5 52.8 – 761.7 609.3 152.4
15 8,787.9 1,586.5 4,690.0 3,967.1 720.4 – – 2.5 48.7 – 835.7 677.7 158.0
22 8,790.9 1,585.6 4,720.4 4,155.8 562.0 – – 2.6 43.8 – 811.0 656.0 155.1
29 8,783.6 1,587.5 4,701.7 4,022.6 676.4 – – 2.7 42.0 – 810.1 646.0 164.2
May 6 8,796.1 1,589.2 4,729.1 4,012.8 713.7 – – 2.7 48.7 – 747.1 589.6 157.4
13 8,810.3 1,590.5 4,729.8 4,079.6 647.8 – – 2.4 46.6 – 782.1 620.7 161.4
20 8,814.0 1,590.9 4,679.3 3,997.8 678.9 – – 2.6 47.8 – 825.6 660.1 165.5
27 8,813.8 1,594.0 4,692.9 3,987.3 703.2 – – 2.5 42.6 – 825.8 662.5 163.2
June 3 8,817.9 1,597.5 4,768.8 4,060.2 706.3 – – 2.3 52.1 – 758.2 593.9 164.3
10 8,820.9 1,598.7 4,781.3 4,026.7 752.3 – – 2.3 49.9 – 756.4 598.7 157.6
17 8,827.9 1,599.6 4,675.5 4,139.0 534.3 – – 2.3 49.0 – 847.3 686.2 161.1
24 8,836.0 1,600.2 4,642.9 3,986.7 654.2 – – 2.0 51.0 – 895.7 715.0 180.7
July 1 8,788.8 1,603.6 4,591.8 3,853.3 736.3 – – 2.1 71.0 – 835.0 647.3 187.7
8 8,774.4 1,606.4 4,642.8 3,914.7 726.0 – – 2.1 55.9 – 819.9 627.7 192.2
15 8,765.7 1,608.7 4,622.9 3,910.3 710.3 – – 2.3 49.8 – 835.3 646.0 189.3
22 8,768.3 1,606.8 4,605.1 3,904.4 698.5 – – 2.2 50.9 – 843.5 656.8 186.7
29 8,764.5 1,600.9 4,568.6 3,855.5 711.1 – – 2.1 60.5 – 844.2 641.9 202.2
Aug. 5 8,746.0 1,595.8 4,625.6 3,959.7 664.1 – – 1.8 53.0 – 744.3 546.8 197.5
Deutsche Bundesbank
2022 Jan. 14 2,946.1 373.2 1,267.0 1,110.6 154.1 – – 2.2 16.4 – 266.5 220.5 46.0
21 2,912.1 373.4 1,289.5 1,059.4 227.8 – – 2.3 18.5 – 222.2 176.7 45.5
28 2,922.8 374.4 1,292.4 1,062.1 228.2 – – 2.1 15.7 – 253.2 202.2 51.0
Feb. 4 2,921.6 374.0 1,340.7 1,094.6 244.0 – – 2.1 16.4 – 206.4 162.7 43.8
11 2,934.4 375.4 1,335.5 1,179.8 153.4 – – 2.3 19.7 – 227.4 185.0 42.4
18 2,932.3 375.9 1,324.7 1,100.4 222.1 – – 2.1 17.6 – 252.2 214.2 38.0
25 2,923.7 378.0 1,304.6 1,071.0 231.4 – – 2.1 16.4 – 266.5 201.2 65.2
Mar. 4 2,939.9 379.1 1,315.2 1,078.3 234.8 – – 2.1 20.0 – 243.7 174.0 69.7
11 2,933.8 383.3 1,322.8 1,084.0 236.7 – – 2.1 16.9 – 238.3 181.8 56.5
18 2,961.2 385.2 1,299.4 1,167.3 130.0 – – 2.1 17.7 – 274.4 224.3 50.1
25 2,925.4 385.9 1,301.1 1,082.0 217.1 – – 2.1 17.0 – 252.5 200.0 52.4
Apr. 1 2,972.8 382.2 1,347.5 1,110.7 234.6 – – 2.2 18.7 – 230.4 181.1 49.3
8 2,950.8 383.5 1,354.0 1,136.8 215.1 – – 2.1 16.9 – 213.9 166.4 47.5
15 2,952.6 387.4 1,324.3 1,116.8 205.3 – – 2.1 15.3 – 248.5 201.7 46.7
22 2,945.6 387.0 1,338.7 1,215.0 121.4 – – 2.2 14.6 – 229.7 184.6 45.0
29 2,952.6 385.0 1,335.7 1,198.1 135.5 – – 2.2 14.0 – 223.4 178.8 44.6
May 6 2,991.6 386.7 1,350.6 1,133.7 214.6 – – 2.3 17.1 – 216.3 169.5 46.8
13 2,998.1 388.3 1,339.4 1,136.1 201.0 – – 2.4 17.6 – 251.7 206.1 45.7
20 2,975.2 388.6 1,323.6 1,122.3 198.9 – – 2.4 15.9 – 240.6 197.7 42.9
27 2,992.4 390.0 1,320.3 1,116.7 201.2 – – 2.4 16.0 – 269.1 227.3 41.8
June 3 2,992.8 388.7 1,346.6 1,132.9 211.5 – – 2.2 18.7 – 248.9 205.6 43.4
10 2,975.2 389.7 1,329.9 1,116.1 211.5 – – 2.3 18.1 – 252.0 209.8 42.3
17 2,999.7 390.9 1,297.9 1,181.7 114.0 – – 2.2 17.6 – 297.8 250.7 47.1
24 2,968.5 390.9 1,295.7 1,154.4 139.3 – – 2.0 15.5 – 284.3 231.7 52.5
July 1 3,013.1 389.1 1,322.5 1,106.4 214.0 – – 2.1 24.8 – 277.5 218.1 59.5
8 2,950.0 390.6 1,303.6 1,087.8 213.8 – – 2.0 21.9 – 255.1 186.8 68.3
15 2,946.9 391.6 1,280.1 1,077.7 200.3 – – 2.1 19.1 – 275.6 212.4 63.2
22 2,941.3 389.4 1,295.5 1,080.1 213.4 – – 2.0 21.0 – 253.9 195.1 58.8
29 2,964.1 388.3 1,285.6 1,076.5 207.1 – – 2.0 22.2 – 245.3 175.5 69.8
Aug. 5 2,998.7 383.3 1,317.4 1,091.8 223.7 – – 1.8 20.4 – 231.9 164.9 67.0
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
504.4 14.1 3.9 3.9 – 178.8 322.7 – 554.8 109.6 2022 Jan. 14
466.8 14.2 3.4 3.4 – 178.8 321.2 – 554.8 109.6 21
439.3 14.5 3.6 3.6 – 178.8 320.8 – 554.8 109.6 28
446.1 13.1 3.3 3.3 – 178.8 321.1 – 554.8 109.9 Feb. 4
431.1 13.1 3.3 3.3 – 178.8 323.5 – 554.9 110.0 11
420.4 13.2 3.3 3.3 – 178.8 325.4 – 554.9 109.9 18
415.6 13.0 3.5 3.5 – 178.8 323.1 – 554.9 109.9 25
447.2 13.2 3.7 3.7 – 178.8 323.1 – 554.9 112.7 Mar. 4
444.2 12.8 3.8 3.8 – 178.8 320.6 – 554.9 115.7 11
458.3 12.3 4.2 4.2 – 178.8 322.1 – 554.9 115.7 18
427.4 11.7 5.2 5.2 – 178.8 320.8 – 554.9 115.7 25
452.5 12.5 5.4 5.4 – 180.2 319.1 – 598.9 115.9 Apr. 1
423.9 11.0 5.4 5.4 – 180.2 312.5 – 598.9 115.9 8
398.7 12.1 5.0 5.0 – 180.2 316.0 – 598.9 115.9 15
395.8 11.7 5.4 5.4 – 180.2 322.1 – 598.9 115.9 22
411.9 11.5 5.6 5.6 – 180.2 318.3 – 598.9 115.9 29
446.1 11.6 5.7 5.7 – 180.2 323.6 – 598.9 116.0 May 6
425.3 11.7 5.7 5.7 – 180.2 323.4 – 598.9 116.0 13
437.2 11.3 5.6 5.6 – 180.2 321.3 – 598.9 116.0 20
426.4 11.1 5.6 5.6 – 180.2 320.5 – 598.9 116.0 27
409.9 11.4 5.5 5.5 – 180.2 320.6 – 598.9 114.9 June 3
403.3 11.7 5.6 5.6 – 180.2 320.1 – 598.9 114.9 10
422.3 11.1 6.2 6.2 – 180.2 322.9 – 598.9 114.9 17
410.6 10.9 6.9 6.9 – 180.2 323.7 – 598.9 114.9 24
434.0 11.5 6.2 6.2 – 184.9 327.5 – 608.5 114.8 July 1
396.5 11.4 6.1 6.1 – 184.9 327.0 – 608.5 114.8 8
397.2 11.5 5.9 5.9 – 184.9 326.2 – 608.5 114.8 15
412.1 11.3 6.0 6.0 – 184.9 324.3 – 608.5 114.8 22
442.2 11.5 5.7 5.7 – 184.9 322.7 – 608.5 114.8 29
476.1 11.3 5.9 5.9 – 184.9 325.6 – 608.5 114.8 Aug. 5
Deutsche Bundesbank
252.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.5 37.4 509.8 170.7 5.7 2022 Jan. 14
237.4 0.4 0.1 0.1 – 46.5 37.7 509.8 170.7 5.7 21
215.9 0.4 0.3 0.3 – 46.5 36.6 511.0 170.7 5.7 28
213.0 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 46.5 36.6 511.1 170.7 5.7 Feb. 4
204.3 0.4 0.2 0.2 – 46.5 37.5 511.1 170.7 5.7 11
189.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 – 46.5 37.6 511.1 170.7 5.7 18
185.8 0.4 0.4 0.4 – 46.5 37.7 511.1 170.7 5.7 25
206.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 – 46.5 37.7 514.2 170.7 5.7 Mar. 4
197.4 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 46.5 37.8 514.2 170.7 5.7 11
208.8 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 46.5 38.3 514.2 170.7 5.7 18
192.6 0.3 0.4 0.4 – 46.5 38.6 514.2 170.7 5.7 25
198.0 0.7 0.5 0.5 – 46.8 37.4 520.0 185.0 5.7 Apr. 1
186.5 0.7 0.3 0.3 – 46.8 37.6 520.0 185.0 5.7 8
181.2 0.7 0.2 0.2 – 46.8 37.7 520.0 185.0 5.7 15
179.2 0.7 0.2 0.2 – 46.8 38.2 520.0 185.0 5.7 22
194.5 0.7 0.2 0.2 – 46.8 38.4 523.3 185.0 5.7 29
220.6 0.7 0.2 0.2 – 46.8 38.6 523.3 185.0 5.7 May 6
200.8 0.5 0.2 0.2 – 46.8 38.8 523.3 185.0 5.7 13
206.0 0.5 0.1 0.1 – 46.8 39.0 523.3 185.0 5.7 20
196.4 0.5 0.1 0.1 – 46.8 39.2 523.3 185.0 5.7 27
185.8 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 46.8 39.3 526.8 185.0 5.7 June 3
180.9 0.5 0.3 0.3 – 46.8 39.5 526.8 185.0 5.7 10
189.8 0.5 0.7 0.7 – 46.8 40.3 526.8 185.0 5.7 17
175.9 0.5 0.9 0.9 – 46.8 40.5 526.8 185.0 5.7 24
187.7 0.6 0.1 0.1 – 48.0 39.6 530.5 187.1 5.7 July 1
166.1 0.6 0.1 0.1 – 48.0 41.0 530.5 187.1 5.7 8
167.6 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 48.0 40.9 530.5 187.1 5.7 15
168.5 0.4 0.2 0.2 – 48.0 41.2 530.5 187.1 5.7 22
214.6 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 48.0 41.7 525.2 187.1 5.7 29
237.4 0.4 0.1 0.1 – 48.0 41.8 525.2 187.1 5.7 Aug. 5
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2020 Sep. 9,097.4 46.1 2,657.2 2,196.9 1,926.4 270.6 460.3 320.7 139.5 4,153.9 3,696.5 3,269.8 2,968.7
Oct. 9,124.3 46.3 2,686.7 2,226.8 1,957.0 269.8 459.9 320.9 139.0 4,181.8 3,713.6 3,283.1 2,980.6
Nov. 9,096.0 45.7 2,684.1 2,232.1 1,965.3 266.9 452.0 313.9 138.1 4,198.6 3,723.7 3,293.3 2,991.0
Dec. 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 Jan. 9,150.4 44.9 2,793.5 2,309.4 2,042.2 267.2 484.1 348.8 135.3 4,195.0 3,716.6 3,302.6 2,997.8
Feb. 9,148.1 45.5 2,824.0 2,328.8 2,060.6 268.2 495.2 361.1 134.1 4,210.4 3,731.9 3,318.5 3,011.4
Mar. 9,261.9 45.7 2,904.5 2,419.8 2,145.0 274.8 484.8 351.2 133.6 4,245.8 3,762.0 3,347.6 3,038.5
Apr. 9,269.2 44.9 2,935.1 2,441.4 2,168.7 272.8 493.7 360.0 133.7 4,236.4 3,756.9 3,347.0 3,036.8
May 9,277.1 45.7 2,974.7 2,485.3 2,212.9 272.4 489.4 355.6 133.9 4,246.1 3,772.8 3,363.3 3,049.8
June 9,293.7 46.5 2,959.9 2,469.9 2,197.4 272.5 490.0 356.7 133.3 4,253.7 3,772.0 3,370.7 3,056.9
July 9,321.9 46.8 2,943.6 2,448.2 2,178.3 269.9 495.3 361.1 134.2 4,270.2 3,788.1 3,386.0 3,071.8
Aug. 9,319.3 46.9 2,950.1 2,457.4 2,188.5 268.8 492.8 359.5 133.3 4,283.3 3,799.4 3,400.4 3,085.0
Sep. 9,325.3 47.4 2,952.3 2,472.9 2,203.6 269.3 479.4 344.9 134.5 4,303.0 3,812.2 3,409.8 3,093.8
Oct. 9,395.0 47.8 2,979.8 2,490.1 2,221.1 269.0 489.7 356.2 133.5 4,322.0 3,832.5 3,437.3 3,117.5
Nov. 9,495.5 48.1 3,008.0 2,519.5 2,253.4 266.1 488.5 355.4 133.1 4,352.1 3,856.4 3,459.8 3,138.9
Dec. 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 Jan. 9,717.0 47.7 3,029.2 2,522.4 2,258.2 264.2 506.8 375.0 131.8 4,378.1 3,875.3 3,484.8 3,162.4
Feb. 9,842.7 47.7 3,082.6 2,564.8 2,299.1 265.8 517.8 383.9 133.9 4,396.3 3,889.1 3,504.4 3,181.6
Mar. 9,962.9 50.0 3,066.9 2,546.2 2,281.9 264.3 520.7 387.1 133.7 4,426.8 3,916.4 3,526.5 3,204.1
Apr. 10,268.8 51.0 3,112.2 2,578.0 2,313.7 264.2 534.2 400.5 133.8 4,434.6 3,929.2 3,546.3 3,223.8
May 10,258.0 50.0 3,122.7 2,592.6 2,326.2 266.4 530.1 397.8 132.3 4,460.3 3,949.5 3,567.4 3,244.7
June 10,429.0 51.7 3,096.6 2,571.1 2,306.4 264.7 525.5 394.0 131.5 4,491.8 3,967.4 3,588.0 3,267.1
Changes 3
2013 –703.6 – 0.5 –257.1 –249.2 –216.5 –32.7 – 7.9 1.6 – 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 –126.2 –128.6 –95.3 –33.4 2.4 7.2 – 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2021 207.2 2.2 161.3 155.6 156.4 – 0.8 5.7 11.7 – 5.9 175.7 154.6 173.7 155.9
2020 Oct. 25.2 0.2 29.1 29.7 30.5 – 0.8 – 0.6 0.1 – 0.7 27.6 17.3 12.9 11.3
Nov. 12.0 – 0.6 29.0 35.8 37.2 – 1.4 – 6.8 – 6.1 – 0.8 18.6 11.3 11.2 11.5
Dec. –141.5 1.8 –59.5 –53.6 –51.2 – 2.4 – 5.9 – 5.8 – 0.2 –18.3 –13.3 4.2 2.7
2021 Jan. 207.1 – 2.6 170.2 131.4 128.6 2.9 38.8 41.1 – 2.2 17.4 7.9 6.8 5.3
Feb. – 2.3 0.7 30.3 19.2 18.2 1.1 11.0 12.2 – 1.2 15.9 15.5 15.7 13.4
Mar. 100.0 0.2 78.0 90.0 83.7 6.3 –12.0 – 11.5 – 0.5 34.3 29.7 28.8 27.0
Apr. 21.2 – 0.8 33.6 23.0 24.6 – 1.6 10.6 10.5 0.2 – 8.8 – 5.2 – 0.1 – 1.1
May 10.7 0.8 38.9 44.1 44.4 – 0.3 – 5.2 – 5.5 0.3 10.4 16.0 15.7 13.0
June 5.3 0.9 –17.1 –16.3 –15.8 – 0.5 – 0.8 – 0.2 – 0.6 7.3 – 0.5 7.6 6.7
July 26.3 0.2 –15.0 –19.5 –17.5 – 2.0 4.5 4.4 0.1 17.3 16.4 15.6 15.3
Aug. – 3.9 0.2 6.7 9.3 10.3 – 1.0 – 2.6 – 1.7 – 0.9 13.2 11.2 14.7 13.4
Sep. 3.0 0.4 0.1 14.4 13.9 0.5 –14.4 – 15.6 1.3 19.8 13.0 9.4 8.8
Oct. 70.4 0.5 27.7 17.3 17.6 – 0.3 10.5 11.4 – 1.0 19.2 20.6 28.0 24.1
Nov. 95.5 0.3 26.6 29.2 32.2 – 3.0 – 2.5 – 2.1 – 0.5 30.6 25.2 22.1 21.0
Dec. –326.2 1.6 –218.7 –186.4 –183.6 – 2.8 –32.2 – 31.2 – 1.0 – 0.9 4.7 9.4 9.1
2022 Jan. 340.3 – 1.9 238.6 189.0 186.9 2.1 49.6 49.7 – 0.1 28.1 15.4 16.2 14.9
Feb. 128.5 – 0.0 52.7 41.4 39.7 1.7 11.3 9.1 2.2 20.4 15.8 21.3 20.9
Mar. 119.7 2.2 –15.5 –18.4 –17.2 – 1.2 2.9 3.0 – 0.1 31.4 27.6 22.2 22.6
Apr. 283.1 1.0 41.6 30.8 30.8 0.0 10.8 10.6 0.2 7.5 12.8 19.7 19.4
May 1.1 – 1.0 12.4 15.3 12.8 2.5 – 2.9 – 1.5 – 1.3 27.4 21.2 21.6 21.3
June 192.3 1.7 –25.9 –21.4 –19.8 – 1.6 – 4.5 – 3.8 – 0.7 30.8 18.4 20.9 22.5
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 2021
301.1 426.7 256.0 170.8 457.4 311.0 215.2 146.4 29.3 117.0 1,063.9 808.9 1,176.3 2020 Sep.
302.5 430.5 257.3 173.2 468.2 318.6 219.6 149.5 30.2 119.3 1,049.9 793.4 1,159.6 Oct.
302.2 430.5 256.7 173.8 474.8 325.6 222.5 149.2 29.1 120.1 1,048.0 792.3 1,119.7 Nov.
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 Dec.
304.9 414.0 253.3 160.7 478.4 330.8 224.5 147.6 28.7 118.9 1,087.5 834.6 1,029.5 2021 Jan.
307.1 413.4 250.6 162.9 478.5 334.5 227.0 144.0 28.8 115.2 1,093.8 843.9 974.4 Feb.
309.1 414.4 249.3 165.1 483.8 339.4 232.3 144.4 28.9 115.5 1,105.7 855.5 960.1 Mar.
310.2 409.9 251.0 158.9 479.5 339.8 232.3 139.7 30.3 109.4 1,122.5 876.2 930.3 Apr.
313.5 409.5 250.6 158.9 473.2 339.1 231.9 134.1 28.4 105.7 1,108.3 862.4 902.3 May
313.8 401.4 249.1 152.3 481.7 339.4 231.8 142.3 28.8 113.5 1,111.0 864.8 922.5 June
314.2 402.2 251.3 150.8 482.0 344.2 236.6 137.8 28.6 109.2 1,097.1 849.1 964.3 July
315.4 398.9 248.0 150.9 484.0 346.1 238.8 137.9 28.3 109.6 1,084.8 839.7 954.2 Aug.
316.0 402.4 248.3 154.1 490.7 352.5 241.7 138.2 27.9 110.3 1,087.9 840.8 934.8 Sep.
319.9 395.1 249.7 145.4 489.5 356.0 244.3 133.4 30.3 103.2 1,134.6 889.6 910.9 Oct.
320.9 396.5 247.8 148.8 495.7 361.6 249.6 134.1 28.5 105.6 1,137.3 892.4 950.0 Nov.
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 Dec.
322.4 390.6 246.9 143.6 502.7 377.7 260.4 125.0 28.5 96.5 1,171.3 925.2 1,090.8 2022 Jan.
322.8 384.8 244.7 140.0 507.2 381.4 262.7 125.8 28.6 97.2 1,190.1 939.6 1,125.9 Feb.
322.3 390.0 245.2 144.8 510.4 379.5 259.4 130.9 29.0 101.9 1,169.2 921.9 1,249.9 Mar.
322.5 382.9 246.5 136.4 505.4 378.8 257.8 126.7 32.2 94.4 1,174.5 926.0 1,496.5 Apr.
322.7 382.1 244.5 137.7 510.9 383.7 260.7 127.1 31.4 95.7 1,166.1 917.3 1,458.8 May
320.9 379.5 244.9 134.6 524.3 388.1 268.4 136.3 33.2 103.1 1,182.3 925.1 1,606.5 June
Changes 3
2.0 – 7.0 –10.9 3.9 – 3.0 – 3.4 – 9.3 0.5 – 2.6 3.1 –38.8 –47.2 –420.8 2013
15.5 –12.3 –15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 – 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
17.8 –19.1 – 6.1 –13.1 21.1 35.5 22.6 –14.3 – 1.1 –13.2 71.7 84.9 –203.7 2021
1.6 4.4 2.0 2.5 10.4 7.3 4.2 3.0 0.9 2.1 –15.3 –16.7 –16.4 2020 Oct.
– 0.3 0.2 – 0.5 0.7 7.3 7.6 3.6 – 0.3 – 1.1 0.8 6.4 6.6 –41.4 Nov.
1.5 –17.5 – 4.4 –13.2 – 4.9 1.9 0.3 – 6.9 0.6 – 7.4 –36.3 –34.4 –29.3 Dec.
1.5 1.1 0.9 0.2 9.5 4.1 3.2 5.3 – 0.9 6.3 84.4 83.6 –62.3 2021 Jan.
2.3 – 0.2 – 2.4 2.3 0.3 3.7 2.4 – 3.4 0.1 – 3.4 6.3 8.9 –55.4 Feb.
1.9 0.9 – 1.3 2.2 4.6 4.2 4.9 0.4 0.1 0.3 2.8 3.3 –15.3 Mar.
1.0 – 5.0 1.7 – 6.7 – 3.6 0.9 0.7 – 4.5 1.5 – 6.0 26.0 29.0 –28.8 Apr.
2.7 0.4 – 0.3 0.7 – 5.6 – 0.1 0.3 – 5.5 – 1.9 – 3.6 –11.4 –11.4 –28.0 May
0.8 – 8.1 – 1.4 – 6.7 7.8 – 0.4 – 0.6 8.2 0.4 7.7 – 5.7 – 5.3 19.9 June
0.4 0.7 2.3 – 1.5 1.0 5.6 4.8 – 4.7 – 0.2 – 4.5 –15.0 –16.5 38.7 July
1.2 – 3.4 – 3.5 0.1 1.9 1.8 2.2 0.1 – 0.3 0.4 –13.1 –10.0 –10.8 Aug.
0.6 3.6 0.3 3.2 6.8 6.3 2.9 0.5 – 0.4 0.9 0.1 – 1.5 –17.4 Sep.
3.9 – 7.4 1.2 – 8.7 – 1.4 3.5 2.6 – 4.8 2.3 – 7.2 47.6 49.5 –24.6 Oct.
1.1 3.0 – 0.9 4.0 5.5 4.8 4.4 0.6 – 1.6 2.2 – 4.5 – 3.6 42.4 Nov.
0.3 – 4.7 – 2.6 – 2.2 – 5.6 0.9 – 5.3 – 6.5 – 0.1 – 6.3 –45.9 –41.0 –62.3 Dec.
1.3 – 0.8 1.8 – 2.6 12.7 14.8 16.0 – 2.1 0.2 – 2.2 72.3 66.7 3.3 2022 Jan.
0.5 – 5.5 – 2.1 – 3.4 4.6 3.7 2.5 0.9 0.1 0.8 20.6 15.8 34.9 Feb.
– 0.4 5.5 0.5 5.0 3.8 – 1.7 – 3.3 5.5 0.4 5.1 –22.2 –19.2 123.7 Mar.
0.2 – 6.8 1.4 – 8.2 – 5.3 – 1.6 – 2.7 – 3.7 3.2 – 6.9 –13.8 –14.2 246.6 Apr.
0.3 – 0.4 – 2.0 1.6 6.2 5.4 3.3 0.8 – 0.8 1.7 – 1.0 – 2.0 –36.6 May
– 1.6 – 2.5 0.4 – 2.9 12.4 3.1 6.7 9.3 1.9 7.4 0.7 – 7.9 185.0 June
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2020 Sep. 9,097.4 1,523.9 1,252.4 271.5 3,975.9 3,795.1 2,436.7 798.3 251.4 560.1 531.7 140.6 72.8
Oct. 9,124.3 1,536.3 1,264.9 271.4 4,015.2 3,827.0 2,473.1 794.2 249.1 559.7 531.7 140.8 69.6
Nov. 9,096.0 1,515.4 1,245.5 269.9 4,035.0 3,846.2 2,508.7 778.0 235.3 559.6 532.0 140.2 69.0
Dec. 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 Jan. 9,150.4 1,560.0 1,262.3 297.7 4,044.0 3,855.8 2,536.8 757.4 219.4 561.6 534.8 138.4 65.8
Feb. 9,148.1 1,584.4 1,261.7 322.7 4,053.2 3,865.2 2,552.4 750.1 214.1 562.6 536.1 137.7 68.2
Mar. 9,261.9 1,634.1 1,336.6 297.6 4,068.3 3,876.2 2,569.2 744.7 212.3 562.3 536.2 142.2 71.0
Apr. 9,269.2 1,659.9 1,344.1 315.8 4,079.3 3,886.3 2,588.3 735.3 205.8 562.7 536.9 143.0 70.2
May 9,277.1 1,661.1 1,353.0 308.1 4,103.8 3,909.2 2,614.0 732.0 205.0 563.2 537.5 146.4 70.4
June 9,293.7 1,670.8 1,357.4 313.4 4,088.4 3,890.3 2,605.4 722.3 198.1 562.6 537.1 151.3 76.7
July 9,321.9 1,682.5 1,362.0 320.4 4,110.8 3,918.9 2,638.6 718.3 196.7 562.0 536.8 146.4 74.0
Aug. 9,319.3 1,686.5 1,365.8 320.7 4,119.2 3,925.6 2,648.6 715.5 194.1 561.5 536.6 147.8 74.7
Sep. 9,325.3 1,667.9 1,354.2 313.6 4,108.9 3,913.6 2,640.2 712.7 194.3 560.7 535.9 148.8 77.1
Oct. 9,395.0 1,690.9 1,364.7 326.2 4,140.0 3,942.6 2,657.0 725.5 206.4 560.1 535.6 151.4 78.1
Nov. 9,495.5 1,718.6 1,374.9 343.8 4,154.1 3,956.1 2,678.9 717.4 200.2 559.8 535.5 151.4 82.5
Dec. 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 Jan. 9,717.0 1,725.2 1,363.7 361.5 4,195.2 3,979.5 2,686.4 732.3 215.9 560.7 537.4 166.7 86.2
Feb. 9,842.7 1,743.7 1,369.7 374.0 4,209.7 3,993.9 2,699.7 733.4 217.5 560.8 537.7 169.3 90.1
Mar. 9,962.9 1,737.5 1,367.8 369.8 4,212.3 3,990.1 2,690.3 740.9 226.7 559.0 536.1 177.7 99.4
Apr. 10,268.8 1,766.8 1,384.4 382.3 4,223.7 4,003.6 2,700.1 745.6 234.6 557.9 535.2 175.5 93.4
May 10,258.0 1,765.9 1,393.7 372.2 4,236.1 4,013.3 2,718.3 738.4 229.4 556.5 534.0 176.2 97.1
June 10,429.0 1,744.3 1,384.6 359.7 4,235.1 4,008.3 2,708.7 744.9 238.2 554.7 532.4 180.5 102.7
Changes 4
2013 –703.6 –106.2 –73.9 –32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 –56.3 –26.6 – 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 –28.4 –32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 –32.1 3.1 – 2.4 – 2.4 – 2.5 – 0.0
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2021 207.2 133.4 103.4 30.0 107.3 96.2 141.4 –45.8 –23.3 0.6 3.9 16.6 13.6
2020 Oct. 25.2 12.3 12.4 – 0.1 39.1 32.1 36.4 – 3.9 – 3.3 – 0.4 – 0.0 0.1 – 3.3
Nov. 12.0 8.2 8.4 – 0.1 25.6 20.2 36.4 –16.0 –13.6 – 0.1 0.3 4.1 3.9
Dec. –141.5 –25.2 – 7.9 –17.3 –12.3 – 8.7 0.3 –10.0 – 8.0 1.0 1.3 – 4.8 –11.8
2021 Jan. 207.1 66.0 25.3 40.8 21.6 19.0 28.4 –10.5 – 7.8 1.1 1.6 2.7 9.7
Feb. – 2.3 24.4 – 0.7 25.1 9.0 9.2 15.5 – 7.3 – 5.3 1.0 1.3 – 0.7 2.4
Mar. 100.0 47.8 73.8 –26.0 13.6 9.9 15.8 – 5.6 – 1.9 – 0.3 0.1 4.0 2.5
Apr. 21.2 27.6 8.3 19.3 12.5 11.2 20.1 – 9.4 – 6.5 0.4 0.7 1.2 – 0.6
May 10.7 0.6 9.1 – 8.5 24.9 23.2 26.0 – 3.2 – 0.7 0.5 0.6 3.5 0.3
June 5.3 8.2 3.7 4.4 –16.6 –19.8 – 9.4 – 9.8 – 7.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 4.5 6.1
July 26.3 14.4 7.4 7.0 22.3 28.6 33.2 – 4.1 – 1.4 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 4.9 – 3.1
Aug. – 3.9 3.9 3.7 0.2 7.8 6.5 9.9 – 2.8 – 2.6 – 0.5 – 0.3 0.9 0.2
Sep. 3.0 –19.5 –11.7 – 7.8 – 7.3 – 8.9 – 6.5 – 1.6 0.4 – 0.8 – 0.6 0.7 2.7
Oct. 70.4 24.1 11.2 12.9 31.1 29.1 16.8 12.9 12.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 2.5 1.1
Nov. 95.5 26.4 9.6 16.7 12.9 12.5 21.1 – 8.4 – 6.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.3 4.2
Dec. –326.2 –90.4 –36.3 –54.1 –24.3 –24.3 –29.6 3.9 3.7 1.4 1.6 2.4 –11.9
2022 Jan. 340.3 93.8 23.2 70.6 64.3 47.0 36.5 10.9 11.9 – 0.4 0.3 12.6 15.3
Feb. 128.5 19.3 6.1 13.2 14.2 14.6 13.4 1.1 1.6 0.1 0.3 2.2 3.5
Mar. 119.7 – 6.6 – 2.1 – 4.5 2.2 – 4.2 – 9.7 7.3 9.2 – 1.8 – 1.6 8.3 9.3
Apr. 283.1 25.1 15.6 9.5 8.0 11.0 7.5 4.1 7.2 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 3.1 – 6.6
May 1.1 0.7 9.8 – 9.1 13.6 10.6 18.9 – 6.9 – 5.0 – 1.3 – 1.2 1.0 3.9
June 192.3 –21.9 – 9.1 –12.8 – 0.7 – 5.0 – 9.6 6.5 8.7 – 1.8 – 1.6 4.6 5.9
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 2012
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 2021
65.2 21.8 2.6 2.3 40.2 39.0 1.2 2.6 1,077.3 25.6 687.1 720.4 1,108.9 2020 Sep.
68.6 25.0 2.6 2.3 47.3 46.6 1.4 2.7 1,075.1 24.6 687.8 712.4 1,093.3 Oct.
68.7 24.3 2.6 2.3 48.5 47.6 9.1 2.5 1,070.0 23.3 696.7 713.1 1,054.3 Nov.
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 Dec.
70.0 23.7 2.6 2.3 49.7 48.3 6.3 2.5 1,058.8 19.7 790.8 708.3 979.7 2021 Jan.
67.0 20.5 2.5 2.3 50.3 48.2 4.5 2.5 1,068.3 19.6 803.5 702.4 929.4 Feb.
68.7 22.0 2.5 2.3 49.9 48.9 6.7 2.9 1,090.4 21.5 833.7 712.0 913.8 Mar.
70.3 23.2 2.5 2.3 50.0 48.6 5.1 2.9 1,091.8 21.0 839.1 705.9 885.3 Apr.
73.5 26.7 2.5 2.3 48.2 46.6 6.0 2.3 1,087.7 23.5 854.7 702.7 858.8 May
72.0 25.9 2.5 2.3 46.9 45.6 4.5 2.3 1,084.6 23.8 836.9 725.4 880.7 June
69.9 22.9 2.5 2.3 45.5 44.3 6.0 2.3 1,087.2 23.5 800.0 719.2 913.9 July
70.7 24.0 2.5 2.3 45.8 44.0 7.4 2.3 1,089.9 25.5 790.7 725.0 898.4 Aug.
69.2 22.4 2.5 2.2 46.6 45.2 7.3 2.2 1,100.5 25.1 840.1 735.9 862.6 Sep.
70.9 23.4 2.4 2.2 46.1 45.2 7.4 2.2 1,118.0 24.6 866.7 729.5 840.3 Oct.
66.4 17.4 2.4 2.2 46.6 45.5 4.2 2.1 1,123.9 26.0 883.1 736.5 872.8 Nov.
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 Dec.
78.1 20.3 2.4 2.2 48.9 45.5 3.0 2.3 1,126.9 25.3 907.4 721.2 1,036.0 2022 Jan.
76.8 19.8 2.4 2.2 46.4 42.8 2.4 2.4 1,141.1 26.2 945.9 717.7 1,080.0 Feb.
75.9 19.0 2.4 2.2 44.5 42.1 2.8 2.5 1,148.9 25.9 926.4 736.8 1,195.6 Mar.
79.8 22.5 2.4 2.2 44.6 42.2 2.3 2.3 1,161.1 26.3 939.2 734.6 1,438.9 Apr.
76.8 19.9 2.3 2.1 46.6 42.8 1.9 2.5 1,164.1 27.7 958.5 732.3 1,396.8 May
75.5 19.1 2.3 2.1 46.2 43.0 2.0 2.5 1,164.6 32.1 945.8 752.0 1,582.6 June
Changes 4
– 0.5 2.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 –11.3 –10.0 4.1 – 3.2 –104.9 –17.6 –134.1 18.9 –417.1 2013
– 2.3 – 1.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.8 – 3.4 – 0.6 –63.7 – 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
3.1 – 8.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 – 5.0 – 7.9 0.3 40.6 6.9 124.9 16.6 –207.9 2021
3.4 3.2 – 0.0 0.0 7.0 7.5 0.3 0.1 – 2.9 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 8.2 –15.5 2020 Oct.
0.2 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.2 1.0 3.3 – 0.2 – 0.9 – 1.2 12.6 3.3 –39.9 Nov.
7.0 6.3 0.0 0.0 1.3 1.0 0.3 – 0.0 – 9.0 – 1.9 –71.4 – 0.7 –23.2 Dec.
– 7.0 – 6.9 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 3.0 – 0.0 2.8 – 0.5 173.2 – 3.7 –49.8 2021 Jan.
– 3.1 – 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.2 – 1.8 – 0.0 8.9 – 0.1 12.2 – 6.2 –48.9 Feb.
1.5 1.3 – 0.0 0.0 – 0.4 0.8 2.1 0.5 15.7 1.7 24.0 7.1 –10.8 Mar.
1.8 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 2.2 – 0.1 7.3 – 0.4 11.1 – 3.7 –31.3 Apr.
3.2 3.5 – 0.0 0.0 – 1.8 – 1.9 0.9 – 0.1 – 2.7 2.5 17.0 – 2.8 –27.1 May
– 1.6 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.3 – 1.0 – 1.5 0.1 – 7.7 0.2 –22.7 20.9 24.6 June
– 1.8 – 2.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.4 – 1.3 1.5 – 0.1 2.3 – 0.2 –37.2 – 5.4 28.5 July
0.7 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.3 – 0.2 1.4 – 0.0 2.2 2.0 – 9.9 5.6 –14.9 Aug.
– 1.9 – 1.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.8 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 7.0 – 0.5 45.5 10.0 –32.4 Sep.
1.5 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 17.3 – 0.5 27.1 – 6.4 –22.8 Oct.
– 4.5 – 6.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.7 0.4 – 3.2 – 0.1 1.7 1.4 11.7 5.9 40.3 Nov.
14.3 5.4 0.0 0.0 – 2.4 – 2.0 – 2.0 0.2 –14.2 1.4 –127.3 – 4.6 –63.4 Dec.
– 2.7 – 2.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 4.7 2.0 0.7 – 0.0 13.4 – 2.3 146.6 –18.3 39.8 2022 Jan.
– 1.3 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.5 – 2.7 – 0.5 0.1 15.0 1.0 39.4 – 3.2 44.2 Feb.
– 1.0 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.6 0.3 0.2 6.9 – 0.3 –20.7 19.0 118.4 Mar.
3.6 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 3.4 0.2 0.4 – 5.8 252.8 Apr.
– 2.9 – 2.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.0 0.6 – 0.4 0.2 6.4 1.4 23.9 – 1.0 –42.4 May
– 1.3 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.4 0.2 0.1 – 0.0 2.4 6.4 1.1 17.8 193.5 June
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
24•
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
End of
monthNumber of
reporting
institu-
tionsBalance
sheet
total  1Cash in
hand and
credit
balances
with
central
banks TotalBalances
and
loansSecurities
issued by
banks Totalfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more than
1 year BillsSecurities
issued by
non-banksPartici-
pating
interestsOther
assets  1
All categories of banks  
2022 Jan. 1,442 9,779.5 1,114.3 2,639.3 2,169.5 468.0 4,724.4 446.2 3,573.4 0.3 691.1 94.9 1,206.5
Feb. 1,442 9,905.7 1,142.6 2,675.9 2,203.3 470.7 4,750.0 453.5 3,587.6 0.3 694.2 94.9 1,242.3
Mar. 1,442 10,025.3 1,137.0 2,666.8 2,194.2 471.4 4,760.3 441.8 3,604.5 0.3 700.1 94.6 1,366.5
Apr. 1,441 10,333.5 1,252.2 2,589.8 2,116.4 471.2 4,780.9 454.6 3,627.3 0.4 682.1 94.6 1,615.9
May 1,439 10,321.7 1,173.6 2,675.5 2,199.3 473.8 4,801.0 458.6 3,640.1 0.3 685.3 94.5 1,577.1
June 1,432 10,491.7 1,143.9 2,695.6 2,222.0 470.5 4,835.6 467.9 3,657.7 0.3 692.3 94.9 1,721.8
Commercial banks 6
2022 May 249 4,622.0 642.4 1,157.7 1,078.1 79.2 1,512.6 303.5 988.0 0.3 211.8 31.6 1,277.7
June 249 4,752.2 620.5 1,179.2 1,100.9 78.0 1,521.7 300.9 994.0 0.3 217.7 31.8 1,399.0
   Big banks 7
2022 May 3 2,386.1 179.4 565.1 534.7 30.4 697.2 142.8 449.9 0.0 100.4 26.2 918.2
June 3 2,419.2 186.5 573.9 544.6 29.3 702.5 137.7 451.2 0.0 109.9 26.3 930.0
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2022 May 138 1,777.8 308.9 427.8 380.2 47.2 686.8 113.8 463.5 0.2 105.2 4.7 349.7
June 139 1,878.8 280.5 443.2 395.7 47.2 690.3 117.7 466.6 0.2 101.6 4.8 459.9
   Branches of foreign banks
2022 May 108 458.1 154.2 164.8 163.2 1.6 128.7 46.8 74.6 0.0 6.2 0.7 9.7
June 107 454.3 153.5 162.2 160.5 1.6 128.8 45.6 76.1 0.0 6.2 0.7 9.1
Landesbanken
2022 May 6 907.8 118.1 248.2 197.2 50.7 423.1 45.0 336.3 0.0 38.3 8.1 110.3
June 6 916.0 108.7 251.0 200.6 50.2 428.5 51.7 334.0 0.0 38.6 8.1 119.7
Savings banks
2022 May 367 1,571.8 176.3 165.7 49.9 115.6 1,190.6 50.3 960.9 – 178.9 15.2 23.9
June 364 1,566.8 168.4 165.2 49.2 115.9 1,194.1 51.6 964.5 – 177.4 15.3 23.8
Credit cooperatives 
2022 May 772 1,158.8 67.4 191.5 76.2 114.9 853.8 31.7 698.4 0.0 123.6 19.1 27.0
June 768 1,158.5 66.8 186.6 71.6 114.6 858.3 32.6 701.8 0.0 123.8 19.2 27.5
Mortgage banks
2022 May 9 232.6 12.2 18.4 11.3 6.7 196.4 2.4 177.5 – 16.5 0.1 5.4
June 9 231.9 12.3 17.7 11.2 6.1 196.6 2.5 178.1 – 15.9 0.1 5.2
Building and loan associations
2022 May 18 260.1 4.6 45.4 30.0 15.4 206.0 1.2 180.2 . 24.6 0.3 3.8
June 18 260.3 3.8 45.6 30.5 15.1 206.7 1.2 181.2 . 24.3 0.3 3.9
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2022 May 18 1,568.7 152.4 848.7 756.6 91.3 418.5 24.6 298.8 0.0 91.5 20.1 129.0
June 18 1,606.0 163.3 850.2 758.1 90.7 429.8 27.4 304.0 0.0 94.6 20.1 142.6
Memo item:    Foreign banks 8
2022 May 141 2,093.6 339.7 596.5 563.2 33.1 618.1 135.0 378.3 0.2 100.4 3.6 535.7
June 140 2,224.1 325.5 607.6 575.5 31.8 614.8 134.2 382.5 0.2 94.3 3.6 672.6
   of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2022 May 33 1,635.5 185.5 431.7 400.0 31.5 489.5 88.2 303.7 0.2 94.2 2.9 526.0
June 33 1,769.8 172.0 445.4 415.0 30.2 486.0 88.7 306.4 0.2 88.2 2.9 663.5
* Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3.  1 Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial
instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning ofSection 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read
in conjunction with Section 35 (1) number 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are classified
under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting date. Trading
portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, in
Tables I.1 to I.3.  2 For building and loan associations: including deposits under savings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
25•
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4
TotalSight
depositsTime
deposits TotalSight
depositsfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more
than
1 year  2Memo 
item:
Liabilities
arising
from
repos  3 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeBank
savings
bondsBearer
debt
securities
out-
standing  5Capital
including
published
reserves,
partici-
pation
rights
capital,
funds for
general
banking
risksOther
liabi-
lities  1End of
month
All categories of banks 
2,462.3 773.0 1,689.2 4,365.8 2,868.1 252.6 654.0 50.0 566.7 542.8 24.3 1,222.0 569.0 1,160.3 2022 Jan.
2,500.1 780.9 1,719.2 4,399.0 2,899.0 257.2 652.0 60.1 566.7 543.1 24.1 1,233.5 569.5 1,203.6 Feb.
2,481.6 770.4 1,711.2 4,395.3 2,895.6 260.1 650.7 50.7 564.8 541.5 24.1 1,255.4 576.7 1,316.3 Mar.
2,498.2 741.2 1,756.9 4,431.3 2,907.0 287.1 649.5 62.5 563.7 540.5 23.9 1,263.1 578.7 1,562.2 Apr.
2,521.3 783.2 1,738.1 4,438.7 2,941.4 263.1 648.0 62.5 562.3 539.3 24.0 1,261.9 579.5 1,520.4 May
2,485.0 772.6 1,712.3 4,439.4 2,937.1 272.0 645.8 62.8 560.4 537.6 24.0 1,273.7 585.7 1,708.0 June
Commercial banks 6
1,314.2 588.6 725.6 1,768.3 1,262.4 157.7 236.5 61.6 102.0 98.5 9.8 178.3 198.3 1,162.9 2022 May
1,289.6 578.1 711.5 1,754.4 1,249.1 156.6 237.3 61.8 101.6 98.1 9.7 181.4 198.3 1,328.6 June
Big banks 7   
533.1 219.0 314.1 838.4 591.9 82.3 76.5 32.3 86.7 83.8 1.1 130.9 72.4 811.3 2022 May
520.9 208.2 312.7 830.9 587.5 79.1 76.7 25.3 86.4 83.6 1.1 134.1 71.5 861.8 June
Regional banks and other commercial banks   
524.8 229.3 295.6 753.8 539.4 51.9 139.0 29.3 14.9 14.3 8.6 46.8 111.6 340.8 2022 May
508.9 219.6 289.3 754.4 537.3 56.5 137.2 36.5 14.8 14.2 8.5 46.9 112.3 456.3 June
Branches of foreign banks   
256.2 140.4 115.9 176.1 131.2 23.5 20.9 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.5 14.4 10.8 2022 May
259.7 150.3 109.4 169.1 124.3 21.0 23.4 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.5 14.6 10.5 June
Landesbanken
298.7 64.2 234.5 271.8 154.9 41.1 70.2 0.7 5.6 5.6 0.0 181.7 43.1 112.5 2022 May
285.3 57.4 227.8 277.0 158.1 43.1 70.2 0.7 5.6 5.6 0.0 185.3 43.1 125.4 June
Savings banks
212.8 5.1 207.7 1,157.6 846.4 11.9 13.9 – 275.4 259.9 10.0 16.2 133.3 51.9 2022 May
207.4 5.7 201.7 1,157.3 846.5 12.3 14.1 – 274.4 259.0 10.1 15.7 136.2 50.2 June
Credit cooperatives
178.1 2.2 175.9 838.7 610.1 28.6 17.3 – 178.8 174.9 3.9 8.9 97.1 36.0 2022 May
177.0 2.5 174.5 838.9 610.0 29.0 17.6 – 178.4 174.5 4.0 8.9 100.2 33.5 June
Mortgage banks
62.3 3.8 58.5 52.8 2.1 4.0 46.6 – – – . 101.3 10.3 5.9 2022 May
61.7 3.9 57.7 53.3 2.5 4.4 46.5 – – – . 100.3 10.3 6.2 June
Building and loan associations
39.4 3.3 36.0 193.9 3.7 1.6 188.1 – 0.5 0.5 0.1 4.6 12.2 10.0 2022 May
39.7 3.5 36.2 193.7 3.9 1.6 187.7 – 0.5 0.5 0.1 4.5 12.2 10.1 June
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
415.8 115.9 299.9 155.6 61.7 18.3 75.5 0.3 – – . 770.9 85.2 141.2 2022 May
424.3 121.4 302.9 164.7 67.1 25.1 72.4 0.3 – – . 777.6 85.3 154.1 June
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
728.9 375.6 353.3 700.1 527.1 54.0 95.8 9.0 20.5 20.3 2.6 44.4 86.5 533.7 2022 May
724.6 377.8 346.8 693.2 517.6 54.7 97.9 10.6 20.4 20.1 2.6 44.3 86.7 675.3 June
 of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9   
472.7 235.3 237.4 523.9 395.9 30.5 74.8 9.0 20.2 19.9 2.5 43.9 72.1 523.0 2022 May
464.9 227.5 237.4 524.1 393.3 33.7 74.6 10.6 20.0 19.8 2.5 43.8 72.1 664.8 June
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Included in time deposits.  4 Excluding deposits
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).  5 Including subordinated
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
6 Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”.  7 Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner
Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische
Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
notes in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, Table I.3, banking group “Big banks “).
8 Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories
of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”.
9 Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in
other banking categories.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
26•
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)      
PeriodCash in
hand
(euro area
banknotes
and
coins)Credit
balances
with the
Bundes-
bank TotalCredit
balances
and loans BillsNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total Loans BillsTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money mar-
ket paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued
by non-
banks  1
End of year or month *
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 – 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2021 Jan. 44.6 1,009.1 1,283.1 1,032.1 0.0 0.7 250.2 9.2 3,654.0 3,250.7 0.3 6.6 396.3
Feb. 45.0 929.2 1,382.3 1,130.2 0.0 1.0 251.1 9.6 3,669.3 3,261.7 0.2 7.4 400.0
Mar. 45.5 983.4 1,419.4 1,160.8 0.0 0.9 257.7 9.8 3,699.1 3,287.5 0.2 6.7 404.7
Apr. 44.7 1,062.1 1,362.4 1,105.7 0.0 0.9 255.8 9.8 3,693.9 3,287.5 0.2 5.6 400.5
May 45.4 1,044.7 1,423.6 1,167.3 0.0 0.9 255.4 10.1 3,709.6 3,300.2 0.1 4.6 404.7
June 46.1 1,042.8 1,409.7 1,153.8 0.0 0.8 255.1 10.3 3,709.2 3,305.7 0.2 5.8 397.6
July 46.3 1,059.2 1,372.0 1,118.1 0.0 0.8 253.2 10.3 3,725.3 3,322.9 0.2 6.1 396.2
Aug. 46.5 1,015.2 1,425.2 1,172.4 0.0 0.8 252.1 10.3 3,736.4 3,332.8 0.1 5.7 397.8
Sep. 47.1 1,054.9 1,399.9 1,147.7 0.0 0.7 251.5 10.3 3,749.8 3,341.9 0.1 4.4 403.3
Oct. 47.6 1,052.4 1,419.3 1,167.7 0.0 0.7 250.9 10.3 3,770.2 3,366.9 0.2 5.0 398.0
Nov. 47.9 1,068.7 1,432.2 1,183.6 – 0.7 248.0 10.0 3,794.0 3,386.4 0.2 5.6 401.9
Dec. 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 Jan. 47.4 1,066.0 1,439.2 1,191.8 – 0.7 246.7 10.1 3,812.8 3,409.0 0.2 3.1 400.5
Feb. 47.2 1,094.0 1,453.6 1,204.6 – 0.3 248.7 10.0 3,826.5 3,426.0 0.2 5.0 395.3
Mar. 49.5 1,086.3 1,442.6 1,195.1 – 0.3 247.3 10.0 3,853.8 3,449.0 0.2 3.3 401.3
Apr. 50.4 1,200.5 1,360.3 1,112.8 – 0.6 246.9 9.9 3,866.6 3,470.0 0.2 3.5 392.9
May 49.4 1,122.8 1,452.7 1,202.9 – 0.7 249.1 9.9 3,886.7 3,488.9 0.2 3.2 394.4
June 51.1 1,090.9 1,462.8 1,214.8 – 0.8 247.2 9.8 3,906.6 3,513.4 0.2 3.7 389.3
Changes *
2013 +0.0 –48.8 –204.1 –170.6 +0.0 – 0.7 –32.7 –0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 –0.1 – 0.6 + 4.8
2014 +0.4 –4.3 –119.3 –87.1 +0.0 + 0.4 –32.6 +0.1 +36.7 +20.6 –0.1 – 0.6 +16.8
2015 +0.3 +73.7 –80.7 – 4.3 –0.0 – 0.4 –75.9 –0.1 +68.9 +54.1 –0.0 – 0.3 +15.1
2016 +6.5 +129.1 +48.1 +66.9 – – 0.9 –17.9 +0.4 +43.7 +62.8 –0.1 – 0.1 –18.9
2017 +6.1 +108.4 +50.3 +70.4 –0.0 + 0.0 –20.1 –0.1 +57.0 +70.2 +0.0 + 0.4 –13.6
2018 +8.5 +24.0 –81.0 –76.6 +0.0 + 0.1 – 4.4 +3.8 +71.5 +105.4 –0.1 – 0.5 –33.2
2019 +2.8 +59.7 –63.0 –61.1 –0.0 – 0.2 – 1.6 –1.4 +126.7 +129.1 +0.1 + 3.1 – 5.5
2020 +4.1 +316.4 +201.2 +191.6 –0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 +4.3 +123.2 +123.6 –0.1 + 0.7 – 1.0
2021 +2.2 +111.8 +44.1 +46.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – 2.0 +1.5 +152.2 +147.8 +0.0 – 2.2 + 6.6
2021 Jan. –2.6 +216.2 –84.9 –87.8 +0.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 +0.4 + 6.6 + 5.3 +0.0 + 2.6 – 1.4
Feb. +0.3 –79.9 +98.9 +97.8 – + 0.3 + 0.8 +0.4 +15.3 +11.0 –0.0 + 0.7 + 3.6
Mar. +0.6 +54.3 +37.1 +30.6 – – 0.1 + 6.6 +0.2 +29.7 +25.6 –0.0 – 1.4 + 5.4
Apr. –0.8 +78.7 –56.7 –54.9 –0.0 – 0.1 – 1.7 +0.0 – 5.2 + 0.0 –0.0 – 1.1 – 4.1
May +0.8 –17.5 +61.2 +61.6 – + 0.0 – 0.4 +0.4 +15.6 +12.5 –0.0 – 1.1 + 4.2
June +0.6 –1.9 –13.6 –13.3 –0.0 – 0.1 – 0.3 +0.1 – 0.4 + 5.5 +0.0 + 1.3 – 7.1
July +0.2 +15.3 –35.1 –33.1 – – 0.0 – 1.9 +0.1 +16.1 +17.2 +0.0 + 0.3 – 1.4
Aug. +0.2 –43.8 +53.4 +54.4 – + 0.1 – 1.1 –0.0 +10.9 + 9.7 –0.0 – 0.5 + 1.7
Sep. +0.6 +39.7 –26.2 –25.5 +0.0 – 0.1 – 0.6 –0.0 +13.5 + 9.2 +0.0 – 1.2 + 5.4
Oct. +0.5 –2.4 +19.5 +20.0 +0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 –0.1 +20.5 +25.1 +0.0 + 0.6 – 5.2
Nov. +0.3 +16.6 +12.9 +15.9 –0.0 – 0.0 – 2.9 –0.3 +25.5 +20.4 +0.0 + 0.6 + 4.5
Dec. +1.6 –163.6 –22.4 –19.6 – – 0.1 – 2.7 +0.3 + 4.3 + 6.2 +0.1 – 3.0 + 0.9
2022 Jan. –2.0 +161.0 +27.8 +26.3 – + 0.1 + 1.4 –0.3 +14.7 +16.6 –0.1 + 0.5 – 2.3
Feb. –0.2 +28.0 +13.1 +11.5 – – 0.4 + 2.0 –0.1 +15.1 +18.4 +0.0 + 1.9 – 5.2
Mar. +2.3 –7.8 –10.9 – 9.5 – – 0.0 – 1.4 –0.0 +27.3 +23.0 –0.0 – 1.7 + 6.0
Apr. +0.9 +114.2 –82.3 –82.3 – + 0.3 – 0.4 –0.0 +13.1 +21.3 +0.0 + 0.2 – 8.4
May –1.0 –77.7 +92.4 +90.0 – + 0.1 + 2.3 –0.0 +20.1 +18.9 –0.1 – 0.3 + 1.5
June +1.7 –31.9 +10.1 +11.9 – + 0.1 – 1.9 –0.1 +19.9 +24.5 –0.0 + 0.5 – 5.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange ofequalisation claims (see also footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the
exchange of equalisation claims.  3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt
securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
27•
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Equalisa-
tion
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in
domestic
banks
and
enterprises TotalSight
deposits
4Time
deposits
4Redis-
counted
bills  5Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
de-
positsTime
deposits
6Savings
de-
posits  7Bank
savings
bonds  8Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
– 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012
– 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013
– 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
– 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
– 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
– 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
– 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
– 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 2021
– 23.7 78.2 1,261.6 140.5 1,121.2 0.0 13.6 3,904.5 2,542.0 773.1 561.6 27.9 34.3 2021 Jan.
– 24.0 78.2 1,260.6 138.0 1,122.5 0.0 14.2 3,913.7 2,557.5 766.1 562.6 27.5 34.3 Feb.
– 24.3 78.3 1,336.0 135.4 1,200.6 0.0 14.7 3,925.8 2,575.2 761.2 562.3 27.1 34.4 Mar.
– 24.5 77.7 1,343.0 136.2 1,206.8 0.0 15.1 3,935.7 2,594.6 751.6 562.8 26.8 34.4 Apr.
– 24.7 78.6 1,351.9 140.0 1,211.9 0.0 15.5 3,956.3 2,620.5 746.2 563.2 26.3 34.6 May
– 25.0 78.7 1,357.0 132.7 1,224.3 0.0 15.8 3,936.4 2,612.1 735.7 562.6 26.1 34.6 June
– 25.1 78.1 1,360.7 136.1 1,224.5 0.0 15.9 3,964.6 2,646.0 730.7 562.0 25.9 34.5 July
– 25.2 78.2 1,364.7 135.3 1,229.4 0.0 16.1 3,971.0 2,656.0 727.8 561.5 25.6 34.3 Aug.
– 25.2 79.0 1,353.8 128.9 1,224.9 0.0 16.2 3,960.3 2,647.9 726.1 560.7 25.5 34.1 Sep.
– 25.1 79.0 1,363.6 132.9 1,230.7 0.0 16.2 3,989.1 2,664.3 739.3 560.1 25.3 33.9 Oct.
– 25.2 79.1 1,373.9 135.2 1,238.6 0.0 16.3 4,002.4 2,685.9 731.8 559.9 24.8 33.6 Nov.
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 Dec.
– 25.7 78.6 1,363.7 137.2 1,226.5 0.0 16.4 4,025.9 2,690.9 750.0 560.8 24.2 33.9 2022 Jan.
– 25.7 78.7 1,369.7 140.5 1,229.2 0.0 16.6 4,037.8 2,704.5 748.5 560.9 23.9 33.8 Feb.
– 25.8 78.7 1,367.7 137.7 1,230.1 0.0 16.5 4,033.7 2,695.6 755.2 559.0 23.9 33.8 Mar.
– 25.9 78.7 1,384.4 140.6 1,243.8 0.0 16.7 4,046.7 2,705.6 759.4 557.9 23.8 33.8 Apr.
– 26.2 78.6 1,393.7 142.7 1,251.0 0.0 17.1 4,056.8 2,724.3 752.1 556.6 23.8 33.6 May
– 26.1 78.8 1,384.7 147.1 1,237.6 0.0 16.9 4,051.8 2,714.4 758.8 554.8 23.8 33.4 June
Changes *
– –3.3 +2.4 –79.4 –24.1 –55.3 +0.0 –3.4 +40.2 +118.4 –53.9 – 7.4 –17.0 –1.7 2013
– –1.9 +2.0 –29.0 + 2.2 –31.2 –0.0 –0.6 +69.7 +107.9 –25.3 – 2.4 –10.6 –2.0 2014
– –2.1 –4.3 –46.6 + 3.3 –50.0 +0.0 –1.3 +106.5 +156.2 –28.3 –11.3 –10.1 –1.6 2015
– –1.3 +1.5 – 1.7 + 0.3 – 2.0 +0.0 –0.5 +104.7 +124.5 – 6.9 – 7.9 –5.0 –0.5 2016
– –0.0 –1.6 +11.0 –18.4 +29.4 –0.0 –0.5 +103.1 +142.8 –27.5 – 5.6 –6.7 +0.4 2017
– –1.0 +3.1 –25.0 – 3.1 –21.9 +0.0 –0.4 +117.7 +139.3 –10.8 – 4.3 –6.5 +3.9 2018
– –0.7 +0.1 – 8.6 + 1.6 –10.2 +0.0 –0.3 +122.5 +155.8 –25.7 – 3.4 –4.1 –1.4 2019
– +5.7 –3.3 +313.4 +23.2 +290.2 –0.0 +8.2 +221.6 +273.7 –32.7 –14.5 –4.9 +1.9 2020
– +2.3 +1.0 +105.2 – 7.4 +112.6 +0.0 +3.3 +95.3 +144.3 –46.2 + 0.7 –3.5 –0.2 2021
– +0.2 –0.1 +24.9 +15.7 + 9.2 +0.0 +0.5 +19.2 +28.9 –10.3 + 1.1 –0.4 –0.1 2021 Jan.
– +0.3 +0.1 – 1.2 – 2.4 + 1.2 –0.0 +0.6 + 9.1 +15.4 – 7.0 + 1.0 –0.4 –0.0 Feb.
– +0.3 +0.1 +75.1 – 2.6 +77.7 – +0.5 +12.2 +17.7 – 4.8 – 0.3 –0.4 +0.1 Mar.
– +0.2 –0.6 + 7.1 + 0.8 + 6.3 +0.0 +0.3 + 9.8 +19.6 – 9.8 + 0.4 –0.3 –0.0 Apr.
– +0.3 +0.3 + 8.9 + 3.9 + 5.0 – +0.5 +20.6 +26.0 – 5.3 + 0.5 –0.5 +0.2 May
– +0.2 +0.1 + 5.0 – 7.3 +12.3 +0.0 +0.3 –19.8 – 8.5 –10.5 – 0.6 –0.2 –0.0 June
– +0.1 +0.1 + 6.6 + 3.5 + 3.1 – +0.1 +28.2 +33.9 – 5.0 – 0.6 –0.2 –0.1 July
– +0.2 +0.1 + 4.1 – 0.8 + 4.9 –0.0 +0.2 + 6.4 +10.0 – 2.9 – 0.5 –0.2 –0.2 Aug.
– +0.0 +0.7 –10.6 – 6.4 – 4.2 +0.0 +0.1 – 6.7 – 5.4 – 0.3 – 0.8 –0.2 –0.2 Sep.
– –0.1 +0.1 +10.5 + 4.0 + 6.5 +0.0 +0.0 +28.8 +16.4 +13.2 – 0.6 –0.2 –0.2 Oct.
– +0.1 +0.1 +10.2 + 2.3 + 7.9 – +0.1 +13.3 +21.5 – 7.6 – 0.2 –0.3 –0.3 Nov.
– +0.5 +0.1 –35.4 –18.0 –17.4 –0.0 +0.0 –25.9 –31.2 + 4.1 + 1.4 –0.2 +0.6 Dec.
– –0.0 –0.6 +23.5 +18.3 + 5.2 –0.0 +0.0 +49.6 +36.3 +14.1 – 0.4 –0.4 –0.3 2022 Jan.
– +0.0 +0.1 + 6.0 + 3.3 + 2.7 –0.0 +0.2 +11.9 +13.6 – 1.6 + 0.1 –0.2 –0.2 Feb.
– +0.1 +0.0 – 1.9 – 2.8 + 0.8 – –0.0 – 4.1 – 9.0 + 6.6 – 1.8 +0.0 – Mar.
– +0.2 –0.0 +16.7 + 3.0 +13.7 – +0.2 +13.0 + 9.5 + 4.2 – 0.6 –0.1 +0.0 Apr.
– +0.3 –0.1 + 9.4 + 2.2 + 7.2 –0.0 +0.3 +10.1 +18.8 – 7.3 – 1.3 +0.0 –0.2 May
– –0.1 +0.2 – 9.0 + 4.4 –13.4 –0.0 –0.2 – 5.0 – 9.9 + 6.7 – 1.8 –0.0 –0.1 June
including subordinated liabilities.  4 Including liabilities arising from monetary policy
operations with the Bundesbank.  5 Own acceptances and promissory notes
outstanding.  6 Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  7 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8).  8 Including liabilities
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
28•
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)    
Credit balances and loans, bills Loans and bills
PeriodCash in
hand
(non-
euro area
banknotes
and
coins) Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued by
non-banks
End of year or month *
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2021 Jan. 0.2 1,135.1 897.8 645.6 252.2 2.6 234.7 3.8 846.9 538.6 142.7 395.8 14.0 294.3
Feb. 0.6 1,146.4 912.7 659.6 253.1 2.2 231.5 3.8 853.6 548.2 150.4 397.7 14.7 290.7
Mar. 0.2 1,140.4 908.0 646.7 261.3 2.3 230.1 3.8 864.8 559.3 153.3 406.1 11.9 293.5
Apr. 0.2 1,172.3 943.1 680.7 262.3 2.3 227.0 3.9 855.5 555.5 152.6 402.9 13.0 287.0
May 0.2 1,157.2 928.1 669.8 258.3 2.4 226.8 3.9 846.1 550.1 147.3 402.8 11.9 284.2
June 0.4 1,159.3 930.3 666.6 263.7 2.5 226.4 3.9 855.1 551.6 146.7 404.9 10.5 293.0
July 0.4 1,139.3 910.4 651.3 259.1 1.9 227.0 3.8 867.2 565.0 158.4 406.6 13.1 289.2
Aug. 0.4 1,125.9 899.8 647.9 251.8 1.6 224.5 3.7 867.4 566.7 158.7 407.9 15.3 285.5
Sep. 0.3 1,113.1 885.7 634.6 251.1 1.1 226.3 3.6 876.0 569.3 156.6 412.7 15.1 291.6
Oct. 0.3 1,166.7 940.5 672.2 268.2 0.9 225.3 3.5 878.0 579.6 164.1 415.5 17.7 280.6
Nov. 0.3 1,164.8 940.3 674.7 265.6 0.8 223.7 3.4 888.2 585.6 164.4 421.2 14.3 288.3
Dec. 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 Jan. 0.3 1,200.2 977.7 714.1 263.6 1.2 221.3 3.5 911.6 610.7 187.0 423.7 10.3 290.7
Feb. 0.5 1,222.3 998.7 734.3 264.4 1.6 222.0 3.6 923.5 615.2 191.4 423.7 9.4 298.9
Mar. 0.5 1,224.2 999.2 729.8 269.4 1.0 224.1 3.6 906.5 597.4 171.8 425.6 10.3 298.9
Apr. 0.6 1,229.5 1,003.6 734.1 269.6 1.6 224.3 3.6 914.4 612.0 180.9 431.1 13.1 289.2
May 0.6 1,222.8 996.5 730.7 265.8 1.7 224.7 3.6 914.3 609.9 182.1 427.9 13.5 290.9
June 0.6 1,232.8 1,007.2 742.2 265.0 2.2 223.3 3.6 929.1 612.4 181.1 431.2 13.7 302.9
Changes *
2013 –0.5 –22.7 –26.9 –1.3 –25.6 +1.8 +2.4 –0.0 –21.2 –33.1 –5.8 –27.2 – 0.7 +12.6
2014 –0.0 +86.1 +80.1 +63.2 +16.8 +0.7 +5.3 –0.6 +5.7 –10.2 –12.8 +2.7 – 1.8 +17.7
2015 +0.1 –91.8 –86.0 –82.2 –3.8 –6.7 +0.8 –0.1 –6.1 –9.2 –6.5 –2.7 + 1.1 +2.0
2016 +0.0 –25.5 –14.5 –38.2 +23.7 –0.7 –10.3 –0.0 +17.4 +28.9 +10.1 +18.8 – 3.0 –8.5
2017 +0.0 –57.2 –48.7 –61.5 +12.8 +0.0 –8.5 +0.6 –4.7 +13.0 +8.6 +4.4 + 0.7 –18.4
2018 +0.0 +49.6 +34.0 +57.7 –23.7 +0.2 +15.3 +0.7 +18.3 +28.3 +3.2 +25.2 – 0.4 –9.7
2019 –0.0 –4.1 –11.3 –21.9 +10.7 +0.8 +6.3 +0.7 +26.8 +19.9 +12.7 +7.3 + 3.0 +3.8
2020 –0.0 –32.0 –22.4 –6.6 –15.8 +0.9 –10.5 +0.3 +34.4 +14.7 +9.0 +5.7 + 3.6 +16.1
2021 +0.0 +52.8 +71.1 +68.9 +2.2 –2.5 –15.8 –0.5 +37.8 +39.7 +29.8 +9.9 – 3.2 +1.4
2021 Jan. –0.0 +106.1 +108.3 +110.3 –1.9 –0.1 –2.1 –0.1 +22.5 +14.5 +17.8 –3.3 + 2.7 +5.3
Feb. +0.3 +11.1 +14.7 +14.0 +0.7 –0.4 –3.2 –0.1 +6.3 +9.0 +7.5 +1.5 + 0.7 –3.5
Mar. –0.3 –11.7 –10.1 –15.8 +5.6 +0.1 –1.7 +0.0 +3.9 +4.9 +0.7 +4.1 – 2.8 +1.8
Apr. –0.0 +37.7 +40.7 +36.8 +3.9 –0.1 –2.9 +0.1 –4.0 +0.6 +0.7 –0.0 + 1.1 –5.6
May +0.0 –14.9 –14.6 –11.5 –3.1 –0.1 –0.3 +0.0 –7.7 –4.2 –4.4 +0.2 – 0.9 –2.6
June +0.2 –4.1 –3.7 –6.3 +2.6 +0.1 –0.5 –0.0 +4.9 –1.8 –1.7 –0.2 – 1.5 +8.2
July +0.0 –21.8 –20.5 –15.7 –4.8 –0.6 –0.7 –0.1 +12.9 +13.0 +11.7 +1.4 + 2.6 –2.8
Aug. –0.0 –13.9 –11.2 –3.6 –7.6 –0.2 –2.5 –0.1 –0.1 +1.4 +0.3 +1.1 + 2.2 –3.8
Sep. –0.1 –18.7 –19.8 –17.0 –2.9 –0.6 +1.7 –0.1 +10.0 +4.6 +1.2 +3.4 – 0.2 +5.6
Oct. +0.0 +54.3 +55.5 +38.3 +17.3 –0.1 –1.1 –0.1 +1.5 +9.9 +7.6 +2.3 + 2.6 –11.0
Nov. –0.0 –5.7 –3.9 +0.2 –4.0 –0.1 –1.8 –0.1 +5.4 +1.8 +1.1 +0.7 – 3.4 +7.1
Dec. –0.0 –65.7 –64.3 –60.9 –3.5 –0.5 –0.9 +0.0 –17.8 –14.0 –12.7 –1.4 – 6.3 +2.5
2022 Jan. +0.1 +95.8 +96.6 +97.4 –0.8 +0.8 –1.7 +0.1 +37.7 +36.2 +34.8 +1.4 + 2.3 –0.7
Feb. +0.2 +23.2 +22.1 +20.8 +1.2 +0.4 +0.7 +0.0 +12.7 +5.2 +4.6 +0.5 – 0.8 +8.4
Mar. –0.0 –0.0 –1.5 –5.8 +4.3 –0.6 +2.1 +0.0 –18.3 –18.9 –20.1 +1.2 + 0.8 –0.2
Apr. +0.1 –9.7 –10.2 –4.6 –5.6 +0.6 –0.1 +0.0 –1.7 +6.8 +6.8 +0.0 + 2.8 –11.3
May +0.0 –1.1 –1.8 –0.1 –1.7 +0.1 +0.5 +0.0 +3.7 +1.1 +2.2 –1.1 + 0.4 +2.2
June +0.0 –15.4 –14.4 –10.3 –4.1 +0.5 –1.5 +0.0 +9.7 –1.7 –2.3 +0.6 + 0.2 +11.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequentrevisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
29•
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Time deposits (including bank
savings bonds)Time deposits (including
savings deposits and bank
savings bonds)
Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in foreign
banks
and
enter-
prises TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
32.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 2012
30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 2013
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 – 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 2021
11.3 16.5 954.9 507.8 447.0 298.5 148.5 – 279.8 145.0 134.8 69.4 65.3 0.1 2021 Jan.
11.3 16.5 987.8 520.0 467.7 318.0 149.7 – 283.4 145.2 138.3 71.5 66.8 0.1 Feb.
11.3 16.6 991.5 520.2 471.3 319.5 151.8 – 288.9 147.8 141.1 73.7 67.4 0.1 Mar.
11.3 16.5 1,008.7 522.1 486.6 343.1 143.5 – 295.8 150.7 145.0 81.0 64.1 0.1 Apr.
11.3 16.5 1,013.1 513.9 499.2 360.2 139.0 – 304.0 148.4 155.6 88.0 67.6 0.1 May
11.3 16.5 1,016.2 539.5 476.7 335.5 141.3 – 290.8 148.4 142.5 79.9 62.6 0.1 June
11.2 16.0 981.6 525.0 456.6 304.9 151.7 – 292.2 151.7 140.5 79.3 61.2 0.1 July
11.2 16.3 969.4 513.0 456.4 293.0 163.5 0.0 298.4 158.9 139.6 78.8 60.8 0.1 Aug.
11.2 16.3 1,003.9 528.2 475.8 315.7 160.1 – 306.0 164.0 142.0 81.5 60.4 0.1 Sep.
11.2 16.3 1,031.2 550.5 480.7 320.4 160.3 0.0 320.9 169.8 151.1 83.3 67.8 0.1 Oct.
11.3 16.4 1,068.2 565.4 502.8 335.0 167.9 0.0 315.5 171.3 144.2 75.5 68.7 0.1 Nov.
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 Dec.
11.1 16.1 1,098.5 635.9 462.7 321.8 140.8 0.0 339.9 177.2 162.7 82.1 80.5 0.1 2022 Jan.
11.1 16.0 1,130.4 640.4 490.0 349.8 140.2 0.0 361.2 194.5 166.7 87.0 79.7 0.1 Feb.
11.1 15.7 1,113.8 632.7 481.1 349.8 131.3 0.0 361.6 200.0 161.6 82.0 79.6 0.1 Mar.
11.1 15.7 1,113.7 600.6 513.2 381.7 131.4 0.0 384.6 201.5 183.2 102.6 80.6 0.1 Apr.
11.1 15.7 1,127.5 640.4 487.1 351.4 135.7 0.0 382.0 217.1 164.9 85.0 79.9 0.2 May
11.0 15.9 1,100.2 625.5 474.7 340.6 134.1 0.0 387.6 222.7 164.9 82.5 82.4 0.3 June
Changes *
– 1.8 – 7.2 –174.0 –75.6 –98.4 –83.1 –15.4 –0.0 +13.5 +9.6 +3.9 +6.9 –3.0 –0.2 2013
+ 0.1 – 3.8 +76.3 +47.8 +28.5 +39.0 –10.5 –0.0 –43.6 –8.3 –35.3 –30.7 –4.6 +0.2 2014
– 0.6 – 6.1 –15.4 +40.6 –56.0 –48.6 – 7.4 –0.0 –26.5 –13.9 –12.6 +0.3 –13.0 –0.0 2015
– 0.1 – 1.5 +82.7 +51.0 +31.7 +27.0 + 4.7 –0.0 +3.5 –3.1 +6.7 +5.9 +0.8 –0.0 2016
– 1.0 – 4.1 –15.5 +25.2 –40.8 –43.2 + 2.4 ±0.0 +31.8 +11.0 +20.8 +15.6 +5.2 –0.4 2017
– 0.2 – 2.2 –23.9 –23.4 – 0.4 + 2.1 – 2.6 –0.0 –11.9 –0.2 –11.8 –5.7 –6.0 –0.2 2018
– 0.3 – 0.9 – 9.5 –49.4 +39.8 +28.0 +11.8 –0.0 –0.8 +2.1 –2.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.0 2019
– 0.2 – 3.9 +83.8 +87.8 – 4.1 –34.7 +30.6 – +23.6 +13.8 +9.8 +7.1 +2.8 +0.0 2020
– 0.2 – 0.8 +136.6 +19.8 +116.8 +89.2 +27.6 +0.0 +22.7 +6.4 +16.3 +0.0 +16.3 –0.0 2021
– 0.0 – 0.8 +191.3 +78.5 +112.9 +92.4 +20.5 – +20.1 +12.3 +7.8 +3.6 +4.2 –0.0 2021 Jan.
– 0.0 – 0.0 +32.7 +12.2 +20.5 +19.3 + 1.2 – +3.4 +0.0 +3.4 +2.0 +1.4 –0.0 Feb.
+ 0.1 – 0.0 – 1.8 –2.6 + 0.8 – 1.1 + 1.9 – +3.2 +1.6 +1.6 +1.3 +0.3 +0.0 Mar.
– 0.0 + 0.0 +23.2 +4.3 +19.0 +26.8 – 7.8 – +7.9 +3.7 +4.2 +7.3 –3.0 +0.0 Apr.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.9 –7.4 +12.2 +16.6 – 4.4 – +8.6 –2.2 +10.8 +7.2 +3.5 –0.0 May
– 0.1 – 0.0 – 1.9 +23.7 –25.6 –27.4 + 1.8 – –14.8 –0.6 –14.2 –9.0 –5.2 –0.0 June
– 0.1 – 0.5 –34.8 –14.6 –20.2 –30.6 +10.4 – +1.3 +2.9 –1.6 –0.3 –1.3 +0.0 July
+ 0.0 + 0.2 –12.8 –12.3 – 0.5 –12.2 +11.7 +0.0 +5.7 +6.7 –1.1 –0.6 –0.5 –0.0 Aug.
– 0.0 + 0.0 +30.5 +12.9 +17.6 +21.4 – 3.9 –0.0 +6.7 +4.9 +1.7 +2.3 –0.6 +0.0 Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 +27.9 +22.7 + 5.2 + 5.1 + 0.2 +0.0 +14.7 +5.8 +9.0 +1.6 +7.4 –0.0 Oct.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 +32.3 +12.5 +19.9 +13.0 + 6.9 – –6.3 +0.8 –7.1 –8.4 +1.3 –0.0 Nov.
– 0.1 + 0.2 –155.0 –110.1 –44.9 –34.0 –10.9 – –27.7 –29.6 +1.9 –7.0 +8.9 +0.0 Dec.
– 0.0 – 0.6 +180.8 +178.4 + 2.4 +19.3 –16.9 – +50.8 +34.9 +16.0 +13.1 +2.9 –2022 Jan.
+ 0.0 – 0.0 +33.4 +5.7 +27.8 +28.3 – 0.5 – +21.2 +17.0 +4.2 +5.0 –0.8 – Feb.
– 0.1 – 0.3 –18.3 –8.5 – 9.8 – 0.7 – 9.1 – –0.1 +5.3 –5.4 –5.3 –0.1 –0.0 Mar.
+ 0.0 – 0.1 –13.2 –39.6 +26.4 +27.6 – 1.1 – +19.2 –0.6 +19.8 +19.1 +0.6 – Apr.
– 0.0 + 0.0 +18.7 +42.5 –23.8 –28.6 + 4.8 – –1.1 +16.4 –17.5 –16.9 –0.5 +0.1 May
– 0.1 + 0.1 –21.2 –5.8 –15.4 –13.0 – 2.4 – +3.5 +4.7 –1.2 –3.4 +2.2 +0.0 June

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
30•
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Short-term lending Medium- and long-term   Lending to domestic
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
Periodincluding 
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claimsexcluding 
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claims Total TotalLoans
and
billsNegotiable
money
market
paper Total LoansTreasury
bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 – 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2021 Jan. 3,654.0 3,251.0 247.7 221.9 221.3 0.6 25.8 19.7 6.1 3,406.3 3,018.4
Feb. 3,669.3 3,261.9 249.5 224.2 223.6 0.6 25.3 18.5 6.8 3,419.7 3,031.9
Mar. 3,699.1 3,287.7 261.3 236.6 236.0 0.6 24.7 18.6 6.1 3,437.8 3,048.6
Apr. 3,693.9 3,287.7 248.6 223.5 222.8 0.7 25.1 20.2 4.9 3,445.2 3,061.5
May 3,709.6 3,300.4 248.7 225.4 224.6 0.8 23.3 19.5 3.8 3,460.9 3,075.1
June 3,709.2 3,305.8 250.7 225.8 225.0 0.8 24.9 19.9 5.1 3,458.5 3,082.5
July 3,725.3 3,323.0 248.2 221.0 220.2 0.8 27.2 21.9 5.3 3,477.1 3,102.5
Aug. 3,736.4 3,332.9 245.0 221.1 220.4 0.7 23.9 18.9 4.9 3,491.5 3,116.8
Sep. 3,749.8 3,342.1 247.8 224.5 223.8 0.7 23.4 19.6 3.7 3,501.9 3,123.2
Oct. 3,770.2 3,367.1 256.5 232.5 231.9 0.6 24.0 19.5 4.4 3,513.7 3,142.9
Nov. 3,794.0 3,386.5 255.6 232.9 232.3 0.6 22.7 17.7 5.0 3,538.4 3,164.9
Dec. 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 Jan. 3,812.8 3,409.2 262.6 242.3 241.7 0.6 20.3 17.8 2.5 3,550.2 3,180.4
Feb. 3,826.5 3,426.2 267.4 246.9 246.1 0.8 20.5 16.3 4.2 3,559.1 3,195.3
Mar. 3,853.8 3,449.2 273.6 254.8 254.0 0.8 18.9 16.3 2.5 3,580.1 3,209.5
Apr. 3,866.6 3,470.2 277.5 257.9 257.0 0.9 19.6 17.1 2.5 3,589.1 3,226.2
May 3,886.7 3,489.1 280.1 262.5 261.5 1.0 17.6 15.4 2.2 3,606.6 3,242.6
June 3,906.6 3,513.5 290.8 271.4 270.5 0.9 19.5 16.6 2.8 3,615.7 3,255.8
Changes *
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 – 13.8 – 5.8 – 6.3 + 0.5 – 8.0 – 7.0 – 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 – 11.6 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 0.0 – 7.1 – 6.5 – 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 – 5.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.8 – 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 – 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 – 12.1 – 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 8.6 – 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 – 19.6 – 19.8 – 19.8 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2021 + 152.2 + 147.8 + 8.8 + 13.8 + 13.8 – 0.1 – 4.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 + 143.4 + 157.9
2021 Jan. + 6.6 + 5.3 + 4.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 4.2 + 1.7 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 5.2
Feb. + 15.3 + 10.9 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 0.0 – 0.5 – 1.2 + 0.7 + 13.5 + 13.3
Mar. + 29.7 + 25.6 + 11.2 + 12.5 + 12.5 – 0.0 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 1.4 + 18.5 + 16.3
Apr. – 5.2 – 0.0 – 12.8 – 13.1 – 13.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.6 – 1.2 + 7.5 + 13.0
May + 15.6 + 12.5 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.1 – 1.8 – 0.6 – 1.2 + 15.5 + 13.4
June – 0.4 + 5.5 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 – 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 – 2.4 + 7.3
July + 16.1 + 17.2 – 2.0 – 4.2 – 4.3 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 18.1 + 19.5
Aug. + 10.9 + 9.7 – 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 3.3 – 2.9 – 0.4 + 14.1 + 14.2
Sep. + 13.5 + 9.3 + 3.3 + 3.7 + 3.8 – 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.7 – 1.2 + 10.2 + 6.2
Oct. + 20.5 + 25.1 + 8.7 + 8.1 + 8.2 – 0.1 + 0.5 – 0.2 + 0.7 + 11.8 + 19.8
Nov. + 25.5 + 20.5 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 2.4 + 0.0 – 1.2 – 1.8 + 0.6 + 24.4 + 19.9
Dec. + 4.3 + 6.3 – 5.8 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 5.2 – 2.5 – 2.7 + 10.1 + 9.8
2022 Jan. + 14.7 + 16.5 + 12.9 + 10.1 + 9.8 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 1.8 + 5.8
Feb. + 15.1 + 18.4 + 6.2 + 6.0 + 5.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 1.5 + 1.7 + 9.0 + 14.9
Mar. + 27.3 + 23.0 + 6.2 + 7.9 + 7.9 – 0.0 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 + 21.0 + 14.2
Apr. + 13.1 + 21.4 + 3.9 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 9.3 + 17.0
May + 20.1 + 18.8 + 2.6 + 4.6 + 4.5 + 0.0 – 2.0 – 1.7 – 0.3 + 17.5 + 16.4
June + 19.9 + 24.5 + 10.8 + 8.9 + 9.0 – 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 9.1 + 13.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
31•
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
TotalMedium-
termLong-
term SecuritiesMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalMedium-
termLong-
termSecur-
ities  1Equal-
isation
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 – 3.5 2012
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 – 2.7 2013
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 – 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 – 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 – 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 – 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 – 1.4 2018
2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 – 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 2020
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 2021
2,776.4 307.8 2,468.6 242.0 22.5 387.9 233.6 15.3 218.3 154.3 – 1.2 2021 Jan.
2,787.7 309.7 2,478.1 244.2 22.8 387.8 232.0 15.4 216.6 155.8 – 1.1 Feb.
2,802.4 314.5 2,487.9 246.1 23.1 389.3 230.7 15.2 215.5 158.6 – 1.1 Mar.
2,813.9 313.6 2,500.3 247.6 23.4 383.7 230.8 15.0 215.8 153.0 – 1.1 Apr.
2,825.1 311.7 2,513.5 249.9 23.6 385.9 231.1 14.9 216.2 154.8 – 1.1 May
2,831.8 310.0 2,521.8 250.7 23.9 376.0 229.2 14.7 214.5 146.8 – 1.1 June
2,851.4 310.7 2,540.8 251.0 24.0 374.6 229.5 14.9 214.6 145.1 – 1.1 July
2,864.5 311.5 2,553.1 252.2 24.2 374.7 229.1 14.7 214.4 145.6 – 1.1 Aug.
2,870.0 310.1 2,559.9 253.2 24.2 378.7 228.7 14.3 214.4 150.1 – 1.0 Sep.
2,885.5 313.5 2,572.0 257.4 24.1 370.9 230.2 14.6 215.6 140.7 – 1.0 Oct.
2,906.5 315.6 2,590.9 258.4 24.2 373.5 230.0 14.5 215.6 143.5 – 1.0 Nov.
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 Dec.
2,920.6 312.8 2,607.8 259.8 24.7 369.8 229.1 13.9 215.2 140.7 – 1.0 2022 Jan.
2,935.4 313.8 2,621.6 259.9 24.6 363.8 228.5 13.9 214.5 135.4 – 1.1 Feb.
2,950.1 316.1 2,633.9 259.4 24.7 370.7 228.8 13.7 215.1 141.8 – 1.1 Mar.
2,966.8 317.3 2,649.5 259.4 24.9 362.9 229.5 13.7 215.8 133.5 – 1.0 Apr.
2,983.1 319.7 2,663.4 259.5 25.1 364.0 229.1 13.7 215.4 134.9 – 1.0 May
2,998.2 322.2 2,675.9 257.6 25.0 360.0 228.2 13.6 214.6 131.7 – 1.0 June
Changes *
+ 17.7 – 0.1 + 17.8 – 0.1 – 2.5 + 0.6 – 4.3 – 0.7 – 3.6 + 4.9 – – 0.8 2013
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 +12.5 – 1.8 – 4.1 – 8.5 – 5.1 – 3.4 + 4.3 – – 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 +14.8 – 2.1 – 6.6 – 6.9 – 4.8 – 2.0 + 0.2 – + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 – 0.9 – 30.9 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 3.3 –23.6 – – 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 +15.8 + 0.1 – 39.9 –10.6 – 1.3 – 9.3 –29.4 – – 0.1 2017
+108.7 +19.3 + 89.4 – 6.7 – 0.9 – 37.1 –10.5 – 2.7 – 7.8 –26.6 – – 0.0 2018
+126.0 +18.9 +107.2 + 6.8 – 0.8 – 17.8 – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 –12.3 – + 0.1 2019
+145.0 + 9.4 +135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 – 2.8 – 1.1 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 1.7 – – 0.4 2020
+140.1 + 5.6 +134.5 +17.8 + 2.3 – 14.6 – 3.3 – 1.3 – 2.0 –11.3 – – 0.0 2021
+ 4.3 – 2.7 + 7.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 – 3.1 – 0.8 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 2.3 – + 0.1 2021 Jan.
+ 11.1 + 1.8 + 9.3 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 – 1.3 + 0.1 – 1.4 + 1.5 – – 0.0 Feb.
+ 14.4 + 4.7 + 9.7 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 2.1 – 1.4 – 0.2 – 1.2 + 3.5 – – 0.0 Mar.
+ 11.5 – 0.9 + 12.4 + 1.5 + 0.2 – 5.5 + 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.3 – 5.6 – – 0.0 Apr.
+ 11.0 – 1.9 + 13.0 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3 – 0.1 + 0.4 + 1.8 – + 0.0 May
+ 6.5 – 1.7 + 8.2 + 0.8 + 0.3 – 9.7 – 1.8 – 0.2 – 1.5 – 7.9 – – 0.0 June
+ 19.2 + 0.2 + 19.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 – 1.7 – – 0.0 July
+ 13.0 + 0.8 + 12.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.4 + 0.5 – – 0.0 Aug.
+ 5.2 – 1.4 + 6.6 + 1.0 – 0.0 + 4.0 – 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.0 + 4.4 – + 0.0 Sep.
+ 15.6 + 3.5 + 12.1 + 4.1 – 0.1 – 7.9 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 – 9.4 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 18.9 + 4.4 + 14.5 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 4.4 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 1.0 + 3.5 – – 0.0 Nov.
+ 9.3 – 1.1 + 10.4 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 – + 0.0 Dec.
+ 4.9 – 1.7 + 6.6 + 0.8 – 0.0 – 4.0 – 0.8 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 3.2 – – 0.0 2022 Jan.
+ 14.8 + 1.0 + 13.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 6.0 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.6 – 5.3 – – 0.0 Feb.
+ 14.7 + 2.3 + 12.4 – 0.5 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 0.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 + 6.5 – – 0.0 Mar.
+ 17.0 + 1.5 + 15.6 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 7.7 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 – 8.4 – – 0.0 Apr.
+ 16.4 + 2.5 + 13.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.1 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.3 + 1.4 – – 0.0 May
+ 15.1 + 2.5 + 12.6 – 1.9 – 0.1 – 4.1 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 3.2 – – 0.0 June

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
August 2022
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insuranceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2020 2,993.0 1,601.8 1,565.6 1,285.1 280.5 1,623.4 443.3 146.7 123.4 82.7 135.8 55.3 59.8 176.0
2021         June 3,056.8 1,634.6 1,619.5 1,316.7 302.8 1,654.3 461.4 142.5 122.1 85.7 135.5 56.0 57.9 182.6
         Sep. 3,093.7 1,653.1 1,648.9 1,337.4 311.4 1,666.9 467.9 143.9 122.2 87.7 136.7 56.2 56.3 182.6         Dec. 3,147.5 1,591.4 1,678.2 1,373.0 305.2 1,701.5 477.2 146.1 128.3 98.0 140.4 55.9 55.6 186.3
2022         Mar. 3,204.0 1,613.7 1,701.0 1,391.9 309.0 1,742.4 485.1 150.9 134.3 101.3 145.3 56.3 54.9 193.2
         June 3,268.7 1,636.4 1,731.4 1,412.8 318.5 1,784.8 494.5 160.2 132.6 104.4 153.4 57.0 56.4 200.2
 Short-term lending
2020 221.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 192.1 4.6 29.0 6.9 16.0 37.0 3.6 6.1 31.62021         June 225.0 − 7.8 − 7.8 195.9 4.5 28.8 5.5 16.7 34.7 4.2 4.4 34.4
         Sep. 223.8 − 7.8 − 7.8 193.7 4.4 30.4 5.1 17.1 35.6 4.0 4.1 34.1         Dec. 231.8 − 6.9 − 6.9 202.7 4.4 31.6 9.1 18.0 36.4 3.3 3.9 35.0
2022         Mar. 254.0 − 7.0 − 7.0 224.1 4.5 36.5 14.0 19.5 39.3 3.6 4.1 38.0
         June 270.5 − 7.0 − 7.0 239.5 4.6 44.7 11.6 20.1 42.2 3.9 4.3 42.2
 Medium-term lending
2020 310.5 − 38.5 − 38.5 230.4 18.5 30.2 5.4 14.8 19.3 4.8 15.0 51.42021         June 310.0 − 39.7 − 39.7 232.8 19.8 27.7 5.0 15.3 19.5 4.5 14.1 51.2
         Sep. 310.1 − 40.2 − 40.2 233.3 20.2 27.8 5.2 15.8 19.3 4.5 12.3 51.7         Dec. 314.5 − 40.5 − 40.5 239.5 20.6 28.3 5.4 19.3 20.8 4.3 12.3 52.0
2022         Mar. 316.1 − 40.8 − 40.8 242.2 21.0 28.9 5.6 20.0 22.0 4.2 11.7 53.1
         June 322.2 − 42.0 − 42.0 249.2 22.2 29.1 5.8 21.0 22.3 4.3 13.3 53.7
 Long-term lending
2020 2,461.4 1,601.8 1,519.1 1,285.1 234.0 1,201.0 420.2 87.5 111.2 51.8 79.4 47.0 38.7 93.02021         June 2,521.8 1,634.6 1,572.0 1,316.7 255.3 1,225.5 437.2 86.0 111.6 53.7 81.3 47.3 39.4 97.0
         Sep. 2,559.9 1,653.1 1,600.9 1,337.4 263.5 1,240.0 443.4 85.6 111.9 54.9 81.8 47.7 39.9 96.8         Dec. 2,601.2 1,591.4 1,630.9 1,373.0 257.8 1,259.3 452.2 86.2 113.8 60.8 83.2 48.3 39.4 99.3
2022         Mar. 2,633.9 1,613.7 1,653.1 1,391.9 261.2 1,276.0 459.6 85.5 114.8 61.8 84.0 48.4 39.2 102.1
         June 2,675.9 1,636.4 1,682.3 1,412.8 269.5 1,296.0 467.7 86.5 115.2 63.4 88.9 48.8 38.8 104.4
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2021         Q2 + 17.9 + 20.9 + 30.7 + 21.0 + 9.7 − 3.2 + 9.6 − 6.7 − 0.9 + 1.1 − 3.7 + 0.6 − 2.2 − 0.0
         Q3 + 37.1 + 18.5 + 29.1 + 19.7 + 9.4 + 12.7 + 6.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 1.0         Q4 + 54.1 + 18.0 + 28.6 + 18.9 + 9.7 + 34.9 + 9.0 + 2.2 + 5.9 + 1.5 + 3.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 3.7
2022         Q1 + 57.9 + 17.9 + 22.0 + 16.6 + 5.3 + 42.0 + 7.0 + 4.8 + 6.3 + 3.2 + 4.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 8.9
         Q2 + 65.0 + 22.2 + 29.9 + 20.5 + 9.4 + 42.7 + 9.1 + 9.4 − 1.7 + 3.2 + 8.2 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 7.1
 Short-term lending
2021         Q2 − 11.1 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 11.6 − 0.2 − 4.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 4.2 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 0.2
         Q3 − 0.3 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3         Q4 + 10.3 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 10.5 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 1.0
2022         Q1 + 23.5 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 22.7 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 2.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 4.4
         Q2 + 16.6 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 15.4 + 0.1 + 8.2 − 2.4 + 0.6 + 2.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 4.2
 Medium-term lending
2021         Q2 − 4.5 − + 0.8 − + 0.8 − 3.5 + 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.8
         Q3 − 0.4 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 + 0.7         Q4 + 6.8 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 8.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 3.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5
2022         Q1 + 1.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.2
         Q2 + 6.4 − + 1.2 − + 1.2 + 7.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.9
 Long-term lending
2021         Q2 + 33.6 + 20.9 + 30.2 + 21.0 + 9.1 + 12.0 + 9.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.5
         Q3 + 37.8 + 18.5 + 28.6 + 19.7 + 8.9 + 14.1 + 6.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.6         Q4 + 37.0 + 18.0 + 28.4 + 18.9 + 9.5 + 16.4 + 8.4 + 0.6 + 1.8 − 3.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 2.2
2022         Q1 + 32.7 + 17.9 + 21.5 + 16.6 + 4.9 + 16.5 + 6.5 − 0.7 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 3.4
         Q2 + 42.0 + 22.2 + 28.7 + 20.5 + 8.1 + 19.9 + 7.9 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 1.5 + 4.9 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 2.1
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
August 2022
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
843.7 286.6 53.8 204.1 464.0 47.9 1,353.4 1,118.3 235.2 177.4 6.7 16.2 4.0 2020
872.0 296.9 58.2 208.6 473.6 48.7 1,386.3 1,154.0 232.4 174.8 6.6 16.2 4.1 2021          June
881.4 304.0 57.5 210.5 478.3 48.9 1,410.5 1,176.6 233.9 176.4 7.0 16.3 4.3          Sep.890.8 308.6 63.8 207.9 483.8 48.3 1,429.3 1,196.6 232.7 184.1 6.9 16.7 4.4          Dec.
906.2 315.6 66.2 209.8 489.1 49.1 1,444.9 1,211.4 233.5 184.4 7.1 16.8 4.4 2022          Mar.
920.4 322.8 68.0 211.5 494.9 49.4 1,467.0 1,232.4 234.6 184.6 7.3 16.9 4.5          June
Short-term lending
61.9 15.7 9.6 10.5 20.9 3.7 28.6 3.4 25.2 1.3 6.7 0.6 0.0 202067.1 16.0 11.5 10.4 21.0 4.1 28.6 3.4 25.2 1.4 6.6 0.5 0.0 2021          June
63.3 16.9 10.3 9.8 20.5 4.3 29.6 3.4 26.2 1.5 7.0 0.5 0.0          Sep.65.5 14.5 13.0 10.0 19.7 3.8 28.6 2.5 26.1 1.4 6.9 0.5 0.0          Dec.
69.2 15.3 14.0 10.5 20.3 4.4 29.2 2.5 26.7 1.6 7.1 0.7 0.0 2022          Mar.
70.5 15.9 13.7 11.1 20.8 4.5 30.3 2.5 27.9 1.7 7.3 0.7 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
89.6 20.4 11.8 24.5 32.0 3.5 79.6 20.0 59.6 56.1 − 0.5 0.0 202095.7 22.2 14.4 26.4 31.3 3.4 76.7 19.8 56.9 53.1 − 0.5 0.0 2021          June
96.7 23.2 13.8 27.4 31.1 3.4 76.3 20.0 56.3 52.4 − 0.6 0.1          Sep.97.0 23.1 15.2 27.1 30.0 3.3 74.4 19.8 54.6 50.6 − 0.6 0.1          Dec.
96.8 22.8 15.5 27.2 30.0 3.2 73.4 19.7 53.7 49.6 − 0.5 0.1 2022          Mar.
99.8 24.1 17.1 26.6 29.9 3.2 72.5 19.8 52.7 48.6 − 0.5 0.1          June
Long-term lending
692.3 250.5 32.4 169.1 411.1 40.7 1,245.3 1,094.9 150.4 120.0 − 15.1 4.0 2020709.2 258.7 32.3 171.8 421.3 41.1 1,281.1 1,130.8 150.3 120.3 − 15.2 4.1 2021          June
721.3 263.9 33.3 173.3 426.7 41.2 1,304.7 1,153.3 151.4 122.6 − 15.3 4.2          Sep.728.4 271.1 35.6 170.8 434.1 41.3 1,326.3 1,174.3 152.0 132.1 − 15.6 4.3          Dec.
740.2 277.5 36.8 172.1 438.8 41.4 1,342.3 1,189.2 153.1 133.2 − 15.6 4.4 2022          Mar.
750.0 282.8 37.3 173.8 444.2 41.7 1,364.2 1,210.1 154.1 134.4 − 15.7 4.4          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 8.7 + 3.2 − 0.9 + 4.3 + 5.8 + 0.4 + 21.3 + 21.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 2021          Q2
+ 9.4 + 6.5 − 0.8 + 1.7 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 24.3 + 22.7 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1          Q3+ 18.8 + 7.3 + 4.2 + 2.8 + 5.2 − 0.6 + 18.8 + 19.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.1          Q4
+ 14.9 + 6.7 + 2.4 + 1.7 + 5.0 + 0.7 + 15.8 + 14.9 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2022          Q1
+ 14.4 + 7.4 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 5.8 + 0.4 + 22.2 + 20.8 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
Short-term lending
− 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 2021          Q2
− 2.7 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q3+ 3.4 − 1.1 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2022          Q1
+ 1.4 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.1 − − 0.1 + 0.0 2021          Q2
+ 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.7 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3+ 1.7 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 1.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.0 2022          Q1
+ 3.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 8.8 + 3.4 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 21.6 + 21.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2021          Q2
+ 11.3 + 4.7 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 4.9 + 0.1 + 23.6 + 22.5 + 1.2 + 1.7 − + 0.1 + 0.1          Q3+ 13.6 + 7.2 + 0.4 + 2.7 + 6.2 + 0.1 + 20.4 + 19.9 + 0.5 + 1.2 − + 0.3 + 0.1          Q4
+ 11.5 + 6.3 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 4.5 + 0.1 + 16.2 + 15.0 + 1.2 + 1.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2022          Q1
+ 10.0 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 1.8 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 22.0 + 20.8 + 1.3 + 1.4 − + 0.1 + 0.1          Q2
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
34•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic non-banks, total                        End of year or month *
2019 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 202.7 613.5 52.7 560.8 575.2 33.2 32.5 14.7 0.2
2020 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2021 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2021 July 3,964.6 2,646.0 730.7 155.4 575.3 47.7 527.6 562.0 25.9 34.5 14.3 1.5
Aug. 3,971.0 2,656.0 727.8 151.2 576.7 48.1 528.5 561.5 25.6 34.3 14.3 1.5
Sep. 3,960.3 2,647.9 726.1 152.7 573.5 47.8 525.7 560.7 25.5 34.1 14.4 1.6
Oct. 3,989.1 2,664.3 739.3 163.6 575.7 49.1 526.6 560.1 25.3 33.9 15.3 1.4
Nov. 4,002.4 2,685.9 731.8 157.1 574.7 49.9 524.8 559.9 24.8 33.6 15.3 0.9
Dec. 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2022 Jan. 4,025.9 2,690.9 750.0 175.9 574.1 49.5 524.6 560.8 24.2 33.9 17.1 1.1
Feb. 4,037.8 2,704.5 748.5 175.5 573.0 48.7 524.3 560.9 23.9 33.8 17.1 1.2
Mar. 4,033.7 2,695.6 755.2 183.4 571.7 49.2 522.5 559.0 23.9 33.8 17.2 1.6
Apr. 4,046.7 2,705.6 759.4 189.8 569.6 50.1 519.5 557.9 23.8 33.8 17.3 1.1
May 4,056.8 2,724.3 752.1 183.3 568.7 51.2 517.5 556.6 23.8 33.6 17.1 0.8
June 4,051.8 2,714.4 758.8 194.7 564.1 49.0 515.1 554.8 23.8 33.4 17.2 0.7
Changes *
2020 +221.6 +273.7 – 32.7 – 15.0 –17.7 – 4.8 –12.9 –14.5 – 4.9 + 1.9 – 0.3 – 0.1
2021 + 95.3 +144.3 – 46.2 – 27.3 –18.9 + 1.5 –20.5 + 0.7 – 3.5 – 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.2
2021 July + 28.2 + 33.9 – 5.0 – 2.8 – 2.2 + 0.3 – 2.5 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.6
Aug. + 6.4 + 10.0 – 2.9 – 4.2 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 – – 0.0
Sep. – 6.7 – 5.4 – 0.3 + 2.1 – 2.4 – 0.6 – 1.8 – 0.8 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
Oct. + 28.8 + 16.4 + 13.2 + 11.0 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 1.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 13.3 + 21.5 – 7.6 – 6.4 – 1.2 + 0.8 – 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.6
Dec. – 25.9 – 31.2 + 4.1 + 3.9 + 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 0.4
2022 Jan. + 49.6 + 36.3 + 14.1 + 15.0 – 0.9 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.2
Feb. + 11.9 + 13.6 – 1.6 – 0.4 – 1.2 – 0.8 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
Mar. – 4.1 – 9.0 + 6.6 + 7.9 – 1.3 + 0.5 – 1.8 – 1.8 + 0.0 – + 0.0 + 0.3
Apr. + 13.0 + 9.5 + 4.2 + 6.4 – 2.2 + 0.8 – 3.0 – 0.6 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5
May + 10.1 + 18.8 – 7.3 – 6.5 – 0.9 + 1.1 – 2.0 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
June – 5.0 – 9.9 + 6.7 + 11.3 – 4.6 – 2.2 – 2.5 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1
Domestic government End of year or month *
2019 237.1 74.7 154.9 76.0 78.9 26.1 52.8 3.4 4.1 24.7 2.2 0.2
2020 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 –
2021 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2021 July 211.8 86.6 119.2 41.6 77.7 20.6 57.0 2.6 3.4 25.2 2.0 –
Aug. 207.9 84.1 117.9 38.8 79.0 21.2 57.9 2.6 3.4 25.3 2.0 –
Sep. 210.8 84.8 120.1 42.2 78.0 20.8 57.2 2.5 3.4 25.2 2.0 –
Oct. 213.9 85.2 122.9 43.5 79.5 22.2 57.3 2.5 3.3 25.2 2.0 –
Nov. 213.7 86.1 121.8 41.4 80.4 23.5 56.9 2.5 3.3 25.1 2.0 –
Dec. 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2022 Jan. 233.5 88.5 139.2 59.2 80.0 24.0 56.0 2.5 3.3 25.5 2.0 –
Feb. 237.9 91.4 140.7 61.0 79.7 23.7 56.0 2.5 3.3 25.5 2.0 –
Mar. 241.0 85.2 150.0 69.7 80.3 24.4 56.0 2.4 3.4 25.5 2.0 –
Apr. 243.7 86.2 151.8 70.8 80.9 25.0 55.9 2.4 3.4 25.6 2.0 –
May 255.6 91.4 158.4 76.1 82.2 25.9 56.3 2.4 3.4 25.6 2.0 –
June 254.9 84.8 164.2 84.6 79.7 23.3 56.3 2.4 3.5 25.4 2.0 –
Changes *
2020 – 6.9 + 5.7 – 11.6 – 16.5 + 4.8 – 5.3 +10.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 + 0.7 – 0.1 – 0.2
2021 – 17.9 + 3.4 – 20.8 – 17.7 – 3.0 + 2.9 – 6.0 – 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.4 – 0.0 + 1.0
2021 July + 2.7 + 5.0 – 2.2 – 2.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.2
Aug. – 3.9 – 2.5 – 1.4 – 2.8 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 –
Sep. + 4.3 + 1.8 + 2.6 + 3.2 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 –
Oct. + 3.1 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 –
Nov. – 0.1 + 0.9 – 1.0 – 2.1 + 1.1 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 –
Dec. – 3.6 – 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 – 0.6 + 0.3 – 0.8 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 1.0
2022 Jan. + 23.4 + 6.1 + 17.4 + 17.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – – 0.3 – 0.0 – 1.0
Feb. + 4.3 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.7 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 –
Mar. + 3.2 – 6.2 + 9.4 + 8.7 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 –
Apr. + 2.7 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 –
May + 11.5 + 5.2 + 6.2 + 5.2 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 –
June – 0.7 – 6.6 + 5.9 + 8.5 – 2.6 – 2.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities.
2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
35•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont´d)
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic enterprises and households                            End of year or month *
2019 3,423.9 2,161.6 661.4 126.7 534.7 26.6 508.0 571.8 29.1 7.8 12.6 0.0
2020 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2021 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2021 July 3,752.8 2,559.4 611.4 113.8 497.7 27.1 470.6 559.5 22.4 9.3 12.3 1.5
Aug. 3,763.1 2,571.9 610.0 112.3 497.6 27.0 470.7 559.0 22.3 9.1 12.3 1.5
Sep. 3,749.4 2,563.1 606.0 110.5 495.5 27.0 468.5 558.2 22.1 8.9 12.4 1.6
Oct. 3,775.1 2,579.2 616.4 120.2 496.2 27.0 469.3 557.6 22.0 8.7 13.4 1.4
Nov. 3,788.6 2,599.8 610.0 115.7 494.3 26.3 467.9 557.4 21.4 8.5 13.3 0.9
Dec. 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2022 Jan. 3,792.4 2,602.4 610.8 116.6 494.1 25.5 468.6 558.3 20.8 8.4 15.0 1.1
Feb. 3,799.9 2,613.1 607.8 114.5 493.3 24.9 468.3 558.4 20.6 8.2 15.1 1.2
Mar. 3,792.7 2,610.4 605.1 113.7 491.4 24.8 466.6 556.6 20.5 8.2 15.2 1.6
Apr. 3,802.9 2,619.4 607.6 119.0 488.6 25.1 463.6 555.5 20.4 8.2 15.2 1.1
May 3,801.2 2,632.9 593.7 107.2 486.5 25.3 461.2 554.2 20.4 8.0 15.1 0.8
June 3,796.9 2,629.7 594.5 110.1 484.4 25.6 458.8 552.4 20.3 8.0 15.2 0.7
Changes *
2020 +228.5 +268.0 – 21.1 + 1.5 –22.6 + 0.5 –23.0 –13.9 – 4.6 + 1.2 – 0.2 + 0.1
2021 +113.2 +140.9 – 25.5 – 9.6 –15.9 – 1.4 –14.5 + 0.9 – 3.1 – 0.6 + 2.8 + 0.2
2021 July + 25.4 + 28.9 – 2.7 – 0.5 – 2.2 + 0.0 – 2.2 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.8
Aug. + 10.3 + 12.4 – 1.5 – 1.5 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.0
Sep. – 11.0 – 7.2 – 2.9 – 1.1 – 1.7 – 0.2 – 1.5 – 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
Oct. + 25.7 + 16.0 + 10.3 + 9.7 + 0.7 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 1.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 13.5 + 20.6 – 6.6 – 4.3 – 2.3 – 0.6 – 1.7 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.6
Dec. – 22.3 – 27.5 + 4.1 + 3.3 + 0.8 – 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 1.8 – 0.6
2022 Jan. + 26.2 + 30.2 – 3.3 – 2.3 – 1.0 – 0.4 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.8
Feb. + 7.5 + 10.7 – 3.0 – 2.1 – 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2
Mar. – 7.4 – 2.7 – 2.8 – 0.8 – 2.0 – 0.1 – 1.9 – 1.8 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3
Apr. + 10.3 + 8.5 + 2.5 + 5.3 – 2.8 + 0.2 – 3.0 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.5
May – 1.4 + 13.5 – 13.6 – 11.7 – 1.9 + 0.2 – 2.1 – 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
June – 4.3 – 3.2 + 0.8 + 2.9 – 2.1 + 0.4 – 2.4 – 1.8 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2019 1,031.5 614.4 399.7 81.1 318.6 15.5 303.1 6.7 10.7 2.4 10.1 0.0
2020 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2021 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2021 July 1,133.9 760.0 359.6 80.7 278.9 15.4 263.6 5.7 8.5 2.3 9.6 1.5
Aug. 1,148.4 775.4 358.9 79.9 279.0 15.3 263.7 5.7 8.5 2.3 9.5 1.5
Sep. 1,141.4 772.1 355.1 78.1 277.0 15.5 261.5 5.7 8.5 2.3 9.6 1.6
Oct. 1,160.1 779.7 366.3 88.4 277.9 15.6 262.3 5.7 8.4 2.3 10.6 1.4
Nov. 1,166.2 791.7 361.1 84.3 276.7 15.5 261.3 5.5 8.0 2.3 10.5 0.9
Dec. 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2022 Jan. 1,170.4 795.8 361.6 85.3 276.4 15.9 260.4 5.1 7.8 2.4 12.2 1.1
Feb. 1,165.1 793.2 359.0 83.4 275.6 15.4 260.2 5.2 7.8 2.2 12.2 1.2
Mar. 1,171.9 802.1 356.9 82.7 274.2 15.5 258.7 5.2 7.8 2.3 12.3 1.6
Apr. 1,165.3 792.4 360.0 88.0 272.0 16.0 256.1 5.2 7.7 2.3 12.4 1.1
May 1,165.6 806.0 346.7 76.4 270.4 16.3 254.1 5.1 7.7 2.3 12.3 0.8
June 1,158.9 798.2 347.9 78.6 269.3 16.9 252.3 5.1 7.7 2.3 12.4 0.7
Changes *
2020 + 81.0 +101.2 – 18.0 + 7.0 –25.0 – 0.4 –24.6 – 0.8 – 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.1
2021 + 28.5 + 47.1 – 16.8 – 1.2 –15.7 + 0.5 –16.2 – 0.5 – 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.2
2021 July + 18.3 + 17.4 + 1.1 + 3.1 – 2.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.8
Aug. + 14.6 + 15.4 – 0.8 – 0.8 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0
Sep. – 5.4 – 2.5 – 2.9 – 1.1 – 1.8 – 0.1 – 1.6 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2
Oct. + 18.7 + 7.7 + 11.1 + 10.2 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 6.1 + 11.9 – 5.4 – 3.9 – 1.5 – 0.1 – 1.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.6
Dec. – 23.4 – 26.5 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.8 – 0.6
2022 Jan. + 27.8 + 30.8 – 2.6 – 2.1 – 0.5 + 0.1 – 0.7 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.8
Feb. – 5.3 – 2.6 – 2.7 – 1.9 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
Mar. + 6.6 + 8.8 – 2.2 – 0.7 – 1.5 + 0.0 – 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3
Apr. – 6.6 – 9.6 + 3.2 + 5.4 – 2.2 + 0.4 – 2.6 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5
May – 0.5 + 12.6 – 13.0 – 11.7 – 1.4 + 0.3 – 1.7 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2
June – 6.7 – 7.8 + 1.2 + 2.2 – 1.1 + 0.6 – 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1
4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
36•
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2  
by creditor group by creditor group 
Domestic households Domestic households
PeriodDeposits of
domestic
households
and
non-profit
institutions,
total Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individualsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tions Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individuals
End of year or month *
2019 2,392.4 1,547.2 1,507.9 266.3 1,081.6 160.1 39.3 261.7 248.3 20.8 190.2 37.3
2020 2,539.5 1,713.8 1,672.7 291.1 1,215.4 166.2 41.1 258.6 245.1 19.3 190.5 35.2
2021 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2022 Jan. 2,621.9 1,806.6 1,761.8 310.8 1,285.6 165.4 44.8 249.1 237.5 18.2 184.0 35.2
Feb. 2,634.8 1,819.9 1,774.2 310.4 1,299.6 164.3 45.7 248.8 236.9 18.4 183.4 35.1
Mar. 2,620.8 1,808.3 1,761.9 303.6 1,296.3 162.0 46.4 248.3 236.3 18.6 182.9 34.9
Apr. 2,637.6 1,827.0 1,780.5 309.6 1,308.1 162.8 46.4 247.6 235.9 18.6 182.5 34.9
May 2,635.6 1,827.0 1,780.3 311.6 1,308.0 160.8 46.7 247.0 235.0 18.6 181.8 34.6
June 2,638.0 1,831.5 1,784.9 308.1 1,316.2 160.7 46.6 246.6 234.4 19.0 181.0 34.4
Changes *
2020 +147.5 +166.9 +165.0 +26.0 +131.5 + 7.5 + 1.8 – 3.1 – 3.2 – 1.5 – 1.6 –0.2
2021 + 84.7 +93.8 +90.3 +17.3 +73.7 – 0.6 + 3.5 – 8.6 – 7.2 – 1.1 – 4.7 –1.3
2022 Jan. – 1.6 – 0.5 – 0.6 + 2.2 – 2.8 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.2 –0.1
Feb. + 12.8 +13.3 +12.4 – 0.5 +14.0 – 1.1 + 0.9 – 0.4 – 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 –0.2
Mar. – 14.0 –11.6 –12.4 – 6.8 – 3.3 – 2.3 + 0.8 – 0.5 – 0.5 + 0.2 – 0.5 –0.2
Apr. + 16.8 +18.2 +18.2 + 6.0 +11.4 + 0.8 + 0.0 – 0.7 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 0.4 +0.0
May – 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 2.0 – 0.2 – 1.1 + 0.2 – 0.6 – 0.9 – – 0.6 –0.3
June + 2.4 + 4.5 + 4.6 – 3.5 + 8.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.6 + 0.4 – 0.9 –0.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional.Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
marked.  1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
€ billion
Deposits    
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
PeriodDomestic
government,
total TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans
End of year or month *
2019 237.1 11.2 5.4 1.5 4.2 0.1 11.6 53.8 21.1 17.1 14.5 1.0 13.1
2020 229.5 48.6 4.8 7.2 36.5 0.0 11.3 46.5 21.2 11.4 13.2 0.7 14.1
2021 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2022 Jan. 233.5 45.5 4.4 5.0 36.0 0.1 11.7 59.3 27.1 20.2 11.3 0.6 13.8
Feb. 237.9 42.8 4.7 2.1 36.0 0.1 11.7 59.7 26.3 21.2 11.6 0.5 13.8
Mar. 241.0 42.1 4.9 1.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 61.7 23.5 26.1 11.6 0.5 13.8
Apr. 243.7 42.2 5.1 1.1 36.0 0.1 11.7 60.7 21.9 26.9 11.4 0.5 13.8
May 255.6 42.8 5.6 1.1 36.0 0.1 11.7 62.0 21.1 29.0 11.4 0.5 13.9
June 254.9 43.0 5.5 4.4 33.1 0.1 11.6 62.8 18.0 33.0 11.3 0.5 13.8
Changes *
2020 – 6.9 +37.3 –0.6 +5.7 +32.2 –0.0 –0.3 –7.0 +0.2 –5.7 –1.3 –0.2 +1.0
2021 –17.9 –5.0 –0.5 –4.1 –0.4 +0.0 +0.3 +1.0 +0.6 +2.3 –1.8 –0.1 +0.0
2022 Jan. +23.4 +2.0 +0.2 +1.8 –0.0 –0.0 +0.0 +11.9 +5.4 +6.4 +0.0 –0.0 –0.3
Feb. + 4.3 –2.7 +0.2 –2.9 –0.0 –0.0 +0.0 +0.5 –0.8 +1.0 +0.3 –0.0 +0.0
Mar. + 3.2 –0.6 +0.2 –0.9 +0.0 –0.0 +0.0 +1.9 –2.9 +4.8 –0.0 –0.0 –0.0
Apr. + 2.7 +0.0 +0.2 –0.1 +0.0 –0.0 +0.0 –1.0 –1.6 +0.8 –0.3 –0.0 +0.0
May +11.5 +0.6 +0.6 +0.0 +0.0 –0.0 –0.0 +1.3 –0.8 +2.0 +0.1 –0.0 +0.0
June – 0.7 +0.2 –0.2 +3.3 –2.9 +0.0 –0.1 +0.8 –3.1 +4.0 –0.1 –0.0 –0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and DeutscheTelekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”.
Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date
are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
37•
IV. Banks
Savings deposits  3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year  2
of which:
Domestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsup to and
including
1 year Totalup to and
including
2 yearsmore than
2 years TotalDomestic
householdsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsBank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)  5Liabilities
arising
from repos Period
End of year or month *
13.3 45.6 216.1 11.2 204.9 565.1 558.1 7.0 18.4 5.4 2.4 –2019
13.5 40.1 218.5 12.0 206.5 552.0 545.7 6.3 15.1 6.7 2.7 –2020
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 –2021
11.6 31.4 217.8 9.6 208.2 553.2 547.1 6.1 13.0 6.1 2.9 –2022 Jan.
11.9 31.1 217.6 9.5 208.2 553.2 547.2 6.0 12.8 6.0 2.9 – Feb.
11.9 31.1 217.2 9.3 207.9 551.4 545.5 5.9 12.8 6.0 2.9 – Mar.
11.7 31.0 216.6 9.1 207.5 550.3 544.4 5.9 12.7 5.9 2.9 – Apr.
12.0 30.9 216.1 9.0 207.2 549.0 543.1 5.9 12.6 5.7 2.8 – May
12.2 31.5 215.1 8.7 206.4 547.3 541.4 5.9 12.6 5.7 2.9 – June
Changes *
+ 0.2 – 5.5 + 2.4 +0.9 + 1.6 –13.0 –12.3 –0.7 – 3.3 +1.3 + 0.2 –2020
– 1.4 – 8.4 – 0.2 –1.9 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 1.5 –0.1 – 1.9 –0.6 + 0.2 –2021
– 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.4 –0.5 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 –0.1 – 0.2 +0.0 + 0.0 –2022 Jan.
+ 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 –0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 –0.0 – 0.2 –0.1 + 0.0 – Feb.
– 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.5 –0.2 – 0.3 – 1.8 – 1.7 –0.1 – 0.1 +0.0 + 0.0 – Mar.
– 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.5 –0.2 – 0.3 – 0.6 – 0.6 –0.0 – 0.1 –0.1 + 0.0 – Apr.
+ 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.5 –0.1 – 0.4 – 1.3 – 1.3 –0.0 – 0.0 –0.2 – 0.0 – May
+ 0.2 + 0.6 – 1.0 –0.3 – 0.7 – 1.8 – 1.7 –0.1 – 0.0 –0.0 + 0.0 – June
registered debt securities.  2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Table IV.12).  3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsofootnote 2).  4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2,4Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
65.3 37.4 8.6 14.0 5.4 0.0 106.8 10.8 48.8 46.2 1.1 –2019
68.5 43.2 8.0 12.4 4.9 0.0 66.0 10.9 32.9 21.4 0.8 –2020
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 –2021
64.7 41.8 6.5 12.1 4.4 0.0 64.0 15.1 27.6 20.6 0.8 –2022 Jan.
68.8 45.4 7.0 12.0 4.3 0.0 66.6 15.0 30.7 20.1 0.8 – Feb.
67.4 43.3 7.5 12.2 4.4 0.0 69.8 13.6 34.9 20.5 0.8 – Mar.
67.5 43.1 7.6 12.4 4.4 0.0 73.4 16.1 35.3 21.1 0.9 – Apr.
72.4 47.9 7.0 13.1 4.4 0.0 78.4 16.8 39.0 21.7 0.9 – May
70.1 45.2 7.2 13.2 4.4 0.0 78.9 16.0 40.0 22.0 0.9 – June
Changes *
+3.5 +5.9 – 0.6 –1.3 – 0.5 –0.0 –40.8 +0.2 –15.9 –24.8 – 0.3 –2020
+2.8 +5.6 – 2.0 –0.2 – 0.5 – –16.8 –2.2 –13.9 –0.6 + 0.1 –2021
–6.2 –6.6 + 0.5 +0.0 – 0.0 – +15.7 +7.1 + 8.6 +0.0 – 0.0 –2022 Jan.
+4.0 +3.6 + 0.6 –0.1 – 0.0 – + 2.5 –0.0 + 3.1 –0.5 – 0.0 – Feb.
–1.4 –2.1 + 0.5 +0.2 + 0.1 – + 3.3 –1.5 + 4.3 +0.5 + 0.0 – Mar.
+0.1 –0.2 + 0.1 +0.3 – 0.0 – + 3.6 +2.6 + 0.4 +0.6 + 0.0 – Apr.
+6.0 +4.8 + 0.8 +0.4 + 0.0 – + 3.6 +0.7 + 2.4 +0.5 – 0.0 – May
–2.3 –2.6 + 0.2 +0.1 + 0.0 – + 0.6 –0.7 + 1.0 +0.3 – 0.0 – June
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Federal Railways Fund,
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund,
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund.  2 Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities.  3 Including deposits under savings and loan
contracts.  4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
38•
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months'
noticeat more than 3
months' notice
Period Total Total Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeMemo
item:
Interest
credited
on
savings
depositsnon-banks,
total Totalof which:
With
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsforeign
non-banks
End of year or month *
2019 581.8 575.2 540.5 313.2 34.7 24.7 6.6 5.9 2.0 35.9 33.2 25.1 2.6
2020 566.8 560.6 533.3 288.0 27.3 18.0 6.3 5.7 1.8 30.2 28.3 22.1 1.9
2021 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 1.5 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2022 Feb. 566.7 560.9 537.8 266.6 23.1 14.1 5.8 5.4 0.1 24.1 23.9 19.0 0.2
Mar. 564.8 559.0 536.2 265.0 22.9 13.9 5.8 5.3 0.1 24.1 23.9 19.0 0.2
Apr. 563.7 557.9 535.3 262.0 22.7 13.7 5.7 5.3 0.1 23.9 23.8 18.9 0.1
May 562.3 556.6 534.0 262.2 22.5 13.5 5.7 5.2 0.1 24.0 23.8 18.8 0.1
June 560.4 554.8 532.4 259.4 22.4 13.4 5.6 5.2 0.1 24.0 23.8 18.8 0.1
Changes *
2020 –14.8 –14.5 –7.2 –24.6 –7.3 –6.7 –0.3 –0.2 . –5.7 –4.9 –3.0 –0.7
2021 +0.3 +0.7 +3.9 –18.5 –3.2 –3.2 –0.4 –0.3 . –5.2 –3.5 –2.3 –1.7
2022 Feb. +0.0 +0.1 +0.3 +0.2 –0.2 –0.2 –0.0 –0.0 . –0.2 –0.2 –0.2 –0.0
Mar. –1.9 –1.8 –1.6 –1.5 –0.2 –0.2 –0.1 –0.0 . +0.0 +0.0 –0.0 –0.0
Apr. –0.7 –0.6 –0.4 –3.1 –0.2 –0.2 –0.0 –0.0 . –0.1 –0.1 –0.1 –0.0
May –1.4 –1.3 –1.2 +0.2 –0.1 –0.2 –0.1 –0.1 . +0.0 +0.0 –0.0 –
June –1.8 –1.8 –1.6 –2.8 –0.2 –0.1 –0.0 –0.0 . –0.0 –0.0 –0.0 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified as timedeposits.  2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
basic rate of interest.  3 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
securities.
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
of which:
with maturities ofNon-negotiable
bearer debt
securities and
money market
paper  6 Subordinated
up to
and including 1 yearmore than 1 year up to
and including 2 years
Period TotalFloating
rate
bonds  1Zero
coupon
bonds  1,2Foreign
currency
bonds  3,4Certifi-
cates
of
deposit Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5more
than
2 years Totalof which:
with
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsnegotiable
debt
securitiesnon-
negotiable
debt
securities
End of year or month *
2019 1,140.7 123.5 28.6 367.7 96.7 117.7 2.6 23.6 4.2 999.4 0.9 0.7 31.5 0.4
2020 1,119.0 117.1 12.7 313.6 89.4 94.3 1.5 23.8 3.1 1,000.9 1.1 0.9 34.8 0.4
2021 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2022 Feb. 1,199.1 102.5 14.0 330.1 92.3 101.1 3.0 17.6 4.6 1,080.4 0.5 0.4 34.4 0.1
Mar. 1,219.8 100.5 14.2 337.0 105.8 114.7 2.9 17.8 4.4 1,087.4 0.6 0.5 35.6 0.1
Apr. 1,227.1 100.1 14.3 344.7 104.2 113.1 3.0 15.2 4.5 1,098.8 0.5 0.4 36.0 0.1
May 1,226.2 98.3 15.0 339.3 100.2 109.3 2.4 16.2 4.5 1,100.7 0.4 0.4 35.7 0.1
June 1,237.2 99.0 16.2 353.3 113.3 124.4 2.3 16.8 4.1 1,096.1 0.8 0.8 36.4 0.1
Changes *
2020 –20.5 –5.2 –0.8 –54.1 –22.3 –22.2 – 1.1 +0.2 –1.1 +1.5 +0.3 +0.2 +2.1 –0.0
2021 +54.0 –10.3 +0.8 +17.6 +9.4 +12.6 + 0.4 –5.9 +1.3 +47.3 +0.4 +0.3 –0.2 –0.3
2022 Feb. +11.4 –2.2 –0.6 –6.1 –1.9 –1.5 + 0.8 –0.2 +0.0 +13.1 –0.2 –0.1 +0.0 –
Mar. +20.8 –2.0 +0.3 +6.9 +13.4 +13.6 – 0.1 +0.2 –0.2 +7.0 +0.1 +0.1 +1.2 –
Apr. + 7.3 –0.4 +0.0 +7.7 –1.5 –1.6 + 0.1 –2.6 +0.1 +11.4 –0.1 –0.1 +0.4 –
May – 1.0 –1.8 +0.4 –5.4 –4.1 –3.8 – 0.6 +0.9 +0.1 +1.9 –0.0 –0.0 –0.3 –
June +11.1 +0.6 +1.3 +14.1 +13.2 +15.1 – 0.0 +0.6 –0.4 –4.7 +0.4 +0.4 +0.7 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies.  2 Issue value when
floated.  3 Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreigncurrencies.  4 Bonds denominated in non-euro area currencies.  5 Negotiable bearer debt
securities and money market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%.
6 Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see
also Table IV.10, footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
39•
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks
(MFIs)  6Deposits of non-
banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans
End of
year/monthNum-
ber
of
associ-
ationsBalance
sheet
total  1Credit
bal-
ances
and
loans
(ex-
cluding
building
loans)  2Building
loans  3Bank
debt
secur-
ities  4Loans
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsInterim
and
bridging
loansOther
building
loansSecur- 
ities (in-
cluding
Treasury
bills
and
Treasury
discount
paper)  5Deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight
and time
depositsDeposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight and
time de-
posits  7Bearer
debt
secur-
ities
out-
stand-
ingCapital
(includ-
ing pub-
lished
re-
serves)  8Memo
item:
New
con-
tracts
entered
into in
year or
month  9
All building and loan associations
2021 18 253.2 30.0 0.0 15.7 10.1 130.5 36.7 26.5 3.0 30.1 184.4 9.2 4.2 12.4 71.4
2022 Apr. 18 257.1 32.4 0.0 15.4 10.1 132.1 38.3 25.0 3.0 34.2 184.6 9.1 4.1 12.2 6.4
May 18 260.1 34.7 0.0 15.4 10.1 132.6 38.7 24.6 3.0 36.4 184.8 9.2 4.6 12.2 7.6
June 18 260.3 34.3 0.0 15.1 10.1 133.2 39.0 24.3 3.0 36.7 184.3 9.5 4.5 12.2 8.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2022 Apr. 10 180.7 17.1 – 6.9 7.4 103.0 32.5 11.1 1.7 31.3 119.8 8.7 4.1 8.3 4.0
May 10 183.5 19.5 – 6.9 7.4 103.3 32.9 10.8 1.7 33.5 119.9 8.7 4.6 8.3 4.5
June 10 183.6 19.2 – 6.7 7.4 103.7 33.1 10.5 1.7 33.5 119.6 9.0 4.5 8.3 5.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2022 Apr. 8 76.4 15.3 0.0 8.5 2.7 29.2 5.8 13.8 1.3 2.9 64.9 0.4 – 3.9 2.5
May 8 76.6 15.2 0.0 8.5 2.7 29.3 5.9 13.8 1.3 2.9 64.8 0.5 – 3.9 3.1
June 8 76.7 15.1 0.0 8.4 2.7 29.5 5.9 13.8 1.3 3.2 64.7 0.5 – 3.9 3.0
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Capital promised Capital disbursed Changes in deposits
under savings and
loan contracts AllocationsDisbursement
commitments
outstanding at
end of periodInterest and
repayments
received on
building loans  11
Deposits under
savings and
loan contractsLoans under
savings and
loan contracts  10
PeriodAmounts
paid into
savings
and
loan ac-
counts  10Interest
credited
on
deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsRepay-
ments
of
deposits
under
cancelled
savings
and
loan
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Net
alloca-
tions  12 Total Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loans Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loansNewly
granted
interim
and
bridging
loans
and
other
building
loans Totalof
which:
Under
alloc-
ated
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Repay-
ments
during
quarterMemo
item:
Housing
bonuses
re-
ceived  13
All building and loan associations
2021 27.7 2.0 9.1 52.3 27.7 47.1 18.3 4.0 4.2 3.4 24.7 18.6 6.3 6.1 4.9 0.1
2022 Apr. 2.2 0.0 0.8 4.7 2.6 4.1 1.7 0.4 0.4 0.4 2.0 20.0 6.6 0.5 0.0
May 2.6 0.1 0.8 4.9 2.7 4.3 1.7 0.3 0.4 0.3 2.2 20.0 6.7 0.5 0.0
June 2.2 0.1 0.8 4.7 2.8 4.6 2.0 0.4 0.4 0.3 2.1 19.5 6.7 0.4 ... 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2022 Apr. 1.4 0.0 0.4 3.3 1.9 3.2 1.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.5 14.3 3.5 0.4 0.0
May 1.6 0.0 0.4 3.4 1.6 3.2 1.2 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.7 14.2 3.5 0.4 0.0
June 1.4 0.1 0.4 3.6 2.1 3.4 1.5 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.6 14.0 3.6 0.3 ... 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2022 Apr. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.3 0.8 1.0 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.5 5.6 3.1 0.1 0.0
May 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.5 1.0 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.5 5.8 3.3 0.1 0.0
June 0.8 0.0 0.4 1.1 0.7 1.2 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.5 5.5 3.1 0.1 ... 0.0
* Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures for
the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 See Table IV.2,
footnote 1.  2 Including claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from
registered debt securities and central bank credit balances.  3 Loans under savings and
loan contracts and interim and bridging loans.  4 Including money market paper and
small amounts of other securities issued by banks.  5 Including equalisation claims.
6 Including liabilities to building and loan associations.  7 Including small amounts of
savings deposits.  8 Including participation rights capital and fund for general bankingrisks. 9 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
new contracts.  10 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital disbursed".  11 Including housing
bonuses credited.  12 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans.  13 The amounts already
credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into
savings and loan accounts" and "Interest and repayments received on building loans".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2019 52 198 1,453.0 407.3 389.2 216.0 173.2 18.1 534.3 436.1 19.7 416.4 98.2 511.5 361.7
2020 50 206 1,552.2 376.7 364.0 213.2 150.8 12.7 504.8 409.6 14.3 395.3 95.2 670.7 523.6
2021 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2021 Aug. 50 204 1,537.2 448.2 434.3 273.1 161.2 13.9 489.2 407.3 13.2 394.1 81.9 599.8 437.4
Sep. 50 205 1,518.6 452.9 439.1 279.3 159.8 13.8 485.2 404.4 13.1 391.3 80.8 580.5 415.3
Oct. 52 207 1,552.0 495.3 481.3 310.3 171.0 13.9 497.7 417.4 13.3 404.1 80.3 559.0 402.4
Nov. 50 204 1,595.0 495.2 481.1 306.5 174.6 14.2 506.4 425.8 13.0 412.7 80.6 593.4 436.9
Dec. 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2022 Jan. 50 209 1,618.8 563.0 548.5 366.5 181.9 14.6 537.7 460.1 13.1 447.0 77.6 518.1 378.0
Feb. 50 209 1,634.4 566.4 551.9 379.5 172.4 14.5 539.7 464.4 13.2 451.1 75.3 528.3 384.8
Mar. 50 208 1,674.9 564.7 550.5 369.7 180.8 14.2 540.1 461.4 13.5 447.9 78.7 570.1 421.1
Apr. 50 208 1,784.0 556.5 542.2 370.7 171.5 14.3 552.8 474.5 13.3 461.2 78.3 674.7 529.5
May 50 208 1,759.2 551.2 537.3 369.0 168.3 13.9 554.0 477.6 13.1 464.5 76.4 653.9 514.9
Changes *
2020 –2 +9 +104.2 –20.3 –15.5 –2.8 –12.7 –4.8 +0.2 –1.0 –5.4 +4.4 +1.2 +164.2 +179.6
2021 +1 +1 –48.4 +87.3 +87.1 +84.9 +2.2 +0.3 –26.2 –6.5 –1.3 –5.1 –19.7 –136.9 –128.1
2021 Sep. – +1 –19.8 +2.9 +3.1 +6.1 –3.1 –0.1 –8.8 –7.0 –0.1 –6.9 –1.8 – 20.4 –24.3
Oct. +2 +2 +33.7 +42.6 +42.5 +31.0 +11.5 +0.1 +13.0 +13.4 +0.2 +13.2 –0.3 – 21.2 –12.6
Nov. –2 –3 +43.0 –2.3 –2.5 –3.7 +1.2 +0.2 +4.4 +5.0 –0.2 +5.2 –0.6 + 33.0 +32.3
Dec. +1 +3 –90.4 –24.0 –23.2 –8.6 –14.6 –0.8 –9.2 –7.0 –0.1 –6.8 –2.2 – 57.3 –32.5
2022 Jan. –1 +2 +113.7 +90.4 +89.2 +68.7 +20.5 +1.2 +36.3 +37.6 +0.2 +37.4 –1.4 – 18.6 –27.9
Feb. – – +15.8 +3.8 +3.9 +13.0 –9.0 –0.1 +3.3 +5.4 +0.1 +5.3 –2.1 + 10.4 + 7.1
Mar. – –1 +40.1 –2.0 –1.7 –9.9 +8.1 –0.3 –1.0 –4.3 +0.2 –4.6 +3.3 + 41.5 +35.7
Apr. – – +106.5 –13.1 –13.1 +1.0 –14.2 +0.1 –1.3 +0.7 –0.1 +0.8 –2.0 +102.0 +104.5
May – – –24.0 –3.4 –3.0 –1.6 –1.5 –0.4 +6.5 +7.8 –0.3 +8.1 –1.3 – 19.9 –13.4
Foreign subsidiaries                                           End of year or month *
2019 15 41 235.2 52.5 46.7 18.3 28.4 5.7 139.0 116.1 14.4 101.7 22.9 43.7 0.0
2020 12 36 229.5 44.8 39.9 17.4 22.5 4.9 139.7 114.4 13.1 101.4 25.3 44.9 0.0
2021 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2021 Aug. 12 35 236.6 44.0 39.1 18.9 20.2 5.0 137.7 113.5 12.1 101.5 24.2 54.8 0.0
Sep. 13 36 244.6 51.9 47.1 21.9 25.2 4.8 138.5 114.5 12.2 102.3 24.0 54.1 0.0
Oct. 12 35 246.1 50.9 45.9 24.3 21.6 5.0 138.5 115.4 12.5 102.9 23.1 56.6 0.0
Nov. 12 35 247.1 52.9 46.7 24.0 22.8 6.2 138.5 115.4 12.6 102.8 23.1 55.7 0.0
Dec. 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2022 Jan. 12 35 245.1 45.9 40.9 20.1 20.8 5.0 140.6 117.5 12.7 104.8 23.1 58.5 0.0
Feb. 12 35 245.7 46.2 41.4 21.1 20.3 4.8 140.6 117.7 12.7 105.0 22.9 58.9 0.0
Mar. 12 35 249.3 45.9 40.9 20.6 20.3 5.0 143.4 119.7 12.9 106.8 23.7 60.0 0.0
Apr. 12 35 253.6 49.4 44.1 21.5 22.6 5.3 145.3 121.6 12.8 108.8 23.7 58.8 0.0
May 12 35 256.5 48.5 43.6 19.6 24.1 4.9 147.7 123.9 13.2 110.8 23.8 60.2 0.0
Changes *
2020 –3 –5 –0.8 –5.3 –5.0 –1.0 –4.0 –0.3 +3.3 +0.8 –1.3 +2.1 +2.4 + 1.2 ± 0.0
2021 ±0 –1 +12.0 +3.8 +2.8 +3.4 –0.5 +1.0 –2.5 –0.5 –0.5 –0.0 –2.1 + 10.8 ± 0.0
2021 Sep. +1 +1 +7.0 +7.3 +7.6 +3.0 +4.6 –0.3 +0.4 +0.5 +0.1 +0.4 –0.2 – 0.7 ± 0.0
Oct. –1 –1 +1.5 –0.9 –1.1 +2.4 –3.6 +0.2 –0.0 +0.9 +0.3 +0.5 –0.9 + 2.5 ± 0.0
Nov. – – –0.2 +1.3 +0.3 –0.4 +0.6 +1.0 –0.6 –0.6 +0.1 –0.7 +0.0 – 0.9 ± 0.0
Dec. – – –1.4 –2.3 –2.4 –3.2 +0.8 +0.1 +0.9 +0.8 +0.0 +0.7 +0.1 – 0.0 ± 0.0
2022 Jan. – – –1.9 –5.0 –3.9 –0.7 –3.0 –1.4 +0.7 +0.8 +0.0 +0.8 –0.1 + 2.6 ± 0.0
Feb. – – +0.8 +0.4 +0.6 +1.0 –0.4 –0.2 +0.1 +0.3 +0.0 +0.3 –0.2 + 0.3 ± 0.0
Mar. – – +3.2 –0.5 –0.7 –0.5 –0.2 +0.2 +2.6 +1.8 +0.2 +1.6 +0.8 + 1.1 ± 0.0
Apr. – – +1.4 +2.0 +2.1 +1.0 +1.1 –0.1 +0.5 +0.6 –0.1 +0.6 –0.0 – 1.1 ± 0.0
May – – +4.0 –0.3 –0.1 –1.9 +1.9 –0.3 +2.9 +2.8 +0.3 +2.5 +0.1 + 1.4 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated fromthe flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always
to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
894.1 613.6 453.2 160.4 280.5 12.7 10.1 2.7 267.8 94.6 53.4 410.9 361.1 2019
872.2 588.5 431.8 156.7 283.7 11.7 10.2 1.5 272.0 61.5 49.9 568.6 523.1 2020
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 2021
932.9 624.6 438.7 185.9 308.3 8.5 7.0 1.5 299.8 81.6 51.3 471.3 436.0 2021 Aug.
937.3 618.3 432.9 185.4 319.0 9.6 7.8 1.8 309.4 81.1 51.6 448.6 414.2 Sep.
982.8 654.6 469.2 185.4 328.2 9.0 7.2 1.8 319.2 83.7 51.7 433.8 401.3 Oct.
988.0 655.8 458.2 197.6 332.2 8.9 7.1 1.8 323.3 82.6 51.9 472.4 435.9 Nov.
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 Dec.
1,066.8 659.1 457.3 201.8 407.7 9.5 7.7 1.8 398.2 86.1 51.8 414.1 377.6 2022 Jan.
1,079.5 664.5 466.8 197.6 415.0 9.8 8.1 1.7 405.2 82.7 51.8 420.4 383.8 Feb.
1,087.0 663.1 462.8 200.3 423.9 10.7 9.0 1.7 413.2 80.7 52.3 454.9 418.8 Mar.
1,075.8 655.6 453.6 202.0 420.1 10.5 8.7 1.8 409.7 88.6 53.3 566.4 526.8 Apr.
1,059.1 633.0 437.3 195.7 426.1 10.5 8.7 1.7 415.6 90.4 52.9 556.8 512.4 May
Changes *
– 9.2 –13.3 –21.4 + 8.1 + 4.1 – 1.0 + 0.3 – 1.4 + 5.1 –28.1 – 3.5 +157.6 + 162.0 2020
+71.1 +43.1 +31.0 +12.0 + 28.1 – 3.6 – 3.9 + 0.3 +31.7 + 0.1 + 1.4 –130.8 – 119.7 2021
+ 1.8 –8.7 –5.8 –2.9 +10.5 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 9.4 – 1.6 +0.3 – 22.9 – 21.8 2021 Sep.
+46.0 +36.8 +36.3 +0.5 + 9.2 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.0 + 9.8 + 2.9 +0.1 – 14.8 – 12.9 Oct.
+ 3.4 –0.4 –9.6 +9.2 + 3.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 4.0 – 2.4 +0.3 + 38.6 + 34.6 Nov.
–37.8 –17.3 +3.0 –20.3 –20.5 – 0.8 – 0.8 – 0.0 –19.7 –17.5 –0.7 – 34.5 – 32.5 Dec.
+114.7 +18.7 –4.0 +22.7 +96.0 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 +94.6 +20.4 +0.6 – 23.8 – 25.8 2022 Jan.
+13.3 +6.0 +9.6 –3.6 + 7.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 – 0.1 + 7.0 – 3.2 +0.0 + 6.3 + 6.3 Feb.
+ 7.0 –1.8 –4.0 +2.2 + 8.8 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 7.9 – 2.4 +0.5 + 34.5 + 35.0 Mar.
–15.2 –11.0 –9.2 –1.8 – 4.2 – 0.2 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 4.0 + 5.3 +0.9 +108.8 + 108.0 Apr.
–10.4 –16.5 –12.5 –4.1 + 6.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 6.2 + 2.7 –0.4 – 13.3 – 14.4 May
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
165.7 68.7 36.6 32.1 97.0 6.6 3.9 2.7 90.4 16.0 22.1 31.4 0.0 2019
163.4 59.6 34.1 25.5 103.8 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.1 16.6 20.3 29.2 0.0 2020
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 2021
169.8 58.2 31.1 27.1 111.6 6.6 4.2 2.4 105.0 17.5 20.8 28.6 0.0 2021 Aug.
175.4 61.5 30.0 31.5 113.9 6.6 4.2 2.4 107.3 18.4 20.7 30.0 0.0 Sep.
177.6 63.8 32.8 31.0 113.8 6.9 4.5 2.4 106.9 17.9 20.4 30.1 0.0 Oct.
177.5 62.6 31.1 31.5 114.9 7.0 4.6 2.4 107.9 17.5 20.3 31.7 0.0 Nov.
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 Dec.
179.6 64.8 33.2 31.7 114.7 7.2 4.8 2.4 107.5 15.9 19.9 29.8 0.0 2022 Jan.
180.9 66.3 33.7 32.7 114.5 7.4 5.0 2.4 107.1 15.8 19.8 29.3 0.0 Feb.
184.0 66.5 34.2 32.3 117.5 7.5 5.1 2.4 110.0 15.7 19.8 29.8 0.0 Mar.
187.8 70.6 36.1 34.4 117.2 7.2 4.8 2.4 110.0 15.5 19.9 30.3 0.0 Apr.
190.9 70.3 36.3 34.1 120.5 7.2 4.8 2.4 113.3 15.3 20.1 30.2 0.0 May
Changes *
+ 1.4 – 7.3 – 2.5 – 4.8 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.3 + 8.7 + 0.6 – 1.8 – 1.0 ± 0.0 2020
+12.1 + 3.2 – 1.1 + 4.3 + 8.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 2021
+ 4.9 +3.0 –1.0 +4.0 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.9 –0.0 + 1.2 ± 0.0 2021 Sep.
+ 2.3 +2.3 +2.7 –0.4 – 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.5 –0.3 + 0.1 ± 0.0 Oct.
– 1.0 –1.6 –1.6 +0.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 – 0.4 –0.0 + 1.2 ± 0.0 Nov.
+ 0.9 +1.5 +1.9 –0.3 – 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 1.2 –0.0 – 1.2 ± 0.0 Dec.
+ 0.4 +0.4 +0.2 +0.2 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5 –0.5 – 1.2 ± 0.0 2022 Jan.
+ 1.5 +1.6 +0.5 +1.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.1 –0.1 – 0.5 ± 0.0 Feb.
+ 2.8 +0.1 +0.5 –0.5 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 2.7 – 0.1 +0.1 + 0.4 ± 0.0 Mar.
+ 1.6 +3.1 +1.9 +1.2 – 1.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.2 – 0.2 +0.1 – 0.1 ± 0.0 Apr.
+ 3.8 +0.1 +0.1 –0.0 + 3.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.8 – 0.2 +0.2 + 0.1 ± 0.0 May
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and
other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.  4 Excluding
subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of negotiable andnon-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Including subordinated
liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 3,656.9 0.1
2022 June 16,121.0 161.2 160.9 3,943.3 3,782.5 0.0
p July 16,174.7 161.7 161.4 ... ... ...
Aug. . . . . . .
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
2022 June 4,408,722 27.3 44,087 43,948 1,109,718 1,065,770 0
p July 4,437,392 27.4 44,374 44,236 ... ... ...
Aug. . . . . . . .
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2022 June 9,539 6,977 3,000 14,053 8,112 94 2,173
July . . . . . . .
Aug. . . . . . . .
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2022 June 3,191,196 14,042 534,721 559,709 109,056
July . . . . .
Aug. . . . . .
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 5 of the
Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum
reserve requirements (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies,
pursuant to Article 6(1)(a)).  3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2%between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at
1%. 4 Article 6(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the
application of minimum reserve requirements.  5 Average credit balances of credit
institutions at national central banks.  6 Average credit balances less required reserves
after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.  7 Required reserves after deduction of the
lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2005 Dec. 6 1.25 – 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr. 13 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 2002 Jan. 1 2.57 2009 Jan. 1 1.62
July 13 0.75 1.50 – 2.25 July 1 2.47 July 1 0.12
2006 Mar. 8 1.50 – 2.50 3.50 Nov. 9 0.50 1.25 – 2.00
June 15 1.75 – 2.75 3.75 Dec. 14 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2003 Jan. 1 1.97 2011 July 1 0.37
Aug. 9 2.00 – 3.00 4.00 July 1 1.22
Oct. 11 2.25 – 3.25 4.25 2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 2012 Jan. 1 0.12
Dec. 13 2.50 – 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan. 1 1.14
2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 July 1 1.13 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
2007 Mar. 14 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 July 1 – 0.38
June 13 3.00 – 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan. 1 1.21
2014 June 11 -0.10 0.15 – 0.40 July 1 1.17 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
2008 July 9 3.25 – 4.25 5.25 Sep. 10 -0.20 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 – 0.73
Oct. 8 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan. 1 1.37
Oct. 9 3.25 3.75 – 4.25 2015 Dec. 9 -0.30 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 1.95 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Nov. 12 2.75 3.25 – 3.75
Dec. 10 2.00 2.50 – 3.00 2016 Mar. 16 -0.40 0.00 – 0.25 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2016 July 1 – 0.88
July 1 3.19
2009 Jan. 21 1.00 2.00 – 3.00 2019 Sep. 18 -0.50 0.00 – 0.25
Mar. 11 0.50 1.50 – 2.50 2008 Jan. 1 3.32
Apr. 8 0.25 1.25 – 2.25 2022 Jul. 27 0.00 0.50 – 0.75 July 1 3.19
May 13 0.25 1.00 – 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2022 Jul.6 1 041 1 041 0,00 - - - 7
Jul.13 916 916 0,00 - - - 7
Jul.20 976 976 0,00 - - - 7
Jul.27 1077 1077 0,00 - - - 7
Aug. 3 864 864 0,00 - - - 7
Aug. 10 907 907 0,00 - - - 7
Aug. 17 823 823 0,00 - - - 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2022 Jun. 30 401 401 2      … - - - 91
Jul. 28 173 173 2      … - - - 91
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month *
% per annum
EURIBOR  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 EONIA  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2022 Jan. – 0.578 . – 0.58 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.53 – 0.48
Feb. – 0.577 . – 0.57 – 0.55 – 0.53 – 0.48 – 0.34
Mar. – 0.579 . – 0.57 – 0.54 – 0.50 – 0.42 – 0.24
Apr. – 0.584 . – 0.57 – 0.54 – 0.45 – 0.31 0.01
May – 0.585 . – 0.57 – 0.55 – 0.39 – 0.14 0.29
June – 0.582 . – 0.57 – 0.53 – 0.24 0.16 0.85
July – 0.511 . – 0.46 – 0.31 0.04 0.47 0.99
* Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor anyone
else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the EURIBOR.
1 Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank
operations; calculated by the European Central Bank from January 4th 1999 until
September 30th 2019 based on real turnover according to the act/360 method. SinceOctober 1st 2019 calculated as Euro Short-Term Rate (€STR) + 8.5 basis points spread.
2 Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters since 30
December 1998 according to the act/360 method. Administrator for EONIA and
EURIBOR: European Money Markets Institute (EMMI)

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 June 0.23 48,834 0.95 220,118 – 0.23 71,148 0.88 21,464
July 0.23 45,300 0.94 219,790 – 0.23 69,514 0.82 20,964
Aug. 0.22 44,901 0.93 219,708 – 0.26 68,741 0.81 21,058
Sep. 0.23 44,268 0.93 219,587 – 0.28 69,338 0.78 21,227
Oct. 0.23 43,497 0.92 219,456 – 0.29 75,404 0.77 22,443
Nov. 0.22 42,503 0.91 219,058 – 0.30 70,830 0.76 22,793
Dec. 0.18 41,979 0.91 220,289 – 0.37 75,038 0.74 22,966
2022 Jan. 0.18 41,157 0.90 220,225 – 0.31 72,404 0.73 23,078
Feb. 0.18 40,586 0.90 220,056 – 0.30 71,560 0.71 23,680
Mar. 0.17 40,201 0.89 219,655 – 0.28 68,341 0.74 24,011
Apr. 0.18 39,503 0.88 219,264 – 0.27 73,001 0.73 23,471
May 0.19 39,659 0.87 218,855 – 0.20 65,198 0.73 23,335
June 0.19 39,702 0.87 218,155 – 0.10 66,307 0.78 23,397
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 June 1.91 4,485 1.54 26,949 1.85 1,399,549 6.60 45,343 3.33 81,846 3.35 323,511
July 1.92 4,642 1.53 26,996 1.83 1,410,004 6.53 44,338 3.33 81,734 3.34 325,291
Aug. 1.94 4,581 1.52 27,041 1.82 1,418,884 6.60 44,785 3.33 81,447 3.32 325,890
Sep. 1.94 4,521 1.52 27,117 1.80 1,427,271 6.67 45,750 3.32 81,133 3.32 325,265
Oct. 1.97 4,623 1.52 27,324 1.79 1,436,840 6.59 44,700 3.32 80,768 3.30 326,197
Nov. 2.08 3,680 1.52 26,929 1.77 1,446,574 6.53 44,871 3.32 79,066 3.30 328,130
Dec. 2.02 3,547 1.52 26,755 1.75 1,454,553 6.60 44,914 3.32 78,679 3.28 327,421
2022 Jan. 2.02 3,690 1.52 26,583 1.74 1,457,059 6.69 44,473 3.32 78,019 3.27 328,346
Feb. 2.02 3,559 1.52 26,620 1.73 1,464,103 6.61 44,903 3.32 77,521 3.26 328,991
Mar. 2.10 3,620 1.53 26,670 1.71 1,473,852 6.59 46,226 3.33 77,518 3.25 328,996
Apr. 2.08 3,636 1.54 26,766 1.71 1,483,015 6.52 45,715 3.33 77,073 3.25 329,959
May 2.15 3,584 1.55 26,874 1.70 1,492,093 6.51 46,567 3.33 76,658 3.25 330,295
June 2.19 3,573 1.58 26,896 1.70 1,499,975 6.59 47,773 3.36 76,319 3.27 330,204
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 June 2.01 149,474 1.65 193,910 1.67 801,420
July 1.94 148,978 1.64 194,327 1.65 808,937
Aug. 1.94 148,766 1.63 196,065 1.64 811,706
Sep. 1.97 149,784 1.64 194,697 1.63 811,174
Oct. 1.92 158,326 1.63 197,964 1.62 813,714
Nov. 1.91 156,340 1.58 203,103 1.61 819,855
Dec. 1.82 161,611 1.56 202,457 1.59 822,730
2022 Jan. 1.81 166,574 1.57 202,813 1.58 824,650
Feb. 1.80 172,663 1.56 202,563 1.58 830,564
Mar. 1.90 179,074 1.58 204,001 1.57 832,210
Apr. 1.91 180,007 1.58 206,200 1.57 838,405
May 1.87 184,783 1.62 208,824 1.58 842,912
June 1.94 189,803 1.65 213,469 1.64 846,529
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 June – 0.01 1,788,689 – 0.04 2,957 0.23 310 0.28 566 0.09 536,727 0.16 25,503
July – 0.01 1,800,235 0.02 2,414 0.28 401 0.29 695 0.08 536,463 0.16 25,216
Aug. – 0.01 1,797,331 0.02 2,315 0.25 278 0.34 558 0.08 536,145 0.16 24,993
Sep. – 0.01 1,791,879 – 0.01 2,254 0.26 241 0.34 513 0.08 535,555 0.15 24,780
Oct. – 0.01 1,800,411 0.06 1,944 0.25 228 0.39 474 0.08 535,197 0.15 24,558
Nov. – 0.01 1,808,547 0.09 1,879 0.21 266 0.48 650 0.08 535,140 0.15 24,329
Dec. – 0.01 1,806,993 – 0.07 2,327 0.20 204 0.51 721 0.08 536,715 0.14 24,116
2022 Jan. – 0.01 1,806,352 0.11 2,132 0.22 363 0.36 642 0.08 537,038 0.14 23,363
Feb. – 0.02 1,819,881 0.06 2,167 0.25 226 0.33 564 0.07 537,327 0.13 23,136
Mar. – 0.02 1,808,690 0.12 2,044 0.28 258 0.38 824 0.07 535,696 0.13 22,897
Apr. – 0.02 1,826,796 0.14 1,974 0.39 292 0.46 694 0.07 534,800 0.13 22,686
May – 0.02 1,827,315 0.14 2,052 0.52 574 0.66 1,023 0.07 533,590 0.14 22,562
June – 0.02 1,831,760 0.17 2,490 0.71 357 0.80 891 0.08 531,946 0.14 22,408
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2021 June – 0.12 569,903 – 0.50 64,520 – 0.14 278 0.20 200
July – 0.12 581,879 – 0.48 57,334 – 0.22 322 0.09 168
Aug. – 0.13 589,698 – 0.50 47,074 – 0.17 174 0.07 699
Sep. – 0.12 590,408 – 0.50 48,685 x .x . 0.11 333
Oct. – 0.13 598,979 – 0.51 70,382 – 0.21 214 0.19 1,102
Nov. – 0.13 604,607 – 0.52 47,155 – 0.16 619 0.25 732
Dec. – 0.14 585,718 – 0.58 43,578 – 0.07 836 0.19 1,004
2022 Jan. – 0.14 596,648 – 0.50 38,323 – 0.18 311 0.28 1,033
Feb. – 0.14 594,874 – 0.48 30,745 0.03 234 0.63 1,123
Mar. – 0.15 607,552 – 0.50 42,187 0.09 417 1.09 1,069
Apr. – 0.15 600,726 – 0.49 42,722 0.37 633 1.12 182
May – 0.15 609,181 – 0.44 41,476 0.44 1,240 1.35 513
June – 0.15 600,607 – 0.36 43,089 0.91 687 2.27 742
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2021 June 5.52 5.40 8,979 6.25 1,741 7.20 359 4.23 3,090 5.94 5,530
July 5.55 5.47 9,279 6.30 1,924 7.15 386 4.26 3,014 5.98 5,880
Aug. 5.54 5.44 8,696 6.29 1,747 7.54 340 4.30 2,828 5.89 5,528
Sep. 5.54 5.46 8,474 6.28 1,669 7.59 323 4.29 2,783 5.94 5,368
Oct. 5.58 5.50 8,375 6.30 1,660 7.55 345 4.34 2,677 5.95 5,353
Nov. 5.46 5.43 8,076 6.17 1,524 7.24 408 4.34 2,691 5.88 4,976
Dec. 5.35 5.36 6,927 6.04 1,221 6.75 465 4.31 2,445 5.84 4,017
2022 Jan. 5.53 5.54 8,604 6.19 1,862 7.29 383 4.29 2,643 6.01 5,578
Feb. 5.41 5.45 8,372 6.14 1,641 7.31 378 4.28 2,652 5.90 5,343
Mar. 5.34 5.38 10,208 6.24 1,935 7.28 397 4.08 3,481 5.97 6,330
Apr. 5.70 5.64 8,523 6.35 1,682 7.93 316 4.46 2,654 6.08 5,553
May 5.81 5.77 9,788 6.51 1,924 8.04 332 4.56 3,067 6.24 6,390
June 5.99 5.95 9,510 6.78 1,927 8.50 306 4.66 3,053 6.46 6,150
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2021 June 1.63 5,170 1.53 1,119 1.55 2,198 2.26 702 1.51 2,270
July 1.68 4,950 1.50 1,428 1.71 1,920 2.09 732 1.52 2,298
Aug. 1.74 4,101 1.60 806 1.88 1,594 2.17 612 1.48 1,895
Sep. 1.65 4,401 1.46 951 1.72 1,950 1.99 626 1.47 1,825
Oct. 1.69 4,327 1.54 1,068 1.79 1,792 2.23 631 1.42 1,904
Nov. 1.68 4,433 1.39 847 1.65 1,759 2.42 704 1.44 1,970
Dec. 1.64 5,757 1.48 1,144 1.58 2,326 2.45 860 1.44 2,571
2022 Jan. 1.62 4,552 1.48 1,288 1.54 1,914 2.32 622 1.49 2,016
Feb. 1.76 4,173 1.60 859 1.69 1,560 2.55 514 1.62 2,099
Mar. 1.87 5,992 1.61 1,247 1.70 2,149 2.43 724 1.85 3,119
Apr. 2.03 4,980 1.70 1,170 1.82 1,829 2.33 760 2.10 2,391
May 2.32 4,277 2.03 913 1.84 1,387 2.89 628 2.46 2,262
June 2.39 5,033 1.96 1,195 1.81 1,990 3.04 717 2.68 2,326
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2021 June 1.70 3,581 . . 1.64 1,516 2.38 508 1.52 1,557
July 1.71 3,514 . . 1.75 1,339 2.10 587 1.53 1,588
Aug. 1.89 2,666 . . 2.05 1,045 2.35 441 1.57 1,180
Sep. 1.72 2,879 . . 1.76 1,259 2.21 444 1.49 1,176
Oct. 1.75 2,884 . . 1.84 1,193 2.17 514 1.46 1,177
Nov. 1.83 2,674 . . 1.83 1,076 2.47 461 1.56 1,137
Dec. 1.73 3,787 . . 1.76 1,495 2.48 564 1.47 1,728
2022 Jan. 1.71 2,950 . . 1.64 1,227 2.38 455 1.54 1,268
Feb. 1.88 2,728 . . 1.92 970 2.68 380 1.64 1,378
Mar. 1.96 3,879 . . 1.84 1,414 2.58 512 1.88 1,953
Apr. 2.13 3,210 . . 1.92 1,079 2.42 577 2.16 1,554
May 2.40 2,886 . . 2.00 928 2.95 493 2.48 1,465
June 2.50 3,459 . . 2.06 1,239 3.13 538 2.62 1,682
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2021 June 1.34 1.29 25,161 1.34 3,327 1.74 2,374 1.33 1,775 1.12 9,196 1.33 11,815
July 1.36 1.31 25,121 1.36 3,808 1.76 2,686 1.32 1,649 1.14 9,216 1.34 11,570
Aug. 1.31 1.27 22,735 1.32 3,095 1.78 2,324 1.37 1,514 1.10 7,975 1.28 10,922
Sep. 1.31 1.26 22,232 1.33 2,986 1.80 2,204 1.33 1,451 1.09 7,631 1.27 10,946
Oct. 1.32 1.28 22,630 1.29 3,683 1.79 2,353 1.33 1,613 1.10 8,013 1.29 10,650
Nov. 1.36 1.32 22,516 1.31 3,079 1.83 2,022 1.43 1,564 1.15 8,171 1.33 10,759
Dec. 1.37 1.32 23,851 1.27 3,446 1.80 2,383 1.39 1,661 1.16 8,614 1.34 11,194
2022 Jan. 1.39 1.35 25,085 1.33 4,969 1.83 2,527 1.35 1,706 1.19 8,661 1.37 12,191
Feb. 1.49 1.45 26,299 1.43 4,706 1.86 2,270 1.45 1,606 1.29 9,322 1.48 13,100
Mar. 1.69 1.65 32,270 1.63 6,216 1.93 2,704 1.65 1,987 1.50 11,809 1.71 15,770
Apr. 1.98 1.94 25,813 1.90 4,946 2.01 2,323 1.88 1,703 1.81 10,024 2.04 11,763
May 2.29 2.25 27,272 2.20 4,758 2.10 2,491 2.10 1,834 2.12 10,907 2.42 12,041
June 2.62 2.57 22,990 2.46 3,897 2.19 2,461 2.45 1,663 2.46 8,659 2.77 10,208
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2021 June . 1.23 10,630 . . 1.69 836 1.14 793 1.06 4,071 1.29 4,930
July . 1.25 10,467 . . 1.66 934 1.15 749 1.08 3,906 1.33 4,878
Aug. . 1.21 9,407 . . 1.67 821 1.21 665 1.03 3,442 1.25 4,479
Sep. . 1.20 9,471 . . 1.67 802 1.13 664 1.03 3,299 1.24 4,706
Oct. . 1.20 9,766 . . 1.70 874 1.16 746 1.02 3,569 1.25 4,577
Nov. . 1.23 9,668 . . 1.72 708 1.22 685 1.08 3,670 1.29 4,605
Dec. . 1.25 10,265 . . 1.70 783 1.22 727 1.09 3,784 1.31 4,971
2022 Jan. . 1.28 11,005 . . 1.75 942 1.18 861 1.13 4,087 1.33 5,115
Feb. . 1.37 11,593 . . 1.74 749 1.28 826 1.24 4,366 1.43 5,652
Mar. . 1.57 14,566 . . 1.80 936 1.54 974 1.46 5,637 1.64 7,019
Apr. . 1.86 11,672 . . 1.88 804 1.71 831 1.77 4,658 1.96 5,379
May . 2.20 12,086 . . 1.96 839 2.08 856 2.11 5,030 2.34 5,361
June . 2.49 10,285 . . 2.08 865 2.37 774 2.41 4,073 2.67 4,573
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 June 7.23 35,815 7.05 28,056 15.55 3,938 2.86 72,488 2.87 72,184
July 7.11 35,046 6.90 27,102 15.54 3,987 2.75 73,098 2.76 72,788
Aug. 7.12 35,662 6.99 27,343 15.58 4,039 2.79 72,942 2.80 72,622
Sep. 7.19 36,720 7.06 28,404 15.53 4,098 2.79 74,750 2.81 74,389
Oct. 7.10 35,633 6.94 27,535 15.02 4,109 2.81 75,550 2.83 75,182
Nov. 7.01 36,013 6.90 27,565 15.01 4,153 2.77 76,312 2.79 75,909
Dec. 7.11 36,163 6.93 28,124 14.94 4,165 2.73 76,261 2.75 75,914
2022 Jan. 7.20 36,030 6.97 28,433 14.97 4,110 2.61 81,598 2.62 81,290
Feb. 7.08 36,335 6.95 28,225 14.96 4,103 2.62 85,173 2.63 84,843
Mar. 7.14 37,360 7.02 29,314 14.94 4,076 2.71 87,104 2.72 86,709
Apr. 7.00 36,819 6.91 28,444 14.96 4,100 2.65 88,202 2.66 87,834
May 6.96 37,636 6.98 28,730 14.89 4,143 2.63 89,402 2.65 88,972
June 7.01 38,871 7.02 30,006 14.84 4,191 2.66 93,227 2.67 92,796
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2021 June 1.28 83,129 1.29 27,883 1.93 9,481 2.37 1,409 1.54 1,734 1.19 52,578 0.78 6,948 1.28 10,979
July 1.35 70,171 1.42 20,858 1.84 9,608 2.26 1,403 1.52 1,753 1.30 41,858 1.29 3,934 1.00 11,615
Aug. 1.33 54,047 1.58 14,739 1.79 7,827 2.31 1,094 1.44 1,308 1.25 33,740 1.14 3,001 1.08 7,077
Sep. 1.36 69,341 1.33 23,411 1.83 9,309 2.39 1,198 1.48 1,245 1.28 45,311 1.44 4,339 1.06 7,939
Oct. 1.21 71,404 1.32 20,386 1.76 9,149 2.38 1,247 1.50 1,242 1.08 48,160 1.43 2,573 1.07 9,033
Nov. 1.18 75,363 1.34 18,828 1.85 9,681 2.35 1,402 1.44 1,474 1.03 48,548 0.95 4,444 1.16 9,814
Dec. 1.20 105,525 1.32 29,572 1.94 10,348 2.28 1,529 1.45 1,817 1.05 71,028 1.40 5,515 1.18 15,288
2022 Jan. 1.29 64,813 1.26 21,030 1.80 8,812 2.39 1,280 1.53 1,443 1.14 44,620 1.49 1,821 1.27 6,837
Feb. 1.32 66,898 1.22 18,910 1.78 9,056 2.55 1,205 1.63 1,445 1.13 42,295 1.71 3,088 1.42 9,809
Mar. 1.50 99,725 1.39 29,044 1.78 10,692 2.54 1,571 1.83 1,981 1.38 68,399 1.77 5,314 1.65 11,768
Apr. 1.53 74,483 1.51 19,771 1.82 9,033 2.63 1,388 2.19 1,883 1.31 47,761 1.79 3,673 1.91 10,745
May 1.49 78,588 1.73 18,948 1.82 9,416 2.82 1,358 2.31 1,703 1.17 53,228 2.65 3,419 2.16 9,464
June 2.19 123,647 1.58 28,803 1.88 10,561 2.97 1,465 2.59 1,483 2.16 94,435 2.35 4,558 2.43 11,145
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2021 June 1.36 13,761 . . 1.79 410 1.84 109 1.20 444 1.35 8,365 1.38 1,110 1.35 3,323
July 1.41 10,857 . . 1.68 445 1.57 117 1.24 404 1.56 6,539 1.30 933 1.02 2,419
Aug. 1.45 7,709 . . 1.81 328 1.76 85 1.18 308 1.55 4,191 1.69 819 1.09 1,978
Sep. 1.35 11,637 . . 1.71 405 2.14 61 1.17 284 1.35 7,760 1.92 827 1.06 2,300
Oct. 1.29 10,023 . . 1.72 371 1.87 78 1.24 298 1.46 5,810 1.90 660 0.73 2,806
Nov. 1.34 8,064 . . 1.76 359 1.60 96 1.19 382 1.43 4,537 1.36 704 1.08 1,986
Dec. 1.27 18,534 . . 1.69 438 1.93 113 1.23 430 1.20 11,302 1.73 1,948 1.18 4,303
2022 Jan. 1.25 10,159 . . 1.66 371 1.54 102 1.35 406 1.19 7,044 1.20 386 1.37 1,850
Feb. 1.60 9,498 . . 1.66 296 1.98 87 1.37 318 1.63 4,798 1.85 1,166 1.46 2,833
Mar. 1.40 14,380 . . 1.71 503 2.07 120 1.63 444 1.15 9,349 2.56 1,117 1.63 2,847
Apr. 1.72 9,355 . . 1.92 325 2.15 113 1.93 481 1.53 5,242 1.68 817 2.07 2,377
May 2.02 9,121 . . 1.95 385 2.43 114 2.20 461 1.81 5,246 3.02 726 2.14 2,189
June 1.90 13,721 . . 1.89 490 2.69 127 2.43 458 1.49 8,720 2.72 1,076 2.72 2,850
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 4
2019 Q3 2,492.5 333.0 468.5 357.2 398.2 768.3 4.6 58.8 38.0 66.0
Q4 2,473.9 317.5 448.2 355.6 407.3 778.3 3.6 64.9 39.8 58.8
2020 Q1 2,426.8 318.2 452.0 364.1 383.1 738.2 4.5 68.5 38.6 59.6
Q2 2,517.5 317.0 460.5 371.9 409.4 788.7 4.3 68.5 38.7 58.5
Q3 2,547.1 311.1 472.9 373.8 411.3 809.5 4.4 67.1 39.0 58.0
Q4 2,587.4 301.7 478.9 370.6 425.4 841.0 4.7 68.1 38.2 58.7
2021 Q1 2,575.3 292.4 466.8 361.7 437.8 844.7 3.9 72.0 38.9 57.2
Q2 2,591.4 280.5 466.5 361.3 449.6 864.5 3.4 72.6 39.0 54.1
Q3 2,633.2 271.8 471.3 358.3 464.4 882.1 3.3 87.9 38.4 55.8
Q4 2,649.9 261.4 468.7 355.1 472.9 903.3 3.2 85.1 40.8 59.4
2022 Q1 2,543.0 245.0 441.0 333.9 471.4 860.4 2.7 87.9 41.1 59.6
    Life insurance
2019 Q3 1,350.1 205.3 242.5 225.2 57.9 563.6 3.1 10.4 20.9 21.0
Q4 1,325.2 194.8 227.6 217.6 61.1 570.4 2.4 13.7 21.1 16.5
2020 Q1 1,295.7 191.4 231.0 220.6 62.0 538.1 2.2 13.9 20.3 16.3
Q2 1,347.1 192.3 234.4 223.6 64.4 577.0 2.8 13.7 20.3 18.5
Q3 1,369.2 188.4 241.6 225.7 66.1 592.6 3.0 13.6 20.6 17.6
Q4 1,395.8 183.5 242.7 229.9 70.2 616.5 3.3 14.3 20.8 14.5
2021 Q1 1,361.2 170.4 231.5 219.6 74.3 614.3 2.1 14.2 21.5 13.2
Q2 1,371.7 164.4 231.3 219.4 78.0 627.2 2.0 14.1 21.5 13.8
Q3 1,386.6 159.1 232.2 214.8 87.7 642.8 1.9 13.4 20.8 13.8
Q4 1,400.8 152.4 232.7 211.8 93.5 658.0 1.7 14.6 21.9 14.3
2022 Q1 1,313.0 137.6 211.8 193.6 99.9 619.5 0.9 13.9 22.1 13.8
    Non-life insurance
2019 Q3 682.6 116.9 135.3 79.9 80.6 189.4 0.4 38.8 11.3 30.0
Q4 673.5 111.2 130.4 79.6 83.6 193.3 0.4 36.2 12.2 26.7
2020 Q1 669.3 111.1 131.3 79.8 80.0 186.9 0.3 38.7 12.0 29.3
Q2 685.4 111.8 134.4 82.4 81.1 197.0 0.4 39.5 12.1 26.7
Q3 693.0 109.3 137.6 83.3 82.7 203.1 0.4 38.5 12.1 26.3
Q4 703.1 105.9 139.5 84.5 85.1 210.2 0.5 37.6 12.7 27.3
2021 Q1 716.8 108.1 139.5 83.6 88.7 215.1 0.4 40.0 12.8 28.6
Q2 720.3 103.3 140.4 83.5 90.6 221.6 0.4 40.4 12.8 27.3
Q3 727.5 98.8 140.2 83.8 93.9 223.3 0.4 46.6 12.9 27.8
Q4 732.4 94.7 139.9 84.8 97.8 227.8 0.3 44.7 14.0 28.4
2022 Q1 721.8 91.9 134.1 81.0 98.9 224.7 0.2 46.1 14.0 30.8
    Reinsurance 5
2019 Q3 459.9 10.8 90.7 52.1 259.6 15.3 1.0 9.6 5.9 15.0
Q4 475.2 11.5 90.2 58.3 262.6 14.5 0.8 15.1 6.6 15.6
2020 Q1 461.7 15.7 89.8 63.7 241.0 13.3 1.9 15.9 6.3 14.1
Q2 485.0 12.9 91.7 65.9 264.0 14.6 1.1 15.2 6.3 13.3
Q3 485.0 13.5 93.7 64.9 262.6 13.7 1.0 15.0 6.3 14.2
Q4 488.5 12.3 96.7 56.3 270.2 14.3 1.0 16.3 4.7 16.9
2021 Q1 497.3 13.9 95.8 58.5 274.7 15.4 1.4 17.7 4.7 15.3
Q2 499.4 12.8 94.8 58.4 280.9 15.6 1.0 18.1 4.6 13.1
Q3 519.0 13.9 98.9 59.6 282.7 16.1 1.0 28.0 4.7 14.2
Q4 516.7 14.3 96.1 58.6 281.6 17.5 1.1 25.9 4.9 16.6
2022 Q1 508.2 15.5 95.1 59.3 272.6 16.3 1.6 27.9 5.0 15.0
Pension funds 6
2019 Q3 726.5 85.6 80.7 31.0 36.5 415.5 – 8.6 46.7 22.0
Q4 735.8 85.2 79.6 31.1 38.7 421.1 – 8.8 48.9 22.3
7 2020 Q1 601.0 92.2 56.8 48.9 9.4 362.0 0.1 11.3 17.6 2.7
Q2 626.0 91.8 58.8 49.8 9.8 383.4 0.1 11.3 18.3 2.8
Q3 638.5 91.1 59.6 50.2 10.1 394.7 0.2 11.6 18.5 2.5
Q4 662.9 88.9 60.6 49.5 10.3 419.5 0.2 11.9 18.8 3.1
2021 Q1 664.3 86.2 58.7 48.6 10.8 427.9 0.2 12.1 17.6 2.3
Q2 683.2 85.0 60.2 49.3 11.3 445.1 0.1 12.1 17.8 2.3
Q3 689.8 82.9 60.4 48.8 11.8 453.6 0.1 12.2 17.8 2.2
Q4 709.8 82.1 60.0 48.7 11.3 473.5 0.1 12.4 18.4 3.2
2022 Q1 687.6 76.4 56.9 46.3 12.1 462.5 0.0 12.9 18.4 2.1
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections as of 2020 Q1. Until 2019 Q4 these are compiled using Solvency I
supervisory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  1 Accounts
receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered bonds, borrowers'
note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. For pension funds as of 2020 Q1 fair values,
previously book values.  2 Including deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as
registered bonds, borrowers' note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. For pension fundsas of 2020 Q1 fair values, previously book values.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables
and claims of pension funds on pension managers.  4 Valuation of listed securities at the
corresponding consistent price from the ESCB's securities database.  5 Not including the
reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  6 The term
"pension funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European
System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and
occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not
included.  7 Change in data sources.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  4
Insurance corporations
2019 Q3 2,492.5 31.7 69.3 488.5 1,769.4 1,543.0 226.4 2.2 131.5 –
Q4 2,473.9 31.7 75.8 515.3 1,714.9 1,499.6 215.3 1.9 134.4 –
2020 Q1 2,426.8 31.8 82.4 464.3 1,721.8 1,483.2 238.6 2.4 124.1 –
Q2 2,517.5 33.1 82.2 505.3 1,767.6 1,527.7 239.9 1.9 127.3 –
Q3 2,547.1 34.3 80.0 515.7 1,785.5 1,549.1 236.4 1.7 129.9 –
Q4 2,587.4 36.6 79.7 540.4 1,799.0 1,579.2 219.8 1.6 130.2 –
2021 Q1 2,575.3 34.8 81.4 551.7 1,778.7 1,541.3 237.4 2.5 126.2 –
Q2 2,591.4 33.0 81.3 558.9 1,793.7 1,556.4 237.3 2.2 122.2 –
Q3 2,633.2 35.4 82.8 567.3 1,818.0 1,569.1 248.9 2.5 127.0 –
Q4 2,649.9 36.1 82.0 579.7 1,821.1 1,578.4 242.7 2.5 128.6 –
2022 Q1 2,543.0 34.4 82.2 565.5 1,728.6 1,474.6 254.0 4.0 128.3 –
    Life insurance
2019 Q3 1,350.1 3.7 15.6 116.0 1,171.9 1,171.9 – 0.6 42.4 –
Q4 1,325.2 3.6 19.1 127.6 1,129.7 1,129.7 – 0.5 44.7 –
2020 Q1 1,295.7 3.6 19.3 114.2 1,117.8 1,117.8 – 0.6 40.3 –
Q2 1,347.1 3.8 19.2 129.8 1,150.3 1,150.3 – 0.5 43.4 –
Q3 1,369.2 3.9 19.5 136.8 1,164.7 1,164.7 – 0.5 43.7 –
Q4 1,395.8 3.9 20.7 142.8 1,185.6 1,185.6 – 0.5 42.2 –
2021 Q1 1,361.2 3.3 19.9 143.1 1,154.3 1,154.3 – 1.0 39.6 –
Q2 1,371.7 3.3 20.4 144.2 1,164.9 1,164.9 – 1.0 37.9 –
Q3 1,386.6 3.3 19.3 148.1 1,176.4 1,176.4 – 1.1 38.4 –
Q4 1,400.8 3.3 20.7 148.2 1,185.5 1,185.5 – 0.9 42.2 –
2022 Q1 1,313.0 3.2 19.9 142.8 1,103.6 1,103.6 – 1.4 42.1 –
    Non-life insurance
2019 Q3 682.6 1.2 9.1 149.7 471.9 354.8 117.1 0.1 50.6 –
Q4 673.5 1.2 9.3 153.7 457.2 349.4 107.8 0.1 52.0 –
2020 Q1 669.3 1.3 9.8 141.9 468.2 344.4 123.8 0.1 48.0 –
Q2 685.4 1.3 9.5 149.3 478.1 355.6 122.5 0.1 47.1 –
Q3 693.0 1.2 9.6 151.9 482.1 362.3 119.8 0.1 48.1 –
Q4 703.1 1.3 9.7 157.9 482.9 368.7 114.2 0.0 51.2 –
2021 Q1 716.8 1.2 10.6 162.8 491.6 362.6 129.0 0.1 50.5 –
Q2 720.3 1.2 10.5 166.4 493.6 366.3 127.3 0.1 48.4 –
Q3 727.5 1.2 10.5 169.2 499.0 367.9 131.2 0.2 47.5 –
Q4 732.4 1.4 10.8 176.2 493.0 367.6 125.4 0.2 50.9 –
2022 Q1 721.8 1.3 11.8 174.3 484.0 347.2 136.8 0.3 50.1 –
    Reinsurance 5
2019 Q3 459.9 26.8 44.7 222.8 125.6 16.3 109.3 1.5 38.5 –
Q4 475.2 26.9 47.4 234.0 128.0 20.6 107.5 1.3 37.7 –
2020 Q1 461.7 26.9 53.3 208.1 135.9 21.0 114.9 1.7 35.8 –
Q2 485.0 28.1 53.5 226.2 139.1 21.8 117.4 1.3 36.8 –
Q3 485.0 29.2 50.9 227.0 138.7 22.1 116.6 1.0 38.1 –
Q4 488.5 31.4 49.3 239.6 130.4 24.8 105.6 1.0 36.7 –
2021 Q1 497.3 30.2 50.9 245.8 132.8 24.4 108.4 1.4 36.2 –
Q2 499.4 28.5 50.4 248.3 135.2 25.2 110.0 1.1 35.9 –
Q3 519.0 30.9 53.0 250.1 142.7 24.9 117.8 1.3 41.1 –
Q4 516.7 31.4 50.5 255.3 142.6 25.3 117.3 1.4 35.5 –
2022 Q1 508.2 30.0 50.4 248.4 140.9 23.8 117.2 2.3 36.1 –
Pension funds 6
2019 Q3 726.5 – 8.2 8.4 628.2 628.2 – – 2.9 78.9
Q4 735.8 – 8.4 8.6 638.0 638.0 – – 3.7 77.1
7 2020 Q1 601.0 – 1.6 22.6 497.5 496.9 – 0.3 8.8 70.3
Q2 626.0 – 1.6 25.6 507.3 506.7 – 0.3 8.9 82.4
Q3 638.5 – 1.6 27.3 511.4 510.8 – 0.3 8.9 88.9
Q4 662.9 – 1.6 28.4 528.5 527.9 – 0.3 9.0 95.1
2021 Q1 664.3 – 1.6 28.8 529.3 528.1 – 0.3 8.6 95.8
Q2 683.2 – 1.8 31.1 536.5 534.8 – 0.2 9.3 104.3
Q3 689.8 – 1.8 31.5 541.1 538.9 – 0.2 9.3 106.0
Q4 709.8 – 1.9 31.8 560.5 557.6 – 0.1 9.2 106.4
2022 Q1 687.6 – 1.4 28.7 555.1 552.2 – 0.1 7.3 95.0
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections as of 2020 Q1. Until 2019 Q4 these are compiled using Solvency I
supervisory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  1 Including
deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers' note loans
and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension funds on pension managers
and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical reserves "life" taking account oftransitional measures. Health insurance is also included in the "non-life insurance"
sector.  4 Own funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth" and "Shares and other
equity".  5 Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which
is included there.  6 Valuation at book values. The term "pension funds" refers to the
institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds
thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the
self-employed. Social security funds are not included.  7 Change in data sources.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2010 146,620 – 1,212 – 7,621 24,044 –17,635 147,831 92,682 –103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 –46,796 850 59,521 20,075 – 23,876 – 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 64,775 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,408 – 12,124 – 11,951 74,483 14,366
2015 33,024 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 69,034 116,493 – 66,330 121,164 61,659 – 83,471
2016 71,380 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 43,951 164,148 – 58,012 187,500 34,660 – 92,768
2017 54,840 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 43,277 137,907 – 71,454 161,012 48,349 – 83,067
2018 64,682 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 48,052 93,103 – 24,417 67,328 50,192 – 28,421
2019 136,117 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 67,581 59,013 8,059 2,408 48,546 77,104
2020 437,976 374,034 14,462 88,703 270,870 63,941 274,979 18,955 226,887 29,138 162,996
2021 283,684 221,648 31,941 19,754 169,953 62,036 310,838 – 41,852 245,198 107,492 – 27,154
2021 July 13,168 3,091 – 9,235 3,715 8,611 10,077 30,955 – 5,500 25,087 11,368 – 17,787
Aug. 27,503 34,709 6,868 1,227 26,615 – 7,206 11,907 – 5,337 17,312 – 68 15,596
Sep. 27,619 17,160 12,855 8,183 – 3,878 10,460 32,908 6,387 17,663 8,858 – 5,289
Oct. 103 3,176 7,354 – 7,515 3,337 – 3,073 9,377 – 17,904 20,765 6,517 – 9,275
Nov. 39,728 31,488 6,574 8,351 16,563 8,241 34,851 – 529 23,375 12,005 4,877
Dec. – 39,780 –23,893 –17,511 – 8,944 2,561 – 15,886 – 1,271 – 9,420 14,137 – 5,988 – 38,509
2022 Jan. 50,489 25,937 10,503 6,559 8,876 24,552 41,057 – 2,870 14,990 28,936 9,432
Feb. 32,161 27,538 10,579 3,056 13,902 4,624 25,309 8,057 14,793 2,459 6,852
Mar. 62,464 43,108 22,778 7,972 12,358 19,356 46,054 6,811 10,709 28,535 16,409
Apr. – 17,449 – 2,238 – 3,167 707 222 – 15,211 – 2,311 – 16,927 13,068 1,548 – 15,138
May 23,669 23,911 4,066 4,901 14,944 – 242 25,954 5,485 14,400 6,069 – 2,285
June 23,261 12,721 5,507 – 1,563 8,777 10,540 17,150 8,471 – 2,289 10,967 6,111
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2010 37,767 20,049 17,718 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,360
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 – 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 – 449
2015 44,165 7,668 36,497 34,437 – 5,421 39,858 9,728
2016 30,896 4,409 26,487 31,037 – 5,143 36,180 – 141
2017 51,571 15,570 36,001 49,913 7,031 42,882 1,658
2018 54,883 16,188 38,695 83,107 – 11,184 94,291 – 28,224
2019 46,021 9,076 36,945 33,675 – 1,119 34,794 12,346
2020 83,859 17,771 66,088 115,960 27 115,933 – 32,101
2021 125,541 49,066 76,475 124,105 10,869 113,236 1,436
2021 July 6,139 825 5,314 3,849 – 74 3,923 2,290
Aug. 11,293 4,667 6,626 11,585 204 11,381 – 291
Sep. 13,516 4,660 8,855 15,099 3,374 11,725 – 1,583
Oct. 10,042 5,498 4,544 15,060 1,401 13,659 – 5,018
Nov. 6,393 2,367 4,026 15,628 2,698 12,930 – 9,235
Dec. 13,692 10,698 2,995 6,987 – 1,848 8,835 6,705
2022 Jan. 6,155 396 5,760 9,711 2,076 7,635 – 3,556
Feb. – 5,455 628 – 6,084 – 4,539 – 1,599 – 2,940 – 916
Mar. 9,478 359 9,119 14,188 – 1,736 15,924 – 4,710
Apr. 6,207 150 6,056 9,419 477 8,942 – 3,212
May 3,197 1,411 1,786 3,880 1,600 2,280 – 684
June – 834 894 – 1,727 610 – 3,308 3,918 – 1,444
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,614 592,375
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,870,084 778,411 39,548 18,327 643,380 77,156 184,206 907,466
2021 1,658,004 795,271 41,866 17,293 648,996 87,116 139,775 722,958
2021 Oct. 135,102 61,412 4,207 530 48,932 7,744 8,280 65,411
Nov. 129,342 59,684 2,153 1,000 47,873 8,658 10,898 58,759
Dec. 83,511 37,389 2,675 1,707 28,987 4,020 5,058 41,064
2022 Jan. 136,066 69,054 11,165 1,510 50,426 5,953 13,257 53,754
Feb. 123,858 67,336 5,174 1,364 54,198 6,600 9,451 47,071
Mar. 168,436 85,551 5,602 875 72,212 6,862 16,473 66,412
Apr. 129,238 68,828 3,091 140 59,957 5,640 8,317 52,093
May 139,081 71,010 3,777 1,809 60,594 4,830 15,238 52,833
June 141,110 74,367 5,929 770 62,377 5,291 12,335 54,408
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 658,521 165,097 28,500 7,427 90,839 38,330 77,439 415,985
2021 486,335 171,799 30,767 6,336 97,816 36,880 64,234 250,303
2021 Oct. 44,782 17,278 3,528 30 11,600 2,121 2,151 25,353
Nov. 29,324 9,512 1,705 500 4,165 3,142 5,667 14,145
Dec. 15,792 4,714 1,625 1,150 1,258 680 1,259 9,820
2022 Jan. 50,605 25,823 9,165 1,510 12,587 2,561 3,583 21,200
Feb. 41,368 22,391 3,487 1,364 14,364 3,175 2,101 16,876
Mar. 44,448 17,785 3,236 300 11,718 2,532 6,408 20,255
Apr. 28,734 13,879 1,926 50 10,089 1,814 1,050 13,805
May 33,822 12,448 3,173 1,264 6,238 1,774 4,423 16,950
June 37,850 7,522 2,681 500 2,342 1,999 4,128 26,200
Net sales 5
2011 22,518 – 54,582 1,657 – 44,290 32,904 – 44,852 – 3,189 80,289
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 473,795 28,147 8,661 8,816 22,067 – 11,398 49,536 396,113
2021 210,231 52,578 17,821 7,471 22,973 4,314 35,531 122,123
2021 Oct. 9,819 7,037 2,418 – 536 3,831 1,325 513 2,269
Nov. 35,511 6,760 – 2,052 221 6,788 1,803 5,562 23,189
Dec. – 27,509 – 13,602 1,753 – 179 – 11,559 – 3,618 – 6,028 – 7,878
2022 Jan. 10,739 12,647 6,459 – 397 5,370 1,214 5,409 – 7,317
Feb. 18,055 10,554 2,870 869 7,435 – 619 924 6,577
Mar. 41,894 23,733 2,097 250 20,258 1,128 7,541 10,620
Apr. – 16,610 – 4,444 720 – 310 – 4,339 – 515 – 1,343 – 10,823
May 24,352 3,706 685 1,774 1,967 – 721 3,607 17,039
June 8,834 3,365 1,839 150 1,840 – 464 – 411 5,880
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,545,200 2 1,174,817 183,980 55,959 687,710 2 247,169 2 379,342 1,991,040
2021 3,781,975 1,250,777 202,385 63,496 731,068 253,828 414,791 2,116,406
2021 Oct. 3,761,389 1,250,677 202,470 63,409 730,167 254,631 413,813 2,096,898
Nov. 3,805,409 1,262,369 200,532 63,672 741,009 257,157 420,551 2,122,489
Dec. 3,781,975 1,250,777 202,385 63,496 731,068 253,828 414,791 2,116,406
2022 Jan. 3,793,633 1,267,273 208,867 63,110 739,737 255,559 420,487 2,105,873
Feb. 3,805,493 1,277,071 211,728 63,984 746,531 254,828 416,380 2,112,042
Mar. 3,851,703 1,302,963 213,413 64,234 769,133 256,182 424,584 2,124,156
Apr. 3,852,737 1,311,841 214,466 63,960 776,662 256,752 424,036 2,116,860
May 3,870,199 1,309,630 214,981 65,720 773,798 255,131 427,139 2,133,430
June 3,888,872 1,319,868 216,994 65,910 781,469 255,496 427,384 2,141,620
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-May 2022
bis unter 2   1 237 429   467 562   57 903   27 728   311 983   69 947   76 957   692 910 
 2 bis unter 4    717 304   319 682   56 800   15 436   189 628   57 818   84 189   313 433 
 4 bis unter 6    561 612   218 319   44 809   10 021   112 114   51 375   62 466   280 827 
6 bis unter 8    386 108   124 238   33 969   5 956   62 626   21 687   44 085   217 785 
 8 bis unter 10    296 953   85 286   10 735   2 265   49 955   22 329   26 917   184 751 
 10 bis unter 15    239 955   59 615   7 686   4 056   37 145   10 728   37 556   142 784 
 15 bis unter 20    102 644   15 337   4 135    359   8 717   2 126   13 737   73 570 
 20 und darüber    346 866   29 830    956    88   9 300   19 485   81 477   235 559 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 – 552 – 762 – 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,673 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,775 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,872 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,635 1,963,588
2021 186,580 4,152 9,561 672 35 – 326 – 212 – 5,578 2,301,942
2021 Oct. 188,444 2,127 2,166 16 –– 4 – 35 – 16 2,267,343
Nov. 188,352 – 109 85 – 6 – 5 – 1 – 194 2,198,231
Dec. 186,580 – 2,595 524 16 –– 201 – 106 – 2,827 2,301,942
2022 Jan. 186,830 250 341 0 2 – 9 – 23 – 61 2,211,900
Feb. 186,737 – 110 64 9 40 – 11 – 76 – 137 2,060,901
Mar. 186,993 256 260 91 –– 0 – 25 – 70 2,076,514
Apr. 186,971 25 47 1 –– 0 – 4 – 19 2,007,353
May 187,056 84 215 42 0 – 0 – 0 – 172 2,004,018
June 187,396 340 138 29 328 –– 108 – 47 1,744,789
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields and indices on German securities
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  4 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-
MFIs)German
bond
index
(REX)iBoxx
€ Germany 
price indexCDAX
share price
indexGerman
share
index
(DAX)
Period % per annumAverage
daily rateEnd-1998
= 100End-1987
= 100End-1987
= 1,000
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 2.9 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2019 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2020 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7 146.15 113.14 586.72 13,718.78
2021 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9 144.23 108.88 654.20 15,884.86
2022 Feb. 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.6 0.8 1.7 141.55 105.86 593.56 14,461.02
Mar. 0.6 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.8 1.0 2.1 138.06 102.90 583.63 14,414.75
Apr. 1.1 0.8 0.7 0.7 1.4 1.5 2.5 135.85 99.80 564.54 14,097.88
May 1.3 1.0 0.9 1.0 1.6 1.7 3.0 135.30 97.98 561.04 14,388.35
June 1.9 1.5 1.4 1.4 2.1 2.3 3.8 133.21 96.13 494.98 12,783.77
July 1.5 1.2 1.0 1.1 1.9 2.0 3.7 137.14 100.13 519.98 13,484.05
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 End of year or month.  3 Source: Deutsche Börse
AG. 4 Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for futures contracts;
calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 – 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 –1,340 – 379 –2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 –7,576 – 694 47,050 1,984 7,035
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,521 144,075 819 –1,745 143,256 44,266 –3,840
2015 181,889 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,753 174,018 7,362 494 166,656 35,259 7,871
2016 156,985 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 37,615 163,934 2,877 –3,172 161,057 40,787 –6,947
2017 153,756 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 58,834 156,282 4,938 1,048 151,344 57,786 –2,526
2018 132,033 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 28,339 138,713 2,979 –2,306 135,734 30,645 –6,680
2019 176,254 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 53,708 180,772 2,719 – 812 178,053 54,520 –4,519
2020 178,613 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 62,585 176,751 336 –1,656 176,415 64,241 1,862
2021 261,295 157,861 41,016 482 31,023 7,841 116,845 103,434 264,055 13,154 254 250,901 103,180 –2,760
2021 Dec. 48,350 34,875 3,380 121 2,182 751 31,495 13,475 49,676 1,186 – 704 48,490 14,179 –1,326
2022 Jan. 23,418 16,969 5,142 – 25 3,876 1,164 11,827 6,448 22,780 1,178 120 21,602 6,328 638
Feb. 10,925 12,223 – 910 102 –1,364 296 13,132 –1,298 11,212 526 – 107 10,686 –1,191 – 287
Mar. 5,368 6,548 – 299 188 –1,082 596 6,847 –1,180 7,930 – 132 – 244 8,062 – 936 –2,562
Apr. 11,416 9,302 2,398 – 288 1,900 676 6,904 2,113 10,952 154 393 10,798 1,720 463
May 5,606 5,058 1,045 251 380 381 4,013 548 4,981 – 132 – 434 5,113 982 625
June 3,063 4,539 – 191 – 8 – 428 389 4,730 –1,476 2,537 –1,186 – 72 3,723 –1,404 525
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2020 2021 2022
 Item 2019 2020 2021 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 17.93 96.81 40.12 3.69 21.81 –25.36 19.57 24.11 14.83
   Debt securities –2.37 2.99 3.11 –0.20 –1.53 1.90 1.58 1.16 0.62
     Short-term debt securities –1.29 1.27 2.27 –0.18 0.12 0.77 0.26 1.12 0.39
     Long-term debt securities –1.08 1.72 0.85 –0.02 –1.65 1.13 1.32 0.05 0.23
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –0.58 1.38 1.34 0.10 –0.64 0.87 1.75 –0.64 0.34
         Non-financial corporations 0.49 –0.17 0.74 –0.48 0.10 0.62 0.59 –0.57 0.17
         Financial corporations –0.64 0.12 1.08 0.09 –0.55 0.48 0.58 0.56 0.44
         General government –0.43 1.44 –0.48 0.49 –0.20 –0.24 0.58 –0.63 –0.27
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –1.79 1.61 1.78 –0.30 –0.88 1.03 –0.17 1.80 0.28
   Loans –1.49 –9.65 50.00 9.65 –0.38 6.35 13.40 30.64 5.36
     Short-term loans 12.60 –7.30 38.01 6.11 –3.95 7.92 11.48 22.56 –2.72
     Long-term loans –14.09 –2.36 11.99 3.55 3.57 –1.57 1.92 8.08 8.08
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors –26.04 –1.15 9.49 3.89 –6.40 –0.14 0.03 16.01 7.85
         Non-financial corporations –28.14 –12.27 7.11 –4.90 –1.66 –3.40 –1.21 13.38 2.44
         Financial corporations 1.86 10.57 2.38 8.65 –4.75 3.26 1.24 2.63 5.41
         General government 0.24 0.55 0.00 0.14 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
       Loans to the rest of the world 24.55 –8.51 40.51 5.77 6.02 6.49 13.37 14.63 –2.49
   Equity and investment fund shares 115.72 110.36 152.30 12.05 45.95 36.54 27.00 42.81 46.14
     Equity 106.72 97.59 130.52 6.14 42.12 29.62 24.27 34.52 44.09
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 6.18 –77.97 15.33 –67.75 12.08 4.92 –18.27 16.59 6.03
         Non-financial corporations 4.62 –78.06 16.89 –68.34 12.08 5.32 –18.80 18.30 5.58
         Financial corporations 1.55 0.09 –1.56 0.60 0.01 –0.41 0.54 –1.70 0.46
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 7.26 6.63 5.69 4.09 0.72 –1.61 5.37 1.20 0.14
       Other equity  1 93.28 168.92 109.51 69.80 29.32 26.31 37.16 16.73 37.92
     Investment fund shares 9.00 12.77 21.78 5.91 3.83 6.92 2.74 8.29 2.05
       Money market fund shares 1.78 3.79 0.66 1.34 –0.47 –0.19 –0.41 1.73 –1.22
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 7.22 8.99 21.12 4.57 4.31 7.11 3.15 6.56 3.26
   Insurance technical reserves 1.81 2.76 2.87 0.80 0.78 0.80 0.61 0.68 –0.11
   Financial derivatives –0.62 –27.52 15.95 –11.28 13.93 2.31 0.45 –0.73 18.66
   Other accounts receivable –64.82 48.81 81.88 50.68 19.72 –6.81 11.76 57.21 2.69
   Total 66.15 224.57 346.24 65.38 100.28 15.72 74.37 155.88 88.19
 External financing
   Debt securities 20.52 36.89 20.86 –3.93 2.77 8.92 10.29 –1.12 10.95
     Short-term securities 4.88 –4.40 2.51 –5.42 –1.19 1.23 3.50 –1.02 3.85
       Long-term securities 15.64 41.29 18.35 1.49 3.96 7.69 6.79 –0.10 7.10
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 6.61 18.12 9.17 0.05 1.96 3.29 2.14 1.78 5.64
           Non-financial corporations 0.49 –0.17 0.74 –0.48 0.10 0.62 0.59 –0.57 0.17
           Financial corporations 5.31 19.86 9.12 1.18 1.98 2.76 1.78 2.61 5.34
           General government 0.47 –0.22 0.09 0.01 0.14 0.03 0.02 –0.10 –0.01
           Households 0.34 –1.35 –0.78 –0.65 –0.26 –0.12 –0.26 –0.15 0.14
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 13.91 18.77 11.70 –3.98 0.81 5.63 8.15 –2.89 5.31
   Loans 82.74 79.12 91.65 9.41 31.98 –10.47 20.51 49.63 39.28
     Short-term loans 26.32 –12.02 47.43 –0.25 26.83 –7.56 12.61 15.56 34.87
     Long-term loans 56.42 91.14 44.22 9.65 5.16 –2.91 7.90 34.07 4.42
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 29.49 31.20 65.39 –0.78 35.31 –13.90 6.89 37.09 39.29
         Non-financial corporations –28.14 –12.27 7.11 –4.90 –1.66 –3.40 –1.21 13.38 2.44
         Financial corporations 56.99 7.63 43.57 –7.64 34.35 –15.53 5.48 19.27 36.90
         General government 0.64 35.83 14.71 11.76 2.62 5.02 2.62 4.45 –0.05
       Loans from the rest of the world 53.25 47.92 26.26 10.19 –3.33 3.43 13.61 12.55 –0.01
   Equity 11.69 60.37 61.44 21.89 14.63 8.50 17.93 20.38 3.11
     Listed shares of domestic sectors –24.77 –62.25 26.38 –66.70 15.28 8.02 –21.41 24.50 12.94
       Non-financial corporations 4.62 –78.06 16.89 –68.34 12.08 5.32 –18.80 18.30 5.58
       Financial corporations –33.41 3.47 –2.37 1.40 0.02 1.52 –3.23 –0.68 5.19
       General government –0.01 0.26 –0.09 –0.01 –0.07 –0.07 –0.00 0.04 0.18
       Households 4.03 12.08 11.96 0.25 3.25 1.25 0.63 6.84 1.99
     Listed shares of the rest of the world –1.16 10.09 18.94 1.68 –4.97 –1.16 31.69 –6.62 –12.78
     Other equity  1 37.61 112.54 16.11 86.91 4.32 1.64 7.65 2.50 2.95
   Insurance technical reserves 7.55 5.84 5.84 1.46 1.46 1.46 1.46 1.46 1.46
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options –1.38 0.54 14.32 1.26 1.27 8.20 3.93 0.93 0.37
   Other accounts payable 8.21 15.29 154.58 22.40 50.12 10.08 31.35 63.03 29.03
   Total 129.32 198.05 348.69 52.48 102.22 26.69 85.46 134.31 84.21
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2020 2021 2022
 Item 2019 2020 2021 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 578.6 717.6 721.9 717.6 713.7 693.5 706.4 721.9 726.8
   Debt securities 49.6 51.5 54.6 51.5 49.9 51.9 53.5 54.6 53.7
     Short-term debt securities 3.7 4.8 7.4 4.8 5.0 5.9 6.2 7.4 7.9
     Long-term debt securities 45.9 46.7 47.2 46.7 44.9 46.0 47.3 47.2 45.9
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 21.1 22.1 23.3 22.1 21.4 22.3 24.0 23.3 23.0
         Non-financial corporations 5.0 4.7 5.3 4.7 4.7 5.3 5.9 5.3 5.2
         Financial corporations 13.6 13.4 14.5 13.4 12.9 13.4 14.0 14.5 14.6
         General government 2.6 4.0 3.5 4.0 3.8 3.6 4.1 3.5 3.2
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 28.4 29.4 31.3 29.4 28.5 29.6 29.5 31.3 30.8
   Loans 731.9 725.0 778.0 725.0 726.4 732.4 746.9 778.0 784.9
     Short-term loans 568.5 566.1 605.1 566.1 562.7 570.5 582.7 605.1 603.6
     Long-term loans 163.5 158.8 172.9 158.8 163.7 161.9 164.2 172.9 181.3
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 414.5 413.3 422.8 413.3 406.9 406.8 406.8 422.8 430.7
         Non-financial corporations 339.9 327.6 334.7 327.6 325.9 322.5 321.3 334.7 337.2
         Financial corporations 67.3 77.8 80.2 77.8 73.1 76.3 77.6 80.2 85.6
         General government 7.3 7.9 7.9 7.9 7.9 7.9 7.9 7.9 7.9
       Loans to the rest of the world 317.4 311.7 355.2 311.7 319.5 325.6 340.1 355.2 354.2
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,439.7 2,534.2 2,889.9 2,534.2 2,701.1 2,788.2 2,844.7 2,889.9 2,815.9
     Equity 2,249.7 2,329.5 2,649.7 2,329.5 2,488.7 2,564.1 2,617.3 2,649.7 2,583.7
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 342.0 307.0 393.0 307.0 359.4 383.5 371.5 393.0 350.1
         Non-financial corporations 332.9 298.9 384.9 298.9 350.9 375.0 361.7 384.9 342.4
         Financial corporations 9.0 8.1 8.0 8.1 8.5 8.5 9.8 8.0 7.7
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 52.2 68.1 73.5 68.1 72.5 70.2 72.6 73.5 69.5
       Other equity  1 1,855.5 1,954.4 2,183.2 1,954.4 2,056.8 2,110.3 2,173.2 2,183.2 2,164.1
     Investment fund shares 190.0 204.7 240.2 204.7 212.4 224.1 227.5 240.2 232.2
       Money market fund shares 3.2 7.0 7.6 7.0 6.5 6.3 5.9 7.6 6.4
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 186.8 197.7 232.6 197.7 205.9 217.8 221.6 232.6 225.8
   Insurance technical reserves 59.2 62.1 64.8 62.1 62.8 63.6 64.1 64.8 64.8
   Financial derivatives 31.6 31.1 26.0 31.1 30.9 52.0 106.6 26.0 147.9
   Other accounts receivable 1,251.2 1,236.0 1,450.3 1,236.0 1,344.9 1,336.3 1,386.4 1,450.3 1,494.0
   Total 5,141.7 5,357.5 5,985.5 5,357.5 5,629.7 5,717.8 5,908.6 5,985.5 6,088.1
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 204.7 238.3 252.3 238.3 239.5 249.3 256.1 252.3 245.3
     Short-term securities 11.9 7.1 9.6 7.1 5.9 7.2 10.6 9.6 13.4
     Long-term securities 192.9 231.2 242.7 231.2 233.6 242.1 245.5 242.7 231.8
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 77.7 96.0 100.6 96.0 95.6 99.5 99.7 100.6 98.6
         Non-financial corporations 5.0 4.7 5.3 4.7 4.7 5.3 5.9 5.3 5.2
         Financial corporations 57.8 78.1 83.2 78.1 78.0 81.2 81.2 83.2 81.8
         General government 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4
         Households 14.4 12.8 11.8 12.8 12.5 12.5 12.1 11.8 11.2
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 127.0 142.3 151.7 142.3 143.9 149.8 156.4 151.7 146.6
   Loans 2,178.5 2,251.6 2,353.2 2,251.6 2,292.2 2,278.4 2,301.9 2,353.2 2,397.8
     Short-term loans 831.3 813.1 864.2 813.1 842.6 834.7 847.8 864.2 900.7
     Long-term loans 1,347.2 1,438.4 1,489.0 1,438.4 1,449.6 1,443.6 1,454.1 1,489.0 1,497.1
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,357.9 1,385.9 1,452.3 1,385.9 1,425.0 1,408.8 1,416.4 1,452.3 1,495.4
         Non-financial corporations 339.9 327.6 334.7 327.6 325.9 322.5 321.3 334.7 337.2
         Financial corporations 967.7 970.9 1,016.2 970.9 1,009.5 991.5 997.8 1,016.2 1,056.9
         General government 50.4 87.4 101.5 87.4 89.6 94.7 97.3 101.5 101.4
       Loans from the rest of the world 820.6 865.7 900.9 865.7 867.2 869.6 885.5 900.9 902.4
   Equity 3,096.8 3,260.9 3,689.0 3,260.9 3,522.5 3,640.3 3,645.9 3,689.0 3,391.9
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 734.1 739.9 924.8 739.9 848.8 896.1 882.4 924.8 840.0
       Non-financial corporations 332.9 298.9 384.9 298.9 350.9 375.0 361.7 384.9 342.4
       Financial corporations 158.0 171.9 210.2 171.9 193.0 202.9 196.9 210.2 194.3
       General government 51.8 56.3 69.9 56.3 67.3 71.8 70.6 69.9 70.0
       Households 191.3 212.8 259.7 212.8 237.6 246.3 253.2 259.7 233.2
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 958.6 995.6 1,126.3 995.6 1,081.5 1,125.8 1,119.2 1,126.3 984.0
     Other equity  1 1,404.2 1,525.5 1,637.9 1,525.5 1,592.3 1,618.4 1,644.2 1,637.9 1,567.9
   Insurance technical reserves 277.3 283.1 289.0 283.1 284.6 286.1 287.5 289.0 290.4
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 68.8 83.3 47.7 83.3 57.2 76.5 128.7 47.7 136.7
   Other accounts payable 1,302.0 1,285.7 1,538.3 1,285.7 1,388.4 1,375.8 1,454.9 1,538.3 1,581.0
   Total 7,128.2 7,402.9 8,169.5 7,402.9 7,784.4 7,906.3 8,075.0 8,169.5 8,043.2
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2020 2021 2022
 Item 2019 2020 2021 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 146.74 213.23 145.52 75.28 48.30 53.09 12.09 32.05 9.29
     Currency 35.26 61.86 59.79 16.47 12.66 16.45 14.97 15.70 13.47
     Deposits 111.49 151.36 85.74 58.82 35.64 36.63 –2.87 16.34 –4.17
       Transferable deposits 111.01 165.34 90.84 56.20 34.10 37.70 2.69 16.35 –0.99
       Time deposits 5.95 1.29 –4.97 2.52 0.06 –1.06 –3.76 –0.21 –1.12
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –5.47 –15.26 –0.13 0.10 1.48 –0.01 –1.81 0.20 –2.07
   Debt securities –1.86 –5.94 –5.89 –3.18 –2.66 –1.30 –1.32 –0.62 2.79
     Short-term debt securities –0.53 0.08 0.31 –0.16 0.16 0.22 –0.10 0.03 –0.04
     Long-term debt securities –1.34 –6.02 –6.20 –3.03 –2.82 –1.52 –1.22 –0.64 2.83
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –2.93 –2.56 –3.70 –1.79 –1.07 –1.26 –0.99 –0.39 2.26
         Non-financial corporations 0.21 –1.32 –0.83 –0.62 –0.28 –0.13 –0.25 –0.16 0.08
         Financial corporations –2.23 –1.26 –2.57 –1.02 –0.67 –1.02 –0.66 –0.23 2.34
         General government –0.92 0.02 –0.30 –0.15 –0.12 –0.11 –0.08 0.00 –0.16
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.07 –3.38 –2.19 –1.39 –1.59 –0.04 –0.33 –0.23 0.53
   Equity and investment fund shares 49.20 90.18 136.53 21.48 28.09 31.66 34.68 42.10 30.51
     Equity 18.92 48.53 31.74 7.73 2.60 7.28 7.57 14.30 7.79
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 6.61 16.05 14.21 –0.35 3.39 2.20 2.34 6.29 2.71
         Non-financial corporations 3.52 11.92 12.64 0.33 3.12 1.58 1.82 6.12 1.97
         Financial corporations 3.09 4.14 1.58 –0.68 0.27 0.62 0.52 0.17 0.74
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 7.45 23.28 10.86 6.44 –1.72 3.54 3.77 5.26 3.44
       Other equity  1 4.86 9.19 6.68 1.64 0.92 1.54 1.46 2.76 1.64
     Investment fund shares 30.28 41.65 104.79 13.75 25.50 24.38 27.11 27.80 22.72
       Money market fund shares –0.32 0.09 0.18 –0.29 0.09 –0.07 –0.01 0.18 –0.02
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 30.60 41.56 104.61 14.04 25.41 24.46 27.12 27.62 22.74
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 17.95 18.34 20.31 1.73 5.40 5.58 3.73 5.60 5.67
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 37.76 47.65 51.92 13.04 16.40 11.14 13.30 11.07 13.15
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 37.31 33.74 27.34 9.78 6.00 4.34 5.03 11.98 5.43
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 –14.28 –10.38 –1.26 –17.41 21.43 –3.27 6.74 –26.16 17.47
   Total 272.82 386.81 374.48 100.72 122.96 101.24 74.26 76.02 84.32
 External financing
   Loans 82.57 83.92 98.64 25.15 16.73 27.53 30.68 23.70 20.36
     Short-term loans 1.02 –5.61 0.86 –1.12 0.47 0.79 1.21 –1.61 0.66
     Long-term loans 81.55 89.52 97.78 26.27 16.26 26.74 29.47 25.31 19.69
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 68.58 85.69 100.36 25.51 18.69 26.54 29.34 25.78 19.22
       Consumer loans 14.42 –4.29 –0.89 –0.66 –1.14 –0.09 2.38 –2.04 0.23
       Entrepreneurial loans –0.43 2.51 –0.82 0.29 –0.82 1.08 –1.04 –0.04 0.91
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 73.41 83.17 94.32 22.37 14.85 27.19 28.38 23.91 20.70
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 9.16 0.75 4.32 2.78 1.89 0.34 2.30 –0.21 –0.35
       Loans from general government and rest of the world –0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.73 0.01 0.90 –0.38 0.01 0.01 0.25 0.63 –0.95
   Total 83.30 83.93 99.54 24.77 16.74 27.54 30.93 24.33 19.40
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2020 2021 2022
 Item 2019 2020 2021 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 2,647.4 2,860.3 3,005.1 2,860.3 2,908.7 2,961.8 2,973.1 3,005.1 3,014.1
     Currency 262.6 324.4 384.2 324.4 337.1 353.6 368.5 384.2 397.7
     Deposits 2,384.8 2,535.8 2,620.9 2,535.8 2,571.6 2,608.3 2,604.6 2,620.9 2,616.4
       Transferable deposits 1,509.1 1,674.1 1,764.4 1,674.1 1,708.3 1,746.0 1,748.1 1,764.4 1,763.5
       Time deposits 301.6 302.8 297.7 302.8 302.9 301.9 297.9 297.7 296.3
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 574.2 558.9 558.8 558.9 560.4 560.4 558.6 558.8 556.7
     Debt securities 121.4 113.3 109.6 113.3 112.8 111.6 110.1 109.6 109.4
       Short-term debt securities 1.6 1.6 1.8 1.6 1.7 1.9 1.8 1.8 1.7
       Long-term debt securities 119.8 111.7 107.8 111.7 111.0 109.7 108.3 107.8 107.7
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 81.5 76.7 75.3 76.7 77.3 76.5 75.3 75.3 75.2
           Non-financial corporations 12.4 10.9 9.8 10.9 10.5 10.5 10.2 9.8 9.4
           Financial corporations 66.6 63.3 63.2 63.3 64.4 63.7 62.9 63.2 63.8
           General government 2.5 2.6 2.2 2.6 2.4 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.0
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 39.9 36.5 34.3 36.5 35.4 35.1 34.8 34.3 34.2
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,388.2 1,541.0 1,901.6 1,541.0 1,659.4 1,746.3 1,794.3 1,901.6 1,839.9
     Equity 708.0 806.4 969.1 806.4 868.6 904.8 923.8 969.1 926.5
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 223.9 243.3 296.0 243.3 271.7 280.0 287.1 296.0 271.0
         Non-financial corporations 182.3 204.0 250.4 204.0 228.2 236.9 244.3 250.4 224.7
         Financial corporations 41.6 39.2 45.6 39.2 43.4 43.1 42.7 45.6 46.3
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 136.3 180.6 249.3 180.6 199.5 216.5 223.3 249.3 240.9
       Other equity  1 347.8 382.6 423.8 382.6 397.4 408.2 413.4 423.8 414.7
     Investment fund shares 680.3 734.6 932.5 734.6 790.7 841.5 870.5 932.5 913.4
       Money market fund shares 2.3 2.3 2.5 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.5 2.5
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 678.0 732.2 930.0 732.2 788.3 839.2 868.2 930.0 910.9
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 393.8 412.2 432.5 412.2 417.6 423.2 426.9 432.5 438.2
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,069.1 1,112.1 1,162.2 1,112.1 1,128.0 1,138.7 1,151.6 1,162.2 1,175.5
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 924.5 956.8 986.2 956.8 962.8 967.2 972.2 986.2 985.6
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 29.6 27.9 27.5 27.9 27.8 28.2 28.5 27.5 25.8
   Total 6,574.1 7,023.6 7,624.7 7,023.6 7,217.1 7,377.0 7,456.6 7,624.7 7,588.4
 Liabilities
   Loans 1,837.9 1,924.6 2,023.5 1,924.6 1,939.6 1,969.5 2,000.5 2,023.5 2,041.2
     Short-term loans 59.0 53.2 53.0 53.2 53.6 54.4 55.6 53.0 53.7
     Long-term loans 1,778.9 1,871.3 1,970.5 1,871.3 1,886.0 1,915.1 1,944.9 1,970.5 1,987.6
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,358.7 1,448.2 1,548.5 1,448.2 1,464.8 1,493.8 1,523.0 1,548.5 1,565.3
       Consumer loans 231.4 226.1 224.5 226.1 224.6 224.4 226.7 224.5 224.9
       Entrepreneurial loans 247.7 250.2 250.5 250.2 250.2 251.2 250.8 250.5 251.1
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,741.6 1,824.6 1,920.3 1,824.6 1,839.8 1,867.3 1,896.1 1,920.3 1,941.0
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 96.3 99.9 103.2 99.9 99.8 102.2 104.4 103.2 100.2
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 19.9 19.4 19.1 19.4 20.6 19.5 19.8 19.1 20.5
   Total 1,857.7 1,943.9 2,042.6 1,943.9 1,960.2 1,989.0 2,020.3 2,042.6 2,061.8
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
August 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
  
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local securitygovernment government government government funds government government government government funds
Period
€ billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2016 + 36.4 + 13.7 + 7.7 + 6.3 + 8.7 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3
2017 + 43.7 + 7.9 + 13.9 + 10.7 + 11.1 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.32018 
p + 64.4 + 21.1 + 11.7 + 15.6 + 16.0 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.5
2019 p + 51.1 + 22.0 + 13.8 + 6.1 + 9.1 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3
2020 p − 145.2 − 86.4 − 30.1 + 6.3 − 35.0 − 4.3 − 2.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 1.0
2021 pe − 130.8 − 142.4 + 3.3 + 4.0 + 4.3 − 3.7 − 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1
2020         H1  p − 47.8 − 26.9 − 9.2 + 0.8 − 12.5 − 2.9 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.8
         H2  p − 97.4 − 59.5 − 20.9 + 5.5 − 22.5 − 5.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 + 0.3 − 1.3
2021         H1  pe − 74.3 − 59.5 − 3.5 + 1.4 − 12.7 − 4.3 − 3.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.7
         H2  pe − 56.5 − 82.9 + 6.8 + 2.6 + 17.0 − 3.0 − 4.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.9
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2016 2,161.5 1,365.6 642.3 166.2 1.2 69.0 43.6 20.5 5.3 0.0
2017 2,111.4 1,349.9 614.9 162.7 0.8 64.6 41.3 18.8 5.0 0.02018 
p 2,062.6 1,322.9 600.8 155.1 0.7 61.2 39.3 17.8 4.6 0.0
2019 p 2,045.7 1,299.7 609.8 152.9 0.7 58.9 37.4 17.6 4.4 0.0
2020 p 2,314.1 1,512.9 660.6 154.1 7.4 68.7 44.9 19.6 4.6 0.2
2021 p 2,475.8 1,666.4 669.0 154.7 0.3 69.3 46.7 18.7 4.3 0.0
2020         Q1  p 2,090.1 1,327.5 623.1 153.4 0.8 60.1 38.1 17.9 4.4 0.0
         Q2  p 2,259.6 1,473.7 645.1 153.6 1.0 66.4 43.3 19.0 4.5 0.0
         Q3  p 2,333.1 1,536.7 655.6 154.7 4.6 69.0 45.5 19.4 4.6 0.1
         Q4  p 2,314.1 1,512.9 660.6 154.1 7.4 68.7 44.9 19.6 4.6 0.2
2021         Q1  p 2,345.0 1,538.6 665.6 154.2 16.2 69.9 45.8 19.8 4.6 0.5
         Q2  p 2,398.8 1,588.7 669.6 155.5 21.2 69.6 46.1 19.4 4.5 0.6
         Q3  p 2,432.5 1,616.7 674.8 155.1 24.2 69.3 46.1 19.2 4.4 0.7
         Q4  p 2,475.8 1,666.4 669.0 154.7 0.3 69.3 46.7 18.7 4.3 0.0
2022         Q1  p 2,482.5 1,671.2 668.0 157.2 3.1 68.2 45.9 18.4 4.3 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus   
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly  
GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2016 1,426.7 739.2 524.3 163.3 1,390.4 754.5 240.7 162.5 68.1 37.3 127.2 + 36.4 1,270.4
2017 1,486.9 773.3 549.5 164.2 1,443.3 784.8 250.6 169.5 71.6 33.8 132.9 + 43.7 1,329.52018 
p 1,557.3 808.2 572.6 176.5 1,492.8 805.6 260.3 176.2 78.4 31.1 141.3 + 64.4 1,387.8
2019 p 1,613.8 834.4 598.2 181.2 1,562.7 846.6 272.7 184.2 83.7 27.3 148.3 + 51.1 1,439.7
2020 p 1,566.9 782.1 607.9 176.9 1,712.1 905.2 284.1 209.8 90.9 21.0 201.2 − 145.2 1,397.0
2021 pe 1,711.1 888.2 633.3 189.6 1,841.9 938.0 294.0 229.9 92.1 21.8 266.0 − 130.8 1,529.0
As a percentage of GDP
2016 45.5 23.6 16.7 5.2 44.4 24.1 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.2 4.1 + 1.2 40.5
2017 45.5 23.7 16.8 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 + 1.3 40.72018 
p 46.2 24.0 17.0 5.2 44.3 23.9 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.2 + 1.9 41.2
2019 p 46.5 24.0 17.2 5.2 45.0 24.4 7.9 5.3 2.4 0.8 4.3 + 1.5 41.5
2020 p 46.5 23.2 18.1 5.3 50.8 26.9 8.4 6.2 2.7 0.6 6.0 − 4.3 41.5
2021 pe 47.9 24.9 17.7 5.3 51.6 26.3 8.2 6.4 2.6 0.6 7.5 − 3.7 42.8
Percentage growth rates
2016 + 4.5 + 4.8 + 4.6 + 2.9 + 4.1 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 6.2 + 5.6 − 11.7 + 4.9 . + 4.7
2017 + 4.2 + 4.6 + 4.8 + 0.5 + 3.8 + 4.0 + 4.1 + 4.3 + 5.1 − 9.3 + 4.5 . + 4.72018 
p + 4.7 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 7.5 + 3.4 + 2.7 + 3.9 + 3.9 + 9.5 − 8.0 + 6.3 . + 4.4
2019 p + 3.6 + 3.2 + 4.5 + 2.7 + 4.7 + 5.1 + 4.8 + 4.5 + 6.8 − 12.2 + 5.0 . + 3.7
2020 p − 2.9 − 6.3 + 1.6 − 2.4 + 9.6 + 6.9 + 4.2 + 13.9 + 8.7 − 23.4 + 35.7 . − 3.0
2021 pe + 9.2 + 13.6 + 4.2 + 7.2 + 7.6 + 3.6 + 3.5 + 9.6 + 1.3 + 4.0 + 32.3 . + 9.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and   
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution  Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
August 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2015 p 829.8 673.3 10.4 804.3 244.1 302.7 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,301.1 1,273.6 + 27.4
2016 p 862.3 705.8 9.0 844.5 251.3 321.6 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 17.8 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.1 1,330.2 + 24.9
2017 p 900.3 734.5 7.9 869.4 261.6 327.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 30.8 631.5 622.0 + 9.5 1,417.5 1,377.2 + 40.3
2018 p 951.8 776.3 6.2 905.6 272.5 338.0 39.2 55.8 16.1 + 46.2 656.2 642.5 + 13.6 1,490.7 1,430.9 + 59.8
2019 p 1,010.3 799.4 11.2 975.5 285.9 349.7 33.6 62.9 16.8 + 34.8 685.0 676.7 + 8.3 1,573.8 1,530.8 + 43.0
2020 p 946.9 739.9 13.9 1,108.0 299.5 422.8 25.9 69.2 59.9 − 161.1 719.5 747.8 − 28.3 1,518.8 1,708.1 − 189.3
2021 p 1,101.6 833.3 24.9 1,240.4 310.6 530.9 21.0 69.5 26.2 − 138.9 769.2 775.2 − 6.0 1,698.3 1,843.2 − 144.9
2019         Q1  p 240.9 192.7 2.5 227.7 68.3 88.5 11.5 10.2 3.3 + 13.2 163.3 166.4 − 3.1 374.3 364.1 + 10.2
         Q2  p 256.3 201.7 2.0 236.1 70.1 87.0 12.2 13.0 2.6 + 20.1 169.9 168.4 + 1.5 396.1 374.5 + 21.6
         Q3  p 245.3 194.7 3.4 236.7 70.9 86.2 4.5 16.4 3.1 + 8.6 168.8 170.3 − 1.5 384.0 376.9 + 7.1
         Q4  p 269.1 210.6 3.2 272.2 76.1 87.5 5.1 22.5 7.7 − 3.1 181.9 172.6 + 9.3 420.7 414.5 + 6.2
2020         Q1  p 244.8 197.5 2.5 236.4 72.9 90.5 11.9 12.0 2.6 + 8.4 168.3 175.7 − 7.4 380.0 379.1 + 0.9
         Q2  p 211.9 158.0 2.7 271.8 72.2 119.1 8.6 15.4 3.4 − 59.8 175.9 187.0 − 11.1 354.5 425.4 − 70.9
         Q3  p 227.8 181.4 4.0 282.3 72.4 102.0 1.4 18.3 34.3 − 54.5 181.1 195.0 − 13.9 370.1 438.5 − 68.4
         Q4  p 259.3 202.0 4.5 315.4 81.4 109.1 5.9 22.8 19.6 − 56.1 186.0 189.6 − 3.5 410.6 470.2 − 59.6
2021         Q1  p 237.1 185.3 4.3 297.0 75.5 130.8 7.3 11.1 14.6 − 59.9 182.4 196.3 − 13.9 381.5 455.3 − 73.8
         Q2  p 270.6 195.7 7.5 300.8 74.8 126.8 10.7 15.2 10.5 − 30.2 185.9 197.0 − 11.1 417.7 459.0 − 41.2
         Q3  p 270.9 210.7 7.4 290.2 75.8 117.5 − 0.4 16.5 10.4 − 19.3 183.4 191.9 − 8.6 413.5 441.4 − 27.8
         Q4  p 328.0 237.8 6.1 342.9 84.1 148.1 3.1 26.4 − 9.4 − 14.9 197.3 190.4 + 6.9 487.7 495.7 − 8.0
2022         Q1  p 277.4 213.9 5.0 278.4 79.6 116.3 5.5 11.9 7.0 − 1.0 193.8 199.8 − 6.0 429.4 436.5 − 7.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans grant ed.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2018 p 374.4 363.5 + 10.9 420.5 400.1 + 20.4 271.8 261.5 + 10.2
2019 p 382.5 369.2 + 13.3 437.2 419.6 + 17.6 284.2 278.1 + 6.1
2020 p 341.4 472.1 − 130.7 456.4 489.4 − 33.0 297.0 294.6 + 2.4
2021 p 370.3 585.9 − 215.6 513.1 508.9 + 4.2 309.9 304.8 + 5.1
2019         Q1  p 84.7 86.1 − 1.4 105.7 96.7 + 8.9 58.2 63.2 − 4.9
         Q2  p 97.7 90.3 + 7.4 106.0 100.2 + 5.8 70.6 65.9 + 4.7
         Q3  p 93.2 91.3 + 1.9 107.9 102.6 + 5.2 69.1 69.2 − 0.1
         Q4  p 106.9 101.5 + 5.4 115.5 118.4 − 2.9 84.5 78.4 + 6.0
2020         Q1  p 92.3 90.4 + 1.9 105.6 99.7 + 5.9 57.9 67.7 − 9.8
         Q2  p 70.8 114.8 − 44.0 108.2 128.0 − 19.8 69.4 69.4 + 0.1
         Q3  p 83.7 105.4 − 21.7 112.9 113.7 − 0.8 67.5 72.6 − 5.1
         Q4  p 94.5 161.5 − 67.0 127.4 146.3 − 18.9 100.3 83.5 + 16.8
2021         Q1  p 75.0 127.5 − 52.5 113.7 120.7 − 7.1 61.1 69.7 − 8.6
         Q2  p 86.4 123.5 − 37.1 122.8 122.0 + 0.8 74.6 71.7 + 2.9
         Q3  p 93.9 128.7 − 34.7 125.9 120.2 + 5.7 74.6 74.9 − 0.3
         Q4  p 115.1 206.3 − 91.2 145.6 144.5 + 1.2 97.6 87.0 + 10.6
2022         Q1  p 94.7 114.0 − 19.3 134.6 122.7 + 11.9 68.4 73.8 − 5.4
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city states Berlin, Bremen and
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- assigned to the general government sector. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
August 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
  
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,8362017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,3682018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,7752019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,911 632,268 313,381 286,065 32,822 107,916 − 274 30,266
2021 833,337 706,978 342,988 325,768 38,222 125,000 + 1,359 29,321
2020         Q1 198,375 168,123 83,086 75,420 9,617 18,875 + 11,377 6,855
         Q2 158,161 135,185 68,653 59,557 6,974 25,107 − 2,131 6,997         Q3 182,202 156,397 78,502 72,613 5,282 25,234 + 571 9,705         Q4 201,173 172,564 83,140 78,475 10,949 38,700 − 10,090 6,709
2021         Q1 189,316 159,271 72,814 73,137 13,320 19,882 + 10,163 6,887
         Q2 191,931 163,158 81,129 74,024 8,005 29,609 − 835 7,438         Q3 211,364 180,378 87,603 84,312 8,464 29,726 + 1,260 7,823         Q4 240,726 204,171 101,442 94,295 8,433 45,784 − 9,229 7,173
2022         Q1 224,006 189,158 92,112 87,240 9,806 24,772 + 10,077 7,261
         Q2 ... 190,982 94,153 86,852 9,977 ... ... 11,576
2021         June . 68,159 34,809 31,309 2,041 . . 2,479
2022         June . 86,884 43,540 39,996 3,348 . . 6,313
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget. 2Customs footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Domestic Import trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax 4 tion tax  5 tax 6 Total VAT VAT fers  8 taxes 9 taxes 9 duties taxes
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,3452017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,1412018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,5712019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,376 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,734 50,107
2021 760,953 370,296 218,407 72,342 42,124 37,423 250,800 187,631 63,169 4,951 98,171 31,613 5,122 53,976
2020         Q1 181,374 88,009 53,389 18,711 8,495 7,415 60,060 46,038 14,022 244 24,517 7,406 1,139 13,251
         Q2 146,360 69,928 50,760 10,633 2,348 6,187 44,262 31,625 12,638 1,170 23,525 6,326 1,149 11,175         Q3 168,308 73,766 47,470 13,492 5,411 7,392 59,819 47,933 11,886 796 25,930 6,784 1,212 11,910         Q4 186,334 89,094 57,667 16,146 8,014 7,268 55,343 43,105 12,238 1,744 31,660 7,259 1,234 13,770
2021         Q1 171,974 86,381 50,854 17,826 10,203 7,498 54,795 45,403 9,392 252 21,712 7,757 1,076 12,703
         Q2 175,242 84,505 50,783 14,347 8,860 10,515 57,634 43,399 14,235 1,215 23,210 7,398 1,281 12,085         Q3 193,910 90,619 53,857 17,973 9,853 8,936 69,528 49,052 20,476 1,189 23,469 7,813 1,292 13,532         Q4 219,827 108,791 62,913 22,196 13,208 10,474 68,843 49,777 19,066 2,295 29,780 8,645 1,473 15,656
2022         Q1 203,130 96,245 56,206 20,915 11,178 7,946 73,584 54,234 19,350 615 22,252 8,975 1,459 13,972
         Q2 204,740 101,822 60,363 17,194 11,246 13,019 67,763 46,755 21,008 1,521 24,441 7,564 1,630 13,758
2021         June 73,759 45,695 18,426 14,247 7,632 5,391 16,578 13,615 2,962 3 8,515 2,575 393 5,600
2022         June 93,193 54,978 20,949 16,152 9,871 8,005 25,754 14,864 10,890 5 9,340 2,551 566 6,309
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike plans. 4After deducting employee refunds and research grants. 5After deducting re-
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens search grants. 6Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains,
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- non-assessed taxes on earnings. 7The allocation of revenue to central, state and
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- local government, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is re gulated in Section
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- local government in revenue for 2021: 45.1:51.2:3.7. The EU share is de ducted from
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- central government’s share. 8Respective percentage share of central and state
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After government for 2021: 41.4:58.6. 9 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 
deducting child benefits and subsidies for supplementary private pension

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
August 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,9662018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,2032019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,651 14,553 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2021 37,120 11,028 14,733 14,980 9,546 6,691 2,089 1,984 18,335 9,824 2,333 1,121 77,335 61,251 14,985
2020         Q1 4,966 4,930 2,413 6,766 2,634 1,708 562 537 4,525 1,981 542 358 17,245 13,391 3,403
         Q2 8,117 4,235 3,772 2,606 2,426 1,585 455 328 3,566 2,154 425 181 12,971 8,842 3,895         Q3 9,985 4,365 3,978 2,817 2,366 1,499 506 414 3,730 2,262 509 283 14,690 10,242 4,095         Q4 14,566 5,145 4,487 2,365 2,101 1,768 715 513 4,234 2,203 567 254 16,584 12,997 3,283
2021         Q1 4,126 3,171 2,585 6,776 2,567 1,692 395 400 4,716 2,110 578 353 17,594 13,798 3,503
         Q2 8,717 2,546 4,053 2,843 2,469 1,640 528 413 4,231 2,374 538 255 17,904 13,692 4,034         Q3 9,532 2,338 3,636 2,911 2,381 1,618 514 538 4,571 2,457 516 269 18,643 14,215 4,133         Q4 14,745 2,972 4,458 2,449 2,130 1,741 651 633 4,816 2,884 700 244 23,194 19,546 3,316
2022         Q1 4,452 2,840 2,372 7,175 2,594 1,785 531 503 5,061 2,827 701 385 21,492 17,454 3,577
         Q2 9,092 3,518 3,648 2,872 2,433 1,722 505 651 4,406 2,238 661 259 ... ... ...
2021         June 3,180 1,559 1,336 760 881 521 145 132 1,445 847 196 87 . . .
2022         June 3,281 2,235 1,192 814 835 592 173 220 1,519 733 209 90 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  
3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,0322018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,0082019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 + 1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 303 56 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 − 3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 344 55 3,901
2021 348,679 245,185 102,772 347,486 296,343 22,734 + 1,192 42,014 40,320 1,241 400 52 3,807
2019         Q1 77,984 54,393 23,426 78,630 67,328 5,087 − 646 39,432 37,637 1,474 263 57 4,001
         Q2 81,410 57,837 23,408 80,804 69,011 5,205 + 605 40,232 38,639 1,272 264 57 3,996         Q3 80,305 56,637 23,481 82,716 70,633 5,330 − 2,411 38,386 36,876 1,183 271 56 3,995         Q4 86,756 63,133 23,413 82,849 70,674 5,333 + 3,907 42,945 40,539 2,074 276 56 3,987
2020         Q1 80,578 55,999 24,436 82,622 70,829 5,346 − 2,045 40,840 38,636 1,848 300 56 3,966
         Q2 82,098 57,515 24,413 82,875 70,889 5,346 − 777 39,779 37,975 1,446 304 55 3,949         Q3 82,689 58,109 24,418 86,497 74,054 5,591 − 3,808 36,898 35,197 1,333 313 55 3,925         Q4 88,978 64,375 24,412 86,605 73,879 5,576 + 2,373 39,847 38,186 1,286 321 55 3,916
2021         Q1 83,066 57,351 25,542 86,048 73,799 5,600 − 2,982 36,888 35,326 1,166 342 54 3,887
         Q2 86,386 60,666 25,545 86,486 73,905 5,679 − 100 36,941 35,554 988 345 53 3,871         Q3 85,535 59,941 25,468 87,123 74,453 5,718 − 1,588 36,041 34,670 973 345 53 3,840         Q4 92,818 67,211 25,415 87,385 74,556 5,730 + 5,432 41,974 40,310 1,241 370 52 3,835
2022         Q1 86,684 60,599 25,937 86,841 74,568 5,734 − 157 41,784 39,952 1,367 399 65 3,783
         Q2 90,040 63,978 25,879 87,138 74,644 5,756 + 2,903 44,425 42,441 1,513 406 65 3,761
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
August 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- Government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy funds Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment payment iture  5 surplus ment
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −2018 39,335 34,172 622 − 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 . 588 8,129 + 6,228 −2019 35,285 29,851 638 − 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 . 842 6,252 + 2,131 −
2020 33,678 28,236 630 − 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 . 1,214 6,076 − 27,335 6,913
2021 35,830 29,571 1,302 − 57,570 19,460 21,003 7,475 . 493 6,080 − 21,739 16,935
2019         Q1 8,369 7,027 148 − 8,597 3,969 403 1,818 . 179 1,450 − 228 −
         Q2 8,685 7,440 156 − 8,136 3,673 204 1,832 . 243 1,475 + 549 −         Q3 8,650 7,263 162 − 7,829 3,682 68 1,711 . 190 1,510 + 821 −         Q4 9,581 8,121 172 − 8,592 3,685 98 1,941 . 230 1,816 + 989 −
2020         Q1 8,123 6,851 153 − 9,301 4,469 392 1,934 . 235 1,470 − 1,179 −
         Q2 7,906 6,691 151 − 17,005 4,869 7,977 1,793 . 254 1,407 − 9,099 −         Q3 8,350 6,934 153 − 18,619 5,737 8,637 1,701 . 472 1,414 − 10,269 −         Q4 9,299 7,760 174 − 16,088 5,543 5,712 1,957 . 251 1,785 − 6,789 6,913
2021         Q1 8,228 6,747 289 − 18,260 5,956 8,006 1,935 . 184 1,391 − 10,033 −
         Q2 8,830 7,301 324 − 16,720 5,029 7,495 1,912 . 108 1,452 − 7,890 −         Q3 8,791 7,290 330 − 12,042 4,447 3,631 1,744 . 91 1,452 − 3,251 −         Q4 9,982 8,234 359 − 10,547 4,028 1,871 1,884 . 110 1,785 − 565 16,935
2022         Q1 8,827 7,374 251 − 10,685 4,424 2,087 1,821 . 135 1,412 − 1,858 −
         Q2 9,327 7,857 262 − 9,457 4,091 1,215 1,794 . 147 1,450 − 130 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- courage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promotion
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- of business start-ups. 5Including collection charges to other social security funds , ex-
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring meas- job seekers. ures and refunds of social contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to en-
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which: of which:
Central Remedies Adminis-
govern- and trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental therapeutic Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 appliances benefits iture  5 surplus
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 7572017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,0412018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 + 2,6542019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 − 1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 − 6,110
2021 289,270 249,734 36,977 294,602 82,748 46,199 45,075 16,335 20,163 16,612 11,735 − 5,332
2019         Q1 59,809 55,622 3,625 62,485 19,586 9,947 10,386 3,738 4,106 3,649 2,707 − 2,676
         Q2 62,121 57,858 3,625 62,858 19,210 10,127 10,421 3,821 4,289 3,535 2,774 − 736         Q3 62,143 57,763 3,625 62,716 19,109 10,229 10,278 3,630 4,467 3,558 2,804 − 573         Q4 67,094 61,884 3,625 64,075 19,497 10,353 10,455 3,821 4,713 3,659 2,975 + 3,019
2020         Q1 61,949 57,419 3,625 66,438 20,049 11,086 10,806 3,804 4,470 4,061 2,816 − 4,489
         Q2 68,108 58,096 9,359 69,487 17,674 10,492 10,908 3,389 3,986 4,143 2,980 − 1,378         Q3 70,130 59,403 10,151 71,063 20,913 10,567 11,642 3,774 4,852 3,829 2,970 − 934         Q4 68,645 62,672 4,805 67,987 19,887 10,729 11,019 3,891 4,725 3,920 3,039 + 658
2021         Q1 72,970 59,338 13,303 72,660 19,631 11,175 11,564 4,069 4,564 4,287 2,967 + 310
         Q2 71,964 61,819 9,965 74,492 20,287 11,275 11,536 4,219 5,085 4,120 2,850 − 2,529         Q3 70,592 61,899 7,942 73,569 20,748 11,756 10,730 4,060 5,085 4,004 2,849 − 2,977         Q4 74,020 66,678 5,767 73,209 21,340 12,043 11,252 4,062 5,290 4,200 3,109 + 810
2022         Q1 79,253 62,142 17,049 81,493 20,550 11,891 11,847 4,286 5,216 4,574 3,510 − 2,240
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, i.e. after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social security funds. sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
August 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1 
of which:
Inpatient Contributions to
of which: Non-cash care Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits  3 total 4 benefit ance scheme  5 expenditure surplus
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 4,626 13,003 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 4,904 13,539 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,5572018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 − 3,3152019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2021 52,573 49,764 53,903 9,573 16,511 13,865 3,070 2,024 − 1,330
2019         Q1 11,123 10,938 10,728 2,060 4,082 2,833 547 437 + 396
         Q2 11,795 11,620 10,812 2,012 4,132 2,868 588 449 + 983         Q3 11,734 11,557 11,159 2,098 4,234 2,972 598 450 + 576         Q4 12,592 12,413 11,252 2,062 4,243 3,064 626 433 + 1,339
2020         Q1 11,693 11,473 11,444 2,186 4,214 3,067 633 489 + 249
         Q2 11,921 11,732 11,816 2,051 4,015 3,173 664 468 + 105         Q3 13,924 11,938 12,890 2,263 4,087 3,249 682 500 + 1,033         Q4 13,079 12,746 12,927 2,306 4,177 3,403 716 481 + 152
2021         Q1 12,093 11,831 13,344 2,355 3,971 3,387 725 512 − 1,251
         Q2 12,933 12,329 13,521 2,287 4,030 3,421 745 510 − 587         Q3 12,624 12,294 13,390 2,393 4,182 3,466 783 509 − 767         Q4 14,853 13,242 13,595 2,475 4,270 3,646 788 503 + 1,258
2022         Q1 12,912 12,412 14,739 2,564 4,974 3,572 775 529 − 1,827
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *The final annual figures generally differ from the ance contributions). 3Data revision in 2014. 4From 2014, also including benefits for
total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter al ia.5For non-pro-
sequently. 1Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund. 2Since 2005, fessional carers. 
including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
 market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,177,231 85,952 607,446 217,604 52,453 1,213,776
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,161,540 205,391 585,446 211,797 48,631 1,110,2752017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017 2,111,360 319,159 538,801 180,145 45,109 1,028,1462018 + 167,231 − 16,248 − 91 − 1,670 2018 2,062,629 364,731 495,374 186,399 44,129 971,9952019 + 185,070 + 63 − 8,044 − 914 2019 2,045,744 366,562 464,612 183,741 48,740 982,089
2020 + 456,828 + 217,904 + 24,181 − 3,399 2020  
p 2,314,090 522,392 492,545 191,497 53,629 1,054,027
2021 p 2,475,776 716,004 493,773 191,386 46,195 1,028,418
2019         Q1 + 56,654 + 3,281 − 2,172 − 1,199 2019          Q1 2,072,772 359,884 483,567 185,767 44,244 999,309
         Q2 + 48,545 + 5,491 − 279 + 7,227          Q2 2,063,198 361,032 475,693 184,077 43,358 999,037         Q3 + 48,053 + 4,030 + 176 − 5,093          Q3 2,080,195 358,813 473,766 185,300 49,755 1,012,562         Q4 + 31,817 − 12,738 − 5,768 − 1,849          Q4 2,045,744 366,562 464,612 183,741 48,740 982,089
2020         Q1 + 65,656 + 31,296 + 9,236 + 1,698 2020          Q1  
p 2,090,099 371,076 481,651 186,021 49,824 1,001,527
         Q2 + 185,560 + 126,585 + 31,212 − 7,314          Q2  p 2,259,576 424,141 546,446 186,616 49,949 1,052,424
         Q3 + 159,067 + 80,783 − 6,080 + 588          Q3  p 2,333,149 468,723 517,114 189,832 51,775 1,105,704
         Q4 + 46,545 − 20,760 − 10,187 + 1,629          Q4  p 2,314,090 522,392 492,545 191,497 53,629 1,054,027
2021         Q1 + 109,953 + 42,045 − 11,737 − 4,708 2021          Q1  p 2,345,044 561,443 476,087 190,467 52,141 1,064,906
         Q2 + 146,852 + 57,601 + 3,463 + 1,576          Q2  p 2,398,790 620,472 477,542 190,219 44,004 1,066,553
         Q3  p 2,432,545 669,659 481,474 191,940 45,707 1,043,766
         Q4  p 2,475,776 716,004 493,773 191,386 46,195 1,028,418
2022         Q1  p 2,482,516 737,978 470,276 193,266 44,405 1,036,590
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
August 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2015 2,177,231 13,949 65,676 1,499,010 90,350 508,246 . .
2016 2,161,540 15,491 69,715 1,483,871 96,254 496,208 . .2017 2,111,360 14,298 48,789 1,484,462 87,799 476,012 . .2018 2,062,629 14,680 52,572 1,456,160 77,296 461,919 . .
2019         Q1 2,072,772 15,512 64,218 1,460,634 72,005 460,402 . .
         Q2 2,063,198 12,719 56,256 1,463,027 75,284 455,911 . .         Q3 2,080,195 17,438 62,602 1,465,529 79,918 454,709 . .         Q4 2,045,744 14,449 49,180 1,458,540 69,289 454,286 . .
2020         Q1  
p 2,090,099 11,410 70,912 1,472,222 85,137 450,418 . .
         Q2  p 2,259,576 13,120 122,225 1,533,857 142,708 447,666 . .
         Q3  p 2,333,149 11,886 180,445 1,582,574 111,480 446,764 . .
         Q4  p 2,314,090 14,486 163,401 1,593,586 94,288 448,330 . .
2021         Q1  p 2,345,044 12,200 180,788 1,637,903 69,739 444,414 . .
         Q2  p 2,398,790 12,901 175,436 1,690,507 76,438 443,508 . .
         Q3  p 2,432,545 13,319 183,243 1,712,600 79,614 443,770 . .
         Q4  p 2,475,776 17,743 183,990 1,731,270 101,870 440,902 . .
2022         Q1  p 2,482,516 15,655 172,294 1,776,631 75,228 442,708 . .
Central government
2015 1,371,933 13,949 49,512 1,138,951 45,256 124,265 1,062 13,667
2016 1,365,579 15,491 55,208 1,123,853 50,004 121,022 556 8,5672017 1,349,945 14,298 36,297 1,131,896 47,761 119,693 1,131 10,6182018 1,322,905 14,680 42,246 1,107,140 42,057 116,782 933 9,975
2019         Q1 1,324,377 15,512 50,032 1,102,604 39,185 117,044 809 11,583
         Q2 1,320,239 12,719 42,752 1,109,057 38,950 116,761 835 13,862         Q3 1,327,958 17,438 48,934 1,105,439 39,067 117,080 704 13,849         Q4 1,299,726 14,449 38,480 1,101,866 28,617 116,314 605 10,301
2020         Q1  
p 1,327,548 11,410 56,680 1,103,934 38,714 116,809 605 8,125
         Q2  p 1,473,720 13,120 109,221 1,139,510 95,489 116,381 585 7,037
         Q3  p 1,536,666 11,886 166,564 1,178,687 62,933 116,596 605 11,731
         Q4  p 1,512,917 14,486 154,498 1,180,683 46,811 116,439 609 14,545
2021         Q1  p 1,538,572 12,200 167,484 1,212,495 29,838 116,553 632 22,956
         Q2  p 1,588,734 12,901 165,373 1,259,206 35,008 116,247 631 29,479
         Q3  p 1,616,738 13,319 170,961 1,280,586 35,984 115,888 677 31,417
         Q4  p 1,666,432 17,743 176,427 1,300,416 56,836 115,010 656 7,975
2022         Q1  p 1,671,160 15,655 155,117 1,340,340 40,788 119,260 534 10,488
State government
2015 659,521 − 16,169 362,376 23,349 257,627 15,867 2,348
2016 642,291 − 14,515 361,996 20,482 245,298 11,273 1,6942017 614,926 − 12,543 354,688 19,628 228,067 14,038 2,0462018 600,776 − 10,332 351,994 18,864 219,587 14,035 1,891
2019         Q1 612,478 − 14,190 361,293 19,374 217,621 15,229 2,004
         Q2 610,700 − 13,508 357,571 24,784 214,838 17,631 1,887         Q3 620,694 − 13,671 363,723 29,765 213,535 17,755 1,957         Q4 609,828 − 10,703 360,495 25,768 212,862 14,934 1,826
2020         Q1  
p 623,096 − 14,234 372,021 28,582 208,260 12,297 1,783
         Q2  p 645,075 − 13,006 398,404 28,298 205,368 11,070 2,085
         Q3  p 655,581 − 13,882 408,310 29,662 203,728 11,717 2,090
         Q4  p 660,572 − 8,904 417,307 30,371 203,991 11,946 1,411
2021         Q1  p 665,620 − 13,305 430,103 23,404 198,808 11,023 2,018
         Q2  p 669,596 − 10,064 436,434 25,197 197,901 12,637 2,073
         Q3  p 674,769 − 12,284 437,437 26,603 198,446 11,555 2,151
         Q4  p 668,951 − 7,564 436,157 29,084 196,146 12,305 1,684
2022         Q1  p 667,953 − 17,178 441,837 16,981 191,956 11,661 1,970
Local government
2015 163,439 − − 2,047 27,474 133,918 2,143 463
2016 166,174 − − 2,404 27,002 136,768 1,819 4312017 162,745 − − 3,082 24,572 135,091 1,881 4662018 155,127 − 1 3,046 20,425 131,655 1,884 497
2019         Q1 153,387 − 1 2,960 18,857 131,570 2,139 498
         Q2 152,014 − − 2,961 18,814 130,239 2,016 525         Q3 151,489 − − 3,016 18,574 129,899 2,065 555         Q4 152,891 − − 2,996 19,079 130,816 1,856 532
2020         Q1  
p 153,423 − − 3,128 19,734 130,560 1,825 508
         Q2  p 153,556 − − 3,094 19,718 130,744 2,085 350
         Q3  p 154,685 − − 2,961 20,596 131,128 2,107 339
         Q4  p 154,054 − − 3,366 18,137 132,551 1,406 330
2021         Q1  p 154,202 − − 3,121 17,429 133,652 2,020 345
         Q2  p 155,485 − − 3,121 18,467 133,897 2,090 348
         Q3  p 155,050 − − 3,000 18,077 133,973 2,156 344
         Q4  p 154,717 − − 3,171 17,203 134,343 1,695 348
2022         Q1  p 157,227 − − 3,054 18,201 135,972 1,973 363
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
August 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2015 1,502 − − − 537 965 91 2,685
2016 1,232 − − − 562 670 89 3,0442017 807 − − − 262 545 15 3,9342018 690 − − − 388 302 16 4,506
2019         Q1 723 − − − 453 270 16 4,110
         Q2 742 − − − 557 185 16 4,224         Q3 594 − − − 391 203 16 4,179         Q4 711 − − − 375 336 16 4,753
2020         Q1  
p 775 − − − 287 488 16 4,328
         Q2  p 980 − − − 581 399 16 4,284
         Q3  p 4,602 − − − 4,210 392 3,956 4,226
         Q4  p 7,439 − − − 7,128 311 6,931 4,606
2021         Q1  p 16,179 − − − 15,985 194 15,853 4,209
         Q2  p 21,194 − − − 20,995 199 20,860 4,318
         Q3  p 24,248 − − − 24,053 195 23,872 4,348
         Q4  p 333 − − − 111 222 − 4,650
2022         Q1  p 3,064 − − − 2,863 201 2,720 4,067
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3 
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 day bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 987,909 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 63,650
2008 1,019,905 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 78,6852009 1,086,173 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 63,121
2010 1,337,160 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 242,251
2011 1,346,869 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 215,1092012 1,390,377 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 203,4672013 1,392,735 10,582 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 190,1272014 1,398,472 12,146 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 180,123
2015 1,371,933 13,949 1,070 1,188,463 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,521
2016 1,365,579 15,491 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,0262017 1,349,945 14,298 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,4552018 1,322,905 14,680 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,8392019 1,299,726 14,449 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,931
2020 
p 1,512,917 14,486 . 1,335,181 808,300 183,046 58,279 − 3,692 98,543 113,141 . 163,250
2021 p 1,666,432 17,743 . 1,476,843 909,276 195,654 65,390 − 6,722 103,936 153,978 . 171,846
2019         Q1 1,324,377 15,512 902 1,152,636 709,008 178,900 66,531 − 4,191 89,782 18,288 31 156,229
         Q2 1,320,239 12,719 852 1,151,809 720,904 173,313 68,110 − 5,691 91,024 15,042 19 155,711         Q3 1,327,958 17,438 822 1,154,373 711,482 183,268 69,088 − 5,639 90,416 18,100 − 156,147         Q4 1,299,726 14,449 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,931
2020         Q1  
p 1,327,548 11,410 . 1,160,614 721,343 182,095 71,028 − 5,310 91,084 23,572 . 155,524
         Q2  p 1,473,720 13,120 . 1,248,731 774,587 178,329 56,061 − 3,752 95,622 79,987 . 211,869
         Q3  p 1,536,666 11,886 . 1,345,251 796,338 191,388 57,144 − 3,737 99,276 127,478 . 179,529
         Q4  p 1,512,917 14,486 . 1,335,181 808,300 183,046 58,279 − 3,692 98,543 113,141 . 163,250
2021         Q1  p 1,538,572 12,200 . 1,379,979 821,254 194,571 60,687 − 3,857 103,910 134,800 . 146,392
         Q2  p 1,588,734 12,901 . 1,424,579 873,345 189,048 62,569 − 5,056 104,997 139,451 . 151,255
         Q3  p 1,616,738 13,319 . 1,451,547 884,358 203,353 63,851 − 5,456 105,398 146,533 . 151,872
         Q4  p 1,666,432 17,743 . 1,476,843 909,276 195,654 65,390 − 6,722 103,936 153,978 . 171,846
2022         Q1  p 1,671,160 15,655 . 1,495,458 930,351 209,424 67,776 − 7,809 108,702 140,427 . 160,048
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by the
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
off-budget entities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2020 2021 2022
2019 2020 2021 2019 2020 2021 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Item Index 2015=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 108.0 98.0 101.9 –1.6 –9.3 4.1 –9.5 –1.4 –1.9 20.1 2.7 –1.7 –0.3
Construction 104.2 108.2 106.3 0.4 3.8 –1.7 –1.8 9.0 –4.4 3.0 1.6 –6.4 2.2
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 109.1 103.5 106.8 3.3 –5.2 3.2 –2.7 –2.9 –7.5 12.6 3.7 4.8 8.7
Information and communication 120.7 119.5 123.3 3.8 –1.0 3.2 –1.1 0.5 0.5 6.5 2.9 3.3 3.9
Financial and insurance activities 95.3 95.8 95.4 1.3 0.5 –0.4 1.3 –0.4 –1.4 –0.7 –0.1 0.6 3.6
Real estate activities 102.7 102.3 103.2 0.9 –0.4 0.9 0.2 –0.4 0.2 1.8 0.8 0.9 0.6
Business services  1 110.7 102.5 108.1 0.1 –7.4 5.5 –8.2 –6.9 –5.7 12.4 9.4 7.2 7.6
Public services, education and health 107.0 103.5 106.7 1.8 –3.2 3.1 0.0 –3.8 –3.3 10.6 3.1 2.9 4.3
Other services 103.3 92.5 93.3 1.9 –10.5 0.8 –3.9 –16.0 –10.4 8.4 2.3 5.1 8.5
Gross value added 107.3 102.1 105.0 1.0 –4.9 2.9 –3.9 –2.4 –3.5 10.9 3.3 1.7 3.6
Gross domestic product  2 107.2 102.3 105.3 1.1 –4.6 2.9 –3.6 –1.9 –3.0 10.8 2.8 1.8 4.0
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 107.0 100.8 101.1 1.6 –5.9 0.3 –3.4 –5.7 –9.4 6.4 1.6 3.3 8.5
Government consumption 110.0 113.9 117.2 3.0 3.5 2.9 4.0 4.2 2.4 6.4 2.0 1.1 1.8
Machinery and equipment 113.1 100.5 103.8 1.0 –11.2 3.3 –9.5 –2.9 0.6 20.8 –2.0 –2.8 0.4
Premises 108.7 111.4 111.5 1.1 2.5 0.0 –0.6 5.1 –1.9 4.4 0.5 –3.0 2.2
Other investment  4 119.9 121.1 121.9 5.5 1.0 0.7 0.3 1.3 –2.0 2.9 1.0 0.8 1.2
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . –0.1 –0.9 1.1 –1.9 –1.3 0.5 0.2 1.9 1.6 0.9
Domestic demand 109.5 105.2 107.6 1.8 –4.0 2.3 –3.7 –3.3 –4.3 7.2 3.4 3.2 6.0
Net exports  6 . . . –0.7 –0.8 0.8 –0.1 1.2 1.0 3.8 –0.4 –1.1 –1.6
     Exports 111.2 100.8 110.5 1.1 –9.3 9.6 –9.1 –3.1 –0.2 28.2 7.4 6.9 2.9
     Imports 117.5 107.4 117.2 2.9 –8.6 9.1 –10.1 –6.4 –2.9 20.6 9.5 11.2 7.2
Gross domestic product  2 107.2 102.3 105.3 1.1 –4.6 2.9 –3.6 –1.9 –3.0 10.8 2.8 1.8 4.0
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,802.9 1,708.0 1,766.6 2.9 –5.3 3.4 –3.7 –5.6 –7.7 8.3 5.6 8.0 13.8
Government consumption 705.2 754.6 800.3 5.2 7.0 6.1 7.3 7.7 6.5 7.0 5.7 5.1 6.9
Machinery and equipment 241.1 216.9 228.4 2.4 –10.0 5.3 –8.3 –1.9 2.0 22.7 –0.2 –0.1 4.4
Premises 364.1 380.1 411.6 5.4 4.4 8.3 0.0 5.7 –0.1 9.5 12.7 10.5 17.4
Other investment  4 137.0 138.9 141.5 6.9 1.4 1.9 0.6 1.7 –0.9 4.1 2.2 2.0 3.3
Changes in inventories  5 26.8 –23.7 29.9 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,277.1 3,174.8 3,378.3 3.7 –3.1 6.4 –3.4 –3.0 –2.7 9.7 8.9 10.0 12.2
Net exports 196.2 192.8 192.4 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,619.4 1,462.1 1,690.6 1.7 –9.7 15.6 –9.9 –3.8 0.8 33.4 15.0 17.0 14.8
     Imports 1,423.2 1,269.3 1,498.2 2.7 –10.8 18.0 –12.5 –8.1 –2.1 30.0 20.4 26.8 25.7
Gross domestic product  2 3,473.4 3,367.6 3,570.6 3.1 –3.0 6.0 –2.7 –1.3 –1.3 11.9 7.3 6.8 8.0
 IV. Prices (2015=100)
Private consumption 105.1 105.8 109.0 1.3 0.6 3.1 –0.3 0.1 1.8 1.7 3.9 4.6 5.0
Gross domestic product 107.0 108.8 112.1 2.1 1.6 3.0 1.0 0.6 1.8 1.0 4.3 4.9 3.9
Terms of trade 100.8 102.9 100.3 0.7 2.0 –2.5 1.8 1.2 0.3 –3.5 –2.5 –4.0 –4.8
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,855.5 1,852.1 1,921.4 4.6 –0.2 3.7 –0.7 0.4 –0.5 5.4 4.9 4.9 6.6
Entrepreneurial and property income 752.7 676.1 778.5 –1.5 –10.2 15.1 –7.4 –2.2 2.3 42.3 12.8 12.6 1.6
National income 2,608.2 2,528.2 2,699.9 2.8 –3.1 6.8 –2.8 –0.3 0.4 13.6 7.2 6.8 5.1
Memo item: Gross national income 3,586.0 3,461.3 3,677.8 3.2 –3.5 6.3 –3.4 –1.7 –1.2 11.8 7.8 7.2 8.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2022.  1 Professional, sci-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added plus
taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit institu-tions serving households.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware
and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net in-
crease in valuables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy Total Inter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2015 = 100
% of total  1   100      14,04      6,37      79,59      29,45      36,98 2.27      10,89      10,31      9,95      12,73      14,16
Period
2018 105.3 109.0 97.4 105.3 105.5 104.6 106.2 106.9 107.4 109.0 106.5 99.9
2019 102.9 112.7 90.4 102.2 101.8 102.6 106.2 101.0 102.8 106.5 103.4 94.9
2020 95.0 116.1 84.4 92.2 94.9 88.2 97.6 97.2 90.6 98.5 89.5 75.9
2021 98.4 114.3 87.1 96.6 102.7 90.5 103.6 99.1 98.9 108.7 95.9 73.9
2021 Q2 99.0 118.1 81.8 97.0 105.3 90.2 103.0 96.5 101.6 108.7 95.4 74.8
Q3 96.9 119.4 80.6 94.2 102.3 85.1 101.9 101.6 97.9 109.0 94.7 61.7
Q4 101.5 124.8 93.5 97.9 98.9 95.1 108.7 102.8 95.9 109.5 102.2 74.3
2022 Q1 96.0 98.7 95.2 95.6 103.2 87.4 104.0 100.9 98.7 109.9 90.5 73.2
Q2 97.5 114.9 82.2 95.6 101.6 88.9 104.9 99.9 98.0 110.1 93.1 74.1
2021 June 100.5 121.0 77.2 98.7 106.1 91.4 106.8 101.5 103.4 111.9 98.9 71.6
2 July 100.4 123.7 77.8 98.1 105.6 91.0 102.3 101.0 101.3 109.7 97.9 73.6
2 Aug. 90.1 112.7 80.2 86.9 97.8 74.5 91.5 98.3 91.2 104.6 86.5 46.0
Sep. 100.1 121.8 83.7 97.6 103.6 89.7 111.8 105.5 101.2 112.8 99.6 65.6
Oct. 102.1 123.8 92.1 99.0 104.5 91.7 112.9 106.2 101.5 110.5 96.3 73.4
Nov. 105.8 127.4 93.1 103.0 104.5 99.7 114.5 107.8 103.4 113.1 101.8 83.9
Dec. 96.5 123.2 95.2 91.8 87.8 93.9 98.8 94.3 82.7 104.9 108.4 65.5
2022 Jan. 90.1 82.4 98.5 90.7 100.0 81.4 96.5 95.8 94.1 103.2 81.9 70.4
Feb. 94.9 97.1 94.5 94.5 101.2 87.9 105.0 96.7 97.5 107.8 89.0 78.5
Mar. 103.0 116.7 92.6 101.5 108.4 92.9 110.6 110.2 104.4 118.6 100.7 70.6
x Apr. 96.3 114.1 89.0 93.8 101.5 85.6 105.1 98.5 97.3 107.5 88.9 70.7
x May 96.1 113.0 80.6 94.3 101.0 87.2 102.6 98.5 97.3 108.6 90.9 73.2
x,p June 100.0 117.5 77.1 98.7 102.4 94.0 106.9 102.8 99.3 114.1 99.5 78.5
Annual percentage change
2018 + 0.9 + 0.3 – 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 – 0.7 + 3.8 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 2.3 – 1.6
2019 – 2.3 + 3.4 – 7.2 – 2.9 – 3.5 – 1.9 ± 0.0 – 5.5 – 4.3 – 2.3 – 2.9 – 5.0
2020 – 7.7 + 3.0 – 6.6 – 9.8 – 6.8 –14.0 – 8.1 – 3.8 –11.9 – 7.5 –13.4 –20.0
2021 + 3.6 – 1.6 + 3.2 + 4.8 + 8.2 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 2.0 + 9.2 +10.4 + 7.2 – 2.6
2021 Q2 +16.9 + 1.9 +12.4 +21.0 +23.0 +25.0 +22.1 + 4.9 +28.9 +23.1 +17.3 +57.9
Q3 + 2.3 + 0.8 + 2.2 + 2.6 + 8.4 – 2.9 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 9.2 +12.3 + 9.3 –21.9
Q4 – 1.8 – 4.6 + 1.9 – 1.5 + 0.7 – 4.9 + 2.1 + 3.8 + 0.4 + 4.0 + 3.7 –19.4
2022 Q1 – 0.4 + 4.2 + 3.1 – 1.5 – 0.8 – 4.6 + 3.2 + 5.5 – 1.5 + 2.4 – 0.8 –13.7
Q2 – 1.6 – 2.7 + 0.5 – 1.5 – 3.5 – 1.4 + 1.8 + 3.6 – 3.6 + 1.2 – 2.4 – 0.9
2021 June + 6.0 – 0.7 + 4.5 + 7.6 +18.0 + 0.1 + 9.9 + 4.9 +20.2 +18.4 + 2.5 – 9.5
2 July + 5.7 + 3.2 + 2.6 + 6.5 +13.2 + 1.7 +10.2 + 3.6 +17.2 +16.2 +13.2 –13.5
2 Aug. + 1.8 – 0.9 – 0.5 + 2.6 + 7.4 – 2.7 – 0.1 + 4.9 + 6.4 +11.6 + 9.8 –24.0
Sep. – 0.6 ± 0.0 + 4.6 – 1.1 + 4.9 – 7.2 + 2.1 + 2.7 + 4.4 + 9.3 + 5.3 –28.4
Oct. – 1.1 – 0.6 + 0.8 – 1.4 + 1.8 – 5.8 + 3.9 + 3.3 + 2.5 + 5.7 + 6.6 –23.6
Nov. – 1.9 – 2.3 + 1.4 – 2.1 + 0.3 – 6.3 + 0.1 + 6.1 + 0.3 + 1.8 + 3.0 –20.5
Dec. – 2.4 –10.3 + 3.4 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 2.4 + 2.4 + 1.8 – 1.9 + 4.7 + 1.7 –12.3
2022 Jan. + 1.2 + 9.4 + 0.8 ± 0.0 – 0.3 – 1.3 + 1.2 + 4.6 – 0.4 + 2.8 + 1.2 – 8.0
Feb. + 2.7 + 9.7 + 8.9 + 1.1 + 1.8 – 2.0 + 6.3 + 8.4 + 0.9 + 3.3 + 0.7 – 6.9
Mar. – 4.5 – 3.1 + 0.1 – 5.1 – 3.6 – 9.5 + 2.3 + 3.9 – 4.5 + 1.2 – 3.5 –24.4
x Apr. – 2.5 – 1.7 + 2.4 – 3.0 – 2.9 – 6.8 + 3.2 + 7.9 – 3.8 + 0.3 – 5.8 –13.1
x May – 1.7 – 3.6 – 1.0 – 1.5 – 4.1 – 0.2 + 2.3 + 1.9 – 3.1 + 1.4 – 2.0 + 2.5
x,p June – 0.5 – 2.9 – 0.1 ± 0.0 – 3.5 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 1.3 – 4.0 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 9.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2015.  2 Influenced by a change in holiday dates.  x Provisional;estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the
Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction
industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2018 110.5 + 1.7 111.5 + 1.9 110.0 + 1.4 110.0 + 4.1 118.9 + 2.1 107.1 + 4.8
2019 104.9 – 5.1 103.5 – 7.2 105.4 – 4.2 107.0 – 2.7 123.3 + 3.7 101.7 – 5.0
2020 97.2 – 7.3 97.9 – 5.4 95.6 – 9.3 105.8 – 1.1 124.4 + 0.9 99.6 – 2.1
2021 119.3 +22.7 124.6 +27.3 116.3 +21.7 117.4 +11.0 146.5 +17.8 107.9 + 8.3
2021 June 126.6 +31.7 127.6 +48.4 125.4 +22.9 132.1 +33.6 151.3 +31.7 125.7 +34.3
July 128.1 +33.0 127.9 +35.5 128.5 +33.3 127.3 +20.8 151.0 +25.5 119.5 +18.9
Aug. 106.4 +16.5 115.6 +28.7 100.1 +10.6 111.2 + 6.5 135.4 + 9.1 103.3 + 5.5
Sep. 122.6 +17.7 124.2 +22.1 122.6 +17.0 113.9 + 2.2 139.1 – 5.0 105.7 + 5.7
Oct. 117.2 + 7.4 124.9 +15.3 112.2 + 2.7 119.8 + 7.5 141.9 – 2.1 112.5 +12.2
Nov. 125.3 +10.2 132.9 +16.6 120.8 + 6.1 124.5 +13.0 149.6 + 8.2 116.2 +15.0
Dec. 123.7 +13.9 120.2 +18.2 126.9 +11.7 114.5 +11.6 148.9 +13.4 103.2 +10.7
2022 Jan. 131.2 +19.7 143.7 +19.2 124.1 +20.8 127.5 +16.1 152.9 + 8.1 119.2 +19.8
Feb. 128.3 +15.4 136.7 +16.3 122.6 +14.0 132.5 +21.0 149.8 +14.3 126.9 +23.8
Mar. 140.1 + 8.2 152.7 +13.3 131.4 + 3.4 146.5 +19.4 182.6 +23.3 134.7 +17.8
Apr. 125.1 + 6.5 143.5 +13.5 111.9 – 0.9 139.1 +26.3 185.7 +14.2 123.7 +33.3
May 123.9 + 8.8 139.3 +13.2 113.5 + 4.7 130.9 +14.9 178.2 +13.4 115.4 +15.9
p June 129.4 + 2.2 142.9 +12.0 120.1 – 4.2 137.1 + 3.8 169.8 +12.2 126.3 + 0.5
From the domestic market
2018 107.2 + 0.2 108.6 + 1.4 106.6 – 1.1 103.0 + 1.4 114.7 + 5.5 98.9 – 0.4
2019 101.2 – 5.6 99.1 – 8.7 103.0 – 3.4 101.2 – 1.7 116.2 + 1.3 96.2 – 2.7
2020 94.9 – 6.2 94.1 – 5.0 95.2 – 7.6 98.0 – 3.2 105.5 – 9.2 95.4 – 0.8
2021 115.5 +21.7 119.6 +27.1 113.1 +18.8 108.0 +10.2 114.8 + 8.8 105.6 +10.7
2021 June 127.7 +22.4 125.1 +53.9 130.5 + 3.7 124.0 +36.0 117.1 +16.6 126.3 +43.4
July 128.7 +35.2 126.1 +34.7 132.1 +37.6 121.3 +22.4 116.0 +11.0 123.1 +26.5
Aug. 104.5 +18.1 111.5 +26.4 98.4 +13.1 106.0 + 6.0 110.9 – 0.4 104.4 + 8.5
Sep. 110.0 +10.6 117.9 +23.6 104.3 + 1.6 103.0 + 1.3 106.1 –15.3 102.0 + 8.9
Oct. 115.6 +10.6 123.1 +15.3 110.0 + 7.2 110.4 + 5.6 106.7 –10.8 111.7 +12.4
Nov. 119.4 + 9.3 126.7 +11.8 113.8 + 7.1 115.4 +10.3 117.6 – 5.4 114.6 +17.1
Dec. 119.1 +21.3 111.4 +17.3 127.7 +25.1 105.5 +16.1 101.9 – 2.0 106.7 +23.4
2022 Jan. 122.2 +18.4 137.7 +21.0 109.9 +15.7 116.5 +20.1 106.0 – 4.5 120.1 +30.1
Feb. 123.4 +14.4 132.1 +17.2 116.0 +10.6 122.9 +22.5 115.6 + 5.2 125.4 +29.1
Mar. 137.4 + 8.6 148.2 +13.7 128.9 + 2.5 132.0 +20.7 135.9 + 3.6 130.7 +28.1
Apr. 124.8 +12.6 139.8 +19.3 110.5 + 3.7 135.2 +32.2 134.0 + 4.5 135.6 +45.0
May 123.2 + 9.7 136.5 +15.0 112.6 + 3.7 118.5 +17.6 141.8 +16.7 110.6 +17.9
p June 126.6 – 0.9 137.6 +10.0 117.2 –10.2 127.1 + 2.5 131.9 +12.6 125.5 – 0.6
From abroad
2018 113.0 + 2.9 114.6 + 2.4 112.0 + 2.8 115.5 + 6.1 122.2 – 0.5 113.4 + 8.5
2019 107.6 – 4.8 108.3 – 5.5 106.9 – 4.6 111.5 – 3.5 129.1 + 5.6 105.9 – 6.6
2020 98.9 – 8.1 102.0 – 5.8 95.9 –10.3 111.8 + 0.3 139.5 + 8.1 102.8 – 2.9
2021 122.2 +23.6 130.1 +27.5 118.1 +23.1 124.8 +11.6 171.9 +23.2 109.6 + 6.6
2021 June 125.8 +40.1 130.2 +43.1 122.4 +39.7 138.3 +32.0 178.8 +41.2 125.2 +28.0
July 127.7 +31.4 129.9 +36.3 126.3 +30.6 131.9 +19.7 179.1 +34.7 116.7 +13.4
Aug. 107.9 +15.5 120.1 +31.3 101.1 + 9.2 115.2 + 6.9 155.2 +15.5 102.4 + 3.2
Sep. 132.1 +22.5 131.1 +20.7 133.7 +26.0 122.4 + 2.8 165.7 + 1.5 108.5 + 3.4
Oct. 118.5 + 5.2 126.8 +15.3 113.5 + 0.1 127.0 + 8.8 170.2 + 2.9 113.1 +12.0
Nov. 129.8 +10.8 139.5 +21.5 125.0 + 5.5 131.5 +14.8 175.4 +17.4 117.4 +13.6
Dec. 127.1 + 9.2 129.7 +19.1 126.4 + 4.8 121.5 + 8.8 186.8 +21.9 100.5 + 2.1
2022 Jan. 138.1 +20.7 150.1 +17.4 132.6 +23.6 136.1 +13.6 190.6 +14.9 118.5 +12.9
Feb. 132.0 +16.1 141.6 +15.4 126.5 +15.9 140.0 +20.1 177.4 +19.8 128.0 +20.1
Mar. 142.1 + 7.8 157.6 +13.0 132.9 + 3.9 157.8 +18.6 220.2 +36.2 137.7 +11.3
Apr. 125.3 + 2.3 147.5 + 8.1 112.8 – 3.3 142.1 +22.3 227.3 +19.5 114.6 +24.2
May 124.4 + 8.0 142.4 +11.3 114.0 + 5.4 140.6 +13.4 207.5 +11.6 119.1 +14.4
p June 131.6 + 4.6 148.6 +14.1 121.9 – 0.4 144.8 + 4.7 200.3 +12.0 126.9 + 1.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2018 135.1 +10.4 131.7 +7.0 137.1 +11.4 128.7 +4.2 125.2 +2.7 138.9 +14.2 136.1 +13.6 132.6 +6.1
2019 146.2 +8.2 145.3 +10.3 150.4 +9.7 142.5 +10.7 138.8 +10.9 147.2 +6.0 148.1 +8.8 141.3 +6.6
2020 145.6 –0.4 144.2 –0.8 160.8 +6.9 130.3 –8.6 141.5 +1.9 147.3 +0.1 139.6 –5.7 143.3 +1.4
2021 159.0 +9.2 164.1 +13.8 174.3 +8.4 156.6 +20.2 158.7 +12.2 153.0 +3.9 161.6 +15.8 146.7 +2.4
2021 May 159.0 +14.7 163.0 +31.8 184.2 +26.3 146.7 +42.6 154.1 +20.6 154.2 –1.2 150.8 +24.2 152.9 –0.8
June 164.6 –1.8 165.2 +7.9 177.5 +7.6 160.4 +15.0 142.6 –13.5 164.0 –11.2 166.7 +15.4 154.5 –21.2
July 160.0 +7.2 168.4 +10.6 179.1 +12.9 163.7 +19.2 150.5 –19.2 150.2 +2.9 158.6 +15.9 149.9 –5.0
Aug. 158.9 +16.4 162.5 +20.5 167.1 +5.4 163.3 +43.4 144.0 +6.4 154.8 +11.9 158.5 +21.9 154.4 +18.4
Sep. 181.0 +19.3 189.0 +20.2 191.5 +10.0 193.2 +36.9 165.4 +1.9 171.7 +18.3 192.9 +31.9 161.1 +11.5
Oct. 158.7 +11.3 168.8 +11.7 169.1 –7.2 171.7 +35.1 157.2 +13.9 146.8 +10.7 171.6 +21.3 137.5 +15.0
Nov. 145.3 +4.1 143.0 –2.7 159.5 –5.0 132.6 +0.3 127.3 –4.6 148.0 +13.0 159.5 +10.9 120.4 +2.4
Dec. 185.3 +24.3 205.7 +41.1 196.2 +3.5 173.7 +50.3 356.7 +213.4 161.6 +5.7 186.9 +38.2 176.8 +25.9
2022 Jan. 142.8 +6.9 145.4 +4.1 165.7 +13.7 134.0 –8.1 121.0 +24.2 139.9 +10.7 149.1 –1.0 121.7 +14.1
Feb. 155.7 +8.7 161.0 +8.1 176.0 +9.1 158.3 +7.5 121.8 +6.7 149.5 +9.4 165.3 +15.3 132.4 +0.2
Mar. 209.6 +32.7 208.8 +32.9 219.4 +25.1 201.7 +42.4 200.5 +29.6 210.4 +32.3 217.4 +44.0 194.6 +25.2
Apr. 164.2 +2.5 157.6 –0.4 178.1 –3.8 142.5 +2.2 146.2 +4.5 171.9 +5.9 153.9 +3.9 167.5 +5.5
May 175.9 +10.6 172.4 +5.8 182.1 –1.1 163.4 +11.4 173.9 +12.8 180.1 +16.8 170.8 +13.3 178.0 +16.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2018 110.7 +2.9 107.5 +1.6 109.6 +3.5 105.6 –2.3 107.1 +0.8 103.0 ±0.0 112.5 +4.5 127.7 +6.0
2019 114.9 +3.8 110.9 +3.2 112.1 +2.3 106.7 +1.0 108.9 +1.7 107.1 +4.0 118.7 +5.5 138.4 +8.4
2020 121.4 +5.7 115.9 +4.5 121.2 +8.1 81.9 –23.2 106.9 –1.8 117.1 +9.3 125.5 +5.7 169.0 +22.1
3 2021 124.9 +2.9 116.9 +0.9 121.9 +0.6 78.1 –4.6 95.4 –10.8 110.4 –5.7 135.4 +7.9 191.4 +13.3
2021 June 130.1 +7.3 122.1 +5.3 122.6 +2.9 113.0 +18.1 97.8 –5.0 125.1 +2.4 132.4 +9.8 184.2 +13.4
July 126.2 +2.6 118.3 +0.6 120.4 +1.0 104.0 +5.9 102.1 –6.4 121.4 –3.4 136.5 +10.1 161.3 +3.1
Aug. 123.3 +2.3 115.6 +0.4 115.2 –4.8 100.5 +9.7 101.8 –2.4 116.8 –0.4 132.8 +10.7 169.6 +9.1
Sep. 121.3 +1.5 113.0 –0.7 112.5 –1.1 100.1 –0.7 100.6 –3.7 113.1 –4.2 132.1 +7.1 171.6 +6.5
Oct. 130.5 +0.9 120.9 –1.7 119.6 –2.3 114.4 +4.8 108.5 –10.6 124.4 –4.4 143.3 +10.1 192.4 +5.4
Nov. 138.3 +1.0 128.2 –1.8 121.2 –1.9 104.5 +15.5 132.7 –14.4 128.1 –9.0 144.1 +7.1 233.4 +2.1
Dec. 144.9 +4.4 133.8 +1.1 138.6 –1.0 98.7 +41.8 143.0 +5.7 124.0 +3.5 150.0 +4.5 218.8 –0.3
2022 Jan. 118.2 +14.0 108.7 +10.2 113.5 –1.8 70.4 +262.9 103.5 +64.8 105.1 +75.8 135.4 +5.8 183.7 –1.7
Feb. 116.2 +10.8 105.8 +6.8 111.8 –1.9 71.1 +218.8 90.5 +43.4 109.2 +54.5 129.3 +0.3 171.7 –3.7
Mar. 136.1 +5.2 121.2 –0.8 130.3 –1.3 90.4 +54.0 95.9 +8.6 132.9 +10.2 142.9 +5.0 193.6 –6.3
Apr. 129.9 +7.3 114.4 +0.7 124.9 +0.6 98.1 +150.9 89.8 +29.6 127.5 +19.2 135.8 +3.2 182.3 –5.8
May 131.9 +5.1 114.6 –2.5 125.5 –1.3 107.1 +72.2 84.8 +14.1 127.5 +12.5 136.5 +6.1 182.9 –8.4
June 129.4 –0.5 111.8 –8.4 125.0 +2.0 105.1 –7.0 89.7 –8.3 118.5 –5.3 138.2 +4.4 174.1 –5.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2021 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2017 44,251 +1.4 32,234 +2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 114 24 2,533 7 855 5.7 731
2018 r44,866 r +1.4 32,964 +2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2019 r45,276 r +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 82,267 827 8 5.0 774
2020 r44,914 r –0.8 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2021 r44,980 r +0.1 33,897 +0.9 9,344 23,602 702 4,101 1,852 1,744 2,613 999 5.7 706
2019 Q2 r45,239 r +1.0 33,388 +1.8 9,455 22,932 750 4,615 51 43 82,227 778 8 4.9 795
Q3 r45,386 r +0.8 33,548 +1.5 9,491 23,049 753 4,598 66 58 2,276 827 5.0 794
Q4 r45,565 r +0.7 33,924 +1.4 9,551 23,388 738 4,522 161 105 2,204 811 4.8 729
2020 Q1 r45,133 r +0.5 33,642 +1.3 9,439 23,284 686 4,458 1,219 949 2,385 960 5.2 683
Q2 r44,723 r –1.1 33,415 +0.1 9,387 23,137 640 4,235 5,399 5,388 2,770 1,154 6.0 593
Q3 r44,809 r –1.3 33,424 –0.4 9,359 23,171 640 4,273 2,705 2,691 2,904 1,266 6.3 583
Q4 r44,993 r –1.3 33,836 –0.3 9,395 23,518 676 4,194 2,433 2,361 2,722 1,167 5.9 595
2021 Q1 r44,514 r –1.4 33,568 –0.2 9,294 23,376 665 4,051 3,473 3,157 2,878 1,248 6.3 586
Q2 r44,812 r +0.2 33,718 +0.9 9,322 23,446 697 4,066 2,164 2,143 2,691 1,024 5.9 658
Q3 r45,157 r +0.8 33,929 +1.5 9,347 23,606 719 4,161 935 915 2,545 920 5.5 774
Q4 r45,437 r +1.0 34,374 +1.6 9,415 23,982 727 4,125 835 762 2,341 802 5.1 804
2022 Q1 r45,173 r +1.5 934,241 9+2.0 99,348 923,942 9 715 94,060 ... 9 785 2,417 874 5.3 818
Q2 1045,476 10 +1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,311 777 11 5.0 864
2019 Mar. r44,980 r +1.2 33,286 +1.9 9,442 22,855 749 4,574 246 32 2,301 850 5.1 797
Apr. r45,143 r +1.1 33,383 +1.8 9,457 22,925 753 4,607 49 40 2,229 795 4.9 796
May r45,268 r +1.0 33,433 +1.8 9,462 22,968 749 4,627 53 45 82,236 772 8 4.9 792
June r45,306 r +0.9 33,407 +1.6 9,455 22,948 750 4,646 51 43 2,216 766 4.9 798
July r45,320 r +0.9 33,360 +1.6 9,450 22,901 757 4,644 55 47 2,275 825 5.0 799
Aug. r45,314 r +0.7 33,610 +1.4 9,505 23,101 750 4,568 60 51 2,319 848 5.1 795
Sep. r45,523 r +0.8 33,938 +1.5 9,583 23,341 754 4,517 84 75 2,234 808 4.9 787
Oct. r45,598 r +0.8 33,966 +1.4 9,567 23,398 748 4,510 111 102 2,204 795 4.8 764
Nov. r45,627 r +0.7 33,968 +1.4 9,559 23,423 742 4,532 124 115 2,180 800 4.8 736
Dec. r45,469 r +0.6 33,740 +1.4 9,474 23,344 694 4,531 247 97 2,227 838 4.9 687
2020 Jan. r45,154 r +0.6 33,608 +1.4 9,432 23,255 689 4,471 382 133 2,426 985 5.3 668
Feb. r45,169 r +0.6 33,624 +1.3 9,427 23,278 683 4,461 439 134 2,396 971 5.3 690
Mar. r45,077 r +0.2 33,648 +1.1 9,440 23,290 675 4,350 2,834 2,580 2,335 925 5.1 691
Apr. r44,808 r –0.7 33,430 +0.1 9,396 23,141 643 4,194 6,007 5,995 2,644 1,093 5.8 626
May r44,672 r –1.3 33,328 –0.3 9,367 23,083 624 4,206 5,726 5,715 2,813 1,172 6.1 584
June r44,688 r –1.4 33,323 –0.3 9,355 23,084 629 4,260 4,464 4,452 2,853 1,197 6.2 570
July r44,699 r –1.4 33,233 –0.4 9,322 23,024 635 4,302 3,319 3,306 2,910 1,258 6.3 573
Aug. r44,737 r –1.3 33,482 –0.4 9,367 23,218 642 4,266 2,551 2,537 2,955 1,302 6.4 584
Sep. r44,990 r –1.2 33,792 –0.4 9,421 23,454 656 4,240 2,244 2,229 2,847 1,238 6.2 591
Oct. r45,076 r –1.1 33,862 –0.3 9,410 23,530 671 4,229 2,037 2,021 2,760 1,183 6.0 602
Nov. r45,030 r –1.3 33,899 –0.2 9,400 23,559 696 4,166 2,405 2,386 2,699 1,152 5.9 601
Dec. r44,873 r –1.3 33,700 –0.1 9,327 23,478 666 4,134 2,856 2,676 2,707 1,166 5.9 581
2021 Jan. r44,489 r –1.5 33,515 –0.3 9,282 23,347 657 4,045 3,638 3,294 2,901 1,298 6.3 566
Feb. r44,486 r –1.5 33,521 –0.3 9,281 23,343 662 4,026 3,766 3,358 2,904 1,270 6.3 583
Mar. r44,567 r –1.1 33,636 –0.0 9,309 23,397 685 4,032 3,016 2,818 2,827 1,177 6.2 609
Apr. r44,676 r –0.3 33,689 +0.8 9,324 23,427 687 4,039 2,583 2,560 2,771 1,091 6.0 629
May r44,796 r +0.3 33,747 +1.3 9,326 23,461 703 4,067 2,342 2,320 2,687 1,020 5.9 654
June r44,963 r +0.6 33,802 +1.4 9,324 23,504 716 4,151 1,568 1,548 2,614 961 5.7 693
July r45,027 r +0.7 33,731 +1.5 9,304 23,458 715 4,194 1,088 1,068 2,590 956 5.6 744
Aug. r45,096 r +0.8 33,994 +1.5 9,358 23,658 722 4,153 857 838 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. r45,347 r +0.8 34,323 +1.6 9,432 23,903 726 4,123 859 839 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. r45,434 r +0.8 34,369 +1.5 9,425 23,965 724 4,123 780 762 2,377 814 5.2 809
Nov. r45,490 r +1.0 34,449 +1.6 9,423 24,039 739 4,133 767 750 2,317 789 5.1 808
Dec. r45,386 r +1.1 34,284 +1.7 9,364 23,980 708 4,112 957 772 2,330 803 5.1 794
2022 Jan. r45,111 r +1.4 34,176 +2.0 9,332 23,900 711 4,048 1,123 847 2,462 903 5.4 792
Feb. r45,157 r +1.5 934,238 9+2.1 99,345 923,937 9 719 94,045 ... 9 804 2,428 884 5.3 822
Mar. r45,250 r +1.5 934,334 9+2.1 99,369 923,999 9 720 94,058 ... 9 705 2,362 835 5.1 839
Apr. r45,370 r +1.6 934,363 9+2.0 99,366 924,033 9 713 94,086 ... 9 429 2,309 800 5.0 852
May r45,485 r +1.5 934,427 9+2.0 99,373 924,078 9 718 94,119 ... 9 328 2,260 771 11 4.9 865
June 1045,573 10 +1.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,363 761 5.2 877
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,470 801 5.4 881
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 From January 2017 persons receiving additional
income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at the same
time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book of the Social SecurityCode (SGB III).  8 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed persons in the
legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).  9 Unadjusted
figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2020 and 2021, the estimated
values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1% for employees
subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.9% for persons solely in jobs
exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 28,1% for cyclically induced
short-time work.  10 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office.
11 From May 2022, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which: Indices of
foreign trade pricesHWWI
Index of World Market
Prices of Raw Materials  4
of which:
Total Food  1,2Non-
energy
industrial
goods  1Energy  1Services  1Actual
rents
for
housingMemo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  3Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  3Exports Imports Energy  5Other raw
materials  6
Period 2015 = 100 2020 = 100
Index level
2018 104.0 106.7 103.0 102.3 104.2 104.6 103.8 110.2 103.7 109.0 101.9 102.7 174.1 99.9
2019 105.5 108.4 104.2 103.7 105.7 106.1 105.3 115.3 104.8 111.5 102.4 101.7 150.2 98.7
2020 7 105.8 7110.9 7104.1 799.0 7106.9 107.6 7 105.8 7117.0 103.8 108.0 101.7 97.3 100.0 100.0
2021 7 109.2 7114.1 7106.7 7109.0 7109.0 109.0 7 109.1 7127.0 114.7 8117.5 107.4 110.4 220.7 137.6
2020 Sep. 7 105.8 7109.9 7103.6 796.9 7108.0 107.8 7 105.8 103.6 103.5 101.3 96.8 97.1 103.5
Oct. 7 105.8 7110.2 7103.9 797.0 7107.6 108.0 7 105.9 103.7 103.8 101.4 97.1 103.3 104.9
Nov. 7 104.7 7110.3 7104.0 796.0 7105.5 108.1 7 105.0 7116.0 103.9 103.9 101.8 97.6 109.5 107.1
Dec. 7 105.3 7109.9 7103.4 797.4 7106.9 108.2 7 105.5 104.7 104.2 101.9 98.2 121.8 112.3
2021 Jan. 106.8 112.3 105.1 102.6 106.9 108.4 106.3 106.2 106.8 102.8 100.1 141.6 120.6
Feb. 107.4 113.0 105.5 104.1 107.3 108.5 107.0 121.2 106.9 108.9 103.3 101.8 146.0 124.7
Mar. 107.9 113.1 105.7 106.2 107.6 108.6 107.5 107.9 114.0 104.1 103.6 150.3 130.4
Apr. 108.4 114.5 105.8 106.1 108.3 108.7 108.2 108.8 115.9 104.9 105.0 154.1 134.3
May 108.7 114.2 106.3 106.7 108.7 108.9 108.7 125.1 110.4 118.5 105.6 106.8 168.3 144.9
June 109.1 114.1 106.5 107.6 109.1 108.9 109.1 111.8 117.7 106.4 108.5 183.0 142.3
July 7 109.7 7114.4 7106.4 7109.0 7110.2 109.1 7 110.1 113.9 r117.2 107.7 110.9 204.8 141.9
Aug. 7 109.8 7114.4 7106.5 7109.4 7110.3 109.2 7 110.1 7129.4 115.6 r118.7 108.5 112.4 217.6 138.9
Sep. 7 110.1 7114.4 7107.6 7110.1 7109.9 109.3 7 110.1 118.3 8117.4 109.5 113.9 256.1 136.3
Oct. 7 110.7 7114.5 7108.0 7114.6 7110.0 109.5 7 110.7 122.8 120.7 111.0 118.2 352.7 143.0
Nov. 7 111.0 7114.9 7108.4 7116.7 7109.5 109.5 7 110.5 7132.2 123.8 125.6 111.9 121.7 304.4 143.0
Dec. 7 111.3 7115.7 7108.6 7115.0 7110.3 109.6 7 111.1 130.0 127.2 113.0 121.8 352.9 148.3
2022 Jan. 112.3 117.2 108.4 123.7 109.8 109.9 111.5 132.8 129.2 115.0 127.0 327.8 157.0
Feb. 113.3 118.2 109.1 127.4 110.2 110.0 112.5 138.1 134.6 133.4 116.1 128.6 336.0 166.5
Mar. 116.1 119.1 110.4 146.1 110.6 110.2 115.3 141.2 153.6 120.7 135.9 504.2 185.4
Apr. 116.9 122.2 111.3 142.7 111.7 110.4 116.2 145.2 162.3 121.7 138.3 407.8 184.8
May 118.2 124.2 112.3 146.7 112.0 110.6 117.3 147.9 147.5 160.7 122.4 139.5 366.8 178.9
June 118.1 125.4 112.5 147.8 111.0 110.8 117.4 148.4 157.6 123.5 140.9 389.3 169.6
July 119.0 127.6 112.6 147.8 112.1 110.9 118.4 ... ... ... ... 449.8 158.0
Annual percentage change
2018 +1.9 +2.6 +0.8 +4.9 +1.6 +1.6 +1.8 +4.7 +2.6 +0.4 +1.2 +2.6 +25.4 +0.3
2019 +1.4 +1.6 +1.1 +1.4 +1.5 +1.5 +1.4 +4.7 +1.1 +2.3 +0.5 –1.0 –13.7 –1.2
2020 7 +0.4 7+2.3 7–0.1 7–4.5 7+1.2 +1.4 7 +0.5 7+1.4 –1.0 –3.1 –0.7 –4.3 –33.4 +1.3
2021 7 +3.2 7+2.9 7+2.5 7+10.1 7+2.0 +1.3 7 +3.1 7+8.6 +10.5 8+8.8 +5.6 +13.5 +120.7 +37.6
2020 Sep. 7 –0.4 7+1.0 7–1.1 7–6.6 7+1.0 +1.3 7 –0.2 –1.0 –5.8 –1.1 –4.3 –32.3 +5.9
Oct. 7 –0.5 7+1.5 7–1.0 7–6.6 7+0.7 +1.3 7 –0.2 –0.7 –5.9 –1.0 –3.9 –29.1 +7.0
Nov. 7 –0.7 7+1.2 7–1.1 7–7.4 7+0.6 +1.3 7 –0.3 7–0.3 –0.5 –7.2 –0.6 –3.8 –28.0 +8.4
Dec. 7 –0.7 7+0.6 7–1.6 7–6.0 7+0.8 +1.3 7 –0.3 +0.2 –8.9 –0.6 –3.4 –20.8 +11.1
2021 Jan. +1.6 +2.0 +1.1 –2.2 +2.5 +1.3 +1.0 +0.9 –5.7 +0.1 –1.2 –2.2 +17.7
Feb. +1.6 +1.6 +1.2 +0.2 +2.0 +1.3 +1.3 +2.9 +1.9 –4.6 +0.7 +1.4 +15.9 +24.6
Mar. +2.0 +1.9 +0.5 +4.5 +2.0 +1.2 +1.7 +3.7 +0.3 +2.2 +6.9 +79.1 +36.1
Apr. +2.1 +2.0 +0.4 +7.6 +1.5 +1.2 +2.0 +5.2 +2.8 +3.3 +10.3 +128.3 +45.0
May +2.4 +1.5 +0.9 +9.5 +1.9 +1.3 +2.5 +5.7 +7.2 +8.6 +4.2 +11.8 +127.4 +56.0
June +2.1 +1.2 +1.6 +9.0 +0.9 +1.2 +2.3 +8.5 +7.0 +5.0 +12.9 +113.0 +51.2
July 7 +3.1 7+3.8 7+3.8 7+11.2 7+0.7 +1.3 7 +3.8 +10.4 r+9.0 +6.3 +15.0 +126.0 +48.1
Aug. 7 +3.4 7+3.9 7+3.8 7+12.1 7+1.2 +1.3 7 +3.9 7+11.8 +12.0 r+13.3 +7.2 +16.5 +127.1 +41.2
Sep. 7 +4.1 7+4.1 7+3.9 7+13.6 7+1.8 +1.4 7 +4.1 +14.2 8+13.4 +8.1 +17.7 +163.7 +31.7
Oct. 7 +4.6 7+3.9 7+3.9 7+18.1 7+2.2 +1.4 7 +4.5 +18.4 +16.3 +9.5 +21.7 +241.4 +36.3
Nov. 7 +6.0 7+4.2 7+4.2 7+21.6 7+3.8 +1.3 7 +5.2 7+14.0 +19.2 +20.9 +9.9 +24.7 +178.0 +33.5
Dec. 7 +5.7 7+5.3 7+5.0 7+18.1 7+3.2 +1.3 7 +5.3 +24.2 +22.1 +10.9 +24.0 +189.7 +32.1
2022 Jan. +5.1 +4.4 +3.1 +20.6 +2.7 +1.4 +4.9 +25.0 +21.0 +11.9 +26.9 +131.5 +30.2
Feb. +5.5 +4.6 +3.4 +22.4 +2.7 +1.4 +5.1 +13.9 +25.9 +22.5 +12.4 +26.3 +130.1 +33.5
Mar. +7.6 +5.3 +4.4 +37.6 +2.8 +1.5 +7.3 +30.9 +34.7 +15.9 +31.2 +235.5 +42.2
Apr. +7.8 +6.7 +5.2 +34.5 +3.1 +1.6 +7.4 +33.5 +40.0 +16.0 +31.7 +164.6 +37.6
May +8.7 +8.8 +5.6 +37.5 +3.0 +1.6 +7.9 +18.2 +33.6 +35.6 +15.9 +30.6 +117.9 +23.5
June +8.2 +9.9 +5.6 +37.4 +1.7 +1.7 +7.6 +32.7 +33.9 +16.1 +29.9 +112.7 +19.2
July +8.5 +11.5 +5.8 +35.6 +1.7 +1.6 +7.5 ... ... ... ... +119.6 +11.3
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw Materi-
als: HWWI.  1 The last data point is at times based on the Bundesbank’s own estimates.
2 Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco.  3 Excluding value added tax.  4 For the eu-ro area, in euro.  5 Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas.  6 Food, beverages and tobac-
co as well as industrial raw materials.  7 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value
added tax between July and December 2020.  8 From September 2021 onwards provi-
sional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2014 1,234.2 4.0 830.5 3.9 394.0 2.6 1,224.5 3.5 1,734.5 2.6 170.6 8.6 9.8
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.5 4.2 1,273.8 4.0 1,782.3 2.8 179.4 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.2
2017 1,395.4 4.3 932.5 4.0 441.8 3.6 1,374.3 3.9 1,905.2 3.5 202.8 8.0 10.6
2018 1,462.6 4.8 976.3 4.7 454.3 2.8 1,430.6 4.1 1,975.8 3.7 223.7 10.3 11.3
2019 1,524.1 4.2 1,022.0 4.7 474.4 4.4 1,496.4 4.6 2,021.6 2.3 218.7 – 2.2 10.8
2020 1,514.1 – 0.7 1,021.3 – 0.1 518.8 9.4 1,540.1 2.9 2,035.1 0.7 327.1 49.6 16.1
2021 1,572.0 3.8 1,065.3 4.3 529.2 2.0 1,594.5 3.5 2,078.4 2.1 311.8 – 4.7 15.0
2020 Q4 417.9 0.1 282.1 1.1 131.3 10.4 413.3 3.9 514.9 0.7 78.9 60.6 15.3
2021 Q1 361.8 – 1.2 245.0 – 0.5 136.2 8.9 381.2 2.6 516.3 – 0.8 113.7 35.1 22.0
Q2 377.4 6.1 251.3 7.0 134.0 2.7 385.3 5.5 509.9 3.7 83.0 –14.8 16.3
Q3 393.5 5.2 272.2 5.5 130.5 – 1.2 402.7 3.2 520.4 2.4 54.2 –18.5 10.4
Q4 439.3 5.1 296.7 5.2 128.5 – 2.1 425.2 2.9 531.8 3.3 60.8 –22.9 11.4
2022 Q1 388.4 7.4 261.7 6.8 131.9 – 3.1 393.6 3.3 536.6 3.9 78.2 –31.2 14.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2022.  * Households includ-
ing non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After deducting
the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees' contributions to the
social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds,
central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net),
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits,
consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plus monetarysocial benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed income, property
income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit institutions serving
households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other
current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  6 In-
cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving as a percentage of
disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change
2014 97.7 3.1 97.8 2.9 97.7 2.8 97.6 2.8 97.2 2.9
2015 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.3 2.3 102.5 2.5
2017 104.5 2.2 104.5 2.2 104.5 2.3 104.7 2.4 105.1 2.6
2018 107.6 3.0 107.5 3.0 107.5 2.8 107.6 2.8 108.5 3.2
2019 110.7 2.9 110.6 2.8 110.1 2.5 110.2 2.4 111.7 3.0
2020 112.9 2.0 112.9 2.1 112.2 1.9 112.3 1.9 111.5 – 0.1
2021 114.7 1.6 114.6 1.6 114.1 1.7 114.1 1.6 115.5 3.6
2021 Q1 106.0 1.4 106.0 1.4 106.1 1.5 113.4 1.5 107.4 0.1
Q2 107.7 2.3 107.6 2.3 106.8 1.4 113.9 1.5 111.4 5.7
Q3 117.8 1.0 117.7 1.0 116.4 1.4 114.2 1.5 115.4 4.3
Q4 127.3 1.6 127.2 1.6 127.2 2.4 114.7 1.8 127.6 3.9
2022 Q1 110.7 4.4 110.6 4.4 107.8 1.6 115.2 1.6 113.4 5.5
Q2 109.8 2.0 109.7 1.9 109.0 2.1 116.3 2.1 . .
2021 Dec. 109.5 – 0.3 109.5 – 0.3 109.2 1.8 114.8 1.8 . .
2022 Jan. 108.4 2.2 108.3 2.2 107.7 1.5 115.2 1.6 . .
Feb. 110.4 4.2 110.3 4.1 107.8 1.6 115.2 1.6 . .
Mar. 113.5 6.9 113.4 6.9 107.8 1.6 115.3 1.6 . .
Apr. 109.5 2.2 109.4 2.2 109.2 2.1 116.1 2.0 . .
May 111.1 4.2 111.0 4.2 109.1 2.2 116.4 2.2 . .
June 108.8 – 0.4 108.7 – 0.4 108.9 2.1 116.4 2.2 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May
2022.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
3 2018 2,589.0 1,536.7 540.8 610.8 288.5 1,052.3 249.5 234.7 172.6 789.8 1,799.2 925.7 558.7 873.4 257.5 205.0
2019 2,800.6 1,769.7 586.3 737.1 333.4 1,030.9 257.5 237.6 168.4 821.0 1,979.6 1,091.2 676.3 888.4 289.8 207.6
2020 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.5 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.3 857.0 304.4 196.1
p 2021 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.9 368.6 1,320.4 272.1 338.2 269.6 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 310.4 238.0
2020 H1 2,891.4 1,800.9 625.0 734.0 319.7 1,090.5 257.6 216.4 220.7 793.7 2,097.7 1,183.8 754.2 913.9 335.5 179.7
H2 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.5 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.3 857.0 304.4 196.1
2021 H1 3,017.6 1,877.0 649.3 745.0 343.7 1,140.6 256.2 273.2 240.8 906.9 2,110.7 1,178.6 751.9 932.1 297.4 206.9
pH2 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.9 368.6 1,320.4 272.1 338.2 269.6 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 310.4 238.0
As a percentage of total assets
3 2018 100.0 59.4 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.6 9.6 9.1 6.7 30.5 69.5 35.8 21.6 33.7 10.0 7.9
2019 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.2 31.7 10.4 7.4
2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
p 2021 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.2 40.1 8.3 10.3 8.2 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 9.4 7.2
2020 H1 100.0 62.3 21.6 25.4 11.1 37.7 8.9 7.5 7.6 27.5 72.6 40.9 26.1 31.6 11.6 6.2
H2 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2021 H1 100.0 62.2 21.5 24.7 11.4 37.8 8.5 9.1 8.0 30.1 70.0 39.1 24.9 30.9 9.9 6.9
pH2 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.2 40.1 8.3 10.3 8.2 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 9.4 7.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
3 2018 2,149.3 1,215.4 388.1 472.9 277.5 933.9 234.5 188.6 139.2 636.7 1,512.6 760.2 442.4 752.3 236.2 152.5
2019 2,302.9 1,396.4 419.6 565.4 319.7 906.5 243.8 188.5 136.8 662.2 1,640.7 887.5 523.8 753.2 257.5 158.0
2020 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.0 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.2 1,628.7 904.7 536.9 724.0 267.3 149.8
p 2021 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 347.4 1,147.0 254.4 281.7 212.3 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.1 274.9 184.0
2020 H1 2,304.8 1,351.9 406.4 547.1 303.3 952.9 243.9 171.5 171.3 614.6 1,690.2 912.1 548.4 778.0 294.6 137.0
H2 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.0 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.2 1,628.7 904.7 536.9 724.0 267.3 149.8
2021 H1 2,392.8 1,398.3 416.6 551.0 322.5 994.6 240.6 221.9 192.4 703.5 1,689.4 892.3 532.0 797.1 261.3 162.1
pH2 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 347.4 1,147.0 254.4 281.7 212.3 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.1 274.9 184.0
As a percentage of total assets
3 2018 100.0 56.6 18.1 22.0 12.9 43.5 10.9 8.8 6.5 29.6 70.4 35.4 20.6 35.0 11.0 7.1
2019 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.3 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
p 2021 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.2 43.7 9.7 10.7 8.1 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 10.5 7.0
2020 H1 100.0 58.7 17.6 23.7 13.2 41.3 10.6 7.4 7.4 26.7 73.3 39.6 23.8 33.8 12.8 6.0
H2 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2021 H1 100.0 58.4 17.4 23.0 13.5 41.6 10.1 9.3 8.0 29.4 70.6 37.3 22.2 33.3 10.9 6.8
pH2 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.2 43.7 9.7 10.7 8.1 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 10.5 7.0
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
3 2018 439.7 321.3 152.7 137.9 11.0 118.3 14.9 46.1 33.3 153.1 286.6 165.5 116.3 121.1 21.3 52.5
2019 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
p 2021 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 56.5 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 53.9
2020 H1 586.6 449.0 218.7 186.8 16.3 137.6 13.7 44.9 49.4 179.1 407.6 271.7 205.7 135.9 40.9 42.6
H2 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2021 H1 624.7 478.7 232.6 194.1 21.2 146.1 15.5 51.4 48.4 203.4 421.3 286.4 219.9 135.0 36.1 44.8
pH2 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 56.5 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 53.9
As a percentage of total assets
3 2018 100.0 73.1 34.7 31.4 2.5 26.9 3.4 10.5 7.6 34.8 65.2 37.6 26.5 27.6 4.8 11.9
2019 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
p 2021 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.5 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 8.1
2020 H1 100.0 76.5 37.3 31.9 2.8 23.5 2.3 7.7 8.4 30.5 69.5 46.3 35.1 23.2 7.0 7.3
H2 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2021 H1 100.0 76.6 37.2 31.1 3.4 23.4 2.5 8.2 7.8 32.6 67.4 45.8 35.2 21.6 5.8 7.2
pH2 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.5 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 8.1
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. In
some cases revised. Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cashequivalents.  2 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.  3 From H1 2018 or 2018 on-
wards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous pe-
riods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  2 Distribution  2
RevenuesOperating income
before depreciation
and amortisation
(EBITDA  1 )Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartileOperating
income (EBIT)Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4€ billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % % € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % %
Total
2014 1,564.3 1.0 198.7 5.0 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.4 109.3 8.6 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.2 11.1
2015 1,633.9 6.9 195.9 – 1.1 12.0 – 1.0 6.3 10.6 17.8 91.5 – 16.4 5.6 – 1.5 1.8 6.7 11.3
2016 1,624.3 – 0.4 214.4 7.8 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.7 9.0 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,719.3 5.1 243.4 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.0 11.0 18.0 141.9 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.1
6 2018 1,706.8 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,764.6 2.6 233.6 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.2 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.6 5.8 11.8
2020 1,632.8 – 8.8 213.6 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 17.9 52.1 – 41.0 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 4.9 10.5
p 2021 1,994.7 20.4 297.9 37.8 14.9 1.9 7.8 13.4 19.9 161.7 212.8 8.1 5.0 2.9 8.2 12.2
2017 H1 843.9 6.7 125.7 14.6 14.9 1.0 5.7 10.1 17.1 78.4 29.6 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.6
H2 878.5 3.5 117.4 14.6 13.4 1.3 6.9 12.0 19.2 63.0 38.2 7.2 1.8 3.2 7.4 12.4
6 2018 H1 848.2 – 0.1 120.8 – 2.1 14.2 – 0.3 5.1 10.6 18.2 72.7 – 5.3 8.6 – 0.5 1.7 6.4 12.5
H2 869.4 1.4 114.4 0.5 13.2 – 0.1 6.3 11.2 18.0 58.0 – 7.6 6.7 – 0.6 2.1 6.8 12.5
2019 H1 861.3 2.7 112.3 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.5 11.8 18.6 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 903.7 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.6 11.8 20.0 52.0 – 11.4 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.5
2020 H1 744.5 – 14.4 78.2 – 34.1 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 8.8
H2 888.4 – 3.3 135.4 17.1 15.2 2.8 7.6 13.2 19.8 44.2 8.7 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.6
2021 H1 920.0 20.3 151.5 87.2 16.5 5.9 7.4 12.6 19.5 84.5 . 9.2 8.3 2.3 7.8 12.2
pH2 1,075.6 20.4 146.6 8.2 13.6 – 1.5 8.4 13.2 20.8 77.2 73.3 7.2 2.2 2.9 7.8 13.4
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2014 1,220.0 1.0 152.2 5.9 12.5 0.6 5.8 10.1 15.5 85.2 9.8 7.0 0.6 1.7 6.0 10.6
2015 1,309.7 7.0 149.0 – 2.6 11.4 – 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.3 69.1 – 19.7 5.3 – 1.8 2.2 6.6 10.4
2016 1,295.9 – 0.8 161.9 6.3 12.5 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 84.8 4.2 6.5 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,395.9 5.5 187.5 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.5 40.6 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,367.7 1.0 175.7 – 1.5 12.9 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 16.0 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.8 6.9 11.4
2019 1,410.9 2.0 168.1 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.8 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.7 10.1
2020 1,285.2 – 9.4 143.6 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 5.7 10.6 16.5 29.1 – 48.1 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.3 9.8
p 2021 1,585.8 22.4 209.0 46.0 13.2 2.1 7.9 12.8 17.9 118.8 326.0 7.5 5.4 2.8 7.8 11.1
2017 H1 695.1 7.3 101.5 18.7 14.6 1.4 6.0 10.1 16.1 66.3 37.3 9.5 2.1 2.3 5.8 10.8
H2 701.4 3.7 86.0 14.2 12.3 1.1 7.0 11.7 16.9 46.2 45.5 6.6 1.9 3.6 7.2 10.8
6 2018 H1 681.9 – 0.1 94.9 – 3.4 13.9 – 0.5 7.0 10.9 16.7 60.0 – 5.9 8.8 – 0.6 2.9 6.8 11.5
H2 695.4 2.1 83.1 0.7 12.0 – 0.2 6.2 11.1 16.2 42.1 – 8.7 6.1 – 0.7 2.0 6.4 11.4
2019 H1 689.9 2.4 83.3 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.9 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.8 6.0 9.5
H2 721.0 1.7 84.8 0.3 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.7 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.1
2020 H1 580.6 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.4 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 14.9 0.2 – 101.7 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.1 7.8
H2 704.6 – 3.0 94.6 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.0 12.1 18.6 28.9 19.7 4.1 1.1 0.3 6.0 10.5
2021 H1 731.9 24.0 111.2 126.9 15.2 6.9 8.2 12.6 18.6 66.7 . 9.1 9.3 2.9 7.9 12.1
pH2 854.2 21.1 97.9 3.9 11.5 – 1.9 7.8 12.4 17.5 52.1 81.1 6.1 2.1 2.7 7.0 11.5
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2014 344.2 0.8 46.5 1.8 13.5 0.1 6.0 12.3 22.6 24.1 4.3 7.0 0.2 2.6 6.3 13.7
2015 324.1 6.1 46.9 4.0 14.5 – 0.3 5.9 11.1 22.1 22.3 – 3.8 6.9 – 0.7 1.3 6.7 13.9
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.3 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.5 12.2
p 2021 408.9 13.0 88.8 21.6 21.7 1.6 7.6 15.0 24.0 42.8 79.7 10.5 3.9 3.0 9.2 15.6
2017 H1 148.8 4.6 24.2 0.4 16.2 – 0.6 5.2 9.8 21.0 12.1 0.3 8.2 – 0.3 1.2 5.6 14.5
H2 177.1 2.5 31.5 15.6 17.8 2.0 6.6 12.5 24.6 16.8 21.6 9.5 1.5 2.9 7.8 17.9
6 2018 H1 166.3 0.2 25.9 2.8 15.6 0.4 3.8 9.5 22.7 12.6 – 1.9 7.6 – 0.2 – 0.9 4.7 15.3
H2 174.0 – 1.3 31.3 – 0.0 18.0 0.2 6.7 11.3 25.6 15.9 – 4.6 9.1 – 0.3 2.2 7.0 17.8
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
H2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.5 13.3
2021 H1 188.1 7.7 40.3 26.1 21.5 3.1 6.9 12.6 24.5 17.8 119.9 9.5 4.8 0.9 6.9 13.6
pH2 221.4 17.9 48.7 18.2 22.0 0.1 9.4 16.5 24.7 25.1 59.1 11.3 3.0 3.8 9.5 17.7
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. In
some cases revised. Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings be-
fore interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation.  2 Quantile data are based on the
groups' unweighted return on sales.  3 Annual figures do not always match the sum ofthe two half-year figures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement sta-
tistics, p. 3.  4 Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large
groups and in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical Series
Seasonally adjusted business statistics.  5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.
6 From H1 2018 or 2018 onwards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing
comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2021 2022
Item 2019 2020 2021 Q3 Q4 Q1 March April May
I.Current Account +277,849 +216,998 +301,548 +90,723 +44,291 + 996 + 7,376 – 3,602 –15,395
1.Goods
Receipts 2,390,756 2,187,668 2,504,403 622,455 671,475 677,718 254,014 233,572 255,194
Expenditure  2,083,527 1,845,143 2,218,825 552,729 634,554 677,956 248,901 235,525 254,619
Balance +307,230 +342,526 +285,573 +69,725 +36,920 – 238 + 5,113 – 1,952 + 575
2.Services
Receipts 1,018,798 866,556 1,001,378 265,110 291,195 270,187 95,948 93,033 96,536
Expenditure  982,729 865,180 906,156 230,845 272,115 240,719 84,842 80,433 84,298
Balance +36,070 + 1,374 +95,222 +34,265 +19,080 +29,467 +11,106 +12,600 +12,237
3.Primary income
Receipts 855,383 715,559 810,638 185,984 216,559 201,556 70,979 69,732 68,240
Expenditure  772,766 684,183 732,386 165,168 188,135 187,755 69,148 72,299 84,495
Balance +82,620 +31,376 +78,251 +20,816 +28,425 +13,801 + 1,831 – 2,567 –16,256
4.Secondary income
Receipts 123,291 126,638 154,464 36,660 42,817 37,515 14,314 12,285 12,972
Expenditure  271,356 284,911 311,965 70,743 82,951 79,549 24,988 23,968 24,924
Balance –148,066 –158,271 –157,503 –34,084 –40,135 –42,034 –10,674 –11,683 –11,952
II.Capital account –26,857 – 3,086 +41,311 +13,895 +12,929 + 7,339 + 2,507 + 2,458 + 1,782
III.Financial account  1 +244,341 +194,663 +341,940 +83,183 +27,229 +13,932 –15,106 –39,165 +13,699
1.Direct investment +86,091 –200,794 +292,022 +106,894 +52,634 +25,982 – 4,310 +31,086 +40,921
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +46,496 –137,138 +148,889 +44,551 –16,014 +48,447 –18,779 +49,287 +25,418
By non-resident units of
the euro area  –39,596 +63,654 –143,130 –62,341 –68,646 +22,465 –14,469 +18,201 –15,503
2.Portfolio investment –104,930 +538,328 +427,270 +55,965 +118,239 –32,612 –73,063 +12,718 +53,600
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +423,918 +686,807 +772,132 +126,214 +140,645 –20,994 –42,958 –52,019 –44,970
Equity and
investment fund shares +58,261 +319,347 +352,979 +44,352 +24,505 –18,689 –39,562 – 5,006 –36,687
Short-term
debt securities  + 6,565 +121,088 +116,846 – 8,476 +82,623 –59,212 –19,369 –50,590 – 4,488
Long-term
debt securities  +359,093 +246,368 +302,307 +90,339 +33,517 +56,906 +15,973 + 3,577 – 3,795
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  +528,848 +148,479 +344,863 +70,250 +22,405 +11,617 +30,105 –64,737 –98,569
Equity and
investment fund shares +283,968 +163,535 +519,946 +129,618 +145,570 –63,928 –32,656 + 1,794 –48,168
Short-term
debt securities  –26,090 +112,497 +40,042 +13,859 –81,475 +81,563 +42,778 –23,123 –22,904
Long-term
debt securities  +270,967 –127,553 –215,125 –73,227 –41,690 – 6,018 +19,983 –43,408 –27,498
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options + 7,673 +29,703 +69,667 +24,062 +44,615 – 5,314 – 4,280 +12,256 – 2,512
4.Other investment +249,506 –185,599 –577,196 –226,885 –191,145 +26,236 +66,465 –94,558 –79,498
Eurosystem +144,207 –203,619 –442,880 –166,708 –357,069 +184,196 –51,924 +57,915 –33,473
General government + 5,268 –16,333 –72,593 –45,934 + 3,119 + 2,062 – 1,264 –24,119 – 2,432
MFIs  2 +186,982 +20,405 –125,367 –33,112 +183,971 –233,851 +43,938 –114,431 –22,765
Enterprises and households –86,953 +13,952 +63,646 +18,871 –21,165 +73,830 +75,717 –13,922 –20,829
5.Reserve assets + 5,998 +13,026 +130,180 +123,148 + 2,887 – 359 + 82 – 667 + 1,188
IV.Net errors and omissions – 6,652 –19,252 – 918 –21,436 –29,991 + 5,597 –24,989 –38,022 +27,312
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Increase: + / decrease: -.2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Zeit Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2007 + 171,493 + 201,728 – 1,183 – 32,465 + 35,620 – 33,390 – 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 13,273
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 – 3,947 – 29,122 + 24,063 – 34,147 – 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 – 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 – 6,605 – 17,642 + 54,524 – 34,764 – 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 – 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 – 6,209 – 25,255 + 51,306 – 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 – 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 – 9,357 – 29,930 + 69,087 – 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 – 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 – 11,388 – 30,774 + 65,658 – 38,703 – 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 – 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 – 12,523 – 39,321 + 63,284 – 43,413 – 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 210,906 + 219,629 – 14,296 – 25,303 + 57,752 – 41,172 + 2,936 + 240,258 – 2,564 + 26,416
2015 + 260,286 + 248,394 – 15,405 – 18,516 + 69,262 – 38,854 – 48 + 234,392 – 2,213 – 25,845
2016 + 266,689 + 252,409 – 19,921 – 20,987 + 76,199 – 40,931 + 2,142 + 261,123 + 1,686 – 7,708
2017 + 255,814 + 255,077 – 13,613 – 23,994 + 76,404 – 51,673 – 2,936 + 276,697 – 1,269 + 23,819
2018 + 267,729 + 221,983 – 22,985 – 15,806 + 111,890 – 50,338 + 580 + 246,928 + 392 – 21,381
2019 + 262,903 + 215,456 – 30,887 – 18,100 + 115,359 – 49,811 – 887 + 186,317 – 544 – 75,700
2020 + 238,741 + 189,963 – 7,246 + 2,725 + 98,780 – 52,727 – 5,829 + 216,515 – 51 – 16,397
2021 + 264,981 + 192,150 + 3,091 + 314 + 126,606 – 54,090 – 1,376 + 314,750 + 31,892 + 51,145
2019 Q3 + 64,013 + 57,726 – 7,447 – 11,912 + 30,937 – 12,738 + 235 + 19,657 – 349 – 44,590
Q4 + 68,030 + 49,432 – 11,400 – 3,126 + 35,102 – 13,378 – 1,412 + 83,477 – 576 + 16,860
2020 Q1 + 62,570 + 52,090 – 2,656 – 2,238 + 27,396 – 14,679 – 608 + 33,152 + 133 – 28,810
Q2 + 37,621 + 28,076 – 1,806 + 5,190 + 13,563 – 9,209 + 55 + 25,747 + 243 – 11,929
Q3 + 62,788 + 55,716 – 695 – 5,827 + 23,501 – 10,601 – 1,493 + 65,414 – 1,276 + 4,118
Q4 + 75,762 + 54,082 – 2,089 + 5,599 + 34,320 – 18,238 – 3,783 + 92,203 + 848 + 20,223
2021 Q1 + 75,009 + 57,190 + 1,200 + 3,281 + 31,814 – 17,276 – 331 + 106,919 + 385 + 32,241
Q2 + 63,932 + 47,133 – 194 + 6,401 + 18,624 – 8,225 – 1,788 + 84,594 + 58 + 22,450
Q3 + 61,165 + 49,076 – 34 – 8,160 + 34,277 – 14,029 + 1,745 + 36,922 + 31,199 – 25,987
Q4 + 64,875 + 38,751 + 2,119 – 1,208 + 41,892 – 14,560 – 1,002 + 86,314 + 250 + 22,441
2022 Q1 + 52,344 + 34,305 + 3,802 – 2,468 + 36,895 – 16,388 – 1,865 + 94,003 + 2,200 + 43,524
Q2 + 24,774 + 27,355 + 11,535 – 7,134 + 16,153 – 11,600 – 4,334 + 49,449 + 597 + 29,008
2020 Jan. + 15,929 + 14,031 – 905 – 859 + 10,181 – 7,423 + 198 + 3,819 + 898 – 12,309
Feb. + 21,309 + 19,874 – 1,884 – 1,316 + 7,135 – 4,383 – 101 + 15,791 + 750 – 5,418
Mar. + 25,331 + 18,185 + 133 – 62 + 10,080 – 2,872 – 706 + 13,542 – 1,514 – 11,083
Apr. + 10,787 + 4,530 – 102 + 1,675 + 9,003 – 4,421 + 110 + 11,487 + 950 + 589
May + 6,134 + 8,575 + 87 + 1,110 + 23 – 3,573 – 9 + 2,095 + 33 – 4,029
June + 20,700 + 14,971 – 1,791 + 2,406 + 4,538 – 1,214 – 47 + 12,165 – 740 – 8,489
July + 20,883 + 20,319 – 330 – 2,709 + 7,024 – 3,751 – 1,005 + 14,644 – 611 – 5,234
Aug. + 16,852 + 13,976 + 38 – 2,543 + 8,850 – 3,432 + 412 + 30,512 – 611 + 13,248
Sep. + 25,053 + 21,421 – 404 – 575 + 7,627 – 3,419 – 900 + 20,258 – 53 – 3,895
Oct. + 24,773 + 20,389 – 415 + 782 + 8,128 – 4,527 – 1,386 + 25,983 + 140 + 2,596
Nov. + 22,799 + 18,384 + 164 + 2,120 + 9,835 – 7,541 – 2,266 + 23,695 + 89 + 3,162
Dec. + 28,191 + 15,308 – 1,838 + 2,697 + 16,356 – 6,171 – 132 + 42,524 + 618 + 14,466
2021 Jan. + 20,394 + 14,733 + 301 + 896 + 11,006 – 6,241 – 458 + 22,458 + 743 + 2,522
Feb. + 20,814 + 18,248 + 44 + 1,159 + 9,016 – 7,609 – 1,461 + 52,644 + 102 + 33,291
Mar. + 33,801 + 24,208 + 855 + 1,227 + 11,792 – 3,427 + 1,588 + 31,817 – 460 – 3,572
Apr. + 23,029 + 15,866 + 83 + 3,051 + 7,812 – 3,701 – 700 + 35,418 – 251 + 13,090
May + 15,757 + 14,492 – 160 + 2,344 + 644 – 1,724 – 375 + 14,146 + 211 – 1,235
June + 25,147 + 16,775 – 117 + 1,005 + 10,167 – 2,800 – 713 + 35,029 + 98 + 10,595
July + 20,669 + 18,645 – 451 – 2,511 + 9,907 – 5,372 – 626 + 5,325 + 102 – 14,718
Aug. + 16,987 + 12,859 + 645 – 3,543 + 11,922 – 4,251 + 493 + 20,653 + 31,254 + 3,173
Sep. + 23,509 + 17,573 – 229 – 2,105 + 12,447 – 4,406 + 1,877 + 10,944 – 158 – 14,442
Oct. + 19,141 + 15,259 + 1,117 – 2,802 + 11,783 – 5,099 + 416 + 21,714 + 261 + 2,157
Nov. + 21,329 + 14,820 + 893 + 71 + 12,021 – 5,582 – 1,153 + 48,411 + 963 + 28,235
Dec. + 24,405 + 8,672 + 109 + 1,523 + 18,088 – 3,878 – 265 + 16,190 – 974 – 7,951
2022 Jan. + 12,519 + 5,831 + 1,230 – 338 + 13,100 – 6,074 – 104 + 55,703 + 309 + 43,288
Feb. + 21,057 + 15,649 + 2,346 + 414 + 10,415 – 5,421 – 1,297 + 28,963 + 1,161 + 9,203
Mar. + 18,768 + 12,824 + 225 – 2,543 + 13,380 – 4,893 – 464 + 9,337 + 730 – 8,967
Apr. + 8,979 + 4,343 + 2,759 – 1,170 + 10,497 – 4,691 – 1,272 + 4,556 + 83 – 3,151
May – 375 + 9,094 + 4,324 – 2,569 – 5,854 – 1,046 – 2,772 – 921 + 161 + 2,226
p June + 16,171 + 13,918 + 4,452 – 3,395 + 11,511 – 5,862 – 290 + 45,814 + 353 + 29,933
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: + / net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2022
Group of countries/country 
2019 2020 
2021 Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June
All countries  1 Exports 1,328,152 1,206,928 1,375,658 110,836 123,234 138,050 122,608 133,313 135,873
Imports 1,104,141 1,026,502 1,203,174 106,184 112,327 130,396 121,788 130,658 128,249
Balance +224,010 +180,427 +172,484 + 4,652 +10,907 + 7,654 + 820 + 2,655 + 7,623
   I. European countries Exports 902,831 824,921 945,989 76,750 85,200 93,357 84,301 90,387 92,164
Imports 747,692 682,477 803,949 68,772 76,680 85,978 79,068 83,277 82,910
Balance +155,140 +142,444 +142,040 + 7,978 + 8,520 + 7,378 + 5,232 + 7,110 + 9,254
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 698,257 635,741 747,249 60,260 67,858 74,950 67,913 72,870 74,565
Imports 593,251 546,655 638,663 51,269 59,182 64,840 59,364 64,667 64,433
Balance +105,006 +89,087 +108,586 + 8,991 + 8,676 +10,109 + 8,549 + 8,203 +10,131
          Euro area (19)       Exports 492,308 441,853 518,913 42,258 47,245 51,826 47,609 50,718 51,885
          countries Imports 409,863 371,211 438,683 35,609 41,279 44,942 41,236 44,455 44,363
Balance +82,445 +70,643 +80,229 + 6,649 + 5,966 + 6,884 + 6,373 + 6,263 + 7,522
          of which:
               Austria Exports 66,076 60,118 71,914 5,891 6,496 7,548 7,198 7,278 7,621
  Imports 44,059 40,454 47,558 3,741 4,463 4,934 4,823 5,133 4,928
Balance +22,017 +19,663 +24,355 + 2,150 + 2,034 + 2,614 + 2,375 + 2,145 + 2,692
               Belgium and Exports 52,006 48,824 57,403 4,675 5,378 6,019 5,275 5,414 5,794
               Luxembourg Imports 46,322 39,584 55,342 4,302 4,794 5,606 4,958 5,827 5,746
Balance + 5,683 + 9,240 + 2,061 + 374 + 584 + 412 + 317 – 414 + 48
               France Exports 106,564 90,910 102,130 8,394 9,139 10,149 9,096 9,898 10,213
  Imports 66,199 56,364 62,057 4,916 5,569 6,269 5,576 5,975 6,493
Balance +40,364 +34,546 +40,073 + 3,478 + 3,570 + 3,880 + 3,520 + 3,923 + 3,721
               Italy Exports 67,887 60,634 75,308 6,024 7,070 7,818 7,336 7,627 7,432
  Imports 57,100 53,906 65,384 4,646 6,068 6,555 5,923 6,445 6,450
Balance +10,786 + 6,728 + 9,923 + 1,379 + 1,002 + 1,263 + 1,413 + 1,183 + 982
               Netherlands Exports 91,528 84,579 100,449 8,204 9,089 9,287 8,857 9,471 9,455
  Imports 97,816 87,024 105,510 9,689 9,556 10,798 10,132 10,468 10,829
Balance – 6,288 – 2,445 – 5,061 – 1,485 – 468 – 1,511 – 1,275 – 997 – 1,374
               Spain  Exports 44,218 37,618 43,693 3,620 3,944 4,200 3,854 4,416 4,047
  Imports 33,126 31,281 34,263 2,823 3,430 3,406 2,983 3,440 3,173
Balance +11,092 + 6,337 + 9,430 + 797 + 514 + 794 + 870 + 976 + 873
          Other EU Member  Exports 205,949 193,888 228,336 18,001 20,613 23,124 20,305 22,152 22,679
          States  Imports 183,387 175,444 199,979 15,659 17,903 19,898 18,128 20,212 20,071
Balance +22,561 +18,444 +28,356 + 2,342 + 2,710 + 3,225 + 2,176 + 1,940 + 2,609
      2. Other European Exports 204,575 189,180 198,740 16,490 17,342 18,407 16,387 17,517 17,599
          countries Imports 154,441 135,822 165,286 17,503 17,498 21,138 19,704 18,610 18,476
Balance +50,134 +53,358 +33,454 – 1,013 – 156 – 2,731 – 3,317 – 1,093 – 877
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 56,345 56,265 60,617 5,220 5,387 6,468 5,370 6,020 5,928
  Imports 45,824 45,556 48,885 3,985 4,494 5,218 4,798 4,712 4,531
Balance +10,521 +10,708 +11,731 + 1,236 + 892 + 1,249 + 572 + 1,308 + 1,397
               United Kingdom Exports 79,166 67,086 65,348 5,457 5,839 6,561 6,119 5,980 6,051
  Imports 38,397 35,018 32,177 2,694 2,555 3,660 3,489 3,346 2,845
Balance +40,770 +32,068 +33,171 + 2,763 + 3,284 + 2,901 + 2,630 + 2,634 + 3,206
   II. Non-European  Exports 421,728 380,292 427,496 33,861 37,800 44,348 37,895 42,455 43,208
       countries Imports 355,390 343,270 398,343 37,345 35,565 44,300 42,578 47,208 45,167
Balance +66,338 +37,022 +29,153 – 3,484 + 2,235 + 48 – 4,683 – 4,753 – 1,960
       1. Africa Exports 23,627 20,086 23,111 1,802 1,918 2,290 1,909 2,193 2,304
Imports 24,475 18,758 26,036 2,207 2,152 3,184 2,924 2,963 3,134
Balance – 848 + 1,328 – 2,925 – 405 – 233 – 894 – 1,015 – 770 – 829
       2. America Exports 165,602 141,375 167,737 13,574 14,874 18,325 16,366 18,254 18,941
  Imports 100,007 94,005 101,275 8,601 8,292 10,826 9,686 10,964 11,808
Balance +65,595 +47,370 +66,463 + 4,973 + 6,583 + 7,499 + 6,680 + 7,290 + 7,133
           of which:
               United States  Exports 118,680 103,476 122,038 9,964 10,937 13,822 11,920 13,439 14,300
  Imports 71,334 67,694 72,132 6,079 6,042 7,531 6,732 7,795 8,397
Balance +47,346 +35,782 +49,906 + 3,885 + 4,895 + 6,290 + 5,188 + 5,644 + 5,903
       3. Asia Exports 221,278 208,146 224,993 17,474 19,917 22,436 18,438 20,806 20,951
  Imports 227,036 226,646 266,849 25,946 24,721 29,594 29,432 32,432 29,440
Balance – 5,759 –18,500 –41,856 – 8,473 – 4,803 – 7,158 –10,994 –11,625 – 8,489
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 28,663 25,882 26,112 1,950 2,201 2,517 1,981 2,218 2,454
  Imports 7,460 6,721 7,506 571 700 733 956 1,036 1,057
Balance +21,202 +19,161 +18,606 + 1,378 + 1,501 + 1,784 + 1,025 + 1,182 + 1,397
               Japan  Exports 20,662 17,396 18,238 1,557 1,737 1,916 1,611 1,675 1,642
Imports 23,904 21,427 23,486 1,855 1,932 2,111 2,085 2,219 2,078
Balance – 3,243 – 4,032 – 5,248 – 298 – 195 – 196 – 474 – 544 – 435
               People's Republic  Exports 95,984 95,840 103,690 7,918 9,064 10,445 8,251 9,207 9,098
               of China  2 Imports 110,054 117,373 142,277 14,631 13,532 16,689 16,710 17,176 16,275
Balance –14,070 –21,533 –38,587 – 6,714 – 4,468 – 6,244 – 8,458 – 7,969 – 7,177
               New industrial countries Exports 54,164 50,590 55,241 4,501 4,985 5,429 4,784 5,434 5,570
               and emerging markets  Imports 51,748 48,222 55,401 5,173 5,031 5,531 5,318 7,255 5,699
               of Asia  3 Balance + 2,416 + 2,368 – 160 – 671 – 46 – 102 – 534 – 1,821 – 129
       4. Oceania and Exports 11,221 10,685 11,655 1,011 1,090 1,297 1,182 1,202 1,011
           polar regions Imports 3,872 3,861 4,183 591 401 696 536 850 785
Balance + 7,349 + 6,824 + 7,472 + 420 + 689 + 601 + 646 + 352 + 226
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. EU excl. UK.  1 Including fuel and other supplies for ships andaircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.  3 Brunei
Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Zeit Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2017 – 23,994 – 3,679 – 43,558 + 9,613 + 14,903 – 8,188 – 1,065 + 2,177 + 1,139 + 76,669 – 1,403
2018 – 15,806 – 2,044 – 44,543 + 10,060 + 17,219 – 7,060 + 723 + 3,322 + 671 +112,223 – 1,004
2019 – 18,100 – 72 – 45,947 + 10,999 + 18,299 – 9,697 – 2,984 + 3,489 + 846 +115,462 – 949
2020 + 2,725 – 9,392 – 14,678 + 10,239 + 17,546 – 7,107 – 4,382 + 3,363 + 3,234 + 97,017 – 1,471
2021 + 314 – 12,067 – 21,924 + 8,737 + 31,878 – 7,515 – 8,523 + 3,513 + 2,605 +126,146 – 2,145
2020 Q4 + 5,599 – 2,902 – 98 + 2,713 + 4,880 – 928 – 1,007 + 668 + 1,067 + 29,998 + 3,255
2021 Q1 + 3,281 – 3,183 – 13 + 2,251 + 5,756 – 2,478 – 1,436 + 884 + 1,324 + 31,487 – 997
Q2 + 6,401 – 2,075 – 2,151 + 2,589 + 8,007 – 1,329 – 1,164 + 914 + 494 + 21,077 – 2,947
Q3 – 8,160 – 2,259 – 14,130 + 1,221 + 9,080 – 2,169 – 2,331 + 946 – 77 + 35,585 – 1,232
Q4 – 1,208 – 4,551 – 5,629 + 2,676 + 9,035 – 1,539 – 3,592 + 769 + 864 + 37,996 + 3,031
2022 Q1 – 2,468 – 5,551 – 4,636 + 2,301 + 7,619 – 3,220 – 1,746 + 949 + 1,233 + 36,924 – 1,262
Q2 – 7,134 – 1,461 – 12,055 + 2,831 + 6,071 – 1,857 – 2,811 + 947 + 322 + 19,623 – 3,791
2021 Aug. – 3,543 – 438 – 5,364 – 418 + 2,818 – 334 – 621 + 303 – 26 + 12,356 – 408
Sep. – 2,105 – 861 – 5,532 + 753 + 3,543 – 552 – 469 + 353 – 8 + 12,871 – 416
Oct. – 2,802 – 1,157 – 3,543 + 1,115 + 2,593 – 637 – 1,813 + 285 + 248 + 12,006 – 472
Nov. + 71 – 1,122 – 1,354 + 646 + 3,318 – 830 – 1,478 + 182 + 252 + 12,184 – 415
Dec. + 1,523 – 2,272 – 733 + 915 + 3,125 – 72 – 301 + 302 + 364 + 13,807 + 3,918
2022 Jan. – 338 – 1,741 – 1,141 + 894 + 2,714 – 1,340 – 458 + 311 + 437 + 13,068 – 405
Feb. + 414 – 1,844 – 1,249 + 714 + 2,773 – 875 – 232 + 322 + 434 + 10,396 – 415
Mar. – 2,543 – 1,966 – 2,246 + 694 + 2,132 – 1,005 – 1,056 + 317 + 361 + 13,460 – 441
Apr. – 1,170 – 805 – 2,247 + 912 + 2,189 – 1,203 – 707 + 288 + 68 + 11,054 – 625
May – 2,569 – 576 – 3,777 + 847 + 1,854 – 718 – 1,028 + 303 + 102 – 3,546 – 2,410
p June – 3,395 – 80 – 6,032 + 1,072 + 2,028 + 64 – 1,076 + 355 + 153 + 12,115 – 757
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Zeit Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2017 – 51,673 – 23,191 – 9,851 + 9,665 – 28,482 .+ 4,613 – 2,936 + 926 – 3,863
2018 – 50,338 – 28,710 – 10,186 + 10,230 – 21,627 .+ 5,142 + 580 + 3,349 – 2,769
2019 – 49,811 – 28,986 – 10,728 + 11,742 – 20,825 .+ 5,431 – 887 + 3,028 – 3,915
2020 – 52,727 – 34,127 – 12,239 + 10,929 – 18,600 .+ 5,908 – 5,829 + 380 – 6,209
2021 – 54,090 – 32,567 – 7,039 + 11,982 – 21,523 .+ 6,170 – 1,376 + 3,191 – 4,567
2020 Q4 – 18,238 – 13,375 – 4,391 + 1,752 – 4,863 + 1,482 + 1,477 – 3,783 + 295 – 4,078
2021 Q1 – 17,276 – 11,088 + 327 + 2,297 – 6,188 .+ 1,543 – 331 + 123 – 454
Q2 – 8,225 – 3,644 – 1,113 + 5,341 – 4,582 .+ 1,543 – 1,788 – 1,578 – 211
Q3 – 14,029 – 8,787 – 2,834 + 2,199 – 5,242 .+ 1,543 + 1,745 + 2,918 – 1,173
Q4 – 14,560 – 9,048 – 3,420 + 2,144 – 5,511 + 1,548 + 1,543 – 1,002 + 1,728 – 2,730
2022 Q1 – 16,388 – 10,040 – 2,369 + 2,410 – 6,348 .+ 1,598 – 1,865 – 1,885 + 20
Q2 – 11,600 – 5,341 – 2,729 + 7,260 – 6,259 + 1,602 + 1,598 – 4,334 – 3,259 – 1,075
2021 Aug. – 4,251 – 2,813 – 277 + 410 – 1,438 + 515 + 514 + 493 + 686 – 192
Sep. – 4,406 – 2,512 – 240 + 1,077 – 1,894 .+ 514 + 1,877 + 2,440 – 563
Oct. – 5,099 – 3,257 – 122 + 472 – 1,843 + 516 + 514 + 416 + 786 – 370
Nov. – 5,582 – 3,691 – 743 + 347 – 1,892 + 516 + 514 – 1,153 – 513 – 640
Dec. – 3,878 – 2,101 – 2,555 + 1,325 – 1,777 + 516 + 514 – 265 + 1,455 – 1,720
2022 Jan. – 6,074 – 4,295 – 1,394 + 454 – 1,779 .+ 533 – 104 – 291 + 187
Feb. – 5,421 – 3,893 – 829 + 940 – 1,527 + 534 + 533 – 1,297 – 1,257 – 40
Mar. – 4,893 – 1,852 – 145 + 1,016 – 3,041 + 537 + 533 – 464 – 337 – 127
Apr. – 4,691 – 2,728 – 426 + 1,060 – 1,963 + 534 + 533 – 1,272 – 790 – 482
May – 1,046 + 1,349 – 488 + 4,973 – 2,396 + 534 + 533 – 2,772 – 2,363 – 409
p June – 5,862 – 3,962 – 1,815 + 1,226 – 1,900 + 535 + 533 – 290 – 106 – 184
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2021 2022
Item 2019  2020  2021  Q3  Q4  Q1 April May June  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +251,072 +739,081 +844,810 +147,616 +276,086 +204,882 +13,112 +27,489 +71,054
1.Direct investment +139,279 +119,458 +163,651 +43,555 +38,791 +44,793 +28,757 + 9,761 +16,259
Equity +116,157 +90,170 +113,012 +35,950 +11,956 +29,186 +10,067 + 8,791 + 9,768
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +40,785 +21,039 +55,475 +17,913 + 7,203 +20,797 + 5,381 + 3,698 + 4,880
Debt instruments +23,122 +29,288 +50,638 + 7,606 +26,835 +15,607 +18,690 + 969 + 6,492
2.Portfolio investment +134,961 +191,740 +221,477 +55,285 +42,049 +59,730 – 7,268 + 1,845 + 6,877
Shares  2 +13,672 +65,214 +56,007 +19,786 +12,910 + 7,228 + 5,830 + 1,539 – 2,187
Investment fund shares  3 +53,708 +62,585 +103,434 +22,168 +39,858 + 3,970 + 2,113 + 548 – 1,476
Short-term  4
debt securities + 7,424 + 3,852 – 6,256 + 7,639 –10,366 + 1,329 + 1,978 – 4,594 – 2
Long-term   5
debt securities +60,157 +60,089 +68,292 + 5,692 – 353 +47,202 –17,189 + 4,351 +10,542
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +24,544 +96,276 +60,977 +10,230 +18,916 +10,566 + 7,401 – 894 + 7,424
4.Other investment  7 –47,168 +331,659 +366,813 + 7,347 +176,081 +87,593 –15,860 +16,617 +40,140
MFIs  8 + 9,256 – 4,522 +112,866 –31,971 –15,065 +139,954 – 3,536 – 593 –15,300
Short-term – 8,901 + 3,526 +99,548 –23,041 –26,717 +131,275 + 2,069 + 2,500 –11,936
Long-term +18,157 – 8,048 +13,318 – 8,931 +11,652 + 8,679 – 5,604 – 3,093 – 3,364
Enterprises and
households  9 +14,348 +90,994 +138,858 +24,931 +44,797 +45,131 +25,287 – 3,854 + 1,930
Short-term + 793 +45,448 +124,088 +17,622 +46,917 +43,566 +22,520 – 4,969 – 54
Long-term +13,555 +45,545 +14,770 + 7,309 – 2,119 + 1,565 + 2,767 + 1,115 + 1,984
General government + 144 + 2,076 – 8,305 – 724 + 756 – 5,842 – 1,792 – 3,631 – 5,289
Short-term + 3,357 + 3,461 – 7,502 – 456 + 1,061 – 5,362 – 1,658 – 3,638 – 4,884
Long-term – 3,213 – 1,385 – 803 – 268 – 305 – 480 – 134 + 7– 405
Bundesbank –70,915 +243,112 +123,394 +15,111 +145,592 –91,650 –35,820 +24,695 +58,799
5.Reserve assets – 544 – 51 +31,892 +31,199 + 250 + 2,200 + 83 + 161 + 353
II.Net foreign investment in the
reporting country (increase: +) +64,756 +522,566 +530,060 +110,694 +189,772 +110,879 + 8,556 +28,410 +25,240
1.Direct investment +63,683 +122,929 +61,833 +19,265 + 5,884 +40,074 +15,966 – 6,995 + 7,749
Equity +23,492 +43,862 +36,972 + 5,379 + 9,840 + 4,684 + 685 + 3,335 + 2,079
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 – 492 + 1,880 + 4,787 + 3,003 + 1,952 + 3,284 + 874 – 513 + 1,047
Debt instruments +40,192 +79,068 +24,861 +13,887 – 3,956 +35,390 +15,281 –10,331 + 5,670
2.Portfolio investment +65,309 +148,877 –33,617 – 8,155 –53,336 +21,283 –18,391 – 2,350 + 5,080
Shares  2 – 7,275 –15,982 – 3,703 + 420 – 7,583 – 9,199 – 3,716 – 690 – 1,556
Investment fund shares  3 – 4,519 + 1,862 – 2,760 – 1,096 – 2,847 – 2,211 + 463 + 625 + 525
Short-term  4
debt securities +14,400 +83,707 +25,027 + 9,532 – 6,073 – 5,244 – 7,485 – 7,046 + 7,458
Long-term   5
debt securities +62,704 +79,290 –52,181 –17,011 –36,833 +37,937 – 7,653 + 4,761 – 1,346
3.Other investment  7 –64,237 +250,760 +501,843 +99,584 +237,225 +49,522 +10,982 +37,756 +12,410
MFIs  8 –10,214 +108,323 +159,384 – 2,854 –114,455 +266,244 + 5,613 +17,906 –17,408
Short-term –20,978 +74,805 +115,401 –19,087 –127,741 +290,964 + 6,103 +13,731 –17,283
Long-term +10,764 +33,517 +43,984 +16,233 +13,286 –24,720 – 490 + 4,175 – 125
Enterprises and
households  9 +43,978 +39,313 +120,200 +27,460 +89,278 –14,909 +25,042 + 4,273 +10,013
Short-term +11,681 +18,361 +115,536 +25,692 +80,436 –17,519 +23,315 + 4,351 +10,422
Long-term +32,297 +20,952 + 4,663 + 1,768 + 8,842 + 2,610 + 1,727 – 79 – 410
General government + 1,620 – 7,817 – 4,537 – 140 – 246 – 641 – 66 + 37 – 609
Short-term + 1,424 – 7,664 – 2,186 – 156 – 661 + 2,078 – 161 + 17 – 617
Long-term + 196 – 153 – 2,351 + 15 + 416 – 2,719 + 94 + 19 + 8
Bundesbank –99,621 +110,941 +226,796 +75,117 +262,648 –201,172 –19,608 +15,541 +20,414
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +186,317 +216,515 +314,750 +36,922 +86,314 +94,003 + 4,556 – 921 +45,814
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see Statistical series, direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities 3ä,  4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,670
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 663,320 497,651
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2020 Feb. 1,106,033 215,748 159,889 14,857 5,989 35,014 836,782 821,562 53,503 577,011 529,022
Mar. 1,218,815 213,722 158,677 14,812 5,965 34,268 952,781 935,126 52,312 617,919 600,896
Apr. 1,214,851 226,903 170,359 14,935 6,857 34,753 934,333 918,814 53,615 616,319 598,532
May 1,209,328 223,125 167,780 14,650 6,787 33,908 931,521 916,145 54,682 612,403 596,925
June 1,294,167 226,135 170,728 14,603 6,955 33,849 1,012,982 995,083 55,050 618,825 675,342
July 1,323,691 233,547 180,400 14,179 7,465 31,503 1,034,282 1,019,214 55,862 599,189 724,503
Aug. 1,358,137 230,309 177,973 14,129 7,423 30,784 1,071,521 1,056,231 56,307 600,390 757,747
Sep. 1,414,933 227,150 173,979 14,293 7,632 31,246 1,131,686 1,115,189 56,097 649,781 765,151
Oct. 1,346,367 227,767 174,433 14,346 7,656 31,332 1,061,498 1,047,327 57,102 619,445 726,922
Nov. 1,347,202 212,286 159,737 14,193 7,535 30,820 1,078,270 1,060,263 56,647 625,921 721,282
Dec. 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 Jan. 1,348,921 219,860 166,494 14,115 8,061 31,190 1,072,140 1,054,994 56,921 638,042 710,879
Feb. 1,328,303 210,619 157,313 14,119 8,047 31,140 1,060,378 1,043,746 57,306 616,473 711,830
Mar. 1,364,046 209,400 155,323 14,367 7,966 31,744 1,098,486 1,081,989 56,160 647,647 716,400
Apr. 1,307,161 210,799 158,143 14,085 7,836 30,735 1,041,472 1,024,734 54,890 604,863 702,299
May 1,370,231 221,201 168,678 14,037 7,809 30,677 1,093,721 1,076,918 55,309 621,827 748,404
June 1,384,834 213,600 159,995 14,326 8,094 31,184 1,115,447 1,101,897 55,787 670,632 714,202
July 1,319,694 219,775 165,984 14,345 8,104 31,343 1,042,015 1,024,970 57,903 657,905 661,789
Aug. 1,360,722 250,742 165,757 45,091 8,174 31,720 1,053,653 1,037,259 56,327 699,773 660,949
Sep. 1,431,909 246,908 160,943 45,606 8,267 32,092 1,130,558 1,115,126 54,443 746,128 685,781
Oct. 1,388,160 250,340 164,602 45,719 8,449 31,570 1,083,141 1,066,604 54,678 735,595 652,564
Nov. 1,456,861 258,815 170,460 46,375 8,405 33,575 1,142,719 1,127,545 55,327 773,217 683,644
Dec. 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 Jan. 1,479,694 261,965 173,362 46,931 8,504 33,168 1,163,561 1,149,868 54,168 807,889 671,805
Feb. 1,491,552 273,726 184,255 46,854 8,711 33,905 1,164,098 1,149,722 53,729 774,786 716,766
Mar. 1,516,744 277,782 187,779 47,375 8,663 33,965 1,184,501 1,169,952 54,462 808,690 708,055
Apr. 1,491,558 288,953 196,274 48,617 8,799 35,263 1,148,681 1,135,400 53,923 790,221 701,337
May 1,505,419 278,174 186,481 48,031 8,681 34,980 1,173,376 1,159,716 53,869 805,179 700,240
June 1,566,099 281,157 187,573 48,712 8,948 35,923 1,232,176 1,216,530 52,767 826,280 739,819
July 1,514,570 280,910 185,950 49,465 9,086 36,409 1,179,431 1,166,155 54,229 810,881 703,689
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2018 933,849 234,970 698,880 466,225 232,654 217,969 14,686 1,232,594 146,575 1,086,019 879,752 206,267 135,214 71,053
2019 963,967 227,688 736,279 502,594 233,685 217,370 16,314 1,305,705 167,656 1,138,048 927,650 210,399 134,768 75,630
2020 1,021,200 248,779 772,421 544,059 228,362 211,891 16,471 1,394,364 171,998 1,222,366 1,012,503 209,863 129,098 80,766
2021 1,152,509 260,321 892,188 604,424 287,764 270,847 16,917 1,548,984 218,886 1,330,098 1,066,016 264,082 175,351 88,730
2022 Jan. 1,182,691 270,790 911,902 621,146 290,756 273,635 17,121 1,578,209 219,558 1,358,651 1,089,067 269,583 179,085 90,498
Feb. 1,197,848 268,435 929,412 620,512 308,901 280,714 28,187 1,567,699 214,946 1,352,753 1,072,422 280,331 180,331 99,999
Mar. 1,215,926 280,049 935,878 614,010 321,868 293,304 28,564 1,575,472 200,446 1,375,026 1,081,713 293,313 193,098 100,215
Apr. 1,266,969 290,472 976,498 651,264 325,234 296,190 29,044 1,629,738 212,997 1,416,741 1,123,694 293,047 189,904 103,142
May 1,258,386 278,294 980,092 649,343 330,749 301,007 29,741 1,619,688 207,553 1,412,135 1,114,726 297,409 193,823 103,586
p June 1,272,427 256,769 1,015,658 669,895 345,763 315,489 30,274 1,641,545 192,443 1,449,102 1,134,627 314,475 210,435 104,040
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2018 544,009 177,064 366,944 274,402 92,542 84,191 8,351 801,772 88,161 713,611 631,814 81,798 61,161 20,637
2019 572,324 176,847 395,476 304,605 90,871 82,120 8,752 836,863 91,122 745,740 660,385 85,355 62,692 22,664
2020 609,449 187,703 421,746 332,983 88,763 79,780 8,983 884,904 95,716 789,188 702,991 86,197 61,357 24,841
2021 660,768 198,911 461,857 350,591 111,266 102,689 8,578 978,060 153,424 824,636 713,878 110,758 84,237 26,521
2022 Jan. 671,660 215,565 456,095 345,388 110,707 102,134 8,572 971,933 142,339 829,594 722,051 107,544 80,084 27,460
Feb. 681,358 211,676 469,682 348,920 120,762 108,053 12,709 973,954 142,276 831,677 716,073 115,604 84,901 30,703
Mar. 699,393 215,782 483,611 355,742 127,869 115,140 12,729 981,025 136,454 844,571 725,830 118,742 88,163 30,579
Apr. 728,052 231,393 496,659 365,832 130,827 118,000 12,827 996,555 136,904 859,651 740,339 119,311 87,983 31,328
May 722,157 220,735 501,423 366,255 135,167 122,235 12,933 999,363 134,322 865,041 740,291 124,749 93,032 31,717
p June 721,781 201,579 520,203 378,096 142,107 128,847 13,260 1,009,735 131,264 878,471 743,955 134,516 102,948 31,568
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2018 389,841 57,905 331,935 191,823 140,112 133,777 6,335 430,822 58,415 372,408 247,939 124,469 74,053 50,416
2019 391,643 50,841 340,803 197,989 142,814 135,251 7,563 468,842 76,534 392,308 267,265 125,043 72,077 52,967
2020 411,751 61,076 350,675 211,076 139,599 132,112 7,487 509,460 76,282 433,178 309,512 123,666 67,741 55,925
2021 491,741 61,410 430,331 253,833 176,498 168,158 8,340 570,924 65,462 505,463 352,138 153,324 91,115 62,210
2022 Jan. 511,031 55,225 455,806 275,758 180,049 171,500 8,549 606,275 77,219 529,056 367,017 162,039 99,001 63,038
Feb. 516,490 56,759 459,731 271,591 188,139 172,661 15,478 593,744 72,670 521,074 356,349 164,725 95,429 69,297
Mar. 516,534 64,267 452,267 258,268 193,999 178,164 15,835 594,446 63,991 530,455 355,883 174,572 104,935 69,636
Apr. 538,918 59,079 479,839 285,432 194,407 178,190 16,217 633,183 76,093 557,090 383,355 173,735 101,921 71,814
May 536,228 57,559 478,669 283,088 195,581 178,773 16,809 620,325 73,231 547,095 374,435 172,660 100,791 71,868
p June 550,646 55,190 495,455 291,799 203,656 186,642 17,014 631,809 61,178 570,631 390,672 179,959 107,487 72,472
Euro area (19)
2018 467,428 156,887 310,542 238,963 71,579 64,295 7,283 735,094 68,959 666,136 601,205 64,931 49,138 15,792
2019 493,062 158,102 334,960 264,834 70,127 62,531 7,595 761,144 70,561 690,584 624,607 65,977 48,775 17,202
2020 522,933 166,846 356,087 287,662 68,425 60,750 7,674 799,046 74,101 724,945 658,931 66,014 47,100 18,914
2021 553,838 176,279 377,560 289,330 88,230 80,844 7,386 896,256 131,735 764,521 675,868 88,653 68,232 20,421
2022 Jan. 575,958 197,224 378,734 291,435 87,300 79,960 7,339 891,509 121,646 769,863 685,108 84,755 63,633 21,122
Feb. 583,733 192,153 391,581 295,971 95,610 84,169 11,441 893,089 121,854 771,235 679,362 91,874 67,627 24,247
Mar. 596,153 195,325 400,828 299,564 101,264 89,818 11,446 897,685 116,893 780,793 686,158 94,635 70,651 23,984
Apr. 628,773 213,684 415,090 310,796 104,294 92,824 11,470 914,122 116,900 797,222 701,576 95,646 71,124 24,522
May 622,482 203,996 418,485 310,720 107,765 96,127 11,638 914,240 112,775 801,465 701,507 99,958 75,219 24,740
p June 616,948 186,043 430,905 315,942 114,963 103,023 11,940 923,330 112,177 811,153 701,635 109,518 85,042 24,476
Extra-Euro area (19)
2018 466,421 78,083 388,338 227,262 161,076 153,673 7,403 497,500 77,617 419,883 278,548 141,336 86,075 55,260
2019 470,905 69,586 401,319 237,761 163,558 154,839 8,719 544,560 97,096 447,465 303,043 144,422 85,993 58,428
2020 498,267 81,933 416,334 256,397 159,937 151,141 8,796 595,318 97,897 497,421 353,572 143,849 81,997 61,852
2021 598,671 84,042 514,629 315,094 199,535 190,003 9,532 652,728 87,151 565,577 390,148 175,429 107,119 68,309
2022 Jan. 606,733 73,566 533,167 329,711 203,456 193,674 9,782 686,699 97,912 588,788 403,959 184,829 115,452 69,377
Feb. 614,115 76,283 537,832 324,541 213,291 196,545 16,746 674,609 93,092 581,516 393,060 188,456 112,704 75,752
Mar. 619,773 84,723 535,050 314,445 220,604 203,486 17,118 677,787 83,553 594,234 395,555 198,679 122,447 76,231
Apr. 638,196 76,788 561,408 340,468 220,940 203,366 17,574 715,616 96,097 619,519 422,118 197,400 118,780 78,620
May 635,904 74,297 561,607 338,623 222,984 204,881 18,103 705,448 94,778 610,670 413,220 197,451 118,605 78,846
p June 655,479 70,726 584,753 353,953 230,800 212,466 18,334 718,215 80,266 637,949 432,992 204,957 125,393 79,564
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2021 1.5749 1.4826 7.6282 7.4370 129.88 10.1633 10.1465 1.0811 0.85960 1.1827
2021 Mar. 1.5444 1.4970 7.7465 7.4363 129.38 10.1469 10.1692 1.1065 0.85873 1.1899
Apr. 1.5544 1.4975 7.8051 7.4367 130.49 10.0376 10.1620 1.1031 0.86527 1.1979
May 1.5653 1.4732 7.8109 7.4362 132.57 10.0931 10.1471 1.0968 0.86258 1.2146
June 1.5761 1.4713 7.7391 7.4364 132.63 10.1444 10.1172 1.0940 0.85872 1.2047
July 1.5926 1.4806 7.6536 7.4373 130.35 10.3767 10.1979 1.0856 0.85613 1.1822
Aug. 1.6118 1.4827 7.6237 7.4369 129.28 10.4195 10.2157 1.0762 0.85287 1.1772
Sep. 1.6087 1.4910 7.6007 7.4361 129.66 10.1861 10.1710 1.0857 0.85683 1.1770
Oct. 1.5669 1.4436 7.4500 7.4398 131.21 9.8143 10.0557 1.0708 0.84694 1.1601
Nov. 1.5615 1.4339 7.2927 7.4373 130.12 9.9661 10.0459 1.0522 0.84786 1.1414
Dec. 1.5781 1.4463 7.1993 7.4362 128.80 10.1308 10.2726 1.0408 0.84875 1.1304
2022 Jan. 1.5770 1.4282 7.1922 7.4411 130.01 10.0070 10.3579 1.0401 0.83503 1.1314
Feb. 1.5825 1.4422 7.1957 7.4408 130.66 10.0544 10.5342 1.0461 0.83787 1.1342
Mar. 1.4946 1.3950 6.9916 7.4404 130.71 9.7367 10.5463 1.0245 0.83638 1.1019
Apr. 1.4663 1.3652 6.9605 7.4391 136.61 9.6191 10.3175 1.0211 0.83655 1.0819
May 1.4995 1.3588 7.0830 7.4405 136.24 10.1453 10.4956 1.0355 0.84969 1.0579
June 1.5044 1.3537 7.0734 7.4392 141.57 10.2972 10.6005 1.0245 0.85759 1.0566
July 1.4856 1.3180 6.8538 7.4426 139.17 10.1823 10.5752 0.9876 0.84955 1.0179
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2022
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-42  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
26 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  526 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.2 96.1 96.2 96.6 96.0 97.9 99.6 95.9 97.7 98.3 98.1 97.8
2000 87.1 86.9 86.2 85.6 88.1 86.2 92.0 97.5 85.5 91.2 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.6 87.2 86.7 84.5 90.2 86.9 91.7 96.6 86.0 90.5 93.0 91.7 91.0
2002 89.8 90.2 89.8 88.0 94.5 90.5 92.4 95.7 88.5 91.1 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.4 101.4 100.8 99.0 106.4 101.6 95.9 94.8 97.6 95.3 97.0 96.7 96.8
2004 104.2 105.2 103.8 102.2 110.9 105.4 96.2 93.6 100.0 95.6 98.5 98.2 98.4
2005 102.8 103.9 101.8 100.5 109.0 102.9 94.8 92.0 98.8 93.3 98.4 97.1 96.7
2006 102.8 103.9 101.2 99.3 109.1 102.3 93.5 90.4 98.2 91.6 98.6 96.7 96.0
2007 106.3 106.8 103.3 101.0 112.7 104.5 94.5 89.6 102.0 92.0 100.9 98.3 97.3
2008 110.1 109.7 105.5 104.8 117.4 106.9 94.9 88.3 105.2 91.3 102.4 98.4 97.5
2009 111.6 110.6 106.7 108.5 120.5 108.0 95.2 89.2 104.7 92.0 101.9 98.6 97.9
2010 104.4 102.9 98.5 100.9 111.9 99.0 92.5 88.7 98.2 88.2 98.8 94.3 92.5
2011 104.2 101.9 96.7 99.3 112.7 98.5 92.1 88.5 97.6 87.4 98.2 93.5 91.9
2012 98.5 96.7 91.1 93.6 107.5 93.7 90.1 88.3 92.5 84.7 95.9 90.5 88.9
2013 102.0 99.8 94.1 96.5 112.2 96.8 92.3 88.8 97.5 86.7 98.1 92.3 90.9
2014 102.3 99.1 94.0 96.6 114.5 97.1 92.9 89.6 97.7 87.4 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.5 89.5 85.5 86.0 106.1 88.6 89.8 90.3 88.9 83.6 94.4 87.8 86.9
2016 95.2 91.4 87.8 p 87.3 110.1 90.6 90.7 90.7 90.4 84.9 95.0 88.8 88.1
2017 97.4 93.4 88.9 p 88.0 112.4 91.8 91.9 90.9 93.3 85.7 96.3 89.9 88.9
2018 99.9 95.5 90.5 p 89.6 117.3 95.0 93.2 91.0 96.4 86.7 97.7 91.2 90.8
2019 98.1 93.1 88.7 p 87.1 115.4 92.4 92.2 91.2 93.5 85.8 96.4 89.9 89.4
2020 99.6 93.5 89.4 p 87.7 119.4 93.9 92.1 91.3 93.3 86.2 96.4 90.1 90.2
2021 99.6 93.4 p 88.6 p 86.1 120.8 94.2 93.3 91.8 95.4 86.6 97.4 90.7 91.0
2020 Feb. 96.2 90.5 88.0 p 87.0 113.5 89.8 91.7 91.4 92.0 85.4 95.5 88.7 88.0
Mar. 98.8 93.0 117.8 93.1 96.3 90.0 89.9
Apr. 98.1 92.5 117.5 93.0 96.1 90.1 90.2
May 98.3 92.6 88.6 p 87.5 117.5 92.9 91.3 91.2 91.3 85.8 96.4 90.2 90.3
June 99.7 93.8 119.1 94.0 97.0 90.8 90.8
July 100.4 94.3 120.3 94.7 96.0 90.0 90.2
Aug. 101.5 94.9 90.3 p 88.5 122.4 95.8 92.7 91.3 94.6 86.9 97.0 90.7 91.2
Sep. 101.5 94.9 122.4 95.8 96.8 90.6 91.1
Oct. 101.3 94.8 122.4 95.7 96.7 90.5 91.0
Nov. 100.6 94.3 90.5 p 87.9 121.6 95.2 93.0 91.3 95.4 86.8 96.5 90.1 90.5
Dec. 101.8 95.2 122.9 96.0 97.0 90.5 90.9
2021 Jan. 101.3 95.3 122.4 96.0 98.0 91.4 91.7
Feb. 100.6 94.5 90.0 p 88.0 121.5 95.1 93.2 91.5 95.5 86.8 98.0 91.3 91.5
Mar. 100.3 94.1 121.2 94.8 97.7 91.1 91.4
Apr. 100.6 94.3 121.9 95.2 97.8 91.2 91.6
May 100.8 94.3 89.3 p 86.4 122.3 95.2 93.0 91.1 95.7 86.4 98.1 91.4 91.8
June 100.2 93.7 121.5 94.5 98.0 91.2 91.5
July 99.7 93.4 120.8 94.1 97.6 91.0 91.2
Aug. 99.3 93.1 p 88.7 p 85.7 120.4 93.8 93.8 92.2 96.0 87.1 97.3 90.6 90.9
Sep. 99.4 93.3 120.4 93.8 97.3 90.7 90.8
Oct. 98.4 92.4 119.5 93.1 96.6 90.0 90.2
Nov. 97.6 91.7 p 86.5 p 84.3 118.8 92.6 93.3 92.4 94.5 86.4 96.2 89.5 89.8
Dec. 97.1 91.2 119.0 92.5 95.8 89.0 89.5
2022 Jan. 96.6 91.2 118.6 p 92.3 96.0 89.0 p 89.5
Feb. 96.9 91.7 p 84.6 p 83.1 118.9 p 92.7 92.1 91.4 92.9 84.9 96.1 89.1 p 89.5
Mar. 95.9 91.3 118.4 p 92.8 96.3 89.5 p 90.0
Apr. 95.2 p 89.9 116.4 p 90.4 96.2 p 89.0 p 88.9
May 95.6 p 90.3 ... ... 116.2 p 90.2 … … … … 96.6 p 89.6 p 89.3
June 95.9 p 90.5 116.5 p 90.3 p95.7 p 88.8 p 88.5
July 94.1 p 89.0 114.6 p 88.9 p94.9 p 88.0 p 87.6
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the curren-
cy concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's price
competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective exchange
rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. The
weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more detailed in-
formation on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the Deutsche
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 The calculations are
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland,
Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the
United States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates were
used.  2 Includes countries belonging to the group EER-19 and additionally Algeria,
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico,Morocco, New Zealand, Peru, Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South
Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and United Arab Emirates. The ECB suspends
the publication and calculation of the euro foreign exchange reference rate against
Russian rouble with effect from March 2, 2022 until further notice. For the calculation
of effective exchange rates, an indicative rate is used for the Russian Federation from
that date. It is calculated from the daily RUB/USD rates determined by the Bank of
Russia in conjunction with the respective ECB's euro foreign exchange reference rate to
the US dollar.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from 2001 in-
cluding Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta,
from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia,
from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.  5 Euro area countries (current
composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-19.  6 Euro area countries (cur-
rent composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-42.

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website. In addition, the new Statistical Series 
provide a new basic structure and advanced options for using data and are also available 
on the Bundesbank’s website.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
A list of the articles published in the period from 
2010 to 2021 is available on the Bundesbank’s 
website.
Monthly Report articles
October 2021
– State government finances in 2020: deficit 
due to temporary effects of pandemic, es -
cape clauses also used to build reserves
– The global economy during the coronavirus 
pandemic
– What do households in Germany think about 
the digital euro? First results from surveys 
and interviews
– The regulation of remuneration at credit in -
stitutions
November 2021
– The current economic situation in GermanyDecember 2021
– Outlook for the German economy for 2022 
to 2024
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2020
January 2022
– Changes in the secured money market
– Climate change and climate policy: analytical 
requirements and options  from a central 
bank perspective
– Scenario- based equity valuation effects in -
duced by greenhouse gas emissions
February 2022
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2022
– Monetary policy in a prolonged period of 
low interest rates – a discussion of the con -
cept of the reversal rate
– German balance of payments in 2021
April 2022
– Potential macroeconomic consequences of 
the war in Ukraine – simulations based on a 
severe risk scenarioDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
85•

– Development of the debt situation in the 
euro area private non- financial sector since 
the outbreak of the COVID-  19 pandemic
– Central government’s debt brake: options for 
stability- oriented further development
– Demand for euro banknotes issued by the 
Bundesbank: current developments
May 2022
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2022
– Outlook for the German economy for 2022 
to 2024
– Pension insurance scheme: long- term scen -
arios and reform options
– Inflation-  induced bracket creep in the in -
come tax scale
– Public finances in the euro area: current de -
velopments and  challenges
– The Bundesbank’s surveys of firms – applica -
tions for assessing the financial situation in 
the corporate sector
July 2022
– Distributional Wealth Accounts for house -
holds in Germany – results and use cases
– Factors influencing international portfolio 
flows
– Cross- border interoperability of central bank 
digital currency
– Government debt in the euro area: develop -
ments in creditor structure
August 2022
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, January 20221,2
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
January 20222
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131
Discussion Paperso
15/2022  
Financial crises and shadow banks: A quantita -
tive analysis16/2022  
What moves markets?
17/ 2022  
Would households understand average inflation 
targeting?
18/ 2022  
Time inconsistency and overdraft use: Evidence 
from transaction data and behavioral measure -
ment experiments
19/ 2022  
The impact of German public support transfers 
on firm finance – Evidence from the Covid-  19 
crisis
20/ 2022  
Foreign exchange interventions and their im -
pact on expectations: Evidence from the USD/  
ILS options market
21/ 2022  
Monetary policy and endogenous financial 
 crises
22/ 2022  
The augmented bank balance- sheet channel of 
monetary policy
23/ 2022  
Pulling ourselves up by our bootstraps: the 
greenhouse gas value of products, enterprises 
and industries
24/ 2022  
CDS market structure and bond spreads
25/ 2022  
Carbon pricing, border adjustment and climate 
clubs: An assessment with EMuSe
26/ 2022  
Spending effects of child- related fiscal transfers
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
87•

27/ 2022  
The impact of weight shifts on inflation: Evi -
dence for the euro area HICP
28/ 2022  
Smart or smash? The effect of financial sanc -
tions on trade in goods and services
29/2022  
Information transmission between banks and 
the market for corporate control
30/2022  
Loan pricing in internal capital markets and the 
impact of the two-tier system – Finance groups 
in Germany
31/2022  
A review of some recent developments in the 
modelling and seasonal adjustment of 
infra-monthly time seriesBanking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, 
January  20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2022  
88•

