Monthly Report
November 2022
Vol. 74  
No 11

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 33512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 16 p.m. on 21 November 2022.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  7
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  13
The recent energy price shock in a historical comparison  ...................................................  15
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  25
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  26
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  39
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  49
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  59
New tasks assigned to the Economic Stabilisation Fund  .....................................................  69Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
6

Overview
Inflationary pressures 
unabated  despite economic 
weak spell
Global activity continues to 
deteriorate 
Global economic activity continued to deterior -
ate in the third quarter of 2022. Sustained 
strong price pressures weighed on private con -
sumption in particular. The tightening of mon -
etary policy being pursued in many places also 
left its first marks. In Europe, exceptionally high 
energy prices and uncertainty about the future 
supply of energy were additional drags on eco -
nomic activity. Growth in gross domestic prod -
uct (GDP) therefore weakened markedly in the 
euro area. In Japan and the United Kingdom, 
economic output even declined somewhat. 
The steep growth in China was primarily due to 
the easing of pandemic-  related restrictions. 
GDP in the United States also increased signifi -
cantly, following a decline in the first half of the 
year. In both economies, though, the under -
lying cyclical trend remained subdued.
Commodity prices falling
Given the global economic slowdown, the 
prices of many industrial commodities con -
tinued to fall over the past few months. Euro -
pean gas and electricity prices even dropped 
fairly significantly since the end of August, from 
their record levels. Key factors behind this were 
reduced consumption (partly on account of the 
weather), persistently high imports of liquefied 
gas and almost completely full gas storage fa -
cilities. Oil prices, by contrast, did not fall any 
further, but picked up again somewhat at the 
beginning of the fourth quarter. One reason for 
this was the decision made by OPEC and its 
partners to substantially reduce crude oil pro -
duction from November onwards. Prices for 
some refined petroleum products, such as die -sel and heating oil, even rose distinctly, mainly 
as a result of declining imports from Russia and 
low inventories. It was only recently that they 
came down again.
Consumer prices and wages 
seeing stronger growth
The dwindling commodity prices did not lead 
to lower consumer inflation rates, however. On 
the contrary, consumer price inflation became 
even more broad- based globally owing to the 
protracted high level of cost pressure. In the 
euro area, annual inflation as measured by the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) 
rose to 10.6% by October, and the rate exclud -
ing energy and food climbed to 5.0%. Looking 
ahead, the declining commodity prices should 
dampen consumer price inflation. However, 
wage growth continued to increase in a num -
ber of advanced economies, which could pro -
long the inflation process.
Financial markets shaped by 
monetary policy normalisation
The international financial markets were 
marked by the record inflation rates together 
with the continued tightening of monetary pol -
icy on both sides of the Atlantic. Yields in sov -
ereign bond markets rose significantly, espe -
cially as key central banks signalled their will -
ingness to raise interest rates further. In July, 
September and November, the Federal Reserve 
raised the policy rate by 75 basis points in each 
case to a target range of between 3.75% and 
4%; the Eurosystem has increased key interest 
rates by a total of 200 basis points in multiple 
increments since July. Both central banks also 
envisaged further interest rate steps. Moreover, 
market participants are expecting the Eurosys -
tem to soon end the reinvestment of maturing 
bonds. At the same time, the risks of expan -Further slow -
down in global 
economy
Drop in indus -
trial commodity 
prices and Euro -
pean gas pricesIncreased 
broad- based 
consumer price 
inflation
Financial mar -
kets centring on 
high inflation 
rates and 
expected tight -
ening of monet -
ary policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
7

sionary fiscal policy in times when monetary 
policy tightening is needed became more 
prominent in the financial markets. In the 
United Kingdom, the announcement of non-  
funded tax cuts (which were later withdrawn) 
led to an abrupt increase in government bond 
yields. The Bank of England perceived this as a 
threat to financial stability and had to deviate 
from its course of monetary policy tightening 
to initiate temporary purchases of domestic 
government bonds and further support meas -
ures. This episode illustrates the tensions that 
interest rate policy normalisation can create in 
the financial markets if it is not flanked by ap -
propriate fiscal policy.
The stock markets rebounded following the 
steep price losses in the previous quarters. Al -
though the rise in interest rates and entrenched 
doubts about the economy continued to 
dampen prices, as of the fourth quarter reports 
of sizeable liquefied gas deliveries and high gas 
storage levels have revived investors’ risk appe -
tite and optimism, especially in Europe. Largely 
driven by the monetary policy tightening im -
pulses of the Eurosystem and the Federal Re -
serve, the euro distinctly lost value against the 
US dollar initially, but subsequently made up 
most of the losses. In effective terms, by con -
trast, the euro gained value.
Further steep interest rate rises 
by Eurosystem
The ECB Governing Council raised the three key 
ECB interest rates by 75 basis points twice, at 
its September meeting and its October meet -
ing. The continued tightening of the monetary 
policy stance occurred because inflation re -
mains high and is gauged to stay above the 2% 
medium- term target for an extended period. 
The risks to the inflation outlook are also still 
primarily tilted to the upside. The withdrawal of 
monetary policy accommodation is aimed at 
reducing support for demand and guarding 
against the risk of a persistent upward shift in 
inflation expectations.In view of the unexpected and extraordinary 
rise in inflation, the Governing Council decided 
furthermore in October to change the terms 
and conditions of the third series of targeted 
longer- term refinancing operations (TLTRO III). 
The recalibration was made to ensure consist -
ency with the broader monetary policy normal -
isation process and to reinforce the transmis -
sion of policy rates to bank lending conditions. 
In addition, the ECB Governing Council ad -
justed the remuneration of minimum reserves 
held by credit institutions with the Eurosystem 
in order to align them more closely with money 
market conditions.
Credit growth defies tighten -
ing of financing conditions
Influenced by the energy crisis and the uncer -
tain economic outlook, the euro area’s broad 
monetary aggregate M3 expanded more 
strongly again in the third quarter than it had 
done in the two weaker preceding quarters. 
One striking development on the components 
side was the strong growth in short- term time 
deposits, whose increased remuneration ap -
pears to have made this form of investment 
significantly more attractive. On the counter -
parts side, robust bank lending to non- financial 
corporations was a major contributor to mon -
etary growth. The banks surveyed in the Bank 
Lending Survey (BLS) reported that they had 
tightened credit standards across all loan cat -
egories – significantly so, in some cases. How -
ever, unlike in the case of loans for house pur -
chase, the tighter financing conditions were 
not yet significantly dampening growth in loans 
to enterprises in the reporting quarter. This is 
because firms’ financing needs remained high, 
especially for working capital and inventories.
Strong demand for loans to 
enterprises in Germany, too
In the third quarter, banks in Germany, too, 
strongly expanded their lending to the domes -Monetary 
policy : ECB Gov -
erning Council 
significantly 
raises key inter -
est rates twice in 
reporting quar -
ter and …… adjusts terms 
of TLTRO III and 
remuneration on 
minimum 
reserves
Robust lending 
supports monet -
ary growthDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
8

tic private sector once again, especially to non- 
financial corporations. The bulk of this was at -
tributable to government assistance loans to 
energy companies, although other firms’ de -
mand for bank loans remained robust as well. 
This was due, inter alia, to the fact that bank 
loans continued to substitute for relatively ex -
pensive capital market financing. Marked in -
flows were likewise recorded in loans to house -
holds in the third quarter, although these were 
weaker than in the preceding quarters.
Q3 sees surprising growth in 
German economic output
Contrary to expectations, German economic 
activity expanded in the third quarter of 2022. 
Although high inflation and uncertainty about 
the future supply of energy weighed on the 
economy, real GDP grew by 0.3% on the quar -
ter after seasonal adjustment according to the 
Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, thus 
exceeding its pre- pandemic level for the first 
time. The lifting of most of the coronavirus 
mitigation measures provided positive momen -
tum in some services sectors. While house -
holds’ reluctance to purchase owing to high 
inflation rates and uncertainty was felt in the 
retail sector, private consumption nonetheless 
rose markedly overall, thus proving more resili -
ent than expected. Diminishing supply bottle -
necks and a high order backlog boosted pro -
duction in the manufacturing sector. The eas -
ing of pressure along supply chains bolstered 
investment in machinery and equipment, too. 
Construction activity weakened against the 
backdrop of high construction prices, reduced 
purchasing power and higher financing costs.
In the third quarter, the labour market moved 
largely sideways in terms of both employment 
and unemployment. The previously very posi -
tive outlook deteriorated, however. At present, 
the labour market is caught between under -
staffing in many sectors, a high number of va -
cancies and long recruitment periods on the 
one hand, and declining demand for labour – especially in the areas hit especially hard by 
cost increases – on the other. This tight situ -
ation will therefore ease in the coming months, 
but the labour market is likely to remain broadly 
stable.
Elevated risk of second- round 
effects on inflation
Negotiated pay rates continued to increase 
moderately in the third quarter of 2022. Never -
theless, a growing number of the most recent 
wage agreements have been strong. In particu -
lar, the annualised wage increases of 6% in the 
chemicals industry and of 5¼% in the metal-  
working and electrical engineering industries 
are much higher than usual for those sectors. 
These deals, which include payments that are 
tax- free and exempt from social security contri -
butions, are more attractive to employees be -
cause the wage increases are markedly higher 
in net percentage terms than in gross percent -
age terms. It is possible that enterprises, too, 
will find the combination of comparatively 
moderate permanent hikes and temporary “in -
flation compensation bonuses” to be more ap -
pealing than higher permanent wage increases.
In view of high inflation, trade unions are call -
ing for exceptionally large wage increases in 
the current round of negotiations. For example, 
the trade union ver.di is demanding a 10.5% 
hike in wages for the public sector at the cen -
tral and local government level for a period of 
12 months. These demands are not expected 
to lead to actual wage settlements of the same 
magnitude. Although this does not suggest 
that wages are accelerating inflation, the risk of 
second- round effects has increased. These ef -
fects would increase the risk of the inflation 
rate remaining well above the euro area’s 
medium- term target of 2% for a longer period 
of time.Robust uptick 
again in German 
banks’ loans to 
domestic private 
sector
Growth in Ger -
man economic 
output in Q3 
2022 contrary 
to expectations
Labour market 
caught between 
labour short -
ages on the one 
hand and 
declining 
demand for 
labour on the 
otherRecent wage 
agreements set 
out larger wage 
increases and 
are specially 
structured
Trade unions’ 
wage demands 
exceptionally 
highDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
9

Double- digit inflation in 
Germany  for the first time 
since the early 1950s
In seasonally adjusted terms, the exceptionally 
strong rise in consumer prices (HICP) continued 
into the third quarter. The already very high 
price increases for food in the previous quarters 
intensified once again. Consumer energy prices 
also continued their marked rise despite factors 
intended to bring relief. These include doing 
away with the renewable energy levy (EEG 
levy), falling crude oil prices and the fuel re -
bate, which was time- limited to the end of Au -
gust. However, the alleviating effect of lower 
oil prices was curbed by the euro’s continued 
depreciation. Other factors, such as higher 
transport costs for heating oil as a result of low 
water levels in Germany’s inland waterways, 
also drove up prices. Lastly, consumer rates for 
gas were once again raised appreciably. In the 
case of non- energy industrial goods, consumer 
price inflation remained robust in line with 
price increases at the upstream stages. Prices 
for services rose just as sharply as in the second 
quarter, although the €9 ticket had a dampen -
ing effect until the end of August. In annual 
terms, the inflation rate as measured by the 
HICP was up by 9.4% in the third quarter, while 
the rate excluding energy and food hit 3.8%.
In October, prices again saw very sharp growth 
of 1.1% on the month in seasonally adjusted 
terms. Energy prices continued to rise mark -
edly. Food and industrial goods prices exclud -
ing energy recorded a further strong increase. 
Annual headline inflation climbed to 11.6% 
after reaching double- digit levels in September 
for the first time since the early 1950s. These 
double- digit inflation figures may even last into 
the new year. The government footing gas bills 
in December, which represents the first stage 
of the gas price brake, will relieve consumers. 
However, it is still unclear to what extent this 
will be reflected in the official price measure -
ment and thus in the inflation rate. The second 
stage of the gas price brake, under which 
households would see a basic quota of 80% of their previous year’s gas consumption esti -
mated at a guaranteed price of 12 cents per 
kWh, could potentially dampen the inflation 
rate by almost one percentage point. Here, 
too, however, uncertainty regarding how this 
will be reflected in the official price measure -
ment and the development of gas prices with -
out a gas price brake is very high. This applies 
in equal measure to the electricity price brake 
envisaged for the beginning of 2023, which 
could temporarily further dampen the reported 
inflation rate. As soon as the gas and electricity 
price brakes expire, their impact on the infla -
tion rate will be reversed.
Decline in GDP expected in Q4 
2022 and Q1 2023
Economic output is set to contract in the final 
quarter of 2022 and first quarter of 2023. Un -
certainty about the energy supply and the asso -
ciated costs are weighing heavily on enter -
prises. According to ifo surveys, all sectors re -
ported that the business situation and business 
expectations were worse in October than in 
the third quarter. Short- term production plans 
and export expectations in the manufacturing 
sector were predominantly pessimistic. The 
slowdown in global economic activity is likely 
to have an impact on exports, even though the 
extensive backlog of orders and receding sup -
ply bottlenecks in industry are somewhat miti -
gating the subdued demand. High inflation is 
also dampening private consumption and thus 
activity in the consumer- related services sec -
tors. At the same time, the positive stimuli from 
the lifting of coronavirus protective measures 
are likely to diminish markedly. Furthermore, 
the government’s pandemic- related consump -
tion spending is likely to taper off. This will 
bring government consumption down from its 
previously elevated level. Finally, construction 
activity is likely to continue to cool down. Over -
all, this means that although economic activity 
was higher than anticipated in the third quar -
ter, a recession is still to be expected in the final 
quarter of 2022 and the first quarter of 2023. Despite relief 
measures, 
exceptionally 
dynamic rise in 
consumer prices 
continued into 
Q3
Inflation rate 
continued to rise 
in October and 
could also 
remain in the 
double- digits in 
months aheadGerman eco -
nomic output 
likely to decline 
significantly in 
Q4 2022 and 
Q1 2023Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
10

However, the extent of the recession is ex -
tremely uncertain. At present, a gas shortage 
can probably be avoided.
Government deficits remain 
high
Public finances continue to be shaped by crises. 
Although existing coronavirus measures are 
elapsing, the government is providing new fi -
nancial assistance in response to inflation and 
the energy crisis. Macroeconomic develop -
ments and high inflation will initially have a 
positive impact on public finances: taxes and 
social contributions are generally tied to nom -
inal variables (such as nominal private con -
sumption and wages) which are seeing strong 
growth, whereas government expenditure will 
only reflect higher prices and interest rates to a 
fairly moderate extent at first. Over time, how -
ever, government spending will also rise more 
sharply as prices and interest rates increase.
Overall, the deficit ratio is likely to fall markedly 
this year due to the prevalence of relieving fac -
tors including a drop in expenditure on 
coronavirus-related transfers to enterprises and 
a dynamic rise in revenue. The government def -
icit is nevertheless likely to rise again in 2023. 
Transfers relating to energy price brakes, in par -
ticular, are likely to lead to considerable add -
itional expenditure. How steeply the deficit 
climbs will depend to a large extent on the de -
cisions taken in this arena – for example, when 
determining the level of counterfinancing for 
the electricity price brake. Looking ahead, new 
measures may also result in additional deficits.
Central government, in particular, is recording 
large deficits. It had already financed support 
measures via emergency loans during the 
coronavirus crisis and intends to do so again 
during the energy crisis. While central govern -
ment plans to once more comply with the 
standard limit under the debt brake in the core 
budget next year, it is mainly financing crisis as -
sistance using the Economic Stabilisation Fund (ESF). To this end, it topped up this special fund 
by €200 billion this year with emergency loans 
that are now to be used to fund measures to 
address the energy crisis by mid- 2024.
Separately, the Federal Government also trans -
ferred sizeable amounts of expenditure and 
borrowing to off- budget entities. For example, 
the Armed Forces Special Fund, Energy and Cli -
mate Fund and Flood Relief Fund have a com -
bined additional deficit margin of around €200 
billion, of which around half consists of corona -
virus emergency loans. The deficit margins of 
the aforementioned funds for the coming years 
therefore amount to a total of around €400 
billion, or roughly 10% of GDP . This corres -
ponds to just over four- fifths of total expend -
iture in the Federal budget in the coming year. 
On balance, central government finances are 
becoming increasingly opaque, and the Federal 
budget only maps to central government activ -
ities to a limited extent.
In view of the current crisis, use of the escape 
clause is justifiable. The measures are also 
linked to the crisis, not least because they sup -
port households in need and hard- hit enter -
prises. The measures reduce uncertainty for 
households and enterprises by shifting energy 
cost risks to the government. It is vital that the 
electricity and gas price brake, as a core elem -
ent of crisis assistance, preserves price incen -
tives to save energy. This would be the case if 
the proposals of the gas price commission, 
which were adopted by a majority, were to be 
implemented. The government is compensat -
ing for large losses at gas trading companies 
(especially Uniper), electing not to take advan -
tage of the potential for price adjustments in 
the contracts.
The fundamental aim of the debt brake is to set 
a narrow framework for net borrowing. This 
year, the ESF will receive a very high borrowing 
authorisation under the escape clause. The gas 
price brake is broadly based. This also seems to 
apply to the electricity price brake, although 
the design of these transfers is not yet final. Government 
finances shaped 
less by corona -
virus crisis but 
more by energy 
crisis and high 
inflation
Deficit expected 
to decline in 
2022, but rise 
again in 2023
Central govern -
ment continues 
to shoulder 
most of the 
crisis  burden …… and is further 
increasing its 
use of ancillary 
budgets
Government put 
to test in energy 
crisis; energy 
saving incentives 
probably largely 
preserved
However, con -
crete action is 
heavily straining 
fiscal rulesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
11

The funds required can be reduced by limiting 
transfers to individuals and enterprises that 
would face excessive burdens without assis -
tance. If policymakers opt for a broader ap -
proach, stronger counterfinancing would make 
sense.
Supply bottlenecks are currently in place and 
inflation is high. Monetary policymakers must 
respond appropriately to high inflation rates, 
with raising policy rates in particular being one 
way of fulfilling their tasks. In the current situ -
ation, public finances should not increase price 
pressures. Given the above, there is an argu -
ment to be made for restricting government 
credit financing fairly tightly and at least avoid -
ing a larger increase in the deficit next year. It 
should be borne in mind that the government 
can only spread higher energy costs out over a 
longer period, or redistribute financing costs. 
Sooner or later, it will be forced to finance the 
measures by increasing revenue or reducing ex -
penditure elsewhere.Improve EU fiscal rules
Improving EU fiscal rules would be vital to en -
sure the resilience of government finances in 
the euro area. The European Commission’s cur -
rent reform proposal is not convincing. It pro -
poses that it negotiate country- specific fiscal 
targets for the coming years with each individ -
ual Member State, taking many aspects into 
account, using assumption- driven long- term 
calculations and giving the Commission consid -
erable discretion. There is a danger that fiscal 
limits will be softened, and that the process of 
determining them will become almost entirely 
opaque. The reduction of high debt ratios 
could thus be considerably delayed in line with 
the rules. Nevertheless, sound public finances 
remain the cornerstone of a stability- oriented 
monetary union. It is ultimately vital for coun -
tries to agree on binding and sufficiently ambi -
tious fiscal rules.Do not hamper 
monetary policy 
through sharply 
rising deficitsThe European 
Commission’s 
proposal for the 
reform of fiscal 
rules is not con -
vincingDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
12

Global and European setting
Global economic 
developments 
Global economic activity continued to deterior -
ate in the third quarter. Sustained, strong price 
pressures weighed on private consumption, in 
particular. The tightening of monetary policy 
being pursued in many places also left its first 
marks. In Europe, exceptionally high energy 
prices and uncertainty about the future supply 
of energy were additional drags on economic 
activity. Growth in gross domestic product 
(GDP) therefore weakened markedly in the 
euro area. In Japan and the United Kingdom, 
economic output even declined somewhat. 
The steep growth in China was primarily due to 
the easing of pandemic-  related restrictions. 
GDP in the United States also increased signifi -
cantly, following a decline in the first half of the 
year. In both economies, though, the under -
lying cyclical forces remained subdued.
Global industry held up surprisingly well in the 
third quarter. It, too, benefited from the easing 
of restrictions in China and the abatement of 
supply chain disruptions. Having suffered heav -
ily from the bottlenecks, the automotive sector 
in particular upped production considerably. 
Overall, global industrial output rose markedly 
in the third quarter, recouping some of the pre -
vious quarter’s decline. There was also distinct 
growth in international trade in goods. Senti -
ment indicators suggest, however, that the ef -
fects of weakening demand could soon gain 
the upper hand. According to surveys among 
purchasing managers, the business outlook in 
the services sector deteriorated further recently 
as well. The surge in activity following the roll -
back of pandemic- related restrictions in exten -
sive parts of the world is likely to have largely 
run its course.
Recent months saw many commodity prices 
continue to fall in the light of the slowing econ -
omy. This was especially true of industrial com -modities. European gas and electricity prices 
even dropped rather significantly from the end 
of August, receding from their record levels. 
Key factors behind this were reduced con -
sumption (partly on account of the weather), 
persistently high imports of liquefied natural 
gas and almost completely full gas storage 
facil ities. Forward quotations indicate that dis -
tinctly higher prices are set to return in the up -
coming winter months, however.
Oil prices did not fall any further of late, instead 
picking up again somewhat at the beginning of 
the fourth quarter. One reason for this was the 
decision made by OPEC and its partners to sub -
stantially reduce crude oil production from No -
vember onwards. So far in November, Brent 
crude has cost only a little less than in August, 
selling for an average of US$95 per barrel. 
Prices for some refined petroleum products, Further slow -
down in global 
economy
Industrial 
activity  still solid 
in Q3, but out -
look significantly 
gloomierEuropean gas 
prices and 
industrial 
commodity  
prices down
Oil price 
buttressed  
by OPEC’s 
production  cut
Global economic indicators*
Sources: CPB, national data, Haver Analytics, S&P Global and 
Bundesbank calculations. * Groups of countries vary due to dif-
ferences in data availability. 1 Bundesbank aggregate of na-
tional data, based on the number of units. 2 Output compo-
nent for the whole economy.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 2022859095100105110Seasonally adjusted
405060708090100110120
Reduced scale
Passenger car 
production1Q4 2019 = 100, log scale
Industrial productione
2530354045505560
Diffusion index,
lin scale
Global Purchasing
Managers' Index2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
13

such as diesel and heating oil, even rose dis -
tinctly, mainly as a result of declining imports 
from Russia and low inventories. They have 
only recently come back down. Overall, the 
strain being placed on the economy by high 
energy prices is currently likely to be on a par 
with the oil crisis of 1973 (see the box on 
pp. 15f.).
Consumer price inflation became even more 
broad- based globally owing to the protracted 
high level of cost pressure. In October, the 
year- on- year rate of the consumer price index 
(CPI) excluding energy and food amounted to 
5.7% in the advanced economies. Food price 
inflation climbed further. Only the increase in 
consumer energy prices eased off somewhat. 
Overall, consumer prices were up by 8.6% on 
the year in October.
Looking ahead, the declining commodity prices 
are set to dampen consumer price inflation. In 
many places, producer prices for intermediate 
goods barely increased further, or even de -
creased. However, wage growth continued to 
mount in a number of advanced economies, 
which could prolong the inflation process. In 
addition, Europe – in particular – could see re -
newed surges in energy prices.
In view of persistent and broad- based con -
sumer price inflation, the staff of the Inter -
national Monetary Fund (IMF) were pessimistic 
in their October outlook for the world econ -
omy.1 Global GDP growth is likely to decline 
significantly to 3.2% this year and slow further 
to 2.7% in 2023. In many countries, economic 
output could contract in at least two consecu -
tive quarters. Projections were downgraded 
significantly, especially for a number of Euro -
pean countries, including Germany and Italy. 
The IMF deems those countries likely to suffer 
particularly heavily from the energy crisis. Des -
pite the global economic slowdown, IMF staff 
assessed consumer price inflation as more per -
sistent than before. Inflation in the advanced Increased, 
broad- based 
consumer price 
inflation
Uncertain out -
look for inflation
IMF warns of 
persistent 
inflation , despite 
global economic 
slowdownCommodity prices
Sources:  Bloomberg  Finance  L.P.,  Haver  Analytics,  ICE  and 
HWWI. • Latest figures: Average of 1 to 11 November 2022 
(industrial commodities) and 1 to 18 November (crude oil and 
natural gas). 1 Price for the front-month futures contract.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 202220406080100120Monthly averages
04080120160200240
Natural gas (TTF)1
in euro per MWh, reduced scaleCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
80100120140160
Industrial commodities
2018 = 100, US$ basis
Sources:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  national  data. 
* EU, Canada, Japan, Norway, Switzerland, the United King-
dom and the United States. 1 Consumer prices excluding en-
ergy and food; additionally excluding alcoholic beverages and 
tobacco  products  for  the  EU,  Norway,  Switzerland  and  the 
United Kingdom.
Deutsche BundesbankConsumer prices in industrial countries*
0123456789
+++++++++Year-on-year percentage change
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022Headline Core rate1
1 See International Monetary Fund (2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
14

The recent energy price shock in a historical comparison
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine 
has driven fossil fuel prices up sharply. To 
many observers, this harks back to the most 
severe worldwide energy crisis to date, the 
1973 oil crisis, when global economic 
growth ground to a virtual halt for two 
years. By comparison, some international 
institutions are currently expecting the sur-
ging energy prices to have only a moderate 
impact.1 They point out that the energy 
intensity  of macroeconomic activity has 
dropped markedly in the meantime and that 
oil prices have risen less sharply than in 1973.
However, the macroeconomic impact of an 
energy price shock depends not only on the 
quantity of energy used but, rather, on the 
macroeconomic expenses of energy con-
sumption.2 Since the early 1970s, the ratio 
of expenditures on energy commodities to 
GDP , though, has trended upwards rather 
than downwards as a result of a distinct rise 
in prices. This is especially true for many 
emerging market economies; yet in the EU 
and the United States, too, expenditures on 
fossil fuels over GDP were, in recent years, 
somewhat higher than prior to the out-
break of the oil crisis in 1973. The compos-
ition of energy expenditure has also changed since then. Whereas, especially in Europe, 
expenditure on natural gas has gained con-
siderably in relevance, the importance of 
coal has diminished.
Also, the entire range of energy commod-
ities has to be looked at in order to com-
pare the current energy price crisis with the 
previous one. A global energy price index 
which takes into account the prices of oil, 
natural gas and coal, weighted by their 
time- varying expenditure shares, rose only 
slightly less in recent months than during 
the 1973 crisis.3 In the EU, energy prices 
overall have even risen signifi  cantly more 
strongly than back in 1973. This is attribut-
able primarily to the high importance of 
natural gas for Europe’s energy supply and 
the heavy dependence on Russian energy 
exports. Gas prices in Europe have conse-
quently risen considerably more strongly 
than elsewhere in the world.
Moreover, the current energy price shock is 
probably due overwhelmingly to supply- 
side causes. In contrast, the rise in oil prices 
in the early 1970s was likely, to a greater 
extent , also demand- driven.4 Whereas the 
1 See Bank for International Settlements (2022) and 
Valckx (2022).
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2012). Another key fac-
tor is the substitutability of energy. The greater it is, the 
smaller the impact of energy price shocks. However, 
there is no clear and compelling evidence that the sub-
stitutability of fossil fuels has increased substantially in 
recent decades.
3 This is attributable fi  rst and foremost to the surge in 
gas prices in the past one- and- a- half years or so. As a 
result of the sharp reduction in Russian gas exports, 
these prices have risen much more steeply than during 
the oil crisis, in which they merely tripled. Conversely, 
though, in 1973 oil prices were up much more sharply 
than in recent months due to, amongst other things, 
the oil embargo imposed against the United States by 
some Arab countries at that time.
4 For more on the role of aggregate demand as a pre-
condition for the oil price surge in the early 1970s, see 
also Barsky and Kilian (2002) and Kilian (2008).Fossil energy commodity expenditures
Sources:  World  Bank,  BP  Statistical  Review  of  World  Energy 
and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank012345As a percentage of GDP, US$ basis
Europe World
2017 – 19 1970 – 72 2017 – 19 1970 – 72Coal
Gas
OilDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
15

economies is projected to still be at 4.4% next 
year and not to drop below 2% until 2025. For 
the already upgraded inflation outlook, the re -
port continued to emphasise the existence of 
upside risks.
China
In China, measures to contain COVID-  19 af -
fected a significantly smaller portion of the 
country in the third quarter of 2022 than had 
been the case in the second quarter. This 
prompted a marked pick- up in economic activ -
ity. According to official data, real GDP rose by 
a seasonally adjusted 3.9% on the quarter, 
more than offsetting the previous decline. Real 
GDP also exceeded the previous year’s figure 
by 3.9%. On the demand side, the recent re -
covery was driven, in particular, by private con -
sumption, which had taken an especially hard 
hit amid the spring lockdowns.This robust economic growth is unlikely to con -
tinue in the current quarter. Over the past few 
weeks, new coronavirus cases have led to a re -
newed tightening of containment measures in 
many areas. The strict zero- COVID policy is 
likely to be maintained over at least the next 
few months. Furthermore, the situation on the 
real estate market remains extremely fraught. 
Selling prices fell again in most major cities, 
and construction starts have now almost halved 
from their peak. The slowdown in export busi -
ness is casting an additional pall over the short- 
term economic outlook. One bright spot re -
mained the fact that the rise in consumer prices 
has still been relatively subdued. Inflation stood 
at 2.1% in October. The rate excluding energy 
and food was just 0.6%.Swift recovery 
thanks to eased 
containment 
measures, …… but outlook 
remains gloomymacroeconomic consequences of demand- 
driven oil price shocks are less clear- cut, 
supply- side oil price shocks are generally 
credited with having a dampening impact.5 
That is another reason why the current 
energy  price shock, at least in Europe, might have a more adverse effect on the aggre-
gate economy than the 1973 oil crisis.
5 See, for example, Kim and Vera (2022).Energy price increases by historical standards*
Sources: World Bank, EIA, ECB, BP Statistical Review of World Energy, Haver Analytics and Bundesbank calculations. * Based on an en-
ergy commodity price index in which global and European wholesale prices for crude oil, natural gas and coal are weighted with the 
corresponding time-varying expenditure shares.
Deutsche Bundesbank1973 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15 20 221000100200300400
–++++Percentage change from the mean of the preceding five years, monthly
Europe (€ basis)Global (US$ basis)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
16

Other selected emerging 
market  economies
In India, the economy appears to have carried 
on expanding in the summer half of 2022. Real 
GDP was 13.5% up on the year in the second 
quarter. That said, framing developments in 
those terms is likely to significantly overstate 
the underlying pace of economic growth, given 
that the second quarter of 2021 saw public life 
still encumbered by tight restrictions in re -
sponse to the Delta wave of coronavirus.2 
Based on the available indicators, aggregate 
growth continued in the third quarter (for 
which GDP data are not yet available). Con -
sumer price inflation declined slightly to 6.8% 
in October, but remained above the upper 
boundary of the monetary policy target range. 
The Indian central bank raised its policy rate to 
5.9% in September.
In Brazil, the economy has been on the up -
swing for some time, partly on the back of high 
commodity prices. In the second quarter of 
2022, real GDP rose by 3.2% on the year. Over -
all, the economy appears to have kept on ex -
panding in the third quarter, albeit probably 
with weakened momentum. This may have 
had something to do with heightened uncer -
tainty in the run- up to the presidential elec -
tions, amongst other factors. There was a fur -
ther perceptible slowdown in consumer price 
inflation. The inflation rate fell to 6.5% in Octo -
ber. The Brazilian central bank left its policy rate 
unchanged at 13.75%.
Russia’s economic recession persisted. Accord -
ing to the flash estimate prepared by Rosstat, 
the national statistical office, real GDP in the 
third quarter was 4.0% below the previous 
year’s level, falling short by a similar amount as 
in the second quarter. Production in the manu -
facturing sector remained depressed in the 
third quarter due to the limited availability of 
intermediate products from abroad. By con -
trast, revenue from energy exports remained 
substantial, despite a decrease in export vol -
umes. Over the coming months, the crisis could be deepened by the impact of a heightened 
shortage of labour caused by the recently 
ordered partial mobilisation. Tens of thousands 
of skilled workers have been called up to the 
military or left the country. Consumer price in -
flation weakened further. The year- on- year rate 
fell from 17.8% in April to 12.6% in October. 
With inflationary pressures easing, Russia’s cen -
tral bank has cut the policy rate from 20% to 
7.5% in six steps since April.
United States
Following two quarters of slight contraction, 
the US economy grew again in the third quar -India’s economy 
likely to have 
continued to 
grow in summer 
half
Continued 
upswing in Brazil 
Russia in 
recession 
Economic out -
put rising againReal GDP in selected major 
emerging market economies
Sources: National Bureau of Statistics of China, Central Statistics 
Office of India, Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics, 
Rosstat  –  Federal  State  Statistics  Service,  and  Bundesbank 
calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 20229095100105Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, log scale
RussiaIndia
75808590951001051109095100105110115
BrazilChina
9095100105
2 According to our calculations, GDP declined by just 
under 2% in the second quarter compared with the previ -
ous quarter, in seasonally adjusted terms (see the chart 
above). However, this result appears to be somewhat im -
plausible in the light of a number of other indicators. For 
example, the Purchasing Managers’ Index for the economy 
as a whole stood at a high level of 58 points in the second 
quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
17

ter. According to the initial estimate, seasonally 
and price- adjusted GDP rose by just over 0.6% 
on the quarter. Export business was the key 
driver behind this growth, with exporters bene -
fiting from the improved situation in China and 
high demand for fossil fuels. On the domestic 
front, the picture was more mixed. The pro -
gressive tightening of monetary policy left clear 
traces. Investment in residential housing and 
commercial construction, which is particularly 
sensitive to interest rates, slumped even fur -
ther. By contrast, investment in machinery and 
equipment recorded a substantial rise, probably 
partly because of the elimination of supply con -
straints, particularly in the case of transport 
equipment. Households upped their consump -
tion expenditure moderately, buoyed by real in -
come growth for the first time in one-and-a-half 
years.
The labour market remained the backbone of 
the solid US consumption activity. Employment 
growth continued in the third quarter and the unemployment rate stayed exceptionally low 
until October. Excess demand declined some -
what from a record high. The number of va -
cancies fell and wage growth – which was al -
ready robust  – did not increase any further. 
However, the strong consumer price inflation 
eased by only a small degree up to October, 
coming to 7.7%. The core inflation rate exclud -
ing energy and food actually climbed further, 
to 6.3%. Against this backdrop, the US central 
bank continued tightening its monetary policy 
stance and, in September and November, in -
creased the target range for the federal funds 
rate by a total of 150 basis points, making it 
3.75% to 4%.
Japan
Japan’s economic recovery was interrupted in 
the third quarter. According to the initial official 
estimate, real GDP in the third quarter fell by a 
seasonally adjusted 0.3% on the previous quar -
ter. While there was a moderate expansion in 
domestic demand, imports registered a steep 
increase. Private consumption went up only 
slightly, as the sharp rise in COVID-  19 cases 
dampened propensity to spend. Industrial out -
put rose substantially once supply bottlenecks 
eased. Amid this setting, the seasonally ad -
justed unemployment rate held steady at 2.6%. 
The year- on- year increase in the CPI climbed to 
3.7% in October, with the weakness of the yen 
playing a role there. The Japanese central bank 
maintained its expansionary stance, since it 
continued to regard the increase in consumer 
price inflation as temporary.
United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, aggregate activity de -
clined somewhat in the third quarter. Real GDP 
contracted by 0.2% on the quarter, in season -
ally adjusted terms. Manufacturing output, in 
particular, fell significantly. Many consumer-  
related service sectors felt the effects of de -
pressed consumer sentiment. Retail activity de -Labour market 
beginning to 
normaliseSlight decline 
in GDP
Receding 
economic  
activity Real GDP in selected industrial countries
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Cabinet Office of Japan, 
Office for National Statistics, Statistics Poland and Bundesbank 
calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 20229095100105110Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, log scale
United KingdomUnited States
9095100105
9095100105
PolandJapan
80859095100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
18

creased by almost 2% on the quarter. Gross 
value added in the hotel and restaurant sector, 
which had experienced a spirited revival in the 
second quarter, moved sideways. The labour 
market situation remained exceptionally fa -
vourable, meanwhile. The unemployment rate 
fell to a new low of 3.6% in the third quarter, 
while wage growth increased to 6.0% on the 
year. The year- on- year rate of the Harmonised 
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) rose to just 
over 11% by October, but would probably have 
been far higher had the government not re -
cently introduced the energy price guarantee. 
In addition, comprehensive tax relief measures 
had been announced in September but, fol -
lowing heavy turmoil in the financial markets, 
were mostly scrapped. In order to preserve 
financial stability, the Bank of England tempor -
arily intervened in the market for long-  term 
government bonds. It abided by its monetary 
policy tightening, however, and raised its policy 
rate by 75 basis points to 3% at the beginning 
of November.
Poland
In Poland, the economic situation stabilised in 
the third quarter. Real GDP saw a return to 
growth following the slump in the second 
quarter, increasing by 0.9% after seasonal ad -
justment. One reason for this was a distinct re -
covery in industrial production in the wake of 
diminishing supply chain problems. Another 
was the continued stability of the labour mar -
ket and strong wage growth supporting private 
consumption. Despite the sharp rise in prices, 
retail sales increased by 1.4% in real terms. The 
unemployment rate fell to a new low of 2.6%. 
In the corporate sector, the gross wage per 
employee rose by 14.5% on the year in Sep -
tember. By October, consumer price inflation 
had accelerated to 17.9%, driven mainly by the 
sharp rise in energy and food prices, although 
even the core rate rose to 11%. In response, 
the central bank raised its policy rate by 25 
basis points to 6.75% in September. The rate 
remained unchanged in October and Novem -ber owing to the renewed deterioration in the 
economic outlook.
Macroeconomic trends in the 
euro area
The euro area economy grew slightly again in 
the third quarter of 2022. According to Euro -
stat’s flash estimate, GDP rose by 0.2% after 
price and seasonal adjustment compared with 
the preceding quarter, which recorded growth 
of 0.8%. The pre- pandemic GDP level was thus 
exceeded by 2.1%. In particular, the hotel and 
restaurant sector and the related sectors of the 
economy are likely to have benefited once 
more from the normalisation following the roll -
back of the majority of pandemic measures. 
Elsewhere, the strain caused by sharp price in -
creases and the European energy crisis has 
been increasingly making itself felt. According 
to surveys, business conditions continued to 
deteriorate across the economy.
The European energy crisis intensified in the 
third quarter. The stoppage in Russian gas de -
liveries via Nord Stream 1 initially pushed gas 
prices further upwards and intensified concerns 
about a possible gas shortage in the winter. 
The gas crisis spilled over to the electricity mar -
ket, where prices also rose sharply. Gas has re -
cently taken on renewed importance for elec -
tricity generation, partly because a consider -
able proportion of French nuclear power plants 
were offline due to maintenance and repair 
work. The massive increases in electricity and 
gas prices increased pressure on producer and 
consumer prices.
Although real disposable income is likely to 
have declined further as a result of sharp price 
increases, private consumption probably in -
creased slightly in the summer, due primarily to 
normalisation effects following the elimination 
of restrictions. This was particularly true of de -
mand for services provided by the hotel and 
restaurant sector, but also of purchases of 
motor vehicles, which increased significantly as Economic situ -
ation stabilised 
in Q3; consumer 
price increase 
acceleratesEconomic out -
put grew slightly 
again in Q3
The energy crisis 
intensified
Private 
consumption  
increased again 
despite sharp 
rise in pricesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
19

a result of an easing of supply bottlenecks. By 
contrast, retail sales declined in price- adjusted 
terms. The saving ratio, which had already 
fallen almost back to its pre-  pandemic level in 
the spring, is likely to have fallen further.
Investment probably increased once again.3 
According to currently available country infor -
mation, investment in machinery and equip -
ment, including expenditure on transportation, 
is likely to have once again expanded markedly. 
At the very least, registrations of commercial 
vehicles rose significantly in the third quarter, 
which is likely to have been helped by the eas -
ing of supply bottlenecks. Investment in infor -mation and communication technologies and 
intellectual property is also likely to have ex -
panded again. By contrast, construction invest -
ment is likely to have declined. In any case, 
construction output fell quite significantly.
According to external trade statistics, euro area 
countries’ exports of goods to non- euro area 
countries shrank in the third quarter after price 
adjustment. The decline was widespread across 
all product classes and was strongest in con -
sumer goods. The value of goods exports, 
however, continued to rise sharply in response 
to the very steep increase in prices. This was 
particularly true of exports to China and Turkey. 
By contrast, exports to the United States and 
the United Kingdom declined somewhat fol -
lowing considerable growth in the preceding 
quarters. The value of exports of services to 
non- euro area countries likely increased mark -
edly once again. However, in addition to the 
recovery in international tourism, price in -
creases may have made a significant contribu -
tion here. Despite the depreciation of the euro, 
imports of goods also rose very sharply in price- 
adjusted terms. The largest increases were re -
corded in intermediate goods. Security of sup -
ply arrangements in the winter may have 
played a role here.
Manufacturing output rose again moderately in 
the third quarter. The high and still rising en -
ergy costs weighed on production activity in 
energy- intensive sectors such as the chemicals 
industry, where production volumes fell per -
ceptibly. At the same time, however, the easing 
of supply chains allowed a significant increase 
in motor vehicle production. There was also 
marked growth in both the pharmaceutical in -
dustry and the manufacture of electronic and 
optical devices. Capacity utilisation declined be -
tween July and October, but still slightly ex -
ceeded the long- term average. The rise in in -Investment up 
once againExports weak
Industrial output 
up again2018 2019 2020 2021 2022100110120Retail sales (price adjusted)
2015 = 100
1.31.52.02.53.0New vehicle registrations
(quarterly totals, 
reduced scale)
90100110120130
Goods exports1Goods imports1Seasonally adjusted, log scaleEconomic indicators for the euro area
Sources: Eurostat, ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Export 
and  import  data  according  to  foreign  trade  statistics  (extra 
trade). Price-adjusted using the producer price index (exports) 
or the import price index.
Deutsche BundesbankNumber (millions)
2015 = 100
8590100110 Industrial production
3 Excluding Ireland. For several years now, the statistical re -
cording of investment as a whole, and of investment in in -
tellectual property in particular, has been strongly influ -
enced by the strategic planning of multinational enterprises 
in that country. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
20

dustrial producer prices became only margin -
ally stronger, but nevertheless reached a new 
peak since the start of monetary union, at 
around 30% on the year. The rate excluding 
energy declined slightly over the course of the 
quarter, mainly due to a recent fall in commod -
ity prices.
The services sector was still providing a percep -
tible boost to growth in the summer. In the 
hotel and restaurant sector, in particular, value 
added rose again after price adjustment. Trans -
port services, various business- related services 
and the information and communication sector 
also probably grew. Producer prices for services 
increased, especially for energy- intensive trans -
port services.
In almost all Member States, economic growth 
weakened in the third quarter under pressure 
from high inflation rates. However, some coun -
tries still benefited from the recovery in tour -
ism.
According to preliminary estimates, economic 
growth in France slowed from 0.5% in the 
second quarter to 0.2% in the third quarter. 
Private consumption did not rise further in the 
face of real income losses, and exports lost mo -
mentum. By contrast, investment, particularly 
in transport, increased very sharply. Expend -
iture on construction stagnated. Imports in -
creased again significantly, partly due to a rise 
in electricity imports.
According to the preliminary estimate by the 
statistical office, economic output in Italy rose 
by a fairly significant 0.5% in the third quarter, 
following an increase of 1.1% in the previous 
period. One of the major drivers seems to have 
been the very lively tourism business. In add -
ition, investment is likely to have expanded 
markedly again, partly in response to the ex -
tension of tax incentives and the allocation of 
funds from the European Union’s Recovery and 
Resilience Facility. By contrast, industrial output 
did not exceed the level of the previous quarter 
and, according to trade statistics, exports also increased only marginally after price adjust -
ment.
In Spain, preliminary estimates show GDP 
growth in the third quarter slowing to 0.2% on 
the quarter. This followed an increase of 1.5% 
in the previous quarter, which had seen extra -
ordinary growth, especially in the tourism sec -
tor, following the withdrawal of pandemic con -
tainment measures. Growth in exports has lost 
pace. Investment growth has also slowed con -
siderably, being largely hampered by weak con -
struction investment. Private consumption, by 
contrast, rose quite sharply, probably partly 
owing to the favourable labour market situ -Moderate 
growth in 
services 
Slowdown in 
almost all 
Member  States
Growth in the 
French economy 
lost considerable 
momentum
Italian economy 
sees further 
marked GDP 
increaseGDP growth in 
Spain slowed 
down signifi -
cantlyAggregate output in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 2022Real GDP, Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
log scale
80859095100105
758085909510080859095100105
Italy
SpainFrance859095100105
of which:Euro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
21

ation and the slight easing of inflationary pres -
sures.4 Overall, fairly buoyant growth in final 
domestic demand went hand in hand with a 
considerable increase in imports.
Economic output fell slightly in the Nether -
lands, Belgium, Austria and Finland in the third 
quarter. In Portugal, there was a further slight 
increase owing to a good tourism season. Eco -
nomic activity in Latvia declined markedly as a 
result of the considerable strain caused by the 
war on Ukraine.
The downturn in economic activity has not yet 
had any significant impact on the labour mar -
ket. The number of unemployed persons con -
tinued to decline markedly until September, 
and the unemployment rate fell to a new low 
of 6.6%. There was another slight rise in em -
ployment in the third quarter. According to the 
surveys, the pronounced bottlenecks in the la -
bour market did not intensify any further. Staff 
shortages in the services sector, in particular, appear to no longer be as severe as before. In 
light of labour market tightness and losses in 
purchasing power, wage growth picked up 
markedly, but remained distinctly below infla -
tion. Given the weak productivity growth over -
all, this is likely to increase cost pressures for 
enterprises.
Euro area consumer prices rose very steeply 
once again in the third quarter of 2022, reach -
ing 2.2% on the quarter after seasonal adjust -
ment. Prices of industrial goods excluding en -
ergy and processed food increased more 
sharply than ever before. Service prices rose at 
a similar pace as in the second quarter. The 
cost increases of the last few quarters were still 
the main driver of prices. In the services sector, 
there was also high demand for transport, 
travel and other recreational services. In the 
case of unprocessed food, the dry weather and 
rising price of fertilisers are likely to have made 
an impact. High international commodity prices 
for food also pushed consumer prices for pro -
cessed food further upwards. These included, 
in particular, dairy, fat and cereal products. As a 
result, the year- on- year increase in the HICP in 
the third quarter recorded another jump, from 
8.0% to 9.3%. The inflation rate excluding en -
ergy and food rose from 3.7% to 4.4%.
Inflation was broadly based across the com -
ponents of the basket of goods. Accordingly, 
common measures of underlying inflation, such 
as trimmed means or differently defined core 
rates, also increased to 5% on average. Price 
pressures were also exceptionally strong in all 
Member States. Inflation rates ranged from 
6.5% in France, where government measures 
had considerably dampened inflation, to more 
than 24% in Estonia. The inflation rate was in 
double digits in just under half of Member 
States.Marked differ -
ences in the 
smaller Member 
States
Labour market 
situation still 
favourable; 
wage growth 
noticeably 
strongerUnabated sharp 
rise in consumer 
prices
Price surge 
broadly basedContributions to the euro area inflation 
rate (HICP)
Sources: Eurostat and the ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 20221012345678910
–++++++++++Percentage points, quarterly averages
Headline HICP inflation
Year-on-year 
percentage changeEnergy
Processed food
Non-energy industrial goods
ServicesUnprocessed food
4 Following the massive increases in energy prices since 
September 2021, base effects and the gas price cap intro -
duced in June 2022 are beginning to take effect.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
22

Consumer prices rose sharply again in October, 
by 1.4% on the month after seasonal adjust -
ment. Food and industrial goods prices in -
creased yet again. The price of services saw fur -
ther substantial growth. Energy prices also 
picked up somewhat again. This resulted in 
year- on- year HICP growth accelerating to 
10.6%, with the rate excluding energy and 
food rising markedly to 5.0%. The continued 
sharp rise in producer prices does not show 
signs of slowing down in the coming months. 
However, many Member States are discussing 
government relief measures that could depress 
inflation rates.
The euro area economy is likely to have lost 
even more momentum over the course of the 
third quarter already, and economic output 
may even contract in the 2022-23 winter half 
as a result of various factors. The previously 
very high gas and electricity prices have fallen 
to a degree, and the oft- feared gas and electri -
city supply situation could potentially be 
avoided. However, prices are expected to rise 
again over the course of the winter. The high 
cost burdens for enterprises and the loss of 
purchasing power for households will only be 
partially offset by the various fiscal support 
measures. Together with the tightening of finan -cing conditions, this is likely to have a negative 
impact on the situation at many enterprises. 
According to surveys, the business climate in all 
economic sectors has continued to cool. The 
increased uncertainty surrounding the risks to 
energy supply and the further development of 
costs will also have played a role in this. In add -
ition, the sales prospects for not only the euro 
area but also the global markets have deterior -
ated. All of this suggests that the 2022-23 win -
ter half is likely to be difficult.Strong price 
pressures con -
tinue in October
Further slow -
down in the 
current  quarter
List of references
Bank for International settlements (2022), Rising commodity prices: are we set for a repeat of the 
1970s?, Annual Economic Report, June 2022, pp. 6 ff.
Barsky, R. B. and L. Kilian (2002), Do We Really Know that Oil Caused the Great Stagflation? 
A Monetary Alternative, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, Vol. 16, pp. 137-183.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national economic 
statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65-78.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2012), The price of crude oil and its impact on economic activity in the 
industrial  countries, Monthly Report, June 2012, pp. 27-49.
International Monetary Fund (2022), World Economic Outlook: Countering the Cost- of- Living 
Crisis , October 2022.Sentiment indicators for the euro area*
Sources: European Commission and Bundesbank calculations. 
* Deviations from the respective average since 2000.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 20226050403020100102030
––––––+++Balance of positive and negative responses as a percentage 
of all responses, seasonally adjusted
Manufacturing
Services sectorConstruction
ConsumerDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
23

Kilian, L. (2008), Exogenous Oil Supply Shocks: How Big Are They and How Much Do They Matter  
for the U. S. Economy?, The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 90(2), pp. 216-240.
Kim, G. and D. Vera (2022), The effect of oil price fluctuation on the economy: what can we learn 
from alternative models?, Journal of Applied Economics, Vol. 25(1), pp. 856-877.
Valckx, N. (2022), Lower Oil Reliance Insulates World From 1970s-  Style Crude Shock, IMF blog, 
https://www.imf.org/en/Blogs/Articles/2022/05/05/lower-oil-reliance-insulates-world-from-1970s- 
style-crude-shockDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
24

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
The ECB Governing Council decided to raise 
the three key ECB interest rates by 75 basis 
points at its meeting in September 2022 and by 
the same increment at its meeting in October. 
Those decisions took the interest rate on the 
deposit facility – currently the most important 
rate for money market rates – to 1.5% and the 
interest rates on the main refinancing oper -
ations and the marginal lending facility to 2% 
and 2.25%, respectively. Overall, the key inter -
est rates have thus risen by 200 basis points so 
far since July. The Governing Council is expect -
ing to raise interest rates further. It will base the 
future policy rate path on the evolving outlook 
for inflation and the economy, following its 
meeting- by- meeting approach.
In view of the unexpected and extraordinary rise 
in inflation, the Governing Council decided fur -
thermore in October to change the terms and 
conditions of the third series of targeted longer-  
term refinancing operations (TLTRO III). The inter -
est rates payable by banks for TLTRO III oper -
ations are being adjusted with effect from 
23  November 2022. From that date until the 
maturity date or early repayment date of each 
operation, the interest rate will be indexed to 
the average applicable key ECB interest rates 
over this period. Banks will be offered three add -
itional voluntary early repayment dates.1 The re -
calibration was carried out to ensure consistency 
with the broader monetary policy normalisation 
process and to reinforce the transmission of pol -
icy rates to bank lending conditions.
Furthermore, the Governing Council adjusted 
the remuneration of minimum reserves held by 
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. In the 
future, minimum reserves will be remunerated 
at the interest rate on the deposit facility, rather than at the main refinancing operations rate. 
This change aligns the remuneration of min -
imum reserves with money market rates.
The decisions in September and October were 
made because inflation remains too high and 
will stay above the 2% target for an extended 
period. In September, euro area inflation 
reached 9.9%. In recent months, soaring en -
ergy and food prices, supply bottlenecks and 
the post- pandemic recovery in demand have 
led to a broadening of price pressures. ECB 
staff made yet another significant upside revi -
sion to their inflation projections in September, 
raising them to 8.1% in 2022, 5.5% in 2023, 
and 2.3% in 2024. Risks to this inflation out -
look are still tilted primarily to the upside, 
which is why monetary policy is aimed at redu -
cing support for demand and guarding against 
the risk of a persistent upward shift in inflation 
expectations.
The euro short- term rate (€STR) closed the 
period under review at 1.401%, which means it 
moved almost entirely in step with the two key 
interest rate hikes totalling 150 basis points 
during the reporting period. The three-  month 
EURIBOR likewise continued to rise significantly, ECB Governing 
Council twice 
raises key inter -
est rates by 
75 basis points
Terms and 
conditions  of 
TLTRO III 
modified 
ECB adjusts 
remuneration of 
minimum 
reservesInflation still far 
too high and set 
to persist above 
target for longer
€STR moves in 
line with policy 
rate hikes
Money market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. • = Aver-
age 1 to 18 November 2022.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 20221.00.500.51.01.52.02.5
––+++++% p.a.
Marginal lending rate
Three-month EURIBOR1Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rate
€STR1
1 For further details, see European Central Bank (2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
25

Money market management and liquidity needs
In the period under review from 27 July 2022 
to 1 November 2022,1 excess liquidity in the 
Eurosystem rose signifi  cantly by a total of 
€196.5 billion to an average of €4,657.7 bil-
lion. The interest rate hikes announced by the 
Governing Council of the ECB were the main 
driver of this increase. They pushed market 
interest rates up, which led to a decline in au-
tonomous factors. The interest rate hike of 50 
basis points in July saw excess liquidity initially 
rise by just €20.6 billion to €4,481.7 billion in 
the fi  fth reserve maintenance period of 2022 
(July- September). Almost 90% of the total in-
crease took place in the sixth reserve mainten-
ance period of 2022 after interest rates were 
raised by 75 basis points in September.
Compared with the fourth reserve mainten-
ance period of 2022, liquidity needs in the 
euro area stemming from autonomous factors 
fell by €238.1 billion to an average of €2,249.0 
billion in the sixth reserve maintenance period 
of 2022. Liquidity in the banking system went up as a result. This was mainly due to a de-
cline in government deposits of €130.9 billion 
to €536.7 billion (with a decrease of €87.8 bil-
lion to €127.2 billion taking place in Ger-
many). Liquidity was also boosted by a fall in 
net banknote issuance of €40.2 billion to 
€1,563.7 billion, which was unusual for the 
time of year. The decrease was largely ex-
plained by credit institutions dissolving the 
high cash balances they had previously held in 
order to avoid negative interest rates. Ger-
many registered a sharp decline in banknotes 
issued of €24.8 billion to €894.7 billion. More-
over, the reduction in the combined total of 
net foreign assets and other factors, which 
are considered together owing to liquidity- 
neutral valuation effects, lowered liquidity 
needs by €65.7 billion. This was mainly due to 
1 Here, the averages of the sixth reserve maintenance 
period of 2022 (September- November 2022) are com-
pared with the averages of the fourth reserve mainten-
ance period of 2022 (June- July 2022).
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2022
27 July
to
13 Sep.14 Sep.
to
1 Nov.
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) +  18.7 +    21.6
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) + 113.7 +    17.2
3. Net foreign assets 1 +   6.4 +     5.7
4. Other factors 1 –  91.2 +   144.8
Total +  47.6 +   189.3
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations +   0.7 +     2.3
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –  24.5 –     6.1
c) Other operations –   4.0 –     6.5
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility +   0.0 +     0.0
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  28.3 – 3,783.0
Total –  56.1 – 3,793.3
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) –   7.2 – 3,604.1
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –   0.5 –     3.0
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
26

the drop in non- monetary policy deposits 
such as deposits by foreign central banks. By 
contrast, the minimum reserve requirement in 
the Eurosystem climbed by €3.5 billion to 
€164.4 billion in the period under review, thus 
further increasing the need for central bank 
liquidity. In Germany, the reserve requirement 
went up by just €0.4 billion to €44.3 billion.
Following the discontinuation of net pur-
chases under the asset purchase programmes 
as of 1  July 2022, only reinvestments have 
taken place. Owing to revaluations, holdings 
of monetary policy assets decreased by €10.6 
billion in the period under review. As at 
14 Novem ber 2022, the balance sheet hold-
ings of the asset purchase programmes 
amounted to €4,946.0 billion (see the adja-
cent table). The average outstanding tender 
volume in the euro area fell by €27.6 billion to 
€2,122.7 billion in the reporting period, result-
ing in net liquidity absorption. On 28 Septem-
ber 2022, a total of €8.3 billion out of all the 
targeted longer- term refi  nancing operations 
of the third series (TLTRO- III) was voluntarily 
repaid ahead of schedule. Moreover, during 
the period under review, liquidity amounting 
to €1.9 billion was repaid at maturity under 
the pandemic emergency longer- term refi  nan-
cing operations (PELTROs). The volume in the 
regular main refi  nancing operations and 
three- month tenders remained at a very low 
level. However, demand increased slightly in 
both, particularly in the context of early 
TLTRO- III repayments. In Germany, the out-
standing volume of all refi  nancing operations 
fell by €8.0 billion to an average of €401.4 bil-
lion of late owing to these early repayments. 
German banks’ share in the outstanding vol-
ume of Eurosystem refi  nancing operations 
was thus around 18.9%, which was almost 
unchanged from the June- July 2022 reserve 
maintenance period.
Since the negative interest rate on the deposit 
facility was reversed on 27 July 2022, the two- 
tier system for the remuneration of excess re-
serves has effectively ceased to have any im-
pact. The ECB Governing Council subse-
quently changed the multiplier for determin-ing the exemption allowances from six times 
the minimum reserve requirement to zero 
with effect from 14 September 2022.
By contrast, the use of the deposit facility 
showed signifi  cant changes from 14 Septem-
ber 2022 after its interest rate was increased 
to 0.75%. As a result, on average around 96% 
of the Euro system’s excess liquidity (94% in 
Germany) was held in the deposit facility in 
the September- November 2022 reserve main-
tenance period.
After the Eurosystem raised its key interest 
rates by 50 basis points in July and 75 basis 
points in September, overnight rates in the 
euro money market went up in the fi  fth and Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as at
11 Nov. 2022
Active programmes 1
PSPP + 0.7 2,587.5
CBPP3 – 1.2 303.3
CSPP + 0.1 344.7
ABSPP – 1.6 23.8
PEPP – 8.3 1,683.9
Completed programmes 
SMP – 0.1 2.8
CBPP1 + 0.0 0.0
CBPP2 – 0.2 0.0
1 Changes due to net purchases, maturities, reinvestments 
and amortisation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankAutonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing  (liquidity-absorbing)  factors  are  preceded  by  a  positive 
(negative)  sign.  1 Including  end-of-quarter  liquidity-neutral 
valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 20221,8001,5001,20090060030003006009001,200
––––––++++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
27

sixth reserve maintenance periods of 2022 
(see the chart above). In both the fi  fth and 
sixth reserve maintenance periods of 2022, 
the unsecured euro short- term rate (€STR) 
mirrored the policy rate increases almost 
exactly, rising to -0.09% and 0.66% on an 
average in the respective periods. The spread 
on the deposit facility rate widened slightly by 
1 basis point to 9 basis points off the back of 
the interest rate rises. At €53.9 billion on aver-
age, €STR turnover in the fi  fth reserve main-
tenance period of 2022 was only marginally 
higher than in the previous period. On 14 Sep-
tember, the fi  rst day of the sixth reserve main-
tenance period of 2022, turnover reached a 
new peak of €80.0 billion and remained at a 
high level thereafter. In keeping with this, average turnover in the sixth reserve mainten-
ance period of 2022 rose markedly by €10 bil-
lion to €63.9 billion.
On the GC Pooling trading platform, too, 
interest rates for overnight transactions in the 
ECB basket were almost fully passed through 
after the fi  rst trading days of the new reserve 
maintenance period, i.e. with a slight lag. 
Trading was carried out at an average of 
-0.10% in the fi  fth reserve maintenance period 
of 2022. This was roughly 48 basis points 
higher than in the previous period. The in-
crease was slightly smaller compared with the 
rise in interest rates during the sixth reserve 
maintenance period of 2022, when trading 
hovered at an average of 0.60%, or 70 basis 
points higher than in the previous period. In 
the ECB EXTended basket, which has a 
broader selection of securities with lower rat-
ing requirements for concluding repo transac-
tions, overnight trading took place at rates of 
-0.05% and 0.67% during the reporting 
period. This was an increase of 48 basis points 
and 72 basis points compared with the re-
spective previous period. A pattern of falling 
interest rates and fairly low volumes can still 
be observed toward the end-of-month dates. 
Turnover in the ECB basket stood at €2.2 bil-
lion, which was higher than in the previous 
period under review. In the ECB EXTended 
basket, on the other hand, it was somewhat 
lower at €2.5 billion. In the sixth reserve main-
tenance period of 2022, a technical migration 
took place on the GC Pooling trading plat-
form, resulting in lower transaction volumes; 
prior to this, turnover had been showing signs 
of an increase.
So far, in the current, seventh reserve main-
tenance period of 2022, it appears that the 
third interest rate hike will be passed on al-
most completely in €STR once again.Deposit facility rate, money market rates 
and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Central 
bank balance minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the 
deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still ongoing. 3 With 
effect from 14 September 2022, the ECB Governing Council set 
the multiplier for the exemption allowance to zero.
Deutsche BundesbankJune July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov.
20221.00.500.51.01.5
––+++Daily data
% p.a.
€ bn
01,0002,0003,0004,0005,000Excess liquidity1
Mean value for the reserve 
maintenance period2ECB EXTended basket€STR
STOXX GC Pooling Overnight
GermanyEuro areaAllowances (two-tier system) 3ECB BasketDeposit facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
28

closing the period at 1.803%, up by around 
154 basis points on mid-August.
Money market forward rates are continuing to 
signal expectations of further key interest rate 
hikes even after the two interest rate moves in 
September and October. For the next monetary 
policy meeting in December, market partici -
pants are fully pricing in an interest rate step of 
50 basis points. The money market forward 
curve is currently expected to peak in mid- 2023 
at around 2.9%, significantly up on mid-  
August, in an indication that market partici -
pants are pricing in a further 90 basis points in 
interest rate hikes overall in the first half of 
2023. The forward curve remained highly vola -
tile, however, amid distinct uncertainty, hover -
ing between 2.5% and 3.2% at its peak over 
recent weeks. The forward curve fell noticeably 
for some time following the Governing Coun -
cil’s meeting in October, with market partici -
pants seemingly interpreting the monetary pol -
icy communication initially as if the risk of a downturn in the economy was being assigned 
increasing importance in the Eurosystem’s reac -
tion function. The forward curve picked up 
again, though, on the release of euro area in -
flation figures for October that once again ex -
ceeded expectations. The path of inflation 
underlined the need for continued decisive 
monetary policy adjustment to preserve price 
stability over the medium term.
Participants in the ECB Survey of Monetary 
Analysts conducted ahead of the September 
and October meetings were likewise expecting 
further interest rate increases. In particular, re -
spondents to the survey conducted prior to the 
October meeting were expecting a median of a 
50 basis point interest rate hike in December 
and further interest rate steps in the first half of 
2023 up to a deposit facility rate of 2.5%.
Net purchases under the pandemic emergency 
purchase programme (PEPP) and asset pur -
chase programme (APP) were discontinued at Money market 
forward rates 
pricing in further 
interest rate 
steps
More interest 
rate hikes 
expected, 
surveys  show
Little change 
in securities 
holdingsOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 202305001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,0005,5006,0006,5007,0007,500€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period1
Third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-III)
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-II)
First series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-I)Pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs)
Additional longer-term refinancing operationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
29

the end of the first and second quarters, re -
spectively, with monetary policy securities hold -
ings showing little change since then. Aggre -
gate holdings reported under both purchase 
programmes are now being influenced only by 
the smoothing over time of reinvestments and 
by the use of amortised cost accounting.2 On 
11 November, the Eurosystem held assets total -
ling €3,258.7 billion as part of the APP (see the 
box entitled “Money market management and 
liquidity needs” on pp. 26 ff. for a breakdown 
of the holdings by individual programme). 
Asset holdings reported under the PEPP came 
to €1,683.6 billion on the same day. The Gov -
erning Council will continue to apply flexibility 
with regard to PEPP reinvestments, with a view 
to countering risks to the monetary policy 
transmission mechanism related to the pan -
demic.
Excess liquidity has risen by around €253 billion 
since mid-  August, lifting the volume of excess 
liquidity to €4,731.9 billion at the end of the 
period under review. The increase was due to a 
significant decline in autonomous factors (see 
the box on pp.  26 ff.). Voluntary repayments 
under TLTRO III, meanwhile, were low in the re -
porting period and had hardly any effect on ex -
cess liquidity. On aggregate, banks made early 
repayments of €6.5 billion on 28  September 
and a further €1.8 billion matured, thus leaving 
€2,121.7 billion still outstanding under the third 
series of TLTROs. Voluntary repayments are 
likely to be higher as of mid- November due to 
the modification of the TLTRO terms and condi -
tions. This would help to reduce the Eurosys -
tem balance sheet and, with that, contribute to 
the overall normalisation of monetary policy.
Monetary developments in 
the euro area
Influenced by the energy crisis and uncertain 
economic outlook, the broad monetary aggre -
gate M3 expanded more strongly again in the 
third quarter than it had done in the two 
weaker preceding quarters, with the annual growth rate rising to 6.3% at the end of Sep -
tember. One striking development on the com -
ponents side was the significant growth in 
short- term time deposits, whose increased re -
muneration appears to have made this form of 
investment significantly more attractive. On the 
counterparts side, robust bank lending to non- 
financial corporations was a major contributor 
to monetary growth in the euro area. Two fac -
tors were behind non- financial corporations’ 
continued brisk demand for loans. First, there 
was weaker internal financing activity and on -
going supply bottlenecks in goods markets. 
Second, firms faced with significantly higher 
bond funding costs switched to currently less 
expensive loan- based financing. The banks sur -
veyed in the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) re -
ported that they had tightened credit standards 
across all loan categories, significantly so, in 
some cases. However, unlike in the case of 
loans for house purchase, the tighter financing 
conditions overall were not yet significantly 
dampening growth in loans to enterprises in 
the reporting quarter.
For the first time in years, it was the M3 com -
ponent short-  term time deposits, rather than 
overnight deposits, that registered the strong -
est inflows in the third quarter. Indeed, the 
build- up of time deposits has not been this 
substantial since mid-  2008, and it extended 
across all sectors. Particularly noteworthy was 
the significant accumulation of time deposits 
by non- financial corporations, which proved to 
be exceptionally strong in September above all. 
Non- financial corporations’ overnight deposits, 
meanwhile, declined over the same period, in a 
sign that the reallocations may have been mo -
tivated by considerations of yield. Ultimately, 
these developments are probably a conse -
quence of the key interest rate increases in July 
and September. Those hikes meant that there 
was no longer any reason to apply negative 
interest rates to large sight deposit holdings. At Excess liquidity 
increased
Monetary 
growth up in Q3Short- term time 
deposits in par -
ticular register 
inflows
2 In particular, the difference between the acquisition and 
redemption value is amortised over the security’s residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and measured 
at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
30

the same time, however, one- year to two- year 
time deposits in particular became a signifi -
cantly more attractive form of investment for 
non- financial corporations because of the 
higher remuneration they offered.
Because the remuneration of short-  term time 
deposits did not become as attractive for 
households as it did for enterprises, the shifts 
observed in the household sector were not as 
significant. Households accumulated both 
overnight deposits and short- term savings de -
posits on balance and –  for the first time in 
years – built up a notable stock of short- term 
time deposits. The brisk growth in deposits was 
also boosted by government transfer payments 
credited to the accounts of households and en -
terprises. This was offset by central govern -
ments of Member States, whose claims on the 
MFI sector do not count towards the money 
supply, reducing deposits on a large scale.
On the counterparts side, it was above all loans 
to the private sector that drove monetary 
growth in the third quarter. As before, loans to 
non- financial corporations accounted for the 
bulk of this growth, with their annual growth 
rate climbing to just under 9% at the end of 
the quarter. Short- term loans, in particular, 
continued their robust growth on the back of 
further increases in the cost of working capital 
and intermediate inputs. Medium- term and 
long- term loans increased significantly as well, 
but this did not come as a result of buoyant in -
vestment activity. Rather, the yields on corpor -
ate bonds rose more strongly than bank lend -
ing rates, prompting large firms in particular to 
switch their funding arrangements away from 
securitised lending to loans. In addition, 
government- sponsored large- volume loans to 
enterprises from the energy sector, issued 
mainly through KfW Group in Germany, exerted 
an influence on aggregate lending. These loans 
were granted to address higher energy costs 
and the associated increased margin require -
ments for futures transactions at energy ex -
changes.Increase in 
money holdings 
also boosted by 
government 
transfers
Strong accumu -
lation of loans 
to non- financial 
corporations, 
mainly to cover 
increased costs 
for intermediate 
inputs and 
energy …Monetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 20222024681012
–++++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14
02468
++++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining 
counterpartsLonger-term 
financial liabilities1Net external assets
Credit to the private
sector2
Financial corporations3
Non-financial corporations4
Households5Contribution of components 
in percentage points
Securities-based lending to general governmentPercentage change
in M3
Percentage change
in M3
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector2Contribution of counterparts in percentage points
Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
31

These factors are also reflected in the results of 
the BLS, according to which the surveyed banks 
saw demand for loans to enterprises rise again 
in the third quarter. Bank managers mainly put 
this down to an increased need for funding for 
inventories and working capital. Demand for 
short- term loans increased accordingly, while 
longer- term loans remained roughly as sought 
after as before. Financing requirements for 
fixed investment declined for the second time 
in succession, with borrowers using the funds 
raised instead to also repay debt securities.
The banks interviewed as part of the BLS re -
ported furthermore that they had tightened 
their credit standards once again in the third 
quarter. The loan rejection rate was up on the 
quarter. As the main reasons for adjusting their 
standards, the banks cited perceived deterior -
ations in both the economic situation and out -
look as well as in sector- specific and firm-  
specific factors. A further decline in risk toler -
ance was another factor in the tightening of 
credit standards. For the first time since 2020, 
deteriorations in the cost of funds and balance 
sheet constraints also exerted negative effects 
on lending. Compared with the impact of in -
creased credit risk, these bank-  related factors 
were of limited significance, however. The 
banks’ view is supported by surveys conducted 
by the ECB and the European Commission, which find that the respondent firms regard 
access  to financing as one of the least pressing 
surveyed problems, despite the tightening of 
financing conditions.
Unlike non- financial corporations, households 
exhibited lower demand for loans in the third 
quarter than they had in the preceding quar -
ters. This slowdown affected loans for house 
purchase in particular. At the end of the quar -
ter, the annual growth rate for these loans de -
clined to just over 5% and was thus ½ percent -
age point lower than one year ago. An import -
ant factor in this development is likely to have 
been the higher interest rates, which, at the 
end of the quarter, were just over 1 percentage 
point higher than at this time last year. The 
banks surveyed by the BLS also reported a con -
siderable fall in the demand for housing loans, 
which they attributed to the higher interest 
rate level and lower consumer confidence.
An additional dampening factor is likely to have 
been the significant tightening of credit stand -
ards for loans to households for house pur -
chase, as indicated by the BLS. The net share of 
banks that reported such adjustments was as 
high as it had last been during the financial cri -
sis. The rejection rate likewise rose considerably 
compared with the previous quarter. The sur -
veyed banks justified the stricter standards on … but a decline 
in funding needs 
for fixed invest -
ment
BLS banks tight -
ened credit 
standards for 
loans to enter -
prisesHousing loans 
to households 
weaker than 
in previous 
quarters  …
… credit stand -
ards tightened 
significantly 
according to BLSConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q2 2022 Q3 2022
Holdings against central government 2 17.1 – 122.0
Monetary aggregate M3 152.5 356.7
Components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 87.6 123.5
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) 37.2 185.4
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 27.7 47.8
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 29.7 –   3.1
Capital and reserves 53.2 50.7
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 23.4 –  53.8Assets Q2 2022 Q3 2022
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 207.5 201.6
Loans 231.4 212.4
Loans, adjusted 1 248.6 216.2
Securities – 23.9 – 10.8
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 76.5 – 52.3
Loans –  0.7 1.7
Securities 77.2 – 54.3
Net external assets – 70.6 –  1.7
Other counterparts of M3 – 14.0 84.1
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
32

the grounds of a perceived increase in credit 
risk. This was attributable not only to the de -
terioration in the general economic situation 
and the bleaker outlook in the housing market, 
but also to the decline in borrowers’ credit -
worthiness. Furthermore, banks reported that 
increased financing costs, which reduced their 
margins, had had a restrictive effect on their 
lending policies.
Similarly to loans for house purchase, con -
sumer credit and other loans also saw weaker 
growth compared with the previous quarter. 
This is also reflected in the BLS: in the third 
quarter, the surveyed banks in the euro area re -
ported a decline in the demand for consumer 
credit and other loans for the first time since 
the second year of the coronavirus pandemic. 
According to the banks that responded to the 
survey, the reasons for this fall in demand were, 
in particular, the higher general interest rate 
level, the decline in consumer confidence, and 
a lower propensity to purchase. At the same 
time, the number of surveyed banks that tight -
ened their standards for consumer credit and 
other loans on balance was as high as it had 
last been during the first year of the pandemic. 
The rejection rate again rose compared with 
the previous quarter. As in the case of loans for 
house purchase, the banks justified this tight -
ening based on their perception of greater 
credit risk.
The effect of securitised lending on monetary 
growth changed significantly following the Euro -
system’s discontinuation of net purchases of 
government and corporate bonds at the end of 
June. For example, in the reporting quarter, the 
MFI sector markedly reduced its holdings of 
government bonds for the first time in three 
years. This was due to the fact that commercial 
banks domiciled in the euro area significantly 
reduced their holdings in the reporting quarter, 
while the Eurosystem only reinvested principal 
payments. The reduction in banks’ securitised 
lending to euro area countries, when viewed in 
isolation, had a dampening effect on monetary 
growth. On balance, however, banks sold off some of the securities to non- residents and 
thus improved their net external positions.
The discontinuation of net asset purchases and 
the hikes in key interest rates contributed to a 
rise in bond yields in the euro area. As a result, 
non- residents again purchased securities from 
euro area issuers, particularly government 
bonds. Despite the improved financial account 
balance, the net external position of the MFI 
sector was, however, balanced overall. This 
was due to the fact that the current account 
continued to deteriorate significantly. Against 
the backdrop of high prices for energy and Consumer credit 
and other loans 
to households 
see weaker 
growth
End of purchase 
programmes 
reflected in 
securitised lend -
ing and net 
external positionHowever, 
inflows in invest -
ment offset by 
outflows in 
current  accountMFI loans to the non-financial private 
sector in the euro area*
20020406080100120140
–+++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank... France
... Italy... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
020406080 To households3To non-financial corporations1
Total2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
33

commodity imports, the balance fell deeper 
into negative territory.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic customers
In contrast to the weak previous quarter, Ger -
man banks’ deposit business with domestic 
customers was exceptionally dynamic in the 
third quarter of 2022. Here, as in the euro area, 
the sharp uptick in interest for short- term time 
deposits among bank customers was particu -
larly striking. At the same time, however, they 
also significantly increased their overnight de -
posits again. Furthermore, the reduction in 
long-  term bank deposits was weaker than in 
many previous quarters. While the remuner -
ation on these deposits, which had risen con -
siderably in some cases, made them more at -
tractive again for some bank customers, the 
current development of deposits in Germany overall, however, indicates that bank custom -
ers’ preference for liquid forms of investment 
has increased again in light of the tense eco -
nomic sentiment and the uncertainty regarding 
the future consequences of the war against 
Ukraine.
The current growth in short- term deposits was 
driven by all money-  holding sectors. Banks re -
corded the largest inflows in their deposit busi -
ness with households, which, after four weaker 
quarters, started to build up overnight deposits 
once again. It appears that the considerably 
clouded economic outlook and high energy 
prices prompted households to hold more 
liquidity. Non-  financial corporations, by con -
trast, increased their overnight deposits only 
marginally in net terms. Over the course of the 
quarter, in an environment of rising interest 
rates, they instead increasingly shifted their 
overnight deposits into short- term time de -
posits with interest rates consistent with mar -
ket conditions. One reason for the increased 
build- up of deposits in this sector is likely to 
have been enterprises’ reluctance to invest in 
fixed assets in light of the uncertain outlook. As 
all other money- holding sectors also recently 
increased their short- term time deposits, such 
deposits made strong gains overall in the third 
quarter.
Despite the tighter financing conditions, banks’ 
lending business with domestic non- banks con -
tinued to expand substantially in the third quar -
ter of 2022, following exceptionally dynamic 
growth in the previous quarter. In this context, 
banks again massively expanded their lending 
to the domestic private sector and also in -
creased their holdings of securities from do -
mestic private issuers to a greater extent. By 
contrast, lending business with the public sec -
tor contracted markedly again. Against the 
backdrop of low new issuance, banks con -
tinued to reduce their holdings of German gov -
ernment securities in particular. The low finan -
cing needs of German public sector budgets 
are likely to be connected not least to high tax Deposit business 
characterised by 
rising interest 
rates and strong 
preference for 
liquidity …… and driven 
by all money- 
holding sectors
Renewed very 
strong momen -
tum in lending 
business with 
non- banksInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 2022101234
–++++% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
34

receipts resulting from the general price infla -
tion, amongst other factors.
The main reason for the robust lending to the 
private sector was the fact that non- financial 
corporations took out an exceptionally large 
volume of loans with domestic banks. Here, 
short- term loans with maturities of up to one 
year saw especially strong growth. Medium-  
term and long- term loans also rose sharply in 
the third quarter, however.
A large portion of the net lending in corporate 
lending business was attributable to govern -
ment assistance loans to energy companies 
that were granted directly by KfW Group. 
These loans mainly served to stabilise energy 
importers and suppliers that were facing liquid -
ity bottlenecks owing to the surge in energy 
prices. However, even without the government- 
guaranteed assistance loans, corporate lending 
business was buoyant in the third quarter. First, 
non- financial corporations’ internal financing 
options recently became considerably restricted 
and enterprises then had to increasingly turn to 
external financing sources. Second, for enter -
prises with existing long- term financing needs, 
it is currently cheaper to obtain funding via 
bank loans than via the capital market.
The responses to the most recent BLS suggest 
that other factors were at play as well. Bank 
managers again cited funding needs for inven -
tories and working capital as a major reason 
for the increased demand for loans to enter -
prises. According to the bank managers, de -
mand increased due to the fact that many en -
terprises expanded their inventories in light of 
the unstable supply chains and the expectation 
of rising costs.
At the same time, the banks surveyed by the 
BLS made their credit standards for corporate 
lending more restrictive on balance and also re -
ported stricter credit terms and conditions 
overall. They pointed to the rise in credit risk as 
the main reason for this tightening. Similarly to 
the euro area as a whole, they primarily attrib -uted this rise to the deterioration in the general 
economic situation and economic outlook, par -
ticularly as a result of the war in Ukraine and 
rising energy costs, but also to sector- specific 
and firm- specific factors. In addition, their re -
duced risk tolerance also had a restrictive ef -
fect. The proportion of rejected loan applica -
tions in corporate lending likewise grew during 
the reporting period compared to the previous 
quarter.
Alongside lending to enterprises, banks in Ger -
many also recorded significant growth in lend -
ing to households during the third quarter. This 
was again driven by loans for house purchase, 
although growth in these loans slowed down 
noticeably for the first time in several years. The 
loss of purchasing power, considerably higher 
construction prices, and the sharp rise in finan -
cing costs dampened households’ demand for 
loans for house purchase. Overall, the annual 
growth rate of loans taken out for house pur -Demand for 
loans among 
non- financial 
corporations 
exceptionally 
high …
… bolstered by 
government 
assistance loans
Loan demand 
driven by 
greater funding 
needs for inven -
tories and work -
ing capital, 
amongst other 
factors
Credit standards 
and terms and 
conditions tight -
ened once againNoticeably 
weaker growth 
in loans for 
house purchaseMFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2022
Q2 Q3
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 4.5 44.6
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years 13.3 65.3
over 2 years – 6.9 – 1.3
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months – 2.9 – 8.1
over 3 months – 0.7 – 0.3
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 0.1 – 0.1
Securities – 9.0 – 8.2
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 62.4 78.0
of which: to households 3 26.2 19.8
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 26.9 55.9
Securities – 0.8 12.9
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. Adjusted for statistical 
changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, households and gen-
eral government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted for 
loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institutions 
serving households. 4   Non- fi  nancial corporations and quasi- 
corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
35

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q4 2022.
Deutsche Bundesbank14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 20221.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2014 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 2200.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
30030
–+
3003060
–++Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
0.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
36

chase continued to decline, slowing to 6.4% 
from 6.9% in the previous quarter.
The supply side also had a considerably more 
restrictive impact in the third quarter. The tight -
ening of credit standards for housing loans was 
even more pronounced than it was for corpor -
ate loans. According to the banks, credit terms 
and conditions were also made noticeably 
more restrictive. In addition, the rejection rate 
rose significantly compared with the previous 
quarter. Furthermore, banks increased their col -
lateral constraints and non- interest rate charges 
and lowered their loan- to- value ratios and 
amounts of credit granted. The banks justified 
these stringent requirements primarily on the 
grounds of a perceived increase in credit risk. 
Alongside the deterioration in the general eco -
nomic situation and the reduced creditworthi -
ness of borrowers, this was also due to the 
bleaker outlook on the residential real estate 
market. In addition, some banks also cited their 
lower risk tolerance and increased costs related 
to their capital position.
According to the BLS, the credit standards and 
terms and conditions for consumer credit and 
other lending to households were also tight -
ened in the third quarter of 2022. Nevertheless, 
as in the previous quarter, net lending in this 
segment remained slightly positive.
For the third quarter of 2022, the surveyed Ger -
man banks reported that there was little 
change in funding conditions overall. Accord -
ing to the banks, the Eurosystem’s asset pur -
chase programmes (APP , PEPP) have contrib -
uted only marginally to improving their liquidity 
positions and market financing conditions over 
the past six months. On the other hand, the 
negative impact of the asset purchase pro -
grammes on banks’ profitability also dimin -
ished significantly.
By contrast, according to the banks, TLTRO III 
continued to have a visibly positive impact on 
their financial situations, despite the fact that 
no further operations have been conducted since December 2021. The operations mainly 
contributed to increases in profitability, more 
comfortable liquidity positions, and improved 
financing conditions. They also contributed to 
improving the banks’ ability to fulfil regulatory 
and supervisory requirements. The banks re -
ported neither the asset purchase programmes 
nor TLTRO III as having a significant impact on 
their lending policies or volumes of lending 
over the past six months.
The negative interest rate on the deposit facility 
until 21 July 2022 led to a decline in lending 
and deposit rates and an increase in deposit 
fees over the past six months. Overall, it once Financing 
conditions  for 
housing loans 
significantly 
more restrictive
Hardly any 
change in 
funding  environ -
ment of German 
banks
Continued posi -
tive effects of 
TLTRO III on 
banks’ financial 
situations2018 2019 2020 2021 202202468Year-on-year change, end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic 
non-financial private sector
202468101214
–+++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchaseTotal,
percentage changeLoan contributions 
in percentage pointsTotal,
percentage changeUp to 1 yearMaturity contributions in percentage points
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 yearsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
37

again squeezed banks’ net interest income. The 
two- tier system for remunerating excess liquid -ity holdings did, however, soften the adverse 
impact on earnings.
List of references
European Central Bank (2022), Press release dated 27 October 2022, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/
press/pr/date/2022/html/ecb.pr221027_1~c8005660b0.en.htmlDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
38

Financial markets
Financial market setting
On both sides of the Atlantic, the record infla -
tion rates together with the continued tighten -
ing of monetary policy held sway over the 
international financial markets. Yields in gov -
ernment bond markets rose significantly, espe -
cially as key central banks signalled their will -
ingness to raise interest rates further in order to 
fulfil their mandate. The Federal Reserve raised 
the key interest rate by 75 basis points in July, 
September and November to a target range 
now of between 3.75% and 4%; since July, the 
Eurosystem has increased key interest rates by 
a total of 200 basis points. Moreover, market 
participants are expecting the Eurosystem to 
stop reinvesting maturing bonds soon. At the 
same time, the risks of an expansionary fiscal 
policy in times of a necessary tightening of 
monetary policy became a topic of greater con -
cern in the financial markets. In the United 
Kingdom, unfunded tax cuts, which were ini -
tially announced and later withdrawn, led to an 
abrupt increase in government bond yields. 
This was perceived by the Bank of England as a 
threat to financial stability and forced it to devi -
ate from its course of monetary policy tighten -
ing to initiate temporary purchases of domestic 
government bonds and further support meas -
ures. The stock markets rebounded following 
the steep price losses in the previous quarters. 
Although the higher interest rates and en -
trenched doubts about the economy continued 
to dampen prices, reports of sizeable liquid gas 
deliveries and high gas storage levels revived 
investors’ risk appetite and economic optimism 
as of the fourth quarter, especially in Europe. 
Driven mainly by the monetary policy tighten -
ing actions of the Eurosystem and the Federal 
Reserve, the euro initially depreciated markedly 
against the US dollar, but subsequently re -
couped most of these losses. In effective terms, 
by contrast, the euro appreciated.Exchange rates
On balance, the euro remained virtually un -
changed against the US dollar compared with 
the beginning of the third quarter of 2022. 
However, up until the beginning of November, 
the European single currency had been trading 
markedly weaker against the US dollar. This 
was mainly because the Eurosystem’s monetary 
policy tightening actions continued to fall short 
of those of the Federal Reserve in the eyes of 
the foreign exchange markets, with the result 
that monetary policy weakened the euro, on 
balance. Moreover, uncertainty in the foreign 
exchange markets remained elevated in the 
light of a number of headwinds, such as Rus -
sia’s war against Ukraine and the deteriorating 
and rather uncertain global economic outlook. 
This was also reflected in high volatility in the 
foreign exchange markets. Such periods of pro -
nounced global uncertainty favour capital flows 
to the United States, which had likely put the 
European single currency under additional pres -
sure against the US dollar. In addition, the en -
ergy crisis, which hit the euro area countries 
particularly hard, drove the euro down further 
against the US dollar. However, the recently im -
proved situation in the gas market, the result -
ing reduction in energy risks with regard to the 
winter months and the associated increase in 
risk appetite counteracted the downward pres -
sure on the euro.
The impact of the different monetary policy 
stance of the United States and the euro area 
on the euro- US dollar exchange rate can be 
clearly observed from developments on a few 
selected dates. For example, the euro fell below 
parity with the US dollar at the end of August, 
i.e. around the time when Jerome Powell, Chair 
of the Federal Reserve, emphasised at the an -
nual meeting of central bankers in Jackson 
Hole with surprising clarity for the markets that 
a continued restrictive monetary policy was ne -
cessary for the United States. On 28 September Financial 
markets  focus -
ing on high 
inflation rates 
and expected 
tightening of 
monetary policyEuro virtually 
unchanged on 
balance against 
the US dollar
Shifts in 
exchange rates 
driven mainly by 
monetary policy 
stances of the 
United States 
and the euro 
areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
39

2022, after the Fed had once again sharply 
raised policy rates in the United States, the 
euro fell to a 20- year low of US$0.96. The euro 
has rebounded since the beginning of Novem -
ber following the publication of lower than ex -
pected inflation figures for the United States, 
which raised expectations among market par -
ticipants that the Fed would tighten monetary 
policy more slowly than previously assumed. At 
the end of the reporting period, the euro was 
trading at US$1.04, down a mere 0.2% from 
its level at the end of June.
Amid considerable exchange rate volatility, the 
euro appreciated on balance against the pound sterling compared with the beginning of the 
second half of the year. During this time, the 
Bank of England raised its policy rate by a total 
of 175 basis points to 3%. Despite this tighten -
ing, inflation in the United Kingdom continued 
to rise. At the same time, there was a marked 
deterioration in the UK economic outlook in 
late summer, which led to a gradual appreci -
ation of the euro against the pound sterling.
In the second half of September, the pound 
sterling experienced an episode of unusually 
high volatility in the foreign exchange market. 
The main reason for this was the announce -
ment of unfunded tax cuts by the new UK gov -
ernment. This fuelled doubts among market 
participants about the sustainability of UK gov -
ernment debt. Moreover, it was clearly per -
ceived that the Bank of England and the UK 
government had taken policy measures whose 
effect on price stability went in different direc -
tions. This caused massive tensions in the UK 
financial market, which led to a sharp depreci -
ation of the pound. At the end of September, 
the euro stood at more than £0.90. In order to 
avert the associated “material risk to UK finan -
cial stability”, the Bank of England intervened 
swiftly with a number of measures (see p. 42). 
At the same time, the Bank of England re -
affirmed its intention to raise policy rates with -
out delay for as long as necessary to achieve 
the inflation target sustainably. As a result, the 
pound sterling partly recouped its previous 
losses against the euro. The subsequent U- turn 
in UK tax policy contributed to this develop -
ment. At the end of the period under review, 
the euro stood at £0.87, which was 1.4% 
higher than at the end of the second quarter.
The euro made considerable gains against the 
yen. Much like in the United States, the differ -
ences in the monetary policy stances between 
the major currency areas is also a key factor in 
this development. For example, the Japanese 
central bank’s adherence to its loose monetary 
policy means that the yield differential between 
the United States and the euro area, on the 
one hand, and Japan, on the other, increased Euro appreciates 
against the 
pound 
sterlin g …
… amid 
unusually high 
volatility
Euro records 
gains against 
yenExchange rate of the euro
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Calculated 
against the currencies of 19 countries. A rise in values indicates 
an appreciation of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankJ J A SOND J FMAM J J A SON
2021 20220.951.001.051.101.151.201.25
125130135140145150
0.820.850.880.91
9296100104Daily data, log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
... yen
... pound sterling
Nominal effective exchange rate1
Q1 1999 = 100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
40

further. To counter the resulting downward 
pressure on the yen – especially against the US 
dollar – the Japanese government intervened 
unilaterally in the foreign exchange market in 
both September and October for the first time 
since 1998. However, the impact of the foreign 
exchange market interventions on the euro- yen 
exchange rate was only short- lived. Overall, the 
euro recorded a gain of 2.5% compared to the 
end of June of this year and was trading at 
¥145 at the end of the reporting period.
On a weighted average against the currencies 
of 19 major trading partners, the euro appreci -
ated by 1.5% on balance. In addition to the 
aforementioned strengthening of the euro 
against the pound sterling and the yen, the eu -
ro’s appreciation was driven above all by sig -
nificant gains against the renminbi. These gains 
were made in the context of weaker growth in 
the Chinese economy, which is being weighed 
down by the rigorous COVID restrictions and 
declining global demand.
Securities markets and 
portfolio  transactions
Bond market
From the end of the second quarter, nominal 
government bond yields rose significantly in 
the major currency areas. Despite growing con -
cerns about the economic outlook, persistently 
high inflation and expectations of a corres -
ponding tightening of monetary policy domin -
ated developments in the financial markets. In 
addition to the measures already adopted by 
central banks, particular attention was paid to 
their forward guidance. As with exchange 
rates, central banks also acted as a clear cata -
lyst for bonds. For example, market participants 
interpreted the press release following the ECB 
Governing Council meeting in October as 
meaning that the Eurosystem would tighten 
somewhat more slowly in future, as consider -
able progress had already been made in with -
drawing monetary policy accommodation. On the other side of the Atlantic, by contrast, fol -
lowing the monetary policy decisions at the be -
ginning of November, Fed Chairman Jerome 
Powell made clear that further interest rate 
hikes were needed to reach the 2% inflation 
target, which ultimately resulted in a steepen -
ing of the short- term interest rate path. Unex -
pectedly low US inflation figures published to -
wards the end of the period under review 
dampened ten- year US yields again markedly. 
Overall, however, they rose by 83 basis points 
to 3.9% in the reporting period. The interest 
rate differential between US Treasury yields and 
the euro area GDP- weighted yield increased by 
21 basis points to 1.2%.Euro stronger in 
effective terms
Ten- year 
government  
bond yields up 
globallyImplied volatility
in the financial markets
Sources: Bloomberg and Thomson Reuters. 1 Calculated using 
the prices of index options with a maturity of 30 days. 2 Im-
plied  volatility  of  currency  options  with  a  maturity  of  three 
months.  3 Implied  volatility  of  options  on  the  Bund  future 
(Germany) and T-Note future (United States) for a three-month 
horizon.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 202205101520102030405060708090
5101520
Bond market3Equity market1
Enlarged scale
Foreign exchange market2%, daily data
United StatesEuro area
VSTOXX 
(EURO STOXX 50)
GermanyUnited States
VIX (S&P 500)
Euro/US dollar
Euro/yenGermany
VDAXDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
41

On balance, ten- year government bond yields 
in the United Kingdom rose more strongly than 
in the United States and the euro area (+103 
basis points to 3.3%). The Bank of England re -
sponded to the continued high inflation rates 
by raising policy rates by 50 basis points in both 
August and September and by 75 basis points 
in November. In the interim, the UK govern -
ment bond markets had experienced turmoil. 
At the end of September, the new UK govern -
ment announced unfunded tax cut plans, lead -
ing yields to rise abruptly to 4.6%. The Bank of 
England perceived this sharp rise in yields as a 
threat to financial stability. Despite its stance of 
monetary policy tightening, it responded by ini -
tiating temporary purchases of long- dated do -
mestic government bonds and further support 
measures. It also postponed the beginning of 
its planned sale of government bonds from its 
monetary policy portfolio. These measures, to -
gether with the government’s subsequent 
withdrawal of its original tax cut plans, helped 
calm the market and bring yields back down.By contrast, the Bank of Japan stuck to its 
highly accommodative monetary policy stance. 
The yield on ten- year Japanese bonds remained 
at the upper end of the target range of 0% 
+/-25 basis points. However, the announced 
option of unlimited bond purchases, together 
with the Bank of Japan’s already large holdings, 
increasingly weighed on the liquidity of Japan -
ese government bonds and led to tensions in 
the foreign exchange markets, as outlined 
above.
On balance, yields on ten- year Bunds rose by 
67 basis points to 2.0% following the end of 
the second quarter. In mid- October they even 
climbed to over 2.4%, reaching their highest 
level in more than ten years. A model break -
down of the yield curve of Federal securities 
suggests that two factors made similar contri -
butions to driving up yields. First, given the per -
sistently high inflation rates, market partici -
pants expected a tighter monetary policy and 
thus a steeper interest rate path. Second, there 
was an increase in the term premia that invest -
ors demand as compensation for assuming 
price risk when purchasing long- term bonds.
One reason for the higher term premia could 
be the termination of the Eurosystem’s net 
asset purchases in June. Moreover, market par -
ticipants expect the reinvestment of maturing 
bonds to be discontinued soon as well, which 
would mean that duration risk, which has been 
borne by the Eurosystem to date, would be 
handed back to the market. In addition, the in -
flation risk premium in the longer maturity seg -
ment has increased.
On balance, the implied volatility of options on 
futures contracts for Bunds – a metric that re -
flects uncertainty about future interest rate de -
velopments – barely changed, thus remaining 
well above its five- year average. However, it fell 
significantly after the most recent Governing 
Council meeting, which is striking. This, to -
gether with the observation that the expected 
monetary policy path fell immediately after the 
Governing Council meeting in October, re -Government 
bond yields in 
the United King -
dom volatile 
and higher on 
balance …… and virtually 
unchanged in 
Japan
Higher ten- year 
Bund yield
Determinants of 
term premia
Implied volatility 
of options on 
futures contracts 
fell following 
latest ECB 
Governing  
Council decisionBond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual ma-
turity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 20221012345
–+++++% p. a., daily data
Euro area
Germany
United States
Japan
United KingdomDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
42

flected the greater certainty with which market 
participants expected a less pronounced tight -
ening. Given the high inflation rates, the cur -
rent inflation outlook and the risk of a de-  
anchoring of long- term inflation expectations, 
this is a development that does not sufficiently 
take into account the likelihood of monetary 
policy on both sides of the Atlantic having to 
move interest rates even into restrictive terri -
tory.
The yield spread between ten- year Bunds and 
maturity- matched bonds issued by the Kredi -
tanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) continued to 
increase from an already high level until the be -
ginning of October, before subsequently nar -
rowing to 0.7 percentage point at the end of 
the reporting period, slightly lower than at the 
end of June. The yield spread reflects the pre -
mium that market participants pay for the par -
ticularly high liquidity of Federal securities. One 
reason for the temporary increase in the liquid -
ity premium was the higher demand from mar -
ket participants for safe securities, for example 
to meet margin requirements on futures ex -
changes.
The yield curve derived from Bund yields shifted 
upwards significantly and flattened slightly dur -
ing the period under review. For example, at 
just over 2%, yields on bonds with a residual 
maturity of one year are higher than at any 
time since the end of 2008.
The yield spread between ten- year Bunds and 
ten- year government bonds issued by other 
euro area countries (GDP- weighted average) 
narrowed slightly from the end of the second 
quarter (-7 basis points to 0.9  percentage 
point). This left the spread still moderately 
above its five- year average (0.8  percentage 
point). The five- year window covers a period in 
which the Eurosystem purchased bonds and 
private investors were more willing to buy 
bonds with lower ratings in their “search for 
yield”.1 It was noteworthy that the turmoil in 
the UK government bond market hardly im -
pacted lower- quality euro area bonds and that liquidity in these market segments remained 
stable throughout. Italian government bond 
spreads widened moderately for a time. Polit -
ical uncertainty surrounding the new Italian 
government’s policies is likely to have contrib -
uted to this. Market liquidity indicators did not 
point to any tightness in the market for euro 
area government bonds during the period 
under review.
At the end of the reporting period, market-  
based short- term inflation expectations for the 
euro area derived from inflation swaps were 
still very significantly above the 2% definition 
of price stability. Compared with the end of the Liquidity 
premium  down
German yield 
curve clearly 
positive across 
the entire 
maturity range
Slight narrowing 
of yield spreads 
in euro areaMarket partici -
pants expected 
a sharp rise in 
inflation rates in 
the short termShort-term HICP paths for the euro area
01234567891011
+++++++++++%
2021 2022 2023 2024
Sources: Fenics Market Data, Consensus Economics, Eurostat 
and Bundesbank calculations. 1 On 21 February 2022, Russia 
recognised  the  independence  of  parts  of  the  Donetsk  and 
Luhansk regions within Ukrainian territory. 2 HICP excluding 
tobacco.
Deutsche BundesbankSurvey averages from 
Consensus EconomicsForward inflation rates
derived from inflation swaps
Actual
annual HICP231 March 2022
7 November 20227 November 2022 21 February 20221
18 November 2022
1 Between January 2019 and October 2019, the Eurosys -
tem did not make any net purchases under the asset pur -
chase programme (APP) but fully reinvested the principal 
payments from maturing securities. Net purchases under 
the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) 
were discontinued at the end of March 2022 and no fur -
ther net purchases have been made under the APP since 
July 2022. However, maturing securities will continue to be 
reinvested in full.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
43

second quarter, market participants once again 
revised their inflation expectations until the end 
of 2023 upwards. From the markets’ perspec -
tive, the inflation rate peaked at just under 11% 
in October 2022. As an annual average, market 
participants are expecting an inflation rate of 
8.6% for 2022 and 5.8% for 2023. The ex -
pected rate of inflation even rises to 2.5% by 
the end of 2024. A period in which high infla -
tion expectations become entrenched increases 
the risk that households and enterprises will 
align their wage and price- setting decisions 
with inflation expectations that are no longer 
oriented to the definition of price stability.
Longer- term inflation expectations have also 
increased. The five- year forward inflation rate 
five years ahead, which is derived from inflation 
swaps, stood at 2.3% at last count, up 23 basis 
points from the end of June. The quarterly 
survey- based inflation expectations calculated 
by Consensus Economics for the euro area six 
to ten years ahead also rose in October to 
2.1%, compared with 2.0% in July 2022. Con -
sequently, the difference between market-  
based and survey- based long- term inflation ex -
pectations widened. This difference is often 
seen as a risk premium and indicates that mar -
ket participants are increasingly concerned 
about very high inflation rates over the longer 
term.
Five- year market- based US forward inflation 
rates in five years likewise rose by 8 basis points 
to 2.5%, while survey- based inflation expect -
ations calculated by Consensus Economics re -
mained unchanged at 2.2%. The inflation risk 
premium as the difference between market-  
based and survey- based inflation expectations 
is also positive in the United States and has 
risen.
Yields on BBB- rated European corporate bonds 
with residual maturities of between seven and 
ten years have gone up since the end of the 
second quarter. At 50 basis points, the increase 
in yields for bonds issued by financial corpor -
ations – which tend to be more highly lever -Rise in longer- 
term inflation 
expectations, 
too
Increase in 
longer- term 
inflation expect -
ations in the 
United States, 
as well
Corporate bond 
yields higherForward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Derived  from  the  fixed  cash 
flow arising from inflation swaps which is swapped for the ac-
tual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro 
area and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised 
over the next five or ten years. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 20221.41.82.22.63.0% p.a., weekly averages
Five-year forward inflation rate in 
five years derived from swapsConsensus Economics inflation
expectations in six to ten years
United StatesEuro area
0.81.21.62.02.4
Yield spreads of corporate bonds
in the euro area*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBoxx indices with a residual maturity of seven 
to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 20220100200300400500600700800900
100200300400High yield1
BBB2
AA2
By sector
BBB financial 
corporations2
BBB non-financial corporations2By rating categoryBasis points, daily dataDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
44

aged – was greater than that recorded for non- 
financial corporate bonds (+30 basis points). 
Since the yields on matched- maturity Bunds in -
creased more strongly on balance, the spreads 
of financial and non- financial corporate bonds 
over Bunds narrowed by 20 and 40 basis 
points, respectively. The spreads on high- yield 
bonds, which had risen sharply in the first half 
of the year, have fallen even more considerably 
since the end of June (-117 basis points). To -
gether with the implied volatility in the equity 
markets, which is likewise declining, this points 
to an increased risk appetite on the part of in -
vestors and to diminished concerns regarding 
the debt sustainability of enterprises with lower 
credit ratings, in particular. In line with this, the 
credit default premia for enterprises without an 
investment- grade rating also declined (iTraxx 
Crossover, five years; -107 basis points). Meas -
ured by yield spreads, financing costs for Euro -
pean enterprises across all rating categories 
were nevertheless still significantly above their 
respective five- year averages.
At €438 billion, gross issuance in the German 
bond market in the third quarter of 2022 ex -
ceeded the previous quarter’s figure (€404 bil -
lion). After deducting redemptions and taking 
account of changes in issuers’ holdings of their 
own bonds, net sales remained relatively high 
at €28 billion. The outstanding volume of for -
eign debt securities in Germany fell by €18½ 
billion over the same period. Thus, funds total -
ling a net €9½ billion were raised in the Ger -
man bond market in the period under review.
Domestic credit institutions issued their own 
bonds to the tune of €28½ billion net in the re -
porting quarter. Alongside an increase in other 
bank debt securities (€7 billion), primarily debt 
securities issued by specialised credit institu -
tions and mortgage Pfandbriefe were placed in 
the market (€12 billion and €10½ billion, re -
spectively) on balance. Meanwhile, net issu -
ance of public Pfandbriefe declined by €1½ bil -
lion.In the course of the third quarter, domestic en -
terprises increased their capital market borrow -
ing by €17 billion in net terms (previous quar -
ter: €4 billion). On balance, this was largely at -
tributable to other financial intermediaries.
The public sector redeemed its own bonds 
amounting to €17½ billion net in the quarter 
under review. Ultimately, this was solely attrib -
utable to the governments of the federal states, 
which reduced their capital market debt by 
€21½ billion. By contrast, central government 
mainly issued five- year Federal notes (Bobls; 
€20½ billion) and 30- year Federal bonds 
(Bunds; €9 billion). Meanwhile, there were net 
redemptions of ten- year Bunds totalling €26 
billion.
In the third quarter of 2022, domestic non-  
banks expanded their bond portfolios in the 
domestic bond market by €23 billion net, pur -
chasing exclusively domestic paper (€37½ bil -
lion) on balance. Domestic credit institutions 
purchased debt securities for €8 billion net, all 
of which were also German securities on bal -
ance. The Bundesbank reduced its bond hold -
ings by €17½ billion net. Moreover, non-  
resident investors offloaded domestic bonds 
with a net value of €4½ billion.
Equity market
International equity markets were heavily influ -
enced by the anticipated tightening of monet -
ary policy on both sides of the Atlantic. Mean -
while, market participants’ concerns about an 
energy crisis and a global economic downturn 
took more of a back seat. In some cases, disap -
pointing economic data even boosted equity 
prices as they fuelled speculation of a slower 
tightening of monetary policy. By contrast, indi -
vidual positive economic signals, such as from 
the US labour market, were interpreted as a 
sign of more rapid policy rate hikes and thus 
temporarily caused price losses. However, the 
most significant burden were higher long- term 
interest rates, which rose as policy rates were Net issuance of 
German debt 
securities
Rise in credit 
institutions’ 
capital  market 
debtNet issuance of 
corporate bonds
Fall in net public 
sector debt
Purchases of 
debt securities
International 
equity markets 
under pressure 
from higher 
interest rates, …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
45

raised and which reduce the present value of 
future profits via the discount factor effect. The 
fact that investors also revised their medium-  
term earnings expectations downwards as a re -
sult of their scepticism about the economy 
exerted additional pressure on prices.
Since the fourth quarter, however, news of 
sizeable liquid gas deliveries and high gas stor -
age levels, amongst other things, has strength -
ened optimism amongst investors in the euro 
area again. They considered a gas shortage in 
the winter to be increasingly unlikely. The more 
positive sentiment among market participants 
and increased risk appetite resulted in less un -
certainty about future price developments, 
which is reflected in the relevant volatility in -
dices. In addition, they expected more favour -
able short-  term earnings growth for European 
enterprises, whose profit margins remain high 
by historical standards. In November, prices 
were additionally boosted by lower than ex -
pected inflation figures for the United States. On balance, the Euro Stoxx and the CDAX re -
corded marked gains from the end of June, at 
10.2% and 9.9%, respectively. The prices of US 
equities (S&P 500) rose by 4.8%, with com -
panies in the energy sector recording particu -
larly significant price increases. In the United 
Kingdom, after calm returned to the govern -
ment bond market, equity prices rose markedly 
in October and have appreciated on balance 
since June (FTSE 100: +3.0%); meanwhile, the 
Japanese Nikkei index climbed by 5.7%.
Bank shares on both sides of the Atlantic out -
performed their respective overall markets. 
Losses that reflected uncertainty about im -
pending credit defaults and some credit institu -
tions’ need for capital increases proved to be 
temporary. On balance, the prices of bank 
stocks listed in the US S&P 500 have risen by 
11.1% since the end of the second quarter, 
while European banks have recorded even 
higher growth (16.9%). An important reason 
for these gains is that term premia which have 
risen in line with tighter monetary policy are 
boosting credit institutions’ revenue from ma -
turity transformation. Towards the end of the 
reporting period, mostly positive quarterly re -
sults for some major US banks also sent prices 
higher.
Measured by the earnings yield based on the 
business outlook for the next 12 months, Euro -
pean equity valuations remained virtually un -
changed compared with the end of June, while 
US equity valuations rose slightly. US equities 
also experienced a drop in the implied cost of 
equity, which also incorporates the medium-  
term earnings prospects and the risk- free inter -
est rate and is calculated using a dividend dis -
count model. This therefore supports the find -
ing of higher US equity valuations. There was 
little change in the implied cost of equity for 
European shares. This reflects, amongst other 
things, the fact that earnings expectations rose 
for the upcoming 12- month period, but weak -
ened over the medium term. The medium- term 
earnings prospects were thus slightly below 
their five- year average at last count. From a … but with 
price gains on 
balanceBank stocks out -
perform market 
as a whole
Indicators of 
valuation level 
present mixed 
pictureInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2021 2022
Q3 Q2 Q3
Debt securities
Residents 75.8 40.9 13.6
Credit institutions – 4.5 –  3.0 8.0
of which:
Foreign debt securities – 1.5 6.8 –  3.4
Deutsche Bundesbank 60.1 25.2 – 17.5
Other sectors 20.2 18.7 23.1
of which:
Domestic debt securities 3.1 31.3 37.6
Non-residents – 7.5 – 11.1 –  4.3
Shares
Residents 30.5 – 11.1 27.3
Credit institutions 3.5 –  1.2 –  2.5
of which:
Domestic shares 0.7 –  0.2 –  0.5
Non-banks 27.0 –  9.9 29.8
of which:
Domestic shares 9.1 8.0 33.9
Non-residents 0.4 –  5.3 6.8
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 14.9 15.6 13.6
Investment in retail funds 10.2 3.3 –  2.5
of which:
Equity funds 2.4 3.4 –  0.7
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
46

long- term perspective, the implied cost of 
equity continues to point to fairly low Euro -
pean equity valuations and fairly high US equity 
valuations.
Domestic enterprises placed new shares worth 
€40½ billion net in the German equity market 
in the third quarter of 2022, following €2½ bil -
lion in the previous quarter. The comparatively 
high figure is primarily attributable to an initial 
public offering. In the same period, the out -
standing volume of foreign equities in the Ger -
man market dropped by €6 billion. On balance, 
equities were acquired almost exclusively by 
German non- banks (€30 billion), which also in -
clude mutual funds. Foreign investors increased 
their equity exposure in Germany by €7 billion 
net, while domestic credit institutions sold 
equities worth €2½ billion net.
Mutual funds
During the reporting period, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded inflows of €11 bil -
lion, after raising funds totalling €19 billion in 
the second quarter. On balance, all of the fresh 
funds were channelled to specialised funds re -
served for institutional investors (€13½ billion). 
Among the various asset classes, mixed secur -
ities funds and open- end real estate funds were 
the chief sellers of new fund shares (€6 billion 
and €4½ billion, respectively). By contrast, 
bond funds redeemed their own shares to the 
tune of €3 billion net. Foreign funds distributed 
in the German market hardly attracted any net 
inflows in the third quarter of 2022. Domestic 
non- banks were the main buyers, adding €12½ 
billion worth of mutual fund shares to their 
portfolios. Domestic credit institutions acquired 
shares for €½ billion net, while non- resident 
invest ors reduced their fund portfolio in Ger -
many by €1½ billion.Direct investment
Transactions in cross- border portfolio invest -
ment resulted in net capital imports of €27½ 
billion in the third quarter of 2022. By contrast, 
direct investment led to capital outflows (€30 
billion).
Enterprises domiciled in Germany expanded 
their direct investment abroad by €51½ billion 
on balance between July and September 2022, 
compared with €54 billion in the previous three 
months. They boosted their equity capital in 
non- resident subsidiaries by €12½ billion, ex -
clusively by reinvesting earnings, on balance. In 
addition, enterprises resident in Germany pro -
vided affiliated group entities abroad with add -
itional credit worth €39 billion, largely relying 
on financial loans to do so. The third quarter 
saw considerable volumes of direct investment 
funds flowing from Germany to the United 
Kingdom (€21½ billion), the United States Stock market 
funding at high 
level
Sales and 
purchases  of 
mutual fund 
shares
Direct invest -
ment sees net 
capital exports
German direct 
investment 
abroad results in 
capital exportsEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankBank indicesBeginning of 2020 = 100, log scale, daily data
Total market indices
6580100120140160
506080100120
2020 2021 2022Euro area
(EURO STOXX)Japan
(Nikkei 225)United States
(S&P 500)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
47

(€9½ billion) and Sweden (€8 billion). By con -
trast, German enterprises scaled back their dir -
ect investment in China (€2½ billion) and Rus -
sia (€1½ billion).
Foreign enterprises increased their direct invest -
ment in Germany by €22 billion in the third 
quarter (compared with €13 billion in the previ -
ous quarter), primarily supplying German enter -
prises with additional intra- group loans worth 
€21½ billion. Financial loans again made up 
the bulk of these transactions. Particularly high 
inflows of direct investment were recorded 
from the United Kingdom (€12 billion), France 
(€6 billion) and Ireland (€2½ billion). By con -
trast, enterprises domiciled in the Netherlands 
and Belgium reduced their direct investment in 
Germany (€11½ billion and €4 billion, respect -
ively).Foreign direct 
investment in 
Germany pro -
duces capital 
inflowsMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2021 r 2022 r
Q3 Q2 Q3p
I. Current account + 61.7 + 24.3 + 22.1
1. Goods + 49.1 + 26.7 + 24.1
2. Services –  7.6 –  7.3 – 21.4
3. Primary income + 34.4 + 16.1 + 36.0
4. Secondary income – 14.2 – 11.3 – 16.6
II. Capital account +  1.9 –  3.8 –  4.3
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) + 36.9 + 55.9 + 12.3
1. Direct investment + 24.3 + 40.8 + 29.9
Domestic investment 
abroad + 43.6 + 54.0 + 51.6
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country + 19.3 + 13.2 + 21.8
2. Portfolio investment + 63.4 + 17.3 – 27.4
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities + 55.3 +  1.6 – 26.7
Shares 1 + 19.8 +  5.0 –  8.2
Investment fund shares 2+ 22.2 +  1.3 +  0.1
of which:
Money market fund 
shares –  2.3 –  0.3 –  0.8
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 +  7.6 –  2.2 –  3.3
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 +  5.7 –  2.5 – 15.3
of which:
Denominated in euro 5 –  0.2 +  3.9 –  5.5
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities –  8.2 – 15.7 +  0.7
Shares 1 +  0.4 –  5.9 +  6.6
Investment fund shares –  1.1 +  1.4 –  1.7
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 +  9.5 –  7.0 –  7.2
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 – 17.0 –  4.1 +  2.9
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 6 – 28.7 –  3.2 – 11.3
3. Financial derivatives 7 + 10.2 + 10.7 + 13.0
4. Other investment 8 – 92.2 – 13.6 –  4.1
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 9 – 29.1 – 25.5 – 26.2
Enterprises and 
 households 10 –  2.5 –  9.2 – 14.1
General government –  0.6 – 10.1 – 11.3
Bundesbank – 60.0 + 31.3 + 47.6
5. Reserve assets + 31.2 +  0.6 +  0.8
IV. Errors and omissions 11 – 26.7 + 35.4 –  5.5
1  Including participation certifi  cates. 2  Including reinvested 
earnings. 3  Short- term: original maturity of up to one year. 
4 Long- term: original maturity of more than one year or unlim-
ited. 5  Including outstanding foreign Deutsche  Mark bonds. 
6 Including bonds issued by the former Federal Railways, the 
former Federal Post Offi   ce and the former Treuhand agency. 
7  Balance of transactions arising from options and fi  nancial 
futures  contracts as well as employee stock options. 8 Includes, 
in particular, loans and trade credits as well as currency and de-
posits. 9 Excluding the Bundesbank. 10  Includes the following 
sectors: fi  nancial corporations (excluding monetary fi  nancial in-
stitutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and 
non- profi  t institutions serving households. 11  Statistical errors 
and omissions resulting from the difference between the bal-
ance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current 
account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
48

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
Contrary to expectations, German economic 
activity increased in the third quarter of 2022. 
Although high inflation and uncertainty about 
the future supply of energy weighed on the 
economy, real gross domestic product (GDP) 
grew by 0.3% on the quarter after seasonal ad -
justment according to the Federal Statistical Of -
fice’s flash estimate,1 thus exceeding its pre-  
pandemic level for the first time. The lifting of 
most coronavirus mitigation measures provided 
positive impetus in some services sectors. While 
households’ reluctance to purchase owing to 
high inflation rates and uncertainty was felt in 
the retail sector, private consumption nonethe -
less rose markedly overall, thus proving more 
resilient than expected. Diminishing supply 
bottlenecks and a high order backlog sup -
ported production in the manufacturing sector. 
Investment in machinery and equipment was 
also bolstered by the easing of pressure along 
supply chains. Construction activity weakened 
against the backdrop of high construction prices, 
reduced purchasing power and higher finan -
cing costs.
High inflation and the tense situation in energy 
markets are likely to persist in the coming 
months. In addition, the weaker global econ -
omy is likely to spill over to the export- driven 
industrial sector. Catch- up effects in the 
consumer- related services sectors are dissipat -
ing. In addition, the higher government con -
sumption in the past on account of the pan -
demic will probably gradually return to normal. 
In the winter half-year (October through 
March), the downward forces are therefore 
likely to predominate and economic output 
could decrease significantly.Price- adjusted exports of goods to both euro 
area and non- euro area countries declined sig -
nificantly in the third quarter. Broken down by 
sector, price- adjusted exports of consumer 
goods were down and exports of intermediate 
goods remained unchanged but exports of 
capital goods increased again.
Business investment in machinery and equip -
ment is expected to have increased markedly in 
the third quarter and receding supply bottle -
necks are likely to have supported investment 
activity. Furthermore, in the second quarter, in -
vestment in machinery and equipment was still 
lagging quite strongly behind its pre- pandemic 
levels. More capital goods were sourced from 
both within Germany and abroad. Manufactur -
ers of capital goods thus experienced a sharp 
rise in domestic sales. In addition, significantly 
more capital goods were imported, with enter -Growth in Ger -
man economic 
output in Q3 
2022 contrary 
to expectations
Downward 
forces likely to 
clearly predom -
inate in the 
winter  half- yearDecline in 
exports of 
goods
Commercial 
investment in 
machinery and 
equipment 
probably  up 
significantly 
Aggregate output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Price 
and calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 20229698100102104106108
–12–8–40+4+8+12Adjusted for price, seasonal and calendar effects
2015 = 100, log scale
Gross domestic product
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
1 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this 
text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, pro -
vided they can be verified and quantified.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
49

prises also stepping up investment in their ve -
hicle fleets. According to data provided by the 
German Association of the Automotive Indus -
try (VDA), there was a substantial rise in motor 
vehicle registrations by commercial owners and 
registration figures for commercial vehicles.
Construction investment is likely to have fallen 
in the third quarter of 2022. This is indicated by 
construction output. High construction prices 
and supply- side bottlenecks, as well as reduced 
purchasing power and higher financing costs, 
dampened construction investment. According 
to data available up to August, revenue in the 
main construction sector rose but this is likely to be due to high price increases. Housing in -
vestment is expected to have fallen particularly 
sharply, whereas investment in commercial 
buildings increased somewhat. Investment in 
public buildings remained lacklustre.
Private consumption is likely to have risen 
markedly in the third quarter of 2022. Positive 
stimuli came from catch- up effects in areas pre -
viously restricted by coronavirus protective 
measures. Steep growth was posted in price-  
adjusted retail sales of textiles, clothing, foot -
wear and leather goods, for example. House -
holds also purchased more passenger cars, as 
indicated by the number of new motor vehicle 
registrations by private owners, which rose 
sharply according to the German Association of 
the Automotive Industry. The easing of supply 
bottlenecks could have played a role here, too. 
However, the effects of high inflation and un -
certainty about energy supply also had an im -
pact. Real retail sales (excluding motor vehicles) 
declined somewhat. Moreover, according to 
surveys by the market research institute GfK, 
consumer sentiment dropped to a record low 
and the propensity to save rose strongly.
Imports of goods fell markedly in real terms in 
the third quarter of 2022. While imports from 
the euro area increased distinctly, they declined 
significantly from non- euro area countries. The 
value of imports from China, the newly indus -
trialised Asian countries and the OPEC coun -
tries contracted sharply. In particular, imports 
from Russia saw a steep decline. The fact that 
gas deliveries from Russia were initially cut back 
and then terminated altogether played a role 
here. Broken down by sector, price- adjusted 
imports of intermediate goods declined steeply, 
mainly due to falling chemical imports, which 
had risen exceptionally sharply in the first half 
of the year. By contrast, considerably more 
consumer and capital goods were imported.Construction 
investment 
probably lowerPrivate 
consumption  
probably higher 
in Q3
Imports of 
goods down8090100110Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 20228090100110
100110120Seasonally and calendar adjusted, quarterly data
to euro area countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted18090100110
€ bnto non-euro area 
countriesof which:MonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
50

Sectoral trends
Seasonally adjusted industrial output was up 
slightly in the third quarter of 2022 (+½%). This 
is probably partly due to the fact that supply 
bottlenecks eased somewhat, according to sur -
veys by the ifo Institute, and the order backlog 
remained exceptionally high. By contrast, the 
temporary low water levels in Germany’s inland 
waterways and the associated restrictions on 
the transport of goods are likely to have damp -
ened industrial output in the third quarter. In 
addition, high energy costs weighed on out -
put, especially in energy- intensive sectors. For 
example, there was a strong decline in the 
manufacture of chemical products, paper and 
paperboard, and other non- metallic mineral 
products. The production of intermediate 
goods fell significantly overall. The manufac -
ture of consumer goods also dropped some -
what, whereas the production of capital goods 
rose steeply on a broad basis.
Seasonally adjusted construction output de -
clined somewhat in the third quarter of 2022 
(-½%). It decreased distinctly in the main con -
struction sector, while remaining virtually un -
changed in the finishing trades. High construc -
tion prices, reduced purchasing power and in -
creased interest rates for building finance are 
dampening demand for construction work. 
Supply- side bottlenecks also continue to have a 
burdening effect. The percentage of enter -
prises in the main construction sector reporting 
disruption to their construction activity due to a 
lack of staff rose significantly in the third quar -
ter, according to surveys by the ifo Institute. By 
contrast, equipment utilisation continued to 
decline.
Economic output in the services sector is likely 
to have risen in the third quarter of 2022. Ser -
vices production was up markedly compared 
with the second quarter according to data 
available up to August.2 The lifting of corona -
virus protective measures resulted in catch- up 
effects in sectors that had previously been re -
stricted. Price- adjusted sales rose steeply in the accommodation sector but declined signifi -
cantly in the catering sector. Furthermore, 
motor vehicle trade was buoyant as evidenced 
by the substantial increase in the passenger car 
registrations collected by the German Associ -
ation of the Automotive Industry. An easing of 
supply bottlenecks is also likely to have pro -
vided some support here. Moreover, according 
to the data available up to August, wholesale 
trade recorded a major increase in real sales. By 
contrast, retail trade suffered from households’ 
reluctance to spend, which was particularly no -
ticeable in areas where catch- up effects were 
of no significance, such as retail sales of furni -
ture and furnishings, household appliances and 
home improvement materials.High order back -
log and allevi -
ation of supply 
bottlenecks sup -
ported industrial 
output
Construction 
activity weak -
ened amid high 
construction 
prices, reduced 
purchasing 
power and 
raised interest 
rates
Catch- up effects 
provided posi -
tive stimuli in 
the services 
sector Output in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 202280859095100105110
1001051101151201251301351402015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data, log scale
MonthlyIndustry
Main constructionIndustry excluding
automotive
Construction1
2 The production index for services comprises the sectors 
of transportation and storage, hotels and restaurants, in -
formation and communication, real estate activities, pro -
fessional, scientific, and technical activities and the provi -
sion of administrative and support service activities.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
51

Labour market
In the third quarter, the labour market moved 
largely sideways in terms of both employment 
and unemployment. The previously very posi -
tive outlook deteriorated, however. At present, 
the labour market is caught between under -
staffing in many sectors, a high number of va -
cancies and long recruitment periods on the 
one hand, and declining demand for labour 
– especially in the areas hit especially hard by 
cost increases – on the other. This tight situ -
ation will therefore ease in the coming months, 
but the labour market is likely to remain broadly 
stable.
The previously positive development in employ -
ment virtually came to a halt in the third quar -
ter. Taking the average of the reporting quarter, 
seasonally adjusted total employment was only 
marginally higher than the level of the previous 
quarter. Employment subject to social security 
contributions and exclusively low- paid part-  
time employment nevertheless rose slightly, 
although  it should be noted that current data is 
only available up to August. Self- employment 
continued to decline.
Stable employment developments are likely to 
mask a high degree of heterogeneity at firm 
level – depending on the impact of cost in -
creases, the energy intensity of manufacturing 
and the respective sales partners. By contrast, 
employment subject to social security contribu -
tions remained largely stable even at the eco -
nomic sector level. One exception was tempor -
ary agency employment, which is the first sec -
tor to make staff adjustments in times of crisis. 
In contrast to this, employment in the IT sector 
and in the hotel and restaurant sector even 
grew considerably towards the end of the 
period under review. The latter is likely to have 
seen a catch- up effect with the expiry of pan -
demic measures. Growth rates declined sharply 
in all other sectors but still remain slightly posi -
tive or neutral.Labour market 
caught between 
labour short -
ages on the one 
hand and 
declining 
demand for 
labour on the 
other
Employment 
growth came to 
a halt in Q3
Growth in 
employment 
subject to social 
security contri -
butions slower 
in almost all 
sectorsLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022Oct.43.544.044.545.045.5
31.031.532.032.533.033.534.034.5–1,000–5000+500+1,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–600–400–2000+200+400+600Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Oct.Oct.Million
Million
Million500700900Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployment
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies2EmployedJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
July/
Aug.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
52

The massive influx of immigrants over the 
course of the year raises the potential labour 
supply and thus mitigates the high degree of 
labour market tightness. Ukrainian refugees 
form the dominant group in terms of number. 
In October, there were 423,000 more Ukrain -
ian citizens who are able to work signed up 
with employment agencies and job centres 
than in February, before the Russian attack on 
the country. For this group of persons, too, the 
granting of basic social security benefits is con -
ditional on their willingness to work. However, 
many of them are unavailable, or only partially 
available, to the labour market because they 
look after children, attend educational estab -
lishments or participate in integration meas -
ures. In October, the Federal Employment 
Agency reported 189,000 more unemployed 
persons of Ukrainian nationality than eight 
months earlier.3 However, a number of Ukrain -
ian citizens have already found a job subject to 
social security contributions since February, 
with the number rising by 51,000 persons up 
to August 2022.
There were 2.52 million persons registered as 
unemployed with the Federal Employment 
Agency in October; the unemployment rate 
stood at 5.5%. Unemployment increased only 
marginally from August to October if factoring 
out the effect of the Ukrainian refugees on the 
statistics.4 This also applies for October, despite 
the substantial increase in the general statutory 
minimum wage to €12 per hour. There are 
therefore no resultant significant negative ef -
fects on unemployment, at least in the short 
term.
The outlook for the labour market has deterior -
ated in recent months. Tightness – expressed 
by the ratio of the still very high level of vacan -
cies to the low number of unemployed per -
sons – is still very high despite a slight decline. 
In this respect, labour market tightness will 
probably ease further at first in the coming 
months, with the level of employment likely to 
be less affected.The number of vacant jobs subject to social 
security contributions reported to the Federal 
Employment Agency has declined slightly since 
the peak in May this year. The jobs on offer in 
the economy as a whole, as determined by the 
Institute for Employment Research (IAB) through 
a survey, fell only marginally in the third quarter 
compared with the record high in the second 
quarter. The time taken to fill a vacant post is 
currently longer than it has ever been in the 
past 30 years. This would normally be a sign of 
a pronounced shortage of skilled workers. 
However, some enterprises may also currently 
be hesitant to fill the vacancies they have ad -
vertised due to the uncertain economic out -
look. In any case, the number of new vacancies 
added fell more sharply than the number of 
existing vacancies. The employment barometer 
of the ifo Institute, which conducts surveys of 
enterprises to chart the recruitment plans in 
trade and industry for the next three months, is 
down significantly, with the outlook dropping 
into neutral territory in October. The IAB’s sur -
vey of developments in employment conducted 
among managers of the regional employment 
agencies is still in expansionary territory but the 
index has likewise declined.
Short- time work has not played much of a role 
recently. As of July and in the wake of most 
pandemic restrictions being lifted, the max -
imum entitlement period for short-  time work -
ing benefits was brought back down to 12 
months. Some other special arrangements also 
ceased to apply. Nevertheless, the number of 
registrations for short- time work was markedly 
higher again in October. The IAB survey on un -Ukrainian 
refugees  con -
tribute to rise in 
potential labour 
supply 
Unemployment 
up only 
marginally  after 
adjustment for 
Ukrainian 
refugee  effect
Situation still 
very tightEmployment 
outlook drops 
into neutral 
territory 
Unemployment 
could see a 
moderate rise
3 See Statistics provided by the Federal Employment 
Agency (2022), p. 13. However, the unemployment figures 
for Ukrainians entail a high degree of uncertainty as only a 
provisional analysis of labour market availability, in particu -
lar, was conducted in the first instance. Initially, the focus 
was on the granting of basic social security benefits.
4 As they have been included in the unemployment statis -
tics since June, a comparison with the previous quarter is 
not very meaningful. For the past three months of August 
to October, the Federal Employment Agency reports a 
steady rise in seasonally adjusted unemployment – exclud -
ing any effect from the influx of Ukrainian citizens – of a 
total of 21,000 persons. See Statistics provided by the Fed -
eral Employment Agency (2022), p. 14.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
53

employment over the next three months is sig -
nalling a further moderate rise in unemploy -
ment. As the prospects of finding a new job re -
main comparatively good, it is, however, only 
frictional unemployment that is likely to in -
crease.
Wages and prices
The third quarter of 2022 saw a continued 
moderate increase in negotiated wages. In -
cluding additional benefits, they were up by 
2.5% on the year, compared with 1.9% in the 
quarter before. The higher rate was attribut -
able in part to bonus payments, such as those 
in the metal- working and electrical engineering 
industries, that had been agreed in 2021. At 
2.2%, year- on- year growth in basic pay ad -
justed for these bonus payments was only mar -
ginally higher in the third quarter than in the 
second. This is an after- effect of moderate 
wage agreements during the pandemic. Actual earnings are likely to have once again risen 
more strongly than negotiated wages in the 
third quarter. The main reason for this is prob -
ably the depressed average earnings level a 
year earlier – caused in particular by the num -
ber of people in short- time work, which was 
still relatively high at that time. In addition, an -
ticipatory effects relating to the general statu -
tory minimum wage, which was raised to €12 
per hour on 1 October, may also have played a 
role.
A growing number of the wage agreements 
concluded in recent times have been strong. In 
particular, the annualised wage increases of 
6% negotiated for the chemicals industry and 
5¼% for the metal-  working and electrical en -
gineering industries are much higher than usual 
for those sectors. However, given that inflation 
rates are likely to remain high in the near term, 
the deal for the chemicals industry will prob -
ably nevertheless result in real gross wage 
losses. Looking at net wage growth, the situ -
ation is somewhat more positive from an em -
ployee perspective. This is due to the specific 
way in which the agreements are structured, 
combining an increase in scheduled rates of 
pay that is below expected inflation with two 
large one- off payments that are tax-  free and 
exempt from social security contributions for 
employees. These “inflation compensation bo -
nuses” make the deals more attractive for em -
ployees, as it means that the wage increases 
are markedly higher in net percentage terms 
than in gross percentage terms.5 It is possible 
that enterprises, too, will find the combination 
of comparatively moderate permanent and 
temporary wage components to be more ap -Negotiated 
wages con -
tinued to rise 
moderately in 
Q3, with actual 
earnings prob -
ably increasing 
more steeplyRecent wage 
agreements set 
out larger wage 
increases and 
are specially 
structured
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 20221012345
–+++++Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Percentage
points
–2–10+1+2%
H1
H1 Wage drift1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 Wage drift 
is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual ear-
nings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche BundesbankQ3
5 The Act on the Temporary Reduction of the Value Added 
Tax Rate on Gas Deliveries via the Natural Gas Network 
(Gesetz zur temporären Senkung des Umsatzsteuersatzes 
auf Gaslieferungen über das Erdgasnetz),  which was an -
nounced in the Federal Gazette on 25  October 2022, 
allows employers to grant their employees up to €3,000 
tax- free and exempt from social security contributions as 
an additional payment at any time between 26 October 
2022 and the end of December 2024 to compensate for 
high inflation. This relief measure, referred to as the infla -
tion compensation bonus, can be paid out in a lump sum 
or alternatively in multiple instalments.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
54

pealing than higher permanent wage increases. 
It is likely, then, that wage bargainers will gen -
erally express an interest in this sort of combin -
ation in future wage negotiations up to the 
end of 2024 – the time until which the inflation 
compensation bonus can be paid out. From a 
macroeconomic perspective, this will make it 
easier to return to lower wage growth after the 
temporary components expire. This could re -
duce the extent of second- round effects on in -
flation, especially in the medium term, and help 
prevent the current high inflation rates from 
becoming even more entrenched.
The wage negotiations currently taking place 
are caught between high inflation and labour 
market shortages, on the one hand, and a 
looming recession and heightened uncertainty 
about future economic developments, on the 
other. As a net importer of energy, Germany is 
experiencing a loss of purchasing power and 
prosperity due to the rising energy prices, 
which are a major driver of the current high in -flation rates. This is making it more difficult for 
trade unions to at least keep real wages steady. 
In view of high inflation, trade unions are call -
ing for exceptionally high wage increases in the 
ongoing round of negotiations. For example, 
the trade union ver.di is demanding a 10.5% in -
crease in wages for the public sector at the 
central and local government level for a period 
of 12 months. It is not expected that these de -
mands will lead to actual wage settlements of 
the same magnitude. Although this does not 
suggest that wages are accelerating inflation, 
the risk of second- round effects has become 
greater. These would increase the risk of the 
euro area inflation rate remaining well above 
the medium- term target of 2% for a longer 
period of time.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the exceptionally 
strong rise in consumer prices (as measured by 
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices – 
HICP) continued into the third quarter. The al -
ready very large increases in food prices in the Trade unions’ 
wage demands 
exceptionally 
high
Despite relief 
measures, 
exceptionally 
dynamic rise in 
consumer prices 
continued into 
Q3Price developments at economic stages as classified for HICP purposes
–400+40+80+120+160Year-on-year percentage change
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
1 Bundesbank calculations (in euro) based on daily prices in USD as quoted by Bloomberg Finance L.P. 2 Including beverages and to-
bacco products.  3 ECB calculations of DG AGRI prices based on the European Commission’s farm gate and wholesale prices. 4 Analog-
ous to HICP classification “non-energy industrial goods”; Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.
Deutsche Bundesbank10010203040
–++++
303691215
–+++++
–200+20+40+60Crude oil price1 (right-hand scale)
HICP – food2Producer prices for food in the euro area3 (right-hand scale)HICP – energy
3036912
–++++
–30+3+6+9+12
HICP – non-energy industrial goods Industrial producer prices4Oct.
Oct.Oct.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
55

previous quarters intensified once again. The 
passing- on of higher agricultural producer 
prices appears to be far from the only reason 
for this. Higher costs in manufacturing and 
trade, such as those for energy, are probably 
also playing a role. Consumer energy prices 
also continued to rise markedly despite factors 
that brought relief. These include the elimin -
ation of the renewable energy levy (EEG levy), 
falling crude oil prices and the fuel rebate, 
which was time- limited to the end of August. 
However, the alleviating effect of lower oil 
prices was curbed by the continued depreci -
ation of the euro. Other factors, such as higher 
transport costs for heating oil as a result of low 
water levels in Germany’s inland waterways, 
also drove prices upwards. Lastly, consumer 
rates for gas were once again raised appre -
ciably. In the case of non-  energy industrial 
goods, consumer price dynamics remained ro -
bust in line with price increases at the earlier 
input stages. Prices for services rose just as 
sharply as they had in the second quarter, al -
though the €9 ticket for local and regional 
public transport had a dampening effect until 
the end of August. Excluding rents and the 
volatile prices for travel, price growth for ser -
vices even edged up again somewhat from an 
already high level. Wage increases are also 
likely to have contributed to this in some sub -
sectors.
In June, annual HICP inflation had declined 
slightly to 8.2% on account of relief measures 
(the fuel rebate and €9 ticket) coming into 
force. Once the relief measures were no longer 
in place, inflation in Germany hit double digits 
(10.9%) in September for the first time since 
the early 1950s. On an average of the third 
quarter, the inflation rate rose from 8.3% to 
9.4%. Excluding energy and food, it likewise 
went up slightly, to 3.8%, despite the dampen -
ing effect of the €9 ticket.
In October, prices again grew strongly on the 
month in seasonally adjusted terms, rising by 
1.1%. Energy prices continued to rise markedly. 
Consumer rates for gas and electricity were raised perceptibly, although the reduction in 
VAT on gas – and district heating – that has 
been in place since this month has probably 
been passed on almost in full. Prices of food 
and non- energy industrial goods continued to 
go up strongly. The increase in the general 
statutory minimum wage is also likely to have 
played a role in the likewise significant rise in 
prices for services. Annual headline inflation 
climbed to 11.6%.6 Core inflation reached 
5.1%, up from 4.7%.
Double- digit inflation could persist into the 
new year as well. There is still strong cost pres -
sure at the earlier input stages of the pricing 
chain, especially for non- energy industrial 
goods. Although market prices for crude oil 
and other energy sources were down recently, 
prices remain for the most part at very high 
levels; the pass- through of increased commod -
ity prices to consumer rates for electricity and 
gas is still ongoing. The government paying gas 
bills in December, which represents the first 
stage of the gas price brake, will bring relief for 
consumers, but it is still unclear to what extent 
this will be reflected in the official price statis -
tics and thus in the inflation rate. The second 
stage of the gas price brake, under which 80% 
of households’ basic gas consumption from the 
previous year would be capped at a guaran -
teed 12 cent/ kWh, could potentially dampen 
the inflation rate by almost 1 percentage point. 
Here, too, however, it is highly uncertain how 
this will be reflected in the official price statis -
tics and how gas prices would develop in the 
absence of a gas price brake. This applies in 
equal measure to the electricity price brake en -
visaged for the start of 2023, which could tem -
porarily further dampen the reported inflation 
rate. As soon as the gas and electricity price 
brakes expire, their impact on the inflation rate 
will reverse. In addition to easing the burden 
on consumers, a directly dampening effect of 
the brakes on inflation would also be desirable 
because, in the current period of record-  high Inflation rate 
hit double digits 
for first time in 
Septem ber after 
temporary relief 
measures came 
to an end …
… and went 
up further in 
OctoberPossibly double- 
digit inflation 
rates in months 
to come, too
6 In the consumer price index (CPI) calculated for national 
purposes, it was 10.4%, having increased from 10.0%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
56

inflation rates, there is a risk of longer- term in -
flation expectations being too closely guided 
by the latest inflation data.
Order books and outlook
Economic output is likely to decline significantly 
in the winter half- year (October through March). 
Uncertainty about the energy supply and its 
costs is weighing heavily on enterprises. Ac -
cording to the most recent autumn survey by 
the Association of German Chambers of Com -
merce and Industry, the majority of the firms 
surveyed perceive energy and commodity 
prices as a risk to business in the coming 
months. In surveys conducted by the ifo Insti -
tute, all sectors reported that the business situ -
ation and business expectations were worse in 
October than in the third quarter. Short- term 
production plans and export expectations in 
the manufacturing sector were predominantly 
pessimistic. The slowdown in global economic 
activity is likely to have an impact on exports, 
even though the extensive backlog of orders 
and receding supply bottlenecks in industry are 
somewhat mitigating the subdued demand. 
High inflation is also dampening private con -
sumption and thus activity in the consumer-  
related services sectors. At the same time, the 
positive effects from the lifting of coronavirus 
mitigation measures are likely to diminish mark -
edly. Furthermore, pandemic- related govern -
ment final consumption expenditure is ex -
pected to taper off. This will bring government 
consumption down from its previously elevated 
level. Finally, construction activity is likely to 
continue to cool down.
Overall, this means that although economic ac -
tivity was higher than anticipated in the third 
quarter, a recession is still to be expected in the 
German economy for the winter half- year. The 
scale of the recession is extremely uncertain, 
though. As things currently stand, a gas short -
age can probably be avoided. But this hinges, 
amongst other things, on gas demand being 
sufficiently reduced – and in the case of house -German eco -
nomic output 
likely to decline 
significantly in 
the winter half- 
year, …
… although 
scale of reces -
sion is extremely 
uncertainDemand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022758090100110120
–30–20–100+10+20+30+40+50
708090100110120130
8090100110120
100110120130140
–20–100+10+20Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data
DomesticInternationalLog scale
of which:Log scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Main construction 
orders
%%TotalMonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
57

holds, in particular, this will be heavily depend -
ent on winter temperatures. If there were a gas 
shortage, the decline in real GDP would be 
more pronounced. Should legislators follow 
the majority on the gas commission with re -
spect to the gas price brake, it – as well as the 
proposed electricity price brake – will preserve 
price incentives to save energy (for more infor -
mation, see the relevant comments on p. 60 
and p. 70).
There were further significant declines in indus -
trial orders in the third quarter of 2022. This 
was due to a sharp drop in domestic demand. 
By contrast, the inflow of orders from outside 
Germany increased slightly. Broken down by 
sector, considerably fewer new orders were re -
ceived by producers of consumer goods and 
intermediate goods. The inflow of orders fell 
sharply in the chemicals industry, in particular. 
New orders received by capital goods produ -
cers remained stable. While new orders for 
other transport equipment fell considerably, 
they rose steeply in the automotive sector. Des -
pite dwindling demand, the order backlog in 
industry remains high. The reach of the order 
books in manufacturing even hit a new record 
high in October, according to ifo Institute sur -
veys. In addition, the surveys indicate that the 
share of manufacturing firms whose output is 
being affected by supply bottlenecks continued 
to decrease. Both factors will probably con -
tinue to support industrial output in the com -
ing months. However, data provided by the 
German Association of the Automotive Indus -
try suggest that fewer passenger cars were 
produced in October.
Construction activity is likely to continue to 
slow down. According to surveys conducted by the ifo Institute, sentiment in the main con -
struction sector deteriorated significantly in 
Octo ber. High construction costs and elevated 
lending rates are increasingly pushing down 
demand for construction work. In July and 
August  – the period up to which statistical data 
are available – the inflow of orders in the main 
construction sector decreased again somewhat 
on the second quarter. New orders were al -
ready down sharply in the second quarter. The 
number of building permits fell considerably in 
the third quarter. The reach of the order books, 
as measured by the ifo Institute, decreased fur -
ther in October. In addition, labour and mater -
ials shortages are continuing to disrupt con -
struction activity, even though the share of 
firms affected by these declined in the report -
ing period.
Household final consumption expenditure is 
likely to fall in the winter half- year. Catch- up ef -
fects in the wake of pandemic- related restric -
tions being lifted will dissipate, and potential 
catch- up effects will be offset by declining pur -
chasing power and concerns about high en -
ergy costs. The consumer climate index calcu -
lated by the market research institute GfK 
stabili sed at a very low level recently. In the 
consumer- related services sectors of retail and 
hotels and restaurants, ifo Institute surveys 
show that the assessment of the current situ -
ation by firms was significantly worse in Octo -
ber than in the third quarter. Business expect -
ations became even more pessimistic. How -
ever, motor vehicle purchases could continue 
to provide a boost, as indicated by new vehicle 
registrations by private owners in October, 
which, according to data from the German As -
sociation of the Automotive Industry, were 
higher than in the third quarter.Industrial new 
orders down 
again, but order 
backlog remains 
highConstruction 
activity likely to 
continue to slow 
down
Private con -
sumption likely 
to decline in the 
winter half- year
List of references
Statistics provided by the Federal Employment Agency (2022), Berichte: Blickpunkt Arbeitsmarkt – 
Monatsbericht zum Arbeits- und Ausbildungsmarkt , Nuremberg, October 2022.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
58

Public finances*
General government budget
Crises continue to shape government finances. 
Whilst expenditure on coronavirus measures is 
tapering off, the government is providing new 
financial assistance in response to the energy 
crisis and high price pressures. Macroeconomic 
developments coupled with high inflation will 
bring temporary budget relief on balance, with 
revenue initially rising more steeply than ex -
penditure. Overall, the outlook with regard to 
the development of government finances is 
very uncertain.
2022 as a whole
In spite of new fiscal measures, the govern -
ment deficit ratio is expected to decline mark -
edly in the current year (2021: 3.7%).
– Macroeconomic developments will have a 
positive impact on government finances. 
This is because taxes and social contribu -
tions are mostly calculated on the basis of 
nominal variables such as nominal private 
consumption and wages. Strong nominal 
economic development will generate con -
siderable growth in revenue accordingly (see 
pp. 62 ff. for information on the new official 
tax estimate). Government expenditure will 
only reflect the higher prices and interest 
rates (excluding ad hoc government meas -
ures) to a comparatively moderate extent 
initially.1
– In terms of fiscal measures, coronavirus-  
related measures (such as transfers for en -
terprises) are elapsing. On the other hand, 
however, new fiscal policy measures in re -
sponse to the energy crisis and high inflation 
are having a burdening effect. Lump- sum 
transfers in connection with high gas and 
energy costs as well as support given to gas 
trading companies (especially Uniper) are particularly weighty in financial terms. Ad 
hoc transfers have also been increased and 
taxes reduced on account of the steep rise 
in prices. Examples of such measures include 
the one-  off payments for persons receiving 
the basic allowance and the retroactive in -
crease in the basic income tax allowance.
Outlook for 2023
The government deficit is likely to rise again in 
2023. The scale of this increase depends, for 
one thing, on decisions concerning the gas and 
electricity price brake that have yet to be 
made.2
– Price- related and real macroeconomic devel -
opments may have only a minor influence 
on government deficits on balance (exclud -
ing associated ad hoc measures). In the 
wake of high inflation, the nominal macro -
economic reference variables for general 
government revenue will probably continue 
growing significantly, in spite of weak real 
economic developments. However, price in -
creases are also likely to impact on govern -
ment spending to an increasing extent. Gov -
ernment purchases of tangible goods or 
other purchases, for instance, are set to be -
come more expensive.Government 
finances less 
affected by 
coronavirus 
crisis , but 
increasingly 
shaped by 
energy crisis
Deficit likely to 
decline mark -
edly in the 
current  year in 
spite of new 
measuresDeficit likely to 
rise again in 
2023
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed report -
ing on budgetary developments (government finance stat -
istics). No data are yet available for local government or the 
statutory health and public long- term care insurance 
schemes for the reporting quarter. These will be analysed in 
the short commentaries in upcoming issues of the Monthly 
Report.
1 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a). 
It is significant for interest expenditure, in particular, that 
the national accounts record this spending on an accruals 
basis. In the accounts, it is then less prone to fluctuation 
due to discounts and premia when securities are issued 
than it is in the central government budget; see p. 64.
2 At the cut- off date, the Federal Cabinet had not yet de -
cided on price brakes. The concrete measures planned 
were therefore still unknown.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
59

– In terms of fiscal measures, the government 
deficit will continue to be influenced by op -
posing effects in 2023: on the one hand, 
coronavirus transfers to enterprises will no 
longer be a factor compared with the previ -
ous year, especially the first half. Moreover, 
coronavirus- related healthcare expenditure 
is likely to fall sharply. On the other hand, 
the funding volume of measures connected 
to the energy crisis and inflation is set to rise 
substantially compared with 2022. Sharp in -
creases in the deficit due to gas and electri -
city price- related measures are to be ex -
pected (see p. 69). The envisaged shift in the 
income tax rate is likely to eliminate bracket 
creep on income tax.
Government should preserve 
energy- saving incentives
The gas price brake and the bailing out of gas 
trading companies is placing a particularly 
heavy burden on the government budget. With 
regard to the former, the Federal Government 
has announced its intention to follow the gas 
commission’s proposals.3 The benefit of the 
proposals adopted by the majority of commis -
sion members is that these preserve price in -
centives to save gas. However, other key elem -
ents of the proposals are also convincing, such 
as applying the gas price brake only to signifi -
cantly reduced consumption (where this reduc -
tion would – according to current estimates – 
prevent a gas shortage). In addition, the gas 
commission recommends basing the price 
brake on medium- term price expectations. 
These are significantly higher than pre-  crisis 
prices; consumers and enterprises alike will 
have to make the necessary changes for this. 
By contrast, the government is compensating 
for large losses at gas trading companies (espe -
cially Uniper), electing not to take advantage of 
the potential for price adjustments in the con -
tracts of gas company customers outlined in 
the German Energy Security Act (Energiesiche -
rungsgesetz);  for more on this, see p. 70. This 
dampens incentives to save energy.With the planned measures, the government 
will share a major part of higher energy costs. 
It is also assuming cost risks, rendering public 
finances volatile with regard to price changes. 
At the same time, however, price uncertainty 
will diminish for households and energy-  
consuming enterprises.
In order to overcome the energy shortage and 
therefore the high market prices, it is also cru -
cial that energy supplies are expanded. To this 
end, the Federal Government is striving, not 
least, to accelerate the expansion of renewable 
energy sources. However, there appear to be 
some hurdles on its part that still need to be 
overcome. For instance, potential locations are 
scarce and approval procedures, including judi -
cial reviews, are lengthy. Moreover, bottlenecks 
will arise if supply networks are not expanded 
quickly enough.
Fiscal policy should not 
increase  price pressures
There are supply bottlenecks at present and in -
flation is high. Monetary policy must respond 
appropriately to the high inflation rates, with 
raising policy rates in particular being one way 
of fulfilling its tasks. In the current situation, 
government finances should not increase price 
pressures.
Given the above, there is an argument to be 
made for not expanding government deficits, 
at least not significantly. As illustrated, a decline 
is on the cards this year, but next year, the def -
icit will probably rise again. In order to keep 
this growth in check, a strong case can be 
made for counterfinancing new measures. The 
intention to use counterfinancing has been an -
nounced, for example, in the case of electricity 
price- related measures, but has not yet been 
implemented in the draft economic plan of the 
Economic Stabilisation Fund (ESF). Counterfi -
nancing generally reduces price pressures and, Government 
measures should 
impede signals 
of scarcity as 
little  as possibleGovernment to 
assume risks 
and decrease 
uncertainty
Expand energy 
supply
Fiscal policy 
should not 
increase price 
pressures
Limit govern -
ment deficits
3 See Expert Commission for Gas and Heating (2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
60

taken in isolation, eases the burden on monet -
ary policy.
It would also be in the interests of strictly apply -
ing the debt brake to restrict credit financing. 
Here, it should be borne in mind that the gov -
ernment can only spread higher energy costs 
out over a longer period, or redistribute finan -
cing costs. Sooner or later, it will need to fund 
the measures by increasing revenue or reducing 
expenditure elsewhere. It is also important not 
to disable the fiscal rules, as credible rules are a 
key anchor of trust and strengthen the ability of 
government finances to withstand crises.
Improve EU fiscal rules
Improving EU fiscal rules is vital if the resilience 
of government finances in the euro area is to 
be ensured. Pre- quantified and sufficiently am -
bitious limits should be enshrined in these rules. 
To this end, reforms could be based on the 
existing budgetary objective: a structural 
budgetary position close to balance and the 
annual adjustment path towards this could be 
reinforced by limiting discretionary powers. For 
countries with a high debt ratio, the quantita -
tive requirements should be backed by sanc -
tions in order to insist more strongly on debt 
ratios being swiftly lowered.4
However, the European Commission’s reform 
proposal is not convincing. The Commission in -
tends to negotiate country-  specific fiscal tar -
gets for the coming years with each individual 
Member State. Numerous different factors are 
to be taken into account here, including eco -
nomic policy objectives. The Commission seems 
to be striving for considerable discretion in this 
regard. Furthermore, it is reliant on long- term 
calculations, which are known to be strongly 
assumption- driven. There is a danger that fiscal 
limits will eventually be softened, and that the 
process of determining them will become al -
most entirely opaque. The reduction of high 
debt ratios could thus be considerably delayed 
in line with the rules. The debate surrounding the reform of EU rules is set to continue over 
the months to come. Here, it is crucial that the 
Member States ultimately agree on rules that 
are conducive to sound public finances – in -
cluding a reliable reduction of high debt ratios.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
govern ment
Tax revenue
Q3 2022
Although tax revenue fell by 4½% on the year,5 
this was solely due to the temporary effect of 
tax- reducing measures, which are intended to 
mitigate high energy prices and the generally 
high level of inflation. In the absence of these 
measures, revenue would have continued ris -
ing significantly.
Wage tax, in particular, fell sharply (-19%) as a 
result of measures taken. For example, the en -
ergy price allowance of €300 per employed 
person was largely paid out at the expense of 
wage tax. Aside from this, persons entitled to 
child benefits received a €100 bonus per child, 
which also drove down revenue. Furthermore, 
the basic income tax allowance and the stand -
ard allowance for employees were raised retro -
actively at the start of the year. Adjusted for 
these measures, revenue would have risen sig -
nificantly.
The fuel tax rebate weighed heavily on energy 
tax revenue (-25% overall). From June to Au -
gust, energy tax rates on fuel were lowered to 
the European minimum rate. This reduced en -
ergy tax revenue from August to October, as 
this flows into the government coffers with a 
time lag. Adjusted for the fuel tax rebate, this 
revenue would have fallen only slightly.Restrict credit 
financing in the 
interests of 
strictly applying 
the debt brake
EU rules should 
be reformed to 
ensure that high 
debt ratios fall 
swiftly, …
… but Commis -
sion proposal 
makes this 
unlikelyQ3 2022: meas -
ures temporarily 
reduce revenue, 
underlying trend 
stable
Wage tax 
revenue  fell 
sharply due to 
temporary 
burdens 
Fuel tax rebate 
led to steep 
decline in 
energy tax
4 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), p. 10.
5 Including EU shares in German tax revenue, but exclud -
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
61

New tax estimate for 2022 to 2027
The most recent tax estimate (autumn 2022) 
suggests that tax revenue will rise by 6½% 
year- on- year in 2022. Nominal macroeconomic 
growth is the main factor behind this increase: the reference variables for tax revenue are 
growing dynamically as prices rise sharply. This 
affects nominal private consumption, above all. 
Nominal income is also climbing significantly – 
mostly due to the phasing- out of short- time 
work. By contrast, it is not only the tax meas -
ures mentioned for the reporting quarter that 
are significantly dampening revenue. These are 
coupled with faster write- offs, meaning that 
earnings from profit- related taxes are tempor -
arily lower (and then higher once more). At the 
beginning of the year, legislators also reduced 
income tax rates by the price increase expected 
at the end of 2020 for 2021. Finally, since Oc -
tober, the VAT rate on natural gas and district 
heating has stood at only 7% rather than 19%. 
Excluding tax cuts, estimated revenue would, in 
fact, increase by as much as 9%.
In 2023, revenue is estimated to rise by 5½%. 
This is again chiefly due to nominal macroeco -
nomic growth, which is projected to be lower 
than in 2022 but still considerable. While real Tax revenue sees 
dynamic growth 
of 6½% in 2022
Significant sur -
plus for 2023 in 
forecast, …Tax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 to Q3Estimate 
for 2022 1Q3
2021 2022 2021 2022
Year- on- year changeYear- on- 
year 
change %Year- on- year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total 2 541.1 593.4 + 52.3 +  9.7 +  6.4 193.9 185.6 –  8.4 –  4.3
of which:
Wage tax 3 155.5 160.0 +  4.5 +  2.9 +  3.4 53.9 43.4 – 10.4 – 19.4
Profi  t- related taxes 106.0 120.5 + 14.4 + 13.6 +  5.1 36.8 39.0 +  2.2 +  6.0
Assessed income tax 4 50.1 55.7 +  5.6 + 11.1 +  4.5 18.0 17.6 –  0.4 –  2.1
Corporation tax 5 28.9 33.1 +  4.2 + 14.6 +  5.2 9.9 10.7 +  0.9 +  8.8
Non- assessed taxes 
on earnings 19.5 26.2 +  6.7 + 34.2 + 19.4 6.8 9.4 +  2.7 + 39.2
Withholding tax on 
interest income and 
capital gains 7.5 5.4 –  2.0 – 26.9 – 30.2 2.2 1.2 –  1.0 – 44.0
VAT6 182.0 212.5 + 30.6 + 16.8 + 13.0 69.5 71.2 +  1.6 +  2.4
Other consumption- 
related taxes 7 62.8 62.3 –  0.5 –  0.9 –  1.8 21.9 20.0 –  2.0 –  8.9
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates and Bundesbank calculations. 1  According to offi   cial tax 
estimate of October 2022. 2 Comprises joint taxes as well as central government taxes and state government taxes. Including EU shares 
in German tax revenue, including customs duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Child benefi  ts and subsidies for 
supplementary private pension plans deducted from revenue. 4 Employee refunds and research grants deducted from revenue. 5 Re-
search grants deducted from revenue. 6 VAT and import VAT. 7 Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, 
air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lottery, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Tax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Comprises joint taxes as 
well as central government taxes and state government taxes. 
Including EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs 
duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022201510505101520
––––++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figuresDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
62

private consumption and real gross domestic 
product (GDP) are set to decline, nominal vari -
ables will increase substantially on account of 
price increases. Legislative changes, by con -
trast, weigh only slightly on growth in tax rev -
enue in the estimate. While major support 
measures with a tax- reducing effect (energy 
price allowance and fuel tax rebate, above all) 
from the year before will have come to an end, 
the full effect of the latest VAT rate cut on nat -
ural gas and district heating will only be felt in 
2023, as it will then apply for the whole year.
However, substantial tax cuts that were not in -
cluded in the tax estimate are on the cards. 
These had already largely been prepared at that 
time, but not yet passed. Taking them into ac -
count, tax revenue for 2023 would rise by only 
3%, with the planned measures resulting in 
shortfalls of around €24 billion (½% of GDP). In 
particular, the considerable bracket creep from 
2022 is intended to be largely compensated in 
the income tax scale of 2023.6 The basic tax al -lowance was already retroactively increased by 
a substantial amount in mid- 2022 for this pur -
pose, but the bulk of this relief is yet to come. 
In addition, the date as of which contributions 
to the pension insurance scheme are set to be 
fully deductible has been brought forward to 
2023. This is in response to a ruling by the Fed -
eral Fiscal Court. The Court foresaw a double 
taxation of future pensions in certain circum -
stances (under current legal regulations).
The potential indirect effects of the announced 
gas and electricity price brakes (see also p. 69) 
on the tax estimate cannot be quantified here, 
not least because these measures have not yet 
been fully specified. Their exact impact on, first 
and foremost, corporate profits, and therefore 
on profit-related taxes, is thus unclear. In the 
wake of the electricity price brake, particularly 
high earnings from electricity production are 
set to be drawn off and redistributed amongst … but substan -
tial tax cuts 
planned and 
thus markedly 
lower growth 
expectedIndirect revenue 
effects from gas 
and electricity 
price brakesOﬃ   cial tax estimate fi  gures and the Federal Government’s macroeconomic projections
 
Item 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027
Tax revenue1
€ billion 887.7 937.3 993.0 1,041.9 1,078.5 1,114.8
% of GDP 23.0 23.1 23.4 23.9 24.1 24.2
Year-on-year change (%) 6.5 5.6 5.9 4.9 3.5 3.4
Revision of previous tax estimate (€ billion) – 1.7 8.9 28.3 44.1 46.8 .
Memo item: Revenue shortfalls due to planned tax 
relief measures (€ billion)
Imminent changes to tax legislation 2 . – 24.2 – 36.3 – 37.6 – 38.6 – 39.7
Revenue shortfalls if, as of 2025, bracket creep 
is compensated for as previously 3 . . . –  4.1 –  8.6 – 13.2
Real GDP growth (%)
Autumn projection (October 2022) 1.4 –  0.4 2.3 0.8 0.8 0.8
Spring projection (April 2022) 2.2 2.5 0.8 0.8 0.8 .
Nominal GDP growth (%)
Autumn projection (October 2022) 7.0 5.3 4.7 2.7 2.7 2.7
Spring projection (April 2022) 6.3 5.2 2.6 2.6 2.6 .
Sources: Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates and Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action. 1 Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue, including customs duties, including receipts from local government taxes. 2 Infl  ation Compensation Act, Annual Tax 
Act 2022, the act prolonging the tax cap for the most energy-intensive users and the tax implications of the increase in the supplementary 
contribution to the statutory health insurance scheme to 1.6% on 1 January 2023. 3 Since 2014, the income tax scale has shifted year 
after year, usually in line with the estimated infl  ation rate of the previous year. The fi  gures shown here are the revenue shortfalls that will 
result if this practice is continued. The calculations are roughly estimated; they are based on the Federal Government’s current autumn 
projection and wage tax receipts according to current tax estimates as defi  ned in the national accounts. The basic income tax allowance 
also shifts in line with the infl  ation rate of the previous year.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
63

other enterprises and households. If this re -
duces taxable profits vis- à- vis the assumptions 
in the forecast, income from profit-related 
taxes will be lower. In addition, the degree to 
which corporate subsidies resulting from the 
gas price brake will increase earnings or will be 
passed on via lower prices is uncertain.
In 2024, revenue is estimated to increase by 
6%. While nominal macroeconomic growth is 
to remain a key factor, 2024 will see real 
growth, as opposed to price increases, driving 
this development again. Revenue is also set to 
rise, as burdens generated by legislative 
changes come to an end: for instance, the 
(lagged) revenue shortfalls once the temporary 
VAT cuts expire in the second quarter of 2024 
for natural gas and district heating, and at the 
start of 2024 for restaurant meals. Moreover, 
following accelerated write- offs in the preced -
ing years, enterprises will no longer be able to 
write off expenditure to the same extent. How -
ever, exhaustive legislative changes are also 
planned for 2024 and have not yet been in -
cluded in the estimate. In line with these 
changes, revenue would be around 1% of GDP 
lower, increasing by only 5%.
According to the tax estimate, revenue is pro -
jected to rise by an average of 4% in the sub -
sequent years up to 2027. In 2025, additional 
receipts will be generated as the financial im -
pact of tax measures elapses; in this vein, en -
terprises will deduct lower expenditure amounts 
following higher write- offs in previous years. In 
addition, the above- mentioned VAT cuts will 
fall away entirely. In subsequent years, legisla -
tive changes will not play a major role in net 
terms. The estimate is therefore a fairly direct 
reflection of the assumptions regarding macro -
economic developments and progressive tax -
ation. The tax cuts currently planned will con -
tinue to apply, but will increase only slightly 
more in terms of volume. However, legislators 
can be expected to raise the basic income tax 
allowance further after 2024 in order to keep 
the minimum subsistence level tax- free. If they 
continue to compensate for bracket creep be -yond 2025, this too will create revenue short -
falls. Risks also exist in connection with the soli -
darity surcharge, the constitutionality of which 
has been called into question for various rea -
sons.
Revision of the tax estimate compared with 
previous forecasts
On balance, the estimate for the current year 
has hardly changed compared with that of 
May. Without new legislative changes, how -
ever, the latest projection would have been sig -
nificantly higher: the Working Party on Tax Rev -
enue Estimates raised their estimates of profit- 
related taxes by a considerable amount due to 
the favourable cash developments in 2022. An -
other factor contributing to the upwards revi -
sion was larger nominal reference variables for 
taxes, reflecting higher prices. These positive 
effects offset substantial tax cuts that came 
into effect after the May tax estimate was final -
ised.
By contrast, the estimate for 2023 is signifi -
cantly higher than it was in May (+0.2% of 
GDP). This is partly due to the fact that the 
working group has extrapolated the positive 
developments in profit- related taxes from 2022. 
The upward revisions for subsequent years are 
set to increase further vis- à- vis 2023 (by 2026: 
upwards revision of 1% of GDP). The macro -
economic assumptions will result in climbing 
additional revenue while profit- related taxes 
make a stable contribution to the upward revi -
sion. Revenue shortfalls due to legislative 
changes, by comparison, are anticipated to de -
cline over time: some of the new tax cuts taken 
into account are of a merely temporary nature.
Central government budget
Q3 2022
Central government recorded a high deficit of 
€39 billion in the third quarter (+€4 billion on 
the previous year). Numerous special factors Dynamic growth 
expected for 
2024, but 
substantial  
additional  tax 
cuts planned
Solid growth 
estimated for 
medium term, 
too, but future 
legislative 
changes spell 
burdensApproach for 
2022 broadly 
confirmed – 
despite  consid -
erable revenue 
shortfalls from 
legislative 
changes
Marked upward 
revisions for 
2023 and subse -
quent years
High deficit in 
Q3: tax revenue 
fell signifi -
cantly …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
64

contributed to this. Revenue declined by 5% 
(-€5 billion), primarily on account of falling tax 
receipts (-6½%). This was due to the relief 
packages from spring and an additional €3½ 
billion being transferred to the EU budget (re -
corded with a tax- reducing effect in the central 
government budget).
Expenditure was down slightly on the year. On 
the one hand, the fact that last year’s advance 
payments to the Flood Relief Fund were of a 
one-off nature (-€16 billion), the decline in 
coronavirus-  related transfers for enterprises 
(-€5 billion) and the absence of deficit compen -
sation payments to the Federal Employment 
Agency (-€3½ billion) eased the situation. On 
the other hand, however, higher interest pay -
ments (+€11 billion), above all, strained central 
government coffers. Declining premia on issued 
Federal securities accounted for just over €4½ 
billion of this.7 An even more significant factor 
was that interest payments due at the begin -
ning of July were shifted from the second quar -
ter to the third quarter once again. Further -
more, central government contributed an add -
itional €6 billion to the Climate and Transform -
ation Fund.
2022 as a whole
For the year as a whole, the central govern -
ment deficit will probably be significantly below 
the budget estimate of €140 billion – unless ex -
tensive cost- intensive measures are additionally 
introduced. According to the latest tax esti -
mate, additional revenue of €10 billion appears 
likely. Moreover, numerous expenditure appro -
priations, e.g. for transfers for enterprises, are 
unlikely to be exhausted. Emergency borrow -
ing of €116 billion had been planned in the 
core budget. As a result of the more favourable 
developments, less than €100 billion may be 
needed. However, both new expenditure and 
additional emergency borrowing are no longer 
being booked in the core budget, and are in -
stead being shifted to special funds (see 
pp. 69 ff.).Budget planning for 2023
It is envisaged that the central government’s 
core budget will formally comply with the debt 
brake ceiling again in 2023. Following the 
Budget Committee’s adjustment meeting, net 
borrowing of almost €46 billion is planned. 
This comprises, first, the structurally permitted 
net borrowing of nearly €13 billion (0.35% of 
GDP in 2021) and, second, cyclically- induced 
net borrowing of just over €15 billion. The lat -
ter reflects the unfavourable economic situ -
ation projected by the Federal Government on 
the basis of the expected slightly negative real 
GDP growth. Third, financial transactions of 
€18 billion are planned; it is permitted to fund 
these by borrowing beyond the regular limit. … and expend -
iture including 
special factors 
down slightly 
on balance
Core budget 
deficit for year 
as a whole 
lower than 
planned, but 
burdens off -
loaded to off- 
budget entitiesNet borrowing 
of €46 billion 
envisagedCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Feder-
al Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget en-
tities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical effects. 
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410050050
––+
–250–200–150–100–500+50
2022
20212020Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20202021€ billion
2022
7 When accounted for in the budget on a cash basis, pre -
mia and discounts are recorded fully at outflow rather than 
over the term of the relevant security. Interest expenditure 
fluctuates very sharply in some cases as a result. For a pro -
posal on recording premia on an accruals basis, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
65

Key central government budget data in connection with the debt brake*
€ billion
Item Actual 2021Target 2022 
with ESF 1Draft 2023
As of JulyAs at 
18 Nov.
1.Expenditure 2 556.6 495.8 445.2 476.3
of which:
1.a Investment 45.8 51.5 58.4 71.5
1.b Global spending increases/ cuts – –   6.5 –  3.7 –   6.9
2.Revenue 2,3 341.0 356.2 387.2 389.9
of which:
2.a Tax revenue 4 313.5 328.4 362.3 358.1
2.b Global revenue increases/ shortfalls – –   1.0 –  9.1 –   4.9
3.Fiscal balance (2.-1.) – 215.6 – 139.6 – 58.0 –  86.4
4.Coin seigniorage 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
5.Withdrawal from reserves (+) . 0.5 40.5 40.5
6.Net borrowing (–) (3.+4.+5.) – 215.4 – 138.9 – 17.2 –  45.6
7.Cyclical component in the budget procedure 5 –  14.3 –   7.9 2.9 –  15.3
8.Balance of fi  nancial transactions 3.0 –   2.8 –  7.7 –  17.7
9.Structural net borrowing (–) (6.-7.-8.) – 204.1 – 128.2 – 12.5 –  12.6
10. Amount exceeding limit in core budget (13.-9.) 192.0 115.7 – –
11. Amount exceeding limit incl. ESF (10.-15.) 192.0 315.7 – –
12. Memo item: Amount exceeding limit with balance of off-budget 
entities  (10.-16.-17.) 123.0 162.9 17.1 142.5
13. Standard upper limit: Structural net borrowing (0.35% of GDP) 6 –  12.1 –  12.5 – 12.5 –  12.6
14. Structural balance (3.-7.-8.) – 204.3 – 128.9 – 53.2 –  53.3
14.a As before, with estimate of potential output acc. to autumn 2022 
economic forecast – 209.9 – 132.2 – 35.0 –  53.3
15. Structural net borrowing of ESF due to energy crisis . – 200.0 . .
16. Defi  cit of ESF due to energy crisis . –  35.1 . – 121.2
16.a ESF funds remaining thereafter . 164.9 . 43.7
17. Memo item:  Balance of off-budget entities previously relevant to the 
debt brake 7 69.0 –  12.0 – 17.1 –  21.4
17.a Climate and Transformation Fund 53.9 –   6.5 –  9.9 –  14.1
17.b Relief Fund (2013 fl  ood) –   0.2 –   0.5 –  0.2 –   0.2
17.c Fund to Promote Municipal Investment –   1.0 –   1.2 –  0.9 –   1.0
17.d Digitalisation Fund 0.2 –   0.2 –  2.7 –   2.7
17.e Fund for Primary School- Age Childcare Provision 0.5 –   0.4 –  0.4 –   0.4
17.f Relief Fund (2021 fl  ood) 15.6 –   3.2 –  3.0 –   3.0
18. Memo item: Balance of Armed Forces Special Fund . –   0.1 –  8.5 –   8.4
18.a Borrowing authorisation remaining thereafter . 99.9 91.4 91.5
19. Memo item:  Balance of central government budget and special funds 
(3.+16.+17.+18.) – 146.6 – 186.8 – 83.6 – 237.3
20. Reserves of special funds for 16. and 17. 112.2 265.1 83.0 122.5
21. Central government assets in civil servants’ pension reserve and civil 
servants’ pension fund 8 28.1 . . .
22. Level of general reserves 48.2 48.2 7.7 7.7
23. Balance on control account 47.7 47.7 47.7 47.7
24. Total outstanding repayment amount including Armed Forces Special 
Fund (from 11. and 18.) 261.6 577.4 585.9 585.8
25. Total outstanding repayment amount from NGEU transfers e,9 14 36 54 54
* Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. For methodological notes, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2016). 1 Def-
icit and reserves of Economic Stabilisation Fund updated in line with reserves fi  gures in ESF draft budget plan for 2023. 2 Excluding trans-
fers to/withdrawals from reserves and including net tax revenue (see footnote 4). 3 Excluding coin seigniorage. 4 After deduction of 
supplementary central government transfers, shares of energy tax revenue, compensation under the 2009 reform of motor vehicle tax 
and budgetary recovery assistance to federal states. 5 For 2021 fi  nal settlement, for 2022 according to budget plan, for 2023 according 
to specifi  c state of planning. 6 Based on gross domestic product in the year before the (comprehensive) budget is prepared. 7 Budgeted 
fi  gures for 2022 from borrowing plan, for 2023 from Bundestag-Drucksache 20/3100 as well as 20/3525 and 20/3527. 8 Market values 
according to central government balance sheet for 2021. Continuous infl  ows; withdrawals from the fund planned from 2030, from re-
serves from 2032. 9  Actual NGEU fi  gure for 2021 as well as budgeted fi  gures and estimates, each multiplied by Germany’s share of 25½% 
in EU gross national income.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
66

The most significant financial transaction is a 
€10 billion loan that central government plans 
to grant to an entity outside the core budget in 
order to build up a capital stock, particularly 
from equity investments. Its earnings are in -
tended to dampen future contribution rates to 
the statutory pension insurance scheme. On 
balance, net borrowing is €28 billion above the 
level planned in July. This is primarily due to 
higher cyclically- induced borrowing and the 
loan to build up a capital stock.
On the revenue side, the new tax estimate en -
visaged additional revenue of €13 billion com -
pared with its May figure if the impact of legis -
lative changes is disregarded. In the July draft 
budget, precautionary items totalling €12 bil -
lion were set aside for tax cuts. However, the 
tax cuts that have now been adopted or are 
currently under discussion in Parliament amount 
to €20 billion. As a result, the volume of un -
tapped precautionary items (global revenue 
shortfalls) fell to €5 billion. Furthermore, the 
€2½ billion Bundesbank profit distribution that 
was included in the July draft budget was elim -
inated from budget estimates. On balance, 
higher receipts from Next Generation EU re -
sulted in additional revenue (+€4 billion); here, 
it seems that funds previously earmarked for 
2022 are to be collected at a later date. The 
planned withdrawal of almost €41 billion from 
the reserves remained unchanged.
Alongside the capital stock loan, higher interest 
payments (+€10 billion) are the main drivers of 
change on the expenditure side compared with 
the July draft budget. Additional expenditure of 
€3 billion is planned on the civic allowance 
(basic income scheme), and just over €2 billion 
on the expanded housing allowance. Assis -
tance to other countries was also significantly 
increased, apparently not least for Ukraine.
Owing to the intensive use of special funds, 
however, the central government budget re -
flects only part of central government’s fiscal 
policy activities. Extensive expenditure and bor -
rowing were offloaded from the core budget. In comparison, the recent adjustments to the 
2023 budget are of minor importance. The 
budget deficit now planned is nevertheless 
large, at €86 billion. It is to be funded from the 
borrowing of almost €46 billion outlined 
above, the withdrawal of close to €41 billion 
from the reserves and moderate coin seignior -
age.
Central government’s 
off- budget entities
Off- budget entities used to create scope 
for deficits
Central government had already considerably 
expanded its scope for deficits in connection 
with off- budget entities at the beginning of 
2022. To achieve this, it had revised the debt 
brake provisions regarding off- budget entities. 
In the autumn of last year, off- budget entities 
had financial reserves of around €50 billion. 
Their use would have been taken into account 
in the debt brake and therefore would not 
have increased the scope for deficits. This was 
changed at the beginning of this year. Since 
then, the expenditure of special funds that are 
not permitted to borrow has been factored out 
of the debt brake.8
In addition to the new regulation, central gov -
ernment set up the Armed Forces Special Fund9 
and topped up existing special funds. In the 
meantime, the Armed Forces Special Fund, the 
Climate and Transformation Fund and the 
Flood Relief Fund taken together have scope 
for deficits of around €200 billion in future 
years (beyond the standard debt brake limit for 
central government). This corresponds to al -
most half of the 2023 central government 
budget. Half of the deficit scope stems from 
emergency borrowing under the escape clause. On balance, 
revenue  esti -
mates changed 
only slightly 
compared with 
July
Additional 
expenditure on 
pension capital 
stock, interest 
payments and 
transfers
Deficit still high 
despite off -
loaded burdensRevised rules 
provide scope 
for deficits
Even before 
increase in ESF’s 
funds, €200 bil -
lion deficit scope 
beyond the debt 
brake
8 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c).
9 This special fund, with its own borrowing authorisation 
of €100 billion, is enshrined in Germany’s Basic Law 
(Grundgesetz)  and is not subject to the debt brake rules. 
However, its loans must also be repaid.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
67

This scope was created, not least, by the 
second supplementary budget for 2021, which 
transferred emergency borrowing from 2021 to 
the Climate and Transformation Fund for 
longer- term use. The CDU/ CSU parliamentary 
group has brought judicial review proceedings 
against this supplementary budget. The Federal 
Constitutional Court’s ruling is still pending. 
Central government is planning to repay the 
debts arising from the emergency borrowing 
and from the Armed Forces Special Fund, be -
ginning in 2028 and 2031, respectively. The re -
payments will then impact on the central gov -
ernment budget for more than three decades. Furthermore, there will also be repayment obli -
gations arising from borrowing by the EU.
To address the energy crisis in the years from 
2022 to 2024, it was recently decided to in -
crease the ESF’s funds by €200 billion using 
emergency borrowing. In view of the current 
crisis, use of the escape clause is understand -
able. There is justification for taking government 
measures, say, to prevent hard- hit households 
and enterprises from becoming overburdened. 
It would be constructive to preserve incentives 
to save energy within the aid schemes. How -
ever, the associated borrowing would be lower 
if the measures were to be less broadly based 
and more extensively counterfinanced. If coun -
terfinancing does not hamper supply and damp -
ens the current high inflation, it will be benefi -
cial for the economy as a whole. That aside, 
some aspects of this approach are unsatisfac -
tory with regard to budget principles, and cen -
tral government finances are becoming increas -
ingly less transparent (see the box on pp. 69 ff.).
Developments in the third quarter and the 
year as a whole
Central government’s off- budget entities 
posted a surplus of €4 billion in the third quar -
ter of 2022.10 In the summer of last year, they 
were €15 billion in surplus, as the Flood Relief 
Fund had received large transfers of €16 billion 
from central government following the floods 
in July 2021. This summer, the annual central 
government grant to the Climate and Trans -
formation Fund in particular had a notable im -
pact, causing it to post a surplus of €3 billion. 
The ESF recorded a surplus of €1½ billion as a 
result of the return flows from coronavirus as -
sistance loans. The newly established Armed 
Forces Special Fund did not yet register any ex -
penditure.Extensive 
increase in ESF’s 
funds
Central 
 government’s 
off- budget 
entities posted 
surplus in Q3 
stemming from 
central govern -
ment funds for 
Climate and 
Transformation 
Fund, …Fiscal balances of central government's 
off-budget entities*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Only entities using a single-entry ac-
counting  system,  i.e.  excluding,  in  particular,  the  bad  bank 
FMS Wertmanagement and also SoFFin, which uses a single-
entry accounting system and which refinances FMS Wertman-
agement. 1 Precautionary fund for final payments of inflation-
indexed Federal securities. 2 Climate and Transformation Fund; 
up to 2022, Energy and Climate Fund. 3 Relief fund for 2021 
flood.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 20224020020406080
––++++€ billion, quarterly figures
OtherFund for inflation-indexed securities1
Economic Stabilisation Fund
Flood Relief Fund 3Climate Fund 2
Total
–40–200+20+40+60+80Cumulated from start of year
10 According to data from the Federal Ministry of Finance, 
i.e. excluding bad banks and other entities that use com -
mercial double- entry bookkeeping. SoFFin’s deficit is also 
factored out. It is based on funds transferred to refinance 
the bad bank FMSW. In return, the direct debt of FMSW, 
which is also attributable to central government, is omitted 
accordingly.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
68

New tasks assigned to the Economic Stabilisation Fund
Fund’s new tasks
By mid- 2024, the Economic Stabilisation 
Fund (ESF) is set to fi  nance measures to 
curb the impact of high energy prices. 
These include, in particular:
– Gas supply: the ESF is to provide support 
to essential gas importers – especially 
Uniper, which is sustaining large losses 
following the suspension of Russian de-
liveries. The costs of procuring replace-
ment gas far exceed the revenue Uniper 
stands to make on the basis of existing 
customer contracts. This support will 
thus shield customers from an otherwise 
sharper rise in energy prices. Uniper re-
cently put its anticipated losses at €40 
billion.1 The Federal Government had 
previously committed to launching a res-
cue package comprising adequate cap-
ital injections. The ESF draft economic 
plan includes capital injections of €15 bil-
lion for 2023 alone.
– Regarding the gas price brake (herein-
after referred to as gas price transfers), 
the ESF is to fi  nance transfers for house-
holds and enterprises. At the time the 
gas commission’s interim report was pre-
sented, its proposals were forecast to be 
in the order of €90 billion. However, the 
volume of funds required for gas price 
transfers is uncertain, as it depends on 
suppliers’ gas prices. In addition, gas 
price transfers may also continue for 
longer than announced so far (end- April 
2024). The ESF draft economic plan fore-
sees expenditure of €40 billion for 2023. 
The Federal Government now appears to 
be expecting gas prices to be signifi  -
cantly lower than anticipated by the gas 
commission.
– Electricity price brake: the ESF is to step 
in to close the funding gaps that are not covered by drawing on electricity sup-
pliers’ profi  ts. The ESF draft economic 
plan envisages central government trans-
fer expenditure of €43 billion for 2023. 
While this budget item is also earmarked 
for liquidity assistance, no repayments 
appear to have been factored in.
– The ESF is also to fi  nance aid for enter-
prises if they continue to struggle as a 
result  of high energy prices. This aid is 
to complement existing assistance, such 
as the Federal budget’s energy cost- 
containment programme.2 Under the 
ESF draft economic plan for 2023, this 
also covers transfers – for hospitals, for 
instance. A total of €18 billion is set aside 
for supplementary assistance.
Using escape clause to secure credit 
fi  nancing
In order to fi  nance these new tasks, the ESF 
received its own borrowing authorisation of 
€200 billion. To this end, the Bundestag 
again activated the debt brake escape 
clause for 2022. From 2031 onwards, the 
debt incurred is to be repaid in a maximum 
of 31 annual instalments (as with the Fed-
eral Armed Forces Fund).
The Federal Government and the Bundes-
tag justify this borrowing as being neces-
sary to counter the danger of a self- 
reinforcing downward spiral for the Ger-
man economy. Without assistance, uncon-
strained energy prices would lead to 
production stoppages and consumption 
cutbacks building up further and further 
throughout the economy. Any attempt to 
1 See Uniper (2022), p. 2.
2 Outfl  ows for this item have so far remained very 
limited. However, many enterprises appear to have not 
yet been hard hit by higher energy prices. Recourse to 
transfers therefore looks set to be greater going for-
ward.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
69

limit losses in purchasing power through 
higher wages and thus stabilise consump-
tion would harbour the risk of a wage- price 
spiral with even higher infl  ation.
Government measures in the energy 
crisis  broadly based
In the energy crisis, the government is 
tasked with supporting those who can 
barely cope with price surges in the short 
term. This means low- income households 
as well as enterprises that have a sustain-
able business model. Measures to be 
fi  nanced by the ESF make an important 
contribution to fulfi  lling that task.
However, these measures are targeted at a 
wide group of benefi  ciaries and shield them 
from price risks across the board. For ex-
ample, households and enterprises that 
have a better fi  nancial standing are also set 
to receive transfers. A link to a party’s fi  nan-
cial performance results from the tax liabil-
ity and this applies to households, too. This 
liability is set to become effective as of the 
income limit for the solidarity surcharge, 
which affects around 10% of those subject 
to income tax.
Gas commission’s proposals preserve 
incentives  to save energy
To overcome the crisis caused by energy 
shortages in the short term, consumption 
has to be lowered. It is therefore important 
that incentives to reduce energy consump-
tion remain in place despite assistance. This 
would be the case if the gas commission’s 
proposals for gas price transfers, which 
were adopted by a majority, were to be im-
plemented. Under these proposals, con-
sumers receive transfers calculated based 
on their previous consumption levels and 
their supplier’s selling price.3 With such a 
set- up, they consistently save the full high 
price charged by their supplier if they re-
duce their current consumption levels.In addition, central government is to sup-
port gas trading companies that are key for 
aggregate energy supply, especially Uniper. 
Counting on contracts that secured low- 
cost deliveries from Russia, Uniper con-
cluded long- term sales contracts with its 
customers. After these deliveries failed to 
materialise as a result of the war, it had to 
procure replacement gas at very high prices. 
Section 24 of the German Energy Security 
Act (Energiesicherungsgesetz)  allows en-
ergy suppliers to pass on price increases re-
sulting from reduced gas imports to their 
customers. Price adjustments are condi-
tional on the Federal Ministry for Economic 
Affairs sounding the alert level and the Fed-
eral Network Agency declaring a “consider-
able reduction” in gas imports. The Ministry 
for Economic Affairs did the former on 
23  June 2022, but sought a different ar-
rangement. It ruled that all gas consumers 
should pay more, not just those directly af-
fected by the supply chain. As of October, 
additional costs were to be fi  nanced by a 
gas price levy. However, the levy was aban-
doned without the Federal Network Agency 
approving price adjustments.
Without these price adjustments, central 
government’s fi  nancing needs increased 
signifi  cantly. Keeping sales prices down for 
customers also means that short- term in-
centives to save energy are lower.
Debt brake rules and budgetary 
principles 
As a basic principle, the debt brake is to set 
a narrow framework for net borrowing. It 
includes, for good reason, an escape clause 
which can be activated in times of crisis. It 
is then permitted to combat the crisis using 
emergency borrowing, which is to be re-
paid at a later date.
3 Only 80% (mainly for households and smaller enter-
prises) and 70% (especially for enterprises with high 
annual consumption) of previous consumption is taken 
into account.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
70

Larger outflows from the ESF are already likely 
to have an impact in the final quarter of this 
year. In addition to support for energy com -
panies, it is planned that the ESF will pay one 
month’s instalment of most consumers’ gas 
and district heating bills. According to the draft 
economic plan for 2023, the Federal Govern -
ment projects a deficit of €35 billion for the 
outflows associated with the support for en -
ergy companies and consumer bills. Overall, 
this is likely to lead to a significant deficit in 
central government’s off- budget entities. By 
contrast, the Armed Forces Special Fund and 
the Climate and Transformation Fund, which 
have very ample scope for financing, are still 
likely to record a roughly balanced result for 
this year.
Outlook for 2023
Next year, the deficits in central government’s 
off- budget entities will increase strongly. In the 
ESF’s draft economic plan for 2023, the Federal Government envisages a deficit of €121 billion 
to cushion the impact of high energy prices. 
However, this amount is subject to great uncer -
tainty, as the related expenditure depends 
heavily on gas and electricity prices and the 
profit levy for the electricity price brake. The 
Federal Government is planning a deficit of €14 
billion for the Climate and Transformation 
Fund. Compared with the summer draft 
budget, the main change is lower revenue from 
emission allowances. This is primarily due to 
the one- year postponement of the price in -
crease for national certificates, which was de -
cided in the wake of the energy crisis. An add -
itional revenue item of €6 billion, for which the 
details are yet to be specified, is still taken into 
account as a counterweight. Spending on 
energy- efficient buildings, in particular, is to rise 
sharply. A deficit of €8½ billion is envisaged for 
the Armed Forces Special Fund. In order to 
achieve the defence spending target of 2% of 
GDP agreed within NATO, outlays would add -
itionally need to increase by around €15 billion. … but marked 
deficit foresee -
able for 2022 as 
a whole owing 
to new tasks of 
ESFVery high deficit 
in ESF next year, 
and significant 
deficits in Armed 
Forces Special 
Fund and 
Climate  and 
Transformation 
FundThis year, the ESF has been given a very 
high borrowing authorisation under the es-
cape clause. The announced gas price trans-
fers are broadly based. This also seems to 
apply to the electricity price brake – the de-
sign of these transfers is also not yet fi  nal. 
The funds required can be reduced by limit-
ing transfers to individuals and enterprises 
that would face excessive burdens without 
assistance. If policymakers opt for a broader 
approach, stronger counterfi  nancing would 
seem appropriate. This does not appear to 
pose any problems from a macroeconomic 
perspective either and could actually be 
benefi  cial. In any case, given the current 
high rate of infl  ation, borrowing to fund the 
measures should be kept as low as possible.
The chosen approach does not always fol-
low budgetary principles. For instance, the 
Federal Government did not derive the ex-
tensive borrowing authorisation of €200 
billion for 2022 from the estimated need for measures. The ESF economic plan for 2022 
does not contain any specifi  c expenditure 
estimates for these measures. Furthermore, 
the decision to grant all authorisations in 
2022 does not comply with the principle of 
annuality. This principle stipulates that ex-
penditure and borrowing be approved on 
an annual basis and not as a package for 
several years. The escape clause would then 
have to be activated for every additional 
year in which emergency borrowing is to be 
used. Finally, the growing number of special 
funds is obscuring central government’s 
fi  nancial situation. As a result, the actual 
central government core budget is becom-
ing more and more incomplete regarding 
central government’s activities – and shows 
only a fraction of central government def-
icits.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
71

The fiscal balances of the other off- budget en -
tities play only a minor role in comparison. Sur -
pluses in pre- funded pension pots could largely 
offset burdens, not least in the special funds 
for flood assistance and digitalisation.
State government budgets11
Core budgets in Q3 2022
State government core budgets had a surplus 
of €4 billion in the third quarter of 2022. This 
was €2½ billion lower than the surplus re -
corded a year earlier. Revenue was down 
slightly on the year (-1%). While the tax rev -
enue accruing to the federal states remained 
stable, revenue from public administrations de -
clined (-6%) because fewer funds from central 
government were channelled through state 
government budgets for coronavirus- related 
transfers for enterprises. By contrast, expend -
iture rose slightly overall (+1%). This was due, in particular, to significantly higher transfers to 
local government, probably as a result of cen -
tral government funds being passed on with a 
lag. By contrast, other operating expenditure 
fell sharply, probably not least because spend -
ing on coronavirus tests in schools was lower.
Core budgets and off- budget entities in 
2022
Viewed together, the core budgets and off-  
budget entities of the state governments im -
proved considerably in the first half of 2022, 
posting a surplus of just under €22 billion and 
thus exceeding the previous year’s result by 
€28 billion. Following the positive develop -
ments seen over the course of the year so far, 
the result for 2022 as a whole is set to be much 
better than in the previous year (2021: +€½ bil -
lion). The state governments are also benefiting 
from strong tax revenue: according to the tax 
estimate, for example, the additional revenue 
compared with the last pre- crisis estimate for 
2022 is €21 billion (5½% of the state govern -
ments’ total tax revenue in 2022). On the ex -
penditure side, it is central government that is 
bearing the brunt of the remaining coronavirus- 
related burdens.
Debt brake escape clauses
The favourable budgetary situation and size -
able reserves indicate that the state govern -
ments will not need to engage in any more 
emergency borrowing in 2022.12 Beyond that, 
the outlook is highly uncertain in view of the 
war in Ukraine and the associated energy crisis. 
According to the current assessment, however, 
the nominal macroeconomic reference vari -
ables for tax revenue are continuing to grow 
considerably. The effect of the sharp price in -
creases on expenditure shows more of a lag. 
The state governments will be starting 2023 in Surplus down 
markedly on the 
yearResult of core 
budgets and off- 
budget entities 
likely improved 
significantly for 
the year as a 
whole
Very positive 
developments to 
date indicate 
that additional 
emergency 
borrowing  is 
inappropriateState government fiscal balance
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 
1 Figure calculated using monthly data from the Federal Minis-
try of Finance; quarterly data are not yet available. 2 Core bud-
gets and off-budget entities together.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q430201001020
–––++
2020Quarterly figures
2022
2021€ billion
Cumulated from start of year 2
20201
–40–30–20–100+10+20+30
2022
2021Off-budget entitiesCore budgets
11 The quarterly data on state government budgets are 
based on the monthly cash statistics for the core budgets. 
Information on the off- budget entities is only available at 
the end of the following quarter.
12 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022d).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
72

a structurally sound position and can therefore 
also shoulder part of the burden of tax relief 
measures.
Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
Q3 2022
The statutory pension insurance scheme re -
corded a deficit of €3½ billion in the third quar -
ter of 2022. It was thus just over €1½ billion 
higher than it had been a year earlier. This is 
due to the large pension adjustment at mid-  
year.
Total revenue rose by 4½%, ½  percentage 
point of which was attributable to back-  
payments from central government.13 Expend -
iture grew more steeply, by almost 6½%. At 
mid- year, pensions increased by 5½%, aver -
aged across Germany (5.35% in western Ger -
many and 6.12% in eastern Germany). This re -
flected the high wage growth experienced in 
2021, driven, amongst other things, by the ris -
ing volume of work due to the decline in short- 
time work. By contrast, the reactivated catch-  
up factor dampened the pension adjustment 
by just over 1 percentage point. It is intended 
to compensate for the fact that the safeguard 
clause prevented a pension cut in 2021, but is 
limited by the guaranteed pension level. The 
number of pensions continued to change only 
moderately. However, it appears that basic 
pension top- ups have now been paid to a not -
able degree, both for 2022 and back- payments 
for 2021. The total volume is likely to be around 
€½ billion. This corresponds to one- fifth of the 
estimated claims accumulated to date.
2022 as a whole
For 2022 as a whole, the pension insurance 
scheme could once again finish with a marked 
surplus (in 2021, it amounted to almost €1 bil -
lion). The pension insurance scheme recorded a cumulative deficit of €½ billion over the first 
three quarters. However, a significant surplus is 
likely to emerge in the fourth quarter as, in the 
final quarter, contributions are likely to rise con -
siderably in line with seasonal patterns. This is 
not altered by the fact that expenditure mo -
mentum will probably accelerate further tem -
porarily at the end of the year: basic pension 
top- ups of just over €1½ billion for 2021 and 
2022 are still outstanding. The result for the Higher deficit in 
Q3 due to large 
pension adjust -
ment
Pensions rose 
by 5½% on 
average in 
Germany 
Marked surplus 
a possibility for 
year as a wholeFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung  Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary quarterly figures as the latter are not subsequently revised.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4420246
––+++
–8–6–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202220212020
2022
202020212020 2021 202202468
2020 2021 202202468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
13 The central government budget for 2022 was not 
adopted until June. The grants to the pension insurance 
scheme are somewhat higher than in the draft budget of 
summer 2021, which formed the basis for payments up to 
the middle of the year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
73

year as a whole would thus be considerably 
better than the Federal Government had ex -
pected in its pension insurance report of au -
tumn 2021 (deficit of €6½ billion). This is be -
cause contribution receipts, in particular, grew 
more strongly. In addition, the number of pen -
sions saw a weaker rise. The free reserves (sus -
tainability reserve) are therefore likely to 
amount to around €41 billion at the end of the 
year. This corresponds to around 1.6 times the 
scheme’s monthly expenditure and is thus well 
above the minimum value of 0.2 times the 
scheme’s monthly expenditure.Outlook for the coming years
Based on the Federal Government’s autumn 
projection, the financial situation is unlikely to 
change significantly next year. On the expend -
iture side, higher pension payments constitute 
a burden: the large adjustment from this year 
will continue to take effect until the middle of 
2023. Thereafter, pensions will follow this 
year’s wage trend, which is also strong. How -
ever, the retroactive basic pension top- ups 
from 2021 (just under €1½ billion) will have 
come to an end. In addition, there will be a 
substantial rise in revenue (according to the 
Federal Government’s key figures).
In the medium to long term, demographic 
trends will put growing pressure on pension 
finances: more and more baby boomers are 
reaching retirement age. In this context, the 
Federal Government’s plans would further in -
crease funding pressure in the longer term: 
from 2026, it intends to stabilise the pension 
level at 48% on a permanent basis. The retire -
ment age is not to be raised any further after 
2031. The contribution rate and central govern -
ment grants would thus have to rise more 
sharply than already envisaged in the legal sta -
tus quo.14 Details of the plan to build- up a cap -
ital stock in order to stabilise contribution rates 
in the future (see p. 67) have not yet been spe -
cified. Extensive assets would be needed in 
order to have any chance of significant stabil -
isation.
Federal Employment Agency
Q3 2022
The Federal Employment Agency ended the 
third quarter of 2022 with a moderate surplus 
of €1 billion.15 Owing to the coronavirus crisis, Financial situ -
ation in 2023 
largely 
unchanged – 
based on 
Federal  Govern -
ment’s key 
figures 
In medium to 
long term, 
demographic 
developments 
will put pressure 
on pension 
finances
Surplus in Q3: 
significantly 
better  resultFinances of the 
Federal Employment Agency*
Source: Federal Employment Agency. * Including transfers to 
the civil servants' pension fund and before payment of central 
government grants.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410505
––+
–30–25–20–15–10–50+5Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202220212020
2021202020222020 2021 2022–400+40+80+120+160
2020 2021 20224004080120160
–++++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
14 For more information on longer- term developments 
and reform options, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2022e).
15 In the core budget, i.e. excluding the civil servants’ pen -
sion fund. Transfers to the fund have been suspended since 
spring 2020 due to the coronavirus crisis.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
74

it had recorded a deficit of almost €3½ billion 
in the previous year.
Total revenue rose by 5½%. By contrast, ex -
penditure continued to decline very sharply on 
the year (-30%). It thus fell to around the level 
it was at before the coronavirus crisis, taking 
into account wage growth in the meantime. 
Although the fall in unemployment benefits 
continued to weaken, expenditure still fell 
steeply on the year, by 9% (-€½ billion). Ex -
penditure on short- time work continued to 
drop very sharply (by 90%, or €3 billion). The 
ongoing recovery of the labour market from 
the effects of the coronavirus pandemic had an 
easing effect. So far, the energy crisis did not 
have a marked impact in this area.
2022 as a whole
Overall, a distinct surplus appears likely for the 
year as a whole. At the end of the third quar -
ter, the Federal Employment Agency still had a 
deficit of €1 billion. However, the result is likely 
to improve markedly by the end of the year: 
owing to contributions on special payments and the relatively low expenditure usually ex -
pected at that time of year, the fourth quarter 
usually has the most favourable result. A dis -
tinct surplus is thus likely overall for 2022 as a 
whole.
Outlook for 2023
Based on the Federal Government’s autumn 
projection, the Federal Employment Agency’s 
surplus will rise significantly next year. The con -
tribution base will thus see a strong increase. 
Furthermore, the contribution rate is scheduled 
to rise by 0.2 percentage point to 2.6%. Based 
on the autumn projection, growth in expend -
iture will be weaker than that in revenue, as it 
predicts only a moderate rise in unemploy -
ment. Moreover, no extensive support meas -
ures by the Federal Employment Agency are 
planned. A possible weakening of macroeco -
nomic developments entailing higher un -
employment and/ or short- time work would hit 
the Federal Employment Agency both on the 
revenue side and, to a far greater extent, the 
expenditure side.Revenue from 
contributions 
up significantly, 
expenditure 
still sharply 
declining
Distinct surplus 
on horizon for 
20222023: further 
significant 
improvement 
in finances
List of references
Commission of experts for gas and heat (2022), Sicher durch den Winter, Final report, October 
2022.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), The typical impact of inflation on government finances, Monthly 
Report, August 2022, pp. 63 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b), Inflation- induced bracket creep in the income tax scale, Monthly 
Report, June 2022, pp. 63-73.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c), Public finances, Monthly Report, February 2022, pp. 62-80.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022d), State government finances in 2021: surplus and additional reserves 
from emergency borrowing, Monthly Report, October 2022, pp. 13-33.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022e), Pension insurance scheme: long- term scenarios and reform 
options , Monthly Report, June 2022, pp. 47-61.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
75

Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), Bundesbank contribution to the public debate on the review of the 
EU economic governance (October to December 2021), http://www.bundesbank.de/content/  
884870 , December 2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), Federal debt: allocate premia on accruals basis in budgetary inter -
est expenditure, Monthly Report, June 2021, pp. 47-51.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Key central government budget data in connection with the debt 
brake, Monthly Report, February 2016, pp. 68 f.
Uniper (2022), Reduced Russian gas deliveries have a significant adverse impact on Uniper’s results 
in the first nine months of 2022, https://www.uniper.energy/news/reduced-russian-gas-deliveries- 
have-a-significant-adverse-impact-on-unipers-results-in-the-first-nine-months-of-2022Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
76

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43 •
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
3•

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
13. General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
14. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78 •
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81 •
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 €STR  5,73 month
EURIBOR  6,7Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  8
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2021 Feb. 16.4 12.1 12.3 11.6 9.6 4.7 – 0.9 – 0.56 – 0.54 – 0.1
Mar. 13.7 10.2 10.1 10.6 8.6 4.0 – 0.3 – 0.56 – 0.54 0.0
Apr. 12.4 9.2 9.4 9.4 7.3 3.4 – 0.3 – 0.57 – 0.54 0.1
May 11.7 8.4 8.6 8.8 6.3 2.9 – 1.0 – 0.56 – 0.54 0.2
June 11.8 8.3 8.4 8.3 6.0 3.3 – 0.6 – 0.56 – 0.54 0.2
July 11.0 7.6 7.8 8.1 5.8 3.1 – 0.5 – 0.57 – 0.55 0.0
Aug. 11.1 7.8 8.0 7.8 5.5 2.8 – 0.8 – 0.57 – 0.55 – 0.1
Sep. 11.1 7.6 7.6 7.7 5.6 3.3 – 0.7 – 0.57 – 0.55 0.1
Oct. 10.7 7.5 7.7 7.5 5.6 3.6 – 0.3 – 0.57 – 0.55 0.2
Nov. 10.0 7.1 7.3 7.3 5.8 3.7 – 0.5 – 0.57 – 0.57 0.2
Dec. 9.8 7.0 6.9 6.9 6.1 3.9 – 0.5 – 0.58 – 0.58 0.1
2022 Jan. 9.2 6.8 6.5 6.6 6.2 4.3 – 0.3 – 0.58 – 0.56 0.4
Feb. 9.1 6.8 6.4 6.4 6.2 4.4 – 0.6 – 0.58 – 0.53 0.8
Mar. 8.8 6.6 6.2 6.2 6.1 4.4 – 0.7 – 0.58 – 0.50 0.9
Apr. 8.2 6.3 6.1 6.0 6.4 5.0 – 0.1 – 0.58 – 0.45 1.4
May 7.9 6.0 5.8 5.8 6.2 5.1 0.0 – 0.59 – 0.39 1.7
June 7.2 5.9 5.7 5.7 6.3 5.4 – 0.0 – 0.58 – 0.24 2.2
July 6.8 5.9 5.7 5.8 5.9 5.4 – 0.1 – 0.51 0.04 1.9
Aug. 6.8 6.3 6.1 6.0 5.7 5.7 – 0.1 – 0.09 0.40 1.8
Sep. 5.6 6.2 6.3 ... 5.5 5.7 – 0.1 0.36 1.01 2.6
Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.66 1.43 3.0
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 EuroShort-Term Rate.  6 Euro interbank offered rate.  7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p.
43●. 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries included: DE,
FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT, GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2021 Feb. +21,855 +32,863 +53,710 +31,501 +98,155 – 462 –73,874 – 1,611 1.2098 100.6 94.5
Mar. +40,387 +37,836 – 6,235 +28,899 –50,962 – 4,926 +21,239 – 486 1.1899 100.3 94.1
Apr. +35,687 +29,397 – 8,950 + 4,306 +31,029 + 6,654 –51,533 + 593 1.1979 100.6 94.3
May +11,656 +26,793 +37,263 + 5,619 +79,738 – 7,115 –42,302 + 1,323 1.2146 100.8 94.3
June +30,931 +31,425 +82,135 –11,569 +44,284 – 2,680 +46,903 + 5,198 1.2047 100.2 93.7
July +36,184 +34,231 +44,399 +49,481 – 8,774 +18,412 –14,382 – 337 1.1822 99.7 93.5
Aug. +20,457 +17,145 +49,503 +64,792 +12,932 + 2,203 –152,505 +122,082 1.1772 99.3 93.1
Sep. +33,115 +22,271 –18,389 + 6,742 +14,477 + 2,664 –43,676 + 1,404 1.1770 99.4 93.2
Oct. + 6,514 +12,934 +25,519 +28,579 +20,476 +13,355 –40,060 + 3,170 1.1601 98.4 92.4
Nov. +13,803 +14,913 + 5,787 + 4,881 +56,566 +25,649 –81,850 + 540 1.1414 97.6 91.7
Dec. +21,920 + 9,977 – 1,639 +25,582 + 5,571 + 1,183 –33,152 – 822 1.1304 97.1 91.2
2022 Jan. – 9,342 – 9,912 +49,184 –10,398 +78,022 + 3,628 –19,747 – 2,320 1.1314 96.6 91.2
Feb. + 54 + 4,160 – 85 +26,941 –27,411 – 2,766 + 1,623 + 1,527 1.1342 96.9 91.6
Mar. + 5,578 + 4,261 –54,420 + 5,909 –101,539 – 2,948 +44,252 – 95 1.1019 95.9 91.3
Apr. –15,096 –12,271 –65,231 –13,938 +23,598 +29,578 –103,831 – 639 1.0819 95.2 89.9
May –32,011 – 6,363 +53,926 +100,761 +28,067 + 2,748 –78,863 + 1,213 1.0579 95.6 90.3
June – 5,117 – 6,873 +30,237 + 4,414 –59,532 – 8,377 +91,987 + 1,745 1.0566 95.9 90.5
July – 8,627 –11,720 +23,811 – 5,754 +39,996 – 1,139 –10,931 + 1,639 1.0179 94.1 p 89.1
Aug. –20,207 –25,004 +12,920 +15,389 –82,013 +10,917 +66,464 + 2,163 1.0128 93.6 p 88.7
Sep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.9904 94.2 p 89.7
Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.9826 94.8 p 91.3
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also Tables
XII.10 and 11, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Bundesbankcalculation. Against the currencies of the EER-19 group.  4 Based on consumer price
indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2019 1.6 2.2 1.1 3.7 1.2 1.8 1.9 5.4 0.5 2.6
2020 –6.1 –5.4 –3.7 –0.6 –2.2 –7.8 –9.0 6.2 –9.0 –2.2
2021 5.3 6.1 2.6 8.0 3.0 6.8 8.4 13.6 6.7 4.1
2021 Q2 14.2 14.4 10.6 13.9 7.5 19.0 15.0 19.5 17.1 9.9
Q3 3.9 4.8 1.8 8.4 3.0 3.7 11.8 10.4 4.6 4.5
Q4 4.8 6.1 1.2 7.4 3.0 4.8 7.4 13.8 6.0 2.7
2022 Q1 5.5 5.2 3.9 4.5 4.3 4.9 9.0 10.8 6.2 5.6
Q2 4.3 4.0 1.7 0.6 3.3 4.3 7.8 11.1 4.8 2.9
Q3 2.1 ... 1.1 ... ... 0.9 ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2019 –0.7 4.8 –3.2 7.1 1.6 0.5 –0.7 7.0 –1.1 0.8
2020 –7.7 –3.8 –9.6 –2.8 –3.2 –10.9 –2.1 14.5 –11.4 –1.8
2021 8.0 16.8 4.7 6.8 4.1 5.9 10.4 16.4 12.2 6.5
2021 Q2 23.7 29.8 20.3 15.0 4.3 22.3 15.5 33.2 32.6 12.6
Q3 5.9 19.4 2.5 7.2 4.5 2.6 9.9 27.6 4.9 6.3
Q4 0.2 11.2 –1.2 5.6 7.4 –0.4 11.9 –18.2 4.6 3.5
2022 Q1 –0.3 6.4 –1.2 4.1 3.4 0.1 4.9 –15.0 1.4 4.0
Q2 0.4 –5.1 –1.3 2.9 7.0 0.2 3.0 –7.3 2.0 3.6
Q3 1.7 –3.8 p 1.6 –4.5 3.1 0.6 3.6 p 4.5 –0.1 –2.6
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2020 74.5 75.5 77.3 67.6 76.9 73.8 71.0 68.8 53.4 72.0
2021 81.4 80.1 84.8 78.1 81.2 81.1 75.6 78.2 76.5 75.3
2022 82.2 79.1 85.2 71.7 80.9 81.7 75.9 80.0 78.4 75.0
2021 Q3 83.0 80.8 86.1 77.7 81.5 82.9 77.9 80.8 77.5 75.5
Q4 82.7 81.2 85.8 83.5 82.7 82.0 77.3 81.7 77.8 76.7
2022 Q1 82.4 80.0 85.9 72.6 81.9 82.7 76.8 78.9 78.6 75.5
Q2 82.5 80.1 85.1 70.4 80.2 82.2 76.6 82.6 78.5 75.6
Q3 82.3 78.9 85.0 74.3 80.8 81.7 74.6 79.7 78.5 75.7
Q4 81.4 77.2 84.9 69.5 80.8 80.3 75.5 78.7 77.9 73.3
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2019 7.5 5.4 3.0 4.5 6.7 8.2 17.3 5.0 10.0 6.3
2020 7.8 5.6 3.6 7.0 7.8 7.8 16.3 5.6 9.2 8.1
2021 e 7.7 e 6.3 3.6 e 6.2 e 7.7 e 7.9 e 14.8 e 6.3 e 9.5 e 7.6
2022 May 6.7 5.8 3.0 5.8 6.1 7.6 12.6 4.2 8.1 6.5
June 6.7 5.9 3.0 5.8 6.8 7.6 12.4 4.2 8.0 6.4
July 6.7 5.9 3.0 5.8 7.2 7.4 12.2 4.3 8.0 6.5
Aug. 6.7 5.8 3.0 5.7 7.3 7.3 12.1 4.4 7.9 6.5
Sep. 6.6 5.7 3.0 5.7 7.3 7.1 11.8 4.4 7.9 6.6
Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.4 ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2019 1.2 1.2 1.4 2.3 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.9 0.6 2.7
2020 0.3 0.4 5 0.4 –0.6 0.4 0.5 –1.3 –0.5 –0.1 0.1
2021 2.6 3.2 5 3.2 4.5 2.1 2.1 0.6 2.4 1.9 3.2
2022 May 8.1 9.9 8.7 20.1 7.1 5.8 10.5 8.3 7.3 16.8
June 8.6 10.5 8.2 22.0 8.1 6.5 11.6 9.6 8.5 19.2
July 8.9 10.4 8.5 23.2 8.0 6.8 11.3 9.6 8.4 21.3
Aug. 9.1 10.5 8.8 25.2 7.9 6.6 11.2 9.0 9.1 21.4
Sep. 9.9 12.1 10.9 24.1 8.4 6.2 12.1 8.6 9.4 22.0
Oct. 10.6 13.1 11.6 22.5 8.4 7.1 9.5 9.4 12.6 21.7
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
2019 –0.6 –1.9 1.5 0.1 –0.9 –3.1 1.1 0.5 –1.5 –0.6
2020 –7.0 –9.0 –4.3 –5.5 –5.5 –9.0 –9.9 –5.0 –9.5 –4.3
2021 –5.1 –5.6 –3.7 –2.4 –2.7 –6.5 –7.5 –1.7 –7.2 –7.0
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
2019 83.9 97.6 58.9 8.5 64.9 97.4 180.6 57.0 134.1 36.5
2020 97.0 112.0 68.0 18.5 74.8 115.0 206.3 58.4 154.9 42.0
2021 95.4 109.2 68.6 17.6 72.4 112.8 194.5 55.4 150.3 43.6
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
4.6 2.3 5.9 2.0 1.5 2.7 2.5 3.5 2.0 5.5 2019
–0.0 –0.8 –8.3 –3.9 –6.5 –8.3 –3.4 –4.3 –11.3 –4.4 2020
6.0 5.1 10.3 4.9 4.6 5.5 3.0 8.2 5.5 6.6 2021
9.1 10.7 16.3 10.2 13.0 16.3 9.9 16.2 17.9 12.1 2021 Q2
5.6 2.0 14.0 5.4 5.4 5.3 1.4 5.1 4.2 8.2 Q3
6.5 4.0 11.7 6.2 6.0 6.7 1.3 10.5 6.6 6.9 Q4
4.8 2.9 8.1 6.7 9.3 11.4 2.9 9.7 6.8 6.7 2022 Q1
1.7 1.6 8.9 5.2 6.0 7.9 1.3 8.3 6.7 5.9 Q2
1.8 ... ... 3.1 ... ... 1.2 3.4 4.2 5.5 Q3
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2.9 –3.2 1.1 –0.9 –0.1 –2.2 0.5 2.8 0.5 4.4 2019
–1.7 –10.8 –0.3 –3.9 –5.9 –7.3 –9.1 –6.4 –9.8 –7.3 2020
20.0 8.4 –0.2 5.0 11.2 3.5 10.4 10.0 7.5 6.4 2021
25.0 24.0 14.3 10.0 24.2 24.3 35.8 24.3 27.2 21.2 2021 Q2
17.8 3.6 –0.1 6.8 9.0 –3.8 0.9 6.3 1.9 4.5 Q3
23.9 3.0 –5.4 4.4 10.3 –1.7 4.0 7.6 1.8 1.0 Q4
23.5 0.2 –2.0 1.9 11.3 –2.9 –1.7 5.0 1.7 3.3 2022 Q1
8.8 –1.7 –5.5 4.8 9.9 2.0 –4.8 2.7 5.2 3.1 Q2
9.3 p –0.4 p 10.5 p 1.9 p 6.3 1.7 –3.4 p 2.6 p 4.5 ... Q3
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
73.0 72.5 70.7 78.3 79.5 74.9 79.5 78.5 74.4 51.5 2020
76.7 82.0 76.8 82.4 87.1 79.2 82.2 84.5 77.8 51.3 2021
77.7 80.8 64.7 83.7 87.7 81.9 83.3 85.0 78.7 58.3 2022
77.4 83.7 78.4 83.8 89.5 78.9 81.9 85.9 77.5 50.3 2021 Q3
78.6 81.8 75.2 83.7 88.6 80.2 82.1 85.3 79.2 55.4 Q4
78.0 81.9 62.9 84.0 88.4 81.8 82.8 86.1 78.8 55.4 2022 Q1
77.5 79.9 64.6 84.3 88.9 82.5 83.9 85.2 80.0 58.3 Q2
78.4 81.4 67.6 83.9 87.8 81.6 83.5 84.6 78.9 58.4 Q3
76.9 79.8 63.6 82.6 85.6 81.6 83.0 84.1 77.2 60.9 Q4
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
6.3 5.6 3.6 3.4 4.5 6.5 5.8 4.5 14.1 7.1 2019
8.6 6.8 4.4 3.9 5.4 6.9 6.7 5.0 15.5 7.6 2020
e 7.1 e 5.4 e 3.4 e 4.2 e 6.2 e 6.6 e 6.9 e 4.8 e 14.8 e 7.5 2021
5.4 4.3 3.0 3.3 4.7 6.0 6.2 4.5 12.6 6.8 2022 May
5.4 4.3 2.9 3.4 4.2 6.0 6.1 4.4 12.6 7.3 June
5.2 4.3 2.9 3.6 4.6 6.0 6.0 4.2 12.7 8.0 July
5.2 4.4 2.9 3.8 5.3 6.0 5.9 4.1 12.7 8.3 Aug.
5.0 4.5 3.0 3.8 5.1 6.1 5.9 4.1 12.7 8.0 Sep.
... ... ... 3.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... Oct.
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2.2 1.6 1.5 2.7 1.5 0.3 2.8 1.7 0.8 0.5 2019
1.1 0.0 0.8 1.1 1.4 –0.1 2.0 –0.3 –0.3 –1.1 2020
4.6 3.5 0.7 2.8 2.8 0.9 2.8 2.0 3.0 2.3 2021
18.5 9.1 5.8 10.2 7.7 8.1 11.8 8.7 8.5 8.8 2022 May
20.5 10.3 6.1 9.9 8.7 9.0 12.6 10.8 10.0 9.0 June
20.9 9.3 6.8 11.6 9.4 9.4 12.8 11.7 10.7 10.6 July
21.1 8.6 7.0 13.7 9.3 9.3 13.4 11.5 10.5 9.6 Aug.
22.5 8.8 7.4 17.1 11.0 9.8 13.6 10.6 9.0 9.0 Sep.
22.1 8.8 7.4 16.8 11.5 10.6 14.5 10.3 7.3 8.6 Oct.
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
0.5 2.2 0.6 1.8 0.6 0.1 –1.2 0.6 –3.1 1.3 2019
–7.0 –3.4 –9.4 –3.7 –8.0 –5.8 –5.4 –7.7 –10.1 –5.8 2020
–1.0 0.8 –7.8 –2.6 –5.9 –2.9 –5.5 –4.7 –6.9 –1.7 2021
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
35.8 22.4 40.7 48.5 70.6 116.6 48.0 65.4 98.2 90.4 2019
46.3 24.5 53.3 54.7 82.9 134.9 58.9 79.6 120.4 113.5 2020
43.7 24.5 56.3 52.4 82.3 125.5 62.2 74.5 118.3 101.0 2021
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of valueadded tax between July and December 2020.  6 According to Maastricht Treaty
definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2021 Feb. 99.8 33.8 9.0 66.0 72.7 –14.7 28.9 43.6 –1.2 –5.7 –0.5 –2.4 7.4
Mar. 176.0 100.7 8.5 75.3 74.0 – 5.9 –6.7 –0.7 12.2 –9.0 –0.3 1.2 20.3
Apr. 55.9 13.3 8.6 42.6 29.0 –11.4 104.5 115.9 –36.9 –23.9 –0.1 –7.5 –5.4
May 124.9 48.3 15.2 76.6 77.6 2.6 24.5 21.8 –23.5 –1.2 –0.2 –15.1 –6.9
June 94.5 37.2 0.8 57.3 58.6 9.2 –74.4 –83.6 26.8 –6.1 –0.4 –4.2 37.6
July 112.9 56.0 8.1 56.8 50.3 – 4.2 74.3 78.6 3.1 –4.7 –0.6 9.3 –0.8
Aug. 35.0 –16.7 –7.8 51.7 60.9 – 4.7 141.2 146.0 –5.9 –7.3 –0.4 –7.0 8.9
Sep. 107.4 72.9 3.6 34.5 43.2 –40.1 –58.2 –18.1 16.6 –4.5 –0.4 8.3 13.2
Oct. 80.6 68.3 21.4 12.3 18.5 –16.4 192.3 208.7 11.4 –10.7 –0.7 16.8 6.0
Nov. 156.1 89.3 –3.6 66.8 67.5 –26.3 15.0 41.3 –7.0 –10.6 –0.7 1.8 2.5
Dec. 53.0 27.8 20.3 25.2 22.7 –51.4 –203.4 –151.9 4.4 18.0 –0.8 –25.0 12.2
2022 Jan. 166.4 91.4 –10.3 75.0 64.7 – 1.6 136.3 137.9 –18.3 –14.7 –0.1 9.4 –12.9
Feb. 109.5 43.1 1.9 66.5 73.8 –14.5 82.6 97.1 –21.2 –12.6 –0.4 –3.6 –4.7
Mar. 158.3 113.0 26.4 45.3 36.0 1.9 –20.6 –22.5 –0.3 2.8 –0.7 –21.8 19.4
Apr. 111.4 96.3 20.1 15.1 5.1 –79.7 –58.2 21.5 8.2 –10.6 –0.1 1.3 17.7
May 106.2 64.3 –19.0 41.9 49.4 –59.6 39.4 99.0 –16.2 3.0 –3.2 –21.3 5.4
June 116.4 83.6 –8.7 32.8 33.7 84.9 –46.0 –130.9 23.4 –4.7 –0.5 1.2 27.4
July 31.2 59.9 –2.8 –28.7 –28.5 –14.9 63.2 78.0 0.7 –11.7 –0.4 –3.9 16.6
Aug. –11.2 25.6 –18.9 –36.8 –31.1 47.5 69.7 22.2 –10.8 –22.0 0.7 1.2 9.2
Sep. 79.3 74.1 1.0 5.2 4.5 –39.1 –196.4 –157.3 19.5 –15.1 –0.6 3.1 32.2
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2021 Feb. 29.8 18.8 4.6 11.1 13.4 26.3 7.0 –19.3 0.8 –1.8 –0.3 4.3 –1.4
Mar. 54.1 35.8 1.8 18.3 19.5 –61.9 1.9 63.9 3.5 –3.5 –0.3 7.1 0.2
Apr. 11.4 0.5 2.4 10.8 7.0 67.3 25.3 –42.0 9.3 –2.4 –0.3 6.4 5.6
May 33.4 16.8 3.2 16.6 18.9 –35.0 –10.9 24.1 –10.3 –2.8 –0.1 –7.3 0.0
June 30.0 8.7 2.4 21.4 22.3 –36.1 –5.3 30.8 3.2 –3.4 –0.2 –7.3 14.1
July 42.9 22.4 2.2 20.4 18.4 42.8 –14.6 –57.4 5.1 –1.8 –0.3 4.3 2.8
Aug. 28.5 16.6 1.6 11.9 15.7 –18.0 18.2 36.2 2.0 –0.5 –0.2 0.9 1.9
Sep. 33.1 16.7 5.4 16.4 16.5 –92.2 –0.7 91.5 3.8 –2.2 –0.2 2.6 3.6
Oct. 37.8 34.7 7.2 3.0 –0.6 47.0 47.6 0.7 18.6 1.4 –0.2 15.6 1.8
Nov. 54.0 28.5 3.4 25.4 28.0 –59.0 –4.2 54.8 5.0 –0.6 –0.2 4.7 1.1
Dec. 12.8 10.9 6.8 2.0 4.7 –122.9 –47.1 75.8 –2.3 9.1 –0.2 –13.2 2.0
2022 Jan. 40.4 31.0 1.4 9.4 7.5 111.9 72.2 –39.7 –4.0 –1.1 –0.8 12.6 –14.8
Feb. 32.7 27.6 3.4 5.2 7.2 16.0 21.9 5.9 5.1 –1.3 –0.2 7.0 –0.4
Mar. 37.0 23.3 4.1 13.7 12.9 –44.2 –22.2 22.0 6.1 –2.0 –0.2 4.1 4.2
Apr. 19.0 18.9 2.7 0.1 –4.5 19.1 –13.0 –32.1 4.4 –2.7 –0.2 3.2 4.1
May 39.1 28.5 3.5 10.6 13.5 –29.8 –0.9 28.9 2.0 –2.4 –0.1 2.0 2.5
June 32.6 25.5 –4.1 7.1 4.8 –22.4 –9.4 13.0 3.8 –3.1 –0.2 –3.8 10.8
July 18.2 30.6 10.6 –12.4 –13.4 42.7 4.3 –38.5 9.3 –2.0 –0.2 8.5 3.0
Aug. 26.0 39.4 –0.2 –13.4 –11.4 –50.3 6.7 57.1 3.0 –0.0 –0.1 0.8 2.3
Sep. 21.4 23.2 0.0 –1.7 –4.6 –20.8 0.8 21.6 4.2 0.1 –0.0 –0.6 4.8
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
30.4 5.2 0.0 52.6 65.4 71.8 7.3 64.5 –18.0 11.6 2.8 –30.7 13.1 2021 Feb.
19.6 73.2 0.0 83.2 101.6 82.6 10.5 72.2 7.3 11.7 –18.6 –4.7 –13.3 Mar.
–32.3 14.2 0.0 94.5 69.1 88.9 8.5 80.4 –27.9 8.1 15.3 8.9 6.8 Apr.
– 8.5 48.9 0.0 110.1 115.6 116.7 13.2 103.5 –11.7 10.7 – 4.1 –8.9 8.1 May
16.8 –4.3 0.0 74.0 88.1 119.7 10.5 109.2 –33.9 2.3 –10.8 –8.4 – 4.6 June
0.4 –55.8 0.0 151.2 113.5 103.3 14.6 88.6 10.5 – 0.3 17.4 22.6 7.4 July
26.6 –10.6 0.0 28.3 33.4 32.4 1.7 30.7 –2.5 3.6 –12.3 5.3 – 6.2 Aug.
6.5 –0.8 0.0 31.1 60.4 76.0 5.3 70.8 –16.5 0.8 12.7 –31.1 2.9 Sep.
– 2.4 –75.0 0.0 129.3 84.7 70.5 6.8 63.7 19.2 – 5.0 13.2 31.5 0.8 Oct.
–48.5 84.9 0.0 95.9 83.7 102.7 6.0 96.7 –19.7 0.7 – 4.4 26.2 – 5.0 Nov.
–44.5 –20.1 0.0 87.6 114.4 104.0 20.6 83.3 6.9 3.6 –41.8 –6.7 – 4.0 Dec.
68.1 91.1 0.0 –23.8 –23.9 –51.4 1.0 –52.4 14.9 12.6 63.5 –23.2 6.2 2022 Jan.
44.6 31.8 0.0 39.3 69.7 76.6 9.1 67.4 –14.8 8.0 9.4 –37.2 – 2.1 Feb.
13.7 52.0 0.0 102.4 113.2 93.1 22.5 70.6 16.0 4.0 –21.8 –3.4 1.5 Mar.
–22.1 –74.8 0.0 94.1 57.7 52.3 11.2 41.1 3.1 2.4 28.8 21.9 13.4 Apr.
–28.9 46.7 0.0 52.2 62.4 68.8 7.8 61.1 –18.4 12.0 4.4 –11.5 – 4.2 May
69.6 51.5 0.0 75.0 79.2 52.6 6.6 46.0 23.5 3.1 –35.5 –1.4 13.8 June
–31.2 –112.2 0.0 149.0 118.8 64.0 8.6 55.4 49.7 5.1 27.0 –3.1 16.4 July
–80.3 56.5 0.0 85.7 76.7 28.4 –5.1 33.6 38.2 10.1 –21.5 7.8 7.9 Aug.
7.4 –44.8 0.0 70.0 59.4 –43.0 –1.0 –41.9 102.9 – 0.5 –21.8 –2.0 22.7 Sep.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
15.4 29.1 2.3 1.5 10.8 20.3 – 8.5 1.2 – 2.4 – 0.0 0.3 2021 Feb.
– 2.3 – 38.0 2.5 2.7 29.1 24.3 – 0.6 0.1 5.0 0.5 – 0.1 Mar.
– 7.4 71.2 0.7 2.6 5.5 13.9 – 5.2 0.7 – 3.4 – 0.1 – 0.4 Apr.
18.8 – 44.9 3.0 2.9 34.8 27.8 2.8 0.6 1.7 – 0.1 2.0 May
6.0 – 14.0 3.1 2.3 – 1.2 7.1 – 8.0 – 0.4 – 0.2 0.1 0.3 June
– 12.0 75.2 4.2 3.7 17.4 21.2 – 4.1 – 0.3 0.6 – 0.1 0.1 July
0.7 – 13.2 2.9 0.2 21.0 20.4 – 1.6 – 0.3 0.1 0.0 2.3 Aug.
7.1 – 77.3 4.6 0.8 7.3 7.6 – 1.3 – 0.6 1.5 – 0.0 0.1 Sep.
– 3.9 53.7 3.3 1.6 16.4 3.9 13.0 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.4 Oct.
7.2 – 42.3 3.7 1.2 25.0 40.9 – 12.3 – 0.1 – 4.7 – 0.3 1.4 Nov.
27.8 –135.3 5.3 4.5 – 0.4 – 12.8 9.1 1.6 – 0.3 0.3 1.7 Dec.
– 38.1 166.0 1.3 0.8 28.4 22.4 9.3 0.3 – 1.2 0.0 – 2.4 2022 Jan.
2.5 14.4 3.0 2.2 26.8 23.3 1.1 0.3 1.1 0.1 0.8 Feb.
– 0.1 – 13.2 5.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 7.4 8.4 – 1.6 0.5 0.2 – 0.1 Mar.
– 3.0 32.9 3.4 2.3 3.7 – 3.4 10.4 – 0.4 – 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.6 Apr.
22.5 – 30.3 3.4 2.7 15.1 22.5 – 7.4 – 1.2 0.4 0.2 0.7 May
14.9 – 37.5 3.7 0.5 29.0 19.6 7.5 – 1.6 0.6 – 0.0 2.9 June
– 38.2 55.3 – 5.3 9.1 34.6 5.7 23.6 – 1.7 4.3 0.1 2.6 July
– 24.1 – 71.1 – 11.7 12.5 67.9 56.8 13.9 – 2.4 – 1.8 – 0.1 1.4 Aug.
4.7 5.7 3.3 0.3 – 13.9 – 57.2 45.1 – 5.3 – 2.6 0.1 6.1 Sep.
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2020 Aug. 30,434.9 19,985.0 14,355.1 12,019.1 1,525.0 811.0 5,629.9 997.8 4,632.1 6,241.9 4,208.0
Sep. 30,522.8 20,084.9 14,349.5 12,019.2 1,520.4 809.9 5,735.4 998.7 4,736.8 6,238.1 4,199.8
Oct. 30,687.0 20,162.5 14,376.6 12,054.8 1,520.5 801.3 5,785.9 1,004.2 4,781.7 6,337.4 4,187.0
Nov. 30,749.4 20,292.0 14,457.7 12,090.4 1,542.2 825.0 5,834.4 1,003.4 4,831.0 6,331.0 4,126.4
Dec. 30,438.8 20,266.1 14,438.3 12,042.9 1,532.2 863.2 5,827.8 990.2 4,837.6 6,108.9 4,063.8
2021 Jan. 30,643.8 20,387.8 14,466.2 12,067.8 1,535.8 862.6 5,921.6 999.4 4,922.1 6,299.8 3,956.2
Feb. 30,546.3 20,463.6 14,500.5 12,090.1 1,541.1 869.3 5,963.1 992.4 4,970.6 6,300.7 3,782.0
Mar. 30,827.0 20,653.7 14,576.8 12,185.3 1,512.6 879.0 6,076.9 993.3 5,083.5 6,360.7 3,812.6
Apr. 30,752.9 20,667.2 14,566.6 12,169.2 1,509.7 887.7 6,100.6 1,007.2 5,093.4 6,396.3 3,689.5
May 30,890.4 20,788.2 14,612.8 12,198.6 1,521.6 892.6 6,175.5 1,006.2 5,169.2 6,434.1 3,668.1
June 30,991.0 20,890.7 14,652.8 12,234.6 1,530.0 888.3 6,237.8 1,004.8 5,233.1 6,400.0 3,700.3
July 31,313.8 21,028.7 14,708.3 12,278.0 1,543.6 886.7 6,320.4 1,011.3 5,309.1 6,504.2 3,781.0
Aug. 31,438.1 21,047.9 14,684.9 12,261.1 1,533.4 890.4 6,363.1 1,002.3 5,360.8 6,653.5 3,736.6
Sep. 31,473.8 21,133.9 14,757.6 12,331.3 1,534.9 891.4 6,376.3 993.6 5,382.7 6,620.6 3,719.3
Oct. 31,776.6 21,201.6 14,817.7 12,379.4 1,548.1 890.2 6,384.0 987.7 5,396.3 6,823.1 3,751.9
Nov. 32,190.9 21,381.2 14,911.2 12,478.0 1,542.2 890.9 6,470.0 985.8 5,484.2 6,915.2 3,894.5
Dec. 31,777.4 21,384.3 14,917.1 12,462.9 1,567.2 887.0 6,467.3 988.5 5,478.8 6,738.8 3,654.3
2022 Jan. 32,405.1 21,564.4 15,039.5 12,602.4 1,553.2 884.0 6,525.0 999.2 5,525.8 6,909.7 3,931.0
Feb. 32,589.1 21,620.3 15,066.9 12,637.3 1,553.6 876.0 6,553.3 991.8 5,561.5 7,007.2 3,961.7
Mar. 32,936.3 21,736.9 15,175.9 12,722.4 1,587.3 866.1 6,561.0 1,001.4 5,559.6 6,994.9 4,204.5
Apr. 33,589.3 21,763.1 15,253.2 12,805.1 1,597.5 850.5 6,509.9 1,011.3 5,498.6 7,082.8 4,743.4
May 33,500.3 21,814.3 15,302.9 12,877.4 1,568.0 857.5 6,511.4 1,003.9 5,507.5 7,032.1 4,653.9
June 33,885.1 21,884.1 15,371.8 12,972.2 1,569.0 830.6 6,512.4 1,003.0 5,509.3 7,063.6 4,937.4
July 33,877.0 21,983.2 15,450.2 13,043.0 1,578.6 828.7 6,533.1 1,003.0 5,530.1 7,216.4 4,677.4
Aug. 34,341.2 21,870.5 15,457.6 13,078.9 1,553.6 825.1 6,412.9 996.9 5,416.0 7,300.4 5,170.3
Sep. 34,749.5 21,868.1 15,523.3 13,156.5 1,545.6 821.2 6,344.7 997.6 5,347.1 7,133.8 5,747.7
German contribution (€ billion)
2020 Aug. 7,167.3 4,723.0 3,642.2 3,180.7 202.9 258.6 1,080.8 287.4 793.3 1,268.8 1,175.5
Sep. 7,236.4 4,749.2 3,647.1 3,184.0 204.9 258.1 1,102.1 289.7 812.4 1,293.8 1,193.4
Oct. 7,257.1 4,801.4 3,670.3 3,200.4 210.7 259.3 1,131.1 292.0 839.1 1,278.8 1,176.8
Nov. 7,240.5 4,841.7 3,688.6 3,213.7 214.3 260.6 1,153.1 290.2 862.9 1,261.9 1,136.9
Dec. 7,172.5 4,839.4 3,695.5 3,216.4 214.7 264.5 1,143.9 286.4 857.4 1,224.1 1,109.1
2021 Jan. 7,220.7 4,865.5 3,705.9 3,224.4 216.4 265.1 1,159.6 286.5 873.1 1,307.6 1,047.6
Feb. 7,182.0 4,885.0 3,724.3 3,238.8 217.4 268.1 1,160.7 283.8 877.0 1,305.0 991.9
Mar. 7,233.5 4,939.8 3,761.1 3,273.4 217.3 270.4 1,178.7 282.6 896.1 1,315.4 978.3
Apr. 7,228.4 4,946.1 3,760.5 3,270.3 217.6 272.6 1,185.6 285.7 899.9 1,333.6 948.6
May 7,228.0 4,977.5 3,777.2 3,283.3 219.5 274.4 1,200.3 283.4 916.9 1,329.8 920.7
June 7,277.1 5,009.8 3,786.4 3,290.4 220.8 275.2 1,223.4 282.3 941.1 1,325.1 942.1
July 7,362.7 5,062.4 3,808.5 3,310.2 221.9 276.4 1,253.9 284.4 969.5 1,317.4 982.9
Aug. 7,395.2 5,087.3 3,824.6 3,325.1 221.4 278.1 1,262.8 280.8 982.0 1,336.0 971.9
Sep. 7,398.6 5,110.8 3,840.8 3,336.4 224.7 279.7 1,270.1 280.7 989.4 1,335.1 952.6
Oct. 7,461.0 5,147.0 3,874.5 3,363.5 228.6 282.4 1,272.5 284.4 988.0 1,385.2 928.8
Nov. 7,575.0 5,210.7 3,904.2 3,389.9 229.0 285.3 1,306.4 280.7 1,025.7 1,396.4 967.9
Dec. 7,475.8 5,212.1 3,914.7 3,393.2 237.0 284.5 1,297.4 278.0 1,019.5 1,355.9 907.8
2022 Jan. 7,787.0 5,243.9 3,944.7 3,422.9 235.8 286.0 1,299.2 279.9 1,019.3 1,433.6 1,109.5
Feb. 7,871.3 5,262.9 3,968.5 3,445.2 238.0 285.3 1,294.3 277.8 1,016.5 1,464.4 1,144.0
Mar. 7,997.7 5,280.7 3,990.2 3,464.4 240.6 285.2 1,290.6 278.6 1,012.0 1,447.5 1,269.5
Apr. 8,259.4 5,278.9 4,008.0 3,481.9 240.1 286.1 1,270.9 283.2 987.7 1,464.0 1,516.5
May 8,228.4 5,304.5 4,034.5 3,506.0 240.8 287.7 1,270.0 280.3 989.7 1,445.0 1,479.0
June 8,413.5 5,322.6 4,058.9 3,537.6 237.8 283.5 1,263.7 282.5 981.2 1,466.1 1,624.8
July 8,287.9 5,375.0 4,096.1 3,560.3 252.7 283.2 1,278.8 283.6 995.2 1,481.5 1,431.4
Aug. 8,546.0 5,364.5 4,132.0 3,600.0 249.1 282.9 1,232.5 281.5 951.0 1,492.4 1,689.0
Sep. 8,857.4 5,356.3 4,153.9 3,624.9 246.0 283.0 1,202.4 284.3 918.1 1,500.5 2,000.5
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,326.8 14,668.1 13,304.3 13,391.2 8,117.1 767.8 184.4 1,892.0 2,390.0 40.0 2020 Aug.
1,330.3 14,758.4 13,361.0 13,467.6 8,175.8 781.0 195.4 1,883.6 2,392.0 39.8 Sep.
1,338.1 14,814.8 13,431.7 13,545.6 8,266.0 783.3 181.9 1,880.4 2,394.6 39.4 Oct.
1,349.9 14,813.0 13,527.2 13,621.6 8,358.3 756.5 179.6 1,885.7 2,402.5 39.0 Nov.
1,370.7 14,772.9 13,620.6 13,728.8 8,459.6 772.0 176.9 1,877.6 2,404.2 38.5 Dec.
1,373.3 14,873.9 13,631.3 13,752.9 8,505.4 743.9 173.8 1,870.6 2,421.0 38.1 2021 Jan.
1,380.6 14,957.8 13,678.6 13,807.8 8,569.6 733.7 169.2 1,865.1 2,432.5 37.7 Feb.
1,391.1 15,076.4 13,757.0 13,913.7 8,654.9 753.5 164.3 1,858.8 2,444.8 37.4 Mar.
1,399.6 15,061.0 13,775.4 13,936.1 8,727.0 731.8 159.5 1,827.5 2,453.0 37.3 Apr.
1,412.8 15,147.4 13,870.8 14,018.1 8,811.2 724.4 155.5 1,826.2 2,463.6 37.1 May
1,423.2 15,241.8 13,943.4 14,091.4 8,917.7 698.2 150.4 1,822.0 2,466.2 36.8 June
1,437.6 15,335.4 14,017.3 14,185.7 9,006.8 705.9 153.6 1,817.0 2,466.2 36.3 July
1,439.2 15,386.3 14,039.3 14,196.7 9,030.0 707.3 151.2 1,809.9 2,462.4 35.9 Aug.
1,444.5 15,442.5 14,075.3 14,239.8 9,093.0 701.2 140.0 1,806.7 2,463.3 35.6 Sep.
1,450.3 15,504.6 14,139.4 14,312.3 9,166.1 709.0 148.0 1,795.5 2,458.8 34.9 Oct.
1,456.3 15,518.4 14,188.5 14,345.4 9,224.1 697.5 143.3 1,786.3 2,459.8 34.3 Nov.
1,477.0 15,579.6 14,310.0 14,464.4 9,316.4 714.5 131.3 1,805.2 2,463.5 33.6 Dec.
1,477.9 15,636.9 14,277.0 14,469.0 9,294.6 707.9 135.3 1,820.2 2,478.2 32.9 2022 Jan.
1,487.0 15,731.6 14,323.8 14,506.2 9,356.7 688.6 134.3 1,807.7 2,486.2 32.7 Feb.
1,509.6 15,840.4 14,415.6 14,599.9 9,439.7 703.7 123.5 1,809.7 2,491.1 32.2 Mar.
1,520.7 15,875.9 14,464.1 14,653.8 9,493.3 709.6 123.5 1,801.9 2,493.3 32.1 Apr.
1,528.5 15,891.0 14,510.0 14,681.4 9,536.9 686.6 120.3 1,803.0 2,505.6 29.0 May
1,535.1 16,040.7 14,573.9 14,750.6 9,583.1 705.9 123.4 1,800.2 2,509.4 28.5 June
1,543.7 16,119.8 14,673.8 14,872.9 9,667.1 745.0 127.1 1,790.8 2,514.8 28.1 July
1,538.6 16,103.2 14,734.9 14,926.7 9,694.5 782.4 125.9 1,770.0 2,525.0 28.9 Aug.
1,537.6 16,168.5 14,768.3 15,005.2 9,686.0 882.9 125.6 1,757.5 2,524.8 28.4 Sep.
German contribution (€ billion)
301.3 4,202.4 3,889.9 3,720.2 2,419.2 159.3 30.1 551.3 531.6 28.8 2020 Aug.
301.9 4,235.6 3,905.7 3,745.0 2,445.3 160.3 30.3 549.2 531.5 28.4 Sep.
303.6 4,245.3 3,935.3 3,781.4 2,476.4 165.4 30.5 549.7 531.5 28.0 Oct.
306.6 4,260.2 3,961.8 3,804.4 2,507.7 157.7 30.6 549.0 531.8 27.6 Nov.
312.2 4,228.5 3,954.1 3,801.5 2,500.9 160.3 31.0 548.8 533.1 27.3 Dec.
313.1 4,218.7 3,980.7 3,829.7 2,541.7 147.0 31.0 548.5 534.8 26.8 2021 Jan.
314.6 4,245.1 3,990.0 3,837.4 2,555.8 141.0 31.1 547.0 536.0 26.4 Feb.
317.3 4,264.3 4,011.8 3,863.4 2,579.8 145.1 31.7 544.6 536.1 26.1 Mar.
319.9 4,262.2 4,013.0 3,874.5 2,594.4 143.0 31.9 542.5 536.8 25.8 Apr.
322.8 4,308.8 4,040.3 3,895.1 2,613.5 146.0 32.2 540.4 537.4 25.7 May
325.1 4,311.0 4,035.3 3,890.5 2,619.4 139.3 31.9 537.5 537.0 25.5 June
328.8 4,313.9 4,047.3 3,911.3 2,645.8 136.0 31.4 536.0 536.7 25.2 July
329.0 4,333.1 4,065.2 3,923.1 2,659.1 135.6 31.3 535.7 536.4 25.0 Aug.
329.8 4,340.5 4,064.1 3,919.8 2,662.1 132.2 31.2 533.6 535.8 24.8 Sep.
331.4 4,354.3 4,080.9 3,950.3 2,681.4 143.0 31.1 534.8 535.5 24.6 Oct.
332.6 4,390.5 4,107.1 3,968.0 2,710.9 132.5 30.3 534.6 535.5 24.3 Nov.
337.1 4,425.2 4,113.0 3,968.5 2,691.5 141.2 30.1 544.6 537.0 24.1 Dec.
337.9 4,418.1 4,139.2 4,006.8 2,737.3 135.4 29.7 543.6 537.4 23.4 2022 Jan.
340.1 4,444.1 4,161.0 4,017.1 2,752.3 132.4 29.4 542.3 537.7 23.1 Feb.
344.3 4,441.6 4,159.0 4,014.6 2,755.3 130.7 29.3 540.4 536.0 22.9 Mar.
346.7 4,445.6 4,158.1 4,019.8 2,754.8 140.0 29.4 537.7 535.1 22.7 Apr.
349.4 4,478.3 4,170.7 4,016.7 2,769.9 125.8 29.7 534.8 533.9 22.6 May
349.9 4,517.1 4,194.6 4,031.6 2,787.1 127.8 30.1 531.9 532.3 22.4 June
359.0 4,507.6 4,222.4 4,070.3 2,813.6 142.1 31.0 530.6 530.6 22.3 July
371.5 4,552.6 4,289.4 4,135.2 2,870.1 153.3 30.6 530.7 528.3 22.2 Aug.
371.8 4,541.8 4,267.6 4,135.1 2,834.2 194.1 30.9 530.7 523.0 22.2 Sep.
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2020 Aug. 828.4 448.5 273.6 79.5 22.1 50.3 19.6 3.5 266.9 266.7 587.0 2,036.6 1,425.3
Sep. 848.8 442.1 274.8 74.4 20.8 49.1 19.5 3.4 237.7 237.5 595.2 2,059.6 1,431.0
Oct. 831.5 437.6 277.4 69.6 20.8 47.0 19.5 3.4 243.1 242.9 609.3 2,043.2 1,418.6
Nov. 733.0 458.4 307.1 64.6 17.8 46.1 19.4 3.3 246.4 246.4 610.3 2,025.2 1,406.4
Dec. 604.8 439.3 294.7 60.3 17.2 44.8 19.0 3.3 221.4 221.3 625.9 1,995.5 1,386.3
2021 Jan. 683.2 437.8 294.4 58.9 17.4 44.1 19.2 3.8 251.6 251.5 644.4 1,990.9 1,369.7
Feb. 713.6 436.4 296.4 54.3 19.0 43.9 19.2 3.7 254.6 254.5 613.7 2,004.4 1,369.6
Mar. 733.1 429.6 295.4 52.1 16.4 43.2 18.9 3.7 236.5 236.5 609.1 2,005.5 1,357.4
Apr. 700.9 424.0 293.9 48.5 16.2 42.9 18.9 3.6 251.1 251.0 617.9 1,991.6 1,350.5
May 692.4 436.9 308.3 47.7 15.9 42.4 19.1 3.5 246.7 246.7 608.4 1,980.7 1,339.4
June 709.2 441.2 314.0 46.6 16.3 42.0 18.8 3.5 236.5 236.5 600.0 1,984.2 1,332.5
July 709.6 440.1 313.9 45.6 16.6 42.0 18.6 3.5 253.9 253.9 622.6 1,999.3 1,334.0
Aug. 736.1 453.5 329.1 43.9 17.0 42.0 18.0 3.4 241.7 241.7 627.9 1,988.5 1,334.0
Sep. 742.6 460.1 334.6 46.3 16.6 41.3 18.1 3.3 257.3 257.2 596.8 2,011.7 1,343.3
Oct. 740.3 451.9 323.3 48.1 18.0 41.6 17.7 3.3 270.3 270.3 628.3 2,031.7 1,353.1
Nov. 691.5 481.6 349.8 50.3 19.1 41.7 17.5 3.3 266.4 266.4 654.5 2,040.2 1,352.7
Dec. 646.7 468.4 337.4 49.7 19.4 41.1 17.6 3.2 224.7 223.5 647.7 2,016.3 1,345.8
2022 Jan. 711.0 456.9 307.3 67.4 19.6 41.2 17.6 3.8 288.5 288.3 624.5 2,043.1 1,348.7
Feb. 755.6 469.9 314.1 73.5 19.8 41.3 17.6 3.7 297.9 297.7 587.2 2,036.9 1,355.4
Mar. 769.7 470.9 304.7 82.5 20.5 42.4 17.3 3.4 276.2 276.0 583.8 2,022.5 1,356.5
Apr. 747.7 474.5 306.7 83.4 21.2 42.6 17.2 3.4 306.2 306.0 605.8 2,066.4 1,360.3
May 718.8 490.8 316.7 88.4 22.3 43.3 16.8 3.3 308.8 308.7 594.4 2,031.4 1,334.5
June 788.4 501.8 325.2 90.9 22.9 43.3 16.2 3.2 274.0 273.8 593.0 2,065.5 1,359.4
July 757.2 489.8 302.8 100.4 24.2 42.9 16.2 3.3 302.1 302.0 589.9 2,085.3 1,358.6
Aug. 676.9 499.6 309.1 104.6 24.0 42.5 16.1 3.2 280.9 280.9 597.6 2,107.7 1,372.4
Sep. 684.3 479.1 281.7 111.2 24.5 42.5 16.0 3.2 259.6 259.6 595.5 2,149.3 1,412.6
German contribution (€ billion)
2020 Aug. 229.5 252.8 118.7 71.3 17.4 42.4 2.6 0.3 1.7 1.5 1.9 517.9 291.1
Sep. 244.7 245.8 119.4 66.0 16.5 41.1 2.5 0.3 1.3 1.1 2.0 525.3 296.1
Oct. 224.8 239.1 119.1 61.7 16.6 39.0 2.5 0.3 1.4 1.3 2.7 519.9 296.2
Nov. 212.1 243.7 131.6 57.3 14.0 38.0 2.5 0.2 9.1 9.1 2.4 515.5 296.1
Dec. 189.2 237.8 131.9 52.8 13.5 36.8 2.5 0.2 12.2 12.2 2.5 503.3 290.1
2021 Jan. 148.9 240.1 136.5 51.6 13.5 35.8 2.4 0.2 8.4 8.4 2.4 503.3 284.6
Feb. 164.3 243.4 142.8 47.3 15.2 35.5 2.5 0.2 6.0 6.0 2.4 510.0 288.4
Mar. 161.9 239.0 144.4 44.9 12.7 34.4 2.4 0.2 11.0 11.0 2.9 523.3 289.8
Apr. 154.6 233.1 142.4 41.5 12.5 34.1 2.4 0.2 7.6 7.6 2.8 524.3 296.2
May 173.3 240.3 150.8 41.0 12.5 33.4 2.4 0.2 9.2 9.2 2.2 518.0 293.2
June 179.3 241.2 152.9 39.9 13.0 32.8 2.4 0.2 9.0 9.0 2.3 515.5 294.6
July 167.3 235.3 148.0 38.9 13.3 32.5 2.4 0.2 9.6 9.6 2.2 518.3 295.1
Aug. 168.1 241.8 155.7 37.3 13.9 32.4 2.4 0.2 9.7 9.7 2.2 522.4 303.1
Sep. 175.2 245.6 158.2 39.8 13.4 31.7 2.3 0.2 11.2 11.2 2.2 530.1 305.5
Oct. 171.3 232.7 142.7 40.9 14.8 31.8 2.3 0.2 10.8 10.8 2.1 547.9 316.4
Nov. 178.4 244.1 155.2 38.8 16.1 31.6 2.2 0.2 6.1 6.1 1.8 556.5 324.8
Dec. 206.2 250.5 161.9 39.1 16.4 30.7 2.3 0.2 5.8 4.8 2.1 547.6 316.3
2022 Jan. 168.1 243.3 139.1 54.6 16.5 30.7 2.2 0.2 4.7 4.7 2.2 562.8 325.1
Feb. 170.6 256.3 147.8 59.2 16.3 30.6 2.2 0.2 5.8 5.8 2.3 572.5 338.8
Mar. 170.6 256.4 137.6 68.8 17.0 30.7 2.2 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.4 581.5 354.8
Apr. 167.6 258.2 137.6 70.0 17.6 30.6 2.2 0.2 4.4 4.4 2.2 596.5 357.3
May 190.1 271.4 144.2 75.3 18.5 31.1 2.2 0.2 4.8 4.8 2.4 596.8 359.0
June 205.0 280.5 147.7 80.5 19.0 31.0 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.3 604.2 362.6
July 166.8 270.4 128.3 89.0 20.2 30.6 2.2 0.1 9.8 9.8 2.4 613.8 369.1
Aug. 142.7 274.6 129.4 92.2 20.4 30.4 2.2 0.1 8.0 8.0 2.3 625.7 384.5
Sep. 147.4 259.3 109.1 96.6 20.8 30.5 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.4 640.0 395.3
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
– 15.4 19.2 2,032.9 4,711.2 3,014.5 – 38.8 3,862.5 0.0 9,856.0 13,340.6 14,027.9 7,033.2 160.0 2020 Aug.
– 14.4 15.3 2,058.7 4,666.9 3,011.2 – 15.9 3,879.2 0.0 9,923.5 13,428.0 14,122.0 7,045.9 163.9 Sep.
– 2.2 15.2 2,030.1 4,789.8 3,038.2 – 47.9 3,858.5 0.0 10,025.3 13,516.4 14,233.1 7,038.6 165.3 Oct.
– 1.5 17.4 2,009.2 4,868.1 2,995.8 – 44.2 3,884.8 0.0 10,167.5 13,629.7 14,354.2 6,979.2 174.0 Nov.
– 4.6 16.9 1,983.2 4,671.6 3,020.5 – 11.3 3,771.5 0.0 10,278.9 13,750.6 14,480.1 6,967.9 176.0 Dec.
1.9 15.7 1,973.3 4,821.4 2,998.4 – 10.2 3,700.0 0.0 10,326.2 13,784.9 14,551.1 6,928.3 177.5 2021 Jan.
13.8 16.4 1,974.2 4,872.9 2,953.0 – 10.8 3,520.1 0.0 10,398.7 13,851.2 14,604.3 6,877.6 176.8 Feb.
– 0.7 16.9 1,989.3 4,944.3 2,967.6 15.9 3,580.6 0.0 10,490.3 13,964.5 14,699.1 6,899.9 173.1 Mar.
6.5 16.6 1,968.5 4,989.3 2,948.0 10.5 3,484.0 0.0 10,569.9 14,021.8 14,781.1 6,827.9 173.5 Apr.
14.8 15.9 1,950.0 4,995.9 2,968.5 53.4 3,476.5 0.0 10,684.4 14,134.6 14,887.1 6,827.9 176.1 May
10.6 16.1 1,957.6 4,964.4 2,979.9 57.4 3,503.6 0.0 10,811.2 14,231.7 14,971.2 6,841.7 180.3 June
16.9 17.1 1,965.4 5,051.0 3,024.8 38.9 3,550.3 0.0 10,915.0 14,345.5 15,122.6 6,888.9 180.9 July
11.9 16.3 1,960.4 5,201.1 3,024.5 29.8 3,499.0 0.0 10,956.6 14,380.6 15,153.0 6,876.1 182.3 Aug.
14.0 17.9 1,979.8 5,226.5 2,997.6 16.1 3,480.9 0.0 11,035.4 14,444.9 15,191.8 6,864.3 187.4 Sep.
14.5 17.8 1,999.5 5,433.0 2,999.7 – 22.8 3,481.5 0.0 11,103.9 14,527.5 15,318.4 6,874.4 188.2 Oct.
12.8 17.8 2,009.6 5,516.9 3,037.4 21.6 3,679.1 0.0 11,196.0 14,607.5 15,414.5 6,912.5 189.7 Nov.
8.9 18.0 1,989.4 5,379.3 3,024.0 54.2 3,374.7 0.0 11,299.6 14,721.8 15,502.3 6,896.4 195.0 Dec.
16.0 18.2 2,008.9 5,554.3 2,999.5 62.2 3,718.2 0.0 11,252.2 14,701.8 15,483.7 6,906.5 196.0 2022 Jan.
25.6 5.5 2,005.8 5,642.2 2,995.1 55.1 3,756.0 0.0 11,331.1 14,772.8 15,523.1 6,886.2 195.0 Feb.
26.5 6.2 1,989.9 5,628.5 3,006.5 81.3 3,987.5 0.0 11,425.5 14,887.7 15,627.3 6,884.1 195.1 Mar.
32.1 15.7 2,018.6 5,765.1 2,986.0 67.7 4,395.4 0.0 11,494.0 14,966.2 15,745.2 6,884.7 197.2 Apr.
28.0 15.1 1,988.3 5,819.3 2,924.5 79.5 4,322.9 0.0 11,557.3 15,021.1 15,789.2 6,791.4 199.0 May
44.0 14.4 2,007.1 5,737.9 2,916.7 76.3 4,646.0 0.0 11,618.4 15,111.6 15,877.6 6,799.0 199.4 June
9.5 16.4 2,059.4 5,869.3 2,978.1 75.0 4,313.8 0.0 11,693.5 15,245.1 15,993.6 6,902.6 203.9 July
11.8 18.9 2,077.0 5,920.2 2,903.3 94.6 4,795.1 0.0 11,715.3 15,317.0 16,071.7 6,824.9 196.7 Aug.
31.8 19.8 2,097.7 5,804.6 2,863.3 29.6 5,341.5 0.0 11,678.7 15,385.8 16,149.7 6,792.5 195.6 Sep.
German contribution (€ billion)
12.0 7.2 498.7 891.2 778.4 –1,114.7 1,888.5 464.3 2,537.9 3,350.2 3,372.9 1,899.9 0.0 2020 Aug.
12.4 6.7 506.2 952.4 787.3 –1,172.8 1,905.3 467.0 2,564.6 3,371.8 3,394.2 1,912.5 0.0 Sep.
11.1 7.0 501.8 906.4 794.7 –1,107.6 1,894.1 469.4 2,595.4 3,403.6 3,425.7 1,913.5 0.0 Oct.
10.0 7.1 498.4 923.3 780.2 –1,109.5 1,859.4 470.7 2,639.3 3,433.2 3,461.8 1,893.5 0.0 Nov.
9.0 6.6 487.7 985.7 787.5 –1,192.0 1,844.9 473.1 2,632.8 3,426.1 3,456.4 1,888.4 0.0 Dec.
7.8 6.8 488.7 1,026.4 778.3 –1,113.3 1,796.5 474.2 2,678.2 3,458.5 3,483.9 1,878.3 0.0 2021 Jan.
7.4 7.5 495.1 1,007.6 756.3 –1,095.7 1,750.3 476.5 2,698.6 3,471.7 3,494.9 1,860.6 0.0 Feb.
8.1 6.8 508.4 1,080.1 754.4 –1,144.4 1,742.0 479.0 2,724.1 3,497.0 3,525.7 1,868.2 0.0 Mar.
7.8 6.6 510.0 1,029.5 759.2 –1,074.2 1,717.0 479.7 2,736.8 3,505.0 3,529.7 1,871.8 0.0 Apr.
9.6 6.7 501.7 1,051.5 768.2 –1,126.5 1,696.6 482.8 2,764.3 3,535.8 3,563.5 1,869.6 0.0 May
9.8 6.9 498.8 1,088.8 775.4 –1,149.4 1,724.5 485.9 2,772.3 3,535.7 3,563.7 1,870.2 0.0 June
9.8 7.0 501.5 1,031.5 795.8 –1,075.6 1,767.0 490.0 2,793.9 3,552.6 3,581.2 1,891.2 0.0 July
12.7 6.5 503.2 1,068.1 793.5 –1,088.4 1,754.6 492.9 2,814.8 3,571.7 3,602.8 1,889.9 0.0 Aug.
13.1 7.0 510.1 1,165.5 781.6 –1,156.2 1,723.6 497.5 2,820.3 3,575.1 3,608.5 1,881.9 0.0 Sep.
13.3 7.2 527.5 1,165.8 783.9 –1,110.5 1,706.6 500.8 2,824.1 3,591.6 3,625.0 1,902.8 0.0 Oct.
14.5 7.4 534.6 1,227.7 803.0 –1,154.8 1,744.2 504.5 2,866.1 3,621.4 3,651.2 1,928.3 0.0 Nov.
16.1 7.5 524.0 1,305.6 796.1 –1,297.0 1,690.3 509.8 2,853.4 3,619.4 3,651.0 1,919.7 0.0 Dec.
13.6 7.7 541.5 1,271.1 778.4 –1,169.6 1,919.3 511.1 2,876.4 3,652.3 3,680.4 1,917.7 0.0 2022 Jan.
14.7 7.5 550.4 1,275.8 774.8 –1,172.9 1,969.0 514.2 2,900.0 3,677.2 3,707.4 1,921.4 0.0 Feb.
14.8 7.3 559.5 1,299.3 781.2 –1,190.8 2,076.2 520.0 2,892.9 3,677.0 3,707.8 1,934.7 0.0 Mar.
14.6 7.1 574.8 1,284.0 769.2 –1,168.1 2,325.6 523.3 2,892.4 3,686.8 3,715.1 1,935.2 0.0 Apr.
14.9 7.3 574.6 1,307.0 748.6 –1,199.2 2,289.8 526.8 2,914.0 3,699.5 3,728.9 1,911.8 0.0 May
18.7 6.6 578.9 1,317.0 743.1 –1,255.4 2,479.8 530.5 2,934.8 3,726.6 3,759.7 1,907.5 0.0 June
21.2 6.8 585.8 1,287.5 779.7 –1,189.6 2,276.7 525.2 2,941.9 3,757.1 3,797.3 1,949.2 0.0 July
21.8 7.6 596.2 1,349.3 739.6 –1,271.6 2,540.1 513.5 2,999.5 3,826.5 3,866.3 1,919.1 0.0 Aug.
27.6 8.1 604.3 1,378.2 711.7 –1,281.1 2,859.0 516.8 2,943.3 3,810.9 3,854.4 1,899.4 0.0 Sep.
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2020 Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 864.4 1.3 1,707.8 0.0 3,475.8 460.7 0.0 1,389.1 749.0 653.5 2,797.0 4,646.8
Dec. 865.1 0.5 1,754.4 0.0 3,614.7 535.4 0.0 1,403.9 647.0 687.7 2,960.7 4,900.0
2021 Jan. 848.6 0.3 1,792.6 0.0 3,712.9 586.9 0.0 1,429.4 530.3 778.4 3,029.4 5,045.7
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 834.9 0.4 1,792.4 0.0 3,825.1 598.0 0.0 1,433.4 595.8 667.9 3,157.7 5,189.1
Apr. 816.7 0.3 2,054.6 0.0 3,951.4 676.4 0.0 1,447.7 644.5 633.4 3,421.1 5,545.2
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 809.8 0.2 2,107.0 0.0 4,092.7 706.5 0.0 1,465.8 586.7 659.1 3,591.7 5,763.9
July 821.7 0.1 2,196.0 0.0 4,244.5 736.6 0.0 1,485.8 652.3 734.5 3,653.1 5,875.5
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 826.7 0.2 2,213.2 0.0 4,378.9 766.6 0.0 1,499.9 635.7 790.4 3,726.2 5,992.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 835.1 0.2 2,209.9 0.0 4,512.3 738.5 0.0 1,507.4 671.3 833.7 3,806.5 6,052.4
Dec. 839.2 0.2 2,208.8 0.0 4,655.6 745.0 0.0 1,521.4 628.3 965.7 3,843.3 6,109.7
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 877.7 0.3 2,201.5 0.0 4,750.2 734.2 0.0 1,540.6 582.0 1,160.5 3,812.3 6,087.1
Mar. 887.2 0.3 2,201.3 0.0 4,842.0 746.0 0.0 1,550.6 642.6 1,091.1 3,900.8 6,197.3
Apr. 913.2 0.4 2,199.8 0.0 4,889.2 714.9 0.0 1,575.9 667.8 1,116.7 3,927.3 6,218.1
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 934.2 0.5 2,198.8 0.0 4,939.1 681.3 0.0 1,591.5 624.1 1,129.1 4,046.1 6,319.0
July 943.7 1.0 2,149.4 0.0 4,958.8 678.7 0.0 1,604.0 667.6 1,158.0 3,943.3 6,226.0
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 950.1 1.7 2,124.9 0.0 4,954.8 707.0 0.0 1,585.3 553.9 1,249.2 3,936.1 6,228.5
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deutsche Bundesbank
2020 Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 212.1 0.7 319.5 0.0 729.0 145.5 0.0 338.1 254.7 – 302.9 826.0 1,309.6
Dec. 213.0 0.3 333.9 0.0 768.7 166.6 0.0 341.2 217.9 – 294.5 884.7 1,392.5
2021 Jan. 208.3 0.1 341.1 0.0 791.3 178.9 0.0 347.3 189.4 – 252.8 878.0 1,404.2
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 205.3 0.1 341.0 0.0 816.9 177.5 0.0 348.3 172.7 – 298.0 962.8 1,488.6
Apr. 198.0 0.0 407.3 0.0 845.8 203.0 0.0 351.7 187.4 – 300.4 1,008.9 1,563.5
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 194.3 0.0 420.5 0.0 884.3 208.5 0.0 356.8 187.3 – 301.9 1,046.7 1,612.0
July 197.4 0.0 434.3 0.0 918.5 204.2 0.0 362.0 206.8 – 270.8 1,046.2 1,612.4
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 199.0 0.1 436.7 0.0 950.8 210.7 0.0 365.0 204.3 – 240.8 1,045.3 1,621.0
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 200.3 0.1 439.1 0.0 978.5 204.4 0.0 367.4 217.7 – 235.2 1,061.6 1,633.3
Dec. 201.3 0.0 440.3 0.0 1,015.8 206.4 0.0 370.9 220.4 – 219.4 1,077.1 1,654.4
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 212.4 0.3 421.7 0.0 1,034.0 204.5 0.0 374.6 205.6 – 165.1 1,048.8 1,627.9
Mar. 215.6 0.1 421.7 0.0 1,057.9 211.8 0.0 378.1 191.1 – 193.7 1,108.0 1,698.0
Apr. 223.9 0.1 420.8 0.0 1,068.7 197.7 0.0 384.9 196.7 – 189.1 1,123.3 1,705.9
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 230.4 0.1 420.2 0.0 1,087.4 189.9 0.0 388.0 196.9 – 183.1 1,147.4 1,725.3
July 231.7 0.3 409.1 0.0 1,084.3 185.8 0.0 390.3 214.9 – 175.4 1,109.7 1,685.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 232.1 0.3 403.6 0.0 1,076.8 228.5 0.0 379.5 157.9 – 161.8 1,108.8 1,716.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
. . . . . . . . . . . .2020 Oct.
– 1.5 ± 0.0 +114.6 ± 0.0 +152.2 +47.5 ± 0.0 + 7.9 +36.1 + 2.5 +171.3 +226.7 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.8 +46.6 ± 0.0 +138.9 +74.7 ± 0.0 +14.8 –102.0 +34.2 +163.7 +253.2 Dec.
–16.5 – 0.2 +38.2 ± 0.0 +98.2 +51.5 ± 0.0 +25.5 –116.7 +90.7 +68.7 +145.7 2021 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
–13.7 + 0.1 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +112.2 +11.1 ± 0.0 + 4.0 +65.5 –110.5 +128.3 +143.4 Mar.
–18.2 – 0.1 +262.2 ± 0.0 +126.3 +78.4 ± 0.0 +14.3 +48.7 –34.5 +263.4 +356.1 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
– 6.9 – 0.1 +52.4 ± 0.0 +141.3 +30.1 ± 0.0 +18.1 –57.8 +25.7 +170.6 +218.7 June
+11.9 – 0.1 +89.0 ± 0.0 +151.8 +30.1 ± 0.0 +20.0 +65.6 +75.4 +61.4 +111.6 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 5.0 + 0.1 +17.2 ± 0.0 +134.4 +30.0 ± 0.0 +14.1 –16.6 +55.9 +73.1 +117.3 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 8.4 ± 0.0 – 3.3 ± 0.0 +133.4 –28.1 ± 0.0 + 7.5 +35.6 +43.3 +80.3 +59.6 Nov.
+ 4.1 ± 0.0 – 1.1 ± 0.0 +143.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 +14.0 –43.0 +132.0 +36.8 +57.3 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+38.5 + 0.1 – 7.3 ± 0.0 +94.6 –10.8 ± 0.0 +19.2 –46.3 +194.8 –31.0 –22.6 Feb.
+ 9.5 ± 0.0 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +91.8 +11.8 ± 0.0 +10.0 +60.6 –69.4 +88.5 +110.2 Mar.
+26.0 + 0.1 – 1.5 ± 0.0 +47.2 –31.1 ± 0.0 +25.3 +25.2 +25.6 +26.5 +20.8 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+21.0 + 0.1 – 1.0 ± 0.0 +49.9 –33.6 ± 0.0 +15.6 –43.7 +12.4 +118.8 +100.9 June
+ 9.5 + 0.5 –49.4 ± 0.0 +19.7 – 2.6 ± 0.0 +12.5 +43.5 +28.9 –102.8 –93.0 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 6.4 + 0.7 –24.5 ± 0.0 – 4.0 +28.3 ± 0.0 –18.7 –113.7 +91.2 – 7.2 + 2.5 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
Deutsche Bundesbank
. . . . . . . . . . . .2020 Oct.
+ 0.0 – 0.1 +35.5 – 0.0 +37.0 + 9.5 ± 0.0 + 1.7 +15.0 – 5.0 +51.2 +62.3 Nov.
+ 0.9 – 0.4 +14.4 + 0.0 +39.8 +21.1 ± 0.0 + 3.1 –36.8 + 8.4 +58.7 +82.9 Dec.
– 4.7 – 0.2 + 7.1 + 0.0 +22.6 +12.3 ± 0.0 + 6.1 –28.5 +41.7 – 6.7 +11.7 2021 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
– 3.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 +25.6 – 1.4 ± 0.0 + 1.0 –16.7 –45.2 +84.8 +84.4 Mar.
– 7.3 – 0.1 +66.3 + 0.0 +28.8 +25.5 ± 0.0 + 3.4 +14.7 – 2.4 +46.0 +74.9 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
– 3.7 + 0.0 +13.2 + 0.0 +38.6 + 5.5 ± 0.0 + 5.1 –0.1 – 1.5 +37.9 +48.5 June
+ 3.1 – 0.0 +13.8 – 0.0 +34.2 – 4.3 ± 0.0 + 5.2 +19.4 +31.1 – 0.5 + 0.4 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 1.6 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.0 +32.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 + 3.0 –2.5 +29.9 – 0.9 + 8.6 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.4 – 0.0 +27.8 – 6.4 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +13.4 + 5.7 +16.3 +12.3 Nov.
+ 1.0 – 0.1 + 1.2 – 0.0 +37.3 + 2.1 ± 0.0 + 3.5 +2.7 +15.7 +15.6 +21.1 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+11.1 + 0.2 –18.6 + 0.0 +18.2 – 2.0 ± 0.0 + 3.7 –14.7 +54.3 –28.3 –26.6 Feb.
+ 3.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 +23.9 + 7.4 ± 0.0 + 3.5 –14.5 –28.6 +59.2 +70.1 Mar.
+ 8.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.0 +10.8 –14.2 ± 0.0 + 6.8 +5.6 + 4.6 +15.2 + 7.9 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+ 6.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 – 0.0 +18.7 – 7.7 ± 0.0 + 3.0 +0.2 + 6.0 +24.1 +19.4 June
+ 1.3 + 0.2 –11.1 – 0.0 – 3.1 – 4.1 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +18.0 + 7.7 –37.7 –39.5 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 0.4 + 0.0 – 5.5 – 0.0 – 7.5 +42.7 ± 0.0 –10.8 –57.1 +13.5 – 0.9 +31.0 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2022 Apr. 15 8,787.9 604.5 500.0 220.2 279.8 25.3 10.0 10.0 –
22 8,790.9 604.5 499.3 220.3 279.0 26.6 10.1 10.1 –
29 8,783.6 604.5 499.3 220.2 279.0 27.1 10.4 10.4 –
May 6 8,796.1 604.5 501.1 220.3 280.8 25.9 10.1 10.1 –
13 8,810.3 604.5 500.2 220.2 279.9 27.2 10.2 10.2 –
20 8,814.0 604.3 500.4 220.2 280.1 27.1 10.4 10.4 –
27 8,813.8 604.3 500.3 220.2 280.0 26.7 10.6 10.6 –
June 3 8,817.9 604.3 500.8 220.2 280.6 26.2 10.1 10.1 –
10 8,820.9 604.3 501.3 220.2 281.1 26.8 10.8 10.8 –
17 8,827.9 604.3 503.8 220.2 283.6 25.0 11.2 11.2 –
24 8,836.0 604.3 502.6 220.2 282.4 26.6 12.1 12.1 –
July 1 8,788.8 604.3 519.3 225.9 293.4 26.9 11.6 11.6 –
8 8,774.4 604.3 519.0 226.6 292.4 27.5 10.3 10.3 –
15 8,765.7 604.3 519.5 226.6 292.9 27.0 10.3 10.3 –
22 8,768.3 604.3 520.3 226.6 293.7 26.3 10.2 10.2 –
29 8,764.5 604.3 521.1 226.6 294.5 25.7 10.3 10.3 –
Aug. 5 8,746.0 604.3 520.5 226.6 293.9 26.8 9.8 9.8 –
12 8,747.8 604.3 520.7 226.6 294.1 26.6 9.9 9.9 –
19 8,750.7 604.3 521.4 226.6 294.7 26.5 9.9 9.9 –
26 8,750.0 604.3 523.4 227.1 296.3 25.4 10.0 10.0 –
Sep. 2 8,756.8 604.3 523.8 227.6 296.2 25.3 10.4 10.4 –
9 8,759.1 604.3 525.5 227.8 297.8 23.8 10.5 10.5 –
16 8,756.9 604.3 526.6 227.8 298.8 24.0 10.7 10.7 –
23 8,777.4 604.3 528.0 227.8 300.2 23.3 11.2 11.2 –
30 8,810.1 592.8 544.7 234.6 310.1 25.6 10.8 10.8 –
Oct. 7 8,772.0 592.8 545.3 234.6 310.7 25.8 10.7 10.7 –
14 8,778.1 592.8 547.2 234.6 312.6 24.9 10.4 10.4 –
21 8,774.8 592.8 548.5 235.2 313.3 25.4 10.8 10.8 –
28 8,770.7 592.8 549.2 236.0 313.2 25.7 11.4 11.4 –
Nov. 4 8,761.7 592.8 553.0 237.3 315.7 23.2 11.4 11.4 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2022 Apr. 15 2,952.6 187.8 89.8 56.0 33.7 0.0 – – –
22 2,945.6 187.7 89.9 56.1 33.8 0.0 – – –
29 2,952.6 187.7 90.1 56.1 34.0 0.0 – – –
May 6 2,991.6 187.7 90.3 56.1 34.2 0.0 – – –
13 2,998.1 187.7 90.3 56.1 34.2 0.0 – – –
20 2,975.2 187.6 90.3 56.1 34.2 0.0 – – –
27 2,992.4 187.6 90.3 56.1 34.3 0.0 – – –
June 3 2,992.8 187.6 90.2 56.1 34.1 0.0 – – –
10 2,975.2 187.6 90.5 56.1 34.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
17 2,999.7 187.6 90.9 56.1 34.8 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
24 2,968.5 187.6 91.1 56.1 35.1 0.0 1.8 1.8 –
July 1 3,013.1 187.6 93.6 57.7 35.9 0.0 1.5 1.5 –
8 2,950.0 187.6 93.4 57.7 35.8 0.0 – – –
15 2,946.9 187.6 93.3 57.7 35.7 0.0 – – –
22 2,941.3 187.6 93.4 57.7 35.7 0.0 – – –
29 2,964.1 187.6 93.1 57.6 35.5 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
Aug. 5 2,998.7 187.6 93.1 57.6 35.5 0.0 – – –
12 3,024.8 187.6 92.9 57.7 35.2 0.0 – – –
19 3,028.6 187.6 93.1 57.7 35.5 0.0 – – –
26 3,060.0 187.6 93.5 57.7 35.9 0.0 – – –
Sep. 2 3,042.0 187.6 93.2 57.9 35.4 0.0 – – –
9 3,020.3 187.6 93.0 57.9 35.2 0.0 – – –
16 3,036.5 187.6 93.7 57.9 35.9 0.0 – – –
23 3,014.7 187.6 94.3 57.9 36.5 0.0 – – –
30 3,064.3 184.0 97.2 59.6 37.6 0.0 – – –
Oct. 7 3,057.7 184.0 97.5 59.6 37.9 0.0 – – –
14 3,060.7 184.0 97.4 59.6 37.8 0.0 – – –
21 3,026.3 184.0 97.3 59.6 37.7 0.0 – – –
28 3,037.7 184.0 97.6 59.7 37.9 0.0 – – –
Nov. 4 3,053.2 184.0 98.1 60.2 37.9 0.0 – – –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
2,199.4 0.5 2,198.9 – – 0.0 – 32.8 5,082.8 4,914.1 168.6 22.1 311.0 2022 Apr. 15
2,199.3 0.5 2,198.8 – – 0.0 – 32.0 5,082.1 4,915.3 166.8 22.1 314.9 22
2,199.6 0.7 2,198.8 – – – – 28.0 5,084.0 4,919.2 164.8 22.1 308.7 29
2,199.4 0.5 2,198.8 – – 0.0 – 30.7 5,092.8 4,927.8 165.0 22.1 309.5 May 6
2,199.3 0.5 2,198.8 – – – – 29.5 5,105.9 4,940.6 165.3 22.1 311.4 13
2,199.2 0.3 2,198.8 – – – – 29.9 5,114.7 4,949.4 165.3 22.1 306.0 20
2,199.5 0.7 2,198.9 – – – – 28.3 5,117.1 4,952.7 164.4 22.1 305.0 27
2,199.3 0.4 2,198.9 – – – – 30.7 5,119.4 4,954.5 165.0 22.1 304.9 June 3
2,199.3 0.4 2,198.8 – – – – 31.9 5,121.4 4,956.1 165.3 22.1 303.0 10
2,199.5 0.7 2,198.8 – – – – 36.4 5,125.1 4,959.2 165.9 22.1 300.5 17
2,199.5 0.7 2,198.8 – – – – 32.2 5,130.7 4,963.7 167.0 22.1 305.9 24
2,126.1 1.5 2,124.6 – – – – 34.5 5,129.1 4,963.5 165.6 21.7 315.4 July 1
2,125.6 1.0 2,124.6 – – 0.0 – 28.4 5,123.0 4,956.9 166.1 21.7 314.6 8
2,125.5 0.9 2,124.6 – – – – 28.8 5,119.3 4,953.9 165.4 21.7 309.4 15
2,125.6 1.0 2,124.6 – – 0.0 – 27.6 5,123.3 4,956.7 166.6 21.7 309.1 22
2,125.8 1.1 2,124.7 – – 0.0 – 30.8 5,125.6 4,958.9 166.8 21.7 299.2 29
2,125.6 0.9 2,124.7 – – – – 15.2 5,117.9 4,952.2 165.7 21.7 304.2 Aug. 5
2,125.6 0.9 2,124.7 – – 0.0 – 15.5 5,119.7 4,953.4 166.4 21.7 303.7 12
2,125.5 0.8 2,124.7 – – – – 13.2 5,123.8 4,956.7 167.2 21.7 304.4 19
2,125.5 0.7 2,124.7 – – 0.0 – 12.9 5,123.1 4,955.5 167.6 21.7 303.8 26
2,129.3 3.9 2,125.4 – – 0.0 – 14.8 5,122.4 4,956.5 165.9 21.7 304.9 Sep. 2
2,129.1 3.7 2,125.4 – – – – 13.7 5,121.5 4,955.3 166.3 21.7 309.0 9
2,129.3 3.9 2,125.4 – – – – 22.4 5,112.4 4,945.7 166.7 21.7 305.5 16
2,129.1 3.7 2,125.4 – – – – 32.0 5,116.9 4,949.9 167.1 21.7 310.9 23
2,120.8 4.5 2,116.0 – – 0.3 – 32.2 5,109.5 4,943.0 166.5 21.7 351.8 30
2,119.7 3.7 2,116.0 – – 0.0 – 19.3 5,109.9 4,943.6 166.2 21.7 326.8 Oct. 7
2,119.7 3.6 2,116.0 – – 0.0 – 17.7 5,120.2 4,953.3 166.9 21.7 323.3 14
2,119.7 3.6 2,116.0 – – – – 13.3 5,118.3 4,951.0 167.3 21.7 324.3 21
2,120.9 4.6 2,116.3 – – – – 16.1 5,111.0 4,946.9 164.2 21.7 321.8 28
2,119.4 3.1 2,116.3 – – – – 19.6 5,104.1 4,942.1 162.1 21.7 316.5 Nov. 4
Deutsche Bundesbank
420.3 0.1 420.2 – – 0.0 – 4.8 1,074.1 1,074.1 – 4.4 1,171.5 2022 Apr. 15
420.3 0.1 420.2 – – 0.0 – 6.1 1,075.6 1,075.6 – 4.4 1,161.6 22
420.4 0.3 420.2 – – 0.0 – 3.8 1,079.5 1,079.5 – 4.4 1,166.6 29
420.2 0.0 420.2 – – 0.0 – 4.3 1,084.4 1,084.4 – 4.4 1,200.2 May 6
420.2 0.0 420.2 – – 0.0 – 3.9 1,089.0 1,089.0 – 4.4 1,202.4 13
420.2 0.1 420.2 – – 0.0 – 4.0 1,088.4 1,088.4 – 4.4 1,180.2 20
420.5 0.3 420.2 – – 0.0 – 4.3 1,093.3 1,093.3 – 4.4 1,191.9 27
420.2 0.0 420.2 – – 0.0 – 5.9 1,095.3 1,095.3 – 4.4 1,189.1 June 3
420.2 0.1 420.2 – – 0.0 – 5.4 1,091.2 1,091.2 – 4.4 1,175.5 10
420.2 0.1 420.2 – – 0.0 – 6.3 1,093.9 1,093.9 – 4.4 1,195.4 17
420.3 0.1 420.2 – – 0.0 – 5.3 1,091.2 1,091.2 – 4.4 1,166.7 24
404.2 0.7 403.6 – – 0.0 – 4.2 1,091.1 1,091.1 – 4.4 1,226.4 July 1
403.8 0.3 403.6 – – 0.0 – 4.2 1,078.6 1,078.6 – 4.4 1,178.0 8
403.8 0.3 403.6 – – 0.0 – 5.6 1,079.4 1,079.4 – 4.4 1,172.7 15
403.9 0.4 403.6 – – 0.0 – 5.2 1,075.7 1,075.7 – 4.4 1,171.1 22
404.0 0.4 403.6 – – 0.0 – 0.6 1,077.2 1,077.2 – 4.4 1,197.1 29
403.7 0.1 403.6 – – 0.0 – 0.3 1,077.7 1,077.7 – 4.4 1,231.8 Aug. 5
403.8 0.2 403.6 – – 0.0 – 0.2 1,078.5 1,078.5 – 4.4 1,257.4 12
403.8 0.2 403.6 – – 0.0 – 0.1 1,079.1 1,079.1 – 4.4 1,260.5 19
403.7 0.1 403.6 – – 0.0 – 0.1 1,076.1 1,076.1 – 4.4 1,294.4 26
404.5 0.8 403.7 – – 0.0 – 0.3 1,078.5 1,078.5 – 4.4 1,273.4 Sep. 2
403.9 0.3 403.7 – – 0.0 – 0.0 1,073.5 1,073.5 – 4.4 1,257.7 9
404.1 0.5 403.7 – – 0.0 – 2.5 1,069.5 1,069.5 – 4.4 1,274.6 16
404.2 0.5 403.7 – – 0.0 – 3.2 1,069.8 1,069.8 – 4.4 1,251.1 23
400.7 1.4 399.3 – – 0.0 – 3.5 1,072.2 1,072.2 – 4.4 1,302.1 30
399.8 0.5 399.3 – – 0.0 – 3.0 1,067.0 1,067.0 – 4.4 1,302.0 Oct. 7
399.9 0.6 399.3 – – 0.0 – 2.5 1,070.4 1,070.4 – 4.4 1,302.0 14
399.9 0.7 399.3 – – 0.0 – 2.5 1,071.9 1,071.9 – 4.4 1,266.2 21
401.0 1.7 399.3 – – 0.0 – 2.9 1,075.2 1,075.2 – 4.4 1,272.7 28
399.7 0.5 399.3 – – 0.0 – 2.3 1,077.9 1,077.9 – 4.4 1,286.7 Nov. 4

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2022 Apr. 15 8,787.9 1,586.5 4,690.0 3,967.1 720.4 – – 2.5 48.7 – 835.7 677.7 158.0
22 8,790.9 1,585.6 4,720.4 4,155.8 562.0 – – 2.6 43.8 – 811.0 656.0 155.1
29 8,783.6 1,587.5 4,701.7 4,022.6 676.4 – – 2.7 42.0 – 810.1 646.0 164.2
May 6 8,796.1 1,589.2 4,729.1 4,012.8 713.7 – – 2.7 48.7 – 747.1 589.6 157.4
13 8,810.3 1,590.5 4,729.8 4,079.6 647.8 – – 2.4 46.6 – 782.1 620.7 161.4
20 8,814.0 1,590.9 4,679.3 3,997.8 678.9 – – 2.6 47.8 – 825.6 660.1 165.5
27 8,813.8 1,594.0 4,692.9 3,987.3 703.2 – – 2.5 42.6 – 825.8 662.5 163.2
June 3 8,817.9 1,597.5 4,768.8 4,060.2 706.3 – – 2.3 52.1 – 758.2 593.9 164.3
10 8,820.9 1,598.7 4,781.3 4,026.7 752.3 – – 2.3 49.9 – 756.4 598.7 157.6
17 8,827.9 1,599.6 4,675.5 4,139.0 534.3 – – 2.3 49.0 – 847.3 686.2 161.1
24 8,836.0 1,600.2 4,642.9 3,986.7 654.2 – – 2.0 51.0 – 895.7 715.0 180.7
July 1 8,788.8 1,603.6 4,591.8 3,853.3 736.3 – – 2.1 71.0 – 835.0 647.3 187.7
8 8,774.4 1,606.4 4,642.8 3,914.7 726.0 – – 2.1 55.9 – 819.9 627.7 192.2
15 8,765.7 1,608.7 4,622.9 3,910.3 710.3 – – 2.3 49.8 – 835.3 646.0 189.3
22 8,768.3 1,606.8 4,605.1 3,904.4 698.5 – – 2.2 50.9 – 843.5 656.8 186.7
29 8,764.5 1,600.9 4,568.6 3,855.5 711.1 – – 2.1 60.5 – 844.2 641.9 202.2
Aug. 5 8,746.0 1,595.8 4,625.6 3,959.7 664.1 – – 1.8 53.0 – 744.3 546.8 197.5
12 8,747.8 1,591.9 4,642.2 3,975.0 665.5 – – 1.7 52.9 – 738.6 543.6 194.9
19 8,750.7 1,584.0 4,598.5 3,941.0 655.6 – – 1.8 49.4 – 784.5 583.8 200.7
26 8,750.0 1,578.0 4,572.8 3,922.3 648.6 – – 1.8 47.9 – 813.3 595.6 217.7
Sep. 2 8,756.8 1,575.5 4,707.9 4,035.2 670.7 – – 2.0 51.5 – 692.8 504.8 187.9
9 8,759.1 1,573.6 4,803.0 3,806.8 994.3 – – 1.8 55.9 – 626.9 472.8 154.1
16 8,756.9 1,569.3 4,816.5 548.1 4,266.6 – – 1.8 72.2 – 655.8 518.1 137.7
23 8,777.4 1,564.9 4,810.4 403.4 4,405.2 – – 1.8 63.4 – 678.5 543.1 135.4
30 8,810.1 1,566.0 4,698.7 318.3 4,378.2 – – 2.3 76.4 – 768.0 557.2 210.7
Oct. 7 8,772.0 1,562.4 4,880.3 251.4 4,626.7 – – 2.1 62.3 – 618.0 483.8 134.2
14 8,778.1 1,561.9 4,854.2 232.2 4,619.7 – – 2.3 54.1 – 668.3 541.1 127.2
21 8,774.8 1,559.8 4,841.5 215.6 4,623.0 – – 2.9 59.7 – 676.4 551.0 125.4
28 8,770.7 1,562.9 4,801.3 231.0 4,567.5 – – 2.8 53.7 – 706.8 578.0 128.8
Nov. 4 8,761.7 1,562.5 4,859.1 240.2 4,616.1 – – 2.8 49.0 – 626.1 499.6 126.5
Deutsche Bundesbank
2022 Apr. 15 2,952.6 387.4 1,324.3 1,116.8 205.3 – – 2.1 15.3 – 248.5 201.7 46.7
22 2,945.6 387.0 1,338.7 1,215.0 121.4 – – 2.2 14.6 – 229.7 184.6 45.0
29 2,952.6 385.0 1,335.7 1,198.1 135.5 – – 2.2 14.0 – 223.4 178.8 44.6
May 6 2,991.6 386.7 1,350.6 1,133.7 214.6 – – 2.3 17.1 – 216.3 169.5 46.8
13 2,998.1 388.3 1,339.4 1,136.1 201.0 – – 2.4 17.6 – 251.7 206.1 45.7
20 2,975.2 388.6 1,323.6 1,122.3 198.9 – – 2.4 15.9 – 240.6 197.7 42.9
27 2,992.4 390.0 1,320.3 1,116.7 201.2 – – 2.4 16.0 – 269.1 227.3 41.8
June 3 2,992.8 388.7 1,346.6 1,132.9 211.5 – – 2.2 18.7 – 248.9 205.6 43.4
10 2,975.2 389.7 1,329.9 1,116.1 211.5 – – 2.3 18.1 – 252.0 209.8 42.3
17 2,999.7 390.9 1,297.9 1,181.7 114.0 – – 2.2 17.6 – 297.8 250.7 47.1
24 2,968.5 390.9 1,295.7 1,154.4 139.3 – – 2.0 15.5 – 284.3 231.7 52.5
July 1 3,013.1 389.1 1,322.5 1,106.4 214.0 – – 2.1 24.8 – 277.5 218.1 59.5
8 2,950.0 390.6 1,303.6 1,087.8 213.8 – – 2.0 21.9 – 255.1 186.8 68.3
15 2,946.9 391.6 1,280.1 1,077.7 200.3 – – 2.1 19.1 – 275.6 212.4 63.2
22 2,941.3 389.4 1,295.5 1,080.1 213.4 – – 2.0 21.0 – 253.9 195.1 58.8
29 2,964.1 388.3 1,285.6 1,076.5 207.1 – – 2.0 22.2 – 245.3 175.5 69.8
Aug. 5 2,998.7 383.3 1,317.4 1,091.8 223.7 – – 1.8 20.4 – 231.9 164.9 67.0
12 3,024.8 379.7 1,340.9 1,116.0 223.2 – – 1.7 23.0 – 232.2 161.9 70.2
19 3,028.6 373.2 1,317.7 1,101.0 214.9 – – 1.7 19.8 – 262.1 183.1 79.0
26 3,060.0 370.7 1,348.4 1,133.9 212.7 – – 1.8 22.3 – 253.3 153.5 99.8
Sep. 2 3,042.0 382.4 1,381.1 1,148.7 230.5 – – 1.8 22.8 – 218.4 140.3 78.2
9 3,020.3 382.1 1,392.6 1,101.0 289.9 – – 1.8 29.1 – 191.7 121.5 70.2
16 3,036.5 381.5 1,406.2 254.0 1,150.5 – – 1.8 30.5 – 212.1 140.1 72.0
23 3,014.7 380.6 1,402.6 174.9 1,225.9 – – 1.8 23.3 – 181.8 116.0 65.8
30 3,064.3 379.8 1,424.3 107.7 1,314.7 – – 1.9 21.8 – 196.3 129.9 66.4
Oct. 7 3,057.7 377.2 1,473.7 79.0 1,392.9 – – 1.8 23.7 – 161.1 101.0 60.0
14 3,060.7 377.6 1,450.5 67.8 1,380.8 – – 2.0 17.1 – 192.6 138.0 54.6
21 3,026.3 377.4 1,437.9 55.4 1,379.7 – – 2.8 18.9 – 176.1 124.7 51.4
28 3,037.7 379.1 1,432.3 59.4 1,370.1 – – 2.8 19.7 – 190.7 139.7 51.0
Nov. 4 3,053.2 378.9 1,436.8 74.0 1,360.0 – – 2.8 13.7 – 182.4 132.3 50.1
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
398.7 12.1 5.0 5.0 – 180.2 316.0 – 598.9 115.9 2022 Apr. 15
395.8 11.7 5.4 5.4 – 180.2 322.1 – 598.9 115.9 22
411.9 11.5 5.6 5.6 – 180.2 318.3 – 598.9 115.9 29
446.1 11.6 5.7 5.7 – 180.2 323.6 – 598.9 116.0 May 6
425.3 11.7 5.7 5.7 – 180.2 323.4 – 598.9 116.0 13
437.2 11.3 5.6 5.6 – 180.2 321.3 – 598.9 116.0 20
426.4 11.1 5.6 5.6 – 180.2 320.5 – 598.9 116.0 27
409.9 11.4 5.5 5.5 – 180.2 320.6 – 598.9 114.9 June 3
403.3 11.7 5.6 5.6 – 180.2 320.1 – 598.9 114.9 10
422.3 11.1 6.2 6.2 – 180.2 322.9 – 598.9 114.9 17
410.6 10.9 6.9 6.9 – 180.2 323.7 – 598.9 114.9 24
434.0 11.5 6.2 6.2 – 184.9 327.5 – 608.5 114.8 July 1
396.5 11.4 6.1 6.1 – 184.9 327.0 – 608.5 114.8 8
397.2 11.5 5.9 5.9 – 184.9 326.2 – 608.5 114.8 15
412.1 11.3 6.0 6.0 – 184.9 324.3 – 608.5 114.8 22
442.2 11.5 5.7 5.7 – 184.9 322.7 – 608.5 114.8 29
476.1 11.3 5.9 5.9 – 184.9 325.6 – 608.5 114.8 Aug. 5
473.7 11.1 5.8 5.8 – 184.9 323.3 – 608.5 114.8 12
484.8 11.4 6.2 6.2 – 184.9 323.7 – 608.5 114.8 19
489.8 11.4 6.7 6.7 – 184.9 321.8 – 608.5 114.8 26
478.6 11.3 6.4 6.4 – 184.9 324.7 – 608.5 114.8 Sep. 2
447.8 11.7 5.9 5.9 – 184.9 326.1 – 608.5 114.7 9
391.9 11.1 6.5 6.5 – 184.9 325.3 – 608.5 114.7 16
407.5 11.0 7.0 7.0 – 184.9 326.5 – 608.5 114.7 23
440.3 11.6 6.8 6.8 – 189.9 326.1 – 611.7 114.7 30
392.3 11.5 6.9 6.9 – 189.9 321.9 – 611.7 114.7 Oct. 7
385.1 11.5 6.9 6.9 – 189.9 319.7 – 611.7 114.7 14
384.8 11.9 6.1 6.1 – 189.9 318.3 – 611.7 114.7 21
391.0 12.2 6.1 6.1 – 189.9 320.3 – 611.7 114.7 28
410.8 12.5 5.8 5.8 – 189.9 319.6 – 611.7 114.7 Nov. 4
Deutsche Bundesbank
181.2 0.7 0.2 0.2 – 46.8 37.7 520.0 185.0 5.7 2022 Apr. 15
179.2 0.7 0.2 0.2 – 46.8 38.2 520.0 185.0 5.7 22
194.5 0.7 0.2 0.2 – 46.8 38.4 523.3 185.0 5.7 29
220.6 0.7 0.2 0.2 – 46.8 38.6 523.3 185.0 5.7 May 6
200.8 0.5 0.2 0.2 – 46.8 38.8 523.3 185.0 5.7 13
206.0 0.5 0.1 0.1 – 46.8 39.0 523.3 185.0 5.7 20
196.4 0.5 0.1 0.1 – 46.8 39.2 523.3 185.0 5.7 27
185.8 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 46.8 39.3 526.8 185.0 5.7 June 3
180.9 0.5 0.3 0.3 – 46.8 39.5 526.8 185.0 5.7 10
189.8 0.5 0.7 0.7 – 46.8 40.3 526.8 185.0 5.7 17
175.9 0.5 0.9 0.9 – 46.8 40.5 526.8 185.0 5.7 24
187.7 0.6 0.1 0.1 – 48.0 39.6 530.5 187.1 5.7 July 1
166.1 0.6 0.1 0.1 – 48.0 41.0 530.5 187.1 5.7 8
167.6 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 48.0 40.9 530.5 187.1 5.7 15
168.5 0.4 0.2 0.2 – 48.0 41.2 530.5 187.1 5.7 22
214.6 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 48.0 41.7 525.2 187.1 5.7 29
237.4 0.4 0.1 0.1 – 48.0 41.8 525.2 187.1 5.7 Aug. 5
240.8 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 48.0 41.8 525.2 187.1 5.7 12
247.3 0.4 0.3 0.3 – 48.0 41.9 525.2 187.1 5.7 19
256.2 0.4 0.8 0.8 – 48.0 41.9 525.2 187.1 5.7 26
240.0 0.4 0.2 0.2 – 48.0 42.4 513.5 187.1 5.7 Sep. 2
226.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 – 48.0 43.2 513.5 187.1 5.7 9
207.6 0.4 0.6 0.6 – 48.0 43.3 513.5 187.1 5.7 16
227.2 0.4 1.1 1.1 – 48.0 43.3 513.5 187.1 5.7 23
241.7 0.6 0.6 0.6 – 49.3 41.8 516.8 185.6 5.7 30
221.4 0.6 0.7 0.7 – 49.3 42.0 516.8 185.6 5.7 Oct. 7
222.7 0.6 0.5 0.5 – 49.3 41.8 516.8 185.6 5.7 14
216.3 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 41.7 516.8 185.6 5.7 21
216.3 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 41.6 516.8 185.6 5.7 28
241.0 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 42.5 516.8 185.6 5.7 Nov. 4
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2020 Dec. 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 Jan. 9,150.4 44.9 2,793.5 2,309.4 2,042.2 267.2 484.1 348.8 135.3 4,195.0 3,716.6 3,302.6 2,997.8
Feb. 9,148.1 45.5 2,824.0 2,328.8 2,060.6 268.2 495.2 361.1 134.1 4,210.4 3,731.9 3,318.5 3,011.4
Mar. 9,261.9 45.7 2,904.5 2,419.8 2,145.0 274.8 484.8 351.2 133.6 4,245.8 3,762.0 3,347.6 3,038.5
Apr. 9,269.2 44.9 2,935.1 2,441.4 2,168.7 272.8 493.7 360.0 133.7 4,236.4 3,756.9 3,347.0 3,036.8
May 9,277.1 45.7 2,974.7 2,485.3 2,212.9 272.4 489.4 355.6 133.9 4,246.1 3,772.8 3,363.3 3,049.8
June 9,293.7 46.5 2,959.9 2,469.9 2,197.4 272.5 490.0 356.7 133.3 4,253.7 3,772.0 3,370.7 3,056.9
July 9,321.9 46.8 2,943.6 2,448.2 2,178.3 269.9 495.3 361.1 134.2 4,270.2 3,788.1 3,386.0 3,071.8
Aug. 9,319.3 46.9 2,950.1 2,457.4 2,188.5 268.8 492.8 359.5 133.3 4,283.3 3,799.4 3,400.4 3,085.0
Sep. 9,325.3 47.4 2,952.3 2,472.9 2,203.6 269.3 479.4 344.9 134.5 4,303.0 3,812.2 3,409.8 3,093.8
Oct. 9,395.0 47.8 2,979.8 2,490.1 2,221.1 269.0 489.7 356.2 133.5 4,322.0 3,832.5 3,437.3 3,117.5
Nov. 9,495.5 48.1 3,008.0 2,519.5 2,253.4 266.1 488.5 355.4 133.1 4,352.1 3,856.4 3,459.8 3,138.9
Dec. 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 Jan. 9,717.0 47.7 3,029.2 2,522.4 2,258.2 264.2 506.8 375.0 131.8 4,378.1 3,875.3 3,484.8 3,162.4
Feb. 9,842.7 47.7 3,082.6 2,564.8 2,299.1 265.8 517.8 383.9 133.9 4,396.3 3,889.1 3,504.4 3,181.6
Mar. 9,962.9 50.0 3,066.9 2,546.2 2,281.9 264.3 520.7 387.1 133.7 4,426.8 3,916.4 3,526.5 3,204.1
Apr. 10,268.8 51.0 3,112.2 2,578.0 2,313.7 264.2 534.2 400.5 133.8 4,434.6 3,929.2 3,546.3 3,223.8
May 10,258.0 50.0 3,122.7 2,592.6 2,326.2 266.4 530.1 397.8 132.3 4,460.3 3,949.5 3,567.4 3,244.7
June 10,428.9 51.8 3,096.5 2,570.9 2,306.2 264.7 525.6 394.1 131.5 4,494.4 3,969.5 3,589.6 3,268.8
July 10,267.9 42.3 3,086.0 2,557.4 2,291.5 266.0 528.6 396.8 131.8 4,528.3 4,008.2 3,627.9 3,293.6
Aug. 10,627.2 23.6 3,166.4 2,625.3 2,359.2 266.1 541.1 409.1 132.0 4,555.4 4,039.2 3,664.4 3,331.1
Sep. 11,057.5 20.7 3,262.6 2,709.4 2,437.3 272.0 553.3 419.2 134.1 4,579.6 4,057.3 3,685.2 3,351.3
Changes 3
2013 –703.6 – 0.5 –257.1 –249.2 –216.5 –32.7 – 7.9 1.6 – 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 –126.2 –128.6 –95.3 –33.4 2.4 7.2 – 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2021 207.2 2.2 161.3 155.6 156.4 – 0.8 5.7 11.7 – 5.9 175.7 154.6 173.7 155.9
2021 Jan. 207.1 – 2.6 170.2 131.4 128.6 2.9 38.8 41.1 – 2.2 17.4 7.9 6.8 5.3
Feb. – 2.3 0.7 30.3 19.2 18.2 1.1 11.0 12.2 – 1.2 15.9 15.5 15.7 13.4
Mar. 100.0 0.2 78.0 90.0 83.7 6.3 –12.0 – 11.5 – 0.5 34.3 29.7 28.8 27.0
Apr. 21.2 – 0.8 33.6 23.0 24.6 – 1.6 10.6 10.5 0.2 – 8.8 – 5.2 – 0.1 – 1.1
May 10.7 0.8 38.9 44.1 44.4 – 0.3 – 5.2 – 5.5 0.3 10.4 16.0 15.7 13.0
June 5.3 0.9 –17.1 –16.3 –15.8 – 0.5 – 0.8 – 0.2 – 0.6 7.3 – 0.5 7.6 6.7
July 26.3 0.2 –15.0 –19.5 –17.5 – 2.0 4.5 4.4 0.1 17.3 16.4 15.6 15.3
Aug. – 3.9 0.2 6.7 9.3 10.3 – 1.0 – 2.6 – 1.7 – 0.9 13.2 11.2 14.7 13.4
Sep. 3.0 0.4 0.1 14.4 13.9 0.5 –14.4 – 15.6 1.3 19.8 13.0 9.4 8.8
Oct. 70.4 0.5 27.7 17.3 17.6 – 0.3 10.5 11.4 – 1.0 19.2 20.6 28.0 24.1
Nov. 95.5 0.3 26.6 29.2 32.2 – 3.0 – 2.5 – 2.1 – 0.5 30.6 25.2 22.1 21.0
Dec. –326.2 1.6 –218.7 –186.4 –183.6 – 2.8 –32.2 – 31.2 – 1.0 – 0.9 4.7 9.4 9.1
2022 Jan. 340.3 – 1.9 238.6 189.0 186.9 2.1 49.6 49.7 – 0.1 28.1 15.4 16.2 14.9
Feb. 128.5 – 0.0 52.7 41.4 39.7 1.7 11.3 9.1 2.2 20.4 15.8 21.3 20.9
Mar. 119.7 2.2 –15.5 –18.4 –17.2 – 1.2 2.9 3.0 – 0.1 31.4 27.6 22.2 22.6
Apr. 283.1 1.0 41.6 30.8 30.8 0.0 10.8 10.6 0.2 7.5 12.8 19.7 19.4
May 1.1 – 1.0 12.4 15.3 12.8 2.5 – 2.9 – 1.5 – 1.3 27.4 21.2 21.6 21.3
June 178.6 1.7 –28.2 –22.2 –20.6 – 1.6 – 6.0 – 5.3 – 0.6 32.9 19.9 22.0 23.7
July –177.9 – 9.5 –12.8 –14.2 –15.0 0.8 1.4 1.4 0.0 29.7 36.0 36.0 22.6
Aug. 359.0 –18.7 83.5 71.7 70.7 1.0 11.8 11.3 0.4 28.1 31.4 36.5 37.5
Sep. 434.8 – 2.9 96.5 84.4 78.1 6.2 12.1 9.7 2.4 27.8 18.1 20.5 19.6
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 2021
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020 Dec.
304.9 414.0 253.3 160.7 478.4 330.8 224.5 147.6 28.7 118.9 1,087.5 834.6 1,029.5 2021 Jan.
307.1 413.4 250.6 162.9 478.5 334.5 227.0 144.0 28.8 115.2 1,093.8 843.9 974.4 Feb.
309.1 414.4 249.3 165.1 483.8 339.4 232.3 144.4 28.9 115.5 1,105.7 855.5 960.1 Mar.
310.2 409.9 251.0 158.9 479.5 339.8 232.3 139.7 30.3 109.4 1,122.5 876.2 930.3 Apr.
313.5 409.5 250.6 158.9 473.2 339.1 231.9 134.1 28.4 105.7 1,108.3 862.4 902.3 May
313.8 401.4 249.1 152.3 481.7 339.4 231.8 142.3 28.8 113.5 1,111.0 864.8 922.5 June
314.2 402.2 251.3 150.8 482.0 344.2 236.6 137.8 28.6 109.2 1,097.1 849.1 964.3 July
315.4 398.9 248.0 150.9 484.0 346.1 238.8 137.9 28.3 109.6 1,084.8 839.7 954.2 Aug.
316.0 402.4 248.3 154.1 490.7 352.5 241.7 138.2 27.9 110.3 1,087.9 840.8 934.8 Sep.
319.9 395.1 249.7 145.4 489.5 356.0 244.3 133.4 30.3 103.2 1,134.6 889.6 910.9 Oct.
320.9 396.5 247.8 148.8 495.7 361.6 249.6 134.1 28.5 105.6 1,137.3 892.4 950.0 Nov.
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 Dec.
322.4 390.6 246.9 143.6 502.7 377.7 260.4 125.0 28.5 96.5 1,171.3 925.2 1,090.8 2022 Jan.
322.8 384.8 244.7 140.0 507.2 381.4 262.7 125.8 28.6 97.2 1,190.1 939.6 1,125.9 Feb.
322.3 390.0 245.2 144.8 510.4 379.5 259.4 130.9 29.0 101.9 1,169.2 921.9 1,249.9 Mar.
322.5 382.9 246.5 136.4 505.4 378.8 257.8 126.7 32.2 94.4 1,174.5 926.0 1,496.5 Apr.
322.7 382.1 244.5 137.7 510.9 383.7 260.7 127.1 31.4 95.7 1,166.1 917.3 1,458.8 May
320.9 379.9 244.9 135.0 524.9 388.1 268.4 136.8 33.2 103.6 1,182.4 925.1 1,603.8 June
334.3 380.3 245.8 134.5 520.2 383.8 266.0 136.4 33.4 103.0 1,199.9 941.5 1,411.5 July
333.3 374.8 243.4 131.4 516.2 387.1 268.6 129.1 33.7 95.4 1,211.7 952.6 1,670.0 Aug.
333.9 372.2 244.5 127.7 522.3 390.4 273.0 132.0 35.4 96.6 1,218.9 959.0 1,975.5 Sep.
Changes 3
2.0 – 7.0 –10.9 3.9 – 3.0 – 3.4 – 9.3 0.5 – 2.6 3.1 –38.8 –47.2 –420.8 2013
15.5 –12.3 –15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 – 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
17.8 –19.1 – 6.1 –13.1 21.1 35.5 22.6 –14.3 – 1.1 –13.2 71.7 84.9 –203.7 2021
1.5 1.1 0.9 0.2 9.5 4.1 3.2 5.3 – 0.9 6.3 84.4 83.6 –62.3 2021 Jan.
2.3 – 0.2 – 2.4 2.3 0.3 3.7 2.4 – 3.4 0.1 – 3.4 6.3 8.9 –55.4 Feb.
1.9 0.9 – 1.3 2.2 4.6 4.2 4.9 0.4 0.1 0.3 2.8 3.3 –15.3 Mar.
1.0 – 5.0 1.7 – 6.7 – 3.6 0.9 0.7 – 4.5 1.5 – 6.0 26.0 29.0 –28.8 Apr.
2.7 0.4 – 0.3 0.7 – 5.6 – 0.1 0.3 – 5.5 – 1.9 – 3.6 –11.4 –11.4 –28.0 May
0.8 – 8.1 – 1.4 – 6.7 7.8 – 0.4 – 0.6 8.2 0.4 7.7 – 5.7 – 5.3 19.9 June
0.4 0.7 2.3 – 1.5 1.0 5.6 4.8 – 4.7 – 0.2 – 4.5 –15.0 –16.5 38.7 July
1.2 – 3.4 – 3.5 0.1 1.9 1.8 2.2 0.1 – 0.3 0.4 –13.1 –10.0 –10.8 Aug.
0.6 3.6 0.3 3.2 6.8 6.3 2.9 0.5 – 0.4 0.9 0.1 – 1.5 –17.4 Sep.
3.9 – 7.4 1.2 – 8.7 – 1.4 3.5 2.6 – 4.8 2.3 – 7.2 47.6 49.5 –24.6 Oct.
1.1 3.0 – 0.9 4.0 5.5 4.8 4.4 0.6 – 1.6 2.2 – 4.5 – 3.6 42.4 Nov.
0.3 – 4.7 – 2.6 – 2.2 – 5.6 0.9 – 5.3 – 6.5 – 0.1 – 6.3 –45.9 –41.0 –62.3 Dec.
1.3 – 0.8 1.8 – 2.6 12.7 14.8 16.0 – 2.1 0.2 – 2.2 72.3 66.7 3.3 2022 Jan.
0.5 – 5.5 – 2.1 – 3.4 4.6 3.7 2.5 0.9 0.1 0.8 20.6 15.8 34.9 Feb.
– 0.4 5.5 0.5 5.0 3.8 – 1.7 – 3.3 5.5 0.4 5.1 –22.2 –19.2 123.7 Mar.
0.2 – 6.8 1.4 – 8.2 – 5.3 – 1.6 – 2.7 – 3.7 3.2 – 6.9 –13.8 –14.2 246.6 Apr.
0.3 – 0.4 – 2.0 1.6 6.2 5.4 3.3 0.8 – 0.8 1.7 – 1.0 – 2.0 –36.6 May
– 1.7 – 2.1 0.4 – 2.5 13.0 3.0 6.1 10.0 1.9 8.1 –10.0 –18.2 182.3 June
13.4 0.0 0.9 – 0.8 – 6.3 – 5.2 – 2.9 – 1.1 0.1 – 1.3 7.8 8.0 –193.2 July
– 1.0 – 5.1 – 2.3 – 2.8 – 3.3 3.4 2.5 – 6.7 0.4 – 7.0 7.2 6.5 258.9 Aug.
0.8 – 2.4 1.1 – 3.5 9.7 3.1 3.8 6.6 1.7 4.9 7.9 6.5 305.5 Sep.
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2020 Dec. 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 Jan. 9,150.4 1,560.0 1,262.3 297.7 4,044.0 3,855.8 2,536.8 757.4 219.4 561.6 534.8 138.4 65.8
Feb. 9,148.1 1,584.4 1,261.7 322.7 4,053.2 3,865.2 2,552.4 750.1 214.1 562.6 536.1 137.7 68.2
Mar. 9,261.9 1,634.1 1,336.6 297.6 4,068.3 3,876.2 2,569.2 744.7 212.3 562.3 536.2 142.2 71.0
Apr. 9,269.2 1,659.9 1,344.1 315.8 4,079.3 3,886.3 2,588.3 735.3 205.8 562.7 536.9 143.0 70.2
May 9,277.1 1,661.1 1,353.0 308.1 4,103.8 3,909.2 2,614.0 732.0 205.0 563.2 537.5 146.4 70.4
June 9,293.7 1,670.8 1,357.4 313.4 4,088.4 3,890.3 2,605.4 722.3 198.1 562.6 537.1 151.3 76.7
July 9,321.9 1,682.5 1,362.0 320.4 4,110.8 3,918.9 2,638.6 718.3 196.7 562.0 536.8 146.4 74.0
Aug. 9,319.3 1,686.5 1,365.8 320.7 4,119.2 3,925.6 2,648.6 715.5 194.1 561.5 536.6 147.8 74.7
Sep. 9,325.3 1,667.9 1,354.2 313.6 4,108.9 3,913.6 2,640.2 712.7 194.3 560.7 535.9 148.8 77.1
Oct. 9,395.0 1,690.9 1,364.7 326.2 4,140.0 3,942.6 2,657.0 725.5 206.4 560.1 535.6 151.4 78.1
Nov. 9,495.5 1,718.6 1,374.9 343.8 4,154.1 3,956.1 2,678.9 717.4 200.2 559.8 535.5 151.4 82.5
Dec. 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 Jan. 9,717.0 1,725.2 1,363.7 361.5 4,195.2 3,979.5 2,686.4 732.3 215.9 560.7 537.4 166.7 86.2
Feb. 9,842.7 1,743.7 1,369.7 374.0 4,209.7 3,993.9 2,699.7 733.4 217.5 560.8 537.7 169.3 90.1
Mar. 9,962.9 1,737.5 1,367.8 369.8 4,212.3 3,990.1 2,690.3 740.9 226.7 559.0 536.1 177.7 99.4
Apr. 10,268.8 1,766.8 1,384.4 382.3 4,223.7 4,003.6 2,700.1 745.6 234.6 557.9 535.2 175.5 93.4
May 10,258.0 1,765.9 1,393.7 372.2 4,236.1 4,013.3 2,718.3 738.4 229.4 556.5 534.0 176.2 97.1
June 10,428.9 1,744.4 1,384.7 359.7 4,235.0 4,008.2 2,708.8 744.7 238.3 554.7 532.4 180.5 102.7
July 10,267.9 1,772.1 1,383.3 388.9 4,267.6 4,041.3 2,722.8 765.6 259.2 552.9 530.7 179.5 99.0
Aug. 10,627.2 1,785.7 1,403.5 382.2 4,322.0 4,089.0 2,760.7 777.8 272.2 550.5 528.3 185.0 103.0
Sep. 11,057.5 1,815.1 1,417.1 398.0 4,342.9 4,106.0 2,748.5 812.4 307.0 545.2 523.1 191.0 101.7
Changes 4
2013 –703.6 –106.2 –73.9 –32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 –56.3 –26.6 – 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 –28.4 –32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 –32.1 3.1 – 2.4 – 2.4 – 2.5 – 0.0
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2021 207.2 133.4 103.4 30.0 107.3 96.2 141.4 –45.8 –23.3 0.6 3.9 16.6 13.6
2021 Jan. 207.1 66.0 25.3 40.8 21.6 19.0 28.4 –10.5 – 7.8 1.1 1.6 2.7 9.7
Feb. – 2.3 24.4 – 0.7 25.1 9.0 9.2 15.5 – 7.3 – 5.3 1.0 1.3 – 0.7 2.4
Mar. 100.0 47.8 73.8 –26.0 13.6 9.9 15.8 – 5.6 – 1.9 – 0.3 0.1 4.0 2.5
Apr. 21.2 27.6 8.3 19.3 12.5 11.2 20.1 – 9.4 – 6.5 0.4 0.7 1.2 – 0.6
May 10.7 0.6 9.1 – 8.5 24.9 23.2 26.0 – 3.2 – 0.7 0.5 0.6 3.5 0.3
June 5.3 8.2 3.7 4.4 –16.6 –19.8 – 9.4 – 9.8 – 7.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 4.5 6.1
July 26.3 14.4 7.4 7.0 22.3 28.6 33.2 – 4.1 – 1.4 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 4.9 – 3.1
Aug. – 3.9 3.9 3.7 0.2 7.8 6.5 9.9 – 2.8 – 2.6 – 0.5 – 0.3 0.9 0.2
Sep. 3.0 –19.5 –11.7 – 7.8 – 7.3 – 8.9 – 6.5 – 1.6 0.4 – 0.8 – 0.6 0.7 2.7
Oct. 70.4 24.1 11.2 12.9 31.1 29.1 16.8 12.9 12.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 2.5 1.1
Nov. 95.5 26.4 9.6 16.7 12.9 12.5 21.1 – 8.4 – 6.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.3 4.2
Dec. –326.2 –90.4 –36.3 –54.1 –24.3 –24.3 –29.6 3.9 3.7 1.4 1.6 2.4 –11.9
2022 Jan. 340.3 93.8 23.2 70.6 64.3 47.0 36.5 10.9 11.9 – 0.4 0.3 12.6 15.3
Feb. 128.5 19.3 6.1 13.2 14.2 14.6 13.4 1.1 1.6 0.1 0.3 2.2 3.5
Mar. 119.7 – 6.6 – 2.1 – 4.5 2.2 – 4.2 – 9.7 7.3 9.2 – 1.8 – 1.6 8.3 9.3
Apr. 283.1 25.1 15.6 9.5 8.0 11.0 7.5 4.1 7.2 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 3.1 – 6.6
May 1.1 0.7 9.8 – 9.1 13.6 10.6 18.9 – 6.9 – 5.0 – 1.3 – 1.2 1.0 3.9
June 178.6 –24.2 – 9.7 –14.5 – 2.8 – 6.6 –10.7 5.9 8.5 – 1.8 – 1.6 4.1 5.6
July –177.9 24.6 – 1.6 26.2 29.3 30.8 13.0 19.6 19.9 – 1.8 – 1.7 – 2.0 – 3.9
Aug. 359.0 15.5 23.0 – 7.5 53.6 47.1 37.2 12.4 12.9 – 2.4 – 2.4 5.3 3.8
Sep. 434.8 27.8 13.5 14.3 20.6 16.7 –12.2 34.2 34.4 – 5.3 – 5.3 5.9 – 1.3
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 2012
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 2021
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020 Dec.
70.0 23.7 2.6 2.3 49.7 48.3 6.3 2.5 1,058.8 19.7 790.8 708.3 979.7 2021 Jan.
67.0 20.5 2.5 2.3 50.3 48.2 4.5 2.5 1,068.3 19.6 803.5 702.4 929.4 Feb.
68.7 22.0 2.5 2.3 49.9 48.9 6.7 2.9 1,090.4 21.5 833.7 712.0 913.8 Mar.
70.3 23.2 2.5 2.3 50.0 48.6 5.1 2.9 1,091.8 21.0 839.1 705.9 885.3 Apr.
73.5 26.7 2.5 2.3 48.2 46.6 6.0 2.3 1,087.7 23.5 854.7 702.7 858.8 May
72.0 25.9 2.5 2.3 46.9 45.6 4.5 2.3 1,084.6 23.8 836.9 725.4 880.7 June
69.9 22.9 2.5 2.3 45.5 44.3 6.0 2.3 1,087.2 23.5 800.0 719.2 913.9 July
70.7 24.0 2.5 2.3 45.8 44.0 7.4 2.3 1,089.9 25.5 790.7 725.0 898.4 Aug.
69.2 22.4 2.5 2.2 46.6 45.2 7.3 2.2 1,100.5 25.1 840.1 735.9 862.6 Sep.
70.9 23.4 2.4 2.2 46.1 45.2 7.4 2.2 1,118.0 24.6 866.7 729.5 840.3 Oct.
66.4 17.4 2.4 2.2 46.6 45.5 4.2 2.1 1,123.9 26.0 883.1 736.5 872.8 Nov.
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 Dec.
78.1 20.3 2.4 2.2 48.9 45.5 3.0 2.3 1,126.9 25.3 907.4 721.2 1,036.0 2022 Jan.
76.8 19.8 2.4 2.2 46.4 42.8 2.4 2.4 1,141.1 26.2 945.9 717.7 1,080.0 Feb.
75.9 19.0 2.4 2.2 44.5 42.1 2.8 2.5 1,148.9 25.9 926.4 736.8 1,195.6 Mar.
79.8 22.5 2.4 2.2 44.6 42.2 2.3 2.3 1,161.1 26.3 939.2 734.6 1,438.9 Apr.
76.8 19.9 2.3 2.1 46.6 42.8 1.9 2.5 1,164.1 27.7 958.5 732.3 1,396.8 May
75.5 19.1 2.3 2.1 46.2 43.0 2.0 2.5 1,164.7 32.2 945.7 752.0 1,582.6 June
78.1 23.2 2.3 2.1 46.8 44.0 4.2 2.5 1,177.1 35.9 926.6 743.6 1,374.2 July
79.7 24.3 2.3 2.1 47.9 44.0 4.8 2.4 1,183.7 38.6 950.2 741.8 1,636.6 Aug.
87.0 31.2 2.3 2.1 45.9 43.3 3.2 2.5 1,203.4 45.9 980.3 757.7 1,952.4 Sep.
Changes 4
– 0.5 2.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 –11.3 –10.0 4.1 – 3.2 –104.9 –17.6 –134.1 18.9 –417.1 2013
– 2.3 – 1.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.8 – 3.4 – 0.6 –63.7 – 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
3.1 – 8.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 – 5.0 – 7.9 0.3 40.6 6.9 124.9 16.6 –207.9 2021
– 7.0 – 6.9 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 3.0 – 0.0 2.8 – 0.5 173.2 – 3.7 –49.8 2021 Jan.
– 3.1 – 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.2 – 1.8 – 0.0 8.9 – 0.1 12.2 – 6.2 –48.9 Feb.
1.5 1.3 – 0.0 0.0 – 0.4 0.8 2.1 0.5 15.7 1.7 24.0 7.1 –10.8 Mar.
1.8 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 2.2 – 0.1 7.3 – 0.4 11.1 – 3.7 –31.3 Apr.
3.2 3.5 – 0.0 0.0 – 1.8 – 1.9 0.9 – 0.1 – 2.7 2.5 17.0 – 2.8 –27.1 May
– 1.6 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.3 – 1.0 – 1.5 0.1 – 7.7 0.2 –22.7 20.9 24.6 June
– 1.8 – 2.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.4 – 1.3 1.5 – 0.1 2.3 – 0.2 –37.2 – 5.4 28.5 July
0.7 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.3 – 0.2 1.4 – 0.0 2.2 2.0 – 9.9 5.6 –14.9 Aug.
– 1.9 – 1.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.8 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 7.0 – 0.5 45.5 10.0 –32.4 Sep.
1.5 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 17.3 – 0.5 27.1 – 6.4 –22.8 Oct.
– 4.5 – 6.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.7 0.4 – 3.2 – 0.1 1.7 1.4 11.7 5.9 40.3 Nov.
14.3 5.4 0.0 0.0 – 2.4 – 2.0 – 2.0 0.2 –14.2 1.4 –127.3 – 4.6 –63.4 Dec.
– 2.7 – 2.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 4.7 2.0 0.7 – 0.0 13.4 – 2.3 146.6 –18.3 39.8 2022 Jan.
– 1.3 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.5 – 2.7 – 0.5 0.1 15.0 1.0 39.4 – 3.2 44.2 Feb.
– 1.0 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.6 0.3 0.2 6.9 – 0.3 –20.7 19.0 118.4 Mar.
3.6 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 3.4 0.2 0.4 – 5.8 252.8 Apr.
– 2.9 – 2.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.0 0.6 – 0.4 0.2 6.4 1.4 23.9 – 1.0 –42.4 May
– 1.5 – 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.4 0.2 0.1 – 0.0 – 4.8 4.3 – 6.3 17.6 199.0 June
1.9 3.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.5 1.1 2.1 0.1 9.1 3.5 –24.8 –10.5 –207.8 July
1.6 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 0.0 0.6 – 0.1 4.1 2.7 20.1 – 3.1 268.3 Aug.
7.2 6.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.7 – 1.6 0.1 20.9 8.5 29.7 14.7 322.6 Sep.
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
24•
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
End of
monthNumber of
reporting
institu-
tionsBalance
sheet
total  1Cash in
hand and
credit
balances
with
central
banks TotalBalances
and
loansSecurities
issued by
banks Totalfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more than
1 year BillsSecurities
issued by
non-banksPartici-
pating
interestsOther
assets  1
All categories of banks  
2022 Apr. 1,441 10,333.5 1,252.2 2,589.8 2,116.4 471.2 4,780.9 454.6 3,627.3 0.4 682.1 94.6 1,615.9
May 1,439 10,321.7 1,173.6 2,675.5 2,199.3 473.8 4,801.0 458.6 3,640.1 0.3 685.3 94.5 1,577.1
June 1,432 10,491.7 1,143.9 2,695.5 2,222.0 470.5 4,835.6 467.9 3,657.7 0.3 692.3 94.9 1,721.8
July 1,425 10,330.6 1,127.2 2,702.9 2,227.8 471.4 4,874.4 464.5 3,690.2 0.3 703.2 96.2 1,529.9
Aug. 1,417 10,690.2 1,150.7 2,746.8 2,270.5 471.6 4,907.5 484.8 3,714.3 0.2 690.9 95.8 1,789.3
Sep. 1,407 11,124.8 145.9 3,860.7 3,376.0 479.0 4,929.2 492.3 3,732.3 0.3 688.2 96.3 2,092.8
Commercial banks 6
2022 Aug. 246 4,855.8 624.0 1,205.8 1,125.1 80.1 1,549.0 307.9 1,009.4 0.2 221.8 31.6 1,445.4
Sep. 246 5,178.8 64.1 1,826.1 1,740.2 84.3 1,558.1 311.5 1,013.9 0.2 223.1 31.6 1,698.9
   Big banks 7
2022 Aug. 3 2,499.0 175.7 601.1 571.4 29.7 718.8 142.5 454.5 0.0 117.9 26.3 977.1
Sep. 3 2,717.6 18.7 771.7 741.8 29.8 728.0 145.4 456.6 0.1 121.6 26.3 1,172.9
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2022 Aug. 136 1,896.0 291.9 448.8 399.3 48.8 692.9 117.6 472.7 0.1 97.4 4.6 457.9
Sep. 136 1,989.5 36.3 743.6 689.1 52.9 691.1 116.6 475.3 0.1 95.0 4.6 513.9
   Branches of foreign banks
2022 Aug. 107 460.8 156.3 156.0 154.4 1.6 137.3 47.8 82.2 0.0 6.5 0.7 10.4
Sep. 107 471.8 9.1 310.9 309.3 1.6 139.0 49.5 82.0 0.1 6.4 0.7 12.2
Landesbanken
2022 Aug. 6 944.6 124.8 251.5 202.7 48.5 431.9 51.3 339.9 0.0 36.8 9.4 127.1
Sep. 6 988.2 1.0 395.4 345.7 49.4 430.8 50.9 340.6 0.0 36.5 9.4 151.6
Savings banks
2022 Aug. 362 1,587.4 169.0 171.4 54.5 116.7 1,207.2 51.9 976.7 – 178.0 15.3 24.5
Sep. 362 1,585.5 42.3 295.0 176.0 118.8 1,208.7 52.8 979.4 – 176.3 15.4 24.1
Credit cooperatives 
2022 Aug. 758 1,174.5 65.5 193.9 78.2 115.1 867.9 32.2 711.5 0.0 124.3 19.4 27.7
Sep. 748 1,175.6 27.0 230.2 114.2 115.2 870.9 32.9 713.9 0.0 124.1 19.5 28.1
Mortgage banks
2022 Aug. 9 234.7 15.3 17.5 10.9 6.3 196.7 2.5 179.5 – 14.7 0.1 5.1
Sep. 9 234.9 4.8 27.5 20.8 6.4 197.3 2.8 179.6 – 14.9 0.1 5.2
Building and loan associations
2022 Aug. 18 258.9 2.4 44.8 29.8 15.0 207.6 1.3 182.7 . 23.6 0.3 3.8
Sep. 18 259.0 1.0 45.7 30.6 15.1 208.2 1.3 183.5 . 23.4 0.3 3.8
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2022 Aug. 18 1,634.2 149.7 861.9 769.3 90.0 447.2 37.6 314.6 0.0 91.7 19.6 155.7
Sep. 18 1,702.7 5.7 1,040.8 948.5 89.7 455.1 40.2 321.5 0.0 90.0 20.0 181.1
Memo item:    Foreign banks 8
2022 Aug. 143 2,367.5 336.2 634.0 600.7 32.6 666.5 162.5 394.1 0.1 103.9 3.6 727.2
Sep. 143 2,532.5 38.8 978.9 941.0 36.4 665.0 165.1 394.8 0.2 99.6 3.6 846.3
   of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2022 Aug. 36 1,906.7 179.9 477.9 446.3 31.0 529.2 114.6 311.9 0.1 97.4 2.9 716.8
Sep. 36 2,060.8 29.8 668.0 631.7 34.8 526.0 115.6 312.8 0.1 93.2 2.9 834.1
* Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3.  1 Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial
instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning ofSection 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read
in conjunction with Section 35 (1) number 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are classified
under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting date. Trading
portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, in
Tables I.1 to I.3.  2 For building and loan associations: including deposits under savings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
25•
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4
TotalSight
depositsTime
deposits TotalSight
depositsfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more
than
1 year  2Memo 
item:
Liabilities
arising
from
repos  3 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeBank
savings
bondsBearer
debt
securities
out-
standing  5Capital
including
published
reserves,
partici-
pation
rights
capital,
funds for
general
banking
risksOther
liabi-
lities  1End of
month
All categories of banks 
2,498.2 741.2 1,756.9 4,431.3 2,907.0 287.1 649.5 62.5 563.7 540.5 23.9 1,263.1 578.7 1,562.2 2022 Apr.
2,521.3 783.2 1,738.1 4,438.7 2,941.4 263.1 648.0 62.5 562.3 539.3 24.0 1,261.9 579.5 1,520.4 May
2,484.9 772.6 1,712.3 4,439.4 2,937.1 272.0 645.8 62.8 560.4 537.6 24.0 1,273.7 585.7 1,708.0 June
2,490.7 743.1 1,747.6 4,476.6 2,950.6 296.0 647.2 65.6 558.6 535.9 24.2 1,274.3 586.4 1,502.6 July
2,523.9 746.9 1,777.0 4,534.7 2,998.1 309.1 646.3 70.2 556.1 533.5 25.1 1,276.5 587.5 1,767.5 Aug.
2,585.3 788.2 1,797.1 4,559.0 2,987.1 354.5 640.7 64.0 550.7 528.1 26.1 1,309.4 588.6 2,082.6 Sep.
Commercial banks 6
1,308.7 564.2 744.5 1,797.5 1,281.6 170.9 234.7 68.5 100.5 97.1 9.9 179.9 198.2 1,371.5 2022 Aug.
1,351.9 590.5 761.4 1,809.2 1,271.8 195.9 234.4 63.4 97.1 93.8 9.9 184.9 198.8 1,634.1 Sep.
Big banks 7   
518.2 198.8 319.4 865.3 610.2 91.3 77.2 29.4 85.5 82.8 1.1 135.1 72.6 907.8 2022 Aug.
533.7 206.1 327.6 859.3 591.7 107.1 77.2 23.2 82.3 79.6 1.1 138.4 72.7 1,113.5 Sep.
Regional banks and other commercial banks   
529.7 219.7 310.0 758.8 544.8 57.1 133.6 39.1 14.6 14.0 8.7 44.4 110.2 452.9 2022 Aug.
547.0 231.8 315.2 776.8 555.7 63.6 134.3 40.2 14.5 13.9 8.7 46.0 110.8 508.9 Sep.
Branches of foreign banks   
260.7 145.7 115.0 173.4 126.6 22.5 23.9 – 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.4 15.4 10.9 2022 Aug.
271.1 152.6 118.5 173.1 124.5 25.3 22.9 – 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.4 15.4 11.7 Sep.
Landesbanken
283.7 49.9 233.7 300.3 160.4 63.5 70.8 1.5 5.6 5.5 0.1 184.8 43.1 132.7 2022 Aug.
292.5 52.7 239.8 302.6 151.4 74.8 70.8 0.5 5.5 5.5 0.1 188.7 43.1 161.3 Sep.
Savings banks
207.3 2.9 204.4 1,176.3 865.2 14.1 13.9 – 272.4 257.0 10.6 16.2 137.2 50.4 2022 Aug.
204.9 3.3 201.7 1,175.6 862.9 16.1 14.1 – 271.2 255.9 11.4 16.2 137.3 51.4 Sep.
Credit cooperatives
178.7 2.2 176.5 852.3 624.2 28.7 18.0 – 177.2 173.4 4.2 8.7 100.9 33.9 2022 Aug.
178.2 3.2 174.9 852.4 624.4 29.2 18.1 – 176.4 172.6 4.3 8.6 101.1 35.4 Sep.
Mortgage banks
62.1 3.8 58.2 53.9 2.7 4.9 46.3 – – – . 102.2 10.4 6.3 2022 Aug.
60.9 4.1 56.9 53.8 2.4 5.2 46.2 – – – . 103.0 10.4 6.7 Sep.
Building and loan associations
38.9 2.8 36.1 193.4 3.8 1.5 187.5 – 0.5 0.5 0.1 4.6 12.1 10.0 2022 Aug.
38.6 3.1 35.5 193.2 3.8 1.5 187.4 – 0.5 0.5 0.1 5.1 12.1 10.0 Sep.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
444.5 121.0 323.5 161.1 60.2 25.5 75.1 0.2 – – . 780.2 85.6 162.8 2022 Aug.
458.2 131.3 326.9 172.1 70.4 31.8 69.7 0.1 – – . 802.9 85.6 183.8 Sep.
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
759.2 371.1 388.1 740.7 552.3 66.8 98.7 40.2 20.0 19.7 3.0 44.2 95.9 727.5 2022 Aug.
791.4 393.9 397.5 748.9 549.8 81.0 97.8 41.0 17.2 16.9 3.1 45.0 96.1 851.1 Sep.
 of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9   
498.4 225.3 273.0 567.3 425.7 44.3 74.8 40.2 19.7 19.4 2.9 43.8 80.5 716.7 2022 Aug.
520.3 241.3 278.9 575.8 425.4 55.7 74.9 41.0 16.9 16.6 3.0 44.6 80.7 839.4 Sep.
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Included in time deposits.  4 Excluding deposits
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).  5 Including subordinated
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
6 Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”.  7 Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner
Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische
Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
notes in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, Table I.3, banking group “Big banks “).
8 Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories
of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”.
9 Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in
other banking categories.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
26•
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)      
PeriodCash in
hand
(euro area
banknotes
and
coins)Credit
balances
with the
Bundes-
bank TotalCredit
balances
and loans BillsNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total Loans BillsTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money mar-
ket paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued
by non-
banks  1
End of year or month *
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 – 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2021 Apr. 44.7 1,062.1 1,362.4 1,105.7 0.0 0.9 255.8 9.8 3,693.9 3,287.5 0.2 5.6 400.5
May 45.4 1,044.7 1,423.6 1,167.3 0.0 0.9 255.4 10.1 3,709.6 3,300.2 0.1 4.6 404.7
June 46.1 1,042.8 1,409.7 1,153.8 0.0 0.8 255.1 10.3 3,709.2 3,305.7 0.2 5.8 397.6
July 46.3 1,059.2 1,372.0 1,118.1 0.0 0.8 253.2 10.3 3,725.3 3,322.9 0.2 6.1 396.2
Aug. 46.5 1,015.2 1,425.2 1,172.4 0.0 0.8 252.1 10.3 3,736.4 3,332.8 0.1 5.7 397.8
Sep. 47.1 1,054.9 1,399.9 1,147.7 0.0 0.7 251.5 10.3 3,749.8 3,341.9 0.1 4.4 403.3
Oct. 47.6 1,052.4 1,419.3 1,167.7 0.0 0.7 250.9 10.3 3,770.2 3,366.9 0.2 5.0 398.0
Nov. 47.9 1,068.7 1,432.2 1,183.6 – 0.7 248.0 10.0 3,794.0 3,386.4 0.2 5.6 401.9
Dec. 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 Jan. 47.4 1,066.0 1,439.2 1,191.8 – 0.7 246.7 10.1 3,812.8 3,409.0 0.2 3.1 400.5
Feb. 47.2 1,094.0 1,453.6 1,204.6 – 0.3 248.7 10.0 3,826.5 3,426.0 0.2 5.0 395.3
Mar. 49.5 1,086.3 1,442.6 1,195.1 – 0.3 247.3 10.0 3,853.8 3,449.0 0.2 3.3 401.3
Apr. 50.4 1,200.5 1,360.3 1,112.8 – 0.6 246.9 9.9 3,866.6 3,470.0 0.2 3.5 392.9
May 49.4 1,122.8 1,452.7 1,202.9 – 0.7 249.1 9.9 3,886.7 3,488.9 0.2 3.2 394.4
June 51.1 1,090.9 1,462.8 1,214.8 – 0.8 247.2 9.8 3,906.6 3,513.4 0.2 3.7 389.3
July 41.6 1,084.2 1,454.9 1,206.8 – 0.8 247.2 9.8 3,945.0 3,539.1 0.2 3.6 402.2
Aug. 23.1 1,126.7 1,480.7 1,232.0 – 1.3 247.5 9.9 3,976.0 3,574.3 0.1 3.9 397.7
Sep. 20.4 123.4 2,572.9 2,318.2 – 1.4 253.2 9.8 3,993.6 3,595.3 0.2 3.6 394.5
Changes *
2013 +0.0 – 48.8 –204.1 –170.6 +0.0 – 0.7 –32.7 –0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 –0.1 – 0.6 + 4.8
2014 +0.4 – 4.3 –119.3 – 87.1 +0.0 + 0.4 –32.6 +0.1 +36.7 +20.6 –0.1 – 0.6 +16.8
2015 +0.3 + 73.7 – 80.7 – 4.3 –0.0 – 0.4 –75.9 –0.1 +68.9 +54.1 –0.0 – 0.3 +15.1
2016 +6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 – – 0.9 –17.9 +0.4 +43.7 +62.8 –0.1 – 0.1 –18.9
2017 +6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 –0.0 + 0.0 –20.1 –0.1 +57.0 +70.2 +0.0 + 0.4 –13.6
2018 +8.5 + 24.0 – 81.0 – 76.6 +0.0 + 0.1 – 4.4 +3.8 +71.5 +105.4 –0.1 – 0.5 –33.2
2019 +2.8 + 59.7 – 63.0 – 61.1 –0.0 – 0.2 – 1.6 –1.4 +126.7 +129.1 +0.1 + 3.1 – 5.5
2020 +4.1 +316.4 +201.2 +191.6 –0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 +4.3 +123.2 +123.6 –0.1 + 0.7 – 1.0
2021 +2.2 +111.8 + 44.1 + 46.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – 2.0 +1.5 +152.2 +147.8 +0.0 – 2.2 + 6.6
2021 Apr. –0.8 + 78.7 – 56.7 – 54.9 –0.0 – 0.1 – 1.7 +0.0 – 5.2 + 0.0 –0.0 – 1.1 – 4.1
May +0.8 – 17.5 + 61.2 + 61.6 – + 0.0 – 0.4 +0.4 +15.6 +12.5 –0.0 – 1.1 + 4.2
June +0.6 – 1.9 – 13.6 – 13.3 –0.0 – 0.1 – 0.3 +0.1 – 0.4 + 5.5 +0.0 + 1.3 – 7.1
July +0.2 + 15.3 – 35.1 – 33.1 – – 0.0 – 1.9 +0.1 +16.1 +17.2 +0.0 + 0.3 – 1.4
Aug. +0.2 – 43.8 + 53.4 + 54.4 – + 0.1 – 1.1 –0.0 +10.9 + 9.7 –0.0 – 0.5 + 1.7
Sep. +0.6 + 39.7 – 26.2 – 25.5 +0.0 – 0.1 – 0.6 –0.0 +13.5 + 9.2 +0.0 – 1.2 + 5.4
Oct. +0.5 – 2.4 + 19.5 + 20.0 +0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 –0.1 +20.5 +25.1 +0.0 + 0.6 – 5.2
Nov. +0.3 + 16.6 + 12.9 + 15.9 –0.0 – 0.0 – 2.9 –0.3 +25.5 +20.4 +0.0 + 0.6 + 4.5
Dec. +1.6 –163.6 – 22.4 – 19.6 – – 0.1 – 2.7 +0.3 + 4.3 + 6.2 +0.1 – 3.0 + 0.9
2022 Jan. –2.0 +161.0 + 27.8 + 26.3 – + 0.1 + 1.4 –0.3 +14.7 +16.6 –0.1 + 0.5 – 2.3
Feb. –0.2 + 28.0 + 13.1 + 11.5 – – 0.4 + 2.0 –0.1 +15.1 +18.4 +0.0 + 1.9 – 5.2
Mar. +2.3 – 7.8 – 10.9 – 9.5 – – 0.0 – 1.4 –0.0 +27.3 +23.0 –0.0 – 1.7 + 6.0
Apr. +0.9 +114.2 – 82.3 – 82.3 – + 0.3 – 0.4 –0.0 +13.1 +21.3 +0.0 + 0.2 – 8.4
May –1.0 – 77.7 + 92.4 + 90.0 – + 0.1 + 2.3 –0.0 +20.1 +18.9 –0.1 – 0.3 + 1.5
June +1.7 – 31.9 + 10.1 + 11.9 – + 0.1 – 1.9 –0.1 +19.9 +24.5 –0.0 + 0.5 – 5.1
July –9.5 – 6.8 – 7.5 – 7.6 – + 0.1 – 0.0 –0.1 +36.1 +23.5 +0.0 – 0.1 +12.7
Aug. –18.5 + 42.5 + 29.0 + 28.3 – + 0.2 + 0.5 +0.1 +30.9 +35.1 –0.0 + 0.3 – 4.5
Sep. –2.7 –1,003.3 +1,091.9 +1,086.0 – + 0.2 + 5.8 –0.0 +16.5 +19.9 +0.1 – 0.3 – 3.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange ofequalisation claims (see also footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the
exchange of equalisation claims.  3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt
securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
27•
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Equalisa-
tion
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in
domestic
banks
and
enterprises TotalSight
deposits
4Time
deposits
4Redis-
counted
bills  5Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
de-
positsTime
deposits
6Savings
de-
posits  7Bank
savings
bonds  8Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
– 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012
– 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013
– 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
– 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
– 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
– 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
– 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
– 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 2021
– 24.5 77.7 1,343.0 136.2 1,206.8 0.0 15.1 3,935.7 2,594.6 751.6 562.8 26.8 34.4 2021 Apr.
– 24.7 78.6 1,351.9 140.0 1,211.9 0.0 15.5 3,956.3 2,620.5 746.2 563.2 26.3 34.6 May
– 25.0 78.7 1,357.0 132.7 1,224.3 0.0 15.8 3,936.4 2,612.1 735.7 562.6 26.1 34.6 June
– 25.1 78.1 1,360.7 136.1 1,224.5 0.0 15.9 3,964.6 2,646.0 730.7 562.0 25.9 34.5 July
– 25.2 78.2 1,364.7 135.3 1,229.4 0.0 16.1 3,971.0 2,656.0 727.8 561.5 25.6 34.3 Aug.
– 25.2 79.0 1,353.8 128.9 1,224.9 0.0 16.2 3,960.3 2,647.9 726.1 560.7 25.5 34.1 Sep.
– 25.1 79.0 1,363.6 132.9 1,230.7 0.0 16.2 3,989.1 2,664.3 739.3 560.1 25.3 33.9 Oct.
– 25.2 79.1 1,373.9 135.2 1,238.6 0.0 16.3 4,002.4 2,685.9 731.8 559.9 24.8 33.6 Nov.
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 Dec.
– 25.7 78.6 1,363.7 137.2 1,226.5 0.0 16.4 4,025.9 2,690.9 750.0 560.8 24.2 33.9 2022 Jan.
– 25.7 78.7 1,369.7 140.5 1,229.2 0.0 16.6 4,037.8 2,704.5 748.5 560.9 23.9 33.8 Feb.
– 25.8 78.7 1,367.7 137.7 1,230.1 0.0 16.5 4,033.7 2,695.6 755.2 559.0 23.9 33.8 Mar.
– 25.9 78.7 1,384.4 140.6 1,243.8 0.0 16.7 4,046.7 2,705.6 759.4 557.9 23.8 33.8 Apr.
– 26.2 78.6 1,393.7 142.7 1,251.0 0.0 17.1 4,056.8 2,724.3 752.1 556.6 23.8 33.6 May
– 26.1 78.8 1,384.7 147.1 1,237.6 0.0 16.9 4,051.8 2,714.4 758.8 554.8 23.8 33.4 June
– 25.9 80.3 1,383.3 134.3 1,249.0 0.0 16.6 4,086.4 2,729.0 780.4 553.0 24.1 33.0 July
– 25.9 79.8 1,403.5 136.0 1,267.5 – 16.5 4,134.3 2,766.8 792.0 550.6 25.0 33.0 Aug.
– 25.8 80.2 1,415.7 149.2 1,266.5 0.0 16.7 4,149.9 2,755.6 823.1 545.2 25.9 33.2 Sep.
Changes *
– –3.3 +2.4 –79.4 –24.1 –55.3 +0.0 –3.4 +40.2 +118.4 –53.9 – 7.4 –17.0 –1.7 2013
– –1.9 +2.0 –29.0 + 2.2 –31.2 –0.0 –0.6 +69.7 +107.9 –25.3 – 2.4 –10.6 –2.0 2014
– –2.1 –4.3 –46.6 + 3.3 –50.0 +0.0 –1.3 +106.5 +156.2 –28.3 –11.3 –10.1 –1.6 2015
– –1.3 +1.5 – 1.7 + 0.3 – 2.0 +0.0 –0.5 +104.7 +124.5 – 6.9 – 7.9 –5.0 –0.5 2016
– –0.0 –1.6 +11.0 –18.4 +29.4 –0.0 –0.5 +103.1 +142.8 –27.5 – 5.6 –6.7 +0.4 2017
– –1.0 +3.1 –25.0 – 3.1 –21.9 +0.0 –0.4 +117.7 +139.3 –10.8 – 4.3 –6.5 +3.9 2018
– –0.7 +0.1 – 8.6 + 1.6 –10.2 +0.0 –0.3 +122.5 +155.8 –25.7 – 3.4 –4.1 –1.4 2019
– +5.7 –3.3 +313.4 +23.2 +290.2 –0.0 +8.2 +221.6 +273.7 –32.7 –14.5 –4.9 +1.9 2020
– +2.3 +1.0 +105.2 – 7.4 +112.6 +0.0 +3.3 +95.3 +144.3 –46.2 + 0.7 –3.5 –0.2 2021
– +0.2 –0.6 + 7.1 + 0.8 + 6.3 +0.0 +0.3 + 9.8 +19.6 – 9.8 + 0.4 –0.3 –0.0 2021 Apr.
– +0.3 +0.3 + 8.9 + 3.9 + 5.0 – +0.5 +20.6 +26.0 – 5.3 + 0.5 –0.5 +0.2 May
– +0.2 +0.1 + 5.0 – 7.3 +12.3 +0.0 +0.3 –19.8 – 8.5 –10.5 – 0.6 –0.2 –0.0 June
– +0.1 +0.1 + 6.6 + 3.5 + 3.1 – +0.1 +28.2 +33.9 – 5.0 – 0.6 –0.2 –0.1 July
– +0.2 +0.1 + 4.1 – 0.8 + 4.9 –0.0 +0.2 + 6.4 +10.0 – 2.9 – 0.5 –0.2 –0.2 Aug.
– +0.0 +0.7 –10.6 – 6.4 – 4.2 +0.0 +0.1 – 6.7 – 5.4 – 0.3 – 0.8 –0.2 –0.2 Sep.
– –0.1 +0.1 +10.5 + 4.0 + 6.5 +0.0 +0.0 +28.8 +16.4 +13.2 – 0.6 –0.2 –0.2 Oct.
– +0.1 +0.1 +10.2 + 2.3 + 7.9 – +0.1 +13.3 +21.5 – 7.6 – 0.2 –0.3 –0.3 Nov.
– +0.5 +0.1 –35.4 –18.0 –17.4 –0.0 +0.0 –25.9 –31.2 + 4.1 + 1.4 –0.2 +0.6 Dec.
– –0.0 –0.6 +23.5 +18.3 + 5.2 –0.0 +0.0 +49.6 +36.3 +14.1 – 0.4 –0.4 –0.3 2022 Jan.
– +0.0 +0.1 + 6.0 + 3.3 + 2.7 –0.0 +0.2 +11.9 +13.6 – 1.6 + 0.1 –0.2 –0.2 Feb.
– +0.1 +0.0 – 1.9 – 2.8 + 0.8 – –0.0 – 4.1 – 9.0 + 6.6 – 1.8 +0.0 – Mar.
– +0.2 –0.0 +16.7 + 3.0 +13.7 – +0.2 +13.0 + 9.5 + 4.2 – 0.6 –0.1 +0.0 Apr.
– +0.3 –0.1 + 9.4 + 2.2 + 7.2 –0.0 +0.3 +10.1 +18.8 – 7.3 – 1.3 +0.0 –0.2 May
– –0.1 +0.2 – 9.0 + 4.4 –13.4 –0.0 –0.2 – 5.0 – 9.9 + 6.7 – 1.8 –0.0 –0.1 June
– –0.2 +1.5 – 1.1 –12.4 +11.2 – –0.3 +33.5 +14.3 +20.7 – 1.8 +0.3 –0.5 July
– –0.0 +0.1 +23.3 + 1.8 +21.6 –0.0 –0.1 +48.1 +37.8 +11.8 – 2.4 +0.9 +0.0 Aug.
– –0.0 +0.4 +12.2 +13.2 – 0.9 +0.0 +0.1 +15.2 –11.4 +31.0 – 5.3 +0.9 +0.2 Sep.
including subordinated liabilities.  4 Including liabilities arising from monetary policy
operations with the Bundesbank.  5 Own acceptances and promissory notes
outstanding.  6 Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  7 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8).  8 Including liabilities
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
28•
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)    
Credit balances and loans, bills Loans and bills
PeriodCash in
hand
(non-
euro area
banknotes
and
coins) Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued by
non-banks
End of year or month *
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2021 Apr. 0.2 1,172.3 943.1 680.7 262.3 2.3 227.0 3.9 855.5 555.5 152.6 402.9 13.0 287.0
May 0.2 1,157.2 928.1 669.8 258.3 2.4 226.8 3.9 846.1 550.1 147.3 402.8 11.9 284.2
June 0.4 1,159.3 930.3 666.6 263.7 2.5 226.4 3.9 855.1 551.6 146.7 404.9 10.5 293.0
July 0.4 1,139.3 910.4 651.3 259.1 1.9 227.0 3.8 867.2 565.0 158.4 406.6 13.1 289.2
Aug. 0.4 1,125.9 899.8 647.9 251.8 1.6 224.5 3.7 867.4 566.7 158.7 407.9 15.3 285.5
Sep. 0.3 1,113.1 885.7 634.6 251.1 1.1 226.3 3.6 876.0 569.3 156.6 412.7 15.1 291.6
Oct. 0.3 1,166.7 940.5 672.2 268.2 0.9 225.3 3.5 878.0 579.6 164.1 415.5 17.7 280.6
Nov. 0.3 1,164.8 940.3 674.7 265.6 0.8 223.7 3.4 888.2 585.6 164.4 421.2 14.3 288.3
Dec. 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 Jan. 0.3 1,200.2 977.7 714.1 263.6 1.2 221.3 3.5 911.6 610.7 187.0 423.7 10.3 290.7
Feb. 0.5 1,222.3 998.7 734.3 264.4 1.6 222.0 3.6 923.5 615.2 191.4 423.7 9.4 298.9
Mar. 0.5 1,224.2 999.2 729.8 269.4 1.0 224.1 3.6 906.5 597.4 171.8 425.6 10.3 298.9
Apr. 0.6 1,229.5 1,003.6 734.1 269.6 1.6 224.3 3.6 914.4 612.0 180.9 431.1 13.1 289.2
May 0.6 1,222.8 996.5 730.7 265.8 1.7 224.7 3.6 914.3 609.9 182.1 427.9 13.5 290.9
June 0.6 1,232.7 1,007.2 742.2 265.0 2.2 223.3 3.6 929.1 612.4 181.1 431.2 13.7 303.0
July 0.6 1,248.0 1,021.1 748.0 273.1 2.7 224.2 3.5 929.4 615.7 177.0 438.7 12.7 301.0
Aug. 0.5 1,266.1 1,038.5 756.2 282.4 3.4 224.2 3.4 931.5 624.9 183.9 441.0 13.4 293.2
Sep. 0.3 1,287.8 1,057.9 771.9 286.0 4.2 225.8 3.8 935.5 629.4 185.2 444.2 12.4 293.7
Changes *
2013 –0.5 –22.7 –26.9 –1.3 –25.6 +1.8 +2.4 –0.0 –21.2 –33.1 –5.8 –27.2 – 0.7 +12.6
2014 –0.0 +86.1 +80.1 +63.2 +16.8 +0.7 +5.3 –0.6 +5.7 –10.2 –12.8 +2.7 – 1.8 +17.7
2015 +0.1 –91.8 –86.0 –82.2 –3.8 –6.7 +0.8 –0.1 –6.1 –9.2 –6.5 –2.7 + 1.1 +2.0
2016 +0.0 –25.5 –14.5 –38.2 +23.7 –0.7 –10.3 –0.0 +17.4 +28.9 +10.1 +18.8 – 3.0 –8.5
2017 +0.0 –57.2 –48.7 –61.5 +12.8 +0.0 –8.5 +0.6 –4.7 +13.0 +8.6 +4.4 + 0.7 –18.4
2018 +0.0 +49.6 +34.0 +57.7 –23.7 +0.2 +15.3 +0.7 +18.3 +28.3 +3.2 +25.2 – 0.4 –9.7
2019 –0.0 –4.1 –11.3 –21.9 +10.7 +0.8 +6.3 +0.7 +26.8 +19.9 +12.7 +7.3 + 3.0 +3.8
2020 –0.0 –32.0 –22.4 –6.6 –15.8 +0.9 –10.5 +0.3 +34.4 +14.7 +9.0 +5.7 + 3.6 +16.1
2021 +0.0 +52.8 +71.1 +68.9 +2.2 –2.5 –15.8 –0.5 +37.8 +39.7 +29.8 +9.9 – 3.2 +1.4
2021 Apr. –0.0 +37.7 +40.7 +36.8 +3.9 –0.1 –2.9 +0.1 –4.0 +0.6 +0.7 –0.0 + 1.1 –5.6
May +0.0 –14.9 –14.6 –11.5 –3.1 –0.1 –0.3 +0.0 –7.7 –4.2 –4.4 +0.2 – 0.9 –2.6
June +0.2 –4.1 –3.7 –6.3 +2.6 +0.1 –0.5 –0.0 +4.9 –1.8 –1.7 –0.2 – 1.5 +8.2
July +0.0 –21.8 –20.5 –15.7 –4.8 –0.6 –0.7 –0.1 +12.9 +13.0 +11.7 +1.4 + 2.6 –2.8
Aug. –0.0 –13.9 –11.2 –3.6 –7.6 –0.2 –2.5 –0.1 –0.1 +1.4 +0.3 +1.1 + 2.2 –3.8
Sep. –0.1 –18.7 –19.8 –17.0 –2.9 –0.6 +1.7 –0.1 +10.0 +4.6 +1.2 +3.4 – 0.2 +5.6
Oct. +0.0 +54.3 +55.5 +38.3 +17.3 –0.1 –1.1 –0.1 +1.5 +9.9 +7.6 +2.3 + 2.6 –11.0
Nov. –0.0 –5.7 –3.9 +0.2 –4.0 –0.1 –1.8 –0.1 +5.4 +1.8 +1.1 +0.7 – 3.4 +7.1
Dec. –0.0 –65.7 –64.3 –60.9 –3.5 –0.5 –0.9 +0.0 –17.8 –14.0 –12.7 –1.4 – 6.3 +2.5
2022 Jan. +0.1 +95.8 +96.6 +97.4 –0.8 +0.8 –1.7 +0.1 +37.7 +36.2 +34.8 +1.4 + 2.3 –0.7
Feb. +0.2 +23.2 +22.1 +20.8 +1.2 +0.4 +0.7 +0.0 +12.7 +5.2 +4.6 +0.5 – 0.8 +8.4
Mar. –0.0 –0.0 –1.5 –5.8 +4.3 –0.6 +2.1 +0.0 –18.3 –18.9 –20.1 +1.2 + 0.8 –0.2
Apr. +0.1 –9.7 –10.2 –4.6 –5.6 +0.6 –0.1 +0.0 –1.7 +6.8 +6.8 +0.0 + 2.8 –11.3
May +0.0 –1.1 –1.8 –0.1 –1.7 +0.1 +0.5 +0.0 +3.7 +1.1 +2.2 –1.1 + 0.4 +2.2
June +0.0 –15.4 –14.4 –10.3 –4.1 +0.5 –1.6 +0.0 +9.7 –1.7 –2.3 +0.6 + 0.2 +11.2
July –0.0 +8.4 +7.3 +1.7 +5.6 +0.5 +0.7 –0.1 –4.7 –0.7 –5.3 +4.6 – 1.1 –2.9
Aug. –0.1 +13.9 +13.2 +6.0 +7.2 +0.7 –0.0 –0.2 +0.1 +7.7 +6.3 +1.4 + 0.7 –8.4
Sep. –0.2 +15.0 +12.6 +11.8 +0.8 +0.8 +1.6 +0.4 +3.2 +1.4 +0.5 +0.9 – 1.0 +2.9
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequentrevisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
29•
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Time deposits (including bank
savings bonds)Time deposits (including
savings deposits and bank
savings bonds)
Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in foreign
banks
and
enter-
prises TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
32.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 2012
30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 2013
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 – 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 2021
11.3 16.5 1,008.7 522.1 486.6 343.1 143.5 – 295.8 150.7 145.0 81.0 64.1 0.1 2021 Apr.
11.3 16.5 1,013.1 513.9 499.2 360.2 139.0 – 304.0 148.4 155.6 88.0 67.6 0.1 May
11.3 16.5 1,016.2 539.5 476.7 335.5 141.3 – 290.8 148.4 142.5 79.9 62.6 0.1 June
11.2 16.0 981.6 525.0 456.6 304.9 151.7 – 292.2 151.7 140.5 79.3 61.2 0.1 July
11.2 16.3 969.4 513.0 456.4 293.0 163.5 0.0 298.4 158.9 139.6 78.8 60.8 0.1 Aug.
11.2 16.3 1,003.9 528.2 475.8 315.7 160.1 – 306.0 164.0 142.0 81.5 60.4 0.1 Sep.
11.2 16.3 1,031.2 550.5 480.7 320.4 160.3 0.0 320.9 169.8 151.1 83.3 67.8 0.1 Oct.
11.3 16.4 1,068.2 565.4 502.8 335.0 167.9 0.0 315.5 171.3 144.2 75.5 68.7 0.1 Nov.
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 Dec.
11.1 16.1 1,098.5 635.9 462.7 321.8 140.8 0.0 339.9 177.2 162.7 82.1 80.5 0.1 2022 Jan.
11.1 16.0 1,130.4 640.4 490.0 349.8 140.2 0.0 361.2 194.5 166.7 87.0 79.7 0.1 Feb.
11.1 15.7 1,113.8 632.7 481.1 349.8 131.3 0.0 361.6 200.0 161.6 82.0 79.6 0.1 Mar.
11.1 15.7 1,113.7 600.6 513.2 381.7 131.4 0.0 384.6 201.5 183.2 102.6 80.6 0.1 Apr.
11.1 15.7 1,127.5 640.4 487.1 351.4 135.7 0.0 382.0 217.1 164.9 85.0 79.9 0.2 May
11.0 15.9 1,100.2 625.5 474.7 340.6 134.1 0.0 387.6 222.7 164.9 82.5 82.4 0.3 June
10.6 15.8 1,107.4 608.8 498.6 359.0 139.6 0.0 390.2 221.6 168.6 87.5 81.1 0.3 July
10.6 15.8 1,120.4 610.9 509.5 360.5 149.0 0.0 400.4 231.3 169.2 87.4 81.8 0.2 Aug.
10.6 15.9 1,169.6 639.0 530.6 373.0 157.6 0.0 409.1 231.4 177.7 95.7 82.0 0.2 Sep.
Changes *
– 1.8 – 7.2 –174.0 –75.6 –98.4 –83.1 –15.4 –0.0 +13.5 +9.6 +3.9 +6.9 –3.0 –0.2 2013
+ 0.1 – 3.8 +76.3 +47.8 +28.5 +39.0 –10.5 –0.0 –43.6 –8.3 –35.3 –30.7 –4.6 +0.2 2014
– 0.6 – 6.1 –15.4 +40.6 –56.0 –48.6 – 7.4 –0.0 –26.5 –13.9 –12.6 +0.3 –13.0 –0.0 2015
– 0.1 – 1.5 +82.7 +51.0 +31.7 +27.0 + 4.7 –0.0 +3.5 –3.1 +6.7 +5.9 +0.8 –0.0 2016
– 1.0 – 4.1 –15.5 +25.2 –40.8 –43.2 + 2.4 ±0.0 +31.8 +11.0 +20.8 +15.6 +5.2 –0.4 2017
– 0.2 – 2.2 –23.9 –23.4 – 0.4 + 2.1 – 2.6 –0.0 –11.9 –0.2 –11.8 –5.7 –6.0 –0.2 2018
– 0.3 – 0.9 – 9.5 –49.4 +39.8 +28.0 +11.8 –0.0 –0.8 +2.1 –2.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.0 2019
– 0.2 – 3.9 +83.8 +87.8 – 4.1 –34.7 +30.6 – +23.6 +13.8 +9.8 +7.1 +2.8 +0.0 2020
– 0.2 – 0.8 +136.6 +19.8 +116.8 +89.2 +27.6 +0.0 +22.7 +6.4 +16.3 +0.0 +16.3 –0.0 2021
– 0.0 + 0.0 +23.2 +4.3 +19.0 +26.8 – 7.8 – +7.9 +3.7 +4.2 +7.3 –3.0 +0.0 2021 Apr.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.9 –7.4 +12.2 +16.6 – 4.4 – +8.6 –2.2 +10.8 +7.2 +3.5 –0.0 May
– 0.1 – 0.0 – 1.9 +23.7 –25.6 –27.4 + 1.8 – –14.8 –0.6 –14.2 –9.0 –5.2 –0.0 June
– 0.1 – 0.5 –34.8 –14.6 –20.2 –30.6 +10.4 – +1.3 +2.9 –1.6 –0.3 –1.3 +0.0 July
+ 0.0 + 0.2 –12.8 –12.3 – 0.5 –12.2 +11.7 +0.0 +5.7 +6.7 –1.1 –0.6 –0.5 –0.0 Aug.
– 0.0 + 0.0 +30.5 +12.9 +17.6 +21.4 – 3.9 –0.0 +6.7 +4.9 +1.7 +2.3 –0.6 +0.0 Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 +27.9 +22.7 + 5.2 + 5.1 + 0.2 +0.0 +14.7 +5.8 +9.0 +1.6 +7.4 –0.0 Oct.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 +32.3 +12.5 +19.9 +13.0 + 6.9 – –6.3 +0.8 –7.1 –8.4 +1.3 –0.0 Nov.
– 0.1 + 0.2 –155.0 –110.1 –44.9 –34.0 –10.9 – –27.7 –29.6 +1.9 –7.0 +8.9 +0.0 Dec.
– 0.0 – 0.6 +180.8 +178.4 + 2.4 +19.3 –16.9 – +50.8 +34.9 +16.0 +13.1 +2.9 –2022 Jan.
+ 0.0 – 0.0 +33.4 +5.7 +27.8 +28.3 – 0.5 – +21.2 +17.0 +4.2 +5.0 –0.8 – Feb.
– 0.1 – 0.3 –18.3 –8.5 – 9.8 – 0.7 – 9.1 – –0.1 +5.3 –5.4 –5.3 –0.1 –0.0 Mar.
+ 0.0 – 0.1 –13.2 –39.6 +26.4 +27.6 – 1.1 – +19.2 –0.6 +19.8 +19.1 +0.6 – Apr.
– 0.0 + 0.0 +18.7 +42.5 –23.8 –28.6 + 4.8 – –1.1 +16.4 –17.5 –16.9 –0.5 +0.1 May
– 0.1 + 0.1 –21.2 –5.8 –15.4 –13.0 – 2.4 – +3.5 +4.7 –1.2 –3.4 +2.2 +0.0 June
– 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 –20.0 +19.7 +16.2 + 3.5 +0.0 +0.1 –2.2 +2.3 +4.0 –1.8 –0.0 July
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.7 +0.3 + 9.4 + 0.3 + 9.2 –0.0 +8.9 +9.1 –0.2 –0.7 +0.5 –0.0 Aug.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 +42.5 +25.4 +17.2 + 9.4 + 7.7 – +6.9 –0.7 +7.5 +7.5 –0.0 +0.0 Sep.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
30•
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Short-term lending Medium- and long-term   Lending to domestic
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
Periodincluding 
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claimsexcluding 
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claims Total TotalLoans
and
billsNegotiable
money
market
paper Total LoansTreasury
bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 – 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2021 Apr. 3,693.9 3,287.7 248.6 223.5 222.8 0.7 25.1 20.2 4.9 3,445.2 3,061.5
May 3,709.6 3,300.4 248.7 225.4 224.6 0.8 23.3 19.5 3.8 3,460.9 3,075.1
June 3,709.2 3,305.8 250.7 225.8 225.0 0.8 24.9 19.9 5.1 3,458.5 3,082.5
July 3,725.3 3,323.0 248.2 221.0 220.2 0.8 27.2 21.9 5.3 3,477.1 3,102.5
Aug. 3,736.4 3,332.9 245.0 221.1 220.4 0.7 23.9 18.9 4.9 3,491.5 3,116.8
Sep. 3,749.8 3,342.1 247.8 224.5 223.8 0.7 23.4 19.6 3.7 3,501.9 3,123.2
Oct. 3,770.2 3,367.1 256.5 232.5 231.9 0.6 24.0 19.5 4.4 3,513.7 3,142.9
Nov. 3,794.0 3,386.5 255.6 232.9 232.3 0.6 22.7 17.7 5.0 3,538.4 3,164.9
Dec. 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 Jan. 3,812.8 3,409.2 262.6 242.3 241.7 0.6 20.3 17.8 2.5 3,550.2 3,180.4
Feb. 3,826.5 3,426.2 267.4 246.9 246.1 0.8 20.5 16.3 4.2 3,559.1 3,195.3
Mar. 3,853.8 3,449.2 273.6 254.8 254.0 0.8 18.9 16.3 2.5 3,580.1 3,209.5
Apr. 3,866.6 3,470.2 277.5 257.9 257.0 0.9 19.6 17.1 2.5 3,589.1 3,226.2
May 3,886.7 3,489.1 280.1 262.5 261.5 1.0 17.6 15.4 2.2 3,606.6 3,242.6
June 3,906.6 3,513.5 290.8 271.4 270.5 0.9 19.5 16.6 2.8 3,615.7 3,255.8
July 3,945.0 3,539.3 291.4 271.8 270.9 0.8 19.6 16.8 2.8 3,653.7 3,293.5
Aug. 3,976.0 3,574.4 305.0 287.3 286.4 0.8 17.7 14.7 3.1 3,671.0 3,314.3
Sep. 3,993.6 3,595.5 311.0 292.8 292.2 0.6 18.2 15.2 3.0 3,682.6 3,329.1
Changes *
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 – 13.8 – 5.8 – 6.3 + 0.5 – 8.0 – 7.0 – 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 – 11.6 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 0.0 – 7.1 – 6.5 – 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 – 5.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.8 – 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 – 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 – 12.1 – 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 8.6 – 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 – 19.6 – 19.8 – 19.8 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2021 + 152.2 + 147.8 + 8.8 + 13.8 + 13.8 – 0.1 – 4.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 + 143.4 + 157.9
2021 Apr. – 5.2 – 0.0 – 12.8 – 13.1 – 13.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.6 – 1.2 + 7.5 + 13.0
May + 15.6 + 12.5 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.1 – 1.8 – 0.6 – 1.2 + 15.5 + 13.4
June – 0.4 + 5.5 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 – 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 – 2.4 + 7.3
July + 16.1 + 17.2 – 2.0 – 4.2 – 4.3 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 18.1 + 19.5
Aug. + 10.9 + 9.7 – 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 3.3 – 2.9 – 0.4 + 14.1 + 14.2
Sep. + 13.5 + 9.3 + 3.3 + 3.7 + 3.8 – 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.7 – 1.2 + 10.2 + 6.2
Oct. + 20.5 + 25.1 + 8.7 + 8.1 + 8.2 – 0.1 + 0.5 – 0.2 + 0.7 + 11.8 + 19.8
Nov. + 25.5 + 20.5 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 2.4 + 0.0 – 1.2 – 1.8 + 0.6 + 24.4 + 19.9
Dec. + 4.3 + 6.3 – 5.8 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 5.2 – 2.5 – 2.7 + 10.1 + 9.8
2022 Jan. + 14.7 + 16.5 + 12.9 + 10.1 + 9.8 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 1.8 + 5.8
Feb. + 15.1 + 18.4 + 6.2 + 6.0 + 5.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 1.5 + 1.7 + 9.0 + 14.9
Mar. + 27.3 + 23.0 + 6.2 + 7.9 + 7.9 – 0.0 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 + 21.0 + 14.2
Apr. + 13.1 + 21.4 + 3.9 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 9.3 + 17.0
May + 20.1 + 18.8 + 2.6 + 4.6 + 4.5 + 0.0 – 2.0 – 1.7 – 0.3 + 17.5 + 16.4
June + 19.9 + 24.5 + 10.8 + 8.9 + 9.0 – 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 9.1 + 13.2
July + 36.1 + 23.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 35.8 + 35.6
Aug. + 30.9 + 35.1 + 13.7 + 15.5 + 15.5 + 0.0 – 1.9 – 2.1 + 0.3 + 17.2 + 20.8
Sep. + 16.5 + 20.0 + 6.1 + 5.6 + 5.8 – 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 10.4 + 13.5
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
31•
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
TotalMedium-
termLong-
term SecuritiesMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalMedium-
termLong-
termSecur-
ities  1Equal-
isation
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 – 3.5 2012
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 – 2.7 2013
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 – 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 – 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 – 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 – 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 – 1.4 2018
2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 – 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 2020
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 2021
2,813.9 313.6 2,500.3 247.6 23.4 383.7 230.8 15.0 215.8 153.0 – 1.1 2021 Apr.
2,825.1 311.7 2,513.5 249.9 23.6 385.9 231.1 14.9 216.2 154.8 – 1.1 May
2,831.8 310.0 2,521.8 250.7 23.9 376.0 229.2 14.7 214.5 146.8 – 1.1 June
2,851.4 310.7 2,540.8 251.0 24.0 374.6 229.5 14.9 214.6 145.1 – 1.1 July
2,864.5 311.5 2,553.1 252.2 24.2 374.7 229.1 14.7 214.4 145.6 – 1.1 Aug.
2,870.0 310.1 2,559.9 253.2 24.2 378.7 228.7 14.3 214.4 150.1 – 1.0 Sep.
2,885.5 313.5 2,572.0 257.4 24.1 370.9 230.2 14.6 215.6 140.7 – 1.0 Oct.
2,906.5 315.6 2,590.9 258.4 24.2 373.5 230.0 14.5 215.6 143.5 – 1.0 Nov.
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 Dec.
2,920.6 312.8 2,607.8 259.8 24.7 369.8 229.1 13.9 215.2 140.7 – 1.0 2022 Jan.
2,935.4 313.8 2,621.6 259.9 24.6 363.8 228.5 13.9 214.5 135.4 – 1.1 Feb.
2,950.1 316.1 2,633.9 259.4 24.7 370.7 228.8 13.7 215.1 141.8 – 1.1 Mar.
2,966.8 317.3 2,649.5 259.4 24.9 362.9 229.5 13.7 215.8 133.5 – 1.0 Apr.
2,983.1 319.7 2,663.4 259.5 25.1 364.0 229.1 13.7 215.4 134.9 – 1.0 May
2,998.2 322.2 2,675.9 257.6 25.0 360.0 228.2 13.6 214.6 131.7 – 1.0 June
3,022.5 327.7 2,694.9 271.0 24.9 360.2 229.0 13.5 215.5 131.2 – 1.0 July
3,044.6 335.4 2,709.1 269.8 24.9 356.6 228.7 13.5 215.2 127.9 – 1.0 Aug.
3,058.8 339.5 2,719.3 270.2 24.8 353.5 229.3 13.8 215.4 124.3 – 1.0 Sep.
Changes *
+ 17.7 – 0.1 + 17.8 – 0.1 – 2.5 + 0.6 – 4.3 – 0.7 – 3.6 + 4.9 – – 0.8 2013
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 +12.5 – 1.8 – 4.1 – 8.5 – 5.1 – 3.4 + 4.3 – – 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 +14.8 – 2.1 – 6.6 – 6.9 – 4.8 – 2.0 + 0.2 – + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 – 0.9 – 30.9 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 3.3 –23.6 – – 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 +15.8 + 0.1 – 39.9 –10.6 – 1.3 – 9.3 –29.4 – – 0.1 2017
+108.7 +19.3 + 89.4 – 6.7 – 0.9 – 37.1 –10.5 – 2.7 – 7.8 –26.6 – – 0.0 2018
+126.0 +18.9 +107.2 + 6.8 – 0.8 – 17.8 – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 –12.3 – + 0.1 2019
+145.0 + 9.4 +135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 – 2.8 – 1.1 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 1.7 – – 0.4 2020
+140.1 + 5.6 +134.5 +17.8 + 2.3 – 14.6 – 3.3 – 1.3 – 2.0 –11.3 – – 0.0 2021
+ 11.5 – 0.9 + 12.4 + 1.5 + 0.2 – 5.5 + 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.3 – 5.6 – – 0.0 2021 Apr.
+ 11.0 – 1.9 + 13.0 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3 – 0.1 + 0.4 + 1.8 – + 0.0 May
+ 6.5 – 1.7 + 8.2 + 0.8 + 0.3 – 9.7 – 1.8 – 0.2 – 1.5 – 7.9 – – 0.0 June
+ 19.2 + 0.2 + 19.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 – 1.7 – – 0.0 July
+ 13.0 + 0.8 + 12.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.4 + 0.5 – – 0.0 Aug.
+ 5.2 – 1.4 + 6.6 + 1.0 – 0.0 + 4.0 – 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.0 + 4.4 – + 0.0 Sep.
+ 15.6 + 3.5 + 12.1 + 4.1 – 0.1 – 7.9 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 – 9.4 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 18.9 + 4.4 + 14.5 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 4.4 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 1.0 + 3.5 – – 0.0 Nov.
+ 9.3 – 1.1 + 10.4 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 – + 0.0 Dec.
+ 4.9 – 1.7 + 6.6 + 0.8 – 0.0 – 4.0 – 0.8 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 3.2 – – 0.0 2022 Jan.
+ 14.8 + 1.0 + 13.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 6.0 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.6 – 5.3 – – 0.0 Feb.
+ 14.7 + 2.3 + 12.4 – 0.5 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 0.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 + 6.5 – – 0.0 Mar.
+ 17.0 + 1.5 + 15.6 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 7.7 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 – 8.4 – – 0.0 Apr.
+ 16.4 + 2.5 + 13.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.1 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.3 + 1.4 – – 0.0 May
+ 15.1 + 2.5 + 12.6 – 1.9 – 0.1 – 4.1 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 3.2 – – 0.0 June
+ 22.5 + 4.4 + 18.1 +13.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.5 – – 0.0 July
+ 22.0 + 7.7 + 14.3 – 1.2 – 0.0 – 3.6 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 3.3 – + 0.0 Aug.
+ 13.1 + 2.7 + 10.4 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 0.5 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 3.6 – + 0.0 Sep.

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
November 2022
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insuranceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2020 2,993.0 1,601.8 1,565.6 1,285.1 280.5 1,623.4 443.3 146.7 123.4 82.7 135.8 55.3 59.8 176.0
2021         Sep. 3,093.7 1,653.1 1,648.9 1,337.4 311.4 1,666.9 467.9 143.9 122.2 87.7 136.7 56.2 56.3 182.6
         Dec. 3,147.5 1,591.4 1,678.2 1,373.0 305.2 1,701.5 477.2 146.1 128.3 98.0 140.4 55.9 55.6 186.3
2022         Mar. 3,204.0 1,613.7 1,701.0 1,391.9 309.0 1,742.4 485.1 150.9 134.3 101.3 145.3 56.3 54.9 193.2
         June 3,268.7 1,636.4 1,731.4 1,412.8 318.5 1,784.8 494.5 160.2 132.6 104.4 153.4 57.0 56.4 200.2         Sep. 3,351.0 1,659.4 1,758.3 1,433.0 325.2 1,845.3 503.1 163.6 147.5 108.9 161.0 56.9 64.7 202.3
 Short-term lending
2020 221.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 192.1 4.6 29.0 6.9 16.0 37.0 3.6 6.1 31.62021         Sep. 223.8 − 7.8 − 7.8 193.7 4.4 30.4 5.1 17.1 35.6 4.0 4.1 34.1
         Dec. 231.8 − 6.9 − 6.9 202.7 4.4 31.6 9.1 18.0 36.4 3.3 3.9 35.0
2022         Mar. 254.0 − 7.0 − 7.0 224.1 4.5 36.5 14.0 19.5 39.3 3.6 4.1 38.0
         June 270.5 − 7.0 − 7.0 239.5 4.6 44.7 11.6 20.1 42.2 3.9 4.3 42.2         Sep. 292.2 − 7.4 − 7.4 260.7 4.9 46.2 24.4 21.1 45.3 3.6 4.2 42.2
 Medium-term lending
2020 310.5 − 38.5 − 38.5 230.4 18.5 30.2 5.4 14.8 19.3 4.8 15.0 51.42021         Sep. 310.1 − 40.2 − 40.2 233.3 20.2 27.8 5.2 15.8 19.3 4.5 12.3 51.7
         Dec. 314.5 − 40.5 − 40.5 239.5 20.6 28.3 5.4 19.3 20.8 4.3 12.3 52.0
2022         Mar. 316.1 − 40.8 − 40.8 242.2 21.0 28.9 5.6 20.0 22.0 4.2 11.7 53.1
         June 322.2 − 42.0 − 42.0 249.2 22.2 29.1 5.8 21.0 22.3 4.3 13.3 53.7         Sep. 339.5 − 43.2 − 43.2 265.9 23.1 30.5 6.0 23.1 21.1 4.3 22.0 54.4
 Long-term lending
2020 2,461.4 1,601.8 1,519.1 1,285.1 234.0 1,201.0 420.2 87.5 111.2 51.8 79.4 47.0 38.7 93.02021         Sep. 2,559.9 1,653.1 1,600.9 1,337.4 263.5 1,240.0 443.4 85.6 111.9 54.9 81.8 47.7 39.9 96.8
         Dec. 2,601.2 1,591.4 1,630.9 1,373.0 257.8 1,259.3 452.2 86.2 113.8 60.8 83.2 48.3 39.4 99.3
2022         Mar. 2,633.9 1,613.7 1,653.1 1,391.9 261.2 1,276.0 459.6 85.5 114.8 61.8 84.0 48.4 39.2 102.1
         June 2,675.9 1,636.4 1,682.3 1,412.8 269.5 1,296.0 467.7 86.5 115.2 63.4 88.9 48.8 38.8 104.4         Sep. 2,719.3 1,659.4 1,707.6 1,433.0 274.6 1,318.6 475.1 86.8 117.1 64.7 94.6 49.0 38.6 105.6
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2021         Q3 + 37.1 + 18.5 + 29.1 + 19.7 + 9.4 + 12.7 + 6.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 1.0
         Q4 + 54.1 + 18.0 + 28.6 + 18.9 + 9.7 + 34.9 + 9.0 + 2.2 + 5.9 + 1.5 + 3.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 3.7
2022         Q1 + 57.9 + 17.9 + 22.0 + 16.6 + 5.3 + 42.0 + 7.0 + 4.8 + 6.3 + 3.2 + 4.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 8.9
         Q2 + 65.0 + 22.2 + 29.9 + 20.5 + 9.4 + 42.7 + 9.1 + 9.4 − 1.7 + 3.2 + 8.2 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 7.1         Q3 + 79.0 + 23.4 + 26.9 + 20.5 + 6.4 + 58.5 + 8.6 + 2.7 + 15.0 + 4.8 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 2.0
 Short-term lending
2021         Q3 − 0.3 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3
         Q4 + 10.3 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 10.5 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 1.0
2022         Q1 + 23.5 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 22.7 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 2.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 4.4
         Q2 + 16.6 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 15.4 + 0.1 + 8.2 − 2.4 + 0.6 + 2.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 4.2         Q3 + 20.2 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 19.8 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 12.8 + 0.9 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1
 Medium-term lending
2021         Q3 − 0.4 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 + 0.7
         Q4 + 6.8 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 8.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 3.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5
2022         Q1 + 1.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.2
         Q2 + 6.4 − + 1.2 − + 1.2 + 7.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.9         Q3 + 16.1 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 16.1 + 0.9 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 2.6 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 8.9 + 0.8
 Long-term lending
2021         Q3 + 37.8 + 18.5 + 28.6 + 19.7 + 8.9 + 14.1 + 6.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.6
         Q4 + 37.0 + 18.0 + 28.4 + 18.9 + 9.5 + 16.4 + 8.4 + 0.6 + 1.8 − 3.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 2.2
2022         Q1 + 32.7 + 17.9 + 21.5 + 16.6 + 4.9 + 16.5 + 6.5 − 0.7 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 3.4
         Q2 + 42.0 + 22.2 + 28.7 + 20.5 + 8.1 + 19.9 + 7.9 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 1.5 + 4.9 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 2.1         Q3 + 42.7 + 23.4 + 25.7 + 20.5 + 5.2 + 22.6 + 7.4 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 5.8 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 1.2
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
November 2022
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
843.7 286.6 53.8 204.1 464.0 47.9 1,353.4 1,118.3 235.2 177.4 6.7 16.2 4.0 2020
881.4 304.0 57.5 210.5 478.3 48.9 1,410.5 1,176.6 233.9 176.4 7.0 16.3 4.3 2021          Sep.
890.8 308.6 63.8 207.9 483.8 48.3 1,429.3 1,196.6 232.7 184.1 6.9 16.7 4.4          Dec.
906.2 315.6 66.2 209.8 489.1 49.1 1,444.9 1,211.4 233.5 184.4 7.1 16.8 4.4 2022          Mar.
920.4 322.8 68.0 211.5 494.9 49.4 1,467.0 1,232.4 234.6 184.6 7.3 16.9 4.5          June940.5 329.1 71.2 215.4 500.0 54.1 1,488.6 1,250.6 238.0 187.3 7.5 17.1 4.6          Sep.
Short-term lending
61.9 15.7 9.6 10.5 20.9 3.7 28.6 3.4 25.2 1.3 6.7 0.6 0.0 202063.3 16.9 10.3 9.8 20.5 4.3 29.6 3.4 26.2 1.5 7.0 0.5 0.0 2021          Sep.
65.5 14.5 13.0 10.0 19.7 3.8 28.6 2.5 26.1 1.4 6.9 0.5 0.0          Dec.
69.2 15.3 14.0 10.5 20.3 4.4 29.2 2.5 26.7 1.6 7.1 0.7 0.0 2022          Mar.
70.5 15.9 13.7 11.1 20.8 4.5 30.3 2.5 27.9 1.7 7.3 0.7 0.0          June73.8 15.8 14.9 11.2 20.9 5.3 30.8 2.5 28.3 1.7 7.5 0.6 0.0          Sep.
Medium-term lending
89.6 20.4 11.8 24.5 32.0 3.5 79.6 20.0 59.6 56.1 − 0.5 0.0 202096.7 23.2 13.8 27.4 31.1 3.4 76.3 20.0 56.3 52.4 − 0.6 0.1 2021          Sep.
97.0 23.1 15.2 27.1 30.0 3.3 74.4 19.8 54.6 50.6 − 0.6 0.1          Dec.
96.8 22.8 15.5 27.2 30.0 3.2 73.4 19.7 53.7 49.6 − 0.5 0.1 2022          Mar.
99.8 24.1 17.1 26.6 29.9 3.2 72.5 19.8 52.7 48.6 − 0.5 0.1          June
104.5 25.2 17.7 27.4 30.4 6.4 73.0 20.1 52.9 48.7 − 0.5 0.1          Sep.
Long-term lending
692.3 250.5 32.4 169.1 411.1 40.7 1,245.3 1,094.9 150.4 120.0 − 15.1 4.0 2020721.3 263.9 33.3 173.3 426.7 41.2 1,304.7 1,153.3 151.4 122.6 − 15.3 4.2 2021          Sep.
728.4 271.1 35.6 170.8 434.1 41.3 1,326.3 1,174.3 152.0 132.1 − 15.6 4.3          Dec.
740.2 277.5 36.8 172.1 438.8 41.4 1,342.3 1,189.2 153.1 133.2 − 15.6 4.4 2022          Mar.
750.0 282.8 37.3 173.8 444.2 41.7 1,364.2 1,210.1 154.1 134.4 − 15.7 4.4          June762.2 288.0 38.5 176.7 448.7 42.5 1,384.8 1,228.0 156.7 137.0 − 15.9 4.5          Sep.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 9.4 + 6.5 − 0.8 + 1.7 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 24.3 + 22.7 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 2021          Q3
+ 18.8 + 7.3 + 4.2 + 2.8 + 5.2 − 0.6 + 18.8 + 19.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.1          Q4
+ 14.9 + 6.7 + 2.4 + 1.7 + 5.0 + 0.7 + 15.8 + 14.9 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2022          Q1
+ 14.4 + 7.4 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 5.8 + 0.4 + 22.2 + 20.8 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 17.6 + 6.2 + 3.1 + 3.8 + 4.3 + 0.2 + 20.4 + 18.2 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3
Short-term lending
− 2.7 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 2021          Q3
+ 3.4 − 1.1 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2022          Q1
+ 1.4 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2+ 3.1 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 −          Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.7 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2021          Q3
+ 1.7 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 1.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.0 2022          Q1
+ 3.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2+ 2.5 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
+ 11.3 + 4.7 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 4.9 + 0.1 + 23.6 + 22.5 + 1.2 + 1.7 − + 0.1 + 0.1 2021          Q3
+ 13.6 + 7.2 + 0.4 + 2.7 + 6.2 + 0.1 + 20.4 + 19.9 + 0.5 + 1.2 − + 0.3 + 0.1          Q4
+ 11.5 + 6.3 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 4.5 + 0.1 + 16.2 + 15.0 + 1.2 + 1.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2022          Q1
+ 10.0 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 1.8 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 22.0 + 20.8 + 1.3 + 1.4 − + 0.1 + 0.1          Q2+ 12.0 + 5.2 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 20.0 + 18.2 + 1.7 + 1.7 − + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
34•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic non-banks, total                        End of year or month *
2019 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 202.7 613.5 52.7 560.8 575.2 33.2 32.5 14.7 0.2
2020 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2021 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2021 Oct. 3,989.1 2,664.3 739.3 163.6 575.7 49.1 526.6 560.1 25.3 33.9 15.3 1.4
Nov. 4,002.4 2,685.9 731.8 157.1 574.7 49.9 524.8 559.9 24.8 33.6 15.3 0.9
Dec. 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2022 Jan. 4,025.9 2,690.9 750.0 175.9 574.1 49.5 524.6 560.8 24.2 33.9 17.1 1.1
Feb. 4,037.8 2,704.5 748.5 175.5 573.0 48.7 524.3 560.9 23.9 33.8 17.1 1.2
Mar. 4,033.7 2,695.6 755.2 183.4 571.7 49.2 522.5 559.0 23.9 33.8 17.2 1.6
Apr. 4,046.7 2,705.6 759.4 189.8 569.6 50.1 519.5 557.9 23.8 33.8 17.3 1.1
May 4,056.8 2,724.3 752.1 183.3 568.7 51.2 517.5 556.6 23.8 33.6 17.1 0.8
June 4,051.8 2,714.4 758.8 194.7 564.1 49.0 515.1 554.8 23.8 33.4 17.2 0.7
July 4,086.4 2,729.0 780.4 213.7 566.7 50.9 515.8 553.0 24.1 33.0 17.3 1.2
Aug. 4,134.3 2,766.8 792.0 226.8 565.1 50.4 514.7 550.6 25.0 33.0 17.5 1.4
Sep. 4,149.9 2,755.6 823.1 263.8 559.3 45.5 513.8 545.2 25.9 33.2 18.3 1.0
Changes *
2020 +221.6 +273.7 – 32.7 – 15.0 –17.7 – 4.8 –12.9 –14.5 – 4.9 + 1.9 – 0.3 – 0.1
2021 + 95.3 +144.3 – 46.2 – 27.3 –18.9 + 1.5 –20.5 + 0.7 – 3.5 – 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.2
2021 Oct. + 28.8 + 16.4 + 13.2 + 11.0 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 1.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 13.3 + 21.5 – 7.6 – 6.4 – 1.2 + 0.8 – 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.6
Dec. – 25.9 – 31.2 + 4.1 + 3.9 + 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 0.4
2022 Jan. + 49.6 + 36.3 + 14.1 + 15.0 – 0.9 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.2
Feb. + 11.9 + 13.6 – 1.6 – 0.4 – 1.2 – 0.8 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
Mar. – 4.1 – 9.0 + 6.6 + 7.9 – 1.3 + 0.5 – 1.8 – 1.8 + 0.0 – + 0.0 + 0.3
Apr. + 13.0 + 9.5 + 4.2 + 6.4 – 2.2 + 0.8 – 3.0 – 0.6 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5
May + 10.1 + 18.8 – 7.3 – 6.5 – 0.9 + 1.1 – 2.0 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
June – 5.0 – 9.9 + 6.7 + 11.3 – 4.6 – 2.2 – 2.5 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1
July + 33.5 + 14.3 + 20.7 + 18.5 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 0.6 – 1.8 + 0.3 – 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5
Aug. + 48.1 + 37.8 + 11.8 + 13.1 – 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.9 – 2.4 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2
Sep. + 15.2 – 11.4 + 31.0 + 36.7 – 5.7 – 4.9 – 0.8 – 5.3 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.8 – 0.4
Domestic government End of year or month *
2019 237.1 74.7 154.9 76.0 78.9 26.1 52.8 3.4 4.1 24.7 2.2 0.2
2020 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 –
2021 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2021 Oct. 213.9 85.2 122.9 43.5 79.5 22.2 57.3 2.5 3.3 25.2 2.0 –
Nov. 213.7 86.1 121.8 41.4 80.4 23.5 56.9 2.5 3.3 25.1 2.0 –
Dec. 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2022 Jan. 233.5 88.5 139.2 59.2 80.0 24.0 56.0 2.5 3.3 25.5 2.0 –
Feb. 237.9 91.4 140.7 61.0 79.7 23.7 56.0 2.5 3.3 25.5 2.0 –
Mar. 241.0 85.2 150.0 69.7 80.3 24.4 56.0 2.4 3.4 25.5 2.0 –
Apr. 243.7 86.2 151.8 70.8 80.9 25.0 55.9 2.4 3.4 25.6 2.0 –
May 255.6 91.4 158.4 76.1 82.2 25.9 56.3 2.4 3.4 25.6 2.0 –
June 254.9 84.8 164.2 84.6 79.7 23.3 56.3 2.4 3.5 25.4 2.0 –
July 258.3 78.0 174.5 93.0 81.5 24.6 57.0 2.4 3.4 25.4 1.9 –
Aug. 272.6 89.1 177.8 96.2 81.5 24.8 56.7 2.4 3.4 25.5 1.9 –
Sep. 273.0 86.6 180.6 104.6 76.0 20.0 56.1 2.3 3.5 25.7 1.9 –
Changes *
2020 – 6.9 + 5.7 – 11.6 – 16.5 + 4.8 – 5.3 +10.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 + 0.7 – 0.1 – 0.2
2021 – 17.9 + 3.4 – 20.8 – 17.7 – 3.0 + 2.9 – 6.0 – 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.4 – 0.0 + 1.0
2021 Oct. + 3.1 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 –
Nov. – 0.1 + 0.9 – 1.0 – 2.1 + 1.1 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 –
Dec. – 3.6 – 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 – 0.6 + 0.3 – 0.8 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 1.0
2022 Jan. + 23.4 + 6.1 + 17.4 + 17.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – – 0.3 – 0.0 – 1.0
Feb. + 4.3 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.7 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 –
Mar. + 3.2 – 6.2 + 9.4 + 8.7 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 –
Apr. + 2.7 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 –
May + 11.5 + 5.2 + 6.2 + 5.2 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 –
June – 0.7 – 6.6 + 5.9 + 8.5 – 2.6 – 2.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 –
July + 3.5 – 6.7 + 10.3 + 8.4 + 1.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 –
Aug. + 14.3 + 11.1 + 3.2 + 3.2 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 –
Sep. + 0.4 – 2.4 + 2.8 + 8.3 – 5.5 – 4.9 – 0.6 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities.
2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
35•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont´d)
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic enterprises and households                            End of year or month *
2019 3,423.9 2,161.6 661.4 126.7 534.7 26.6 508.0 571.8 29.1 7.8 12.6 0.0
2020 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2021 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2021 Oct. 3,775.1 2,579.2 616.4 120.2 496.2 27.0 469.3 557.6 22.0 8.7 13.4 1.4
Nov. 3,788.6 2,599.8 610.0 115.7 494.3 26.3 467.9 557.4 21.4 8.5 13.3 0.9
Dec. 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2022 Jan. 3,792.4 2,602.4 610.8 116.6 494.1 25.5 468.6 558.3 20.8 8.4 15.0 1.1
Feb. 3,799.9 2,613.1 607.8 114.5 493.3 24.9 468.3 558.4 20.6 8.2 15.1 1.2
Mar. 3,792.7 2,610.4 605.1 113.7 491.4 24.8 466.6 556.6 20.5 8.2 15.2 1.6
Apr. 3,802.9 2,619.4 607.6 119.0 488.6 25.1 463.6 555.5 20.4 8.2 15.2 1.1
May 3,801.2 2,632.9 593.7 107.2 486.5 25.3 461.2 554.2 20.4 8.0 15.1 0.8
June 3,796.9 2,629.7 594.5 110.1 484.4 25.6 458.8 552.4 20.3 8.0 15.2 0.7
July 3,828.1 2,650.9 605.9 120.7 485.2 26.3 458.9 550.6 20.7 7.6 15.4 1.2
Aug. 3,861.7 2,677.7 614.2 130.6 483.6 25.6 458.0 548.2 21.6 7.5 15.6 1.4
Sep. 3,876.9 2,669.0 642.5 159.2 483.3 25.6 457.7 542.9 22.5 7.5 16.3 1.0
Changes *
2020 +228.5 +268.0 – 21.1 + 1.5 –22.6 + 0.5 –23.0 –13.9 – 4.6 + 1.2 – 0.2 + 0.1
2021 +113.2 +140.9 – 25.5 – 9.6 –15.9 – 1.4 –14.5 + 0.9 – 3.1 – 0.6 + 2.8 + 0.2
2021 Oct. + 25.7 + 16.0 + 10.3 + 9.7 + 0.7 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 1.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 13.5 + 20.6 – 6.6 – 4.3 – 2.3 – 0.6 – 1.7 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.6
Dec. – 22.3 – 27.5 + 4.1 + 3.3 + 0.8 – 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 1.8 – 0.6
2022 Jan. + 26.2 + 30.2 – 3.3 – 2.3 – 1.0 – 0.4 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.8
Feb. + 7.5 + 10.7 – 3.0 – 2.1 – 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2
Mar. – 7.4 – 2.7 – 2.8 – 0.8 – 2.0 – 0.1 – 1.9 – 1.8 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3
Apr. + 10.3 + 8.5 + 2.5 + 5.3 – 2.8 + 0.2 – 3.0 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.5
May – 1.4 + 13.5 – 13.6 – 11.7 – 1.9 + 0.2 – 2.1 – 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
June – 4.2 – 3.2 + 0.8 + 2.9 – 2.1 + 0.4 – 2.4 – 1.8 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1
July + 30.0 + 21.0 + 10.4 + 10.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 – 0.1 – 1.8 + 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.5
Aug. + 33.8 + 26.7 + 8.6 + 9.8 – 1.2 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 2.4 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2
Sep. + 14.8 – 8.9 + 28.2 + 28.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 5.3 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.8 – 0.4
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2019 1,031.5 614.4 399.7 81.1 318.6 15.5 303.1 6.7 10.7 2.4 10.1 0.0
2020 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2021 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2021 Oct. 1,160.1 779.7 366.3 88.4 277.9 15.6 262.3 5.7 8.4 2.3 10.6 1.4
Nov. 1,166.2 791.7 361.1 84.3 276.7 15.5 261.3 5.5 8.0 2.3 10.5 0.9
Dec. 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2022 Jan. 1,170.4 795.8 361.6 85.3 276.4 15.9 260.4 5.1 7.8 2.4 12.2 1.1
Feb. 1,165.1 793.2 359.0 83.4 275.6 15.4 260.2 5.2 7.8 2.2 12.2 1.2
Mar. 1,171.9 802.1 356.9 82.7 274.2 15.5 258.7 5.2 7.8 2.3 12.3 1.6
Apr. 1,165.3 792.4 360.0 88.0 272.0 16.0 256.1 5.2 7.7 2.3 12.4 1.1
May 1,165.6 806.0 346.7 76.4 270.4 16.3 254.1 5.1 7.7 2.3 12.3 0.8
June 1,158.9 798.2 347.9 78.6 269.3 16.9 252.3 5.1 7.7 2.3 12.4 0.7
July 1,168.8 797.0 358.8 88.5 270.3 17.5 252.8 5.1 7.9 1.9 12.5 1.2
Aug. 1,205.4 826.9 365.4 96.1 269.3 16.8 252.4 5.1 8.0 1.9 12.6 1.4
Sep. 1,215.7 815.8 386.8 117.9 268.9 16.6 252.3 5.0 8.1 1.9 13.4 1.0
Changes *
2020 + 81.0 +101.2 – 18.0 + 7.0 –25.0 – 0.4 –24.6 – 0.8 – 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.1
2021 + 28.5 + 47.1 – 16.8 – 1.2 –15.7 + 0.5 –16.2 – 0.5 – 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.2
2021 Oct. + 18.7 + 7.7 + 11.1 + 10.2 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 6.1 + 11.9 – 5.4 – 3.9 – 1.5 – 0.1 – 1.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.6
Dec. – 23.4 – 26.5 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.8 – 0.6
2022 Jan. + 27.8 + 30.8 – 2.6 – 2.1 – 0.5 + 0.1 – 0.7 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.8
Feb. – 5.3 – 2.6 – 2.7 – 1.9 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
Mar. + 6.6 + 8.8 – 2.2 – 0.7 – 1.5 + 0.0 – 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3
Apr. – 6.6 – 9.6 + 3.2 + 5.4 – 2.2 + 0.4 – 2.6 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5
May – 0.5 + 12.6 – 13.0 – 11.7 – 1.4 + 0.3 – 1.7 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2
June – 6.7 – 7.8 + 1.2 + 2.2 – 1.1 + 0.6 – 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1
July + 8.8 – 1.4 + 10.0 + 9.3 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.5
Aug. + 36.6 + 29.9 + 6.6 + 7.6 – 1.0 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2
Sep. + 9.9 – 11.4 + 21.3 + 21.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.4
4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
36•
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2  
by creditor group by creditor group 
Domestic households Domestic households
PeriodDeposits of
domestic
households
and
non-profit
institutions,
total Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individualsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tions Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individuals
End of year or month *
2019 2,392.4 1,547.2 1,507.9 266.3 1,081.6 160.1 39.3 261.7 248.3 20.8 190.2 37.3
2020 2,539.5 1,713.8 1,672.7 291.1 1,215.4 166.2 41.1 258.6 245.1 19.3 190.5 35.2
2021 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2022 Apr. 2,637.6 1,827.0 1,780.5 309.6 1,308.1 162.8 46.4 247.6 235.9 18.6 182.5 34.9
May 2,635.6 1,827.0 1,780.3 311.6 1,308.0 160.8 46.7 247.0 235.0 18.6 181.8 34.6
June 2,638.0 1,831.5 1,784.9 308.1 1,316.2 160.7 46.6 246.6 234.4 19.0 181.0 34.4
July 2,659.3 1,853.9 1,807.6 317.0 1,328.2 162.4 46.3 247.1 234.8 19.3 181.0 34.4
Aug. 2,656.3 1,850.8 1,803.8 320.0 1,323.2 160.5 47.0 248.8 235.7 19.8 181.7 34.1
Sep. 2,661.2 1,853.3 1,805.7 314.2 1,329.9 161.5 47.6 255.7 241.9 21.8 185.7 34.4
Changes *
2020 +147.5 +166.9 +165.0 +26.0 +131.5 + 7.5 + 1.8 – 3.1 – 3.2 – 1.5 – 1.6 –0.2
2021 + 84.7 +93.8 +90.3 +17.3 +73.7 – 0.6 + 3.5 – 8.6 – 7.2 – 1.1 – 4.7 –1.3
2022 Apr. + 16.8 +18.2 +18.2 + 6.0 +11.4 + 0.8 + 0.0 – 0.7 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 0.4 +0.0
May – 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 2.0 – 0.2 – 1.1 + 0.2 – 0.6 – 0.9 – – 0.6 –0.3
June + 2.4 + 4.5 + 4.6 – 3.5 + 8.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.6 + 0.4 – 0.9 –0.1
July + 21.3 +22.4 +22.7 + 8.9 +12.5 + 1.2 – 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 –0.1
Aug. – 2.8 – 3.2 – 3.9 + 3.0 – 5.1 – 1.9 + 0.7 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.8 –0.1
Sep. + 4.9 + 2.5 + 1.9 – 5.8 + 6.7 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 6.8 + 6.3 + 2.0 + 4.0 +0.3
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional.Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
marked.  1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
€ billion
Deposits    
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
PeriodDomestic
government,
total TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans
End of year or month *
2019 237.1 11.2 5.4 1.5 4.2 0.1 11.6 53.8 21.1 17.1 14.5 1.0 13.1
2020 229.5 48.6 4.8 7.2 36.5 0.0 11.3 46.5 21.2 11.4 13.2 0.7 14.1
2021 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2022 Apr. 243.7 42.2 5.1 1.1 36.0 0.1 11.7 60.7 21.9 26.9 11.4 0.5 13.8
May 255.6 42.8 5.6 1.1 36.0 0.1 11.7 62.0 21.1 29.0 11.4 0.5 13.9
June 254.9 43.0 5.5 4.4 33.1 0.1 11.6 62.8 18.0 33.0 11.3 0.5 13.8
July 258.3 44.0 5.7 4.2 34.0 0.1 11.5 65.7 17.2 36.8 11.2 0.5 13.9
Aug. 272.6 44.0 5.6 4.3 34.0 0.1 11.5 65.7 16.0 38.1 11.1 0.5 14.0
Sep. 273.0 43.3 6.7 8.3 28.2 0.1 11.6 71.2 19.4 40.5 10.8 0.5 14.1
Changes *
2020 – 6.9 +37.3 –0.6 +5.7 +32.2 –0.0 –0.3 –7.0 +0.2 –5.7 –1.3 –0.2 +1.0
2021 –17.9 –5.0 –0.5 –4.1 –0.4 +0.0 +0.3 +1.0 +0.6 +2.3 –1.8 –0.1 +0.0
2022 Apr. + 2.7 +0.0 +0.2 –0.1 +0.0 –0.0 +0.0 –1.0 –1.6 +0.8 –0.3 –0.0 +0.0
May +11.5 +0.6 +0.6 +0.0 +0.0 –0.0 –0.0 +1.3 –0.8 +2.0 +0.1 –0.0 +0.0
June – 0.7 +0.2 –0.2 +3.3 –2.9 +0.0 –0.1 +0.8 –3.1 +4.0 –0.1 –0.0 –0.0
July + 3.5 +1.1 +0.2 –0.1 +1.0 – –0.1 +2.8 –0.8 +3.8 –0.1 –0.0 +0.1
Aug. +14.3 +0.0 –0.1 +0.1 +0.0 +0.0 +0.0 +0.0 –1.2 +1.4 –0.2 –0.0 +0.1
Sep. + 0.4 –0.7 +1.1 +4.0 –5.8 –0.0 +0.0 +5.5 +3.4 +2.4 –0.3 +0.0 +0.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and DeutscheTelekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”.
Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date
are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
37•
IV. Banks
Savings deposits  3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year  2
of which:
Domestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsup to and
including
1 year Totalup to and
including
2 yearsmore than
2 years TotalDomestic
householdsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsBank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)  5Liabilities
arising
from repos Period
End of year or month *
13.3 45.6 216.1 11.2 204.9 565.1 558.1 7.0 18.4 5.4 2.4 –2019
13.5 40.1 218.5 12.0 206.5 552.0 545.7 6.3 15.1 6.7 2.7 –2020
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 –2021
11.7 31.0 216.6 9.1 207.5 550.3 544.4 5.9 12.7 5.9 2.9 –2022 Apr.
12.0 30.9 216.1 9.0 207.2 549.0 543.1 5.9 12.6 5.7 2.8 – May
12.2 31.5 215.1 8.7 206.4 547.3 541.4 5.9 12.6 5.7 2.9 – June
12.3 32.3 214.8 8.8 206.1 545.5 539.7 5.7 12.8 5.6 2.9 – July
13.2 34.5 214.4 8.8 205.6 543.1 537.4 5.7 13.5 5.6 2.9 – Aug.
13.7 41.3 214.4 8.9 205.4 537.9 532.3 5.6 14.3 5.6 3.0 – Sep.
Changes *
+ 0.2 – 5.5 + 2.4 +0.9 + 1.6 –13.0 –12.3 –0.7 – 3.3 +1.3 + 0.2 –2020
– 1.4 – 8.4 – 0.2 –1.9 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 1.5 –0.1 – 1.9 –0.6 + 0.2 –2021
– 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.5 –0.2 – 0.3 – 0.6 – 0.6 –0.0 – 0.1 –0.1 + 0.0 –2022 Apr.
+ 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.5 –0.1 – 0.4 – 1.3 – 1.3 –0.0 – 0.0 –0.2 – 0.0 – May
+ 0.2 + 0.6 – 1.0 –0.3 – 0.7 – 1.8 – 1.7 –0.1 – 0.0 –0.0 + 0.0 – June
+ 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.3 +0.0 – 0.4 – 1.8 – 1.7 –0.1 + 0.2 –0.1 + 0.0 – July
+ 0.8 + 2.2 – 0.2 +0.1 – 0.3 – 2.3 – 2.3 –0.1 + 0.7 –0.1 + 0.0 – Aug.
+ 0.6 + 6.8 + 0.0 +0.2 – 0.2 – 5.2 – 5.1 –0.1 + 0.8 +0.0 + 0.0 – Sep.
registered debt securities.  2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Table IV.12).  3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsofootnote 2).  4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2,4Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
65.3 37.4 8.6 14.0 5.4 0.0 106.8 10.8 48.8 46.2 1.1 –2019
68.5 43.2 8.0 12.4 4.9 0.0 66.0 10.9 32.9 21.4 0.8 –2020
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 –2021
67.5 43.1 7.6 12.4 4.4 0.0 73.4 16.1 35.3 21.1 0.9 –2022 Apr.
72.4 47.9 7.0 13.1 4.4 0.0 78.4 16.8 39.0 21.7 0.9 – May
70.1 45.2 7.2 13.2 4.4 0.0 78.9 16.0 40.0 22.0 0.9 – June
67.0 41.2 7.7 13.7 4.4 0.0 81.6 13.9 44.3 22.6 0.7 – July
76.2 48.9 9.1 13.8 4.4 0.0 86.7 18.6 44.7 22.6 0.7 – Aug.
72.1 45.0 9.5 13.2 4.4 0.0 86.5 15.5 46.3 23.9 0.7 – Sep.
Changes *
+3.5 +5.9 – 0.6 –1.3 – 0.5 –0.0 –40.8 +0.2 –15.9 –24.8 – 0.3 –2020
+2.8 +5.6 – 2.0 –0.2 – 0.5 – –16.8 –2.2 –13.9 –0.6 + 0.1 –2021
+0.1 –0.2 + 0.1 +0.3 – 0.0 – + 3.6 +2.6 + 0.4 +0.6 + 0.0 –2022 Apr.
+6.0 +4.8 + 0.8 +0.4 + 0.0 – + 3.6 +0.7 + 2.4 +0.5 – 0.0 – May
–2.3 –2.6 + 0.2 +0.1 + 0.0 – + 0.6 –0.7 + 1.0 +0.3 – 0.0 – June
–3.1 –4.0 + 0.5 +0.5 – – + 2.7 –2.1 + 4.3 +0.6 – 0.1 – July
+9.1 +7.6 + 1.4 +0.1 + 0.0 – + 5.1 +4.7 + 0.4 +0.0 + 0.0 – Aug.
–4.1 –3.9 + 0.4 –0.6 + 0.0 – – 0.2 –3.1 + 1.6 +1.3 – – Sep.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Federal Railways Fund,
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund,
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund.  2 Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities.  3 Including deposits under savings and loan
contracts.  4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
38•
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months'
noticeat more than 3
months' notice
Period Total Total Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeMemo
item:
Interest
credited
on
savings
depositsnon-banks,
total Totalof which:
With
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsforeign
non-banks
End of year or month *
2019 581.8 575.2 540.5 313.2 34.7 24.7 6.6 5.9 2.0 35.9 33.2 25.1 2.6
2020 566.8 560.6 533.3 288.0 27.3 18.0 6.3 5.7 1.8 30.2 28.3 22.1 1.9
2021 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 1.5 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2022 May 562.3 556.6 534.0 262.2 22.5 13.5 5.7 5.2 0.1 24.0 23.8 18.8 0.1
June 560.4 554.8 532.4 259.4 22.4 13.4 5.6 5.2 0.1 24.0 23.8 18.8 0.1
July 558.6 553.0 530.7 259.5 22.2 13.3 5.6 5.2 0.1 24.2 24.1 18.9 0.1
Aug. 556.1 550.6 528.4 257.1 22.2 13.3 5.6 5.1 0.1 25.1 25.0 19.2 0.2
Sep. 550.7 545.2 523.1 252.7 22.1 13.3 5.5 5.0 0.1 26.1 25.9 19.4 0.2
Changes *
2020 –14.8 –14.5 –7.2 –24.6 –7.3 –6.7 –0.3 –0.2 . –5.7 –4.9 –3.0 –0.7
2021 +0.3 +0.7 +3.9 –18.5 –3.2 –3.2 –0.4 –0.3 . –5.2 –3.5 –2.3 –1.7
2022 May –1.4 –1.3 –1.2 +0.2 –0.1 –0.2 –0.1 –0.1 . +0.0 +0.0 –0.0 –
June –1.8 –1.8 –1.6 –2.8 –0.2 –0.1 –0.0 –0.0 . –0.0 –0.0 –0.0 –
July –1.9 –1.8 –1.7 +0.2 –0.2 –0.0 –0.0 –0.0 . +0.3 +0.3 +0.1 –
Aug. –2.5 –2.4 –2.3 –2.3 –0.1 –0.0 –0.1 –0.1 . +0.9 +0.9 +0.3 +0.0
Sep. –5.4 –5.3 –5.3 –4.3 –0.0 –0.0 –0.1 –0.1 . +1.0 +0.9 +0.2 +0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified as timedeposits.  2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
basic rate of interest.  3 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
securities.
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
of which:
with maturities ofNon-negotiable
bearer debt
securities and
money market
paper  6 Subordinated
up to
and including 1 yearmore than 1 year up to
and including 2 years
Period TotalFloating
rate
bonds  1Zero
coupon
bonds  1,2Foreign
currency
bonds  3,4Certifi-
cates
of
deposit Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5more
than
2 years Totalof which:
with
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsnegotiable
debt
securitiesnon-
negotiable
debt
securities
End of year or month *
2019 1,140.7 123.5 28.6 367.7 96.7 117.7 2.6 23.6 4.2 999.4 0.9 0.7 31.5 0.4
2020 1,119.0 117.1 12.7 313.6 89.4 94.3 1.5 23.8 3.1 1,000.9 1.1 0.9 34.8 0.4
2021 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2022 May 1,226.2 98.3 15.0 339.3 100.2 109.3 2.4 16.2 4.5 1,100.7 0.4 0.4 35.7 0.1
June 1,237.2 99.0 16.2 353.3 113.3 124.4 2.3 16.8 4.1 1,096.1 0.8 0.8 36.4 0.1
July 1,237.8 98.0 16.2 344.8 105.0 115.4 2.1 17.7 4.1 1,104.7 1.0 0.9 36.5 0.1
Aug. 1,239.1 96.8 16.7 336.8 98.9 109.9 2.1 21.6 4.1 1,107.7 0.9 0.8 37.4 0.1
Sep. 1,271.1 96.1 16.9 353.1 117.9 128.8 1.9 23.1 3.9 1,119.3 0.8 0.8 38.2 0.1
Changes *
2020 –20.5 –5.2 –0.8 –54.1 –22.3 –22.2 – 1.1 +0.2 –1.1 +1.5 +0.3 +0.2 +2.1 –0.0
2021 +54.0 –10.3 +0.8 +17.6 +9.4 +12.6 + 0.4 –5.9 +1.3 +47.3 +0.4 +0.3 –0.2 –0.3
2022 May – 1.0 –1.8 +0.4 –5.4 –4.1 –3.8 – 0.6 +0.9 +0.1 +1.9 –0.0 –0.0 –0.3 –
June +11.1 +0.6 +1.3 +14.1 +13.2 +15.1 – 0.0 +0.6 –0.4 –4.7 +0.4 +0.4 +0.7 –
July + 1.8 +0.3 –0.0 –8.5 –8.3 –9.0 – 0.2 +0.9 –0.0 +9.8 +0.1 +0.1 +0.1 –
Aug. + 1.3 –1.2 +0.5 –8.0 –6.1 –5.5 + 0.0 +3.8 –0.1 +3.0 –0.0 –0.0 +0.9 –
Sep. +32.0 –0.7 +0.2 +16.3 +19.0 +18.9 – 0.2 +1.5 –0.2 +11.6 –0.1 –0.1 +0.8 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies.  2 Issue value when
floated.  3 Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreigncurrencies.  4 Bonds denominated in non-euro area currencies.  5 Negotiable bearer debt
securities and money market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%.
6 Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see
also Table IV.10, footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
39•
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks
(MFIs)  6Deposits of non-
banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans
End of
year/monthNum-
ber
of
associ-
ationsBalance
sheet
total  1Credit
bal-
ances
and
loans
(ex-
cluding
building
loans)  2Building
loans  3Bank
debt
secur-
ities  4Loans
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsInterim
and
bridging
loansOther
building
loansSecur- 
ities (in-
cluding
Treasury
bills
and
Treasury
discount
paper)  5Deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight
and time
depositsDeposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight and
time de-
posits  7Bearer
debt
secur-
ities
out-
stand-
ingCapital
(includ-
ing pub-
lished
re-
serves)  8Memo
item:
New
con-
tracts
entered
into in
year or
month  9
All building and loan associations
2021 18 253.2 30.0 0.0 15.7 10.1 130.5 36.7 26.5 3.0 30.1 184.4 9.2 4.2 12.4 71.4
2022 July 18 260.0 33.7 0.0 15.0 10.3 133.6 39.4 24.2 2.9 36.8 184.0 9.5 4.6 12.1 8.7
Aug. 18 258.9 32.3 0.0 15.0 10.4 133.9 39.8 23.6 2.9 36.0 184.0 9.3 4.6 12.1 8.1
Sep. 18 259.0 31.6 0.0 15.1 10.5 134.3 40.0 23.4 2.9 35.7 184.0 9.2 5.1 12.1 8.2
Private building and Ioan associations
2022 July 10 183.5 18.7 – 6.7 7.5 104.0 33.5 10.4 1.7 33.8 119.4 9.0 4.6 8.2 5.6
Aug. 10 182.3 17.4 – 6.7 7.6 104.2 33.8 9.9 1.7 33.0 119.3 8.8 4.6 8.2 5.3
Sep. 10 182.4 16.9 – 7.0 7.6 104.6 34.0 9.7 1.6 32.8 119.2 8.8 5.1 8.2 5.4
Public building and Ioan associations
2022 July 8 76.6 15.0 0.0 8.3 2.8 29.6 5.9 13.8 1.3 3.0 64.6 0.5 – 3.9 3.2
Aug. 8 76.6 14.9 0.0 8.3 2.8 29.7 6.0 13.7 1.3 3.0 64.8 0.5 – 3.9 2.8
Sep. 8 76.6 14.8 0.0 8.1 2.9 29.8 6.0 13.6 1.2 2.9 64.8 0.5 – 3.9 2.8
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Capital promised Capital disbursed Changes in deposits
under savings and
loan contracts AllocationsDisbursement
commitments
outstanding at
end of periodInterest and
repayments
received on
building loans  11
Deposits under
savings and
loan contractsLoans under
savings and
loan contracts  10
PeriodAmounts
paid into
savings
and
loan ac-
counts  10Interest
credited
on
deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsRepay-
ments
of
deposits
under
cancelled
savings
and
loan
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Net
alloca-
tions  12 Total Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loans Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loansNewly
granted
interim
and
bridging
loans
and
other
building
loans Totalof
which:
Under
alloc-
ated
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Repay-
ments
during
quarterMemo
item:
Housing
bonuses
re-
ceived  13
All building and loan associations
2021 27.7 2.0 9.1 52.3 27.7 47.1 18.3 4.0 4.2 3.4 24.7 18.6 6.3 6.1 4.9 0.1
2022 July 2.2 0.1 0.8 4.0 2.5 4.1 1.7 0.3 0.5 0.4 1.9 18.8 6.6 0.4 0.0
Aug. 2.2 0.1 0.7 3.9 2.5 3.9 1.6 0.4 0.5 0.3 1.9 19.0 6.6 0.4 0.0
Sep. 2.2 0.1 0.8 3.7 2.4 3.9 1.6 0.4 0.5 0.3 1.8 18.3 6.5 0.4 ... 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2022 July 1.4 0.1 0.5 2.8 1.7 3.1 1.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.5 13.4 3.5 0.3 0.0
Aug. 1.4 0.1 0.4 2.8 1.7 3.0 1.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.5 13.6 3.5 0.3 0.0
Sep. 1.4 0.1 0.4 2.7 1.7 2.9 1.2 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.4 13.2 3.5 0.3 ... 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2022 July 0.8 0.0 0.4 1.2 0.8 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 5.4 3.0 0.1 0.0
Aug. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 5.4 3.1 0.1 0.0
Sep. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.7 1.0 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.4 5.2 3.0 0.1 ... 0.0
* Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures for
the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 See Table IV.2,
footnote 1.  2 Including claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from
registered debt securities and central bank credit balances.  3 Loans under savings and
loan contracts and interim and bridging loans.  4 Including money market paper and
small amounts of other securities issued by banks.  5 Including equalisation claims.
6 Including liabilities to building and loan associations.  7 Including small amounts of
savings deposits.  8 Including participation rights capital and fund for general bankingrisks. 9 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
new contracts.  10 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital disbursed".  11 Including housing
bonuses credited.  12 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans.  13 The amounts already
credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into
savings and loan accounts" and "Interest and repayments received on building loans".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2019 52 198 1,453.0 407.3 389.2 216.0 173.2 18.1 534.3 436.1 19.7 416.4 98.2 511.5 361.7
2020 50 206 1,552.2 376.7 364.0 213.2 150.8 12.7 504.8 409.6 14.3 395.3 95.2 670.7 523.6
2021 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2021 Nov. 50 204 1,595.0 495.2 481.1 306.5 174.6 14.2 506.4 425.8 13.0 412.7 80.6 593.4 436.9
Dec. 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2022 Jan. 50 209 1,618.8 563.0 548.5 366.5 181.9 14.6 537.7 460.1 13.1 447.0 77.6 518.1 378.0
Feb. 50 209 1,634.4 566.4 551.9 379.5 172.4 14.5 539.7 464.4 13.2 451.1 75.3 528.3 384.8
Mar. 50 208 1,674.9 564.7 550.5 369.7 180.8 14.2 540.1 461.4 13.5 447.9 78.7 570.1 421.1
Apr. 50 208 1,784.0 556.5 542.2 370.7 171.5 14.3 552.8 474.5 13.3 461.2 78.3 674.7 529.5
May 50 208 1,759.2 551.2 537.3 369.0 168.3 13.9 554.0 477.6 13.1 464.5 76.4 653.9 514.9
June 51 211 1,741.0 516.8 502.8 338.8 164.0 13.9 553.5 480.7 12.1 468.6 72.8 670.7 524.4
July 52 211 1,688.6 503.1 488.6 327.5 161.1 14.5 555.8 484.9 11.0 474.0 70.8 629.7 454.0
Aug. 50 208 1,735.3 497.8 483.0 328.4 154.6 14.8 569.2 497.0 11.1 485.9 72.2 668.3 503.1
Changes *
2020 –2 +9 +104.2 –20.3 –15.5 –2.8 –12.7 –4.8 +0.2 –1.0 –5.4 +4.4 +1.2 +164.2 +179.6
2021 +1 +1 –48.4 +87.3 +87.1 +84.9 +2.2 +0.3 –26.2 –6.5 –1.3 –5.1 –19.7 –136.9 –128.1
2021 Dec. +1 +3 –90.4 –24.0 –23.2 –8.6 –14.6 –0.8 –9.2 –7.0 –0.1 –6.8 –2.2 – 57.3 –32.5
2022 Jan. –1 +2 +113.7 +90.4 +89.2 +68.7 +20.5 +1.2 +36.3 +37.6 +0.2 +37.4 –1.4 – 18.6 –27.9
Feb. – – +15.8 +3.8 +3.9 +13.0 –9.0 –0.1 +3.3 +5.4 +0.1 +5.3 –2.1 + 10.4 + 7.1
Mar. – –1 +40.1 –2.0 –1.7 –9.9 +8.1 –0.3 –1.0 –4.3 +0.2 –4.6 +3.3 + 41.5 +35.7
Apr. – – +106.5 –13.1 –13.1 +1.0 –14.2 +0.1 –1.3 +0.7 –0.1 +0.8 –2.0 +102.0 +104.5
May – – –24.0 –3.4 –3.0 –1.6 –1.5 –0.4 +6.5 +7.8 –0.3 +8.1 –1.3 – 19.9 –13.4
June +1 +3 –19.9 –36.9 –36.9 –30.2 –6.6 +0.0 –8.4 –4.0 –1.0 –3.1 –4.4 + 15.1 + 7.4
July +1 – –53.4 –15.9 –16.5 –11.3 –5.2 +0.5 –4.8 –2.0 –1.2 –0.8 –2.7 – 42.0 –71.9
Aug. –2 –3 +51.8 –6.6 –6.9 +0.9 –7.8 +0.3 +9.0 +8.0 +0.1 +7.9 +1.0 + 37.8 +47.9
Foreign subsidiaries                                           End of year or month *
2019 15 41 235.2 52.5 46.7 18.3 28.4 5.7 139.0 116.1 14.4 101.7 22.9 43.7 0.0
2020 12 36 229.5 44.8 39.9 17.4 22.5 4.9 139.7 114.4 13.1 101.4 25.3 44.9 0.0
2021 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2021 Nov. 12 35 247.1 52.9 46.7 24.0 22.8 6.2 138.5 115.4 12.6 102.8 23.1 55.7 0.0
Dec. 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2022 Jan. 12 35 245.1 45.9 40.9 20.1 20.8 5.0 140.6 117.5 12.7 104.8 23.1 58.5 0.0
Feb. 12 35 245.7 46.2 41.4 21.1 20.3 4.8 140.6 117.7 12.7 105.0 22.9 58.9 0.0
Mar. 12 35 249.3 45.9 40.9 20.6 20.3 5.0 143.4 119.7 12.9 106.8 23.7 60.0 0.0
Apr. 12 35 253.6 49.4 44.1 21.5 22.6 5.3 145.3 121.6 12.8 108.8 23.7 58.8 0.0
May 12 35 256.5 48.5 43.6 19.6 24.1 4.9 147.7 123.9 13.2 110.8 23.8 60.2 0.0
June 12 35 258.0 50.3 44.6 21.5 23.1 5.7 148.9 125.1 13.1 112.0 23.8 58.8 0.0
July 11 34 256.6 47.8 42.1 19.7 22.4 5.7 150.6 126.0 13.0 113.0 24.7 58.2 0.0
Aug. 11 34 263.5 48.4 42.8 19.7 23.0 5.6 150.1 125.5 13.2 112.3 24.6 64.9 0.0
Changes *
2020 –3 –5 –0.8 –5.3 –5.0 –1.0 –4.0 –0.3 +3.3 +0.8 –1.3 +2.1 +2.4 + 1.2 ± 0.0
2021 ±0 –1 +12.0 +3.8 +2.8 +3.4 –0.5 +1.0 –2.5 –0.5 –0.5 –0.0 –2.1 + 10.8 ± 0.0
2021 Dec. – – –1.4 –2.3 –2.4 –3.2 +0.8 +0.1 +0.9 +0.8 +0.0 +0.7 +0.1 – 0.0 ± 0.0
2022 Jan. – – –1.9 –5.0 –3.9 –0.7 –3.0 –1.4 +0.7 +0.8 +0.0 +0.8 –0.1 + 2.6 ± 0.0
Feb. – – +0.8 +0.4 +0.6 +1.0 –0.4 –0.2 +0.1 +0.3 +0.0 +0.3 –0.2 + 0.3 ± 0.0
Mar. – – +3.2 –0.5 –0.7 –0.5 –0.2 +0.2 +2.6 +1.8 +0.2 +1.6 +0.8 + 1.1 ± 0.0
Apr. – – +1.4 +2.0 +2.1 +1.0 +1.1 –0.1 +0.5 +0.6 –0.1 +0.6 –0.0 – 1.1 ± 0.0
May – – +4.0 –0.3 –0.1 –1.9 +1.9 –0.3 +2.9 +2.8 +0.3 +2.5 +0.1 + 1.4 ± 0.0
June – – –0.3 +0.8 +0.2 +2.0 –1.8 +0.6 +0.3 +0.3 –0.0 +0.3 +0.0 – 1.4 ± 0.0
July –1 –1 –2.8 –3.2 –3.1 –1.9 –1.2 –0.1 +1.0 +0.2 –0.2 +0.3 +0.8 – 0.6 ± 0.0
Aug. – – +5.9 +0.2 +0.3 +0.1 +0.2 –0.1 –0.9 –0.9 +0.3 –1.1 –0.1 + 6.7 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated fromthe flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always
to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
894.1 613.6 453.2 160.4 280.5 12.7 10.1 2.7 267.8 94.6 53.4 410.9 361.1 2019
872.2 588.5 431.8 156.7 283.7 11.7 10.2 1.5 272.0 61.5 49.9 568.6 523.1 2020
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 2021
988.0 655.8 458.2 197.6 332.2 8.9 7.1 1.8 323.3 82.6 51.9 472.4 435.9 2021 Nov.
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 Dec.
1,066.8 659.1 457.3 201.8 407.7 9.5 7.7 1.8 398.2 86.1 51.8 414.1 377.6 2022 Jan.
1,079.5 664.5 466.8 197.6 415.0 9.8 8.1 1.7 405.2 82.7 51.8 420.4 383.8 Feb.
1,087.0 663.1 462.8 200.3 423.9 10.7 9.0 1.7 413.2 80.7 52.3 454.9 418.8 Mar.
1,075.8 655.6 453.6 202.0 420.1 10.5 8.7 1.8 409.7 88.6 53.3 566.4 526.8 Apr.
1,059.1 633.0 437.3 195.7 426.1 10.5 8.7 1.7 415.6 90.4 52.9 556.8 512.4 May
1,035.8 630.0 447.9 182.1 405.8 10.7 8.9 1.8 395.1 84.1 53.4 567.7 521.9 June
1,045.4 634.6 458.7 175.9 410.8 10.6 8.8 1.8 400.2 81.3 53.9 507.9 452.6 July
1,050.7 639.8 470.6 169.1 411.0 11.3 9.5 1.8 399.6 88.1 54.6 541.9 500.5 Aug.
Changes *
– 9.2 –13.3 –21.4 + 8.1 + 4.1 – 1.0 + 0.3 – 1.4 + 5.1 –28.1 – 3.5 +157.6 + 162.0 2020
+71.1 +43.1 +31.0 +12.0 + 28.1 – 3.6 – 3.9 + 0.3 +31.7 + 0.1 + 1.4 –130.8 – 119.7 2021
–37.8 –17.3 +3.0 –20.3 –20.5 – 0.8 – 0.8 – 0.0 –19.7 –17.5 –0.7 – 34.5 – 32.5 2021 Dec.
+114.7 +18.7 –4.0 +22.7 +96.0 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 +94.6 +20.4 +0.6 – 23.8 – 25.8 2022 Jan.
+13.3 +6.0 +9.6 –3.6 + 7.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 – 0.1 + 7.0 – 3.2 +0.0 + 6.3 + 6.3 Feb.
+ 7.0 –1.8 –4.0 +2.2 + 8.8 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 7.9 – 2.4 +0.5 + 34.5 + 35.0 Mar.
–15.2 –11.0 –9.2 –1.8 – 4.2 – 0.2 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 4.0 + 5.3 +0.9 +108.8 + 108.0 Apr.
–10.4 –16.5 –12.5 –4.1 + 6.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 6.2 + 2.7 –0.4 – 13.3 – 14.4 May
–26.9 –6.4 +10.6 –17.0 –20.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 –20.7 – 8.0 +0.5 + 10.9 + 9.5 June
+ 6.6 +1.9 +10.8 –8.9 + 4.7 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 4.8 – 3.9 +0.5 – 59.8 – 69.3 July
+ 3.4 +3.4 +11.9 –8.6 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 – 0.7 + 6.0 +0.6 + 39.9 + 48.0 Aug.
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
165.7 68.7 36.6 32.1 97.0 6.6 3.9 2.7 90.4 16.0 22.1 31.4 0.0 2019
163.4 59.6 34.1 25.5 103.8 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.1 16.6 20.3 29.2 0.0 2020
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 2021
177.5 62.6 31.1 31.5 114.9 7.0 4.6 2.4 107.9 17.5 20.3 31.7 0.0 2021 Nov.
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 Dec.
179.6 64.8 33.2 31.7 114.7 7.2 4.8 2.4 107.5 15.9 19.9 29.8 0.0 2022 Jan.
180.9 66.3 33.7 32.7 114.5 7.4 5.0 2.4 107.1 15.8 19.8 29.3 0.0 Feb.
184.0 66.5 34.2 32.3 117.5 7.5 5.1 2.4 110.0 15.7 19.8 29.8 0.0 Mar.
187.8 70.6 36.1 34.4 117.2 7.2 4.8 2.4 110.0 15.5 19.9 30.3 0.0 Apr.
190.9 70.3 36.3 34.1 120.5 7.2 4.8 2.4 113.3 15.3 20.1 30.2 0.0 May
190.7 68.9 35.9 33.0 121.7 7.4 5.1 2.3 114.3 16.0 20.3 31.0 0.0 June
189.6 66.3 35.0 31.4 123.3 7.7 5.4 2.4 115.5 15.6 20.2 31.2 0.0 July
194.4 67.0 36.3 30.7 127.5 8.1 5.7 2.3 119.4 15.3 20.4 33.3 0.0 Aug.
Changes *
+ 1.4 – 7.3 – 2.5 – 4.8 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.3 + 8.7 + 0.6 – 1.8 – 1.0 ± 0.0 2020
+12.1 + 3.2 – 1.1 + 4.3 + 8.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 2021
+ 0.9 +1.5 +1.9 –0.3 – 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 1.2 –0.0 – 1.2 ± 0.0 2021 Dec.
+ 0.4 +0.4 +0.2 +0.2 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5 –0.5 – 1.2 ± 0.0 2022 Jan.
+ 1.5 +1.6 +0.5 +1.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.1 –0.1 – 0.5 ± 0.0 Feb.
+ 2.8 +0.1 +0.5 –0.5 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 2.7 – 0.1 +0.1 + 0.4 ± 0.0 Mar.
+ 1.6 +3.1 +1.9 +1.2 – 1.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.2 – 0.2 +0.1 – 0.1 ± 0.0 Apr.
+ 3.8 +0.1 +0.1 –0.0 + 3.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.8 – 0.2 +0.2 + 0.1 ± 0.0 May
– 1.5 –2.0 –0.4 –1.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.7 +0.2 + 0.4 ± 0.0 June
– 2.0 –3.0 –1.0 –2.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.4 –0.1 – 0.3 ± 0.0 July
+ 4.1 +0.4 +1.3 –0.9 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 3.4 – 0.3 +0.2 + 1.9 ± 0.0 Aug.
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and
other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.  4 Excluding
subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of negotiable andnon-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Including subordinated
liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 3,656.9 0.1
2022 Sep. 16,469.8 164.7 164.4 332.0 167.7 0.1
Oct. . . . . . .
p Nov. 16,753.0 167.5 167.2 ... ... ...
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
2022 Sep. 4,448,025 27.0 44,480 44,344 125,890 81,546 39
Oct. . . . . . . .
p Nov. 4,626,252 27.6 46,263 46,128 ... ... ...
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2022 Sep. 9,453 7,106 2,909 14,152 8,219 109 2,396
Oct. . . . . . . .
Nov. 9,860 7,463 3,017 14,396 8,279 118 2,634
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2022 Sep. 3,245,595 12,012 522,559 554,738 113,122
Oct. . . . . .
Nov. 3,338,047 14,874 561,376 546,860 128,993
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 5 of the
Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum
reserve requirements (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies,
pursuant to Article 6(1)(a)).  3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2%between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at
1%. 4 Article 6(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the
application of minimum reserve requirements.  5 Average credit balances of credit
institutions at national central banks.  6 Average credit balances less required reserves
after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.  7 Required reserves after deduction of the
lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2005 Dec. 6 1.25 – 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr. 13 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 2002 Jan. 1 2.57 2009 Jan. 1 1.62
July 13 0.75 1.50 – 2.25 July 1 2.47 July 1 0.12
2006 Mar. 8 1.50 – 2.50 3.50 Nov. 9 0.50 1.25 – 2.00
June 15 1.75 – 2.75 3.75 Dec. 14 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2003 Jan. 1 1.97 2011 July 1 0.37
Aug. 9 2.00 – 3.00 4.00 2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 July 1 1.22
Oct. 11 2.25 – 3.25 4.25 2012 Jan. 1 0.12
Dec. 13 2.50 – 3.50 4.50 2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 2004 Jan. 1 1.14
Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 July 1 1.13 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
2007 Mar. 14 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 July 1 – 0.38
June 13 3.00 – 4.00 5.00 2014 June 11 -0.10 0.15 – 0.40 2005 Jan. 1 1.21
Sep. 10 -0.20 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 1.17 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
2008 July 9 3.25 – 4.25 5.25 July 1 – 0.73
Oct. 8 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 2015 Dec. 9 -0.30 0.05 – 0.30 2006 Jan. 1 1.37
Oct. 9 3.25 3.75 – 4.25 July 1 1.95 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Nov. 12 2.75 3.25 – 3.75 2016 Mar. 16 -0.40 0.00 – 0.25
Dec. 10 2.00 2.50 – 3.00 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2016 July 1 – 0.88
2019 Sep. 18 -0.50 0.00 – 0.25 July 1 3.19
2009 Jan. 21 1.00 2.00 – 3.00
Mar. 11 0.50 1.50 – 2.50 2022 Jul. 27 0.00 0.50 – 0.75 2008 Jan. 1 3.32
Apr. 8 0.25 1.25 – 2.25 Sep. 14 0.75 1.25 – 1.50 July 1 3.19
May 13 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 Nov. 2 1,50 2,00 – 2,25
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2022 Oct. 5 3 665 3 665 1,25 - - 7
Oct. 12 3 622 3 622 1,25 - - 7
Oct. 19 3 640 3 640 1,25 - - 7
Oct. 26 4 588 4 588 1,25 - - 7
Nov. 5 3 105 3 105 2,00 - - 7
Nov. 12 1 545 1 545 2,00 - - 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2022 Sep. 29 722 722 2      … - - - 84
Oct. 27 408 408 2      … - - - 91
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month *
% per annum
EURIBOR  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 EONIA  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2022 Apr. – 0.584 . – 0.57 – 0.54 – 0.45 – 0.31 0.01
May – 0.585 . – 0.57 – 0.55 – 0.39 – 0.14 0.29
June – 0.582 . – 0.57 – 0.53 – 0.24 0.16 0.85
July – 0.511 . – 0.46 – 0.31 0.04 0.47 0.99
Aug. – 0.085 . – 0.07 0.02 0.40 0.84 1.25
Sep. 0.355 . 0.42 0.57 1.01 1.60 2.23
Oct. 0.656 . 0.70 0.92 1.43 2.00 2.63
* Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor anyone
else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the EURIBOR.
1 Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank
operations; calculated by the European Central Bank from January 4th 1999 until
September 30th 2019 based on real turnover according to the act/360 method. SinceOctober 1st 2019 calculated as Euro Short-Term Rate (€STR) + 8.5 basis points spread.
2 Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters since 30
December 1998 according to the act/360 method. Administrator for EONIA and
EURIBOR: European Money Markets Institute (EMMI)

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 Sep. 0.23 44,268 0.93 219,587 – 0.28 69,338 0.78 21,227
Oct. 0.23 43,497 0.92 219,456 – 0.29 75,404 0.77 22,443
Nov. 0.22 42,503 0.91 219,058 – 0.30 70,830 0.76 22,793
Dec. 0.18 41,979 0.91 220,289 – 0.37 75,038 0.74 22,966
2022 Jan. 0.18 41,157 0.90 220,225 – 0.31 72,404 0.73 23,078
Feb. 0.18 40,586 0.90 220,056 – 0.30 71,560 0.71 23,680
Mar. 0.17 40,201 0.89 219,655 – 0.28 68,341 0.74 24,011
Apr. 0.18 39,503 0.88 219,264 – 0.27 73,001 0.73 23,471
May 0.19 39,659 0.87 218,855 – 0.20 65,198 0.73 23,335
June 0.19 39,682 0.87 218,128 – 0.10 66,308 0.78 23,397
July 0.24 40,392 0.86 217,843 0.04 72,141 0.86 24,213
Aug. 0.30 42,949 0.86 217,606 0.17 79,349 0.92 24,813
Sep. 0.46 50,098 0.86 217,566 0.52 96,035 0.97 24,627
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 Sep. 1.94 4,521 1.52 27,117 1.80 1,427,271 6.67 45,750 3.32 81,133 3.32 325,265
Oct. 1.97 4,623 1.52 27,324 1.79 1,436,840 6.59 44,700 3.32 80,768 3.30 326,197
Nov. 2.08 3,680 1.52 26,929 1.77 1,446,574 6.53 44,871 3.32 79,066 3.30 328,130
Dec. 2.02 3,547 1.52 26,755 1.75 1,454,553 6.60 44,914 3.32 78,679 3.28 327,421
2022 Jan. 2.02 3,690 1.52 26,583 1.74 1,457,059 6.69 44,473 3.32 78,019 3.27 328,346
Feb. 2.02 3,559 1.52 26,620 1.73 1,464,103 6.61 44,903 3.32 77,521 3.26 328,991
Mar. 2.10 3,620 1.53 26,670 1.71 1,473,852 6.59 46,226 3.33 77,518 3.25 328,996
Apr. 2.08 3,636 1.54 26,766 1.71 1,483,015 6.52 45,715 3.33 77,073 3.25 329,959
May 2.15 3,584 1.55 26,874 1.70 1,492,093 6.51 46,567 3.33 76,658 3.25 330,295
June 2.19 3,573 1.58 26,899 1.70 1,500,141 6.59 47,810 3.36 76,324 3.27 330,379
July 2.28 3,687 1.70 27,244 1.70 1,508,724 6.58 46,813 3.39 77,074 3.27 333,017
Aug. 2.43 3,713 1.76 27,275 1.70 1,515,561 6.75 47,402 3.41 76,990 3.29 334,182
Sep. 2.61 3,627 1.86 27,290 1.70 1,522,592 6.94 48,424 3.46 76,416 3.32 333,385
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 Sep. 1.97 149,784 1.64 194,697 1.63 811,174
Oct. 1.92 158,326 1.63 197,964 1.62 813,714
Nov. 1.91 156,340 1.58 203,103 1.61 819,855
Dec. 1.82 161,611 1.56 202,457 1.59 822,730
2022 Jan. 1.81 166,574 1.57 202,813 1.58 824,650
Feb. 1.80 172,663 1.56 202,563 1.58 830,564
Mar. 1.90 179,074 1.58 204,001 1.57 832,210
Apr. 1.91 180,007 1.58 206,200 1.57 838,405
May 1.87 184,783 1.62 208,824 1.58 842,912
June 1.94 189,986 1.65 213,733 1.64 846,768
July 2.07 194,397 1.69 218,875 1.66 854,793
Aug. 2.24 209,826 1.74 226,447 1.68 861,022
Sep. 2.62 211,712 2.01 230,621 1.80 865,980
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 Sep. – 0.01 1,791,879 – 0.01 2,254 0.26 241 0.34 513 0.08 535,555 0.15 24,780
Oct. – 0.01 1,800,411 0.06 1,944 0.25 228 0.39 474 0.08 535,197 0.15 24,558
Nov. – 0.01 1,808,547 0.09 1,879 0.21 266 0.48 650 0.08 535,140 0.15 24,329
Dec. – 0.01 1,806,993 – 0.07 2,327 0.20 204 0.51 721 0.08 536,715 0.14 24,116
2022 Jan. – 0.01 1,806,352 0.11 2,132 0.22 363 0.36 642 0.08 537,038 0.14 23,363
Feb. – 0.02 1,819,881 0.06 2,167 0.25 226 0.33 564 0.07 537,327 0.13 23,136
Mar. – 0.02 1,808,690 0.12 2,044 0.28 258 0.38 824 0.07 535,696 0.13 22,897
Apr. – 0.02 1,826,796 0.14 1,974 0.39 292 0.46 694 0.07 534,800 0.13 22,686
May – 0.02 1,827,315 0.14 2,052 0.52 574 0.66 1,023 0.07 533,590 0.14 22,562
June – 0.02 1,831,910 0.17 2,490 0.71 357 0.80 891 0.08 531,943 0.14 22,408
July – 0.00 1,854,420 0.31 3,227 0.83 776 0.75 1,128 0.07 530,302 0.15 22,255
Aug. 0.00 1,852,118 0.49 4,742 1.04 925 0.95 1,582 0.08 527,959 0.16 22,201
Sep. 0.01 1,854,046 0.84 7,457 1.49 915 1.29 1,289 0.09 522,686 0.19 22,155
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2021 Sep. – 0.12 590,408 – 0.50 48,685 x .x . 0.11 333
Oct. – 0.13 598,979 – 0.51 70,382 – 0.21 214 0.19 1,102
Nov. – 0.13 604,607 – 0.52 47,155 – 0.16 619 0.25 732
Dec. – 0.14 585,718 – 0.58 43,578 – 0.07 836 0.19 1,004
2022 Jan. – 0.14 596,648 – 0.50 38,323 – 0.18 311 0.28 1,033
Feb. – 0.14 594,874 – 0.48 30,745 0.03 234 0.63 1,123
Mar. – 0.15 607,552 – 0.50 42,187 0.09 417 1.09 1,069
Apr. – 0.15 600,726 – 0.49 42,722 0.37 633 1.12 182
May – 0.15 609,181 – 0.44 41,476 0.44 1,240 1.35 513
June – 0.15 600,646 – 0.36 43,089 0.91 687 2.27 742
July – 0.07 604,802 – 0.11 26,039 1.15 678 1.90 1,466
Aug. – 0.01 636,259 0.07 51,099 0.92 467 . .
Sep. 0.03 615,796 0.62 73,349 1.93 494 2.75 1,112
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2021 Sep. 5.54 5.46 8,474 6.28 1,669 7.59 323 4.29 2,783 5.94 5,368
Oct. 5.58 5.50 8,375 6.30 1,660 7.55 345 4.34 2,677 5.95 5,353
Nov. 5.46 5.43 8,076 6.17 1,524 7.24 408 4.34 2,691 5.88 4,976
Dec. 5.35 5.36 6,927 6.04 1,221 6.75 465 4.31 2,445 5.84 4,017
2022 Jan. 5.53 5.54 8,604 6.19 1,862 7.29 383 4.29 2,643 6.01 5,578
Feb. 5.41 5.45 8,372 6.14 1,641 7.31 378 4.28 2,652 5.90 5,343
Mar. 5.34 5.38 10,208 6.24 1,935 7.28 397 4.08 3,481 5.97 6,330
Apr. 5.70 5.64 8,523 6.35 1,682 7.93 316 4.46 2,654 6.08 5,553
May 5.81 5.77 9,788 6.51 1,924 8.04 332 4.56 3,067 6.24 6,390
June 5.99 5.95 9,509 6.79 1,926 8.50 307 4.66 3,054 6.46 6,149
July 6.15 6.12 9,064 6.97 1,771 8.76 314 4.80 2,968 6.65 5,782
Aug. 6.33 6.31 8,927 7.25 1,765 8.79 349 4.92 2,931 6.88 5,647
Sep. 6.43 6.43 8,563 7.37 1,613 8.64 346 4.96 2,923 7.09 5,294
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2021 Sep. 1.65 4,401 1.46 951 1.72 1,950 1.99 626 1.47 1,825
Oct. 1.69 4,327 1.54 1,068 1.79 1,792 2.23 631 1.42 1,904
Nov. 1.68 4,433 1.39 847 1.65 1,759 2.42 704 1.44 1,970
Dec. 1.64 5,757 1.48 1,144 1.58 2,326 2.45 860 1.44 2,571
2022 Jan. 1.62 4,552 1.48 1,288 1.54 1,914 2.32 622 1.49 2,016
Feb. 1.76 4,173 1.60 859 1.69 1,560 2.55 514 1.62 2,099
Mar. 1.87 5,992 1.61 1,247 1.70 2,149 2.43 724 1.85 3,119
Apr. 2.03 4,980 1.70 1,170 1.82 1,829 2.33 760 2.10 2,391
May 2.32 4,277 2.03 913 1.84 1,387 2.89 628 2.46 2,262
June 2.39 5,035 1.96 1,196 1.81 1,990 3.04 717 2.68 2,328
July 2.62 4,606 1.97 1,195 2.06 1,980 3.24 629 2.97 1,997
Aug. 2.94 4,474 2.33 777 2.24 1,627 3.48 730 3.30 2,117
Sep. 2.95 4,254 2.51 1,090 2.60 2,249 3.39 610 3.33 1,395
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2021 Sep. 1.72 2,879 . . 1.76 1,259 2.21 444 1.49 1,176
Oct. 1.75 2,884 . . 1.84 1,193 2.17 514 1.46 1,177
Nov. 1.83 2,674 . . 1.83 1,076 2.47 461 1.56 1,137
Dec. 1.73 3,787 . . 1.76 1,495 2.48 564 1.47 1,728
2022 Jan. 1.71 2,950 . . 1.64 1,227 2.38 455 1.54 1,268
Feb. 1.88 2,728 . . 1.92 970 2.68 380 1.64 1,378
Mar. 1.96 3,879 . . 1.84 1,414 2.58 512 1.88 1,953
Apr. 2.13 3,210 . . 1.92 1,079 2.42 577 2.16 1,554
May 2.40 2,886 . . 2.00 928 2.95 493 2.48 1,465
June 2.50 3,461 . . 2.06 1,239 3.13 538 2.62 1,684
July 2.76 2,994 . . 2.21 1,252 3.36 474 3.08 1,268
Aug. 2.94 2,573 . . 2.38 1,063 3.68 435 3.19 1,075
Sep. 3.09 2,843 . . 2.76 1,446 3.53 465 3.37 932
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2021 Sep. 1.31 1.26 22,232 1.33 2,986 1.80 2,204 1.33 1,451 1.09 7,631 1.27 10,946
Oct. 1.32 1.28 22,630 1.29 3,683 1.79 2,353 1.33 1,613 1.10 8,013 1.29 10,650
Nov. 1.36 1.32 22,516 1.31 3,079 1.83 2,022 1.43 1,564 1.15 8,171 1.33 10,759
Dec. 1.37 1.32 23,851 1.27 3,446 1.80 2,383 1.39 1,661 1.16 8,614 1.34 11,194
2022 Jan. 1.39 1.35 25,085 1.33 4,969 1.83 2,527 1.35 1,706 1.19 8,661 1.37 12,191
Feb. 1.49 1.45 26,299 1.43 4,706 1.86 2,270 1.45 1,606 1.29 9,322 1.48 13,100
Mar. 1.69 1.65 32,270 1.63 6,216 1.93 2,704 1.65 1,987 1.50 11,809 1.71 15,770
Apr. 1.98 1.94 25,813 1.90 4,946 2.01 2,323 1.88 1,703 1.81 10,024 2.04 11,763
May 2.29 2.25 27,272 2.20 4,758 2.10 2,491 2.10 1,834 2.12 10,907 2.42 12,041
June 2.62 2.57 22,990 2.46 3,897 2.19 2,461 2.45 1,663 2.46 8,659 2.77 10,208
July 2.85 2.80 21,054 2.48 3,828 2.33 2,814 2.64 1,592 2.73 8,023 3.04 8,626
Aug. 2.89 2.84 18,491 2.57 3,215 2.55 2,488 2.78 1,512 2.74 6,880 3.04 7,610
Sep. 3.08 3.01 16,112 2.81 2,718 2.73 2,186 2.93 1,365 2.96 5,968 3.18 6,593
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2021 Sep. . 1.20 9,471 . . 1.67 802 1.13 664 1.03 3,299 1.24 4,706
Oct. . 1.20 9,766 . . 1.70 874 1.16 746 1.02 3,569 1.25 4,577
Nov. . 1.23 9,668 . . 1.72 708 1.22 685 1.08 3,670 1.29 4,605
Dec. . 1.25 10,265 . . 1.70 783 1.22 727 1.09 3,784 1.31 4,971
2022 Jan. . 1.28 11,005 . . 1.75 942 1.18 861 1.13 4,087 1.33 5,115
Feb. . 1.37 11,593 . . 1.74 749 1.28 826 1.24 4,366 1.43 5,652
Mar. . 1.57 14,566 . . 1.80 936 1.54 974 1.46 5,637 1.64 7,019
Apr. . 1.86 11,672 . . 1.88 804 1.71 831 1.77 4,658 1.96 5,379
May . 2.20 12,086 . . 1.96 839 2.08 856 2.11 5,030 2.34 5,361
June . 2.49 10,285 . . 2.08 865 2.37 774 2.41 4,073 2.67 4,573
July . 2.69 9,711 . . 2.19 1,031 2.51 802 2.63 3,794 2.91 4,084
Aug. . 2.74 8,203 . . 2.36 820 2.63 711 2.68 3,215 2.92 3,457
Sep. . 2.90 7,168 . . 2.54 746 2.80 638 2.84 2,725 3.05 3,059
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 Sep. 7.19 36,720 7.06 28,404 15.53 4,098 2.79 74,750 2.81 74,389
Oct. 7.10 35,633 6.94 27,535 15.02 4,109 2.81 75,550 2.83 75,182
Nov. 7.01 36,013 6.90 27,565 15.01 4,153 2.77 76,312 2.79 75,909
Dec. 7.11 36,163 6.93 28,124 14.94 4,165 2.73 76,261 2.75 75,914
2022 Jan. 7.20 36,030 6.97 28,433 14.97 4,110 2.61 81,598 2.62 81,290
Feb. 7.08 36,335 6.95 28,225 14.96 4,103 2.62 85,173 2.63 84,843
Mar. 7.14 37,360 7.02 29,314 14.94 4,076 2.71 87,104 2.72 86,709
Apr. 7.00 36,819 6.91 28,444 14.96 4,100 2.65 88,202 2.66 87,834
May 6.96 37,636 6.98 28,730 14.89 4,143 2.63 89,402 2.65 88,972
June 7.01 38,876 7.02 30,004 14.84 4,192 2.66 93,301 2.67 92,870
July 7.04 37,549 6.98 28,881 14.80 4,246 2.68 93,897 2.69 93,495
Aug. 7.17 38,113 7.17 29,170 14.94 4,305 2.73 96,714 2.74 96,288
Sep. 7.31 39,138 7.36 30,018 14.97 4,359 3.03 97,594 3.05 97,115
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2021 Sep. 1.36 69,341 1.33 23,411 1.83 9,309 2.39 1,198 1.48 1,245 1.28 45,311 1.44 4,339 1.06 7,939
Oct. 1.21 71,404 1.32 20,386 1.76 9,149 2.38 1,247 1.50 1,242 1.08 48,160 1.43 2,573 1.07 9,033
Nov. 1.18 75,363 1.34 18,828 1.85 9,681 2.35 1,402 1.44 1,474 1.03 48,548 0.95 4,444 1.16 9,814
Dec. 1.20 105,525 1.32 29,572 1.94 10,348 2.28 1,529 1.45 1,817 1.05 71,028 1.40 5,515 1.18 15,288
2022 Jan. 1.29 64,813 1.26 21,030 1.80 8,812 2.39 1,280 1.53 1,443 1.14 44,620 1.49 1,821 1.27 6,837
Feb. 1.32 66,898 1.22 18,910 1.78 9,056 2.55 1,205 1.63 1,445 1.13 42,295 1.71 3,088 1.42 9,809
Mar. 1.50 99,725 1.39 29,044 1.78 10,692 2.54 1,571 1.83 1,981 1.38 68,399 1.77 5,314 1.65 11,768
Apr. 1.53 74,483 1.51 19,771 1.82 9,033 2.63 1,388 2.19 1,883 1.31 47,761 1.79 3,673 1.91 10,745
May 1.49 78,588 1.73 18,948 1.82 9,416 2.82 1,358 2.31 1,703 1.17 53,228 2.65 3,419 2.16 9,464
June 2.19 123,645 1.58 28,803 1.88 10,561 2.97 1,465 2.59 1,483 2.16 94,434 2.35 4,558 2.43 11,144
July 1.89 80,810 1.76 22,550 1.95 10,057 3.12 1,435 2.91 1,400 1.66 53,206 2.43 3,997 2.50 10,715
Aug. 1.97 87,373 1.54 20,380 2.17 9,306 3.36 1,327 2.96 1,241 1.80 64,748 2.47 2,987 2.56 7,764
Sep. 2.70 99,772 2.23 28,864 2.60 10,907 3.85 1,438 3.19 1,075 2.64 76,003 2.99 3,670 2.96 6,679
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2021 Sep. 1.35 11,637 . . 1.71 405 2.14 61 1.17 284 1.35 7,760 1.92 827 1.06 2,300
Oct. 1.29 10,023 . . 1.72 371 1.87 78 1.24 298 1.46 5,810 1.90 660 0.73 2,806
Nov. 1.34 8,064 . . 1.76 359 1.60 96 1.19 382 1.43 4,537 1.36 704 1.08 1,986
Dec. 1.27 18,534 . . 1.69 438 1.93 113 1.23 430 1.20 11,302 1.73 1,948 1.18 4,303
2022 Jan. 1.25 10,159 . . 1.66 371 1.54 102 1.35 406 1.19 7,044 1.20 386 1.37 1,850
Feb. 1.60 9,498 . . 1.66 296 1.98 87 1.37 318 1.63 4,798 1.85 1,166 1.46 2,833
Mar. 1.40 14,380 . . 1.71 503 2.07 120 1.63 444 1.15 9,349 2.56 1,117 1.63 2,847
Apr. 1.72 9,355 . . 1.92 325 2.15 113 1.93 481 1.53 5,242 1.68 817 2.07 2,377
May 2.02 9,121 . . 1.95 385 2.43 114 2.20 461 1.81 5,246 3.02 726 2.14 2,189
June 1.90 13,721 . . 1.89 490 2.69 127 2.43 458 1.49 8,720 2.72 1,076 2.72 2,850
July 2.00 11,739 . . 2.03 487 2.84 102 2.67 398 1.64 7,081 2.99 1,130 2.41 2,541
Aug. 2.20 7,929 . . 2.25 501 2.97 91 2.74 319 2.02 4,945 2.99 603 2.30 1,470
Sep. . . . . 2.85 606 3.37 78 3.01 299 . . 3.16 1,131 2.99 1,713
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 4
2019 Q4 2,473.9 317.5 448.2 355.6 407.3 778.3 3.6 64.9 39.8 58.8
2020 Q1 2,426.8 318.2 452.0 364.1 383.1 738.2 4.5 68.5 38.6 59.6
Q2 2,517.5 317.0 460.5 371.9 409.4 788.7 4.3 68.5 38.7 58.5
Q3 2,547.1 311.1 472.9 373.8 411.3 809.5 4.4 67.1 39.0 58.0
Q4 2,587.4 301.7 478.9 370.6 425.4 841.0 4.7 68.1 38.2 58.7
2021 Q1 2,575.3 292.4 466.8 361.7 437.8 844.7 3.9 72.0 38.9 57.2
Q2 2,591.4 280.5 466.5 361.3 449.6 864.5 3.4 72.6 39.0 54.1
Q3 2,633.2 271.8 471.3 358.3 464.4 882.1 3.3 87.9 38.4 55.8
Q4 2,649.9 261.4 468.7 355.1 472.9 903.3 3.2 85.1 40.8 59.4
2022 Q1 2,541.0 244.9 441.0 333.9 469.7 860.3 2.7 87.8 41.1 59.6
Q2 2,368.8 217.7 394.5 306.8 464.6 793.1 3.0 86.0 41.4 61.8
    Life insurance
2019 Q4 1,325.2 194.8 227.6 217.6 61.1 570.4 2.4 13.7 21.1 16.5
2020 Q1 1,295.7 191.4 231.0 220.6 62.0 538.1 2.2 13.9 20.3 16.3
Q2 1,347.1 192.3 234.4 223.6 64.4 577.0 2.8 13.7 20.3 18.5
Q3 1,369.2 188.4 241.6 225.7 66.1 592.6 3.0 13.6 20.6 17.6
Q4 1,395.8 183.5 242.7 229.9 70.2 616.5 3.3 14.3 20.8 14.5
2021 Q1 1,361.2 170.4 231.5 219.6 74.3 614.3 2.1 14.2 21.5 13.2
Q2 1,371.7 164.4 231.3 219.4 78.0 627.2 2.0 14.1 21.5 13.8
Q3 1,386.6 159.1 232.2 214.8 87.7 642.8 1.9 13.4 20.8 13.8
Q4 1,400.8 152.4 232.7 211.8 93.5 658.0 1.7 14.6 21.9 14.3
2022 Q1 1,312.9 137.6 211.8 193.6 99.9 619.4 0.9 13.9 22.1 13.8
Q2 1,199.6 121.7 182.3 174.0 104.4 562.5 0.9 13.5 22.2 18.0
    Non-life insurance
2019 Q4 673.5 111.2 130.4 79.6 83.6 193.3 0.4 36.2 12.2 26.7
2020 Q1 669.3 111.1 131.3 79.8 80.0 186.9 0.3 38.7 12.0 29.3
Q2 685.4 111.8 134.4 82.4 81.1 197.0 0.4 39.5 12.1 26.7
Q3 693.0 109.3 137.6 83.3 82.7 203.1 0.4 38.5 12.1 26.3
Q4 703.1 105.9 139.5 84.5 85.1 210.2 0.5 37.6 12.7 27.3
2021 Q1 716.8 108.1 139.5 83.6 88.7 215.1 0.4 40.0 12.8 28.6
Q2 720.3 103.3 140.4 83.5 90.6 221.6 0.4 40.4 12.8 27.3
Q3 727.5 98.8 140.2 83.8 93.9 223.3 0.4 46.6 12.9 27.8
Q4 732.4 94.7 139.9 84.8 97.8 227.8 0.3 44.7 14.0 28.4
2022 Q1 721.4 91.9 134.1 81.0 98.9 224.6 0.2 46.0 14.0 30.7
Q2 683.4 82.7 124.4 75.3 99.4 213.3 0.1 44.5 14.2 29.6
    Reinsurance 5
2019 Q4 475.2 11.5 90.2 58.3 262.6 14.5 0.8 15.1 6.6 15.6
2020 Q1 461.7 15.7 89.8 63.7 241.0 13.3 1.9 15.9 6.3 14.1
Q2 485.0 12.9 91.7 65.9 264.0 14.6 1.1 15.2 6.3 13.3
Q3 485.0 13.5 93.7 64.9 262.6 13.7 1.0 15.0 6.3 14.2
Q4 488.5 12.3 96.7 56.3 270.2 14.3 1.0 16.3 4.7 16.9
2021 Q1 497.3 13.9 95.8 58.5 274.7 15.4 1.4 17.7 4.7 15.3
Q2 499.4 12.8 94.8 58.4 280.9 15.6 1.0 18.1 4.6 13.1
Q3 519.0 13.9 98.9 59.6 282.7 16.1 1.0 28.0 4.7 14.2
Q4 516.7 14.3 96.1 58.6 281.6 17.5 1.1 25.9 4.9 16.6
2022 Q1 506.6 15.5 95.1 59.3 271.0 16.3 1.6 27.9 5.0 15.0
Q2 485.8 13.2 87.8 57.5 260.8 17.3 1.9 27.9 5.1 14.2
Pension funds 6
2019 Q4 735.8 85.2 79.6 31.1 38.7 421.1 – 8.8 48.9 22.3
7 2020 Q1 601.0 92.2 56.8 48.9 9.4 362.0 0.1 11.3 17.6 2.7
Q2 626.0 91.8 58.8 49.8 9.8 383.4 0.1 11.3 18.3 2.8
Q3 638.5 91.1 59.6 50.2 10.1 394.7 0.2 11.6 18.5 2.5
Q4 662.9 88.9 60.6 49.5 10.3 419.5 0.2 11.9 18.8 3.1
2021 Q1 664.3 86.2 58.7 48.6 10.8 427.9 0.2 12.1 17.6 2.3
Q2 683.2 85.0 60.2 49.3 11.3 445.1 0.1 12.1 17.8 2.3
Q3 689.8 82.9 60.4 48.8 11.8 453.6 0.1 12.2 17.8 2.2
Q4 709.8 82.1 60.0 48.7 11.3 473.5 0.1 12.4 18.4 3.2
2022 Q1 687.7 76.4 56.9 46.3 12.1 462.6 0.0 12.9 18.4 2.1
Q2 661.3 71.3 53.4 43.3 12.5 447.6 0.0 12.5 17.4 3.3
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections as of 2020 Q1. Until 2019 Q4 these are compiled using Solvency I
supervisory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  1 Accounts
receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered bonds, borrowers'
note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. For pension funds as of 2020 Q1 fair values,
previously book values.  2 Including deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as
registered bonds, borrowers' note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. For pension fundsas of 2020 Q1 fair values, previously book values.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables
and claims of pension funds on pension managers.  4 Valuation of listed securities at the
corresponding consistent price from the ESCB's securities database.  5 Not including the
reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  6 The term
"pension funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European
System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and
occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not
included.  7 Change in data sources.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  4
Insurance corporations
2019 Q4 2,473.9 31.7 75.8 515.3 1,714.9 1,499.6 215.3 1.9 134.4 –
2020 Q1 2,426.8 31.8 82.4 464.3 1,721.8 1,483.2 238.6 2.4 124.1 –
Q2 2,517.5 33.1 82.2 505.3 1,767.6 1,527.7 239.9 1.9 127.3 –
Q3 2,547.1 34.3 80.0 515.7 1,785.5 1,549.1 236.4 1.7 129.9 –
Q4 2,587.4 36.6 79.7 540.4 1,799.0 1,579.2 219.8 1.6 130.2 –
2021 Q1 2,575.3 34.8 81.4 551.7 1,778.7 1,541.3 237.4 2.5 126.2 –
Q2 2,591.4 33.0 81.3 558.9 1,793.7 1,556.4 237.3 2.2 122.2 –
Q3 2,633.2 35.4 82.8 567.3 1,818.0 1,569.1 248.9 2.5 127.0 –
Q4 2,649.9 36.1 82.0 579.7 1,821.1 1,578.4 242.7 2.5 128.6 –
2022 Q1 2,541.0 34.4 82.2 563.8 1,728.4 1,474.6 253.8 4.0 128.3 –
Q2 2,368.8 33.7 78.9 543.2 1,579.7 1,331.2 248.5 5.9 127.4 –
    Life insurance
2019 Q4 1,325.2 3.6 19.1 127.6 1,129.7 1,129.7 – 0.5 44.7 –
2020 Q1 1,295.7 3.6 19.3 114.2 1,117.8 1,117.8 – 0.6 40.3 –
Q2 1,347.1 3.8 19.2 129.8 1,150.3 1,150.3 – 0.5 43.4 –
Q3 1,369.2 3.9 19.5 136.8 1,164.7 1,164.7 – 0.5 43.7 –
Q4 1,395.8 3.9 20.7 142.8 1,185.6 1,185.6 – 0.5 42.2 –
2021 Q1 1,361.2 3.3 19.9 143.1 1,154.3 1,154.3 – 1.0 39.6 –
Q2 1,371.7 3.3 20.4 144.2 1,164.9 1,164.9 – 1.0 37.9 –
Q3 1,386.6 3.3 19.3 148.1 1,176.4 1,176.4 – 1.1 38.4 –
Q4 1,400.8 3.3 20.7 148.2 1,185.5 1,185.5 – 0.9 42.2 –
2022 Q1 1,312.9 3.2 19.9 142.8 1,103.6 1,103.6 – 1.4 42.1 –
Q2 1,199.6 3.1 19.1 141.5 988.5 988.5 – 2.6 44.9 –
    Non-life insurance
2019 Q4 673.5 1.2 9.3 153.7 457.2 349.4 107.8 0.1 52.0 –
2020 Q1 669.3 1.3 9.8 141.9 468.2 344.4 123.8 0.1 48.0 –
Q2 685.4 1.3 9.5 149.3 478.1 355.6 122.5 0.1 47.1 –
Q3 693.0 1.2 9.6 151.9 482.1 362.3 119.8 0.1 48.1 –
Q4 703.1 1.3 9.7 157.9 482.9 368.7 114.2 0.0 51.2 –
2021 Q1 716.8 1.2 10.6 162.8 491.6 362.6 129.0 0.1 50.5 –
Q2 720.3 1.2 10.5 166.4 493.6 366.3 127.3 0.1 48.4 –
Q3 727.5 1.2 10.5 169.2 499.0 367.9 131.2 0.2 47.5 –
Q4 732.4 1.4 10.8 176.2 493.0 367.6 125.4 0.2 50.9 –
2022 Q1 721.4 1.3 11.8 174.1 483.8 347.2 136.6 0.3 50.1 –
Q2 683.4 1.3 11.2 169.5 453.6 323.2 130.4 0.5 47.4 –
    Reinsurance 5
2019 Q4 475.2 26.9 47.4 234.0 128.0 20.6 107.5 1.3 37.7 –
2020 Q1 461.7 26.9 53.3 208.1 135.9 21.0 114.9 1.7 35.8 –
Q2 485.0 28.1 53.5 226.2 139.1 21.8 117.4 1.3 36.8 –
Q3 485.0 29.2 50.9 227.0 138.7 22.1 116.6 1.0 38.1 –
Q4 488.5 31.4 49.3 239.6 130.4 24.8 105.6 1.0 36.7 –
2021 Q1 497.3 30.2 50.9 245.8 132.8 24.4 108.4 1.4 36.2 –
Q2 499.4 28.5 50.4 248.3 135.2 25.2 110.0 1.1 35.9 –
Q3 519.0 30.9 53.0 250.1 142.7 24.9 117.8 1.3 41.1 –
Q4 516.7 31.4 50.5 255.3 142.6 25.3 117.3 1.4 35.5 –
2022 Q1 506.6 30.0 50.4 246.8 140.9 23.8 117.2 2.3 36.1 –
Q2 485.8 29.3 48.6 232.2 137.7 19.5 118.2 2.8 35.1 –
Pension funds 6
2019 Q4 735.8 – 8.4 8.6 638.0 638.0 – – 3.7 77.1
7 2020 Q1 601.0 – 1.6 22.6 497.5 496.9 – 0.3 8.8 70.3
Q2 626.0 – 1.6 25.6 507.3 506.7 – 0.3 8.9 82.4
Q3 638.5 – 1.6 27.3 511.4 510.8 – 0.3 8.9 88.9
Q4 662.9 – 1.6 28.4 528.5 527.9 – 0.3 9.0 95.1
2021 Q1 664.3 – 1.6 28.8 529.3 528.1 – 0.3 8.6 95.8
Q2 683.2 – 1.8 31.1 536.5 534.8 – 0.2 9.3 104.3
Q3 689.8 – 1.8 31.5 541.1 538.9 – 0.2 9.3 106.0
Q4 709.8 – 1.9 31.8 560.5 557.6 – 0.1 9.2 106.4
2022 Q1 687.7 – 1.4 28.7 555.1 552.3 – 0.1 7.3 95.0
Q2 661.3 – 0.9 23.7 555.6 552.8 – 0.1 5.1 75.9
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections as of 2020 Q1. Until 2019 Q4 these are compiled using Solvency I
supervisory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  1 Including
deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers' note loans
and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension funds on pension managers
and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical reserves "life" taking account oftransitional measures. Health insurance is also included in the "non-life insurance"
sector.  4 Own funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth" and "Shares and other
equity".  5 Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which
is included there.  6 Valuation at book values. The term "pension funds" refers to the
institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds
thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the
self-employed. Social security funds are not included.  7 Change in data sources.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2010 146,620 – 1,212 – 7,621 24,044 –17,635 147,831 92,682 –103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 –46,796 850 59,521 20,075 – 23,876 – 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 64,775 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,408 – 12,124 – 11,951 74,483 14,366
2015 33,024 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 69,034 116,493 – 66,330 121,164 61,659 – 83,471
2016 71,380 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 43,951 164,148 – 58,012 187,500 34,660 – 92,768
2017 54,840 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 43,277 137,907 – 71,454 161,012 48,349 – 83,067
2018 64,682 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 48,052 93,103 – 24,417 67,328 50,192 – 28,421
2019 136,117 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 67,581 59,013 8,059 2,408 48,546 77,104
2020 437,976 374,034 14,462 88,703 270,870 63,941 274,979 18,955 226,887 29,138 162,996
2021 283,684 221,648 31,941 19,754 169,953 62,036 310,838 – 41,852 245,198 107,492 – 27,154
2021 Oct. 103 3,176 7,354 – 7,515 3,337 – 3,073 9,377 – 17,904 20,765 6,517 – 9,275
Nov. 39,728 31,488 6,574 8,351 16,563 8,241 34,851 – 529 23,375 12,005 4,877
Dec. – 39,780 –23,893 –17,511 – 8,944 2,561 – 15,886 – 1,271 – 9,420 14,137 – 5,988 – 38,509
2022 Jan. 49,962 25,410 9,976 6,559 8,876 24,552 40,530 – 2,870 14,990 28,409 9,432
Feb. 32,181 27,557 10,598 3,056 13,902 4,624 25,329 8,057 14,793 2,478 6,852
Mar. 62,964 43,608 23,278 7,972 12,358 19,356 46,555 6,811 10,709 29,035 16,409
Apr. – 17,423 – 2,212 – 3,140 707 222 – 15,211 – 2,285 – 16,927 13,068 1,574 – 15,138
May 23,669 23,911 4,066 4,901 14,944 – 242 25,954 5,485 14,400 6,069 – 2,285
June 23,509 12,731 5,517 – 1,563 8,777 10,778 17,236 8,471 – 2,289 11,054 6,273
July – 17,762 –12,924 – 6,955 11,041 –17,011 – 4,838 – 6,668 10,710 – 13,670 – 3,708 – 11,094
Aug. 17,950 25,220 2,770 2,198 20,251 – 7,270 – 334 – 10,189 – 726 10,581 18,284
Sep. 9,124 15,603 32,624 3,897 –20,918 – 6,479 20,602 7,491 – 3,147 16,257 – 11,478
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2010 37,767 20,049 17,718 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,360
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 – 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 – 449
2015 44,165 7,668 36,497 34,437 – 5,421 39,858 9,728
2016 30,896 4,409 26,487 31,037 – 5,143 36,180 – 141
2017 51,571 15,570 36,001 49,913 7,031 42,882 1,658
2018 54,883 16,188 38,695 83,107 – 11,184 94,291 – 28,224
2019 46,021 9,076 36,945 33,675 – 1,119 34,794 12,346
2020 83,859 17,771 66,088 115,960 27 115,933 – 32,101
2021 125,541 49,066 76,475 124,105 10,869 113,236 1,436
2021 Oct. 10,042 5,498 4,544 15,060 1,401 13,659 – 5,018
Nov. 6,393 2,367 4,026 15,628 2,698 12,930 – 9,235
Dec. 13,692 10,698 2,995 6,987 – 1,848 8,835 6,705
2022 Jan. 6,155 396 5,760 9,711 2,076 7,635 – 3,556
Feb. – 5,455 628 – 6,084 – 4,539 – 1,599 – 2,940 – 916
Mar. 9,478 359 9,119 14,188 – 1,736 15,924 – 4,710
Apr. 6,207 150 6,056 9,419 477 8,942 – 3,212
May 3,197 1,411 1,786 3,880 1,600 2,280 – 684
June – 25,843 894 – 26,737 – 24,422 – 3,308 – 21,114 – 1,421
July – 2,467 1,374 – 3,841 – 704 – 2,145 1,441 – 1,763
Aug. – 917 87 – 1,003 1,736 165 1,571 – 2,653
Sep. 37,499 38,800 – 1,301 26,279 – 489 26,768 11,220
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,614 592,375
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,870,084 778,411 39,548 18,327 643,380 77,156 184,206 907,466
2021 1,658,004 795,271 41,866 17,293 648,996 87,116 139,775 722,958
2022 Jan. 136,055 69,043 11,165 1,510 50,426 5,942 13,257 53,754
Feb. 123,858 67,336 5,174 1,364 54,198 6,600 9,451 47,071
Mar. 168,436 85,551 5,602 875 72,212 6,862 16,473 66,412
Apr. 129,238 68,828 3,091 140 59,957 5,640 8,317 52,093
May 139,081 71,010 3,777 1,809 60,594 4,830 15,238 52,833
June 141,105 74,361 5,924 770 62,377 5,290 12,335 54,408
July 148,625 72,487 5,291 348 59,203 7,645 21,763 54,375
Aug. 130,730 77,533 5,282 110 66,372 5,769 10,735 42,462
Sep. 160,226 96,842 10,333 2,847 73,908 9,754 18,913 44,471
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 658,521 165,097 28,500 7,427 90,839 38,330 77,439 415,985
2021 486,335 171,799 30,767 6,336 97,816 36,880 64,234 250,303
2022 Jan. 50,594 25,812 9,165 1,510 12,587 2,550 3,583 21,200
Feb. 41,368 22,391 3,487 1,364 14,364 3,175 2,101 16,876
Mar. 44,448 17,785 3,236 300 11,718 2,532 6,408 20,255
Apr. 28,734 13,879 1,926 50 10,089 1,814 1,050 13,805
May 33,822 12,448 3,173 1,264 6,238 1,774 4,423 16,950
June 37,845 7,517 2,676 500 2,342 1,999 4,128 26,200
July 47,135 12,838 2,626 250 8,760 1,201 13,373 20,925
Aug. 26,527 13,524 2,158 – 9,811 1,555 1,178 11,825
Sep. 48,303 19,352 7,086 1,821 7,179 3,267 8,100 20,850
Net sales 5
2011 22,518 – 54,582 1,657 – 44,290 32,904 – 44,852 – 3,189 80,289
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 473,795 28,147 8,661 8,816 22,067 – 11,398 49,536 396,113
2021 210,231 52,578 17,821 7,471 22,973 4,314 35,531 122,123
2022 Jan. 10,728 12,636 6,459 – 397 5,370 1,203 5,409 – 7,317
Feb. 18,055 10,554 2,870 869 7,435 – 619 924 6,577
Mar. 41,894 23,733 2,097 250 20,258 1,128 7,541 10,620
Apr. – 16,610 – 4,444 720 – 310 – 4,339 – 515 – 1,343 – 10,823
May 24,352 3,706 685 1,774 1,967 – 721 3,607 17,039
June 8,820 3,351 1,834 150 1,840 – 474 – 411 5,880
July – 9,336 – 9,581 1,183 – 4,070 – 7,083 390 11,189 – 10,945
Aug. 14,448 1,731 4,546 – 1,290 – 778 – 747 – 119 12,836
Sep. 5,365 30,693 5,512 980 19,958 4,244 3,795 – 29,123
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,545,200 2 1,174,817 183,980 55,959 687,710 2 247,169 2 379,342 1,991,040
2021 3,781,975 1,250,777 202,385 63,496 731,068 253,828 414,791 2,116,406
2022 Jan. 3,794,503 1,267,762 209,367 63,110 739,737 255,548 420,868 2,105,873
Feb. 3,806,369 1,277,560 212,228 63,984 746,531 254,817 416,767 2,112,042
Mar. 3,851,741 1,302,963 213,413 64,234 769,133 256,183 424,622 2,124,156
Apr. 3,852,799 1,311,863 214,466 63,960 776,664 256,773 424,076 2,116,860
May 3,870,240 1,309,630 214,981 65,720 773,798 255,131 427,180 2,133,430
June 3,888,933 1,319,854 216,989 65,910 781,469 255,486 427,460 2,141,620
July 3,884,305 1,318,280 218,402 61,866 781,239 256,772 439,070 2,126,954
Aug. 3,901,993 1,323,161 222,515 60,584 784,706 255,355 439,459 2,139,374
Sep. 3,913,416 1,357,947 228,228 61,580 807,922 260,216 443,516 2,111,953
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-July 2022
bis unter 2   1 210 443   488 973   58 802   23 551   336 182   70 438   80 361   641 109 
 2 bis unter 4    722 649   317 732   61 621   14 685   178 628   62 798   80 845   324 072 
 4 bis unter 6    608 911   231 737   48 541   10 673   121 173   51 351   68 058   309 116 
6 bis unter 8    387 857   125 981   31 391   5 490   68 447   20 653   39 247   222 629 
 8 bis unter 10    277 466   86 571   14 181   2 671   47 633   22 086   31 412   159 483 
 10 bis unter 15    239 838   62 947   9 263   4 061   39 037   10 586   34 923   141 968 
 15 bis unter 20    123 101   13 678   3 561    360   7 781   1 976   14 600   94 823 
 20 und darüber    343 151   30 328    869    89   9 040   20 330   94 070   218 754 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 – 552 – 762 – 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,673 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,775 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,872 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,635 1,963,588
2021 186,580 4,152 9,561 672 35 – 326 – 212 – 5,578 2,301,942
2022 Jan. 186,830 250 341 0 2 – 9 – 23 – 61 2,211,900
Feb. 186,737 – 110 64 9 40 – 11 – 76 – 137 2,060,901
Mar. 186,993 256 260 91 –– 0 – 25 – 70 2,076,514
Apr. 186,971 25 47 1 –– 0 – 4 – 19 2,007,353
May 187,056 84 215 42 0 – 0 – 0 – 172 2,004,018
June 187,396 340 138 29 328 –– 108 – 47 1,744,789
July 186,233 – 1,194 120 39 –– 1 – 25 – 1,326 1,847,025
Aug. 185,545 – 688 42 – –– 0 – 32 – 698 1,769,546
Sep. 185,966 419 488 – –– 7 –– 62 1,635,277
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields and indices on German securities
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  4 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-
MFIs)German
bond
index
(REX)iBoxx
€ Germany 
price indexCDAX
share price
indexGerman
share
index
(DAX)
Period % per annumAverage
daily rateEnd-1998
= 100End-1987
= 100End-1987
= 1,000
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2019 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2020 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7 146.15 113.14 586.72 13,718.78
2021 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9 144.23 108.88 654.20 15,884.86
2022 Apr. 1.1 0.8 0.7 0.7 1.4 1.5 2.5 135.85 99.80 564.54 14,097.88
May 1.3 1.0 0.9 1.0 1.6 1.7 3.0 135.30 97.98 561.04 14,388.35
June 1.9 1.5 1.4 1.4 2.1 2.3 3.8 133.21 96.13 494.98 12,783.77
July 1.5 1.2 1.0 1.1 1.9 2.0 3.7 137.14 100.13 519.98 13,484.05
Aug. 1.5 1.1 1.0 1.0 1.9 1.9 3.3 131.87 94.89 493.47 12,834.96
Sep. 2.3 1.9 1.7 1.8 2.7 2.6 4.3 127.98 91.15 458.93 12,114.36
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 End of year or month.  3 Source: Deutsche Börse
AG. 4 Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for futures contracts;
calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 – 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 –1,340 – 379 –2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 –7,576 – 694 47,050 1,984 7,035
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,521 144,075 819 –1,745 143,256 44,266 –3,840
2015 181,889 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,753 174,018 7,362 494 166,656 35,259 7,871
2016 156,985 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 37,615 163,934 2,877 –3,172 161,057 40,787 –6,947
2017 153,756 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 58,834 156,282 4,938 1,048 151,344 57,786 –2,526
2018 132,033 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 28,339 138,713 2,979 –2,306 135,734 30,645 –6,680
2019 176,254 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 53,708 180,772 2,719 – 812 178,053 54,520 –4,519
2020 178,613 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 62,585 176,751 336 –1,656 176,415 64,241 1,862
2021 261,295 157,861 41,016 482 31,023 7,841 116,845 103,434 264,055 13,154 254 250,901 103,180 –2,760
2022 Mar. 5,368 6,548 – 299 188 –1,082 596 6,847 –1,180 7,930 – 132 – 244 8,062 – 936 –2,562
Apr. 11,416 9,302 2,398 – 288 1,900 676 6,904 2,113 10,952 154 393 10,798 1,720 463
May 5,606 5,058 1,045 251 380 381 4,013 548 4,981 – 132 – 434 5,113 982 625
June 3,171 4,539 – 191 – 8 – 428 389 4,730 –1,368 2,907 –1,186 – 72 4,093 –1,296 264
July 3,330 2,810 – 965 76 –1,427 386 3,775 520 5,076 1,176 74 3,900 446 –1,746
Aug. 7,540 6,943 – 206 – 103 – 252 116 7,152 597 7,570 – 498 – 77 8,068 674 – 31
Sep. 336 1,349 –1,343 64 –1,577 288 2,712 –1,013 233 – 320 – 294 553 – 719 102
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2021 2022
 Item 2019 2020 2021 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 17.93 96.81 40.12 21.81 –25.36 19.57 24.11 14.83 –27.36
   Debt securities –2.37 2.99 3.11 –1.53 1.90 1.58 1.16 0.64 –0.10
     Short-term debt securities –1.29 1.27 2.27 0.12 0.77 0.26 1.12 0.39 –1.94
     Long-term debt securities –1.08 1.72 0.85 –1.65 1.13 1.32 0.05 0.25 1.84
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –0.58 1.38 1.34 –0.64 0.87 1.75 –0.64 0.34 0.98
         Non-financial corporations 0.49 –0.17 0.74 0.10 0.62 0.59 –0.57 0.17 –0.17
         Financial corporations –0.64 0.12 1.08 –0.55 0.48 0.58 0.56 0.44 0.73
         General government –0.43 1.44 –0.48 –0.20 –0.24 0.58 –0.63 –0.27 0.43
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –1.79 1.61 1.78 –0.88 1.03 –0.17 1.80 0.31 –1.08
   Loans –1.48 –9.64 50.61 –0.23 6.50 13.55 30.79 5.36 17.95
     Short-term loans 12.60 –7.30 38.01 –3.95 7.92 11.48 22.56 –2.72 13.04
     Long-term loans –14.08 –2.34 12.61 3.73 –1.42 2.07 8.23 8.08 4.90
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors –26.03 –1.13 10.10 –6.25 0.01 0.18 16.16 7.85 2.51
         Non-financial corporations –28.14 –12.27 7.11 –1.66 –3.40 –1.21 13.38 2.44 5.52
         Financial corporations 1.86 10.57 2.38 –4.75 3.26 1.24 2.63 5.41 –3.01
         General government 0.25 0.57 0.61 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.00 0.00
       Loans to the rest of the world 24.55 –8.51 40.51 6.02 6.49 13.37 14.63 –2.49 15.44
   Equity and investment fund shares 123.65 114.98 162.49 47.81 38.47 29.57 46.64 48.70 37.54
     Equity 114.64 102.20 140.71 43.98 31.55 26.84 38.35 46.53 39.39
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 6.18 –77.97 15.33 12.08 4.92 –18.27 16.59 6.03 7.40
         Non-financial corporations 4.62 –78.06 16.89 12.08 5.32 –18.80 18.30 5.58 7.12
         Financial corporations 1.55 0.09 –1.56 0.01 –0.41 0.54 –1.70 0.46 0.28
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 7.40 5.01 5.09 0.64 –0.87 4.64 0.68 –0.75 3.22
       Other equity  1 101.07 175.16 120.29 31.25 27.50 40.47 21.08 41.24 28.77
     Investment fund shares 9.00 12.77 21.78 3.83 6.92 2.74 8.29 2.17 –1.85
       Money market fund shares 1.78 3.79 0.66 –0.47 –0.19 –0.41 1.73 –1.22 –0.42
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 7.22 8.99 21.12 4.31 7.11 3.15 6.56 3.39 –1.43
   Insurance technical reserves 1.81 2.76 2.87 0.78 0.80 0.61 0.69 –0.11 7.74
   Financial derivatives –0.62 –27.52 15.55 13.92 2.29 0.44 –1.09 18.59 27.87
   Other accounts receivable –67.63 44.68 68.81 9.37 –13.71 16.60 56.55 1.97 –27.51
   Total 71.28 225.07 343.56 91.93 10.88 81.92 158.84 89.98 36.13
 External financing
   Debt securities 20.52 36.89 20.86 2.77 8.92 10.29 –1.12 10.95 3.77
     Short-term securities 4.88 –4.40 2.51 –1.19 1.23 3.50 –1.02 3.85 1.21
       Long-term securities 15.64 41.29 18.35 3.96 7.69 6.79 –0.10 7.10 2.56
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 6.61 18.12 9.16 1.96 3.29 2.14 1.78 5.64 1.64
           Non-financial corporations 0.49 –0.17 0.74 0.10 0.62 0.59 –0.57 0.17 –0.17
           Financial corporations 5.31 19.86 9.12 1.98 2.76 1.78 2.61 5.34 1.87
           General government 0.47 –0.22 0.09 0.14 0.03 0.02 –0.10 –0.01 –0.08
           Households 0.34 –1.35 –0.79 –0.26 –0.12 –0.26 –0.15 0.14 0.01
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 13.91 18.77 11.70 0.81 5.63 8.15 –2.89 5.31 2.13
   Loans 90.09 84.73 94.00 28.53 –10.92 22.98 53.40 33.15 39.43
     Short-term loans 33.43 –7.17 50.98 23.43 –8.60 14.96 21.18 25.70 15.73
     Long-term loans 56.66 91.89 43.02 5.10 –2.32 8.03 32.22 7.45 23.70
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 36.84 36.81 67.74 31.86 –14.35 9.37 40.86 33.16 32.35
         Non-financial corporations –28.14 –12.27 7.11 –1.66 –3.40 –1.21 13.38 2.44 5.52
         Financial corporations 64.24 13.26 46.49 31.00 –15.98 7.95 23.53 28.45 22.64
         General government 0.75 35.81 14.14 2.52 5.03 2.64 3.95 2.26 4.20
       Loans from the rest of the world 53.25 47.92 26.26 –3.33 3.43 13.61 12.55 –0.01 7.08
   Equity 11.69 60.37 61.44 14.63 8.50 17.93 20.38 3.11 7.71
     Listed shares of domestic sectors –24.77 –62.25 26.38 15.28 8.02 –21.41 24.50 12.93 10.11
       Non-financial corporations 4.62 –78.06 16.89 12.08 5.32 –18.80 18.30 5.58 7.12
       Financial corporations –33.41 3.47 –2.37 0.02 1.52 –3.23 –0.68 5.19 –1.41
       General government –0.01 0.26 –0.09 –0.07 –0.07 –0.00 0.04 0.18 0.20
       Households 4.03 12.08 11.96 3.25 1.25 0.63 6.84 1.98 4.20
     Listed shares of the rest of the world –1.16 10.09 18.94 –4.97 –1.16 31.69 –6.62 –12.77 –1.54
     Other equity  1 37.61 112.54 16.11 4.32 1.64 7.65 2.50 2.95 –0.87
   Insurance technical reserves 7.55 5.83 4.25 1.06 1.06 1.06 1.06 1.06 1.06
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options –1.38 0.54 14.32 1.27 8.20 3.93 0.93 0.37 2.32
   Other accounts payable 8.87 14.40 147.36 48.66 8.52 29.78 60.40 27.28 28.03
   Total 137.34 202.76 342.23 96.92 24.29 85.97 135.06 75.93 82.32
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2021 2022
 Item 2019 2020 2021 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 578.6 717.6 721.9 713.7 693.5 706.4 721.9 726.8 692.7
   Debt securities 49.6 51.5 54.3 49.9 51.7 53.3 54.3 53.4 51.3
     Short-term debt securities 3.7 4.8 7.1 5.0 5.7 6.0 7.1 7.5 5.6
     Long-term debt securities 45.9 46.7 47.2 44.9 46.0 47.3 47.2 45.9 45.6
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 21.1 22.1 23.3 21.4 22.3 24.0 23.3 23.0 23.0
         Non-financial corporations 5.0 4.7 5.3 4.7 5.3 5.9 5.3 5.2 4.9
         Financial corporations 13.6 13.4 14.5 12.9 13.4 14.0 14.5 14.6 14.7
         General government 2.6 4.0 3.5 3.8 3.6 4.1 3.5 3.2 3.5
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 28.4 29.4 31.0 28.5 29.4 29.3 31.0 30.4 28.2
   Loans 731.9 725.0 778.6 726.6 732.8 747.4 778.6 785.5 807.7
     Short-term loans 568.5 566.1 605.1 562.7 570.5 582.7 605.1 603.6 619.2
     Long-term loans 163.5 158.9 173.5 163.9 162.2 164.7 173.5 181.9 188.5
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 414.5 413.4 423.5 407.1 407.1 407.3 423.5 431.3 433.8
         Non-financial corporations 339.9 327.6 334.7 325.9 322.5 321.3 334.7 337.2 342.7
         Financial corporations 67.3 77.8 80.2 73.1 76.3 77.6 80.2 85.6 82.6
         General government 7.4 7.9 8.5 8.1 8.2 8.4 8.5 8.5 8.5
       Loans to the rest of the world 317.4 311.7 355.2 319.5 325.6 340.1 355.2 354.2 373.8
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,448.6 2,559.5 2,912.8 2,726.9 2,813.6 2,871.7 2,912.8 2,838.5 2,765.7
     Equity 2,258.6 2,354.8 2,672.6 2,514.5 2,589.5 2,644.2 2,672.6 2,606.2 2,548.2
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 342.0 307.0 393.0 359.4 383.5 371.5 393.0 350.1 305.0
         Non-financial corporations 332.9 298.9 384.9 350.9 375.0 361.7 384.9 342.4 298.2
         Financial corporations 9.0 8.1 8.0 8.5 8.5 9.8 8.0 7.7 6.8
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 52.3 66.6 71.5 71.0 69.4 71.0 71.5 66.5 66.3
       Other equity  1 1,864.3 1,981.2 2,208.2 2,084.2 2,136.6 2,201.7 2,208.2 2,189.6 2,176.8
     Investment fund shares 190.0 204.7 240.2 212.4 224.1 227.5 240.2 232.3 217.5
       Money market fund shares 3.2 7.0 7.6 6.5 6.3 5.9 7.6 6.4 6.0
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 186.8 197.7 232.6 205.9 217.8 221.6 232.6 225.9 211.5
   Insurance technical reserves 59.2 62.1 64.8 62.8 63.6 64.1 64.8 64.8 72.7
   Financial derivatives 31.6 31.1 106.0 30.9 52.0 106.6 106.0 147.9 164.5
   Other accounts receivable 1,251.0 1,237.4 1,458.5 1,347.8 1,340.7 1,392.2 1,458.5 1,506.2 1,542.3
   Total 5,150.4 5,384.2 6,096.9 5,658.6 5,747.8 5,941.7 6,096.9 6,123.1 6,096.9
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 204.7 238.3 252.3 239.5 249.3 256.1 252.3 245.3 229.7
     Short-term securities 11.9 7.1 9.6 5.9 7.2 10.6 9.6 13.4 14.7
     Long-term securities 192.9 231.2 242.7 233.6 242.1 245.5 242.7 231.8 215.1
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 77.7 96.0 100.6 95.6 99.5 99.7 100.6 98.6 92.6
         Non-financial corporations 5.0 4.7 5.3 4.7 5.3 5.9 5.3 5.2 4.9
         Financial corporations 57.8 78.1 83.2 78.0 81.2 81.2 83.2 81.8 76.8
         General government 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.3
         Households 14.4 12.8 11.8 12.5 12.5 12.1 11.8 11.2 10.6
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 127.0 142.3 151.7 143.9 149.8 156.4 151.7 146.6 137.1
   Loans 2,200.1 2,278.4 2,382.8 2,315.6 2,301.4 2,327.5 2,382.8 2,422.5 2,469.6
     Short-term loans 838.3 825.0 879.6 851.1 842.2 857.6 879.6 907.0 927.9
     Long-term loans 1,361.8 1,453.4 1,503.3 1,464.5 1,459.2 1,469.9 1,503.3 1,515.5 1,541.8
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,379.5 1,412.7 1,482.0 1,448.4 1,431.8 1,442.0 1,482.0 1,520.1 1,551.4
         Non-financial corporations 339.9 327.6 334.7 325.9 322.5 321.3 334.7 337.2 342.7
         Financial corporations 974.0 982.8 1,031.1 1,018.0 999.7 1,008.5 1,031.1 1,064.5 1,086.2
         General government 65.7 102.3 116.2 104.5 109.5 112.2 116.2 118.4 122.5
       Loans from the rest of the world 820.6 865.7 900.9 867.2 869.6 885.5 900.9 902.4 918.2
   Equity 3,096.8 3,260.9 3,689.0 3,522.5 3,640.3 3,645.9 3,689.0 3,391.9 2,994.2
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 734.1 739.9 924.8 848.8 896.1 882.4 924.8 840.1 734.0
       Non-financial corporations 332.9 298.9 384.9 350.9 375.0 361.7 384.9 342.4 298.2
       Financial corporations 158.0 171.9 210.2 193.0 202.9 196.9 210.2 194.3 161.9
       General government 51.8 56.3 69.9 67.3 71.8 70.6 69.9 70.0 70.7
       Households 191.3 212.8 259.7 237.6 246.3 253.2 259.7 233.3 203.2
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 958.6 995.6 1,126.3 1,081.5 1,125.8 1,119.2 1,126.3 984.0 795.2
     Other equity  1 1,404.2 1,525.5 1,637.9 1,592.3 1,618.4 1,644.2 1,637.9 1,567.9 1,465.0
   Insurance technical reserves 277.3 283.1 287.4 284.2 285.3 286.3 287.4 288.4 289.5
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 68.8 83.3 161.7 65.1 92.3 152.4 161.7 168.3 162.6
   Other accounts payable 1,302.2 1,287.6 1,551.9 1,385.9 1,383.7 1,455.0 1,551.9 1,582.8 1,616.3
   Total 7,150.0 7,431.7 8,325.2 7,812.8 7,952.2 8,123.3 8,325.2 8,099.2 7,762.0
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2021 2022
 Item 2019 2020 2021 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 146.74 213.31 145.57 48.31 53.10 12.10 32.06 11.73 31.66
     Currency 35.26 61.94 59.84 12.68 16.47 14.98 15.72 13.47 12.35
     Deposits 111.49 151.36 85.74 35.64 36.63 –2.87 16.34 –1.74 19.31
       Transferable deposits 111.01 165.34 90.84 34.10 37.70 2.69 16.35 –0.99 23.73
       Time deposits 5.95 1.29 –4.97 0.06 –1.06 –3.76 –0.21 1.32 –0.81
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –5.47 –15.26 –0.13 1.48 –0.01 –1.81 0.20 –2.07 –3.61
   Debt securities –1.86 –5.94 –5.89 –2.66 –1.30 –1.32 –0.62 2.81 4.85
     Short-term debt securities –0.53 0.08 0.31 0.16 0.22 –0.10 0.03 –0.02 0.05
     Long-term debt securities –1.33 –6.02 –6.20 –2.82 –1.52 –1.22 –0.64 2.83 4.79
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –2.93 –2.56 –3.70 –1.07 –1.26 –0.99 –0.39 2.26 3.77
         Non-financial corporations 0.21 –1.32 –0.83 –0.28 –0.13 –0.25 –0.16 0.08 –0.02
         Financial corporations –2.23 –1.26 –2.57 –0.67 –1.02 –0.66 –0.23 2.34 3.18
         General government –0.92 0.02 –0.30 –0.12 –0.11 –0.08 0.00 –0.16 0.61
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.07 –3.38 –2.19 –1.59 –0.04 –0.32 –0.23 0.55 1.08
   Equity and investment fund shares 49.20 90.18 136.55 28.10 31.66 34.68 42.10 30.54 22.10
     Equity 18.92 48.53 31.76 2.60 7.28 7.57 14.30 7.82 9.85
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 6.61 16.05 14.21 3.39 2.20 2.34 6.29 2.70 5.54
         Non-financial corporations 3.52 11.92 12.64 3.12 1.58 1.82 6.12 1.97 3.90
         Financial corporations 3.09 4.14 1.58 0.27 0.62 0.52 0.17 0.74 1.64
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 7.45 23.29 10.87 –1.71 3.55 3.78 5.26 3.48 2.33
       Other equity  1 4.86 9.19 6.68 0.93 1.54 1.46 2.76 1.64 1.98
     Investment fund shares 30.28 41.65 104.79 25.50 24.38 27.11 27.80 22.72 12.25
       Money market fund shares –0.32 0.09 0.18 0.09 –0.07 –0.01 0.18 –0.02 0.28
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 30.60 41.56 104.61 25.41 24.46 27.12 27.62 22.74 11.97
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 17.95 18.34 20.31 5.40 5.58 3.73 5.60 5.67 5.74
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 37.76 47.65 51.92 16.40 11.14 13.30 11.07 10.16 8.32
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 37.31 33.72 25.16 5.46 3.79 4.48 11.43 11.17 8.21
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 –14.28 –10.44 1.65 21.65 –2.74 7.97 –25.23 12.97 –9.19
   Total 272.82 386.82 375.27 122.66 101.23 74.96 76.42 85.04 71.69
 External financing
   Loans 82.57 83.92 98.64 16.73 27.53 30.68 23.70 20.35 28.13
     Short-term loans 1.02 –5.61 0.86 0.47 0.79 1.21 –1.61 0.66 1.09
     Long-term loans 81.55 89.52 97.78 16.26 26.74 29.47 25.31 19.68 27.04
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 68.58 85.69 100.36 18.69 26.54 29.34 25.78 19.21 26.84
       Consumer loans 14.42 –4.29 –0.89 –1.14 –0.09 2.38 –2.04 0.23 0.91
       Entrepreneurial loans –0.43 2.51 –0.82 –0.82 1.08 –1.04 –0.04 0.91 0.38
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 73.41 83.17 94.32 14.85 27.19 28.38 23.91 20.70 27.94
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 9.16 0.75 4.32 1.89 0.34 2.30 –0.21 –0.36 0.19
       Loans from general government and rest of the world –0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 –0.01
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.73 0.01 0.90 0.01 0.01 0.25 0.63 –0.94 1.75
   Total 83.30 83.93 99.54 16.74 27.54 30.93 24.33 19.41 29.88
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2021 2022
 Item 2019 2020 2021 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 2,647.4 2,860.4 3,005.3 2,908.8 2,961.9 2,973.2 3,005.3 3,016.7 3,047.3
     Currency 262.6 324.5 384.4 337.2 353.7 368.6 384.4 397.8 410.2
     Deposits 2,384.8 2,535.8 2,620.9 2,571.6 2,608.3 2,604.6 2,620.9 2,618.9 2,637.1
       Transferable deposits 1,509.1 1,674.1 1,764.4 1,708.3 1,746.0 1,748.1 1,764.4 1,763.5 1,786.7
       Time deposits 301.6 302.8 297.7 302.9 301.9 297.9 297.7 298.7 297.9
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 574.2 558.9 558.8 560.4 560.4 558.6 558.8 556.7 552.6
     Debt securities 121.4 113.3 109.6 112.8 111.6 110.1 109.6 109.5 107.8
       Short-term debt securities 1.6 1.6 1.8 1.7 1.9 1.8 1.8 1.7 1.7
       Long-term debt securities 119.8 111.7 107.8 111.0 109.7 108.3 107.8 107.7 106.1
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 81.5 76.7 75.3 77.3 76.5 75.3 75.3 75.2 74.7
           Non-financial corporations 12.4 10.9 9.8 10.5 10.5 10.2 9.8 9.4 8.9
           Financial corporations 66.6 63.3 63.2 64.4 63.7 62.9 63.2 63.8 63.3
           General government 2.5 2.6 2.2 2.4 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.0 2.5
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 40.0 36.6 34.3 35.5 35.1 34.8 34.3 34.3 33.1
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,388.2 1,541.0 1,901.6 1,659.4 1,746.3 1,794.3 1,901.6 1,840.4 1,696.6
     Equity 708.0 806.5 969.1 868.7 904.8 923.8 969.1 926.8 847.5
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 223.9 243.3 296.0 271.7 280.0 287.1 296.0 271.0 236.7
         Non-financial corporations 182.3 204.0 250.4 228.2 236.9 244.3 250.4 224.7 195.7
         Financial corporations 41.6 39.2 45.6 43.4 43.1 42.7 45.6 46.3 41.1
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 136.3 180.6 249.3 199.6 216.5 223.3 249.3 241.1 214.1
       Other equity  1 347.8 382.6 423.8 397.4 408.3 413.4 423.8 414.7 396.7
     Investment fund shares 680.3 734.6 932.5 790.7 841.5 870.5 932.5 913.6 849.1
       Money market fund shares 2.3 2.3 2.5 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.5 2.5 2.8
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 678.0 732.2 930.0 788.3 839.2 868.2 930.0 911.1 846.3
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 393.8 412.2 432.5 417.6 423.2 426.9 432.5 438.2 443.9
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,069.1 1,112.1 1,162.2 1,128.0 1,138.7 1,151.6 1,162.2 1,172.5 1,180.0
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 924.5 956.8 984.0 962.3 966.1 970.5 984.0 991.1 993.3
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 29.6 27.9 27.5 27.8 28.2 28.5 27.5 25.7 27.3
   Total 6,574.2 7,023.7 7,622.6 7,216.7 7,376.0 7,455.1 7,622.6 7,594.1 7,496.3
 Liabilities
   Loans 1,837.9 1,924.6 2,023.5 1,939.6 1,969.5 2,000.5 2,023.5 2,041.2 2,069.0
     Short-term loans 59.0 53.2 53.0 53.6 54.4 55.6 53.0 53.7 54.8
     Long-term loans 1,778.9 1,871.3 1,970.5 1,886.0 1,915.1 1,944.9 1,970.5 1,987.6 2,014.3
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,358.7 1,448.2 1,548.5 1,464.8 1,493.8 1,523.0 1,548.5 1,565.3 1,592.2
       Consumer loans 231.4 226.1 224.5 224.6 224.4 226.7 224.5 224.9 225.5
       Entrepreneurial loans 247.7 250.2 250.5 250.2 251.2 250.8 250.5 251.1 251.4
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,741.6 1,824.6 1,920.3 1,839.8 1,867.3 1,896.1 1,920.3 1,941.0 1,968.8
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 96.3 99.9 103.2 99.8 102.2 104.4 103.2 100.2 100.3
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 19.4 19.5 20.3 19.5 19.5 19.7 20.3 19.4 21.1
   Total 1,857.2 1,944.0 2,043.9 1,959.1 1,988.9 2,020.2 2,043.9 2,060.6 2,090.2
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
November 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
  
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local securitygovernment government government government funds government government government government funds
Period
€ billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2016 + 36.4 + 13.7 + 7.7 + 6.3 + 8.7 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3
2017 + 43.7 + 7.9 + 13.9 + 10.7 + 11.1 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.32018 + 65.6 + 21.0 + 12.0 + 16.7 + 16.0 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.52019 
p + 53.2 + 21.4 + 14.0 + 8.6 + 9.2 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3
2020 p − 147.6 − 87.4 − 30.9 + 5.5 − 34.8 − 4.3 − 2.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 1.0
2021 p − 134.3 − 145.9 + 2.8 + 4.6 + 4.3 − 3.7 − 4.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1
2020         H1  p − 48.6 − 27.3 − 9.4 + 0.5 − 12.4 − 2.9 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.8
         H2  p − 98.9 − 60.1 − 21.4 + 5.1 − 22.4 − 5.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 + 0.3 − 1.3
2021         H1  p − 75.6 − 60.7 − 4.0 + 1.5 − 12.4 − 4.3 − 3.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.7
         H2  p − 58.6 − 85.2 + 6.8 + 3.1 + 16.7 − 3.1 − 4.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.9
2022         H1  pe − 13.0 − 42.8 + 16.6 + 5.7 + 7.4 − 0.7 − 2.3 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.4
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2016 2,161.6 1,365.6 642.3 166.2 1.2 69.0 43.6 20.5 5.3 0.0
2017 2,111.8 1,349.9 614.9 163.1 0.8 64.6 41.3 18.8 5.0 0.02018 2,063.6 1,322.9 600.9 155.9 0.7 61.3 39.3 17.9 4.6 0.02019 
p 2,046.6 1,299.7 610.0 153.6 0.7 58.9 37.4 17.6 4.4 0.0
2020 p 2,315.2 1,512.9 660.9 154.8 7.5 68.0 44.4 19.4 4.5 0.2
2021 p 2,471.6 1,667.2 662.7 156.2 0.4 68.6 46.3 18.4 4.3 0.0
2020         Q1  p 2,091.5 1,327.5 623.7 154.2 0.8 60.0 38.1 17.9 4.4 0.0
         Q2  p 2,261.0 1,473.7 645.7 154.4 1.0 66.1 43.1 18.9 4.5 0.0
         Q3  p 2,334.6 1,536.6 656.2 155.5 4.6 68.5 45.1 19.3 4.6 0.1
         Q4  p 2,315.2 1,512.9 660.9 154.8 7.5 68.0 44.4 19.4 4.5 0.2
2021         Q1  p 2,345.6 1,538.7 665.4 154.7 16.2 69.0 45.2 19.6 4.5 0.5
         Q2  p 2,397.7 1,589.1 667.8 155.6 21.2 68.7 45.5 19.1 4.5 0.6
         Q3  p 2,430.8 1,617.3 672.4 154.9 24.3 68.6 45.6 19.0 4.4 0.7
         Q4  p 2,471.6 1,667.2 662.7 156.2 0.4 68.6 46.3 18.4 4.3 0.0
2022         Q1  p 2,475.7 1,671.9 662.0 155.7 3.1 67.4 45.5 18.0 4.2 0.1
         Q2  p 2,515.0 1,711.0 659.8 157.7 3.3 67.2 45.7 17.6 4.2 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus   
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly  
GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2016 1,426.7 739.2 524.3 163.3 1,390.4 754.5 240.7 162.5 68.1 37.3 127.2 + 36.4 1,270.4
2017 1,486.9 773.3 549.5 164.2 1,443.3 784.8 250.6 169.5 71.6 33.8 132.9 + 43.7 1,329.52018 1,557.2 808.1 572.6 176.6 1,491.6 805.6 260.3 176.4 78.5 31.2 139.7 + 65.6 1,387.72019 
p 1,615.8 834.3 598.2 183.4 1,562.6 845.6 273.2 187.2 84.4 27.4 144.8 + 53.2 1,439.6
2020 p 1,569.1 783.1 608.1 177.8 1,716.6 904.8 284.3 209.4 93.2 21.5 203.4 − 147.6 1,398.2
2021 p 1,711.7 887.6 633.7 190.5 1,846.0 940.9 294.4 227.2 93.4 20.8 269.3 − 134.3 1,528.8
As a percentage of GDP
2016 45.5 23.6 16.7 5.2 44.4 24.1 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.2 4.1 + 1.2 40.5
2017 45.5 23.7 16.8 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 + 1.3 40.72018 46.3 24.0 17.0 5.2 44.3 23.9 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.1 + 1.9 41.22019 
p 46.5 24.0 17.2 5.3 45.0 24.3 7.9 5.4 2.4 0.8 4.2 + 1.5 41.4
2020 p 46.1 23.0 17.9 5.2 50.4 26.6 8.3 6.1 2.7 0.6 6.0 − 4.3 41.1
2021 p 47.5 24.6 17.6 5.3 51.3 26.1 8.2 6.3 2.6 0.6 7.5 − 3.7 42.4
Percentage growth rates
2016 + 4.5 + 4.8 + 4.6 + 2.9 + 4.1 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 6.2 + 5.6 − 11.7 + 4.9 . + 4.7
2017 + 4.2 + 4.6 + 4.8 + 0.5 + 3.8 + 4.0 + 4.1 + 4.3 + 5.1 − 9.3 + 4.5 . + 4.72018 + 4.7 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 7.6 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 3.9 + 4.1 + 9.7 − 7.8 + 5.1 . + 4.42019 
p + 3.8 + 3.2 + 4.5 + 3.8 + 4.8 + 5.0 + 5.0 + 6.1 + 7.5 − 12.2 + 3.7 . + 3.7
2020 p − 2.9 − 6.1 + 1.7 − 3.0 + 9.9 + 7.0 + 4.0 + 11.8 + 10.4 − 21.5 + 40.5 . − 2.9
2021 p + 9.1 + 13.3 + 4.2 + 7.1 + 7.5 + 4.0 + 3.6 + 8.5 + 0.2 − 3.4 + 32.4 . + 9.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and   
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution  Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
November 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2015 p 829.8 673.3 10.4 804.3 244.1 302.7 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,301.1 1,273.6 + 27.4
2016 p 862.3 705.8 9.0 844.5 251.3 321.6 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 17.8 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.1 1,330.2 + 24.9
2017 p 900.3 734.5 7.9 869.4 261.6 327.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 30.8 631.5 622.0 + 9.5 1,417.5 1,377.2 + 40.3
2018 p 951.8 776.3 6.2 905.6 272.5 338.0 39.2 55.8 16.1 + 46.2 656.2 642.5 + 13.6 1,490.7 1,430.9 + 59.8
2019 p 1,010.3 799.4 11.2 975.5 285.9 349.7 33.6 62.9 16.8 + 34.8 685.0 676.7 + 8.3 1,573.8 1,530.8 + 43.0
2020 p 946.9 739.9 13.9 1,111.3 299.5 422.8 25.9 69.2 59.9 − 164.4 719.5 747.8 − 28.3 1,518.8 1,711.5 − 192.7
2021 p 1,108.0 833.3 25.5 1,241.5 310.7 531.5 21.1 69.9 26.2 − 133.5 769.7 776.2 − 6.5 1,704.7 1,844.7 − 140.0
2020         Q1  p 244.8 197.5 2.5 236.4 72.9 90.5 11.9 12.0 2.6 + 8.4 168.3 175.7 − 7.4 380.0 379.1 + 0.9
         Q2  p 212.2 158.1 2.7 272.0 72.2 119.1 8.6 15.4 3.4 − 59.8 175.9 187.0 − 11.1 354.8 425.7 − 70.9
         Q3  p 227.5 181.4 4.0 282.1 72.4 102.0 1.4 18.3 34.3 − 54.5 181.1 195.0 − 13.9 369.9 438.3 − 68.4
         Q4  p 259.3 201.9 4.5 315.4 81.4 109.1 5.9 22.8 19.6 − 56.1 186.0 189.6 − 3.5 410.6 470.2 − 59.6
2021         Q1  p 237.1 185.3 4.3 297.0 75.5 130.8 7.3 11.1 14.6 − 59.9 182.4 196.3 − 13.9 381.5 455.3 − 73.8
         Q2  p 270.6 195.8 7.5 300.8 74.8 126.8 10.7 15.2 10.5 − 30.2 185.9 197.0 − 11.1 417.7 459.0 − 41.2
         Q3  p 270.9 210.7 7.4 290.2 75.8 117.5 − 0.4 16.5 10.4 − 19.3 183.4 191.9 − 8.6 413.5 441.4 − 27.8
         Q4  p 328.0 237.7 6.1 342.9 84.1 148.1 3.1 26.4 − 9.4 − 14.9 197.3 190.4 + 6.9 487.7 495.7 − 8.0
2022         Q1  p 277.4 224.0 5.0 278.4 79.6 116.3 5.5 11.9 7.0 − 1.0 193.8 199.8 − 6.0 429.4 436.5 − 7.1
         Q2  p 288.4 224.6 5.1 294.7 77.8 126.5 10.6 15.3 5.9 − 6.2 199.9 196.7 + 3.2 445.1 448.2 − 3.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans grant ed.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2018 p 374.4 363.5 + 10.9 420.5 400.1 + 20.4 271.8 261.5 + 10.2
2019 p 382.5 369.2 + 13.3 437.2 419.6 + 17.6 284.2 278.1 + 6.1
2020 p 341.4 472.1 − 130.7 456.4 489.4 − 33.0 297.0 294.6 + 2.4
2021 p 370.3 585.9 − 215.6 510.2 509.1 + 1.1 309.9 304.8 + 5.1
2020         Q1  p 92.3 90.4 + 1.9 105.6 99.7 + 5.9 57.9 67.7 − 9.8
         Q2  p 70.8 114.8 − 44.0 108.2 128.0 − 19.8 69.4 69.4 + 0.1
         Q3  p 83.7 105.4 − 21.7 112.9 113.7 − 0.8 67.5 72.6 − 5.1
         Q4  p 94.5 161.5 − 67.0 127.4 146.3 − 18.9 100.3 83.5 + 16.8
2021         Q1  p 75.0 127.5 − 52.5 113.7 120.7 − 7.1 61.1 69.7 − 8.6
         Q2  p 86.4 123.5 − 37.1 122.8 122.0 + 0.8 74.6 71.7 + 2.9
         Q3  p 93.9 128.7 − 34.7 125.9 120.2 + 5.7 74.6 74.9 − 0.3
         Q4  p 115.1 206.3 − 91.2 145.6 144.5 + 1.2 97.6 87.0 + 10.6
2022         Q1  p 94.7 114.0 − 19.3 134.6 122.7 + 11.9 68.4 73.8 − 5.4
         Q2  p 99.7 123.5 − 23.7 133.2 123.6 + 9.6 81.0 77.3 + 3.7
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city states Berlin, Bremen and
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- assigned to the general government sector. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
November 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
  
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,8362017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,3682018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,7752019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,911 632,268 313,381 286,065 32,822 107,916 − 274 30,266
2021 833,337 706,978 342,988 325,768 38,222 125,000 + 1,359 29,321
2020         Q1 198,375 168,123 83,086 75,420 9,617 18,875 + 11,377 6,855
         Q2 158,161 135,185 68,653 59,557 6,974 25,107 − 2,131 6,997         Q3 182,202 156,397 78,502 72,613 5,282 25,234 + 571 9,705         Q4 201,173 172,564 83,140 78,475 10,949 38,700 − 10,090 6,709
2021         Q1 189,316 159,271 72,814 73,137 13,320 19,882 + 10,163 6,887
         Q2 191,931 163,158 81,129 74,024 8,005 29,609 − 835 7,438         Q3 211,364 180,378 87,603 84,312 8,464 29,726 + 1,260 7,823         Q4 240,726 204,171 101,442 94,295 8,433 45,784 − 9,229 7,173
2022         Q1 224,006 189,158 92,112 87,240 9,806 24,772 + 10,077 7,261
         Q2 224,538 190,982 94,153 86,852 9,977 34,149 − 594 11,576         Q3 ... 174,232 84,078 80,020 10,133 ... ... 7,953
2021         Sep. . 72,231 34,690 34,158 3,382 . . 2,341
2022         Sep. . 66,745 32,551 30,738 3,455 . . 2,373
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget. 2Customs footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Domestic Import trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax 4 tion tax  5 tax 6 Total VAT VAT fers  8 taxes 9 taxes 9 duties taxes
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,3452017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,1412018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,5712019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,376 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,734 50,107
2021 760,953 370,296 218,407 72,342 42,124 37,423 250,800 187,631 63,169 4,951 98,171 31,613 5,122 53,976
2020         Q1 181,374 88,009 53,389 18,711 8,495 7,415 60,060 46,038 14,022 244 24,517 7,406 1,139 13,251
         Q2 146,360 69,928 50,760 10,633 2,348 6,187 44,262 31,625 12,638 1,170 23,525 6,326 1,149 11,175         Q3 168,308 73,766 47,470 13,492 5,411 7,392 59,819 47,933 11,886 796 25,930 6,784 1,212 11,910         Q4 186,334 89,094 57,667 16,146 8,014 7,268 55,343 43,105 12,238 1,744 31,660 7,259 1,234 13,770
2021         Q1 171,974 86,381 50,854 17,826 10,203 7,498 54,795 45,403 9,392 252 21,712 7,757 1,076 12,703
         Q2 175,242 84,505 50,783 14,347 8,860 10,515 57,634 43,399 14,235 1,215 23,210 7,398 1,281 12,085         Q3 193,910 90,619 53,857 17,973 9,853 8,936 69,528 49,052 20,476 1,189 23,469 7,813 1,292 13,532         Q4 219,827 108,791 62,913 22,196 13,208 10,474 68,843 49,777 19,066 2,295 29,780 8,645 1,473 15,656
2022         Q1 203,130 96,245 56,206 20,915 11,178 7,946 73,584 54,234 19,350 615 22,252 8,975 1,459 13,972
         Q2 204,740 101,822 60,363 17,194 11,246 13,019 67,763 46,755 21,008 1,521 24,441 7,564 1,630 13,758         Q3 185,552 82,392 43,431 17,598 10,724 10,639 71,164 49,323 21,841 1,471 21,657 7,115 1,753 11,320
2021         Sep. 78,211 44,626 16,727 16,876 8,745 2,279 22,117 16,343 5,774 2 8,477 2,561 429 5,980
2022         Sep. 71,161 36,801 7,741 16,856 10,535 1,668 23,746 16,749 6,997 1 7,579 2,365 669 4,416
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike plans. 4After deducting employee refunds and research grants. 5After deducting re-
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens search grants. 6Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains,
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- non-assessed taxes on earnings. 7The allocation of revenue to central, state and
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- local government, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is re gulated in Section
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- local government in revenue for 2021: 45.1:51.2:3.7. The EU share is de ducted from
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- central government’s share. 8Respective percentage share of central and state
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After government for 2021: 41.4:58.6. 9 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 
deducting child benefits and subsidies for supplementary private pension

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
November 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,9662018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,2032019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,651 14,553 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2021 37,120 11,028 14,733 14,980 9,546 6,691 2,089 1,984 18,335 9,824 2,333 1,121 77,335 61,251 14,985
2020         Q1 4,966 4,930 2,413 6,766 2,634 1,708 562 537 4,525 1,981 542 358 17,245 13,391 3,403
         Q2 8,117 4,235 3,772 2,606 2,426 1,585 455 328 3,566 2,154 425 181 12,971 8,842 3,895         Q3 9,985 4,365 3,978 2,817 2,366 1,499 506 414 3,730 2,262 509 283 14,690 10,242 4,095         Q4 14,566 5,145 4,487 2,365 2,101 1,768 715 513 4,234 2,203 567 254 16,584 12,997 3,283
2021         Q1 4,126 3,171 2,585 6,776 2,567 1,692 395 400 4,716 2,110 578 353 17,594 13,798 3,503
         Q2 8,717 2,546 4,053 2,843 2,469 1,640 528 413 4,231 2,374 538 255 17,904 13,692 4,034         Q3 9,532 2,338 3,636 2,911 2,381 1,618 514 538 4,571 2,457 516 269 18,643 14,215 4,133         Q4 14,745 2,972 4,458 2,449 2,130 1,741 651 633 4,816 2,884 700 244 23,194 19,546 3,316
2022         Q1 4,452 2,840 2,372 7,175 2,594 1,785 531 503 5,061 2,827 701 385 21,492 17,454 3,577
         Q2 9,092 3,518 3,648 2,872 2,433 1,722 505 651 4,406 2,238 661 259 21,318 16,839 4,077         Q3 7,103 2,571 3,742 3,059 2,325 1,598 549 710 4,100 2,138 596 281 ... ... ...
2021         Sep. 3,434 1,473 1,145 743 747 555 182 198 1,551 730 187 93 . . .
2022         Sep. 2,117 1,604 1,385 812 695 541 181 244 1,355 718 189 102 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  
3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,0322018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,0082019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 + 1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 303 56 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 − 3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 344 55 3,901
2021 348,679 245,185 102,772 347,486 296,343 22,734 + 1,192 42,014 40,320 1,241 400 52 3,807
2020         Q1 80,578 55,999 24,436 82,622 70,829 5,346 − 2,045 40,840 38,636 1,848 300 56 3,966
         Q2 82,098 57,515 24,413 82,875 70,889 5,346 − 777 39,779 37,975 1,446 304 55 3,949         Q3 82,689 58,109 24,418 86,497 74,054 5,591 − 3,808 36,898 35,197 1,333 313 55 3,925         Q4 88,978 64,375 24,412 86,605 73,879 5,576 + 2,373 39,847 38,186 1,286 321 55 3,916
2021         Q1 83,066 57,351 25,542 86,048 73,799 5,600 − 2,982 36,888 35,326 1,166 342 54 3,887
         Q2 86,386 60,666 25,545 86,486 73,905 5,679 − 100 36,941 35,554 988 345 53 3,871         Q3 85,535 59,941 25,468 87,123 74,453 5,718 − 1,588 36,041 34,670 973 345 53 3,840         Q4 92,818 67,211 25,415 87,385 74,556 5,730 + 5,432 41,974 40,310 1,241 370 52 3,835
2022         Q1 86,684 60,599 25,937 86,841 74,568 5,734 − 157 41,784 39,952 1,367 399 65 3,783
         Q2 90,040 63,978 25,879 87,138 74,644 5,756 + 2,903 44,425 42,441 1,513 406 65 3,761         Q3 89,284 62,891 26,218 92,606 79,400 6,127 − 3,322 41,548 39,767 1,315 415 51 3,775
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
November 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- Government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy funds Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment payment iture  5 surplus ment
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −2018 39,335 34,172 622 − 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 . 588 8,129 + 6,228 −2019 35,285 29,851 638 − 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 . 842 6,252 + 2,131 −
2020 33,678 28,236 630 − 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 . 1,214 6,076 − 27,335 6,913
2021 35,830 29,571 1,302 − 57,570 19,460 21,003 7,475 . 493 6,080 − 21,739 16,935
2020         Q1 8,123 6,851 153 − 9,301 4,469 392 1,934 . 235 1,470 − 1,179 −
         Q2 7,906 6,691 151 − 17,005 4,869 7,977 1,793 . 254 1,407 − 9,099 −         Q3 8,350 6,934 153 − 18,619 5,737 8,637 1,701 . 472 1,414 − 10,269 −         Q4 9,299 7,760 174 − 16,088 5,543 5,712 1,957 . 251 1,785 − 6,789 6,913
2021         Q1 8,228 6,747 289 − 18,260 5,956 8,006 1,935 . 184 1,391 − 10,033 −
         Q2 8,830 7,301 324 − 16,720 5,029 7,495 1,912 . 108 1,452 − 7,890 −         Q3 8,791 7,290 330 − 12,042 4,447 3,631 1,744 . 91 1,452 − 3,251 −         Q4 9,982 8,234 359 − 10,547 4,028 1,871 1,884 . 110 1,785 − 565 16,935
2022         Q1 8,827 7,374 251 − 10,685 4,424 2,087 1,821 . 135 1,412 − 1,858 −
         Q2 9,327 7,857 262 − 9,457 4,091 1,215 1,794 . 147 1,450 − 130 −         Q3 9,278 7,740 261 − 8,401 4,056 408 1,621 . 107 1,506 + 877 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- courage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promotion
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- of business start-ups. 5Including collection charges to other social security funds , ex-
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring meas- job seekers. ures and refunds of social contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to en-
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which: of which:
Central Remedies Adminis-
govern- and trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental therapeutic Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 appliances benefits iture  5 surplus
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 7572017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,0412018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 + 2,6542019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 − 1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 − 6,110
2021 289,270 249,734 36,977 294,602 82,748 46,199 45,075 16,335 20,163 16,612 11,735 − 5,332
2020         Q1 61,949 57,419 3,625 66,438 20,049 11,086 10,806 3,804 4,470 4,061 2,816 − 4,489
         Q2 68,108 58,096 9,359 69,487 17,674 10,492 10,908 3,389 3,986 4,143 2,980 − 1,378         Q3 70,130 59,403 10,151 71,063 20,913 10,567 11,642 3,774 4,852 3,829 2,970 − 934         Q4 68,645 62,672 4,805 67,987 19,887 10,729 11,019 3,891 4,725 3,920 3,039 + 658
2021         Q1 72,970 59,338 13,303 72,660 19,631 11,175 11,564 4,069 4,564 4,287 2,967 + 310
         Q2 71,964 61,819 9,965 74,492 20,287 11,275 11,536 4,219 5,085 4,120 2,850 − 2,529         Q3 70,592 61,899 7,942 73,569 20,748 11,756 10,730 4,060 5,085 4,004 2,849 − 2,977         Q4 74,020 66,678 5,767 73,209 21,340 12,043 11,252 4,062 5,290 4,200 3,109 + 810
2022         Q1 79,253 62,142 17,049 81,493 20,550 11,891 11,847 4,286 5,216 4,574 3,510 − 2,240
         Q2 79,112 64,611 14,280 79,269 21,080 12,053 12,085 4,249 5,335 4,457 2,958 − 158
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, i.e. after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social security funds. sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
November 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1 
of which:
Inpatient Contributions to
of which: Non-cash care Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits  3 total 4 benefit ance scheme  5 expenditure surplus
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 4,626 13,003 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 4,904 13,539 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,5572018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 − 3,3152019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2021 52,573 49,764 53,903 9,573 16,511 13,865 3,070 2,024 − 1,330
2020         Q1 11,693 11,473 11,444 2,186 4,214 3,067 633 489 + 249
         Q2 11,921 11,732 11,816 2,051 4,015 3,173 664 468 + 105         Q3 13,924 11,938 12,890 2,263 4,087 3,249 682 500 + 1,033         Q4 13,079 12,746 12,927 2,306 4,177 3,403 716 481 + 152
2021         Q1 12,093 11,831 13,344 2,355 3,971 3,387 725 512 − 1,251
         Q2 12,933 12,329 13,521 2,287 4,030 3,421 745 510 − 587         Q3 12,624 12,294 13,390 2,393 4,182 3,466 783 509 − 767         Q4 14,853 13,242 13,595 2,475 4,270 3,646 788 503 + 1,258
2022         Q1 12,912 12,412 14,739 2,564 4,974 3,572 775 529 − 1,827
         Q2 15,350 12,951 14,827 2,464 5,026 3,698 795 548 + 523
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *The final annual figures generally differ from the ance contributions). 3Data revision in 2014. 4From 2014, also including benefits for
total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter al ia.5For non-pro-
sequently. 1Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund. 2Since 2005, fessional carers. 
including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
 market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,177,231 85,952 607,446 217,604 52,453 1,213,776
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,161,570 205,391 585,456 211,797 48,651 1,110,2752017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017 2,111,751 319,159 539,181 180,145 45,121 1,028,1462018 + 167,231 − 16,248 − 91 − 1,670 2018 2,063,571 364,731 496,314 186,399 44,131 971,9952019 + 185,070 + 63 − 8,044 − 914 2019 2,046,638 366,562 458,336 183,741 48,740 989,259
2020 + 456,828 + 217,904 + 24,181 − 3,399 2020 2,315,216 522,392 493,679 191,450 40,615 1,067,080
2021 
p 2,471,628 716,004 485,156 191,908 40,621 1,037,939
2020         Q1 + 65,656 + 31,296 + 9,236 + 1,698 2020          Q1 2,091,520 371,076 469,822 186,030 49,825 1,014,768
         Q2 + 185,560 + 126,585 + 31,212 − 7,314          Q2 2,261,026 424,141 535,844 186,577 49,948 1,064,516         Q3 + 159,067 + 80,783 − 6,080 + 588          Q3 2,334,627 468,723 508,090 189,788 51,777 1,116,249         Q4 + 46,545 − 20,760 − 10,187 + 1,629          Q4 2,315,216 522,392 493,679 191,450 40,615 1,067,080
2021         Q1 + 109,953 + 42,045 − 11,737 − 4,708 2021          Q1  
p 2,345,586 561,443 468,094 190,392 51,830 1,073,827
         Q2 + 146,852 + 57,601 + 3,463 + 1,576          Q2  p 2,397,710 620,472 470,564 190,129 43,264 1,073,280
         Q3  p 2,430,788 669,659 472,510 191,836 44,537 1,052,246
         Q4  p 2,471,628 716,004 485,156 191,908 40,621 1,037,939
2022         Q1  p 2,475,736 737,978 469,107 194,059 39,384 1,035,207
         Q2  p 2,514,988 759,385 472,710 202,494 43,034 1,037,364
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
November 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2015 2,177,231 13,949 65,676 1,499,010 90,350 508,246 . .
2016 2,161,570 15,491 69,715 1,483,871 96,254 496,239 . .2017 2,111,751 14,298 48,789 1,484,462 87,799 476,403 . .2018 2,063,571 14,680 52,572 1,456,160 77,410 462,748 . .2019 2,046,638 14,449 56,350 1,458,540 62,288 455,011 . .
2020         Q1 2,091,520 11,410 84,162 1,472,222 72,560 451,167 . .
         Q2 2,261,026 13,120 134,275 1,533,857 131,335 448,438 . .         Q3 2,334,627 11,886 190,945 1,582,574 101,669 447,553 . .         Q4 2,315,216 14,486 173,851 1,596,141 82,437 448,301 . .
2021         Q1  
p 2,345,586 12,200 190,021 1,637,515 61,278 444,571 . .
         Q2  p 2,397,710 12,901 182,659 1,689,922 69,010 443,218 . .
         Q3  p 2,430,788 13,319 192,480 1,711,739 69,831 443,420 . .
         Q4  p 2,471,628 17,743 195,420 1,729,881 86,437 442,146 . .
2022         Q1  p 2,475,736 15,655 172,881 1,775,452 69,481 442,267 . .
         Q2  p 2,514,988 17,750 161,918 1,811,387 76,658 447,274 . .
Central government
2015 1,371,933 13,949 49,512 1,138,951 45,256 124,265 1,062 13,667
2016 1,365,579 15,491 55,208 1,123,853 50,004 121,022 556 8,5672017 1,349,948 14,298 36,297 1,131,896 47,761 119,696 1,131 10,6182018 1,322,907 14,680 42,246 1,107,140 42,057 116,784 933 9,9752019 1,299,727 14,449 38,480 1,101,866 28,617 116,315 605 10,301
2020         Q1 1,327,538 11,410 56,680 1,103,934 38,714 116,799 605 8,125
         Q2 1,473,699 13,120 109,221 1,139,510 95,489 116,360 585 7,037         Q3 1,536,634 11,886 166,564 1,178,687 62,933 116,564 605 11,731         Q4 1,512,875 14,486 154,498 1,180,683 46,811 116,396 609 14,545
2021         Q1  
p 1,538,718 12,200 167,484 1,212,495 29,817 116,722 602 22,947
         Q2  p 1,589,070 12,901 165,373 1,259,206 34,965 116,626 643 29,461
         Q3  p 1,617,263 13,319 170,961 1,280,586 35,919 116,478 687 31,390
         Q4  p 1,667,150 17,743 176,428 1,300,416 56,744 115,818 640 8,083
2022         Q1  p 1,671,870 15,655 155,119 1,340,340 40,701 120,055 531 10,453
         Q2  p 1,710,978 17,750 147,674 1,373,617 46,356 125,581 649 10,555
State government
2015 659,521 − 16,169 362,376 23,349 257,627 15,867 2,348
2016 642,291 − 14,515 361,996 20,482 245,298 11,273 1,6942017 614,936 − 12,543 354,688 19,628 228,076 14,038 2,0462018 600,899 − 10,332 351,994 18,977 219,596 14,035 1,8912019 609,950 − 17,873 360,495 18,767 212,816 14,934 1,826
2020         Q1 623,720 − 27,484 372,021 16,000 208,216 12,297 1,783
         Q2 645,700 − 25,056 398,404 16,916 205,324 11,070 2,085         Q3 656,207 − 24,382 408,310 19,836 203,679 11,717 2,090         Q4 660,917 − 19,354 419,862 18,624 203,078 11,946 1,410
2021         Q1  
p 665,415 − 22,538 429,641 14,933 198,303 10,959 1,998
         Q2  p 667,802 − 17,287 435,726 17,844 196,945 12,466 2,047
         Q3  p 672,433 − 21,521 436,506 17,374 197,033 11,421 2,119
         Q4  p 662,728 − 18,994 434,930 13,851 194,953 12,443 1,766
2022         Q1  p 661,971 − 17,765 440,766 13,534 189,906 11,700 1,935
         Q2  p 659,846 − 14,247 443,413 14,876 187,310 11,451 1,823
Local government
2015 163,439 − − 2,047 27,474 133,918 2,143 463
2016 166,205 − − 2,404 27,002 136,798 1,819 4312017 163,124 − − 3,082 24,572 135,471 1,881 4662018 155,930 − 1 3,046 20,425 132,458 1,884 4972019 153,634 − − 2,996 19,079 131,559 1,856 532
2020         Q1 154,200 − − 3,128 19,739 131,333 1,825 508
         Q2 154,368 − − 3,094 19,728 131,546 2,085 350         Q3 155,532 − − 2,961 20,610 131,960 2,107 339         Q4 154,834 − − 3,366 18,033 133,435 1,404 330
2021         Q1  
p 154,659 − − 3,121 17,480 134,058 2,010 320
         Q2  p 155,643 − − 3,121 18,475 134,048 2,071 313
         Q3  p 154,910 − − 3,000 17,649 134,261 2,127 306
         Q4  p 156,230 − − 3,241 17,255 135,734 1,768 293
2022         Q1  p 155,675 − − 3,052 16,075 136,548 1,933 315
         Q2  p 157,705 − − 2,969 16,186 138,550 1,823 361
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
November 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2015 1,502 − − − 537 965 91 2,685
2016 1,232 − − − 562 670 89 3,0442017 807 − − − 262 545 15 3,9342018 704 − − − 388 316 16 4,5062019 738 − − − 375 363 16 4,753
2020         Q1 806 − − − 287 519 16 4,328
         Q2 1,015 − − − 581 433 16 4,284         Q3 4,640 − − − 4,210 430 3,956 4,226         Q4 7,480 − − − 7,128 352 6,931 4,606
2021         Q1  
p 16,220 − − − 15,985 235 15,853 4,160
         Q2  p 21,234 − − − 20,995 239 20,860 4,220
         Q3  p 24,288 − − − 24,053 235 23,872 4,292
         Q4  p 392 − − − 131 261 19 4,729
2022         Q1  p 3,104 − − − 2,863 240 2,720 4,181
         Q2  p 3,321 − − − 3,078 242 2,939 4,124
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3 
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 day bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 987,909 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 63,650
2008 1,019,905 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 78,6852009 1,086,173 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 63,121
2010 1,337,160 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 242,251
2011 1,346,869 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 215,1092012 1,390,377 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 203,4672013 1,392,735 10,582 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 190,1272014 1,398,472 12,146 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 180,123
2015 1,371,933 13,949 1,070 1,188,463 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,521
2016 1,365,579 15,491 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,0262017 1,349,948 14,298 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,4572018 1,322,907 14,680 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,8412019 1,299,727 14,449 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,932
2020 1,512,875 14,486 . 1,335,181 808,300 183,046 58,279 − 3,692 98,543 113,141 . 163,208
2021 
p 1,667,150 17,743 . 1,476,844 909,276 195,654 65,390 − 6,722 103,936 153,978 . 172,562
2020         Q1 1,327,538 11,410 . 1,160,614 721,343 182,095 71,028 − 5,310 91,084 23,572 . 155,514
         Q2 1,473,699 13,120 . 1,248,731 774,587 178,329 56,061 − 3,752 95,622 79,987 . 211,849         Q3 1,536,634 11,886 . 1,345,251 796,338 191,388 57,144 − 3,737 99,276 127,478 . 179,497         Q4 1,512,875 14,486 . 1,335,181 808,300 183,046 58,279 − 3,692 98,543 113,141 . 163,208
2021         Q1  
p 1,538,718 12,200 . 1,379,979 821,254 194,571 60,687 − 3,857 103,910 134,800 . 146,538
         Q2  p 1,589,070 12,901 . 1,424,579 873,345 189,048 62,569 − 5,056 104,997 139,451 . 151,591
         Q3  p 1,617,263 13,319 . 1,451,547 884,358 203,353 63,851 − 5,456 105,398 146,533 . 152,397
         Q4  p 1,667,150 17,743 . 1,476,844 909,276 195,654 65,390 − 6,722 103,936 153,978 . 172,562
2022         Q1  p 1,671,870 15,655 . 1,495,459 930,351 209,424 67,776 − 7,809 108,702 140,427 . 160,756
         Q2  p 1,710,978 17,750 . 1,521,291 962,484 203,362 70,217 − 11,209 111,343 138,495 . 171,937
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by the
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
off-budget entities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2020 2021 2022
2019 2020 2021 2019 2020 2021 4.Vj. 1.Vj. 2.Vj. 3.Vj. 4.Vj. 1.Vj. 2.Vj.
Item Index 2015=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 108.2 100.4 104.9 –1.1 –7.2 4.5 0.6 –0.9 20.2 2.6 –1.1 0.9 –0.6
Construction 100.1 102.1 100.7 –3.6 2.0 –1.4 7.2 –5.5 4.1 2.3 –6.1 3.9 –3.9
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 109.3 101.0 103.9 3.4 –7.5 2.8 –5.5 –6.8 11.5 3.2 4.1 9.3 5.9
Information and communication 120.7 120.8 125.2 3.9 0.1 3.6 1.2 0.9 7.0 3.9 2.9 3.5 4.0
Financial and insurance activities 95.4 98.9 99.1 1.7 3.6 0.3 1.9 0.8 –0.2 –0.1 0.6 4.9 4.8
Real estate activities 101.7 102.2 103.1 0.3 0.4 0.9 0.4 –0.2 3.1 0.2 0.7 1.8 1.0
Business services  1 110.7 105.1 109.8 0.1 –5.0 4.4 –4.1 –4.7 13.0 6.5 4.4 5.9 3.8
Public services, education and health 106.6 105.4 107.6 1.5 –1.1 2.0 –2.0 –1.1 8.6 –0.2 1.6 2.4 1.5
Other services 103.1 91.2 91.5 1.8 –11.6 0.4 –17.2 –11.0 9.0 1.5 4.3 7.6 7.3
Gross value added 107.0 102.8 105.6 0.8 –3.9 2.7 –1.6 –2.7 10.7 2.2 1.2 3.6 2.0
Gross domestic product  2 107.1 103.2 105.9 1.1 –3.7 2.6 –1.2 –2.3 10.6 1.8 1.2 3.9 1.8
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 107.2 101.1 101.5 1.6 –5.7 0.4 –5.7 –8.7 6.5 1.4 3.1 8.8 7.2
Government consumption 109.4 113.8 118.1 2.6 4.0 3.8 5.8 3.4 8.5 2.1 1.4 4.4 1.9
Machinery and equipment 113.2 100.8 104.3 1.0 –11.0 3.5 –2.5 1.1 20.8 –2.1 –2.6 0.6 0.6
Premises 108.6 112.9 112.9 1.0 3.9 0.0 6.7 –2.0 4.4 0.6 –3.2 3.0 –3.9
Other investment  4 120.3 116.3 117.6 6.1 –3.3 1.0 –3.2 –2.0 4.1 1.6 0.7 1.7 1.8
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . –0.1 –0.3 0.5 –0.9 0.5 –0.4 1.0 0.9 –0.3 0.3
Domestic demand 109.4 106.1 108.1 1.7 –3.0 1.9 –2.5 –3.6 7.1 2.3 2.4 5.7 4.1
Net exports  6 . . . –0.6 –0.8 0.8 1.2 1.1 3.8 –0.3 –1.0 –1.5 –2.1
     Exports 111.3 101.0 110.8 1.3 –9.3 9.7 –2.6 –0.2 28.2 7.4 7.2 3.4 1.9
     Imports 117.6 107.6 117.3 2.9 –8.5 9.0 –5.7 –2.9 20.6 9.3 11.1 7.5 7.2
Gross domestic product  2 107.1 103.2 105.9 1.1 –3.7 2.6 –1.2 –2.3 10.6 1.8 1.2 3.9 1.8
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,805.5 1,713.5 1,773.8 3.0 –5.1 3.5 –5.7 –7.0 8.3 5.3 7.9 14.2 14.3
Government consumption 703.2 748.0 797.5 5.1 6.4 6.6 7.6 6.3 7.9 6.2 6.1 9.4 7.0
Machinery and equipment 241.2 217.5 229.4 2.4 –9.8 5.5 –1.5 2.5 22.6 –0.3 0.2 6.0 7.2
Premises 363.5 384.8 416.7 5.2 5.9 8.3 7.3 –0.1 9.5 12.8 10.3 18.2 14.2
Other investment  4 137.7 133.8 137.7 7.6 –2.8 2.9 –2.6 –0.6 5.8 3.4 2.9 5.6 5.0
Changes in inventories  5 25.9 16.1 55.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,276.9 3,213.8 3,410.2 3.7 –1.9 6.1 –1.8 –1.9 9.3 7.8 9.4 13.0 12.8
Net exports 196.3 191.7 191.6 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,621.0 1,464.8 1,693.9 1.8 –9.6 15.6 –3.2 0.8 33.3 15.1 17.1 15.1 15.8
     Imports 1,424.6 1,273.1 1,502.4 2.7 –10.6 18.0 –7.3 –2.1 30.0 20.3 26.7 26.6 28.4
Gross domestic product  2 3,473.3 3,405.4 3,601.8 3.2 –2.0 5.8 –0.2 –0.6 11.5 6.3 6.3 8.6 7.8
 IV. Prices (2015=100)
Private consumption 105.1 105.7 109.0 1.3 0.6 3.1 –0.0 1.8 1.7 3.8 4.7 4.9 6.6
Gross domestic product 107.1 109.1 112.4 2.1 1.8 3.1 1.0 1.7 0.9 4.4 5.0 4.6 5.9
Terms of trade 100.8 102.8 100.1 0.7 2.0 –2.6 1.1 0.2 –3.5 –2.7 –4.2 –5.4 –5.2
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,856.2 1,853.9 1,918.0 4.6 –0.1 3.5 0.5 –0.7 5.1 4.7 4.6 6.6 5.6
Entrepreneurial and property income 752.1 717.7 825.4 –1.7 –4.6 15.0 5.6 7.3 39.9 9.7 10.5 2.5 –3.0
National income 2,608.2 2,571.6 2,743.4 2.7 –1.4 6.7 1.8 1.8 13.4 6.2 6.1 5.3 3.1
Memo item: Gross national income 3,590.1 3,505.7 3,729.5 3.2 –2.4 6.4 –0.3 –0.1 11.9 7.3 6.9 8.9 7.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2022.  1 Professional, sci-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added plus
taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit institu-tions serving households.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware
and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net in-
crease in valuables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy Total Inter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2015 = 100
% of total  1   100      14,04      6,37      79,59      29,45      36,98 2.27      10,89      10,31      9,95      12,73      14,16
Period
2018 105.3 109.0 97.4 105.3 105.5 104.6 106.2 106.9 107.4 109.0 106.5 99.9
2019 102.9 112.7 90.4 102.2 101.8 102.6 106.2 101.0 102.8 106.5 103.4 94.9
2020 95.0 116.1 84.4 92.2 94.9 88.2 97.6 97.2 90.6 98.5 89.5 75.9
2021 98.4 114.3 87.1 96.6 102.7 90.5 103.6 99.1 98.9 108.7 95.9 73.9
2021 Q3 96.9 119.4 80.6 94.2 102.3 85.1 101.9 101.6 97.9 109.0 94.7 61.7
Q4 101.5 124.8 93.5 97.9 98.9 95.1 108.7 102.8 95.9 109.5 102.2 74.3
2022 Q1 96.0 98.7 95.2 95.6 103.2 87.4 104.0 100.9 98.7 109.9 90.5 73.2
Q2 97.5 114.9 82.5 95.6 102.0 89.5 106.0 97.1 98.1 111.3 94.2 74.5
x,p Q3 97.9 117.9 79.9 95.9 99.7 91.2 105.6 99.7 95.9 117.9 95.9 75.0
2021 Sep. 100.1 121.8 83.7 97.6 103.6 89.7 111.8 105.5 101.2 112.8 99.6 65.6
Oct. 102.1 123.8 92.1 99.0 104.5 91.7 112.9 106.2 101.5 110.5 96.3 73.4
Nov. 105.8 127.4 93.1 103.0 104.5 99.7 114.5 107.8 103.4 113.1 101.8 83.9
Dec. 96.5 123.2 95.2 91.8 87.8 93.9 98.8 94.3 82.7 104.9 108.4 65.5
2022 Jan. 90.1 82.4 98.5 90.7 100.0 81.4 96.5 95.8 94.1 103.2 81.9 70.4
Feb. 94.9 97.1 94.5 94.5 101.2 87.9 105.0 96.7 97.5 107.8 89.0 78.5
Mar. 103.0 116.7 92.6 101.5 108.4 92.9 110.6 110.2 104.4 118.6 100.7 70.6
Apr. 96.1 112.3 89.2 93.7 101.7 85.8 106.4 95.9 97.5 108.4 89.5 70.7
May 96.1 113.9 80.8 94.2 101.3 87.4 103.8 95.9 97.5 109.4 91.5 73.1
June 100.4 118.6 77.4 99.0 102.9 95.3 107.7 99.5 99.4 116.0 101.5 79.6
x July 99.6 123.8 81.9 96.8 102.5 91.7 102.6 97.3 97.8 116.4 95.7 75.5
x Aug. 91.5 111.4 77.6 89.2 95.5 81.5 98.5 96.4 90.2 113.2 89.4 60.2
x,p Sep. 102.7 118.6 80.3 101.7 101.1 100.3 115.8 105.3 99.8 124.1 102.6 89.2
Annual percentage change
2018 + 0.9 + 0.3 – 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 – 0.7 + 3.8 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 2.3 – 1.6
2019 – 2.3 + 3.4 – 7.2 – 2.9 – 3.5 – 1.9 ± 0.0 – 5.5 – 4.3 – 2.3 – 2.9 – 5.0
2020 – 7.7 + 3.0 – 6.6 – 9.8 – 6.8 –14.0 – 8.1 – 3.8 –11.9 – 7.5 –13.4 –20.0
2021 + 3.6 – 1.6 + 3.2 + 4.8 + 8.2 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 2.0 + 9.2 +10.4 + 7.2 – 2.6
2021 Q3 + 2.3 + 0.8 + 2.2 + 2.6 + 8.4 – 2.9 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 9.2 +12.3 + 9.3 –21.9
Q4 – 1.8 – 4.6 + 1.9 – 1.5 + 0.7 – 4.9 + 2.1 + 3.8 + 0.4 + 4.0 + 3.7 –19.4
2022 Q1 – 0.4 + 4.2 + 3.1 – 1.5 – 0.8 – 4.6 + 3.2 + 5.5 – 1.5 + 2.4 – 0.8 –13.7
Q2 – 1.5 – 2.7 + 0.8 – 1.4 – 3.2 – 0.8 + 2.9 + 0.6 – 3.4 + 2.3 – 1.3 – 0.4
x,p Q3 + 1.1 – 1.2 – 0.8 + 1.8 – 2.6 + 7.2 + 3.7 – 1.9 – 2.0 + 8.1 + 1.3 +21.4
2021 Sep. – 0.6 ± 0.0 + 4.6 – 1.1 + 4.9 – 7.2 + 2.1 + 2.7 + 4.4 + 9.3 + 5.3 –28.4
Oct. – 1.1 – 0.6 + 0.8 – 1.4 + 1.8 – 5.8 + 3.9 + 3.3 + 2.5 + 5.7 + 6.6 –23.6
Nov. – 1.9 – 2.3 + 1.4 – 2.1 + 0.3 – 6.3 + 0.1 + 6.1 + 0.3 + 1.8 + 3.0 –20.5
Dec. – 2.4 –10.3 + 3.4 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 2.4 + 2.4 + 1.8 – 1.9 + 4.7 + 1.7 –12.3
2022 Jan. + 1.2 + 9.4 + 0.8 ± 0.0 – 0.3 – 1.3 + 1.2 + 4.6 – 0.4 + 2.8 + 1.2 – 8.0
Feb. + 2.7 + 9.7 + 8.9 + 1.1 + 1.8 – 2.0 + 6.3 + 8.4 + 0.9 + 3.3 + 0.7 – 6.9
Mar. – 4.5 – 3.1 + 0.1 – 5.1 – 3.6 – 9.5 + 2.3 + 3.9 – 4.5 + 1.2 – 3.5 –24.4
Apr. – 2.7 – 3.3 + 2.6 – 3.1 – 2.7 – 6.5 + 4.5 + 5.0 – 3.6 + 1.1 – 5.2 –13.1
May – 1.7 – 2.8 – 0.7 – 1.6 – 3.8 ± 0.0 + 3.5 – 0.8 – 2.9 + 2.1 – 1.4 + 2.4
June – 0.1 – 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 – 3.0 + 4.3 + 0.8 – 2.0 – 3.9 + 3.7 + 2.6 +11.2
x July – 0.8 + 0.1 + 5.3 – 1.3 – 2.9 + 0.8 + 0.3 – 3.7 – 3.5 + 6.1 – 2.2 + 2.6
x Aug. + 1.6 – 1.2 – 3.2 + 2.6 – 2.4 + 9.4 + 7.7 – 1.9 – 1.1 + 8.2 + 3.4 +30.9
x,p Sep. + 2.6 – 2.6 – 4.1 + 4.2 – 2.4 +11.8 + 3.6 – 0.2 – 1.4 +10.0 + 3.0 +36.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2015.  2 Influenced by a change in holiday dates.  x Provisional;estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the
Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction
industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2018 110.5 + 1.7 111.5 + 1.9 110.0 + 1.4 110.1 + 4.2 118.9 + 2.1 107.1 + 4.8
2019 104.9 – 5.1 103.5 – 7.2 105.4 – 4.2 107.0 – 2.8 123.3 + 3.7 101.7 – 5.0
2020 97.2 – 7.3 97.9 – 5.4 95.6 – 9.3 105.8 – 1.1 124.4 + 0.9 99.6 – 2.1
2021 119.3 +22.7 124.6 +27.3 116.3 +21.7 117.5 +11.1 146.5 +17.8 107.9 + 8.3
2021 Sep. 122.6 +17.7 124.2 +22.1 122.6 +17.0 114.0 + 2.2 139.1 – 5.0 105.7 + 5.7
Oct. 117.2 + 7.4 124.9 +15.3 112.2 + 2.7 119.8 + 7.5 141.9 – 2.1 112.4 +12.1
Nov. 125.3 +10.2 132.9 +16.6 120.8 + 6.1 124.5 +13.0 149.6 + 8.2 116.2 +15.0
Dec. 123.7 +13.9 120.2 +18.2 127.0 +11.8 114.5 +11.6 148.9 +13.4 103.2 +10.7
2022 Jan. 131.2 +19.7 143.7 +19.2 124.1 +20.8 127.5 +16.1 152.9 + 8.1 119.2 +19.9
Feb. 128.3 +15.4 136.7 +16.3 122.6 +14.0 132.6 +21.1 149.8 +14.3 126.9 +23.8
Mar. 140.1 + 8.2 152.7 +13.3 131.4 + 3.4 146.5 +19.4 182.6 +23.3 134.7 +17.8
Apr. 125.1 + 6.5 143.5 +13.5 111.9 – 0.9 139.0 +26.2 185.7 +14.2 123.6 +33.2
May 123.9 + 8.8 139.3 +13.2 113.5 + 4.8 131.0 +15.0 178.2 +13.4 115.5 +16.0
June 129.5 + 2.3 143.2 +12.2 120.1 – 4.2 137.6 + 4.2 171.3 +13.2 126.5 + 0.6
July 127.6 – 0.4 144.2 +12.7 118.2 – 8.0 121.6 – 4.5 150.3 – 0.5 112.0 – 6.3
Aug. 114.4 + 7.5 127.6 +10.4 105.4 + 5.3 121.7 + 9.4 157.8 +16.5 109.7 + 6.2
p Sep. 121.8 – 0.7 131.7 + 6.0 114.0 – 7.0 135.1 +18.5 163.7 +17.7 125.7 +18.9
From the domestic market
2018 107.2 + 0.2 108.6 + 1.4 106.6 – 1.1 103.0 + 1.4 114.7 + 5.5 98.9 – 0.4
2019 101.2 – 5.6 99.1 – 8.7 103.0 – 3.4 101.2 – 1.7 116.2 + 1.3 96.2 – 2.7
2020 94.9 – 6.2 94.1 – 5.0 95.2 – 7.6 98.0 – 3.2 105.5 – 9.2 95.4 – 0.8
2021 115.5 +21.7 119.6 +27.1 113.1 +18.8 108.0 +10.2 114.8 + 8.8 105.6 +10.7
2021 Sep. 110.0 +10.6 117.9 +23.6 104.3 + 1.6 103.0 + 1.3 106.1 –15.3 102.0 + 8.9
Oct. 115.6 +10.6 123.1 +15.3 110.0 + 7.2 110.4 + 5.6 106.7 –10.8 111.7 +12.4
Nov. 119.4 + 9.3 126.7 +11.8 113.8 + 7.1 115.4 +10.3 117.6 – 5.4 114.6 +17.1
Dec. 119.1 +21.3 111.4 +17.3 127.7 +25.1 105.5 +16.1 101.9 – 2.0 106.7 +23.4
2022 Jan. 122.2 +18.4 137.7 +21.0 109.9 +15.7 116.5 +20.1 106.0 – 4.5 120.1 +30.1
Feb. 123.4 +14.4 132.1 +17.2 116.0 +10.6 122.9 +22.5 115.6 + 5.2 125.4 +29.1
Mar. 137.4 + 8.6 148.2 +13.7 128.9 + 2.5 132.0 +20.7 135.9 + 3.6 130.7 +28.1
Apr. 124.8 +12.6 139.8 +19.3 110.5 + 3.7 135.2 +32.2 134.0 + 4.5 135.6 +45.0
May 123.2 + 9.7 136.5 +15.0 112.6 + 3.7 118.5 +17.6 141.8 +16.7 110.6 +17.9
June 126.8 – 0.7 138.1 +10.4 117.1 –10.3 127.3 + 2.7 135.2 +15.5 124.6 – 1.3
July 124.5 – 3.3 144.5 +14.6 109.6 –17.0 110.6 – 8.8 123.7 + 6.6 106.1 –13.8
Aug. 109.8 + 5.1 124.1 +11.3 97.8 – 0.6 108.3 + 2.2 121.1 + 9.2 104.0 – 0.4
p Sep. 120.2 + 9.3 129.4 + 9.8 111.1 + 6.5 128.9 +25.1 124.6 +17.4 130.3 +27.7
From abroad
2018 113.0 + 2.9 114.6 + 2.4 112.0 + 2.8 115.5 + 6.1 122.2 – 0.5 113.4 + 8.5
2019 107.6 – 4.8 108.3 – 5.5 106.9 – 4.6 111.5 – 3.5 129.1 + 5.6 105.9 – 6.6
2020 98.9 – 8.1 102.0 – 5.8 95.9 –10.3 111.8 + 0.3 139.5 + 8.1 102.8 – 2.9
2021 122.2 +23.6 130.1 +27.5 118.1 +23.1 124.8 +11.6 171.9 +23.2 109.6 + 6.6
2021 Sep. 132.1 +22.5 131.1 +20.7 133.7 +26.0 122.5 + 2.9 165.7 + 1.5 108.6 + 3.5
Oct. 118.5 + 5.2 126.8 +15.3 113.5 + 0.1 127.0 + 8.8 170.2 + 2.9 113.0 +11.9
Nov. 129.8 +10.8 139.5 +21.5 125.0 + 5.5 131.5 +14.8 175.4 +17.4 117.4 +13.6
Dec. 127.1 + 9.1 129.7 +19.1 126.5 + 4.9 121.5 + 8.8 186.8 +21.9 100.5 + 2.1
2022 Jan. 138.1 +20.7 150.1 +17.4 132.6 +23.6 136.1 +13.6 190.6 +14.9 118.5 +13.0
Feb. 132.0 +16.1 141.6 +15.4 126.5 +15.9 140.1 +20.2 177.4 +19.8 128.0 +20.1
Mar. 142.1 + 7.8 157.6 +13.0 132.9 + 3.9 157.8 +18.6 220.2 +36.2 137.7 +11.2
Apr. 125.3 + 2.3 147.5 + 8.1 112.8 – 3.3 142.0 +22.2 227.3 +19.5 114.5 +24.1
May 124.5 + 8.1 142.4 +11.3 114.1 + 5.6 140.7 +13.5 207.5 +11.6 119.2 +14.6
June 131.6 + 4.6 148.7 +14.2 121.9 – 0.4 145.6 + 5.3 200.3 +12.0 127.9 + 2.2
July 130.0 + 1.8 143.9 +10.8 123.4 – 2.3 130.1 – 1.4 171.7 – 4.1 116.6 – 0.1
Aug. 117.9 + 9.3 131.4 + 9.4 109.9 + 8.7 132.0 +14.6 187.4 +20.7 114.1 +11.4
p Sep. 123.0 – 6.9 134.1 + 2.3 115.7 –13.5 139.9 +14.2 195.2 +17.8 122.1 +12.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2018 135.0 +10.3 131.7 +7.0 137.1 +11.4 128.7 +4.2 125.2 +2.7 138.9 +14.2 136.1 +13.6 132.6 +6.1
2019 146.2 +8.3 145.3 +10.3 150.4 +9.7 142.5 +10.7 138.8 +10.9 147.2 +6.0 148.1 +8.8 141.3 +6.6
2020 145.6 –0.4 144.2 –0.8 160.8 +6.9 130.3 –8.6 141.5 +1.9 147.3 +0.1 139.6 –5.7 143.3 +1.4
2021 159.0 +9.2 164.1 +13.8 174.3 +8.4 156.6 +20.2 158.7 +12.2 153.0 +3.9 161.6 +15.8 146.7 +2.4
2021 Aug. 158.9 +16.4 162.5 +20.5 167.1 +5.4 163.3 +43.4 144.0 +6.4 154.8 +11.9 158.5 +21.9 154.4 +18.3
Sep. 181.0 +19.3 189.0 +20.2 191.5 +10.0 193.2 +36.9 165.4 +1.9 171.7 +18.3 192.9 +31.9 161.1 +11.5
Oct. 158.7 +11.4 168.8 +11.7 169.1 –7.2 171.7 +35.1 157.2 +13.9 146.8 +10.7 171.6 +21.3 137.5 +15.0
Nov. 145.3 +4.1 143.0 –2.7 159.5 –5.0 132.6 +0.3 127.3 –4.6 148.0 +13.0 159.5 +10.9 120.4 +2.4
Dec. 185.3 +24.3 205.7 +41.1 196.2 +3.5 173.7 +50.3 356.7 +213.4 161.5 +5.6 186.9 +38.2 176.7 +25.9
2022 Jan. 142.8 +6.9 145.4 +4.1 165.7 +13.7 134.0 –8.1 121.0 +24.2 139.9 +10.6 149.1 –1.0 121.7 +14.1
Feb. 155.7 +8.7 161.0 +8.1 176.0 +9.1 158.3 +7.5 121.8 +6.7 149.5 +9.4 165.3 +15.3 132.4 +0.2
Mar. 209.5 +32.6 208.8 +32.9 219.4 +25.1 201.7 +42.4 200.5 +29.6 210.4 +32.3 217.4 +44.0 194.5 +25.2
Apr. 164.2 +2.5 157.6 –0.4 178.1 –3.8 142.5 +2.2 146.2 +4.5 171.9 +5.9 153.9 +3.9 167.6 +5.5
May 175.9 +10.6 172.4 +5.8 182.1 –1.1 163.4 +11.4 173.9 +12.8 180.0 +16.7 170.8 +13.3 178.0 +16.3
June 175.2 +6.4 166.3 +0.7 177.9 +0.2 153.3 –4.4 176.5 +23.8 185.6 +13.2 177.5 +6.4 171.0 +10.8
July 180.6 +12.9 179.1 +6.4 171.1 –4.5 177.7 +8.6 211.0 +40.2 182.3 +21.4 190.1 +19.9 175.5 +17.1
Aug. 157.2 –1.1 148.3 –8.7 145.1 –13.2 143.2 –12.3 178.2 +23.7 167.5 +8.2 156.0 –1.6 165.9 +7.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2018 110.7 +3.0 107.5 +1.6 109.6 +3.6 105.6 –2.3 107.1 +0.8 103.0 ±0.0 112.4 +4.4 127.7 +6.0
2019 115.0 +3.9 111.0 +3.3 112.2 +2.4 106.7 +1.0 108.9 +1.7 107.1 +4.0 118.8 +5.7 138.4 +8.4
2020 121.4 +5.6 115.9 +4.4 121.4 +8.2 81.9 –23.2 106.9 –1.8 117.1 +9.3 125.4 +5.6 169.0 +22.1
3 2021 124.9 +2.9 116.9 +0.9 121.8 +0.3 78.1 –4.6 95.3 –10.9 110.4 –5.7 135.2 +7.8 191.1 +13.1
2021 Sep. 120.7 +0.9 112.4 –1.3 112.1 –1.3 100.0 –0.8 102.3 –2.1 113.4 –3.9 130.9 +6.1 172.1 +6.8
Oct. 130.5 +0.9 120.8 –1.7 119.7 –2.4 114.8 +5.0 109.1 –10.0 125.9 –3.2 141.1 +8.4 191.4 +4.8
Nov. 140.5 +2.7 130.1 –0.3 121.5 –1.6 106.1 +17.2 135.1 –12.9 129.6 –7.9 147.0 +9.2 236.4 +3.4
Dec. 145.6 +4.7 134.5 +1.5 137.6 –3.0 97.3 +39.8 147.8 +9.2 122.0 +1.6 155.8 +9.5 220.8 +0.5
2022 Jan. 121.9 +18.5 112.0 +14.5 116.6 +1.0 73.4 +265.2 111.6 +84.2 112.4 +93.5 140.2 +13.2 183.8 –0.9
Feb. 119.7 +15.0 108.9 +10.8 115.2 +0.6 73.5 +223.8 97.6 +56.2 113.9 +68.7 132.2 +6.3 173.3 –2.7
Mar. 138.5 +6.7 123.2 +0.6 132.2 +0.1 94.2 +62.4 101.3 +19.9 137.5 +12.2 147.4 +8.7 194.3 –5.5
Apr. 133.3 +10.4 117.2 +3.4 127.2 +2.4 102.2 +158.1 95.4 +35.1 132.6 +24.6 140.8 +7.1 183.8 –4.4
May 134.2 +7.0 116.3 –0.9 127.6 +0.7 109.4 +75.9 89.3 +21.7 129.6 +14.7 141.4 +8.9 183.0 –7.8
June 130.8 +0.5 112.7 –7.7 127.0 +4.3 105.1 –7.2 93.1 –3.3 119.2 –5.4 142.5 +7.9 175.1 –5.0
July 135.7 +8.0 116.2 –1.4 131.0 +8.5 105.4 +2.6 100.7 –0.3 121.8 ±0.0 149.8 +9.9 182.2 +13.3
Aug. 130.0 +5.8 110.5 –4.1 126.1 +9.9 97.3 –3.1 97.8 –3.0 114.2 –3.7 143.6 +7.2 173.2 +3.6
Sep. 132.7 +9.9 111.3 –1.0 125.3 +11.8 115.1 +15.1 105.2 +2.8 118.9 +4.9 143.7 +9.8 185.7 +7.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2021 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2017 44,251 +1.4 32,234 +2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 114 24 2,533 7 855 5.7 731
2018 44,866 +1.4 32,964 +2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2019 45,276 +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 82,267 827 8 5.0 774
2020 44,914 –0.8 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2021 44,980 +0.1 33,897 +0.9 9,344 23,602 702 4,101 1,852 1,744 2,613 999 5.7 706
2019 Q3 45,386 +0.8 33,548 +1.5 9,491 23,049 753 4,598 66 58 2,276 827 5.0 794
Q4 45,565 +0.7 33,924 +1.4 9,551 23,388 738 4,522 161 105 2,204 811 4.8 729
2020 Q1 45,133 +0.5 33,642 +1.3 9,439 23,284 686 4,458 1,219 949 2,385 960 5.2 683
Q2 44,723 –1.1 33,415 +0.1 9,387 23,137 640 4,235 5,399 5,388 2,770 1,154 6.0 593
Q3 44,809 –1.3 33,424 –0.4 9,359 23,171 640 4,273 2,705 2,691 2,904 1,266 6.3 583
Q4 44,993 –1.3 33,836 –0.3 9,395 23,518 676 4,194 2,433 2,361 2,722 1,167 5.9 595
2021 Q1 44,514 –1.4 33,568 –0.2 9,294 23,376 665 4,051 3,473 3,157 2,878 1,248 6.3 586
Q2 44,812 +0.2 33,718 +0.9 9,322 23,446 697 4,066 2,164 2,143 2,691 1,024 5.9 658
Q3 45,157 +0.8 33,929 +1.5 9,347 23,606 719 4,161 935 915 2,545 920 5.5 774
Q4 45,437 +1.0 34,374 +1.6 9,415 23,982 727 4,125 835 762 2,341 802 5.1 804
2022 Q1 r45,180 r +1.5 34,242 +2.0 9,348 23,943 715 4,061 1,033 792 2,417 874 5.3 818
Q2 r45,481 r +1.5 934,396 9+2.0 99,371 924,053 9 717 94,110 ... 9 330 2,311 777 10 5.0 864
Q3 1145,647 11 +1.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,501 804 5.5 880
2019 June 45,306 +0.9 33,407 +1.6 9,455 22,948 750 4,646 51 43 2,216 766 4.9 798
July 45,320 +0.9 33,360 +1.6 9,450 22,901 757 4,644 55 47 2,275 825 5.0 799
Aug. 45,314 +0.7 33,610 +1.4 9,505 23,101 750 4,568 60 51 2,319 848 5.1 795
Sep. 45,523 +0.8 33,938 +1.5 9,583 23,341 754 4,517 84 75 2,234 808 4.9 787
Oct. 45,598 +0.8 33,966 +1.4 9,567 23,398 748 4,510 111 102 2,204 795 4.8 764
Nov. 45,627 +0.7 33,968 +1.4 9,559 23,423 742 4,532 124 115 2,180 800 4.8 736
Dec. 45,469 +0.6 33,740 +1.4 9,474 23,344 694 4,531 247 97 2,227 838 4.9 687
2020 Jan. 45,154 +0.6 33,608 +1.4 9,432 23,255 689 4,471 382 133 2,426 985 5.3 668
Feb. 45,169 +0.6 33,624 +1.3 9,427 23,278 683 4,461 439 134 2,396 971 5.3 690
Mar. 45,077 +0.2 33,648 +1.1 9,440 23,290 675 4,350 2,834 2,580 2,335 925 5.1 691
Apr. 44,808 –0.7 33,430 +0.1 9,396 23,141 643 4,194 6,007 5,995 2,644 1,093 5.8 626
May 44,672 –1.3 33,328 –0.3 9,367 23,083 624 4,206 5,726 5,715 2,813 1,172 6.1 584
June 44,688 –1.4 33,323 –0.3 9,355 23,084 629 4,260 4,464 4,452 2,853 1,197 6.2 570
July 44,699 –1.4 33,233 –0.4 9,322 23,024 635 4,302 3,319 3,306 2,910 1,258 6.3 573
Aug. 44,737 –1.3 33,482 –0.4 9,367 23,218 642 4,266 2,551 2,537 2,955 1,302 6.4 584
Sep. 44,990 –1.2 33,792 –0.4 9,421 23,454 656 4,240 2,244 2,229 2,847 1,238 6.2 591
Oct. 45,076 –1.1 33,862 –0.3 9,410 23,530 671 4,229 2,037 2,021 2,760 1,183 6.0 602
Nov. 45,030 –1.3 33,899 –0.2 9,400 23,559 696 4,166 2,405 2,386 2,699 1,152 5.9 601
Dec. 44,873 –1.3 33,700 –0.1 9,327 23,478 666 4,134 2,856 2,676 2,707 1,166 5.9 581
2021 Jan. 44,489 –1.5 33,515 –0.3 9,282 23,347 657 4,045 3,638 3,294 2,901 1,298 6.3 566
Feb. 44,486 –1.5 33,521 –0.3 9,281 23,343 662 4,026 3,766 3,358 2,904 1,270 6.3 583
Mar. 44,567 –1.1 33,636 –0.0 9,309 23,397 685 4,032 3,016 2,818 2,827 1,177 6.2 609
Apr. 44,676 –0.3 33,689 +0.8 9,324 23,427 687 4,039 2,583 2,560 2,771 1,091 6.0 629
May 44,796 +0.3 33,747 +1.3 9,326 23,461 703 4,067 2,342 2,320 2,687 1,020 5.9 654
June 44,963 +0.6 33,802 +1.4 9,324 23,504 716 4,151 1,568 1,548 2,614 961 5.7 693
July 45,027 +0.7 33,731 +1.5 9,304 23,458 715 4,194 1,088 1,068 2,590 956 5.6 744
Aug. 45,096 +0.8 33,994 +1.5 9,358 23,658 722 4,153 857 838 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. 45,347 +0.8 34,323 +1.6 9,432 23,903 726 4,123 859 839 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. 45,434 +0.8 34,369 +1.5 9,425 23,965 724 4,123 780 762 2,377 814 5.2 809
Nov. 45,490 +1.0 34,449 +1.6 9,423 24,039 739 4,133 767 750 2,317 789 5.1 808
Dec. 45,386 +1.1 34,284 +1.7 9,364 23,980 708 4,112 957 772 2,330 803 5.1 794
2022 Jan. r45,110 r +1.4 34,176 +2.0 9,332 23,900 711 4,048 1,123 847 2,462 903 5.4 792
Feb. r45,169 r +1.5 34,243 +2.2 9,346 23,939 719 4,049 1,087 803 2,428 884 5.3 822
Mar. r45,261 r +1.6 34,334 +2.1 9,369 23,999 719 4,061 888 727 2,362 835 5.1 839
Apr. r45,372 r +1.6 34,368 +2.0 9,366 24,037 713 4,091 453 439 2,309 800 5.0 852
May r45,494 r +1.6 934,435 9+2.0 99,375 924,083 9 718 94,127 ... 9 305 2,260 771 10 4.9 865
June r45,578 r +1.4 934,438 9+1.9 99,376 924,080 9 723 94,160 ... 9 247 2,363 761 5.2 877
July r45,561 r +1.2 934,318 9+1.7 99,360 923,986 9 718 94,170 ... 9 94 2,470 801 5.4 881
Aug. r45,586 r +1.1 934,568 9+1.7 99,418 924,167 9 725 94,147 ... 9 106 2,547 827 5.6 887
Sep. 1145,795 11 +1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,486 782 5.4 873
Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,442 764 5.3 846
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 From January 2017 persons receiving additional
income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at the same
time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book of the Social SecurityCode (SGB III).  8 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed persons in the
legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).  9 Unadjusted
figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2020 and 2021, the estimated
values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1% for employees
subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.9% for persons solely in jobs
exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 28,1% for cyclically induced
short-time work.  10 From May 2022, calculated on the basis of new labour force fig-
ures. 11 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which: Indices of
foreign trade pricesHWWI
Index of World Market
Prices of Raw Materials  4
of which:
Total Food  1,2Non-
energy
industrial
goods  1Energy  1Services  1Actual
rents
for
housingMemo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  3Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  3Exports Imports Energy  5Other raw
materials  6
Period 2015 = 100 2020 = 100
Index level
2018 104.0 106.7 103.0 102.3 104.2 104.6 103.8 110.2 103.7 109.0 101.9 102.7 174.1 99.9
2019 105.5 108.4 104.2 103.7 105.7 106.1 105.3 115.3 104.8 111.5 102.4 101.7 150.2 98.7
2020 7 105.8 7110.9 7104.1 799.0 7106.9 107.6 7 105.8 7117.0 103.8 108.0 101.7 97.3 100.0 100.0
2021 7 109.2 7114.1 7106.7 7109.0 7109.0 109.0 7 109.1 7127.0 114.7 117.5 107.4 110.4 220.7 137.6
2020 Dec. 7 105.3 7109.9 7103.4 797.4 7106.9 108.2 7 105.5 104.7 104.2 101.9 98.2 121.8 112.3
2021 Jan. 106.8 112.3 105.1 102.6 106.9 108.4 106.3 106.2 106.8 102.8 100.1 141.6 120.6
Feb. 107.4 113.0 105.5 104.1 107.3 108.5 107.0 121.2 106.9 108.9 103.3 101.8 146.0 124.7
Mar. 107.9 113.1 105.7 106.2 107.6 108.6 107.5 107.9 114.0 104.1 103.6 150.3 130.4
Apr. 108.4 114.5 105.8 106.1 108.3 108.7 108.2 108.8 115.9 104.9 105.0 154.1 134.3
May 108.7 114.2 106.3 106.7 108.7 108.9 108.7 125.1 110.4 118.5 105.6 106.8 168.3 144.9
June 109.1 114.1 106.5 107.6 109.1 108.9 109.1 111.8 117.7 106.4 108.5 183.0 142.3
July 7 109.7 7114.4 7106.4 7109.0 7110.2 109.1 7 110.1 113.9 117.2 107.7 110.9 204.8 141.9
Aug. 7 109.8 7114.4 7106.5 7109.4 7110.3 109.2 7 110.1 7129.4 115.6 118.7 108.5 112.4 217.6 138.9
Sep. 7 110.1 7114.4 7107.6 7110.1 7109.9 109.3 7 110.1 118.3 117.4 109.5 113.9 256.1 136.3
Oct. 7 110.7 7114.5 7108.0 7114.6 7110.0 109.5 7 110.7 122.8 120.7 111.0 118.2 352.7 143.0
Nov. 7 111.0 7114.9 7108.4 7116.7 7109.5 109.5 7 110.5 7132.2 123.8 125.6 111.9 121.7 304.4 143.0
Dec. 7 111.3 7115.7 7108.6 7115.0 7110.3 109.6 7 111.1 130.0 127.2 113.0 121.8 352.9 148.3
2022 Jan. 112.3 117.2 108.4 123.7 109.8 109.9 111.5 132.8 8129.2 115.0 127.0 327.8 157.0
Feb. 113.3 118.2 109.1 127.4 110.2 110.0 112.5 138.1 134.6 133.4 116.1 128.6 336.0 166.5
Mar. 116.1 119.1 110.4 146.1 110.6 110.2 115.3 141.2 153.6 120.7 135.9 504.2 185.4
Apr. 116.9 122.2 111.3 142.7 111.7 110.4 116.2 145.2 162.3 121.7 138.3 407.8 184.8
May 118.2 124.2 112.3 146.7 112.0 110.6 117.3 147.9 147.5 160.7 122.4 139.5 366.8 178.9
June 118.1 125.4 112.5 147.8 111.0 110.8 117.4 148.4 157.5 123.5 140.9 389.3 169.6
July 119.0 127.6 112.6 147.8 112.1 110.9 118.4 156.3 156.4 126.0 142.9 449.8 158.0
Aug. 119.5 129.1 113.0 148.6 112.2 111.1 118.8 151.7 168.6 159.7 128.7 149.1 534.2 159.4
Sep. 122.1 130.9 114.5 158.8 113.9 111.2 121.1 172.5 163.7 127.9 147.8 528.5 157.4
Oct. 123.5 132.2 115.8 164.5 114.3 111.4 122.2 ... ... ... ... 442.1 154.4
Annual percentage change
2018 +1.9 +2.6 +0.8 +4.9 +1.6 +1.6 +1.8 +4.7 +2.6 +0.4 +1.2 +2.6 +25.4 +0.3
2019 +1.4 +1.6 +1.1 +1.4 +1.5 +1.5 +1.4 +4.7 +1.1 +2.3 +0.5 –1.0 –13.7 –1.2
2020 7 +0.4 7+2.3 7–0.1 7–4.5 7+1.2 +1.4 7 +0.5 7+1.4 –1.0 –3.1 –0.7 –4.3 –33.4 +1.3
2021 7 +3.2 7+2.9 7+2.5 7+10.1 7+2.0 +1.3 7 +3.1 7+8.6 +10.5 +8.8 +5.6 +13.5 +120.7 +37.6
2020 Dec. 7 –0.7 7+0.6 7–1.6 7–6.0 7+0.8 +1.3 7 –0.3 +0.2 –8.9 –0.6 –3.4 –20.8 +11.1
2021 Jan. +1.6 +2.0 +1.1 –2.2 +2.5 +1.3 +1.0 +0.9 –5.7 +0.1 –1.2 –2.2 +17.7
Feb. +1.6 +1.6 +1.2 +0.2 +2.0 +1.3 +1.3 +2.9 +1.9 –4.6 +0.7 +1.4 +15.9 +24.6
Mar. +2.0 +1.9 +0.5 +4.5 +2.0 +1.2 +1.7 +3.7 +0.3 +2.2 +6.9 +79.1 +36.1
Apr. +2.1 +2.0 +0.4 +7.6 +1.5 +1.2 +2.0 +5.2 +2.8 +3.3 +10.3 +128.3 +45.0
May +2.4 +1.5 +0.9 +9.5 +1.9 +1.3 +2.5 +5.7 +7.2 +8.6 +4.2 +11.8 +127.4 +56.0
June +2.1 +1.2 +1.6 +9.0 +0.9 +1.2 +2.3 +8.5 +7.0 +5.0 +12.9 +113.0 +51.2
July 7 +3.1 7+3.8 7+3.8 7+11.2 7+0.7 +1.3 7 +3.8 +10.4 +9.0 +6.3 +15.0 +126.0 +48.1
Aug. 7 +3.4 7+3.9 7+3.8 7+12.1 7+1.2 +1.3 7 +3.9 7+11.8 +12.0 +13.3 +7.2 +16.5 +127.1 +41.2
Sep. 7 +4.1 7+4.1 7+3.9 7+13.6 7+1.8 +1.4 7 +4.1 +14.2 +13.4 +8.1 +17.7 +163.7 +31.7
Oct. 7 +4.6 7+3.9 7+3.9 7+18.1 7+2.2 +1.4 7 +4.5 +18.4 +16.3 +9.5 +21.7 +241.4 +36.3
Nov. 7 +6.0 7+4.2 7+4.2 7+21.6 7+3.8 +1.3 7 +5.2 7+14.0 +19.2 +20.9 +9.9 +24.7 +178.0 +33.5
Dec. 7 +5.7 7+5.3 7+5.0 7+18.1 7+3.2 +1.3 7 +5.3 +24.2 +22.1 +10.9 +24.0 +189.7 +32.1
2022 Jan. +5.1 +4.4 +3.1 +20.6 +2.7 +1.4 +4.9 +25.0 8+21.0 +11.9 +26.9 +131.5 +30.2
Feb. +5.5 +4.6 +3.4 +22.4 +2.7 +1.4 +5.1 +13.9 +25.9 +22.5 +12.4 +26.3 +130.1 +33.5
Mar. +7.6 +5.3 +4.4 +37.6 +2.8 +1.5 +7.3 +30.9 +34.7 +15.9 +31.2 +235.5 +42.2
Apr. +7.8 +6.7 +5.2 +34.5 +3.1 +1.6 +7.4 +33.5 +40.0 +16.0 +31.7 +164.6 +37.6
May +8.7 +8.8 +5.6 +37.5 +3.0 +1.6 +7.9 +18.2 +33.6 +35.6 +15.9 +30.6 +117.9 +23.5
June +8.2 +9.9 +5.6 +37.4 +1.7 +1.7 +7.6 +32.7 +33.8 +16.1 +29.9 +112.7 +19.2
July +8.5 +11.5 +5.8 +35.6 +1.7 +1.6 +7.5 +37.2 +33.4 +17.0 +28.9 +119.6 +11.3
Aug. +8.8 +12.8 +6.1 +35.8 +1.7 +1.7 +7.9 +17.2 +45.8 +34.5 +18.6 +32.7 +145.5 +14.8
Sep. +10.9 +14.4 +6.4 +44.2 +3.6 +1.7 +10.0 +45.8 +39.4 +16.8 +29.8 +106.4 +15.5
Oct. +11.6 +15.5 +7.2 +43.5 +3.9 +1.7 +10.4 ... ... ... ... +25.3 +8.0
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw Materi-
als: HWWI.  1 The last data point is at times based on the Bundesbank’s own estimates.
2 Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco.  3 Excluding value added tax.  4 For the eu-ro area, in euro.  5 Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas.  6 Food, beverages and tobac-
co as well as industrial raw materials.  7 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value
added tax between July and December 2020.  8 From January 2022 onwards provisional
figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2014 1,234.2 4.0 830.5 3.9 394.0 2.6 1,224.5 3.5 1,734.5 2.6 170.6 8.6 9.8
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.5 4.2 1,273.8 4.0 1,782.3 2.8 179.4 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.2
2017 1,395.4 4.3 932.5 4.0 441.8 3.6 1,374.3 3.9 1,905.2 3.5 202.8 8.0 10.6
2018 1,462.7 4.8 976.1 4.7 455.2 3.0 1,431.3 4.1 1,976.6 3.7 223.2 10.1 11.3
2019 1,524.4 4.2 1,022.0 4.7 476.7 4.7 1,498.7 4.7 2,023.6 2.4 218.2 – 2.3 10.8
2020 1,514.9 – 0.6 1,020.0 – 0.2 524.6 10.0 1,544.6 3.1 2,050.1 1.3 336.6 54.3 16.4
2021 1,570.6 3.7 1,062.6 4.2 532.8 1.6 1,595.4 3.3 2,089.9 1.9 316.0 – 6.1 15.1
2021 Q1 362.0 – 1.2 244.5 – 0.7 137.8 8.8 382.3 2.5 522.1 – 0.2 115.7 34.9 22.2
Q2 377.1 5.8 250.7 6.8 134.9 2.2 385.6 5.2 514.9 3.5 84.8 –15.3 16.5
Q3 393.0 5.1 271.6 5.5 131.2 – 1.8 402.8 3.0 520.4 1.7 54.4 –21.2 10.4
Q4 438.5 4.9 295.8 5.0 129.0 – 2.6 424.8 2.6 532.5 2.7 61.2 –25.0 11.5
2022 Q1 388.6 7.3 261.4 6.9 134.3 – 2.5 395.8 3.5 541.2 3.7 77.2 –33.3 14.3
Q2 400.2 6.1 265.4 5.9 129.7 – 3.9 395.1 2.5 546.9 6.2 55.4 –34.6 10.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2022.  * Households in-
cluding non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees'
contributions to the social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension
payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social
benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plusmonetary social benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed
income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit
institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related
taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company
pension funds.  6 Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving
as a percentage of disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change
2014 97.7 3.1 97.7 3.0 97.7 2.8 97.6 2.9 97.2 2.9
2015 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.3 2.3 102.5 2.5
2017 104.5 2.2 104.4 2.2 104.5 2.3 104.7 2.4 105.1 2.6
2018 107.6 3.0 107.5 3.0 107.5 2.8 107.6 2.8 108.4 3.2
2019 110.7 2.9 110.6 2.8 110.1 2.4 110.2 2.4 111.7 3.0
2020 112.9 2.0 112.9 2.1 112.2 1.9 112.3 1.9 111.6 – 0.1
2021 114.7 1.6 114.6 1.6 114.1 1.7 114.1 1.6 115.3 3.3
2021 Q2 107.7 2.3 107.6 2.3 106.7 1.4 113.9 1.5 111.2 5.4
Q3 117.8 1.0 117.7 1.0 116.4 1.4 114.2 1.5 115.1 4.0
Q4 127.3 1.6 127.2 1.6 127.2 2.4 114.7 1.8 127.2 3.7
2022 Q1 110.7 4.4 110.6 4.4 107.7 1.6 115.2 1.6 113.3 5.5
Q2 109.8 2.0 109.7 1.9 109.0 2.1 116.3 2.1 116.0 4.3
Q3 120.8 2.6 120.7 2.5 119.3 2.5 116.7 2.2 . .
2022 Mar. 113.4 6.9 113.3 6.9 107.8 1.6 115.3 1.6 . .
Apr. 109.4 2.1 109.3 2.0 109.1 2.0 116.1 2.0 . .
May 111.2 4.2 111.0 4.2 109.1 2.2 116.4 2.2 . .
June 108.8 – 0.4 108.7 – 0.4 108.9 2.2 116.5 2.2 . .
July 144.0 3.5 143.9 3.4 139.9 3.3 116.6 2.2 . .
Aug. 109.3 1.9 109.2 1.9 109.1 2.2 116.7 2.2 . .
Sep. 109.2 2.0 109.1 2.0 109.1 2.0 116.8 2.1 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August
2022.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
3 2018 2,589.0 1,536.7 540.8 610.8 288.5 1,052.3 249.5 234.7 172.6 789.8 1,799.2 925.7 558.7 873.4 257.5 205.0
2019 2,800.6 1,769.7 586.3 737.1 333.4 1,030.9 257.5 237.6 168.4 821.0 1,979.6 1,091.2 676.3 888.4 289.8 207.6
2020 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.5 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.3 857.0 304.4 196.1
p 2021 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.9 368.6 1,320.4 272.1 338.2 269.6 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 310.4 238.0
2020 H1 2,891.4 1,800.9 625.0 734.0 319.7 1,090.5 257.6 216.4 220.7 793.7 2,097.7 1,183.8 754.2 913.9 335.5 179.7
H2 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.5 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.3 857.0 304.4 196.1
2021 H1 3,017.6 1,877.0 649.3 745.0 343.7 1,140.6 256.2 273.2 240.8 906.9 2,110.7 1,178.6 751.9 932.1 297.4 206.9
pH2 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.9 368.6 1,320.4 272.1 338.2 269.6 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 310.4 238.0
As a percentage of total assets
3 2018 100.0 59.4 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.6 9.6 9.1 6.7 30.5 69.5 35.8 21.6 33.7 10.0 7.9
2019 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.2 31.7 10.4 7.4
2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
p 2021 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.2 40.1 8.3 10.3 8.2 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 9.4 7.2
2020 H1 100.0 62.3 21.6 25.4 11.1 37.7 8.9 7.5 7.6 27.5 72.6 40.9 26.1 31.6 11.6 6.2
H2 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2021 H1 100.0 62.2 21.5 24.7 11.4 37.8 8.5 9.1 8.0 30.1 70.0 39.1 24.9 30.9 9.9 6.9
pH2 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.2 40.1 8.3 10.3 8.2 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 9.4 7.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
3 2018 2,149.3 1,215.4 388.1 472.9 277.5 933.9 234.5 188.6 139.2 636.7 1,512.6 760.2 442.4 752.3 236.2 152.5
2019 2,302.9 1,396.4 419.6 565.4 319.7 906.5 243.8 188.5 136.8 662.2 1,640.7 887.5 523.8 753.2 257.5 158.0
2020 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.0 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.2 1,628.7 904.7 536.9 724.0 267.3 149.8
p 2021 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 347.4 1,147.0 254.4 281.7 212.3 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.1 274.9 184.0
2020 H1 2,304.8 1,351.9 406.4 547.1 303.3 952.9 243.9 171.5 171.3 614.6 1,690.2 912.1 548.4 778.0 294.6 137.0
H2 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.0 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.2 1,628.7 904.7 536.9 724.0 267.3 149.8
2021 H1 2,392.8 1,398.3 416.6 551.0 322.5 994.6 240.6 221.9 192.4 703.5 1,689.4 892.3 532.0 797.1 261.3 162.1
pH2 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 347.4 1,147.0 254.4 281.7 212.3 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.1 274.9 184.0
As a percentage of total assets
3 2018 100.0 56.6 18.1 22.0 12.9 43.5 10.9 8.8 6.5 29.6 70.4 35.4 20.6 35.0 11.0 7.1
2019 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.3 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
p 2021 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.2 43.7 9.7 10.7 8.1 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 10.5 7.0
2020 H1 100.0 58.7 17.6 23.7 13.2 41.3 10.6 7.4 7.4 26.7 73.3 39.6 23.8 33.8 12.8 6.0
H2 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2021 H1 100.0 58.4 17.4 23.0 13.5 41.6 10.1 9.3 8.0 29.4 70.6 37.3 22.2 33.3 10.9 6.8
pH2 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.2 43.7 9.7 10.7 8.1 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 10.5 7.0
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
3 2018 439.7 321.3 152.7 137.9 11.0 118.3 14.9 46.1 33.3 153.1 286.6 165.5 116.3 121.1 21.3 52.5
2019 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
p 2021 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 56.5 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 53.9
2020 H1 586.6 449.0 218.7 186.8 16.3 137.6 13.7 44.9 49.4 179.1 407.6 271.7 205.7 135.9 40.9 42.6
H2 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2021 H1 624.7 478.7 232.6 194.1 21.2 146.1 15.5 51.4 48.4 203.4 421.3 286.4 219.9 135.0 36.1 44.8
pH2 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 56.5 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 53.9
As a percentage of total assets
3 2018 100.0 73.1 34.7 31.4 2.5 26.9 3.4 10.5 7.6 34.8 65.2 37.6 26.5 27.6 4.8 11.9
2019 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
p 2021 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.5 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 8.1
2020 H1 100.0 76.5 37.3 31.9 2.8 23.5 2.3 7.7 8.4 30.5 69.5 46.3 35.1 23.2 7.0 7.3
H2 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2021 H1 100.0 76.6 37.2 31.1 3.4 23.4 2.5 8.2 7.8 32.6 67.4 45.8 35.2 21.6 5.8 7.2
pH2 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.5 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 8.1
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.  3 From H1 2018 or 2018 onwards: significant
changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  2 Distribution  2
RevenuesOperating income
before depreciation
and amortisation
(EBITDA  1 )Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartileOperating
income (EBIT)Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4€ billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % % € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % %
Total
2014 1,564.3 1.0 198.7 5.0 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.4 109.3 8.6 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.2 11.1
2015 1,633.9 6.9 195.9 – 1.1 12.0 – 1.0 6.3 10.6 17.8 91.5 – 16.4 5.6 – 1.5 1.8 6.7 11.3
2016 1,624.3 – 0.4 214.4 7.8 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.7 9.0 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,719.3 5.1 243.4 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.0 11.0 18.0 141.9 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.1
6 2018 1,706.8 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,764.6 2.6 233.6 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.2 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.6 5.8 11.8
2020 1,632.8 – 8.8 213.6 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 17.9 52.1 – 41.0 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 4.9 10.5
p 2021 1,994.7 20.4 297.9 37.8 14.9 1.9 7.8 13.4 19.9 161.7 212.8 8.1 5.0 2.9 8.2 12.2
2017 H1 843.9 6.7 125.7 14.6 14.9 1.0 5.7 10.1 17.1 78.4 29.6 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.6
H2 878.5 3.5 117.4 14.6 13.4 1.3 6.9 12.0 19.2 63.0 38.2 7.2 1.8 3.2 7.4 12.4
6 2018 H1 848.2 – 0.1 120.8 – 2.1 14.2 – 0.3 5.1 10.6 18.2 72.7 – 5.3 8.6 – 0.5 1.7 6.4 12.5
H2 869.4 1.4 114.4 0.5 13.2 – 0.1 6.3 11.2 18.0 58.0 – 7.6 6.7 – 0.6 2.1 6.8 12.5
2019 H1 861.3 2.7 112.3 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.5 11.8 18.6 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 903.7 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.6 11.8 20.0 52.0 – 11.4 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.5
2020 H1 744.5 – 14.4 78.2 – 34.1 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 8.8
H2 888.4 – 3.3 135.4 17.1 15.2 2.8 7.6 13.2 19.8 44.2 8.7 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.6
2021 H1 920.0 20.3 151.5 87.2 16.5 5.9 7.4 12.6 19.5 84.5 . 9.2 8.3 2.3 7.8 12.2
pH2 1,075.6 20.4 146.6 8.2 13.6 – 1.5 8.4 13.2 20.8 77.2 73.3 7.2 2.2 2.9 7.8 13.4
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2014 1,220.0 1.0 152.2 5.9 12.5 0.6 5.8 10.1 15.5 85.2 9.8 7.0 0.6 1.7 6.0 10.6
2015 1,309.7 7.0 149.0 – 2.6 11.4 – 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.3 69.1 – 19.7 5.3 – 1.8 2.2 6.6 10.4
2016 1,295.9 – 0.8 161.9 6.3 12.5 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 84.8 4.2 6.5 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,395.9 5.5 187.5 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.5 40.6 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,367.7 1.0 175.7 – 1.5 12.9 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 16.0 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.8 6.9 11.4
2019 1,410.9 2.0 168.1 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.8 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.7 10.1
2020 1,285.2 – 9.4 143.6 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 5.7 10.6 16.5 29.1 – 48.1 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.3 9.8
p 2021 1,585.8 22.4 209.0 46.0 13.2 2.1 7.9 12.8 17.9 118.8 326.0 7.5 5.4 2.8 7.8 11.1
2017 H1 695.1 7.3 101.5 18.7 14.6 1.4 6.0 10.1 16.1 66.3 37.3 9.5 2.1 2.3 5.8 10.8
H2 701.4 3.7 86.0 14.2 12.3 1.1 7.0 11.7 16.9 46.2 45.5 6.6 1.9 3.6 7.2 10.8
6 2018 H1 681.9 – 0.1 94.9 – 3.4 13.9 – 0.5 7.0 10.9 16.7 60.0 – 5.9 8.8 – 0.6 2.9 6.8 11.5
H2 695.4 2.1 83.1 0.7 12.0 – 0.2 6.2 11.1 16.2 42.1 – 8.7 6.1 – 0.7 2.0 6.4 11.4
2019 H1 689.9 2.4 83.3 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.9 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.8 6.0 9.5
H2 721.0 1.7 84.8 0.3 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.7 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.1
2020 H1 580.6 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.4 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 14.9 0.2 – 101.7 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.1 7.8
H2 704.6 – 3.0 94.6 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.0 12.1 18.6 28.9 19.7 4.1 1.1 0.3 6.0 10.5
2021 H1 731.9 24.0 111.2 126.9 15.2 6.9 8.2 12.6 18.6 66.7 . 9.1 9.3 2.9 7.9 12.1
pH2 854.2 21.1 97.9 3.9 11.5 – 1.9 7.8 12.4 17.5 52.1 81.1 6.1 2.1 2.7 7.0 11.5
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2014 344.2 0.8 46.5 1.8 13.5 0.1 6.0 12.3 22.6 24.1 4.3 7.0 0.2 2.6 6.3 13.7
2015 324.1 6.1 46.9 4.0 14.5 – 0.3 5.9 11.1 22.1 22.3 – 3.8 6.9 – 0.7 1.3 6.7 13.9
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.3 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.5 12.2
p 2021 408.9 13.0 88.8 21.6 21.7 1.6 7.6 15.0 24.0 42.8 79.7 10.5 3.9 3.0 9.2 15.6
2017 H1 148.8 4.6 24.2 0.4 16.2 – 0.6 5.2 9.8 21.0 12.1 0.3 8.2 – 0.3 1.2 5.6 14.5
H2 177.1 2.5 31.5 15.6 17.8 2.0 6.6 12.5 24.6 16.8 21.6 9.5 1.5 2.9 7.8 17.9
6 2018 H1 166.3 0.2 25.9 2.8 15.6 0.4 3.8 9.5 22.7 12.6 – 1.9 7.6 – 0.2 – 0.9 4.7 15.3
H2 174.0 – 1.3 31.3 – 0.0 18.0 0.2 6.7 11.3 25.6 15.9 – 4.6 9.1 – 0.3 2.2 7.0 17.8
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
H2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.5 13.3
2021 H1 188.1 7.7 40.3 26.1 21.5 3.1 6.9 12.6 24.5 17.8 119.9 9.5 4.8 0.9 6.9 13.6
pH2 221.4 17.9 48.7 18.2 22.0 0.1 9.4 16.5 24.7 25.1 59.1 11.3 3.0 3.8 9.5 17.7
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted re-
turn on sales.  3 Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year fig-ures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  4 Adjusted
for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and in the
reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical Series Seasonally adjusted
business statistics.  5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.  6 From H1 2018 or
2018 onwards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with pre-
vious periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2021 2022
Item 2019 2020 2021 Q4 Q1 Q2 June July August
I.Current Account +274,072 +188,715 +288,711 +42,237 – 3,710 –52,224 – 5,117 – 8,627 –20,207
1.Goods
Receipts 2,391,225 2,186,895 2,508,365 673,090 678,995 725,057 251,588 242,500 237,713
Expenditure  2,082,442 1,844,858 2,218,075 635,266 680,486 750,564 258,461 254,221 262,718
Balance +308,783 +342,038 +290,289 +37,824 – 1,491 –25,507 – 6,873 –11,720 –25,004
2.Services
Receipts 1,017,051 874,787 1,011,875 295,313 271,618 301,600 107,318 109,360 103,991
Expenditure  983,596 890,415 920,099 276,999 243,470 257,553 90,452 91,537 91,369
Balance +33,456 –15,628 +91,776 +18,314 +28,147 +44,047 +16,866 +17,822 +12,622
3.Primary income
Receipts 878,662 719,224 825,878 220,840 204,034 227,187 80,775 66,962 65,678
Expenditure  799,268 699,098 760,042 194,549 191,333 262,878 82,921 68,449 59,573
Balance +79,392 +20,127 +65,840 +26,292 +12,701 –35,691 – 2,145 – 1,487 + 6,105
4.Secondary income
Receipts 123,566 127,112 150,864 42,134 35,700 42,889 14,073 11,312 10,200
Expenditure  271,125 284,932 310,055 82,325 78,767 77,961 27,037 24,553 24,130
Balance –147,560 –157,820 –159,191 –40,191 –43,067 –35,073 –12,965 –13,242 –13,930
II.Capital account –26,436 + 3,415 +45,816 +13,390 + 7,217 +98,520 + 4,430 + 2,296 + 1,605
III.Financial account  1 +199,891 +190,637 +315,775 +29,667 – 5,321 +18,932 +30,237 +23,811 +12,920
1.Direct investment +64,432 –182,487 +294,688 +59,042 +22,452 +91,237 + 4,414 – 5,754 +15,389
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +43,613 –109,104 +162,013 – 7,474 +55,242 +53,996 –39,438 +14,019 +59,505
By non-resident units of
the euro area  –20,818 +73,382 –132,675 –66,515 +32,791 –37,241 –43,852 +19,773 +44,116
2.Portfolio investment –138,254 +530,060 +317,164 +82,613 –50,928 – 7,867 –59,532 +39,996 –82,013
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +435,232 +686,301 +790,249 +155,932 –16,062 –109,688 –24,974 –22,559 –33,633
Equity and
investment fund shares +63,391 +319,816 +369,550 +36,292 –16,676 –60,110 –20,661 –12,604 –31,202
Short-term
debt securities  + 6,403 +120,830 +119,474 +83,475 –59,984 –69,478 –15,758 + 1,683 + 847
Long-term
debt securities  +365,436 +245,652 +301,229 +36,167 +60,597 +19,899 +11,445 –11,638 – 3,278
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  +573,487 +156,239 +473,083 +73,319 +34,865 –101,821 +34,558 –62,555 +48,380
Equity and
investment fund shares +330,676 +166,846 +667,112 +211,763 –44,670 –32,472 + 5,610 – 5,899 + 6,295
Short-term
debt securities  –27,515 +114,567 +32,997 –86,792 +82,400 –77,926 – 4,721 –29,167 +11,635
Long-term
debt securities  +270,324 –125,176 –227,022 –51,651 – 2,865 + 8,576 +33,669 –27,490 +30,451
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options + 7,219 +18,890 +68,591 +40,187 – 2,086 +23,949 – 8,377 – 1,139 +10,917
4.Other investment +260,497 –189,019 –494,728 –155,062 +26,128 –90,707 +91,987 –10,931 +66,464
Eurosystem +144,209 –203,797 –442,764 –357,070 +184,740 – 4,101 –28,083 +35,229 –29,198
General government + 4,818 –15,761 –71,715 + 4,362 – 413 –28,609 – 2,262 –12,117 – 654
MFIs  2 +189,827 +19,340 –126,788 +183,570 –234,488 –91,744 +82,317 –39,693 +84,779
Enterprises and households –78,363 +11,193 +146,537 +14,076 +76,291 +33,746 +40,013 + 5,651 +11,537
5.Reserve assets + 5,999 +13,193 +130,061 + 2,888 – 888 + 2,319 + 1,745 + 1,639 + 2,163
IV.Net errors and omissions –47,748 – 1,494 –18,754 –25,961 – 8,829 –27,364 +30,924 +30,142 +31,523
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Increase: + / decrease: -.2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Zeit Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2007 + 171,493 + 201,728 – 1,183 – 32,465 + 35,620 – 33,390 – 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 13,273
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 – 3,947 – 29,122 + 24,063 – 34,147 – 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 – 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 – 6,605 – 17,642 + 54,524 – 34,764 – 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 – 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 – 6,209 – 25,255 + 51,306 – 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 – 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 – 9,357 – 29,930 + 69,087 – 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 – 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 – 11,388 – 30,774 + 65,658 – 38,703 – 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 – 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 – 12,523 – 39,321 + 63,284 – 43,413 – 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 210,906 + 219,629 – 14,296 – 25,303 + 57,752 – 41,172 + 2,936 + 240,258 – 2,564 + 26,416
2015 + 260,286 + 248,394 – 15,405 – 18,516 + 69,262 – 38,854 – 48 + 234,392 – 2,213 – 25,845
2016 + 266,689 + 252,409 – 19,921 – 20,987 + 76,199 – 40,931 + 2,142 + 261,123 + 1,686 – 7,708
2017 + 255,814 + 255,077 – 13,613 – 23,994 + 76,404 – 51,673 – 2,936 + 276,697 – 1,269 + 23,819
2018 + 267,729 + 221,983 – 22,985 – 15,806 + 111,890 – 50,338 + 580 + 246,928 + 392 – 21,381
2019 + 262,903 + 215,456 – 30,887 – 18,100 + 115,359 – 49,811 – 887 + 186,317 – 544 – 75,700
2020 + 238,741 + 189,963 – 7,246 + 2,725 + 98,780 – 52,727 – 5,829 + 216,515 – 51 – 16,397
2021 + 264,954 + 194,963 + 3,091 – 2,107 + 127,142 – 55,044 – 588 + 314,750 + 31,892 + 50,383
2019 Q4 + 68,030 + 49,432 – 11,400 – 3,126 + 35,102 – 13,378 – 1,412 + 83,477 – 576 + 16,860
2020 Q1 + 62,570 + 52,090 – 2,656 – 2,238 + 27,396 – 14,679 – 608 + 33,152 + 133 – 28,810
Q2 + 37,621 + 28,076 – 1,806 + 5,190 + 13,563 – 9,209 + 55 + 25,747 + 243 – 11,929
Q3 + 62,788 + 55,716 – 695 – 5,827 + 23,501 – 10,601 – 1,493 + 65,414 – 1,276 + 4,118
Q4 + 75,762 + 54,082 – 2,089 + 5,599 + 34,320 – 18,238 – 3,783 + 92,203 + 848 + 20,223
2021 Q1 + 76,516 + 58,643 + 1,200 + 3,264 + 31,911 – 17,302 – 322 + 106,919 + 385 + 30,725
Q2 + 65,741 + 48,853 – 194 + 6,415 + 18,806 – 8,332 – 1,755 + 84,594 + 58 + 20,608
Q3 + 61,739 + 49,114 – 34 – 7,569 + 34,408 – 14,214 + 1,890 + 36,922 + 31,199 – 26,707
Q4 + 60,958 + 38,353 + 2,119 – 4,217 + 42,017 – 15,196 – 401 + 86,314 + 250 + 25,757
2022 Q1 + 54,430 + 35,793 + 3,132 – 1,716 + 37,191 – 16,836 – 1,459 + 94,003 + 2,200 + 41,031
Q2 + 24,259 + 26,711 + 8,139 – 7,258 + 16,119 – 11,313 – 3,775 + 55,875 + 597 + 35,390
p Q3 + 22,087 + 24,135 + 162 – 21,439 + 35,988 – 16,598 – 4,349 + 12,263 + 784 – 5,475
2020 Apr. + 10,787 + 4,530 – 102 + 1,675 + 9,003 – 4,421 + 110 + 11,487 + 950 + 589
May + 6,134 + 8,575 + 87 + 1,110 + 23 – 3,573 – 9 + 2,095 + 33 – 4,029
June + 20,700 + 14,971 – 1,791 + 2,406 + 4,538 – 1,214 – 47 + 12,165 – 740 – 8,489
July + 20,883 + 20,319 – 330 – 2,709 + 7,024 – 3,751 – 1,005 + 14,644 – 611 – 5,234
Aug. + 16,852 + 13,976 + 38 – 2,543 + 8,850 – 3,432 + 412 + 30,512 – 611 + 13,248
Sep. + 25,053 + 21,421 – 404 – 575 + 7,627 – 3,419 – 900 + 20,258 – 53 – 3,895
Oct. + 24,773 + 20,389 – 415 + 782 + 8,128 – 4,527 – 1,386 + 25,983 + 140 + 2,596
Nov. + 22,799 + 18,384 + 164 + 2,120 + 9,835 – 7,541 – 2,266 + 23,695 + 89 + 3,162
Dec. + 28,191 + 15,308 – 1,838 + 2,697 + 16,356 – 6,171 – 132 + 42,524 + 618 + 14,466
2021 Jan. + 20,841 + 15,161 + 301 + 891 + 11,043 – 6,253 – 461 + 22,458 + 743 + 2,078
Feb. + 20,958 + 18,375 + 44 + 1,152 + 9,043 – 7,612 – 1,457 + 52,644 + 102 + 33,143
Mar. + 34,716 + 25,107 + 855 + 1,220 + 11,825 – 3,436 + 1,596 + 31,817 – 460 – 4,496
Apr. + 23,767 + 16,589 + 83 + 3,049 + 7,840 – 3,711 – 691 + 35,418 – 251 + 12,342
May + 16,512 + 15,224 – 160 + 2,349 + 675 – 1,735 – 366 + 14,146 + 211 – 2,000
June + 25,462 + 17,040 – 117 + 1,017 + 10,291 – 2,887 – 698 + 35,029 + 98 + 10,266
July + 20,980 + 18,951 – 451 – 2,445 + 9,978 – 5,504 – 534 + 5,325 + 102 – 15,122
Aug. + 16,712 + 12,506 + 645 – 3,483 + 11,952 – 4,264 + 506 + 20,653 + 31,254 + 3,436
Sep. + 24,047 + 17,657 – 229 – 1,641 + 12,478 – 4,446 + 1,917 + 10,944 – 158 – 15,021
Oct. + 16,282 + 15,148 + 1,117 – 5,570 + 11,830 – 5,126 + 424 + 21,714 + 261 + 5,007
Nov. + 20,888 + 14,647 + 893 – 137 + 12,051 – 5,673 – 1,062 + 48,411 + 963 + 28,585
Dec. + 23,788 + 8,558 + 109 + 1,490 + 18,135 – 4,396 + 237 + 16,190 – 974 – 7,835
2022 Jan. + 14,593 + 7,876 + 1,230 – 338 + 13,126 – 6,072 – 106 + 55,703 + 309 + 41,216
Feb. + 21,989 + 16,212 + 1,885 + 765 + 10,445 – 5,432 – 1,295 + 28,963 + 1,161 + 8,269
Mar. + 17,849 + 11,705 + 17 – 2,144 + 13,620 – 5,332 – 58 + 9,337 + 730 – 8,454
Apr. + 9,914 + 5,272 + 2,759 – 1,170 + 10,496 – 4,684 – 1,272 + 6,877 + 83 – 1,765
May + 750 + 10,195 + 4,324 – 2,570 – 5,858 – 1,016 – 2,772 + 1,400 + 161 + 3,422
June + 13,595 + 11,244 + 1,056 – 3,519 + 11,481 – 5,612 + 269 + 47,597 + 353 + 33,734
July + 6,395 + 8,582 + 323 – 7,195 + 11,595 – 6,587 – 2,149 – 11,943 – 484 – 16,188
Aug. + 880 + 2,904 – 618 – 8,939 + 12,679 – 5,763 – 947 + 31,062 + 81 + 31,129
p Sep. + 14,811 + 12,649 + 458 – 5,304 + 11,714 – 4,248 – 1,252 – 6,857 + 1,187 – 20,416
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: + / net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2022
Group of countries/country 
2019 2020 
2021 Apr. May June July Aug. Sep.
All countries  1 Exports 1,328,152 1,206,928 1,379,346 123,678 134,828 136,058 127,822 128,692 142,145
Imports 1,104,141 1,026,502 1,204,050 121,904 131,073 128,571 122,953 128,392 134,043
Balance +224,010 +180,427 +175,296 + 1,774 + 3,756 + 7,488 + 4,868 + 300 + 8,102
   I. European countries Exports 902,831 824,921 949,744 85,352 91,821 92,230 86,855 86,034 96,010
Imports 747,692 682,477 803,687 78,969 83,667 82,969 80,931 82,823 87,057
Balance +155,140 +142,444 +146,057 + 6,383 + 8,154 + 9,261 + 5,924 + 3,211 + 8,952
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 698,257 635,741 751,322 68,948 74,279 74,558 70,060 68,705 76,888
Imports 593,251 546,655 638,064 59,258 64,807 64,458 60,636 60,657 66,894
Balance +105,006 +89,087 +113,259 + 9,690 + 9,472 +10,100 + 9,423 + 8,048 + 9,993
          Euro area (19)       Exports 492,308 441,853 522,026 48,302 52,472 51,779 49,638 46,807 53,815
          countries Imports 409,863 371,211 438,294 41,163 44,556 44,468 41,897 41,238 46,269
Balance +82,445 +70,643 +83,732 + 7,140 + 7,916 + 7,311 + 7,741 + 5,569 + 7,546
          of which:
               Austria Exports 66,076 60,118 72,385 7,352 7,240 7,705 7,544 7,835 8,218
  Imports 44,059 40,454 47,492 4,774 5,151 4,866 5,268 5,026 5,353
Balance +22,017 +19,663 +24,893 + 2,578 + 2,089 + 2,839 + 2,276 + 2,809 + 2,864
               Belgium and Exports 52,006 48,824 58,080 5,351 5,979 5,793 6,533 5,875 6,290
               Luxembourg Imports 46,322 39,584 55,726 4,959 5,928 5,736 5,722 5,237 6,855
Balance + 5,683 + 9,240 + 2,354 + 392 + 51 + 57 + 811 + 637 – 565
               France Exports 106,564 90,910 102,741 9,190 9,767 10,094 9,438 8,942 10,400
  Imports 66,199 56,364 61,921 5,587 5,875 6,485 5,659 5,353 5,837
Balance +40,364 +34,546 +40,820 + 3,602 + 3,892 + 3,610 + 3,779 + 3,589 + 4,563
               Italy Exports 67,887 60,634 75,526 7,403 8,701 7,362 7,075 5,762 7,720
  Imports 57,100 53,906 65,389 5,938 6,543 6,469 6,158 5,404 6,071
Balance +10,786 + 6,728 +10,137 + 1,464 + 2,159 + 893 + 917 + 357 + 1,649
               Netherlands Exports 91,528 84,579 101,050 8,958 9,203 9,355 9,125 8,798 9,235
  Imports 97,816 87,024 105,113 10,080 10,519 10,756 10,279 11,018 10,930
Balance – 6,288 – 2,445 – 4,063 – 1,122 – 1,316 – 1,401 – 1,154 – 2,220 – 1,695
               Spain  Exports 44,218 37,618 43,932 3,911 4,353 4,037 3,925 3,545 4,316
  Imports 33,126 31,281 34,180 2,978 3,368 3,150 2,898 2,429 3,338
Balance +11,092 + 6,337 + 9,752 + 933 + 984 + 887 + 1,027 + 1,116 + 978
          Other EU Member  Exports 205,949 193,888 229,296 20,646 21,807 22,780 20,422 21,898 23,072
          States  Imports 183,387 175,444 199,770 18,096 20,250 19,990 18,740 19,419 20,625
Balance +22,561 +18,444 +29,526 + 2,550 + 1,556 + 2,790 + 1,682 + 2,479 + 2,447
      2. Other European Exports 204,575 189,180 198,421 16,404 17,542 17,671 16,795 17,330 19,122
          countries Imports 154,441 135,822 165,623 19,710 18,860 18,511 20,295 22,166 20,163
Balance +50,134 +53,358 +32,798 – 3,307 – 1,318 – 839 – 3,499 – 4,837 – 1,041
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 56,345 56,265 60,638 5,369 6,060 5,937 5,821 5,825 6,412
  Imports 45,824 45,556 49,247 4,796 4,714 4,550 4,542 4,235 4,383
Balance +10,521 +10,708 +11,391 + 573 + 1,346 + 1,387 + 1,278 + 1,590 + 2,029
               United Kingdom Exports 79,166 67,086 65,002 6,126 5,960 6,098 5,778 5,849 6,517
  Imports 38,397 35,018 32,245 3,493 3,370 2,849 3,074 3,101 3,541
Balance +40,770 +32,068 +32,757 + 2,633 + 2,590 + 3,249 + 2,704 + 2,748 + 2,976
   II. Non-European  Exports 421,728 380,292 427,430 37,914 42,533 43,324 40,446 42,122 45,658
       countries Imports 355,390 343,270 399,604 42,836 47,281 45,481 41,882 45,405 46,808
Balance +66,338 +37,022 +27,827 – 4,922 – 4,749 – 2,157 – 1,436 – 3,283 – 1,150
       1. Africa Exports 23,627 20,086 23,068 1,907 2,225 2,308 2,110 2,280 2,280
Imports 24,475 18,758 26,241 2,928 2,953 3,152 2,853 2,672 2,826
Balance – 848 + 1,328 – 3,173 – 1,021 – 728 – 844 – 743 – 392 – 545
       2. America Exports 165,602 141,375 167,735 16,368 18,249 18,980 17,224 18,052 20,326
  Imports 100,007 94,005 101,525 9,781 11,007 12,035 10,589 12,088 11,769
Balance +65,595 +47,370 +66,210 + 6,587 + 7,243 + 6,945 + 6,635 + 5,964 + 8,557
           of which:
               United States  Exports 118,680 103,476 121,980 11,909 13,438 14,331 12,415 13,341 15,354
  Imports 71,334 67,694 72,316 6,774 7,854 8,509 7,589 8,393 8,237
Balance +47,346 +35,782 +49,664 + 5,135 + 5,583 + 5,821 + 4,825 + 4,948 + 7,116
       3. Asia Exports 221,278 208,146 224,897 18,455 20,808 20,985 19,963 20,707 21,903
  Imports 227,036 226,646 267,604 29,510 32,563 29,487 27,548 30,147 31,687
Balance – 5,759 –18,500 –42,707 –11,055 –11,755 – 8,502 – 7,585 – 9,440 – 9,784
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 28,663 25,882 26,090 1,980 2,213 2,452 2,347 2,720 2,987
  Imports 7,460 6,721 7,509 960 1,039 1,058 1,095 889 1,246
Balance +21,202 +19,161 +18,582 + 1,019 + 1,174 + 1,394 + 1,252 + 1,831 + 1,742
               Japan  Exports 20,662 17,396 18,245 1,622 1,680 1,646 1,582 1,687 1,806
Imports 23,904 21,427 23,477 2,080 2,222 2,071 1,944 2,162 2,284
Balance – 3,243 – 4,032 – 5,232 – 458 – 543 – 426 – 363 – 475 – 478
               People's Republic  Exports 95,984 95,840 103,564 8,255 9,205 9,070 8,886 8,918 9,048
               of China  2 Imports 110,054 117,373 142,964 16,773 17,245 16,318 14,602 15,931 16,806
Balance –14,070 –21,533 –39,400 – 8,517 – 8,040 – 7,248 – 5,716 – 7,013 – 7,758
               New industrial countries Exports 54,164 50,590 55,295 4,783 5,435 5,598 5,268 5,356 5,489
               and emerging markets  Imports 51,748 48,222 55,441 5,336 7,282 5,712 5,302 5,746 6,159
               of Asia  3 Balance + 2,416 + 2,368 – 146 – 554 – 1,847 – 114 – 34 – 390 – 669
       4. Oceania and Exports 11,221 10,685 11,731 1,184 1,251 1,051 1,149 1,083 1,149
           polar regions Imports 3,872 3,861 4,233 617 759 807 892 498 526
Balance + 7,349 + 6,824 + 7,497 + 567 + 492 + 244 + 258 + 585 + 623
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. EU excl. UK.  1 Including fuel and other supplies for ships andaircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.  3 Brunei
Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Zeit Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2017 – 23,994 – 3,679 – 43,558 + 9,613 + 14,903 – 8,188 – 1,065 + 2,177 + 1,139 + 76,669 – 1,403
2018 – 15,806 – 2,044 – 44,543 + 10,060 + 17,219 – 7,060 + 723 + 3,322 + 671 +112,223 – 1,004
2019 – 18,100 – 72 – 45,947 + 10,999 + 18,299 – 9,697 – 2,984 + 3,489 + 846 +115,462 – 949
2020 + 2,725 – 9,392 – 14,678 + 10,239 + 17,546 – 7,107 – 4,382 + 3,363 + 3,234 + 97,017 – 1,471
2021 – 2,107 – 12,067 – 24,345 + 8,737 + 31,878 – 7,515 – 8,523 + 3,513 + 2,605 +126,518 – 1,981
2021 Q1 + 3,264 – 3,183 – 31 + 2,251 + 5,756 – 2,478 – 1,436 + 884 + 1,324 + 31,567 – 980
Q2 + 6,415 – 2,075 – 2,136 + 2,589 + 8,007 – 1,329 – 1,164 + 914 + 494 + 21,185 – 2,873
Q3 – 7,569 – 2,259 – 13,539 + 1,221 + 9,080 – 2,169 – 2,331 + 946 – 77 + 35,676 – 1,192
Q4 – 4,217 – 4,551 – 8,639 + 2,676 + 9,035 – 1,539 – 3,592 + 769 + 864 + 38,089 + 3,064
2022 Q1 – 1,716 – 5,053 – 4,636 + 2,257 + 7,972 – 3,304 – 1,720 + 949 + 1,234 + 37,216 – 1,260
Q2 – 7,258 – 1,607 – 12,055 + 2,874 + 6,058 – 1,919 – 2,735 + 948 + 320 + 19,595 – 3,796
p Q3 – 21,439 – 5,414 – 18,583 + 1,878 + 5,247 – 2,677 – 3,620 + 986 – 167 + 37,711 – 1,556
2021 Nov. – 137 – 1,122 – 1,562 + 646 + 3,318 – 830 – 1,478 + 182 + 252 + 12,215 – 415
Dec. + 1,490 – 2,272 – 766 + 915 + 3,125 – 72 – 301 + 302 + 364 + 13,840 + 3,932
2022 Jan. – 338 – 1,741 – 1,141 + 894 + 2,714 – 1,340 – 458 + 311 + 437 + 13,094 – 405
Feb. + 765 – 1,490 – 1,249 + 714 + 2,773 – 875 – 232 + 322 + 434 + 10,426 – 415
Mar. – 2,144 – 1,822 – 2,246 + 649 + 2,485 – 1,089 – 1,030 + 316 + 362 + 13,697 – 439
Apr. – 1,170 – 805 – 2,247 + 912 + 2,189 – 1,203 – 707 + 288 + 68 + 11,054 – 625
May – 2,570 – 576 – 3,777 + 847 + 1,854 – 718 – 1,028 + 303 + 102 – 3,546 – 2,414
June – 3,519 – 226 – 6,032 + 1,115 + 2,015 + 1 – 1,000 + 357 + 150 + 12,087 – 756
July – 7,195 – 1,092 – 5,781 + 532 + 1,414 – 1,354 – 1,335 + 323 – 79 + 12,167 – 493
Aug. – 8,939 – 2,501 – 7,049 + 622 + 1,388 – 719 – 1,281 + 314 – 48 + 13,273 – 547
p Sep. – 5,304 – 1,821 – 5,753 + 725 + 2,445 – 605 – 1,005 + 350 – 40 + 12,270 – 516
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Zeit Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2017 – 51,673 – 23,191 – 9,851 + 9,665 – 28,482 .+ 4,613 – 2,936 + 926 – 3,863
2018 – 50,338 – 28,710 – 10,186 + 10,230 – 21,627 .+ 5,142 + 580 + 3,349 – 2,769
2019 – 49,811 – 28,986 – 10,728 + 11,742 – 20,825 .+ 5,431 – 887 + 3,028 – 3,915
2020 – 52,727 – 34,127 – 12,239 + 10,929 – 18,600 .+ 5,908 – 5,829 + 380 – 6,209
2021 – 55,044 – 37,607 – 8,072 + 11,423 – 17,437 .+ 6,170 – 588 + 3,191 – 3,779
2021 Q1 – 17,302 – 12,044 + 281 + 2,172 – 5,257 .+ 1,543 – 322 + 123 – 445
Q2 – 8,332 – 4,756 – 1,240 + 5,207 – 3,577 .+ 1,543 – 1,755 – 1,578 – 177
Q3 – 14,214 – 9,993 – 3,036 + 2,056 – 4,221 .+ 1,543 + 1,890 + 2,918 – 1,028
Q4 – 15,196 – 10,814 – 4,077 + 1,987 – 4,382 .+ 1,543 – 401 + 1,728 – 2,129
2022 Q1 – 16,836 – 10,543 – 2,803 + 2,458 – 6,293 .+ 1,598 – 1,459 – 1,892 + 433
Q2 – 11,313 – 5,184 – 2,465 + 7,315 – 6,129 + 1,603 + 1,598 – 3,775 – 3,027 – 748
p Q3 – 16,598 – 11,251 – 3,163 + 1,857 – 5,347 + 1,603 + 1,598 – 4,349 – 3,454 – 895
2021 Nov. – 5,673 – 4,118 – 839 + 300 – 1,555 .+ 514 – 1,062 – 513 – 549
Dec. – 4,396 – 3,055 – 3,081 + 1,262 – 1,342 .+ 514 + 237 + 1,455 – 1,217
2022 Jan. – 6,072 – 4,338 – 1,399 + 454 – 1,734 .+ 533 – 106 – 291 + 186
Feb. – 5,432 – 3,940 – 836 + 940 – 1,492 .+ 533 – 1,295 – 1,257 – 38
Mar. – 5,332 – 2,266 – 568 + 1,065 – 3,067 .+ 533 – 58 – 343 + 285
Apr. – 4,684 – 2,757 – 420 + 1,117 – 1,928 + 534 + 533 – 1,272 – 790 – 482
May – 1,016 + 1,344 – 458 + 4,973 – 2,361 + 534 + 533 – 2,772 – 2,363 – 409
June – 5,612 – 3,772 – 1,587 + 1,225 – 1,840 + 535 + 533 + 269 + 126 + 142
July – 6,587 – 4,578 – 1,697 + 432 – 2,008 + 535 + 533 – 2,149 – 1,653 – 496
Aug. – 5,763 – 4,094 – 1,196 + 418 – 1,669 + 534 + 533 – 947 – 716 – 231
p Sep. – 4,248 – 2,579 – 270 + 1,007 – 1,669 + 534 + 533 – 1,252 – 1,084 – 168
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2022
Item 2019  2020  2021  Q1 Q2 Q3 p July August September  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +251,072 +739,081 +844,810 +204,882 +114,464 +152,696 –39,396 +174,329 +17,763
1.Direct investment +139,279 +119,458 +163,651 +44,793 +53,963 +51,632 + 1,120 +54,178 – 3,667
Equity +116,157 +90,170 +113,012 +29,186 +24,419 +12,684 + 5,570 + 9,395 – 2,282
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +40,785 +21,039 +55,475 +20,797 +13,306 +12,467 + 2,145 + 6,933 + 3,389
Debt instruments +23,122 +29,288 +50,638 +15,607 +29,545 +38,948 – 4,450 +44,783 – 1,385
2.Portfolio investment +134,961 +191,740 +221,477 +59,730 + 1,603 –26,670 – 9,207 – 8,785 – 8,678
Shares  2 +13,672 +65,214 +56,007 + 7,228 + 4,986 – 8,186 – 4,889 – 2,112 – 1,185
Investment fund shares  3 +53,708 +62,585 +103,434 + 3,970 + 1,293 + 103 + 520 + 597 – 1,013
Short-term  4
debt securities + 7,424 + 3,852 – 6,256 + 1,329 – 2,152 – 3,311 – 2,140 – 345 – 826
Long-term   5
debt securities +60,157 +60,089 +68,292 +47,202 – 2,523 –15,276 – 2,698 – 6,925 – 5,653
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +24,544 +96,276 +60,977 +10,566 +10,694 +13,049 + 3,989 + 720 + 8,340
4.Other investment  7 –47,168 +331,659 +366,813 +87,593 +47,606 +113,901 –34,814 +128,134 +20,581
MFIs  8 + 9,256 – 4,522 +112,866 +139,954 –19,411 +42,054 + 5,980 +20,663 +15,411
Short-term – 8,901 + 3,526 +99,548 +131,275 – 7,349 +20,616 – 4,349 +12,130 +12,835
Long-term +18,157 – 8,048 +13,318 + 8,679 –12,061 +21,430 +10,323 + 8,536 + 2,571
Enterprises and
households  9 +14,348 +90,994 +138,858 +45,131 +30,105 +31,449 + 8,850 +32,416 – 9,817
Short-term + 793 +45,448 +124,088 +43,566 +24,008 +25,380 + 6,098 +30,677 –11,395
Long-term +13,555 +45,545 +14,770 + 1,565 + 6,097 – 1,402 – 520 – 93 – 789
General government + 144 + 2,076 – 8,305 – 5,842 –10,764 .+ 3,101 . .
Short-term + 3,357 + 3,461 – 7,502 – 5,362 –10,180 .+ 3,061 – 3,683 .
Long-term – 3,213 – 1,385 – 803 – 480 – 584 – 624 – 438 – 83 – 103
Bundesbank –70,915 +243,112 +123,394 –91,650 +47,675 .–52,744 . .
5.Reserve assets – 544 – 51 +31,892 + 2,200 + 597 + 784 – 484 + 81 + 1,187
II.Net foreign investment in the
reporting country (increase: +) +64,756 +522,566 +530,060 +110,879 +58,590 +140,433 –27,453 +143,266 +24,620
1.Direct investment +63,683 +122,929 +61,833 +40,074 +13,168 +21,751 –12,943 +41,162 – 6,468
Equity +23,492 +43,862 +36,972 + 4,684 + 5,410 + 386 – 2,121 + 416 + 2,091
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 – 492 + 1,880 + 4,787 + 3,284 + 1,347 – 2,207 – 2,631 – 677 + 1,100
Debt instruments +40,192 +79,068 +24,861 +35,390 + 7,758 +21,365 –10,822 +40,746 – 8,559
2.Portfolio investment +65,309 +148,877 –33,617 +21,283 –15,738 + 682 –14,604 +15,599 – 314
Shares  2 – 7,275 –15,982 – 3,703 – 9,199 – 5,940 + 6,644 – 1,764 – 2,654 +11,061
Investment fund shares  3 – 4,519 + 1,862 – 2,760 – 2,211 + 1,352 – 1,675 – 1,746 – 31 + 102
Short-term  4
debt securities +14,400 +83,707 +25,027 – 5,244 – 7,004 – 7,187 – 5,866 – 4,687 + 3,367
Long-term   5
debt securities +62,704 +79,290 –52,181 +37,937 – 4,145 + 2,896 – 5,227 +22,968 –14,845
3.Other investment  7 –64,237 +250,760 +501,843 +49,522 +61,159 +118,000 + 93 +86,505 +31,402
MFIs  8 –10,214 +108,323 +159,384 +266,244 + 6,112 +68,292 – 547 +18,718 +50,121
Short-term –20,978 +74,805 +115,401 +290,964 + 2,551 +48,818 – 2,232 + 9,042 +42,008
Long-term +10,764 +33,517 +43,984 –24,720 + 3,561 +19,473 + 1,685 + 9,676 + 8,113
Enterprises and
households  9 +43,978 +39,313 +120,200 –14,909 +39,341 +45,528 +14,553 +37,749 – 6,774
Short-term +11,681 +18,361 +115,536 –17,519 +37,724 +45,353 +15,663 +37,183 – 7,493
Long-term +32,297 +20,952 + 4,663 + 2,610 + 1,618 – 638 – 1,312 + 196 + 478
General government + 1,620 – 7,817 – 4,537 – 641 – 641 .+ 2,248 . .
Short-term + 1,424 – 7,664 – 2,186 + 2,078 – 760 + 2,649 + 2,256 – 1,532 + 1,925
Long-term + 196 – 153 – 2,351 – 2,719 + 119 . .+ 4+ 7
Bundesbank –99,621 +110,941 +226,796 –201,172 +16,347 .–16,161 . .
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +186,317 +216,515 +314,750 +94,003 +55,875 +12,263 –11,943 +31,062 – 6,857
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see Statistical series, direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities 3ä,  4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,670
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 663,320 497,651
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2020 May 1,209,328 223,125 167,780 14,650 6,787 33,908 931,521 916,145 54,682 612,403 596,925
June 1,294,167 226,135 170,728 14,603 6,955 33,849 1,012,982 995,083 55,050 618,825 675,342
July 1,323,691 233,547 180,400 14,179 7,465 31,503 1,034,282 1,019,214 55,862 599,189 724,503
Aug. 1,358,137 230,309 177,973 14,129 7,423 30,784 1,071,521 1,056,231 56,307 600,390 757,747
Sep. 1,414,933 227,150 173,979 14,293 7,632 31,246 1,131,686 1,115,189 56,097 649,781 765,151
Oct. 1,346,367 227,767 174,433 14,346 7,656 31,332 1,061,498 1,047,327 57,102 619,445 726,922
Nov. 1,347,202 212,286 159,737 14,193 7,535 30,820 1,078,270 1,060,263 56,647 625,921 721,282
Dec. 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 Jan. 1,348,921 219,860 166,494 14,115 8,061 31,190 1,072,140 1,054,994 56,921 638,042 710,879
Feb. 1,328,303 210,619 157,313 14,119 8,047 31,140 1,060,378 1,043,746 57,306 616,473 711,830
Mar. 1,364,046 209,400 155,323 14,367 7,966 31,744 1,098,486 1,081,989 56,160 647,647 716,400
Apr. 1,307,161 210,799 158,143 14,085 7,836 30,735 1,041,472 1,024,734 54,890 604,863 702,299
May 1,370,231 221,201 168,678 14,037 7,809 30,677 1,093,721 1,076,918 55,309 621,827 748,404
June 1,384,834 213,600 159,995 14,326 8,094 31,184 1,115,447 1,101,897 55,787 670,632 714,202
July 1,319,694 219,775 165,984 14,345 8,104 31,343 1,042,015 1,024,970 57,903 657,905 661,789
Aug. 1,360,722 250,742 165,757 45,091 8,174 31,720 1,053,653 1,037,259 56,327 699,773 660,949
Sep. 1,431,909 246,908 160,943 45,606 8,267 32,092 1,130,558 1,115,126 54,443 746,128 685,781
Oct. 1,388,160 250,340 164,602 45,719 8,449 31,570 1,083,141 1,066,604 54,678 735,595 652,564
Nov. 1,456,861 258,815 170,460 46,375 8,405 33,575 1,142,719 1,127,545 55,327 773,217 683,644
Dec. 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 Jan. 1,479,694 261,965 173,362 46,931 8,504 33,168 1,163,561 1,149,868 54,168 807,889 671,805
Feb. 1,491,552 273,726 184,255 46,854 8,711 33,905 1,164,098 1,149,722 53,729 774,786 716,766
Mar. 1,516,744 277,782 187,779 47,375 8,663 33,965 1,184,501 1,169,952 54,462 808,690 708,055
Apr. 1,491,558 288,953 196,274 48,617 8,799 35,263 1,148,681 1,135,400 53,923 790,221 701,337
May 1,505,419 278,174 186,481 48,031 8,681 34,980 1,173,376 1,159,716 53,869 805,179 700,240
June 1,566,099 281,157 187,573 48,712 8,948 35,923 1,232,176 1,216,530 52,767 826,280 739,819
July 1,514,570 280,910 185,950 49,465 9,086 36,409 1,179,431 1,166,155 54,229 810,881 703,689
Aug. 1,590,572 280,160 184,794 49,614 9,300 36,451 1,258,187 1,245,014 52,225 842,576 747,996
Sep. 1,613,008 281,258 184,022 50,287 9,358 37,592 1,281,266 1,266,647 50,483 829,129 783,879
Oct. 1,569,272 274,421 178,101 49,675 9,527 37,119 1,243,873 1,230,005 50,977 811,033 758,239
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2018 933,849 234,970 698,880 466,225 232,654 217,969 14,686 1,232,594 146,575 1,086,019 879,752 206,267 135,214 71,053
2019 963,967 227,688 736,279 502,594 233,685 217,370 16,314 1,305,705 167,656 1,138,048 927,650 210,399 134,768 75,630
2020 1,021,200 248,779 772,421 544,059 228,362 211,891 16,471 1,394,364 171,998 1,222,366 1,012,503 209,863 129,098 80,766
2021 1,152,509 260,321 892,188 604,424 287,764 270,847 16,917 1,548,984 218,886 1,330,098 1,066,016 264,082 175,351 88,730
2022 Apr. 1,266,969 290,472 976,498 651,264 325,234 296,190 29,044 1,629,738 212,997 1,416,741 1,123,694 293,047 189,904 103,142
May 1,258,386 278,294 980,092 649,343 330,749 301,007 29,741 1,619,688 207,553 1,412,135 1,114,726 297,409 193,823 103,586
June 1,271,963 256,426 1,015,537 669,832 345,705 315,398 30,307 1,641,340 192,674 1,448,666 1,134,510 314,156 210,108 104,048
July 1,278,059 263,838 1,014,221 670,948 343,273 313,123 30,151 1,651,392 211,988 1,439,404 1,126,247 313,157 207,607 105,549
Aug. 1,354,989 272,669 1,082,320 736,951 345,370 315,253 30,117 1,733,100 233,330 1,499,769 1,181,732 318,037 212,527 105,510
p Sep. 1,339,460 261,968 1,077,492 708,346 369,146 339,013 30,133 1,715,748 213,365 1,502,383 1,163,140 339,243 233,980 105,262
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2018 544,009 177,064 366,944 274,402 92,542 84,191 8,351 801,772 88,161 713,611 631,814 81,798 61,161 20,637
2019 572,324 176,847 395,476 304,605 90,871 82,120 8,752 836,863 91,122 745,740 660,385 85,355 62,692 22,664
2020 609,449 187,703 421,746 332,983 88,763 79,780 8,983 884,904 95,716 789,188 702,991 86,197 61,357 24,841
2021 660,768 198,911 461,857 350,591 111,266 102,689 8,578 978,060 153,424 824,636 713,878 110,758 84,237 26,521
2022 Apr. 728,052 231,393 496,659 365,832 130,827 118,000 12,827 996,555 136,904 859,651 740,339 119,311 87,983 31,328
May 722,157 220,735 501,423 366,255 135,167 122,235 12,933 999,363 134,322 865,041 740,291 124,749 93,032 31,717
June 721,354 201,319 520,035 377,912 142,123 128,838 13,285 1,008,127 131,237 876,890 742,665 134,224 102,643 31,581
July 731,384 212,349 519,035 376,509 142,526 129,216 13,310 1,022,914 147,814 875,100 741,511 133,588 101,399 32,190
Aug. 747,731 213,111 534,620 391,171 143,449 129,991 13,458 1,065,471 173,966 891,505 756,559 134,946 102,673 32,273
p Sep. 732,485 196,567 535,918 384,943 150,974 137,415 13,560 1,056,193 157,314 898,880 754,263 144,617 112,444 32,172
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2018 389,841 57,905 331,935 191,823 140,112 133,777 6,335 430,822 58,415 372,408 247,939 124,469 74,053 50,416
2019 391,643 50,841 340,803 197,989 142,814 135,251 7,563 468,842 76,534 392,308 267,265 125,043 72,077 52,967
2020 411,751 61,076 350,675 211,076 139,599 132,112 7,487 509,460 76,282 433,178 309,512 123,666 67,741 55,925
2021 491,741 61,410 430,331 253,833 176,498 168,158 8,340 570,924 65,462 505,463 352,138 153,324 91,115 62,210
2022 Apr. 538,918 59,079 479,839 285,432 194,407 178,190 16,217 633,183 76,093 557,090 383,355 173,735 101,921 71,814
May 536,228 57,559 478,669 283,088 195,581 178,773 16,809 620,325 73,231 547,095 374,435 172,660 100,791 71,868
June 550,609 55,106 495,502 291,920 203,582 186,560 17,022 633,213 61,437 571,776 391,845 179,931 107,465 72,466
July 546,675 51,488 495,186 294,439 200,748 183,907 16,841 628,478 64,174 564,304 384,736 179,568 106,208 73,360
Aug. 607,258 59,558 547,700 345,779 201,921 185,262 16,659 667,628 59,364 608,264 425,173 183,091 109,854 73,237
p Sep. 606,975 65,401 541,574 323,402 218,171 201,598 16,573 659,555 56,052 603,503 408,878 194,626 121,536 73,090
Euro area (19)
2018 467,428 156,887 310,542 238,963 71,579 64,295 7,283 735,094 68,959 666,136 601,205 64,931 49,138 15,792
2019 493,062 158,102 334,960 264,834 70,127 62,531 7,595 761,144 70,561 690,584 624,607 65,977 48,775 17,202
2020 522,933 166,846 356,087 287,662 68,425 60,750 7,674 799,046 74,101 724,945 658,931 66,014 47,100 18,914
2021 553,838 176,279 377,560 289,330 88,230 80,844 7,386 896,256 131,735 764,521 675,868 88,653 68,232 20,421
2022 Apr. 628,773 213,684 415,090 310,796 104,294 92,824 11,470 914,122 116,900 797,222 701,576 95,646 71,124 24,522
May 622,482 203,996 418,485 310,720 107,765 96,127 11,638 914,240 112,775 801,465 701,507 99,958 75,219 24,740
June 616,656 185,782 430,873 315,885 114,988 103,025 11,963 923,861 111,967 811,894 702,692 109,202 84,715 24,487
July 620,871 194,739 426,132 310,274 115,858 103,880 11,978 938,353 128,484 809,869 700,797 109,072 84,082 24,990
Aug. 632,469 197,783 434,687 317,577 117,110 104,948 12,162 979,675 154,215 825,461 715,036 110,424 85,330 25,094
p Sep. 617,477 179,838 437,639 314,442 123,197 110,874 12,323 968,740 138,659 830,081 712,505 117,576 92,837 24,739
Extra-Euro area (19)
2018 466,421 78,083 388,338 227,262 161,076 153,673 7,403 497,500 77,617 419,883 278,548 141,336 86,075 55,260
2019 470,905 69,586 401,319 237,761 163,558 154,839 8,719 544,560 97,096 447,465 303,043 144,422 85,993 58,428
2020 498,267 81,933 416,334 256,397 159,937 151,141 8,796 595,318 97,897 497,421 353,572 143,849 81,997 61,852
2021 598,671 84,042 514,629 315,094 199,535 190,003 9,532 652,728 87,151 565,577 390,148 175,429 107,119 68,309
2022 Apr. 638,196 76,788 561,408 340,468 220,940 203,366 17,574 715,616 96,097 619,519 422,118 197,400 118,780 78,620
May 635,904 74,297 561,607 338,623 222,984 204,881 18,103 705,448 94,778 610,670 413,220 197,451 118,605 78,846
June 655,307 70,643 584,664 353,947 230,717 212,373 18,344 717,479 80,707 636,772 431,818 204,954 125,393 79,561
July 657,188 69,098 588,090 360,674 227,415 209,243 18,173 713,039 83,504 629,535 425,450 204,085 123,525 80,560
Aug. 722,520 74,887 647,633 419,374 228,259 210,304 17,955 753,424 79,116 674,308 466,696 207,613 127,197 80,416
p Sep. 721,983 82,130 639,853 393,903 245,949 228,139 17,810 747,008 74,706 672,302 450,635 221,666 141,144 80,523
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2021 1.5749 1.4826 7.6282 7.4370 129.88 10.1633 10.1465 1.0811 0.85960 1.1827
2021 June 1.5761 1.4713 7.7391 7.4364 132.63 10.1444 10.1172 1.0940 0.85872 1.2047
July 1.5926 1.4806 7.6536 7.4373 130.35 10.3767 10.1979 1.0856 0.85613 1.1822
Aug. 1.6118 1.4827 7.6237 7.4369 129.28 10.4195 10.2157 1.0762 0.85287 1.1772
Sep. 1.6087 1.4910 7.6007 7.4361 129.66 10.1861 10.1710 1.0857 0.85683 1.1770
Oct. 1.5669 1.4436 7.4500 7.4398 131.21 9.8143 10.0557 1.0708 0.84694 1.1601
Nov. 1.5615 1.4339 7.2927 7.4373 130.12 9.9661 10.0459 1.0522 0.84786 1.1414
Dec. 1.5781 1.4463 7.1993 7.4362 128.80 10.1308 10.2726 1.0408 0.84875 1.1304
2022 Jan. 1.5770 1.4282 7.1922 7.4411 130.01 10.0070 10.3579 1.0401 0.83503 1.1314
Feb. 1.5825 1.4422 7.1957 7.4408 130.66 10.0544 10.5342 1.0461 0.83787 1.1342
Mar. 1.4946 1.3950 6.9916 7.4404 130.71 9.7367 10.5463 1.0245 0.83638 1.1019
Apr. 1.4663 1.3652 6.9605 7.4391 136.61 9.6191 10.3175 1.0211 0.83655 1.0819
May 1.4995 1.3588 7.0830 7.4405 136.24 10.1453 10.4956 1.0355 0.84969 1.0579
June 1.5044 1.3537 7.0734 7.4392 141.57 10.2972 10.6005 1.0245 0.85759 1.0566
July 1.4856 1.3180 6.8538 7.4426 139.17 10.1823 10.5752 0.9876 0.84955 1.0179
Aug. 1.4550 1.3078 6.8884 7.4393 136.85 9.8309 10.5021 0.9690 0.84499 1.0128
Sep. 1.4820 1.3187 6.9508 7.4366 141.57 10.1697 10.7840 0.9640 0.87463 0.9904
Oct. 1.5474 1.3477 7.0687 7.4389 144.73 10.3919 10.9503 0.9791 0.87058 0.9826
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2022
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-42  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
26 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  526 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.2 95.9 96.2 96.6 96.0 97.9 99.6 95.9 97.7 98.3 98.1 97.8
2000 87.1 86.9 86.1 85.7 88.1 86.1 92.0 97.5 85.5 91.2 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.6 87.2 86.6 84.5 90.2 86.9 91.7 96.6 86.1 90.5 93.0 91.7 91.0
2002 89.8 90.2 89.7 88.1 94.5 90.5 92.4 95.7 88.5 91.1 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.4 101.4 100.7 99.1 106.4 101.5 95.9 94.8 97.6 95.3 97.0 96.7 96.8
2004 104.2 105.2 103.7 102.3 110.9 105.3 96.2 93.6 100.0 95.6 98.5 98.2 98.4
2005 102.8 103.9 101.7 100.5 109.0 102.9 94.8 92.0 98.8 93.3 98.4 97.1 96.7
2006 102.8 103.9 101.1 99.4 109.1 102.2 93.6 90.4 98.2 91.6 98.6 96.7 96.0
2007 106.3 106.8 103.3 101.0 112.7 104.5 94.5 89.6 102.0 92.0 100.9 98.3 97.3
2008 110.1 109.7 105.5 104.8 117.4 106.9 94.9 88.4 105.1 91.3 102.4 98.4 97.5
2009 111.6 110.6 106.6 108.4 120.5 108.0 95.2 89.2 104.7 92.0 101.9 98.6 97.9
2010 104.4 102.9 98.4 100.9 111.9 99.0 92.5 88.7 98.2 88.1 98.8 94.3 92.5
2011 104.2 101.9 96.6 99.2 112.7 98.5 92.1 88.5 97.6 87.4 98.2 93.5 91.9
2012 98.5 96.7 91.1 93.4 107.5 93.7 90.1 88.3 92.5 84.7 95.9 90.5 88.9
2013 102.0 99.8 94.1 96.4 112.2 96.8 92.3 88.8 97.5 86.6 98.1 92.3 90.9
2014 102.3 99.1 94.0 96.5 114.5 97.1 92.9 89.6 97.7 87.4 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.5 89.5 85.5 85.9 106.1 88.6 89.8 90.3 88.9 83.6 94.4 87.8 87.0
2016 95.2 91.4 87.8 p 87.2 110.1 90.6 90.7 90.7 90.4 84.9 95.0 88.8 88.1
2017 97.4 93.4 88.9 p 87.9 112.4 91.8 91.9 90.9 93.3 85.7 96.3 89.9 88.9
2018 99.9 95.5 90.5 p 89.4 117.3 95.0 93.2 91.0 96.4 86.7 97.7 91.2 90.8
2019 98.1 93.1 88.8 p 86.9 115.4 92.3 92.2 91.2 93.5 85.9 96.4 89.9 89.4
2020 99.6 93.5 89.4 p 87.6 119.4 93.8 92.4 91.5 93.5 86.5 96.4 90.1 90.2
2021 99.6 93.4 p 88.7 p 86.0 120.8 94.2 93.5 92.0 95.6 86.9 97.4 90.7 91.0
2020 May 98.3 92.6 88.9 p 87.2 117.5 92.9 91.9 91.9 91.9 86.4 96.3 90.2 90.2
June 99.7 93.8 119.1 94.0 97.0 90.8 90.8
July 100.4 94.4 120.3 94.8 96.0 90.0 90.2
Aug. 101.5 94.8 90.1 p 88.4 122.4 95.8 92.3 91.0 94.2 86.6 97.0 90.7 91.2
Sep. 101.5 94.9 122.4 95.7 96.8 90.7 91.1
Oct. 101.3 94.7 122.4 95.7 96.7 90.5 91.0
Nov. 100.6 94.3 90.5 p 87.8 121.6 95.1 93.1 91.4 95.5 86.9 96.5 90.1 90.5
Dec. 101.8 95.2 122.9 95.9 97.0 90.5 90.9
2021 Jan. 101.3 95.2 122.4 96.0 98.0 91.4 91.7
Feb. 100.6 94.5 90.1 p 87.9 121.5 95.1 93.6 91.9 96.0 87.2 97.9 91.2 91.5
Mar. 100.3 94.1 121.2 94.8 97.7 91.1 91.4
Apr. 100.6 94.3 121.9 95.2 97.9 91.2 91.6
May 100.8 94.3 89.5 p 86.4 122.3 95.3 93.5 91.6 96.2 86.9 98.1 91.3 91.7
June 100.2 93.7 121.5 94.6 97.9 91.1 91.5
July 99.7 93.5 120.8 94.2 97.7 91.0 91.2
Aug. 99.3 93.1 p 88.5 p 85.7 120.4 93.8 93.6 92.1 95.6 86.9 97.4 90.7 90.9
Sep. 99.4 93.2 120.4 93.7 97.3 90.6 90.7
Oct. 98.4 92.4 119.5 93.1 96.7 90.0 90.2
Nov. 97.6 91.7 p 86.5 p 84.0 118.8 92.6 93.4 92.6 94.6 86.4 96.2 89.5 89.8
Dec. 97.1 91.2 119.0 92.4 95.8 89.0 89.5
2022 Jan. 96.6 91.2 118.6 p 92.3 96.0 89.0 p 89.5
Feb. 96.9 91.6 p 84.9 p 82.4 118.9 p 92.6 93.0 92.3 93.7 85.8 96.1 89.1 p 89.5
Mar. 95.9 91.3 118.4 p 92.6 96.3 89.5 p 90.0
Apr. 95.2 89.9 116.4 p 90.2 96.1 89.0 p 88.9
May 95.6 90.3 p 83.7 p 80.7 116.2 p 90.0 92.4 91.9 92.8 85.2 96.6 89.6 p 89.3
June 95.9 90.5 116.5 p 90.1 95.7 88.8 p 88.4
July 94.1 p 89.1 114.6 p 88.8 94.9 p 88.0 p 87.6
Aug. 93.6 p 88.7 ... ... 114.1 p 88.5 … … … … 94.5 p 87.7 p 87.3
Sep. 94.2 p 89.7 114.5 p 89.2 p96.0 p 89.2 p 88.7
Oct. 94.8 p 91.3 115.4 p 90.8 p96.6 p 90.2 p 89.7
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the curren-
cy concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's price
competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective exchange
rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. The
weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more detailed in-
formation on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the Deutsche
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 The calculations are
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland,
Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the
United States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates were
used.  2 Includes countries belonging to the group EER-19 and additionally Algeria,
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico,Morocco, New Zealand, Peru, Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South
Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and United Arab Emirates. The ECB suspends
the publication and calculation of the euro foreign exchange reference rate against
Russian rouble with effect from March 2, 2022 until further notice. For the calculation
of effective exchange rates, an indicative rate is used for the Russian Federation from
that date. It is calculated from the daily RUB/USD rates determined by the Bank of
Russia in conjunction with the respective ECB's euro foreign exchange reference rate to
the US dollar.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from 2001 in-
cluding Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta,
from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia,
from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.  5 Euro area countries (current
composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-19.  6 Euro area countries (cur-
rent composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-42.

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website. In addition, the new Statistical Series 
provide a new basic structure and advanced options for using data and are also available 
on the Bundesbank’s website.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
A list of the articles published in the period from 
2010 to 2021 is available on the Bundesbank’s 
website.
Monthly Report articles
February 2022
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2022
– Monetary policy in a prolonged period of 
low interest rates – a discussion of the con -
cept of the reversal rate
– German balance of payments in 2021
April 2022
– Potential macroeconomic consequences of 
the war in Ukraine – simulations based on a 
severe risk scenario– Development of the debt situation in the 
euro area private non- financial sector since 
the outbreak of the COVID-  19 pandemic
– Central government’s debt brake: options for 
stability- oriented further development
– Demand for euro banknotes issued by the 
Bundesbank: current developments
May 2022
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2022
– Outlook for the German economy for 2022 
to 2024
– Pension insurance scheme: long- term scen -
arios and reform options
– Inflation-  induced bracket creep in the in -
come tax scale
– Public finances in the euro area: current de -
velopments and  challenges
– The Bundesbank’s surveys of firms – applica -
tions for assessing the financial situation in 
the corporate sector
July 2022
– Distributional Wealth Accounts for house -
holds in Germany – results and use cases
– Factors influencing international portfolio 
flowsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
85•

– Cross- border interoperability of central bank 
digital currency
– Government debt in the euro area: develop -
ments in creditor structure
August 2022
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2022
– Negative interest rate policy period and 
pandemic  as reflected in the Bank Lending 
Survey
– Productivity effects of reallocation in the cor -
porate sector during the COVID-  19 crisis
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2021
– The role of the International Monetary Fund 
in preventing and managing crises
October 2022
– State government finances in 2021: Surplus   
and additional reserves from emergency bor -
rowing
– Member States’ financial relationships with 
the EU budget and the Next Generation EU 
off-budget entity in 2021
– The validity of interest parity in times of crisis
– Market conditions for Bunds in the context 
of monetary policy purchases and height -
ened uncertainty
November 2022
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, January 20221,2
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
January 20222
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131
Discussion Paperso
27/ 2022  
The impact of weight shifts on inflation: Evi -
dence for the euro area HICP28/ 2022  
Smart or smash? The effect of financial sanc -
tions on trade in goods and services
29/2022  
Information transmission between banks and 
the market for corporate control
30/2022  
Loan pricing in internal capital markets and the 
impact of the two-tier system – Finance groups 
in Germany
31/2022  
A review of some recent developments in 
the  modelling and seasonal adjustment of 
infra-monthly time series
32/ 2022  
New facts on consumer price rigidity in the euro 
area
33/ 2022  
Going below zero – How do banks react?
34/ 2022  
Global monetary and financial spillovers: Evi -
dence from a new measure of Bundesbank pol -
icy shocks
35/2022  
Robust real-time estimates of the German out -
put gap based on a multivariate trend-cycle de -
composition
36/2022  
The impact of natural disasters on banks‘ im -
pairment flow – Evidence from Germany
37/2022  
Basel III and SME bank finance in Germany
38/2022  
The effects of sanctions on Russian banks in 
TARGET2 transactions data
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
87•

39/2022  
The Eurosystem‘s asset purchase programmes, 
securities lending and Bund specialness
40/ 2022  
Determinants of TARGET2 transactions of Euro -
pean banks based on micro- data
41/ 2022  
Who creates and who bears flow externalities 
in mutual funds?
42/ 2022  
Robust real rate rules
43/ 2022  
The global financial cycle and macroeconomic 
tail risks
44/ 2022  
Chinese supply chain shocksBanking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, 
January  20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2022  
88•

