Monthly Report
May 2022
Vol. 74  
No 5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 33512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 a.m. on 20 May 2022.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
The possible longer- term impact of the Ukraine war on the Russian economy  ...................  15
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  24
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  25
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  37
Holder structure and free float of Federal securities  ............................................................  40
Do financial sanctions against Russian banks affect payments? Evidence from the 
German  TARGET2 component  .............................................................................................  48
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  57
Supply bottlenecks likely to weigh on industrial production for quite some time  ................  58
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  70Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
5

Overview
War and supply bottlenecks 
weighing on economic 
recovery  and driving inflation
The consequences of Russia’s war of aggres -
sion against Ukraine, which began at the end 
of February 2022, are weighing on the global 
economy. Activity is being throttled in particu -
lar by the surge in the prices of numerous com -
modities, which is driving up enterprises’ pro -
duction costs and diminishing households’ pur -
chasing power. Heightened uncertainty about 
the availability of key raw materials and inter -
mediate inputs is adding to the gloom sur -
rounding the business climate. This is affecting 
a number of European countries in particular 
that are heavily dependent on Russian energy 
supplies.  March also saw the disruptions to 
international supply chains flare up again, after 
having previously faded into the background 
somewhat. Given the strict measures intro -
duced in China to combat the spread of the 
coronavirus, these problems could become 
considerably more acute in the near future.
Following the start of the war, the prices of fos -
sil fuels as well as some industrial metals and 
food, of which Russia and Ukraine are among 
the world’s most significant producers, in -
creased abruptly. This was mainly on account 
of concerns about future supply stoppages and 
embargo measures. After it became clear that 
energy commodities would initially be largely 
exempt from western sanctions, and with Rus -
sian commodity exports falling only moderately 
to date, prices declined again sizeably for the 
most part. Food prices, however, especially 
those for wheat and corn, continued to rise 
until this report went to press.
In combination with the strong price pressures 
at upstream stages of production, the high en -
ergy and food prices played a major role in the 
further considerable increase in consumer 
prices across the globe. In the industrial coun -tries, annual consumer price inflation reached 
7.6% in April, its highest level in more than 40 
years. The narrower core definition of inflation, 
excluding energy and food, continued to climb 
as well, reaching 5.0%. In view of persistently 
high prices for commodities, transport services 
and other intermediate goods, consumer prices 
are likely to keep rising sharply in the coming 
months.
Financial markets concerned 
over rising inflation rates and 
war against Ukraine
Mounting inflation concerns and the war 
against Ukraine also shaped developments in 
global financial markets in recent weeks. Given 
higher inflation rates and expectations, bond 
market yields rose markedly worldwide, also 
against the backdrop of key central banks 
pushing to recalibrate monetary policy. For ex -
ample, the UK and US central banks further 
tightened their monetary policy stance by re -
peatedly raising their policy rates. In addition, 
the Federal Reserve announced that, starting in 
June 2022, it would reduce its holdings of 
assets purchased under monetary policy pur -
chase programmes. The Bank of Japan, by con -
trast, pledged to stick to its policy of keeping 
yields low. The war against Ukraine added to 
the inflation concerns that had already been 
worrying market participants, not least on ac -
count of the considerably higher energy prices; 
the conflict ultimately also stoked expectations 
of a faster adjustment of the monetary policy 
stance. Moreover, the war increased uncer -
tainty surrounding the economic outlook. This 
culminated in growing financial market volatil -
ity and a sharp but brief slump in stock prices. 
Significantly stronger headwinds on the stock 
exchanges came from the higher interest rate 
level. Overall, European and US stocks have de -
clined substantially in value in the year to date. 
In foreign exchange markets, the feared eco -War against 
Ukraine and 
anti- coronavirus 
measures in 
China straining 
the global 
economy 
Perceptible rise 
in commodity 
prices since the 
start of the 
war …
… and, as a 
result, stronger 
consumer price 
inflationFinancial market 
developments 
influenced by 
rising inflation 
rates, war 
against Ukraine 
and less accom -
modative mon -
etary policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
6

nomic fallout from the war and expectations 
concerning differences in the pace of monetary 
policy adjustment in the major currency areas 
pushed down the euro’s exchange rate.
The end of the extremely expansionary monet -
ary policy drew closer in the euro area, too. In 
March, the Governing Council of the ECB de -
cided to scale back purchases under the asset 
purchase programme (APP) more rapidly over 
the course of the second quarter than had 
been planned in December. April saw the ECB 
Governing Council conclude that the net pur -
chases could be discontinued in the third quar -
ter. The ECB Governing Council also amended 
its forward guidance on policy rates. According 
to the new wording, the Governing Council 
will make any adjustments to the key ECB inter -
est rates “some time” after the end of the net 
asset purchases under the APP . With this new 
wording, the Governing Council is maintaining 
optionality in terms of the timing of its first 
interest rate moves. This also includes the pos -
sibility of making the first increase in key inter -
est rates very soon after the end of the net pur -
chases under the APP . Recent statements by 
numerous members of the Governing Council 
have given a significant push to corresponding 
market expectations of a first interest rate hike, 
with markets currently anticipating the first 
move in July and pricing in four 25- basis- point 
increases by the end of the year.
The broad monetary aggregate M3 grew sig -
nificantly in the first quarter of 2022 as well. 
However, growth continued to lose momen -
tum compared to the strong inflows of the pre -
ceding quarters. This was due to the reduction 
in net asset purchases under the pandemic 
emergency purchase programme (PEPP), which 
were discontinued in March, as planned. At the 
same time, lending to the domestic private sec -
tor continued to rise sharply in the first quarter, 
primarily in the form of loans to households for 
house purchase, but also as loans to non-  
financial corporations. The expectation of rising 
bank lending rates is likely to have been an im -
portant driver of the buoyant demand for credit. The banks responding to the Bank Lend -
ing Survey (BLS) reported that they had tight -
ened credit standards for loans to enterprises 
again somewhat in the first quarter, for the first 
time in a year.
Strong recovery that would 
have been expected in the 
German economy from spring 
onwards significantly 
weakened 
Economic activity in Germany picked up slightly 
in the first quarter of 2022, after declining 
somewhat in the final quarter of 2021. Accord -
ing to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash esti -
mate, real gross domestic product (GDP) was 
0.2% up on the quarter after seasonal adjust -
ment. Construction provided a strong boost, 
helped by the mild weather conditions. On the 
back of a good start to the year, industrial out -
put also increased somewhat on the quarter. 
The effects of Russia’s war on Ukraine have 
been weighing considerably on the economy 
since the start of the conflict, however. Supply 
bottlenecks flared up again in industry and 
construction, after having arguably eased 
somewhat at the beginning of the quarter. The 
sharp rise in energy prices, too, will have damp -
ened output. Exports declined sharply in March 
and were also well below the previous quar -
ter’s level in the first quarter of 2022 as a 
whole. High energy prices also exacerbated the 
already high rate of price increase, diminishing 
the purchasing power of household incomes. 
This depressed private consumption, which 
was impaired further by the pandemic and the 
associated containment measures. By contrast, 
construction investment and investment in ma -
chinery and equipment are likely to have in -
creased, despite the supply bottlenecks.
This is also borne out by German banks’ con -
tinued robust lending to households and non- 
financial corporations. Household demand for 
loans, especially those for house purchase, re -Monetary 
policy : ECB Gov -
erning Council 
signals prospect 
of swifter nor -
malisation
Monetary 
growth flagging 
furtherGerman econ -
omy weighed 
down by pan -
demic, high 
inflation and the 
Russian attack 
on Ukraine in 
Q1 2022
Robust uptick in 
German banks’ 
loans to domes -
tic private sectorDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
7

mained strong. In addition to their income and 
asset situation, which remains favourable, 
households’ desire to lock in interest rates 
played a role here. Demand for loans was again 
high on the part of enterprises, too. The bor -
rowed funds were used for the short-  term 
bridging of unplanned financing needs for in -
ventories and working capital and to fund fixed 
investment.
The German labour market developed excep -
tionally favourably in the first quarter of 2022. 
Employment expanded strongly and unemploy -
ment continued to decline markedly. In con -
trast to the number of hours worked per em -
ployee, which likely remains depressed, both 
indicators were back to where they had been 
just before the outbreak of the pandemic. 
However, this also saw the return of the labour 
shortages seen in pre- crisis times. The factors 
weighing on economic activity in the first quar -
ter – the strong spread of the Omicron variant 
and, most recently, Russia’s invasion of 
Ukraine – are more likely to have had an ad -
verse impact on actual hours worked by em -
ployees and labour productivity. Short- time 
work for economic reasons increased again 
somewhat, for instance. Nevertheless, the lead -
ing labour market indicators remained optimis -
tic for the coming months after having been 
briefly shaken by the outbreak of war.
Negotiated wages recorded significantly 
stronger increases in the first quarter of 2022 
than in the final quarter of 2021, rising by 4.4% 
on the year mainly as a result of high one- off 
payments and coronavirus bonuses. By con -
trast, after adjustment for such one- off pay -
ments, basic remuneration was up by only 
1.6%. Actual earnings are likely to have risen 
even more steeply than negotiated wages in 
the first quarter, mainly on account of the 
marked decline in short- time work compared 
with the previous year.
At present, the growth in negotiated wages is 
still being influenced by existing collective 
agreements that had been concluded in a set -ting of lower inflation rates and pandemic-  
related challenges. New agreements made in 
the first quarter, too, were still moderate for 
the most part, despite the sharp rise in infla -
tion. Upcoming wage negotiations could, on 
the one hand, see the uncertainty surrounding 
future economic growth and concerns about 
potential job losses dampening wage increases 
somewhat. On the other hand, the persistently 
high inflation rates and mounting labour mar -
ket shortages will probably contribute to mark -
edly more substantial wage settlements than in 
the recent past. It should be borne in mind 
here that the increased prices for largely im -
ported fossil fuels narrow the scope for income 
distribution in Germany.
Consumer prices experienced another steep 
rise at the beginning of the year. In the first 
quarter of 2022, inflation as measured by the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) 
stood at 2.8% on the quarter after seasonal 
adjustment. This was the strongest quarterly in -
crease in prices in Germany since the beginning 
of monetary union. Energy prices picked up at 
a particularly rapid pace. Moreover, food price 
inflation and the inflation rate for non- energy 
industrial goods grew considerably as a result 
of new supply bottlenecks. Looking at the year- 
on- year figures, the inflation rate rose signifi -
cantly in the first quarter of 2022, from 5.4% to 
6.1%. By comparison, core inflation excluding 
volatile energy and food components came to 
3.1%. It was therefore lower than in the previ -
ous quarter, when the price- driving effect of 
the expiry of the VAT cut was still being re -
corded.
In April, prices after seasonal adjustment in -
creased considerably on the month, albeit not 
at the exceptional pace seen in March. This 
was chiefly attributable to energy prices, which 
eased slightly following a sharp rise in the pre -
vious month. Compared with the previous year, 
headline inflation came to 7.8%, up from 7.6% 
in March. Similarly high rates were last ob -
served in the former West Germany during the 
first Gulf War at the beginning of the 1980s. Employment 
and unemploy -
ment barely 
touched by 
strains on the 
economy
Negotiated 
wages rose con -
siderably in Q1 
due to high one- 
off payments; 
actual earnings 
probably rose 
substantially as 
wellWage agree -
ments still mod -
erate so far, but 
distinctly larger 
wage increases 
possible in com -
ing months
Inflation picked 
up significantly 
in Q1 …
… and is likely 
to remain high 
for the time 
beingDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
8

Given this strong rate of upstream inflation, 
from today’s perspective average inflation for 
the current year is expected to sit at around 
7%. That said, uncertainty about the price out -
look is particularly high at present.
As things stand today, German economic out -
put is likely to increase slightly, if at all, in the 
second quarter of 2022. This is due to the inter -
play of strong but opposing forces. On the one 
hand, the easing of the measures to protect 
against the coronavirus is likely to provide a 
major boost to services sectors and the related 
consumer spending. On the other hand, the re -
percussions of Russia’s attack on Ukraine are 
exacerbating the pressures exerted by high in -
flation and supply bottlenecks. They are also 
giving rise to further negative effects and will 
probably considerably weaken the strong re -
covery that had previously been anticipated. 
Household consumption will be dampened by 
the high level of inflation and by the uncer -
tainty about how the conflict will evolve. High 
energy and material costs and the heightened 
uncertainty are also weighing on output in the 
industrial sector and in construction. Supply 
chains are once again coming under significant 
strain on account of the Ukraine war and 
COVID-  19 lockdowns in China. Exports are also 
likely to remain markedly below the level of the 
first quarter due to disruptions in foreign trade 
and lower foreign demand as a result of the 
war’s impact.
Outlook for public finances 
in the current year and in the 
medium term
Fiscal policy is currently responding to the fall -
out, in terms of defence, energy and social pol -
icy, from the Russian war of aggression. The 
Federal Government is planning to step up de -
fence spending, for example. Other measures 
aim to shield households and enterprises to a 
degree from the steeply rising energy costs. As -
sistance packages for refugees and for Ukraine 
are another factor. The measures are to be financed by new borrowing, which is why it 
looks like deficits will be higher than antici -
pated as recently as the start of the year.
Uncertainty is, once again, very high. From to -
day’s perspective, though, the general govern -
ment deficit is likely to decline significantly in 
this year and the next (2021: deficit ratio 3.7%). 
This assumes that the fallout from the war re -
mains limited and that the coronavirus crisis 
does not flare up again. In that scenario, the 
coronavirus response measures and the new 
temporary assistance will probably expire and 
the economy could be expected to recover.
The coming years are likely to see substantial 
structural deficits, mainly on account of central 
government. Although the Federal Govern -
ment announced that compliance with the 
debt brake would resume from 2023 onwards, 
it is planning to use the extensive general re -
serve, which will result in a correspondingly 
higher deficit. Additional extensive deficits are 
expected in the special funds. These will affect, 
in particular, the planned new special fund for 
the German armed forces and the Energy and 
Climate Fund (ECF). The additional leeway for 
deficits in the special funds as well as from the 
core budget reserves amounts to around €230 
billion in total (currently 6% of GDP). That lee -
way is likely to be all but fully utilised up to 
2026, meaning that the deficits could be al -
most 1½% of GDP higher between 2023 and 
2026 than without that scope.
Central government created the broad leeway 
for deficits from 2023 onwards partly out of 
emergency borrowing from 2020 and 2021, 
using this primarily to top up the ECF, for ex -
ample. The resources will be used to fund 
climate   change mitigation measures for some 
years. However, the Federal Constitutional 
Court is currently assessing whether emergency 
borrowing from 2021 can be rolled over. In the 
current year, additional emergency borrowing 
is also planned for measures relating to the 
Russian war against Ukraine. There would need 
to be good reasons why the individual meas -Economic out -
put likely to 
increase slightly 
in Q2 at best; 
boost produced 
by easing of 
coronavirus 
protection  
measures coun -
terbalanced by 
impact of 
Ukraine war
Fiscal policy 
response to 
fallout  from 
Russian  war of 
aggressionSignificant 
decline in deficit 
anticipated 
nonetheless
Central govern -
ment expected 
to see substan -
tial structural 
deficits in the 
medium term
Broad leeway 
for deficits due 
to broad inter -
pretation of the 
escape clauseDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
9

ures are suited to overcoming the emergency 
situation. It would also have to be explained 
why, in the current economic setting, these 
need to be funded out of additional emergency 
borrowing (instead of counterfinancing them 
or using the reserve, which currently totals just 
under €50 billion).
Fiscal policy in a difficult 
economic  environment
Government budgets are a key anchor of sta -
bility in times of crisis. That said, there is no 
compelling case for a large credit- financed fis -
cal stimulus at the current juncture, particularly 
in view of the high price inflation and supply 
bottlenecks. In an economic situation such as 
this, additional credit- financed demand im -
pulses have smaller real effects and tend to in -
crease price pressures, if anything.
The objectives of energy policy are to make 
Germany independent of Russian energy sup -
plies as soon as possible and to achieve net zero carbon emissions over the long term. Price 
signals support these aims efficiently by indicat -
ing shortages and triggering important adjust -
ment reactions. Government measures that re -
duce energy prices in the short term counteract 
the desired adjustment process, meanwhile.
In the current situation, low-  income house -
holds need government protection. Means-  
tested measures such as the one- off payments 
for low earners can provide targeted relief 
here. The one- off energy price allowance will 
also benefit lower- income individuals to a 
greater degree. This allowance is a broader-  
based measure, however, given that all persons 
in employment will receive this amount, which 
is subject to taxation. Other parts of the since- 
adopted package of measures for households 
clash with the energy policy objectives to a de -
gree. Targeted transfer, guarantee and loan 
programmes are planned for distressed enter -
prises. What is important is that these pro -
grammes preserve the incentive for enterprises 
to rapidly cut back their use of fossil fuels and 
to turn to renewable sources of energy.In a scenario of 
supply bottle -
necks, credit- 
financed 
impulses pro -
duce smaller 
real effects and 
increased price 
pressures
Let price signals 
take effectTargeted sup -
port for house -
holds and firms 
without hinder -
ing transform -
ationDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
10

Global and European setting
Global economic 
developments 
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which began at 
the end of February 2022, has been a drag on 
the global economy. Activity is being throttled 
in particular by the surge in the prices of nu -
merous commodities, which is driving up en -
terprises’ production costs and eroding house -
holds’ purchasing power. Heightened uncer -
tainty about the availability of key commodities 
and intermediate inputs is adding to the gloom 
surrounding the business climate. The impact 
of the conflict on global economic activity is 
only likely to become fully apparent as the year 
unfolds. Nevertheless, economic dynamics 
were already quite weak in the first quarter of 
2022. One factor in this was the spread of the 
Omicron variant of the coronavirus, which was 
a temporary drag on economic activity in many 
places. Against this backdrop, gross domestic 
product (GDP) in the euro area continued to 
only see muted growth. In the United States 
and Japan, economic output even declined 
slightly. The United Kingdom, by contrast, saw 
a marked expansion of GDP . In China, eco -
nomic activity also continued to increase quite 
strongly, as the Omicron wave did not reach 
large parts of the country until the end of the 
quarter.
The strict measures taken in China against the 
spread of the Omicron variant and the Russian 
war against Ukraine are jeopardising the up -
swing in global industry.  March already saw 
disruptions to international supply chains flare 
up again, after having previously faded into the 
background somewhat. The European automo -
tive industry suffered production stoppages due to a lack of intermediate inputs from 
Ukraine. There were also signs of shortages in 
some of those industrial raw materials which 
are mainly produced in Russia and Ukraine. 
Owing to China’s central position in cross-  
border value chains, business closures and lo -
gistical problems there could cause major dis -
ruptions worldwide.1 According to the latest 
surveys of purchasing managers, price pres -
sures at upstream stages of production have in -
tensified. These pressures are themselves being 
caused by the already significant increases in 
the prices of a large number of commodities at 
the beginning of the war.
Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the 
prices of fossil fuels as well as of some indus -
trial metals and those foods of which Russia 
and Ukraine are among the world’s most sig -Outlook for 
global economy 
severely clouded 
by the war in 
Ukraine
Increasing 
burdens  on 
global industrial 
production Sharp rise in 
commodity 
prices since the 
start of the war
Global economic indicators*
Sources: CPB, national data, Haver Analytics and Bundesbank 
calculations. * Groups of countries vary due to differences in 
data  availability.  1 Bundesbank  aggregate  of  national  data, 
based on the number of units.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 2022859095100105110Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
405060708090100110120
Reduced scale
Passenger car 
production1Industrial production
e
e
1 Empirical studies on the role of China in the slump in pro -
duction observed in the EU and the United States in spring 
2020 suggest that production in industries highly depend -
ent on Chinese supplies fell significantly more sharply in 
March and April 2020 than in other industries. See 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021) as well as Khalil and Weber 
(2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
11

nificant producers surged.2 This was mainly on 
account of concerns about future delivery stop -
pages and embargo measures. With the supply 
situation already strained, the price of Brent 
crude oil climbed by more than one- third in the 
space of a few days to just under US$134 per 
barrel, its highest level in 14 years. European 
natural gas prices, which had already risen very 
sharply in the months before, almost tripled 
temporarily in comparison to pre- war levels. 
Much the same thing happened with coal 
prices. After it became clear, however, that en -
ergy commodities would initially be largely ex -
empt from western sanctions, and with Russian 
commodity exports falling only moderately to 
date, most prices came back down again sig -
nificantly. Growing concerns about Chinese de -
mand in relation to their zero- COVID policy 
also played a role in the decline in prices.3 So 
far, in May, prices for crude oil (at US$110 per 
barrel) and European natural gas had exceeded 
their levels before the war by around 13% and 
9%, respectively. Prices for industrial raw ma -
terials such as palladium, nickel and aluminium 
also rose, in some cases significantly, at the be -
ginning of the war, before more recently falling 
below their pre- war levels on balance. By con -
trast, food prices, particularly those for wheat 
and corn, continued to rise until recently and 
were, on the whole, close to their all- time high 
at the time this report went to press.
High energy and food prices were a driving 
force behind the renewed sharp rise in con -
sumer price inflation around the world. In the 
advanced economies, annual consumer price 
inflation reached 7.6% by April, its highest level 
in more than 40 years. The narrower core def -
inition of inflation, which strips out energy and 
food, continued to climb as well, reaching 
5.0%. In view of persistently high prices for 
commodities, transport services and other Increased 
consumer  price 
inflationCommodity prices
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Haver Analytics and HWWI. 
• Latest figures: Average of 1 to 13 May 2022, or 1 to 19 May 
2022 for crude oil and natural gas. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 22203040507090120Monthly averages, log scale
51020305070100150
Natural gas (TTF)
in euro per MWh
2018 = 100, US$ basisCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
70100130160
Industrial commodities
80100150200
Food and beverages
Sources: Bundesbank calculations based on national data. * EU, 
Japan, Canada, Norway, Switzerland, the United States and the 
United Kingdom. 1 Consumer prices excluding energy and food; 
additionally excluding alcoholic beverages and tobacco products 
for the EU, Norway, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.
Deutsche BundesbankConsumer prices in industrial countries*
012345678
++++++++Year-on-year percentage change
2018 2019 2020 2021 22Total Core rate1
2 For information on the importance of Russia as a com -
modity exporter, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2022) pp. 18 f.
3 The release of record high quantities of strategic oil re -
serves in some producing countries, especially the United 
States, also dampened crude oil prices. See International 
Energy Agency (2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
12

intermediate goods, consumer prices are likely 
to keep rising sharply in the coming months.
Against this background, the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) significantly raised its in -
flation forecast for advanced economies for the 
current year and again stressed the upside risks 
to this outlook.4 At the same time, the IMF 
lowered its global growth forecast for 2022 by 
0.8 percentage point to 3.6%. This was mainly 
due to the war in Ukraine and the western 
sanctions against Russia, which are likely to 
plunge the Russian economy into a severe re -
cession. Moreover, the outlook deteriorated 
particularly sharply for those European coun -
tries that are closely economically intercon -
nected with Russia or Ukraine owing to their 
geographical proximity or are heavily depend -
ent on Russian energy supplies. For the United 
States and China, the IMF reduced its GDP 
forecasts only slightly, despite country- specific 
factors such as the expected tightening of 
monetary policy in the United States and the 
strict zero- COVID strategy in China.
China
For several weeks now, the Chinese economy 
has been severely affected by strict anti-  
coronavirus measures. The cities of Shenzhen 
and Shanghai, with 18 and 26 million inhabit -
ants, respectively, have been in a hard lock -
down for weeks. The containment measures 
had only a tentative impact on economic out -
put in the first quarter. According to official 
data, real GDP growth even accelerated mark -
edly to 4.8% on the year.5
However, as the Chinese government con -
tinues to pursue its rigorous zero- COVID policy 
in the fight against the virus, a strong dampen -
ing effect on economic output in the second 
quarter is to be expected. Private consumption, 
in particular, is set to decline significantly. Chi -
nese exports are also likely to feel the effects. 
Although the authorities have tried to allow in -
dustrial and port facilities to continue to oper -ate, there have already been considerable pro -
duction and transport disruptions. This is also 
likely to impair global supply chains over the 
next few months. In view of the severe strain 
the economy is under, the authorities have an -
nounced economic stimulus measures. No 
major monetary policy stimuli have been used 
so far, however, although China was one of the 
few countries in which the rise in consumer 
prices has not accelerated in recent months. In 
April, the year- on- year rate of inflation was IMF raises its 
inflation forecast 
for 2022 
significantly 
Economy suffer -
ing from strict 
anti- coronavirus 
measures for 
several weeks
Marked 
dampening  
effect on eco -
nomic output in 
the second 
quarter likelyComposite Purchasing Managers' Indices 
in selected large emerging market 
economies
Source: S&P Global.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 20222030405060Seasonally adjusted, monthly data
India
Brazil0102030405060
Russia2030405060
102030405060China
4 See International Monetary Fund (2022).
5 Compared with the previous period, real GDP rose by a 
seasonally adjusted 1.3%, which was slightly less than in 
the final quarter of 2021.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
13

2.1%; excluding energy and food, it was as little  
as 0.9%.
Other selected emerging 
market  economies
India’s economic upturn continued in the first 
quarter of 2022, although the new coronavirus 
wave at the beginning of the year is likely to 
have slowed growth somewhat. In the final 
quarter of 2021, real GDP had already once 
again clearly exceeded its pre- pandemic level. 
The export industry has become an important 
driver of growth in recent quarters, having 
benefited from, among other things, some 
large multinational enterprises relocating to 
India. In the first quarter of 2022, goods ex -
ports (in US dollar terms) exceeded the level at 
the start of the pandemic by just under one-  
half. Consumer price inflation increased mark -
edly to 7.8% in April against the backdrop of 
higher food prices. The central bank therefore 
raised its policy rate at the beginning of May 
for the first time since 2018, by 40 basis points 
to 4.4%.
Economic activity in Brazil is likely to have re -
mained anaemic in the first quarter of 2022. 
Real GDP has been more or less stagnant since 
as early as the beginning of 2021. Economic 
output has recently slightly exceeded pre- crisis 
levels, yet private consumption is still lagging 
significantly behind. This is also due to the fact 
that real disposable income fell significantly last 
year, owing to the sharp rise in prices. Con -
sumer price inflation has continued to acceler -
ate in recent months, reaching 12.1% in April. 
The central bank has therefore continued to 
tighten its monetary policy. Since February 
2021, it has already raised its policy rate by a 
total of almost 11 percentage points to 12.75% 
at the end of the period under review.
Russia’s economy is facing a severe recession 
owing to the consequences of the Russian in -
vasion of Ukraine. Economic sanctions imposed 
by western countries, such as the exclusion of Russian banks from the international payment 
system SWIFT or restrictions on the export of 
high- tech goods to Russia, have had a particu -
larly significant impact. Russian industry has 
thus been cut off from important foreign inter -
mediate goods.6 In addition, many foreign en -
terprises have ceased business with Russia on 
their own initiative. Oil and gas exports, the 
main pillar of the Russian economy, have so far 
only been partially affected by sanctions and 
voluntary boycotts. The sharp rise in energy 
prices is actually gifting Russia with exception -
ally high foreign exchange revenue at present. 
This is another reason why the rouble has more 
than made up for its initially sharp losses in 
value. In the future, however, Russian energy 
exports are also likely to suffer considerable 
losses, especially if sanctions are expanded. All 
in all, Russia is thus at risk of large welfare 
losses over the longer term (see the box on 
pp.  15f.). Consumer price inflation surged in 
the first weeks of the war. Given the subse -
quent stabilisation of the rouble, however, the 
inflation rate increased only slightly to 17.8% in 
April. This allowed the central bank to lower its 
policy rate, which it had raised substantially to 
20% at the beginning of the war, to 14% at 
the end of the period under review.
United States
In the first quarter of 2022, the economic up -
turn in the United States halted for the first 
time since the end of the pandemic- induced re -
cession. According to initial estimates, GDP fell 
by 0.4% on the quarter after price and sea -
sonal adjustment. Nevertheless, the underlying 
cyclical trend would appear to be intact. Private 
domestic final demand, often used as a yard -
stick for said trend, expanded rapidly. House -
holds increased their consumption again, des -
pite considerable losses in purchasing power as 
a result of the sharp rise in prices. In fact, after Further recovery 
in India
Economic 
activity  in Brazil 
remains listless
Russia facing 
severe economic 
crisis as a result 
of western 
sanctions Q1 decline in 
GDP likely only 
temporary
6 According to official Russian data, industrial production 
was still fairly robust in March. However, major difficulties 
in the production process are likely to arise once inventor -
ies of intermediate goods have been exhausted.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
14

The possible longer- term impact of the Ukraine war on the 
Russian economy
Russia’s economy faces a severe crisis owing 
to the far- reaching sanctions imposed by 
western countries and decisions by many 
foreign enterprises to sever their trading 
relation ships with Russia or cease doing 
business in the Russian market. The Inter-
national Monetary Fund (IMF), writing in 
the April 2022 edition of its World Eco-
nomic Outlook, forecasts that real gross do-
mestic product (GDP) will shrink by 8.5% 
this year. Other institutions are predicting 
that the decline will be signifi  cantly heavier 
still.1 For the coming year, the IMF is ex-
pecting the downward movement to con-
tinue, albeit at a much slower pace. The 
scale of the looming recession is thus likely 
to far eclipse even the sharp decline in GDP 
seen during the global fi  nancial crisis of 
2009.
While the economic downturn back then 
came in the wake of a protracted and 
robust  upswing, Russia’s economy was 
already  lethargic before the current crisis 
occurred, with real GDP growing by a 
meagre 0.9% per year on average between 
2013 and 2021. Measured in terms of US 
dollars and current prices, economic output 
per capita even declined markedly, shrink-
ing from US$15,900 to US$12,200. One 
notable factor behind this loss of income 
was the signifi  cant drop in the price of oil, 
and thus in Russia’s export revenues, during 
this period.2
To reduce its reliance on energy exports, 
the Russian government has been striving 
for several years to promote industry and 
other non- commodity sectors. One meas-
ure saw the government pursue an import 
substitution policy, partly also in response 
to the economic sanctions imposed by western countries in connection with the 
annexation of Crimea in 2014. This strategy 
met with little success overall, however. In 
particular, Russia failed to build up domestic 
production operations in the high- tech sec-
tor that meet western quality standards.
Russia thus remains heavily dependent to 
this day on foreign intermediate goods, 
particularly from the EU and other ad-
vanced economies. The new export bans 
introduced by western countries and the 
supply restrictions imposed by many enter-
prises are therefore likely to hurt Russian 
industry  in particular. In a recent central 
bank survey, almost 40% of industrial en-
terprises reported that they were fi  nding it 
diffi   cult to source alternative suppliers.3 Sur-
veys among purchasing managers, further-
more, indicate that delivery times for inter-
mediate goods in manufacturing have in-
creased sharply, which is a sign that fi  rms 
are experiencing considerable supply chain 
problems. Russian exporters, meanwhile, 
need to scout for new sales markets and 
logis tical opportunities. Overall, Russian 
industry  faces the prospect of severe effi   -
ciency losses and technological regression 
now that the country has been largely os-
tracised from the international community.
1 The Bank of Russia, too, is expecting GDP to contract 
by between 8% and 10% this year. See Bank of Russia 
(2022).
2 The price of oil plummeted between mid- 2014 and 
early 2016 as the United States stepped up the pro-
duction of shale oil, and it did not make a full recovery. 
See Deutsche Bundesbank (2016) for the impact of the 
oil price slump on the Russian economy.
3 Russian fi  rms are likely to step up their efforts to 
source supplies from Asia over the medium and long 
term. Whether and to what extent trading partners 
there are willing to do business with them is question-
able, however. China, in particular, is unlikely to want 
to run the risk of undermining western sanctions. See 
Simola (2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
15

Services was home to a small number of up 
and coming business areas before the war 
broke out, such as the IT sector and fi  nance. 
They, too, are likely to face stiff headwinds. 
Recent years have already seen an exodus 
of highly skilled workers from Russia,4 and 
the brain drain looks set to increase further 
because of the war in Ukraine. Reports sug-
gest that tens of thousands of IT specialists 
have turned their backs on Russia since the 
confl  ict erupted.
All these challenges would suggest that the 
Russian economy’s reliance on oil and gas 
exports in the coming years will arguably be 
even greater than it is today. But with many 
buyers exercising restraint, Russia is cur-
rently having to grant hefty price discounts 
on its oil exports.5 In addition, the subdued 
demand may soon leave Russia with no 
choice but to signifi  cantly cut its oil produc-
tion. The latest forecast by the Oxford Insti-
tute for Energy Studies (2022) indicates that 
oil production is likely to decline from the 
pre- war level of 11 million barrels per day 
(mb/ d) to around 9 mb/ d by the end of 
2022. The planned EU embargo could even 
push this fi  gure down to less than 7 mb/ d 
by year- end.6Russia’s gas deliveries are more focused 
than even its oil exports on Europe as a 
sales market. Only a very small fraction of 
Russian gas exports are currently routed via 
pipelines to China, and the major Western 
Siberian Yamal gas fi  elds that supply Europe 
are not even linked up with Asia yet. That 
situation would only change when the 
proposed  additional pipeline (Power of 
Siberia  2) goes into operation. However, the 
negotiations between China and Russia on 
the terms and conditions of construction 
are likely to last a few years yet. This con-
trasts with plans by Germany –  currently 
Russia’s most important gas customer – to 
wean itself off Russian gas by 2024 at the 
latest. Moreover, it is unclear whether Rus-
sia will even be able to shoulder this colos-
sal infrastructure project, with all the sanc-
tions in place.
All in all, the Russian economy not only 
faces sizeable drops in activity in the short 
term but also signifi  cant scarring in the 
longer term as a result of the war. The 
structural problems that already surfaced in 
recent years will probably become consider-
ably more acute. Overall, Russia is heading 
towards a situation where it loses a consid-
erable share of its welfare on a lasting basis.
4 Offi   cial fi  gures indicate that overall, for every ten 
people who left Russia fi  fteen migrated to Russia be-
tween 2015 and 2020. However, these were mainly 
low- skilled workers from other CIS countries. Despite 
the positive migration balance, the number of people 
of working age has shrunk by around 8% since 2010. 
These demographic strains are likely to persist in the 
years ahead.
5 Russia’s Urals brand of crude oil is currently trading 
at a discount of around US$35 per barrel to the North 
Sea Brent variety.
6 This forecast seems to be based on the assumption 
that Russia will probably fi  nd it diffi   cult to ship oil ori-
ginally destined for Europe to Asia by sea. That would 
call for the mobilisation of a signifi  cant fraction of the 
global fl  eet of oil tankers. In addition, western coun-
tries are looking to clamp down on sanctions- evading 
transactions of this kind.Real GDP in Russia
Sources:  Rosstat  and  IMF.  1 World  Economic  Outlook,  April 
2022.
Deutsche Bundesbank2000 = 100, log scale
100110130150180200
2000 05 10 15 20 23IMF
forecast1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
16

price adjustment, expenditure on services ex -
ceeded pre- pandemic levels for the first time. 
Investment in private housing construction rose 
once again. Spending on new machinery and 
equipment in trade and industry even ex -
panded very considerably. There was also a 
similarly steep rise in imports. At the same time, 
the weaker global economy was reflected in a 
decline in exports. In addition, the reduced 
build- up of inventories and the further decline 
in government demand were a drag on eco -
nomic growth.
By contrast, the US labour market continued its 
recovery. The unemployment rate almost re -
turned to pre- pandemic levels. At the same 
time, numerous job openings remained vacant. 
Given the high demand for labour, wage 
growth continued to accelerate, while never -
theless remaining below the rise in consumer 
prices. Consumer price index (CPI) inflation rose 
to 8.5% in March and fell only slightly in the 
past month. Against this background, the US 
Federal Reserve tightened its monetary policy 
stance, raising its policy rate by a total of 75 
basis points in March and May.
Japan
The rebound in the Japanese economy stalled 
over the winter. According to the initial official 
estimate, real GDP in the first quarter fell by a 
seasonally adjusted 0.2% on the previous quar -
ter. Private consumption stagnated as a result 
of the rapid spread of the Omicron variant at 
the beginning of the quarter. Although 
sickness- related losses of working hours and 
renewed supply bottlenecks weighed on Jap -
anese firms at the beginning of the year, busi -
ness investment increased slightly in the first 
quarter. Imports also picked up substantially. By 
contrast, there was only a slight increase in ex -
ports. Government demand was cut back once 
again. Labour market conditions continued to 
improve. The seasonally adjusted unemploy -
ment rate declined to 2.6% by March. Annual 
CPI inflation increased to 2.5% in April,7 ex-ceeding the Japanese central bank’s inflation 
target for the first time since 2015. However, 
the central bank assessed the increase in price 
inflation as temporary and maintained its ex -
pansionary stance.
United Kingdom
The UK economy grew at a slower, but none -
theless solid pace in the first quarter of 2022. 
According to initial estimates, price and 
seasonally- adjusted GDP rose by 0.8% on the 
quarter. This was the first time that the pre-  
crisis level had been exceeded. The recovery 
was broadly based across sectors. In particular, 
high- contact services benefited from the ebb -
ing of the Omicron wave. In the hotel and res -
taurant sector, real gross value added rose by 
more than 5%. Construction activity and the 
manufacturing sector also grew more buoy -
antly at the beginning of the year than in the 
previous quarter. However, many industrial en -
terprises are increasingly complaining about 
the persistently surging prices for intermediate 
inputs as well as about supply bottlenecks and 
labour shortages. The unemployment rate fell 
to 3.7%, below the low of December 2019. 
Against this backdrop, wages rose significantly. 
Annual Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
(HICP) inflation rose sharply, reaching 9% by 
April. The Bank of England subsequently raised 
its policy rate by a further 25 basis points to 1% 
in May and announced additional tightening 
over the next few months.
Poland
Poland’s economic upswing continued in the 
first quarter of 2022. Real GDP grew by 2.4% 
after seasonal adjustment. The renewed strong Monetary policy 
turnaround 
initiated 
Slight decline in 
GDPMarked growth 
in GDP
Upswing robust 
so far
7 In addition to the rise in energy prices, one reason for 
this was the expiry of a one- off effect. The substantial re -
duction in mobile phone charges triggered by a reform in 
April 2021 had pushed down annual CPI inflation by 
1.4 percentage points in March. In April, the decline in mo -
bile phone charges dampened the inflation rate by only 
0.6 percentage point.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
17

GDP growth was mainly driven by the further 
expansion of industrial output. However, con -
sumption activity was also buoyant, with the 
very favourable labour market situation likely to 
have been one reason for this. The unemploy -
ment rate stood at just 3% in March, and gross 
average wages in the corporate sector rose by 
12.4% on the year. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine 
also represents a turning point for Poland. At 
3.7% of total exports, its share of exports to 
Russia is almost twice as high as that of Ger -
many. In addition, Poland is the main destin -
ation for refugees from Ukraine.8 However, the 
commodity crisis and the Russian gas embargo 
have not caught the country off guard. Poland 
has been in the process of reducing its energy 
dependency on Russia for years.9 Despite price- 
dampening measures introduced by the gov -
ernment, consumer price inflation increased to 
12.4% by April. Energy and food accounted for 
a considerable share of this, but the core rate 
excluding these components also rose to 7.7%. 
As a result, the Polish central bank raised its policy rate in four further increments between 
February and May by a total of 300 basis points 
to a current level of 5.25%.
Macroeconomic trends in the 
euro area
The euro area economy also grew only slightly 
in the first quarter of 2022. According to Euro -
stat’s flash estimate, GDP rose by 0.3% on the 
quarter after price and seasonal adjustment, 
thereby exceeding its pre- pandemic level by 
0.5%. At the beginning of the quarter, the 
Omicron wave, in particular, weighed on ser -
vices sector activity. Towards the end of the 
quarter, the impact of the war prevented a 
stronger recovery. As a result, parts of industry 
experienced production stoppages and private 
consumption suffered from the erosion of pur -
chasing power caused by energy prices.
In the medium term, too, the impact of the 
war on Ukraine is likely to weigh on the euro 
area economy, especially if the conflict escal -
ates further and associated sanctions and re -
taliatory measures are expanded.10 In addition 
to higher energy prices, the heightened uncer -
tainty, for example regarding the reliability of 
the energy supply, and possible supply stop -
pages for other commodities, are the main 
constraining factors. Conversely, the export 
losses in the Russian sales market are likely to 
be of lesser importance. Russia accounted for 
merely 3% of euro area goods exports in 2021.
By contrast, the burdens caused by the corona -
virus pandemic are likely to wane further. The Further slight 
increase in eco -
nomic activity
Ongoing strains 
caused by the 
war on UkraineReal GDP in selected industrial countries
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Cabinet Office of Ja-
pan,  Office  for  National  Statistics,  Statistics  Poland  and 
Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 229095100105Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, log scale
United KingdomUnited States
9095100105
9095100105
PolandJapan
80859095100
8 According to the Polish Border Guard, more than 3.2 mil -
lion refugees from Ukraine have entered Poland to date, al -
though they have by no means all remained there. In Pol -
and, Ukrainians can take up work without a work permit 
for six months within one year. In the years prior to the 
war, there were already up to 1.7 million such employment 
contracts per year.
9 Poland has had an LNG terminal for importing liquefied 
gas since 2015. Moreover, the new Baltic Pipe system is 
scheduled to be completed this year, which will allow 
pipeline- based gas imports from Norway.
10 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
18

economic impact of the Omicron wave at the 
beginning of the year was already much smaller 
than previously expected. Although, for a time, 
a considerable number of working hours were 
lost due to illness, these absences were mostly 
short- lived and the health system was not over -
whelmed as had been feared. As a result, con -
tainment measures were further eased, which 
benefited service providers in particular.
Consumption activity in the euro area remained 
subdued in the first quarter of 2022. After the 
recovery phase in the final quarter of 2021, re -
tail sales fell again in price- adjusted terms. New 
motor vehicle registrations even dropped quite 
substantially again and were down by one-  
third on their pre- pandemic level. This was 
probably partly due to supply difficulties for 
intermediate input products for motor vehicle 
production worsening again in connection 
with the Ukraine war. In any event, according 
to European Commission surveys, the propen -
sity to purchase passenger cars decreased only 
slightly. The consumption of services is also 
likely to have barely increased on a quarterly 
average, although it made a clear recovery over 
the course of the quarter once various infection 
protection measures had been eased.
A major reason for the subdued development 
of private consumption is likely to have been 
the significant deterioration in households’ 
financial situation. In the first quarter, con -
sumer prices rose by no less than 6.1% on the 
year. The increase in the wage bill is expected 
to have lagged considerably behind this. The 
various fiscal relief measures are also unlikely to 
have made up for the losses in purchasing 
power.11 As a result, consumer confidence fell 
distinctly below its long- term average until 
March, according to European Commission 
surveys.
Gross fixed capital formation is likely to have 
risen further in the first quarter.12 Construction 
output rose very robustly. The upward trend in 
investment in information and communication 
technologies and intellectual property seems to have continued. By contrast, expenditure on 
transportation probably declined. In any case, 
the number of commercial vehicle registrations 
fell very steeply again, which is likely to have 
been partly due to supply bottlenecks. By com -
parison, investment in other machinery and 
equipment probably increased markedly. In 
January and February, capital goods producers’ Pandemic- 
related burdens 
waning
Subdued 
consumption  
activity …
… also due to 
the pronounced 
losses in pur -
chasing power
Investment 
remains on 
an upward 
trajectory Aggregate output in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 2022Real GDP, Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
log scale
80859095100
758085909510080859095100
Italy
SpainEuro area
France859095100
of which:
11 See Sgaravatti et al. (2022) for an overview of the fiscal 
measures taken to cushion the increase in energy prices.
12 Excluding Ireland. For several years now, the statistical 
recording of investment as a whole, and of investment in 
intellectual property in particular, has been strongly influ -
enced by the strategic planning of multinational enterprises 
in that country. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
19

domestic sales significantly exceeded the previ -
ous quarter’s level after price adjustment.
Euro area countries’ exports of goods to third 
countries continued to increase in the first 
quarter after price adjustment. This is likely to 
have been due, in particular, to favourable 
global industrial activity at the beginning of the 
year, but also to the depreciation of the euro in 
recent months. In terms of value, goods ex -
ports even rose by a very substantial degree 
again in the light of continued surging prices. 
This was particularly true of goods exports to 
the United States. Exports to China also ex -
panded visibly. By comparison, exports to Rus -
sia declined significantly under the influence of 
the war on Ukraine. According to figures from 
the balance of payments, the recovery of ser -
vices exports from the euro area to third coun -
tries slowed markedly. One reason for this was 
probably the pandemic-induced slump in tour -
ism at the beginning of the year. Goods im -
ports to the euro area from third countries in -creased only marginally in real terms in the first 
quarter. The largest increases were consistent 
with the robust investment activity in inter -
mediate and capital goods, whilst imports of 
consumer goods declined. In terms of value, 
imports rose very sharply amidst the consider -
able price increases.
The upward movement in manufacturing con -
tinued at the beginning of the year, mainly due 
to the at times marked easing of some supply 
bottlenecks coupled with well- filled order 
books. The outbreak of the war has directly 
hampered those sectors, in particular, whose 
supply chains extend to Ukraine and Russia. 
This includes, above all, motor vehicle manu -
facturers. Moreover, the sanctions prevented 
certain products from being delivered and 
orders were not placed. In addition, the costs 
for intermediate goods continued to rise. In 
view of the heightened uncertainty, the order 
situation deteriorated somewhat. All of this 
contributed to a significant decline in industrial 
production in March. Nevertheless, capacity 
utilisation picked up slightly between January 
and April, thus continuing to exceed the long- 
term average. Industrial producer prices rose at 
a faster pace. Price inflation was especially pro -
nounced for intermediate goods but it also in -
creasingly extended to capital and consumer 
goods.
Economic output in various services sectors is 
likely to have recovered at the end of the quar -
ter. Especially hotels and restaurants as well as 
art and cultural activities widened their services 
considerably following the easing of contain -
ment measures. As businesses were still subject 
to extensive restrictions at the beginning of the 
year, on a quarterly average the previous quar -
ter’s level was probably just maintained. By 
contrast, various business- related services are 
likely to have expanded further. Activity in the 
information and communications sector in -
creased particularly significantly once more.
In most Member States, economic output in -
creased in the first quarter of 2022. The main Goods trade 
with third 
countries  sees 
strong growth 
given surging 
pricesSituation in 
manufacturing 
strained again 
recently
Service providers 
see slight recov -
ery at the end of 
the quarterConsumer sentiment in the euro area*
Source: European Commission. * Deviations from the respective 
average since 2000. 1 Response to the question: “In view of 
the general economic situation, do you think that now it is the 
right moment for people to make major purchases?”
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 22–20–100+10201001020
––++Balance of positive and negative responses as a percentage 
of all responses, seasonally adjusted, monthly data
Current propensity to make 
major purchases1Financial situation of households 
over next 12 monthsConsumer confidence
30201001020
–––++Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
20

factors behind the remaining growth disparities 
were the effects of the last wave of the pan -
demic, the impact of the war on Ukraine and 
sanctions on Russia.
In France, real GDP in the first quarter stag -
nated at the previous quarter’s level. The de -
cline in private consumption, in particular, was 
a drag. Especially at the beginning of the quar -
ter, the consumption of services was restricted 
against the backdrop of the resurgent infection 
rates. The consumption of goods likewise de -
clined significantly. This is likely to have been 
partly due to greater price pressures despite the 
energy price brake. Investment remained on a 
moderate upward trajectory, by contrast. Al -
though services exports rose markedly once 
more, the pandemic is likely to have distinctly 
slowed business activity in the tourism sector. 
Growth in goods exports weakened signifi -
cantly, as did growth in goods imports.
In Italy, too, the recovery in macroeconomic ac -
tivity came to a standstill at the beginning of 
the year. According to preliminary data, real 
GDP fell by as much as 0.2% in the first quar -
ter, thus remaining slightly below its pre- crisis 
level. A key reason for this was a pronounced 
setback in industrial production, which was 
probably due in part initially to a shortage of 
intermediate input products and later to busi -
ness with Russia coming to a halt and the steep 
rise in energy prices. The services sector, too, 
generated only very little stimulus. Domestic 
tourism collapsed at the beginning of the year, 
and the number of foreign tourists has not yet 
returned to pre- pandemic levels, either.
According to preliminary estimates, in Spain 
aggregate output in the first quarter rose 
slightly by 0.3% on the quarter. At 3.5%, the 
gap compared with the pre- crisis level thus re -
mained significantly larger than in the other 
euro area countries. Here, too, a decline in pri -
vate consumption was the main reason for the 
slowdown in the recovery, with the pandemic 
likely to have played only a minor role. Losses 
in purchasing power as a result of the sharp rise in consumer prices, especially for energy, 
were a much more significant factor. The con -
tinued recovery of tourism had a counterbalan -
cing effect.
In Austria and Portugal, GDP increased consid -
erably once most infection protection measures 
had been lifted, with tourism likely to have 
played a key role. In Belgium, real GDP rose 
moderately. Despite potentially considerable 
strains caused by the war on Ukraine, activity 
also increased in Finland, Slovakia, Lithuania 
and Latvia, probably mainly as a result of the 
good start to the year once the infection pro -
tection measures had been eased. GDP in the 
Netherlands was unchanged.
The labour market situation improved once 
again in the euro area. The unemployment rate 
fell to a new low of 6.8% in March 2022 and 
the number of persons in employment con -
tinued to rise in the first quarter. The employ -
ment outlook deteriorated markedly in industry 
and services over the course of the quarter. At 
the same time, surveys indicate that the short -
age of labour was more pronounced than ever 
before. The rise in gross wages and salaries per 
employee is likely to have accelerated further in 
the first quarter, in part due to minimum wage 
hikes. However, the increases are not likely to 
have kept pace with inflation, meaning that 
real wages probably declined.
Consumer price inflation intensified in the euro 
area in the first quarter of 2022. The HICP in -
creased by a seasonally adjusted 2.7% on the 
quarter. Prices for energy and other industrial 
goods, in particular, rose more sharply than 
ever before. Food prices saw their steepest 
growth since 2007, and the rise in services 
prices also remained exceptionally strong. An -
nual headline HICP inflation subsequently 
jumped from 4.6% in the fourth quarter to 
6.1%, with energy prices rising by 35%. The in -
flation rate excluding energy and food grew 
from 2.4% to 2.7%.Economic out -
put rose in most 
Member States
French economy 
stagnates
Decline in Italy’s 
real GDP
Activity in Spain 
continuing to 
rise, but signifi -
cantly more 
slowlyMarked differ -
ences in the 
smaller Member 
States
Further improve -
ment in labour 
market situation 
at the beginning 
of the year
Surge in 
consumer  prices 
in Q1 2022Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
21

The main reason behind the accelerated con -
sumer price inflation is the increase in cost 
pressures at upstream stages. Crude oil prices 
and wholesale prices for natural gas continued 
to rise as a result of the Ukraine war, as did 
other commodity prices, and supply bottle -
necks intensified again. For example, European cereal prices rose by more than 10% on the 
quarter and by more than 50% on the year. 
The price of industrial inputs increased by a fur -
ther 6% on the quarter and by more than 20% 
on the year. Although these broad- based cost 
pressures have already been clearly reflected in 
consumer prices, they are unlikely to have been 
passed through in full yet.
In April, the annual HICP rate remained at 
7.4%, as in the previous month. Annual rates of 
change in prices of food, services and non-  
energy industrial goods reached their highest 
levels since the beginning of monetary union. 
The inflation rate excluding energy and food 
picked up robustly from 3.0% to 3.5%. Accord -
ing to market and survey- based inflation ex -
pectations, inflation rates are expected to nor -
malise only very gradually. Inflation expect -
ations for 2023 are still significantly elevated. 
At present, they are not moving towards the 
2% mark again until 2024 (see p. 44).
In the current quarter, economic development 
is likely to be largely slowed by the impact of 
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the resulting 
sanctions. High commodity prices, especially 
for energy, are a considerable drag, and there is 
a great deal of uncertainty about the stability 
of the supply of commodities. While industrial 
enterprises are increasingly trying to tap alter -
native delivery channels and safeguard value 
chains, this costs time. Supply bottlenecks are 
also likely to intensify in the face of pandemic- 
related restrictions in China. All of this is visibly 
weighing on business sentiment, especially in 
industry. Sentiment among service providers, 
who can hope to benefit from the easing of in -
fection protection measures, remained more 
upbeat. However, they, too, might feel the ef -
fects of the restraint shown by households, 
who are suffering from the erosion of purchas -
ing power as a result of the sharp rises in prices. 
According to European Commission surveys, 
consumer confidence, including, in particular, 
the propensity to make purchases and expect -
ations with regard to the future financial situ -
ation, deteriorated again in April and fell clearly Persistent price 
pressures 
stemming  from 
upstream stagesInflation rate 
remained at 
all- time high 
in April
Distinct negative 
effects in the 
current quarter 
due to rising 
costs and 
heightened 
uncertaintyUnderlying inflation in the euro area
Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations. 1 exE = HICP 
excluding energy, exEuF = HICP excluding energy and unpro-
cessed food, exEF = HICP excluding energy and food, exEFTC = 
HICP  excluding  energy,  food,  travel  and  clothing,  Trim10  = 
mean trimmed by 10%, Trim30 = mean trimmed by 30%.
Deutsche BundesbankHICP exEF
HICP exEFTC
Range of indicators 
of underlying inflation
(exE, exEuF, exEF, exEFTC
Trim10, Trim30, median)1
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 22101234567
–+++++++ HICP
Business sentiment in the euro area*
Source: European Commission. * Deviations from the respective 
average since 2000.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 22–30–20–100+10+2060504030201001020
––––––++Balance of positive and negative responses as a percentage 
of all responses, seasonally adjusted, monthly data
ConstructionManufacturingServices sector
100102030
–+++Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
22

below the long- term average. This could sig -
nificantly impair the robust recovery in private consumption expected before the outbreak of 
the war.
List of references
Bank of Russia (2022), Bank of Russia’s medium- term forecast, 29 April 2022, https://www.cbr.ru/
Collection/Collection/File/40965/forecast_220429_e.pdf .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022), Potential macroeconomic consequences of the war in Ukraine – 
simulations based on a severe risk scenario, Monthly Report, April 2022, pp. 13-29.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), The role of the disruption of Chinese supply chains in production 
slumps in the United States and the EU in spring 2020, Monthly Report, October 2021, pp. 52-54.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national economic 
statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65-78.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), The economic crisis in Russia, Monthly Report, May 2016, pp. 14-16.
International Energy Agency (2022), IEA confirms member country contributions to second 
collective  action to release oil stocks in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, press release, 
7 April 2022, https://www.iea.org/news/iea- confirms- member- country- contributions- to- second-  
collective- action- to- release- oil- stocks- in- response- to- russia- s- invasion- of- ukraine .
International Monetary Fund (2022), World Economic Outlook: War Sets Back the Global Recovery  , 
April 2022.
Khalil, M. and M.-D. Weber (2022), Chinese supply chain shocks, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion 
Paper, forthcoming.
Oxford Institute for Energy Studies (2022), Implications of the proposed EU ban of Russian oil for 
global oil markets, presentation, 5 May 2022, https://www.oxfordenergy.org/wpcms/wp-content/
uploads/2022/05/Implications-of-the-proposed-EU-ban-of-Russian-oil-for-global-oil-markets.pdf .
Sgaravatti, G., S. Tagliapietra and G. Zachmann (2022), National policies to shield consumers from 
rising energy prices, Bruegel Datasets, https://www.bruegel.org/publications/datasets/national-  
policies- to- shield- consumers- from- rising- energy- prices /.
Simola, H. (2022), Made in Russia? Assessing Russia’s potential for import substitution, BOFIT 
Policy  Brief 2022, No 3.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
23

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
In March, the Governing Council of the ECB de -
cided to scale back net purchases under the 
asset purchase programme (APP) more rapidly 
than had been planned in December. As a re -
sult, monthly net purchases, which amounted 
to €40 billion in April, will be reduced to €30 
billion in May and €20 billion in June. If the in -
coming data support the expectation that the 
medium- term inflation outlook will not fall 
below the 2% inflation target again, even after 
the end of net purchases under the APP , the 
Governing Council will discontinue net pur -
chases in the third quarter. In April, the Govern -
ing Council judged that the incoming data 
since its March meeting reinforce its expect -
ation that net asset purchases under the APP 
should be discontinued in the third quarter.
The ECB Governing Council also adjusted the 
forward guidance on its key interest rates at its 
March meeting. According to the new word -
ing, the Governing Council will make any ad -
justments to the key ECB interest rates “some 
time” after the end of the net purchases under 
the APP . Any adjustments that take place will be gradual. With this new wording, the Gov -
erning Council is maintaining optionality in 
terms of the timing of the first interest rate 
moves.
The decisions in March and April were taken 
against the background of further increasing 
inflationary pressures. The published inflation 
data for January, February and March were also 
well above the previous expectations. Unex -
pectedly high energy costs are one major rea -
son for this. Price increases have also become 
more broadly based. Measures of underlying 
inflation have risen to levels above 2% in recent 
months. The new ECB staff projections again 
revised the baseline scenario for inflation sig -
nificantly upwards compared with December, 
to 5.1% in 2022, 2.1% in 2023 and 1.9% in 
2024. However, the war against Ukraine is a 
substantial upside risk to inflation, especially for 
energy prices. If the resulting price pressures 
feed through into higher than anticipated 
wage rises or if there are persistent, adverse 
supply- side disruptions, inflation could turn out 
to be higher over the medium term than in the 
baseline scenario. In April, the ECB Governing 
Council noted that inflation had again in -
creased significantly and will remain high over 
the coming months, mainly because of the 
sharp rise in energy costs. Inflation pressures 
have intensified across many sectors. The up -
side risks surrounding the inflation outlook 
have also increased, especially in the near term, 
and a correction of inflation expectations to 
levels above the inflation target is likewise 
among the current risk factors for persistently 
high inflation rates.
The euro short- term rate (€STR) showed little 
change overall and was down slightly at -0.59% 
at the end of the period under review. The 
three- month EURIBOR, by contrast, continued 
to climb perceptibly as it had done since Febru -
ary. It recently stood at -0.38%, which was 
around 15 basis points higher than in mid-  ECB Governing 
Council decides 
to scale back 
net purchases 
under the APP 
more rapidly
Adjustment of 
forward guid -
ance on policy 
ratesInflation still 
higher than 
expected and 
with upside risks
Little change in 
the €STR; further 
increase in the 
EURIBORMoney market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. • Average 
1 to 13 May 2022.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 20220.60.50.40.30.20.100.10.20.3
––––––+++
Three-month EURIBOR1
Deposit 
facility rateMain refinancing rateMarginal lending rate% p.a.
€STR1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
24

Money market management and liquidity needs
In the period under review from February to 
April 2022,1 excess liquidity in the Eurosys-
tem rose by a total of €94.3 billion to an 
average of €4,485.4 billion. It initially in-
creased by €101.7 billion to €4,492.8 billion 
in the fi  rst reserve maintenance period of 
2022 (February- March), before dipping 
slightly by €7.4 billion in the second reserve 
maintenance period (March- April). On the 
one hand, this was due to a reduction in 
liquidity- providing asset purchases owing to 
the discontinuation of the pandemic emer-
gency purchase programme (PEPP) on 
31  March 2022. On the other, liquidity- 
absorbing autonomous factors increased 
more strongly in the second maintenance 
period of the year than in the fi  rst.
In the period under review, additional cen-
tral bank liquidity was provided primarily 
through €139.0 billion worth of net asset purchases under the purchase programmes. 
The bulk of these purchases was attribut-
able to the PEPP . As at 13 May 2022, the 
balance sheet holdings of the asset pur-
chase programmes amounted to €4,940.6 
billion (see the table on p. 26). By contrast, 
the average outstanding tender volume in 
the euro area fell slightly by €1.7 billion to 
€2,200.1 billion in the period under review, 
resulting in a low level of liquidity absorp-
tion. After the fi  nal targeted longer- term re-
fi  nancing operation of the third series 
(TLTRO- III) had been allotted in December 
2021, a total of €1.8 billion was voluntarily 
repaid on 30 March 2022 under TLTRO- III 
operations one to seven. Moreover, during 
the period under review, liquidity amount-
1 The averages of the second reserve maintenance 
period of 2022 (March- April 2022) are compared here 
with the averages of the eighth reserve maintenance 
period of 2021 (December 2021- February 2022).
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2022
9 Feb.
to
15 Mar.16 Mar.
to
19 Apr.
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) – 10.0 – 25.3
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) – 60.6 – 25.2
3. Net foreign assets 1 +  9.5 + 26.0
4. Other factors 1 + 69.4 – 25.6
Total +  8.3 – 50.1
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations +  0.0 +  0.1
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –  0.2 –  1.5
c) Other operations + 91.8 + 47.2
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility +  0.0 +  0.0
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 11.8 + 31.1
Total + 79.8 + 76.9
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) + 88.5 + 26.5
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) +  1.5 –  2.8
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
25

ing to €0.4 billion was repaid at maturity 
under the pandemic emergency longer-term 
refi  nancing operations (PELTROs). Uptake of 
the regular main refi  nancing operations and 
three- month tenders likewise remained very 
subdued. In Germany, the outstanding vol-
ume of all refi  nancing operations fell by 
€1.1 billion to an average of €420.8 billion. 
As a result, German banks’ share of the out-
standing tender volume in the Eurosystem 
came to around 19.1%.
In the second reserve maintenance period 
of 2022, liquidity needs stemming from au-
tonomous factors rose by €41.7 billion com-pared to the eighth maintenance period of 
2021, reaching a new record average high 
of €2,447.2 billion. This was mainly due to 
an increase in government deposits of 
€85.7 billion to €667.8 billion. Another 
liquidity- absorbing effect was caused by the 
volume of banknotes in circulation rising by 
€35.3 billion to €1,575.9 billion (see the 
table on p. 25). By contrast, the decline in 
the balances of non- euro area central 
banks, which is included under “other fac-
tors”, had a liquidity- providing effect. A 
large part of these amounts was held in 
Germany. The €8.9 billion decline in gov-
ernment deposits with the Bundesbank like-
wise provided liquidity. Net banknote issu-
ance, which absorbs liquidity, went up 
markedly by €18.6 billion to €902.4 billion 
in Germany. Over the reporting period, the 
minimum reserve requirement in the Euro-
system climbed by €1.4 billion to €156.8 
billion in the March- April maintenance 
period, thus further increasing the need for 
central bank liquidity. In Germany, the re-
serve requirement went up by €0.8 billion 
to €43.3 billion.
At 99%, banks’ utilisation of exemption al-
lowances under the two- tier system for re-
munerating excess reserve holdings re-
mained virtually unchanged for both the 
euro area and Germany in the period under 
review. As excess liquidity rose by €94.3 bil-
lion and the absolute exemption allowance 
increased less sharply, the share of excess 
liquidity remunerated at -0.50% expanded 
(see the chart on p. 27). As a result, an aver-
age of 20.7% of the excess liquidity in the 
Eurosystem was exempt from negative re-
muneration in the second reserve mainten-
ance period of 2022, which was 0.4 per-
centage point less than in the previous 
maintenance period (in Germany: 20.1%, 
previous period: 20.9%).Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as at
13 May 2022
Active programmes 1
PSPP + 37.3 2,572.3
CBPP3 –  0.8 297.9
CSPP + 17.4 338.2
ABSPP –  0.9 26.9
PEPP + 90.5 1,701.1
Completed programmes 
SMP –  3.2 3.3
CBPP1 –  0.4 0.0
CBPP2 –  1.0 0.8
1 Changes due to net purchases, maturities, reinvestments 
and amortisation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankAutonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing  (liquidity-absorbing)  factors  are  preceded  by  a  positive 
(negative)  sign.  1 Including  end-of-quarter  liquidity-neutral 
valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 20221,8001,5001,20090060030003006009001,200
––––––++++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
26

Overnight rates in the euro money market 
continued to be based on the deposit facil-
ity rate of -0.50% (see the chart above). 
However, given the ongoing downward 
trend in overnight rates amidst high excess 
liquidity, the spread to the deposit facility 
rate widened slightly in the reporting 
period. By contrast, the increase in rate hike 
expectations did not affect the very short 
end of the money market. In both the fi  rst 
and the second maintenance periods of 
2022, the unsecured euro short- term rate 
(€STR) was set at an average of -0.58%. At 
the end of the quarter in March, €STR fell 
by one basis point on the day to -0.59%. At 
€57.0 billion, turnover in the fi  rst mainten-
ance period of 2022 was high on average, 
before falling to €51.8 billion in the follow-
ing period. The decline was due to lower 
market liquidity on public holidays and at 
the end of the quarter. On the GC Pooling 
trading platform, the period under review 
saw overnight transactions in the ECB bas-
ket being conducted at an average of 
-0.57% in the fi  rst maintenance period of 
2022 and -0.59% in the second, compared 
with the previous fi  gure of -0.56% in the 
eighth maintenance period of 2021. By con-
trast, in the ECB EXTended basket, which 
has a broader selection of securities with 
lower rating requirements for concluding 
repo transactions, overnight trading was 
carried out at rates of -0.53% and -0.54% 
in the reporting period. This exceeded the 
average level of -0.56% in the preceding 
period (the eighth maintenance period of 
2021), which was infl  uenced by a sharp 
temporary decline at year- end. The usual 
pattern of lower overnight rates at the end 
of the quarter was visible at the end of 
March 2022, too. On this day, the price of 
secured overnight money in the ECB basket 
decreased signifi  cantly for low volumes, 
falling by around 20 basis points to -0.80%. 
In the ECB EXTended basket, however, there 
was only a marginal decline to -0.57%. Liquidity- driven secured turnover on the GC 
Pooling platform remained low in both bas-
kets during the period under review (at 
around €1.0 billion in the ECB basket and 
around €2.0 billion in the EXTended bas-
ket). The low turnover volumes are likely to 
have contributed to the fact that GC Pool-
ing overnight rates remained signifi  cantly 
more volatile than €STR in the period under 
review.Deposit facility rate, money market rates 
and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Central 
bank balance minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the 
deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche BundesbankDec. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May
2021 20220.90.80.70.60.50.4
––––––Daily data
% p.a.
€ bn
01,0002,0003,0004,0005,000Excess liquidity1
Mean value for the 
reserve maintenance period2ECB EXTended basket
€STRSTOXX GC Pooling Overnight
GermanyEuro areaAllowances (two-tier system)– 1.93ECB BasketDeposit 
facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
27

February. The increase in the EURIBOR is prob -
ably mainly due to the stronger pricing- in of ex -
pectations of a rise in key monetary policy rates 
in the near future.
While short- term money market rates have 
shown mixed developments since mid- February, 
money market forward rates have continued to 
climb, thus reflecting market participants’ ex -
pectations of an earlier and swifter normalisa -
tion of monetary policy. Market participants re -
cently priced in an initial interest rate hike of 25 
basis points in July 2022. The steeper path of 
the forward curve also suggests that market 
participants are pricing in three further interest 
rate increases of 25 basis points this year. The 
Eurosystem’s Survey of Monetary Analysts 
(SMA), conducted prior to the March and April 
meetings, confirms expectations of an earlier 
first interest rate hike and a less gradual interest 
rate path. The period in time at which survey 
participants are expecting the first interest rate 
hike moved forward perceptibly to the fourth quarter of 2022 according to both rounds of 
the survey (January round of the SMA: Q3 
2023). The further increase in inflationary pres -
sures and new upside surprises in euro area in -
flation are likely to be the root cause of the ad -
justed market expectations. Additionally, the 
more rapid path towards normalisation that 
other major central banks are taking could play 
a role. The difference in the timing of the first 
interest rate hike according to the forward 
curve and according to the surveys probably 
stems from two main factors. First, the forward 
curve still contains positive risk premia. Second, 
the last SMA was carried out before the April 
meeting, meaning that survey participants 
were able to factor in neither the most up- to- 
date information on inflation developments 
nor recent public statements by various mem -
bers of the Governing Council.
The APP holdings recorded on the balance 
sheet have risen by €81.3 billion since mid-  
February. On 13  May, the Eurosystem held Money market 
forward rates 
reflect expect -
ations of swifter 
normalisation of 
monetary policy
Net purchases 
under the PEPP 
discontinued at 
end of MarchOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 202205001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,0005,5006,0006,5007,0007,500€ billion
Mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
Purchase programmesFirst series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-I)Third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-III)
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-II)Pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs)
Additional longer-term refinancing operationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
28

assets totalling €3,235.3 billion as part of the 
APP (see the box on pp. 25ff. for a breakdown 
of the holdings by individual programme). 
Securities holdings reported under the pan -
demic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) 
amounted to €1,701.1 billion on 13 May, up by 
€42.6 billion. Net purchases under the PEPP 
were discontinued at the end of March, as 
planned. The holdings reported under both 
purchase programmes continue to be influ -
enced by the smoothing over time of reinvest -
ments and by the use of amortised cost ac -
counting.1
Excess liquidity has changed only marginally 
since mid- February on the whole. As this report 
went to press, its volume stood at €4,570 bil -
lion, which corresponds to an increase of 
around €39.4 billion since mid- February (see 
the box on pp. 25ff.). The smaller increase com -
pared with previous periods was due to the sig -
nificant reduction in net asset purchases. Be -
sides this, no more targeted longer- term refi -
nancing operations (TLTROs) were conducted 
in the reporting period. Demand for standard 
operations was very subdued.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 continued 
to expand considerably in the first quarter of 
2022, but lost momentum compared to the 
sharp growth seen in the preceding quarters. 
The annual growth rate of M3 thus declined 
further. At the end of the quarter, it stood at 
6.3%, which was only half as much as its 
pandemic- induced peak at the beginning of 
2021. The continued slowdown in monetary 
growth was due to the scaling back of net 
asset purchases under the PEPP , which were 
discontinued in March, as planned. At the same 
time, lending to the domestic private sector 
continued to rise substantially in the first quar -
ter, primarily in the form of loans to households 
for house purchase, but also as loans to non-  
financial corporations. The anticipated rise in lending rates was an important driver of the 
buoyant demand for credit. Credit supply con -
ditions remained favourable, although the 
banks responding to the Bank Lending Survey 
(BLS) reported that, for the first time in a year, 
they had tightened credit standards for loans 
to enterprises again somewhat in the first quar -
ter.
Among the components of M3, overnight de -
posits continued to contribute the most to the 
build- up in the monetary aggregate in the first 
quarter. However, their growth declined signifi -
cantly once more compared with the previous 
quarters. This was mainly because the non-  
financial corporate sector only built up a small 
volume of short- term deposits on balance. Al -
though firms were able to push through price 
increases in many cases, thus increasing their 
revenue per se, their expenditure on intermedi -
ate goods and operating equipment also went 
up at the same time, not least off the back of 
the sharp rise in energy import prices. By con -
trast, despite interest rates showing very little 
change, households stepped up their accumu -
lation of deposits again somewhat in the re -
porting quarter, following a very weak previous 
quarter. This was due, in particular, to increased 
uncertainty, first stemming from the unpredict -
able consequences of the Omicron variant of 
the coronavirus, and later on as a result of Rus -
sia’s attack on Ukraine. As is often the case in a 
crisis, the latter also led to a significant rise in 
the demand for cash.
On the counterparts side, monetary growth 
continued to be driven by lending to domestic 
non- banks. Lending to the domestic private 
sector, in particular, continued to rise in the first 
quarter, with loans to households making the 
largest contribution (see the lower chart on 
p. 32). Demand for housing loans, especially, 
remained dynamic. On balance, despite the re -
cent rise in lending rates, banks recorded large Only slight 
change in excess 
liquidity
Monetary 
growth con -
tinued to lose 
momentumAccumulation 
of overnight 
deposits tailed 
off again
Further substan -
tial rise in loans 
to households 
for house pur -
chase, …
1 In particular, the difference between the acquisition and 
redemption value is amortised over the security’s residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and measured 
at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
29

inflows in this credit segment, spread across 
the majority of euro area countries, in all three 
months. At the end of March, annual growth in 
loans for house purchase held steady at 5.4%.
According to the banks responding to the BLS, 
demand for housing loans was primarily stimu -
lated by the persistently low general level of 
interest rates. On the supply side, the banks 
participating in the BLS continued on the path 
of essentially unchanged credit standards, 
tightening their standards for loans for house 
purchase only marginally in the first quarter. 
This was attributable to conflicting factors. On 
the one hand, banks reported that borrowers’ 
creditworthiness had declined and that the 
outlook in the housing market had deterior -
ated. On the other hand, however, they indi -
cated that banks’ liquidity position had im -
proved.
Despite the containment measures associated 
with the Omicron wave, banks also recorded 
perceptible inflows in consumer credit in the 
reporting quarter. This is consistent with the 
fact that the banks surveyed in the BLS re -
ported a notable increase in demand for con -
sumer and other loans in the first quarter. The 
main reasons they gave for this rise were 
household’s greater propensity to purchase 
and improved consumer confidence. Further -
more, the banks responding to the BLS indi -
cated that they had again marginally eased 
their credit standards for consumer and other 
loans. However, credit inflows in this segment 
ground to a halt in March due to the war in 
Ukraine and its economic fallout, which damp -
ened consumer confidence and led households 
to postpone large purchases.
Banks also recorded substantial inflows of loans 
to euro area enterprises in the first quarter. One 
reason for enterprises’ buoyant demand for 
loans is likely to have been to secure compara -
tively low interest rates in light of an expected 
tightening of the monetary policy stance. This 
is consistent with the fact that non- financial 
corporations mainly sought long- term loans in … credit stand -
ards tightened 
marginally 
according to BLS
Perceptible 
inflows in con -
sumer credit, 
too
Strong recovery 
in lending to 
non- financial 
corporations …Monetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 222024681012
–++++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14
20246
–+++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial
liabilities1
Net external assets
Credit to the private
sector2
Financial corporations3
Non-financial corporations4
Households5Contribution of components 
in percentage points
Securities-based lending to general governmentPercentage change
in M3
Percentage change in M3
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector2Contribution of counterparts in percentage points
Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
30

the first quarter. In addition, the economic dis -
ruption caused by the coronavirus pandemic 
subsided, which bolstered demand for credit in 
this segment. The data provided by the banks 
participating in the BLS suggest that the bor -
rowed funds were used to finance fixed invest -
ment and mergers and acquisitions as well as 
for refinancing.
In addition, BLS banks reported higher finan -
cing needs by non- financial corporations for in -
ventories and working capital. This is in line 
with the significant net inflows recorded for 
short- term loans, especially in March, which 
are likely to be related to the outbreak of the 
war in Ukraine. On the one hand, it is possible 
that enterprises require more funds due to the 
sharp rise in the already high commodity prices, 
new massive trade restrictions and the consid -
erable increase in uncertainty. On the other 
hand, enterprises may have brought forward 
their lending because banks – as reported in 
the BLS as well – are planning to tighten their 
credit supply.
The annual growth rate of loans to non-  
financial corporations, which had risen signifi -
cantly in the fourth quarter of 2021 due to a 
one- off effect linked to TLTRO-  III,2 was almost 
unchanged at 4.2% at the end of March. Look -
ing at the largest Member States, it is striking that the bulk of lending in the first quarter was 
borne by banks in Germany and France. By 
contrast, Italy generated only weak stimulus; in 
Spain, banks recorded net outflows of loans.
For the first time in a year, the banks surveyed 
in the BLS tightened their credit standards in 
corporate lending somewhat at the aggregate 
level in the first quarter. The main reasons cited 
by banks were their perceived deterioration in 
the economic situation and outlook, sector-  
specific and firm- specific factors, and borrow -
ers’ creditworthiness. Banks also reported that 
their risk tolerance had declined. On balance, 
the surveyed banks in the euro area are plan -
ning to tighten their standards further in the 
second quarter. This is probably also linked to 
the feared negative impact of the war on the 
economy and on credit risk in corporate lend -
ing.
In addition to loans to the private sector, in -
flows to securities-  based lending to general 
government also boosted monetary growth 
(see the upper chart on p. 32). That said, they … even after 
war broke out 
in Ukraine
Heterogeneous 
lending in 
Member  StatesBLS banks tight -
ened credit 
standards in 
corporate 
lending Consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q4 2021 Q1 2022
Holdings against central government 2 106.7 – 52.6
Monetary aggregate M3 267.8 186.9
of which components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 212.0 191.5
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) 31.3 21.7
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 24.4 – 26.3
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 18.3 – 51.5
of which:
Capital and reserves 20.3 12.3
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 2.0 – 63.7Assets Q4 2021 Q1 2022
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 229.6 180.4
of which:
Loans 175.1 183.5
Loans, adjusted 1 225.5 173.9
Securities 54.5 –   3.1
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 201.1 84.6
of which:
Loans –  1.1 –   2.0
Securities 202.0 86.5
Net external assets – 71.7 –  50.1
Other counterparts of M3 34.2 – 132.1
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche Bundesbank
2 A reference period for credit growth connected to these 
operations expired at the end of 2021. This determined 
whether a bank participating in the TLTRO- III series would 
receive the particularly favourable special interest rate con -
ditions during the relevant period. For this reason, banks 
with previously weak lending records were particularly 
interested in strengthening their lending.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
31

were significantly lower in the quarter under 
review than in the preceding quarters, as the 
Eurosystem reduced the monthly net purchases 
of government bonds under the PEPP as sched -
uled and discontinued them in March. In April, 
the Governing Council reaffirmed its expect -
ation that the remaining net purchases under 
the APP would likewise be discontinued in the 
third quarter. This counterpart’s contribution to 
monetary growth is therefore likely to decline 
further over the coming months.
As in the preceding quarters, the MFI sector’s 
net external asset position continued to have a 
dampening effect on monetary growth. This 
was due to the ongoing negative balance of 
the euro area’s financial account with the rest 
of the world, driven partly by the fact that non- 
residents continued to sell euro area govern -
ment bonds on balance. However, as the Gov -
erning Council is planning to reduce and even -
tually discontinue net purchases under the APP , 
this factor is likely to have less and less of an ef -
fect. Furthermore, the typical positive impact of 
the current account on monetary growth was 
also much smaller. Though the current account 
balance remained positive for January and Feb -
ruary according to the non- seasonally adjusted 
figures available so far, the trade balance in 
particular narrowed significantly on the back of 
sharp rises in energy prices.
German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business with domestic 
customers grew steeply in the first quarter of 
2022. This was again driven by strong inflows 
to overnight deposits, which were broadly 
based across the money- holding sectors. In 
addition, however, short- term time deposits 
were also topped up much more strongly than 
usual, though these were exclusively the short- 
term time deposits of general government, 
which expanded these considerably as a result 
of high tax revenue. That said, the momentum Declining Euro -
system net pur -
chases damp -
ened inflows 
to securitised 
lending 
Net external 
asset position 
has further 
dampening 
effect on monet -
ary growth
Steep increase in 
deposit business 
due primarily to 
overnight 
depositsSecurities-based lending to general 
government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2220002004006008001,0001,200
–++++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
Eurosystem
Other MFIsof which:By the euro area MFI sector
MFI loans to the non-financial private 
sector in the euro area*
4020020406080100120140
––+++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 22
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
–200+20+40+60+80 To households3To non-financial corporations1
Total2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
32

behind deposit business dwindled markedly 
during the quarter as individual money- holding 
sectors – including households – reduced their 
overnight deposits again on balance at the end 
of the first quarter. One reason for this could 
be the average interest rate on these deposits 
falling further into negative territory over the 
course of the quarter (see the adjacent chart). 
Moreover, the recent significant rise in inflation 
rates is also likely to have raised households’ 
awareness of the opportunity costs of holding 
money.
It was also striking that domestic enterprises 
topped up their overnight deposits substan -
tially, despite the increased opportunity costs. It 
appears that uncertainty about the economic 
fallout of the war in Ukraine led enterprises to 
park freed- up funds and postpone planned in -
vestment.
Banks’ lending business with domestic non-  
banks was also very dynamic in the first quarter 
of 2022. Lending to the domestic private sec -
tor, which grew steeply once again, was the 
main factor in this development. By contrast, 
lending to the public sector declined markedly 
for the fourth consecutive quarter in view of 
the improved budgetary situation, particularly 
in the case of state and local governments.
In the case of banks’ lending to domestic non- 
financial corporations, the expected counter -
movement to the exceptionally strong growth 
in lending to this sector in the final quarter of 
2021 was largely absent. Instead, firms’ de -
mand for both short- term and long- term loans 
was again high, indicating persistently elevated 
financing needs on the part of non- financial 
corporations. Hence, the annual growth rate of 
loans to non- financial corporations continued 
to rise and stood at just under 6% at the end of 
the quarter.
This is consistent with the fact that, as reported 
by the banks surveyed in the BLS, non- financial 
corporations’ demand for credit continued to 
increase on the quarter. Once again, the sur -Substantial rise 
in deposits of 
non- financial 
corporations
Lending business 
with non- banks 
very dynamic 
again
Financing needs 
of non- financial 
corporations 
remain highInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 2022101234
–++++% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight deposits
MFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2021 2022
Q4 Q1
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 0.9 56.0
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years 10.4 21.0
over 2 years – 2.1 – 3.1
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months – 0.5 – 1.0
over 3 months – 0.5 – 1.1
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 2.3 – 0.2
Securities – 4.8 – 1.9
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 57.7 57.7
of which: to households 3 24.3 27.6
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 30.8 25.3
Securities 3.7 2.6
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. Data adjusted for statis-
tical changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, households and 
general government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted 
for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 4   Non- fi  nancial corporations and 
quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
33

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q2 2022.
Deutsche Bundesbank14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 20221.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2014 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 2200.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
30030
–+
3003060
–++Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
0.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
34

veyed bank managers cited the need for funds 
for fixed investment as well as for inventories 
and working capital as the main reasons for 
this. According to the bank managers, short-  
term financing needs also increased as a result 
of firms boosting their inventories in the face of 
unstable supply chains and the heightened un -
certainty caused by the Ukraine war. Further -
more, according to the BLS, the low general 
level of interest rates again played a greater 
role in demand growth than in the preceding 
quarters. The banks surveyed in the BLS also 
consider interest rate hedging motives, in an -
ticipation of rising interest rates, as a factor in 
this regard. This could be one reason why long- 
term loans continued to increase in March, 
even though, when viewed in isolation, the 
high degree of uncertainty about the economic 
fallout of the war dampened enterprises’ pro -
pensity to invest.
At the same time, the surveyed banks tight -
ened their credit standards for corporate lend -
ing slightly on balance, while leaving their 
credit terms and conditions unchanged on the 
whole. They justified these stricter standards by 
pointing to the heightened level of credit risk, 
chiefly citing sector- specific and firm- specific 
factors as well as the deterioration of the gen -
eral economic situation and outlook as ex -
planatory factors.
Growth in German banks’ lending business was 
also shouldered to a significant extent by loans 
to households. Crucial for the most recent spell 
of growth were once again loans for house 
purchase, which also grew steeply in the first 
quarter. However, the annual growth rate of 
loans taken out for house purchase remained 
virtually unchanged at 7.0% at the end of 
March.
The rise in loans to households was also driven 
by consumer credit, which recorded marked 
net inflows in the reporting quarter. House -
holds’ demand for bank loans has been 
boosted by the continued favourable income 
and asset situation and low financing costs, even though interest rates for individual seg -
ments, including loans for house purchase, 
have risen slightly at the current end.
The data provided by banks participating in the 
BLS are broadly in line with developments in 
lending. Banks saw the main reason for the 
high demand from households in the persist -
ently low general level of interest rates, coupled 
with the expectation of rising interest rates. In 
addition, borrowers’ belief that the outlook on 
the real estate market will remain bright and 
the anticipation of rising real estate prices 
stimulated demand.Credit demand 
driven chiefly by 
higher need for 
funds for inven -
tories and work -
ing capital as 
well as interest 
rate hedging 
motives
Lending policy 
in corporate 
banking slightly 
restrictive
Demand for 
housing loans 
remains brisk
Recent marked 
inflows in con -
sumer creditDemand bol -
stered by con -
tinued favour -
able financing 
costs and bright 
outlook in real 
estate market2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 22–10+1+2+3+4+5+6Year-on-year change, end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic 
non-financial private sector
3210123456
–––++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchaseTotal,
percentage changeLoan contributions 
in percentage pointsTotal,
percentage changeUp to 1 yearMaturity contributions in percentage points
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 yearsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
35

In the first quarter, the banks surveyed in the 
BLS tightened their lending policies for loans to 
households for house purchase on balance. 
Housing market prospects, which had deterior -
ated according to the banks’ assessment, were 
the most commonly cited reason for this tight -
ening. On balance, a decline in borrowers’ 
creditworthiness and a deterioration in the 
general economic situation and outlook also 
contributed to the tightening of policies. Fur -
thermore, a reduction in banks’ risk tolerance 
and the restrictive effect of equity costs and 
funding conditions played a certain role.
In response to the ad hoc questions in the April 
survey, German banks reported that their fund -
ing conditions had deteriorated somewhat 
compared with the previous quarter.
Over the last six months, the Eurosystem’s pur -
chase programmes (APP and PEPP) have helped 
improve the liquidity position of commercial 
banks and their market funding conditions, but 
they were still negatively impacting bank profit -ability through net interest income. The pur -
chase programmes did not contribute to credit 
growth over the past six months.
The negative interest rate on the deposit facility 
depressed lending and deposit rates and 
pushed up fees for deposits. Overall, it once 
again squeezed banks’ net interest income. The 
two- tier system for remunerating excess liquid -
ity holdings did, however, soften the adverse 
impact on profitability.
Ten out of 33 banks from the German BLS sam -
ple took part in the TLTRO- III operation in De -
cember 2021, mainly on account of the attract -
ive design. Banks reported using the obtained 
funds primarily for lending and as a substitute 
for maturing debt securities and interbank 
loans. According to the banks participating in 
the survey, the TLTRO- III operations had an eas -
ing impact on their lending policies and con -
tributed to a rise in lending, particularly to en -
terprises.Restrictive lend -
ing policies for 
loans to house -
holds for house 
purchase
Funding environ -
ment deterior -
ated somewhat 
for German 
banks
Purchase 
programmes  
improved banks’ 
liquidity position 
and funding 
conditionsTwo- tier system 
for excess liquid -
ity supports 
profitability
TLTRO- III funds 
used for lending 
and substituting 
liabilitiesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
36

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Mounting inflation concerns and the war 
against Ukraine shaped developments in global 
financial markets in recent weeks. Given higher 
inflation rates and expectations, bond market 
yields rose markedly worldwide, also against 
the backdrop of key central banks pushing to 
recalibrate monetary policy. For example, the 
UK and US central banks further tightened their 
monetary policy stance by repeatedly raising 
their policy rates.1 In addition, the Federal Re -
serve announced that, starting in June 2022, it 
would reduce its securities holdings purchased 
under monetary policy purchase programmes. 
The Bank of Japan, by contrast, pledged to 
stick to its yield curve control policy. The war 
against Ukraine added to the inflation concerns 
that had already been worrying market partici -
pants, not least on account of the considerably 
higher energy prices, and ultimately also stoked 
expectations of a faster adjustment of the 
monetary policy stance. Moreover, the war in -
creased uncertainty surrounding the economic 
outlook. This culminated in growing financial 
market volatility and a sharp but brief slump in 
stock prices. Significantly stronger headwinds 
on the stock exchanges came from the higher 
interest rate level. Overall, European and US 
stocks have declined substantially in value in 
the year to date. In foreign exchange markets, 
the feared economic consequences of the war 
and expectations concerning differences in the 
pace of monetary policy adjustment in the 
major currency areas pushed down the euro’s 
exchange rate.
Exchange rates
While the euro had fluctuated around the 
US$1.13 mark at the start of the year without 
showing any clear trend, this changed abruptly 
with the Russian invasion of Ukraine. First, price 
volatility in the foreign exchange markets in -creased markedly. Second, the currencies of 
countries in relatively close geographical prox -
imity to the war or that have relatively close 
trade links with Russia, e.g. due to importing 
energy sources such as oil and gas, tended to 
come under downward pressure. The euro also 
depreciated significantly against the US dollar 
because it was expected that the economic im -
pact of the war and the sanctions imposed 
against and on the table for the Russian Feder -
ation would hit the euro area harder than they 
would the United States. At the same time, the 
US dollar benefited from its status as a safe 
haven currency.
The euro’s exchange rate stabilised temporarily 
in March. This was supported by signals from 
ECB representatives to possibly raise key inter -
est rates earlier than expected. Moreover, the 
euro benefited from vague hopes of a negoti -
ated solution in the war against Ukraine. How -
ever, the monetary policy decisions made by 
the ECB Governing Council in March did not 
have a lasting impact on the euro/ US dollar ex -
change rate; although the prospect of conclud -
ing asset purchases in the third quarter was 
raised, it was left open as to when there might 
be a key interest rate turnaround in the euro 
area.
In April, signals from the Federal Reserve that it 
planned to accelerate the monetary policy nor -
malisation process in the United States led once 
again to considerable exchange rate losses for 
the euro. As a result of the associated specula -
tion about a growing divergence in monetary 
policy stances on both sides of the Atlantic, the 
euro fell to a five- year low of less than US$1.04, 
but stabilised again more recently. As this re -
port went to press, the euro stood at US$1.05. 
It has thus depreciated by 7.1% against the US 
currency since the end of December 2021.Financial mar -
kets price rising 
inflation rates 
and less accom -
modative mon -
etary policy into 
valuations
On balance, 
euro suffers 
significant  
exchange rate 
losses against 
US dollar, … 1 For information on the ECB Governing Council’s meas -
ures, see p. 24.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
37

Despite four policy rate hikes in the United 
Kingdom since December of last year, the euro 
recorded slight net gains against the pound 
sterling. These were largely the result of the 
market reaction to the Bank of England’s latest 
monetary policy meeting. As expected, it de -
cided to raise its base rate (Bank Rate) to 1%. 
At the same time, however, it pointed to a 
medium- term decline in the inflation rate re -
sulting from the economic downturn, which, 
according to its forecast, is likely to be greater 
than expected by market participants. In their 
view, this, in turn, has increased the likelihood 
of a less steep interest rate path, which put 
pressure on the pound sterling. Recently, how -ever, the publication of robust labour market 
data for the United Kingdom again resulted in 
a countermovement. As this report went to 
press, the euro was trading at £0.85, around 
0.8% higher than at the end of December.
On balance, the yen has depreciated markedly 
across the board since the start of the year, al -
though it temporarily benefited from the high 
degree of uncertainty in the financial markets. 
For a time, the euro recorded a five- year high 
against the yen, while the US dollar even hit a 
20- year high. One key reason for the yen’s 
losses was the Bank of Japan’s renewed com -
mitment in March to maintaining its ultra- loose 
monetary policy stance in view of lower do -
mestic inflation rates rather than following in 
the footsteps of other central banks and chan -
ging its monetary policy course. As a result of 
the widening interest rate differential between 
the yen and other major currencies, the yen be -
came even more attractive as a funding cur -
rency for carry trades, which generally reduced 
its value.2 As this report went to press, the euro 
was trading at ¥134. It was thus some 3.1% 
above its value at the end of December.
Measured as a weighted average against the 
currencies of 19 major trading partners, the 
euro has depreciated by 1.6% net since the end 
of December. Losses were recorded against the 
US dollar and the currencies of numerous 
commodity- exporting countries, which bene -
fited from higher commodity prices. This con -
trasted with gains against the yen, the pound 
sterling and the currencies of some central and 
eastern European countries that are even more 
directly affected by the war in Ukraine than the 
euro area. On balance, the price competitive -
ness of euro area suppliers improved over the 
period under review, but looking at the long-  
term average, their competitive position can 
still be considered neutral.… but appreci -
ates slightly 
against pound 
sterling  …… and mark -
edly against yen
Euro down in 
effective termsExchange rate of the euro
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Calculated 
against the currencies of 19 countries. A rise in values indicates 
an appreciation of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankD J FMAM J J A S ON D J FMAM
20 2021 20221.001.051.101.151.201.25
125130135140
0.830.860.890.92
9497100103Daily data, log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
... yen
... pound sterling
Nominal effective exchange rate1
Q1 1999 = 100
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2014).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
38

Securities markets and 
portfolio  investment
Bond market
Nominal government bond yields have risen 
very significantly in the major currency areas 
since the start of the year. This was the govern -
ment bond markets’ response to rising inflation 
figures, market participants’ higher inflation ex -
pectations and the prospect of a less expan -
sionary monetary policy stance. Yields on inter -
national benchmark bonds fell temporarily 
when the war first broke out in Ukraine owing 
to higher demand for safe haven assets. How -
ever, given the rising inflation figures world -
wide, they quickly resumed their upward trend. 
The Federal Reserve contributed to higher 
yields, particularly in the US bond market, as it 
repeatedly responded to inflationary pressures 
with monetary policy tightening measures. In 
view of this, yields on ten- year US Treasuries in -
creased especially significantly, rising by 135 
basis points to 2.9%. Analyses of the US Treas -
ury yield curve show that market participants 
expect a significantly steeper interest rate path 
over the next two years, too, than they did at 
the start of the year. In addition, higher term 
premia –  the amount investors demand as 
compensation for assuming interest rate risk 
when purchasing long- term bonds – also con -
tributed to the increase in US Treasury yields. 
Real term premia, which can also reflect in -
creased cyclical risks, are currently the domin -
ant yield component.
In the United Kingdom, the yields on ten-  year 
gilts rose by 90 basis points to 1.9%. The Bank 
of England continued to tighten its monetary 
policy in view of persistently high inflation 
rates. By contrast, the Bank of Japan continued 
to maintain its strongly accommodative monet -
ary policy stance and its ten- year government 
bond yield target of close to 0%, countering 
the international interest rate trend. It an -
nounced in February that it would aim to keep 
yields at no more than 0.25% by offering un -
limited bond buying. The yield on ten- year Ten- year 
government  
bond yields up 
globally
Government 
bond yields up 
significantly in 
United Kingdom 
and slightly in 
JapanBond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual ma-
turity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 20220.90.60.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.03.3
–––+++++++++++% p. a., daily data
Euro area
Germany
United States
Japan
United Kingdom
Spreads of ten-year government bonds 
over German Federal bonds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022050100150200250300350400450Basis points, daily data
Italy
Spain
Ireland FranceGreece
PortugalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
39

Holder structure and free fl  oat of Federal securities
The market for Federal securities plays a key 
role in the international bond market. 
Thanks to their high credit quality and 
liquidity, German government bonds have 
become an important benchmark for the 
prices of other fi  nancial market instruments 
in the euro area and shape the euro area’s 
spot and futures markets. Federal securities 
typically have a very broad investor base. 
Demand for German government bonds 
comes from a wide range of sectors in Ger-
many as well as other countries, both inside 
and outside Europe. In this context, Federal 
securities play an essential role in the re-
serve assets of foreign central banks.
In March 2015, for monetary policy rea-
sons, the Eurosystem began to buy Federal 
securities in the secondary market as part of 
the public sector purchase programme 
(PSPP). This caused the established holder 
structure to shift in favour of the Eurosys-
tem. Up to the beginning of 2020, these 
shifts were relatively strong, as the Federal 
Government’s net issuance was close to 
zero during this period. In net terms, the in-
crease in the Eurosystem’s holdings there-
fore led to a corresponding decrease in the 
holdings of other investors.
Given the much gloomier economic out-
look and the feared risks to price stability 
following the outbreak of the coronavirus 
pandemic, in March 2020 the Governing 
Council of the European Central Bank (ECB) 
approved an additional purchase pro-
gramme – the pandemic emergency pur-
chase programme (PEPP), which likewise in-
cluded government debt securities. In the 
second quarter of 2020, the German Fed-
eral Government also adopted extensive fi  s-
cal measures which were largely fi  nanced 
through the capital market. Since the be-
ginning of the pandemic, on balance, cen-
tral government’s net issuance has ex-ceeded the Eurosystem’s net purchase vol-
umes of Federal securities.
This box illustrates the changes in the holder 
structure of Federal securities.1 To this end, 
we compare the current fi  gures on holder 
structure (December 2021) with the data 
from prior to the launch of the PSPP (De-
cember 2014) and from before the out-
break of the coronavirus pandemic (Decem-
ber 2019). It becomes clear that the holder 
structure has shifted considerably under the 
purchase programmes. The stock of freely 
tradable bonds, the free fl  oat, initially fell 
both in absolute terms as well as in relation 
to the outstanding volume. This has changed 
since the outbreak of the pandemic. While 
in relative terms, the free fl  oat continued to 
fall steadily to almost  30% at the end of the 
period under review, in absolute terms it ini-
tially rose again and has hovered at just 
over €500 billion since then.
Reference dataset
The holder structure of Federal securities 
can be examined in detail on the basis of 
the European Securities Holdings Statistics 
by Sector (SHSS), which are collected in the 
Eurosystem.2 The SHSS capture both the 
proprietary and customer securities hold-
ings of all reporting account- keeping insti-
tutions in the euro area. The SHSS do not 
include the holdings of the ECB or the euro 
area national central banks. Combined with 
the Bundesbank’s holdings, which can be 
extracted from the Bank’s internal accounts, 
just over 97% of the total outstanding vol-
ume of Federal securities was captured at 
the end of 2021 and assigned to the sector 
and country of the respective holder ac-
1 For more information on the holder structure of Fed-
eral securities, see also Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2015).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
40

cording to the reporting template.3 On the 
basis of changes in holdings as shown in 
the SHSS, it is possible to deduce which in-
vestor groups were net buyers or sellers in 
the market.4
Holder structure
Under the PSPP , the Bundesbank built up 
holdings of Federal securities of just under 
€280 billion by the end of 2019. The on-
going and additional purchases under the 
PEPP saw these holdings rise to just under 
€560 billion by the end of 2021, which is 
roughly equivalent to 34% of the total out-
standing volume. As the Eurosystem only 
makes purchases in the secondary market, 
the question arises as to who was the net 
seller in the market.5The SHSS data show that, since the end of 
2014, investors from non- euro area coun-
tries have scaled back their holdings of Fed-
eral securities by €48 billion to just over 
€620 billion. This represents a decline of 
just under 19  percentage points in the 
respect ive outstanding volume to 37.5%.6 
Private investors from the United States and 
3 The calculations are based on all outstanding Federal 
securities, ranging from six and twelve- month treasury 
discount paper (Bubills) to 30- year Federal bonds 
(Bunds). The Finance Agency’s own holdings are also 
included.
4 Because the calculations are based on changes in 
holdings, the terms “purchases” and “sales” are always 
taken to include the redemptions of maturing Federal 
securities.
5 For more information about the structure of the 
monetary policy purchase programmes, see https://
www.bundesbank.de/en/tasks/monetary-policy/
outright-transactions/outright-transactions-626094.
6 The dominant role played by sellers from non- euro 
area countries is also refl  ected in aggregate PSPP pur-
chases. For more information, see Koijen et al. (2021).Holder structure of Federal securities*
Holdings in € bn/%
Item2014 2019 2021
€ bn % € bn % € bn %
Geographical breakdown
Germany (incl. Bundesbank) 123.1 10.4 393.0 33.4 767.5 46.3
Euro area excl. Germany 220.1 18.5 173.6 14.8 222.5 13.4
Non- euro area countries 669.2 56.3 512.0 43.5 621.5 37.5
Not recorded 176.6 14.9 97.2 8.3 46.3 2.8
Sectoral breakdown
Private sector
Germany 70.5 5.9 50.6 4.3 44.6 2.7
Financial investors 59.2 5.0 47.0 4.0 40.1 2.4
of which: MFIs (banks) 17.1 1.4 7.9 0.7 5.0 0.3
Investment funds 34.0 2.9 28.9 2.5 24.5 1.5
Insurance corporations and 
pension  funds 7.4 0.6 9.9 0.8 10.5 0.6
Non- fi  nancial investors 11.3 1.0 3.5 0.3 4.4 0.3
Euro area excl. Germany 212.1 17.8 170.4 14.5 216.9 13.1
Financial investors 207.7 17.5 168.6 14.3 214.2 12.9
of which: MFIs (banks) 36.2 3.0 – 0.5 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.1
Investment funds 83.7 7.0 76.8 6.5 101.1 6.1
Insurance corporations and 
pension  funds 83.4 7.0 92.0 7.8 113.0 6.8
Non- fi  nancial investors 4.4 0.4 1.8 0.1 2.7 0.2
Non- euro area countries 350.7 29.5 301.2 25.6 346.3 20.9
Public sector (central bank and general government)
Total (all countries) 379.1 31.9 556.5 47.3 1,003.7 60.5
of which: Bundesbank (PSPP and PEPP) 0.0 0.0 277.4 23.6 559.3 33.7
Total outstanding volume 1,188.9 100.0 1,175.8 100.0 1,657.7 100.0
Sources: ESCB (SHSS database), Finance Agency and Bundesbank calculations. * Holdings at year- end based on nominal values. 
Securities issued by FMS Wertpapiermanagement and central government’s off- budget entities are not included. The fi  gures 
for “euro area excl. Germany” do not contain any own holdings of the ECB or the euro area national central banks. The fi  gures 
contain own holdings of the Finance Agency.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
41

the United Kingdom sold just under €60 bil-
lion worth of Federal securities, which 
equates to a 9 percentage point decline in 
the share of the total outstanding volume. 
The sellers were probably mainly fi  nancial 
sector players whose decision to sell may 
have been chiefl  y driven by the low yields 
on Federal bonds.7 By contrast, China’s 
public sector (central bank and general gov-
ernment) acted as a net buyer, purchasing 
just under €50 billion in Federal securities in 
total. However, owing to the higher total 
outstanding volume, this represents a slight 
percentage decline in the share to just 
under 13% at the end of the period under 
review. It is noteworthy that China’s public 
sector was a net seller in the market when 
the PSPP was launched, but upped its hold-
ings again after 2019.8 Unlike for private in-
vestors, currency policy considerations, 
above all, are likely to have played a key 
role here.
Since the end of 2014, private investors 
from the euro area have reduced their hold-
ings of Federal securities by €21 billion. 
Measured in terms of the total outstanding 
volume, this decline comes to around 8 per-
centage points. Within the sector, fi  nancial 
investors constituted the largest investor 
group.9 Investment funds and euro area 
banks as a whole reduced their holdings by 
€41.5 billion, or just over 6.5  percentage 
points in terms of the share of outstanding 
volume. It is striking that banks almost com-
pletely dissolved their holdings. In the euro 
area excluding Germany, they even recently 
built up a small net short position on aggre-
gate. As is the case for private investors 
from non- euro area countries, this may 
have been largely driven by developments 
in German government bond yields. More-
over, euro area banks have access to the 
deposit facility, which can be a cheaper safe 
alternative to Federal securities and is not 
open to other investors. Euro area insur-
ance corporations and pension funds are 
another major investor group. Unlike other 
fi  nancial investors, they temporarily in-creased their holdings of Federal securities, 
probably not least in connection with regu-
latory requirements. On balance, at just 
under 7.5% (€124 billion), the share of the 
outstanding volume of Federal bonds held 
by insurance corporations and pension 
funds from Germany and the rest of the 
euro area has remained virtually unchanged 
since the end of 2014. Recently, insurance 
corporations and pension funds surpassed 
even investment funds as the largest in-
vestor group among fi  nancial investors.
Free fl  oat
Free fl  oat normally refers to the holdings of 
an issuance that are freely available for trad-
ing. It is different to the stock held by in-
vestors that purchase bonds and then hold 
them to maturity. These “buy and hold” in-
vestors include, for example, central banks, 
insurance corporations and pension funds. 
A large volume of bonds in free fl  oat facili-
tates tradability and allows new, relevant in-
formation to be priced in under competitive 
conditions. The size of the free fl  oat can be 
stated both in absolute amounts and as a 
percentage of the total outstanding vol-
ume.
Although there is no uniform defi  nition of 
the free fl  oat, based on the available data, 
it can be approximated for the purpose of 
this analysis using the sum of the private 
sector holdings excluding insurance corpor-
ations and pension funds.
7 The fi  nancial centres of London and New York, 
where many institutional investors that hold German 
securities on behalf of clients are resident, also have a 
bearing on the fi  gures for the United Kingdom and 
United States. In these cases, the SHSS data shed no 
light on the end investor. The SHSS data for non- euro 
area countries cannot be broken down in more detail, 
for example by fi  nancial and non- fi  nancial investors.
8 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2017).
9 This more detailed sectoral breakdown is available 
only for euro area investors (see the table on p. 41). In-
vestors from non- euro area countries can only be 
broken down into public sector (central bank and gen-
eral government) and non- public sector.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
42

Japanese  bonds therefore rose comparatively 
moderately by 17 basis points to 0.24%, which 
corresponds to the upper end of the target 
range. The spread between Japanese bonds 
and ten- year Federal bonds (Bunds) has in -
creased significantly to a level not seen since 
2014, while their spread over US Treasuries is at 
a three- year high.
Yields on ten- year Bunds also rose significantly 
during the reporting period (1.0%, +113 basis 
points). They returned to positive levels in Janu -
ary for the first time since mid- 2019. Such a 
steep rise in interest rates had last been ob -
served in the spring of 2015, when the ten- year 
yield on Federal securities rose by around one 
percentage point in the span of a few weeks 
(the Bund tantrum). A model breakdown of the 
yield curve of Federal securities shows that two 
factors contributed to the rise in yields. First, 
term premia increased. To some extent, this is 
likely to be a consequence of lower net asset 
purchases by the Eurosystem. Second, market participants expected higher short- term inter -
est rates, especially in the short to medium 
term, in view of constantly rising inflation rates.
The yield curve derived from the yields of Fed -
eral securities shifted significantly upwards and 
became steeper during the period under re -
view. As this report went to press, short- dated 
bonds also started yielding more than the de -
posit facility rate of -0.5%. From the two-  year 
maturity category onwards, the yield curve was 
positive. At the end of 2021, the only bonds to 
generate positive yields had been those with 
residual maturities of more than 20 years. At 
last count, the yield spread between Federal 
securities and maturity- matched bonds issued 
by the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) 
was wider than at the end of last year (+20 
basis points to 0.7 percentage point). The pre -
mium paid by market participants for the par -
ticularly high liquidity of Federal securities has 
therefore increased since the start of the year. 
Given the repricing of bonds in an environment Higher ten- year 
Federal 
securities  yield 
due to increased 
short- term inter -
est rate expect -
ations and 
higher term 
premia German yield 
curve shifted 
significantly 
upwards and 
became steeperUnder the PSPP , the stock of freely tradable 
Federal securities declined in both absolute 
and percentage terms up to the end of 
2019, falling by just over €160 billion to just 
under €470 billion, or by just over 13 per-
centage points to just under 40%. This 
changed after the outbreak of the pan-
demic. As a result of the higher net issuance 
stemming from the fi  scal measures and the 
monetary policy measures taken, the free 
fl  oat has developed differently in percent-
age and absolute terms since the second 
quarter of 2020. The Federal Government’s 
strong issuance activity during the pan-
demic exceeded the Eurosystem’s pur-
chases of German government bonds. This 
caused the percentage share of the free 
fl  oat to decline further to around 30% at 
the end of the period under review. How-
ever, at the same time, the absolute volume 
in free fl  oat rose slightly by just over €38 
billion to a little more than €500 billion.Federal securities in free float*
Sources: ESCB (SHSS database), Finance Agency and Bundes-
bank  calculations.  * End-of-quarter  values  based  on  nominal 
values. Securities issued by FMS Wertpapiermanagement and 
central  government’s  off-budget  entities  are  not  included. 
1 Total private sector holdings, excluding insurance corpora-
tions and pension funds. It is assumed that the outstanding 
volume of securities not captured by the SHSS can be divided 
equally between those in free float and those held by strategic 
investors. This assumption is based on the figures prior to the 
launch of the PSPP, when approximately half of the outstand-
ing volume was in free float. 2 Free float in relation to the total 
outstanding  volume  of  securities,  including  the  Finance 
Agency's own holdings.
Deutsche Bundesbank14 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021303540455055€ bn
450500550600650
%Absolute free float1
Relative free float2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
43

of higher inflation rates, the volatility of Federal 
securities yields also increased. As a result, the 
implied volatility of options on futures contracts 
for Bunds was above its five- year average.
The yield spread between ten- year Bunds and 
ten- year government bonds of other euro area 
countries (GDP- weighted average) widened 
compared with the start of the year by 32 basis 
points to 1.0 percentage point. Even after the 
scheduled conclusion of net asset purchases 
under the pandemic emergency purchase pro -
gramme (PEPP), the yield spread remained only 
moderately above the five- year average 
(0.8 percentage point). The five- year window 
fully covers a period during which the Eurosys -
tem was active in bond markets.3 In this envir -
onment of generally low interest rates, private 
investors were more willing to purchase bonds 
with lower ratings in order to obtain a some -
what higher interest rate (“search for yield”). 
The current widening of the spread reflected 
the fact that, in the wake of the expected shift in monetary policy stance, the relative prices of 
bonds with different ratings will also return to 
normal. Changes in the yield spreads of the 
other euro area Member States were not uni -
form, but instead reflected different country-  
specific risks. For example, the yield spreads of 
countries with a poorer rating widened some -
what disproportionately overall. In particular, 
the yield spread of Greek government bonds, 
which, with a Standard & Poor’s rating of BB+, 
are not classified as investment grade, widened 
significantly (+108 basis points). However, it re -
mained slightly below its five- year average. 
Market liquidity indicators did not point to any 
pronounced tightness in the market for euro 
area government bonds during the period 
under review.
At the end of the reporting period, market-  
based short- term inflation expectations for the 
euro area derived from inflation swaps were 
well above the 2% definition of price stability 
over a two- year horizon, peaking at over 8% 
for September 2022. At the end of 2021, infla -
tion swaps had still been indicating that infla -
tion would rapidly fall back to 2% from a high 
level by the end of this year. With the recent in -
crease, the profile of market- based indicators 
of inflation expectations for the next two years 
shifted very significantly upwards. This process 
started with the publication of surprisingly high 
inflation figures at the beginning of the year 
and intensified with the outbreak of the war 
against Ukraine (see also p. 22). The expected 
inflation rates for 2023 increased particularly 
sharply. However, inflation expectations have 
also risen in the medium term since the begin -
ning of the year. Inflation swaps recently re -
corded an inflation rate in excess of 2.5% for 
April 2024, the last month for which detailed 
information is currently available.4 On an an -Widening of 
yield spreads in 
euro areaMarket partici -
pants expected 
higher inflation 
rates in the 
medium termShort-term HICP paths for the euro area
0123456789
+++++++++%
2021 2022 2023 2024
Sources: Fenics Market Data, Consensus Economics, Eurostat 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 On  Monday,  21  February 
2022,  Russia  recognised  the  independence  of  parts  of  the 
Donetsk and Luhansk regions within Ukrainian territory. 2 HICP 
excluding tobacco.
Deutsche BundesbankSurvey averages from 
Consensus EconomicsForward inflation rates
derived from inflation swaps
Actual
annual HICP 231 December 2021
9 May 2022
19 May 20229 May 2022
21 February 20221
3 Between January 2019 and October 2019, the Eurosys -
tem did not make any net purchases under the asset pur -
chase programme (APP) but fully reinvested the principal 
payments from maturing securities.
4 Detailed inflation swaps are available at monthly horizon 
intervals for the next 24 monthly data releases. In addition, 
there are inflation swaps with less granular annual maturity 
intervals up to a ten- year horizon.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
44

nual average, market participants expected a 
rate of 7.7% for 2022 and 4.6% for 2023. A 
period in which high inflation expectations be -
come entrenched increases the risk that house -
holds and enterprises will align their wage and 
price- setting decisions with inflation expect -
ations that are above the 2% inflation target.
Market- based inflation expectations were also 
considerably above survey expectations and 
markedly above the March ECB staff projec -
tions. Methodological and economic factors 
can cause market and survey- based inflation 
expectations to diverge. The positive inflation 
risk premium reflected in the difference be -
tween market and survey- based values sug -
gests, for instance, that market participants are 
hedging against risks arising from unexpectedly 
high inflation in the future. In their assessment, 
they also take into account war- related scen -
arios which can have serious implications for 
energy price movements. Market participants 
who assume the risk of insuring others against 
high inflation in risky situations charge a pre -
mium, which means that, in addition to the 
probability of high inflation occurring in swap 
rates, the risk itself is also priced in.
Market participants also expected markedly 
higher inflation rates in the long term. At 2.3% 
at last count, the five- year forward inflation 
rate five years ahead, which is likewise derived 
from inflation swaps, was 30 basis points 
higher than at the beginning of the year and 
53 basis points higher than before the Russian 
invasion of Ukraine. On the other hand, survey- 
based inflation expectations calculated by Con -
sensus Economics for the euro area six to ten 
years ahead fell slightly in April to 1.9%, com -
pared with 2.0% in January 2022. As with the 
above- mentioned short- term inflation expect -
ations derived from inflation swaps, risk premia 
are likely to have additionally contributed to 
the sharp rise in long- term market- based indi -
cators.
Yields on European corporate bonds with re -
sidual maturities of between seven and ten years have risen significantly since the begin -
ning of the year. Given that the yields on 
matched- maturity Federal securities rose less 
sharply on balance, the spreads of BBB- rated 
European financial and non- financial corporate 
bonds over Bunds widened by 131 and 89 basis 
points, respectively. Yields and risk premia on 
high- yield bonds rose particularly sharply. At 
the same time, the credit default premia for 
debtors with poor creditworthiness increased 
(iTraxx Crossover (five years), +235 basis points). 
The majority of this increase already took place 
prior to the invasion of Ukraine by the Russian 
Federation. Measured by yield spreads, funding 
conditions for European enterprises in the cap -
ital market were hovering at just over ½ per -
centage point above their five- year average as 
this report went to press.
Gross issuance in the German bond market in 
the first quarter of 2022 was significantly higher 
than in the preceding three- month period. 
Overall, German issuers placed €433½ billion Survey and 
market- based 
inflation expect -
ations differ due 
to risk premia
Significantly 
greater rise in 
long- term for -
ward inflation 
rates in the euro 
area
Corporate bond 
yield spreads upHigh net 
issuance  of 
German  debt 
securitiesForward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Derived  from  the  fixed  cash 
flow arising from inflation swaps which is swapped for the ac-
tual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro 
area and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised 
over the next five or ten years. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 20221.41.82.22.63.0% p.a., weekly averages
Five-year forward inflation rate in 
five years derived from swapsConsensus Economics inflation
expectations in six to ten years
United StatesEuro area
0.81.21.62.02.4Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
45

worth of debt securities in the market, up from 
€354 billion in the previous three months. Net 
of redemptions and changes in issuers’ own 
holdings, residents ramped up their capital 
market borrowing by €87½ billion. The out -
standing volume of foreign debt securities in 
the German market rose by €48½ billion in the first quarter. On balance, the total outstanding 
volume of bonds in Germany thus grew by 
€136 billion in the quarter under review.
Domestic credit institutions increased their cap -
ital market debt by €43½ billion on balance be -
tween January and March, compared with net 
redemptions of €4 billion in the previous quar -
ter. The primary instruments issued were debt 
securities of specialised credit institutions (€33 
billion), followed to a lesser extent by mort -
gage Pfandbriefe (€5 billion) and other bank 
debt securities that can be structured flexibly 
(€4 billion).
In the first quarter of 2022, the public sector is -
sued bonds to the tune of €26 billion net, fol -
lowing €21½ billion in the previous three-  
month period. The Federal Government (in -
cluding the resolution agency classified as part 
of central government) issued mainly 30-  year 
Federal bonds (Bunds) and five- year Federal 
notes (Bobls) (€16 billion and €14 billion re -
spectively). This contrasted with net redemp -
tions of Treasury discount paper (Bubills) 
amounting to €13½ billion. State and local 
governments issued bonds worth €3 billion 
net.
In the quarter under review, domestic enter -
prises were highly active in the corporate bond 
market, issuing a net €17½ billion worth of 
bonds. Their net redemptions equalled €8 bil -
lion a quarter earlier. The bulk of these issues 
was attributable to non- financial corporations 
(€11 billion).
All groups of investors acquired debt securities 
in the first quarter of 2022, with domestic non- 
banks expanding their bond portfolios by a net 
€51 billion, in particular. Foreign debt securities 
were the instrument of choice (€36 billion). The 
Bundesbank acquired bonds in the amount of 
€40½ billion net, predominantly under the Eu -
rosystem’s asset purchase programmes. The 
majority of these purchases involved domestic 
paper issued by public sector entities. Foreign 
investors, meanwhile, acquired a net €32½ bil -Rise in credit 
institutions’ 
capital  market 
debt
Net public 
sector  issuance
Net issuance of 
corporate bonds
Purchases of 
debt securitiesRegional effects on stock prices resulting 
from the war in Ukraine*
02,0004,0006,0008,000
– 15 – 10 – 5 0 + 5
Sources: Refinitiv, Luftlinie.org, OpenStreetMap.org, Opendata-
commons.org,  © OpenStreetMap  contributors.  * Percentage 
changes  in  MSCI  indices  in  local  currency  (performance  in-
dices).
Deutsche BundesbankPercentage change in the stock indexDistance between the capital
and Kyiv (km)
GBUS JP
CA
FRDEGBUSJP
CA
FRDE21 Feb. to
1 Apr. 2221 Feb. to
4 Mar. 22
ITITInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2021 2022
Q1 Q4 Q1
Debt securities
Residents 92.8 41.9 103.3
Credit institutions 10.9 – 27.9 12.0
of which:
Foreign debt securities –  4.2 – 15.0 12.3
Deutsche Bundesbank 54.6 58.3 40.5
Other sectors 27.3 11.5 50.8
of which:
Domestic debt securities – 13.0 8.4 15.0
Non-residents 28.1 – 42.9 32.7
Shares
Residents 25.6 37.7 19.4
Credit institutions 3.6 2.3 – 1.3
of which:
Domestic shares 2.6 –  0.1 – 0.7
Non-banks 22.0 35.4 20.6
of which:
Domestic shares 1.7 26.2 11.3
Non-residents 8.9 –  7.5 – 9.2
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 23.9 56.7 31.8
Investment in retail funds 9.4 11.6 3.9
of which:
Equity funds 4.3 2.7 0.0
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
46

lion worth of German debt securities. Domestic 
credit institutions likewise expanded their bond 
portfolio, by €12 billion in net terms. On bal -
ance, their interest focused exclusively on for -
eign debt securities.
Equity market
International equity market prices have de -
clined markedly since the beginning of the 
year. The rise in long-  term interest rates in 
many countries was the decisive factor. They 
weighed on prices throughout the reporting 
period via the discount factor effect. Recently, 
concerns about economic developments have 
also arisen, not least as a result of lockdowns in 
China due to the zero- COVID policy being pur -
sued there. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine also led 
to abrupt, albeit mostly short- lived, price losses 
in global equity markets. Relatively speaking, 
the stock exchanges in Europe were affected 
the most in the period immediately after the 
start of the war. This reflected the fact that the 
economies of those countries in closer proxim -
ity to Russia and Ukraine are usually also more 
closely intertwined with these countries. This 
also applies to Germany, whose economy had 
been heavily dependent on Russian commod -
ities up until the start of the war. As a reflection 
of the slump in prices, uncertainty in the equity 
markets temporarily spiked after the start of 
the war. However, as uncertainty declined, 
prices picked up again somewhat. Toward the 
end of the reporting period, the regionally dif -
ferentiated price pattern largely disappeared. 
On balance, the US S&P 500 (-18.2%), the Euro 
Stoxx (-14.7%) and the CDAX (-17.3%) have 
each recorded significant losses since the be -
ginning of the year. The Japanese Nikkei’s 
losses were more moderate (-8.3%). In the 
United Kingdom, markets closed at the end of 
the period under review down only slightly 
from the beginning of the year (FTSE  100: 
-1.1%). One reason for this better performance 
is that the FTSE index contains a large contin -
gent of enterprises that benefited from the 
high price gains in the commodity sector.International 
equity markets 
with lossesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2021 2022
Q1 Q4 Q1p
I. Current account +  75.0 +  64.9 +  52.3
1. Goods +  57.2 +  38.8 +  34.3
2. Services +   3.3 –   1.2 –   2.5
3. Primary income +  31.8 +  41.9 +  36.9
4. Secondary income –  17.3 –  14.6 –  16.4
II. Capital account –   0.3 –   1.0 –   1.9
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) + 106.9 +  86.3 +  94.0
1. Direct investment +  32.0 +  32.9 +   4.7
Domestic investment 
abroad +  51.0 +  38.8 +  44.8
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country +  19.0 +   5.9 +  40.1
2. Portfolio investment +  28.4 +  95.4 +  38.4
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities +  65.1 +  42.0 +  59.7
Shares 1 +  13.0 +  12.9 +   7.2
Investment fund shares 2+  16.7 +  39.9 +   4.0
of which:
Money market fund 
shares –   8.4 +  14.0 –   8.7
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 +   2.6 –  10.4 +   1.3
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 +  32.8 –   0.4 +  47.2
of which:
Denominated in euro 5+  21.3 +   4.2 +  42.3
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities +  36.7 –  53.3 +  21.3
Shares 1 +   8.5 –   7.6 –   9.2
Investment fund shares +   0.2 –   2.8 –   2.2
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 +  19.7 –   6.1 –   5.2
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 +   8.4 –  36.8 +  37.9
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 6 –   1.5 –  32.9 +  16.8
3. Financial derivatives 7 +  20.3 +  18.9 +  10.6
4. Other investment 8 +  25.8 –  61.1 +  38.1
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 9 – 105.8 +  99.4 – 126.3
Enterprises and 
 households 10 +  53.9 –  44.5 +  60.0
General government –   2.1 +   1.0 –   5.2
Bundesbank +  79.8 – 117.1 + 109.5
5. Reserve assets +   0.4 +   0.3 +   2.2
IV. Errors and omissions 11 +  32.2 +  22.4 +  43.5
1  Including participation certifi  cates. 2  Including reinvested 
earnings. 3  Short- term: original maturity of up to one year. 
4 Long- term: original maturity of more than one year or unlim-
ited. 5  Including outstanding foreign Deutsche  Mark bonds. 
6 Including bonds issued by the former Federal Railways, the 
former Federal Post Offi   ce and the former Treuhand agency. 
7  Balance of transactions arising from options and fi  nancial 
futures  contracts as well as employee stock options. 8 Includes, 
in particular, loans and trade credits as well as currency and de-
posits. 9 Excluding the Bundesbank. 10  Includes the following 
sectors: loans corporations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institu-
tions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and 
non- profi  t institutions serving households. 11  Statistical errors 
and omissions resulting from the difference between the bal-
ance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current 
account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
47

Do fi  nancial sanctions against Russian banks affect pay-
ments? Evidence from the German TARGET2 component
Russia’s annexation of the Crimean penin-
sula in March 2014 prompted the European 
Union (EU) to impose fi  nancial sanctions on 
Russia for the fi  rst time. In mid- 2014, it 
adopted targeted measures not only against 
individuals but also against specifi  c Russian 
credit institutions. Following the Russian in-
vasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022, the 
European Union tightened and expanded 
the sanctions. Many other countries also 
adopted sanctions against Russia or ex-
tended existing restrictions.
This study uses transaction data from the 
German TARGET2 component (TARGET2- 
Bundesbank) between 1 February 2022 and 
30 April 2022 to assess whether fi  nancial 
sanctions against Russian credit institutions 
which have been newly implemented or 
tightened since the end of February 2022 
actually reduced fi  nancial fl  ows in the Ger-
man TARGET2 component and whether the 
various types of sanctions had different ef-
fects.1 The analysis is based exclusively on 
data from the Bundesbank’s TARGET2 com-
ponent system and focuses only on the 
“customer payments” and “interbank pay-
ments” transaction categories,2,3 not taking 
into account third- party data. The advan-
tage of the TARGET2 data used is that they 
are available on a daily basis. Furthermore, 
the effect of the sanctions can be cleanly 
identifi  ed econometrically, as the dataset 
contains accounts of both sanctioned and 
non- sanctioned Russian banks. However, a 
caveat is in order: the study only covers a 
subset of all payments to and from Russia, 
as other payment channels and TARGET2 
component systems are not taken into ac-
count.4 Moreover, it includes only those 
transactions from TARGET2- Bundesbank ini-
tiated by Russian banks via correspondent banks in the EU in TARGET2 or TARGET2 
payments intended for Russian banks. This 
is why further studies are needed, especially 
given the possibility of circumvention and 
also incorporating additional data sources, 
in order to draw general conclusions on the 
impact of fi  nancial sanctions on fi  nancial 
fl  ows.
The study distinguishes between three dif-
ferent types of fi  nancial sanctions against 
Russian banks. These are capital market 
sanctions, SWIFT exclusion5 and prohib-
itions on disposal (see the table on p. 49).
Nine Russian banks are subject to capital 
market sanctions (column 1).6 This means 
that EU market participants are prohibited 
from directly or indirectly purchasing, sell-
ing, providing investment services for or as-
1 TARGET2 (Trans- European Automated Real- time 
Gross settlement Express Transfer system) is a Eurosys-
tem payment system for the fast and secure settlement 
of individual electronic payments within the European 
Union. TARGET2 is based on a single shared platform 
(SSP) and guarantees the rapid exchange of central 
bank liquidity in real time.
2 Only payments processed via the German TARGET2 
component are taken into account. Payments from 
Russia initiated, for example, via an Austrian bank in 
TARGET2 and intended, say, for a recipient in France 
are not included. This therefore represents only a sub-
set of all TARGET2 business activities.
3 These two transaction categories make up around 
95% of the total number of observations. In terms of 
value, they comprise around 60% of the recorded cap-
ital fl  ows. Credit institutions’ intra- group payments ac-
count for the majority of the other transactions in 
TARGET2- Bundesbank.
4 Important Russian participants are also included, for 
example, in the Austrian and French TARGET2 com-
ponents. In addition to their TARGET2 business activ-
ities, Russian credit institutions also use other payment 
systems to settle their payments.
5 The Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Tele-
communication (SWIFT) operates a particularly secure 
telecommunications network which is used by banks 
worldwide to settle fi  nancial transactions.
6 The capital market measures also apply to the sub-
sidiaries of the aforementioned credit institutions 
domiciled outside the EU.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
48

sistance in the issuance of, or otherwise 
dealing with transferable securities and 
money market instruments issued by the 
sanctioned institutions. As a result, these 
Russian banks are no longer able to refi  -
nance themselves in the EU via capital mar-
ket instruments (depending on the limita-
tion of maturity via bonds or money market 
instruments). Seen in isolation, these types 
of fi  nancial sanctions are likely to be, rela-
tively speaking, the softest type of instru-
ment, as other forms of borrowing are still 
possible.7 Furthermore, this measure does 
not address payment transactions, which 
means that payments may continue to be 
made. In addition, the nine Russian banks 
affected – at least under these EU regula-
tions – are not prevented from buying or 
selling, on behalf of their customers, secur-
ities issued by other entities.8
The SWIFT exclusion (column 2) is governed 
by Council Regulation (EU) 2022/ 345: “It 
shall be prohibited as of 12 March 2022 to provide specialised fi  nancial messaging ser-
vices, which are used to exchange fi  nancial 
data, to the legal persons, entities or bodies 
listed in Annex XIV or to any legal person, 
entity or body established in Russia whose 
proprietary rights are directly or indirectly 
owned for more than 50% by an entity 
listed in Annex XIV.” The organisations listed 
in said Annex include seven Russian banks. 
This type of fi  nancial sanction has consider-
ably more bite than capital market sanc-
tions. Nevertheless, the affected Russian 
institu tions can continue to make inter-
national credit transfers via alternative pay-
ment systems, such as the Chinese Cross- 
Border Interbank Payment System (CIPS), or 
other secure communication channels, such 
as secure fax lines. As standardised messa-
7 Article 5 of Council Regulation (EU) No 833/ 2014 
also prohibits lending to certain Russian credit institu-
tions.
8 However, since 26 February 2022, general restric-
tions on some Russian enterprises have also been in 
force in the securities sector (Articles 5e and 5f of 
Regulation (EU) No 833/ 2014).Financial sanctions against Russian banks
 
Capital market sanctions SWIFT exclusion Prohibitions on disposal
Council Regulation (EU) No 833/ 2014 of 
31 July 2014 and Council Regulation 
(EU) 2022/ 328 of 25 February 2022Council Regulation (EU) 2022/ 345 of 
1 March 2022Council Implementing Regulation (EU) 
No 826/ 2014 of 30 July 2014, Council 
Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/ 
260 of 23 February 2022 and Council 
Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/ 
581 of 8 April 2022
Alfa Bank (from 25 February 2022)
Bank Otkritie (from 25 February 2022) Bank Otkritie (from 14 March 2022) Bank Otkritie (from 8 April 2022)
Bank Rossiya (from 25 February 2022) Bank Rossiya (from 14 March 2022) Bank Rossiya (from 23 February 2022)
Gazprombank (from 31 July 2014)
Novikombank (from 14 March 2022) Novikombank (from 8 April 2022)
Promsvyazbank (from 25 February 2022) Promsvyazbank (from 14 March 2022) Promsvyazbank
(from 23 February 2022)
Rosselkhozbank
(from 31 July 2014)
Russian National Commercial Bank 
(from 30 July 2014)
Sberbank (from 31 July 2014)
Sovcombank (from 14 March 2022) Sovcombank (from 8 April 2022)
Vnesheconombank (VEB)
(from 31 July 2014)Vnesheconombank (VEB) 
(from 14 March 2022)Vnesheconombank (VEB)
(from 23 February 2022)
VTB Bank (from 31 July 2014) VTB Bank (from 14 March 2022) VTB Bank (from 8 April 2022)
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
49

ging via SWIFT is no longer possible, the 
number and volume of transactions are 
likely to decline considerably in practice.
Eight Russian banks are subject to prohib-
itions on disposal (column 3). All funds and 
economic resources belonging to, owned, 
held or controlled by any natural or legal 
persons, entities or bodies, or natural or 
legal persons, entities or bodies associated 
with them shall be frozen. No funds or eco-
nomic resources shall be made available, 
directly or indirectly, to or for the benefi  t of 
the parties concerned. This type of fi  nancial 
sanction is likely to be toughest of the three 
types discussed here, as these measures dir-
ectly affect payments.9,10
As mentioned above, this study is confi  ned 
to TARGET2- Bundesbank transaction data. 
This includes payments initiated by Russian 
banks via correspondent banks in the EU in 
TARGET2- Bundesbank or intended for Rus-
sian banks – where apparent based on 
available information.11
All in all, the dataset comprises business- 
day transactions for 518 Russian institutions 
with a unique business identifi  er code (BIC) 
and 62 TARGET2 business days. 163 BICs 
are subject to capital market sanctions, 50 
BICs to SWIFT exclusion and 50 BICs to a 
prohibition on disposal.12 As different types 
of sanctions have been imposed on several 
Russian banks, there is overlap between the 
affected BICs.
The upper section of the chart on p. 51 de-
scribes the business- day aggregated infl  ows 
and outfl  ows in TARGET2- Bundesbank via 
the accounts of non- sanctioned and sanc-
tioned Russian banks from column (1) be-
tween 1 February 2022 and 30 April 2022 
(capital market sanctions). Up to and in-
cluding 24 February 2022, the business- day 
average of infl  ows to (outfl  ows from) non- sanctioned bank accounts stood at €1.5 bil-
lion (€1.1 billion). The business- day average 
of infl  ows (outfl  ows) subsequently fell to 
€0.7 billion (€0.7 billion). Capital fl  ows into 
and out of the accounts of sanctioned 
banks also decreased. Up to and including 
24 February 2022, the business- day average 
value of infl  ows (outfl  ows) amounted to 
€1.6 billion (€1.8 billion). Infl  ows (outfl  ows) 
subsequently dropped to €221 million 
(€291 million). In the course of April, the 
fi  nancial fl  ows of both groups went back 
up in some cases.
The middle section of the chart on p. 51 
illustrates  the capital fl  ows in TARGET2- 
Bundesbank via the bank accounts of the 
seven Russian banks excluded from SWIFT. 
The pattern of gross fl  ows to or from the 
accounts of non- sanctioned Russian banks 
is very similar to that under capital market 
sanctions. It is striking that transactions 
plummeted following the Russian invasion 
of Ukraine on 24 February 2022. Since the 
decision to exclude several Russian banks 
from SWIFT on 1 March 2022, the aggre-
gate daily transactions of the sanctioned 
bank accounts have been close to zero.
The lower section of the chart on p. 51 illus-
trates the capital fl  ows of non- sanctioned 
and sanctioned Russian banks in the event 
of a prohibition on disposal. These types of 
sanctions also include restrictions on pay-
9 In the past, prohibitions on disposal have often been 
imposed on certain individuals in sanctioned countries.
10 Depending on the business activity of the Russian 
bank, in specifi  c cases a SWIFT exclusion may also have 
a stronger impact than a prohibition on disposal.
11 It is not always mandatory to populate the message 
fi  elds in SWIFT. There are strong signs of an increase in 
“free format” messages, where the fi  eld is populated 
but not with an automatically identifi  able BIC. In the 
TARGET2 transaction data, the corresponding fi  eld is 
then empty. The assumption is that Russian institutions 
are trying to conceal their transactions.
12 As a rule, a single credit institution has several BICs. 
Therefore, the number of BICs is greater than the num-
ber of sanctioned Russian banks.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
50

ments. The pattern of gross fl  ows to or 
from the accounts of the non- sanctioned 
Russian banks is once again very similar. 
Since the prohibition on disposal went into 
effect on 23 February 2022, capital fl  ows to 
or from the accounts of sanctioned banks 
have likewise been close to zero. However, 
even immediately before the prohibition on 
disposal, the average daily gross fl  ows to 
and from sanctioned banks were at a low 
level: €53 million in infl  ows to Russian bank 
accounts and €93 million in outfl  ows from 
Russian bank accounts (from 1 February to 
22 February 2022).The descriptive statistics indicate that cap-
ital fl  ows to and from both the accounts of 
non- sanctioned banks and the accounts of 
sanctioned banks fell sharply following the 
introduction or tightening of strict meas-
ures against Russian banks. The effect on 
the accounts of sanctioned banks was more 
severe in the case of SWIFT exclusion and 
prohibition on disposals than in the case of 
capital market sanctions.
However, the descriptive analysis does not 
take into account general macroeconomic 
developments or across- the- board reluc-
tance to engage in transactions as a result Daily transactions by Russian banks in TARGET2-Bundesbank
Deutsche BundesbankFebruary March April
202201,0002,0003,0004,0005,000Transaction values in € mn
01,0002,0003,0004,0005,0006,00001,0002,0003,0004,0005,000
01,0002,0003,0004,0005,0006,000
01,0002,0003,0004,0005,0006,000
01,0002,0003,0004,0005,0006,000
February March April
2022Sanctioned banks Non-sanctioned banks
Outflows Inflows
Prohibitions on disposalSWIFT exclusionCapital market sanctions
1 March:
announced
25 February and 8 April:
restrictions tightened 
(further)25 February:
restrictions tightened
14 March:
implementedDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
51

of the war, both of which affect all Russian 
banks equally. The econometric analysis 
below therefore incorporates additional ef-
fects, such as the withdrawal of multi-
national enterprises from Russia, which is 
also likely to have had a negative impact on 
payments. In addition, the study takes into 
account potential interdependencies when 
Russian banks are affected by multiple sanc-
tions.
In order to assess the effect of fi  nancial 
sanctions on Russian banks, the study uses 
a difference- in- differences estimator. This 
method attempts to identify a causal effect. 
For this purpose, a group experiencing a 
certain intervention (“treatment”, here: ac-
counts of sanctioned Russian banks) is com-
pared with a control group (accounts of 
non- sanctioned Russian banks). Since the 
beginning of the war can be interpreted as 
an exogenous event that leads to the intro-
duction or tightening of sanctions, a “treat-
ment” exists in the subsequent period. Rus-
sian bank accounts that make payments via 
TARGET2- Bundesbank but are not subject 
to sanctions serve as a control group. Only 
the effects on sanctioned banks that go be-
yond general developments are of interest. 
Data gaps are fi  lled with nil values in order 
to create a balanced panel. In the follow-
ing, equation (1) is estimated using the 
Pseudo- Poisson Maximum Likelihood 
(PPML) estimator in order to account for 
non- linear effects:
(1)Capital ﬂowsbt=↵+ exp[ βSanctions bt
(+γAnticipationbt)
+⇡b+σt]+" bt
where Capital /f_l  owsbt represents the re-
spective gross fl  ow (infl  ows/ outfl  ows) of 
the Russian account b  (identifi  ed using 
the BIC) on day t  as part of the German 
TARGET2 component. Sanctionsbt is a bin-
ary variable that assumes the value of 1  if the Russian account b  is affected by EU 
fi  nancial sanctions on day t. A negative esti-
mation coeffi   cient of β is to be expected. 
The three different types of fi  nancial sanc-
tions from the table on p. 53 (capital mar-
ket sanctions, SWIFT exclusion and prohib-
itions on disposal) serve as the basis for the 
sanctioned BICs. The value of Sanctionsbt 
corresponds to the value of 1  for the af-
fected BIC b as from the fi  rst day on which 
the fi  rst sanction was imposed on the re-
spective bank.13 In the case of the SWIFT 
exclusion, the binary variable Sanctionsbt 
assumes the value of 1  as of 14  March 
2022. However, as the SWIFT exclusion was 
already announced on 1 March 2022, the 
estimation also incorporates an anticipation 
effect into the corresponding regression. 
The variable Anticipationbt assumes the 
value of 1  between 1  March 2022 and 
11  March 2022. πb and σt denote bank- 
specifi  c and time- specifi  c fi  xed effects. As 
only Russian accounts are examined, the 
time- specifi  c fi  xed effects refl  ect Russia’s 
general macroeconomic developments. 
This environment is likely to affect all Rus-
sian accounts simultaneously and in a simi-
lar way. The bank- specifi  c fi  xed effects are 
designed to control for general business re-
lationships that do not change over time. 
εbt is the statistical error term.
A baseline specifi  cation does not distinguish 
between the different types of sanctions: 
the sanction variable assumes the value of 1 
once a sanction on the respective Russian 
bank has been imposed, irrespective of 
whether it is a capital market sanction, 
SWIFT exclusion or a prohibition on dis-
posal. A second estimation then incorpor-
ates multiple binary sanction variables sim-
ultaneously to assess which types of fi  nan-
13 Since various Russian banks were already subject to 
sanctions before the start of the estimation period, 
their transactions are ultimately a non- factor in the 
estimation results.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
52

cial sanctions have a particularly strong im-
pact on fi  nancial fl  ows.
The above table presents the estimation re-
sults of equation (1). Non- sanctioned Rus-
sian banks serve as a control group in all 
estimates. The results should therefore be 
interpreted in comparison with this group. 
The fi  rst two columns show the coeffi   cients 
for fi  nancial sanctions imposed on Russian 
banks irrespective of their type. The results 
are statistically signifi  cant for both infl  ows 
and outfl  ows. The estimated coeffi   cient of 
-1.271 (-1.996) means that the infl  ows (out-
fl  ows) to or from the accounts of sanc-
tioned Russian banks have fallen by 71.9% 
(86.4%) solely on account of the sanctions 
and irrespective of other infl  uences. Col-
umns (3) and (4) distinguish between the 
types of fi  nancial sanctions: all three binary 
variables are included in the estimation. The 
estimation also controls for anticipation ef-
fects regarding the SWIFT exclusion. The re-
gression results are likewise negative and 
statistically highly signifi  cant. The coeffi   -
cient of -1.177 (-1.670) for infl  ows (out-fl  ows) for capital market sanctions means 
that gross fl  ows to and from the accounts 
of sanctioned Russian banks have fallen by 
69.2% (81.2%). By comparison, the SWIFT 
exclusion had a stronger effect: transac-
tions ground to a virtual halt (each -99.9%). 
Since the implementation of the SWIFT 
exclusion  did not take place until a few 
days after the announcement, the anticipa-
tion effects between 1  March 2022 and 
11 March 2022 are also visible. According 
to the estimation results, gross fl  ows col-
lapsed nearly completely even before the 
decision was actually implemented (-99.3%). 
The results of the prohibitions on disposal 
are likewise statistically highly signifi  cant 
and negative. Infl  ows (outfl  ows) fell by 
91.3% (97.6%). This means that all three 
types of fi  nancial sanctions lead to a decline 
in fi  nancial fl  ows in the German TARGET2 
component, with capital market sanctions, 
as the least severe sanctions, showing the 
weakest response in terms of value. Ac-
cording to the estimation results, SWIFT 
exclu sion as well as prohibitions on disposal  Effect of sanctions against Russian banks
 
ItemBaseline specifi  cationDistinction by type of fi  nancial 
sanction 
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Infl  ows Outfl  ows Infl  ows Outfl  ows
Sanctions – 1.271*** – 1.996*** . .
(0.344) (0.564)
Anticipation . . –  4.949*** –  7.793***
(1.080) (1.091)
Capital market sanctions . . –  1.177*** –  1.670***
(0.196) (0.368)
SWIFT exclusion . . – 10.263*** – 12.134***
(1.178) (1.062)
Prohibitions on disposal . . –  2.439*** –  3.750***
(0.423) (0.264)
Observations 24,924 28,644 24,924 28,644
Adjusted R2 0.856 0.847 0.866 0.864
*** Signifi  cant at the 1% level, ** signifi  cant at the 5% level, * signifi  cant at the 10% level. Bank account- specifi  c and 
time-specifi  c fi  xed effects are taken into account but not reported. Robust standard errors (clustered across bank accounts) in 
parentheses.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
53

Despite the war, analysts have continued to 
rate the fundamentals of enterprises in Europe 
(Euro Stoxx) and the United States (S&P 500) as 
good. Since the beginning of the year, they 
have revised their sales outlook for the coming 
financial years upwards. However, analysts also 
assumed that profits would be squeezed by 
costs. Measured by the earnings yield based on 
the business outlook for the next 12 months, 
equity valuations on both sides of the Atlantic 
are more favourable than at the beginning of 
the year. By contrast, the lower implied cost of 
equity5 has shown that the valuation level is 
somewhat higher. The main reason for this is 
that the implied cost of equity also took into 
account medium- term earnings prospects, 
which declined from a high level. By historical 
standards, equity valuations remain rather high 
overall in the United States and rather low in 
the euro area.
In the first three months of 2022, German 
stock corporations raised €1½ billion net in new funds (previous quarter: €18½ billion). The 
volume of foreign shares in the German market 
rose by €9 billion over the same period. On bal -
ance, domestic non- banks were the sole buyers 
of equities (€20½ billion). By contrast, foreign 
investors – as is often the case in the run- up to 
dividend payment dates in the second quar -
ter – and domestic credit institutions reduced 
their equity portfolios by €9 billion and €1½ 
billion net, respectively.
Mutual funds
In the first quarter of 2022, domestic invest -
ment companies posted inflows of €35½ bil -
lion, following a quarter in which a very high 
volume of mutual fund shares had been issued 
(€68½ billion). On balance, specialised funds 
reserved for institutional investors were by far Indicators of 
valuation level 
present mixed 
picture
Equity market 
funding lowSales and 
purchase  of 
mutual fund 
sharescause transactions in TARGET2- Bundesbank 
to be discontinued almost entirely.14
The results illustrate that there was a gen-
eral decline in the transactions of Russian 
banks recorded in the German TARGET2 
component after 24 February 2022. Gross 
fl  ows from both non- sanctioned and sanc-
tioned Russian banks’ accounts decreased 
following the expansion and tightening of 
sanctions as a result of Russia’s invasion of 
Ukraine. Capital market sanctions, SWIFT 
exclusion and the prohibitions on disposal 
are likely to have a strong impact according 
to estimation results. The anticipation ef-
fects prior to the implementation of the 
SWIFT exclusion have also led to a statistic-
ally signifi  cant fall in infl  ows and outfl  ows. 
However, potential circumvention effects 
cannot be ruled out per se: such transac-
tions could be taking place via TARGET2 ac-
counts in component systems of other euro area countries or via alternative payment 
channels and systems.
14 Additional robustness analyses with interaction 
terms which incorporate additional interdependencies 
of the sanctioned Russian banks do not change these 
results. Thus, potential sanctions overlaps do not ap-
pear to play a signifi  cant additional role.
5 The implied cost of equity can be calculated using a divi -
dend discount model; see Deutsche Bundesbank (2016).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
54

the primary beneficiaries (€32 billion). Among 
the asset classes, mixed securities funds, in par -
ticular, saw significant inflows of capital (€14½ 
billion), but bond funds, open-  end real estate 
funds (€6 billion each), and equity- based funds 
(€4½ billion) likewise recorded inflows. The 
outstanding volume of foreign mutual fund 
shares in Germany rose by €4 billion in the 
period under review. Mutual fund shares were 
bought on balance almost exclusively by do -
mestic non- banks, which added fund shares 
worth €40½ billion net to their portfolios. 
Most of these shares were issued by domestic 
mutual funds. German credit institutions bol -
stered their fund portfolios by €1½ billion net, 
while non- resident investors reduced their fund 
portfolio in Germany by €2 billion net.
Direct investment
Transactions in cross- border portfolio invest -
ment resulted in net capital exports of €38½ 
billion in the first quarter of 2022. Direct invest -
ment likewise recorded net outflows, albeit to 
a considerably lesser extent (€4½ billion).
Enterprises domiciled in Germany expanded 
their foreign direct investment by €45 billion in 
the first three months of this year on balance, 
as against €39 billion in the previous quarter. In 
the process, they boosted the equity capital they provided to foreign affiliates by €29 bil -
lion. Reinvested profits accounted for just over 
two- thirds of this. In addition, firms resident in 
Germany provided affiliated group entities 
abroad with additional loans worth €15½ bil -
lion, relying, on balance, exclusively on trade 
credits to do so. The first quarter saw consider -
able volumes of direct investment funds flow -
ing from Germany to the United Kingdom 
(€14½ billion) and China (€7 billion). By con -
trast, return flows of funds from Sweden (€5½ 
billion) and Russia (€3½ billion) consisted pre -
dominantly of repayments of previously granted 
loans.
Conversely, foreign enterprises increased their 
direct investment in Germany sharply between 
January and March 2022 (€40 billion, com -
pared with €6 billion in the fourth quarter of 
2021). They enlarged their equity capital in Ger -
man subsidiaries by 4½ billion. German enter -
prises saw considerably larger inflows of funds 
via intra- group credit transactions (€35½ bil -
lion). Additional loans made up the bulk of 
these transactions, on balance. In the first quar -
ter, particularly high direct investment inflows 
were reported for the United Kingdom (€21½ 
billion), France (€4½ billion), Switzerland and 
the United States (€4 billion each). By contrast, 
sizeable net outflows to Estonia (€3 billion) and 
the Netherlands (€2 billion) were generated 
through repayments of intra- group loans.Direct invest -
ment posts net 
capital exports
German direct 
investment 
abroad results in 
capital exportsCapital inflows 
through foreign 
direct invest -
ment in 
Germany 
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), The market for Federal securities: holder structure and the main 
drivers of yield movements, Monthly Report, July 2018, pp. 15-38.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), The Eurosystem’s bond purchases and the exchange rate of the 
euro, Monthly Report, January 2017, pp. 13-39.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Stock market valuations – theoretical basics and enhancing the 
metrics , Monthly Report, April 2016, pp. 15-29.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2015), Securities holdings statistics for analysing holdings of securities in 
Germany and Europe: methodology and results, Monthly Report, March 2015, pp. 95-107.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
55

Deutsche Bundesbank (2014), Exchange rates and financial stress, Monthly Report, July 2014, 
pp. 15-28.
Koijen, R.S.J., F. Koulischer, B. Nguyen, and M. Yogo (2021), Inspecting the mechanism of quanti -
tative easing in the euro area, Journal of Financial Economics 140(1), pp. 1-20.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
56

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
Economic activity in Germany picked up slightly 
in the first quarter of 2022, after declining 
somewhat in the final quarter of 2021. Accord -
ing to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash esti -
mate, real gross domestic product (GDP) was 
0.2% up on the quarter after seasonal adjust -
ment.1 Construction provided a strong boost, 
helped by the mild weather conditions. Thanks 
to a good start to the year, industrial output 
also increased somewhat on the quarter. The 
effects of Russia’s war on Ukraine have been 
weighing considerably on the economy since 
the start of the conflict, however. Supply bottle -
necks flared up again in industry and in con -
struction, after having arguably eased some -
what at the beginning of the quarter.2 The 
steep rise in energy prices, too, will have 
slowed output. Exports declined sharply in 
March and were also well below the previous 
quarter’s level in the first quarter of 2022 as a 
whole. High energy prices also exacerbated the 
already high rate of price increase, diminishing 
the purchasing power of household incomes. 
This depressed private consumption, which 
was impaired further by the pandemic and the 
associated containment measures. By contrast, 
construction investment and investment in ma -
chinery and equipment are likely to have in -
creased, despite the supply bottlenecks.
Looking ahead to the second quarter, opposing 
forces are likely to have an impact on economic 
output. Headwinds are coming, in particular, 
from the high level of inflation, supply bottle -
necks, high uncertainty and weaker foreign de -
mand. These are being counterbalanced by the 
broad and extensive easing of coronavirus mitiga tion measures. On balance, from today’s 
perspective, these upward forces are likely to 
prevail by a slight margin at best.
Exports of goods declined significantly in the 
first quarter of 2022 in real terms. In regional 
terms, this was mainly due to a steep decline in 
exports to euro area countries, probably partly 
on account of the fairly weak pace of growth 
in the euro area. Exports to non- euro area 
countries also declined slightly, however. Ex -
ports to Russia fell considerably in terms of 
value.3 In March, they dropped by just over 
three- fifths as a result of the sanctions and 
other measures taken in response to Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine. The value of exports to the 
newly industrialised Asian economies also de -
creased in the first quarter. By contrast, nom -
inal exports to the United Kingdom remained 
virtually stable. Exports to the United States, German econ -
omy weighed 
down by pan -
demic, high 
inflation and the 
Russian attack 
on Ukraine in 
Q1 2022
Economic 
output  could 
grow slightly at 
most in Q2Exports of 
goods down 
significantly  
in Q1
Aggregate output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Price 
and calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 22949698100102104106108
–12–9–6–30+3+6+9+12Adjusted for price, seasonal and calendar effects
2015 = 100, log scale
Gross domestic product
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
1 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this 
text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, pro -
vided they can be verified and quantified.
2 See the box on pp. 58 f. of this Monthly Report.
3 In 2021, the value of goods exports to Russia accounted 
for a little less than 2% of German foreign trade.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
57

Supply bottlenecks likely to weigh on industrial production 
for quite some time
Since the beginning of 2021, there have 
been considerable bottlenecks in the supply 
of important intermediate products and 
raw materials. In Germany, this has primar-
ily affected industry.1 As a result, industrial 
production has not yet returned to its level 
prior to the coronavirus crisis, despite high 
demand for industrial products. These sup-
ply bottlenecks have continued to put sig-
nifi  cant strain on German industry this year. 
They had eased somewhat before the Rus-
sian attack on Ukraine.2 The war, however, 
caused a relapse.3 Some intermediate prod-
ucts are not available due to the war and 
sanctions. Logistical problems and high 
transport costs have also played a role. The 
resurgence of the pandemic in China and 
the associated stringent protection meas-
ures have further exacerbated supply prob-
lems.In March 2022, the Bundesbank surveyed 
industrial enterprises as part of the Bundes-
bank Online Panel Firms (BOP- F) on the cur-
rent and expected impact of supply bottle-
necks on their production activity.4 Of more 
than 500 manufacturing enterprises sur-
veyed, 80% reported that their access to 
intermediate goods had deteriorated in 
2021 or that they expected it to do so in 
2022. These enterprises were then asked 
how strong the decline in output due to 
supply bottlenecks had been or was likely 
to be.5 This helps provide an impression not 
only of the breadth of the impact of supply 
bottlenecks across enterprises, but also of 
its intensity. In addition, respondents were 
1 It is true that supply diffi   culties arose when the 
coronavirus pandemic started back in spring 2020. 
However, these bottlenecks have been weighing on 
the global economy since the spring of 2021 in par-
ticular, when global demand surged following the 
pandemic- induced lockdowns in the winter of 
2020-21. The supply bottlenecks are therefore, in prin-
ciple, a global phenomenon, which can be attributed 
to various factors on both the demand and supply 
sides. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a).
2 See ifo Institute (2022a).
3 In March and April 2022, 80% and 75% of enter-
prises, respectively, complained about bottlenecks in 
the procurement of intermediate products and raw 
materials. See ifo Institute (2022b). Purchasing man-
agers also reported renewed supply chain disruptions, 
with both the war and pandemic protection measures 
in China playing a role. See BME (2022).
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a). However, the 
relevant questions were only asked in March 2022 
(wave 14). Answers were received during the period 
from 26 February 2022 to 23 March 2022.
5 Six different periods were considered: the fourth 
quarter of 2021, the fi  rst quarter of 2022, the second 
quarter of 2022, the second half of 2022, and the 
years 2023 and 2024. The responses were also 
weighted by enterprise sales in 2021. No production 
losses were assumed for the 20% of enterprises which 
did not record or expect a deterioration in access to 
intermediate goods in 2021 and 2022. Exceptions to 
this simplifi  ed assumption – for example, if a company 
expected an improvement in access to intermediate 
products overall in 2022, but still feared production 
losses due to supply bottlenecks  – would therefore 
imply even higher declines in production than calcu-
lated here.(Expected) production losses stemming 
from supply bottlenecks*
024681012%
H2 Q4 Q1 Q2
2021 2022 2023 2024
Source: Bundesbank Online Panel Firms, March 2022. * Based 
on the responses of 404 (out of 507) manufacturing firms to 
the question of what percentage decline in the production of 
goods they had recorded or expected as a result of supply 
bottlenecks. No production losses were assumed for the re-
maining 103 industrial enterprises, which did not record or ex-
pect a deterioration in access to intermediate goods in 2021 
and 2022.
Deutsche BundesbankWeighted by sales UnweightedDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
58

asked to provide an estimate of the ex-
pected duration of the supply disruptions.6
The results suggest that supply bottlenecks 
weighed more heavily on output in the fi  rst 
quarter of 2022 than in the fourth quarter 
of 2021. This likely refl  ects a major decline 
in output in March as a result of the Russian 
attack on Ukraine.7 Given the ongoing war 
in Ukraine, industrial enterprises expect pro-
duction losses to worsen in the second 
quarter. According to the survey, that is 
when the supply chain problems will reach 
their peak. Expected production losses 
gradually decline thereafter. However, even 
in 2024, enterprises still expect distinct pro-
duction losses due to supply bottlenecks.8
According to the survey results, the prob-
lems caused by supply bottlenecks will thus 
persist for longer than had been assumed in 
the Bundesbank’s macroeconomic projec-
tion of December 2021. At that time, a 
gradual easing of supply bottlenecks by the 
end of 2022 was expected, with subse-
quent strong catch- up effects.9 This will 
place a signifi  cant strain on industrial pro-
duction and will cause a signifi  cant delay to 
the originally expected recovery. The survey 
results do also suggest that some catch- up 
effects from previously lost production 
could occur. For example, fi  rms that experi-
enced or expected a decline in production 
for at least one of the periods under review 
were asked whether they expected to be 
able to recover some of the production 
they had lost as a result of supply bottle-
necks. Almost half said yes.10 All in all, how-
ever, the survey results suggest a much 
more cautious view of supply bottlenecks 
and their consequences than the assump-
tions made in the December projection.
Two important factors need to be taken 
into account when interpreting these re-
sults. The Russian war of aggression began 
two days before the fi  rst industrial enter-
prise submitted its responses to the survey. The responses could thus be strongly infl  u-
enced by the invasion and its attendant un-
certainties. These relate, in particular, to the 
reliability of the energy supply at their pro-
duction sites in Germany.11 The expected 
losses in production –  some even lasting 
into 2024  – could partly refl  ect concerns 
about energy disruptions. Nevertheless, as 
long as the relevant supplies from Russia do 
not actually fail to materialise, the survey re-
sults are likely to overstate the expected 
production losses. This stands in contrast, 
however, to the pandemic situation in 
China, at least in the short term. The latest 
lockdown in Shanghai began at the end of 
March, and thus after the survey was com-
pleted. Production losses could therefore 
have been underestimated, especially in 
2022.
6 At the end of 2021, the German Economic Institute 
(Institut der deutschen Wirtschaft, IW) and the ifo In-
stitute already carried out a survey on expected pro-
duction shortfalls due to supply bottlenecks and their 
duration. In the IW economic survey in autumn 2021, 
three- quarters of the enterprises surveyed reported a 
loss in output of, on average, 7% for the fourth quar-
ter of 2021. Moreover, enterprises said that they ex-
pected that the situation would only start to improve 
signifi  cantly from the second half of 2022 onwards. 
See German Economic Institute (2021). This is consist-
ent with the results of the ifo Institute survey of No-
vember 2021, which show that industrial enterprises 
assumed, on average, that supply problems would last 
eight months, i.e. until mid- 2022. See ifo Institute 
(2021).
7 According to the German Association of the Auto-
motive Industry, for example, fewer cable harnesses 
were supplied for the manufacture of motor vehicles. 
Besides Tunisia, their main country of manufacture is 
Ukraine. Owing to their specifi  c nature, production of 
these items could not be moved or substituted on 
short notice. See German Association of the Automo-
tive Industry (2022).
8 A comparison of the weighted and unweighted re-
sults shows that larger enterprises consistently expect 
somewhat smaller production losses.
9 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b).
10 These enterprises were then asked how long they 
expected the catch- up process would last. More than 
60% of them expected a period lasting until the end of 
the current year. Almost all remaining enterprises ex-
pected a period lasting until the end of 2023.
11 The economic consequences of a cut in Russian gas 
supplies were already being discussed prior to 24 Feb-
ruary 2022. From the moment Russia fi  rst publicly 
threatened to halt supply on 7 March 2022, at the very 
latest, the issue became omnipresent.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
59

China and Japan even increased significantly. 
Broken down by category of goods, price-  
adjusted exports of intermediate goods and 
capital goods declined sharply, whilst exports 
of consumer goods picked up distinctly.
Until the start of the war, business investment 
in machinery and equipment is likely to have 
been supported by positive expectations about 
future output and by the easing of supply 
bottlenecks in the meantime. However, the 
outlook deteriorated considerably from March 
onwards, and uncertainty surrounding the con -
tinuation of the conflict is likely to have 
weighed on the propensity to invest. Neverthe -
less, business investment may have risen overall 
in the first quarter. The strong increase in the 
domestic sales of manufacturers of capital 
goods would suggest that this is the case. 
While this stood against a steep decline in the 
value of imports of capital goods, enterprises 
probably invested somewhat more in their ve -
hicle fleets. This is indicated by the number of 
new commercial registrations of passenger ve -
hicles, which rose slightly according to the Ger -
man Association of the Automotive Industry 
(VDA). There was also a significant increase in 
the number of commercial vehicle registra -
tions.
Construction investment probably increased 
substantially in the first quarter, as suggested 
by sales in the main construction sector – fig -
ures for which are available up to February – 
which were up considerably from the fourth 
quarter in terms of value. Even if the sharp rise 
in construction prices is taken into account, sig -
nificant growth is still likely. Investment in pub -
lic construction looks to have increased particu -
larly strongly.
Private consumption is likely to have declined in 
the first quarter of 2022. On the one hand, it 
was constrained by pandemic- related restric -
tions, which particularly affected the consump -
tion of contact- intensive services. For example, 
first- quarter revenue in the hotel and restaurant 
services sector was significantly lower than in the fourth quarter. In addition, high inflation 
reduced households’ purchasing power. Uncer -
tainty about the consequences of the war also 
weighed on the propensity to consume, espe -
cially at the end of the quarter. In the retail sec -
tor, price- adjusted sales declined somewhat. As 
in previous waves of the pandemic, sales fig -
ures fell especially steeply for bricks- and- mortar 
outlets selling textiles, clothing, footwear and 
leather goods, as well as for retailers of infor -
mation and communication technology de -
vices. However, retail sales via mail order and 
the internet, which were not affected by the 
protective measures, also fell sharply. In add -
ition, there were probably fewer cars pur -
chased. This is indicated by new car registra -
tions for private owners, which declined mark -
edly in the first quarter, according to VDA data.
Price- adjusted imports of goods posted a sig -
nificant decline in the first quarter of 2022. 
From a regional perspective, the decline 
stemmed from trade with euro area countries, 
as was the case for exports. Imports from non- 
euro area countries were slightly higher, how -
ever, with the value of imports from OPEC 
countries and Russia increasing sharply. This 
was due to the high share of energy imports 
and the inflation in their prices. Nominal im -
ports from China also rose strongly. Price-  
adjusted imports of capital goods declined 
steeply, whilst imports of intermediate goods 
were down slightly. Imports of consumer goods 
increased somewhat.
Sectoral trends
Seasonally adjusted industrial production in the 
first quarter of 2022 increased slightly on the 
quarter (+½%). In January and February, it had 
initially recovered further. In March, however, 
it  declined considerably as the war against 
Ukraine created many burdens, including new 
disruptions to supply chains. According to sur -
veys by the ifo Institute, the percentage of en -
terprises reporting production delays caused by 
supply bottlenecks rose sharply again. While Probable 
increase in busi -
ness investment 
in machinery 
and equipment
Construction 
investment 
probably up 
substantially
Pandemic and 
high inflation 
weighing on 
private  con -
sumptionPrice- adjusted 
imports of 
goods down 
significantly 
Recovery in 
industrial pro -
duction slowed 
down, particu -
larly by effects 
of war on 
UkraineDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
60

capital goods were still a driver of growth in 
the fourth quarter of 2021, their output 
dropped markedly in the first quarter of 2022. 
This was partly due to the fact that motor ve -
hicle production, which is important for the 
German economy, was probably severely af -
fected by the renewed tightening of supply 
bottlenecks. By contrast, manufacturers of 
other transport equipment and of computer, 
electronic and optical products saw a major in -
crease in production. Industrial production was 
bolstered by a robust increase in the manufac -
ture of consumer goods. In particular, the 
manufacture of pharmaceutical products in -
creased considerably. Production of intermedi -
ate goods edged up slightly.
According to the ifo Institute, capacity utilisa -
tion of tangible fixed assets in manufacturing 
remained constant between the surveys in 
January and April. It thus continued to distinctly 
exceed its long-  term average. Capacity utilisa -
tion in capital goods manufacturing fell sharply, 
which is consistent with the lower output of 
capital goods. Although considerably more 
consumer goods were produced, capacity util -
isation among their manufacturers remained 
unchanged. By contrast, capacity utilisation 
rose slightly for manufacturers of intermediate 
goods.
Construction output picked up strongly in sea -
sonally adjusted terms in the first quarter of 
2022 (+4%), growing substantially on the quar -
ter in both the finishing trades and main con -
struction sector. The increase in output in the 
main construction sector was spread equally 
across building construction and civil engineer -
ing. The main reason for the higher level of 
construction output was the mild weather for 
the time of year. According to ifo Institute sur -
veys, the share of enterprises reporting mater -
ials shortages initially declined, much like in the 
industrial sector, but rose again significantly in 
March due to the war against Ukraine. In line 
with the sharp expansion in construction out -
put, the utilisation of machinery and equip -
ment increased significantly in the reporting period and remained high in a long- term com -
parison.
Activity in the services sector is likely to have 
declined in the first quarter. In the hotel and 
restaurant services sector, price- adjusted sales 
fell significantly on average in the first quarter 
compared with the previous quarter. However, 
they picked up again over the course of the 
quarter. In the reporting period, there were 
entry restrictions in place for hotels and res -
taurants, which have since been eased again. 
The coronavirus protection measures hit rev -
enue in the accommodation sector much more 
strongly than they did food and beverage ser -Utilisation of 
industrial cap -
acity stable at 
above average 
level
Construction 
output up 
sharply, particu -
larly owing to 
favourable 
weather  
conditions 
Activity in 
services  sector 
probably 
declining 708090100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 22758090100110
90100110120Seasonally and calendar adjusted, quarterly data
to euro area countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted1758090100110
€ bnto non-euro area countriesof which:MonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
61

vices. Real sales in the retail sector declined 
markedly. Wholesale sales fell slightly, accord -
ing to the data available up to February. Sales 
of motor vehicles were probably also down. On 
an average of January and February – data are 
available up until then – price- adjusted sales in 
the motor vehicle trade remained unchanged 
compared with the fourth quarter of 2021. 
However, the number of car registrations re -
corded by the VDA dropped dramatically in 
March and were slightly below the previous 
quarter’s level in the first quarter. The results of 
ifo Institute surveys on the business situation of 
enterprises also signal a decline in business ac -
tivity in the services sector in the first quarter of 
2022.
Labour market
The labour market developed exceptionally fa -
vourably in the first quarter of 2022. Employ -
ment expanded strongly and unemployment continued to decline markedly. Both indicators 
returned to the levels seen just before the out -
break of the pandemic. However, this also saw 
the return of the labour shortages seen before 
the crisis. The factors weighing on economic 
activity in the first quarter – the strong spread 
of the Omicron variant and, most recently, Rus -
sia’s invasion of Ukraine – are more likely to 
have had an adverse impact on actual hours 
worked by employees and labour productivity. 
Cyclical short- time work increased again some -
what, for instance. Nevertheless, the leading 
labour market indicators remained optimistic 
for the coming months after having been 
briefly shaken by the outbreak of war.
The number of employed persons rose sharply 
in the first few months of 2022. On an average 
of the first quarter, the seasonally adjusted 
number of persons in work rose by 217,000 on 
the quarter overall, representing an increase of 
0.5%. In March, the previous peak in employ -
ment recorded in early 2020 was exceeded for 
the first time. The increase in employment is 
predominantly attributable to jobs subject to 
social security contributions. On an average of 
January and February alone – estimates do not 
yet go beyond that – 200,000 more persons 
were employed in jobs with full social security 
coverage than in the final quarter of 2021. 
There was robust employment growth in al -
most all economic sectors. The strongest in -
crease was recorded in IT and in administrative 
and support services (including temporary em -
ployment). Some services sectors benefited 
from reduced containment measures to com -
bat the pandemic over the course of the quar -
ter. After a long period of stagnation, employ -
ment growth in the manufacturing sector also 
started to pick up a little. However, the strains 
entailed by the international setting are having 
the most noticeable dampening effect on em -
ployment growth in this sector.
Unlike employment, cyclical short- time work 
has not yet returned to its pre- crisis level. Ac -
cording to estimates by the Federal Employ -
ment Agency, the number of short- time work -Employment 
and unemploy -
ment barely 
touched by 
strains on the 
economy
Employment up 
sharply in Q1, 
in a return to 
pre- crisis levels
Marked rise in 
short- time work 
over December 
and JanuaryOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 22707580859095100105110
1001051101151201251301351402015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data, log scale
MonthlyIndustry
Main constructionIndustry excluding
automotive
Construction1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
62

ers increased slightly in December and January 
compared with November 2021. Since the 
average working hours lost per short- time 
worker were also markedly higher, the total 
loss of working hours rose by more than one- 
third in these two months. Once again, be -
cause of the pandemic, this mainly affected the 
hotel and restaurant services sector and, to a 
lesser extent, the wholesale and retail trade. 
However, the number of short- time workers 
fell again in February. This decline may have 
continued in the subsequent months as well, 
seeing as registrations for short- time work 
dropped significantly in March and April.
Unemployment was distinctly down in the first 
quarter of 2022. In seasonally adjusted terms, 
the Federal Employment Agency registered just 
over 100,000 fewer unemployed persons than 
in the fourth quarter of 2021, with the corres -
ponding rate falling by 0.2 percentage point. In 
April 2022, the number of unemployed persons 
continued to decline, dropping to 2.29 million, 
and the unemployment rate to 5.0%. This 
matches the level of the first quarter of 2020, 
which had not yet been affected by the pan -
demic. The number of unemployed persons 
covered by the statutory unemployment insur -
ance scheme who can be placed relatively 
quickly is already lower than immediately prior 
to the outbreak of the pandemic, and has 
barely fallen in recent months. By contrast, the 
reduction in unemployment among those re -
ceiving the basic welfare allowance acceler -
ated.
In contrast to employment and unemployment, 
other labour market indicators, such as hours 
worked per employee, have probably not yet 
returned to their pre- crisis levels.4 Over the past 
two years, adjustment to the fluctuating level 
of output during the various waves of the pan -
demic has largely been through working hours. 
In addition to the massive use of short- time Unemployment 
also back to 
pre- crisis levels
Hours worked 
per employee 
and hourly 
productivity 
not yet fully 
recovered, 
however Labour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 22Apr.43.043.544.044.545.045.5
30.531.031.532.032.533.033.534.034.5–1,000–5000+500+1,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–600–400–2000+200+400+600Apr.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Apr.Million
Million
Million400600800Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployment
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies2EmployedJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Jan.-
Feb.
4 Hours worked and labour productivity are components 
of the national accounts, which were not yet available for 
the first quarter of 2022 as at the cut- off date for this re -
port.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
63

work, the number of hours worked has also 
been shortened due to fewer overtime hours 
worked and the reduction of balances on work -
ing time accounts. Even if the long- term nega -
tive trend in hours worked – which is mainly 
due to the increasing share of part- time work – 
is taken into account, the number of hours 
worked is still significantly lower than would be 
expected if the crisis were fully overcome. In 
the reporting quarter, the spread of the Omi -
cron wave is likely to have additionally reduced 
hours worked, as employees were sick or in 
quarantine. The outbreak of war in Ukraine and 
pandemic- related closures in China are placing 
further strain on economic activity. Labour 
productivity, which has also remained below its 
trend level so far, will continue to suffer as a re -
sult.
The leading labour market indicators, which 
focus mainly on further employment develop -
ments, remained very stable in expansionary 
territory despite the added uncertainty and 
foreseeable burdens caused by the Ukraine 
war. According to the employment barometers 
of the ifo Institute and the Institute for Employ -
ment Research (IAB), enterprises are planning 
to increase their staff numbers on balance. 
With infection rates on the decline, the outlook 
has improved, especially in some services sec -
tors. In the manufacturing sector, by contrast, 
recruitment plans are less expansionary. Des -
pite recent events, the number of reported va -
cancies subject to social security contributions 
has risen again. The ongoing shortage of quali -
fied staff is also likely to have played a part in 
this. The time taken to fill vacancies is already 
very long and continues to rise. Unemployment 
is expected to decline further over the next few 
months, too, according to the IAB’s survey of 
the heads of regional employment agencies.
Wages and prices
Negotiated wages rose considerably more 
strongly in the first quarter of 2022 than in the 
final quarter of 2021. In the first quarter, they increased by 4.4% on the year, compared with 
1.6% in the preceding quarter. This high growth 
rate was largely attributable to sizeable one- off 
payments in industry and large coronavirus bo -
nuses, granted in the public sector of the Fed -
eral states, in particular. Meanwhile, basic pay 
adjusted for such one- off payments rose by just 
1.6% in the first quarter year- on- year, after 
1.8% in the fourth quarter of 2021. Actual 
earnings are likely to have risen even more 
sharply than negotiated wages in the first three 
months of the year. This is mainly because no -
ticeably less short- time work meant that the 
number of hours worked was significantly 
higher than in the first quarter of 2021.
At present, the growth in negotiated wages is 
still being driven by old collective agreements, 
which were concluded in an environment of 
lower inflation rates and pandemic- related 
challenges. New agreements made in the first 
quarter were, likewise, usually still moderate 
despite the sharp rise in inflation. For example, 
the annualised wage growth in the latest wage 
agreements for private and public sector banks, 
the printing industry and insurance companies 
ranged from 1.6% to 2.4%. In the chemical in -
dustry, management and the trade unions 
agreed on a large one- off payment and for the 
agreement to have only a short term until the 
autumn of 2022 as a “bridging solution”. The 
main reason for this was the uncertain eco -
nomic outlook due to the war in Ukraine and 
the considerable rise in energy prices.
On the one hand, uncertainty about future 
economic developments and concerns about 
potential job losses could dampen wage in -
creases somewhat in the upcoming wage ne -
gotiations. On the other hand, persistently high 
inflation rates and increasing labour market 
tightness are likely to contribute to noticeably 
more substantial wage settlements than in the 
recent past. For example, the trade unions’ 
minimum aim is to compensate for the high in -
flation rates. In the steel industry, the IG Metall 
trade union is demanding a wage increase of 
8.2% to apply for a 12- month period. The cur -Employment 
plans still expan -
sionary despite 
burdensNegotiated 
wages rose con -
siderably in Q1 
due to high one- 
off payments; 
actual earnings 
probably also 
rose substan -
tially
Wage agree -
ments still mod -
erate so far, …
… however, 
wage agree -
ments could 
be markedly 
stronger over 
the coming 
monthsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
64

rent wage demands being made by trade 
unions in other sectors range from 6% to 7.5% 
to run for 12 months. It remains to be seen 
whether these demands are achieved. It should 
be borne in mind that higher prices for largely 
imported fossil fuels narrow the scope for in -
come distribution within Germany.
Consumer prices spiked sharply higher again at 
the beginning of the year. In the first quarter of 
2022, quarterly inflation as measured by the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) 
stood at 2.8% after seasonal adjustment, up 
from 1.2%. This was the strongest quarterly in -
crease in prices in Germany since the beginning 
of monetary union. The momentum of energy 
price growth was particularly high given the 
dramatic rise in crude oil prices and market 
prices for not only gas but also electricity. More -
over, new supply bottlenecks caused a consid -
erable acceleration in the rate of price increase 
for food and non- energy industrial goods. This 
was partly due to the impact of Russia’s war 
against Ukraine, which likewise contributed to 
the sharp rise in energy prices. In terms of ser -
vices, the price increase remained above aver -
age, but not quite as much so as in the previ -
ous quarters. Looking at the annual figures, 
too, the inflation rate rose significantly in the 
first quarter of 2022, from 5.4% to 6.1%. Fac -
toring out the volatile components energy and 
food, however, the inflation rate fell distinctly, 
from 3.6% to 3.1%. However, this was mainly 
attributable to the end of the base effect as a 
result of the temporary VAT cut in the second 
half of 2020, which had lifted inflation in the 
final quarter of 2021.
In April, seasonally adjusted prices rose consid -
erably on the month, although the increase 
was not as exceptionally strong as in March. 
This was chiefly attributable to energy prices, 
which fell slightly following a sharp rise in the 
previous month. By contrast, food prices rose 
even more steeply than they did when the tem -
porary VAT cut was reversed in January of last 
year. There was a significant increase in the 
cost of meat, as well as cereals and dairy prod -ucts, in particular. Prices of non- energy indus -
trial goods and services also rose on a broad 
basis. Compared with the previous year, prices 
grew by a total of 7.8%, compared with al -
ready 7.6% in March.5 The last time such high 
rates were observed in the former West Ger -
many was during the first Gulf War at the be -
ginning of the 1980s. Excluding energy and 
food, the rate of price increase worked out at 
3.9%, up from 3.4%.
Over the coming months, consumer price infla -
tion could initially continue to rise slightly and 
then decline only moderately given the high 
rates of price increase at earlier stages of the 
pricing chain. In view of the war in Ukraine and 
supply bottlenecks resulting from the pan -
demic, producer prices for consumer goods 
(excluding food) rose sharply by historical 
standards in the period under review. Much the Inflation signifi -
cantly higher 
in Q1
Broad- based 
price surge 
again in AprilInflation likely to 
remain high for 
the time being2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 20220.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
–+++++++++Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Per-
centage
points
–2–10+1+2%
Q1
Wage drift1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 Wage drift 
is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual earn-
ings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche Bundesbank
5 The national consumer price index rose at a rate of 7.4%, 
up from 7.3%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
65

same is true of producer prices for food. This is 
likely to make industrial goods and food more 
expensive at the consumer level. In the services 
segment, too, enterprises have recently sig -
nalled an increasing willingness to pass through 
to consumer prices the higher cost of inter -
mediate goods and the increase in the min -
imum wage due to be introduced in October 
2022.6 This option is made easier by ongoing 
high demand. Government relief measures re -
lating to fuel, electricity and local public trans -
port are likely to temporarily dampen the price 
increases somewhat. Overall, though, as things 
currently stand, the inflation rate is still likely to 
average around 7% this year. That said, uncer -
tainty about the price outlook is particularly 
high at present.
Order books and outlook
As things currently stand, German economic 
output is likely to increase slightly, if at all, in the second quarter of 2022.7 This is due to the 
interplay of strong but opposing forces. On the 
one hand, the easing of the measures designed 
to contain the coronavirus is likely to provide a 
major boost to services and the related con -
sumer spending. On the other hand, the reper -
cussions of Russia’s attack on Ukraine are ex -
acerbating the pressures exerted by high infla -
tion and supply bottlenecks. They are also giv -
ing rise to further negative effects and will 
probably considerably weaken the strong re -
covery that had previously been anticipated. 
Household consumption is being dampened by 
the high level of inflation and by the uncer -
tainty about how the conflict will evolve. High 
energy and materials costs and the heightened 
uncertainty are also weighing on output in the 
industrial sector and in construction. Supply Economic out -
put likely to 
increase slightly 
in Q2, if at all; 
positive effect of 
easing of meas -
ures to contain 
the coronavirus 
probably offset 
by impact of 
war in UkrainePrice developments at economic stages as classified for HICP purposes
–400+40+80+120+160Year-on-year percentage change
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
1 Bundesbank calculations (in euro) based on daily prices in USD as quoted by Bloomberg Finance L.P. 2 ECB calculations of DG AGRI 
prices based on the European Commission’s farm gate and wholesale prices. 3 Analogous to HICP classification “non-energy industrial 
goods”; Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.
Deutsche Bundesbank10010203040
–++++
3036
–++
0+20+40+60Crude oil price1 (right-hand scale)
HICP – food Producer prices for food in the euro area2 (right-hand scale)HICP – energy
30369
–+++
–30+3+6+9
HICP – non-energy industrial goods Industrial producer prices 3Apr.
Apr.Apr.
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b).
7 However, the outlook is highly uncertain and depends on 
further developments in the war on Ukraine. For more in -
formation on the possible macroeconomic effects in a se -
vere crisis scenario, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
66

chains are once again coming under significant 
strain on account of the war in Ukraine and 
coronavirus lockdowns in China. According to 
Bundesbank survey results, this is likely to lead 
to an increase in output losses in manufactur -
ing (see the box on pp. 58 f.). This is consistent 
with VDA data on the number of passenger 
cars manufactured, which recovered only par -
tially in April from the sharp downturn in March 
and were still markedly lower than in the first 
quarter. Exports are also likely to remain mark -
edly below the level of the first quarter due to 
the disruptions to foreign trade and lower for -
eign demand as a result of the impact of the 
war. This is suggested, amongst other things, 
by the sharp decline in export expectations in 
manufacturing, but also by the drop in China’s 
imports in April.
Households’ consumption expenditure could 
pick up significantly again in the second quar -
ter. The broad and extensive easing of the 
measures taken to contain the coronavirus 
means that many of the consumption options 
that were previously restricted are available 
once more and are probably also being used. 
According to ifo Institute surveys, for example, 
the assessment of the current situation of firms 
in the hotel and restaurant services sector 
brightened considerably in April. Moreover, 
footfall figures, which are available up to mid- 
May, were considerably higher than in the first 
quarter. However, high inflation, the associated 
loss of purchasing power and the increased un -
certainty surrounding the war on Ukraine are 
likely to represent a considerable drag on the 
recovery in private consumption. At last count, 
income expectations as measured by the mar -
ket research institution Gesellschaft für Kon -
sumforschung (GfK) fell to their lowest level in 
almost 20 years. Economic expectations and 
the propensity to purchase also declined con -
siderably. The forecast consumer climate index 
fell to a historical low. Retail trade, in particular, 
could suffer from consumers’ reluctance to 
consume. According to surveys conducted by 
the ifo Institute, business conditions there de -High inflation 
and uncertainty 
are holding back 
the recovery in 
private con -
sumptionDemand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2265708090100110120
–30–20–100+10+20+30+40+50
65708090100110120130
120
65708090100110
90100110120130140
–100+10+20Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data
DomesticInternationalLog scale
of which:Log scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Main construction orders
%%Total
MonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
67

teriorated sharply during the period under re -
view.
The ifo business climate index recovered only 
marginally in April from the sharp downturn it 
suffered in March. This meant that sentiment 
remained considerably below the average of 
the first quarter. One of the main reasons for 
this was that firms’ business expectations be -
came much more pessimistic across all sectors. 
By contrast, firms believed their current busi -
ness situation to be only slightly worse. This 
discrepancy can probably be explained by the 
fact that the very broad- based rise in concerns 
among some firms seen since March is not yet 
reflected in actual business activity. There are 
major differences between the sectors, how -
ever. Sentiment in the main construction sector 
and – to a somewhat lesser degree – in the 
manufacturing sector deteriorated particularly 
sharply, both in terms of expectations and the 
assessment of the current situation. A signifi -
cant further increase in materials shortages has 
been a factor in both sectors since the out -
break of the war. Production plans in manufac -
turing fell sharply. By contrast, the situation 
among retailers deteriorated only somewhat. 
Elsewhere in the services sector, the assess -
ment of the current situation actually improved. 
The easing of the measures intended to con -
tain the coronavirus was probably a major fac -
tor in this.
Industrial new orders rose significantly in the 
first quarter of 2022 compared with the previ -
ous quarter. This was due, in particular, to large 
orders; if these are excluded, new orders in -
creased only slightly. Broken down by region, 
the inflow of new orders from non- euro area 
countries rose substantially. By contrast, slightly 
fewer new orders were received from the euro 
area countries and from within Germany. Broken down by sector, demand for capital 
goods rose sharply. In particular, new orders in 
the manufacture of other transport equipment, 
which are usually very volatile, climbed steeply. 
Manufacturers of machinery and equipment, 
meanwhile, received distinctly fewer orders. 
Demand for consumer goods expanded 
strongly. Manufacturers of pharmaceutical 
products also saw a sharp rise in new orders. 
By contrast, the inflow of orders to intermedi -
ate goods producers declined slightly. Accord -
ing to data provided by the Federal Statistical 
Office, the order books and the reach of the 
order books continued to increase from already 
high levels. The results of ifo Institute surveys 
suggest that the orders situation in manufac -
turing remained good in April.
In the construction sector, output could decline 
in the second quarter. The mood among firms 
in the main construction sector suffered from 
the recent significant increase in materials 
shortages and a renewed worsening of labour 
shortages. The high cost of construction mater -
ials and higher interest rates on loans for build -
ing finance are placing an additional burden on 
the construction sector.8 According to ifo Insti -
tute surveys, business expectations even fell to 
their lowest level since German reunification. In 
addition, the first quarter benefited from mild 
weather, which means that a countermove -
ment is likely in the second quarter. As previ -
ously, the demand side is unlikely to be the 
limiting factor for construction. According to 
the data available up to February, new orders in 
the main construction sector declined sharply. 
However, surveys conducted by the ifo Institute 
show the reach of the order books to have re -
mained exceptionally high in April.Sentiment 
among firms 
considerably 
worse than 
in Q1
Orders situation 
in industry still 
goodConstruction 
sector suffering 
from, amongst 
other things, 
materials short -
ages and higher 
interest rates for 
building finance
List of references
BME (2022), EMI: Produktion leidet unter Lieferengpässen und schwacher Nachfrage, BME press 
release of 5 May 2022.8 See ifo Institute (2022c).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
68

Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), Dokumentation zur Unternehmensstudie der Bundesbank (BOP- F) 
– Welle 12-14, available at https://www.bundesbank.de/resource/blob/825468/6201b5279d3074
4e5d587aa88e9cc5b1/mL/fragebogen-08-data.pdf .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b), The macroeconomic impact of the planned increase in the general 
statutory minimum wage to €12 per hour, Monthly Report, February 2022, pp. 54 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c), Potential macroeconomic consequences of the war in Ukraine – 
simulations based on a severe risk scenario, Monthly Report, April 2022, pp. 13 ff.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), The German economy, Monthly Report, May 2021, pp. 51ff.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), Outlook for the German economy for 2022 to 2024, Monthly 
Report , December 2021, pp. 17 ff.
German Association of the Automotive Industry (2022), Support for sanctions – significant impact 
of the war, press release of 3 March 2022.
German Economic Institute (2021), Anhaltende Produktionsausfälle durch fehlende Vorleistungen, 
IW- Kurzbericht 91/ 2021 of 10 December 2021.
ifo Institute (2022a), Shortage of Materials in German Manufacturing Eases Somewhat, ifo press 
release of 31 January 2022.
ifo Institute (2022b), Shortage of Materials in German Manufacturing Eases Slightly, ifo press 
release  of 29 April 2022.
ifo Institute (2022c), Sentiment in Construction Plummets; Material Shortage Continues, press 
release  of 28 April 2022.
ifo Institute (2021), Shortage of Materials Lessens Slightly in German Manufacturing, ifo press 
release  of 3 November 2021.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
69

Public finances*
General government budget
Outlook for 2022
Fiscal policy is currently largely focused on re -
sponding to the fallout, in terms of energy, so -
cial and defence policy, from the Russian war 
of aggression on Ukraine. The Federal Govern -
ment is planning to become independent of 
Russian energy supplies and accelerate the shift 
to renewable energy. In addition, more funds 
are to be channelled into defence. Other meas -
ures aim to shield households and enterprises 
to a degree from the steeply rising energy 
costs. Assistance for refugees and for Ukraine is 
another factor. The Federal Government in -
tends to finance these measures with new bor -
rowing. To this end, further emergency loans 
are envisaged in the core central government 
budget, and a special fund for the German 
armed forces is planned. The coronavirus crisis, 
too, is continuing to weigh on public finances. 
However, the budgetary burdens associated 
with the crisis are likely to decline considerably 
this year.
From today’s perspective, the general govern -
ment deficit is likely to decline markedly this 
year (2021: deficit ratio 3.7%),1 driven predom -
inantly by fiscal coronavirus response measures 
expiring. The attendant relief will outweigh the 
budgetary burdens resulting from newly 
planned support measures. Moreover, current 
projections continue to foresee an economic 
recovery, assuming that the war and its fallout 
do not escalate further. This will also reduce 
the deficit. Under these conditions, the debt 
ratio will drop considerably (2021: 69.3%).
The outlook for 2022 is now significantly less 
favourable than expected at the start of the 
year. This is chiefly down to additional burdens 
on the expenditure side, among them the new 
fiscal measures. In addition, the unexpectedly 
sharp rise in prices will drive up costs for gov -ernment consumption, in particular. The inter -
est burden will increase, especially for inflation- 
linked Federal securities. The strain from new 
measures will be only moderate on the revenue 
side,2 and the stronger price increases will even 
have an easing effect: in April, the Federal Gov -
ernment projected a weaker increase in real 
gross domestic product (GDP) for 2022 than in 
January but raised its projection somewhat for 
nominal private consumption and gross wages 
and salaries. Viewed in isolation, this increases 
the expected revenue from taxes and social 
contributions. However, the fact that revenue 
developments were surprisingly favourable up 
to the end of the period under review irrespect -
ive of this has had an even more positive effect: 
the latest official tax revenue forecast is around 
€40 billion higher than the forecast from au -
tumn 2021 (see pp. 74 ff.).
Outlook for the medium- term 
planning period
Next year, the deficit is likely to decline further, 
assuming the coronavirus crisis does not flare 
up again and the fallout from the war in 
Ukraine does not worsen. While structural sur -
pluses were recorded before the coronavirus 
crisis, the coming years are likely to see signifi -Fiscal policy also 
focused on 
fallout  from 
Russian  war of 
aggression
Deficit ratio 
could nonethe -
less fall mark -
edly in 2022, as 
coronavirus- 
related burdens 
taper off
Outlook for 2022 
significantly less 
favourable than 
expected at start 
of yearSignificant struc -
tural deficits 
likely in the 
medium term; 
central govern -
ment with broad 
leeway for 
deficits 
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed report -
ing on budgetary developments (government finance stat -
istics). No data are yet available for local government or the 
statutory health and public long- term care insurance 
schemes for the reporting quarter. These will be analysed in 
the short commentaries in upcoming issues of the Monthly 
Report.
1 Meanwhile, the Federal Government’s stability pro -
gramme from April reports a deficit ratio of 3¾% for 2022, 
which is almost unchanged from 2021. Compared with 
this, developments appear likely to be more favourable. For 
a more detailed assessment of the national accounts pro -
jection from the stability programme, see Independent Ad -
visory Board to the Stability Council (2022).
2 The national accounts record the one- off energy price al -
lowance as a monetary social benefit. In the government 
finance statistics, it reduces tax revenue. In each case, it is re -
corded in net terms, i.e. less the income tax to be paid on it.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
70

cant structural deficits, mainly at the central 
government level. While the Federal Govern -
ment announced that compliance with the 
debt brake would resume from 2023 onwards, 
it is planning to make use of the extensive gen -
eral reserves, which will result in a correspond -
ingly higher deficit. Even more extensive deficits  
are expected in central government’s special   
funds, particularly the planned Armed Forces 
Special Fund and the Energy and Climate Fund 
(ECF). The additional leeway for deficits in the 
special funds as well as from the core budget 
reserves amounts to around €230  billion in 
total (currently 6% of GDP , see p. 77). That is 
likely to be all but fully utilised by 2026, mean -
ing that the deficits could be almost 1½% of 
GDP higher on average between 2023 and 
2026 than without that scope.
High uncertainty
However, the outlook for this year and beyond 
is highly uncertain. For example, the fallout 
from the war could intensify further and add -
itionally impair macroeconomic developments.3 
This may lead to the adoption of additional fis -
cal support measures. Moreover, it is difficult to 
predict how outflows from central govern -
ment’s special funds will develop from year to 
year. This is likely to have a significant impact 
on the path of general government deficits. It is 
also unclear whether the ECF is even allowed 
to make any use of credit authorisations: the 
vast majority were justified under the escape 
clause by the need to address the coronavirus 
pandemic. The Federal Constitutional Court is 
currently reviewing some of the transfers.
Fiscal policy in a difficult 
economic  environment
Government budgets are a key anchor of sta -
bility in times of crisis. That said, there is no 
compelling case for a broad- based credit-  
financed fiscal stimulus at present. The baseline 
scenarios of current projections generally indi -cate that the economy is recovering. The pace 
of recovery may now be more subdued than 
previously expected, but it has not ground to a 
halt. Supply- side disruptions, for one, have 
emerged, and broad-  based price pressures 
have started to take hold. In an economic situ -
ation such as this, additional credit- financed 
demand impulses have smaller real effects and 
tend to increase price pressures.
If developments prove to be less favourable, 
with the economic recovery stalling or even 
suffering a setback, the automatic stabilisers 
will initially take effect. These include, in par -
ticular, expenditure- side benefits for unemploy -
ment or short-  time work. In addition to the 
automatic stabilisers, further fiscal stabilisation 
measures may also be warranted.
If supply bottlenecks and high price pressures 
persisted in this case, a broad- based credit-  
financed fiscal demand stimulus would still not 
be advisable. Additional government assistance 
should then ideally target households and en -
terprises in need. Assuming overall demand is 
not suffering, it would be appropriate to coun -
terfinance such targeted measures immedi -
ately. This is because, in a scenario of supply 
bottlenecks and high price pressures, it would 
be counterproductive to further strengthen 
general demand. In this context, counterfi -
nancing ultimately means that any burdens on 
the private sector, such as those caused by high 
energy costs, are directly redistributed via the 
government budget without further exacerbat -
ing macroeconomic disruptions.
By contrast, a broad- based fiscal stimulus could 
be considered if demand looks set to weaken 
severely – for example, if export markets suffer 
a sizeable slump or substantial distortions on 
the financial markets spill over to the real econ -
omy. Given such conditions, the underlying 
price pressures would be expected to ease and 
expansionary fiscal policy to meet with under -
utilised capacity.Outlook uncer -
tain: economy 
as a whole, 
measures, use of 
special funds
No compelling 
case for broad- 
based credit- 
financed fiscal 
stimulus 
at presentIf crisis intensi -
fied, automatic 
stabilisers would 
initially take 
effect; …
… if supply 
bottlenecks and 
price pressures 
persist, counter -
financing of 
further  targeted 
measures appro -
priate; …
… credit- 
financed 
stimulus  worth 
considering if 
demand weak -
ens severely
3 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
71

Germany’s energy policy is directed at making 
the country independent of Russian energy 
supplies as soon as possible and achieving net 
zero carbon emissions over the long term. 
These aims are well achievable, in particular, if 
the appropriate price signals are able to take 
effect. Prices reflect (relative) shortages and 
provide incentives to reduce energy consump -
tion and switch to renewable energy. Govern -
ment measures should not obstruct this pro -
cess. Care should therefore be taken to ensure 
that government assistance to households and 
enterprises distorts price signals as little as pos -
sible.
One- off payments that top up means- tested 
social transfers such as the basic allowance are 
therefore particularly suitable for providing tar -
geted support to households in the short term. 
Generally speaking, such transfers must be ad -
justed promptly if they would otherwise no 
longer cover basic needs. The one- off energy 
price allowance is designed differently: it will 
be paid out to all employees subject to income 
tax. As it is taxable, however, it will provide 
greater relief to low- income households. Irre -
spective of the distributional effects, the 
planned ad hoc energy tax cuts are detrimental 
for another reason: they weaken the – gener -
ally desirable – price signals.New transfer, guarantee and loan programmes 
are in place for enterprises hit hard by soaring 
costs, disrupted supply chains or embargoes. 
Such programmes are relatively targeted as 
long as they are reserved for enterprises suffer -
ing substantial distress. They must meet the re -
quirements of the European framework for 
state aid. It is important to limit such pro -
grammes to temporary crisis situations. More -
over, it is crucial that they do not hinder the ne -
cessary process of transformation. First, enter -
prises receiving support should have a business 
model that promises to be sustainable, also in 
view of the planned reduction of carbon emis -
sions as part of the energy transition. Second, 
these programmes should maintain the incen -
tive for enterprises to rapidly cut back on their 
energy consumption and turn to renewable 
sources.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
govern ment
Tax revenue
First quarter of 2022
Over the first three months of 2022, tax rev -
enue4 rose sharply on the year (+18%, or 
+€31 billion; see the chart above and the table 
on p. 73). However, this growth was also driven 
by sizeable base effects. First, VAT rates had 
been temporarily lowered in the second half of 
2020, which was still dampening revenue in 
the first quarter of 2021. Second, revenue from 
import VAT was lower in the same quarter last 
year on a one- off basis, as the date on which 
payments were due had been pushed back. 
Third, revenue in the first quarter of 2022 is 
likely to have been bolstered by lower tax de -
ferrals and the receipt of previously deferred 
payments.Energy policy: 
price signals 
set important 
incentives 
Focus on low- 
income house -
holds, lump- sum 
transfers instead 
of price controlsSupport hard- hit 
enterprises with -
out hindering 
transformation
Tax revenue 
grew sharply 
in Q1Tax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Comprises joint taxes as 
well as central government taxes and state government taxes. 
Including EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs 
duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022201510505101520
––––++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figures
4 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
72

More than half of the unadjusted growth in tax 
revenue in the first quarter was thus attribut -
able to VAT. Including the one- off effects men -
tioned above, VAT receipts shot up by 34%. 
Adjusted for these one- off effects, however, 
the increase in VAT revenue is still likely to have 
been considerable. It was boosted by dynamic 
growth in nominal private consumption and 
housing construction.
At 11%, growth in wage tax receipts was like -
wise strong. Gross wages and salaries rose dy -
namically, mainly because short- time work de -
creased considerably. Revenue growth includes 
the effects of fiscal drag. This was partly offset 
by relief in the tax scale. These measures com -
pensate for the bracket creep expected in au -
tumn 2020 for 2021: the basic income tax 
allow ance was raised by 2½% and the other 
income  tax brackets were also shifted just over 
1% to the right (specified tax rates then only 
apply to higher nominal taxable income). Child 
benefit payments stagnated following the sig -
nificant increase in benefits at the beginning of 
2021. As child benefit is deducted from wage 
tax, this item rose as a result. Of the profit-  
related taxes, assessed income tax, in particu -
lar, saw a sharp increase. Corporation tax also 
grew dynamically. Advance payments for the 
current year, a major revenue item, recorded a 
considerable plus.
New tax estimate for 2022 to 2026 as well 
as additional tax cuts
According to the latest official tax estimate, 
general government tax revenue will rise by 
6½% on the year in 2022 (see also the table on 
p. 74). This is mainly due to the dynamic eco -
nomic growth in nominal terms, which is what 
the estimates are based on. Nominal private 
consumption, in particular, will rise sharply. 
Wages will likewise see a considerable increase 
– pushing up revenue, not least through pro -
gressive income taxation. Meanwhile, tax 
measures will have a marked dampening effect 
on revenue. Write- off provisions were im -proved and income tax rates lowered at the 
start of the year.
However, sizeable tax cuts not passed by the 
Bundestag until after the tax estimate was 
finalised  have not yet been factored into it, as 
it only takes account of applicable law. For ex -
ample, a one- off energy price allowance sub -
ject to income tax will be paid out of wage and 
income tax receipts to persons in employment. 
The fuel tax rates on petrol and diesel will be 
cut to the European minimum rate for three 
months. Furthermore, the basic income tax al -
lowance is to be raised again retroactively from 
1  January 2022. These are just some of the Strong rise in 
VAT revenue
Wage and 
profit- related 
taxes likewise 
made significant 
contribution to 
growth
Tax estimate for 
2022 projects 
dynamic 
revenue  growth 
of 6½%However, 
additional  tax 
cuts likely to 
considerably 
reduce growthTax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 Estimate 
for 
2022 1 2021 2022
€ billionYear-
on-year 
change 
%Year-
on-year 
change 
%
Tax revenue, total 2 172.0 203.1 + 18.1 +  7.4
of which:
Wage tax 3 50.9 56.2 + 10.5 +  8.1
Profi  t-related taxes 35.5 40.0 + 12.7 +  0.5
Assessed income 
tax4 17.8 20.9 + 17.3 –  3.1
Corporation tax 5 10.2 11.2 +  9.6 –  0.9
Non- assessed 
taxes on earnings 4.3 5.1 + 20.9 + 17.7
Withholding tax 
on interest 
income  and 
capital  gains 3.2 2.8 – 13.6 – 14.3
VAT6 54.8 73.6 + 34.3 + 12.9
Other 
consumption-related 
taxes 7 19.5 20.5 +  5.3 +  3.0
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Working Party on Tax Revenue  
Estimates and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial 
tax estimate of May 2022. 2 Comprises joint taxes as well as 
central government taxes and state government taxes. Including 
EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs duties, but 
excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Child benefi  ts 
and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans deducted 
from revenue. 4  Employee refunds and research grants de-
ducted from revenue. 5  Research grants deducted from rev-
enue. 6 VAT and import VAT. 7 Taxes on energy, tobacco, insur-
ance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, air traffi   c, coffee, spark-
ling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lotter-
ies, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
73

measures that are planned. Overall, these steps 
are likely to reduce revenue in 2022 by 2½% of 
tax revenue.
In 2023, revenue growth is expected to amount 
to 4½%. Nominal macroeconomic growth will 
be significant and progressive taxation will con -
tinue to have a bolstering effect. On balance, 
legislative changes that have already been 
adopted and thus taken into account will not 
have any major effect.
The tax cuts not passed by the Bundestag until 
after the tax estimate was finalised and there -
fore not factored into it will play a considerably 
smaller role in 2023 than in 2022, as the one- 
off energy price allowance and the fuel tax cut 
will only affect the current year. That said, the 
measures will still reduce next year’s revenue by 
1%. However, the Federal Finance Minister also 
announced that the Federal Government 
wishes to continue compensating for bracket 
creep in income tax. According to established practice, the inflation forecast for 2022 re -
leased in the autumn of 2022 would be fac -
tored into the income tax scale from 1 January 
2023. Owing to high inflation, this is likely to 
result in further revenue shortfalls amounting 
to just over 1% of tax revenue in 2022. In add -
ition, the guidelines set out by the Federal Fis -
cal Court to prevent the foreseeable double 
taxation of future pensions still need to be im -
plemented. One particular measure to this end 
under the coalition agreement is for the full 
deductibility   of pension contributions to be 
brought forward from 2025 to 2023.
According to the tax estimate, revenue is pro -
jected to rise by an average of 3½% in the sub -
sequent years up to 2026. On balance, legisla -
tive changes will play no major role. The fore -
cast is therefore a fairly direct reflection of the 
assumptions regarding macroeconomic devel -
opments and progressive taxation. However, 
the basic income tax allowance is likely to be 
raised again in 2023 and the years that follow. Significant 
increase in rev -
enue in tax esti -
mate for 2023
Sizeable short -
falls due to add -
itional legislative 
changes likely in 
2023, tooSolid growth in 
medium term 
partly reflects 
fiscal dragOffi   cial tax estimate fi  gures and the Federal Government’s macroeconomic projections
 
Item 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Tax revenue1
€ billion 833.2 889.3 928.4 964.7 997.8 1,031.7
% of GDP 23.3 23.4 23.2 23.5 23.7 23.9
Year-on-year change (%) 12.6 6.7 4.4 3.9 3.4 3.4
Revision compared with previous tax estimate 
(€ billion) 21.2 40.4 46.3 45.6 44.0 44.1
Memo item: Revenue shortfalls resulting from 
prospective  tax relief (€ billion)
Changes in tax law passed by the Bundestag 2 . – 21.9 –  8.4 –  9.4 –  7.3 –  4.1
Revenue shortfalls if bracket creep is 
compensated  for in same manner as previously 3 . . – 11.4 – 16.6 – 20.8 – 25.1
Real GDP growth (%)
Spring projection (April 2022) 2.9 2.2 2.5 0.8 0.8 0.8
Autumn projection (October 2021) 2.6 4.1 1.6 0.8 0.8 0.8
Nominal GDP growth (%)
Spring projection (April 2022) 6.0 6.3 5.2 2.6 2.6 2.6
Autumn projection (October 2021) 5.6 6.4 3.3 2.6 2.6 2.6
Sources: Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates and Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action. 1 Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue, including customs duties, including receipts from local government taxes. 2 Fourth Coronavirus Tax Assistance Act 
(Corona-Steuerhilfegesetz), second Act Amending the Tax Code and the Introductory Act to the Tax Code (Gesetz zur Änderung der Ab-
gabenordnung und des Einführungsgesetzes zur Abgabenordnung), Tax Relief Act 2022 (Steuerentlastungsgesetz 2022), Energy Tax 
Reduction  Act (Energiesteuersenkungsgesetz), seventh Act Amending the Regionalisation Act (Gesetz zur Änderung des Regionalisie-
rungsgesetzes), Act on Immediate Additional Children’s Allowance and One-Off Payment (Sofortzuschlags- und Einmalzahlungsgesetz). 
3 Since 2014, the income tax scale has shifted year after year, usually in line with the estimated infl  ation of the previous year. The fi  gures 
shown here are the revenue shortfalls that will result if this practice is continued. For this purpose, the revenue effects are roughly esti-
mated. The calculations are based on the Federal Government’s current spring projection and wage tax receipts based on current tax 
estimates (according to the national accounts). The basic income tax allowance also shifts in line with the infl  ation rate of the previous 
year.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
74

In line with the approach taken since the mid -
dle of the last decade, further measures to 
compensate for bracket creep can also be ex -
pected. Given the Federal Government’s macro -
economic assumptions, this would mean re -
ductions of just under ½ percentage point in 
revenue growth each year. Risks also exist in 
connection with the solidarity surcharge, the 
constitutionality of which has been called into 
question for various reasons. All in all, tax rev -
enue is therefore expected to be significantly 
lower in the medium term than indicated by 
the latest tax estimate.
Revision of the tax estimate compared with 
previous forecasts
Compared with the autumn 2021 tax estimate, 
revenue is up and will reach a peak of €46 bil -
lion in 2023. One key reason for this is that the 
annual result for 2021 was far more favourable 
than anticipated – especially with respect to 
profit-  related taxes. VAT revenue also saw 
stronger growth than forecast in the autumn. It 
was assumed that these positive developments 
would for the most part persist. The revised 
macroeconomic assumptions have also re -
sulted in slight revenue increases. This is be -
cause the tax estimate looks at nominal devel -
opments, not the less favourable real (price-  
adjusted) developments. In this context, the es -
pecially high revenue- yielding macroeconomic 
reference variables (nominal private consump -
tion and gross wages and salaries) were revised 
upwards. According to the new estimate, 
profit- related taxes will also develop signifi -
cantly more favourably than forecast in the au -
tumn – despite the growth rate of macroeco -
nomic profits being revised downwards in the 
national accounts. The higher estimate is the 
product of the previous year’s favourable out -
come and the stable development of advance 
payments in the first quarter.
Even compared with expectations from the 
period directly prior to the coronavirus crisis, 
the working group’s forecast is now signifi -
cantly higher than had been projected in au -tumn 2019 for these years. Revenue- reducing 
legislative changes enacted in the meantime 
will therefore be more than offset. The current 
estimate exceeds the autumn 2019 forecast by 
€14 billion for 2022. A large amount of add -
itional revenue will be generated by unexpect -
edly high profit- related taxes up to the first 
quarter of 2022 and more favourable nominal 
macroeconomic assumptions. These positive 
influences will outweigh the revenue shortfalls 
stemming from legislative changes enacted in 
the meantime, even though such shortfalls will 
also be significant this year, at almost €40 bil -
lion. In 2023 and 2024, additional revenue will 
increase to €24 billion and €30 billion com -
pared with the autumn 2019 estimate: the up -
ward revision of nominal macroeconomic as -
sumptions will become more relevant and the 
improved write- off provisions agreed in the 
meantime will cease to cause significant short -
falls.
Central government budget
First quarter of 2022
Central government posted a deficit of €19 bil -
lion in the first quarter of 2022. This constitutes 
a decrease of €33 billion on the previous year. 
Revenue rose sharply, going up by €20 billion 
(26%) almost exclusively on account of higher 
tax receipts (+28%). Only part of this could be 
explained by the lack of the previous burdens 
arising from VAT measures and savings from EU 
contributions (€4 billion reduction in advance 
deductions from tax revenue). Underlying dy -
namics were also strong. As in 2021, the Bun -
desbank did not distribute any profit because it 
increased its risk provisions in the wake of asset 
purchases. Overall, expenditure fell sharply, de -
creasing by €13 billion (-11%). This was mainly 
due to declining transfers to enterprises in re -
sponse to the coronavirus pandemic (-€7 bil -
lion) and reduced loans to the Federal Employ -
ment Agency (-€6 billion).Strong upward 
revisions for 
2022 and subse -
quent years 
compared with 
autumn estimate 
Upward revision 
also compared 
with pre- 
coronavirus 
outlook Sharp decrease 
in deficit in Q1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
75

2022 budget planning
In mid- March, the Federal Government pre -
sented a new draft of the 2022 central govern -
ment budget. Like the previous government’s 
original draft, this envisaged net borrowing of 
almost €100 billion. According to the new 
draft, the borrowing limit imposed under the 
debt brake was to be exceeded by €81 billion. 
The government justified this on the basis of an 
emergency resulting from the coronavirus pan -
demic.5 The draft also included the first energy 
price relief package. However, it did not yet ac -
count for the impact of the Russian war of ag -
gression on Ukraine. An amendment to the 
draft budget was therefore announced.
The Federal Government adopted this amend -
ment to the draft budget on 27 April, which in -
creases the projection for net borrowing by 
€39 billion. A global revenue shortfall item of 
€13 billion covers tax revenue losses resulting 
from the second energy price relief package of 24 March. The amendment also includes larger 
allocations of VAT funds by central government 
to the state governments to compensate them 
for costs relating to refugees from Ukraine. The 
spending increase of €26 billion includes higher 
transfers for Ukraine and basic allowance bene -
fits for refugees. It also covers new business 
aid, with transfers totalling €5 billion being 
budgeted for businesses hit hard by higher en -
ergy costs. However, the bulk of additional 
spending is bundled into a global precautionary 
item of €14 billion. Its intended purpose is to 
finance measures that have already been ap -
proved or for which approval is imminent.6
The Bundestag’s Budget Committee did not 
make any changes to the estimated net bor -
rowing figure in its final deliberations. Owing 
to the now more favourable tax estimate, add -
itional revenue will amount to €12 billion net. 
This is offset by higher expenditure appropri -
ations in the same amount. On balance, the 
majority of these are attributable to coronavirus- 
related spending in the healthcare sector. In 
addition, estimated interest expenditure was 
revised upwards by €5 billion in view of interest 
rate developments in the capital markets. This 
is reflected in significantly reduced expected 
premia for new issues.7 Higher other expend -
iture appropriations, particularly for business 
aid, are offset by a decrease in budgeted global 
spending increases.8
Net borrowing therefore remains at €139 bil -
lion. A cyclical burden (€8 billion) and financial 
transactions (€3 billion) are factored out of the 
debt brake.9 On balance, this leaves a structural March draft 
of central 
govern ment 
budget contains 
pandemic- 
related 
emergency  
borrowing Amendment to 
draft budget 
contains add -
itional borrow -
ing authorisa -
tions of €39 
billion  for war- 
related  budget -
ary burdens 
Final deliber -
ations: revenue 
increases from 
tax estimate off -
set by additional 
spending
Standard limit 
under debt 
brake exceeded 
by €116 billionCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fe-
deral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-
fects. 
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410050050
––+
–250–200–150–100–500+50
2022
20212020Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20202021€ billion
2022
5 For details on the context provided back when the first 
draft budget for 2022 was passed in June 2021, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021).
6 For the sake of budgetary clarity, it is important to attrib -
ute budgeted expenditure to specific budget items, wher -
ever possible.
7 The volatility of interest expenditure could be prevented 
by recording premia and discounts on an accrual basis. See 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c), p. 61.
8 This means that, on balance, budgeted global spending 
cuts are the dominant factor here.
9 The debt brake ceased to apply to special funds without 
their own borrowing authorisation at the start of 2022; ac -
cording to the government’s March decision, it expects 
them to record deficits of €12 billion.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
76

net borrowing figure of €128 billion, exceeding 
the standard limit by €116 billion. The conse -
quence that this will have for the repayment 
schedule is that, from 2028 onwards, the avail -
able scope for borrowing will be just over 
€3½ billion lower annually.
As things currently stand, it appears that a gen -
erous approach has been taken in drawing up 
the plans for the current year – as in the 
budgets for previous years. However, the plans 
are also fraught with considerable uncertainty 
in view of the Russian war of aggression and its 
impact.In the amendment to the draft budget, the 
government cites two emergencies in its rea -
soning for exceeding its borrowing limit. First, 
it points out that the budgetary situation is par -
ticularly strained due to the fallout from the 
pandemic and the war. Second, it considers the 
planned measures necessary, but does not ex -
plain the reasons in more detail. The Constitu -
tional Court of Hesse had previously called for 
detailed discussions on the Hessian debt brake 
in such a context.10 According to the court, jus -
tification would have to be given, in particular, 
as to why the additional measures and their Plans cautious 
as things 
currently  stand, 
but fraught with 
uncertaintyLittle justification  
for exceeding 
standard limitKey central government budget data in connection with the debt brake*
€ billion
Item Actual 2020Provisional 
actual 2021 Target 2022
 1. Expenditure 1 441.8 556.6 495.8
of which:
 1.a Investment 50.3 45.8 51.5
 1.b Global spending increases/ cuts – – –   6.5
 2. Revenue 1,2 311.1 341.0 356.2
of which:
 2.a Tax revenue 1 283.3 313.5 328.4
 2.b Global revenue increases/ shortfalls – – –   1.0
 3. Fiscal balance (2.-1.) – 130.7 – 215.6 – 139.6
 4. Coin seigniorage 0.2 0.2 0.2
 5. Transfer to (–)/ withdrawal from (+) reserves – – 0.5
 6. Net borrowing (–)/ repayment (+) (3.+4.+5.) – 130.5 – 215.4 – 138.9
 7. Cyclical component in the budget procedure –  42.6 –  12.5 –   7.9
 8. Balance of fi  nancial transactions –   6.6 3.0 –   2.8
 9. Structural net borrowing (–)/ repayment (+) (6.-7.-8.) –  81.3 – 205.9 – 128.2
10. Amount exceeding limit (12.-9.) 69.6 193.8 115.7
11. Memo item: Amount exceeding limit incl. special funds (10.-14.) 41.9 124.8 127.6
12. Standard upper limit: structural net borrowing (0.35% of GDP) 3 –  11.7 –  12.1 –  12.5
13. Structural balance (3.-7.-8.) –  81.5 – 206.1 – 128.9
13.a  As before, with estimate of potential output acc. to spring 2022 economic forecast –  95.2 – 202.6 – 128.9
14. Memo item: Balance of off- budget entities relevant up to this point 4 27.7 69.0 –  11.9
14.a Energy and Climate Fund 25.3 53.9 –   6.4
14.b Relief Fund (2013 fl  ood) –   0.4 –   0.2 –   0.5
14.c Fund to Promote Municipal Investment –   1.0 –   1.0 –   1.2
14.d Digitalisation Fund 1.3 0.2 –   0.2
14.e Fund for Primary School- Age Childcare Provision 2.5 0.5 –   0.4
14.f Flood Relief Fund (2021 fl  ood) – 15.6 –   3.2
15. Memo item: Balance of the planned Armed Forces Special Fund 5 – – –  20.0
15.a  Borrowing authorisation remaining thereafter – – 80.0
16. Reserves of special funds for 14. 43.2 112.2 100.3
17. Level of general reserves 48.2 48.2 48.2
18. Balance on control account 47.7 47.7 47.7
19. Total outstanding repayment amount including Armed Forces Special Fund 
(from 10. and 15.) 69.6 263.4 399.1
* Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. For methodological notes, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2016). 1 After 
deduction of supplementary central government transfers, shares of energy tax revenue, compensation under the 2009 reform of motor 
vehicle tax and consolidation/ budgetary recovery assistance to federal states, excluding transfers to/ withdrawals from reserves. 2 Exclud-
ing coin seigniorage. 3 Based on gross domestic product in the year before the (comprehensive) budget is prepared. 4 Budgeted fi  gures 
for 2022 from borrowing plan contained in Bundestags-Drucksache 20/1000. 5 Assuming constant annual allocation of funds from 2022 
to 2026.
Deutsche Bundesbank
10 See Constitutional Court of Hesse (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
77

credit financing are appropriate for addressing 
the particular emergency situation. With regard 
to the amendment to the draft central govern -
ment budget, the economic environment 
would probably be particularly relevant, as this 
is already characterised by steep price rises and 
supply bottlenecks. Higher government deficits 
tend to amplify such frictions (see the remarks 
on p. 71). The government’s lowering of en -
ergy taxes also appears to require further ex -
planation. Whilst it is true that this can offset 
higher energy prices, it masks price signals that 
would be helpful in overcoming the emergency 
caused by the energy crisis in an economically 
efficient manner.
Emergency borrowing could be more limited in 
scope if the government already made use of 
its reserves of €48 billion this year. On the one 
hand, budgets would initially come under pres -
sure starting in 2023 due to the absence of 
available reserves. On the other hand, pressure 
on budgets would be eased from 2028 on -
wards because the emergency loans that would 
have to be repaid would then be smaller. The 
government has stated that it needs the re -
serves in order to comply with the standard 
limit under the debt brake from 2023. How -
ever, it should then explain why it is not pos -
sible to make use of other financing options. 
Another reason why this appears remarkable is 
that the government has already created add -
itional scope for borrowing for the coming 
years via special funds: specifically, the revised 
accounting method for special funds means 
that it has an additional €112 billion at its dis -
posal compared with the plans drawn up by 
the previous government.11
Under the Basic Law, emergency borrowing 
must be tied to a repayment schedule. As 
things currently stand, the emergency loans 
taken out in 2020 are to be repaid at €3½ bil -
lion per year starting in 2023. The annual re -
payments of €11 billion for the 2021 budget 
are to then commence three years later. When 
it adopts the 2022 budget, the Bundestag is 
now expected to defer these repayment sched -ules. The government is aiming to defer repay -
ments until 2028 and to make repayments until 
2058 instead of until 2042, as had previously 
been decided. The reasoning given for this is 
the timetable for the repayment of European 
debt for assistance provided in response to the 
coronavirus pandemic (NextGenerationEU). 
This delay is not compatible with the debt 
brake’s intention to protect future budgets 
from borrowing burdens. However, from an 
economic perspective, it is worth considering 
amending the constitutional rules on repay -
ment obligations given low debt ratios.12
Benchmark figures up to 2026
In mid- March, the Federal Government also 
adopted the benchmark figures for the 2023 
budget and for the medium- term fiscal plan up 
to 2026. From 2023, it plans to resume compli -
ance with the debt brake’s standard limit for 
structural net borrowing. To this end, it intends 
to use up the reserves by the end of 2025: it 
plans to withdraw €28 billion next year, and 
the remainder in the two years thereafter. To 
ensure compliance with the standard limit, 
nominal expenditure will also increase very little 
in the later planning years. To some extent, this 
means that expenditure cuts are needed in real 
terms. Defence spending is a different matter, 
though. This is set to rise permanently to over 
2% of GDP . This is not reflected in the bench -
mark figures, as the government wishes to ini -
tially finance the additional expenditure via 
borrowing by a new Armed Forces Special 
Fund. It is not yet known how the spending in -
creases will be financed in the core budget 
after that. Pressure on the central government 
budget will be eased with respect to payments 
to the social security funds: as of next year, the 
special grants for the statutory health insurance 
scheme are set to be discontinued. However, it 
is likely that the health insurance institutions 
will then have to sharply raise their supplemen -
tary contribution rates. The repayment obliga -Sparing reserves 
increases 
amount of net 
borrowing 
requiring repay -
ment and there -
fore also seems 
to warrant a 
more detailed 
explanation
Planned deferral 
of repayments in 
conflict with 
debt brake 
objectivesBenchmark 
figures  up to 
2026: return to 
standard debt 
brake limit with 
reserve funds 
and tight 
expenditure 
appropriations
11 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b), pp. 70 ff.
12 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c), p. 64.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
78

tions for emergency loans no longer appear in 
the figures, as they have – as explained above – 
been deferred to a period outside the fiscal 
planning horizon. In the longer term, demo -
graphic developments are also likely to place 
a  serious strain on the central government 
budget in the form of higher grants to the pen -
sion insurance scheme. The fact that the re -
placement rate for a standard pension is set to 
be frozen at 48% beyond 2025 will have an ex -
acerbating effect. As previously planned, the 
retirement age is to remain fixed at 67 from 
2032. Under these conditions, the contribution 
rate and the central government grants linked 
to it will rise considerably.
Central government’s off- budget entities: 
first quarter and outlook
Central government’s off- budget entities (ex -
cluding the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund 
(SoFFin), bad banks and other entities that use 
commercial double- entry bookkeeping) posted 
a surplus of €½ billion in the first quarter of 
2022.13 This constituted a year- on- year im -
provement of €5 billion. The ECF saw its deficit 
shrink by €2 billion. This was due, on balance, 
to the higher price of electricity, which reduced 
the need for subsidies for electricity from re -
newable energy sources. At the start of 2021, 
the Economic Stabilisa tion Fund was still €1½ 
billion in deficit as a result of coronavirus aid 
for enterprises (in particular guaranteed assis -
tance loans provided via the KfW). At the be -
ginning of this year, repay ments culminated in 
a surplus of €2 billion.
For 2022 as a whole, a surplus is expected for 
the existing off- budget entities, albeit on a sig -
nificantly smaller scale than the previous year’s 
figure (€76 billion).
– The Federal Government is planning a deficit 
of €6 billion for the ECF. Last year, a special 
payment from central government produced 
a surplus of €54 billion.14– The Flood Relief Fund will record a deficit 
this year. Last year, it posted a sizeable sur -
plus as a result of pre- funding by central 
government amounting to €16 billion.
– The Economic Stabilisation Fund should see 
its surplus climb considerably (2021: €2 bil -
lion), provided this is not counteracted by 
new assistance measures.
– The off- budget entity “Provision for final 
payments for inflation- indexed Federal 
securities” will see significant growth in its 
surplus on the back of increased transfers to 
the fund by central government due to the 
high rate of inflation.
Overall, the off- budget entities could neverthe -
less end up in deficit this year. This is because, 
over the course of the year, a new special fund 
is to be introduced, financing additional de -
fence spending via borrowing. The Federal 
Government is planning the increased expend -
iture in response to Russia’s war of aggression. 
The special fund is to sit outside the scope of 
the debt brake and receive borrowing authori -
sations of €100 billion. The plans provide for a 
repayment obligation but without a specific 
timeframe attached. Setting up the special 
fund in the form envisaged will only be possible 
with the approval of opposition parties – a high 
bar which ought to avoid setting a precedent 
undermining the binding effect of the debt 
brake. Given that a budget plan for the special 
fund has yet to be presented, for the current 
year it is almost impossible to gauge the vol -
umes involved in procurement and thus to say 
what the fund’s deficit will be.Improved result 
for central gov -
ernment’s off- 
budget entities 
in Q1 2022: 
alleviating  
factors  for ECF 
and Economic 
Stabilisation 
Fund
Off- budget 
entities set to 
record surplus 
for 2022 as a 
wholeHigh borrowing 
authorisation for 
planned Armed 
Forces Special 
Fund …
13 According to figures from the Federal Ministry of 
Finance. The Ministry does not publish quarterly data for 
off- budget entities that keep commercial accounts, such as 
the bad bank FMS Wertmanagement. The deficit gener -
ated by SoFFin, which uses a single- entry accounting sys -
tem, has also been excluded, as it is largely a result of the 
loans passed on to FMS Wertmanagement.
14 Central government made this payment under recourse 
to the escape clause. This is currently the subject of review 
by the Constitutional Court in response to a constitutional 
complaint lodged by the opposition.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
79

Together with the pre- funded ECF, it is foresee -
able that the off- budget entities will post rela -
tively large deficits over the next few years.
State government budgets15
Core budgets in the first quarter of 2022
State government core budgets finished the 
first quarter with a very high surplus of €14 bil -
lion. In the same quarter last year, where the 
effects of the pandemic were more strongly 
felt, they had posted a deficit of €3 billion. Rev -
enue went up by 15%, driven primarily by 
strong growth in tax revenue (+25%, or +€18 
billion). Receipts from public administrations 
went down. A contributing factor here appears 
to have been the lower central government 
payments for business aid, which are chan -
nelled through the state budgets.There was barely any increase in expenditure 
overall. On the one hand, other operating ex -
penditure, in particular, climbed significantly 
(+9%), not least as a result of the regular 
coronavirus testing in schools. In addition, per -
sonnel expenditure –  a major expenditure 
item – rose rather strongly, by 6%. This was 
partly because the federal states were still pay -
ing out coronavirus bonuses with preferential 
tax treatment to salaried employees and civil 
servants in the first quarter of 2022. There was 
also a distinct increase in transfers to public ad -
ministrations, especially to local government. 
Meanwhile, other expenditure fell sharply. 
Lower volumes of business aid, which –  as 
mentioned previously – is financed by central 
government, probably played an especially sig -
nificant role here.
Core budgets and off- budget entities in 
2022 as a whole
Taken together, the federal states’ core budgets 
and off- budget entities recorded a surplus of 
€3½ billion last year. This year, the outturn 
could be similar. On the expenditure side, a 
continued marked increase is likely not least in 
personnel expenditure – a sizeable budget 
item; transfers to local government will also 
probably show another perceptible rise. When 
it comes to other operating expenditure, how -
ever, declining spending on vaccination centres 
and school testing in particular will likely take 
some of the pressure off over the remainder of 
the year. On the other hand, rising prices will 
probably exert a counter effect. The Russian 
war of aggression is affecting federal states’ ex -
penditure levels primarily in the form of add -
itional costs associated with refugees. Central 
government appears to be shouldering the 
bulk of that burden, however. According to the 
most recent tax estimate, tax revenue will con -
tinue to rise markedly this year, even after the 
surprisingly high result of the previous year. 
While that increase will be much less strong … weighing on 
outlook for off- 
budget entities
Very high 
surplus  in Q1 
against back -
drop of strong 
tax growthBarely any 
expenditure 
growth in net 
terms
Core budgets 
and off- budget 
entities: result 
could change to 
only a limited 
extent this yearState government fiscal balance
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 
1 Figure calculated using monthly data from the Federal Minis-
try of Finance; quarterly data are not yet available. 2 Core bud-
gets and off-budget entities together.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q430201001020
–––++
2020Quarterly figures
20222021€ billion
Cumulated from start of year 2
20201
–40–30–20–100+10
2021Off-budget entitiesCore budgets
15 The quarterly data on state government budgets are 
based on the monthly cash statistics for the core budgets.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
80

than at the beginning of the year, it will never -
theless ease the strain on state government 
budgets. Even so, the tax cuts passed by the 
Bundestag could weigh on state government 
revenue.
State government debt brakes
Many federal states have activated the debt 
brake escape clause again this year in order to 
cope with the coronavirus crisis. Pandemic-  
related encumbrances ought now to be mod -
est, however. The year 2021 already saw tax 
revenue exceed the level expected in the last 
pre- crisis tax estimate of 2019. The same is true 
of the tax revenue now projected for the cur -
rent year. On the expenditure side, coronavirus 
measures appear to have weighed on the fed -
eral states as a whole to the tune of almost €10 
billion in 2021. As things stand today, those en -
cumbrances are likely to at least halve this year. 
Overall, it must be ensured that emergency 
borrowing is utilised in a targeted manner for 
overcoming emergency situations. This was 
also stressed in the ruling delivered at the start 
of April by the Federal Constitutional Court for 
Rhineland- Palatinate. Consequently, the federal 
states must give sound justification in the event 
of recourse to emergency borrowing.
Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
First quarter
In the first quarter of 2022, the statutory pen -
sion insurance scheme had a largely balanced 
budget, an improvement of €3 billion on the 
year. Total revenue increased by 4½%. There 
was a strong 5½% rise in contribution receipts, 
bolstered by the sharp decline in short- time 
work. Central government funds increased by 
1%: their growth was subdued on account of 
the rules coupling them to the weak wage de -
velopments of 2020 this year.At 1%, expenditure growth was much weaker 
than growth in revenue. The reason for that 
minimal growth was the fact that pensions 
were not raised in western Germany in mid-  
2021 (eastern Germany: +0.7%). The number 
of pensions hardly changed. Moreover, it ap -
pears that the volume of supplementary pay -
ments being made and retroactively paid out in 
connection with the basic pension introduced 
last year remained very limited.
2022 as a whole
Expenditure in the year as a whole is rising sig -
nificantly more strongly than in the first quarter 
of 2022. Most notably, individual pensions on 
an average for this year are growing far more 
strongly, increasing by 3% in total. Mid- year 
will see them rise by a sharp 5½%, averaged 
across Germany (5.35% in western Germany 
and 6.12% in eastern Germany). The key rea -
son behind this development is the high wage 
growth recorded in 2021, which was driven by 
declining short- time work. The catch- up factor 
will dampen the pension adjustment by just 
over 1 percentage point: after being temporar -
ily suspended it has now been reactivated by 
the Federal Government. This factor compen -
sates for the application of the safeguard 
clause in 2021 that meant that pensions were 
not cut. The Federal Government expects the 
number of pensions to grow somewhat more 
strongly again than in the previous year (2021: 
+0.2%). On top of this, expenditure on the 
basic pension is climbing: the pension insur -
ance scheme is paying it out on an increased 
scale and still has basic pensions for 2021 to 
pay out retroactively. By contrast, revenue 
growth is likely to be significantly weaker for 
the year as a whole.
Compared with the previous year, 2022 as a 
whole is thus likely to see a deterioration in the 
finances of the pension insurance scheme. Fol -
lowing a surplus of almost €1 billion last year 
(according to provisional figures), a significant 
deficit is now on the cards for 2022, which 
could amount to around €2½ billion. There are Only limited 
burdens  left over 
from corona -
virus pandemic; 
emergency 
borrowing  
needs careful 
justification
Balanced result 
for the quarter; 
steep growth in 
contribution 
receiptsLow pension 
adjustment from 
previous year 
dampened 
expenditure 
dynamics
Large pension 
adjustment in 
2022 accelerat -
ing growth in 
expenditure
Considerable 
deficit antici -
pated for 2022 
as a wholeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
81

risks on the revenue side with regard to the 
economic impact of the Russian war of aggres -
sion.
Medium and long- term outlook
It is to be expected that the deficits recorded 
by the pension insurance scheme will increase 
over the coming years. The reserves will then 
gradually be depleted. On balance, new meas -
ures will serve to curb the rise in pension ex -
penditure up to the end of 2025, though. The 
suspension of the pension adjustment formula 
until 2025 means that pensions will grow at a 
slower pace, increasing by only so much every year as to maintain a minimum replacement 
rate of 48%. Without this measure, they would 
be just over 2% higher on an annual average 
for a time. While there are other new measures 
which will increase expenditure, they will have 
less of an impact. One such measure is a blan -
ket rise in pensions from 2024 onwards for 
those who entered retirement due to a reduc -
tion in earning capacity between 2001 and 
2018.
Once reserves have run down to their min -
imum level, balance will need to be restored to 
the budget. To achieve this, as things stand 
today, the contribution rate will need to rise by 
roughly 1 percentage point around 2025 (with -
out factoring in any risks related to the Russian 
war of aggression). The contribution rate cur -
rently sits at 18.6%.
Looking at the longer term, further measures 
will bring increased financial pressures for the 
pension insurance scheme. The Federal Gov -
ernment is planning to continue the 48% 
threshold for the replacement rate beyond 
2025. In order to fund this, contribution rates 
will need to rise more sharply. This will also 
place a greater strain on the central govern -
ment budget because central government 
funds will increase along with the contribution 
rate, among other things.
Federal Employment Agency
First quarter
The Federal Employment Agency posted a def -
icit of €2 billion in the first quarter of 2022.16 
This was €8 billion lower than in the same 
quarter of 2021 because the Federal Employ -
ment Agency was no longer as severely af -
fected by the coronavirus crisis.New pension 
policy plans 
will alleviate 
pressure  over 
medium termContribution 
rate will never -
theless rise 
sharply around 
2025
Contributions 
set for strong 
increases in the 
long term 
against 
backdrop  of 
permanent  48% 
threshold
Sharp fall in 
deficit  in year- 
on- year termsFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung  Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary quarterly figures as the latter are not subsequently revised.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4420246
––+++
–8–6–4–20+2Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202220212020
2022
2020
20212020 2021 20220246
2020 2021 20220246 Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
16 In the core budget, i.e. excluding the civil servants’ pen -
sion fund. Transfers to the fund are recorded as expend -
iture, lowering the core budget balance. These transfers 
were suspended in 2022 because of the coronavirus crisis 
(as they have been since 2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
82

Revenue rose substantially, by 7½% overall. 
Growth in contribution receipts was somewhat 
stronger still, at 9½%. This was due, not least, 
to the recovery in employment after the 
coronavirus crisis. Revenue from insolvency 
benefit contributions fell by 13%, pushed down 
by the reduction in the contribution rate from 
0.12% to 0.09% at the start of 2022.
Expenditure was 42% down on the same quar -
ter of the previous year, though it was still 24% 
higher than in the last pre- crisis year of 2019. In 
the first quarter of 2022, expenditure on un -
employment benefits fell by 26% on the year 
(-€1½ billion) and expenditure on short- time 
work by as much as 74% on the year (-€6 bil -
lion).
2022 as a whole
The Federal Employment Agency’s finances will 
improve considerably in 2022 provided that the 
labour market and wages develop in line with 
the Federal Government’s spring projection. 
However, if the Russian war of aggression 
exerts stronger impacts these could quickly 
place a significant strain on the Federal Employ -
ment Agency, for example through short- time 
working benefits.
The Federal Employment Agency’s budget plan 
from last autumn still envisaged a deficit of 
€1½ billion in the core budget. However, as in 
the past, the estimates for spending on active 
labour market policy measures are likely to be 
on the generous side. The Federal Govern -
ment’s spring forecast also shows revenue 
growing at a markedly higher rate than had been projected. Overall, this scenario foresees 
a close- to- balance budget, following a deficit 
of €22 billion last year (before central govern -
ment grants of €17 billion).Strong increase 
in revenue from 
higher contribu -
tion receipts
Sharp decline in 
expenditure due 
to improved 
labour market 
situation
Favourable 
labour market 
developments, 
but risks in 
connection  
with war
Current baseline 
scenario more 
favourable than 
the Federal 
Employment 
Agency’s budget 
plan
List of references
Constitutional Court of Hesse (2021), judgment of 27 October 2021 on the constitutionality of 
Hesse’s coronavirus special fund, court reference number P .St. 2783, P .St. 2827.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), Potential macroeconomic consequences of the war in Ukraine – 
simulations based on a heightened risk scenario, Monthly Report, April 2022, pp. 13-29.Finances of the 
Federal Employment Agency*
Source: Federal Employment Agency. * Including transfers to 
the civil servants' pension fund and before payment of central 
government grants.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410505
––+
–30–25–20–15–10–50+5Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202220212020
2021202020222020 2021 2022–60–300+30+60+90+120+150
2020 2021 202260300306090120150
––+++++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
83

Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b), Public finances, Monthly Report, February 2022, pp. 62-80.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c), Central government’s debt brake: options for stability- oriented 
further  development, Monthly Report, April 2022, pp. 49-66.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), Public finances, Monthly Report, August 2021, pp. 71-82.
Independent Advisory Board to the Stability Council (2022), 18. Stellungnahme zur Einhaltung der 
Obergrenze für das strukturelle gesamtstaatliche Finanzierungsdefizit nach § 51 Absatz 2 HGrG, 
26 April 2022.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
84

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43 •
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
3•

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
13. General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
14. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78 •
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81 •
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 €STR  5,73 month
EURIBOR  6,7Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  8
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2020 Aug. 13.3 9.6 9.5 9.9 7.7 4.7 – 0.1 – 0.55 – 0.48 – 0.0
Sep. 13.8 10.3 10.3 10.1 8.2 4.5 – 0.4 – 0.55 – 0.49 – 0.1
Oct. 13.9 10.4 10.5 10.6 8.3 4.3 – 0.5 – 0.55 – 0.51 – 0.2
Nov. 14.5 10.8 11.0 11.2 8.6 4.4 – 0.7 – 0.56 – 0.52 – 0.2
Dec. 15.6 11.7 12.2 11.9 9.3 5.0 – 0.5 – 0.56 – 0.54 – 0.2
2021 Jan. 16.4 12.2 12.5 12.3 9.4 4.8 – 0.9 – 0.56 – 0.55 – 0.2
Feb. 16.4 12.1 12.3 11.6 9.6 4.7 – 0.9 – 0.56 – 0.54 – 0.1
Mar. 13.7 10.2 10.1 10.6 8.6 4.0 – 0.3 – 0.56 – 0.54 0.0
Apr. 12.4 9.2 9.4 9.4 7.3 3.4 – 0.3 – 0.57 – 0.54 0.1
May 11.7 8.4 8.6 8.8 6.3 2.9 – 1.0 – 0.56 – 0.54 0.2
June 11.8 8.3 8.4 8.3 6.0 3.3 – 0.6 – 0.56 – 0.54 0.2
July 11.0 7.6 7.8 8.1 5.8 3.2 – 0.5 – 0.57 – 0.55 0.0
Aug. 11.1 7.8 8.0 7.8 5.5 2.9 – 0.8 – 0.57 – 0.55 – 0.1
Sep. 11.1 7.6 7.6 7.8 5.6 3.4 – 0.7 – 0.57 – 0.55 0.1
Oct. 10.7 7.5 7.7 7.5 5.7 3.6 – 0.2 – 0.57 – 0.55 0.2
Nov. 10.0 7.1 7.3 7.3 5.8 3.8 – 0.3 – 0.57 – 0.57 0.2
Dec. 9.8 7.0 6.9 6.9 6.1 4.0 – 0.4 – 0.58 – 0.58 0.1
2022 Jan. 9.2 6.8 6.5 6.6 6.2 4.4 – 0.2 – 0.58 – 0.56 0.4
Feb. 9.1 6.7 6.4 6.4 6.3 4.4 – 0.4 – 0.58 – 0.53 0.8
Mar. 8.8 6.6 6.3 ... 6.0 4.4 – 0.7 – 0.58 – 0.50 0.9
Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... – 0.58 – 0.45 1.4
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 EuroShort-Term Rate.  6 Euro interbank offered rate.  7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p.
43●. 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries included: DE,
FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT, GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2020 Aug. +25,006 +24,282 +47,160 +10,318 +35,415 –16,620 +16,743 + 1,304 1.1828 101.5 94.9
Sep. +37,429 +34,583 +44,329 –22,205 – 1,563 – 9,399 +74,908 + 2,589 1.1792 101.5 94.9
Oct. +30,735 +38,534 +35,707 +33,821 +98,039 + 3,739 –102,806 + 2,914 1.1775 101.3 94.8
Nov. +28,199 +34,904 +40,627 –45,561 +185,623 +10,347 –107,174 – 2,610 1.1838 100.6 94.3
Dec. +42,689 +39,241 +52,603 –97,995 +298,039 –30,237 –118,954 + 1,749 1.2170 101.8 95.2
2021 Jan. +17,245 +21,625 +31,004 +44,251 +22,828 +11,025 –46,147 – 954 1.2171 101.3 95.2
Feb. +23,309 +33,347 +53,581 +49,087 +94,564 – 1,787 –86,704 – 1,579 1.2098 100.6 94.5
Mar. +39,748 +37,742 +22,237 +37,796 –29,880 – 6,061 +20,817 – 435 1.1899 100.3 94.0
Apr. +32,309 +28,369 + 3,863 + 752 +27,253 + 6,906 –31,632 + 583 1.1979 100.6 94.2
May +13,642 +27,661 +38,501 +17,653 +80,744 – 7,016 –54,223 + 1,343 1.2146 100.8 94.2
June +31,970 +31,926 +60,619 –13,146 +52,022 – 2,378 +18,930 + 5,192 1.2047 100.2 93.7
July +40,745 +33,888 +46,417 +43,006 + 2,693 +18,359 –17,304 – 338 1.1822 99.7 93.5
Aug. +20,099 +15,839 +34,276 +42,708 +34,628 + 1,688 –166,830 +122,082 1.1772 99.3 93.2
Sep. +33,160 +21,246 + 4,092 +21,261 +16,776 + 4,169 –39,569 + 1,455 1.1770 99.4 93.3
Oct. + 7,218 +12,497 +23,260 +15,410 +33,345 +13,923 –42,584 + 3,165 1.1601 98.4 92.4
Nov. + 9,733 +15,111 – 2,532 – 775 +64,801 +26,302 –93,412 + 553 1.1414 97.6 91.7
Dec. +22,452 +10,998 + 1,441 +32,649 +21,592 + 4,304 –56,275 – 827 1.1304 97.1 91.2
2022 Jan. – 2,549 – 7,329 + 9,273 + 4,718 +26,166 + 3,766 –23,208 – 2,169 1.1314 96.6 p 91.2
Feb. +11,426 +10,743 – 1,449 +48,464 –23,679 – 965 –26,935 + 1,665 1.1342 96.9 p 91.6
Mar. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1019 95.9 p 91.4
Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0819 95.2 p 90.4
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also Tables
XII.10 and 11, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Bundesbankcalculation. Against the currencies of the EER-19 group.  4 Based on consumer price
indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2019 1.6 2.1 1.1 4.1 1.2 1.8 1.8 4.9 0.5 2.5
2020 –6.4 –5.7 –4.6 –3.0 –2.3 –7.9 –9.0 5.9 –9.0 –3.8
2021 5.4 6.2 2.9 8.3 3.5 7.0 8.3 13.5 6.6 4.5
2020 Q4 –4.3 –4.3 –1.9 –1.5 0.0 –3.7 –7.1 4.5 –5.8 –1.2
2021 Q1 –0.9 0.0 –3.0 3.7 –1.3 1.6 –0.8 12.8 0.4 –0.9
Q2 14.6 15.1 10.8 12.7 8.2 19.4 15.0 21.0 18.1 10.6
Q3 4.1 5.0 2.8 8.3 3.6 3.6 11.8 11.3 3.8 5.0
Q4 4.7 5.6 1.8 8.6 3.5 5.1 7.4 9.6 5.6 3.1
2022 Q1 5.1 ... 4.0 ... ... 5.3 ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2019 –1.0 4.8 –4.3 7.1 1.6 0.5 –0.7 7.0 –1.1 0.8
2020 –8.0 –3.8 –10.2 –2.8 –3.2 –10.9 –2.1 14.5 –11.4 –1.8
2021 7.8 16.8 p 4.1 6.8 4.2 5.9 10.2 16.4 12.2 6.5
2020 Q4 –0.6 0.6 –3.0 3.2 –2.1 –4.2 3.1 25.0 –2.6 2.2
2021 Q1 4.7 8.4 –1.2 –0.2 0.0 2.0 4.7 40.6 10.3 3.7
Q2 23.2 29.8 19.3 15.1 4.4 22.3 15.6 33.2 32.5 12.6
Q3 6.0 19.4 2.6 7.1 4.6 2.6 9.7 27.6 4.9 6.3
Q4 0.2 11.2 p –1.5 5.6 7.5 –0.3 11.3 –18.2 4.6 3.6
2022 Q1 –0.3 5.3 p –0.8 4.1 ... 0.2 4.4 p –14.2 1.4 4.0
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2019 82.2 81.2 84.6 72.6 81.0 84.5 71.6 77.3 77.4 76.3
2020 74.6 75.6 77.3 67.6 76.9 73.8 71.0 68.8 53.4 72.0
2021 81.4 80.1 84.8 78.2 81.2 81.1 75.6 78.2 76.4 75.2
2021 Q1 79.2 78.9 82.1 74.0 78.9 79.3 73.0 76.8 75.1 74.1
Q2 80.8 79.6 84.9 76.8 81.6 80.2 74.4 73.6 75.4 74.7
Q3 83.0 80.9 86.1 78.6 81.5 82.9 77.8 80.8 77.5 75.5
Q4 82.7 81.1 85.9 83.2 82.7 82.0 77.3 81.6 77.7 76.6
2022 Q1 82.4 80.0 85.8 72.3 81.9 82.7 76.8 78.9 78.7 75.5
Q2 82.6 80.2 84.9 70.0 80.2 82.2 76.7 82.6 78.8 75.6
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2019 7.5 5.4 3.2 4.5 6.7 8.2 17.3 5.0 10.0 6.3
2020 7.8 5.6 3.8 7.0 7.8 7.8 16.3 5.6 9.2 8.1
2021 e 7.7 e 6.3 3.6 e 6.2 e 7.7 e 7.9 e 14.8 e 6.3 e 9.5 e 7.6
2021 Nov. 7.1 5.8 3.2 5.3 6.8 7.4 13.4 5.2 9.0 7.3
Dec. 7.0 5.7 3.2 5.4 7.2 7.5 12.8 5.1 8.8 7.4
2022 Jan. 6.9 5.6 3.1 5.8 7.0 7.4 13.0 5.0 8.6 7.3
Feb. 6.9 5.6 3.0 5.4 6.5 7.4 12.8 4.8 8.5 7.2
Mar. 6.8 5.6 2.9 5.4 6.4 7.4 12.9 5.1 8.3 7.0
Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.8 ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2019 1.2 1.2 1.4 2.3 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.9 0.6 2.7
2020 0.3 0.4 5 0.4 –0.6 0.4 0.5 –1.3 –0.5 –0.1 0.1
2021 2.6 3.2 5 3.2 4.5 2.1 2.1 0.6 2.4 1.9 3.2
2021 Nov. 4.9 7.1 5 6.0 8.6 3.5 3.4 4.0 5.4 3.9 7.4
Dec. 5.0 6.6 5 5.7 12.0 3.2 3.4 4.4 5.7 4.2 7.9
2022 Jan. 5.1 8.5 5.1 11.0 4.1 3.3 5.5 5.0 5.1 7.5
Feb. 5.9 9.5 5.5 11.6 4.4 4.2 6.3 5.7 6.2 8.8
Mar. 7.4 9.3 7.6 14.8 5.8 5.1 8.0 6.9 6.8 11.5
Apr. 7.4 9.3 7.8 19.1 5.8 5.4 9.1 7.3 6.3 13.1
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
2019 –0.7 –2.0 1.5 0.1 –0.9 –3.1 1.1 0.5 –1.5 –0.6
2020 –7.1 –9.0 –4.3 –5.6 –5.5 –8.9 –10.2 –5.1 –9.6 –4.5
2021 –5.1 –5.5 –3.7 –2.4 –2.6 –6.5 –7.4 –1.9 –7.2 –7.3
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
2019 83.8 97.7 58.9 8.6 59.6 97.4 180.7 57.2 134.1 36.7
2020 97.2 112.8 68.7 19.0 69.0 114.6 206.3 58.4 155.3 43.3
2021 95.6 108.2 69.3 18.1 65.8 112.9 193.3 56.0 150.8 44.8
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
4.6 3.3 5.9 2.0 1.5 2.7 2.6 3.3 2.1 5.3 2019
–0.1 –1.8 –8.3 –3.8 –6.7 –8.4 –4.4 –4.2 –10.8 –5.0 2020
5.0 6.9 9.4 5.0 4.5 4.9 3.0 8.1 5.1 5.5 2021
0.3 0.7 –8.0 –2.9 –5.7 –6.4 –1.8 –3.1 –8.8 –3.8 2020 Q4
1.6 5.6 –0.3 –2.2 –5.0 –5.3 0.2 1.5 –4.5 –2.1 2021 Q1
8.3 12.7 16.1 10.7 12.9 16.0 9.6 16.1 17.8 13.0 Q2
4.8 4.8 12.7 5.4 5.4 4.4 1.3 5.0 3.4 5.3 Q3
5.2 4.8 10.0 6.5 5.5 5.8 1.4 10.4 5.5 6.4 Q4
4.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... 9.8 6.5 ... 2022 Q1
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2.9 –3.1 1.1 –0.9 –0.1 –2.2 0.5 2.8 0.5 4.4 2019
–1.7 –10.8 –0.2 –3.9 –5.9 –7.3 –9.1 –6.4 –9.8 –7.3 2020
20.0 8.1 –0.3 5.0 11.2 3.5 10.4 9.9 7.5 7.0 2021
2.7 –2.7 –0.9 –1.9 0.9 –2.0 1.7 –1.1 –2.1 –1.7 2020 Q4
13.3 5.1 –8.4 –0.8 3.2 –0.6 6.6 3.4 2.6 1.1 2021 Q1
25.0 24.0 14.1 10.0 24.1 24.3 35.8 24.1 27.2 21.3 Q2
17.8 3.4 –0.2 6.8 9.7 –3.8 0.9 6.2 1.9 4.9 Q3
23.9 2.0 –5.5 4.5 9.6 –1.7 4.0 7.5 1.8 2.6 Q4
22.9 ... ... ... p 9.8 –3.2 –1.7 p 3.5 p 2.0 ... 2022 Q1
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
77.3 80.0 77.4 84.1 86.6 78.8 87.2 84.3 80.3 63.8 2019
73.0 72.5 70.7 78.3 79.5 75.7 79.5 78.5 74.4 51.5 2020
76.7 81.9 76.8 82.4 87.1 79.8 82.2 84.4 77.8 51.3 2021
74.1 78.7 75.8 80.4 84.0 79.5 82.4 82.5 77.0 50.5 2021 Q1
76.6 83.6 77.9 81.8 86.3 79.5 82.5 84.2 77.4 48.8 Q2
77.7 83.1 78.4 83.8 89.5 78.9 81.9 85.8 77.5 50.2 Q3
78.3 82.1 75.2 83.6 88.5 81.4 82.1 85.2 79.2 55.6 Q4
77.9 81.8 62.9 84.0 88.4 82.9 82.8 86.4 78.8 55.4 2022 Q1
77.5 80.1 64.6 84.3 89.0 83.2 83.9 85.5 80.0 58.1 Q2
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
6.3 5.6 3.6 3.4 4.5 6.5 5.8 4.5 14.1 7.1 2019
8.6 6.8 4.4 3.9 5.4 6.9 6.7 5.0 15.5 7.6 2020
e 7.1 e 5.4 e 3.6 e 4.2 e 6.2 e 6.6 e 6.9 e 4.8 e 14.8 e 7.5 2021
6.7 4.9 3.1 3.7 5.2 6.2 6.6 4.6 13.5 6.6 2021 Nov.
6.6 4.9 3.2 3.8 4.8 5.8 6.6 4.4 13.4 6.6 Dec.
7.0 4.7 3.1 3.6 4.8 5.8 6.6 4.2 13.3 6.5 2022 Jan.
7.0 4.6 3.1 3.4 4.8 5.6 6.5 4.1 13.4 6.3 Feb.
6.9 4.5 3.0 3.3 4.2 5.7 6.5 4.0 13.5 5.9 Mar.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Apr.
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2.2 1.6 1.5 2.7 1.5 0.3 2.8 1.7 0.8 0.5 2019
1.1 0.0 0.8 1.1 1.4 –0.1 2.0 –0.3 –0.3 –1.1 2020
4.6 3.5 0.7 2.8 2.8 0.9 2.8 2.0 3.0 2.3 2021
9.3 6.3 2.4 5.9 4.1 2.6 4.8 4.9 5.5 4.7 2021 Nov.
10.7 5.4 2.6 6.4 3.8 2.8 5.1 5.1 6.6 4.8 Dec.
12.3 4.6 4.1 7.6 4.5 3.4 7.7 6.0 6.2 5.0 2022 Jan.
14.0 7.8 4.2 7.3 5.5 4.4 8.3 7.0 7.6 5.8 Feb.
15.6 7.9 4.5 11.7 6.6 5.5 9.6 6.0 9.8 6.2 Mar.
16.6 9.0 5.4 11.2 7.1 7.4 10.9 7.4 8.3 8.6 Apr.
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
0.5 2.3 0.6 1.7 0.6 0.1 –1.3 0.4 –3.1 1.3 2019
–7.3 –3.4 –9.5 –3.7 –8.0 –5.8 –5.5 –7.8 –10.3 –5.8 2020
–1.0 0.9 –8.0 –2.5 –5.9 –2.8 –6.2 –5.2 –6.9 –1.7 2021
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
35.9 22.3 40.7 48.5 70.6 116.6 48.1 65.6 98.3 91.1 2019
46.6 24.8 53.4 54.3 83.3 135.2 59.7 79.8 120.0 115.0 2020
44.3 24.4 57.0 52.1 82.8 127.4 63.1 74.7 118.4 103.6 2021
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of valueadded tax between July and December 2020.  6 According to Maastricht Treaty
definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2020 Aug. 84.3 25.6 17.2 58.7 66.7 1.6 –18.0 –19.6 13.1 9.6 –0.4 –11.5 15.5
Sep. 84.4 –2.8 –2.9 87.2 86.3 45.9 –26.7 –72.6 10.6 –11.0 –0.2 19.4 2.5
Oct. 69.9 30.9 –4.7 39.0 33.1 –26.7 87.6 114.3 –17.4 –4.3 –0.4 –29.7 17.1
Nov. 117.4 72.8 29.0 44.6 45.3 –30.4 91.8 122.2 4.7 13.2 –0.5 –10.7 2.7
Dec. – 3.6 –1.0 30.0 –2.6 6.2 –46.9 –194.4 –147.5 9.3 –5.5 –0.5 –14.4 29.7
2021 Jan. 133.3 30.1 4.3 103.2 94.1 38.8 162.4 123.6 –36.2 –9.2 0.1 –16.0 –11.1
Feb. 99.8 33.8 9.0 66.0 72.7 –14.7 28.9 43.6 –1.2 –5.7 –0.5 –2.4 7.4
Mar. 176.0 100.7 8.5 75.3 74.0 – 5.9 –6.7 –0.7 12.2 –9.0 –0.3 1.2 20.3
Apr. 55.9 13.3 8.6 42.6 29.0 –11.4 104.5 115.9 –36.9 –23.9 –0.1 –7.5 –5.4
May 124.9 48.3 15.2 76.6 77.6 2.6 24.5 21.8 –23.5 –1.2 –0.2 –15.1 –6.9
June 94.5 37.2 0.8 57.3 58.6 9.2 –74.4 –83.7 26.8 –6.1 –0.4 –4.2 37.6
July 119.0 62.2 8.2 56.8 50.3 – 4.9 78.2 83.1 4.4 –4.2 –0.6 9.3 –0.1
Aug. 35.3 –16.4 –7.6 51.7 60.9 – 4.9 141.0 146.0 –5.9 –7.3 –0.4 –7.0 8.9
Sep. 107.5 73.0 3.8 34.4 43.2 –40.2 –58.3 –18.1 16.6 –4.5 –0.4 8.3 13.2
Oct. 80.8 68.5 21.5 12.3 18.4 –16.6 192.0 208.6 16.7 –10.6 –0.7 22.0 6.0
Nov. 156.4 89.6 –3.4 66.8 67.5 –26.7 14.7 41.4 –6.0 –10.6 –0.7 2.7 2.5
Dec. 53.2 28.1 20.5 25.1 22.6 –51.3 –203.5 –152.2 6.5 18.1 –0.8 –24.5 13.7
2022 Jan. 162.0 88.8 –9.2 73.3 62.9 – 7.4 125.7 133.1 –20.7 –14.7 –0.0 4.3 –10.2
Feb. 113.1 47.0 –0.4 66.1 73.4 –10.2 89.8 100.0 –17.0 –8.9 –0.3 –1.9 –5.8
Mar. 139.4 101.4 17.5 38.0 35.6 –21.2 –21.9 –0.7 –11.3 3.3 –0.6 –34.8 20.8
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2020 Aug. 9.3 7.5 1.9 1.8 7.9 5.6 –8.1 –13.7 –5.2 –2.2 –0.4 –4.4 1.8
Sep. 22.6 4.6 1.3 18.1 15.8 –34.8 22.9 57.8 10.4 –3.4 –0.4 5.1 9.1
Oct. 48.7 22.1 6.6 26.7 23.9 30.1 –16.6 –46.8 –2.0 –0.5 –0.4 –4.5 3.4
Nov. 44.0 19.6 4.5 24.5 26.0 –15.1 7.4 22.5 0.6 –1.5 –0.4 0.2 2.3
Dec. – 0.9 7.5 3.6 –8.4 –4.6 –107.2 –35.1 72.1 –7.5 –1.3 –0.3 –7.1 1.2
2021 Jan. 30.1 12.1 3.1 18.1 18.1 41.7 79.7 38.0 –11.4 –2.9 –0.6 –1.6 –6.4
Feb. 29.8 18.8 4.6 11.1 13.4 26.3 7.0 –19.3 0.8 –1.8 –0.3 4.3 –1.4
Mar. 54.1 35.8 1.8 18.3 19.5 –61.9 1.9 63.9 3.5 –3.5 –0.3 7.1 0.2
Apr. 11.4 0.5 2.4 10.8 7.0 67.3 25.3 –42.0 9.3 –2.4 –0.3 6.4 5.6
May 33.4 16.8 3.2 16.6 18.9 –35.0 –10.9 24.1 –10.3 –2.8 –0.1 –7.3 0.0
June 30.0 8.7 2.4 21.4 22.3 –36.1 –5.3 30.8 3.2 –3.4 –0.2 –7.3 14.1
July 42.9 22.4 2.2 20.4 18.4 42.8 –14.6 –57.4 5.1 –1.8 –0.3 4.3 2.8
Aug. 28.5 16.6 1.6 11.9 15.7 –18.0 18.2 36.2 2.0 –0.5 –0.2 0.9 1.9
Sep. 33.1 16.7 5.4 16.4 16.5 –92.2 –0.7 91.5 3.8 –2.2 –0.2 2.6 3.6
Oct. 37.8 34.7 7.2 3.0 –0.6 47.0 47.6 0.7 18.6 1.4 –0.2 15.6 1.8
Nov. 54.0 28.5 3.4 25.4 28.0 –59.0 –4.2 54.8 5.0 –0.6 –0.2 4.7 1.1
Dec. 12.8 10.9 6.8 2.0 4.7 –122.9 –47.1 75.8 –2.3 9.1 –0.2 –13.2 2.0
2022 Jan. 40.4 31.0 1.4 9.4 7.5 111.9 72.2 –39.7 –4.0 –1.1 –0.8 12.6 –14.8
Feb. 32.7 27.6 3.4 5.2 7.2 16.0 22.0 5.9 5.1 –1.3 –0.2 7.0 –0.4
Mar. 37.0 23.3 4.2 13.8 12.8 –44.3 –22.3 22.0 6.2 –1.9 –0.2 4.1 4.2
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
40.7 5.8 0.0 18.2 35.3 44.8 5.9 38.9 –18.6 9.1 – 4.8 –0.1 – 4.2 2020 Aug.
20.2 42.0 0.0 88.0 82.3 63.7 3.5 60.1 16.7 1.9 –29.5 8.2 – 3.5 Sep.
–17.2 –40.0 0.0 108.9 85.9 100.7 7.8 93.0 –17.3 2.5 5.3 14.1 12.5 Oct.
–98.5 52.3 0.0 129.4 125.2 152.4 11.8 140.6 –35.2 8.1 – 0.7 1.1 3.2 Nov.
–128.1 –52.1 0.0 138.3 128.3 117.1 20.8 96.2 10.6 0.6 –24.7 20.1 – 3.5 Dec.
78.3 33.2 0.0 69.1 32.3 44.5 2.6 41.9 –30.6 18.4 29.9 18.5 5.7 2021 Jan.
30.4 5.2 0.0 52.6 65.4 71.8 7.3 64.5 –18.0 11.6 2.8 –30.7 13.1 Feb.
19.6 73.2 0.0 83.2 101.6 82.6 10.5 72.2 7.3 11.7 –18.6 –4.7 –13.3 Mar.
–32.3 14.2 0.0 94.5 69.1 88.9 8.5 80.4 –27.9 8.1 15.3 8.9 6.8 Apr.
– 8.5 48.9 0.0 110.1 115.6 116.7 13.2 103.5 –11.7 10.7 – 4.1 –8.9 8.1 May
16.8 –4.3 0.0 74.0 88.1 119.7 10.5 109.2 –33.9 2.3 –10.8 –8.4 – 4.6 June
0.4 –53.3 0.0 152.9 115.2 104.9 14.6 90.3 10.5 – 0.3 17.4 22.6 7.4 July
26.6 –10.6 0.0 28.3 33.4 32.4 1.7 30.7 –2.5 3.6 –12.3 5.3 – 6.1 Aug.
6.5 –0.8 0.0 31.2 60.4 76.0 5.3 70.8 –16.5 0.8 12.7 –31.1 2.9 Sep.
– 2.4 –80.1 0.0 129.1 84.7 70.4 6.8 63.7 19.2 – 5.0 13.2 31.5 0.7 Oct.
–48.5 83.9 0.0 95.8 83.7 102.7 6.0 96.7 –19.7 0.7 – 4.4 26.2 – 5.1 Nov.
–44.5 –22.0 0.0 87.8 114.4 104.0 20.6 83.3 6.9 3.6 –41.8 –6.7 – 3.8 Dec.
68.1 83.0 0.0 –23.5 –22.3 –51.2 0.9 –52.1 14.5 14.4 63.5 –24.2 5.9 2022 Jan.
44.5 33.8 0.0 40.9 62.8 70.9 9.2 61.7 –16.1 8.0 9.4 –39.4 8.6 Feb.
14.3 23.8 0.0 110.6 115.0 95.4 22.5 72.9 16.8 2.8 –23.9 4.9 – 3.0 Mar.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
21.0 – 14.2 3.8 0.9 13.3 18.6 – 4.9 0.2 – 0.4 0.3 – 0.3 2020 Aug.
15.3 – 58.3 2.7 0.6 20.4 26.2 – 5.2 – 0.1 – 0.4 0.2 – 0.2 Sep.
– 20.0 70.5 2.4 1.7 30.3 30.6 – 0.1 – 0.0 0.2 0.6 – 1.0 Oct.
– 12.7 3.6 1.3 3.0 37.4 49.3 – 14.3 0.3 3.3 – 0.3 – 0.9 Nov.
– 22.9 – 73.4 2.4 5.6 – 4.3 – 5.8 – 1.7 1.3 3.1 0.1 – 1.3 Dec.
– 40.3 95.7 1.1 0.9 27.8 45.9 – 14.8 1.6 – 3.8 – 0.0 – 1.1 2021 Jan.
15.4 29.1 2.3 1.5 10.8 20.3 – 8.5 1.2 – 2.4 – 0.0 0.3 Feb.
– 2.3 – 38.0 2.5 2.7 29.1 24.3 – 0.6 0.1 5.0 0.5 – 0.1 Mar.
– 7.4 71.2 0.7 2.6 5.5 13.9 – 5.2 0.7 – 3.4 – 0.1 – 0.4 Apr.
18.8 – 44.9 3.0 2.9 34.8 27.8 2.8 0.6 1.7 – 0.1 2.0 May
6.0 – 14.0 3.1 2.3 – 1.2 7.1 – 8.0 – 0.4 – 0.2 0.1 0.3 June
– 12.0 75.2 4.2 3.7 17.4 21.2 – 4.1 – 0.3 0.6 – 0.1 0.1 July
0.7 – 13.2 2.9 0.2 21.0 20.4 – 1.6 – 0.3 0.1 0.0 2.3 Aug.
7.1 – 77.3 4.6 0.8 7.3 7.6 – 1.3 – 0.6 1.5 – 0.0 0.1 Sep.
– 3.9 53.7 3.3 1.6 16.4 3.9 13.0 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.4 Oct.
7.2 – 42.3 3.7 1.2 25.0 40.9 – 12.3 – 0.1 – 4.7 – 0.3 1.4 Nov.
27.8 –135.3 5.3 4.5 – 0.4 – 12.8 9.1 1.6 – 0.3 0.3 1.7 Dec.
– 38.1 164.6 1.3 0.8 29.8 22.3 10.7 0.3 – 1.2 0.0 – 2.4 2022 Jan.
2.5 16.1 3.0 2.2 25.0 22.7 – 0.1 0.3 1.1 0.1 0.8 Feb.
– 0.1 – 13.2 5.8 4.2 – 0.2 – 7.7 8.6 – 1.6 0.5 0.2 – 0.1 Mar.
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2020 Feb. 29,486.1 18,768.4 14,102.9 11,697.4 1,564.1 841.4 4,665.5 992.3 3,673.3 6,412.9 4,304.7
Mar. 30,019.5 19,015.8 14,241.5 11,884.9 1,559.3 797.3 4,774.4 1,006.7 3,767.6 6,482.9 4,520.8
Apr. 30,449.1 19,309.4 14,349.9 11,933.4 1,614.3 802.2 4,959.5 1,018.1 3,941.4 6,583.3 4,556.4
May 30,500.5 19,611.5 14,470.1 12,020.6 1,646.6 802.8 5,141.4 1,013.8 4,127.7 6,464.0 4,425.1
June 30,406.4 19,761.9 14,451.9 11,982.0 1,653.7 816.1 5,310.0 1,005.3 4,304.7 6,297.2 4,347.3
July 30,598.6 19,912.2 14,334.1 12,013.7 1,506.0 814.5 5,578.1 1,006.0 4,572.1 6,291.1 4,395.3
Aug. 30,434.9 19,985.0 14,355.1 12,019.1 1,525.0 811.0 5,629.9 997.8 4,632.1 6,241.9 4,208.0
Sep. 30,522.8 20,084.9 14,349.5 12,019.2 1,520.4 809.9 5,735.4 998.7 4,736.8 6,238.0 4,199.8
Oct. 30,687.0 20,162.5 14,376.6 12,054.8 1,520.5 801.3 5,785.9 1,004.2 4,781.7 6,337.4 4,187.0
Nov. 30,749.4 20,292.0 14,457.7 12,090.4 1,542.2 825.0 5,834.4 1,003.4 4,831.0 6,331.0 4,126.4
Dec. 30,438.8 20,266.1 14,438.3 12,042.9 1,532.2 863.2 5,827.8 990.2 4,837.6 6,108.9 4,063.8
2021 Jan. 30,643.8 20,387.8 14,466.2 12,067.8 1,535.8 862.6 5,921.6 999.4 4,922.1 6,299.8 3,956.2
Feb. 30,546.3 20,463.6 14,500.5 12,090.1 1,541.1 869.3 5,963.1 992.4 4,970.6 6,300.7 3,782.0
Mar. 30,827.0 20,653.7 14,576.8 12,185.3 1,512.6 879.0 6,076.9 993.3 5,083.5 6,360.7 3,812.6
Apr. 30,752.9 20,667.2 14,566.6 12,169.2 1,509.7 887.7 6,100.6 1,007.2 5,093.4 6,396.3 3,689.5
May 30,890.4 20,788.2 14,612.8 12,198.6 1,521.6 892.6 6,175.5 1,006.2 5,169.2 6,434.1 3,668.1
June 30,991.0 20,890.7 14,652.8 12,234.6 1,530.0 888.3 6,237.8 1,004.8 5,233.1 6,400.1 3,700.3
July 31,313.8 21,028.8 14,708.4 12,278.0 1,543.8 886.7 6,320.4 1,011.3 5,309.1 6,504.0 3,781.0
Aug. 31,438.1 21,048.3 14,685.2 12,261.1 1,533.7 890.4 6,363.1 1,002.3 5,360.8 6,653.1 3,736.6
Sep. 31,473.8 21,134.4 14,758.1 12,331.3 1,535.4 891.4 6,376.3 993.6 5,382.7 6,620.1 3,719.3
Oct. 31,776.5 21,202.4 14,818.4 12,379.4 1,548.8 890.2 6,384.0 987.7 5,396.3 6,822.3 3,751.8
Nov. 32,190.7 21,382.2 14,912.2 12,478.2 1,543.1 890.9 6,470.0 985.8 5,484.2 6,914.0 3,894.4
Dec. 31,778.2 21,385.6 14,918.4 12,463.1 1,568.2 887.1 6,467.3 988.5 5,478.8 6,737.5 3,655.1
2022 Jan. 32,376.2 21,548.4 15,025.2 12,583.4 1,558.2 883.6 6,523.2 999.2 5,523.9 6,895.4 3,932.5
Feb. 32,570.7 21,607.6 15,056.5 12,624.6 1,556.1 875.8 6,551.1 991.9 5,559.2 7,000.0 3,963.1
Mar. 32,901.9 21,711.8 15,159.8 12,715.0 1,578.4 866.4 6,552.1 994.7 5,557.4 6,989.8 4,200.3
German contribution (€ billion)
2020 Feb. 7,028.5 4,531.0 3,562.2 3,092.6 203.2 266.4 968.8 290.8 678.0 1,306.1 1,191.4
Mar. 7,148.1 4,567.1 3,589.0 3,128.9 202.1 258.0 978.1 292.4 685.7 1,321.3 1,259.6
Apr. 7,258.0 4,605.2 3,606.5 3,143.8 206.5 256.1 998.7 294.8 703.9 1,346.6 1,306.2
May 7,230.4 4,666.4 3,640.1 3,167.2 215.9 257.1 1,026.2 293.8 732.5 1,326.0 1,238.1
June 7,225.3 4,692.6 3,641.6 3,164.7 220.4 256.6 1,051.0 291.5 759.6 1,304.2 1,228.5
July 7,267.6 4,718.8 3,634.9 3,175.5 202.7 256.7 1,083.9 293.4 790.5 1,282.9 1,265.8
Aug. 7,167.3 4,723.0 3,642.2 3,180.7 202.9 258.6 1,080.8 287.4 793.3 1,268.8 1,175.5
Sep. 7,236.4 4,749.2 3,647.1 3,184.0 204.9 258.1 1,102.1 289.7 812.4 1,293.8 1,193.4
Oct. 7,257.1 4,801.4 3,670.3 3,200.4 210.7 259.3 1,131.1 292.0 839.1 1,278.8 1,176.8
Nov. 7,240.5 4,841.7 3,688.6 3,213.7 214.3 260.6 1,153.1 290.2 862.9 1,261.9 1,136.9
Dec. 7,172.5 4,839.4 3,695.5 3,216.4 214.7 264.5 1,143.9 286.4 857.4 1,224.1 1,109.1
2021 Jan. 7,220.7 4,865.5 3,705.9 3,224.4 216.4 265.1 1,159.6 286.5 873.1 1,307.6 1,047.6
Feb. 7,182.0 4,885.0 3,724.3 3,238.8 217.4 268.1 1,160.7 283.8 877.0 1,305.0 991.9
Mar. 7,233.5 4,939.8 3,761.1 3,273.4 217.3 270.4 1,178.7 282.6 896.1 1,315.4 978.3
Apr. 7,228.4 4,946.1 3,760.5 3,270.3 217.6 272.6 1,185.6 285.7 899.9 1,333.6 948.6
May 7,228.0 4,977.5 3,777.2 3,283.3 219.5 274.4 1,200.3 283.4 916.9 1,329.8 920.7
June 7,277.1 5,009.8 3,786.4 3,290.4 220.8 275.2 1,223.4 282.3 941.1 1,325.1 942.1
July 7,362.7 5,062.4 3,808.5 3,310.2 221.9 276.4 1,253.9 284.4 969.5 1,317.4 982.9
Aug. 7,395.2 5,087.3 3,824.6 3,325.1 221.4 278.1 1,262.8 280.8 982.0 1,336.0 971.9
Sep. 7,398.6 5,110.8 3,840.8 3,336.4 224.7 279.7 1,270.1 280.7 989.4 1,335.1 952.6
Oct. 7,461.0 5,147.0 3,874.5 3,363.5 228.6 282.4 1,272.5 284.4 988.0 1,385.2 928.8
Nov. 7,575.0 5,210.7 3,904.2 3,389.9 229.0 285.3 1,306.4 280.7 1,025.7 1,396.4 967.9
Dec. 7,475.8 5,212.1 3,914.7 3,393.2 237.0 284.5 1,297.4 278.0 1,019.5 1,355.9 907.8
2022 Jan. 7,787.1 5,243.9 3,944.7 3,422.9 235.8 286.0 1,299.2 279.9 1,019.3 1,433.5 1,109.6
Feb. 7,871.4 5,262.9 3,968.5 3,445.2 238.0 285.3 1,294.3 277.8 1,016.5 1,464.3 1,144.2
Mar. 7,996.9 5,280.7 3,990.1 3,464.3 240.6 285.2 1,290.6 278.7 1,011.9 1,447.3 1,268.9
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,229.3 13,477.0 12,528.5 12,615.6 7,430.6 731.6 198.6 1,888.7 2,322.0 44.1 2020 Feb.
1,253.1 13,775.3 12,782.4 12,903.7 7,698.1 759.4 192.1 1,883.4 2,327.6 43.1 Mar.
1,273.5 13,996.0 12,953.0 13,065.1 7,852.4 762.3 188.2 1,876.7 2,343.4 42.1 Apr.
1,293.5 14,302.8 13,164.0 13,264.9 8,009.7 779.7 188.4 1,881.9 2,363.7 41.4 May
1,306.6 14,478.2 13,208.9 13,310.8 8,066.5 763.6 186.8 1,877.8 2,375.5 40.6 June
1,320.9 14,592.9 13,276.6 13,363.7 8,090.1 783.2 186.3 1,882.5 2,381.1 40.4 July
1,326.8 14,668.1 13,304.3 13,391.2 8,117.1 767.8 184.4 1,892.0 2,390.0 40.0 Aug.
1,330.3 14,758.4 13,361.0 13,467.6 8,175.8 781.0 195.4 1,883.6 2,392.0 39.8 Sep.
1,338.1 14,814.8 13,431.7 13,545.6 8,266.0 783.3 181.9 1,880.4 2,394.6 39.4 Oct.
1,349.9 14,813.0 13,527.2 13,621.6 8,358.3 756.5 179.6 1,885.7 2,402.5 39.0 Nov.
1,370.7 14,772.9 13,620.6 13,728.8 8,459.6 772.0 176.9 1,877.6 2,404.2 38.5 Dec.
1,373.3 14,873.9 13,631.3 13,752.9 8,505.4 743.9 173.8 1,870.6 2,421.0 38.1 2021 Jan.
1,380.6 14,957.8 13,678.6 13,807.8 8,569.6 733.7 169.2 1,865.1 2,432.5 37.7 Feb.
1,391.1 15,076.4 13,757.0 13,913.7 8,654.9 753.5 164.3 1,858.8 2,444.8 37.4 Mar.
1,399.6 15,061.0 13,775.3 13,936.1 8,727.0 731.8 159.5 1,827.5 2,453.0 37.3 Apr.
1,412.8 15,147.4 13,870.8 14,018.1 8,811.1 724.4 155.5 1,826.2 2,463.6 37.1 May
1,423.2 15,241.8 13,943.4 14,091.3 8,917.7 698.2 150.4 1,822.0 2,466.2 36.8 June
1,437.6 15,335.4 14,017.2 14,185.7 9,006.7 705.9 153.6 1,817.0 2,466.2 36.3 July
1,439.2 15,386.3 14,039.3 14,196.7 9,030.0 707.3 151.2 1,809.9 2,462.4 35.9 Aug.
1,444.5 15,442.5 14,075.3 14,239.7 9,092.9 701.1 140.0 1,806.7 2,463.3 35.6 Sep.
1,450.3 15,504.6 14,139.4 14,312.4 9,166.1 709.0 148.0 1,795.5 2,458.8 34.9 Oct.
1,456.3 15,518.6 14,188.7 14,345.5 9,224.1 697.5 143.3 1,786.4 2,459.8 34.3 Nov.
1,476.9 15,579.8 14,310.2 14,464.6 9,316.4 714.5 131.3 1,805.4 2,463.5 33.6 Dec.
1,477.8 15,626.6 14,262.4 14,458.9 9,294.9 709.2 135.3 1,808.4 2,478.2 32.9 2022 Jan.
1,487.0 15,718.0 14,310.3 14,492.7 9,351.3 688.7 134.3 1,799.5 2,486.2 32.7 Feb.
1,509.5 15,835.5 14,411.3 14,594.6 9,434.3 704.2 123.9 1,810.0 2,489.8 32.4 Mar.
German contribution (€ billion)
281.3 3,890.4 3,750.4 3,576.3 2,265.3 142.0 31.3 569.8 535.4 32.5 2020 Feb.
282.2 3,982.8 3,830.4 3,655.2 2,346.4 147.3 30.5 567.2 532.0 31.8 Mar.
286.5 3,997.3 3,828.9 3,665.7 2,359.6 149.2 30.0 563.6 532.2 31.1 Apr.
291.8 4,080.7 3,885.8 3,710.9 2,396.9 158.3 29.0 563.6 532.5 30.7 May
296.5 4,132.2 3,873.6 3,711.6 2,408.7 152.1 29.6 559.0 532.6 29.7 June
300.4 4,170.7 3,880.3 3,716.8 2,409.9 163.5 30.0 552.8 531.5 29.2 July
301.3 4,202.4 3,889.9 3,720.2 2,419.2 159.3 30.1 551.3 531.6 28.8 Aug.
301.9 4,235.6 3,905.7 3,745.0 2,445.3 160.3 30.3 549.2 531.5 28.4 Sep.
303.6 4,245.3 3,935.3 3,781.4 2,476.4 165.4 30.5 549.7 531.5 28.0 Oct.
306.6 4,260.2 3,961.8 3,804.4 2,507.7 157.7 30.6 549.0 531.8 27.6 Nov.
312.2 4,228.5 3,954.1 3,801.5 2,500.9 160.3 31.0 548.8 533.1 27.3 Dec.
313.1 4,218.7 3,980.7 3,829.7 2,541.7 147.0 31.0 548.5 534.8 26.8 2021 Jan.
314.6 4,245.1 3,990.0 3,837.4 2,555.8 141.0 31.1 547.0 536.0 26.4 Feb.
317.3 4,264.3 4,011.8 3,863.4 2,579.8 145.1 31.7 544.6 536.1 26.1 Mar.
319.9 4,262.2 4,013.0 3,874.5 2,594.4 143.0 31.9 542.5 536.8 25.8 Apr.
322.8 4,308.8 4,040.3 3,895.1 2,613.5 146.0 32.2 540.4 537.4 25.7 May
325.1 4,311.0 4,035.3 3,890.5 2,619.4 139.3 31.9 537.5 537.0 25.5 June
328.8 4,313.9 4,047.3 3,911.3 2,645.8 136.0 31.4 536.0 536.7 25.2 July
329.0 4,333.1 4,065.2 3,923.1 2,659.1 135.6 31.3 535.7 536.4 25.0 Aug.
329.8 4,340.5 4,064.1 3,919.8 2,662.1 132.2 31.2 533.6 535.8 24.8 Sep.
331.4 4,354.3 4,080.9 3,950.3 2,681.4 143.0 31.1 534.8 535.5 24.6 Oct.
332.6 4,390.5 4,107.1 3,968.0 2,710.9 132.5 30.3 534.6 535.5 24.3 Nov.
337.1 4,425.2 4,113.0 3,968.5 2,691.5 141.2 30.1 544.6 537.0 24.1 Dec.
337.9 4,419.6 4,138.4 4,008.2 2,737.3 136.9 29.7 543.6 537.4 23.4 2022 Jan.
340.1 4,443.7 4,161.0 4,016.8 2,751.7 132.7 29.4 542.3 537.7 23.1 Feb.
344.3 4,441.2 4,158.8 4,014.2 2,754.5 131.2 29.3 540.3 536.0 22.9 Mar.
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2020 Feb. 425.5 436.0 219.8 96.8 32.8 59.2 23.3 4.0 263.2 262.7 547.4 2,190.9 1,497.8
Mar. 430.2 441.4 232.8 93.3 31.0 58.2 22.3 3.9 293.2 292.6 526.9 2,173.9 1,484.3
Apr. 502.3 428.6 233.9 84.0 29.4 56.4 21.1 3.8 289.0 288.6 542.9 2,158.7 1,472.6
May 603.1 434.8 245.9 81.7 28.4 54.7 20.3 3.8 297.8 297.5 542.3 2,134.3 1,470.7
June 726.2 441.1 259.5 82.4 24.6 51.8 19.3 3.4 254.8 254.6 556.6 2,105.0 1,453.7
July 787.6 441.5 264.3 80.1 23.2 51.0 19.4 3.5 271.8 271.6 586.4 2,055.1 1,434.5
Aug. 828.4 448.5 273.6 79.5 22.1 50.3 19.6 3.5 266.9 266.7 587.0 2,036.6 1,425.3
Sep. 848.8 442.1 274.8 74.4 20.8 49.1 19.5 3.4 237.7 237.5 595.2 2,059.6 1,431.0
Oct. 831.5 437.6 277.4 69.6 20.8 47.0 19.5 3.4 243.1 242.9 609.3 2,043.2 1,418.6
Nov. 733.0 458.4 307.1 64.6 17.8 46.1 19.4 3.3 246.4 246.4 610.3 2,025.2 1,406.4
Dec. 604.8 439.3 294.7 60.3 17.2 44.8 19.0 3.3 221.4 221.3 626.0 1,995.5 1,386.3
2021 Jan. 683.2 437.8 294.4 58.9 17.4 44.1 19.2 3.8 251.6 251.5 644.5 1,990.9 1,369.7
Feb. 713.6 436.4 296.4 54.3 19.0 43.9 19.2 3.7 254.6 254.5 613.8 2,004.3 1,369.6
Mar. 733.1 429.6 295.4 52.1 16.4 43.2 18.9 3.7 236.5 236.5 609.1 2,005.5 1,357.4
Apr. 700.9 424.0 293.9 48.5 16.2 42.9 18.9 3.6 251.1 251.0 618.0 1,991.6 1,350.5
May 692.4 436.9 308.3 47.7 15.9 42.4 19.1 3.5 246.7 246.7 608.5 1,980.7 1,339.4
June 709.3 441.2 314.0 46.6 16.3 42.0 18.8 3.5 236.5 236.5 600.0 1,984.2 1,332.4
July 709.7 440.1 313.9 45.6 16.6 42.0 18.6 3.5 253.9 253.9 622.6 1,999.3 1,334.0
Aug. 736.1 453.5 329.1 43.9 17.0 42.0 18.0 3.4 241.7 241.7 627.9 1,988.5 1,334.0
Sep. 742.7 460.1 334.6 46.3 16.6 41.3 18.1 3.3 257.3 257.2 596.8 2,011.7 1,343.3
Oct. 740.3 451.9 323.3 48.1 18.0 41.6 17.7 3.3 270.3 270.3 628.3 2,036.8 1,358.3
Nov. 691.5 481.6 349.8 50.3 19.1 41.7 17.5 3.3 266.4 266.4 654.5 2,046.2 1,358.8
Dec. 646.7 468.4 337.4 49.7 19.4 41.1 17.6 3.2 224.7 223.5 647.7 2,023.0 1,352.4
2022 Jan. 710.9 456.8 307.2 67.4 19.6 41.2 17.6 3.8 288.5 288.3 623.4 2,043.2 1,352.8
Feb. 755.5 469.9 314.0 73.5 19.8 41.3 17.6 3.7 297.9 297.7 584.0 2,049.5 1,360.7
Mar. 770.2 470.7 304.6 82.5 20.5 42.4 17.3 3.4 274.0 273.9 588.9 2,018.3 1,351.4
German contribution (€ billion)
2020 Feb. 62.2 251.9 85.5 86.0 26.3 50.9 2.8 0.4 2.0 1.8 1.8 563.9 310.3
Mar. 69.7 257.9 97.6 82.5 24.7 49.8 2.8 0.4 1.7 1.6 2.2 553.0 310.7
Apr. 87.5 244.0 94.7 74.4 23.7 48.3 2.7 0.4 3.4 3.3 2.1 550.6 306.2
May 116.2 253.6 108.0 72.9 22.9 46.7 2.8 0.3 2.4 2.3 1.9 543.1 305.4
June 174.0 246.5 106.1 74.1 19.5 44.0 2.5 0.3 0.9 0.7 1.8 532.8 297.2
July 208.5 245.3 109.6 71.4 18.3 43.2 2.5 0.3 2.1 2.0 1.6 523.3 293.3
Aug. 229.5 252.8 118.7 71.3 17.4 42.4 2.6 0.3 1.7 1.5 1.9 517.9 291.1
Sep. 244.7 245.8 119.4 66.0 16.5 41.1 2.5 0.3 1.3 1.1 2.0 525.3 296.1
Oct. 224.8 239.1 119.1 61.7 16.6 39.0 2.5 0.3 1.4 1.3 2.7 519.9 296.2
Nov. 212.1 243.7 131.6 57.3 14.0 38.0 2.5 0.2 9.1 9.1 2.4 515.5 296.1
Dec. 189.2 237.8 131.9 52.8 13.5 36.8 2.5 0.2 12.2 12.2 2.5 503.3 290.1
2021 Jan. 148.9 240.1 136.5 51.6 13.5 35.8 2.4 0.2 8.4 8.4 2.4 503.3 284.6
Feb. 164.3 243.4 142.8 47.3 15.2 35.5 2.5 0.2 6.0 6.0 2.4 510.0 288.4
Mar. 161.9 239.0 144.4 44.9 12.7 34.4 2.4 0.2 11.0 11.0 2.9 523.3 289.8
Apr. 154.6 233.1 142.4 41.5 12.5 34.1 2.4 0.2 7.6 7.6 2.8 524.3 296.2
May 173.3 240.3 150.8 41.0 12.5 33.4 2.4 0.2 9.2 9.2 2.2 518.0 293.2
June 179.3 241.2 152.9 39.9 13.0 32.8 2.4 0.2 9.0 9.0 2.3 515.5 294.6
July 167.3 235.3 148.0 38.9 13.3 32.5 2.4 0.2 9.6 9.6 2.2 518.3 295.1
Aug. 168.1 241.8 155.7 37.3 13.9 32.4 2.4 0.2 9.7 9.7 2.2 522.4 303.1
Sep. 175.2 245.6 158.2 39.8 13.4 31.7 2.3 0.2 11.2 11.2 2.2 530.1 305.5
Oct. 171.3 232.7 142.7 40.9 14.8 31.8 2.3 0.2 10.8 10.8 2.1 547.9 316.4
Nov. 178.4 244.1 155.2 38.8 16.1 31.6 2.2 0.2 6.1 6.1 1.8 556.5 324.8
Dec. 206.2 250.5 161.9 39.1 16.4 30.7 2.3 0.2 5.8 4.8 2.1 547.6 316.3
2022 Jan. 168.1 243.3 139.1 54.6 16.5 30.7 2.2 0.2 4.7 4.7 2.2 562.8 325.1
Feb. 170.6 256.3 147.8 59.2 16.3 30.6 2.2 0.2 5.8 5.8 2.3 572.5 338.8
Mar. 170.6 256.4 137.6 68.8 17.0 30.7 2.2 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.4 581.5 354.8
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
3.5 23.0 2,164.4 4,820.3 2,966.7 26.4 3,964.7 0.0 9,012.7 12,441.8 13,101.0 7,127.1 156.9 2020 Feb.
29.8 20.5 2,123.6 4,910.3 2,930.7 11.6 4,144.5 0.0 9,312.6 12,762.0 13,448.8 7,043.0 152.5 Mar.
12.7 21.3 2,124.8 5,058.7 2,947.0 – 25.4 4,208.7 0.0 9,490.6 12,941.2 13,619.4 7,050.8 153.0 Apr.
4.1 22.2 2,108.0 4,956.8 2,952.7 – 33.1 4,053.3 0.0 9,682.0 13,166.2 13,836.0 7,042.6 154.7 May
– 0.3 20.6 2,084.7 4,723.1 2,977.4 – 4.2 4,008.9 0.0 9,768.9 13,242.8 13,915.4 7,035.8 158.0 June
– 11.9 19.9 2,047.1 4,744.5 3,017.5 – 54.6 4,064.1 0.0 9,813.1 13,308.1 14,012.0 7,042.1 159.4 July
– 15.4 19.2 2,032.9 4,711.2 3,014.5 – 38.8 3,862.5 0.0 9,856.0 13,340.6 14,027.9 7,033.2 160.0 Aug.
– 14.4 15.3 2,058.7 4,666.9 3,011.2 – 15.9 3,879.2 0.0 9,923.5 13,428.0 14,122.0 7,045.8 163.9 Sep.
– 2.2 15.2 2,030.1 4,789.8 3,038.2 – 47.9 3,858.5 0.0 10,025.3 13,516.4 14,233.1 7,038.6 165.3 Oct.
– 1.5 17.4 2,009.2 4,868.1 2,995.8 – 44.2 3,884.8 0.0 10,167.5 13,629.7 14,354.2 6,979.2 174.0 Nov.
– 4.6 16.9 1,983.2 4,671.6 3,020.5 – 11.3 3,771.5 0.0 10,278.9 13,750.6 14,480.2 6,967.9 176.0 Dec.
1.9 15.7 1,973.3 4,821.4 2,998.4 – 10.2 3,700.1 0.0 10,326.2 13,784.9 14,551.2 6,928.3 177.5 2021 Jan.
13.8 16.4 1,974.2 4,872.9 2,952.9 – 10.9 3,520.1 0.0 10,398.7 13,851.2 14,604.3 6,877.6 176.8 Feb.
– 0.7 16.9 1,989.3 4,944.3 2,967.6 15.9 3,580.6 0.0 10,490.2 13,964.4 14,699.1 6,899.9 173.1 Mar.
6.5 16.5 1,968.5 4,989.3 2,948.0 10.4 3,484.0 0.0 10,569.9 14,021.8 14,781.1 6,827.9 173.5 Apr.
14.8 15.9 1,950.0 4,995.9 2,968.5 53.3 3,476.5 0.0 10,684.4 14,134.5 14,887.1 6,827.8 176.1 May
10.6 16.1 1,957.6 4,964.4 2,979.9 57.4 3,503.6 0.0 10,811.2 14,231.7 14,971.2 6,841.7 180.3 June
16.9 17.1 1,965.4 5,051.0 3,024.7 38.9 3,550.3 0.0 10,914.9 14,345.4 15,122.6 6,888.9 180.9 July
11.9 16.3 1,960.4 5,201.1 3,024.5 29.8 3,499.0 0.0 10,956.6 14,380.5 15,153.0 6,876.1 182.3 Aug.
14.0 17.9 1,979.8 5,226.4 2,997.6 16.1 3,480.9 0.0 11,035.4 14,444.8 15,191.8 6,864.3 187.4 Sep.
14.4 17.8 2,004.7 5,432.8 2,999.7 – 22.7 3,476.3 0.0 11,103.9 14,527.5 15,318.3 6,879.7 188.2 Oct.
12.6 17.8 2,015.8 5,516.8 3,037.4 21.7 3,672.8 0.0 11,195.9 14,607.5 15,414.2 6,918.8 189.7 Nov.
8.9 18.0 1,996.1 5,378.9 3,025.6 54.2 3,367.4 0.0 11,299.5 14,721.8 15,502.3 6,904.9 195.0 Dec.
15.0 18.9 2,009.3 5,548.5 3,001.5 57.0 3,709.6 0.0 11,252.4 14,703.3 15,483.8 6,897.1 196.0 2022 Jan.
26.2 15.4 2,007.8 5,639.0 2,995.9 56.2 3,743.1 0.0 11,325.5 14,767.3 15,524.9 6,880.9 195.0 Feb.
34.5 4.8 1,979.0 5,646.8 3,008.5 71.1 3,949.3 0.0 11,422.3 14,884.1 15,637.9 6,875.7 197.5 Mar.
German contribution (€ billion)
21.7 6.8 535.4 850.2 764.8 –912.0 1,867.4 442.7 2,350.9 3,174.6 3,207.0 1,953.8 0.0 2020 Feb.
18.4 6.3 528.3 901.4 757.6 –990.7 1,940.1 455.0 2,444.0 3,263.9 3,292.5 1,935.1 0.0 Mar.
15.9 6.9 527.8 942.0 759.1 –1,003.6 2,007.1 458.2 2,454.3 3,266.4 3,294.7 1,930.3 0.0 Apr.
14.9 7.3 520.8 917.3 756.1 –1,003.8 1,932.8 458.5 2,505.0 3,323.2 3,349.8 1,918.3 0.0 May
14.8 7.1 510.9 939.7 769.1 –1,074.1 1,923.1 458.1 2,514.8 3,325.2 3,349.7 1,913.0 0.0 June
12.8 6.7 503.7 907.0 784.6 –1,089.1 1,967.5 460.5 2,519.5 3,336.8 3,360.1 1,913.6 0.0 July
12.0 7.2 498.7 891.2 778.4 –1,114.7 1,888.5 464.3 2,537.9 3,350.2 3,372.9 1,899.9 0.0 Aug.
12.4 6.7 506.2 952.4 787.3 –1,172.8 1,905.3 467.0 2,564.6 3,371.8 3,394.2 1,912.5 0.0 Sep.
11.1 7.0 501.8 906.4 794.7 –1,107.6 1,894.1 469.4 2,595.4 3,403.6 3,425.7 1,913.5 0.0 Oct.
10.0 7.1 498.4 923.3 780.2 –1,109.5 1,859.4 470.7 2,639.3 3,433.2 3,461.8 1,893.5 0.0 Nov.
9.0 6.6 487.7 985.7 787.5 –1,192.0 1,844.9 473.1 2,632.8 3,426.1 3,456.4 1,888.4 0.0 Dec.
7.8 6.8 488.7 1,026.4 778.3 –1,113.3 1,796.5 474.2 2,678.2 3,458.5 3,483.9 1,878.3 0.0 2021 Jan.
7.4 7.5 495.1 1,007.6 756.3 –1,095.7 1,750.3 476.5 2,698.6 3,471.7 3,494.9 1,860.6 0.0 Feb.
8.1 6.8 508.4 1,080.1 754.4 –1,144.4 1,742.0 479.0 2,724.1 3,497.0 3,525.7 1,868.2 0.0 Mar.
7.8 6.6 510.0 1,029.5 759.2 –1,074.2 1,717.0 479.7 2,736.8 3,505.0 3,529.7 1,871.8 0.0 Apr.
9.6 6.7 501.7 1,051.5 768.2 –1,126.5 1,696.6 482.8 2,764.3 3,535.8 3,563.5 1,869.6 0.0 May
9.8 6.9 498.8 1,088.8 775.4 –1,149.4 1,724.5 485.9 2,772.3 3,535.7 3,563.7 1,870.2 0.0 June
9.8 7.0 501.5 1,031.5 795.8 –1,075.6 1,767.0 490.0 2,793.9 3,552.6 3,581.2 1,891.2 0.0 July
12.7 6.5 503.2 1,068.1 793.5 –1,088.4 1,754.6 492.9 2,814.8 3,571.7 3,602.8 1,889.9 0.0 Aug.
13.1 7.0 510.1 1,165.5 781.6 –1,156.2 1,723.6 497.5 2,820.3 3,575.1 3,608.5 1,881.9 0.0 Sep.
13.3 7.2 527.5 1,165.8 783.9 –1,110.5 1,706.6 500.8 2,824.1 3,591.6 3,625.0 1,902.8 0.0 Oct.
14.5 7.4 534.6 1,227.7 803.0 –1,154.8 1,744.2 504.5 2,866.1 3,621.4 3,651.2 1,928.3 0.0 Nov.
16.1 7.5 524.0 1,305.6 796.1 –1,297.0 1,690.3 509.8 2,853.4 3,619.4 3,651.0 1,919.7 0.0 Dec.
13.6 7.7 541.5 1,271.1 778.4 –1,171.4 1,919.7 511.1 2,876.4 3,653.7 3,681.9 1,917.7 0.0 2022 Jan.
14.7 7.5 550.4 1,275.8 774.8 –1,174.7 1,971.3 514.2 2,899.4 3,676.9 3,707.1 1,921.4 0.0 Feb.
14.8 7.3 559.5 1,299.3 781.2 –1,193.1 2,078.1 520.0 2,892.1 3,676.6 3,707.3 1,934.7 0.0 Mar.
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2020 Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 926.3 0.6 865.7 0.0 2,784.2 271.8 0.0 1,321.9 374.4 788.6 1,820.2 3,413.8
June 950.4 0.3 984.2 0.0 2,986.9 299.9 0.0 1,347.9 477.1 830.5 1,966.5 3,614.4
July 871.3 0.8 1,401.5 0.0 3,168.2 356.0 0.0 1,365.7 671.2 703.1 2,345.9 4,067.5
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 865.9 1.3 1,593.2 0.0 3,323.6 413.2 0.0 1,381.2 712.9 651.0 2,625.7 4,420.1
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 864.4 1.3 1,707.8 0.0 3,475.8 460.7 0.0 1,389.1 749.0 653.5 2,797.0 4,646.8
Dec. 865.1 0.5 1,754.4 0.0 3,614.7 535.4 0.0 1,403.9 647.0 687.7 2,960.7 4,900.0
2021 Jan. 848.6 0.3 1,792.6 0.0 3,712.9 586.9 0.0 1,429.4 530.3 778.4 3,029.4 5,045.7
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 834.9 0.4 1,792.4 0.0 3,825.1 598.0 0.0 1,433.4 595.8 667.9 3,157.7 5,189.1
Apr. 816.7 0.3 2,054.6 0.0 3,951.4 676.4 0.0 1,447.7 644.5 633.4 3,421.1 5,545.2
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 809.8 0.2 2,107.0 0.0 4,092.7 706.5 0.0 1,465.8 586.7 659.1 3,591.7 5,763.9
July 821.7 0.1 2,196.0 0.0 4,244.5 736.6 0.0 1,485.8 652.3 734.5 3,653.1 5,875.5
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 826.7 0.2 2,213.2 0.0 4,378.9 766.6 0.0 1,499.9 635.7 790.4 3,726.2 5,992.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 835.1 0.2 2,209.9 0.0 4,512.3 738.5 0.0 1,507.4 671.3 833.7 3,806.5 6,052.4
Dec. 839.2 0.2 2,208.8 0.0 4,655.6 745.0 0.0 1,521.4 628.3 965.7 3,843.3 6,109.7
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 877.7 0.3 2,201.5 0.0 4,750.2 734.2 0.0 1,540.6 582.0 1,160.5 3,812.3 6,087.1
Mar. 887.2 0.3 2,201.3 0.0 4,842.0 746.0 0.0 1,550.6 642.6 1,091.1 3,900.8 6,197.3
Apr. 913.2 0.4 2,199.8 0.0 4,889.2 714.9 0.0 1,575.9 667.8 1,116.7 3,927.3 6,218.1
Deutsche Bundesbank
2020 Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 238.0 0.2 106.8 0.0 585.3 76.3 0.0 324.1 102.0 – 174.5 602.8 1,003.2
June 248.7 0.1 122.5 0.0 623.1 85.0 0.0 326.4 137.6 – 172.6 618.1 1,029.5
July 222.1 0.5 235.2 0.0 655.9 108.2 0.0 331.5 205.0 – 238.1 707.1 1,146.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 212.1 0.8 284.0 0.0 692.0 136.0 0.0 336.4 239.6 – 298.0 774.8 1,247.3
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 212.1 0.7 319.5 0.0 729.0 145.5 0.0 338.1 254.7 – 302.9 826.0 1,309.6
Dec. 213.0 0.3 333.9 0.0 768.7 166.6 0.0 341.2 217.9 – 294.5 884.7 1,392.5
2021 Jan. 208.3 0.1 341.1 0.0 791.3 178.9 0.0 347.3 189.4 – 252.8 878.0 1,404.2
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 205.3 0.1 341.0 0.0 816.9 177.5 0.0 348.3 172.7 – 298.0 962.8 1,488.6
Apr. 198.0 0.0 407.3 0.0 845.8 203.0 0.0 351.7 187.4 – 300.4 1,008.9 1,563.5
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 194.3 0.0 420.5 0.0 884.3 208.5 0.0 356.8 187.3 – 301.9 1,046.7 1,612.0
July 197.4 0.0 434.3 0.0 918.5 204.2 0.0 362.0 206.8 – 270.8 1,046.2 1,612.4
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 199.0 0.1 436.7 0.0 950.8 210.7 0.0 365.0 204.3 – 240.8 1,045.3 1,621.0
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 200.3 0.1 439.1 0.0 978.5 204.4 0.0 367.4 217.7 – 235.2 1,061.6 1,633.3
Dec. 201.3 0.0 440.3 0.0 1,015.8 206.4 0.0 370.9 220.4 – 219.4 1,077.1 1,654.4
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 212.4 0.3 421.7 0.0 1,034.0 204.5 0.0 374.6 205.6 – 165.1 1,048.8 1,627.9
Mar. 215.6 0.1 421.7 0.0 1,057.9 211.8 0.0 378.1 191.1 – 193.7 1,108.0 1,698.0
Apr. 223.9 0.1 420.8 0.0 1,068.7 197.7 0.0 384.9 196.7 – 189.1 1,123.3 1,705.9
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
. . . . . . . . . . . .2020 Apr.
+159.2 – 0.8 +249.8 ± 0.0 +117.5 +27.2 ± 0.0 +44.8 +105.8 +170.2 +177.9 +249.7 May
+24.1 – 0.3 +118.5 ± 0.0 +202.7 +28.1 ± 0.0 +26.0 +102.7 +41.9 +146.3 +200.6 June
–79.1 + 0.5 +417.3 ± 0.0 +181.3 +56.1 ± 0.0 +17.8 +194.1 –127.4 +379.4 +453.1 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
– 5.4 + 0.5 +191.7 ± 0.0 +155.4 +57.2 ± 0.0 +15.5 +41.7 –52.1 +279.8 +352.6 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
– 1.5 ± 0.0 +114.6 ± 0.0 +152.2 +47.5 ± 0.0 + 7.9 +36.1 + 2.5 +171.3 +226.7 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.8 +46.6 ± 0.0 +138.9 +74.7 ± 0.0 +14.8 –102.0 +34.2 +163.7 +253.2 Dec.
–16.5 – 0.2 +38.2 ± 0.0 +98.2 +51.5 ± 0.0 +25.5 –116.7 +90.7 +68.7 +145.7 2021 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
–13.7 + 0.1 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +112.2 +11.1 ± 0.0 + 4.0 +65.5 –110.5 +128.3 +143.4 Mar.
–18.2 – 0.1 +262.2 ± 0.0 +126.3 +78.4 ± 0.0 +14.3 +48.7 –34.5 +263.4 +356.1 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
– 6.9 – 0.1 +52.4 ± 0.0 +141.3 +30.1 ± 0.0 +18.1 –57.8 +25.7 +170.6 +218.7 June
+11.9 – 0.1 +89.0 ± 0.0 +151.8 +30.1 ± 0.0 +20.0 +65.6 +75.4 +61.4 +111.6 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 5.0 + 0.1 +17.2 ± 0.0 +134.4 +30.0 ± 0.0 +14.1 –16.6 +55.9 +73.1 +117.3 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 8.4 ± 0.0 – 3.3 ± 0.0 +133.4 –28.1 ± 0.0 + 7.5 +35.6 +43.3 +80.3 +59.6 Nov.
+ 4.1 ± 0.0 – 1.1 ± 0.0 +143.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 +14.0 –43.0 +132.0 +36.8 +57.3 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+38.5 + 0.1 – 7.3 ± 0.0 +94.6 –10.8 ± 0.0 +19.2 –46.3 +194.8 –31.0 –22.6 Feb.
+ 9.5 ± 0.0 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +91.8 +11.8 ± 0.0 +10.0 +60.6 –69.4 +88.5 +110.2 Mar.
+26.0 + 0.1 – 1.5 ± 0.0 +47.2 –31.1 ± 0.0 +25.3 +25.2 +25.6 +26.5 +20.8 Apr.
Deutsche Bundesbank
. . . . . . . . . . . .2020 Apr.
+53.0 – 0.2 +32.9 – 0.0 +11.6 +10.9 ± 0.0 +12.9 +37.6 –49.6 +85.6 +109.5 May
+10.7 – 0.1 +15.7 + 0.0 +37.8 + 8.7 ± 0.0 + 2.3 +35.6 + 2.0 +15.3 +26.3 June
–26.6 + 0.4 +112.6 – 0.0 +32.8 +23.2 ± 0.0 + 5.1 +67.5 –65.5 +89.0 +117.3 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
–10.0 + 0.3 +48.9 + 0.0 +36.1 +27.9 ± 0.0 + 5.0 +34.6 –59.9 +67.6 +100.5 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 0.0 – 0.1 +35.5 – 0.0 +37.0 + 9.5 ± 0.0 + 1.7 +15.0 – 5.0 +51.2 +62.3 Nov.
+ 0.9 – 0.4 +14.4 + 0.0 +39.8 +21.1 ± 0.0 + 3.1 –36.8 + 8.4 +58.7 +82.9 Dec.
– 4.7 – 0.2 + 7.1 + 0.0 +22.6 +12.3 ± 0.0 + 6.1 –28.5 +41.7 – 6.7 +11.7 2021 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
– 3.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 +25.6 – 1.4 ± 0.0 + 1.0 –16.7 –45.2 +84.8 +84.4 Mar.
– 7.3 – 0.1 +66.3 + 0.0 +28.8 +25.5 ± 0.0 + 3.4 +14.7 – 2.4 +46.0 +74.9 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
– 3.7 + 0.0 +13.2 + 0.0 +38.6 + 5.5 ± 0.0 + 5.1 –0.1 – 1.5 +37.9 +48.5 June
+ 3.1 – 0.0 +13.8 – 0.0 +34.2 – 4.3 ± 0.0 + 5.2 +19.4 +31.1 – 0.5 + 0.4 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 1.6 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.0 +32.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 + 3.0 –2.5 +29.9 – 0.9 + 8.6 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.4 – 0.0 +27.8 – 6.4 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +13.4 + 5.7 +16.3 +12.3 Nov.
+ 1.0 – 0.1 + 1.2 – 0.0 +37.3 + 2.1 ± 0.0 + 3.5 +2.7 +15.7 +15.6 +21.1 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+11.1 + 0.2 –18.6 + 0.0 +18.2 – 2.0 ± 0.0 + 3.7 –14.7 +54.3 –28.3 –26.6 Feb.
+ 3.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 +23.9 + 7.4 ± 0.0 + 3.5 –14.5 –28.6 +59.2 +70.1 Mar.
+ 8.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.0 +10.8 –14.2 ± 0.0 + 6.8 +5.6 + 4.6 +15.2 + 7.9 Apr.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2021 Oct. 15 8,336.7 517.8 488.7 213.6 275.1 24.3 10.7 10.7 –
22 8,368.3 517.8 489.7 214.0 275.6 24.3 10.9 10.9 –
29 8,366.1 517.9 489.0 214.9 274.1 24.5 10.8 10.8 –
Nov. 5 8,382.7 517.9 489.9 215.1 274.8 24.1 10.5 10.5 –
12 8,404.8 517.9 489.7 214.9 274.8 24.0 11.0 11.0 –
19 8,442.3 517.9 490.7 214.9 275.8 25.5 10.7 10.7 –
26 8,457.0 517.9 490.7 214.9 275.8 26.1 10.4 10.4 –
Dec. 3 8,469.9 517.9 490.8 214.9 275.9 24.3 10.0 10.0 –
10 8,496.6 517.9 490.9 215.2 275.7 24.6 11.5 11.5 –
17 8,511.5 517.9 490.6 215.3 275.3 24.4 11.6 11.6 –
24 8,512.3 517.9 491.3 215.6 275.7 24.7 13.3 13.3 –
31 8,566.4 559.4 500.1 218.9 281.2 24.6 13.0 13.0 –
2022 Jan. 7 8,573.3 559.4 497.2 218.9 278.3 26.1 10.0 10.0 –
14 8,594.0 559.4 496.2 218.9 277.3 26.6 10.5 10.5 –
21 8,600.3 559.4 495.6 218.9 276.7 26.7 10.4 10.4 –
28 8,622.6 559.4 496.7 219.0 277.7 26.7 10.2 10.2 –
Feb. 4 8,630.1 559.4 496.8 219.3 277.5 25.6 10.0 10.0 –
11 8,651.8 559.4 497.1 219.3 277.8 25.8 10.1 10.1 –
18 8,667.9 559.4 498.9 219.3 279.5 24.1 10.0 10.0 –
25 8,671.3 559.4 499.2 219.3 279.8 24.0 10.2 10.2 –
Mar. 4 8,673.0 559.4 498.2 219.3 278.9 25.4 10.4 10.4 –
11 8,687.0 559.4 498.9 219.4 279.5 24.7 10.4 10.4 –
18 8,700.0 559.5 498.4 219.3 279.0 24.6 10.6 10.6 –
25 8,710.6 559.5 498.7 220.4 278.4 24.9 12.4 12.4 –
Apr. 1 8,754.0 604.5 500.2 222.0 278.1 26.4 11.3 11.3 –
8 8,763.7 604.5 498.6 220.2 278.4 25.8 10.0 10.0 –
15 8,787.9 604.5 500.0 220.2 279.8 25.3 10.0 10.0 –
22 8,790.9 604.5 499.3 220.3 279.0 26.6 10.1 10.1 –
29 8,783.6 604.5 499.3 220.2 279.0 27.1 10.4 10.4 –
May 6 8,796.1 604.5 501.1 220.3 280.8 25.9 10.1 10.1 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2021 Oct. 15 2,797.4 160.9 86.5 53.9 32.6 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
22 2,780.9 160.9 86.7 54.1 32.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
29 2,788.5 160.9 86.2 54.3 32.0 0.0 – – –
Nov. 5 2,812.8 160.9 86.7 54.3 32.4 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
12 2,826.1 160.9 86.7 54.1 32.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
19 2,866.9 160.9 87.1 54.1 33.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
26 2,865.0 160.9 87.3 54.1 33.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
Dec. 3 2,889.6 160.9 86.9 54.1 32.9 0.0 – – –
10 2,929.3 160.9 86.4 54.1 32.3 0.0 – – –
17 2,960.9 160.9 86.2 54.1 32.1 0.0 – – –
24 2,968.1 160.9 86.2 54.1 32.1 0.0 – – –
31 3,012.2 173.8 87.6 54.9 32.6 0.0 – – –
2022 Jan. 7 2,942.1 173.8 87.9 54.9 33.0 0.0 – – –
14 2,946.1 173.8 87.9 54.9 32.9 0.0 – – –
21 2,912.1 173.8 87.8 54.9 32.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
28 2,922.8 173.8 88.1 54.9 33.2 0.0 – – –
Feb. 4 2,921.6 173.8 88.4 55.1 33.3 0.0 – – –
11 2,934.4 173.8 88.9 55.1 33.7 0.0 – – –
18 2,932.3 173.8 89.0 55.1 33.9 0.0 – – –
25 2,923.7 173.8 89.0 55.1 33.9 0.0 – – –
Mar. 4 2,939.9 173.8 89.0 55.1 33.9 0.1 – – –
11 2,933.8 173.8 88.5 55.1 33.3 0.0 – – –
18 2,961.2 173.8 88.4 55.1 33.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 –
25 2,925.4 173.8 89.4 55.6 33.7 0.0 – – –
Apr. 1 2,972.8 187.8 90.0 56.0 34.0 0.0 – – –
8 2,950.8 187.8 89.8 56.0 33.7 0.0 – – –
15 2,952.6 187.8 89.8 56.0 33.7 0.0 – – –
22 2,945.6 187.7 89.9 56.1 33.8 0.0 – – –
29 2,952.6 187.7 90.1 56.1 34.0 0.0 – – –
May 6 2,991.6 187.7 90.3 56.1 34.2 0.0 – – –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
2,208.8 0.2 2,208.6 – – 0.0 – 31.0 4,714.4 4,532.6 181.8 22.2 318.9 2021 Oct. 15
2,208.7 0.1 2,208.6 – – – – 30.2 4,743.0 4,560.7 182.3 22.2 321.4 22
2,208.8 0.1 2,208.7 – – 0.0 – 26.5 4,745.7 4,568.3 177.4 22.2 320.8 29
2,208.7 0.1 2,208.7 – – – – 26.1 4,764.8 4,586.6 178.2 22.2 318.5 Nov. 5
2,208.9 0.3 2,208.7 – – – – 23.1 4,789.0 4,611.1 177.8 22.2 319.1 12
2,208.8 0.2 2,208.7 – – 0.0 – 31.9 4,818.4 4,640.4 178.0 22.2 316.2 19
2,208.8 0.2 2,208.6 – – – – 27.4 4,838.6 4,662.5 176.1 22.2 314.9 26
2,208.8 0.2 2,208.6 – – – – 27.3 4,851.0 4,676.0 175.0 22.2 317.5 Dec. 3
2,208.8 0.2 2,208.6 – – 0.0 – 29.9 4,874.9 4,699.9 175.0 22.2 315.9 10
2,209.8 0.1 2,209.7 – – – – 32.0 4,885.9 4,713.7 172.2 22.2 317.0 17
2,201.7 0.2 2,201.5 – – – – 28.4 4,896.6 4,723.8 172.8 22.2 316.2 24
2,201.9 0.4 2,201.5 – – – – 26.6 4,886.5 4,713.5 173.0 22.2 332.3 31
2,201.9 0.4 2,201.5 – – – – 30.7 4,896.1 4,723.1 173.0 22.2 329.8 2022 Jan. 7
2,201.9 0.4 2,201.5 – – – – 31.7 4,921.5 4,748.7 172.8 22.2 324.0 14
2,201.9 0.4 2,201.5 – – – – 30.5 4,934.5 4,761.3 173.2 22.2 319.0 21
2,201.7 0.2 2,201.5 – – – – 32.0 4,955.7 4,783.4 172.3 22.2 318.0 28
2,201.7 0.2 2,201.5 – – – – 32.6 4,970.1 4,800.3 169.8 22.1 311.9 Feb. 4
2,201.8 0.2 2,201.5 – – 0.1 – 27.9 4,990.8 4,820.2 170.7 22.1 316.8 11
2,201.8 0.3 2,201.5 – – – – 27.3 5,008.3 4,836.9 171.5 22.1 316.0 18
2,201.9 0.4 2,201.5 – – – – 27.6 5,011.1 4,839.4 171.6 22.1 315.7 25
2,201.3 0.2 2,201.1 – – – – 30.1 5,018.0 4,848.7 169.2 22.1 308.0 Mar. 4
2,201.4 0.3 2,201.1 – – – – 25.6 5,031.9 4,862.4 169.5 22.1 312.6 11
2,201.3 0.2 2,201.0 – – – – 28.4 5,042.8 4,873.1 169.7 22.1 312.4 18
2,201.3 0.2 2,201.0 – – – – 33.5 5,054.1 4,883.7 170.4 22.1 304.2 25
2,199.5 0.4 2,198.9 – – 0.3 – 34.1 5,045.7 4,877.5 168.2 22.1 310.2 Apr. 1
2,199.3 0.4 2,198.9 – – 0.0 – 32.4 5,061.2 4,892.6 168.6 22.1 309.9 8
2,199.4 0.5 2,198.9 – – 0.0 – 32.8 5,082.8 4,914.1 168.6 22.1 311.0 15
2,199.3 0.5 2,198.8 – – 0.0 – 32.0 5,082.1 4,915.3 166.8 22.1 314.9 22
2,199.6 0.7 2,198.8 – – – – 28.0 5,084.0 4,919.2 164.8 22.1 308.7 29
2,199.4 0.5 2,198.8 – – 0.0 – 30.7 5,092.8 4,927.8 165.0 22.1 309.5 May 6
Deutsche Bundesbank
440.4 0.2 440.3 – – 0.0 – 6.2 981.9 981.9 – 4.4 1,116.7 2021 Oct. 15
440.3 0.1 440.3 – – 0.0 – 7.8 989.5 989.5 – 4.4 1,091.1 22
440.3 0.1 440.3 – – 0.0 – 6.4 992.1 992.1 – 4.4 1,097.9 29
440.3 0.0 440.3 – – 0.0 – 5.6 1,000.2 1,000.2 – 4.4 1,114.4 Nov. 5
440.4 0.1 440.3 – – 0.0 – 5.2 1,006.1 1,006.1 – 4.4 1,122.4 12
440.4 0.1 440.3 – – 0.0 – 5.7 1,013.5 1,013.5 – 4.4 1,154.4 19
440.3 0.0 440.3 – – 0.0 – 4.2 1,015.0 1,015.0 – 4.4 1,152.7 26
440.3 0.0 440.3 – – 0.0 – 4.4 1,021.8 1,021.8 – 4.4 1,170.8 Dec. 3
440.3 0.0 440.3 – – 0.0 – 5.5 1,025.5 1,025.5 – 4.4 1,206.2 10
440.6 0.0 440.6 – – 0.0 – 5.0 1,027.6 1,027.6 – 4.4 1,236.2 17
421.8 0.2 421.7 – – 0.0 – 4.3 1,029.6 1,029.6 – 4.4 1,260.7 24
422.0 0.3 421.7 – – 0.0 – 3.5 1,027.7 1,027.7 – 4.4 1,293.1 31
422.0 0.3 421.7 – – 0.0 – 4.0 1,025.3 1,025.3 – 4.4 1,224.6 2022 Jan. 7
422.0 0.3 421.7 – – 0.0 – 3.4 1,031.6 1,031.6 – 4.4 1,222.9 14
422.1 0.4 421.7 – – 0.0 – 3.1 1,034.7 1,034.7 – 4.4 1,186.0 21
421.8 0.2 421.7 – – 0.0 – 3.3 1,041.9 1,041.9 – 4.4 1,189.4 28
421.8 0.2 421.7 – – 0.0 – 4.3 1,048.9 1,048.9 – 4.4 1,179.8 Feb. 4
421.9 0.2 421.7 – – 0.1 – 4.6 1,053.7 1,053.7 – 4.4 1,187.1 11
421.8 0.2 421.7 – – 0.0 – 4.3 1,057.5 1,057.5 – 4.4 1,181.4 18
421.8 0.2 421.7 – – 0.0 – 4.8 1,057.2 1,057.2 – 4.4 1,172.7 25
421.7 0.0 421.7 – – 0.0 – 4.4 1,059.6 1,059.6 – 4.4 1,186.9 Mar. 4
421.7 0.0 421.7 – – 0.0 – 4.0 1,060.1 1,060.1 – 4.4 1,181.2 11
421.7 0.0 421.7 – – 0.0 – 7.0 1,065.6 1,065.6 – 4.4 1,200.2 18
421.7 0.0 421.7 – – 0.0 – 5.2 1,065.9 1,065.9 – 4.4 1,165.0 25
420.3 0.1 420.2 – – 0.0 – 5.2 1,068.4 1,068.4 – 4.4 1,196.6 Apr. 1
420.2 0.0 420.2 – – 0.0 – 4.4 1,067.3 1,067.3 – 4.4 1,176.9 8
420.3 0.1 420.2 – – 0.0 – 4.8 1,074.1 1,074.1 – 4.4 1,171.5 15
420.3 0.1 420.2 – – 0.0 – 6.1 1,075.6 1,075.6 – 4.4 1,161.6 22
420.4 0.3 420.2 – – 0.0 – 3.8 1,079.5 1,079.5 – 4.4 1,166.6 29
420.2 0.0 420.2 – – 0.0 – 4.3 1,084.4 1,084.4 – 4.4 1,200.2 May 6

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2021 Oct. 15 8,336.7 1,509.0 4,564.0 3,786.5 775.1 – – 2.4 27.0 – 793.5 670.9 122.6
22 8,368.3 1,509.9 4,575.1 3,805.2 767.6 – – 2.4 26.3 – 799.8 679.3 120.6
29 8,366.1 1,513.3 4,567.8 3,759.9 805.6 – – 2.3 30.4 – 785.0 661.1 123.9
Nov. 5 8,382.7 1,514.6 4,642.7 4,023.0 617.5 – – 2.2 36.0 – 705.3 587.5 117.9
12 8,404.8 1,515.5 4,636.0 3,902.5 731.4 – – 2.1 34.9 – 711.8 596.1 115.7
19 8,442.3 1,516.3 4,557.0 3,787.1 767.8 – – 2.1 39.9 – 809.5 686.6 123.0
26 8,457.0 1,518.3 4,539.6 3,766.0 771.5 – – 2.1 37.3 – 831.1 707.8 123.3
Dec. 3 8,469.9 1,523.3 4,623.1 3,827.4 793.6 – – 2.1 40.1 – 735.9 620.4 115.5
10 8,496.6 1,528.2 4,600.8 3,813.2 785.4 – – 2.2 43.7 – 738.5 612.6 125.9
17 8,511.5 1,534.3 4,504.7 3,743.2 759.3 – – 2.2 51.4 – 760.0 616.8 143.2
24 8,512.3 1,543.0 4,439.9 3,759.0 678.7 – – 2.2 53.6 – 751.5 593.5 158.0
31 8,566.4 1,544.4 4,293.9 3,512.2 779.6 – – 2.2 76.7 – 757.1 590.4 166.7
2022 Jan. 7 8,573.3 1,541.6 4,541.5 3,894.0 644.5 – – 2.9 49.4 – 668.3 510.1 158.2
14 8,594.0 1,538.8 4,599.8 3,891.5 705.4 – – 2.8 46.9 – 720.2 574.0 146.2
21 8,600.3 1,538.5 4,623.8 3,838.8 782.4 – – 2.7 49.3 – 739.9 588.7 151.3
28 8,622.6 1,539.1 4,598.2 3,819.0 776.8 – – 2.4 45.6 – 818.1 656.8 161.3
Feb. 4 8,630.1 1,540.4 4,700.5 3,897.7 800.7 – – 2.2 51.2 – 710.7 567.7 143.0
11 8,651.8 1,542.3 4,679.4 4,069.3 607.4 – – 2.8 50.2 – 765.1 616.4 148.7
18 8,667.9 1,543.5 4,637.1 3,876.6 757.9 – – 2.6 49.4 – 832.0 690.4 141.6
25 8,671.3 1,546.5 4,636.9 3,875.5 759.0 – – 2.5 46.3 – 842.8 667.9 174.9
Mar. 4 8,673.0 1,556.2 4,656.7 3,855.9 798.6 – – 2.2 56.3 – 770.1 601.2 169.0
11 8,687.0 1,565.2 4,648.0 3,836.6 809.2 – – 2.2 49.4 – 793.6 629.0 164.6
18 8,700.0 1,569.1 4,582.1 3,992.4 587.0 – – 2.7 48.4 – 854.2 699.4 154.7
25 8,710.6 1,571.3 4,605.9 3,839.6 763.7 – – 2.7 52.7 – 866.3 708.2 158.2
Apr. 1 8,754.0 1,575.1 4,646.7 3,886.3 758.2 – – 2.3 60.6 – 787.0 628.7 158.3
8 8,763.7 1,578.5 4,722.9 3,987.1 733.3 – – 2.5 52.8 – 761.7 609.3 152.4
15 8,787.9 1,586.5 4,690.0 3,967.1 720.4 – – 2.5 48.7 – 835.7 677.7 158.0
22 8,790.9 1,585.6 4,720.4 4,155.8 562.0 – – 2.6 43.8 – 811.0 656.0 155.1
29 8,783.6 1,587.5 4,701.7 4,022.6 676.4 – – 2.7 42.0 – 810.1 646.0 164.2
May 6 8,796.1 1,589.2 4,729.1 4,012.8 713.7 – – 2.7 48.7 – 747.1 589.6 157.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
2021 Oct. 15 2,797.4 367.4 1,262.9 1,041.7 218.9 – – 2.4 15.0 – 254.1 224.1 30.0
22 2,780.9 368.0 1,254.4 1,039.1 212.9 – – 2.3 15.7 – 247.2 218.8 28.4
29 2,788.5 367.0 1,281.6 1,046.1 233.2 – – 2.3 18.4 – 217.3 188.7 28.6
Nov. 5 2,812.8 367.7 1,304.3 1,158.7 143.4 – – 2.2 19.0 – 212.7 185.7 27.0
12 2,826.1 369.2 1,292.1 1,124.8 165.2 – – 2.1 18.2 – 221.4 194.2 27.2
19 2,866.9 370.1 1,285.9 1,062.8 221.0 – – 2.1 20.1 – 260.8 230.5 30.3
26 2,865.0 371.6 1,274.5 1,057.7 214.7 – – 2.1 16.4 – 267.4 236.9 30.5
Dec. 3 2,889.6 370.1 1,300.1 1,066.5 231.5 – – 2.1 15.7 – 251.2 220.0 31.2
10 2,929.3 372.4 1,293.6 1,054.4 237.0 – – 2.2 15.9 – 267.8 230.5 37.3
17 2,960.9 375.8 1,229.9 1,017.3 210.4 – – 2.1 17.5 – 310.5 260.9 49.5
24 2,968.1 378.9 1,193.5 975.4 215.9 – – 2.1 13.7 – 309.4 248.9 60.5
31 3,012.2 374.6 1,138.2 902.1 233.9 – – 2.2 27.0 – 298.9 246.7 52.2
2022 Jan. 7 2,942.1 373.3 1,233.9 1,085.0 146.6 – – 2.2 19.5 – 245.4 193.0 52.3
14 2,946.1 373.2 1,267.0 1,110.6 154.1 – – 2.2 16.4 – 266.5 220.5 46.0
21 2,912.1 373.4 1,289.5 1,059.4 227.8 – – 2.3 18.5 – 222.2 176.7 45.5
28 2,922.8 374.4 1,292.4 1,062.1 228.2 – – 2.1 15.7 – 253.2 202.2 51.0
Feb. 4 2,921.6 374.0 1,340.7 1,094.6 244.0 – – 2.1 16.4 – 206.4 162.7 43.8
11 2,934.4 375.4 1,335.5 1,179.8 153.4 – – 2.3 19.7 – 227.4 185.0 42.4
18 2,932.3 375.9 1,324.7 1,100.4 222.1 – – 2.1 17.6 – 252.2 214.2 38.0
25 2,923.7 378.0 1,304.6 1,071.0 231.4 – – 2.1 16.4 – 266.5 201.2 65.2
Mar. 4 2,939.9 379.1 1,315.2 1,078.3 234.8 – – 2.1 20.0 – 243.7 174.0 69.7
11 2,933.8 383.3 1,322.8 1,084.0 236.7 – – 2.1 16.9 – 238.3 181.8 56.5
18 2,961.2 385.2 1,299.4 1,167.3 130.0 – – 2.1 17.7 – 274.4 224.3 50.1
25 2,925.4 385.9 1,301.1 1,082.0 217.1 – – 2.1 17.0 – 252.5 200.0 52.4
Apr. 1 2,972.8 382.2 1,347.5 1,110.7 234.6 – – 2.2 18.7 – 230.4 181.1 49.3
8 2,950.8 383.5 1,354.0 1,136.8 215.1 – – 2.1 16.9 – 213.9 166.4 47.5
15 2,952.6 387.4 1,324.3 1,116.8 205.3 – – 2.1 15.3 – 248.5 201.7 46.7
22 2,945.6 387.0 1,338.7 1,215.0 121.4 – – 2.2 14.6 – 229.7 184.6 45.0
29 2,952.6 385.0 1,335.7 1,198.1 135.5 – – 2.2 14.0 – 223.4 178.8 44.6
May 6 2,991.6 386.7 1,350.6 1,133.7 214.6 – – 2.3 17.1 – 216.3 169.5 46.8
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
318.7 12.3 4.5 4.5 – 176.1 316.2 – 506.0 109.4 2021 Oct. 15
331.7 12.4 4.9 4.9 – 176.1 316.7 – 506.0 109.4 22
344.3 13.1 3.5 3.5 – 176.1 317.3 – 506.0 109.4 29
353.6 13.0 3.2 3.2 – 176.1 322.9 – 506.0 109.3 Nov. 5
377.7 12.8 3.4 3.4 – 176.1 321.3 – 506.0 109.3 12
385.8 15.0 3.8 3.8 – 176.1 323.5 – 506.0 109.3 19
399.5 15.7 3.8 3.8 – 176.1 320.2 – 506.0 109.3 26
417.3 14.2 3.8 3.8 – 176.1 320.8 – 506.0 109.3 Dec. 3
455.1 14.2 3.9 3.9 – 176.1 320.9 – 506.0 109.3 10
531.7 13.8 3.8 3.8 – 176.1 320.4 – 506.0 109.3 17
593.0 14.2 3.5 3.5 – 176.1 322.3 – 506.0 109.3 24
710.0 14.1 2.7 2.7 – 178.8 324.6 – 554.8 109.3 31
586.8 14.4 3.5 3.5 – 178.8 324.6 – 554.8 109.6 2022 Jan. 7
504.4 14.1 3.9 3.9 – 178.8 322.7 – 554.8 109.6 14
466.8 14.2 3.4 3.4 – 178.8 321.2 – 554.8 109.6 21
439.3 14.5 3.6 3.6 – 178.8 320.8 – 554.8 109.6 28
446.1 13.1 3.3 3.3 – 178.8 321.1 – 554.8 109.9 Feb. 4
431.1 13.1 3.3 3.3 – 178.8 323.5 – 554.9 110.0 11
420.4 13.2 3.3 3.3 – 178.8 325.4 – 554.9 109.9 18
415.6 13.0 3.5 3.5 – 178.8 323.1 – 554.9 109.9 25
447.2 13.2 3.7 3.7 – 178.8 323.1 – 554.9 112.7 Mar. 4
444.2 12.8 3.8 3.8 – 178.8 320.6 – 554.9 115.7 11
458.3 12.3 4.2 4.2 – 178.8 322.1 – 554.9 115.7 18
427.4 11.7 5.2 5.2 – 178.8 320.8 – 554.9 115.7 25
452.5 12.5 5.4 5.4 – 180.2 319.1 – 598.9 115.9 Apr. 1
423.9 11.0 5.4 5.4 – 180.2 312.5 – 598.9 115.9 8
398.7 12.1 5.0 5.0 – 180.2 316.0 – 598.9 115.9 15
395.8 11.7 5.4 5.4 – 180.2 322.1 – 598.9 115.9 22
411.9 11.5 5.6 5.6 – 180.2 318.3 – 598.9 115.9 29
446.1 11.6 5.7 5.7 – 180.2 323.6 – 598.9 116.0 May 6
Deutsche Bundesbank
155.4 0.3 0.5 0.5 – 45.8 35.6 497.5 157.2 5.7 2021 Oct. 15
152.7 0.3 0.5 0.5 – 45.8 35.7 497.5 157.2 5.7 22
157.9 0.3 0.3 0.3 – 45.8 36.1 500.8 157.2 5.7 29
162.7 0.3 0.4 0.4 – 45.8 36.2 500.8 157.2 5.7 Nov. 5
178.9 0.3 0.4 0.4 – 45.8 36.3 500.8 157.2 5.7 12
183.1 0.3 0.8 0.8 – 45.8 36.3 500.8 157.2 5.7 19
188.0 0.3 0.8 0.8 – 45.8 36.5 500.8 157.2 5.7 26
202.0 0.3 0.4 0.4 – 45.8 36.4 504.5 157.2 5.7 Dec. 3
229.6 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.8 36.5 504.5 157.2 5.7 10
277.4 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.8 36.7 504.5 157.2 5.7 17
322.3 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.8 37.0 504.5 157.2 5.7 24
404.3 0.0 – – – 46.5 36.4 509.8 170.7 5.7 31
299.5 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.5 37.3 509.8 170.7 5.7 2022 Jan. 7
252.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.5 37.4 509.8 170.7 5.7 14
237.4 0.4 0.1 0.1 – 46.5 37.7 509.8 170.7 5.7 21
215.9 0.4 0.3 0.3 – 46.5 36.6 511.0 170.7 5.7 28
213.0 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 46.5 36.6 511.1 170.7 5.7 Feb. 4
204.3 0.4 0.2 0.2 – 46.5 37.5 511.1 170.7 5.7 11
189.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 – 46.5 37.6 511.1 170.7 5.7 18
185.8 0.4 0.4 0.4 – 46.5 37.7 511.1 170.7 5.7 25
206.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 – 46.5 37.7 514.2 170.7 5.7 Mar. 4
197.4 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 46.5 37.8 514.2 170.7 5.7 11
208.8 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 46.5 38.3 514.2 170.7 5.7 18
192.6 0.3 0.4 0.4 – 46.5 38.6 514.2 170.7 5.7 25
198.0 0.7 0.5 0.5 – 46.8 37.4 520.0 185.0 5.7 Apr. 1
186.5 0.7 0.3 0.3 – 46.8 37.6 520.0 185.0 5.7 8
181.2 0.7 0.2 0.2 – 46.8 37.7 520.0 185.0 5.7 15
179.2 0.7 0.2 0.2 – 46.8 38.2 520.0 185.0 5.7 22
194.5 0.7 0.2 0.2 – 46.8 38.4 523.3 185.0 5.7 29
220.6 0.7 0.2 0.2 – 46.8 38.6 523.3 185.0 5.7 May 6
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2020 June 9,026.9 46.0 2,542.6 2,056.2 1,788.0 268.2 486.4 343.6 142.8 4,153.0 3,683.1 3,249.8 2,949.1
July 9,069.0 45.5 2,574.4 2,099.6 1,830.7 268.9 474.8 333.3 141.5 4,153.7 3,688.0 3,258.4 2,958.3
Aug. 8,985.5 46.0 2,595.4 2,127.5 1,858.5 269.0 467.9 328.0 139.9 4,148.3 3,691.9 3,266.7 2,966.1
Sep. 9,097.4 46.1 2,657.2 2,196.9 1,926.4 270.6 460.3 320.7 139.5 4,153.9 3,696.5 3,269.8 2,968.7
Oct. 9,124.3 46.3 2,686.7 2,226.8 1,957.0 269.8 459.9 320.9 139.0 4,181.8 3,713.6 3,283.1 2,980.6
Nov. 9,096.0 45.7 2,684.1 2,232.1 1,965.3 266.9 452.0 313.9 138.1 4,198.6 3,723.7 3,293.3 2,991.0
Dec. 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 Jan. 9,150.4 44.9 2,793.5 2,309.4 2,042.2 267.2 484.1 348.8 135.3 4,195.0 3,716.6 3,302.6 2,997.8
Feb. 9,148.1 45.5 2,824.0 2,328.8 2,060.6 268.2 495.2 361.1 134.1 4,210.4 3,731.9 3,318.5 3,011.4
Mar. 9,261.9 45.7 2,904.5 2,419.8 2,145.0 274.8 484.8 351.2 133.6 4,245.8 3,762.0 3,347.6 3,038.5
Apr. 9,269.2 44.9 2,935.1 2,441.4 2,168.7 272.8 493.7 360.0 133.7 4,236.4 3,756.9 3,347.0 3,036.8
May 9,277.1 45.7 2,974.7 2,485.3 2,212.9 272.4 489.4 355.6 133.9 4,246.1 3,772.8 3,363.3 3,049.8
June 9,293.7 46.5 2,959.9 2,469.9 2,197.4 272.5 490.0 356.7 133.3 4,253.7 3,772.0 3,370.7 3,056.9
July 9,321.9 46.8 2,943.6 2,448.2 2,178.3 269.9 495.3 361.1 134.2 4,270.2 3,788.1 3,386.0 3,071.8
Aug. 9,319.3 46.9 2,950.1 2,457.4 2,188.5 268.8 492.8 359.5 133.3 4,283.3 3,799.4 3,400.4 3,085.0
Sep. 9,325.3 47.4 2,952.3 2,472.9 2,203.6 269.3 479.4 344.9 134.5 4,303.0 3,812.2 3,409.8 3,093.8
Oct. 9,395.0 47.8 2,979.8 2,490.1 2,221.1 269.0 489.7 356.2 133.5 4,322.0 3,832.5 3,437.3 3,117.5
Nov. 9,495.5 48.1 3,008.0 2,519.5 2,253.4 266.1 488.5 355.4 133.1 4,352.1 3,856.4 3,459.8 3,138.9
Dec. 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 Jan. 9,717.0 47.7 3,029.2 2,522.4 2,258.2 264.2 506.8 375.0 131.8 4,378.1 3,875.3 3,484.8 3,162.4
Feb. 9,842.8 47.7 3,082.6 2,564.8 2,299.1 265.8 517.8 383.9 133.9 4,396.3 3,889.1 3,504.4 3,181.6
Mar. 9,963.7 50.0 3,068.5 2,547.8 2,283.5 264.3 520.7 387.1 133.7 4,426.8 3,916.4 3,526.5 3,204.1
Changes 3
2013 –703.6 – 0.5 –257.1 –249.2 –216.5 –32.7 – 7.9 1.6 – 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 –126.2 –128.6 –95.3 –33.4 2.4 7.2 – 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2021 207.2 2.2 161.3 155.6 156.4 – 0.8 5.7 11.7 – 5.9 175.7 154.6 173.7 155.9
2020 July 67.5 – 0.5 36.5 45.1 44.3 0.8 – 8.6 – 7.5 – 1.1 3.1 6.6 10.2 10.8
Aug. –79.5 0.5 21.7 28.2 28.0 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.9 – 1.5 – 4.9 4.3 8.7 8.1
Sep. 104.9 0.1 60.5 69.0 67.5 1.5 – 8.5 – 8.0 – 0.4 5.2 4.5 3.0 2.6
Oct. 25.2 0.2 29.1 29.7 30.5 – 0.8 – 0.6 0.1 – 0.7 27.6 17.3 12.9 11.3
Nov. 12.0 – 0.6 29.0 35.8 37.2 – 1.4 – 6.8 – 6.1 – 0.8 18.6 11.3 11.2 11.5
Dec. –141.5 1.8 –59.5 –53.6 –51.2 – 2.4 – 5.9 – 5.8 – 0.2 –18.3 –13.3 4.2 2.7
2021 Jan. 207.1 – 2.6 170.2 131.4 128.6 2.9 38.8 41.1 – 2.2 17.4 7.9 6.8 5.3
Feb. – 2.3 0.7 30.3 19.2 18.2 1.1 11.0 12.2 – 1.2 15.9 15.5 15.7 13.4
Mar. 100.0 0.2 78.0 90.0 83.7 6.3 –12.0 – 11.5 – 0.5 34.3 29.7 28.8 27.0
Apr. 21.2 – 0.8 33.6 23.0 24.6 – 1.6 10.6 10.5 0.2 – 8.8 – 5.2 – 0.1 – 1.1
May 10.7 0.8 38.9 44.1 44.4 – 0.3 – 5.2 – 5.5 0.3 10.4 16.0 15.7 13.0
June 5.3 0.9 –17.1 –16.3 –15.8 – 0.5 – 0.8 – 0.2 – 0.6 7.3 – 0.5 7.6 6.7
July 26.3 0.2 –15.0 –19.5 –17.5 – 2.0 4.5 4.4 0.1 17.3 16.4 15.6 15.3
Aug. – 3.9 0.2 6.7 9.3 10.3 – 1.0 – 2.6 – 1.7 – 0.9 13.2 11.2 14.7 13.4
Sep. 3.0 0.4 0.1 14.4 13.9 0.5 –14.4 – 15.6 1.3 19.8 13.0 9.4 8.8
Oct. 70.4 0.5 27.7 17.3 17.6 – 0.3 10.5 11.4 – 1.0 19.2 20.6 28.0 24.1
Nov. 95.5 0.3 26.6 29.2 32.2 – 3.0 – 2.5 – 2.1 – 0.5 30.6 25.2 22.1 21.0
Dec. –326.2 1.6 –218.7 –186.4 –183.6 – 2.8 –32.2 – 31.2 – 1.0 – 0.9 4.7 9.4 9.1
2022 Jan. 339.9 – 1.9 238.1 188.8 186.6 2.2 49.3 49.4 – 0.1 28.1 15.4 16.2 14.9
Feb. 128.8 – 0.0 52.8 41.4 39.7 1.7 11.4 9.2 2.2 20.4 15.8 21.4 20.9
Mar. 123.2 2.2 –13.7 –16.8 –15.6 – 1.3 3.2 3.2 – 0.0 31.6 27.7 22.3 22.7
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 2021
300.7 433.3 257.8 175.5 469.9 331.1 215.4 138.8 29.2 109.6 1,075.8 816.4 1,209.5 2020 June
300.1 429.6 259.1 170.5 465.7 313.2 217.1 152.5 29.9 122.6 1,047.3 792.5 1,248.1 July
300.7 425.1 253.7 171.4 456.5 311.1 214.5 145.4 29.2 116.1 1,037.6 784.0 1,158.2 Aug.
301.1 426.7 256.0 170.8 457.4 311.0 215.2 146.4 29.3 117.0 1,063.9 808.9 1,176.3 Sep.
302.5 430.5 257.3 173.2 468.2 318.6 219.6 149.5 30.2 119.3 1,049.9 793.4 1,159.6 Oct.
302.2 430.5 256.7 173.8 474.8 325.6 222.5 149.2 29.1 120.1 1,048.0 792.3 1,119.7 Nov.
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 Dec.
304.9 414.0 253.3 160.7 478.4 330.8 224.5 147.6 28.7 118.9 1,087.5 834.6 1,029.5 2021 Jan.
307.1 413.4 250.6 162.9 478.5 334.5 227.0 144.0 28.8 115.2 1,093.8 843.9 974.4 Feb.
309.1 414.4 249.3 165.1 483.8 339.4 232.3 144.4 28.9 115.5 1,105.7 855.5 960.1 Mar.
310.2 409.9 251.0 158.9 479.5 339.8 232.3 139.7 30.3 109.4 1,122.5 876.2 930.3 Apr.
313.5 409.5 250.6 158.9 473.2 339.1 231.9 134.1 28.4 105.7 1,108.3 862.4 902.3 May
313.8 401.4 249.1 152.3 481.7 339.4 231.8 142.3 28.8 113.5 1,111.0 864.8 922.5 June
314.2 402.2 251.3 150.8 482.0 344.2 236.6 137.8 28.6 109.2 1,097.1 849.1 964.3 July
315.4 398.9 248.0 150.9 484.0 346.1 238.8 137.9 28.3 109.6 1,084.8 839.7 954.2 Aug.
316.0 402.4 248.3 154.1 490.7 352.5 241.7 138.2 27.9 110.3 1,087.9 840.8 934.8 Sep.
319.9 395.1 249.7 145.4 489.5 356.0 244.3 133.4 30.3 103.2 1,134.6 889.6 910.9 Oct.
320.9 396.5 247.8 148.8 495.7 361.6 249.6 134.1 28.5 105.6 1,137.3 892.4 950.0 Nov.
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 Dec.
322.4 390.6 246.9 143.6 502.7 377.7 260.4 125.0 28.5 96.5 1,171.2 925.2 1,090.8 2022 Jan.
322.8 384.8 244.7 140.0 507.2 381.4 262.7 125.8 28.6 97.2 1,190.1 939.6 1,126.1 Feb.
322.4 389.9 245.2 144.8 510.4 379.4 259.3 130.9 29.1 101.9 1,169.0 921.9 1,249.4 Mar.
Changes 3
2.0 – 7.0 –10.9 3.9 – 3.0 – 3.4 – 9.3 0.5 – 2.6 3.1 –38.8 –47.2 –420.8 2013
15.5 –12.3 –15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 – 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
17.8 –19.1 – 6.1 –13.1 21.1 35.5 22.6 –14.3 – 1.1 –13.2 71.7 84.9 –203.7 2021
– 0.6 – 3.6 1.3 – 4.9 – 3.5 1.6 2.7 – 5.1 0.6 – 5.7 –10.3 – 7.1 38.7 2020 July
0.6 – 4.4 – 5.4 0.9 – 9.2 – 2.3 – 2.5 – 6.9 – 0.7 – 6.2 – 7.0 – 6.0 –89.8 Aug.
0.4 1.5 2.2 – 0.7 0.7 – 0.1 0.7 0.9 0.1 0.7 21.1 20.0 18.0 Sep.
1.6 4.4 2.0 2.5 10.4 7.3 4.2 3.0 0.9 2.1 –15.3 –16.7 –16.4 Oct.
– 0.3 0.2 – 0.5 0.7 7.3 7.6 3.6 – 0.3 – 1.1 0.8 6.4 6.6 –41.4 Nov.
1.5 –17.5 – 4.4 –13.2 – 4.9 1.9 0.3 – 6.9 0.6 – 7.4 –36.3 –34.4 –29.3 Dec.
1.5 1.1 0.9 0.2 9.5 4.1 3.2 5.3 – 0.9 6.3 84.4 83.6 –62.3 2021 Jan.
2.3 – 0.2 – 2.4 2.3 0.3 3.7 2.4 – 3.4 0.1 – 3.4 6.3 8.9 –55.4 Feb.
1.9 0.9 – 1.3 2.2 4.6 4.2 4.9 0.4 0.1 0.3 2.8 3.3 –15.3 Mar.
1.0 – 5.0 1.7 – 6.7 – 3.6 0.9 0.7 – 4.5 1.5 – 6.0 26.0 29.0 –28.8 Apr.
2.7 0.4 – 0.3 0.7 – 5.6 – 0.1 0.3 – 5.5 – 1.9 – 3.6 –11.4 –11.4 –28.0 May
0.8 – 8.1 – 1.4 – 6.7 7.8 – 0.4 – 0.6 8.2 0.4 7.7 – 5.7 – 5.3 19.9 June
0.4 0.7 2.3 – 1.5 1.0 5.6 4.8 – 4.7 – 0.2 – 4.5 –15.0 –16.5 38.7 July
1.2 – 3.4 – 3.5 0.1 1.9 1.8 2.2 0.1 – 0.3 0.4 –13.1 –10.0 –10.8 Aug.
0.6 3.6 0.3 3.2 6.8 6.3 2.9 0.5 – 0.4 0.9 0.1 – 1.5 –17.4 Sep.
3.9 – 7.4 1.2 – 8.7 – 1.4 3.5 2.6 – 4.8 2.3 – 7.2 47.6 49.5 –24.6 Oct.
1.1 3.0 – 0.9 4.0 5.5 4.8 4.4 0.6 – 1.6 2.2 – 4.5 – 3.6 42.4 Nov.
0.3 – 4.7 – 2.6 – 2.2 – 5.6 0.9 – 5.3 – 6.5 – 0.1 – 6.3 –45.9 –41.0 –62.3 Dec.
1.3 – 0.8 1.8 – 2.6 12.7 14.8 16.0 – 2.1 0.2 – 2.2 72.3 66.8 3.3 2022 Jan.
0.5 – 5.5 – 2.1 – 3.4 4.6 3.7 2.5 0.9 0.1 0.8 20.6 15.8 35.0 Feb.
– 0.4 5.4 0.5 5.0 3.9 – 1.6 – 3.3 5.5 0.5 5.1 –20.1 –17.0 123.1 Mar.
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2020 June 9,026.9 1,503.5 1,230.4 273.1 3,906.1 3,754.5 2,379.1 812.8 256.1 562.5 532.8 139.2 71.1
July 9,069.0 1,488.7 1,209.5 279.2 3,937.1 3,783.3 2,408.1 814.3 263.0 560.9 531.7 132.9 65.5
Aug. 8,985.5 1,489.8 1,213.2 276.6 3,951.0 3,790.7 2,421.8 808.3 258.8 560.6 531.8 129.7 63.6
Sep. 9,097.4 1,523.9 1,252.4 271.5 3,975.9 3,795.1 2,436.7 798.3 251.4 560.1 531.7 140.6 72.8
Oct. 9,124.3 1,536.3 1,264.9 271.4 4,015.2 3,827.0 2,473.1 794.2 249.1 559.7 531.7 140.8 69.6
Nov. 9,096.0 1,515.4 1,245.5 269.9 4,035.0 3,846.2 2,508.7 778.0 235.3 559.6 532.0 140.2 69.0
Dec. 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 Jan. 9,150.4 1,560.0 1,262.3 297.7 4,044.0 3,855.8 2,536.8 757.4 219.4 561.6 534.8 138.4 65.8
Feb. 9,148.1 1,584.4 1,261.7 322.7 4,053.2 3,865.2 2,552.4 750.1 214.1 562.6 536.1 137.7 68.2
Mar. 9,261.9 1,634.1 1,336.6 297.6 4,068.3 3,876.2 2,569.2 744.7 212.3 562.3 536.2 142.2 71.0
Apr. 9,269.2 1,659.9 1,344.1 315.8 4,079.3 3,886.3 2,588.3 735.3 205.8 562.7 536.9 143.0 70.2
May 9,277.1 1,661.1 1,353.0 308.1 4,103.8 3,909.2 2,614.0 732.0 205.0 563.2 537.5 146.4 70.4
June 9,293.7 1,670.8 1,357.4 313.4 4,088.4 3,890.3 2,605.4 722.3 198.1 562.6 537.1 151.3 76.7
July 9,321.9 1,682.5 1,362.0 320.4 4,110.8 3,918.9 2,638.6 718.3 196.7 562.0 536.8 146.4 74.0
Aug. 9,319.3 1,686.5 1,365.8 320.7 4,119.2 3,925.6 2,648.6 715.5 194.1 561.5 536.6 147.8 74.7
Sep. 9,325.3 1,667.9 1,354.2 313.6 4,108.9 3,913.6 2,640.2 712.7 194.3 560.7 535.9 148.8 77.1
Oct. 9,395.0 1,690.9 1,364.7 326.2 4,140.0 3,942.6 2,657.0 725.5 206.4 560.1 535.6 151.4 78.1
Nov. 9,495.5 1,718.6 1,374.9 343.8 4,154.1 3,956.1 2,678.9 717.4 200.2 559.8 535.5 151.4 82.5
Dec. 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 Jan. 9,717.0 1,723.3 1,363.7 359.6 4,196.6 3,981.1 2,686.9 733.4 217.0 560.7 537.4 166.6 85.7
Feb. 9,842.8 1,741.8 1,369.7 372.1 4,209.3 3,993.9 2,699.1 734.0 218.1 560.8 537.7 169.0 90.1
Mar. 9,963.7 1,736.8 1,368.9 367.9 4,211.9 3,989.9 2,689.4 741.5 227.4 559.0 536.1 177.5 99.4
Changes 4
2013 –703.6 –106.2 –73.9 –32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 –56.3 –26.6 – 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 –28.4 –32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 –32.1 3.1 – 2.4 – 2.4 – 2.5 – 0.0
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2021 207.2 133.4 103.4 30.0 107.3 96.2 141.4 –45.8 –23.3 0.6 3.9 16.6 13.6
2020 July 67.5 –11.0 –19.0 8.1 34.1 31.5 31.0 2.1 7.4 – 1.6 – 1.1 – 5.7 – 5.4
Aug. –79.5 1.6 4.0 – 2.4 14.4 7.7 13.8 – 5.9 – 4.1 – 0.2 0.2 – 3.2 – 1.9
Sep. 104.9 33.1 38.7 – 5.7 24.1 3.7 14.4 –10.2 – 7.6 – 0.5 – 0.1 10.7 9.1
Oct. 25.2 12.3 12.4 – 0.1 39.1 32.1 36.4 – 3.9 – 3.3 – 0.4 – 0.0 0.1 – 3.3
Nov. 12.0 8.2 8.4 – 0.1 25.6 20.2 36.4 –16.0 –13.6 – 0.1 0.3 4.1 3.9
Dec. –141.5 –25.2 – 7.9 –17.3 –12.3 – 8.7 0.3 –10.0 – 8.0 1.0 1.3 – 4.8 –11.8
2021 Jan. 207.1 66.0 25.3 40.8 21.6 19.0 28.4 –10.5 – 7.8 1.1 1.6 2.7 9.7
Feb. – 2.3 24.4 – 0.7 25.1 9.0 9.2 15.5 – 7.3 – 5.3 1.0 1.3 – 0.7 2.4
Mar. 100.0 47.8 73.8 –26.0 13.6 9.9 15.8 – 5.6 – 1.9 – 0.3 0.1 4.0 2.5
Apr. 21.2 27.6 8.3 19.3 12.5 11.2 20.1 – 9.4 – 6.5 0.4 0.7 1.2 – 0.6
May 10.7 0.6 9.1 – 8.5 24.9 23.2 26.0 – 3.2 – 0.7 0.5 0.6 3.5 0.3
June 5.3 8.2 3.7 4.4 –16.6 –19.8 – 9.4 – 9.8 – 7.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 4.5 6.1
July 26.3 14.4 7.4 7.0 22.3 28.6 33.2 – 4.1 – 1.4 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 4.9 – 3.1
Aug. – 3.9 3.9 3.7 0.2 7.8 6.5 9.9 – 2.8 – 2.6 – 0.5 – 0.3 0.9 0.2
Sep. 3.0 –19.5 –11.7 – 7.8 – 7.3 – 8.9 – 6.5 – 1.6 0.4 – 0.8 – 0.6 0.7 2.7
Oct. 70.4 24.1 11.2 12.9 31.1 29.1 16.8 12.9 12.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 2.5 1.1
Nov. 95.5 26.4 9.6 16.7 12.9 12.5 21.1 – 8.4 – 6.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.3 4.2
Dec. –326.2 –90.4 –36.3 –54.1 –24.3 –24.3 –29.6 3.9 3.7 1.4 1.6 2.4 –11.9
2022 Jan. 339.9 91.7 23.0 68.8 65.7 48.6 37.1 11.9 12.9 – 0.4 0.3 12.4 14.8
Feb. 128.8 19.3 6.1 13.2 12.5 13.0 12.3 0.7 1.2 0.1 0.3 2.0 4.0
Mar. 123.2 – 5.1 – 0.9 – 4.2 2.5 – 4.0 – 9.7 7.5 9.3 – 1.8 – 1.6 8.5 9.3
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 2012
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 2021
65.4 19.2 2.6 2.4 12.5 11.8 0.9 2.1 1,074.0 28.6 696.8 702.1 1,141.4 2020 June
64.8 20.2 2.6 2.3 20.8 20.1 2.1 1.9 1,067.4 25.9 698.3 694.7 1,178.9 July
63.6 19.3 2.6 2.3 30.6 29.8 1.7 1.9 1,063.9 25.5 682.1 699.9 1,095.2 Aug.
65.2 21.8 2.6 2.3 40.2 39.0 1.2 2.6 1,077.3 25.6 687.1 720.4 1,108.9 Sep.
68.6 25.0 2.6 2.3 47.3 46.6 1.4 2.7 1,075.1 24.6 687.8 712.4 1,093.3 Oct.
68.7 24.3 2.6 2.3 48.5 47.6 9.1 2.5 1,070.0 23.3 696.7 713.1 1,054.3 Nov.
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 Dec.
70.0 23.7 2.6 2.3 49.7 48.3 6.3 2.5 1,058.8 19.7 790.8 708.3 979.7 2021 Jan.
67.0 20.5 2.5 2.3 50.3 48.2 4.5 2.5 1,068.3 19.6 803.5 702.4 929.4 Feb.
68.7 22.0 2.5 2.3 49.9 48.9 6.7 2.9 1,090.4 21.5 833.7 712.0 913.8 Mar.
70.3 23.2 2.5 2.3 50.0 48.6 5.1 2.9 1,091.8 21.0 839.1 705.9 885.3 Apr.
73.5 26.7 2.5 2.3 48.2 46.6 6.0 2.3 1,087.7 23.5 854.7 702.7 858.8 May
72.0 25.9 2.5 2.3 46.9 45.6 4.5 2.3 1,084.6 23.8 836.9 725.4 880.7 June
69.9 22.9 2.5 2.3 45.5 44.3 6.0 2.3 1,087.2 23.5 800.0 719.2 913.9 July
70.7 24.0 2.5 2.3 45.8 44.0 7.4 2.3 1,089.9 25.5 790.7 725.0 898.4 Aug.
69.2 22.4 2.5 2.2 46.6 45.2 7.3 2.2 1,100.5 25.1 840.1 735.9 862.6 Sep.
70.9 23.4 2.4 2.2 46.1 45.2 7.4 2.2 1,118.0 24.6 866.7 729.5 840.3 Oct.
66.4 17.4 2.4 2.2 46.6 45.5 4.2 2.1 1,123.9 26.0 883.1 736.5 872.8 Nov.
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 Dec.
78.5 20.7 2.4 2.2 48.9 45.5 3.0 2.3 1,126.9 25.3 907.4 721.2 1,036.3 2022 Jan.
76.5 19.5 2.4 2.2 46.4 42.8 2.4 2.4 1,141.1 26.2 945.9 717.7 1,082.2 Feb.
75.7 18.8 2.4 2.2 44.5 42.1 2.8 2.5 1,148.9 25.9 926.4 736.9 1,197.5 Mar.
Changes 4
– 0.5 2.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 –11.3 –10.0 4.1 – 3.2 –104.9 –17.6 –134.1 18.9 –417.1 2013
– 2.3 – 1.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.8 – 3.4 – 0.6 –63.7 – 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
3.1 – 8.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 – 5.0 – 7.9 0.3 40.6 6.9 124.9 16.6 –207.9 2021
– 0.3 1.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 8.3 8.3 1.3 – 0.2 3.3 – 1.2 10.9 – 4.3 33.3 2020 July
– 1.3 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.8 9.8 – 0.5 0.0 – 2.2 – 0.4 –14.9 5.7 –83.7 Aug.
1.6 2.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.6 9.2 – 0.5 0.7 10.5 0.0 2.6 19.6 14.9 Sep.
3.4 3.2 – 0.0 0.0 7.0 7.5 0.3 0.1 – 2.9 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 8.2 –15.5 Oct.
0.2 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.2 1.0 3.3 – 0.2 – 0.9 – 1.2 12.6 3.3 –39.9 Nov.
7.0 6.3 0.0 0.0 1.3 1.0 0.3 – 0.0 – 9.0 – 1.9 –71.4 – 0.7 –23.2 Dec.
– 7.0 – 6.9 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 3.0 – 0.0 2.8 – 0.5 173.2 – 3.7 –49.8 2021 Jan.
– 3.1 – 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.2 – 1.8 – 0.0 8.9 – 0.1 12.2 – 6.2 –48.9 Feb.
1.5 1.3 – 0.0 0.0 – 0.4 0.8 2.1 0.5 15.7 1.7 24.0 7.1 –10.8 Mar.
1.8 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 2.2 – 0.1 7.3 – 0.4 11.1 – 3.7 –31.3 Apr.
3.2 3.5 – 0.0 0.0 – 1.8 – 1.9 0.9 – 0.1 – 2.7 2.5 17.0 – 2.8 –27.1 May
– 1.6 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.3 – 1.0 – 1.5 0.1 – 7.7 0.2 –22.7 20.9 24.6 June
– 1.8 – 2.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.4 – 1.3 1.5 – 0.1 2.3 – 0.2 –37.2 – 5.4 28.5 July
0.7 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.3 – 0.2 1.4 – 0.0 2.2 2.0 – 9.9 5.6 –14.9 Aug.
– 1.9 – 1.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.8 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 7.0 – 0.5 45.5 10.0 –32.4 Sep.
1.5 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 17.3 – 0.5 27.1 – 6.4 –22.8 Oct.
– 4.5 – 6.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.7 0.4 – 3.2 – 0.1 1.7 1.4 11.7 5.9 40.3 Nov.
14.3 5.4 0.0 0.0 – 2.4 – 2.0 – 2.0 0.2 –14.2 1.4 –127.3 – 4.6 –63.4 Dec.
– 2.3 – 2.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 4.7 2.0 0.7 – 0.0 13.4 – 2.3 146.6 –18.3 40.0 2022 Jan.
– 2.0 – 1.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.5 – 2.7 – 0.5 0.1 15.0 1.0 39.5 – 3.2 46.2 Feb.
– 0.8 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.6 0.3 0.2 8.1 – 0.1 –19.5 19.0 117.7 Mar.
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
24•
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
End of
monthNumber of
reporting
institu-
tionsBalance
sheet
total  1Cash in
hand and
credit
balances
with
central
banks TotalBalances
and
loansSecurities
issued by
banks Totalfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more than
1 year BillsSecurities
issued by
non-banksPartici-
pating
interestsOther
assets  1
All categories of banks  
2021 Oct. 1,459 9,456.7 1,101.0 2,586.1 2,108.1 476.3 4,648.2 415.3 3,531.2 0.3 678.6 95.5 1,025.9
Nov. 1,448 9,556.7 1,117.4 2,597.0 2,123.8 471.7 4,682.2 414.1 3,557.7 0.3 690.1 95.7 1,064.3
Dec. 1,446 9,233.3 955.4 2,510.2 2,041.2 468.1 4,669.3 398.2 3,566.3 0.4 693.7 95.9 1,002.5
2022 Jan. 1,442 9,779.5 1,114.3 2,639.3 2,169.5 468.0 4,724.4 446.2 3,573.4 0.3 691.1 94.9 1,206.5
Feb. 1,442 9,905.7 1,142.6 2,675.9 2,203.3 470.7 4,750.0 453.5 3,587.6 0.3 694.2 94.9 1,242.3
Mar. 1,442 10,025.2 1,137.0 2,666.8 2,194.2 471.3 4,760.3 441.8 3,604.5 0.3 700.1 94.6 1,366.5
Commercial banks 6
2022 Feb. 250 4,333.4 614.9 1,196.3 1,113.2 81.8 1,506.7 306.4 975.6 0.3 216.8 32.2 983.4
Mar. 250 4,417.9 601.4 1,186.0 1,105.0 80.7 1,501.6 289.6 981.7 0.2 223.7 31.9 1,097.0
   Big banks 7
2022 Feb. 3 2,150.7 175.6 574.1 544.6 29.6 694.9 143.9 447.0 0.0 99.5 26.2 679.9
Mar. 3 2,209.5 172.3 557.6 527.9 29.7 690.0 131.1 448.2 0.0 107.6 26.2 763.4
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2022 Feb. 139 1,727.2 307.8 427.4 376.0 50.6 692.1 120.9 457.8 0.1 111.0 5.3 294.6
Mar. 139 1,740.9 290.7 433.9 384.2 49.5 687.4 114.2 460.7 0.1 109.9 5.0 324.0
   Branches of foreign banks
2022 Feb. 108 455.5 131.5 194.8 192.6 1.5 119.7 41.6 70.8 0.1 6.3 0.7 8.8
Mar. 108 467.4 138.4 194.5 193.0 1.5 124.2 44.3 72.8 0.0 6.2 0.7 9.6
Landesbanken
2022 Feb. 6 883.7 128.7 234.4 186.7 47.4 420.3 42.1 335.4 0.0 39.9 8.1 92.2
Mar. 6 886.6 126.8 237.5 188.6 48.6 418.5 42.0 334.7 0.0 38.9 8.1 95.7
Savings banks
2022 Feb. 368 1,555.4 180.5 163.6 49.1 114.5 1,172.4 49.2 943.5 – 179.0 15.1 23.8
Mar. 368 1,553.3 174.3 162.4 47.6 114.8 1,178.2 50.2 948.5 – 178.8 15.2 23.2
Credit cooperatives 
2022 Feb. 773 1,145.7 67.1 193.3 78.9 114.1 839.5 30.9 684.5 0.0 123.8 19.0 26.8
Mar. 773 1,144.6 66.9 188.3 73.9 114.1 843.2 31.5 688.2 0.0 123.5 19.0 27.1
Mortgage banks
2022 Feb. 9 232.8 12.7 18.2 11.1 7.1 196.0 2.1 176.8 – 17.1 0.1 5.7
Mar. 9 231.3 11.0 18.4 11.5 6.8 196.2 2.7 176.9 – 16.5 0.1 5.5
Building and loan associations
2022 Feb. 18 254.1 3.0 42.4 26.9 15.4 205.1 1.0 177.6 . 26.6 0.3 3.3
Mar. 18 255.8 3.3 43.2 27.9 15.4 205.5 1.0 178.7 . 25.7 0.3 3.5
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2022 Feb. 18 1,500.6 135.7 827.7 737.4 90.4 410.0 21.7 294.2 0.0 91.1 20.1 107.1
Mar. 18 1,535.7 153.3 831.0 739.6 90.9 417.0 24.8 295.8 0.0 93.0 20.0 114.3
Memo item:    Foreign banks 8
2022 Feb. 141 1,971.0 311.4 630.9 592.5 37.1 612.4 133.2 369.9 0.2 107.2 3.6 412.7
Mar. 141 2,030.5 306.2 636.5 600.7 35.6 618.6 137.6 372.9 0.2 105.3 3.6 465.6
   of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2022 Feb. 33 1,515.5 180.0 436.1 399.9 35.5 492.7 91.5 299.1 0.1 100.8 2.9 403.9
Mar. 33 1,563.0 167.8 442.0 407.7 34.1 494.4 93.4 300.1 0.1 99.1 2.9 456.0
* Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3.  1 Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial
instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning ofSection 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read
in conjunction with Section 35 (1) number 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are classified
under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting date. Trading
portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, in
Tables I.1 to I.3.  2 For building and loan associations: including deposits under savings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
25•
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4
TotalSight
depositsTime
deposits TotalSight
depositsfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more
than
1 year  2Memo 
item:
Liabilities
arising
from
repos  3 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeBank
savings
bondsBearer
debt
securities
out-
standing  5Capital
including
published
reserves,
partici-
pation
rights
capital,
funds for
general
banking
risksOther
liabi-
lities  1End of
month
All categories of banks 
2,394.9 683.5 1,711.4 4,310.0 2,834.1 241.5 642.9 53.7 566.1 541.0 25.4 1,213.2 563.6 975.0 2021 Oct.
2,442.1 700.6 1,741.5 4,317.8 2,857.2 227.2 642.8 47.4 565.8 541.0 24.9 1,225.7 565.0 1,006.1 Nov.
2,253.1 573.1 1,679.9 4,264.5 2,796.5 224.3 651.9 32.0 567.1 542.6 24.7 1,208.2 564.9 942.7 Dec.
2,462.3 773.0 1,689.2 4,365.8 2,868.1 252.6 654.0 50.0 566.7 542.8 24.3 1,222.0 569.0 1,160.3 2022 Jan.
2,500.1 780.9 1,719.2 4,399.0 2,899.0 257.2 652.0 60.1 566.7 543.1 24.1 1,233.5 569.5 1,203.6 Feb.
2,481.6 770.4 1,711.2 4,395.3 2,895.6 260.1 650.7 50.7 564.8 541.5 24.1 1,255.4 576.7 1,316.3 Mar.
Commercial banks 6
1,322.5 589.8 732.6 1,749.0 1,231.9 163.7 240.8 58.7 102.6 99.0 10.1 177.7 192.9 891.3 2022 Feb.
1,311.2 588.8 722.4 1,739.7 1,230.9 156.7 239.8 49.5 102.3 98.8 10.0 177.2 197.9 991.9 Mar.
Big banks 7   
527.0 211.3 315.7 833.1 586.5 82.2 76.3 34.2 87.0 84.1 1.1 130.3 72.3 588.0 2022 Feb.
521.1 214.5 306.6 828.0 585.9 77.7 76.3 28.1 86.9 84.0 1.1 130.2 73.2 657.0 Mar.
Regional banks and other commercial banks   
540.8 235.7 305.0 740.2 519.8 54.3 142.2 24.5 15.1 14.5 8.9 46.4 106.6 293.3 2022 Feb.
528.4 224.2 304.2 731.5 511.7 54.5 141.5 21.3 15.0 14.4 8.8 46.0 110.4 324.7 Mar.
Branches of foreign banks   
254.7 142.9 111.8 175.8 125.6 27.3 22.3 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 1.0 14.0 10.0 2022 Feb.
261.7 150.2 111.5 180.2 133.3 24.5 22.0 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 1.0 14.3 10.2 Mar.
Landesbanken
295.5 66.2 229.2 272.7 162.6 34.2 70.2 0.7 5.7 5.7 0.0 181.7 43.2 90.7 2022 Feb.
283.3 56.5 226.8 282.9 163.1 44.5 69.6 0.9 5.7 5.6 0.0 183.1 43.2 94.2 Mar.
Savings banks
206.3 4.0 202.3 1,150.9 838.2 11.6 13.4 – 277.7 261.7 9.9 16.3 132.0 49.8 2022 Feb.
208.8 5.2 203.6 1,145.3 833.1 11.9 13.5 – 276.8 261.0 10.0 16.1 132.4 50.6 Mar.
Credit cooperatives
172.2 1.6 170.6 833.5 605.8 27.1 16.5 – 180.3 176.3 3.8 9.0 95.0 36.0 2022 Feb.
173.6 1.8 171.8 829.8 601.9 27.6 16.9 – 179.6 175.6 3.9 8.9 95.2 37.0 Mar.
Mortgage banks
62.8 3.9 58.8 53.5 2.0 4.1 47.4 – – – . 99.6 10.4 6.5 2022 Feb.
62.4 3.7 58.7 53.3 2.5 3.7 47.2 – – – . 98.5 10.7 6.3 Mar.
Building and loan associations
34.0 2.5 31.4 194.1 3.6 1.7 188.3 – 0.5 0.5 0.1 4.2 12.2 9.5 2022 Feb.
35.4 3.1 32.3 194.1 3.6 1.7 188.3 – 0.5 0.5 0.1 4.2 12.3 9.8 Mar.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
407.0 112.8 294.2 145.3 54.9 14.7 75.5 0.7 – – . 744.9 83.7 119.7 2022 Feb.
406.7 111.2 295.5 150.1 60.5 14.0 75.4 0.3 – – . 767.4 85.0 126.3 Mar.
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
737.5 386.9 350.6 688.0 505.8 60.0 98.8 11.0 20.6 20.3 2.8 45.6 85.3 414.6 2022 Feb.
740.7 380.5 360.2 689.0 511.5 56.2 98.0 10.9 20.5 20.3 2.7 44.2 86.3 470.2 Mar.
 of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9   
482.8 244.0 238.7 512.3 380.2 32.8 76.5 11.0 20.2 19.9 2.7 44.6 71.3 404.6 2022 Feb.
479.0 230.4 248.7 508.8 378.2 31.7 76.1 10.9 20.2 19.9 2.6 43.2 72.0 460.0 Mar.
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Included in time deposits.  4 Excluding deposits
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).  5 Including subordinated
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
6 Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”.  7 Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner
Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische
Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
notes in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, Table I.3, banking group “Big banks “).
8 Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories
of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”.
9 Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in
other banking categories.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
26•
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)      
PeriodCash in
hand
(euro area
banknotes
and
coins)Credit
balances
with the
Bundes-
bank TotalCredit
balances
and loans BillsNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total Loans BillsTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money mar-
ket paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued
by non-
banks  1
End of year or month *
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 – 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2020 Oct. 46.1 811.0 1,397.3 1,145.2 0.0 0.8 251.2 8.6 3,651.1 3,237.6 0.2 9.0 404.3
Nov. 45.4 863.2 1,351.9 1,101.3 0.0 0.8 249.8 8.6 3,661.1 3,247.4 0.2 7.6 405.8
Dec. 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 Jan. 44.6 1,009.1 1,283.1 1,032.1 0.0 0.7 250.2 9.2 3,654.0 3,250.7 0.3 6.6 396.3
Feb. 45.0 929.2 1,382.3 1,130.2 0.0 1.0 251.1 9.6 3,669.3 3,261.7 0.2 7.4 400.0
Mar. 45.5 983.4 1,419.4 1,160.8 0.0 0.9 257.7 9.8 3,699.1 3,287.5 0.2 6.7 404.7
Apr. 44.7 1,062.1 1,362.4 1,105.7 0.0 0.9 255.8 9.8 3,693.9 3,287.5 0.2 5.6 400.5
May 45.4 1,044.7 1,423.6 1,167.3 0.0 0.9 255.4 10.1 3,709.6 3,300.2 0.1 4.6 404.7
June 46.1 1,042.8 1,409.7 1,153.8 0.0 0.8 255.1 10.3 3,709.2 3,305.7 0.2 5.8 397.6
July 46.3 1,059.2 1,372.0 1,118.1 0.0 0.8 253.2 10.3 3,725.3 3,322.9 0.2 6.1 396.2
Aug. 46.5 1,015.2 1,425.2 1,172.4 0.0 0.8 252.1 10.3 3,736.4 3,332.8 0.1 5.7 397.8
Sep. 47.1 1,054.9 1,399.9 1,147.7 0.0 0.7 251.5 10.3 3,749.8 3,341.9 0.1 4.4 403.3
Oct. 47.6 1,052.4 1,419.3 1,167.7 0.0 0.7 250.9 10.3 3,770.2 3,366.9 0.2 5.0 398.0
Nov. 47.9 1,068.7 1,432.2 1,183.6 – 0.7 248.0 10.0 3,794.0 3,386.4 0.2 5.6 401.9
Dec. 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 Jan. 47.4 1,066.0 1,439.2 1,191.8 – 0.7 246.7 10.1 3,812.8 3,409.0 0.2 3.1 400.5
Feb. 47.2 1,094.0 1,453.6 1,204.6 – 0.3 248.7 10.0 3,826.5 3,426.0 0.2 5.0 395.3
Mar. 49.5 1,086.3 1,442.6 1,195.1 – 0.3 247.3 10.0 3,853.8 3,449.0 0.2 3.3 401.3
Changes *
2013 +0.0 –48.8 –204.1 –170.6 +0.0 – 0.7 –32.7 –0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 –0.1 – 0.6 + 4.8
2014 +0.4 –4.3 –119.3 –87.1 +0.0 + 0.4 –32.6 +0.1 +36.7 +20.6 –0.1 – 0.6 +16.8
2015 +0.3 +73.7 –80.7 – 4.3 –0.0 – 0.4 –75.9 –0.1 +68.9 +54.1 –0.0 – 0.3 +15.1
2016 +6.5 +129.1 +48.1 +66.9 – – 0.9 –17.9 +0.4 +43.7 +62.8 –0.1 – 0.1 –18.9
2017 +6.1 +108.4 +50.3 +70.4 –0.0 + 0.0 –20.1 –0.1 +57.0 +70.2 +0.0 + 0.4 –13.6
2018 +8.5 +24.0 –81.0 –76.6 +0.0 + 0.1 – 4.4 +3.8 +71.5 +105.4 –0.1 – 0.5 –33.2
2019 +2.8 +59.7 –63.0 –61.1 –0.0 – 0.2 – 1.6 –1.4 +126.7 +129.1 +0.1 + 3.1 – 5.5
2020 +4.1 +316.4 +201.2 +191.6 –0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 +4.3 +123.2 +123.6 –0.1 + 0.7 – 1.0
2021 +2.2 +111.8 +44.1 +46.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – 2.0 +1.5 +152.2 +147.8 +0.0 – 2.2 + 6.6
2020 Oct. +0.2 –73.5 +103.4 +104.2 – – 0.2 – 0.6 +0.3 +16.5 +12.9 +0.0 + 0.6 + 3.0
Nov. –0.6 +52.3 –17.1 –15.6 –0.0 – 0.0 – 1.5 –0.0 +10.6 +10.5 –0.0 – 1.4 + 1.6
Dec. +1.8 –70.3 +16.0 +18.4 – – 0.1 – 2.3 +0.2 –14.1 – 2.3 +0.0 – 3.6 – 8.1
2021 Jan. –2.6 +216.2 –84.9 –87.8 +0.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 +0.4 + 6.6 + 5.3 +0.0 + 2.6 – 1.4
Feb. +0.3 –79.9 +98.9 +97.8 – + 0.3 + 0.8 +0.4 +15.3 +11.0 –0.0 + 0.7 + 3.6
Mar. +0.6 +54.3 +37.1 +30.6 – – 0.1 + 6.6 +0.2 +29.7 +25.6 –0.0 – 1.4 + 5.4
Apr. –0.8 +78.7 –56.7 –54.9 –0.0 – 0.1 – 1.7 +0.0 – 5.2 + 0.0 –0.0 – 1.1 – 4.1
May +0.8 –17.5 +61.2 +61.6 – + 0.0 – 0.4 +0.4 +15.6 +12.5 –0.0 – 1.1 + 4.2
June +0.6 –1.9 –13.6 –13.3 –0.0 – 0.1 – 0.3 +0.1 – 0.4 + 5.5 +0.0 + 1.3 – 7.1
July +0.2 +15.3 –35.1 –33.1 – – 0.0 – 1.9 +0.1 +16.1 +17.2 +0.0 + 0.3 – 1.4
Aug. +0.2 –43.8 +53.4 +54.4 – + 0.1 – 1.1 –0.0 +10.9 + 9.7 –0.0 – 0.5 + 1.7
Sep. +0.6 +39.7 –26.2 –25.5 +0.0 – 0.1 – 0.6 –0.0 +13.5 + 9.2 +0.0 – 1.2 + 5.4
Oct. +0.5 –2.4 +19.5 +20.0 +0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 –0.1 +20.5 +25.1 +0.0 + 0.6 – 5.2
Nov. +0.3 +16.6 +12.9 +15.9 –0.0 – 0.0 – 2.9 –0.3 +25.5 +20.4 +0.0 + 0.6 + 4.5
Dec. +1.6 –163.6 –22.4 –19.6 – – 0.1 – 2.7 +0.3 + 4.3 + 6.2 +0.1 – 3.0 + 0.9
2022 Jan. –2.0 +161.0 +27.8 +26.3 – + 0.1 + 1.4 –0.3 +14.7 +16.6 –0.1 + 0.5 – 2.3
Feb. –0.2 +28.0 +13.1 +11.5 – – 0.4 + 2.0 –0.1 +15.1 +18.4 +0.0 + 1.9 – 5.2
Mar. +2.3 –7.8 –10.9 – 9.5 – – 0.0 – 1.4 –0.0 +27.3 +23.0 –0.0 – 1.7 + 6.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange ofequalisation claims (see also footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the
exchange of equalisation claims.  3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt
securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
27•
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Equalisa-
tion
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in
domestic
banks
and
enterprises TotalSight
deposits
4Time
deposits
4Redis-
counted
bills  5Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
de-
positsTime
deposits
6Savings
de-
posits  7Bank
savings
bonds  8Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
– 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012
– 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013
– 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
– 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
– 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
– 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
– 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
– 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 2021
– 22.8 79.4 1,263.7 131.5 1,132.2 0.0 12.3 3,874.1 2,481.4 804.1 559.7 28.9 34.6 2020 Oct.
– 22.9 78.1 1,244.8 134.6 1,110.2 0.0 12.5 3,894.3 2,515.3 790.9 559.6 28.5 34.4 Nov.
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 Dec.
– 23.7 78.2 1,261.6 140.5 1,121.2 0.0 13.6 3,904.5 2,542.0 773.1 561.6 27.9 34.3 2021 Jan.
– 24.0 78.2 1,260.6 138.0 1,122.5 0.0 14.2 3,913.7 2,557.5 766.1 562.6 27.5 34.3 Feb.
– 24.3 78.3 1,336.0 135.4 1,200.6 0.0 14.7 3,925.8 2,575.2 761.2 562.3 27.1 34.4 Mar.
– 24.5 77.7 1,343.0 136.2 1,206.8 0.0 15.1 3,935.7 2,594.6 751.6 562.8 26.8 34.4 Apr.
– 24.7 78.6 1,351.9 140.0 1,211.9 0.0 15.5 3,956.3 2,620.5 746.2 563.2 26.3 34.6 May
– 25.0 78.7 1,357.0 132.7 1,224.3 0.0 15.8 3,936.4 2,612.1 735.7 562.6 26.1 34.6 June
– 25.1 78.1 1,360.7 136.1 1,224.5 0.0 15.9 3,964.6 2,646.0 730.7 562.0 25.9 34.5 July
– 25.2 78.2 1,364.7 135.3 1,229.4 0.0 16.1 3,971.0 2,656.0 727.8 561.5 25.6 34.3 Aug.
– 25.2 79.0 1,353.8 128.9 1,224.9 0.0 16.2 3,960.3 2,647.9 726.1 560.7 25.5 34.1 Sep.
– 25.1 79.0 1,363.6 132.9 1,230.7 0.0 16.2 3,989.1 2,664.3 739.3 560.1 25.3 33.9 Oct.
– 25.2 79.1 1,373.9 135.2 1,238.6 0.0 16.3 4,002.4 2,685.9 731.8 559.9 24.8 33.6 Nov.
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 Dec.
– 25.7 78.6 1,363.7 137.2 1,226.5 0.0 16.4 4,025.9 2,690.9 750.0 560.8 24.2 33.9 2022 Jan.
– 25.7 78.7 1,369.7 140.5 1,229.2 0.0 16.6 4,037.8 2,704.5 748.5 560.9 23.9 33.8 Feb.
– 25.8 78.7 1,367.7 137.7 1,230.1 0.0 16.5 4,033.7 2,695.6 755.2 559.0 23.9 33.8 Mar.
Changes *
– –3.3 +2.4 –79.4 –24.1 –55.3 +0.0 –3.4 +40.2 +118.4 –53.9 – 7.4 –17.0 –1.7 2013
– –1.9 +2.0 –29.0 + 2.2 –31.2 –0.0 –0.6 +69.7 +107.9 –25.3 – 2.4 –10.6 –2.0 2014
– –2.1 –4.3 –46.6 + 3.3 –50.0 +0.0 –1.3 +106.5 +156.2 –28.3 –11.3 –10.1 –1.6 2015
– –1.3 +1.5 – 1.7 + 0.3 – 2.0 +0.0 –0.5 +104.7 +124.5 – 6.9 – 7.9 –5.0 –0.5 2016
– –0.0 –1.6 +11.0 –18.4 +29.4 –0.0 –0.5 +103.1 +142.8 –27.5 – 5.6 –6.7 +0.4 2017
– –1.0 +3.1 –25.0 – 3.1 –21.9 +0.0 –0.4 +117.7 +139.3 –10.8 – 4.3 –6.5 +3.9 2018
– –0.7 +0.1 – 8.6 + 1.6 –10.2 +0.0 –0.3 +122.5 +155.8 –25.7 – 3.4 –4.1 –1.4 2019
– +5.7 –3.3 +313.4 +23.2 +290.2 –0.0 +8.2 +221.6 +273.7 –32.7 –14.5 –4.9 +1.9 2020
– +2.3 +1.0 +105.2 – 7.4 +112.6 +0.0 +3.3 +95.3 +144.3 –46.2 + 0.7 –3.5 –0.2 2021
– +0.1 +0.2 +12.2 + 7.7 + 4.4 – +0.2 +40.0 +38.6 + 2.2 – 0.4 –0.4 +0.3 2020 Oct.
– +0.2 +0.1 + 8.3 + 3.5 + 4.8 –0.0 +0.3 +20.5 +34.1 –13.2 – 0.1 –0.3 –0.2 Nov.
– +0.6 +0.1 – 8.1 – 9.6 + 1.5 – +0.5 – 9.2 – 2.3 – 7.6 + 1.0 –0.2 –0.0 Dec.
– +0.2 –0.1 +24.9 +15.7 + 9.2 +0.0 +0.5 +19.2 +28.9 –10.3 + 1.1 –0.4 –0.1 2021 Jan.
– +0.3 +0.1 – 1.2 – 2.4 + 1.2 –0.0 +0.6 + 9.1 +15.4 – 7.0 + 1.0 –0.4 –0.0 Feb.
– +0.3 +0.1 +75.1 – 2.6 +77.7 – +0.5 +12.2 +17.7 – 4.8 – 0.3 –0.4 +0.1 Mar.
– +0.2 –0.6 + 7.1 + 0.8 + 6.3 +0.0 +0.3 + 9.8 +19.6 – 9.8 + 0.4 –0.3 –0.0 Apr.
– +0.3 +0.3 + 8.9 + 3.9 + 5.0 – +0.5 +20.6 +26.0 – 5.3 + 0.5 –0.5 +0.2 May
– +0.2 +0.1 + 5.0 – 7.3 +12.3 +0.0 +0.3 –19.8 – 8.5 –10.5 – 0.6 –0.2 –0.0 June
– +0.1 +0.1 + 6.6 + 3.5 + 3.1 – +0.1 +28.2 +33.9 – 5.0 – 0.6 –0.2 –0.1 July
– +0.2 +0.1 + 4.1 – 0.8 + 4.9 –0.0 +0.2 + 6.4 +10.0 – 2.9 – 0.5 –0.2 –0.2 Aug.
– +0.0 +0.7 –10.6 – 6.4 – 4.2 +0.0 +0.1 – 6.7 – 5.4 – 0.3 – 0.8 –0.2 –0.2 Sep.
– –0.1 +0.1 +10.5 + 4.0 + 6.5 +0.0 +0.0 +28.8 +16.4 +13.2 – 0.6 –0.2 –0.2 Oct.
– +0.1 +0.1 +10.2 + 2.3 + 7.9 – +0.1 +13.3 +21.5 – 7.6 – 0.2 –0.3 –0.3 Nov.
– +0.5 +0.1 –35.4 –18.0 –17.4 –0.0 +0.0 –25.9 –31.2 + 4.1 + 1.4 –0.2 +0.6 Dec.
– –0.0 –0.6 +23.5 +18.3 + 5.2 –0.0 +0.0 +49.6 +36.3 +14.1 – 0.4 –0.4 –0.3 2022 Jan.
– +0.0 +0.1 + 6.0 + 3.3 + 2.7 –0.0 +0.2 +11.9 +13.6 – 1.6 + 0.1 –0.2 –0.2 Feb.
– +0.1 +0.0 – 1.9 – 2.8 + 0.8 – –0.0 – 4.1 – 9.0 + 6.6 – 1.8 +0.0 – Mar.
including subordinated liabilities.  4 Including liabilities arising from monetary policy
operations with the Bundesbank.  5 Own acceptances and promissory notes
outstanding.  6 Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  7 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8).  8 Including liabilities
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
28•
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)    
Credit balances and loans, bills Loans and bills
PeriodCash in
hand
(non-
euro area
banknotes
and
coins) Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued by
non-banks
End of year or month *
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2020 Oct. 0.3 1,064.7 822.9 564.5 258.5 3.5 238.3 4.1 839.8 539.3 137.7 401.6 16.5 284.1
Nov. 0.2 1,056.0 815.8 563.4 252.4 3.5 236.7 4.0 845.6 539.5 139.8 399.7 14.0 292.1
Dec. 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 Jan. 0.2 1,135.1 897.8 645.6 252.2 2.6 234.7 3.8 846.9 538.6 142.7 395.8 14.0 294.3
Feb. 0.6 1,146.4 912.7 659.6 253.1 2.2 231.5 3.8 853.6 548.2 150.4 397.7 14.7 290.7
Mar. 0.2 1,140.4 908.0 646.7 261.3 2.3 230.1 3.8 864.8 559.3 153.3 406.1 11.9 293.5
Apr. 0.2 1,172.3 943.1 680.7 262.3 2.3 227.0 3.9 855.5 555.5 152.6 402.9 13.0 287.0
May 0.2 1,157.2 928.1 669.8 258.3 2.4 226.8 3.9 846.1 550.1 147.3 402.8 11.9 284.2
June 0.4 1,159.3 930.3 666.6 263.7 2.5 226.4 3.9 855.1 551.6 146.7 404.9 10.5 293.0
July 0.4 1,139.3 910.4 651.3 259.1 1.9 227.0 3.8 867.2 565.0 158.4 406.6 13.1 289.2
Aug. 0.4 1,125.9 899.8 647.9 251.8 1.6 224.5 3.7 867.4 566.7 158.7 407.9 15.3 285.5
Sep. 0.3 1,113.1 885.7 634.6 251.1 1.1 226.3 3.6 876.0 569.3 156.6 412.7 15.1 291.6
Oct. 0.3 1,166.7 940.5 672.2 268.2 0.9 225.3 3.5 878.0 579.6 164.1 415.5 17.7 280.6
Nov. 0.3 1,164.8 940.3 674.7 265.6 0.8 223.7 3.4 888.2 585.6 164.4 421.2 14.3 288.3
Dec. 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 Jan. 0.3 1,200.2 977.7 714.1 263.6 1.2 221.3 3.5 911.6 610.7 187.0 423.7 10.3 290.7
Feb. 0.5 1,222.3 998.7 734.3 264.4 1.6 222.0 3.6 923.5 615.2 191.4 423.7 9.4 298.9
Mar. 0.5 1,224.2 999.2 729.8 269.4 1.0 224.1 3.6 906.5 597.4 171.8 425.6 10.3 298.9
Changes *
2013 –0.5 –22.7 –26.9 –1.3 –25.6 +1.8 +2.4 –0.0 –21.2 –33.1 –5.8 –27.2 – 0.7 +12.6
2014 –0.0 +86.1 +80.1 +63.2 +16.8 +0.7 +5.3 –0.6 +5.7 –10.2 –12.8 +2.7 – 1.8 +17.7
2015 +0.1 –91.8 –86.0 –82.2 –3.8 –6.7 +0.8 –0.1 –6.1 –9.2 –6.5 –2.7 + 1.1 +2.0
2016 +0.0 –25.5 –14.5 –38.2 +23.7 –0.7 –10.3 –0.0 +17.4 +28.9 +10.1 +18.8 – 3.0 –8.5
2017 +0.0 –57.2 –48.7 –61.5 +12.8 +0.0 –8.5 +0.6 –4.7 +13.0 +8.6 +4.4 + 0.7 –18.4
2018 +0.0 +49.6 +34.0 +57.7 –23.7 +0.2 +15.3 +0.7 +18.3 +28.3 +3.2 +25.2 – 0.4 –9.7
2019 –0.0 –4.1 –11.3 –21.9 +10.7 +0.8 +6.3 +0.7 +26.8 +19.9 +12.7 +7.3 + 3.0 +3.8
2020 –0.0 –32.0 –22.4 –6.6 –15.8 +0.9 –10.5 +0.3 +34.4 +14.7 +9.0 +5.7 + 3.6 +16.1
2021 +0.0 +52.8 +71.1 +68.9 +2.2 –2.5 –15.8 –0.5 +37.8 +39.7 +29.8 +9.9 – 3.2 +1.4
2020 Oct. +0.0 –20.8 –19.5 –19.8 +0.3 –0.1 –1.2 +0.1 +16.7 +7.8 +6.9 +0.9 + 1.3 +7.6
Nov. –0.0 –3.4 –1.9 +1.8 –3.7 –0.0 –1.5 –0.1 +9.7 +3.6 +2.8 +0.8 – 2.5 +8.6
Dec. –0.0 –26.9 –26.3 –28.9 +2.6 –0.9 +0.2 –0.1 –19.3 –13.7 –13.6 –0.0 – 2.7 –3.0
2021 Jan. –0.0 +106.1 +108.3 +110.3 –1.9 –0.1 –2.1 –0.1 +22.5 +14.5 +17.8 –3.3 + 2.7 +5.3
Feb. +0.3 +11.1 +14.7 +14.0 +0.7 –0.4 –3.2 –0.1 +6.3 +9.0 +7.5 +1.5 + 0.7 –3.5
Mar. –0.3 –11.7 –10.1 –15.8 +5.6 +0.1 –1.7 +0.0 +3.9 +4.9 +0.7 +4.1 – 2.8 +1.8
Apr. –0.0 +37.7 +40.7 +36.8 +3.9 –0.1 –2.9 +0.1 –4.0 +0.6 +0.7 –0.0 + 1.1 –5.6
May +0.0 –14.9 –14.6 –11.5 –3.1 –0.1 –0.3 +0.0 –7.7 –4.2 –4.4 +0.2 – 0.9 –2.6
June +0.2 –4.1 –3.7 –6.3 +2.6 +0.1 –0.5 –0.0 +4.9 –1.8 –1.7 –0.2 – 1.5 +8.2
July +0.0 –21.8 –20.5 –15.7 –4.8 –0.6 –0.7 –0.1 +12.9 +13.0 +11.7 +1.4 + 2.6 –2.8
Aug. –0.0 –13.9 –11.2 –3.6 –7.6 –0.2 –2.5 –0.1 –0.1 +1.4 +0.3 +1.1 + 2.2 –3.8
Sep. –0.1 –18.7 –19.8 –17.0 –2.9 –0.6 +1.7 –0.1 +10.0 +4.6 +1.2 +3.4 – 0.2 +5.6
Oct. +0.0 +54.3 +55.5 +38.3 +17.3 –0.1 –1.1 –0.1 +1.5 +9.9 +7.6 +2.3 + 2.6 –11.0
Nov. –0.0 –5.7 –3.9 +0.2 –4.0 –0.1 –1.8 –0.1 +5.4 +1.8 +1.1 +0.7 – 3.4 +7.1
Dec. –0.0 –65.7 –64.3 –60.9 –3.5 –0.5 –0.9 +0.0 –17.8 –14.0 –12.7 –1.4 – 6.3 +2.5
2022 Jan. +0.1 +95.8 +96.6 +97.4 –0.8 +0.8 –1.7 +0.1 +37.7 +36.2 +34.8 +1.4 + 2.3 –0.7
Feb. +0.2 +23.2 +22.1 +20.8 +1.2 +0.4 +0.7 +0.0 +12.7 +5.2 +4.6 +0.5 – 0.8 +8.4
Mar. –0.0 –0.0 –1.5 –5.8 +4.3 –0.6 +2.1 +0.0 –18.3 –18.9 –20.1 +1.2 + 0.8 –0.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequentrevisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
29•
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Time deposits (including bank
savings bonds)Time deposits (including
savings deposits and bank
savings bonds)
Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in foreign
banks
and
enter-
prises TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
32.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 2012
30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 2013
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 – 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 2021
11.5 19.0 833.2 487.3 345.9 224.6 121.3 – 269.5 142.6 127.0 68.5 58.4 0.1 2020 Oct.
11.5 19.0 836.8 491.3 345.5 219.0 126.5 – 279.9 154.2 125.8 66.0 59.7 0.1 Nov.
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 Dec.
11.3 16.5 954.9 507.8 447.0 298.5 148.5 – 279.8 145.0 134.8 69.4 65.3 0.1 2021 Jan.
11.3 16.5 987.8 520.0 467.7 318.0 149.7 – 283.4 145.2 138.3 71.5 66.8 0.1 Feb.
11.3 16.6 991.5 520.2 471.3 319.5 151.8 – 288.9 147.8 141.1 73.7 67.4 0.1 Mar.
11.3 16.5 1,008.7 522.1 486.6 343.1 143.5 – 295.8 150.7 145.0 81.0 64.1 0.1 Apr.
11.3 16.5 1,013.1 513.9 499.2 360.2 139.0 – 304.0 148.4 155.6 88.0 67.6 0.1 May
11.3 16.5 1,016.2 539.5 476.7 335.5 141.3 – 290.8 148.4 142.5 79.9 62.6 0.1 June
11.2 16.0 981.6 525.0 456.6 304.9 151.7 – 292.2 151.7 140.5 79.3 61.2 0.1 July
11.2 16.3 969.4 513.0 456.4 293.0 163.5 0.0 298.4 158.9 139.6 78.8 60.8 0.1 Aug.
11.2 16.3 1,003.9 528.2 475.8 315.7 160.1 – 306.0 164.0 142.0 81.5 60.4 0.1 Sep.
11.2 16.3 1,031.2 550.5 480.7 320.4 160.3 0.0 320.9 169.8 151.1 83.3 67.8 0.1 Oct.
11.3 16.4 1,068.2 565.4 502.8 335.0 167.9 0.0 315.5 171.3 144.2 75.5 68.7 0.1 Nov.
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 Dec.
11.1 16.1 1,098.5 635.9 462.7 321.8 140.8 0.0 339.9 177.2 162.7 82.1 80.5 0.1 2022 Jan.
11.1 16.0 1,130.4 640.4 490.0 349.8 140.2 0.0 361.2 194.5 166.7 87.0 79.7 0.1 Feb.
11.1 15.7 1,113.8 632.7 481.1 349.8 131.3 0.0 361.6 200.0 161.6 82.0 79.6 0.1 Mar.
Changes *
– 1.8 – 7.2 –174.0 –75.6 –98.4 –83.1 –15.4 –0.0 +13.5 +9.6 +3.9 +6.9 –3.0 –0.2 2013
+ 0.1 – 3.8 +76.3 +47.8 +28.5 +39.0 –10.5 –0.0 –43.6 –8.3 –35.3 –30.7 –4.6 +0.2 2014
– 0.6 – 6.1 –15.4 +40.6 –56.0 –48.6 – 7.4 –0.0 –26.5 –13.9 –12.6 +0.3 –13.0 –0.0 2015
– 0.1 – 1.5 +82.7 +51.0 +31.7 +27.0 + 4.7 –0.0 +3.5 –3.1 +6.7 +5.9 +0.8 –0.0 2016
– 1.0 – 4.1 –15.5 +25.2 –40.8 –43.2 + 2.4 ±0.0 +31.8 +11.0 +20.8 +15.6 +5.2 –0.4 2017
– 0.2 – 2.2 –23.9 –23.4 – 0.4 + 2.1 – 2.6 –0.0 –11.9 –0.2 –11.8 –5.7 –6.0 –0.2 2018
– 0.3 – 0.9 – 9.5 –49.4 +39.8 +28.0 +11.8 –0.0 –0.8 +2.1 –2.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.0 2019
– 0.2 – 3.9 +83.8 +87.8 – 4.1 –34.7 +30.6 – +23.6 +13.8 +9.8 +7.1 +2.8 +0.0 2020
– 0.2 – 0.8 +136.6 +19.8 +116.8 +89.2 +27.6 +0.0 +22.7 +6.4 +16.3 +0.0 +16.3 –0.0 2021
+ 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 +0.5 – 0.4 – 2.0 + 1.6 – –0.6 –3.2 +2.6 +2.3 +0.3 +0.0 2020 Oct.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.9 +5.9 + 2.0 – 3.7 + 5.7 – +11.6 +12.2 –0.6 –2.1 +1.5 –0.0 Nov.
– 0.2 – 1.7 –72.1 –60.9 –11.2 –12.6 + 1.4 – –20.3 –20.3 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 +0.0 Dec.
– 0.0 – 0.8 +191.3 +78.5 +112.9 +92.4 +20.5 – +20.1 +12.3 +7.8 +3.6 +4.2 –0.0 2021 Jan.
– 0.0 – 0.0 +32.7 +12.2 +20.5 +19.3 + 1.2 – +3.4 +0.0 +3.4 +2.0 +1.4 –0.0 Feb.
+ 0.1 – 0.0 – 1.8 –2.6 + 0.8 – 1.1 + 1.9 – +3.2 +1.6 +1.6 +1.3 +0.3 +0.0 Mar.
– 0.0 + 0.0 +23.2 +4.3 +19.0 +26.8 – 7.8 – +7.9 +3.7 +4.2 +7.3 –3.0 +0.0 Apr.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.9 –7.4 +12.2 +16.6 – 4.4 – +8.6 –2.2 +10.8 +7.2 +3.5 –0.0 May
– 0.1 – 0.0 – 1.9 +23.7 –25.6 –27.4 + 1.8 – –14.8 –0.6 –14.2 –9.0 –5.2 –0.0 June
– 0.1 – 0.5 –34.8 –14.6 –20.2 –30.6 +10.4 – +1.3 +2.9 –1.6 –0.3 –1.3 +0.0 July
+ 0.0 + 0.2 –12.8 –12.3 – 0.5 –12.2 +11.7 +0.0 +5.7 +6.7 –1.1 –0.6 –0.5 –0.0 Aug.
– 0.0 + 0.0 +30.5 +12.9 +17.6 +21.4 – 3.9 –0.0 +6.7 +4.9 +1.7 +2.3 –0.6 +0.0 Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 +27.9 +22.7 + 5.2 + 5.1 + 0.2 +0.0 +14.7 +5.8 +9.0 +1.6 +7.4 –0.0 Oct.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 +32.3 +12.5 +19.9 +13.0 + 6.9 – –6.3 +0.8 –7.1 –8.4 +1.3 –0.0 Nov.
– 0.1 + 0.2 –155.0 –110.1 –44.9 –34.0 –10.9 – –27.7 –29.6 +1.9 –7.0 +8.9 +0.0 Dec.
– 0.0 – 0.6 +180.8 +178.4 + 2.4 +19.3 –16.9 – +50.8 +34.9 +16.0 +13.1 +2.9 –2022 Jan.
+ 0.0 – 0.0 +33.4 +5.7 +27.8 +28.3 – 0.5 – +21.2 +17.0 +4.2 +5.0 –0.8 – Feb.
– 0.1 – 0.3 –18.3 –8.5 – 9.8 – 0.7 – 9.1 – –0.1 +5.3 –5.4 –5.3 –0.1 –0.0 Mar.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
30•
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Short-term lending Medium- and long-term   Lending to domestic
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
Periodincluding 
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claimsexcluding 
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claims Total TotalLoans
and
billsNegotiable
money
market
paper Total LoansTreasury
bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 – 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2020 Oct. 3,651.1 3,237.8 261.0 229.5 228.7 0.7 31.6 23.3 8.2 3,390.1 2,991.5
Nov. 3,661.1 3,247.6 258.7 229.3 228.7 0.6 29.4 22.4 7.0 3,402.4 3,001.7
Dec. 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 Jan. 3,654.0 3,251.0 247.7 221.9 221.3 0.6 25.8 19.7 6.1 3,406.3 3,018.4
Feb. 3,669.3 3,261.9 249.5 224.2 223.6 0.6 25.3 18.5 6.8 3,419.7 3,031.9
Mar. 3,699.1 3,287.7 261.3 236.6 236.0 0.6 24.7 18.6 6.1 3,437.8 3,048.6
Apr. 3,693.9 3,287.7 248.6 223.5 222.8 0.7 25.1 20.2 4.9 3,445.2 3,061.5
May 3,709.6 3,300.4 248.7 225.4 224.6 0.8 23.3 19.5 3.8 3,460.9 3,075.1
June 3,709.2 3,305.8 250.7 225.8 225.0 0.8 24.9 19.9 5.1 3,458.5 3,082.5
July 3,725.3 3,323.0 248.2 221.0 220.2 0.8 27.2 21.9 5.3 3,477.1 3,102.5
Aug. 3,736.4 3,332.9 245.0 221.1 220.4 0.7 23.9 18.9 4.9 3,491.5 3,116.8
Sep. 3,749.8 3,342.1 247.8 224.5 223.8 0.7 23.4 19.6 3.7 3,501.9 3,123.2
Oct. 3,770.2 3,367.1 256.5 232.5 231.9 0.6 24.0 19.5 4.4 3,513.7 3,142.9
Nov. 3,794.0 3,386.5 255.6 232.9 232.3 0.6 22.7 17.7 5.0 3,538.4 3,164.9
Dec. 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 Jan. 3,812.8 3,409.2 262.6 242.3 241.7 0.6 20.3 17.8 2.5 3,550.2 3,180.4
Feb. 3,826.5 3,426.2 267.4 246.9 246.1 0.8 20.5 16.3 4.2 3,559.1 3,195.3
Mar. 3,853.8 3,449.2 273.6 254.8 254.0 0.8 18.9 16.3 2.5 3,580.1 3,209.5
Changes *
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 – 13.8 – 5.8 – 6.3 + 0.5 – 8.0 – 7.0 – 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 – 11.6 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 0.0 – 7.1 – 6.5 – 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 – 5.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.8 – 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 – 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 – 12.1 – 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 8.6 – 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 – 19.6 – 19.8 – 19.8 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2021 + 152.2 + 147.8 + 8.8 + 13.8 + 13.8 – 0.1 – 4.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 + 143.4 + 157.9
2020 Oct. + 16.5 + 12.9 – 0.9 – 2.6 – 2.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 17.4 + 14.6
Nov. + 10.6 + 10.4 – 2.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 2.0 – 0.7 – 1.2 + 12.7 + 10.6
Dec. – 14.1 – 2.3 – 15.5 – 7.7 – 7.5 – 0.2 – 7.8 – 4.4 – 3.4 + 1.4 + 11.2
2021 Jan. + 6.6 + 5.3 + 4.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 4.2 + 1.7 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 5.2
Feb. + 15.3 + 10.9 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 0.0 – 0.5 – 1.2 + 0.7 + 13.5 + 13.3
Mar. + 29.7 + 25.6 + 11.2 + 12.5 + 12.5 – 0.0 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 1.4 + 18.5 + 16.3
Apr. – 5.2 – 0.0 – 12.8 – 13.1 – 13.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.6 – 1.2 + 7.5 + 13.0
May + 15.6 + 12.5 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.1 – 1.8 – 0.6 – 1.2 + 15.5 + 13.4
June – 0.4 + 5.5 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 – 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 – 2.4 + 7.3
July + 16.1 + 17.2 – 2.0 – 4.2 – 4.3 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 18.1 + 19.5
Aug. + 10.9 + 9.7 – 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 3.3 – 2.9 – 0.4 + 14.1 + 14.2
Sep. + 13.5 + 9.3 + 3.3 + 3.7 + 3.8 – 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.7 – 1.2 + 10.2 + 6.2
Oct. + 20.5 + 25.1 + 8.7 + 8.1 + 8.2 – 0.1 + 0.5 – 0.2 + 0.7 + 11.8 + 19.8
Nov. + 25.5 + 20.5 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 2.4 + 0.0 – 1.2 – 1.8 + 0.6 + 24.4 + 19.9
Dec. + 4.3 + 6.3 – 5.8 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 5.2 – 2.5 – 2.7 + 10.1 + 9.8
2022 Jan. + 14.7 + 16.5 + 12.9 + 10.1 + 9.8 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 1.8 + 5.8
Feb. + 15.1 + 18.4 + 6.2 + 6.0 + 5.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 1.5 + 1.7 + 9.0 + 14.9
Mar. + 27.3 + 23.0 + 6.2 + 7.9 + 7.9 – 0.0 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 + 21.0 + 14.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
31•
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
TotalMedium-
termLong-
term SecuritiesMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalMedium-
termLong-
termSecur-
ities  1Equal-
isation
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 – 3.5 2012
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 – 2.7 2013
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 – 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 – 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 – 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 – 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 – 1.4 2018
2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 – 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 2020
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 2021
2,751.8 313.2 2,438.6 239.7 21.6 398.6 234.0 15.9 218.1 164.6 – 1.2 2020 Oct.
2,762.3 311.5 2,450.8 239.4 21.8 400.7 234.2 15.7 218.6 166.4 – 1.2 Nov.
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 Dec.
2,776.4 307.8 2,468.6 242.0 22.5 387.9 233.6 15.3 218.3 154.3 – 1.2 2021 Jan.
2,787.7 309.7 2,478.1 244.2 22.8 387.8 232.0 15.4 216.6 155.8 – 1.1 Feb.
2,802.4 314.5 2,487.9 246.1 23.1 389.3 230.7 15.2 215.5 158.6 – 1.1 Mar.
2,813.9 313.6 2,500.3 247.6 23.4 383.7 230.8 15.0 215.8 153.0 – 1.1 Apr.
2,825.1 311.7 2,513.5 249.9 23.6 385.9 231.1 14.9 216.2 154.8 – 1.1 May
2,831.8 310.0 2,521.8 250.7 23.9 376.0 229.2 14.7 214.5 146.8 – 1.1 June
2,851.4 310.7 2,540.8 251.0 24.0 374.6 229.5 14.9 214.6 145.1 – 1.1 July
2,864.5 311.5 2,553.1 252.2 24.2 374.7 229.1 14.7 214.4 145.6 – 1.1 Aug.
2,870.0 310.1 2,559.9 253.2 24.2 378.7 228.7 14.3 214.4 150.1 – 1.0 Sep.
2,885.5 313.5 2,572.0 257.4 24.1 370.9 230.2 14.6 215.6 140.7 – 1.0 Oct.
2,906.5 315.6 2,590.9 258.4 24.2 373.5 230.0 14.5 215.6 143.5 – 1.0 Nov.
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 Dec.
2,920.6 312.8 2,607.8 259.8 24.7 369.8 229.1 13.9 215.2 140.7 – 1.0 2022 Jan.
2,935.4 313.8 2,621.6 259.9 24.6 363.8 228.5 13.9 214.5 135.4 – 1.1 Feb.
2,950.1 316.1 2,634.0 259.4 24.7 370.6 228.8 13.7 215.1 141.8 – 1.1 Mar.
Changes *
+ 17.7 – 0.1 + 17.8 – 0.1 – 2.5 + 0.6 – 4.3 – 0.7 – 3.6 + 4.9 – – 0.8 2013
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 +12.5 – 1.8 – 4.1 – 8.5 – 5.1 – 3.4 + 4.3 – – 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 +14.8 – 2.1 – 6.6 – 6.9 – 4.8 – 2.0 + 0.2 – + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 – 0.9 – 30.9 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 3.3 –23.6 – – 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 +15.8 + 0.1 – 39.9 –10.6 – 1.3 – 9.3 –29.4 – – 0.1 2017
+108.7 +19.3 + 89.4 – 6.7 – 0.9 – 37.1 –10.5 – 2.7 – 7.8 –26.6 – – 0.0 2018
+126.0 +18.9 +107.2 + 6.8 – 0.8 – 17.8 – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 –12.3 – + 0.1 2019
+145.0 + 9.4 +135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 – 2.8 – 1.1 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 1.7 – – 0.4 2020
+140.1 + 5.6 +134.5 +17.8 + 2.3 – 14.6 – 3.3 – 1.3 – 2.0 –11.3 – – 0.0 2021
+ 13.5 + 0.1 + 13.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 0.9 – 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.9 – + 0.0 2020 Oct.
+ 10.9 – 1.2 + 12.1 – 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3 – 0.2 + 0.5 + 1.8 – – 0.0 Nov.
+ 9.5 – 1.0 + 10.5 + 1.7 + 0.7 – 9.8 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 9.9 – – 0.1 Dec.
+ 4.3 – 2.7 + 7.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 – 3.1 – 0.8 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 2.3 – + 0.1 2021 Jan.
+ 11.1 + 1.8 + 9.3 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 – 1.3 + 0.1 – 1.4 + 1.5 – – 0.0 Feb.
+ 14.4 + 4.7 + 9.7 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 2.1 – 1.4 – 0.2 – 1.2 + 3.5 – – 0.0 Mar.
+ 11.5 – 0.9 + 12.4 + 1.5 + 0.2 – 5.5 + 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.3 – 5.6 – – 0.0 Apr.
+ 11.0 – 1.9 + 13.0 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3 – 0.1 + 0.4 + 1.8 – + 0.0 May
+ 6.5 – 1.7 + 8.2 + 0.8 + 0.3 – 9.7 – 1.8 – 0.2 – 1.5 – 7.9 – – 0.0 June
+ 19.2 + 0.2 + 19.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 – 1.7 – – 0.0 July
+ 13.0 + 0.8 + 12.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.4 + 0.5 – – 0.0 Aug.
+ 5.2 – 1.4 + 6.6 + 1.0 – 0.0 + 4.0 – 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.0 + 4.4 – + 0.0 Sep.
+ 15.6 + 3.5 + 12.1 + 4.1 – 0.1 – 7.9 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 – 9.4 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 18.9 + 4.4 + 14.5 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 4.4 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 1.0 + 3.5 – – 0.0 Nov.
+ 9.3 – 1.1 + 10.4 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 – + 0.0 Dec.
+ 4.9 – 1.7 + 6.6 + 0.8 – 0.0 – 4.0 – 0.8 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 3.2 – – 0.0 2022 Jan.
+ 14.8 + 1.0 + 13.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 6.0 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.6 – 5.3 – – 0.0 Feb.
+ 14.7 + 2.3 + 12.4 – 0.5 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 0.3 – 0.2 + 0.6 + 6.5 – – 0.0 Mar.

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
May 2022
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insuranceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2020 2,993.0 1,601.8 1,565.6 1,285.1 280.5 1,623.4 443.3 146.7 123.4 82.7 135.8 55.3 59.8 176.0
2021         Mar. 3,038.4 1,618.9 1,587.9 1,302.5 285.4 1,657.2 451.2 149.2 123.0 84.6 139.1 55.4 60.1 182.5
         June 3,056.8 1,634.6 1,619.5 1,316.7 302.8 1,654.3 461.4 142.5 122.1 85.7 135.5 56.0 57.9 182.6         Sep. 3,093.7 1,653.1 1,648.9 1,337.4 311.4 1,666.9 467.9 143.9 122.2 87.7 136.7 56.2 56.3 182.6         Dec. 3,147.5 1,591.4 1,678.2 1,373.0 305.2 1,701.5 477.2 146.1 128.3 98.0 140.4 55.9 55.6 186.3
2022         Mar. 3,204.0 1,613.7 1,700.9 1,391.9 309.0 1,742.4 485.1 150.9 134.3 101.3 145.3 56.3 54.9 193.2
 Short-term lending
2020 221.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 192.1 4.6 29.0 6.9 16.0 37.0 3.6 6.1 31.62021         Mar. 236.0 − 8.0 − 8.0 207.4 4.7 33.4 6.4 16.7 38.9 3.9 6.1 34.2
         June 225.0 − 7.8 − 7.8 195.9 4.5 28.8 5.5 16.7 34.7 4.2 4.4 34.4         Sep. 223.8 − 7.8 − 7.8 193.7 4.4 30.4 5.1 17.1 35.6 4.0 4.1 34.1         Dec. 231.8 − 6.9 − 6.9 202.7 4.4 31.6 9.1 18.0 36.4 3.3 3.9 35.0
2022         Mar. 254.0 − 7.0 − 7.0 224.1 4.5 36.5 14.0 19.5 39.3 3.6 4.1 38.0
 Medium-term lending
2020 310.5 − 38.5 − 38.5 230.4 18.5 30.2 5.4 14.8 19.3 4.8 15.0 51.42021         Mar. 314.5 − 38.9 − 38.9 236.4 19.1 29.2 5.1 15.3 19.7 4.5 14.7 52.9
         June 310.0 − 39.7 − 39.7 232.8 19.8 27.7 5.0 15.3 19.5 4.5 14.1 51.2         Sep. 310.1 − 40.2 − 40.2 233.3 20.2 27.8 5.2 15.8 19.3 4.5 12.3 51.7         Dec. 314.5 − 40.5 − 40.5 239.5 20.6 28.3 5.4 19.3 20.8 4.3 12.3 52.0
2022         Mar. 316.1 − 40.8 − 40.8 242.2 21.0 28.9 5.6 20.0 22.0 4.2 11.7 53.1
 Long-term lending
2020 2,461.4 1,601.8 1,519.1 1,285.1 234.0 1,201.0 420.2 87.5 111.2 51.8 79.4 47.0 38.7 93.02021         Mar. 2,487.9 1,618.9 1,541.0 1,302.5 238.5 1,213.5 427.4 86.6 111.5 52.6 80.5 47.1 39.3 95.4
         June 2,521.8 1,634.6 1,572.0 1,316.7 255.3 1,225.5 437.2 86.0 111.6 53.7 81.3 47.3 39.4 97.0         Sep. 2,559.9 1,653.1 1,600.9 1,337.4 263.5 1,240.0 443.4 85.6 111.9 54.9 81.8 47.7 39.9 96.8         Dec. 2,601.2 1,591.4 1,630.9 1,373.0 257.8 1,259.3 452.2 86.2 113.8 60.8 83.2 48.3 39.4 99.3
2022         Mar. 2,633.9 1,613.7 1,653.1 1,391.9 261.2 1,276.1 459.6 85.5 114.8 61.8 84.0 48.4 39.2 102.1
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2021         Q1 + 44.8 + 17.1 + 22.2 + 17.3 + 4.9 + 33.0 + 7.6 + 2.5 − 0.7 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 6.2
         Q2 + 17.9 + 20.9 + 30.7 + 21.0 + 9.7 − 3.2 + 9.6 − 6.7 − 0.9 + 1.1 − 3.7 + 0.6 − 2.2 − 0.0         Q3 + 37.1 + 18.5 + 29.1 + 19.7 + 9.4 + 12.7 + 6.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 1.0         Q4 + 54.1 + 18.0 + 28.6 + 18.9 + 9.7 + 34.9 + 9.0 + 2.2 + 5.9 + 1.5 + 3.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 3.7
2022         Q1 + 57.9 + 17.6 + 22.0 + 16.6 + 5.3 + 42.0 + 7.0 + 4.8 + 6.3 + 3.2 + 4.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 8.9
 Short-term lending
2021         Q1 + 14.9 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 15.4 + 0.1 + 4.4 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 2.6
         Q2 − 11.1 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 11.6 − 0.2 − 4.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 4.2 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 0.2         Q3 − 0.3 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3         Q4 + 10.3 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 10.5 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 1.0
2022         Q1 + 23.5 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 22.7 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 2.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 4.4
 Medium-term lending
2021         Q1 + 3.8 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 5.9 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.5
         Q2 − 4.5 − + 0.8 − + 0.8 − 3.5 + 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.8         Q3 − 0.4 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 + 0.7         Q4 + 6.8 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 8.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 3.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5
2022         Q1 + 1.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.2
 Long-term lending
2021         Q1 + 26.1 + 17.1 + 21.8 + 17.3 + 4.5 + 11.7 + 6.9 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 2.2
         Q2 + 33.6 + 20.9 + 30.2 + 21.0 + 9.1 + 12.0 + 9.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.5         Q3 + 37.8 + 18.5 + 28.6 + 19.7 + 8.9 + 14.1 + 6.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.6         Q4 + 37.0 + 18.0 + 28.4 + 18.9 + 9.5 + 16.4 + 8.4 + 0.6 + 1.8 − 3.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 2.2
2022         Q1 + 32.7 + 17.6 + 21.5 + 16.6 + 4.9 + 16.5 + 6.5 − 0.7 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 3.4
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
May 2022
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
843.7 286.6 53.8 204.1 464.0 47.9 1,353.4 1,118.3 235.2 177.4 6.7 16.2 4.0 2020
863.3 293.7 59.2 204.3 467.7 48.3 1,364.8 1,132.6 232.2 175.4 6.6 16.4 4.1 2021          Mar.
872.0 296.9 58.2 208.6 473.6 48.7 1,386.3 1,154.0 232.4 174.8 6.6 16.2 4.1          June881.4 304.0 57.5 210.5 478.3 48.9 1,410.5 1,176.6 233.9 176.4 7.0 16.3 4.3          Sep.890.8 308.6 63.8 207.9 483.8 48.3 1,429.3 1,196.6 232.7 184.1 6.9 16.7 4.4          Dec.
906.2 315.6 66.2 209.8 489.1 49.1 1,444.9 1,211.4 233.5 184.5 7.1 16.8 4.4 2022          Mar.
Short-term lending
61.9 15.7 9.6 10.5 20.9 3.7 28.6 3.4 25.2 1.3 6.7 0.6 0.0 202067.9 16.5 12.3 10.2 20.5 3.9 27.9 3.4 24.6 1.3 6.6 0.7 0.0 2021          Mar.
67.1 16.0 11.5 10.4 21.0 4.1 28.6 3.4 25.2 1.4 6.6 0.5 0.0          June63.3 16.9 10.3 9.8 20.5 4.3 29.6 3.4 26.2 1.5 7.0 0.5 0.0          Sep.65.5 14.5 13.0 10.0 19.7 3.8 28.6 2.5 26.1 1.4 6.9 0.5 0.0          Dec.
69.2 15.3 14.0 10.5 20.3 4.4 29.2 2.5 26.7 1.6 7.1 0.7 0.0 2022          Mar.
Medium-term lending
89.6 20.4 11.8 24.5 32.0 3.5 79.6 20.0 59.6 56.1 − 0.5 0.0 202094.9 21.9 14.4 25.2 31.5 3.6 77.6 19.8 57.8 54.2 − 0.5 0.0 2021          Mar.
95.7 22.2 14.4 26.4 31.3 3.4 76.7 19.8 56.9 53.1 − 0.5 0.0          June96.7 23.2 13.8 27.4 31.1 3.4 76.3 20.0 56.3 52.4 − 0.6 0.1          Sep.97.0 23.1 15.2 27.1 30.0 3.3 74.4 19.8 54.6 50.6 − 0.6 0.1          Dec.
96.8 22.8 15.5 27.2 30.0 3.2 73.4 19.7 53.7 49.6 − 0.5 0.1 2022          Mar.
Long-term lending
692.3 250.5 32.4 169.1 411.1 40.7 1,245.3 1,094.9 150.4 120.0 − 15.1 4.0 2020700.5 255.3 32.5 168.9 415.7 40.8 1,259.3 1,109.5 149.8 119.9 − 15.2 4.1 2021          Mar.
709.2 258.7 32.3 171.8 421.3 41.1 1,281.1 1,130.8 150.3 120.3 − 15.2 4.1          June721.3 263.9 33.3 173.3 426.7 41.2 1,304.7 1,153.3 151.4 122.6 − 15.3 4.2          Sep.728.4 271.1 35.6 170.8 434.1 41.3 1,326.3 1,174.3 152.0 132.1 − 15.6 4.3          Dec.
740.2 277.5 36.8 172.1 438.8 41.4 1,342.3 1,189.1 153.1 133.3 − 15.6 4.4 2022          Mar.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 19.6 + 7.0 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 + 14.6 − 2.9 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 2021          Q1
+ 8.7 + 3.2 − 0.9 + 4.3 + 5.8 + 0.4 + 21.3 + 21.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0          Q2+ 9.4 + 6.5 − 0.8 + 1.7 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 24.3 + 22.7 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1          Q3+ 18.8 + 7.3 + 4.2 + 2.8 + 5.2 − 0.6 + 18.8 + 19.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.1          Q4
+ 14.9 + 6.7 + 2.4 + 1.7 + 5.0 + 0.7 + 15.8 + 14.9 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2022          Q1
Short-term lending
+ 6.0 + 0.7 + 2.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2021          Q1
− 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2− 2.7 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q3+ 3.4 − 1.1 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 3.6 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2022          Q1
Medium-term lending
+ 5.6 + 1.5 + 2.6 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.9 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2021          Q1
+ 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.1 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.7 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3+ 1.7 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 1.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.0 2022          Q1
Long-term lending
+ 8.0 + 4.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 4.1 + 0.1 + 14.3 + 14.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 2021          Q1
+ 8.8 + 3.4 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 21.6 + 21.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 11.3 + 4.7 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 4.9 + 0.1 + 23.6 + 22.5 + 1.2 + 1.7 − + 0.1 + 0.1          Q3+ 13.6 + 7.2 + 0.4 + 2.7 + 6.2 + 0.1 + 20.4 + 19.9 + 0.5 + 1.2 − + 0.3 + 0.1          Q4
+ 11.5 + 6.3 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 4.5 + 0.1 + 16.2 + 15.0 + 1.2 + 1.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2022          Q1
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
34•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic non-banks, total                        End of year or month *
2019 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 202.7 613.5 52.7 560.8 575.2 33.2 32.5 14.7 0.2
2020 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2021 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2021 Apr. 3,935.7 2,594.6 751.6 168.9 582.7 46.8 535.9 562.8 26.8 34.4 14.4 1.0
May 3,956.3 2,620.5 746.2 165.9 580.3 47.3 533.1 563.2 26.3 34.6 14.4 0.7
June 3,936.4 2,612.1 735.7 158.1 577.5 47.4 530.1 562.6 26.1 34.6 14.4 1.0
July 3,964.6 2,646.0 730.7 155.4 575.3 47.7 527.6 562.0 25.9 34.5 14.3 1.5
Aug. 3,971.0 2,656.0 727.8 151.2 576.7 48.1 528.5 561.5 25.6 34.3 14.3 1.5
Sep. 3,960.3 2,647.9 726.1 152.7 573.5 47.8 525.7 560.7 25.5 34.1 14.4 1.6
Oct. 3,989.1 2,664.3 739.3 163.6 575.7 49.1 526.6 560.1 25.3 33.9 15.3 1.4
Nov. 4,002.4 2,685.9 731.8 157.1 574.7 49.9 524.8 559.9 24.8 33.6 15.3 0.9
Dec. 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2022 Jan. 4,025.9 2,690.9 750.0 175.9 574.1 49.5 524.6 560.8 24.2 33.9 17.1 1.1
Feb. 4,037.8 2,704.5 748.5 175.5 573.0 48.7 524.3 560.9 23.9 33.8 17.1 1.2
Mar. 4,033.7 2,695.6 755.2 183.4 571.7 49.2 522.5 559.0 23.9 33.8 17.2 1.6
Changes *
2020 +221.6 +273.7 – 32.7 – 15.0 –17.7 – 4.8 –12.9 –14.5 – 4.9 + 1.9 – 0.3 – 0.1
2021 + 95.3 +144.3 – 46.2 – 27.3 –18.9 + 1.5 –20.5 + 0.7 – 3.5 – 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.2
2021 Apr. + 9.8 + 19.6 – 9.8 – 6.6 – 3.2 – 0.0 – 3.1 + 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1
May + 20.6 + 26.0 – 5.3 – 3.0 – 2.4 + 0.4 – 2.8 + 0.5 – 0.5 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.3
June – 19.8 – 8.5 – 10.5 – 7.8 – 2.7 + 0.2 – 2.9 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.2
July + 28.2 + 33.9 – 5.0 – 2.8 – 2.2 + 0.3 – 2.5 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.6
Aug. + 6.4 + 10.0 – 2.9 – 4.2 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 – – 0.0
Sep. – 6.7 – 5.4 – 0.3 + 2.1 – 2.4 – 0.6 – 1.8 – 0.8 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
Oct. + 28.8 + 16.4 + 13.2 + 11.0 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 1.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 13.3 + 21.5 – 7.6 – 6.4 – 1.2 + 0.8 – 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.6
Dec. – 25.9 – 31.2 + 4.1 + 3.9 + 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 0.4
2022 Jan. + 49.6 + 36.3 + 14.1 + 15.0 – 0.9 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.2
Feb. + 11.9 + 13.6 – 1.6 – 0.4 – 1.2 – 0.8 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
Mar. – 4.1 – 9.0 + 6.6 + 7.9 – 1.3 + 0.5 – 1.8 – 1.8 + 0.0 – + 0.0 + 0.3
Domestic government End of year or month *
2019 237.1 74.7 154.9 76.0 78.9 26.1 52.8 3.4 4.1 24.7 2.2 0.2
2020 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 –
2021 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2021 Apr. 213.7 80.5 127.0 47.8 79.3 19.8 59.5 2.6 3.5 25.4 2.0 –
May 218.4 88.4 123.8 45.8 78.0 19.8 58.2 2.6 3.5 25.3 2.0 –
June 209.0 81.5 121.5 43.8 77.6 20.3 57.3 2.6 3.4 25.2 2.0 0.2
July 211.8 86.6 119.2 41.6 77.7 20.6 57.0 2.6 3.4 25.2 2.0 –
Aug. 207.9 84.1 117.9 38.8 79.0 21.2 57.9 2.6 3.4 25.3 2.0 –
Sep. 210.8 84.8 120.1 42.2 78.0 20.8 57.2 2.5 3.4 25.2 2.0 –
Oct. 213.9 85.2 122.9 43.5 79.5 22.2 57.3 2.5 3.3 25.2 2.0 –
Nov. 213.7 86.1 121.8 41.4 80.4 23.5 56.9 2.5 3.3 25.1 2.0 –
Dec. 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2022 Jan. 233.5 88.5 139.2 59.2 80.0 24.0 56.0 2.5 3.3 25.5 2.0 –
Feb. 237.9 91.4 140.7 61.0 79.7 23.7 56.0 2.5 3.3 25.5 2.0 –
Mar. 241.0 85.2 150.0 69.7 80.3 24.4 56.0 2.4 3.4 25.5 2.0 –
Changes *
2020 – 6.9 + 5.7 – 11.6 – 16.5 + 4.8 – 5.3 +10.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 + 0.7 – 0.1 – 0.2
2021 – 17.9 + 3.4 – 20.8 – 17.7 – 3.0 + 2.9 – 6.0 – 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.4 – 0.0 + 1.0
2021 Apr. – 0.7 + 3.7 – 4.4 – 3.5 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – –
May + 4.7 + 7.9 – 3.2 – 2.0 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 –
June – 9.3 – 6.9 – 2.3 – 2.0 – 0.4 + 0.5 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.2
July + 2.7 + 5.0 – 2.2 – 2.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.2
Aug. – 3.9 – 2.5 – 1.4 – 2.8 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 –
Sep. + 4.3 + 1.8 + 2.6 + 3.2 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 –
Oct. + 3.1 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 –
Nov. – 0.1 + 0.9 – 1.0 – 2.1 + 1.1 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 –
Dec. – 3.6 – 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 – 0.6 + 0.3 – 0.8 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 1.0
2022 Jan. + 23.4 + 6.1 + 17.4 + 17.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – – 0.3 – 0.0 – 1.0
Feb. + 4.3 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.7 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 –
Mar. + 3.2 – 6.2 + 9.4 + 8.7 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities.
2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
35•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont´d)
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic enterprises and households                            End of year or month *
2019 3,423.9 2,161.6 661.4 126.7 534.7 26.6 508.0 571.8 29.1 7.8 12.6 0.0
2020 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2021 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2021 Apr. 3,721.9 2,514.1 624.5 121.1 503.4 27.1 476.4 560.1 23.2 9.0 12.3 1.0
May 3,737.9 2,532.1 622.4 120.1 502.3 27.5 474.9 560.6 22.8 9.2 12.3 0.7
June 3,727.4 2,530.5 614.2 114.3 499.9 27.1 472.8 560.0 22.6 9.3 12.4 0.7
July 3,752.8 2,559.4 611.4 113.8 497.7 27.1 470.6 559.5 22.4 9.3 12.3 1.5
Aug. 3,763.1 2,571.9 610.0 112.3 497.6 27.0 470.7 559.0 22.3 9.1 12.3 1.5
Sep. 3,749.4 2,563.1 606.0 110.5 495.5 27.0 468.5 558.2 22.1 8.9 12.4 1.6
Oct. 3,775.1 2,579.2 616.4 120.2 496.2 27.0 469.3 557.6 22.0 8.7 13.4 1.4
Nov. 3,788.6 2,599.8 610.0 115.7 494.3 26.3 467.9 557.4 21.4 8.5 13.3 0.9
Dec. 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2022 Jan. 3,792.4 2,602.4 610.8 116.6 494.1 25.5 468.6 558.3 20.8 8.4 15.0 1.1
Feb. 3,799.9 2,613.1 607.8 114.5 493.3 24.9 468.3 558.4 20.6 8.2 15.1 1.2
Mar. 3,792.7 2,610.4 605.1 113.7 491.4 24.8 466.6 556.6 20.5 8.2 15.2 1.6
Changes *
2020 +228.5 +268.0 – 21.1 + 1.5 –22.6 + 0.5 –23.0 –13.9 – 4.6 + 1.2 – 0.2 + 0.1
2021 +113.2 +140.9 – 25.5 – 9.6 –15.9 – 1.4 –14.5 + 0.9 – 3.1 – 0.6 + 2.8 + 0.2
2021 Apr. + 10.5 + 15.8 – 5.4 – 3.2 – 2.2 + 0.1 – 2.3 + 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
May + 16.0 + 18.1 – 2.1 – 1.0 – 1.1 + 0.4 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.3
June – 10.5 – 1.6 – 8.2 – 5.8 – 2.4 – 0.4 – 2.0 – 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0
July + 25.4 + 28.9 – 2.7 – 0.5 – 2.2 + 0.0 – 2.2 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.8
Aug. + 10.3 + 12.4 – 1.5 – 1.5 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.0
Sep. – 11.0 – 7.2 – 2.9 – 1.1 – 1.7 – 0.2 – 1.5 – 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
Oct. + 25.7 + 16.0 + 10.3 + 9.7 + 0.7 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 1.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 13.5 + 20.6 – 6.6 – 4.3 – 2.3 – 0.6 – 1.7 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.6
Dec. – 22.3 – 27.5 + 4.1 + 3.3 + 0.8 – 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 1.8 – 0.6
2022 Jan. + 26.2 + 30.2 – 3.3 – 2.3 – 1.0 – 0.4 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.8
Feb. + 7.5 + 10.7 – 3.0 – 2.1 – 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2
Mar. – 7.4 – 2.7 – 2.8 – 0.8 – 2.0 – 0.1 – 1.9 – 1.8 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2019 1,031.5 614.4 399.7 81.1 318.6 15.5 303.1 6.7 10.7 2.4 10.1 0.0
2020 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2021 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2021 Apr. 1,124.8 742.4 367.7 83.4 284.3 15.2 269.2 5.8 8.9 2.2 9.6 1.0
May 1,128.0 746.8 366.7 83.6 283.1 15.7 267.4 5.8 8.7 2.2 9.6 0.7
June 1,115.6 742.7 358.5 77.6 280.9 15.4 265.5 5.8 8.6 2.3 9.6 0.7
July 1,133.9 760.0 359.6 80.7 278.9 15.4 263.6 5.7 8.5 2.3 9.6 1.5
Aug. 1,148.4 775.4 358.9 79.9 279.0 15.3 263.7 5.7 8.5 2.3 9.5 1.5
Sep. 1,141.4 772.1 355.1 78.1 277.0 15.5 261.5 5.7 8.5 2.3 9.6 1.6
Oct. 1,160.1 779.7 366.3 88.4 277.9 15.6 262.3 5.7 8.4 2.3 10.6 1.4
Nov. 1,166.2 791.7 361.1 84.3 276.7 15.5 261.3 5.5 8.0 2.3 10.5 0.9
Dec. 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2022 Jan. 1,170.4 795.8 361.6 85.3 276.4 15.9 260.4 5.1 7.8 2.4 12.2 1.1
Feb. 1,165.1 793.2 359.0 83.4 275.6 15.4 260.2 5.2 7.8 2.2 12.2 1.2
Mar. 1,171.9 802.1 356.9 82.7 274.2 15.5 258.7 5.2 7.8 2.3 12.3 1.6
Changes *
2020 + 81.0 +101.2 – 18.0 + 7.0 –25.0 – 0.4 –24.6 – 0.8 – 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.1
2021 + 28.5 + 47.1 – 16.8 – 1.2 –15.7 + 0.5 –16.2 – 0.5 – 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.2
2021 Apr. – 10.0 – 5.7 – 4.2 – 1.8 – 2.4 – 0.0 – 2.4 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.1
May + 3.2 + 4.4 – 1.1 + 0.2 – 1.3 + 0.5 – 1.8 + 0.0 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.3
June – 12.3 – 4.2 – 8.0 – 6.0 – 2.0 – 0.3 – 1.8 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0
July + 18.3 + 17.4 + 1.1 + 3.1 – 2.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.8
Aug. + 14.6 + 15.4 – 0.8 – 0.8 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0
Sep. – 5.4 – 2.5 – 2.9 – 1.1 – 1.8 – 0.1 – 1.6 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2
Oct. + 18.7 + 7.7 + 11.1 + 10.2 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 6.1 + 11.9 – 5.4 – 3.9 – 1.5 – 0.1 – 1.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.6
Dec. – 23.4 – 26.5 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.8 – 0.6
2022 Jan. + 27.8 + 30.8 – 2.6 – 2.1 – 0.5 + 0.1 – 0.7 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.8
Feb. – 5.3 – 2.6 – 2.7 – 1.9 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
Mar. + 6.6 + 8.8 – 2.2 – 0.7 – 1.5 + 0.0 – 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3
4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
36•
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2  
by creditor group by creditor group 
Domestic households Domestic households
PeriodDeposits of
domestic
households
and
non-profit
institutions,
total Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individualsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tions Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individuals
End of year or month *
2019 2,392.4 1,547.2 1,507.9 266.3 1,081.6 160.1 39.3 261.7 248.3 20.8 190.2 37.3
2020 2,539.5 1,713.8 1,672.7 291.1 1,215.4 166.2 41.1 258.6 245.1 19.3 190.5 35.2
2021 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2021 Oct. 2,615.0 1,799.4 1,755.6 310.2 1,279.3 166.2 43.8 250.1 237.8 18.0 185.8 33.9
Nov. 2,622.4 1,808.2 1,763.6 310.5 1,287.6 165.6 44.5 249.0 237.1 18.1 185.2 33.8
Dec. 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2022 Jan. 2,621.9 1,806.6 1,761.8 310.8 1,285.6 165.4 44.8 249.1 237.5 18.2 184.0 35.2
Feb. 2,634.8 1,819.9 1,774.2 310.4 1,299.6 164.3 45.7 248.8 236.9 18.4 183.4 35.1
Mar. 2,620.8 1,808.3 1,761.9 303.6 1,296.3 162.0 46.4 248.3 236.3 18.6 182.9 34.9
Changes *
2020 +147.5 +166.9 +165.0 +26.0 +131.5 + 7.5 + 1.8 – 3.1 – 3.2 – 1.5 – 1.6 –0.2
2021 + 84.7 +93.8 +90.3 +17.3 +73.7 – 0.6 + 3.5 – 8.6 – 7.2 – 1.1 – 4.7 –1.3
2021 Oct. + 7.0 + 8.4 + 9.0 + 4.7 + 4.6 – 0.3 – 0.7 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 –0.1
Nov. + 7.4 + 8.7 + 8.0 + 0.3 + 8.3 – 0.6 + 0.7 – 1.2 – 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 –0.2
Dec. + 1.1 – 1.0 – 1.2 – 1.8 + 0.8 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.4 +0.2
2022 Jan. – 1.6 – 0.5 – 0.6 + 2.2 – 2.8 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.2 –0.1
Feb. + 12.8 +13.3 +12.4 – 0.5 +14.0 – 1.1 + 0.9 – 0.4 – 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 –0.2
Mar. – 14.0 –11.6 –12.4 – 6.8 – 3.3 – 2.3 + 0.8 – 0.5 – 0.5 + 0.2 – 0.5 –0.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional.Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
marked.  1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
€ billion
Deposits    
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
PeriodDomestic
government,
total TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans
End of year or month *
2019 237.1 11.2 5.4 1.5 4.2 0.1 11.6 53.8 21.1 17.1 14.5 1.0 13.1
2020 229.5 48.6 4.8 7.2 36.5 0.0 11.3 46.5 21.2 11.4 13.2 0.7 14.1
2021 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2021 Oct. 213.9 45.2 6.3 2.9 36.0 0.0 11.4 49.1 23.6 13.4 11.5 0.6 13.8
Nov. 213.7 45.5 6.7 2.8 36.0 0.1 11.4 47.4 22.3 13.0 11.6 0.6 13.7
Dec. 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2022 Jan. 233.5 45.5 4.4 5.0 36.0 0.1 11.7 59.3 27.1 20.2 11.3 0.6 13.8
Feb. 237.9 42.8 4.7 2.1 36.0 0.1 11.7 59.7 26.3 21.2 11.6 0.5 13.8
Mar. 241.0 42.1 4.9 1.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 61.7 23.5 26.1 11.6 0.5 13.8
Changes *
2020 – 6.9 +37.3 –0.6 +5.7 +32.2 –0.0 –0.3 –7.0 +0.2 –5.7 –1.3 –0.2 +1.0
2021 –17.9 –5.0 –0.5 –4.1 –0.4 +0.0 +0.3 +1.0 +0.6 +2.3 –1.8 –0.1 +0.0
2021 Oct. + 3.1 +0.0 –0.1 +0.1 –0.0 – +0.0 –0.0 –0.5 +0.4 +0.1 –0.0 +0.0
Nov. – 0.1 +0.4 +0.4 –0.0 +0.0 +0.0 +0.0 –1.6 –1.3 –0.4 +0.1 –0.0 –0.1
Dec. – 3.6 –2.0 –2.4 +0.3 +0.0 –0.0 +0.3 –0.0 –0.6 +0.9 –0.3 –0.0 +0.4
2022 Jan. +23.4 +2.0 +0.2 +1.8 –0.0 –0.0 +0.0 +11.9 +5.4 +6.4 +0.0 –0.0 –0.3
Feb. + 4.3 –2.7 +0.2 –2.9 –0.0 –0.0 +0.0 +0.5 –0.8 +1.0 +0.3 –0.0 +0.0
Mar. + 3.2 –0.6 +0.2 –0.9 +0.0 –0.0 +0.0 +1.9 –2.9 +4.8 –0.0 –0.0 –0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and DeutscheTelekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”.
Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date
are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
37•
IV. Banks
Savings deposits  3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year  2
of which:
Domestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsup to and
including
1 year Totalup to and
including
2 yearsmore than
2 years TotalDomestic
householdsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsBank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)  5Liabilities
arising
from repos Period
End of year or month *
13.3 45.6 216.1 11.2 204.9 565.1 558.1 7.0 18.4 5.4 2.4 –2019
13.5 40.1 218.5 12.0 206.5 552.0 545.7 6.3 15.1 6.7 2.7 –2020
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 –2021
12.4 31.8 218.3 11.4 207.0 551.9 545.8 6.2 13.6 6.4 2.8 –2021 Oct.
11.8 31.4 217.5 10.9 206.7 551.9 545.6 6.3 13.4 6.2 2.8 – Nov.
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 – Dec.
11.6 31.4 217.8 9.6 208.2 553.2 547.1 6.1 13.0 6.1 2.9 –2022 Jan.
11.9 31.1 217.6 9.5 208.2 553.2 547.2 6.0 12.8 6.0 2.9 – Feb.
11.9 31.1 217.2 9.3 207.9 551.4 545.5 5.9 12.8 6.0 2.9 – Mar.
Changes *
+ 0.2 – 5.5 + 2.4 +0.9 + 1.6 –13.0 –12.3 –0.7 – 3.3 +1.3 + 0.2 –2020
– 1.4 – 8.4 – 0.2 –1.9 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 1.5 –0.1 – 1.9 –0.6 + 0.2 –2021
– 0.4 – 0.6 – 0.2 –0.1 – 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.5 +0.0 – 0.1 –0.2 + 0.0 –2021 Oct.
– 0.5 – 0.4 – 0.8 –0.5 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.1 +0.1 – 0.1 –0.2 + 0.0 – Nov.
+ 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.6 –0.8 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 1.6 –0.1 – 0.2 –0.1 + 0.0 – Dec.
– 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.4 –0.5 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 –0.1 – 0.2 +0.0 + 0.0 –2022 Jan.
+ 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 –0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 –0.0 – 0.2 –0.1 + 0.0 – Feb.
– 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.5 –0.2 – 0.3 – 1.8 – 1.7 –0.1 – 0.1 +0.0 + 0.0 – Mar.
registered debt securities.  2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Table IV.12).  3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsofootnote 2).  4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2,4Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
65.3 37.4 8.6 14.0 5.4 0.0 106.8 10.8 48.8 46.2 1.1 –2019
68.5 43.2 8.0 12.4 4.9 0.0 66.0 10.9 32.9 21.4 0.8 –2020
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 –2021
62.3 40.2 5.3 12.3 4.5 0.0 57.4 15.1 21.9 19.6 0.8 –2021 Oct.
66.0 44.0 5.4 12.2 4.4 0.0 54.7 13.1 20.1 20.6 0.8 – Nov.
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 – Dec.
64.7 41.8 6.5 12.1 4.4 0.0 64.0 15.1 27.6 20.6 0.8 –2022 Jan.
68.8 45.4 7.0 12.0 4.3 0.0 66.6 15.0 30.7 20.1 0.8 – Feb.
67.4 43.3 7.5 12.2 4.4 0.0 69.8 13.6 34.9 20.5 0.8 – Mar.
Changes *
+3.5 +5.9 – 0.6 –1.3 – 0.5 –0.0 –40.8 +0.2 –15.9 –24.8 – 0.3 –2020
+2.8 +5.6 – 2.0 –0.2 – 0.5 – –16.8 –2.2 –13.9 –0.6 + 0.1 –2021
+0.1 +0.0 – 0.2 +0.3 – 0.0 – + 3.0 +1.0 + 0.9 +1.2 – 0.0 –2021 Oct.
+3.7 +3.8 + 0.1 –0.1 – 0.1 – – 2.6 –2.0 – 1.7 +1.0 + 0.1 – Nov.
+4.9 +4.5 + 0.6 –0.2 + 0.0 – – 6.4 –5.2 – 1.2 –0.1 + 0.0 – Dec.
–6.2 –6.6 + 0.5 +0.0 – 0.0 – +15.7 +7.1 + 8.6 +0.0 – 0.0 –2022 Jan.
+4.0 +3.6 + 0.6 –0.1 – 0.0 – + 2.5 –0.0 + 3.1 –0.5 – 0.0 – Feb.
–1.4 –2.1 + 0.5 +0.2 + 0.1 – + 3.3 –1.5 + 4.3 +0.5 + 0.0 – Mar.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Federal Railways Fund,
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund,
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund.  2 Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities.  3 Including deposits under savings and loan
contracts.  4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
38•
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months'
noticeat more than 3
months' notice
Period Total Total Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeMemo
item:
Interest
credited
on
savings
depositsnon-banks,
total Totalof which:
With
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsforeign
non-banks
End of year or month *
2019 581.8 575.2 540.5 313.2 34.7 24.7 6.6 5.9 2.0 35.9 33.2 25.1 2.6
2020 566.8 560.6 533.3 288.0 27.3 18.0 6.3 5.7 1.8 30.2 28.3 22.1 1.9
2021 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 1.5 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2021 Nov. 565.8 559.9 535.6 267.9 24.3 15.1 5.9 5.4 0.1 24.9 24.8 19.6 0.2
Dec. 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 0.7 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2022 Jan. 566.7 560.8 537.5 266.3 23.3 14.3 5.9 5.4 0.1 24.3 24.2 19.2 0.2
Feb. 566.7 560.9 537.8 266.6 23.1 14.1 5.8 5.4 0.1 24.1 23.9 19.0 0.2
Mar. 564.8 559.0 536.2 265.0 22.9 13.9 5.8 5.3 0.1 24.1 23.9 19.0 0.2
Changes *
2020 –14.8 –14.5 –7.2 –24.6 –7.3 –6.7 –0.3 –0.2 . –5.7 –4.9 –3.0 –0.7
2021 +0.3 +0.7 +3.9 –18.5 –3.2 –3.2 –0.4 –0.3 . –5.2 –3.5 –2.3 –1.7
2021 Nov. –0.3 –0.2 –0.0 –3.7 –0.2 –0.2 –0.0 –0.0 . –0.3 –0.3 –0.2 +0.0
Dec. +1.4 +1.4 +1.6 +1.1 –0.2 –0.3 –0.0 –0.0 . –0.2 –0.2 –0.1 +0.0
2022 Jan. –0.5 –0.4 +0.3 –2.7 –0.8 –0.5 –0.0 –0.0 . –0.4 –0.4 –0.3 –0.0
Feb. +0.0 +0.1 +0.3 +0.2 –0.2 –0.2 –0.0 –0.0 . –0.2 –0.2 –0.2 –0.0
Mar. –1.9 –1.8 –1.6 –1.5 –0.2 –0.2 –0.1 –0.0 . +0.0 +0.0 –0.0 –0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified as timedeposits.  2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
basic rate of interest.  3 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
securities.
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
of which:
with maturities ofNon-negotiable
bearer debt
securities and
money market
paper  6 Subordinated
up to
and including 1 yearmore than 1 year up to
and including 2 years
Period TotalFloating
rate
bonds  1Zero
coupon
bonds  1,2Foreign
currency
bonds  3,4Certifi-
cates
of
deposit Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5more
than
2 years Totalof which:
with
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsnegotiable
debt
securitiesnon-
negotiable
debt
securities
End of year or month *
2019 1,140.7 123.5 28.6 367.7 96.7 117.7 2.6 23.6 4.2 999.4 0.9 0.7 31.5 0.4
2020 1,119.0 117.1 12.7 313.6 89.4 94.3 1.5 23.8 3.1 1,000.9 1.1 0.9 34.8 0.4
2021 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2021 Nov. 1,190.4 109.0 14.3 336.4 103.2 109.8 2.1 18.0 4.4 1,062.6 0.8 0.6 35.3 0.1
Dec. 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2022 Jan. 1,187.6 104.8 14.6 336.1 94.2 102.6 2.2 17.8 4.5 1,067.3 0.7 0.5 34.4 0.1
Feb. 1,199.1 102.5 14.0 330.1 92.3 101.1 3.0 17.6 4.6 1,080.4 0.5 0.4 34.4 0.1
Mar. 1,219.8 100.5 14.2 337.0 105.8 114.7 2.9 17.8 4.4 1,087.4 0.6 0.5 35.6 0.1
Changes *
2020 –20.5 –5.2 –0.8 –54.1 –22.3 –22.2 – 1.1 +0.2 –1.1 +1.5 +0.3 +0.2 +2.1 –0.0
2021 +54.0 –10.3 +0.8 +17.6 +9.4 +12.6 + 0.4 –5.9 +1.3 +47.3 +0.4 +0.3 –0.2 –0.3
2021 Nov. +12.0 –0.2 +1.5 +6.5 +7.9 +8.1 + 0.0 –0.1 +0.0 +3.9 +0.1 +0.0 +0.6 –
Dec. –16.8 –2.2 –0.8 –5.0 –4.4 –3.0 – 0.3 +0.1 +0.1 –13.8 +0.1 +0.0 –0.7 –
2022 Jan. +14.0 –2.0 +1.1 +4.7 –4.5 –4.2 + 0.3 –0.3 +0.1 +18.5 –0.2 –0.2 +0.1 –
Feb. +11.4 –2.2 –0.6 –6.1 –1.9 –1.5 + 0.8 –0.2 +0.0 +13.1 –0.2 –0.1 +0.0 –
Mar. +20.8 –2.0 +0.3 +6.9 +13.4 +13.6 – 0.1 +0.2 –0.2 +7.0 +0.1 +0.1 +1.2 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies.  2 Issue value when
floated.  3 Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreigncurrencies.  4 Bonds denominated in non-euro area currencies.  5 Negotiable bearer debt
securities and money market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%.
6 Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see
also Table IV.10, footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
39•
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks
(MFIs)  6Deposits of non-
banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans
End of
year/monthNum-
ber
of
associ-
ationsBalance
sheet
total  1Credit
bal-
ances
and
loans
(ex-
cluding
building
loans)  2Building
loans  3Bank
debt
secur-
ities  4Loans
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsInterim
and
bridging
loansOther
building
loansSecur- 
ities (in-
cluding
Treasury
bills
and
Treasury
discount
paper)  5Deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight
and time
depositsDeposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight and
time de-
posits  7Bearer
debt
secur-
ities
out-
stand-
ingCapital
(includ-
ing pub-
lished
re-
serves)  8Memo
item:
New
con-
tracts
entered
into in
year or
month  9
All building and loan associations
2021 18 253.2 30.0 0.0 15.7 10.1 130.5 36.7 26.5 3.0 30.1 184.4 9.2 4.2 12.4 71.4
2022 Jan. 18 253.4 30.2 0.0 15.4 10.1 130.8 36.9 26.8 3.0 30.6 184.7 9.2 4.1 12.2 5.3
Feb. 18 254.1 30.0 0.0 15.4 10.0 131.1 37.4 26.6 3.0 31.0 184.9 9.2 4.2 12.2 5.5
Mar. 18 255.8 31.2 0.0 15.4 10.0 131.9 37.9 25.7 3.0 32.4 184.9 9.2 4.2 12.3 6.1
Private building and Ioan associations
2022 Jan. 10 177.4 14.9 – 6.7 7.4 102.1 31.5 12.7 1.7 27.7 120.1 8.8 4.1 8.3 3.2
Feb. 10 178.1 15.0 – 6.8 7.4 102.2 31.8 12.4 1.7 28.3 120.2 8.8 4.2 8.4 3.3
Mar. 10 179.7 15.9 – 6.9 7.3 102.9 32.2 11.8 1.7 29.7 120.1 8.8 4.2 8.4 3.7
Public building and Ioan associations
2022 Jan. 8 76.0 15.3 0.0 8.7 2.7 28.7 5.5 14.1 1.3 2.9 64.6 0.4 – 3.9 2.0
Feb. 8 76.0 15.0 0.0 8.7 2.7 28.9 5.6 14.1 1.3 2.7 64.8 0.4 – 3.9 2.2
Mar. 8 76.2 15.3 0.0 8.5 2.7 29.0 5.7 13.9 1.3 2.7 64.8 0.4 – 3.9 2.4
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Capital promised Capital disbursed Changes in deposits
under savings and
loan contracts AllocationsDisbursement
commitments
outstanding at
end of periodInterest and
repayments
received on
building loans  11
Deposits under
savings and
loan contractsLoans under
savings and
loan contracts  10
PeriodAmounts
paid into
savings
and
loan ac-
counts  10Interest
credited
on
deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsRepay-
ments
of
deposits
under
cancelled
savings
and
loan
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Net
alloca-
tions  12 Total Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loans Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loansNewly
granted
interim
and
bridging
loans
and
other
building
loans Totalof
which:
Under
alloc-
ated
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Repay-
ments
during
quarterMemo
item:
Housing
bonuses
re-
ceived  13
All building and loan associations
2021 27.7 2.0 9.1 52.3 27.7 47.1 18.3 4.0 4.2 3.4 24.7 18.6 6.3 6.1 4.9 0.1
2022 Jan. 2.4 0.0 0.7 4.4 2.2 3.6 1.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.9 19.0 6.3 0.5 0.0
Feb. 2.3 0.0 0.7 4.7 2.2 3.7 1.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.9 19.7 6.4 0.5 0.0
Mar. 2.3 0.0 0.8 5.0 2.4 4.5 1.6 0.3 0.4 0.3 2.6 20.0 6.5 0.5 ... 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2022 Jan. 1.6 0.0 0.4 3.3 1.6 2.8 1.0 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.5 14.1 3.5 0.4 0.0
Feb. 1.5 0.0 0.4 3.3 1.5 2.8 1.0 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.6 14.4 3.5 0.4 0.0
Mar. 1.5 0.0 0.4 3.4 1.7 3.5 1.2 0.2 0.3 0.2 2.0 14.5 3.5 0.4 ... 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2022 Jan. 0.9 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.6 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.9 2.9 0.1 0.0
Feb. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.4 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 5.2 3.0 0.1
Mar. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.6 0.8 1.0 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.5 5.5 3.0 0.1 ... 0.0
* Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures for
the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 See Table IV.2,
footnote 1.  2 Including claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from
registered debt securities and central bank credit balances.  3 Loans under savings and
loan contracts and interim and bridging loans.  4 Including money market paper and
small amounts of other securities issued by banks.  5 Including equalisation claims.
6 Including liabilities to building and loan associations.  7 Including small amounts of
savings deposits.  8 Including participation rights capital and fund for general bankingrisks. 9 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
new contracts.  10 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital disbursed".  11 Including housing
bonuses credited.  12 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans.  13 The amounts already
credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into
savings and loan accounts" and "Interest and repayments received on building loans".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2019 52 198 1,453.0 407.3 389.2 216.0 173.2 18.1 534.3 436.1 19.7 416.4 98.2 511.5 361.7
2020 50 206 1,552.2 376.7 364.0 213.2 150.8 12.7 504.8 409.6 14.3 395.3 95.2 670.7 523.6
2021 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2021 May 49 203 1,476.1 430.6 417.9 257.9 160.0 12.6 493.8 405.2 13.1 392.2 88.6 551.7 415.5
June 49 203 1,475.7 421.2 407.8 242.9 164.9 13.4 492.9 407.5 13.0 394.5 85.5 561.6 417.1
July 50 204 1,524.4 444.9 431.0 266.8 164.2 13.8 494.0 410.8 13.2 397.6 83.2 585.5 436.6
Aug. 50 204 1,537.2 448.2 434.3 273.1 161.2 13.9 489.2 407.3 13.2 394.1 81.9 599.8 437.4
Sep. 50 205 1,518.6 452.9 439.1 279.3 159.8 13.8 485.2 404.4 13.1 391.3 80.8 580.5 415.3
Oct. 52 207 1,552.0 495.3 481.3 310.3 171.0 13.9 497.7 417.4 13.3 404.1 80.3 559.0 402.4
Nov. 50 204 1,595.0 495.2 481.1 306.5 174.6 14.2 506.4 425.8 13.0 412.7 80.6 593.4 436.9
Dec. 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2022 Jan. 50 209 1,618.8 563.0 548.5 366.5 181.9 14.6 537.7 460.1 13.1 447.0 77.6 518.1 378.0
Feb. 50 209 1,634.4 566.4 551.9 379.5 172.4 14.5 539.7 464.4 13.2 451.1 75.3 528.3 384.8
Changes *
2020 –2 +9 +104.2 –20.3 –15.5 –2.8 –12.7 –4.8 +0.2 –1.0 –5.4 +4.4 +1.2 +164.2 +179.6
2021 +1 +1 –48.4 +87.3 +87.1 +84.9 +2.2 +0.3 –26.2 –6.5 –1.3 –5.1 –19.7 –136.9 –128.1
2021 June – – –1.6 –11.5 –12.2 –15.0 +2.8 +0.7 –7.0 –2.9 –0.1 –2.8 –4.1 + 8.6 – 1.1
July +1 +1 +48.7 +23.4 +23.0 +24.0 –0.9 +0.4 +0.7 +3.1 +0.2 +2.9 –2.4 + 24.0 +19.5
Aug. – – +12.6 +3.1 +3.0 +6.3 –3.2 +0.0 –5.5 –4.1 +0.0 –4.1 –1.4 + 14.1 + 0.3
Sep. – +1 –19.8 +2.9 +3.1 +6.1 –3.1 –0.1 –8.8 –7.0 –0.1 –6.9 –1.8 – 20.4 –24.3
Oct. +2 +2 +33.7 +42.6 +42.5 +31.0 +11.5 +0.1 +13.0 +13.4 +0.2 +13.2 –0.3 – 21.2 –12.6
Nov. –2 –3 +43.0 –2.3 –2.5 –3.7 +1.2 +0.2 +4.4 +5.0 –0.2 +5.2 –0.6 + 33.0 +32.3
Dec. +1 +3 –90.4 –24.0 –23.2 –8.6 –14.6 –0.8 –9.2 –7.0 –0.1 –6.8 –2.2 – 57.3 –32.5
2022 Jan. –1 +2 +113.7 +90.4 +89.2 +68.7 +20.5 +1.2 +36.3 +37.6 +0.2 +37.4 –1.4 – 18.6 –27.9
Feb. – – +15.8 +3.8 +3.9 +13.0 –9.0 –0.1 +3.3 +5.4 +0.1 +5.3 –2.1 + 10.4 + 7.1
Foreign subsidiaries                                           End of year or month *
2019 15 41 235.2 52.5 46.7 18.3 28.4 5.7 139.0 116.1 14.4 101.7 22.9 43.7 0.0
2020 12 36 229.5 44.8 39.9 17.4 22.5 4.9 139.7 114.4 13.1 101.4 25.3 44.9 0.0
2021 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2021 May 12 36 230.8 41.9 37.0 18.5 18.5 4.9 136.8 112.7 12.3 100.4 24.2 52.2 0.0
June 12 36 235.5 43.6 38.9 19.9 19.0 4.7 136.8 112.5 12.0 100.4 24.3 55.1 0.0
July 12 35 236.5 44.7 39.6 20.1 19.5 5.1 136.4 112.6 12.0 100.6 23.8 55.4 0.0
Aug. 12 35 236.6 44.0 39.1 18.9 20.2 5.0 137.7 113.5 12.1 101.5 24.2 54.8 0.0
Sep. 13 36 244.6 51.9 47.1 21.9 25.2 4.8 138.5 114.5 12.2 102.3 24.0 54.1 0.0
Oct. 12 35 246.1 50.9 45.9 24.3 21.6 5.0 138.5 115.4 12.5 102.9 23.1 56.6 0.0
Nov. 12 35 247.1 52.9 46.7 24.0 22.8 6.2 138.5 115.4 12.6 102.8 23.1 55.7 0.0
Dec. 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2022 Jan. 12 35 245.1 45.9 40.9 20.1 20.8 5.0 140.6 117.5 12.7 104.8 23.1 58.5 0.0
Feb. 12 35 245.7 46.2 41.4 21.1 20.3 4.8 140.6 117.7 12.7 105.0 22.9 58.9 0.0
Changes *
2020 –3 –5 –0.8 –5.3 –5.0 –1.0 –4.0 –0.3 +3.3 +0.8 –1.3 +2.1 +2.4 + 1.2 ± 0.0
2021 ±0 –1 +12.0 +3.8 +2.8 +3.4 –0.5 +1.0 –2.5 –0.5 –0.5 –0.0 –2.1 + 10.8 ± 0.0
2021 June – – +3.5 +1.1 +1.4 +1.4 +0.1 –0.3 –0.6 –0.8 –0.3 –0.5 +0.2 + 2.9 ± 0.0
July – –1 +0.8 +1.1 +0.7 +0.2 +0.4 +0.4 –0.5 +0.1 –0.0 +0.1 –0.6 + 0.3 ± 0.0
Aug. – – –0.0 –0.7 –0.6 –1.3 +0.7 –0.1 +1.2 +0.8 +0.0 +0.8 +0.4 – 0.5 ± 0.0
Sep. +1 +1 +7.0 +7.3 +7.6 +3.0 +4.6 –0.3 +0.4 +0.5 +0.1 +0.4 –0.2 – 0.7 ± 0.0
Oct. –1 –1 +1.5 –0.9 –1.1 +2.4 –3.6 +0.2 –0.0 +0.9 +0.3 +0.5 –0.9 + 2.5 ± 0.0
Nov. – – –0.2 +1.3 +0.3 –0.4 +0.6 +1.0 –0.6 –0.6 +0.1 –0.7 +0.0 – 0.9 ± 0.0
Dec. – – –1.4 –2.3 –2.4 –3.2 +0.8 +0.1 +0.9 +0.8 +0.0 +0.7 +0.1 – 0.0 ± 0.0
2022 Jan. – – –1.9 –5.0 –3.9 –0.7 –3.0 –1.4 +0.7 +0.8 +0.0 +0.8 –0.1 + 2.6 ± 0.0
Feb. – – +0.8 +0.4 +0.6 +1.0 –0.4 –0.2 +0.1 +0.3 +0.0 +0.3 –0.2 + 0.3 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated fromthe flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always
to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
894.1 613.6 453.2 160.4 280.5 12.7 10.1 2.7 267.8 94.6 53.4 410.9 361.1 2019
872.2 588.5 431.8 156.7 283.7 11.7 10.2 1.5 272.0 61.5 49.9 568.6 523.1 2020
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 2021
907.0 604.3 431.2 173.1 302.7 8.6 7.1 1.5 294.0 74.9 50.2 444.0 414.5 2021 May
904.8 607.4 438.0 169.4 297.4 8.3 6.8 1.5 289.0 72.1 51.0 447.9 415.9 June
930.2 622.8 444.9 177.9 307.3 8.7 7.2 1.5 298.7 74.7 51.2 468.4 435.5 July
932.9 624.6 438.7 185.9 308.3 8.5 7.0 1.5 299.8 81.6 51.3 471.3 436.0 Aug.
937.3 618.3 432.9 185.4 319.0 9.6 7.8 1.8 309.4 81.1 51.6 448.6 414.2 Sep.
982.8 654.6 469.2 185.4 328.2 9.0 7.2 1.8 319.2 83.7 51.7 433.8 401.3 Oct.
988.0 655.8 458.2 197.6 332.2 8.9 7.1 1.8 323.3 82.6 51.9 472.4 435.9 Nov.
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 Dec.
1,066.8 659.1 457.3 201.8 407.7 9.5 7.7 1.8 398.2 86.1 51.8 414.1 377.6 2022 Jan.
1,079.5 664.5 466.8 197.6 415.0 9.8 8.1 1.7 405.2 82.7 51.8 420.4 383.8 Feb.
Changes *
– 9.2 –13.3 –21.4 + 8.1 + 4.1 – 1.0 + 0.3 – 1.4 + 5.1 –28.1 – 3.5 +157.6 + 162.0 2020
+71.1 +43.1 +31.0 +12.0 + 28.1 – 3.6 – 3.9 + 0.3 +31.7 + 0.1 + 1.4 –130.8 – 119.7 2021
– 5.2 +0.3 +6.7 –6.5 – 5.5 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.0 – 5.2 – 4.1 +0.8 + 3.9 + 1.4 2021 June
+25.3 +15.3 +6.9 +8.3 +10.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 9.7 + 2.6 +0.2 + 20.5 + 19.5 July
+ 2.3 +1.4 –6.2 +7.5 + 0.9 – 0.2 – 0.2 – + 1.1 + 6.6 +0.2 + 3.0 + 0.6 Aug.
+ 1.8 –8.7 –5.8 –2.9 +10.5 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 9.4 – 1.6 +0.3 – 22.9 – 21.8 Sep.
+46.0 +36.8 +36.3 +0.5 + 9.2 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.0 + 9.8 + 2.9 +0.1 – 14.8 – 12.9 Oct.
+ 3.4 –0.4 –9.6 +9.2 + 3.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 4.0 – 2.4 +0.3 + 38.6 + 34.6 Nov.
–37.8 –17.3 +3.0 –20.3 –20.5 – 0.8 – 0.8 – 0.0 –19.7 –17.5 –0.7 – 34.5 – 32.5 Dec.
+114.7 +18.7 –4.0 +22.7 +96.0 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 +94.6 +20.4 +0.6 – 23.8 – 25.8 2022 Jan.
+13.3 +6.0 +9.6 –3.6 + 7.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 – 0.1 + 7.0 – 3.2 +0.0 + 6.3 + 6.3 Feb.
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
165.7 68.7 36.6 32.1 97.0 6.6 3.9 2.7 90.4 16.0 22.1 31.4 0.0 2019
163.4 59.6 34.1 25.5 103.8 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.1 16.6 20.3 29.2 0.0 2020
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 2021
165.8 57.0 32.1 24.9 108.9 6.5 4.0 2.4 102.4 17.3 20.4 27.3 0.0 2021 May
167.8 58.5 32.2 26.3 109.3 6.6 4.2 2.4 102.7 17.6 20.5 29.6 0.0 June
169.7 58.6 32.4 26.3 111.1 6.6 4.2 2.4 104.5 17.7 20.5 28.6 0.0 July
169.8 58.2 31.1 27.1 111.6 6.6 4.2 2.4 105.0 17.5 20.8 28.6 0.0 Aug.
175.4 61.5 30.0 31.5 113.9 6.6 4.2 2.4 107.3 18.4 20.7 30.0 0.0 Sep.
177.6 63.8 32.8 31.0 113.8 6.9 4.5 2.4 106.9 17.9 20.4 30.1 0.0 Oct.
177.5 62.6 31.1 31.5 114.9 7.0 4.6 2.4 107.9 17.5 20.3 31.7 0.0 Nov.
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 Dec.
179.6 64.8 33.2 31.7 114.7 7.2 4.8 2.4 107.5 15.9 19.9 29.8 0.0 2022 Jan.
180.9 66.3 33.7 32.7 114.5 7.4 5.0 2.4 107.1 15.8 19.8 29.3 0.0 Feb.
Changes *
+ 1.4 – 7.3 – 2.5 – 4.8 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.3 + 8.7 + 0.6 – 1.8 – 1.0 ± 0.0 2020
+12.1 + 3.2 – 1.1 + 4.3 + 8.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 2021
+ 1.2 +1.2 +0.1 +1.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.3 +0.1 + 1.9 ± 0.0 2021 June
+ 1.8 +0.1 +0.2 –0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.1 –0.1 – 1.1 ± 0.0 July
– 0.1 –0.5 –1.3 +0.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 – 0.2 +0.3 – 0.1 ± 0.0 Aug.
+ 4.9 +3.0 –1.0 +4.0 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.9 –0.0 + 1.2 ± 0.0 Sep.
+ 2.3 +2.3 +2.7 –0.4 – 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.5 –0.3 + 0.1 ± 0.0 Oct.
– 1.0 –1.6 –1.6 +0.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 – 0.4 –0.0 + 1.2 ± 0.0 Nov.
+ 0.9 +1.5 +1.9 –0.3 – 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 1.2 –0.0 – 1.2 ± 0.0 Dec.
+ 0.4 +0.4 +0.2 +0.2 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5 –0.5 – 1.2 ± 0.0 2022 Jan.
+ 1.5 +1.6 +0.5 +1.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.1 –0.1 – 0.5 ± 0.0 Feb.
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and
other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.  4 Excluding
subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of negotiable andnon-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Including subordinated
liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 3,656.9 0.1
2022 Mar. 15,714.8 157.1 156.8 3,927.3 3,770.5 0.0
p Apr. 15,812.7 158.1 157.8 ... ... ...
May . . . . . .
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
2022 Mar. 4,343,199 27.6 43,432 43,292 1,123,279 1,079,987 0
p Apr. 4,381,728 27.7 43,817 43,678 ... ... ...
May . . . . . . .
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2022 Mar. 9,285 7,023 3,009 13,901 8,047 102 1,927
Apr. 9,417 7,154 3,021 13,929 8,091 98 1,968
May . . . . . . .
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2022 Mar. 3,128,670 12,145 537,335 562,538 102,513
Apr. 3,154,265 12,984 550,922 562,634 100,923
May . . . . .
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 5 of the
Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum
reserve requirements (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies,
pursuant to Article 6(1)(a)).  3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2%between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at
1%. 4 Article 6(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the
application of minimum reserve requirements.  5 Average credit balances of credit
institutions at national central banks.  6 Average credit balances less required reserves
after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.  7 Required reserves after deduction of the
lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2005 Dec. 6 1.25 – 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr. 13 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 2002 Jan. 1 2.57 2009 Jan. 1 1.62
July 13 0.75 1.50 – 2.25 July 1 2.47 July 1 0.12
2006 Mar. 8 1.50 – 2.50 3.50 Nov. 9 0.50 1.25 – 2.00
June 15 1.75 – 2.75 3.75 Dec. 14 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2003 Jan. 1 1.97 2011 July 1 0.37
Aug. 9 2.00 – 3.00 4.00 July 1 1.22
Oct. 11 2.25 – 3.25 4.25 2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 2012 Jan. 1 0.12
Dec. 13 2.50 – 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan. 1 1.14
2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 July 1 1.13 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
2007 Mar. 14 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 July 1 – 0.38
June 13 3.00 – 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan. 1 1.21
2014 June 11 -0.10 0.15 – 0.40 July 1 1.17 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
2008 July 9 3.25 – 4.25 5.25 Sep. 10 -0.20 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 – 0.73
Oct. 8 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan. 1 1.37
Oct. 9 3.25 3.75 – 4.25 2015 Dec. 9 -0.30 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 1.95 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Nov. 12 2.75 3.25 – 3.75
Dec. 10 2.00 2.50 – 3.00 2016 Mar. 16 -0.40 0.00 – 0.25 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2016 July 1 – 0.88
July 1 3.19
2009 Jan. 21 1.00 2.00 – 3.00 2019 Sep. 18 -0.50 0.00 – 0.25
Mar. 11 0.50 1.50 – 2.50 2008 Jan. 1 3.32
Apr. 8 0.25 1.25 – 2.25 July 1 3.19
May 13 0.25 1.00 – 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2022 Apr. 6 408 408 0,00 - - - 7
Apr. 13 540 540 0,00 - - - 7
Apr. 20 474 474 0,00 - - - 7
Apr. 27 721 721 0,00 - - - 7
May 4 549 549 0,00 - - - 7
May 11 495 495 0,00 - - - 7
May 18 319 319 0,00 - - - 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2022 Mar. 31 82 82 2      … - - - 91
Apr. 28 58 58 2      … - - - 91
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month *
% per annum
EURIBOR  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 EONIA  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2021 Oct. – 0.571 – 0.49 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.55 – 0.53 – 0.48
Nov. – 0.573 – 0.49 – 0.57 – 0.57 – 0.57 – 0.53 – 0.49
Dec. – 0.577 – 0.49 – 0.58 – 0.60 – 0.58 – 0.55 – 0.50
2022 Jan. – 0.578 . – 0.58 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.53 – 0.48
Feb. – 0.577 . – 0.57 – 0.55 – 0.53 – 0.48 – 0.34
Mar. – 0.579 . – 0.57 – 0.54 – 0.50 – 0.42 – 0.24
Apr. – 0.584 . – 0.57 – 0.54 – 0.45 – 0.31 0.01
* Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor anyone
else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the EURIBOR.
1 Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank
operations; calculated by the European Central Bank from January 4th 1999 until
September 30th 2019 based on real turnover according to the act/360 method. SinceOctober 1st 2019 calculated as Euro Short-Term Rate (€STR) + 8.5 basis points spread.
2 Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters since 30
December 1998 according to the act/360 method. Administrator for EONIA and
EURIBOR: European Money Markets Institute (EMMI)

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 Mar. 0.25 51,417 0.98 220,406 – 0.18 77,326 0.83 21,860
Apr. 0.25 50,078 0.97 220,310 – 0.19 74,026 0.84 21,529
May 0.24 48,897 0.96 220,455 – 0.21 74,080 0.83 21,455
June 0.23 48,834 0.95 220,118 – 0.23 71,148 0.88 21,464
July 0.23 45,300 0.94 219,790 – 0.23 69,514 0.82 20,964
Aug. 0.22 44,901 0.93 219,708 – 0.26 68,741 0.81 21,058
Sep. 0.23 44,268 0.93 219,587 – 0.28 69,338 0.78 21,227
Oct. 0.23 43,497 0.92 219,456 – 0.29 75,404 0.77 22,443
Nov. 0.22 42,503 0.91 219,058 – 0.30 70,830 0.76 22,793
Dec. 0.18 41,979 0.91 220,289 – 0.37 75,038 0.74 22,966
2022 Jan. 0.18 41,157 0.90 220,225 – 0.31 72,404 0.73 23,078
Feb. 0.18 40,586 0.90 220,056 – 0.30 71,560 0.71 23,680
Mar. 0.17 40,212 0.89 219,655 – 0.28 68,371 0.74 24,160
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 Mar. 1.89 4,545 1.56 26,788 1.91 1,373,003 6.72 44,263 3.34 83,114 3.40 322,618
Apr. 1.86 4,496 1.56 26,870 1.88 1,381,533 6.65 43,462 3.34 82,596 3.38 323,494
May 1.94 4,575 1.55 26,759 1.87 1,390,096 6.63 43,692 3.33 82,120 3.36 323,923
June 1.91 4,485 1.54 26,949 1.85 1,399,549 6.60 45,343 3.33 81,846 3.35 323,511
July 1.92 4,642 1.53 26,996 1.83 1,410,004 6.53 44,338 3.33 81,734 3.34 325,291
Aug. 1.94 4,581 1.52 27,041 1.82 1,418,884 6.60 44,785 3.33 81,447 3.32 325,890
Sep. 1.94 4,521 1.52 27,117 1.80 1,427,271 6.67 45,750 3.32 81,133 3.32 325,265
Oct. 1.97 4,623 1.52 27,324 1.79 1,436,840 6.59 44,700 3.32 80,768 3.30 326,197
Nov. 2.08 3,680 1.52 26,929 1.77 1,446,574 6.53 44,871 3.32 79,066 3.30 328,130
Dec. 2.02 3,547 1.52 26,755 1.75 1,454,553 6.60 44,914 3.32 78,679 3.28 327,421
2022 Jan. 2.02 3,697 1.52 26,600 1.74 1,457,100 6.69 44,503 3.32 77,914 3.27 328,356
Feb. 2.02 3,567 1.52 26,633 1.73 1,464,146 6.61 44,917 3.32 77,427 3.26 329,007
Mar. 2.11 3,621 1.53 26,686 1.71 1,473,805 6.59 46,255 3.33 77,352 3.25 329,112
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 Mar. 1.78 163,745 1.67 194,734 1.69 794,245
Apr. 1.96 151,270 1.67 195,027 1.68 798,088
May 1.93 153,129 1.65 194,737 1.68 802,212
June 2.01 149,474 1.65 193,910 1.67 801,420
July 1.94 148,978 1.64 194,327 1.65 808,937
Aug. 1.94 148,766 1.63 196,065 1.64 811,706
Sep. 1.97 149,784 1.64 194,697 1.63 811,174
Oct. 1.92 158,326 1.63 197,964 1.62 813,714
Nov. 1.91 156,340 1.58 203,103 1.61 819,855
Dec. 1.82 161,611 1.56 202,457 1.59 822,730
2022 Jan. 1.81 166,542 1.57 202,062 1.58 825,433
Feb. 1.80 172,615 1.56 201,758 1.58 831,417
Mar. 1.90 179,017 1.57 202,677 1.57 833,551
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 Mar. – 0.00 1,750,971 0.06 3,073 0.32 342 0.41 834 0.09 535,778 0.17 26,115
Apr. – 0.00 1,772,803 0.06 2,465 0.28 379 0.32 591 0.09 536,476 0.17 25,840
May – 0.01 1,786,469 0.01 2,399 0.37 307 0.32 529 0.09 537,061 0.16 25,715
June – 0.01 1,788,689 – 0.04 2,957 0.23 310 0.28 566 0.09 536,727 0.16 25,503
July – 0.01 1,800,235 0.02 2,414 0.28 401 0.29 695 0.08 536,463 0.16 25,216
Aug. – 0.01 1,797,331 0.02 2,315 0.25 278 0.34 558 0.08 536,145 0.16 24,993
Sep. – 0.01 1,791,879 – 0.01 2,254 0.26 241 0.34 513 0.08 535,555 0.15 24,780
Oct. – 0.01 1,800,411 0.06 1,944 0.25 228 0.39 474 0.08 535,197 0.15 24,558
Nov. – 0.01 1,808,547 0.09 1,879 0.21 266 0.48 650 0.08 535,140 0.15 24,329
Dec. – 0.01 1,806,993 – 0.07 2,327 0.20 204 0.51 721 0.08 536,715 0.14 24,116
2022 Jan. – 0.01 1,806,352 0.11 2,132 0.22 363 0.36 642 0.08 537,038 0.14 23,363
Feb. – 0.02 1,819,881 0.06 2,167 0.25 226 0.33 564 0.07 537,327 0.13 23,136
Mar. – 0.02 1,808,505 0.12 2,045 0.28 258 0.38 819 0.07 535,693 0.13 22,900
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2021 Mar. – 0.11 571,025 – 0.12 54,987 0.07 363 0.24 919
Apr. – 0.10 559,616 – 0.25 52,411 – 0.10 113 0.23 87
May – 0.11 564,627 – 0.34 53,947 – 0.04 194 0.37 231
June – 0.12 569,903 – 0.50 64,520 – 0.14 278 0.20 200
July – 0.12 581,879 – 0.48 57,334 – 0.22 322 0.09 168
Aug. – 0.13 589,698 – 0.50 47,074 – 0.17 174 0.07 699
Sep. – 0.12 590,408 – 0.50 48,685 x .x . 0.11 333
Oct. – 0.13 598,979 – 0.51 70,382 – 0.21 214 0.19 1,102
Nov. – 0.13 604,607 – 0.52 47,155 – 0.16 619 0.25 732
Dec. – 0.14 585,718 – 0.58 43,578 – 0.07 836 0.19 1,004
2022 Jan. – 0.14 596,648 – 0.50 38,323 – 0.18 311 0.28 1,033
Feb. – 0.14 594,874 – 0.48 30,745 0.03 234 0.63 1,123
Mar. – 0.15 607,528 – 0.50 42,187 0.09 417 1.09 1,069
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2021 Mar. 5.35 5.27 9,298 6.17 1,786 6.23 384 4.05 3,296 5.92 5,619
Apr. 5.51 5.38 7,926 6.17 1,482 6.76 325 4.25 2,731 5.92 4,871
May 5.49 5.37 7,573 6.21 1,400 7.01 301 4.24 2,605 5.90 4,667
June 5.52 5.40 8,979 6.25 1,741 7.20 359 4.23 3,090 5.94 5,530
July 5.55 5.47 9,279 6.30 1,924 7.15 386 4.26 3,014 5.98 5,880
Aug. 5.54 5.44 8,696 6.29 1,747 7.54 340 4.30 2,828 5.89 5,528
Sep. 5.54 5.46 8,474 6.28 1,669 7.59 323 4.29 2,783 5.94 5,368
Oct. 5.58 5.50 8,375 6.30 1,660 7.55 345 4.34 2,677 5.95 5,353
Nov. 5.46 5.43 8,076 6.17 1,524 7.24 408 4.34 2,691 5.88 4,976
Dec. 5.35 5.36 6,927 6.04 1,221 6.75 465 4.31 2,445 5.84 4,017
2022 Jan. 5.53 5.54 8,604 6.19 1,862 7.29 383 4.29 2,643 6.01 5,578
Feb. 5.41 5.45 8,372 6.14 1,641 7.31 378 4.28 2,652 5.90 5,343
Mar. 5.34 5.38 10,212 6.24 1,935 7.28 397 4.08 3,486 5.97 6,330
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2021 Mar. 1.68 5,715 1.59 1,331 1.69 2,358 2.20 691 1.53 2,666
Apr. 1.65 4,662 1.52 1,263 1.58 1,956 2.08 724 1.55 1,982
May 1.74 3,877 1.51 909 1.79 1,589 2.32 550 1.51 1,738
June 1.63 5,170 1.53 1,119 1.55 2,198 2.26 702 1.51 2,270
July 1.68 4,950 1.50 1,428 1.71 1,920 2.09 732 1.52 2,298
Aug. 1.74 4,101 1.60 806 1.88 1,594 2.17 612 1.48 1,895
Sep. 1.65 4,401 1.46 951 1.72 1,950 1.99 626 1.47 1,825
Oct. 1.69 4,327 1.54 1,068 1.79 1,792 2.23 631 1.42 1,904
Nov. 1.68 4,433 1.39 847 1.65 1,759 2.42 704 1.44 1,970
Dec. 1.64 5,757 1.48 1,144 1.58 2,326 2.45 860 1.44 2,571
2022 Jan. 1.62 4,552 1.48 1,288 1.54 1,914 2.32 622 1.49 2,016
Feb. 1.76 4,173 1.60 859 1.69 1,560 2.55 514 1.62 2,099
Mar. 1.87 5,990 1.61 1,247 1.70 2,149 2.44 722 1.85 3,119
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2021 Mar. 1.78 3,846 . . 1.83 1,507 2.26 535 1.60 1,804
Apr. 1.73 3,212 . . 1.65 1,316 2.17 555 1.62 1,341
May 1.85 2,624 . . 1.93 1,052 2.29 451 1.59 1,121
June 1.70 3,581 . . 1.64 1,516 2.38 508 1.52 1,557
July 1.71 3,514 . . 1.75 1,339 2.10 587 1.53 1,588
Aug. 1.89 2,666 . . 2.05 1,045 2.35 441 1.57 1,180
Sep. 1.72 2,879 . . 1.76 1,259 2.21 444 1.49 1,176
Oct. 1.75 2,884 . . 1.84 1,193 2.17 514 1.46 1,177
Nov. 1.83 2,674 . . 1.83 1,076 2.47 461 1.56 1,137
Dec. 1.73 3,787 . . 1.76 1,495 2.48 564 1.47 1,728
2022 Jan. 1.71 2,950 . . 1.64 1,227 2.38 455 1.54 1,268
Feb. 1.88 2,728 . . 1.92 970 2.68 380 1.64 1,378
Mar. 1.96 3,877 . . 1.84 1,414 2.59 510 1.88 1,953
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2021 Mar. 1.22 1.18 28,589 1.26 4,248 1.75 2,684 1.25 1,958 1.02 10,006 1.17 13,941
Apr. 1.27 1.23 24,541 1.30 3,804 1.79 2,343 1.28 1,725 1.06 8,741 1.23 11,732
May 1.31 1.27 22,786 1.35 3,379 1.83 2,064 1.30 1,568 1.09 8,416 1.29 10,738
June 1.34 1.29 25,161 1.34 3,327 1.74 2,374 1.33 1,775 1.12 9,196 1.33 11,815
July 1.36 1.31 25,121 1.36 3,808 1.76 2,686 1.32 1,649 1.14 9,216 1.34 11,570
Aug. 1.31 1.27 22,735 1.32 3,095 1.78 2,324 1.37 1,514 1.10 7,975 1.28 10,922
Sep. 1.31 1.26 22,232 1.33 2,986 1.80 2,204 1.33 1,451 1.09 7,631 1.27 10,946
Oct. 1.32 1.28 22,630 1.29 3,683 1.79 2,353 1.33 1,613 1.10 8,013 1.29 10,650
Nov. 1.36 1.32 22,516 1.31 3,079 1.83 2,022 1.43 1,564 1.15 8,171 1.33 10,759
Dec. 1.37 1.32 23,851 1.27 3,446 1.80 2,383 1.39 1,661 1.16 8,614 1.34 11,194
2022 Jan. 1.39 1.35 25,085 1.33 4,969 1.83 2,527 1.35 1,706 1.19 8,661 1.37 12,191
Feb. 1.49 1.45 26,299 1.43 4,706 1.86 2,270 1.45 1,606 1.29 9,322 1.48 13,100
Mar. 1.69 1.65 32,267 1.63 6,216 1.93 2,704 1.65 1,984 1.50 11,809 1.71 15,770
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2021 Mar. . 1.11 12,754 . . 1.69 929 1.08 884 0.95 4,589 1.14 6,352
Apr. . 1.15 10,483 . . 1.71 801 1.10 822 1.00 3,834 1.18 5,026
May . 1.19 9,797 . . 1.74 747 1.09 725 1.01 3,738 1.25 4,587
June . 1.23 10,630 . . 1.69 836 1.14 793 1.06 4,071 1.29 4,930
July . 1.25 10,467 . . 1.66 934 1.15 749 1.08 3,906 1.33 4,878
Aug. . 1.21 9,407 . . 1.67 821 1.21 665 1.03 3,442 1.25 4,479
Sep. . 1.20 9,471 . . 1.67 802 1.13 664 1.03 3,299 1.24 4,706
Oct. . 1.20 9,766 . . 1.70 874 1.16 746 1.02 3,569 1.25 4,577
Nov. . 1.23 9,668 . . 1.72 708 1.22 685 1.08 3,670 1.29 4,605
Dec. . 1.25 10,265 . . 1.70 783 1.22 727 1.09 3,784 1.31 4,971
2022 Jan. . 1.28 11,005 . . 1.75 942 1.18 861 1.13 4,087 1.33 5,115
Feb. . 1.37 11,593 . . 1.74 749 1.28 826 1.24 4,366 1.43 5,652
Mar. . 1.57 14,564 . . 1.80 936 1.54 972 1.46 5,637 1.64 7,019
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 Mar. 7.41 34,973 7.11 27,993 15.45 3,910 2.77 72,139 2.78 71,866
Apr. 7.37 34,035 7.02 27,152 15.48 3,899 2.84 70,358 2.85 70,106
May 7.28 34,454 7.01 27,148 15.51 3,905 2.79 72,023 2.80 71,766
June 7.23 35,815 7.05 28,056 15.55 3,938 2.86 72,488 2.87 72,184
July 7.11 35,046 6.90 27,102 15.54 3,987 2.75 73,098 2.76 72,788
Aug. 7.12 35,662 6.99 27,343 15.58 4,039 2.79 72,942 2.80 72,622
Sep. 7.19 36,720 7.06 28,404 15.53 4,098 2.79 74,750 2.81 74,389
Oct. 7.10 35,633 6.94 27,535 15.02 4,109 2.81 75,550 2.83 75,182
Nov. 7.01 36,013 6.90 27,565 15.01 4,153 2.77 76,312 2.79 75,909
Dec. 7.11 36,163 6.93 28,124 14.94 4,165 2.73 76,261 2.75 75,914
2022 Jan. 7.20 36,030 6.97 28,433 14.97 4,110 2.61 81,598 2.62 81,290
Feb. 7.08 36,335 6.95 28,225 14.96 4,103 2.62 85,173 2.63 84,843
Mar. 7.14 37,372 7.02 29,326 14.94 4,076 2.71 87,123 2.72 86,728
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2021 Mar. 1.09 93,353 1.59 21,948 1.90 10,691 2.16 1,432 1.54 1,842 0.89 62,746 1.17 6,173 1.20 10,469
Apr. 1.52 56,777 1.55 18,920 1.90 9,318 2.23 1,385 1.55 1,553 1.46 35,109 1.43 3,022 1.15 6,390
May 1.32 58,626 1.53 16,038 1.89 8,462 2.33 1,179 1.56 1,578 1.20 36,993 1.42 2,491 1.06 7,923
June 1.28 83,129 1.29 27,883 1.93 9,481 2.37 1,409 1.54 1,734 1.19 52,578 0.78 6,948 1.28 10,979
July 1.35 70,171 1.42 20,858 1.84 9,608 2.26 1,403 1.52 1,753 1.30 41,858 1.29 3,934 1.00 11,615
Aug. 1.33 54,047 1.58 14,739 1.79 7,827 2.31 1,094 1.44 1,308 1.25 33,740 1.14 3,001 1.08 7,077
Sep. 1.36 69,341 1.33 23,411 1.83 9,309 2.39 1,198 1.48 1,245 1.28 45,311 1.44 4,339 1.06 7,939
Oct. 1.21 71,404 1.32 20,386 1.76 9,149 2.38 1,247 1.50 1,242 1.08 48,160 1.43 2,573 1.07 9,033
Nov. 1.18 75,363 1.34 18,828 1.85 9,681 2.35 1,402 1.44 1,474 1.03 48,548 0.95 4,444 1.16 9,814
Dec. 1.20 105,525 1.32 29,572 1.94 10,348 2.28 1,529 1.45 1,817 1.05 71,028 1.40 5,515 1.18 15,288
2022 Jan. 1.29 64,813 1.26 21,030 1.80 8,812 2.39 1,280 1.53 1,443 1.14 44,620 1.49 1,821 1.27 6,837
Feb. 1.32 66,898 1.22 18,910 1.78 9,056 2.55 1,205 1.63 1,445 1.13 42,295 1.71 3,088 1.42 9,809
Mar. 1.50 99,126 1.39 28,815 1.78 10,687 2.54 1,571 1.83 1,939 1.38 68,143 1.78 5,240 1.65 11,546
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2021 Mar. 1.19 13,787 . . 1.64 481 1.81 106 1.17 399 1.12 8,540 1.33 825 1.23 3,436
Apr. 1.44 7,883 . . 1.79 377 1.68 117 1.15 359 1.55 4,450 1.51 967 1.07 1,613
May 1.46 7,097 . . 1.76 340 1.73 75 1.21 404 1.68 3,830 1.15 439 1.11 2,009
June 1.36 13,761 . . 1.79 410 1.84 109 1.20 444 1.35 8,365 1.38 1,110 1.35 3,323
July 1.41 10,857 . . 1.68 445 1.57 117 1.24 404 1.56 6,539 1.30 933 1.02 2,419
Aug. 1.45 7,709 . . 1.81 328 1.76 85 1.18 308 1.55 4,191 1.69 819 1.09 1,978
Sep. 1.35 11,637 . . 1.71 405 2.14 61 1.17 284 1.35 7,760 1.92 827 1.06 2,300
Oct. 1.29 10,023 . . 1.72 371 1.87 78 1.24 298 1.46 5,810 1.90 660 0.73 2,806
Nov. 1.34 8,064 . . 1.76 359 1.60 96 1.19 382 1.43 4,537 1.36 704 1.08 1,986
Dec. 1.27 18,534 . . 1.69 438 1.93 113 1.23 430 1.20 11,302 1.73 1,948 1.18 4,303
2022 Jan. 1.25 10,159 . . 1.66 371 1.54 102 1.35 406 1.19 7,044 1.20 386 1.37 1,850
Feb. 1.60 9,498 . . 1.66 296 1.98 87 1.37 318 1.63 4,798 1.85 1,166 1.46 2,833
Mar. 1.40 14,379 . . 1.71 503 2.07 120 1.63 444 1.15 9,348 2.56 1,117 1.63 2,847
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 4
2019 Q2 2,407.6 336.8 449.0 339.3 387.9 735.8 3.6 57.9 37.1 60.3
Q3 2,492.5 333.0 468.5 357.2 398.2 768.3 4.6 58.8 38.0 66.0
Q4 2,473.9 317.6 448.2 355.5 407.3 778.3 3.6 64.9 39.8 58.8
2020 Q1 2,426.9 318.3 452.1 364.0 383.0 738.4 4.5 68.5 38.6 59.6
Q2 2,517.7 317.1 460.6 371.9 409.2 789.0 4.3 68.5 38.7 58.5
Q3 2,547.5 311.1 472.9 373.9 411.0 809.9 4.4 67.1 39.0 58.1
Q4 2,587.9 301.8 479.0 370.6 425.0 841.7 4.7 68.2 38.2 58.7
2021 Q1 2,574.8 292.8 466.8 361.9 437.0 845.0 3.9 71.9 38.4 57.0
Q2 2,590.6 281.3 466.5 361.6 448.0 864.5 3.5 72.5 38.6 54.1
Q3 2,630.7 272.9 471.1 358.6 461.5 881.5 3.4 87.8 38.1 55.8
Q4 2,645.6 263.1 466.6 355.1 469.8 900.5 3.3 84.8 40.7 61.8
    Life insurance
2019 Q2 1,291.9 205.8 227.6 214.2 55.4 538.9 2.4 10.0 20.3 17.4
Q3 1,350.1 205.3 242.5 225.2 57.9 563.6 3.1 10.4 20.9 21.0
Q4 1,325.2 194.9 227.6 217.6 61.1 570.4 2.4 13.7 21.1 16.5
2020 Q1 1,295.8 191.5 231.0 220.6 61.9 538.2 2.2 13.9 20.3 16.3
Q2 1,347.1 192.4 234.4 223.6 64.1 577.3 2.8 13.7 20.3 18.5
Q3 1,369.2 188.4 241.6 225.7 65.7 593.0 3.0 13.6 20.6 17.6
Q4 1,395.9 183.6 242.8 229.9 69.7 617.1 3.3 14.3 20.8 14.5
2021 Q1 1,361.7 170.7 231.7 219.7 74.2 614.8 2.1 14.3 21.0 13.1
Q2 1,373.1 165.0 231.7 219.6 77.9 627.8 2.0 14.2 21.2 13.7
Q3 1,387.5 160.0 232.7 215.0 87.0 642.9 2.0 13.5 20.6 13.8
Q4 1,399.8 153.9 231.4 211.6 92.2 656.2 1.9 14.7 21.8 16.1
    Non-life insurance
2019 Q2 665.6 119.8 131.1 76.1 78.2 182.4 0.4 37.7 11.0 29.1
Q3 682.6 116.9 135.3 79.9 80.6 189.4 0.4 38.8 11.3 30.0
Q4 673.5 111.3 130.4 79.6 83.6 193.3 0.4 36.2 12.2 26.7
2020 Q1 669.4 111.1 131.3 79.8 80.0 186.9 0.3 38.7 12.0 29.3
Q2 685.6 111.9 134.4 82.4 81.1 197.1 0.4 39.5 12.1 26.7
Q3 693.3 109.3 137.6 83.3 82.7 203.2 0.4 38.5 12.1 26.3
Q4 703.5 105.9 139.5 84.5 85.2 210.3 0.5 37.6 12.7 27.3
2021 Q1 715.8 108.2 139.3 83.7 88.1 214.8 0.4 39.9 12.8 28.6
Q2 718.1 103.5 140.0 83.6 89.2 221.1 0.4 40.2 12.7 27.3
Q3 724.3 99.0 139.5 84.0 91.8 222.5 0.5 46.4 12.8 27.8
Q4 726.8 94.8 139.0 85.1 93.6 226.8 0.4 44.3 14.0 28.8
    Reinsurance 5
2019 Q2 450.1 11.1 90.4 49.0 254.3 14.4 0.8 10.2 5.8 13.9
Q3 459.9 10.8 90.7 52.1 259.6 15.3 1.0 9.6 5.9 15.0
Q4 475.2 11.5 90.2 58.3 262.6 14.5 0.8 15.1 6.6 15.6
2020 Q1 461.7 15.7 89.8 63.7 241.0 13.3 1.9 15.9 6.3 14.1
Q2 485.0 12.9 91.7 65.9 264.0 14.6 1.1 15.2 6.3 13.3
Q3 485.0 13.5 93.7 64.9 262.6 13.7 1.0 15.0 6.3 14.2
Q4 488.5 12.3 96.7 56.3 270.2 14.3 1.0 16.3 4.7 16.9
2021 Q1 497.3 13.9 95.8 58.5 274.7 15.4 1.4 17.7 4.7 15.3
Q2 499.4 12.8 94.8 58.4 280.9 15.6 1.0 18.1 4.6 13.1
Q3 519.0 13.8 98.9 59.6 282.7 16.1 1.0 27.9 4.7 14.2
Q4 519.1 14.3 96.1 58.4 284.0 17.5 1.1 25.9 4.9 16.9
Pension funds 6
2019 Q2 707.9 87.6 76.5 31.0 34.1 402.0 – 8.5 46.0 22.2
Q3 726.5 85.6 80.7 31.0 36.5 415.5 – 8.6 46.7 22.0
Q4 735.8 85.2 79.6 31.1 38.7 421.1 – 8.8 48.9 22.3
7 2020 Q1 599.1 92.2 57.0 48.5 9.3 361.3 0.1 10.4 17.5 2.7
Q2 623.3 92.2 58.8 49.1 9.7 382.1 0.1 10.4 18.1 2.8
Q3 635.9 90.8 59.6 50.2 10.1 392.8 0.2 11.6 18.2 2.5
Q4 647.7 85.8 59.7 47.4 10.1 412.2 0.2 11.9 17.3 3.2
2021 Q1 661.5 86.9 59.2 48.6 10.9 423.9 0.2 12.3 17.3 2.3
Q2 680.8 86.8 61.3 49.4 11.5 439.3 0.1 12.5 17.7 2.3
Q3 686.5 85.3 61.9 49.0 11.8 445.7 0.1 12.7 17.8 2.3
Q4 706.7 85.6 62.0 49.0 11.5 463.9 0.1 13.3 18.3 3.0
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections as of 2020 Q1. Until 2019 Q4 these are compiled using Solvency I
supervisory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  1 Accounts
receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered bonds, borrowers'
note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. For pension funds as of 2020 Q1 fair values,
previously book values.  2 Including deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as
registered bonds, borrowers' note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. For pension fundsas of 2020 Q1 fair values, previously book values.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables
and claims of pension funds on pension managers.  4 Valuation of listed securities at the
corresponding consistent price from the ESCB's securities database.  5 Not including the
reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  6 The term
"pension funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European
System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and
occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not
included.  7 Change in data sources.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  4
Insurance corporations
2019 Q2 2,407.6 31.9 69.4 489.7 1,687.4 1,466.0 221.4 1.8 127.5 –
Q3 2,492.5 31.7 69.3 488.5 1,769.4 1,543.0 226.4 2.2 131.5 –
Q4 2,473.9 31.7 75.8 515.3 1,714.9 1,499.6 215.3 1.9 134.3 –
2020 Q1 2,426.9 31.8 82.4 464.3 1,721.9 1,483.2 238.7 2.4 124.1 –
Q2 2,517.7 33.1 82.2 505.4 1,767.7 1,527.7 240.0 1.9 127.4 –
Q3 2,547.5 34.3 80.0 515.9 1,785.7 1,549.2 236.5 1.7 129.9 –
Q4 2,587.9 36.6 79.7 540.5 1,799.2 1,579.3 219.9 1.6 130.3 –
2021 Q1 2,574.8 34.8 81.4 550.5 1,778.0 1,541.0 237.0 2.5 127.7 –
Q2 2,590.6 33.0 81.3 556.7 1,793.2 1,556.4 236.9 2.2 124.0 –
Q3 2,630.7 35.4 82.8 563.9 1,816.6 1,568.2 248.4 2.5 129.4 –
Q4 2,645.6 36.1 81.9 576.6 1,819.0 1,577.6 241.4 2.5 129.6 –
    Life insurance
2019 Q2 1,291.9 4.1 14.5 121.8 1,108.6 1,108.6 – 0.4 42.4 –
Q3 1,350.1 3.7 15.6 116.0 1,171.9 1,171.9 – 0.6 42.4 –
Q4 1,325.2 3.6 19.1 127.6 1,129.6 1,129.6 – 0.5 44.7 –
2020 Q1 1,295.8 3.6 19.3 114.3 1,117.8 1,117.8 – 0.6 40.3 –
Q2 1,347.1 3.8 19.2 129.8 1,150.3 1,150.3 – 0.5 43.4 –
Q3 1,369.2 3.9 19.5 136.8 1,164.8 1,164.8 – 0.5 43.7 –
Q4 1,395.9 3.9 20.7 142.9 1,185.7 1,185.7 – 0.5 42.3 –
2021 Q1 1,361.7 3.3 19.9 143.2 1,154.2 1,154.2 – 1.0 40.1 –
Q2 1,373.1 3.3 20.4 144.3 1,165.1 1,165.1 – 1.0 39.0 –
Q3 1,387.5 3.3 19.3 148.0 1,175.6 1,175.6 – 1.1 40.1 –
Q4 1,399.8 3.3 20.7 147.7 1,185.8 1,185.8 – 1.0 41.2 –
    Non-life insurance
2019 Q2 665.6 1.1 8.8 147.0 459.4 341.5 117.8 0.1 49.3 –
Q3 682.6 1.2 9.1 149.7 471.9 354.8 117.1 0.1 50.6 –
Q4 673.5 1.2 9.3 153.7 457.2 349.4 107.8 0.1 52.0 –
2020 Q1 669.4 1.3 9.8 142.0 468.2 344.4 123.8 0.1 48.0 –
Q2 685.6 1.3 9.5 149.4 478.2 355.6 122.6 0.1 47.1 –
Q3 693.3 1.2 9.6 152.0 482.3 362.4 119.9 0.1 48.1 –
Q4 703.5 1.3 9.7 158.1 483.1 368.7 114.4 0.0 51.3 –
2021 Q1 715.8 1.2 10.6 161.8 491.4 362.5 128.9 0.1 50.6 –
Q2 718.1 1.2 10.5 164.5 493.4 366.2 127.1 0.1 48.4 –
Q3 724.3 1.2 10.5 166.3 498.8 367.9 130.9 0.2 47.4 –
Q4 726.8 1.4 10.7 170.5 492.4 367.5 124.9 0.2 51.7 –
    Reinsurance 5
2019 Q2 450.1 26.6 46.1 220.8 119.4 15.8 103.6 1.3 35.9 –
Q3 459.9 26.8 44.7 222.8 125.6 16.3 109.3 1.5 38.5 –
Q4 475.2 26.9 47.4 234.0 128.0 20.6 107.5 1.3 37.7 –
2020 Q1 461.7 26.9 53.3 208.1 135.9 21.0 114.9 1.7 35.8 –
Q2 485.0 28.1 53.5 226.2 139.1 21.8 117.4 1.3 36.8 –
Q3 485.0 29.2 50.9 227.0 138.7 22.1 116.6 1.0 38.1 –
Q4 488.5 31.4 49.3 239.6 130.4 24.8 105.6 1.0 36.7 –
2021 Q1 497.3 30.2 50.9 245.5 132.4 24.2 108.1 1.4 37.0 –
Q2 499.4 28.5 50.4 247.9 134.7 25.0 109.7 1.1 36.7 –
Q3 519.0 30.9 53.0 249.7 142.2 24.7 117.5 1.3 41.9 –
Q4 519.1 31.4 50.5 258.4 140.8 24.2 116.5 1.4 36.7 –
Pension funds 6
2019 Q2 707.9 – 8.1 8.3 620.3 620.3 – – 2.8 68.4
Q3 726.5 – 8.2 8.4 628.2 628.2 – – 2.9 78.9
Q4 735.8 – 8.4 8.6 638.0 638.0 – – 3.7 77.1
7 2020 Q1 599.1 – 1.6 19.4 497.3 496.7 – 0.3 8.1 72.4
Q2 623.3 – 1.6 21.6 506.4 505.8 – 0.3 8.3 85.0
Q3 635.9 – 1.6 22.4 510.0 509.3 – 0.3 8.7 92.9
Q4 647.7 – 1.6 21.8 516.3 515.6 – 0.3 8.9 98.8
2021 Q1 661.5 – 1.5 23.6 526.8 526.1 – 0.3 8.6 100.7
Q2 680.8 – 1.6 26.4 532.4 531.7 – 0.4 9.2 110.8
Q3 686.5 – 1.6 27.2 536.1 535.4 – 0.4 9.2 112.1
Q4 706.7 – 1.6 28.3 550.4 549.7 – 0.4 9.3 116.7
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections as of 2020 Q1. Until 2019 Q4 these are compiled using Solvency I
supervisory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  1 Including
deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers' note loans
and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension funds on pension managers
and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical reserves "life" taking account oftransitional measures. Health insurance is also included in the "non-life insurance"
sector.  4 Own funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth" and "Shares and other
equity".  5 Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which
is included there.  6 Valuation at book values. The term "pension funds" refers to the
institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds
thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the
self-employed. Social security funds are not included.  7 Change in data sources.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2010 146,620 – 1,212 – 7,621 24,044 –17,635 147,831 92,682 –103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 –46,796 850 59,521 20,075 – 23,876 – 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 64,775 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,408 – 12,124 – 11,951 74,483 14,366
2015 33,024 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 69,034 116,493 – 66,330 121,164 61,659 – 83,471
2016 71,380 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 43,951 164,148 – 58,012 187,500 34,660 – 92,768
2017 54,840 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 43,277 137,907 – 71,454 161,012 48,349 – 83,067
2018 64,682 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 48,052 93,103 – 24,417 67,328 50,192 – 28,421
2019 136,117 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 67,581 59,013 8,059 2,408 48,546 77,104
2020 446,000 382,059 14,257 89,473 278,328 63,941 283,003 18,955 226,887 37,162 162,996
2021 271,580 209,544 30,499 19,754 159,291 62,036 298,734 – 41,852 245,198 95,388 – 27,154
2021 Apr. 17,474 12,385 – 2,710 6,063 9,032 5,089 25,862 – 17,641 24,095 19,408 – 8,388
May 37,348 32,105 – 3,450 7,280 28,274 5,243 31,795 – 2,194 25,538 8,451 5,553
June 28,895 15,246 1,998 – 283 13,531 13,649 30,938 – 583 22,605 8,915 – 2,043
July 16,188 6,111 – 9,235 3,715 11,631 10,077 33,975 – 5,500 25,087 14,388 – 17,787
Aug. 26,337 33,544 6,868 1,227 25,449 – 7,206 10,741 – 5,337 17,312 – 1,234 15,596
Sep. 25,460 15,000 12,854 8,183 – 6,037 10,460 30,749 6,387 17,663 6,699 – 5,289
Oct. – 589 2,484 7,039 – 7,515 2,960 – 3,073 8,685 – 17,904 20,765 5,825 – 9,275
Nov. 43,911 35,671 6,715 8,351 20,605 8,241 39,034 – 529 23,375 16,188 4,877
Dec. – 44,349 –28,463 –17,520 – 8,944 – 1,999 – 15,886 – 5,841 – 9,420 14,137 – 10,558 – 38,509
2022 Jan. 50,776 26,225 10,485 6,592 9,148 24,552 41,344 – 2,870 14,990 29,224 9,432
Feb. 28,771 24,147 10,378 3,056 10,713 4,624 21,919 8,057 14,793 – 931 6,852
Mar. 56,461 37,105 22,850 7,972 6,283 19,356 40,051 6,802 10,709 22,541 16,409
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2010 37,767 20,049 17,718 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,360
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 – 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 – 449
2015 44,165 7,668 36,497 34,437 – 5,421 39,858 9,728
2016 30,896 4,409 26,487 31,037 – 5,143 36,180 – 141
2017 51,571 15,570 36,001 49,913 7,031 42,882 1,658
2018 54,883 16,188 38,695 83,107 – 11,184 94,291 – 28,224
2019 46,021 9,076 36,945 33,675 – 1,119 34,794 12,346
2020 83,859 17,771 66,088 115,960 27 115,933 – 32,101
2021 125,541 49,066 76,475 124,105 10,869 113,236 1,436
2021 Apr. 17,766 882 16,884 16,134 1,816 14,318 1,632
May 39 1,170 – 1,131 – 893 – 387 – 506 932
June 12,178 5,166 7,013 15,030 36 14,994 – 2,851
July 6,139 825 5,314 3,849 – 74 3,923 2,290
Aug. 11,293 4,667 6,626 11,585 204 11,381 – 291
Sep. 13,516 4,660 8,855 15,099 3,374 11,725 – 1,583
Oct. 10,042 5,498 4,544 15,060 1,401 13,659 – 5,018
Nov. 6,393 2,367 4,026 15,628 2,698 12,930 – 9,235
Dec. 13,692 10,698 2,995 6,987 – 1,848 8,835 6,705
2022 Jan. 6,155 396 5,760 9,711 2,076 7,635 – 3,556
Feb. – 5,455 628 – 6,084 – 4,539 – 1,599 – 2,940 – 916
Mar. 9,478 359 9,119 14,188 – 1,736 15,924 – 4,710
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,614 592,375
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,739,485 776,970 38,948 17,527 643,340 77,155 184,986 777,529
2021 1,690,466 795,260 41,866 17,293 648,985 87,116 139,775 755,431
2021 July 144,442 62,554 1,211 250 54,155 6,938 8,870 73,018
Aug. 136,705 67,235 1,340 0 59,379 6,516 11,920 57,550
Sep. 154,974 68,421 4,772 1,250 55,371 7,028 20,886 65,668
Oct. 134,141 61,412 4,207 530 48,932 7,744 8,280 64,449
Nov. 134,576 59,684 2,153 1,000 47,873 8,658 10,898 63,993
Dec. 83,743 37,389 2,675 1,707 28,987 4,020 5,058 41,296
2022 Jan. 142,047 69,054 11,165 1,510 50,426 5,953 13,257 59,736
Feb. 126,844 67,336 5,174 1,364 54,198 6,600 9,451 50,057
Mar. 160,832 85,552 5,597 875 72,212 6,868 16,473 58,807
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 536,359 165,146 28,500 7,427 90,889 38,329 78,356 292,857
2021 523,432 171,798 30,767 6,336 97,816 36,879 64,234 287,400
2021 July 37,970 8,795 800 250 5,419 2,326 3,202 25,973
Aug. 33,366 10,632 1,340 0 8,165 1,127 3,442 19,292
Sep. 60,975 18,007 4,400 0 10,365 3,241 12,400 30,568
Oct. 42,885 17,278 3,528 30 11,600 2,121 2,151 23,455
Nov. 35,010 9,512 1,705 500 4,165 3,142 5,667 19,831
Dec. 18,367 4,714 1,625 1,150 1,258 680 1,259 12,394
2022 Jan. 54,305 25,823 9,165 1,510 12,587 2,561 3,583 24,900
Feb. 44,458 22,391 3,487 1,364 14,364 3,175 2,101 19,966
Mar. 45,202 17,781 3,231 300 11,718 2,532 6,408 21,013
Net sales 5
2011 22,518 – 54,582 1,657 – 44,290 32,904 – 44,852 – 3,189 80,289
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 343,046 26,505 7,861 8,016 22,026 – 11,399 50,316 266,225
2021 244,012 52,517 17,821 7,471 22,962 4,264 35,531 155,965
2021 July 6,092 – 5,788 – 41 – 327 – 5,174 – 246 2,085 9,795
Aug. 33,206 6,654 – 1,096 – 92 7,304 539 994 25,557
Sep. 18,729 11,684 2,474 65 11,735 – 2,590 10,401 – 3,357
Oct. 8,808 6,987 2,418 – 536 3,831 1,275 513 1,307
Nov. 40,745 6,760 – 2,052 221 6,788 1,803 5,562 28,423
Dec. – 27,276 – 13,602 1,753 – 179 – 11,559 – 3,618 – 6,028 – 7,645
2022 Jan. 18,190 12,647 6,459 – 397 5,370 1,214 5,442 101
Feb. 21,041 10,554 2,870 869 7,435 – 619 924 9,563
Mar. 34,398 23,841 2,092 250 20,270 1,230 7,541 3,015
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,411,642 2 1,173,329 183,261 55,192 687,670 2 247,206 2 378,864 1,859,449
2021 3,685,313 1,250,481 202,185 63,496 731,012 253,788 414,636 2,020,196
2021 July 3,588,790 1,217,483 198,247 63,952 700,893 254,391 401,097 1,970,210
Aug. 3,622,442 1,224,961 197,175 63,869 708,773 255,144 402,456 1,995,025
Sep. 3,648,347 1,241,938 199,733 63,941 725,214 253,050 413,262 1,993,147
Oct. 3,659,584 1,250,383 202,270 63,409 730,113 254,591 413,663 1,995,538
Nov. 3,708,673 1,262,073 200,331 63,672 740,953 257,117 420,395 2,026,205
Dec. 3,685,313 1,250,481 202,185 63,496 731,012 253,788 414,636 2,020,196
2022 Jan. 3,704,975 1,266,896 208,667 63,110 739,680 255,440 420,363 2,017,717
Feb. 3,720,126 1,277,013 211,728 63,984 746,473 254,828 416,227 2,026,886
Mar. 3,758,429 1,303,024 213,408 64,234 769,087 256,295 424,053 2,031,352
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-March 2022
bis unter 2   1 182 292   458 647   58 032   26 512   305 550   68 553   78 703   644 942 
 2 bis unter 4    691 640   313 592   53 212   16 079   186 764   57 537   73 979   304 069 
 4 bis unter 6    577 212   210 192   46 798   9 361   104 816   49 217   63 450   303 571 
6 bis unter 8    363 655   133 171   32 422   6 272   69 346   25 131   44 658   185 826 
 8 bis unter 10    295 761   82 884   10 987   1 907   48 186   21 805   29 385   183 492 
 10 bis unter 15    229 457   55 242   7 639   3 609   32 201   11 794   38 972   135 242 
 15 bis unter 20    93 455   18 955   3 366    408   13 209   1 972   11 381   63 119 
 20 und darüber    324 957   30 340    952    87   9 014   20 286   83 525   211 093 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 – 552 – 762 – 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,673 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,775 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,872 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,635 1,963,588
2021 186,580 4,152 9,561 672 35 – 326 – 212 – 5,578 2,301,942
2021 July 181,614 – 65 74 31 2 – 1 – 2 – 169 2,266,494
Aug. 186,083 4,425 4,593 171 11 70 – 4 – 416 2,315,847
Sep. 186,316 230 678 6 11 – 14 – 9 – 443 2,238,994
Oct. 188,444 2,127 2,166 16 –– 4 – 35 – 16 2,267,343
Nov. 188,352 – 109 85 – 6 – 5 – 1 – 194 2,198,231
Dec. 186,580 – 2,595 524 16 –– 201 – 106 – 2,827 2,301,942
2022 Jan. 186,830 250 341 – 2 – 9 – 23 – 61 2,211,900
Feb. 186,737 – 110 64 9 40 – 11 – 76 – 137 2,060,901
Mar. 186,993 256 260 91 –– 0 – 25 – 70 2,076,514
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields and indices on German securities
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  4 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-
MFIs)German
bond
index
(REX)iBoxx
€ Germany 
price indexCDAX
share price
indexGerman
share
index
(DAX)
Period % per annumAverage
daily rateEnd-1998
= 100End-1987
= 100End-1987
= 1,000
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 2.9 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2019 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2020 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7 146.15 113.14 586.72 13,718.78
2021 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9 144.23 108.88 654.20 15,884.86
2021 Oct. 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 0.1 0.3 1.0 143.52 108.60 653.37 15,688.77
Nov. – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 1.0 145.58 110.72 627.49 15,100.13
Dec. – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 0.1 0.2 1.0 144.23 108.88 654.20 15,884.86
2022 Jan. 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.2 0.5 1.2 143.24 107.29 636.37 15,471.20
Feb. 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.6 0.8 1.7 141.55 105.86 593.56 14,461.02
Mar. 0.6 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.8 1.0 2.1 138.06 102.90 583.63 14,414.75
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 End of year or month.  3 Source: Deutsche Börse
AG. 4 Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for futures contracts;
calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 – 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 –1,340 – 379 –2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 –7,576 – 694 47,050 1,984 7,035
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,521 144,075 819 –1,745 143,256 44,266 –3,840
2015 181,889 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,753 174,018 7,362 494 166,656 35,259 7,871
2016 156,985 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 37,615 163,934 2,877 –3,172 161,057 40,787 –6,947
2017 153,756 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 58,834 156,282 4,938 1,048 151,344 57,786 –2,526
2018 132,033 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 28,339 138,713 2,979 –2,306 135,734 30,645 –6,680
2019 176,254 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 53,708 180,772 2,719 – 812 178,053 54,520 –4,519
2020 178,613 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 62,585 176,751 336 –1,656 176,415 64,241 1,862
2021 261,295 157,861 41,016 482 31,023 7,841 116,845 103,434 264,055 13,154 254 250,901 103,180 –2,760
2021 Sep. 13,638 5,145 2,414 – 52 1,696 673 2,731 8,493 13,484 265 9 13,219 8,484 154
Oct. 30,667 20,211 4,435 6 3,507 451 15,775 10,457 31,225 1,775 – 191 29,450 10,648 – 558
Nov. 29,103 13,176 3,779 – 68 3,006 651 9,398 15,927 30,066 1,737 640 28,329 15,287 – 963
Dec. 48,350 34,875 3,380 121 2,182 751 31,495 13,475 49,676 1,186 – 704 48,490 14,179 –1,326
2022 Jan. 23,418 16,969 5,142 – 25 3,876 1,164 11,827 6,448 22,780 1,178 120 21,602 6,328 638
Feb. 10,912 12,223 – 910 102 –1,364 296 13,132 –1,311 11,190 529 – 105 10,661 –1,206 – 278
Mar. . 6,548 – 299 188 –1,082 596 6,847 . . . . . . .
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2020 2021
 Item 2019 2020 2021 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 17.93 96.81 40.12 45.66 3.69 21.81 –25.36 19.57 24.11
   Debt securities –2.37 2.99 3.12 0.57 –0.20 –1.53 1.90 1.58 1.17
     Short-term debt securities –1.29 1.27 2.27 1.25 –0.18 0.12 0.77 0.26 1.12
     Long-term debt securities –1.08 1.72 0.85 –0.68 –0.02 –1.65 1.13 1.32 0.06
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –0.58 1.38 1.34 –0.48 0.10 –0.64 0.87 1.75 –0.64
         Non-financial corporations 0.49 –0.17 0.74 0.13 –0.48 0.10 0.62 0.59 –0.57
         Financial corporations –0.64 0.12 1.08 –0.41 0.09 –0.55 0.48 0.58 0.56
         General government –0.43 1.44 –0.48 –0.20 0.49 –0.20 –0.24 0.58 –0.63
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –1.79 1.61 1.79 1.05 –0.30 –0.88 1.03 –0.17 1.81
   Loans –1.49 –9.65 50.00 –6.78 9.66 –0.38 6.35 13.40 30.64
     Short-term loans 12.60 –7.30 38.01 1.41 6.11 –3.95 7.92 11.48 22.56
     Long-term loans –14.09 –2.36 11.99 –8.19 3.55 3.57 –1.57 1.92 8.08
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors –26.04 –1.15 9.49 –3.49 3.89 –6.40 –0.14 0.03 16.01
         Non-financial corporations –28.14 –12.27 7.11 –3.86 –4.90 –1.66 –3.40 –1.21 13.38
         Financial corporations 1.86 10.57 2.38 0.24 8.65 –4.75 3.26 1.24 2.63
         General government 0.24 0.55 0.00 0.14 0.14 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
       Loans to the rest of the world 24.55 –8.50 40.51 –3.29 5.77 6.02 6.49 13.37 14.63
   Equity and investment fund shares 115.90 110.30 151.31 41.40 11.97 45.63 36.71 27.01 41.96
     Equity 106.90 97.53 129.55 36.54 6.07 41.80 29.79 24.27 33.69
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 6.18 –77.97 15.33 10.02 –67.75 12.08 4.92 –18.27 16.59
         Non-financial corporations 4.62 –78.06 16.89 10.15 –68.34 12.08 5.32 –18.80 18.30
         Financial corporations 1.55 0.09 –1.56 –0.14 0.60 0.01 –0.41 0.54 –1.70
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 7.26 6.63 5.69 3.56 4.09 0.72 –1.61 5.37 1.20
       Other equity  1 93.46 168.86 108.53 22.97 69.72 29.00 26.48 37.16 15.90
     Investment fund shares 9.00 12.77 21.76 4.87 5.91 3.83 6.92 2.74 8.27
       Money market fund shares 1.78 3.79 0.66 3.27 1.34 –0.47 –0.19 –0.41 1.73
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 7.22 8.99 21.10 1.60 4.57 4.31 7.11 3.15 6.54
   Insurance technical reserves 1.81 2.76 2.87 0.66 0.79 0.78 0.80 0.61 0.68
   Financial derivatives –0.62 –27.52 10.14 –4.14 –11.28 13.93 2.31 –2.53 –3.56
   Other accounts receivable –64.82 47.61 83.56 44.28 50.68 19.75 –6.79 11.44 59.16
   Total 66.33 223.30 341.12 121.65 65.30 99.98 15.90 71.07 154.16
 External financing
   Debt securities 20.52 36.63 20.86 10.58 –4.01 2.77 8.92 10.29 –1.12
     Short-term securities 4.88 –4.40 2.51 –3.91 –5.42 –1.19 1.23 3.50 –1.02
       Long-term securities 15.64 41.02 18.35 14.49 1.41 3.96 7.69 6.79 –0.10
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 6.61 18.12 9.15 5.05 0.05 1.96 3.29 2.14 1.76
           Non-financial corporations 0.49 –0.17 0.74 0.13 –0.48 0.10 0.62 0.59 –0.57
           Financial corporations 5.31 19.86 9.10 5.44 1.18 1.98 2.75 1.78 2.59
           General government 0.47 –0.22 0.09 0.05 0.01 0.14 0.03 0.02 –0.10
           Households 0.34 –1.35 –0.78 –0.57 –0.65 –0.26 –0.12 –0.26 –0.15
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 13.91 18.51 11.72 5.53 –4.06 0.81 5.63 8.15 –2.88
   Loans 82.55 80.70 91.41 2.38 9.38 31.83 –10.25 20.50 49.32
     Short-term loans 26.32 –12.02 47.44 1.28 –0.25 26.83 –7.54 12.61 15.54
     Long-term loans 56.24 92.71 43.97 1.10 9.62 5.00 –2.71 7.90 33.78
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 29.31 32.78 65.14 –3.98 –0.81 35.16 –13.68 6.89 36.77
         Non-financial corporations –28.14 –12.27 7.11 –3.86 –4.90 –1.66 –3.40 –1.21 13.38
         Financial corporations 56.81 9.22 43.20 –11.14 –7.67 34.14 –15.52 5.44 19.13
         General government 0.64 35.82 14.83 11.02 11.75 2.68 5.24 2.66 4.26
       Loans from the rest of the world 53.25 47.92 26.26 6.36 10.19 –3.33 3.43 13.61 12.55
   Equity 11.69 60.37 61.44 23.17 21.89 14.63 8.50 17.93 20.38
     Listed shares of domestic sectors –24.77 –62.25 26.37 10.80 –66.70 15.27 8.02 –21.42 24.49
       Non-financial corporations 4.62 –78.06 16.89 10.15 –68.34 12.08 5.32 –18.80 18.30
       Financial corporations –33.41 3.47 –2.39 –1.01 1.40 0.02 1.52 –3.24 –0.68
       General government –0.01 0.26 –0.09 –0.01 –0.01 –0.07 –0.07 –0.00 0.04
       Households 4.03 12.08 11.96 1.67 0.25 3.25 1.25 0.63 6.84
     Listed shares of the rest of the world –1.16 10.09 18.96 –0.71 1.68 –4.97 –1.15 31.69 –6.61
     Other equity  1 37.61 112.54 16.11 13.09 86.91 4.32 1.64 7.65 2.50
   Insurance technical reserves 7.55 5.84 5.84 1.46 1.46 1.46 1.46 1.46 1.46
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options –1.38 0.54 20.02 0.06 1.26 1.27 8.20 6.58 3.97
   Other accounts payable 8.21 15.29 154.39 40.91 22.40 50.13 9.92 31.34 63.01
   Total 129.14 199.36 353.95 78.55 52.37 102.08 26.76 88.10 137.02
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2020 2021
 Item 2019 2020 2021 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 578.6 717.6 721.9 703.4 717.6 713.7 693.5 706.4 721.9
   Debt securities 49.6 51.5 54.6 51.5 51.5 49.9 51.9 53.5 54.6
     Short-term debt securities 3.7 4.8 7.4 5.1 4.8 5.0 5.9 6.2 7.4
     Long-term debt securities 45.9 46.7 47.2 46.3 46.7 44.9 46.0 47.3 47.2
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 21.1 22.1 23.3 21.9 22.1 21.4 22.3 24.0 23.3
         Non-financial corporations 5.0 4.7 5.3 5.1 4.7 4.7 5.3 5.9 5.3
         Financial corporations 13.6 13.4 14.5 13.2 13.4 12.9 13.4 14.0 14.5
         General government 2.6 4.0 3.5 3.5 4.0 3.8 3.6 4.1 3.5
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 28.4 29.4 31.3 29.6 29.4 28.5 29.6 29.5 31.3
   Loans 731.9 725.0 778.0 716.7 725.0 726.4 732.4 746.9 778.0
     Short-term loans 568.5 566.1 605.1 560.7 566.1 562.7 570.5 582.7 605.1
     Long-term loans 163.5 158.8 172.9 156.0 158.8 163.7 161.9 164.2 172.9
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 414.5 413.3 422.8 409.4 413.3 406.9 406.8 406.8 422.8
         Non-financial corporations 339.9 327.6 334.7 332.5 327.6 325.9 322.5 321.3 334.7
         Financial corporations 67.3 77.8 80.2 69.2 77.8 73.1 76.3 77.6 80.2
         General government 7.3 7.9 7.9 7.7 7.9 7.9 7.9 7.9 7.9
       Loans to the rest of the world 317.4 311.7 355.2 307.2 311.7 319.5 325.6 340.1 355.2
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,439.7 2,534.7 2,884.4 2,454.7 2,534.7 2,699.9 2,786.1 2,842.1 2,884.4
     Equity 2,249.7 2,330.0 2,644.3 2,261.3 2,330.0 2,487.6 2,562.0 2,614.6 2,644.3
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 342.0 307.0 393.0 352.5 307.0 359.4 383.5 371.5 393.0
         Non-financial corporations 332.9 298.9 384.9 346.0 298.9 350.9 375.0 361.7 384.9
         Financial corporations 9.0 8.1 8.0 6.5 8.1 8.5 8.5 9.8 8.0
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 52.2 68.1 73.5 56.5 68.1 72.5 70.2 72.6 73.5
       Other equity  1 1,855.5 1,954.9 2,177.8 1,852.3 1,954.9 2,055.7 2,108.3 2,170.5 2,177.8
     Investment fund shares 190.0 204.7 240.2 193.5 204.7 212.4 224.1 227.5 240.2
       Money market fund shares 3.2 7.0 7.6 5.7 7.0 6.5 6.3 5.9 7.6
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 186.8 197.7 232.5 187.8 197.7 205.9 217.8 221.6 232.5
   Insurance technical reserves 59.2 62.1 64.8 61.3 62.1 62.8 63.6 64.1 64.8
   Financial derivatives 31.6 31.1 26.0 29.6 31.1 30.9 52.0 106.6 26.0
   Other accounts receivable 1,251.2 1,236.0 1,446.3 1,190.4 1,236.0 1,344.9 1,336.3 1,386.3 1,446.3
   Total 5,141.7 5,358.0 5,976.0 5,207.6 5,358.0 5,628.5 5,715.8 5,905.8 5,976.0
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 204.7 249.6 252.2 251.8 249.6 239.3 249.1 256.0 252.2
     Short-term securities 11.9 7.1 9.6 12.6 7.1 5.9 7.2 10.6 9.6
     Long-term securities 192.9 242.5 242.5 239.2 242.5 233.4 242.0 245.3 242.5
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 77.7 96.0 100.6 94.9 96.0 95.6 99.6 99.7 100.6
         Non-financial corporations 5.0 4.7 5.3 5.1 4.7 4.7 5.3 5.9 5.3
         Financial corporations 57.8 78.1 83.2 76.1 78.1 78.0 81.2 81.2 83.2
         General government 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.4
         Households 14.4 12.8 11.8 13.3 12.8 12.5 12.5 12.1 11.8
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 127.0 153.6 151.5 156.9 153.6 143.7 149.6 156.2 151.5
   Loans 2,177.1 2,251.6 2,352.9 2,242.3 2,251.6 2,292.2 2,278.6 2,302.2 2,352.9
     Short-term loans 831.3 813.1 864.2 815.3 813.1 842.6 834.7 847.8 864.2
     Long-term loans 1,345.8 1,438.4 1,488.7 1,427.0 1,438.4 1,449.6 1,443.9 1,454.4 1,488.7
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,356.5 1,385.9 1,452.0 1,388.5 1,385.9 1,425.1 1,409.0 1,416.7 1,452.0
         Non-financial corporations 339.9 327.6 334.7 332.5 327.6 325.9 322.5 321.3 334.7
         Financial corporations 966.2 970.9 1,015.7 980.5 970.9 1,009.4 991.5 997.8 1,015.7
         General government 50.4 87.4 101.6 75.5 87.4 89.7 95.0 97.6 101.6
       Loans from the rest of the world 820.6 865.7 900.9 853.9 865.7 867.2 869.6 885.5 900.9
   Equity 3,096.8 3,260.9 3,689.0 3,090.7 3,260.9 3,522.5 3,640.3 3,645.9 3,689.0
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 734.1 739.9 924.7 747.4 739.9 848.8 896.0 882.4 924.7
       Non-financial corporations 332.9 298.9 384.9 346.0 298.9 350.9 375.0 361.7 384.9
       Financial corporations 158.0 171.9 210.2 156.1 171.9 193.0 202.9 196.9 210.2
       General government 51.8 56.3 69.9 53.3 56.3 67.3 71.8 70.6 69.9
       Households 191.3 212.8 259.7 192.0 212.8 237.6 246.3 253.2 259.7
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 958.6 995.6 1,126.4 923.5 995.6 1,081.5 1,125.8 1,119.3 1,126.4
     Other equity  1 1,404.2 1,525.5 1,637.9 1,419.8 1,525.5 1,592.3 1,618.4 1,644.2 1,637.9
   Insurance technical reserves 277.3 283.1 289.0 281.7 283.1 284.6 286.1 287.5 289.0
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 68.8 83.3 47.7 81.8 83.3 57.2 76.5 128.7 47.7
   Other accounts payable 1,302.0 1,284.2 1,530.8 1,271.2 1,284.2 1,388.3 1,376.7 1,458.8 1,530.8
   Total 7,126.7 7,412.7 8,161.6 7,219.4 7,412.7 7,784.1 7,907.2 8,079.1 8,161.6
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2020 2021
 Item 2019 2020 2021 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 146.74 213.23 144.97 41.75 75.28 48.31 53.09 12.10 31.47
     Currency 35.26 61.86 59.81 12.03 16.47 12.67 16.46 14.97 15.71
     Deposits 111.49 151.36 85.16 29.72 58.82 35.64 36.63 –2.87 15.76
       Transferable deposits 111.01 165.34 90.84 31.76 56.20 34.10 37.70 2.69 16.35
       Time deposits 5.95 1.29 –5.55 0.59 2.52 0.06 –1.06 –3.76 –0.79
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –5.47 –15.26 –0.13 –2.63 0.10 1.48 –0.01 –1.81 0.20
   Debt securities –1.86 –5.94 –5.88 –1.67 –3.18 –2.66 –1.30 –1.32 –0.61
     Short-term debt securities –0.53 0.08 0.31 0.10 –0.16 0.16 0.22 –0.10 0.03
     Long-term debt securities –1.34 –6.02 –6.19 –1.77 –3.03 –2.82 –1.52 –1.22 –0.63
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –2.93 –2.56 –3.70 –1.17 –1.79 –1.07 –1.26 –0.99 –0.39
         Non-financial corporations 0.21 –1.32 –0.83 –0.56 –0.62 –0.28 –0.13 –0.25 –0.16
         Financial corporations –2.23 –1.26 –2.57 –0.36 –1.02 –0.67 –1.02 –0.66 –0.23
         General government –0.92 0.02 –0.30 –0.24 –0.15 –0.12 –0.11 –0.08 0.00
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.07 –3.38 –2.18 –0.50 –1.39 –1.59 –0.04 –0.33 –0.22
   Equity and investment fund shares 49.20 90.18 136.50 20.35 21.48 28.09 31.66 34.68 42.06
     Equity 18.92 48.53 31.72 11.60 7.73 2.60 7.28 7.57 14.28
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 6.61 16.05 14.21 1.98 –0.35 3.39 2.20 2.34 6.29
         Non-financial corporations 3.52 11.92 12.64 1.71 0.33 3.12 1.58 1.82 6.12
         Financial corporations 3.09 4.14 1.58 0.27 –0.68 0.27 0.62 0.52 0.17
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 7.45 23.28 10.84 7.43 6.43 –1.72 3.54 3.77 5.24
       Other equity  1 4.86 9.19 6.67 2.20 1.64 0.92 1.54 1.46 2.75
     Investment fund shares 30.28 41.65 104.78 8.75 13.75 25.50 24.38 27.11 27.79
       Money market fund shares –0.32 0.09 0.18 0.10 –0.29 0.09 –0.07 –0.01 0.18
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 30.60 41.56 104.59 8.65 14.04 25.41 24.46 27.12 27.61
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 17.95 18.34 20.31 5.57 1.73 5.40 5.58 3.73 5.60
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 37.76 47.65 51.92 9.41 13.04 16.40 11.14 13.30 11.07
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 37.31 33.74 22.55 7.18 9.78 6.01 4.34 5.03 7.18
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 –14.28 –10.46 2.32 3.49 –17.42 21.67 –3.66 6.40 –22.10
   Total 272.83 386.74 372.68 86.07 100.71 123.22 100.85 73.93 74.68
 External financing
   Loans 82.57 83.84 98.66 27.41 25.14 16.79 27.54 30.68 23.64
     Short-term loans 1.02 –5.61 0.87 –0.53 –1.12 0.48 0.79 1.22 –1.61
     Long-term loans 81.55 89.45 97.79 27.94 26.26 16.31 26.76 29.47 25.25
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 68.59 85.62 100.37 25.43 25.51 18.75 26.56 29.35 25.72
       Consumer loans 14.42 –4.29 –0.89 1.08 –0.66 –1.14 –0.09 2.38 –2.04
       Entrepreneurial loans –0.43 2.51 –0.82 0.91 0.29 –0.82 1.08 –1.04 –0.04
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 73.41 83.17 94.32 27.32 22.37 14.85 27.19 28.38 23.91
       Loans from other financial institutions 9.06 0.77 4.34 0.10 2.77 1.94 0.35 2.31 –0.26
       Loans from general government and rest of the world –0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.73 0.01 0.95 0.32 –0.38 0.01 0.01 0.25 0.68
   Total 83.30 83.85 99.61 27.73 24.76 16.80 27.56 30.93 24.32
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2020 2021
 Item 2019 2020 2021 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 2,647.4 2,860.3 3,004.6 2,785.0 2,860.3 2,908.7 2,961.8 2,973.1 3,004.6
     Currency 262.6 324.4 384.2 308.0 324.4 337.1 353.6 368.5 384.2
     Deposits 2,384.8 2,535.8 2,620.3 2,477.0 2,535.8 2,571.6 2,608.3 2,604.6 2,620.3
       Transferable deposits 1,509.1 1,674.1 1,764.4 1,617.9 1,674.1 1,708.3 1,746.0 1,748.1 1,764.4
       Time deposits 301.6 302.8 297.1 300.3 302.8 302.9 301.9 297.9 297.1
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 574.2 558.9 558.8 558.8 558.9 560.4 560.4 558.6 558.8
     Debt securities 121.4 113.3 109.7 113.5 113.3 112.8 111.6 110.1 109.7
       Short-term debt securities 1.6 1.6 1.8 1.8 1.6 1.7 1.9 1.8 1.8
       Long-term debt securities 119.8 111.7 107.8 111.7 111.7 111.0 109.7 108.3 107.8
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 81.5 76.7 75.3 76.1 76.7 77.3 76.5 75.3 75.3
           Non-financial corporations 12.4 10.9 9.8 11.3 10.9 10.5 10.5 10.2 9.8
           Financial corporations 66.6 63.3 63.2 62.1 63.3 64.4 63.7 62.9 63.2
           General government 2.5 2.6 2.2 2.7 2.6 2.4 2.3 2.2 2.2
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 39.9 36.5 34.4 37.4 36.5 35.4 35.1 34.8 34.4
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,388.2 1,541.0 1,901.6 1,425.4 1,541.0 1,659.4 1,746.3 1,794.3 1,901.6
     Equity 708.0 806.4 969.0 737.8 806.4 868.6 904.8 923.8 969.0
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 223.9 243.3 296.0 217.3 243.3 271.7 280.0 287.1 296.0
         Non-financial corporations 182.3 204.0 250.4 183.6 204.0 228.2 236.9 244.3 250.4
         Financial corporations 41.6 39.2 45.6 33.7 39.2 43.4 43.1 42.7 45.6
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 136.3 180.6 249.3 156.1 180.6 199.5 216.5 223.3 249.3
       Other equity  1 347.8 382.6 423.8 364.4 382.6 397.4 408.2 413.4 423.8
     Investment fund shares 680.3 734.6 932.5 687.7 734.6 790.7 841.5 870.5 932.5
       Money market fund shares 2.3 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.5
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 678.0 732.2 930.0 684.9 732.2 788.3 839.2 868.2 930.0
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 393.8 412.2 432.5 410.5 412.2 417.6 423.2 426.9 432.5
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,069.1 1,112.1 1,162.2 1,101.2 1,112.1 1,128.0 1,138.7 1,151.6 1,162.2
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 924.5 956.8 979.4 953.2 956.8 962.8 967.2 972.2 979.4
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 29.6 27.9 27.9 30.0 27.9 27.8 28.2 28.5 27.9
   Total 6,574.1 7,023.6 7,617.7 6,818.8 7,023.6 7,217.1 7,377.0 7,456.6 7,617.7
 Liabilities
   Loans 1,837.9 1,924.6 2,023.4 1,899.0 1,924.6 1,939.7 1,969.5 2,000.6 2,023.4
     Short-term loans 59.0 53.2 53.0 54.3 53.2 53.6 54.4 55.6 53.0
     Long-term loans 1,778.9 1,871.3 1,970.4 1,844.7 1,871.3 1,886.1 1,915.1 1,945.0 1,970.4
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,358.7 1,448.2 1,548.4 1,422.6 1,448.2 1,464.9 1,493.9 1,523.1 1,548.4
       Consumer loans 231.4 226.1 224.5 227.0 226.1 224.6 224.4 226.7 224.5
       Entrepreneurial loans 247.7 250.2 250.5 249.5 250.2 250.2 251.2 250.8 250.5
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,741.6 1,824.6 1,920.3 1,801.6 1,824.6 1,839.8 1,867.3 1,896.1 1,920.3
       Loans from other financial institutions 96.1 99.8 103.1 97.3 99.8 99.7 102.1 104.3 103.1
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 19.9 19.4 19.2 21.2 19.4 20.6 19.5 19.8 19.2
   Total 1,857.7 1,943.9 2,042.6 1,920.2 1,943.9 1,960.2 1,989.0 2,020.3 2,042.6
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
May 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
  
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local securitygovernment government government government funds government government government government funds
Period
€ billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2015 + 29.1 + 17.6 + 4.6 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 + 36.4 + 13.7 + 7.7 + 6.3 + 8.7 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.32017 + 43.7 + 7.9 + 13.9 + 10.7 + 11.1 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.32018 
p + 64.4 + 21.1 + 11.7 + 15.6 + 16.0 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.5
2019 p + 51.1 + 22.0 + 13.8 + 6.1 + 9.1 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3
2020 p − 145.2 − 86.4 − 30.1 + 6.3 − 35.0 − 4.3 − 2.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 1.0
2021 pe − 132.5 − 143.4 + 5.1 + 1.4 + 4.4 − 3.7 − 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
2020         H1  p − 47.8 − 26.9 − 9.2 + 0.8 − 12.5 − 2.9 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.8
         H2  p − 97.4 − 59.5 − 20.9 + 5.5 − 22.5 − 5.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 + 0.3 − 1.3
2021         H1  pe − 72.0 − 59.0 − 1.7 + 1.4 − 12.7 − 4.2 − 3.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.7
         H2  pe − 60.5 − 84.4 + 6.8 − 0.0 + 17.1 − 3.3 − 4.5 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.9
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2015 2,177.2 1,371.9 659.5 163.4 1.5 71.9 45.3 21.8 5.4 0.0
2016 2,161.5 1,365.6 642.3 166.2 1.2 69.0 43.6 20.5 5.3 0.02017 2,111.4 1,349.9 614.9 162.7 0.8 64.6 41.3 18.8 5.0 0.02018 
p 2,062.6 1,322.9 600.8 155.1 0.7 61.2 39.3 17.8 4.6 0.0
2019 p 2,045.7 1,299.7 609.8 152.9 0.7 58.9 37.4 17.6 4.4 0.0
2020 p 2,314.1 1,512.9 660.6 154.1 7.4 68.7 44.9 19.6 4.6 0.2
2021 p 2,475.8 1,666.4 669.0 154.7 0.3 69.3 46.7 18.7 4.3 0.0
2020         Q1  p 2,090.1 1,327.5 623.1 153.4 0.8 60.1 38.1 17.9 4.4 0.0
         Q2  p 2,259.6 1,473.7 645.1 153.6 1.0 66.4 43.3 19.0 4.5 0.0
         Q3  p 2,333.1 1,536.7 655.6 154.7 4.6 69.0 45.5 19.4 4.6 0.1
         Q4  p 2,314.1 1,512.9 660.6 154.1 7.4 68.7 44.9 19.6 4.6 0.2
2021         Q1  p 2,345.0 1,538.6 665.6 154.2 16.2 69.9 45.8 19.8 4.6 0.5
         Q2  p 2,398.8 1,588.7 669.6 155.5 21.2 69.6 46.1 19.4 4.5 0.6
         Q3  p 2,432.5 1,616.7 674.8 155.1 24.2 69.3 46.1 19.2 4.4 0.7
         Q4  p 2,475.8 1,666.4 669.0 154.7 0.3 69.3 46.7 18.7 4.3 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus   
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly  
GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2015 1,364.9 705.1 501.2 158.6 1,335.8 721.9 233.0 153.0 64.5 42.2 121.2 + 29.1 1,213.3
2016 1,426.7 739.2 524.3 163.3 1,390.4 754.5 240.7 162.5 68.1 37.3 127.2 + 36.4 1,270.42017 1,486.9 773.3 549.5 164.2 1,443.3 784.8 250.6 169.5 71.6 33.8 132.9 + 43.7 1,329.52018 
p 1,557.3 808.2 572.6 176.5 1,492.8 805.6 260.3 176.2 78.4 31.1 141.3 + 64.4 1,387.8
2019 p 1,613.8 834.4 598.2 181.2 1,562.7 846.6 272.7 184.2 83.7 27.3 148.3 + 51.1 1,439.7
2020 p 1,566.9 782.1 607.9 176.9 1,712.1 905.2 284.1 209.8 90.9 21.0 201.2 − 145.2 1,397.0
2021 pe 1,705.8 882.6 632.8 190.3 1,838.2 936.5 294.1 232.5 91.7 21.0 262.4 − 132.5 1,522.9
As a percentage of GDP
2015 45.1 23.3 16.6 5.2 44.1 23.9 7.7 5.1 2.1 1.4 4.0 + 1.0 40.1
2016 45.5 23.6 16.7 5.2 44.4 24.1 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.2 4.1 + 1.2 40.52017 45.5 23.7 16.8 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 + 1.3 40.72018 
p 46.2 24.0 17.0 5.2 44.3 23.9 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.2 + 1.9 41.2
2019 p 46.5 24.0 17.2 5.2 45.0 24.4 7.9 5.3 2.4 0.8 4.3 + 1.5 41.5
2020 p 46.5 23.2 18.1 5.3 50.8 26.9 8.4 6.2 2.7 0.6 6.0 − 4.3 41.5
2021 pe 47.8 24.7 17.7 5.3 51.5 26.2 8.2 6.5 2.6 0.6 7.3 − 3.7 42.6
Percentage growth rates
2015 + 3.9 + 4.8 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 3.0 + 4.4 + 2.4 + 4.0 + 6.6 − 10.5 − 1.8 . + 4.6
2016 + 4.5 + 4.8 + 4.6 + 2.9 + 4.1 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 6.2 + 5.6 − 11.7 + 4.9 . + 4.72017 + 4.2 + 4.6 + 4.8 + 0.5 + 3.8 + 4.0 + 4.1 + 4.3 + 5.1 − 9.3 + 4.5 . + 4.72018 
p + 4.7 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 7.5 + 3.4 + 2.7 + 3.9 + 3.9 + 9.5 − 8.0 + 6.3 . + 4.4
2019 p + 3.6 + 3.2 + 4.5 + 2.7 + 4.7 + 5.1 + 4.8 + 4.5 + 6.8 − 12.2 + 5.0 . + 3.7
2020 p − 2.9 − 6.3 + 1.6 − 2.4 + 9.6 + 6.9 + 4.2 + 13.9 + 8.7 − 23.4 + 35.7 . − 3.0
2021 pe + 8.9 + 12.9 + 4.1 + 7.6 + 7.4 + 3.5 + 3.5 + 10.8 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 30.4 . + 9.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and   
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution  Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
May 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2015 p 829.8 673.3 10.4 804.3 244.1 302.7 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,301.1 1,273.6 + 27.4
2016 p 862.3 705.8 9.0 844.5 251.3 321.6 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 17.8 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.1 1,330.2 + 24.9
2017 p 900.3 734.5 7.9 869.4 261.6 327.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 30.8 631.5 622.0 + 9.5 1,417.5 1,377.2 + 40.3
2018 p 951.8 776.3 6.2 905.6 272.5 338.0 39.2 55.8 16.1 + 46.2 656.2 642.5 + 13.6 1,490.7 1,430.9 + 59.8
2019 p 1,010.3 799.4 11.2 975.5 285.9 349.7 33.6 62.9 16.8 + 34.8 685.0 676.7 + 8.3 1,573.8 1,530.8 + 43.0
2020 p 947.0 739.9 13.9 1,112.4 299.5 422.8 25.9 69.2 60.1 − 165.5 719.5 747.4 − 27.9 1,518.9 1,712.3 − 193.4
2019         Q1  p 240.9 192.7 2.5 227.7 68.3 88.5 11.5 10.2 3.3 + 13.2 163.3 166.4 − 3.1 374.3 364.1 + 10.2
         Q2  p 256.3 201.7 2.0 236.1 70.1 87.0 12.2 13.0 2.6 + 20.1 169.9 168.4 + 1.5 396.1 374.5 + 21.6
         Q3  p 245.3 194.7 3.4 236.7 70.9 86.2 4.5 16.4 3.1 + 8.6 168.8 170.3 − 1.5 384.0 376.9 + 7.1
         Q4  p 269.1 210.6 3.2 272.2 76.1 87.5 5.1 22.5 7.7 − 3.1 181.9 172.6 + 9.3 420.7 414.5 + 6.2
2020         Q1  p 244.8 197.4 2.5 236.4 72.9 90.5 11.9 12.0 2.6 + 8.4 168.3 175.7 − 7.4 380.0 379.1 + 0.9
         Q2  p 211.9 158.1 2.7 271.8 72.2 119.1 8.6 15.4 3.4 − 59.8 175.9 187.0 − 11.1 354.5 425.4 − 70.9
         Q3  p 227.8 181.4 4.0 282.3 72.4 102.0 1.4 18.3 34.3 − 54.5 181.1 195.0 − 13.9 370.1 438.5 − 68.4
         Q4  p 259.3 201.9 4.5 315.4 81.4 109.1 5.9 22.8 19.6 − 56.1 186.0 189.6 − 3.5 410.6 470.2 − 59.6
2021         Q1  p 240.7 185.2 4.3 300.6 75.5 134.4 7.3 11.1 14.6 − 59.9 182.4 196.3 − 13.9 385.2 458.9 − 73.8
         Q2  p 267.0 195.8 7.5 297.2 74.8 123.2 10.7 15.2 10.5 − 30.2 185.9 197.0 − 11.1 414.1 455.3 − 41.2
         Q3  p 270.9 210.7 7.4 290.2 75.8 117.5 − 0.4 16.5 10.4 − 19.3 183.4 191.9 − 8.6 413.5 441.4 − 27.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans grant ed.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2018 p 374.4 363.5 + 10.9 420.5 400.1 + 20.4 271.8 261.5 + 10.2
2019 p 382.5 369.2 + 13.3 437.2 419.6 + 17.6 284.2 278.1 + 6.1
2020 p 341.4 472.1 − 130.7 456.4 489.4 − 33.0 297.0 294.6 + 2.4
2021 p 370.3 585.9 − 215.6 513.1 508.9 + 4.2 309.9 304.8 + 5.1
2019         Q1  p 84.7 86.1 − 1.4 105.7 96.7 + 8.9 58.2 63.2 − 4.9
         Q2  p 97.7 90.3 + 7.4 106.0 100.2 + 5.8 70.6 65.9 + 4.7
         Q3  p 93.2 91.3 + 1.9 107.9 102.6 + 5.2 69.1 69.2 − 0.1
         Q4  p 106.9 101.5 + 5.4 115.5 118.4 − 2.9 84.5 78.4 + 6.0
2020         Q1  p 92.3 90.4 + 1.9 105.6 99.7 + 5.9 57.9 67.7 − 9.8
         Q2  p 70.8 114.8 − 44.0 108.2 128.0 − 19.8 69.4 69.4 + 0.1
         Q3  p 83.7 105.4 − 21.7 112.9 113.7 − 0.8 67.5 72.6 − 5.1
         Q4  p 94.5 161.5 − 67.0 127.4 146.3 − 18.9 100.3 83.5 + 16.8
2021         Q1  p 75.0 127.5 − 52.5 113.7 120.7 − 7.1 61.1 69.7 − 8.6
         Q2  p 86.4 123.5 − 37.1 122.8 122.0 + 0.8 74.6 71.7 + 2.9
         Q3  p 93.9 128.7 − 34.7 125.9 120.2 + 5.7 74.6 74.9 − 0.3
         Q4  p 115.1 206.3 − 91.2 148.5 144.3 + 4.2 97.6 87.0 + 10.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city states Berlin, Bremen and
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- assigned to the general government sector. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
May 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
  
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,8362017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,3682018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,7752019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,911 632,268 313,381 286,065 32,822 107,916 − 274 30,266
2021 833,337 706,978 342,988 325,768 38,222 125,000 + 1,359 29,321
2020         Q1 198,375 168,123 83,086 75,420 9,617 18,875 + 11,377 6,855
         Q2 158,161 135,185 68,653 59,557 6,974 25,107 − 2,131 6,997         Q3 182,202 156,397 78,502 72,613 5,282 25,234 + 571 9,705         Q4 201,173 172,564 83,140 78,475 10,949 38,700 − 10,090 6,709
2021         Q1 189,316 159,271 72,814 73,137 13,320 19,882 + 10,163 6,887
         Q2 191,931 163,158 81,129 74,024 8,005 29,609 − 835 7,438         Q3 211,364 180,378 87,603 84,312 8,464 29,726 + 1,260 7,823         Q4 240,726 204,171 101,442 94,295 8,433 45,784 − 9,229 7,173
2022         Q1 ... 189,158 92,112 87,240 9,806 ... ... 7,261
2021         Mar. . 64,816 32,006 30,306 2,504 . . 2,296
2022         Mar. . 76,345 38,282 35,628 2,434 . . 2,366
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget. 2Customs footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Domestic Import trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax 4 tion tax  5 tax 6 Total VAT VAT fers  8 taxes 9 taxes 9 duties taxes
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,3452017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,1412018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,5712019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,376 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,734 50,107
2021 760,953 370,296 218,407 72,342 42,124 37,423 250,800 187,631 63,169 4,951 98,171 31,613 5,122 53,976
2020         Q1 181,374 88,009 53,389 18,711 8,495 7,415 60,060 46,038 14,022 244 24,517 7,406 1,139 13,251
         Q2 146,360 69,928 50,760 10,633 2,348 6,187 44,262 31,625 12,638 1,170 23,525 6,326 1,149 11,175         Q3 168,308 73,766 47,470 13,492 5,411 7,392 59,819 47,933 11,886 796 25,930 6,784 1,212 11,910         Q4 186,334 89,094 57,667 16,146 8,014 7,268 55,343 43,105 12,238 1,744 31,660 7,259 1,234 13,770
2021         Q1 171,974 86,381 50,854 17,826 10,203 7,498 54,795 45,403 9,392 252 21,712 7,757 1,076 12,703
         Q2 175,242 84,505 50,783 14,347 8,860 10,515 57,634 43,399 14,235 1,215 23,210 7,398 1,281 12,085         Q3 193,910 90,619 53,857 17,973 9,853 8,936 69,528 49,052 20,476 1,189 23,469 7,813 1,292 13,532         Q4 219,827 108,791 62,913 22,196 13,208 10,474 68,843 49,777 19,066 2,295 29,780 8,645 1,473 15,656
2022         Q1 203,130 96,245 56,206 20,915 11,178 7,946 73,584 54,234 19,350 615 22,252 8,975 1,459 13,972
2021         Mar. 70,284 41,745 15,951 15,443 7,581 2,770 17,616 10,557 7,058 11 7,506 2,993 414 5,468
2022         Mar. 82,408 47,977 17,995 17,495 9,379 3,108 22,338 12,357 9,981 5 8,179 3,423 487 6,063
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike plans. 4After deducting employee refunds and research grants. 5After deducting re-
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens search grants. 6Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains,
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- non-assessed taxes on earnings. 7The allocation of revenue to central, state and
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- local government, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is re gulated in Section
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- local government in revenue for 2021: 45.1:51.2:3.7. The EU share is de ducted from
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- central government’s share. 8Respective percentage share of central and state
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After government for 2021: 41.4:58.6. 9 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 
deducting child benefits and subsidies for supplementary private pension

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
May 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,9662018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,2032019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,651 14,553 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2021 37,120 11,028 14,733 14,980 9,546 6,691 2,089 1,984 18,335 9,824 2,333 1,121 77,335 61,251 14,985
2020         Q1 4,966 4,930 2,413 6,766 2,634 1,708 562 537 4,525 1,981 542 358 17,245 13,391 3,403
         Q2 8,117 4,235 3,772 2,606 2,426 1,585 455 328 3,566 2,154 425 181 12,971 8,842 3,895         Q3 9,985 4,365 3,978 2,817 2,366 1,499 506 414 3,730 2,262 509 283 14,690 10,242 4,095         Q4 14,566 5,145 4,487 2,365 2,101 1,768 715 513 4,234 2,203 567 254 16,584 12,997 3,283
2021         Q1 4,126 3,171 2,585 6,776 2,567 1,692 395 400 4,716 2,110 578 353 17,594 13,798 3,503
         Q2 8,717 2,546 4,053 2,843 2,469 1,640 528 413 4,231 2,374 538 255 17,904 13,692 4,034         Q3 9,532 2,338 3,636 2,911 2,381 1,618 514 538 4,571 2,457 516 269 18,643 14,215 4,133         Q4 14,745 2,972 4,458 2,449 2,130 1,741 651 633 4,816 2,884 700 244 23,194 19,546 3,316
2022         Q1 4,452 2,840 2,372 7,175 2,594 1,785 531 503 5,061 2,827 701 385 ... ... ...
2021         Mar. 2,286 1,384 1,121 866 896 695 121 138 1,759 822 201 212 . . .
2022         Mar. 2,547 1,677 1,086 986 948 652 131 154 1,857 1,114 214 238 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  
3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,0322018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,0082019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 + 1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 303 56 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 − 3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 344 55 3,901
2021 
p 347,805 245,169 101,970 347,043 296,713 22,728 + 762 41,974 40,310 1,241 370 52 3,835
2019         Q1 77,984 54,393 23,426 78,630 67,328 5,087 − 646 39,432 37,637 1,474 263 57 4,001
         Q2 81,410 57,837 23,408 80,804 69,011 5,205 + 605 40,232 38,639 1,272 264 57 3,996         Q3 80,305 56,637 23,481 82,716 70,633 5,330 − 2,411 38,386 36,876 1,183 271 56 3,995         Q4 86,756 63,133 23,413 82,849 70,674 5,333 + 3,907 42,945 40,539 2,074 276 56 3,987
2020         Q1 80,578 55,999 24,436 82,622 70,829 5,346 − 2,045 40,840 38,636 1,848 300 56 3,966
         Q2 82,098 57,515 24,413 82,875 70,889 5,346 − 777 39,779 37,975 1,446 304 55 3,949         Q3 82,689 58,109 24,418 86,497 74,054 5,591 − 3,808 36,898 35,197 1,333 313 55 3,925         Q4 88,978 64,375 24,412 86,605 73,879 5,576 + 2,373 39,847 38,186 1,286 321 55 3,916
2021         Q1 83,066 57,351 25,542 86,048 73,799 5,600 − 2,982 36,888 35,326 1,166 342 54 3,887
         Q2 86,386 60,666 25,545 86,486 73,905 5,679 − 100 36,941 35,554 988 345 53 3,871         Q3 85,535 59,941 25,468 87,123 74,453 5,718 − 1,588 36,041 34,670 973 345 53 3,840         Q4 92,818 67,211 25,415 87,385 74,556 5,730 + 5,432 41,974 40,310 1,241 370 52 3,835
2022         Q1 86,684 60,599 25,937 86,841 74,568 5,734 − 157 41,784 39,952 1,367 399 65 3,783
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
May 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- Government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy funds Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment payment iture  5 surplus ment
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −2018 39,335 34,172 622 − 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 . 588 8,129 + 6,228 −2019 35,285 29,851 638 − 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 . 842 6,252 + 2,131 −
2020 33,678 28,236 630 − 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 . 1,214 6,076 − 27,335 6,913
2021 35,830 29,571 1,302 − 57,570 19,460 21,003 7,475 . 493 6,080 − 21,739 16,935
2019         Q1 8,369 7,027 148 − 8,597 3,969 403 1,818 . 179 1,450 − 228 −
         Q2 8,685 7,440 156 − 8,136 3,673 204 1,832 . 243 1,475 + 549 −         Q3 8,650 7,263 162 − 7,829 3,682 68 1,711 . 190 1,510 + 821 −         Q4 9,581 8,121 172 − 8,592 3,685 98 1,941 . 230 1,816 + 989 −
2020         Q1 8,123 6,851 153 − 9,301 4,469 392 1,934 . 235 1,470 − 1,179 −
         Q2 7,906 6,691 151 − 17,005 4,869 7,977 1,793 . 254 1,407 − 9,099 −         Q3 8,350 6,934 153 − 18,619 5,737 8,637 1,701 . 472 1,414 − 10,269 −         Q4 9,299 7,760 174 − 16,088 5,543 5,712 1,957 . 251 1,785 − 6,789 6,913
2021         Q1 8,228 6,747 289 − 18,260 5,956 8,006 1,935 . 184 1,391 − 10,033 −
         Q2 8,830 7,301 324 − 16,720 5,029 7,495 1,912 . 108 1,452 − 7,890 −         Q3 8,791 7,290 330 − 12,042 4,447 3,631 1,744 . 91 1,452 − 3,251 −         Q4 9,982 8,234 359 − 10,547 4,028 1,871 1,884 . 110 1,785 − 565 16,935
2022         Q1 8,827 7,374 251 − 10,685 4,424 2,087 1,821 . 135 1,412 − 1,858 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- courage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promotion
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- of business start-ups. 5Including collection charges to other social security funds , ex-
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring meas- job seekers. ures and refunds of social contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to en-
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which: of which:
Central Remedies Adminis-
govern- and trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental therapeutic Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 appliances benefits iture  5 surplus
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 7572017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,0412018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 + 2,6542019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 − 1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 − 6,110
2021 
p 289,546 249,735 36,977 293,930 82,006 46,248 45,081 16,410 20,025 16,612 11,774 − 4,385
2019         Q1 59,809 55,622 3,625 62,485 19,586 9,947 10,386 3,738 4,106 3,649 2,707 − 2,676
         Q2 62,121 57,858 3,625 62,858 19,210 10,127 10,421 3,821 4,289 3,535 2,774 − 736         Q3 62,143 57,763 3,625 62,716 19,109 10,229 10,278 3,630 4,467 3,558 2,804 − 573         Q4 67,094 61,884 3,625 64,075 19,497 10,353 10,455 3,821 4,713 3,659 2,975 + 3,019
2020         Q1 61,949 57,419 3,625 66,438 20,049 11,086 10,806 3,804 4,470 4,061 2,816 − 4,489
         Q2 68,108 58,096 9,359 69,487 17,674 10,492 10,908 3,389 3,986 4,143 2,980 − 1,378         Q3 70,130 59,403 10,151 71,063 20,913 10,567 11,642 3,774 4,852 3,829 2,970 − 934         Q4 68,645 62,672 4,805 67,987 19,887 10,729 11,019 3,891 4,725 3,920 3,039 + 658
2021         Q1 72,970 59,338 13,303 72,660 19,631 11,175 11,564 4,069 4,564 4,287 2,967 + 310
         Q2 71,964 61,819 9,965 74,492 20,287 11,275 11,536 4,219 5,085 4,120 2,850 − 2,529         Q3 70,592 61,899 7,942 73,569 20,748 11,756 10,730 4,060 5,085 4,004 2,849 − 2,977         Q4 74,020 66,678 5,767 73,209 21,340 12,043 11,252 4,062 5,290 4,200 3,109 + 810
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, i.e. after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social security funds. sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
May 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1 
of which:
Inpatient Contributions to
of which: Non-cash care Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits  3 total 4 benefit ance scheme  5 expenditure surplus
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 4,626 13,003 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 4,904 13,539 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,5572018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 − 3,3152019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2021 
p 52,503 49,696 53,850 9,510 16,452 13,920 3,041 2,032 − 1,347
2019         Q1 11,123 10,938 10,728 2,060 4,082 2,833 547 437 + 396
         Q2 11,795 11,620 10,812 2,012 4,132 2,868 588 449 + 983         Q3 11,734 11,557 11,159 2,098 4,234 2,972 598 450 + 576         Q4 12,592 12,413 11,252 2,062 4,243 3,064 626 433 + 1,339
2020         Q1 11,693 11,473 11,444 2,186 4,214 3,067 633 489 + 249
         Q2 11,921 11,732 11,816 2,051 4,015 3,173 664 468 + 105         Q3 13,924 11,938 12,890 2,263 4,087 3,249 682 500 + 1,033         Q4 13,079 12,746 12,927 2,306 4,177 3,403 716 481 + 152
2021         Q1 12,093 11,831 13,344 2,355 3,971 3,387 725 512 − 1,251
         Q2 12,933 12,329 13,521 2,287 4,030 3,421 745 510 − 587         Q3 12,624 12,294 13,390 2,393 4,182 3,466 783 509 − 767         Q4 14,853 13,242 13,595 2,475 4,270 3,646 788 503 + 1,258
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *The final annual figures generally differ from the ance contributions). 3Data revision in 2014. 4From 2014, also including benefits for
total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter al ia.5For non-pro-
sequently. 1Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund. 2Since 2005, fessional carers. 
including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
 market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,177,231 85,952 607,446 217,604 52,453 1,213,776
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,161,540 205,391 585,446 211,797 48,631 1,110,2752017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017 2,111,360 319,159 538,801 180,145 45,109 1,028,1462018 + 167,231 − 16,248 − 91 − 1,670 2018 2,062,629 364,731 495,374 186,399 44,129 971,9952019 + 185,070 + 63 − 8,044 − 914 2019 2,045,744 366,562 464,612 183,741 48,740 982,089
2020 + 456,828 + 217,904 + 24,181 − 3,399 2020  
p 2,314,090 522,392 492,545 191,497 53,629 1,054,027
2021 p 2,475,776 716,004 493,773 191,386 46,195 1,028,418
2019         Q1 + 56,654 + 3,281 − 2,172 − 1,199 2019          Q1 2,072,772 359,884 483,567 185,767 44,244 999,309
         Q2 + 48,545 + 5,491 − 279 + 7,227          Q2 2,063,198 361,032 475,693 184,077 43,358 999,037         Q3 + 48,053 + 4,030 + 176 − 5,093          Q3 2,080,195 358,813 473,766 185,300 49,755 1,012,562         Q4 + 31,817 − 12,738 − 5,768 − 1,849          Q4 2,045,744 366,562 464,612 183,741 48,740 982,089
2020         Q1 + 65,656 + 31,296 + 9,236 + 1,698 2020          Q1  
p 2,090,099 371,076 481,651 186,021 49,824 1,001,527
         Q2 + 185,560 + 126,585 + 31,212 − 7,314          Q2  p 2,259,576 424,141 546,446 186,616 49,949 1,052,424
         Q3 + 159,067 + 80,783 − 6,080 + 588          Q3  p 2,333,149 468,723 517,114 189,832 51,775 1,105,704
         Q4 + 46,545 − 20,760 − 10,187 + 1,629          Q4  p 2,314,090 522,392 492,545 191,497 53,629 1,054,027
2021         Q1 + 109,953 + 42,045 − 11,737 − 4,708 2021          Q1  p 2,345,044 561,443 476,087 190,467 52,141 1,064,906
         Q2 + 146,852 + 57,601 + 3,463 + 1,576          Q2  p 2,398,790 620,472 477,542 190,219 44,004 1,066,553
         Q3  p 2,432,545 669,659 481,474 191,940 45,707 1,043,766
         Q4  p 2,475,776 716,004 493,773 191,386 46,195 1,028,418
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
May 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2015 2,177,231 13,949 65,676 1,499,010 90,350 508,246 . .
2016 2,161,540 15,491 69,715 1,483,871 96,254 496,208 . .2017 2,111,360 14,298 48,789 1,484,462 87,799 476,012 . .2018 2,062,629 14,680 52,572 1,456,160 77,296 461,919 . .
2019         Q1 2,072,772 15,512 64,218 1,460,634 72,005 460,402 . .
         Q2 2,063,198 12,719 56,256 1,463,027 75,284 455,911 . .         Q3 2,080,195 17,438 62,602 1,465,529 79,918 454,709 . .         Q4 2,045,744 14,449 49,180 1,458,540 69,289 454,286 . .
2020         Q1  
p 2,090,099 11,410 70,912 1,472,222 85,137 450,418 . .
         Q2  p 2,259,576 13,120 122,225 1,533,857 142,708 447,666 . .
         Q3  p 2,333,149 11,886 180,445 1,582,574 111,480 446,764 . .
         Q4  p 2,314,090 14,486 163,401 1,593,586 94,288 448,330 . .
2021         Q1  p 2,345,044 12,200 180,788 1,637,903 69,739 444,414 . .
         Q2  p 2,398,790 12,901 175,436 1,690,507 76,438 443,508 . .
         Q3  p 2,432,545 13,319 183,243 1,712,600 79,614 443,770 . .
         Q4  p 2,475,776 17,743 183,990 1,731,270 101,870 440,902 . .
Central government
2015 1,371,933 13,949 49,512 1,138,951 45,256 124,265 1,062 13,667
2016 1,365,579 15,491 55,208 1,123,853 50,004 121,022 556 8,5672017 1,349,945 14,298 36,297 1,131,896 47,761 119,693 1,131 10,6182018 1,322,905 14,680 42,246 1,107,140 42,057 116,782 933 9,975
2019         Q1 1,324,377 15,512 50,032 1,102,604 39,185 117,044 809 11,583
         Q2 1,320,239 12,719 42,752 1,109,057 38,950 116,761 835 13,862         Q3 1,327,958 17,438 48,934 1,105,439 39,067 117,080 704 13,849         Q4 1,299,726 14,449 38,480 1,101,866 28,617 116,314 605 10,301
2020         Q1  
p 1,327,548 11,410 56,680 1,103,934 38,714 116,809 605 8,125
         Q2  p 1,473,720 13,120 109,221 1,139,510 95,489 116,381 585 7,037
         Q3  p 1,536,666 11,886 166,564 1,178,687 62,933 116,596 605 11,731
         Q4  p 1,512,917 14,486 154,498 1,180,683 46,811 116,439 609 14,545
2021         Q1  p 1,538,572 12,200 167,484 1,212,495 29,838 116,553 632 22,956
         Q2  p 1,588,734 12,901 165,373 1,259,206 35,008 116,247 631 29,479
         Q3  p 1,616,738 13,319 170,961 1,280,586 35,984 115,888 677 31,417
         Q4  p 1,666,432 17,743 176,427 1,300,416 56,836 115,010 656 7,975
State government
2015 659,521 − 16,169 362,376 23,349 257,627 15,867 2,348
2016 642,291 − 14,515 361,996 20,482 245,298 11,273 1,6942017 614,926 − 12,543 354,688 19,628 228,067 14,038 2,0462018 600,776 − 10,332 351,994 18,864 219,587 14,035 1,891
2019         Q1 612,478 − 14,190 361,293 19,374 217,621 15,229 2,004
         Q2 610,700 − 13,508 357,571 24,784 214,838 17,631 1,887         Q3 620,694 − 13,671 363,723 29,765 213,535 17,755 1,957         Q4 609,828 − 10,703 360,495 25,768 212,862 14,934 1,826
2020         Q1  
p 623,096 − 14,234 372,021 28,582 208,260 12,297 1,783
         Q2  p 645,075 − 13,006 398,404 28,298 205,368 11,070 2,085
         Q3  p 655,581 − 13,882 408,310 29,662 203,728 11,717 2,090
         Q4  p 660,572 − 8,904 417,307 30,371 203,991 11,946 1,411
2021         Q1  p 665,620 − 13,305 430,103 23,404 198,808 11,023 2,018
         Q2  p 669,596 − 10,064 436,434 25,197 197,901 12,637 2,073
         Q3  p 674,769 − 12,284 437,437 26,603 198,446 11,555 2,151
         Q4  p 668,951 − 7,564 436,157 29,084 196,146 12,305 1,684
Local government
2015 163,439 − − 2,047 27,474 133,918 2,143 463
2016 166,174 − − 2,404 27,002 136,768 1,819 4312017 162,745 − − 3,082 24,572 135,091 1,881 4662018 155,127 − 1 3,046 20,425 131,655 1,884 497
2019         Q1 153,387 − 1 2,960 18,857 131,570 2,139 498
         Q2 152,014 − − 2,961 18,814 130,239 2,016 525         Q3 151,489 − − 3,016 18,574 129,899 2,065 555         Q4 152,891 − − 2,996 19,079 130,816 1,856 532
2020         Q1  
p 153,423 − − 3,128 19,734 130,560 1,825 508
         Q2  p 153,556 − − 3,094 19,718 130,744 2,085 350
         Q3  p 154,685 − − 2,961 20,596 131,128 2,107 339
         Q4  p 154,054 − − 3,366 18,137 132,551 1,406 330
2021         Q1  p 154,202 − − 3,121 17,429 133,652 2,020 345
         Q2  p 155,485 − − 3,121 18,467 133,897 2,090 348
         Q3  p 155,050 − − 3,000 18,077 133,973 2,156 344
         Q4  p 154,717 − − 3,171 17,203 134,343 1,695 348
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
May 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2015 1,502 − − − 537 965 91 2,685
2016 1,232 − − − 562 670 89 3,0442017 807 − − − 262 545 15 3,9342018 690 − − − 388 302 16 4,506
2019         Q1 723 − − − 453 270 16 4,110
         Q2 742 − − − 557 185 16 4,224         Q3 594 − − − 391 203 16 4,179         Q4 711 − − − 375 336 16 4,753
2020         Q1  
p 775 − − − 287 488 16 4,328
         Q2  p 980 − − − 581 399 16 4,284
         Q3  p 4,602 − − − 4,210 392 3,956 4,226
         Q4  p 7,439 − − − 7,128 311 6,931 4,606
2021         Q1  p 16,179 − − − 15,985 194 15,853 4,209
         Q2  p 21,194 − − − 20,995 199 20,860 4,318
         Q3  p 24,248 − − − 24,053 195 23,872 4,348
         Q4  p 333 − − − 111 222 − 4,650
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3 
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 day bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 987,909 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 63,650
2008 1,019,905 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 78,6852009 1,086,173 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 63,121
2010 1,337,160 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 242,251
2011 1,346,869 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 215,1092012 1,390,377 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 203,4672013 1,392,735 10,582 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 190,1272014 1,398,472 12,146 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 180,123
2015 1,371,933 13,949 1,070 1,188,463 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,521
2016 1,365,579 15,491 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,0262017 1,349,945 14,298 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,4552018 1,322,905 14,680 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,8392019 1,299,726 14,449 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,931
2020 
p 1,512,917 14,486 . 1,335,181 808,300 183,046 58,279 − 3,692 98,543 113,141 . 163,250
2021 p 1,666,432 17,743 . 1,476,843 909,276 195,654 65,390 − 6,722 103,936 153,978 . 171,846
2019         Q1 1,324,377 15,512 902 1,152,636 709,008 178,900 66,531 − 4,191 89,782 18,288 31 156,229
         Q2 1,320,239 12,719 852 1,151,809 720,904 173,313 68,110 − 5,691 91,024 15,042 19 155,711         Q3 1,327,958 17,438 822 1,154,373 711,482 183,268 69,088 − 5,639 90,416 18,100 − 156,147         Q4 1,299,726 14,449 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,931
2020         Q1  
p 1,327,548 11,410 . 1,160,614 721,343 182,095 71,028 − 5,310 91,084 23,572 . 155,524
         Q2  p 1,473,720 13,120 . 1,248,731 774,587 178,329 56,061 − 3,752 95,622 79,987 . 211,869
         Q3  p 1,536,666 11,886 . 1,345,251 796,338 191,388 57,144 − 3,737 99,276 127,478 . 179,529
         Q4  p 1,512,917 14,486 . 1,335,181 808,300 183,046 58,279 − 3,692 98,543 113,141 . 163,250
2021         Q1  p 1,538,572 12,200 . 1,379,979 821,254 194,571 60,687 − 3,857 103,910 134,800 . 146,392
         Q2  p 1,588,734 12,901 . 1,424,579 873,345 189,048 62,569 − 5,056 104,997 139,451 . 151,255
         Q3  p 1,616,738 13,319 . 1,451,547 884,358 203,353 63,851 − 5,456 105,398 146,533 . 151,872
         Q4  p 1,666,432 17,743 . 1,476,843 909,276 195,654 65,390 − 6,722 103,936 153,978 . 171,846
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by the
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
off-budget entities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2020 2021
2019 2020 2021 2019 2020 2021 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Item Index 2015=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 108.0 98.0 102.0 –1.6 –9.3 4.1 –21.3 –9.5 –1.4 –2.0 20.2 2.7 –1.5
Construction 104.2 108.2 107.6 0.4 3.8 –0.5 1.9 –1.8 9.0 –4.2 3.4 1.9 –3.1
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 109.1 103.5 106.6 3.3 –5.2 3.0 –14.9 –2.7 –2.9 –7.5 12.7 3.6 3.9
Information and communication 120.7 119.5 123.6 3.8 –1.0 3.4 –4.4 –1.1 0.5 0.5 6.5 3.2 3.8
Financial and insurance activities 95.3 95.8 95.5 1.3 0.5 –0.3 0.8 1.3 –0.4 –1.4 –0.7 –0.7 1.4
Real estate activities 102.7 102.3 103.2 0.9 –0.4 0.9 –1.6 0.2 –0.4 0.2 1.8 0.9 0.8
Business services  1 110.7 102.5 108.2 0.1 –7.4 5.6 –13.4 –8.2 –6.9 –5.7 12.5 9.5 7.7
Public services, education and health 107.0 103.5 106.9 1.8 –3.2 3.2 –8.9 0.0 –3.8 –3.1 10.4 3.2 3.3
Other services 103.3 92.5 93.4 1.9 –10.5 0.9 –19.7 –3.9 –16.0 –10.3 8.2 2.3 5.5
Gross value added 107.3 102.1 105.1 1.0 –4.9 2.9 –11.9 –3.9 –2.4 –3.5 10.9 3.3 2.0
Gross domestic product  2 107.2 102.3 105.3 1.1 –4.6 2.9 –11.3 –3.6 –1.9 –3.0 10.8 2.8 1.8
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 107.0 100.8 100.9 1.6 –5.9 0.1 –13.2 –3.4 –5.7 –9.2 6.5 1.4 2.6
Government consumption 110.0 113.9 117.4 3.0 3.5 3.1 3.5 4.0 4.2 2.3 6.3 1.9 2.0
Machinery and equipment 113.1 100.5 103.9 1.0 –11.2 3.4 –23.6 –9.5 –2.9 0.6 20.8 –2.0 –2.6
Premises 108.7 111.4 112.2 1.1 2.5 0.7 0.7 –0.6 5.1 –1.6 4.8 0.8 –1.6
Other investment  4 119.9 121.1 121.9 5.5 1.0 0.7 –1.3 0.3 1.3 –2.0 2.9 1.0 0.8
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . –0.1 –0.9 1.0 –0.2 –1.9 –1.3 0.3 0.3 1.9 1.4
Domestic demand 109.5 105.2 107.5 1.8 –4.0 2.2 –8.5 –3.7 –3.3 –4.4 7.3 3.3 3.0
Net exports  6 . . . –0.7 –0.8 0.8 –3.3 –0.1 1.2 1.1 3.8 –0.3 –1.0
     Exports 111.2 100.8 110.8 1.1 –9.3 9.9 –22.1 –9.1 –3.1 –0.1 27.6 7.5 8.2
     Imports 117.5 107.4 117.4 2.9 –8.6 9.3 –17.3 –10.1 –6.4 –2.9 20.2 9.4 12.2
Gross domestic product  2 107.2 102.3 105.3 1.1 –4.6 2.9 –11.3 –3.6 –1.9 –3.0 10.8 2.8 1.8
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,802.9 1,708.0 1,763.0 2.9 –5.3 3.2 –12.1 –3.7 –5.6 –7.5 8.3 5.3 7.2
Government consumption 705.2 754.6 801.3 5.2 7.0 6.2 7.6 7.3 7.7 6.5 6.9 5.7 5.8
Machinery and equipment 241.1 216.9 228.2 2.4 –10.0 5.2 –22.5 –8.3 –1.9 2.0 22.7 –0.2 –0.5
Premises 364.1 380.1 414.3 5.4 4.4 9.0 3.7 0.0 5.7 0.2 9.9 13.1 12.2
Other investment  4 137.0 138.9 141.5 6.9 1.4 1.8 –1.0 0.6 1.7 –0.9 4.1 2.2 2.0
Changes in inventories  5 26.8 –23.7 24.9 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,277.1 3,174.8 3,373.1 3.7 –3.1 6.2 –7.7 –3.4 –3.0 –2.8 9.7 8.7 9.7
Net exports 196.2 192.8 197.5 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,619.4 1,462.1 1,694.6 1.7 –9.7 15.9 –22.5 –9.9 –3.8 1.0 32.8 15.2 18.2
     Imports 1,423.2 1,269.3 1,497.0 2.7 –10.8 17.9 –21.0 –12.5 –8.1 –2.3 29.4 20.0 27.4
Gross domestic product  2 3,473.4 3,367.6 3,570.6 3.1 –3.0 6.0 –9.2 –2.7 –1.3 –1.3 11.9 7.3 6.8
 IV. Prices (2015=100)
Private consumption 105.1 105.8 109.0 1.3 0.6 3.1 1.3 –0.3 0.1 1.9 1.7 3.9 4.5
Gross domestic product 107.0 108.8 112.1 2.1 1.6 3.0 2.4 1.0 0.6 1.8 1.0 4.3 4.9
Terms of trade 100.8 102.9 100.5 0.7 2.0 –2.3 4.2 1.8 1.2 0.5 –3.4 –2.3 –3.8
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,855.5 1,852.1 1,920.4 4.6 –0.2 3.7 –3.2 –0.7 0.4 –0.4 5.4 4.9 4.7
Entrepreneurial and property income 752.7 676.1 777.4 –1.5 –10.2 15.0 –27.2 –7.4 –2.2 1.8 42.3 11.9 13.5
National income 2,608.2 2,528.2 2,697.8 2.8 –3.1 6.7 –9.8 –2.8 –0.3 0.3 13.5 7.0 6.9
Memo item: Gross national income 3,586.0 3,461.3 3,678.5 3.2 –3.5 6.3 –9.2 –3.4 –1.7 –1.2 11.8 7.8 7.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2022.  1 Professional,
scientific, technical, administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit insti-tutions serving households.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware
and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net in-
crease in valuables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy TotalInter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2015 = 100
% of total  1   100      14,04      6,37      79,59      29,45      36,98 2.27      10,89      10,31      9,95      12,73      14,16
Period
2018 2 105.8 2 109.0 97.4 106.0 105.5 106.1 106.2 106.9 107.4 109.0 106.5 103.6
2019 102.5 112.7 90.4 101.7 101.8 101.5 106.2 101.0 102.8 106.5 103.4 92.0
2020 94.1 116.1 84.4 91.0 94.9 85.7 97.6 97.2 90.6 98.5 89.5 69.3
x 2021 97.1 114.3 86.9 94.8 102.2 87.2 103.7 99.0 98.4 108.1 95.8 65.3
2021 Q1 95.0 94.8 92.0 95.3 103.6 88.1 100.7 96.1 99.5 107.1 91.3 75.4
Q2 97.7 118.2 81.5 95.4 104.8 87.1 103.0 96.4 101.1 108.2 95.3 66.7
Q3 95.8 119.3 80.5 92.8 101.9 82.5 102.5 101.3 97.5 108.8 94.6 55.2
x Q4 99.8 125.0 93.6 95.8 98.4 90.9 108.8 102.2 95.6 108.4 102.2 63.8
x 2022 Q1 95.0 100.3 93.5 94.2 102.6 84.0 104.0 104.1 97.4 109.9 90.0 64.9
2021 Mar. 105.5 119.1 92.1 104.2 111.2 97.8 107.3 106.2 107.7 116.5 103.7 81.1
Apr. 97.5 116.2 86.5 95.0 104.2 88.1 101.9 92.0 100.9 106.9 94.5 71.2
May 96.5 117.6 81.2 94.0 104.7 84.6 100.3 95.8 99.7 106.4 92.9 64.1
June 99.2 120.9 76.9 97.1 105.4 88.6 106.7 101.3 102.7 111.2 98.5 64.7
3 July 99.0 123.2 77.7 96.4 105.2 87.6 102.9 100.9 101.0 109.9 98.1 64.6
3 Aug. 89.6 113.1 80.1 86.3 97.9 73.2 93.0 98.1 91.0 105.3 86.4 42.8
Sep. 98.7 121.7 83.8 95.8 102.6 86.7 111.5 105.0 100.6 111.1 99.3 58.2
x Oct. 100.5 124.2 92.4 96.9 103.9 87.8 113.0 105.5 101.2 109.5 96.4 63.6
x Nov. 103.8 127.7 93.1 100.4 103.9 94.7 114.3 107.1 103.1 111.8 101.6 71.1
x Dec. 95.0 123.0 95.2 90.0 87.5 90.2 99.1 94.1 82.5 104.0 108.6 56.6
x 2022 Jan. 89.6 85.2 98.4 89.6 99.6 78.3 96.6 99.6 93.1 103.4 81.9 62.5
x Feb. 93.7 97.2 94.4 93.0 100.7 83.9 105.0 100.5 96.4 107.9 88.9 67.9
x,p Mar. 101.8 118.6 87.7 100.0 107.5 89.8 110.4 112.3 102.8 118.3 99.2 64.3
Annual percentage change
2018 2+ 0.9 2+ 0.3 – 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 – 0.7 + 3.8 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 2.3 – 1.6
2019 – 3.1 + 3.4 – 7.2 – 4.1 – 3.5 – 4.3 ± 0.0 – 5.5 – 4.3 – 2.3 – 2.9 –11.2
2020 – 8.2 + 3.0 – 6.6 –10.5 – 6.8 –15.6 – 8.1 – 3.8 –11.9 – 7.5 –13.4 –24.7
x 2021 + 3.2 – 1.6 + 3.0 + 4.2 + 7.7 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 1.9 + 8.6 + 9.7 + 7.0 – 5.8
2021 Q1 – 1.7 – 4.7 – 2.4 – 1.1 + 2.3 – 3.3 – 0.9 – 3.8 + 1.3 + 3.6 – 0.1 – 5.9
Q2 +16.0 + 2.1 +11.9 +19.8 +22.4 +22.8 +22.1 + 4.8 +28.2 +22.5 +17.2 +51.1
Q3 + 2.2 + 0.7 + 2.2 + 2.5 + 7.9 – 2.7 + 4.6 + 3.4 + 8.7 +12.1 + 9.2 –23.0
x Q4 – 2.0 – 4.5 + 2.0 – 1.7 + 0.2 – 5.1 + 2.2 + 3.3 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 3.7 –21.6
x 2022 Q1 ± 0.0 + 5.9 + 1.6 – 1.1 – 0.9 – 4.7 + 3.3 + 8.3 – 2.0 + 2.6 – 1.4 –13.9
2021 Mar. + 5.0 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 6.0 + 6.9 + 6.4 + 5.1 + 2.1 + 6.8 + 8.1 + 3.2 +20.7
Apr. +27.6 + 3.3 +18.8 +35.1 +25.7 +61.7 +44.5 + 2.7 +37.8 +27.6 +35.0 +384.4
May +16.8 + 3.8 +13.2 +20.4 +24.6 +21.6 +17.7 + 7.0 +29.0 +22.9 +19.9 +40.6
June + 5.8 – 0.7 + 3.9 + 7.3 +17.2 ± 0.0 + 9.8 + 4.6 +19.4 +17.7 + 2.1 –10.3
3 July + 5.7 + 2.8 + 2.6 + 6.5 +12.8 + 1.7 +10.9 + 3.5 +16.8 +16.4 +13.4 –15.0
3 Aug. + 1.8 – 0.5 – 0.7 + 2.6 + 7.5 – 2.8 + 1.5 + 4.7 + 6.2 +12.4 + 9.6 –25.3
Sep. – 0.7 – 0.1 + 4.9 – 1.2 + 3.8 – 6.8 + 1.8 + 2.2 + 3.8 + 7.8 + 5.0 –28.9
x Oct. – 1.3 – 0.3 + 1.2 – 1.7 + 1.2 – 6.0 + 4.0 + 2.6 + 2.2 + 4.8 + 6.8 –25.6
x Nov. – 2.1 – 2.1 + 1.4 – 2.3 – 0.3 – 6.6 – 0.1 + 5.4 ± 0.0 + 0.6 + 2.8 –23.1
x Dec. – 2.7 –10.5 + 3.4 – 1.1 – 0.5 – 2.7 + 2.8 + 1.6 – 2.0 + 3.8 + 1.9 –14.2
x 2022 Jan. + 1.1 +11.7 + 0.9 – 0.4 – 0.6 – 3.2 + 1.2 + 7.8 – 1.1 + 3.0 – 0.1 –12.0
x Feb. + 3.1 + 9.3 + 9.1 + 1.5 + 1.4 – 2.0 + 5.8 +11.9 – 0.2 + 3.5 + 0.8 – 8.4
x,p Mar. – 3.5 – 0.4 – 4.8 – 4.0 – 3.3 – 8.2 + 2.9 + 5.7 – 4.5 + 1.5 – 4.3 –20.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2015.  2 As of January 2018 weights in structural and civilengineering work corrected by the Federal Statistical Office.  3 Influenced by a change
in holiday dates.  x Provisional; estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal
Statistical Office to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly
Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2018 110.5 + 1.7 111.5 + 1.9 109.9 + 1.3 110.0 + 4.1 118.9 + 2.1 107.1 + 4.8
2019 104.8 – 5.2 103.5 – 7.2 105.4 – 4.1 107.0 – 2.7 123.3 + 3.7 101.7 – 5.0
2020 97.2 – 7.3 97.9 – 5.4 95.6 – 9.3 105.8 – 1.1 124.4 + 0.9 99.6 – 2.1
2021 119.3 +22.7 124.5 +27.2 116.4 +21.8 116.4 +10.0 145.6 +17.0 106.7 + 7.1
2021 Mar. 129.0 +30.8 133.3 +23.0 127.0 +40.2 123.8 + 8.8 146.9 +19.5 116.2 + 5.0
Apr. 118.2 +84.4 126.2 +64.3 114.2 +116.7 111.4 +21.9 161.7 +84.4 94.8 + 2.5
May 114.3 +60.3 123.0 +60.4 109.0 +68.0 113.5 +19.3 157.0 +41.4 99.2 +10.3
June 125.7 +30.8 127.7 +48.5 126.0 +23.5 114.1 +15.4 151.3 +31.7 101.8 + 8.8
July 127.7 +32.5 128.1 +35.6 127.4 +32.0 127.8 +21.3 150.1 +24.8 120.4 +19.8
Aug. 106.5 +16.6 115.8 +29.0 100.1 +10.6 111.2 + 6.5 132.0 + 6.4 104.3 + 6.5
Sep. 122.1 +17.2 123.2 +21.1 122.5 +16.9 113.5 + 1.7 138.7 – 5.3 105.2 + 5.2
Oct. 117.2 + 7.4 126.7 +17.0 110.8 + 1.4 120.3 + 8.1 143.2 – 1.2 112.8 +12.5
Nov. 125.4 +10.3 132.5 +16.2 121.2 + 6.4 123.2 +11.8 149.9 + 8.5 114.4 +13.3
Dec. 123.8 +14.0 120.8 +18.8 126.8 +11.5 115.3 +12.3 148.2 +12.9 104.6 +12.2
2022 Jan. 131.2 +19.1 143.7 +20.2 124.0 +18.9 127.5 +14.7 152.9 + 9.1 119.2 +17.3
Feb. 128.2 +15.1 136.6 +16.9 122.6 +13.5 132.6 +19.2 149.8 +16.6 126.9 +20.4
p Mar. 139.4 + 8.1 152.3 +14.3 130.6 + 2.8 145.9 +17.9 182.7 +24.4 133.7 +15.1
From the domestic market
2018 107.2 + 0.2 108.6 + 1.4 106.6 – 1.1 102.9 + 1.3 114.7 + 5.5 98.9 – 0.4
2019 101.2 – 5.6 99.1 – 8.7 102.9 – 3.5 101.2 – 1.7 116.2 + 1.3 96.1 – 2.8
2020 94.9 – 6.2 94.1 – 5.0 95.2 – 7.5 98.0 – 3.2 105.5 – 9.2 95.4 – 0.7
2021 115.0 +21.2 119.3 +26.8 112.5 +18.2 106.3 + 8.5 114.2 + 8.2 103.6 + 8.6
2021 Mar. 125.7 +30.1 128.9 +25.6 125.3 +39.8 109.8 + 0.9 130.4 +25.7 102.8 – 7.0
Apr. 111.0 +69.2 117.1 +59.3 107.1 +88.9 101.7 +26.8 126.9 +93.4 93.2 + 9.5
May 112.5 +50.6 118.5 +58.4 109.1 +50.3 100.9 +14.5 122.0 +22.2 93.8 +11.4
June 126.3 +21.1 125.6 +54.5 130.6 + 3.7 102.0 +11.7 118.5 +18.0 96.4 + 9.3
July 126.1 +32.3 125.8 +34.4 127.1 +32.3 121.8 +23.0 115.4 +10.4 124.0 +27.6
Aug. 105.0 +18.6 111.3 +26.2 99.3 +14.1 106.6 + 6.5 111.0 – 0.3 105.1 + 9.1
Sep. 109.5 +10.1 117.5 +23.2 103.6 + 0.9 102.7 + 1.0 105.5 –15.8 101.7 + 8.5
Oct. 115.1 +10.1 124.2 +16.3 108.0 + 5.3 110.2 + 5.6 105.8 –11.5 111.7 +12.5
Nov. 118.7 + 8.7 126.3 +11.5 112.9 + 6.2 113.6 + 8.6 114.6 – 7.8 113.3 +15.7
Dec. 118.9 +21.1 112.1 +18.0 126.6 +24.0 106.9 +17.5 100.4 – 3.6 109.1 +26.1
2022 Jan. 122.2 +18.8 137.7 +22.4 109.9 +15.2 116.5 +18.8 106.0 – 4.6 120.1 +28.2
Feb. 123.3 +14.4 132.0 +18.0 116.0 +10.2 122.9 +21.4 115.6 + 6.6 125.4 +27.1
p Mar. 137.0 + 9.0 147.8 +14.7 128.6 + 2.6 131.3 +19.6 136.5 + 4.7 129.5 +26.0
From abroad
2018 113.0 + 2.9 114.6 + 2.4 111.9 + 2.8 115.5 + 6.1 122.2 – 0.5 113.4 + 8.5
2019 107.6 – 4.8 108.3 – 5.5 106.9 – 4.5 111.5 – 3.5 129.1 + 5.6 105.9 – 6.6
2020 98.9 – 8.1 102.0 – 5.8 95.9 –10.3 111.8 + 0.3 139.5 + 8.1 102.8 – 2.9
2021 122.6 +24.0 130.1 +27.5 118.8 +23.9 124.2 +11.1 171.0 +22.6 109.1 + 6.1
2021 Mar. 131.5 +31.4 138.1 +20.5 128.1 +40.5 134.7 +14.5 160.1 +15.7 126.5 +14.1
Apr. 123.7 +96.7 136.1 +69.5 118.4 +135.4 118.9 +18.9 189.7 +79.8 96.1 – 2.1
May 115.7 +68.2 127.9 +62.5 109.0 +80.8 123.2 +22.5 185.2 +54.3 103.3 + 9.5
June 125.3 +39.5 130.0 +42.9 123.3 +40.8 123.5 +17.8 177.7 +40.4 106.0 + 8.4
July 128.9 +32.5 130.6 +36.9 127.6 +32.0 132.4 +20.0 178.1 +33.9 117.7 +14.3
Aug. 107.6 +15.2 120.6 +31.8 100.6 + 8.6 114.8 + 6.5 148.9 +10.8 103.7 + 4.5
Sep. 131.7 +22.2 129.3 +19.1 133.9 +26.2 121.9 + 2.3 165.5 + 1.3 107.9 + 2.9
Oct. 118.8 + 5.5 129.5 +17.7 112.5 – 0.8 128.2 + 9.9 173.3 + 4.8 113.6 +12.5
Nov. 130.4 +11.4 139.3 +21.3 126.2 + 6.5 130.6 +14.1 178.3 +19.3 115.2 +11.5
Dec. 127.6 + 9.5 130.3 +19.7 127.0 + 5.2 121.9 + 9.1 186.6 +21.8 101.1 + 2.7
2022 Jan. 138.0 +19.2 150.1 +18.0 132.5 +20.9 136.1 +12.2 190.6 +16.6 118.5 +10.0
Feb. 132.0 +15.7 141.6 +15.9 126.5 +15.3 140.1 +17.8 177.4 +22.6 128.0 +15.7
p Mar. 141.3 + 7.5 157.1 +13.8 131.8 + 2.9 157.2 +16.7 219.8 +37.3 137.0 + 8.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2018 135.0 +10.3 131.7 +7.0 137.1 +11.4 128.7 +4.2 125.2 +2.7 139.0 +14.3 136.0 +13.5 132.6 +6.1
2019 146.1 +8.2 145.3 +10.3 150.4 +9.7 142.5 +10.7 138.8 +10.9 147.1 +5.8 148.1 +8.9 141.3 +6.6
2020 145.6 –0.3 144.2 –0.8 160.8 +6.9 130.3 –8.6 141.5 +1.9 147.3 +0.1 139.6 –5.7 143.3 +1.4
2021 159.0 +9.2 164.1 +13.8 174.3 +8.4 156.6 +20.2 158.7 +12.2 153.0 +3.9 161.6 +15.8 146.7 +2.4
2021 Feb. 143.2 +6.5 148.9 +4.2 161.3 +8.9 147.2 +4.5 114.1 –14.3 136.7 +9.8 143.4 +3.0 132.1 +9.6
Mar. 158.0 –0.6 157.1 +1.8 175.4 +3.2 141.6 +0.2 154.7 +2.7 159.1 –3.3 151.1 –2.7 155.5 –0.6
Apr. 160.2 +7.0 158.3 +18.0 185.2 +40.5 139.5 +1.6 139.9 +7.5 162.3 –3.2 148.1 +5.5 158.8 –7.2
May 158.9 +14.6 163.0 +31.8 184.2 +26.3 146.7 +42.6 154.1 +20.6 154.2 –1.2 150.8 +24.3 152.9 –0.7
June 164.7 –1.8 165.2 +7.9 177.5 +7.6 160.4 +15.0 142.6 –13.5 164.1 –11.1 166.8 +15.6 154.5 –21.2
July 160.0 +7.2 168.4 +10.6 179.1 +12.9 163.7 +19.2 150.5 –19.2 150.2 +2.9 158.6 +15.9 149.9 –5.0
Aug. 158.9 +16.5 162.5 +20.5 167.1 +5.4 163.3 +43.4 144.0 +6.4 154.8 +12.0 158.5 +21.9 154.4 +18.4
Sep. 181.0 +19.3 189.0 +20.2 191.5 +10.0 193.2 +36.9 165.4 +1.9 171.7 +18.2 192.9 +31.9 161.1 +11.5
Oct. 158.6 +11.2 168.8 +11.7 169.1 –7.2 171.7 +35.1 157.2 +13.9 146.8 +10.6 171.6 +21.3 137.4 +14.8
Nov. 145.3 +4.1 143.0 –2.7 159.5 –5.0 132.6 +0.3 127.3 –4.6 148.1 +13.1 159.5 +10.9 120.5 +2.5
Dec. 185.4 +24.3 205.7 +41.1 196.2 +3.5 173.7 +50.3 356.7 +213.4 161.7 +5.7 187.0 +38.3 176.9 +26.0
2022 Jan. 142.8 +7.0 145.4 +4.1 165.7 +13.7 134.0 –8.1 121.0 +24.2 139.8 +10.7 149.1 –1.0 121.7 +14.2
Feb. 155.7 +8.7 161.0 +8.1 176.0 +9.1 158.3 +7.5 121.8 +6.7 149.5 +9.4 165.3 +15.3 132.5 +0.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2018 110.7 +2.9 107.5 +1.6 109.6 +3.5 105.6 –2.3 107.1 +0.8 103.0 ±0.0 112.5 +4.5 127.7 +6.0
2019 114.9 +3.8 110.9 +3.2 112.1 +2.3 106.7 +1.0 108.9 +1.7 107.1 +4.0 118.7 +5.5 138.4 +8.4
2020 121.4 +5.7 115.9 +4.5 121.2 +8.1 81.9 –23.2 106.9 –1.8 117.1 +9.3 125.5 +5.7 169.0 +22.1
3 2021 124.9 +2.9 116.9 +0.9 121.8 +0.5 78.0 –4.8 95.4 –10.8 110.3 –5.8 135.3 +7.8 191.3 +13.2
2021 Mar. 129.4 +8.9 122.2 +7.7 131.9 +0.9 58.7 +17.9 88.3 +4.4 120.5 +11.9 135.9 –2.4 206.7 +34.2
Apr. 121.1 +8.8 113.5 +7.3 124.2 –0.6 39.1 +32.5 69.4 +26.0 106.8 +5.6 131.7 +14.5 193.5 +11.7
May 125.5 +1.5 117.5 –0.3 127.0 –0.4 62.2 –20.8 74.3 –22.9 113.3 –11.6 128.7 +12.7 199.8 +18.2
June 129.9 +7.1 121.9 +5.2 121.9 +2.3 113.0 +18.2 97.8 –5.0 125.0 +2.3 132.4 +9.9 184.3 +13.4
July 126.2 +2.6 118.2 +0.5 120.4 +1.0 103.9 +5.8 102.1 –6.4 121.3 –3.5 136.4 +10.0 161.4 +3.1
Aug. 123.2 +2.2 115.6 +0.4 115.2 –4.8 100.5 +9.7 101.8 –2.4 116.8 –0.3 132.8 +10.7 169.5 +9.0
Sep. 121.3 +1.5 113.0 –0.7 112.5 –1.1 100.1 –0.7 100.7 –3.6 113.1 –4.2 132.1 +7.1 171.5 +6.5
Oct. 130.4 +0.8 120.8 –1.8 119.5 –2.4 114.2 +4.6 108.4 –10.6 124.3 –4.5 143.3 +10.1 192.0 +5.1
Nov. 138.3 +1.0 128.2 –1.8 121.1 –1.9 104.5 +15.5 132.7 –14.4 128.3 –8.8 144.1 +7.1 233.0 +1.9
Dec. 144.8 +4.3 133.7 +1.1 138.5 –1.1 98.5 +41.5 142.8 +5.5 123.9 +3.3 149.8 +4.5 218.7 –0.4
2022 Jan. 118.2 +14.0 108.6 +10.1 113.5 –1.7 70.4 +262.9 103.6 +65.2 105.1 +75.8 135.3 +5.7 182.9 –2.1
Feb. 116.3 +11.0 105.9 +7.0 112.1 –1.5 71.3 +219.7 90.4 +43.0 109.3 +54.6 129.0 +0.1 171.3 –4.0
Mar. 135.0 +4.3 120.2 –1.6 130.5 –1.1 89.3 +52.1 95.4 +8.0 132.4 +9.9 138.9 +2.2 191.7 –7.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2021 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2017 44,251 +1.4 32,234 +2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 114 24 2,533 7 855 5.7 731
2018 44,858 +1.4 32,964 +2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2019 45,268 +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 82,267 827 8 5.0 774
2020 44,898 –0.8 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2021 r44,918 r +0.0 933,899 9+1.0 99,345 923,604 9 702 94,101 ... 9 1,744 2,613 999 5.7 706
2019 Q1 44,906 +1.2 33,214 +2.0 9,419 22,803 761 4,581 303 34 2,360 892 5.2 780
Q2 45,230 +1.0 33,388 +1.8 9,455 22,932 750 4,615 51 43 82,227 778 8 4.9 795
Q3 45,378 +0.8 33,548 +1.5 9,491 23,049 753 4,598 66 58 2,276 827 5.0 794
Q4 45,559 +0.7 33,924 +1.4 9,551 23,388 738 4,522 161 105 2,204 811 4.8 729
2020 Q1 45,122 +0.5 33,642 +1.3 9,439 23,284 686 4,458 1,219 949 2,385 960 5.2 683
Q2 44,712 –1.1 33,415 +0.1 9,387 23,137 640 4,235 5,399 5,388 2,770 1,154 6.0 593
Q3 44,794 –1.3 33,424 –0.4 9,359 23,171 640 4,273 2,705 2,691 2,904 1,266 6.3 583
Q4 44,965 –1.3 33,836 –0.3 9,395 23,518 676 4,194 2,433 2,361 2,722 1,167 5.9 595
2021 Q1 r44,451 r –1.5 33,568 –0.2 9,294 23,376 665 4,051 3,473 3,157 2,878 1,248 6.3 586
Q2 r44,742 r +0.1 33,718 +0.9 9,322 23,446 697 4,066 2,164 2,143 2,691 1,024 10 5.9 658
Q3 r45,088 r +0.7 33,929 +1.5 9,347 23,606 719 4,161 935 915 2,545 920 5.5 774
Q4 r45,391 r +0.9 934,381 9+1.6 99,417 923,988 9 727 94,126 ... 9 762 2,341 802 5.1 804
2022 Q1 1145,138 11 +1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,417 874 5.3 818
2018 Dec. 45,171 +1.2 33,286 +2.1 9,434 22,854 773 4,637 166 26 2,210 777 4.9 781
2019 Jan. 44,852 +1.2 33,156 +2.0 9,405 22,762 763 4,574 354 42 2,406 919 5.3 758
Feb. 44,894 +1.2 33,199 +2.0 9,416 22,794 758 4,564 310 29 2,373 908 5.3 784
Mar. 44,971 +1.1 33,286 +1.9 9,442 22,855 749 4,574 246 32 2,301 850 5.1 797
Apr. 45,134 +1.1 33,383 +1.8 9,457 22,925 753 4,607 49 40 2,229 795 4.9 796
May 45,259 +1.0 33,433 +1.8 9,462 22,968 749 4,627 53 45 82,236 772 8 4.9 792
June 45,297 +0.9 33,407 +1.6 9,455 22,948 750 4,646 51 43 2,216 766 4.9 798
July 45,312 +0.9 33,360 +1.6 9,450 22,901 757 4,644 55 47 2,275 825 5.0 799
Aug. 45,307 +0.7 33,610 +1.4 9,505 23,101 750 4,568 60 51 2,319 848 5.1 795
Sep. 45,516 +0.8 33,938 +1.5 9,583 23,341 754 4,517 84 75 2,234 808 4.9 787
Oct. 45,592 +0.8 33,966 +1.4 9,567 23,398 748 4,510 111 102 2,204 795 4.8 764
Nov. 45,622 +0.7 33,968 +1.4 9,559 23,423 742 4,532 124 115 2,180 800 4.8 736
Dec. 45,463 +0.6 33,740 +1.4 9,474 23,344 694 4,531 247 97 2,227 838 4.9 687
2020 Jan. 45,140 +0.6 33,608 +1.4 9,432 23,255 689 4,471 382 133 2,426 985 5.3 668
Feb. 45,160 +0.6 33,624 +1.3 9,427 23,278 683 4,461 439 134 2,396 971 5.3 690
Mar. 45,066 +0.2 33,648 +1.1 9,440 23,290 675 4,350 2,834 2,580 2,335 925 5.1 691
Apr. 44,798 –0.7 33,430 +0.1 9,396 23,141 643 4,194 6,007 5,995 2,644 1,093 5.8 626
May 44,662 –1.3 33,328 –0.3 9,367 23,083 624 4,206 5,726 5,715 2,813 1,172 6.1 584
June 44,676 –1.4 33,323 –0.3 9,355 23,084 629 4,260 4,464 4,452 2,853 1,197 6.2 570
July 44,687 –1.4 33,233 –0.4 9,322 23,024 635 4,302 3,319 3,306 2,910 1,258 6.3 573
Aug. 44,722 –1.3 33,482 –0.4 9,367 23,218 642 4,266 2,551 2,537 2,955 1,302 6.4 584
Sep. 44,972 –1.2 33,792 –0.4 9,421 23,454 656 4,240 2,244 2,229 2,847 1,238 6.2 591
Oct. 45,054 –1.2 33,862 –0.3 9,410 23,530 671 4,229 2,037 2,021 2,760 1,183 6.0 602
Nov. 45,002 –1.4 33,899 –0.2 9,400 23,559 696 4,166 2,405 2,386 2,699 1,152 5.9 601
Dec. 44,838 –1.4 33,700 –0.1 9,327 23,478 666 4,134 2,856 2,676 2,707 1,166 5.9 581
2021 Jan. r44,430 r –1.6 33,515 –0.3 9,282 23,347 657 4,045 3,638 3,294 2,901 1,298 6.3 566
Feb. r44,423 r –1.6 33,521 –0.3 9,281 23,343 662 4,026 3,766 3,358 2,904 1,270 6.3 583
Mar. r44,501 r –1.3 33,636 –0.0 9,309 23,397 685 4,032 3,016 2,818 2,827 1,177 6.2 609
Apr. r44,608 r –0.4 33,689 +0.8 9,324 23,427 687 4,039 2,583 2,560 2,771 1,091 6.0 629
May r44,726 r +0.1 33,747 +1.3 9,326 23,461 703 4,067 2,342 2,320 2,687 1,020 10 5.9 654
June r44,892 r +0.5 33,802 +1.4 9,324 23,504 716 4,151 1,568 1,548 2,614 961 5.7 693
July r44,956 r +0.6 33,731 +1.5 9,304 23,458 715 4,194 1,088 1,068 2,590 956 5.6 744
Aug. r45,028 r +0.7 33,994 +1.5 9,358 23,658 722 4,153 857 838 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. r45,280 r +0.7 34,323 +1.6 9,432 23,903 726 4,123 859 839 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. r45,376 r +0.7 34,369 +1.5 9,425 23,965 724 4,123 780 762 2,377 814 5.2 809
Nov. r45,448 r +1.0 934,467 9+1.7 99,428 924,054 9 738 94,137 ... 9 752 2,317 789 5.1 808
Dec. r45,350 r +1.1 934,292 9+1.8 99,365 923,989 9 708 94,111 ... 9 772 2,330 803 5.1 794
2022 Jan. r45,058 r +1.4 934,175 9+2.0 99,331 923,903 9 710 94,042 ... 9 801 2,462 903 5.4 792
Feb. r45,121 r +1.6 934,242 9+2.1 99,345 923,942 9 718 94,041 ... 9 723 2,428 884 5.3 822
Mar. 1145,236 11 +1.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,362 835 5.1 839
Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,309 800 5.0 852
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 From January 2017 persons receiving additional
income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at the same
time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book of the Social SecurityCode (SGB III).  8 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed persons in the
legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).  9 Unadjusted
figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2019 and 2020, the estimated
values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1% for employees
subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.9% for persons solely in jobs
exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 55.3% for cyclically induced
short-time work.  10 From May 2021, calculated on the basis of new labour force fig-
ures. 11 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which: Indices of
foreign trade pricesHWWI
Index of World Market
Prices of Raw Materials  4
of which:
Total Food  1,2Non-
energy
industrial
goods  1Energy  1Services  1Actual
rents
for
housingMemo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  3Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  3Exports Imports Energy  5Other raw
materials  6
Period 2015 = 100 2020 = 100
Index level
2018 104.0 106.7 103.0 102.3 104.2 104.6 103.8 110.2 103.7 109.0 101.9 102.7 174.1 99.9
2019 105.5 108.4 104.2 103.7 105.7 106.1 105.3 115.3 104.8 111.5 102.4 101.7 150.2 98.7
2020 7 105.8 7110.9 7104.1 799.0 7106.9 107.6 7 105.8 7117.0 103.8 108.0 101.7 97.3 100.0 100.0
2021 7 109.2 7114.1 7106.7 7109.0 7109.0 109.0 7 109.1 7127.0 114.7 8117.5 107.4 110.4 220.7 137.6
2020 June 106.9 112.7 104.8 98.7 108.1 107.6 106.6 103.0 110.0 101.3 96.1 85.9 94.1
July 7 106.4 7110.2 7102.5 798.0 7109.4 107.7 7 106.1 103.2 107.5 101.3 96.4 90.6 95.8
Aug. 7 106.2 7110.1 7102.6 797.6 7109.0 107.8 7 106.0 7115.7 103.2 104.8 101.2 96.5 95.8 98.4
Sep. 7 105.8 7109.9 7103.6 796.9 7108.0 107.8 7 105.8 103.6 103.5 101.3 96.8 97.1 103.5
Oct. 7 105.8 7110.2 7103.9 797.0 7107.6 108.0 7 105.9 103.7 103.8 101.4 97.1 103.3 104.9
Nov. 7 104.7 7110.3 7104.0 796.0 7105.5 108.1 7 105.0 7116.0 103.9 103.9 101.8 97.6 109.5 107.1
Dec. 7 105.3 7109.9 7103.4 797.4 7106.9 108.2 7 105.5 104.7 104.2 101.9 98.2 121.8 112.3
2021 Jan. 106.8 112.3 105.1 102.6 106.9 108.4 106.3 106.2 106.8 102.8 100.1 141.6 120.6
Feb. 107.4 113.0 105.5 104.1 107.3 108.5 107.0 121.2 106.9 108.9 103.3 101.8 146.0 124.7
Mar. 107.9 113.1 105.7 106.2 107.6 108.6 107.5 107.9 114.0 104.1 103.6 150.3 130.4
Apr. 108.4 114.5 105.8 106.1 108.3 108.7 108.2 108.8 115.9 104.9 105.0 154.1 134.3
May 108.7 114.2 106.3 106.7 108.7 108.9 108.7 125.1 110.4 118.5 105.6 106.8 168.3 144.9
June 109.1 114.1 106.5 107.6 109.1 108.9 109.1 111.8 117.7 106.4 108.5 183.0 142.3
July 7 109.7 7114.4 7106.4 7109.0 7110.2 109.1 7 110.1 113.9 117.3 107.7 110.9 204.8 141.9
Aug. 7 109.8 7114.4 7106.5 7109.4 7110.3 109.2 7 110.1 7129.4 115.6 118.8 108.5 112.4 217.6 138.9
Sep. 7 110.1 7114.4 7107.6 7110.1 7109.9 109.3 7 110.1 118.3 8117.4 109.5 113.9 256.1 136.3
Oct. 7 110.7 7114.5 7108.0 7114.6 7110.0 109.5 7 110.7 122.8 120.6 111.0 118.2 352.7 143.0
Nov. 7 111.0 7114.9 7108.4 7116.7 7109.5 109.5 7 110.5 7132.2 123.8 125.5 111.9 121.7 304.4 143.0
Dec. 7 111.3 7115.7 7108.6 7115.0 7110.3 109.6 7 111.1 130.0 127.1 113.0 121.8 352.9 148.3
2022 Jan. 112.3 117.2 108.4 123.7 109.8 109.9 111.5 132.8 129.2 115.0 127.0 327.8 157.0
Feb. 113.3 118.2 109.1 127.4 110.2 110.0 112.5 138.1 134.6 133.4 116.1 128.6 336.0 166.5
Mar. 116.1 119.1 110.4 146.1 110.6 110.2 115.3 141.2 153.6 120.7 135.9 504.2 185.4
Apr. 116.9 122.2 111.3 142.7 111.7 110.4 116.2 ... ... ... ... 407.8 184.8
Annual percentage change
2018 +1.9 +2.6 +0.8 +4.9 +1.6 +1.6 +1.8 +4.7 +2.6 +0.4 +1.2 +2.6 +25.4 +0.3
2019 +1.4 +1.6 +1.1 +1.4 +1.5 +1.5 +1.4 +4.7 +1.1 +2.3 +0.5 –1.0 –13.7 –1.2
2020 7 +0.4 7+2.3 7–0.1 7–4.5 7+1.2 +1.4 7 +0.5 7+1.4 –1.0 –3.1 –0.7 –4.3 –33.4 +1.3
2021 7 +3.2 7+2.9 7+2.5 7+10.1 7+2.0 +1.3 7 +3.1 7+8.6 +10.5 8+8.8 +5.6 +13.5 +120.7 +37.6
2020 June +0.8 +4.0 +0.7 –5.9 +1.4 +1.4 +0.9 –1.8 –4.4 –1.0 –5.1 –37.8 –4.5
July 7 ±0.0 7+1.4 7–0.8 7–6.4 7+1.4 +1.4 7 –0.1 –1.7 –5.9 –1.1 –4.6 –36.1 –5.1
Aug. 7 –0.1 7+1.2 7–0.8 7–6.0 7+1.1 +1.4 7 ±0.0 7–0.1 –1.2 –6.8 –1.1 –4.0 –29.3 +2.3
Sep. 7 –0.4 7+1.0 7–1.1 7–6.6 7+1.0 +1.3 7 –0.2 –1.0 –5.8 –1.1 –4.3 –32.3 +5.9
Oct. 7 –0.5 7+1.5 7–1.0 7–6.6 7+0.7 +1.3 7 –0.2 –0.7 –5.9 –1.0 –3.9 –29.1 +7.0
Nov. 7 –0.7 7+1.2 7–1.1 7–7.4 7+0.6 +1.3 7 –0.3 7–0.3 –0.5 –7.2 –0.6 –3.8 –28.0 +8.4
Dec. 7 –0.7 7+0.6 7–1.6 7–6.0 7+0.8 +1.3 7 –0.3 +0.2 –8.9 –0.6 –3.4 –20.8 +11.1
2021 Jan. +1.6 +2.0 +1.1 –2.2 +2.5 +1.3 +1.0 +0.9 –5.7 +0.1 –1.2 –2.2 +17.7
Feb. +1.6 +1.6 +1.2 +0.2 +2.0 +1.3 +1.3 +2.9 +1.9 –4.6 +0.7 +1.4 +15.9 +24.6
Mar. +2.0 +1.9 +0.5 +4.5 +2.0 +1.2 +1.7 +3.7 +0.3 +2.2 +6.9 +79.1 +36.1
Apr. +2.1 +2.0 +0.4 +7.6 +1.5 +1.2 +2.0 +5.2 +2.8 +3.3 +10.3 +128.3 +45.0
May +2.4 +1.5 +0.9 +9.5 +1.9 +1.3 +2.5 +5.7 +7.2 +8.6 +4.2 +11.8 +127.4 +56.0
June +2.1 +1.2 +1.6 +9.0 +0.9 +1.2 +2.3 +8.5 +7.0 +5.0 +12.9 +113.0 +51.2
July 7 +3.1 7+3.8 7+3.8 7+11.2 7+0.7 +1.3 7 +3.8 +10.4 +9.1 +6.3 +15.0 +126.0 +48.1
Aug. 7 +3.4 7+3.9 7+3.8 7+12.1 7+1.2 +1.3 7 +3.9 7+11.8 +12.0 +13.4 +7.2 +16.5 +127.1 +41.2
Sep. 7 +4.1 7+4.1 7+3.9 7+13.6 7+1.8 +1.4 7 +4.1 +14.2 8+13.4 +8.1 +17.7 +163.7 +31.7
Oct. 7 +4.6 7+3.9 7+3.9 7+18.1 7+2.2 +1.4 7 +4.5 +18.4 +16.2 +9.5 +21.7 +241.4 +36.3
Nov. 7 +6.0 7+4.2 7+4.2 7+21.6 7+3.8 +1.3 7 +5.2 7+14.0 +19.2 +20.8 +9.9 +24.7 +178.0 +33.5
Dec. 7 +5.7 7+5.3 7+5.0 7+18.1 7+3.2 +1.3 7 +5.3 +24.2 +22.0 +10.9 +24.0 +189.7 +32.1
2022 Jan. +5.1 +4.4 +3.1 +20.6 +2.7 +1.4 +4.9 +25.0 +21.0 +11.9 +26.9 +131.5 +30.2
Feb. +5.5 +4.6 +3.4 +22.4 +2.7 +1.4 +5.1 +13.9 +25.9 +22.5 +12.4 +26.3 +130.1 +33.5
Mar. +7.6 +5.3 +4.4 +37.6 +2.8 +1.5 +7.3 +30.9 +34.7 +15.9 +31.2 +235.5 +42.2
Apr. +7.8 +6.7 +5.2 +34.5 +3.1 +1.6 +7.4 ... ... ... ... +164.6 +37.6
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw Materi-
als: HWWI.  1 The last data point is at times based on the Bundesbank’s own estimates.
2 Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco.  3 Excluding value added tax.  4 For the eu-ro area, in euro.  5 Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas.  6 Food, beverages and tobac-
co as well as industrial raw materials.  7 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value
added tax between July and December 2020.  8 From September 2021 onwards provi-
sional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2014 1,234.2 4.0 830.5 3.9 394.0 2.6 1,224.5 3.5 1,734.5 2.6 170.6 8.6 9.8
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.5 4.2 1,273.8 4.0 1,782.3 2.8 179.4 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.2
2017 1,395.4 4.3 932.5 4.0 441.8 3.6 1,374.3 3.9 1,905.2 3.5 202.8 8.0 10.6
2018 1,462.6 4.8 976.3 4.7 454.3 2.8 1,430.6 4.1 1,975.8 3.7 223.7 10.3 11.3
2019 1,524.1 4.2 1,022.0 4.7 474.4 4.4 1,496.4 4.6 2,021.6 2.3 218.7 – 2.2 10.8
2020 1,514.1 – 0.7 1,021.3 – 0.1 518.8 9.4 1,540.1 2.9 2,035.1 0.7 327.1 49.6 16.1
2021 1,571.2 3.8 1,064.2 4.2 531.5 2.5 1,595.7 3.6 2,074.0 1.9 311.1 – 4.9 15.0
2020 Q3 374.1 – 1.2 258.1 – 0.6 132.0 10.2 390.1 2.8 508.1 0.7 66.5 44.4 13.1
Q4 417.9 0.1 282.1 1.1 131.3 10.4 413.3 3.9 514.9 0.7 78.9 60.6 15.3
2021 Q1 362.0 – 1.1 245.1 – 0.5 136.5 9.2 381.6 2.7 517.3 – 0.6 113.9 35.2 22.0
Q2 377.2 6.0 251.0 6.9 134.4 3.0 385.4 5.5 509.8 3.7 82.9 –14.9 16.3
Q3 393.6 5.2 272.1 5.4 130.8 – 0.9 403.0 3.3 519.2 2.2 54.0 –18.9 10.4
Q4 438.3 4.9 296.0 5.0 129.8 – 1.2 425.8 3.0 527.8 2.5 60.4 –23.5 11.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2022.  * Households in-
cluding non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees'
contributions to the social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension
payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social
benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plusmonetary social benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed
income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit
institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related
taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company
pension funds.  6 Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving
as a percentage of disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change
2014 97.7 3.1 97.7 2.9 97.7 2.8 97.6 2.8 97.2 2.9
2015 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.3 2.3 102.5 2.5
2017 104.5 2.3 104.5 2.2 104.5 2.3 104.7 2.4 105.1 2.6
2018 107.6 3.0 107.5 3.0 107.5 2.8 107.6 2.8 108.5 3.2
2019 110.7 2.9 110.6 2.8 110.1 2.5 110.2 2.4 111.7 3.0
2020 112.9 2.0 112.9 2.1 112.2 1.9 112.3 1.9 111.5 – 0.1
2021 114.7 1.6 114.7 1.6 114.0 1.6 114.1 1.6 115.4 3.5
2020 Q4 125.3 2.5 125.2 2.5 124.2 1.7 112.7 1.7 122.8 1.2
2021 Q1 106.0 1.4 106.0 1.4 106.1 1.5 113.4 1.5 107.5 0.1
Q2 107.7 2.3 107.6 2.3 106.8 1.4 113.9 1.5 111.3 5.7
Q3 117.8 1.0 117.8 1.0 116.4 1.5 114.2 1.5 115.4 4.3
Q4 127.3 1.6 127.2 1.6 126.6 2.0 114.8 1.8 127.3 3.7
2022 Q1 110.7 4.4 110.6 4.4 108.6 2.4 115.2 1.6 . .
2021 Sep. 107.0 1.7 106.9 1.7 107.0 1.7 114.4 1.6 . .
Oct. 108.9 3.4 108.8 3.3 107.2 1.8 114.6 1.7 . .
Nov. 163.4 1.7 163.3 1.7 163.5 2.2 114.8 1.9 . .
Dec. 109.5 – 0.3 109.5 – 0.3 109.2 1.8 114.8 1.8 . .
2022 Jan. 108.4 2.2 108.3 2.2 107.7 1.5 115.2 1.6 . .
Feb. 110.5 4.3 110.4 4.2 110.2 3.9 115.2 1.6 . .
Mar. 113.3 6.8 113.2 6.8 107.8 1.6 115.3 1.6 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February
2022.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2017 2,395.6 1,487.8 498.6 602.4 295.9 907.8 230.6 225.0 156.1 756.7 1,638.9 866.3 495.7 772.6 236.1 195.5
3 2018 2,589.0 1,536.7 540.8 610.8 288.5 1,052.3 249.5 234.7 172.6 789.8 1,799.2 925.7 558.7 873.4 257.5 205.0
2019 2,800.6 1,769.7 586.3 737.1 333.4 1,030.9 257.5 237.6 168.4 821.0 1,979.6 1,091.2 676.3 888.4 289.8 207.6
2020 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.5 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.3 857.0 304.4 196.1
2019 H2 2,800.6 1,769.7 586.3 737.1 333.4 1,030.9 257.5 237.6 168.4 821.0 1,979.6 1,091.2 676.3 888.4 289.8 207.6
2020 H1 2,891.4 1,800.9 625.0 734.0 319.7 1,090.5 257.6 216.4 220.7 793.7 2,097.7 1,183.8 754.2 913.9 335.5 179.7
H2 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.5 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.3 857.0 304.4 196.1
p 2021 H1 3,017.6 1,877.0 649.3 745.0 343.7 1,140.6 256.2 273.2 240.8 906.9 2,110.7 1,178.6 751.9 932.1 297.4 206.9
As a percentage of total assets
2017 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.2 12.4 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.5 31.6 68.4 36.2 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
3 2018 100.0 59.4 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.6 9.6 9.1 6.7 30.5 69.5 35.8 21.6 33.7 10.0 7.9
2019 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.2 31.7 10.4 7.4
2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2019 H2 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.2 31.7 10.4 7.4
2020 H1 100.0 62.3 21.6 25.4 11.1 37.7 8.9 7.5 7.6 27.5 72.6 40.9 26.1 31.6 11.6 6.2
H2 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
p 2021 H1 100.0 62.2 21.5 24.7 11.4 37.8 8.5 9.1 8.0 30.1 70.0 39.1 24.9 30.9 9.9 6.9
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2017 1,988.8 1,190.4 351.5 483.6 281.8 798.3 215.7 181.3 128.5 609.5 1,379.3 719.1 397.8 660.2 218.4 150.0
3 2018 2,149.3 1,215.4 388.1 472.9 277.5 933.9 234.5 188.6 139.2 636.7 1,512.6 760.2 442.4 752.3 236.2 152.5
2019 2,302.9 1,396.4 419.6 565.4 319.7 906.5 243.8 188.5 136.8 662.2 1,640.7 887.5 523.8 753.2 257.5 158.0
2020 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.0 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.2 1,628.7 904.7 536.9 724.0 267.3 149.8
2019 H2 2,302.9 1,396.4 419.6 565.4 319.7 906.5 243.8 188.5 136.8 662.2 1,640.7 887.5 523.8 753.2 257.5 158.0
2020 H1 2,304.8 1,351.9 406.4 547.1 303.3 952.9 243.9 171.5 171.3 614.6 1,690.2 912.1 548.4 778.0 294.6 137.0
H2 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.0 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.2 1,628.7 904.7 536.9 724.0 267.3 149.8
p 2021 H1 2,392.8 1,398.3 416.6 551.0 322.5 994.6 240.6 221.9 192.4 703.5 1,689.4 892.3 532.0 797.1 261.3 162.1
As a percentage of total assets
2017 100.0 59.9 17.7 24.3 14.2 40.1 10.9 9.1 6.5 30.7 69.4 36.2 20.0 33.2 11.0 7.5
3 2018 100.0 56.6 18.1 22.0 12.9 43.5 10.9 8.8 6.5 29.6 70.4 35.4 20.6 35.0 11.0 7.1
2019 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.3 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2019 H2 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.3 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
2020 H1 100.0 58.7 17.6 23.7 13.2 41.3 10.6 7.4 7.4 26.7 73.3 39.6 23.8 33.8 12.8 6.0
H2 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
p 2021 H1 100.0 58.4 17.4 23.0 13.5 41.6 10.1 9.3 8.0 29.4 70.6 37.3 22.2 33.3 10.9 6.8
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2017 406.9 297.4 147.1 118.8 14.1 109.5 14.8 43.6 27.6 147.2 259.6 147.3 97.9 112.4 17.6 45.5
3 2018 439.7 321.3 152.7 137.9 11.0 118.3 14.9 46.1 33.3 153.1 286.6 165.5 116.3 121.1 21.3 52.5
2019 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2019 H2 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
2020 H1 586.6 449.0 218.7 186.8 16.3 137.6 13.7 44.9 49.4 179.1 407.6 271.7 205.7 135.9 40.9 42.6
H2 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
p 2021 H1 624.7 478.7 232.6 194.1 21.2 146.1 15.5 51.4 48.4 203.4 421.3 286.4 219.9 135.0 36.1 44.8
As a percentage of total assets
2017 100.0 73.1 36.2 29.2 3.5 26.9 3.7 10.7 6.8 36.2 63.8 36.2 24.1 27.6 4.3 11.2
3 2018 100.0 73.1 34.7 31.4 2.5 26.9 3.4 10.5 7.6 34.8 65.2 37.6 26.5 27.6 4.8 11.9
2019 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2019 H2 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
2020 H1 100.0 76.5 37.3 31.9 2.8 23.5 2.3 7.7 8.4 30.5 69.5 46.3 35.1 23.2 7.0 7.3
H2 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
p 2021 H1 100.0 76.6 37.2 31.1 3.4 23.4 2.5 8.2 7.8 32.6 67.4 45.8 35.2 21.6 5.8 7.2
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.  3 From H1 2018 or 2018 onwards: significant
changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  2 Distribution  2
RevenuesOperating income
before depreciation
and amortisation
(EBITDA  1 )Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartileOperating
income (EBIT)Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4€ billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % % € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % %
Total
2013 1,539.8 – 0.7 187.0 – 2.8 12.1 – 0.3 5.1 10.3 18.5 99.4 5.5 6.5 0.4 1.9 5.9 11.1
2014 1,564.3 1.0 198.7 5.0 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.4 109.3 8.6 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.2 11.1
2015 1,633.9 6.9 195.9 – 1.1 12.0 – 1.0 6.3 10.6 17.8 91.5 – 16.4 5.6 – 1.5 1.8 6.7 11.3
2016 1,624.3 – 0.4 214.4 7.8 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.7 9.0 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,719.3 5.1 243.4 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.0 11.0 18.0 141.9 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.1
6 2018 1,706.8 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,764.6 2.6 233.6 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.2 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.6 5.8 11.8
2020 1,632.8 – 8.8 213.6 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 17.9 52.1 – 41.0 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 4.9 10.5
2016 H2 842.4 1.1 102.9 9.8 12.2 1.0 6.9 11.9 19.0 46.3 21.0 5.5 0.8 3.0 7.5 12.5
2017 H1 843.9 6.7 125.7 14.6 14.9 1.0 5.7 10.1 17.1 78.4 29.6 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.6
H2 878.5 3.5 117.4 14.6 13.4 1.3 6.9 12.0 19.2 63.0 38.2 7.2 1.8 3.2 7.4 12.4
6 2018 H1 848.2 – 0.1 120.8 – 2.1 14.2 – 0.3 5.1 10.6 18.2 72.7 – 5.3 8.6 – 0.5 1.7 6.4 12.5
H2 869.4 1.4 114.4 0.5 13.2 – 0.1 6.3 11.2 18.0 58.0 – 7.6 6.7 – 0.6 2.1 6.8 12.5
2019 H1 861.3 2.7 112.3 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.5 11.8 18.6 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 903.7 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.6 11.8 20.0 52.0 – 11.4 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.5
2020 H1 744.5 – 14.4 78.2 – 34.1 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 8.8
H2 888.4 – 3.3 135.4 17.1 15.2 2.8 7.6 13.2 19.8 44.2 8.7 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.6
p 2021 H1 919.8 20.1 152.4 88.0 16.6 6.0 7.4 12.6 19.5 85.4 . 9.3 8.3 2.3 7.8 12.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2013 1,198.8 – 0.8 142.6 – 2.5 11.9 – 0.2 5.1 10.3 16.0 77.4 – 5.8 6.5 – 0.3 1.6 5.8 10.5
2014 1,220.0 1.0 152.2 5.9 12.5 0.6 5.8 10.1 15.5 85.2 9.8 7.0 0.6 1.7 6.0 10.6
2015 1,309.7 7.0 149.0 – 2.6 11.4 – 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.3 69.1 – 19.7 5.3 – 1.8 2.2 6.6 10.4
2016 1,295.9 – 0.8 161.9 6.3 12.5 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 84.8 4.2 6.5 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,395.9 5.5 187.5 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.5 40.6 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,367.7 1.0 175.7 – 1.5 12.9 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 16.0 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.8 6.9 11.4
2019 1,410.9 2.0 168.1 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.8 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.7 10.1
2020 1,285.2 – 9.4 143.6 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 5.7 10.6 16.5 29.1 – 48.1 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.3 9.8
2016 H2 670.8 0.6 75.4 12.1 11.2 1.1 6.2 11.3 16.7 32.1 34.4 4.8 0.9 2.4 6.3 10.8
2017 H1 695.1 7.3 101.5 18.7 14.6 1.4 6.0 10.1 16.1 66.3 37.3 9.5 2.1 2.3 5.8 10.8
H2 701.4 3.7 86.0 14.2 12.3 1.1 7.0 11.7 16.9 46.2 45.5 6.6 1.9 3.6 7.2 10.8
6 2018 H1 681.9 – 0.1 94.9 – 3.4 13.9 – 0.5 7.0 10.9 16.7 60.0 – 5.9 8.8 – 0.6 2.9 6.8 11.5
H2 695.4 2.1 83.1 0.7 12.0 – 0.2 6.2 11.1 16.2 42.1 – 8.7 6.1 – 0.7 2.0 6.4 11.4
2019 H1 689.9 2.4 83.3 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.9 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.8 6.0 9.5
H2 721.0 1.7 84.8 0.3 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.7 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.1
2020 H1 580.6 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.4 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 14.9 0.2 – 101.7 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.1 7.8
H2 704.6 – 3.0 94.6 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.0 12.1 18.6 28.9 19.7 4.1 1.1 0.3 6.0 10.5
p 2021 H1 731.9 23.8 112.1 128.5 15.3 7.0 8.2 12.6 18.6 67.7 . 9.3 9.4 2.9 7.9 12.1
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2013 341.0 – 0.1 44.4 – 3.5 13.0 – 0.5 5.2 9.3 20.7 21.9 82.2 6.4 2.9 2.4 5.9 11.8
2014 344.2 0.8 46.5 1.8 13.5 0.1 6.0 12.3 22.6 24.1 4.3 7.0 0.2 2.6 6.3 13.7
2015 324.1 6.1 46.9 4.0 14.5 – 0.3 5.9 11.1 22.1 22.3 – 3.8 6.9 – 0.7 1.3 6.7 13.9
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.3 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.5 12.2
2016 H2 171.6 2.9 27.4 4.2 16.0 0.2 7.4 13.3 24.3 14.1 3.0 8.2 0.0 4.0 8.9 17.1
2017 H1 148.8 4.6 24.2 0.4 16.2 – 0.6 5.2 9.8 21.0 12.1 0.3 8.2 – 0.3 1.2 5.6 14.5
H2 177.1 2.5 31.5 15.6 17.8 2.0 6.6 12.5 24.6 16.8 21.6 9.5 1.5 2.9 7.8 17.9
6 2018 H1 166.3 0.2 25.9 2.8 15.6 0.4 3.8 9.5 22.7 12.6 – 1.9 7.6 – 0.2 – 0.9 4.7 15.3
H2 174.0 – 1.3 31.3 – 0.0 18.0 0.2 6.7 11.3 25.6 15.9 – 4.6 9.1 – 0.3 2.2 7.0 17.8
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
H2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.5 13.3
p 2021 H1 187.9 7.7 40.3 25.7 21.4 3.1 6.9 12.6 24.5 17.7 119.8 9.4 4.8 0.9 6.9 13.6
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted re-
turn on sales.  3 Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year fig-ures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  4 Adjusted
for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and in the
reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical Series Seasonally adjusted
business statistics.  5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.  6 From this point on-
wards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous pe-
riods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2021 2022
Item 2019 2020 2021 Q2 Q3 Q4  December January February  p
I.Current Account +273,903 +219,080 +291,630 +77,921 +94,004 +39,403 +22,452 – 2,549 +11,426
1.Goods
Receipts 2,392,037 2,188,391 2,508,421 622,057 623,441 672,702 226,272 206,571 223,590
Expenditure  2,083,737 1,847,313 2,218,170 534,100 552,467 634,096 215,274 213,900 212,847
Balance +308,299 +341,079 +290,249 +87,956 +70,973 +38,606 +10,998 – 7,329 +10,743
2.Services
Receipts 1,019,656 869,514 1,003,644 235,642 265,308 291,761 103,767 88,495 83,926
Expenditure  984,330 863,985 907,700 210,057 231,013 271,705 96,700 76,175 75,459
Balance +35,330 + 5,530 +95,943 +25,584 +34,295 +20,057 + 7,067 +12,321 + 8,467
3.Primary income
Receipts 853,413 753,071 795,654 216,908 184,889 208,309 77,303 64,558 61,402
Expenditure  769,040 718,040 732,400 218,864 165,911 186,765 59,932 56,186 52,160
Balance +84,373 +35,031 +63,252 – 1,957 +18,979 +21,544 +17,371 + 8,372 + 9,242
4.Secondary income
Receipts 119,797 124,786 150,609 34,666 39,588 41,410 16,512 10,260 11,328
Expenditure  273,896 287,345 308,423 68,328 69,831 82,213 29,497 26,172 28,355
Balance –154,096 –162,557 –157,815 –33,662 –30,244 –40,803 –12,985 –15,913 –17,026
II.Capital account –26,857 – 3,163 +40,828 + 6,521 +18,681 +12,760 + 6,916 + 2,732 + 3,269
III.Financial account  1 +208,170 +197,526 +316,759 +102,983 +84,785 +22,169 + 1,441 + 9,273 – 1,449
1.Direct investment +71,412 –150,812 +290,652 + 5,259 +106,975 +47,284 +32,649 + 4,718 +48,464
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  + 571 –15,353 +148,661 – 485 +45,755 –24,103 –92,421 +54,756 +31,778
By non-resident units of
the euro area  –70,841 +135,461 –141,988 – 5,745 –61,218 –71,386 –125,070 +50,038 –16,687
2.Portfolio investment –93,777 +536,984 +421,366 +160,019 +54,097 +119,738 +21,592 +26,166 –23,679
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +423,422 +689,039 +765,294 +230,359 +121,276 +143,852 +33,064 +18,635 – 5,016
Equity and
investment fund shares +57,433 +314,529 +354,131 +117,454 +41,721 +28,530 + 2,159 +44,995 –37,243
Short-term
debt securities  – 905 +125,715 +116,603 +14,872 – 7,932 +82,699 +39,041 –40,448 – 4,918
Long-term
debt securities  +366,895 +248,795 +294,561 +98,033 +87,488 +32,623 – 8,136 +14,088 +37,145
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  +517,199 +152,054 +343,931 +70,341 +67,179 +24,115 +11,473 – 7,532 +18,663
Equity and
investment fund shares +289,454 +159,616 +509,621 +133,313 +124,776 +145,834 +80,792 –35,566 + 8,039
Short-term
debt securities  –28,277 +139,008 +23,602 +10,565 + 9,401 –81,935 –53,452 +26,494 +23,537
Long-term
debt securities  +256,024 –146,570 –189,292 –73,537 –66,999 –39,782 –15,866 + 1,540 –12,914
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options + 6,945 + 9,165 +69,434 – 2,488 +24,216 +44,529 + 4,304 + 3,766 – 965
4.Other investment +217,293 –210,977 –594,933 –66,925 –223,703 –192,271 –56,275 –23,208 –26,935
Eurosystem +144,211 –203,600 –442,796 –63,381 –166,751 –356,934 –293,582 +216,455 +20,012
General government + 4,154 –18,138 –73,916 – 9,857 –37,484 + 2,235 + 3,073 + 6,867 – 4,480
MFIs  2 +186,932 +17,495 –133,383 – 6,353 –38,438 +184,625 +233,199 –230,491 –64,204
Enterprises and households –118,004 – 6,734 +55,165 +12,667 +18,970 –22,196 + 1,035 –16,039 +21,737
5.Reserve assets + 6,297 +13,163 +130,240 + 7,118 +123,199 + 2,891 – 827 – 2,169 + 1,665
IV.Net errors and omissions –38,877 –18,394 –15,699 +18,541 –27,900 –29,994 –27,927 + 9,091 –16,143
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Increase: + / decrease: -.2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Zeit Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2007 + 171,493 + 201,728 – 1,183 – 32,465 + 35,620 – 33,390 – 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 13,273
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 – 3,947 – 29,122 + 24,063 – 34,147 – 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 – 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 – 6,605 – 17,642 + 54,524 – 34,764 – 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 – 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 – 6,209 – 25,255 + 51,306 – 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 – 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 – 9,357 – 29,930 + 69,087 – 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 – 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 – 11,388 – 30,774 + 65,658 – 38,703 – 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 – 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 – 12,523 – 39,321 + 63,284 – 43,413 – 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 210,906 + 219,629 – 14,296 – 25,303 + 57,752 – 41,172 + 2,936 + 240,258 – 2,564 + 26,416
2015 + 260,286 + 248,394 – 15,405 – 18,516 + 69,262 – 38,854 – 48 + 234,392 – 2,213 – 25,845
2016 + 266,689 + 252,409 – 19,921 – 20,987 + 76,199 – 40,931 + 2,142 + 261,123 + 1,686 – 7,708
2017 + 255,814 + 255,077 – 13,613 – 23,994 + 76,404 – 51,673 – 2,936 + 276,697 – 1,269 + 23,819
2018 + 267,729 + 221,983 – 22,985 – 15,806 + 111,890 – 50,338 + 580 + 246,928 + 392 – 21,381
2019 + 262,903 + 215,456 – 30,887 – 18,100 + 115,359 – 49,811 – 887 + 186,317 – 544 – 75,700
2020 + 238,741 + 189,963 – 7,246 + 2,725 + 98,780 – 52,727 – 5,829 + 216,515 – 51 – 16,397
2021 + 264,981 + 192,150 + 3,091 + 314 + 126,606 – 54,090 – 1,376 + 314,750 + 31,892 + 51,145
2019 Q2 + 59,361 + 52,177 – 7,580 – 2,223 + 16,014 – 6,606 – 509 + 40,266 + 444 – 18,586
Q3 + 64,013 + 57,726 – 7,447 – 11,912 + 30,937 – 12,738 + 235 + 19,657 – 349 – 44,590
Q4 + 68,030 + 49,432 – 11,400 – 3,126 + 35,102 – 13,378 – 1,412 + 83,477 – 576 + 16,860
2020 Q1 + 62,570 + 52,090 – 2,656 – 2,238 + 27,396 – 14,679 – 608 + 33,152 + 133 – 28,810
Q2 + 37,621 + 28,076 – 1,806 + 5,190 + 13,563 – 9,209 + 55 + 25,747 + 243 – 11,929
Q3 + 62,788 + 55,716 – 695 – 5,827 + 23,501 – 10,601 – 1,493 + 65,414 – 1,276 + 4,118
Q4 + 75,762 + 54,082 – 2,089 + 5,599 + 34,320 – 18,238 – 3,783 + 92,203 + 848 + 20,223
2021 Q1 + 75,009 + 57,190 + 1,200 + 3,281 + 31,814 – 17,276 – 331 + 106,919 + 385 + 32,241
Q2 + 63,932 + 47,133 – 194 + 6,401 + 18,624 – 8,225 – 1,788 + 84,594 + 58 + 22,450
Q3 + 61,165 + 49,076 – 34 – 8,160 + 34,277 – 14,029 + 1,745 + 36,922 + 31,199 – 25,987
Q4 + 64,875 + 38,751 + 2,119 – 1,208 + 41,892 – 14,560 – 1,002 + 86,314 + 250 + 22,441
p 2022 Q1 + 52,344 + 34,305 + 3,802 – 2,468 + 36,895 – 16,388 – 1,865 + 94,003 + 2,200 + 43,524
2019 Oct. + 19,815 + 20,453 – 3,131 – 5,744 + 9,915 – 4,809 – 895 + 43,277 – 107 + 24,357
Nov. + 23,931 + 17,195 – 2,913 + 603 + 9,918 – 3,785 – 480 + 17,523 – 356 – 5,928
Dec. + 24,284 + 11,784 – 5,357 + 2,016 + 15,269 – 4,784 – 37 + 22,677 – 113 – 1,570
2020 Jan. + 15,929 + 14,031 – 905 – 859 + 10,181 – 7,423 + 198 + 3,819 + 898 – 12,309
Feb. + 21,309 + 19,874 – 1,884 – 1,316 + 7,135 – 4,383 – 101 + 15,791 + 750 – 5,418
Mar. + 25,331 + 18,185 + 133 – 62 + 10,080 – 2,872 – 706 + 13,542 – 1,514 – 11,083
Apr. + 10,787 + 4,530 – 102 + 1,675 + 9,003 – 4,421 + 110 + 11,487 + 950 + 589
May + 6,134 + 8,575 + 87 + 1,110 + 23 – 3,573 – 9 + 2,095 + 33 – 4,029
June + 20,700 + 14,971 – 1,791 + 2,406 + 4,538 – 1,214 – 47 + 12,165 – 740 – 8,489
July + 20,883 + 20,319 – 330 – 2,709 + 7,024 – 3,751 – 1,005 + 14,644 – 611 – 5,234
Aug. + 16,852 + 13,976 + 38 – 2,543 + 8,850 – 3,432 + 412 + 30,512 – 611 + 13,248
Sep. + 25,053 + 21,421 – 404 – 575 + 7,627 – 3,419 – 900 + 20,258 – 53 – 3,895
Oct. + 24,773 + 20,389 – 415 + 782 + 8,128 – 4,527 – 1,386 + 25,983 + 140 + 2,596
Nov. + 22,799 + 18,384 + 164 + 2,120 + 9,835 – 7,541 – 2,266 + 23,695 + 89 + 3,162
Dec. + 28,191 + 15,308 – 1,838 + 2,697 + 16,356 – 6,171 – 132 + 42,524 + 618 + 14,466
2021 Jan. + 20,394 + 14,733 + 301 + 896 + 11,006 – 6,241 – 458 + 22,458 + 743 + 2,522
Feb. + 20,814 + 18,248 + 44 + 1,159 + 9,016 – 7,609 – 1,461 + 52,644 + 102 + 33,291
Mar. + 33,801 + 24,208 + 855 + 1,227 + 11,792 – 3,427 + 1,588 + 31,817 – 460 – 3,572
Apr. + 23,029 + 15,866 + 83 + 3,051 + 7,812 – 3,701 – 700 + 35,418 – 251 + 13,090
May + 15,757 + 14,492 – 160 + 2,344 + 644 – 1,724 – 375 + 14,146 + 211 – 1,235
June + 25,147 + 16,775 – 117 + 1,005 + 10,167 – 2,800 – 713 + 35,029 + 98 + 10,595
July + 20,669 + 18,645 – 451 – 2,511 + 9,907 – 5,372 – 626 + 5,325 + 102 – 14,718
Aug. + 16,987 + 12,859 + 645 – 3,543 + 11,922 – 4,251 + 493 + 20,653 + 31,254 + 3,173
Sep. + 23,509 + 17,573 – 229 – 2,105 + 12,447 – 4,406 + 1,877 + 10,944 – 158 – 14,442
Oct. + 19,141 + 15,259 + 1,117 – 2,802 + 11,783 – 5,099 + 416 + 21,714 + 261 + 2,157
Nov. + 21,329 + 14,820 + 893 + 71 + 12,021 – 5,582 – 1,153 + 48,411 + 963 + 28,235
Dec. + 24,405 + 8,672 + 109 + 1,523 + 18,088 – 3,878 – 265 + 16,190 – 974 – 7,951
2022 Jan. + 12,519 + 5,831 + 1,230 – 338 + 13,100 – 6,074 – 104 + 55,703 + 309 + 43,288
Feb. + 21,057 + 15,649 + 2,346 + 414 + 10,415 – 5,421 – 1,297 + 28,963 + 1,161 + 9,203
p Mar. + 18,768 + 12,824 + 225 – 2,543 + 13,380 – 4,893 – 464 + 9,337 + 730 – 8,967
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: + / net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2021 2022
Group of countries/country 
2019 2020 
2021 Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar.
All countries  1 Exports 1,328,152 1,206,928 1,375,658 121,413 126,032 117,016 109,580 123,344 137,871
Imports 1,104,141 1,026,502 1,203,174 108,809 114,520 110,622 106,253 112,306 130,427
Balance +224,010 +180,427 +172,484 +12,603 +11,512 + 6,393 + 3,327 +11,039 + 7,444
   I. European countries Exports 902,831 824,921 945,989 84,073 87,211 79,082 75,479 85,382 93,322
Imports 747,692 682,477 804,226 72,878 77,702 73,259 68,782 76,269 85,796
Balance +155,140 +142,444 +141,763 +11,194 + 9,509 + 5,823 + 6,697 + 9,113 + 7,526
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 698,257 635,741 747,241 66,778 68,119 63,252 59,040 67,862 74,959
Imports 593,251 546,655 638,969 57,670 60,832 56,585 51,180 58,718 64,690
Balance +105,006 +89,087 +108,272 + 9,108 + 7,287 + 6,668 + 7,860 + 9,144 +10,269
          Euro area (19)       Exports 492,308 441,853 518,940 46,518 47,157 44,011 41,374 47,251 51,658
          countries Imports 409,863 371,211 438,815 40,056 41,834 39,423 35,514 40,539 44,975
Balance +82,445 +70,643 +80,126 + 6,462 + 5,323 + 4,588 + 5,860 + 6,713 + 6,683
          of which:
               Austria Exports 66,076 60,118 71,955 6,456 6,752 5,938 5,702 6,415 7,660
  Imports 44,059 40,454 47,572 4,241 4,287 4,202 3,661 4,461 4,920
Balance +22,017 +19,663 +24,383 + 2,215 + 2,465 + 1,736 + 2,041 + 1,954 + 2,740
               Belgium and Exports 52,006 48,824 57,317 5,262 5,077 4,871 4,585 5,305 5,789
               Luxembourg Imports 46,322 39,584 55,350 4,977 5,292 4,760 4,277 4,801 5,463
Balance + 5,683 + 9,240 + 1,968 + 285 – 215 + 111 + 308 + 504 + 326
               France Exports 106,564 90,910 102,230 8,767 9,439 8,431 8,221 9,188 10,206
  Imports 66,199 56,364 62,075 5,708 5,755 5,384 4,916 5,662 6,218
Balance +40,364 +34,546 +40,155 + 3,059 + 3,685 + 3,047 + 3,305 + 3,526 + 3,988
               Italy Exports 67,887 60,634 75,359 7,681 6,673 6,065 5,941 7,128 7,630
  Imports 57,100 53,906 65,377 5,849 6,109 5,480 4,610 6,043 6,469
Balance +10,786 + 6,728 + 9,982 + 1,832 + 563 + 585 + 1,331 + 1,084 + 1,161
               Netherlands Exports 91,528 84,579 100,477 8,782 8,902 9,677 8,024 9,179 9,335
  Imports 97,816 87,024 105,534 10,219 10,718 10,485 9,700 9,748 11,201
Balance – 6,288 – 2,445 – 5,057 – 1,437 – 1,816 – 809 – 1,675 – 569 – 1,866
               Spain  Exports 44,218 37,618 43,589 3,645 4,020 3,494 3,584 3,990 4,243
  Imports 33,126 31,281 34,331 2,748 3,339 3,408 2,817 3,443 3,337
Balance +11,092 + 6,337 + 9,258 + 897 + 681 + 86 + 767 + 547 + 906
          Other EU Member  Exports 205,949 193,888 228,300 20,260 20,962 19,242 17,666 20,611 23,301
          States  Imports 183,387 175,444 200,154 17,614 18,998 17,162 15,666 18,180 19,715
Balance +22,561 +18,444 +28,146 + 2,645 + 1,964 + 2,080 + 2,000 + 2,431 + 3,586
      2. Other European Exports 204,575 189,180 198,748 17,295 19,092 15,829 16,439 17,520 18,363
          countries Imports 154,441 135,822 165,257 15,208 16,870 16,675 17,602 17,550 21,107
Balance +50,134 +53,358 +33,491 + 2,086 + 2,222 – 845 – 1,163 – 31 – 2,743
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 56,345 56,265 60,617 5,336 6,140 4,945 5,207 5,384 6,470
  Imports 45,824 45,556 48,889 4,222 4,593 3,840 4,110 4,590 5,180
Balance +10,521 +10,708 +11,727 + 1,114 + 1,547 + 1,105 + 1,097 + 793 + 1,290
               United Kingdom Exports 79,166 67,086 65,356 5,722 6,123 4,959 5,410 5,838 6,526
  Imports 38,397 35,018 32,164 2,885 2,925 2,648 2,695 2,543 3,638
Balance +40,770 +32,068 +33,192 + 2,837 + 3,198 + 2,311 + 2,715 + 3,295 + 2,888
   II. Non-European  Exports 421,728 380,292 427,496 37,100 38,591 37,706 33,875 37,728 44,219
       countries Imports 355,390 343,270 398,020 35,841 36,715 37,260 37,367 35,882 44,457
Balance +66,338 +37,022 +29,476 + 1,260 + 1,876 + 446 – 3,492 + 1,846 – 238
       1. Africa Exports 23,627 20,086 23,111 1,703 1,926 1,938 1,802 1,922 2,276
Imports 24,475 18,758 26,030 2,662 2,239 2,167 2,202 2,199 3,173
Balance – 848 + 1,328 – 2,919 – 959 – 313 – 229 – 400 – 277 – 897
       2. America Exports 165,602 141,375 167,737 14,733 15,215 14,573 13,504 14,754 18,261
  Imports 100,007 94,005 101,212 8,393 8,700 9,116 8,704 8,543 11,015
Balance +65,595 +47,370 +66,525 + 6,340 + 6,514 + 5,457 + 4,800 + 6,211 + 7,247
           of which:
               United States  Exports 118,680 103,476 122,038 10,897 11,001 10,695 9,901 10,835 13,769
  Imports 71,334 67,694 72,032 6,001 6,300 6,377 6,197 6,215 7,670
Balance +47,346 +35,782 +50,005 + 4,896 + 4,700 + 4,318 + 3,704 + 4,620 + 6,099
       3. Asia Exports 221,278 208,146 224,993 19,673 20,226 20,153 17,559 19,966 22,385
  Imports 227,036 226,646 266,597 24,451 25,486 25,435 25,873 24,737 29,620
Balance – 5,759 –18,500 –41,604 – 4,778 – 5,260 – 5,282 – 8,314 – 4,771 – 7,235
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 28,663 25,882 26,112 2,180 2,273 2,782 1,953 2,204 2,461
  Imports 7,460 6,721 7,510 752 790 719 559 700 728
Balance +21,202 +19,161 +18,602 + 1,428 + 1,483 + 2,063 + 1,395 + 1,504 + 1,732
               Japan  Exports 20,662 17,396 18,238 1,573 1,686 1,504 1,557 1,737 1,917
Imports 23,904 21,427 23,471 2,046 2,139 1,884 1,836 1,924 2,130
Balance – 3,243 – 4,032 – 5,234 – 473 – 453 – 380 – 280 – 187 – 213
               People's Republic  Exports 95,984 95,840 103,690 9,385 8,972 8,442 8,002 9,044 10,456
               of China  2 Imports 110,054 117,373 142,035 13,461 14,132 14,691 14,614 13,576 16,775
Balance –14,070 –21,533 –38,345 – 4,075 – 5,160 – 6,249 – 6,612 – 4,532 – 6,319
               New industrial countries Exports 54,164 50,590 55,241 4,794 5,185 5,072 4,502 5,054 5,422
               and emerging markets  Imports 51,748 48,222 55,401 4,781 5,082 4,819 5,144 5,008 5,448
               of Asia  3 Balance + 2,416 + 2,368 – 160 + 13 + 103 + 253 – 642 + 46 – 25
       4. Oceania and Exports 11,221 10,685 11,655 991 1,224 1,042 1,009 1,086 1,297
           polar regions Imports 3,872 3,861 4,182 335 290 542 588 403 650
Balance + 7,349 + 6,824 + 7,473 + 656 + 934 + 500 + 421 + 683 + 647
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. EU excl. UK.  1 Including fuel and other supplies for ships andaircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.  3 Brunei
Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Zeit Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2017 – 23,994 – 3,679 – 43,558 + 9,613 + 14,903 – 8,188 – 1,065 + 2,177 + 1,139 + 76,669 – 1,403
2018 – 15,806 – 2,044 – 44,543 + 10,060 + 17,219 – 7,060 + 723 + 3,322 + 671 +112,223 – 1,004
2019 – 18,100 – 72 – 45,947 + 10,999 + 18,299 – 9,697 – 2,984 + 3,489 + 846 +115,462 – 949
2020 + 2,725 – 9,392 – 14,678 + 10,239 + 17,546 – 7,107 – 4,382 + 3,363 + 3,234 + 97,017 – 1,471
2021 + 314 – 12,067 – 21,924 + 8,737 + 31,878 – 7,515 – 8,523 + 3,513 + 2,605 +126,146 – 2,145
2020 Q3 – 5,827 – 2,735 – 7,386 + 2,233 + 3,331 – 2,031 – 1,586 + 895 + 283 + 24,338 – 1,120
Q4 + 5,599 – 2,902 – 98 + 2,713 + 4,880 – 928 – 1,007 + 668 + 1,067 + 29,998 + 3,255
2021 Q1 + 3,281 – 3,183 – 13 + 2,251 + 5,756 – 2,478 – 1,436 + 884 + 1,324 + 31,487 – 997
Q2 + 6,401 – 2,075 – 2,151 + 2,589 + 8,007 – 1,329 – 1,164 + 914 + 494 + 21,077 – 2,947
Q3 – 8,160 – 2,259 – 14,130 + 1,221 + 9,080 – 2,169 – 2,331 + 946 – 77 + 35,585 – 1,232
Q4 – 1,208 – 4,551 – 5,629 + 2,676 + 9,035 – 1,539 – 3,592 + 769 + 864 + 37,996 + 3,031
p 2022 Q1 – 2,468 – 5,551 – 4,636 + 2,301 + 7,619 – 3,220 – 1,746 + 949 + 1,233 + 36,924 – 1,262
2021 May + 2,344 – 772 – 139 + 917 + 2,368 – 541 – 406 + 286 + 175 + 2,660 – 2,191
June + 1,005 – 744 – 2,100 + 396 + 3,044 – 8 – 592 + 366 + 177 + 10,420 – 430
July – 2,511 – 961 – 3,234 + 886 + 2,719 – 1,283 – 1,240 + 291 – 43 + 10,358 – 408
Aug. – 3,543 – 438 – 5,364 – 418 + 2,818 – 334 – 621 + 303 – 26 + 12,356 – 408
Sep. – 2,105 – 861 – 5,532 + 753 + 3,543 – 552 – 469 + 353 – 8 + 12,871 – 416
Oct. – 2,802 – 1,157 – 3,543 + 1,115 + 2,593 – 637 – 1,813 + 285 + 248 + 12,006 – 472
Nov. + 71 – 1,122 – 1,354 + 646 + 3,318 – 830 – 1,478 + 182 + 252 + 12,184 – 415
Dec. + 1,523 – 2,272 – 733 + 915 + 3,125 – 72 – 301 + 302 + 364 + 13,807 + 3,918
2022 Jan. – 338 – 1,741 – 1,141 + 894 + 2,714 – 1,340 – 458 + 311 + 437 + 13,068 – 405
Feb. + 414 – 1,844 – 1,249 + 714 + 2,773 – 875 – 232 + 322 + 434 + 10,396 – 415
p Mar. – 2,543 – 1,966 – 2,246 + 694 + 2,132 – 1,005 – 1,056 + 317 + 361 + 13,460 – 441
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Zeit Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2017 – 51,673 – 23,191 – 9,851 + 9,665 – 28,482 .+ 4,613 – 2,936 + 926 – 3,863
2018 – 50,338 – 28,710 – 10,186 + 10,230 – 21,627 .+ 5,142 + 580 + 3,349 – 2,769
2019 – 49,811 – 28,986 – 10,728 + 11,742 – 20,825 .+ 5,431 – 887 + 3,028 – 3,915
2020 – 52,727 – 34,127 – 12,239 + 10,929 – 18,600 .+ 5,908 – 5,829 + 380 – 6,209
2021 – 54,090 – 32,567 – 7,039 + 11,982 – 21,523 .+ 6,170 – 1,376 + 3,191 – 4,567
2020 Q3 – 10,601 – 6,387 – 3,264 + 2,153 – 4,215 .+ 1,477 – 1,493 – 34 – 1,459
Q4 – 18,238 – 13,375 – 4,391 + 1,752 – 4,863 + 1,482 + 1,477 – 3,783 + 295 – 4,078
2021 Q1 – 17,276 – 11,088 + 327 + 2,297 – 6,188 .+ 1,543 – 331 + 123 – 454
Q2 – 8,225 – 3,644 – 1,113 + 5,341 – 4,582 .+ 1,543 – 1,788 – 1,578 – 211
Q3 – 14,029 – 8,787 – 2,834 + 2,199 – 5,242 .+ 1,543 + 1,745 + 2,918 – 1,173
Q4 – 14,560 – 9,048 – 3,420 + 2,144 – 5,511 + 1,548 + 1,543 – 1,002 + 1,728 – 2,730
p 2022 Q1 – 16,388 – 10,040 – 2,369 + 2,410 – 6,348 .+ 1,598 – 1,865 – 1,885 + 20
2021 May – 1,724 – 525 – 251 + 2,817 – 1,200 + 516 + 514 – 375 – 267 – 108
June – 2,800 – 1,177 – 377 + 1,173 – 1,623 + 515 + 514 – 713 – 589 – 124
July – 5,372 – 3,462 – 2,317 + 712 – 1,910 .+ 514 – 626 – 208 – 418
Aug. – 4,251 – 2,813 – 277 + 410 – 1,438 + 515 + 514 + 493 + 686 – 192
Sep. – 4,406 – 2,512 – 240 + 1,077 – 1,894 .+ 514 + 1,877 + 2,440 – 563
Oct. – 5,099 – 3,257 – 122 + 472 – 1,843 + 516 + 514 + 416 + 786 – 370
Nov. – 5,582 – 3,691 – 743 + 347 – 1,892 + 516 + 514 – 1,153 – 513 – 640
Dec. – 3,878 – 2,101 – 2,555 + 1,325 – 1,777 + 516 + 514 – 265 + 1,455 – 1,720
2022 Jan. – 6,074 – 4,295 – 1,394 + 454 – 1,779 .+ 533 – 104 – 291 + 187
Feb. – 5,421 – 3,893 – 829 + 940 – 1,527 + 534 + 533 – 1,297 – 1,257 – 40
p Mar. – 4,893 – 1,852 – 145 + 1,016 – 3,041 + 537 + 533 – 464 – 337 – 127
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2021 2022
Item 2019  2020  2021  Q3  Q4  Q1 p January  February March  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +251,072 +739,081 +844,810 +147,616 +276,086 +204,882 +112,263 +48,762 +43,856
1.Direct investment +139,279 +119,458 +163,651 +43,555 +38,791 +44,793 +36,523 + 7,375 + 896
Equity +116,157 +90,170 +113,012 +35,950 +11,956 +29,186 +10,166 +10,901 + 8,120
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +40,785 +21,039 +55,475 +17,913 + 7,203 +20,797 + 6,079 + 8,594 + 6,124
Debt instruments +23,122 +29,288 +50,638 + 7,606 +26,835 +15,607 +26,357 – 3,526 – 7,224
2.Portfolio investment +134,961 +191,740 +221,477 +55,285 +42,049 +59,730 +36,398 – 2,697 +26,029
Shares  2 +13,672 +65,214 +56,007 +19,786 +12,910 + 7,228 + 5,398 – 6,023 + 7,853
Investment fund shares  3 +53,708 +62,585 +103,434 +22,168 +39,858 + 3,970 + 6,448 – 1,298 – 1,180
Short-term  4
debt securities + 7,424 + 3,852 – 6,256 + 7,639 –10,366 + 1,329 + 3,150 – 3,796 + 1,975
Long-term   5
debt securities +60,157 +60,089 +68,292 + 5,692 – 353 +47,202 +21,402 + 8,420 +17,380
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +24,544 +96,276 +60,977 +10,230 +18,916 +10,566 +12,725 + 4,788 – 6,947
4.Other investment  7 –47,168 +331,659 +366,813 + 7,347 +176,081 +87,593 +26,309 +38,135 +23,149
MFIs  8 + 9,256 – 4,522 +112,866 –31,971 –15,065 +139,954 +132,202 +28,281 –20,529
Short-term – 8,901 + 3,526 +99,548 –23,041 –26,717 +131,275 +131,415 +26,258 –26,399
Long-term +18,157 – 8,048 +13,318 – 8,931 +11,652 + 8,679 + 787 + 2,023 + 5,869
Enterprises and
households  9 +14,348 +90,994 +138,858 +24,931 +44,797 +45,131 + 6,894 +12,497 +25,740
Short-term + 793 +45,448 +124,088 +17,622 +46,917 +43,566 + 4,304 +11,540 +27,722
Long-term +13,555 +45,545 +14,770 + 7,309 – 2,119 + 1,565 + 2,590 + 957 – 1,982
General government + 144 + 2,076 – 8,305 – 724 + 756 – 5,842 – 197 – 3,181 – 2,464
Short-term + 3,357 + 3,461 – 7,502 – 456 + 1,061 – 5,362 + 359 – 3,177 – 2,544
Long-term – 3,213 – 1,385 – 803 – 268 – 305 – 480 – 556 – 4+ 80
Bundesbank –70,915 +243,112 +123,394 +15,111 +145,592 –91,650 –112,590 + 537 +20,403
5.Reserve assets – 544 – 51 +31,892 +31,199 + 250 + 2,200 + 309 + 1,161 + 730
II.Net foreign investment in the
reporting country (increase: +) +64,756 +522,566 +530,060 +110,694 +189,772 +110,879 +56,560 +19,799 +34,520
1.Direct investment +63,683 +122,929 +61,833 +19,265 + 5,884 +40,074 +42,543 – 7,186 + 4,717
Equity +23,492 +43,862 +36,972 + 5,379 + 9,840 + 4,684 + 2,078 + 1,760 + 847
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 – 492 + 1,880 + 4,787 + 3,003 + 1,952 + 3,284 + 1,350 + 1,292 + 642
Debt instruments +40,192 +79,068 +24,861 +13,887 – 3,956 +35,390 +40,465 – 8,946 + 3,870
2.Portfolio investment +65,309 +148,877 –33,617 – 8,155 –53,336 +21,283 + 6,514 + 5,632 + 9,137
Shares  2 – 7,275 –15,982 – 3,703 + 420 – 7,583 – 9,199 – 3,557 – 932 – 4,710
Investment fund shares  3 – 4,519 + 1,862 – 2,760 – 1,096 – 2,847 – 2,211 + 638 – 287 – 2,562
Short-term  4
debt securities +14,400 +83,707 +25,027 + 9,532 – 6,073 – 5,244 – 4,472 –11,975 +11,203
Long-term   5
debt securities +62,704 +79,290 –52,181 –17,011 –36,833 +37,937 +13,905 +18,827 + 5,206
3.Other investment  7 –64,237 +250,760 +501,843 +99,584 +237,225 +49,522 + 7,504 +21,353 +20,665
MFIs  8 –10,214 +108,323 +159,384 – 2,854 –114,455 +266,244 +230,832 +54,648 –19,236
Short-term –20,978 +74,805 +115,401 –19,087 –127,741 +290,964 +244,681 +56,025 – 9,742
Long-term +10,764 +33,517 +43,984 +16,233 +13,286 –24,720 –13,849 – 1,377 – 9,494
Enterprises and
households  9 +43,978 +39,313 +120,200 +27,460 +89,278 –14,909 –14,925 – 4,145 + 4,160
Short-term +11,681 +18,361 +115,536 +25,692 +80,436 –17,519 –17,041 – 5,605 + 5,127
Long-term +32,297 +20,952 + 4,663 + 1,768 + 8,842 + 2,610 + 2,117 + 1,460 – 967
General government + 1,620 – 7,817 – 4,537 – 140 – 246 – 641 – 6,364 + 3,881 + 1,842
Short-term + 1,424 – 7,664 – 2,186 – 156 – 661 + 2,078 – 3,554 + 3,816 + 1,816
Long-term + 196 – 153 – 2,351 + 15 + 416 – 2,719 – 2,810 + 65 + 26
Bundesbank –99,621 +110,941 +226,796 +75,117 +262,648 –201,172 –202,039 –33,031 +33,899
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +186,317 +216,515 +314,750 +36,922 +86,314 +94,003 +55,703 +28,963 + 9,337
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see Statistical series, direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities 3ä,  4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,670
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 663,320 497,651
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2019 Nov. 1,134,129 197,047 143,253 14,799 6,116 32,879 885,524 870,520 51,558 579,285 554,845
Dec. 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 663,320 497,651
2020 Jan. 1,090,725 209,432 154,867 14,785 6,110 33,671 828,120 811,435 53,173 580,866 509,859
Feb. 1,106,033 215,748 159,889 14,857 5,989 35,014 836,782 821,562 53,503 577,011 529,022
Mar. 1,218,815 213,722 158,677 14,812 5,965 34,268 952,781 935,126 52,312 617,919 600,896
Apr. 1,214,851 226,903 170,359 14,935 6,857 34,753 934,333 918,814 53,615 616,319 598,532
May 1,209,328 223,125 167,780 14,650 6,787 33,908 931,521 916,145 54,682 612,403 596,925
June 1,294,167 226,135 170,728 14,603 6,955 33,849 1,012,982 995,083 55,050 618,825 675,342
July 1,323,691 233,547 180,400 14,179 7,465 31,503 1,034,282 1,019,214 55,862 599,189 724,503
Aug. 1,358,137 230,309 177,973 14,129 7,423 30,784 1,071,521 1,056,231 56,307 600,390 757,747
Sep. 1,414,933 227,150 173,979 14,293 7,632 31,246 1,131,686 1,115,189 56,097 649,781 765,151
Oct. 1,346,367 227,767 174,433 14,346 7,656 31,332 1,061,498 1,047,327 57,102 619,445 726,922
Nov. 1,347,202 212,286 159,737 14,193 7,535 30,820 1,078,270 1,060,263 56,647 625,921 721,282
Dec. 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 Jan. 1,348,921 219,860 166,494 14,115 8,061 31,190 1,072,140 1,054,994 56,921 638,042 710,879
Feb. 1,328,303 210,619 157,313 14,119 8,047 31,140 1,060,378 1,043,746 57,306 616,473 711,830
Mar. 1,364,046 209,400 155,323 14,367 7,966 31,744 1,098,486 1,081,989 56,160 647,647 716,400
Apr. 1,307,161 210,799 158,143 14,085 7,836 30,735 1,041,472 1,024,734 54,890 604,863 702,299
May 1,370,231 221,201 168,678 14,037 7,809 30,677 1,093,721 1,076,918 55,309 621,827 748,404
June 1,384,834 213,600 159,995 14,326 8,094 31,184 1,115,447 1,101,897 55,787 670,632 714,202
July 1,319,694 219,775 165,984 14,345 8,104 31,343 1,042,015 1,024,970 57,903 657,905 661,789
Aug. 1,360,722 250,742 165,757 45,091 8,174 31,720 1,053,653 1,037,259 56,327 699,773 660,949
Sep. 1,431,909 246,908 160,943 45,606 8,267 32,092 1,130,558 1,115,126 54,443 746,128 685,781
Oct. 1,388,160 250,340 164,602 45,719 8,449 31,570 1,083,141 1,066,604 54,678 735,595 652,564
Nov. 1,456,861 258,815 170,460 46,375 8,405 33,575 1,142,719 1,127,545 55,327 773,217 683,644
Dec. 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 Jan. 1,479,694 261,965 173,362 46,931 8,504 33,168 1,163,561 1,149,868 54,168 807,889 671,805
Feb. 1,491,552 273,726 184,255 46,854 8,711 33,905 1,164,098 1,149,722 53,729 774,786 716,766
Mar. 1,516,744 277,782 187,779 47,375 8,663 33,965 1,184,501 1,169,952 54,462 808,690 708,055
Apr. 1,491,558 288,953 196,274 48,617 8,799 35,263 1,148,681 1,135,400 53,923 790,221 701,337
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2018 933,849 234,970 698,880 466,225 232,654 217,969 14,686 1,232,594 146,575 1,086,019 879,752 206,267 135,214 71,053
2019 963,967 227,688 736,279 502,594 233,685 217,370 16,314 1,305,705 167,656 1,138,048 927,650 210,399 134,768 75,630
2020 1,021,200 248,779 772,421 544,059 228,362 211,891 16,471 1,394,364 171,998 1,222,366 1,012,503 209,863 129,098 80,766
2021 1,152,509 260,321 892,188 604,424 287,764 270,847 16,917 1,548,984 218,886 1,330,098 1,066,016 264,082 175,351 88,730
2021 Oct. 1,131,037 271,635 859,402 596,651 262,750 245,676 17,074 1,503,115 211,654 1,291,460 1,054,476 236,984 148,085 88,898
Nov. 1,175,237 277,554 897,684 621,094 276,590 259,158 17,433 1,548,326 223,393 1,324,933 1,073,773 251,160 162,349 88,811
Dec. 1,152,509 260,321 892,188 604,424 287,764 270,847 16,917 1,548,984 218,886 1,330,098 1,066,016 264,082 175,351 88,730
2022 Jan. 1,182,691 270,790 911,902 621,146 290,756 273,635 17,121 1,578,209 219,558 1,358,651 1,089,067 269,583 179,085 90,498
Feb. 1,197,848 268,435 929,412 620,512 308,901 280,714 28,187 1,567,699 214,946 1,352,753 1,072,422 280,331 180,331 99,999
p Mar. 1,215,926 280,049 935,878 614,010 321,868 293,304 28,564 1,575,472 200,446 1,375,026 1,081,713 293,313 193,098 100,215
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2018 544,009 177,064 366,944 274,402 92,542 84,191 8,351 801,772 88,161 713,611 631,814 81,798 61,161 20,637
2019 572,324 176,847 395,476 304,605 90,871 82,120 8,752 836,863 91,122 745,740 660,385 85,355 62,692 22,664
2020 609,449 187,703 421,746 332,983 88,763 79,780 8,983 884,904 95,716 789,188 702,991 86,197 61,357 24,841
2021 660,768 198,911 461,857 350,591 111,266 102,689 8,578 978,060 153,424 824,636 713,878 110,758 84,237 26,521
2021 Oct. 670,194 213,397 456,797 352,977 103,820 94,656 9,164 947,643 129,096 818,547 721,460 97,087 70,380 26,707
Nov. 683,376 217,947 465,428 355,285 110,143 100,892 9,251 968,904 141,415 827,489 719,796 107,693 81,141 26,553
Dec. 660,768 198,911 461,857 350,591 111,266 102,689 8,578 978,060 153,424 824,636 713,878 110,758 84,237 26,521
2022 Jan. 671,660 215,565 456,095 345,388 110,707 102,134 8,572 971,933 142,339 829,594 722,051 107,544 80,084 27,460
Feb. 681,358 211,676 469,682 348,920 120,762 108,053 12,709 973,954 142,276 831,677 716,073 115,604 84,901 30,703
p Mar. 699,393 215,782 483,611 355,742 127,869 115,140 12,729 981,025 136,454 844,571 725,830 118,742 88,163 30,579
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2018 389,841 57,905 331,935 191,823 140,112 133,777 6,335 430,822 58,415 372,408 247,939 124,469 74,053 50,416
2019 391,643 50,841 340,803 197,989 142,814 135,251 7,563 468,842 76,534 392,308 267,265 125,043 72,077 52,967
2020 411,751 61,076 350,675 211,076 139,599 132,112 7,487 509,460 76,282 433,178 309,512 123,666 67,741 55,925
2021 491,741 61,410 430,331 253,833 176,498 168,158 8,340 570,924 65,462 505,463 352,138 153,324 91,115 62,210
2021 Oct. 460,843 58,238 402,605 243,674 158,931 151,020 7,910 555,472 82,558 472,913 333,016 139,897 77,706 62,191
Nov. 491,862 59,606 432,256 265,809 166,447 158,265 8,182 579,422 81,978 497,444 353,977 143,467 81,208 62,259
Dec. 491,741 61,410 430,331 253,833 176,498 168,158 8,340 570,924 65,462 505,463 352,138 153,324 91,115 62,210
2022 Jan. 511,031 55,225 455,806 275,758 180,049 171,500 8,549 606,275 77,219 529,056 367,017 162,039 99,001 63,038
Feb. 516,490 56,759 459,731 271,591 188,139 172,661 15,478 593,744 72,670 521,074 356,349 164,725 95,429 69,297
p Mar. 516,534 64,267 452,267 258,268 193,999 178,164 15,835 594,446 63,991 530,455 355,883 174,572 104,935 69,636
Euro area (19)
2018 467,428 156,887 310,542 238,963 71,579 64,295 7,283 735,094 68,959 666,136 601,205 64,931 49,138 15,792
2019 493,062 158,102 334,960 264,834 70,127 62,531 7,595 761,144 70,561 690,584 624,607 65,977 48,775 17,202
2020 522,933 166,846 356,087 287,662 68,425 60,750 7,674 799,046 74,101 724,945 658,931 66,014 47,100 18,914
2021 553,838 176,279 377,560 289,330 88,230 80,844 7,386 896,256 131,735 764,521 675,868 88,653 68,232 20,421
2021 Oct. 568,007 192,324 375,682 295,513 80,169 72,227 7,942 866,845 108,707 758,139 682,340 75,799 55,264 20,534
Nov. 579,922 198,341 381,581 295,204 86,377 78,367 8,010 884,965 120,057 764,908 680,461 84,447 64,003 20,444
Dec. 553,838 176,279 377,560 289,330 88,230 80,844 7,386 896,256 131,735 764,521 675,868 88,653 68,232 20,421
2022 Jan. 575,958 197,224 378,734 291,435 87,300 79,960 7,339 891,509 121,646 769,863 685,108 84,755 63,633 21,122
Feb. 583,733 192,153 391,581 295,971 95,610 84,169 11,441 893,089 121,854 771,235 679,362 91,874 67,627 24,247
p Mar. 596,153 195,325 400,828 299,564 101,264 89,818 11,446 897,685 116,893 780,793 686,158 94,635 70,651 23,984
Extra-Euro area (19)
2018 466,421 78,083 388,338 227,262 161,076 153,673 7,403 497,500 77,617 419,883 278,548 141,336 86,075 55,260
2019 470,905 69,586 401,319 237,761 163,558 154,839 8,719 544,560 97,096 447,465 303,043 144,422 85,993 58,428
2020 498,267 81,933 416,334 256,397 159,937 151,141 8,796 595,318 97,897 497,421 353,572 143,849 81,997 61,852
2021 598,671 84,042 514,629 315,094 199,535 190,003 9,532 652,728 87,151 565,577 390,148 175,429 107,119 68,309
2021 Oct. 563,030 79,310 483,720 301,138 182,582 173,449 9,133 636,269 102,948 533,321 372,136 161,185 92,821 68,364
Nov. 595,315 79,212 516,103 325,889 190,214 180,791 9,423 663,360 103,335 560,025 393,312 166,713 98,346 68,368
Dec. 598,671 84,042 514,629 315,094 199,535 190,003 9,532 652,728 87,151 565,577 390,148 175,429 107,119 68,309
2022 Jan. 606,733 73,566 533,167 329,711 203,456 193,674 9,782 686,699 97,912 588,788 403,959 184,829 115,452 69,377
Feb. 614,115 76,283 537,832 324,541 213,291 196,545 16,746 674,609 93,092 581,516 393,060 188,456 112,704 75,752
p Mar. 619,773 84,723 535,050 314,445 220,604 203,486 17,118 677,787 83,553 594,234 395,555 198,679 122,447 76,231
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2021 1.5749 1.4826 7.6282 7.4370 129.88 10.1633 10.1465 1.0811 0.85960 1.1827
2020 Dec. 1.6166 1.5595 7.9602 7.4412 126.28 10.6008 10.1736 1.0814 0.90624 1.2170
2021 Jan. 1.5764 1.5494 7.8730 7.4387 126.31 10.3661 10.0952 1.0794 0.89267 1.2171
Feb. 1.5605 1.5354 7.8136 7.4367 127.49 10.2791 10.0887 1.0858 0.87268 1.2098
Mar. 1.5444 1.4970 7.7465 7.4363 129.38 10.1469 10.1692 1.1065 0.85873 1.1899
Apr. 1.5544 1.4975 7.8051 7.4367 130.49 10.0376 10.1620 1.1031 0.86527 1.1979
May 1.5653 1.4732 7.8109 7.4362 132.57 10.0931 10.1471 1.0968 0.86258 1.2146
June 1.5761 1.4713 7.7391 7.4364 132.63 10.1444 10.1172 1.0940 0.85872 1.2047
July 1.5926 1.4806 7.6536 7.4373 130.35 10.3767 10.1979 1.0856 0.85613 1.1822
Aug. 1.6118 1.4827 7.6237 7.4369 129.28 10.4195 10.2157 1.0762 0.85287 1.1772
Sep. 1.6087 1.4910 7.6007 7.4361 129.66 10.1861 10.1710 1.0857 0.85683 1.1770
Oct. 1.5669 1.4436 7.4500 7.4398 131.21 9.8143 10.0557 1.0708 0.84694 1.1601
Nov. 1.5615 1.4339 7.2927 7.4373 130.12 9.9661 10.0459 1.0522 0.84786 1.1414
Dec. 1.5781 1.4463 7.1993 7.4362 128.80 10.1308 10.2726 1.0408 0.84875 1.1304
2022 Jan. 1.5770 1.4282 7.1922 7.4411 130.01 10.0070 10.3579 1.0401 0.83503 1.1314
Feb. 1.5825 1.4422 7.1957 7.4408 130.66 10.0544 10.5342 1.0461 0.83787 1.1342
Mar. 1.4946 1.3950 6.9916 7.4404 130.71 9.7367 10.5463 1.0245 0.83638 1.1019
Apr. 1.4663 1.3652 6.9605 7.4391 136.61 9.6191 10.3175 1.0211 0.83655 1.0819
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2022
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-42  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
26 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  526 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.2 96.1 96.0 96.6 96.0 97.9 99.6 95.9 97.7 98.3 98.1 97.8
2000 87.1 86.9 86.1 85.5 88.1 86.2 92.0 97.5 85.5 91.2 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.6 87.2 86.7 84.3 90.2 86.9 91.7 96.6 86.0 90.5 93.0 91.7 91.1
2002 89.8 90.2 89.8 87.9 94.5 90.5 92.4 95.7 88.5 91.1 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.4 101.4 100.8 98.9 106.4 101.6 95.9 94.8 97.6 95.3 97.0 96.7 96.9
2004 104.2 105.2 103.8 102.1 110.9 105.4 96.2 93.6 100.0 95.6 98.5 98.2 98.5
2005 102.8 103.9 101.8 100.4 109.0 102.9 94.8 92.0 98.8 93.3 98.4 97.1 96.8
2006 102.8 103.9 101.2 99.2 109.1 102.3 93.5 90.4 98.2 91.6 98.6 96.7 96.1
2007 106.3 106.8 103.3 100.8 112.7 104.5 94.5 89.6 102.0 92.0 100.9 98.3 97.4
2008 110.1 109.7 105.5 104.7 117.4 106.9 94.9 88.3 105.2 91.3 102.4 98.4 97.6
2009 111.6 110.6 106.6 108.3 120.5 108.0 95.2 89.2 104.7 92.0 101.9 98.6 98.0
2010 104.4 102.9 98.5 100.7 111.9 99.0 92.5 88.7 98.2 88.2 98.8 94.3 92.6
2011 104.2 101.9 96.7 99.1 112.7 98.5 92.1 88.5 97.6 87.4 98.2 93.5 92.0
2012 98.5 96.7 91.1 93.4 107.5 93.7 90.1 88.3 92.5 84.7 95.9 90.5 89.0
2013 102.0 99.8 94.1 96.3 112.2 96.8 92.3 88.8 97.5 86.6 98.1 92.3 91.0
2014 102.3 99.1 94.0 96.5 114.5 97.1 92.9 89.6 97.7 87.4 98.2 92.5 91.6
2015 92.5 89.5 85.5 85.9 106.1 88.6 89.8 90.3 88.9 83.6 94.4 87.8 87.0
2016 95.2 91.4 87.8 p 87.2 110.1 90.6 90.7 90.8 90.4 84.9 95.0 88.8 88.2
2017 97.4 93.4 88.9 p 87.9 112.4 91.8 91.9 90.9 93.3 85.7 96.3 89.9 89.0
2018 99.9 95.5 90.4 p 89.5 117.3 95.0 93.2 91.0 96.4 86.7 97.7 91.1 90.9
2019 98.1 93.1 88.7 p 87.0 115.4 92.4 92.2 91.2 93.5 85.8 96.4 89.9 89.5
2020 99.6 93.5 89.3 p 87.6 119.4 93.9 92.1 91.3 93.3 86.2 96.4 90.1 90.3
2021 99.6 93.4 p 88.5 p 85.4 120.8 94.2 93.3 91.8 95.4 86.6 97.4 90.7 91.1
2019 Nov. 97.4 92.1 88.5 86.2 114.6 91.2 92.1 91.5 92.8 85.8 95.9 89.4 88.9
Dec. 97.3 92.0 114.6 91.1 95.8 89.4 88.8
2020 Jan. 96.9 91.3 114.1 90.4 95.9 89.1 88.5
Feb. 96.2 90.5 88.0 p 86.9 113.5 89.7 91.7 91.4 92.0 85.5 95.5 88.8 88.2
Mar. 98.8 92.9 117.8 93.0 96.4 90.0 90.1
Apr. 98.1 92.4 117.5 92.9 96.1 90.0 90.3
May 98.3 92.5 88.7 p 87.4 117.5 92.8 91.3 91.2 91.2 85.8 96.3 90.2 90.3
June 99.7 93.8 119.1 94.0 97.0 90.8 90.9
July 100.4 94.4 120.3 94.8 96.0 90.0 90.3
Aug. 101.5 94.9 90.2 p 88.3 122.4 95.9 92.6 91.3 94.5 86.9 97.0 90.8 91.4
Sep. 101.5 94.9 122.4 95.8 96.8 90.6 91.2
Oct. 101.3 94.8 122.4 95.7 96.7 90.5 91.1
Nov. 100.6 94.3 90.4 p 87.7 121.6 95.2 93.0 91.3 95.4 86.8 96.5 90.1 90.6
Dec. 101.8 95.2 122.9 96.0 97.0 90.6 91.0
2021 Jan. 101.3 95.2 122.4 96.0 98.0 91.4 91.8
Feb. 100.6 94.5 90.0 p 87.7 121.5 95.1 93.2 91.5 95.6 86.8 98.0 91.2 91.6
Mar. 100.3 94.0 121.2 94.7 97.7 91.1 91.4
Apr. 100.6 94.2 121.9 95.1 97.9 91.2 91.7
May 100.8 94.2 89.3 p 85.6 122.3 95.2 92.9 91.1 95.5 86.3 98.0 91.3 91.8
June 100.2 93.7 121.5 94.5 97.9 91.1 91.5
July 99.7 93.5 120.8 94.3 97.7 91.0 91.3
Aug. 99.3 93.2 p 88.5 p 84.9 120.4 93.9 93.7 92.2 95.9 87.0 97.3 90.7 91.0
Sep. 99.4 93.3 120.4 93.8 97.4 90.7 90.9
Oct. 98.4 92.4 119.5 93.1 96.7 90.0 90.3
Nov. 97.6 91.7 p 86.4 p 83.5 118.8 92.6 93.3 92.5 94.5 86.3 96.2 89.5 89.9
Dec. 97.1 91.2 119.0 92.5 95.8 89.0 89.6
2022 Jan. 96.6 p 91.2 118.6 p 92.3 p96.0 p 89.0 p 89.6
Feb. 96.9 p 91.6 ... ... 118.9 p 92.7 … … … … p96.1 p 89.2 p 89.6
Mar. 95.9 p 91.4 118.4 p 92.9 p96.4 p 89.7 p 90.3
Apr. 95.2 p 90.4 116.4 p 91.0 p96.0 p 89.1 p 89.3
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the curren-
cy concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's price
competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective exchange
rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. The
weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more detailed in-
formation on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the Deutsche
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 The calculations are
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland,
Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the
United States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates were
used.  2 Includes countries belonging to the group EER-19 and additionally Algeria,
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico,Morocco, New Zealand, Peru, Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South
Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and United Arab Emirates. The ECB suspends
the publication and calculation of the euro foreign exchange reference rate against
Russian rouble with effect from March 2, 2022 until further notice. For the calculation
of effective exchange rates, an indicative rate is used for the Russian Federation from
that date. It is calculated from the daily RUB/USD rates determined by the Bank of
Russia in conjunction with the respective ECB's euro foreign exchange reference rate to
the US dollar.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from 2001 in-
cluding Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta,
from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia,
from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.  5 Euro area countries (current
composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-19.  6 Euro area countries (cur-
rent composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-42.

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website. In addition, the new Statistical Series 
provide a new basic structure and advanced options for using data and are also available 
on the Bundesbank’s website.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
A list of the articles published in the period from 
2010 to 2021 is available on the Bundesbank’s 
website.
Monthly Report articles
July 2021
– Cross-border corporate takeovers: the im -
pact of internationalisation on enterprises in 
Germany
– Crypto tokens and decentralised financial 
applica tions
– Digital risks in the banking sector
– Macroprudential policy and growth-at-risk
August 2021
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2021
– The Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy– The impact of the Eurosystem’s monetary 
policy on Bitcoin and other crypto tokens
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2020
October 2021
– State government finances in 2020: deficit 
due to temporary effects of pandemic, es -
cape clauses also used to build reserves
– The global economy during the coronavirus 
pandemic
– What do households in Germany think about 
the digital euro? First results from surveys 
and interviews
– The regulation of remuneration at credit in -
stitutions
November 2021
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2021
– Outlook for the German economy for 2022 
to 2024
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2020
January 2022
– Changes in the secured money marketDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
85•

– Climate change and climate policy: analytical 
requirements and options  from a central 
bank perspective
– Scenario- based equity valuation effects in -
duced by greenhouse gas emissions
February 2022
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2022
– Monetary policy in a prolonged period of 
low interest rates – a discussion of the con -
cept of the reversal rate
– German balance of payments in 2021
April 2022
– Potential macroeconomic consequences of 
the war in Ukraine – simulations based on a 
severe risk scenario
– Development of the debt situation in the 
euro area private non- financial sector since 
the outbreak of the COVID-  19 pandemic
– Central government’s debt brake: options for 
stability- oriented further development
– Demand for euro banknotes issued by the 
Bundesbank: current developments
May 2022
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, January 20212
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
January 20222
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131
Discussion Paperso
55/2021  
The hockey stick Phillips curve and the effective 
lower bound56/2021  
Economic theories and macroeconomic reality
01/2022  
Climate change and individual behavior
02/2022  
EU enlargement and (temporary) migration: 
Effects  on labour market outcomes in Germany
03/2022  
You can‘t always get what you want (where 
you want it): cross- border effect of the US 
money market fund reform
04/2022  
Calibration alternatives to logistic regression 
and their potential for transferring the disper -
sion of discriminatory power into uncertainties 
of probabilities of default
05/2022  
Time- variation in the effects of push and pull 
factors on portfolio flows: evidence from a 
Bayesian dynamic factor model
06/2022  
Banks‘ strategic interaction, adverse price dy -
namics and systemic liquidity risk
07/2022  
The impact of carbon pricing in a multi- region 
production network model and an application 
to climate scenarios
08/2022  
Cybersecurity and financial stability
09/ 2022  
Existence and uniqueness of solutions to dy -
namic models with occasionally binding con -
straints
10/ 2022  
Optimal timing of policy interventions in 
troubled banks
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
87•

11/ 2022  
Wealth and subjective well- being in Germany
12/ 2022  
Inflation expectations and climate concern
13/ 2022  
Adressing COVID-  19 outliers in BVARs with 
stochastic  volatility
14/ 2022  
Interest rate shocks, competition and bank 
liquidity  creation 
15/2022  
Financial crises and shadow banks: A quantita -
tive analysis
16/2022  
What moves markets?Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, 
January  20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2022  
88•

