Monthly Report
February 2022
Vol. 74  
No 2

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 3512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 a.m. on 18 February 2022.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
The current situation in euro area and US labour markets  ..................................................  15
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  25
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  26
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  38
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  47
The macroeconomic impact of the planned increase in the general statutory minimum 
wage to €12 per hour  ........................................................................................................  54
Housing prices in Germany in 2021  ....................................................................................  57
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  62
German government budget still heavily shaped by coronavirus pandemic in 2021  ...........  63
Central government special funds now outside the debt brake  ...........................................  71
Provisional accounting for central government’s debt brake for 2021  .................................  73Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
4

The current economic situation in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
5

Overview
Stronger global inflation 
triggers  shift in monetary 
policy stance
Global economic growth is likely to have picked 
up again somewhat in the final quarter of 
2021. However, economic developments were 
quite varied from region to region. In the 
United States, real gross domestic product saw 
a return to strong growth due to factors limit -
ing production easing off to a certain extent 
and COVID-  19 cases tailing off. In China, the 
normalisation of the power supply contributed 
to more dynamic growth. In the euro area, 
meanwhile, the upswing was significantly 
weakened as containment measures were 
tightened and consumer behaviour became 
more cautious once again.
The acceleration of global economic growth 
was attributable not least to industry, and in 
Germany, specifically to car manufacturers. The 
worldwide shortage of highly sought-after 
semiconductor components persisted. That 
said, the situation eased somewhat with the re -
covery of production in South-  East Asia. This 
had been restricted for some time due to the 
pandemic. Amid the rapid spread of the Omi -
cron variant, there is currently a risk of supply- 
side obstacles becoming worse again. How -
ever, the consequences of the spread of this 
variant will probably be significantly less disrup -
tive to high- contact service sectors than was 
the case with previous waves of infection. Con -
tainment measures have generally been tight -
ened to no more than a moderate degree, or 
have even been relaxed most recently due to 
the fact that, in many places, the virus variant is 
infecting largely vaccinated populations and 
fewer infected people are becoming severely ill. 
However, the high case numbers mean that 
more people are required to isolate or quaran -
tine, hampering economic activity. Even so, 
judging by the experiences of other countries, 
the Omicron wave could subside quickly, mean -ing that the burdens it brings with it are likely 
to be quite short- lived.
In view of the improved demand outlook and a 
strained supply situation, crude oil prices have 
risen considerably of late. Gas prices in Europe 
dipped slightly at the start of January after hav -
ing reached record highs in December 2021. 
Due to the protracted political crisis between 
Russia and Ukraine, however, the cost of future 
gas flows became significantly more expensive, 
and futures suggest that gas prices will stay 
high for the remainder of the year.
High energy prices made a substantial contri -
bution to the renewed rise in global consumer 
price inflation. According to an initial estimate, 
the year- on- year rate of change up to January 
in consumer prices for the industrial countries 
as a whole rose to 5.8%. But even defined 
more narrowly, i.e. excluding energy and food, 
the inflation rate climbed to 4.3%, which is 
indicative   of broader- based inflation. This 
develop  ment was driven by buoyant demand 
coupled with high cost pressures initially result -
ing chiefly from price increases at upstream 
production stages and for transport services. 
Moreover, some industrial countries were al -
ready experiencing accelerated wage growth. 
Against this backdrop, many central banks 
tightened their monetary policy stance or at 
least considered doing so.
Mounting inflationary risks also shaped devel -
opments in the international financial markets. 
Market participants on both sides of the Atlan -
tic revised their inflation expectations for the 
current and coming year upwards multiple 
times. Together with the assessment that the 
burdens resulting from the Omicron variant 
would be manageable, this led to some central 
banks making their monetary policy less ac -
commodative. The Bank of England, for 
instance , responded with two Bank Rate in -
creases, while the Fed announced in January Global economy 
probably 
regained some 
momentum 
in Q4
Marked recovery 
in industry; 
 temporarily 
increased bur -
dens on service 
providersFurther rise in 
crude oil prices; 
gas prices per -
sistently high
Renewed rise in 
consumer price 
inflation in 
industrial coun -
tries; central 
banks signal 
policy tightening
Financial mar -
kets shaped by 
mounting infla -
tionary risks and 
expectations of 
tightened mon -
etary policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
6

that it deemed it appropriate to bring net asset 
purchases to an end in March and to raise the 
federal funds rate soon. Market participants are 
now anticipating a less expansionary monetary 
policy for the euro area going forward, too. As 
a result, benchmark returns have increased and 
real interest rates have also risen. On the whole, 
yields on euro area corporate bonds went up 
significantly more strongly still than govern -
ment bond yields. On balance, then, the yield 
spreads of corporate bonds, which are an indi -
cator of enterprises’ funding conditions, were 
most recently slightly above their five- year aver -
age. Amid rising interest rates, prices on the 
international equity markets declined, but they 
were predominantly in positive territory com -
pared with the end of September. This was 
due, first and foremost, to an improvement in 
overall earnings expectations, particularly on 
the back of increased profit margins at large 
enterprises. Foreign exchange market develop -
ments were also influenced largely by the per -
sistently high inflation rates worldwide, the 
measures announced by central banks to coun -
teract these as well as those already taken, and 
speculation among market participants regard -
ing further steps towards monetary policy nor -
malisation. Measured as a weighted average 
against the currencies of 19 major trading part -
ners, the euro has, on balance, depreciated by 
2.1% net since the end of September.
In December 2021, the ECB Governing Council 
decided on a step- by- step reduction in the 
pace of asset purchases, whereby net asset 
purchases under the pandemic emergency pur -
chase programme (PEPP) would be reduced in 
the first quarter of 2022 and discontinued at 
the end of March. At the same time, the Gov -
erning Council extended the reinvestment hori -
zon for the PEPP to at least the end of 2024. 
Furthermore, it decided to conduct larger net 
asset purchases on a temporary basis under the 
asset purchase programme (APP) as of April 
2022. These are set at €40 billion per month in 
the second quarter and €30 billion in the third 
quarter, before being maintained at their previ -ous monthly pace of €20 billion from October 
2022 onwards.
In February 2022, the Governing Council con -
firmed the decisions it had made in December. 
However, it also made various changes to its 
communication. For instance, the need for 
monetary policy accommodation was no 
longer mentioned, nor was inflation projected 
to settle below its target. Instead, the Govern -
ing Council stressed that inflation had risen 
steeply over the last few months and had also 
been higher than expected in January. In con -
trast to December, it explicitly spoke of risks to 
the inflation outlook being tilted to the upside, 
particularly in the short term. Furthermore, the 
Governing Council’s monetary policy communi -
cation no longer ruled out an initial interest 
rate increase as early as this year.
This adjustment to the Governing Council’s 
monetary policy communication contributed to 
a further rise in money market forward rates. 
Using these rates as a basis, it appears that 
market participants most recently priced in an 
initial interest rate hike of 10 basis points for as 
early as July 2022. In addition, the futures curve 
became far steeper, meaning that a more im -
mediate impact of interest rate increases is also 
priced in. Although it can be assumed that the 
rise in forward rates is in large part attributable 
to risk premia and not to anticipated higher 
interest rates, market participants will probably 
expect interest rates to rise far earlier than they 
had predicted back in December. This was also 
backed up by the Eurosystem’s monetary policy 
survey conducted prior to the February meet -
ing (Survey of Monetary Analysts). Compared 
with the December survey, respondents’ pre -
dictions of when the first interest rate hike 
would take place moved forwards again.
The broad monetary aggregate M3 expanded 
significantly in the fourth quarter of 2021 as 
well. However, net inflows remained markedly 
below the high levels that were recorded in the 
previous year owing to the coronavirus pan -
demic. Monetary growth thus continued to ECB Governing 
Council decides 
to end net asset 
purchases under 
PEPPECB Governing 
Council sees 
risks to inflation 
outlook tilted 
to upside
Money market 
forward rates 
rise sharply once 
again
Further normal -
isation of mon -
etary growthDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
7

normalise. Besides the Eurosystem’s ongoing 
asset purchases, monetary growth was mainly 
supported by banks’ lending to the domestic 
private sector. Looking at loans to non- financial 
corporations, the special conditions applicable 
under TLTRO-III, which are linked to a lending 
benchmark, resulted in considerable frontload -
ing effects in the final quarter. At the same 
time, household demand for loans for house 
purchase remained strong. The banks 
responding  to the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) 
reported that they had left credit standards for 
loans to enterprises and loans to households 
for house purchase broadly unchanged in the 
fourth quarter.
Economic activity in Germany declined mark -
edly in the fourth quarter of 2021, having 
shown strong growth in the third quarter. Ac -
cording to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash 
estimate, real gross domestic product (GDP) 
shrank by 0.7% on the quarter after seasonal 
adjustment. It was thus still 1.5% short of its 
pre- crisis level recorded in the fourth quarter of 
2019. Real GDP grew by 2.8% in 2021 as a 
whole, having fallen in 2020 as a result of the 
pandemic.
The decline in economic output in the fourth 
quarter of 2021 was largely due to the resur -
gence of the pandemic. The resulting contain -
ment measures and social and physical distan -
cing requirements hit some services sectors 
hard. In addition, it appears that activity in the 
construction sector remained lacklustre in spite 
of high demand. The construction sector is ex -
periencing a lack of labour and a major – albeit 
decreasing – materials shortage. By contrast, 
industry made a positive contribution. In the 
first three quarters of 2021, growing bottle -
necks in the supply of intermediate goods had 
seen industrial production decline despite order 
books being very well filled. Although surveys 
indicated that enterprises still considered the 
supply problems to be severe in the fourth 
quarter, the increase in industrial production 
suggests that they eased to a certain extent. 
On the expenditure side of GDP , one particular way in which the resurgence of the pandemic 
was reflected was a clear decline in private 
consumption. By contrast, investment in ma -
chinery and equipment as well as exports prob -
ably rose on the back of the positive develop -
ments.
In line with these developments, German banks 
substantially expanded their lending to the do -
mestic private sector in the fourth quarter. 
Loans to non- financial corporations saw par -
ticularly strong growth, especially in the short- 
term segment. First, this was because banks 
upped their lending in order to qualify for the 
more favourable interest rate on their TLTRO- III 
operations. Second, production delays caused 
by aggregate supply bottlenecks increased 
enter  prises’ short-  term financing needs. Lend -
ing to households rose sharply, too. This was 
due to constantly high net inflows to loans for 
house purchase, demand for which was bol -
stered by the still exceptionally favourable 
financing terms. Banks tightened their credit 
standards for loans to households for house 
purchase again marginally in net terms.
The factors that curbed economic activity in 
the fourth quarter had barely any impact on 
the labour market. Employment continued to 
recover, and both unemployment and the use 
of short- time working arrangements fell sub -
stantially. Leading indicators suggest only a 
comparatively mild dip in the labour market in 
the first quarter of 2022, despite the currently 
high infection rates.
With a year- on- year increase of 1.5%, negoti -
ated wages climbed more sharply in the fourth 
quarter of 2021 than in the third quarter. In line 
with the distinct drop- off in short- time work -
ing, actual earnings probably rose by consider -
ably more than negotiated wages. At just 1.5% 
in 2021 as a whole, negotiated wages rose sig -
nificantly less sharply than in the year before, 
chiefly owing to wage agreements being mod -
est as a result of the pandemic.Distinct decline 
in German eco -
nomic output 
towards end 
of year
Resurgence 
of pandemic 
depressed ser -
vices sector and 
private con -
sumption; indus -
trial production 
and exports up 
despite ongoing 
issue of serious 
supply bottle -
necksStrong uptick in 
German banks’ 
lending to 
domestic private 
sector
Labour market 
recovery con -
tinued in Q4
Negotiated 
wages rose 
more sharply in 
Q4 than in Q3; 
actual earnings 
probably up 
again consider -
ablyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
8

This year, the rise in negotiated wage rates will 
still be largely influenced by the wage agree -
ments concluded in previous years. At the time 
the agreements were made, there was a great 
deal of uncertainty surrounding the economic 
outlook and inflation rates were low. In this 
year’s small wage round for roughly 8 million 
employees, the favourable macroeconomic 
outlook, increasing labour market shortages 
and high inflation rates could contribute to dis -
tinctly higher wage agreements.
The Federal Labour Minister is aiming to in -
crease the statutory general minimum wage to 
€12 per hour from 1 October 2022. This polit -
ical intervention in the wage-  setting process 
would raise pay distinctly in the lower wage 
brackets as well as having a marked impact on 
the wage brackets above, thus presumably in -
creasing upward pressure on aggregate wages. 
Based on historical relationships, the macro -
economic effects will probably be manageable. 
However, in the current environment of very 
high interest rates, a potentially stronger pass- 
through of wages to prices cannot be ruled 
out.
Consumer price inflation continued to rise in 
the final quarter of 2021. On average between 
October and December, the Harmonised Index 
of Consumer Prices (HICP) went up by 1.2% on 
the quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. The 
higher inflation rate was chiefly due to energy 
prices, which increased even more sharply than 
before. Growth in prices for food, services and 
non- energy industrial goods remained strong, 
but was slightly down on the previous quarter. 
HICP inflation was up very significantly by 5.4% 
on the year, following an increase of 3.5% in 
the third quarter. Excluding energy and food, 
the inflation rate grew from 2.1% to 3.6%, thus 
also reaching its highest level since the euro 
area was established.
At 3.2%, average consumer price inflation for 
2021 increased very considerably on the year. 
First, the base effect of the temporary reduc -
tion in VAT rates in the second half of 2020 sig -nificantly increased inflation rates in the corres -
ponding period of 2021, and second, energy 
prices picked up substantially over the course 
of the year. Non- energy industrial goods and 
services inflation rose unexpectedly sharply, es -
pecially from mid- year onwards. This was due 
to high price pressures on upstream stages of 
the supply chain resulting from pandemic-  
related supply bottlenecks, increased transport 
costs and higher commodity prices. Given the 
level of demand, these were passed through to 
consumers.
At the beginning of 2022, the pace of growth 
in consumer prices increased substantially once 
again. Energy prices, in particular, picked up 
sharply owing to considerable price hikes for 
gas and electricity, though prices of other HICP 
components also continued to rise on a broad 
basis. Therefore, despite the elimination of the 
VAT base effect, in a year- on- year comparison 
the inflation rate declined to only a compara -
tively small extent from 5.7% in December to 
5.1% in January. In the coming months, infla -
tionary pressures are likely to remain high, 
given the considerable price increases in up -
stream stages of the supply chain and persist -
ent demand.
German economic output is likely to decline 
again markedly in the first quarter of 2022. This 
is due to the resurgence of the pandemic 
caused by the Omicron variant. In contrast to 
previous waves of the pandemic, the services 
sector is unlikely to be the only one in which ac -
tivity is being adversely affected by containment 
measures and social and physical distancing re -
quirements. In fact, working hours lost due to 
the pandemic could also be having a distinctly 
dampening effect on economic output – and in 
other sectors, too. Nevertheless, positive effects 
are expected from the industrial sector. Here 
there are signs of a further easing of supply 
bottlenecks, and demand for industrial products 
remains high. In light of very robust demand, 
GDP is likely to rebound strongly in the second 
quarter, provided the pandemic subsides and 
the supply bottlenecks continue to ease.Small 2022 
wage round in 
an environment 
of high inflation 
rates
Planned increase 
of general min -
imum wage to 
€12 per hour 
raises pressure 
on aggregate 
wages
Inflation rate hit 
record level at 
end of 2021
On an annual 
average, con -
sumer prices up 
very consider -
ably in 2021High price 
increases con -
tinued on a 
broad front 
in January
Economic out -
put likely to 
decline again 
markedly in Q1 
2022 before 
strongly 
rebounding 
in Q2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
9

Last year, government finances continued to 
make a considerable contribution to support -
ing the economy during the coronavirus crisis. 
This was reflected above all in high expend -
iture, for example for transfers to enterprises 
and short- time working benefits. Revenue 
made a strong recovery, with taxes even sur -
passing the level that had been expected for 
2021 prior to the crisis, after factoring out 
legislative  changes implemented in the mean -
time. According to initial data, the deficit again 
amounted to just over 4% of GDP (2020: 
4.3%). The debt ratio is likely to have been in 
the region of 70% at the end of 2021.
Government finances look set to improve sig -
nificantly this year. The main reason for this is 
the economic recovery, which should be ac -
companied by government economic support 
coming to an end. The deficit will then go back 
down and the debt ratio will see a decrease 
owing to nominal GDP growth in the ratio’s 
denominator. It is thus likely that the govern -
ment budget will weather the coronavirus crisis 
well. While the deficits are high for a time, this 
is largely due to temporary crisis-  related bur -
dens that will subside again rather quickly.
The vast majority of crisis- related burdens fall 
under the central government budget. The 
debt brake’s escape clause, which is designed 
for use in such an emergency situation, was 
therefore activated for the central government 
budget in 2020 and 2021. In these crisis years, 
the deficits of the core budget amounted to 
nearly €350 billion in total. However, this high 
figure far exceeds the coronavirus- related bur -
dens in the core budget. This is because the 
deficits include nearly €100 billion (2½% of 
GDP) in exceptional loan authorisations that 
were not needed and that the central govern -
ment has placed in its special funds. The second 
2021 supplementary budget agreed in January 
2022 alone accounts for €60 billion of this 
amount. In January, the Bundestag also de -
cided to exempt central government’s special 
funds from the debt brake going forward. It is 
only through this measure that the authorisa -tions contained in the special funds can be 
used to temporarily expand the leeway for bor -
rowing even after the end of the pandemic 
emergency. These funds have been earmarked 
for expenditure that is not closely connected to 
the pandemic response.
As a result, beyond the pandemic emergency 
and over and above the regular debt brake 
limit, there is considerable additional scope for 
borrowing in the upcoming financial planning 
period. The repayment burdens associated with 
this are to be deferred until the period after 
2027. In these later years, there will therefore 
be less financial leeway. All in all, the way the 
debt brake is being used does not appear to be 
in the spirit of its intention. This could poten -
tially weaken the binding effect of the debt 
brake. Yet this binding effect is crucial if the 
debt brake is to reliably ensure sound govern -
ment finances. There may be arguments for 
modifying the debt brake’s design. Indeed, 
moderate deficits certainly pose no threat to 
the soundness of government finances, and the 
requirements of the debt brake are also some -
times stricter than what is prescribed under the 
EU a new design rules. If a new design were to 
take these factors into account, a transparent 
and stability- oriented reform of the debt brake 
would be the more suitable path to take.
A stable monetary union also depends on 
sound government finances. This means that 
effective fiscal rules are important at the Euro -
pean level, too. They need to have the effect of 
reliably lowering high debt ratios. The European 
rules have thus far not fulfilled this task, which 
means there is certainly room for improvement 
here. In particular, the quantitative require -
ments for the medium- term budgetary object -
ive should be clearer and more binding. Even 
then, a stabilising and future- oriented fiscal pol -
icy would still be a possibility. Improvements in 
this regard would include, for example, national 
bad weather funds that are built up when times 
are good and a capped golden rule that pro -
tects government investment expenditure to an 
extent that it is consistent with stability.Government 
finances pro -
vided strong 
suport to econ -
omy again in 
2021; deficit 
again high
Deficit likely to 
decline signifi -
cantly in 2022; 
government 
budget looks set 
to weather crisis 
well
Flexible handling 
of debt brake 
considerably 
expands leeway 
for borrowing 
and …… threatens 
binding effect 
of debt brake
Greater binding 
effect of Euro -
pean fiscal rules 
desirableDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
10

Global and European setting
Global economic 
 developments
Global economic growth is likely to have picked 
up again somewhat in the final quarter of 
2021. However, economic developments were 
fairly different from region to region. In the 
United States and Japan, real gross domestic 
product (GDP) saw a return to strong growth 
due to factors limiting production easing off to 
a certain extent and COVID-  19 cases dropping. 
In China, the normalisation of the power sup -
ply contributed to more dynamic growth. In 
Europe, by contrast, the economy was stifled 
by the pandemic once again. In the euro area, 
the upswing was significantly weakened as 
containment measures were tightened and 
consumer behaviour became more cautious 
again. The United Kingdom, which was one of 
the first industrial countries to be hit by the es -
pecially contagious Omicron variant of the 
coronavirus, also recorded only moderate GDP 
growth.
The acceleration of global economic growth 
was attributable not least to industry and to 
motor vehicle manufacturers in particular. The 
worldwide shortage of semiconductor com -
ponents, for which there is great demand, per -
sisted. However, the situation eased somewhat 
as production in South- East Asia recovered 
from temporary restrictions due to the pan -
demic. Amid the rapid spread of the Omicron 
variant, there is currently a risk of supply- side 
obstacles becoming worse again. In many 
areas, sickness rates climbed to record levels. 
Furthermore, supply chains and transport 
routes may have been impaired by closures of 
factories and ports, particularly in countries 
that continued to attempt to contain infections 
using stringent measures.
High- contact service sectors will probably be 
significantly less disrupted by the consequences 
of the spread of the Omicron variant than they had been in previous waves of infection. Con -
tainment measures were generally tightened to 
just a moderate degree, or even recently re -
laxed, because, in many places, the Omicron 
variant was affecting largely vaccinated popu -
lations and symptoms were more frequently 
mild. However, the high case numbers mean 
that more people are subject to isolation and 
quarantine rules, hampering economic activity. 
Accordingly, there was a deterioration in senti -
ment among purchasing managers in the ser -
vices sector around the world in January. Even 
so, judging by the experiences of other coun -
tries, the Omicron wave could subside again 
quickly, meaning that these burdens are likely 
to be quite short- lived.
Against the backdrop of the increased numbers 
of infections, amongst other factors, the staff 
of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) re -Global economy 
probably 
regained some 
momentum in 
Q4
Noticeable 
revival in global 
industryShort- lived 
pandemic- 
related burdens 
on services 
sector 
Global economic indicators*
Sources: CPB, national data, Haver Analytics and Bundesbank 
calculations. * Groups of countries vary due to differences in 
data  availability.  1 Bundesbank  aggregate  of  national  data, 
based on the number of units.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021859095100105Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
405060708090100110120
Reduced scale
Passenger car 
production1Industrial productione
eDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
11

vised its global growth forecast for 2022 down -
wards by 0.5  percentage point to 4.4%.1 In 
light of China’s zero- COVID strategy and the 
ongoing problems in its real estate sector, the 
IMF reconsidered China’s growth prospects to 
be less favourable. The IMF staff lowered its 
growth projection for the United States by an even larger amount in order to incorporate the 
likely failure of major fiscal initiatives as well as 
the prospect of monetary policy accommoda -
tion being reversed earlier than originally an -
nounced. At the same time, the IMF now ex -
pects that higher rates of inflation in many re -
gions of the world will persist for longer and 
once again warned of upside risks to the infla -
tion outlook.
At the beginning of the year, commodity prices 
rose once again across the board starting from 
a high level. In particular, crude oil prices re -
cently rose by a considerable amount and ex -
ceeded US$90 per barrel for the first time since 
2014. Alongside robust demand, temporary 
production losses and concerns surrounding 
continued supply tensions in the global crude 
oil market had an inflationary impact.2 Gas 
prices in Europe dipped slightly at the start of 
January after having reached record highs in 
December 2021. The key factors in this context 
were the unusually warm weather for that time 
of year and significantly increased liquid natural 
gas imports from the United States. Due to the 
protracted political crisis between Russia and 
Ukraine, however, the cost of future gas flows 
became significantly more expensive, and fu -
tures contracts suggest that gas prices will re -
main high for the remainder of the year. Indus -
trial commodity prices picked up considerably 
again, too.
High energy prices made a substantial contri -
bution to the renewed rise in consumer price 
inflation around the world. According to an ini -
tial estimate, the year- on- year rate of change in 
consumer prices for the industrial countries as 
a whole rose to 5.8% up to January. But, even 
defined more narrowly, i.e. excluding energy 
IMF revises 2022 
global growth 
forecast signifi -
cantly down -
wards, warns of 
upside risks to 
inflation outlookCrude oil prices 
reach seven- 
year high, 
futures suggest 
persistently high 
gas prices
Consumer price 
inflation in 
industrial coun -
tries rises againWorld market prices for crude oil, 
natural gas and industrial raw materials
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and HWWI. • Latest figures: 
average of 1 to 11 February 2022, or 1 to 17 February 2022 for 
crude oil. 1 According to HWWI commodity price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 22243040507090110Monthly averages, log scale
30100
50150250350
Natural gas12018 = 100, US$ basisCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
70100130160 Industrial raw materials1
Sources: Bundesbank calculations based on national data. * EU, 
Japan, Canada, Norway, Switzerland, the United States and the 
United  Kingdom.  1 Consumer  prices  excluding  energy  and 
food; additionally excluding alcoholic beverages and tobacco 
products for the EU, Norway, Switzerland and the United King-
dom.
Deutsche BundesbankConsumer prices in industrial countries*
0123456
++++++Year-on-year percentage change
2018 2019 2020 2021 22Total Core rate1
1 See International Monetary Fund (2022).
2 The latter were fuelled by a number of factors, which in -
clude, for example, low inventories, missed production tar -
gets amongst OPEC countries, and geopolitical conflicts. In 
addition, there has been a perceptible decline in invest -
ment in production capacity over previous years, in which 
deterioration in the longer- term outlook for demand in 
light of global efforts to reduce CO₂ emissions may have 
played a role.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
12

and food, consumer price inflation climbed to 
4.3%, meaning that inflationary pressures had 
become more broadly based. This development 
was driven by buoyant demand coupled with 
high cost pressures initially resulting chiefly 
from price increases at the upstream produc -
tion stages and for transport services. More -
over, some industrial countries were already ex -
periencing accelerated wage growth. This 
holds especially true for the United States, 
where the labour market appears to have over -
heated. In the euro area, too, there are increas -
ing signs of tensions on the labour market (see 
the box on pp.  15f.). Against this backdrop, 
many central banks tightened their monetary 
policy stance or at least considered doing so.
China
According to official estimates, real GDP in 
China rose by a seasonally adjusted 1.6% in the 
final quarter of 2021 compared with the pre -
ceding quarter, in which growth of only 0.7% 
was recorded.3 The main reason for the higher 
pace of growth was increased activity in the in -
dustrial sector, which had been adversely af -
fected by severe power shortages in the third 
quarter. Industry also benefited from the on -
going boom in foreign business.4 The under -
lying cyclical trend in China remained weak, 
though. The downturn in the real estate mar -
ket continued. The number of homes pur -
chased and construction projects commenced 
once again fell significantly. Should the situ -
ation on the housing market come to a head, it 
could have adverse economic implications not 
only for China but also for other countries.5
Private consumption also appears to have re -
mained lacklustre in the fourth quarter. This 
was partly due to the fact that the spread of 
the Delta variant of the coronavirus led to out -
breaks in a number of cities and provinces, 
which resulted in strict containment measures 
being imposed at the local level. Dampened 
consumption activity is probably one reason 
why consumer price inflation, at 0.9% on the year in January 2022, was very weak by inter -
national standards. The rate excluding food 
and energy was also low, at 1.2%.
Other selected emerging 
 market economies
The Indian economy is likely to have continued 
to recover in the fourth quarter of 2021 from 
the consequences of the severe Delta wave in 
the second quarter. Economic output fell just 
short of pre- pandemic levels in the third quar -
ter. There was continued strong growth in 
goods exports throughout the reporting period. 
Export revenue in US dollar terms was over 
one- third higher in the fourth quarter than in Industry revival, 
but underlying 
cyclical trend 
remains weak
Containment 
measures curb 
consumption 
but also 
inflation Recovery con -
tinued in IndiaReal GDP in selected major 
emerging market economies
Sources: National Bureau of Statistics of China, Central Statistics 
Office of India, Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics, 
Rosstat  –  Federal  State  Statistics  Service,  and  Bundesbank 
calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 20219095100Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, log scale
RussiaIndia
75808590951001059095100105110
BrazilChina
105
9095100
3 In a year- on- year comparison, economic growth in the 
final quarter stood at 4%.
4 With year- on- year growth of +23%, revenue from goods 
exports (in US dollar terms) again went up very sharply. 
However, price rises are also likely to have played a large 
part in this.
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
13

the same period a year earlier. However, spend -
ing on imports also went up sharply due to ris -
ing commodity prices. Meanwhile, industrial 
production expanded only slightly on the year, 
while motor vehicle production even suffered a 
setback. Consumer price inflation rose mark -
edly to 6.0% in January 2022. The Indian cen -
tral bank nevertheless left its policy rate at 4%.
In Brazil, real GDP had already returned to pre- 
crisis levels back in early 2021. However, it 
dipped back down in the second and third 
quarters, and it is unlikely to have experienced 
a revival in the fourth quarter either. Industrial 
production stagnated, while retail sales de -
creased markedly in price- adjusted terms. A 
major reason for the weak consumption activ -
ity is likely to have been strong inflation. Con -
sumer price inflation increased to 10.5% in the 
fourth quarter and remained at a similarly high 
level at the start of the year. The Brazilian cen -
tral bank therefore continued to tighten its 
monetary policy. All in all, it has raised its policy 
rate by 875 basis points since March 2021 to a 
current rate of 10.75%.
According to preliminary government esti -
mates, economic output in Russia increased by 
4.6% in 2021 as a whole. This more than com -
pensated for the pandemic- related losses of 
2020. In the final quarter, for which no GDP 
figures are available yet, there appears to have 
been a two- speed economic development. 
Manufacturing output increased sharply. Rev -
enue from energy exports also recorded re -
newed significant growth thanks to a sharp rise 
in oil and gas prices. However, the week of 
non- working days between the end of October 
and start of November ordered across the 
country in response to the tense pandemic situ -
ation is likely to have hit the services sectors es -
pecially hard. Up to January, consumer price in -
flation rose to 8.7% on the year. Given the 
geopolitical tensions relating to Ukraine, the 
start of the year saw the rouble come under in -
tensified downward pressure. The Russian cen -
tral bank has increased its policy rate in three steps by a total of 275 basis points since the 
start of October to 9.5%.
United States
In the United States, the economy shifted into 
a higher gear in the final quarter of 2021. Pre -
liminary estimates indicate that seasonally ad -
justed real GDP was up by 1.7% on the third 
quarter. The main reason for this good per -
formance is that adverse factors that had 
stalled the upswing in the third quarter became 
less significant. For example, the wave of infec -
tions brought about by the Delta variant of the 
coronavirus continued to subside. After repair -
ing storm damage, factories and ports on the 
East Coast returned to business as usual. Lastly, 
the automotive sector benefited from factors 
affecting upstream stages of production easing 
off to a certain extent. US firms used the over -
all strong increase in the supply of domestic 
and imported goods first and foremost to re -
stock. By contrast, the level of investment in 
machinery and equipment or buildings only 
slightly exceeded the level of the previous quar -
ter. Households upped their consumption ex -
penditure only moderately, with recent pur -
chasing power losses decreasing their propen -
sity to purchase. Consumer price inflation con -
tinued to rise and in January reached its highest 
level in almost 40 years, at 7.5%. At 6.0%, the 
core rate, which excludes energy and food, 
was only slightly lower. In view of this, the US 
central bank indicated in January that it could 
soon raise its interest rates.
It is not just due to surging inflation that the US 
economy will be unlikely to build much on the 
fourth quarter’s high pace of growth at the 
start of 2022. The rapid spread of the highly 
contagious Omicron variant is putting pressure 
on demand for high- contact services and has 
already resulted in a considerable number of 
working hours being lost due to illness and 
quarantine rules. Total hours worked saw a 
marked decrease in January.Economy in 
Brazil  persist -
ently weak
Two- speed eco -
nomic develop -
ment in RussiaStrong GDP 
growth in Q4
Pandemic- 
related setback 
at start of yearDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
14

The current situation in euro area and US labour markets
As the global economy quickly bounced 
back from the pandemic- induced slump in 
spring 2020, many countries’ labour mar-
kets made a brisk recovery as well, fi  rst and 
foremost in the United States and the euro 
area. So much so, in fact, that labour short-
ages have been on the rise again at enter-
prises on both sides of the Atlantic in recent 
months. Wage growth in the United States 
has already gained signifi  cant traction as a 
result of this, and the question is whether 
something similar might happen in the euro 
area.
There are considerable differences between 
the US and euro area labour markets, how-
ever. For one thing, the US labour market is 
far more fl  exible. For another, there is less 
intervention to stabilise employment in the 
United States, as developments during the 
coronavirus pandemic demonstrated once 
again. Within the space of two months in 
spring 2020, the US unemployment rate 
shot more than 11  percentage points 
higher, compared with a modest increase of 
just over 1  percentage point in the euro 
area. This difference will have been largely 
the result of comprehensive measures in 
the euro area aimed at preserving jobs, 
such as short- time working arrangements. 
In the United States, by contrast, house-
holds received support in the form of in-
creased direct relief payments, while fi  rms 
were given incentives to quickly hire back 
employees who may have been laid off. As 
the economy recovered, the jobless rate in 
the United States was already almost back 
at its pre- crisis level at the end of 2021.1 In 
the euro area, meanwhile, it even dropped 
noticeably below its level before the onset 
of the crisis (which was admittedly substan-
tially higher).Labour demand in both the US and the 
euro area has remained exceptionally brisk 
ever since, with fi  rms fi  nding it increasingly 
diffi   cult to fi  ll vacancies. The number of un-
fi  lled positions in the euro area climbed to 
an all- time high in the third quarter of 2021. 
Business survey fi  ndings indicate that the 
situation may have deteriorated further still 
in the meantime, with the share of fi  rms re-
porting labour shortages peaking in the fi  rst 
quarter of 2022 in both industry and ser-
vices sectors.
1 It thus also fell short of widely used estimates of the 
natural rate of unemployment and the long- term level 
expected by members of the US Fed’s Federal Open 
Market Committee (FOMC). The decline in the un-
employment rate came to a halt in January 2022 due 
to a resurgence of pandemic- related challenges.
Beveridge curves
01234567
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
Sources: US Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat, Haver Analy-
tics and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Number of job vacancies 
as a percentage of filled and unfilled positions.
Deutsche BundesbankJob vacancy rate1
Unemployment rateQ4 2019Q4 2021
Q1 2006
Q4 2019Q3 2021
Q1 2006%, quarterly data, seasonally adjusted
Euro areaUnited StatesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
15

Tense as the situation in the euro area may 
be, matters are worse still in the United 
States, where job vacancy fi  gures actually 
exceeded the number of people seeking 
work recently. This will undoubtedly be due 
in part to the US economy’s particularly 
brisk and robust recovery.2 But not even in 
earlier boom periods has labour demand in 
the United States exceeded supply on this 
scale. This is clearly shown by shifts in the 
Beveridge curve, which captures the rela-
tionship between the unemployment rate 
and the job vacancy rate. Labour force par-
ticipation, which contracted as the crisis un-
folded and remains depressed, appears to 
be a notable factor holding back employ-
ment growth.3 The euro area was more 
successful in keeping people in the labour 
market, which goes some way towards ex-
plaining why labour shortages are less 
pressing here than they are in the United 
States.
The different degrees of labour market slack 
are refl  ected in wage developments as well. 
Wage growth has already gained consider-
able traction in the United States, with the 
strong increases in wages particularly bene-
fi  ting workers in high- contact services sec-
tors initially before spreading to other in-dustries.4 The euro area likewise saw wage 
growth pick up somewhat of late, albeit at 
a fl  atter pace so far than immediately prior 
to the pandemic.5 Looking ahead, wage 
growth will probably accelerate appreciably 
in the euro area as well, particularly in light 
of the strong consumer price infl  ation, but 
increases are unlikely to be as noticeable as 
in the United States owing to the differ-
ences outlined above.Gross wages and salaries per employee
210123456
––++++++Annualised changes on the penultimate year, quarterly data, 
seasonally adjusted
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
Sources: US Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat, Haver Analytics 
and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Average weekly earnings of all 
employees on private nonfarm payrolls. 2 Data for the total 
economy.
Deutsche BundesbankUnited States1
Euro area2
2 In the United States, real gross domestic product 
was already above its pre- crisis level in spring 2021, 
whilst in the euro area, the level immediately prior to 
the crisis was only reached six months later. Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2021b) provides background on why the 
US and euro area economies have fared differently 
since the onset of the pandemic.
3 US labour force participation did not make a full re-
covery for a number of possible reasons: the very gen-
erous income support programmes during the pan-
demic, concerns about becoming infected with the 
coronavirus, the increased demands placed on families 
(in particular on mothers of younger children), and 
older workers withdrawing early from the labour force. 
Sectoral shifts induced by the pandemic may also have 
led to an increase in the mismatch between job re-
quirements and job seeker profi  les. These factors are 
discussed in Pizzinelli and Shibata (2022), for example.
4 Projections based on modifi  ed Phillips curves that in-
clude, amongst other things, the job vacancy rate as a 
measure of the degree of slack in the labour market 
imply that US wage growth could actually gain even 
more pace over the next two years. See Domash and 
Summers (2022).
5 The different labour market responses to the pan-
demic partly explain the divergent growth rates of 
average wages in the United States and the euro area 
in 2020. In the United States, it was particularly people 
with low incomes who were affected by layoffs, which 
is why average gross wages per employee increased 
signifi  cantly initially before subsiding again to a degree 
as workers were rehired. Average gross wages per em-
ployee in the euro area, by contrast, fell signifi  cantly at 
fi  rst because many employees switched to short- time 
work schemes. The analysis of wage changes on the 
penultimate year disregards short- term compositional 
effects attributable to the crisis.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
16

Japan
In Japan, the road to recovery remained bumpy. 
According to the initial official estimate, in the 
fourth quarter real GDP rose by a seasonally 
adjusted 1.3% on the previous quarter, in 
which it had contracted markedly. Private con -
sumption expanded steeply on the back of a 
receding number of COVID-  19 cases and a re -
laxation of containment measures. Motor ve -
hicle production also picked up again following 
a slight easing of supply bottlenecks for semi -
conductors. Business investment likewise ex -
panded somewhat as a result. Exports rose 
markedly, driven by an increase in foreign sales 
of motor vehicles. By contrast, imports re -
corded a slight decline. Labour market condi -
tions continued to improve and the seasonally 
adjusted unemployment rate fell to 2.7%. In 
the current quarter, the spread of the Omicron 
variant is likely to again dampen economic ac -
tivity. Furthermore, a resurgence of supply 
bottlenecks is constraining production in the 
manufacturing sector. In the first few months 
of the year, a number of motor vehicle manu -
facturers again idled production. The year- on- 
year rate of the consumer price index (CPI) fell 
to 0.5% in January as a result of base effects.6 
The Bank of Japan recently revised its inflation 
forecast for the coming fiscal year upwards and 
now forecasts price risks to be balanced rather 
than tilted to the downside.
United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, the overall economic 
upturn continued, maintaining its moderate 
pace in the final quarter of 2021. According to 
the preliminary estimate, real GDP increased by 
1.0% on the quarter after seasonal adjustment 
and was just short of its pre- crisis level. The ser -
vices sector was again the driving force behind 
this growth. High- contact service sectors, such 
as hotel and restaurant services as well as 
wholesale and retail trade, suffered a marked 
dampening towards the end of the year due to 
the spread of the Omicron variant. However, activity was up significantly in the health and 
social services sector, boosted by the increase 
in testing and vaccinations in December. Fur -
thermore, providers of transport services bene -
fited from the increased use of online shopping 
during the Christmas shopping season. By con -
trast, a shortage of materials continued to 
weigh on operations in the manufacturing sec -
tor and production stagnated. The construction 
sector, which is facing a severe shortage of 
staff, saw only a slight pick- up in activity. In 
spite of the UK Coronavirus Job Retention 
Scheme coming to an end on 30 September 
2021, the unemployment rate has since con -
tinued to fall and now stands at 4.1%. At the 
same time, the number of reported vacancies 
reached an all- time high. The tight labour mar -Recovery after 
pandemic- 
related setback
Moderate 
economic  
expansionReal GDP in selected industrial countries
Sources:  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis,  Cabinet  Office  of 
Japan,  Office  for  National  Statistics,  Statistics  Poland  and 
Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 20219095100105Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, log scale
United KingdomUnited States
9095100105
9095100105
PolandJapan
80859095100
6 The considerable reduction in mobile phone charges also 
continues to have a dampening effect here. Since a reform 
of mobile phone charges in April 2021, they had declined 
by 48% by January. In January, this one- off effect pushed 
down the year- on- year rate of the CPI by 1.5 percentage 
points.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
17

ket situation was also reflected in persistently 
robust wage growth. The acceleration of wage 
growth is adding to general cost pressure and 
could fuel consumer price inflation even fur -
ther. The year- on- year rate of the Harmonised 
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) rose to 5.5% 
in January. As a result, the Bank of England 
raised its policy rate by 40 basis points to 0.5%. 
It believes that some further modest tightening 
in monetary policy is likely to be appropriate in 
the coming months.
Poland
Despite another sharp wave of the pandemic, 
Poland’s upturn continued unabated in the 
final quarter, in which real GDP grew by 1.7% 
after seasonal adjustment. This was notably 
attributable  to a sharp increase in industrial 
production. Retail sales likewise rose consider -
ably in price- adjusted terms. In December, the 
unemployment rate fell to 2.9%, thus returning 
to its historically low level from March 2020. 
Initial estimates put growth in the Polish econ -
omy at 5.7% for full-year 2021. However, the 
strong upswing has also meant a significant 
rise in inflation. The rate of consumer price in -
crease accelerated to 8.6% on the year in De -
cember, with the energy component account -
ing for a substantial portion of this. Yet, even 
excluding energy and food, consumer prices 
were still up by 5.3%. Consumer price inflation 
intensified even further in January, rising to 
9.2%. As a result, the Polish central bank has 
raised its policy rate in three further increments 
since December, by a total of 150 basis points 
to 2.75%. The Polish government also insti -
gated measures to curb prices, lowering VAT 
on gas and electricity for three months and fuel 
taxes for five months. As of February, VAT on 
food is to be cut to 0% for five months.Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
In the euro area, the economic recovery came 
to a near- standstill towards the end of 2021. 
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, real GDP 
rose by just 0.3% on the preceding quarter 
after price and seasonal adjustment. A key rea -
son for this was a renewed flare-up of the 
coronavirus pandemic, which led to contain -
ment measures being temporarily tightened, 
significantly so in some cases. This had a par -
ticular impact on accommodation and food 
service activities as well as various other ser -
vices, and dampened private consumption. The 
sharply rising prices for energy and intermedi -
ate products increased enterprises’ production 
costs and resulted in considerable price in -
creases that were passed through to con -
sumers. This eroded households’ purchasing 
power. According to the EU survey, the supply 
bottlenecks that had previously impaired the 
activities of industrial enterprises continued to 
spread, but their intensity is likely to have 
dropped off somewhat. In any case, there was 
a noticeable increase in motor vehicle produc -
tion, which had suffered in particular measure 
under the effects of the semiconductor short -
age.
In total, euro area GDP rose by 5.2% in 2021 
after having fallen by 6.5% in 2020 due to the 
pandemic. The pre- crisis GDP level was re -
attained towards the end of the year.
In the eastern euro area Member States, the 
pandemic situation had already deteriorated 
towards the end of the third quarter. Subse -
quently, the Delta variant of the coronavirus 
also increasingly spread throughout the more 
western Member States. In these countries, 
however, this wave of infections was consider -
ably less pronounced. Higher vaccination rates 
are likely to have been one reason for this. 
There were significant differences in the re -
sponses to this wave of the pandemic from 
country to country. While some individual 
countries temporarily reimposed very stringent Strong growth, 
significant 
inflation Recovery comes 
to near- standstill 
at end of 2021
Pre- crisis level 
reattained
Pandemic 
situation  more 
tense again, but 
measures tight -
ened only to 
limited extentDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
18

containment measures (including Austria and 
the Netherlands), other countries tightened 
their restrictions only to a limited extent. To -
wards the end of the quarter, the spread of the 
Omicron variant caused the number of infec -
tions to rise to record highs. Although contain -
ment measures were tightened somewhat 
again, more substantial economic losses were 
likely to have arisen from temporary losses of 
work due to illness and quarantine as well as 
from changes in behaviour.
It appears that private consumption did not rise 
further in the fourth quarter after seeing strong 
growth in the third quarter. Although retail 
sales rose somewhat again in price- adjusted 
terms, new vehicle registrations continued to 
decline, probably in part due to delivery diffi -
culties among motor vehicle manufacturers. 
The reasons for the slowdown in private con -
sumption are likely to have been factors related 
to the wave of infections such as access restric -
tions, reduced opening hours and capacity re -
strictions. In this context, demand for recre -
ation and leisure services, which had seen 
strong growth in the third quarter, experienced 
a renewed decline. In addition, the consider -
able rise in the costs of living led to a notice -
able reduction in consumers’ purchasing 
power.
By contrast, gross fixed capital formation is 
likely to have risen in the fourth quarter.7 This 
holds especially true for investment in informa -
tion and communication technologies as well 
as investment in intellectual property, which 
appear to have recorded strong expansion 
once again. Construction investment appears 
to have remained subdued. In any case, there 
was no increase in construction work. It is also 
likely that purchases of transport equipment 
only saw little growth. The numbers of com -
mercial vehicle registrations fell once again, 
probably due in part to delivery difficulties 
among motor vehicle manufacturers. By con -
trast, spending on other machinery and equip -
ment is likely to have risen. In October and 
November  , capital goods producers’ domestic sales markedly exceeded the previous quarter’s 
level after price adjustment.
Goods exports to third countries likely rose 
somewhat in price- adjusted terms. Based on 
value, goods exports even rose by a very signifi -
cant degree due to large rises in prices. In re -
gional terms, the recovery in exports to the 
United Kingdom continued. Goods exports to 
the United States saw strong growth. Follow -Private con -
sumption shifts 
down a gear
Investment 
remains on 
upward 
trajectory 
Goods trade 
with third coun -
tries sees strong 
growth with ris -
ing pricesAggregate output in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021Real GDP, Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
log scale
80859095100
758085909510080859095100
Italy
SpainEuro area
France859095100
of which:
7 Excluding Ireland. For several years now, the statistical re -
cording of investment as a whole, and of investment in in -
tellectual property in particular, has been strongly influ -
enced by the strategic planning of multinational enterprises 
in that country. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
19

ing a weak preceding quarter, exports to China 
rose again somewhat. According to figures 
from the balance of payments, services exports 
from the euro area to third countries grew to a 
remarkable extent, driven largely by the on -
going recovery in tourism. Goods imports to 
the euro area from third countries also rose to 
a considerable extent, both in price- adjusted 
terms as well as by value. The distinct rise in im -
ports of intermediate products suggests that 
supply bottlenecks are easing slightly.
The situation in manufacturing brightened up 
in the fourth quarter. Although the industrial 
production index fell markedly compared with 
the preceding quarter, this was the result of 
one- off developments in Ireland and in the 
pharmaceutical sector. In particular, motor ve -
hicle production saw noticeable growth, which 
was probably attributable chiefly to an im -
provement in the supply of semiconductors. 
Nevertheless, materials shortages continued to 
stifle economic activity. Another dampening factor was the sharp increases in prices for en -
ergy and intermediate products. Consequently, 
there was also a rise in the producer prices of 
capital goods and consumer goods. According 
to surveys, the number of orders on hand re -
mained favourable through to the end of the 
year. There was also hardly any change in cap -
acity utilisation, which slightly exceeded its 
long- term average.
In the fourth quarter, activity in various services 
sectors declined again somewhat as a result of 
the pandemic; particularly affected were hotel 
and restaurant services as well as art and cul -
tural activities. Nevertheless, the level of activity 
was considerably higher than in the previous 
year. By contrast, economic activity is likely to 
have risen further in a number of commercial 
services sectors. The strong upswing in the in -
formation and communications sector con -
tinued.
Economic dynamics weakened considerably to -
wards the end of the year in most euro area 
Member States. However, there were differ -
ences depending on the extent to which each 
country was affected by the latest wave of in -
fections, the progress made in their vaccination 
campaigns, and the containment measures 
taken. Differences in their economic structures 
as well as their progress in the recovery process 
also played a role.
In France, GDP growth slowed to 0.7% in the 
fourth quarter. This meant that it had already 
slightly exceeded its pre- crisis GDP level. Fol -
lowing the very large rise in the third quarter, 
which was largely due to catch- up effects, pri -
vate consumption recorded moderate growth 
once again. In light of the fact that the number 
of infections had remained subdued over a 
long period of time, revenues in the hotel and 
restaurant services sector continued to grow 
and have since reattained their pre- crisis level. 
An additional reason for the persistently good 
consumption activity is likely to have been the 
government financial assistance that was used 
to mitigate the effects of rising energy prices Brighter situ -
ation in manu -
facturing due to 
slight easing of 
materials short -
agesInterruption in 
recovery among 
service providers
Weaker dynam -
ics in all Mem -
ber States
French eco -
nomic output 
already exceeds 
pre- crisis levelProducer prices in the euro area
Source: Eurostat. 1 Bundesbank aggregate of sub-indices for 
capital goods and consumer goods.
Deutsche Bundesbank2001 05 10 15 2120020406080
–++++Year-on-year percentage change, monthly data
–10–50+5+10+15+20
21012345
––+++++Intermediate goods
Final products1EnergyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
20

on individuals with lower incomes.8 Following 
a pause, investment activities were expanded 
markedly, driven solely by investment in intel -
lectual property. By contrast, expenditure for 
construction stagnated, and investment in ma -
chinery and equipment declined considerably 
once again. However, there was a distinct rise 
in external trade. Services exports continued to 
benefit from the recovery in tourism, and goods 
exports also recorded significant growth.
In Italy, the overall economic recovery slowed 
down considerably towards the end of the 
year. Based on preliminary figures, real GDP in -
creased by 0.6% in the fourth quarter and thus 
fell short of its pre- crisis level by 0.5%. Services 
sectors, which had recorded strong expansion 
in the second and third quarters, are likely to 
have lost momentum in particular. While tour -
ism made further progress towards normalisa -
tion, it did not achieve this in full. According to 
the most recent figures, retail sales only saw 
marginal growth in price- adjusted terms. Pro -
duction in the manufacturing sector, which had 
already noticeably exceeded pre- crisis levels, is 
likely to have expanded further. Most recently, 
however, there was a significant rise in the 
number of enterprises reporting factors limiting 
production. The upswing in the construction 
sector continued. On the expenditure side, 
goods exports and gross fixed capital forma -
tion are likely to have increased markedly. Pri -
vate consumption expenditure is likely to have 
seen only little growth in real terms, meaning 
that hardly any progress was made in closing 
the considerable gap to its pre- crisis level.
The economic recovery in Spain, which is lag -
ging behind that of other major euro area 
countries, continued largely unhindered. Ac -
cording to preliminary estimates, aggregate 
output increased in the fourth quarter by 2.0% 
from the preceding quarter. Nevertheless, it still 
fell short of its pre- crisis level by 4%. A key 
driver of the recovery was tourism. In light of 
the relatively calm situation with regard to the 
pandemic, the tourism season was able to be 
extended well into the fourth quarter. However, sales in the accommodation and food service 
activities sector remained around 10% below 
their pre- crisis level. Investment activities also 
saw perceptible growth. Construction invest -
ment rose again for the first time since the end 
of 2020. By contrast, there was a decline in pri -
vate consumption. A reason for this is likely to 
have been the loss of purchasing power result -
ing from the sharp increase in energy prices.9
In the autumn, economic output also rose in 
most other Member States as well. The rise 
was especially pronounced in Portugal. By con -
trast, Belgium, Slovakia and Lithuania posted 
only little growth in GDP . More substantial de -
clines were seen in Germany and Austria; in the 
case of the latter, this was probably due to the 
drastic measures that were implemented to 
contain the pandemic. In the Netherlands, eco -
nomic output continued to grow despite the 
temporary, comprehensive restrictions. In Lat -
via, output fell only to a marginal degree.
The situation on the labour market continued 
to improve. The unemployment rate fell further 
and stood at 7.0% in December, which repre -
sented the lowest rate since the start of monet -
ary union. The number of persons in employ -
ment rose to a lesser extent than in the previ -
ous quarter, but exceeded its pre- crisis level for 
the first time. The number of hours worked is 
also likely to have risen, but probably fell short 
of its pre- crisis level. These favourable develop -
ments were chiefly attributable to the strong 
demand for labour (see the box on pp. 15f.). 
Furthermore, job retention schemes are still in 
effect in some countries, and the number of 
employees in the public sector has grown by 1 
million since the outbreak of the crisis. This is Slowdown in 
economic 
recovery  in Italy
Spanish recovery 
continuesNoticeable 
heterogeneity  
amongst other 
Member States 
as well
Labour market 
situation 
remains 
favourable 
8 In October, the French government approved a one- off 
“inflation payout” of €100 to each person with a monthly 
net income of less than €2,000. The payments were dis -
bursed in December. Furthermore, households that were 
already receiving financial support for energy costs were 
given an additional payment of €100.
9 In Spain, energy prices rose by 38% over the previous 
quarter in the fourth quarter. This was considerably sharper 
than the rise recorded in the euro area as a whole, which 
amounted to 26%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
21

also likely to have contributed to the labour 
shortage, about which complaints are becom -
ing increasingly vocal. Looking ahead, all of 
these factors, in conjunction with higher infla -
tion, are likely to considerably increase pressure 
on wages.
The rise in consumer prices in the euro area in -
tensified to an exceptionally strong degree in 
the fourth quarter of 2021. As measured by the 
HICP , prices increased by 1.5% compared with 
the previous quarter after seasonal adjustment. 
Energy prices recorded an especially sharp in -
crease, rising by 9.1%. However, this intensifi -
cation of inflationary pressures also comprised 
other categories of goods. As a result, annual 
HICP inflation jumped from 2.8% in the third 
quarter to 4.6%, while the rate excluding en -
ergy and food climbed from 1.4% to 2.4%.
The rise in inflation in 2021 was broadly based. 
Major reasons were the considerable increase 
in crude oil prices and the sharp rise in whole -
sale prices for gas. Despite government inter -
vention, consumer prices for gas rose by 26% 
on the year in the fourth quarter. For electricity, 
for which peak loads are often provided by gas 
facilities, prices increased by 19%. Fuel prices 
were up by 29%. Prices for food products also 
rose by 2.5% on the year, most recently as a re -
sult of sharp rises in the wholesale prices of 
meat and cereal products. For services, inflation 
rose to 2.4%. In this context, a key role was 
played by price rises in high- contact services. 
These include, in particular, transport, travel, 
accommodation and food service activities. In -
flation for non- energy industrial goods also 
continued to rise significantly, reaching 2.4%. It 
was mainly new and used cars, furniture, cloth -
ing and hygiene and wellness products that 
saw prices go up steeply. The reasons for this 
were strong inflation for intermediate goods, 
increased transport costs, as well as ongoing 
delivery bottlenecks against strong demand at 
the same time.
Average euro area inflation for 2021 stood at 
2.6%, following a rate of just 0.3% in the pre -Consumer price 
inflation intensi -
fies significantly 
in Q4
Broad- based 
inflationary 
pressures across 
all componentsContributions of selected components to 
HICP sub-aggregates in the euro area*
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations. * The sum of 
the contributions may differ from the year-on-year rate due to 
rounding.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021129630369121518212427
––––+++++++++Quarterly data, year-on-year percentage change, 
contributions in percentage points
0+1+2+3+4
10123
–+++
–10+1+2+3HICP energy
Contributions:
Other energyFuels
Gas
Electricity
Other food
MeatBread and cereals
Other servicesTransport
Package holidays and accommodation services
Recreation
Other non-energy industrial goodsVehicles
Furniture and furnishingsEnlarged scale
HICP food
Contributions:
HICP services
Contributions:
HICP non-energy industrial goods
Contributions:Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
22

vious year. This shift was due primarily to 
energy  prices, which, after a decline of almost 
7% in 2020, rose by 13% in 2021. However, 
the rate excluding energy and food also 
doubled from 0.7% to 1.5%. This was attribut -
able to increased inflationary pressures for both 
industrial goods as well as high- contact ser -
vices.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, the an -
nual HICP rate grew to 5.1% in January 2022. 
The expiration of baseline effects should have 
considerably dampened inflation; however, this 
was instead overcompensated by larger in -
creases in prices for energy and food. Only the 
rate excluding energy and food declined slightly 
from 2.6% to 2.3%. This was mainly due to the 
prices of non- energy industrial goods, with 
special factors regarding the timing of seasonal 
sales in 2021 playing a role.
In the first quarter, the Omicron wave is likely 
to stifle the economic upturn to a large extent; 
this is due less to additional administrative re -
strictions and more to expected labour losses 
resulting from illness and quarantine rules. Al -
though enterprises know how to manage these 
absences, it is not possible to fully rule out sup -
ply constraints. In addition, consumer senti -
ment has become more subdued. Alongside 
the wave of infections, the greater rises in 
prices are likely to be a key reason for this. 
Once this wave of infections has abated, the 
underlying expansionary forces should have a stronger impact again. The numbers of orders 
on hand in the industrial and construction sec -
tors remain favourable, and households’ de -
mand for services should normalise quickly. A 
similar picture is also obtained from business 
surveys. However, increased rises in costs and 
prices as well as the slow resolution of short -
ages are cause for concern.Inflation rate 
rises further in 
January
Pandemic a 
drag on eco -
nomic activity at 
start of year, tooSentiment indicators for the euro area*
Source: European Commission. * Deviations from the respect-
ive average since 2000.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 22–100+1050403020100102030
–––––+++
Consumer confidenceBusiness sectorBalance of positive and negative responses as a percentage 
of all responses, seasonally adjusted, monthly data
Services sector
Manufacturing industry
Construction
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), The potential effects of a sharp downturn on the Chinese real 
estate  market, Monthly Report, November 2021, pp. 14 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), The global economy during the coronavirus pandemic, Monthly 
Report, October 2021, pp. 43-64.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national economic 
statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65-78.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
23

Domash, A. and L. H. Summers (2022), How Tight are U. S. Labor Markets?, NBER Working Paper, 
No 29739.
International Monetary Fund (2022), World Economic Outlook Update: Rising Caseloads, a 
Disrupted  Recovery, and Higher Inflation, January 2022.
Pizzinelli, C. and I. Shibata (2022), Why Jobs are Plentiful While Workers are Scarce, IMFBlog: 
Insights  & Analysis on Economics & Finance, blog entry dated 19 January 2022, https://blogs.imf.
org/2022/01/19/why-jobs-are-plentiful-while-workers-are-scarce /Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
24

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
In December 2021, the Governing Council of 
the ECB approved a step- by- step reduction in 
the pace of asset purchases for the coming 
quarters, with net purchases under the pan -
demic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) 
being discontinued at the end of March 2022. 
Furthermore, the Governing Council expects to 
conduct net purchases under the PEPP in the 
first quarter of 2022 at a lower pace than in the 
previous quarter. At the same time, it decided 
to temporarily step up net purchases under the 
asset purchase programme (APP) as of April 
2022. These are set at €40 billion per month in 
the second quarter and €30 billion per month 
in the third quarter. As of October 2022, net 
purchases under the APP are to resume a 
monthly pace of €20 billion. This will apply for 
as long as necessary to reinforce the accommo -
dative impact of the key interest rates. The 
Governing Council still expects net purchases 
to end shortly before it starts raising the key 
ECB interest rates.
Moreover, the ECB Governing Council decided 
to extend the reinvestment horizon for the 
PEPP . It now intends to reinvest the principal 
payments from maturing securities purchased 
under the PEPP until at least the end of 2024. It 
previously expected to do so until the end of 
2023. In any case, the future roll- off of the 
PEPP portfolio will be managed to avoid inter -
ference with the appropriate monetary policy 
stance. In the event of renewed market frag -
mentation related to the pandemic, these re -
investments can be adjusted flexibly across 
time, asset classes and jurisdictions at any time. 
This could include purchasing bonds issued by 
the Hellenic Republic over and above rollovers 
of redemptions.
The ECB Governing Council left its policy rates 
and the associated forward guidance un -changed. It also expects the special terms and 
conditions under the third series of targeted 
longer- term refinancing operations (TLTRO- III) 
to come to an end in June 2022. Nevertheless, 
the ECB Governing Council will continue to 
monitor bank funding conditions and ensure 
that the maturing of TLTRO- III operations does 
not hamper the smooth transmission of mon -
etary policy.
The decisions in December were taken against 
the backdrop of increased uncertainty sur -
rounding the inflation outlook. In the Decem -
ber forecast, Eurosystem staff had revised their 
inflation forecast for 2022 strongly upwards 
again. At the same time, they still projected 
that inflation would settle below the 2% target 
over the projection horizon. The ECB Govern -
ing Council believes that monetary accommo -
dation was still needed for inflation to stabilise 
at 2% over the medium term. However, in light 
of this uncertainty, it stressed the importance 
of flexibility and optionality in the conduct of 
monetary policy. The ECB Governing Council 
signalled its readiness to adjust all of its instru -
ments as appropriate and in either direction.ECB Governing 
Council decides 
to discontinue 
PEPP net pur -
chases and 
boost APP 
envelope 
ECB Governing 
Council extends 
reinvestment 
horizon for PEPPKey interest 
rates and for -
ward guidance 
unchanged
ECB Governing 
Council stresses 
flexibility and 
optionality
Money market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. • Average 
1 to 17 February 2022.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 20220.60.50.40.30.20.100.10.20.3
––––––+++
Three-month EURIBOR1
Deposit 
facility rateMain refinancing rateMarginal lending rate% p.a.
€STR1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
25

Money market management and liquidity needs
In the period under review from November 
2021 to February 2022,1 excess liquidity in the 
Eurosystem fell by a total of €0.2 billion to an 
average of €4,391.1 billion. Excess liquidity ini-
tially rose in the seventh reserve maintenance 
period of 2021 (November- December) by 
€42.8 billion to €4,434.1 billion. However, the 
subsequent decline of €43.0 billion in the 
eighth reserve maintenance period of 2021 
(December 2021- February 2022) fully reversed 
the previous increase. This development was 
due, on the one hand, to lower volumes of 
liquidity- providing asset purchases and, on 
the other hand, to a stronger increase in 
liquidity- absorbing autonomous factors in the 
eighth versus the seventh reserve mainten-
ance period of 2021. Both developments are 
commonly observed at the turn of the year, 
which fell during the reporting period.
Additional central bank liquidity was provided 
primarily through a total of €237.9 billion 
worth of net asset purchases conducted as part of the purchase programmes. The major-
ity of these purchases were attributable to the 
pandemic emergency purchase programme 
(PEPP). As at 11 February 2022, the balance 
sheet holdings of the asset purchase pro-
grammes amounted to €4,820.2 billion (see 
the table on p. 27). By contrast, the average 
outstanding tender volume in the euro area 
decreased by €8.3 billion to €2,201.8 billion 
during the period under review. Although the 
allotment volume for the tenth operation in 
the third series of targeted longer- term refi  -
nancing operations (TLTRO- III) in December 
stood at €52.0 billion, a total of €60.2 billion 
was repaid from the fi  rst to the sixth TLTRO- III 
operations under the voluntary early repay-
ment option, leading to a net absorption of 
liquidity for the TLTROs. At €1.1 billion in total, 
1 Here, the averages of the eighth reserve mainten-
ance period of 2021 (December 2021- February 2022) 
are compared with the averages of the sixth reserve 
maintenance period of 2021 (September- November).
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2021/22
3 Nov.
to
21 Dec.22 Dec.
to
8 Feb.
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  14.0 –  19.2
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  43.0 +  46.3
3. Net foreign assets 1 +   4.1 +  38.5
4. Other factors 1 – 132.0 – 194.8
Total –  98.9 – 129.2
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations +   0.0 +   0.1
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –   1.1 –   7.3
c) Other operations + 143.3 +  94.6
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility +   0.0 +   0.0
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –   6.5 +  10.8
Total + 135.7 +  98.2
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) +  36.8 –  31.0
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –   1.4 –   1.2
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
26

there was little demand for the eleventh pan-
demic emergency longer- term refi  nancing op-
eration (PELTRO) in December 2021 (previous 
operation in September 2021: €1.3 billion). 
Uptake of the regular main refi  nancing oper-
ations and three- month tenders likewise re-
mained very subdued. In Germany, the out-
standing volume of all refi  nancing operations 
fell by €17.3 billion to an average of €421.9 
billion. As a result, German banks’ share of 
the outstanding tender volume in the Eurosys-
tem came to around 19.2%.
In the eighth reserve maintenance period of 
2021, liquidity needs stemming from autono-
mous factors rose by €228.1 billion compared 
with the sixth reserve maintenance period of 
2021, reaching a new record high of €2,405.5 
billion (see the table on p. 26).2 This was pri-
marily attributable to the usual increases in 
the balances of non- euro area central banks 
at the end of the year. Another liquidity- 
absorbing effect was caused by the volume of 
banknotes in circulation rising by €33.2 billion 
to €1,540.6 billion. By contrast, a decrease in 
government deposits of €89.3 billion to 
€582.0 billion provided more liquidity. Ger-
many accounted for 59% of the total increase 
in the balances of non- euro area central 
banks, which had a liquidity- absorbing effect 
in the other factors category. Net banknote is-
suance in Germany went up by €19.9 billion 
to €883.7 billion. The decrease in government 
deposits of €12.1 billion to €205.6 billion pro-
vided more liquidity in Germany, too. Over the 
reporting period, the minimum reserve re-
quirement in the Eurosystem climbed by €2.6 
billion to €155.4 billion in the December 2021- 
February 2022 maintenance period, which led 
to an additional need for central bank liquid-
ity. In Germany the reserve requirement went 
up by €0.8 billion to €42.5 billion.
At over 99%, utilisation of exemption allow-
ances under the two- tier system for remuner-
ating excess reserve holdings remained virtu-
ally unchanged for both the euro area and 
Germany in the period under review. While 
excess liquidity remained roughly the same at 
€4,400 billion and the absolute exemption al-lowance increased, there was a decline in ex-
cess liquidity holdings remunerated at -0.50% 
(see the chart on p. 28). As a result, 21.1% of 
the excess liquidity in the Eurosystem was ex-
empt from negative remuneration on average 
in the eighth reserve maintenance period of 
2021, which was 0.4 percentage point more 
than in the previous maintenance period (in 
Germany: 20.9%, previous period: 20.3%).
During the period under review, overnight 
rates in the euro money market remained Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as at
11 Feb. 2022
Active programmes 1
PSPP +  39.9 2,512.0
CBPP3 +   0.2 295.6
CSPP +  14.3 319.4
ABSPP +   1.4 27.0
PEPP + 182.7 1,658.5
Completed programmes 
SMP +   0.0 6.5
CBPP1 –   0.1 0.1
CBPP2 –   0.6 1.1
1 Changes due to net purchases, maturities, reinvestments 
and amortisation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankAutonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing  (liquidity-absorbing)  factors  are  preceded  by  a  positive 
(negative)  sign.  1 Including  end-of-quarter  liquidity-neutral 
valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 221,5001,20090060030003006009001,200
–––––++++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the Eurosystem
2 Average of the eighth reserve maintenance period of 
2021 (December 2021- February 2022) compared with 
the average of the sixth reserve maintenance period of 
2021 (September- November).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
27

close to the deposit facility rate of -0.50% 
(see the adjacent chart), except as at 31 De-
cember 2021. However, the high level of ex-
cess liquidity led to a further drop in overnight 
rates. In the eighth reserve maintenance 
period of 2021, the unsecured euro short- 
term rate (€STR) was set at -0.58% on aver-
age and was therefore 1 basis point lower 
than in the previous period. The €STR fell by 
1 basis point to -0.59% as at 31 December 
2021. On the following day, the €STR returned 
to its previous level, which it maintained until 
the end of the reserve maintenance period on 
8  February 2022 without any major fl  uctu-
ations. Average daily turnover dropped from 
€51.2 billion to €49.6 billion compared with 
the previous period, infl  uenced by lower levels of liquidity on public holidays and the last day 
of the year. However, the volumes recorded in 
the reporting period were higher than the vol-
ume from the sixth reserve maintenance 
period (September- November 2021) of €48.5 
billion. On the GC Pooling trading platform, 
overnight trades in the ECB basket were exe-
cuted at -0.56% on average in the eighth re-
serve maintenance period of 2021, compared 
with -0.57% (seventh period) and -0.55% 
(sixth period). At the end of 2021, no trades 
were executed in the ECB basket on the trad-
ing days of 29 and 31 December. In the ECB 
EXTended basket, which has a broader selec-
tion of securities with lower rating require-
ments for concluding repo transactions, over-
night trading was carried out at a rate of 
-0.56% on average in the eighth reserve main-
tenance period of 2021 and thus 5 basis 
points below the rate of the previous period. 
The clear difference between the interest rate 
levels in the current and previous periods 
stemmed from the sharp decline of 137 basis 
points to -1.93% on 31 December. Without 
this year- end effect, the average interest rate 
in the ECB EXTended basket would have been 
-0.52% and thus only 1 basis point lower than 
in the seventh reserve maintenance period of 
2021. As in the preceding period, the vast ma-
jority of overnight transactions were also ac-
counted for by the ECB EXTended basket in 
the eighth reserve maintenance period of 
2021, with an average turnover of €2.3 billion 
per day compared with €0.7 billion in the ECB 
basket. Liquidity- driven secured turnover on 
the GC Pooling platform therefore remained 
very low. This meant that providers of liquidity 
continued to refrain from using higher- quality 
collateral from the ECB basket in transactions, 
which refl  ected the generally limited availabil-
ity of this type of collateral in the market dur-
ing the period under review.Deposit facility rate, money market rates 
and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Central 
bank balance minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the 
deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche BundesbankSep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb.
2021 20220.90.80.70.60.50.40.3
–––––––
€ bnDaily data
% p.a.
01,0002,0003,0004,0005,000Excess liquidity1
Mean value for the 
reserve maintenance period2ECB EXTended basket
€STRSTOXX GC Pooling Overnight
GermanyEuro areaAllowances (two-tier system)– 1.93ECB BasketDeposit 
facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
28

In February 2022, the ECB Governing Council 
confirmed the decisions it had made in Decem -
ber 2021. However, it did make various changes 
to its communication. For instance, the need 
for monetary policy accommodation was no 
longer mentioned, nor was inflation projected 
to settle below its target. Instead, the Govern -
ing Council stressed that inflation had risen 
steeply over the last few months and had also 
been higher than expected in January. In con -
trast to December, it explicitly spoke of risks to 
the inflation outlook being tilted to the upside, 
particularly in the near term. In view of the cur -
rent uncertainty, flexibility and optionality in 
conducting monetary policy need to be main -
tained more than ever. Moreover, monetary 
policy communication did not repeat the state -
ment that key interest rates are unlikely to be 
raised this year.
The APP holdings recorded on the balance 
sheet have risen by €53.6 billion since mid-  
November. On 11 February, the stock of APP assets held by the Eurosystem reached a total 
of €3,154.0 billion (a breakdown of these hold -
ings by individual asset purchase programme 
can be found on pp. 26 ff.). The reported hold -
ings continue to be influenced by the smooth -
ing over time of reinvestments in line with the 
technical parameters agreed upon in December 
2018 and by the use of amortised cost ac -
counting.1 Securities holdings reported under 
the PEPP amounted to €1,658.5 billion on 
11 February, up by €157.1 billion.
The tenth and last operation of the TLTRO- III 
series was settled on 22 December 2021, with 
159 banks taking up a total of €52.0 billion. At 
the same time, there were voluntary repay -
ments of funds provided under earlier TLTRO- III 
operations in the amount of €60.2 billion. 
Overall, a combined volume of €2,198.0 billion ECB Governing 
Council sees 
risks to inflation 
outlook tilted to 
upside in Febru -
aryAPP and PEPP 
securities hold -
ings recorded 
on balance 
sheet continue 
to grow
Final TLTRO- III 
sees banks take 
up €52 billionOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2205001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,0005,5006,0006,5007,000€ billion
Mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
Purchase programmesFirst series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-I)Third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-III)
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-II)Pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs)
Additional longer-term refinancing operations
1 In particular, the difference between the acquisition and 
redemption value is amortised over the security’s residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and measured 
at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
29

is thus outstanding for all TLTRO- III operations. 
In December, uptake of the pandemic emer -
gency longer-  term refinancing operation 
(PELTRO), which was also the last operation of 
its kind, was once again very low at €1.1 billion.
Excess liquidity saw a temporary marked de -
cline at the end of December on account of the 
usual year- end effects. Overall, however, it con -
tinued to rise owing to the ongoing net asset 
purchases under the APP and PEPP (see the box 
on pp. 26 ff.). As this report went to press, the 
volume of excess liquidity stood at €4,530.6 
billion, which corresponds to an increase of 
around €82.1 billion since mid- November.
On 3 January 2022, the publication of EONIA 
was discontinued as planned following a tran -
sition period. Since October 2019, EONIA had 
only been computed by applying a fixed spread 
to the euro short- term rate (€STR). In future, 
€STR will thus be the unsecured benchmark 
interest rate for the short- term money market 
in the euro area. Short- term money market 
interest rates fluctuated somewhat more 
strongly in December and at the turn of the 
year than is usually the case for that time of 
year. €STR fell to -0.59% at the end of the year 
and stood at -0.58% as this report went to 
press. The three- month EURIBOR declined 
much more sharply as early as mid- December 
and fell to as low as -0.61% for a time. As this 
report went to press, it was at -0.53% and thus 
slightly above its level in November.
Money market forward rates have risen sharply 
again in the wake of the monetary policy meet -
ing in December. Using these rates as a basis, it 
appears that market participants most recently 
priced in an initial interest rate hike of 10 basis 
points for as early as July 2022. In addition, the 
futures curve became considerably steeper, 
meaning that a faster pace of rate hikes is also 
priced in. Although it can still be assumed that 
the rise in forward rates is in large part attribut -
able to risk premia and not to expectations of 
higher interest rates, market participants will 
probably expect rate hikes significantly earlier than they had anticipated back in December. 
This was also backed up by the Eurosystem’s 
monetary policy survey (Survey of Monetary 
Analysts) conducted prior to the February 
meeting. Compared with the December survey, 
respondents’ predictions regarding when the 
first interest rate hike would take place moved 
forwards again. It is now expected in the third 
quarter of 2023. One reason for the change in 
market participants’ expectations was the wan -
ing concerns about the economic impact of the 
wave of infections with the Omicron variant of 
the coronavirus. Another reason was that some 
large central banks began to tighten their mon -
etary policy stance or announced that they 
would soon tighten their stance. The significant 
unexpected upside developments in euro area 
inflation again as well as the change in the ECB 
Governing Council’s communication led to fur -
ther rises in forward rates recently.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 also re -
corded considerable net inflows in the fourth 
quarter of 2021, which, on the whole, were 
slightly above the inflows in the three preced -
ing quarters. Nevertheless, it remained signifi -
cantly below the high build- up caused by the 
coronavirus pandemic in 2020. The annual 
growth rate of M3 decreased again as a result 
and stood at 6.9% at the end of the year. One 
reason behind this monetary growth was the 
Eurosystem’s ongoing asset purchases. An -
other was that banks’ lending to the domestic 
private sector also accelerated significantly, 
which was mainly attributable to the sharp rise 
in lending to non- financial corporations. In this 
respect, the TLTRO- III requirements for obtain -
ing the special interest rate conditions granted 
by the Eurosystem, which are coupled to lend -
ing growth, resulted in considerable frontload -
ing effects. At the same time, households’ de -
mand for loans for house purchase remained 
high, bolstered by the persistently low general 
level of interest rates.Further rise in 
excess liquidity
Short- term mar -
ket interest rates 
fluctuate at 
year- end
Money market 
forward rates up 
sharply once 
againFurther normal -
isation of mon -
etary growthDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
30

Among the components of M3, overnight de -
posits once again contributed the most to the 
build- up in the monetary aggregate in the 
fourth quarter. That said, its expansion slowed 
significantly compared with the preceding 
quarters, reaching its lowest value since the 
outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic. Other 
forms of short- term deposits increased some -
what in importance, especially time deposits, 
as did money market fund shares in certain 
countries.
The contrasting developments that occurred in 
individual sectors were striking again. For ex -
ample, the inflow to households’ short- term 
deposits diminished again considerably. This 
continued slowdown is probably attributable 
to the generally improved consumption options 
that, on the whole, led to a decline in the sav -
ings ratio despite the pandemic wave that 
flared up at the beginning of the first quarter. 
Furthermore, the increase in the real opportun -
ity costs of holding money following the rise in 
the inflation rate is likely to have boosted this 
development.
By contrast, non- financial corporations ex -
panded their deposits considerably again in the 
fourth quarter, especially their overnight de -
posits. This development first reflects the con -
tinued high profit margins in parts of the cor -
porate sector. Second, enterprises have had to 
postpone investment on account of persistent 
bottlenecks in the supply of intermediate 
goods, which means that the outflow of funds 
was again lower in parts of the corporate sec -
tor, as it had been in the preceding quarter.
On the counterparts side, monetary growth 
was driven by the sharp increase in lending to 
domestic non- banks. Inflows to securities-  
based lending to general government were 
again high (see the upper chart on p.  33). 
These are primarily due to the monthly net pur -
chases of government bonds by the Eurosys -
tem under the PEPP and APP . Moreover, com -
mercial banks also upped their holdings of 
bonds issued by the public sector. In addition, Accumulation 
of overnight 
deposits 
slackened 
Households 
recorded lower 
inflows to short- 
term deposits …
… whilst enter -
prises saw 
considerable  
increase, espe -
cially in over -
night deposits
Build- up of 
securitised 
lending  mainly 
driven by Euro -
system net 
purchases Monetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 20212024681012
–++++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14
20246
–+++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial liabilities1
Net external assets
Credit to the private sector2
Financial corporations3
Non-financial corporations4
Households5Contribution of components 
in percentage points
Securities-based lending to 
general governmentPercentage change
in M3
Percentage change
in M3Contribution of counterparts in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector2Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
31

lending to the domestic private sector in -
creased sharply in the fourth quarter.2
After adjustment for loan sales and securitisa -
tion, banks’ lending to non- financial corpor -
ations was unusually high, having risen in the 
fourth quarter of 2021 at a similar rate as at the 
beginning of the coronavirus pandemic on bal -
ance (see the lower chart on p. 33). This rise 
was spread broadly across Member States and 
maturities, although growth was especially 
strong for short- term loans. The annual growth 
rate, which had fallen to 1.9% at the end of 
June 2021 on account of a strong coronavirus 
baseline effect, thus returned to a level of 4.2% 
as at the end of the year.
Although bank lending to enterprises had al -
ready regained momentum since mid- 2021, the 
very strong inflow at the end of the year was 
attributable to a one- off factor linked to TLTRO- 
III, which was that one of the reference periods 
for credit growth connected to these oper -
ations expired at the end of December. It was 
this reference period that determined whether 
banks participating in the TLTRO- III series would 
have access to extremely favourable refinan -
cing conditions in the period between June 
2021 and June 2022. For this reason, banks 
with previously weak lending records were par -
ticularly interested in frontloading their lending into the fourth quarter of 2021 or in granting 
more short- term loans. One indication of this is 
the fact that the (already very low) short- term 
lending rates clearly dropped at the same time 
in some euro area countries. Correspondingly, 
lending business is likely to be lower in the first 
quarter of 2022. A similar pattern could also be 
observed in March 2021, when the last refer -
ence period came to a close.
The high demand for short- term loans from 
non- financial corporations can be explained by 
shortages in materials and labour, especially in 
construction and industry, which are currently 
driving up enterprises’ inventory and operating 
costs. Long- term loans, too, continued to be in 
demand, albeit to a considerably weaker extent 
than in the first half of 2021. This stems from 
the fact that aggregate supply bottlenecks con -
tinued to cloud the investment climate in the 
fourth quarter.
In the context of the Bank Lending Survey 
(BLS), the responding bank managers likewise 
noted an increase in loan demand. According Strong growth in 
lending to non- 
financial corpor -
ations at year- 
end …
… underpinned 
by TLTRO- III 
provisions Aggregate 
supply  bottle -
necks affect 
demand for 
creditConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q3 2021 Q4 2021
Holdings against central government 2 10.8 106.6
Monetary aggregate M3 259.5 269.8
of which components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 279.4 211.5
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) – 22.6 31.2
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 2.7 27.1
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 0.0 7.3
of which:
Capital and reserves 11.8 14.6
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 11.8 – 7.3Assets Q3 2021 Q4 2021
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 132.0 222.6
of which:
Loans 117.5 169.1
Loans, adjusted 1 120.5 218.3
Securities 14.5 53.6
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 150.6 201.0
of which:
Loans –  4.7 –  1.2
Securities 155.2 202.2
Net external assets – 40.8 – 67.9
Other counterparts of M3 28.5 28.0
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche Bundesbank
2 In the quarter under review, some of these loans were 
securitised by banks and removed from the banks’ balance 
sheets. The banks acquired larger volumes of securitised 
loans at the same time, which was reflected by the rise in 
their securities- based lending to financial vehicle corpor -
ations engaged in the securitisation sector.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
32

to them, the increased need for funds resulted 
chiefly from greater financing requirements for 
inventories and working capital as well as fixed 
investment. In addition, banks believed that 
mergers and acquisitions, debt refinancing and 
restructuring as well as the low general level of 
interest rates contributed to the uptick in de -
mand. As in the preceding two quarters, the 
banks surveyed in the BLS left credit standards 
for corporate loans virtually unchanged on bal -
ance.
Loans to households likewise showed further 
robust expansion in the fourth quarter of 2021. 
However, housing loans, which make up the 
most significant portion of household lending, 
recorded somewhat smaller inflows at year-end 
compared with previous quarters. As a result, 
the annual growth rate for housing loans 
shrank slightly to 5.4%. Contributing factors 
are likely to have been the noteworthy mater -
ials shortages in construction and other supply- 
side bottlenecks, which led to a widening dis -
crepancy between orders and production in 
the fourth quarter.
The BLS banks once again cited strengthened 
consumer confidence and the low general level 
of interest rates as major factors behind the 
lively demand for housing loans. Demand was 
also stimulated by the positive outlook on the 
residential real estate market. On the supply 
side, the banks participating in the BLS left their 
credit standards for loans for house purchase 
unchanged in the fourth quarter. Banks thereby 
continued on the path of essentially unchanged 
credit standards upon which they had em -
barked in the first quarter of 2021, after having 
tightened them in 2020, the first year of the 
pandemic.
Consumer loans to households increased for 
the third consecutive quarter, although growth 
still fell significantly short of the rates recorded 
before the outbreak of the pandemic. Amongst 
other factors, the stricter containment meas -
ures introduced at the end of the year are likely 
to have put a fresh damper on activity in the BLS banks left 
credit standards 
on loans to 
enterprises virtu -
ally unchanged
Further substan -
tial rise in loans 
to households 
for house pur -
chase …
… while credit 
standards 
remain 
unchanged 
according to BLS
Perceptible 
inflows in 
consumer  
credit, tooSecurities-based lending to general 
government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 202120002004006008001,0001,200
–++++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
Eurosystem
Other MFIsof which:By the euro area MFI sector
MFI loans to the non-financial private 
sector in the euro area*
4020020406080100120140
––+++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
–200+20+40+60+80 To households3To non-financial corporations1
Total2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
33

high- contact services sector in particular. The 
banks responding to the BLS reported only a 
marginal rise in demand for consumer and 
other loans. The main reasons they gave for 
this rise were improved consumer confidence 
and the low general level of interest rates. Fur -
thermore, the banks surveyed as part of the 
BLS indicated that they had again marginally 
eased their credit standards for consumer and 
other loans.
Unlike the dynamic lending business, the MFI 
sector’s net external asset position had a con -
siderable dampening effect on monetary 
growth in the fourth quarter of 2021. As usual, 
the euro area’s persistent current account sur -
plus did lead to an inflow of capital when 
viewed in isolation. However, other balance of 
payments items brought about a larger nega -
tive effect overall. This manifested, in particular, 
in the form of the negative balance in cross-  
border securities transactions, which was most 
likely caused primarily by the higher yields out -
side the euro area, chiefly in the United States 
and the United Kingdom.
German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 domestic customers
The deposit business among banks in Germany 
continued to lose momentum in the fourth 
quarter of 2021. This was mainly due to over -
night deposits, where inflows weakened sig -
nificantly over the course of 2021 amid fluctu -
ations, reaching only a slightly positive build- up 
in the final quarter.
The overall slowdown in the accumulation of 
deposits in Germany was, above all, the result 
of a change in the investment behaviour of 
households, which continued to lose interest in 
building up overnight bank deposits. The in -
crease in the opportunity costs of holding 
money over the year is likely to have played a 
key role in this adjustment. First, average inter -
est on this type of deposit fell further into Net external 
asset position 
has considerable 
dampening 
effect on monet -
ary growth
Build- up of 
deposits con -
tinues to slow
Households’ 
accumulation of 
deposits consid -
erably weaker 
than usualInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 2021101234
–++++% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight deposits
MFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2021
Q3 Q4
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 37.1 0.7
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years – 5.7 10.4
over 2 years – 5.0 – 2.0
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months 0.1 – 0.5
over 3 months – 0.8 – 0.5
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 0.7 – 2.4
Securities 0.3 – 4.7
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 40.1 58.0
of which: to households 3 23.6 24.3
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 15.3 31.0
Securities 4.1 3.6
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. Data adjusted for statis-
tical changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, households and 
general government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted 
for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 4   Non- fi  nancial corporations and 
quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
34

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q1 2022.
Deutsche Bundesbank14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 20221.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2014 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 2200.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
30030
–+
3003060
–++Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
0.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
35

negative territory in the final quarter of 2021. 
Second, the high rates of inflation are likely to 
have raised households’ awareness of the real 
cost involved in holding money.
By contrast, banks’ lending business with the 
domestic non- bank sector grew sharply in the 
fourth quarter of 2021. This was mainly due to 
the strong expansion in lending to the domes -
tic private sector. Lending to the public sector, 
on the other hand, contracted distinctly once 
again.
One of the main reasons for lending being so 
robust was the fact that non-  financial corpor -ations took out a noticeably large amount of 
loans with domestic banks. In addition to funds 
needed for inventories and working capital, the 
banks surveyed in the BLS cited the funding of 
fixed investment as a key reason for the rise in 
demand. Although this meant that financing 
needs for fixed investment did recover, they 
continued to remain below the figures re -
corded before the outbreak of the pandemic.
While the increase in loans occurred across all 
maturities, it was particularly pronounced in 
the short- term segment. As in the euro area as 
a whole, the end of the reference period for 
obtaining special interest rate conditions in the 
context of the TLTRO- III series is likely to have 
played a role here. The end of this reference 
period encouraged some banks to push ahead 
with granting, in particular, short- term loans to 
non- financial corporations in the final quarter 
of 2021. Some of these loans were granted at 
very favourable interest rate conditions.
This is consistent with banks easing their credit 
terms and conditions on the whole in the 
fourth quarter. In this vein, banks narrowed 
their margins on average- risk and riskier loans. 
The last time this happened was in the final 
quarter of 2018. By contrast, according to the 
BLS, credit standards in corporate banking 
were left unchanged on balance in the quarter 
under review for the third time in a row.
Besides a flourishing corporate banking busi -
ness, banks also saw robust net growth in lend -
ing to domestic households in the reporting 
quarter. This was on account of the consist -
ently high inflows to housing loans. House -
holds’ persistently high demand for loans for 
house purchase is likely to have been fuelled by 
the expansion in government grants for energy- 
efficient buildings in the third quarter of 2021, 
which included not only low interest rate loans 
but also extensive subsidies towards new build -
ings and refurbishments. However, overall, the 
annual growth of loans taken out for house 
purchase did not accelerate further in the final 
quarter of 2021; at 7.1% at the end of Decem -Credit business 
with non- banks 
very buoyant 
owing to loans 
to the private 
sectorSubstantial 
lending  to non- 
financial corpor -
ations due to 
combination of 
various demand 
factors  …
… and banks’ 
TLTRO- III motives
Lending policies 
in corporate 
banking support 
demand overall
Loans granted 
for house pur -
chase see con -
sistently high 
growth2017 2018 2019 2020 2021–10+1+2+3+4+5+6Year-on-year change, end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic 
non-financial private sector
3210123456
–––++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchaseTotal,
percentage changeLoan contributions 
in percentage pointsTotal,
percentage changeUp to 1 yearMaturity contributions in percentage points
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 yearsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
36

ber, it came close to its all- time high of 7.2%, 
which it had reached in the preceding quarter.
Credit standards for loans to households for 
house purchase were again tightened margin -
ally in net terms in the fourth quarter. The re -
jection rate was somewhat higher again com -
pared with the preceding quarter. Following 
the rises in 2020, this means that the rejection 
rate is likely persisting at an elevated level. On 
balance, overall credit terms and conditions 
were eased marginally.
According to the BLS, the policies applicable to 
consumer loans and other loans to households 
were not adjusted in the final quarter of 2021, 
after they had been slightly eased on balance 
in the preceding three quarters. At the same 
time, the interest rates banks offered on con -
sumer and other loans were favourable to de -
mand in the fourth quarter. Nevertheless, there 
was no notable growth in current net lending 
in this segment. This development is likely at -
tributable not least to a re- intensification of the 
pandemic at the end of the year.
In response to the ad hoc questions asked in 
January’s BLS, German banks reported that 
their funding situation had improved again on 
the quarter, especially with regard to raising 
funding through medium to long-  term debt 
securities and short- term deposits.
Banks responded to regulatory and supervisory 
activities by continuing to strengthen their cap -
ital positions last year. In the second half of 2021, consistent with banks’ expectations, the 
level of the NPL ratio (percentage share of 
(gross) NPL stocks to the gross book value of 
loans) had only a marginal impact, or none 
whatsoever, on lending policy. For the first half 
of 2022, too, banks are not expecting the NPL 
ratio to exert any meaningful influence on their 
lending policies.
In the second half of 2021, German banks left 
credit standards largely unchanged in nearly all 
surveyed sectors of the economy. Only in the 
commercial real estate sector did they report a 
discernible tightening. For the first half of 2022, 
banks are planning to ease their credit stand -
ards for commercial real estate lending and to 
tighten standards for loans for house purchase.
In the second half of 2021, banks made no 
changes to their lending guidelines for corona -
virus assistance loans guaranteed in whole or in 
part by the government. They had relaxed 
these standards in the first half of the year. 
Banks reported a continued decline in demand 
for loans to enterprises with pandemic- related 
government guarantees among large enter -
prises in the second half of 2021. The reason 
given for this was a reduction in the need for 
funds for fixed investment as well as the fact 
that fewer guaranteed loans were taken out to 
substitute non- guaranteed loans. Demand 
among small and medium- sized enterprises 
rose marginally because more funding was 
once again requested in order to meet acute 
liquidity needs.Credit standards 
for loans for 
house purchase 
marginally 
tighter; slight 
easing of credit 
terms and con -
ditions on the 
whole
Lending policies 
on consumer 
and other credit 
friendly overall, 
but no notable 
increases in net 
lending
Funding environ -
ment somewhat 
improved for 
German banksLevel of NPL 
ratio has no 
noteworthy 
impact on 
changes in 
 German banks’ 
lending policies 
in second half of 
2021
Credit standards 
in commercial 
real estate tight -
ened in second 
half of 2021
Credit standards 
for government- 
guaranteed 
loans un -
changed in 
second half 
of 2021Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
37

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Developments in the international financial 
markets in the final quarter of 2021 and the 
first weeks of 2022 were marked by increasing 
inflationary risks. In light of surprisingly high 
rates of price increase on both sides of the At -
lantic, market participants revised their inflation 
expectations for the major currency areas up -
wards multiple times for the current and the 
coming year. Together with the assessment 
that the burdens imposed by the Omicron vari -
ant would be manageable, this led some cen -
tral banks to take a less accommodative mon -
etary policy stance. The Bank of England, for 
instance, responded with two Bank Rate in -
creases, while the Federal Reserve (Fed) an -
nounced in January that it deemed it appropri -
ate to bring net asset purchases to an end in 
March and to raise the federal funds rate soon. 
Looking ahead, market participants are now 
anticipating a less expansionary monetary pol -
icy for the euro area, too. As a result, bench -
mark returns increased, and real interest rates 
also rose. On the whole, yields on euro area 
corporate bonds even rose significantly more 
strongly than government bond yields. On bal -
ance, the yield spreads of corporate bonds, 
which serve as an indicator of funding condi -
tions for enterprises, were therefore slightly 
above their five- year average as this report 
went to press. International equity markets de -
clined amid rising interest rates, but remained 
predominantly in positive territory compared 
with the end of September. This was due, first 
and foremost, to an improvement in overall 
earnings expectations, particularly on the back 
of increased profit margins at large enterprises. 
Foreign exchange market developments were 
also influenced largely by the persistently high 
inflation rates worldwide, the measures central 
banks have announced to combat inflation as 
well as those already taken, and speculation 
among market participants regarding further 
steps towards monetary policy normalisation. Measured as a weighted average against the 
currencies of 19 major trading partners, the 
euro has, on balance, depreciated by 2.1% net 
since the end of September 2021.
Exchange rates
The euro lost 3.2% of its value compared with 
the US dollar in the first three weeks of Novem -
ber 2021 due to stronger rate hike expectations 
for the United States, but was able to recover 
somewhat towards the end of the month. The 
highly contagious Omicron variant of COVID-  19 
temporarily muted market expectations of an 
early Federal Reserve interest rate hike. In the 
euro area, however, the correction of expect -
ations was comparatively small, as Eurosystem 
policy rate increases had not been expected 
until later in the first place. The temporary con -
vergence of market views concerning the mon -
etary policy stances of the Eurosystem and the 
US central bank allowed the euro to rally 
against the dollar, on balance. Subsequently, 
this currency pair moved in a narrow range 
around US$1.13 per euro – without any clearly 
discernible trend – until into the first week of 
January.
The euro/ US dollar exchange rate did not see 
more movement until January. After a short-  
lived strengthening of the euro, sentiment 
shifted in favour of the US dollar in the second 
half of January as various members of the Fed -
eral Reserve’s Open Market Committee sig -
nalled a speedy monetary policy response to 
the previously published high level of consumer 
price inflation of 7% in the United States and 
that it might soon begin to tighten its policy 
rate. Increased geopolitical tensions between 
Russia and Ukraine additionally propped up the 
US dollar. As a result, the euro reached its low -
est level of the last 20 months, trading at 
US$1.11. However, more surprisingly high infla -
tion figures emerged from the euro area at the Financial mar -
kets shaped by 
increasing infla -
tionary risks and 
expectations of 
monetary policy 
tightening
Euro down 
against the 
US dollar on 
balanceDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
38

end of the month, prompting market expect -
ations of a normalisation to be brought for -
ward here, too, which strengthened the euro 
again. The euro appreciation accelerated fur -
ther when, at the press conference following 
the ECB Governing Council’s meeting in Febru -
ary, a policy rate adjustment during the current 
year was no longer explicitly ruled out. As this 
report went to press, the euro stood at US$1.14. 
It has thus lost 1.8% of its value since the end 
of September.
The British pound appreciated on a broad basis 
after the Bank of England raised its official Bank 
Rate in mid- December to combat the UK’s own 
high inflation. Given the rapid spread of new 
COVID-  19 infections in the United Kingdom, a 
majority of observers had not anticipated a de -
cision of this kind at this point in time. At the 
beginning of February, the Bank of England 
upped the ante with a second interest rate 
hike, after the UK inflation rate once again 
proved higher than expected. While this initially 
caused the euro to weaken further against the 
pound sterling, it rallied markedly against the 
UK currency when, later that day, the markets 
revised their interest rate outlook for the euro 
area upwards following the latest monetary 
policy meeting of the ECB Governing Council. 
For a few days, this more than made up for the 
immediately preceding exchange rate losses. 
When this report went to press, the euro was 
trading at £0.83, around 3.0% lower than at 
the end of September.
Following the Japanese central bank’s Decem -
ber meeting, the yen began to depreciate 
against the euro and other currencies. This was 
due to monetary policy decisions and Japan’s 
low inflation rates (by international standards) 
both failing to spark any market fantasies of in -
flation rate increases. In mid-  January, however, 
sentiment in the foreign exchange markets 
swung temporarily in the yen’s favour when 
the Bank of Japan raised its inflation forecast 
for the coming fiscal year and pointed to bal -
anced price risks in its Outlook Report, having 
previously highlighted deflationary risks for years. Nevertheless, following the ECB Govern -
ing Council’s monetary policy meeting, the 
euro once again appreciated against the yen, 
too. As this report went to press, the euro was 
trading at ¥131. It was thus some 0.9% above 
its value at the end of September.
Measured as a weighted average against the 
currencies of 19 major trading partners, the 
euro has depreciated by 2.1% net since the end 
of September. It lost ground especially against 
the currencies of countries whose central banks 
have already chosen to raise policy rates in the 
current cycle. Losses were consequently re -
corded against the pound sterling, as well as Euro also loses 
ground against 
the pound 
sterling  …
… but records 
gains against 
the yen
Euro weaker in 
effective termsExchange rate of the euro
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Calculated 
against the currencies of 19 countries. A rise in values indicates 
an appreciation of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankS OND J FMAM J J A SOND J F
2020 2021 20221.101.151.201.25
120125130135
0.830.860.890.92
9497100103Daily data, log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
... yen
... pound sterling
Nominal effective exchange rate1
Q1 1999 = 100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
39

the Norwegian krone (-0.4%), the forint (-1.1%), 
the Czech koruna (-4.4%) and the zloty (-2.5%). 
On balance, the price competitiveness of euro 
area suppliers improved over the period under 
review, but looking at the long- term average, 
their competitive position can currently still be 
considered neutral.
Securities markets and 
 portfolio investment
Bond market
Nominal government bond yields rose consid -
erably in all major currency areas since the end 
of September. This was chiefly due to reduced 
concerns about the economic impact of the 
Omicron wave – despite high infection rates – 
and an initial tightening of monetary policy in a 
solidifying inflation environment. Fiscal policy 
measures, meanwhile, played a subordinate 
role. The failure of the US government’s “Build Back Better” social and infrastructure policy 
package at the beginning of 2022, for instance, 
only temporarily dampened the rise in yields. In 
the United States, nominal yields on ten- year 
US Treasuries rose sharply by 48 basis points 
from the end of September to reach 2.0%. As 
expectations concerning average inflation over 
the next ten years derived from inflation swaps 
increased only slightly in the period under re -
view, the real rate of interest increased as well.
Against the backdrop of rising inflation expect -
ations and the Bank of England’s tightening of 
monetary policy, yields on ten- year gilts in the 
UK rose by 45 basis points. In light of the steps 
made toward a normalisation of monetary pol -
icy, Japanese government bonds also saw 
somewhat higher yields. However, the increase 
in yields was significantly weaker here (+16 
basis points). At 0.2%, yields on ten- year gov -
ernment bonds therefore continued to move 
within the range in which market participants 
assume that the Bank of Japan wishes to keep 
interest rates.
Yields on ten- year government bonds rose by 
43 basis points, a similar level of growth as that 
seen in US and UK bond yields; as this report 
went to press, they had risen to 0.2%, the first 
time they had clearly been in positive territory 
since spring 2019. In fact, the increase in the 
interest rate even amounted to 59 basis points 
in relation to the ECB’s Governing Council 
meeting in mid- December. This clear increase 
indicates that market participants now see the 
inflation process in the euro area as involving 
significantly higher upside risks. They expect 
that the euro area will also see a reduction in 
policy easing and are pricing in the correspond -
ing stronger monetary policy responses. This 
was also evident in market developments dur -
ing the press conference after the ECB Govern -
ing Council’s monetary policy meeting at the 
beginning of February, when short-  term bond 
yields in particular rose sharply.
Model breakdowns of the Bund yield curve also 
indicate that the increase in ten- year nominal Ten- year govern -
ment bond 
yields up 
globally  …… as well as in 
GermanyBond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual ma-
turity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 20220.90.60.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.4
–––++++++++% p. a., daily data
Euro area
Germany
United States
Japan
United KingdomDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
40

interest rates since the end of September is 
ultimately  entirely down to a rise in risk- neutral 
short- term interest rate expectations, while the 
term premium has decreased. This increase in 
implied short-  term interest rates reveals that 
market participants expect a steeper interest 
rate path and thus tighter monetary policy in 
the longer term given current inflation con -
cerns.
The yield curve derived from the yields on Fed -
eral securities has shifted over the reporting 
period; as this report went to press, it was sig -
nificantly steeper in the short to medium- term 
maturity segment. While Federal securities with 
a residual maturity of up to six years were yield -
ing less than the deposit facility rate of -0.5% 
at the start of the fourth quarter, yields on two- 
year and longer- dated securities were above 
this rate at the time this report went to press. 
At the same time, the premium that market 
participants pay for the particularly high liquid -
ity and scarcity of Federal securities increased. 
As a result, the yield spread between Federal 
securities and maturity- matched bonds issued 
by the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau  (KfW) 
widened distinctly.
The GDP- weighted yield on ten- year euro area 
bonds (excluding Germany) has also risen since 
the end of September 2021 (by 70 basis points 
to 1.0%). The interest rate spread between this 
measure and German Bunds with the same 
maturity increased by 27 basis points to 0.8%. 
While many euro area Member States saw 
yields move in fairly close concert with Bunds, 
yield spreads widened disproportionately for 
countries with poorer credit ratings such as 
Greece (+132 basis points) and Italy (+55 basis 
points). The increase in Greek government 
bond yields probably also reflects the fact that 
net asset purchases under the pandemic emer -
gency purchase programme (PEPP) will be dis -
continued at the end of March 2022 as planned 
and Greek government bonds are not eligible 
for purchase under the topped- up public sector 
purchase programme (PSPP). In Italy, increased 
uncertainty in connection with the presidential Rise in ten- year 
bond yields 
ultimately driven 
by expected 
interest rate 
path
German yield 
curve steeper
Widening of 
yield spreads 
in euro areaSpreads of ten-year government bonds 
over German Federal bonds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022050100150200250300350400450Basis points, daily data
Italy
Spain
Ireland FranceGreece
Portugal
Forward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Derived  from  the  fixed  cash 
flow arising from inflation swaps which is swapped for the ac-
tual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro 
area and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised 
over the next five or ten years. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 20221.41.82.22.6Weekly averages
% p. a.
Five-year forward inflation rate in 
five years derived from swapsConsensus Economics inflation
expectations in six to ten years
United StatesEuro area
0.81.21.62.02.4
% p. a.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
41

elections also temporarily played a role. At the 
time this report went to press, liquidity indica -
tors showed no particular tensions in the mar -
ket for euro area government bonds. Relative 
to the implied volatility of options on futures 
contracts for Bunds, price uncertainty never -
theless rose noticeably; at the time this report went to press, it was considerably higher than 
its five- year average. Higher volatility is, how -
ever, not unusual in periods of rising policy 
rates.
Inflation swaps indicate that market partici -
pants revised their short- term inflation expect -
ations upwards multiple times in recent months 
in response to rates of price increase that were 
higher than generally expected. As this report 
went to press, market- based inflation expect -
ations for the Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP) in the euro area (excluding to -
bacco) stood at 5.0% on average for 2022. At 
present, market participants do not anticipate 
an annual rate of change in the HICP of 2% 
until November 2023. Surveys conducted by 
Consensus Economics also showed that infla -
tion expectations for 2022 were revised up -
wards in January and February; the annual 
average stood at 3.9% at last count. Survey-  
based inflation expectations for the coming 
months were consistently below the market-  
based values. The positive inflation risk pre -
mium reflected in the difference between mar -
ket and survey- based values for this period sug -
gests that market participants are hedging 
against risks arising from unexpectedly high in -
flation in the future. The option- implied prob -
ability that average euro area inflation over the 
next five years could exceed the new target of 
2% has increased from 40% at the end of Sep -
tember to 49% as this report went to press.
In contrast to the inflation expectations over 
the short and medium term, market data point 
to virtually unchanged inflation expectations 
for forward inflation rates in five years. Thus, at 
1.8%, the forward inflation rate over a five- year 
period starting in five years’ time, which is de -
rived from inflation swaps, was only marginally 
shy of its value at the end of September. Survey- 
based inflation expectations calculated by Con -
sensus Economics for the euro area six to ten 
years ahead were raised to the target of 2% in 
January, compared with 1.9% in October 2021.Market partici -
pants do not 
expect inflation 
rates of 2% until 
November 2023
Forward infla -
tion rates in 
euro areaTen-year real interest rates in various 
currency areas*
43210
––––% p.a., monthly data
2020 2021 2022
Sources:  Bloomberg  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Real  in-
terest rates based on ten-year nominal interest rates less con-
current  inflation  expectations  based  on  inflation  swaps.  For 
Germany, the inflation swaps of the euro area are used.
Deutsche BundesbankUnited StatesGermany Euro area
United
Kingdom
Short-term HICP paths for the euro area
10123456
–++++++%
2020 2021 2022 2023
Sources: Fenics Market Data, Consensus Economics, Eurostat 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Excluding  tobacco.  Year-on-
year change.
Deutsche BundesbankSurvey averages from 
Consensus EconomicsForward inflation rates
derived from inflation swaps
Actual
annual HICP 112 July 2021
7 February 2022
17 February 202212 July 2021
7 February 2022Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
42

Yields on BBB- rated European corporate bonds 
with residual maturities of between seven and 
ten years have risen significantly since Septem -
ber 2021. Bonds issued by financial corpor -
ations recorded an increase in yields of 111 
basis points to 2.1%. At 1.7%, yields on non-  
financial corporate bonds were 96 basis points 
higher than at the end of September 2021. 
Since the yields on matched-  maturity Federal 
securities rose less sharply on balance, the 
spreads of European financial and non- financial 
corporate bonds over Bunds widened by 68 
and 52 basis points, respectively. The increase 
in yields on high- yield bonds was particularly 
strong, with spreads rising by 95 basis points. 
At the same time, the credit default premia for 
debtors with poor creditworthiness increased 
(iTraxx Crossover (five years) +78 basis points). 
Measured by yield spreads, funding conditions 
for European enterprises in the capital market 
were somewhat above their five-  year average 
as this report went to press.
Gross issuance in the German bond market in 
the fourth quarter of 2021 fell significantly 
short of the value for the previous quarter. 
Overall, German borrowers issued paper to the 
tune of €354 billion, down from €442½ billion 
in the previous three months. Net of redemp -
tions and changes in issuers’ own holdings, do -
mestic issuers ramped up their capital market 
borrowing by €12 billion. The outstanding vol -
ume of foreign debt securities in the German 
market fell by €11½ billion in the fourth quar -
ter. On balance, the total outstanding volume 
of bonds in Germany thus climbed by €1 billion 
in the quarter under review.
In the final quarter of 2021, the public sector is -
sued bonds to the tune of €21½ billion net, fol -
lowing €31 billion in the previous quarter. The 
Federal government (including the resolution 
agency classified as part of central government) 
issued mainly Federal bonds (Bunds), primarily 
with a ten- year maturity (€15 billion). This con -
trasted with net redemptions of five- year Fed -
eral notes (Bobls) totalling €4½ billion. State and local governments redeemed debt secur -
ities worth €4½ billion on balance.
In the quarter under review, domestic enter -
prises redeemed bonds worth a net €8 billion, 
following net issuance amounting to €13 bil -
lion in the previous quarter. These redemptions 
were, on balance, almost solely attributable to 
other financial intermediaries’ long- term secur -
ities expiring.
Domestic credit institutions reduced their cap -
ital market debt in the quarter under review by 
€1½ billion, following net issuance of €9 billion 
in the previous quarter. Redemptions mostly af -
fected debt securities of specialised credit insti -
tutions (€1½ billion) and public Pfandbriefe (€1 
billion). By contrast, other bank debt securities 
that can be structured flexibly were issued to 
the tune of €1½ billion net.
The Bundesbank was the chief net purchaser of 
debt securities in the fourth quarter of 2021, in -Yield spreads of 
corporate bonds 
up
Low net sales in 
the bond market
Lower net public 
sector issuanceOutstanding vol -
ume of corpor -
ate bonds down
Fall in credit 
institutions’ cap -
ital market debt
Purchases of 
debt securitiesInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2020 2021
Q4 Q3 Q4
Debt securities
Residents 70.9 72.2 43.4
Credit institutions –  14.4 – 4.5 – 27.8
of which:
Foreign debt securities 2.0 – 1.5 – 15.0
Deutsche Bundesbank 70.5 60.1 58.3
Other sectors 14.8 16.6 12.9
of which:
Domestic debt securities 2.5 3.6 10.5
Non-residents – 105.7 – 9.6 – 42.6
Shares
Residents 30.2 30.8 38.8
Credit institutions 5.2 3.5 2.3
of which:
Domestic shares 1.8 0.7 –  0.1
Non-banks 25.0 27.3 36.6
of which:
Domestic shares 3.0 9.1 26.2
Non-residents –   0.6 0.4 –  7.5
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 43.3 14.9 56.7
Investment in retail funds 8.0 10.2 11.6
of which:
Equity funds 4.3 2.4 2.7
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
43

creasing its bond portfolio by €58½ billion net, 
principally under the Eurosystem’s asset pur -
chase programmes. Domestic non- banks ac -
quired debt securities for €13 billion net, with 
domestic paper the focus of interest. By con -
trast, foreign investors and domestic credit in -
stitutions disposed of fixed- income securities 
amounting to €42½ billion and €28 billion net 
respectively.
Equity market
Prices in the international equity markets have 
declined markedly since the start of January 
when expectations of rising central bank inter -
est rates became entrenched. However, previ -
ous price gains meant that some markets were 
still trading slightly higher than at the end of 
the third quarter of 2021. This was true of 
equity markets in the United Kingdom and the 
United States, for example – the UK’s FTSE 100 
index rose by 6.4% from the end of September, while the US S&P 500 increased by 1.7%. 
Meanwhile, the Euro STOXX recorded com -
paratively weak growth (+0.5%). By contrast, 
the CDAX and the Nikkei recorded net losses 
on balance, sliding 1.5% and 7.5% respectively.
Price developments on either side of the Atlan -
tic varied greatly in individual sectors. For in -
stance, technology stocks, in particular, which 
recently reached high valuations, sustained sig -
nificant price losses in some cases. Market par -
ticipants anticipate that these stock corpor -
ations, which have particularly strong growth 
prospects, will see a disproportionately positive 
earnings trend in the medium and long term as 
compared with enterprises with an established 
business model. A higher interest rate means 
that these profits, which lie far in the future, 
are discounted at a higher rate and their 
present value is reduced accordingly, which 
weighs on these enterprises’ share price. By 
contrast, shares in energy companies have ex -
perienced strong growth given the sharp rise in 
energy prices.
Similarly, strong price gains were recorded by 
European bank stocks, which – spurred by the 
prospect of improved margin business – bene -
fited disproportionately from an interest rate 
rise and the associated steepening of the yield 
curve. Higher earnings expectations for banks 
have led to the equity prices of banks listed in 
the Euro STOXX increasing by 9.0% since the 
end of the third quarter of 2021, thus signifi -
cantly outpacing the market as a whole. By 
contrast, bank stocks in the United States 
posted lower gains (+2.6%). In this context, the 
overall flattening of the US yield curve, as 
measured by the spread between two- year and 
ten- year yields, observed since September had 
a dampening effect.
Price uncertainty in the equity markets –  as 
measured by the implied volatility of equity in -
dices calculated from options  – was slightly 
higher than at the end of September 2021 on 
balance. It experienced two wave-  like phases 
during the reporting period. Initially, the World Majority of 
international 
equity markets 
experience rising 
pricesBank stocks in 
the euro area 
outperform mar -
ket as a whole
Stock market 
volatility slightly 
upEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankBank indicesBeginning of 2019 = 100, log scale, daily data
Total market indices
90
80100120140160180200
5570
6080100120140160180
2020 2021 2022Euro area
(EURO STOXX)Japan
(Nikkei 225)United States
(S&P 500)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
44

Health Organization’s classification of the Omi -
cron variant as a variant of concern temporarily 
led to a strong increase in equity market volatil -
ity worldwide. However, as growing evidence 
emerged that this virus variant could be less 
severe  than previously thought, volatility in the 
equity markets subsided again in the following 
weeks. At the start of the year, global monetary 
policy tightening and geopolitical tensions con -
tributed to a renewed rise in price uncertainty.
European equity valuations became more fa -
vourable compared with the end of September 
2021. For instance, the implied cost of equity of 
the Euro STOXX – calculated from the Bundes -
bank’s dividend discount model  – went up. 
This indicator recently recorded high levels by 
historical standards, which suggests that the 
prices of the stocks that constitute the Euro 
STOXX are valued moderately in relation to the 
companies’ earnings outlook. It should be 
noted, however, that analysts’ short- term earn -
ings expectations and medium-  term earnings 
growth expectations remain at a very high level 
according to IBES surveys.
Different developments were observed in the 
United States. Here, the implied cost of equity 
declined somewhat. Given analysts’ current 
earnings expectations, this indicates a balanced 
valuation level overall.
On balance, funding in the German stock mar -
ket totalled €18½ billion in the final quarter of 
2021, compared with €10 billion in the preced -
ing quarter. A large- scale capital injection by a 
public limited company played a key role in this 
context. The volume of foreign shares in the 
German market rose by €12½ billion over the 
same period. On balance, equities were pur -
chased mainly by resident non- banks (€36½ 
billion), which also include investment com -
panies. Domestic credit institutions added €2½ 
billion net to their share portfolios, while for -
eign investors reduced their equity exposure in 
Germany by €7½ billion on balance.Valuations down 
in the euro area, 
still low by his -
torical standards
Valuations in the 
United States up 
slightly
Stock market 
fundingMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2020 2021
Q4 Q3 Q4p
I. Current account +  72.3 + 59.0 +  60.1 
1. Goods +  53.7 + 46.1 +  36.7 
2. Services +   6.0 –  3.3 +   3.4 
3. Primary income +  30.4 + 29.2 +  36.2 
4. Secondary income –  17.9 – 13.1 –  16.2 
II. Capital account –   3.4 +  2.0 –   3.8 
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) +  96.4 +  8.7 +  59.3 
1. Direct investment +   3.2 + 17.9 +  18.6 
Domestic investment 
abroad +  43.8 + 37.0 +  27.6 
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country +  40.7 + 19.0 +   9.0 
2. Portfolio investment + 172.5 + 61.2 +  94.9 
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities +  67.7 + 51.0 +  41.9 
Shares 1 +  22.9 + 19.4 +  13.3 
Investment fund shares 2+  30.2 + 22.3 +  40.0 
of which:
Money market fund 
shares +   8.4 –  2.2 +  14.0 
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 –   1.9 +  6.7 –  10.4 
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 +  16.5 +  2.5 –   1.0 
of which:
Denominated in euro 5+   7.7 –  3.5 +   3.5 
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities – 104.8 – 10.2 –  53.0 
Shares 1 –   1.0 +  0.4 –   7.6 
Investment fund shares +   1.8 –  1.1 –   2.8 
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 –  33.5 +  8.9 –   6.2 
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 –  72.2 – 18.5 –  36.3 
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 6 –  39.0 – 28.7 –  32.9 
3. Financial derivatives 7 +   9.1 – 10.7 +  13.4 
4. Other investment 8 –  89.3 – 91.0 –  67.9 
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 9 +  23.7 – 29.1 +  98.7 
Enterprises and 
 households 10 –   1.3 –  1.3 –  53.3 
General government –   0.9 –  0.6 +   3.8 
Bundesbank – 110.8 – 60.0 – 117.1 
5. Reserve assets +   0.8 + 31.2 +   0.3 
IV. Errors and omissions 11 +  27.6 – 52.2 +   3.0 
1  Including participation certifi  cates. 2  Including reinvested 
earnings. 3  Short- term: original maturity of up to one year. 
4 Long- term: original maturity of more than one year or unlim-
ited. 5  Including outstanding foreign Deutsche  Mark bonds. 
6 Including bonds issued by the former Federal Railways, the 
former Federal Post Offi   ce and the former Treuhand agency. 
7  Balance of transactions arising from options and fi  nancial 
futures  contracts as well as employee stock options. 8 Includes, 
in particular, loans and trade credits as well as currency and de-
posits. 9 Excluding the Bundesbank. 10  Includes the following 
sectors: fi  nancial corporations (excluding monetary fi  nancial in-
stitutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and 
non- profi  t institutions serving households. 11  Statistical errors 
and omissions resulting from the difference between the bal-
ance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current 
account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
45

Mutual funds
In the final quarter of 2021, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded a significant net in -
flow of €68½ billion, compared with €25 bil -
lion in the previous quarter. On balance, the 
bulk of the net new money was channelled to 
specialised funds reserved for institutional in -
vestors (€56½ billion). Among the asset classes, 
mixed securities funds, in particular, saw signifi -
cant inflows of capital (€26½ billion), with 
funds of funds (€11 billion), equity funds (€8½ 
billion), open- end real estate funds (€7 billion) 
and bond funds (€4½ billion) also recording in -
flows. The outstanding volume of foreign mu -
tual fund shares in Germany rose by €40 billion 
in the period under review. Mutual fund shares 
were bought on balance almost exclusively by 
domestic non- banks, which added a notable 
€106½ billion net worth of fund shares to their 
portfolios. Most of these shares were issued by 
domestic mutual funds. German credit institu -
tions bolstered their fund portfolios by €4½ bil -
lion net, while non- resident investors disposed 
of domestic fund shares worth €3 billion net.
Direct investment
Transactions in cross- border portfolio invest -
ment resulted in net capital exports of €95 bil -
lion in the fourth quarter of 2021. Direct invest -ment, too, resulted in net capital outflows 
(€18½ billion).
Enterprises domiciled in Germany expanded 
their direct investment abroad by €27½ billion 
between October and December 2021 (previ -
ous quarter: €37 billion). They boosted their 
equity capital in foreign subsidiaries by €6 bil -
lion. Furthermore, they provided affiliated 
group entities with additional loans worth 
€21½ billion. The fourth quarter saw consider -
able volumes of direct investment funds flow -
ing from Germany to the United States (€9 bil -
lion), Luxembourg (€7½ billion) and Sweden 
(€3½ billion). By contrast, domestic enterprises 
reduced their investment in the Netherlands 
(€11 billion) and in China (€2 billion).
Conversely, foreign enterprises increased their 
direct investment in Germany by €9 billion, fol -
lowing €19 billion in the third quarter of 2021. 
On balance, the additional funds were pro -
vided exclusively in the form of equity capital. 
Intra- group lending saw the granting of new 
loans and redemptions balance each other out. 
Particularly high inflows of direct investment 
were recorded from Ireland (€6 billion) and the 
United States (€5½ billion) in the fourth quar -
ter. Enterprises from the Netherlands (€11 bil -
lion) and the United Kingdom (€3 billion) re -
duced their direct investment funds in Ger -
many.Sales and 
purchases  of 
mutual fund 
shares
Direct invest -
ment sees net 
capital exportsGerman direct 
investment 
abroad results in 
capital exports
Capital inflows 
through foreign 
direct invest -
ment in 
Germany Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
46

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
Economic activity in Germany declined mark -
edly in the fourth quarter of 2021, having 
shown strong growth in the third quarter. Ac -
cording to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash 
estimate, real gross domestic product (GDP) 
shrank by 0.7% on the quarter after seasonal 
adjustment.1 It was thus down by 1.5% on its 
pre- crisis level in the fourth quarter of 2019. 
Real GDP grew by 2.8% in 2021 as a whole, 
having fallen in 2020 as a result of the pan -
demic. The preliminary annual outturn was re -
vised upwards slightly.
The decline in economic output in the fourth 
quarter of 2021 was largely due to the resur -
gence of the pandemic. The resulting contain -
ment measures and changes in behaviour hit 
some services sectors hard. In addition, it ap -
pears that activity in the construction sector re -
mained lacklustre in spite of high demand. The 
construction sector is currently experiencing a 
lack of labour and a major – albeit decreasing – 
materials shortage. By contrast, industry made 
a positive contribution. In the first three quar -
ters of 2021, growing bottlenecks in the supply 
of intermediate goods had curbed industrial 
production despite order books being very well 
filled. Although surveys indicated that enter -
prises still considered the supply problems to 
be severe in the fourth quarter, the increase in 
industrial production suggests that they eased 
somewhat. On the expenditure side of GDP , 
one particular way in which the resurgence of 
the pandemic was reflected was in a clear de -
cline in private consumption. Government con -
sumption rose, however, probably in connec -
tion with more vaccinations and tests. Invest -
ment in machinery and equipment as well as 
exports are also likely to have grown in the wake of positive developments in industry. Ag -
gregate economic output is likely to decline 
again markedly in Q1 2022 due to the pan -
demic before picking up sharply in Q2.
Goods exports were up significantly in the 
fourth quarter of 2021 in price- adjusted terms. 
The rise is in line with high foreign demand and 
the latest expansion in industrial output. Broken 
down by region, exports to euro area countries 
and non- euro area countries contributed to the 
growth in equal measure, with the increase in 
the value of exports broadly based in regional 
terms. Broken down by category of goods, ex -
ports of capital goods recorded considerable 
growth, particularly for motor vehicles and 
motor vehicle parts, according to the price-  
adjusted figures available up to November. Ex -
ports of consumer goods were clearly higher, 
although slightly fewer pharmaceutical prod -Distinct decline 
in German eco -
nomic output 
towards end of 
2021
Resurgence 
of pandemic 
depressed ser -
vices sector and 
private con -
sumption; indus -
trial production 
and exports up 
despite ongoing 
issue of serious 
supply bottle -
necksGoods exports 
up significantly
Aggregate output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Price 
and calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021949698100102104106108
–12–9–6–30+3+6+9+12Adjusted for price, seasonal and calendar effects
2015 = 100, log scale
Gross domestic product
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
1 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this 
text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, pro -
vided they can be verified and quantified.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
47

ucts were exported. Exports of intermediate 
goods edged up slightly.
Investment in new machinery and equipment is 
likely to have risen in the fourth quarter. The 
slight easing of supply bottlenecks and in -
creased capacity utilisation in manufacturing 
are likely to have boosted investment activity. 
Manufacturers of capital goods experienced a 
steep rise in domestic sales. In addition, the 
value of capital goods imports climbed strongly 
according to the figures available up until No -
vember. Enterprises are likely to have scaled 
back investment in their fleets of vehicles, how -
ever. This is indicated by the number of com -mercial passenger vehicle registrations and 
registration figures for commercial vehicles, 
which dropped sharply in the fourth quarter.
Construction investment is likely to have re -
mained lacklustre in the final quarter of 2021. 
Sales figures in the main construction sector 
available up to November increased strongly on 
the previous quarter in terms of value, but in 
real terms the rise was significantly smaller due 
to high price increases. Whilst investment in 
commercial buildings has probably risen mark -
edly, investment in housing construction is 
likely to have remained virtually stable. Finish -
ing trades, for which no sales data are available 
yet for the fourth quarter, could have damp -
ened the overall figure. This is indicated by the 
sharp fall in output in the finishing trades.
Private consumption is likely to have gone 
down significantly in the fourth quarter of 
2021, after it had shown a steep rise in the 
third quarter. The escalation of the pandemic 
dampened the consumption of high- contact 
services in particular. Sales in the hotel and res -
taurant sector, for example, declined strongly 
according to the price- adjusted figures avail -
able up to November. Real retail sales were 
likewise slightly lower. Bricks- and- mortar retail -
ers of textiles, clothing, footwear and leather 
goods posted a particularly steep fall in sales. 
Sales of information and communication tech -
nology equipment and furniture, furnishings, 
household appliances and home improvement 
materials also experienced a considerable 
slump. This contrasted with a substantial rise in 
mail order and online trade. Car purchases are 
likely to have increased in the fourth quarter. 
This is indicated by the number of new private 
car registrations, which rose steeply according 
to the German Association of the Automotive 
Industry (VDA).
Imports of goods rose steeply in real terms in 
the fourth quarter of 2021, with imports from 
euro area countries and non- euro area coun -
tries expanding at a similar pace. Broken down 
by category of goods, the volume of consumer Investment in 
new machinery 
and equipment 
likely to have 
risenConstruction 
investment likely 
to be lacklustre
Private con -
sumption down 
significantly
Steep rise in 
imports of 
goods708090100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021758090100110
90100110120Seasonally and calendar adjusted, quarterly data
to euro area countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted1758090100110
€ bnto non-euro area countriesof which:MonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
48

goods imports saw a particularly substantial in -
crease according to the figures available up to 
November. Considerably more pharmaceutical 
products were imported, which was probably 
partly connected with a greater number of vac -
cinations and tests. Imports of capital goods 
likewise increased steeply on the back of a 
sharp pick-up in imports of motor vehicles and 
motor vehicle parts.
Sectoral trends
After seasonal adjustment, industrial output 
was up significantly in the fourth quarter of 
2021 compared with the third quarter (+1¾%). 
This could mark a turning point. Before this, in -
dustrial output had fallen sharply since the be -
ginning of 2021. Growing bottlenecks in the 
supply of intermediate goods had prevented in -
dustry from benefiting from the high demand 
for industrial products. The recent rise in indus -
trial output suggests a slight easing of the sup -
ply bottlenecks. This is consistent with the fact 
that delivery times increased to a smaller extent 
according to surveys conducted by IHS Markit. 
However, the share of enterprises in the manu -
facturing sector reporting production delays 
due to supply bottlenecks rose further in the 
fourth quarter according to ifo Institute sur -
veys. The higher industrial output in the fourth 
quarter was attributable to a rise in the produc -
tion of capital goods. Motor vehicle produc -
tion, in particular, experienced a significant in -
crease following a strong slump. Other trans -
port equipment was up substantially, too. By 
contrast, there was a clear drop in the manu -
facture of machinery and equipment and the 
production of computer, electronic and optical 
products was slightly lower. The production of 
consumer goods remained broadly unchanged, 
although more pharmaceutical products were 
produced. Intermediate goods production de -
clined slightly. Overall, industrial output was 
still down by 4¾% on the pre- crisis level of the 
fourth quarter of 2019.According to the ifo Institute, capacity utilisa -
tion of tangible fixed assets in manufacturing 
rose slightly between the surveys in October 
and January and was distinctly above its long- 
term average. Manufacturers of capital goods 
saw a particularly steep rise in capacity utilisa -
tion. This is consistent with the robust growth 
in capital goods production. Producers of con -
sumer goods also experienced a marked in -
crease in capacity utilisation, however, whereas 
there was a slight fall in the intermediate goods 
sector.
Construction output was clearly down again in 
the fourth quarter after adjustment for sea -
sonal variations (-2%). This was due to consid -
erably less production in the finishing trades. It 
should be noted, however, that initial data 
often undergo substantial revision. The slightly 
higher output in the main construction sector 
was not enough to offset the decline in the fin -
ishing trades. Sluggish activity in the construc -
tion sector might be related to a shortage of Possible turn -
around in 
industry 
Slight increase in 
industrial cap -
acity utilisation
Construction 
output clearly 
down againOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021707580859095100105110
1001051101151201251301351402015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data, log scale
MonthlyIndustry
Main constructionIndustry excluding
automotive
Construction1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
49

labour  . The percentage of enterprises in the 
main construction sector reporting a disruption 
to production due to a lack of staff reached a 
new high, according to surveys by the ifo Insti -
tute. By contrast, various economic indicators 
suggest favourable conditions for growth in 
construction in the fourth quarter. Although 
high from a long- term perspective, the share of 
firms suffering from material shortages was in 
decline. At the same time, demand for con -
struction work remained brisk, with the reach 
of the order books in the main construction 
sector as determined by ifo Institute surveys 
attaining  a new record high. This resulted in a 
further steep rise in the cost of construction 
work, however. Equipment utilisation edged up 
again and remains at a high level from a long- 
term perspective.
Economic output in the services sectors is likely 
to have fallen markedly due to the resurgence 
in pandemic activity. On an average of October 
and November – the last period for which fig -
ures are available – price- adjusted sales in the 
hotel and restaurant sector were down sharply 
compared with the third quarter. Real retail 
sales declined only slightly in the fourth quar -
ter, which was due mainly to the fact that mail 
order and online trade was up substantially. 
Motor vehicle trade is also likely to have been 
sluggish. According to data provided by the 
German Association of the Automotive Indus -
try (VDA), new passenger car registrations 
dropped significantly due to the strong decline 
in commercial vehicle registrations. By contrast, 
data available up to November show that price- 
adjusted wholesale sales rose slightly in line 
with developments in industry. Results of ifo In -
stitute surveys assessing the situation indicate 
weak business activity in most of the remaining 
services sectors.
Labour market
The factors that curbed economic activity in 
the fourth quarter had barely any impact on 
the labour market. Employment continued to recover, and both unemployment and the use 
of short- time working arrangements fell sub -
stantially. Leading indicators suggest only a 
comparatively mild dip in the labour market in 
the first quarter of 2022, despite the currently 
high infection rates.
Employment levels rose significantly in the last 
few months of 2021. On an average of the 
fourth quarter, the seasonally adjusted number 
of persons in work rose by 157,000 on the 
quarter overall, representing an increase of 
0.3%. The employment losses at the beginning 
of the pandemic were therefore already re -
couped for the most part. Nonetheless, the 
number of persons in employment was still 
down by ½% compared with the beginning of 
2020. Employment subject to social security 
contributions presents a much more favourable 
picture. The core form of employment, which 
received massive support through the use of 
short- time work during the crisis, is now just 
over 1% higher than the high pre- crisis employ -
ment level. By contrast, exclusively low-  paid 
part- time employment plays a role as a flexibil -
ity reserve; it moved in line with the severity of 
the containment measures during the pan -
demic. The importance of its role also left a 
mark in wholesale and retail trade and the 
hotel and restaurant sector, which were par -
ticularly hard hit by the measures.
The share of employment shifted across the 
sectors during the crisis and these trends have 
also continued in the past few months. On an 
average of October and November, the IT sec -
tor, business- related services (excluding tem -
porary agency employment) and construction 
registered the largest increase in employment 
subject to social security contributions com -
pared with the previous quarter. The previous 
relatively strong recovery in the hotel and res -
taurant sector ground to a halt again with the 
Delta wave of the pandemic. A slight improve -
ment was observed in other services sectors. 
The number of employees in manufacturing re -
mained no more than stable, however. Tem -
porary agency employment, whose employees Distinct adverse 
effect on ser -
vices sector
Labour market 
recovery con -
tinued in Q4Employment up 
again signifi -
cantly in fourth 
quarter, jobs 
subject to social 
security contri -
butions well 
above pre- crisis 
levels
Jobs subject to 
social security 
contributions 
remain on 
upward trajec -
tory in several 
services sectorsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
50

are often deployed in industry, even declined 
somewhat.
Cyclical short- time working declined further up 
to November last year, albeit at a slower pace 
than in the third quarter. According to the ini -
tial estimate by the Federal Employment 
Agency, 574,000 persons were still in econom -
ically induced short- time work in November, al -
most one- tenth of the highest level in April 
2020. However, a slight increase may be ex -
pected again in the coming months due to the 
intensification of the pandemic. The number of 
persons named in notifications of short- time 
work rose in November, but an even greater in -
crease was noted in December and January. 
Nonetheless, registrations were down consid -
erably on the level seen during the second 
coronavirus wave last year. Wholesale and re -
tail trade and the hotel and restaurant sector 
were once again primarily affected.
Registered unemployment was also down sig -
nificantly. In the quarter under review, it de -
clined by 117,000 persons in seasonally ad -
justed terms, with the unemployment rate fall -
ing by 0.2 percentage point. In January 2022, 
the number of unemployed persons continued 
to drop to a new total of 2.34 million, or 5.1%, 
thus almost matching the low of the first quar -
ter of 2020 again. However, the pandemic has 
caused a rise in the share of unemployed per -
sons receiving the basic allowance for job seek -
ers or those who are long-  term unemployed. 
These persons have often not received any vo -
cational training and, in particular, face the 
threat of their labour market- related skills be -
coming worthless. This makes it more difficult 
for them to return to employment, even in 
view of the ongoing shortage of qualified per -
sonnel. On the other hand, the number of un -
employed persons claiming insurance benefits 
who are relatively easy to place is already lower 
than immediately before the outbreak of the 
pandemic.
Labour shortages returned to many industries 
with the recovery in the third and fourth quar -Short- time work -
ing scaled back 
further
Unemployment 
almost down to 
pre- crisis levelLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 22Jan.43.043.544.044.545.045.5
30.531.031.532.032.533.033.534.0–1,000–5000+500+1,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–600–400–2000+200+400+600Jan.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Jan.Million
Million
Million400600800Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployment
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies2EmployedJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Oct.-
Nov.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
51

ters of 2021. The situation was exacerbated by 
the impact of a negative age structure on la -
bour supply. This results from the demographic 
situation in Germany and has become increas -
ingly noticeable since 2020. It is also the main 
reason for the lower labour force participation 
rate. By contrast, only a few persons have with -
drawn from the labour market during the crisis 
due to “discouraged worker” effects. Immigra -
tion is also down on previous years, however. 
The sequencing of pandemic- induced closures 
and openings is clearly reflected in the monthly 
immigration statistics published by Germany’s 
Federal Statistical Office. Statistics for net mi -
gration to Germany recovered quickly with the 
easing of respective measures. In the second 
half of 2020 and the second half of 2021, the 
number of migrants was even higher than in 
the second half of 20192 but this was not 
enough to compensate for the low level of im -
migration in the first six months of both 2020 
and 2021. The labour force is currently mark -
edly smaller overall than before the pandemic.
The leading labour market indicators deterior -
ated over the past few months. The unemploy -
ment barometer of the Institute for Employ -
ment Research (IAB) is currently in neutral terri -
tory. This would suggest unemployment re -
maining at the current low level over the next 
few months, but not declining further. By con -
trast, the employment barometers of the ifo In -
stitute and the IAB show that the willingness of 
enterprises to recruit new staff is down only 
moderately. Overall, the expansionary recruit -
ment plans of enterprises continue to predom -
inate in the short term but there are fundamen -
tal signs of employment growth as well. The re -
ported number of vacancies subject to social 
security contributions has already been rising 
for one and a half years and is now higher than 
at the beginning of 2020. A very high number 
of job vacancies are being reported to the Fed -
eral Employment Agency. However, the va -
cancy period for open positions has likewise al -
ready returned to the record level seen before 
the crisis. This is consistent with the various re -
ports of labour shortages. Furthermore, a lack of personnel during the Omicron wave could 
distinctly curb the number of hours worked in 
the first quarter.
Wages and prices
Negotiated wages climbed more sharply in the 
fourth quarter of 2021 than in the third quar -
ter. Including additional benefits, they were up 
by 1.5% on the year in the fourth quarter, com -
pared with 1.0% in the previous quarter. In 
both quarters, these growth rates were, how -
ever, depressed by delays in paying out bo -
nuses and negative base effects as a result of 
high coronavirus bonuses a year earlier. Basic 
remuneration, which more accurately reflects 
the underlying momentum of developments in 
negotiated wages, rose slightly more strongly 
both in the third and fourth quarters, at 1.4% 
and 1.8% on the year, respectively. Actual earn -
ings are likely to have risen considerably more 
robustly than negotiated wage rates in line 
with the marked reduction in short- time work 
in the fourth quarter.
Looking at 2021 as a whole, negotiated wages 
rose significantly less, at just 1.5%, than in the 
year before. This was chiefly because the pan -
demic resulted in modest wage agreements. 
Actual earnings, meanwhile, rose a hefty 3.2% 
according to provisional calculations by the 
Federal Statistical Office, mainly as a result of 
the marked drop in short- term work. The wage 
drift was consequently well into positive terri -
tory again, at 1.6  percentage points, after a 
clear decline in 2020.
In the ongoing year, the rise in negotiated 
wage rates is still largely influenced by wage 
agreements concluded in previous years. At the Labour supply 
falls due to 
unfavourable 
age structure 
effect and lower 
levels of migra -
tion during 
pandemic 
Recruitment 
plans expan -
sionary in both 
short and 
medium termNegotiated 
wages rose 
more sharply in 
Q4 than in Q3; 
actual earnings 
probably 
climbed consid -
erably again
Wage drift well 
into positive ter -
ritory again in 
2021
2 5% more persons moved to Germany on balance in the 
second half of 2020 compared to one year earlier. It was 
55% fewer in the first half of the year, however. The de -
cline of just over one- third in the first half of 2021 com -
pared to the pre- crisis year was likewise considerable. Ac -
cording to statistics up to November 2021, on balance 
42% more persons have already moved to Germany than 
in the corresponding period of 2019.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
52

time the agreements were made, there was a 
great deal of uncertainty surrounding the eco -
nomic outlook, and inflation rates were low. 
The situation will likely be different in this year’s 
small wage round for roughly 8 million employ -
ees. However, the trade unions’ wage demands 
are currently only slightly higher than last year, 
at 5% to 6% for a period of 12 months. None -
theless, they could potentially be higher in the 
future. The German Mining, Chemical and En -
ergy Industries Union (IG BCE), for instance, has 
not yet specified its concrete wage demand for 
the chemical industry, but has indicated that it 
is aiming for a perceptible increase in real 
wages given high inflation rates and a high in -
flation outlook, amongst other factors. Later in 
the year, wage negotiations will take place, 
inter alia, in the insurance sector, in the printing 
industry, the steel industry, the private transport 
industry and, in the fourth quarter, in the metal 
and electrical engineering industry. The favour -
able macroeconomic outlook, increasing la -
bour market shortages and high inflation rates 
could then help bring about markedly higher 
wage agreements than in the recent past.
The general statutory minimum wage has 
stood at €9.82 per hour since 1 January 2022, 
and is set to increase to €10.45 per hour on 
1  July 2022. The Federal Labour Minister is 
aiming to lift it to €12 per hour from 1 October 
2022. This political intervention in the wage-  
setting process would raise pay distinctly in the 
lower wage brackets as well as having a marked 
impact on the wage brackets above, thus pre -
sumably increasing upward pressure on aggre -
gate wages. Looking at the historical relation -
ships, the macroeconomic effects will probably 
be manageable (see the box on pp. 54 f.). How -
ever, in the current environment of very high 
inflation rates, a potentially stronger pass-  
through of wages to prices cannot be ruled 
out.
Consumer price inflation continued to acceler -
ate in the final quarter of 2021. Between Octo -
ber and December, the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices (HICP) rose by an average of 1.2% on the quarter in seasonally adjusted 
terms. This compares with a gain of 1.0% in 
the third quarter. The higher inflation rate was 
chiefly due to energy prices, which increased 
even more sharply than before in line with 
crude oil prices. Growth in prices for food, ser -
vices and non- energy industrial goods re -
mained strong, but was slightly down on the 
previous quarter. The HICP rose very signifi -
cantly by 5.4% on the year, following 3.5% in 
the third quarter. Excluding energy and food, 
the inflation rate grew from 2.1% to 3.6%, thus 
also reaching its highest level since the euro 
area was established.
At 3.2%, average consumer price inflation for 
2021 increased very considerably on the year. 
One factor was that the base effect of the tem -
porary reduction in VAT rates in the second half 
of 2020 significantly increased inflation rates in 
the corresponding period of 2021.3 Another Small 2022 
wage round in 
an environment 
of high inflation 
rates
Planned increase 
of general min -
imum wage to 
€12 per hour 
raises pressure 
on aggregate 
wages
Inflation rate hit 
record level at 
end of 2021On an annual 
average, con -
sumer prices 
rose very con -
siderably in 
20212014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 20210.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
–+++++++Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Per-
centage
points
–4–20+2%
Wage drift1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 Wage drift 
is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual earn-
ings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
53

The macroeconomic impact of the planned increase 
in the general statutory minimum wage to €12 per hour
Under the coalition agreement, the general 
statutory minimum wage is set to be raised 
to €12 an hour. This increase, according to 
reports, is scheduled to take effect on 1 Oc-
tober 2022 and would be in addition to the 
regularly scheduled hike to €10.45 per hour 
with effect from 1 July 2022. It will occur 
outside the usual framework and without 
the involvement of the Minimum Wage 
Commission. Contrary to the provisions of 
Section 9(2) of the Minimum Wage Act 
(Mindestlohngesetz), it will probably not 
just track the past years’ aggregate negoti-
ated wage developments. This administra-
tive intervention in the wage structure is 
likely to lead to changes in hours worked, 
employment, labour force participation, 
and infl  ation and GDP trends. These im-
pacts can be quantifi  ed using the Bundes-
bank’s macroeconometric model. The start-
ing point here is the direct stimulus on 
wages of the minimum wage hike, calcu-
lated in a back- of- the- envelope manner.
Impacts on aggregate wage growth are 
caused primarily by changes in the wages 
of the directly affected employees and their 
spillover effects on the upstream wage 
brackets. The set of directly affected em-
ployees is broken down into three groups: 
full- time and part- time employees subject 
to social security contributions, and margin-
ally employed persons. In order to quantify 
the respective share of directly affected em-
ployees subject to social security contribu-
tions working either full- time or part- time in 
the fourth quarter of 2022, trends in effect-
ive wages are extrapolated up until then.1 
The share of directly affected marginally 
employed persons was kept unchanged in 
the calculations. The direct macroeconomic 
wage impact is composed of the directly af-fected employees’ share of the aggregate 
wage bill and their percentage pay rise. 
Under further assumptions regarding the 
wage distribution in the €10.45 to €12 per 
hour range at the time of the minimum 
wage hike, the direct impact on the wage 
level ends up being just over 0.4%.2 This is 
joined by knock- on effects on employees 
earning more than €12 per hour. According 
to econometric estimates, these effects 
amount to an additional 0.4%. Recourse 
was taken here to the results based on the 
introduction of the minimum wage in 
2015.3
On the whole, based on this back- of- the- 
envelope calculation, the minimum wage 
hike in autumn 2022 – excluding the im-
pact of possible further adjustment re-
sponses in the labour market – can be ex-
pected to push up the aggregate wage bill 
by 0.8%. This means that the planned min-
imum wage hike would have a somewhat 
weaker impact on the aggregate wage bill 
than the introduction of the minimum 
wage in 2015. Although the group of af-
fected employees is larger this time since 
1 Data on the number of persons for wage bins are 
available in the statistics of the Federal Employment 
Agency broken down by gross monthly earnings but 
not by hourly wages. At an hourly wage of €12, full- 
time employees would earn, in arithmetical terms, 
average gross wages of around €1,900 per month. For 
part- time employees subject to social security contri-
butions, the minimum wage threshold would rest at a 
gross monthly wage of around €1,000 in arithmetical 
terms. Civil servants were not incorporated into the 
calculations.
2 In this calculation, it is assumed that half of the dir-
ectly affected workers receive the minimum wage of 
€10.45 in force at that time immediately prior to the 
minimum wage hike in autumn 2022 and the wages 
of the other half are evenly distributed in the range be-
tween that fi  gure and €12.
3 See Hammer and Hertweck (2022). By assumption, 
the estimated knock- on effect is proportional to the 
wage impact among the directly affected employees.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
54

the minimum wage bites more deeply into 
the wage distribution, the average percent-
age increase in gross hourly wages will 
probably be smaller than in 2015.
In order to quantify the macroeconomic im-
pact of the minimum wage hikes, in simula-
tions run using the Bundesbank’s macro-
econometric model, gross hourly wages 
were increased by 0.8% relative to the 
baseline, starting in the fourth quarter of 
2022.4 Higher wage costs cause consumer 
prices to increase gradually. Annual average 
prices for 2024 are around one- and- a- half- 
tenths of one percent above the baseline.5 
After four years, they are likely to be around 
one- quarter percent higher.6 Another im-
pact of the wage hike is that households 
see an increase in their disposable income 
and step up their real consumer spending.7 
Following the minimum wage hike, there-
fore, real gross domestic product initially 
rises marginally above the baseline. Higher 
domestic production costs, on the other 
hand, dampen price competitiveness. Real 
exports consequently fall below their initial 
level. This thus makes up for the small posi-
tive impact of domestic demand on gross 
domestic product.
The macroeconomic impacts of the min-
imum wage hike are based on the esti-
mated elasticities of the macroeconometric 
model. Since the minimum wage hike was 
announced well in advance, the higher 
wage costs could be passed through to 
consumer prices more quickly than sug-
gested by the model elasticities. In the cur-
rent environment of higher infl  ation rates, 
fi  rms’ rising production costs could also be 
refl  ected in consumer prices more strongly 
than in the past.4 The size of the shock to gross hourly wages is de-
rived from the 0.8% wage bill effect described above. 
Hours worked remain, by assumption, initially un-
changed.
5 2024 represents the end of the horizon of the Bun-
desbank’s latest macroeconomic projections, which 
have been used as the baseline. See Deutsche Bundes-
bank (2021a).
6 The long- run elasticity of consumer prices to wage 
changes of around 0.3 also corresponds more or less 
to the results presented in Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2019).
7 Although, owing to the higher wage costs, fi  rms re-
duce their demand for labour to a certain degree, this 
only partly makes up for the aggregated income ef-
fects via higher hourly wages.Impact of raising the minimum wage 
to €12*
Deviation from the baseline (%)
Item 2023 2024
Gross wages and salaries 1 + 0.84 + 0.89
Total number of hours worked – 0.29 – 0.19
Real GDP + 0.02 – 0.01
HICP + 0.06 + 0.14
* Based on a simulation using the macroeconometric 
model and on an assumed increase in the minimum wage 
as of 1 October 2022. 1 Including endogenous feedback 
effects. Per hour worked.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
55

factor was that energy prices picked up sub -
stantially over the course of the year. Prices for 
non- energy industrial goods and services also 
accelerated unexpectedly sharply, especially 
from mid- year onwards. This was due to high 
price pressures in upstream stages of the sup -
ply chain resulting from pandemic- related sup -
ply bottlenecks, increased transport costs and 
higher commodity prices. Given the high de -
mand, this was passed through to consumers. 
This meant that the rate excluding energy and 
food also rose significantly (from 0.7% to 
2.2%). Overall, the rate of inflation in 2021 was 
above average, even excluding one-  off effects 
such as the VAT base effect. By contrast, the of -ficial consumer price statistics suggest that the 
increase in rents was similarly moderate as in 
the previous year, at 1.3% (for developments in 
housing prices in 2021, see the box on pp. 57 f.).
At the beginning of 2022, consumer price mo -
mentum picked up again substantially. Energy 
prices, in particular, rose strongly owing to con -
siderably higher prices for gas and electricity, 
though prices of other HICP components also 
continued to rise on a broad basis. In a year-  
on- year comparison, the inflation rate there -
fore declined only relatively little, from 5.7% in 
December to 5.1% in January, despite the elim -
ination of the VAT base effect.4 Core inflation, 
too, was still well above its long- term average 
in January, at 2.8%. In the coming months, in -
flationary pressures are likely to remain high, 
given the considerable price increases in up -
stream stages of the supply chain.
Order books and outlook
German economic output is likely to contract 
markedly again in the first quarter of 2022. This 
is due to the resurgence of the pandemic 
caused by the Omicron variant. In contrast to 
previous waves of the pandemic, the services 
sector is unlikely to be the only sector to see 
activity impaired by containment measures and 
behavioural adjustments. In fact, working 
hours lost due to the pandemic could also have 
a distinctly dampening effect on economic out -
put – in other sectors, too.5 Nevertheless, posi -
tive effects are expected from the industrial High price 
increases con -
tinued on a 
broad front in 
January
In the first quar -
ter of 2022, 
economic out -
put is likely to 
contract mark -
edly againExport pricesImport, export, producer and 
consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2295100105110115120125
95100105110115120125130
100105110115
20246
–+++Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Lin scale
Year-on-year change3Consumer prices2Producer prices1
%2015 = 100, log scale
95100105110115Import prices
Jan.Jan.
4 The Federal Statistical Office conducted its regular update 
of the HICP expenditure weights in January 2022. In view 
of the coronavirus pandemic, it again used more up- to- 
date data sources than usual (see Federal Statistical Office 
(2022)). Overall, the changes were more moderate than a 
year earlier (see Deutsche Bundesbank (2021c)). This was 
evident, inter alia, in a smaller difference between the 
January HICP rate and the national consumer price index 
(CPI), which is designed such that weights are not updated 
(January rate: 4.9%).
5 According to a flash poll conducted by the Association of 
German Chambers of Industry and Commerce (DIHK) 
among 370 firms, one in four firms recently reported suf -
fering from considerable staff shortages. See Association of 
German Chambers of Commerce and Industry (DIHK) 
(2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
56

Housing prices in Germany in 2021
Housing price growth accelerated consider-
ably last year, with housing in non- urban re-
gions, too, likely to have become signifi  -
cantly more expensive. Alongside the price 
effects of the persistently high demand for 
housing, the costs of materials for new 
housing rose substantially owing to delivery 
bottlenecks, amongst other factors. None-
theless, the housing supply grew strongly. 
Given weaker developments in some funda-
mentals, overvaluations in the housing mar-
ket rose during the reporting year.1
In Germany as a whole, residential real es-
tate prices rose by 11.3%, according to data 
provided by the Association of German 
Pfandbrief Banks (vdp). The housing price 
index of the Federal Statistical Offi   ce like-
wise rose strongly on an average of the fi  rst 
three quarters of 2021, at 10.6% over the 
same period a year earlier. Hypoport AG’s 
Europace house price index (EPX) likewise 
indicates strong rates of increase in housing 
prices in 2021, at 12.8%. All three indicators 
are thus showing the highest rate of price 
increase since the beginning of the recent 
upswing in the residential property market.
In 2021, housing prices in urban areas rose 
perceptibly. According to calculations based 
on bulwiengesa AG data for 127 German 
towns and cities, prices were up by 7%, 
thus picking up at a somewhat accelerated 
pace relative to the two previous years, in 
which growth rates had moderated. In the 
seven major cities, the rate of price increase 
was only slightly higher, at 7½%.2 Accord-
ing to vdp data, too, housing infl  ation 
picked up in the seven major cities, but was 
below that of Germany as a whole.
There was hardly any acceleration in the in-
crease in rents for new tenancies in the re-
porting year. Calculations based on bul-
wiengesa AG data indicate a 2½% rise in 
the price of rents for new tenancies in towns and cities. In the seven major cities, 
rents rose only marginally faster, at 2¾%. 
According to vdp data, rents for new let-
tings in Germany as a whole picked up 
somewhat more sharply than in the seven 
major cities.
The key determinants of demand in the 
housing market developed only moderately 
in the reporting year. Disposable income 
rose by a modest 1.8% after hardly rising at 
all in 2020. However, there are few signs of 
economic growth remaining permanently 
stunted by the pandemic, and the labour 
market has thus far rebounded quickly and 
strongly from the coronavirus crisis.3 The 
interest rate on mortgage loans averaged 
across all lock- in periods remained virtually 
unchanged at its all- time low of 1.3% in 
2021. Adjusted for longer- term infl  ation ex-
pectations, the interest rate dropped mar-
ginally, following two years in which it had 
already moved slightly into negative terri-
tory. Since income growth lagged behind 
property price rises and interest rates pro-
vided no meaningful relief, affordability de-
teriorated in light of the sharp rise in prices.4
Expansion of the housing supply made pro-
gress in the reporting year, though the pace 
was curbed by pandemic- induced bottle-
necks in deliveries of intermediate goods. 
Shortages of commodities and building ma-
terials drove up the costs of materials for 
1 This box deals with residential property price devel-
opments in the context of the real economy. For more 
on the fi  nancial stability aspects of residential real es-
tate fi  nancing, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2021d).
2 The seven major cities are Berlin, Cologne, Düssel-
dorf, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, Munich and Stutt-
gart.
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021e).
4 See the Bundesbank’s system of indicators for the 
German residential property market, which is available 
at https://www.bundesbank.de/en/statistics/sets-of- 
indicators/system-of-indicators-for-the-german- 
residential-property-market/system-of-indicators-for- 
the-german-residential-property-market-795268Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
57

construction work by a massive 13.4% in 
the third quarter of 2021 as compared to 
the same period a year earlier. Calculated 
excluding value added tax (VAT), construc-
tion prices in the reporting year rose at a 
highly accelerated rate of 7.7%.5 Despite 
the bottlenecks in the construction sector, 
the additional supply is likely to reach the 
previous year’s number of building comple-
tions, when just under 310,000 housing 
units were added. At an estimated 380,000, 
the number of construction permits was 
higher than a year earlier.
Housing price overvaluations increased in 
the reporting year. Owing to the, in some 
cases, still uncertain longer- term impacts of 
the pandemic – such as on disposable in-
comes – and looking at the exceptionally 
strong rises in construction prices, assessing 
housing prices is currently fraught with a 
particularly great degree of uncertainty. Ac-
cording to current estimates, in 2021 real 
estate prices in urban areas were between 
15% and 40% above the level suggested by 
the socio- demographic and economic fun-
damentals.6 In the reporting year, the price- 
rent ratio for housing units in towns and 
cities was just over 30% above its longer- 
term mean, and in the seven major cities, 
around 40% above its longer- term mean. 
According to evaluations of the indicators 
that are currently available for the reporting 
year, price deviations were up considerably 
for Germany as a whole, too. Both in terms 
of the price- income ratio and according to 
estimation results for the long- run relation-
ship between real estate prices, incomes 
and interest rates, housing prices in Ger-
many stood at between 20% and 35% 
above the benchmark.7Price indices for housing
1 Weighted by transaction. Bundesbank calculations based on 
price  data  provided  by  bulwiengesa  AG.  2 Berlin,  Cologne, 
Düsseldorf, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, Munich and Stutt-
gart.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 212010 = 100, annual data, log scale
95100110120130140150160170180190200210220230240
95100110120130 130140150160170180190
95100110120130140150160 160170180190200210220
95100110120130140150160170180190
Destatis house price indexHypoport AG composite indexvdp price index for
owner-occupied housingDeutsche Bundesbank1
Quarterlyof which:
7 major cities2Total
127 towns and cities
5 Including the VAT hike in January 2021, construction 
prices rose by 9.1% in the reporting year.
6 For an explanation of the underlying panel estima-
tion approach used, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2020a).
7 For an explanation of the valuation approaches 
used, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
58

sector. Here there are signs of a further easing 
of supply bottlenecks, and demand for indus -
trial products remains high. The percentage of 
manufacturing firms to see output curtailed by 
delivery bottlenecks according to ifo Institute 
surveys declined distinctly in January. Manufac -
turing firms also had markedly higher produc -
tion plans and export expectations than in the 
fourth quarter of 2021.
The ifo business climate index picked up again 
somewhat in January, for the first time since 
mid- 2021. Business expectations even im -
proved significantly in most sectors. They fell 
short of the average for the fourth quarter only 
in the main construction industry. By contrast, 
businesses took a worse overall view of the 
current business situation than a quarter earlier, 
with only manufacturing bucking this trend. 
The main reason for the muted assessment of 
the situation in the services sector and in 
wholesale and retail trade is likely to be the rise 
in infection rates as a result of the Omicron 
wave. In manufacturing, meanwhile, a let- up in 
disruptions to supply chains is likely to have 
had a positive impact.
Industrial orders fell steeply on the quarter in 
the fourth quarter of 2021, mainly because 
relatively few large orders were received. Ex -
cluding large orders, however, demand rose 
slightly. Broken down by sector, the volume of 
orders received by manufacturers of capital 
goods dropped steeply. Demand for motor ve -
hicles and motor vehicle parts rose markedly, 
however. Orders of intermediate goods fell 
slightly. By contrast, new orders received by 
producers of consumer goods rose sharply. 
Broken down by region, demand from non-  
euro area countries fell significantly. Domestic 
orders dropped slightly. The inflow of orders 
from the euro area picked up slightly. Despite 
the decline, industrial orders were still consider -
ably higher than the pre- crisis level measured in 
the fourth quarter of 2019. Especially when 
compared with industrial output, which is still 
well below its pre- crisis level, demand for Ger -
man industrial goods remains high. The reach Sentiment 
among busi -
nesses recently 
improved again 
for the first time 
in some time
Industrial orders 
down due to a 
lack of large 
orders but still 
at a high levelDemand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 202165708090100110120
–30–20–100+10+20+30+40+50
65708090100110120130
120
65708090100110
90100110120130140
–100+10+20Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data
DomesticInternationalLog scale
of which:Log scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Main construction orders
%%Total
MonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
59

of the order books in manufacturing marked a 
new record high in January 2022, according to 
ifo Institute survey results.
The construction industry was likely still operat -
ing at its capacity limit at the beginning of the 
year. New orders in the main construction in -
dustry were down significantly in October and 
November – the latest months for which fig -
ures are available – compared with the strong 
third quarter. Whilst incoming orders in public 
building construction rose smartly, orders fell 
substantially in commercial building construc -
tion and in housing construction. Incoming 
orders in the civil engineering industry rose 
somewhat. Building permits also declined 
somewhat from a high level. Nonetheless, the 
reach of the order books in the main construc -
tion industry attained a new high in January, 
according to ifo Institute survey data. Utilisa -
tion of equipment and machinery increased 
further and was consequently even further 
above its long- term average. The percentage of 
enterprises whose construction activity was 
hampered by a lack of staff or materials de -
clined of late, but was still very high in a long- 
term comparison.Household final consumption expenditure is 
likely to fall again in the first quarter. Private 
owners registered considerably more vehicles 
in January than in the fourth quarter. Nonethe -
less, consumer sentiment remained depressed 
during the reporting period, according to the 
results of a GfK survey. Consumption of high-  
contact services continues to be dampened by 
the pandemic. The high rates of price increase 
are also likely to be weighing on private con -
sumption.
In light of very strong demand, the German 
economy is likely to rebound robustly in the 
second quarter, provided the pandemic sub -
sides and supply bottlenecks continue to ease. 
Therefore, the economic outlook appears only 
marginally less favourable from today’s per -
spective than anticipated in the December 
2021 projections despite the heightened bur -
dens as a result of the pandemic and the high 
inflation rate.6 While GDP growth is likely to be 
markedly lower in 2022, the fundamental up -
ward trajectory of the German economy is not 
in doubt.Construction 
industry remains 
at capacity limitPandemic con -
tinues to weigh 
on private con -
sumption in the 
first quarter
GDP likely to 
pick up sharply 
again in the 
second quarter, 
fundamental 
upward trajec -
tory of the Ger -
man economy 
as described in 
the December 
projection not 
in doubt
List of references
Association of German Chambers of Commerce and Industry (DIHK) (2022), Immer mehr Unter -
nehmen erwarten im Februar personelle Engpässe , report of 5 February 2022, https://www.dihk.
de/de/immer-mehr-unternehmen-erwarten-im-februar-personelle-engpaesse-65144 , accessed on 
8 February 2022.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), Outlook for the German economy for 2022 to 2024, Monthly 
Report , December 2021, pp. 17-43.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), The German economy, Monthly Report, November 2021, pp. 51-62.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021c), One- off effects relating to COVID-  19 in the HICP in 2021, Monthly 
Report, February 2021, pp. 63-66.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021d), Situation in the household sector, Financial Stability Review 2021, 
November 2021, pp. 29-35.6 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
60

Deutsche Bundesbank (2021e), Pandemic- induced damage to German potential output moderate 
so far, Monthly Report, December 2021, pp. 30-32.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), Two models for estimating residential property prices in Germany, 
Monthly Report, October 2020, pp. 73-74.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b) The protracted rise in residential property prices in Germany from 
a macroeconomic perspective: transmission channels and fundamental determinants, Monthly 
Report , October 2020, pp. 67-85.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), Transmission of wage changes to prices in the Bundesbank’s macro-
econometric model, Monthly Report, September 2019, pp. 19-22.
Federal Statistical Office (2022), Ableitung des HVPI-  Wägungsschemas für das Jahr 2022 (Preis -
basis Dezember 2021),  method report of 31 January 2022, https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/
Wirtschaft/Preise/Verbraucherpreisindex/Methoden/Downloads/hvpi-gewichtung.html
Hammer, L. and M. S. Hertweck (2022), EU Enlargement and (Temporary) Migration: Effects on 
Labour  Market Outcomes in Germany, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper No 02/ 2022.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
61

Public finances*
General government budget
Last year, government finances continued to 
make a considerable contribution to support -
ing the economy during the coronavirus crisis. 
This was reflected primarily in high expend -
iture. The transfers to enterprises to compen -
sate for lost revenue were especially sizeable, 
followed by wage replacement benefits (mainly 
short-  time working benefits). Money was also 
spent on health protection, notably on corona -
virus testing and vaccinations. Looking at gov -ernment revenue, VAT measures, in particular, 
continued to play a role. On the whole, how -
ever, revenue recovered well, with taxes even 
surpassing the level that had been expected for 
2021 prior to the crisis, after factoring out le -
gislative changes implemented in the mean -
time. According to initial data, the deficit 
amounted to 4.3% of gross domestic product 
(GDP), meaning there was no year- on- year 
change (see the box on pp. 63 ff.). More recent 
data, including on tax revenue, suggest that 
the deficit is ultimately likely to have been 
markedly lower in 2021.
The deficit looks set to shrink considerably this 
year. The reason for this is that, in the absence 
of any more unpleasant surprises, the economy 
should continue to recover following a setback 
in the fourth quarter of 2021 and first quarter 
of 2022. Government assistance in response to 
the coronavirus crisis and the automatic stabil -
isers will therefore probably put significantly 
less pressure on the budget compared with 
2021. What remains unclear is the extent to 
which new government measures will already 
impact the budget in 2022. As things currently 
stand, additional expenditure is likely to be 
limited.
Based on current assessments, the government 
budget will weather the coronavirus crisis well. 
While deficits were high for a time, these pri -
marily reflected the automatic effects of the 
economic downturn on the budget as well as 
the temporary coronavirus response measures. 
Disregarding these temporary effects, i.e. in 
structural terms, there are signs that the deficit Government 
finances pro -
vided strong 
support to econ -
omy in 2021, 
too; large deficit 
again
Lower deficit in 
2022 due to 
economic recov -
ery and expiring 
coronavirus 
response 
measures 
Government 
budget looks set 
to weather crisis 
wellGeneral government fiscal ratios and 
main components affecting 
developments *
* General government budget as defined in the national ac-
counts.  1 For  information  on  the  breakdown,  see  pp. 63 ff. 
2 Change in the ratio to trend GDP. 3 In 2020, these largely 
concern the fiscal policy measures implemented in response to 
the coronavirus crisis.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 20214446485052
–4–20+2Revenue
ExpenditureExpenditure
Fiscal balance
Year-on-year change in the ratio to GDP 
in percentage points1
20246
–+++
–6–4–20+2Fiscal balanceCyclical component
Temporary effects2,3
Other2
TotalAs a percentage of GDP
* The section entitled “General government budget” relates  
to data from the national accounts and the Maastricht 
debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed reporting on 
budgetary developments (government finance statistics). 
No data are yet available for local government or the statu -
tory health and public long- term care insurance schemes 
for the reporting quarter. These will be analysed in the 
short commentaries in upcoming issues of the Monthly 
Report. Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
62

German government budget still heavily shaped 
by coronavirus pandemic in 2021*
The German government budget closed 
with another high defi  cit in 2021. According 
to fi  rst reports, that defi  cit amounted to 
4.3% of gross domestic product (GDP) – as 
in 2020. This box will separate temporary in-
fl  uences (for the most part due to the 
coronavirus crisis) from structural develop-
ments. A large portion of the data is still esti-
mated and liable to revision due to elevated 
uncertainty in the coronavirus crisis.1 It is un-
likely that this will make for any substantive 
changes in the overall picture, however.
High defi  cit due to temporary encum-
brances during coronavirus crisis
The underutilisation of macroeconomic pro-
duction factors was one element contribut-
ing to the government defi  cit. Domestic 
constraints relating to coronavirus as well as 
supply bottlenecks affecting intermediate 
goods and raw materials persisted. Through 
the automatic stabilisers, this resulted in an 
estimated cyclical burden amounting to 
1¼% of GDP , which was the same as the 
previous year.Temporary coronavirus response measures 
and other special temporary effects also 
had an impact, exerting a distinctly higher 
strain than last year, amounting to 3¼% of 
GDP .
Quantitatively speaking, support measures 
for enterprises accounted for the biggest 
dent, with bridging aid schemes playing by 
far the greatest role. This was aid for which 
enterprises of a slightly larger nature that 
had suffered severe declines in sales were 
also eligible to apply. Alongside this, the 
Federal Employment Agency alleviated 
some of the burden on fi  rms by continuing 
to assume responsibility for payment of so-
cial security contributions in the event of 
short- time work.2 The government also off-
set some of the losses sustained by passen-
* See Deutsche Bundesbank (2006) for notes on the 
analytical approach used here. The analysis refers to 
data from the national accounts.
1 Revisions to the fi  rst round of national accounts fi  g-
ures are expected for taxes, for instance: cash infl  ows 
from tax revenue in 2021 are signifi  cantly higher than 
expected in November 2021’s offi   cial tax estimate. The 
November estimate is usually based on the fi  rst na-
tional accounts fi  gures. Another point is that estimat-
ing the structural values necessarily involves making as-
sumptions about how the economy will develop, an 
exercise made considerably more diffi   cult by the 
coronavirus crisis. Furthermore, it is not possible to 
precisely pinpoint all of the temporary coronavirus re-
sponse measures and effects.
2 Expenditure on short- time working benefi  ts is largely 
included in the category of cyclical infl  uences (similarly 
to employment benefi  t I). By contrast, relief for enter-
prises from having to pay social security contributions 
for short- time workers is counted as part of the special 
temporary coronavirus response measures.Temporary coronavirus response 
measures*
* Bundesbank  estimates.  Transfers  to  enterprises  and  private 
households comprise all measures that provide comprehensive 
relief and do not entail any repayment obligation. 1 Special tax 
rules that shift enterprises' tax payments along the time axis.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021–0.30+0.3+0.6+0.9+1.2+1.5+1.8+2.1+2.4+2.7+3.0+3.3As a percentage of GDP
Reduction in VAT 
ratesSpending on 
health protection
Transfers 
to enterprises
Liquidity assistance 
for enterprises1Transfers to
private householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
63

ger transport companies. In addition, VAT 
on restaurant meals remained at its reduced 
rate. There was a material increase in 
healthcare spending on measures to pro-
tect against coronavirus, most notably vac-
cinations and testing. Spending on personal 
protective equipment and medicines also 
continued. Central government again made 
compensation payments to hospitals for 
keeping beds unoccupied, though these 
were somewhat lower than they had been 
in the previous year. In terms of the pan-
demic, private households received support 
primarily in the form of compensation for 
loss of earnings related to the virus but not 
directly due to illness; they were also aided 
through provision of a bonus child benefi  t 
payment, one- off payments for recipients 
of the basic allowance and increased bene-
fi  ts from the Federal Employment Agency.Independent of the coronavirus crisis, other 
transitory effects weighed on the govern-
ment budget. These included compensa-
tion to energy companies related to the 
move away from nuclear power (just under 
0.1% of GDP). In addition, the Federal Con-
stitutional Court ruled the application of the 
established high rate of interest on tax 
debts from 2018 onwards to be unconstitu-
tional. The government is now required to 
repay any overpayments.3Structural development of the government budget*
Year-on-year change in the ratio to trend GDP in percentage points
Item 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021Pre-
COVID: 
2019 in 
 relation 
to 2013COVID: 
2021 in 
 relation 
to 2019
 1Unadjusted fi  scal balance 1 0.5 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.6 – 0.4 – 5.8 0.0 1.4 – 5.8
 2 Cyclical component 1 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.3 0.4 – 0.1 – 2.2 0.0 1.2 – 2.2
 3 Special temporary effects 1 – 0.1 0.1 0.0 – 0.3 0.2 0.1 – 2.7 – 0.7 0.0 – 3.4
 4Fiscal balance 0.6 0.1 – 0.2 0.1 0.1 – 0.5 – 0.8 0.6 0.2 – 0.2
 5Interest payable – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 0.0 – 1.0 – 0.2
 6Primary balance 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.4 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.7 – 1.0 0.6 – 0.8 – 0.4
 7Revenue 0.2 0.1 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.1 – 0.2 0.8 1.5 0.6
 8 Taxes and social contributions 0.0 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.7 1.5 0.8
 9 Fiscal drag 2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.6 0.2
10 Decoupling of macroeco-
nomic reference variables 
from GDP 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0
11 Legislative changes 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.5
12 Residual – 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.9 1.1 1.1
13 Other revenue 3 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.2 0.0 – 0.2 0.1 0.0 – 0.2
14Primary expenditure – 0.2 0.2 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.8 0.9 0.2 2.3 1.1
15 Social payments 0.0 0.3 0.4 0.3 – 0.1 0.3 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 0.1
16 Subsidies 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.5
17 Compensation of employees 0.0 – 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 – 0.1 0.2 0.0
18 Intermediate consumption 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 – 0.1 0.4 0.1
19 Gross fi  xed capital formation – 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 0.3 0.0
20 Other expenditure 4 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.5
* The structural fi  gures are derived by adjusting for cyclical infl  uences and special temporary effects. 1 Change in the ratio to 
GDP compared with previous year. 2 The term “fi  scal drag” encompasses the positive revenue effect of bracket creep in income 
taxation and the negative impact of the fact that specifi  c excise duties are largely independent of prices. 3 Other current trans-
fers receivable, sales and total capital revenue. 4 Other current transfers payable, other net acquisitions of non- fi  nancial assets 
and capital transfers payable.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3 Payments on the basis of court rulings of this kind 
are recorded in the national accounts as government 
capital transfers. They increase the defi  cit as soon as 
the decision enters into legal force and it is possible to 
gauge the reimbursements.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
64

Moderate improvement in structural 
balance
The structural balance is obtained by de-
ducting the cyclical and temporary infl  u-
ences described above from the unadjusted 
balance. Overall, there was a moderate im-
provement in the structural situation of 
government fi  nances compared to the pre-
vious year, amounting to ½% of GDP (see 
the table on p. 64, item 4).4
The improvement was chiefl  y attributable 
to robust growth in the tax ratio. Profi  t- 
related taxes and VAT both increased 
strongly, their growth signifi  cantly outstrip-
ping trend growth in the macroeconomic 
reference variables (see item 12). Counter-
vailing tax cuts, such as the partial abolition 
of the solidarity surcharge, were more than 
offset. Furthermore, additional contribution 
rates to health insurance institutions rose, 
which pushed up the social security contri-
butions ratio slightly. Further revenues came 
from the national carbon pricing regime. 
These are recorded in the national accounts 
as taxes. Grants from the EU’s NextGenera-
tionEU programme increased the ratio for 
other revenue (see item 13).
On the expenditure side, the structurally 
higher revenues came up against increased 
expenditure on climate action in particular. 
This pushed up the ratios for subsidies (see 
item 16) and other expenditure (see item 
20) in particular. The investment ratio de-
creased slightly, meanwhile (see item 19). 
Supply and implementation bottlenecks 
likely played a part here. It is also possible 
that local governments held back on invest-
ment due to uncertainty surrounding the 
budgetary outlook. Overall, the structural 
expenditure ratio held more or less steady 
around the level of the previous year.Government budget broadly balanced 
in structural terms
The current assessment is that, in structural 
terms, the government budget closed 2021 
broadly in balance. The unadjusted defi  cit is 
explained, for the most part, by the under-
utilisation of aggregate capacity and the 
temporary coronavirus response measures. 
The structural balance ratio was barely 
changed against the pre- crisis year of 2019, 
though both the structural revenue ratio 
and structural expenditure ratio rose sub-
stantially.
The increase in the structural revenue ratio 
was in large part driven by the tax ratio. 
Despite hefty tax cuts, this was already back 
up above its 2019 pre- crisis level, exhibiting 
stronger growth than can be explained by 
legislative changes, the effects of tax pro-
gression and macroeconomic develop-
ments. It is hard to predict how permanent 
these increased receipts will prove against 
the backdrop of the determinants discussed 
– even if taxes are likely to work out even 
higher in the national accounts on the back 
of favourable developments at the end of 
the year. There is therefore a certain risk of 
drawing too optimistic an assessment of 
the structural situation of public fi  nances at 
present.
4 When comparing with fi  gures from the Federal Gov-
ernment or the European Commission, it is important 
to note that the temporary coronavirus response 
measures are part of the structural balance in those 
cases. This means there can be signifi  cant differences 
between the levels and changes seen there.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
65

will be no more than moderate this year. This is 
a deterioration compared with the pre- crisis 
year of 2019, when a moderate structural sur -
plus was recorded. Compared with 2019, ex -
penditure on pensions, healthcare, long- term 
care and transfers to finance climate action will 
increase significantly. On the revenue side, le -
gislative changes will put pressure on the gov -
ernment budget. For example, the solidarity 
surcharge was partially abolished in 2021. But 
the overall uncertainty stemming from the crisis 
also extends to the structural situation for 
govern ment finances. In particular, projecting 
trends in tax developments is difficult in a crisis 
setting. Such developments depend not least 
on the extent to which the pandemic causes 
lasting harm to potential output. Based on cur -
rent assessments, however, the damage to po -
tential output is so far moderate at most.1
The pandemic is also having a major bearing 
on the debt ratio: standing at 59% in 2019, it is 
likely to have increased to around 70% by the 
end of 2021. From 2022 onwards, however, it 
stands to reason that the ratio will shrink back 
down on account of a return to lower deficits 
and nominal GDP growth in the denominator. 
Furthermore, the debt effects of the corona -
virus crisis not reflected in the deficit will prob -
ably decrease. Specifically, it is likely that debt- 
financed assistance loans, equity injections and 
higher cash reserves will be repaid or scaled 
back.
It goes without saying that future fiscal devel -
opments will depend in part on how the gov -
erning coalition at the Federal level implements 
its plans. One significant factor in how govern -
ment finances develop will be how the coali -
tion applies the debt brake. If sound govern -
ment finances are to be assured, fiscal rules 
need to be used to reliably keep government 
deficits in check. To this end, spending needs 
to be prioritised and, if necessary, revenue 
needs to be raised. The latest decisions on the 
central government budget have put off these 
decisions and are ultimately aimed at debt 
financing on a larger scale. To wit, emergency loans taken out in 2020 and 2021 and not 
needed are to be used to finance future gov -
ernment projects after the pandemic emer -
gency has ended. All in all, the way the debt 
brake is being used does not appear to be in 
the spirit of its intention (for more details, see 
pp. 70 ff.). Its binding effect could be adversely 
affected. There may be arguments for modify -
ing the debt brake’s design. Indeed, moderate 
deficits certainly pose no threat to the sound -
ness of government finances, and the require -
ments of the debt brake are also sometimes 
stricter than what is prescribed under the EU 
budget rules. If a new design were to take 
account  of these factors, a transparent and 
stability- oriented reform of the debt brake 
would be the more suitable path to take.
In the interest of a stable monetary union, too, 
it is important to safeguard sound government 
finances. This means that effective fiscal rules 
are also important at the European level. They 
need to have the effect of reliably lowering 
high debt ratios. While the European rules set 
appropriate limits for fiscal policy in principle, 
they often fail to fulfil their task as they are fre -
quently applied overly flexibly and the rules 
often appear to be subject to political negoti -
ations. This means there is certainly room for 
improvement here. In particular, the quantita -
tive requirements for the medium- term budget -
ary objective should be clearer and more bind -
ing. Even then, it would still be possible to have 
a fiscal policy that is both future- oriented and 
more heavily geared towards stabilisation. Im -
provements in this regard would include, for 
example, national bad weather funds that are 
built up when times are good and a capped 
golden rule that protects government invest -
ment expenditure to an extent that it is consist -
ent with stability.2Debt ratio up 
significantly for 
a time
Do not under -
mine debt brake 
with excessive 
flexibilityDebate on 
reforming Euro -
pean fiscal rules
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a).
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
66

Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Year- on- year growth in tax revenue3 was strong 
in 2021, at 11½% (see the adjacent chart and 
the table on p. 68). It therefore already man -
aged to surpass its pre- crisis level from 2019, by 
3½%. While tax revenue still fell short (-2%, or 
-€16 billion) of the level projected in the last 
pre- COVID-  19 estimate for 2021, this is due to 
legislative changes implemented in the mean -
time that led to lower tax revenue. Some of 
these were support measures adopted in re -
sponse to the coronavirus crisis. That said, 
measures that were not connected to the 
coronavirus response also had a major impact 
(e.g. lowering the solidarity surcharge and in -
come tax). Adjusted for all legislative changes 
implemented in the intervening period, tax rev -
enue was 3% higher than estimated prior to 
the pandemic for 2021.
Revenue was considerably higher than pro -
jected in the official tax estimate of November 
2021 (+€16 billion, or a revision of +2½ per -
centage points in the rate of change). Profit-  
related taxes, in particular, surprised on the up -
side. The more favourable level is likely to have 
an impact in later years, too, at least to some 
extent. However, uncertainty is very high, espe -
cially given the crisis setting.
Profit- related taxes saw steep year- on- year 
growth (+36%). They thus accounted for half 
of the increase in total revenue, despite their 
share in revenue only amounting to around 
one- fifth. In 2020, however, profit- related taxes 
had also decreased at an above average rate. 
Multiple factors are likely to have been respon -
sible for the steep growth. First, corporate 
profits jumped back up sharply.4 Second, a role 
may have been played by the fact that enter -
prises could immediately offset expected losses 
from 2020 against profits from 2019 up to an 
upper limit. The tax loss carryforwards for 2021 were thus lower than they might otherwise 
have been. Third, there were additional pay -
ments and fewer refunds for 2020. Ultimately, 
profit performance seems to have been more 
favourable than initially expected.
VAT also made a considerable contribution to 
the rise in revenue. Growth in the nominal 
macroeconomic reference variables of private 
consumption, residential investment and gov -
ernment consumption was dynamic. In add -
ition, the majority of tax payments deferred in 
2020 are now likely to have been made. Legis -
lative changes continued to cause large short -
falls, in all probability on a similar scale to those 
of the previous year.5
Wage tax rose by 4½%. Revenue growth was 
curbed due to the basic income tax allowance 
and child tax allowance being raised and the 
other income tax brackets being shifted to the Tax revenue 
recovered to 
large extent in 
2021 from 
slump caused 
by pandemic
November tax 
estimate signifi -
cantly exceeded 
– profit- related 
taxes better 
than expected
Revenue 
rebound driven 
primarily by 
profit- related 
taxes and …… VATTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Comprises joint taxes as 
well as central government taxes and state government taxes. 
Including EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs 
duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021201510505101520
––––++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figures
3 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the year.
4 The fact that, according to initial figures, non- financial 
groups’ return on sales recovered well in 2021 is one indi -
cation of strong corporate profits. See Deutsche Bundes -
bank (2021c), p. 57.
5 The financial impact of the temporary VAT cut in the 
second half of 2020 also made itself felt in January and 
February 2021. This is due to enterprises paying VAT with a 
lag of two months in most cases. The collection of import 
VAT was also deferred by six weeks in January 2021. In 
addition, the VAT rate cut on restaurant meals still applies.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
67

right. Legislators have been shifting the income 
tax scale on a regular basis since 2014. The 
idea behind this is to prevent progressive tax -
ation from increasing as taxpayers move into 
higher tax brackets due to inflation. In the ab -
sence of such adjustments, taxation of real in -
come would continually rise in line with infla -
tion. When the scale is shifted gradually to the 
right, the individual tax rates that it contains 
then apply as of ever higher (nominal) income 
brackets. Shifts in the income tax scale are 
based on estimated inflation rates. Inflation 
was unexpectedly high in 2021, and the bracket 
creep in 2021 will therefore be offset to only a 
relatively minor extent. However, the reverse 
had generally been the case in previous years. 
In 2018, 2019 and 2020, in particular, inflation 
turned out to be markedly lower than pro -
jected. Overall, the shifts in the scale since 2014 
have been high enough to prevent bracket 
creep.The latest official tax estimate of November 
2021 assumes favourable revenue prospects for 
2022 and beyond.6 In view of last year’s highly 
favourable result, it stands to reason that the 
tax estimate will be even higher, with at least a 
portion of the additional revenue probably 
being carried forward as a base effect. How -
ever, revenue- reducing legislative changes that 
had not yet been taken into account in the tax 
estimate are looming on the horizon. For ex -
ample, the Federal Government held out the 
prospect of continuing to compensate for add -
itional, inflation- related burdens stemming 
from bracket creep. In addition, the change -
over to deferred taxation of pensions is to be 
adjusted, a move made necessary following a 
ruling by the Federal Fiscal Court. There appear 
to be plans for contributions to the pension in -
surance scheme to be fully deductible as spe -Wage tax made 
moderate contri -
bution to 
growth; bracket 
creep since 2014 
offset overall2022 and later 
years: tax out -
look favourable 
overall, but relief 
measures likely 
to curb growth 
slightlyTax revenue
 
Type of taxYear as a wholeEstimate 
for 2021 1Q4
2020 2021 2020 2021
€ billionYear- on- year changeYear- on- 
year 
change % € billionYear- on- year change
€ billion % € billion %
Tax revenue, total 2 682.4 761.0 + 78.6 + 11.5 +  9.1 186.3 219.8 + 33.5 + 18.0
of which:
Wage tax 3 209.3 218.4 +  9.1 +  4.4 +  4.1 57.7 62.9 +  5.2 +  9.1
Profi  t- related taxes 111.5 151.9 + 40.4 + 36.2 + 27.0 31.4 45.9 + 14.5 + 46.0
Assessed income tax 4 59.0 72.3 + 13.4 + 22.7 + 17.5 16.1 22.2 +  6.1 + 37.5
Corporation tax 5 24.3 42.1 + 17.9 + 73.6 + 60.3 8.0 13.2 +  5.2 + 64.8
Non- assessed taxes 
on earnings 21.5 27.4 +  5.9 + 27.4 + 11.4 5.6 7.9 +  2.3 + 40.4
Withholding tax on 
interest income and 
capital gains 6.8 10.0 +  3.3 + 48.3 + 40.5 1.6 2.6 +  0.9 + 56.6
VAT6 219.5 250.8 + 31.3 + 14.3 + 12.3 55.3 68.8 + 13.5 + 24.4
Other consumption- 
related taxes 7 90.1 90.6 +  0.5 +  0.6 +  0.1 27.3 27.8 +  0.4 +  1.5
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates and Bundesbank calculations. 1  According to offi   cial tax 
estimate of November 2021. 2 Comprises joint taxes as well as central government taxes and state government taxes. Including EU shares 
in German tax revenue, including customs duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Child benefi  ts and subsidies for 
supplementary private pension plans deducted from revenue. 4 Employee refunds and research grants deducted from revenue. 5 Re-
search grants deducted from revenue. 6 VAT and import VAT. 7 Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, 
air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lottery, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6 For more details on the official tax estimate, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2021d), pp. 65ff., which also includes a com -
parison with the November 2019 estimate.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
68

cial expenses from next year already (instead of 
from 2025). From 2023, the taxable share of 
pensions upon retirement is also set to increase 
more slowly than currently planned.7 In the 
period covered by the tax estimate, the annual 
tax shortfalls from this package are expected to 
make themselves felt in 2023 especially, before 
decreasing again. In addition, various corona -
virus support measures are to be extended. 
One major factor contributing to the shortfalls 
is that firms will be able to accelerate their 
write- offs of capital equipment for a longer 
period – this will then also be possible for the 
2022 acquisition year. Furthermore, the coali -
tion agreement sets out accelerated write- off 
provisions for investments in climate and infor -
mation technology. The resulting loss of rev -
enue will depend on what form these provi -
sions take. Risks exist in connection with the 
solidarity surcharge: there are questions as to 
whether it is still sufficiently justified given that 
special- purpose grants to the eastern German 
states have since been discontinued.
Central government budget
The central government budget recorded a 
very large deficit in the second pandemic year 
of 2021. Provisional figures from the Federal 
Ministry of Finance put it at €216 billion (2020: 
€131 billion). Thanks to higher tax receipts, rev -
enue returned to steep growth, rising by 8½% 
(+€29 billion). However, expenditure rose far 
more sharply still, by 24% (+€114 billion). Trans -
fers to central government’s off- budget entities 
alone increased by €48 billion, with inflows 
into the new Flood Relief Fund (€16 billion) and 
the Energy and Climate Fund (€62 billion, and 
thus €35 billion more than in 2020). Grants 
from central government to the social security 
funds went up by €38 billion. For example, 
central government provided significantly 
greater compensation for pandemic- related 
healthcare spending. Transfers to the Federal 
Employment Agency were slightly higher still 
(+€17 billion; see the box on pp. 73f.). Transfers 
to enterprises in response to the coronavirus pandemic increased by €30 billion and reached 
€49 billion. Since the application and approval 
processes take a certain amount of time, this 
figure also included extensive aid to compen -
sate for lost revenue in the previous year. Inso -
far as the federal states involved settled already 
foreseeable payments at the end of 2021, it 
also reflects burdens from the current year.8 
Interest expenditure saw a renewed decrease, 
by €2½ billion. Sizeable premia were again col -
lected, which are deducted from the interest 2021 budget 
result: deficit up 
even more and 
very large due 
to coronavirus 
pandemic and 
pre-funding 
of off- budget 
entitiesCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fe-
deral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-
fects. 
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410050050
––+
–250–200–150–100–500+50
2019
20212019Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20202020€ billion
2021
7 In the course of changing over to deferred taxation, the 
taxable share of pensions has been gradually increasing 
since 2005, starting at 50% and currently expected to 
reach the final value of 100% by 2040. The tax- free pen -
sion amount, which is usually determined on a one- time 
basis upon retirement, applies for the entire period over 
which the pension is drawn. Regular pension adjustments 
will thus be fully subject to taxation; see also Federal Min -
istry of Finance (2020).
8 Central government expenditure was around €4 billion 
higher than the payments recorded in the application stat -
istics. For the current year, the rules for interim manage -
ment of the budget set a narrow limit for such business aid 
from central government: 45% of the budget estimate 
from last summer’s draft is principally available, i.e. only 
just over €3 billion.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
69

expenditure. At €11 billion, though, these pre -
mia were around €1 billion lower than in 2020.
Prior to the approval of the second supplemen -
tary budget for 2021 in the Bundestag, there 
was an initial report on the provisional outturn 
for the 2021 budget.9 However, these figures 
were not factored into the second supplemen -
tary budget. Instead, the expected result from 
the first supplementary budget was adopted as 
it stood. This budgeted value was €25 billion 
less favourable than the provisional budget re -
sult. Estimated revenue was €9 billion lower 
than in the budget outturn, with tax revenue 
especially affected. On the expenditure side, 
the transfers to the Flood Relief Fund totalling 
€16 billion were not taken into account in the 
second supplementary budget. Additionally, 
the grant to the Federal Employment Agency 
was underestimated by almost €14 billion. 
These two factors resulted in unplanned ex -
penditure of €30 billion. In addition, a global 
expenditure cut of €7½ billion on balance was 
budgeted.10 Nevertheless, the planned expend -
iture volume was €16 billion higher than actual 
expenditure. The main reason for this was that 
the estimates for business aid and other 
coronavirus- related spending were too high. 
Interest expenditure was also lower, with the 
estimates for premia remaining well below the 
provisional actual figures.
In autumn 2020, the Bundestag activated the 
debt brake escape clause for the 2021 budget 
year. Borrowing authorisations were very gen -
erous both when the budget was adopted and 
then again in spring 2021 for the first supple -
mentary budget. As uncertainty was high dur -
ing the crisis, the large precautionary buffers 
were comprehensible from an economic per -
spective. However, developments in the central 
government budget proved to be much more 
favourable, and a large part of the authorisa -
tions were not actually required last year. €60 
billion was nevertheless used recently to pre-  
fund government climate protection projects in 
future years. To this end, the Energy and Cli -
mate Fund received transfers from the second 2021 supplementary budget. At the same time, 
the Bundestag decided that the debt brake 
would no longer apply to special funds with no 
borrowing authorisation of their own. This rule 
entered into force with retroactive effect. As a 
result, all reserves of these special funds can 
now be used without corresponding payments 
being limited by the debt brake (see the box on 
p. 71). Concerns as to whether this change is 
compatible with constitutional law were 
voiced, inter alia, at a hearing of the Budget 
Committee of the German Bundestag. Oppon -
ents criticised that emergency loans taken out 
had been set aside and repurposed.11 Refer -
ence was also made to a ruling by the Consti -
tutional Court of Hesse from 27  October 
2021.12 The opposition announced their inten -
tion to lodge a constitutional complaint.
These changes to the debt brake will mean far 
greater budgetary scope in the next few years. 
Based on the special funds’ reserves, this scope 
amounts to €112 billion and will primarily affect 
the current legislative period.
– Of this figure, €69 billion comes from 2021. 
This corresponds to the off- budget entities’ 
surpluses stemming from debt-  financed 
transfers from the core budget, with the 
Energy  and Climate Fund, in particular, and 
the new Flood Relief Fund making the big -
gest contributions. Net borrowing therefore 
breached the standard limit under the debt 
brake by a correspondingly larger amount in 
2021 (see the boxes on p. 71 and pp. 73 f.). 
This means that recourse to the escape 
clause was greater.
– A further €43 billion originates from special 
funds’ reserves that were built up from Second supple -
mentary budget 
for 2021 does 
not take into 
account more 
favourable 
budget outturn 
figures already 
available
Exceptional bor -
rowing to fund 
future projects – 
intention to 
lodge constitu -
tional complaint 
announcedAdditional 
scope …
… of €69 billion 
from 2021 …
9 See Federal Ministry of Finance (2022a). As a planning 
tool, the budget plan is commonly prepared before the 
outturn. Information that is already available is also usually 
included.
10 A global expenditure cut in budget plans has to be 
achieved in the course of implementing the budget by 
making savings in individual budget items in order to meet 
the planned expenditure total.
11 See Deutscher Bundestag (2022).
12 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2021d), p. 72.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
70

Central government special funds now outside the debt 
brake
On 27  January 2022, the Bundestag de-
cided that, going forward, special funds 
with no borrowing authorisation of their 
own would be treated differently under the 
debt brake. This applies to all special funds 
with no borrowing authorisation of their 
own and which were created after 2010.
Previously, these special funds were counted 
towards the debt brake: their balances (sur-
plus or defi  cit) were deducted from borrow-
ing in the core budget. As a result, it made 
no difference for the debt brake if a pay-
ment from the central government budget 
fl  owed to one of these special funds: this 
created a defi  cit in the core budget and an 
offsetting surplus in the special fund.1 The 
issue for the debt brake was rather the 
amount that the special fund paid to third 
parties: this created a defi  cit when viewing 
the core budget and its special funds as a 
consolidated entity.2 Using borrowing au-
thorisations to provide advance fi  nancing 
for the Energy and Climate Fund in 2020 
thus had no effect on the debt brake.
The change means that the annual borrow-
ing limit imposed by the debt brake now 
applies only to the core budget (and not to 
the special funds). As a result, a transfer 
from the core budget to a special fund will 
have an immediate effect on the debt brake 
in the shape of higher net borrowing. Bor-
rowing authorisations granted by way of 
exception to overcome emergencies can 
thus be set aside for subsequent years. Ac-
tual outfl  ows from the special fund at a 
later date no longer play a role for the debt 
brake.
The new accounting method for special 
funds does not apply only as of the 2021 fi  scal year – it also applies to reserves from 
previous years. Thus, the debt brake fi  gures 
were settled again with retroactive effect. 
Earlier transfers to the relevant special funds 
therefore represent a burden in previous ac-
counting for the debt brake. This meant 
that the balance on the control account 
also had to be recalculated: this balance 
consists of amounts credited for fi  scal years 
prior to 2020. These amounts are now 
smaller because the transfers to special 
funds are now accounted for as burdens. In 
this respect, budget accounts that had al-
ready been closed were effectively re-
opened. As legally required, these budgets 
had previously been settled for the last time 
on 1 September of the following year.
The European fi  scal rules include the special 
funds: the medium- term budgetary object-
ive applies to the general government struc-
tural defi  cit. Central government therefore 
still needs to limit the defi  cits of its special 
funds in such a way that general govern-
ment requirements are met. Additionally, 
the onus is on the Stability Council to work 
towards ensuring that the European fi  scal 
limits are not breached.
1 The result under the debt brake would only have 
been affected by payments between the core budget 
reserves (without being counted towards borrowing 
relevant to the debt brake) and a special fund. No such 
payments were made, however.
2 When a special fund generated income from third 
parties, this accordingly increased the room for man-
oeuvre under the debt brake.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
71

transfers in previous years. This includes pre- 
funding, particularly of the Energy and Cli -
mate Fund, in 2020 when the escape clause 
was also activated (€28 billion). The remain -
der comes from years further back when the 
escape clause was not activated. For the 
years back to 2016, the change in rules 
means that special funds’ surpluses, which 
previously counted towards the debt brake, 
are no longer included. This reduced the bal -
ance on the control account, which shows a 
cumulated undershooting of the regular 
borrowing limit under the debt brake, by 
€4½ billion.13
The largest chunk of this future budgetary 
scope (€97 billion, or 2½% of GDP) was there -
fore accumulated via higher emergency loans 
taken out in 2020 and 2021. This lowers the 
scope for borrowing in the repayment years. To 
date, repayment of the emergency loans taken 
out in 2020 is due between 2023 and 2042, 
and those taken out in 2021, between 2026 
and 2042. The new accounting rules for special 
funds mean an annual repayment burden of 
€3½ billion as of 2023, rising to €15 billion as 
of 2026. However, the Federal Government has 
announced that it will revise the repayment 
schedules with the 2022 budget. According to 
the coalition agreement, the schedules are to 
be brought into line with the repayment dead -
lines for the EU’s NextGenerationEU crisis fund. 
All repayments would then not start until 2028 
and would be spread over 30 years (as op -
posed to the 20 years envisaged to date). The 
annual repayment amount for all emergency 
loans taken out so far would then total €8½ 
billion. Of these annual amounts, just over 
€3½ billion would be due to changing the 
rules for the special funds. Additional interest 
payments would inflate the burdens further.
All in all, the way the debt brake is being used 
does not appear to be in the spirit of its inten -
tion. This applies to the use of the escape 
clause, in particular. Activation of the escape 
clause is predicated on a particular crisis situ -
ation, one that is beyond the government’s control and impacts significantly on the state’s 
financial position. For 2020 and 2021, this was 
indeed the case. However, the exceptional bor -
rowing authorisations set aside for future ex -
penditure are not closely related to the corona -
virus pandemic. They are instead being used to 
release future climate policy measures from the 
annual debt brake limits. A stimulus in demand 
from abolishing the renewable energy (EEG) 
levy is set to be financed in this way using the 
escape clause, too.
However, the majority of forecasts available 
predict that the economy as a whole will be 
more or less back to normal as early as 2022 or 
even in a more favourable condition. According 
to the government’s projection from last au -
tumn, employment will be higher as of 2023 
and unemployment will be lower than ex -
pected prior to the outbreak of the crisis. There 
is no indication that macroeconomic demand 
requires an additional stimulus. The draft 
budget states that private investment dropped 
away in the crisis years and that measures to 
promote it are now necessary. However, total 
capital stock in the coming years is now ex -
pected to be only slightly lower than levels 
forecast before the crisis and a catch- up pro -
cess already appears to be under way. No eco -
nomic justification was presented stating that a 
moderate undershooting of previous expect -
ations constitutes a real crisis situation that can 
only be overcome with emergency borrowing. 
The simple fact that certain measures appear 
essential is not sufficient to justify funding them 
with stockpiled emergency loans. The aim of 
the debt brake is rather to make sure priorities 
are set – irrespective of whether on the rev -
enue or the expenditure side.
Under the debt brake, even before an emer -
gency loan can be taken out, a repayment 
schedule must be agreed. This is to prevent a 
situation whereby the escape clause is used to … and €43 
billion  from 
previous  years
Higher repay -
ment obligations 
under debt 
brake, but defer -
ral of repay -
ments also 
announced
Approach 
appears incom -
patible with 
intention of 
debt brakeAs things stand 
today, acute 
phase of crisis 
overcome
Question retro -
active adjust -
ment of agreed 
repayment 
schedules
13 For the years prior to 2016 (before the borrowing limit 
of 0.35% of GDP came into force), the credit balance on 
the control account was cancelled. The remainder was not 
offset.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
72

Provisional accounting for central government’s debt brake 
for 2021
In the initial accounting for last year,1 the 
Federal Ministry of Finance took into ac-
count the new rule for special funds. The 
results for previous years were also adjusted 
accordingly.
In 2021, the standard limit was exceeded by 
a total of €193 billion. This limit stood at €12 billion (0.35% of gross domestic prod-
uct in 2019). Net borrowing came to €215 
billion. To compute the key structural fi  gure, 
the calculated cyclical burden of €14 billion 
was deducted from this and the balance of 
fi  nancial transactions, which stood at +€3 
1 See Federal Ministry of Finance (2022b).
Key central government budget data in connection with the debt brake*
€ billion
Item Actual 20202nd supple-
ment 2021Provisional 
actual 2021
 1. Expenditure 1 441.8 572.7 556.6
 of which:
 1.a Investment 50.3 59.3 45.8
 1.b Global spending increases/ cuts – –   7.7 –
 2. Revenue 1,2 311.1 332.3 341.0
 of which:
 2.a Tax revenue 1 283.3 284.0 313.5
 2.b Global revenue increases/ shortfalls – 22.0 –
 3. Fiscal balance (2.-1.) – 130.7 – 240.4 – 215.6
 4. Coin seigniorage 0.2 0.2 0.2
 5. Transfer to (–)/ withdrawal from (+) reserves – – –
 6. Net borrowing (–)/ repayment (+) (3.+4.+5.) – 130.5 – 240.2 – 215.4
 7. Cyclical component in the budget procedure –  42.6 –  13.9 –  13.9
 8. Balance of fi  nancial transactions –   6.6 –   5.4 3.0
 9. Structural net borrowing (–)/ repayment (+) (6.-7.-8.) –  81.3 – 220.9 – 204.5
10. Amount exceeding limit (12.-9.) 69.6 208.9 192.5
11. Memo item: Amount exceeding limit incl. special funds (10.-14.) 41.9 150.5 123.5
12. Standard upper limit: structural net borrowing (0.35% of GDP) 3 –  11.7 –  12.1 –  12.1
13. Structural balance (3.-7.-8.) –  81.5 – 221.2 – 204.7
13.a  As before, with estimate of potential output acc. to 2022 Annual 
Economic Report –  93.1 – 213.5 – 197.1
14. Memo item: Balance of relevant off- budget entities to date 4 27.7 58.4 69.0
 of which:
14.a Energy and Climate Fund 25.3 46.2 53.9
14.b Relief Fund (2013 fl  ood) –   0.4 –   0.5 –   0.2
14.c Fund to Promote Municipal Investment –   1.0 –   1.5 –   1.0
14.d Digitalisation Fund 1.3 –   1.8 0.2
14.e Fund for Primary School- Age Childcare Provision 2.5 0.0 0.5
14.f Flood Relief Fund (2021 fl  ood) – 16.0 15.6
15. Reserves of special funds for 14. 43.2 101.6 112.2
16. Level of general reserves 48.2 48.2 48.2
17. Balance on control account 47.7 47.7 47.7
18. Total outstanding repayment amount (from 10.) 69.6 278.4 262.0
* Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. For methodological notes, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2016). 1 After deduction of supplementary central government transfers, shares of energy tax revenue, compensation under 
the 2009 reform of motor vehicle tax and consolidation/ budgetary recovery assistance to federal states, excluding transfers to/ 
withdrawals from reserves. 2 Excluding coin seigniorage. 3 Based on gross domestic product in the year before the (compre-
hensive) budget is prepared. 4 Budgeted fi  gure for second supplementary budget in 2021: 14.a and 14.f plus central govern-
ment transfers planned (14.a) and made (14.f).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
73

build up additional debt on a permanent basis. 
The repayment schedule is there to ensure a re -
liable commitment to scaling back debt. Early 
repayment is not actually required from an eco -
nomic perspective, as the debt ratio is set to 
come down and the interest burden is low. 
However, removing repayment from the up -
coming medium- term planning to generate 
scope for new projects in non- crisis situations 
could potentially weaken the binding effect of 
the debt brake. This binding effect is crucial if 
the debt brake is to reliably ensure sound gov -
ernment finances. Moreover, it is essential to 
not lose sight of the fact that future govern -
ment budgets will also have to bear the strain 
of demographic change. Burdens are thus not 
being shifted to years where the fiscal situation 
is likely to be relaxed. As of 2028, repayments 
of European debt from the NextGenerationEU 
programme will also weigh on the budget.
The new Federal Government is planning on 
presenting a revised draft budget for 2022 on 9 March. Net borrowing is not expected to ex -
ceed the €100 billion originally planned. On 
the one hand, the underlying more favourable 
budgetary development suggests relief com -
pared to previous plans for 2022 as well. On 
the other hand, the additional costs from the 
coalition agreements need to be taken into ac -
count.
If the government wants to exceed the regular 
ceiling for net borrowing, it will again have to 
take recourse to the escape clause. This re -
quires presenting justification that the crisis 
situation persists and continues to place a sig -
nificant strain on government finances. How -
ever, despite the ongoing presence of the 
coronavirus, the projections available do not in -
dicate that the economy as a whole is still in a 
state of crisis. Some coronavirus response 
measures remain in place. However, central 
government has a general reserve of €48 bil -
lion. This reserve was topped up prior to the cri -
sis with surpluses recorded in the 2015 to 2019 Underlying trend 
for 2022 central 
government 
budget much 
more favour -
able, but add -
itional costs 
from new 
 projects
Renewed 
recourse to 
escape clause 
requires exten -
sive justificationbillion, was added. The calculation of fi  nan-
cial transactions for the 2021 accounting is 
consistent with the spirit of the debt brake: 
the defi  cit- offsetting payments to the Fed-
eral Employment Agency, which were 
counted as loans only during the year, were 
reclassifi  ed as grants before the books were 
closed. Thus, loans amounting to €17 bil-
lion that were granted and reported as 
fi  nancial transactions during the year were 
not included here. The surplus from fi  nan-
cial transactions, which has a negative im-
pact on the structural balance, is based on 
the counting of a Federal Employment 
Agency debt of €7 billion which central 
government forgave. The agency had re-
ceived this loan in 2020 to offset its defi  cit. 
Previously, the rulebook on central govern-
ment’s debt brake stipulated that fi  nancial 
transactions are to be counted in accord-
ance with budget accounting.2 Debt for-
giveness represents a burden on central government fi  nances without a payment 
transaction, however. Thus, the counting of 
forgiven debt is consistent with the spirit of 
the debt brake.
2 See Federal Ministry of Finance (2021), p. 18. For re-
cording options then possible for central government 
transactions to offset defi  cits of the Federal Employ-
ment Agency, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2021d), 
p. 69.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
74

budget years. Coronavirus- related budgetary 
burdens could be financed from the reserve 
without having to activate the escape clause. 
Extensive justification –  detailing why emer -
gency loans are needed and for which concrete 
measures specifically – would therefore be re -
quired before more of these loans could be 
taken out.
Central government’s off- budget entities (ex -
cluding the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund 
(SoFFin), bad banks and other entities that use 
commercial double-  entry bookkeeping) closed 
2021 with a very high surplus.14 Large transfers 
from the core budget were the major driving 
force, pushing the surplus up to €76 billion, 
after a deficit of €6 billion the year before. The 
Energy and Climate Fund made the largest con -
tribution (surplus of €54 billion) to the result for 
the year. Outflows from this fund were still 
much lower than planned, but not by as much 
as in the previous year. The new Flood Relief 
Fund disbursed only just under €½ billion, putt -
ing its surplus at almost €16 billion. Despite 
paying out €6½ billion in new coronavirus as -
sistance loans, the Economic Stabilisation Fund 
still posted a surplus of just under €2 billion, 
stemming primarily from repayments of loans 
and capital assistance for enterprises such as 
Lufthansa . This surplus came after a deficit of 
€40 billion last year, resulting chiefly from refi -
nancing the KfW’s coronavirus assistance loans.
The Energy and Climate Fund could achieve a 
roughly balanced budget for 2022 as a whole. 
While the Federal Government is striving to 
make greater use of this fund, current plans to 
abolish the renewable energy (EEG) levy on the 
electricity price before 2023 might only have a 
minor impact on it. In the four months since 
the EEG levy for 2022 was calculated, the bal -
ance on the EEG account has risen by €8 bil -
lion, and high electricity prices are expected to 
continue to significantly rein in the need for 
grants for eligible electricity producers. The 
new Flood Relief Fund is likely to have much 
higher outflows than last year, and no add -
itional injection of funds is planned at present. Regarding the Economic Stabilisation Fund, by 
contrast, the application period for aid meas -
ures ends in mid- 2022 and the credit facility for 
loans has been cut back extensively. Due to a 
favourable outlook for macroeconomic devel -
opment, take- up of new aid measures could be 
rather low. Given that financing conditions for 
enterprises are still attractive, repayments may 
considerably outweigh outpayments. Under 
these circumstances, it is even possible that 
central government’s off- budget entities will 
again close the year in surplus.
State government budgets15
State government core budgets posted a slight 
surplus of €1 billion for 2021, compared with a 
very high deficit of €39 billion one year previ -
ously. Data for state government off-  budget 
entities are not yet available. Based on figures 
for the first three quarters, a slight deficit is 
emerging.16 Including their off- budget entities, 
the federal states are likely to have attained a 
roughly balanced budget in 2021.
Revenue in the core budgets rose by 10% over 
the year as a whole. This was primarily due to Central govern -
ment’s off- 
budget entities 
post very high 
surplus due to 
pre- funding
Surplus possible 
in 2022 due to 
repayments to 
Economic Stabil -
isation FundState govern -
ment core 
budgets post 
slight surplus 
in 2021
14 According to figures from the Federal Ministry of 
Finance. The Ministry does not publish quarterly data for 
off- budget entities that keep commercial accounts, such as 
the bad bank FMS Wertmanagement. The deficit gener -
ated by SoFFin, which uses a single- entry accounting sys -
tem, has also been excluded. Since 2019, SoFFin has been 
taking out loans and lending these funds to FMS Wertman -
agement, which uses them to refinance legacy debt. Over -
all, therefore, SoFFin’s deficit does not increase central gov -
ernment’s consolidated debt level.
15 The data on state government core budgets in the re -
porting quarter are based on the Federal Ministry of 
Finance’s monthly cash statistics.
16 According to the quarterly figures, a consolidated deficit 
of €½ billion was recorded after three quarters (with ad -
vance payments of staff costs recorded using the accruals 
method). The surplus in the core budgets was countered 
by the deficit in the off-  budget entities. According to the 
monthly statistics, data on core budgets in the fourth quar -
ter do not reveal any notable payment flows between the 
core budgets and the off- budget entities. It is therefore 
possible that the off- budget entities’ balances were largely 
stable. However, the data do not yet include €2 billion to 
pre- fund Saxony-  Anhalt’s coronavirus special fund, which 
was set up at the end of 2021, for instance. More compre -
hensive data are likely to be available at the end of the cur -
rent quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
75

the strong growth in tax revenue (+13%), 
which was 3% above the revenue level pro -
jected in the pre- crisis official tax estimate for 
2021. This means that tax revenue was no 
longer suffering the effects of the crisis. Re -
ceipts from public administrations, a large rev -
enue item, continued to increase (+4%) despite 
the substantially elevated prior- year basis. Total 
expenditure rose only slightly (+1½%). Al -
though there was perceptible additional spend -
ing on the running of vaccination centres and 
coronavirus testing at schools, reduced inflows 
to state government coronavirus special funds 
appear to have had a dampening effect.
After improving greatly in 2021, state govern -
ment finances are likely to remain largely un -
changed this year. Following last year’s strong 
recovery, tax revenue will probably grow only 
moderately. Transfers from central government 
are likely to see a significant reduction due to 
the expiry of pandemic response measures 
funded by central government. Fundamentally, this does not place a net financial burden on 
the state governments, as they are also spend -
ing less on such measures. However, the funds 
received from central government appear to 
have exceeded the corresponding state gov -
ernment expenditure at the end of 2021. If 
some of the central government funds received 
in 2021 have been spent with a delay, this will 
have a negative impact on the balance for 
2022. In addition, personnel expenditure is 
likely to rise markedly. While the state govern -
ments will probably discontinue most of the 
special coronavirus aid accruing to their local 
governments, regular payments made under 
local government financial equalisation 
schemes could increase. Although pandemic-  
related administrative expenses (primarily 
coronavirus tests at schools) will probably con -
tinue to rise significantly at first, they should 
decline as the pandemic ebbs.
All in all, the remaining coronavirus- related 
burdens are likely to be of a manageable size. It 
would therefore seem inappropriate for state 
governments to activate their debt brake es -
cape clauses or tap reserves built up using prior 
emergency loans. Rhineland- Palatinate, for ex -
ample, has been back in compliance with its 
regular debt limit since last year. Other federal 
states have also already announced that they 
will revert to their normal rules and begin mak -
ing repayments in 2022. Lower Saxony, for in -
stance, intends to repay debt from loans it took 
out on the basis of cyclical developments. Thur -
ingia, meanwhile, is starting to pay off its emer -
gency loans this year. Some state governments 
probably took out more emergency loans than 
they need to tackle the pandemic. In that case, 
it would seem appropriate for these govern -
ments to promptly repay loans used to build re -
serves. Using these funds for other purposes 
would not comply with the spirit of the debt 
brake.17Strong growth in 
tax revenue and 
moderate rise in 
expenditure
State govern -
ment budgets 
probably largely 
unchanged this 
yearNo longer 
appropriate for 
state govern -
ments to acti -
vate escape 
clauses in 2022State government fiscal balance
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 
1 Figure based on monthly data from the Federal Ministry of 
Finance; quarterly data are not yet available. 2 Core budgets 
and off-budget entities together.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q430201001020
–––++
2019Quarterly figures
20212020€ billion
Cumulated from start of year 2
2020Off-budget entitiesCore budgets
1
–40–30–20–100+10+20+30
2019
2021
17 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021e), pp. 38 f.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
76

Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
According to preliminary data, the statutory 
pension insurance scheme recorded a surplus 
of almost €1 billion in 2021. This constituted a 
substantial improvement on 2020, when the 
scheme posted a deficit of almost €4½ billion. 
The surplus is ultimately due to a one- off effect 
relating to the basic pension: central govern -
ment already transferred its full grant of €1½ 
billion last year. This grant is intended, initially, 
to broadly offset the annual additional benefits 
paid out by the scheme. However, only a small 
portion of the entitlements arising in 2021 have 
yet been disbursed.18 As a result of the surplus, 
the sustainability reserve swelled to €39 billion 
at the end of 2021 (just over 1.6 times the 
scheme’s monthly expenditure), leaving it 
around €34 billion above the statutory min -
imum of 0.2 times the scheme’s monthly ex -
penditure.
On the revenue side, contribution receipts rose 
by 4%. At 4½%, the increase in central govern -
ment funds was somewhat larger, with 1½ per -
centage points being attributable to the add -
itional central government funds for the basic 
pension. Expenditure growth was much 
weaker, at 2½%. This was primarily because 
pensions were not raised in western Germany 
in mid- 2021 (eastern Germany: +0.7%). On 
average across the year, pensions increased by 
a total of 2%. By contrast, the number of pen -
sions again saw only moderate growth.
This year, expenditure will rise more rapidly 
than revenue, meaning that a significant deficit 
is on the cards. Growth in central government 
funds will be subdued, as they are rules- based 
and tied to the weak wage developments of 
2020. The fact that pensions barely rose in 
2021 will continue to have a dampening effect 
on expenditure in the first half of the year. 
However, the pension increase in mid- 2022 is 
likely to be very high. Alongside the current 
basic pension top- ups, moreover, the scheme will also have to make back- payments for 2021. 
That alone will probably worsen the annual re -
sult by around €2½ billion given that benefits 
for 2021 are being paid out with a delay.
In spring, the Ministry of Labour calculates how 
high the pension adjustment will be at mid-  
year. In the pension insurance report of autumn 
2021, the Ministry still assumed that the in -Surplus in 2021 
due to central 
government 
funds for as yet 
unpaid basic 
pension benefits
Revenue 
increased signifi -
cantly, spending 
dynamics sub -
dued
Significant def -
icit on the cards 
for 2022Finances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary quarterly figures as the latter are not subsequently re-
vised.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4420246
––+++
–8–6–4–20+2Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202120202019
2019
2020
20212019 2020 202102468
2019 2020 202102468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
18 The pension insurance scheme expects that the last 
basic pensions from 2021 will only be paid out by the end 
of 2022.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
77

crease would come to an average of 5½%.19 
However, the new Federal Government is plan -
ning to reactivate the catch- up factor in the 
pension adjustment. As things stand, this fac -
tor is deactivated up to and including 2025. 
Once the factor is reactivated, the pension cut 
that was waived in 2021 on account of the 
safeguard clause will be recouped. The waived 
cut will be offset against the annual pension in -
creases, meaning that pensions will not fall but 
will merely rise somewhat more slowly. Accord -
ing to the coalition agreement, however, the 
statutory pension level is to be redefined at the 
same time. This currently stands at 49.4%; the 
planned change would bring it down to 48.3%.20 The redefinition will not change pen -
sions initially. The lower statutory pension level 
will affect the pension adjustment, however. As 
the pension level is not permitted to fall below 
48%, the catch- up factor will have only a minor 
impact. Pensions thus remain likely to rise 
steeply in mid- 2022.
Last year’s pension insurance report outlines 
the upcoming financial pressures – which will 
not be substantially eased by the changes de -
scribed above. According to the report, the 
contribution rate will leap from the current fig -
ure of 18.6% to 19.5% in 2024, before climb -
ing to 19.7% in 2025. The pension level in 2025 
will be almost unchanged, at 49.2% (48% fol -
lowing the redefinition of the statutory pension 
level and reactivation of the catch- up factor). 
The growing financial pressures will continue 
to make their presence felt after 2025: up to 
2035, the contribution rate will rise continu -
ously to almost 22½%. The statutory pension 
level will fall to just under 46% (45% under the 
new definition). The new Federal Government 
now intends to ensure a statutory pension level 
of 48% beyond 2025, too. This would subject 
the pension insurance scheme to significant 
additional financial pressures. Consequently, 
contribution rates would be likely to increase 
even further. As the bulk of the central govern -
ment transfers to the scheme rise along with 
the contribution rate, the central government 
budget would also come under greater strain. 
This strain will grow even further if central gov -
ernment caps the rise in the contribution rate 
through additional grants.Planned reacti -
vation of the 
catch- up factor 
will only slightly 
dampen pension 
increaseStabilisation of 
the statutory 
pension level 
would intensify 
financial pres -
sures already on 
the horizonFinances of the 
Federal Employment Agency*
Source: Federal Employment Agency. * Including transfers to 
the civil servants' pension fund and before payment of central 
government grants.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410505
––+
–30–25–20–15–10–50+5Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202120202019
2021202020192019 2020 2021–300+30+60+90+120+150
2019 2020 2021300306090120150
–+++++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
19 The report puts the pension adjustment for western 
Germany at just over 5% and that for eastern Germany at 
6%. This strong increase is due primarily to the wage 
growth seen in 2021, which was intensified by the decline 
in short- time working. In addition, there will be a retro -
active upward correction for developments in 2020: the 
relevant earnings subject to compulsory contributions 
probably increased significantly more strongly than the 
wages that the 2021 pension adjustment was based on. 
For more detailed information, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2020) .
20 A statistical one- off effect involving earnings subject to 
compulsory contributions increased the statutory pension 
level in 2021 by around 1  percentage point. With the 
planned change, this effect will be eliminated again.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
78

Federal Employment Agency
In 2021, the Federal Employment Agency again 
played a significant role in stabilising the econ -
omy: due to the crisis, it posted a deficit of €22 
billion (compared with €27 billion in 2020) be -
fore receipt of the central government grants.21 
Excluding the surpluses from insolvency benefit 
contributions and winter employment compen -
sation contributions, the deficit came to €23 
billion. The Federal Employment Agency partly 
offset the deficit with its reserves of €6 bil -
lion.22 In addition, central government issued 
intrayear loans of €17 billion. At the end of the 
year, it converted these loans into a grant.
The Federal Employment Agency’s revenue (ex -
cluding the central government grant to offset 
the deficit) grew robustly by 6½%. Contribu -
tion receipts increased by just over 4½%. This 
was connected, not least, to the renewed rise 
in employment. A year earlier, the contribution 
base had declined by 1½% due to the crisis. 
Growth in revenue from insolvency benefit 
contributions was exceptionally strong given 
that the contribution rate had doubled to 
0.12%.23
Expenditure fell by 5½%, though was still 75% 
above the pre- crisis level of 2019. Given the im -
proved labour market situation, spending on 
unemployment benefits declined (-5½%). The 
Federal Employment Agency’s expenditure on 
short- time working was down by 7½% on the 
year, although it still amounted to €21 billion. 
€8 billion of this was spent on social security 
contributions, via which the Federal Employ -
ment Agency is providing enterprises with 
pandemic- related relief. Insolvency benefit dropped by 60% from the elevated level re -
corded a year earlier. Despite exemptions from 
the obligation to file for insolvency having ex -
pired at the end of April 2021, insolvency bene -
fit hit its lowest level in more than 20 years.
The Federal Employment Agency’s finances 
should improve significantly this year. Its budget 
plan, approved in December, envisages a deficit 
of €1½ billion in the core budget. This deficit is 
to be offset by a central government grant. On 
the revenue side, contribution receipts are pro -
jected to increase by a considerable 4%. The 
insolvency benefit contribution rate was 
lowered to 0.09%. On the expenditure side, 
the budget plan envisages a sharp decline in 
spending on unemployment benefits and short- 
time working benefits. However, coronavirus 
infection rates have gone back up since the 
budget plan was put together. This means that 
pandemic- related burdens will probably ease 
off more slowly than projected. The Federal 
Government has since partially extended the 
pandemic- related special arrangements until 
the end of June 2022. All in all, the agency’s 
finances are likely to develop somewhat less 
favourably  than planned.Another very 
large deficit due 
to the crisis
Robust revenue 
growth due to 
increased contri -
bution receipts 
and higher con -
tributions for 
insolvency bene -
fit payments
Lower expend -
iture due to 
reduced short- 
time working 
and improved 
labour market 
situationSmall deficit 
planned for 
2022 – offset by 
central govern -
ment grant
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), Pandemic- induced damage to German potential output moderate 
so far, Monthly Report, December 2021, pp. 30-32.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), Public debate on the review of the EU economic governance: 
Bundes bank statement of 22 December 2021, www.bundesbank.de/content/88487021 In the core budget, i.e. excluding the civil servants’ pen -
sion fund. Transfers to the fund are recorded as expend -
iture, lowering the core budget balance. These transfers 
were suspended in 2021 (as previously during 2020) be -
cause of the coronavirus crisis. As a result, the fund posted 
a deficit of €½ billion. Its reserves declined to €8½ billion 
at the end of the year.
22 Consequently, the Federal Employment Agency no 
longer has any reserves available to it in the contribution- 
funded unemployment insurance scheme. The insolvency 
benefit and winter employment compensation reserves, 
which are funded by specific levies, came to a combined 
total of just over €2½ billion at the end of 2021 (up €1 bil -
lion on the year).
23 This brought the contribution rate up to its 2010-2020 
average.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
79

Deutsche Bundesbank (2021c), Profitability and financial position of German listed groups in 2020 
and an outlook for 2021, Monthly Report, December 2021, pp. 55-57.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021d), Public finances, Monthly Report, November 2021, pp. 63-79.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021e), State government finances in 2020: deficit due to temporary 
effects  of pandemic, escape clauses also used to build reserves, Monthly Report, October 2021, 
pp. 15-39.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020), Public finances, Annual pension adjustments in need of reform, 
Monthly Report, November 2020, pp. 72-73.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Key central government budget data in connection with the debt 
brake, Monthly Report, February 2016, pp. 68-69.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2006), A disaggregated framework for analysing public finances: Germany’s  
fiscal track record between 2000 and 2005, Monthly Report, March 2006, pp. 61-76.
Deutscher Bundestag (2022), Öffentliche Anhörungen, Zweites Nachtragshaushaltsgesetz, 
10 January 2022.
Federal Ministry of Finance (2022a), Lindner: “Dank Widerstandskraft der Wirtschaft: 24,8 Mrd. 
Euro weniger Schulden als geplant”, preliminary budget outturn, press release, 14 January 2022.
Federal Ministry of Finance (2022b), Vorläufiger Abschluss des Bundeshaushalts 2021, Monthly 
Report , January 2022, pp. 23-47.
Federal Ministry of Finance (2021), Kompendium zur Schuldenregel des Bundes (Schuldenbremse), 
31 March 2021.
Federal Ministry of Finance (2020), Besteuerung von Alterseinkünften, 2020 edition, pp. 7-10.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
80

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43 •
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
3•

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
13. General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
14. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78 •
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81 •
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 EONIA  5,73 month
EURIBOR  6,7Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  8
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2020 May 12.6 9.1 8.9 8.7 6.1 4.9 0.2 – 0.46 – 0.27 0.2
June 12.8 9.3 9.2 9.4 6.9 4.6 – 0.5 – 0.46 – 0.38 0.1
July 13.6 10.1 10.0 9.6 7.4 4.7 – 0.5 – 0.46 – 0.44 0.0
Aug. 13.3 9.6 9.5 9.9 7.7 4.7 – 0.1 – 0.47 – 0.48 – 0.0
Sep. 13.8 10.3 10.3 10.1 8.2 4.5 – 0.4 – 0.47 – 0.49 – 0.1
Oct. 13.9 10.4 10.4 10.6 8.3 4.3 – 0.5 – 0.47 – 0.51 – 0.2
Nov. 14.5 10.8 10.9 11.2 8.6 4.4 – 0.7 – 0.47 – 0.52 – 0.2
Dec. 15.6 11.7 12.2 11.9 9.3 5.0 – 0.5 – 0.47 – 0.54 – 0.2
2021 Jan. 16.4 12.2 12.5 12.3 9.4 4.8 – 0.9 – 0.48 – 0.55 – 0.2
Feb. 16.4 12.1 12.3 11.6 9.6 4.7 – 0.9 – 0.48 – 0.54 – 0.1
Mar. 13.7 10.2 10.1 10.6 8.6 4.0 – 0.3 – 0.48 – 0.54 0.0
Apr. 12.4 9.2 9.4 9.4 7.3 3.4 – 0.3 – 0.48 – 0.54 0.1
May 11.7 8.4 8.6 8.8 6.3 2.9 – 1.0 – 0.48 – 0.54 0.2
June 11.8 8.3 8.4 8.3 6.0 3.3 – 0.6 – 0.48 – 0.54 0.2
July 11.0 7.6 7.8 8.1 5.8 3.1 – 0.5 – 0.48 – 0.55 0.0
Aug. 11.0 7.8 8.0 7.8 5.5 2.8 – 0.8 – 0.48 – 0.55 – 0.1
Sep. 11.1 7.6 7.6 7.8 5.6 3.4 – 0.7 – 0.49 – 0.55 0.1
Oct. 10.7 7.5 7.7 7.5 5.6 3.6 – 0.3 – 0.49 – 0.55 0.2
Nov. 10.0 7.1 7.4 7.3 5.8 3.7 – 0.5 – 0.49 – 0.57 0.2
Dec. 9.8 6.9 6.9 ... 6.1 3.9 – 0.6 – 0.49 – 0.58 0.1
2022 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . – 0.56 0.4
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 Euro
overnight index average. The calculation of EONIA was discontinued. From January
2022 on the referende interest rate related to unsecured overnight loans will be onlypublished as Euro Short-Term Rate (€STR) in Table VI.4.  6 Euro interbank offered rate.
7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p. 43●. 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year
government bonds. Countries included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT, GR, SK, CY,
SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2020 May – 1,354 +16,641 –11,139 –49,799 +33,541 + 8,840 – 5,383 + 1,662 1.0902 98.3 92.6
June +16,845 +27,683 +30,327 –40,288 –41,664 +20,438 +92,011 – 170 1.1255 99.7 93.8
July +28,197 +35,469 +16,605 +49,125 –29,375 – 5,833 + 3,246 – 558 1.1463 100.4 94.4
Aug. +24,965 +24,407 +52,848 +14,351 +35,481 –15,708 +17,420 + 1,304 1.1828 101.5 94.9
Sep. +37,576 +34,895 +50,431 –22,555 + 3,082 – 9,747 +77,062 + 2,589 1.1792 101.5 94.8
Oct. +30,862 +38,834 +46,064 +41,904 +101,009 + 4,317 –104,080 + 2,914 1.1775 101.3 94.7
Nov. +27,529 +34,937 +49,240 –37,814 +185,183 +11,041 –106,561 – 2,610 1.1838 100.6 94.1
Dec. +42,311 +38,682 +33,797 –108,628 +287,644 –29,887 –117,081 + 1,749 1.2170 101.8 95.1
2021 Jan. +15,582 +21,486 +46,394 +51,009 + 9,647 +12,510 –25,840 – 933 1.2171 101.3 95.2
Feb. +21,755 +33,110 +46,913 +38,741 +84,641 – 1,219 –73,629 – 1,621 1.2098 100.6 94.5
Mar. +37,439 +36,897 + 5,126 +19,132 – 6,472 – 5,311 – 1,685 – 538 1.1899 100.3 94.0
Apr. +32,472 +28,323 +23,744 +14,106 +33,051 + 1,931 –25,974 + 630 1.1979 100.6 94.2
May +14,424 +26,982 +33,002 + 3,892 +87,992 – 4,581 –55,639 + 1,337 1.2146 100.8 94.3
June +21,639 +29,899 +31,016 –26,805 +48,086 + 3,671 + 1,578 + 4,487 1.2047 100.2 93.7
July +38,673 +32,926 +37,748 +61,366 –20,559 +21,709 –24,430 – 338 1.1822 99.7 93.5
Aug. +18,016 +15,597 +11,339 +44,590 +23,290 – 8,292 –170,136 +121,887 1.1772 99.3 93.2
Sep. +32,776 +21,853 +32,197 +21,239 +50,036 + 718 –40,626 + 830 1.1770 99.4 93.2
Oct. +21,833 +17,655 +13,142 +22,232 +20,647 + 4,592 –37,487 + 3,159 1.1601 98.4 p 92.3
Nov. +25,950 +18,010 +42,960 +11,827 +95,304 +21,890 –86,664 + 602 1.1414 97.6 p 91.6
Dec. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1304 97.1 p 91.1
2022 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1314 96.6 p 90.6
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also Tables
XII.10 and 11, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Bundesbankcalculation. Against the currencies of the EER-19 group.  4 Based on consumer price
indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2019 1.6 2.1 1.1 4.1 1.2 1.8 1.8 4.9 0.4 2.5
2020 –6.4 –5.7 –4.6 –3.0 –2.8 –7.9 –9.0 5.9 –8.9 –3.6
2021 ... ... 2.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2020 Q3 –4.0 –3.6 –3.6 –2.8 –2.9 –3.8 –10.2 10.8 –5.4 –2.4
Q4 –4.4 –4.3 –1.9 –1.5 –0.9 –3.7 –7.1 4.5 –6.2 –1.2
2021 Q1 –1.1 0.0 –3.0 4.1 –1.7 1.7 –1.8 11.7 0.3 –0.7
Q2 14.4 15.1 10.8 13.0 8.5 19.4 16.6 21.1 17.9 10.8
Q3 3.9 5.0 2.8 8.6 4.0 3.6 13.7 11.4 4.1 5.2
Q4 4.6 ... 1.4 ... ... 4.9 ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2019 –1.1 4.8 –4.3 7.1 1.6 0.5 –0.7 7.0 –1.1 0.8
2020 –7.9 –3.8 –10.2 –5.7 –3.2 –10.9 –2.1 14.5 –11.4 –1.8
2021 e 7.8 16.9 p 4.0 6.2 4.2 6.1 10.2 p 16.8 11.8 6.5
2020 Q3 –6.1 –3.5 –10.0 –2.5 –4.9 –7.8 –2.0 9.1 –5.2 –1.9
Q4 –0.5 0.6 –2.9 0.1 –2.1 –4.3 3.1 25.0 –2.5 2.2
2021 Q1 4.7 8.4 –1.2 –1.5 0.2 2.4 4.7 40.6 9.9 3.7
Q2 23.1 29.8 19.2 14.5 4.4 22.2 15.6 33.2 31.9 12.6
Q3 6.0 19.4 2.6 7.1 4.7 3.0 9.7 27.6 4.4 6.3
Q4 e 0.1 11.3 p –1.9 5.4 7.3 –0.4 11.2 p –17.0 4.2 3.6
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2019 82.3 81.2 84.5 72.8 81.1 84.5 71.5 77.3 77.4 76.3
2020 74.3 75.5 77.0 67.4 76.8 73.5 70.8 68.5 53.1 71.8
2021 81.1 79.9 84.8 77.9 81.2 80.8 75.6 78.0 76.2 75.0
2020 Q4 76.2 75.9 79.1 69.6 75.4 76.0 73.2 72.0 71.4 72.7
2021 Q1 77.4 77.4 80.4 71.6 78.1 77.1 72.5 74.5 72.8 73.1
Q2 82.3 80.2 86.7 76.5 81.0 82.8 74.7 77.2 75.7 75.0
Q3 82.8 81.3 87.0 78.8 82.5 82.0 77.8 79.7 78.8 75.4
Q4 82.0 80.7 85.1 84.6 83.0 81.1 77.3 80.4 77.3 76.6
2022 Q1 81.9 79.5 85.5 72.4 82.2 81.4 77.0 77.6 77.5 75.3
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2019 7.5 5.4 3.2 4.5 6.7 8.2 17.3 5.0 10.0 6.3
2020 7.8 5.6 3.8 7.0 7.8 7.8 16.3 5.6 9.2 8.1
2021 e 7.7 e 6.3 p 3.5 e 6.2 e 7.7 e 7.9 e 14.8 e 6.3 e 9.5 e 7.6
2021 Aug. 7.5 6.3 p 3.4 5.8 7.1 7.9 13.7 5.4 9.2 7.4
Sep. 7.4 6.2 p 3.3 5.6 7.7 7.7 13.2 5.2 9.1 7.0
Oct. 7.3 6.0 p 3.3 5.2 6.7 7.6 13.5 5.2 9.3 7.0
Nov. 7.1 5.9 p 3.2 5.3 6.8 7.5 13.3 5.3 9.1 7.3
Dec. 7.0 5.7 p 3.2 5.2 7.2 7.4 12.7 5.2 9.0 7.5
2022 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5.3 ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2019 1.2 1.2 1.4 2.3 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.9 0.6 2.7
2020 0.3 0.4 5 0.4 –0.6 0.4 0.5 –1.3 –0.5 –0.1 0.1
2021 2.6 3.2 5 3.2 4.5 2.1 2.1 0.6 2.4 1.9 3.2
2021 Aug. 3.0 4.7 5 3.4 5.0 1.8 2.4 1.2 3.0 2.5 3.6
Sep. 3.4 3.8 5 4.1 6.4 2.1 2.7 1.9 3.8 2.9 4.7
Oct. 4.1 5.4 5 4.6 6.8 2.8 3.2 2.8 5.1 3.2 6.0
Nov. 4.9 7.1 5 6.0 8.6 3.5 3.4 4.0 5.4 3.9 7.4
Dec. 5.0 6.6 5 5.7 12.0 3.2 3.4 4.4 5.7 4.2 7.9
2022 Jan. e 5.1 e 8.5 5.1 e 11.7 e 3.4 e 3.3 5.5 e 5.0 e 5.3 7.5
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
2019 –0.6 –1.9 1.5 0.1 –0.9 –3.1 1.1 0.5 –1.5 –0.6
2020 –7.2 –9.1 –4.3 –5.6 –5.5 –9.1 –10.1 –4.9 –9.6 –4.5
2021 ... ... –4.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
2018 85.5 99.9 61.3 8.2 59.8 97.8 186.4 63.1 134.4 37.1
2019 83.6 97.7 58.9 8.6 59.5 97.5 180.7 57.2 134.3 36.7
2020 97.3 112.8 68.7 19.0 69.5 115.0 206.3 58.4 155.6 43.2
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
4.6 3.3 5.9 2.0 1.5 2.7 2.6 3.3 2.1 5.3 2019
–0.1 –1.8 –8.2 –3.8 –6.7 –8.4 –4.4 –4.2 –10.8 –5.2 2020
4.8 ... ... 4.8 ... ... ... ... 5.0 ... 2021
0.9 0.0 –10.9 –2.6 –4.4 –6.6 –2.0 –1.4 –8.6 –4.8 2020 Q3
0.3 0.7 –7.8 –2.9 –5.7 –6.4 –1.8 –3.1 –8.8 –4.0 Q4
1.6 5.5 –0.9 –2.4 –5.1 –5.7 0.2 1.6 –4.6 –2.3 2021 Q1
8.3 12.6 14.9 10.4 13.0 16.2 9.6 16.3 17.7 13.0 Q2
4.8 5.3 9.7 5.2 5.7 4.5 1.3 5.0 3.4 5.5 Q3
4.4 ... ... 6.2 ... ... 1.4 ... 5.1 ... Q4
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
3.2 –3.1 1.1 –0.9 –0.0 –2.2 0.5 2.8 0.5 –13.5 2019
–2.3 –10.8 –0.2 –3.9 –5.9 –7.3 –9.1 –6.4 –9.8 11.7 2020
20.0 p 7.5 p –0.4 p 5.2 p 11.0 3.4 10.4 p 10.2 p 7.5 ... 2021
0.0 –8.0 –3.0 –4.7 –3.3 –1.4 –1.4 –3.7 –5.3 45.0 2020 Q3
0.6 –2.0 –0.9 –1.9 0.9 –2.0 1.7 –1.0 –2.1 2.5 Q4
12.4 4.6 –8.4 –0.6 3.2 –0.6 6.6 3.5 2.7 0.8 2021 Q1
23.7 23.0 14.2 10.1 24.1 24.3 35.8 24.2 27.2 11.4 Q2
17.4 2.9 –0.2 7.4 9.7 –3.8 0.9 6.5 1.9 –2.4 Q3
26.5 p 1.7 p –6.0 p 4.4 p 8.8 –2.1 4.0 p 8.2 p 1.7 ... Q4
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
77.3 79.8 77.3 84.2 86.6 78.7 87.7 84.4 80.3 63.8 2019
72.9 72.2 70.4 78.2 79.2 75.5 79.3 78.2 74.3 51.7 2020
76.5 81.9 76.8 82.1 86.9 79.8 82.1 84.5 77.6 50.6 2021
73.4 75.3 73.5 78.0 80.8 77.8 79.7 81.6 74.8 46.7 2020 Q4
72.4 75.6 73.7 79.2 82.2 78.4 81.4 80.9 75.7 48.6 2021 Q1
77.0 88.2 81.1 82.2 87.1 80.7 83.2 85.8 78.1 49.5 Q2
78.0 82.1 78.3 83.6 89.7 79.1 82.7 86.6 77.6 49.4 Q3
78.4 81.8 74.1 83.3 88.5 81.0 80.9 84.6 78.9 54.9 Q4
77.5 80.2 63.4 83.7 88.2 82.0 82.8 85.8 78.0 54.6 2022 Q1
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
6.3 5.6 3.6 3.4 4.5 6.5 5.8 4.5 14.1 7.1 2019
8.6 6.8 4.4 3.9 5.4 6.9 6.7 5.0 15.5 7.6 2020
e 6.9 e 5.6 e 3.6 e 4.2 e 6.2 e 6.6 e 6.8 e 4.8 e 14.8 e 7.5 2021
7.0 5.3 3.6 4.2 p 5.8 6.3 6.6 4.6 14.7 6.8 2021 Aug.
6.7 5.2 3.5 4.1 p 5.1 6.4 6.5 4.6 14.3 6.2 Sep.
6.5 5.0 3.4 3.9 p 5.7 6.4 6.4 4.7 13.9 6.6 Oct.
6.0 5.0 3.4 3.7 p 5.2 6.3 6.4 4.8 13.4 6.4 Nov.
5.6 5.0 3.4 3.8 p 4.9 5.9 6.4 4.6 13.0 6.4 Dec.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2022 Jan.
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2.2 1.6 1.5 2.7 1.5 0.3 2.8 1.7 0.8 0.5 2019
1.1 0.0 0.8 1.1 1.4 –0.1 2.0 –0.3 –0.3 –1.1 2020
4.6 3.5 0.7 2.8 2.8 0.9 2.8 2.0 3.0 2.3 2021
5.0 3.5 0.4 2.7 3.2 1.3 3.3 2.1 3.3 3.3 2021 Aug.
6.4 4.0 0.7 3.0 3.3 1.3 4.0 2.7 4.0 3.6 Sep.
8.2 5.3 1.4 3.7 3.8 1.8 4.4 3.5 5.4 4.4 Oct.
9.3 6.3 2.4 5.9 4.1 2.6 4.8 4.9 5.5 4.7 Nov.
10.7 5.4 2.6 6.4 3.8 2.8 5.1 5.1 6.6 4.8 Dec.
12.3 e 4.6 e 3.8 e 7.6 e 4.6 e 3.4 e 8.5 6.0 6.2 e 5.2 2022 Jan.
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
0.5 2.3 0.5 1.7 0.6 0.1 –1.3 0.4 –2.9 1.3 2019
–7.2 –3.5 –9.7 –4.2 –8.3 –5.8 –5.5 –7.7 –11.0 –5.7 2020
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2021
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
33.7 20.8 43.6 52.4 74.0 121.5 49.6 70.3 97.5 98.4 2018
35.9 22.3 40.7 48.5 70.6 116.6 48.1 65.6 95.5 91.1 2019
46.6 24.8 53.4 54.3 83.2 135.2 59.7 79.8 120.0 115.3 2020
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of valueadded tax between July and December 2020.  6 According to Maastricht Treaty
definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2020 May 293.9 121.5 32.2 172.4 177.1 9.2 –41.8 –51.0 21.3 5.5 –0.8 –0.8 17.4
June 136.5 –15.7 15.4 152.2 160.5 68.5 –145.3 –213.8 –0.7 –6.2 –1.2 –8.4 15.1
July 155.4 75.4 28.2 80.0 79.4 –35.1 89.6 124.7 0.4 1.5 –0.1 –7.1 6.1
Aug. 84.3 25.6 17.2 58.7 66.7 1.6 –18.0 –19.6 13.1 9.6 –0.4 –11.5 15.5
Sep. 84.4 –2.8 –2.9 87.2 86.3 45.9 –26.7 –72.6 10.6 –11.0 –0.2 19.4 2.5
Oct. 69.9 30.9 –4.7 39.0 33.1 –26.7 87.6 114.3 –17.4 –4.3 –0.4 –29.7 17.1
Nov. 117.4 72.8 29.0 44.6 45.3 –30.4 91.8 122.2 4.7 13.2 –0.5 –10.7 2.7
Dec. – 3.7 –1.1 29.9 –2.6 6.2 –46.9 –194.4 –147.5 9.2 –5.5 –0.5 –14.4 29.5
2021 Jan. 133.3 30.2 4.3 103.2 94.1 38.8 162.4 123.6 –36.3 –9.2 0.1 –16.0 –11.1
Feb. 99.8 33.8 9.0 66.0 72.7 –14.7 28.9 43.6 –1.2 –5.7 –0.5 –2.4 7.3
Mar. 176.0 100.7 8.5 75.3 74.0 – 5.9 –6.7 –0.7 12.1 –9.0 –0.3 1.2 20.3
Apr. 55.8 13.2 8.6 42.6 29.0 –11.4 104.5 115.9 –36.9 –23.9 –0.1 –7.5 –5.4
May 125.0 48.3 15.3 76.6 77.6 2.6 24.5 21.8 –23.5 –1.2 –0.2 –15.1 –6.9
June 94.5 37.2 0.8 57.3 58.6 9.2 –74.4 –83.7 26.8 –6.1 –0.4 –4.2 37.6
July 114.0 57.2 8.2 56.8 50.3 – 3.4 78.2 81.6 3.8 –4.7 –0.6 9.3 –0.2
Aug. 35.3 –16.4 –7.5 51.7 60.9 – 3.2 141.0 144.2 –6.0 –7.3 –0.4 –7.0 8.8
Sep. 105.9 73.1 3.8 32.8 41.5 –39.7 –59.0 –19.2 15.4 –4.5 –0.4 8.4 11.9
Oct. 80.3 68.0 21.6 12.3 18.4 – 9.1 191.7 200.9 11.5 –10.5 –0.7 16.9 5.8
Nov. 156.2 89.3 –3.3 66.8 67.5 –27.8 14.4 42.1 –6.9 –10.5 –0.7 1.8 2.4
Dec. 46.6 21.4 19.4 25.2 22.8 –53.9 –205.4 –151.5 1.6 18.1 –0.8 –24.0 8.3
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2020 May 58.3 27.1 10.0 31.2 32.7 11.7 –22.1 –33.8 2.3 –1.5 –0.4 –1.2 5.4
June 26.4 2.6 3.5 23.7 25.9 –45.6 –20.9 24.7 –7.9 –7.1 –1.0 –7.9 8.1
July 25.9 13.8 0.3 12.2 10.3 9.4 –9.7 –19.1 –3.0 –6.9 –0.6 1.2 3.3
Aug. 9.3 7.5 1.9 1.8 7.9 5.6 –8.1 –13.7 –5.2 –2.2 –0.4 –4.4 1.8
Sep. 22.6 4.6 1.3 18.1 15.8 –34.8 22.9 57.8 10.4 –3.4 –0.4 5.1 9.1
Oct. 48.7 22.1 6.6 26.7 23.9 30.1 –16.6 –46.8 –2.0 –0.5 –0.4 –4.5 3.4
Nov. 44.0 19.6 4.5 24.5 26.0 –15.1 7.4 22.5 0.6 –1.5 –0.4 0.2 2.3
Dec. – 0.9 7.5 3.6 –8.4 –4.6 –107.2 –35.1 72.1 –7.5 –1.3 –0.3 –7.1 1.2
2021 Jan. 30.1 12.1 3.1 18.1 18.1 41.7 79.7 38.0 –11.4 –2.9 –0.6 –1.6 –6.4
Feb. 29.8 18.8 4.6 11.1 13.4 26.3 7.0 –19.3 0.8 –1.8 –0.3 4.3 –1.4
Mar. 54.1 35.8 1.8 18.3 19.5 –61.9 1.9 63.9 3.5 –3.5 –0.3 7.1 0.2
Apr. 11.4 0.5 2.4 10.8 7.0 67.3 25.3 –42.0 9.3 –2.4 –0.3 6.4 5.6
May 33.4 16.8 3.2 16.6 18.9 –35.0 –10.9 24.1 –10.3 –2.8 –0.1 –7.3 0.0
June 30.0 8.7 2.4 21.4 22.3 –36.1 –5.3 30.8 3.2 –3.4 –0.2 –7.3 14.1
July 42.9 22.4 2.2 20.4 18.4 42.8 –14.6 –57.4 5.1 –1.8 –0.3 4.3 2.8
Aug. 28.5 16.6 1.6 11.9 15.7 –18.0 18.2 36.2 2.0 –0.5 –0.2 0.9 1.9
Sep. 33.1 16.7 5.4 16.4 16.5 –92.2 –0.7 91.5 3.8 –2.2 –0.2 2.6 3.6
Oct. 37.8 34.7 7.2 3.0 –0.6 47.0 47.6 0.7 18.6 1.4 –0.2 15.6 1.8
Nov. 54.0 28.5 3.4 25.4 28.0 –59.0 –4.2 54.8 5.0 –0.6 –0.2 4.7 1.1
Dec. 12.4 10.4 6.8 2.0 4.7 –124.3 –48.3 76.0 –2.0 9.2 –0.2 –13.1 2.2
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
100.9 –46.0 0.0 217.9 226.3 189.5 20.1 169.5 16.8 19.9 9.6 –0.6 – 8.5 2020 May
123.2 38.2 0.0 81.6 79.0 88.5 13.1 75.4 –20.5 10.9 –42.7 14.3 – 6.3 June
– 6.2 –62.4 0.0 185.3 150.9 125.1 14.3 110.8 20.1 5.8 18.1 29.8 –10.4 July
40.7 5.8 0.0 18.2 35.3 44.8 5.9 38.9 –18.6 9.1 – 4.8 –0.1 – 4.2 Aug.
20.2 42.0 0.0 88.0 82.3 63.7 3.5 60.1 16.7 1.9 –29.5 8.2 – 3.5 Sep.
–17.2 –40.0 0.0 108.9 85.9 100.7 7.8 93.0 –17.3 2.5 5.3 14.1 12.5 Oct.
–98.5 52.3 0.0 129.4 125.2 152.4 11.8 140.6 –35.2 8.1 – 0.7 1.1 3.2 Nov.
–128.1 –52.0 0.0 138.3 128.3 117.1 20.8 96.2 10.6 0.6 –24.7 20.1 – 3.5 Dec.
78.3 33.3 0.0 69.1 32.3 44.5 2.6 41.9 –30.6 18.4 29.9 18.5 5.7 2021 Jan.
30.4 5.2 0.0 52.6 65.4 71.8 7.3 64.5 –18.0 11.6 2.8 –30.7 13.1 Feb.
19.6 73.3 0.0 83.3 101.6 82.6 10.5 72.2 7.3 11.7 –18.6 –4.7 –13.3 Mar.
–32.3 14.1 0.0 94.5 69.1 88.9 8.5 80.4 –27.9 8.1 15.3 8.9 6.8 Apr.
– 8.5 49.0 0.0 110.1 115.6 116.7 13.2 103.5 –11.7 10.7 – 4.1 –8.9 8.1 May
16.8 –4.3 0.0 74.0 88.1 119.7 10.5 109.2 –33.9 2.3 –10.8 –8.4 – 4.6 June
0.4 –54.5 0.0 151.2 113.4 103.2 14.6 88.6 10.5 – 0.3 17.4 22.6 7.4 July
26.6 –8.8 0.0 28.4 33.4 32.3 1.6 30.7 –2.5 3.6 –12.4 5.3 – 5.9 Aug.
6.5 –0.3 0.0 30.8 60.3 76.0 5.2 70.8 –16.5 0.8 12.6 –31.1 2.6 Sep.
– 2.4 –74.9 0.0 136.1 84.4 70.3 6.8 63.4 19.1 – 5.0 13.2 31.4 8.0 Oct.
–48.5 85.2 0.0 94.1 83.4 102.5 6.0 96.5 –19.8 0.7 – 4.4 26.8 – 7.1 Nov.
–44.7 –22.7 0.0 84.6 114.4 103.8 20.7 83.2 6.9 3.6 –42.1 –5.9 – 7.5 Dec.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
28.6 – 9.3 0.3 5.3 48.4 43.4 6.2 0.3 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 0.4 2020 May
57.8 – 69.3 – 0.4 4.7 0.1 9.9 – 7.7 – 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.2 – 0.3 June
14.2 – 11.1 2.4 3.9 35.2 27.4 8.6 – 1.1 1.3 – 0.2 – 0.8 July
21.0 – 14.2 3.8 0.9 13.3 18.6 – 4.9 0.2 – 0.4 0.3 – 0.3 Aug.
15.3 – 58.3 2.7 0.6 20.4 26.2 – 5.2 – 0.1 – 0.4 0.2 – 0.2 Sep.
– 20.0 70.5 2.4 1.7 30.3 30.6 – 0.1 – 0.0 0.2 0.6 – 1.0 Oct.
– 12.7 3.6 1.3 3.0 37.4 49.3 – 14.3 0.3 3.3 – 0.3 – 0.9 Nov.
– 22.9 – 73.4 2.4 5.6 – 4.3 – 5.8 – 1.7 1.3 3.1 0.1 – 1.3 Dec.
– 40.3 95.7 1.1 0.9 27.8 45.9 – 14.8 1.6 – 3.8 – 0.0 – 1.1 2021 Jan.
15.4 29.1 2.3 1.5 10.8 20.3 – 8.5 1.2 – 2.4 – 0.0 0.3 Feb.
– 2.3 – 38.0 2.5 2.7 29.1 24.3 – 0.6 0.1 5.0 0.5 – 0.1 Mar.
– 7.4 71.2 0.7 2.6 5.5 13.9 – 5.2 0.7 – 3.4 – 0.1 – 0.4 Apr.
18.8 – 44.9 3.0 2.9 34.8 27.8 2.8 0.6 1.7 – 0.1 2.0 May
6.0 – 14.0 3.1 2.3 – 1.2 7.1 – 8.0 – 0.4 – 0.2 0.1 0.3 June
– 12.0 75.2 4.2 3.7 17.4 21.2 – 4.1 – 0.3 0.6 – 0.1 0.1 July
0.7 – 13.2 2.9 0.2 21.0 20.4 – 1.6 – 0.3 0.1 0.0 2.3 Aug.
7.1 – 77.3 4.6 0.8 7.3 7.6 – 1.3 – 0.6 1.5 – 0.0 0.1 Sep.
– 3.9 53.7 3.3 1.6 16.4 3.9 13.0 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.4 Oct.
7.2 – 42.3 3.7 1.2 25.0 40.9 – 12.3 – 0.1 – 4.7 – 0.3 1.4 Nov.
27.8 –137.1 5.3 4.5 – 0.6 – 13.0 9.0 1.6 – 0.3 0.3 1.7 Dec.
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2019 Nov. 29,016.4 18,729.9 14,100.0 11,684.5 1,569.8 845.7 4,629.9 998.5 3,631.4 6,269.6 4,016.9
Dec. 28,325.6 18,591.8 14,008.8 11,616.8 1,544.2 847.8 4,582.9 981.0 3,601.9 5,930.4 3,803.4
2020 Jan. 29,018.7 18,723.0 14,063.1 11,668.8 1,543.2 851.0 4,659.9 1,003.4 3,656.5 6,301.7 3,994.0
Feb. 29,486.1 18,768.4 14,102.9 11,697.4 1,564.1 841.4 4,665.5 992.3 3,673.3 6,412.9 4,304.7
Mar. 30,019.5 19,015.8 14,241.5 11,884.9 1,559.3 797.3 4,774.4 1,006.7 3,767.6 6,482.9 4,520.8
Apr. 30,449.1 19,309.7 14,350.3 11,933.4 1,614.3 802.5 4,959.5 1,018.1 3,941.4 6,583.0 4,556.4
May 30,500.5 19,611.5 14,470.1 12,020.6 1,646.6 802.8 5,141.4 1,013.8 4,127.7 6,464.0 4,425.1
June 30,406.4 19,761.9 14,451.9 11,982.0 1,653.7 816.1 5,310.0 1,005.3 4,304.7 6,297.2 4,347.3
July 30,598.6 19,912.2 14,334.1 12,013.7 1,506.0 814.5 5,578.1 1,006.0 4,572.1 6,291.1 4,395.3
Aug. 30,434.9 19,985.0 14,355.1 12,019.1 1,525.0 811.0 5,629.9 997.8 4,632.1 6,241.9 4,208.0
Sep. 30,522.8 20,084.9 14,349.5 12,019.2 1,520.4 809.9 5,735.4 998.7 4,736.8 6,238.0 4,199.8
Oct. 30,687.0 20,162.5 14,376.6 12,054.8 1,520.5 801.3 5,785.9 1,004.2 4,781.7 6,337.4 4,187.0
Nov. 30,749.4 20,292.0 14,457.7 12,090.4 1,542.2 825.0 5,834.4 1,003.4 4,831.0 6,331.0 4,126.4
Dec. 30,438.6 20,266.0 14,438.2 12,042.9 1,532.1 863.2 5,827.8 990.2 4,837.6 6,108.9 4,063.7
2021 Jan. 30,643.6 20,387.8 14,466.2 12,067.8 1,535.7 862.6 5,921.6 999.4 4,922.2 6,299.8 3,956.0
Feb. 30,546.1 20,463.6 14,500.5 12,090.1 1,541.1 869.3 5,963.1 992.4 4,970.7 6,300.7 3,781.8
Mar. 30,827.0 20,653.7 14,576.8 12,185.3 1,512.5 879.0 6,076.9 993.3 5,083.6 6,360.7 3,812.6
Apr. 30,752.9 20,667.1 14,566.5 12,169.2 1,509.6 887.7 6,100.6 1,007.2 5,093.4 6,396.3 3,689.5
May 30,890.4 20,788.2 14,612.7 12,198.6 1,521.5 892.6 6,175.5 1,006.2 5,169.3 6,434.1 3,668.1
June 30,991.0 20,890.7 14,652.8 12,234.6 1,529.9 888.3 6,237.9 1,004.8 5,233.1 6,400.1 3,700.3
July 31,313.8 21,028.8 14,708.4 12,278.0 1,543.7 886.7 6,320.4 1,011.3 5,309.1 6,504.0 3,781.0
Aug. 31,438.1 21,048.3 14,685.2 12,261.1 1,533.7 890.4 6,363.1 1,002.3 5,360.8 6,653.2 3,736.6
Sep. 31,474.0 21,134.5 14,758.2 12,331.3 1,535.4 891.4 6,376.3 993.6 5,382.8 6,620.1 3,719.3
Oct. 31,776.0 21,201.9 14,818.0 12,378.9 1,548.9 890.2 6,384.0 987.7 5,396.3 6,822.0 3,752.1
Nov. 32,189.8 21,381.5 14,911.4 12,477.2 1,543.4 890.9 6,470.1 985.9 5,484.2 6,913.4 3,894.9
Dec. 31,778.6 21,380.9 14,914.0 12,458.8 1,568.5 886.7 6,467.0 988.4 5,478.6 6,735.4 3,662.2
German contribution (€ billion)
2019 Nov. 6,785.4 4,490.1 3,527.4 3,064.8 199.7 262.9 962.6 292.6 670.0 1,289.6 1,005.8
Dec. 6,716.1 4,480.4 3,527.3 3,064.0 197.9 265.4 953.1 288.5 664.6 1,236.4 999.3
2020 Jan. 6,847.7 4,503.3 3,537.5 3,071.5 198.2 267.8 965.8 292.8 673.0 1,290.1 1,054.4
Feb. 7,028.5 4,531.0 3,562.2 3,092.6 203.2 266.4 968.8 290.8 678.0 1,306.1 1,191.4
Mar. 7,148.1 4,567.1 3,589.0 3,128.9 202.1 258.0 978.1 292.4 685.7 1,321.3 1,259.6
Apr. 7,258.0 4,605.2 3,606.5 3,143.8 206.5 256.1 998.7 294.8 703.9 1,346.6 1,306.2
May 7,230.4 4,666.4 3,640.1 3,167.2 215.9 257.1 1,026.2 293.8 732.5 1,326.0 1,238.1
June 7,225.3 4,692.6 3,641.6 3,164.7 220.4 256.6 1,051.0 291.5 759.6 1,304.2 1,228.5
July 7,267.6 4,718.8 3,634.9 3,175.5 202.7 256.7 1,083.9 293.4 790.5 1,282.9 1,265.8
Aug. 7,167.3 4,723.0 3,642.2 3,180.7 202.9 258.6 1,080.8 287.4 793.3 1,268.8 1,175.5
Sep. 7,236.4 4,749.2 3,647.1 3,184.0 204.9 258.1 1,102.1 289.7 812.4 1,293.8 1,193.4
Oct. 7,257.1 4,801.4 3,670.3 3,200.4 210.7 259.3 1,131.1 292.0 839.1 1,278.8 1,176.8
Nov. 7,240.5 4,841.7 3,688.6 3,213.7 214.3 260.6 1,153.1 290.2 862.9 1,261.9 1,136.9
Dec. 7,172.5 4,839.4 3,695.5 3,216.4 214.7 264.5 1,143.9 286.4 857.4 1,224.1 1,109.1
2021 Jan. 7,220.7 4,865.5 3,705.9 3,224.4 216.4 265.1 1,159.6 286.5 873.1 1,307.6 1,047.6
Feb. 7,182.0 4,885.0 3,724.3 3,238.8 217.4 268.1 1,160.7 283.8 877.0 1,305.0 991.9
Mar. 7,233.5 4,939.8 3,761.1 3,273.4 217.3 270.4 1,178.7 282.6 896.1 1,315.4 978.3
Apr. 7,228.4 4,946.1 3,760.5 3,270.3 217.6 272.6 1,185.6 285.7 899.9 1,333.6 948.6
May 7,228.0 4,977.5 3,777.2 3,283.3 219.5 274.4 1,200.3 283.4 916.9 1,329.8 920.7
June 7,277.1 5,009.8 3,786.4 3,290.4 220.8 275.2 1,223.4 282.3 941.1 1,325.1 942.1
July 7,362.7 5,062.4 3,808.5 3,310.2 221.9 276.4 1,253.9 284.4 969.5 1,317.4 982.9
Aug. 7,395.2 5,087.3 3,824.6 3,325.1 221.4 278.1 1,262.8 280.8 982.0 1,336.0 971.9
Sep. 7,398.6 5,110.8 3,840.8 3,336.4 224.7 279.7 1,270.1 280.7 989.4 1,335.1 952.6
Oct. 7,461.0 5,147.0 3,874.5 3,363.5 228.6 282.4 1,272.5 284.4 988.0 1,385.2 928.8
Nov. 7,575.0 5,210.7 3,904.2 3,389.9 229.0 285.3 1,306.4 280.7 1,025.7 1,396.4 967.9
Dec. 7,476.7 5,212.2 3,914.8 3,393.3 236.9 284.5 1,297.4 277.9 1,019.5 1,354.6 909.9
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,215.1 13,389.0 12,520.8 12,572.5 7,386.6 740.9 200.6 1,885.5 2,310.4 48.6 2019 Nov.
1,231.5 13,311.4 12,508.3 12,583.4 7,391.7 738.4 200.1 1,892.8 2,314.1 46.2 Dec.
1,224.1 13,359.6 12,460.6 12,555.5 7,362.8 734.5 200.1 1,891.0 2,322.3 44.7 2020 Jan.
1,229.3 13,477.0 12,528.5 12,615.6 7,430.6 731.6 198.6 1,888.7 2,322.0 44.1 Feb.
1,253.1 13,775.3 12,782.4 12,903.7 7,698.1 759.4 192.1 1,883.4 2,327.6 43.1 Mar.
1,273.5 13,996.0 12,953.0 13,065.1 7,852.4 762.3 188.2 1,876.7 2,343.4 42.1 Apr.
1,293.5 14,302.8 13,164.0 13,264.9 8,009.7 779.7 188.4 1,881.9 2,363.7 41.4 May
1,306.6 14,478.2 13,208.9 13,310.8 8,066.5 763.6 186.8 1,877.8 2,375.5 40.6 June
1,320.9 14,592.9 13,276.6 13,363.7 8,090.1 783.2 186.3 1,882.5 2,381.1 40.4 July
1,326.8 14,668.1 13,304.3 13,391.2 8,117.1 767.8 184.4 1,892.0 2,390.0 40.0 Aug.
1,330.3 14,758.4 13,361.0 13,467.6 8,175.8 781.0 195.4 1,883.6 2,392.0 39.8 Sep.
1,338.1 14,814.8 13,431.7 13,545.6 8,266.0 783.3 181.9 1,880.4 2,394.6 39.4 Oct.
1,349.9 14,813.0 13,527.2 13,621.6 8,358.3 756.5 179.6 1,885.7 2,402.5 39.0 Nov.
1,370.7 14,772.9 13,620.6 13,728.8 8,459.6 772.0 176.9 1,877.6 2,404.2 38.5 Dec.
1,373.3 14,873.9 13,631.3 13,752.9 8,505.4 743.9 173.8 1,870.6 2,421.0 38.1 2021 Jan.
1,380.6 14,957.8 13,678.6 13,807.8 8,569.5 733.7 169.2 1,865.1 2,432.5 37.7 Feb.
1,391.1 15,076.4 13,757.0 13,913.7 8,654.9 753.5 164.3 1,858.8 2,444.8 37.4 Mar.
1,399.6 15,061.0 13,775.3 13,936.1 8,727.0 731.8 159.5 1,827.5 2,453.0 37.3 Apr.
1,412.8 15,147.4 13,870.8 14,018.1 8,811.1 724.4 155.5 1,826.2 2,463.6 37.1 May
1,423.2 15,241.8 13,943.4 14,091.3 8,917.7 698.2 150.4 1,822.0 2,466.2 36.8 June
1,437.5 15,335.4 14,017.2 14,185.7 9,006.7 705.9 153.6 1,817.0 2,466.2 36.3 July
1,439.1 15,386.3 14,039.3 14,196.7 9,030.0 707.3 151.2 1,809.9 2,462.4 35.9 Aug.
1,444.3 15,442.5 14,075.3 14,239.7 9,092.9 701.1 140.0 1,806.7 2,463.3 35.6 Sep.
1,450.1 15,504.3 14,138.4 14,312.0 9,165.8 708.9 148.0 1,795.6 2,458.8 34.9 Oct.
1,456.2 15,518.0 14,188.2 14,344.8 9,223.6 697.3 143.3 1,786.6 2,459.8 34.3 Nov.
1,476.8 15,577.6 14,308.2 14,462.3 9,314.2 714.5 131.1 1,805.5 2,463.5 33.6 Dec.
German contribution (€ billion)
278.4 3,874.7 3,753.7 3,580.0 2,257.7 143.0 30.8 573.7 539.2 35.6 2019 Nov.
281.8 3,863.9 3,744.4 3,574.3 2,250.5 144.8 31.0 573.5 540.0 34.5 Dec.
281.2 3,850.4 3,733.8 3,572.3 2,255.2 145.3 31.0 570.6 537.2 33.0 2020 Jan.
281.3 3,890.4 3,750.4 3,576.3 2,265.3 142.0 31.3 569.8 535.4 32.5 Feb.
282.2 3,982.8 3,830.4 3,655.2 2,346.4 147.3 30.5 567.2 532.0 31.8 Mar.
286.5 3,997.3 3,828.9 3,665.7 2,359.6 149.2 30.0 563.6 532.2 31.1 Apr.
291.8 4,080.7 3,885.8 3,710.9 2,396.9 158.3 29.0 563.6 532.5 30.7 May
296.5 4,132.2 3,873.6 3,711.6 2,408.7 152.1 29.6 559.0 532.6 29.7 June
300.4 4,170.7 3,880.3 3,716.8 2,409.9 163.5 30.0 552.8 531.5 29.2 July
301.3 4,202.4 3,889.9 3,720.2 2,419.2 159.3 30.1 551.3 531.6 28.8 Aug.
301.9 4,235.6 3,905.7 3,745.0 2,445.3 160.3 30.3 549.2 531.5 28.4 Sep.
303.6 4,245.3 3,935.3 3,781.4 2,476.4 165.4 30.5 549.7 531.5 28.0 Oct.
306.6 4,260.2 3,961.8 3,804.4 2,507.7 157.7 30.6 549.0 531.8 27.6 Nov.
312.2 4,228.5 3,954.1 3,801.5 2,500.9 160.3 31.0 548.8 533.1 27.3 Dec.
313.1 4,218.7 3,980.7 3,829.7 2,541.7 147.0 31.0 548.5 534.8 26.8 2021 Jan.
314.6 4,245.1 3,990.0 3,837.4 2,555.8 141.0 31.1 547.0 536.0 26.4 Feb.
317.3 4,264.3 4,011.8 3,863.4 2,579.8 145.1 31.7 544.6 536.1 26.1 Mar.
319.9 4,262.2 4,013.0 3,874.5 2,594.4 143.0 31.9 542.5 536.8 25.8 Apr.
322.8 4,308.8 4,040.3 3,895.1 2,613.5 146.0 32.2 540.4 537.4 25.7 May
325.1 4,311.0 4,035.3 3,890.5 2,619.4 139.3 31.9 537.5 537.0 25.5 June
328.8 4,313.9 4,047.3 3,911.3 2,645.8 136.0 31.4 536.0 536.7 25.2 July
329.0 4,333.1 4,065.2 3,923.1 2,659.1 135.6 31.3 535.7 536.4 25.0 Aug.
329.8 4,340.5 4,064.1 3,919.8 2,662.1 132.2 31.2 533.6 535.8 24.8 Sep.
331.4 4,354.3 4,080.9 3,950.3 2,681.4 143.0 31.1 534.8 535.5 24.6 Oct.
332.6 4,390.5 4,107.1 3,968.0 2,710.9 132.5 30.3 534.6 535.5 24.3 Nov.
337.1 4,425.0 4,112.9 3,968.2 2,691.2 141.2 30.1 544.6 537.0 24.1 Dec.
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2019 Nov. 363.9 452.6 235.7 95.5 33.8 59.1 24.8 3.8 284.3 283.7 541.3 2,187.5 1,493.3
Dec. 297.5 430.4 224.7 85.9 33.7 59.1 23.6 3.6 250.3 249.8 519.8 2,154.2 1,487.0
2020 Jan. 381.8 422.3 209.6 92.7 33.2 59.5 23.2 4.1 243.4 242.9 551.8 2,187.7 1,500.2
Feb. 425.5 436.0 219.8 96.8 32.8 59.2 23.3 4.0 263.2 262.7 547.4 2,190.9 1,497.8
Mar. 430.2 441.4 232.8 93.3 31.0 58.2 22.3 3.9 293.2 292.6 526.9 2,173.9 1,484.3
Apr. 502.3 428.6 233.9 84.0 29.4 56.4 21.1 3.8 289.0 288.6 542.9 2,158.7 1,472.6
May 603.1 434.8 245.9 81.7 28.4 54.7 20.3 3.8 297.8 297.5 542.3 2,134.3 1,470.7
June 726.2 441.1 259.5 82.4 24.6 51.8 19.3 3.4 254.8 254.6 556.6 2,105.0 1,453.7
July 787.6 441.5 264.3 80.1 23.2 51.0 19.4 3.5 271.8 271.6 586.4 2,055.1 1,434.5
Aug. 828.4 448.5 273.6 79.5 22.1 50.3 19.6 3.5 266.9 266.7 587.0 2,036.6 1,425.3
Sep. 848.8 442.1 274.8 74.4 20.8 49.1 19.5 3.4 237.7 237.5 595.2 2,059.6 1,431.0
Oct. 831.5 437.6 277.4 69.6 20.8 47.0 19.5 3.4 243.1 242.9 609.3 2,043.2 1,418.6
Nov. 733.0 458.4 307.1 64.6 17.8 46.1 19.4 3.3 246.4 246.4 610.3 2,025.2 1,406.4
Dec. 604.8 439.3 294.7 60.3 17.2 44.8 19.0 3.3 221.4 221.3 626.0 1,995.5 1,386.3
2021 Jan. 683.2 437.8 294.4 58.9 17.4 44.1 19.2 3.8 251.6 251.5 644.5 1,990.9 1,369.7
Feb. 713.6 436.4 296.4 54.3 19.0 43.9 19.2 3.7 254.6 254.5 613.8 2,004.3 1,369.6
Mar. 733.1 429.6 295.4 52.1 16.4 43.2 18.9 3.7 236.5 236.5 609.1 2,005.5 1,357.4
Apr. 700.9 424.0 293.9 48.5 16.2 42.9 18.9 3.6 251.1 251.0 618.0 1,991.6 1,350.5
May 692.4 436.9 308.3 47.7 15.9 42.4 19.1 3.5 246.7 246.7 608.5 1,980.7 1,339.4
June 709.3 441.2 314.0 46.6 16.3 42.0 18.8 3.5 236.5 236.5 600.0 1,984.2 1,332.4
July 709.7 440.1 313.9 45.6 16.6 42.0 18.6 3.5 253.9 253.8 622.7 1,999.4 1,334.0
Aug. 736.1 453.5 329.1 43.9 17.0 42.0 18.0 3.4 241.6 241.5 628.0 1,988.8 1,334.1
Sep. 742.7 460.1 334.6 46.3 16.6 41.3 18.1 3.3 257.1 257.0 596.9 2,011.7 1,343.3
Oct. 740.3 452.0 323.3 48.2 18.0 41.6 17.7 3.3 270.2 270.2 628.3 2,039.0 1,355.8
Nov. 691.5 481.7 349.9 50.4 19.1 41.7 17.5 3.3 266.3 266.3 655.0 2,045.4 1,354.6
Dec. 646.6 468.7 337.5 49.8 19.4 41.1 17.6 3.2 224.3 223.1 649.1 2,018.1 1,345.7
German contribution (€ billion)
2019 Nov. 45.4 249.3 83.4 83.9 27.4 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.7 1.5 1.9 560.4 302.2
Dec. 43.4 246.2 89.5 75.4 27.0 51.0 2.9 0.4 3.5 3.4 1.8 551.4 301.6
2020 Jan. 37.8 240.2 77.8 81.4 26.6 51.3 2.7 0.4 2.5 2.4 1.8 560.9 306.5
Feb. 62.2 251.9 85.5 86.0 26.3 50.9 2.8 0.4 2.0 1.8 1.8 563.9 310.3
Mar. 69.7 257.9 97.6 82.5 24.7 49.8 2.8 0.4 1.7 1.6 2.2 553.0 310.7
Apr. 87.5 244.0 94.7 74.4 23.7 48.3 2.7 0.4 3.4 3.3 2.1 550.6 306.2
May 116.2 253.6 108.0 72.9 22.9 46.7 2.8 0.3 2.4 2.3 1.9 543.1 305.4
June 174.0 246.5 106.1 74.1 19.5 44.0 2.5 0.3 0.9 0.7 1.8 532.8 297.2
July 208.5 245.3 109.6 71.4 18.3 43.2 2.5 0.3 2.1 2.0 1.6 523.3 293.3
Aug. 229.5 252.8 118.7 71.3 17.4 42.4 2.6 0.3 1.7 1.5 1.9 517.9 291.1
Sep. 244.7 245.8 119.4 66.0 16.5 41.1 2.5 0.3 1.3 1.1 2.0 525.3 296.1
Oct. 224.8 239.1 119.1 61.7 16.6 39.0 2.5 0.3 1.4 1.3 2.7 519.9 296.2
Nov. 212.1 243.7 131.6 57.3 14.0 38.0 2.5 0.2 9.1 9.1 2.4 515.5 296.1
Dec. 189.2 237.8 131.9 52.8 13.5 36.8 2.5 0.2 12.2 12.2 2.5 503.3 290.1
2021 Jan. 148.9 240.1 136.5 51.6 13.5 35.8 2.4 0.2 8.4 8.4 2.4 503.3 284.6
Feb. 164.3 243.4 142.8 47.3 15.2 35.5 2.5 0.2 6.0 6.0 2.4 510.0 288.4
Mar. 161.9 239.0 144.4 44.9 12.7 34.4 2.4 0.2 11.0 11.0 2.9 523.3 289.8
Apr. 154.6 233.1 142.4 41.5 12.5 34.1 2.4 0.2 7.6 7.6 2.8 524.3 296.2
May 173.3 240.3 150.8 41.0 12.5 33.4 2.4 0.2 9.2 9.2 2.2 518.0 293.2
June 179.3 241.2 152.9 39.9 13.0 32.8 2.4 0.2 9.0 9.0 2.3 515.5 294.6
July 167.3 235.3 148.0 38.9 13.3 32.5 2.4 0.2 9.6 9.6 2.2 518.3 295.1
Aug. 168.1 241.8 155.7 37.3 13.9 32.4 2.4 0.2 9.7 9.7 2.2 522.4 303.1
Sep. 175.2 245.6 158.2 39.8 13.4 31.7 2.3 0.2 11.2 11.2 2.2 530.1 305.5
Oct. 171.3 232.7 142.7 40.9 14.8 31.8 2.3 0.2 10.8 10.8 2.1 547.9 316.4
Nov. 178.4 244.1 155.2 38.8 16.1 31.6 2.2 0.2 6.1 6.1 1.8 556.5 324.8
Dec. 206.2 250.6 161.9 39.1 16.4 30.8 2.3 0.2 5.8 4.8 2.2 547.6 316.2
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
6.8 19.2 2,161.5 4,769.8 2,922.7 31.4 3,675.2 0.0 8,971.7 12,401.3 13,041.1 7,081.1 157.9 2019 Nov.
– 11.0 19.2 2,146.1 4,452.0 2,912.1 25.2 3,469.2 0.0 8,975.3 12,395.7 12,995.0 7,059.8 152.0 Dec.
– 0.3 21.7 2,166.2 4,762.6 2,949.8 24.3 3,715.4 0.0 8,927.4 12,357.5 13,003.1 7,115.3 154.9 2020 Jan.
3.5 23.0 2,164.4 4,820.3 2,966.7 26.4 3,964.7 0.0 9,012.7 12,441.8 13,101.0 7,127.1 156.9 Feb.
29.8 20.5 2,123.6 4,910.3 2,930.7 11.6 4,144.5 0.0 9,312.6 12,762.0 13,448.8 7,043.0 152.5 Mar.
12.7 21.3 2,124.8 5,058.7 2,947.0 – 25.4 4,208.7 0.0 9,490.6 12,941.2 13,619.4 7,050.8 153.0 Apr.
4.1 22.2 2,108.0 4,956.8 2,952.7 – 33.1 4,053.3 0.0 9,682.0 13,166.2 13,836.0 7,042.6 154.7 May
– 0.3 20.6 2,084.7 4,723.1 2,977.4 – 4.2 4,008.9 0.0 9,768.9 13,242.8 13,915.4 7,035.8 158.0 June
– 11.9 19.9 2,047.1 4,744.5 3,017.5 – 54.6 4,064.1 0.0 9,813.1 13,308.1 14,012.0 7,042.1 159.4 July
– 15.4 19.2 2,032.9 4,711.2 3,014.5 – 38.8 3,862.5 0.0 9,856.0 13,340.6 14,027.9 7,033.2 160.0 Aug.
– 14.4 15.3 2,058.7 4,666.9 3,011.2 – 15.9 3,879.2 0.0 9,923.5 13,428.0 14,122.0 7,045.8 163.9 Sep.
– 2.2 15.2 2,030.1 4,789.8 3,038.2 – 47.9 3,858.5 0.0 10,025.3 13,516.4 14,233.1 7,038.6 165.3 Oct.
– 1.5 17.4 2,009.2 4,868.1 2,995.8 – 44.2 3,884.8 0.0 10,167.5 13,629.7 14,354.2 6,979.2 174.0 Nov.
– 4.6 16.9 1,983.2 4,671.6 3,020.4 – 11.3 3,771.4 0.0 10,278.9 13,750.6 14,480.2 6,967.8 176.0 Dec.
1.9 15.7 1,973.3 4,821.4 2,998.3 – 10.2 3,700.1 0.0 10,326.2 13,784.9 14,551.2 6,928.1 177.5 2021 Jan.
13.8 16.4 1,974.2 4,872.9 2,952.8 – 10.9 3,520.1 0.0 10,398.7 13,851.2 14,604.3 6,877.4 176.8 Feb.
– 0.7 16.9 1,989.3 4,944.3 2,967.4 15.9 3,580.8 0.0 10,490.2 13,964.5 14,699.1 6,899.7 173.1 Mar.
6.5 16.5 1,968.5 4,989.3 2,947.8 10.4 3,484.2 0.0 10,569.9 14,021.8 14,781.1 6,827.7 173.5 Apr.
14.8 15.9 1,950.0 4,995.9 2,968.3 53.3 3,476.7 0.0 10,684.4 14,134.5 14,887.1 6,827.6 176.1 May
10.6 16.1 1,957.5 4,964.4 2,979.7 57.4 3,503.8 0.0 10,811.2 14,231.7 14,971.2 6,841.5 180.3 June
16.9 17.1 1,965.4 5,049.4 3,024.5 40.5 3,550.6 0.0 10,914.9 14,345.4 15,122.6 6,888.6 180.9 July
12.1 16.3 1,960.4 5,197.7 3,024.1 33.0 3,499.4 0.0 10,956.5 14,380.4 15,153.1 6,875.7 182.3 Aug.
14.0 17.9 1,979.8 5,221.8 2,997.3 20.9 3,481.4 0.0 11,035.2 14,444.6 15,191.5 6,864.0 187.4 Sep.
21.6 17.8 1,999.5 5,420.5 2,999.3 – 17.8 3,482.1 0.0 11,103.5 14,527.0 15,325.0 6,874.2 188.2 Oct.
17.6 18.0 2,009.8 5,505.6 3,036.9 26.7 3,679.6 0.0 11,195.3 14,606.7 15,419.1 6,912.5 189.7 Nov.
10.4 18.1 1,989.6 5,368.0 3,022.9 60.9 3,381.0 0.0 11,295.8 14,717.9 15,501.0 6,895.8 193.4 Dec.
German contribution (€ billion)
21.4 5.8 533.1 877.7 749.1 –951.9 1,671.9 430.8 2,341.2 3,168.5 3,199.3 1,943.1 0.0 2019 Nov.
21.0 6.1 524.3 863.5 750.1 –999.8 1,681.4 435.8 2,340.1 3,161.1 3,193.6 1,933.9 0.0 Dec.
23.9 6.7 530.2 831.0 757.2 –900.5 1,744.6 437.9 2,333.0 3,157.1 3,192.1 1,942.8 0.0 2020 Jan.
21.7 6.8 535.4 850.2 764.8 –912.0 1,867.4 442.7 2,350.9 3,174.6 3,207.0 1,953.8 0.0 Feb.
18.4 6.3 528.3 901.4 757.6 –990.7 1,940.1 455.0 2,444.0 3,263.9 3,292.5 1,935.1 0.0 Mar.
15.9 6.9 527.8 942.0 759.1 –1,003.6 2,007.1 458.2 2,454.3 3,266.4 3,294.7 1,930.3 0.0 Apr.
14.9 7.3 520.8 917.3 756.1 –1,003.8 1,932.8 458.5 2,505.0 3,323.2 3,349.8 1,918.3 0.0 May
14.8 7.1 510.9 939.7 769.1 –1,074.1 1,923.1 458.1 2,514.8 3,325.2 3,349.7 1,913.0 0.0 June
12.8 6.7 503.7 907.0 784.6 –1,089.1 1,967.5 460.5 2,519.5 3,336.8 3,360.1 1,913.6 0.0 July
12.0 7.2 498.7 891.2 778.4 –1,114.7 1,888.5 464.3 2,537.9 3,350.2 3,372.9 1,899.9 0.0 Aug.
12.4 6.7 506.2 952.4 787.3 –1,172.8 1,905.3 467.0 2,564.6 3,371.8 3,394.2 1,912.5 0.0 Sep.
11.1 7.0 501.8 906.4 794.7 –1,107.6 1,894.1 469.4 2,595.4 3,403.6 3,425.7 1,913.5 0.0 Oct.
10.0 7.1 498.4 923.3 780.2 –1,109.5 1,859.4 470.7 2,639.3 3,433.2 3,461.8 1,893.5 0.0 Nov.
9.0 6.6 487.7 985.7 787.5 –1,192.0 1,844.9 473.1 2,632.8 3,426.1 3,456.4 1,888.4 0.0 Dec.
7.8 6.8 488.7 1,026.4 778.3 –1,113.3 1,796.5 474.2 2,678.2 3,458.5 3,483.9 1,878.3 0.0 2021 Jan.
7.4 7.5 495.1 1,007.6 756.3 –1,095.7 1,750.3 476.5 2,698.6 3,471.7 3,494.9 1,860.6 0.0 Feb.
8.1 6.8 508.4 1,080.1 754.4 –1,144.4 1,742.0 479.0 2,724.1 3,497.0 3,525.7 1,868.2 0.0 Mar.
7.8 6.6 510.0 1,029.5 759.2 –1,074.2 1,717.0 479.7 2,736.8 3,505.0 3,529.7 1,871.8 0.0 Apr.
9.6 6.7 501.7 1,051.5 768.2 –1,126.5 1,696.6 482.8 2,764.3 3,535.8 3,563.5 1,869.6 0.0 May
9.8 6.9 498.8 1,088.8 775.4 –1,149.4 1,724.5 485.9 2,772.3 3,535.7 3,563.7 1,870.2 0.0 June
9.8 7.0 501.5 1,031.5 795.8 –1,075.6 1,767.0 490.0 2,793.9 3,552.6 3,581.2 1,891.2 0.0 July
12.7 6.5 503.2 1,068.1 793.5 –1,088.4 1,754.6 492.9 2,814.8 3,571.7 3,602.8 1,889.9 0.0 Aug.
13.1 7.0 510.1 1,165.5 781.6 –1,156.2 1,723.6 497.5 2,820.3 3,575.1 3,608.5 1,881.9 0.0 Sep.
13.3 7.2 527.5 1,165.8 783.9 –1,110.5 1,706.6 500.8 2,824.1 3,591.6 3,625.0 1,902.8 0.0 Oct.
14.5 7.4 534.6 1,227.7 803.0 –1,154.8 1,744.2 504.5 2,866.1 3,621.4 3,651.2 1,928.3 0.0 Nov.
16.1 7.5 524.0 1,305.6 796.2 –1,296.9 1,691.2 509.8 2,853.1 3,619.2 3,650.8 1,919.8 0.0 Dec.
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2020 Jan. 768.6 2.9 616.1 0.0 2,639.1 254.6 0.0 1,282.2 211.8 654.3 1,623.7 3,160.6
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 767.1 1.4 615.9 0.0 2,666.7 244.6 0.0 1,277.1 268.6 618.4 1,642.3 3,164.1
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 926.3 0.6 865.7 0.0 2,784.2 271.8 0.0 1,321.9 374.4 788.6 1,820.2 3,413.8
June 950.4 0.3 984.2 0.0 2,986.9 299.9 0.0 1,347.9 477.1 830.5 1,966.5 3,614.4
July 871.3 0.8 1,401.5 0.0 3,168.2 356.0 0.0 1,365.7 671.2 703.1 2,345.9 4,067.5
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 865.9 1.3 1,593.2 0.0 3,323.6 413.2 0.0 1,381.2 712.9 651.0 2,625.7 4,420.1
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 864.4 1.3 1,707.8 0.0 3,475.8 460.7 0.0 1,389.1 749.0 653.5 2,797.0 4,646.8
Dec. 865.1 0.5 1,754.4 0.0 3,614.7 535.4 0.0 1,403.9 647.0 687.7 2,960.7 4,900.0
2021 Jan. 848.6 0.3 1,792.6 0.0 3,712.9 586.9 0.0 1,429.4 530.3 778.4 3,029.4 5,045.7
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 834.9 0.4 1,792.4 0.0 3,825.1 598.0 0.0 1,433.4 595.8 667.9 3,157.7 5,189.1
Apr. 816.7 0.3 2,054.6 0.0 3,951.4 676.4 0.0 1,447.7 644.5 633.4 3,421.1 5,545.2
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 809.8 0.2 2,107.0 0.0 4,092.7 706.5 0.0 1,465.8 586.7 659.1 3,591.7 5,763.9
July 821.7 0.1 2,196.0 0.0 4,244.5 736.6 0.0 1,485.8 652.3 734.5 3,653.1 5,875.5
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 826.7 0.2 2,213.2 0.0 4,378.9 766.6 0.0 1,499.9 635.7 790.4 3,726.2 5,992.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 835.1 0.2 2,209.9 0.0 4,512.3 738.5 0.0 1,507.4 671.3 833.7 3,806.5 6,052.4
Dec. 839.2 0.2 2,208.8 0.0 4,655.6 745.0 0.0 1,521.4 628.3 965.7 3,843.3 6,109.7
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deutsche Bundesbank
2020 Jan. 186.0 0.9 74.0 0.0 567.9 73.6 0.0 311.7 52.7 – 95.7 486.5 871.8
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 185.0 0.4 74.0 0.0 573.7 65.4 0.0 311.2 64.4 – 125.0 517.1 893.7
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 238.0 0.2 106.8 0.0 585.3 76.3 0.0 324.1 102.0 – 174.5 602.8 1,003.2
June 248.7 0.1 122.5 0.0 623.1 85.0 0.0 326.4 137.6 – 172.6 618.1 1,029.5
July 222.1 0.5 235.2 0.0 655.9 108.2 0.0 331.5 205.0 – 238.1 707.1 1,146.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 212.1 0.8 284.0 0.0 692.0 136.0 0.0 336.4 239.6 – 298.0 774.8 1,247.3
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 212.1 0.7 319.5 0.0 729.0 145.5 0.0 338.1 254.7 – 302.9 826.0 1,309.6
Dec. 213.0 0.3 333.9 0.0 768.7 166.6 0.0 341.2 217.9 – 294.5 884.7 1,392.5
2021 Jan. 208.3 0.1 341.1 0.0 791.3 178.9 0.0 347.3 189.4 – 252.8 878.0 1,404.2
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 205.3 0.1 341.0 0.0 816.9 177.5 0.0 348.3 172.7 – 298.0 962.8 1,488.6
Apr. 198.0 0.0 407.3 0.0 845.8 203.0 0.0 351.7 187.4 – 300.4 1,008.9 1,563.5
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 194.3 0.0 420.5 0.0 884.3 208.5 0.0 356.8 187.3 – 301.9 1,046.7 1,612.0
July 197.4 0.0 434.3 0.0 918.5 204.2 0.0 362.0 206.8 – 270.8 1,046.2 1,612.4
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 199.0 0.1 436.7 0.0 950.8 210.7 0.0 365.0 204.3 – 240.8 1,045.3 1,621.0
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 200.3 0.1 439.1 0.0 978.5 204.4 0.0 367.4 217.7 – 235.2 1,061.6 1,633.3
Dec. 201.3 0.0 440.3 0.0 1,015.8 206.4 0.0 370.9 220.4 – 219.4 1,077.1 1,654.4
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
– 4.7 + 1.1 –47.6 ± 0.0 +20.3 – 3.3 ± 0.0 +19.3 –14.8 + 6.2 –38.4 –22.3 2020 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
– 1.5 – 1.5 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +27.6 –10.0 ± 0.0 – 5.1 +56.8 –35.9 +18.6 + 3.5 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+159.2 – 0.8 +249.8 ± 0.0 +117.5 +27.2 ± 0.0 +44.8 +105.8 +170.2 +177.9 +249.7 May
+24.1 – 0.3 +118.5 ± 0.0 +202.7 +28.1 ± 0.0 +26.0 +102.7 +41.9 +146.3 +200.6 June
–79.1 + 0.5 +417.3 ± 0.0 +181.3 +56.1 ± 0.0 +17.8 +194.1 –127.4 +379.4 +453.1 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
– 5.4 + 0.5 +191.7 ± 0.0 +155.4 +57.2 ± 0.0 +15.5 +41.7 –52.1 +279.8 +352.6 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
– 1.5 ± 0.0 +114.6 ± 0.0 +152.2 +47.5 ± 0.0 + 7.9 +36.1 + 2.5 +171.3 +226.7 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.8 +46.6 ± 0.0 +138.9 +74.7 ± 0.0 +14.8 –102.0 +34.2 +163.7 +253.2 Dec.
–16.5 – 0.2 +38.2 ± 0.0 +98.2 +51.5 ± 0.0 +25.5 –116.7 +90.7 +68.7 +145.7 2021 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
–13.7 + 0.1 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +112.2 +11.1 ± 0.0 + 4.0 +65.5 –110.5 +128.3 +143.4 Mar.
–18.2 – 0.1 +262.2 ± 0.0 +126.3 +78.4 ± 0.0 +14.3 +48.7 –34.5 +263.4 +356.1 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
– 6.9 – 0.1 +52.4 ± 0.0 +141.3 +30.1 ± 0.0 +18.1 –57.8 +25.7 +170.6 +218.7 June
+11.9 – 0.1 +89.0 ± 0.0 +151.8 +30.1 ± 0.0 +20.0 +65.6 +75.4 +61.4 +111.6 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 5.0 + 0.1 +17.2 ± 0.0 +134.4 +30.0 ± 0.0 +14.1 –16.6 +55.9 +73.1 +117.3 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 8.4 ± 0.0 – 3.3 ± 0.0 +133.4 –28.1 ± 0.0 + 7.5 +35.6 +43.3 +80.3 +59.6 Nov.
+ 4.1 ± 0.0 – 1.1 ± 0.0 +143.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 +14.0 –43.0 +132.0 +36.8 +57.3 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
Deutsche Bundesbank
– 0.9 + 0.4 – 8.5 + 0.0 + 1.8 – 8.6 ± 0.0 + 4.1 –3.2 +39.6 –38.9 –43.5 2020 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
– 1.0 – 0.5 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 5.8 – 8.2 ± 0.0 – 0.5 +11.7 –29.3 +30.7 +21.9 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+53.0 – 0.2 +32.9 – 0.0 +11.6 +10.9 ± 0.0 +12.9 +37.6 –49.6 +85.6 +109.5 May
+10.7 – 0.1 +15.7 + 0.0 +37.8 + 8.7 ± 0.0 + 2.3 +35.6 + 2.0 +15.3 +26.3 June
–26.6 + 0.4 +112.6 – 0.0 +32.8 +23.2 ± 0.0 + 5.1 +67.5 –65.5 +89.0 +117.3 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
–10.0 + 0.3 +48.9 + 0.0 +36.1 +27.9 ± 0.0 + 5.0 +34.6 –59.9 +67.6 +100.5 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 0.0 – 0.1 +35.5 – 0.0 +37.0 + 9.5 ± 0.0 + 1.7 +15.0 – 5.0 +51.2 +62.3 Nov.
+ 0.9 – 0.4 +14.4 + 0.0 +39.8 +21.1 ± 0.0 + 3.1 –36.8 + 8.4 +58.7 +82.9 Dec.
– 4.7 – 0.2 + 7.1 + 0.0 +22.6 +12.3 ± 0.0 + 6.1 –28.5 +41.7 – 6.7 +11.7 2021 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
– 3.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 +25.6 – 1.4 ± 0.0 + 1.0 –16.7 –45.2 +84.8 +84.4 Mar.
– 7.3 – 0.1 +66.3 + 0.0 +28.8 +25.5 ± 0.0 + 3.4 +14.7 – 2.4 +46.0 +74.9 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
– 3.7 + 0.0 +13.2 + 0.0 +38.6 + 5.5 ± 0.0 + 5.1 –0.1 – 1.5 +37.9 +48.5 June
+ 3.1 – 0.0 +13.8 – 0.0 +34.2 – 4.3 ± 0.0 + 5.2 +19.4 +31.1 – 0.5 + 0.4 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 1.6 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.0 +32.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 + 3.0 –2.5 +29.9 – 0.9 + 8.6 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.4 – 0.0 +27.8 – 6.4 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +13.4 + 5.7 +16.3 +12.3 Nov.
+ 1.0 – 0.1 + 1.2 – 0.0 +37.3 + 2.1 ± 0.0 + 3.5 +2.7 +15.7 +15.6 +21.1 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2021 July 16 7,950.7 514.7 354.9 87.1 267.9 25.4 10.3 10.3 –
23 7,988.0 514.7 354.0 87.2 266.7 26.6 10.9 10.9 –
30 7,987.4 514.7 354.8 87.2 267.5 25.3 10.3 10.3 –
Aug. 6 8,009.7 514.7 354.8 87.3 267.4 25.4 10.5 10.5 –
13 8,036.0 514.7 355.5 87.3 268.2 24.5 10.6 10.6 –
20 8,052.8 514.7 355.7 87.3 268.4 24.2 10.6 10.6 –
27 8,191.3 514.7 477.1 209.7 267.4 25.0 10.8 10.8 –
Sep. 3 8,207.5 514.7 477.3 209.7 267.6 24.8 11.1 11.1 –
10 8,222.7 514.7 477.6 210.1 267.5 24.9 10.6 10.6 –
17 8,244.6 514.7 475.3 210.9 264.4 27.6 11.8 11.8 –
24 8,273.2 514.7 475.6 211.2 264.4 27.6 13.7 13.7 –
Oct. 1 8,289.1 517.8 487.7 213.4 274.3 24.9 10.7 10.7 –
8 8,314.3 517.8 488.0 213.6 274.4 24.9 10.7 10.7 –
15 8,336.7 517.8 488.7 213.6 275.1 24.3 10.7 10.7 –
22 8,368.3 517.8 489.7 214.0 275.6 24.3 10.9 10.9 –
29 8,366.1 517.9 489.0 214.9 274.1 24.5 10.8 10.8 –
Nov. 5 8,382.7 517.9 489.9 215.1 274.8 24.1 10.5 10.5 –
12 8,404.8 517.9 489.7 214.9 274.8 24.0 11.0 11.0 –
19 8,442.3 517.9 490.7 214.9 275.8 25.5 10.7 10.7 –
26 8,457.0 517.9 490.7 214.9 275.8 26.1 10.4 10.4 –
Dec. 3 8,469.9 517.9 490.8 214.9 275.9 24.3 10.0 10.0 –
10 8,496.6 517.9 490.9 215.2 275.7 24.6 11.5 11.5 –
17 8,511.5 517.9 490.6 215.3 275.3 24.4 11.6 11.6 –
24 8,512.3 517.9 491.3 215.6 275.7 24.7 13.3 13.3 –
31 8,566.4 559.4 500.1 218.9 281.2 24.6 13.0 13.0 –
2022 Jan. 7 8,573.3 559.4 497.2 218.9 278.3 26.1 10.0 10.0 –
14 8,594.0 559.4 496.2 218.9 277.3 26.6 10.5 10.5 –
21 8,600.3 559.4 495.6 218.9 276.7 26.7 10.4 10.4 –
28 8,622.6 559.4 496.7 219.0 277.7 26.7 10.2 10.2 –
Feb. 4 8,630.1 559.4 496.8 219.3 277.5 25.6 10.0 10.0 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2021 July 16 2,668.1 160.0 53.8 22.4 31.3 0.0 – – –
23 2,665.0 160.0 53.8 22.4 31.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
30 2,659.0 160.0 53.7 22.4 31.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
Aug. 6 2,687.1 160.0 53.7 22.5 31.2 0.0 – – –
13 2,696.2 160.0 53.6 22.5 31.2 0.0 – – –
20 2,694.4 160.0 53.7 22.5 31.2 0.0 – – –
27 2,724.3 160.0 84.7 53.4 31.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 –
Sep. 3 2,749.6 160.0 85.0 53.4 31.6 0.0 0.6 0.6 –
10 2,747.9 160.0 84.7 53.4 31.3 0.0 – – –
17 2,749.3 160.0 84.6 53.4 31.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
24 2,782.2 160.0 84.6 53.4 31.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
Oct. 1 2,794.1 160.9 86.0 53.9 32.1 0.0 – – –
8 2,793.0 160.9 86.2 53.9 32.3 0.0 – – –
15 2,797.4 160.9 86.5 53.9 32.6 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
22 2,780.9 160.9 86.7 54.1 32.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
29 2,788.5 160.9 86.2 54.3 32.0 0.0 – – –
Nov. 5 2,812.8 160.9 86.7 54.3 32.4 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
12 2,826.1 160.9 86.7 54.1 32.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
19 2,866.9 160.9 87.1 54.1 33.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
26 2,865.0 160.9 87.3 54.1 33.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
Dec. 3 2,889.6 160.9 86.9 54.1 32.9 0.0 – – –
10 2,929.3 160.9 86.4 54.1 32.3 0.0 – – –
17 2,960.9 160.9 86.2 54.1 32.1 0.0 – – –
24 2,968.1 160.9 86.2 54.1 32.1 0.0 – – –
31 3,012.2 173.8 87.6 54.9 32.6 0.0 – – –
2022 Jan. 7 2,942.1 173.8 87.9 54.9 33.0 0.0 – – –
14 2,946.1 173.8 87.9 54.9 32.9 0.0 – – –
21 2,912.1 173.8 87.8 54.9 32.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
28 2,922.8 173.8 88.1 54.9 33.2 0.0 – – –
Feb. 4 2,921.6 173.8 88.4 55.1 33.3 0.0 – – –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
2,216.8 0.0 2,216.7 – – – – 31.7 4,466.7 4,280.2 186.6 22.1 308.1 2021 July 16
2,216.8 0.1 2,216.7 – – – – 31.2 4,499.4 4,313.0 186.4 22.1 312.3 23
2,214.3 0.1 2,214.1 – – 0.1 – 34.2 4,509.0 4,322.0 187.1 22.1 302.6 30
2,214.2 0.1 2,214.1 – – – – 32.3 4,526.9 4,341.1 185.8 22.1 308.8 Aug. 6
2,214.2 0.2 2,214.1 – – – – 33.2 4,549.7 4,363.9 185.8 22.1 311.3 13
2,214.3 0.2 2,214.1 – – – – 32.1 4,571.2 4,384.6 186.6 22.1 307.8 20
2,212.4 0.1 2,212.3 – – – – 34.6 4,584.6 4,398.5 186.1 22.1 310.0 27
2,211.5 0.0 2,211.4 – – – – 35.4 4,596.1 4,412.8 183.2 22.1 314.6 Sep. 3
2,211.8 0.3 2,211.4 – – 0.0 – 32.9 4,613.1 4,430.7 182.4 22.1 315.1 10
2,211.8 0.3 2,211.4 – – – – 35.0 4,633.9 4,452.2 181.6 22.1 312.4 17
2,211.3 0.0 2,211.3 – – 0.0 – 35.4 4,660.9 4,478.7 182.3 22.1 311.8 24
2,208.8 0.1 2,208.7 – – – – 33.1 4,666.5 4,484.2 182.3 22.2 317.5 Oct. 1
2,208.9 0.2 2,208.6 – – – – 29.8 4,689.7 4,507.6 182.1 22.2 322.4 8
2,208.8 0.2 2,208.6 – – 0.0 – 31.0 4,714.4 4,532.6 181.8 22.2 318.9 15
2,208.7 0.1 2,208.6 – – – – 30.2 4,743.0 4,560.7 182.3 22.2 321.4 22
2,208.8 0.1 2,208.7 – – 0.0 – 26.5 4,745.7 4,568.3 177.4 22.2 320.8 29
2,208.7 0.1 2,208.7 – – – – 26.1 4,764.8 4,586.6 178.2 22.2 318.5 Nov. 5
2,208.9 0.3 2,208.7 – – – – 23.1 4,789.0 4,611.1 177.8 22.2 319.1 12
2,208.8 0.2 2,208.7 – – 0.0 – 31.9 4,818.4 4,640.4 178.0 22.2 316.2 19
2,208.8 0.2 2,208.6 – – – – 27.4 4,838.6 4,662.5 176.1 22.2 314.9 26
2,208.8 0.2 2,208.6 – – – – 27.3 4,851.0 4,676.0 175.0 22.2 317.5 Dec. 3
2,208.8 0.2 2,208.6 – – 0.0 – 29.9 4,874.9 4,699.9 175.0 22.2 315.9 10
2,209.8 0.1 2,209.7 – – – – 32.0 4,885.9 4,713.7 172.2 22.2 317.0 17
2,201.7 0.2 2,201.5 – – – – 28.4 4,896.6 4,723.8 172.8 22.2 316.2 24
2,201.9 0.4 2,201.5 – – – – 26.6 4,886.5 4,713.5 173.0 22.2 332.3 31
2,201.9 0.4 2,201.5 – – – – 30.7 4,896.1 4,723.1 173.0 22.2 329.8 2022 Jan. 7
2,201.9 0.4 2,201.5 – – – – 31.7 4,921.5 4,748.7 172.8 22.2 324.0 14
2,201.9 0.4 2,201.5 – – – – 30.5 4,934.5 4,761.3 173.2 22.2 319.0 21
2,201.7 0.2 2,201.5 – – – – 32.0 4,955.7 4,783.4 172.3 22.2 318.0 28
2,201.7 0.2 2,201.5 – – – – 32.6 4,970.1 4,800.3 169.8 22.1 311.9 Feb. 4
Deutsche Bundesbank
437.5 0.0 437.5 – – – – 6.3 927.1 927.1 – 4.4 1,078.9 2021 July 16
437.6 0.0 437.5 – – 0.0 – 7.1 935.9 935.9 – 4.4 1,065.9 23
437.2 0.1 437.1 – – 0.1 – 8.3 938.4 938.4 – 4.4 1,056.9 30
437.1 0.0 437.1 – – 0.0 – 8.7 943.1 943.1 – 4.4 1,080.0 Aug. 6
437.2 0.1 437.1 – – 0.0 – 7.9 948.9 948.9 – 4.4 1,084.1 13
437.2 0.1 437.1 – – 0.0 – 7.6 954.9 954.9 – 4.4 1,076.5 20
436.3 0.0 436.3 – – 0.0 – 8.2 954.6 954.6 – 4.4 1,075.9 27
436.2 – 436.2 – – 0.0 – 10.8 960.0 960.0 – 4.4 1,092.6 Sep. 3
436.5 0.3 436.2 – – 0.0 – 8.6 957.0 957.0 – 4.4 1,096.6 10
436.5 0.3 436.2 – – 0.0 – 8.3 963.9 963.9 – 4.4 1,091.2 17
436.2 0.0 436.2 – – 0.0 – 7.6 972.9 972.9 – 4.4 1,116.2 24
440.4 0.1 440.3 – – 0.0 – 5.8 973.0 973.0 – 4.4 1,123.5 Oct. 1
440.4 0.2 440.3 – – 0.0 – 7.1 973.7 973.7 – 4.4 1,120.2 8
440.4 0.2 440.3 – – 0.0 – 6.2 981.9 981.9 – 4.4 1,116.7 15
440.3 0.1 440.3 – – 0.0 – 7.8 989.5 989.5 – 4.4 1,091.1 22
440.3 0.1 440.3 – – 0.0 – 6.4 992.1 992.1 – 4.4 1,097.9 29
440.3 0.0 440.3 – – 0.0 – 5.6 1,000.2 1,000.2 – 4.4 1,114.4 Nov. 5
440.4 0.1 440.3 – – 0.0 – 5.2 1,006.1 1,006.1 – 4.4 1,122.4 12
440.4 0.1 440.3 – – 0.0 – 5.7 1,013.5 1,013.5 – 4.4 1,154.4 19
440.3 0.0 440.3 – – 0.0 – 4.2 1,015.0 1,015.0 – 4.4 1,152.7 26
440.3 0.0 440.3 – – 0.0 – 4.4 1,021.8 1,021.8 – 4.4 1,170.8 Dec. 3
440.3 0.0 440.3 – – 0.0 – 5.5 1,025.5 1,025.5 – 4.4 1,206.2 10
440.6 0.0 440.6 – – 0.0 – 5.0 1,027.6 1,027.6 – 4.4 1,236.2 17
421.8 0.2 421.7 – – 0.0 – 4.3 1,029.6 1,029.6 – 4.4 1,260.7 24
422.0 0.3 421.7 – – 0.0 – 3.5 1,027.7 1,027.7 – 4.4 1,293.1 31
422.0 0.3 421.7 – – 0.0 – 4.0 1,025.3 1,025.3 – 4.4 1,224.6 2022 Jan. 7
422.0 0.3 421.7 – – 0.0 – 3.4 1,031.6 1,031.6 – 4.4 1,222.9 14
422.1 0.4 421.7 – – 0.0 – 3.1 1,034.7 1,034.7 – 4.4 1,186.0 21
421.8 0.2 421.7 – – 0.0 – 3.3 1,041.9 1,041.9 – 4.4 1,189.4 28
421.8 0.2 421.7 – – 0.0 – 4.3 1,048.9 1,048.9 – 4.4 1,179.8 Feb. 4

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2021 July 16 7,950.7 1,491.7 4,430.6 3,610.6 818.1 – – 1.9 20.8 – 752.2 650.5 101.8
23 7,988.0 1,494.0 4,391.4 3,605.7 783.9 – – 1.8 23.1 – 807.7 702.5 105.2
30 7,987.4 1,497.9 4,440.0 3,756.8 681.0 – – 2.3 25.8 – 732.8 618.6 114.2
Aug. 6 8,009.7 1,499.6 4,492.6 3,758.1 732.2 – – 2.3 23.1 – 699.2 584.6 114.6
13 8,036.0 1,500.7 4,488.3 3,674.7 811.4 – – 2.2 23.7 – 751.3 635.3 116.0
20 8,052.8 1,499.9 4,471.8 3,665.0 804.7 – – 2.0 24.3 – 803.8 681.1 122.7
27 8,191.3 1,500.1 4,454.5 3,663.0 789.2 – – 2.3 23.2 – 828.0 703.6 124.3
Sep. 3 8,207.5 1,500.8 4,543.2 3,728.0 813.0 – – 2.3 30.5 – 736.3 617.5 118.8
10 8,222.7 1,502.0 4,567.5 3,744.0 821.4 – – 2.1 23.6 – 731.8 617.6 114.3
17 8,244.6 1,504.0 4,523.1 3,941.3 579.7 – – 2.0 23.6 – 792.0 671.0 120.9
24 8,273.2 1,504.3 4,476.0 3,787.8 686.2 – – 2.0 26.2 – 845.4 731.9 113.5
Oct. 1 8,289.1 1,505.5 4,534.9 3,761.3 771.1 – – 2.5 26.6 – 775.7 653.4 122.2
8 8,314.3 1,507.8 4,588.3 3,806.2 779.6 – – 2.5 25.7 – 749.4 626.2 123.2
15 8,336.7 1,509.0 4,564.0 3,786.5 775.1 – – 2.4 27.0 – 793.5 670.9 122.6
22 8,368.3 1,509.9 4,575.1 3,805.2 767.6 – – 2.4 26.3 – 799.8 679.3 120.6
29 8,366.1 1,513.3 4,567.8 3,759.9 805.6 – – 2.3 30.4 – 785.0 661.1 123.9
Nov. 5 8,382.7 1,514.6 4,642.7 4,023.0 617.5 – – 2.2 36.0 – 705.3 587.5 117.9
12 8,404.8 1,515.5 4,636.0 3,902.5 731.4 – – 2.1 34.9 – 711.8 596.1 115.7
19 8,442.3 1,516.3 4,557.0 3,787.1 767.8 – – 2.1 39.9 – 809.5 686.6 123.0
26 8,457.0 1,518.3 4,539.6 3,766.0 771.5 – – 2.1 37.3 – 831.1 707.8 123.3
Dec. 3 8,469.9 1,523.3 4,623.1 3,827.4 793.6 – – 2.1 40.1 – 735.9 620.4 115.5
10 8,496.6 1,528.2 4,600.8 3,813.2 785.4 – – 2.2 43.7 – 738.5 612.6 125.9
17 8,511.5 1,534.3 4,504.7 3,743.2 759.3 – – 2.2 51.4 – 760.0 616.8 143.2
24 8,512.3 1,543.0 4,439.9 3,759.0 678.7 – – 2.2 53.6 – 751.5 593.5 158.0
31 8,566.4 1,544.4 4,293.9 3,512.2 779.6 – – 2.2 76.7 – 757.1 590.4 166.7
2022 Jan. 7 8,573.3 1,541.6 4,541.5 3,894.0 644.5 – – 2.9 49.4 – 668.3 510.1 158.2
14 8,594.0 1,538.8 4,599.8 3,891.5 705.4 – – 2.8 46.9 – 720.2 574.0 146.2
21 8,600.3 1,538.5 4,623.8 3,838.8 782.4 – – 2.7 49.3 – 739.9 588.7 151.3
28 8,622.6 1,539.1 4,598.2 3,819.0 776.8 – – 2.4 45.6 – 818.1 656.8 161.3
Feb. 4 8,630.1 1,540.4 4,700.5 3,897.7 800.7 – – 2.2 51.2 – 710.7 567.7 143.0
Deutsche Bundesbank
2021 July 16 2,668.1 363.6 1,253.6 1,022.7 229.1 – – 1.8 9.1 – 227.6 212.5 15.1
23 2,665.0 364.7 1,243.3 1,010.4 231.1 – – 1.8 11.4 – 230.8 215.5 15.3
30 2,659.0 363.3 1,249.8 1,055.6 192.0 – – 2.2 12.7 – 206.4 189.2 17.2
Aug. 6 2,687.1 364.3 1,278.2 1,117.5 158.5 – – 2.2 11.4 – 203.9 188.3 15.6
13 2,696.2 365.0 1,255.4 1,025.3 227.8 – – 2.2 11.6 – 233.1 216.0 17.1
20 2,694.4 365.2 1,246.9 1,024.4 220.4 – – 2.0 13.5 – 238.5 223.2 15.3
27 2,724.3 366.3 1,234.2 1,008.2 223.6 – – 2.3 11.9 – 244.1 227.6 16.4
Sep. 3 2,749.6 364.8 1,281.0 1,037.1 241.7 – – 2.3 17.8 – 213.1 196.5 16.6
10 2,747.9 366.0 1,273.8 1,031.0 240.7 – – 2.1 11.4 – 217.7 200.2 17.5
17 2,749.3 368.2 1,242.4 1,100.6 139.8 – – 2.0 11.7 – 252.3 233.1 19.2
24 2,782.2 368.6 1,257.9 1,096.0 159.9 – – 2.0 13.9 – 260.8 238.6 22.2
Oct. 1 2,794.1 365.4 1,281.8 1,055.8 223.5 – – 2.5 14.8 – 235.1 208.2 26.9
8 2,793.0 366.4 1,292.0 1,062.4 227.0 – – 2.5 14.6 – 225.8 194.2 31.6
15 2,797.4 367.4 1,262.9 1,041.7 218.9 – – 2.4 15.0 – 254.1 224.1 30.0
22 2,780.9 368.0 1,254.4 1,039.1 212.9 – – 2.3 15.7 – 247.2 218.8 28.4
29 2,788.5 367.0 1,281.6 1,046.1 233.2 – – 2.3 18.4 – 217.3 188.7 28.6
Nov. 5 2,812.8 367.7 1,304.3 1,158.7 143.4 – – 2.2 19.0 – 212.7 185.7 27.0
12 2,826.1 369.2 1,292.1 1,124.8 165.2 – – 2.1 18.2 – 221.4 194.2 27.2
19 2,866.9 370.1 1,285.9 1,062.8 221.0 – – 2.1 20.1 – 260.8 230.5 30.3
26 2,865.0 371.6 1,274.5 1,057.7 214.7 – – 2.1 16.4 – 267.4 236.9 30.5
Dec. 3 2,889.6 370.1 1,300.1 1,066.5 231.5 – – 2.1 15.7 – 251.2 220.0 31.2
10 2,929.3 372.4 1,293.6 1,054.4 237.0 – – 2.2 15.9 – 267.8 230.5 37.3
17 2,960.9 375.8 1,229.9 1,017.3 210.4 – – 2.1 17.5 – 310.5 260.9 49.5
24 2,968.1 378.9 1,193.5 975.4 215.9 – – 2.1 13.7 – 309.4 248.9 60.5
31 3,012.2 374.6 1,138.2 902.1 233.9 – – 2.2 27.0 – 298.9 246.7 52.2
2022 Jan. 7 2,942.1 373.3 1,233.9 1,085.0 146.6 – – 2.2 19.5 – 245.4 193.0 52.3
14 2,946.1 373.2 1,267.0 1,110.6 154.1 – – 2.2 16.4 – 266.5 220.5 46.0
21 2,912.1 373.4 1,289.5 1,059.4 227.8 – – 2.3 18.5 – 222.2 176.7 45.5
28 2,922.8 374.4 1,292.4 1,062.1 228.2 – – 2.1 15.7 – 253.2 202.2 51.0
Feb. 4 2,921.6 374.0 1,340.7 1,094.6 244.0 – – 2.1 16.4 – 206.4 162.7 43.8
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
277.6 10.3 2.5 2.5 – 55.8 302.1 – 497.6 109.5 2021 July 16
292.9 10.2 2.4 2.4 – 55.8 303.4 – 497.6 109.5 23
312.3 9.9 2.7 2.7 – 55.8 303.1 – 497.6 109.4 30
312.4 9.9 2.7 2.7 – 55.8 307.3 – 497.6 109.4 Aug. 6
286.1 9.8 2.6 2.6 – 55.8 310.6 – 497.6 109.4 13
270.4 9.4 2.8 2.8 – 55.8 307.7 – 497.6 109.4 20
279.4 12.4 3.0 3.0 – 174.7 309.0 – 497.6 109.4 27
286.0 12.3 2.9 2.9 – 174.7 313.9 – 497.6 109.4 Sep. 3
286.7 12.4 2.8 2.8 – 174.7 314.3 – 497.6 109.4 10
288.1 12.3 2.4 2.4 – 174.7 317.6 – 497.6 109.4 17
306.2 12.2 2.5 2.5 – 174.7 318.9 – 497.6 109.4 24
323.5 12.6 4.1 4.1 – 176.1 314.9 – 506.0 109.4 Oct. 1
319.5 12.5 4.3 4.3 – 176.1 315.4 – 506.0 109.4 8
318.7 12.3 4.5 4.5 – 176.1 316.2 – 506.0 109.4 15
331.7 12.4 4.9 4.9 – 176.1 316.7 – 506.0 109.4 22
344.3 13.1 3.5 3.5 – 176.1 317.3 – 506.0 109.4 29
353.6 13.0 3.2 3.2 – 176.1 322.9 – 506.0 109.3 Nov. 5
377.7 12.8 3.4 3.4 – 176.1 321.3 – 506.0 109.3 12
385.8 15.0 3.8 3.8 – 176.1 323.5 – 506.0 109.3 19
399.5 15.7 3.8 3.8 – 176.1 320.2 – 506.0 109.3 26
417.3 14.2 3.8 3.8 – 176.1 320.8 – 506.0 109.3 Dec. 3
455.1 14.2 3.9 3.9 – 176.1 320.9 – 506.0 109.3 10
531.7 13.8 3.8 3.8 – 176.1 320.4 – 506.0 109.3 17
593.0 14.2 3.5 3.5 – 176.1 322.3 – 506.0 109.3 24
710.0 14.1 2.7 2.7 – 178.8 324.6 – 554.8 109.3 31
586.8 14.4 3.5 3.5 – 178.8 324.6 – 554.8 109.6 2022 Jan. 7
504.4 14.1 3.9 3.9 – 178.8 322.7 – 554.8 109.6 14
466.8 14.2 3.4 3.4 – 178.8 321.2 – 554.8 109.6 21
439.3 14.5 3.6 3.6 – 178.8 320.8 – 554.8 109.6 28
446.1 13.1 3.3 3.3 – 178.8 321.1 – 554.8 109.9 Feb. 4
Deutsche Bundesbank
116.6 0.4 – – – 14.5 35.6 485.9 155.5 5.7 2021 July 16
117.1 0.4 – – – 14.5 35.7 485.9 155.5 5.7 23
124.6 0.4 – – – 14.5 36.2 490.0 155.5 5.7 30
127.1 0.3 – – – 14.5 36.1 490.0 155.5 5.7 Aug. 6
128.9 0.3 – – – 14.5 36.1 490.0 155.5 5.7 13
128.0 0.3 – – – 14.5 36.3 490.0 155.5 5.7 20
134.4 0.3 – – – 45.4 36.4 490.0 155.5 5.7 27
136.6 0.3 0.2 0.2 – 45.4 36.2 492.9 155.5 5.7 Sep. 3
142.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 – 45.4 37.2 492.9 155.5 5.7 10
137.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 45.4 37.7 492.9 155.5 5.7 17
143.5 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 45.4 37.7 492.9 155.5 5.7 24
155.1 0.3 – – – 45.8 35.4 497.5 157.2 5.7 Oct. 1
151.9 0.3 0.2 0.2 – 45.8 35.6 497.5 157.2 5.7 8
155.4 0.3 0.5 0.5 – 45.8 35.6 497.5 157.2 5.7 15
152.7 0.3 0.5 0.5 – 45.8 35.7 497.5 157.2 5.7 22
157.9 0.3 0.3 0.3 – 45.8 36.1 500.8 157.2 5.7 29
162.7 0.3 0.4 0.4 – 45.8 36.2 500.8 157.2 5.7 Nov. 5
178.9 0.3 0.4 0.4 – 45.8 36.3 500.8 157.2 5.7 12
183.1 0.3 0.8 0.8 – 45.8 36.3 500.8 157.2 5.7 19
188.0 0.3 0.8 0.8 – 45.8 36.5 500.8 157.2 5.7 26
202.0 0.3 0.4 0.4 – 45.8 36.4 504.5 157.2 5.7 Dec. 3
229.6 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.8 36.5 504.5 157.2 5.7 10
277.4 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.8 36.7 504.5 157.2 5.7 17
322.3 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.8 37.0 504.5 157.2 5.7 24
404.3 0.0 – – – 46.5 36.4 509.8 170.7 5.7 31
299.5 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.5 37.3 509.8 170.7 5.7 2022 Jan. 7
252.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.5 37.4 509.8 170.7 5.7 14
237.4 0.4 0.1 0.1 – 46.5 37.7 509.8 170.7 5.7 21
215.9 0.4 0.3 0.3 – 46.5 36.6 511.0 170.7 5.7 28
213.0 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 46.5 36.6 511.1 170.7 5.7 Feb. 4
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2020 Mar. 8,912.6 48.1 2,421.0 1,920.7 1,651.9 268.8 500.4 357.5 142.8 4,096.9 3,641.9 3,215.5 2,915.9
Apr. 9,014.6 48.6 2,442.9 1,943.2 1,674.0 269.2 499.7 355.0 144.8 4,115.5 3,656.4 3,225.2 2,926.3
May 8,915.3 48.1 2,395.2 1,896.4 1,631.8 264.6 498.8 355.2 143.6 4,149.8 3,682.9 3,247.5 2,946.1
June 9,026.9 46.0 2,542.6 2,056.2 1,788.0 268.2 486.4 343.6 142.8 4,153.0 3,683.1 3,249.8 2,949.1
July 9,069.0 45.5 2,574.4 2,099.6 1,830.7 268.9 474.8 333.3 141.5 4,153.7 3,688.0 3,258.4 2,958.3
Aug. 8,985.5 46.0 2,595.4 2,127.5 1,858.5 269.0 467.9 328.0 139.9 4,148.3 3,691.9 3,266.7 2,966.1
Sep. 9,097.4 46.1 2,657.2 2,196.9 1,926.4 270.6 460.3 320.7 139.5 4,153.9 3,696.5 3,269.8 2,968.7
Oct. 9,124.3 46.3 2,686.7 2,226.8 1,957.0 269.8 459.9 320.9 139.0 4,181.8 3,713.6 3,283.1 2,980.6
Nov. 9,096.0 45.7 2,684.1 2,232.1 1,965.3 266.9 452.0 313.9 138.1 4,198.6 3,723.7 3,293.3 2,991.0
Dec. 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 Jan. 9,150.4 44.9 2,793.5 2,309.4 2,042.2 267.2 484.1 348.8 135.3 4,195.0 3,716.6 3,302.6 2,997.8
Feb. 9,148.1 45.5 2,824.0 2,328.8 2,060.6 268.2 495.2 361.1 134.1 4,210.4 3,731.9 3,318.5 3,011.4
Mar. 9,261.9 45.7 2,904.5 2,419.8 2,145.0 274.8 484.8 351.2 133.6 4,245.8 3,762.0 3,347.6 3,038.5
Apr. 9,269.2 44.9 2,935.1 2,441.4 2,168.7 272.8 493.7 360.0 133.7 4,236.4 3,756.9 3,347.0 3,036.8
May 9,277.1 45.7 2,974.7 2,485.3 2,212.9 272.4 489.4 355.6 133.9 4,246.1 3,772.8 3,363.3 3,049.8
June 9,293.7 46.5 2,959.9 2,469.9 2,197.4 272.5 490.0 356.7 133.3 4,253.7 3,772.0 3,370.7 3,056.9
July 9,321.9 46.8 2,943.6 2,448.2 2,178.3 269.9 495.3 361.1 134.2 4,270.2 3,788.1 3,386.0 3,071.8
Aug. 9,319.3 46.9 2,950.1 2,457.4 2,188.5 268.8 492.8 359.5 133.3 4,283.3 3,799.4 3,400.4 3,085.0
Sep. 9,325.3 47.4 2,952.3 2,472.9 2,203.6 269.3 479.4 344.9 134.5 4,303.0 3,812.2 3,409.8 3,093.8
Oct. 9,395.0 47.8 2,979.8 2,490.1 2,221.1 269.0 489.7 356.2 133.5 4,322.0 3,832.5 3,437.3 3,117.5
Nov. 9,495.5 48.1 3,008.0 2,519.5 2,253.4 266.1 488.5 355.4 133.1 4,352.1 3,856.4 3,459.8 3,138.9
Dec. 9,173.0 49.7 2,789.4 2,332.9 2,069.4 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.5 3,860.5 3,468.8 3,147.7
Changes 3
2012 –129.2 2.9 –81.9 –28.4 3.0 –31.4 –53.5 – 39.7 –13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 –703.6 – 0.5 –257.1 –249.2 –216.5 –32.7 – 7.9 1.6 – 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 –126.2 –128.6 –95.3 –33.4 2.4 7.2 – 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2020 Apr. 96.1 0.5 20.8 21.8 21.5 0.3 – 1.1 – 3.0 1.9 18.2 14.2 9.8 10.5
May –40.6 – 0.6 22.6 22.4 19.3 3.1 0.2 1.3 – 1.1 27.3 24.9 20.5 18.0
June 118.6 – 2.1 149.4 161.5 157.8 3.7 –12.1 – 11.2 – 0.9 5.0 1.7 3.6 4.3
July 67.5 – 0.5 36.5 45.1 44.3 0.8 – 8.6 – 7.5 – 1.1 3.1 6.6 10.2 10.8
Aug. –79.5 0.5 21.7 28.2 28.0 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.9 – 1.5 – 4.9 4.3 8.7 8.1
Sep. 104.9 0.1 60.5 69.0 67.5 1.5 – 8.5 – 8.0 – 0.4 5.2 4.5 3.0 2.6
Oct. 25.2 0.2 29.1 29.7 30.5 – 0.8 – 0.6 0.1 – 0.7 27.6 17.3 12.9 11.3
Nov. 12.0 – 0.6 29.0 35.8 37.2 – 1.4 – 6.8 – 6.1 – 0.8 18.6 11.3 11.2 11.5
Dec. –141.5 1.8 –59.5 –53.6 –51.2 – 2.4 – 5.9 – 5.8 – 0.2 –18.3 –13.3 4.2 2.7
2021 Jan. 201.4 – 2.6 169.3 131.0 128.3 2.8 38.2 40.5 – 2.3 16.8 7.7 6.6 5.1
Feb. – 2.3 0.7 30.3 19.2 18.2 1.1 11.0 12.2 – 1.2 15.9 15.5 15.7 13.4
Mar. 100.0 0.2 78.0 90.0 83.7 6.3 –12.0 – 11.5 – 0.5 34.3 29.7 28.8 27.0
Apr. 21.2 – 0.8 33.6 23.0 24.6 – 1.6 10.6 10.5 0.2 – 8.8 – 5.2 – 0.1 – 1.1
May 10.7 0.8 38.9 44.1 44.4 – 0.3 – 5.2 – 5.5 0.3 10.4 16.0 15.7 13.0
June 5.3 0.9 –17.1 –16.3 –15.8 – 0.5 – 0.8 – 0.2 – 0.6 7.3 – 0.5 7.6 6.7
July 26.3 0.2 –15.0 –19.5 –17.5 – 2.0 4.5 4.4 0.1 17.3 16.4 15.6 15.3
Aug. – 3.9 0.2 6.7 9.3 10.3 – 1.0 – 2.6 – 1.7 – 0.9 13.2 11.2 14.7 13.4
Sep. 3.0 0.4 0.1 14.4 13.9 0.5 –14.4 – 15.6 1.3 19.8 13.0 9.4 8.8
Oct. 70.4 0.5 27.7 17.3 17.6 – 0.3 10.5 11.4 – 1.0 19.2 20.6 28.0 24.1
Nov. 95.5 0.3 26.6 29.2 32.2 – 3.0 – 2.5 – 2.1 – 0.5 30.6 25.2 22.1 21.0
Dec. –322.4 1.6 –218.5 –186.6 –183.8 – 2.7 –32.0 – 31.0 – 1.0 – 1.0 5.0 9.8 9.5
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011
259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
299.6 426.4 258.5 167.9 455.0 325.2 212.8 129.8 29.5 100.3 1,104.4 838.8 1,242.1 2020 Mar.
298.8 431.2 259.2 172.0 459.1 329.0 217.4 130.2 31.1 99.1 1,119.2 852.3 1,288.4 Apr.
301.4 435.4 258.3 177.1 466.9 334.5 220.6 132.3 31.0 101.3 1,102.1 840.8 1,220.2 May
300.7 433.3 257.8 175.5 469.9 331.1 215.4 138.8 29.2 109.6 1,075.8 816.4 1,209.5 June
300.1 429.6 259.1 170.5 465.7 313.2 217.1 152.5 29.9 122.6 1,047.3 792.5 1,248.1 July
300.7 425.1 253.7 171.4 456.5 311.1 214.5 145.4 29.2 116.1 1,037.6 784.0 1,158.2 Aug.
301.1 426.7 256.0 170.8 457.4 311.0 215.2 146.4 29.3 117.0 1,063.9 808.9 1,176.3 Sep.
302.5 430.5 257.3 173.2 468.2 318.6 219.6 149.5 30.2 119.3 1,049.9 793.4 1,159.6 Oct.
302.2 430.5 256.7 173.8 474.8 325.6 222.5 149.2 29.1 120.1 1,048.0 792.3 1,119.7 Nov.
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 Dec.
304.9 414.0 253.3 160.7 478.4 330.8 224.5 147.6 28.7 118.9 1,087.5 834.6 1,029.5 2021 Jan.
307.1 413.4 250.6 162.9 478.5 334.5 227.0 144.0 28.8 115.2 1,093.8 843.9 974.4 Feb.
309.1 414.4 249.3 165.1 483.8 339.4 232.3 144.4 28.9 115.5 1,105.7 855.5 960.1 Mar.
310.2 409.9 251.0 158.9 479.5 339.8 232.3 139.7 30.3 109.4 1,122.5 876.2 930.3 Apr.
313.5 409.5 250.6 158.9 473.2 339.1 231.9 134.1 28.4 105.7 1,108.3 862.4 902.3 May
313.8 401.4 249.1 152.3 481.7 339.4 231.8 142.3 28.8 113.5 1,111.0 864.8 922.5 June
314.2 402.2 251.3 150.8 482.0 344.2 236.6 137.8 28.6 109.2 1,097.1 849.1 964.3 July
315.4 398.9 248.0 150.9 484.0 346.1 238.8 137.9 28.3 109.6 1,084.8 839.7 954.2 Aug.
316.0 402.4 248.3 154.1 490.7 352.5 241.7 138.2 27.9 110.3 1,087.9 840.8 934.8 Sep.
319.9 395.1 249.7 145.4 489.5 356.0 244.3 133.4 30.3 103.2 1,134.6 889.6 910.9 Oct.
320.9 396.5 247.8 148.8 495.7 361.6 249.6 134.1 28.5 105.6 1,137.3 892.4 950.0 Nov.
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.1 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,092.9 852.1 890.4 Dec.
Changes 3
–11.8 10.7 –10.5 21.2 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.5 0.5 – 2.2 2.7 –15.5 –17.7 –62.2 2012
2.0 – 7.0 –10.9 3.9 – 3.0 – 3.4 – 9.3 0.5 – 2.6 3.1 –38.8 –47.2 –420.8 2013
15.5 –12.3 –15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 – 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
– 0.7 4.5 0.6 3.9 4.0 3.7 4.3 0.3 1.6 – 1.3 10.4 9.3 46.3 2020 Apr.
2.5 4.4 – 0.9 5.3 2.5 0.8 – 1.2 1.6 – 0.6 2.2 –23.0 –18.2 –67.0 May
– 0.7 – 1.9 – 0.3 – 1.6 3.3 – 3.2 – 4.9 6.4 – 1.8 8.2 –22.9 –21.2 –10.8 June
– 0.6 – 3.6 1.3 – 4.9 – 3.5 1.6 2.7 – 5.1 0.6 – 5.7 –10.3 – 7.1 38.7 July
0.6 – 4.4 – 5.4 0.9 – 9.2 – 2.3 – 2.5 – 6.9 – 0.7 – 6.2 – 7.0 – 6.0 –89.8 Aug.
0.4 1.5 2.2 – 0.7 0.7 – 0.1 0.7 0.9 0.1 0.7 21.1 20.0 18.0 Sep.
1.6 4.4 2.0 2.5 10.4 7.3 4.2 3.0 0.9 2.1 –15.3 –16.7 –16.4 Oct.
– 0.3 0.2 – 0.5 0.7 7.3 7.6 3.6 – 0.3 – 1.1 0.8 6.4 6.6 –41.4 Nov.
1.5 –17.5 – 4.4 –13.2 – 4.9 1.9 0.3 – 6.9 0.6 – 7.4 –36.3 –34.4 –29.3 Dec.
1.5 1.1 0.9 0.2 9.1 3.8 2.9 5.3 – 0.9 6.2 80.2 79.8 –62.3 2021 Jan.
2.3 – 0.2 – 2.4 2.3 0.3 3.7 2.4 – 3.4 0.1 – 3.4 6.3 8.9 –55.4 Feb.
1.9 0.9 – 1.3 2.2 4.6 4.2 4.9 0.4 0.1 0.3 2.8 3.3 –15.3 Mar.
1.0 – 5.0 1.7 – 6.7 – 3.6 0.9 0.7 – 4.5 1.5 – 6.0 26.0 29.0 –28.8 Apr.
2.7 0.4 – 0.3 0.7 – 5.6 – 0.1 0.3 – 5.5 – 1.9 – 3.6 –11.4 –11.4 –28.0 May
0.8 – 8.1 – 1.4 – 6.7 7.8 – 0.4 – 0.6 8.2 0.4 7.7 – 5.7 – 5.3 19.9 June
0.4 0.7 2.3 – 1.5 1.0 5.6 4.8 – 4.7 – 0.2 – 4.5 –15.0 –16.5 38.7 July
1.2 – 3.4 – 3.5 0.1 1.9 1.8 2.2 0.1 – 0.3 0.4 –13.1 –10.0 –10.8 Aug.
0.6 3.6 0.3 3.2 6.8 6.3 2.9 0.5 – 0.4 0.9 0.1 – 1.5 –17.4 Sep.
3.9 – 7.4 1.2 – 8.7 – 1.4 3.5 2.6 – 4.8 2.3 – 7.2 47.6 49.5 –24.6 Oct.
1.1 3.0 – 0.9 4.0 5.5 4.8 4.4 0.6 – 1.6 2.2 – 4.5 – 3.6 42.4 Nov.
0.3 – 4.7 – 2.6 – 2.1 – 6.0 0.4 – 5.7 – 6.4 – 0.1 – 6.3 –44.9 –40.1 –59.5 Dec.
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2020 Mar. 8,912.6 1,418.4 1,135.8 282.6 3,853.2 3,705.0 2,299.1 841.5 268.6 564.4 532.5 135.5 72.3
Apr. 9,014.6 1,426.3 1,156.6 269.6 3,872.7 3,729.4 2,339.0 826.7 259.6 563.8 532.6 130.3 65.2
May 8,915.3 1,386.1 1,112.0 274.0 3,913.5 3,764.4 2,370.9 829.9 266.6 563.6 532.9 136.6 70.6
June 9,026.9 1,503.5 1,230.4 273.1 3,906.1 3,754.5 2,379.1 812.8 256.1 562.5 532.8 139.2 71.1
July 9,069.0 1,488.7 1,209.5 279.2 3,937.1 3,783.3 2,408.1 814.3 263.0 560.9 531.7 132.9 65.5
Aug. 8,985.5 1,489.8 1,213.2 276.6 3,951.0 3,790.7 2,421.8 808.3 258.8 560.6 531.8 129.7 63.6
Sep. 9,097.4 1,523.9 1,252.4 271.5 3,975.9 3,795.1 2,436.7 798.3 251.4 560.1 531.7 140.6 72.8
Oct. 9,124.3 1,536.3 1,264.9 271.4 4,015.2 3,827.0 2,473.1 794.2 249.1 559.7 531.7 140.8 69.6
Nov. 9,096.0 1,515.4 1,245.5 269.9 4,035.0 3,846.2 2,508.7 778.0 235.3 559.6 532.0 140.2 69.0
Dec. 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 Jan. 9,150.4 1,560.0 1,262.3 297.7 4,044.0 3,855.8 2,536.8 757.4 219.4 561.6 534.8 138.4 65.8
Feb. 9,148.1 1,584.4 1,261.7 322.7 4,053.2 3,865.2 2,552.4 750.1 214.1 562.6 536.1 137.7 68.2
Mar. 9,261.9 1,634.1 1,336.6 297.6 4,068.3 3,876.2 2,569.2 744.7 212.3 562.3 536.2 142.2 71.0
Apr. 9,269.2 1,659.9 1,344.1 315.8 4,079.3 3,886.3 2,588.3 735.3 205.8 562.7 536.9 143.0 70.2
May 9,277.1 1,661.1 1,353.0 308.1 4,103.8 3,909.2 2,614.0 732.0 205.0 563.2 537.5 146.4 70.4
June 9,293.7 1,670.8 1,357.4 313.4 4,088.4 3,890.3 2,605.4 722.3 198.1 562.6 537.1 151.3 76.7
July 9,321.9 1,682.5 1,362.0 320.4 4,110.8 3,918.9 2,638.6 718.3 196.7 562.0 536.8 146.4 74.0
Aug. 9,319.3 1,686.5 1,365.8 320.7 4,119.2 3,925.6 2,648.6 715.5 194.1 561.5 536.6 147.8 74.7
Sep. 9,325.3 1,667.9 1,354.2 313.6 4,108.9 3,913.6 2,640.2 712.7 194.3 560.7 535.9 148.8 77.1
Oct. 9,395.0 1,690.9 1,364.7 326.2 4,140.0 3,942.6 2,657.0 725.5 206.4 560.1 535.6 151.4 78.1
Nov. 9,495.5 1,718.6 1,374.9 343.8 4,154.1 3,956.1 2,678.9 717.4 200.2 559.8 535.5 151.4 82.5
Dec. 9,173.0 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.7 3,931.7 2,649.1 721.4 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
Changes 4
2012 –129.2 –68.7 –70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 –90.4 –50.2 1.5 14.1 – 1.4 5.4
2013 –703.6 –106.2 –73.9 –32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 –56.3 –26.6 – 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 –28.4 –32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 –32.1 3.1 – 2.4 – 2.4 – 2.5 – 0.0
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2020 Apr. 96.1 7.0 20.3 –13.3 18.8 24.0 39.6 –15.0 – 9.2 – 0.7 0.1 – 5.3 – 7.1
May –40.6 22.0 16.8 5.2 34.0 33.3 29.9 3.6 7.3 – 0.2 0.3 1.2 0.1
June 118.6 118.2 118.9 – 0.7 – 7.0 – 9.6 8.3 –16.8 –10.5 – 1.1 – 0.1 2.6 0.6
July 67.5 –11.0 –19.0 8.1 34.1 31.5 31.0 2.1 7.4 – 1.6 – 1.1 – 5.7 – 5.4
Aug. –79.5 1.6 4.0 – 2.4 14.4 7.7 13.8 – 5.9 – 4.1 – 0.2 0.2 – 3.2 – 1.9
Sep. 104.9 33.1 38.7 – 5.7 24.1 3.7 14.4 –10.2 – 7.6 – 0.5 – 0.1 10.7 9.1
Oct. 25.2 12.3 12.4 – 0.1 39.1 32.1 36.4 – 3.9 – 3.3 – 0.4 – 0.0 0.1 – 3.3
Nov. 12.0 8.2 8.4 – 0.1 25.6 20.2 36.4 –16.0 –13.6 – 0.1 0.3 4.1 3.9
Dec. –141.5 –25.2 – 7.9 –17.3 –12.3 – 8.7 0.3 –10.0 – 8.0 1.0 1.3 – 4.8 –11.8
2021 Jan. 201.4 65.4 25.0 40.4 21.0 18.6 28.1 –10.6 – 7.8 1.1 1.6 2.6 9.7
Feb. – 2.3 24.4 – 0.7 25.1 9.0 9.2 15.5 – 7.3 – 5.3 1.0 1.3 – 0.7 2.4
Mar. 100.0 47.8 73.8 –26.0 13.6 9.9 15.8 – 5.6 – 1.9 – 0.3 0.1 4.0 2.5
Apr. 21.2 27.6 8.3 19.3 12.5 11.2 20.1 – 9.4 – 6.5 0.4 0.7 1.2 – 0.6
May 10.7 0.6 9.1 – 8.5 24.9 23.2 26.0 – 3.2 – 0.7 0.5 0.6 3.5 0.3
June 5.3 8.2 3.7 4.4 –16.6 –19.8 – 9.4 – 9.8 – 7.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 4.5 6.1
July 26.3 14.4 7.4 7.0 22.3 28.6 33.2 – 4.1 – 1.4 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 4.9 – 3.1
Aug. – 3.9 3.9 3.7 0.2 7.8 6.5 9.9 – 2.8 – 2.6 – 0.5 – 0.3 0.9 0.2
Sep. 3.0 –19.5 –11.7 – 7.8 – 7.3 – 8.9 – 6.5 – 1.6 0.4 – 0.8 – 0.6 0.7 2.7
Oct. 70.4 24.1 11.2 12.9 31.1 29.1 16.8 12.9 12.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 2.5 1.1
Nov. 95.5 26.4 9.6 16.7 12.9 12.5 21.1 – 8.4 – 6.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.3 4.2
Dec. –322.4 –90.1 –36.2 –53.9 –24.2 –24.3 –29.7 4.0 3.7 1.4 1.6 2.4 –11.8
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 2011
42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 2012
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
60.6 16.5 2.6 2.4 12.8 11.2 1.7 2.5 1,074.1 30.8 674.1 713.4 1,175.2 2020 Mar.
62.4 17.6 2.6 2.4 13.0 11.1 3.4 2.4 1,078.1 29.6 704.0 693.5 1,234.2 Apr.
63.4 16.4 2.6 2.4 12.5 10.8 2.2 2.2 1,076.9 28.8 693.7 686.4 1,154.4 May
65.4 19.2 2.6 2.4 12.5 11.8 0.9 2.1 1,074.0 28.6 696.8 702.1 1,141.4 June
64.8 20.2 2.6 2.3 20.8 20.1 2.1 1.9 1,067.4 25.9 698.3 694.7 1,178.9 July
63.6 19.3 2.6 2.3 30.6 29.8 1.7 1.9 1,063.9 25.5 682.1 699.9 1,095.2 Aug.
65.2 21.8 2.6 2.3 40.2 39.0 1.2 2.6 1,077.3 25.6 687.1 720.4 1,108.9 Sep.
68.6 25.0 2.6 2.3 47.3 46.6 1.4 2.7 1,075.1 24.6 687.8 712.4 1,093.3 Oct.
68.7 24.3 2.6 2.3 48.5 47.6 9.1 2.5 1,070.0 23.3 696.7 713.1 1,054.3 Nov.
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 Dec.
70.0 23.7 2.6 2.3 49.7 48.3 6.3 2.5 1,058.8 19.7 790.8 708.3 979.7 2021 Jan.
67.0 20.5 2.5 2.3 50.3 48.2 4.5 2.5 1,068.3 19.6 803.5 702.4 929.4 Feb.
68.7 22.0 2.5 2.3 49.9 48.9 6.7 2.9 1,090.4 21.5 833.7 712.0 913.8 Mar.
70.3 23.2 2.5 2.3 50.0 48.6 5.1 2.9 1,091.8 21.0 839.1 705.9 885.3 Apr.
73.5 26.7 2.5 2.3 48.2 46.6 6.0 2.3 1,087.7 23.5 854.7 702.7 858.8 May
72.0 25.9 2.5 2.3 46.9 45.6 4.5 2.3 1,084.6 23.8 836.9 725.4 880.7 June
69.9 22.9 2.5 2.3 45.5 44.3 6.0 2.3 1,087.2 23.5 800.0 719.2 913.9 July
70.7 24.0 2.5 2.3 45.8 44.0 7.4 2.3 1,089.9 25.5 790.7 725.0 898.4 Aug.
69.2 22.4 2.5 2.2 46.6 45.2 7.3 2.2 1,100.5 25.1 840.1 735.9 862.6 Sep.
70.9 23.4 2.4 2.2 46.1 45.2 7.4 2.2 1,118.0 24.6 866.7 729.5 840.3 Oct.
66.4 17.4 2.4 2.2 46.6 45.5 4.2 2.1 1,123.9 26.0 883.1 736.5 872.8 Nov.
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.9 Dec.
Changes 4
– 7.2 – 3.6 0.5 0.3 – 7.9 – 9.2 –19.6 1.2 –107.0 –18.6 54.2 21.0 –68.5 2012
– 0.5 2.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 –11.3 –10.0 4.1 – 3.2 –104.9 –17.6 –134.1 18.9 –417.1 2013
– 2.3 – 1.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.8 – 3.4 – 0.6 –63.7 – 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
1.8 1.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 1.7 – 0.1 1.6 – 1.3 27.6 –20.7 60.3 2020 Apr.
1.1 – 1.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 1.2 – 0.1 5.1 – 0.6 –21.9 3.5 –82.0 May
2.0 2.8 – 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 – 1.3 – 0.2 – 1.3 – 0.1 4.6 16.4 –10.8 June
– 0.3 1.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 8.3 8.3 1.3 – 0.2 3.3 – 1.2 10.9 – 4.3 33.3 July
– 1.3 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.8 9.8 – 0.5 0.0 – 2.2 – 0.4 –14.9 5.7 –83.7 Aug.
1.6 2.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.6 9.2 – 0.5 0.7 10.5 0.0 2.6 19.6 14.9 Sep.
3.4 3.2 – 0.0 0.0 7.0 7.5 0.3 0.1 – 2.9 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 8.2 –15.5 Oct.
0.2 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.2 1.0 3.3 – 0.2 – 0.9 – 1.2 12.6 3.3 –39.9 Nov.
7.0 6.3 0.0 0.0 1.3 1.0 0.3 – 0.0 – 9.0 – 1.9 –71.4 – 0.7 –23.2 Dec.
– 7.1 – 6.9 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 3.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 – 1.5 171.3 – 3.7 –49.0 2021 Jan.
– 3.1 – 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.2 – 1.8 – 0.0 8.9 – 0.1 12.2 – 6.2 –48.9 Feb.
1.5 1.3 – 0.0 0.0 – 0.4 0.8 2.1 0.5 15.7 1.7 24.0 7.1 –10.8 Mar.
1.8 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 2.2 – 0.1 7.3 – 0.4 11.1 – 3.7 –31.3 Apr.
3.2 3.5 – 0.0 0.0 – 1.8 – 1.9 0.9 – 0.1 – 2.7 2.5 17.0 – 2.8 –27.1 May
– 1.6 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.3 – 1.0 – 1.5 0.1 – 7.7 0.2 –22.7 20.9 24.6 June
– 1.8 – 2.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.4 – 1.3 1.5 – 0.1 2.3 – 0.2 –37.2 – 5.4 28.5 July
0.7 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.3 – 0.2 1.4 – 0.0 2.2 2.0 – 9.9 5.6 –14.9 Aug.
– 1.9 – 1.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.8 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 7.0 – 0.5 45.5 10.0 –32.4 Sep.
1.5 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 17.3 – 0.5 27.1 – 6.4 –22.8 Oct.
– 4.5 – 6.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.7 0.4 – 3.2 – 0.1 1.7 1.4 11.7 5.9 40.3 Nov.
14.3 5.4 0.0 0.0 – 2.4 – 2.0 – 2.0 0.2 –12.7 1.9 –125.9 – 4.4 –63.2 Dec.
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
24•
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
End of
monthNumber of
reporting
institu-
tionsBalance
sheet
total  1Cash in
hand and
credit
balances
with
central
banks TotalBalances
and
loansSecurities
issued by
banks Totalfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more than
1 year BillsSecurities
issued by
non-banksPartici-
pating
interestsOther
assets  1
All categories of banks  
2021 July 1,484 9,383.6 1,106.7 2,511.3 2,028.4 480.2 4,592.5 400.2 3,487.5 0.3 685.3 94.3 1,078.9
Aug. 1,483 9,380.8 1,062.6 2,551.1 2,072.1 476.5 4,603.9 397.8 3,501.6 0.2 683.3 94.6 1,068.6
Sep. 1,469 9,386.7 1,103.1 2,513.0 2,033.4 477.8 4,625.8 399.7 3,511.4 0.3 694.9 95.4 1,049.5
Oct. 1,459 9,456.7 1,101.0 2,586.1 2,108.1 476.3 4,648.2 415.3 3,531.2 0.3 678.6 95.5 1,025.9
Nov. 1,448 9,556.7 1,117.4 2,597.0 2,123.8 471.7 4,682.2 414.1 3,557.7 0.3 690.1 95.7 1,064.3
Dec. 1,446 9,235.1 955.4 2,510.2 2,041.2 468.1 4,669.3 398.2 3,566.2 0.4 693.8 95.9 1,004.2
Commercial banks 6
2021 Nov. 253 4,025.0 592.5 1,129.1 1,047.0 81.4 1,469.9 277.3 968.1 0.2 210.6 32.7 800.7
Dec. 251 3,808.9 503.9 1,071.2 990.7 80.3 1,451.8 261.2 970.1 0.3 215.2 32.7 749.2
   Big banks 7
2021 Nov. 3 2,153.5 182.3 555.9 525.2 30.7 687.7 137.0 445.0 0.0 100.6 26.9 700.8
Dec. 3 2,018.6 144.5 513.0 482.6 30.4 676.3 130.2 446.4 0.1 97.9 26.9 657.9
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2021 Nov. 140 1,420.7 280.8 378.9 329.5 49.2 665.0 101.4 451.9 0.2 103.7 5.1 91.0
Dec. 139 1,332.5 224.2 362.5 313.9 48.4 659.1 92.3 453.4 0.2 110.9 5.2 81.5
   Branches of foreign banks
2021 Nov. 110 450.8 129.5 194.4 192.4 1.5 117.2 38.9 71.2 0.0 6.3 0.7 9.0
Dec. 109 457.8 135.1 195.8 194.2 1.5 116.4 38.7 70.3 0.1 6.4 0.7 9.9
Landesbanken
2021 Nov. 6 879.3 120.2 235.8 187.8 47.7 418.5 38.1 337.4 0.0 40.8 8.8 96.0
Dec. 6 804.8 81.3 207.5 160.8 46.5 417.6 39.8 335.4 0.0 40.7 8.8 89.7
Savings banks
2021 Nov. 371 1,546.1 184.1 165.4 50.0 115.3 1,158.1 47.4 932.2 – 177.8 15.1 23.4
Dec. 371 1,550.5 184.5 165.7 51.3 114.3 1,162.4 46.9 936.8 – 178.1 15.1 22.7
Credit cooperatives 
2021 Nov. 773 1,134.2 66.3 194.9 80.9 113.8 828.2 29.9 675.7 0.0 122.4 18.8 26.0
Dec. 773 1,140.4 70.5 192.8 79.5 113.2 832.0 29.9 679.0 0.0 122.9 18.9 26.2
Mortgage banks
2021 Nov. 9 228.6 11.0 16.0 8.3 7.3 194.7 2.1 175.1 – 17.3 0.1 6.7
Dec. 9 228.9 10.7 17.0 9.4 7.3 195.0 2.1 175.5 – 17.2 0.1 6.0
Building and loan associations
2021 Nov. 18 252.1 2.6 43.0 27.4 15.7 202.8 1.0 175.3 . 26.5 0.3 3.4
Dec. 18 253.2 2.9 42.8 27.1 15.7 203.8 1.0 176.3 . 26.5 0.3 3.5
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2021 Nov. 18 1,491.5 140.7 812.8 722.3 90.4 410.0 18.3 293.9 0.0 94.8 19.9 108.1
Dec. 18 1,448.4 101.6 813.2 722.3 90.8 406.5 17.4 293.1 0.0 93.1 20.0 107.0
Memo item:    Foreign banks 8
2021 Nov. 143 1,655.3 290.7 585.2 548.5 36.1 599.3 122.5 365.4 0.2 103.2 3.6 176.6
Dec. 142 1,551.0 269.8 513.0 477.6 35.2 589.3 110.5 365.7 0.2 110.1 3.6 175.3
   of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2021 Nov. 33 1,204.6 161.2 390.9 356.1 34.6 482.0 83.6 294.2 0.1 96.9 2.9 167.6
Dec. 33 1,093.2 134.7 317.2 283.4 33.6 472.9 71.8 295.4 0.1 103.8 2.9 165.5
* Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3.  1 Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial
instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning ofSection 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read
in conjunction with Section 35 (1) number 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are classified
under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting date. Trading
portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, in
Tables I.1 to I.3.  2 For building and loan associations: including deposits under savings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
25•
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4
TotalSight
depositsTime
deposits TotalSight
depositsfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more
than
1 year  2Memo 
item:
Liabilities
arising
from
repos  3 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeBank
savings
bondsBearer
debt
securities
out-
standing  5Capital
including
published
reserves,
partici-
pation
rights
capital,
funds for
general
banking
risksOther
liabi-
lities  1End of
month
All categories of banks 
2,342.3 661.1 1,681.1 4,256.8 2,797.7 229.1 635.9 49.5 568.1 542.4 26.0 1,179.4 560.4 1,044.8 2021 July
2,334.1 648.3 1,685.8 4,269.4 2,814.9 224.4 636.8 54.7 567.6 542.1 25.8 1,186.0 560.6 1,030.6 Aug.
2,357.7 657.1 1,700.6 4,266.2 2,811.9 228.7 633.3 50.3 566.7 541.4 25.6 1,204.5 562.0 996.3 Sep.
2,394.9 683.5 1,711.4 4,310.0 2,834.1 241.5 642.9 53.7 566.1 541.0 25.4 1,213.2 563.6 975.0 Oct.
2,442.1 700.6 1,741.5 4,317.8 2,857.2 227.2 642.8 47.4 565.8 541.0 24.9 1,225.7 565.0 1,006.1 Nov.
2,253.1 573.1 1,679.9 4,264.5 2,796.5 224.3 651.9 32.0 567.1 542.6 24.7 1,208.2 564.9 944.5 Dec.
Commercial banks 6
1,262.2 515.7 746.4 1,701.1 1,209.0 145.6 234.3 46.4 101.6 97.8 10.6 172.9 188.7 700.2 2021 Nov.
1,147.6 422.7 724.9 1,661.7 1,160.1 146.4 242.5 31.3 102.2 98.5 10.5 169.4 188.8 641.3 Dec.
Big banks 7   
515.1 206.5 308.6 831.2 593.9 70.6 79.4 31.5 86.2 83.1 1.2 129.3 73.6 604.2 2021 Nov.
478.8 169.4 309.4 784.0 549.2 68.5 78.4 19.2 86.7 83.7 1.2 124.9 73.6 557.2 Dec.
Regional banks and other commercial banks   
491.2 149.8 341.4 699.6 492.8 51.2 131.4 14.9 15.0 14.3 9.3 42.5 101.3 86.0 2021 Nov.
410.5 93.7 316.7 702.2 487.3 49.6 141.0 12.1 15.1 14.4 9.2 43.5 101.2 75.0 Dec.
Branches of foreign banks   
255.8 159.5 96.3 170.2 122.3 23.9 23.5 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 1.0 13.8 9.9 2021 Nov.
258.3 159.5 98.8 175.5 123.6 28.3 23.1 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 1.0 13.9 9.1 Dec.
Landesbanken
306.7 66.2 240.6 256.9 151.0 28.6 71.4 0.9 5.9 5.8 0.0 184.5 43.2 88.0 2021 Nov.
255.0 41.9 213.1 239.1 139.5 22.9 70.9 0.7 5.8 5.8 0.0 181.7 43.3 85.8 Dec.
Savings banks
200.0 4.7 195.3 1,149.3 838.6 10.2 13.2 – 277.0 260.5 10.3 16.7 132.0 48.1 2021 Nov.
199.8 2.7 197.0 1,154.1 844.3 9.0 13.3 – 277.4 261.0 10.1 16.2 132.0 48.3 Dec.
Credit cooperatives
165.3 1.4 163.9 830.5 602.9 27.4 15.5 – 180.8 176.3 3.8 9.6 94.5 34.2 2021 Nov.
168.5 1.0 167.5 833.2 605.5 26.7 15.9 – 181.3 176.8 3.9 9.6 94.7 34.3 Dec.
Mortgage banks
60.2 2.1 58.1 53.8 2.0 4.1 47.7 – – – . 98.4 10.0 6.2 2021 Nov.
61.0 2.1 58.9 53.0 1.8 3.7 47.4 – – – . 97.9 10.0 7.0 Dec.
Building and loan associations
32.6 2.3 30.3 192.1 3.7 1.6 186.3 – 0.5 0.5 0.1 4.3 12.4 10.8 2021 Nov.
33.1 1.7 31.4 193.6 3.7 1.6 187.7 – 0.5 0.5 0.1 4.2 12.4 9.9 Dec.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
415.1 108.2 306.9 134.2 50.0 9.7 74.4 0.1 – – . 739.4 84.1 118.7 2021 Nov.
388.0 100.9 287.1 129.7 41.4 13.9 74.2 0.0 – – . 729.2 83.7 117.8 Dec.
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
697.3 317.8 379.5 658.3 496.2 50.3 88.6 8.8 20.3 20.0 2.9 41.5 79.7 178.5 2021 Nov.
602.2 254.8 347.4 656.8 479.8 55.2 98.4 5.8 20.5 20.2 2.9 41.5 79.9 170.5 Dec.
 of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9   
441.4 158.3 283.1 488.1 373.9 26.4 65.1 8.8 19.9 19.5 2.9 40.5 66.0 168.6 2021 Nov.
343.9 95.3 248.6 481.3 356.2 26.9 75.3 5.8 20.1 19.8 2.8 40.5 66.0 161.5 Dec.
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Included in time deposits.  4 Excluding deposits
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).  5 Including subordinated
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
6 Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”.  7 Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner
Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische
Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
notes in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, Table I.3, banking group “Big banks “).
8 Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories
of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”.
9 Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in
other banking categories.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
26•
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)      
PeriodCash in
hand
(euro area
banknotes
and
coins)Credit
balances
with the
Bundes-
bank TotalCredit
balances
and loans BillsNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total Loans BillsTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money mar-
ket paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued
by non-
banks  1
End of year or month *
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 – 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.9
2020 July 45.2 810.5 1,270.5 1,019.2 0.0 1.2 250.0 7.5 3,625.7 3,217.2 0.2 8.0 400.3
Aug. 45.7 760.8 1,348.1 1,096.7 0.0 1.1 250.3 7.8 3,629.7 3,219.6 0.2 9.4 400.5
Sep. 45.8 884.4 1,293.9 1,041.1 0.0 1.0 251.8 8.3 3,634.2 3,224.4 0.2 8.4 401.3
Oct. 46.1 811.0 1,397.3 1,145.2 0.0 0.8 251.2 8.6 3,651.1 3,237.6 0.2 9.0 404.3
Nov. 45.4 863.2 1,351.9 1,101.3 0.0 0.8 249.8 8.6 3,661.1 3,247.4 0.2 7.6 405.8
Dec. 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 Jan. 44.6 1,009.1 1,283.1 1,032.1 0.0 0.7 250.2 9.2 3,654.0 3,250.7 0.3 6.6 396.3
Feb. 45.0 929.2 1,382.3 1,130.2 0.0 1.0 251.1 9.6 3,669.3 3,261.7 0.2 7.4 400.0
Mar. 45.5 983.4 1,419.4 1,160.8 0.0 0.9 257.7 9.8 3,699.1 3,287.5 0.2 6.7 404.7
Apr. 44.7 1,062.1 1,362.4 1,105.7 0.0 0.9 255.8 9.8 3,693.9 3,287.5 0.2 5.6 400.5
May 45.4 1,044.7 1,423.6 1,167.3 0.0 0.9 255.4 10.1 3,709.6 3,300.2 0.1 4.6 404.7
June 46.1 1,042.8 1,409.7 1,153.8 0.0 0.8 255.1 10.3 3,709.2 3,305.7 0.2 5.8 397.6
July 46.3 1,059.2 1,372.0 1,118.1 0.0 0.8 253.2 10.3 3,725.3 3,322.9 0.2 6.1 396.2
Aug. 46.5 1,015.2 1,425.2 1,172.4 0.0 0.8 252.1 10.3 3,736.4 3,332.8 0.1 5.7 397.8
Sep. 47.1 1,054.9 1,399.9 1,147.7 0.0 0.7 251.5 10.3 3,749.8 3,341.9 0.1 4.4 403.3
Oct. 47.6 1,052.4 1,419.3 1,167.7 0.0 0.7 250.9 10.3 3,770.2 3,366.9 0.2 5.0 398.0
Nov. 47.9 1,068.7 1,432.2 1,183.6 – 0.7 248.0 10.0 3,794.0 3,386.4 0.2 5.6 401.9
Dec. 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.9
Changes *
2013 +0.0 –48.8 –204.1 –170.6 +0.0 – 0.7 –32.7 –0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 –0.1 – 0.6 + 4.8
2014 +0.4 –4.3 –119.3 –87.1 +0.0 + 0.4 –32.6 +0.1 +36.7 +20.6 –0.1 – 0.6 +16.8
2015 +0.3 +73.7 –80.7 – 4.3 –0.0 – 0.4 –75.9 –0.1 +68.9 +54.1 –0.0 – 0.3 +15.1
2016 +6.5 +129.1 +48.1 +66.9 – – 0.9 –17.9 +0.4 +43.7 +62.8 –0.1 – 0.1 –18.9
2017 +6.1 +108.4 +50.3 +70.4 –0.0 + 0.0 –20.1 –0.1 +57.0 +70.2 +0.0 + 0.4 –13.6
2018 +8.5 +24.0 –81.0 –76.6 +0.0 + 0.1 – 4.4 +3.8 +71.5 +105.4 –0.1 – 0.5 –33.2
2019 +2.8 +59.7 –63.0 –61.1 –0.0 – 0.2 – 1.6 –1.4 +126.7 +129.1 +0.1 + 3.1 – 5.5
2020 +4.1 +316.4 +201.2 +191.6 –0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 +4.3 +123.2 +123.6 –0.1 + 0.7 – 1.0
2021 +2.2 +111.8 +44.1 +46.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – 2.0 +1.5 +152.2 +147.8 +0.0 – 2.2 + 6.6
2020 July –0.5 +42.9 + 0.1 – 0.4 – + 0.1 + 0.4 +0.6 + 4.6 +10.5 –0.0 + 0.0 – 5.9
Aug. +0.5 –49.7 +77.6 +77.5 –0.0 – 0.2 + 0.3 +0.3 + 4.0 + 2.4 +0.0 + 1.4 + 0.2
Sep. +0.1 +123.6 –54.2 –55.6 +0.0 – 0.0 + 1.5 +0.5 + 4.6 + 4.8 +0.0 – 1.0 + 0.7
Oct. +0.2 –73.5 +103.4 +104.2 – – 0.2 – 0.6 +0.3 +16.5 +12.9 +0.0 + 0.6 + 3.0
Nov. –0.6 +52.3 –17.1 –15.6 –0.0 – 0.0 – 1.5 –0.0 +10.6 +10.5 –0.0 – 1.4 + 1.6
Dec. +1.8 –70.3 +16.0 +18.4 – – 0.1 – 2.3 +0.2 –14.1 – 2.3 +0.0 – 3.6 – 8.1
2021 Jan. –2.6 +216.2 –84.9 –87.8 +0.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 +0.4 + 6.6 + 5.3 +0.0 + 2.6 – 1.4
Feb. +0.3 –79.9 +98.9 +97.8 – + 0.3 + 0.8 +0.4 +15.3 +11.0 –0.0 + 0.7 + 3.6
Mar. +0.6 +54.3 +37.1 +30.6 – – 0.1 + 6.6 +0.2 +29.7 +25.6 –0.0 – 1.4 + 5.4
Apr. –0.8 +78.7 –56.7 –54.9 –0.0 – 0.1 – 1.7 +0.0 – 5.2 + 0.0 –0.0 – 1.1 – 4.1
May +0.8 –17.5 +61.2 +61.6 – + 0.0 – 0.4 +0.4 +15.6 +12.5 –0.0 – 1.1 + 4.2
June +0.6 –1.9 –13.6 –13.3 –0.0 – 0.1 – 0.3 +0.1 – 0.4 + 5.5 +0.0 + 1.3 – 7.1
July +0.2 +15.3 –35.1 –33.1 – – 0.0 – 1.9 +0.1 +16.1 +17.2 +0.0 + 0.3 – 1.4
Aug. +0.2 –43.8 +53.4 +54.4 – + 0.1 – 1.1 –0.0 +10.9 + 9.7 –0.0 – 0.5 + 1.7
Sep. +0.6 +39.7 –26.2 –25.5 +0.0 – 0.1 – 0.6 –0.0 +13.5 + 9.2 +0.0 – 1.2 + 5.4
Oct. +0.5 –2.4 +19.5 +20.0 +0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 –0.1 +20.5 +25.1 +0.0 + 0.6 – 5.2
Nov. +0.3 +16.6 +12.9 +15.9 –0.0 – 0.0 – 2.9 –0.3 +25.5 +20.4 +0.0 + 0.6 + 4.5
Dec. +1.6 –163.6 –22.4 –19.6 – – 0.1 – 2.7 +0.3 + 4.3 + 6.2 +0.1 – 3.0 + 1.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange ofequalisation claims (see also footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the
exchange of equalisation claims.  3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt
securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
27•
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Equalisa-
tion
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in
domestic
banks
and
enterprises TotalSight
deposits
4Time
deposits
4Redis-
counted
bills  5Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
de-
positsTime
deposits
6Savings
de-
posits  7Bank
savings
bonds  8Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
– 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012
– 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013
– 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
– 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
– 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
– 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
– 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
– 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 2021
– 22.2 79.3 1,207.9 125.0 1,082.8 0.0 11.1 3,803.4 2,414.0 798.6 560.9 29.9 33.8 2020 July
– 22.5 79.2 1,211.5 126.2 1,085.3 0.0 11.5 3,820.8 2,427.7 802.9 560.6 29.6 34.0 Aug.
– 22.7 79.2 1,251.5 123.8 1,127.8 0.0 12.0 3,834.2 2,442.8 802.0 560.1 29.3 34.3 Sep.
– 22.8 79.4 1,263.7 131.5 1,132.2 0.0 12.3 3,874.1 2,481.4 804.1 559.7 28.9 34.6 Oct.
– 22.9 78.1 1,244.8 134.6 1,110.2 0.0 12.5 3,894.3 2,515.3 790.9 559.6 28.5 34.4 Nov.
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 Dec.
– 23.7 78.2 1,261.6 140.5 1,121.2 0.0 13.6 3,904.5 2,542.0 773.1 561.6 27.9 34.3 2021 Jan.
– 24.0 78.2 1,260.6 138.0 1,122.5 0.0 14.2 3,913.7 2,557.5 766.1 562.6 27.5 34.3 Feb.
– 24.3 78.3 1,336.0 135.4 1,200.6 0.0 14.7 3,925.8 2,575.2 761.2 562.3 27.1 34.4 Mar.
– 24.5 77.7 1,343.0 136.2 1,206.8 0.0 15.1 3,935.7 2,594.6 751.6 562.8 26.8 34.4 Apr.
– 24.7 78.6 1,351.9 140.0 1,211.9 0.0 15.5 3,956.3 2,620.5 746.2 563.2 26.3 34.6 May
– 25.0 78.7 1,357.0 132.7 1,224.3 0.0 15.8 3,936.4 2,612.1 735.7 562.6 26.1 34.6 June
– 25.1 78.1 1,360.7 136.1 1,224.5 0.0 15.9 3,964.6 2,646.0 730.7 562.0 25.9 34.5 July
– 25.2 78.2 1,364.7 135.3 1,229.4 0.0 16.1 3,971.0 2,656.0 727.8 561.5 25.6 34.3 Aug.
– 25.2 79.0 1,353.8 128.9 1,224.9 0.0 16.2 3,960.3 2,647.9 726.1 560.7 25.5 34.1 Sep.
– 25.1 79.0 1,363.6 132.9 1,230.7 0.0 16.2 3,989.1 2,664.3 739.3 560.1 25.3 33.9 Oct.
– 25.2 79.1 1,373.9 135.2 1,238.6 0.0 16.3 4,002.4 2,685.9 731.8 559.9 24.8 33.6 Nov.
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 Dec.
Changes *
– –3.3 +2.4 –79.4 –24.1 –55.3 +0.0 –3.4 +40.2 +118.4 –53.9 – 7.4 –17.0 –1.7 2013
– –1.9 +2.0 –29.0 + 2.2 –31.2 –0.0 –0.6 +69.7 +107.9 –25.3 – 2.4 –10.6 –2.0 2014
– –2.1 –4.3 –46.6 + 3.3 –50.0 +0.0 –1.3 +106.5 +156.2 –28.3 –11.3 –10.1 –1.6 2015
– –1.3 +1.5 – 1.7 + 0.3 – 2.0 +0.0 –0.5 +104.7 +124.5 – 6.9 – 7.9 –5.0 –0.5 2016
– –0.0 –1.6 +11.0 –18.4 +29.4 –0.0 –0.5 +103.1 +142.8 –27.5 – 5.6 –6.7 +0.4 2017
– –1.0 +3.1 –25.0 – 3.1 –21.9 +0.0 –0.4 +117.7 +139.3 –10.8 – 4.3 –6.5 +3.9 2018
– –0.7 +0.1 – 8.6 + 1.6 –10.2 +0.0 –0.3 +122.5 +155.8 –25.7 – 3.4 –4.1 –1.4 2019
– +5.7 –3.3 +313.4 +23.2 +290.2 –0.0 +8.2 +221.6 +273.7 –32.7 –14.5 –4.9 +1.9 2020
– +2.3 +1.0 +105.2 – 7.4 +112.6 +0.0 +3.3 +95.3 +144.3 –46.2 + 0.7 –3.5 –0.2 2021
– +0.9 +0.5 –21.7 – 6.4 –15.2 –0.0 +1.2 +37.1 +28.7 +10.5 – 1.6 –0.4 +0.4 2020 July
– +0.3 –0.1 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 2.4 +0.0 +0.4 +17.4 +13.6 + 4.3 – 0.2 –0.3 +0.2 Aug.
– +0.2 +0.0 +40.0 – 2.5 +42.5 +0.0 +0.5 +13.4 +15.1 – 0.9 – 0.5 –0.4 +0.3 Sep.
– +0.1 +0.2 +12.2 + 7.7 + 4.4 – +0.2 +40.0 +38.6 + 2.2 – 0.4 –0.4 +0.3 Oct.
– +0.2 +0.1 + 8.3 + 3.5 + 4.8 –0.0 +0.3 +20.5 +34.1 –13.2 – 0.1 –0.3 –0.2 Nov.
– +0.6 +0.1 – 8.1 – 9.6 + 1.5 – +0.5 – 9.2 – 2.3 – 7.6 + 1.0 –0.2 –0.0 Dec.
– +0.2 –0.1 +24.9 +15.7 + 9.2 +0.0 +0.5 +19.2 +28.9 –10.3 + 1.1 –0.4 –0.1 2021 Jan.
– +0.3 +0.1 – 1.2 – 2.4 + 1.2 –0.0 +0.6 + 9.1 +15.4 – 7.0 + 1.0 –0.4 –0.0 Feb.
– +0.3 +0.1 +75.1 – 2.6 +77.7 – +0.5 +12.2 +17.7 – 4.8 – 0.3 –0.4 +0.1 Mar.
– +0.2 –0.6 + 7.1 + 0.8 + 6.3 +0.0 +0.3 + 9.8 +19.6 – 9.8 + 0.4 –0.3 –0.0 Apr.
– +0.3 +0.3 + 8.9 + 3.9 + 5.0 – +0.5 +20.6 +26.0 – 5.3 + 0.5 –0.5 +0.2 May
– +0.2 +0.1 + 5.0 – 7.3 +12.3 +0.0 +0.3 –19.8 – 8.5 –10.5 – 0.6 –0.2 –0.0 June
– +0.1 +0.1 + 6.6 + 3.5 + 3.1 – +0.1 +28.2 +33.9 – 5.0 – 0.6 –0.2 –0.1 July
– +0.2 +0.1 + 4.1 – 0.8 + 4.9 –0.0 +0.2 + 6.4 +10.0 – 2.9 – 0.5 –0.2 –0.2 Aug.
– +0.0 +0.7 –10.6 – 6.4 – 4.2 +0.0 +0.1 – 6.7 – 5.4 – 0.3 – 0.8 –0.2 –0.2 Sep.
– –0.1 +0.1 +10.5 + 4.0 + 6.5 +0.0 +0.0 +28.8 +16.4 +13.2 – 0.6 –0.2 –0.2 Oct.
– +0.1 +0.1 +10.2 + 2.3 + 7.9 – +0.1 +13.3 +21.5 – 7.6 – 0.2 –0.3 –0.3 Nov.
– +0.5 +0.1 –35.4 –18.0 –17.4 –0.0 +0.0 –25.9 –31.2 + 4.1 + 1.4 –0.2 +0.6 Dec.
including subordinated liabilities.  4 Including liabilities arising from monetary policy
operations with the Bundesbank.  5 Own acceptances and promissory notes
outstanding.  6 Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  7 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8).  8 Including liabilities
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
28•
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)    
Credit balances and loans, bills Loans and bills
PeriodCash in
hand
(non-
euro area
banknotes
and
coins) Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued by
non-banks
End of year or month *
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 291.0
2020 July 0.3 1,083.1 834.0 574.4 259.6 3.4 245.7 3.9 829.1 536.3 138.8 397.5 15.1 277.6
Aug. 0.3 1,066.8 821.2 563.3 257.9 3.5 242.1 4.1 819.9 531.3 133.7 397.6 15.6 272.9
Sep. 0.2 1,084.3 841.3 583.4 257.9 3.6 239.4 4.1 821.9 530.4 130.3 400.2 15.2 276.3
Oct. 0.3 1,064.7 822.9 564.5 258.5 3.5 238.3 4.1 839.8 539.3 137.7 401.6 16.5 284.1
Nov. 0.2 1,056.0 815.8 563.4 252.4 3.5 236.7 4.0 845.6 539.5 139.8 399.7 14.0 292.1
Dec. 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 Jan. 0.2 1,135.1 897.8 645.6 252.2 2.6 234.7 3.8 846.9 538.6 142.7 395.8 14.0 294.3
Feb. 0.6 1,146.4 912.7 659.6 253.1 2.2 231.5 3.8 853.6 548.2 150.4 397.7 14.7 290.7
Mar. 0.2 1,140.4 908.0 646.7 261.3 2.3 230.1 3.8 864.8 559.3 153.3 406.1 11.9 293.5
Apr. 0.2 1,172.3 943.1 680.7 262.3 2.3 227.0 3.9 855.5 555.5 152.6 402.9 13.0 287.0
May 0.2 1,157.2 928.1 669.8 258.3 2.4 226.8 3.9 846.1 550.1 147.3 402.8 11.9 284.2
June 0.4 1,159.3 930.3 666.6 263.7 2.5 226.4 3.9 855.1 551.6 146.7 404.9 10.5 293.0
July 0.4 1,139.3 910.4 651.3 259.1 1.9 227.0 3.8 867.2 565.0 158.4 406.6 13.1 289.2
Aug. 0.4 1,125.9 899.8 647.9 251.8 1.6 224.5 3.7 867.4 566.7 158.7 407.9 15.3 285.5
Sep. 0.3 1,113.1 885.7 634.6 251.1 1.1 226.3 3.6 876.0 569.3 156.6 412.7 15.1 291.6
Oct. 0.3 1,166.7 940.5 672.2 268.2 0.9 225.3 3.5 878.0 579.6 164.1 415.5 17.7 280.6
Nov. 0.3 1,164.8 940.3 674.7 265.6 0.8 223.7 3.4 888.2 585.6 164.4 421.2 14.3 288.3
Dec. 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 291.0
Changes *
2013 –0.5 –22.7 –26.9 –1.3 –25.6 +1.8 +2.4 –0.0 –21.2 –33.1 –5.8 –27.2 – 0.7 +12.6
2014 –0.0 +86.1 +80.1 +63.2 +16.8 +0.7 +5.3 –0.6 +5.7 –10.2 –12.8 +2.7 – 1.8 +17.7
2015 +0.1 –91.8 –86.0 –82.2 –3.8 –6.7 +0.8 –0.1 –6.1 –9.2 –6.5 –2.7 + 1.1 +2.0
2016 +0.0 –25.5 –14.5 –38.2 +23.7 –0.7 –10.3 –0.0 +17.4 +28.9 +10.1 +18.8 – 3.0 –8.5
2017 +0.0 –57.2 –48.7 –61.5 +12.8 +0.0 –8.5 +0.6 –4.7 +13.0 +8.6 +4.4 + 0.7 –18.4
2018 +0.0 +49.6 +34.0 +57.7 –23.7 +0.2 +15.3 +0.7 +18.3 +28.3 +3.2 +25.2 – 0.4 –9.7
2019 –0.0 –4.1 –11.3 –21.9 +10.7 +0.8 +6.3 +0.7 +26.8 +19.9 +12.7 +7.3 + 3.0 +3.8
2020 –0.0 –32.0 –22.4 –6.6 –15.8 +0.9 –10.5 +0.3 +34.4 +14.7 +9.0 +5.7 + 3.6 +16.1
2021 +0.0 +52.8 +71.1 +68.9 +2.2 –2.5 –15.8 –0.5 +38.1 +39.9 +29.1 +10.8 – 3.2 +1.4
2020 July –0.0 –17.9 –14.4 –11.2 –3.2 –0.2 –3.3 +0.1 –0.9 +5.3 +5.9 –0.6 – 0.7 –5.4
Aug. –0.0 –14.4 –11.1 –10.0 –1.1 +0.1 –3.4 +0.1 –8.4 –4.2 –4.8 +0.6 + 0.5 –4.7
Sep. –0.0 +13.9 +16.6 +18.2 –1.6 +0.1 –2.8 –0.0 +0.1 –2.5 –3.8 +1.3 – 0.4 +3.0
Oct. +0.0 –20.8 –19.5 –19.8 +0.3 –0.1 –1.2 +0.1 +16.7 +7.8 +6.9 +0.9 + 1.3 +7.6
Nov. –0.0 –3.4 –1.9 +1.8 –3.7 –0.0 –1.5 –0.1 +9.7 +3.6 +2.8 +0.8 – 2.5 +8.6
Dec. –0.0 –26.9 –26.3 –28.9 +2.6 –0.9 +0.2 –0.1 –19.3 –13.7 –13.6 –0.0 – 2.7 –3.0
2021 Jan. –0.0 +106.1 +108.3 +110.3 –1.9 –0.1 –2.1 –0.1 +22.5 +14.5 +17.8 –3.3 + 2.7 +5.3
Feb. +0.3 +11.1 +14.7 +14.0 +0.7 –0.4 –3.2 –0.1 +6.3 +9.0 +7.5 +1.5 + 0.7 –3.5
Mar. –0.3 –11.7 –10.1 –15.8 +5.6 +0.1 –1.7 +0.0 +3.9 +4.9 +0.7 +4.1 – 2.8 +1.8
Apr. –0.0 +37.7 +40.7 +36.8 +3.9 –0.1 –2.9 +0.1 –4.0 +0.6 +0.7 –0.0 + 1.1 –5.6
May +0.0 –14.9 –14.6 –11.5 –3.1 –0.1 –0.3 +0.0 –7.7 –4.2 –4.4 +0.2 – 0.9 –2.6
June +0.2 –4.1 –3.7 –6.3 +2.6 +0.1 –0.5 –0.0 +4.9 –1.8 –1.7 –0.2 – 1.5 +8.2
July +0.0 –21.8 –20.5 –15.7 –4.8 –0.6 –0.7 –0.1 +12.9 +13.0 +11.7 +1.4 + 2.6 –2.8
Aug. –0.0 –13.9 –11.2 –3.6 –7.6 –0.2 –2.5 –0.1 –0.1 +1.4 +0.3 +1.1 + 2.2 –3.8
Sep. –0.1 –18.7 –19.8 –17.0 –2.9 –0.6 +1.7 –0.1 +10.0 +4.6 +1.2 +3.4 – 0.2 +5.6
Oct. +0.0 +54.3 +55.5 +38.3 +17.3 –0.1 –1.1 –0.1 +1.5 +9.9 +7.6 +2.3 + 2.6 –11.0
Nov. –0.0 –5.7 –3.9 +0.2 –4.0 –0.1 –1.8 –0.1 +5.4 +1.8 +1.1 +0.7 – 3.4 +7.1
Dec. –0.0 –65.7 –64.3 –60.9 –3.5 –0.5 –0.9 +0.0 –17.6 –13.8 –13.3 –0.5 – 6.3 +2.5
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequentrevisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
29•
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Time deposits (including bank
savings bonds)Time deposits (including
savings deposits and bank
savings bonds)
Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in foreign
banks
and
enter-
prises TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
32.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 2012
30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 2013
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 – 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 2021
11.2 19.0 843.9 489.3 354.7 238.8 115.8 – 270.6 139.4 131.3 72.5 58.8 0.1 2020 July
11.2 19.0 828.9 474.8 354.1 238.8 115.2 – 263.2 134.8 128.3 69.9 58.5 0.1 Aug.
11.4 19.0 832.4 486.5 345.9 226.4 119.6 – 269.6 145.5 124.1 66.0 58.1 0.1 Sep.
11.5 19.0 833.2 487.3 345.9 224.6 121.3 – 269.5 142.6 127.0 68.5 58.4 0.1 Oct.
11.5 19.0 836.8 491.3 345.5 219.0 126.5 – 279.9 154.2 125.8 66.0 59.7 0.1 Nov.
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 Dec.
11.3 16.5 954.9 507.8 447.0 298.5 148.5 – 279.8 145.0 134.8 69.4 65.3 0.1 2021 Jan.
11.3 16.5 987.8 520.0 467.7 318.0 149.7 – 283.4 145.2 138.3 71.5 66.8 0.1 Feb.
11.3 16.6 991.5 520.2 471.3 319.5 151.8 – 288.9 147.8 141.1 73.7 67.4 0.1 Mar.
11.3 16.5 1,008.7 522.1 486.6 343.1 143.5 – 295.8 150.7 145.0 81.0 64.1 0.1 Apr.
11.3 16.5 1,013.1 513.9 499.2 360.2 139.0 – 304.0 148.4 155.6 88.0 67.6 0.1 May
11.3 16.5 1,016.2 539.5 476.7 335.5 141.3 – 290.8 148.4 142.5 79.9 62.6 0.1 June
11.2 16.0 981.6 525.0 456.6 304.9 151.7 – 292.2 151.7 140.5 79.3 61.2 0.1 July
11.2 16.3 969.4 513.0 456.4 293.0 163.5 0.0 298.4 158.9 139.6 78.8 60.8 0.1 Aug.
11.2 16.3 1,003.9 528.2 475.8 315.7 160.1 – 306.0 164.0 142.0 81.5 60.4 0.1 Sep.
11.2 16.3 1,031.2 550.5 480.7 320.4 160.3 0.0 320.9 169.8 151.1 83.3 67.8 0.1 Oct.
11.3 16.4 1,068.2 565.4 502.8 335.0 167.9 0.0 315.5 171.3 144.2 75.5 68.7 0.1 Nov.
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 Dec.
Changes *
– 1.8 – 7.2 –174.0 –75.6 –98.4 –83.1 –15.4 –0.0 +13.5 +9.6 +3.9 +6.9 –3.0 –0.2 2013
+ 0.1 – 3.8 +76.3 +47.8 +28.5 +39.0 –10.5 –0.0 –43.6 –8.3 –35.3 –30.7 –4.6 +0.2 2014
– 0.6 – 6.1 –15.4 +40.6 –56.0 –48.6 – 7.4 –0.0 –26.5 –13.9 –12.6 +0.3 –13.0 –0.0 2015
– 0.1 – 1.5 +82.7 +51.0 +31.7 +27.0 + 4.7 –0.0 +3.5 –3.1 +6.7 +5.9 +0.8 –0.0 2016
– 1.0 – 4.1 –15.5 +25.2 –40.8 –43.2 + 2.4 ±0.0 +31.8 +11.0 +20.8 +15.6 +5.2 –0.4 2017
– 0.2 – 2.2 –23.9 –23.4 – 0.4 + 2.1 – 2.6 –0.0 –11.9 –0.2 –11.8 –5.7 –6.0 –0.2 2018
– 0.3 – 0.9 – 9.5 –49.4 +39.8 +28.0 +11.8 –0.0 –0.8 +2.1 –2.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.0 2019
– 0.2 – 3.9 +83.8 +87.8 – 4.1 –34.7 +30.6 – +23.6 +13.8 +9.8 +7.1 +2.8 +0.0 2020
– 0.2 – 0.8 +136.6 +19.8 +116.8 +89.2 +27.6 +0.0 +22.7 +6.4 +16.3 +0.0 +16.3 –0.0 2021
– 0.1 + 0.0 +17.6 +20.7 – 3.1 – 4.1 + 1.0 – –2.7 –4.7 +2.0 +4.0 –2.0 +0.0 2020 July
+ 0.0 – 0.0 –13.9 –13.8 – 0.0 + 0.5 – 0.5 – –7.2 –4.4 –2.7 –2.5 –0.2 –0.0 Aug.
+ 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 +10.4 – 9.5 –13.5 + 4.0 – +5.8 +10.4 –4.6 –4.1 –0.5 +0.0 Sep.
+ 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 +0.5 – 0.4 – 2.0 + 1.6 – –0.6 –3.2 +2.6 +2.3 +0.3 +0.0 Oct.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.9 +5.9 + 2.0 – 3.7 + 5.7 – +11.6 +12.2 –0.6 –2.1 +1.5 –0.0 Nov.
– 0.2 – 1.7 –72.1 –60.9 –11.2 –12.6 + 1.4 – –20.3 –20.3 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 +0.0 Dec.
– 0.0 – 0.8 +191.3 +78.5 +112.9 +92.4 +20.5 – +20.1 +12.3 +7.8 +3.6 +4.2 –0.0 2021 Jan.
– 0.0 – 0.0 +32.7 +12.2 +20.5 +19.3 + 1.2 – +3.4 +0.0 +3.4 +2.0 +1.4 –0.0 Feb.
+ 0.1 – 0.0 – 1.8 –2.6 + 0.8 – 1.1 + 1.9 – +3.2 +1.6 +1.6 +1.3 +0.3 +0.0 Mar.
– 0.0 + 0.0 +23.2 +4.3 +19.0 +26.8 – 7.8 – +7.9 +3.7 +4.2 +7.3 –3.0 +0.0 Apr.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.9 –7.4 +12.2 +16.6 – 4.4 – +8.6 –2.2 +10.8 +7.2 +3.5 –0.0 May
– 0.1 – 0.0 – 1.9 +23.7 –25.6 –27.4 + 1.8 – –14.8 –0.6 –14.2 –9.0 –5.2 –0.0 June
– 0.1 – 0.5 –34.8 –14.6 –20.2 –30.6 +10.4 – +1.3 +2.9 –1.6 –0.3 –1.3 +0.0 July
+ 0.0 + 0.2 –12.8 –12.3 – 0.5 –12.2 +11.7 +0.0 +5.7 +6.7 –1.1 –0.6 –0.5 –0.0 Aug.
– 0.0 + 0.0 +30.5 +12.9 +17.6 +21.4 – 3.9 –0.0 +6.7 +4.9 +1.7 +2.3 –0.6 +0.0 Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 +27.9 +22.7 + 5.2 + 5.1 + 0.2 +0.0 +14.7 +5.8 +9.0 +1.6 +7.4 –0.0 Oct.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 +32.3 +12.5 +19.9 +13.0 + 6.9 – –6.3 +0.8 –7.1 –8.4 +1.3 –0.0 Nov.
– 0.1 + 0.2 –155.0 –110.1 –44.9 –34.0 –10.9 – –27.7 –29.6 +1.9 –7.0 +8.9 +0.0 Dec.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
30•
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Short-term lending Medium- and long-term   Lending to domestic
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
Periodincluding 
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claimsexcluding 
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claims Total TotalLoans
and
billsNegotiable
money
market
paper Total LoansTreasury
bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 – 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 3,798.1 3,392.6 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2020 July 3,625.7 3,217.4 274.8 243.4 242.6 0.8 31.5 24.2 7.3 3,350.9 2,953.2
Aug. 3,629.7 3,219.7 265.6 237.7 236.9 0.8 28.0 19.4 8.6 3,364.0 2,967.3
Sep. 3,634.2 3,224.6 261.9 232.0 231.3 0.7 29.9 22.3 7.7 3,372.3 2,976.0
Oct. 3,651.1 3,237.8 261.0 229.5 228.7 0.7 31.6 23.3 8.2 3,390.1 2,991.5
Nov. 3,661.1 3,247.6 258.7 229.3 228.7 0.6 29.4 22.4 7.0 3,402.4 3,001.7
Dec. 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 Jan. 3,654.0 3,251.0 247.7 221.9 221.3 0.6 25.8 19.7 6.1 3,406.3 3,018.4
Feb. 3,669.3 3,261.9 249.5 224.2 223.6 0.6 25.3 18.5 6.8 3,419.7 3,031.9
Mar. 3,699.1 3,287.7 261.3 236.6 236.0 0.6 24.7 18.6 6.1 3,437.8 3,048.6
Apr. 3,693.9 3,287.7 248.6 223.5 222.8 0.7 25.1 20.2 4.9 3,445.2 3,061.5
May 3,709.6 3,300.4 248.7 225.4 224.6 0.8 23.3 19.5 3.8 3,460.9 3,075.1
June 3,709.2 3,305.8 250.7 225.8 225.0 0.8 24.9 19.9 5.1 3,458.5 3,082.5
July 3,725.3 3,323.0 248.2 221.0 220.2 0.8 27.2 21.9 5.3 3,477.1 3,102.5
Aug. 3,736.4 3,332.9 245.0 221.1 220.4 0.7 23.9 18.9 4.9 3,491.5 3,116.8
Sep. 3,749.8 3,342.1 247.8 224.5 223.8 0.7 23.4 19.6 3.7 3,501.9 3,123.2
Oct. 3,770.2 3,367.1 256.5 232.5 231.9 0.6 24.0 19.5 4.4 3,513.7 3,142.9
Nov. 3,794.0 3,386.5 255.6 232.9 232.3 0.6 22.7 17.7 5.0 3,538.4 3,164.9
Dec. 3,798.1 3,392.6 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
Changes *
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 – 13.8 – 5.8 – 6.3 + 0.5 – 8.0 – 7.0 – 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 – 11.6 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 0.0 – 7.1 – 6.5 – 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 – 5.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.8 – 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 – 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 – 12.1 – 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 8.6 – 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 – 19.6 – 19.8 – 19.8 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2021 + 152.2 + 147.8 + 8.9 + 13.8 + 13.8 – 0.1 – 4.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 + 143.4 + 157.9
2020 July + 4.6 + 10.5 – 5.9 – 6.9 – 6.8 – 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 10.5 + 15.2
Aug. + 4.0 + 2.4 – 7.5 – 4.1 – 4.1 – 0.0 – 3.5 – 4.9 + 1.4 + 11.5 + 12.6
Sep. + 4.6 + 4.9 – 3.7 – 5.6 – 5.6 – 0.1 + 2.0 + 2.9 – 0.9 + 8.3 + 8.6
Oct. + 16.5 + 12.9 – 0.9 – 2.6 – 2.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 17.4 + 14.6
Nov. + 10.6 + 10.4 – 2.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 2.0 – 0.7 – 1.2 + 12.7 + 10.6
Dec. – 14.1 – 2.3 – 15.5 – 7.7 – 7.5 – 0.2 – 7.8 – 4.4 – 3.4 + 1.4 + 11.2
2021 Jan. + 6.6 + 5.3 + 4.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 4.2 + 1.7 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 5.2
Feb. + 15.3 + 10.9 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 0.0 – 0.5 – 1.2 + 0.7 + 13.5 + 13.3
Mar. + 29.7 + 25.6 + 11.2 + 12.5 + 12.5 – 0.0 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 1.4 + 18.5 + 16.3
Apr. – 5.2 – 0.0 – 12.8 – 13.1 – 13.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.6 – 1.2 + 7.5 + 13.0
May + 15.6 + 12.5 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.1 – 1.8 – 0.6 – 1.2 + 15.5 + 13.4
June – 0.4 + 5.5 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 – 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 – 2.4 + 7.3
July + 16.1 + 17.2 – 2.0 – 4.2 – 4.3 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 18.1 + 19.5
Aug. + 10.9 + 9.7 – 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 3.3 – 2.9 – 0.4 + 14.1 + 14.2
Sep. + 13.5 + 9.3 + 3.3 + 3.7 + 3.8 – 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.7 – 1.2 + 10.2 + 6.2
Oct. + 20.5 + 25.1 + 8.7 + 8.1 + 8.2 – 0.1 + 0.5 – 0.2 + 0.7 + 11.8 + 19.8
Nov. + 25.5 + 20.5 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 2.4 + 0.0 – 1.2 – 1.8 + 0.6 + 24.4 + 19.9
Dec. + 4.3 + 6.3 – 5.8 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 5.2 – 2.5 – 2.7 + 10.1 + 9.8
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
31•
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
TotalMedium-
termLong-
term SecuritiesMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalMedium-
termLong-
termSecur-
ities  1Equal-
isation
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 – 3.5 2012
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 – 2.7 2013
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 – 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 – 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 – 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 – 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 – 1.4 2018
2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 – 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 2020
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.5 143.9 – 1.0 2021
2,715.7 312.5 2,403.2 237.5 21.0 397.7 234.9 16.7 218.1 162.8 – 1.2 2020 July
2,729.1 313.1 2,416.0 238.2 21.3 396.7 234.4 16.7 217.7 162.3 – 1.2 Aug.
2,737.4 313.1 2,424.2 238.6 21.5 396.3 233.7 16.2 217.5 162.6 – 1.2 Sep.
2,751.8 313.2 2,438.6 239.7 21.6 398.6 234.0 15.9 218.1 164.6 – 1.2 Oct.
2,762.3 311.5 2,450.8 239.4 21.8 400.7 234.2 15.7 218.6 166.4 – 1.2 Nov.
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 Dec.
2,776.4 307.8 2,468.6 242.0 22.5 387.9 233.6 15.3 218.3 154.3 – 1.2 2021 Jan.
2,787.7 309.7 2,478.1 244.2 22.8 387.8 232.0 15.4 216.6 155.8 – 1.1 Feb.
2,802.4 314.5 2,487.9 246.1 23.1 389.3 230.7 15.2 215.5 158.6 – 1.1 Mar.
2,813.9 313.6 2,500.3 247.6 23.4 383.7 230.8 15.0 215.8 153.0 – 1.1 Apr.
2,825.1 311.7 2,513.5 249.9 23.6 385.9 231.1 14.9 216.2 154.8 – 1.1 May
2,831.8 310.0 2,521.8 250.7 23.9 376.0 229.2 14.7 214.5 146.8 – 1.1 June
2,851.4 310.7 2,540.8 251.0 24.0 374.6 229.5 14.9 214.6 145.1 – 1.1 July
2,864.5 311.5 2,553.1 252.2 24.2 374.7 229.1 14.7 214.4 145.6 – 1.1 Aug.
2,870.0 310.1 2,559.9 253.2 24.2 378.7 228.7 14.3 214.4 150.1 – 1.0 Sep.
2,885.5 313.5 2,572.0 257.4 24.1 370.9 230.2 14.6 215.6 140.7 – 1.0 Oct.
2,906.5 315.6 2,590.9 258.4 24.2 373.5 230.0 14.5 215.6 143.5 – 1.0 Nov.
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.5 143.9 – 1.0 Dec.
Changes *
+ 17.7 – 0.1 + 17.8 – 0.1 – 2.5 + 0.6 – 4.3 – 0.7 – 3.6 + 4.9 – – 0.8 2013
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 +12.5 – 1.8 – 4.1 – 8.5 – 5.1 – 3.4 + 4.3 – – 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 +14.8 – 2.1 – 6.6 – 6.9 – 4.8 – 2.0 + 0.2 – + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 – 0.9 – 30.9 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 3.3 –23.6 – – 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 +15.8 + 0.1 – 39.9 –10.6 – 1.3 – 9.3 –29.4 – – 0.1 2017
+108.7 +19.3 + 89.4 – 6.7 – 0.9 – 37.1 –10.5 – 2.7 – 7.8 –26.6 – – 0.0 2018
+126.0 +18.9 +107.2 + 6.8 – 0.8 – 17.8 – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 –12.3 – + 0.1 2019
+145.0 + 9.4 +135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 – 2.8 – 1.1 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 1.7 – – 0.4 2020
+140.1 + 5.6 +134.5 +17.8 + 2.3 – 14.6 – 3.4 – 1.3 – 2.0 –11.2 – – 0.0 2021
+ 16.1 + 1.6 + 14.5 – 0.9 + 0.9 – 4.7 + 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.7 – 5.1 – + 0.0 2020 July
+ 11.9 + 0.7 + 11.2 + 0.7 + 0.3 – 1.0 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.5 – 0.5 – – 0.0 Aug.
+ 8.2 – 0.0 + 8.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.4 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 + 0.3 – + 0.0 Sep.
+ 13.5 + 0.1 + 13.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 0.9 – 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.9 – + 0.0 Oct.
+ 10.9 – 1.2 + 12.1 – 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3 – 0.2 + 0.5 + 1.8 – – 0.0 Nov.
+ 9.5 – 1.0 + 10.5 + 1.7 + 0.7 – 9.8 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 9.9 – – 0.1 Dec.
+ 4.3 – 2.7 + 7.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 – 3.1 – 0.8 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 2.3 – + 0.1 2021 Jan.
+ 11.1 + 1.8 + 9.3 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 – 1.3 + 0.1 – 1.4 + 1.5 – – 0.0 Feb.
+ 14.4 + 4.7 + 9.7 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 2.1 – 1.4 – 0.2 – 1.2 + 3.5 – – 0.0 Mar.
+ 11.5 – 0.9 + 12.4 + 1.5 + 0.2 – 5.5 + 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.3 – 5.6 – – 0.0 Apr.
+ 11.0 – 1.9 + 13.0 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3 – 0.1 + 0.4 + 1.8 – + 0.0 May
+ 6.5 – 1.7 + 8.2 + 0.8 + 0.3 – 9.7 – 1.8 – 0.2 – 1.5 – 7.9 – – 0.0 June
+ 19.2 + 0.2 + 19.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 – 1.7 – – 0.0 July
+ 13.0 + 0.8 + 12.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.4 + 0.5 – – 0.0 Aug.
+ 5.2 – 1.4 + 6.6 + 1.0 – 0.0 + 4.0 – 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.0 + 4.4 – + 0.0 Sep.
+ 15.6 + 3.5 + 12.1 + 4.1 – 0.1 – 7.9 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 – 9.4 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 18.9 + 4.4 + 14.5 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 4.4 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 1.0 + 3.5 – – 0.0 Nov.
+ 9.3 – 1.1 + 10.4 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.4 – + 0.0 Dec.

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
February 2022
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insuranceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2019 2,864.8 1,512.1 1,470.4 1,213.0 257.4 1,560.5 416.1 146.6 119.0 77.1 141.6 54.2 50.3 168.2
2020         Dec. 2,993.0 1,601.8 1,565.6 1,285.1 280.5 1,623.4 443.3 146.7 123.4 82.7 135.8 55.3 59.8 176.0
2021         Mar. 3,038.4 1,618.9 1,587.9 1,302.5 285.4 1,657.2 451.2 149.2 123.0 84.6 139.1 55.4 60.1 182.5
         June 3,056.8 1,634.6 1,619.5 1,316.7 302.8 1,654.3 461.4 142.5 122.1 85.7 135.5 56.0 57.9 182.6         Sep. 3,093.7 1,653.1 1,648.9 1,337.4 311.4 1,666.9 467.9 143.9 122.2 87.7 136.7 56.2 56.3 182.6         Dec. 3,147.5 1,591.4 1,678.2 1,373.0 305.1 1,701.5 477.2 146.1 128.3 98.0 140.4 55.9 55.8 186.3
 Short-term lending
2019 238.4 − 8.1 − 8.1 206.2 4.7 35.9 5.6 15.7 48.6 3.8 4.6 27.02020         Dec. 221.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 192.1 4.6 29.0 6.9 16.0 37.0 3.6 6.1 31.6
2021         Mar. 236.0 − 8.0 − 8.0 207.4 4.7 33.4 6.4 16.7 38.9 3.9 6.1 34.2
         June 225.0 − 7.8 − 7.8 195.9 4.5 28.8 5.5 16.7 34.7 4.2 4.4 34.4         Sep. 223.8 − 7.8 − 7.8 193.7 4.4 30.4 5.1 17.1 35.6 4.0 4.1 34.1         Dec. 231.9 − 6.9 − 6.9 202.7 4.4 31.6 9.1 18.0 36.4 3.3 3.9 35.0
 Medium-term lending
2019 301.3 − 36.6 − 36.6 219.5 16.6 28.5 4.9 13.9 19.7 4.6 10.2 52.02020         Dec. 310.5 − 38.5 − 38.5 230.4 18.5 30.2 5.4 14.8 19.3 4.8 15.0 51.4
2021         Mar. 314.5 − 38.9 − 38.9 236.4 19.1 29.2 5.1 15.3 19.7 4.5 14.7 52.9
         June 310.0 − 39.7 − 39.7 232.8 19.8 27.7 5.0 15.3 19.5 4.5 14.1 51.2         Sep. 310.1 − 40.2 − 40.2 233.3 20.2 27.8 5.2 15.8 19.3 4.5 12.3 51.7         Dec. 314.5 − 40.5 − 40.5 239.5 20.6 28.3 5.4 19.3 20.8 4.3 12.3 52.0
 Long-term lending
2019 2,325.1 1,512.1 1,425.7 1,213.0 212.7 1,134.9 394.8 82.2 108.6 47.6 73.3 45.8 35.5 89.22020         Dec. 2,461.4 1,601.8 1,519.1 1,285.1 234.0 1,201.0 420.2 87.5 111.2 51.8 79.4 47.0 38.7 93.0
2021         Mar. 2,487.9 1,618.9 1,541.0 1,302.5 238.5 1,213.5 427.4 86.6 111.5 52.6 80.5 47.1 39.3 95.4
         June 2,521.8 1,634.6 1,572.0 1,316.7 255.3 1,225.5 437.2 86.0 111.6 53.7 81.3 47.3 39.4 97.0         Sep. 2,559.9 1,653.1 1,600.9 1,337.4 263.5 1,240.0 443.4 85.6 111.9 54.9 81.8 47.7 39.9 96.8         Dec. 2,601.2 1,591.4 1,630.8 1,373.0 257.8 1,259.3 452.2 86.2 113.8 60.8 83.2 48.3 39.6 99.2
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2020         Q4 + 23.9 + 21.3 + 27.7 + 19.3 + 8.4 + 6.1 + 8.4 − 10.3 + 2.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.2 + 2.4
2021         Q1 + 44.8 + 17.1 + 22.2 + 17.3 + 4.9 + 33.0 + 7.6 + 2.5 − 0.7 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 6.2
         Q2 + 17.9 + 20.9 + 30.7 + 21.0 + 9.7 − 3.2 + 9.6 − 6.7 − 0.9 + 1.1 − 3.7 + 0.6 − 2.2 − 0.0         Q3 + 37.1 + 18.5 + 29.1 + 19.7 + 9.4 + 12.7 + 6.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 1.0         Q4 + 53.4 + 20.2 + 31.9 + 22.9 + 9.0 + 34.9 + 12.9 + 2.2 + 5.8 + 7.6 + 3.7 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 3.6
 Short-term lending
2020         Q4 − 10.0 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 9.3 − 0.4 − 8.0 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 1.4 − 0.6 + 0.8 + 1.6
2021         Q1 + 14.9 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 15.4 + 0.1 + 4.4 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 2.6
         Q2 − 11.1 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 11.6 − 0.2 − 4.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 4.2 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 0.2         Q3 − 0.3 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3         Q4 + 10.3 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 10.5 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 1.0
 Medium-term lending
2020         Q4 − 2.2 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 − 1.6 + 0.6 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.2
2021         Q1 + 3.8 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 5.9 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.5
         Q2 − 4.5 − + 0.8 − + 0.8 − 3.5 + 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.8         Q3 − 0.4 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 + 0.7         Q4 + 6.8 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 8.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 3.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5
 Long-term lending
2020         Q4 + 36.1 + 21.3 + 27.7 + 19.3 + 8.4 + 16.9 + 8.2 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 1.0
2021         Q1 + 26.1 + 17.1 + 21.8 + 17.3 + 4.5 + 11.7 + 6.9 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 2.2
         Q2 + 33.6 + 20.9 + 30.2 + 21.0 + 9.1 + 12.0 + 9.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.5         Q3 + 37.8 + 18.5 + 28.6 + 19.7 + 8.9 + 14.1 + 6.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.6         Q4 + 36.3 + 20.2 + 31.7 + 22.9 + 8.8 + 16.4 + 12.4 + 0.6 + 1.7 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 2.1
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
February 2022
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
803.6 264.5 51.1 193.9 447.5 47.6 1,288.4 1,050.4 238.0 176.5 7.9 15.9 3.9 2019
843.7 286.6 53.8 204.1 464.0 47.9 1,353.4 1,118.3 235.2 177.4 6.7 16.2 4.0 2020          Dec.
863.3 293.7 59.2 204.3 467.7 48.3 1,364.8 1,132.6 232.2 175.4 6.6 16.4 4.1 2021          Mar.
872.0 296.9 58.2 208.6 473.6 48.7 1,386.3 1,154.0 232.4 174.8 6.6 16.2 4.1          June881.4 304.0 57.5 210.5 478.3 48.9 1,410.5 1,176.6 233.9 176.4 7.0 16.3 4.3          Sep.890.8 308.6 63.6 207.9 483.8 48.3 1,429.3 1,196.6 232.7 184.1 6.9 16.7 4.4          Dec.
Short-term lending
65.0 14.4 9.7 10.2 23.9 4.9 31.6 3.3 28.2 1.3 7.9 0.7 0.0 201961.9 15.7 9.6 10.5 20.9 3.7 28.6 3.4 25.2 1.3 6.7 0.6 0.0 2020          Dec.
67.9 16.5 12.3 10.2 20.5 3.9 27.9 3.4 24.6 1.3 6.6 0.7 0.0 2021          Mar.
67.1 16.0 11.5 10.4 21.0 4.1 28.6 3.4 25.2 1.4 6.6 0.5 0.0          June63.3 16.9 10.3 9.8 20.5 4.3 29.6 3.4 26.2 1.5 7.0 0.5 0.0          Sep.65.5 14.5 13.0 10.0 19.7 3.8 28.6 2.5 26.1 1.4 6.9 0.5 0.0          Dec.
Medium-term lending
85.7 18.1 11.0 22.9 31.9 3.5 81.4 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0 201989.6 20.4 11.8 24.5 32.0 3.5 79.6 20.0 59.6 56.1 − 0.5 0.0 2020          Dec.
94.9 21.9 14.4 25.2 31.5 3.6 77.6 19.8 57.8 54.2 − 0.5 0.0 2021          Mar.
95.7 22.2 14.4 26.4 31.3 3.4 76.7 19.8 56.9 53.1 − 0.5 0.0          June96.7 23.2 13.8 27.4 31.1 3.4 76.3 20.0 56.3 52.4 − 0.6 0.1          Sep.97.0 23.1 15.2 27.1 30.0 3.3 74.4 19.8 54.6 50.6 − 0.6 0.1          Dec.
Long-term lending
652.9 232.0 30.4 160.9 391.7 39.1 1,175.5 1,027.1 148.3 117.1 − 14.7 3.8 2019692.3 250.5 32.4 169.1 411.1 40.7 1,245.3 1,094.9 150.4 120.0 − 15.1 4.0 2020          Dec.
700.5 255.3 32.5 168.9 415.7 40.8 1,259.3 1,109.5 149.8 119.9 − 15.2 4.1 2021          Mar.
709.2 258.7 32.3 171.8 421.3 41.1 1,281.1 1,130.8 150.3 120.3 − 15.2 4.1          June721.3 263.9 33.3 173.3 426.7 41.2 1,304.7 1,153.3 151.4 122.6 − 15.3 4.2          Sep.728.3 271.1 35.4 170.8 434.1 41.3 1,326.3 1,174.3 152.0 132.1 − 15.6 4.3          Dec.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 9.6 + 5.2 − 1.5 + 1.8 + 4.4 − 0.2 + 17.6 + 19.3 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.1 2020          Q4
+ 19.6 + 7.0 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 + 14.6 − 2.9 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 2021          Q1
+ 8.7 + 3.2 − 0.9 + 4.3 + 5.8 + 0.4 + 21.3 + 21.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0          Q2+ 9.4 + 6.5 − 0.8 + 1.7 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 24.3 + 22.7 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1          Q3+ 12.6 + 7.1 + 5.7 − 1.6 + 5.2 − 0.6 + 18.1 + 18.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.1          Q4
Short-term lending
− 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 2020          Q4
+ 6.0 + 0.7 + 2.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2021          Q1
− 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2− 2.7 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q3+ 3.4 − 1.1 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
Medium-term lending
− 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2020          Q4
+ 5.6 + 1.5 + 2.6 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.9 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2021          Q1
+ 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.1 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.7 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3+ 1.8 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 1.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
Long-term lending
+ 10.8 + 4.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 4.9 + 0.5 + 19.0 + 19.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − + 0.2 + 0.1 2020          Q4
+ 8.0 + 4.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 4.1 + 0.1 + 14.3 + 14.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 2021          Q1
+ 8.8 + 3.4 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 21.6 + 21.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 11.3 + 4.7 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 4.9 + 0.1 + 23.6 + 22.5 + 1.2 + 1.7 − + 0.1 + 0.1          Q3+ 7.4 + 7.0 + 1.9 − 1.7 + 6.2 + 0.1 + 19.6 + 19.2 + 0.5 + 1.2 − + 0.3 + 0.1          Q4
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
34•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic non-banks, total                        End of year or month *
2019 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 202.7 613.5 52.7 560.8 575.2 33.2 32.5 14.7 0.2
2020 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2021 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2021 Jan. 3,904.5 2,542.0 773.1 181.6 591.5 47.4 544.2 561.6 27.9 34.3 14.3 0.5
Feb. 3,913.7 2,557.5 766.1 174.7 591.4 49.0 542.4 562.6 27.5 34.3 14.4 0.5
Mar. 3,925.8 2,575.2 761.2 175.4 585.9 46.9 539.0 562.3 27.1 34.4 14.4 0.9
Apr. 3,935.7 2,594.6 751.6 168.9 582.7 46.8 535.9 562.8 26.8 34.4 14.4 1.0
May 3,956.3 2,620.5 746.2 165.9 580.3 47.3 533.1 563.2 26.3 34.6 14.4 0.7
June 3,936.4 2,612.1 735.7 158.1 577.5 47.4 530.1 562.6 26.1 34.6 14.4 1.0
July 3,964.6 2,646.0 730.7 155.4 575.3 47.7 527.6 562.0 25.9 34.5 14.3 1.5
Aug. 3,971.0 2,656.0 727.8 151.2 576.7 48.1 528.5 561.5 25.6 34.3 14.3 1.5
Sep. 3,960.3 2,647.9 726.1 152.7 573.5 47.8 525.7 560.7 25.5 34.1 14.4 1.6
Oct. 3,989.1 2,664.3 739.3 163.6 575.7 49.1 526.6 560.1 25.3 33.9 15.3 1.4
Nov. 4,002.4 2,685.9 731.8 157.1 574.7 49.9 524.8 559.9 24.8 33.6 15.3 0.9
Dec. 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
Changes *
2020 +221.6 +273.7 – 32.7 – 15.0 –17.7 – 4.8 –12.9 –14.5 – 4.9 + 1.9 – 0.3 – 0.1
2021 + 95.3 +144.3 – 46.2 – 27.3 –18.9 + 1.5 –20.5 + 0.7 – 3.5 – 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.2
2021 Jan. + 19.2 + 28.9 – 10.3 – 7.3 – 3.0 – 0.6 – 2.5 + 1.1 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.4
Feb. + 9.1 + 15.4 – 7.0 – 6.9 – 0.1 + 1.7 – 1.8 + 1.0 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0
Mar. + 12.2 + 17.7 – 4.8 + 0.7 – 5.5 – 2.2 – 3.4 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
Apr. + 9.8 + 19.6 – 9.8 – 6.6 – 3.2 – 0.0 – 3.1 + 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1
May + 20.6 + 26.0 – 5.3 – 3.0 – 2.4 + 0.4 – 2.8 + 0.5 – 0.5 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.3
June – 19.8 – 8.5 – 10.5 – 7.8 – 2.7 + 0.2 – 2.9 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.2
July + 28.2 + 33.9 – 5.0 – 2.8 – 2.2 + 0.3 – 2.5 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.6
Aug. + 6.4 + 10.0 – 2.9 – 4.2 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 – – 0.0
Sep. – 6.7 – 5.4 – 0.3 + 2.1 – 2.4 – 0.6 – 1.8 – 0.8 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
Oct. + 28.8 + 16.4 + 13.2 + 11.0 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 1.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 13.3 + 21.5 – 7.6 – 6.4 – 1.2 + 0.8 – 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.6
Dec. – 25.9 – 31.2 + 4.1 + 3.9 + 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 0.4
Domestic government End of year or month *
2019 237.1 74.7 154.9 76.0 78.9 26.1 52.8 3.4 4.1 24.7 2.2 0.2
2020 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 –
2021 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2021 Jan. 224.1 77.5 140.3 57.8 82.5 20.8 61.7 2.7 3.7 25.3 2.1 –
Feb. 224.4 80.7 137.3 53.6 83.8 22.4 61.3 2.7 3.6 25.3 2.1 –
Mar. 214.4 76.8 131.4 51.2 80.2 19.9 60.3 2.6 3.5 25.3 2.0 –
Apr. 213.7 80.5 127.0 47.8 79.3 19.8 59.5 2.6 3.5 25.4 2.0 –
May 218.4 88.4 123.8 45.8 78.0 19.8 58.2 2.6 3.5 25.3 2.0 –
June 209.0 81.5 121.5 43.8 77.6 20.3 57.3 2.6 3.4 25.2 2.0 0.2
July 211.8 86.6 119.2 41.6 77.7 20.6 57.0 2.6 3.4 25.2 2.0 –
Aug. 207.9 84.1 117.9 38.8 79.0 21.2 57.9 2.6 3.4 25.3 2.0 –
Sep. 210.8 84.8 120.1 42.2 78.0 20.8 57.2 2.5 3.4 25.2 2.0 –
Oct. 213.9 85.2 122.9 43.5 79.5 22.2 57.3 2.5 3.3 25.2 2.0 –
Nov. 213.7 86.1 121.8 41.4 80.4 23.5 56.9 2.5 3.3 25.1 2.0 –
Dec. 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
Changes *
2020 – 6.9 + 5.7 – 11.6 – 16.5 + 4.8 – 5.3 +10.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 + 0.7 – 0.1 – 0.2
2021 – 17.9 + 3.4 – 20.8 – 17.7 – 3.0 + 2.9 – 6.0 – 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.4 – 0.0 + 1.0
2021 Jan. – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.8 – 1.8 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 –
Feb. + 0.3 + 3.3 – 3.0 – 4.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 –
Mar. – 10.0 – 4.0 – 5.9 – 2.3 – 3.6 – 2.5 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 –
Apr. – 0.7 + 3.7 – 4.4 – 3.5 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – –
May + 4.7 + 7.9 – 3.2 – 2.0 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 –
June – 9.3 – 6.9 – 2.3 – 2.0 – 0.4 + 0.5 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.2
July + 2.7 + 5.0 – 2.2 – 2.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.2
Aug. – 3.9 – 2.5 – 1.4 – 2.8 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 –
Sep. + 4.3 + 1.8 + 2.6 + 3.2 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 –
Oct. + 3.1 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 –
Nov. – 0.1 + 0.9 – 1.0 – 2.1 + 1.1 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 –
Dec. – 3.6 – 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 – 0.6 + 0.3 – 0.8 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 1.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities.
2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
35•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont´d)
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic enterprises and households                            End of year or month *
2019 3,423.9 2,161.6 661.4 126.7 534.7 26.6 508.0 571.8 29.1 7.8 12.6 0.0
2020 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2021 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2021 Jan. 3,680.4 2,464.5 632.8 123.8 509.0 26.6 482.5 558.9 24.2 9.0 12.3 0.5
Feb. 3,689.2 2,476.7 628.8 121.1 507.7 26.6 481.1 559.9 23.9 9.0 12.3 0.5
Mar. 3,711.4 2,498.4 629.8 124.1 505.7 27.0 478.7 559.7 23.5 9.1 12.3 0.9
Apr. 3,721.9 2,514.1 624.5 121.1 503.4 27.1 476.4 560.1 23.2 9.0 12.3 1.0
May 3,737.9 2,532.1 622.4 120.1 502.3 27.5 474.9 560.6 22.8 9.2 12.3 0.7
June 3,727.4 2,530.5 614.2 114.3 499.9 27.1 472.8 560.0 22.6 9.3 12.4 0.7
July 3,752.8 2,559.4 611.4 113.8 497.7 27.1 470.6 559.5 22.4 9.3 12.3 1.5
Aug. 3,763.1 2,571.9 610.0 112.3 497.6 27.0 470.7 559.0 22.3 9.1 12.3 1.5
Sep. 3,749.4 2,563.1 606.0 110.5 495.5 27.0 468.5 558.2 22.1 8.9 12.4 1.6
Oct. 3,775.1 2,579.2 616.4 120.2 496.2 27.0 469.3 557.6 22.0 8.7 13.4 1.4
Nov. 3,788.6 2,599.8 610.0 115.7 494.3 26.3 467.9 557.4 21.4 8.5 13.3 0.9
Dec. 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
Changes *
2020 +228.5 +268.0 – 21.1 + 1.5 –22.6 + 0.5 –23.0 –13.9 – 4.6 + 1.2 – 0.2 + 0.1
2021 +113.2 +140.9 – 25.5 – 9.6 –15.9 – 1.4 –14.5 + 0.9 – 3.1 – 0.6 + 2.8 + 0.2
2021 Jan. + 24.6 + 31.5 – 7.6 – 5.6 – 2.0 – 0.5 – 1.5 + 1.1 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.4
Feb. + 8.8 + 12.1 – 4.0 – 2.6 – 1.4 + 0.0 – 1.4 + 1.0 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0
Mar. + 22.2 + 21.7 + 1.0 + 3.0 – 2.0 + 0.4 – 2.4 – 0.2 – 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4
Apr. + 10.5 + 15.8 – 5.4 – 3.2 – 2.2 + 0.1 – 2.3 + 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
May + 16.0 + 18.1 – 2.1 – 1.0 – 1.1 + 0.4 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.3
June – 10.5 – 1.6 – 8.2 – 5.8 – 2.4 – 0.4 – 2.0 – 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0
July + 25.4 + 28.9 – 2.7 – 0.5 – 2.2 + 0.0 – 2.2 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.8
Aug. + 10.3 + 12.4 – 1.5 – 1.5 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.0
Sep. – 11.0 – 7.2 – 2.9 – 1.1 – 1.7 – 0.2 – 1.5 – 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
Oct. + 25.7 + 16.0 + 10.3 + 9.7 + 0.7 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 1.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 13.5 + 20.6 – 6.6 – 4.3 – 2.3 – 0.6 – 1.7 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.6
Dec. – 22.3 – 27.5 + 4.1 + 3.3 + 0.8 – 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 1.8 – 0.6
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2019 1,031.5 614.4 399.7 81.1 318.6 15.5 303.1 6.7 10.7 2.4 10.1 0.0
2020 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2021 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2021 Jan. 1,122.7 732.9 374.7 84.2 290.5 14.8 275.7 5.8 9.3 2.3 9.6 0.5
Feb. 1,109.4 723.5 370.9 82.0 288.9 14.9 274.0 5.8 9.1 2.3 9.6 0.5
Mar. 1,134.9 748.2 371.8 85.1 286.7 15.2 271.5 5.8 9.0 2.2 9.6 0.9
Apr. 1,124.8 742.4 367.7 83.4 284.3 15.2 269.2 5.8 8.9 2.2 9.6 1.0
May 1,128.0 746.8 366.7 83.6 283.1 15.7 267.4 5.8 8.7 2.2 9.6 0.7
June 1,115.6 742.7 358.5 77.6 280.9 15.4 265.5 5.8 8.6 2.3 9.6 0.7
July 1,133.9 760.0 359.6 80.7 278.9 15.4 263.6 5.7 8.5 2.3 9.6 1.5
Aug. 1,148.4 775.4 358.9 79.9 279.0 15.3 263.7 5.7 8.5 2.3 9.5 1.5
Sep. 1,141.4 772.1 355.1 78.1 277.0 15.5 261.5 5.7 8.5 2.3 9.6 1.6
Oct. 1,160.1 779.7 366.3 88.4 277.9 15.6 262.3 5.7 8.4 2.3 10.6 1.4
Nov. 1,166.2 791.7 361.1 84.3 276.7 15.5 261.3 5.5 8.0 2.3 10.5 0.9
Dec. 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
Changes *
2020 + 81.0 +101.2 – 18.0 + 7.0 –25.0 – 0.4 –24.6 – 0.8 – 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.1
2021 + 28.5 + 47.1 – 16.8 – 1.2 –15.7 + 0.5 –16.2 – 0.5 – 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.2
2021 Jan. + 6.5 + 13.8 – 7.0 – 5.0 – 2.1 – 0.2 – 1.9 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.4
Feb. – 13.4 – 9.4 – 3.8 – 2.2 – 1.5 + 0.1 – 1.6 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0
Mar. + 25.6 + 24.8 + 0.9 + 3.1 – 2.2 + 0.3 – 2.5 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4
Apr. – 10.0 – 5.7 – 4.2 – 1.8 – 2.4 – 0.0 – 2.4 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.1
May + 3.2 + 4.4 – 1.1 + 0.2 – 1.3 + 0.5 – 1.8 + 0.0 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.3
June – 12.3 – 4.2 – 8.0 – 6.0 – 2.0 – 0.3 – 1.8 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0
July + 18.3 + 17.4 + 1.1 + 3.1 – 2.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.8
Aug. + 14.6 + 15.4 – 0.8 – 0.8 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0
Sep. – 5.4 – 2.5 – 2.9 – 1.1 – 1.8 – 0.1 – 1.6 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2
Oct. + 18.7 + 7.7 + 11.1 + 10.2 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 6.1 + 11.9 – 5.4 – 3.9 – 1.5 – 0.1 – 1.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.6
Dec. – 23.4 – 26.5 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.8 – 0.6
4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
36•
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2  
by creditor group by creditor group 
Domestic households Domestic households
PeriodDeposits of
domestic
households
and
non-profit
institutions,
total Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individualsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tions Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individuals
End of year or month *
2019 2,392.4 1,547.2 1,507.9 266.3 1,081.6 160.1 39.3 261.7 248.3 20.8 190.2 37.3
2020 2,539.5 1,713.8 1,672.7 291.1 1,215.4 166.2 41.1 258.6 245.1 19.3 190.5 35.2
2021 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2021 July 2,618.9 1,799.4 1,755.5 306.6 1,280.3 168.5 44.0 251.8 238.7 18.3 186.4 34.0
Aug. 2,614.6 1,796.5 1,751.9 310.0 1,275.1 166.8 44.6 251.1 238.1 17.8 186.5 33.8
Sep. 2,608.1 1,791.1 1,746.6 305.4 1,274.6 166.5 44.5 250.9 238.1 18.1 186.0 34.0
Oct. 2,615.0 1,799.4 1,755.6 310.2 1,279.3 166.2 43.8 250.1 237.8 18.0 185.8 33.9
Nov. 2,622.4 1,808.2 1,763.6 310.5 1,287.6 165.6 44.5 249.0 237.1 18.1 185.2 33.8
Dec. 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
Changes *
2020 +147.5 +166.9 +165.0 +26.0 +131.5 + 7.5 + 1.8 – 3.1 – 3.2 – 1.5 – 1.6 –0.2
2021 + 84.7 +93.8 +90.3 +17.3 +73.7 – 0.6 + 3.5 – 8.6 – 7.2 – 1.1 – 4.7 –1.3
2021 July + 7.1 +11.5 +10.8 + 7.8 + 3.2 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 3.8 – 3.5 – 0.5 – 2.6 –0.5
Aug. – 4.3 – 3.0 – 3.6 + 3.3 – 5.3 – 1.6 + 0.7 – 0.7 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 0.1 –0.1
Sep. – 5.6 – 4.7 – 4.6 – 4.5 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 – 0.1 –0.0
Oct. + 7.0 + 8.4 + 9.0 + 4.7 + 4.6 – 0.3 – 0.7 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 –0.1
Nov. + 7.4 + 8.7 + 8.0 + 0.3 + 8.3 – 0.6 + 0.7 – 1.2 – 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 –0.2
Dec. + 1.1 – 1.0 – 1.2 – 1.8 + 0.8 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.4 +0.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional.Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
marked.  1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
€ billion
Deposits    
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
PeriodDomestic
government,
total TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans
End of year or month *
2019 237.1 11.2 5.4 1.5 4.2 0.1 11.6 53.8 21.1 17.1 14.5 1.0 13.1
2020 229.5 48.6 4.8 7.2 36.5 0.0 11.3 46.5 21.2 11.4 13.2 0.7 14.1
2021 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2021 July 211.8 44.3 6.2 3.0 35.0 0.0 11.3 48.7 24.8 11.2 12.1 0.6 13.9
Aug. 207.9 44.0 6.2 1.8 36.0 0.0 11.4 42.9 18.9 11.4 12.0 0.6 13.9
Sep. 210.8 45.2 6.4 2.7 36.1 0.0 11.4 49.1 24.1 13.0 11.4 0.6 13.8
Oct. 213.9 45.2 6.3 2.9 36.0 0.0 11.4 49.1 23.6 13.4 11.5 0.6 13.8
Nov. 213.7 45.5 6.7 2.8 36.0 0.1 11.4 47.4 22.3 13.0 11.6 0.6 13.7
Dec. 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
Changes *
2020 – 6.9 +37.3 –0.6 +5.7 +32.2 –0.0 –0.3 –7.0 +0.2 –5.7 –1.3 –0.2 +1.0
2021 –17.9 –5.0 –0.5 –4.1 –0.4 +0.0 +0.3 +1.0 +0.6 +2.3 –1.8 –0.1 +0.0
2021 July + 2.7 –1.3 –0.1 –1.2 –0.0 – –0.1 +5.6 +5.0 +0.6 +0.0 –0.0 +0.0
Aug. – 3.9 –0.2 +0.0 –1.3 +1.0 – +0.0 –5.8 –5.9 +0.3 –0.1 –0.0 +0.0
Sep. + 4.3 +1.2 +0.3 +0.9 +0.0 – –0.0 +6.2 +5.3 +1.5 –0.5 –0.0 –0.1
Oct. + 3.1 +0.0 –0.1 +0.1 –0.0 – +0.0 –0.0 –0.5 +0.4 +0.1 –0.0 +0.0
Nov. – 0.1 +0.4 +0.4 –0.0 +0.0 +0.0 +0.0 –1.6 –1.3 –0.4 +0.1 –0.0 –0.1
Dec. – 3.6 –2.0 –2.4 +0.3 +0.0 –0.0 +0.3 –0.0 –0.6 +0.9 –0.3 –0.0 +0.4
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and DeutscheTelekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”.
Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date
are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
37•
IV. Banks
Savings deposits  3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year  2
of which:
Domestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsup to and
including
1 year Totalup to and
including
2 yearsmore than
2 years TotalDomestic
householdsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsBank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)  5Liabilities
arising
from repos Period
End of year or month *
13.3 45.6 216.1 11.2 204.9 565.1 558.1 7.0 18.4 5.4 2.4 –2019
13.5 40.1 218.5 12.0 206.5 552.0 545.7 6.3 15.1 6.7 2.7 –2020
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 –2021
13.1 33.1 218.7 11.7 207.0 553.7 547.5 6.2 13.9 7.0 2.8 –2021 July
13.0 32.4 218.7 11.7 207.0 553.2 547.1 6.2 13.8 6.8 2.8 – Aug.
12.7 32.4 218.5 11.5 207.0 552.4 546.3 6.2 13.7 6.6 2.8 – Sep.
12.4 31.8 218.3 11.4 207.0 551.9 545.8 6.2 13.6 6.4 2.8 – Oct.
11.8 31.4 217.5 10.9 206.7 551.9 545.6 6.3 13.4 6.2 2.8 – Nov.
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 – Dec.
Changes *
+ 0.2 – 5.5 + 2.4 +0.9 + 1.6 –13.0 –12.3 –0.7 – 3.3 +1.3 + 0.2 –2020
– 1.4 – 8.4 – 0.2 –1.9 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 1.5 –0.1 – 1.9 –0.6 + 0.2 –2021
– 0.3 – 3.6 – 0.2 +0.0 – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.4 –0.1 – 0.1 –0.1 + 0.0 –2021 July
– 0.2 – 0.7 – 0.0 –0.1 + 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.5 –0.0 – 0.1 –0.2 + 0.0 – Aug.
– 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 –0.1 + 0.2 – 0.8 – 0.8 –0.0 – 0.1 –0.2 + 0.0 – Sep.
– 0.4 – 0.6 – 0.2 –0.1 – 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.5 +0.0 – 0.1 –0.2 + 0.0 – Oct.
– 0.5 – 0.4 – 0.8 –0.5 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.1 +0.1 – 0.1 –0.2 + 0.0 – Nov.
+ 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.6 –0.8 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 1.6 –0.1 – 0.2 –0.1 + 0.0 – Dec.
registered debt securities.  2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Table IV.12).  3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsofootnote 2).  4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2,4Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
65.3 37.4 8.6 14.0 5.4 0.0 106.8 10.8 48.8 46.2 1.1 –2019
68.5 43.2 8.0 12.4 4.9 0.0 66.0 10.9 32.9 21.4 0.8 –2020
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 –2021
62.0 39.3 5.9 12.2 4.6 0.0 56.8 16.2 21.5 18.4 0.8 –2021 July
65.5 43.1 5.6 12.2 4.5 0.0 55.5 15.9 20.0 18.8 0.8 – Aug.
62.2 40.1 5.6 12.0 4.5 0.0 54.3 14.2 20.9 18.5 0.8 – Sep.
62.3 40.2 5.3 12.3 4.5 0.0 57.4 15.1 21.9 19.6 0.8 – Oct.
66.0 44.0 5.4 12.2 4.4 0.0 54.7 13.1 20.1 20.6 0.8 – Nov.
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 – Dec.
Changes *
+3.5 +5.9 – 0.6 –1.3 – 0.5 –0.0 –40.8 +0.2 –15.9 –24.8 – 0.3 –2020
+2.8 +5.6 – 2.0 –0.2 – 0.5 – –16.8 –2.2 –13.9 –0.6 + 0.1 –2021
–0.4 –0.2 – 0.1 +0.0 – 0.1 – – 1.1 +0.3 – 1.5 +0.0 – 0.0 –2021 July
+3.5 +3.8 – 0.3 –0.0 – 0.0 – – 1.3 –0.3 – 1.5 +0.5 + 0.0 – Aug.
–2.9 –2.7 – 0.1 –0.0 – 0.1 – – 0.2 –1.0 + 1.0 –0.2 – 0.0 – Sep.
+0.1 +0.0 – 0.2 +0.3 – 0.0 – + 3.0 +1.0 + 0.9 +1.2 – 0.0 – Oct.
+3.7 +3.8 + 0.1 –0.1 – 0.1 – – 2.6 –2.0 – 1.7 +1.0 + 0.1 – Nov.
+4.9 +4.5 + 0.6 –0.2 + 0.0 – – 6.4 –5.2 – 1.2 –0.1 + 0.0 – Dec.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Federal Railways Fund,
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund,
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund.  2 Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities.  3 Including deposits under savings and loan
contracts.  4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
38•
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months'
noticeat more than 3
months' notice
Period Total Total Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeMemo
item:
Interest
credited
on
savings
depositsnon-banks,
total Totalof which:
With
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsforeign
non-banks
End of year or month *
2019 581.8 575.2 540.5 313.2 34.7 24.7 6.6 5.9 2.0 35.9 33.2 25.1 2.6
2020 566.8 560.6 533.3 288.0 27.3 18.0 6.3 5.7 1.8 30.2 28.3 22.1 1.9
2021 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 1.5 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2021 Aug. 567.6 561.5 536.6 273.1 25.0 15.8 6.0 5.5 0.1 25.8 25.6 20.3 0.2
Sep. 566.7 560.7 536.0 270.2 24.8 15.6 6.0 5.5 0.1 25.6 25.5 20.2 0.1
Oct. 566.1 560.1 535.6 271.8 24.5 15.4 5.9 5.4 0.1 25.4 25.3 20.0 0.1
Nov. 565.8 559.9 535.6 267.9 24.3 15.1 5.9 5.4 0.1 24.9 24.8 19.6 0.2
Dec. 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 0.7 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
Changes *
2020 –14.8 –14.5 –7.2 –24.6 –7.3 –6.7 –0.3 –0.2 . –5.7 –4.9 –3.0 –0.7
2021 +0.3 +0.7 +3.9 –18.5 –3.2 –3.2 –0.4 –0.3 . –5.2 –3.5 –2.3 –1.7
2021 Aug. –0.5 –0.5 –0.3 +0.1 –0.2 –0.3 –0.1 –0.0 . –0.2 –0.2 –0.1 –0.0
Sep. –0.9 –0.8 –0.6 –2.9 –0.2 –0.2 –0.0 –0.0 . –0.2 –0.2 –0.1 –0.0
Oct. –0.6 –0.6 –0.4 +1.6 –0.2 –0.2 –0.0 –0.0 . –0.2 –0.2 –0.2 +0.0
Nov. –0.3 –0.2 –0.0 –3.7 –0.2 –0.2 –0.0 –0.0 . –0.3 –0.3 –0.2 +0.0
Dec. +1.4 +1.4 +1.6 +1.1 –0.2 –0.3 –0.0 –0.0 . –0.2 –0.2 –0.1 +0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified as timedeposits.  2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
basic rate of interest.  3 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
securities.
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
of which:
with maturities ofNon-negotiable
bearer debt
securities and
money market
paper  6 Subordinated
up to
and including 1 yearmore than 1 year up to
and including 2 years
Period TotalFloating
rate
bonds  1Zero
coupon
bonds  1,2Foreign
currency
bonds  3,4Certifi-
cates
of
deposit Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5more
than
2 years Totalof which:
with
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsnegotiable
debt
securitiesnon-
negotiable
debt
securities
End of year or month *
2019 1,140.7 123.5 28.6 367.7 96.7 117.7 2.6 23.6 4.2 999.4 0.9 0.7 31.5 0.4
2020 1,119.0 117.1 12.7 313.6 89.4 94.3 1.5 23.8 3.1 1,000.9 1.1 0.9 34.8 0.4
2021 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2021 Aug. 1,152.1 110.4 11.9 318.6 95.9 101.6 2.1 20.0 4.2 1,030.5 1.5 1.0 33.9 0.1
Sep. 1,169.7 108.6 12.5 331.6 104.4 110.2 2.1 18.9 4.3 1,040.6 1.2 1.0 34.7 0.1
Oct. 1,178.4 109.2 12.8 330.0 95.2 101.7 2.1 18.0 4.4 1,058.7 0.7 0.6 34.7 0.1
Nov. 1,190.4 109.0 14.3 336.4 103.2 109.8 2.1 18.0 4.4 1,062.6 0.8 0.6 35.3 0.1
Dec. 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
Changes *
2020 –20.5 –5.2 –0.8 –54.1 –22.3 –22.2 – 1.1 +0.2 –1.1 +1.5 +0.3 +0.2 +2.1 –0.0
2021 +54.0 –10.3 +0.8 +17.6 +9.4 +12.6 + 0.4 –5.9 +1.3 +47.3 +0.4 +0.3 –0.2 –0.3
2021 Aug. + 6.8 –1.2 +0.5 –0.2 +6.5 +7.3 + 0.0 –1.4 +0.1 +0.9 –0.1 +0.0 –0.2 –
Sep. +17.6 –1.8 +0.5 +13.0 +8.5 +8.6 + 0.0 –1.1 +0.1 +10.2 –0.3 –0.1 +0.8 –
Oct. + 8.0 +0.5 +0.4 –1.8 –9.1 –8.5 + 0.0 –1.1 +0.1 +17.5 +0.2 +0.2 +0.0 –
Nov. +12.0 –0.2 +1.5 +6.5 +7.9 +8.1 + 0.0 –0.1 +0.0 +3.9 +0.1 +0.0 +0.6 –
Dec. –16.8 –2.2 –0.8 –5.0 –4.4 –3.0 – 0.3 +0.1 +0.1 –13.8 +0.1 +0.0 –0.7 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies.  2 Issue value when
floated.  3 Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreigncurrencies.  4 Bonds denominated in non-euro area currencies.  5 Negotiable bearer debt
securities and money market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%.
6 Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see
also Table IV.10, footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
39•
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks
(MFIs)  6Deposits of non-
banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans
End of
year/monthNum-
ber
of
associ-
ationsBalance
sheet
total  1Credit
bal-
ances
and
loans
(ex-
cluding
building
loans)  2Building
loans  3Bank
debt
secur-
ities  4Loans
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsInterim
and
bridging
loansOther
building
loansSecur- 
ities (in-
cluding
Treasury
bills
and
Treasury
discount
paper)  5Deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight
and time
depositsDeposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight and
time de-
posits  7Bearer
debt
secur-
ities
out-
stand-
ingCapital
(includ-
ing pub-
lished
re-
serves)  8Memo
item:
New
con-
tracts
entered
into in
year or
month  9
All building and loan associations
2021 18 253.2 30.0 0.0 15.7 10.1 130.5 36.7 26.5 3.0 30.1 184.4 9.2 4.2 12.4 71.4
2021 Oct. 18 250.6 29.1 0.0 15.6 10.2 129.4 36.0 26.6 2.9 28.1 183.2 8.9 4.3 12.4 5.2
Nov. 18 252.1 30.0 0.0 15.7 10.2 129.8 36.4 26.5 2.9 29.7 182.9 9.1 4.3 12.4 5.5
Dec. 18 253.2 30.0 0.0 15.7 10.1 130.5 36.7 26.5 3.0 30.1 184.4 9.2 4.2 12.4 6.2
Private building and Ioan associations
2021 Oct. 10 175.3 14.2 – 6.8 7.5 101.0 30.7 12.4 1.7 25.6 119.0 8.5 4.3 8.5 3.1
Nov. 10 176.8 15.0 – 6.9 7.4 101.2 31.0 12.5 1.7 27.1 119.1 8.7 4.3 8.5 3.4
Dec. 10 177.7 15.0 – 6.9 7.4 101.9 31.3 12.5 1.7 27.5 120.0 8.8 4.2 8.5 3.9
Public building and Ioan associations
2021 Oct. 8 75.3 15.0 0.0 8.8 2.7 28.4 5.3 14.2 1.2 2.5 64.1 0.4 – 3.9 2.1
Nov. 8 75.3 15.0 0.0 8.8 2.7 28.5 5.4 14.0 1.2 2.6 63.9 0.5 – 3.9 2.1
Dec. 8 75.5 15.0 0.0 8.8 2.7 28.7 5.4 14.0 1.2 2.6 64.4 0.5 – 3.9 2.4
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Capital promised Capital disbursed Changes in deposits
under savings and
loan contracts AllocationsDisbursement
commitments
outstanding at
end of periodInterest and
repayments
received on
building loans  11
Deposits under
savings and
loan contractsLoans under
savings and
loan contracts  10
PeriodAmounts
paid into
savings
and
loan ac-
counts  10Interest
credited
on
deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsRepay-
ments
of
deposits
under
cancelled
savings
and
loan
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Net
alloca-
tions  12 Total Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loans Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loansNewly
granted
interim
and
bridging
loans
and
other
building
loans Totalof
which:
Under
alloc-
ated
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Repay-
ments
during
quarterMemo
item:
Housing
bonuses
re-
ceived  13
All building and loan associations
2021 27.7 2.0 9.1 52.3 27.7 47.1 18.3 4.0 4.2 3.4 24.7 18.6 6.3 6.1 ... 0.1
2021 Oct. 2.2 0.0 0.8 4.2 2.1 3.7 1.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 2.0 19.1 6.3 0.5 0.0
Nov. 2.3 0.1 1.0 4.6 2.4 4.2 1.6 0.3 0.3 0.3 2.3 19.0 6.4 0.5 0.0
Dec. 2.4 1.5 0.8 4.0 2.2 4.0 1.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 2.2 18.6 6.3 0.6 ... 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2021 Oct. 1.4 0.0 0.4 3.0 1.4 2.8 0.9 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.6 14.2 3.4 0.4 0.0
Nov. 1.5 0.0 0.4 3.3 1.6 3.2 1.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.8 14.0 3.5 0.4 0.0
Dec. 1.5 1.0 0.4 2.9 1.5 3.0 1.1 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.7 13.7 3.4 0.5 ... 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2021 Oct. 0.8 0.0 0.4 1.2 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.9 2.9 0.1 0.0
Nov. 0.8 0.0 0.6 1.3 0.8 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.9 2.9 0.1 0.0
Dec. 0.8 0.5 0.4 1.1 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.5 4.9 2.9 0.1 ... 0.0
* Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures for
the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 See Table IV.2,
footnote 1.  2 Including claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from
registered debt securities and central bank credit balances.  3 Loans under savings and
loan contracts and interim and bridging loans.  4 Including money market paper and
small amounts of other securities issued by banks.  5 Including equalisation claims.
6 Including liabilities to building and loan associations.  7 Including small amounts of
savings deposits.  8 Including participation rights capital and fund for general bankingrisks. 9 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
new contracts.  10 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital disbursed".  11 Including housing
bonuses credited.  12 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans.  13 The amounts already
credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into
savings and loan accounts" and "Interest and repayments received on building loans".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2018 49 183 1,401.2 403.8 392.8 192.1 200.7 11.0 516.8 427.7 20.0 407.7 89.1 480.5 309.0
2019 52 198 1,453.0 407.3 389.2 216.0 173.2 18.1 534.3 436.1 19.7 416.4 98.2 511.5 361.7
2020 50 206 1,552.2 376.7 364.0 213.2 150.8 12.7 504.8 409.6 14.3 395.3 95.2 670.7 523.6
2021 Feb. 49 203 1,487.0 429.1 416.7 258.4 158.3 12.4 492.2 402.6 13.6 389.1 89.6 565.6 431.8
Mar. 49 203 1,492.8 417.4 404.9 238.9 166.0 12.5 492.9 403.9 13.3 390.6 89.0 582.5 430.8
Apr. 49 202 1,478.2 432.8 420.7 266.5 154.2 12.1 488.7 401.7 13.3 388.3 87.0 556.7 413.3
May 49 203 1,476.1 430.6 417.9 257.9 160.0 12.6 493.8 405.2 13.1 392.2 88.6 551.7 415.5
June 49 203 1,475.7 421.2 407.8 242.9 164.9 13.4 492.9 407.5 13.0 394.5 85.5 561.6 417.1
July 50 204 1,524.4 444.9 431.0 266.8 164.2 13.8 494.0 410.8 13.2 397.6 83.2 585.5 436.6
Aug. 50 204 1,537.2 448.2 434.3 273.1 161.2 13.9 489.2 407.3 13.2 394.1 81.9 599.8 437.4
Sep. 50 205 1,518.6 452.9 439.1 279.3 159.8 13.8 485.2 404.4 13.1 391.3 80.8 580.5 415.3
Oct. 52 207 1,552.0 495.3 481.3 310.3 171.0 13.9 497.7 417.4 13.3 404.1 80.3 559.0 402.4
Nov. 50 204 1,595.0 495.2 481.1 306.5 174.6 14.2 506.4 425.8 13.0 412.7 80.6 593.4 436.9
Changes *
2019 +3 +15 +51.5 –4.7 –7.7 +23.9 –31.6 +2.9 +12.6 +0.9 –0.3 +1.2 +11.7 + 30.6 +49.6
2020 –2 +9 +104.2 –20.3 –15.5 –2.8 –12.7 –4.8 +0.2 –1.0 –5.4 +4.4 +1.2 +164.2 +179.6
2021 Mar. – – +4.5 –14.7 –14.6 –19.5 +4.9 –0.1 –7.5 –5.7 –0.3 –5.5 –1.8 + 15.6 – 4.7
Apr. – –1 –13.3 +18.2 +18.4 +27.6 –9.2 –0.2 +3.2 +4.0 +0.0 +4.0 –0.9 – 24.5 –14.4
May – +1 –1.6 –2.8 –3.3 –9.8 +6.5 +0.5 +7.0 +5.0 –0.3 +5.3 +1.9 – 3.4 + 3.1
June – – –1.6 –11.5 –12.2 –15.0 +2.8 +0.7 –7.0 –2.9 –0.1 –2.8 –4.1 + 8.6 – 1.1
July +1 +1 +48.7 +23.4 +23.0 +24.0 –0.9 +0.4 +0.7 +3.1 +0.2 +2.9 –2.4 + 24.0 +19.5
Aug. – – +12.6 +3.1 +3.0 +6.3 –3.2 +0.0 –5.5 –4.1 +0.0 –4.1 –1.4 + 14.1 + 0.3
Sep. – +1 –19.8 +2.9 +3.1 +6.1 –3.1 –0.1 –8.8 –7.0 –0.1 –6.9 –1.8 – 20.4 –24.3
Oct. +2 +2 +33.7 +42.6 +42.5 +31.0 +11.5 +0.1 +13.0 +13.4 +0.2 +13.2 –0.3 – 21.2 –12.6
Nov. –2 –3 +43.0 –2.3 –2.5 –3.7 +1.2 +0.2 +4.4 +5.0 –0.2 +5.2 –0.6 + 33.0 +32.3
Foreign subsidiaries                                           End of year or month *
2018 17 43 237.2 51.2 45.4 20.1 25.3 5.8 136.4 111.7 13.8 97.8 24.7 49.6 0.0
2019 15 41 235.2 52.5 46.7 18.3 28.4 5.7 139.0 116.1 14.4 101.7 22.9 43.7 0.0
2020 12 36 229.5 44.8 39.9 17.4 22.5 4.9 139.7 114.4 13.1 101.4 25.3 44.9 0.0
2021 Feb. 12 36 231.6 42.2 37.2 19.0 18.3 5.0 137.9 113.4 12.7 100.7 24.5 51.5 0.0
Mar. 12 36 228.7 43.3 38.4 19.0 19.4 4.9 137.7 113.1 12.7 100.4 24.5 47.7 0.0
Apr. 12 36 230.8 42.7 37.4 19.0 18.4 5.3 136.5 112.7 12.6 100.1 23.8 51.6 0.0
May 12 36 230.8 41.9 37.0 18.5 18.5 4.9 136.8 112.7 12.3 100.4 24.2 52.2 0.0
June 12 36 235.5 43.6 38.9 19.9 19.0 4.7 136.8 112.5 12.0 100.4 24.3 55.1 0.0
July 12 35 236.5 44.7 39.6 20.1 19.5 5.1 136.4 112.6 12.0 100.6 23.8 55.4 0.0
Aug. 12 35 236.6 44.0 39.1 18.9 20.2 5.0 137.7 113.5 12.1 101.5 24.2 54.8 0.0
Sep. 13 36 244.6 51.9 47.1 21.9 25.2 4.8 138.5 114.5 12.2 102.3 24.0 54.1 0.0
Oct. 12 35 246.1 50.9 45.9 24.3 21.6 5.0 138.5 115.4 12.5 102.9 23.1 56.6 0.0
Nov. 12 35 247.1 52.9 46.7 24.0 22.8 6.2 138.5 115.4 12.6 102.8 23.1 55.7 0.0
Changes *
2019 –2 –2 –7.2 +0.4 +0.5 –1.8 +2.3 –0.2 +1.6 +3.5 +0.5 +3.0 –1.9 – 9.1 ± 0.0
2020 –3 –5 –0.8 –5.3 –5.0 –1.0 –4.0 –0.3 +3.3 +0.8 –1.3 +2.1 +2.4 + 1.2 ± 0.0
2021 Mar. – – –4.5 +0.3 +0.5 +0.0 +0.5 –0.2 –1.1 –1.1 +0.0 –1.1 +0.0 – 3.8 ± 0.0
Apr. – – +3.5 +0.0 –0.5 –0.0 –0.5 +0.5 –0.4 +0.3 –0.1 +0.5 –0.7 + 3.9 ± 0.0
May – – +0.4 –0.6 –0.2 –0.5 +0.3 –0.4 +0.5 +0.1 –0.3 +0.4 +0.4 + 0.5 ± 0.0
June – – +3.5 +1.1 +1.4 +1.4 +0.1 –0.3 –0.6 –0.8 –0.3 –0.5 +0.2 + 2.9 ± 0.0
July – –1 +0.8 +1.1 +0.7 +0.2 +0.4 +0.4 –0.5 +0.1 –0.0 +0.1 –0.6 + 0.3 ± 0.0
Aug. – – –0.0 –0.7 –0.6 –1.3 +0.7 –0.1 +1.2 +0.8 +0.0 +0.8 +0.4 – 0.5 ± 0.0
Sep. +1 +1 +7.0 +7.3 +7.6 +3.0 +4.6 –0.3 +0.4 +0.5 +0.1 +0.4 –0.2 – 0.7 ± 0.0
Oct. –1 –1 +1.5 –0.9 –1.1 +2.4 –3.6 +0.2 –0.0 +0.9 +0.3 +0.5 –0.9 + 2.5 ± 0.0
Nov. – – –0.2 +1.3 +0.3 –0.4 +0.6 +1.0 –0.6 –0.6 +0.1 –0.7 +0.0 – 0.9 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated fromthe flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always
to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
897.1 607.2 428.8 178.4 290.0 11.4 9.7 1.8 278.5 91.2 54.0 358.9 302.6 2018
894.1 613.6 453.2 160.4 280.5 12.7 10.1 2.7 267.8 94.6 53.4 410.9 361.1 2019
872.2 588.5 431.8 156.7 283.7 11.7 10.2 1.5 272.0 61.5 49.9 568.6 523.1 2020
906.9 600.1 421.4 178.6 306.8 9.9 8.4 1.5 296.9 68.0 50.1 462.1 430.8 2021 Feb.
907.4 606.9 435.0 172.0 300.4 9.5 8.0 1.5 290.9 72.1 50.7 462.7 429.7 Mar.
911.4 612.3 438.3 174.0 299.1 9.0 7.5 1.5 290.1 73.1 50.3 443.4 412.2 Apr.
907.0 604.3 431.2 173.1 302.7 8.6 7.1 1.5 294.0 74.9 50.2 444.0 414.5 May
904.8 607.4 438.0 169.4 297.4 8.3 6.8 1.5 289.0 72.1 51.0 447.9 415.9 June
930.2 622.8 444.9 177.9 307.3 8.7 7.2 1.5 298.7 74.7 51.2 468.4 435.5 July
932.9 624.6 438.7 185.9 308.3 8.5 7.0 1.5 299.8 81.6 51.3 471.3 436.0 Aug.
937.3 618.3 432.9 185.4 319.0 9.6 7.8 1.8 309.4 81.1 51.6 448.6 414.2 Sep.
982.8 654.6 469.2 185.4 328.2 9.0 7.2 1.8 319.2 83.7 51.7 433.8 401.3 Oct.
988.0 655.8 458.2 197.6 332.2 8.9 7.1 1.8 323.3 82.6 51.9 472.4 435.9 Nov.
Changes *
– 7.2 + 2.4 +24.4 –22.0 – 9.6 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 –10.9 + 3.0 – 0.6 + 52.0 + 58.5 2019
– 9.2 –13.3 –21.4 + 8.1 + 4.1 – 1.0 + 0.3 – 1.4 + 5.1 –28.1 – 3.5 +157.6 + 162.0 2020
– 2.5 +4.2 +14.4 –10.2 – 6.7 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 6.3 + 2.8 +0.6 – 0.3 – 1.1 2021 Mar.
+ 6.2 +7.3 +2.2 +5.1 – 1.1 – 0.6 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.5 + 2.3 –0.4 – 18.1 – 17.5 Apr.
– 3.4 –7.0 –7.1 +0.1 + 3.6 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 4.0 + 2.3 –0.1 + 0.5 + 2.3 May
– 5.2 +0.3 +6.7 –6.5 – 5.5 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.0 – 5.2 – 4.1 +0.8 + 3.9 + 1.4 June
+25.3 +15.3 +6.9 +8.3 +10.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 9.7 + 2.6 +0.2 + 20.5 + 19.5 July
+ 2.3 +1.4 –6.2 +7.5 + 0.9 – 0.2 – 0.2 – + 1.1 + 6.6 +0.2 + 3.0 + 0.6 Aug.
+ 1.8 –8.7 –5.8 –2.9 +10.5 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 9.4 – 1.6 +0.3 – 22.9 – 21.8 Sep.
+46.0 +36.8 +36.3 +0.5 + 9.2 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.0 + 9.8 + 2.9 +0.1 – 14.8 – 12.9 Oct.
+ 3.4 –0.4 –9.6 +9.2 + 3.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 4.0 – 2.4 +0.3 + 38.6 + 34.6 Nov.
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
171.5 71.6 36.1 35.5 100.0 9.1 6.4 2.7 90.8 14.3 22.4 29.0 0.0 2018
165.7 68.7 36.6 32.1 97.0 6.6 3.9 2.7 90.4 16.0 22.1 31.4 0.0 2019
163.4 59.6 34.1 25.5 103.8 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.1 16.6 20.3 29.2 0.0 2020
166.8 60.2 34.8 25.4 106.5 6.4 3.9 2.5 100.1 16.6 20.3 27.9 0.0 2021 Feb.
164.5 59.2 34.3 25.0 105.2 6.4 4.0 2.5 98.8 16.9 20.4 27.0 0.0 Mar.
166.1 59.0 33.4 25.7 107.0 6.4 4.0 2.5 100.6 17.3 20.4 27.0 0.0 Apr.
165.8 57.0 32.1 24.9 108.9 6.5 4.0 2.4 102.4 17.3 20.4 27.3 0.0 May
167.8 58.5 32.2 26.3 109.3 6.6 4.2 2.4 102.7 17.6 20.5 29.6 0.0 June
169.7 58.6 32.4 26.3 111.1 6.6 4.2 2.4 104.5 17.7 20.5 28.6 0.0 July
169.8 58.2 31.1 27.1 111.6 6.6 4.2 2.4 105.0 17.5 20.8 28.6 0.0 Aug.
175.4 61.5 30.0 31.5 113.9 6.6 4.2 2.4 107.3 18.4 20.7 30.0 0.0 Sep.
177.6 63.8 32.8 31.0 113.8 6.9 4.5 2.4 106.9 17.9 20.4 30.1 0.0 Oct.
177.5 62.6 31.1 31.5 114.9 7.0 4.6 2.4 107.9 17.5 20.3 31.7 0.0 Nov.
Changes *
– 6.7 – 3.2 + 0.5 – 3.8 – 3.5 – 2.5 – 2.5 + 0.0 – 1.0 + 1.7 – 0.4 – 1.8 ± 0.0 2019
+ 1.4 – 7.3 – 2.5 – 4.8 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.3 + 8.7 + 0.6 – 1.8 – 1.0 ± 0.0 2020
– 3.5 –1.5 –0.6 –1.0 – 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 + 0.3 +0.0 – 1.4 ± 0.0 2021 Mar.
+ 2.6 +0.3 –0.9 +1.2 + 2.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.4 +0.0 + 0.5 ± 0.0 Apr.
+ 0.0 –1.9 –1.3 –0.6 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.0 +0.0 + 0.4 ± 0.0 May
+ 1.2 +1.2 +0.1 +1.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.3 +0.1 + 1.9 ± 0.0 June
+ 1.8 +0.1 +0.2 –0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.1 –0.1 – 1.1 ± 0.0 July
– 0.1 –0.5 –1.3 +0.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 – 0.2 +0.3 – 0.1 ± 0.0 Aug.
+ 4.9 +3.0 –1.0 +4.0 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.9 –0.0 + 1.2 ± 0.0 Sep.
+ 2.3 +2.3 +2.7 –0.4 – 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.5 –0.3 + 0.1 ± 0.0 Oct.
– 1.0 –1.6 –1.6 +0.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 – 0.4 –0.0 + 1.2 ± 0.0 Nov.
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and
other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.  4 Excluding
subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of negotiable andnon-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Including subordinated
liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 ... ...
p 2021 Dec. 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 ... ...
2022 Jan. . . . . . .
p Feb. ... ... ... ... ... ...
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
p 2021 Dec. 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
2022 Jan. . . . . . . .
p Feb. 4,195,931 ... 41,959 41,820 ... ... ...
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2021 Dec. 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2022 Jan. . . . . . . .
Feb. 8,903 6,491 3,057 13,382 8,091 97 1,798
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2021 Dec. 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2022 Jan. . . . . .
Feb. 3,048,292 14,448 463,994 562,766 106,433
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 3 of the
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum reserves
(excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4(1)).
3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve base. The reserve ratio forliabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2% between 1 January 1999
and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at 1%.  4 Article 5(2) of the
Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum reserves.
5 Average credit balances of credit institutions at national central banks.  6 Average
credit balances less required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.
7 Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2005 Dec. 6 1.25 – 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr. 13 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 2002 Jan. 1 2.57 2009 Jan. 1 1.62
July 13 0.75 1.50 – 2.25 July 1 2.47 July 1 0.12
2006 Mar. 8 1.50 – 2.50 3.50 Nov. 9 0.50 1.25 – 2.00
June 15 1.75 – 2.75 3.75 Dec. 14 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2003 Jan. 1 1.97 2011 July 1 0.37
Aug. 9 2.00 – 3.00 4.00 July 1 1.22
Oct. 11 2.25 – 3.25 4.25 2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 2012 Jan. 1 0.12
Dec. 13 2.50 – 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan. 1 1.14
2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 July 1 1.13 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
2007 Mar. 14 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 July 1 – 0.38
June 13 3.00 – 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan. 1 1.21
2014 June 11 -0.10 0.15 – 0.40 July 1 1.17 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
2008 July 9 3.25 – 4.25 5.25 Sep. 10 -0.20 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 – 0.73
Oct. 8 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan. 1 1.37
Oct. 9 3.25 3.75 – 4.25 2015 Dec. 9 -0.30 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 1.95 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Nov. 12 2.75 3.25 – 3.75
Dec. 10 2.00 2.50 – 3.00 2016 Mar. 16 -0.40 0.00 – 0.25 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2016 July 1 – 0.88
July 1 3.19
2009 Jan. 21 1.00 2.00 – 3.00 2019 Sep. 18 -0.50 0.00 – 0.25
Mar. 11 0.50 1.50 – 2.50 2008 Jan. 1 3.32
Apr. 8 0.25 1.25 – 2.25 July 1 3.19
May 13 0.25 1.00 – 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2022 Jan. 19 437 437 0,00 - - - 7
Jan. 26 198 198 0,00 - - - 7
Feb. 2 192 192 0,00 - - - 7
Feb. 9 231 231 0,00 - - - 7
Feb. 16 296 296 0,00 - - - 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2021 Dec. 23 18 18 2      … - - - 91
2022 Jan. 27 10 10 2      … - - - 91
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month *
% per annum
EURIBOR  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 EONIA  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2021 July – 0.566 – 0.48 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.55 – 0.52 – 0.49
Aug. – 0.568 – 0.48 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.55 – 0.53 – 0.50
Sep. – 0.570 – 0.49 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.55 – 0.52 – 0.49
Oct. – 0.571 – 0.49 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.55 – 0.53 – 0.48
Nov. – 0.573 – 0.49 – 0.57 – 0.57 – 0.57 – 0.53 – 0.49
Dec. – 0.577 – 0.49 – 0.58 – 0.60 – 0.58 – 0.55 – 0.50
2022 Jan. – 0.578 . – 0.58 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.53 – 0.48
* Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor anyone
else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the EURIBOR.
1 Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank
operations; calculated by the European Central Bank from January 4th 1999 until
September 30th 2019 based on real turnover according to the act/360 method. SinceOctober 1st 2019 calculated as Euro Short-Term Rate (€STR) + 8.5 basis points spread.
2 Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters since 30
December 1998 according to the act/360 method. Administrator for EONIA and
EURIBOR: European Money Markets Institute (EMMI)

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 Dec. 0.25 53,079 1.00 219,376 – 0.17 79,340 0.84 22,256
2021 Jan. 0.25 51,896 0.99 220,299 – 0.16 74,531 0.85 21,979
Feb. 0.26 51,369 0.98 220,419 – 0.16 72,894 0.85 22,242
Mar. 0.25 51,417 0.98 220,406 – 0.18 77,326 0.83 21,860
Apr. 0.25 50,078 0.97 220,310 – 0.19 74,026 0.84 21,529
May 0.24 48,897 0.96 220,455 – 0.21 74,080 0.83 21,455
June 0.23 48,834 0.95 220,118 – 0.23 71,148 0.88 21,464
July 0.23 45,300 0.94 219,790 – 0.23 69,514 0.82 20,964
Aug. 0.22 44,901 0.93 219,708 – 0.26 68,741 0.81 21,058
Sep. 0.23 44,268 0.93 219,587 – 0.28 69,338 0.78 21,227
Oct. 0.23 43,497 0.92 219,456 – 0.29 75,404 0.77 22,443
Nov. 0.22 42,503 0.91 219,058 – 0.30 70,830 0.76 22,793
Dec. 0.18 41,979 0.91 220,293 – 0.37 75,038 0.74 22,965
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 Dec. 1.92 4,557 1.60 27,024 1.97 1,353,793 6.80 45,013 3.37 85,416 3.45 323,181
2021 Jan. 1.90 4,663 1.59 26,903 1.95 1,357,733 6.90 43,164 3.36 84,363 3.42 323,164
Feb. 1.89 4,642 1.57 26,790 1.93 1,363,884 6.76 43,200 3.36 83,522 3.41 323,393
Mar. 1.89 4,545 1.56 26,788 1.91 1,373,003 6.72 44,263 3.34 83,114 3.40 322,618
Apr. 1.86 4,496 1.56 26,870 1.88 1,381,533 6.65 43,462 3.34 82,596 3.38 323,494
May 1.94 4,575 1.55 26,759 1.87 1,390,096 6.63 43,692 3.33 82,120 3.36 323,923
June 1.91 4,485 1.54 26,949 1.85 1,399,549 6.60 45,343 3.33 81,846 3.35 323,511
July 1.92 4,642 1.53 26,996 1.83 1,410,004 6.53 44,338 3.33 81,734 3.34 325,291
Aug. 1.94 4,581 1.52 27,041 1.82 1,418,884 6.60 44,785 3.33 81,447 3.32 325,890
Sep. 1.94 4,521 1.52 27,117 1.80 1,427,271 6.67 45,750 3.32 81,133 3.32 325,265
Oct. 1.97 4,623 1.52 27,324 1.79 1,436,840 6.59 44,700 3.32 80,768 3.30 326,197
Nov. 2.08 3,680 1.52 26,929 1.77 1,446,574 6.53 44,871 3.32 79,066 3.30 328,130
Dec. 2.02 3,547 1.52 26,754 1.75 1,454,525 6.60 44,912 3.32 78,680 3.28 327,461
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 Dec. 2.03 150,278 1.71 186,798 1.73 787,188
2021 Jan. 2.06 149,911 1.71 186,599 1.71 790,534
Feb. 2.02 152,425 1.71 189,130 1.70 793,839
Mar. 1.78 163,745 1.67 194,734 1.69 794,245
Apr. 1.96 151,270 1.67 195,027 1.68 798,088
May 1.93 153,129 1.65 194,737 1.68 802,212
June 2.01 149,474 1.65 193,910 1.67 801,420
July 1.94 148,978 1.64 194,327 1.65 808,937
Aug. 1.94 148,766 1.63 196,065 1.64 811,706
Sep. 1.97 149,784 1.64 194,697 1.63 811,174
Oct. 1.92 158,326 1.63 197,964 1.62 813,714
Nov. 1.91 156,340 1.58 203,103 1.61 819,855
Dec. 1.82 161,705 1.56 202,437 1.59 822,784
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 Dec. 0.00 1,715,292 – 0.01 3,214 0.40 394 0.59 794 0.10 532,793 0.18 27,312
2021 Jan. 0.00 1,732,961 0.03 3,036 0.38 357 0.55 734 0.10 534,458 0.17 26,749
Feb. – 0.00 1,754,413 0.07 2,793 0.36 385 0.50 741 0.09 535,684 0.17 26,435
Mar. – 0.00 1,750,971 0.06 3,073 0.32 342 0.41 834 0.09 535,778 0.17 26,115
Apr. – 0.00 1,772,803 0.06 2,465 0.28 379 0.32 591 0.09 536,476 0.17 25,840
May – 0.01 1,786,469 0.01 2,399 0.37 307 0.32 529 0.09 537,061 0.16 25,715
June – 0.01 1,788,689 – 0.04 2,957 0.23 310 0.28 566 0.09 536,727 0.16 25,503
July – 0.01 1,800,235 0.02 2,414 0.28 401 0.29 695 0.08 536,463 0.16 25,216
Aug. – 0.01 1,797,331 0.02 2,315 0.25 278 0.34 558 0.08 536,145 0.16 24,993
Sep. – 0.01 1,791,879 – 0.01 2,254 0.26 241 0.34 513 0.08 535,555 0.15 24,780
Oct. – 0.01 1,800,411 0.06 1,944 0.25 228 0.39 474 0.08 535,197 0.15 24,558
Nov. – 0.01 1,808,547 0.09 1,879 0.21 266 0.48 650 0.08 535,140 0.15 24,329
Dec. – 0.01 1,806,933 – 0.07 2,327 0.20 204 0.51 721 0.08 536,715 0.14 24,116
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2020 Dec. – 0.09 546,575 – 0.42 34,321 – 0.12 556 0.26 970
2021 Jan. – 0.10 545,028 – 0.23 35,220 – 0.05 126 0.19 129
Feb. – 0.10 539,935 – 0.26 32,726 – 0.01 113 0.37 537
Mar. – 0.11 571,025 – 0.12 54,987 0.07 363 0.24 919
Apr. – 0.10 559,616 – 0.25 52,411 – 0.10 113 0.23 87
May – 0.11 564,627 – 0.34 53,947 – 0.04 194 0.37 231
June – 0.12 569,903 – 0.50 64,520 – 0.14 278 0.20 200
July – 0.12 581,879 – 0.48 57,334 – 0.22 322 0.09 168
Aug. – 0.13 589,698 – 0.50 47,074 – 0.17 174 0.07 699
Sep. – 0.12 590,408 – 0.50 48,685 x .x . 0.11 333
Oct. – 0.13 598,979 – 0.51 70,382 – 0.21 214 0.19 1,102
Nov. – 0.13 604,607 – 0.52 47,155 – 0.16 619 0.25 732
Dec. – 0.14 585,567 – 0.58 43,578 – 0.07 836 0.19 1,004
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2020 Dec. 5.53 5.48 6,652 6.08 1,193 8.08 551 4.24 2,544 5.97 3,556
2021 Jan. 5.88 5.85 6,836 6.43 1,655 7.99 439 4.45 1,973 6.26 4,423
Feb. 5.65 5.65 7,077 6.34 1,630 7.76 379 4.33 2,194 6.11 4,503
Mar. 5.35 5.27 9,298 6.17 1,786 6.23 384 4.05 3,296 5.92 5,619
Apr. 5.51 5.38 7,926 6.17 1,482 6.76 325 4.25 2,731 5.92 4,871
May 5.49 5.37 7,573 6.21 1,400 7.01 301 4.24 2,605 5.90 4,667
June 5.52 5.40 8,979 6.25 1,741 7.20 359 4.23 3,090 5.94 5,530
July 5.55 5.47 9,279 6.30 1,924 7.15 386 4.26 3,014 5.98 5,880
Aug. 5.54 5.44 8,696 6.29 1,747 7.54 340 4.30 2,828 5.89 5,528
Sep. 5.54 5.46 8,474 6.28 1,669 7.59 323 4.29 2,783 5.94 5,368
Oct. 5.58 5.50 8,375 6.30 1,660 7.55 345 4.34 2,677 5.95 5,353
Nov. 5.46 5.43 8,076 6.17 1,524 7.24 408 4.34 2,691 5.88 4,976
Dec. 5.35 5.36 6,928 6.04 1,221 6.74 466 4.31 2,445 5.84 4,017
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2020 Dec. 1.77 5,473 1.56 1,254 1.81 2,404 2.30 772 1.54 2,297
2021 Jan. 1.79 4,530 1.66 1,532 1.93 1,958 2.17 572 1.55 2,000
Feb. 1.71 4,265 1.69 1,000 1.74 1,680 2.08 578 1.58 2,007
Mar. 1.68 5,715 1.59 1,331 1.69 2,358 2.20 691 1.53 2,666
Apr. 1.65 4,662 1.52 1,263 1.58 1,956 2.08 724 1.55 1,982
May 1.74 3,877 1.51 909 1.79 1,589 2.32 550 1.51 1,738
June 1.63 5,170 1.53 1,119 1.55 2,198 2.26 702 1.51 2,270
July 1.68 4,950 1.50 1,428 1.71 1,920 2.09 732 1.52 2,298
Aug. 1.74 4,101 1.60 806 1.88 1,594 2.17 612 1.48 1,895
Sep. 1.65 4,401 1.46 951 1.72 1,950 1.99 626 1.47 1,825
Oct. 1.69 4,327 1.54 1,068 1.79 1,792 2.23 631 1.42 1,904
Nov. 1.68 4,433 1.39 847 1.65 1,759 2.42 704 1.44 1,970
Dec. 1.64 5,755 1.49 1,131 1.58 2,324 2.45 860 1.44 2,571
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2020 Dec. 1.85 3,793 . . 1.87 1,629 2.47 523 1.63 1,641
2021 Jan. 1.77 3,041 . . 1.76 1,281 2.34 402 1.62 1,358
Feb. 1.86 2,843 . . 1.89 1,058 2.40 390 1.70 1,395
Mar. 1.78 3,846 . . 1.83 1,507 2.26 535 1.60 1,804
Apr. 1.73 3,212 . . 1.65 1,316 2.17 555 1.62 1,341
May 1.85 2,624 . . 1.93 1,052 2.29 451 1.59 1,121
June 1.70 3,581 . . 1.64 1,516 2.38 508 1.52 1,557
July 1.71 3,514 . . 1.75 1,339 2.10 587 1.53 1,588
Aug. 1.89 2,666 . . 2.05 1,045 2.35 441 1.57 1,180
Sep. 1.72 2,879 . . 1.76 1,259 2.21 444 1.49 1,176
Oct. 1.75 2,884 . . 1.84 1,193 2.17 514 1.46 1,177
Nov. 1.83 2,674 . . 1.83 1,076 2.47 461 1.56 1,137
Dec. 1.73 3,787 . . 1.76 1,495 2.48 564 1.47 1,728
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2020 Dec. 1.21 1.16 22,148 1.29 3,033 1.75 2,195 1.31 1,698 1.02 7,733 1.11 10,522
2021 Jan. 1.23 1.19 21,721 1.32 3,866 1.79 2,124 1.34 1,615 1.03 7,316 1.15 10,666
Feb. 1.22 1.17 22,145 1.30 3,246 1.73 2,098 1.28 1,563 1.04 7,547 1.14 10,938
Mar. 1.22 1.18 28,589 1.26 4,248 1.75 2,684 1.25 1,958 1.02 10,006 1.17 13,941
Apr. 1.27 1.23 24,541 1.30 3,804 1.79 2,343 1.28 1,725 1.06 8,741 1.23 11,732
May 1.31 1.27 22,786 1.35 3,379 1.83 2,064 1.30 1,568 1.09 8,416 1.29 10,738
June 1.34 1.29 25,161 1.34 3,327 1.74 2,374 1.33 1,775 1.12 9,196 1.33 11,815
July 1.36 1.31 25,121 1.36 3,808 1.76 2,686 1.32 1,649 1.14 9,216 1.34 11,570
Aug. 1.31 1.27 22,735 1.32 3,095 1.78 2,324 1.37 1,514 1.10 7,975 1.28 10,922
Sep. 1.31 1.26 22,232 1.33 2,986 1.80 2,204 1.33 1,451 1.09 7,631 1.27 10,946
Oct. 1.32 1.28 22,630 1.29 3,683 1.79 2,353 1.33 1,613 1.10 8,013 1.29 10,650
Nov. 1.36 1.32 22,516 1.31 3,079 1.83 2,022 1.43 1,564 1.15 8,171 1.33 10,759
Dec. 1.37 1.32 23,851 1.27 3,446 1.80 2,383 1.39 1,661 1.16 8,614 1.34 11,194
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2020 Dec. . 1.08 9,592 . . 1.63 796 1.12 781 0.95 3,355 1.07 4,660
2021 Jan. . 1.13 9,731 . . 1.71 814 1.11 780 0.97 3,226 1.14 4,911
Feb. . 1.11 9,659 . . 1.60 752 1.08 773 0.96 3,228 1.14 4,906
Mar. . 1.11 12,754 . . 1.69 929 1.08 884 0.95 4,589 1.14 6,352
Apr. . 1.15 10,483 . . 1.71 801 1.10 822 1.00 3,834 1.18 5,026
May . 1.19 9,797 . . 1.74 747 1.09 725 1.01 3,738 1.25 4,587
June . 1.23 10,630 . . 1.69 836 1.14 793 1.06 4,071 1.29 4,930
July . 1.25 10,467 . . 1.66 934 1.15 749 1.08 3,906 1.33 4,878
Aug. . 1.21 9,407 . . 1.67 821 1.21 665 1.03 3,442 1.25 4,479
Sep. . 1.20 9,471 . . 1.67 802 1.13 664 1.03 3,299 1.24 4,706
Oct. . 1.20 9,766 . . 1.70 874 1.16 746 1.02 3,569 1.25 4,577
Nov. . 1.23 9,668 . . 1.72 708 1.22 685 1.08 3,670 1.29 4,605
Dec. . 1.25 10,265 . . 1.70 783 1.22 727 1.09 3,784 1.31 4,971
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2020 Dec. 7.32 36,062 7.11 28,411 15.15 4,101 2.70 73,441 2.71 73,178
2021 Jan. 7.51 34,191 7.08 27,635 15.28 4,011 2.77 71,756 2.78 71,526
Feb. 7.40 34,121 7.03 27,298 15.38 3,944 2.76 73,589 2.77 73,354
Mar. 7.41 34,973 7.11 27,993 15.45 3,910 2.77 72,139 2.78 71,866
Apr. 7.37 34,035 7.02 27,152 15.48 3,899 2.84 70,358 2.85 70,106
May 7.28 34,454 7.01 27,148 15.51 3,905 2.79 72,023 2.80 71,766
June 7.23 35,815 7.05 28,056 15.55 3,938 2.86 72,488 2.87 72,184
July 7.11 35,046 6.90 27,102 15.54 3,987 2.75 73,098 2.76 72,788
Aug. 7.12 35,662 6.99 27,343 15.58 4,039 2.79 72,942 2.80 72,622
Sep. 7.19 36,720 7.06 28,404 15.53 4,098 2.79 74,750 2.81 74,389
Oct. 7.10 35,633 6.94 27,535 15.02 4,109 2.81 75,550 2.83 75,182
Nov. 7.01 36,013 6.90 27,565 15.01 4,153 2.77 76,312 2.79 75,909
Dec. 7.11 36,165 6.93 28,126 14.94 4,165 2.73 76,235 2.75 75,888
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2020 Dec. 1.33 87,725 1.37 26,272 2.01 9,615 2.31 1,615 1.56 2,110 1.23 56,078 1.36 4,945 1.11 13,362
2021 Jan. 1.36 55,365 1.52 17,883 1.99 8,828 2.30 1,183 1.56 1,552 1.22 35,711 1.45 2,185 1.03 5,906
Feb. 1.37 54,516 1.55 14,708 2.00 8,851 2.23 1,084 1.57 1,533 1.22 32,922 1.37 2,679 1.09 7,447
Mar. 1.09 93,353 1.59 21,948 1.90 10,691 2.16 1,432 1.54 1,842 0.89 62,746 1.17 6,173 1.20 10,469
Apr. 1.52 56,777 1.55 18,920 1.90 9,318 2.23 1,385 1.55 1,553 1.46 35,109 1.43 3,022 1.15 6,390
May 1.32 58,626 1.53 16,038 1.89 8,462 2.33 1,179 1.56 1,578 1.20 36,993 1.42 2,491 1.06 7,923
June 1.28 83,129 1.29 27,883 1.93 9,481 2.37 1,409 1.54 1,734 1.19 52,578 0.78 6,948 1.28 10,979
July 1.35 70,171 1.42 20,858 1.84 9,608 2.26 1,403 1.52 1,753 1.30 41,858 1.29 3,934 1.00 11,615
Aug. 1.33 54,047 1.58 14,739 1.79 7,827 2.31 1,094 1.44 1,308 1.25 33,740 1.14 3,001 1.08 7,077
Sep. 1.36 69,341 1.33 23,411 1.83 9,309 2.39 1,198 1.48 1,245 1.28 45,311 1.44 4,339 1.06 7,939
Oct. 1.21 71,404 1.32 20,386 1.76 9,149 2.38 1,247 1.50 1,242 1.08 48,160 1.43 2,573 1.07 9,033
Nov. 1.18 75,363 1.34 18,828 1.85 9,681 2.35 1,402 1.44 1,474 1.03 48,548 0.95 4,444 1.16 9,814
Dec. 1.20 105,521 1.32 29,571 1.94 10,347 2.28 1,529 1.45 1,817 1.05 71,026 1.40 5,514 1.18 15,288
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2020 Dec. 1.33 15,369 . . 1.68 494 1.68 134 1.16 452 1.41 8,979 1.39 1,222 1.11 4,088
2021 Jan. 1.25 7,702 . . 1.73 430 1.65 99 1.32 374 1.26 4,614 1.69 574 0.88 1,611
Feb. 1.42 6,642 . . 1.83 339 1.67 89 1.07 331 1.61 3,930 1.31 383 0.96 1,570
Mar. 1.19 13,787 . . 1.64 481 1.81 106 1.17 399 1.12 8,540 1.33 825 1.23 3,436
Apr. 1.44 7,883 . . 1.79 377 1.68 117 1.15 359 1.55 4,450 1.51 967 1.07 1,613
May 1.46 7,097 . . 1.76 340 1.73 75 1.21 404 1.68 3,830 1.15 439 1.11 2,009
June 1.36 13,761 . . 1.79 410 1.84 109 1.20 444 1.35 8,365 1.38 1,110 1.35 3,323
July 1.41 10,857 . . 1.68 445 1.57 117 1.24 404 1.56 6,539 1.30 933 1.02 2,419
Aug. 1.45 7,709 . . 1.81 328 1.76 85 1.18 308 1.55 4,191 1.69 819 1.09 1,978
Sep. 1.35 11,637 . . 1.71 405 2.14 61 1.17 284 1.35 7,760 1.92 827 1.06 2,300
Oct. 1.29 10,023 . . 1.72 371 1.87 78 1.24 298 1.46 5,810 1.90 660 0.73 2,806
Nov. 1.34 8,064 . . 1.76 359 1.60 96 1.19 382 1.43 4,537 1.36 704 1.08 1,986
Dec. 1.27 18,534 . . 1.69 438 1.93 113 1.23 430 1.20 11,302 1.73 1,948 1.18 4,303
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 4
2019 Q1 2,343.3 332.1 431.8 329.8 380.9 708.9 2.6 58.7 37.1 61.4
Q2 2,407.6 336.8 449.0 339.3 387.9 735.8 3.6 57.9 37.1 60.3
Q3 2,492.5 333.0 468.5 357.2 398.2 768.3 4.6 58.8 38.0 66.0
Q4 2,473.9 317.6 448.2 355.5 407.3 778.3 3.6 64.9 39.8 58.8
2020 Q1 2,426.9 318.3 452.1 364.0 383.0 738.4 4.5 68.5 38.6 59.6
Q2 2,517.7 317.1 460.6 371.9 409.2 789.0 4.3 68.5 38.7 58.5
Q3 2,547.5 311.1 472.9 373.9 411.0 809.9 4.4 67.1 39.0 58.1
Q4 2,587.9 301.8 479.0 370.6 425.0 841.7 4.7 68.2 38.2 58.7
2021 Q1 2,574.8 292.8 466.8 361.9 437.0 845.0 3.9 71.9 38.4 57.0
Q2 2,590.6 281.3 466.5 361.6 448.0 864.5 3.5 72.5 38.6 54.1
Q3 2,632.3 272.9 472.2 358.7 461.8 881.6 3.4 87.9 38.1 55.8
    Life insurance
2019 Q1 1,239.7 202.9 213.7 206.1 52.8 517.7 1.6 10.4 20.3 14.1
Q2 1,291.9 205.8 227.6 214.2 55.4 538.9 2.4 10.0 20.3 17.4
Q3 1,350.1 205.3 242.5 225.2 57.9 563.6 3.1 10.4 20.9 21.0
Q4 1,325.2 194.9 227.6 217.6 61.1 570.4 2.4 13.7 21.1 16.5
2020 Q1 1,295.8 191.5 231.0 220.6 61.9 538.2 2.2 13.9 20.3 16.3
Q2 1,347.1 192.4 234.4 223.6 64.1 577.3 2.8 13.7 20.3 18.5
Q3 1,369.2 188.4 241.6 225.7 65.7 593.0 3.0 13.6 20.6 17.6
Q4 1,395.9 183.6 242.8 229.9 69.7 617.1 3.3 14.3 20.8 14.5
2021 Q1 1,361.7 170.7 231.7 219.7 74.2 614.8 2.1 14.3 21.0 13.1
Q2 1,373.1 165.0 231.7 219.6 77.9 627.8 2.0 14.2 21.2 13.7
Q3 1,388.0 160.0 232.8 215.1 87.2 643.1 2.0 13.5 20.6 13.8
    Non-life insurance
2019 Q1 655.2 119.1 127.5 74.4 76.2 177.1 0.3 38.2 11.0 31.4
Q2 665.6 119.8 131.1 76.1 78.2 182.4 0.4 37.7 11.0 29.1
Q3 682.6 116.9 135.3 79.9 80.6 189.4 0.4 38.8 11.3 30.0
Q4 673.5 111.3 130.4 79.6 83.6 193.3 0.4 36.2 12.2 26.7
2020 Q1 669.4 111.1 131.3 79.8 80.0 186.9 0.3 38.7 12.0 29.3
Q2 685.6 111.9 134.4 82.4 81.1 197.1 0.4 39.5 12.1 26.7
Q3 693.3 109.3 137.6 83.3 82.7 203.2 0.4 38.5 12.1 26.3
Q4 703.5 105.9 139.5 84.5 85.2 210.3 0.5 37.6 12.7 27.3
2021 Q1 715.8 108.2 139.3 83.7 88.1 214.8 0.4 39.9 12.8 28.6
Q2 718.1 103.5 140.0 83.6 89.2 221.1 0.4 40.2 12.7 27.3
Q3 725.3 99.0 140.5 84.0 91.9 222.4 0.5 46.4 12.8 27.8
    Reinsurance 5
2019 Q1 448.4 10.1 90.6 49.3 251.9 14.0 0.7 10.2 5.8 15.9
Q2 450.1 11.1 90.4 49.0 254.3 14.4 0.8 10.2 5.8 13.9
Q3 459.9 10.8 90.7 52.1 259.6 15.3 1.0 9.6 5.9 15.0
Q4 475.2 11.5 90.2 58.3 262.6 14.5 0.8 15.1 6.6 15.6
2020 Q1 461.7 15.7 89.8 63.7 241.0 13.3 1.9 15.9 6.3 14.1
Q2 485.0 12.9 91.7 65.9 264.0 14.6 1.1 15.2 6.3 13.3
Q3 485.0 13.5 93.7 64.9 262.6 13.7 1.0 15.0 6.3 14.2
Q4 488.5 12.3 96.7 56.3 270.2 14.3 1.0 16.3 4.7 16.9
2021 Q1 497.3 13.9 95.8 58.5 274.7 15.4 1.4 17.7 4.7 15.3
Q2 499.4 12.8 94.8 58.4 280.9 15.6 1.0 18.1 4.6 13.1
Q3 519.0 13.8 98.9 59.6 282.7 16.1 1.0 27.9 4.7 14.2
Pension funds 6
2019 Q1 691.3 89.6 72.4 30.5 32.4 390.9 – 8.3 45.2 22.0
Q2 707.9 87.6 76.5 31.0 34.1 402.0 – 8.5 46.0 22.2
Q3 726.5 85.6 80.7 31.0 36.5 415.5 – 8.6 46.7 22.0
Q4 735.8 85.2 79.6 31.1 38.7 421.1 – 8.8 48.9 22.3
7 2020 Q1 599.1 92.2 57.0 48.5 9.3 361.3 0.1 10.4 17.5 2.7
Q2 623.3 92.2 58.8 49.1 9.7 382.1 0.1 10.4 18.1 2.8
Q3 635.9 90.8 59.6 50.2 10.1 392.8 0.2 11.6 18.2 2.5
Q4 647.7 85.8 59.7 47.4 10.1 412.2 0.2 11.9 17.3 3.2
2021 Q1 661.5 86.9 59.2 48.6 10.9 423.9 0.2 12.3 17.3 2.3
Q2 680.8 86.8 61.3 49.4 11.5 439.3 0.1 12.5 17.7 2.3
Q3 686.5 85.4 61.9 48.9 12.2 445.3 0.1 12.7 17.8 2.3
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections as of 2020 Q1. Until 2019 Q4 these are compiled using Solvency I
supervisory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  1 Accounts
receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered bonds, borrowers'
note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. For pension funds as of 2020 Q1 fair values,
previously book values.  2 Including deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as
registered bonds, borrowers' note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. For pension fundsas of 2020 Q1 fair values, previously book values.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables
and claims of pension funds on pension managers.  4 Valuation of listed securities at the
corresponding consistent price from the ESCB's securities database.  5 Not including the
reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  6 The term
"pension funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European
System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and
occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not
included.  7 Change in data sources.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  4
Insurance corporations
2019 Q1 2,343.3 31.6 68.2 487.9 1,624.8 1,403.6 221.2 1.5 129.2 –
Q2 2,407.6 31.9 69.4 489.7 1,687.4 1,466.0 221.4 1.8 127.5 –
Q3 2,492.5 31.7 69.3 488.5 1,769.4 1,543.0 226.4 2.2 131.5 –
Q4 2,473.9 31.7 75.8 515.3 1,714.9 1,499.6 215.3 1.9 134.3 –
2020 Q1 2,426.9 31.8 82.4 464.3 1,721.9 1,483.2 238.7 2.4 124.1 –
Q2 2,517.7 33.1 82.2 505.4 1,767.7 1,527.7 240.0 1.9 127.4 –
Q3 2,547.5 34.3 80.0 515.9 1,785.7 1,549.2 236.5 1.7 129.9 –
Q4 2,587.9 36.6 79.7 540.5 1,799.2 1,579.3 219.9 1.6 130.3 –
2021 Q1 2,574.8 34.8 81.4 550.5 1,778.0 1,541.0 237.0 2.5 127.7 –
Q2 2,590.6 33.0 81.3 556.7 1,793.2 1,556.4 236.9 2.2 124.0 –
Q3 2,632.3 35.4 82.8 564.0 1,817.2 1,568.7 248.5 2.5 130.4 –
    Life insurance
2019 Q1 1,239.7 4.1 14.4 120.9 1,058.9 1,058.9 – 0.4 41.1 –
Q2 1,291.9 4.1 14.5 121.8 1,108.6 1,108.6 – 0.4 42.4 –
Q3 1,350.1 3.7 15.6 116.0 1,171.9 1,171.9 – 0.6 42.4 –
Q4 1,325.2 3.6 19.1 127.6 1,129.6 1,129.6 – 0.5 44.7 –
2020 Q1 1,295.8 3.6 19.3 114.3 1,117.8 1,117.8 – 0.6 40.3 –
Q2 1,347.1 3.8 19.2 129.8 1,150.3 1,150.3 – 0.5 43.4 –
Q3 1,369.2 3.9 19.5 136.8 1,164.8 1,164.8 – 0.5 43.7 –
Q4 1,395.9 3.9 20.7 142.9 1,185.7 1,185.7 – 0.5 42.3 –
2021 Q1 1,361.7 3.3 19.9 143.2 1,154.2 1,154.2 – 1.0 40.1 –
Q2 1,373.1 3.3 20.4 144.3 1,165.1 1,165.1 – 1.0 39.0 –
Q3 1,388.0 3.3 19.4 148.0 1,176.1 1,176.1 – 1.1 40.1 –
    Non-life insurance
2019 Q1 655.2 1.1 9.3 144.1 448.5 328.9 119.6 0.0 52.2 –
Q2 665.6 1.1 8.8 147.0 459.4 341.5 117.8 0.1 49.3 –
Q3 682.6 1.2 9.1 149.7 471.9 354.8 117.1 0.1 50.6 –
Q4 673.5 1.2 9.3 153.7 457.2 349.4 107.8 0.1 52.0 –
2020 Q1 669.4 1.3 9.8 142.0 468.2 344.4 123.8 0.1 48.0 –
Q2 685.6 1.3 9.5 149.4 478.2 355.6 122.6 0.1 47.1 –
Q3 693.3 1.2 9.6 152.0 482.3 362.4 119.9 0.1 48.1 –
Q4 703.5 1.3 9.7 158.1 483.1 368.7 114.4 0.0 51.3 –
2021 Q1 715.8 1.2 10.6 161.8 491.4 362.5 128.9 0.1 50.6 –
Q2 718.1 1.2 10.5 164.5 493.4 366.2 127.1 0.1 48.4 –
Q3 725.3 1.2 10.5 166.3 498.8 367.9 130.9 0.2 48.4 –
    Reinsurance 5
2019 Q1 448.4 26.5 44.5 222.9 117.4 15.8 101.6 1.1 36.0 –
Q2 450.1 26.6 46.1 220.8 119.4 15.8 103.6 1.3 35.9 –
Q3 459.9 26.8 44.7 222.8 125.6 16.3 109.3 1.5 38.5 –
Q4 475.2 26.9 47.4 234.0 128.0 20.6 107.5 1.3 37.7 –
2020 Q1 461.7 26.9 53.3 208.1 135.9 21.0 114.9 1.7 35.8 –
Q2 485.0 28.1 53.5 226.2 139.1 21.8 117.4 1.3 36.8 –
Q3 485.0 29.2 50.9 227.0 138.7 22.1 116.6 1.0 38.1 –
Q4 488.5 31.4 49.3 239.6 130.4 24.8 105.6 1.0 36.7 –
2021 Q1 497.3 30.2 50.9 245.5 132.4 24.2 108.1 1.4 37.0 –
Q2 499.4 28.5 50.4 247.9 134.7 25.0 109.7 1.1 36.7 –
Q3 519.0 30.9 53.0 249.7 142.2 24.7 117.5 1.3 41.9 –
Pension funds 6
2019 Q1 691.3 – 8.1 8.1 613.8 613.8 – – 2.9 58.4
Q2 707.9 – 8.1 8.3 620.3 620.3 – – 2.8 68.4
Q3 726.5 – 8.2 8.4 628.2 628.2 – – 2.9 78.9
Q4 735.8 – 8.4 8.6 638.0 638.0 – – 3.7 77.1
7 2020 Q1 599.1 – 1.6 19.4 497.3 496.7 – 0.3 8.1 72.4
Q2 623.3 – 1.6 21.6 506.4 505.8 – 0.3 8.3 85.0
Q3 635.9 – 1.6 22.4 510.0 509.3 – 0.3 8.7 92.9
Q4 647.7 – 1.6 21.8 516.3 515.6 – 0.3 8.9 98.8
2021 Q1 661.5 – 1.5 23.6 526.8 526.1 – 0.3 8.6 100.7
Q2 680.8 – 1.6 26.4 532.4 531.7 – 0.4 9.2 110.8
Q3 686.5 – 1.6 27.2 536.2 535.6 – 0.4 9.2 112.0
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections as of 2020 Q1. Until 2019 Q4 these are compiled using Solvency I
supervisory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  1 Including
deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers' note loans
and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension funds on pension managers
and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical reserves "life" taking account oftransitional measures. Health insurance is also included in the "non-life insurance"
sector.  4 Own funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth" and "Shares and other
equity".  5 Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which
is included there.  6 Valuation at book values. The term "pension funds" refers to the
institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds
thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the
self-employed. Social security funds are not included.  7 Change in data sources.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2010 146,620 – 1,212 – 7,621 24,044 –17,635 147,831 92,682 –103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 –46,796 850 59,521 20,075 – 23,876 – 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 64,775 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,408 – 12,124 – 11,951 74,483 14,366
2015 33,024 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 69,034 116,493 – 66,330 121,164 61,659 – 83,471
2016 71,380 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 43,951 164,148 – 58,012 187,500 34,660 – 92,768
2017 54,840 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 43,277 137,907 – 71,454 161,012 48,349 – 83,067
2018 61,661 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 45,031 95,902 – 24,417 67,328 52,991 – 34,241
2019 137,356 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 68,820 62,915 8,059 2,408 52,448 74,441
2020 438,208 382,059 14,257 89,473 278,328 56,150 278,521 18,955 226,887 32,679 159,688
2021 285,998 212,171 32,956 19,924 159,291 73,828 317,713 – 41,773 245,198 114,288 – 31,715
2021 Jan. 56,876 27,740 3,995 3,797 19,948 29,136 43,949 8,455 13,518 21,976 12,927
Feb. 42,555 19,574 3,411 – 2,569 18,732 22,980 43,479 – 3,738 20,397 26,821 – 925
Mar. 39,153 39,488 21,772 551 17,165 – 334 24,601 6,152 20,708 – 2,259 14,553
Apr. 17,262 12,392 – 2,704 6,063 9,032 4,870 25,929 – 17,641 24,095 19,475 – 8,668
May 37,055 32,136 – 3,450 7,311 28,274 4,919 32,266 – 2,194 25,538 8,922 4,789
June 29,666 15,241 1,998 – 288 13,531 14,426 31,901 – 583 22,605 9,879 – 2,235
July 13,429 6,113 – 9,235 3,717 11,631 7,316 31,061 – 5,500 25,087 11,474 – 17,632
Aug. 25,703 33,565 6,870 1,245 25,449 – 7,862 10,463 – 5,337 17,312 – 1,511 15,239
Sep. 23,518 13,731 11,555 8,212 – 6,037 9,787 30,686 6,387 17,663 6,637 – 7,168
Oct. – 564 2,824 7,365 – 7,501 2,960 – 3,388 8,400 – 17,904 20,765 5,539 – 8,963
Nov. 44,330 36,512 7,557 8,350 20,605 7,818 39,452 – 529 23,375 16,607 4,877
Dec. – 42,984 –27,144 –16,181 – 8,964 – 1,999 – 15,840 – 4,476 – 9,341 14,137 – 9,272 – 38,509
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2010 37,767 20,049 17,718 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,360
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 – 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 – 449
2015 44,165 7,668 36,497 34,437 – 5,421 39,858 9,728
2016 30,896 4,409 26,487 31,037 – 5,143 36,180 – 141
2017 51,571 15,570 36,001 49,913 7,031 42,882 1,658
2018 55,729 16,188 39,541 83,036 – 11,184 94,220 – 27,307
2019 47,115 9,076 38,039 33,573 – 1,119 34,692 13,542
2020 84,953 17,771 67,182 116,813 27 116,786 – 31,860
2021 119,379 49,066 70,313 122,931 10,869 112,062 – 3,552
2021 Jan. – 7,264 1,441 – 8,705 – 10,433 863 – 11,296 3,169
Feb. 9,412 2,729 6,683 11,010 1,501 9,509 – 1,598
Mar. 20,639 8,964 11,676 17,986 1,285 16,701 2,653
Apr. 17,279 882 16,397 15,913 1,816 14,097 1,366
May 4,781 1,170 3,612 3,907 – 387 4,294 875
June 12,085 5,166 6,919 14,962 36 14,926 – 2,878
July 5,793 825 4,968 3,502 – 74 3,576 2,291
Aug. 11,833 4,667 7,166 12,131 204 11,927 – 297
Sep. 13,541 4,660 8,881 15,127 3,374 11,753 – 1,586
Oct. 11,194 5,498 5,696 16,212 1,401 14,811 – 5,018
Nov. 6,393 2,367 4,026 15,628 2,698 12,930 – 9,235
Dec. 13,692 10,698 2,995 6,987 – 1,848 8,835 6,705
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,614 592,375
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,739,485 776,970 38,948 17,527 643,340 77,155 184,986 777,529
2021 1,690,427 795,254 41,866 17,293 648,992 87,104 139,741 755,431
2021 Apr. 145,418 62,631 4,441 1,000 50,889 6,301 11,673 71,113
May 138,917 58,587 2,131 250 50,439 5,766 15,601 64,729
June 148,673 68,494 1,236 700 57,098 9,460 13,550 66,630
July 144,450 62,560 1,211 250 54,160 6,939 8,872 73,018
Aug. 136,725 67,235 1,340 0 59,379 6,516 11,940 57,550
Sep. 155,004 68,421 4,772 1,250 55,371 7,028 20,916 65,668
Oct. 134,154 61,412 4,207 530 48,932 7,744 8,293 64,449
Nov. 134,571 59,681 2,153 1,000 47,873 8,654 10,897 63,993
Dec. 83,715 37,382 2,675 1,707 28,989 4,010 5,037 41,296
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 536,359 165,146 28,500 7,427 90,889 38,329 78,356 292,857
2021 523,375 171,797 30,767 6,336 97,815 36,879 64,177 287,400
2021 Apr. 48,999 12,414 3,051 250 7,001 2,111 7,640 28,945
May 45,302 11,672 2,131 250 6,132 3,159 6,058 27,572
June 47,884 11,296 908 700 5,981 3,707 6,767 29,821
July 37,975 8,800 800 250 5,424 2,326 3,202 25,973
Aug. 33,381 10,632 1,340 0 8,165 1,127 3,457 19,292
Sep. 60,975 18,007 4,400 0 10,365 3,241 12,400 30,568
Oct. 42,898 17,278 3,528 30 11,600 2,121 2,165 23,455
Nov. 35,010 9,512 1,705 500 4,165 3,142 5,667 19,831
Dec. 18,359 4,716 1,625 1,150 1,260 680 1,249 12,394
Net sales 5
2011 22,518 – 54,582 1,657 – 44,290 32,904 – 44,852 – 3,189 80,289
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 343,046 26,505 7,861 8,016 22,026 – 11,399 50,316 266,225
2021 244,764 53,302 17,821 7,471 22,969 5,042 35,497 155,965
2021 Apr. 9,029 – 2,148 1,114 968 – 4,362 132 4,506 6,671
May 31,324 – 4,344 1,076 – 907 – 3,822 – 691 7,307 28,362
June 16,508 3,561 821 616 – 588 2,712 1,974 10,973
July 6,100 – 5,782 – 41 – 327 – 5,169 – 245 2,088 9,795
Aug. 33,226 6,654 – 1,096 – 92 7,304 539 1,014 25,557
Sep. 18,759 11,684 2,474 65 11,735 – 2,590 10,431 – 3,357
Oct. 8,950 7,116 2,418 – 536 3,831 1,404 527 1,307
Nov. 40,963 6,979 – 2,052 221 6,788 2,022 5,561 28,423
Dec. – 26,865 – 13,171 1,753 – 179 – 11,557 – 3,189 – 6,049 – 7,645
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,411,642 2 1,173,329 183,261 55,192 687,670 2 247,206 2 378,864 1,859,449
2021 3,685,054 1,251,164 202,185 63,496 731,014 254,469 414,895 2,018,995
2021 Apr. 3,533,432 1,219,467 195,766 63,790 707,428 252,482 392,063 1,921,902
May 3,562,200 1,212,645 196,850 62,878 701,731 251,186 399,222 1,950,333
June 3,587,728 1,222,221 197,721 63,515 706,439 254,546 401,612 1,963,895
July 3,586,593 1,216,275 197,729 63,186 700,892 254,468 401,308 1,969,010
Aug. 3,620,354 1,223,751 196,656 63,103 708,770 255,222 402,779 1,993,824
Sep. 3,647,554 1,241,988 199,783 63,941 725,213 253,051 413,619 1,991,947
Oct. 3,658,858 1,250,511 202,320 63,409 730,111 254,670 414,009 1,994,338
Nov. 3,707,992 1,262,311 200,331 63,671 740,953 257,355 420,677 2,025,004
Dec. 3,685,054 1,251,164 202,185 63,496 731,014 254,469 414,895 2,018,995
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-December 2021
bis unter 2   1 173 730   448 985   55 987   24 400   297 067   71 531   71 585   653 160 
 2 bis unter 4    671 322   294 174   51 910   16 646   173 584   52 034   75 034   302 114 
 4 bis unter 6    543 735   198 772   40 343   9 235   99 001   50 192   61 234   283 730 
6 bis unter 8    364 879   133 730   28 046   7 280   70 772   27 631   43 444   187 705 
 8 bis unter 10    311 790   77 099   13 547   2 157   41 468   19 926   31 823   202 868 
 10 bis unter 15    196 219   53 206   8 138   2 733   30 115   12 221   38 236   104 778 
 15 bis unter 20    112 309   15 974   3 281    881   9 888   1 923   11 031   85 303 
 20 und darüber    311 070   29 224    931    164   9 118   19 011   82 509   199 337 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 – 552 – 762 – 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,673 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,775 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,872 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,635 1,963,588
2021 186,580 4,152 9,561 672 35 – 326 – 212 – 5,578 2,301,942
2021 Apr. 182,665 106 116 73 1 – 0 – 1 – 84 2,194,286
May 182,152 – 514 205 26 –– 0 – 92 – 653 2,228,053
June 182,226 75 275 73 –– 87 – 70 – 116 2,262,394
July 181,614 – 65 74 31 2 – 1 – 2 – 169 2,266,494
Aug. 186,083 4,425 4,593 171 11 70 – 4 – 416 2,315,847
Sep. 186,316 230 678 6 11 – 14 – 9 – 443 2,238,994
Oct. 188,444 2,127 2,166 16 –– 4 – 35 – 16 2,267,343
Nov. 188,352 – 109 85 – 6 – 5 – 1 – 194 2,198,231
Dec. 186,580 – 2,595 524 16 0 – 201 – 106 – 2,827 2,301,942
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields and indices on German securities
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  4 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-
MFIs)German
bond
index
(REX)iBoxx
€ Germany 
price indexCDAX
share price
indexGerman
share
index
(DAX)
Period % per annumAverage
daily rateEnd-1998
= 100End-1987
= 100End-1987
= 1,000
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 2.9 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2019 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2020 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7 146.15 113.14 586.72 13,718.78
2021 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9 144.23 108.88 654.20 15,884.86
2021 Aug. – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.0 0.7 145.90 110.25 662.93 15,835.09
Sep. – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9 144.41 108.60 638.37 15,260.69
Oct. 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 0.1 0.3 1.0 143.52 108.60 653.37 15,688.77
Nov. – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 1.0 145.58 110.72 627.49 15,100.13
Dec. – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 0.1 0.2 1.0 144.23 108.88 654.20 15,884.86
2022 Jan. 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.2 0.5 1.2 143.24 107.29 636.37 15,471.20
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 End of year or month.  3 Source: Deutsche Börse
AG. 4 Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for futures contracts;
calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 – 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 –1,340 – 379 –2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 –7,576 – 694 47,050 1,984 7,035
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,521 144,075 819 –1,745 143,256 44,266 –3,840
2015 181,889 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,753 174,018 7,362 494 166,656 35,259 7,871
2016 156,985 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 37,615 163,934 2,877 –3,172 161,057 40,787 –6,947
2017 153,756 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 58,834 156,282 4,938 1,048 151,344 57,786 –2,526
2018 132,060 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 28,366 138,424 2,979 –2,306 135,445 30,672 –6,364
2019 176,465 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 53,919 181,388 2,719 – 812 178,669 54,731 –4,923
2020 180,462 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 64,435 179,529 336 –1,656 179,193 66,091 933
2021 261,769 157,861 41,016 482 31,023 7,841 116,845 103,909 264,588 13,154 254 251,434 103,655 –2,818
2021 June 23,101 12,411 3,231 78 2,252 757 9,181 10,690 23,929 733 446 23,196 10,244 – 827
July 16,945 11,842 4,098 – 82 3,506 503 7,744 5,103 17,731 1,051 – 477 16,680 5,580 – 786
Aug. 16,774 8,078 3,673 – 6 3,086 445 4,405 8,695 17,239 1,024 – 68 16,215 8,763 – 466
Sep. 13,661 5,145 2,414 – 52 1,696 673 2,731 8,516 13,508 265 9 13,243 8,507 154
Oct. 30,703 20,211 4,435 6 3,507 451 15,775 10,492 31,243 1,775 – 191 29,468 10,683 – 540
Nov. 29,135 13,176 3,779 – 68 3,006 651 9,398 15,958 30,098 1,737 640 28,361 15,318 – 963
Dec. 48,385 34,875 3,380 121 2,182 751 31,495 13,510 49,711 1,186 – 704 48,525 14,214 –1,326
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2020 2021
 Item 2018 2019 2020 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 25.63 18.26 100.01 46.79 45.71 6.78 19.68 –24.65 20.31
   Debt securities 5.22 –2.18 2.99 2.47 0.57 –0.20 –1.53 1.90 1.57
     Short-term debt securities 1.42 –1.31 1.27 0.53 1.25 –0.18 0.12 0.77 0.26
     Long-term debt securities 3.81 –0.87 1.72 1.94 –0.68 –0.02 –1.65 1.13 1.32
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 0.64 –0.47 1.38 1.80 –0.48 0.10 –0.64 0.87 1.75
         Non-financial corporations 0.58 0.51 –0.17 0.20 0.13 –0.48 0.10 0.62 0.59
         Financial corporations 1.39 –0.56 0.12 0.60 –0.41 0.09 –0.55 0.48 0.58
         General government –1.34 –0.41 1.44 1.00 –0.20 0.49 –0.20 –0.24 0.58
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 4.59 –1.71 1.61 0.67 1.05 –0.31 –0.88 1.03 –0.18
   Loans –0.87 –2.76 –19.33 –3.19 –7.81 –0.27 3.96 8.72 25.16
     Short-term loans 24.05 12.37 –8.52 –2.83 0.49 3.22 –0.20 11.24 16.57
     Long-term loans –24.92 –15.13 –10.82 –0.35 –8.30 –3.50 4.16 –2.52 8.59
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 6.25 –25.00 0.28 6.99 –3.13 4.24 –5.83 0.43 0.60
         Non-financial corporations 4.52 –28.14 –12.27 5.75 –3.86 –4.90 –1.66 –3.40 –1.21
         Financial corporations 1.36 2.90 11.99 1.11 0.59 9.00 –4.17 3.84 1.81
         General government 0.36 0.24 0.55 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.00 0.00 0.00
       Loans to the rest of the world –7.12 22.24 –19.61 –10.18 –4.68 –4.52 9.79 8.29 24.56
   Equity and investment fund shares 130.37 108.78 103.43 –2.88 36.62 11.19 23.17 13.47 21.36
     Equity 128.36 99.77 90.65 –4.03 31.75 5.27 19.34 6.55 18.65
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 18.54 6.18 –77.97 –18.72 10.02 –67.75 12.08 4.92 –18.27
         Non-financial corporations 17.99 4.62 –78.06 –18.55 10.15 –68.34 12.08 5.32 –18.80
         Financial corporations 0.55 1.55 0.09 –0.18 –0.14 0.60 0.01 –0.41 0.54
       Listed shares of the rest of the world –4.08 7.26 6.63 –1.28 3.56 4.09 0.72 12.10 5.66
       Other equity  1 113.90 86.34 161.98 15.97 18.18 68.93 6.54 –10.47 31.26
     Investment fund shares 2.01 9.00 12.78 1.15 4.87 5.91 3.83 6.92 2.72
       Money market fund shares –0.53 1.78 3.79 0.98 3.27 1.34 –0.47 –0.19 –0.41
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 2.54 7.22 8.99 0.17 1.60 4.57 4.31 7.11 3.13
   Insurance technical reserves 0.39 1.68 2.02 0.50 0.45 0.55 0.43 0.61 0.65
   Financial derivatives 1.99 –0.62 –27.51 –10.75 –4.12 –11.29 14.11 2.44 –2.26
   Other accounts receivable 37.96 –58.43 48.12 –54.64 46.91 46.22 25.99 –4.16 13.91
   Total 200.69 64.72 209.72 –21.70 118.34 52.97 85.82 –1.68 80.71
 External financing
   Debt securities 0.47 20.52 36.63 23.36 10.58 –4.01 2.67 8.92 10.34
     Short-term securities 3.38 4.88 –4.40 2.76 –3.91 –5.42 –1.19 1.23 3.50
       Long-term securities –2.91 15.64 41.02 20.60 14.49 1.41 3.86 7.69 6.84
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 3.46 6.62 18.12 11.47 5.05 0.06 1.96 3.29 2.14
           Non-financial corporations 0.58 0.51 –0.17 0.20 0.13 –0.48 0.10 0.62 0.59
           Financial corporations 2.88 5.31 19.86 11.20 5.44 1.18 1.98 2.75 1.78
           General government 0.01 0.47 –0.22 –0.19 0.05 0.01 0.14 0.03 0.02
           Households –0.01 0.34 –1.35 0.26 –0.57 –0.65 –0.26 –0.12 –0.26
         Debt securities of the rest of the world –2.99 13.90 18.51 11.89 5.53 –4.06 0.71 5.63 8.20
   Loans 149.42 71.99 69.86 29.91 –0.56 3.66 30.34 6.99 24.39
     Short-term loans 72.89 24.12 –17.46 –27.12 –0.82 –4.47 33.80 –2.07 13.00
     Long-term loans 76.53 47.86 87.32 57.03 0.26 8.12 –3.46 9.06 11.39
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 75.48 27.59 30.38 25.26 –4.55 –1.45 38.24 –10.53 7.91
         Non-financial corporations 4.52 –28.14 –12.27 5.75 –3.86 –4.90 –1.66 –3.40 –1.21
         Financial corporations 69.55 55.16 6.95 3.07 –11.66 –8.31 36.89 –12.43 6.01
         General government 1.41 0.57 35.70 16.45 10.97 11.76 3.01 5.30 3.11
       Loans from the rest of the world 73.94 44.39 39.48 4.64 3.99 5.11 –7.90 17.51 16.48
   Equity 16.08 17.96 56.49 9.74 21.58 19.10 14.52 8.00 29.06
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 73.05 –24.76 –62.25 –13.51 10.80 –66.70 15.27 8.02 –21.41
       Non-financial corporations 17.99 4.62 –78.06 –18.55 10.15 –68.34 12.08 5.32 –18.80
       Financial corporations 46.83 –33.41 3.47 1.46 –1.01 1.40 0.02 1.52 –3.24
       General government 0.53 –0.01 0.26 0.09 –0.01 –0.01 –0.07 –0.07 –0.00
       Households 7.70 4.03 12.08 3.50 1.67 0.25 3.25 1.25 0.64
     Listed shares of the rest of the world –31.77 –1.31 12.70 18.37 –1.32 1.56 –5.02 –0.66 35.77
     Other equity  1 –25.20 44.04 106.03 4.87 12.10 84.24 4.27 0.65 14.70
   Insurance technical reserves 6.08 7.55 5.84 1.46 1.46 1.46 1.46 1.46 1.46
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options –0.49 –1.38 0.54 –2.26 0.06 1.26 1.27 8.20 6.58
   Other accounts payable 55.00 7.43 15.62 –44.73 39.91 22.74 53.86 13.41 32.79
   Total 226.55 124.07 184.97 17.48 73.02 44.21 104.12 46.97 104.61
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2020 2021
 Item 2018 2019 2020 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 582.4 573.7 715.2 626.2 698.1 715.2 709.2 689.7 703.2
   Debt securities 50.8 49.6 51.5 51.5 51.5 51.5 49.9 51.9 53.5
     Short-term debt securities 4.9 3.7 4.8 3.8 5.1 4.8 5.0 5.9 6.2
     Long-term debt securities 45.9 45.9 46.7 47.7 46.3 46.7 44.9 46.0 47.3
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 21.3 21.1 22.1 22.3 21.9 22.1 21.4 22.3 24.0
         Non-financial corporations 4.5 5.0 4.7 5.0 5.1 4.7 4.7 5.3 5.9
         Financial corporations 13.8 13.6 13.4 13.6 13.2 13.4 12.9 13.4 14.0
         General government 3.0 2.6 4.0 3.7 3.5 4.0 3.8 3.6 4.1
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 29.5 28.4 29.4 29.2 29.6 29.4 28.5 29.6 29.5
   Loans 733.8 733.4 717.0 728.7 718.5 717.0 722.4 730.8 756.8
     Short-term loans 555.6 569.4 565.8 564.4 563.2 565.8 565.9 577.1 594.4
     Long-term loans 178.2 164.0 151.2 164.4 155.2 151.2 156.5 153.7 162.4
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 440.3 415.3 415.6 414.4 411.3 415.6 409.7 410.2 410.8
         Non-financial corporations 368.0 339.9 327.6 336.4 332.5 327.6 325.9 322.5 321.3
         Financial corporations 65.2 68.1 80.1 70.5 71.1 80.1 75.9 79.7 81.5
         General government 7.1 7.3 7.9 7.6 7.7 7.9 7.9 7.9 7.9
       Loans to the rest of the world 293.6 318.1 301.5 314.3 307.2 301.5 312.7 320.7 346.1
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,221.8 2,434.0 2,514.5 2,401.1 2,443.0 2,514.5 2,660.3 2,735.8 2,781.5
     Equity 2,055.4 2,244.0 2,309.8 2,214.5 2,249.5 2,309.8 2,447.9 2,511.7 2,554.1
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 302.6 342.0 307.0 337.2 352.5 307.0 359.4 383.5 371.5
         Non-financial corporations 296.0 332.9 298.9 329.6 346.0 298.9 350.9 375.0 361.7
         Financial corporations 6.6 9.0 8.1 7.6 6.5 8.1 8.5 8.5 9.8
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 39.9 52.2 68.1 48.5 56.5 68.1 72.5 83.9 86.6
       Other equity  1 1,713.0 1,849.8 1,934.7 1,828.8 1,840.5 1,934.7 2,016.0 2,044.2 2,096.1
     Investment fund shares 166.4 190.0 204.7 186.6 193.5 204.7 212.4 224.1 227.4
       Money market fund shares 1.0 3.2 7.0 2.4 5.7 7.0 6.5 6.3 5.9
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 165.4 186.8 197.7 184.2 187.8 197.7 205.9 217.8 221.5
   Insurance technical reserves 56.3 59.2 62.1 60.6 61.3 62.1 62.8 63.6 64.1
   Financial derivatives 33.3 31.6 31.1 34.8 29.7 31.1 31.4 52.0 106.5
   Other accounts receivable 1,171.1 1,246.6 1,227.9 1,125.5 1,186.0 1,227.9 1,334.9 1,323.5 1,370.7
   Total 4,849.6 5,127.9 5,319.3 5,028.5 5,188.0 5,319.3 5,570.9 5,647.2 5,836.3
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 181.3 204.7 249.6 238.6 251.8 249.6 251.1 261.0 255.1
     Short-term securities 6.8 11.9 7.1 16.6 12.6 7.1 5.9 7.2 10.6
     Long-term securities 174.5 192.9 242.5 222.0 239.2 242.5 245.2 253.8 244.5
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 70.1 77.7 96.0 88.8 94.9 96.0 95.6 99.6 99.7
         Non-financial corporations 4.5 5.0 4.7 5.0 5.1 4.7 4.7 5.3 5.9
         Financial corporations 51.5 57.8 78.1 69.7 76.1 78.1 78.0 81.2 81.2
         General government 0.1 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5
         Households 14.0 14.4 12.8 13.8 13.3 12.8 12.5 12.5 12.1
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 111.1 127.0 153.6 149.9 156.9 153.6 155.5 161.4 155.4
   Loans 2,093.6 2,178.0 2,236.5 2,242.0 2,237.6 2,236.5 2,270.0 2,272.3 2,304.2
     Short-term loans 804.6 831.9 808.6 818.1 814.8 808.6 844.9 842.3 855.8
     Long-term loans 1,289.0 1,346.1 1,427.9 1,423.9 1,422.8 1,427.9 1,425.0 1,430.0 1,448.4
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,321.1 1,360.2 1,387.2 1,394.9 1,390.5 1,387.2 1,429.5 1,416.5 1,425.2
         Non-financial corporations 368.0 339.9 327.6 336.4 332.5 327.6 325.9 322.5 321.3
         Financial corporations 903.6 970.1 972.3 994.3 982.6 972.3 1,013.7 998.8 1,005.6
         General government 49.5 50.3 87.3 64.3 75.4 87.3 89.8 95.1 98.2
       Loans from the rest of the world 772.5 817.8 849.3 847.1 847.1 849.3 840.5 855.8 879.1
   Equity 2,701.1 3,102.2 3,259.8 2,950.1 3,092.2 3,259.8 3,521.3 3,638.1 3,643.4
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 660.1 734.1 739.9 711.3 747.4 739.9 848.8 896.0 882.1
       Non-financial corporations 296.0 332.9 298.9 329.6 346.0 298.9 350.9 375.0 361.7
       Financial corporations 162.6 158.0 171.9 150.5 156.1 171.9 193.0 202.9 196.9
       General government 41.6 51.8 56.3 50.5 53.3 56.3 67.3 71.8 70.6
       Households 159.8 191.3 212.8 180.8 192.0 212.8 237.6 246.3 252.9
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 764.0 958.6 995.6 855.9 923.5 995.6 1,081.5 1,125.8 1,119.5
     Other equity  1 1,277.0 1,409.6 1,524.3 1,382.9 1,421.3 1,524.3 1,591.1 1,616.3 1,641.7
   Insurance technical reserves 269.8 277.3 283.1 280.2 281.7 283.1 284.6 286.1 287.5
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 65.8 68.8 83.3 88.8 81.3 83.3 67.6 76.9 129.2
   Other accounts payable 1,189.4 1,298.5 1,277.7 1,221.3 1,267.8 1,277.7 1,375.8 1,361.1 1,443.9
   Total 6,500.9 7,129.5 7,390.0 7,021.1 7,212.4 7,390.0 7,770.3 7,895.4 8,063.3
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2020 2021
 Item 2018 2019 2020 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 137.95 142.20 210.03 73.09 41.50 74.44 48.52 52.42 11.11
     Currency 29.92 35.19 61.65 16.99 11.97 16.29 12.96 17.10 14.59
     Deposits 108.03 107.01 148.38 56.10 29.53 58.15 35.57 35.32 –3.48
       Transferable deposits 109.88 111.01 165.34 58.64 31.76 56.20 34.10 37.70 2.69
       Time deposits 6.78 1.47 –1.70 –0.85 0.41 1.85 –0.01 –2.37 –4.36
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –8.63 –5.47 –15.26 –1.70 –2.63 0.10 1.48 –0.01 –1.81
   Debt securities 1.55 –1.85 –5.94 0.38 –1.67 –3.18 –2.66 –1.30 –1.32
     Short-term debt securities –0.13 –0.53 0.08 0.16 0.10 –0.16 0.16 0.22 –0.10
     Long-term debt securities 1.69 –1.33 –6.02 0.22 –1.77 –3.03 –2.82 –1.52 –1.22
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 2.20 –2.93 –2.56 0.55 –1.17 –1.79 –1.07 –1.26 –0.99
         Non-financial corporations –0.10 0.21 –1.32 0.19 –0.56 –0.62 –0.28 –0.13 –0.25
         Financial corporations 2.77 –2.22 –1.26 0.47 –0.36 –1.02 –0.67 –1.02 –0.66
         General government –0.47 –0.92 0.02 –0.11 –0.24 –0.15 –0.12 –0.11 –0.08
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –0.65 1.08 –3.38 –0.17 –0.50 –1.39 –1.59 –0.05 –0.32
   Equity and investment fund shares 38.48 49.75 90.18 28.96 20.35 21.48 28.09 31.66 34.60
     Equity 18.90 18.90 48.53 15.57 11.60 7.73 2.60 7.28 7.52
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 9.45 6.60 16.05 6.35 1.98 –0.35 3.39 2.20 2.35
         Non-financial corporations 6.29 3.52 11.92 3.41 1.71 0.33 3.12 1.58 1.83
         Financial corporations 3.16 3.08 4.14 2.94 0.27 –0.68 0.27 0.62 0.52
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 4.41 7.45 23.28 6.40 7.43 6.43 –1.72 3.54 3.72
       Other equity  1 5.04 4.86 9.19 2.82 2.20 1.64 0.92 1.54 1.45
     Investment fund shares 19.59 30.84 41.65 13.39 8.75 13.75 25.50 24.38 27.09
       Money market fund shares –0.22 –0.32 0.09 –0.10 0.10 –0.29 0.09 –0.07 –0.01
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 19.80 31.17 41.56 13.49 8.65 14.04 25.41 24.46 27.10
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 15.80 17.95 18.34 5.54 5.57 1.73 5.40 5.58 3.73
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 28.22 37.85 47.96 8.83 9.49 13.12 15.86 10.46 12.88
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 37.28 37.31 33.75 7.12 7.18 9.79 6.01 4.34 3.32
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 –12.81 –10.38 –7.48 –13.31 3.65 –16.68 22.02 –2.28 11.00
   Total 246.47 272.82 386.84 110.61 86.07 100.69 123.25 100.87 75.32
 External financing
   Loans 64.87 82.50 83.95 18.57 27.42 25.15 16.79 27.56 30.71
     Short-term loans 2.45 0.95 –5.50 –2.29 –0.53 –1.11 0.48 0.79 1.21
     Long-term loans 62.43 81.55 89.45 20.86 27.94 26.26 16.31 26.77 29.49
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 53.88 68.51 85.73 19.41 25.43 25.51 18.75 26.57 29.37
       Consumer loans 11.14 14.42 –4.29 –2.05 1.08 –0.66 –1.14 –0.09 2.38
       Entrepreneurial loans –0.14 –0.43 2.51 1.21 0.91 0.29 –0.82 1.08 –1.04
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 61.72 73.41 83.17 17.96 27.32 22.37 14.85 27.19 28.38
       Loans from other financial institutions 3.14 9.06 0.78 0.61 0.10 2.77 1.94 0.37 2.34
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.80 0.73 0.01 0.25 0.32 –0.38 0.01 0.01 0.25
   Total 65.67 83.23 83.97 18.82 27.73 24.77 16.80 27.57 30.96
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2020 2021
 Item 2018 2019 2020 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 2,457.4 2,599.6 2,809.3 2,693.7 2,734.9 2,809.3 2,858.0 2,910.4 2,920.7
     Currency 227.3 262.5 324.2 295.9 307.9 324.2 337.1 354.2 368.8
     Deposits 2,230.1 2,337.1 2,485.2 2,397.8 2,427.0 2,485.2 2,520.9 2,556.2 2,551.9
       Transferable deposits 1,398.0 1,509.1 1,674.1 1,586.4 1,617.9 1,674.1 1,708.3 1,746.0 1,748.1
       Time deposits 252.4 253.9 252.1 249.9 250.3 252.1 252.2 249.8 245.3
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 579.7 574.2 558.9 561.5 558.8 558.9 560.4 560.4 558.6
     Debt securities 117.5 121.4 113.3 114.5 113.7 113.3 112.8 111.6 110.0
       Short-term debt securities 2.1 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.6 1.7 1.9 1.8
       Long-term debt securities 115.4 119.8 111.7 112.8 111.9 111.7 111.0 109.7 108.2
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 80.2 81.5 76.7 76.7 76.1 76.7 77.3 76.5 75.3
           Non-financial corporations 12.1 12.4 10.9 11.8 11.3 10.9 10.5 10.5 10.2
           Financial corporations 64.6 66.6 63.3 62.0 62.1 63.3 64.4 63.7 62.9
           General government 3.4 2.5 2.6 3.0 2.7 2.6 2.4 2.3 2.2
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 37.4 39.9 36.5 37.8 37.6 36.5 35.4 35.1 34.7
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,164.0 1,388.3 1,541.0 1,376.2 1,425.4 1,541.0 1,659.4 1,746.3 1,790.8
     Equity 590.6 708.0 806.4 710.3 737.8 806.4 868.6 904.8 920.5
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 184.1 223.9 243.3 209.2 217.3 243.3 271.7 280.0 286.8
         Non-financial corporations 151.9 182.3 204.0 172.3 183.6 204.0 228.2 236.9 244.1
         Financial corporations 32.2 41.6 39.2 36.9 33.7 39.2 43.4 43.1 42.7
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 100.2 136.3 180.6 144.7 156.1 180.6 199.5 216.5 221.1
       Other equity  1 306.3 347.8 382.6 356.4 364.4 382.6 397.4 408.2 412.7
     Investment fund shares 573.4 680.2 734.6 665.9 687.7 734.6 790.7 841.5 870.2
       Money market fund shares 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.7 2.7 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.3
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 571.1 678.0 732.2 663.2 684.9 732.2 788.3 839.2 867.9
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 375.9 393.8 412.2 404.9 410.5 412.2 417.6 423.2 426.9
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,011.1 1,069.1 1,112.1 1,091.6 1,101.2 1,112.1 1,128.0 1,138.7 1,151.6
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 883.8 924.5 956.8 945.3 953.2 956.8 962.8 967.2 970.5
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 29.6 29.6 27.9 29.6 30.0 27.9 27.8 28.2 28.5
   Total 6,039.4 6,526.4 6,972.6 6,655.8 6,768.9 6,972.6 7,166.4 7,325.6 7,398.9
 Liabilities
   Loans 1,754.8 1,837.9 1,924.6 1,870.3 1,899.0 1,924.6 1,939.7 1,969.5 2,000.6
     Short-term loans 58.3 59.0 53.2 55.1 54.3 53.2 53.6 54.4 55.6
     Long-term loans 1,696.5 1,778.9 1,871.3 1,815.3 1,844.7 1,871.3 1,886.1 1,915.2 1,945.0
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,287.0 1,358.7 1,448.2 1,396.2 1,422.6 1,448.2 1,464.9 1,493.9 1,523.1
       Consumer loans 218.1 231.4 226.1 226.0 227.0 226.1 224.6 224.4 226.7
       Entrepreneurial loans 249.7 247.7 250.2 248.1 249.5 250.2 250.2 251.2 250.8
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,667.2 1,741.6 1,824.6 1,773.2 1,801.6 1,824.6 1,839.8 1,867.3 1,896.1
       Loans from other financial institutions 87.5 96.1 99.8 97.1 97.3 99.8 99.7 102.1 104.3
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 18.3 19.7 19.2 21.6 21.2 19.2 20.5 19.4 19.2
   Total 1,773.1 1,857.6 1,943.8 1,891.9 1,920.2 1,943.8 1,960.2 1,988.9 2,019.8
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
February 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
  
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local securitygovernment government government government funds government government government government funds
Period
€ billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2015 + 29.1 + 17.6 + 4.6 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 + 36.4 + 13.7 + 7.7 + 6.3 + 8.7 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.32017 + 43.7 + 7.9 + 13.9 + 10.7 + 11.1 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.32018 
p + 64.4 + 21.1 + 11.7 + 15.6 + 16.0 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.5
2019 p + 51.1 + 22.0 + 13.8 + 6.1 + 9.1 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3
2020 p − 145.2 − 86.4 − 30.1 + 6.3 − 35.0 − 4.3 − 2.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 1.0
2021 pe − 153.9 − 155.3 − 1.6 + 3.1 − 0.1 − 4.3 − 4.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0
2019         H1  p + 47.0 + 18.9 + 12.8 + 6.8 + 8.4 + 2.8 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5
         H2  p + 4.1 + 3.1 + 1.0 − 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
2020         H1  p − 47.8 − 26.9 − 9.2 + 0.8 − 12.5 − 2.9 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.8
         H2  p − 97.4 − 59.5 − 20.9 + 5.5 − 22.5 − 5.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 + 0.3 − 1.3
2021         H1  pe − 76.1 − 62.0 − 2.8 + 1.5 − 12.7 − 4.4 − 3.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.7
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2015 2,178.1 1,372.2 659.5 164.0 1.5 72.0 45.3 21.8 5.4 0.0
2016 2,162.7 1,365.9 642.3 166.9 1.2 69.0 43.6 20.5 5.3 0.02017 2,112.5 1,350.3 614.9 163.5 0.8 64.7 41.3 18.8 5.0 0.02018 
p 2,063.5 1,323.1 600.8 155.9 0.7 61.3 39.3 17.8 4.6 0.0
2019 p 2,046.7 1,299.9 609.8 153.7 0.7 58.9 37.4 17.6 4.4 0.0
2020 p 2,314.3 1,513.2 660.6 154.2 7.4 68.7 44.9 19.6 4.6 0.2
2020         Q1  p 2,090.4 1,327.7 623.1 153.6 0.8 60.1 38.1 17.9 4.4 0.0
         Q2  p 2,259.9 1,473.9 645.1 153.7 1.0 66.4 43.3 19.0 4.5 0.0
         Q3  p 2,333.4 1,536.9 655.6 154.8 4.6 69.1 45.5 19.4 4.6 0.1
         Q4  p 2,314.3 1,513.2 660.6 154.2 7.4 68.7 44.9 19.6 4.6 0.2
2021         Q1  p 2,345.1 1,538.9 665.6 154.2 16.2 69.9 45.9 19.8 4.6 0.5
         Q2  p 2,399.0 1,589.2 669.6 155.5 21.2 69.7 46.1 19.4 4.5 0.6
         Q3  p 2,433.2 1,617.2 674.8 155.5 24.2 69.4 46.1 19.3 4.4 0.7
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus the first half of the year. Therefore, the 2021 half-year figures are not directly compat-
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. In connection ible with the annual figures. 2Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output
with the publication of the 2021 annual figures, no revised figures were released for of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2015 1,364.9 705.1 501.2 158.6 1,335.8 721.9 233.0 153.0 64.5 42.2 121.2 + 29.1 1,213.3
2016 1,426.7 739.2 524.3 163.3 1,390.4 754.5 240.7 162.5 68.1 37.3 127.2 + 36.4 1,270.42017 1,486.9 773.3 549.5 164.2 1,443.3 784.8 250.6 169.5 71.6 33.8 132.9 + 43.7 1,329.52018 
p 1,557.3 808.2 572.6 176.5 1,492.8 805.6 260.3 176.2 78.4 31.1 141.3 + 64.4 1,387.8
2019 p 1,613.8 834.4 598.2 181.2 1,562.7 846.6 272.7 184.2 83.7 27.3 148.3 + 51.1 1,439.7
2020 p 1,566.9 782.1 607.9 176.9 1,712.1 905.2 284.1 209.8 90.9 21.0 201.2 − 145.2 1,397.0
2021 pe 1,684.8 865.2 632.6 187.0 1,838.6 938.0 293.6 234.8 90.3 21.1 260.8 − 153.9 1,505.2
As a percentage of GDP
2015 45.1 23.3 16.6 5.2 44.1 23.9 7.7 5.1 2.1 1.4 4.0 + 1.0 40.1
2016 45.5 23.6 16.7 5.2 44.4 24.1 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.2 4.1 + 1.2 40.52017 45.5 23.7 16.8 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 + 1.3 40.72018 
p 46.2 24.0 17.0 5.2 44.3 23.9 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.2 + 1.9 41.2
2019 p 46.5 24.0 17.2 5.2 45.0 24.4 7.9 5.3 2.4 0.8 4.3 + 1.5 41.5
2020 p 46.5 23.2 18.1 5.3 50.8 26.9 8.4 6.2 2.7 0.6 6.0 − 4.3 41.5
2021 pe 47.3 24.3 17.7 5.2 51.6 26.3 8.2 6.6 2.5 0.6 7.3 − 4.3 42.2
Percentage growth rates
2015 + 3.9 + 4.8 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 3.0 + 4.4 + 2.4 + 4.0 + 6.6 − 10.5 − 1.8 . + 4.6
2016 + 4.5 + 4.8 + 4.6 + 2.9 + 4.1 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 6.2 + 5.6 − 11.7 + 4.9 . + 4.72017 + 4.2 + 4.6 + 4.8 + 0.5 + 3.8 + 4.0 + 4.1 + 4.3 + 5.1 − 9.3 + 4.5 . + 4.72018 
p + 4.7 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 7.5 + 3.4 + 2.7 + 3.9 + 3.9 + 9.5 − 8.0 + 6.3 . + 4.4
2019 p + 3.6 + 3.2 + 4.5 + 2.7 + 4.7 + 5.1 + 4.8 + 4.5 + 6.8 − 12.2 + 5.0 . + 3.7
2020 p − 2.9 − 6.3 + 1.6 − 2.4 + 9.6 + 6.9 + 4.2 + 13.9 + 8.7 − 23.4 + 35.7 . − 3.0
2021 pe + 7.5 + 10.6 + 4.0 + 5.7 + 7.4 + 3.6 + 3.3 + 11.9 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 29.7 . + 7.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and   
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution  Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
February 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2015 p 829.8 673.3 10.4 804.3 244.1 302.7 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,301.1 1,273.6 + 27.4
2016 p 862.3 705.8 9.0 844.5 251.3 321.6 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 17.8 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.1 1,330.2 + 24.9
2017 p 900.3 734.5 7.9 869.4 261.6 327.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 30.8 631.5 622.0 + 9.5 1,417.5 1,377.2 + 40.3
2018 p 951.8 776.3 6.2 905.6 272.5 338.0 39.2 55.8 16.1 + 46.2 656.2 642.5 + 13.6 1,490.7 1,430.9 + 59.8
2019 p 1,010.3 799.4 11.2 975.5 285.9 349.7 33.6 62.9 16.8 + 34.8 685.0 676.7 + 8.3 1,573.8 1,530.8 + 43.0
2020 p 947.0 739.9 13.9 1,112.4 299.5 422.8 25.9 69.2 60.1 − 165.5 719.5 747.4 − 27.9 1,518.9 1,712.3 − 193.4
2019         Q1  p 240.9 192.7 2.5 227.7 68.3 88.5 11.5 10.2 3.3 + 13.2 163.3 166.4 − 3.1 374.3 364.1 + 10.2
         Q2  p 256.3 201.7 2.0 236.1 70.1 87.0 12.2 13.0 2.6 + 20.1 169.9 168.4 + 1.5 396.1 374.5 + 21.6
         Q3  p 245.3 194.7 3.4 236.7 70.9 86.2 4.5 16.4 3.1 + 8.6 168.8 170.3 − 1.5 384.0 376.9 + 7.1
         Q4  p 269.1 210.6 3.2 272.2 76.1 87.5 5.1 22.5 7.7 − 3.1 181.9 172.6 + 9.3 420.7 414.5 + 6.2
2020         Q1  p 244.8 197.4 2.5 236.4 72.9 90.5 11.9 12.0 2.6 + 8.4 168.3 175.7 − 7.4 380.0 379.1 + 0.9
         Q2  p 211.9 158.1 2.7 271.8 72.2 119.1 8.6 15.4 3.4 − 59.8 175.9 187.0 − 11.1 354.5 425.4 − 70.9
         Q3  p 227.8 181.4 4.0 282.3 72.4 102.0 1.4 18.3 34.3 − 54.5 181.1 195.0 − 13.9 370.1 438.5 − 68.4
         Q4  p 259.3 201.9 4.5 315.4 81.4 109.1 5.9 22.8 19.6 − 56.1 186.0 189.6 − 3.5 410.6 470.2 − 59.6
2021         Q1  p 240.7 185.2 4.3 300.6 75.5 134.4 7.3 11.1 14.6 − 59.9 182.4 196.3 − 13.9 385.2 458.9 − 73.8
         Q2  p 267.0 195.8 7.5 297.2 74.8 123.2 10.7 15.2 10.5 − 30.2 185.9 197.0 − 11.1 414.1 455.3 − 41.2
         Q3  p 270.9 210.7 7.4 290.2 75.8 117.5 − 0.4 16.5 10.4 − 19.3 183.4 191.9 − 8.6 413.5 441.4 − 27.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans grant ed.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2018 p 374.4 363.5 + 10.9 420.5 400.1 + 20.4 271.8 261.5 + 10.2
2019 p 382.5 369.2 + 13.3 437.2 419.6 + 17.6 284.2 278.1 + 6.1
2020 p 341.4 472.1 − 130.7 456.4 489.4 − 33.0 297.0 294.6 + 2.4
2019         Q1  p 84.7 86.1 − 1.4 105.7 96.7 + 8.9 58.2 63.2 − 4.9
         Q2  p 97.7 90.3 + 7.4 106.0 100.2 + 5.8 70.6 65.9 + 4.7
         Q3  p 93.2 91.3 + 1.9 107.9 102.6 + 5.2 69.1 69.2 − 0.1
         Q4  p 106.9 101.5 + 5.4 115.5 118.4 − 2.9 84.5 78.4 + 6.0
2020         Q1  p 92.3 90.4 + 1.9 105.6 99.7 + 5.9 57.9 67.7 − 9.8
         Q2  p 70.8 114.8 − 44.0 108.2 128.0 − 19.8 69.4 69.4 + 0.1
         Q3  p 83.7 105.4 − 21.7 112.9 113.7 − 0.8 67.5 72.6 − 5.1
         Q4  p 94.5 161.5 − 67.0 127.4 146.3 − 18.9 100.3 83.5 + 16.8
2021         Q1  p 75.0 127.5 − 52.5 113.7 120.7 − 7.1 61.1 69.7 − 8.6
         Q2  p 86.4 123.5 − 37.1 122.8 122.0 + 0.8 74.6 71.7 + 2.9
         Q3  p 93.9 128.7 − 34.7 125.9 120.2 + 5.7 74.6 74.9 − 0.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city states Berlin, Bremen and
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- assigned to the general government sector. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
February 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
  
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,8362017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,3682018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,7752019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,911 632,268 313,381 286,065 32,822 107,916 − 274 30,266
2021 ... 706,978 342,988 325,768 38,222 ... ... 29,321
2020         Q1 198,375 168,123 83,086 75,420 9,617 18,875 + 11,377 6,855
         Q2 158,161 135,185 68,653 59,557 6,974 25,107 − 2,131 6,997         Q3 182,202 156,397 78,502 72,613 5,282 25,234 + 571 9,705         Q4 201,173 172,564 83,140 78,475 10,949 38,700 − 10,090 6,709
2021         Q1 189,316 159,271 72,814 73,137 13,320 19,882 + 10,163 6,887
         Q2 191,931 163,158 81,129 74,024 8,005 29,609 − 835 7,438         Q3 211,331 180,378 87,603 84,312 8,464 29,690 + 1,263 7,823         Q4 ... 204,171 101,442 94,295 8,433 ... ... 7,173
2020         Dec. . 85,922 44,302 38,133 3,487 . . 2,236
2021         Dec. . 103,273 55,460 46,618 1,195 . . 2,518
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget. 2Customs footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Domestic Import trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax 4 tion tax  5 tax 6 Total VAT VAT fers  8 taxes 9 taxes 9 duties taxes
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,3452017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,1412018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,5712019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,376 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,734 50,107
2021 760,953 370,296 218,407 72,342 42,124 37,423 250,800 187,631 63,169 4,951 98,171 31,613 5,122 53,976
2020         Q1 181,374 88,009 53,389 18,711 8,495 7,415 60,060 46,038 14,022 244 24,517 7,406 1,139 13,251
         Q2 146,360 69,928 50,760 10,633 2,348 6,187 44,262 31,625 12,638 1,170 23,525 6,326 1,149 11,175         Q3 168,308 73,766 47,470 13,492 5,411 7,392 59,819 47,933 11,886 796 25,930 6,784 1,212 11,910         Q4 186,334 89,094 57,667 16,146 8,014 7,268 55,343 43,105 12,238 1,744 31,660 7,259 1,234 13,770
2021         Q1 171,974 86,381 50,854 17,826 10,203 7,498 54,795 45,403 9,392 252 21,712 7,757 1,076 12,703
         Q2 175,242 84,505 50,783 14,347 8,860 10,515 57,634 43,399 14,235 1,215 23,210 7,398 1,281 12,085         Q3 193,910 90,619 53,857 17,973 9,853 8,936 69,528 49,052 20,476 1,189 23,469 7,813 1,292 13,532         Q4 219,827 108,791 62,913 22,196 13,208 10,474 68,843 49,777 19,066 2,295 29,780 8,645 1,473 15,656
2020         Dec. 93,335 54,842 26,655 16,508 8,077 3,602 19,227 15,006 4,221 831 15,405 2,623 407 7,413
2021         Dec. 111,534 65,550 28,118 19,759 11,404 6,268 27,016 16,976 10,040 1,034 14,480 2,909 545 8,262
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike plans. 4After deducting employee refunds and research grants. 5After deducting re-
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens search grants. 6Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains,
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- non-assessed taxes on earnings. 7The allocation of revenue to central, state and
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- local government, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is re gulated in Section
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- local government in revenue for 2021: 45.1:51.2:3.7. The EU share is de ducted from
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- central government’s share. 8Respective percentage share of central and state
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After government for 2021: 41.4:58.6. 9 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 
deducting child benefits and subsidies for supplementary private pension

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
February 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,9662018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,2032019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,651 14,553 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2021 37,120 11,028 14,733 14,980 9,546 6,691 2,089 1,984 18,335 9,824 2,333 1,121 ... ... ...
2020         Q1 4,966 4,930 2,413 6,766 2,634 1,708 562 537 4,525 1,981 542 358 17,245 13,391 3,403
         Q2 8,117 4,235 3,772 2,606 2,426 1,585 455 328 3,566 2,154 425 181 12,971 8,842 3,895         Q3 9,985 4,365 3,978 2,817 2,366 1,499 506 414 3,730 2,262 509 283 14,690 10,242 4,095         Q4 14,566 5,145 4,487 2,365 2,101 1,768 715 513 4,234 2,203 567 254 16,584 12,997 3,283
2021         Q1 4,126 3,171 2,585 6,776 2,567 1,692 395 400 4,716 2,110 578 353 17,594 13,798 3,503
         Q2 8,717 2,546 4,053 2,843 2,469 1,640 528 413 4,231 2,374 538 255 17,904 13,692 4,034         Q3 9,532 2,338 3,636 2,911 2,381 1,618 514 538 4,571 2,457 516 269 18,610 14,181 4,134         Q4 14,745 2,972 4,458 2,449 2,130 1,741 651 633 4,816 2,884 700 244 ... ... ...
2020         Dec. 7,829 3,025 1,996 717 689 570 365 213 1,515 815 205 88 . . .
2021         Dec. 7,984 2,059 1,936 730 645 612 289 225 1,680 906 234 90 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  
3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,0322018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,0082019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 + 1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 303 56 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 − 3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 344 55 3,901
2021 
p 347,805 245,169 101,970 347,043 296,713 22,728 + 762 41,974 40,310 1,241 370 52 3,835
2019         Q1 77,984 54,393 23,426 78,630 67,328 5,087 − 646 39,432 37,637 1,474 263 57 4,001
         Q2 81,410 57,837 23,408 80,804 69,011 5,205 + 605 40,232 38,639 1,272 264 57 3,996         Q3 80,305 56,637 23,481 82,716 70,633 5,330 − 2,411 38,386 36,876 1,183 271 56 3,995         Q4 86,756 63,133 23,413 82,849 70,674 5,333 + 3,907 42,945 40,539 2,074 276 56 3,987
2020         Q1 80,578 55,999 24,436 82,622 70,829 5,346 − 2,045 40,840 38,636 1,848 300 56 3,966
         Q2 82,098 57,515 24,413 82,875 70,889 5,346 − 777 39,779 37,975 1,446 304 55 3,949         Q3 82,689 58,109 24,418 86,497 74,054 5,591 − 3,808 36,898 35,197 1,333 313 55 3,925         Q4 88,978 64,375 24,412 86,605 73,879 5,576 + 2,373 39,847 38,186 1,286 321 55 3,916
2021         Q1 83,066 57,351 25,542 86,048 73,799 5,600 − 2,982 36,888 35,326 1,166 342 54 3,887
         Q2 86,386 60,666 25,545 86,486 73,905 5,679 − 100 36,941 35,554 988 345 53 3,871         Q3 85,535 59,941 25,468 87,123 74,453 5,718 − 1,588 36,041 34,670 973 345 53 3,840         Q4 92,818 67,211 25,415 87,385 74,556 5,730 + 5,432 41,974 40,310 1,241 370 52 3,835
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
February 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- Government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy funds Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment payment iture  5 surplus ment
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −2018 39,335 34,172 622 − 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 . 588 8,129 + 6,228 −2019 35,285 29,851 638 − 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 . 842 6,252 + 2,131 −
2020 33,678 28,236 630 − 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 . 1,214 6,076 − 27,335 6,913
2021 35,830 29,571 1,302 − 57,570 19,460 21,003 7,475 . 493 6,080 − 21,739 16,935
2019         Q1 8,369 7,027 148 − 8,597 3,969 403 1,818 . 179 1,450 − 228 −
         Q2 8,685 7,440 156 − 8,136 3,673 204 1,832 . 243 1,475 + 549 −         Q3 8,650 7,263 162 − 7,829 3,682 68 1,711 . 190 1,510 + 821 −         Q4 9,581 8,121 172 − 8,592 3,685 98 1,941 . 230 1,816 + 989 −
2020         Q1 8,123 6,851 153 − 9,301 4,469 392 1,934 . 235 1,470 − 1,179 −
         Q2 7,906 6,691 151 − 17,005 4,869 7,977 1,793 . 254 1,407 − 9,099 −         Q3 8,350 6,934 153 − 18,619 5,737 8,637 1,701 . 472 1,414 − 10,269 −         Q4 9,299 7,760 174 − 16,088 5,543 5,712 1,957 . 251 1,785 − 6,789 6,913
2021         Q1 8,228 6,747 289 − 18,260 5,956 8,006 1,935 . 184 1,391 − 10,033 −
         Q2 8,830 7,301 324 − 16,720 5,029 7,495 1,912 . 108 1,452 − 7,890 −         Q3 8,791 7,290 330 − 12,042 4,447 3,631 1,744 . 91 1,452 − 3,251 −         Q4 9,982 8,234 359 − 10,547 4,028 1,871 1,884 . 110 1,785 − 565 16,935
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- courage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promotion
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- of business start-ups. 5Including collection charges to other social security funds , ex-
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring meas- job seekers. ures and refunds of social contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to en-
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which: of which:
Central Remedies Adminis-
govern- and trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental therapeutic Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 appliances benefits iture  5 surplus
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 7572017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,0412018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 + 2,6542019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 − 1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 − 6,110
2019         Q1 59,809 55,622 3,625 62,485 19,586 9,947 10,386 3,738 4,106 3,649 2,707 − 2,676
         Q2 62,121 57,858 3,625 62,858 19,210 10,127 10,421 3,821 4,289 3,535 2,774 − 736         Q3 62,143 57,763 3,625 62,716 19,109 10,229 10,278 3,630 4,467 3,558 2,804 − 573         Q4 67,094 61,884 3,625 64,075 19,497 10,353 10,455 3,821 4,713 3,659 2,975 + 3,019
2020         Q1 61,949 57,419 3,625 66,438 20,049 11,086 10,806 3,804 4,470 4,061 2,816 − 4,489
         Q2 68,108 58,096 9,359 69,487 17,674 10,492 10,908 3,389 3,986 4,143 2,980 − 1,378         Q3 70,130 59,403 10,151 71,063 20,913 10,567 11,642 3,774 4,852 3,829 2,970 − 934         Q4 68,645 62,672 4,805 67,987 19,887 10,729 11,019 3,891 4,725 3,920 3,039 + 658
2021         Q1 72,970 59,338 13,303 72,660 19,631 11,175 11,564 4,069 4,564 4,287 2,967 + 310
         Q2 71,964 61,819 9,965 74,492 20,287 11,275 11,536 4,219 5,085 4,120 2,850 − 2,529         Q3 70,592 61,899 7,942 73,569 20,748 11,756 10,730 4,060 5,085 4,004 2,849 − 2,977
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, i.e. after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social security funds. sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
February 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1 
of which:
Inpatient Contributions to
of which: Non-cash care Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits  3 total 4 benefit ance scheme  5 expenditure surplus
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 4,626 13,003 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 4,904 13,539 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,5572018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 − 3,3152019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2019         Q1 11,123 10,938 10,728 2,060 4,082 2,833 547 437 + 396
         Q2 11,795 11,620 10,812 2,012 4,132 2,868 588 449 + 983         Q3 11,734 11,557 11,159 2,098 4,234 2,972 598 450 + 576         Q4 12,592 12,413 11,252 2,062 4,243 3,064 626 433 + 1,339
2020         Q1 11,693 11,473 11,444 2,186 4,214 3,067 633 489 + 249
         Q2 11,921 11,732 11,816 2,051 4,015 3,173 664 468 + 105         Q3 13,924 11,938 12,890 2,263 4,087 3,249 682 500 + 1,033         Q4 13,079 12,746 12,927 2,306 4,177 3,403 716 481 + 152
2021         Q1 12,093 11,831 13,344 2,355 3,971 3,387 725 512 − 1,251
         Q2 12,933 12,329 13,521 2,287 4,030 3,421 745 510 − 587         Q3 12,624 12,294 13,390 2,393 4,182 3,466 783 509 − 767
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *The final annual figures generally differ from the ance contributions). 3Data revision in 2014. 4From 2014, also including benefits for
total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter al ia.5For non-pro-
sequently. 1Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund. 2Since 2005, fessional carers. 
including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
 market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,178,094 85,952 608,042 186,661 49,906 1,247,533
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,162,650 205,391 586,202 179,755 46,342 1,144,9592017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017 2,112,469 319,159 539,558 175,617 43,442 1,034,6942018 + 167,231 − 16,248 − 91 − 1,670 2018 2,063,538 364,731 496,130 181,077 43,453 978,1472019 + 185,070 + 63 − 8,044 − 914 2019 2,046,671 366,562 466,694 177,601 48,340 987,476
2020 + 456,828 + 217,904 + 24,181 − 3,399 2020  
p 2,314,330 522,392 496,606 184,701 53,450 1,057,180
2019         Q1 + 56,654 + 3,281 − 2,172 − 1,199 2019          Q1 2,073,704 359,884 485,579 179,512 43,594 1,005,136
         Q2 + 48,545 + 5,491 − 279 + 7,227          Q2 2,064,129 361,032 478,965 179,168 42,838 1,002,126         Q3 + 48,053 + 4,030 + 176 − 5,093          Q3 2,081,124 358,813 476,798 179,228 49,221 1,017,065         Q4 + 31,817 − 12,738 − 5,768 − 1,849          Q4 2,046,671 366,562 466,694 177,601 48,340 987,476
2020         Q1 + 65,656 + 31,296 + 9,236 + 1,698 2020          Q1  
p 2,090,390 371,076 483,783 180,477 49,428 1,005,626
         Q2 + 185,560 + 126,585 + 31,212 − 7,314          Q2  p 2,259,854 424,141 548,754 181,288 49,629 1,056,041
         Q3 + 159,067 + 80,783 − 6,080 + 588          Q3  p 2,333,413 468,723 520,248 184,051 51,683 1,108,708
         Q4 + 46,545 − 20,760 − 10,187 + 1,629          Q4  p 2,314,330 522,392 496,606 184,701 53,450 1,057,180
2021         Q1 + 109,953 + 42,045 − 11,737 − 4,708 2021          Q1  p 2,345,138 561,443 478,289 182,756 52,095 1,070,554
         Q2 + 146,852 + 57,601 + 3,463 + 1,576          Q2  p 2,399,045 620,472 477,703 182,868 43,990 1,074,011
         Q3  p 2,433,247 669,659 486,439 183,485 41,335 1,052,328
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
February 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2015 2,178,094 14,303 65,676 1,498,922 90,350 508,842 . .
2016 2,162,650 15,845 69,715 1,483,871 96,254 496,965 . .2017 2,112,469 14,651 48,789 1,484,462 87,799 476,769 . .2018 2,063,538 14,833 52,572 1,456,160 77,296 462,676 . .
2019         Q1 2,073,704 15,663 64,218 1,460,634 72,005 461,184 . .
         Q2 2,064,129 12,868 56,256 1,463,027 75,284 456,693 . .         Q3 2,081,124 17,586 62,602 1,465,529 79,918 455,491 . .         Q4 2,046,671 14,595 49,180 1,458,540 69,289 455,068 . .
2020         Q1  
p 2,090,390 11,590 70,912 1,472,174 85,137 450,577 . .
         Q2  p 2,259,854 13,333 122,225 1,533,762 142,708 447,826 . .
         Q3  p 2,333,413 12,134 180,445 1,582,430 111,480 446,923 . .
         Q4  p 2,314,330 14,768 163,401 1,593,394 94,288 448,479 . .
2021         Q1  p 2,345,138 12,482 180,788 1,637,711 69,668 444,488 . .
         Q2  p 2,399,045 13,183 175,436 1,690,315 76,371 443,740 . .
         Q3  p 2,433,247 13,601 183,243 1,712,408 79,898 444,096 . .
Central government
2015 1,372,199 14,303 49,512 1,138,862 45,256 124,265 1,062 13,667
2016 1,365,933 15,845 55,208 1,123,853 50,004 121,022 556 8,5672017 1,350,298 14,651 36,297 1,131,896 47,761 119,693 1,131 10,6182018 1,323,058 14,833 42,246 1,107,140 42,057 116,782 933 9,975
2019         Q1 1,324,528 15,663 50,032 1,102,604 39,185 117,044 809 11,583
         Q2 1,320,388 12,868 42,752 1,109,057 38,950 116,761 835 13,862         Q3 1,328,106 17,586 48,934 1,105,439 39,067 117,080 704 13,849         Q4 1,299,872 14,595 38,480 1,101,866 28,617 116,314 605 10,301
2020         Q1  
p 1,327,729 11,590 56,680 1,103,935 38,714 116,809 605 8,174
         Q2  p 1,473,936 13,333 109,221 1,139,513 95,489 116,381 585 7,136
         Q3  p 1,536,918 12,134 166,564 1,178,691 62,933 116,596 605 11,878
         Q4  p 1,513,204 14,768 154,498 1,180,688 46,811 116,439 609 14,741
2021         Q1  p 1,538,857 12,482 167,484 1,212,500 29,837 116,553 632 23,153
         Q2  p 1,589,176 13,183 165,373 1,259,211 35,006 116,404 631 29,675
         Q3  p 1,617,179 13,601 170,961 1,280,591 35,981 116,045 677 31,613
State government
2015 659,521 − 16,169 362,376 23,349 257,627 15,867 2,348
2016 642,291 − 14,515 361,996 20,482 245,298 11,273 1,6942017 614,926 − 12,543 354,688 19,628 228,067 14,038 2,0462018 600,776 − 10,332 351,994 18,864 219,587 14,035 1,891
2019         Q1 612,478 − 14,190 361,293 19,374 217,621 15,229 2,004
         Q2 610,700 − 13,508 357,571 24,784 214,838 17,631 1,887         Q3 620,694 − 13,671 363,723 29,765 213,535 17,755 1,957         Q4 609,828 − 10,703 360,495 25,768 212,862 14,934 1,826
2020         Q1  
p 623,096 − 14,234 372,021 28,582 208,260 12,346 1,783
         Q2  p 645,075 − 13,006 398,404 28,298 205,368 11,168 2,085
         Q3  p 655,581 − 13,882 408,310 29,662 203,728 11,864 2,090
         Q4  p 660,572 − 8,904 417,307 30,371 203,990 12,143 1,411
2021         Q1  p 665,624 − 13,305 430,103 23,404 198,812 11,219 2,018
         Q2  p 669,605 − 10,064 436,434 25,197 197,910 12,834 2,073
         Q3  p 674,763 − 12,284 437,437 26,603 198,439 11,752 2,146
Local government
2015 164,036 − − 2,047 27,474 134,515 2,143 463
2016 166,931 − − 2,404 27,002 137,524 1,819 4312017 163,501 − − 3,082 24,572 135,848 1,881 4662018 155,884 − 1 3,046 20,425 132,412 1,884 497
2019         Q1 154,169 − 1 2,960 18,857 132,351 2,139 498
         Q2 152,796 − − 2,961 18,814 131,021 2,016 525         Q3 152,271 − − 3,016 18,574 130,681 2,065 555         Q4 153,673 − − 2,996 19,079 131,598 1,856 532
2020         Q1  
p 153,582 − − 3,128 19,734 130,720 1,825 508
         Q2  p 153,716 − − 3,094 19,718 130,903 2,085 350
         Q3  p 154,845 − − 2,961 20,596 131,288 2,107 339
         Q4  p 154,203 − − 3,366 18,137 132,700 1,406 330
2021         Q1  p 154,202 − − 3,121 17,357 133,723 2,020 345
         Q2  p 155,485 − − 3,121 18,400 133,964 2,090 348
         Q3  p 155,508 − − 3,000 18,362 134,146 2,151 344
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
February 2022
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2015 1,502 − − − 537 965 91 2,685
2016 1,232 − − − 562 670 89 3,0442017 807 − − − 262 545 15 3,9342018 690 − − − 388 302 16 4,506
2019         Q1 723 − − − 453 270 16 4,110
         Q2 742 − − − 557 185 16 4,224         Q3 594 − − − 391 203 16 4,179         Q4 711 − − − 375 336 16 4,753
2020         Q1  
p 775 − − − 287 488 16 4,328
         Q2  p 980 − − − 581 399 16 4,284
         Q3  p 4,602 − − − 4,210 392 3,956 4,226
         Q4  p 7,439 − − − 7,128 311 6,931 4,606
2021         Q1  p 16,179 − − − 15,985 194 15,853 4,209
         Q2  p 21,194 − − − 20,995 199 20,860 4,318
         Q3  p 24,248 − − − 24,053 195 23,872 4,348
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3 
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 day bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 987,909 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 63,650
2008 1,019,905 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 78,6852009 1,086,173 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 63,121
2010 1,337,160 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 242,251
2011 1,346,869 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 215,1092012 1,390,377 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 203,4672013 1,392,745 10,592 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 190,1272014 1,398,475 12,150 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 180,123
2015 1,372,199 14,303 1,070 1,188,375 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,521
2016 1,365,933 15,845 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,0262017 1,350,298 14,651 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,4552018 1,323,058 14,833 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,8392019 1,299,872 14,595 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,931
2020 
p 1,513,204 14,768 . 1,335,186 808,300 183,046 58,279 − 3,692 98,543 113,141 . 163,250
2019         Q1 1,324,528 15,663 902 1,152,636 709,008 178,900 66,531 − 4,191 89,782 18,288 31 156,229
         Q2 1,320,388 12,868 852 1,151,809 720,904 173,313 68,110 − 5,691 91,024 15,042 19 155,711         Q3 1,328,106 17,586 822 1,154,373 711,482 183,268 69,088 − 5,639 90,416 18,100 − 156,147         Q4 1,299,872 14,595 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,931
2020         Q1  
p 1,327,729 11,590 . 1,160,616 721,343 182,095 71,028 − 5,310 91,084 23,572 . 155,524
         Q2  p 1,473,936 13,333 . 1,248,734 774,587 178,329 56,061 − 3,752 95,622 79,987 . 211,869
         Q3  p 1,536,918 12,134 . 1,345,255 796,338 191,388 57,144 − 3,737 99,276 127,478 . 179,529
         Q4  p 1,513,204 14,768 . 1,335,186 808,300 183,046 58,279 − 3,692 98,543 113,141 . 163,250
2021         Q1  p 1,538,857 12,482 . 1,379,984 821,254 194,571 60,687 − 3,857 103,910 134,800 . 146,390
         Q2  p 1,589,176 13,183 . 1,424,584 873,345 189,048 62,569 − 5,056 104,997 139,451 . 151,410
         Q3  p 1,617,179 13,601 . 1,451,552 884,358 203,353 63,851 − 5,456 105,398 146,533 . 152,026
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by the
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
off-budget entities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2020 2021
2019 2020 2021 2019 2020 2021 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Item Index 2015=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 108.0 98.0 101.7 –1.6 –9.3 3.8 –5.1 –21.3 –9.5 –1.4 –2.1 19.9 1.9
Construction 104.2 108.2 107.7 0.4 3.8 –0.4 6.0 1.9 –1.8 9.0 –4.5 3.1 3.5
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 109.1 103.5 106.6 3.3 –5.2 3.0 0.3 –14.9 –2.7 –2.9 –7.7 12.4 2.8
Information and communication 120.7 119.5 123.5 3.8 –1.0 3.3 0.6 –4.4 –1.1 0.5 0.4 6.6 2.6
Financial and insurance activities 95.3 95.8 95.4 1.3 0.5 –0.4 0.4 0.8 1.3 –0.4 –0.8 –0.5 0.9
Real estate activities 102.7 102.3 103.3 0.9 –0.4 1.0 0.0 –1.6 0.2 –0.4 –0.0 1.8 0.3
Business services  1 110.7 102.5 108.1 0.1 –7.4 5.4 –1.4 –13.4 –8.2 –6.9 –6.7 9.8 6.1
Public services, education and health 107.0 103.5 106.9 1.8 –3.2 3.2 –0.5 –8.9 0.0 –3.8 –3.2 10.3 2.9
Other services 103.3 92.5 93.1 1.9 –10.5 0.6 –2.7 –19.7 –3.9 –16.0 –10.5 8.1 1.8
Gross value added 107.3 102.1 105.0 1.0 –4.9 2.9 –1.3 –11.9 –3.9 –2.4 –3.8 10.5 2.6
Gross domestic product  2 107.2 102.3 105.1 1.1 –4.6 2.7 –1.5 –11.3 –3.6 –1.9 –3.2 10.4 2.5
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 107.0 100.8 100.8 1.6 –5.9 0.0 –1.1 –13.2 –3.4 –5.7 –9.2 6.5 1.6
Government consumption 110.0 113.9 117.7 3.0 3.5 3.4 2.5 3.5 4.0 4.2 2.4 6.0 2.2
Machinery and equipment 113.1 100.5 103.7 1.0 –11.2 3.2 –9.4 –23.6 –9.5 –2.9 0.6 20.7 –1.9
Premises 108.7 111.4 112.0 1.1 2.5 0.5 5.4 0.7 –0.6 5.1 –1.8 4.7 2.0
Other investment  4 119.9 121.1 121.9 5.5 1.0 0.7 3.8 –1.3 0.3 1.3 –2.1 2.6 0.8
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . –0.1 –0.9 0.7 –0.3 –0.2 –1.9 –1.3 0.3 0.4 2.0
Domestic demand 109.5 105.2 107.2 1.8 –4.0 1.9 –0.3 –8.5 –3.7 –3.3 –4.4 7.4 3.7
Net exports  6 . . . –0.7 –0.8 0.9 –1.2 –3.3 –0.1 1.2 0.9 3.3 –0.9
     Exports 111.2 100.8 110.3 1.1 –9.3 9.4 –3.1 –22.1 –9.1 –3.1 –0.5 26.4 5.5
     Imports 117.5 107.4 116.6 2.9 –8.6 8.6 –0.6 –17.3 –10.1 –6.4 –2.9 20.1 8.9
Gross domestic product  2 107.2 102.3 105.1 1.1 –4.6 2.7 –1.5 –11.3 –3.6 –1.9 –3.2 10.4 2.5
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,802.9 1,708.0 1,760.6 2.9 –5.3 3.1 0.5 –12.1 –3.7 –5.6 –7.5 8.3 5.5
Government consumption 705.2 754.6 804.3 5.2 7.0 6.6 5.4 7.6 7.3 7.7 6.6 7.1 7.1
Machinery and equipment 241.1 216.9 227.7 2.4 –10.0 5.0 –8.0 –22.5 –8.3 –1.9 2.0 22.5 –0.1
Premises 364.1 380.1 413.8 5.4 4.4 8.9 9.0 3.7 0.0 5.7 0.0 9.8 14.3
Other investment  4 137.0 138.9 141.5 6.9 1.4 1.8 4.3 –1.0 0.6 1.7 –1.0 3.8 2.0
Changes in inventories  5 26.8 –23.7 11.8 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,277.1 3,174.8 3,359.6 3.7 –3.1 5.8 1.6 –7.7 –3.4 –3.0 –2.8 9.8 9.2
Net exports 196.2 192.8 204.3 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,619.4 1,462.1 1,685.4 1.7 –9.7 15.3 –2.8 –22.5 –9.9 –3.8 0.5 31.6 13.1
     Imports 1,423.2 1,269.3 1,481.2 2.7 –10.8 16.7 –1.6 –21.0 –12.5 –8.1 –2.3 29.4 19.5
Gross domestic product  2 3,473.4 3,367.6 3,563.9 3.1 –3.0 5.8 0.8 –9.2 –2.7 –1.3 –1.5 11.5 7.1
 IV. Prices (2015=100)
Private consumption 105.1 105.8 109.0 1.3 0.6 3.0 1.6 1.3 –0.3 0.1 1.9 1.7 3.8
Gross domestic product 107.0 108.8 112.1 2.1 1.6 3.1 2.4 2.4 1.0 0.6 1.8 1.0 4.5
Terms of trade 100.8 102.9 100.8 0.7 2.0 –2.0 1.3 4.2 1.8 1.2 0.5 –3.4 –2.3
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,855.5 1,852.1 1,915.2 4.6 –0.2 3.4 2.9 –3.2 –0.7 0.4 –0.4 5.4 4.4
Entrepreneurial and property income 752.7 676.1 780.2 –1.5 –10.2 15.4 –5.6 –27.2 –7.4 –2.2 1.9 41.5 12.8
National income 2,608.2 2,528.2 2,695.4 2.8 –3.1 6.6 0.1 –9.8 –2.8 –0.3 0.3 13.3 6.8
Memo item: Gross national income 3,586.0 3,461.3 3,669.8 3.2 –3.5 6.0 0.3 –9.2 –3.4 –1.7 –1.3 11.5 7.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2021. Initial annual
results for 2021: figures computed in January 2022.  1 Professional, scientific, technical,
administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added plus taxes on prod-
ucts (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit institutions servinghouseholds.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware and entertain-
ment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net increase in valu-
ables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy TotalInter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2015 = 100
% of total  1   100      14,04      6,37      79,59      29,45      36,98 2.27      10,89      10,31      9,95      12,73      14,16
Period
2018 2 105.8 2 109.1 97.4 106.0 105.5 106.0 106.2 106.9 107.3 108.9 106.5 103.5
2019 102.5 112.8 90.4 101.6 101.8 101.4 106.2 101.0 102.8 106.5 103.4 92.0
2020 94.1 116.1 84.4 91.0 94.9 85.7 97.6 97.2 90.5 98.5 89.5 69.3
x 2021 96.9 113.9 86.8 94.7 102.1 87.0 103.8 99.0 98.4 108.0 95.6 65.3
2020 Q4 101.8 130.7 91.8 97.5 98.3 95.9 106.5 99.0 95.4 105.3 98.5 81.4
2021 Q1 95.0 94.7 92.0 95.2 103.6 88.1 100.7 96.1 99.4 107.0 91.3 75.4
Q2 97.7 118.2 81.5 95.3 104.8 87.1 103.0 96.4 101.1 108.2 95.3 66.7
r Q3 95.8 119.4 80.5 92.8 101.9 82.5 102.5 101.3 97.5 108.8 94.6 55.2
x Q4 99.3 123.4 93.2 95.5 98.2 90.5 109.1 102.1 95.6 107.9 101.2 63.9
2020 Dec. 97.6 137.0 92.2 91.1 87.9 92.9 96.5 92.5 84.2 100.3 106.5 66.2
2021 Jan. 88.6 76.3 97.5 90.0 100.2 80.9 95.6 92.4 94.1 100.4 82.1 71.0
Feb. 90.9 88.9 86.5 91.6 99.3 85.6 99.2 89.8 96.6 104.2 88.2 74.1
Mar. 105.4 119.0 92.1 104.1 111.2 97.7 107.3 106.2 107.6 116.5 103.6 81.0
Apr. 97.4 116.1 86.5 95.0 104.2 88.1 101.9 92.0 100.9 106.9 94.5 71.2
May 96.5 117.6 81.2 94.0 104.7 84.6 100.4 95.8 99.7 106.4 93.0 64.1
June 99.1 120.8 76.9 97.0 105.4 88.5 106.7 101.4 102.7 111.2 98.4 64.7
3,r July 99.0 123.2 77.7 96.4 105.2 87.6 102.9 100.9 101.0 110.0 98.2 64.6
3,r Aug. 89.6 113.1 80.1 86.3 97.9 73.2 93.0 98.1 91.0 105.3 86.4 42.8
r Sep. 98.7 121.8 83.8 95.8 102.6 86.7 111.5 105.0 100.6 111.1 99.3 58.2
x Oct. 100.5 124.3 92.4 96.9 103.9 87.8 113.1 105.5 101.2 109.5 96.4 63.6
x Nov. 103.7 127.7 93.1 100.3 103.9 94.6 114.3 107.1 103.1 111.8 101.6 71.1
x,p Dec. 93.6 118.3 94.2 89.2 86.9 89.0 100.0 93.8 82.6 102.4 105.5 57.0
Annual percentage change
2018 2+ 0.9 2+ 0.4 – 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 – 0.7 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 2.3 – 1.7
2019 – 3.1 + 3.4 – 7.2 – 4.2 – 3.5 – 4.3 ± 0.0 – 5.5 – 4.2 – 2.2 – 2.9 –11.1
2020 – 8.2 + 2.9 – 6.6 –10.4 – 6.8 –15.5 – 8.1 – 3.8 –12.0 – 7.5 –13.4 –24.7
x 2021 + 3.0 – 1.9 + 2.8 + 4.1 + 7.6 + 1.5 + 6.4 + 1.9 + 8.7 + 9.6 + 6.8 – 5.8
2020 Q4 – 1.6 + 5.0 – 2.7 – 3.0 + 1.2 – 6.0 – 2.5 – 3.7 – 1.9 – 0.6 – 9.2 – 4.2
2021 Q1 – 1.7 – 4.7 – 2.3 – 1.1 + 2.3 – 3.3 – 0.9 – 3.8 + 1.3 + 3.5 – 0.1 – 5.9
Q2 +15.9 + 2.0 +11.9 +19.7 +22.4 +22.8 +22.1 + 4.8 +28.2 +22.5 +17.2 +51.1
r Q3 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 2.2 + 2.5 + 7.9 – 2.7 + 4.6 + 3.4 + 8.7 +12.1 + 9.3 –23.0
x Q4 – 2.5 – 5.5 + 1.6 – 2.1 ± 0.0 – 5.6 + 2.4 + 3.2 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 2.7 –21.5
2020 Dec. + 0.8 + 9.3 – 3.8 – 0.8 + 5.6 – 4.9 – 0.9 – 1.3 + 2.3 + 2.1 – 8.5 – 1.2
2021 Jan. – 3.7 – 9.9 – 2.6 – 2.9 + 1.6 – 6.0 – 3.4 – 5.7 – 1.1 + 0.8 – 0.6 –12.2
Feb. – 6.6 – 7.6 – 5.7 – 6.5 – 1.7 –10.2 – 4.3 – 8.1 – 2.1 + 1.5 – 3.3 –19.6
Mar. + 4.9 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 5.9 + 6.9 + 6.3 + 5.1 + 2.1 + 6.7 + 8.1 + 3.2 +20.5
Apr. +27.5 + 3.2 +18.8 +35.1 +25.7 +61.7 +44.5 + 2.7 +37.8 +27.6 +35.0 +384.4
May +16.8 + 3.8 +13.2 +20.4 +24.6 +21.6 +17.7 + 7.0 +29.0 +22.9 +20.0 +40.6
June + 5.7 – 0.7 + 3.9 + 7.2 +17.2 – 0.1 + 9.8 + 4.8 +19.4 +17.7 + 2.0 –10.3
3,r July + 5.7 + 2.8 + 2.6 + 6.5 +12.8 + 1.9 +11.0 + 3.5 +16.8 +16.5 +13.7 –15.0
3,r Aug. + 1.8 – 0.6 – 0.7 + 2.6 + 7.5 – 2.8 + 1.5 + 4.8 + 6.2 +12.4 + 9.6 –25.3
r Sep. – 0.7 ± 0.0 + 4.9 – 1.2 + 3.8 – 6.8 + 1.8 + 2.1 + 3.8 + 7.8 + 5.0 –28.9
x Oct. – 1.2 – 0.2 + 1.2 – 1.6 + 1.2 – 5.9 + 4.0 + 2.6 + 2.2 + 4.8 + 6.8 –25.6
x Nov. – 2.2 – 2.1 + 1.4 – 2.4 – 0.3 – 6.7 – 0.1 + 5.4 ± 0.0 + 0.6 + 2.8 –23.1
x,p Dec. – 4.1 –13.6 + 2.2 – 2.1 – 1.1 – 4.2 + 3.6 + 1.4 – 1.9 + 2.1 – 0.9 –13.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2015.  2 As of January 2018 weights in structural and civilengineering work corrected by the Federal Statistical Office.  3 Influenced by a change
in holiday dates.  x Provisional; estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal
Statistical Office to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly
Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2018 110.5 + 1.7 111.5 + 1.9 110.0 + 1.4 110.0 + 4.1 118.9 + 2.1 107.1 + 4.8
2019 104.9 – 5.1 103.5 – 7.2 105.4 – 4.2 107.0 – 2.7 123.3 + 3.7 101.6 – 5.1
2020 97.2 – 7.3 97.9 – 5.4 95.6 – 9.3 105.8 – 1.1 124.3 + 0.8 99.6 – 2.0
p 2021 119.3 +22.7 124.6 +27.3 116.4 +21.8 116.4 +10.0 145.4 +17.0 106.7 + 7.1
2020 Dec. 108.6 + 6.3 101.7 + 9.8 113.7 + 4.2 102.7 + 9.6 131.3 + 9.1 93.2 + 9.9
2021 Jan. 110.2 + 1.7 119.6 + 7.7 104.3 – 2.1 111.1 + 1.0 140.1 + 8.4 101.5 – 2.0
Feb. 111.4 + 6.6 116.8 +10.4 108.0 + 5.6 111.2 – 2.8 128.5 + 6.2 105.4 – 6.1
Mar. 129.0 +30.8 133.4 +23.2 127.0 +40.2 123.9 + 8.9 146.9 +19.5 116.3 + 5.1
Apr. 118.2 +84.4 126.2 +64.3 114.1 +116.5 111.4 +21.9 161.7 +84.4 94.8 + 2.5
May 114.3 +60.3 123.0 +60.4 109.0 +68.0 113.5 +19.3 157.0 +41.4 99.1 +10.2
June 125.7 +30.8 127.7 +48.5 126.0 +23.5 114.1 +15.4 151.2 +31.6 101.8 + 8.8
July 127.6 +32.4 128.1 +35.6 127.4 +32.2 127.8 +21.1 150.1 +24.8 120.4 +19.7
Aug. 106.5 +16.6 115.8 +29.0 100.1 +10.6 111.2 + 6.6 132.0 + 6.4 104.3 + 6.6
Sep. 122.1 +17.2 123.2 +21.1 122.6 +17.0 113.6 + 1.8 138.8 – 5.2 105.2 + 5.1
Oct. 117.2 + 7.4 126.7 +17.0 110.8 + 1.4 120.3 + 8.0 143.2 – 1.2 112.8 +12.5
Nov. 125.4 +10.3 132.5 +16.2 121.2 + 6.4 123.2 +11.8 149.9 + 8.5 114.4 +13.3
p Dec. 123.5 +13.7 121.6 +19.6 125.8 +10.6 115.0 +12.0 145.5 +10.8 104.9 +12.6
From the domestic market
2018 107.2 + 0.2 108.6 + 1.4 106.6 – 1.1 102.9 + 1.3 114.7 + 5.5 98.9 – 0.4
2019 101.2 – 5.6 99.1 – 8.7 102.9 – 3.5 101.2 – 1.7 116.2 + 1.3 96.1 – 2.8
2020 94.9 – 6.2 94.1 – 5.0 95.1 – 7.6 98.0 – 3.2 105.5 – 9.2 95.4 – 0.7
p 2021 115.0 +21.2 119.4 +26.9 112.5 +18.3 106.4 + 8.6 114.3 + 8.3 103.7 + 8.7
2020 Dec. 98.2 + 4.8 95.0 +12.8 102.1 – 0.3 91.0 + 1.9 104.1 – 3.0 86.5 + 4.0
2021 Jan. 102.9 + 1.5 112.6 + 6.8 95.4 – 2.7 98.1 – 3.1 111.0 + 6.3 93.7 – 6.4
Feb. 107.8 + 6.2 111.9 +12.1 105.3 + 2.9 101.2 – 3.9 108.4 + 5.7 98.7 – 7.1
Mar. 125.6 +30.0 128.9 +25.6 125.2 +39.7 109.8 + 0.9 130.5 +25.8 102.8 – 7.0
Apr. 110.9 +69.1 117.1 +59.3 107.0 +88.7 101.7 +26.8 126.9 +93.4 93.2 + 9.5
May 112.5 +50.6 118.5 +58.4 109.1 +50.3 100.9 +14.5 122.0 +22.2 93.8 +11.4
June 126.3 +21.1 125.6 +54.5 130.6 + 3.7 102.0 +11.8 118.5 +18.0 96.4 + 9.4
July 126.1 +32.5 125.8 +34.4 127.1 +32.4 121.8 +22.9 115.4 +10.4 124.0 +27.4
Aug. 105.0 +18.6 111.3 +26.0 99.3 +14.1 106.6 + 6.6 111.0 – 0.3 105.1 + 9.3
Sep. 109.5 +10.1 117.5 +23.2 103.6 + 0.9 102.7 + 1.0 105.6 –15.8 101.7 + 8.5
Oct. 115.1 +10.1 124.2 +16.3 108.0 + 5.3 110.2 + 5.6 105.8 –11.5 111.7 +12.5
Nov. 118.7 + 8.7 126.3 +11.5 112.9 + 6.2 113.6 + 8.6 114.6 – 7.8 113.3 +15.7
p Dec. 119.3 +21.5 113.1 +19.1 126.2 +23.6 107.9 +18.6 101.6 – 2.4 110.0 +27.2
From abroad
2018 113.0 + 2.9 114.6 + 2.4 112.0 + 2.8 115.5 + 6.1 122.2 – 0.5 113.4 + 8.5
2019 107.6 – 4.8 108.3 – 5.5 106.9 – 4.6 111.5 – 3.5 129.1 + 5.6 105.9 – 6.6
2020 98.9 – 8.1 101.9 – 5.9 95.9 –10.3 111.8 + 0.3 139.5 + 8.1 102.9 – 2.8
p 2021 122.5 +23.9 130.1 +27.7 118.7 +23.8 124.1 +11.0 170.5 +22.2 109.1 + 6.0
2020 Dec. 116.5 + 7.3 108.9 + 7.1 120.7 + 6.6 111.8 +15.1 153.2 +16.9 98.4 +14.3
2021 Jan. 115.7 + 1.8 127.2 + 8.5 109.6 – 1.8 121.1 + 3.7 163.5 + 9.5 107.5 + 1.1
Feb. 114.1 + 6.9 122.1 + 8.7 109.7 + 7.2 118.9 – 2.1 144.7 + 6.6 110.6 – 5.3
Mar. 131.6 +31.5 138.2 +20.7 128.1 +40.5 134.8 +14.6 160.1 +15.7 126.6 +14.2
Apr. 123.7 +96.7 136.1 +69.5 118.4 +135.4 118.9 +18.9 189.7 +79.8 96.1 – 2.1
May 115.7 +68.2 127.9 +62.5 109.0 +80.8 123.2 +22.5 185.2 +54.2 103.2 + 9.4
June 125.3 +39.5 130.0 +42.9 123.3 +40.8 123.5 +17.8 177.6 +40.3 106.0 + 8.4
July 128.8 +32.4 130.6 +36.9 127.6 +32.0 132.4 +19.9 178.1 +33.9 117.7 +14.2
Aug. 107.6 +15.2 120.6 +31.8 100.6 + 8.6 114.8 + 6.6 148.9 +10.8 103.7 + 4.6
Sep. 131.7 +22.2 129.3 +19.1 134.0 +26.3 122.0 + 2.3 165.5 + 1.3 107.9 + 2.8
Oct. 118.8 + 5.5 129.5 +17.7 112.5 – 0.8 128.2 + 9.8 173.3 + 4.8 113.6 +12.4
Nov. 130.4 +11.4 139.3 +21.3 126.2 + 6.5 130.6 +14.1 178.3 +19.3 115.2 +11.5
p Dec. 126.7 + 8.8 130.7 +20.0 125.6 + 4.1 120.5 + 7.8 180.9 +18.1 101.0 + 2.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2017 122.4 +7.0 123.1 +7.0 123.1 +5.3 123.4 +7.4 121.9 +12.0 121.6 +6.9 119.8 +7.3 125.0 +7.8
2018 134.7 +10.0 131.1 +6.5 136.6 +11.0 127.9 +3.6 125.2 +2.7 138.8 +14.1 135.6 +13.2 132.4 +5.9
2019 146.0 +8.4 145.0 +10.6 150.1 +9.9 142.2 +11.2 138.9 +10.9 147.1 +6.0 147.9 +9.1 141.2 +6.6
2020 145.7 –0.2 144.3 –0.5 160.9 +7.2 130.5 –8.2 141.5 +1.9 147.3 +0.1 139.7 –5.5 143.4 +1.6
2020 Nov. 139.6 –3.9 146.9 –5.0 167.7 +12.0 132.2 –20.6 133.4 +4.9 131.0 –2.5 143.8 –14.2 117.6 +0.4
Dec. 150.5 +1.6 147.8 –0.8 191.9 +7.7 117.9 –10.1 113.7 –4.6 153.7 +4.4 136.6 –11.4 141.3 +15.0
2021 Jan. 134.0 +3.6 140.5 +4.8 147.3 +7.2 146.0 +8.7 97.7 –20.4 126.5 +2.0 150.7 +6.8 106.8 –4.0
Feb. 143.2 +6.5 148.8 +4.1 161.1 +8.6 147.2 +4.5 114.1 –14.3 136.7 +9.8 143.4 +3.0 132.1 +9.5
Mar. 157.5 –0.8 156.3 +1.5 173.8 +2.5 141.4 +0.1 154.3 +2.5 159.0 –3.3 150.9 –2.8 155.2 –0.8
Apr. 160.1 +7.0 158.3 +18.0 185.1 +40.7 139.5 +1.6 139.8 +7.5 162.3 –3.2 148.1 +5.5 158.8 –7.2
May 159.2 +14.7 163.5 +31.9 185.1 +26.2 146.8 +42.7 154.3 +20.5 154.2 –1.2 150.8 +24.3 153.0 –0.7
June 164.4 –2.0 164.7 +7.6 176.5 +7.0 160.3 +14.9 142.4 –13.6 164.0 –11.2 166.7 +15.5 154.4 –21.3
July 160.0 +7.3 168.5 +11.0 179.3 +13.6 163.7 +19.3 150.6 –19.0 150.2 +2.9 158.6 +15.9 150.0 –4.9
Aug. 158.9 +16.2 162.4 +19.9 167.0 +4.6 163.3 +43.2 144.0 +6.3 154.8 +11.9 158.5 +21.8 154.4 +18.3
Sep. 180.8 +19.3 188.6 +20.1 190.7 +10.0 193.1 +36.9 165.2 +1.9 171.7 +18.3 192.8 +31.9 161.0 +11.5
Oct. 158.8 +11.5 169.0 +12.1 169.5 –6.6 171.7 +35.1 157.3 +14.2 146.8 +10.7 171.6 +21.3 137.5 +15.0
Nov. 145.2 +4.0 142.8 –2.8 159.0 –5.2 132.6 +0.3 127.1 –4.7 148.0 +13.0 159.5 +10.9 120.4 +2.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2018 110.7 +2.9 107.5 +1.6 109.6 +3.5 105.6 –2.4 107.1 +0.8 103.0 ±0.0 112.5 +4.5 127.7 +6.0
2019 114.9 +3.8 111.0 +3.3 112.1 +2.3 106.7 +1.0 108.9 +1.7 107.1 +4.0 118.7 +5.5 138.4 +8.4
2020 121.4 +5.7 115.9 +4.4 121.2 +8.1 81.9 –23.2 106.9 –1.8 117.1 +9.3 125.5 +5.7 169.0 +22.1
3 2021 125.1 +3.0 117.0 +0.9 122.6 +1.2 77.9 –4.9 95.3 –10.9 110.0 –6.1 135.0 +7.6 191.1 +13.1
2020 Dec. 138.7 +4.1 132.2 +3.0 140.0 +9.5 69.6 –41.5 135.3 –15.0 119.9 +5.9 143.4 +7.5 219.5 +27.7
3 2021 Jan. 103.9 –3.8 98.8 –5.1 116.3 +12.2 19.4 –78.1 62.7 –45.7 59.6 –38.4 127.8 +3.4 186.5 +34.8
Feb. 105.0 –0.8 99.2 –2.2 114.5 +5.6 22.3 –72.3 63.1 –35.9 70.4 –27.7 128.5 +8.9 178.2 +40.6
Mar. 129.6 +9.1 122.4 +7.8 132.7 +1.5 58.7 +17.9 88.3 +4.4 120.3 +11.7 135.6 –2.6 206.4 +34.0
Apr. 121.3 +9.0 113.8 +7.6 125.0 +0.1 39.1 +32.5 69.4 +26.0 106.8 +5.6 131.4 +14.3 193.3 +11.6
May 125.7 +1.7 117.7 –0.1 127.8 +0.2 62.1 –20.9 74.3 –22.9 113.1 –11.7 128.6 +12.6 199.6 +18.0
June 130.1 +7.3 122.0 +5.3 122.7 +2.9 113.2 +18.4 97.8 –5.0 124.9 +2.2 132.3 +9.8 184.0 +13.2
July 126.5 +2.8 118.4 +0.7 121.2 +1.7 103.7 +5.6 102.2 –6.3 121.2 –3.6 136.2 +9.8 161.3 +3.1
Aug. 123.5 +2.5 115.8 +0.6 115.9 –4.2 100.7 +9.9 101.6 –2.6 116.7 –0.4 132.8 +10.7 168.8 +8.6
Sep. 121.5 +1.7 113.2 –0.5 113.2 –0.5 100.4 –0.4 100.6 –3.7 112.8 –4.4 131.8 +6.8 171.5 +6.5
Oct. 130.8 +1.2 121.1 –1.5 120.3 –1.7 113.5 +3.8 108.9 –10.1 124.0 –4.7 143.3 +10.1 192.3 +5.3
Nov. 138.5 +1.2 128.3 –1.8 122.1 –1.1 104.6 +15.6 132.7 –14.4 127.8 –9.2 143.5 +6.7 232.5 +1.7
Dec. 144.3 +4.0 133.2 +0.8 138.9 –0.8 97.6 +40.2 141.9 +4.9 122.5 +2.2 148.3 +3.4 219.4 –0.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2021 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2017 44,251 +1.4 32,234 +2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 114 24 2,533 7 855 5.7 731
2018 44,858 +1.4 32,964 +2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2019 45,268 +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 82,267 827 8 5.0 774
2020 44,898 –0.8 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2021 944,920 9 +0.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,613 999 5.7 706
2018 Q4 45,245 +1.2 33,452 +2.1 9,498 22,890 819 4,627 88 35 2,200 755 4.9 804
2019 Q1 44,906 +1.2 33,214 +2.0 9,419 22,803 761 4,581 303 34 2,360 892 5.2 780
Q2 45,230 +1.0 33,388 +1.8 9,455 22,932 750 4,615 51 43 82,227 778 8 4.9 795
Q3 45,378 +0.8 33,548 +1.5 9,491 23,049 753 4,598 66 58 2,276 827 5.0 794
Q4 45,559 +0.7 33,924 +1.4 9,551 23,388 738 4,522 161 105 2,204 811 4.8 729
2020 Q1 45,122 +0.5 33,642 +1.3 9,439 23,284 686 4,458 1,219 949 2,385 960 5.2 683
Q2 44,712 –1.1 33,415 +0.1 9,387 23,137 640 4,235 5,399 5,388 2,770 1,154 6.0 593
Q3 44,794 –1.3 33,424 –0.4 9,359 23,171 640 4,273 2,705 2,691 2,904 1,266 6.3 583
Q4 44,965 –1.3 33,836 –0.3 9,395 23,518 676 4,194 2,433 2,361 2,722 1,167 5.9 595
2021 Q1 r44,451 r –1.5 33,568 –0.2 9,294 23,376 665 4,051 3,473 3,157 2,878 1,248 6.3 586
Q2 r44,742 r +0.1 33,718 +0.9 9,322 23,446 697 4,066 2,164 2,143 2,691 1,024 10 5.9 658
Q3 r45,088 r +0.7 1133,930 11+1.5 119,347 1123,607 11 720 114,167 ... 11 896 2,545 920 5.5 774
Q4 945,399 9 +1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,341 802 5.1 804
2018 Sep. 45,164 +1.2 33,422 +2.1 9,496 22,827 842 4,619 42 34 2,256 759 5.0 834
Oct. 45,251 +1.3 33,488 +2.2 9,515 22,895 827 4,616 46 37 2,204 742 4.9 824
Nov. 45,314 +1.3 33,513 +2.1 9,513 22,934 822 4,638 51 43 2,186 745 4.8 807
Dec. 45,171 +1.2 33,286 +2.1 9,434 22,854 773 4,637 166 26 2,210 777 4.9 781
2019 Jan. 44,852 +1.2 33,156 +2.0 9,405 22,762 763 4,574 354 42 2,406 919 5.3 758
Feb. 44,894 +1.2 33,199 +2.0 9,416 22,794 758 4,564 310 29 2,373 908 5.3 784
Mar. 44,971 +1.1 33,286 +1.9 9,442 22,855 749 4,574 246 32 2,301 850 5.1 797
Apr. 45,134 +1.1 33,383 +1.8 9,457 22,925 753 4,607 49 40 2,229 795 4.9 796
May 45,259 +1.0 33,433 +1.8 9,462 22,968 749 4,627 53 45 82,236 772 8 4.9 792
June 45,297 +0.9 33,407 +1.6 9,455 22,948 750 4,646 51 43 2,216 766 4.9 798
July 45,312 +0.9 33,360 +1.6 9,450 22,901 757 4,644 55 47 2,275 825 5.0 799
Aug. 45,307 +0.7 33,610 +1.4 9,505 23,101 750 4,568 60 51 2,319 848 5.1 795
Sep. 45,516 +0.8 33,938 +1.5 9,583 23,341 754 4,517 84 75 2,234 808 4.9 787
Oct. 45,592 +0.8 33,966 +1.4 9,567 23,398 748 4,510 111 102 2,204 795 4.8 764
Nov. 45,622 +0.7 33,968 +1.4 9,559 23,423 742 4,532 124 115 2,180 800 4.8 736
Dec. 45,463 +0.6 33,740 +1.4 9,474 23,344 694 4,531 247 97 2,227 838 4.9 687
2020 Jan. 45,140 +0.6 33,608 +1.4 9,432 23,255 689 4,471 382 133 2,426 985 5.3 668
Feb. 45,160 +0.6 33,624 +1.3 9,427 23,278 683 4,461 439 134 2,396 971 5.3 690
Mar. 45,066 +0.2 33,648 +1.1 9,440 23,290 675 4,350 2,834 2,580 2,335 925 5.1 691
Apr. 44,798 –0.7 33,430 +0.1 9,396 23,141 643 4,194 6,007 5,995 2,644 1,093 5.8 626
May 44,662 –1.3 33,328 –0.3 9,367 23,083 624 4,206 5,726 5,715 2,813 1,172 6.1 584
June 44,676 –1.4 33,323 –0.3 9,355 23,084 629 4,260 4,464 4,452 2,853 1,197 6.2 570
July 44,687 –1.4 33,233 –0.4 9,322 23,024 635 4,302 3,319 3,306 2,910 1,258 6.3 573
Aug. 44,722 –1.3 33,482 –0.4 9,367 23,218 642 4,266 2,551 2,537 2,955 1,302 6.4 584
Sep. 44,972 –1.2 33,792 –0.4 9,421 23,454 656 4,240 2,244 2,229 2,847 1,238 6.2 591
Oct. 45,054 –1.2 33,862 –0.3 9,410 23,530 671 4,229 2,037 2,021 2,760 1,183 6.0 602
Nov. 45,002 –1.4 33,899 –0.2 9,400 23,559 696 4,166 2,405 2,386 2,699 1,152 5.9 601
Dec. 44,838 –1.4 33,700 –0.1 9,327 23,478 666 4,134 2,856 2,676 2,707 1,166 5.9 581
2021 Jan. r44,430 r –1.6 33,515 –0.3 9,282 23,347 657 4,045 3,638 3,294 2,901 1,298 6.3 566
Feb. r44,423 r –1.6 33,521 –0.3 9,281 23,343 662 4,026 3,766 3,358 2,904 1,270 6.3 583
Mar. r44,501 r –1.3 33,636 –0.0 9,309 23,397 685 4,032 3,016 2,818 2,827 1,177 6.2 609
Apr. r44,608 r –0.4 33,689 +0.8 9,324 23,427 687 4,039 2,583 2,560 2,771 1,091 6.0 629
May r44,726 r +0.1 33,747 +1.3 9,326 23,461 703 4,067 2,342 2,320 2,687 1,020 10 5.9 654
June r44,892 r +0.5 33,802 +1.4 9,324 23,504 716 4,151 1,568 1,548 2,614 961 5.7 693
July r44,956 r +0.6 33,731 +1.5 9,304 23,458 715 4,194 1,088 1,068 2,590 956 5.6 744
Aug. r45,022 r +0.7 1133,995 11+1.5 119,358 1123,659 11 724 114,165 ... 11 836 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. r45,285 r +0.7 1134,325 11+1.6 119,433 1123,903 11 728 114,135 ... 11 784 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. r45,399 r +0.8 1134,372 11+1.5 119,426 1123,965 11 726 114,141 ... 11 702 2,377 814 5.2 809
Nov. r45,454 r +1.0 1134,451 11+1.6 119,424 1124,039 11 741 114,149 ... 11 574 2,317 789 5.1 808
Dec. 945,344 9 +1.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,330 803 5.1 794
2022 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,462 903 5.4 792
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 From January 2017 persons receiving additional
income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at the same
time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book of the Social SecurityCode (SGB III).  8 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed persons in the
legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).  9 Initial pre-
liminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office.  10 From May 2021, calculated on the
basis of new labour force figures.  11 Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Em-
ployment Agency. In 2019 and 2020, the estimated values for Germany deviated from
the final data by a maximum of 0.1% for employees subject to social contributions, by
a maximum of 0.9% for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by
a maximum of 55.3% for cyclically induced short-time work.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which: Indices of
foreign trade pricesHWWI
Index of World Market
Prices of Raw Materials  4
of which:
Total Food  1,2Non-
energy
industrial
goods  1Energy  1Services  1Actual
rents
for
housingMemo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  3Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  3Exports Imports Energy  5Other raw
materials  6
Period 2015 = 100 2020 = 100
Index level
2018 104.0 106.7 103.0 102.3 104.2 104.6 103.8 110.2 103.7 109.0 101.9 102.7 174.1 99.9
2019 105.5 108.4 104.2 103.7 105.7 106.1 105.3 115.3 104.8 111.5 102.4 101.7 150.2 98.7
2020 7 105.8 7110.9 7104.1 799.0 7106.9 107.6 7 105.8 7117.0 103.8 108.0 101.7 97.3 100.0 100.0
2021 7 109.2 7114.1 7106.7 7109.0 7109.0 109.0 7 109.1 7127.0 114.7 8117.5 107.4 110.4 220.7 137.6
2020 Mar. 105.8 111.0 105.2 101.6 105.5 107.3 105.7 104.1 113.7 101.9 96.9 83.9 95.8
Apr. 106.2 112.2 105.4 98.6 106.7 107.4 106.1 103.4 112.7 101.5 95.2 67.5 92.6
May 106.2 112.5 105.4 97.4 106.7 107.5 106.0 118.3 103.0 109.1 101.3 95.5 74.0 92.9
June 106.9 112.7 104.8 98.7 108.1 107.6 106.6 103.0 110.0 101.3 96.1 85.9 94.1
July 7 106.4 7110.2 7102.5 798.0 7109.4 107.7 7 106.1 103.2 107.5 101.3 96.4 90.6 95.8
Aug. 7 106.2 7110.1 7102.6 797.6 7109.0 107.8 7 106.0 7115.7 103.2 104.8 101.2 96.5 95.8 98.4
Sep. 7 105.8 7109.9 7103.6 796.9 7108.0 107.8 7 105.8 103.6 103.5 101.3 96.8 97.1 103.5
Oct. 7 105.8 7110.2 7103.9 797.0 7107.6 108.0 7 105.9 103.7 103.8 101.4 97.1 103.3 104.9
Nov. 7 104.7 7110.3 7104.0 796.0 7105.5 108.1 7 105.0 7116.0 103.9 103.9 101.8 97.6 109.5 107.1
Dec. 7 105.3 7109.9 7103.4 797.4 7106.9 108.2 7 105.5 104.7 104.2 101.9 98.2 121.8 112.3
2021 Jan. 106.8 112.3 105.1 102.6 106.9 108.4 106.3 106.2 8106.7 102.8 100.1 141.6 120.6
Feb. 107.4 113.0 105.5 104.1 107.3 108.5 107.0 121.2 106.9 108.9 103.3 101.8 146.0 124.7
Mar. 107.9 113.1 105.7 106.2 107.6 108.6 107.5 107.9 114.0 104.1 103.6 150.3 130.4
Apr. 108.4 114.5 105.8 106.1 108.3 108.7 108.2 108.8 115.9 104.9 105.0 154.1 134.3
May 108.7 114.2 106.3 106.7 108.7 108.9 108.7 125.1 110.4 118.5 105.6 106.8 168.3 144.9
June 109.1 114.1 106.5 107.6 109.1 108.9 109.1 111.8 117.7 106.4 108.5 183.0 142.3
July 7 109.7 7114.4 7106.4 7109.0 7110.2 109.1 7 110.1 113.9 117.3 107.7 110.9 204.8 141.9
Aug. 7 109.8 7114.4 7106.5 7109.4 7110.3 109.2 7 110.1 7129.4 115.6 118.8 108.5 112.4 217.6 138.9
Sep. 7 110.1 7114.4 7107.6 7110.1 7109.9 109.3 7 110.1 118.3 117.4 109.5 113.9 256.1 136.3
Oct. 7 110.7 7114.5 7108.0 7114.6 7110.0 109.5 7 110.7 122.8 120.6 111.0 118.2 352.7 143.0
Nov. 7 111.0 7114.9 7108.4 7116.7 7109.5 109.5 7 110.5 7132.2 123.8 125.6 111.9 121.7 304.4 143.0
Dec. 7 111.3 7115.7 7108.6 7115.0 7110.3 109.6 7 111.1 130.0 127.2 113.0 121.8 352.9 148.3
2022 Jan. 112.3 117.2 108.4 123.7 109.8 109.9 111.5 ... ... ... ... 327.8 157.0
Annual percentage change
2018 +1.9 +2.6 +0.8 +4.9 +1.6 +1.6 +1.8 +4.7 +2.6 +0.4 +1.2 +2.6 +25.4 +0.3
2019 +1.4 +1.6 +1.1 +1.4 +1.5 +1.5 +1.4 +4.7 +1.1 +2.3 +0.5 –1.0 –13.7 –1.2
2020 7 +0.4 7+2.3 7–0.1 7–4.5 7+1.2 +1.4 7 +0.5 7+1.4 –1.0 –3.1 –0.7 –4.3 –33.4 +1.3
2021 7 +3.2 7+2.9 7+2.5 7+10.1 7+2.0 +1.3 7 +3.1 7+8.6 +10.5 8+8.8 +5.6 +13.5 +120.7 +37.6
2020 Mar. +1.3 +3.1 +1.3 –0.8 +1.3 +1.5 +1.4 –0.8 +0.4 –0.5 –5.5 –46.8 –3.6
Apr. +0.8 +4.0 +0.8 –5.6 +1.3 +1.5 +0.9 –1.9 –2.5 –1.1 –7.4 –58.1 –6.7
May +0.5 +3.9 +0.8 –8.2 +1.3 +1.5 +0.6 +2.9 –2.2 –5.7 –1.2 –7.0 –52.8 –4.2
June +0.8 +4.0 +0.7 –5.9 +1.4 +1.4 +0.9 –1.8 –4.4 –1.0 –5.1 –37.8 –4.5
July 7 ±0.0 7+1.4 7–0.8 7–6.4 7+1.4 +1.4 7 –0.1 –1.7 –5.9 –1.1 –4.6 –36.1 –5.1
Aug. 7 –0.1 7+1.2 7–0.8 7–6.0 7+1.1 +1.4 7 ±0.0 7–0.1 –1.2 –6.8 –1.1 –4.0 –29.3 +2.3
Sep. 7 –0.4 7+1.0 7–1.1 7–6.6 7+1.0 +1.3 7 –0.2 –1.0 –5.8 –1.1 –4.3 –32.3 +5.9
Oct. 7 –0.5 7+1.5 7–1.0 7–6.6 7+0.7 +1.3 7 –0.2 –0.7 –5.9 –1.0 –3.9 –29.1 +7.0
Nov. 7 –0.7 7+1.2 7–1.1 7–7.4 7+0.6 +1.3 7 –0.3 7–0.3 –0.5 –7.2 –0.6 –3.8 –28.0 +8.4
Dec. 7 –0.7 7+0.6 7–1.6 7–6.0 7+0.8 +1.3 7 –0.3 +0.2 –8.9 –0.6 –3.4 –20.8 +11.1
2021 Jan. +1.6 +2.0 +1.1 –2.2 +2.5 +1.3 +1.0 +0.9 8–5.7 +0.1 –1.2 –2.2 +17.7
Feb. +1.6 +1.6 +1.2 +0.2 +2.0 +1.3 +1.3 +2.9 +1.9 –4.6 +0.7 +1.4 +15.9 +24.6
Mar. +2.0 +1.9 +0.5 +4.5 +2.0 +1.2 +1.7 +3.7 +0.3 +2.2 +6.9 +79.1 +36.1
Apr. +2.1 +2.0 +0.4 +7.6 +1.5 +1.2 +2.0 +5.2 +2.8 +3.3 +10.3 +128.3 +45.0
May +2.4 +1.5 +0.9 +9.5 +1.9 +1.3 +2.5 +5.7 +7.2 +8.6 +4.2 +11.8 +127.4 +56.0
June +2.1 +1.2 +1.6 +9.0 +0.9 +1.2 +2.3 +8.5 +7.0 +5.0 +12.9 +113.0 +51.2
July 7 +3.1 7+3.8 7+3.8 7+11.2 7+0.7 +1.3 7 +3.8 +10.4 +9.1 +6.3 +15.0 +126.0 +48.1
Aug. 7 +3.4 7+3.9 7+3.8 7+12.1 7+1.2 +1.3 7 +3.9 7+11.8 +12.0 +13.4 +7.2 +16.5 +127.1 +41.2
Sep. 7 +4.1 7+4.1 7+3.9 7+13.6 7+1.8 +1.4 7 +4.1 +14.2 +13.4 +8.1 +17.7 +163.7 +31.7
Oct. 7 +4.6 7+3.9 7+3.9 7+18.1 7+2.2 +1.4 7 +4.5 +18.4 +16.2 +9.5 +21.7 +241.4 +36.3
Nov. 7 +6.0 7+4.2 7+4.2 7+21.6 7+3.8 +1.3 7 +5.2 7+14.0 +19.2 +20.9 +9.9 +24.7 +178.0 +33.5
Dec. 7 +5.7 7+5.3 7+5.0 7+18.1 7+3.2 +1.3 7 +5.3 +24.2 +22.1 +10.9 +24.0 +189.7 +32.1
2022 Jan. +5.1 +4.4 +3.1 +20.6 +2.7 +1.4 +4.9 ... ... ... ... +131.5 +30.2
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw Materi-
als: HWWI.  1 The last data point is at times based on the Bundesbank’s own estimates.
2 Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco.  3 Excluding value added tax.  4 For the eu-ro area, in euro.  5 Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas.  6 Food, beverages and tobac-
co as well as industrial raw materials.  7 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value
added tax between July and December 2020.  8 From January 2021 onwards provisional
figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2013 1,186.3 3.2 799.4 3.0 383.9 1.9 1,183.2 2.6 1,690.8 1.3 157.1 – 2.5 9.3
2014 1,234.2 4.0 830.5 3.9 394.0 2.6 1,224.5 3.5 1,734.5 2.6 170.6 8.6 9.8
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.5 4.2 1,273.8 4.0 1,782.3 2.8 179.4 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.2
2017 1,395.4 4.3 932.5 4.0 441.8 3.6 1,374.3 3.9 1,905.2 3.5 202.8 8.0 10.6
2018 1,462.6 4.8 976.3 4.7 454.3 2.8 1,430.6 4.1 1,975.8 3.7 223.7 10.3 11.3
2019 1,524.1 4.2 1,022.0 4.7 474.4 4.4 1,496.4 4.6 2,021.6 2.3 218.7 – 2.2 10.8
2020 1,514.1 – 0.7 1,021.3 – 0.1 518.8 9.4 1,540.1 2.9 2,035.1 0.7 327.1 49.6 16.1
2020 Q2 355.9 – 4.4 234.8 – 3.8 130.4 11.3 365.2 1.1 491.7 – 1.5 97.4 92.3 19.8
Q3 374.1 – 1.2 258.1 – 0.6 132.0 10.2 390.1 2.8 508.1 0.7 66.5 44.4 13.1
Q4 417.9 0.1 282.1 1.1 131.3 10.4 413.3 3.9 514.9 0.7 78.9 60.6 15.3
2021 Q1 362.0 – 1.1 245.1 – 0.5 136.8 9.4 381.8 2.8 517.2 – 0.6 113.9 35.2 22.0
Q2 377.1 6.0 250.8 6.8 134.6 3.2 385.4 5.5 509.9 3.7 83.0 –14.8 16.3
Q3 391.3 4.6 270.1 4.6 131.1 – 0.7 401.1 2.8 521.8 2.7 56.0 –15.8 10.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2021.  * Households in-
cluding non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees'
contributions to the social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension
payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social
benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plusmonetary social benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed
income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit
institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related
taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company
pension funds.  6 Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving
as a percentage of disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change
2014 97.7 3.1 97.8 2.9 97.7 2.8 97.6 2.8 97.2 2.9
2015 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.3 2.3 102.5 2.5
2017 104.5 2.2 104.5 2.2 104.5 2.3 104.7 2.4 105.1 2.6
2018 107.6 3.0 107.5 3.0 107.5 2.8 107.6 2.8 108.5 3.2
2019 110.7 2.9 110.6 2.8 110.1 2.5 110.2 2.4 111.7 3.0
2020 112.9 2.0 112.9 2.1 112.2 1.9 112.3 1.9 111.5 – 0.1
2021 114.7 1.5 114.6 1.5 114.0 1.6 114.1 1.5 . .
2020 Q3 116.7 1.6 116.6 1.6 114.8 1.6 112.6 1.7 110.7 – 0.2
Q4 125.3 2.5 125.2 2.6 124.2 1.7 112.7 1.7 122.8 1.2
2021 Q1 106.0 1.4 106.0 1.4 106.1 1.5 113.4 1.5 107.5 0.1
Q2 107.7 2.3 107.6 2.3 106.7 1.4 113.9 1.5 111.3 5.6
Q3 117.8 1.0 117.7 1.0 116.4 1.4 114.2 1.4 114.8 3.7
Q4 127.3 1.6 127.2 1.5 126.6 1.9 114.7 1.8 . .
2021 June 109.2 4.0 109.2 4.0 106.6 1.4 113.9 1.4 . .
July 139.2 – 0.1 139.2 – 0.1 135.5 1.2 114.1 1.3 . .
Aug. 107.2 1.7 107.2 1.7 106.8 1.5 114.2 1.4 . .
Sep. 107.0 1.7 106.9 1.7 107.0 1.6 114.4 1.6 . .
Oct. 108.8 3.3 108.8 3.3 107.1 1.7 114.6 1.7 . .
Nov. 163.4 1.7 163.4 1.7 163.5 2.2 114.8 1.8 . .
Dec. 109.5 – 0.3 109.4 – 0.4 109.2 1.8 114.8 1.8 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
November 2021.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2017 2,395.6 1,487.8 498.6 602.4 295.9 907.8 230.6 225.0 156.1 756.7 1,638.9 866.3 495.7 772.6 236.1 195.5
3 2018 2,589.0 1,536.7 540.8 610.8 288.5 1,052.3 249.5 234.7 172.6 789.8 1,799.2 925.7 558.7 873.4 257.5 205.0
2019 2,800.6 1,769.7 586.3 737.1 333.4 1,030.9 257.5 237.6 168.4 821.0 1,979.6 1,091.2 676.3 888.4 289.8 207.6
2020 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.5 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.3 857.0 304.4 196.1
2019 H2 2,800.6 1,769.7 586.3 737.1 333.4 1,030.9 257.5 237.6 168.4 821.0 1,979.6 1,091.2 676.3 888.4 289.8 207.6
2020 H1 2,891.4 1,800.9 625.0 734.0 319.7 1,090.5 257.6 216.4 220.7 793.7 2,097.7 1,183.8 754.2 913.9 335.5 179.7
H2 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.5 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.3 857.0 304.4 196.1
p 2021 H1 3,017.6 1,877.0 649.3 745.0 343.7 1,140.6 256.2 273.2 240.8 906.9 2,110.7 1,178.6 751.9 932.1 297.4 206.9
As a percentage of total assets
2017 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.2 12.4 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.5 31.6 68.4 36.2 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
3 2018 100.0 59.4 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.6 9.6 9.1 6.7 30.5 69.5 35.8 21.6 33.7 10.0 7.9
2019 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.2 31.7 10.4 7.4
2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2019 H2 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.2 31.7 10.4 7.4
2020 H1 100.0 62.3 21.6 25.4 11.1 37.7 8.9 7.5 7.6 27.5 72.6 40.9 26.1 31.6 11.6 6.2
H2 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
p 2021 H1 100.0 62.2 21.5 24.7 11.4 37.8 8.5 9.1 8.0 30.1 70.0 39.1 24.9 30.9 9.9 6.9
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2017 1,988.8 1,190.4 351.5 483.6 281.8 798.3 215.7 181.3 128.5 609.5 1,379.3 719.1 397.8 660.2 218.4 150.0
3 2018 2,149.3 1,215.4 388.1 472.9 277.5 933.9 234.5 188.6 139.2 636.7 1,512.6 760.2 442.4 752.3 236.2 152.5
2019 2,302.9 1,396.4 419.6 565.4 319.7 906.5 243.8 188.5 136.8 662.2 1,640.7 887.5 523.8 753.2 257.5 158.0
2020 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.0 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.2 1,628.7 904.7 536.9 724.0 267.3 149.8
2019 H2 2,302.9 1,396.4 419.6 565.4 319.7 906.5 243.8 188.5 136.8 662.2 1,640.7 887.5 523.8 753.2 257.5 158.0
2020 H1 2,304.8 1,351.9 406.4 547.1 303.3 952.9 243.9 171.5 171.3 614.6 1,690.2 912.1 548.4 778.0 294.6 137.0
H2 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.0 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.2 1,628.7 904.7 536.9 724.0 267.3 149.8
p 2021 H1 2,392.8 1,398.3 416.6 551.0 322.5 994.6 240.6 221.9 192.4 703.5 1,689.4 892.3 532.0 797.1 261.3 162.1
As a percentage of total assets
2017 100.0 59.9 17.7 24.3 14.2 40.1 10.9 9.1 6.5 30.7 69.4 36.2 20.0 33.2 11.0 7.5
3 2018 100.0 56.6 18.1 22.0 12.9 43.5 10.9 8.8 6.5 29.6 70.4 35.4 20.6 35.0 11.0 7.1
2019 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.3 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2019 H2 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.3 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
2020 H1 100.0 58.7 17.6 23.7 13.2 41.3 10.6 7.4 7.4 26.7 73.3 39.6 23.8 33.8 12.8 6.0
H2 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
p 2021 H1 100.0 58.4 17.4 23.0 13.5 41.6 10.1 9.3 8.0 29.4 70.6 37.3 22.2 33.3 10.9 6.8
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2017 406.9 297.4 147.1 118.8 14.1 109.5 14.8 43.6 27.6 147.2 259.6 147.3 97.9 112.4 17.6 45.5
3 2018 439.7 321.3 152.7 137.9 11.0 118.3 14.9 46.1 33.3 153.1 286.6 165.5 116.3 121.1 21.3 52.5
2019 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2019 H2 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
2020 H1 586.6 449.0 218.7 186.8 16.3 137.6 13.7 44.9 49.4 179.1 407.6 271.7 205.7 135.9 40.9 42.6
H2 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
p 2021 H1 624.7 478.7 232.6 194.1 21.2 146.1 15.5 51.4 48.4 203.4 421.3 286.4 219.9 135.0 36.1 44.8
As a percentage of total assets
2017 100.0 73.1 36.2 29.2 3.5 26.9 3.7 10.7 6.8 36.2 63.8 36.2 24.1 27.6 4.3 11.2
3 2018 100.0 73.1 34.7 31.4 2.5 26.9 3.4 10.5 7.6 34.8 65.2 37.6 26.5 27.6 4.8 11.9
2019 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2019 H2 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
2020 H1 100.0 76.5 37.3 31.9 2.8 23.5 2.3 7.7 8.4 30.5 69.5 46.3 35.1 23.2 7.0 7.3
H2 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
p 2021 H1 100.0 76.6 37.2 31.1 3.4 23.4 2.5 8.2 7.8 32.6 67.4 45.8 35.2 21.6 5.8 7.2
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.  3 From H1 2018 or 2018 onwards: significant
changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  2 Distribution  2
RevenuesOperating income
before depreciation
and amortisation
(EBITDA  1 )Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartileOperating
income (EBIT)Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4€ billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % % € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % %
Total
2013 1,539.8 – 0.7 187.0 – 2.8 12.1 – 0.3 5.1 10.3 18.5 99.4 5.5 6.5 0.4 1.9 5.9 11.1
2014 1,564.3 1.0 198.7 5.0 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.4 109.3 8.6 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.2 11.1
2015 1,633.9 6.9 195.9 – 1.1 12.0 – 1.0 6.3 10.6 17.8 91.5 – 16.4 5.6 – 1.5 1.8 6.7 11.3
2016 1,624.3 – 0.4 214.4 7.8 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.7 9.0 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,719.3 5.1 243.4 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.0 11.0 18.0 141.9 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.1
6 2018 1,706.8 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,764.6 2.6 233.6 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.2 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.6 5.8 11.8
2020 1,632.8 – 8.8 213.6 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 17.9 52.1 – 41.0 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 4.9 10.5
2016 H2 842.4 1.1 102.9 9.8 12.2 1.0 6.9 11.9 19.0 46.3 21.0 5.5 0.8 3.0 7.5 12.5
2017 H1 843.9 6.7 125.7 14.6 14.9 1.0 5.7 10.1 17.1 78.4 29.6 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.6
H2 878.5 3.5 117.4 14.6 13.4 1.3 6.9 12.0 19.2 63.0 38.2 7.2 1.8 3.2 7.4 12.4
6 2018 H1 848.2 – 0.1 120.8 – 2.1 14.2 – 0.3 5.1 10.6 18.2 72.7 – 5.3 8.6 – 0.5 1.7 6.4 12.5
H2 869.4 1.4 114.4 0.5 13.2 – 0.1 6.3 11.2 18.0 58.0 – 7.6 6.7 – 0.6 2.1 6.8 12.5
2019 H1 861.3 2.7 112.3 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.5 11.8 18.6 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 903.7 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.6 11.8 20.0 52.0 – 11.4 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.5
2020 H1 744.5 – 14.4 78.2 – 34.1 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 8.8
H2 888.4 – 3.3 135.4 17.1 15.2 2.8 7.6 13.2 19.8 44.2 8.7 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.6
p 2021 H1 919.8 20.1 152.4 88.0 16.6 6.0 7.4 12.6 19.5 85.4 . 9.3 8.3 2.3 7.8 12.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2013 1,198.8 – 0.8 142.6 – 2.5 11.9 – 0.2 5.1 10.3 16.0 77.4 – 5.8 6.5 – 0.3 1.6 5.8 10.5
2014 1,220.0 1.0 152.2 5.9 12.5 0.6 5.8 10.1 15.5 85.2 9.8 7.0 0.6 1.7 6.0 10.6
2015 1,309.7 7.0 149.0 – 2.6 11.4 – 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.3 69.1 – 19.7 5.3 – 1.8 2.2 6.6 10.4
2016 1,295.9 – 0.8 161.9 6.3 12.5 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 84.8 4.2 6.5 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,395.9 5.5 187.5 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.5 40.6 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,367.7 1.0 175.7 – 1.5 12.9 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 16.0 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.8 6.9 11.4
2019 1,410.9 2.0 168.1 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.8 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.7 10.1
2020 1,285.2 – 9.4 143.6 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 5.7 10.6 16.5 29.1 – 48.1 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.3 9.8
2016 H2 670.8 0.6 75.4 12.1 11.2 1.1 6.2 11.3 16.7 32.1 34.4 4.8 0.9 2.4 6.3 10.8
2017 H1 695.1 7.3 101.5 18.7 14.6 1.4 6.0 10.1 16.1 66.3 37.3 9.5 2.1 2.3 5.8 10.8
H2 701.4 3.7 86.0 14.2 12.3 1.1 7.0 11.7 16.9 46.2 45.5 6.6 1.9 3.6 7.2 10.8
6 2018 H1 681.9 – 0.1 94.9 – 3.4 13.9 – 0.5 7.0 10.9 16.7 60.0 – 5.9 8.8 – 0.6 2.9 6.8 11.5
H2 695.4 2.1 83.1 0.7 12.0 – 0.2 6.2 11.1 16.2 42.1 – 8.7 6.1 – 0.7 2.0 6.4 11.4
2019 H1 689.9 2.4 83.3 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.9 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.8 6.0 9.5
H2 721.0 1.7 84.8 0.3 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.7 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.1
2020 H1 580.6 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.4 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 14.9 0.2 – 101.7 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.1 7.8
H2 704.6 – 3.0 94.6 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.0 12.1 18.6 28.9 19.7 4.1 1.1 0.3 6.0 10.5
p 2021 H1 731.9 23.8 112.1 128.5 15.3 7.0 8.2 12.6 18.6 67.7 . 9.3 9.4 2.9 7.9 12.1
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2013 341.0 – 0.1 44.4 – 3.5 13.0 – 0.5 5.2 9.3 20.7 21.9 82.2 6.4 2.9 2.4 5.9 11.8
2014 344.2 0.8 46.5 1.8 13.5 0.1 6.0 12.3 22.6 24.1 4.3 7.0 0.2 2.6 6.3 13.7
2015 324.1 6.1 46.9 4.0 14.5 – 0.3 5.9 11.1 22.1 22.3 – 3.8 6.9 – 0.7 1.3 6.7 13.9
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.3 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.5 12.2
2016 H2 171.6 2.9 27.4 4.2 16.0 0.2 7.4 13.3 24.3 14.1 3.0 8.2 0.0 4.0 8.9 17.1
2017 H1 148.8 4.6 24.2 0.4 16.2 – 0.6 5.2 9.8 21.0 12.1 0.3 8.2 – 0.3 1.2 5.6 14.5
H2 177.1 2.5 31.5 15.6 17.8 2.0 6.6 12.5 24.6 16.8 21.6 9.5 1.5 2.9 7.8 17.9
6 2018 H1 166.3 0.2 25.9 2.8 15.6 0.4 3.8 9.5 22.7 12.6 – 1.9 7.6 – 0.2 – 0.9 4.7 15.3
H2 174.0 – 1.3 31.3 – 0.0 18.0 0.2 6.7 11.3 25.6 15.9 – 4.6 9.1 – 0.3 2.2 7.0 17.8
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
H2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.5 13.3
p 2021 H1 187.9 7.7 40.3 25.7 21.4 3.1 6.9 12.6 24.5 17.7 119.8 9.4 4.8 0.9 6.9 13.6
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted re-
turn on sales.  3 Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year fig-ures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  4 Adjusted
for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and in the
reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical Series Seasonally adjusted
business statistics.  5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.  6 From this point on-
wards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous pe-
riods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2021
Item 2018 2019 2020 Q1  Q2 Q3 September October November  p
I.Current Account +340,980 +277,277 +221,591 +74,776 +68,535 +89,465 +32,776 +21,833 +25,950
1.Goods
Receipts 2,332,341 2,393,803 2,192,093 591,485 622,109 623,627 216,602 221,163 236,194
Expenditure  2,046,711 2,083,694 1,851,113 499,991 536,905 553,251 194,749 203,508 218,184
Balance +285,627 +310,107 +340,980 +91,493 +85,204 +70,376 +21,853 +17,655 +18,010
2.Services
Receipts 949,227 1,017,589 865,196 207,785 231,610 261,819 88,916 91,200 90,691
Expenditure  832,048 983,923 858,198 191,740 207,949 226,981 72,874 74,233 73,749
Balance +117,180 +33,665 + 6,994 +16,045 +23,662 +34,838 +16,042 +16,967 +16,942
3.Primary income
Receipts 856,474 859,321 756,045 184,068 201,896 183,003 64,084 54,424 59,169
Expenditure  765,793 772,943 720,532 160,033 208,203 168,846 55,977 52,907 53,944
Balance +90,679 +86,376 +35,513 +24,034 – 6,309 +14,156 + 8,107 + 1,517 + 5,225
4.Secondary income
Receipts 109,968 115,363 117,362 29,059 32,077 38,283 11,367 10,095 10,255
Expenditure  262,477 268,233 279,256 85,856 66,099 68,188 24,592 24,401 24,482
Balance –152,505 –152,870 –161,894 –56,797 –34,022 –29,904 –13,225 –14,306 –14,227
II.Capital account –35,859 –26,273 – 1,735 + 3,153 + 6,813 +17,499 + 5,654 + 4,268 + 1,917
III.Financial account  1 +300,611 +242,451 +242,527 +98,433 +87,762 +81,284 +32,197 +13,142 +42,960
1.Direct investment +117,161 +89,417 –174,919 +108,882 – 8,807 +127,195 +21,239 +22,232 +11,827
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  –302,648 +15,678 –14,851 +101,555 –28,726 +49,001 +24,244 +15,236 +42,527
By non-resident units of
the euro area  –419,811 –73,740 +160,068 – 7,327 –19,919 –78,193 + 3,005 – 6,996 +30,699
2.Portfolio investment +231,034 –90,030 +539,298 +87,816 +169,129 +52,767 +50,036 +20,647 +95,304
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +205,324 +424,728 +673,578 +266,325 +226,834 +117,330 +43,465 +39,903 +54,787
Equity and
investment fund shares +47,214 +57,582 +305,625 +166,878 +114,413 +38,440 + 7,876 + 8,478 – 2,993
Short-term
debt securities  –52,659 + 132 +126,361 +26,607 +13,839 –12,925 + 3,912 + 6,469 +38,087
Long-term
debt securities  +210,768 +367,018 +241,591 +72,841 +98,583 +91,816 +31,677 +24,957 +19,693
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  –25,711 +514,761 +134,281 +178,508 +57,705 +64,564 – 6,571 +19,257 –40,517
Equity and
investment fund shares +88,614 +289,750 +117,658 +95,735 +121,053 +118,716 + 46 +34,092 +21,928
Short-term
debt securities  –60,213 –26,912 +138,223 +84,832 +10,853 + 6,380 +34,233 –16,870 – 1,447
Long-term
debt securities  –54,112 +251,923 –121,600 – 2,056 –74,201 –60,533 –40,850 + 2,035 –60,998
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options +39,650 + 6,666 +14,002 + 5,980 + 1,021 +14,135 + 718 + 4,592 +21,890
4.Other investment –112,487 +230,102 –149,018 –101,154 –80,035 –235,192 –40,626 –37,487 –86,664
Eurosystem –134,168 +144,211 –203,600 +144,271 –63,595 –166,934 –48,810 – 9,620 –54,175
General government – 4,921 + 554 –18,857 –24,917 – 9,142 –37,054 – 4,002 + 754 – 4,044
MFIs  2 +99,940 +186,932 +17,450 –273,474 – 6,094 –40,408 –16,916 –22,958 –18,982
Enterprises and households –73,338 –101,593 +55,986 +52,968 – 1,205 + 9,203 +29,101 – 5,662 – 9,462
5.Reserve assets +25,252 + 6,297 +13,163 – 3,092 + 6,454 +122,379 + 830 + 3,159 + 602
IV.Net errors and omissions – 4,509 – 8,553 +22,672 +20,505 +12,415 –25,679 – 6,233 –12,959 +15,093
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Increase: + / decrease: -.2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Zeit Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2007 + 171,493 + 201,728 – 1,183 – 32,465 + 35,620 – 33,390 – 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 13,273
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 – 3,947 – 29,122 + 24,063 – 34,147 – 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 – 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 – 6,605 – 17,642 + 54,524 – 34,764 – 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 – 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 – 6,209 – 25,255 + 51,306 – 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 – 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 – 9,357 – 29,930 + 69,087 – 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 – 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 – 11,388 – 30,774 + 65,658 – 38,703 – 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 – 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 – 12,523 – 39,321 + 63,284 – 43,413 – 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 210,906 + 219,629 – 14,296 – 25,303 + 57,752 – 41,172 + 2,936 + 240,258 – 2,564 + 26,416
2015 + 260,286 + 248,394 – 15,405 – 18,516 + 69,262 – 38,854 – 48 + 234,392 – 2,213 – 25,845
2016 + 266,689 + 252,409 – 19,921 – 20,987 + 76,199 – 40,931 + 2,142 + 261,123 + 1,686 – 7,708
2017 + 254,936 + 255,077 – 13,613 – 23,994 + 74,629 – 50,776 – 2,936 + 276,709 – 1,269 + 24,710
2018 + 264,156 + 224,584 – 22,682 – 17,410 + 105,694 – 48,713 + 676 + 246,544 + 392 – 18,288
2019 + 258,627 + 216,523 – 31,760 – 20,653 + 111,191 – 48,434 – 526 + 203,799 – 544 – 54,302
2020 + 234,408 + 190,022 – 8,907 + 3,471 + 92,497 – 51,582 – 4,771 + 231,103 – 51 + 1,466
p 2021 + 247,409 + 184,442 – 7,962 + 13,714 + 107,761 – 58,508 – 3,944 + 268,789 + 31,892 + 25,324
2019 Q1 + 70,210 + 56,391 – 4,760 – 1,290 + 31,863 – 16,753 + 900 + 44,999 – 63 – 26,111
Q2 + 57,800 + 52,295 – 7,867 – 2,849 + 14,629 – 6,274 – 374 + 47,570 + 444 – 9,856
Q3 + 62,831 + 57,801 – 7,757 – 12,518 + 29,954 – 12,405 + 265 + 18,301 – 349 – 44,796
Q4 + 67,786 + 50,037 – 11,376 – 3,995 + 34,746 – 13,003 – 1,317 + 92,930 – 576 + 26,460
2020 Q1 + 61,990 + 52,294 – 2,696 – 2,773 + 26,874 – 14,404 – 348 + 37,818 + 133 – 23,824
Q2 + 37,780 + 27,995 – 1,960 + 5,647 + 13,060 – 8,922 + 188 + 28,568 + 243 – 9,400
Q3 + 62,371 + 56,000 – 1,106 – 5,402 + 22,142 – 10,369 – 1,206 + 68,302 – 1,276 + 7,136
Q4 + 72,266 + 53,732 – 3,145 + 5,999 + 30,421 – 17,886 – 3,405 + 96,416 + 848 + 27,555
2021 Q1 + 68,317 + 56,185 – 1,223 + 5,056 + 27,693 – 20,618 – 215 + 123,063 + 385 + 54,961
r Q2 + 60,053 + 45,470 – 2,141 + 8,553 + 14,602 – 8,572 – 1,887 + 77,713 + 58 + 19,547
r Q3 + 58,952 + 46,114 – 3,485 – 3,256 + 29,227 – 13,133 + 1,968 + 8,706 + 31,199 – 52,213
p Q4 + 60,088 + 36,673 – 1,113 + 3,361 + 36,240 – 16,185 – 3,811 + 59,306 + 250 + 3,029
2019 July + 20,611 + 20,555 – 3,036 – 4,819 + 9,538 – 4,664 + 171 + 11,234 + 348 – 9,548
Aug. + 17,334 + 16,559 – 1,639 – 5,218 + 10,219 – 4,226 + 788 – 1,942 + 755 – 20,065
Sep. + 24,886 + 20,687 – 3,083 – 2,482 + 10,197 – 3,516 – 694 + 9,009 – 1,452 – 15,183
Oct. + 19,690 + 20,550 – 3,285 – 5,948 + 9,775 – 4,687 – 823 + 44,140 – 107 + 25,273
Nov. + 23,695 + 17,228 – 3,055 + 392 + 9,744 – 3,669 – 491 + 20,116 – 356 – 3,088
Dec. + 24,401 + 12,259 – 5,035 + 1,562 + 15,227 – 4,647 – 3 + 28,674 – 113 + 4,275
2020 Jan. + 15,759 + 14,015 – 769 – 1,090 + 10,156 – 7,321 + 267 + 3,235 + 898 – 12,791
Feb. + 21,548 + 20,188 – 1,768 – 1,359 + 7,014 – 4,294 + 48 + 17,898 + 750 – 3,698
Mar. + 24,683 + 18,092 – 159 – 324 + 9,704 – 2,789 – 663 + 16,684 – 1,514 – 7,336
Apr. + 10,184 + 3,930 – 617 + 1,710 + 8,859 – 4,315 + 88 + 10,215 + 950 – 58
May + 7,411 + 9,326 + 768 + 1,553 – 14 – 3,454 + 8 + 115 + 33 – 7,304
June + 20,185 + 14,739 – 2,111 + 2,384 + 4,215 – 1,154 + 91 + 18,238 – 740 – 2,039
July + 20,644 + 20,206 – 430 – 2,646 + 6,782 – 3,698 – 928 + 18,341 – 611 – 1,375
Aug. + 16,758 + 14,005 – 226 – 2,308 + 8,416 – 3,355 + 486 + 32,997 – 611 + 15,753
Sep. + 24,969 + 21,788 – 450 – 448 + 6,944 – 3,315 – 764 + 16,964 – 53 – 7,241
Oct. + 24,361 + 20,723 – 513 + 843 + 7,236 – 4,442 – 1,320 + 27,100 + 140 + 4,060
Nov. + 21,660 + 18,474 + 122 + 2,239 + 8,537 – 7,589 – 2,090 + 14,685 + 89 – 4,885
Dec. + 26,245 + 14,535 – 2,754 + 2,917 + 14,648 – 5,855 + 5 + 54,631 + 618 + 28,380
2021 Jan. + 18,148 + 14,532 – 440 + 1,160 + 9,795 – 7,340 – 395 + 27,039 + 743 + 9,286
Feb. + 18,724 + 18,088 – 728 + 1,733 + 7,636 – 8,733 – 1,448 + 52,214 + 102 + 34,938
Mar. + 31,445 + 23,565 – 56 + 2,162 + 10,262 – 4,545 + 1,628 + 43,810 – 460 + 10,737
r Apr. + 22,129 + 15,539 – 662 + 3,904 + 6,508 – 3,822 – 984 + 27,431 – 251 + 6,286
r May + 14,016 + 13,796 – 778 + 2,699 – 642 – 1,837 – 271 + 17,729 + 211 + 3,984
r June + 23,908 + 16,135 – 701 + 1,950 + 8,735 – 2,913 – 632 + 32,553 + 98 + 9,277
r July + 19,513 + 17,446 – 1,487 – 473 + 8,292 – 5,752 – 574 + 632 + 102 – 18,308
r Aug. + 17,147 + 12,019 – 426 – 2,641 + 10,287 – 2,518 + 586 + 10,824 + 31,254 – 6,909
r Sep. + 22,292 + 16,648 – 1,572 – 141 + 10,648 – 4,863 + 1,955 – 2,749 – 158 – 26,996
r Oct. + 17,621 + 13,885 – 440 – 539 + 9,916 – 5,641 + 507 + 5,190 + 261 – 12,938
r Nov. + 18,550 + 13,425 – 583 + 1,093 + 10,158 – 6,126 – 1,067 + 43,250 + 963 + 25,767
p Dec. + 23,917 + 9,363 – 90 + 2,807 + 16,166 – 4,418 – 3,251 + 10,866 – 974 – 9,800
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: + / net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2021
Group of countries/country 
2019 2020 
2021 July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec.  p
All countries  1 Exports 1,328,152 1,206,928 1,375,463 115,134 104,524 118,170 121,389 125,875 117,002
Imports 1,104,141 1,026,502 1,202,177 97,290 92,952 102,050 108,673 114,290 109,992
Balance +224,010 +180,427 +173,287 +17,845 +11,572 +16,120 +12,716 +11,586 + 7,010
   I. European countries Exports 902,831 824,921 946,026 78,617 71,402 81,723 84,075 87,239 79,142
Imports 747,692 682,477 803,546 65,828 59,904 67,381 72,950 77,334 72,865
Balance +155,140 +142,444 +142,480 +12,789 +11,498 +14,341 +11,125 + 9,905 + 6,276
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 698,257 635,741 747,197 61,655 55,739 64,614 66,780 68,112 63,336
Imports 593,251 546,655 638,529 52,784 47,008 53,711 57,781 60,492 56,343
Balance +105,006 +89,087 +108,667 + 8,871 + 8,732 +10,903 + 9,000 + 7,620 + 6,992
          Euro area (19)       Exports 492,308 441,853 518,949 43,256 37,764 44,948 46,472 47,250 44,089
          countries Imports 409,863 371,211 438,318 36,761 32,412 36,628 40,111 41,589 39,127
Balance +82,445 +70,643 +80,631 + 6,495 + 5,352 + 8,320 + 6,361 + 5,661 + 4,963
          of which:
               Austria Exports 66,076 60,118 71,908 6,056 5,546 6,354 6,447 6,810 5,931
  Imports 44,059 40,454 47,553 4,141 3,428 4,247 4,190 4,316 4,200
Balance +22,017 +19,663 +24,355 + 1,914 + 2,118 + 2,108 + 2,258 + 2,494 + 1,731
               Belgium and Exports 52,006 48,824 57,291 4,515 4,334 4,968 5,210 5,102 4,907
               Luxembourg Imports 46,322 39,584 54,838 4,792 4,500 4,700 4,911 5,255 4,547
Balance + 5,683 + 9,240 + 2,453 – 277 – 166 + 269 + 299 – 153 + 360
               France Exports 106,564 90,910 102,398 8,430 7,141 8,726 8,838 9,414 8,483
  Imports 66,199 56,364 62,336 5,241 4,440 5,321 5,733 5,810 5,457
Balance +40,364 +34,546 +40,062 + 3,190 + 2,701 + 3,405 + 3,105 + 3,604 + 3,026
               Italy Exports 67,887 60,634 75,293 6,692 4,725 6,564 7,608 6,671 6,086
  Imports 57,100 53,906 65,286 5,737 4,550 5,486 5,807 6,043 5,466
Balance +10,786 + 6,728 +10,007 + 955 + 175 + 1,078 + 1,801 + 628 + 620
               Netherlands Exports 91,528 84,579 100,501 8,186 7,921 8,859 8,827 8,952 9,658
  Imports 97,816 87,024 105,691 8,641 8,194 8,977 10,344 10,463 10,380
Balance – 6,288 – 2,445 – 5,191 – 455 – 273 – 118 – 1,517 – 1,511 – 722
               Spain  Exports 44,218 37,618 43,584 3,642 3,046 3,647 3,641 4,029 3,503
  Imports 33,126 31,281 34,092 2,815 2,173 2,497 2,781 3,358 3,383
Balance +11,092 + 6,337 + 9,492 + 827 + 873 + 1,150 + 859 + 670 + 120
          Other EU Member  Exports 205,949 193,888 228,248 18,399 17,975 19,666 20,309 20,863 19,247
          States  Imports 183,387 175,444 200,212 16,023 14,596 17,083 17,670 18,903 17,217
Balance +22,561 +18,444 +28,036 + 2,376 + 3,380 + 2,582 + 2,639 + 1,959 + 2,030
      2. Other European Exports 204,575 189,180 198,829 16,962 15,663 17,109 17,294 19,127 15,806
          countries Imports 154,441 135,822 165,017 13,044 12,896 13,670 15,169 16,842 16,522
Balance +50,134 +53,358 +33,812 + 3,917 + 2,767 + 3,439 + 2,126 + 2,285 – 716
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 56,345 56,265 60,600 4,835 4,927 5,009 5,337 6,151 4,939
  Imports 45,824 45,556 48,832 3,893 3,768 4,070 4,212 4,570 3,827
Balance +10,521 +10,708 +11,768 + 942 + 1,158 + 939 + 1,125 + 1,581 + 1,112
               United Kingdom Exports 79,166 67,086 65,443 5,935 4,793 5,739 5,721 6,150 4,952
  Imports 38,397 35,018 31,987 2,854 2,293 2,312 2,842 2,895 2,593
Balance +40,770 +32,068 +33,456 + 3,081 + 2,500 + 3,427 + 2,879 + 3,255 + 2,359
   II. Non-European  Exports 421,728 380,292 426,950 36,312 32,900 35,940 37,075 38,405 37,632
       countries Imports 355,390 343,270 397,136 31,372 32,809 34,384 35,578 36,804 36,981
Balance +66,338 +37,022 +29,814 + 4,940 + 91 + 1,557 + 1,497 + 1,601 + 651
       1. Africa Exports 23,627 20,086 22,722 2,297 1,863 2,058 1,657 1,842 1,924
Imports 24,475 18,758 25,996 2,088 1,981 2,257 2,633 2,274 2,152
Balance – 848 + 1,328 – 3,274 + 209 – 118 – 200 – 977 – 432 – 228
       2. America Exports 165,602 141,375 167,837 14,799 13,046 14,452 14,810 15,192 14,553
  Imports 100,007 94,005 101,064 7,805 8,689 8,772 8,364 8,724 9,073
Balance +65,595 +47,370 +66,773 + 6,993 + 4,358 + 5,680 + 6,446 + 6,468 + 5,480
           of which:
               United States  Exports 118,680 103,476 122,121 10,837 9,406 10,752 10,968 10,981 10,676
  Imports 71,334 67,694 71,964 5,486 6,207 6,259 6,002 6,298 6,369
Balance +47,346 +35,782 +50,157 + 5,350 + 3,200 + 4,493 + 4,965 + 4,683 + 4,307
       3. Asia Exports 221,278 208,146 224,748 18,141 17,160 18,470 19,625 20,146 20,114
  Imports 227,036 226,646 266,045 21,118 21,845 23,058 24,259 25,523 25,318
Balance – 5,759 –18,500 –41,297 – 2,977 – 4,686 – 4,588 – 4,633 – 5,377 – 5,205
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 28,663 25,882 26,048 2,013 2,112 2,160 2,173 2,269 2,770
  Imports 7,460 6,721 7,489 681 623 659 745 789 706
Balance +21,202 +19,161 +18,560 + 1,332 + 1,488 + 1,500 + 1,428 + 1,480 + 2,064
               Japan  Exports 20,662 17,396 18,238 1,435 1,557 1,640 1,573 1,687 1,503
Imports 23,904 21,427 23,487 1,944 1,924 2,111 2,039 2,153 1,879
Balance – 3,243 – 4,032 – 5,249 – 509 – 367 – 472 – 467 – 466 – 376
               People's Republic  Exports 95,984 95,840 103,659 8,344 7,631 8,458 9,381 8,944 8,424
               of China  2 Imports 110,054 117,373 141,609 10,843 11,396 12,287 13,335 14,132 14,584
Balance –14,070 –21,533 –37,949 – 2,499 – 3,765 – 3,828 – 3,954 – 5,188 – 6,160
               New industrial countries Exports 54,164 50,590 55,134 4,672 4,074 4,383 4,755 5,157 5,082
               and emerging markets  Imports 51,748 48,222 55,225 4,320 4,732 4,757 4,727 5,079 4,819
               of Asia  3 Balance + 2,416 + 2,368 – 92 + 352 – 658 – 374 + 28 + 78 + 263
       4. Oceania and Exports 11,221 10,685 11,642 1,076 831 961 983 1,225 1,042
           polar regions Imports 3,872 3,861 4,031 361 295 296 322 284 438
Balance + 7,349 + 6,824 + 7,611 + 715 + 536 + 665 + 661 + 942 + 604
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. EU excl. UK.  1 Including fuel and other supplies for ships andaircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.  3 Brunei
Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Zeit Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2017 – 23,994 – 3,679 – 43,558 + 9,613 + 14,903 – 8,188 – 1,065 + 2,177 – 637 + 76,669 – 1,403
2018 – 17,410 – 2,003 – 44,543 + 9,535 + 17,398 – 7,206 + 580 + 3,325 – 1,208 +107,902 – 1,001
2019 – 20,653 + 2 – 45,947 + 10,392 + 17,728 – 9,561 – 2,933 + 3,493 + 373 +111,763 – 945
2020 + 3,471 – 6,095 – 14,698 + 9,461 + 17,392 – 6,822 – 4,775 + 3,347 + 2,307 + 91,586 – 1,396
p 2021 + 13,714 – 1,277 – 20,487 + 8,565 + 33,409 – 7,199 – 7,027 + 3,152 + 2,433 +107,424 – 2,096
2020 Q2 + 5,647 – 1,534 + 259 + 2,332 + 4,794 – 1,524 – 1,125 + 879 + 384 + 15,200 – 2,524
Q3 – 5,402 – 1,863 – 7,428 + 2,206 + 3,353 – 1,993 – 1,645 + 892 + 97 + 23,168 – 1,123
Q4 + 5,999 – 1,478 – 32 + 2,458 + 4,902 – 1,140 – 1,042 + 695 + 909 + 26,265 + 3,247
2021 Q1 + 5,056 – 1,036 – 378 + 2,614 + 5,875 – 2,501 – 1,418 + 785 + 999 + 27,710 – 1,016
Q2 + 8,553 – 223 – 1,723 + 2,522 + 8,438 – 1,254 – 1,241 + 824 + 464 + 17,003 – 2,865
Q3 – 3,256 + 577 – 12,797 + 863 + 9,267 – 2,007 – 1,027 + 855 + 112 + 30,348 – 1,234
p Q4 + 3,361 – 595 – 5,588 + 2,566 + 9,830 – 1,437 – 3,340 + 687 + 859 + 32,363 + 3,018
2021 Feb. + 1,733 – 356 – 62 + 797 + 1,865 – 733 – 260 + 262 + 359 + 7,576 – 299
Mar. + 2,162 – 220 – 183 + 803 + 2,706 – 900 – 811 + 267 + 297 + 10,328 – 363
Apr. + 3,904 + 192 – 155 + 1,204 + 2,954 – 673 – 153 + 265 + 138 + 6,694 – 323
May + 2,699 – 190 – 144 + 847 + 2,389 – 477 – 495 + 289 + 171 + 1,278 – 2,091
June + 1,950 – 224 – 1,425 + 472 + 3,095 – 104 – 592 + 271 + 155 + 9,031 – 451
July – 473 – 87 – 3,328 + 761 + 2,834 – 1,178 + 24 + 293 + 26 + 8,675 – 410
Aug. – 2,641 + 465 – 5,126 – 557 + 2,842 – 350 – 526 + 305 + 43 + 10,652 – 408
Sep. – 141 + 198 – 4,344 + 660 + 3,591 – 480 – 526 + 257 + 43 + 11,021 – 416
Oct. – 539 + 94 – 3,532 + 1,102 + 3,387 – 590 – 1,561 + 287 + 256 + 10,133 – 473
Nov. + 1,093 + 43 – 1,324 + 598 + 3,318 – 802 – 1,478 + 184 + 258 + 10,316 – 415
p Dec. + 2,807 – 733 – 733 + 867 + 3,125 – 45 – 301 + 216 + 345 + 11,914 + 3,907
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Zeit Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2017 – 50,776 – 23,191 – 9,851 + 9,665 – 27,584 + 4,632 + 4,613 – 2,936 + 926 – 3,863
2018 – 48,713 – 28,645 – 10,186 + 10,237 – 20,067 + 5,152 + 5,142 + 676 + 3,444 – 2,768
2019 – 48,434 – 28,956 – 10,728 + 11,745 – 19,479 + 5,445 + 5,431 – 526 + 2,754 – 3,280
2020 – 51,582 – 34,268 – 12,211 + 10,877 – 17,313 + 5,925 + 5,908 – 4,771 + 469 – 5,240
p 2021 – 58,508 – 38,108 – 11,957 + 11,752 – 20,400 .+ 6,170 – 3,944 – 201 – 3,744
2020 Q2 – 8,922 – 4,819 – 2,270 + 4,506 – 4,104 + 1,480 + 1,477 + 188 + 504 – 316
Q3 – 10,369 – 6,422 – 3,249 + 2,144 – 3,947 + 1,481 + 1,477 – 1,206 – 54 – 1,151
Q4 – 17,886 – 13,463 – 4,378 + 1,713 – 4,423 + 1,482 + 1,477 – 3,405 + 464 – 3,869
2021 Q1 – 20,618 – 14,676 – 3,294 + 2,276 – 5,942 .+ 1,543 – 215 – 25 – 190
Q2 – 8,572 – 4,303 – 1,584 + 5,280 – 4,269 .+ 1,543 – 1,887 – 1,702 – 184
Q3 – 13,133 – 8,057 – 1,848 + 2,115 – 5,076 .+ 1,543 + 1,968 + 2,870 – 902
p Q4 – 16,185 – 11,072 – 5,231 + 2,081 – 5,113 + 1,547 + 1,543 – 3,811 – 1,344 – 2,468
2021 Feb. – 8,733 – 6,458 – 661 + 923 – 2,275 + 515 + 514 – 1,448 – 1,236 – 212
Mar. – 4,545 – 2,364 – 830 + 955 – 2,181 + 516 + 514 + 1,628 + 1,584 + 44
Apr. – 3,822 – 2,165 – 641 + 1,332 – 1,658 .+ 514 – 984 – 857 – 127
May – 1,837 – 734 – 409 + 2,799 – 1,103 + 516 + 514 – 271 – 250 – 21
June – 2,913 – 1,405 – 535 + 1,149 – 1,508 + 515 + 514 – 632 – 596 – 36
July – 5,752 – 3,968 – 2,738 + 686 – 1,784 .+ 514 – 574 – 242 – 332
Aug. – 2,518 – 1,072 + 1,552 + 379 – 1,446 + 515 + 514 + 586 + 679 – 93
Sep. – 4,863 – 3,017 – 662 + 1,050 – 1,846 .+ 514 + 1,955 + 2,433 – 477
Oct. – 5,641 – 3,932 – 726 + 452 – 1,709 + 516 + 514 + 507 + 787 – 280
Nov. – 6,126 – 4,363 – 1,346 + 327 – 1,763 + 516 + 514 – 1,067 – 513 – 554
p Dec. – 4,418 – 2,777 – 3,159 + 1,302 – 1,641 + 516 + 514 – 3,251 – 1,617 – 1,634
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2021
Item 2019 2020 2021  p Q2 Q3 Q4 p October November December  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +247,406 +707,119 +787,847 +132,028 +116,122 +252,427 +75,923 +150,378 +26,125
1.Direct investment +136,291 +96,602 +127,384 +17,302 +36,955 +27,610 + 7,061 +36,689 –16,140
Equity +116,375 +79,229 +74,327 +31,115 +25,246 + 5,860 + 6,661 + 6,076 – 6,876
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +37,654 +16,648 +34,952 + 7,491 +12,714 + 514 + 4,992 + 433 – 4,911
Debt instruments +19,916 +17,373 +53,057 –13,813 +11,709 +21,749 + 400 +30,613 – 9,264
2.Portfolio investment +136,850 +186,532 +229,685 +59,175 +50,981 +41,877 +13,430 +27,510 + 937
Shares  2 +14,111 +65,947 +51,949 +10,119 +19,425 +13,327 + 6,326 + 3,734 + 3,268
Investment fund shares  3 +53,919 +64,435 +103,909 +24,841 +22,315 +39,960 +10,492 +15,958 +13,510
Short-term  4
debt securities + 8,599 + 2,019 – 5,866 – 5,848 + 6,740 –10,386 + 1,284 – 2,393 – 9,277
Long-term   5
debt securities +60,221 +54,131 +79,694 +30,063 + 2,501 – 1,024 – 4,672 +10,211 – 6,563
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +24,532 +99,097 +38,494 +13,451 –10,713 +13,409 + 1,830 +10,222 + 1,357
4.Other investment  7 –49,723 +324,940 +360,393 +42,041 + 7,700 +169,280 +53,341 +74,994 +40,946
MFIs  8 + 9,276 – 4,494 +112,191 +17,351 –31,973 –15,743 +65,215 – 2,133 –78,825
Short-term – 8,901 + 3,526 +98,918 +13,907 –23,041 –27,347 +45,617 + 1,019 –73,983
Long-term +18,177 – 8,020 +13,273 + 3,444 – 8,932 +11,604 +19,598 – 3,152 – 4,842
Enterprises and
households  9 +16,241 +85,204 +127,651 + 8,452 +25,272 +35,950 +29,905 +16,552 –10,507
Short-term + 4,510 +43,928 +118,120 + 5,122 +19,167 +38,264 +33,439 +17,754 –12,928
Long-term +11,730 +41,276 + 9,531 + 3,330 + 6,105 – 2,314 – 3,534 – 1,201 + 2,421
General government – 4,325 + 1,118 – 2,843 – 723 – 710 + 3,481 + 5,638 + 997 – 3,154
Short-term – 1,139 + 2,399 – 1,942 – 695 – 442 + 3,786 + 5,855 + 1,164 – 3,233
Long-term – 3,186 – 1,281 – 901 – 28 – 268 – 305 – 217 – 167 + 79
Bundesbank –70,915 +243,112 +123,394 +16,961 +15,111 +145,592 –47,417 +59,577 +133,432
5.Reserve assets – 544 – 51 +31,892 + 58 +31,199 + 250 + 261 + 963 – 974
II.Net foreign investment in the
reporting country (increase: +) +43,607 +476,016 +519,058 +54,315 +107,415 +193,120 +70,733 +107,129 +15,259
1.Direct investment +60,170 +97,216 +55,981 +13,647 +19,006 + 8,982 +12,716 +17,090 –20,824
Equity +30,250 +31,079 +27,655 + 8,759 + 4,454 + 8,778 + 6,784 + 1,638 + 355
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 1,031 + 2,152 + 2,295 – 1,921 + 2,176 + 1,001 + 526 + 894 – 419
Debt instruments +29,920 +66,136 +28,326 + 4,888 +14,552 + 204 + 5,931 +15,452 –21,179
2.Portfolio investment +63,443 +143,783 –42,691 –10,289 –10,247 –53,007 –14,530 – 5,345 –33,132
Shares  2 – 6,075 –16,838 – 8,158 – 5,174 + 411 – 7,583 – 5,027 – 9,259 + 6,703
Investment fund shares  3 – 4,923 + 933 – 2,818 + 999 – 1,097 – 2,829 – 540 – 963 – 1,326
Short-term  4
debt securities +15,902 +80,193 +22,359 + 216 + 8,917 – 6,250 – 8,864 +12,454 – 9,840
Long-term   5
debt securities +58,539 +79,494 –54,073 – 6,330 –18,478 –36,345 – 99 – 7,577 –28,669
3.Other investment  7 –80,006 +235,017 +505,769 +50,957 +98,656 +237,145 +72,547 +95,383 +69,215
MFIs  8 –10,214 +108,397 +159,566 +28,522 – 2,854 –114,454 +42,209 +25,434 –182,098
Short-term –20,978 +74,805 +115,402 +43,378 –19,087 –127,740 +34,387 +17,917 –180,045
Long-term +10,764 +33,591 +44,164 –14,856 +16,233 +13,286 + 7,823 + 7,517 – 2,053
Enterprises and
households  9 +29,501 +26,267 +119,938 – 4,287 +26,526 +89,224 +39,605 +27,693 +21,926
Short-term + 9,988 +18,062 +117,587 – 781 +26,151 +80,737 +34,284 +25,296 +21,156
Long-term +19,513 + 8,206 + 2,351 – 3,505 + 375 + 8,487 + 5,321 + 2,397 + 769
General government + 262 –10,521 – 531 + 3,635 – 133 – 273 + 1,153 + 5,251 – 6,676
Short-term + 124 –10,306 + 1,750 + 3,624 – 156 – 675 + 1,130 + 5,242 – 7,047
Long-term + 138 – 216 – 2,281 + 10 + 22 + 402 + 23 + 9+ 371
Bundesbank –99,554 +110,874 +226,796 +23,087 +75,117 +262,648 –10,420 +37,005 +236,063
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +203,799 +231,103 +268,789 +77,713 + 8,706 +59,306 + 5,190 +43,250 +10,866
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see Statistical series, direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities 3ä,  4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,670
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 671,202 489,769
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2019 Aug. 1,173,640 205,331 149,696 14,703 6,379 34,553 915,546 897,901 52,763 638,733 534,907
Sep. 1,185,142 202,285 147,611 14,831 6,396 33,447 930,892 915,342 51,965 626,236 558,906
Oct. 1,103,094 199,858 146,284 14,663 6,287 32,624 852,754 837,377 50,482 596,696 506,398
Nov. 1,134,129 197,047 143,253 14,799 6,116 32,879 885,524 870,520 51,558 590,333 543,797
Dec. 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 671,202 489,769
2020 Jan. 1,090,725 209,432 154,867 14,785 6,110 33,671 828,120 811,435 53,173 580,910 509,814
Feb. 1,106,033 215,748 159,889 14,857 5,989 35,014 836,782 821,562 53,503 577,033 529,000
Mar. 1,218,815 213,722 158,677 14,812 5,965 34,268 952,781 935,126 52,312 617,919 600,896
Apr. 1,214,851 226,903 170,359 14,935 6,857 34,753 934,333 918,814 53,615 616,319 598,532
May 1,209,328 223,125 167,780 14,650 6,787 33,908 931,521 916,145 54,682 612,403 596,925
June 1,294,167 226,135 170,728 14,603 6,955 33,849 1,012,982 995,083 55,050 618,825 675,342
July 1,323,691 233,547 180,400 14,179 7,465 31,503 1,034,282 1,019,214 55,862 599,189 724,503
Aug. 1,358,137 230,309 177,973 14,129 7,423 30,784 1,071,521 1,056,231 56,307 600,390 757,747
Sep. 1,414,933 227,150 173,979 14,293 7,632 31,246 1,131,686 1,115,189 56,097 649,781 765,151
Oct. 1,346,367 227,767 174,433 14,346 7,656 31,332 1,061,498 1,047,327 57,102 619,445 726,922
Nov. 1,347,202 212,286 159,737 14,193 7,535 30,820 1,078,270 1,060,263 56,647 625,921 721,282
Dec. 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 Jan. 1,348,921 219,860 166,494 14,115 8,061 31,190 1,072,140 1,054,994 56,921 638,042 710,879
Feb. 1,328,303 210,619 157,313 14,119 8,047 31,140 1,060,378 1,043,746 57,306 616,473 711,830
Mar. 1,364,046 209,400 155,323 14,367 7,966 31,744 1,098,486 1,081,989 56,160 647,647 716,400
Apr. 1,307,161 210,799 158,143 14,085 7,836 30,735 1,041,472 1,024,734 54,890 604,863 702,299
May 1,370,231 221,201 168,678 14,037 7,809 30,677 1,093,721 1,076,918 55,309 621,827 748,404
June 1,384,834 213,600 159,995 14,326 8,094 31,184 1,115,447 1,101,897 55,787 670,632 714,202
July 1,319,694 219,775 165,984 14,345 8,104 31,343 1,042,015 1,024,970 57,903 657,905 661,789
Aug. 1,360,722 250,742 165,757 45,091 8,174 31,720 1,053,653 1,037,259 56,327 699,773 660,949
Sep. 1,431,909 246,908 160,943 45,606 8,267 32,092 1,130,558 1,115,126 54,443 746,128 685,781
Oct. 1,388,160 250,340 164,602 45,719 8,449 31,570 1,083,141 1,066,604 54,678 735,595 652,564
Nov. 1,456,861 258,815 170,460 46,375 8,405 33,575 1,142,719 1,127,545 55,327 773,217 683,644
Dec. 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 Jan. 1,479,694 261,965 173,362 46,931 8,504 33,168 1,163,561 1,149,868 54,168 807,889 671,805
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
r 2018 933,849 234,970 698,880 466,225 232,654 217,969 14,686 1,232,594 146,575 1,086,019 879,752 206,267 135,214 71,053
r 2019 963,967 227,688 736,279 502,594 233,685 217,370 16,314 1,305,705 167,656 1,138,048 927,650 210,399 134,768 75,630
2020 1,007,574 250,320 757,254 529,154 228,099 211,800 16,300 1,360,348 167,766 1,192,582 984,663 207,919 129,171 78,748
2021 1,152,509 260,321 892,188 604,424 287,764 270,847 16,917 1,548,984 218,886 1,330,098 1,066,016 264,082 175,351 88,730
2021 July 1,066,535 253,859 812,676 569,944 242,732 225,820 16,912 1,412,766 176,627 1,236,138 1,016,188 219,950 135,566 84,384
Aug. 1,077,379 260,534 816,844 579,112 237,732 220,894 16,839 1,412,471 175,411 1,237,061 1,022,017 215,044 129,822 85,222
Sep. 1,097,096 252,493 844,603 596,143 248,459 231,425 17,035 1,453,494 180,196 1,273,297 1,041,650 231,647 146,328 85,319
Oct. 1,125,092 271,255 853,837 591,532 262,304 245,203 17,102 1,501,407 209,230 1,292,177 1,054,098 238,079 149,153 88,926
Nov. 1,175,237 277,554 897,684 621,094 276,590 259,158 17,433 1,548,326 223,393 1,324,933 1,073,773 251,160 162,349 88,811
Dec. 1,152,509 260,321 892,188 604,424 287,764 270,847 16,917 1,548,984 218,886 1,330,098 1,066,016 264,082 175,351 88,730
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
r 2018 544,009 177,064 366,944 274,402 92,542 84,191 8,351 801,772 88,161 713,611 631,814 81,798 61,161 20,637
r 2019 572,324 176,847 395,476 304,605 90,871 82,120 8,752 836,863 91,122 745,740 660,385 85,355 62,692 22,664
2020 599,741 188,300 411,440 322,386 89,054 80,200 8,854 866,365 92,592 773,773 687,613 86,160 62,357 23,803
2021 660,768 198,911 461,857 350,591 111,266 102,689 8,578 978,060 153,424 824,636 713,878 110,758 84,237 26,521
2021 July 634,744 198,458 436,285 341,574 94,712 85,629 9,083 895,013 92,773 802,240 711,618 90,622 65,103 25,519
Aug. 645,244 207,098 438,146 346,930 91,215 82,131 9,084 894,407 93,977 800,430 713,628 86,802 61,163 25,639
Sep. 651,741 199,547 452,194 354,045 98,149 88,928 9,221 924,662 110,957 813,705 720,832 92,873 67,426 25,446
Oct. 666,662 213,054 453,609 350,110 103,499 94,344 9,155 946,765 127,235 819,530 721,091 98,439 71,779 26,660
Nov. 683,376 217,947 465,428 355,285 110,143 100,892 9,251 968,904 141,415 827,489 719,796 107,693 81,141 26,553
Dec. 660,768 198,911 461,857 350,591 111,266 102,689 8,578 978,060 153,424 824,636 713,878 110,758 84,237 26,521
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
r 2018 389,841 57,905 331,935 191,823 140,112 133,777 6,335 430,822 58,415 372,408 247,939 124,469 74,053 50,416
r 2019 391,643 50,841 340,803 197,989 142,814 135,251 7,563 468,842 76,534 392,308 267,265 125,043 72,077 52,967
2020 407,833 62,020 345,814 206,768 139,046 131,600 7,445 493,983 75,175 418,809 297,050 121,758 66,813 54,945
2021 491,741 61,410 430,331 253,833 176,498 168,158 8,340 570,924 65,462 505,463 352,138 153,324 91,115 62,210
2021 July 431,792 55,401 376,391 228,370 148,020 140,191 7,829 517,753 83,854 433,899 304,570 129,328 70,464 58,864
Aug. 432,135 53,436 378,699 232,181 146,517 138,763 7,754 518,064 81,434 436,630 308,388 128,242 68,659 59,583
Sep. 445,355 52,946 392,409 242,098 150,310 142,497 7,814 528,832 69,240 459,592 320,818 138,775 78,901 59,873
Oct. 458,429 58,202 400,228 241,423 158,805 150,859 7,946 554,642 81,995 472,647 333,007 139,640 77,374 62,265
Nov. 491,862 59,606 432,256 265,809 166,447 158,265 8,182 579,422 81,978 497,444 353,977 143,467 81,208 62,259
Dec. 491,741 61,410 430,331 253,833 176,498 168,158 8,340 570,924 65,462 505,463 352,138 153,324 91,115 62,210
Euro area (19)
r 2018 467,428 156,887 310,542 238,963 71,579 64,295 7,283 735,094 68,959 666,136 601,205 64,931 49,138 15,792
r 2019 493,062 158,102 334,960 264,834 70,127 62,531 7,595 761,144 70,561 690,584 624,607 65,977 48,775 17,202
2020 515,425 167,497 347,928 279,213 68,715 61,150 7,565 783,041 71,423 711,617 645,409 66,208 48,316 17,891
2021 553,838 176,279 377,560 289,330 88,230 80,844 7,386 896,256 131,735 764,521 675,868 88,653 68,232 20,421
2021 July 541,433 180,967 360,466 287,849 72,617 64,790 7,827 814,810 73,730 741,080 670,829 70,251 50,514 19,737
Aug. 548,489 187,471 361,018 291,497 69,521 61,737 7,783 816,982 75,912 741,070 674,183 66,887 47,226 19,661
Sep. 551,461 179,869 371,592 296,105 75,487 67,519 7,968 844,370 91,097 753,273 681,087 72,186 52,538 19,648
Oct. 566,212 192,182 374,031 294,113 79,918 71,985 7,933 866,674 107,300 759,374 682,156 77,219 56,744 20,475
Nov. 579,922 198,341 381,581 295,204 86,377 78,367 8,010 884,965 120,057 764,908 680,461 84,447 64,003 20,444
Dec. 553,838 176,279 377,560 289,330 88,230 80,844 7,386 896,256 131,735 764,521 675,868 88,653 68,232 20,421
Extra-Euro area (19)
r 2018 466,421 78,083 388,338 227,262 161,076 153,673 7,403 497,500 77,617 419,883 278,548 141,336 86,075 55,260
r 2019 470,905 69,586 401,319 237,761 163,558 154,839 8,719 544,560 97,096 447,465 303,043 144,422 85,993 58,428
2020 492,149 82,823 409,326 249,941 159,385 150,650 8,735 577,307 96,343 480,965 339,254 141,711 80,854 60,856
2021 598,671 84,042 514,629 315,094 199,535 190,003 9,532 652,728 87,151 565,577 390,148 175,429 107,119 68,309
2021 July 525,102 72,892 452,210 282,095 170,115 161,030 9,086 597,955 102,897 495,058 345,359 149,699 85,052 64,647
Aug. 528,890 73,063 455,826 287,615 168,212 159,156 9,055 595,489 99,499 495,991 347,833 148,157 82,596 65,561
Sep. 545,634 72,624 473,011 300,038 172,972 163,906 9,066 609,124 89,099 520,024 360,563 159,461 93,790 65,672
Oct. 558,880 79,074 479,806 297,419 182,387 173,218 9,169 634,733 101,930 532,803 371,942 160,860 92,409 68,451
Nov. 595,315 79,212 516,103 325,889 190,214 180,791 9,423 663,360 103,335 560,025 393,312 166,713 98,346 68,368
Dec. 598,671 84,042 514,629 315,094 199,535 190,003 9,532 652,728 87,151 565,577 390,148 175,429 107,119 68,309
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2021 1.5749 1.4826 7.6282 7.4370 129.88 10.1633 10.1465 1.0811 0.85960 1.1827
2020 Sep. 1.6307 1.5586 8.0333 7.4418 124.50 10.7769 10.4279 1.0786 0.90947 1.1792
Oct. 1.6521 1.5559 7.9225 7.4424 123.89 10.9220 10.3967 1.0739 0.90741 1.1775
Nov. 1.6266 1.5472 7.8152 7.4459 123.61 10.7453 10.2311 1.0785 0.89605 1.1838
Dec. 1.6166 1.5595 7.9602 7.4412 126.28 10.6008 10.1736 1.0814 0.90624 1.2170
2021 Jan. 1.5764 1.5494 7.8730 7.4387 126.31 10.3661 10.0952 1.0794 0.89267 1.2171
Feb. 1.5605 1.5354 7.8136 7.4367 127.49 10.2791 10.0887 1.0858 0.87268 1.2098
Mar. 1.5444 1.4970 7.7465 7.4363 129.38 10.1469 10.1692 1.1065 0.85873 1.1899
Apr. 1.5544 1.4975 7.8051 7.4367 130.49 10.0376 10.1620 1.1031 0.86527 1.1979
May 1.5653 1.4732 7.8109 7.4362 132.57 10.0931 10.1471 1.0968 0.86258 1.2146
June 1.5761 1.4713 7.7391 7.4364 132.63 10.1444 10.1172 1.0940 0.85872 1.2047
July 1.5926 1.4806 7.6536 7.4373 130.35 10.3767 10.1979 1.0856 0.85613 1.1822
Aug. 1.6118 1.4827 7.6237 7.4369 129.28 10.4195 10.2157 1.0762 0.85287 1.1772
Sep. 1.6087 1.4910 7.6007 7.4361 129.66 10.1861 10.1710 1.0857 0.85683 1.1770
Oct. 1.5669 1.4436 7.4500 7.4398 131.21 9.8143 10.0557 1.0708 0.84694 1.1601
Nov. 1.5615 1.4339 7.2927 7.4373 130.12 9.9661 10.0459 1.0522 0.84786 1.1414
Dec. 1.5781 1.4463 7.1993 7.4362 128.80 10.1308 10.2726 1.0408 0.84875 1.1304
2022 Jan. 1.5770 1.4282 7.1922 7.4411 130.01 10.0070 10.3579 1.0401 0.83503 1.1314
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2022
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-42  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
26 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  526 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
2000 87.1 86.8 86.1 85.5 88.1 86.1 92.0 97.4 85.5 91.2 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.6 87.1 86.8 84.5 90.2 86.9 91.7 96.5 86.0 90.5 93.0 91.7 91.1
2002 89.8 90.2 89.9 88.0 94.5 90.5 92.3 95.6 88.5 91.0 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.4 101.3 101.0 99.0 106.4 101.5 95.8 94.7 97.6 95.3 97.0 96.7 96.9
2004 104.2 105.2 104.0 102.2 110.9 105.3 96.2 93.5 100.0 95.6 98.5 98.2 98.5
2005 102.8 103.8 102.0 100.6 109.0 102.9 94.7 92.0 98.8 93.3 98.4 97.1 96.8
2006 102.8 103.8 101.5 99.4 109.1 102.2 93.5 90.3 98.2 91.6 98.6 96.7 96.1
2007 106.3 106.8 103.6 101.1 112.7 104.4 94.5 89.6 102.0 91.9 100.9 98.3 97.4
2008 110.1 109.7 105.8 104.9 117.4 106.9 94.8 88.3 105.1 91.2 102.4 98.4 97.6
2009 111.6 110.5 107.0 108.6 120.5 107.9 95.2 89.1 104.7 92.0 101.9 98.6 98.0
2010 104.4 102.8 98.8 101.0 111.9 99.0 92.5 88.7 98.2 88.1 98.8 94.3 92.6
2011 104.2 101.9 97.0 99.3 112.7 98.5 92.1 88.4 97.6 87.3 98.2 93.5 92.0
2012 98.5 96.7 91.4 93.7 107.5 93.7 90.1 88.3 92.5 84.7 95.9 90.5 89.0
2013 102.0 99.7 94.5 96.6 112.2 96.7 92.3 88.7 97.5 86.6 98.1 92.3 91.0
2014 102.3 99.1 94.4 96.7 114.5 97.1 92.9 89.6 97.7 87.3 98.2 92.5 91.6
2015 92.5 89.4 85.8 86.1 106.1 88.6 89.8 90.2 88.9 83.6 94.4 87.8 87.0
2016 95.2 91.4 88.1 p 87.3 110.1 90.6 90.6 90.7 90.4 84.9 95.0 88.8 88.2
2017 97.4 93.3 89.2 p 87.9 112.4 91.8 91.9 90.8 93.3 85.7 96.3 89.9 89.0
2018 99.9 95.5 90.7 p 89.4 117.3 94.9 93.1 90.9 96.4 86.7 97.7 91.1 90.9
2019 98.1 93.1 88.9 p 87.0 115.4 92.3 92.1 91.1 93.5 85.8 96.4 89.9 89.5
2020 99.6 93.5 p 89.4 p 87.5 119.4 93.8 92.1 91.2 93.3 86.2 96.4 90.1 90.3
2021 99.6 p 93.4 ... ... 120.8 p 94.2 … … … … p97.4 p 90.7 p 91.1
2019 Feb. 98.3 93.6 89.1 p 87.3 115.6 92.9 92.1 90.7 94.1 85.6 96.5 90.0 89.5
Mar. 97.7 93.0 115.2 92.4 96.2 89.6 89.2
Apr. 97.6 92.8 115.0 92.2 96.5 89.8 89.4
May 98.1 93.2 88.8 p 87.1 115.7 92.7 92.2 91.0 93.8 85.7 96.7 90.2 89.8
June 98.7 93.7 116.2 93.0 96.8 90.3 89.9
July 98.3 93.3 115.3 92.2 96.7 90.1 89.5
Aug. 98.8 93.7 89.2 p 87.2 116.2 92.8 92.2 91.3 93.5 86.0 96.5 90.2 89.8
Sep. 98.1 92.9 115.3 92.0 96.2 89.9 89.4
Oct. 98.0 92.6 115.2 91.7 96.2 89.8 89.2
Nov. 97.4 92.0 88.6 p 86.2 114.6 91.1 92.0 91.3 92.8 85.8 95.9 89.4 88.9
Dec. 97.3 91.9 114.6 91.0 95.9 89.4 88.8
2020 Jan. 96.9 91.2 114.1 90.4 95.9 89.1 88.4
Feb. 96.2 90.5 88.0 p 86.7 113.5 89.7 91.6 91.3 91.9 85.4 95.5 88.7 88.1
Mar. 98.8 92.9 117.8 93.0 96.4 90.0 90.1
Apr. 98.1 92.5 117.5 92.9 96.2 90.1 90.3
May 98.3 92.6 89.0 p 87.3 117.5 92.9 91.2 91.1 91.2 85.8 96.3 90.2 90.3
June 99.7 93.8 119.1 93.9 97.0 90.8 90.9
July 100.4 94.4 120.3 94.8 96.0 90.0 90.3
Aug. 101.5 94.9 90.1 p 88.2 122.4 95.8 92.7 91.3 94.6 86.9 97.0 90.8 91.4
Sep. 101.5 94.8 122.4 95.7 96.8 90.7 91.2
Oct. 101.3 94.7 122.4 95.6 96.6 90.5 91.1
Nov. 100.6 94.1 p 90.4 p 87.8 121.6 95.0 92.9 91.1 95.4 86.7 96.5 90.1 90.6
Dec. 101.8 95.1 122.9 95.8 96.9 90.5 91.0
2021 Jan. 101.3 95.2 122.4 96.0 97.9 91.4 91.8
Feb. 100.6 94.5 p 90.0 p 87.6 121.5 95.1 93.0 91.3 95.4 86.7 97.9 91.2 91.5
Mar. 100.3 94.0 121.2 94.7 97.7 91.1 91.4
Apr. 100.6 94.2 121.9 95.1 97.9 91.2 91.7
May 100.8 94.3 p 88.9 p 85.5 122.3 95.2 92.9 91.1 95.5 86.4 98.1 91.3 91.8
June 100.2 93.7 121.5 94.5 98.0 91.1 91.5
July 99.7 93.5 120.8 94.2 97.6 91.0 91.3
Aug. 99.3 93.2 p 88.0 p 84.6 120.4 93.9 93.9 92.4 96.0 87.1 97.3 90.7 91.0
Sep. 99.4 93.2 120.4 p 93.8 97.3 90.6 p 90.9
Oct. 98.4 p 92.3 119.5 p 93.0 96.7 p 90.0 p 90.3
Nov. 97.6 p 91.6 ... ... 118.8 p 92.5 … … … … 96.1 p 89.5 p 89.9
Dec. 97.1 p 91.1 119.0 p 92.3 p95.8 p 89.0 p 89.6
2022 Jan. 96.6 p 90.6 118.6 p 91.7 p96.8 p 89.8 p 90.2
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's
price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective
exchange rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitive-
ness. The weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more
detailed information on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the
Deutsche Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1  The
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral
exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Australia,
Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan,
Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United
Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and wage indices were not avai-lable, estimates were used.  2 ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the
group EER-19 and additionally Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Peru, Philippines, the
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and
United Arab Emirates.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from
2001 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and
Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including
Latvia, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.  5 Euro area countries
(current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-19.  6 Euro area
countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-42.

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website. In addition, the new Statistical Series 
provide a new basic structure and advanced options for using data and are also available 
on the Bundesbank’s website.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
A list of the articles published in the period from 
2010 to 2021 is available on the Bundesbank’s 
website.
Monthly Report articles
April 2021
– The impact of monetary policy depending on 
the debt situation in the non- financial private 
sector: Evidence for the euro area
– Assessments and expectations of firms in the 
pandemic: findings from the  Bundesbank 
Online Panel Firms
– Digital money: options for payments
May 2021
– The current economic situation in GermanyJune 2021
– Outlook for the German economy for 2021 
to 2023
– Government finances: Central bank bond 
purchases increase sensitivity to interest rate 
changes
– Federal debt: allocate premia on accruals 
basis in budgetary interest expenditure
– Local government finances: how cash ad -
vances can be limited and budget  imbalances 
avoided
July 2021
– Cross-border corporate takeovers: the im -
pact of internationalisation on enterprises in 
Germany
– Crypto tokens and decentralised financial 
applica tions
– Digital risks in the banking sector
– Macroprudential policy and growth-at-risk
August 2021
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2021
– The Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy
– The impact of the Eurosystem’s monetary 
policy on Bitcoin and other crypto tokensDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
85•

– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2020
October 2021
– State government finances in 2020: deficit 
due to temporary effects of pandemic, es -
cape clauses also used to build reserves
– The global economy during the coronavirus 
pandemic
– What do households in Germany think about 
the digital euro? First results from surveys 
and interviews
– The regulation of remuneration at credit in -
stitutions
November 2021
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2021
– Outlook for the German economy for 2022 
to 2024
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2020
January 2022
– Changes in the secured money market
– Climate change and climate policy: analytical 
requirements and options  from a central 
bank perspective
– Scenario- based equity valuation effects in -
duced by greenhouse gas emissions
February 2022
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, January 20212
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
 July 20212
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131
Discussion Paperso
40/2021  
Hitting the elusive inflation target41/2021  
Monetary policy and Bitcoin
42/2021  
Bank risk- taking and impaired monetary policy 
transmission
43/2021  
Gauging the effects of the German COVID-19 
fiscal stimulus package
44/2021  
Household bargaining, pension contributions 
and retirement expectations: evidence from the 
German Panel on Household Finances
45/2021  
Identifying empty creditors with a shock and 
micro-data
46/2021  
Why are interest rates on bank deposits so low?
47/2021  
Consumption taxation to finance pension pay -
ments
48/2021  
Do inflation expectations improve model-based 
inflation forecasts?
49/2021  
US trade policy and the US dollar
50/2021  
Using energy and emissions taxation to finance 
labor tax reductions in a multi-sector economy: 
An assessment with EMuSe
51/2021  
Optimal monetary policy using reinforcement 
learning
52/2021  
Exchange rate depreciations and local business 
cycles: The role of bank loan supply
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
87•

53/2021  
Economic analysis using higher frequency time 
series: Challenges for seasonal adjustment
54/2021  
Markups and financial shocks
55/2021  
The hockey stick Phillips curve and the effective 
lower bound
56/2021  
Economic theories and macroeconomic reality
01/2022  
Climate change and individual behavior
02/2022  
EU enlargement and (temporary) migration: 
Effects  on labour market outcomes in GermanyBanking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, 
January  20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2022  
88•

