Monthly Report
August 2023
Vol. 75  
No 8

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 33512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 p.m. on 18 August 2023.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
The construction boom in the US semiconductor industry  ..................................................  15
The central and eastern European EU Member States between decelerating growth 
and persistent inflation  .......................................................................................................  18
Supply- side and demand- side factors limiting production in the euro area  .........................  22
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  28
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  29
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  41
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  50
The role of inflation and inflation expectations in wage negotiations during the period 
of high inflation  ..................................................................................................................  54
Potential for correction of residential property price  exaggerations in Germany  .................  58
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  62Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
5

Overview
German economy still lack -
lustre amid persistently high 
inflation
Global activity subdued
Global activity remained subdued in the second 
quarter. Private consumption in particular was 
slow to gain traction because although infla -
tion eased, it was still strong in many places. At 
the same time, the tighter monetary policy 
stance in many regions is likely to have been an 
increasing drag on the global economy. In the 
euro area, this backdrop meant that it was only 
thanks to irregular effects that the economy 
was able to register perceptible growth. Eco -
nomic activity in the United States, by contrast, 
remained in comparatively good shape. In 
China, meanwhile, the recovery set in motion 
by the end of the zero- COVID policy quickly 
lost momentum.
Around the world, industry in particular was 
impacted by the frail economy. Industrial pro -
duction worldwide and global trade have been 
lacklustre for more than a year now. Surveys of 
manufacturing firms are showing no signs of a 
turnaround. Quite the opposite: purchasing 
managers’ indices indicate that output and 
new orders were down again in July. This mal -
aise now appears to have spilled over into the 
services sector, where growth had previously 
been fairly brisk. By contrast, consumer confi -
dence in a number of large advanced econ -
omies increased markedly, probably on the 
back of the continued robust labour markets 
and the prospect of a renewed upturn in real 
incomes.Price pressures easing world -
wide, but inflation rates still 
high
The past few months have seen consumer price 
inflation rates decline significantly around the 
world, even if they were still high in many 
places. By July, annual inflation in the group of 
advanced economies had dropped to 4.3%, 
largely on account of the significantly lower en -
ergy prices. It would also appear that under -
lying inflation has now passed its peak, with 
the core rate declining to 5.0% as this report 
went to press. At the same time, however, the 
impression took hold that inflation rates will 
nonetheless persist for longer above the rates 
targeted by central banks. In particular, the on -
going high wage pressures could make it 
harder to press ahead with curbing inflation. It 
also appeared that no further relief was forth -
coming from commodity markets as this report 
went to press. In fact, crude oil prices have 
even picked up again noticeably since the end 
of June.
Global financial markets: all 
eyes on inflation outlook
The inflation outlook shaped events in financial 
markets. Price pressures turned out to be unex -
pectedly persistent, mainly for the less volatile 
core components of consumer prices. Labour 
markets, which are crucial for the pace at 
which inflation declines, proved to be robust as 
well. This is the background against which cen -
tral banks in most major currency areas decided 
on further policy rate increases and made it 
clear that the degree of monetary policy restric -
tion would continue to increase. Only towards 
the end of the period under review did expect -
ations emerge –  especially for the United 
States  – that the end of the rate hike cycle 
might be reached in the near future. Risk- free Global economy 
still negatively 
impacted by 
fallout from 
strong inflation
Global industrial 
activity weak in 
particularInflation rates 
on the decline 
worldwide
Yields up amid 
persistent core 
inflation and 
monetary policy 
tighteningDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
6

yields in bond markets rose on balance over 
the reporting period.
Sentiment in the markets for risky asset classes 
was upbeat overall, as reflected in a robust 
appetite for risk which was also buoyed by the 
continued decline in uncertainty surrounding 
the US regional banking sector. This led to a 
drop in the yield spreads on less liquid bonds, 
corporate bonds and some other government 
bonds, including in the euro area. The ECB 
Governing Council’s decision not to reinvest 
the principal payments from maturing securities 
under the asset purchase programme (APP) as 
of July 2023 also did not prompt any 
reassessment of the differences in credit quality 
across European government bonds.
In equity markets, investors’ persistently strong 
appetite for risk combined with a more robust 
US economy provided a significant boost for 
the US S&P 500 index; in Europe, by contrast, 
the gloomy economic outlook for the euro 
area meant that the EURO STOXX index posted 
minor losses. Overall, the monetary policy 
measures taken are passing through to finan -
cing conditions in the euro area capital market 
roughly as strongly as past experience would 
suggest. Market participants’ assessments of 
underlying price pressures in the different cur -
rency areas, and thus their view of future cen -
tral bank policy, provided key impetus for for -
eign exchange markets as well. In this context, 
the euro appreciated for a time against the US 
dollar, but was unable to hold onto its gains, 
with the result that the exchange rate remained 
almost unchanged on balance.
ECB Governing Council raises 
key interest rates further
The ECB Governing Council raised the three key 
ECB interest rates by 25 basis points at its mon -
etary policy meeting in June 2023 and did the 
same at its July meeting. The policy rate in -
creases are a response to the stubborn inflation 
environment, as reflected in particular by underlying inflation. The key ECB interest rates 
need to be set at sufficiently restrictive levels 
for as long as necessary to achieve a timely re -
turn of inflation to the 2% medium- term tar -
get. Going forward, the ECB Governing Council 
will continue to follow a data-  dependent ap -
proach.
The ECB Governing Council also confirmed in 
June its announcement from May that it would 
stop reinvesting the principal payments from 
maturing securities under the APP as of July 
2023. In July, the Governing Council also de -
cided to set the remuneration of minimum re -
serves at 0% to improve the efficiency of its 
monetary policy. That decision reduces the 
total amount of interest payable by the Euro -
system on reserves while preserving the effect -
iveness of monetary policy.
Supply- side and demand- side 
factors weakening credit 
growth in euro area
As a result of this continued monetary policy 
tightening and weak economic developments, 
euro area monetary growth continued to de -
cline in the second quarter of 2023, with the 
annual rate of the broad monetary aggregate 
M3 falling to just over ½% at the end of June. 
This was due, in particular, to the ongoing de -
cline in overnight deposits, which still earn rela -
tively low interest. Given the widening interest 
rate spread, investors continued to rebalance 
their portfolios towards higher- yielding forms 
of investment – and away from M3 as well. On 
the supply side, the ongoing reduction of the 
Eurosystem’s balance sheet combined with still 
weak bank lending caused monetary growth to 
slow. The subdued economic outlook, the as -
sociated credit risk and the higher financing 
costs dampened lending to non- financial cor -
porations and households. According to the 
latest Bank Lending Survey, in the reporting 
quarter loan demand fell again while the con -
tinued tightening of lending conditions was a 
factor in weaker credit growth in the euro area.Diverging eco -
nomic outlook 
leads to mixed 
developments in 
global equity 
markets
Monetary pol -
icy: ECB Govern -
ing Council 
raises key inter -
est rates twice 
by 25 basis 
points and …… discontinues 
APP reinvest -
ments
Monetary 
growth reduced 
by investors’ 
portfolio rebal -
ancing and 
weak lendingDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
7

German economy still experi -
encing weak spell
The German economy is still experiencing a 
period of weakness. According to the Federal 
Statistical Office’s flash estimate, economic 
output stagnated in the second quarter of 
2023, after having contracted in the winter 
half- year (October- March). Weak foreign de -
mand weighed on industry. Higher financing 
costs also presented headwinds for the econ -
omy. These depressed demand for construction 
work and capital goods and slowed lending. 
Loans to households for house purchase, in 
particular, saw significantly less demand than in 
previous quarters. However, growth in loans to 
non- financial corporations also continued to 
lose momentum in the second quarter. Devel -
opments in the real economy could have been 
even weaker were it not for the still high back -
log of orders in parts of industry and construc -
tion and abating supply bottlenecks. The sound 
labour market also acted as a tailwind for the 
economy. As wages continued to rise steeply 
and inflation was no longer quite so high, pri -
vate consumption probably recovered some -
what.
Wages continue to rise steeply
The labour market is proving fairly robust in the 
current phase of cyclical weakness. Neverthe -
less, in the second quarter the previously high 
pace of employment growth declined mark -
edly, and unemployment saw a moderate up -
tick. Although labour market tightness eased 
slightly, there are still a comparatively large 
number of vacancies given the relatively low 
unemployment figures. The leading indicators 
suggest that employment will remain stable in 
the coming months, with unemployment con -
tinuing to rise slightly.
Negotiated wages continued to rise sharply in 
the second quarter of 2023. Growth in actual 
earnings probably outpaced that of negotiated 
wages in the second quarter as well. Moreover, the most recent wage agreements were once 
again generally high. As before, they consist of 
a combination of significant inflation compen -
sation bonuses and high permanent wage in -
creases. With inflation still high and the labour 
market remaining fairly tight, high wage settle -
ments are expected in the coming months, 
too.
Core inflation rate still very 
high
Consumer prices (as measured by the Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices, or HICP) once 
again rose sharply in the second quarter. Aver -
aged over April to June 2023, they increased by 
a seasonally adjusted 1.0%, compared with 
0.9% in the first quarter. Looking at the year-  
on- year figures, the inflation rate fell from 
8.8% to 6.9% in the second quarter of 2023. 
This was mainly because energy prices had 
risen sharply in the previous year in the wake of 
the Russian invasion of Ukraine and this base 
effect has now dissipated. The prices of food 
and non- energy industrial goods also went up 
less sharply than in the previous quarter. By 
contrast, services prices picked up significantly 
year on year. Accordingly, the core rate, which 
excludes the volatile components of energy 
and food, held stubbornly firm at 5.6% in the 
second quarter, compared with 5.5% in the 
quarter before.
In July, the inflation rate fell slightly to 6.5%, 
after having stood at 6.8% in June. The core 
inflation rate excluding energy and food rose a 
little, however, to 6.2%. This high figure was 
partly due to one- off effects from last year’s fis -
cal relief measures and the effect of the in -
crease in the HICP weight for package holidays 
in 2023. But even without these one- off ef -
fects, the core rate is likely to have remained at 
a very high level of around 5½%. In the coming 
months, inflation will, as things currently stand, 
probably come down further, mainly thanks to 
an increasingly dampening contribution from 
energy prices. In addition, abating price pres -German econ -
omy lacklustre 
in Q2
Labour market 
fairly robustNegotiated 
wages rose 
sharply, recent 
wage agree -
ments contain 
large increases
Inflation stub -
bornly high in 
Q2 2023
Inflation rate 
down slightly in 
July, likely to 
subside over rest 
of the year as 
wellDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
8

sures along supply chains and lapsing one- off 
effects are likely to play a part in lower infla -
tion. By contrast, wage growth will probably 
remain strong, even going into the new year. 
This is a key reason why the inflation rate is 
likely to stay above 2% for longer. Higher infla -
tion expectations and potentially recurring en -
ergy price shocks also pose upside risks to the 
price outlook.
Economic output expected to 
more or less stagnate in the 
third quarter, too
German economic output will probably remain 
largely unchanged again in the third quarter of 
2023. Given stable employment and strong 
wage growth, as well as declining inflation, the 
recovery in private consumption is likely to con -
tinue. This will also give a boost to the services 
sector. Some subsectors in industry and con -
struction are continuing to benefit from their 
large order backlog. Diminishing supply bottle -
necks mean that orders can be processed more 
quickly. However, industrial output looks set to 
remain weak at first, as foreign demand has 
been on a downward trend of late. High finan -
cing costs will probably continue to weigh on 
investment. They are also still dampening de -
mand in the construction sector, which is likely 
to be increasingly reflected in production.
Government deficit decreasing 
as temporary support meas -
ures wind down
The German government will record a signifi -
cant deficit in 2023, too. This is because it con -
tinues to provide extensive crisis- related sup -
port to enterprises and households, mainly by 
using energy price brakes and, in the area of 
wages, by exempting inflation compensation 
bonuses from taxes in some cases. Neverthe -
less, the general government deficit is likely to 
decline again on the year (2022: 2.7% of GDP). 
This is because, compared with 2022, tempor -ary support measures are likely to become less 
significant overall. One major reason for this is 
the fact that energy prices are lower than ex -
pected. As a result, energy subsidies are weigh -
ing far less heavily on the government budget 
than originally anticipated.
The deficit is likely to fall again next year as the 
volume of temporary support measures con -
tinues to decrease. However, the rest of the 
government budget (excluding the temporary 
support measures) is increasingly moving into 
deficit. These diverging developments mainly 
apply to central government (including its spe -
cial funds), which is funding the lion’s share of 
the support measures and will thus benefit the 
most from the easing of this burden. At the 
same time, its credit-  financed expenditure on 
climate policy and defence is rising sharply. Fur -
thermore, there are signs that state and local 
government budgets will also be fairly expan -
sionary in the year ahead.
Central government building 
up large deficits in off- budget 
entities
With regard to central government finances, it 
is not enough to focus solely on net borrowing 
in the core budget. Although the core budget 
will again comply with the standard limit under 
the debt brake as of 2023, it is still showing a 
large deficit this year, much of which is being 
financed from the general reserves. The off-  
budget entities also show significant deficits in 
the planning period from 2024 to 2027. They 
are mainly used to finance expenditure on en -
ergy and climate policy, as well as defence. To 
fund its projects here, central government is 
using reserves from coronavirus emergency 
loans as well as loans from the Armed Forces 
Fund. Overall, the structural deficit is likely to 
be significantly higher than the debt brake ceil -
ing for net borrowing. That said, the plans for 
the off- budget entities have not been pub -
lished in full. It is also unclear how central gov -
ernment will cope with the financial challenges Economic out -
put is likely to 
more or less 
stagnate again 
in the third 
quarter of 2023
General govern -
ment still run -
ning significant 
deficit in 2023 
owing to exten -
sive support 
measuresExpiring crisis 
measures will 
further reduce 
deficit in 2024; 
expansionary 
spending stance 
in other areas
Central govern -
ment continues 
to apply the 
debt brake to its 
core budget, 
with significant 
deficits in its off- 
budget entitiesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
9

once the scope for deficits in the off- budget 
entities has been used up. From 2028 onwards, 
it will also have to make substantial repayments 
for emergency borrowing and EU debt.
Need for sound fiscal policy in 
high inflation environment
Given the high level of inflation, it would be 
prudent from a stability policy perspective not 
to adopt any further measures that increase 
the deficit. Otherwise, monetary policy would 
need to be tightened even more sharply in 
order to achieve its inflation target. For fiscal 
policy, this also means, for example, that the 
funds freed up from energy support measures 
should not be spent elsewhere. This does not 
mean neglecting important policy objectives. 
Rather, they would have to be funded directly 
– either by lowering expenditure elsewhere or 
by increasing revenue. This would, for example, 
allow measures that improve growth condi -
tions to be implemented without stimulating 
demand through additional deficits.
The binding effect of the debt brake is also 
strengthened if large- scale expenditure is not 
funded upfront via the escape clause. Effective 
fiscal rules ensure sound public finances. And 
sound public finances are not only important 
for a stability- oriented monetary policy stance; they also underpin a government’s ability to 
take action.
At present, the debt brake is making the bor -
rowing framework relatively restrictive. A re -
form that moderately raised the regular limits 
of the debt brake would therefore also be jus -
tifiable in the interests of stable public finances. 
The Bundesbank has made proposals for a 
stability-  oriented reform. For example, the 
scope for deficits could be extended if the debt 
ratio is below 60%. If investments are to be 
prioritised within the prescribed limits, leeway 
could be reserved for net investment.
Public finances in some other euro area coun -
tries are considerably less favourable than in 
Germany. At the end of the period under re -
view, the German debt ratio stood at around 
66% and, in line with current plans, is gradually 
falling further towards 60%. By contrast, debt 
ratios of over 100% are expected for 2023 and 
beyond in a number of euro area countries in -
cluding the major economies of Italy, Spain and 
France. It is crucial that the fiscal rules encour -
age governments to bring down high debt 
ratios. For this to happen, the Stability and 
Growth Pact will have to be more stringent and 
more binding after the reform. The debate sur -
rounding this reform is still underway. How -
ever, the European Commission’s current pro -
posal risks failing to meet this objective.Given high infla -
tion, it would be 
prudent not to 
ease fiscal policy
Effective debt 
brake ensures 
sound public 
finances; …… stability- 
oriented reform 
justifiable
Very high debt 
ratios in some 
parts of the euro 
area; binding 
fiscal rules 
therefore par -
ticularly import -
antDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
10

Global and European setting
Global economic 
 developments
Global activity remained subdued in the second 
quarter. Private consumption, in particular, was 
slow to pick up on account of price inflation, 
which was easing but still strong in many 
places. At the same time, the tightening of 
monetary policy stances in many regions is 
likely to have been an increasing drag on the 
global economy. In the euro area, this back -
drop meant that it was only thanks to irregular 
effects that the economy was able to register 
perceptible growth. The United Kingdom’s 
economy barely made any forward progress. 
Economic activity in the United States, by con -
trast, remained in comparatively good shape. 
In Japan, upward movement in aggregate ac -
tivity continued with greater intensity. In China, 
meanwhile, the recovery set in motion by the 
end of the zero- COVID policy quickly lost mo -
mentum.
Around the world, industry in particular has 
been impacted by the frail economy right up to 
the present date. Industrial production world -
wide and global trade have been lacklustre for 
more than a year now. Surveys amongst enter -
prises have so far shown no sign of any turn -
about, either. Quite the opposite: purchasing 
managers’ indices indicate that output and 
new orders were down again in July. This mal -
aise now appears to have spilled over into the 
services sector, where growth had previously 
been fairly brisk.1 A boost in private consump -
tion could put wind in the global economy’s 
sails. Consumer confidence has recently in -
creased markedly in some major industrial 
countries, probably on the back of the con -
tinued robust labour markets and the prospect 
of a renewed upturn in real incomes.The past few months have seen consumer price 
inflation rates decline significantly around the 
world, even if they were still high in many 
places. By July, annual inflation in the group of Global activity 
remains 
subdued  …
… especially 
in industryInflation rates 
on the decline 
worldwide
International sentiment indicators
Sources: S&P Global, national data, Haver Analytics  and Bundes-
bank  calculations.  1 Components  for  output  (manufacturing) 
and business activity (services). 2 Australia, the EU, Japan, the 
United Kingdom and the United States. Weighted using private 
consumption expenditure for 2019 in US dollars.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 2023–3–2–10+1+2Seasonally adjusted
2030405060Global purchasing managers' indices1
Diffusion index
Manufacturing
Services sector
Consumer confidence in industrial countries2
Standardised
Sources:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  national  data. 
* EU, Canada, Japan, Norway, Switzerland, the United King-
dom and the United States. 1 Consumer prices excluding en-
ergy and food; additionally excluding alcoholic beverages and 
tobacco  products  for  the  EU,  Norway,  Switzerland  and  the 
United Kingdom.
Deutsche BundesbankConsumer prices in industrial countries*
0123456789
+++++++++Year-on-year percentage change
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023Headline Core rate1
1 The services sector has rarely been able to decouple itself 
from a weakness in the manufacturing sector for long, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
11

advanced economies had dropped to 4.3%, 
just under 1.6  percentage points lower than 
three months earlier, largely on account of the 
significantly lower energy prices. Underlying in -
flation, however, also appears to have now 
passed its peak. Consumer prices excluding en -
ergy and food were 5.0% higher than in the 
previous year as this report went to press. 
However, further curbing of inflation could be -
come more difficult. This is due, not least, to 
wage growth, which remains very vigorous in 
many places.
There were no signs of further relief from the 
commodity markets at the end of the period under review. In fact, crude oil prices have even 
picked up again markedly since the end of 
June. This was mainly due to new production 
cutbacks by OPEC and its partners. Against this 
background, it appears increasingly less likely 
that global oil output will meet demand in the 
second half of the year.2 As this report went to 
press, the price of a barrel of Brent crude oil 
stood at US$86, just under 14% more than in 
May. The decline in gas prices also petered out 
in recent months. At €37/ MWh, European gas 
(TTF) was noticeably more expensive than in 
May. Thanks to well- stocked storage facilities 
and subdued demand, however, chances are 
good that drastic price spikes – like those ob -
served in the previous year – could be avoided 
in the coming heating season. The prices of 
most other commodities have seen only a 
minor decline of late. Concerns about the sup -
ply of some food products could become even 
more serious in future. Following Russia’s ter -
mination of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, this is 
true of cereals, amongst other goods.3
The decisive factor for the way the global econ -
omy develops going forward will be how 
quickly and sustainably consumer price infla -
tion can be brought back into line with the sta -
bility objectives of the central banks. The Inter -
national Monetary Fund (IMF) took a sceptical 
view in its regular economic outlook update for 
July.4 Inflation targets are unlikely to be met in 
almost 90% of all economies in 2024, either. 
For the advanced economies, the correspond -
ing inflation forecasts were actually revised 
slightly upwards again. The staff of the IMF 
largely maintained their subdued growth out -
look for the global economy. At rates of 3.0% 
each, global GDP is likely to expand much more 
slowly this year and the next than was usual in 
the years before the pandemic. However, given Decline in com -
modity prices 
levels off
IMF not expect -
ing quick return 
to price stabilityCommodity prices
Sources:  Bloomberg  Finance  L.P.,  Haver  Analytics,  ICE  and 
HWWI. • Latest figures: Average of 1 to 11 August 2023, or 1 
to 17 August 2023 for crude oil and natural gas. 1 Price for 
the front-month futures contract.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 202320406080100120Monthly averages
04080120160200240
Reduced scale
Natural gas (TTF)1
in euro per MWhCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
80100120140160180 Food and beverages
2020 = 100, US$ basis
2 For example, the International Energy Agency expects an 
undersupplied global oil market in the second half of 2023, 
see International Energy Agency (2023).
3 Global supply of rice could also decline significantly, as 
India, the world’s most important rice exporter, has re -
cently prohibited exports of various varieties of the crop in 
the face of rising prices.
4 See International Monetary Fund (2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
12

the easing of the bank turmoil that occurred in 
March and April, the IMF estimates the risk 
profile to be less unfavourable.
China
In China, the economic recovery that started 
after the end of the zero- COVID policy lost 
considerable momentum in the second quarter 
of 2023. According to the official estimate, real 
GDP grew by only 0.8% in seasonally adjusted 
terms compared with the first quarter, in which 
it had risen by 2.2%. Consumption, in particu -
lar, lost momentum. Exports also declined 
markedly, and the real estate market tended 
once more to sluggishness after having stabil -
ised at the beginning of the year. All of this also 
dampened consumer price developments. In 
July, they were even 0.3% lower than in the 
previous year. Food and energy prices fell in 
particular. However, even excluding these 
goods, inflation was subdued at 0.8% at the 
end of the period under review. Given the 
broad economic slowdown, the Chinese gov -
ernment recently launched some support 
measures and the central bank eased its mon -
etary policy slightly.
Nevertheless, growth in the Chinese economy 
is likely to remain anaemic for the time being. 
According to purchasing managers’ surveys, 
sentiment in industry has been clouded, and 
households have also not had much optimism. 
The deteriorating labour market situation has 
contributed to this. Youth unemployment has 
continued to rise significantly in recent months, 
reaching just over one- fifth of the labour force 
under 25. All in all, there is much to suggest 
that the COVID-  19 pandemic and, in particular, 
the containment measures taken in this context 
have left China with deeper economic scars 
than other countries.Other selected emerging 
 market economies
India’s economy appears to have remained on 
a buoyant growth trajectory in the second 
quarter. This is indicated by persistently favour -
able surveys among purchasing managers. In 
the services sector, the corresponding index ac -
tually rose in July to its highest level since 2010. 
However, the current monsoon season, which 
could be considerably weaker than usual due 
to the weather phenomenon El Niño, poses a 
risk for further macroeconomic developments. 
A weaker monsoon would worsen harvest pro -
spects and with them the income situation of a 
large part of the rural population. Owing to 
weather- related harvest difficulties, some food 
prices have already risen significantly in recent 
weeks. As a result, consumer price inflation 
rose to 7.4% in July. The central bank left its 
policy rate unchanged at 6.5%.Recovery loses 
momentum
No significant 
growth acceler -
ation expected 
in the short termBuoyant growth 
in India likely 
continuingConsumption and price developments 
in China
5,0005,5006,0006,5007,000
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China and Bundesbank 
calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankPre-pandemic trend
Pandemic/zero-COVID policy–10+1+2+3+4+5+6Consumption expenditure
per capita basis, quarterly data, 
seasonally adjusted
Excluding energy 
and foodYuan
Overall price indexConsumer prices
Year-on-year change%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
13

In Brazil, the underlying cyclical trend is likely to 
have remained rather weak in the second quar -
ter of 2023. Real GDP , which had risen very 
steeply at the beginning of the year due to a 
record harvest, may in fact have contracted 
somewhat again. At any rate, domestic de -
mand continued to provide only a small boost 
in the second quarter. Consumer price inflation 
nevertheless rose to 4.0% in July on the year. 
Transport costs, in particular, have risen re -
cently after the government reintroduced the 
tax on fuel, which had been suspended last 
year. By contrast, the core rate excluding food 
and energy has fallen significantly in recent 
months. At the beginning of August, the cen -
tral bank reduced the policy rate by 50 basis 
points to 13.25%.
In recent months, Russia’s economy appears to 
have remained on the path to recovery it em -
barked on following the sharp slump at the 
start of the war in Ukraine. According to data 
from the country’s national statistical office 
Rosstat, real GDP rose by 4.9% year on year in 
the second quarter of 2023. The recovery was 
driven in part by the significant expansion in 
public expenditure since the beginning of the 
war, in particular for the production of 
weapons. Moreover, the availability of foreign 
intermediate goods appears to have improved 
considerably. This was due, in particular, to the 
sharp increase in deliveries from China and 
other neighbours of Russia. As a result, its trade 
surplus fell considerably and downward pres -
sure on the rouble intensified significantly. 
Against this backdrop, consumer price inflation 
rose to 4.3% in July. For this reason, the Bank 
of Russia has increased its policy rate since July 
in two steps by a total of 450 basis points to 
12%.
United States
In the United States, the economy remained in 
good shape in the second quarter. According 
to preliminary estimates, real GDP grew by 
0.6% in seasonally adjusted terms compared with the previous quarter. The robust domestic 
economy made up for weaknesses in foreign 
business. Households continued to expand 
their consumption after the considerable rise 
already seen at the start of the year. Govern -
ment demand also continued to support eco -
nomic growth. The impulse was even greater 
owing to gross fixed capital formation, which 
picked up substantially after a one- year 
drought. Further easing of supply constraints in 
the transport sector made itself felt here. Com -
mercial construction benefited from a boom in 
the semiconductor sector, which was also 
sparked by political initiatives (see the box on 
pp.  15f.). By contrast, the decline in private 
housing investment continued, albeit at a 
slower pace. Most of the adjustments to less 
favourable financing conditions appear to have 
already been made in this sector.
The tightening of monetary policy over the past 
one and a half years has had an increasing im -
pact in other areas. Although labour market 
utilisation has remained high of late, job and 
wage growth have continued to decline slightly. 
Consumer price increases have also been less 
pronounced in recent months, with lower en -
ergy prices playing a key role. In July, the con -
sumer price index (CPI) rose by 3.2% on the 
year. Price inflation also eased somewhat when 
excluding energy and food. However, the core 
rate was still 4.7% at the end of the period 
under review. In this context, the Federal Re -
serve System increased the target range for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points in July, 
making it 5.25% to 5.5%.
Japan
Japan’s economic growth picked up momen -
tum in the second quarter. According to pre -
liminary estimates, real GDP increased by 1.5% 
on the quarter after seasonal adjustment. 
However, this was largely due to high net ex -
ports. Following a steep decline in the previous 
quarter, exports of goods, including motor ve -
hicles in particular, saw a distinct recovery. Ex -Economic activ -
ity in Brazil lack -
ing momentum
Russia’s econ -
omy probably 
still on path to 
recovery
Robust eco -
nomic activityMonetary policy 
tightening is 
gradually having 
an impact
Significant GDP 
growthDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
14

The construction boom in the US semiconductor industry
Governments around the world are cur-
rently competing to establish semicon-
ductor production sites. This development 
has been triggered not least by the experi-
ences of the past few years. The pandemic 
led to repeated shortages of semiconductor 
products on account of both supply disrup-
tions and extremely vigorous demand. The 
automotive industry in particular suffered 
considerable production losses due to a 
lack of intermediate products. Furthermore, 
concerns about being too reliant on Asia 
have increased recently in western industrial 
countries amid rising geopolitical tensions. 
Almost three- quarters of the semiconduct-
ors produced worldwide come from China, 
Taiwan, Japan and South Korea.1
Against this backdrop, the US government 
is pushing ahead with initiatives to 
strengthen semiconductor production in 
the United States. Last year, the US govern-
ment adopted the CHIPS and Science Act, 
which will provide subsidies of around 
US$280 billion up until 2031 to promote 
the semiconductor industry. The bulk of the 
expenditure is to be used for research pur-
poses. US$39 billion is being fed directly 
into fostering the construction of semicon-
ductor production sites. Added to this are 
around US$24 billion worth of tax credits 
for semiconductor investment.2
These incentives appear to be having sig-
nifi  cant effects. Numerous international 
technology companies have announced the opening of new sites and their intention to 
expand in the United States. The total vol-
ume of the ongoing and planned projects is 
estimated at almost US$220 billion.3 This is 
more than fi  ve times the construction in-
vestment for the entire US technology sec-
tor in 2022.4
Despite complaints about long approval 
processes and a shortage of skilled workers, 
many investment projects have already 
been initiated in recent months. The US 
technology sector’s expenditure on con-
struction investment tripled last year. Its 
share in private non- residential construction 
investment jumped from less than 6% in 
the second quarter of 2022 to more than 
16% most recently. The surge in investment 
in the technology sector also explains why 
non- residential construction investment 
1 Data refer to the year 2020. See Congressional Re-
search Service (2023a).
2 See Congressional Budget Offi   ce (2022) and The 
White House (2022).
3 See Semiconductor Industry Association (2023).
4 This includes not only the semiconductor industry 
but also, in particular, the software, consumer elec-
tronics and e- mobility sectors.Non-residential construction investment 
in the United States
Sources: U.S. Census Bureau, Haver Analytics and Bundesbank 
calculations. 1 Production of computers, electronic and elec-
trical products.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 20233540455055
0510
05101520
Percentage share of the technology sectorUS$ billion
Excluding the technology sector1
Technology sector1US$ billionTotalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
15

ports of travel services also rose briskly again. 
By contrast, imports fell again significantly, re -
flecting subdued domestic activity. Private con -
sumption declined and gross fixed capital for -
mation increased only marginally. Nevertheless, 
the labour market remained robust. Unemploy -
ment dropped to 2.5% by June. In line with the 
above, wage growth recently picked up mark -
edly. Recent wage agreements suggest that the 
coming months should continue to see consid -
erable growth. Consumer price inflation also 
remained strong by Japanese standards. The 
year- on- year CPI rate barely changed towards 
the end of the period under review, standing at 
3.3% in July. Against this backdrop, the Bank of 
Japan has maintained its expansionary stance 
as at the end of July, but has announced that it 
will be more flexible in future. The fluctuation 
band around ten- year government bond yields 
will be interpreted less rigidly.United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, economic activity im -
proved only slightly in the second quarter. Sea -
sonally and price- adjusted GDP rose by 0.2% 
on the quarter. The services sector in particular 
stayed subdued, although unusually sunny 
weather provided the leisure activity and hospi -
tality sectors with good quarterly results. In the 
retail sector, real gross value added remained 
well below its pre- pandemic level. Construction 
output rose markedly in the favourable wea -
ther conditions. Manufacturing output actually 
increased robustly. By contrast, the labour mar -
ket situation continued to deteriorate. The un -
employment rate rose to 4.2% at the end of 
the period under review. However, this has not 
yet curbed high wage growth and has also 
contributed to the year- on- year rate of the Har -
monised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) re -
maining at 6.8% in July. In the face of persist -
ently high inflation, the Bank of England con -
tinued to tighten its monetary policy stance, Economic activ -
ity still subduedgrew strongly overall on the year. In other 
non- residential construction, the situation 
remained tense in the face of ongoing 
problems, such as the high vacancy rates 
for offi   ce buildings and the challenges 
posed by tighter fi  nancing conditions.
Nevertheless, the direct impact of the con-
struction boom in the technology sector on 
aggregate economic activity in the United 
States is likely to be rather modest given its 
small weight. Non- residential construction 
investment contributed just one- quarter of 
a percentage point overall to the real GDP 
growth of 2.6% in the last four quarters. 
The impact on the labour market is also 
likely to be barely visible.5
However, the US government could achieve 
at least some of its industrial policy goals. 
Downstream production should become 
more resilient through the promotion of the domestic semiconductor industry. Never-
theless, the pursuit of greater self- suffi   ciency 
means that the potential offered by the 
international division of labour remains un-
tapped. It should also be noted that other 
regions, including the European Union (EU), 
are likewise promoting the establishment of 
semiconductor production sites. The aim is 
for one- fi  fth of all semiconductors to come 
from the EU by 2030; compared with 10% 
at present.6 The danger of all of these initia-
tives is that the substantial use of public 
funds will create global overcapacity.
5 According to announcements in the industrial sector, 
the new manufacturing sites would create only 50,000 
additional jobs in the United States. This would not 
even be in line with the trend in aggregate employ-
ment growth seen within one month. See Semicon-
ductor Industry Association (2023).
6 By launching its initiative for a European Chips Act, 
the EU is pursuing similar objectives to those of the US 
government; see European Union (2022). For an over-
view of funding programmes in other countries, see 
Congressional Research Service (2023b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
16

raising its key interest rate by a total of 75 basis 
points in July and August to 5.25%.
Poland
In Poland, economic output fell significantly by 
3.7%, following a steep rise in the previous 
quarter. The underlying trend dynamics of the 
Polish economy have thus moved sideways 
since the start of the Russian invasion of 
Ukraine. Economic growth has also weakened 
in other countries in the region since the out -
break of the war (see the box on pp. 18 ff.). In 
Poland, inflation abated only little and re -
mained exceptionally strong, weighing on pur -
chasing power and dampening domestic de -
mand. In price and seasonally adjusted terms, 
retail sales continued to decline substantially in 
the second quarter. Industrial output likewise 
fell significantly. By contrast, impetus was pro -
vided by investment. The labour market re -
mained robust. The unemployment rate re -
mained close to its historical low. Wages grew 
robustly by 12% on the year. Consumer price 
inflation decreased slightly to 10.8% in July. At 
10.6%, the core rate was almost as high. The 
National Bank of Poland left its policy rate un -
changed at 6.75%.
Macroeconomic trends in the 
euro area
Following two quarters of stagnation, the 
underlying trend of economic output in the 
euro area improved slightly in the second quar -
ter of 2023. According to the Eurostat flash 
estimate, real GDP rose surprisingly sharply by 
0.3% on the quarter after seasonal adjustment. 
However, this included a comparatively large 
contribution from Ireland. Excluding Ireland, 
whose GDP is heavily influenced by the stra -
tegic activities of multinational enterprises,5 
growth amounted to just under 0.2%. The 
GDP figures for the two preceding quarters 
were revised slightly upwards as part of the 
regular revisions of the national accounts. Fol -lowing these revisions, the figures are now in -
dicative of a prolonged period of weakness, 
but not a recession. In this context, demand-  
side factors increasingly displaced supply- side 
factors as the most significant factors limiting 
production (see the box on pp. 22 and 23).
Private consumption in the euro area is likely to 
have stabilised in the second quarter, following 
two quarters of marked decline. Disposable in -
come is also likely to have risen very consider -
ably again and, in light of the gradual easing of 
inflation, purchasing power is also likely to 
have increased somewhat. In particular, ex -
penditure for services, including transport and 
hospitality services, probably saw some growth 
as a result. By contrast, retail sales stagnated in 
real terms, and there was another drop in new 
car registrations. Despite steady improvement, Marked decline 
in GDP
Slight rise in 
economic 
output No further 
decline in 
private  con -
sumptionReal GDP in selected industrial countries
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Cabinet Office of Japan, 
Office for National Statistics, Statistics Poland and Bundesbank 
calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 20239095100105110115Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, log scale
United KingdomUnited States
9095100105110
9095100105
PolandJapan
7580859095100
5 Ireland’s GDP grew by 3.3% on the quarter. For more 
information on the issues surrounding Ireland’s GDP , see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
17

The central and eastern European EU Member States 
between decelerating growth and persistent infl  ation
The severe economic shocks of recent years 
hit the central and eastern European EU 
Member States especially hard. This group 
of countries overcame the COVID- 19 pan-
demic surprisingly quickly, and, at fi  rst, the 
brisk growth of the preceding years con-
tinued. The fallout from Russia’s war of ag-
gression against Ukraine placed central and 
eastern European economies under re-
newed pressure, however. Price infl  ation, in 
particular, heated up considerably.During this crisis, too, the central and east-
ern European EU Member States initially 
proved more resilient than anticipated, with 
the grouping still recording a 4.1% increase 
in real gross domestic product (GDP) in 
2022. However, economic growth weak-
ened signifi  cantly over the course of the 
year. In some countries –  Estonia, Latvia 
and Lithuania, as well as the Czech Republic 
and Hungary – economic output declined 
markedly, at least for a time.
Success in securing the energy supply and 
the fact that the direct effects of diminished 
opportunities for sales in Russia and Ukraine 
turned out to be moderate were instrumen-
tal in keeping economic developments fa-
vourable overall last year. In addition, indus-
trial output was buoyed by the easing of 
supply chain problems and by pent- up de-
mand. Some countries also benefi  ted heav-
ily from the return of tourism following the 
end of the pandemic. As a result, the labour 
market situation remained favourable. At 
4%, unemployment stayed close to its low, 
despite the infl  ux of Ukrainian refugees 
fl  eeing the war. Employment continued to 
climb in most of the countries.
This drove a signifi  cant increase in infl  ation, 
however. Immediately after the outbreak of 
the war, the infl  ation rate as measured by 
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices, 
rose from about 8% in January 2022 to 
more than 10% in March. It continued its 
upward trajectory as the year progressed, 
reaching just over 16% in November. Over-
all, this group of countries experienced 
higher rates of infl  ation than the western 
and southern European countries. This was 
partly due to the above- average rise in food 
prices, a component accorded a higher Economic performance, unemployment 
and consumer prices in the central and 
eastern European EU Member States
Sources:  Eurostat  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 ILO  defin-
ition, seasonally adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 2023024681012
50510152025
–+++++Lin scale
Unemployment rate1 (%)
Range of the highest and 
lowest inflation rates considered
in the analysisHICP
Year-on-year percentage change90100110120130 2015 = 100, adjusted for
seasonal and calendar effects, log scale
Real GDPDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
18

weighting in the basket of goods in the 
central and eastern European countries.
However, core infl  ation, too, was up in the 
central and eastern European EU Member 
States, hitting 11.5% by December 2022. 
Strong wage growth, which had already in-
tensifi  ed markedly prior to the COVID- 19 
crisis, was a key driving factor. Wages in 
central and eastern Europe climbed by a 
good 12% in 2022, with the strongest 
growth being recorded in countries con-
ducting their own, independent monetary 
policy. In Slovenia and Slovakia, in particu-
lar, growth was far more moderate. Despite 
the strong wage increases, all countries in 
the group saw a considerable slide in real 
wages. Levels of price infl  ation in the region 
have now eased somewhat in the interven-
ing period. Headline infl  ation receded to 
10.8% by mid- 2023, while the core rate fell 
to 10.1%. There was another slight cooling 
of headline infl  ation in July, taking it to 
10.1%.
Monetary policymakers responded to the 
rise in consumer price infl  ation by adopting 
a much tighter stance. The Czech central 
bank had already raised its policy rate to 
7% by June 2022 and has since left it un-
changed. Poland’s central bank increased its policy rate to 6.75% by September 2022, 
while the Hungarian central bank even 
went to 13%. Most recently, January 2023 
saw the Romanian central bank hike its pol-
icy rate to 7%.1 In addition, the Czech and 
Polish central banks also sought to support 
or strengthen their currencies by means of 
foreign exchange interventions, with a view 
to dampening imported infl  ation. While the 
Czech koruna appreciated against the euro, 
Poland, Hungary and Romania all experi-
enced a depreciation, which pushed infl  a-
tion even higher for a time.
Over the course of last year, macroeco-
nomic imbalances increased markedly in 
the central and eastern European EU Mem-
ber States. Unit labour costs climbed more 
strongly, and price and cost competitive-
ness declined considerably. On top of that, 
current account defi  cits grew, not least be-
cause of the dramatic rise in prices for im-
ported energy. The current account defi  cits 
of Hungary and Romania reached levels in 
excess of 8% of GDP . Government budget 
defi  cits, too, receded only slightly from the 
highs seen during the COVID- 19 crisis. Hun-
1 Owing to the currency board arrangement in Bul-
garia, the country’s central bank does not set a policy 
rate.Per capita GDP in the central and eastern European EU countries
As a percentage of the average GDP per capita across the EU's 27 Member States, adjusted for purchasing power parity
55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankSloveniaCzech RepublicPolandHungary
Estonia
LithuaniaLatvia
AverageSlovakia
Croatia
RomaniaBulgaria2022 2021Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
19

gary and Romania again led the fi  eld, with 
government defi  cits amounting to more 
than 6% of GDP .
Despite the challenging economic environ-
ment, further progress towards conver-
gence was made last year. Calculated at 
purchasing power parities, the gap be-
tween per capita GDP for the country group 
as a whole and the average for the EU nar-
rowed to 20.6%. Five years ago that fi  gure 
stood at almost 30%. Once the COVID- 19 
crisis came to an end, countries with sub-
stantial tourism sectors especially – such as 
Slovenia and Croatia – made the greatest 
progress towards convergence. With fi  rms 
setting up new production sites on Polish 
and Hungarian soil,2 those two countries 
also made signifi  cant inroads on their way 
to convergence. But not all countries made 
progress. Slovakia and the Czech Republic 
actually lost ground last year in light of the 
ongoing economic downturn.
In 2022, Slovenia was furthest ahead in 
terms of real convergence, followed by the 
Czech Republic, Lithuania and Estonia, all of 
which exceeded the average for the coun-
try group. Poland’s convergence level, at al-
most 80% of the EU average, is now slightly 
above the group average. It is followed by 
Hungary and Romania and, at just under 
75% of the EU average, Latvia and Croatia. 
Next comes Slovakia, at just under 70%. 
Bulgaria still had the furthest to go in terms 
of convergence, with less than 60% of the 
EU average.
The central and eastern European EU Mem-
ber States are facing muted growth pro-
spects this year. Private consumption is gen-
erally expected to be more buoyant in the 
second half of the year. However, with in-
dustrial activity looking set to remain rather 
weak in the euro area, foreign demand is 
likely to stay on the subdued side.Bringing the high infl  ation rates back down 
is a key policy objective. Infl  ation will abate 
to some extent simply by dint of the re-
duced energy prices. However, given the 
sizeable real wage losses and that a consid-
erable degree of tightness is still evident in 
the labour market, there is a risk that fur-
ther disinfl  ation will be curbed by strong 
wage growth. This is also likely to weigh on 
price competitiveness. Nevertheless, lower 
energy prices mean that external imbal-
ances are expected to decline markedly this 
year.3
The region’s longer- term growth outlook 
remains favourable, meanwhile. The re-
orientation of supply chains has already 
brought increased foreign investment to 
the region in more recent times. According 
to the OECD, for example, net infl  ows in 
Poland have risen signifi  cantly again since 
the COVID- 19 crisis. It is a similar story for 
Slovakia. In the Czech Republic, net infl  ows 
were up at least slightly.4 This trend is likely 
to continue. In addition, sizeable payments 
from the Next Generation EU programme 
are still on the horizon, for investment in 
digitalisation and climate action.5 Popula-
tion ageing remains the biggest challenge 
facing economic performance going for-
ward. Migratory movements have also 
stepped up again following the end of the 
COVID- 19 crisis. Ageing and migration 
mean that most countries in the group have 
seen a decline in their population.
2 For example, two Korean electronics groups each 
opened a production site for manufacturing lithium- 
ion batteries destined for electric vehicles, one choos-
ing Hungary (Samsung 2021) and the other Poland (LG 
Chem 2022).
3 See, for example, European Commission (2023).
4 By contrast, net infl  ows in Hungary declined sharply; 
see OECD (2023).
5 Having said that, EU funds have yet to be disbursed 
to Poland and Hungary: checks as to whether the con-
ditions are met are still pending on account of the on-
going confl  icts around judicial independence, the rule 
of law and safeguards to prevent funds from the EU 
budget being allocated without due control.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
20

consumer confidence remained subdued. It re -
mains to be seen whether the saving ratio, 
which was well above its average for the pre-  
pandemic years during the first quarter, has 
also declined given the rising interest rates on 
investments.
Gross fixed capital formation is likely to have 
expanded further in the second quarter, but at 
a considerably slower pace than at the start of 
the year.6 Expenditure on machinery and equip -
ment probably increased once again. In any 
case, capital goods producers’ domestic sales 
rose significantly in price- adjusted terms in 
April and May. The prolonged upward trend in 
investment in information and communication 
technologies and intellectual property seems to 
have continued. Construction investment ap -
pears to have recorded only marginal growth, 
following robust expansion at the beginning of 
the year. Construction output fell compared 
with the previous quarter in April and May. The 
tightening of financing conditions is probably 
having a growing impact in this regard. The 
number of construction permits for residential 
buildings was in decline in the period up to 
April, and household demand for real estate 
loans continued to fall.
In light of the subdued global industrial activity, 
exports of goods from the euro area to non-  
euro area countries fell slightly in price- adjusted 
terms in the second quarter. Exports to China in 
particular saw sharp contraction, but exports to 
the United States were also lower than in the 
previous quarter. By contrast, exports to the 
United Kingdom rose again somewhat. Exports 
of services were considerably more spirited. In 
this context, international tourism in the south -
ern euro area countries is likely to have played 
the most significant role. Imports of goods 
from non- euro area countries declined mark -
edly in terms of value as import prices fell sig -
nificantly.
Industrial output continued to contract in the 
second quarter. Here, the slowdown was 
broadly based across segments. Production of intermediate goods continued to fall, and the 
decline in consumer goods production intensi -
fied once again. One exception was the pro -
duction of motor vehicles, which increased 
again as supply chain problems continued to 
ease. In this segment, production has now 
caught up with pre- pandemic levels. Further -
more, the manufacture of capital goods saw 
distinct expansion. Capacity utilisation de -
creased markedly between April and July, most 
recently falling below its long- term average.Increase in 
investment
Goods trade 
with non- euro 
area countries 
down slightly in 
price- adjusted 
terms
Output down in 
the manufactur -
ing sectorAggregate output in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 2023Real GDP, Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
log scale
80859095100105
105
758085909510080859095100105
Italy
SpainEuro area
France859095100105
of which:
6 Excluding Ireland (for more information, see footnote 5).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
21

Supply- side and demand- side factors limiting production in 
the euro area
Monthly surveys asking fi  rms about their 
current situations and outlooks for the near 
future are indispensable sources of informa-
tion for economic analysis. These surveys 
are published considerably earlier than the 
indicators encompassed by the offi   cial stat-
istics and allow for initial appraisals of cur-
rent developments and – depending on the 
questions posed – the reasons behind them, 
too.The European Commission also publishes 
quarterly survey results on factors limiting 
production in the euro area, with the most 
recent round in July 2023.1 The surveys 
draw a distinction between insuffi   cient de-
mand, shortages of labour, shortages of 
material (or equipment/ space in the case of 
services), fi  nancial constraints, and other 
factors. Respondents are also able to an-
swer that they did not experience any fac-
tors limiting their production.
The results of these surveys can be used to 
track the exceptional developments seen 
over the past three years. The COVID- 19 
pandemic and the measures taken to con-
tain it in the spring of 2020 hampered pro-
duction either directly (“Other” category), 
which was the case particularly in the ser-
vices sector, or via drops in demand. In add-
ition, complaints of materials shortages 
began to surface in industry, probably 
owing to pandemic- related production 
losses. These quickly died down, however, 
as did reports of insuffi   cient demand. Other 
factors limiting production also receded in 
signifi  cance again, but remained elevated 
for a long time. This is likely to refl  ect the 
continued existence of pandemic- related 
restrictions at the time.
Subsequent developments were initially 
shaped by the steep rise in production con-
straints caused by shortages of materials in 
industry. Labour force shortages also be-
came considerably more prominent in both 
industry and services. At the same time, 
barely any enterprises were complaining of 
1 The data currently available extend back, in some 
cases, to 1985 (for industry) and 2003 (for services) 
and were calculated on the basis of national sources.Factors limiting production, as reported*
0102030405060Percentage of surveyed firms
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Sources:  European  Commission,  business  and  consumer  sur-
veys. * Multiple answers possible.
Deutsche BundesbankNone
Demand
Labour force
Shortage of material (industry) or 
equipment / space (services)
ServicesIndustry
0102030405060Financial
OtherDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
22

sales problems. Combined, all of this re-
fl  ected the strong – and in some cases tem-
porarily pent- up – demand, fi  rst for goods 
and later for services as well.
Shortages of materials then gradually be-
came less signifi  cant in industry from the 
beginning of 2022, but remained elevated 
until recently, partly owing to the repercus-
sions of Russia’s ongoing war of aggression 
against Ukraine. In industry, complaints 
about demand picked up again from mid- 
2022 as a result of higher infl  ation and 
tighter monetary policy, mounting consider-
ably in recent times, too. However, even at 
the current end, only one- third of fi  rms re-
ported insuffi   cient demand – a proportion 
barely higher than the long- term average. 
In mid- 2020, at the beginning of the 
COVID- 19 pandemic, it was one- half of 
fi  rms and, in 2009, at the height of the 
fi  nancial crisis, the fi  gure was just over 
60%. In the services sector, just under 30% 
of fi  rms also cited demand as a factor limit-
ing business, but this was less than the 
long- term average.
In industry, labour force shortages appear 
to have recently become somewhat less 
signifi  cant, but they remain an important 
factor weighing on production. This was 
true to an even greater extent in services. 
At the current end, no less than one- third 
of fi  rms within the services sector com-
plained of labour force shortages, com-
pared with the long- term average of around 
10%. This is likely to be, in part, an after- 
effect of the COVID- 19 pandemic. During 
the pandemic, many skilled workers turned 
their backs on various branches of the ser-
vices sector due to a lack of job opportun-
ities.
Remarkably, fi  nancial factors did not play 
any notable role over the entire period 
under review. Even at the current end, their signifi  cance has climbed only slightly. So far, 
the tightening of monetary policy seems to 
be acting primarily as a curb on demand.
The overall picture for the moment, as 
painted by the European Commission’s lat-
est quarterly survey, reveals a services sector 
that is prosperous but constrained by short-
ages of labour, with industry suffering from 
insuffi   cient demand in some areas. Looking 
at the euro area economy as a whole, 
demand- side limiting factors took on con-
siderably more weight again, outstripping 
supply- side constraints. This should also 
have an impact on how prices develop. 
Shortages of labour remain a challenge, 
however.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
23

The services sector is likely to have held up bet -
ter than the manufacturing sector in the second 
quarter. Business activity rose in most seg -
ments. The hospitality sector in particular re -
corded significant gains. Brisk tourism is likely 
to have provided a boost primarily to the hotel 
sector. Activity in the transport and commercial 
services sectors was also up again.
There continued to be major differences in 
macroeconomic dynamics among the member 
countries of the euro area. This was mainly at -
tributable to differences in the significance of 
industry and tourism as well as developments 
in household purchasing power.In France, preliminary estimates suggest that 
economic growth in the second quarter was 
0.5% higher than in the previous quarter. The 
main driver was once again buoyant foreign 
trade. Alongside the continually vibrant tourism 
business, a key role was played by a one-  off 
effect in goods exports arising from the deliv -
ery of a cruise ship. Domestic demand re -
mained weak. Private consumption decreased 
considerably and investment increased only 
slightly. On the output side, it was mainly in -
dustry that saw expansion, recording another 
substantial rise. Service providers also expanded 
their business activities. By contrast, construc -
tion activity continued to decline.
In Italy, economic output did not quite main -
tain its elevated level from the first quarter. Ac -
cording to preliminary data, real GDP fell by 
0.3% in the second quarter, after climbing by 
0.6% in the first quarter. This was due chiefly to 
weak domestic demand. The tighter financing 
conditions and the rollback of the very large tax 
incentives that had been granted in previous 
years weighed on construction investment in 
particular. In addition, demand for industrial 
goods also weakened owing to the global eco -
nomic situation. Against this backdrop, indus -
trial output declined.
The Spanish economy continued to grow in the 
second quarter, expanding by 0.4%. As a re -
sult, economic output exceeded its pre-  
pandemic level again for the first time. There 
was another considerable rise in investment. 
Private consumption saw distinct recovery fol -
lowing two quarters of decline. This is likely to 
have been driven by the comparatively good 
labour market situation and the recovery in 
households’ real disposable income as price 
pressures eased. By contrast, despite a strong 
tourism season, there was a marked fall in for -
eign trade, with exports dropping more sharply 
than imports. On the output side, considerable 
gains were recorded primarily in construction, 
but also in the services sector, while there was 
a distinct decline in manufacturing.Services activity 
distinctly more 
robust
Weak economic 
activity in most 
euro area 
countries Strong growth 
in French econ -
omy, partly due 
to one- off effect
Contraction in 
Italian GDP
Further marked 
increase in GDP 
in SpainShort-term indicators for the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Price-adjust-
ed figures. 2 Excluding trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 20232015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
90100110120
8590100110120130758090100110120
Retail sales1
Services output2Industrial output
Construction output758090100110Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
24

In Lithuania and Finland, real GDP increased 
significantly; these countries had previously 
been especially impacted by the effects of the 
war against Ukraine. There was moderate eco -
nomic growth in Belgium, Slovenia and Slo -
vakia, while the economy stagnated in Portu -
gal. Economic activity declined in the Nether -
lands, Austria, Latvia, Estonia and Cyprus.
The labour market situation remained favour -
able in the second quarter. The unemployment 
rate even fell once again compared with the 
winter months, and employment continued to 
rise. However, employment growth flattened 
and labour shortages eased somewhat. Em -
ployment expectations for the next three 
months also declined for both industry and the 
services sector. Wage growth is likely to remain 
strong.
Consumer price inflation weakened somewhat 
further in the second quarter, but remained 
fairly high despite the renewed steep decline in 
energy prices. HICP rose by just under 0.6% on 
the quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. Ex -
cluding energy and food, this figure stood at 
1.1%.
Year- on- year inflation fell significantly to 6.2%. 
Unlike in the previous quarter, energy no longer 
contributed to price inflation. Food prices rose 
somewhat less sharply than they had previ -
ously. At 5.5%, the core inflation rate excluding 
energy and food remained unchanged on the 
year. On the one hand, price inflation for ser -
vices was much higher than it had been in the 
spring. This was chiefly attributable to consid -
erably higher wages, alongside base effects 
arising from fiscal relief measures in 2022.7 On 
the other hand, the high inflation for non-  
energy industrial goods diminished markedly. 
This held especially true for durable goods such 
as furniture and passenger cars, but also for 
non- durable goods, which had previously been 
subject to particularly high price inflation.
In July, consumer prices rose by 0.3% in sea -
sonally adjusted terms compared with the pre -vious month. Energy prices continued to fall 
substantially, and the rise in the prices of ser -
vices was also somewhat less strong. However, 
the prices of unprocessed food and non- energy 
industrial goods increased to an exceptionally 
strong degree. At 5.3% in July, euro area an -
nual inflation was only 0.2  percentage point 
lower than in the previous month. The core 
rate remained unchanged at 5.5%.
The pace of economic activity in the euro area 
is likely to remain subdued in the third quarter. 
While supply- side burdens, such as shortages of 
materials and labour, continue to ease, it is now 
weak demand that is likely to depress economic 
activity. The main reasons for this are inflation, 
which is easing only slowly, higher financing 
costs, and the subdued global economy. Ac -
cording to the business and consumer surveys 
conducted by the European Commission, the 
business climate has actually clouded again 
since April, following a brief period of recovery. 
The Purchasing Managers’ Index for the whole 
economy also dropped back below the expan -
sion threshold in June and continued to fall in 
July. In particular, the sub- index for manufactur -
ing decreased further. The sentiment indicators Marked differ -
ences among 
the smaller euro 
area countries, 
too
Labour market 
still well utilised, 
strong growth in 
wages
Price inflation 
somewhat 
weaker
Core inflation 
rate still highOnly slight 
decline in 
inflation  in July
Underlying 
dynamics likely 
remain very sub -
dued in current 
quarterContributions to the euro area
inflation rate (HICP)
Sources: Eurostat, ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 202320246810
–+++++Quarterly averages
Food
Services
Non-energy 
industrial goodsEnergy
HICP (%)Contributions in percentage points
July
7 In particular, services in the passenger transport sector 
were significantly more expensive than they had been one 
year earlier, as the €9 ticket was available in Germany for a 
limited period of time from June 2022.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
25

for the services sector likewise point to a marked 
slowdown, even though the situation in this 
sector still appears to be better than in industry. 
Despite rising financing costs, sentiment in the 
construction sector remained distinctly better. 
Thus far, it has mainly been new housing con -
struction that has suffered, while public and 
commercial construction is likely to have con -
tinued to flourish. Against the backdrop of re -
ceding inflation and rising incomes, consumer 
confidence continued to improve up to the end 
of the period under review, but remained below 
its long- term average. While private consump -
tion appears to be gaining traction, strong 
growth stimuli are probably not to be expected 
here for the time being either.
List of references
Congressional Budget Office (2022), Estimated Budgetary Effects of H. R. 4346, Cost Estimate, 
21 July 2023, https://www.cbo.gov/system/files?file=2022-07/hr4346_chip.pdf
Congressional Research Service (2023a), Semiconductors and the Semiconductor Industry, CRS 
Report, No R47508, 19 April 2023.
Congressional Research Service (2023b), Semiconductors and the CHIPS Act: The Global Context, 
CRS Report, No R47558, 18 May 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), The two- speed global economy, Monthly Report, November 2019, 
pp. 11f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national economic 
statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65-78.
European Commission (2023), European Economic Forecast, Spring 2023.
European Union (2022), European Chips Act, https://commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/
priorities-2019-2024/europe-fit-digital-age/european-chips-act_en
International Energy Agency (2023), Oil Market Report, August 2023.
International Monetary Fund (2023), World Economic Outlook Update: Near-  Term Resilience, Per -
sistent Challenges, July 2023.
OECD (2023), Foreign Investment Statistics: Data, Analysis and Forecasts, https://www.oecd.org/
investment/statistics.htmSentiment indicators for the euro area*
Sources: European Commission and Bundesbank calculations. 
* Deviations from the respective average since 2000.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 202360504030201001020
––––––++Seasonally adjusted
Manufacturing
Services sectorConstruction
ConsumerDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
26

Semiconductor Industry Association (2023), U. S. Semiconductor Ecosystem Map, https://www.
semiconductors.org/u-s-semiconductor-ecosystem-map
The White House (2022), FACT SHEET: CHIPS and Science Act Will Lower Costs, Create Jobs, 
Strengthen Supply Chains, and Counter China, Briefing Room, Statements and Releases, 9 August 
2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/08/09/fact-sheet-  
chips-and-science-act-will-lower-costs-create-jobs-strengthen-supply-chains-and-counter-chinaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
27

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
The ECB Governing Council decided to raise its 
three key interest rates by 25 basis points each 
at its monetary policy meetings in both June 
and July 2023. The interest rate on the deposit 
facility, which is currently the most significant 
for money market rates, thus now stands at 
3.75%. The interest rates on the main refinan -
cing operations and the marginal lending facil -
ity stand at 4.25% and 4.5%, respectively. 
These rate increases reflect the Governing 
Council’s current assessment of the inflation 
outlook, the dynamics of underlying inflation, 
and the strength of monetary policy transmis -
sion. Despite a fall in actual inflation figures, 
the June projections indicate that inflation will 
remain too high for too long. Eurosystem staff 
revised the baseline path of headline inflation 
upwards compared with the projections from 
March. The new projections now see headline 
inflation at 5.4% for 2023, 3.0% for 2024, and 
2.2% for 2025. The indicators of underlying 
price pressures remained strong, although 
some showed tentative signs of softening. 
Nevertheless, the projections for inflation ex -
cluding energy and food were likewise revised upwards compared with the March projec -
tions, especially for 2023 and 2024. The devel -
opments observed since the June meeting sup -
port the Governing Council’s expectation that 
inflation will drop further over the remainder of 
the year, but will stay above the 2% target for 
an extended period. Furthermore, there are still 
upside risks to inflation, including from poten -
tial renewed upward pressure on prices for en -
ergy and food as well as a persistent rise in in -
flation expectations above the target. At the 
same time, however, the Governing Council 
believes that the rate increases thus far have 
been forcefully transmitted to financing condi -
tions and have gradually had an effect on the 
economy as a whole. For instance, borrowing 
costs have increased steeply and growth in 
lending is slowing.
The Governing Council’s future decisions will 
ensure that the key ECB interest rates are set at 
sufficiently restrictive levels for as long as ne -
cessary to achieve a timely return of inflation to 
the 2% medium-  term target. The Governing 
Council will continue to follow a data-  
dependent approach to determining the ap -
propriate level and duration of restriction. In 
particular, interest rate decisions will therefore 
continue to be based on assessments of the in -
flation outlook, the dynamics of underlying in -
flation, and the strength of monetary policy 
transmission.
In June, the ECB Governing Council confirmed 
its announcement from May that it would stop 
reinvesting principal payments from maturing 
securities under the asset purchase programme 
(APP) as of July 2023. In July, the Governing 
Council additionally decided to set the remu -
neration of minimum reserves at 0%, rather 
than at the deposit facility rate, in order to im -
prove the efficiency of its monetary policy. This 
decision will preserve the effectiveness of mon -
etary policy while reducing the overall amount 
of interest that the Eurosystem needs to pay on ECB Governing 
Council raises 
key interest rates 
by 25 basis 
points in both 
June and July
Future interest 
rate decisions 
continue to 
follow  data- 
dependent 
approach
Further deci -
sions: discon -
tinuation of APP 
reinvestment 
and adjustment 
of minimum 
reserve 
remuneration Key ECB interest rates and money 
market interest rates in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Monthly averages. • = Average 1 to 17 August 
2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank2021 2022 20231012345
–+++++% p.a.
Marginal lending rate
€STR1Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
28

Money market management and liquidity needs
In the reporting period from 10 May 2023 
to 1 August 2023,1 excess liquidity in the 
Eurosystem decreased markedly by a total 
of €296.3 billion to an average of €3,716.7 
billion, though it remained at a high level. 
The decline was driven by early repayments 
and maturing securities under the third ser-
ies of targeted longer- term refi  nancing op-
erations (TLTRO III). Shrinkage in the out-
standing volume under the asset purchase 
programmes also contributed to bringing 
liquidity down, albeit to a lesser extent.
Compared with the second reserve main-
tenance period of 2023 (March- May 2023), 
liquidity needs in the euro area stemming 
from autonomous factors (see the table 
below) fell by €181.8 billion to an average 
of €1,664.1 billion in the fourth reserve 
maintenance period of 2023 (June- August 
2023). Without this liquidity- providing de-velopment, excess liquidity would have 
contracted even more sharply. Liquidity 
needs were primarily lower on account of 
the marked decline of €106.2 billion in gov-
ernment deposits (of which €23.4 billion in 
Germany). The signifi  cant rise (€82.8 billion) 
in the combined total of net foreign assets 
and other factors, which are considered to-
gether owing to liquidity- neutral valuation 
effects, made a further major contribution 
to this development. The liquidity- providing 
effect was, inter alia, the result of the drop 
in other non- monetary policy deposits, 
which are counted among the other fac-
tors. These include, in particular, deposits 
from foreign central banks, which fell by 
€37.2 billion. The decline in deposits held in 
1 The averages of the fourth reserve maintenance 
period of 2023 (June- August 2023) are compared here 
with the averages of the second reserve maintenance 
period of 2023 (March- May 2023).
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2023
10 May
to
20 June21 June
to
1 Aug.
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –   3.9 –   3.3
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) + 104.2 +   2.0
3. Net foreign assets 1 +   3.2 –  20.4
4. Other factors 1 +  63.9 +  36.1
Total + 167.4 +  14.4
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations +   0.2 +   9.3
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –  17.2 – 418.5
c) Other operations –  21.5 –  31.1
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility +   0.0 +   0.0
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 130.3 + 422.0
Total – 168.8 –  18.3
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) –   1.1 –   4.2
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) +   1.0 –   0.3
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
29

Germany amounted to €55.6 billion. Net 
banknote issuance in the Eurosystem rose 
overall by €7.2 billion to €1,567.0 billion, 
absorbing liquidity. In Germany, it went up 
by €7.6 billion to €907.9 billion. Over the 
period under review, the minimum reserve 
requirement in the Eurosystem fell by €0.7 
billion to €165.1 billion, which marginally 
decreased the need for central bank liquid-
ity. In Germany, the reserve requirement 
went down by €0.6 billion to €44.9 billion.
The scaling down of the asset purchase 
programme (APP) had the greatest impact 
on the change in purchase programmes. From March to June 2023, the portfolio 
was reduced on schedule by an average of 
€15 billion per month. Since 1 July 2023, re-
investments under the APP have been dis-
continued. At the same time, reinvestment 
in the pandemic emergency purchase pro-
gramme (PEPP) has remained unchanged. 
Overall, holdings of monetary policy assets 
decreased by €52.7 billion in the period 
under review. As at 4 August 2023, the bal-
ance sheet holdings of the asset purchase 
programmes amounted to €4,822.4 billion 
(see the adjacent table).2
The average outstanding tender volume in 
the euro area decreased by €426.2 billion 
to €693.0 billion during the period under 
review. The maturity date for TLTRO III.4 
and a voluntary early repayment option for 
TLTRO III.5-10 fell within the period under 
review, on 28 June. On that date, the re-
payment amount totalled €506.3 billion. 
The volume under the regular main refi  nan-
cing operations and three- month tenders 
rose perceptibly after the TLTRO III.4 oper-
ations reached maturity, but has recently 
been declining again and has remained low 
overall. In Germany, the average outstand-
ing volume of all refi  nancing operations fell 
by €56.9 billion to an average of €144.0 bil-
lion in the period under review. This was 
due to maturities and voluntary early repay-
ments under TLTRO III in June, amounting 
to €68.8 billion. German banks’ share in the 
outstanding volume of Eurosystem refi  nan-
cing operations was around 21%, roughly 
3  percentage points higher than in the 
second reserve maintenance period of 
2023.
The Eurosystem’s key interest rate hikes of 
25 basis points each in May and June re-Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as at
4 Aug. 2023
Active programmes 1
PSPP – 41.1 2,498.8
CBPP3 –  3.1 295.5
CSPP –  4.2 335.7
ABSPP –  2.0 16.9
PEPP –  2.3 1,672.6
Completed programmes 
SMP +  0.0 2.9
CBPP1 +  0.0 0.0
CBPP2 +  0.0 0.0
1 Changes due to net purchases, maturities, reinvestments 
and amortisation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank
2 In addition to the effects of reduced reinvestment 
under the APP , holdings were also shaped by revalu-
ations and the smoothing of reinvestments under both 
programmes.Autonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing factors are preceded by a positive sign. Liquidity-absorbing 
factors are preceded by a negative sign. 1 Including end-of-
quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 20231,8001,5001,20090060030003006009001,200
––––––++++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
30

sulted in a correspondingly higher level of 
overnight rates in the euro money market in 
the third and fourth reserve maintenance 
periods of 2023 (see the adjacent chart). 
The marked decline in excess liquidity in the 
period under review had no discernible im-
pact on overnight trading.
The unsecured euro short- term rate (€STR) 
mirrored all of the key interest rate increases 
over the period under review. With the 
spread between the €STR and the deposit 
facility rate remaining constant at 10 basis 
points, the €STR was 3.15% and 3.40% on 
average in the respective reserve mainten-
ance period. The €STR volume averaged 
€62.9 billion in the third reserve mainten-
ance period of 2023, before declining 
slightly to €61.7 billion in the subsequent 
reserve maintenance period.
In the secured money market, interest rates 
on the GC Pooling trading platform also 
mirrored key interest rate increases, albeit 
with their usual higher fl  uctuation range 
than in the €STR. Overnight transactions in 
the ECB basket were executed at an aver-
age of 3.13% in the third reserve mainten-
ance period of 2023 and 3.42% in the sub-
sequent reserve maintenance period. The 
spread over the deposit facility rate thus 
widened slightly to 12 basis points before 
falling back to 9 basis points. In the ECB 
EXTended  basket, on the other hand, which 
has a broader selection of securities with 
lower rating requirements for concluding 
repo transactions, overnight trading took 
place at rates closer to the deposit rate 
– 3.21% and 3.45%, respectively – during 
the period under review. Average volumes 
traded in both baskets ranged between 
€4.0 billion and €5.0 billion in the period 
under review.
In the fi  fth reserve maintenance period of 
2023, which is currently under way, it ap-pears interest rate increases are again being 
fully passed on to the €STR.Deposit facility rate, money market rates 
and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Central 
bank balance minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the 
deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche BundesbankMar. Apr. May June July Aug.
20232.02.53.03.54.0
+++++Daily data
% p.a.
0€ bn
3,0004,0005,000 Excess liquidity1Mean value for 
the reserve
maintenance period2ECB EXTended basket€STR
STOXX GC Pooling Overnight
ECB basketDeposit facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
31

reserves. It will maintain the current degree of 
control over the monetary policy stance and 
ensure the full pass- through of the interest rate 
decisions to money markets.
The euro short- term rate (€STR) once again 
moved almost entirely in line with the two key 
interest rate hikes totalling 50 basis points dur -
ing the reporting period. It stood most recently 
at 3.657% and thus remained around 10 basis 
points below the deposit facility rate.
Following the July meeting of the ECB Govern -
ing Council, money market forward rates de -
clined slightly in response to the Governing 
Council’s even greater emphasis on its data-  
dependent approach to future interest rate de -
cisions. At present, market participants are not 
pricing in another full interest rate step of 25 
basis points. The money market forward curve 
currently peaks in the fourth quarter of 2023 at 
around 3.8%, roughly 15 basis points up on 
the present level.The ECB Survey of Monetary Analysts (SMA) 
conducted ahead of the July meeting showed 
that the median analyst was still expecting two 
further interest rate hikes. The interest rate rise 
of 25 basis points in July was in line with ex -
pectations. For the monetary policy meeting in 
September, survey respondents expect one 
additional interest rate rise in the same amount. 
This would bring the deposit facility rate to 4%.
Monetary policy asset holdings continued to 
decline during the reporting period. As of the 
beginning of July, reinvestments under the APP 
were completely discontinued, which acceler -
ated the reduction in asset holdings. On 11 Au -
gust, the Eurosystem held assets totalling 
€3,146.9 billion under the APP (see the box on 
pp. 29 ff. for a breakdown of the holdings by 
individual programme). Asset holdings reported 
under the pandemic emergency purchase pro -
gramme (PEPP) came to €1,675 billion on the 
same day. The ECB Governing Council will con -
tinue applying flexibility in reinvesting redemp -€STR moves in 
line with key 
interest rate 
hikes again
Money market 
forward rates no 
longer pricing in 
full interest rate 
stepRespondents to 
monetary policy 
survey expect 
further rise in 
interest rates
APP holdings 
reduced at 
faster pace since 
JulyOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 202305001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,0005,5006,0006,5007,0007,500€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period1
Third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations
(TLTRO III)
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations
(TLTRO II)
First series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations
(TLTRO I)Pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs)
Additional longer-term refinancing operationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
32

tions coming due in the PEPP portfolio, with a 
view to countering risks to the monetary policy 
transmission mechanism related to the pan -
demic. The aggregate holdings reported under 
both purchase programmes was influenced by 
the smoothing over time of reinvestments and 
by the use of amortised cost accounting.1
Excess liquidity has contracted significantly 
since mid- May, falling by around €453 billion. 
At last count, it came to €3,644 billion. This 
sharp decline was due mainly to the final ma -
turity of the fourth operation of the third series 
of longer- term refinancing operations (TLTRO III) 
in June. Furthermore, voluntary early repay -
ments for the still outstanding TLTRO III oper -
ations were made in the amount of approxi -
mately €29 billion. The complete discontinu -
ation of reinvestments under the APP also 
caused excess liquidity to shrink further as of 
July. Excess liquidity was also influenced by the 
development of autonomous factors (see the 
box on pp. 29 ff.).
Monetary developments in 
the euro area
As a result of the continued monetary policy 
tightening and weak economic developments, 
euro area monetary growth continued to de -
cline in the second quarter of 2023, with the 
annual growth rate of the broad monetary ag -
gregate M3 falling to just over ½% at the end 
of June (see the adjacent chart). The decrease 
applied particularly to overnight deposits, 
which continued to earn relatively low interest. 
Against the backdrop of the significant rises in 
money market interest rates and capital market 
yields, the money- holding sectors continued to 
shift their portfolios towards higher-  yielding 
forms of investment, including to those outside 
of M3. On the supply side, the ongoing reduc -
tion of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet com -Sharp fall in 
excess liquidity, 
mainly due to 
TLTRO maturity
Monetary 
growth still in 
declineMonetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source:  ECB.  1 Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation  as 
well as for positions arising from notional cash pooling services 
provided by MFIs. 2 Denoted with a negative sign because, per 
se,  an  increase  curbs  M3  growth.  3 Non-monetary  financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023642024681012
–––++++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14
02468
++++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining 
counterpartsLonger-term 
financial liabilities2Net external assets
Credit to the private sector1
Financial corporations3
Non-financial corporations4
Households5Contribution of components 
in percentage points
Securities-based lending to general governmentPercentage
change
in M3
Percentage
change
in M3
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector1Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points
Contribution of sectors in percentage points
1 In particular, the difference between the acquisition and 
redemption value is amortised over the security’s residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and measured 
at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
33

bined with still weak bank lending caused 
monetary growth to slow. The subdued eco -
nomic outlook, the associated credit risks, and 
the increased financing costs dampened lend -
ing to non- financial corporations and house -
holds. First, according to the most recent Bank 
Lending Survey (BLS), demand for credit fell in 
the reporting quarter once again. Second, the 
ongoing tightening of credit conditions con -
tributed to weaker lending.
With regard to the components of the broad 
monetary aggregate M3, households and non- 
financial corporations in particular reduced 
their overnight deposits and instead invested in 
short- term time deposits (see the table above). 
Short- term savings deposits remained un -
attractive due to their lower interest rates com -
pared with short- term time deposits. House -
holds, which hold the largest share of savings 
deposits, therefore reduced their short- term 
savings deposits by a significant degree in the 
second quarter. Money market fund shares also 
continued to be purchased, albeit to a lesser 
extent than in the previous quarter.
Over the quarter, there were again net out -
flows from M3, which were counterbalanced 
by net inflows to monetary capital. Overall, the 
increase in the items categorised under monet -
ary capital exceeded the decrease in M3, mean -ing that, in arithmetical terms, the money-  
holding sector did not withdraw any funds 
from the monetary financial institutions (MFI) 
sector. Longer- term bank debt securities were 
especially demanded by investors, but longer-  
term bank deposits also benefited from port -
folio reallocation. In the preceding quarters, 
the growth in these items was driven mainly on 
the demand side by investors’ greater focus on 
earnings. The repayment of the TLTRO loans at 
the end of June 2023, which reduced some of 
the excess liquidity within the banking system, 
also recently increased the incentive for banks 
to make these forms of deposit more attract -
ive.
Lending to non- MFIs in the euro area was 
negative on balance in the second quarter, too. 
This was mainly due to a net reduction in 
securitised lending to general government: the 
Eurosystem continued to shrink its APP port -
folio and commercial banks also scaled back 
their holdings of euro area government bonds 
again. By contrast, commercial banks increased 
their holdings of private sector securities. How -
ever, the relatively large increase in bonds was 
overstated by extensive securitisations of resi -Portfolio shifts 
away from over -
night deposits in 
particular and 
towards short- 
term time 
deposits
Further rise in 
longer- term 
investments at 
banksFurther reduc -
tion in securi -
tised lending, 
especially to 
general govern -
mentConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q1 2023 Q2 2023
Holdings against central government 2 – 110.1 – 102.1
Monetary aggregate M3 –  66.5 –  44.3
Components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) – 375.1 – 258.0
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) 249.3 188.3
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 59.4 25.4
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 85.4 83.3
Capital and reserves 9.1 8.0
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities 76.3 75.3Assets Q1 2023  Q2 2023
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area –  5.9 8.0
Loans 7.0 – 29.9
Loans, adjusted 1 4.0 2.6
Securities – 12.9 38.0
Credit to general government 
in the euro area – 80.5 – 87.1
Loans – 19.8 –  9.7
Securities – 60.7 – 77.4
Net external assets 72.0 89.0
Other counterparts of M3 – 76.7 – 73.0
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
34

dential real estate loans, especially by banks 
domiciled in France.2
Lending to the domestic private sector weak -
ened further in the second quarter and saw 
hardly any growth over the previous quarter by 
the end of June. Loans to non- financial corpor -
ations stagnated, while loans to households 
even went down slightly. Among the four larg -
est euro area Member States, banks in Ger -
many and France recorded only small net in -
flows of credit, while the balances at banks in 
Italy and Spain continued to fall into negative 
territory (see the adjacent chart). The annual 
growth rate of corporate loans in the euro 
area, which was still at a multi- year high of just 
under 9% at the end of October 2022, dropped 
to 3% by the end of June.
Loans to non- financial corporations lost trac -
tion mainly because of the weak state of the 
economy and the tightening of monetary pol -
icy in the euro area. These two factors damp -
ened both loan supply and loan demand. Euro 
area banks raised their lending rates further as 
a way of accounting for their increased cost of 
funds and the deterioration in the risk situation. 
In addition, assuming the usual empirical rela -
tionships hold, the steps taken in the past quar -
ters to tighten credit supply conditions are also 
likely to have had a dampening effect on lend -
ing. Enterprises, too, responded to the general 
economic situation, mainly repaying short- term 
loans on balance after these had become more 
costly in line with the increase in money market 
interest rates. Longer- term loans, on the other 
hand, recorded growth despite investment ac -
tivity losing momentum. The rise in interest 
rates on these loans has been relatively modest 
thus far, which would suggest that a desire to 
lock in interest rates played a role here.
The BLS, too, identifies the unfavourable gen -
eral economic situation as the main factor be -
hind the weak loan growth. The surveyed 
banks expressed the view that the second 
quarter of 2023 had seen demand for loans to 
enterprises decline at the strongest rate ever re -corded since the survey began in 2003. While 
respondents had been expecting demand to 
decline this quarter, they had not anticipated 
such a severe drop. The BLS banks cited the in -
crease in the general level of interest rates and 
the decrease in financing needs related to fixed 
investment as the main reasons for the weaker 
demand for loans. In addition, demand was no Lending to 
domestic private 
sector weak -
ened further …
… for both 
demand- side 
and supply- side 
reasons
Rise in interest 
rates and declin -
ing financing 
needs related to 
fixed investment 
according to BLS 
explain sharp 
drop in demandMFI loans to the private non-financial 
sector in the euro area*
20020406080100120140
–+++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank... France
... Italy... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
–200+20+40+60+80 To households3To non-financial corporations1
Total2
2 In this context, existing loans are bundled into tranches 
via securitisation vehicles and converted into bonds. For 
the banks involved, this reduces their loan holdings accord -
ingly, whilst increasing their holdings of securitised loans. 
As the securitisation process is per se irrelevant for the eco -
nomic assessment of lending, the table on p. 34 also in -
cludes a memo item that shows the adjusted change in 
lending to the private sector corrected for this effect.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
35

longer buoyed by financing needs related to in -
ventories and working capital, as it had been 
during the previous year.
The BLS data suggest that euro area banks 
tightened their credit standards for loans to en -
terprises again in the second quarter, but to a 
lesser degree than in the previous quarter and 
in line with the expectations indicated in the 
latest round of the BLS. The surveyed banks re -
ported yet again that elevated credit risk was 
the most important reason for their adjust -
ments, citing above all their perception that the 
economic situation and outlook had deterior -
ated, as well as industry-  specific and firm-  
specific factors. Inherently bank- related as -
pects, meanwhile, such as their risk tolerance 
and liquidity position, played less of a role in 
the tightening of credit standards than in previ -
ous quarters, the banks reported.
Lending to households weakened for the fifth 
consecutive quarter, recording a slight net out -flow for the first time since the end of 2013. 
Loans for house purchase, which are the most 
important component in terms of volume, 
played a major role in this. These loans posted 
no more than a marginal increase on the quar -
ter after adjustment for loan sales and securi -
tisation. While consumer credit more or less 
stagnated in the quarter under review, the rela -
tively volatile loans categorised as “other lend -
ing” (including loans to sole proprietors) re -
sulted in a net outflow on aggregate across all 
three categories in the second quarter. The 
continued slowdown was due in particular to 
the increased interest rates and continued high 
inflation in the euro area, which is having a 
negative effect on real disposable incomes and 
consumer confidence. Growth in loans to 
households for house purchase was addition -
ally dampened by the persistently high house 
prices, even if the increase in these prices came 
to a halt recently in the euro area. Annual 
growth in loans to households contracted to 
1¾% at the end of the quarter, leaving it al -
most 3  percentage points down compared 
with the multi- year high it reached one year 
earlier.
Consistent with this observation, the banks sur -
veyed as part of the BLS reported a continued 
decline in demand for housing loans in the 
euro area as well. They attributed this fall in 
demand primarily to the increased level of 
interest rates, the gloomy housing market pro -
spects, and a decline in consumer confidence, 
but reported that demand had declined to a 
lesser extent than in previous quarters.
Banks’ lending policies were another drag on 
loan growth. The BLS banks reportedly tight -
ened their credit standards for loans to house -
holds for house purchase, but to a lesser de -
gree than in the previous quarter. In this loan 
category, too, the surveyed banks said that 
they had tightened their credit standards mainly 
on account of their perception that credit risk 
had increased. This assessment was based not 
only on the deterioration in the general eco -
nomic situation and the bleaker housing mar -Credit standards 
in corporate 
lending tight -
ened again, but 
to a lesser 
degree than 
beforeFlows of loans 
to households 
for house pur -
chase weaker 
again
BLS banks report 
continued 
decline in 
demand for 
loans for house 
purchase …
… and further 
tightening of 
credit standards 
at the same 
timeInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 202310123
–+++% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
36

ket outlook, but also the decline in borrowers’ 
creditworthiness.
German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 domestic customers
With interest rates rising further, German 
banks’ deposit business with domestic custom -
ers expanded markedly in the second quarter 
of 2023, after barely growing in the two pre -
ceding quarters. Inflows went primarily into 
short- term time deposits. The sharp rise in this 
type of deposit largely matched the net out -
flows out of overnight deposits and short- term 
savings deposits. These shifts, which were ob -
served in households’ deposits in particular and 
on a smaller scale in non- financial corporations’ 
deposits as well, came about because the yield 
spread continued to widen between short- term 
time deposits remunerating at close- to- market 
rates and other short- term bank deposits (see 
the chart on p. 36). There was lively domestic 
demand for long-  term bank deposits again in 
the current quarter, with households adding 
noticeably to their stocks of long-  term time 
and savings deposits, and insurance corpor -
ations and pension funds scaling back their 
long- term time deposits far less substantially 
than has been typical in recent years. This de -
velopment suggests that longer- term bank de -
posits are also beginning to benefit from rising 
interest rates.
German banks’ lending business with domestic 
customers weakened again significantly in the 
second quarter of 2023. First, growth in loans 
to the domestic private sector was noticeably 
weaker than in the previous quarters. Second, 
unlike in the last two quarters, lending to gen -
eral government recorded marked outflows, 
particularly as a result of the distinct reduction 
in securitised lending.
Credit flows to the domestic private sector 
were weak due to sluggish lending to both 
households and non- financial corporations (see the chart above). Non- financial corporations 
made further net additions to their stocks of 
long- term loans, but to a somewhat lesser ex -
tent than in the previous quarters. They also 
redeemed short- term loans again on balance. 
Special factors, such as expiring government 
assistance loans, appear to have stopped exert -
ing a particular influence in this regard because 
net flows followed similar patterns across dif -
ferent categories of banks.
On aggregate, current developments in loans 
to non- financial corporations probably reflect 
multiple factors on both the demand and sup -
ply sides. In addition to the decline in enter -Deposit business 
characterised by 
rebalancing as 
interest rates 
rise
Lending business 
with non- banks 
weakens furtherLending to non- 
financial corpor -
ations sees 
divergent devel -
opments in indi -
vidual maturities2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 202302468Year-on-year change, end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic 
private non-financial sector
202468101214
–+++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchaseTotal,
percentage changeLoan contributions 
in percentage pointsTotal,
percentage changeUp to 1 yearMaturity contributions in percentage points
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 yearsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
37

Bank conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q3 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 20231.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30+60–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2015 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 230.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.0
30030
–+
30030
–+Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
38

prises’ financing needs on the back of lower 
energy prices and receding supply bottlenecks, 
significantly higher lending rates and muted 
global economic activity are also likely to have 
weighed on loan growth.
The banks interviewed as part of the BLS thus 
reported again that loan demand had declined 
in net terms in the second quarter of 2023. Al -
though demand dropped in all the sectors sur -
veyed, the largest decline over the past six 
months was in the real estate sector. The banks 
mainly attributed this fall in demand to the 
higher general level of interest rates and the 
decline in financing needs related to fixed in -
vestment. For the first time since 2019, finan -
cing needs related to inventories and working 
capital no longer propped up demand, but had 
a broadly neutral impact on it overall.
On the supply side, the banks surveyed by the 
BLS tightened their credit standards for corpor -
ate lending on balance again at the same time 
– but to a lesser degree than in the previous 
quarter – and also reported tighter credit terms 
and conditions overall. The banks cited their re -
duced risk tolerance and elevated credit risk as 
the main reasons for their more restrictive lend -
ing policy stances. The more restrictive credit 
terms and conditions mainly took the shape of 
wider margins. While the real estate sector was 
hit disproportionately hard by the tightening of 
lending policies over the past six months, re -
strictive adjustments were made in all the other 
sectors covered by the BLS as well. Leaving 
aside the real estate sector, this tightening was 
also comparatively strong in construction (ex -
cluding real estate) and energy- intensive manu -
facturing. By contrast, banks tightened their 
credit standards and credit terms and condi -
tions less severely in the services sector (exclud -
ing financial services and real estate) and in the 
wholesale and retail trade sector.
The German BLS banks reported that, over the 
past 12 months, climate- related risks and meas -
ures to cope with climate change had had a 
restrictive impact on their policies for loans to enterprises that make a relatively sizeable con -
tribution to climate change. Over the next 12 
months, the banks are planning to tighten their 
lending policies more sharply in connection 
with the impact of climate change. At the same 
time, the impact of climate change, taken in 
isolation, stimulated corporate demand for 
loans from German banks. The banks attrib -
uted the positive impulses to the fiscal support 
for measures to cope with climate change and 
also to increased financing needs related to in -
vestment and corporate restructuring in con -
nection with climate change. The banks are 
expecting the topic of climate change to con -
tribute to an increase in demand over the next 
12 months, too.
Lending business with domestic households 
came almost entirely to a standstill in the 
second quarter. Households reduced their bank 
debt taken out for consumption and other pur -
poses markedly and exhibited only minimal de -
mand for housing loans. High inflation, the Slowdown in 
loans to non- 
financial corpor -
ations driven by 
demand- side 
and supply- side 
factors
Higher lending 
rates and declin -
ing financing 
needs related to 
fixed investment 
dampening 
demand
BLS credit stand -
ards tightened 
again, but to a 
lesser degree 
than in the pre -
vious quarter
Climate- related 
risks and meas -
ures to cope 
with climate 
change dampen 
loan supply
Growth in loans 
to households 
weak due to 
declining loan 
demand …MFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2023
Q1 Q2
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight – 76.6 – 49.2
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years 99.1 91.1
over 2 years 2.7 3.2
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months – 24.9 – 30.4
over 3 months 3.7 6.1
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans 0.9 –  0.1
Securities –  0.6 –  2.4
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 18.7 3.8
of which: to households 3 8.7 1.1
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 2.1 3.7
Securities 0.3 5.4
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. Adjusted for statistical 
changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, households and gen-
eral government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted for 
loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institutions 
serving households. 4   Non- fi  nancial corporations and quasi- 
corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
39

persistently high construction prices, and fur -
ther increases in the costs of funds dampened 
household demand for construction work and 
bank loans.
According to the BLS, the bank supply side also 
had a restrictive impact in the second quarter. 
The surveyed banks reported that restrictive ad -
justments were made on balance to their credit 
standards and terms and conditions for loans 
to households for house purchase. The banks attributed the stricter requirements primarily to 
the gloomy housing market prospects and their 
lower risk tolerance.
The BLS banks tightened their credit standards 
and terms and conditions for consumer credit 
and other lending to households as well in the 
second quarter of 2023. In this loan category, 
too, the tightening was primarily a result of in -
creased credit risk and lower risk tolerance.… and more 
restrictive lend -
ing policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
40

Financial markets
Financial market setting
The inflation outlook also shaped events in 
financial markets. Price pressures turned out to 
be unexpectedly persistent, mainly for the less 
volatile core components of consumer prices. 
Labour markets, which are important for the 
pace at which inflation declines, likewise 
proved robust. This is the background against 
which central banks in most major currency 
areas decided on further policy rate increases 
and made it clear that the degree of monetary 
policy restriction would continue to increase. 
Only towards the end of the period under re -
view did expectations emerge – especially for 
the United States  – that the end of the rate 
hike cycle might be reached in the near future. 
Risk- free yields in bond markets rose on bal -
ance over the reporting period.
Sentiment in the markets for risky asset classes 
was upbeat overall, as reflected in a robust ap -
petite for risk, which was also buoyed by the 
continued decline in uncertainty surrounding 
the US regional banking sector. This led to a 
drop in the yield spreads on less liquid bonds, 
corporate bonds and some other government 
bonds, including in the euro area. The ECB 
Governing Council’s decision not to reinvest 
the principal payments from maturing secur -
ities under the asset purchase programme 
(APP) as of July 2023 also did not prompt any 
reassessment of the differences in credit quality 
across European government bonds.
In equity markets, investors’ persistently strong 
appetite for risk combined with a more robust 
US economy provided a significant boost for 
the US S&P 500 index; in Europe, by contrast, 
the gloomier economic outlook for the euro 
area meant that the EURO STOXX index posted 
minor losses. Overall, the monetary policy 
measures taken are passing through to finan -
cing conditions in the euro area capital market 
roughly as strongly as past experience would suggest. Market participants’ assessments of 
underlying price pressures in the different cur -
rency areas, and thus their view of future cen -
tral bank policy, provided key impetus for for -
eign exchange markets as well. In this context, 
the euro appreciated for a time against the US 
dollar, but was unable to hold onto its gains, 
with the result that the exchange rate remained 
almost unchanged on balance.
Exchange rates
On balance, the exchange rate of the euro 
against the US dollar remained virtually un -
changed compared with the start of the second 
quarter of 2023. However, the euro did come 
under pressure initially over the course of May, 
partly off the back of a series of economic fig -
ures that were unexpectedly strong for the 
United States but weaker for the euro area. 
These figures showed the US economy to be 
more dynamic than that of the euro area, 
which buoyed the US dollar. They also re -
inforced the impression held by market partici -
pants that the Federal Reserve would continue 
to raise its policy rate beyond the summer. As 
this caused the yield spread between the 
United States and the euro area to widen, 
investors  increasingly sought US dollar-  
denominated assets, thus weakening the euro.
From June onwards, sentiment in the foreign 
exchange markets swung in the other direc -
tion. The publication of US inflation figures in 
June and July, in particular, added to the signs 
of an easing of price pressures in the United 
States and fuelled market participants’ expect -
ations that a further Fed interest rate hike in 
July might in fact be the last one for the time 
being. At the same time, interest rate expect -
ations for the euro area continued to rise. 
There were also indications that an economic 
downturn in the United States might not be 
necessary to effectively push down inflation to -Yields up amid 
persistent core 
inflation and 
monetary policy 
tightening
Diverging eco -
nomic outlook 
leads to mixed 
developments in 
global equity 
marketsEuro practically 
unchanged 
against 
US dollar  , …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
41

ward the target. In the foreign exchange mar -
ket, this led to a marked improvement in senti -
ment and an increase in the global appetite for 
risk. This combination of interest rate expect -
ations and increasing risk appetite led to net 
capital outflows from the United States, which 
weakened the external value of the US dollar 
against the euro. The latter appreciated to 
US$1.13, reaching its highest level since Febru -
ary 2022. However, the euro gave up part of its 
gains as the impression took hold that there 
might be no further policy rate hikes in the 
euro area either, at least for the time being. At 
the end of the reporting period, the euro was trading at US$1.09, up 0.2% on its value at the 
end of March.
The euro was markedly stronger against the 
yen. The main reason for the sustained depre -
ciation of the yen against a variety of curren -
cies is the Bank of Japan’s monetary policy. The 
Bank of Japan remained committed to negative 
interest rates despite continued price pressures 
and the rising policy rates of other major cen -
tral banks. This initially further widened the gap 
to euro area yields, which were also on the up, 
and weakened the yen against the euro. In July, 
the appreciation of the euro came to an end 
amid emerging speculation that the Bank of 
Japan might soon ease its yield curve control. 
The actual decision to control the band more 
flexibly at the end of the month did not provide 
the yen with any additional sustained support 
(see also the section on capital markets on 
p.  44). Overall, the euro recorded a marked 
gain of 9.7% compared to the end of March 
and was trading at ¥159 at the end of the re -
porting period.
The euro depreciated against the pound ster -
ling. As against the US dollar, the euro progres -
sively lost value against the pound sterling over 
the course of May in the wake of some weak 
economic data for the euro area. While the 
United Kingdom has itself been facing weak 
economic growth and stubbornly high inflation 
for some time, observers increasingly assumed 
that the persistently high price pressures would 
force the Bank of England to raise its policy rate 
above the level in other advanced economies. 
Yields thus rose noticeably more strongly than 
in the euro area, strengthening the pound into 
the summer months. Only in July, with the an -
nouncement of lower than expected inflation 
figures for the United Kingdom, did expect -
ations of further interest rate hikes by the Bank 
of England decline and the euro appreciate 
slightly again for a while. At the end of the 
period under review, the euro stood at £0.85, 
which was 2.9% lower than at the end of the 
first quarter.… up markedly 
against the 
yen, …
… but down 
against the 
pound sterlingExchange rate of the euro
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Calculated 
against the currencies of 18 countries. A rise in values indicates 
an appreciation of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankMAM J J A S OND J FMAM J J A
2022 20230.951.001.051.101.15
125130135140145150155160
0.820.850.880.91
9296100104Daily data, log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
... yen
... pound sterling
Nominal effective exchange rate1
Q1 1999 = 100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
42

On a weighted average against the currencies 
of 18 major trading partners, the euro appreci -
ated by 1.1% on balance. This was mainly due 
to the euro’s gains against the yen and the ren -
minbi (6.2%). Measured against a broad group 
of 41 currencies, the appreciation of the effect -
ive euro was higher still at 2.7%. However, this 
development is mainly due to the sharp depre -
ciation of just a few currencies. The appreci -
ation of the euro against the Turkish lira (41.6%) 
and the Russian rouble (25.5%) stand out here 
in particular. The effective euro thus reached a 
record high against the broad group of partner 
currencies at the end of July. It should be noted, 
however, that the external value of the euro 
against currencies with a similar stability-  
oriented monetary policy to that of the Euro -
system is a long way off its previous highs.
Securities markets and 
 portfolio transactions
Bond market
Nominal government bond yields increased 
from their levels at the end of the first quarter 
of 2023, above all in the United States, but also 
to a more moderate extent in the euro area. In 
this context, the main focus of attention in 
government bond markets was the persistence 
of inflation dynamics and the question of how 
restrictive the path of monetary policy tighten -
ing measures needs to be in order to achieve a 
timely return to the 2% stability mark. The Fed -
eral Reserve raised its key interest rate twice in 
the reporting period, each time by 25 basis 
points. At the beginning of the reporting 
period, expectations of further policy rate hikes 
were initially dampened by concerns that fur -
ther problems in the US regional banking sec -
tor could weigh more heavily on the economy. 
However, these uncertainties gradually dissi -
pated over the remainder of the period. The US 
policy rate path expected by market partici -
pants therefore shifted further upwards in light 
of the robust US economy and unexpectedly 
persistent inflation, even though market par -ticipants latterly considered the likelihood of a 
further interest rate move in the near future to 
be rather low. Increased policy rate expect -
ations contributed to higher US government 
bond yields at the long end of the yield curve 
as well. Higher term premia additionally in -
creased upward pressure on the yields of long- 
term US Treasuries. The decision by rating 
agency Fitch to downgrade the US credit rating 
by one notch from “AAA” to “AA+” did not sig -
nificantly affect the yields on ten- year US Treas -
uries, which increased over the entire reporting 
period by 82 basis points to 4.3%. The Euro -
system also continued to tighten its monetary 
policy stance, raising key interest rates by a 
total of 75 basis points in three steps since the 
end of the first quarter. While inflationary pres -
sures remained high, the economic picture in 
the euro area deteriorated, though this did not, 
in itself, significantly dampen the rise in yields. 
On balance, the GDP- weighted yield on ten-  
year euro area bonds increased by 40 basis 
points to 3.3%.In effective 
terms, euro 
stronger on 
balance 
Yields on ten- 
year govern -
ment bonds up 
in euro area and 
United StatesHistorical decomposition of ten-year 
German Federal bonds
Sources: Refinitiv and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Based on a 
VAR model with sign restrictions (see Brandt et al., 2021). Es-
timation period: January 1999 to August 2023.
Deutsche BundesbankMar. Apr. May June July Aug.
2023201001020304050
––+++++Cumulated change since 31 March 2023 in basis points,
daily data
Global risk appetite
US macroContribution of shocks1
Change in yield on ten-year
German Federal bondsUS monetary policy
Euro area macroEuro area monetary policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
43

Yields on ten- year Federal bonds (Bunds) rose 
to a similar extent (+42 basis points to 2.7%) 
amid minor fluctuations. A model decompos -
ition of the yield curve of Federal securities into 
an expected policy rate path and term premia 
shows that this increase in yields is attributable 
first and foremost to higher nominal term pre -
mia. The latter also include inflation risk pre -
mia, which compensate for the risk of inflation 
being unexpectedly high. Of late, market par -
ticipants have demanded a higher premium for 
this inflation risk, in particular (see the section 
on the inflation risk premium on p. 45).
The Federal securities yield curve shifted up -
wards during the period under review. As a re -
sult of the Eurosystem’s (expected) policy rate 
hikes, yields rose at the short end, in particular. 
As short- term yields rose more strongly than 
long- term yields, the yield curve inverted fur -
ther. A strongly inverted yield curve is empiric -
ally regarded as a signal that market partici -
pants expect a recession over the next 12 months. The model- implied probability of an 
impending recession, as estimated from the 
slope of the yield curve, thus rose significantly.1
In the United Kingdom, the yields on ten-  year 
gilts rose markedly in the period under review 
(+128 basis points to 4.8%). As the UK inflation 
outlook remained high, the Bank of England 
raised its key interest rate by a total of 100 
basis points in the period under review. In 
Japan, too, yields rose as a result of monetary 
policy decisions. In July, the Bank of Japan de -
cided to conduct its yield curve control policy 
with greater flexibility. While its target is still to 
keep long- term interest rates close to 0%, it 
raised the strict ceiling of the target range at 
which it may purchase unlimited amounts of 
government bonds by 50 basis points to 1%. 
Against this backdrop, the yield on ten- year 
Japanese government bonds rose relatively sig -
nificantly to 0.7% (+33 basis points), which also 
pushed up global yields for a time. Yields on 
Japanese bonds were thus at a level last ob -
served in 2014.
As this report went to press, ten- year German 
Federal bonds were yielding 0.9  percentage 
point lower than the maturity- matched govern -
ment bonds of other euro area countries (GDP- 
weighted average). The yield spread therefore 
barely changed on balance and remained close 
to the five- year average (0.8 percentage point). 
The fact that reinvestments of maturing secur -
ities under the APP were discontinued in July 
2023 therefore did not provide any visible 
boost to yield spreads. Greek bond spreads fell 
very sharply (-64 basis points), which is prob -
ably partly attributable to the re- election of the 
Greek government in June. The government 
vowed to repay ahead of schedule bilateral as -Higher yields on 
ten- year Ger -
man Federal 
securities
Yield curve of 
Federal secur -
ities becomes 
more invertedYields up in 
United Kingdom 
and Japan
Yield spreads in 
the euro area 
virtually 
unchangedSpreads of ten-year government bonds 
over German Federal bonds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022 2023050100150200250300350400450Basis points, daily data
Italy
Spain
Ireland FranceGreece
Portugal
1 On the basis of different model approaches and taking 
into account the term spread between ten- year and three- 
month government bond yields, there is currently a histor -
ically high market- based probability of a recession. In the 
model approach, earlier recessions are dated according to 
the definition used by the German Council of Economic 
Experts. For a discussion of the model approach, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
44

sistance loans issued by euro area countries 
during the sovereign debt crisis.
Market- based inflation expectations for the 
euro area remained well above the 2% defin -
ition of price stability across the entire ten- year 
observation period. Market-  based inflation ex -
pectations for 2023 declined as inflation figures 
edged down slowly. Despite this, forward infla -
tion rates extending beyond the current year 
did not move closer to the inflation target in a 
sustainable manner. For instance, towards the 
end of the period under review, market partici -
pants expected inflation rates of 2.9% and 
2.6% for 2024 and 2025, respectively, meaning 
that market- based inflation measures were also 
above the definition of price stability in the me -
dium term. By contrast, the June Eurosystem 
staff macroeconomic projections assumed a 
baseline scenario for the inflation outlook, ac -
cording to which inflation will reach a level of 
2.2% in 2025. Although the inverted yield 
curve indicated that market participants ex -
pected an economic slowdown, they therefore 
also anticipate inflation rates to be too high in 
the medium term. Survey- based inflation ex -
pectations calculated by Consensus Economics 
in July put inflation rates at 5.4%, 2.4% and 
2.0% for the years 2023, 2024 and 2025, dis -
playing a pattern that was more compatible 
with achieving the inflation target by 2025. 
However, from the perspective of market par -
ticipants, there was a high risk that this target 
would be missed.
Longer- term market- based inflation expect -
ations remained worryingly high and continued 
to rise. The five- year forward inflation rate five 
years ahead, which is derived from inflation 
swaps, stood at 2.6% at last count, up 20 basis 
points from the end of the first quarter. It thus 
exceeded the level observed at the beginning 
of March this year, which until then had been 
the highest figure recorded since 2012. Mean -
while, quarterly survey- based inflation expect -
ations calculated by Consensus Economics for 
the euro area six to ten years ahead remained 
virtually unchanged. They were therefore still close to the inflation target of 2% in July, too. 
Consequently, the difference between market- 
based and survey- based long- term inflation ex -
pectations widened. This difference is con -
sidered primarily as a measure of the inflation 
risk premium. Its increase reflected market par -
ticipants’ growing concern that inflation could 
be above the inflation target in the medium 
and long term. The probabilities of future infla -
tion rates derived from inflation options also 
pointed to a high degree of uncertainty among 
market participants. An average inflation rate 
of above 2% over the next five years was impli -
citly considered by far the most likely scenario.
Market-  based five- year US forward inflation 
rates five years ahead rose to 2.7% (+10 basis 
points). Meanwhile, quarterly survey- based in -
flation expectations six to ten years ahead cal -
culated by Consensus Economics fell 11 basis 
points between April and July to 2.2%. The in -
flation risk premium as the difference between 
market- based and survey- based inflation ex -
pectations therefore also increased in the 
United States in the period under review.
Yields on BBB- rated European corporate bonds 
and high- yield bonds with residual maturities 
of between seven and ten years rose slightly. 
Within the BBB rating category, bond yields of 
financial corporations fell by 13 basis points, Market partici -
pants expected 
inflation rates to 
remain high in 
the short to 
medium term
Long- term infla -
tion expect -
ations upLong- term infla -
tion expect -
ations in the 
United States 
up; survey data 
down slightly
Corporate bond 
yields slightly 
higherExpectations for HICP inflation in the 
euro area
2.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027
Sources:  Bloomberg,  Consensus  Economics,  Fenics  Market 
Data  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Forward  inflation  rates 
based on inflation-linked swaps (2025 to 2027) and inflation-
fixing swaps (2023, 2024).
Deutsche BundesbankYear-on-year percentage change
Consensus Economics surveys
(July 2023)
Market-based expectations1
(August 2023)Eurosystem projection (June 2023)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
45

whereas those of non- financial corporations in -
creased (+29 basis points). The decline in finan -
cial corporate bond yields was in line with ten -
sions easing markedly in the European banking 
sector. This was also reflected in visibly declin -
ing credit default premia on subordinated 
bonds issued by financial corporations (as 
measured by the iTraxx Europe Subordinated 
Financials index) and in European credit institu -
tions’ equity price gains (see p.  47). Yield 
spreads over Bunds with the same maturity 
narrowed markedly in both the BBB and high- 
yield segments. Thus, significantly higher risk-  
free interest rates did not translate into tighter 
financing conditions for corporate bonds. 
Nevertheless, measured by yield spreads, finan -
cing costs for European enterprises in all rating 
categories remained significantly above their 
respective five- year averages.
At €465½ billion, gross issuance in the German 
bond market in the second quarter of 2023 
was down somewhat on the previous quarter’s figure (€473½ billion). Net of redemptions and 
changes in issuers’ holdings of their own debt 
securities, domestic issuers ramped up their 
capital market borrowing by €52½ billion. The 
outstanding volume of foreign debt securities 
in the German market rose by €48 billion in the 
second quarter. On balance, the total outstand -
ing volume of bonds in Germany thus climbed 
by €100½ billion in the quarter under review.
In the second quarter of 2023, the public sec -
tor issued bonds to the tune of €26½ billion 
net, following €30 billion in the previous three- 
month period. The Federal Government (in -
cluding the resolution agency classified as part 
of central government) issued mainly 7- year 
and 30- year Federal bonds (Bunds) (€10 billion 
and €14½ billion, respectively) as well as Treas -
ury discount paper (Bubills) (€10½ billion). 
Meanwhile, net redemptions of ten- year Bunds 
totalled €5½ billion. State and local govern -
ments redeemed debt securities worth €7 bil -
lion on balance.
The quarter under review saw domestic credit 
institutions increase their capital market debt 
by €21 billion, compared to €47½ billion in the 
previous quarter. The primary instruments used 
were debt securities issued by specialised credit 
institutions as well as other bank debt secur -
ities that can be structured flexibly (€8½ billion 
and €7 billion, respectively), but also mortgage 
Pfandbriefe and public Pfandbriefe on a smaller 
scale (€4 billion and €1 billion, respectively).
Domestic enterprises issued bonds worth €5 
billion net in the second quarter, following €1 
billion in the previous three- month period. On 
balance, the primary issuers here were non-  
financial corporations (€2½ billion). However, 
other financial intermediaries and insurance 
corporations also issued new bonds worth 
€1½ billion net in each case.
In the second quarter of 2023, domestic non-  
banks expanded their bond portfolios in the 
bond market by €69 billion net, striking a more 
or less even balance between domestic and High net issu -
ance of German 
debt securitiesNet public 
sector  issuance
Rise in credit 
institutions’ cap -
ital market debt
Net issuance of 
corporate bonds
Purchases of 
debt securitiesLong-term forward inflation rates* in the 
euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Refinitiv, Consensus Economics and Bun-
desbank calculations. * Derived from the fixed cash flow ari-
sing from inflation swaps which is swapped for the actual an-
nual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro area 
and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised over 
the next five or ten years. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022 20231.41.82.22.63.0% p.a., weekly averages
Five-year forward inflation rate in 
five years derived from swapsConsensus Economics
inflation expectations 
in six to ten years
United StatesEuro area
0.81.21.62.02.42.8Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
46

foreign securities. Non- resident investors ex -
panded their German bond portfolio by €38½ 
billion net. Domestic credit institutions pur -
chased bonds worth €17 billion net, which 
consisted almost exclusively of foreign secur -
ities. The Bundesbank’s holdings of debt secur -
ities fell by €24 billion on balance. This was 
largely because securities from the Eurosys -
tem’s purchase programmes matured and prin -
cipal payments were only partially reinvested 
up until July and have not been reinvested 
since.
Equity market
The international equity markets were charac -
terised by diverging economic signals on either 
side of the Atlantic and an increase in global 
risk appetite. In the United States, investor op -
timism was mainly boosted by favourable 
macro data – in particular the surprisingly 
strong economic growth recorded in the 
second quarter and continued positive signals 
from the US labour market. Together with the 
signs of easing US price pressures, this fuelled 
the hope that the Federal Reserve would be 
able to successfully lower inflation without hav -
ing to accept a sharp economic downturn. This 
outlook was further strengthened by the fact 
that the previous tensions in the US regional 
banking system continued to ease and, most 
recently, no longer played a significant role in 
financial market developments. Concerns stem -
ming from the first quarter that the tensions in 
the US regional banking sector could make it 
more difficult for the Fed to combat inflation 
therefore also waned. The growth in investor 
confidence provided a particularly strong boost 
to shares in technology companies, which in -
vestors primarily see as having favourable long- 
term prospects. It was also reflected in a sharp 
decline in uncertainty about future develop -
ments in US equity prices, which can be meas -
ured by the implied volatility of broad equity 
indices.Taken in isolation, the surprisingly positive US 
economic signals and the increase in global risk 
appetite also boosted European equities. In the 
euro area, however, these price- supporting fac -
tors were partly offset by higher risk- free inter -
est rates as well as, first and foremost, the dis -
tinct deterioration in the economic outlook 
since the end of April which slowed the up -
ward movement in the equity markets. As in 
the previous quarter, market participants’ focus 
was also on the future monetary policy stance. 
However, speculation that the economic slow -
down could cause the Eurosystem to soften its 
anti- inflationary stance ultimately had only a 
temporary impact on equity prices. On balance, 
the prices of European equities (EURO STOXX), 
German equities (CDAX) and UK shares 
(FTSE 100) have fallen slightly since the end of 
the first quarter (-2.2%, -2.9% and -4.2%, re -
spectively). Meanwhile, US equities (S&P 500), 
which are relatively heavily influenced by tech -
nology companies, recorded an increase of International 
equity markets 
supported by 
robust US econ -
omy and invest -
ors’ risk appetite
European equity 
markets down 
slightly, strong 
growth in the 
United States 
and JapanInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2022 2023
Q2 Q1 Q2
Debt securities
Residents 35.5 85.4 62.3
Credit institutions –  3.0 32.1 17.2
of which:
Foreign debt securities 6.8 27.9 16.3
Deutsche Bundesbank 25.2 1.1 – 23.8
Other sectors 13.3 52.2 68.8
of which:
Domestic debt securities 26.3 15.2 35.8
Non-residents –  6.2 57.1 38.4
Shares
Residents – 10.5 14.9 4.7
Credit institutions –  1.2 9.4 –  2.6
of which:
Domestic shares –  0.2 – 0.8 0.5
Non-banks –  9.2 5.4 7.3
of which:
Domestic shares 11.3 9.8 8.5
Non-residents –  8.6 – 4.8 –  4.8
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 15.6 14.9 4.0
Investment in retail funds 3.3 5.8 1.2
of which:
Equity funds 3.4 4.8 0.8
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
47

6.4%. Japanese equities (Nikkei index) appreci -
ated by as much as 12.8%.
European and US bank stocks continued their 
recovery in the reporting period, almost re -
couping the losses they sustained following the 
turmoil in the US regional banking system in 
March. Unexpectedly good quarterly results 
and higher interest margins at big banks on 
both sides of the Atlantic are likely to have 
played a major role in the price gains. On bal -
ance, the prices of European and US bank 
stocks rose by 8.1% and 5.6%, respectively, as 
compared with the end of the first quarter.
European and US equity valuations increased 
somewhat compared with the end of the first 
quarter. These valuation measures are derived 
from a dividend discount model that also takes 
into account enterprises’ medium- term earn -
ings outlook and the path of risk- free interest 
rates. Accordingly, both the equity risk pre -
mium and the cost of equity for the EURO 
STOXX and S&P 500 fell slightly. However, the 
medium- term earnings outlook moved in dif -
ferent directions for US and European enter -
prises, respectively. Analysts revised the 
medium- term earnings outlook downwards for 
European enterprises in view of the weakened 
economic outlook, which had a significant 
dampening effect on share price develop -
ments. Meanwhile, the earnings outlook for 
listed companies in the United States improved 
considerably. In long- term comparisons, both 
the equity risk premia and the implied cost of 
equity currently suggest a relatively high valu -
ation for European and US equities.
German stock corporations raised €4 billion in 
new funds on balance in the second quarter of 
2023 (previous quarter: also €4 billion). The 
volume of foreign shares in the German market 
shrank by €4½ billion in the same period. On 
balance, domestic non- banks were the sole 
buyers of equities (€7½ billion). By contrast, 
foreign investors and domestic credit institu -
tions pared back their equity portfolios by €5 
billion and €2½ billion net, respectively.Bank stocks out -
perform market 
as a whole
Valuations 
slightly up on 
both sides of 
the Atlantic
Equity market 
fundingMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2022 2023
Q2 Q1 Q2p
I. Current account + 30.5 +  69.9 + 60.1
1. Goods + 27.0 +  55.2 + 56.4
2. Services –  5.3 –   6.7 – 14.4
3. Primary income + 22.3 +  41.1 + 27.5
4. Secondary income – 13.5 –  19.6 –  9.3
II. Capital account –  4.8 –  11.3 –  4.0
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) + 67.3 + 100.4 + 60.5
1. Direct investment + 53.0 +  38.1 + 11.5
Domestic investment 
abroad + 59.2 +  27.9 + 25.2
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country +  6.2 –  10.2 + 13.7
2. Portfolio investment + 12.8 +  25.7 + 15.8
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities +  1.6 +  78.9 + 48.1
Shares 1 +  3.2 +   4.1 –  4.7
Investment fund shares 2+  3.6 +  10.9 +  4.7
of which:
Money market fund 
shares +  1.5 +   0.5 +  1.7
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 +  0.3 +   7.6 +  2.9
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 –  5.5 +  56.3 + 45.1
of which:
Denominated in euro 5 –  1.1 +  55.9 + 34.4
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities – 11.1 +  53.2 + 32.3
Shares 1 –  5.9 –   4.9 –  5.1
Investment fund shares +  1.0 +   0.9 –  1.0
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 –  2.7 +   1.6 +  9.5
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 –  3.6 +  55.6 + 28.9
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 6 –  2.8 +  47.5 + 23.7
3. Financial derivatives 7 + 12.9 +  20.2 + 11.2
4. Other investment 8 – 11.9 +  16.1 + 20.9
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 9 – 25.5 –  42.6 + 10.8
Enterprises and 
 households 10 –  7.2 +  28.6 + 37.8
General government – 10.5 +   8.4 –  2.8
Bundesbank + 31.3 +  21.7 – 24.9
5. Reserve assets +  0.6 +   0.2 +  1.1
IV. Errors and omissions 11 + 41.6 +  41.8 +  4.5
1  Including participation certifi  cates. 2  Including reinvested 
earnings. 3  Short- term: original maturity of up to one year. 
4 Long- term: original maturity of more than one year or unlim-
ited. 5  Including outstanding foreign Deutsche  Mark bonds. 
6 Including bonds issued by the former Federal Railways, the 
former Federal Post Offi   ce and the former Treuhand agency. 
7  Balance of transactions arising from options and fi  nancial 
futures  contracts as well as employee stock options. 8 Includes, 
in particular, loans and trade credits as well as currency and de-
posits. 9 Excluding the Bundesbank. 10  Includes the following 
sectors: fi  nancial corporations (excluding monetary fi  nancial in-
stitutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and 
non- profi  t institutions serving households. 11  Statistical errors 
and omissions resulting from the difference between the bal-
ance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current 
account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
48

During the reporting quarter, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded weak inflows of €5 
billion, after raising €21 billion in the previous 
quarter. On balance, specialised funds reserved 
for institutional investors were by far the great -
est beneficiaries (€4 billion). Of the various 
asset classes, bond funds and open-  end real 
estate funds, in particular, registered significant 
inflows of capital (€3½ billion and €2 billion, 
respectively). By contrast, mixed securities 
funds redeemed their own units to the tune of 
€1 billion net. The outstanding volume of for -
eign mutual fund shares in Germany rose by 
€4½ billion in the period under review. Mutual 
fund shares were bought on balance almost 
exclusively by domestic non- banks, which 
added fund shares worth €11 billion net to 
their portfolios. Most of these shares were is -
sued by domestic mutual funds. Non-  resident 
investors trimmed their share portfolios in Ger -
many by €1 billion net.
Direct investment
Against the backdrop of persistently high infla -
tion and a decline in the uncertainty that had 
temporarily built up in the financial markets as 
a result of the US banking crisis, transactions in 
cross- border portfolio investment led to net 
capital exports of €16 billion in the second 
quarter of 2023. Direct investment, too, re -
sulted in capital outflows (€11½ billion).
Enterprises domiciled in Germany expanded 
their direct investment abroad by €25 billion on balance between April and June 2023, com -
pared with €28 billion in the previous three 
months, primarily providing foreign affiliates 
with additional equity capital (€25 billion). Re -
invested earnings accounted for around two-  
thirds of this development. Enterprises resident 
in Germany also granted a small volume of 
additional credit to affiliated group entities 
abroad (€½ billion). This was done exclusively 
through financial loans on balance. By contrast, 
trade credits were mainly redeemed. Significant 
volumes of German direct investment flowed 
to China (€6½ billion), Luxembourg and Switz -
erland (both countries saw inflows of €4½ bil -
lion). By contrast, German enterprises scaled 
back their direct investment in Ireland, the 
Netherlands and Finland (€1 billion in each 
case).
Foreign enterprises increased their direct invest -
ment in Germany by €13½ billion in the second 
quarter (following a reduction of €10 billion in 
the previous quarter) and augmented their 
equity capital in German subsidiaries by €5½ 
billion. In addition, they raised the volume of 
loans granted to German enterprises by €8½ 
billion, mainly via financial loans. Enterprises 
from Luxembourg (€8 billion) and the United 
States (€5 billion) boosted their direct invest -
ment funds in Germany by particularly large 
amounts. By contrast, outflows of direct invest -
ment were recorded from Malta, Slovakia and 
the United Kingdom (€1 billion in each case).Sales and 
purchases  of 
mutual fund 
shares
Direct invest -
ment sees net 
capital exportsGerman direct 
investment 
abroad results in 
capital exports
Foreign direct 
investment in 
Germany pro -
duces capital 
inflows
List of references
Brandt, L., A. S. Guilhem, M. Schröder and I. Van Robays (2021), What drives euro area financial 
market developments? The role of US spillovers and global risk, European Central Bank, Working 
Paper Series, No 2560.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023), Current drivers of market- based probabilities of recession based on 
the yield curve, Monthly Report, January 2023, pp. 65-68.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
49

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
The German economy is still experiencing a 
period of weakness. Economic output stag -
nated in the second quarter of 2023, after hav -
ing contracted in the winter half- year (October- 
March). According to the Federal Statistical Of -
fice’s flash estimate, gross domestic product 
(GDP) remained at the level recorded in the 
previous quarter in seasonally adjusted terms.1 
Weak foreign demand weighed on industry. 
Higher financing costs also presented head -
winds for the economy. These depressed de -
mand for construction work and capital goods. 
Developments in the economy could have been 
even weaker were it not for the still high back -
log of orders in parts of industry and construc -
tion and abating supply bottlenecks. The sound 
labour market also acted as a tailwind for the 
economy. As wages continued to rise steeply and inflation was no longer quite so high, it is 
likely that private consumption recovered 
somewhat.
Economic activity in detail
After seasonal adjustment, industrial output 
declined markedly in the second quarter. This is 
likely to have been reflected in the trend de -
cline in domestic and foreign demand.2 In add -
ition, high energy costs are likely to have 
weighed heavily on some industrial sectors. 
Output in the energy-  intensive sectors fell 
steeply as a result. This is reflected in the 
marked drop in the manufacture of intermedi -
ate goods, which encompasses the energy-  
intensive industrial sectors. Non-  energy-  
intensive sectors were likewise affected by the 
decline, however. Production of capital goods 
was also lower, for example. Higher financing 
costs, which are weighing on demand, are 
likely to have played a major role in this. By 
contrast, production of consumer goods ex -
panded. According to surveys by the ifo Insti -
tute and S&P Global, supply bottlenecks in in -
dustry continued to ease overall. Together with 
the large order backlog, this offset the decline 
in demand. Weak foreign demand was re -
flected in slightly lower price- adjusted goods 
exports.
The rise in financing costs dampened demand 
for commercial investment in machinery and 
equipment while on the other hand the easing 
of supply bottlenecks benefited investment. 
Price- adjusted imports of capital goods point to German econ -
omy still experi -
encing weak 
spell
Industry and 
exports of 
goods lacklustre
Aggregate output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Price 
and calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 239698100102104106108
–12–8–40+4+8+12Adjusted for price, seasonal and calendar effects
2015 = 100, log scale
Gross domestic product
% Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
1 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this 
text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, pro -
vided they can be verified and quantified. The flash esti -
mate also included revisions for the previous quarters in 
some cases. Overall, this results in a markedly higher level 
of economic activity than previously reported.
2 Industrial orders increased overall in the second quarter 
but excluding large orders they continued to decline 
sharply.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
50

an increase in investment although capital 
goods producers experienced a decline in 
price- adjusted sales in Germany. Enterprises 
probably invested more in computers, elec -
tronic and optical products and in their vehicle 
fleets. The latter is also indicated by the sharp 
rise in commercial motor vehicle registrations 
shown in data provided by the German Associ -
ation of the Automotive industry (VDA).
Seasonally adjusted construction output fell 
markedly in the second quarter, with the de -
cline in the finishing trades significantly stronger 
than in main construction. A countermove -
ment had been expected owing to favourable 
weather conditions in the first quarter. Demand 
for construction work was likewise weak. New 
orders in the main construction sector rose on 
average in April and May – data are available 
up to this point – compared with the previous 
quarter, but were considerably depressed when 
making a year- on- year comparison. Given this, 
construction output remained relatively robust. 
Much like in the industrial sector, diminishing 
material shortages and the large order backlog 
are likely to have provided support. According 
to ifo Institute surveys, the reach of order 
books in the main construction sector remained 
high in a long- term comparison, despite the 
decline in the second quarter. In line with out -
put, construction investment is also likely to 
have remained sluggish.
Private consumption may have recovered 
somewhat in the second quarter. Inflation, 
which remained high despite having fallen, 
continued to weigh on consumers’ purchasing 
power but this was countered by substantial 
wage increases. In the retail sector, price-  
adjusted sales went up perceptibly. Current ac -
count statistics on travel indicate that travel ex -
penditure was significantly higher, too. Price-  
adjusted sales declined in hospitality services, 
however. Households also continued to show 
restraint in their car purchases. According to 
VDA data, new passenger car registrations fell 
again. The services sector as a whole may have 
recorded slight growth in the second quarter. According to data available up to May, services 
production (excluding trade) even rose sharply. 
Motor vehicle registrations were also up no -
ticeably overall in the second quarter on the 
back of commercial vehicle registrations. This 
should have bolstered motor vehicle trade. 
However, wholesale trade, which is more 
closely related to developments in industry, de -
celerated, with price- adjusted sales declining 
significantly.
Labour market
The labour market is proving fairly robust in the 
current phase of cyclical weakness. Neverthe -
less, in the second quarter, the previously high 
pace of employment growth declined mark -
edly, and unemployment saw a moderate up -
tick. Although labour market tightness eased 
slightly, there are still a comparatively large 
number of vacancies given the relatively low 
unemployment figures. The leading indicators Commercial 
investment in 
machinery and 
equipment 
caught between 
higher financing 
costs and dimin -
ishing supply 
bottlenecks
Construction 
output and 
investment rela -
tively robust in 
view of declin -
ing demand
Private con -
sumption likely 
to have 
recovered 
somewhat  and 
services  sector 
activity may 
have increased 
slightly
Labour market 
fairly robustOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2380859095100105110
1001051101151201251301351402015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data, log scale
MonthlyIndustry
Industry excluding
energy-intensive
sectors
Main constructionConstruction1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
51

suggest that employment will remain stable in 
the coming months, with unemployment con -
tinuing to rise slightly.
The declining momentum in the second quar -
ter primarily marks a provisional end to what 
was unusually strong employment growth in 
the past winter half- year, given that economic 
activity was already weak.3 Employment growth 
was still shaped by catch- up effects after the 
end of the pandemic, the extremely high level 
of labour market tightness and the very low 
number of working hours per employed per -
son.4 On an average of the reporting quarter, 
seasonally adjusted total employment was up 
by 70,000 people, or just under 0.2%, from the 
previous quarter’s level. However, over the 
course of the second quarter, growth in total 
employment slowed considerably, coming to a 
standstill in June. This is mainly attributable to 
employment subject to social security contribu -
tions, which in April and May only slightly ex -
ceeded the level of March. The number of 
people in exclusively low- paid part- time work 
(mini- jobs) also climbed at a slower pace. How -
ever, the number of self-  employed persons, 
which had previously been characterised by a 
long-  term negative trend, has recently stabil -
ised.
In the first two months of the second quarter, 
employment subject to social security contribu -
tions slightly exceeded the average of the first 
quarter of 2023 by 38,000 persons or 0.1%. 
Growth was particularly evident in health and 
social services, which are unaffected by the 
economic cycle, and in the public sector. Fol -
lowing the end of the pandemic, hospitality 
services once again saw positive catch-  up ef -
fects, which have now expired. Employment in 
the manufacturing sector remained stable al -Declining 
momentum, 
but stable 
employment
Employment 
subject to social 
security contri -
butions grew 
mainly in certain 
services sectorsLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023July44.044.545.045.546.0
32.032.533.033.534.034.535.0–1,000–5000+500+1,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–600–400–2000+200+400+600+800JulySeasonally adjusted, quarterly data
JulyMillion
Million
Million500700900Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployment
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies2EmployedJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Apr.-
May
3 As part of the revision of the national accounts, employ -
ment was revised upwards by a total of around 250,000 
employees in August 2023 for the period from the begin -
ning of 2022. This was also a significant factor in the 
2022-23 winter half- year.
4 The slowdown in employment growth had already been 
expected in the Bundesbank’s projections published in June 
2023. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
52

though the number of temporary workers fell 
significantly. These are often deployed in the 
manufacturing sector, where they offer a flex -
ible adjustment reserve. Employment in the 
wholesale and retail trade also declined.
Registered unemployment rose markedly in the 
second quarter. Looking at the quarterly aver -
age, the Federal Employment Agency recorded 
just under 60,000 more persons as unemployed 
compared with the previous quarter in season -
ally adjusted terms. The unemployment rate 
went up by 0.1 percentage point on the quar -
ter, from 5.5% to 5.6%.
Unemployment increased somewhat on the 
year but this was only partly attributable to cyc -
lical factors. The cyclical weakness is mainly re -
flected in the increase in unemployment among 
those receiving insurance benefits under the 
statutory unemployment insurance scheme, 
which has risen moderately over the past 12 
months by around 75,000 persons in total. The 
rise in unemployment among those receiving 
the basic welfare allowance (SGB II) explains 
the second half of the increase compared to 
the same month one year earlier. As the first 
wave of Ukrainian refugees was already regis -
tered by the Federal Employment Agency one 
year ago after the war broke out in February 
2022, the year- on- year comparison of un -
employment figures is now less strongly af -
fected by their initial registration. Nevertheless, 
the continued high level of immigration – not 
just from Ukraine – plays a role in the rise in 
unemployment. Registration as unemployed is 
part of the integration process and is therefore 
not an immediate warning sign for the econ -
omy.5 As refugees generally do not have any 
assets and have not been insured beforehand 
in the unemployment insurance scheme, they 
are almost exclusively eligible for the basic wel -
fare allowance (SGB II).
Leading indicators suggest that employment 
will remain stable in the coming months. Struc -
tural demand for labour is still high. Across the 
industrial sector as a whole, the private sector’s hiring plans for the next three months are 
broadly balanced between those planning to 
increase their staffing levels and those with 
plans to reduce headcount. Service providers, 
for example, are expected to recruit new staff 
on balance. According to the monthly ifo sur -
vey, all other sectors are tending to get by with 
fewer staff. Although component B (employ -
ment) of the labour market barometer of the 
Institute for Employment Research (IAB) de -
clined in recent months, it remains in positive 
territory.6 Reported unsubsidised vacancies for 
positions subject to social security contribu -Marked rise in 
unemployment 
in Q2
Over past 
12 months, rise 
in unemploy -
ment driven 
roughly equally 
by cyclical fac -
tors and refugee 
migration
Leading indica -
tors point to 
employment 
remaining stable2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 202310123456
–++++++Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Percentage
points
–2–10+1+2%
Wage drift1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 Wage drift 
is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual ear-
nings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche Bundesbankquarterly
5 Language and integration courses and labour market 
policy measures also form part of the integration process, 
however. In these cases, participants are not counted as 
unemployed as they are not available on the labour mar -
ket. As employment is often not taken up immediately 
after the end of the training measure, a new period of un -
employment begins. This means that the effect of refugees 
on the unemployment statistics can be spread over a 
longer time frame.
6 Here, managers from all local employment agencies are 
asked about the outlook in the respective agency district 
over the next three months.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
53

The role of infl  ation and infl  ation expectations in wage 
negotiations during the period of high infl  ation
Growth in negotiated wages plays a key 
role in wage developments in Germany. 
Alongside productivity gains and the sector- 
specifi  c labour market and business situ-
ation, infl  ation and expectations about in-
fl  ation developments also affect the wage 
setting. The exceptionally high infl  ation 
rates since 2022 have highlighted the role 
infl  ation and infl  ation expectations play in 
wage negotiations from a monetary policy 
perspective, too. To better assess the role of 
these two variables in the most recent 
round of wage negotiations, in the summer 
of 2022, the Bundesbank conducted a tele-
phone survey of experts among the wage 
bargainers involved in the negotiations,1 
thus quickly gaining insights into how their 
behaviour might have changed in the new 
high- infl  ation environment.
The survey covers the wage rounds that 
took place between March 2022 and May 
2023.2 The evaluation is broken down into 
two categories: the wage rounds in the 
spring and summer of 2022 and those in 
late 2022 and early 2023, although the lat-
ter continued into the spring of 2023 in a 
few cases. This breakdown allows us to 
identify changes in the role of infl  ation and 
infl  ation expectations during the period of 
rising infl  ation rates.
According to the survey, actual infl  ation, or 
rather even more so expected infl  ation, has 
played a key role for both employers and 
trade unions in the wage rounds since the 
spring of 2022. Wage bargainers relied 
heavily on external forecasts when forming 
their expectations about future infl  ation. 
The percentage of respondents using infl  a-
tion forecasts produced by external pro-
viders rose markedly to 100% between the wage rounds in the spring and summer of 
2022 and the winter pay rounds in late 
2022 and early 2023.3 Compared with a 
similar Bundesbank telephone survey con-
ducted during the spell of low infl  ation in 
2016, the share of trade unions that took 
external infl  ation forecasts into account in 
wage negotiations thus almost doubled. In 
the summer of 2022, economic develop-
ments were exceptionally uncertain owing 
to the energy crisis. In these circumstances, 
referring to external infl  ation forecasts was 
probably a way for the parties to strengthen 
their own negotiating position, with both 
trade unions and employers’ associations 
relying primarily on the joint projections 
produced by several of Germany’s institutes 
for economic research (the Joint Economic 
Forecast). However, forecasts from other 
bodies such as the German Council of Eco-
nomic Experts were also used on occasion. 
These forecasts generally cover the current 
and next calendar year.
The Eurosystem’s medium- term infl  ation 
target of 2% became signifi  cantly less rele-
vant as an anchor in the wage negotiations 
over the course of 2022. This is especially 
true with regard to trade unions’ wage de-
mands. While two- thirds of all respondents 
still described the Eurosystem’s infl  ation tar-
1 The 29 respondents were chief negotiators, individ-
uals involved in the negotiations and economists from 
industry and trade union sectors representing around 
half of salaried employees. Of the 29 respondents, 15 
belonged to trade unions and 14 to employers’ associ-
ations. The response rate for all sectors invited to take 
part in an interview was 78%.
2 At the time of the survey, negotiations had been 
concluded in 13 sectors in the spring and summer 
wage round. At that time, wage negotiations were still 
pending for 16 sectors in the winter wage round in 
late 2022 and early 2023.
3 All responses were weighted by the percentage of 
employees represented by the survey participants.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
54

get as very important or important for wage 
demands and wage offers in the second 
and third quarters of 2022, signiﬁ  cantly less 
than half of respondents did so in the wage 
rounds from the fourth quarter onwards. 
This suggests that the importance of the 
medium- term inﬂ  ation target declined with 
rising current inﬂ  ation. However, the over-
whelming majority of employers have de-
scribed the inﬂ  ation target as not very im-
portant or irrelevant for their wage offers 
over the course of time. During wage nego-
tiations, the importance attached to certain 
factors relevant to the wage- setting process 
may change over time. The survey therefore 
included an additional question asking to 
what extent the 2% inﬂ  ation target was 
taken into account when reaching the 
wage settlement. There was no change for 
employers here in a comparison of the 
wage rounds. Trade unions’ behaviour did 
change, on the other hand, as unlike in the 
past, the Eurosystem’s medium- term inﬂ  a-
tion target of 2% ceased to play any role 
for them at all in the wage agreements in 
the winter of 2022-23. A comparison with 
the survey conducted in the low inﬂ  ation 
environment in 2016 likewise suggests that 
the 2% inﬂ  ation target became less import-
ant in recent wage negotiations. In 2016, 
around one- quarter of the trade unions sur-
veyed still took the inﬂ  ation target into ac-
count in the imminent wage agreements. 
The recent situation involving very sharp 
price increases is likely to be the reason for 
this ﬁ  nding. However, it would be worrying 
from a monetary policy perspective if trade 
unions’ inﬂ  ation expectations were to re-
main permanently above the 2% target. 
This would increase the risk of the high in-
ﬂ  ation rates becoming more strongly en-
trenched than previously assumed.
In most cases, the increases in negotiated 
wages in 2022 only partially offset the ero-
sion of monetary value. This raises the ques-tion as to whether real wage losses should 
be offset by raising wages again at a later 
date. In the summer of 2022, only a few 
respondents among the wage bargainers 
expected another round of inflation- 
offsetting wage adjustments in the period 
from 2023 onwards – after overcoming the 
energy crisis but without a rapid return of 
inﬂ  ation toward the 2% mark. Unsurpris-
ingly, employers were very cautious about 
an additional round of wage increases. 
From the trade unions’ perspective, one 
factor may have been the fact that in the 
summer of 2022, sizeable government sup-
port payments were up for discussion and a 
severe recession was looming. Meanwhile, 
concerns about job security are likely to 
have diminished and the government sup-
port payments made until now (such as the 
temporary funding of inﬂ  ation compensa-
tion bonuses and energy price allowances 
that were being debated at the time) are 
likely to have postponed the question of 
further offsetting the losses in real wages. 
This is also why wage developments in Ger-
many are subject to potential upside risk.Measure of expected inflation from 
trade unions' perspective*
* Employee-weighted response percentages. Question: “Look-
ing at the most recent/upcoming wage agreement in your sec-
tor, which consumer price inflation expectations were/will be 
considered?”
Deutsche Bundesbank020406080100%
Eurosystem
inflation target,
i.e. 2% over the
medium termexternal
forecastunion's own
forecast2016 Spring / summer 2022 Winter 2022-23Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
55

tions have been falling for around one year 
now. Nevertheless, the number of vacancies re -
mains comparatively high.
Nevertheless, the low movement between em -
ployment and unemployment suggests a cer -
tain degree of uncertainty in the labour market. 
On the one hand, the likelihood of moving 
from employment into unemployment is cur -
rently still very small and close to its historical 
low. On the other hand, the likelihood of mov -
ing out of unemployment and into employ -
ment has fallen sharply over the past 12 
months. One contributory factor is the high 
proportion of refugees, as integration into em -
ployment is difficult and lengthy for people 
whose primary reason for coming to Germany 
is not economic migration. Even without this 
effect, however, it is currently not easy for un -
employed persons to migrate into employ -
ment. According to the unemployment com -
ponent of the IAB labour market barometer, unemployment is likely to increase gradually 
again in the coming months.
Wages and prices
Negotiated wages continued to rise sharply in 
the second quarter of 2023. Including add -
itional benefits, they were up by 3.9% on the 
year in the second quarter, compared with 
3.8% in the quarter before. High inflation com -
pensation bonuses, in particular, were a key 
factor.7 Adjusted for these one- off payments, 
negotiated pay rose by 2.5% year on year in 
the second quarter, slightly more slowly than in 
the first quarter, when it increased by 2.7%. 
The permanent wage increase of 5.2% from 
June in the metal- working and electrical engin -
eering industries was partly offset by wage-  Transition from 
unemployment 
to employment 
down sharply Negotiated 
wages rose 
sharply, with 
actual earnings 
probably 
increasing even 
more strongly 
stillPrice developments at economic stages as classified for HICP purposes
–60–40–200+20+40+60+80+100Year-on-year percentage change
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
1 Eurostat. 2 Bundesbank calculations (in euro) based on daily prices in USD as quoted by Bloomberg Finance L.P. 3 Including bever-
ages and tobacco products.  4 ECB calculations of DG AGRI prices based on the European Commission’s farm gate and wholesale 
prices. 5 Analogous to HICP classification “non-energy industrial goods”; Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Stat-
istical Office.
Deutsche Bundesbank10010203040
–++++
505101520
–++++
–20–100+10+20+30+40+50Crude oil price2 (right-hand scale)
HICP – food1,3Producer prices for food in the euro area4 (right-hand scale)HICP – energy1
3036912
–++++
–30+3+6+9+12
HICP – non-energy industrial goods1Industrial producer prices5July
JulyJuly
7 A recent example is the sum of €1,240 which public-  
sector employees working for central and local govern -
ment received in June 2023.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
56

dampening effects from months with no wage 
rises (zero months) in several other sectors. The 
latter are partly due to delayed wage settle -
ments.8 Actual earnings probably outpaced ne -
gotiated wages again in the second quarter of 
2023. This is because the minimum wage led 
to strong wage increases in labour- intensive 
low- wage jobs without collective wage agree -
ments and higher performance-  related bo -
nuses were paid at large enterprises.
The most recent wage agreements were again 
high for the most part. As before, they consist 
of a combination of significant inflation com -
pensation bonuses and high permanent wage 
increases. The latest mediator suggestion at rail 
operator Deutsche Bahn would also involve 
strong wage increases if accepted by employ -
ers and trade unions. Lower pay groups would 
benefit disproportionately.
Negotiations in the retail sector as well as in 
wholesale and foreign trade, which were 
launched back in April, are ongoing. The trade 
union ver.di had made high wage demands by 
historical standards (16% for retail trade, 13% 
for wholesale and foreign trade, in each case 
to run for a period of 12 months). Meanwhile, 
the ifo Institute sees an increasingly gloomy 
business outlook and fairly subdued sales 
growth. Nevertheless, with inflation still high 
and the labour market remaining fairly robust, 
other sectors are likewise likely to reach high 
wage settlements over the next few months.
The general statutory minimum wage is to be 
raised from the current level of €12 per hour to 
€12.41 as at 1 January 2024 and to €12.82 as 
at 1 January 2025. This was the recommenda -
tion put forward by the Federal Government’s 
independent Minimum Wage Commission on 
26 June 2023. Germany’s labour minister im -
mediately announced that he would endorse 
this recommendation and would table it in the 
Federal Cabinet. Compared with the last three 
high minimum wage increases in 2022, the 
planned raises from next year onwards are 
fairly small. From today’s perspective, the an -nounced minimum wage increases, taken in 
isolation, do not entail any significant upward 
risks to aggregate wage developments.
Consumer prices (as measured by the Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices, or HICP) rose 
sharply again in the second quarter. Averaged 
over April to June 2023, they appreciated by a 
seasonally adjusted 1.0%, compared with 0.9% 
in the first quarter. The prices of processed 
food, non-  energy industrial goods, and ser -
vices, in particular, continued to rise sharply. 
Energy prices fell again, but no longer as 
sharply as in the first quarter. In a year- on- year 
comparison, the inflation rate fell from 8.8% to 
6.9% in the second quarter of 2023. This was 
mainly because energy prices had risen sharply 
in the previous year in the wake of Russia’s in -
vasion of Ukraine and this base effect has now 
disappeared. At around 14%, year- on- year in -
flation in food prices was still very considerable, 
but somewhat reduced compared to the first 
quarter. And the prices of non- energy industrial 
goods, too, rose less sharply than in the previ -
ous quarter, following the decline in upstream 
price pressure. By contrast, year- on- year infla -
tion in services prices picked up significantly. In 
addition to rising wage costs, special factors 
from the temporary relief measures taken last 
year (including the €9 travel ticket) were a fac -
tor here. Accordingly, the core rate, which ex -
cludes the volatile components energy and 
food, held stubbornly firm at 5.6% in the 
second quarter, compared with 5.5% in the 
quarter before.
In July, consumer prices rose slightly, by a sea -
sonally adjusted 0.1% month- on- month. Food 
and services prices, in particular, continued to 
appreciate, while the prices of energy and 
other goods declined slightly. Compared with 
the previous year, inflation fell slightly to 6.5%, 
having stood at 6.8% in June.9 By contrast, the New wage 
agreements con -
tinue to involve 
a mix of infla -
tion compensa -
tion bonuses 
and high per -
manent wage 
increases
Delays in reach -
ing wage agree -
ments in trade
The planned 
increase in the 
statutory min -
imum wage 
poses hardly 
any upside risks 
to aggregate 
wage develop -
mentsInflation stub -
bornly high in 
spring 2023
Inflation rate 
down slightly in 
July; core rate 
historically high
8 It should also be noted that many wage agreements in -
cluded arrangements to pay inflation compensation bo -
nuses at first, with permanent wage increases not taking 
effect until a later date.
9 CPI inflation stood at 6.2%, after 6.4%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
57

Potential for correction of residential property price 
 exaggerations in Germany
The dramatic rise in infl  ation rates and 
fi  nancing costs in 2022 hit the German resi-
dential real estate market at a time when it 
had been overvalued for some time,1 with 
both factors putting a strong brake on price 
dynamics. Recent declines in residential 
property prices are not yet refl  ected in the 
annual average fi  gures for 2022. This is be-
cause prices had still been rising steeply 
until mid- 2022. They fell from that point 
onwards, but at the end of 2022 were still 
close to the level seen at end- 2021. Evi-
dence that overvaluations persist could po-
tentially mean further –  possibly signifi  -
cant – price corrections. There is a risk of 
abrupt corrections, especially in the purely 
speculative component of overvaluation, 
which refers to that part of the overvalu-
ation that is derived solely from the pro-
spect of further price increases in the fu-
ture. In conceptual terms, this speculative 
component is equivalent to a price bubble.2
The calculation of the purely speculative 
price components for residential real estate 
is based on the expectations expressed in the Bundesbank Online Panel Households 
(BOP- HH), which are combined with the re-
sults for regional overvaluations.3 There is 
evidence of these exaggerations that are 
susceptible to correction if overvaluations 
are expected to increase further in an al-
ready overvalued region.
As in the previous year, residential real es-
tate in Germany was overvalued by be-
tween 20% and 30% on average in 2022, 
according to the Bundesbank’s panel 
model.4 Averaged across 2022, residential 
property prices in more than 90% of the 
400 German administrative districts were 
detached from fundamental determinants.5 
Households’ expectations on changes in 
the district- specifi  c price- to- rent ratio as 
given in the BOP- HH are used as indicators 
of expected valuation gains. While respond-
ents in around 30% of the overvalued dis-
tricts (i.e. around 20% of all districts) ex-
pected a further rise in price- to- rent ratios 
in 2019, this share increased to around 50% 
by 2022.
According to the latest survey conducted in 
May 2023, however, households in just 
1 Residential property overvaluations are seen as the 
deviations of prices from their fundamental value. In 
the Bundesbank’s panel model, this is calculated using 
fundamental economic and socio- demographic fac-
tors, which include housing stock, per capita dispos-
able income, population density, mortgage interest 
rate and expected GDP growth. For an in- depth de-
scription of the valuation approaches used, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a).
2 See Stiglitz (1990).
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b).
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b). Since February 
2023, newly added price data for non- urban regions 
have largely confi  rmed the valuation results for Ger-
many as a whole.
5 By defi  nition, districts with overvaluations are those 
in which residential property prices are more than 10% 
above the reference value.Residential property price deviations in 
2022 according to regional panel model
1 Berlin,  Cologne,  Düsseldorf,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  Hamburg, 
Munich and Stuttgart.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40Deviation from estimated fundamental price in %
Seven 
big cities1
Towns 
and cities
GermanyActual interest rate developments
Interest rate level in 2009Scenario for sustainable mortgage lending rate:Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
58

over 10% of the regions with overvalu-
ations expected a further increase in valu-
ation levels.6 In line with this, the share of 
overvalued districts in which some degree 
of normalisation – in this case declines – in 
the price- to- rent ratio was expected went 
up again to around 80%. Many households 
surveyed thus adjusted their expectations of 
future valuations downwards over the past 
year.7
The survey data for 2023 point to a broad- 
based, modest reduction in the speculative 
components, and not to drastic corrections. 
In more than 90% of the districts, the re-
cently expected decline in the price- to- rent 
ratio – i.e. in the valuation level – was less 
than 10%. In around half of those regions 
where valuation levels are likely to fall, re-
spondents assumed a decrease in prices of 
less than 2.5%, while roughly three- quarters 
of these districts expected to experience 
price declines of no more than 5%. This 
means that the expected reduction in over-
valuations is likely to take place without an 
overly signifi  cant drop in house prices. This 
is partly due to the fact that rents are barely 
expected to fall.
These fi  ndings are subject to considerable 
uncertainty, as the statistical recording and 
assessment of house price developments 
has become more diffi   cult of late. Since the 
start of the energy crisis in 2022, the im-
portance of energy effi   ciency in determin-
ing prices in the real estate market is likely 
to have increased. By their very nature, 
survey- based price data are not quality- 
adjusted. The decline in prices expected in 
the May 2023 survey could therefore, in 
some cases, also refl  ect higher price dis-
counts for properties with lower energy ef-
fi  ciency.8 As a result, it is more diffi   cult to 
attribute the fall in price- to- rent ratios to 
speculative motives becoming less import-
ant. The orderly reduction of speculative motives could therefore be smaller than the 
calculations suggest and the risk of out-
standing abrupt price corrections could be 
greater. However, the impact of possibly in-
complete quality adjustment, which only af-
fects the properties of a building, is con-
fi  ned to the structure component. The value 
of the land is not affected.
6 Data constraints mean that the results for regional 
overvaluations are not yet available for 2023. The cal-
culations for 2023 are based on the district- specifi  c 
valuation results for 2022. The number of overvalued 
districts could tend to be lower in 2023. This alone 
could mean that the share of districts with speculative 
motives is higher than reported. However, it would 
also mean that fewer districts were affected so that, 
on balance, there would probably be little change in 
the risk assessment.
7 The relevant questions in the BOP- HH are always 
asked in May of a given year.
8 In the case of residential property price indices com-
piled by statistical offi   ces and the private sector, the 
key factor is how well hedonic quality adjustment, on 
which the results are based, deals with this diffi   culty.Districts with expected increases in the 
price-to-rent ratio*
* Bundesbank calculations conducted using survey-based data 
provided as part of the Bundesbank Online Panel Households 
(BOP-HH). Overvaluations according to the panel model. Ex-
pected development in the price-to-rent ratio in the next 12 
months. The results for 2023 are based on the district-specific 
valuation results for 2022.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 20230102030405060Share of all overvalued districts in %Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
59

core rate excluding energy and food rose 
slightly and is now at a record level of 6.2%. 
One- off effects were a factor in this – mainly 
the effects of the increase in the HICP weight 
of package holidays in 2023 as well as last 
year’s fiscal relief measures mentioned above.10 
However, even without these one- off effects, 
the core rate would likely have remained at a 
very high level of around 5½%.
In the coming months, inflation will, as things 
currently stand, probably come down further, 
mainly thanks to an increasingly dampening 
contribution from energy prices. In addition, 
abating price pressures along supply chains and lapsing one- off effects are likely to contribute 
to lower inflation. By contrast, wage growth 
will probably remain strong, even going into 
the new year. This is a key reason why the infla -
tion rate is likely to stay above 2% in the longer 
term.11 Higher inflation expectations and po -
tentially recurring energy price shocks also pose 
upside risks to the price outlook.
Order books and outlook
German economic output will probably remain 
largely unchanged again in the third quarter of 
2023. Given stable employment and strong 
wage growth as well as declining inflation 
rates, the recovery in private consumption is 
likely to continue. This should also provide the 
services sector with a boost. Some subsectors 
of industry and construction are continuing to 
benefit from their large order backlog. Dimin -
ishing supply bottlenecks mean that orders can 
be processed more quickly. However, industrial 
output looks set to remain weak initially, as for -
eign demand was on a downward trend in the 
period under review. High financing costs will 
probably continue to weigh on investment. 
They are also still dampening demand in the 
construction sector, something that is likely in -
creasingly to be reflected in output.
Private consumption is expected to buoy the 
economy in the third quarter. The consumer cli -
mate index forecast by the market research in -
stitute GfK for August improved again and ex -
ceeded its second- quarter average. Income ex -
pectations, in particular, rose significantly, and 
the propensity to purchase also edged up 
slightly. Car purchases could again make a posi -
tive contribution to private consumption. This 
is signalled by new passenger car registrations, 
which picked up again in July and significantly 
exceeded the previous quarter’s level according 
to data provided by the German Association of Inflation is likely 
to ease later in 
the yearEconomic out -
put is likely to 
more or less 
stagnate again 
in the third 
quarter of 2023
Private con -
sumption buoy -
ing economyDemand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 23758090100110120
–30–150+15+30+45+60
100110120130140
–30–150+15+30Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data
Log scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Log scale
Main construction orders
%%Monthly
Total
Excluding large 
orders
10 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c).
11 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a). According to 
updated estimates, the average inflation rate is likely to re -
main at around 6% in 2023.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
60

the Automotive Industry (VDA). However, ifo 
Institute surveys suggest that the rise in private 
consumption may be weak. This is because en -
terprises in the consumer- related retail and 
hospitality sectors rated the business situation 
as worse than in the previous quarter.
Industry is likely to dampen macroeconomic 
developments in the third quarter. The slow -
down in demand for industrial goods con -
tinued in the period under review. During the 
second quarter, industry received slightly more 
new orders than in the previous quarter. How -
ever, this was attributable solely to large orders, 
which are usually processed over an extended 
period of time. Excluding these, demand from both Germany and abroad fell sharply. Short-  
term production plans and export expectations, 
which became markedly more pessimistic ac -
cording to ifo Institute surveys, also point to a 
slowdown in industrial activity. By contrast, the 
large order backlog and the fact that supply 
bottlenecks continued to ease had a positive 
impact on industrial output.12 According to the 
Federal Statistical Office, the order books and 
the range of orders have, on balance, been fall -
ing for some months now but remain at a high 
level.Industrial output 
expected to be 
weak
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), Arduous recovery amid high and only gradually easing inflation – 
outlook for the German economy up to 2025, Monthly Report, June 2023, pp. 13-37.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), House prices in Germany in 2022, Monthly Report, February 2023, 
pp. 59-61.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), Impact of the new HICP/ CPI weights on inflation developments in 
Germany, Monthly Report, March 2023, pp. 8-11.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), Two models for estimating residential property prices in Germany, 
Monthly Report, October 2020, pp. 73-74.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), The protracted rise in residential property prices in Germany from 
a macroeconomic perspective: transmission channels and fundamental determinants, Monthly 
Report , October 2020, pp. 67-85.
Stiglitz,  J. E. (1990), Symposium on Bubbles, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol.  4, No  2, 
pp. 13-18.12 Surveys conducted by the ifo Institute and S&P Global 
indicate that bottlenecks continued to ease at the begin -
ning of the current quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
61

Public finances*
General government budget
2023 as a whole
The German government will record a signifi -
cant deficit in 2023, too. It will probably finance 
this in large part using reserves from previous 
years, which it has primarily formed from emer -
gency loans. However, the deficit is likely to de -
cline further on the year (2022: 2.7% of gross 
domestic product (GDP)). The main reason for 
this is that temporary support measures are 
putting much less strain on public finances 
overall than in 2022. Of these measures, the 
electricity and gas price brakes are still likely to 
make the strongest impact in 2023 – albeit to a 
much lesser extent than originally projected. In 
order to finance the price brakes and other en -
ergy support measures, the Economic Stabilisa -
tion Fund for Energy Assistance (ESF- E) was 
filled using emergency loans last year.
The debt ratio is expected to fall further this 
year in view of debt growing more slowly than 
nominal GDP in the denominator of the ratio. 
By the end of March, the debt ratio had de -
creased to 65.9%, compared with 66.2% at 
the end of 2022. This decline could accelerate 
further over the course of the year, as an 
above- average proportion of the year’s bor -
rowing is likely to have occurred in the first 
quarter.
Outlook for 2024 and 2025
According to the Bundesbank’s most recent 
projection in June, public finances will continue 
to recover up to 2025.1 The deficit ratio is ex -
pected to decline, standing at just over 1% of 
GDP in each of the coming two years. The debt 
ratio is set to fall to 62% by the end of 2025. 
The decline in the deficit will continue to be 
driven by the expiry of temporary support 
measures. This will outweigh the stance in the rest of the general government budget (exclud -
ing the temporary support measures), which 
will increasingly be tilted towards a deficit. The 
recently presented central government plans 
do not fundamentally change the budgetary 
outlook. However, deficits are likely to be 
somewhat higher as a result of measures taken 
(see pp. 66 ff.).
Fiscal policy stance amid high 
inflation rates
In view of foreseeable high price pressures, it 
would be appropriate, from a monetary policy 
perspective, not to loosen the fiscal policy 
stance. There would otherwise be a risk of in -
creased inflationary pressures in the medium 
term. Monetary policy would then need to be 
tightened even further in order to meet the in -
flation target.
The fiscal policy stance depends on general 
government developments as a whole; limiting 
the focus to the central government budget 
alone is too narrow. Although the general gov -
ernment deficit is projected to decline in the 
years from 2023 to 2025, this is solely due to 
the expiry of temporary support measures. This 
development is largely in line with the easing of 
the pandemic burden on the private sector and 
lower energy payments to foreign countries. 
On balance, these expiring government meas -
ures and the diminishing crisis burdens are 
therefore unlikely to weigh on macroeconomic 
developments. From the current perspective, 
the general government budget balance, ex -
cluding cyclical influences and temporary meas -
ures, is set to deteriorate. Expiring support 2023 fiscal 
policy  largely 
financed from 
emergency 
loans
Decline in debt 
ratio continuing
Expiring crisis 
measures will 
reduce deficit 
further in 2024; 
expansionary 
spending stance 
in other areasAppropriate not 
to loosen fiscal 
policy stance 
given high price 
pressures
Fiscal policy to 
be interpreted 
as fairly expan -
sionary between 
2023 and 2025
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. This is followed by reporting on budgetary 
developments (government finance statistics) in the areas 
for which data are available for the second quarter of 
2023.
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
62

measures aside, then, the basic stance is ex -
pected to be expansionary. Amongst other fac -
tors, central government is likely to report in -
creasing deficits in its off- budget entities for 
climate policy and defence. The budgetary 
stance of state and local governments is also 
shaping up to be fairly expansionary.
If fiscal policymakers want to avoid creating 
additional inflationary pressures, it would make 
sense not to adopt any further deficit- increasing 
measures. This would also include, for example, 
not planning other uses for the reserves from 
the ESF- E that will foreseeably become avail -
able. This does not mean neglecting important 
policy objectives that would improve growth 
conditions, for instance. However, with a view 
to reducing price pressures, these objectives 
would need to be counterfinanced upfront – 
either by lowering other expenditure or gener -
ating additional revenue.
Apply fiscal rules effectively, 
make public finances 
 transparent
Effective fiscal rules that safeguard sound 
public  finances are important, not least, for 
stability- oriented monetary policy. They are not 
at odds with forward-  looking government ac -
tivity, either. Indeed, sound public finances are 
what gives a state the ability to take action. 
Transparent public finances are also crucial in 
helping the general public to understand 
budget planning and budgetary developments.
Recently, central and state governments have 
increasingly shifted tasks over to the off- budget 
entities. In some cases, future expenditure has 
been funded upfront via the escape clause. The 
number and size of off- budget entities are im -
pairing the transparency and monitoring of 
public finances. When the escape clause is 
used to finance large amounts of future ex -
penditure upfront, it also undermines the bind -
ing effect of the debt brake.2It is important that credible and binding fiscal 
rules are set for central and state government 
again in future. At present, the debt brake is 
making the borrowing framework relatively re -
strictive. In this respect, a reform that moder -
ately raises the regular upper limit of the debt 
brake would also be justifiable in the interests 
of stable public finances. The Bundesbank has 
made proposals for a stability- oriented reform.3 
The scope for deficits, for instance, could be 
extended if the debt ratio is below 60%. If in -
vestment is to be prioritised within the limits, 
leeway could be reserved for net investment.
Public finances in some other euro area coun -
tries are considerably less favourable than in 
Germany. For 2023, the European Commission 
anticipates very high debt ratios in Italy, Spain 
and France, amongst other countries (140%, 
111% and 110% respectively); in some cases, 
these ratios are not set to fall in 2024, either. It 
is crucial that the fiscal rules lead governments 
to bring down their high debt ratios. For this to 
happen, the Stability and Growth Pact should 
be more stringent and more binding after the 
reform. The debate surrounding this reform is 
still underway. However, the European Com -
mission’s current proposal is at risk of failing to 
meet this objective.4
Budgetary development of 
central, state and local 
 government
Tax revenue
Second quarter of 2023
Tax revenue5 in the second quarter was 2½% 
lower than a year earlier (see the chart on p. 64 Additional 
deficit- increasing 
measures would 
intensify infla -
tionary pressures
Effective fiscal 
rules support 
stability- oriented 
monetary policy
Problems with 
off- budget 
entitiesEffective debt 
brake ensures 
sound public 
finances; 
stability- oriented 
reform is justifi -
able
Very high debt 
ratios in some 
parts of the euro 
area; binding 
fiscal rules 
therefore 
particularly  
important
Tax revenue fell 
significantly in 
Q2 due to tax 
cuts
2 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b).
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a).
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), pp. 71ff.
5 Including EU shares in German tax revenue, but exclud -
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
63

and the table on p. 65). In the absence of tax 
cuts, it would have risen slightly.
Without tax cuts, revenue from wage tax 
would actually have seen dynamic growth, but 
instead, it fell by 1½%. The main factor here is 
the Inflation Compensation Act (Inflationsaus -
gleichsgesetz),  which adjusted the income tax 
scale to the high inflation rate of the previous 
year and raised child benefits. Increased child 
benefits reduce wage tax receipts because they 
are deducted from wage tax revenue. Further -
more, until the end of 2024, additional one- off 
wage payments of up to a total of €3,000 will 
count as tax- exempt inflation compensation 
bonuses (Inflationsausgleichsprämie).
Revenue from profit taxes decreased by 5% 
overall. The adjustments made to the income 
tax scale contributed to this. Moreover, receipts 
from the taxation of dividends, which is gener -
ally very volatile over the course of the year, fell 
sharply. However, the positive underlying trend 
for profit- related taxes may have remained in -
tact. Although income tax revenue would have 
fallen even without the income tax adjust -
ments, advance payments for the current year, 
by contrast, rose considerably (adjusted for le -
gislative changes). In addition, revenue from 
corporation tax saw continued dynamic 
growth.Revenue from VAT declined slightly in the 
second quarter (-½%). Here, too, a tax cut had 
an impact: the tax rate for natural gas and dis -
trict heating was temporarily lowered. This may 
have had a stronger impact in the quarter 
under review if the taxes overpaid on con -
sumption invoices for the last heating period 
had to be reimbursed. However, even aside 
from this, VAT saw relatively weak growth.
Real estate acquisition tax revenue dropped by 
33%. This is equivalent to €1½ billion and ac -
counts for almost one- third of the decline in 
total tax revenue. The fall in revenue from real 
estate acquisition tax is consistent with the de -
creased value of sales in the real estate sector. 
This is likely to reflect the fall in real estate 
prices, for one thing. For another, transactions 
in residential real estate have probably declined 
recently. This latter development is related, in 
particular, to the significant increase in finan -
cing costs.
2023 as a whole
The official tax estimate projects a rise of 3% in 
tax revenue (excluding local government taxes) 
for the year as a whole. In the first half of the 
year, receipts fell by 2% – and thus developed 
somewhat less favourably than expected. Over 
the course of the year as a whole, the pro -
jected result could nevertheless still be achieved. 
This is because, for the remainder of 2023, a 
much more positive growth rate is anticipated 
than in the first half of the year: a number of 
temporary measures, which reduced revenue in 
the second half of 2022, will then be absent. 
Specifically, the energy price allowance (Ener -
giepreispauschale)  for employed persons, in 
particular, resulted in shortfalls in the second 
half of last year. In addition, the basic income 
tax allowance and the employees’ standard de -
duction for income- related expenses increased 
retroactively from the beginning of 2022. Fur -
thermore, energy tax rates on fuel were lower 
(“fuel rebate”), and parents received a bonus 
child benefit payment via lower wage tax rev -
enue.Wage tax fell 
due to major 
legislative 
changes
Profit- related 
taxes down sig -
nificantly, but 
positive under -
lying trend 
appears intactVAT weak, not 
only because of 
tax cuts
Real estate 
acquisition tax 
revenue still in 
freefall
Tax estimate up 
by 3% for the 
year as a whole 
– faster growth 
envisaged for 
H2Tax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Comprises joint taxes as 
well as central government taxes and state government taxes. 
Including EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs 
duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2021 2022 2023505101520
–++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figuresDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
64

Central government finances
Overview for 2023
The central government deficit including off-  
budget entities6 was considerably lower in the 
second quarter than it was one year ago, fall -
ing by €13 billion to €5 billion. The core budget 
and the off-  budget entities as a whole saw 
their results improve by roughly the same 
amount.
A high overall deficit of €232 billion is planned 
for the year as a whole. Off- budget entities ac -
count for €146 billion of this sum.7 However, 
their deficit is likely to be significantly lower 
than planned, mainly due to reduced energy 
price support needs.Central government budget: 
second   quarter of 2023
In the core budget, the deficit fell to €18 billion 
in the second quarter, compared with almost 
€24 billion in the same quarter of 2022. Rev -
enue saw moderate growth of 2% (+€2 bil -
lion), with tax revenue only rising by 1%. Total 
expenditure went down by 3% (-€3½ billion). 
Although pandemic- related spending declined 
sharply, this was offset by a steep rise in inter -Q2: overall 
deficit  down 
significantly 
Year as a whole: 
very high deficit 
planned, but 
considerably 
more favourable 
outcome likelySlight rise in tax 
revenue and 
declining 
expenditureTax revenue
 
Type of taxH1Estimate 
for 2023 1Q2
2022 2023 2022 2023
€ billionYear-on-year 
changeYear-
on-year 
change
in % € billionYear-on-year 
change
€ billion % € billion %
Tax revenue, total 2 407.9 399.8 – 8.1 –  2.0 +  2.9 204.7 200.0 – 4.7 –  2.3
of which:
Wage tax 3 116.6 115.2 – 1.4 –  1.2 +  6.1 60.4 59.5 – 0.8 –  1.4
Profi  t-related taxes 81.5 78.2 – 3.3 –  4.1 +  2.9 41.5 39.4 – 2.1 –  5.0
Assessed income tax 4 38.1 35.2 – 2.9 –  7.6 +  0.8 17.2 15.5 – 1.7 – 10.0
Corporation tax 5 22.4 23.1 + 0.7 +  3.0 +  0.4 11.2 12.4 + 1.2 + 10.3
Non- assessed taxes on 
earnings 16.7 16.4 – 0.3 –  2.0 + 12.9 11.6 9.8 – 1.8 – 15.2
Withholding tax on inter-
est income  and capital  
gains 4.2 3.5 – 0.8 – 18.0 –  4.7 1.4 1.7 + 0.3 + 17.5
VAT6 141.3 140.8 – 0.6 –  0.4 +  1.6 67.8 67.3 – 0.5 –  0.7
Other consumption-related 
taxes 7 42.3 43.3 + 0.9 +  2.2 +  5.0 21.8 22.0 + 0.1 +  0.6
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Working Party on Tax Revenue  Estimates and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax esti-
mate of May 2023. 2 Comprises joint taxes as well as central government taxes and state government taxes. Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue, including customs duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Child benefi  ts and subsidies for 
supplementary private pension plans deducted from revenue. 4 Employee refunds and research grants deducted from revenue. 5 Re-
search grants deducted from revenue. 6 VAT and import VAT. 7 Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, air 
traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lotteries, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6 Central government off- budget entities that use the 
single- entry system and for which quarterly data are already 
available are included here (see pp. 69 f.). These comprise, 
in particular, (i) the ESF- E, (ii) the off- budget entities relevant 
to the debt brake up to 2021 and (iii) the Armed Forces 
Fund (see the table on p. 67, rows 16, 17 and 20). In add -
ition, the reporting group for off- budget entities includes, 
above all, (iv) the other funds shown in the central govern -
ment budget’s borrowing plan (for making provisions for 
repayment and for expanding childcare, both row 18) as 
well as (v) the precautionary funds for civil servants’ pen -
sions. In particular, the bad bank FMSW, the fund for the 
disposal of nuclear energy waste, the motorway company 
and the development aid company GIZ are excluded.
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), p. 69, items 3 and 21 
of the table.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
65

est expenditure (+€11 billion), with provisions 
for final payments on inflation- linked Federal 
bonds seeing a particular increase. Discounts, 
which mainly occurred in tap issues of long-  
dated bonds with low coupons, resulted in 
additional expenditure of €1½ billion. Add -
itional interest expenditure on account of in -
creased debt and higher coupons also contrib -
uted to this.
Central government budget: 2023 as a 
whole
The deficit of €86 billion projected in the core 
budget could be undershot. A reserve of €5 bil -
lion, which is planned in for legislative changes, 
will not be needed as things currently stand. 
Thus, additional revenue appears likely here. 
However, when the draft budget for 2024 was 
presented, it was announced that receipts from 
the EU would be deferred to the following 
year. Interest expenditure is difficult to forecast. 
It also depends, in particular, on the extent to which long- dated bonds with low coupons are 
tap issued or issued. The resulting discounts are 
not recorded on an accruals basis and are 
therefore very volatile.
A better budget outturn than projected seems 
logical, also in view of the debt brake: specific -
ally, the upper net borrowing limit under the 
debt brake could be lower this year than as -
sumed in the planning. For instance, according 
to the Federal Government’s spring forecast, 
the cyclical burden is €7 billion lower than ori -
ginally planned. Relief of a purely cyclical na -
ture lessens borrowing potential in the context 
of the debt brake. This is because it is not sup -
posed to open up new fiscal space so as to 
avoid a procyclical fiscal policy stance.
Draft central government budget for 2024
In its draft budget from the beginning of July, 
the Federal Government intends to comply 
with the standard limit under the debt brake. It 
plans to limit net borrowing to €17 billion and 
to withdraw €1½ billion from the reserve. 
Hence, the core budget deficit is reduced very 
significantly, by almost €70 billion compared 
with the 2023 plan.
This decline in the core budget deficit does not 
equate to a correspondingly restrictive fiscal 
policy stance in Germany. Specifically, it should 
be borne in mind that deficits in key off- budget 
entities will increase and that some deficit-  
reducing factors are not likely to have a restrict -
ive effect overall. For example, the Armed 
Forces Fund and the Climate Fund are set to 
expand their deficits sharply in 2024. Although 
the deficit of the ESF- E is likely to fall steeply, 
this will chiefly be due to correspondingly lower 
energy prices. In this respect, its lower expend -
iture is likely to be accompanied by, at most, a 
limited rebound in household energy costs, 
meaning that the overall effect is not restrict -
ive. Several other developments easing the bur -
den on the core budget compared with the 
previous year are also unlikely to have a re -
strictive effect. In particular, the burdens arising Central govern -
ment’s 2023 
budgetary 
objective could 
be undershotUpper net 
borrowing  limit 
lower, according 
to Federal Gov -
ernment’s spring 
forecast
Core budget 
deficit expected 
to fall very 
significantly 
Core budget 
deficit reduction 
does not equate 
to highly 
restrictive fiscal 
policyFiscal balance of central government 
budget *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Feder-
al Ministry of Finance. * Excluding off-budget entities. Not ad-
justed for financial transactions or cyclical effects. 
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4–250–200–150–100–500100500
––
2023
20212021Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
2022€ billion
20222023Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
66

Key central government budget data*
€ billion
ItemActual 
2022Target 
2023Draft 
2024Fiscal plan
2025 2026 2027
1.Expenditure of central government budget (CGB) 1 480.7 476.3 445.7 451.8 460.3 467.2
of which:
1.a Investment 46.2 71.5 54.2 60.2 59.1 57.2
1.b Global spending increases/ cuts ––   6.9 –   9.7 –  12.4 –  10.7 –  27.0
2.Revenue of CGB 1,2 364.7 389.9 427.6 429.2 444.7 452.0
of which:
2.a Tax revenue 3 337.2 358.1 375.3 394.6 409.1 421.3
2.b Global revenue increases/ shortfalls ––   4.9 1.4 –   1.4 –   1.2 –   2.6
3.Fiscal balance of CGB (2.-1.) – 116.0 –  86.4 –  18.1 –  22.6 –  15.6 –  15.2
4.Coin seigniorage of CGB 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2
5.Transfer to (–) / withdrawal from reserves (+) in CGB 0.5 40.5 1.4 6.4 . .
6.Net borrowing (–) / repayment (+) of CGB (3.+4.+5.) – 115.4 –  45.6 –  16.6 –  16.0 –  15.4 –  15.0
7.Cyclical component in the budget procedure 4 –   0.4 –  15.3 –   2.4 –   2.0 –   0.9 0.0
8.Balance of fi  nancial transactions of CGB –   4.1 –  17.7 –   0.6 0.4 0.5 0.4
9.Structural net borrowing (–) / repayment (+) of CGB (6.-7.-8.) – 110.9 –  12.6 –  13.6 –  14.4 –  15.0 –  15.4
10. Amount exceeding limit in CGB (13.-9.) 98.4 – – – – –
11. Amount exceeding limit incl. Economic Stabilisation Fund for 
 Energy Assistance (ESF-E) (10.-15.) 277.8 – – – – –
12. Memo item: Amount exceeding limit with balance of off-budget 
entities  (10.-16.-17.) 123.7 142.5 39.8 . . .
13. Standard upper limit: Structural net borrowing (0.35% of GDP) 5–  12.5 –  12.6 –  13.5 –  14.4 –  14.9 –  15.4
14. Structural balance of CGB (3.-7.-8.) – 111.5 –  53.4 –  15.1 –  21.0 –  15.2 –  15.6
14.a As before, with estimate of potential output acc. to 2023 
spring forecast – 109.0 –  61.0 –  15.0 –  21.0 –  15.2 –  15.6
15. Structural net borrowing of ESF-E – 179.4 – – – – –
16. Balance of ESF-E –  30.2 – 121.2 –  10.3 . . .
16.a ESF-E funds remaining thereafter 169.8 48.6 38.3 . . .
17. Balance of special funds (SFs) relevant to the debt brake prior 
to 2022 6 4.9 –  21.4 –  29.4 . . .
17.a Climate and Transformation Fund 5.3 –  14.1 –  29.2 –  28.2 –  13.4 0
17.b 2013 Flood Relief Fund –   0.2 –   0.2 –   0.2 . . .
17.c Fund to Promote Municipal Investment –   0.7 –   1.0 . . . .
17.d Digitalisation Fund 2.1 –   2.7 – – – –
17.e Fund for Primary School- Age Childcare Provision –   0.1 –   0.4 . . . .
17.f 2021 Flood Relief Fund –   1.6 –   3.0 . . . .
18. Balance of SFs for making provisions for repayment and for 
extending  childcare 6 4.4 5.5 . . . .
19. Balance of other SFs without own constitutional rules 7 –   9.9 . . . . .
20. Balance of Armed Forces Fund ––   8.4 –  19.2 . . .
20.a Borrowing authorisation remaining thereafter 100.0 91.6 72.4 . . .
21. Balance of CGB and SFs (3.+16.+17.+18.+19.+20.) – 146.8 – 231.7 –  77.0 . . .
22. Reserves of SFs for 16. and 17. 286.9 144.4 104.7 . . .
23. Central government assets in civil servants’ pension reserves 
and pension fund 8 26.3 . . . . .
24. Level of general reserves of CGB 48.2 7.7 6.4 – – –
25. Balance on control account 47.7 47.7 47.7 47.7 47.7 47.7
26. Total outstanding repayment amount including Armed Forces 
Fund (from 11. and 20.) 539.4 547.8 567.1 567.1 567.2 567.2
27. Total outstanding repayment amount from NGEU grants e,9 30 53 70 87 105 105
* Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. For a detailed explanation of debt brake and special fund metrics, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016) and Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b). 1 Excluding transfers to/withdrawals from reserves and including net 
tax revenue (see footnote 3). 2 Excluding coin seigniorage. 3 After deduction of supplementary central government transfers, shares of 
energy tax revenue, compensation under the 2009 reform of motor vehicle tax and budgetary recovery assistance to federal states. 4 For 
2022 according to the 2022 budget accounts, for 2023 according to the budget plan, and for the years thereafter according to the spring 
forecast. 5 Based on gross domestic product in the year before the (comprehensive) budget is prepared. 6 Budgeted fi  gures for 2023 from 
borrowing plan. 7 Entities with quarterly data, but excluding data on results in borrowing plan. Above all, ESF (excluding ESF-E) and pen-
sion provisions. 8 Market values according to central government balance sheet for 2022. Continuous infl  ows; withdrawals from the fund 
planned from 2030, from reserves from 2032. 9 NGEU budgeted fi  gures and estimates, each multiplied by Germany’s share of 25% in EU 
gross national income.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
67

from financial transactions alone are set to fall 
by €17 billion. Additionally, pandemic- related 
special expenditure, which is estimated at 
roughly €10 billion for 2023, will be absent. 
Moreover, budgetary calls on guarantees, 
which are currently still heightened as a result 
of the pandemic and the energy crisis, will de -
crease. Furthermore, total interest expenditure 
is projected to be €3 billion lower. Aside from 
this, central government expects higher re -
ceipts from the EU recovery plan in 2024, which 
also will not have a restrictive impact.
In some cases, central government will directly 
employ the special funds to ease the burden on 
the core budget. For instance, compared with 
the 2023 budget, it will shift expenditure of €3 
billion to the Climate Fund, primarily for the 
promotion of microelectronics. It also intends 
to dissolve the Digitalisation Fund, thus redu -
cing net borrowing in the core budget by €5 
billion.8 For this purpose, central government 
will ultimately assume the fund’s reserve, which 
it financed mainly from emergency loans in the 
years from 2020 to 2022.
Discounts raise interest expenditure signifi -
cantly in the draft for 2024, too. Generally allo -
cating premia and discounts over the term of 
the respective security is advisable when re -
cording them in the budget. This would ensure 
that the interest burdens are recorded appro -
priately from an economic perspective, and 
budgetary developments would be less volatile. 
At the current end, interest expenditure would 
then be lower.
Fiscal plan up to 2027
In its medium- term planning, too, the govern -
ment will comply with the borrowing limit in its 
core budget. Net borrowing will continue to 
fall to €15 billion in 2027, the final year of the 
planning period. It will be dampened by a with -
drawal from reserves (€6½ billion) only in 2025. 
Expenditure is expected to grow moderately, by 
a nominal average of 1½%. The rising grants to 
the pension insurance scheme alone are likely to take up most of this. Additional expenditure 
on the envisaged basic child allowance and the 
further increase in generational capital does 
not, therefore, appear to be reflected yet. Fur -
thermore, the fiscal plan contains large global 
spending cuts that have yet to be achieved. 
They amount to between €11 billion and €12 
billion per year in 2025 and 2026 and are thus 
on a similar scale to those in the draft for 2024. 
In 2027, global spending cuts will rise sharply 
to €27 billion, which corresponds, after all, to 
nearly 6% of the total expenditure planned for 
that year. However, the Federal Ministry of 
Finance estimates that the remaining need for 
fiscal policy action will only amount to around 
€5 billion per year from 2025 onwards. It does 
not make clear how the differences between 
the need for action and the reported global 
items can be explained.9 Overall revenue (just 
under +2% per annum) will rise less strongly on 
average than estimated taxes (+4% per an -
num). This could be due to provision for tax 
policy measures. Defaults would be associated, 
for example, with the announced tax breaks 
for enterprises. There will also be defaults if 
compensation for bracket creep in the income 
tax scale continues from 2025 onwards.
The medium- term planning presented gives no 
indication of the extent to which the govern -
ment envisages large- scale deficits in its off-  
budget entities. It is unclear how financial chal -
lenges are to be overcome once their scope for 
deficits has been exhausted. This chiefly con -
cerns the high expenditure on defence and cli -
mate policy, which is to be financed by the Burdens shifted 
to special funds
Interest burdens 
still overstated 
in 2024
Fiscal plan with 
need for action, 
but at the same 
time provision 
apparently 
made on 
revenue  sideFiscal policy 
challenges 
shifted to 
special  funds 
without plans 
for follow- up 
financing
8 See Federal Ministry of Finance (2023), pp. 26 f.
9 One factor could be that incomplete expenditure out -
flows are assumed in a large number of areas. It may also 
have been expected that the Armed Forces Fund would still 
be able to finance some of the military procurements 
planned for 2027. For example, Table 7.12 of the Federal 
Government’s latest Financial Report shows a strong in -
crease in expenditure on military procurements, etc. for 
2027. This rise is similar in size to the increase in global 
spending cuts reported in this table. By contrast, relatively 
constant expenditure of around €52 billion per annum is 
envisaged for the Federal Ministry of Defence’s departmen -
tal budget in the period from 2024 to 2027 (see p. 27 of 
the Financial Report).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
68

Armed Forces Fund and Climate Fund using 
borrowed funds. From 2028 onwards, repay -
ment burdens for emergency, defence and EU 
borrowing will follow, and demographic pres -
sures on the central government budget will 
increase.10
Fiscal planning is subject to the risk that the 
Federal Constitutional Court will soon limit spe -
cial funds’ scope for deficits.11 With respect to 
the second supplementary budget for 2021, 
the court is currently examining, in particular, 
the extent to which the escape clause permits 
reserves to be formed in the Climate Fund 
using emergency borrowing of €60 billion. If 
these reserves were not usable, expenditure 
would have to be funded directly from other 
sources.
Off- budget entities: second quarter and 
outlook for 2023 as a whole
Central government’s off- budget entities12 re-
corded a surplus totalling almost €13 billion in 
the second quarter of 2023 (see the adjacent 
chart), having posted a surplus of €6 billion a 
year earlier. The Precautionary Fund for Re -
demptions of Inflation-  Indexed Securities 
posted a higher surplus. It received more funds 
from the core budget.13 The balance of the 
Economic Stabilisation Fund (ESF) excluding its 
branch for energy assistance (ESF-E) improved 
to an even greater extent: large- scale aid loans 
were repaid, while new take- up virtually ceased 
to play any role.14 The Financial Market Stabil -
isation Fund (SoFFin) likewise recorded a sur -
plus as a result of bad bank FMSW repaying 
loans.15 Moderate deficits were recorded for 
most other special funds. It would appear that 
the energy price brakes are now having only a 
moderate impact on the ESF- E after it incurred 
high costs in the first quarter. The outflows 
from the Climate Fund and the Armed Forces 
Fund were also rather small compared with 
projected figures.16Legal risks 
surrounding  
planned use of 
reserves from 
emergency 
borrowing 
Q2: surplus, with 
energy price 
assistance of 
only minor 
significance Fiscal balances of central government's 
off-budget entities*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Only entities using a single-entry ac-
counting  system,  i.e.  excluding,  in  particular,  the  bad  bank 
FMS Wertmanagement and, until the end of 2022, also SoFFin, 
which uses a single-entry accounting system and whose defi-
cits refinanced the bad bank's debts. 1 Precautionary fund for 
final payments of inflation-indexed Federal securities. 2 Climate 
and  Transformation  Fund;  up  to  2022,  Energy  and  Climate 
Fund.
Deutsche Bundesbank2021 2022 2023604020020406080
–––++++€ billion, quarterly figures
OtherFund for inflation-indexed securities1
Economic Stabilisation Fund
Armed Forces FundClimate Fund 2
Total
–60–40–200+20+40+60+80Cumulated over the year
10 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), p. 72.
11 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), p. 63.
12 According to data from the Federal Ministry of Finance, 
i.e. excluding bad banks and other entities that use com -
mercial double- entry bookkeeping.
13 In the national accounts, these transfers from the core 
budget count as current interest expenditure. This fund’s 
balance therefore plays no role in the deficit under the 
European budgetary rules.
14 However, it is not known how the return flows were 
distributed between aid loans relating to the COVID-  19 cri -
sis and those relating to the energy crisis.
15 The deficit incurred a year earlier was not included in 
this publication’s reporting as it involved FMSW refinan -
cing. It therefore did not lead to higher central government 
debt. FMSW has been paying back its loans in net terms 
since the start of 2023. This is likely to be linked to the fact 
that FMSW is further scaling back its portfolio. SoFFin’s sur -
plus thus indicates a decrease in overall central government 
debt and is included.
16 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), pp. 71 and 74 for 
more on gaps in transparency in central government’s off- 
budget entities.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
69

Overall, the deficit for off- budget entities in the 
current year will be significantly lower than 
projected (-€146 billion). It could even be 
below the previous year’s deficit (2022: -€31 
billion). While the ESF- E’s deficit is substantial, 
it is likely to remain well below the budgeted 
figure of €121 billion. It recorded a deficit of 
€29 billion in the first half of the year. A more 
precise projection is difficult, though. Not least, 
the development to date may partly reflect the 
fact that the fund initially overpaid assistance 
and that this was offset again in the second 
quarter. In any case, however, pressure on the 
fund is set to ease as the year progresses. For 
example, the skimming of extraordinary rev -
enues from high electricity prices will only start 
to generate revenue in the second half of the 
year. Moreover, more suppliers have cut their 
prices, which will reduce spending on the en -
ergy price brakes. All in all, the possibility of the 
ESF- E recording only minimal deficits in the 
second half of the year cannot be ruled out. In 
the rest of the ESF, repayments of coronavirus 
or energy crisis aid loans could lead to a not -
able surplus.
In addition, deficits are likely to be significantly 
lower than planned, particularly for the Climate 
Fund and the Armed Forces Fund. The Climate 
Fund’s programme expenditure was put at €36 
billion. By the middle of the year, only €8 billion 
had been paid out. In the case of the Armed 
Forces Fund, no more than just over €1 billion 
of the envisaged €8½ billion had been paid out 
by mid- 2023.
The draft plans available for the off- budget en -
tities for 2024 are incomplete. So far as it is 
possible to tell, a growing deficit is envisaged 
compared with what is taking shape in 2023. 
The Climate Fund’s deficit is expected to rise 
sharply to €29 billion. Compared with last 
year’s plan, the fund will also assume add -
itional tasks, e.g. in the area of microelectron -
ics, and will promote the improvement of the 
rail network. It appears that a deficit of €19 bil -
lion is anticipated for the Armed Forces Fund, 
whilst a deficit of €10 billion plus interest ex -penditure has been budgeted for the ESF-  
E.  The surplus of the Precautionary Fund for 
Redemptions of Inflation- Indexed Securities 
could shrink slightly. Transfers from central gov -
ernment decrease as inflation goes down. 
However, unlike in the current year, no repay -
ments are due.
All in all, it is evident that central government 
uses special funds fairly flexibly to finance add -
itional central government expenditure from 
their reserves. This leads to additional deficits 
that – if inflation rates remain high – will in -
crease the pressure on monetary policymakers 
to take action. Against this background, it 
would at least seem advisable not to redirect 
unused funds in the ESF- E to new measures. 
This is not currently planned, but nor does the 
Federal Government appear to be intending to 
liquidate the reserves and the ESF- E when the 
statutory deadline for assistance expires in mid- 
2024.
State government budgets17
Core budgets in the second quarter of 
2023
The state government core budgets recorded a 
surplus of €2½ billion in the second quarter. 
This was down €7 billion on the surplus re -
ported in the second quarter of 2022. The main 
reasons for this were strong expenditure 
growth and a slight decline in revenue. Al -
though tax revenue rose moderately, revenue 
from public administrations – not least central 
government funds for transfers to enterprises 
in response to the coronavirus pandemic – fell 
sharply. Expenditure grew by 5½%. In particu -
lar, transfers to local government increased 
very steeply (+10%). In April, for example, sub -
stantial additional state government funds for 
refugee assistance were transferred to local Deficits in off- 
budget entities 
could fall in 
2023: ESF- E 
deficit  likely to 
be significantly 
below projected 
figure, …
… and spending 
of Climate Fund 
and Armed 
Forces Fund set 
to fall
Plans for 2024 
foresee further 
increase in off- 
budget entities’ 
deficitPlanned use of 
reserves in con -
flict with recom -
mendations on 
deficit reduction
Far smaller 
surplus  in Q2 
due to strong 
expenditure 
growth and 
slight decline in 
revenue
17 The quarterly data on state government budgets are 
based on the monthly cash statistics for the core budgets. 
Information on the off-  budget entities is not yet available 
for the quarter under review.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
70

governments in Baden-  Württemberg. Person -
nel expenditure also saw strong growth 
(+6½%). This rise was above average, in par -
ticular, in Hesse due to supplementary adjust -
ments to civil servant salaries and in Bavaria 
due to retroactive payments of higher local and 
family allowances.
Core budgets and off- budget entities: start 
of 2023 and outlook
In the first quarter, the state government core 
budgets and off- budget entities combined re -
corded a deficit of €1½ billion. The balance 
thus deteriorated by €13 billion on the year. 
This was due to developments in the core 
budgets. By contrast, off- budget entities’ per -
formance improved.
For the year as a whole, too, the outturn for 
the core budgets and off- budget entities com -
bined is expected to deteriorate sharply. They 
are likely to slip significantly into deficit. In 
2022, they had posted a surplus of just over 
€12 billion.18 Tax growth rates are anticipated  
to recover in the second half of the year. How -
ever, transfers to local government look set to 
continue rising sharply. In addition, personnel 
expenditure, a particularly large expenditure 
item, will probably see strong growth, both 
through wage adjustments and through re -
cruitment. Individual states are also likely to 
spend more of their own resources on climate 
change mitigation or economic aid. They have 
made a substantial amount of money available 
for this purpose through emergency borrowing 
in special funds.19
As things stand, no significant change in the 
finances of the state governments is to be ex -
pected for next year. According to the tax esti -
mate, tax revenue will rise by 4½%. However, 
significant growth is also envisaged on the ex -
penditure side. In particular, the state govern -
ments will be faced with a wage round and 
adjustments to civil servant salaries. Following 
the latest wage agreements in other parts of 
the public sector, it would appear that relatively strong pay increases are on the cards. It re -
mains to be seen how state governments will 
cover the associated funding gaps within the 
framework of their debt brakes.
Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
Second quarter of 2023
The statutory pension insurance scheme 
achieved a surplus of €2 billion in the second 
quarter of 2023. It was thus down by almost 
€1 billion compared with the same quarter of 
the previous year. Expenditure was up by just 
under 6½% on the corresponding prior- year 
figure. This was mainly due to the substantial State of core 
budgets and off- 
budget entities 
at start of year 
much worse 
than a year 
earlier 
Considerable 
deficit expected 
for 2023 as a 
whole
No improvement 
in finances for 
2024 noticeableLower surplus in 
Q2 following 
substantial pen -
sion increase in 
mid- 2022State government fiscal balance
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 
1 Figure calculated using monthly cash statistics from the Fe-
deral Ministry of Finance; quarterly data are not yet available. 
2 Core budgets and off-budget entities together.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4201001020
––++
2021Quarterly figures
2023
2022€ billion
Cumulated from start of year 2
20231
–100+10+20+30
2022
2021Off-budget entitiesCore budgets
18 An upward revision of just over €1½ billion compared 
with the data available and reported in May 2023 due to 
off- budget entities’ improved budget outturn.
19 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), pp. 75-76.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
71

pension increase in mid- 2022. At a little over 
5%, total revenue recorded somewhat slower 
growth (contribution receipts: +5½%).
2023 as a whole
A surplus also appears possible for the year as 
a whole (previous year: +€3½ billion). Although 
the half- year result worsened by €2 billion on 
the year, the balance should stabilise in the 
second half of the year. In mid- 2023, pensions 
went up by a national average of just over 
4½%,20 somewhat less than in the year before. 
On the revenue side, however, contributions 
are likely to continue rising sharply: this will probably still be the case even if more compon -
ents of wages and salaries are received as infla -
tion compensation bonuses that are exempt 
from social contributions.
Outlook
The pension insurance scheme is likely to re -
cord another surplus next year. Contribution 
receipts are expected to keep developing fa -
vourably. While central government’s draft 
budget for 2024 does envisage an ad hoc cut 
of €½ billion in central government funds, 
these will still increase by around 5%, not least 
because of the strong wage developments in 
the previous year. On the expenditure side, an -
other large pension increase is expected in mid- 
2024. This is largely based on the strong per 
capita growth in wages and salaries this year. 
All in all, revenue and expenditure could thus 
roughly balance each other out.
In subsequent years, demographic develop -
ments will place a growing strain on the pen -
sion scheme’s finances as the number of pen -
sions rises more rapidly. Funding pressures will 
be heightened further by the Federal Govern -
ment’s plans, according to which the replace -
ment rate will not fall below 48% after 2025, 
either. The contribution rate and central gov -
ernment grants would then have to rise mark -
edly more sharply than envisaged in the current 
legal situation.21 The generational capital 
planned by the Federal Government is not likely 
to significantly reduce this pressure on contri -
butions.
Deterioration 
in 2023, but 
another surplus 
possibleAnother surplus 
possible in 
2024, …
… but high bur -
dens foreseeable 
in futureFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final  annual  figures  differ  from  the  total  of  the  reported  
quarterly figures as the latter are not revised.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4420246
––+++
–6–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202320222021
2022
2023
20212021 2022 202302468
2021 2022 202302468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
20 For more information on the pension increase, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), p. 66.
21 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b). The increase in the 
contribution rate and central government funds is now 
somewhat weaker. This is due to more favourable demo -
graphic assumptions. The Federal Statistical Office (2022) 
submitted new updated demographic projections in au -
tumn 2022. The pressure on the pension scheme’s finances 
is being eased by higher migration and a somewhat weaker 
increase in life expectancy than previously.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
72

Federal Employment Agency
Second quarter of 2023
The Federal Employment Agency posted a sur -
plus of just over €½ billion in the second quar -
ter of 2023.22 This was an improvement of al -
most €1 billion compared with the same quar -
ter of the previous year. The main reason for 
this was strong revenue growth (+11%), the 
bulk of which was due to the contribution rate 
being raised by 0.2 percentage point to 2.6% 
at the start of the year. Expenditure rose con -
siderably more weakly, with an increase of just 
over 2%. The very sharp fall in expenditure on 
short-  time working benefits (-70%, or -€1 bil -
lion) had a dampening effect here. By contrast, 
spending on unemployment benefits rose at an 
accelerated pace (+13%, or +€½ billion), partly 
as a result of more insurees receiving benefits. 
In addition, the resumption of transfers to the 
civil servants’ pension fund had a particularly 
large impact on expenditure. These transfers 
had been paused during the pandemic.
2023 as a whole
The Federal Employment Agency is expected to 
record a significant surplus for the year as a 
whole. It already posted a surplus after the first 
half of 2023, following a deficit of €2 billion a 
year earlier. Its balance is likely to improve in 
the second half of the year, too, but to a lesser 
extent. This is because the increase in expend -
iture on unemployment benefits could be 
somewhat higher.Moderate sur -
plus for Federal 
Employment 
Agency in Q2
All in all, signifi -
cant surplus on 
the cards for 
2023
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), Arduous recovery amid high and only gradually easing inflation – 
outlook for the German economy up to 2025, Monthly Report, June 2023, pp. 13-37.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), The growing significance of central government’s off- budget 
entities , Monthly Report, June 2023, pp. 63-81.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), Public finances, Monthly Report, May 2023, pp. 57-75.Finances of the 
Federal Employment Agency*
Source: Federal Employment Agency. * Including transfers to 
the civil servants' pension fund and before payment of central 
government grants.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410505
––+
–25–20–15–10–50+5Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202320222021
20212023
20222021 2022 2023–400+40+80+120
2021 2022 20234004080120
–+++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
22 In the core budget, i.e. excluding the civil servants’ pen -
sion fund. Transfers to the fund lower the core budget bal -
ance.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
73

Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), Public finances, Monthly Report, February 2023, pp. 64-80.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), Central government’s debt brake: options for stability- oriented 
further development, Monthly Report, April 2022, pp. 49-66.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b), Pension insurance scheme: long- term scenarios and reform 
options , Monthly Report, June 2022, pp. 47-61.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Key central government budget data in connection with the debt 
brake, Monthly Report, February 2016, pp. 68-69.
Federal Ministry of Finance (2023), Zusätzliche Informationen zum Regierungsentwurf für den 
Bundes haushalt 2024, July 2023.
Federal Statistical Office (2022), 15. koordinierte Bevölkerungsvorausberechnung – Deutschland, 
Berichtszeitraum 2021-2070.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
74

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43 •
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields on German securities  .........................................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
3•

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Maastricht debt by creditor  .........................................................................................  63 •
13. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78 •
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81 •
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 €STR  5,6Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  7
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2021 Nov. 10.2 7.2 7.5 7.5 5.8 3.7 – 0.5 – 0.57 0.2
Dec. 10.0 7.0 7.0 7.1 6.1 3.9 – 0.5 – 0.58 0.1
2022 Jan. 9.4 7.0 6.7 6.8 6.2 4.4 – 0.3 – 0.58 0.4
Feb. 9.3 6.9 6.5 6.6 6.3 4.4 – 0.6 – 0.58 0.8
Mar. 9.1 6.8 6.5 6.5 6.1 4.4 – 0.8 – 0.58 0.9
Apr. 8.6 6.6 6.4 6.3 6.4 5.0 – 0.2 – 0.58 1.4
May 8.3 6.3 6.1 6.1 6.2 5.1 – 0.1 – 0.59 1.7
June 7.5 6.2 6.0 6.0 6.3 5.4 – 0.2 – 0.58 2.2
July 7.0 6.1 5.9 6.0 5.9 5.4 – 0.2 – 0.51 1.9
Aug. 6.8 6.3 6.2 6.0 5.7 5.7 – 0.4 – 0.09 1.8
Sep. 5.3 5.9 6.0 5.7 5.5 5.7 – 0.4 0.36 2.6
Oct. 3.5 5.0 4.9 5.2 5.1 5.3 – 0.7 0.66 3.0
Nov. 2.1 4.5 4.6 4.4 4.8 5.2 – 0.1 1.37 2.7
Dec. 0.2 3.4 3.8 3.8 3.9 4.4 0.5 1.57 2.8
2023 Jan. – 1.3 2.6 3.1 3.2 3.0 3.7 1.2 1.90 2.9
Feb. – 3.1 1.7 2.6 2.6 2.5 3.3 1.8 2.28 3.0
Mar. – 4.7 1.1 2.1 2.1 2.0 2.9 2.3 2.57 3.1
Apr. – 5.7 0.5 1.5 1.5 1.4 2.4 2.4 2.90 3.0
May – 7.0 – 0.1 1.0 1.0 0.9 2.3 3.1 3.08 3.0
June – 8.0 – 0.5 0.6 ... 0.4 1.6 3.3 3.24 3.0
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.40 3.1
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 EuroShort-Term Rate.  6 See also footnotes to Table VI.3, p. 43●. 7 GDP-weighted yield on
ten-year government bonds. Countries included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT,
GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assetsReference
rate 
vis-á-vis the
US dollar Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2021 Nov. +19,661 +13,529 – 9,494 + 7,106 +55,232 +25,547 –97,921 + 542 1.1414 97.6 91.8
Dec. +32,673 + 9,198 +29,655 +14,131 +24,902 + 115 – 8,674 – 820 1.1304 97.1 91.2
2022 Jan. – 6,164 –11,333 – 9,364 – 289 +51,258 + 3,062 –61,075 – 2,321 1.1314 96.6 91.1
Feb. + 7,045 + 7,880 +44,277 +43,551 – 6,431 – 3,857 + 9,488 + 1,526 1.1342 96.9 91.6
Mar. + 5,369 + 1,384 –19,759 +23,697 –136,572 + 2,624 +90,586 – 95 1.1019 95.9 91.4
Apr. –14,980 –13,116 –28,199 +17,249 +33,628 +21,864 –100,232 – 708 1.0819 95.2 90.0
May –28,980 – 7,752 +61,702 +120,438 +23,540 + 1,396 –84,882 + 1,210 1.0579 95.6 90.4
June – 4,363 – 7,997 +14,518 + 8,784 –86,875 + 3,074 +87,721 + 1,814 1.0566 95.9 90.6
July –15,845 –12,961 +16,882 – 7,759 +48,281 +10,520 –35,796 + 1,636 1.0179 94.1 89.1
Aug. –29,623 –30,402 – 5,830 –28,702 –59,182 +12,420 +67,471 + 2,163 1.0128 93.6 88.8
Sep. –21,601 –12,400 –47,235 +69,983 –166,756 +15,515 +30,551 + 3,472 0.9904 94.2 p 89.8
Oct. –16,676 – 8,515 +22,133 – 315 –21,109 + 2,237 +37,390 + 3,931 0.9826 94.8 p 91.1
Nov. + 5,763 + 7,390 – 5,984 –18,557 –26,773 + 1,364 +37,469 + 513 1.0201 96.0 p 92.0
Dec. +19,429 + 8,558 +42,466 + 4,113 +56,720 – 7,707 –15,482 + 4,823 1.0589 97.0 p 92.3
2023 Jan. –12,657 –14,379 +20,784 + 5,700 +32,042 – 568 – 7,665 – 8,725 1.0769 97.3 p 92.5
Feb. +10,520 +21,029 + 507 +53,020 –28,109 +10,410 –23,433 –11,381 1.0715 97.3 p 92.6
Mar. +34,357 +43,607 +26,319 – 4,081 –100,376 + 5,676 +123,453 + 1,647 1.0706 97.5 p 92.8
Apr. + 4,252 +15,097 –29,487 + 7,128 +33,054 + 951 –68,770 – 1,849 1.0968 98.6 p 93.6
May –11,271 +23,901 +21,528 –34,821 +61,106 +13,207 –19,376 + 1,413 1.0868 98.1 p 93.0
June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0840 98.3 p 93.2
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1058 99.3 p 94.2
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also Tables
XII. 9 and 11, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Bundesbank cal-culation. Vis-á-vis the currencies of the extended EER group of tranding partners (fixed
composition).  4 Based on consumer price indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Croatia Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2020 –6.0 –5.4 –3.8 –0.6 –2.4 –7.5 –9.0 6.6 –9.0 –8.5 –2.3
2021 5.5 6.3 3.2 8.0 3.2 6.4 8.4 15.1 7.0 13.1 4.3
2022 3.4 3.2 1.8 –1.3 1.6 2.5 5.9 9.4 3.7 6.2 2.8
2022 Q1 5.4 5.3 4.3 2.9 3.5 4.5 8.5 8.8 6.5 7.8 6.6
Q2 4.2 4.1 1.6 –0.3 2.7 4.1 7.4 9.3 5.0 8.7 3.5
Q3 2.4 2.1 1.2 –2.9 1.2 1.1 3.9 9.4 2.4 5.3 0.6
Q4 1.8 1.6 0.2 –4.1 –0.7 0.3 4.5 10.2 1.1 3.5 1.2
2023 Q1 1.1 1.4 0.1 –3.2 0.4 1.1 2.3 2.2 2.0 2.8 0.8
Q2 0.6 ... –0.6 ... ... 0.4 ... 2.7 ... ... –0.9
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2020 –7.7 –3.8 –9.6 –2.8 –3.2 –10.9 –2.1 14.5 –11.5 –3.4 –1.8
2021 8.9 16.8 4.6 12.8 4.2 5.9 10.4 28.3 12.2 6.4 6.5
2022 2.3 –0.7 –0.3 –2.3 4.0 –0.2 2.4 18.9 0.4 1.6 0.8
2022 Q1 1.6 6.4 –1.3 4.3 5.7 –0.3 4.9 7.6 1.5 2.9 4.0
Q2 2.0 –5.1 –1.3 2.5 8.0 –0.2 3.1 14.9 2.1 2.5 3.6
Q3 3.4 –3.6 1.9 –5.0 3.5 0.2 3.6 21.0 0.0 2.4 –2.7
Q4 2.2 –0.2 –0.6 –10.4 –0.6 –0.3 –1.8 29.8 –2.2 –1.4 –1.1
2023 Q1 0.3 –2.9 0.4 –9.5 0.9 –0.4 2.0 7.8 –1.5 –1.7 –5.9
Q2 –1.2 –6.1 p–0.2 –14.1 –3.0 1.5 0.8 p 4.9 –3.9 0.1 –6.7
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2020 74.5 75.6 77.3 67.7 76.9 73.8 71.0 69.1 53.3 67.8 72.0
2021 81.4 80.1 84.9 78.1 81.2 81.1 75.7 78.0 76.5 75.0 75.3
2022 82.2 79.1 85.2 71.7 81.0 81.8 75.9 79.8 78.4 77.0 75.0
2022 Q2 82.5 80.0 84.9 69.2 80.7 82.2 76.8 81.2 78.8 79.9 75.6
Q3 81.9 79.0 85.1 74.5 81.2 81.7 74.5 79.2 78.4 75.9 75.7
Q4 81.4 77.2 84.9 71.7 80.7 80.6 75.5 79.8 77.9 74.3 73.3
2023 Q1 81.4 76.7 84.6 71.1 78.4 81.0 74.8 79.2 77.4 77.6 72.6
Q2 81.2 77.3 84.2 69.9 76.6 82.0 73.8 ... 77.4 78.2 73.8
Q3 80.2 75.1 82.9 63.2 77.9 82.2 76.3 ... 77.0 78.5 72.7
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2020 7.9 5.6 3.6 7.0 7.8 7.8 16.3 5.6 9.2 7.6 8.1
2021 7.7 e 6.3 3.6 e 6.2 e 7.7 e 7.9 e 14.8 e 6.3 e 9.5 e 7.7 e 7.6
2022 6.7 e 5.5 p 3.1 e 5.6 e 6.8 e 7.3 e 12.5 e 4.5 e 8.1 e 6.8 e 6.9
2023 Jan. 6.7 5.7 3.0 5.2 7.1 7.1 11.4 4.2 7.9 6.8 6.4
Feb. 6.6 5.6 3.0 5.3 6.6 7.1 11.1 4.1 7.9 6.7 6.1
Mar. 6.5 5.6 3.0 5.9 6.6 7.0 11.4 4.1 7.8 6.6 5.9
Apr. 6.4 5.6 3.0 6.2 7.0 7.0 11.2 4.2 7.7 6.6 5.7
May 6.4 5.7 3.0 6.7 7.0 7.1 11.3 4.1 7.5 6.6 5.7
June 6.4 5.7 3.0 6.6 7.1 7.1 11.1 4.2 7.4 6.8 5.7
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.1 ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2020 0.3 0.4 5 0.4 –0.6 0.4 0.5 –1.3 –0.5 –0.1 0.0 0.1
2021 2.6 3.2 5 3.2 4.5 2.1 2.1 0.6 2.4 1.9 2.7 3.2
2022 8.4 10.3 8.7 19.4 7.2 5.9 9.3 8.1 8.7 10.7 17.2
2023 Feb. 8.5 5.4 9.3 17.8 8.0 7.3 6.5 8.1 9.8 11.7 20.1
Mar. 6.9 4.9 7.8 15.6 6.7 6.7 5.4 7.0 8.1 10.5 17.2
Apr. 7.0 3.3 7.6 13.2 6.3 6.9 4.5 6.3 8.6 8.9 15.0
May 6.1 2.7 6.3 11.2 5.0 6.0 4.1 5.4 8.0 8.3 12.3
June 5.5 1.6 6.8 9.0 4.1 5.3 2.8 4.8 6.7 8.3 8.1
July e 5.3 1.7 6.5 e 6.3 e 4.2 5.1 3.5 4.6 6.3 8.0 6.6
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
2020 –7.1 –9.0 –4.3 –5.5 –5.6 –9.0 –9.7 –5.0 –9.7 –7.3 –4.4
2021 –5.3 –5.5 –3.7 –2.4 –2.8 –6.5 –7.1 –1.6 –9.0 –2.5 –7.1
2022 –3.6 –3.9 –2.7 –0.9 –0.9 –4.7 –2.3 1.6 –8.0 0.4 –4.4
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
2020 97.2 112.0 68.7 18.5 74.7 114.6 206.3 58.4 154.9 87.0 42.0
2021 95.4 109.1 69.3 17.6 72.6 112.9 194.6 55.4 149.9 78.4 43.7
2022 91.5 105.1 66.2 18.4 73.0 111.6 171.3 44.7 144.4 68.4 40.8
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
–0.0 –0.8 –8.6 –3.9 –6.5 –8.3 –3.3 –4.3 –11.3 –4.4 2020
6.0 5.1 11.7 6.2 4.6 5.5 4.9 8.2 5.5 6.6 2021
1.9 1.5 7.1 4.3 4.9 6.7 1.7 5.4 5.5 5.6 2022
4.8 2.6 8.3 6.4 9.3 11.4 3.0 10.2 6.8 6.7 2022 Q1
1.7 2.3 9.6 5.2 6.5 8.0 1.3 8.6 6.9 5.9 Q2
1.8 3.8 5.6 3.0 2.1 5.0 1.3 3.3 5.1 5.5 Q3
–0.3 –2.2 5.2 2.9 2.4 2.8 1.2 0.2 3.3 4.6 Q4
–2.4 –0.3 3.1 1.9 1.9 2.8 1.0 0.8 4.5 3.1 2023 Q1
0.6 ... ... –0.3 ... ... 1.5 1.4 1.7 2.1 Q2
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
–1.9 –10.8 –0.3 –3.9 –5.9 –7.3 –8.5 –5.2 –9.8 –7.3 2020
20.2 8.4 0.1 5.0 11.3 3.5 10.3 10.2 7.5 6.4 2021
9.4 –1.3 2.8 2.6 7.1 –0.0 –3.9 1.2 3.0 1.1 2022
23.5 0.1 –2.1 2.1 11.6 –2.9 –2.4 6.4 1.7 3.0 2022 Q1
9.2 –1.6 –4.0 4.7 8.6 2.0 –3.2 2.8 5.0 3.0 Q2
10.0 –0.3 7.7 2.4 5.7 1.3 –1.4 1.7 4.5 –1.0 Q3
–2.5 –3.3 10.0 1.3 2.8 –0.3 –8.4 –5.7 0.7 –0.4 Q4
–11.7 –4.3 13.7 –3.6 1.1 1.3 –3.4 –3.4 1.6 –1.3 2023 Q1
–0.8 p –6.9 p 7.6 p –9.7 p –1.0 –5.1 0.6 p –4.1 p –2.0 ... Q2
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
73.0 72.5 70.7 78.2 79.5 74.9 79.5 78.4 74.4 51.5 2020
76.7 82.0 76.8 82.4 87.1 79.2 82.2 84.5 77.8 51.3 2021
77.4 80.8 64.7 83.7 87.7 81.9 83.3 84.9 78.7 58.2 2022
78.2 79.9 64.6 84.2 88.8 82.4 83.9 85.1 80.0 58.8 2022 Q2
76.8 81.4 67.6 83.9 87.9 81.6 83.5 84.1 78.9 58.3 Q3
76.1 79.8 63.6 82.6 85.6 81.6 83.0 84.0 77.2 60.4 Q4
69.7 74.3 65.7 82.9 87.1 81.5 80.2 83.1 77.1 59.8 2023 Q1
70.5 75.5 53.3 82.5 86.3 83.6 84.0 83.9 76.3 60.9 Q2
67.0 72.0 69.4 81.3 84.6 80.9 83.0 83.0 76.2 62.7 Q3
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
8.6 6.8 4.4 3.9 5.4 6.9 6.7 5.0 15.5 7.6 2020
e 7.1 e 5.4 e 3.4 e 4.2 e 6.2 e 6.6 e 6.9 e 4.8 e 14.8 e 7.5 2021
e 5.9 e 4.6 e 2.9 e 3.6 e 4.8 e 6.1 e 6.2 e 4.0 e 13.0 e 6.8 2022
6.8 4.9 3.0 3.6 5.1 7.0 6.1 3.5 13.0 6.7 2023 Jan.
7.3 4.9 2.9 3.5 4.9 6.9 6.1 3.6 12.8 6.3 Feb.
7.6 4.9 2.8 3.5 4.4 6.8 6.1 3.6 12.5 5.7 Mar.
7.5 4.9 2.8 3.4 5.1 6.5 6.1 3.6 12.1 5.1 Apr.
7.2 5.0 2.7 3.5 4.6 6.4 6.0 3.6 11.9 4.8 May
7.5 5.1 2.6 3.5 5.1 6.4 6.0 3.5 11.7 4.8 June
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... July
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
1.1 0.0 0.8 1.1 1.4 –0.1 2.0 –0.3 –0.3 –1.1 2020
4.6 3.5 0.7 2.8 2.8 0.9 2.8 2.0 3.0 2.3 2021
18.9 8.2 6.1 11.6 8.6 8.1 12.1 9.3 8.3 8.1 2022
17.2 4.8 7.0 8.9 11.0 8.6 15.4 9.4 6.0 6.7 2023 Feb.
15.2 2.9 7.1 4.5 9.2 8.0 14.8 10.4 3.1 6.1 Mar.
13.3 2.7 6.4 5.8 9.4 6.9 14.0 9.2 3.8 3.9 Apr.
10.7 2.0 6.3 6.8 8.7 5.4 12.3 8.1 2.9 3.6 May
8.2 1.0 6.2 6.4 7.8 4.7 11.3 6.6 1.6 2.8 June
7.2 2.0 5.6 p 5.3 e 7.0 4.3 e 10.2 5.7 2.1 2.4 July
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
–6.5 –3.4 –9.7 –3.7 –8.0 –5.8 –5.4 –7.7 –10.1 –5.8 2020
–1.2 0.7 –7.8 –2.4 –5.8 –2.9 –5.4 –4.6 –6.9 –2.0 2021
–0.6 0.2 –5.8 0.0 –3.2 –0.4 –2.0 –3.0 –4.8 2.1 2022
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
46.3 24.5 52.9 54.7 82.9 134.9 58.9 79.6 120.4 113.8 2020
43.7 24.5 55.1 52.5 82.3 125.4 61.0 74.5 118.3 101.2 2021
38.4 24.6 53.4 51.0 78.4 113.9 57.8 69.9 113.2 86.5 2022
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of valueadded tax between July and December 2020.  6 Including Croatia from 2023 onwards.
7 According to Maastricht Treaty definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2021 Nov. 156.4 89.5 –3.5 66.9 67.5 –32.3 15.1 47.3 –7.0 –10.6 –0.7 1.8 2.5
Dec. 52.7 27.6 20.1 25.1 22.6 –62.4 –205.6 –143.3 4.3 18.0 –0.8 –25.1 12.1
2022 Jan. 173.3 98.0 –10.2 75.3 64.8 7.9 141.4 133.5 –19.9 –14.8 –0.1 9.3 –14.3
Feb. 110.9 44.4 2.0 66.5 73.8 –14.7 82.3 97.0 –24.6 –12.6 –0.4 –3.5 –8.1
Mar. 149.8 104.5 26.4 45.3 36.0 4.3 –23.7 –28.1 –2.2 2.8 –0.7 –21.8 17.5
Apr. 112.0 96.8 20.2 15.2 5.2 –101.6 –79.2 22.3 5.5 –10.5 –0.2 1.5 14.7
May 107.2 65.1 –18.8 42.1 49.5 –51.8 40.4 92.2 –17.8 3.1 –3.2 –21.2 3.6
June 116.2 83.6 –8.8 32.6 33.5 99.5 –25.9 –125.4 20.3 –4.8 –0.4 1.0 24.4
July 29.8 58.6 –3.0 –28.8 –28.8 –27.6 63.7 91.3 4.6 –11.7 –0.4 –3.6 20.3
Aug. –10.7 26.1 –18.8 –36.8 –31.2 46.9 69.4 22.5 –15.8 –22.1 0.8 1.9 3.6
Sep. 86.6 83.1 –0.1 3.4 2.2 –53.1 –199.8 –146.8 12.9 –16.4 –0.4 3.6 26.1
Oct. –12.5 0.1 –6.1 –12.6 –9.7 – 0.8 169.5 170.3 –11.3 –14.7 0.0 11.5 –8.1
Nov. 93.0 83.9 31.0 9.0 14.3 14.6 –40.6 –55.2 35.8 1.7 –0.1 34.6 –0.4
Dec. –122.3 –89.1 –1.0 –33.2 –41.2 – 0.0 –257.1 –257.1 43.8 10.0 –0.1 1.1 32.8
2023 Jan. –10.1 –0.7 –14.3 –9.5 –4.2 11.7 126.6 114.9 31.4 –6.2 1.8 57.5 –21.8
Feb. 7.6 –13.3 3.2 20.9 29.8 8.3 0.5 –7.8 12.7 –1.3 1.3 10.0 2.7
Mar. 33.8 41.0 11.7 –7.2 –9.7 74.9 112.0 37.1 30.2 10.8 1.0 5.9 12.6
Apr. – 9.2 24.2 30.8 –33.4 –29.1 –25.7 –36.4 –10.7 10.5 9.3 1.0 4.0 –3.8
May 0.8 46.5 33.3 –45.8 –50.0 –16.8 10.7 27.5 35.7 –0.3 2.0 26.6 7.4
June – 2.6 –15.3 –15.8 12.7 19.5 136.8 35.9 –100.9 33.6 1.2 2.4 22.3 7.8
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2021 Nov. 54.0 28.5 3.4 25.4 28.0 –59.0 –4.2 54.8 5.0 –0.6 –0.2 4.7 1.1
Dec. 12.8 10.9 6.8 2.0 4.7 –122.9 –47.1 75.8 –2.3 9.1 –0.2 –13.2 2.0
2022 Jan. 40.4 31.0 1.4 9.4 7.5 111.9 72.2 –39.7 –4.0 –1.1 –0.8 12.6 –14.8
Feb. 32.7 27.6 3.4 5.2 7.2 16.0 21.9 5.9 5.1 –1.3 –0.2 7.0 –0.4
Mar. 37.0 23.3 4.1 13.7 12.9 –44.2 –22.2 22.0 6.1 –2.0 –0.2 4.1 4.2
Apr. 19.0 18.9 2.7 0.1 –4.5 19.1 –13.0 –32.1 4.4 –2.7 –0.2 3.2 4.1
May 39.1 28.5 3.5 10.6 13.5 –29.8 –0.9 28.9 2.0 –2.4 –0.1 2.0 2.5
June 32.6 25.5 –4.1 7.1 4.8 –22.4 –9.4 13.0 3.8 –3.1 –0.2 –3.8 10.8
July 18.2 30.6 10.6 –12.4 –13.4 42.7 4.3 –38.5 9.3 –2.0 –0.2 8.5 3.0
Aug. 26.0 39.4 –0.2 –13.4 –11.4 –50.3 6.7 57.1 3.0 –0.0 –0.1 0.8 2.3
Sep. 21.5 23.1 0.1 –1.7 –4.5 –27.4 1.6 29.0 4.1 –0.3 –0.0 –0.6 5.0
Oct. 12.8 10.5 –0.2 2.3 1.9 45.1 20.4 –24.7 –7.6 –1.2 0.2 3.2 –9.8
Nov. 25.4 26.2 1.4 –0.9 0.8 38.0 8.9 –29.1 9.8 1.9 0.2 7.1 0.6
Dec. –28.8 –19.6 –2.4 –9.3 –8.2 –37.1 –71.9 –34.8 –0.5 –3.7 0.4 –1.9 4.8
2023 Jan. 27.5 16.9 –0.2 10.7 8.9 63.0 29.8 –33.3 –14.3 2.7 1.0 3.1 –21.0
Feb. 9.2 8.3 –0.2 0.9 1.8 58.4 –2.0 –60.3 3.3 0.6 1.2 –2.1 3.5
Mar. 4.8 8.1 6.4 –3.4 –3.7 –12.4 10.5 23.0 15.5 6.0 1.6 4.4 3.5
Apr. – 3.7 13.0 1.2 –16.7 –20.2 62.7 –15.2 –77.9 5.0 2.0 1.5 –3.0 4.5
May 5.2 11.7 –1.2 –6.5 –4.8 9.8 16.5 6.7 16.8 2.7 2.2 6.1 5.7
June 1.7 –1.7 4.1 3.4 5.4 7.7 –9.9 –17.6 9.0 –0.9 2.7 –1.0 8.2
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
–48.5 90.7 0.0 85.0 76.4 94.1 6.0 88.0 –18.3 0.7 – 5.0 24.5 – 6.9 2021 Nov.
–44.5 –43.1 0.0 91.2 121.7 120.4 20.6 99.8 –2.3 3.6 –33.4 –7.4 – 7.1 Dec.
68.1 95.1 0.0 – 3.7 – 3.6 –39.5 1.0 –40.5 23.3 12.6 57.2 –26.2 9.1 2022 Jan.
44.6 36.4 0.0 39.3 68.0 73.8 9.1 64.6 –13.8 8.0 9.4 –37.1 – 0.4 Feb.
13.7 49.0 0.0 97.1 108.4 88.1 22.5 65.6 16.3 4.0 –17.6 –0.2 – 2.2 Mar.
–22.1 –98.6 0.0 103.0 65.2 64.0 11.2 52.8 –1.1 2.3 25.1 20.2 16.5 Apr.
–28.9 55.4 0.0 53.6 63.4 67.3 7.8 59.6 –15.9 11.9 4.7 –10.1 – 5.2 May
69.6 67.9 0.0 73.2 79.5 52.3 6.6 45.7 24.1 3.1 –32.5 –1.0 11.1 June
–31.2 –137.3 0.0 159.6 126.7 74.8 8.6 66.2 46.7 5.1 23.7 –2.0 18.0 July
–80.3 69.0 0.0 79.0 71.5 20.1 –4.6 24.8 41.3 10.0 –22.6 6.8 7.4 Aug.
7.3 21.4 0.0 1.5 – 1.7 –100.9 –1.4 –99.5 99.8 – 0.6 –19.5 –8.4 21.6 Sep.
– 5.4 64.4 0.0 –57.5 –76.7 –157.1 –0.4 –156.8 85.4 – 5.0 4.4 36.7 –25.4 Oct.
–10.5 –4.3 0.0 70.3 20.8 –30.0 –3.5 –26.5 59.2 – 8.3 27.4 22.3 16.6 Nov.
–84.5 –61.6 0.0 3.5 13.3 –61.3 11.6 –72.9 59.8 14.8 –46.5 2.8 10.5 Dec.
–38.7 123.7 0.0 –132.7 –149.0 –231.2 –13.2 –217.9 76.0 6.2 35.1 6.6 – 7.8 2023 Jan.
20.3 25.1 0.0 –42.1 –63.1 –135.2 –3.5 –131.7 72.1 0.0 – 2.2 –6.4 29.4 Feb.
30.5 33.8 0.0 16.7 9.7 –104.1 3.9 –108.0 119.4 – 5.5 –25.7 20.6 9.6 Mar.
–26.5 –29.0 0.0 9.1 –18.2 –52.5 4.1 –56.6 45.7 –11.4 6.7 21.6 0.2 Apr.
–104.5 72.0 0.0 –38.4 –44.7 –93.9 1.7 –95.6 52.6 – 3.5 29.6 –8.8 5.1 May
24.6 71.0 0.0 9.5 22.2 –61.0 3.2 –64.1 94.2 –11.1 –11.2 –4.6 – 1.2 June
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
7.2 – 42.3 3.7 1.2 25.0 40.9 – 12.3 – 0.1 – 4.7 – 0.3 1.4 2021 Nov.
27.8 –135.3 5.3 4.5 – 0.4 – 12.8 9.1 1.6 – 0.3 0.3 1.7 Dec.
– 38.1 166.0 1.3 0.8 28.4 22.4 9.3 0.3 – 1.2 0.0 – 2.4 2022 Jan.
2.5 14.4 3.0 2.2 26.8 23.3 1.1 0.3 1.1 0.1 0.8 Feb.
– 0.1 – 13.2 5.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 7.4 8.4 – 1.6 0.5 0.2 – 0.1 Mar.
– 3.0 32.9 3.4 2.3 3.7 – 3.4 10.4 – 0.4 – 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.6 Apr.
22.5 – 30.3 3.4 2.7 15.1 22.5 – 7.4 – 1.2 0.4 0.2 0.7 May
14.9 – 37.5 3.7 0.5 29.0 19.6 7.5 – 1.6 0.6 – 0.0 2.9 June
– 38.2 55.3 – 5.3 9.1 34.6 5.7 23.6 – 1.7 4.3 0.1 2.6 July
– 24.1 – 71.1 – 11.7 12.5 67.9 56.8 13.9 – 2.4 – 1.8 – 0.1 1.4 Aug.
4.7 – 1.1 3.3 0.3 – 13.6 – 56.8 45.1 – 5.3 – 2.6 0.1 6.0 Sep.
5.1 65.9 0.1 0.1 – 5.4 – 32.1 36.8 – 3.3 – 0.2 0.1 – 6.7 Oct.
22.6 13.6 – 0.0 – 0.3 17.3 12.6 4.3 – 5.5 3.2 0.0 2.7 Nov.
– 16.3 – 24.6 2.1 2.4 – 24.6 – 37.6 19.0 – 4.1 – 2.0 0.1 0.0 Dec.
– 42.9 147.9 2.3 – 5.1 – 0.2 – 37.1 38.4 – 6.5 – 0.1 – 0.2 5.4 2023 Jan.
12.9 50.9 1.1 – 0.7 0.4 – 33.2 32.6 – 8.0 1.3 – 0.1 7.8 Feb.
27.1 – 34.8 2.3 0.9 – 15.5 – 45.7 31.8 – 10.4 – 0.2 0.3 8.7 Mar.
– 39.0 86.7 1.9 0.7 6.3 – 11.7 25.3 – 10.2 0.7 0.2 1.9 Apr.
– 11.8 3.1 2.6 0.9 6.9 – 6.1 18.4 – 10.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 5.2 May
– 9.8 9.6 1.7 1.1 0.7 – 29.1 36.7 – 10.0 – 0.3 – 0.0 3.5 June
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2021 May 30,888.3 20,788.3 14,612.9 12,198.6 1,521.7 892.6 6,175.5 1,006.2 5,169.2 6,432.0 3,668.1
June 30,989.4 20,890.5 14,652.6 12,234.6 1,529.8 888.3 6,237.8 1,004.8 5,233.1 6,398.7 3,700.3
July 31,313.9 21,028.4 14,708.1 12,278.0 1,543.4 886.7 6,320.4 1,011.3 5,309.1 6,504.5 3,781.0
Aug. 31,438.2 21,047.9 14,684.9 12,261.1 1,533.4 890.4 6,363.1 1,002.3 5,360.8 6,653.6 3,736.6
Sep. 31,472.9 21,133.7 14,757.3 12,330.9 1,535.1 891.4 6,376.4 993.6 5,382.8 6,619.9 3,719.3
Oct. 31,778.8 21,201.7 14,817.8 12,379.4 1,548.1 890.3 6,384.0 987.7 5,396.3 6,825.2 3,751.9
Nov. 32,193.4 21,381.5 14,911.5 12,478.0 1,542.5 891.0 6,470.1 985.8 5,484.2 6,917.4 3,894.5
Dec. 31,777.4 21,384.4 14,917.2 12,462.9 1,567.3 887.0 6,467.2 988.5 5,478.8 6,738.7 3,654.2
2022 Jan. 32,417.1 21,571.9 15,046.9 12,609.0 1,553.3 884.6 6,525.0 999.2 5,525.8 6,914.5 3,930.7
Feb. 32,601.8 21,629.0 15,075.7 12,645.3 1,553.8 876.6 6,553.3 991.8 5,561.5 7,011.4 3,961.5
Mar. 32,937.3 21,737.1 15,176.1 12,722.0 1,587.5 866.7 6,561.0 1,001.4 5,559.6 6,996.1 4,204.1
Apr. 33,570.1 21,764.2 15,254.1 12,805.3 1,597.7 851.1 6,510.1 1,011.3 5,498.8 7,063.0 4,742.9
May 33,482.5 21,816.2 15,304.5 12,878.2 1,568.2 858.1 6,511.7 1,003.9 5,507.7 7,013.2 4,653.1
June 33,886.1 21,886.0 15,373.6 12,973.4 1,569.1 831.1 6,512.4 1,003.0 5,509.4 7,064.5 4,935.5
July 33,877.7 21,984.6 15,451.6 13,043.7 1,578.6 829.2 6,533.1 1,003.0 5,530.1 7,216.9 4,676.2
Aug. 34,342.9 21,872.4 15,459.5 13,080.1 1,553.8 825.7 6,412.9 996.9 5,416.1 7,301.6 5,168.9
Sep. 34,619.1 21,901.4 15,558.1 13,191.3 1,545.0 821.7 6,343.3 998.1 5,345.2 7,241.7 5,476.0
Oct. 34,551.1 21,891.6 15,553.1 13,190.6 1,533.0 829.6 6,338.5 995.2 5,343.3 7,336.9 5,322.6
Nov. 34,226.4 22,012.4 15,628.2 13,228.7 1,559.1 840.4 6,384.2 990.2 5,394.0 7,207.7 5,006.2
Dec. 33,866.7 21,792.9 15,515.8 13,124.7 1,555.4 835.7 6,277.1 998.9 5,278.2 6,873.2 5,200.6
2023 Jan. 33,828.5 21,883.6 15,553.3 13,172.0 1,545.6 835.8 6,330.3 1,000.3 5,330.0 6,982.8 4,962.1
Feb. 34,114.8 21,860.4 15,543.2 13,157.8 1,540.9 844.6 6,317.2 991.3 5,325.9 7,003.0 5,251.4
Mar. 33,955.1 21,921.1 15,575.4 13,175.7 1,552.2 847.4 6,345.7 995.3 5,350.4 7,101.3 4,932.7
Apr. 33,927.5 21,905.4 15,597.8 13,165.4 1,566.3 866.2 6,307.6 991.1 5,316.5 7,025.7 4,996.4
May 34,106.9 21,917.1 15,648.8 13,183.8 1,595.7 869.3 6,268.3 995.4 5,272.9 7,125.1 5,064.7
June 34,037.3 21,906.7 15,629.0 13,178.0 1,584.4 866.6 6,277.7 988.4 5,289.3 7,065.4 5,065.1
German contribution (€ billion)
2021 May 7,228.0 4,977.5 3,777.2 3,283.3 219.5 274.4 1,200.3 283.4 916.9 1,329.8 920.7
June 7,277.1 5,009.8 3,786.4 3,290.4 220.8 275.2 1,223.4 282.3 941.1 1,325.1 942.1
July 7,362.7 5,062.4 3,808.5 3,310.2 221.9 276.4 1,253.9 284.4 969.5 1,317.4 982.9
Aug. 7,395.2 5,087.3 3,824.6 3,325.1 221.4 278.1 1,262.8 280.8 982.0 1,336.0 971.9
Sep. 7,398.6 5,110.8 3,840.8 3,336.4 224.7 279.7 1,270.1 280.7 989.4 1,335.1 952.6
Oct. 7,461.0 5,147.0 3,874.5 3,363.5 228.6 282.4 1,272.5 284.4 988.0 1,385.2 928.8
Nov. 7,575.0 5,210.7 3,904.2 3,389.9 229.0 285.3 1,306.4 280.7 1,025.7 1,396.4 967.9
Dec. 7,475.8 5,212.1 3,914.7 3,393.2 237.0 284.5 1,297.4 278.0 1,019.5 1,355.9 907.8
2022 Jan. 7,787.0 5,243.9 3,944.7 3,422.9 235.8 286.0 1,299.2 279.9 1,019.3 1,433.6 1,109.5
Feb. 7,871.3 5,262.9 3,968.5 3,445.2 238.0 285.3 1,294.3 277.8 1,016.5 1,464.4 1,144.0
Mar. 7,997.7 5,280.7 3,990.2 3,464.4 240.6 285.2 1,290.6 278.6 1,012.0 1,447.5 1,269.5
Apr. 8,259.4 5,278.9 4,008.0 3,481.9 240.1 286.1 1,270.9 283.2 987.7 1,464.0 1,516.5
May 8,228.4 5,304.5 4,034.5 3,506.0 240.8 287.7 1,270.0 280.3 989.7 1,445.0 1,479.0
June 8,413.5 5,322.6 4,058.9 3,537.6 237.8 283.5 1,263.7 282.5 981.2 1,466.1 1,624.8
July 8,287.9 5,375.0 4,096.1 3,560.3 252.7 283.2 1,278.8 283.6 995.2 1,481.5 1,431.4
Aug. 8,546.0 5,364.5 4,132.0 3,600.0 249.1 282.9 1,232.5 281.5 951.0 1,492.4 1,689.0
Sep. 8,857.6 5,356.3 4,153.9 3,624.8 246.1 283.0 1,202.4 284.3 918.1 1,502.4 1,998.8
Oct. 8,826.7 5,366.0 4,163.6 3,634.6 245.9 283.1 1,202.4 284.8 917.5 1,509.0 1,951.8
Nov. 8,653.9 5,402.0 4,189.2 3,656.3 249.8 283.1 1,212.8 283.4 929.4 1,502.4 1,749.6
Dec. 8,626.1 5,345.2 4,165.8 3,636.7 245.9 283.2 1,179.4 283.2 896.1 1,417.3 1,863.7
2023 Jan. 8,561.4 5,377.1 4,178.3 3,652.7 245.9 279.7 1,198.8 285.0 913.9 1,443.8 1,740.5
Feb. 8,712.0 5,371.7 4,186.6 3,662.2 243.6 280.9 1,185.1 284.0 901.1 1,443.9 1,896.4
Mar. 8,573.5 5,388.1 4,193.6 3,661.9 252.1 279.6 1,194.5 284.2 910.3 1,457.2 1,728.2
Apr. 8,559.3 5,383.7 4,206.2 3,672.7 252.4 281.1 1,177.5 287.7 889.8 1,435.7 1,739.8
May 8,612.3 5,390.9 4,218.3 3,686.3 252.1 279.9 1,172.6 286.1 886.4 1,468.3 1,753.1
June 8,648.1 5,387.5 4,216.0 3,679.2 255.5 281.4 1,171.5 284.2 887.4 1,433.5 1,827.0
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,412.8 15,170.0 13,893.5 14,040.7 8,834.2 724.0 155.5 1,826.2 2,463.6 37.1 2021 May
1,423.2 15,270.3 13,971.9 14,119.8 8,947.0 697.4 150.4 1,822.0 2,466.2 36.8 June
1,437.6 15,380.5 14,062.4 14,230.8 9,052.5 705.3 153.6 1,817.0 2,466.2 36.3 July
1,439.2 15,441.7 14,094.7 14,252.2 9,086.6 706.2 151.2 1,809.9 2,462.4 35.9 Aug.
1,444.5 15,482.5 14,115.3 14,279.8 9,133.9 700.2 140.0 1,806.7 2,463.3 35.6 Sep.
1,450.3 15,542.2 14,177.1 14,350.0 9,205.6 707.1 148.0 1,795.5 2,458.8 34.9 Oct.
1,456.3 15,548.8 14,218.9 14,375.7 9,255.0 697.0 143.3 1,786.3 2,459.8 34.3 Nov.
1,477.0 15,617.2 14,347.7 14,502.1 9,363.7 704.9 131.3 1,805.2 2,463.5 33.6 Dec.
1,477.9 15,694.2 14,327.3 14,526.9 9,353.8 706.6 135.3 1,820.2 2,479.3 31.8 2022 Jan.
1,487.0 15,787.1 14,373.0 14,561.7 9,412.4 688.4 134.3 1,807.7 2,487.3 31.6 Feb.
1,509.6 15,891.2 14,465.7 14,650.6 9,490.5 703.7 123.5 1,809.6 2,492.1 31.2 Mar.
1,520.7 15,934.3 14,521.8 14,712.1 9,555.8 705.4 123.5 1,802.0 2,494.3 31.0 Apr.
1,528.5 15,950.4 14,568.7 14,740.8 9,597.9 684.9 120.2 1,803.2 2,506.6 27.9 May
1,535.1 16,100.5 14,633.1 14,810.3 9,643.8 704.8 123.4 1,800.3 2,510.4 27.5 June
1,543.7 16,184.3 14,738.3 14,937.4 9,735.4 741.0 127.1 1,791.0 2,515.8 27.1 July
1,539.1 16,161.9 14,793.1 14,985.4 9,754.1 781.5 125.9 1,770.0 2,526.0 28.0 Aug.
1,537.7 16,199.4 14,785.2 15,036.4 9,688.0 913.3 125.5 1,756.3 2,525.7 27.6 Sep.
1,537.2 16,095.8 14,708.2 14,936.7 9,521.8 993.0 130.3 1,741.7 2,522.3 27.6 Oct.
1,533.7 16,084.9 14,722.7 14,917.6 9,457.0 1,042.9 134.6 1,741.1 2,514.5 27.6 Nov.
1,545.3 15,997.1 14,765.9 14,929.6 9,389.2 1,099.5 133.9 1,749.5 2,530.0 27.6 Dec.
1,533.4 15,876.9 14,667.4 14,845.0 9,228.1 1,163.7 146.1 1,746.4 2,532.0 28.7 2023 Jan.
1,529.9 15,843.6 14,625.0 14,773.2 9,083.9 1,223.7 157.3 1,746.5 2,531.8 30.0 Feb.
1,533.8 15,891.7 14,649.1 14,788.4 8,989.9 1,311.8 174.0 1,756.9 2,524.7 31.1 Mar.
1,537.9 15,848.6 14,649.0 14,784.4 8,939.1 1,345.9 187.8 1,765.7 2,513.9 32.2 Apr.
1,539.7 15,717.6 14,616.2 14,756.3 8,856.0 1,387.1 199.8 1,768.1 2,510.9 34.3 May
1,542.8 15,757.7 14,645.7 14,753.0 8,759.7 1,453.7 217.7 1,768.3 2,516.7 37.0 June
German contribution (€ billion)
322.8 4,308.8 4,040.3 3,895.1 2,613.5 146.0 32.2 540.4 537.4 25.7 2021 May
325.1 4,311.0 4,035.3 3,890.5 2,619.4 139.3 31.9 537.5 537.0 25.5 June
328.8 4,313.9 4,047.3 3,911.3 2,645.8 136.0 31.4 536.0 536.7 25.2 July
329.0 4,333.1 4,065.2 3,923.1 2,659.1 135.6 31.3 535.7 536.4 25.0 Aug.
329.8 4,340.5 4,064.1 3,919.8 2,662.1 132.2 31.2 533.6 535.8 24.8 Sep.
331.4 4,354.3 4,080.9 3,950.3 2,681.4 143.0 31.1 534.8 535.5 24.6 Oct.
332.6 4,390.5 4,107.1 3,968.0 2,710.9 132.5 30.3 534.6 535.5 24.3 Nov.
337.1 4,425.2 4,113.0 3,968.5 2,691.5 141.2 30.1 544.6 537.0 24.1 Dec.
337.9 4,418.1 4,139.2 4,006.8 2,737.3 135.4 29.7 543.6 537.4 23.4 2022 Jan.
340.1 4,444.1 4,161.0 4,017.1 2,752.3 132.4 29.4 542.3 537.7 23.1 Feb.
344.3 4,441.6 4,159.0 4,014.6 2,755.3 130.7 29.3 540.4 536.0 22.9 Mar.
346.7 4,445.6 4,158.1 4,019.8 2,754.8 140.0 29.4 537.7 535.1 22.7 Apr.
349.4 4,478.3 4,170.7 4,016.7 2,769.9 125.8 29.7 534.8 533.9 22.6 May
349.9 4,517.1 4,194.6 4,031.6 2,787.1 127.8 30.1 531.9 532.3 22.4 June
359.0 4,507.6 4,222.4 4,070.3 2,813.6 142.1 31.0 530.6 530.6 22.3 July
371.5 4,552.6 4,289.4 4,135.2 2,870.1 153.3 30.6 530.7 528.3 22.2 Aug.
371.8 4,541.5 4,267.4 4,135.1 2,834.9 193.7 30.9 530.3 523.0 22.2 Sep.
371.8 4,546.8 4,270.2 4,140.4 2,804.0 233.2 31.6 529.3 519.8 22.4 Oct.
371.5 4,578.7 4,283.7 4,146.3 2,806.0 240.1 32.1 531.0 514.4 22.6 Nov.
374.0 4,534.2 4,260.8 4,119.2 2,764.3 260.2 34.1 527.1 510.4 23.0 Dec.
368.9 4,489.3 4,257.7 4,126.0 2,749.9 286.6 36.9 529.6 499.1 24.0 2023 Jan.
368.1 4,496.6 4,250.9 4,106.5 2,706.5 314.2 39.1 530.3 491.2 25.2 Feb.
369.0 4,505.7 4,236.8 4,090.4 2,667.4 336.4 42.4 536.3 481.0 26.8 Mar.
369.8 4,473.0 4,248.0 4,104.2 2,660.3 360.2 46.1 538.3 471.0 28.3 Apr.
370.7 4,470.7 4,257.0 4,104.8 2,647.5 373.8 50.3 541.8 460.8 30.5 May
371.7 4,459.2 4,258.2 4,095.2 2,616.4 400.0 53.7 541.0 450.9 33.2 June
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2021 May 692.4 436.9 308.3 47.7 15.9 42.4 19.1 3.5 247.4 247.4 608.6 1,978.6 1,339.4
June 709.3 441.2 314.0 46.6 16.3 42.0 18.8 3.5 245.8 245.8 600.5 1,982.6 1,333.7
July 709.6 440.1 313.9 45.6 16.6 42.0 18.6 3.5 254.6 254.5 622.6 1,999.4 1,334.0
Aug. 736.1 453.5 329.1 43.9 17.0 42.0 18.0 3.4 243.0 243.0 628.1 1,988.5 1,334.0
Sep. 742.6 460.1 334.6 46.3 16.6 41.3 18.1 3.3 260.8 260.7 597.0 2,013.4 1,344.0
Oct. 740.3 451.9 323.3 48.1 18.0 41.6 17.7 3.3 272.2 272.2 630.3 2,040.1 1,356.4
Nov. 691.5 481.6 349.8 50.3 19.1 41.7 17.5 3.3 267.7 267.6 654.8 2,046.7 1,355.2
Dec. 646.7 468.4 337.4 49.7 19.4 41.1 17.6 3.2 234.3 233.1 647.5 2,019.7 1,346.8
2022 Jan. 711.0 456.2 306.6 67.4 19.6 41.2 17.6 3.8 291.8 291.6 621.2 2,049.2 1,351.4
Feb. 755.6 469.9 314.1 73.5 19.8 41.3 17.6 3.7 301.3 301.1 584.0 2,044.8 1,358.7
Mar. 769.7 470.9 304.7 82.5 20.5 42.4 17.3 3.4 283.8 283.6 583.8 2,026.7 1,358.6
Apr. 747.7 474.5 306.7 83.4 21.2 42.6 17.2 3.4 310.1 309.9 604.0 2,073.8 1,362.8
May 718.8 490.8 316.7 88.4 22.3 43.3 16.8 3.3 313.0 312.9 593.9 2,038.0 1,337.7
June 788.4 501.8 325.2 90.9 22.9 43.3 16.2 3.2 281.2 281.1 592.9 2,069.3 1,361.0
July 757.2 489.8 302.8 100.4 24.2 42.9 16.2 3.3 306.0 305.9 590.8 2,090.9 1,361.1
Aug. 676.9 499.6 309.1 104.6 24.0 42.5 16.1 3.2 283.8 283.7 597.5 2,113.5 1,375.1
Sep. 684.3 478.8 281.7 111.2 24.5 42.3 16.0 3.2 264.8 264.7 589.1 2,153.5 1,415.1
Oct. 678.9 480.2 287.2 109.2 24.3 41.5 14.7 3.2 268.8 268.8 625.8 2,130.5 1,416.5
Nov. 668.8 498.6 306.2 109.2 25.1 40.8 14.2 3.2 295.4 295.4 648.0 2,159.0 1,441.3
Dec. 584.0 483.5 296.0 103.6 27.2 40.2 13.5 3.0 248.3 248.3 650.9 2,166.2 1,474.6
2023 Jan. 551.2 480.7 283.1 113.0 27.5 40.6 12.8 3.7 284.0 284.0 657.6 2,205.1 1,510.3
Feb. 572.0 498.4 297.4 115.1 28.7 40.3 13.2 3.7 281.6 281.5 651.2 2,259.1 1,531.4
Mar. 602.7 500.6 288.6 125.7 28.4 39.6 14.7 3.6 255.3 255.2 671.9 2,257.1 1,551.2
Apr. 576.2 488.0 277.8 123.3 29.7 39.4 14.2 3.6 261.7 261.3 693.5 2,253.0 1,560.9
May 471.5 489.8 277.1 126.7 29.3 39.4 13.8 3.5 291.9 287.8 684.8 2,299.9 1,590.5
June 496.1 508.6 287.7 134.7 29.4 39.3 14.0 3.4 280.4 280.3 680.3 2,312.2 1,599.7
German contribution (€ billion)
2021 May 173.3 240.3 150.8 41.0 12.5 33.4 2.4 0.2 9.2 9.2 2.2 518.0 293.2
June 179.3 241.2 152.9 39.9 13.0 32.8 2.4 0.2 9.0 9.0 2.3 515.5 294.6
July 167.3 235.3 148.0 38.9 13.3 32.5 2.4 0.2 9.6 9.6 2.2 518.3 295.1
Aug. 168.1 241.8 155.7 37.3 13.9 32.4 2.4 0.2 9.7 9.7 2.2 522.4 303.1
Sep. 175.2 245.6 158.2 39.8 13.4 31.7 2.3 0.2 11.2 11.2 2.2 530.1 305.5
Oct. 171.3 232.7 142.7 40.9 14.8 31.8 2.3 0.2 10.8 10.8 2.1 547.9 316.4
Nov. 178.4 244.1 155.2 38.8 16.1 31.6 2.2 0.2 6.1 6.1 1.8 556.5 324.8
Dec. 206.2 250.5 161.9 39.1 16.4 30.7 2.3 0.2 5.8 4.8 2.1 547.6 316.3
2022 Jan. 168.1 243.3 139.1 54.6 16.5 30.7 2.2 0.2 4.7 4.7 2.2 562.8 325.1
Feb. 170.6 256.3 147.8 59.2 16.3 30.6 2.2 0.2 5.8 5.8 2.3 572.5 338.8
Mar. 170.6 256.4 137.6 68.8 17.0 30.7 2.2 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.4 581.5 354.8
Apr. 167.6 258.2 137.6 70.0 17.6 30.6 2.2 0.2 4.4 4.4 2.2 596.5 357.3
May 190.1 271.4 144.2 75.3 18.5 31.1 2.2 0.2 4.8 4.8 2.4 596.8 359.0
June 205.0 280.5 147.7 80.5 19.0 31.0 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.3 604.2 362.6
July 166.8 270.4 128.3 89.0 20.2 30.6 2.2 0.1 9.8 9.8 2.4 613.8 369.1
Aug. 142.7 274.6 129.4 92.2 20.4 30.4 2.2 0.1 8.0 8.0 2.3 625.7 384.5
Sep. 147.4 259.1 109.0 96.6 20.8 30.3 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.4 640.0 395.3
Oct. 152.5 253.9 108.1 93.1 20.5 30.1 2.1 0.1 5.2 5.2 2.5 633.9 398.1
Nov. 175.5 256.9 114.7 88.9 21.5 29.8 1.9 0.1 8.3 8.3 2.5 634.2 402.6
Dec. 159.2 255.8 117.3 83.2 23.9 29.6 1.8 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.6 631.2 409.3
2023 Jan. 116.4 246.9 99.4 92.2 23.8 29.8 1.6 0.1 6.1 6.1 2.4 639.6 417.9
Feb. 129.3 260.8 110.3 94.6 24.6 29.7 1.5 0.1 7.5 7.5 2.3 651.5 427.1
Mar. 156.4 258.8 102.2 101.4 24.1 29.6 1.4 0.1 7.2 7.2 2.6 658.0 440.3
Apr. 117.4 251.4 97.3 97.8 25.4 29.5 1.3 0.1 7.9 7.9 2.7 654.9 446.8
May 105.6 260.2 104.8 99.5 25.0 29.7 1.2 0.1 7.7 7.7 2.6 670.7 458.1
June 95.9 268.2 106.1 106.4 24.9 29.5 1.1 0.1 7.3 7.3 2.6 672.2 453.5
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
13.2 15.9 1,949.5 4,992.3 2,968.5 33.5 3,476.5 0.0 10,707.4 14,157.2 14,908.2 6,827.3 176.1 2021 May
8.1 16.1 1,958.5 4,957.1 2,979.9 26.4 3,503.6 0.0 10,840.5 14,260.2 14,997.7 6,842.7 180.3 June
17.0 17.1 1,965.3 5,043.1 3,024.8 1.1 3,550.3 0.0 10,960.7 14,390.6 15,167.9 6,888.8 180.9 July
12.0 16.3 1,960.3 5,189.9 3,024.5 – 15.9 3,499.0 0.0 11,013.2 14,436.0 15,208.7 6,876.0 182.3 Aug.
15.9 17.7 1,979.7 5,212.8 2,997.6 – 16.5 3,480.9 0.0 11,076.3 14,484.8 15,233.7 6,864.2 187.4 Sep.
23.0 17.6 1,999.5 5,409.6 2,999.7 – 49.4 3,483.7 0.0 11,143.4 14,565.2 15,366.5 6,874.5 188.2 Oct.
19.3 17.8 2,009.6 5,499.4 3,037.4 1.1 3,681.3 0.0 11,226.8 14,637.9 15,451.7 6,912.5 189.7 Nov.
12.3 18.0 1,989.3 5,370.5 3,026.8 12.7 3,371.8 0.0 11,346.9 14,759.5 15,543.1 6,899.2 195.0 Dec.
22.0 18.5 2,008.7 5,541.7 3,001.7 22.9 3,716.5 0.0 11,310.7 14,760.1 15,545.1 6,907.4 196.0 2022 Jan.
33.4 5.7 2,005.7 5,629.5 2,994.0 16.8 3,757.2 0.0 11,386.8 14,829.4 15,584.4 6,883.9 195.0 Feb.
30.7 6.2 1,989.8 5,610.2 3,003.0 38.0 3,991.1 0.0 11,476.3 14,939.5 15,683.4 6,879.4 195.1 Mar.
39.0 16.2 2,018.6 5,747.7 2,979.2 – 2.7 4,402.9 0.0 11,556.5 15,025.5 15,810.2 6,876.8 197.2 Apr.
34.0 15.6 1,988.4 5,795.3 2,915.9 15.6 4,332.0 0.0 11,618.3 15,081.4 15,855.4 6,782.0 199.0 May
47.8 14.4 2,007.0 5,719.3 2,905.2 25.9 4,656.7 0.0 11,679.1 15,172.2 15,942.0 6,786.6 199.4 June
15.1 16.4 2,059.5 5,862.8 2,970.9 7.7 4,320.5 0.0 11,761.8 15,310.5 16,065.4 6,894.6 203.9 July
16.7 19.0 2,077.8 5,914.8 2,890.5 33.9 4,808.0 0.0 11,775.4 15,377.1 16,136.7 6,812.0 196.7 Aug.
34.9 19.5 2,099.1 5,898.7 2,845.0 16.1 5,114.8 0.0 11,681.0 15,419.3 16,179.6 6,773.5 195.9 Sep.
3.8 24.0 2,102.8 6,038.5 2,819.3 38.9 4,996.2 0.0 11,519.5 15,336.1 16,114.0 6,736.2 196.0 Oct.
23.7 22.8 2,112.5 5,881.3 2,857.3 66.8 4,700.0 0.0 11,474.5 15,337.0 16,165.7 6,782.4 199.7 Nov.
31.7 23.2 2,111.2 5,553.4 2,817.9 57.5 4,830.2 0.0 11,396.7 15,330.3 16,146.7 6,749.5 192.2 Dec.
17.8 27.9 2,159.4 5,636.4 2,861.7 85.2 4,688.3 0.0 11,214.6 15,230.8 16,062.6 6,840.5 191.1 2023 Jan.
46.9 30.4 2,181.8 5,670.9 2,810.9 81.4 4,986.3 0.0 11,082.0 15,172.8 16,028.2 6,813.2 191.8 Feb.
54.0 30.4 2,172.6 5,657.4 2,893.1 89.6 4,705.3 0.0 10,971.3 15,173.5 16,033.0 6,897.0 182.0 Mar.
50.2 32.9 2,170.0 5,623.3 2,885.4 99.2 4,724.9 0.0 10,914.3 15,151.9 16,036.8 6,896.2 182.4 Apr.
57.0 32.8 2,210.1 5,721.0 2,908.2 131.8 4,812.1 0.0 10,827.9 15,118.5 16,012.1 6,963.5 178.1 May
51.9 34.5 2,225.8 5,582.4 2,879.2 88.5 4,913.8 0.0 10,744.9 15,133.6 16,012.0 6,953.0 177.2 June
German contribution (€ billion)
9.6 6.7 501.7 1,051.5 768.2 –1,126.5 1,696.6 482.8 2,764.3 3,535.8 3,563.5 1,869.6 0.0 2021 May
9.8 6.9 498.8 1,088.8 775.4 –1,149.4 1,724.5 485.9 2,772.3 3,535.7 3,563.7 1,870.2 0.0 June
9.8 7.0 501.5 1,031.5 795.8 –1,075.6 1,767.0 490.0 2,793.9 3,552.6 3,581.2 1,891.2 0.0 July
12.7 6.5 503.2 1,068.1 793.5 –1,088.4 1,754.6 492.9 2,814.8 3,571.7 3,602.8 1,889.9 0.0 Aug.
13.1 7.0 510.1 1,165.5 781.6 –1,156.2 1,723.6 497.5 2,820.3 3,575.1 3,608.5 1,881.9 0.0 Sep.
13.3 7.2 527.5 1,165.8 783.9 –1,110.5 1,706.6 500.8 2,824.1 3,591.6 3,625.0 1,902.8 0.0 Oct.
14.5 7.4 534.6 1,227.7 803.0 –1,154.8 1,744.2 504.5 2,866.1 3,621.4 3,651.2 1,928.3 0.0 Nov.
16.1 7.5 524.0 1,305.6 796.1 –1,297.0 1,690.3 509.8 2,853.4 3,619.4 3,651.0 1,919.7 0.0 Dec.
13.6 7.7 541.5 1,271.1 778.4 –1,169.6 1,919.3 511.1 2,876.4 3,652.3 3,680.4 1,917.7 0.0 2022 Jan.
14.7 7.5 550.4 1,275.8 774.8 –1,172.9 1,969.0 514.2 2,900.0 3,677.2 3,707.4 1,921.4 0.0 Feb.
14.8 7.3 559.5 1,299.3 781.2 –1,190.8 2,076.2 520.0 2,892.9 3,677.0 3,707.8 1,934.7 0.0 Mar.
14.6 7.1 574.8 1,284.0 769.2 –1,168.1 2,325.6 523.3 2,892.4 3,686.8 3,715.1 1,935.2 0.0 Apr.
14.9 7.3 574.6 1,307.0 748.6 –1,199.2 2,289.8 526.8 2,914.0 3,699.5 3,728.9 1,911.8 0.0 May
18.7 6.6 578.9 1,317.0 743.1 –1,255.4 2,479.8 530.5 2,934.8 3,726.6 3,759.7 1,907.5 0.0 June
21.2 6.8 585.8 1,287.5 779.7 –1,189.6 2,276.7 525.2 2,941.9 3,757.1 3,797.3 1,949.2 0.0 July
21.8 7.6 596.2 1,349.3 739.6 –1,271.6 2,540.1 513.5 2,999.5 3,826.5 3,866.3 1,919.1 0.0 Aug.
27.5 8.1 604.3 1,385.2 711.9 –1,287.1 2,858.3 516.8 2,944.0 3,811.2 3,854.6 1,899.2 0.0 Sep.
19.1 9.7 605.0 1,355.1 693.8 –1,215.2 2,804.7 516.8 2,912.1 3,812.3 3,848.8 1,880.8 0.0 Oct.
20.8 11.2 602.2 1,310.2 714.6 –1,191.2 2,596.7 516.8 2,920.8 3,819.7 3,862.5 1,900.3 0.0 Nov.
20.2 11.7 599.3 1,265.7 690.1 –1,230.4 2,726.5 518.9 2,881.6 3,795.1 3,835.9 1,869.2 0.0 Dec.
24.0 13.1 602.4 1,226.5 689.1 –1,117.5 2,625.9 521.2 2,849.3 3,789.5 3,835.2 1,874.9 0.0 2023 Jan.
29.3 15.8 606.4 1,171.8 668.4 –1,073.2 2,787.2 522.2 2,816.8 3,782.0 3,836.8 1,860.1 0.0 Feb.
36.2 17.5 604.3 1,188.0 700.6 –1,129.7 2,641.2 524.5 2,769.6 3,756.4 3,819.8 1,897.7 0.0 Mar.
37.0 18.5 599.4 1,107.1 704.2 –1,028.5 2,637.8 526.4 2,757.6 3,759.4 3,825.5 1,899.8 0.0 Apr.
41.3 19.6 609.9 1,122.4 715.6 –1,038.1 2,660.7 529.0 2,752.4 3,762.9 3,834.1 1,927.5 0.0 May
44.7 19.6 607.9 1,099.8 709.7 –1,026.6 2,723.8 530.7 2,722.5 3,759.5 3,833.8 1,921.4 0.0 June
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2021 July 821.7 0.1 2,196.0 0.0 4,244.5 736.6 0.0 1,485.8 652.3 734.5 3,653.1 5,875.5
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 826.7 0.2 2,213.2 0.0 4,378.9 766.6 0.0 1,499.9 635.7 790.4 3,726.2 5,992.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 835.1 0.2 2,209.9 0.0 4,512.3 738.5 0.0 1,507.4 671.3 833.7 3,806.5 6,052.4
Dec. 839.2 0.2 2,208.8 0.0 4,655.6 745.0 0.0 1,521.4 628.3 965.7 3,843.3 6,109.7
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 877.7 0.3 2,201.5 0.0 4,750.2 734.2 0.0 1,540.6 582.0 1,160.5 3,812.3 6,087.1
Mar. 887.2 0.3 2,201.3 0.0 4,842.0 746.0 0.0 1,550.6 642.6 1,091.1 3,900.8 6,197.3
Apr. 913.2 0.4 2,199.8 0.0 4,889.2 714.9 0.0 1,575.9 667.8 1,116.7 3,927.3 6,218.1
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 934.2 0.5 2,198.8 0.0 4,939.1 681.3 0.0 1,591.5 624.1 1,129.1 4,046.1 6,319.0
July 943.7 1.0 2,149.4 0.0 4,958.8 678.7 0.0 1,604.0 667.6 1,158.0 3,943.3 6,226.0
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 950.1 1.7 2,124.9 0.0 4,954.8 707.0 0.0 1,585.3 553.9 1,249.2 3,936.1 6,228.5
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 955.8 4.0 2,118.8 0.0 4,948.3 4,490.0 0.0 1,563.7 536.7 1,104.4 332.0 6,385.7
Dec. 960.4 1.9 1,947.1 0.0 4,946.1 4,521.5 0.0 1,560.8 492.5 1,066.9 213.8 6,296.2
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 940.4 1.2 1,303.3 0.1 4,942.1 4,051.6 0.0 1,565.6 372.8 1,001.6 195.6 5,812.7
Mar. 916.8 0.9 1,233.3 0.0 4,939.0 4,103.0 0.0 1,553.9 380.2 861.8 191.1 5,848.0
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 945.0 1.4 1,117.7 0.1 4,905.6 3,996.1 0.0 1,559.8 360.6 870.5 182.7 5,738.6
June 948.2 1.6 1,100.5 0.1 4,884.1 4,126.4 0.0 1,563.7 256.4 806.6 181.6 5,871.7
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deutsche Bundesbank
2021 July 197.4 0.0 434.3 0.0 918.5 204.2 0.0 362.0 206.8 – 270.8 1,046.2 1,612.4
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 199.0 0.1 436.7 0.0 950.8 210.7 0.0 365.0 204.3 – 240.8 1,045.3 1,621.0
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 200.3 0.1 439.1 0.0 978.5 204.4 0.0 367.4 217.7 – 235.2 1,061.6 1,633.3
Dec. 201.3 0.0 440.3 0.0 1,015.8 206.4 0.0 370.9 220.4 – 219.4 1,077.1 1,654.4
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 212.4 0.3 421.7 0.0 1,034.0 204.5 0.0 374.6 205.6 – 165.1 1,048.8 1,627.9
Mar. 215.6 0.1 421.7 0.0 1,057.9 211.8 0.0 378.1 191.1 – 193.7 1,108.0 1,698.0
Apr. 223.9 0.1 420.8 0.0 1,068.7 197.7 0.0 384.9 196.7 – 189.1 1,123.3 1,705.9
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 230.4 0.1 420.2 0.0 1,087.4 189.9 0.0 388.0 196.9 – 183.1 1,147.4 1,725.3
July 231.7 0.3 409.1 0.0 1,084.3 185.8 0.0 390.3 214.9 – 175.4 1,109.7 1,685.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 232.1 0.3 403.6 0.0 1,076.8 228.5 0.0 379.5 157.9 – 161.8 1,108.8 1,716.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 231.7 0.8 400.5 0.0 1,071.5 1,304.0 0.0 379.0 127.2 – 231.4 125.9 1,808.8
Dec. 232.4 0.5 352.5 0.0 1,079.2 1,346.6 0.0 378.8 121.0 – 242.4 60.5 1,785.9
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 229.8 0.4 231.9 0.1 1,076.8 1,234.6 0.0 377.2 77.8 – 205.4 54.8 1,666.7
Mar. 228.9 0.4 212.8 0.0 1,077.0 1,263.7 0.0 374.5 69.2 – 242.5 54.2 1,692.4
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 239.2 0.7 200.2 0.1 1,066.1 1,228.0 0.0 375.7 73.4 – 221.1 50.1 1,653.9
June 241.7 0.7 198.9 0.1 1,056.8 1,256.3 0.0 377.2 54.7 – 241.8 52.0 1,685.4
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
+11.9 – 0.1 +89.0 ± 0.0 +151.8 +30.1 ± 0.0 +20.0 +65.6 +75.4 +61.4 +111.6 2021 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 5.0 + 0.1 +17.2 ± 0.0 +134.4 +30.0 ± 0.0 +14.1 –16.6 +55.9 +73.1 +117.3 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 8.4 ± 0.0 – 3.3 ± 0.0 +133.4 –28.1 ± 0.0 + 7.5 +35.6 +43.3 +80.3 +59.6 Nov.
+ 4.1 ± 0.0 – 1.1 ± 0.0 +143.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 +14.0 –43.0 +132.0 +36.8 +57.3 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+38.5 + 0.1 – 7.3 ± 0.0 +94.6 –10.8 ± 0.0 +19.2 –46.3 +194.8 –31.0 –22.6 Feb.
+ 9.5 ± 0.0 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +91.8 +11.8 ± 0.0 +10.0 +60.6 –69.4 +88.5 +110.2 Mar.
+26.0 + 0.1 – 1.5 ± 0.0 +47.2 –31.1 ± 0.0 +25.3 +25.2 +25.6 +26.5 +20.8 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+21.0 + 0.1 – 1.0 ± 0.0 +49.9 –33.6 ± 0.0 +15.6 –43.7 +12.4 +118.8 +100.9 June
+ 9.5 + 0.5 –49.4 ± 0.0 +19.7 – 2.6 ± 0.0 +12.5 +43.5 +28.9 –102.8 –93.0 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 6.4 + 0.7 –24.5 ± 0.0 – 4.0 +28.3 ± 0.0 –18.7 –113.7 +91.2 – 7.2 + 2.5 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 5.7 + 2.3 – 6.1 ± 0.0 – 6.5 +3,783.0 ± 0.0 –21.6 –17.2 –144.8 –3,604.1 +157.2 Nov.
+ 4.6 – 2.1 –171.7 ± 0.0 – 2.2 +31.5 ± 0.0 – 2.9 –44.2 –37.5 –118.2 –89.5 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
–20.0 – 0.7 –643.8 + 0.1 – 4.0 –469.9 ± 0.0 + 4.8 –119.7 –65.3 –18.2 –483.5 Feb.
–23.6 – 0.3 –70.0 – 0.1 – 3.1 +51.4 ± 0.0 –11.7 +7.4 –139.8 – 4.5 +35.3 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+28.2 + 0.5 –115.6 + 0.1 –33.4 –106.9 ± 0.0 + 5.9 –19.6 + 8.7 – 8.4 –109.4 May
+ 3.2 + 0.2 –17.2 ± 0.0 –21.5 +130.3 ± 0.0 + 3.9 –104.2 –63.9 – 1.1 +133.1 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 3.1 – 0.0 +13.8 – 0.0 +34.2 – 4.3 ± 0.0 + 5.2 +19.4 +31.1 – 0.5 + 0.4 2021 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 1.6 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.0 +32.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 + 3.0 –2.5 +29.9 – 0.9 + 8.6 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.4 – 0.0 +27.8 – 6.4 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +13.4 + 5.7 +16.3 +12.3 Nov.
+ 1.0 – 0.1 + 1.2 – 0.0 +37.3 + 2.1 ± 0.0 + 3.5 +2.7 +15.7 +15.6 +21.1 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+11.1 + 0.2 –18.6 + 0.0 +18.2 – 2.0 ± 0.0 + 3.7 –14.7 +54.3 –28.3 –26.6 Feb.
+ 3.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 +23.9 + 7.4 ± 0.0 + 3.5 –14.5 –28.6 +59.2 +70.1 Mar.
+ 8.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.0 +10.8 –14.2 ± 0.0 + 6.8 +5.6 + 4.6 +15.2 + 7.9 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+ 6.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 – 0.0 +18.7 – 7.7 ± 0.0 + 3.0 +0.2 + 6.0 +24.1 +19.4 June
+ 1.3 + 0.2 –11.1 – 0.0 – 3.1 – 4.1 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +18.0 + 7.7 –37.7 –39.5 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 0.4 + 0.0 – 5.5 – 0.0 – 7.5 +42.7 ± 0.0 –10.8 –57.1 +13.5 – 0.9 +31.0 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
– 0.5 + 0.5 – 3.1 + 0.0 – 5.3 +1,075.5 ± 0.0 – 0.6 –30.7 –69.6 –982.9 +92.0 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.4 –48.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 +42.7 ± 0.0 – 0.1 –6.2 –11.0 –65.4 –22.9 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
– 2.5 – 0.1 –120.6 + 0.1 – 2.4 –112.0 ± 0.0 – 1.6 –43.2 +37.0 – 5.6 –119.3 Feb.
– 1.0 + 0.0 –19.1 – 0.0 + 0.2 +29.1 ± 0.0 – 2.7 –8.6 –37.1 – 0.7 +25.7 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+10.3 + 0.2 –12.7 + 0.0 –11.0 –35.7 ± 0.0 + 1.2 +4.1 +21.4 – 4.1 –38.5 May
+ 2.6 + 0.1 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 9.3 +28.3 ± 0.0 + 1.4 –18.7 –20.7 + 1.9 +31.5 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2023 Jan. 13 7,972.1 593.0 525.6 229.7 295.9 20.9 12.5 12.5 –
20 7,959.2 593.0 523.3 230.0 293.3 19.4 12.4 12.4 –
27 7,894.0 593.0 519.5 229.9 289.6 18.5 12.1 12.1 –
Feb. 3 7,875.4 593.0 511.1 230.0 281.1 16.9 12.0 12.0 –
10 7,872.2 593.0 503.7 230.2 273.5 17.1 12.3 12.3 –
17 7,873.6 593.0 505.3 230.2 275.0 16.6 12.3 12.3 –
24 7,839.4 593.0 507.8 230.5 277.3 15.6 12.4 12.4 –
Mar. 3 7,830.8 593.0 507.6 230.5 277.1 15.1 12.1 12.1 –
10 7,829.4 593.0 506.6 230.5 276.1 15.4 12.5 12.5 –
17 7,831.9 593.0 507.7 230.5 277.2 14.8 13.0 13.0 –
24 7,835.9 593.0 508.7 230.5 278.2 14.0 14.0 14.0 –
31 7,729.6 632.9 501.7 229.1 272.6 15.2 13.6 13.6 –
Apr. 7 7,729.3 632.9 501.5 229.1 272.4 14.4 12.7 12.7 –
14 7,730.9 632.9 501.8 229.1 272.7 13.9 12.6 12.6 –
21 7,714.2 632.9 498.8 229.1 269.6 15.7 12.6 12.6 –
28 7,719.8 632.9 499.0 229.4 269.6 14.2 12.9 12.9 –
May 5 7,716.9 632.9 500.7 230.3 270.5 13.2 12.8 12.8 –
12 7,728.5 632.9 499.0 230.4 268.7 14.5 12.9 12.9 –
19 7,730.1 632.9 500.6 230.4 270.2 13.7 12.9 12.9 –
26 7,713.7 632.8 500.2 230.4 269.9 13.9 13.8 13.8 –
June 2 7,712.7 632.8 500.8 230.5 270.3 13.9 13.4 13.4 –
9 7,714.4 632.8 500.5 231.0 269.6 14.1 13.4 13.4 –
16 7,709.7 632.8 502.4 231.0 271.4 13.1 13.7 13.7 –
23 7,710.6 632.8 500.3 231.1 269.2 14.8 13.8 13.8 –
30 7,219.7 609.3 497.5 229.1 268.5 13.3 15.8 15.8 –
July 7 7,206.9 609.3 499.1 229.1 270.0 12.1 13.9 13.9 –
14 7,205.5 609.3 497.7 229.0 268.6 13.7 14.1 14.1 –
21 7,186.9 609.3 496.6 228.9 267.6 14.3 14.2 14.2 –
28 7,189.3 609.3 497.8 229.0 268.8 12.9 14.2 14.2 –
Aug. 4 7,164.6 609.3 497.0 229.1 267.9 14.0 14.1 14.1 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2023 Jan. 13 2,817.4 184.0 92.2 58.1 34.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
20 2,787.2 184.0 92.4 58.1 34.4 0.0 – – –
27 2,765.8 184.0 92.2 58.0 34.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
Feb. 3 2,791.4 184.0 92.0 58.1 34.0 0.0 – – –
10 2,772.5 184.0 92.1 58.1 34.0 0.0 – – –
17 2,760.1 184.0 91.8 58.1 33.7 0.0 – – –
24 2,709.2 184.0 92.9 58.1 34.9 0.0 – – –
Mar. 3 2,736.1 184.0 92.3 58.1 34.2 0.0 – – –
10 2,725.7 184.0 92.0 58.1 33.9 0.0 – – –
17 2,738.8 184.0 92.3 58.1 34.3 0.0 – – –
24 2,713.8 184.0 92.5 58.1 34.4 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
31 2,775.1 196.4 91.7 57.4 34.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
Apr. 7 2,723.0 196.4 91.6 57.4 34.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 –
14 2,718.4 196.4 91.6 57.4 34.2 0.0 – – –
21 2,673.2 196.4 91.8 57.4 34.3 0.0 – – –
28 2,675.9 196.4 91.8 57.4 34.4 0.0 – – –
May 5 2,683.5 196.4 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 – – –
12 2,699.7 196.4 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
19 2,675.2 196.4 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
26 2,689.2 196.3 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
June 2 2,675.0 196.3 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 – – –
9 2,664.6 196.3 92.3 58.2 34.1 0.0 – – –
16 2,671.3 196.3 92.3 58.2 34.1 0.0 – – –
23 2,646.6 196.3 92.4 58.2 34.2 0.0 – – –
30 2,590.6 189.0 91.8 57.9 33.9 0.0 1.9 1.9 –
July 7 2,569.4 189.0 91.8 57.9 33.8 0.0 – – –
14 2,551.9 189.0 91.7 57.9 33.9 0.0 – – –
21 2,550.2 189.0 91.7 57.9 33.8 0.0 – – –
28 2,547.0 189.0 91.7 57.9 33.8 0.0 – – –
Aug. 4 2,562.8 189.0 91.9 58.0 33.9 0.0 – – –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
1,322.4 1.0 1,321.4 – – – – 24.8 5,129.3 4,949.7 179.6 21.6 322.0 2023 Jan. 13
1,322.3 0.8 1,321.4 – – – – 28.8 5,116.8 4,938.4 178.5 21.6 321.6 20
1,259.2 1.2 1,258.0 – – 0.0 – 28.6 5,123.4 4,945.1 178.3 21.6 318.1 27
1,258.8 0.8 1,258.0 – – 0.0 – 25.8 5,116.6 4,940.6 176.0 21.5 319.6 Feb. 3
1,259.0 1.0 1,258.0 – – 0.1 – 27.6 5,121.5 4,945.2 176.3 21.5 316.5 10
1,258.8 0.8 1,258.0 – – 0.0 – 35.4 5,119.0 4,942.6 176.5 21.5 311.6 17
1,222.2 1.2 1,220.9 – – 0.0 – 36.2 5,121.0 4,942.9 178.2 21.5 309.7 24
1,221.8 0.8 1,220.9 – – 0.0 – 29.5 5,116.0 4,937.6 178.3 21.5 314.1 Mar. 3
1,221.8 0.9 1,220.9 – – – – 25.8 5,115.3 4,936.4 178.9 21.5 317.4 10
1,221.9 1.0 1,220.9 – – 0.0 – 40.2 5,108.7 4,930.1 178.5 21.5 311.1 17
1,222.0 1.0 1,220.9 – – 0.1 – 45.3 5,106.3 4,928.2 178.2 21.5 311.1 24
1,102.4 1.7 1,100.5 – – 0.2 – 41.1 5,087.5 4,909.7 177.9 21.5 313.8 31
1,101.7 1.2 1,100.5 – – 0.0 – 36.9 5,093.2 4,914.8 178.4 21.5 314.5 Apr. 7
1,102.1 1.6 1,100.5 – – – – 35.7 5,083.8 4,905.1 178.7 21.5 326.6 14
1,102.0 1.5 1,100.5 – – 0.0 – 37.1 5,076.0 4,895.0 181.0 21.5 317.6 21
1,102.6 1.9 1,100.4 – – 0.2 – 33.1 5,078.5 4,895.7 182.8 21.5 325.2 28
1,101.6 1.2 1,100.4 – – 0.0 – 37.1 5,072.9 4,892.5 180.4 21.5 324.3 May 5
1,101.8 1.3 1,100.4 – – – – 37.2 5,081.4 4,900.1 181.2 21.5 327.5 12
1,101.9 1.4 1,100.4 – – – – 38.2 5,076.8 4,895.2 181.6 21.5 331.7 19
1,102.6 2.0 1,100.4 – – 0.1 – 37.7 5,064.0 4,879.3 184.7 21.5 327.3 26
1,103.2 2.5 1,100.7 – – – – 37.7 5,067.3 4,881.1 186.2 21.5 322.2 June 2
1,102.1 1.3 1,100.7 – – 0.1 – 36.4 5,066.9 4,880.2 186.7 21.5 326.8 9
1,101.9 1.2 1,100.7 – – 0.1 – 42.1 5,054.0 4,867.8 186.2 21.5 328.3 16
1,102.0 1.2 1,100.7 – – 0.1 – 43.1 5,052.9 4,866.2 186.7 21.5 329.4 23
616.7 18.6 598.0 – – 0.2 – 42.6 5,045.1 4,858.9 186.2 21.0 358.4 30
610.5 12.5 598.0 – – 0.0 – 41.9 5,047.8 4,860.1 187.7 21.0 351.2 July 7
609.9 11.8 598.0 – – 0.1 – 33.6 5,050.5 4,860.6 189.9 21.0 355.8 14
608.1 10.0 598.0 – – 0.1 – 38.2 5,031.5 4,841.8 189.8 21.0 353.7 21
611.7 11.0 600.4 – – 0.2 – 33.9 5,027.2 4,837.3 189.8 21.0 361.4 28
607.8 7.4 600.4 – – 0.0 – 35.6 5,011.7 4,822.4 189.4 21.0 354.1 Aug. 4
Deutsche Bundesbank
236.0 0.2 235.9 – – 0.0 – 3.7 1,077.5 1,077.5 – 4.4 1,219.4 2023 Jan. 13
236.0 0.2 235.9 – – 0.0 – 4.4 1,077.1 1,077.1 – 4.4 1,188.8 20
222.6 0.5 222.1 – – 0.0 – 5.2 1,080.2 1,080.2 – 4.4 1,177.1 27
222.3 0.2 222.1 – – 0.0 – 4.9 1,081.5 1,081.5 – 4.4 1,202.1 Feb. 3
222.5 0.4 222.1 – – 0.1 – 7.7 1,084.1 1,084.1 – 4.4 1,177.6 10
222.4 0.3 222.1 – – 0.0 – 7.8 1,078.1 1,078.1 – 4.4 1,171.5 17
208.9 0.7 208.2 – – 0.0 – 7.8 1,075.4 1,075.4 – 4.4 1,135.7 24
208.6 0.4 208.2 – – 0.0 – 9.2 1,077.8 1,077.8 – 4.4 1,159.8 Mar. 3
208.6 0.4 208.2 – – 0.0 – 7.3 1,072.3 1,072.3 – 4.4 1,157.0 10
208.6 0.4 208.2 – – 0.0 – 7.4 1,072.3 1,072.3 – 4.4 1,169.7 17
208.7 0.6 208.2 – – – – 8.5 1,071.0 1,071.0 – 4.4 1,144.2 24
199.6 0.8 198.8 – – 0.1 – 7.1 1,072.4 1,072.4 – 4.4 1,203.2 31
199.2 0.4 198.8 – – 0.0 – 8.3 1,074.3 1,074.3 – 4.4 1,148.8 Apr. 7
199.2 0.5 198.8 – – 0.0 – 8.4 1,066.2 1,066.2 – 4.4 1,152.0 14
199.3 0.5 198.8 – – 0.0 – 7.8 1,057.6 1,057.6 – 4.4 1,115.9 21
200.2 1.1 198.9 – – 0.2 – 9.0 1,059.2 1,059.2 – 4.4 1,114.8 28
199.7 0.8 198.9 – – 0.0 – 8.2 1,061.6 1,061.6 – 4.4 1,121.4 May 5
199.7 0.8 198.9 – – – – 5.7 1,064.2 1,064.2 – 4.4 1,137.4 12
199.6 0.7 198.9 – – – – 8.4 1,055.8 1,055.8 – 4.4 1,118.6 19
199.7 0.8 198.9 – – 0.1 – 8.8 1,057.1 1,057.1 – 4.4 1,130.9 26
199.9 1.0 198.9 – – – – 7.6 1,058.4 1,058.4 – 4.4 1,116.5 June 2
199.5 0.5 198.9 – – 0.1 – 9.1 1,057.0 1,057.0 – 4.4 1,105.9 9
199.5 0.5 198.9 – – 0.1 – 11.3 1,050.0 1,050.0 – 4.4 1,117.5 16
199.5 0.5 198.9 – – 0.1 – 10.3 1,050.5 1,050.5 – 4.4 1,093.3 23
134.0 2.8 131.1 – – 0.2 – 10.3 1,048.1 1,048.1 – 4.4 1,111.0 30
132.6 1.5 131.1 – – 0.0 – 11.6 1,048.8 1,048.8 – 4.4 1,091.2 July 7
132.5 1.3 131.1 – – 0.1 – 9.8 1,048.9 1,048.9 – 4.4 1,075.6 14
132.5 1.3 131.1 – – 0.1 – 11.4 1,047.8 1,047.8 – 4.4 1,073.4 21
133.2 1.7 131.2 – – 0.2 – 12.3 1,048.6 1,048.6 – 4.4 1,067.8 28
132.1 0.9 131.2 – – 0.0 – 11.5 1,049.2 1,049.2 – 4.4 1,084.6 Aug. 4

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2023 Jan. 13 7,972.1 1,566.2 4,300.0 172.5 4,126.2 – – 1.2 57.5 – 472.5 369.3 103.2
20 7,959.2 1,561.5 4,337.7 175.1 4,161.3 – – 1.3 45.1 – 471.7 367.7 104.0
27 7,894.0 1,559.0 4,268.9 176.0 4,091.7 – – 1.3 39.0 – 497.7 398.1 99.6
Feb. 3 7,875.4 1,557.6 4,282.8 202.2 4,079.3 – – 1.3 39.2 – 454.3 353.4 100.8
10 7,872.2 1,555.7 4,320.4 180.6 4,138.6 – – 1.3 34.4 – 452.5 356.1 96.4
17 7,873.6 1,554.2 4,333.7 165.0 4,167.4 – – 1.3 32.6 – 466.6 372.5 94.1
24 7,839.4 1,553.8 4,285.3 172.0 4,112.0 – – 1.3 29.5 – 496.1 402.5 93.6
Mar. 3 7,830.8 1,554.0 4,310.5 170.7 4,138.5 – – 1.3 37.1 – 455.8 361.6 94.2
10 7,829.4 1,553.4 4,336.5 176.9 4,158.3 – – 1.3 29.7 – 444.8 354.8 90.0
17 7,831.9 1,554.5 4,175.9 234.9 3,939.8 – – 1.3 33.6 – 570.5 425.4 145.1
24 7,835.9 1,553.3 4,223.7 174.9 4,047.5 – – 1.3 37.0 – 510.0 418.0 92.1
31 7,729.6 1,556.6 4,034.3 197.4 3,836.6 – – 0.4 61.1 – 497.4 400.9 96.5
Apr. 7 7,729.3 1,563.7 4,167.8 158.7 4,008.7 – – 0.4 36.0 – 442.4 350.8 91.6
14 7,730.9 1,561.1 4,172.9 155.7 4,016.8 – – 0.4 35.4 – 446.7 356.9 89.8
21 7,714.2 1,558.8 4,181.6 164.9 4,016.3 – – 0.4 31.9 – 442.2 354.7 87.5
28 7,719.8 1,563.6 4,163.5 181.2 3,981.9 – – 0.4 35.3 – 471.3 381.1 90.2
May 5 7,716.9 1,563.6 4,271.2 204.8 4,066.1 – – 0.3 37.0 – 362.4 275.9 86.5
12 7,728.5 1,562.2 4,302.7 171.2 4,131.2 – – 0.3 39.5 – 352.4 265.1 87.3
19 7,730.1 1,562.2 4,280.8 156.3 4,124.2 – – 0.3 40.8 – 375.4 289.9 85.4
26 7,713.7 1,563.6 4,290.6 155.7 4,134.6 – – 0.3 39.5 – 349.4 261.5 87.9
June 2 7,712.7 1,565.5 4,321.5 157.5 4,163.7 – – 0.3 40.7 – 327.4 233.4 94.1
9 7,714.4 1,565.5 4,343.6 162.5 4,180.7 – – 0.3 37.4 – 318.3 228.0 90.3
16 7,709.7 1,564.4 4,309.6 193.6 4,115.6 – – 0.3 37.2 – 337.6 239.8 97.8
23 7,710.6 1,563.8 4,289.7 185.2 4,104.4 – – 0.1 41.0 – 351.1 255.9 95.2
30 7,219.7 1,566.1 3,751.3 174.5 3,576.8 – – 0.0 51.9 – 353.0 258.1 94.9
July 7 7,206.9 1,568.2 3,836.7 166.9 3,669.8 – – 0.0 34.3 – 318.4 230.9 87.6
14 7,205.5 1,568.8 3,827.8 156.4 3,671.4 – – 0.0 32.3 – 338.9 250.6 88.2
21 7,186.9 1,567.7 3,791.3 157.3 3,634.0 – – 0.0 33.9 – 346.8 260.8 86.0
28 7,189.3 1,569.0 3,770.2 185.1 3,585.1 – – 0.0 32.8 – 370.5 281.6 88.9
Aug. 4 7,164.6 1,569.4 3,818.4 168.0 3,650.3 – – 0.0 30.9 – 305.9 219.0 86.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
2023 Jan. 13 2,817.4 375.9 1,292.0 45.3 1,245.4 – – 1.2 21.0 – 114.3 81.8 32.5
20 2,787.2 374.7 1,312.9 45.4 1,266.3 – – 1.2 13.9 – 85.0 53.8 31.3
27 2,765.8 374.3 1,289.8 44.4 1,244.2 – – 1.2 12.7 – 101.0 72.4 28.6
Feb. 3 2,791.4 374.9 1,322.2 64.9 1,256.0 – – 1.3 13.6 – 91.1 61.0 30.2
10 2,772.5 375.0 1,340.8 52.9 1,286.6 – – 1.3 9.2 – 79.0 52.2 26.8
17 2,760.1 374.8 1,325.5 44.6 1,279.6 – – 1.3 9.5 – 98.9 72.2 26.6
24 2,709.2 374.7 1,301.2 45.3 1,254.6 – – 1.3 8.6 – 92.0 66.5 25.5
Mar. 3 2,736.1 374.2 1,318.6 45.9 1,271.5 – – 1.3 13.2 – 94.8 70.6 24.2
10 2,725.7 374.4 1,333.4 50.2 1,281.9 – – 1.3 8.2 – 78.7 55.5 23.2
17 2,738.8 374.9 1,275.0 62.5 1,211.3 – – 1.2 10.5 – 127.7 103.7 24.0
24 2,713.8 374.7 1,276.1 48.7 1,226.2 – – 1.2 9.1 – 104.1 80.2 24.0
31 2,775.1 374.3 1,256.6 53.3 1,203.0 – – 0.3 18.4 – 125.6 100.9 24.7
Apr. 7 2,723.0 377.3 1,283.3 38.8 1,244.1 – – 0.3 10.7 – 102.0 77.7 24.3
14 2,718.4 376.1 1,289.6 37.7 1,251.5 – – 0.3 12.3 – 96.4 73.8 22.7
21 2,673.2 375.4 1,265.2 42.6 1,222.3 – – 0.3 10.4 – 80.4 60.3 20.1
28 2,675.9 376.0 1,262.9 50.9 1,211.7 – – 0.3 12.4 – 91.7 68.5 23.2
May 5 2,683.5 375.9 1,298.9 66.2 1,232.5 – – 0.3 13.0 – 70.5 50.6 19.9
12 2,699.7 376.3 1,317.2 46.8 1,270.1 – – 0.3 11.8 – 74.1 53.8 20.3
19 2,675.2 377.2 1,300.0 39.7 1,260.0 – – 0.3 11.7 – 78.3 58.6 19.7
26 2,689.2 378.4 1,302.1 38.7 1,263.1 – – 0.3 11.3 – 91.3 71.1 20.2
June 2 2,675.0 376.6 1,314.2 38.7 1,275.3 – – 0.3 11.7 – 69.5 48.2 21.2
9 2,664.6 377.3 1,306.8 45.3 1,261.2 – – 0.3 11.5 – 71.6 49.8 21.8
16 2,671.3 377.7 1,312.0 58.1 1,253.6 – – 0.3 9.1 – 72.2 47.7 24.6
23 2,646.6 377.3 1,285.3 52.8 1,232.4 – – 0.0 10.6 – 73.5 51.0 22.5
30 2,590.6 376.6 1,202.5 49.1 1,153.3 – – 0.0 14.4 – 71.8 48.1 23.7
July 7 2,569.4 377.7 1,228.2 42.2 1,185.9 – – 0.0 10.6 – 64.6 42.1 22.5
14 2,551.9 378.0 1,201.0 41.8 1,159.2 – – 0.0 7.7 – 78.2 57.6 20.6
21 2,550.2 377.5 1,209.1 42.2 1,166.9 – – 0.0 9.1 – 65.8 45.0 20.8
28 2,547.0 378.6 1,193.6 59.1 1,134.4 – – 0.0 8.4 – 74.7 54.0 20.7
Aug. 4 2,562.8 378.1 1,227.7 51.2 1,176.5 – – 0.0 6.8 – 57.1 37.9 19.2
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
378.3 11.0 4.8 4.8 – 182.4 295.0 – 588.7 115.8 2023 Jan. 13
342.6 11.4 4.6 4.6 – 182.4 297.8 – 588.7 115.8 20
328.3 11.3 5.0 5.0 – 182.4 297.4 – 588.7 116.4 27
339.0 11.0 4.8 4.8 – 182.4 298.7 – 589.1 116.4 Feb. 3
311.5 10.9 5.1 5.1 – 182.4 293.7 – 589.1 116.4 10
289.6 10.9 5.0 5.0 – 182.4 293.0 – 589.1 116.4 17
278.8 10.8 6.1 6.1 – 182.4 290.9 – 589.1 116.4 24
280.7 10.3 5.6 5.6 – 182.4 284.6 – 589.1 120.7 Mar. 3
275.2 10.3 5.3 5.3 – 182.4 282.0 – 589.1 120.7 10
305.0 10.4 5.4 5.4 – 182.4 284.3 – 589.1 120.7 17
316.5 10.9 5.3 5.3 – 182.4 286.9 – 589.1 120.8 24
357.4 11.1 5.3 5.3 – 180.3 283.8 – 622.2 120.2 31
305.8 11.2 5.3 5.3 – 180.3 274.6 – 622.2 120.2 Apr. 7
298.1 11.6 5.1 5.1 – 180.3 277.4 – 622.2 120.2 14
287.2 11.6 5.1 5.1 – 180.3 273.2 – 622.2 120.2 21
271.6 11.0 5.5 5.5 – 180.3 275.5 – 622.2 120.2 28
265.4 11.0 5.2 5.2 – 180.3 278.5 – 622.2 120.2 May 5
255.7 11.3 5.1 5.1 – 180.3 277.0 – 622.2 120.2 12
252.4 11.4 7.0 7.0 – 180.3 277.6 – 622.2 120.2 19
253.1 11.4 7.6 7.6 – 180.3 275.7 – 622.2 120.2 26
245.4 11.7 7.5 7.5 – 180.3 270.3 – 622.2 120.2 June 2
237.8 12.2 7.1 7.1 – 180.3 269.8 – 622.2 120.2 9
248.5 12.5 7.1 7.1 – 180.3 270.3 – 622.2 120.2 16
252.0 13.0 6.7 6.7 – 180.3 270.6 – 622.2 120.2 23
300.3 13.4 6.6 6.6 – 178.4 281.5 – 597.0 120.2 30
258.8 13.5 6.5 6.5 – 178.4 274.9 – 597.0 120.2 July 7
250.5 13.6 6.0 6.0 – 178.4 272.1 – 597.0 120.2 14
257.1 13.5 6.7 6.7 – 178.4 274.2 – 597.0 120.2 21
255.9 13.8 4.4 4.4 – 178.4 277.1 – 597.0 120.2 28
253.5 13.7 3.8 3.8 – 178.4 273.4 – 597.0 120.2 Aug. 4
Deutsche Bundesbank
220.7 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 47.0 37.3 521.6 181.7 5.7 2023 Jan. 13
207.3 0.3 0.0 0.0 – 47.0 37.0 521.6 181.7 5.7 20
195.1 0.3 0.1 0.1 – 47.0 34.1 523.8 181.7 5.7 27
198.2 0.3 0.0 0.0 – 47.0 35.5 521.2 181.7 5.7 Feb. 3
177.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 – 47.0 35.3 521.2 181.7 5.7 10
160.3 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 47.0 35.3 521.2 181.7 5.7 17
141.3 0.2 0.9 0.9 – 47.0 34.7 521.2 181.7 5.7 24
141.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 47.0 36.4 522.2 181.7 5.5 Mar. 3
138.4 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 47.0 35.9 522.2 181.7 5.5 10
158.7 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 47.0 35.4 522.2 181.7 5.5 17
158.4 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 47.0 34.8 522.2 181.7 5.5 24
196.8 0.2 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 33.4 524.5 193.2 5.5 31
147.6 0.2 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 32.1 524.5 193.2 5.5 Apr. 7
142.6 0.2 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 31.4 524.5 193.2 5.5 14
141.7 0.2 0.2 0.2 – 46.5 30.0 524.5 193.2 5.5 21
131.2 0.1 0.3 0.3 – 46.5 29.6 526.4 193.2 5.5 28
122.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 31.3 526.4 193.2 5.5 May 5
114.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 34.4 526.4 193.2 5.5 12
101.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 35.0 526.4 193.2 5.5 19
99.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 35.2 526.4 193.2 5.5 26
94.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 34.5 529.0 193.2 5.5 June 2
88.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 34.6 529.0 193.2 5.5 9
91.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 34.7 529.0 193.2 5.5 16
90.7 0.1 0.1 0.1 – 46.5 34.8 529.0 193.2 5.5 23
122.0 0.2 – – – 46.0 35.4 530.7 185.5 5.5 30
85.1 0.2 – – – 46.0 35.4 530.7 185.5 5.5 July 7
83.7 0.2 – – – 46.0 35.4 530.7 185.5 5.5 14
85.2 0.1 – – – 46.0 35.5 530.7 185.5 5.5 21
88.1 0.1 – – – 46.0 35.7 530.7 185.5 5.5 28
88.4 0.1 0.2 0.2 – 46.0 35.0 532.2 185.5 5.5 Aug. 4
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2021 Sep. 9,325.3 47.4 2,952.3 2,472.9 2,203.6 269.3 479.4 344.9 134.5 4,303.0 3,812.2 3,409.8 3,093.8
Oct. 9,395.0 47.8 2,979.8 2,490.1 2,221.1 269.0 489.7 356.2 133.5 4,322.0 3,832.5 3,437.3 3,117.5
Nov. 9,495.5 48.1 3,008.0 2,519.5 2,253.4 266.1 488.5 355.4 133.1 4,352.1 3,856.4 3,459.8 3,138.9
Dec. 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 Jan. 9,717.0 47.7 3,029.2 2,522.4 2,258.2 264.2 506.8 375.0 131.8 4,378.1 3,875.3 3,484.8 3,162.4
Feb. 9,842.7 47.7 3,082.6 2,564.8 2,299.1 265.8 517.8 383.9 133.9 4,396.3 3,889.1 3,504.4 3,181.6
Mar. 9,962.9 50.0 3,066.9 2,546.2 2,281.9 264.3 520.7 387.1 133.7 4,426.8 3,916.4 3,526.5 3,204.1
Apr. 10,268.8 51.0 3,112.2 2,578.0 2,313.7 264.2 534.2 400.5 133.8 4,434.6 3,929.2 3,546.3 3,223.8
May 10,258.0 50.0 3,122.7 2,592.6 2,326.2 266.4 530.1 397.8 132.3 4,460.3 3,949.5 3,567.4 3,244.7
June 10,428.9 51.8 3,096.5 2,570.9 2,306.2 264.7 525.6 394.1 131.5 4,494.4 3,969.5 3,589.6 3,268.8
July 10,267.9 42.3 3,086.0 2,557.4 2,291.5 266.0 528.6 396.8 131.8 4,528.3 4,008.2 3,627.9 3,293.6
Aug. 10,627.2 23.6 3,166.4 2,625.3 2,359.2 266.1 541.1 409.1 132.0 4,555.4 4,039.2 3,664.4 3,331.1
Sep. 11,063.0 20.7 3,268.0 2,714.2 2,442.2 272.0 553.7 419.7 134.0 4,579.6 4,057.2 3,685.0 3,351.1
Oct. 11,036.0 20.0 3,259.8 2,696.8 2,424.2 272.6 563.0 416.3 146.7 4,591.1 4,077.8 3,699.7 3,365.9
Nov. 10,762.4 19.1 3,180.1 2,630.6 2,360.1 270.5 549.5 403.2 146.2 4,610.5 4,089.4 3,715.1 3,379.3
Dec. 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 18.2 3,085.7 2,550.5 2,288.2 262.3 535.1 383.8 151.4 4,600.1 4,080.1 3,706.1 3,372.3
Feb. 10,760.9 18.0 3,085.7 2,541.4 2,274.9 266.5 544.3 390.6 153.8 4,614.2 4,094.2 3,714.7 3,381.3
Mar. 10,553.8 17.9 3,041.3 2,497.8 2,229.3 268.4 543.5 391.2 152.3 4,620.6 4,094.7 3,718.2 3,386.0
Apr. 10,564.3 18.9 3,047.7 2,507.0 2,237.3 269.7 540.7 384.5 156.2 4,630.5 4,096.8 3,721.7 3,390.4
May 10,653.7 18.2 3,091.2 2,550.3 2,279.7 270.6 541.0 383.4 157.5 4,642.2 4,103.4 3,733.0 3,400.9
June 10,578.1 17.7 2,967.1 2,434.6 2,166.5 268.2 532.5 371.5 161.0 4,646.8 4,108.1 3,734.6 3,397.2
Changes 3
2014 206.8 0.4 –126.2 –128.6 –95.3 –33.4 2.4 7.2 – 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2021 207.2 2.2 161.3 155.6 156.4 – 0.8 5.7 11.7 – 5.9 175.7 154.6 173.7 155.9
2022 1,170.5 –29.7 149.5 103.7 100.5 3.2 45.8 33.1 12.7 242.4 223.1 237.5 220.6
2021 Oct. 70.4 0.5 27.7 17.3 17.6 – 0.3 10.5 11.4 – 1.0 19.2 20.6 28.0 24.1
Nov. 95.5 0.3 26.6 29.2 32.2 – 3.0 – 2.5 – 2.1 – 0.5 30.6 25.2 22.1 21.0
Dec. –326.2 1.6 –218.7 –186.4 –183.6 – 2.8 –32.2 – 31.2 – 1.0 – 0.9 4.7 9.4 9.1
2022 Jan. 340.3 – 1.9 238.6 189.0 186.9 2.1 49.6 49.7 – 0.1 28.1 15.4 16.2 14.9
Feb. 128.5 – 0.0 52.7 41.4 39.7 1.7 11.3 9.1 2.2 20.4 15.8 21.3 20.9
Mar. 119.7 2.2 –15.5 –18.4 –17.2 – 1.2 2.9 3.0 – 0.1 31.4 27.6 22.2 22.6
Apr. 283.1 1.0 41.6 30.8 30.8 0.0 10.8 10.6 0.2 7.5 12.8 19.7 19.4
May 1.1 – 1.0 12.4 15.3 12.8 2.5 – 2.9 – 1.5 – 1.3 27.4 21.2 21.6 21.3
June 178.6 1.7 –28.2 –22.2 –20.6 – 1.6 – 6.0 – 5.3 – 0.6 32.9 19.9 22.0 23.7
July –177.9 – 9.5 –12.8 –14.2 –15.0 0.8 1.4 1.4 0.0 29.7 36.0 36.0 22.6
Aug. 359.0 –18.7 83.5 71.7 70.7 1.0 11.8 11.3 0.4 28.1 31.4 36.5 37.5
Sep. 428.4 – 2.9 99.8 88.6 82.4 6.2 11.3 9.0 2.3 27.0 17.2 19.5 18.7
Oct. –19.3 – 0.7 – 6.7 –17.0 –17.7 0.6 10.3 – 2.4 12.7 12.4 21.1 15.3 15.5
Nov. –245.9 – 0.9 –75.9 –65.0 –63.0 – 2.0 –10.9 – 10.5 – 0.5 21.4 13.0 17.1 15.1
Dec. –225.1 0.9 –240.0 –196.2 –189.2 – 7.1 –43.8 – 41.2 – 2.6 –24.0 – 8.4 – 9.9 –11.6
2023 Jan. 87.5 – 1.8 155.0 122.2 119.3 2.8 32.8 24.0 8.9 22.8 6.5 8.1 8.0
Feb. 167.0 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 9.1 –13.4 4.3 8.3 5.8 2.5 13.4 13.6 7.9 8.3
Mar. –195.2 – 0.1 –42.8 –43.2 –45.0 1.8 0.4 1.9 – 1.5 8.2 2.0 5.0 6.2
Apr. 16.7 1.0 7.7 9.8 8.1 1.7 – 2.1 – 6.0 3.9 11.0 3.0 4.2 5.1
May 74.7 – 0.7 40.7 42.6 41.9 0.7 – 2.0 – 3.2 1.3 11.2 6.5 11.2 10.4
June –74.9 – 0.5 –122.9 –114.3 –113.2 – 1.1 – 8.5 – 12.0 3.5 4.2 4.2 1.2 – 3.1
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 2021
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 2022
316.0 402.4 248.3 154.1 490.7 352.5 241.7 138.2 27.9 110.3 1,087.9 840.8 934.8 2021 Sep.
319.9 395.1 249.7 145.4 489.5 356.0 244.3 133.4 30.3 103.2 1,134.6 889.6 910.9 Oct.
320.9 396.5 247.8 148.8 495.7 361.6 249.6 134.1 28.5 105.6 1,137.3 892.4 950.0 Nov.
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 Dec.
322.4 390.6 246.9 143.6 502.7 377.7 260.4 125.0 28.5 96.5 1,171.3 925.2 1,090.8 2022 Jan.
322.8 384.8 244.7 140.0 507.2 381.4 262.7 125.8 28.6 97.2 1,190.1 939.6 1,125.9 Feb.
322.3 390.0 245.2 144.8 510.4 379.5 259.4 130.9 29.0 101.9 1,169.2 921.9 1,249.9 Mar.
322.5 382.9 246.5 136.4 505.4 378.8 257.8 126.7 32.2 94.4 1,174.5 926.0 1,496.5 Apr.
322.7 382.1 244.5 137.7 510.9 383.7 260.7 127.1 31.4 95.7 1,166.1 917.3 1,458.8 May
320.9 379.9 244.9 135.0 524.9 388.1 268.4 136.8 33.2 103.6 1,182.4 925.1 1,603.8 June
334.3 380.3 245.8 134.5 520.2 383.8 266.0 136.4 33.4 103.0 1,199.9 941.5 1,411.5 July
333.3 374.8 243.4 131.4 516.2 387.1 268.6 129.1 33.7 95.4 1,211.7 952.6 1,670.0 Aug.
333.9 372.2 244.5 127.7 522.4 390.5 273.1 132.0 35.4 96.6 1,220.9 961.0 1,973.8 Sep.
333.8 378.1 246.0 132.1 513.3 385.7 268.4 127.6 34.4 93.2 1,234.2 975.7 1,930.8 Oct.
335.9 374.2 246.3 127.9 521.1 394.0 276.5 127.1 32.7 94.4 1,224.6 963.4 1,728.1 Nov.
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 Dec.
333.8 374.0 250.3 123.7 520.1 393.5 280.2 126.6 30.2 96.4 1,161.9 904.0 1,719.2 2023 Jan.
333.5 379.5 248.2 131.3 520.0 393.3 279.2 126.8 31.3 95.4 1,167.6 904.4 1,875.3 Feb.
332.2 376.5 248.9 127.6 526.0 397.5 275.7 128.4 30.9 97.5 1,168.5 902.6 1,705.4 Mar.
331.2 375.1 250.9 124.2 533.7 405.8 280.9 128.0 32.3 95.7 1,149.9 883.9 1,717.3 Apr.
332.1 370.5 249.8 120.7 538.7 407.7 284.6 131.0 31.9 99.1 1,177.7 912.0 1,724.4 May
337.4 373.4 248.7 124.7 538.7 403.2 279.6 135.6 31.0 104.5 1,150.6 886.7 1,795.8 June
Changes 3
15.5 –12.3 –15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 – 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
17.8 –19.1 – 6.1 –13.1 21.1 35.5 22.6 –14.3 – 1.1 –13.2 71.7 84.9 –203.7 2021
16.9 –14.4 1.9 –16.3 19.3 20.7 24.4 – 1.4 2.6 – 3.9 15.0 – 0.8 793.3 2022
3.9 – 7.4 1.2 – 8.7 – 1.4 3.5 2.6 – 4.8 2.3 – 7.2 47.6 49.5 –24.6 2021 Oct.
1.1 3.0 – 0.9 4.0 5.5 4.8 4.4 0.6 – 1.6 2.2 – 4.5 – 3.6 42.4 Nov.
0.3 – 4.7 – 2.6 – 2.2 – 5.6 0.9 – 5.3 – 6.5 – 0.1 – 6.3 –45.9 –41.0 –62.3 Dec.
1.3 – 0.8 1.8 – 2.6 12.7 14.8 16.0 – 2.1 0.2 – 2.2 72.3 66.7 3.3 2022 Jan.
0.5 – 5.5 – 2.1 – 3.4 4.6 3.7 2.5 0.9 0.1 0.8 20.6 15.8 34.9 Feb.
– 0.4 5.5 0.5 5.0 3.8 – 1.7 – 3.3 5.5 0.4 5.1 –22.2 –19.2 123.7 Mar.
0.2 – 6.8 1.4 – 8.2 – 5.3 – 1.6 – 2.7 – 3.7 3.2 – 6.9 –13.8 –14.2 246.6 Apr.
0.3 – 0.4 – 2.0 1.6 6.2 5.4 3.3 0.8 – 0.8 1.7 – 1.0 – 2.0 –36.6 May
– 1.7 – 2.1 0.4 – 2.5 13.0 3.0 6.1 10.0 1.9 8.1 –10.0 –18.2 182.3 June
13.4 0.0 0.9 – 0.8 – 6.3 – 5.2 – 2.9 – 1.1 0.1 – 1.3 7.8 8.0 –193.2 July
– 1.0 – 5.1 – 2.3 – 2.8 – 3.3 3.4 2.5 – 6.7 0.4 – 7.0 7.2 6.5 258.9 Aug.
0.8 – 2.4 1.1 – 3.5 9.9 3.3 4.0 6.6 1.7 4.8 0.7 0.1 303.7 Sep.
– 0.3 5.9 1.4 4.4 – 8.7 – 4.4 – 4.6 – 4.3 – 1.0 – 3.3 19.7 20.4 –44.0 Oct.
2.0 – 4.1 0.0 – 4.1 8.4 9.2 9.6 – 0.8 – 1.7 0.9 8.8 4.8 –199.3 Nov.
1.8 1.5 0.9 0.6 –15.6 – 9.3 – 6.2 – 6.4 – 1.9 – 4.5 –75.0 –69.5 112.9 Dec.
0.1 – 1.6 2.3 – 3.9 16.3 9.4 10.0 6.9 – 0.6 7.5 33.4 27.8 –121.8 2023 Jan.
– 0.4 5.6 – 2.0 7.7 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.4 0.5 1.1 – 0.7 – 1.7 – 6.6 156.4 Feb.
– 1.2 – 3.0 0.8 – 3.7 6.1 4.6 – 3.0 1.5 – 0.4 1.9 9.6 6.5 –170.1 Mar.
– 1.0 – 1.2 2.1 – 3.3 8.0 8.5 5.4 – 0.5 1.4 – 1.9 –14.9 –15.4 11.9 Apr.
0.9 – 4.7 – 1.2 – 3.5 4.6 1.5 3.2 3.2 – 0.4 3.6 16.5 17.4 7.1 May
4.3 3.0 – 1.1 4.0 0.0 – 4.6 – 4.9 4.6 – 0.9 5.5 –19.0 –17.2 63.2 June
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2021 Sep. 9,325.3 1,667.9 1,354.2 313.6 4,108.9 3,913.6 2,640.2 712.7 194.3 560.7 535.9 148.8 77.1
Oct. 9,395.0 1,690.9 1,364.7 326.2 4,140.0 3,942.6 2,657.0 725.5 206.4 560.1 535.6 151.4 78.1
Nov. 9,495.5 1,718.6 1,374.9 343.8 4,154.1 3,956.1 2,678.9 717.4 200.2 559.8 535.5 151.4 82.5
Dec. 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 Jan. 9,717.0 1,725.2 1,363.7 361.5 4,195.2 3,979.5 2,686.4 732.3 215.9 560.7 537.4 166.7 86.2
Feb. 9,842.7 1,743.7 1,369.7 374.0 4,209.7 3,993.9 2,699.7 733.4 217.5 560.8 537.7 169.3 90.1
Mar. 9,962.9 1,737.5 1,367.8 369.8 4,212.3 3,990.1 2,690.3 740.9 226.7 559.0 536.1 177.7 99.4
Apr. 10,268.8 1,766.8 1,384.4 382.3 4,223.7 4,003.6 2,700.1 745.6 234.6 557.9 535.2 175.5 93.4
May 10,258.0 1,765.9 1,393.7 372.2 4,236.1 4,013.3 2,718.3 738.4 229.4 556.5 534.0 176.2 97.1
June 10,428.9 1,744.4 1,384.7 359.7 4,235.0 4,008.2 2,708.8 744.7 238.3 554.7 532.4 180.5 102.7
July 10,267.9 1,772.1 1,383.3 388.9 4,267.6 4,041.3 2,722.8 765.6 259.2 552.9 530.7 179.5 99.0
Aug. 10,627.2 1,785.7 1,403.5 382.2 4,322.0 4,089.0 2,760.7 777.8 272.2 550.5 528.3 185.0 103.0
Sep. 11,063.0 1,814.5 1,415.7 398.8 4,342.6 4,105.7 2,748.5 812.0 306.6 545.2 523.1 191.1 102.4
Oct. 11,036.0 1,837.4 1,419.0 418.4 4,359.6 4,122.0 2,741.6 838.3 334.6 542.1 519.8 190.0 92.4
Nov. 10,762.4 1,773.7 1,345.0 428.7 4,401.0 4,132.6 2,752.4 843.3 344.7 536.8 514.3 193.1 97.3
Dec. 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 1,642.4 1,231.2 411.2 4,392.0 4,124.2 2,706.4 895.1 397.6 522.7 498.8 188.7 94.3
Feb. 10,760.9 1,633.5 1,226.0 407.5 4,391.4 4,113.2 2,670.6 926.7 428.4 515.9 490.8 191.2 97.2
Mar. 10,553.8 1,618.0 1,210.4 407.6 4,368.3 4,092.1 2,625.3 959.7 462.3 507.2 480.5 197.9 98.8
Apr. 10,564.3 1,632.8 1,227.7 405.1 4,370.1 4,099.8 2,620.9 980.3 482.3 498.6 470.4 199.5 93.6
May 10,653.7 1,622.7 1,229.8 392.9 4,384.2 4,108.2 2,613.0 1,004.7 504.1 490.6 460.2 201.6 97.9
June 10,578.1 1,531.0 1,150.0 381.0 4,377.0 4,109.0 2,586.2 1,039.6 540.2 483.3 450.2 196.6 90.9
Changes 4
2014 206.8 –28.4 –32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 –32.1 3.1 – 2.4 – 2.4 – 2.5 – 0.0
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2021 207.2 133.4 103.4 30.0 107.3 96.2 141.4 –45.8 –23.3 0.6 3.9 16.6 13.6
2022 1,170.5 –15.6 –105.9 90.3 208.9 165.9 60.6 132.8 148.1 –27.5 –26.3 18.4 12.8
2021 Oct. 70.4 24.1 11.2 12.9 31.1 29.1 16.8 12.9 12.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 2.5 1.1
Nov. 95.5 26.4 9.6 16.7 12.9 12.5 21.1 – 8.4 – 6.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.3 4.2
Dec. –326.2 –90.4 –36.3 –54.1 –24.3 –24.3 –29.6 3.9 3.7 1.4 1.6 2.4 –11.9
2022 Jan. 340.3 93.8 23.2 70.6 64.3 47.0 36.5 10.9 11.9 – 0.4 0.3 12.6 15.3
Feb. 128.5 19.3 6.1 13.2 14.2 14.6 13.4 1.1 1.6 0.1 0.3 2.2 3.5
Mar. 119.7 – 6.6 – 2.1 – 4.5 2.2 – 4.2 – 9.7 7.3 9.2 – 1.8 – 1.6 8.3 9.3
Apr. 283.1 25.1 15.6 9.5 8.0 11.0 7.5 4.1 7.2 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 3.1 – 6.6
May 1.1 0.7 9.8 – 9.1 13.6 10.6 18.9 – 6.9 – 5.0 – 1.3 – 1.2 1.0 3.9
June 178.6 –24.2 – 9.7 –14.5 – 2.8 – 6.6 –10.7 5.9 8.5 – 1.8 – 1.6 4.1 5.6
July –177.9 24.6 – 1.6 26.2 29.3 30.8 13.0 19.6 19.9 – 1.8 – 1.7 – 2.0 – 3.9
Aug. 359.0 15.5 23.0 – 7.5 53.6 47.1 37.2 12.4 12.9 – 2.4 – 2.4 5.3 3.8
Sep. 428.4 25.2 11.7 13.5 19.0 15.4 –13.3 34.0 34.1 – 5.3 – 5.3 5.6 – 0.9
Oct. –19.3 24.2 3.8 20.3 17.2 16.2 – 7.3 26.6 28.2 – 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.7 – 9.7
Nov. –245.9 –60.3 –73.0 12.7 45.6 21.3 14.3 12.2 10.1 – 5.3 – 5.4 – 3.2 5.4
Dec. –225.1 –152.7 –112.7 –40.0 –55.4 –37.3 –39.2 5.6 9.4 – 3.7 – 4.1 –11.9 –12.8
2023 Jan. 87.5 23.3 0.0 23.3 49.1 30.9 –10.4 46.7 44.0 – 5.5 – 6.4 8.2 10.1
Feb. 167.0 –10.3 – 5.6 – 4.7 – 1.8 –11.8 –36.4 31.3 30.7 – 6.7 – 7.9 2.1 2.7
Mar. –195.2 –13.4 –14.7 1.3 –21.7 –20.0 –44.1 32.8 33.5 – 8.7 –10.3 7.1 1.8
Apr. 16.7 15.5 17.5 – 1.9 2.4 8.1 – 4.1 20.8 20.2 – 8.6 –10.1 1.8 – 5.1
May 74.7 –12.3 1.5 –13.8 11.6 7.3 – 8.6 23.9 21.4 – 8.0 –10.2 0.7 4.0
June –74.9 –91.7 –79.8 –11.9 – 7.2 0.8 –26.7 34.8 35.9 – 7.3 – 9.9 – 5.0 – 7.0
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 2021
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 2022
69.2 22.4 2.5 2.2 46.6 45.2 7.3 2.2 1,100.5 25.1 840.1 735.9 862.6 2021 Sep.
70.9 23.4 2.4 2.2 46.1 45.2 7.4 2.2 1,118.0 24.6 866.7 729.5 840.3 Oct.
66.4 17.4 2.4 2.2 46.6 45.5 4.2 2.1 1,123.9 26.0 883.1 736.5 872.8 Nov.
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 Dec.
78.1 20.3 2.4 2.2 48.9 45.5 3.0 2.3 1,126.9 25.3 907.4 721.2 1,036.0 2022 Jan.
76.8 19.8 2.4 2.2 46.4 42.8 2.4 2.4 1,141.1 26.2 945.9 717.7 1,080.0 Feb.
75.9 19.0 2.4 2.2 44.5 42.1 2.8 2.5 1,148.9 25.9 926.4 736.8 1,195.6 Mar.
79.8 22.5 2.4 2.2 44.6 42.2 2.3 2.3 1,161.1 26.3 939.2 734.6 1,438.9 Apr.
76.8 19.9 2.3 2.1 46.6 42.8 1.9 2.5 1,164.1 27.7 958.5 732.3 1,396.8 May
75.5 19.1 2.3 2.1 46.2 43.0 2.0 2.5 1,164.7 32.2 945.7 752.0 1,582.6 June
78.1 23.2 2.3 2.1 46.8 44.0 4.2 2.5 1,177.1 35.9 926.6 743.6 1,374.2 July
79.7 24.3 2.3 2.1 47.9 44.0 4.8 2.4 1,183.7 38.6 950.2 741.8 1,636.6 Aug.
86.4 31.2 2.3 2.1 45.9 43.3 3.2 2.5 1,203.3 45.8 987.2 758.0 1,951.6 Sep.
95.4 39.7 2.2 2.1 47.6 44.9 4.0 2.6 1,202.6 39.4 980.8 751.8 1,897.2 Oct.
93.5 31.3 2.2 2.0 75.4 71.1 4.7 2.6 1,202.3 42.2 939.7 747.3 1,691.1 Nov.
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 Dec.
92.3 30.4 2.2 2.0 79.1 73.8 3.9 2.5 1,205.2 47.4 890.6 728.9 1,719.6 2023 Jan.
91.8 30.0 2.2 1.9 87.0 82.5 5.0 2.4 1,221.5 55.6 901.8 724.9 1,880.4 Feb.
97.0 28.5 2.1 1.9 78.2 73.3 4.7 2.6 1,231.2 64.6 863.1 734.8 1,731.0 Mar.
103.7 33.9 2.1 1.9 70.8 65.9 5.4 2.8 1,235.3 67.3 856.2 735.7 1,726.0 Apr.
101.6 30.7 2.1 1.8 74.4 62.4 6.0 2.6 1,257.4 72.5 888.2 746.8 1,745.8 May
103.6 32.5 2.0 1.8 71.4 64.0 4.8 2.6 1,254.5 76.3 853.2 749.5 1,805.4 June
Changes 4
– 2.3 – 1.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.8 – 3.4 – 0.6 –63.7 – 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
3.1 – 8.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 – 5.0 – 7.9 0.3 40.6 6.9 124.9 16.6 –207.9 2021
5.8 8.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 24.6 23.0 1.2 0.4 67.2 12.6 45.6 5.0 857.7 2022
1.5 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 17.3 – 0.5 27.1 – 6.4 –22.8 2021 Oct.
– 4.5 – 6.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.7 0.4 – 3.2 – 0.1 1.7 1.4 11.7 5.9 40.3 Nov.
14.3 5.4 0.0 0.0 – 2.4 – 2.0 – 2.0 0.2 –14.2 1.4 –127.3 – 4.6 –63.4 Dec.
– 2.7 – 2.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 4.7 2.0 0.7 – 0.0 13.4 – 2.3 146.6 –18.3 39.8 2022 Jan.
– 1.3 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.5 – 2.7 – 0.5 0.1 15.0 1.0 39.4 – 3.2 44.2 Feb.
– 1.0 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.6 0.3 0.2 6.9 – 0.3 –20.7 19.0 118.4 Mar.
3.6 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 3.4 0.2 0.4 – 5.8 252.8 Apr.
– 2.9 – 2.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.0 0.6 – 0.4 0.2 6.4 1.4 23.9 – 1.0 –42.4 May
– 1.5 – 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.4 0.2 0.1 – 0.0 – 4.8 4.3 – 6.3 17.6 199.0 June
1.9 3.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.5 1.1 2.1 0.1 9.1 3.5 –24.8 –10.5 –207.8 July
1.6 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 0.0 0.6 – 0.1 4.1 2.7 20.1 – 3.1 268.3 Aug.
6.5 6.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.7 – 1.6 0.1 15.8 7.0 31.8 14.9 323.1 Sep.
9.1 8.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.7 1.6 0.8 0.1 1.8 – 6.3 – 2.8 – 5.3 –55.3 Oct.
– 8.6 – 8.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 27.5 25.8 0.8 0.0 7.4 2.4 –29.9 – 1.1 –208.4 Nov.
1.0 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 6.3 – 4.3 – 1.3 0.1 –11.5 – 1.2 –132.1 1.9 125.9 Dec.
– 1.9 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.9 6.9 0.5 – 0.2 22.4 6.6 95.0 –17.6 –85.0 2023 Jan.
– 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 7.9 8.7 1.2 – 0.1 13.0 8.1 6.9 – 5.0 163.2 Feb.
5.3 – 1.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 8.8 – 9.2 – 0.3 0.3 13.6 9.2 –33.8 11.2 –151.2 Mar.
6.9 5.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.4 – 7.4 0.7 0.1 5.7 2.7 – 4.9 1.8 – 4.7 Apr.
– 3.3 – 3.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 3.6 – 3.5 0.6 – 0.1 16.8 5.0 25.6 9.2 23.2 May
2.0 1.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.0 1.6 – 1.2 – 0.0 – 3.7 3.1 –35.0 3.6 60.3 June
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
24•
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
End of
monthNumber of
reporting
institu-
tionsBalance
sheet
total  1Cash in
hand and
credit
balances
with
central
banks TotalBalances
and
loansSecurities
issued by
banks Totalfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more than
1 year BillsSecurities
issued by
non-banksPartici-
pating
interestsOther
assets  1
All categories of banks  
2023 Jan. 1,384 10,650.7 109.2 3,638.9 3,161.2 474.0 4,957.2 489.6 3,766.4 0.2 676.6 95.7 1,849.6
Feb. 1,385 10,825.7 74.4 3,673.4 3,187.8 481.7 4,976.6 485.3 3,779.4 0.2 693.0 96.1 2,005.1
Mar. 1,385 10,617.5 72.8 3,630.6 3,143.2 483.4 4,983.5 488.3 3,777.1 0.2 701.1 96.4 1,834.2
Apr. 1,384 10,627.8 74.6 3,618.8 3,128.7 485.3 4,991.8 492.5 3,782.2 0.2 699.8 96.9 1,845.7
May 1,383 10,716.8 68.0 3,694.9 3,203.2 487.4 5,004.1 490.7 3,797.9 0.2 698.6 97.4 1,852.5
June 1,375 10,639.8 70.5 3,543.4 3,053.2 485.6 5,003.9 478.6 3,795.4 0.2 711.0 97.4 1,924.7
Commercial banks 6
2023 May 242 4,899.5 25.3 1,718.8 1,630.4 88.0 1,622.4 329.5 1,037.5 0.1 247.6 31.8 1,501.2
June 241 4,906.5 25.1 1,649.2 1,559.6 89.2 1,624.4 316.2 1,039.4 0.1 259.5 31.8 1,576.1
   Big banks 7
2023 May 3 2,452.2 12.1 691.7 659.3 32.4 736.5 156.2 456.9 0.0 118.4 26.1 985.7
June 3 2,472.0 12.1 652.6 619.2 33.4 743.9 154.4 454.6 0.0 131.3 26.1 1,037.3
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2023 May 132 1,967.5 10.6 704.1 649.6 54.0 745.2 128.9 491.3 0.1 122.8 4.3 503.4
June 131 1,911.1 8.6 646.6 593.8 52.4 727.9 112.2 491.8 0.1 119.2 4.1 523.8
   Branches of foreign banks
2023 May 107 479.8 2.5 323.0 321.5 1.5 140.8 44.3 89.3 – 6.3 1.4 12.1
June 107 523.5 4.4 350.0 346.6 3.4 152.6 49.6 93.0 – 9.0 1.6 14.9
Landesbanken
2023 May 6 969.7 5.7 390.2 336.1 53.4 435.0 45.9 349.4 0.0 34.7 9.6 129.2
June 6 931.8 3.6 355.8 301.8 53.4 434.4 46.6 346.7 0.0 36.1 9.5 128.4
Savings banks
2023 May 358 1,564.4 18.9 286.9 167.2 119.7 1,216.2 53.7 994.3 – 167.6 16.3 26.2
June 358 1,548.9 21.7 269.0 150.5 118.6 1,216.7 54.1 994.3 – 167.7 16.3 25.2
Credit cooperatives 
2023 May 733 1,162.7 13.3 216.1 104.5 110.8 884.2 34.1 730.0 0.0 120.1 19.9 29.3
June 727 1,155.7 13.8 207.4 97.8 109.1 885.1 34.7 730.8 0.0 119.6 19.9 29.6
Mortgage banks
2023 May 8 228.4 0.1 22.3 15.6 6.7 200.3 3.6 182.4 – 14.4 0.1 5.6
June 7 222.3 0.2 16.9 10.0 6.8 199.9 3.6 182.1 – 14.2 0.1 5.3
Building and loan associations
2023 May 18 260.2 0.5 45.0 29.2 15.7 210.8 1.3 187.0 . 22.5 0.3 3.7
June 18 259.5 0.2 44.0 28.2 15.8 211.4 1.4 187.6 . 22.4 0.3 3.7
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2023 May 18 1,631.8 4.2 1,015.7 920.1 93.1 435.3 22.7 317.3 0.0 91.8 19.5 157.2
June 18 1,615.1 5.9 1,001.1 905.4 92.7 432.1 22.0 314.5 0.0 91.5 19.5 156.5
Memo item:    Foreign banks 8
2023 May 139 2,463.5 10.6 929.0 891.8 36.8 708.9 161.8 414.0 0.1 128.7 4.3 810.8
June 138 2,448.5 11.7 891.9 853.6 37.9 701.3 151.6 415.8 0.1 127.2 4.3 839.2
   of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2023 May 32 1,983.7 8.1 606.0 570.3 35.3 568.1 117.5 324.8 0.1 122.3 2.9 798.6
June 31 1,925.0 7.3 541.9 507.0 34.5 548.8 102.0 322.9 0.1 118.2 2.7 824.3
* Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3.  1 Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial
instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning ofSection 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read
in conjunction with Section 35 (1) number 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are classified
under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting date. Trading
portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, in
Tables I.1 to I.3.  2 For building and loan associations: including deposits under savings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
25•
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4
TotalSight
depositsTime
deposits TotalSight
depositsfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more
than
1 year  2Memo 
item:
Liabilities
arising
from
repos  3 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeBank
savings
bondsBearer
debt
securities
out-
standing  5Capital
including
published
reserves,
partici-
pation
rights
capital,
funds for
general
banking
risksOther
liabi-
lities  1End of
month
All categories of banks 
2,320.7 743.7 1,576.9 4,604.7 2,936.3 448.4 651.3 71.7 527.9 503.5 40.9 1,287.5 592.6 1,845.1 2023 Jan.
2,312.9 740.8 1,572.0 4,615.5 2,906.1 486.7 655.8 78.5 521.1 495.5 45.8 1,296.2 592.4 2,008.6 Feb.
2,270.4 713.0 1,557.4 4,579.8 2,856.6 496.6 662.4 76.8 512.3 485.1 52.1 1,312.4 596.4 1,858.4 Mar.
2,270.3 681.4 1,588.9 4,590.6 2,840.7 520.8 666.9 82.4 503.5 474.9 58.7 1,308.3 598.5 1,860.2 Apr.
2,288.9 733.9 1,554.9 4,608.9 2,843.2 531.5 672.8 86.6 495.5 464.5 65.9 1,342.1 603.8 1,873.2 May
2,175.4 699.0 1,476.4 4,587.8 2,806.5 548.2 672.4 73.8 488.1 454.5 72.6 1,332.1 608.1 1,936.3 June
Commercial banks 6
1,194.9 562.0 632.9 1,847.5 1,211.4 284.8 247.8 84.5 84.5 76.5 18.9 201.7 210.2 1,445.3 2023 May
1,144.2 540.6 603.5 1,833.7 1,194.3 288.8 246.3 72.0 84.4 74.3 20.0 202.9 210.8 1,514.8 June
Big banks 7   
433.8 180.2 253.6 855.1 536.7 167.0 77.2 43.9 73.1 65.8 1.1 150.5 77.2 935.6 2023 May
406.4 172.3 234.0 852.3 528.5 172.8 76.4 37.3 73.5 64.1 1.1 152.2 79.6 981.5 June
Regional banks and other commercial banks   
492.5 228.6 263.9 812.0 548.6 84.8 149.7 40.7 11.1 10.4 17.8 50.9 116.0 496.1 2023 May
455.8 208.5 247.2 774.6 521.3 74.6 149.2 34.6 10.7 9.9 18.8 49.9 114.1 516.7 June
Branches of foreign banks   
268.5 153.1 115.4 180.4 126.1 33.0 20.9 – 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.3 16.9 13.6 2023 May
282.1 159.8 122.3 206.9 144.5 41.3 20.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.8 17.1 16.7 June
Landesbanken
276.4 54.9 221.5 300.3 146.9 76.3 71.7 1.5 4.9 4.9 0.5 205.4 43.2 144.4 2023 May
245.3 47.2 198.1 294.6 145.2 72.3 71.7 1.2 4.8 4.8 0.5 206.5 43.1 142.3 June
Savings banks
183.6 3.9 179.7 1,168.3 819.7 52.4 15.1 – 246.6 230.1 34.5 19.7 138.4 54.5 2023 May
173.4 3.7 169.6 1,163.0 806.0 60.5 15.1 – 242.5 225.8 38.9 19.4 140.3 52.8 June
Credit cooperatives
169.0 3.5 165.6 847.5 584.6 67.3 25.1 – 159.0 152.7 11.5 8.1 103.1 35.1 2023 May
163.3 3.7 159.6 846.1 576.8 74.4 26.3 – 155.9 149.2 12.8 8.1 104.8 33.4 June
Mortgage banks
49.0 3.6 45.4 56.7 3.3 6.8 46.6 0.5 – – . 106.8 8.9 7.0 2023 May
44.4 3.5 40.8 56.3 2.9 6.9 46.4 0.5 – – . 105.7 8.9 7.0 June
Building and loan associations
37.3 3.6 33.7 195.2 4.1 2.0 188.5 – 0.4 0.4 0.2 6.1 13.0 8.6 2023 May
36.8 3.0 33.9 194.8 3.9 2.1 188.2 – 0.4 0.4 0.2 6.1 13.0 8.8 June
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
378.6 102.4 276.2 193.4 73.3 41.8 78.0 0.0 – – . 794.2 87.1 178.5 2023 May
368.1 97.3 270.8 199.3 77.4 43.2 78.3 0.1 – – . 783.2 87.2 177.3 June
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
729.2 382.5 346.7 776.1 528.2 123.5 103.5 46.8 11.9 11.5 9.0 49.9 100.9 807.4 2023 May
696.1 368.5 327.5 764.7 519.9 121.4 102.4 40.1 11.5 11.1 9.5 49.6 99.0 839.2 June
 of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9   
460.7 229.4 231.3 595.7 402.1 90.5 82.6 46.8 11.6 11.2 8.9 49.6 83.9 793.7 2023 May
414.0 208.7 205.3 557.8 375.4 80.1 81.7 40.1 11.2 10.8 9.5 48.8 81.9 822.5 June
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Included in time deposits.  4 Excluding deposits
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).  5 Including subordinated
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
6 Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”.  7 Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner
Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische
Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
notes in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, Table I.3, banking group “Big banks “).
8 Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories
of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”.
9 Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in
other banking categories.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
26•
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)      
PeriodCash in
hand
(euro area
banknotes
and
coins)Credit
balances
with the
Bundes-
bank TotalCredit
balances
and loans BillsNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total Loans BillsTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money mar-
ket paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued
by non-
banks  1
End of year or month *
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2022 Jan. 47.4 1,066.0 1,439.2 1,191.8 – 0.7 246.7 10.1 3,812.8 3,409.0 0.2 3.1 400.5
Feb. 47.2 1,094.0 1,453.6 1,204.6 – 0.3 248.7 10.0 3,826.5 3,426.0 0.2 5.0 395.3
Mar. 49.5 1,086.3 1,442.6 1,195.1 – 0.3 247.3 10.0 3,853.8 3,449.0 0.2 3.3 401.3
Apr. 50.4 1,200.5 1,360.3 1,112.8 – 0.6 246.9 9.9 3,866.6 3,470.0 0.2 3.5 392.9
May 49.4 1,122.8 1,452.7 1,202.9 – 0.7 249.1 9.9 3,886.7 3,488.9 0.2 3.2 394.4
June 51.1 1,090.9 1,462.8 1,214.8 – 0.8 247.2 9.8 3,906.6 3,513.4 0.2 3.7 389.3
July 41.6 1,084.2 1,454.9 1,206.8 – 0.8 247.2 9.8 3,945.0 3,539.1 0.2 3.6 402.2
Aug. 23.1 1,126.7 1,480.7 1,232.0 – 1.3 247.5 9.9 3,976.0 3,574.3 0.1 3.9 397.7
Sep. 20.4 122.4 2,573.9 2,319.2 – 1.4 253.2 9.8 3,993.6 3,595.3 0.2 3.6 394.5
Oct. 19.7 86.6 2,592.3 2,337.0 – 1.5 253.7 10.0 4,014.1 3,611.6 0.2 4.3 398.0
Nov. 18.8 88.4 2,524.4 2,271.2 – 1.5 251.7 11.1 4,025.7 3,625.3 0.2 3.6 396.7
Dec. 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2023 Jan. 18.0 89.5 2,443.6 2,198.1 – 1.0 244.5 12.7 4,016.2 3,622.4 0.1 4.3 389.4
Feb. 17.8 52.2 2,471.9 2,222.2 – 1.0 248.8 12.8 4,030.2 3,629.4 0.1 2.9 397.9
Mar. 17.7 53.5 2,426.8 2,175.1 – 1.0 250.7 12.6 4,030.5 3,634.7 0.1 4.3 391.4
Apr. 18.7 54.2 2,434.7 2,182.3 – 1.1 251.3 12.7 4,032.5 3,641.2 0.1 3.2 388.1
May 18.1 48.7 2,483.6 2,230.4 – 0.8 252.4 12.7 4,039.0 3,650.5 0.1 2.2 386.2
June 17.5 51.6 2,366.1 2,114.1 – 0.9 251.0 12.7 4,042.1 3,645.6 0.1 2.9 393.5
Changes *
2014 +0.4 – 4.3 –119.3 – 87.1 +0.0 + 0.4 –32.6 +0.1 +36.7 +20.6 –0.1 – 0.6 +16.8
2015 +0.3 + 73.7 – 80.7 – 4.3 –0.0 – 0.4 –75.9 –0.1 +68.9 +54.1 –0.0 – 0.3 +15.1
2016 +6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 – – 0.9 –17.9 +0.4 +43.7 +62.8 –0.1 – 0.1 –18.9
2017 +6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 –0.0 + 0.0 –20.1 –0.1 +57.0 +70.2 +0.0 + 0.4 –13.6
2018 +8.5 + 24.0 – 81.0 – 76.6 +0.0 + 0.1 – 4.4 +3.8 +71.5 +105.4 –0.1 – 0.5 –33.2
2019 +2.8 + 59.7 – 63.0 – 61.1 –0.0 – 0.2 – 1.6 –1.4 +126.7 +129.1 +0.1 + 3.1 – 5.5
2020 +4.1 +316.4 +201.2 +191.6 –0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 +4.3 +123.2 +123.6 –0.1 + 0.7 – 1.0
2021 +2.2 +111.8 + 44.1 + 46.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – 2.0 +1.5 +152.2 +147.8 +0.0 – 2.2 + 6.6
2022 –29.6 –836.6 +938.0 +938.1 – + 0.2 – 0.3 +1.7 +216.7 +220.1 –0.1 + 0.1 – 3.3
2022 Jan. –2.0 +161.0 + 27.8 + 26.3 – + 0.1 + 1.4 –0.3 +14.7 +16.6 –0.1 + 0.5 – 2.3
Feb. –0.2 + 28.0 + 13.1 + 11.5 – – 0.4 + 2.0 –0.1 +15.1 +18.4 +0.0 + 1.9 – 5.2
Mar. +2.3 – 7.8 – 10.9 – 9.5 – – 0.0 – 1.4 –0.0 +27.3 +23.0 –0.0 – 1.7 + 6.0
Apr. +0.9 +114.2 – 82.3 – 82.3 – + 0.3 – 0.4 –0.0 +13.1 +21.3 +0.0 + 0.2 – 8.4
May –1.0 – 77.7 + 92.4 + 90.0 – + 0.1 + 2.3 –0.0 +20.1 +18.9 –0.1 – 0.3 + 1.5
June +1.7 – 31.9 + 10.1 + 11.9 – + 0.1 – 1.9 –0.1 +19.9 +24.5 –0.0 + 0.5 – 5.1
July –9.5 – 6.8 – 7.5 – 7.6 – + 0.1 – 0.0 –0.1 +36.1 +23.5 +0.0 – 0.1 +12.7
Aug. –18.5 + 42.5 + 29.0 + 28.3 – + 0.2 + 0.5 +0.1 +30.9 +35.1 –0.0 + 0.3 – 4.5
Sep. –2.7 –1,004.3 +1,092.9 +1,087.0 – + 0.2 + 5.7 –0.0 +16.5 +19.9 +0.1 – 0.3 – 3.2
Oct. –0.7 – 35.8 + 18.5 + 17.8 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +0.2 +20.7 +16.6 –0.0 + 0.7 + 3.5
Nov. –0.8 + 1.8 – 67.6 – 65.5 – – 0.0 – 2.1 +1.1 +12.0 +13.9 –0.0 – 0.7 – 1.3
Dec. +1.0 – 19.9 –177.4 –169.9 – – 0.5 – 7.0 +1.0 – 9.6 –11.7 +0.0 – 0.9 + 2.9
2023 Jan. –1.8 + 22.2 + 96.7 + 96.7 – + 0.0 – 0.1 +0.6 + 0.6 + 9.2 –0.1 + 1.6 –10.3
Feb. –0.2 – 37.4 + 28.6 + 24.3 – + 0.0 + 4.3 +0.2 +13.3 + 6.3 –0.0 – 1.5 + 8.5
Mar. –0.1 + 1.3 – 45.1 – 47.0 – + 0.0 + 1.9 –0.1 + 0.9 + 6.0 +0.0 + 1.4 – 6.5
Apr. +1.0 + 0.7 + 7.8 + 7.2 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +0.1 + 2.1 + 6.5 +0.0 – 1.2 – 3.2
May –0.7 – 5.5 + 48.9 + 48.1 – – 0.3 + 1.1 –0.0 + 6.5 + 9.4 +0.0 – 1.0 – 1.9
June –0.5 + 2.9 –116.9 –115.7 – + 0.1 – 1.3 +0.0 + 4.4 – 3.7 –0.0 + 0.7 + 7.4
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange ofequalisation claims (see also footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the
exchange of equalisation claims.  3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt
securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
27•
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Equalisa-
tion
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in
domestic
banks
and
enterprises TotalSight
deposits
4Time
deposits
4Redis-
counted
bills  5Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
de-
positsTime
deposits
6Savings
de-
posits  7Bank
savings
bonds  8Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
– 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013
– 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
– 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
– 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
– 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
– 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
– 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 2021
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 2022
– 25.7 78.6 1,363.7 137.2 1,226.5 0.0 16.4 4,025.9 2,690.9 750.0 560.8 24.2 33.9 2022 Jan.
– 25.7 78.7 1,369.7 140.5 1,229.2 0.0 16.6 4,037.8 2,704.5 748.5 560.9 23.9 33.8 Feb.
– 25.8 78.7 1,367.7 137.7 1,230.1 0.0 16.5 4,033.7 2,695.6 755.2 559.0 23.9 33.8 Mar.
– 25.9 78.7 1,384.4 140.6 1,243.8 0.0 16.7 4,046.7 2,705.6 759.4 557.9 23.8 33.8 Apr.
– 26.2 78.6 1,393.7 142.7 1,251.0 0.0 17.1 4,056.8 2,724.3 752.1 556.6 23.8 33.6 May
– 26.1 78.8 1,384.7 147.1 1,237.6 0.0 16.9 4,051.8 2,714.4 758.8 554.8 23.8 33.4 June
– 25.9 80.3 1,383.3 134.3 1,249.0 0.0 16.6 4,086.4 2,729.0 780.4 553.0 24.1 33.0 July
– 25.9 79.8 1,403.5 136.0 1,267.5 – 16.5 4,134.3 2,766.8 792.0 550.6 25.0 33.0 Aug.
– 25.8 80.2 1,415.7 149.2 1,266.5 0.0 16.7 4,149.9 2,755.6 823.1 545.2 25.9 33.2 Sep.
– 25.8 80.4 1,419.0 138.1 1,280.9 0.0 16.1 4,168.4 2,748.7 849.3 542.2 28.1 33.6 Oct.
– 25.9 80.2 1,345.0 135.4 1,209.6 0.0 16.1 4,205.6 2,767.9 869.3 536.9 31.5 34.8 Nov.
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 Dec.
– 25.6 80.0 1,231.2 142.6 1,088.7 0.0 15.6 4,199.7 2,722.8 913.5 522.7 40.6 36.9 2023 Jan.
– 25.6 80.2 1,226.0 140.7 1,085.3 0.0 15.6 4,197.1 2,687.7 947.9 516.0 45.5 37.2 Feb.
– 24.6 80.3 1,210.4 137.0 1,073.4 0.0 15.2 4,167.4 2,639.8 968.6 507.2 51.7 36.4 Mar.
– 24.7 80.9 1,227.7 140.8 1,086.9 0.0 15.2 4,167.3 2,632.0 978.5 498.6 58.3 36.5 Apr.
– 24.7 81.1 1,229.8 137.8 1,091.9 0.0 15.1 4,172.9 2,623.9 993.0 490.6 65.4 36.6 May
– 24.4 81.2 1,149.6 134.0 1,015.6 0.0 14.6 4,176.3 2,600.9 1,020.0 483.3 72.1 36.5 June
Changes *
– –1.9 +2.0 –29.0 + 2.2 –31.2 –0.0 –0.6 +69.7 +107.9 –25.3 – 2.4 –10.6 –2.0 2014
– –2.1 –4.3 –46.6 + 3.3 –50.0 +0.0 –1.3 +106.5 +156.2 –28.3 –11.3 –10.1 –1.6 2015
– –1.3 +1.5 – 1.7 + 0.3 – 2.0 +0.0 –0.5 +104.7 +124.5 – 6.9 – 7.9 –5.0 –0.5 2016
– –0.0 –1.6 +11.0 –18.4 +29.4 –0.0 –0.5 +103.1 +142.8 –27.5 – 5.6 –6.7 +0.4 2017
– –1.0 +3.1 –25.0 – 3.1 –21.9 +0.0 –0.4 +117.7 +139.3 –10.8 – 4.3 –6.5 +3.9 2018
– –0.7 +0.1 – 8.6 + 1.6 –10.2 +0.0 –0.3 +122.5 +155.8 –25.7 – 3.4 –4.1 –1.4 2019
– +5.7 –3.3 +313.4 +23.2 +290.2 –0.0 +8.2 +221.6 +273.7 –32.7 –14.5 –4.9 +1.9 2020
– +2.3 +1.0 +105.2 – 7.4 +112.6 +0.0 +3.3 +95.3 +144.3 –46.2 + 0.7 –3.5 –0.2 2021
– –0.1 +1.7 –104.6 + 8.8 –113.4 –0.0 –0.6 +191.8 +65.8 +143.4 –27.5 +10.1 +1.7 2022
– –0.0 –0.6 +23.5 +18.3 + 5.2 –0.0 +0.0 +49.6 +36.3 +14.1 – 0.4 –0.4 –0.3 2022 Jan.
– +0.0 +0.1 + 6.0 + 3.3 + 2.7 –0.0 +0.2 +11.9 +13.6 – 1.6 + 0.1 –0.2 –0.2 Feb.
– +0.1 +0.0 – 1.9 – 2.8 + 0.8 – –0.0 – 4.1 – 9.0 + 6.6 – 1.8 +0.0 – Mar.
– +0.2 –0.0 +16.7 + 3.0 +13.7 – +0.2 +13.0 + 9.5 + 4.2 – 0.6 –0.1 +0.0 Apr.
– +0.3 –0.1 + 9.4 + 2.2 + 7.2 –0.0 +0.3 +10.1 +18.8 – 7.3 – 1.3 +0.0 –0.2 May
– –0.1 +0.2 – 9.0 + 4.4 –13.4 –0.0 –0.2 – 5.0 – 9.9 + 6.7 – 1.8 –0.0 –0.1 June
– –0.2 +1.5 – 1.1 –12.4 +11.2 – –0.3 +33.5 +14.3 +20.7 – 1.8 +0.3 –0.5 July
– –0.0 +0.1 +23.3 + 1.8 +21.6 –0.0 –0.1 +48.1 +37.8 +11.8 – 2.4 +0.9 +0.0 Aug.
– –0.0 +0.4 +12.2 +13.2 – 0.9 +0.0 +0.1 +15.6 –11.4 +31.3 – 5.3 +0.9 +0.2 Sep.
– –0.0 +0.1 + 3.5 –10.9 +14.4 +0.0 –0.5 +17.4 – 8.0 +26.2 – 3.1 +2.2 +0.4 Oct.
– +0.1 –0.1 –73.9 – 2.6 –71.3 –0.0 –0.1 +45.3 +20.9 +26.3 – 5.3 +3.4 +1.3 Nov.
– –0.3 +0.1 –113.2 – 8.5 –104.7 –0.0 –0.4 –43.4 –47.1 + 4.2 – 3.7 +3.2 +1.1 Dec.
– –0.0 –0.4 – 0.3 + 5.8 – 6.1 +0.0 –0.1 +37.6 – 2.9 +40.0 – 5.5 +6.0 +1.0 2023 Jan.
– –0.0 +0.2 – 5.2 – 1.9 – 3.4 – –0.0 – 2.5 –35.0 +34.4 – 6.7 +4.8 +0.4 Feb.
– –0.3 +0.1 –15.2 – 3.7 –11.5 – –0.4 –29.6 –47.3 +20.2 – 8.7 +6.2 –0.1 Mar.
– +0.0 +1.1 +17.3 + 3.8 +13.5 –0.0 –0.0 – 0.1 – 7.9 + 9.8 – 8.6 +6.6 +0.0 Apr.
– +0.0 +0.2 + 2.1 – 3.0 + 5.0 –0.0 –0.1 + 5.6 – 7.9 +14.5 – 8.0 +7.1 +0.1 May
– –0.4 +0.1 –79.7 – 3.7 –76.0 +0.0 –0.5 + 2.3 –23.0 +26.0 – 7.3 +6.7 –0.1 June
including subordinated liabilities.  4 Including liabilities arising from monetary policy
operations with the Bundesbank.  5 Own acceptances and promissory notes
outstanding.  6 Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  7 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8).  8 Including liabilities
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
28•
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)    
Credit balances and loans, bills Loans and bills
PeriodCash in
hand
(non-
euro area
banknotes
and
coins) Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued by
non-banks
End of year or month *
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2022 Jan. 0.3 1,200.2 977.7 714.1 263.6 1.2 221.3 3.5 911.6 610.7 187.0 423.7 10.3 290.7
Feb. 0.5 1,222.3 998.7 734.3 264.4 1.6 222.0 3.6 923.5 615.2 191.4 423.7 9.4 298.9
Mar. 0.5 1,224.2 999.2 729.8 269.4 1.0 224.1 3.6 906.5 597.4 171.8 425.6 10.3 298.9
Apr. 0.6 1,229.5 1,003.6 734.1 269.6 1.6 224.3 3.6 914.4 612.0 180.9 431.1 13.1 289.2
May 0.6 1,222.8 996.5 730.7 265.8 1.7 224.7 3.6 914.3 609.9 182.1 427.9 13.5 290.9
June 0.6 1,232.7 1,007.2 742.2 265.0 2.2 223.3 3.6 929.1 612.4 181.1 431.2 13.7 303.0
July 0.6 1,248.0 1,021.1 748.0 273.1 2.7 224.2 3.5 929.4 615.7 177.0 438.7 12.7 301.0
Aug. 0.5 1,266.1 1,038.5 756.2 282.4 3.4 224.2 3.4 931.5 624.9 183.9 441.0 13.4 293.2
Sep. 0.3 1,287.8 1,057.9 771.9 286.0 4.2 225.8 3.8 935.5 629.4 185.2 444.2 12.4 293.7
Oct. 0.3 1,296.6 1,065.2 787.3 277.9 3.1 228.3 3.4 931.2 629.3 182.0 447.3 12.5 289.5
Nov. 0.2 1,273.7 1,043.2 766.3 276.9 2.9 227.6 3.5 938.8 631.7 187.5 444.2 12.5 294.6
Dec. 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2023 Jan. 0.2 1,195.3 963.1 700.1 263.0 2.7 229.5 4.0 941.0 633.6 190.9 442.7 20.1 287.3
Feb. 0.2 1,201.5 965.7 701.9 263.8 2.9 232.9 4.2 946.4 635.5 190.5 444.9 15.8 295.1
Mar. 0.2 1,203.8 968.2 704.1 264.0 2.9 232.7 4.3 953.0 630.8 187.8 443.0 12.5 309.8
Apr. 0.2 1,184.1 946.5 681.7 264.8 3.6 234.0 4.2 959.3 633.6 191.7 441.9 13.9 311.8
May 0.2 1,211.3 972.8 706.0 266.8 3.4 235.1 4.2 965.1 638.1 193.4 444.7 14.6 312.4
June 0.2 1,177.3 939.1 681.7 257.4 3.6 234.6 4.3 961.8 628.4 181.4 447.0 15.8 317.6
Changes *
2014 –0.0 +86.1 +80.1 +63.2 +16.8 +0.7 +5.3 –0.6 +5.7 –10.2 –12.8 +2.7 – 1.8 +17.7
2015 +0.1 –91.8 –86.0 –82.2 –3.8 –6.7 +0.8 –0.1 –6.1 –9.2 –6.5 –2.7 + 1.1 +2.0
2016 +0.0 –25.5 –14.5 –38.2 +23.7 –0.7 –10.3 –0.0 +17.4 +28.9 +10.1 +18.8 – 3.0 –8.5
2017 +0.0 –57.2 –48.7 –61.5 +12.8 +0.0 –8.5 +0.6 –4.7 +13.0 +8.6 +4.4 + 0.7 –18.4
2018 +0.0 +49.6 +34.0 +57.7 –23.7 +0.2 +15.3 +0.7 +18.3 +28.3 +3.2 +25.2 – 0.4 –9.7
2019 –0.0 –4.1 –11.3 –21.9 +10.7 +0.8 +6.3 +0.7 +26.8 +19.9 +12.7 +7.3 + 3.0 +3.8
2020 –0.0 –32.0 –22.4 –6.6 –15.8 +0.9 –10.5 +0.3 +34.4 +14.7 +9.0 +5.7 + 3.6 +16.1
2021 +0.0 +52.8 +71.1 +68.9 +2.2 –2.5 –15.8 –0.5 +37.8 +39.7 +29.8 +9.9 – 3.2 +1.4
2022 –0.1 +21.7 +20.4 +17.9 +2.6 +1.3 –0.0 +0.2 +37.0 +37.0 +16.8 +20.2 + 6.7 –6.7
2022 Jan. +0.1 +95.8 +96.6 +97.4 –0.8 +0.8 –1.7 +0.1 +37.7 +36.2 +34.8 +1.4 + 2.3 –0.7
Feb. +0.2 +23.2 +22.1 +20.8 +1.2 +0.4 +0.7 +0.0 +12.7 +5.2 +4.6 +0.5 – 0.8 +8.4
Mar. –0.0 –0.0 –1.5 –5.8 +4.3 –0.6 +2.1 +0.0 –18.3 –18.9 –20.1 +1.2 + 0.8 –0.2
Apr. +0.1 –9.7 –10.2 –4.6 –5.6 +0.6 –0.1 +0.0 –1.7 +6.8 +6.8 +0.0 + 2.8 –11.3
May +0.0 –1.1 –1.8 –0.1 –1.7 +0.1 +0.5 +0.0 +3.7 +1.1 +2.2 –1.1 + 0.4 +2.2
June +0.0 –15.4 –14.4 –10.3 –4.1 +0.5 –1.6 +0.0 +9.7 –1.7 –2.3 +0.6 + 0.2 +11.2
July –0.0 +8.4 +7.3 +1.7 +5.6 +0.5 +0.7 –0.1 –4.7 –0.7 –5.3 +4.6 – 1.1 –2.9
Aug. –0.1 +13.9 +13.2 +6.0 +7.2 +0.7 –0.0 –0.2 +0.1 +7.7 +6.3 +1.4 + 0.7 –8.4
Sep. –0.2 +15.0 +12.6 +11.8 +0.8 +0.8 +1.6 +0.4 +3.2 +1.4 –0.2 +1.6 – 1.0 +2.9
Oct. +0.0 +13.4 +11.9 +18.2 –6.3 –1.0 +2.5 –0.3 –2.2 +1.4 –2.9 +4.3 + 0.0 –3.6
Nov. –0.1 –9.4 –8.7 –13.4 +4.7 –0.2 –0.4 +0.1 +16.5 +9.7 +5.5 +4.2 – 0.0 +6.8
Dec. –0.0 –112.4 –106.8 –104.0 –2.8 –1.2 –4.4 +0.2 –19.9 –11.2 –12.7 +1.5 + 2.4 –11.1
2023 Jan. –0.0 +48.2 +40.6 +46.3 –5.7 +1.1 +6.5 +0.3 +30.0 +19.5 +18.6 +0.9 + 5.3 +5.2
Feb. +0.0 +0.6 –2.8 –1.2 –1.6 +0.1 +3.3 +0.2 +1.6 –1.2 –1.3 +0.1 – 4.4 +7.2
Mar. –0.0 +9.2 +9.2 +6.2 +3.0 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 +11.2 –1.1 –1.5 +0.4 – 3.3 +15.5
Apr. +0.0 –17.0 –19.0 –20.9 +1.9 +0.7 +1.3 –0.1 +8.2 +4.4 +4.5 –0.1 + 1.5 +2.4
May +0.0 +16.9 +16.2 +18.0 –1.8 –0.2 +0.9 –0.0 +1.5 +1.4 +1.3 +0.1 + 0.6 –0.5
June +0.0 –17.7 –17.6 –9.9 –7.6 +0.2 –0.3 +0.1 –1.9 –8.7 –11.1 +2.4 + 1.2 +5.6
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequentrevisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
29•
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Time deposits (including bank
savings bonds)Time deposits (including
savings deposits and bank
savings bonds)
Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in foreign
banks
and
enter-
prises TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 2013
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 – 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 2021
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 2022
11.1 16.1 1,098.5 635.9 462.7 321.8 140.8 0.0 339.9 177.2 162.7 82.1 80.5 0.1 2022 Jan.
11.1 16.0 1,130.4 640.4 490.0 349.8 140.2 0.0 361.2 194.5 166.7 87.0 79.7 0.1 Feb.
11.1 15.7 1,113.8 632.7 481.1 349.8 131.3 0.0 361.6 200.0 161.6 82.0 79.6 0.1 Mar.
11.1 15.7 1,113.7 600.6 513.2 381.7 131.4 0.0 384.6 201.5 183.2 102.6 80.6 0.1 Apr.
11.1 15.7 1,127.5 640.4 487.1 351.4 135.7 0.0 382.0 217.1 164.9 85.0 79.9 0.2 May
11.0 15.9 1,100.2 625.5 474.7 340.6 134.1 0.0 387.6 222.7 164.9 82.5 82.4 0.3 June
10.6 15.8 1,107.4 608.8 498.6 359.0 139.6 0.0 390.2 221.6 168.6 87.5 81.1 0.3 July
10.6 15.8 1,120.4 610.9 509.5 360.5 149.0 0.0 400.4 231.3 169.2 87.4 81.8 0.2 Aug.
10.6 15.9 1,169.6 639.0 530.6 373.0 157.6 0.0 409.1 231.4 177.7 95.7 82.0 0.2 Sep.
10.6 15.9 1,188.9 657.6 531.3 372.1 159.2 0.0 401.8 220.0 181.8 100.0 81.8 0.2 Oct.
10.6 15.8 1,150.7 612.1 538.7 385.9 152.7 – 414.1 235.1 179.0 91.2 87.7 0.1 Nov.
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 Dec.
10.4 15.6 1,089.4 601.2 488.3 344.5 143.8 – 405.1 213.5 191.5 101.9 89.6 0.2 2023 Jan.
10.4 15.8 1,086.8 600.1 486.7 345.1 141.6 – 418.4 218.4 200.0 109.9 90.1 0.2 Feb.
10.4 15.9 1,060.0 576.0 484.0 329.3 154.7 – 412.5 216.8 195.7 98.9 96.9 0.3 Mar.
10.4 15.9 1,042.6 540.6 502.0 343.8 158.2 – 423.3 208.8 214.6 116.6 97.9 0.3 Apr.
10.4 16.1 1,059.1 596.1 462.9 299.9 163.0 0.0 436.0 219.3 216.7 116.7 100.0 0.3 May
10.2 16.0 1,025.8 565.0 460.8 302.6 158.2 0.0 411.5 205.6 205.9 107.3 98.6 0.4 June
Changes *
+ 0.1 – 3.8 +76.3 +47.8 +28.5 +39.0 –10.5 –0.0 –43.6 –8.3 –35.3 –30.7 –4.6 +0.2 2014
– 0.6 – 6.1 –15.4 +40.6 –56.0 –48.6 – 7.4 –0.0 –26.5 –13.9 –12.6 +0.3 –13.0 –0.0 2015
– 0.1 – 1.5 +82.7 +51.0 +31.7 +27.0 + 4.7 –0.0 +3.5 –3.1 +6.7 +5.9 +0.8 –0.0 2016
– 1.0 – 4.1 –15.5 +25.2 –40.8 –43.2 + 2.4 ±0.0 +31.8 +11.0 +20.8 +15.6 +5.2 –0.4 2017
– 0.2 – 2.2 –23.9 –23.4 – 0.4 + 2.1 – 2.6 –0.0 –11.9 –0.2 –11.8 –5.7 –6.0 –0.2 2018
– 0.3 – 0.9 – 9.5 –49.4 +39.8 +28.0 +11.8 –0.0 –0.8 +2.1 –2.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.0 2019
– 0.2 – 3.9 +83.8 +87.8 – 4.1 –34.7 +30.6 – +23.6 +13.8 +9.8 +7.1 +2.8 +0.0 2020
– 0.2 – 0.8 +136.6 +19.8 +116.8 +89.2 +27.6 +0.0 +22.7 +6.4 +16.3 +0.0 +16.3 –0.0 2021
– 0.7 – 1.0 +85.8 +29.1 +56.7 +69.6 –13.0 –0.0 +68.2 +49.0 +19.2 +13.9 +5.3 +0.0 2022
– 0.0 – 0.6 +180.8 +178.4 + 2.4 +19.3 –16.9 – +50.8 +34.9 +16.0 +13.1 +2.9 –2022 Jan.
+ 0.0 – 0.0 +33.4 +5.7 +27.8 +28.3 – 0.5 – +21.2 +17.0 +4.2 +5.0 –0.8 – Feb.
– 0.1 – 0.3 –18.3 –8.5 – 9.8 – 0.7 – 9.1 – –0.1 +5.3 –5.4 –5.3 –0.1 –0.0 Mar.
+ 0.0 – 0.1 –13.2 –39.6 +26.4 +27.6 – 1.1 – +19.2 –0.6 +19.8 +19.1 +0.6 – Apr.
– 0.0 + 0.0 +18.7 +42.5 –23.8 –28.6 + 4.8 – –1.1 +16.4 –17.5 –16.9 –0.5 +0.1 May
– 0.1 + 0.1 –21.2 –5.8 –15.4 –13.0 – 2.4 – +3.5 +4.7 –1.2 –3.4 +2.2 +0.0 June
– 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 –20.0 +19.7 +16.2 + 3.5 +0.0 +0.1 –2.2 +2.3 +4.0 –1.8 –0.0 July
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.7 +0.3 + 9.4 + 0.3 + 9.2 –0.0 +8.9 +9.1 –0.2 –0.7 +0.5 –0.0 Aug.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 +42.5 +25.4 +17.2 + 9.4 + 7.7 – +6.9 –0.7 +7.5 +7.5 –0.0 +0.0 Sep.
– + 0.0 +22.6 +20.5 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 1.9 – –5.9 –10.8 +5.0 +4.9 +0.1 –0.1 Oct.
– 0.0 – 0.0 –24.1 –41.3 +17.2 +17.4 – 0.2 –0.0 +5.3 +13.1 –7.9 –7.4 –0.5 –0.0 Nov.
– 0.2 – 0.0 –145.0 –128.3 –16.7 – 6.9 – 9.8 – –40.7 –37.2 –3.5 –6.2 +2.7 –0.0 Dec.
– 0.0 – 0.1 +93.8 +122.3 –28.4 –30.8 + 2.4 – +35.9 +18.1 +17.8 +17.9 –0.1 +0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 – 7.0 –3.5 – 3.5 – 0.9 – 2.6 – +11.6 +4.1 +7.5 +7.2 +0.3 +0.1 Feb.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 –21.8 –21.5 – 0.3 –13.9 +13.6 – –3.9 –0.8 –3.1 –10.0 +7.0 +0.1 Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 –15.3 –34.3 +19.0 +15.2 + 3.8 – +11.7 –7.7 +19.3 +18.1 +1.2 –0.0 Apr.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 +10.1 +52.6 –42.5 –46.3 + 3.8 +0.0 +9.2 +9.5 –0.3 –1.2 +0.9 –0.0 May
– 0.2 – 0.0 –18.2 –17.9 – 0.3 + 3.9 – 4.2 – –23.1 –13.1 –9.9 –8.7 –1.2 +0.1 June

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
30•
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Short-term lending Medium- and long-term   Lending to domestic
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
Periodincluding 
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claimsexcluding 
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claims Total TotalLoans
and
billsNegotiable
money
market
paper Total LoansTreasury
bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 – 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2022 Jan. 3,812.8 3,409.2 262.6 242.3 241.7 0.6 20.3 17.8 2.5 3,550.2 3,180.4
Feb. 3,826.5 3,426.2 267.4 246.9 246.1 0.8 20.5 16.3 4.2 3,559.1 3,195.3
Mar. 3,853.8 3,449.2 273.6 254.8 254.0 0.8 18.9 16.3 2.5 3,580.1 3,209.5
Apr. 3,866.6 3,470.2 277.5 257.9 257.0 0.9 19.6 17.1 2.5 3,589.1 3,226.2
May 3,886.7 3,489.1 280.1 262.5 261.5 1.0 17.6 15.4 2.2 3,606.6 3,242.6
June 3,906.6 3,513.5 290.8 271.4 270.5 0.9 19.5 16.6 2.8 3,615.7 3,255.8
July 3,945.0 3,539.3 291.4 271.8 270.9 0.8 19.6 16.8 2.8 3,653.7 3,293.5
Aug. 3,976.0 3,574.4 305.0 287.3 286.4 0.8 17.7 14.7 3.1 3,671.0 3,314.3
Sep. 3,993.6 3,595.5 311.0 292.8 292.2 0.6 18.2 15.2 3.0 3,682.6 3,329.1
Oct. 4,014.1 3,611.8 308.7 288.9 288.4 0.5 19.9 16.1 3.8 3,705.3 3,347.5
Nov. 4,025.7 3,625.4 310.7 292.9 292.6 0.4 17.7 14.5 3.2 3,715.0 3,359.0
Dec. 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2023 Jan. 4,016.2 3,622.5 303.2 282.5 281.9 0.5 20.7 17.0 3.8 3,713.1 3,360.2
Feb. 4,030.2 3,629.5 297.8 279.9 279.2 0.7 18.0 15.8 2.2 3,732.4 3,371.2
Mar. 4,030.5 3,634.8 305.0 285.1 284.4 0.7 19.9 16.3 3.6 3,725.5 3,369.3
Apr. 4,032.5 3,641.3 304.1 283.3 282.8 0.6 20.8 18.2 2.6 3,728.4 3,374.4
May 4,039.0 3,650.6 299.7 281.0 280.2 0.8 18.7 17.4 1.3 3,739.3 3,388.0
June 4,042.1 3,645.7 300.3 280.5 279.6 0.9 19.8 17.8 2.0 3,741.8 3,388.7
Changes *
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 – 11.6 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 0.0 – 7.1 – 6.5 – 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 – 5.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.8 – 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 – 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 – 12.1 – 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 8.6 – 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 – 19.6 – 19.8 – 19.8 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2021 + 152.2 + 147.8 + 8.8 + 13.8 + 13.8 – 0.1 – 4.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 + 143.4 + 157.9
2022 + 216.7 + 220.0 + 47.6 + 48.5 + 48.5 + 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.9 + 0.0 + 169.1 + 184.8
2022 Jan. + 14.7 + 16.5 + 12.9 + 10.1 + 9.8 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 1.8 + 5.8
Feb. + 15.1 + 18.4 + 6.2 + 6.0 + 5.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 1.5 + 1.7 + 9.0 + 14.9
Mar. + 27.3 + 23.0 + 6.2 + 7.9 + 7.9 – 0.0 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 + 21.0 + 14.2
Apr. + 13.1 + 21.4 + 3.9 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 9.3 + 17.0
May + 20.1 + 18.8 + 2.6 + 4.6 + 4.5 + 0.0 – 2.0 – 1.7 – 0.3 + 17.5 + 16.4
June + 19.9 + 24.5 + 10.8 + 8.9 + 9.0 – 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 9.1 + 13.2
July + 36.1 + 23.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 35.8 + 35.6
Aug. + 30.9 + 35.1 + 13.7 + 15.5 + 15.5 + 0.0 – 1.9 – 2.1 + 0.3 + 17.2 + 20.8
Sep. + 16.5 + 20.0 + 4.8 + 4.4 + 4.6 – 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 11.7 + 14.8
Oct. + 20.7 + 16.6 – 2.0 – 3.6 – 3.5 – 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 22.7 + 18.5
Nov. + 12.0 + 13.9 + 2.2 + 4.4 + 4.5 – 0.1 – 2.1 – 1.5 – 0.6 + 9.7 + 11.8
Dec. – 9.6 – 11.7 – 13.9 – 12.8 – 12.7 – 0.0 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.9 + 4.2 + 1.8
2023 Jan. + 0.6 + 9.2 + 6.7 + 2.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 4.1 + 2.6 + 1.4 – 6.1 + 0.3
Feb. + 13.3 + 6.3 – 6.0 – 3.2 – 3.3 + 0.1 – 2.8 – 1.2 – 1.6 + 19.3 + 11.0
Mar. + 0.9 + 6.0 + 7.6 + 5.7 + 5.7 – 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.4 – 6.7 – 1.8
Apr. + 2.1 + 6.5 – 0.9 – 1.7 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.9 – 1.1 + 3.0 + 5.1
May + 6.5 + 9.4 – 4.4 – 2.3 – 2.6 + 0.3 – 2.1 – 0.8 – 1.2 + 10.9 + 13.6
June + 4.4 – 3.7 + 1.8 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 2.6 + 0.9
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
31•
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
TotalMedium-
termLong-
term SecuritiesMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalMedium-
termLong-
termSecur-
ities  1Equal-
isation
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 – 2.7 2013
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 – 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 – 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 – 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 – 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 – 1.4 2018
2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 – 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 2020
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 2021
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 2022
2,920.6 312.8 2,607.8 259.8 24.7 369.8 229.1 13.9 215.2 140.7 – 1.0 2022 Jan.
2,935.4 313.8 2,621.6 259.9 24.6 363.8 228.5 13.9 214.5 135.4 – 1.1 Feb.
2,950.1 316.1 2,633.9 259.4 24.7 370.7 228.8 13.7 215.1 141.8 – 1.1 Mar.
2,966.8 317.3 2,649.5 259.4 24.9 362.9 229.5 13.7 215.8 133.5 – 1.0 Apr.
2,983.1 319.7 2,663.4 259.5 25.1 364.0 229.1 13.7 215.4 134.9 – 1.0 May
2,998.2 322.2 2,675.9 257.6 25.0 360.0 228.2 13.6 214.6 131.7 – 1.0 June
3,022.5 327.7 2,694.9 271.0 24.9 360.2 229.0 13.5 215.5 131.2 – 1.0 July
3,044.6 335.4 2,709.1 269.8 24.9 356.6 228.7 13.5 215.2 127.9 – 1.0 Aug.
3,058.8 339.5 2,719.3 270.2 24.8 353.5 229.3 13.8 215.4 124.3 – 1.0 Sep.
3,077.4 344.8 2,732.7 270.1 24.8 357.8 229.9 13.8 216.1 127.9 – 1.0 Oct.
3,086.6 344.9 2,741.7 272.4 24.8 356.0 231.7 13.9 217.8 124.3 – 1.0 Nov.
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 Dec.
3,090.3 349.9 2,740.4 269.9 24.6 352.9 233.4 13.8 219.5 119.5 – 1.0 2023 Jan.
3,102.0 355.3 2,746.7 269.2 24.5 361.2 232.5 13.7 218.8 128.7 – 1.1 Feb.
3,101.5 354.8 2,746.7 267.8 23.6 356.2 232.6 13.6 219.0 123.6 – 1.0 Mar.
3,107.6 355.6 2,752.0 266.8 23.6 354.0 232.7 13.9 218.8 121.2 – 1.0 Apr.
3,120.7 360.8 2,760.0 267.2 23.7 351.4 232.4 13.6 218.8 119.0 – 1.0 May
3,117.4 360.0 2,757.4 271.3 23.3 353.1 230.9 13.4 217.6 122.2 – 1.0 June
Changes *
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 +12.5 – 1.8 – 4.1 – 8.5 – 5.1 – 3.4 + 4.3 – – 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 +14.8 – 2.1 – 6.6 – 6.9 – 4.8 – 2.0 + 0.2 – + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 – 0.9 – 30.9 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 3.3 –23.6 – – 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 +15.8 + 0.1 – 39.9 –10.6 – 1.3 – 9.3 –29.4 – – 0.1 2017
+108.7 +19.3 + 89.4 – 6.7 – 0.9 – 37.1 –10.5 – 2.7 – 7.8 –26.6 – – 0.0 2018
+126.0 +18.9 +107.2 + 6.8 – 0.8 – 17.8 – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 –12.3 – + 0.1 2019
+145.0 + 9.4 +135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 – 2.8 – 1.1 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 1.7 – – 0.4 2020
+140.1 + 5.6 +134.5 +17.8 + 2.3 – 14.6 – 3.3 – 1.3 – 2.0 –11.3 – – 0.0 2021
+169.9 +33.5 +136.4 +14.9 – 0.1 – 15.7 + 2.5 – 0.7 + 3.3 –18.2 – – 0.0 2022
+ 4.9 – 1.7 + 6.6 + 0.8 – 0.0 – 4.0 – 0.8 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 3.2 – – 0.0 2022 Jan.
+ 14.8 + 1.0 + 13.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 6.0 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.6 – 5.3 – – 0.0 Feb.
+ 14.7 + 2.3 + 12.4 – 0.5 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 0.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 + 6.5 – – 0.0 Mar.
+ 17.0 + 1.5 + 15.6 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 7.7 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 – 8.4 – – 0.0 Apr.
+ 16.4 + 2.5 + 13.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.1 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.3 + 1.4 – – 0.0 May
+ 15.1 + 2.5 + 12.6 – 1.9 – 0.1 – 4.1 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 3.2 – – 0.0 June
+ 22.5 + 4.4 + 18.1 +13.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.5 – – 0.0 July
+ 22.0 + 7.7 + 14.3 – 1.2 – 0.0 – 3.6 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 3.3 – + 0.0 Aug.
+ 14.3 + 4.0 + 10.4 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 0.5 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 3.6 – + 0.0 Sep.
+ 18.6 + 5.3 + 13.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.6 – 0.0 + 0.6 + 3.6 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 9.4 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 2.4 + 0.0 – 2.1 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.4 – 3.6 – + 0.0 Nov.
+ 0.3 + 4.0 – 3.7 + 1.6 – 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.4 – – 0.0 Dec.
+ 4.4 + 1.2 + 3.3 – 4.2 + 0.0 – 6.4 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 6.1 – – 0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 11.7 + 5.4 + 6.4 – 0.7 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.7 + 9.2 – + 0.1 Feb.
– 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.0 – 1.4 – 0.3 – 4.8 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.3 – 5.1 – – 0.0 Mar.
+ 6.1 + 0.8 + 5.3 – 1.0 + 0.0 – 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 – 0.2 – 2.3 – + 0.0 Apr.
+ 13.2 + 5.2 + 8.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 2.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.3 – – 0.0 May
– 3.3 – 1.1 – 2.2 + 4.1 – 0.3 + 1.8 – 1.5 – 0.2 – 1.2 + 3.2 – – 0.0 June

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
32•
IV. Banks
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
billion €
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios)  1
of which:
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Period TotalMortgage
loans,
total TotalMortgage
loans
secured
by
residen-
tial real
estateOther
housing
loans Totalof which:
Housing
loansManufac-
turingElectricity,
gas and
water
supply;
refuse
disposal,          
mining
and
quarryingConstruc-
tionWhole-
sale and
retail
trade;
repair of
motor                
vehicles
and
motor-
cyclesAgri-
culture,
forestry,
fishing
and
aqua-
cultureTransport-
ation and
storage;
post and                      
telecom-
munica-
tionsFinancial
intermedi-
ation
(excluding
MFIs) and
insurance   
com-
panies
Lending, total                                                 End of year or quarter *
2021 3,147.5 1,591.4 1,678.2 1,373.0 305.2 1,701.5 477.2 146.1 128.3 98.0 140.4 55.9 55.6 186.3
2022 Q2 3,268.7 1,636.4 1,731.4 1,412.8 318.5 1,784.8 494.5 160.2 132.6 104.4 153.4 57.0 56.4 200.2
Q3 3,351.0 1,659.4 1,758.3 1,433.0 325.2 1,845.3 503.1 163.6 147.5 107.3 163.3 56.9 64.9 202.3
Q4 3,365.3 1,676.5 1,773.9 1,448.0 325.8 1,852.2 509.1 160.0 137.7 108.8 155.1 56.3 65.2 211.9
2023 Q1 3,385.9 1,687.3 1,779.0 1,457.3 321.7 1,872.4 512.9 162.8 138.1 110.9 157.5 56.1 63.1 222.8
Q2 3,397.0 1,701.4 1,787.6 1,471.4 316.3 1,879.4 517.7 162.6 137.7 112.5 159.2 56.3 61.9 221.5
Short-term lending
2021 231.8 – 6.9 – 6.9 202.7 4.4 31.6 9.1 18.0 36.4 3.3 3.9 35.0
2022 Q2 270.5 – 7.0 – 7.0 239.5 4.6 44.7 11.6 20.1 42.2 3.9 4.3 42.2
Q3 292.2 – 7.4 – 7.4 260.7 4.9 46.2 24.4 21.1 45.3 3.6 4.2 42.2
Q4 279.4 – 7.4 – 7.4 248.9 5.0 41.6 12.1 20.8 44.7 3.3 3.8 49.8
2023 Q1 284.4 – 7.6 – 7.6 253.6 5.3 43.4 8.1 21.9 46.5 3.4 3.7 54.0
Q2 279.6 – 7.6 – 7.6 248.9 5.4 42.3 7.7 22.6 46.8 3.8 3.6 50.4
Medium-term lending
2021 314.5 – 40.5 – 40.5 239.5 20.6 28.3 5.4 19.3 20.8 4.3 12.3 52.0
2022 Q2 322.2 – 42.0 – 42.0 249.2 22.2 29.1 5.8 21.0 22.3 4.3 13.3 53.7
Q3 339.5 – 43.2 – 43.2 265.9 23.1 30.5 6.0 21.6 23.4 4.3 22.2 54.4
Q4 348.7 – 43.4 – 43.4 275.8 23.5 31.2 6.5 22.2 24.3 4.1 23.0 56.2
2023 Q1 354.8 – 42.8 – 42.8 283.5 23.7 32.5 9.2 22.4 24.8 4.1 21.0 59.3
Q2 360.0 – 42.8 – 42.8 289.4 24.1 34.0 8.0 22.8 26.9 4.1 19.1 61.3
Long-term lending
2021 2,601.2 1,591.4 1,630.9 1,373.0 257.8 1,259.3 452.2 86.2 113.8 60.8 83.2 48.3 39.4 99.3
2022 Q2 2,675.9 1,636.4 1,682.3 1,412.8 269.5 1,296.0 467.7 86.5 115.2 63.4 88.9 48.8 38.8 104.4
Q3 2,719.3 1,659.4 1,707.6 1,433.0 274.6 1,318.6 475.1 86.8 117.1 64.7 94.6 49.0 38.6 105.6
Q4 2,737.1 1,676.5 1,723.1 1,448.0 275.1 1,327.5 480.6 87.2 119.0 65.8 86.1 48.9 38.4 105.9
2023 Q1 2,746.7 1,687.3 1,728.6 1,457.3 271.3 1,335.3 483.9 86.9 120.8 66.6 86.1 48.6 38.4 109.5
Q2 2,757.4 1,701.4 1,737.2 1,471.4 265.9 1,341.1 488.2 86.3 122.1 67.1 85.5 48.5 39.2 109.7
Lending, total                                                 Change during quarter *
2022 Q2 +65.0 +22.2 +29.9 +20.5 + 9.4 +42.7 + 9.1 + 9.4 – 1.7 + 3.2 + 8.2 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 7.1
Q3 +79.0 +23.4 +26.9 +20.5 + 6.4 +58.5 + 8.6 + 2.5 +14.9 + 2.7 + 9.6 – 0.1 + 8.5 + 2.0
Q4 +16.5 +17.2 +15.4 +14.8 + 0.6 + 8.9 + 5.9 – 3.2 – 9.9 + 1.4 – 2.7 – 0.6 + 0.3 +10.2
2023 Q1 +20.4 +11.3 + 4.8 + 8.6 – 3.8 +19.9 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 2.1 – 0.2 – 2.1 +10.6
Q2 +12.3 +14.1 + 8.6 +14.1 – 5.4 + 8.2 + 4.9 – 0.1 – 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.2
Short-term lending
2022 Q2 +16.6 – + 0.0 – + 0.0 +15.4 + 0.1 + 8.2 – 2.4 + 0.6 + 2.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 4.2
Q3 +20.2 – + 0.3 – + 0.3 +19.8 + 0.3 + 0.7 +12.8 + 0.9 + 2.8 – 0.3 – 0.2 + 0.1
Q4 –11.8 – – 0.0 – – 0.0 –10.8 + 0.1 – 4.3 –12.3 – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 7.8
2023 Q1 + 4.7 – + 0.2 – + 0.2 + 4.7 + 0.3 + 1.8 – 4.0 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 3.9
Q2 – 3.6 – – 0.0 – – 0.0 – 3.6 + 0.1 – 1.1 – 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.4
Medium-term lending
2022 Q2 + 6.4 – + 1.2 – + 1.2 + 7.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.9
Q3 +16.1 – + 0.9 – + 0.9 +16.1 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 1.1 – 0.0 + 8.9 + 0.8
Q4 + 9.3 – + 0.1 – + 0.1 +10.0 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 0.8 + 1.9
2023 Q1 + 6.1 – – 0.5 – – 0.5 + 7.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 2.0 + 3.0
Q2 + 4.9 – + 0.0 – + 0.0 + 5.6 + 0.4 + 1.6 – 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.1 – 0.0 – 1.6 + 2.1
Long-term lending
2022 Q2 +42.0 +22.2 +28.7 +20.5 + 8.1 +19.9 + 7.9 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 1.5 + 4.9 + 0.3 – 0.3 + 2.1
Q3 +42.7 +23.4 +25.7 +20.5 + 5.2 +22.6 + 7.4 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 5.7 + 0.3 – 0.2 + 1.2
Q4 +19.0 +17.2 +15.3 +14.8 + 0.5 + 9.7 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 1.1 – 3.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.5
2023 Q1 + 9.6 +11.3 + 5.1 + 8.6 – 3.5 + 7.6 + 2.9 – 0.3 + 1.7 + 0.8 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 3.7
Q2 +11.1 +14.1 + 8.7 +14.1 – 5.4 + 6.2 + 4.3 – 0.6 + 1.3 + 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1
* Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
33•
IV. Banks
Lending to employees and other individualsLending to
non-profit institutions
Services sector (including the professions) Memo items: Other lending
of which: of which:
TotalHousing
enterprisesHolding
companiesOther
real
estate
activitiesLending
to self-
employed
persons  2Lending
to craft
enterprises TotalHousing
loans TotalInstalment
loans  3Debit
balances
on wage,
salary
and
pension
accounts Totalof which:
Housing
loans   Period
End of year or quarter *                                   Lending, total
890.8 308.6 63.8 207.9 483.8 48.3 1,429.3 1,196.6 232.7 184.1 6.9 16.7 4.4 2021
920.4 322.8 68.0 211.5 494.9 49.4 1,467.0 1,232.4 234.6 184.6 7.3 16.9 4.5 2022 Q2
939.6 329.1 71.2 215.5 500.0 54.1 1,488.6 1,250.6 238.0 187.3 7.5 17.1 4.6 Q3
957.4 334.0 79.9 218.2 501.7 54.1 1,495.8 1,260.1 235.7 185.9 7.1 17.3 4.6 Q4
961.2 336.3 78.6 220.4 503.4 54.2 1,496.2 1,261.4 234.7 185.5 7.3 17.4 4.7 2023 Q1
967.7 340.4 78.0 220.9 504.3 55.0 1,500.1 1,265.2 234.9 186.0 7.3 17.5 4.7 Q2
Short-term lending
65.5 14.5 13.0 10.0 19.7 3.8 28.6 2.5 26.1 1.4 6.9 0.5 0.0 2021
70.5 15.9 13.7 11.1 20.8 4.5 30.3 2.5 27.9 1.7 7.3 0.7 0.0 2022 Q2
73.8 15.8 14.9 11.2 20.9 5.3 30.8 2.5 28.3 1.7 7.5 0.6 0.0 Q3
73.0 16.1 15.6 10.8 20.4 5.0 29.9 2.4 27.5 1.7 7.1 0.6 – Q4
72.5 16.5 14.9 11.6 21.0 5.3 30.2 2.3 27.9 2.1 7.3 0.6 –2023 Q1
71.7 16.5 14.2 11.0 21.0 6.7 30.1 2.2 27.9 2.3 7.3 0.6 – Q2
Medium-term lending
97.0 23.1 15.2 27.1 30.0 3.3 74.4 19.8 54.6 50.6 – 0.6 0.1 2021
99.8 24.1 17.1 26.6 29.9 3.2 72.5 19.8 52.7 48.6 – 0.5 0.1 2022 Q2
103.6 25.2 17.7 27.5 30.4 6.4 73.0 20.1 52.9 48.7 – 0.5 0.1 Q3
108.2 25.4 20.1 28.4 30.1 6.5 72.3 19.8 52.5 48.0 – 0.6 0.1 Q4
110.3 25.3 21.4 29.0 30.3 6.4 70.8 19.0 51.8 47.3 – 0.5 0.1 2023 Q1
113.2 25.9 22.0 29.5 30.9 6.2 70.1 18.6 51.5 46.9 – 0.6 0.1 Q2
Long-term lending
728.4 271.1 35.6 170.8 434.1 41.3 1,326.3 1,174.3 152.0 132.1 – 15.6 4.3 2021
750.0 282.8 37.3 173.8 444.2 41.7 1,364.2 1,210.1 154.1 134.4 – 15.7 4.4 2022 Q2
762.2 288.0 38.5 176.7 448.7 42.5 1,384.8 1,228.0 156.7 137.0 – 15.9 4.5 Q3
776.2 292.6 44.2 179.0 451.1 42.6 1,393.5 1,237.9 155.6 136.2 – 16.1 4.6 Q4
778.4 294.6 42.4 179.7 452.1 42.5 1,395.1 1,240.1 155.1 136.1 – 16.3 4.6 2023 Q1
782.7 298.0 41.8 180.3 452.3 42.1 1,399.9 1,244.4 155.5 136.8 – 16.3 4.6 Q2
Change during quarter *                                    Lending, total
+14.4 + 7.4 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 5.8 + 0.4 +22.2 +20.8 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 2022 Q2
+18.3 + 6.2 + 3.1 + 3.9 + 4.3 + 0.2 +20.4 +18.2 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 Q3
+13.3 + 4.9 + 3.5 + 2.4 + 2.1 – 0.1 + 7.5 + 9.5 – 2.0 – 1.3 – 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 Q4
+ 4.1 + 2.5 – 1.4 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.3 – 0.8 – 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 2023 Q1
+ 6.2 + 4.1 – 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 4.0 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
Short-term lending
+ 1.4 + 0.6 – 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 – 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.0 2022 Q2
+ 3.1 – 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 – Q3
– 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.0 Q4
– 0.1 + 0.4 – 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 – –2023 Q1
– 0.9 + 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.6 – 0.1 + 1.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 3.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.9 + 0.1 – 1.0 – 1.1 – + 0.0 – 0.0 2022 Q2
+ 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – + 0.0 + 0.0 Q3
+ 4.6 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.6 – + 0.0 – 0.0 Q4
+ 2.1 – 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.8 – 0.7 – 0.7 – – 0.0 –2023 Q1
+ 2.4 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.4 – + 0.0 – 0.0 Q2
Long-term lending
+10.0 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 1.8 + 5.4 + 0.3 +22.0 +20.8 + 1.3 + 1.4 – + 0.1 + 0.1 2022 Q2
+12.0 + 5.2 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 4.3 + 0.3 +20.0 +18.2 + 1.7 + 1.7 – + 0.2 + 0.1 Q3
+ 9.3 + 4.6 + 0.5 + 1.9 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.9 – 0.9 – 0.7 – + 0.2 + 0.1 Q4
+ 2.1 + 2.2 – 2.0 + 0.8 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 – + 0.1 + 0.1 2023 Q1
+ 4.7 + 3.4 – 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.4 + 4.8 + 4.3 + 0.5 + 0.7 – + 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
are not specially marked.  1 Excluding fiduciary loans.  2 Including sole proprietors. 3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
34•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic non-banks, total                        End of year or month *
2020 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2021 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2022 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.6 35.9 18.5 3.9
2022 July 4,086.4 2,729.0 780.4 213.7 566.7 50.9 515.8 553.0 24.1 33.0 17.3 1.2
Aug. 4,134.3 2,766.8 792.0 226.8 565.1 50.4 514.7 550.6 25.0 33.0 17.5 1.4
Sep. 4,149.9 2,755.6 823.1 263.8 559.3 45.5 513.8 545.2 25.9 33.2 18.3 1.0
Oct. 4,168.4 2,748.7 849.3 290.1 559.3 45.6 513.7 542.2 28.1 33.6 18.3 1.6
Nov. 4,205.6 2,767.9 869.3 309.6 559.7 46.8 512.9 536.9 31.5 34.8 18.4 4.4
Dec. 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.6 35.9 18.5 3.9
2023 Jan. 4,199.7 2,722.8 913.5 351.2 562.3 52.1 510.2 522.7 40.6 36.9 18.6 2.1
Feb. 4,197.1 2,687.7 947.9 381.5 566.4 54.2 512.3 516.0 45.5 37.2 18.7 2.9
Mar. 4,167.4 2,639.8 968.6 402.4 566.3 55.7 510.6 507.2 51.7 36.4 18.7 3.3
Apr. 4,167.3 2,632.0 978.5 408.7 569.7 59.4 510.3 498.6 58.3 36.5 18.9 3.0
May 4,172.9 2,623.9 993.0 419.3 573.6 61.7 511.9 490.6 65.4 36.6 20.4 4.1
June 4,176.3 2,600.9 1,020.0 445.4 574.6 64.4 510.2 483.3 72.1 36.5 20.3 2.8
Changes *
2021 + 95.3 +144.3 – 46.2 – 27.3 –18.9 + 1.5 –20.5 + 0.7 – 3.5 – 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.2
2022 +191.8 + 65.8 +143.4 +152.5 – 9.1 + 0.6 – 9.7 –27.5 +10.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6
2022 July + 33.5 + 14.3 + 20.7 + 18.5 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 0.6 – 1.8 + 0.3 – 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5
Aug. + 48.1 + 37.8 + 11.8 + 13.1 – 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.9 – 2.4 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2
Sep. + 15.6 – 11.4 + 31.3 + 37.0 – 5.7 – 4.9 – 0.8 – 5.3 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.8 – 0.4
Oct. + 17.4 – 8.0 + 26.2 + 26.3 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 2.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.5
Nov. + 45.3 + 20.9 + 26.3 + 18.7 + 7.7 + 1.3 + 6.4 – 5.3 + 3.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 2.9
Dec. – 43.4 – 47.1 + 4.2 + 5.2 – 1.0 + 3.7 – 4.7 – 3.7 + 3.2 + 1.1 + 0.0 – 0.6
2023 Jan. + 37.6 – 2.9 + 40.0 + 36.4 + 3.6 + 1.6 + 2.0 – 5.5 + 6.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 – 1.8
Feb. – 2.5 – 35.0 + 34.4 + 30.3 + 4.1 + 2.1 + 2.0 – 6.7 + 4.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.8
Mar. – 29.6 – 47.3 + 20.2 + 20.3 – 0.1 + 1.5 – 1.6 – 8.7 + 6.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.3
Apr. – 0.1 – 7.9 + 9.8 + 6.4 + 3.4 + 3.7 – 0.3 – 8.6 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.2
May + 5.6 – 7.9 + 14.5 + 10.5 + 3.9 + 2.3 + 1.6 – 8.0 + 7.1 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.1
June + 2.3 – 23.0 + 26.0 + 25.4 + 0.7 + 2.4 – 1.7 – 7.3 + 6.7 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.3
Domestic government End of year or month *
2020 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 –
2021 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2022 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
2022 July 258.3 78.0 174.5 93.0 81.5 24.6 57.0 2.4 3.4 25.4 1.9 –
Aug. 272.6 89.1 177.8 96.2 81.5 24.8 56.7 2.4 3.4 25.5 1.9 –
Sep. 273.0 86.6 180.6 104.6 76.0 20.0 56.1 2.3 3.5 25.7 1.9 –
Oct. 271.2 86.8 178.6 101.2 77.4 19.6 57.8 2.3 3.5 25.7 1.9 –
Nov. 304.5 106.0 192.8 109.6 83.2 20.8 62.4 2.1 3.7 26.6 1.9 2.4
Dec. 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
2023 Jan. 299.4 94.5 199.3 114.4 84.9 23.1 61.8 1.8 3.8 27.5 1.9 0.3
Feb. 317.8 101.4 211.0 123.3 87.6 23.9 63.8 1.7 3.8 27.5 1.9 1.3
Mar. 308.9 92.6 211.0 123.9 87.1 23.4 63.7 1.6 3.8 26.8 1.9 1.1
Apr. 295.1 85.4 204.4 116.3 88.1 24.7 63.4 1.5 3.8 26.8 1.9 1.4
May 300.1 92.2 202.7 115.0 87.7 24.3 63.4 1.3 3.9 26.8 1.9 1.7
June 308.1 95.9 207.0 119.2 87.7 24.2 63.5 1.2 4.0 26.6 1.8 0.5
Changes *
2021 – 17.9 + 3.4 – 20.8 – 17.7 – 3.0 + 2.9 – 6.0 – 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.4 – 0.0 + 1.0
2022 + 69.1 + 0.2 + 69.2 + 64.7 + 4.5 – 0.9 + 5.4 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.5 – 0.1 + 1.4
2022 July + 3.5 – 6.7 + 10.3 + 8.4 + 1.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 –
Aug. + 14.3 + 11.1 + 3.2 + 3.2 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 –
Sep. + 0.4 – 2.4 + 2.8 + 8.3 – 5.5 – 4.9 – 0.6 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 –
Oct. – 1.9 + 0.2 – 2.1 – 3.4 + 1.3 – 0.4 + 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 –
Nov. + 33.0 + 19.2 + 13.9 + 8.3 + 5.6 + 1.0 + 4.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.0 + 2.4
Dec. – 24.7 – 23.5 – 1.1 – 2.8 + 1.7 + 2.4 – 0.7 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.0 –
2023 Jan. + 19.7 + 11.9 + 7.7 + 7.6 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 2.1
Feb. + 18.3 + 6.8 + 11.6 + 8.9 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 1.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.1
Mar. – 8.9 – 8.8 – 0.1 + 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.2
Apr. – 14.1 – 7.1 – 6.9 – 7.9 + 1.0 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.2
May + 5.0 + 6.6 – 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.4
June + 8.0 + 3.8 + 4.2 + 4.2 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.3
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities.
2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
35•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont´d)
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic enterprises and households                            End of year or month *
2020 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2021 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2022 3,882.2 2,638.1 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
2022 July 3,828.1 2,650.9 605.9 120.7 485.2 26.3 458.9 550.6 20.7 7.6 15.4 1.2
Aug. 3,861.7 2,677.7 614.2 130.6 483.6 25.6 458.0 548.2 21.6 7.5 15.6 1.4
Sep. 3,876.9 2,669.0 642.5 159.2 483.3 25.5 457.7 542.9 22.5 7.5 16.3 1.0
Oct. 3,897.2 2,661.9 670.8 188.9 481.9 25.9 455.9 539.9 24.6 7.9 16.4 1.6
Nov. 3,901.1 2,661.9 676.5 200.0 476.5 26.0 450.5 534.8 27.8 8.3 16.4 2.1
Dec. 3,882.2 2,638.1 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
2023 Jan. 3,900.2 2,628.3 714.2 236.8 477.4 29.0 448.4 520.9 36.8 9.4 16.7 1.9
Feb. 3,879.3 2,586.4 737.0 258.2 478.8 30.3 448.5 514.3 41.7 9.7 16.8 1.6
Mar. 3,858.5 2,547.3 757.6 278.4 479.2 32.3 446.9 505.7 47.9 9.7 16.9 2.2
Apr. 3,872.2 2,546.5 774.1 292.5 481.6 34.7 446.9 497.1 54.5 9.7 17.0 1.7
May 3,872.8 2,531.8 790.2 304.3 485.9 37.4 448.5 489.2 61.5 9.8 18.5 2.4
June 3,868.2 2,505.0 813.1 326.1 486.9 40.2 446.7 482.0 68.1 9.9 18.5 2.3
Changes *
2021 +113.2 +140.9 – 25.5 – 9.6 –15.9 – 1.4 –14.5 + 0.9 – 3.1 – 0.6 + 2.8 + 0.2
2022 +122.7 + 65.6 + 74.2 + 87.8 –13.6 + 1.4 –15.1 –27.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.3
2022 July + 30.0 + 21.0 + 10.4 + 10.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 – 0.1 – 1.8 + 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.5
Aug. + 33.8 + 26.7 + 8.6 + 9.8 – 1.2 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 2.4 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2
Sep. + 15.1 – 8.9 + 28.5 + 28.7 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 5.3 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.8 – 0.4
Oct. + 19.2 – 8.2 + 28.3 + 29.7 – 1.4 + 0.4 – 1.8 – 3.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.5
Nov. + 12.2 + 1.7 + 12.4 + 10.3 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 1.8 – 5.1 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.5
Dec. – 18.7 – 23.7 + 5.4 + 8.0 – 2.7 + 1.4 – 4.0 – 3.6 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.6
2023 Jan. + 17.9 – 14.9 + 32.3 + 28.7 + 3.6 + 1.7 + 1.9 – 5.3 + 5.8 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.3
Feb. – 20.8 – 41.9 + 22.8 + 21.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 6.6 + 4.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.3
Mar. – 20.7 – 38.5 + 20.3 + 19.7 + 0.6 + 2.0 – 1.4 – 8.6 + 6.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5
Apr. + 14.0 – 0.7 + 16.7 + 14.3 + 2.4 + 2.4 – 0.0 – 8.5 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5
May + 0.6 – 14.6 + 16.1 + 11.8 + 4.3 + 2.7 + 1.6 – 7.9 + 7.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.7
June – 5.6 – 26.8 + 21.8 + 21.1 + 0.7 + 2.4 – 1.8 – 7.2 + 6.6 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2020 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2021 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2022 1,193.5 783.4 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.6 1.9 13.5 1.5
2022 July 1,168.8 797.0 358.8 88.5 270.3 17.5 252.8 5.1 7.9 1.9 12.5 1.2
Aug. 1,205.4 826.9 365.4 96.1 269.3 16.8 252.4 5.1 8.0 1.9 12.6 1.4
Sep. 1,215.7 815.8 386.8 117.9 268.9 16.6 252.3 5.0 8.1 1.9 13.4 1.0
Oct. 1,232.8 809.3 410.4 143.0 267.4 16.7 250.7 4.9 8.2 1.9 13.3 1.6
Nov. 1,223.9 805.3 405.5 144.1 261.4 16.2 245.1 4.7 8.4 1.9 13.3 2.1
Dec. 1,193.5 783.4 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.6 1.9 13.5 1.5
2023 Jan. 1,220.2 792.5 414.7 156.8 257.9 17.1 240.8 4.3 8.7 2.0 13.5 1.9
Feb. 1,199.2 761.5 424.4 166.8 257.6 17.0 240.6 4.3 9.1 2.0 13.6 1.6
Mar. 1,192.4 749.3 429.7 174.1 255.5 16.8 238.8 4.1 9.3 1.9 13.6 2.2
Apr. 1,190.6 743.1 433.9 178.0 255.9 17.4 238.6 4.0 9.6 2.0 13.7 1.7
May 1,189.3 742.5 433.2 175.7 257.5 17.9 239.6 3.9 9.7 2.0 15.2 2.4
June 1,181.8 726.7 441.4 185.1 256.2 18.3 237.9 3.8 9.9 2.0 15.1 2.3
Changes *
2021 + 28.5 + 47.1 – 16.8 – 1.2 –15.7 + 0.5 –16.2 – 0.5 – 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.2
2022 + 56.2 + 17.7 + 38.8 + 52.1 –13.3 + 1.0 –14.3 – 0.9 + 0.6 – 0.5 + 1.0 + 1.3
2022 July + 8.8 – 1.4 + 10.0 + 9.3 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.5
Aug. + 36.6 + 29.9 + 6.6 + 7.6 – 1.0 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2
Sep. + 10.2 – 11.4 + 21.6 + 21.8 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.4
Oct. + 16.0 – 7.6 + 23.6 + 25.1 – 1.5 + 0.1 – 1.5 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.5
Nov. – 0.5 – 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 – 0.3 + 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.5
Dec. – 30.3 – 21.7 – 8.5 – 3.3 – 5.2 + 0.6 – 5.7 – 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.6
2023 Jan. + 26.5 + 9.0 + 17.4 + 15.9 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 1.3 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3
Feb. – 21.0 – 31.0 + 9.7 + 10.0 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.3
Mar. – 6.6 – 11.8 + 5.1 + 6.9 – 1.8 – 0.2 – 1.6 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.5
Apr. – 1.6 – 6.2 + 4.5 + 4.1 + 0.4 + 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5
May – 1.2 – 0.5 – 0.7 – 2.3 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 1.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.7
June – 8.5 – 15.9 + 7.3 + 8.9 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1
4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
36•
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2  
by creditor group by creditor group 
Domestic households Domestic households
PeriodDeposits of
domestic
households
and
non-profit
institutions,
total Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individualsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tions Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individuals
End of year or month *
2020 2,539.5 1,713.8 1,672.7 291.1 1,215.4 166.2 41.1 258.6 245.1 19.3 190.5 35.2
2021 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2022 2,688.7 1,854.7 1,809.9 307.3 1,342.5 160.1 44.8 284.8 268.7 31.2 200.5 37.1
2023 Jan. 2,680.0 1,835.8 1,791.8 305.3 1,329.4 157.1 44.0 299.5 282.9 34.5 210.1 38.3
Feb. 2,680.1 1,824.9 1,780.9 300.0 1,325.3 155.6 44.0 312.6 295.4 38.1 218.1 39.2
Mar. 2,666.0 1,798.0 1,754.4 290.0 1,310.9 153.5 43.5 328.0 309.7 42.2 227.2 40.2
Apr. 2,681.6 1,803.5 1,761.0 291.7 1,315.1 154.3 42.4 340.2 321.6 45.2 235.5 40.9
May 2,683.5 1,789.3 1,746.6 290.0 1,304.9 151.7 42.7 357.0 337.2 48.7 246.6 41.9
June 2,686.4 1,778.3 1,736.0 282.4 1,302.6 151.1 42.3 371.7 351.9 52.1 256.8 43.1
Changes *
2021 + 84.7 +93.8 +90.3 +17.3 +73.7 – 0.6 + 3.5 – 8.6 – 7.2 – 1.1 – 4.7 –1.3
2022 + 66.5 +48.0 +47.8 – 1.5 +54.1 – 4.7 + 0.1 +35.4 +31.4 +12.9 +17.2 +1.2
2023 Jan. – 8.6 –23.9 –23.1 – 1.9 –18.1 – 3.0 – 0.8 +14.9 +14.2 + 3.4 + 9.6 +1.2
Feb. + 0.1 –10.9 –10.9 – 5.3 – 4.1 – 1.5 – 0.0 +13.1 +12.5 + 3.6 + 8.0 +0.9
Mar. – 14.1 –26.8 –26.3 –10.4 –14.4 – 1.5 – 0.5 +15.2 +14.1 + 4.0 + 9.1 +1.0
Apr. + 15.6 + 5.5 + 6.6 + 1.6 + 4.1 + 0.9 – 1.1 +12.2 +11.9 + 3.0 + 8.2 +0.8
May + 1.9 –14.1 –14.4 – 1.8 –10.3 – 2.4 + 0.3 +16.8 +15.5 + 3.5 +11.1 +1.0
June + 2.9 –10.9 –10.4 – 7.6 – 2.2 – 0.6 – 0.5 +14.5 +14.7 + 3.3 +10.1 +1.3
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional.Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
marked.  1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
€ billion
Deposits    
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
PeriodDomestic
government,
total TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans
End of year or month *
2020 229.5 48.6 4.8 7.2 36.5 0.0 11.3 46.5 21.2 11.4 13.2 0.7 14.1
2021 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2022 279.8 66.8 7.9 24.2 34.6 0.1 11.4 53.8 17.1 25.2 10.9 0.5 15.9
2023 Jan. 299.4 73.8 15.5 23.7 34.6 0.0 11.4 65.6 22.2 31.3 11.6 0.5 16.1
Feb. 317.8 82.5 16.4 29.5 36.6 0.0 11.4 70.3 24.2 34.2 11.4 0.5 16.1
Mar. 308.9 73.3 13.4 23.3 36.6 0.0 11.4 67.7 22.7 33.5 11.1 0.5 15.4
Apr. 295.1 65.9 10.3 19.2 36.4 0.0 11.4 61.6 18.2 32.1 10.9 0.5 15.4
May 300.1 62.4 9.7 16.4 36.2 0.0 11.4 59.5 18.6 29.6 10.8 0.5 15.5
June 308.1 64.0 13.8 13.8 36.5 0.0 11.1 70.0 23.9 34.9 10.7 0.5 15.5
Changes *
2021 –17.9 –5.0 –0.5 –4.1 –0.4 +0.0 +0.3 +1.0 +0.6 +2.3 –1.8 –0.1 +0.0
2022 +69.1 +23.0 +3.5 +20.9 –1.4 –0.0 –0.3 +6.4 –4.6 +11.3 –0.3 –0.1 +1.8
2023 Jan. +19.7 +6.9 +7.5 –0.6 –0.0 –0.0 +0.0 +11.9 +5.1 +6.1 +0.7 +0.0 +0.1
Feb. +18.3 +8.7 +0.9 +5.8 +2.0 –0.0 +0.0 +4.7 +2.0 +2.9 –0.2 –0.0 +0.0
Mar. – 8.9 –9.2 –3.0 –6.2 –0.0 –0.0 +0.0 –2.5 –1.4 –0.7 –0.4 –0.0 –0.0
Apr. –14.1 –7.4 –3.1 –4.0 –0.2 – –0.0 –6.4 –4.5 –1.7 –0.2 +0.0 +0.0
May + 5.0 –3.5 –0.5 –2.8 –0.1 –0.0 –0.0 –2.1 +0.5 –2.5 –0.1 –0.0 +0.1
June + 8.0 +1.6 +4.1 –2.7 +0.2 – –0.2 +10.5 +5.3 +5.3 –0.1 –0.0 +0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and DeutscheTelekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”.
Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date
are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
37•
IV. Banks
Savings deposits  3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year  2
of which:
Domestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsup to and
including
1 year Totalup to and
including
2 yearsmore than
2 years TotalDomestic
householdsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsBank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)  5Liabilities
arising
from repos Period
End of year or month *
13.5 40.1 218.5 12.0 206.5 552.0 545.7 6.3 15.1 6.7 2.7 –2020
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 –2021
16.0 67.2 217.5 10.6 206.9 526.8 521.8 5.1 22.4 6.8 3.1 –2022
16.6 80.0 219.5 12.0 207.5 516.6 511.7 4.9 28.1 7.4 3.2 –2023 Jan.
17.2 91.4 221.3 13.3 207.9 510.0 505.2 4.8 32.6 7.8 3.2 – Feb.
18.3 104.3 223.7 15.5 208.2 501.5 496.9 4.6 38.6 7.8 3.3 – Mar.
18.6 114.5 225.7 17.3 208.4 493.1 488.6 4.5 44.9 7.7 3.3 – Apr.
19.9 128.7 228.4 19.5 208.8 485.3 481.0 4.4 51.8 7.7 3.3 – May
19.7 141.0 230.7 21.9 208.8 478.2 474.0 4.2 58.2 7.8 3.4 – June
Changes *
– 1.4 – 8.4 – 0.2 –1.9 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 1.5 –0.1 – 1.9 –0.6 + 0.2 –2021
+ 4.0 + 35.7 – 0.3 +0.5 – 0.8 –26.1 –25.0 –1.1 + 9.2 +0.7 + 0.3 –2022
+ 0.7 + 12.8 + 2.1 +1.4 + 0.6 – 5.3 – 5.0 –0.2 + 5.7 +0.7 + 0.1 –2023 Jan.
+ 0.6 + 11.3 + 1.8 +1.4 + 0.4 – 6.6 – 6.5 –0.1 + 4.5 +0.3 + 0.0 – Feb.
+ 1.1 + 12.8 + 2.4 +2.2 + 0.2 – 8.5 – 8.3 –0.2 + 5.9 –0.0 + 0.0 – Mar.
+ 0.3 + 10.2 + 2.0 +1.8 + 0.2 – 8.4 – 8.3 –0.1 + 6.3 –0.0 + 0.0 – Apr.
+ 1.3 + 14.1 + 2.7 +2.2 + 0.5 – 7.8 – 7.6 –0.2 + 7.0 –0.0 + 0.0 – May
– 0.1 + 12.2 + 2.3 +2.4 – 0.1 – 7.1 – 7.0 –0.1 + 6.3 +0.1 + 0.0 – June
registered debt securities.  2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Table IV.12).  3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsofootnote 2).  4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2,4Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
68.5 43.2 8.0 12.4 4.9 0.0 66.0 10.9 32.9 21.4 0.8 –2020
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 –2021
80.0 49.2 12.5 13.8 4.4 0.0 79.2 8.3 44.9 25.5 0.6 –2022
71.4 39.5 13.6 13.9 4.4 0.0 88.8 17.3 45.9 24.8 0.7 –2023 Jan.
76.6 42.9 15.4 14.0 4.3 0.0 88.5 17.9 44.3 25.7 0.7 – Feb.
73.9 39.1 16.6 14.0 4.2 0.0 94.0 17.4 50.5 25.4 0.7 – Mar.
73.6 38.7 16.8 14.1 4.0 0.0 94.0 18.4 48.2 26.7 0.7 – Apr.
80.2 43.7 18.2 14.3 4.0 0.0 98.1 20.1 50.8 26.4 0.8 – May
75.1 38.3 18.6 14.1 4.0 0.0 99.0 19.9 51.9 26.4 0.7 – June
Changes *
+2.8 +5.6 – 2.0 –0.2 – 0.5 – –16.8 –2.2 –13.9 –0.6 + 0.1 –2021
+10.2 +0.9 + 7.9 +1.3 + 0.1 – +29.6 +0.3 +24.5 +4.9 – 0.2 –2022
–8.7 –9.7 + 1.1 +0.0 – 0.0 – + 9.5 +9.1 + 1.1 –0.6 + 0.0 –2023 Jan.
+5.2 +3.4 + 1.8 +0.1 – 0.1 – – 0.3 +0.5 – 1.6 +0.8 – 0.0 – Feb.
–2.6 –3.8 + 1.2 +0.1 – 0.1 – + 5.4 –0.5 + 6.2 –0.3 + 0.0 – Mar.
–0.3 –0.4 + 0.2 +0.1 – 0.2 – – 0.1 +1.0 – 2.3 +1.3 – 0.0 – Apr.
+6.5 +5.0 + 1.4 +0.2 – 0.1 – + 4.1 +1.7 + 2.6 –0.3 + 0.0 – May
–5.1 –5.4 + 0.4 –0.1 + 0.0 – + 0.9 –0.2 + 1.1 –0.0 – 0.0 – June
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Federal Railways Fund,
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund,
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund.  2 Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities.  3 Including deposits under savings and loan
contracts.  4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
38•
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months'
noticeat more than 3
months' notice
Period Total Total Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeMemo
item:
Interest
credited
on
savings
depositsnon-banks,
total Totalof which:
With
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsforeign
non-banks
End of year or month *
2020 566.8 560.6 533.3 288.0 27.3 18.0 6.3 5.7 1.8 30.2 28.3 22.1 1.9
2021 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 1.5 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2022 538.5 533.2 510.3 254.2 22.9 14.2 5.3 4.8 1.4 34.9 34.6 20.8 0.2
2023 Feb. 521.1 516.0 490.9 233.4 25.1 16.7 5.1 4.6 0.1 45.8 45.5 22.1 0.3
Mar. 512.3 507.2 480.6 229.4 26.7 18.4 5.0 4.5 0.1 52.1 51.7 22.9 0.4
Apr. 503.5 498.6 470.4 214.3 28.2 20.1 4.9 4.4 0.1 58.7 58.3 23.7 0.4
May 495.5 490.6 460.2 210.0 30.4 22.3 4.9 4.3 0.1 65.9 65.4 24.5 0.5
June 488.1 483.3 450.2 206.0 33.0 25.2 4.8 4.2 0.1 72.6 72.1 25.4 0.5
Changes *
2021 +0.3 +0.7 +3.9 –18.5 –3.2 –3.2 –0.4 –0.3 . –5.2 –3.5 –2.3 –1.7
2022 –28.1 –27.5 –26.4 –14.6 –1.2 –0.6 –0.6 –0.6 . +10.2 +10.1 +1.3 +0.1
2023 Feb. –6.8 –6.7 –7.9 –3.8 +1.2 +1.3 –0.1 –0.1 . +4.9 +4.8 +0.6 +0.0
Mar. –8.8 –8.7 –10.3 –3.9 +1.6 +1.7 –0.1 –0.1 . +6.3 +6.2 +0.8 +0.0
Apr. –8.7 –8.6 –10.1 –4.7 +1.5 +1.6 –0.1 –0.1 . +6.6 +6.6 +0.8 +0.0
May –8.1 –8.0 –10.2 –4.2 +2.2 +2.2 –0.1 –0.1 . +7.2 +7.1 +0.9 +0.1
June –7.4 –7.3 –9.9 –4.0 +2.6 +2.9 –0.1 –0.1 . +6.7 +6.7 +0.8 +0.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified as timedeposits.  2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
basic rate of interest.  3 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
securities.
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
of which:
with maturities ofNon-negotiable
bearer debt
securities and
money market
paper  6 Subordinated
up to
and including 1 yearmore than 1 year up to
and including 2 years
Period TotalFloating
rate
bonds  1Zero
coupon
bonds  1,2Foreign
currency
bonds  3,4Certifi-
cates
of
deposit Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5more
than
2 years Totalof which:
with
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsnegotiable
debt
securitiesnon-
negotiable
debt
securities
End of year or month *
2020 1,119.0 117.1 12.7 313.6 89.4 94.3 1.5 23.8 3.1 1,000.9 1.1 0.9 34.8 0.4
2021 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2022 1,231.5 92.8 15.0 307.8 88.6 98.6 1.4 26.6 3.4 1,106.4 0.8 0.7 37.8 0.1
2023 Feb. 1,258.2 94.2 14.2 300.3 84.7 98.4 1.4 31.9 3.6 1,127.9 0.9 0.8 38.0 0.1
Mar. 1,274.7 86.0 14.3 300.0 95.3 111.6 1.4 34.2 3.6 1,128.9 0.8 0.8 37.7 0.1
Apr. 1,270.7 85.9 13.6 282.8 91.5 107.1 1.4 33.1 3.7 1,130.4 0.8 0.8 37.6 0.1
May 1,305.4 85.9 13.4 299.8 104.6 121.4 1.5 35.8 3.8 1,148.3 0.8 0.8 36.7 0.1
June 1,294.5 84.0 14.7 299.6 98.4 118.1 1.4 35.9 3.3 1,140.5 0.5 0.5 37.7 0.1
Changes *
2021 +54.0 –10.3 +0.8 +17.6 +9.4 +12.6 + 0.4 –5.9 +1.3 +47.3 +0.4 +0.3 –0.2 –0.3
2022 +59.1 –12.7 +1.1 –23.6 –9.9 –8.3 – 0.5 +8.5 –1.1 +58.9 –0.1 +0.1 +3.5 –
2023 Feb. + 8.5 +3.0 –0.2 –5.1 –6.5 –2.9 + 0.0 +3.4 +0.1 +7.9 +0.0 +0.0 +0.3 –
Mar. +16.5 –8.2 +0.1 –0.3 +10.6 +13.2 + 0.0 +2.3 +0.0 +1.0 –0.0 +0.0 –0.3 –
Apr. – 4.1 –0.1 –0.7 –17.2 –3.8 –4.6 + 0.0 –1.1 +0.1 +1.6 –0.0 –0.0 –0.1 –
May +34.7 +0.1 –0.2 +17.0 +13.1 +14.3 + 0.1 +2.6 +0.1 +17.8 +0.0 +0.0 –0.9 –
June –10.2 –1.9 +1.3 –0.2 –6.2 –3.2 + 0.0 +0.7 –0.0 –7.8 –0.0 –0.0 +1.0 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies.  2 Issue value when
floated.  3 Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreigncurrencies.  4 Bonds denominated in non-euro area currencies.  5 Negotiable bearer debt
securities and money market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%.
6 Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see
also Table IV.10, footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
39•
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks
(MFIs)  6Deposits of non-
banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans
End of
year/monthNum-
ber
of
associ-
ationsBalance
sheet
total  1Credit
bal-
ances
and
loans
(ex-
cluding
building
loans)  2Building
loans  3Bank
debt
secur-
ities  4Loans
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsInterim
and
bridging
loansOther
building
loansSecur- 
ities (in-
cluding
Treasury
bills
and
Treasury
discount
paper)  5Deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight
and time
depositsDeposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight and
time de-
posits  7Bearer
debt
secur-
ities
out-
stand-
ingCapital
(includ-
ing pub-
lished
re-
serves)  8Memo
item:
New
con-
tracts
entered
into in
year or
month  9
All building and loan associations
2022 18 259.7 30.6 0.0 15.4 11.1 135.0 40.5 22.9 2.5 36.1 185.3 9.3 5.2 12.3 91.3
2023 Apr. 18 260.4 30.3 0.0 15.6 12.4 134.8 40.5 22.8 1.9 35.7 184.9 10.3 6.1 12.9 8.2
May 18 260.2 29.7 0.0 15.7 12.7 134.8 40.7 22.5 1.8 35.5 184.9 10.4 6.1 13.0 8.4
June 18 259.5 28.3 0.1 15.8 13.1 135.0 40.8 22.4 1.7 35.1 184.5 10.3 6.1 13.0 8.3
Private building and Ioan associations
2023 Apr. 10 183.7 15.9 0.0 8.0 8.7 104.7 34.5 9.2 1.0 33.0 119.1 10.0 6.1 8.9 5.5
May 10 183.6 15.4 0.0 8.3 8.9 104.7 34.7 9.0 0.9 33.0 119.2 10.1 6.1 8.9 5.7
June 10 182.9 14.1 0.0 8.4 9.2 104.9 34.8 8.9 0.8 32.4 118.9 9.9 6.1 8.9 5.6
Public building and Ioan associations
2023 Apr. 8 76.8 14.5 0.0 7.6 3.6 30.1 6.0 13.6 0.9 2.7 65.8 0.3 – 4.0 2.7
May 8 76.5 14.3 0.0 7.5 3.8 30.1 6.0 13.5 0.9 2.5 65.7 0.3 – 4.1 2.8
June 8 76.6 14.2 0.0 7.4 4.0 30.2 6.1 13.5 0.8 2.7 65.6 0.3 – 4.1 2.7
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Capital promised Capital disbursed Changes in deposits
under savings and
loan contracts AllocationsDisbursement
commitments
outstanding at
end of periodInterest and
repayments
received on
building loans  11
Deposits under
savings and
loan contractsLoans under
savings and
loan contracts  10
PeriodAmounts
paid into
savings
and
loan ac-
counts  10Interest
credited
on
deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsRepay-
ments
of
deposits
under
cancelled
savings
and
loan
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Net
alloca-
tions  12 Total Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loans Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loansNewly
granted
interim
and
bridging
loans
and
other
building
loans Totalof
which:
Under
alloc-
ated
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Repay-
ments
during
quarterMemo
item:
Housing
bonuses
re-
ceived  13
All building and loan associations
2022 27.5 2.0 8.7 51.5 30.7 48.5 20.2 4.1 5.3 3.8 23.0 16.4 6.7 5.4 4.1 0.2
2023 Apr. 2.2 0.1 0.5 4.5 3.6 4.2 2.3 0.4 0.7 0.4 1.2 15.0 7.1 0.4 0.0
May 2.5 0.1 0.6 4.2 3.2 4.1 2.1 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.3 14.6 7.1 0.4 0.0
June 2.3 0.1 0.6 4.6 3.5 4.3 2.2 0.4 0.8 0.3 1.4 14.3 7.2 0.4 ... 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2023 Apr. 1.4 0.1 0.3 3.2 2.5 3.1 1.7 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.9 10.1 3.8 0.3 0.0
May 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.9 2.1 2.9 1.4 0.2 0.4 0.3 1.0 9.8 3.8 0.3 0.0
June 1.5 0.0 0.3 3.2 2.4 3.0 1.5 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.1 9.7 4.0 0.3 ... 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2023 Apr. 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.1 1.1 0.6 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.9 3.3 0.1 0.0
May 0.9 0.0 0.3 1.3 1.1 1.2 0.7 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.8 3.3 0.1 0.0
June 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.4 1.1 1.3 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.7 3.2 0.1 ... 0.0
* Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures for
the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 See Table IV.2,
footnote 1.  2 Including claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from
registered debt securities and central bank credit balances.  3 Loans under savings and
loan contracts and interim and bridging loans.  4 Including money market paper and
small amounts of other securities issued by banks.  5 Including equalisation claims.
6 Including liabilities to building and loan associations.  7 Including small amounts of
savings deposits.  8 Including participation rights capital and fund for general bankingrisks. 9 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
new contracts.  10 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital disbursed".  11 Including housing
bonuses credited.  12 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans.  13 The amounts already
credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into
savings and loan accounts" and "Interest and repayments received on building loans".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2020 50 206 1,552.2 376.7 364.0 213.2 150.8 12.7 504.8 409.6 14.3 395.3 95.2 670.7 523.6
2021 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2022 47 202 1,625.5 461.8 447.4 315.6 131.8 14.4 516.7 447.7 9.7 437.9 69.0 647.0 513.3
2022 Aug. 50 208 1,735.3 497.8 483.0 328.4 154.6 14.8 569.2 497.0 11.1 485.9 72.2 668.3 503.1
Sep. 50 208 1,889.5 536.3 522.4 354.4 168.0 13.9 563.5 488.9 10.6 478.3 74.6 789.8 632.4
Oct. 50 207 1,873.5 533.0 519.9 359.7 160.2 13.1 562.1 487.8 11.2 476.5 74.4 778.4 625.8
Nov. 50 207 1,757.8 511.2 498.6 347.3 151.3 12.6 548.7 475.2 10.5 464.7 73.6 697.9 526.6
Dec. 47 202 1,625.5 461.8 447.4 315.6 131.8 14.4 516.7 447.7 9.7 437.9 69.0 647.0 513.3
2023 Jan. 47 201 1,638.4 503.3 488.3 346.1 142.2 14.9 510.1 439.4 9.5 429.9 70.7 625.0 462.3
Feb. 47 200 1,663.9 493.1 477.4 337.8 139.6 15.6 509.2 440.0 9.6 430.5 69.2 661.6 509.3
Mar. 47 199 1,565.2 471.2 454.2 313.9 140.3 17.0 500.4 432.5 9.3 423.2 67.9 593.7 437.7
Apr. 47 196 1,566.1 470.6 453.1 312.2 141.0 17.4 499.2 432.1 8.6 423.5 67.1 596.3 440.8
May 47 201 1,616.3 478.9 459.4 310.3 149.1 19.5 506.8 434.7 6.3 428.3 72.1 630.7 462.3
Changes *
2021 +1 +1 –48.4 +87.3 +87.1 +84.9 +2.2 +0.3 –26.2 –6.5 –1.3 –5.1 –19.7 –136.9 –128.1
2022 –4 –5 +124.1 –13.3 –14.3 +17.8 –32.1 +1.0 +6.7 +17.5 –3.2 +20.6 –10.8 +108.1 +103.0
2022 Sep. ±0 – +153.1 +36.7 +37.6 +26.0 +11.6 –0.9 –11.9 –13.7 –0.5 –13.2 +1.8 +120.3 +128.5
Oct. ±0 –1 –15.2 –1.6 –0.8 +5.3 –6.1 –0.8 +3.0 +2.7 +0.6 +2.1 +0.3 – 10.6 – 6.0
Nov. ±0 – –113.5 –17.9 –17.5 –12.4 –5.0 –0.4 –0.4 –0.8 –0.8 –0.0 +0.5 – 78.3 –97.0
Dec. –3 –5 –131.0 –46.9 –48.7 –31.7 –17.0 +1.8 –23.6 –19.9 –0.7 –19.2 –3.7 – 49.6 –11.9
2023 Jan. ±0 –1 +13.3 +42.5 +42.0 +30.5 +11.5 +0.5 –2.7 –4.8 –0.3 –4.6 +2.1 – 21.6 –50.4
Feb. ±0 –1 +24.5 –11.7 –12.4 –8.3 –4.1 +0.7 –5.7 –3.7 +0.1 –3.8 –2.0 + 35.6 +46.2
Mar. ±0 –1 –97.4 –20.0 –21.3 –24.0 +2.6 +1.3 –2.9 –2.3 –0.3 –2.0 –0.7 – 66.6 –70.4
Apr. ±0 –3 +1.3 +0.4 –0.0 –1.7 +1.6 +0.5 +1.6 +2.1 –0.7 +2.8 –0.5 + 3.1 + 3.5
May ±0 +5 +48.9 +5.8 +3.8 –1.9 +5.7 +2.1 +0.6 –3.7 –2.3 –1.4 +4.3 + 33.0 +20.1
Foreign subsidiaries                                           End of year or month *
2020 12 36 229.5 44.8 39.9 17.4 22.5 4.9 139.7 114.4 13.1 101.4 25.3 44.9 0.0
2021 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2022 11 32 256.7 61.5 52.0 20.5 31.4 9.5 145.8 124.5 13.3 111.2 21.3 49.4 0.0
2022 Aug. 11 34 263.5 48.4 42.8 19.7 23.0 5.6 150.1 125.5 13.2 112.3 24.6 64.9 0.0
Sep. 11 33 260.5 53.0 47.9 20.8 27.1 5.2 149.3 126.0 13.1 112.9 23.3 58.2 0.0
Oct. 11 33 258.2 53.0 47.0 19.3 27.7 6.0 149.1 127.0 13.3 113.7 22.0 56.1 0.0
Nov. 11 33 258.2 58.1 49.5 19.4 30.1 8.6 148.4 127.0 13.4 113.6 21.4 51.7 0.0
Dec. 11 32 256.7 61.5 52.0 20.5 31.4 9.5 145.8 124.5 13.3 111.2 21.3 49.4 0.0
2023 Jan. 11 32 253.0 60.0 49.9 20.0 29.9 10.1 145.3 124.5 13.3 111.3 20.7 47.8 0.0
Feb. 11 32 254.8 60.7 50.6 22.4 28.2 10.1 146.1 125.4 13.4 111.9 20.7 47.9 0.0
Mar. 11 32 253.9 62.2 51.7 20.7 31.0 10.5 146.5 126.2 13.3 112.9 20.2 45.2 0.0
Apr. 11 31 250.9 64.4 53.3 22.4 30.9 11.1 145.3 125.6 13.0 112.6 19.8 41.2 0.0
May 11 31 250.9 59.3 48.8 21.5 27.2 10.5 146.2 126.3 12.8 113.5 19.9 45.5 0.0
Changes *
2021 ±0 –1 +12.0 +3.8 +2.8 +3.4 –0.5 +1.0 –2.5 –0.5 –0.5 –0.0 –2.1 + 10.8 ± 0.0
2022 –1 –3 +6.5 +8.2 +5.2 –0.2 +5.6 +2.8 +5.0 +6.9 +0.7 +6.3 –1.9 – 6.5 ± 0.0
2022 Sep. – –1 –4.4 +3.9 +4.5 +1.0 +3.5 –0.6 –1.5 –0.2 –0.1 –0.1 –1.3 – 6.7 ± 0.0
Oct. – – –1.2 +0.6 –0.4 –1.5 +1.1 +1.0 +0.3 +1.5 +0.2 +1.4 –1.2 – 2.1 ± 0.0
Nov. – – +1.7 +5.4 +2.6 +0.1 +2.6 +2.8 +0.7 +1.4 +0.1 +1.2 –0.7 – 4.4 ± 0.0
Dec. – –1 +0.2 +4.1 +3.0 +1.2 +1.8 +1.1 –1.7 –1.6 –0.2 –1.5 –0.0 – 2.2 ± 0.0
2023 Jan. – – –2.7 –1.0 –1.7 –0.6 –1.2 +0.7 –0.0 +0.6 –0.0 +0.6 –0.6 – 1.6 ± 0.0
Feb. – – +0.6 +0.3 +0.4 +2.4 –2.1 –0.1 +0.2 +0.2 +0.2 +0.0 –0.0 + 0.1 ± 0.0
Mar. – – +0.4 +2.0 +1.5 –1.7 +3.2 +0.6 +1.1 +1.6 –0.1 +1.7 –0.5 – 2.7 ± 0.0
Apr. – –1 –2.7 +2.2 +1.6 +1.7 –0.1 +0.6 –0.8 –0.4 –0.3 –0.1 –0.5 – 4.1 ± 0.0
May – – –1.5 –5.7 –4.9 –0.8 –4.1 –0.7 –0.1 –0.3 –0.2 –0.0 +0.1 + 4.3 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated fromthe flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always
to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
872.2 588.5 431.8 156.7 283.7 11.7 10.2 1.5 272.0 61.5 49.9 568.6 523.1 2020
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 2021
943.4 573.6 435.2 138.5 369.8 10.4 8.9 1.5 359.4 61.7 63.1 557.4 512.9 2022
1,050.7 639.8 470.6 169.1 411.0 11.3 9.5 1.8 399.6 88.1 54.6 541.9 500.5 2022 Aug.
1,072.5 661.9 480.1 181.8 410.6 11.3 9.5 1.9 399.3 89.6 55.4 672.1 629.1 Sep.
1,054.2 645.1 466.6 178.5 409.1 10.7 8.9 1.8 398.4 85.7 66.2 667.4 622.7 Oct.
1,041.1 639.9 457.8 182.1 401.2 10.2 8.6 1.6 391.0 82.6 65.5 568.6 523.8 Nov.
943.4 573.6 435.2 138.5 369.8 10.4 8.9 1.5 359.4 61.7 63.1 557.4 512.9 Dec.
985.2 595.5 432.8 162.6 389.7 9.5 8.3 1.2 380.2 85.2 63.2 504.8 462.6 2023 Jan.
960.9 578.2 420.7 157.5 382.7 9.0 7.8 1.2 373.7 87.3 63.5 552.1 509.9 Feb.
950.4 574.0 425.9 148.1 376.3 7.8 6.6 1.2 368.6 71.7 63.4 479.7 439.4 Mar.
940.7 561.4 407.2 154.2 379.3 7.5 6.3 1.2 371.8 79.9 62.9 482.6 442.1 Apr.
958.9 576.0 416.7 159.4 382.9 7.8 6.5 1.2 375.1 81.4 63.4 512.7 462.9 May
Changes *
+71.1 +43.1 +31.0 +12.0 + 28.1 – 3.6 – 3.9 + 0.3 +31.7 + 0.1 + 1.4 –130.8 – 119.7 2021
– 6.2 –64.2 –22.2 –42.0 + 58.0 + 2.3 + 2.6 – 0.3 +55.7 – 6.3 +11.8 +119.0 + 109.5 2022
+19.3 +19.8 +9.4 +10.4 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.3 +0.8 +130.2 + 128.5 2022 Sep.
–15.9 –14.5 –13.4 –1.1 – 1.4 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.8 – 3.0 +10.9 – 4.7 – 6.4 Oct.
– 7.9 –0.5 –8.8 +8.3 – 7.4 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 6.9 – 0.9 –0.8 – 98.8 – 98.9 Nov.
–94.3 –63.2 –22.6 –40.6 –31.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 –31.3 –19.6 –2.4 – 11.2 – 10.9 Dec.
+43.3 +23.2 –2.3 +25.5 +20.1 – 0.8 – 0.6 – 0.2 +20.9 +24.0 +0.1 – 52.5 – 50.3 2023 Jan.
–26.5 –19.3 –12.2 –7.1 – 7.2 – 0.5 – 0.5 + 0.0 – 6.7 + 1.1 +0.4 + 47.2 + 47.3 Feb.
– 7.8 –1.8 +5.2 –7.0 – 6.0 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 5.8 –14.3 –0.2 – 72.3 – 70.5 Mar.
– 8.3 –11.4 –18.7 +7.3 + 3.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 3.4 + 8.6 –0.5 + 2.9 + 2.7 Apr.
+15.1 +11.7 +9.4 +2.3 + 3.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 0.1 +0.5 + 30.0 + 20.8 May
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
163.4 59.6 34.1 25.5 103.8 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.1 16.6 20.3 29.2 0.0 2020
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 2021
189.4 67.5 38.6 28.9 122.0 6.9 4.6 2.3 115.1 13.5 20.1 33.7 0.0 2022
194.4 67.0 36.3 30.7 127.5 8.1 5.7 2.3 119.4 15.3 20.4 33.3 0.0 2022 Aug.
191.4 68.3 37.1 31.2 123.0 7.7 5.3 2.3 115.4 14.8 20.0 34.4 0.0 Sep.
188.7 68.1 37.5 30.6 120.6 7.4 5.1 2.3 113.2 13.8 20.3 35.4 0.0 Oct.
190.2 68.8 38.7 30.1 121.5 7.1 4.8 2.3 114.4 13.1 20.4 34.4 0.0 Nov.
189.4 67.5 38.6 28.9 122.0 6.9 4.6 2.3 115.1 13.5 20.1 33.7 0.0 Dec.
186.2 66.7 38.5 28.2 119.6 7.0 4.5 2.5 112.6 12.8 20.1 33.9 0.0 2023 Jan.
187.2 69.3 40.3 29.1 117.9 6.9 4.4 2.5 110.9 12.7 20.2 34.7 0.0 Feb.
186.6 71.2 42.2 29.1 115.4 6.8 4.3 2.5 108.5 12.3 20.3 34.8 0.0 Mar.
183.5 71.0 44.0 27.0 112.5 6.9 4.5 2.5 105.6 12.2 20.2 35.0 0.0 Apr.
183.9 71.2 43.6 27.6 112.8 6.9 4.4 2.5 105.9 12.1 20.6 34.3 0.0 May
Changes *
+12.1 + 3.2 – 1.1 + 4.3 + 8.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 2021
+ 7.7 + 1.4 + 5.6 – 4.2 + 6.3 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 6.7 – 2.9 – 0.2 + 2.2 ± 0.0 2022
– 4.1 +1.0 +0.8 +0.1 – 5.1 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 4.7 – 0.5 –0.4 + 0.7 ± 0.0 2022 Sep.
– 2.0 +0.0 +0.4 –0.4 – 2.0 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.7 – 1.0 +0.3 + 1.4 ± 0.0 Oct.
+ 2.7 +0.6 +1.2 –0.6 + 2.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 2.4 – 0.7 +0.1 – 0.4 ± 0.0 Nov.
+ 0.4 –0.9 –0.1 –0.8 + 1.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.3 –0.2 – 0.3 ± 0.0 Dec.
– 2.6 –0.6 –0.1 –0.5 – 2.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 2.1 – 0.7 +0.0 + 0.5 ± 0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 0.1 +2.4 +1.8 +0.6 – 2.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 2.2 – 0.1 +0.1 + 0.5 ± 0.0 Feb.
+ 0.3 +2.2 +1.9 +0.3 – 1.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 1.8 – 0.4 +0.0 + 0.4 ± 0.0 Mar.
– 2.7 –0.1 +1.8 –1.9 – 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 2.7 – 0.1 –0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 Apr.
– 0.6 –0.3 –0.4 +0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.0 +0.4 – 1.2 ± 0.0 May
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and
other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.  4 Excluding
subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of negotiable andnon-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Including subordinated
liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 3,656.9 0.1
2022 16,843.0 168.4 168.0 195.6 28.1 0.0
p 2023 June 16,548.3 165.5 165.1 177.4 12.3 0.1
July . . . . . .
p Aug. 16,563.5 165.6 165.3 ... ... ...
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
2022 4,664,630 27.7 46,646 46,512 54,848 8,337 5
p 2023 June 4,503,620 27.2 45,036 44,902 48,416 3,514 43
July . . . . . . .
p Aug. 4,535,644 27.4 45,356 45,223 ... ... ...
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2022 9,814 7,396 3,216 14,465 8,295 117 2,471
2023 June 9,115 7,335 2,952 14,343 8,193 137 2,403
July . . . . . . .
Aug. . . . . . . .
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2022 3,352,177 12,609 566,227 543,694 116,094
2023 June 3,380,000 16,017 446,421 499,682 119,057
July . . . . .
Aug. . . . . .
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 5 of the
Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum
reserve requirements (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies,
pursuant to Article 6(1)(a)).  3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2%between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at
1%. 4 Article 6(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the
application of minimum reserve requirements.  5 Average credit balances of credit
institutions at national central banks.  6 Average credit balances less required reserves
after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.  7 Required reserves after deduction of the
lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2008 July 9 3.25 – 4.25 5.25 2014 June 11 – 0.10 0.15 – 0.40 2002 Jan. 1 2.57 2009 Jan. 1 1.62
Oct. 8 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 Sep. 10 – 0.20 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 2.47 July 1 0.12
Oct. 9 3.25 3.75 – 4.25
Nov. 12 2.75 3.25 – 3.75 2015 Dec. 9 – 0.30 0.05 – 0.30 2003 Jan. 1 1.97 2011 July 1 0.37
Dec. 10 2.00 2.50 – 3.00 July 1 1.22
2016 Mar. 16 – 0.40 0.00 – 0.25 2012 Jan. 1 0.12
2009 Jan. 21 1.00 2.00 – 3.00 2004 Jan. 1 1.14
Mar. 11 0.50 1.50 – 2.50 2019 Sep. 18 – 0.50 0.00 – 0.25 July 1 1.13 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
Apr. 8 0.25 1.25 – 2.25 July 1 – 0.38
May 13 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2022 July 27 0.00 0.50 – 0.75 2005 Jan. 1 1.21
Sep. 14 0.75 1.25 – 1.50 July 1 1.17 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
2011 Apr. 13 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 Nov. 2 1.50 2.00 – 2.25 July 1 – 0.73
July 13 0.75 1.50 – 2.25 Dec. 21 2.00 2.50 – 2.75 2006 Jan. 1 1.37
Nov. 9 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 July 1 1.95 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Dec. 14 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2023 Feb. 8 2.50 3.00 – 3.25
Mar. 22 3.00 3.50 – 3.75 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2016 July 1 – 0.88
2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 May 10 3.25 3.75 – 4.00 July 1 3.19
June 21 3.50 4.00 – 4.25 2023 Jan. 1 1.62
2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 Aug. 2 3.75 4.25 – 4.50 2008 Jan. 1 3.32 July 1 3.12
Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 July 1 3.19
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2023 July 12 11 883 11 883 4.00 – – – 7
July 19 10 025 10 025 4.00 – – – 7
July 26 11 036 11 036 4.00 – – – 7
–
Aug. 2 7 367 7 367 4.25 – – – 7
Aug. 9 5 691 5 691 4.25 – – – 7
Aug. 16 5 152 5 152 4.25 – – – 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2023 June 1 789 789 2      … – – – 91
June 29 4 327 4 327 2      … – – – 91
July 27 3 165 3 165 2      … – – − 91
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month
% per annum
EURIBOR ®  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2022 Dec. 1.568 1.60 1.72 2.06 2.56 3.02
2023 Jan. 1.902 1.89 1.98 2.35 2.86 3.34
Feb. 2.275 2.30 2.37 2.64 3.14 3.53
Mar. 2.572 2.57 2.71 2.91 3.27 3.65
Apr. 2.900 2.88 2.96 3.18 3.52 3.76
May 3.080 3.09 3.15 3.37 3.68 3.86
June 3.238 3.25 3.34 3.54 3.83 4.01
July 3.402 3.40 3.47 3.67 3.94 4.15
1 Euro Short-Term Rate: on the basis of individual euro-denominated transactions
conducted and settled on the previous business day, the European Central Bank
publishes the €STR since 2 October 2019. T Monthly averages are calculations by
Deutsche Bundesbank. ransactions are reported by euro area banks subject to reporting
obligations in compliance with Money Market Statistical Reporting Regulation.2 Monthly averages are own calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank based on Euribor ®
daily rates calculated by the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). The monthly
data are unweighted averages. Information on the methodology of Euribor ® daily
rates administered by EMMI is available here:
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/benchmarks/euribor/methodology/

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 June 0.19 39,682 0.87 218,128 – 0.10 66,308 0.78 23,397
July 0.24 40,392 0.86 217,843 0.04 72,141 0.86 24,213
Aug. 0.30 42,949 0.86 217,606 0.17 79,349 0.92 24,813
Sep. 0.46 50,096 0.86 217,608 0.52 95,994 0.97 24,605
Oct. 0.67 56,389 0.85 217,771 0.76 116,977 1.00 24,179
Nov. 0.94 69,368 0.85 218,426 1.13 121,576 1.00 23,542
Dec. 1.16 84,147 0.86 220,466 1.39 123,678 1.02 22,605
2023 Jan. 1.37 103,036 0.87 221,773 1.67 131,363 1.05 23,299
Feb. 1.57 119,894 0.87 222,671 1.98 140,254 1.07 23,409
Mar. 1.77 140,046 0.88 223,661 2.29 148,756 1.09 22,527
Apr. 1.91 157,796 0.89 224,586 2.44 155,233 1.12 22,140
May 2.07 180,323 0.90 225,884 2.65 153,693 1.17 22,199
June 2.23 200,548 0.91 226,645 2.86 162,008 1.20 22,135
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 June 2.19 3,573 1.58 26,899 1.70 1,500,141 6.59 47,810 3.36 76,324 3.27 330,379
July 2.28 3,687 1.70 27,244 1.70 1,508,724 6.58 46,813 3.39 77,074 3.27 333,017
Aug. 2.43 3,713 1.76 27,275 1.70 1,515,561 6.75 47,402 3.41 76,990 3.29 334,182
Sep. 2.61 3,627 1.86 27,290 1.70 1,522,592 6.95 48,339 3.46 77,011 3.32 333,384
Oct. 3.06 3,689 2.06 27,325 1.72 1,528,186 7.39 47,749 3.53 76,686 3.42 333,308
Nov. 3.35 3,604 2.21 27,320 1.73 1,533,123 7.51 47,012 3.60 75,908 3.46 333,366
Dec. 3.66 3,497 2.37 26,984 1.74 1,535,823 7.73 47,250 3.68 76,467 3.49 331,711
2023 Jan. 4.10 3,550 2.52 26,527 1.76 1,534,684 8.20 46,598 3.78 75,973 3.55 332,207
Feb. 4.32 3,429 2.64 26,317 1.77 1,536,492 8.44 47,291 3.84 75,755 3.59 332,184
Mar. 4.45 3,493 2.77 26,266 1.78 1,540,365 8.67 48,137 3.94 75,854 3.64 330,164
Apr. 4.72 3,490 2.94 26,102 1.79 1,542,767 8.86 47,023 4.05 75,742 3.72 330,568
May 4.93 3,423 3.03 25,960 1.81 1,544,206 9.12 47,513 4.14 75,472 3.77 330,677
June 5.10 3,298 3.13 25,865 1.82 1,546,102 9.25 48,284 4.24 76,261 3.83 329,576
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 June 1.94 189,986 1.65 213,733 1.64 846,768
July 2.07 194,397 1.69 218,875 1.66 854,793
Aug. 2.24 209,826 1.74 226,447 1.68 861,022
Sep. 2.63 211,369 2.00 230,393 1.80 865,922
Oct. 3.05 209,961 2.26 237,078 1.92 874,758
Nov. 3.49 213,334 2.49 236,253 1.96 879,122
Dec. 3.70 192,635 2.83 240,161 2.01 872,949
2023 Jan. 4.04 199,612 3.07 241,498 2.05 876,315
Feb. 4.28 194,396 3.22 246,124 2.07 878,910
Mar. 4.66 193,205 3.45 245,152 2.13 876,723
Apr. 4.98 194,154 3.65 247,337 2.19 879,353
May 5.19 194,261 3.76 252,289 2.22 885,481
June 5.42 194,076 3.95 250,105 2.29 883,199
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 June – 0.02 1,831,910 0.17 2,490 0.71 357 0.80 891 0.08 531,943 0.14 22,408
July – 0.00 1,854,420 0.31 3,227 0.83 776 0.75 1,128 0.07 530,302 0.15 22,255
Aug. 0.00 1,852,118 0.49 4,742 1.04 925 0.95 1,582 0.08 527,959 0.16 22,201
Sep. 0.01 1,854,045 0.84 7,457 1.49 915 1.29 1,289 0.09 522,685 0.19 22,155
Oct. 0.01 1,853,933 1.06 10,188 1.89 1,332 1.49 1,549 0.11 519,453 0.27 22,383
Nov. 0.02 1,858,811 1.34 17,255 1.99 1,783 1.70 1,958 0.13 514,161 0.33 22,556
Dec. 0.07 1,857,241 1.53 20,197 2.01 1,738 1.52 2,138 0.16 510,188 0.40 22,970
2023 Jan. 0.09 1,839,201 1.68 26,082 2.14 2,941 1.97 2,504 0.20 498,875 0.53 23,945
Feb. 0.12 1,828,243 1.95 25,533 2.24 2,346 2.09 1,853 0.26 490,990 0.67 25,179
Mar. 0.17 1,801,473 2.19 29,674 2.36 3,672 2.07 2,194 0.30 480,790 0.84 26,746
Apr. 0.22 1,807,037 2.33 28,088 2.47 3,409 2.35 2,055 0.35 470,731 0.96 28,261
May 0.30 1,792,902 2.58 35,359 2.67 4,281 2.39 2,371 0.39 460,587 1.13 30,499
June 0.34 1,782,330 2.78 34,880 2.91 4,266 2.53 1,999 0.43 450,713 1.28 33,163
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2022 June – 0.15 600,646 – 0.36 43,089 0.91 687 2.27 742
July – 0.07 604,802 – 0.11 26,039 1.15 678 1.90 1,466
Aug. – 0.01 636,259 0.07 51,099 0.92 467 . .
Sep. 0.03 615,838 0.62 73,349 1.93 494 2.75 1,111
Oct. 0.04 617,742 0.81 99,703 1.34 707 1.89 146
Nov. 0.10 612,760 1.43 90,346 2.66 631 1.94 189
Dec. 0.11 601,728 1.66 65,813 2.94 734 2.42 252
2023 Jan. 0.19 595,205 1.96 89,287 2.92 671 2.41 89
Feb. 0.28 580,954 2.31 100,034 3.09 539 2.17 238
Mar. 0.44 568,777 2.58 89,971 2.95 723 2.62 292
Apr. 0.48 558,564 2.82 79,535 3.14 655 2.83 210
May 0.55 558,743 3.01 81,462 2.86 625 2.64 225
June 0.63 549,466 3.20 88,964 3.48 703 2.90 206
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2022 June 5.99 5.95 9,509 6.79 1,926 8.50 307 4.66 3,054 6.46 6,149
July 6.15 6.12 9,064 6.97 1,771 8.76 314 4.80 2,968 6.65 5,782
Aug. 6.33 6.31 8,927 7.25 1,765 8.79 349 4.92 2,931 6.88 5,647
Sep. 6.43 6.43 8,562 7.37 1,613 8.64 346 4.96 2,922 7.09 5,294
Oct. 6.74 6.75 7,362 7.57 1,339 8.79 366 5.28 2,546 7.43 4,450
Nov. 6.81 6.87 7,913 7.92 1,330 7.51 385 5.37 2,868 7.74 4,659
Dec. 6.62 6.71 7,270 7.69 1,091 7.64 465 5.26 3,083 7.79 3,722
2023 Jan. 7.49 7.54 8,159 8.43 1,607 7.95 406 6.01 2,728 8.34 5,025
Feb. 7.56 7.52 7,505 8.42 1,364 8.96 307 6.13 2,664 8.24 4,534
Mar. 7.74 7.70 8,778 8.62 1,592 8.71 322 6.39 3,150 8.42 5,306
Apr. 8.10 7.99 7,348 8.87 1,351 9.77 278 6.69 2,551 8.62 4,519
May 8.13 8.07 8,269 9.00 1,505 9.98 296 6.79 2,819 8.66 5,154
June 8.05 7.99 9,277 9.15 1,568 10.32 316 6.62 3,494 8.72 5,468
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2022 June 2.39 5,035 1.96 1,196 1.81 1,990 3.04 717 2.68 2,328
July 2.62 4,606 1.97 1,195 2.06 1,980 3.24 629 2.97 1,997
Aug. 2.94 4,474 2.33 777 2.24 1,627 3.48 730 3.30 2,117
Sep. 2.95 4,255 2.51 1,090 2.60 2,250 3.39 610 3.33 1,395
Oct. 3.40 3,728 2.68 1,190 3.06 1,805 4.00 541 3.61 1,382
Nov. 3.78 3,938 3.28 947 3.52 1,808 4.18 746 3.90 1,384
Dec. 3.90 5,403 3.43 1,210 3.86 3,026 4.24 762 3.80 1,615
2023 Jan. 4.10 3,906 3.74 1,286 3.98 2,082 4.55 621 4.07 1,203
Feb. 4.35 3,065 4.03 814 4.36 1,467 4.83 508 4.10 1,090
Mar. 4.56 4,852 4.29 1,293 4.66 2,388 4.87 761 4.28 1,703
Apr. 4.64 3,803 4.45 1,210 4.76 1,767 4.92 744 4.31 1,292
May 4.83 3,400 4.62 997 5.08 1,511 5.10 710 4.37 1,179
June 4.93 4,344 4.68 1,389 5.26 1,976 5.19 892 4.33 1,476
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2022 June 2.50 3,461 . . 2.06 1,239 3.13 538 2.62 1,684
July 2.76 2,994 . . 2.21 1,252 3.36 474 3.08 1,268
Aug. 2.94 2,573 . . 2.38 1,063 3.68 435 3.19 1,075
Sep. 3.09 2,843 . . 2.76 1,446 3.53 465 3.37 932
Oct. 3.44 2,570 . . 3.05 1,244 4.19 405 3.63 921
Nov. 3.91 2,684 . . 3.69 1,175 4.32 563 3.94 946
Dec. 4.11 3,777 . . 4.10 2,187 4.51 554 3.89 1,036
2023 Jan. 4.18 2,830 . . 4.06 1,489 4.75 465 4.07 876
Feb. 4.44 2,297 . . 4.47 1,105 4.94 411 4.15 781
Mar. 4.69 3,544 . . 4.75 1,822 5.13 567 4.37 1,155
Apr. 4.77 2,657 . . 4.90 1,207 5.01 575 4.44 875
May 4.98 2,473 . . 5.28 1,072 5.24 547 4.44 854
June 5.04 3,180 . . 5.36 1,536 5.36 634 4.35 1,010
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2022 June 2.62 2.57 22,990 2.46 3,897 2.19 2,461 2.45 1,663 2.46 8,659 2.77 10,208
July 2.85 2.80 21,054 2.48 3,828 2.33 2,814 2.64 1,592 2.73 8,023 3.04 8,626
Aug. 2.89 2.84 18,491 2.57 3,215 2.55 2,488 2.78 1,512 2.74 6,880 3.04 7,610
Sep. 3.08 3.01 16,113 2.81 2,719 2.73 2,186 2.93 1,366 2.96 5,969 3.18 6,593
Oct. 3.31 3.25 14,926 2.79 3,204 2.90 2,522 3.23 1,363 3.19 5,433 3.48 5,607
Nov. 3.67 3.60 13,557 3.32 2,689 3.40 2,330 3.75 1,209 3.51 4,846 3.75 5,172
Dec. 3.60 3.52 13,514 3.17 2,756 3.57 2,620 3.74 1,267 3.41 4,837 3.55 4,790
2023 Jan. 3.73 3.66 12,735 3.47 3,076 3.95 2,244 3.80 1,196 3.45 4,531 3.70 4,764
Feb. 3.85 3.79 12,055 3.73 2,724 4.16 2,097 3.99 1,207 3.60 4,229 3.74 4,522
Mar. 3.95 3.88 15,260 3.76 3,248 4.44 2,459 4.10 1,524 3.64 5,388 3.80 5,889
Apr. 3.98 3.93 12,999 4.06 2,870 4.63 2,109 4.23 1,276 3.70 4,471 3.77 5,144
May 3.99 3.94 13,657 3.92 2,945 4.82 2,148 4.27 1,359 3.66 5,038 3.76 5,112
June 4.12 4.06 13,986 4.28 2,565 5.05 2,302 4.38 1,451 3.73 4,988 3.84 5,246
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2022 June . 2.49 10,285 . . 2.08 865 2.37 774 2.41 4,073 2.67 4,573
July . 2.69 9,711 . . 2.19 1,031 2.51 802 2.63 3,794 2.91 4,084
Aug. . 2.74 8,203 . . 2.36 820 2.63 711 2.68 3,215 2.92 3,457
Sep. . 2.90 7,168 . . 2.54 746 2.80 638 2.84 2,725 3.05 3,059
Oct. . 3.15 6,622 . . 2.78 916 3.20 661 3.10 2,482 3.31 2,563
Nov. . 3.47 6,083 . . 3.22 806 3.62 563 3.42 2,402 3.57 2,312
Dec. . 3.43 5,975 . . 3.46 923 3.64 554 3.36 2,213 3.42 2,285
2023 Jan. . 3.51 5,615 . . 3.85 813 3.66 584 3.38 2,136 3.47 2,082
Feb. . 3.64 5,134 . . 4.04 763 3.84 556 3.49 1,928 3.58 1,887
Mar. . 3.74 6,734 . . 4.30 841 4.05 752 3.56 2,520 3.65 2,621
Apr. . 3.79 5,967 . . 4.61 824 4.02 601 3.59 2,141 3.62 2,401
May . 3.82 5,821 . . 4.68 789 4.14 629 3.59 2,225 3.66 2,178
June . 3.85 6,186 . . 4.81 836 4.13 648 3.61 2,315 3.67 2,387
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 June 7.01 38,876 7.02 30,004 14.84 4,192 2.66 93,301 2.67 92,870
July 7.04 37,549 6.98 28,881 14.80 4,246 2.68 93,897 2.69 93,495
Aug. 7.17 38,113 7.17 29,170 14.94 4,305 2.73 96,714 2.74 96,288
Sep. 7.31 39,138 7.36 30,018 14.97 4,359 3.04 97,298 3.05 96,819
Oct. 7.78 38,898 7.74 30,031 15.66 4,479 3.39 97,186 3.40 96,732
Nov. 8.44 38,580 8.20 27,368 15.61 6,475 3.74 97,850 3.76 97,371
Dec. 8.70 38,597 8.53 27,493 15.55 6,515 3.99 94,611 4.01 94,205
2023 Jan. 9.16 38,116 8.95 27,199 16.34 6,480 4.31 98,205 4.32 97,791
Feb. 9.40 38,538 9.32 27,356 16.60 6,475 4.63 98,285 4.65 97,859
Mar. 9.56 39,280 9.54 28,281 16.58 6,390 5.08 98,123 5.11 97,659
Apr. 9.78 38,352 9.76 27,177 17.13 6,407 5.44 99,534 5.47 99,094
May 9.98 38,906 10.10 27,431 17.19 6,478 5.61 99,175 5.63 98,709
June 10.11 39,692 10.30 28,067 17.23 6,528 5.83 99,329 5.86 98,875
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2022 June 2.19 123,645 1.58 28,803 1.88 10,561 2.97 1,465 2.59 1,483 2.16 94,434 2.35 4,558 2.43 11,144
July 1.89 80,810 1.76 22,550 1.95 10,057 3.12 1,435 2.91 1,400 1.66 53,206 2.43 3,997 2.50 10,715
Aug. 1.97 87,373 1.54 20,380 2.17 9,306 3.36 1,327 2.96 1,241 1.80 64,748 2.47 2,987 2.56 7,764
Sep. 2.67 99,740 2.23 28,861 2.60 10,891 3.85 1,435 3.19 1,075 2.61 75,992 2.99 3,670 2.96 6,677
Oct. 2.86 88,486 2.60 25,332 3.12 10,741 4.26 1,591 3.55 989 2.67 64,795 3.83 3,917 3.34 6,453
Nov. 3.14 76,430 3.14 20,220 3.53 10,542 4.71 1,587 3.80 1,046 2.94 51,493 3.51 3,923 3.33 7,839
Dec. 3.45 107,068 3.42 32,607 3.91 11,995 4.98 1,854 3.81 1,138 3.35 75,616 3.55 6,334 3.25 10,131
2023 Jan. 3.59 81,688 3.66 23,420 4.41 10,450 5.10 1,586 3.88 1,021 3.42 60,491 3.85 2,968 3.24 5,172
Feb. 3.88 85,530 3.83 19,830 4.84 10,275 5.58 1,480 4.06 863 3.70 64,785 4.07 2,789 3.66 5,338
Mar. 4.36 102,182 4.20 29,585 5.18 12,826 5.70 2,212 4.13 1,223 4.24 70,035 4.41 5,308 3.91 10,578
Apr. 4.45 73,584 4.46 23,051 5.24 9,722 5.84 1,572 4.32 999 4.36 51,380 4.18 3,476 3.77 6,435
May 4.65 79,772 4.62 21,546 5.37 11,322 6.13 1,607 4.22 1,060 4.59 55,568 4.00 3,590 4.00 6,625
June 4.89 101,321 4.89 33,260 5.58 12,584 6.39 1,760 4.31 1,219 4.85 72,380 5.00 4,770 4.00 8,608
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2022 June 1.90 13,721 . . 1.89 490 2.69 127 2.43 458 1.49 8,720 2.72 1,076 2.72 2,850
July 2.00 11,739 . . 2.03 487 2.84 102 2.67 398 1.64 7,081 2.99 1,130 2.41 2,541
Aug. 2.20 7,929 . . 2.25 501 2.97 91 2.74 319 2.02 4,945 2.99 603 2.30 1,470
Sep. . . . . 2.86 608 3.37 78 3.01 299 . . 3.16 1,131 2.99 1,712
Oct. 2.82 10,559 . . 3.01 572 3.48 95 3.32 261 2.71 7,209 3.43 750 2.82 1,672
Nov. 3.50 9,542 . . 3.45 462 3.93 93 3.49 269 3.56 6,290 3.81 739 3.12 1,689
Dec. 3.41 17,202 . . 3.72 588 4.08 126 3.41 291 3.41 10,703 4.20 1,417 3.08 4,077
2023 Jan. . . . . 4.00 553 3.72 123 . . 3.92 6,635 4.01 652 3.07 1,196
Feb. 3.93 8,371 . . 4.34 400 4.37 96 3.61 208 4.03 6,148 3.87 514 3.20 1,005
Mar. 4.15 14,364 . . 4.60 641 4.73 117 3.62 331 4.22 10,350 4.11 1,117 3.64 1,808
Apr. 4.48 10,295 . . 4.88 452 4.52 120 3.81 269 4.71 6,760 4.81 541 3.69 2,153
May . . . . 5.06 456 4.80 108 3.80 268 . . 4.37 876 3.77 1,623
June . . . . 5.14 574 4.75 99 3.87 340 . . 5.16 1,293 3.75 1,183
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 
2020 Q3 2,561.3 311.1 476.9 373.8 410.1 819.8 4.4 67.1 39.0 58.9
Q4 2,605.6 301.7 485.5 370.6 425.0 853.2 4.7 68.1 38.2 58.7
2021 Q1 2,592.3 292.4 470.7 361.7 437.4 858.1 3.9 71.9 38.9 57.2
Q2 2,609.9 280.5 470.3 361.2 449.2 879.6 3.4 72.5 38.9 54.2
Q3 2,653.1 271.7 474.2 358.2 463.4 899.8 3.3 87.8 38.3 56.3
Q4 2,667.2 261.3 468.6 355.1 472.4 921.6 3.2 85.0 40.8 59.3
2022 Q1 2,547.3 243.7 440.2 333.2 468.7 870.5 2.7 87.5 41.0 59.8
Q2 2,369.7 215.6 390.3 305.5 462.5 803.5 3.0 85.5 41.3 62.5
Q3 2,296.2 202.0 369.9 289.1 461.2 776.7 4.0 84.2 41.4 67.6
Q4 2,274.7 189.5 373.7 279.7 465.8 772.2 3.4 79.5 38.7 72.2
2023 Q1 2,326.4 201.6 380.7 280.0 472.2 790.4 3.6 85.1 38.5 74.4
    Life insurance
2020 Q3 1,378.1 188.4 243.6 225.7 66.0 599.5 3.0 13.6 20.6 17.6
Q4 1,406.7 183.5 246.4 229.9 70.2 623.8 3.3 14.3 20.8 14.5
2021 Q1 1,372.8 170.4 234.3 219.6 74.3 623.1 2.1 14.2 21.5 13.2
Q2 1,384.9 164.4 234.1 219.4 78.0 637.6 2.0 14.1 21.5 13.8
Q3 1,400.1 159.2 233.8 214.8 87.7 654.6 1.9 13.4 20.8 13.8
Q4 1,411.1 152.4 231.9 211.8 93.4 669.1 1.7 14.6 21.9 14.3
2022 Q1 1,317.7 136.8 211.5 193.1 99.7 626.1 0.9 13.9 22.0 13.8
Q2 1,202.1 120.5 180.3 173.1 104.2 569.4 0.9 13.6 22.1 17.9
Q3 1,149.6 110.2 166.6 162.1 107.0 546.4 1.1 12.3 22.3 21.7
Q4 1,130.1 103.6 170.5 155.6 111.4 540.0 1.1 11.5 19.5 16.8
2023 Q1 1,147.9 105.0 170.4 155.7 113.3 553.5 1.0 12.1 19.4 17.5
    Non-life insurance
2020 Q3 697.6 109.3 139.2 83.3 82.6 206.1 0.4 38.5 12.1 26.3
Q4 709.4 105.9 141.9 84.5 85.1 214.2 0.5 37.5 12.7 27.3
2021 Q1 721.2 108.1 140.2 83.6 88.7 218.9 0.4 40.0 12.8 28.6
Q2 724.6 103.3 141.0 83.4 90.5 225.7 0.4 40.3 12.7 27.2
Q3 733.1 98.7 141.0 83.8 93.7 228.4 0.4 46.4 12.8 27.7
Q4 738.4 94.6 140.1 84.7 97.5 234.3 0.3 44.6 14.0 28.4
2022 Q1 722.4 91.4 133.4 80.8 98.5 227.7 0.2 45.7 13.9 30.7
Q2 681.6 81.9 122.0 74.8 98.6 216.5 0.1 44.0 14.1 29.5
Q3 661.1 76.2 116.0 70.3 99.2 212.2 0.1 43.1 14.1 29.7
Q4 659.0 72.7 115.2 69.1 99.8 215.5 0.2 42.4 14.2 30.1
2023 Q1 686.8 81.3 121.1 69.5 102.5 219.8 0.1 45.1 14.2 33.2
    Reinsurance 4
2020 Q3 485.6 13.5 94.1 64.9 261.4 14.3 1.0 15.0 6.3 15.1
Q4 489.5 12.3 97.2 56.3 269.7 15.2 1.0 16.3 4.7 16.9
2021 Q1 498.4 13.9 96.3 58.5 274.4 16.2 1.4 17.7 4.7 15.3
Q2 500.4 12.8 95.2 58.4 280.7 16.4 1.0 18.1 4.6 13.2
Q3 519.9 13.9 99.3 59.6 282.0 16.7 1.0 28.0 4.7 14.8
Q4 517.7 14.3 96.6 58.6 281.4 18.2 1.1 25.9 4.9 16.7
2022 Q1 507.1 15.5 95.3 59.3 270.4 16.7 1.6 27.9 5.0 15.3
Q2 486.0 13.2 88.0 57.5 259.6 17.6 1.9 27.9 5.1 15.1
Q3 485.5 15.6 87.3 56.7 255.1 18.1 2.7 28.8 5.1 16.2
Q4 485.6 13.2 88.0 55.0 254.6 16.7 2.1 25.7 5.0 25.3
2023 Q1 491.8 15.3 89.3 54.9 256.5 17.1 2.4 27.8 4.8 23.7
Pension funds 5
2020 Q3 638.5 91.1 59.6 50.2 10.1 394.7 0.2 11.6 18.5 2.5
Q4 662.9 88.9 60.6 49.5 10.3 419.5 0.2 11.9 18.8 3.1
2021 Q1 664.3 86.1 58.7 48.6 10.8 427.9 0.2 12.1 17.6 2.3
Q2 683.2 85.0 60.2 49.3 11.2 445.2 0.1 12.1 17.8 2.3
Q3 689.8 82.9 60.4 48.9 11.8 453.6 0.1 12.2 17.8 2.2
Q4 709.9 82.1 60.0 48.7 11.2 473.5 0.1 12.4 18.5 3.3
2022 Q1 689.0 75.7 56.6 46.2 11.9 465.3 0.0 12.5 18.5 2.2
Q2 664.2 70.2 52.8 43.2 12.3 452.2 0.0 12.4 18.6 2.5
Q3 654.6 67.6 51.8 42.0 12.7 446.0 0.0 13.2 18.7 2.6
Q4 660.9 67.3 53.0 41.8 12.8 450.2 0.0 13.6 18.8 3.4
2023 Q1 664.9 65.7 55.0 41.8 13.2 454.3 0.0 13.5 18.8 2.6
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including
registered bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrower's note
loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables and claims ofpension funds on pension managers.  4 Not including the reinsurance business
conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 The term "pension funds"
refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts.
Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension
schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  6
Insurance corporations
2020 Q3 2,561.3 34.3 80.0 515.8 1,785.6 1,549.2 236.4 1.7 144.0 –
Q4 2,605.6 36.6 79.7 540.4 1,798.9 1,579.2 219.8 1.6 148.5 –
2021 Q1 2,592.3 34.8 81.4 551.7 1,778.6 1,541.3 237.3 2.5 143.4 –
Q2 2,609.9 33.0 81.3 558.7 1,793.5 1,556.3 237.1 2.2 141.1 –
Q3 2,653.1 35.4 82.8 567.0 1,817.7 1,569.1 248.7 2.5 147.6 –
Q4 2,667.2 36.0 81.9 579.3 1,820.7 1,578.3 242.3 2.5 146.8 –
2022 Q1 2,547.3 34.4 82.1 563.1 1,725.9 1,472.6 253.3 4.0 137.7 –
Q2 2,369.7 33.6 78.7 541.6 1,574.4 1,326.8 247.5 6.0 135.3 –
Q3 2,296.2 33.8 73.6 537.4 1,506.0 1,262.3 243.7 7.4 138.0 –
Q4 2,274.7 32.3 70.1 543.7 1,486.5 1,248.7 237.8 5.6 136.5 –
2023 Q1 2,326.4 33.1 71.2 544.5 1,538.9 1,277.1 261.8 4.4 134.3 –
    Life insurance
2020 Q3 1,378.1 3.9 19.5 136.8 1,164.7 1,164.7 – 0.5 52.7 –
Q4 1,406.7 3.9 20.7 142.8 1,185.6 1,185.6 – 0.5 53.2 –
2021 Q1 1,372.8 3.3 19.9 143.1 1,154.3 1,154.3 – 1.0 51.2 –
Q2 1,384.9 3.3 20.4 144.2 1,164.9 1,164.9 – 1.0 51.1 –
Q3 1,400.1 3.3 19.3 148.1 1,176.4 1,176.4 – 1.1 51.9 –
Q4 1,411.1 3.3 20.7 148.2 1,185.5 1,185.5 – 0.9 52.5 –
2022 Q1 1,317.7 3.2 19.9 142.9 1,101.6 1,101.6 – 1.4 48.8 –
Q2 1,202.1 3.1 19.0 141.4 984.5 984.5 – 2.7 51.3 –
Q3 1,149.6 3.0 17.0 138.0 936.9 936.9 – 3.1 51.8 –
Q4 1,130.1 2.7 16.6 136.0 924.9 924.9 – 2.3 47.7 –
2023 Q1 1,147.9 2.8 17.8 133.0 945.8 945.8 – 1.9 46.6 –
    Non-life insurance
2020 Q3 697.6 1.2 9.6 151.9 482.1 362.3 119.8 0.1 52.7 –
Q4 709.4 1.3 9.7 158.0 482.9 368.7 114.2 0.0 57.6 –
2021 Q1 721.2 1.2 10.6 162.7 491.5 362.6 128.9 0.1 55.1 –
Q2 724.6 1.2 10.5 166.2 493.4 366.2 127.1 0.1 53.1 –
Q3 733.1 1.2 10.5 168.9 498.7 367.8 130.9 0.2 53.7 –
Q4 738.4 1.4 10.7 175.8 492.6 367.6 125.0 0.2 57.8 –
2022 Q1 722.4 1.3 11.7 173.1 483.0 347.1 135.9 0.3 53.0 –
Q2 681.6 1.2 11.1 167.6 451.9 322.7 129.2 0.5 49.2 –
Q3 661.1 1.2 10.5 167.9 430.4 307.4 123.0 0.5 50.5 –
Q4 659.0 1.2 10.4 170.2 425.1 306.7 118.4 0.4 51.7 –
2023 Q1 686.8 1.2 10.7 172.8 450.8 314.3 136.5 0.4 50.9 –
    Reinsurance 4
2020 Q3 485.6 29.2 50.9 227.1 138.8 22.1 116.7 1.0 38.6 –
Q4 489.5 31.4 49.3 239.6 130.4 24.8 105.6 1.0 37.7 –
2021 Q1 498.4 30.2 50.9 245.8 132.8 24.4 108.4 1.4 37.2 –
Q2 500.4 28.5 50.4 248.3 135.2 25.2 110.0 1.1 36.9 –
Q3 519.9 30.9 53.0 250.1 142.7 24.9 117.8 1.3 42.0 –
Q4 517.7 31.4 50.5 255.3 142.6 25.3 117.3 1.4 36.5 –
2022 Q1 507.1 30.0 50.4 247.2 141.3 23.9 117.4 2.3 35.9 –
Q2 486.0 29.3 48.6 232.6 138.0 19.6 118.4 2.8 34.7 –
Q3 485.5 29.7 46.2 231.5 138.7 18.0 120.7 3.8 35.7 –
Q4 485.6 28.4 43.1 237.5 136.5 17.1 119.4 2.9 37.1 –
2023 Q1 491.8 29.2 42.8 238.7 142.2 17.0 125.3 2.1 36.8 –
Pension funds 5
2020 Q3 638.5 – 1.6 27.8 510.5 509.9 – 0.3 9.2 89.0
Q4 662.9 – 1.6 28.4 528.5 527.9 – 0.3 9.0 95.1
2021 Q1 664.3 – 1.7 29.1 530.3 529.2 – 0.3 9.0 94.0
Q2 683.2 – 1.8 31.3 536.7 535.0 – 0.2 9.2 104.0
Q3 689.8 – 1.9 31.9 539.8 537.6 – 0.2 9.3 106.8
Q4 709.9 – 1.9 32.0 560.2 557.3 – 0.1 8.9 106.8
2022 Q1 689.0 – 2.0 26.8 559.0 556.8 – 0.1 11.2 89.9
Q2 664.2 – 1.8 23.4 559.7 558.1 – 0.1 11.6 67.7
Q3 654.6 – 1.9 21.2 561.1 560.2 – 0.1 13.0 57.2
Q4 660.9 – 1.8 24.3 580.8 580.5 – 0.1 11.5 42.5
2023 Q1 664.9 – 1.8 24.7 578.9 578.6 – 0.1 11.4 48.1
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Including deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered
bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension
funds on pension managers and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical
reserves "life" taking account of transitional measures. Health insurance is also includedin the "non-life insurance" sector.  4 Not including the reinsurance business conducted
by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 Valuation at book values. The term "pen-
sion funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of
Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational
pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.  6 Own
funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth" and "Shares and other equity".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2011 33,649 13,575 –46,796 850 59,521 20,075 – 23,876 – 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 58,735 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 90,697 44,384 – 12,124 – 11,951 68,459 14,351
2015 15,219 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 51,229 99,225 – 66,330 121,164 44,391 – 84,006
2016 68,998 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 41,569 161,776 – 58,012 187,500 32,288 – 92,778
2017 51,034 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 39,471 134,192 – 71,454 161,012 44,634 – 83,158
2018 78,657 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 62,027 107,155 – 24,417 67,328 64,244 – 28,499
2019 139,611 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 71,075 60,195 8,059 2,408 49,728 79,416
2020 451,409 374,034 14,462 88,703 270,870 77,374 285,318 18,955 226,887 39,476 166,091
2021 233,453 221,648 31,941 19,754 169,953 11,805 255,702 – 41,852 245,198 52,356 – 22,249
2022 155,940 156,190 59,322 35,221 61,648 – 219 155,609 2,915 49,774 102,920 331
2022 July – 17,525 –13,509 – 7,536 11,041 –17,014 – 4,016 – 6,403 10,710 – 13,670 – 3,443 – 11,122
Aug. 15,672 22,057 2,780 2,225 17,052 – 6,385 – 3,617 – 10,189 – 726 7,298 19,289
Sep. 9,558 15,007 32,705 3,897 –21,595 – 5,449 18,638 7,491 – 3,147 14,294 – 9,080
Oct. – 1,614 – 3,868 – 6,143 – 2,570 4,846 2,254 17,813 4,260 3,619 9,934 – 19,427
Nov. 45,419 36,891 2,672 5,087 29,133 8,528 13,173 193 4,041 8,940 32,246
Dec. – 27,425 –31,394 –15,450 – 6,091 – 9,853 4,001 11,231 – 18,577 – 6,015 35,823 – 38,656
2023 Jan. 58,333 26,856 19,250 4,335 3,270 31,477 41,346 10,522 7,783 23,041 16,987
Feb. 24,581 11,680 5,466 – 1,673 7,886 12,901 25,280 13,504 – 4,961 16,736 – 699
Mar. 59,563 39,989 22,802 – 1,704 18,892 19,573 18,732 8,063 – 1,710 12,379 40,831
Apr. 8,074 – 4,404 – 1,130 – 3,176 – 97 12,477 12,253 – 747 – 13,293 26,292 – 4,179
May 49,437 34,077 28,468 3,010 2,599 15,359 12,041 1,206 – 1,655 12,490 37,395
June 43,134 22,925 – 6,489 5,325 24,089 20,209 37,959 16,773 – 8,853 30,039 5,175
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 – 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,337 11,991 5,346 2,851
2014 43,488 18,778 24,710 43,930 17,203 26,727 – 443
2015 56,979 7,668 49,311 46,721 – 5,421 52,142 10,258
2016 39,133 4,409 34,724 39,265 – 5,143 44,408 – 132
2017 52,932 15,570 37,362 51,270 7,031 44,239 1,662
2018 61,400 16,188 45,212 89,624 – 11,184 100,808 – 28,224
2019 54,830 9,076 45,754 43,070 – 1,119 44,189 11,759
2020 72,321 17,771 54,550 105,483 27 105,456 – 33,162
2021 115,746 49,066 66,681 102,927 10,869 92,058 12,819
2022 – 14,234 27,792 – 34,858 – 7,006 – 8,262 1,256 – 7,228
2022 July – 2,745 1,374 – 4,119 – 2,030 – 2,145 115 – 715
Aug. – 1,603 87 – 1,690 1,049 165 884 – 2,652
Sep. – 986 1,166 – 2,152 – 12,004 – 529 – 11,475 11,018
Oct. – 1,785 154 – 1,939 – 4,007 – 1,588 – 2,419 2,222
Nov. – 5,647 247 – 5,894 – 8,903 1,414 – 10,317 3,256
Dec. 14,926 20,925 1,169 16,366 – 3,089 19,455 – 1,440
2023 Jan. 6,525 133 6,393 8,105 2,935 5,170 – 1,580
Feb. 4,863 2,371 2,492 6,098 4,494 1,604 – 1,235
Mar. – 1,346 1,696 – 3,042 650 1,985 – 1,335 – 1,996
Apr. 5,001 2,576 2,426 6,321 3,235 3,086 – 1,320
May – 708 592 – 1,299 377 – 2,497 2,874 – 1,084
June – 4,411 1,067 – 5,478 – 2,013 – 3,322 1,309 – 2,398
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,870,084 778,411 39,548 18,327 643,380 77,156 184,206 907,466
2021 1,658,004 795,271 41,866 17,293 648,996 87,116 139,775 722,958
2022 1,683,265 861,989 66,811 11,929 700,062 83,188 169,680 651,596
2022 Oct. 172,464 59,445 5,875 1,086 45,698 6,786 11,037 101,982
Nov. 152,777 70,448 2,969 91 55,905 11,482 20,625 61,705
Dec. 80,590 49,026 2,329 979 39,181 6,538 11,536 20,028
2023 Jan. 132,817 74,019 10,797 929 52,888 9,405 14,710 44,088
Feb. 155,676 81,678 2,245 1,729 63,385 14,319 12,146 61,853
Mar. 190,528 99,938 1,252 60 89,786 8,840 11,158 79,431
Apr. 129,401 69,020 2,954 543 60,740 4,783 10,608 49,772
May 169,866 97,645 4,531 760 83,511 8,844 16,336 55,885
June 171,944 84,953 3,264 1,556 70,601 9,532 21,513 65,478
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 658,521 165,097 28,500 7,427 90,839 38,330 77,439 415,985
2021 486,335 171,799 30,767 6,336 97,816 36,880 64,234 250,303
2022 485,287 164,864 41,052 7,139 91,143 25,530 56,491 263,932
2022 Oct. 85,086 9,230 3,570 77 4,885 697 2,507 73,350
Nov. 34,411 7,379 1,895 – 2,006 3,478 9,336 17,696
Dec. 6,561 2,256 54 4 711 1,488 304 4,000
2023 Jan. 47,131 21,923 4,927 529 14,197 2,271 3,408 21,800
Feb. 51,443 14,927 820 310 10,272 3,525 3,065 33,450
Mar. 46,975 14,091 1,147 – 11,809 1,136 1,658 31,225
Apr. 33,709 10,326 2,769 500 6,367 690 2,683 20,700
May 49,315 14,703 2,898 – 9,458 2,347 4,527 30,085
June 53,960 12,885 2,664 498 9,123 600 10,475 30,600
Net sales 5
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 473,795 28,147 8,661 8,816 22,067 – 11,398 49,536 396,113
2021 210,231 52,578 17,821 7,471 22,973 4,314 35,531 122,123
2022 135,853 36,883 23,894 – 9,399 15,944 6,444 30,671 68,299
2022 Oct. 44,009 – 8,997 3,797 – 1,764 – 9,843 – 1,187 – 4,111 57,117
Nov. 37,459 – 2,300 – 2,165 – 944 – 2,680 3,488 6,015 33,744
Dec. – 42,448 – 23,318 – 3,643 – 3,697 – 16,193 216 – 1,825 – 17,306
2023 Jan. 24,590 14,006 6,314 – 1,551 4,428 4,815 3,554 7,030
Feb. 9,644 2,700 – 2,433 1,512 – 2,861 6,482 – 2,541 9,486
Mar. 46,022 19,989 – 2,032 – 1,517 18,332 5,206 – 1,614 27,647
Apr. – 26,464 – 2,812 1,244 – 5 – 3,074 – 976 – 3,714 – 19,938
May 40,674 26,575 1,932 254 20,562 3,826 2,259 11,840
June 25,537 – 7,752 – 509 11 – 9,065 1,811 7,579 25,710
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,545,200 2 1,174,817 183,980 55,959 687,710 2 247,169 2 379,342 1,991,040
2021 3,781,975 1,250,777 202,385 63,496 731,068 253,828 414,791 2,116,406
2022 3,930,390 1,302,028 225,854 54,199 761,047 260,928 441,234 2,187,127
2022 Oct. 3,954,338 1,345,723 231,901 58,854 796,028 258,940 438,743 2,169,872
Nov. 3,981,275 1,333,432 229,589 57,912 784,494 261,438 444,010 2,203,833
Dec. 3,930,390 1,302,028 225,854 54,199 761,047 260,928 441,234 2,187,127
2023 Jan. 3,948,426 1,313,581 232,105 52,647 763,260 265,568 444,529 2,190,316
Feb. 3,963,852 1,320,844 229,851 54,180 764,148 272,666 442,389 2,200,618
Mar. 4,005,403 1,335,447 227,451 52,890 777,696 277,410 440,399 2,229,557
Apr. 3,977,194 1,330,812 228,764 52,910 772,714 276,424 436,591 2,209,790
May 4,027,974 1,364,889 230,966 53,237 799,875 280,811 439,299 2,223,786
June 4,052,239 1,354,418 230,474 53,223 788,442 282,279 446,803 2,251,019
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-April 2023
bis unter 2   1 205 973   489 245   59 044   18 242   319 050   92 909   79 439   637 290 
 2 bis unter 4    728 564   318 901   64 471   15 515   169 343   69 572   79 488   330 174 
 4 bis unter 6    638 898   231 255   54 221   7 157   125 519   44 358   71 186   336 457 
6 bis unter 8    426 744   130 962   26 387   5 160   72 168   27 247   41 429   254 353 
 8 bis unter 10    298 806   80 006   14 016   2 916   47 398   15 676   32 304   186 496 
 10 bis unter 15    242 492   58 471   8 147   3 863   37 003   9 458   31 587   152 434 
 15 bis unter 20    115 962   14 412   3 421    282   8 576   2 133   14 753   86 797 
 20 und darüber    394 800   31 166    767    87   9 384   20 927   96 616   267 018 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,673 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,775 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,872 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,635 1,963,588
2021 186,580 4,152 9,561 672 35 – 326 – 212 – 5,578 2,301,942
2022 199,789 12,272 14,950 224 371 – 29 – 293 – 2,952 1,858,963
2022 Oct. 186,402 – 36 76 1 –– 0 –– 112 1,777,136
Nov. 186,351 – 57 31 13 – – –– 102 1,918,565
Dec. 199,789 13,437 13,584 – – – –– 147 1,858,963
2023 Jan. 199,778 – 11 16 – – –– 0 – 27 2,027,004
Feb. 198,334 162 149 – 50 –– 0 – 37 2,064,749
Mar. 198,157 – 185 178 – – – –– 363 2,080,189
Apr. 198,426 267 431 – –– 0 – 6 – 157 2,086,578
May 198,497 71 153 – –– 0 –– 82 2,048,166
June 198,505 8 422 – –– 262 – 17 – 135 2,061,065
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields and indices on German securities
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  4 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-
MFIs)German
bond
index
(REX)iBoxx
€ Germany 
price indexCDAX
share price
indexGerman
share
index
(DAX)
Period % per annumAverage
daily rateEnd-1998
= 100End-1987
= 100End-1987
= 1,000
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2019 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2020 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7 146.15 113.14 586.72 13,718.78
2021 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9 144.23 108.88 654.20 15,884.86
2022 1.5 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.9 1.9 3.3 125.74 88.43 525.64 13,923.59
2022 Dec. 2.5 2.2 2.1 2.1 3.0 2.9 4.2 125.74 88.43 525.64 13,923.59
2023 Jan. 2.7 2.3 2.2 2.2 3.1 2.9 4.1 125.97 89.91 581.65 15,128.27
Feb. 2.8 2.5 2.4 2.4 3.2 3.1 4.1 123.74 87.57 583.92 15,365.14
Mar. 2.9 2.6 2.4 2.4 3.3 3.2 4.4 125.99 89.48 587.20 15,522.40
Apr. 2.8 2.5 2.4 2.4 3.3 3.1 4.2 125.78 89.74 598.41 15,922.38
May 2.8 2.5 2.4 2.3 3.3 3.1 4.2 126.41 90.00 573.96 15,664.02
June 2.9 2.6 2.5 2.4 3.3 3.1 4.2 124.18 89.36 589.74 16,147.90
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 End of year or month.  3 Source: Deutsche Börse
AG. 4 Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for futures contracts;
calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 – 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 –1,340 – 379 –2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 –7,576 – 694 47,050 1,984 7,035
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 137,294 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 39,583 141,134 819 –1,745 140,315 41,328 –3,841
2015 189,802 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 43,665 181,932 7,362 494 174,570 43,171 7,870
2016 149,288 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 29,919 156,236 2,877 –3,172 153,359 33,091 –6,948
2017 148,214 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 53,292 150,740 4,938 1,048 145,802 52,244 –2,526
2018 108,293 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 4,599 114,973 2,979 –2,306 111,994 6,905 –6,680
2019 171,666 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 49,120 176,210 2,719 – 812 173,491 49,932 –4,544
2020 151,960 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 35,932 150,998 336 –1,656 150,662 37,588 962
2021 274,261 157,861 41,016 482 31,023 7,841 116,845 116,401 282,694 13,154 254 269,540 116,147 –8,433
2022 112,637 79,022 6,057 482 444 5,071 72,991 33,614 115,872 3,170 –1,459 112,702 35,073 –3,235
2022 Dec. 24,523 11,942 431 108 – 17 322 11,513 12,581 23,320 1,885 – 534 21,435 13,115 1,203
2023 Jan. 14,093 8,014 2,506 – 218 2,185 557 5,508 6,079 13,890 –4,078 – 672 17,968 6,751 203
Feb. 13,837 10,533 2,090 – 167 2,077 137 8,444 3,304 12,862 – 426 – 507 13,288 3,811 975
Mar. 3,720 2,204 1,226 300 814 164 984 1,516 3,966 –1,018 – 416 4,984 1,932 – 246
Apr. 3,367 1,130 297 146 – 61 235 833 2,237 3,340 – 247 96 3,587 2,141 28
May 8,348 6,261 1,228 – 144 1,301 21 5,035 2,087 8,074 – 49 42 8,123 2,045 274
June –1,802 –2,213 – 312 – 31 – 628 271 –1,901 411 – 472 85 – 19 – 557 430 –1,330
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2021 2022 2023
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 96.82 46.19 67.90 26.03 13.90 –26.90 51.95 28.96 –25.80
   Debt securities 2.99 3.11 4.12 1.16 0.64 –0.10 3.52 0.05 4.43
     Short-term debt securities 1.27 2.27 1.23 1.12 0.39 –1.94 3.00 –0.22 1.92
     Long-term debt securities 1.72 0.85 2.88 0.05 0.25 1.84 0.53 0.26 2.51
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.38 1.34 3.40 –0.64 0.34 0.98 1.65 0.43 3.82
         Non-financial corporations –0.17 0.74 0.87 –0.57 0.17 –0.17 0.74 0.14 0.76
         Financial corporations 0.12 1.08 1.78 0.56 0.44 0.73 0.66 –0.05 1.44
         General government 1.44 –0.48 0.74 –0.63 –0.27 0.43 0.25 0.34 1.63
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.61 1.78 0.72 1.80 0.31 –1.08 1.88 –0.38 0.60
   Loans –7.35 63.01 44.17 35.29 4.29 16.30 31.37 –7.78 28.55
     Short-term loans –4.27 44.68 27.96 18.60 2.69 12.28 27.97 –14.97 20.00
     Long-term loans –3.09 18.34 16.22 16.69 1.60 4.02 3.40 7.19 8.55
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors –0.12 10.10 22.99 16.16 8.25 2.92 14.54 –2.72 37.02
         Non-financial corporations –12.27 7.11 23.94 13.38 2.44 5.52 8.47 7.51 29.88
         Financial corporations 11.58 2.38 –1.29 2.63 5.73 –2.68 5.98 –10.31 7.13
         General government 0.57 0.61 0.34 0.15 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.00
       Loans to the rest of the world –7.23 52.92 21.18 19.13 –3.97 13.38 16.83 –5.07 –8.47
   Equity and investment fund shares 100.72 166.19 117.27 43.95 40.46 47.34 3.31 26.15 0.40
     Equity 87.95 144.41 117.12 35.66 38.25 49.16 5.55 24.16 –0.94
       Listed shares of domestic sectors –77.97 15.33 44.06 16.59 6.03 7.40 34.33 –3.70 –10.61
         Non-financial corporations –78.06 16.89 43.77 18.30 5.58 7.12 34.91 –3.84 –10.53
         Financial corporations 0.09 –1.56 0.29 –1.70 0.46 0.28 –0.58 0.13 –0.07
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 5.01 5.11 5.53 0.70 –0.26 3.16 0.08 2.55 –7.75
       Other equity  1 160.91 123.97 67.52 18.37 32.47 38.60 –28.86 25.31 17.41
     Investment fund shares 12.77 21.78 0.16 8.29 2.22 –1.82 –2.24 1.99 1.34
       Money market fund shares 3.79 0.66 –0.38 1.73 –1.22 –0.42 –1.12 2.37 –0.80
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 8.99 21.12 0.53 6.56 3.44 –1.40 –1.12 –0.38 2.14
   Insurance technical reserves 0.37 18.01 1.61 4.47 4.99 –1.20 –1.00 –1.19 6.30
   Financial derivatives –27.54 15.54 29.09 –1.09 21.27 28.28 10.09 –30.54 0.21
   Other accounts receivable 59.32 71.29 27.54 53.16 –11.30 –36.19 –54.45 129.48 85.66
   Total 225.34 383.33 291.71 162.97 74.25 27.54 44.79 145.13 99.74
 External financing
   Debt securities 36.89 20.86 14.16 –1.12 10.95 3.77 1.37 –1.93 1.38
     Short-term securities –4.40 2.51 –0.36 –1.02 3.85 1.21 –2.73 –2.69 –0.16
       Long-term securities 41.29 18.35 14.52 –0.10 7.10 2.56 4.10 0.76 1.54
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 18.06 9.14 5.87 1.76 5.64 1.62 0.19 –1.58 1.74
           Non-financial corporations –0.17 0.74 0.87 –0.57 0.17 –0.17 0.74 0.14 0.76
           Financial corporations 19.80 9.09 4.48 2.59 5.34 1.86 –0.75 –1.97 0.41
           General government –0.22 0.09 –0.07 –0.10 –0.01 –0.08 0.01 0.01 –0.00
           Households –1.35 –0.79 0.59 –0.15 0.14 0.01 0.19 0.24 0.57
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 18.83 11.73 8.28 –2.87 5.31 2.15 1.18 –0.35 –0.36
   Loans 96.76 135.74 181.21 71.37 34.58 41.22 67.15 38.27 15.31
     Short-term loans –2.80 81.44 105.44 29.93 29.26 21.74 46.53 7.91 –18.11
     Long-term loans 99.56 54.30 75.78 41.44 5.32 19.48 20.62 30.35 33.42
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 38.42 77.53 157.66 40.57 37.71 36.35 59.41 24.18 48.92
         Non-financial corporations –12.27 7.11 23.94 13.38 2.44 5.52 8.47 7.51 29.88
         Financial corporations 15.00 56.63 118.38 24.23 33.71 28.07 36.60 20.00 24.15
         General government 35.68 13.79 15.34 2.96 1.57 2.77 14.34 –3.33 –5.11
       Loans from the rest of the world 58.34 58.21 23.55 30.79 –3.14 4.87 7.73 14.08 –33.61
   Equity 60.37 61.44 15.39 20.38 3.11 8.99 3.48 –0.19 –3.47
     Listed shares of domestic sectors –62.25 26.37 57.07 24.51 12.91 10.14 33.32 0.70 –13.14
       Non-financial corporations –78.06 16.89 43.77 18.30 5.58 7.12 34.91 –3.84 –10.53
       Financial corporations 3.46 –2.39 2.29 –0.67 5.17 –1.43 –4.47 3.01 –0.62
       General government 0.26 –0.09 0.76 0.04 0.18 0.24 0.25 0.10 –1.18
       Households 12.08 11.96 10.24 6.84 1.98 4.21 2.63 1.43 –0.82
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 10.09 18.96 –9.57 –6.63 –12.75 –2.10 8.05 –2.78 3.95
     Other equity  1 112.54 16.11 –32.10 2.50 2.95 0.95 –37.89 1.88 5.72
   Insurance technical reserves 5.83 4.25 4.25 1.06 1.06 1.06 1.06 1.06 1.06
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.54 14.32 –14.10 0.93 –2.28 –0.27 1.80 –13.34 –3.57
   Other accounts payable 22.28 136.29 63.75 49.28 13.84 11.85 20.34 17.73 9.28
   Total 222.68 372.91 264.67 141.90 61.26 66.62 95.20 41.59 19.99
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2021 2022 2023
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 717.4 727.5 795.3 727.5 731.7 698.7 767.4 795.3 744.3
   Debt securities 51.5 54.3 53.8 54.3 53.4 51.3 53.7 53.8 58.8
     Short-term debt securities 4.8 7.1 8.4 7.1 7.5 5.6 8.6 8.4 10.3
     Long-term debt securities 46.7 47.2 45.5 47.2 45.9 45.7 45.1 45.5 48.5
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 22.1 23.3 24.7 23.3 23.0 23.0 24.1 24.7 28.7
         Non-financial corporations 4.7 5.3 5.8 5.3 5.2 4.9 5.5 5.8 6.5
         Financial corporations 13.4 14.5 15.0 14.5 14.6 14.7 14.9 15.0 16.6
         General government 4.0 3.5 3.9 3.5 3.2 3.5 3.6 3.9 5.6
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 29.4 31.0 29.2 31.0 30.4 28.2 29.7 29.2 30.1
   Loans 725.1 780.5 827.2 780.5 785.9 806.5 840.9 827.2 855.2
     Short-term loans 571.1 611.2 640.8 611.2 614.9 629.8 660.0 640.8 660.1
     Long-term loans 154.0 169.2 186.3 169.2 171.0 176.7 180.9 186.3 195.0
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 412.5 422.6 445.5 422.6 430.8 433.7 448.3 445.5 482.6
         Non-financial corporations 327.6 334.7 358.7 334.7 337.2 342.7 351.1 358.7 388.5
         Financial corporations 76.9 79.3 78.0 79.3 85.0 82.4 88.3 78.0 85.2
         General government 7.9 8.5 8.9 8.5 8.6 8.7 8.8 8.9 8.9
       Loans to the rest of the world 312.7 357.9 381.6 357.9 355.1 372.7 392.6 381.6 372.6
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,572.7 2,921.5 2,707.2 2,921.5 2,845.3 2,785.3 2,756.1 2,707.2 2,783.1
     Equity 2,368.0 2,681.3 2,494.6 2,681.3 2,613.1 2,567.9 2,544.3 2,494.6 2,563.9
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 307.0 393.0 331.2 393.0 350.1 305.0 307.5 331.2 361.1
         Non-financial corporations 298.9 384.9 324.4 384.9 342.4 298.2 301.7 324.4 353.7
         Financial corporations 8.1 8.0 6.7 8.0 7.7 6.8 5.7 6.7 7.4
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 66.6 71.5 69.7 71.5 67.0 66.8 65.4 69.7 64.1
       Other equity  1 1,994.4 2,216.8 2,093.8 2,216.8 2,196.0 2,196.1 2,171.4 2,093.8 2,138.8
     Investment fund shares 204.7 240.2 212.6 240.2 232.3 217.5 211.9 212.6 219.2
       Money market fund shares 7.0 7.6 7.2 7.6 6.4 6.0 4.9 7.2 6.5
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 197.7 232.6 205.4 232.6 225.9 211.5 207.0 205.4 212.7
   Insurance technical reserves 62.1 64.8 41.0 64.8 47.8 45.2 42.8 41.0 47.2
   Financial derivatives 30.9 106.0 92.2 106.0 147.8 164.4 199.0 92.2 65.3
   Other accounts receivable 1,243.9 1,456.5 1,520.4 1,456.5 1,493.1 1,519.1 1,531.0 1,520.4 1,574.4
   Total 5,403.7 6,111.0 6,037.1 6,111.0 6,105.0 6,070.5 6,191.0 6,037.1 6,128.2
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 238.3 252.3 228.7 252.3 245.3 229.7 226.7 228.7 231.2
     Short-term securities 7.1 9.6 9.3 9.6 13.4 14.7 12.0 9.3 9.1
     Long-term securities 231.2 242.7 219.4 242.7 231.8 215.1 214.7 219.4 222.1
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 96.1 100.6 90.7 100.6 98.6 92.5 90.3 90.7 93.2
         Non-financial corporations 4.7 5.3 5.8 5.3 5.2 4.9 5.5 5.8 6.5
         Financial corporations 78.2 83.2 73.4 83.2 81.7 76.7 73.8 73.4 74.4
         General government 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3
         Households 12.8 11.8 11.3 11.8 11.2 10.6 10.7 11.3 11.9
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 142.3 151.7 137.9 151.7 146.7 137.2 136.4 137.9 138.0
   Loans 2,270.6 2,403.4 2,587.9 2,403.4 2,439.9 2,485.5 2,559.6 2,587.9 2,602.7
     Short-term loans 830.0 903.1 1,011.2 903.1 933.5 959.0 1,010.0 1,011.2 991.1
     Long-term loans 1,440.5 1,500.3 1,576.7 1,500.3 1,506.4 1,526.5 1,549.6 1,576.7 1,611.6
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,391.8 1,470.5 1,627.8 1,470.5 1,508.8 1,542.6 1,603.2 1,627.8 1,675.0
         Non-financial corporations 327.6 334.7 358.7 334.7 337.2 342.7 351.1 358.7 388.5
         Financial corporations 962.2 1,020.3 1,138.5 1,020.3 1,054.8 1,080.3 1,118.1 1,138.5 1,160.7
         General government 102.0 115.6 130.7 115.6 116.9 119.6 133.9 130.7 125.8
       Loans from the rest of the world 878.8 932.9 960.2 932.9 931.1 942.9 956.4 960.2 927.7
   Equity 3,260.9 3,689.0 2,988.1 3,689.0 3,391.9 2,994.2 2,843.1 2,988.1 3,264.2
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 739.9 924.8 760.4 924.8 840.0 733.3 691.4 760.4 854.2
       Non-financial corporations 298.9 384.9 324.4 384.9 342.4 298.2 301.7 324.4 353.7
       Financial corporations 171.9 210.3 151.1 210.3 194.3 161.8 138.1 151.1 182.0
       General government 56.3 69.9 69.2 69.9 70.0 70.7 61.4 69.2 78.9
       Households 212.8 259.7 215.7 259.7 233.3 202.6 190.2 215.7 239.6
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 995.6 1,126.3 824.1 1,126.3 984.0 795.9 732.0 824.1 942.8
     Other equity  1 1,525.5 1,637.9 1,403.6 1,637.9 1,567.9 1,465.0 1,419.7 1,403.6 1,467.2
   Insurance technical reserves 283.1 287.4 291.6 287.4 288.4 289.5 290.6 291.6 292.7
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 83.4 137.9 62.6 137.9 143.5 137.1 161.0 62.6 34.0
   Other accounts payable 1,275.8 1,525.4 1,603.4 1,525.4 1,546.6 1,566.4 1,651.6 1,603.4 1,603.3
   Total 7,412.1 8,295.5 7,762.2 8,295.5 8,055.6 7,702.4 7,732.5 7,762.2 8,028.1
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2021 2022 2023
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 213.31 146.16 109.27 32.62 10.73 27.30 33.05 38.20 –16.08
     Currency 61.94 60.55 44.93 16.24 13.63 11.48 13.67 6.14 2.80
     Deposits 151.36 85.61 64.34 16.38 –2.90 15.81 19.37 32.06 –18.88
       Transferable deposits 165.34 90.84 47.63 16.35 –0.99 23.73 20.48 4.41 –60.51
       Time deposits 1.29 –5.09 32.66 –0.17 0.16 –4.31 6.22 30.59 45.14
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –15.26 –0.13 –15.94 0.20 –2.07 –3.61 –7.32 –2.95 –3.52
   Debt securities –5.94 –5.89 24.97 –0.62 2.81 4.85 5.36 11.96 29.66
     Short-term debt securities 0.08 0.31 1.99 0.03 –0.02 0.05 0.17 1.79 7.86
     Long-term debt securities –6.02 –6.20 22.98 –0.64 2.83 4.80 5.18 10.17 21.80
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –2.56 –3.70 20.30 –0.39 2.26 3.77 3.76 10.52 25.63
         Non-financial corporations –1.32 –0.83 0.49 –0.16 0.08 –0.02 0.21 0.23 0.53
         Financial corporations –1.26 –2.57 17.47 –0.23 2.34 3.18 2.94 9.01 21.58
         General government 0.02 –0.30 2.35 0.00 –0.16 0.61 0.61 1.29 3.53
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –3.38 –2.19 4.67 –0.23 0.55 1.08 1.60 1.44 4.03
   Equity and investment fund shares 90.18 136.54 78.00 42.10 30.64 22.35 9.21 15.82 13.45
     Equity 48.53 31.76 27.00 14.30 7.82 10.01 3.98 5.19 1.34
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 16.05 14.21 12.31 6.29 2.70 5.55 3.36 0.70 0.05
         Non-financial corporations 11.92 12.64 9.91 6.12 1.97 3.90 2.68 1.36 –1.09
         Financial corporations 4.14 1.58 2.40 0.17 0.74 1.64 0.67 –0.66 1.14
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 23.29 10.87 8.70 5.26 3.47 2.46 –0.45 3.22 0.54
       Other equity  1 9.19 6.68 5.98 2.76 1.64 2.01 1.07 1.26 0.75
     Investment fund shares 41.65 104.79 51.01 27.80 22.82 12.34 5.23 10.63 12.12
       Money market fund shares 0.09 0.18 0.82 0.18 –0.02 0.28 0.12 0.44 0.44
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 41.56 104.61 50.19 27.62 22.84 12.05 5.11 10.19 11.68
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 18.34 20.31 –0.49 5.60 4.49 –1.86 –1.31 –1.81 6.37
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 47.71 51.63 31.69 11.00 6.57 5.62 12.12 7.39 1.42
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 33.69 27.36 49.78 10.57 15.74 12.87 8.92 12.25 12.36
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 –10.44 –1.32 –5.33 –25.44 14.06 –0.29 –0.93 –18.18 22.71
   Total 386.85 374.80 287.90 75.84 85.04 70.83 66.41 65.60 69.88
 External financing
   Loans 83.95 98.17 83.67 23.13 20.37 27.92 25.87 9.50 2.64
     Short-term loans –5.61 0.86 2.59 –1.61 0.66 1.09 0.74 0.10 0.74
     Long-term loans 89.55 97.31 81.08 24.74 19.71 26.83 25.14 9.40 1.91
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 85.72 99.89 79.69 25.21 19.24 26.63 23.30 10.53 2.88
       Consumer loans –4.29 –0.89 4.60 –2.04 0.23 0.91 2.59 0.87 0.54
       Entrepreneurial loans 2.51 –0.83 –0.61 –0.04 0.91 0.39 –0.01 –1.90 –0.78
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 83.17 94.32 82.56 23.91 20.70 27.94 24.46 9.45 1.80
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 0.78 3.85 1.11 –0.78 –0.33 –0.02 1.41 0.05 0.84
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.00 –0.00 –0.00 –0.00 –0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.01 0.90 2.97 0.63 –0.94 0.80 1.18 1.93 –0.59
   Total 83.96 99.07 86.65 23.76 19.43 28.73 27.06 11.43 2.06
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2021 2022 2023
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 2,860.4 3,005.5 3,116.9 3,005.5 3,017.3 3,047.4 3,084.0 3,116.9 3,099.6
     Currency 324.5 385.1 430.0 385.1 398.7 410.2 423.9 430.0 432.8
     Deposits 2,535.8 2,620.5 2,686.9 2,620.5 2,618.6 2,637.2 2,660.1 2,686.9 2,666.8
       Transferable deposits 1,674.1 1,764.4 1,811.7 1,764.4 1,763.5 1,786.7 1,807.3 1,811.7 1,756.0
       Time deposits 302.8 297.3 332.9 297.3 298.5 297.9 307.6 332.9 377.1
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 558.9 558.8 542.3 558.8 556.7 552.6 545.3 542.3 533.8
     Debt securities 113.3 109.6 125.1 109.6 109.5 107.8 110.4 125.1 156.9
       Short-term debt securities 1.6 1.8 3.9 1.8 1.7 1.7 1.9 3.9 11.7
       Long-term debt securities 111.7 107.8 121.2 107.8 107.7 106.1 108.5 121.2 145.2
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 76.7 75.3 88.4 75.3 75.2 74.7 76.1 88.4 116.1
           Non-financial corporations 10.9 9.8 9.5 9.8 9.4 8.9 8.9 9.5 10.1
           Financial corporations 63.3 63.2 74.6 63.2 63.8 63.3 64.2 74.6 98.2
           General government 2.6 2.2 4.2 2.2 2.0 2.5 3.0 4.2 7.8
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 36.6 34.3 36.7 34.3 34.3 33.1 34.3 36.7 40.8
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,536.4 1,900.5 1,730.9 1,900.5 1,841.4 1,694.5 1,661.2 1,730.9 1,822.9
     Equity 801.8 968.0 874.9 968.0 927.8 845.3 828.2 874.9 930.2
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 243.3 296.0 255.8 296.0 271.0 236.1 223.2 255.8 281.6
         Non-financial corporations 204.0 250.4 207.9 250.4 224.7 195.1 183.3 207.9 231.0
         Financial corporations 39.2 45.6 47.9 45.6 46.3 41.0 39.9 47.9 50.6
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 180.6 249.3 213.7 249.3 241.1 210.7 210.2 213.7 226.7
       Other equity  1 378.0 422.7 405.3 422.7 415.7 398.5 394.8 405.3 421.9
     Investment fund shares 734.6 932.5 856.0 932.5 913.6 849.3 833.0 856.0 892.7
       Money market fund shares 2.3 2.5 3.3 2.5 2.5 2.8 2.9 3.3 3.7
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 732.2 930.0 852.7 930.0 911.1 846.5 830.1 852.7 888.9
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 412.2 432.5 41.3 432.5 50.2 46.8 44.0 41.3 47.5
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,112.1 1,162.2 1,087.0 1,162.2 1,276.4 1,152.8 1,096.9 1,087.0 1,112.5
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 956.8 986.2 1,118.9 986.2 1,124.1 1,115.0 1,110.8 1,118.9 1,126.3
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 27.9 27.5 26.5 27.5 26.0 27.8 27.5 26.5 27.0
   Total 7,019.0 7,624.0 7,246.6 7,624.0 7,444.8 7,192.1 7,134.7 7,246.6 7,392.6
 Liabilities
   Loans 1,923.8 2,024.3 2,111.8 2,024.3 2,045.4 2,074.6 2,102.7 2,111.8 2,114.5
     Short-term loans 53.2 53.0 55.5 53.0 53.7 54.8 55.8 55.5 56.6
     Long-term loans 1,870.6 1,971.3 2,056.3 1,971.3 1,991.7 2,019.8 2,047.0 2,056.3 2,057.9
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,447.5 1,549.3 1,632.3 1,549.3 1,569.5 1,597.8 1,621.3 1,632.3 1,636.2
       Consumer loans 226.1 224.5 228.9 224.5 224.9 225.5 228.1 228.9 229.7
       Entrepreneurial loans 250.2 250.5 250.6 250.5 251.1 251.3 253.4 250.6 248.6
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,824.6 1,920.3 2,004.0 1,920.3 1,941.0 1,968.8 1,995.3 2,004.0 2,005.8
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 99.1 104.0 107.8 104.0 104.4 105.8 107.4 107.8 108.8
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 19.5 20.3 23.6 20.3 19.5 20.4 21.6 23.6 23.0
   Total 1,943.3 2,044.6 2,135.4 2,044.6 2,064.9 2,095.0 2,124.4 2,135.4 2,137.6
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
58•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
General
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
fundsGeneral
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus 1
2016 +36.4 +13.7 +7.7 +6.3 +8.7 +1.2 +0.4 +0.2 +0.2 +0.3
2017 +43.7 + 7.9 +13.9 +10.7 +11.1 +1.3 +0.2 +0.4 +0.3 +0.3
2018 +65.6 +21.0 +12.0 +16.7 +16.0 +1.9 +0.6 +0.4 +0.5 +0.5
p 2019 +53.2 +21.4 +14.0 +8.6 +9.2 +1.5 +0.6 +0.4 +0.2 +0.3
p 2020 –147.6 –87.4 –30.9 +5.5 –34.8 –4.3 –2.6 –0.9 +0.2 –1.0
p 2021 –134.3 –145.9 +2.8 +4.6 +4.3 –3.7 –4.1 +0.1 +0.1 +0.1
pe 2022 –106.0 –132.7 +14.4 +3.9 +8.4 –2.7 –3.4 +0.4 +0.1 +0.2
p 2021 H1 –75.6 –60.7 –4.0 +1.5 –12.4 –4.3 –3.5 –0.2 +0.1 –0.7
pH2 –58.6 –85.2 +6.8 +3.1 +16.7 –3.1 –4.6 +0.4 +0.2 +0.9
pe 2022 H1 – 6.5 –37.5 +17.7 +5.8 +7.5 –0.3 –2.0 +0.9 +0.3 +0.4
peH2 –99.6 –95.3 –3.4 –1.8 +0.9 –5.0 –4.8 –0.2 –0.1 +0.0
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2016 2,161.6 1,365.6 642.3 166.2 1.2 69.0 43.6 20.5 5.3 0.0
2017 2,130.5 1,361.7 616.8 168.3 0.8 65.2 41.7 18.9 5.2 0.0
2018 2,083.4 1,334.7 603.1 161.7 0.7 61.9 39.7 17.9 4.8 0.0
p 2019 2,068.8 1,312.7 612.6 160.3 0.7 59.6 37.8 17.6 4.6 0.0
p 2020 2,339.9 1,527.1 664.3 162.0 7.5 68.7 44.8 19.5 4.8 0.2
p 2021 2,494.6 1,679.8 665.1 164.1 0.4 69.3 46.6 18.5 4.6 0.0
p 2022 2,563.1 1,776.9 636.6 171.2 2.2 66.2 45.9 16.4 4.4 0.1
p 2021 Q1 2,368.9 1,552.6 667.5 162.0 16.2 69.7 45.7 19.6 4.8 0.5
pQ2 2,418.8 1,602.7 667.8 163.2 21.2 69.3 45.9 19.1 4.7 0.6
pQ3 2,452.5 1,630.6 673.1 162.6 24.3 69.2 46.0 19.0 4.6 0.7
pQ4 2,494.6 1,679.8 665.1 164.1 0.4 69.3 46.6 18.5 4.6 0.0
p 2022 Q1 2,498.8 1,684.9 664.0 163.7 3.1 67.9 45.8 18.0 4.4 0.1
pQ2 2,536.6 1,724.1 660.2 165.8 3.3 67.6 45.9 17.6 4.4 0.1
pQ3 2,551.5 1,757.8 644.9 165.6 3.7 67.0 46.2 16.9 4.3 0.1
pQ4 2,563.1 1,776.9 636.6 171.2 2.2 66.2 45.9 16.4 4.4 0.1
p 2023 Q1 2,589.0 1,799.7 633.2 173.4 3.0 65.9 45.8 16.1 4.4 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The deficit/surplus in
accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition.  2 Quarterly GDP
ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters.
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts *
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total TaxesSocial con-
tributions Other TotalSocial
benefitsCompen-
sation of
employeesInter-
mediate
consumptionGross
capital
formation Interest OtherDeficit/
surplusMemo item:
Total tax
burden  1
€ billion
2016 1,426.7 739.2 524.3 163.3 1,390.4 754.5 240.7 162.5 68.1 37.3 127.2 +36.4 1,270.4
2017 1,486.9 773.3 549.5 164.2 1,443.3 784.8 250.6 169.5 71.6 33.8 132.9 +43.7 1,329.5
2018 1,557.2 808.1 572.6 176.6 1,491.6 805.6 260.3 176.4 78.5 31.2 139.7 +65.6 1,387.7
p 2019 1,615.8 834.3 598.2 183.4 1,562.6 845.6 273.2 187.2 84.4 27.4 144.8 +53.2 1,439.6
p 2020 1,569.1 783.1 608.1 177.8 1,716.6 904.8 284.3 209.4 93.2 21.5 203.4 –147.6 1,398.2
p 2021 1,711.7 887.6 633.7 190.5 1,846.0 940.9 294.4 227.2 93.4 20.8 269.3 –134.3 1,528.8
pe 2022 1,820.1 956.5 666.3 197.3 1,926.2 973.3 307.6 238.5 103.1 26.2 277.5 –106.0 1,633.6
As a percentage of GDP
2016 45.5 23.6 16.7 5.2 44.4 24.1 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.2 4.1 +1.2 40.5
2017 45.5 23.7 16.8 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 +1.3 40.7
2018 46.3 24.0 17.0 5.2 44.3 23.9 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.1 +1.9 41.2
p 2019 46.5 24.0 17.2 5.3 45.0 24.3 7.9 5.4 2.4 0.8 4.2 +1.5 41.4
p 2020 46.1 23.0 17.9 5.2 50.4 26.6 8.3 6.1 2.7 0.6 6.0 –4.3 41.1
p 2021 47.5 24.6 17.6 5.3 51.3 26.1 8.2 6.3 2.6 0.6 7.5 –3.7 42.4
pe 2022 47.0 24.7 17.2 5.1 49.8 25.1 7.9 6.2 2.7 0.7 7.2 –2.7 42.2
Percentage growth rates
2016 +4.5 +4.8 +4.6 +2.9 +4.1 +4.5 +3.3 +6.2 +5.6 –11.7 +4.9 . +4.7
2017 +4.2 +4.6 +4.8 +0.5 +3.8 +4.0 +4.1 +4.3 +5.1 –9.3 +4.5 . +4.7
2018 +4.7 +4.5 +4.2 +7.6 +3.3 +2.6 +3.9 +4.1 +9.7 –7.8 +5.1 . +4.4
p 2019 +3.8 +3.2 +4.5 +3.8 +4.8 +5.0 +5.0 +6.1 +7.5 –12.2 +3.7 . +3.7
p 2020 –2.9 –6.1 +1.7 –3.0 +9.9 +7.0 +4.0 +11.8 +10.4 –21.5 +40.5 . –2.9
p 2021 +9.1 +13.3 +4.2 +7.1 +7.5 +4.0 +3.6 +8.5 +0.2 –3.4 +32.4 . +9.3
pe 2022 +6.3 +7.8 +5.1 +3.6 +4.3 +3.4 +4.5 +5.0 +10.4 +26.0 +3.0 . +6.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office.  * Figures in accordance with ESA 2010.  1 Taxes and
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution Fund.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
59•
X. Public finances in Germany
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3
Period Total  4 TaxesFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5 Total  4Person-
nel
expend-
itureCurrent
grants InterestFixed
asset
forma-
tionFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5Deficit/
surplusRev-
enue  6Expend-
itureDeficit/
surplusRev-
enueExpend-
itureDeficit/
surplus
2016 859.7 705.8 8.8 842.8 251.3 320.8 43.3 48.3 11.7 +16.8 601.8 594.8 +7.1 1,352.5 1,328.6 +23.9
2017 897.6 734.5 7.7 867.8 261.5 327.2 41.9 51.7 13.8 +29.8 631.5 622.0 +9.5 1,414.9 1,375.6 +39.3
2018 949.2 776.3 6.0 904.0 272.4 337.3 39.1 55.1 16.1 +45.2 656.2 642.5 +13.6 1,488.1 1,429.3 +58.8
2019 1,007.7 799.4 11.0 973.9 285.9 348.9 33.5 62.2 16.8 +33.7 685.0 676.7 +8.3 1,571.2 1,529.2 +42.0
2020 944.3 739.9 13.7 1,109.7 299.4 422.0 25.8 68.6 59.9 –165.4 719.5 747.8 –28.3 1,516.2 1,709.9 –193.7
2021 1,105.4 833.3 25.3 1,239.9 310.7 530.7 21.0 69.3 26.1 –134.5 769.2 777.1 –7.9 1,701.5 1,843.9 –142.4
P 2022 1,146.2 895.9 32.4 1,284.6 325.6 500.9 33.5 72.4 74.4 –138.4 800.6 794.8 +5.9 1,774.0 1,906.5 –132.5
2020 Q1 244.8 197.5 2.5 236.4 72.9 90.5 11.9 12.0 2.6 + 8.4 P168.3 P175.7 P–7.4 P380.0 P379.1 P+0.9
Q2 215.6 158.1 2.7 275.4 72.2 119.1 8.6 15.4 3.4 –59.8 P175.9 P187.0 P–11.1 P358.1 P429.0 P–70.9
Q3 227.5 181.4 4.0 282.1 72.4 101.9 1.4 18.3 34.3 –54.5 P181.1 P195.0 P–13.9 P369.9 P438.3 P–68.4
Q4 259.3 201.9 4.5 315.4 81.4 109.2 5.9 22.8 19.6 –56.1 P186.0 P189.6 P–3.5 P410.6 P470.2 P–59.6
2021 Q1 240.7 185.3 4.3 300.6 75.5 130.8 7.3 11.1 14.6 –59.9 P182.4 P196.3 P–13.9 P385.2 P458.9 P–73.8
Q2 267.0 195.8 7.5 297.1 74.8 122.7 10.7 15.2 10.5 –30.2 P185.9 P197.0 P–11.1 P414.1 P455.3 P–41.2
Q3 270.9 210.7 7.4 290.2 75.8 116.3 – 0.4 16.5 10.4 –19.3 P183.4 P191.9 P–8.6 P413.5 P441.4 P–27.8
Q4 332.9 237.7 6.1 347.8 84.1 153.4 3.1 26.4 – 9.4 –14.9 P197.3 P190.4 P+6.9 P492.6 P500.6 P–8.0
2022 Q1 278.2 224.0 5.0 279.3 79.6 116.8 5.5 11.9 7.0 – 1.0 P193.8 P199.8 P–6.0 P430.3 P437.3 P–7.1
Q2 288.0 224.6 5.1 294.2 77.8 126.4 10.6 15.3 5.9 – 6.2 P199.9 P196.7 P+3.2 P444.7 P447.7 P–3.1
Q3 272.3 207.0 13.3 303.4 78.1 117.0 10.8 17.7 10.8 –31.0 P194.0 P197.6 P–3.6 P423.1 P457.7 P–34.6
PQ4 314.3 243.1 9.1 406.1 89.5 139.2 6.5 27.5 50.6 –91.8 210.5 198.1 +12.4 481.6 560.9 –79.4
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data.  1 Annual fig-
ures based on the quarterly figures of the Federal Statistical Office, core budgets and
off-budget entities which are assigned to the general government sector.  2 The annual
figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all pro-
visional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated.  3 The develop-
ment of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statisticalchangeovers.  4 Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state
and local government.  5 On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as dis-
posals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted.  6 Excluding central govern-
ment liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency.
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2016 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 380.2 372.0 + 8.2 247.1 241.7 + 5.4
2017 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 396.7 385.5 +11.3 258.5 247.7 +10.7
2018 374.4 363.5 +10.9 419.6 399.8 +19.9 270.0 260.1 + 9.8
2019 382.5 369.2 +13.3 436.3 419.3 +17.0 282.4 276.7 + 5.7
2020 341.4 472.1 –130.7 455.5 489.0 –33.6 295.2 293.2 + 2.0
2021 370.3 585.9 –215.6 509.3 508.7 + 0.5 308.0 303.4 + 4.6
2022 399.6 515.6 –116.0 534.3 523.7 +10.6 328.5 325.8 + 2.7
2020 Q1 92.3 90.4 + 1.9 105.6 99.7 + 5.9 57.9 67.7 – 9.8
Q2 70.8 114.8 –44.0 108.2 128.0 –19.8 69.4 69.4 + 0.1
Q3 83.7 105.4 –21.7 112.9 113.7 – 0.8 67.5 72.6 – 5.1
Q4 94.5 161.5 –67.0 127.4 146.3 –18.9 100.3 83.5 +16.8
2021 Q1 75.0 127.5 –52.5 113.7 120.7 – 7.1 61.1 69.7 – 8.6
Q2 86.4 123.5 –37.1 122.8 122.0 + 0.8 74.6 71.7 + 2.9
Q3 93.9 128.7 –34.7 125.9 120.2 + 5.7 74.6 74.9 – 0.3
Q4 115.1 206.3 –91.2 145.6 144.5 + 1.2 97.6 87.0 +10.6
2022 Q1 94.7 114.0 –19.3 134.6 122.7 +11.9 68.4 73.8 – 5.4
Q2 99.7 123.5 –23.7 133.2 123.6 + 9.6 81.0 77.3 + 3.7
Q3 89.0 127.8 –38.7 126.1 121.4 + 4.7 81.1 80.3 + 0.8
Q4 116.1 150.4 –34.2 139.6 153.4 –13.8 98.0 94.5 + 3.5
2023 Q1 96.2 116.9 –20.7 121.0 122.3 – 1.3 73.3 81.0 – 7.7
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office data and Bundesbank
calculations.  1 Any amounts of the Bundesbank's profit distribution exceeding the
reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government'sspecial funds are not included here.  2 Including the local authority level of the city
states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg.  3 Data of core budgets and off-budget entities
which are assigned to the general government sector.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
60•
X. Public finances in Germany
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Period Total TotalCentral
government  1State
government  1 European Union  2Local
government  3Balance of
untransferred
tax shares  4Memo item:
Amounts deducted
in the Federal
budget  5
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,836
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 – 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,911 632,268 313,381 286,065 32,822 107,916 – 274 30,266
2021 833,337 706,978 342,988 325,768 38,222 125,000 + 1,359 29,321
2022 895,854 760,321 372,121 349,583 38,617 134,146 + 1,387 34,911
2021 Q1 189,316 159,271 72,814 73,137 13,320 19,882 + 10,163 6,887
Q2 191,931 163,158 81,129 74,024 8,005 29,609 – 835 7,438
Q3 211,364 180,378 87,603 84,312 8,464 29,726 + 1,260 7,823
Q4 240,726 204,171 101,442 94,295 8,433 45,784 – 9,229 7,173
2022 Q1 224,006 189,158 92,112 87,240 9,806 24,772 + 10,077 7,261
Q2 224,538 190,982 94,153 86,852 9,977 34,149 – 594 11,576
Q3 205,544 174,232 84,078 80,020 10,133 33,618 – 2,306 7,953
Q4 241,767 205,950 101,778 95,471 8,702 41,607 – 5,790 8,121
2023 Q1 220,950 186,173 93,366 83,536 9,271 26,505 + 8,271 7,665
Q2 ... 186,597 94,492 82,961 9,144 ... ... 8,959
2022 June . 86,884 43,540 39,996 3,348 . . 6,313
2023 June . 80,242 40,858 36,246 3,138 . . 2,486
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers,
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern-
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these amounts
which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget.  2 Customs duties andshares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government
tax revenue.  3 Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin, Bremen and
Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms.  4 Difference between local
government's share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in
the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local govern-
ment in the same period.  5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1.
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
€ million
Joint taxes
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7
Period Total  1 TotalWage
tax 3Assessed
income
tax 4Corpora-
tion tax  5Invest-
ment
income
tax 6 TotalDomestic
VATImport
VATLocal
business
tax
trans-
fers  8Central
govern-
ment
taxes  9State
govern-
ment
taxes  9EU
customs
dutiesMemo
item:
Local
govern-
ment
share in
joint
taxes
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,376 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,734 50,107
2021 760,953 370,296 218,407 72,342 42,124 37,423 250,800 187,631 63,169 4,951 98,171 31,613 5,122 53,976
2022 814,886 390,111 227,205 77,411 46,334 39,161 284,850 198,201 86,649 6,347 96,652 30,097 6,829 54,565
2021 Q1 171,974 86,381 50,854 17,826 10,203 7,498 54,795 45,403 9,392 252 21,712 7,757 1,076 12,703
Q2 175,242 84,505 50,783 14,347 8,860 10,515 57,634 43,399 14,235 1,215 23,210 7,398 1,281 12,085
Q3 193,910 90,619 53,857 17,973 9,853 8,936 69,528 49,052 20,476 1,189 23,469 7,813 1,292 13,532
Q4 219,827 108,791 62,913 22,196 13,208 10,474 68,843 49,777 19,066 2,295 29,780 8,645 1,473 15,656
2022 Q1 203,130 96,245 56,206 20,915 11,178 7,946 73,584 54,234 19,350 615 22,252 8,975 1,459 13,972
Q2 204,740 101,822 60,363 17,194 11,246 13,019 67,763 46,755 21,008 1,521 24,441 7,564 1,630 13,758
Q3 185,552 82,392 43,431 17,598 10,724 10,639 71,164 49,323 21,841 1,471 21,657 7,115 1,753 11,320
Q4 221,464 109,652 67,205 21,704 13,186 7,557 72,339 47,889 24,451 2,740 28,302 6,444 1,987 15,514
2023 Q1 199,764 94,453 55,669 19,728 10,700 8,357 73,522 52,197 21,325 370 23,110 6,815 1,494 13,591
Q2 199,993 98,917 59,538 15,467 12,406 11,506 67,260 47,855 19,405 1,499 24,740 6,142 1,435 13,396
2022 June 93,193 54,978 20,949 16,152 9,871 8,005 25,754 14,864 10,890 5 9,340 2,551 566 6,309
2023 June 86,391 52,851 20,542 15,866 10,341 6,102 21,602 15,292 6,310 10 9,242 2,207 479 6,150
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations.  1 This total, unlike
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of untrans-
ferred tax shares.  2 Respective percentage share of central, state and local government
in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and
non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on interest income and
capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12.  3 After deducting child benefits
and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans.  4 After deducting employeerefunds and research grants.  5 After deducting research grants.  6 Final withholding tax
on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings.  7 The allocation
of revenue to central, state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular
intervals, is regulated in Section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percent-
age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2022: 46.6:50.5:2.8.
The EU share is deducted from central government's share.  8 Respective percentage
share of central and state government for 2022: 41.4:58.6.  9 For the breakdown, see
Table X. 7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
61•
X. Public finances in Germany
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
of which:
PeriodEnergy
taxSoli-
darity
surchargeTobacco
taxInsurance
taxMotor
vehicle
taxElectri-
city taxAlcohol
tax OtherTax on
the acqui-
sition of
land and
buildingsInherit-
ance
taxBetting
and
lottery
tax Other TotalLocal
business
tax 2Real
property
taxes
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,654
2017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 – 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,966
2018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,203
2019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,651 14,553 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2021 37,120 11,028 14,733 14,980 9,546 6,691 2,089 1,984 18,335 9,824 2,333 1,121 77,335 61,251 14,985
2022 33,667 11,978 14,229 15,672 9,499 6,830 2,191 2,585 17,122 9,226 2,569 1,180 87,315 70,382 15,282
2021 Q1 4,126 3,171 2,585 6,776 2,567 1,692 395 400 4,716 2,110 578 353 17,594 13,798 3,503
Q2 8,717 2,546 4,053 2,843 2,469 1,640 528 413 4,231 2,374 538 255 17,904 13,692 4,034
Q3 9,532 2,338 3,636 2,911 2,381 1,618 514 538 4,571 2,457 516 269 18,643 14,215 4,133
Q4 14,745 2,972 4,458 2,449 2,130 1,741 651 633 4,816 2,884 700 244 23,194 19,546 3,316
2022 Q1 4,452 2,840 2,372 7,175 2,594 1,785 531 503 5,061 2,827 701 385 21,492 17,454 3,577
Q2 9,092 3,518 3,648 2,872 2,433 1,722 505 651 4,406 2,238 661 259 21,318 16,839 4,077
Q3 7,103 2,571 3,742 3,059 2,325 1,598 549 710 4,100 2,138 596 281 21,463 16,792 4,249
Q4 13,020 3,049 4,467 2,567 2,147 1,725 606 722 3,555 2,023 611 254 23,043 19,298 3,380
2023 Q1 4,362 2,888 2,669 7,637 2,632 1,749 530 643 3,362 2,368 666 420 21,555 17,471 3,610
Q2 8,796 3,649 3,830 3,091 2,475 1,669 517 712 2,937 2,323 615 267 ... ... ...
2022 June 3,281 2,235 1,192 814 835 592 173 220 1,519 733 209 90 . . .
2023 June 2,846 2,334 1,349 880 901 534 149 250 1,017 870 192 127 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 For the sum total, see Table X. 6.  2 Including revenue from offshore wind
farms.
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  3
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions  2Payments
from
central
government TotalPension
paymentsPen-
sioners'
health
insuranceDeficit/
surplus Total Deposits  4SecuritiesEquity
interests,
mortgages
and other
loans  5Real
estateMemo
item:
Adminis-
trative
assets
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 –2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,147
2017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 +529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,032
2018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 +4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,008
2019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 +1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 303 56 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 –3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 344 55 3,901
2021 348,679 245,185 102,772 347,486 296,343 22,734 +1,192 42,014 40,320 1,241 400 52 3,807
2022 363,871 258,269 104,876 360,436 308,168 23,792 +3,435 46,087 44,181 1,399 457 51 3,746
2020 Q1 80,578 55,999 24,436 82,622 70,829 5,346 –2,045 40,840 38,636 1,848 300 56 3,966
Q2 82,098 57,515 24,413 82,875 70,889 5,346 –777 39,779 37,975 1,446 304 55 3,949
Q3 82,689 58,109 24,418 86,497 74,054 5,591 –3,808 36,898 35,197 1,333 313 55 3,925
Q4 88,978 64,375 24,412 86,605 73,879 5,576 +2,373 39,847 38,186 1,286 321 55 3,916
2021 Q1 83,066 57,351 25,542 86,048 73,799 5,600 –2,982 36,888 35,326 1,166 342 54 3,887
Q2 86,386 60,666 25,545 86,486 73,905 5,679 –100 36,941 35,554 988 345 53 3,871
Q3 85,535 59,941 25,468 87,123 74,453 5,718 –1,588 36,041 34,670 973 345 53 3,840
Q4 92,818 67,211 25,415 87,385 74,556 5,730 +5,432 41,974 40,310 1,241 370 52 3,835
2022 Q1 86,684 60,599 25,937 86,841 74,568 5,734 –157 41,784 39,952 1,367 399 65 3,783
Q2 90,040 63,978 25,879 87,138 74,644 5,756 +2,903 44,425 42,441 1,513 406 65 3,761
Q3 89,284 62,891 26,218 92,606 79,400 6,127 –3,322 41,548 39,767 1,315 415 51 3,775
Q4 96,931 70,750 25,995 93,444 79,944 6,170 +3,487 46,082 44,186 1,399 446 51 3,767
2023 Q1 91,370 64,171 26,972 92,422 79,330 6,142 –1,052 45,109 43,030 1,569 460 51 3,724
Q2 94,735 67,459 26,942 92,585 79,177 6,165 +2,151 47,245 45,043 1,693 461 48 3,705
Sources: German pension insurance scheme and Bundesbank calculations.  * Excluding
the German pension insurance scheme for mining, railway and maritime industries. The
final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as
the latter are not revised.  1 Including financial compensation payments. Excluding in-vestment spending and proceeds.  2 Including contributions for recipients of govern-
ment cash benefits.  3 Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
quarter.  4 Including cash.  5 Excluding loans to other social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
62•
X. Public finance in Germany
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total  1Contri-
butionsInsolvency
compen-
sation levyGovernment
funds TotalUnemploy-
ment
benefit  2Short-time
working
benefits  3Job
promotion  4Insolvency
benefit
paymentAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  5Deficit/
surplusMemo item:
Deficit-
offsetting
grant or
loan from
central
government
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 – 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 595 5,314 +5,463 –
2017 37,819 32,501 882 – 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 687 6,444 +5,952 –
2018 39,335 34,172 622 – 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 588 8,129 +6,228 –
2019 35,285 29,851 638 – 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 842 6,252 +2,131 –
2020 33,678 28,236 630 – 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 1,214 6,076 –27,335 6,913
2021 35,830 29,571 1,302 – 57,570 19,460 21,003 7,475 493 6,080 –21,739 16,935
2022 37,831 31,651 1,062 – 37,530 16,588 3,865 7,125 534 6,256 + 300 423
2020 Q1 8,123 6,851 153 – 9,301 4,469 392 1,934 235 1,470 –1,179 –
Q2 7,906 6,691 151 – 17,005 4,869 7,977 1,793 254 1,407 –9,099 –
Q3 8,350 6,934 153 – 18,619 5,737 8,637 1,701 472 1,414 –10,269 –
Q4 9,299 7,760 174 – 16,088 5,543 5,712 1,957 251 1,785 –6,789 6,913
2021 Q1 8,228 6,747 289 – 18,260 5,956 8,006 1,935 184 1,391 –10,033 –
Q2 8,830 7,301 324 – 16,720 5,029 7,495 1,912 108 1,452 –7,890 –
Q3 8,791 7,290 330 – 12,042 4,447 3,631 1,744 91 1,452 –3,251 –
Q4 9,982 8,234 359 – 10,547 4,028 1,871 1,884 110 1,785 – 565 16,935
2022 Q1 8,827 7,374 251 – 10,685 4,424 2,087 1,821 135 1,412 –1,858 –
Q2 9,327 7,857 262 – 9,457 4,091 1,215 1,794 147 1,450 – 130 –
Q3 9,278 7,740 261 – 8,401 4,056 408 1,621 107 1,506 + 877 –
Q4 10,398 8,679 289 – 8,987 4,016 156 1,889 145 1,888 +1,411 423
2023 Q1 9,836 8,442 178 – 9,942 4,727 592 1,858 376 1,550 – 106 –
Q2 10,387 8,976 186 – 9,661 4,604 380 1,902 271 1,689 + 726 –
Source: Federal Employment Agency and Bundesbank calculations.  * Including transfers
to the civil servants' pension fund.  1 Excluding central government deficit-offsetting
grant or loan.  2 Unemployment benefit in case of unemployment.  3 Including seasonal
short-time working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, re-
structuring measures and refunds of social contributions.  4 Vocational training, meas-ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, integration, compensation top-up pay-
ments and promotion of business start-ups.  5 Including collection charges to other
social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the
basic allowance for job seekers.
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions Central
government
funds  2 TotalHospital
treatmentPharma-
ceuticalsMedical
treatmentDental
treatment  3Remedies
and
therapeutic
appliancesSickness
benefitsAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  4Deficit/
surplus
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 757
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 +3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 +2,654
2019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 –1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 –6,110
2021 289,270 249,734 36,977 294,602 82,748 46,199 45,075 16,335 20,163 16,612 11,727 –5,332
2022 315,248 262,367 50,223 310,594 85,061 48,354 46,379 16,737 21,259 17,947 12,418 +4,654
2020 Q1 61,949 57,419 3,625 66,438 20,049 11,086 10,806 3,804 4,470 4,061 2,816 –4,489
Q2 68,108 58,096 9,359 69,487 17,674 10,492 10,908 3,389 3,986 4,143 2,980 –1,378
Q3 70,130 59,403 10,151 71,063 20,913 10,567 11,642 3,774 4,852 3,829 2,970 – 934
Q4 68,645 62,672 4,805 67,987 19,887 10,729 11,019 3,891 4,725 3,920 3,039 + 658
2021 Q1 72,970 59,338 13,303 72,660 19,631 11,175 11,564 4,069 4,564 4,287 2,967 + 310
Q2 71,964 61,819 9,965 74,492 20,287 11,275 11,536 4,219 5,085 4,120 2,850 –2,529
Q3 70,592 61,899 7,942 73,569 20,748 11,756 10,730 4,060 5,085 4,004 2,849 –2,977
Q4 74,020 66,678 5,767 73,209 21,340 12,043 11,252 4,062 5,290 4,200 3,109 + 810
2022 Q1 79,253 62,142 17,049 81,493 20,550 11,891 11,847 4,286 5,216 4,574 3,510 –2,240
Q2 79,112 64,611 14,280 79,269 21,080 12,053 12,085 4,249 5,335 4,457 2,958 – 158
Q3 75,516 65,242 9,804 75,011 21,164 12,221 11,545 3,956 5,352 4,441 2,996 + 505
Q4 81,512 70,384 9,091 74,894 21,659 12,242 11,717 4,310 5,442 4,486 3,148 +6,617
2023 Q1 73,718 66,513 6,759 77,593 22,196 12,209 12,181 4,370 5,621 4,927 3,169 –3,875
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as the latter are not
revised. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensationscheme.  2 Federal grant and liquidity assistance.  3 Including dentures.  4 Net, i.e. after
deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contributions incurred by other
social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
63•
X. Public finances in Germany
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period Total Contributions TotalNon-cash
care benefitsInpatient
care total  2Nursing
benefitContributions to
pension insur-
ance scheme  3Administrative
expenditureDeficit/
surplus
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 4,904 13,539 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,235
2017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 – 2,557
2018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 – 3,315
2019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2021 52,573 49,764 53,903 9,573 16,511 13,865 3,070 2,024 – 1,330
2022 57,944 52,604 60,100 10,405 20,542 14,872 3,223 2,166 – 2,156
2020 Q1 11,693 11,473 11,444 2,186 4,214 3,067 633 489 + 249
Q2 11,921 11,732 11,816 2,051 4,015 3,173 664 468 + 105
Q3 13,924 11,938 12,890 2,263 4,087 3,249 682 500 + 1,033
Q4 13,079 12,746 12,927 2,306 4,177 3,403 716 481 + 152
2021 Q1 12,093 11,831 13,344 2,355 3,971 3,387 725 512 – 1,251
Q2 12,933 12,329 13,521 2,287 4,030 3,421 745 510 – 587
Q3 12,624 12,294 13,390 2,393 4,182 3,466 783 509 – 767
Q4 14,853 13,242 13,595 2,475 4,270 3,646 788 503 + 1,258
2022 Q1 12,912 12,412 14,739 2,564 4,974 3,572 775 529 – 1,827
Q2 15,350 12,951 14,827 2,464 5,026 3,698 795 548 + 523
Q3 13,708 13,021 15,387 2,638 5,197 3,755 802 542 – 1,679
Q4 15,813 14,067 15,078 2,581 5,281 3,892 837 528 + 735
2023 Q1 14,283 13,169 14,698 2,876 5,377 3,846 843 570 – 415
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  * The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the
latter are not revised.  1 Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund.  2 In-cluding benefits for short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter alia.
3 For non-professional carers.
12. Maastricht debt by creditor
€ million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Bundesbank Domestic MFIsOther domestic
financial corporations Other domestic creditors Foreign creditors
of which: of which: of which: of which: of which: Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities
2016 2,161,570 205,391 191,880 585,456 223,407 211,515 111,843 48,630 14,181 1,110,579 1,012,275
2017 2,130,519 319,159 305,301 557,949 194,619 180,104 81,125 45,106 10,456 1,028,201 941,750
2018 2,083,367 364,731 350,487 516,113 167,506 186,346 89,794 44,124 8,724 972,053 892,223
2019 2,068,810 366,562 352,025 480,190 158,119 183,714 88,771 48,738 7,224 989,607 908,750
2020 2,339,934 522,392 507,534 517,602 157,828 191,231 99,840 41,093 8,372 1,067,616 996,418
2021 2,494,587 716,004 700,921 509,199 144,646 191,580 103,049 39,444 7,436 1,038,360 969,252
p 2022 2,563,081 741,363 726,147 521,043 126,890 210,888 126,042 43,796 8,972 1,045,990 980,812
2020 Q1 2,114,285 371,076 356,469 492,265 163,767 185,789 92,790 49,820 7,746 1,015,334 935,611
Q2 2,284,382 424,141 409,393 558,876 172,257 186,352 93,968 49,942 8,600 1,065,069 983,910
Q3 2,358,574 468,723 453,952 531,714 167,754 189,475 97,660 51,791 8,100 1,116,871 1,046,047
Q4 2,339,934 522,392 507,534 517,602 157,828 191,231 99,840 41,093 8,372 1,067,616 996,418
2021 Q1 2,368,916 561,443 546,539 491,995 162,961 190,136 99,333 50,869 8,060 1,074,473 1,010,644
Q2 2,418,789 620,472 605,429 494,443 151,182 189,992 99,734 39,995 7,700 1,073,887 1,008,537
Q3 2,452,516 669,659 654,600 496,368 152,068 191,571 101,742 41,857 8,069 1,053,061 987,742
Q4 2,494,587 716,004 700,921 509,199 144,646 191,580 103,049 39,444 7,436 1,038,360 969,252
p 2022 Q1 2,498,760 737,978 722,843 493,359 143,411 194,096 106,165 37,842 6,959 1,035,484 968,957
pQ2 2,536,603 759,385 744,213 497,517 133,999 202,680 115,576 39,891 8,086 1,037,128 971,366
pQ3 2,551,520 741,360 726,147 528,509 126,865 202,277 116,267 39,610 8,986 1,039,763 969,223
pQ4 2,563,081 741,363 726,147 521,043 126,890 210,888 126,042 43,796 8,972 1,045,990 980,812
p 2023 Q1 2,589,018 741,587 726,326 495,838 129,371 209,058 124,774 49,918 16,123 1,092,617 1,029,687
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
64•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
General government
2016 2,161,570 15,491 69,715 1,483,871 96,254 496,239 . .
2017 2,130,519 14,298 48,789 1,484,462 88,841 494,129 . .
2018 2,083,367 14,680 52,572 1,456,160 79,171 480,783 . .
2019 2,068,810 14,449 56,350 1,458,540 64,464 475,007 . .
2020 Q1 2,114,285 11,410 84,160 1,472,222 74,813 471,680 . .
Q2 2,284,382 13,120 134,272 1,533,857 133,665 469,468 . .
Q3 2,358,574 11,886 190,939 1,582,574 104,075 469,099 . .
Q4 2,339,934 14,486 173,851 1,596,141 85,384 470,072 . .
2021 Q1 2,368,916 12,283 190,022 1,637,516 62,725 466,371 . .
Q2 2,418,789 13,065 182,660 1,689,923 69,272 463,869 . .
Q3 2,452,516 13,565 192,481 1,711,741 70,629 464,100 . .
Q4 2,494,587 17,743 195,420 1,729,884 88,684 462,855 . .
p 2022 Q1 2,498,760 15,676 172,881 1,775,454 70,285 464,464 . .
pQ2 2,536,603 17,793 161,918 1,811,322 75,954 469,616 . .
pQ3 2,551,520 22,631 150,016 1,797,472 82,941 498,460 . .
pQ4 2,563,081 16,985 150,704 1,818,159 92,781 484,452 . .
p 2023 Q1 2,589,018 14,913 145,846 1,880,435 86,529 461,294 . .
Central government
2016 1,365,579 15,491 55,208 1,123,853 50,004 121,022 556 8,567
2017 1,361,680 14,298 36,297 1,131,896 48,305 130,885 1,131 10,618
2018 1,334,661 14,680 42,246 1,107,140 43,067 127,528 933 9,975
2019 1,312,675 14,449 38,480 1,101,866 29,956 127,924 605 10,301
2020 Q1 1,340,794 11,410 56,679 1,103,934 40,120 128,652 605 8,119
Q2 1,487,263 13,120 109,217 1,139,510 96,960 128,457 585 7,026
Q3 1,550,507 11,886 166,559 1,178,687 64,470 128,905 605 11,713
Q4 1,527,062 14,486 154,498 1,180,683 48,414 128,981 609 14,521
2021 Q1 1,552,615 12,283 167,485 1,212,495 31,284 129,068 602 22,929
Q2 1,602,675 13,065 165,374 1,259,206 36,297 128,734 643 29,448
Q3 1,630,577 13,565 170,962 1,280,586 37,116 128,348 687 31,382
Q4 1,679,842 17,743 176,428 1,300,416 57,806 127,448 640 8,080
p 2022 Q1 1,684,879 15,676 155,119 1,340,340 41,903 131,841 531 10,451
pQ2 1,724,097 17,793 147,674 1,373,617 47,652 137,362 604 10,552
pQ3 1,757,787 22,631 144,987 1,369,630 56,254 164,285 768 13,203
pQ4 1,776,883 16,985 146,974 1,391,710 71,867 149,348 8,826 9,159
p 2023 Q1 1,799,711 14,913 140,484 1,456,149 60,887 127,278 3,686 10,642
State government
2016 642,291 – 14,515 361,996 20,482 245,298 11,273 1,694
2017 616,790 – 12,543 354,688 19,790 229,769 14,038 2,046
2018 603,143 – 10,332 351,994 19,250 221,567 14,035 1,891
2019 612,559 – 17,873 360,495 19,076 215,115 14,934 1,826
2020 Q1 626,402 – 27,484 372,021 16,329 210,568 12,292 1,783
Q2 648,455 – 25,056 398,404 17,267 207,728 11,059 2,085
Q3 659,035 – 24,382 408,310 20,208 206,136 11,701 2,090
Q4 664,284 – 19,354 419,862 19,481 205,587 11,924 1,410
2021 Q1 667,504 – 22,538 429,641 14,367 200,958 10,942 1,998
Q2 667,750 – 17,287 435,726 16,169 198,568 12,454 2,047
Q3 673,140 – 21,521 436,506 16,312 198,801 11,414 2,119
Q4 665,104 – 18,994 434,930 14,313 196,866 12,441 1,766
p 2022 Q1 663,981 – 17,765 440,766 12,390 193,061 11,697 1,935
pQ2 660,246 – 14,247 443,413 12,056 190,530 11,449 1,777
pQ3 644,911 – 5,031 433,503 14,826 191,552 14,099 2,200
pQ4 636,554 – 3,732 432,252 11,782 188,788 11,704 1,701
p 2023 Q1 633,211 – 5,366 430,184 11,800 185,861 12,020 2,365
Local government
2016 166,205 – – 2,404 27,002 136,798 1,819 431
2017 168,305 – – 3,082 24,909 140,314 1,881 466
2018 161,729 – 1 3,046 20,903 137,779 1,884 497
2019 160,250 – – 2,996 19,607 137,647 1,856 532
2020 Q1 161,020 – – 3,128 20,257 137,636 1,824 508
Q2 161,393 – – 3,094 20,236 138,063 2,084 350
Q3 162,760 – – 2,961 21,108 138,691 2,106 339
Q4 161,974 – – 3,366 18,520 140,088 1,402 330
2021 Q1 161,985 – – 3,121 18,025 140,839 2,009 320
Q2 163,157 – – 3,121 19,079 140,957 2,070 313
Q3 162,609 – – 3,000 18,311 141,298 2,127 306
Q4 164,118 – – 3,241 17,978 142,899 1,768 293
p 2022 Q1 163,678 – – 3,052 16,821 143,804 1,933 315
pQ2 165,754 – – 2,902 16,961 145,891 1,823 361
pQ3 165,560 – – 2,856 15,926 146,778 2,247 358
pQ4 171,150 – – 2,883 18,210 150,057 1,748 470
p 2023 Q1 173,432 – – 2,883 18,525 152,024 2,355 487
For footnotes see end of table.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
65•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont´d)
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:   2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
Social security funds
2016 1,232 – – – 562 670 89 3,044
2017 807 – – – 262 545 15 3,934
2018 704 – – – 388 316 16 4,506
2019 738 – – – 375 363 16 4,753
2020 Q1 806 – – – 287 519 16 4,328
Q2 1,015 – – – 581 433 16 4,284
Q3 4,640 – – – 4,210 430 3,956 4,226
Q4 7,480 – – – 7,128 352 6,931 4,606
2021 Q1 16,220 – – – 15,985 235 15,853 4,160
Q2 21,234 – – – 20,995 239 20,860 4,220
Q3 24,288 – – – 24,053 235 23,872 4,292
Q4 392 – – – 131 261 19 4,729
p 2022 Q1 3,104 – – – 2,863 240 2,720 4,181
pQ2 3,320 – – – 3,078 242 2,939 4,124
pQ3 3,686 – – – 3,439 247 3,311 4,665
pQ4 2,196 – – – 1,589 607 1,424 12,372
p 2023 Q1 2,971 – – – 1,895 1,076 2,245 6,812
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office and
the Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency.  1 Particularly liabilities resulting
from coins in circulation.  2 Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt vis-à-visother government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on the
market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated between
different government subsectors.
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
€ million
Currency and deposits  2Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3
Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total  1 Total  1Federal
day bond Total  1Conventional
Federal
bonds
(Bunds)Conventional
Federal
notes
(Bobls)Conventional
Federal
Treasury
notes
(Schätze)  4Treasury
discount
paper
(Bubills)  5Federal
savings
notesGreen
Federal
securitiesInflation-
linked
Federal
securities  6Capital
indexation
of inflation-
linked
securities Loans  1
2007 987,909 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 102,083 37,385 10,287 . 13,464 506 63,650
2008 1,019,905 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 105,684 40,795 9,649 . 19,540 1,336 78,685
2009 1,086,173 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 113,637 104,409 9,471 . 24,730 1,369 63,121
2010 1,337,160 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 126,220 85,867 8,704 . 35,906 2,396 242,251
2011 1,346,869 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 130,648 58,297 8,208 . 44,241 3,961 215,109
2012 1,390,377 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 117,719 56,222 6,818 . 52,119 5,374 203,467
2013 1,392,735 10,582 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 110,029 50,004 4,488 . 51,718 4,730 190,127
2014 1,398,472 12,146 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 103,445 27,951 2,375 . 63,245 5,368 180,123
2015 1,371,933 13,949 1,070 1,188,463 663,296 232,387 96,389 18,536 1,305 . 74,495 5,607 169,521
2016 1,365,579 15,491 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 95,727 23,609 737 . 66,464 3,602 171,026
2017 1,361,680 14,298 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 91,013 10,037 289 . 72,855 4,720 179,190
2018 1,334,661 14,680 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 86,009 12,949 48 . 64,647 5,139 170,595
2019 1,312,675 14,449 –1,140,346 719,747 174,719 89,230 13,487 . . 69,805 6,021 157,880
2020 1,527,062 14,486 .1,335,181 801,910 179,560 98,543 113,141 . 9,876 58,279 3,692 177,395
2021 1,679,842 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 185,255
p 2022 1,776,883 16,985 .1,538,683 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 221,215
2020 Q1 1,340,794 11,410 .1,160,613 721,343 182,095 91,084 23,572 . . 71,028 5,310 168,772
Q2 1,487,263 13,120 .1,248,728 774,587 178,329 95,622 79,987 . . 56,061 3,752 225,416
Q3 1,550,507 11,886 .1,345,246 790,288 191,388 99,276 127,478 . 6,050 57,144 3,737 193,375
Q4 1,527,062 14,486 .1,335,181 801,910 179,560 98,543 113,141 . 9,876 58,279 3,692 177,395
2021 Q1 1,552,615 12,283 .1,379,980 814,864 189,935 103,910 134,800 . 11,026 60,687 3,857 160,352
Q2 1,602,675 13,065 .1,424,579 861,455 184,413 104,997 139,451 . 16,526 62,569 5,056 165,031
Q3 1,630,577 13,565 .1,451,549 869,195 198,692 105,398 146,533 . 19,824 63,851 5,456 165,464
Q4 1,679,842 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 185,255
p 2022 Q1 1,684,879 15,676 .1,495,459 911,280 204,534 108,702 140,427 . 23,961 67,776 7,809 173,744
pQ2 1,724,097 17,793 .1,521,291 937,949 198,472 111,343 138,495 . 29,425 70,217 11,209 185,014
pQ3 1,757,787 22,631 .1,514,617 918,838 208,509 111,675 137,740 . 35,527 71,498 12,879 220,539
pQ4 1,776,883 16,985 .1,538,683 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 221,215
p 2023 Q1 1,799,711 14,913 .1,596,633 987,363 213,514 120,904 127,143 . 39,459 73,591 15,497 188,164
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, and
Bundesbank calculations.  1 Comprises all of central government, i.e. all off-budget en-
tities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned bad bank FMS
Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government from an economic
perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) 2010.  2 Particularly liabilitiesresulting from coins in circulation.  3 Issuances by the Federal Republic of Germany. Ex-
cluding issuers' holdings of own securities but including those held by other govern-
ment entities.  4 Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency (expired
in 2011).  5 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014).  6 Excluding
inflation-induced indexation of capital.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2021 2022 2023
2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Item Index 2015=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 100.4 104.9 104.8 –7.2 4.5 –0.1 2.6 –1.1 1.2 –0.1 0.9 –2.2 1.6
Construction 102.1 100.7 97.7 2.0 –1.4 –2.9 2.3 –6.1 4.7 –3.4 –4.6 –6.4 –0.7
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 101.0 103.9 108.1 –7.5 2.8 4.0 3.2 4.1 9.2 5.7 2.3 –0.4 –0.5
Information and communication 120.8 125.2 129.4 0.1 3.6 3.4 3.9 2.9 3.6 2.8 3.9 3.2 2.8
Financial and insurance activities 98.9 99.1 101.3 3.6 0.3 2.2 –0.1 0.6 2.2 2.0 2.4 2.4 –0.4
Real estate activities 102.2 103.1 104.2 0.4 0.9 1.1 0.2 0.7 1.8 1.1 0.7 0.7 1.1
Business services  1 105.1 109.8 112.9 –5.0 4.4 2.9 6.5 4.4 6.7 2.2 1.0 1.8 0.1
Public services, education and health 105.4 107.6 110.2 –1.1 2.0 2.4 –0.2 1.6 2.7 0.8 2.8 3.4 1.8
Other services 91.2 91.5 97.6 –11.6 0.4 6.7 1.5 4.3 9.8 8.4 2.8 6.2 1.5
Gross value added 102.8 105.6 107.5 –3.9 2.7 1.8 2.2 1.2 3.8 1.7 1.4 0.4 0.7
Gross domestic product  2 103.2 105.9 107.8 –3.7 2.6 1.8 1.8 1.2 4.1 1.7 1.3 0.2 –0.2
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 101.1 101.5 106.5 –5.7 0.4 4.9 1.4 3.1 9.2 7.4 3.0 0.6 –1.0
Government consumption 113.8 118.1 119.5 4.0 3.8 1.2 2.1 1.4 4.4 –0.0 0.3 0.2 –5.4
Machinery and equipment 100.8 104.3 107.7 –11.0 3.5 3.3 –2.1 –2.6 0.7 0.7 8.9 3.1 6.7
Premises 112.9 112.9 110.8 3.9 0.0 –1.8 0.6 –3.2 3.4 –3.3 –1.7 –5.2 –2.9
Other investment  4 116.3 117.6 120.0 –3.3 1.0 2.1 1.6 0.7 1.7 1.8 2.4 2.5 2.6
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . –0.3 0.5 0.4 1.0 0.9 –1.0 0.1 1.3 1.0 1.1
Domestic demand 106.1 108.1 111.7 –3.0 1.9 3.3 2.3 2.4 5.2 3.6 3.5 1.0 –0.4
Net exports  6 . . . –0.8 0.8 –1.3 –0.3 –1.0 –0.8 –1.7 –2.0 –0.7 0.1
     Exports 101.0 110.8 114.5 –9.3 9.7 3.4 7.4 7.2 4.6 3.3 5.4 0.4 1.8
     Imports 107.6 117.3 125.4 –8.5 9.0 6.9 9.3 11.1 7.2 7.8 11.0 2.0 1.7
Gross domestic product  2 103.2 105.9 107.8 –3.7 2.6 1.8 1.8 1.2 4.1 1.7 1.3 0.2 –0.2
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,713.5 1,773.8 1,982.7 –5.1 3.5 11.8 5.3 7.9 14.2 14.2 10.4 8.8 7.3
Government consumption 748.0 797.5 849.3 6.4 6.6 6.5 6.2 6.1 9.4 6.0 5.6 5.2 –1.6
Machinery and equipment 217.5 229.4 253.7 –9.8 5.5 10.6 –0.3 0.2 6.2 7.6 17.4 11.2 14.8
Premises 384.8 416.7 474.7 5.9 8.3 13.9 12.8 10.3 18.7 14.8 13.3 9.5 11.4
Other investment  4 133.8 137.7 144.0 –2.8 2.9 4.6 3.4 2.9 5.6 5.0 4.9 3.1 3.5
Changes in inventories  5 16.1 55.1 89.5 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,213.8 3,410.2 3,794.0 –1.9 6.1 11.3 7.8 9.4 12.9 12.8 11.8 7.9 5.1
Net exports 191.7 191.6 75.9 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,464.8 1,693.9 1,954.6 –9.6 15.6 15.4 15.1 17.1 16.3 17.3 19.0 9.5 6.3
     Imports 1,273.1 1,502.4 1,878.7 –10.6 18.0 25.0 20.3 26.7 26.6 29.2 33.4 12.9 4.2
Gross domestic product  2 3,405.4 3,601.8 3,869.9 –2.0 5.8 7.4 6.3 6.3 9.2 8.2 6.1 6.5 6.0
 IV. Prices (2015=100)
Private consumption 105.7 109.0 116.2 0.6 3.1 6.6 3.8 4.7 4.6 6.4 7.2 8.1 8.4
Gross domestic product 109.1 112.4 118.6 1.8 3.1 5.5 4.4 5.0 4.9 6.3 4.8 6.2 6.2
Terms of trade 102.8 100.1 95.5 2.0 –2.6 –4.6 –2.7 –4.2 –5.7 –5.2 –6.1 –1.4 1.8
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,853.9 1,918.0 2,020.5 –0.1 3.5 5.3 4.7 4.6 6.7 5.4 4.2 5.1 6.3
Entrepreneurial and property income 717.7 825.4 840.1 –4.6 15.0 1.8 9.7 10.5 4.2 –1.4 5.2 –1.4 9.9
National income 2,571.6 2,743.4 2,860.5 –1.4 6.7 4.3 6.2 6.1 5.9 3.4 4.5 3.3 7.5
Memo item: Gross national income 3,505.7 3,729.5 4,000.8 –2.4 6.4 7.3 7.3 6.9 9.4 7.7 6.0 6.2 6.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2023.  1 Professional, sci-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added plus
taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit institu-tions serving households.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware
and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net in-
crease in valuables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy Total Inter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2015 = 100
% of total  1   100      14.04      6.37      79.60      29.44      36.96 2.28      10.92      10.27      9.95      12.73      14.14
Period
2019 102.9 112.7 90.4 102.2 101.8 102.6 106.2 101.0 102.8 106.5 103.4 94.9
2020 95.0 116.2 84.4 92.2 94.9 88.2 97.6 97.2 90.6 98.5 89.5 75.9
2021 98.4 114.3 87.0 96.5 102.6 90.5 103.6 99.1 98.9 108.7 95.9 73.9
2022 97.9 112.5 85.5 96.3 99.5 92.3 105.4 99.6 96.5 114.0 96.7 76.7
2022 Q2 97.5 115.0 82.7 95.6 101.8 89.6 105.5 97.2 98.1 111.2 94.1 75.0
Q3 98.0 116.5 79.7 96.2 99.8 91.6 105.4 100.0 95.9 117.9 96.5 75.2
Q4 100.3 119.9 84.3 98.0 93.2 100.3 106.9 101.4 93.0 116.9 105.7 83.0
r 2023 Q1 95.9 96.7 85.1 96.7 98.0 95.8 104.7 95.0 95.8 117.6 92.9 90.4
x,p Q2 97.2 114.0 66.4 96.8 96.3 96.8 102.1 96.6 95.7 116.0 95.3 88.6
2022 June 100.6 118.7 77.7 99.2 102.7 95.7 106.2 99.9 99.4 115.7 101.6 80.2
2 July 99.1 121.0 82.2 96.6 102.2 91.5 101.4 97.4 97.5 115.5 95.4 75.9
2 Aug. 91.5 110.4 78.1 89.2 95.0 81.7 98.2 96.7 90.0 112.0 89.4 60.2
Sep. 103.4 118.1 78.7 102.8 102.2 101.6 116.6 105.9 100.3 126.1 104.6 89.6
Oct. 101.6 121.8 80.8 99.7 100.4 96.7 111.5 105.3 100.7 118.6 98.4 83.7
Nov. 105.8 124.0 85.1 104.2 100.6 106.2 113.6 104.9 100.1 124.2 106.3 95.4
Dec. 93.4 113.9 86.9 90.2 78.6 98.0 95.7 93.9 78.2 108.0 112.3 69.9
r 2023 Jan. 88.0 80.1 89.2 89.3 93.7 84.7 94.2 92.0 90.3 108.4 83.2 78.3
r Feb. 95.1 97.0 82.2 95.8 96.6 96.1 103.2 91.4 94.1 115.9 91.8 93.9
r Mar. 104.7 113.0 83.9 105.0 103.6 106.5 116.6 101.5 102.9 128.6 103.7 99.1
x Apr. 96.3 112.5 73.1 95.4 96.1 94.2 104.1 95.5 95.7 113.7 91.8 87.1
x May 96.4 113.8 64.2 96.0 95.7 96.5 98.4 94.5 95.1 114.3 93.2 90.5
x,p June 98.9 115.7 62.0 98.9 97.2 99.7 103.8 99.7 96.3 120.0 100.8 88.3
Annual percentage change
2019 – 2.3 + 3.5 – 7.2 – 2.9 – 3.5 – 1.9 ± 0.0 – 5.5 – 4.2 – 2.3 – 2.9 – 5.0
2020 – 7.7 + 3.1 – 6.6 – 9.8 – 6.8 –14.0 – 8.1 – 3.8 –11.9 – 7.5 –13.4 –20.0
2021 + 3.6 – 1.6 + 3.1 + 4.7 + 8.1 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 2.0 + 9.2 +10.4 + 7.2 – 2.6
2022 – 0.5 – 1.6 – 1.7 – 0.2 – 3.0 + 2.0 + 1.7 + 0.5 – 2.4 + 4.9 + 0.8 + 3.8
2022 Q2 – 1.5 – 2.7 + 1.1 – 1.4 – 3.4 – 0.6 + 2.5 + 0.7 – 3.5 + 2.3 – 1.4 + 0.3
Q3 + 1.2 – 2.4 – 1.1 + 2.1 – 2.5 + 7.7 + 3.5 – 1.6 – 2.0 + 8.1 + 1.9 +21.9
Q4 – 1.2 – 4.0 – 9.8 + 0.1 – 5.7 + 5.5 – 1.7 – 1.3 – 3.1 + 6.7 + 3.4 +11.8
r 2023 Q1 + 0.1 – 2.1 –10.8 + 1.3 – 5.0 + 9.5 + 0.9 – 4.8 – 3.1 + 7.0 + 2.6 +23.2
x,p Q2 – 0.3 – 0.8 –19.6 + 1.2 – 5.3 + 8.0 – 3.2 – 0.7 – 2.4 + 4.3 + 1.2 +18.1
2022 June + 0.2 – 1.9 + 0.8 + 0.6 – 3.2 + 4.8 – 0.6 – 1.6 – 3.9 + 3.4 + 2.7 +12.0
2 July – 1.3 – 2.1 + 5.7 – 1.5 – 3.2 + 0.5 – 0.9 – 3.6 – 3.8 + 5.3 – 2.7 + 3.1
2 Aug. + 1.6 – 2.0 – 2.6 + 2.6 – 2.9 + 9.7 + 7.3 – 1.6 – 1.3 + 7.1 + 3.4 +30.9
Sep. + 3.3 – 3.0 – 5.9 + 5.3 – 1.4 +13.4 + 4.4 + 0.4 – 0.9 +11.8 + 5.0 +36.6
Oct. – 0.5 – 1.5 –12.3 + 0.6 – 3.9 + 5.5 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.8 + 7.2 + 2.2 +14.0
Nov. ± 0.0 – 2.7 – 8.6 + 1.2 – 3.7 + 6.5 – 0.8 – 2.6 – 3.2 + 9.8 + 4.4 +13.7
Dec. – 3.1 – 7.8 – 8.7 – 1.6 –10.3 + 4.5 – 3.1 – 0.3 – 5.7 + 2.8 + 3.6 + 6.7
r 2023 Jan. – 1.7 – 2.1 – 9.8 – 1.0 – 6.0 + 4.8 – 1.4 – 3.2 – 4.2 + 5.6 + 2.5 +11.7
r Feb. + 0.4 + 0.2 –13.2 + 1.5 – 4.5 + 9.0 – 1.3 – 4.0 – 3.6 + 7.2 + 2.8 +18.9
r Mar. + 1.4 – 3.9 – 9.5 + 3.2 – 4.5 +14.0 + 5.0 – 7.1 – 1.7 + 8.2 + 2.5 +39.4
x Apr. + 0.7 + 0.3 –18.1 + 2.4 – 5.1 +10.2 – 1.2 + 0.5 – 1.7 + 5.7 + 3.1 +22.5
x May ± 0.0 – 0.2 –20.7 + 1.6 – 5.5 +10.0 – 6.2 – 2.3 – 2.5 + 3.5 + 1.6 +22.6
x,p June – 1.7 – 2.5 –20.2 – 0.3 – 5.4 + 4.2 – 2.3 – 0.2 – 3.1 + 3.7 – 0.8 +10.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2015.  2 Influenced by a change in holiday dates.  x Provisional;estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the
Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction
industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2019 104.9 – 5.1 103.5 – 7.2 105.4 – 4.2 107.0 – 2.7 123.3 + 3.7 101.7 – 5.0
2020 97.2 – 7.3 97.9 – 5.4 95.6 – 9.3 105.7 – 1.2 124.4 + 0.9 99.6 – 2.1
2021 119.3 +22.7 124.6 +27.3 116.3 +21.7 117.4 +11.1 146.5 +17.8 107.9 + 8.3
2022 126.2 + 5.8 138.4 +11.1 118.3 + 1.7 129.0 + 9.9 164.8 +12.5 117.2 + 8.6
2022 June 129.3 + 2.1 142.4 +11.6 120.4 – 4.1 136.0 + 3.0 168.3 +11.2 125.3 – 0.2
July 127.7 – 0.3 143.7 +12.4 118.9 – 7.5 120.7 – 5.2 149.9 – 0.7 111.0 – 7.1
Aug. 114.5 + 7.6 128.3 +11.0 104.9 + 4.8 122.2 + 9.9 161.0 +18.9 109.4 + 5.9
Sep. 123.6 + 0.8 132.0 + 6.3 117.1 – 4.6 134.4 +17.9 166.4 +19.5 123.9 +17.2
Oct. 125.5 + 7.1 134.9 + 8.1 119.3 + 6.3 128.9 + 7.6 173.5 +22.3 114.2 + 1.5
Nov. 124.4 – 0.7 135.4 + 1.9 117.0 – 3.1 129.4 + 3.9 149.6 – 0.1 122.8 + 5.7
Dec. 121.3 – 1.9 127.6 + 6.2 118.6 – 6.5 112.0 – 2.2 139.8 – 6.2 102.9 – 0.2
2023 Jan. 125.8 – 5.3 139.2 – 3.5 118.1 – 6.9 122.2 – 3.3 135.6 –11.9 117.8 + 0.3
Feb. 128.9 + 0.1 133.7 – 2.1 126.3 + 1.9 125.8 – 2.4 154.0 + 0.1 116.6 – 3.4
Mar. 130.2 – 6.3 138.7 – 9.4 124.8 – 3.4 132.5 – 8.9 168.5 –13.1 120.7 – 6.9
Apr. 115.9 – 6.1 128.6 –10.0 107.6 – 1.9 118.5 –13.1 156.3 –17.1 106.1 –10.9
May 121.4 – 2.0 124.5 –10.7 120.1 + 5.5 117.1 – 8.2 133.2 –25.5 111.8 + 1.1
p June 136.2 + 5.3 128.4 – 9.8 142.0 +17.9 128.1 – 5.8 159.5 – 5.2 117.8 – 6.0
From the domestic market
2019 101.2 – 5.6 99.1 – 8.7 103.0 – 3.4 101.2 – 1.7 116.2 + 1.3 96.1 – 2.8
2020 94.9 – 6.2 94.1 – 5.0 95.1 – 7.7 98.0 – 3.2 105.5 – 9.2 95.4 – 0.7
2021 115.5 +21.7 119.5 +27.0 113.1 +18.9 108.0 +10.2 114.9 + 8.9 105.6 +10.7
2022 122.7 + 6.2 135.4 +13.3 112.6 – 0.4 118.2 + 9.4 125.0 + 8.8 115.9 + 9.8
2022 June 125.6 – 1.6 137.0 + 9.5 116.0 –11.1 124.7 + 0.6 127.4 + 8.7 123.8 – 2.0
July 124.5 – 3.3 143.9 +14.1 110.1 –16.7 110.4 – 9.0 124.7 + 7.5 105.6 –14.2
Aug. 110.2 + 5.5 124.9 +12.0 97.9 – 0.5 108.2 + 2.1 121.3 + 9.4 103.7 – 0.7
Sep. 120.6 + 9.6 128.8 + 9.2 112.9 + 8.2 125.7 +21.9 123.5 +16.3 126.4 +23.9
Oct. 120.5 + 4.2 133.8 + 8.8 108.9 – 1.0 121.7 +10.1 123.7 +15.9 121.0 + 8.2
Nov. 123.2 + 3.2 134.4 + 6.1 113.3 – 0.4 125.7 + 8.9 128.2 + 9.0 124.9 + 9.0
Dec. 115.4 – 3.0 127.5 +14.5 108.6 –14.9 92.1 –12.7 99.3 – 2.6 89.7 –15.9
2023 Jan. 121.5 – 2.6 137.3 – 1.0 110.5 – 3.0 105.0 –10.7 105.7 – 9.0 104.8 –11.3
Feb. 125.8 + 2.0 133.3 + 0.8 121.4 + 4.3 111.8 – 5.6 113.6 – 3.4 111.2 – 6.3
Mar. 130.1 – 6.0 137.0 – 7.9 126.0 – 3.7 118.7 – 8.9 133.1 – 6.8 113.8 – 9.8
Apr. 117.5 – 4.9 132.6 – 4.3 106.9 – 2.6 102.8 –21.2 118.9 –13.7 97.4 –23.9
May 122.9 + 0.4 124.7 – 8.5 124.0 +10.7 104.9 – 7.4 110.5 –19.9 103.0 – 1.8
p June 121.7 – 3.1 120.1 –12.3 125.9 + 8.5 103.1 –17.3 104.0 –18.4 102.8 –17.0
From abroad
2019 107.6 – 4.8 108.3 – 5.5 106.9 – 4.6 111.5 – 3.5 129.0 + 5.6 105.9 – 6.6
2020 98.9 – 8.1 102.0 – 5.8 95.9 –10.3 111.8 + 0.3 139.6 + 8.2 102.8 – 2.9
2021 122.2 +23.6 130.1 +27.5 118.2 +23.3 124.8 +11.6 171.9 +23.1 109.6 + 6.6
2022 128.8 + 5.4 141.6 + 8.8 121.8 + 3.0 137.4 +10.1 196.8 +14.5 118.2 + 7.8
2022 June 132.1 + 4.9 148.2 +13.8 123.0 + 0.4 144.7 + 4.7 201.2 +12.5 126.4 + 1.0
July 130.2 + 2.0 143.4 +10.4 124.2 – 1.7 128.6 – 2.5 170.2 – 4.9 115.1 – 1.4
Aug. 117.7 + 9.1 132.0 + 9.9 109.1 + 7.9 133.0 +15.5 193.0 +24.4 113.7 +11.0
Sep. 125.9 – 4.8 135.4 + 3.3 119.6 –10.6 141.2 +15.4 200.9 +21.2 121.9 +12.4
Oct. 129.3 + 9.1 136.0 + 7.3 125.5 +10.6 134.5 + 5.9 213.6 +25.5 109.0 – 3.6
Nov. 125.3 – 3.5 136.5 – 2.2 119.2 – 4.6 132.3 + 0.6 166.8 – 5.0 121.2 + 3.2
Dec. 125.7 – 1.1 127.7 – 1.5 124.6 – 1.5 127.4 + 4.9 172.4 – 7.8 113.0 +12.5
2023 Jan. 129.1 – 7.3 141.2 – 6.0 122.7 – 8.9 135.6 + 1.7 159.7 –13.3 127.8 + 9.3
Feb. 131.3 – 1.2 134.2 – 5.0 129.2 + 0.6 136.7 – 0.2 186.5 + 1.9 120.7 – 1.2
Mar. 130.3 – 6.4 140.5 –11.0 124.0 – 3.3 143.2 – 9.0 197.0 –16.1 125.9 – 4.8
Apr. 114.6 – 7.0 124.3 –15.8 108.1 – 1.4 130.7 – 7.2 186.4 –18.8 112.7 + 0.4
May 120.3 – 3.8 124.2 –13.0 117.7 + 2.4 126.5 – 8.7 151.4 –28.5 118.5 + 3.1
p June 147.2 +11.4 137.4 – 7.3 151.7 +23.3 147.5 + 1.9 204.1 + 1.4 129.2 + 2.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2019 146.2 +8.2 145.3 +10.3 150.4 +9.7 142.6 +10.8 138.9 +10.9 147.1 +5.9 148.1 +8.8 141.3 +6.6
2020 145.6 –0.4 144.2 –0.8 160.8 +6.9 130.2 –8.7 141.5 +1.9 147.3 +0.1 139.6 –5.7 143.3 +1.4
2021 159.0 +9.2 164.1 +13.8 174.3 +8.4 156.6 +20.3 158.5 +12.0 153.0 +3.9 161.5 +15.7 146.7 +2.4
2022 166.8 +4.9 161.7 –1.5 167.7 –3.8 155.0 –1.0 166.8 +5.2 172.7 +12.9 171.9 +6.4 160.5 +9.4
2022 May 175.9 +10.6 172.1 +5.5 182.1 –1.1 163.0 +11.0 173.5 +12.4 180.2 +16.9 170.7 +13.1 178.0 +16.4
June 175.2 +6.4 166.3 +0.7 177.9 +0.2 153.3 –4.3 176.6 +24.0 185.6 +13.1 177.5 +6.5 171.0 +10.7
July 180.6 +12.9 179.3 +6.5 171.1 –4.5 178.0 +8.7 211.5 +40.4 182.1 +21.2 190.1 +19.9 175.5 +17.1
Aug. 157.2 –1.1 148.2 –8.8 145.1 –13.2 143.0 –12.4 178.0 +23.6 167.6 +8.3 155.9 –1.6 165.9 +7.4
Sep. 164.2 –9.3 159.4 –15.6 162.5 –15.1 153.9 –20.3 169.5 +2.6 169.9 –1.1 166.1 –13.8 163.2 +1.3
Oct. 161.8 +2.0 145.1 –14.1 148.3 –12.3 140.2 –18.4 153.0 –2.7 181.3 +23.5 172.5 +0.5 157.9 +14.8
Nov. 148.3 +2.1 134.7 –5.7 130.9 –17.9 127.0 –4.2 176.1 +38.6 164.0 +10.7 155.2 –2.7 150.9 +25.3
Dec. 166.0 –10.3 162.2 –21.0 154.8 –21.1 165.5 –4.4 174.5 –50.9 170.4 +5.4 188.6 +1.0 146.9 –16.8
2023 Jan. 132.2 –7.4 125.7 –13.6 126.8 –23.5 128.4 –4.3 112.1 –7.5 139.7 –0.1 145.8 –2.3 119.8 –1.6
Feb. 151.8 –2.5 130.4 –19.0 127.4 –27.6 133.0 –15.9 130.9 +7.5 176.6 +18.1 167.6 +1.5 148.5 +12.1
Mar. 192.7 –8.0 179.4 –14.0 155.1 –29.3 197.2 –2.0 193.1 –3.5 208.2 –1.1 216.9 –0.1 187.8 –3.5
Apr. 169.9 +3.5 147.6 –6.4 144.6 –18.8 141.6 –0.8 179.7 +22.7 195.9 +14.0 178.4 +15.8 175.6 +4.8
May 176.1 +0.1 153.5 –10.8 153.9 –15.5 147.4 –9.6 175.1 +0.9 202.4 +12.3 187.5 +9.8 176.5 –0.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2019 115.0 +3.9 111.0 +3.3 112.2 +2.4 106.7 +1.0 108.9 +1.6 107.1 +4.0 118.8 +5.7 138.3 +8.3
2020 121.4 +5.6 115.9 +4.4 121.4 +8.2 81.9 –23.2 106.9 –1.8 117.1 +9.3 125.4 +5.6 169.0 +22.2
2021 124.7 +2.7 116.7 +0.7 121.7 +0.2 78.1 –4.6 95.4 –10.8 110.5 –5.6 135.2 +7.8 189.9 +12.4
3 2022 134.4 +7.8 115.8 –0.8 128.3 +5.4 102.8 +31.6 107.6 +12.8 123.0 +11.3 144.7 +7.0 188.6 –0.7
2022 June 130.7 +0.6 112.6 –7.6 126.9 +4.3 105.6 –6.8 92.7 –3.8 119.6 –5.2 141.5 +7.1 174.5 –4.6
July 135.6 +8.0 116.1 –1.3 130.9 +8.5 106.0 +3.2 100.2 –0.9 122.1 +0.2 149.0 +9.3 182.0 +14.0
Aug. 130.2 +6.2 110.6 –3.8 126.2 +10.0 98.3 –2.2 98.5 –2.4 114.4 –3.6 142.9 +6.7 173.0 +4.2
Sep. 133.4 +10.7 111.9 –0.3 125.3 +11.9 116.4 +16.3 108.7 +6.2 119.1 +5.0 144.7 +10.5 186.7 +9.2
Oct. 138.5 +6.4 115.0 –4.6 132.6 +10.9 116.4 +1.4 111.9 +2.5 126.0 +0.1 145.5 +3.1 193.0 +1.4
Nov. 148.3 +5.8 123.6 –4.8 133.6 +10.0 117.0 +11.4 137.1 +1.4 130.1 +0.2 156.6 +6.5 236.4 +0.6
Dec. 152.6 +4.9 126.7 –5.7 146.9 +6.8 125.6 +28.7 149.4 +1.1 123.5 +1.1 161.1 +3.4 210.4 –4.3
2023 Jan. 125.1 +3.6 104.4 –5.9 123.6 +6.4 86.6 +21.1 112.1 +0.5 109.4 –1.4 140.2 +1.0 171.8 –5.4
Feb. 123.3 +4.1 101.7 –5.6 123.9 +7.9 83.9 +16.2 100.3 +3.8 109.1 –2.9 136.2 +4.0 165.8 –3.2
Mar. 139.0 +0.9 113.4 –7.4 138.5 +4.8 99.6 +6.5 104.7 +3.2 130.6 –4.1 149.7 +2.7 183.4 –4.5
Apr. 137.6 +3.9 111.7 –4.0 137.7 +8.4 108.0 +6.1 93.5 –0.4 129.0 –1.9 147.2 +5.6 176.8 –2.3
May 139.9 +4.6 113.6 –1.9 139.1 +9.1 112.5 +2.7 89.9 +0.6 130.3 +0.3 149.3 +6.6 179.4 –0.8
June 136.8 +4.7 111.0 –1.4 136.5 +7.6 117.3 +11.1 93.3 +0.6 121.0 +1.2 148.3 +4.8 171.3 –1.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2022 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2018 44,866 +1.4 32,964 +2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2019 r45,276 r +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 72,267 827 7 5.0 774
2020 r44,915 r –0.8 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2021 r44,984 r +0.2 33,897 +0.9 9,344 23,602 702 4,101 1,852 1,744 2,613 999 5.7 706
2022 r45,596 r +1.4 34,507 +1.8 9,400 24,135 721 4,125 426 337 2,418 808 5.3 845
2020 Q2 r44,723 r –1.1 33,415 +0.1 9,387 23,137 640 4,235 5,399 5,388 2,770 1,154 6.0 593
Q3 r44,809 r –1.3 33,424 –0.4 9,359 23,171 640 4,273 2,705 2,691 2,904 1,266 6.3 583
Q4 r44,994 r –1.3 33,836 –0.3 9,395 23,518 676 4,194 2,433 2,361 2,722 1,167 5.9 595
2021 Q1 r44,518 r –1.4 33,568 –0.2 9,294 23,376 665 4,051 3,473 3,157 2,878 1,248 6.3 586
Q2 r44,815 r +0.2 33,718 +0.9 9,322 23,446 697 4,066 2,164 2,143 2,691 1,024 5.9 658
Q3 r45,161 r +0.8 33,929 +1.5 9,347 23,606 719 4,161 935 915 2,545 920 5.5 774
Q4 r45,443 r +1.0 34,374 +1.6 9,415 23,982 727 4,125 835 762 2,341 802 5.1 804
2022 Q1 r45,199 r +1.5 34,242 +2.0 9,348 23,943 715 4,061 1,033 792 2,417 874 5.3 818
Q2 r45,519 r +1.6 34,401 +2.0 9,372 24,056 718 4,112 337 324 2,311 777 5.0 864
Q3 r45,707 r +1.2 34,522 +1.7 9,405 24,133 724 4,159 103 92 2,501 804 5.5 880
Q4 r45,959 r +1.1 34,864 +1.4 9,475 24,409 730 4,166 229 139 2,443 778 5.3 817
2023 Q1 r45,619 r +0.9 834,597 8+1.0 89,392 824,276 8 694 84,146 ... 8 155 2,610 900 5.7 773
Q2 945,859 9 +0.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,561 839 10 5.6 770
2020 Mar. r45,077 r +0.2 33,648 +1.1 9,440 23,290 675 4,350 2,834 2,580 2,335 925 5.1 691
Apr. r44,808 r –0.7 33,430 +0.1 9,396 23,141 643 4,194 6,007 5,995 2,644 1,093 5.8 626
May r44,672 r –1.3 33,328 –0.3 9,367 23,083 624 4,206 5,726 5,715 2,813 1,172 6.1 584
June r44,688 r –1.4 33,323 –0.3 9,355 23,084 629 4,260 4,464 4,452 2,853 1,197 6.2 570
July r44,699 r –1.4 33,233 –0.4 9,322 23,024 635 4,302 3,319 3,306 2,910 1,258 6.3 573
Aug. r44,737 r –1.3 33,482 –0.4 9,367 23,218 642 4,266 2,551 2,537 2,955 1,302 6.4 584
Sep. r44,991 r –1.2 33,792 –0.4 9,421 23,454 656 4,240 2,244 2,229 2,847 1,238 6.2 591
Oct. r45,076 r –1.1 33,862 –0.3 9,410 23,530 671 4,229 2,037 2,021 2,760 1,183 6.0 602
Nov. r45,031 r –1.3 33,899 –0.2 9,400 23,559 696 4,166 2,405 2,386 2,699 1,152 5.9 601
Dec. r44,874 r –1.3 33,700 –0.1 9,327 23,478 666 4,134 2,856 2,676 2,707 1,166 5.9 581
2021 Jan. r44,493 r –1.5 33,515 –0.3 9,282 23,347 657 4,045 3,638 3,294 2,901 1,298 6.3 566
Feb. r44,490 r –1.5 33,521 –0.3 9,281 23,343 662 4,026 3,766 3,358 2,904 1,270 6.3 583
Mar. r44,570 r –1.1 33,636 –0.0 9,309 23,397 685 4,032 3,016 2,818 2,827 1,177 6.2 609
Apr. r44,680 r –0.3 33,689 +0.8 9,324 23,427 687 4,039 2,583 2,560 2,771 1,091 6.0 629
May r44,799 r +0.3 33,747 +1.3 9,326 23,461 703 4,067 2,342 2,320 2,687 1,020 5.9 654
June r44,966 r +0.6 33,802 +1.4 9,324 23,504 716 4,151 1,568 1,548 2,614 961 5.7 693
July r45,030 r +0.7 33,731 +1.5 9,304 23,458 715 4,194 1,088 1,068 2,590 956 5.6 744
Aug. r45,101 r +0.8 33,994 +1.5 9,358 23,658 722 4,153 857 838 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. r45,352 r +0.8 34,323 +1.6 9,432 23,903 726 4,123 859 839 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. r45,440 r +0.8 34,369 +1.5 9,425 23,965 724 4,123 780 762 2,377 814 5.2 809
Nov. r45,496 r +1.0 34,449 +1.6 9,423 24,039 739 4,133 767 750 2,317 789 5.1 808
Dec. r45,393 r +1.2 34,284 +1.7 9,364 23,980 708 4,112 957 772 2,330 803 5.1 794
2022 Jan. r45,126 r +1.4 34,176 +2.0 9,332 23,900 711 4,048 1,123 847 2,462 903 5.4 792
Feb. r45,187 r +1.6 34,243 +2.2 9,346 23,939 719 4,049 1,087 803 2,428 884 5.3 822
Mar. r45,284 r +1.6 34,334 +2.1 9,369 23,999 719 4,061 888 727 2,362 835 5.1 839
Apr. r45,399 r +1.6 34,368 +2.0 9,366 24,037 713 4,091 453 439 2,309 800 5.0 852
May r45,536 r +1.6 34,445 +2.1 9,376 24,089 719 4,131 318 305 2,260 771 4.9 865
June r45,623 r +1.5 34,445 +1.9 9,376 24,084 724 4,164 241 228 2,363 761 5.2 877
July r45,584 r +1.2 34,322 +1.8 9,361 23,988 718 4,176 115 102 2,470 801 5.4 881
Aug. r45,643 r +1.2 34,571 +1.7 9,417 24,169 725 4,151 87 76 2,547 827 5.6 887
Sep. r45,894 r +1.2 34,899 +1.7 9,499 24,401 733 4,136 108 97 2,486 782 5.4 873
Oct. r45,990 r +1.2 34,893 +1.5 9,489 24,414 734 4,161 134 124 2,442 764 5.3 846
Nov. r46,006 r +1.1 34,897 +1.3 9,478 24,435 738 4,179 156 147 2,434 770 5.3 823
Dec. r45,882 r +1.1 34,705 +1.2 9,414 24,357 704 4,182 397 146 2,454 799 5.4 781
2023 Jan. r45,573 r +1.0 34,550 +1.1 9,381 24,240 697 4,138 451 145 2,616 911 5.7 764
Feb. r45,613 r +0.9 834,565 8+0.9 89,386 824,255 8 689 84,139 ... 8 159 2,620 910 5.7 778
Mar. r45,672 r +0.9 834,649 8+0.9 89,407 824,311 8 689 84,143 ... 8 160 2,594 878 5.7 777
Apr. r45,766 r +0.8 834,659 8+0.8 89,405 824,324 8 682 84,173 ... 8 139 2,586 855 5.7 773
May r45,875 r +0.7 834,698 8+0.7 89,408 824,351 8 685 84,218 ... 8 131 2,544 829 10 5.5 767
June 945,936 9 +0.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,555 833 5.5 769
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,617 878 5.7 772
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed
persons in the legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).8 Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2021 and 2022,
the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1%
for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.5% for persons
solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 61,3% for
cyclically induced short-time work.  9 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statis-
tical Office.  10 From May 2023, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which: Indices of
foreign trade pricesHWWI
Index of World Market
Prices of Raw Materials  4
of which:
Total Food  1,2Non-
energy
industrial
goods  1 Energy  1 Services  1Actual
rents
for
housingMemo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  3Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  3Exports Imports Energy  5Other raw
materials  6
Period 2015 = 100 2020 = 100 2015 = 100 2020 = 100
Index level
2020 7 105.8 7110.9 7104.1 7 99.0 7106.9 107.6 7 100.0 7117.0 103.8 108.0 101.7 97.3 100.0 100.0
2021 7 109.2 7114.1 7106.7 7109.0 7109.0 109.0 7 103.1 7127.0 114.7 117.5 107.4 110.4 220.7 137.6
2022 118.7 126.2 112.7 146.8 112.2 110.8 110.2 148.3 152.4 8156.2 123.1 139.4 430.8 164.0
2021 Sep. 7 110.1 7114.4 7107.6 7110.1 7109.9 109.3 7 103.8 118.3 117.4 109.5 113.9 256.1 136.3
Oct. 7 110.7 7114.5 7108.0 7114.6 7110.0 109.5 7 104.3 122.8 120.7 111.0 118.2 352.7 143.0
Nov. 7 111.0 7114.9 7108.4 7116.7 7109.5 109.5 7 104.5 7132.2 123.8 125.6 111.9 121.7 304.4 143.0
Dec. 7 111.3 7115.7 7108.6 7115.0 7110.3 109.6 7 104.7 130.0 127.2 113.0 121.8 352.9 148.3
2022 Jan. 112.3 117.2 108.4 123.7 109.8 109.9 105.2 132.8 129.2 115.0 127.0 327.8 157.0
Feb. 113.3 118.2 109.1 127.4 110.2 110.0 106.0 138.1 134.6 133.4 116.1 128.6 336.0 166.5
Mar. 116.1 119.1 110.4 146.1 110.6 110.2 108.1 141.2 153.6 120.7 135.9 504.2 185.4
Apr. 116.9 122.2 111.3 142.7 111.7 110.4 108.8 145.2 162.3 121.7 138.3 407.8 184.8
May 118.2 124.2 112.3 146.7 112.0 110.6 109.8 147.9 147.5 160.7 122.4 139.5 366.8 178.9
June 118.1 125.4 112.5 147.8 111.0 110.8 109.8 148.4 157.5 123.5 140.9 389.3 169.6
July 119.0 127.6 112.6 147.8 112.1 110.9 110.3 156.3 156.5 126.0 142.9 449.8 158.0
Aug. 119.5 129.1 113.0 148.6 112.2 111.1 110.7 151.7 168.6 159.8 128.7 149.1 534.2 159.4
Sep. 122.1 130.9 114.5 158.8 113.9 111.2 112.7 172.5 8164.7 127.9 147.8 528.5 157.4
Oct. 123.5 132.2 115.8 164.5 114.3 111.4 113.5 165.2 166.5 125.5 146.0 442.1 154.4
Nov. 123.5 133.6 116.3 163.5 113.7 111.6 113.7 155.4 158.7 165.7 124.9 139.4 425.7 149.5
Dec. 122.0 134.6 116.6 143.9 114.8 111.7 113.2 158.1 165.1 125.0 137.1 435.7 147.0
2023 Jan. 122.6 136.7 116.4 154.8 113.8 112.1 114.3 154.8 161.8 124.0 135.4 306.4 148.8
Feb. 123.8 139.5 117.0 154.9 115.0 112.2 115.2 159.7 152.8 160.6 123.8 132.2 277.2 150.8
Mar. 125.1 141.3 118.3 155.0 116.1 112.5 116.1 150.6 155.3 123.5 130.8 247.1 146.2
Apr. 125.8 141.1 119.0 156.1 117.1 112.6 116.6 151.1 151.8 123.0 128.6 248.0 143.2
May 125.6 141.1 119.3 154.0 116.9 112.8 116.5 161.0 149.0 148.4 122.5 126.8 212.8 138.2
June 126.1 141.2 119.5 153.7 117.8 113.0 116.8 148.6 149.8 122.4 124.8 203.4 137.1
July 126.7 141.2 118.8 153.6 119.6 113.2 117.1 ... ... ... ... 215.4 135.1
Annual percentage change
2020 7 +0.4 7+2.3 7–0.1 7–4.5 7+1.2 +1.4 7 +0.5 7+1.4 –1.0 –3.1 –0.7 –4.3 –33.4 + 1.3
2021 7 +3.2 7+2.9 7+2.5 7+10.1 7+2.0 +1.3 7 +3.1 7+8.6 +10.5 +8.8 +5.6 +13.5 +120.7 +37.6
2022 +8.7 +10.6 +5.7 +34.7 +2.9 +1.7 +6.9 +16.8 +32.9 8+32.9 +14.6 +26.3 +95.2 +19.2
2021 Sep. 7 +4.1 7+4.1 7+3.9 7+13.6 7+1.8 +1.4 7 +4.1 +14.2 +13.4 +8.1 +17.7 +163.7 +31.7
Oct. 7 +4.6 7+3.9 7+3.9 7+18.1 7+2.2 +1.4 7 +4.4 +18.4 +16.3 +9.5 +21.7 +241.4 +36.3
Nov. 7 +6.0 7+4.2 7+4.2 7+21.6 7+3.8 +1.3 7 +4.8 7+14.0 +19.2 +20.9 +9.9 +24.7 +178.0 +33.5
Dec. 7 +5.7 7+5.3 7+5.0 7+18.1 7+3.2 +1.3 7 +4.9 +24.2 +22.1 +10.9 +24.0 +189.7 +32.1
2022 Jan. +5.1 +4.4 +3.1 +20.6 +2.7 +1.4 +4.2 +25.0 +21.0 +11.9 +26.9 +131.5 +30.2
Feb. +5.5 +4.6 +3.4 +22.4 +2.7 +1.4 +4.3 +13.9 +25.9 +22.5 +12.4 +26.3 +130.1 +33.5
Mar. +7.6 +5.3 +4.4 +37.6 +2.8 +1.5 +5.9 +30.9 +34.7 +15.9 +31.2 +235.5 +42.2
Apr. +7.8 +6.7 +5.2 +34.5 +3.1 +1.6 +6.3 +33.5 +40.0 +16.0 +31.7 +164.6 +37.6
May +8.7 +8.8 +5.6 +37.5 +3.0 +1.6 +7.0 +18.2 +33.6 +35.6 +15.9 +30.6 +117.9 +23.5
June +8.2 +9.9 +5.6 +37.4 +1.7 +1.7 +6.7 +32.7 +33.8 +16.1 +29.9 +112.7 +19.2
July +8.5 +11.5 +5.8 +35.6 +1.7 +1.6 +6.7 +37.2 +33.5 +17.0 +28.9 +119.6 +11.3
Aug. +8.8 +12.8 +6.1 +35.8 +1.7 +1.7 +7.0 +17.2 +45.8 +34.6 +18.6 +32.7 +145.5 +14.8
Sep. +10.9 +14.4 +6.4 +44.2 +3.6 +1.7 +8.6 +45.8 8+40.3 +16.8 +29.8 +106.4 +15.5
Oct. +11.6 +15.5 +7.2 +43.5 +3.9 +1.7 +8.8 +34.5 +37.9 +13.1 +23.5 +25.3 + 8.0
Nov. +11.3 +16.3 +7.3 +40.1 +3.8 +1.9 +8.8 +17.5 +28.2 +31.9 +11.6 +14.5 +39.8 + 4.5
Dec. +9.6 +16.3 +7.4 +25.1 +4.1 +1.9 +8.1 +21.6 +29.8 +10.6 +12.6 +23.5 – 0.9
2023 Jan. +9.2 +16.6 +7.4 +25.1 +3.6 +2.0 +8.7 +16.6 +25.2 +7.8 +6.6 – 6.5 – 5.2
Feb. +9.3 +18.0 +7.2 +21.6 +4.4 +2.0 +8.7 +15.6 +13.5 +20.4 +6.6 +2.8 –17.5 – 9.4
Mar. +7.8 +18.6 +7.2 +6.1 +5.0 +2.1 +7.4 +6.7 +1.1 +2.3 –3.8 –51.0 –21.1
Apr. +7.6 +15.5 +6.9 +9.4 +4.8 +2.0 +7.2 +4.1 –6.5 +1.1 –7.0 –39.2 –22.5
May +6.3 +13.6 +6.2 +5.0 +4.4 +2.0 +6.1 +8.9 +1.0 –7.7 +0.1 –9.1 –42.0 –22.8
June +6.8 +12.6 +6.2 +4.0 +6.1 +2.0 +6.4 +0.1 –4.9 –0.9 –11.4 –47.8 –19.2
July +6.5 +10.7 +5.5 +3.9 +6.7 +2.1 +6.2 ... ... ... ... –52.1 –14.5
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw Materi-
als: HWWI.  1 The last data point is at times based on the Bundesbank’s own estimates.
2 Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco.  3 Excluding value added tax.  4 For the eu-ro area, in euro.  5 Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas.  6 Food, beverages and tobac-
co as well as industrial raw materials.  7 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value
added tax between July and December 2020.  8 From September 2022 onwards, provi-
sional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.5 4.2 1,273.8 4.0 1,782.3 2.8 179.4 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.2
2017 1,395.4 4.3 932.5 4.0 441.8 3.6 1,374.3 3.9 1,905.2 3.5 202.8 8.0 10.6
2018 1,462.7 4.8 976.1 4.7 455.2 3.0 1,431.3 4.1 1,976.6 3.7 223.2 10.1 11.3
2019 1,524.4 4.2 1,022.0 4.7 476.7 4.7 1,498.7 4.7 2,023.6 2.4 218.2 – 2.3 10.8
2020 1,514.9 – 0.6 1,020.0 – 0.2 524.6 10.0 1,544.6 3.1 2,050.1 1.3 336.6 54.3 16.4
2021 1,570.6 3.7 1,062.6 4.2 532.8 1.6 1,595.4 3.3 2,089.9 1.9 316.0 – 6.1 15.1
2022 1,660.4 5.7 1,118.7 5.3 538.9 1.1 1,657.5 3.9 2,235.8 7.0 253.1 –19.9 11.3
2021 Q4 438.5 4.9 295.8 5.0 129.0 – 2.6 424.8 2.6 532.5 2.7 61.2 –25.0 11.5
2022 Q1 388.9 7.4 261.4 6.9 134.5 – 2.4 395.9 3.6 541.9 3.8 77.6 –32.9 14.3
Q2 399.1 5.8 262.3 4.7 131.4 – 2.6 393.7 2.1 548.9 6.6 57.5 –32.2 10.5
Q3 410.0 4.3 282.9 4.2 137.6 4.9 420.5 4.4 570.6 9.7 56.2 3.4 9.9
Q4 462.4 5.5 312.0 5.5 135.5 5.0 447.4 5.3 574.4 7.9 61.7 0.8 10.7
2023 Q1 415.7 6.9 284.9 9.0 140.9 4.8 425.9 7.6 578.1 6.7 80.0 3.1 13.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2023.  * Households includ-
ing non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After deducting
the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees' contributions to the
social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds,
central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net),
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits,
consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plus monetarysocial benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed income, property
income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit institutions serving
households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other
current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  6 In-
cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving as a percentage of
disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change
2015 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.3 2.3 102.5 2.5
2017 104.5 2.3 104.5 2.3 104.6 2.3 104.7 2.4 105.1 2.6
2018 107.6 3.0 107.6 3.0 107.5 2.8 107.6 2.8 108.4 3.2
2019 110.8 3.0 110.8 3.0 110.6 2.9 110.4 2.6 111.7 3.0
2020 113.2 2.1 113.2 2.2 112.9 2.0 112.6 2.0 111.6 – 0.1
2021 114.9 1.5 114.9 1.5 114.7 1.6 114.3 1.5 115.3 3.3
2022 117.9 2.7 117.9 2.6 117.3 2.2 116.7 2.1 120.0 4.1
2022 Q1 110.8 4.3 110.8 4.2 108.8 2.2 115.5 1.5 113.3 5.5
Q2 109.9 2.0 109.9 1.9 109.3 2.2 116.6 2.2 115.6 4.0
Q3 120.9 2.5 120.9 2.5 120.9 2.5 116.9 2.2 118.4 2.9
Q4 130.1 2.0 130.1 2.0 130.1 2.0 117.8 2.4 132.5 4.2
2023 Q1 115.1 3.9 115.1 3.8 111.7 2.6 118.6 2.7 119.7 5.7
Q2 114.2 3.9 114.2 3.9 112.1 2.5 119.5 2.5 . .
2022 Dec. 112.5 2.4 112.5 2.4 112.3 2.5 118.1 2.6 . .
2023 Jan. 115.9 6.8 115.9 6.7 110.9 2.7 118.6 2.7 . .
Feb. 117.6 6.5 117.6 6.5 113.4 2.6 118.6 2.7 . .
Mar. 111.8 – 1.5 111.8 – 1.5 110.9 2.6 118.7 2.7 . .
Apr. 112.3 2.5 112.3 2.5 112.0 2.4 119.2 2.4 . .
May 113.0 1.6 113.0 1.6 111.8 2.3 119.2 2.2 . .
June 117.4 7.7 117.4 7.7 112.4 3.0 120.1 2.9 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May
2023.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2019 2,800.6 1,769.7 586.3 737.1 333.4 1,030.9 257.5 237.6 168.4 821.0 1,979.6 1,091.2 676.3 888.4 289.8 207.6
2020 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.6 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.4 857.0 304.4 196.1
2021 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 367.9 1,320.4 272.1 261.5 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 391.8 236.7
p 2022 3,432.3 2,057.2 713.5 804.4 368.5 1,375.1 326.0 268.1 244.3 1,133.7 2,298.6 1,195.7 760.3 1,102.8 331.7 273.2
2021 H1 3,017.6 1,877.0 649.3 745.0 343.7 1,140.6 256.2 242.3 238.5 906.9 2,110.7 1,178.6 763.1 932.1 330.3 206.9
H2 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 367.9 1,320.4 272.1 261.5 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 391.8 236.7
2022 H1 3,593.6 2,108.1 719.1 796.3 387.5 1,485.5 322.4 284.8 225.4 1,075.4 2,518.2 1,237.0 847.9 1,281.2 430.7 260.7
pH2 3,432.3 2,057.2 713.5 804.4 368.5 1,375.1 326.0 268.1 244.3 1,133.7 2,298.6 1,195.7 760.3 1,102.8 331.7 273.2
As a percentage of total assets
2019 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.2 31.7 10.4 7.4
2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2021 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.2 40.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 11.9 7.2
p 2022 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 10.7 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
2021 H1 100.0 62.2 21.5 24.7 11.4 37.8 8.5 8.0 7.9 30.1 70.0 39.1 25.3 30.9 10.9 6.9
H2 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.2 40.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 11.9 7.2
2022 H1 100.0 58.7 20.0 22.2 10.8 41.3 9.0 7.9 6.3 29.9 70.1 34.4 23.6 35.7 12.0 7.3
pH2 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 10.7 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2019 2,302.9 1,396.4 419.6 565.4 319.7 906.5 243.8 188.5 136.8 662.2 1,640.7 887.5 523.8 753.2 257.5 158.0
2020 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.1 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.3 1,628.8 904.7 537.0 724.0 267.3 149.8
2021 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 346.6 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.2 356.3 184.0
p 2022 2,731.4 1,538.5 461.6 591.8 346.7 1,192.9 307.5 209.0 186.4 880.2 1,851.2 912.8 534.4 938.5 291.1 215.0
2021 H1 2,392.8 1,398.3 416.6 551.0 322.5 994.6 240.6 190.9 190.1 703.5 1,689.4 892.3 543.2 797.1 294.2 162.1
H2 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 346.6 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.2 356.3 184.0
2022 H1 2,898.3 1,582.5 462.4 583.8 362.8 1,315.9 303.6 222.5 177.2 830.9 2,067.4 945.2 616.6 1,122.2 389.8 207.6
pH2 2,731.4 1,538.5 461.6 591.8 346.7 1,192.9 307.5 209.0 186.4 880.2 1,851.2 912.8 534.4 938.5 291.1 215.0
As a percentage of total assets
2019 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.3 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2021 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.2 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 13.6 7.0
p 2022 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 12.7 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
2021 H1 100.0 58.4 17.4 23.0 13.5 41.6 10.1 8.0 7.9 29.4 70.6 37.3 22.7 33.3 12.3 6.8
H2 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.2 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 13.6 7.0
2022 H1 100.0 54.6 16.0 20.1 12.5 45.4 10.5 7.7 6.1 28.7 71.3 32.6 21.3 38.7 13.5 7.2
pH2 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 12.7 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2019 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2021 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 55.2 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 52.6
p 2022 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
2021 H1 624.7 478.7 232.6 194.1 21.2 146.1 15.5 51.4 48.4 203.4 421.3 286.4 219.9 135.0 36.1 44.8
H2 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 55.2 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 52.6
2022 H1 695.3 525.7 256.7 212.5 24.8 169.6 18.8 62.2 48.2 244.5 450.8 291.8 231.4 159.0 40.9 53.1
pH2 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
As a percentage of total assets
2019 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2021 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.3 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 7.9
p 2022 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
2021 H1 100.0 76.6 37.2 31.1 3.4 23.4 2.5 8.2 7.8 32.6 67.4 45.8 35.2 21.6 5.8 7.2
H2 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.3 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 7.9
2022 H1 100.0 75.6 36.9 30.6 3.6 24.4 2.7 9.0 6.9 35.2 64.8 42.0 33.3 22.9 5.9 7.6
pH2 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  2 Distribution  2
RevenuesOperating income
before depreciation
and amortisation
(EBITDA  1 )Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartileOperating
income (EBIT)Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4€ billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % % € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % %
Total
2015 1,633.9 6.9 195.9 – 1.1 12.0 – 1.0 6.3 10.6 17.8 91.5 – 16.4 5.6 – 1.5 1.8 6.7 11.3
2016 1,624.3 – 0.4 214.4 7.8 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.7 9.0 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,719.3 5.1 243.4 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.0 11.0 18.0 141.9 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.1
6 2018 1,706.8 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,764.6 2.6 233.6 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.2 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.6 5.8 11.8
2020 1,632.8 – 8.8 213.6 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 17.9 52.1 – 41.0 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 4.9 10.5
2021 1,994.7 20.4 297.7 37.7 14.9 1.9 7.8 13.4 19.9 161.5 212.6 8.1 5.0 2.9 8.2 12.2
p 2022 2,430.3 20.8 324.6 7.8 13.4 – 1.6 6.2 11.8 18.4 170.8 4.0 7.0 – 1.1 1.6 6.5 12.4
2018 H1 848.2 – 0.1 120.8 – 2.1 14.2 – 0.3 5.1 10.6 18.2 72.7 – 5.3 8.6 – 0.5 1.7 6.4 12.5
H2 869.4 1.4 114.4 0.5 13.2 – 0.1 6.3 11.2 18.0 58.0 – 7.6 6.7 – 0.6 2.1 6.8 12.5
2019 H1 861.3 2.7 112.3 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.5 11.8 18.6 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 903.7 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.6 11.8 20.0 52.0 – 11.4 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.5
2020 H1 744.5 – 14.4 78.2 – 34.1 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 8.8
H2 888.4 – 3.3 135.4 17.1 15.2 2.8 7.6 13.2 19.8 44.2 8.6 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.6
2021 H1 920.0 20.3 151.5 87.2 16.5 5.9 7.4 12.6 19.5 84.5 . 9.2 8.3 2.3 7.8 12.2
H2 1,075.6 20.4 146.4 8.1 13.6 – 1.6 7.9 13.2 20.8 77.0 73.1 7.2 2.2 2.9 7.7 13.4
2022 H1 1,149.7 23.5 161.0 4.8 14.0 – 2.5 6.1 11.5 18.4 84.9 – 1.6 7.4 – 1.9 1.6 6.4 11.8
pH2 1,282.4 18.4 163.7 10.9 12.8 – 0.9 5.5 11.6 18.9 86.0 10.2 6.7 – 0.5 1.7 6.7 12.9
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2015 1,309.7 7.0 149.0 – 2.6 11.4 – 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.3 69.1 – 19.7 5.3 – 1.8 2.2 6.6 10.4
2016 1,295.9 – 0.8 161.9 6.3 12.5 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 84.8 4.2 6.5 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,395.9 5.5 187.5 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.5 40.6 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,367.7 1.0 175.7 – 1.5 12.9 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 16.0 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.8 6.9 11.4
2019 1,410.9 2.0 168.1 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.8 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.7 10.1
2020 1,285.2 – 9.4 143.6 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 5.7 10.6 16.5 29.1 – 48.1 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.3 9.8
2021 1,585.8 22.4 208.9 45.9 13.2 2.1 7.9 12.8 17.9 118.6 325.8 7.5 5.4 2.8 7.8 11.1
p 2022 1,956.4 21.6 222.7 4.6 11.4 – 1.9 6.8 11.3 16.4 117.1 – 4.0 6.0 – 1.6 1.8 6.3 10.7
2018 H1 681.9 – 0.1 94.9 – 3.4 13.9 – 0.5 7.0 10.9 16.7 60.0 – 5.9 8.8 – 0.6 2.9 6.8 11.5
H2 695.4 2.1 83.1 0.7 12.0 – 0.2 6.2 11.1 16.2 42.1 – 8.7 6.1 – 0.7 2.0 6.4 11.4
2019 H1 689.9 2.4 83.3 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.9 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.8 6.0 9.5
H2 721.0 1.7 84.8 0.3 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.7 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.1
2020 H1 580.6 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.4 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 14.9 0.2 – 101.7 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.1 7.8
H2 704.6 – 3.0 94.6 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.0 12.1 18.6 28.9 19.6 4.1 1.1 0.3 6.0 10.4
2021 H1 731.9 24.0 111.2 126.9 15.2 6.9 8.2 12.6 18.6 66.7 . 9.1 9.3 2.9 7.9 12.1
H2 854.2 21.1 97.7 3.8 11.4 – 1.9 7.8 12.3 17.5 51.9 80.8 6.1 2.0 2.6 7.0 11.5
2022 H1 923.4 23.8 110.9 – 2.5 12.0 – 3.3 7.7 11.5 16.3 59.0 – 14.2 6.4 – 2.8 2.3 6.4 10.4
pH2 1,034.8 19.7 112.0 12.8 10.8 – 0.7 5.9 10.7 16.7 58.2 9.3 5.6 – 0.5 1.3 6.3 11.4
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2015 324.1 6.1 46.9 4.0 14.5 – 0.3 5.9 11.1 22.1 22.3 – 3.8 6.9 – 0.7 1.3 6.7 13.9
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.3 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.5 12.2
2021 408.9 13.0 88.8 21.6 21.7 1.6 7.6 15.0 24.0 42.8 79.7 10.5 3.9 3.0 9.2 15.6
p 2022 473.9 17.4 101.9 15.3 21.5 – 0.4 5.2 13.1 22.8 53.8 26.4 11.3 0.8 1.0 6.9 14.4
2018 H1 166.3 0.2 25.9 2.8 15.6 0.4 3.8 9.5 22.7 12.6 – 1.9 7.6 – 0.2 – 0.9 4.7 15.3
H2 174.0 – 1.3 31.3 – 0.0 18.0 0.2 6.7 11.3 25.6 15.9 – 4.6 9.1 – 0.3 2.2 7.0 17.8
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
H2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.5 13.3
2021 H1 188.1 7.7 40.3 26.1 21.5 3.1 6.9 12.6 24.5 17.8 119.9 9.5 4.8 0.9 6.9 13.6
H2 221.4 17.9 48.7 18.2 22.0 0.1 9.4 16.5 24.7 25.1 59.1 11.3 3.0 3.8 9.5 17.7
2022 H1 226.3 22.0 50.1 25.3 22.2 0.6 4.6 11.6 20.9 25.9 46.4 11.5 1.9 – 0.5 6.3 13.5
pH2 247.6 13.4 51.8 7.0 20.9 – 1.3 5.2 14.1 24.0 27.8 12.1 11.2 – 0.1 2.2 7.5 15.4
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted re-
turn on sales.  3 Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year fig-ures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  4 Adjusted
for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and in the
reporting sample. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics,
p. 6. 5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.  6 From 2018 onwards: significant
changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2022 2023
Item 2020 2021 2022 Q3  Q4  Q1 March April May  p
I.Current Account +201,555 +351,748 –100,626 –67,069 + 8,516 +32,220 +34,357 + 4,252 –11,271
1.Goods
Receipts 2,177,403 2,493,451 2,929,483 746,043 775,677 737,065 274,147 228,602 250,750
Expenditure  1,846,539 2,219,306 3,008,746 801,805 768,244 686,809 230,540 213,505 226,849
Balance +330,862 +274,146 –79,264 –55,763 + 7,433 +50,257 +43,607 +15,097 +23,901
2.Services
Receipts 883,410 1,029,838 1,258,196 334,879 329,297 295,093 103,388 102,168 105,612
Expenditure  890,695 926,414 1,131,753 313,956 303,119 281,290 101,605 94,426 96,198
Balance – 7,286 +103,423 +126,446 +20,923 +26,179 +13,802 + 1,782 + 7,742 + 9,414
3.Primary income
Receipts 733,848 856,413 948,766 227,109 261,644 259,035 92,451 82,971 85,774
Expenditure  698,616 722,662 927,128 216,895 247,471 248,597 88,718 89,164 121,587
Balance +35,231 +133,751 +21,637 +10,215 +14,173 +10,440 + 3,733 – 6,193 –35,812
4.Secondary income
Receipts 129,435 159,349 164,740 39,114 44,833 39,199 13,183 13,035 16,134
Expenditure  286,683 318,921 334,183 81,557 84,101 81,477 27,949 25,429 24,908
Balance –157,250 –159,574 –169,443 –42,444 –39,268 –42,279 –14,766 –12,394 – 8,774
II.Capital account + 4,591 +51,732 +146,524 + 9,320 +22,555 + 3,525 + 3,908 + 676 + 1,393
III.Financial account  1 +183,185 +377,580 +85,607 –36,183 +58,615 +47,610 +26,319 –29,487 +21,528
1.Direct investment –217,132 +335,674 +232,193 +33,522 –14,759 +54,639 – 4,081 + 7,128 –34,821
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  –66,615 +243,047 –57,545 +10,076 –265,500 +58,343 + 7,204 + 1,813 +25,880
By non-resident units of
the euro area  +150,518 –92,628 –289,741 –23,446 –250,741 + 3,704 +11,285 – 5,314 +60,701
2.Portfolio investment +513,135 +321,215 –290,271 –177,657 + 8,838 –96,443 –100,376 +33,054 +61,106
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +698,531 +794,327 –229,900 –173,427 +95,518 +61,565 –11,191 +40,390 +37,708
Equity and
investment fund shares +321,263 +369,850 –188,019 –100,805 – 811 +32,175 –12,095 +16,983 + 293
Short-term
debt securities  +125,759 +119,360 –108,725 –47,305 +58,503 –59,396 –12,455 + 9,576 +17,952
Long-term
debt securities  +251,509 +305,114 +66,844 –25,316 +37,825 +88,786 +13,359 +13,831 +19,464
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  +185,394 +473,110 +60,371 + 4,231 +86,681 +158,007 +89,184 + 7,336 –23,398
Equity and
investment fund shares +189,142 +641,855 +35,137 – 6,635 +111,458 +24,295 +28,834 – 9,245 –20,328
Short-term
debt securities  +116,321 +30,111 –66,129 –27,754 –23,830 – 2,070 +31,830 + 4,639 –11,633
Long-term
debt securities  –120,070 –198,853 +91,362 +38,619 – 947 +135,782 +28,521 +11,942 + 8,563
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options +16,737 +57,745 +62,512 +38,455 – 4,106 +15,518 + 5,676 + 951 +13,207
4.Other investment –142,738 –467,427 +63,209 +62,226 +59,377 +92,355 +123,453 –68,770 –19,376
Eurosystem –205,598 –449,195 +180,651 +66,028 –69,841 +167,664 –57,696 +87,972 +30,653
General government –15,336 –80,350 –51,039 –20,921 + 4,630 + 4,459 – 269 – 1,750 – 4,618
MFIs  2 +17,691 –123,761 –287,895 –40,415 +75,957 –10,704 +157,755 –143,015 – 1,215
Enterprises and households +60,505 +185,883 +221,493 +57,534 +48,632 –69,063 +23,664 –11,978 –44,196
5.Reserve assets +13,182 +130,370 +17,964 + 7,271 + 9,267 –18,459 + 1,647 – 1,849 + 1,413
IV.Net errors and omissions –22,963 –25,899 +39,708 +21,565 +27,544 +11,864 –11,946 –34,415 +31,406
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Increase: + / decrease: -.2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Zeit Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 – 3,947 – 29,122 + 24,063 – 34,147 – 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 – 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 – 6,605 – 17,642 + 54,524 – 34,764 – 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 – 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 – 6,209 – 25,255 + 51,306 – 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 – 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 – 9,357 – 29,930 + 69,087 – 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 – 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 – 11,388 – 30,774 + 65,658 – 38,703 – 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 – 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 – 12,523 – 39,321 + 63,284 – 43,413 – 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 211,477 + 219,629 – 14,296 – 25,303 + 58,646 – 41,495 + 3,255 + 230,931 – 2,564 + 16,200
2015 + 259,781 + 248,394 – 15,405 – 18,516 + 69,324 – 39,420 + 265 + 237,733 – 2,213 – 22,313
2016 + 270,200 + 252,409 – 19,921 – 20,987 + 77,258 – 38,480 + 2,451 + 258,906 + 1,686 – 13,744
2017 + 255,964 + 255,077 – 13,613 – 23,994 + 77,046 – 52,165 – 2,653 + 268,306 – 1,269 + 14,996
2018 + 267,609 + 221,983 – 22,985 – 15,806 + 112,389 – 50,958 + 914 + 242,889 + 392 – 25,634
2019 + 283,849 + 219,548 – 32,263 – 13,553 + 128,602 – 50,747 – 3,705 + 200,312 – 544 – 79,832
2020 + 240,239 + 191,031 – 8,907 + 7,418 + 96,014 – 54,224 – 9,120 + 191,481 – 51 – 39,638
2021 + 278,689 + 194,388 + 4,757 + 4,802 + 138,545 – 59,046 – 1,179 + 248,551 + 31,892 – 28,959
2022 + 162,033 + 111,887 + 9,999 – 31,036 + 150,017 – 68,835 – 18,644 + 227,707 + 4,426 + 84,319
2020 Q3 + 62,279 + 55,197 – 933 – 4,752 + 22,659 – 10,824 – 2,450 + 66,302 – 1,276 + 6,473
Q4 + 76,342 + 55,114 – 2,996 + 7,417 + 32,628 – 18,816 – 4,181 + 84,069 + 848 + 11,908
2021 Q1 + 77,373 + 57,527 + 679 + 5,095 + 32,650 – 17,899 – 834 + 72,025 + 385 – 4,514
Q2 + 67,702 + 48,292 + 868 + 7,141 + 21,166 – 8,897 – 2,336 + 87,467 + 58 + 22,101
Q3 + 65,695 + 49,316 + 145 – 5,830 + 37,736 – 15,527 + 1,985 + 16,702 + 31,199 – 50,977
Q4 + 67,919 + 39,252 + 3,064 – 1,604 + 46,994 – 16,723 + 7 + 72,358 + 250 + 4,432
2022 Q1 + 59,579 + 34,428 + 3,927 + 3,038 + 40,362 – 18,249 – 3,021 + 78,775 + 2,200 + 22,216
Q2 + 30,458 + 27,027 + 7,766 – 5,314 + 22,259 – 13,513 – 4,780 + 67,323 + 597 + 41,645
Q3 + 19,883 + 19,911 – 361 – 22,180 + 39,507 – 17,356 – 5,860 – 30,017 + 784 – 44,040
Q4 + 52,112 + 30,520 – 1,333 – 6,579 + 47,889 – 19,718 – 4,984 + 111,625 + 845 + 64,497
2023 Q1 + 69,937 + 55,177 – 1,396 – 6,692 + 41,057 – 19,605 – 11,325 + 100,395 + 224 + 41,783
p Q2 + 60,100 + 56,392 – 639 – 14,422 + 27,465 – 9,335 – 4,036 + 60,527 + 1,096 + 4,463
2021 Jan. + 21,402 + 15,161 + 200 + 1,554 + 11,132 – 6,445 – 667 + 17,047 + 743 – 3,688
Feb. + 22,176 + 18,147 + 39 + 1,739 + 9,312 – 7,022 – 1,596 + 22,939 + 102 + 2,360
Mar. + 33,795 + 24,219 + 441 + 1,802 + 12,206 – 4,432 + 1,430 + 32,038 – 460 – 3,186
Apr. + 24,445 + 16,424 + 441 + 3,520 + 8,407 – 3,905 – 897 + 29,252 – 251 + 5,705
May + 16,786 + 14,730 – 102 + 2,453 + 1,511 – 1,908 – 528 + 23,514 + 211 + 7,257
June + 26,471 + 17,139 + 530 + 1,168 + 11,248 – 3,084 – 911 + 34,700 + 98 + 9,140
July + 21,623 + 18,516 – 472 – 1,848 + 10,917 – 5,962 – 487 + 1,156 + 102 – 19,980
Aug. + 18,381 + 12,984 + 897 – 3,024 + 13,086 – 4,665 + 532 + 17,522 + 31,254 – 1,391
Sep. + 25,690 + 17,816 – 280 – 958 + 13,733 – 4,901 + 1,939 – 1,977 – 158 – 29,606
Oct. + 18,128 + 15,135 + 1,038 – 4,720 + 13,280 – 5,567 + 506 + 13,955 + 261 – 4,680
Nov. + 22,113 + 14,414 + 759 + 138 + 13,670 – 6,108 – 1,007 + 33,852 + 963 + 12,746
Dec. + 27,678 + 9,704 + 1,266 + 2,978 + 20,043 – 5,048 + 508 + 24,551 – 974 – 3,634
2022 Jan. + 16,699 + 6,950 + 803 + 1,740 + 14,181 – 6,173 – 417 + 29,438 + 309 + 13,156
Feb. + 23,254 + 15,092 + 1,472 + 2,099 + 11,673 – 5,609 – 1,637 + 48,042 + 1,161 + 26,424
Mar. + 19,626 + 12,386 + 1,653 – 801 + 14,508 – 6,467 – 968 + 1,295 + 730 – 17,363
Apr. + 11,358 + 5,271 + 2,536 – 917 + 12,425 – 5,421 – 1,556 + 19,988 + 83 + 10,186
May + 3,627 + 11,096 + 4,323 – 1,959 – 3,881 – 1,628 – 2,724 + 893 + 161 – 10
June + 15,474 + 10,661 + 906 – 2,438 + 13,715 – 6,464 – 501 + 46,441 + 353 + 31,469
July + 7,849 + 7,849 + 382 – 6,089 + 13,001 – 6,912 – 2,321 – 23,333 – 484 – 28,861
Aug. + 660 + 2,096 – 567 – 9,555 + 14,077 – 5,957 – 1,261 + 16,672 + 81 + 17,273
Sep. + 11,374 + 9,967 – 176 – 6,536 + 12,429 – 4,486 – 2,277 – 23,355 + 1,187 – 32,452
Oct. + 8,585 + 6,243 – 34 – 5,287 + 13,076 – 5,447 – 2,212 + 44,969 + 672 + 38,596
Nov. + 18,533 + 13,428 + 731 – 2,077 + 13,661 – 6,479 – 2,129 + 466 + 425 – 15,938
Dec. + 24,994 + 10,849 – 2,030 + 785 + 21,152 – 7,792 – 643 + 66,191 – 252 + 41,839
2023 Jan. + 16,964 + 11,678 + 233 – 1,534 + 12,362 – 5,542 – 4,700 + 12,938 – 341 + 675
Feb. + 22,466 + 18,505 – 163 – 2,175 + 12,175 – 6,039 – 1,789 + 32,679 + 143 + 12,002
Mar. + 30,508 + 24,994 – 1,466 – 2,983 + 16,520 – 8,023 – 4,835 + 54,778 + 423 + 29,105
Apr. + 22,352 + 16,296 + 301 – 3,330 + 14,455 – 5,069 – 640 – 11,702 + 88 – 33,414
May + 8,169 + 15,803 + 281 – 6,134 – 1,421 – 79 – 2,309 + 15,498 + 45 + 9,638
p June + 29,579 + 24,293 – 1,222 – 4,958 + 14,431 – 4,186 – 1,088 + 56,731 + 962 + 28,239
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: + / net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2023
Group of countries/country 
2020 2021 
2022 Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June
All countries  1 Exports 1,206,928 1,379,346 1,576,784 126,321 132,663 146,274 122,486 131,152 138,869
Imports 1,026,502 1,204,050 1,494,501 116,321 115,952 123,650 108,870 117,644 116,639
Balance +180,427 +175,296 +82,282 +10,000 +16,710 +22,624 +13,616 +13,508 +22,231
   I. European countries Exports 824,921 949,744 1,074,144 88,261 90,668 98,385 84,119 89,357 93,743
Imports 682,477 803,687 966,501 72,416 75,920 80,821 69,781 76,913 76,228
Balance +142,444 +146,057 +107,643 +15,846 +14,748 +17,564 +14,337 +12,444 +17,515
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 635,741 751,322 861,164 71,311 72,966 76,916 68,564 71,589 75,516
Imports 546,655 638,064 735,965 56,352 61,989 65,731 57,257 62,978 62,966
Balance +89,087 +113,259 +125,199 +14,959 +10,977 +11,185 +11,307 + 8,611 +12,550
          Euro area (20)       Exports 445,225 525,992 605,831 50,855 51,836 54,195 48,219 50,175 53,194
          countries Imports 372,855 440,248 507,571 38,048 41,193 43,808 38,057 42,230 41,770
Balance +72,370 +85,744 +98,260 +12,807 +10,643 +10,387 +10,162 + 7,945 +11,425
          of which:
               Austria Exports 60,118 72,385 88,685 6,710 6,845 7,427 6,470 6,657 6,878
  Imports 40,454 47,492 57,649 4,129 4,717 5,137 4,520 4,854 4,895
Balance +19,663 +24,893 +31,036 + 2,580 + 2,129 + 2,290 + 1,949 + 1,803 + 1,983
               Belgium and Exports 48,824 58,080 69,626 5,597 5,954 6,095 5,405 5,718 6,149
               Luxembourg Imports 39,584 55,726 66,532 4,509 4,731 4,826 4,665 5,296 4,703
Balance + 9,240 + 2,354 + 3,095 + 1,088 + 1,223 + 1,269 + 739 + 421 + 1,446
               France Exports 90,910 102,741 116,040 9,798 10,149 10,453 9,627 9,736 10,741
  Imports 56,364 61,921 69,289 5,167 6,240 6,618 5,611 5,927 6,285
Balance +34,546 +40,820 +46,751 + 4,631 + 3,909 + 3,835 + 4,016 + 3,809 + 4,456
               Italy Exports 60,634 75,526 87,504 7,581 7,858 8,039 6,547 7,184 7,370
  Imports 53,906 65,389 72,239 5,204 6,077 6,714 5,719 6,276 6,336
Balance + 6,728 +10,137 +15,265 + 2,377 + 1,781 + 1,324 + 828 + 909 + 1,034
               Netherlands Exports 84,579 101,050 110,634 10,212 9,386 9,839 9,259 9,228 9,736
  Imports 87,024 105,113 119,531 9,254 8,586 9,579 8,073 9,023 9,455
Balance – 2,445 – 4,063 – 8,897 + 958 + 800 + 260 + 1,186 + 204 + 281
               Spain  Exports 37,618 43,932 49,021 4,179 4,509 4,761 4,241 4,556 4,750
  Imports 31,281 34,180 37,413 3,077 3,375 3,694 3,036 3,729 3,315
Balance + 6,337 + 9,752 +11,608 + 1,102 + 1,134 + 1,067 + 1,205 + 827 + 1,435
          Other EU Member  Exports 190,517 225,331 255,333 20,456 21,130 22,721 20,345 21,414 22,322
          States  Imports 173,800 197,815 228,394 18,304 20,796 21,924 19,199 20,748 21,196
Balance +16,717 +27,515 +26,939 + 2,152 + 334 + 798 + 1,145 + 666 + 1,126
      2. Other European Exports 189,180 198,421 212,980 16,950 17,702 21,469 15,555 17,768 18,227
          countries Imports 135,822 165,623 230,536 16,064 13,932 15,090 12,525 13,934 13,262
Balance +53,358 +32,798 –17,556 + 886 + 3,770 + 6,380 + 3,030 + 3,834 + 4,965
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 56,265 60,638 70,630 5,601 5,700 6,517 4,912 5,556 5,746
  Imports 45,556 49,247 55,348 4,501 4,047 4,661 3,735 4,609 4,561
Balance +10,708 +11,391 +15,282 + 1,100 + 1,653 + 1,856 + 1,177 + 947 + 1,185
               United Kingdom Exports 67,086 65,002 73,787 6,045 6,317 7,561 5,597 6,462 6,779
  Imports 35,018 32,245 37,899 3,233 3,160 3,468 2,939 3,225 3,080
Balance +32,068 +32,757 +35,888 + 2,811 + 3,157 + 4,093 + 2,658 + 3,237 + 3,699
   II. Non-European  Exports 380,292 427,430 497,583 37,696 41,636 47,508 37,983 41,415 44,747
       countries Imports 343,270 399,604 527,042 43,828 39,924 42,690 38,956 40,557 40,236
Balance +37,022 +27,827 –29,459 – 6,132 + 1,713 + 4,818 – 973 + 858 + 4,511
       1. Africa Exports 20,086 23,068 26,466 2,040 2,326 2,566 2,057 2,694 2,976
Imports 18,758 26,241 33,549 3,024 2,604 2,987 2,755 2,903 2,872
Balance + 1,328 – 3,173 – 7,083 – 983 – 278 – 421 – 698 – 209 + 104
       2. America Exports 141,375 167,735 210,641 16,523 17,847 20,681 16,345 17,210 19,047
  Imports 94,005 101,525 130,590 11,617 10,395 11,956 10,550 10,662 10,480
Balance +47,370 +66,210 +80,051 + 4,906 + 7,452 + 8,725 + 5,795 + 6,548 + 8,567
           of which:
               United States  Exports 103,476 121,980 156,185 12,101 13,116 14,617 11,951 12,477 13,777
  Imports 67,694 72,316 92,291 8,324 7,442 8,807 7,737 7,610 7,598
Balance +35,782 +49,664 +63,894 + 3,777 + 5,675 + 5,810 + 4,214 + 4,867 + 6,178
       3. Asia Exports 208,146 224,897 246,458 18,106 20,090 22,836 18,580 20,327 21,528
  Imports 226,646 267,604 355,474 28,561 26,286 27,192 25,128 26,383 26,494
Balance –18,500 –42,707 –109,016 –10,456 – 6,195 – 4,356 – 6,548 – 6,056 – 4,966
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 25,882 26,090 29,657 2,410 2,643 3,121 2,327 2,374 2,663
  Imports 6,721 7,509 12,803 1,403 1,508 1,602 1,577 1,596 1,062
Balance +19,161 +18,582 +16,854 + 1,007 + 1,135 + 1,519 + 750 + 778 + 1,601
               Japan  Exports 17,396 18,245 20,514 1,653 1,748 1,941 1,536 1,658 1,794
Imports 21,427 23,477 25,282 2,092 2,120 2,407 2,072 2,019 2,301
Balance – 4,032 – 5,232 – 4,768 – 439 – 372 – 466 – 536 – 362 – 507
               People's Republic  Exports 95,840 103,564 106,878 7,296 7,942 9,018 7,743 8,715 8,738
               of China  2 Imports 117,373 142,964 192,003 14,622 12,952 13,059 12,051 12,852 13,750
Balance –21,533 –39,400 –85,125 – 7,326 – 5,010 – 4,041 – 4,308 – 4,137 – 5,012
               New industrial countries Exports 50,590 55,295 63,381 4,686 5,415 5,975 4,862 4,803 5,858
               and emerging markets  Imports 48,222 55,441 70,581 5,779 5,651 5,970 5,815 6,060 5,457
               of Asia  3 Balance + 2,368 – 146 – 7,200 – 1,093 – 236 + 5– 953 – 1,257 + 401
       4. Oceania and Exports 10,685 11,731 14,019 1,027 1,373 1,426 1,002 1,183 1,196
           polar regions Imports 3,861 4,233 7,429 626 638 555 524 608 390
Balance + 6,824 + 7,497 + 6,590 + 401 + 734 + 871 + 478 + 575 + 806
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. Euro area incl. Croatia.  1 Including fuel and other supplies forships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.
3 Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Zeit Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2018 – 15,806 – 2,044 – 44,543 + 10,059 + 17,219 – 7,060 + 723 + 3,322 + 671 +112,410 – 692
2019 – 13,553 + 3,607 – 45,947 + 10,755 + 18,368 – 9,763 – 2,948 + 3,489 + 492 +128,990 – 880
2020 + 7,418 – 5,302 – 14,678 + 10,051 + 17,665 – 7,770 – 4,426 + 3,368 + 3,196 + 94,205 – 1,387
2021 + 4,802 – 6,635 – 24,323 + 8,306 + 32,834 – 8,466 – 9,361 + 3,531 + 2,664 +137,881 – 1,999
2022 – 31,036 – 8,643 – 55,244 + 9,464 + 31,406 – 11,241 – 10,085 + 4,078 + 1,993 +152,926 – 4,902
2021 Q4 – 1,604 – 3,073 – 8,636 + 2,551 + 9,344 – 1,551 – 3,757 + 763 + 824 + 43,098 + 3,071
2022 Q1 + 3,038 – 2,849 – 6,033 + 1,996 + 11,530 – 3,704 – 1,520 + 1,063 + 1,288 + 40,527 – 1,453
Q2 – 5,314 – 187 – 13,125 + 2,270 + 7,307 – 2,182 – 2,722 + 1,062 + 425 + 25,841 – 4,007
Q3 – 22,180 – 3,727 – 22,632 + 2,159 + 5,874 – 3,429 – 3,712 + 1,100 – 82 + 41,295 – 1,705
Q4 – 6,579 – 1,880 – 13,454 + 3,039 + 6,695 – 1,926 – 2,131 + 853 + 362 + 45,264 + 2,263
2023 Q1 – 6,692 – 2,788 – 8,001 + 1,777 + 5,263 – 3,682 – 3,001 + 1,051 + 1,224 + 41,509 – 1,676
p Q2 – 14,422 – 1,700 – 14,337 + 1,964 + 4,693 – 2,601 – 4,812 + 778 + 394 + 30,032 – 2,961
2022 Aug. – 9,555 – 2,244 – 8,609 + 676 + 1,673 – 783 – 1,335 + 317 – 22 + 14,668 – 569
Sep. – 6,536 – 706 – 8,123 + 679 + 2,659 – 1,199 – 1,090 + 457 – 7 + 13,013 – 577
Oct. – 5,287 – 315 – 7,710 + 642 + 2,127 – 1,050 – 108 + 335 + 93 + 13,662 – 680
Nov. – 2,077 – 836 – 3,469 + 956 + 1,859 – 371 – 1,446 + 327 + 74 + 14,226 – 639
Dec. + 785 – 729 – 2,276 + 1,441 + 2,710 – 505 – 577 + 192 + 194 + 17,376 + 3,582
2023 Jan. – 1,534 – 637 – 2,326 + 771 + 1,928 – 1,434 – 1,302 + 391 + 449 + 12,557 – 644
Feb. – 2,175 – 1,101 – 2,334 + 542 + 946 – 910 – 398 + 351 + 409 + 12,290 – 524
Mar. – 2,983 – 1,050 – 3,341 + 463 + 2,388 – 1,338 – 1,301 + 309 + 366 + 16,661 – 507
Apr. – 3,330 – 452 – 3,406 + 553 + 2,362 – 1,519 – 1,599 + 227 + 104 + 14,820 – 469
May – 6,134 – 707 – 5,027 + 677 + 1,127 – 1,234 – 1,685 + 220 + 111 – 666 – 867
p June – 4,958 – 542 – 5,904 + 734 + 1,205 + 152 – 1,528 + 331 + 179 + 15,878 – 1,625
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Zeit Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2018 – 50,958 – 33,109 – 10,849 + 9,753 – 17,848 .– 5,142 + 914 + 3,349 – 2,435
2019 – 50,747 – 30,251 – 11,473 + 11,591 – 20,496 .– 5,431 – 3,705 – 298 – 3,407
2020 – 54,224 – 36,074 – 13,498 + 10,767 – 18,150 .– 5,908 – 9,120 – 3,418 – 5,702
2021 – 59,046 – 36,974 – 11,303 + 11,888 – 22,072 .– 6,170 – 1,179 – 392 – 787
2022 – 68,835 – 41,923 – 17,878 + 14,041 – 26,913 .– 7,149 – 18,644 – 14,397 – 4,247
2021 Q4 – 16,723 – 11,058 – 5,349 + 2,135 – 5,664 .– 1,543 + 7 + 963 – 956
2022 Q1 – 18,249 – 10,960 – 3,153 + 2,477 – 7,288 – 1,995 – 1,719 – 3,021 – 2,865 – 156
Q2 – 13,513 – 5,957 – 3,247 + 7,339 – 7,556 .– 1,810 – 4,780 – 3,988 – 792
Q3 – 17,356 – 11,401 – 3,727 + 2,138 – 5,955 .– 1,810 – 5,860 – 4,533 – 1,326
Q4 – 19,718 – 13,604 – 7,751 + 2,086 – 6,113 .– 1,810 – 4,984 – 3,011 – 1,973
2023 Q1 – 19,605 – 10,860 – 3,352 + 2,580 – 8,744 .– 1,731 – 11,325 – 10,563 – 762
p Q2 – 9,335 – 3,474 – 1,696 + 7,491 – 5,861 .– 1,691 – 4,036 – 3,073 – 963
2022 Aug. – 5,957 – 4,111 – 1,275 + 426 – 1,847 .– 603 – 1,261 – 1,028 – 233
Sep. – 4,486 – 2,589 – 587 + 1,271 – 1,897 .– 603 – 2,277 – 1,555 – 722
Oct. – 5,447 – 3,509 – 1,505 + 524 – 1,938 .– 600 – 2,212 – 1,559 – 653
Nov. – 6,479 – 4,468 – 1,623 + 417 – 2,010 – 619 – 600 – 2,129 – 1,846 – 283
Dec. – 7,792 – 5,628 – 4,623 + 1,145 – 2,165 – 616 – 611 – 643 + 394 – 1,037
2023 Jan. – 5,542 – 3,794 – 1,910 + 654 – 1,749 – 604 – 603 – 4,700 – 4,169 – 532
Feb. – 6,039 – 3,879 – 923 + 991 – 2,161 – 564 – 564 – 1,789 – 1,776 – 13
Mar. – 8,023 – 3,188 – 519 + 935 – 4,835 .– 564 – 4,835 – 4,618 – 217
Apr. – 5,069 – 3,264 – 1,060 + 1,070 – 1,806 .– 564 – 640 – 182 – 458
May – 79 + 1,974 – 254 + 5,166 – 2,053 .– 564 – 2,309 – 2,114 – 195
p June – 4,186 – 2,184 – 382 + 1,255 – 2,003 .– 564 – 1,088 – 777 – 311
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2022 2023
Item 2020 2021 2022 Q4 Q1 Q2 p April May June  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +724,008 +819,754 +328,088 –66,050 +130,426 +25,914 –42,058 +46,133 +21,840
1.Direct investment +134,017 +180,852 +169,006 +10,260 +27,888 +25,234 + 8,630 – 4,809 +21,414
Equity +89,898 +121,136 +114,061 +32,688 +23,029 +24,931 + 9,053 + 7,030 + 8,848
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +17,533 +59,185 +69,943 +12,154 +16,481 +15,964 + 7,246 + 1,306 + 7,411
Debt instruments +44,119 +59,716 +54,945 –22,429 + 4,859 + 303 – 424 –11,839 +12,566
2.Portfolio investment +166,417 +174,958 +16,697 +23,963 +78,923 +48,078 +16,930 +15,459 +15,689
Shares  2 +53,110 +46,753 –16,698 – 9,357 + 4,072 – 4,703 + 2,216 – 1,987 – 4,932
Investment fund shares  3 +35,932 +116,401 +33,614 +18,537 +10,899 + 4,735 + 2,237 + 2,087 + 411
Short-term  4
debt securities +10,507 – 107 +12,340 + 5,126 + 7,640 + 2,917 + 1,961 + 451 + 505
Long-term   5
debt securities +66,867 +11,912 –12,559 + 9,657 +56,312 +45,129 +10,517 +14,909 +19,704
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +94,579 +60,178 +42,677 – 2,054 +20,246 +11,210 + 5,293 + 9,554 – 3,637
4.Other investment  7 +329,046 +371,874 +95,282 –99,063 + 3,145 –59,704 –72,999 +25,884 –12,588
MFIs  8 – 4,313 +112,903 +59,476 –103,228 +65,798 –23,036 –14,019 +16,899 –25,916
Short-term + 3,683 +99,380 +34,961 –109,790 +68,459 –18,347 –16,083 +18,361 –20,625
Long-term – 8,021 +13,204 +24,474 + 6,490 – 2,691 – 4,703 + 2,062 – 1,471 – 5,294
Enterprises and
households  9 +88,179 +143,700 +46,596 – 5,531 +33,616 +63,547 +31,550 +10,432 +21,564
Short-term +44,218 +113,230 +23,769 –13,198 +29,268 +59,162 +30,558 + 7,943 +20,661
Long-term +22,325 –13,944 – 7,625 – 244 + 594 + 510 + 153 + 1,182 – 824
General government + 2,069 – 8,123 –24,958 + 645 + 9,444 – 2,644 – 2,251 – 874 + 481
Short-term + 3,461 – 7,256 –23,451 + 920 + 3,286 – 1,897 – 2,220 – 691 + 1,014
Long-term – 2,485 – 2,327 – 2,883 – 274 + 4,337 – 985 – 37 – 183 – 765
Bundesbank +243,112 +123,394 +14,167 + 9,051 –105,713 –97,571 –88,280 – 574 – 8,716
5.Reserve assets – 51 +31,892 + 4,426 + 845 + 224 + 1,096 + 88 + 45 + 962
II.Net foreign investment in the
reporting country (increase: +) +532,526 +571,203 +100,381 –177,676 +30,030 –34,613 –30,356 +30,634 –34,891
1.Direct investment +138,902 +80,483 +43,725 –15,589 –10,209 +13,702 + 7,275 – 1,074 + 7,500
Equity +45,841 +41,374 +14,811 + 3,618 +13,182 + 5,256 + 6,972 – 2,243 + 527
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 707 + 7,659 + 7,123 + 1,344 + 5,976 – 4,031 + 177 – 4,402 + 194
Debt instruments +93,061 +39,109 +28,914 –19,207 –23,391 + 8,446 + 304 + 1,170 + 6,973
2.Portfolio investment +150,014 –28,581 – 7,600 –23,214 +53,182 +32,309 – 5,471 +36,346 + 1,434
Shares  2 –17,040 + 2,101 – 4,695 + 2,941 – 4,868 – 5,054 – 1,320 – 1,323 – 2,410
Investment fund shares  3 + 962 – 8,433 – 3,235 – 318 + 932 – 1,029 + 28 + 274 – 1,330
Short-term  4
debt securities +84,459 +29,313 –37,218 –24,696 + 1,551 + 9,477 – 3,789 +14,261 – 996
Long-term   5
debt securities +81,632 –51,563 +37,548 – 1,142 +55,568 +28,914 – 390 +23,134 + 6,170
3.Other investment  7 +243,611 +519,301 +64,255 –138,873 –12,943 –80,623 –32,160 – 4,638 –43,826
MFIs  8 +108,426 +161,287 +152,946 –187,546 +108,354 –33,858 – 3,516 +18,973 –49,315
Short-term +74,908 +115,265 +160,854 –181,523 +88,506 –37,871 – 8,364 +14,243 –43,750
Long-term +33,579 +46,044 – 7,910 – 6,025 +19,847 + 4,015 + 4,848 + 4,730 – 5,563
Enterprises and
households  9 +32,084 +135,961 + 6,958 –36,507 + 5,051 +25,753 +34,377 + 1,168 – 9,792
Short-term +14,969 +99,877 – 9,271 –46,236 – 711 +20,221 +33,599 – 840 –12,538
Long-term +13,511 +12,382 + 8,907 + 8,020 + 4,498 + 4,254 + 374 + 1,550 + 2,330
General government – 7,840 – 4,742 – 4,931 – 7,399 + 1,074 + 159 + 1,073 + 1,338 – 2,251
Short-term – 7,557 – 2,134 – 2,478 – 7,371 + 1,683 + 157 + 1,082 + 1,324 – 2,249
Long-term – 280 – 2,605 – 2,451 – 25 – 609 + 2– 9+ 13 – 2
Bundesbank +110,941 +226,796 –90,717 +92,579 –127,423 –72,678 –64,093 –26,117 +17,532
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +191,481 +248,551 +227,707 +111,625 +100,395 +60,527 –11,702 +15,498 +56,731
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see Statistical series, direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities  3 4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 663,320 497,651
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2021 Feb. 1,328,303 210,619 157,313 14,119 8,047 31,140 1,060,378 1,043,746 57,306 616,473 711,830
Mar. 1,364,046 209,400 155,323 14,367 7,966 31,744 1,098,486 1,081,989 56,160 647,647 716,400
Apr. 1,307,161 210,799 158,143 14,085 7,836 30,735 1,041,472 1,024,734 54,890 604,863 702,299
May 1,370,231 221,201 168,678 14,037 7,809 30,677 1,093,721 1,076,918 55,309 621,827 748,404
June 1,384,834 213,600 159,995 14,326 8,094 31,184 1,115,447 1,101,897 55,787 670,632 714,202
July 1,319,694 219,775 165,984 14,345 8,104 31,343 1,042,015 1,024,970 57,903 657,905 661,789
Aug. 1,360,722 250,742 165,757 45,091 8,174 31,720 1,053,653 1,037,259 56,327 699,773 660,949
Sep. 1,431,909 246,908 160,943 45,606 8,267 32,092 1,130,558 1,115,126 54,443 746,128 685,781
Oct. 1,388,160 250,340 164,602 45,719 8,449 31,570 1,083,141 1,066,604 54,678 735,595 652,564
Nov. 1,456,861 258,815 170,460 46,375 8,405 33,575 1,142,719 1,127,545 55,327 773,217 683,644
Dec. 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 Jan. 1,479,694 261,965 173,362 46,931 8,504 33,168 1,163,561 1,149,868 54,168 807,889 671,805
Feb. 1,491,552 273,726 184,255 46,854 8,711 33,905 1,164,098 1,149,722 53,729 774,786 716,766
Mar. 1,516,744 277,782 187,779 47,375 8,663 33,965 1,184,501 1,169,952 54,462 808,690 708,055
Apr. 1,491,558 288,953 196,274 48,617 8,799 35,263 1,148,681 1,135,400 53,923 790,221 701,337
May 1,505,419 278,174 186,481 48,031 8,681 34,980 1,173,376 1,159,716 53,869 805,179 700,240
June 1,566,099 281,157 187,573 48,712 8,948 35,923 1,232,176 1,216,530 52,767 826,280 739,819
July 1,514,570 280,910 185,950 49,465 9,086 36,409 1,179,431 1,166,155 54,229 810,881 703,689
Aug. 1,590,572 280,160 184,794 49,614 9,300 36,451 1,258,187 1,245,014 52,225 842,576 747,996
Sep. 1,613,008 281,258 184,022 50,287 9,358 37,592 1,281,266 1,266,647 50,483 829,129 783,879
Oct. 1,569,272 274,421 178,101 49,675 9,527 37,119 1,243,873 1,230,005 50,977 811,035 758,237
Nov. 1,577,175 277,458 183,052 49,168 9,315 35,923 1,248,088 1,233,980 51,629 810,314 766,861
Dec. 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 Jan. 1,508,507 281,692 190,062 48,256 9,437 33,938 1,176,042 1,162,354 50,772 793,716 714,791
Feb. 1,455,724 276,016 183,755 48,582 9,480 34,199 1,130,353 1,114,888 49,356 743,006 712,718
Mar. 1,522,539 288,131 196,405 48,039 9,373 34,314 1,184,604 1,170,620 49,804 791,478 731,061
Apr. 1,431,180 285,667 194,679 47,642 9,297 34,049 1,096,324 1,081,284 49,189 726,986 704,194
May 1,435,049 290,368 197,915 48,658 9,379 34,416 1,095,750 1,081,900 48,931 701,467 733,582
June 1,416,292 280,820 188,991 48,618 9,292 33,919 1,087,034 1,068,747 48,438 718,324 697,969
July 1,399,374 282,438 191,458 48,368 9,184 33,429 1,068,875 1,052,218 48,061 689,447 709,927
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2019 968,277 227,767 740,510 503,698 236,812 220,465 16,348 1,312,974 167,925 1,145,050 932,555 212,495 136,829 75,666
2020 1,030,962 244,325 786,637 546,252 240,385 213,568 26,816 1,419,220 172,112 1,247,108 1,028,217 218,891 130,165 88,726
2021 1,163,639 256,764 906,875 616,964 289,911 261,752 28,159 1,576,549 215,064 1,361,485 1,105,049 256,436 159,446 96,990
2022 1,232,675 251,857 980,818 661,948 318,870 289,264 29,606 1,607,074 174,307 1,432,767 1,139,934 292,833 189,258 103,576
2023 Jan. 1,251,083 289,266 961,817 652,943 308,874 279,086 29,788 1,595,520 187,666 1,407,854 1,127,741 280,113 174,233 105,880
Feb. 1,288,815 294,730 994,085 681,436 312,649 282,699 29,950 1,639,386 203,036 1,436,350 1,158,439 277,911 170,382 107,529
Mar. 1,258,723 285,902 972,822 650,929 321,892 291,477 30,415 1,591,228 184,372 1,406,856 1,120,422 286,434 180,614 105,820
Apr. 1,287,498 326,535 960,963 657,274 303,689 273,260 30,429 1,627,060 207,609 1,419,450 1,142,227 277,223 170,765 106,458
May 1,291,982 337,758 954,224 650,906 303,318 271,538 31,780 1,634,912 222,301 1,412,611 1,136,125 276,486 170,424 106,061
p June 1,319,752 353,872 965,880 655,110 310,770 279,036 31,734 1,623,613 203,914 1,419,699 1,136,600 283,099 176,131 106,968
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2019 573,453 176,913 396,539 304,545 91,994 83,227 8,768 841,017 91,513 749,504 663,166 86,337 63,664 22,674
2020 612,885 185,565 427,320 333,594 93,725 80,717 13,008 899,482 97,582 801,899 712,252 89,647 61,761 27,886
2021 660,557 194,046 466,511 358,320 108,191 95,340 12,851 988,142 151,193 836,949 733,188 103,761 74,174 29,587
2022 703,663 192,412 511,251 387,897 123,354 109,914 13,440 991,655 125,880 865,775 750,939 114,836 82,671 32,165
2023 Jan. 738,136 233,031 505,105 382,294 122,811 109,204 13,607 987,775 118,557 869,217 756,471 112,746 79,879 32,867
Feb. 748,489 237,252 511,237 385,937 125,300 111,832 13,468 981,655 119,121 862,533 747,403 115,130 81,543 33,588
Mar. 746,393 231,542 514,851 383,998 130,854 116,916 13,937 972,305 114,893 857,411 738,453 118,958 86,201 32,757
Apr. 783,061 262,600 520,462 394,679 125,782 111,680 14,102 996,850 119,224 877,627 762,940 114,686 81,522 33,165
p May 789,513 280,245 509,267 385,234 124,033 109,647 14,386 985,185 124,431 860,754 747,268 113,487 81,388 32,099
June 796,692 288,883 507,809 381,368 126,441 111,936 14,505 999,650 128,228 871,422 753,195 118,227 86,243 31,984
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2019 394,824 50,853 343,971 199,153 144,818 137,238 7,580 471,958 76,412 395,546 269,388 126,157 73,165 52,992
2020 418,077 58,760 359,317 212,658 146,659 132,851 13,808 519,738 74,530 445,208 315,965 129,244 68,404 60,840
2021 503,082 62,718 440,364 258,644 181,720 166,411 15,309 588,407 63,871 524,536 371,861 152,675 85,271 67,403
2022 529,012 59,445 469,567 274,050 195,517 179,351 16,166 615,419 48,427 566,992 388,995 177,997 106,587 71,410
2023 Jan. 512,946 56,235 456,712 270,649 186,063 169,882 16,181 607,745 69,108 538,637 371,270 167,367 94,353 73,014
Feb. 540,325 57,477 482,848 295,498 187,350 170,867 16,483 657,732 83,915 573,817 411,036 162,781 88,839 73,942
Mar. 512,330 54,360 457,970 266,932 191,039 174,561 16,477 618,923 69,479 549,444 381,969 167,476 94,413 73,062
Apr. 504,437 63,935 440,502 262,595 177,907 161,580 16,327 630,209 88,386 541,824 379,287 162,537 89,244 73,293
May 502,469 57,512 444,957 265,671 179,286 161,892 17,394 649,727 97,870 551,857 388,858 162,999 89,036 73,963
p June 523,059 64,989 458,070 273,742 184,329 167,100 17,229 623,963 75,686 548,277 383,405 164,872 89,887 74,984
Euro area (20)
2019 494,383 158,182 336,201 264,821 71,380 63,742 7,638 764,929 71,012 693,917 626,886 67,031 49,802 17,229
2020 526,584 164,691 361,893 288,485 73,408 61,662 11,746 812,136 75,869 736,267 666,749 69,518 47,547 21,971
2021 555,081 172,032 383,050 297,861 85,189 73,511 11,678 904,888 129,783 775,105 693,366 81,739 58,280 23,459
2022 597,491 173,395 424,096 328,761 95,336 83,244 12,092 903,757 105,435 798,322 709,668 88,654 63,579 25,075
2023 Jan. 638,359 216,337 422,022 326,150 95,872 83,620 12,252 901,298 99,420 801,878 715,508 86,370 60,792 25,578
Feb. 644,861 220,008 424,854 328,128 96,725 84,652 12,074 893,319 100,251 793,068 705,928 87,140 61,107 26,033
Mar. 641,632 214,675 426,957 325,761 101,197 88,646 12,550 883,244 95,565 787,679 698,040 89,639 64,217 25,422
Apr. 679,900 246,187 433,713 336,129 97,584 84,845 12,739 909,076 99,419 809,658 723,243 86,415 60,837 25,578
May 686,342 262,375 423,967 327,377 96,590 83,622 12,967 896,990 105,532 791,459 705,854 85,604 61,181 24,423
p June 692,681 272,828 419,853 321,786 98,066 84,971 13,095 910,396 109,049 801,347 711,455 89,892 65,678 24,214
Extra-Euro area (20)
2019 473,894 69,585 404,309 238,877 165,432 156,723 8,709 548,045 . . . 145,464 87,027 58,437
2020 504,378 79,634 424,743 257,766 166,977 151,907 15,070 607,084 96,243 510,840 361,467 149,373 82,618 66,755
2021 608,558 84,732 523,826 319,103 204,723 188,241 16,481 671,661 85,281 586,380 411,683 174,697 101,165 73,532
2022 635,184 . . . 223,535 206,021 17,514 703,317 . . . 204,179 125,679 78,501
2023 Jan. 612,724 . . . 213,002 195,466 17,535 694,222 . . . 193,743 113,441 80,302
Feb. 643,953 . . . . . . 746,067 . . . 190,771 109,275 81,497
Mar. 617,092 . . . . . . 707,984 . . . 196,795 116,397 80,398
Apr. 607,598 . . . . . . 717,983 . . . 190,808 109,928 80,880
May 605,640 . . . 206,729 187,916 18,813 737,921 . . . 190,881 109,243 81,638
p June 627,071 . . . 212,703 194,065 18,638 713,217 . . . 193,207 110,453 82,754
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2021 1.5749 1.4826 7.6282 7.4370 129.88 10.1633 10.1465 1.0811 0.85960 1.1827
2022 1.5167 1.3695 7.0788 7.4396 138.03 10.1026 10.6296 1.0047 0.85276 1.0530
2022 Mar. 1.4946 1.3950 6.9916 7.4404 130.71 9.7367 10.5463 1.0245 0.83638 1.1019
Apr. 1.4663 1.3652 6.9605 7.4391 136.61 9.6191 10.3175 1.0211 0.83655 1.0819
May 1.4995 1.3588 7.0830 7.4405 136.24 10.1453 10.4956 1.0355 0.84969 1.0579
June 1.5044 1.3537 7.0734 7.4392 141.57 10.2972 10.6005 1.0245 0.85759 1.0566
July 1.4856 1.3180 6.8538 7.4426 139.17 10.1823 10.5752 0.9876 0.84955 1.0179
Aug. 1.4550 1.3078 6.8884 7.4393 136.85 9.8309 10.5021 0.9690 0.84499 1.0128
Sep. 1.4820 1.3187 6.9508 7.4366 141.57 10.1697 10.7840 0.9640 0.87463 0.9904
Oct. 1.5474 1.3477 7.0687 7.4389 144.73 10.3919 10.9503 0.9791 0.87058 0.9826
Nov. 1.5455 1.3708 7.3171 7.4387 145.12 10.3357 10.8798 0.9842 0.86892 1.0201
Dec. 1.5685 1.4379 7.3859 7.4377 142.82 10.4480 10.9859 0.9865 0.86950 1.0589
2023 Jan. 1.5523 1.4474 7.3173 7.4383 140.54 10.7149 11.2051 0.9961 0.88212 1.0769
Feb. 1.5514 1.4400 7.3244 7.4447 142.38 10.9529 11.1725 0.9905 0.88550 1.0715
Mar. 1.6034 1.4649 7.3807 7.4456 143.01 11.2858 11.2276 0.9908 0.88192 1.0706
Apr. 1.6389 1.4792 7.5561 7.4518 146.51 11.5187 11.3370 0.9846 0.88115 1.0968
May 1.6346 1.4687 7.5948 7.4485 148.93 11.7330 11.3697 0.9751 0.87041 1.0868
June 1.6157 1.4414 7.7653 7.4492 153.15 11.7164 11.6766 0.9764 0.85861 1.0840
July 1.6423 1.4618 7.9482 7.4508 155.94 11.3474 11.6343 0.9663 0.85856 1.1058
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  
2023 January 1 Croatia Croatian kuna HRK 7.53450  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2023
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the  Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
extended EER group of trading partners  1broad EER group of
trading partners  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
27 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  527 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.1 95.9 96.0 96.6 95.9 97.9 99.6 95.7 97.7 98.3 98.1 97.8
2000 87.0 86.8 86.0 85.5 88.1 86.1 92.0 97.5 85.4 91.1 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.5 87.1 86.5 84.3 90.2 86.9 91.7 96.6 86.0 90.5 93.0 91.7 91.0
2002 89.8 90.2 89.6 87.9 94.5 90.5 92.3 95.7 88.4 91.0 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.4 101.4 100.8 99.0 106.4 101.6 95.8 94.8 97.5 95.3 97.0 96.7 96.8
2004 104.2 105.3 103.8 102.2 110.9 105.4 96.1 93.6 99.9 95.6 98.5 98.2 98.4
2005 102.8 104.0 101.8 100.4 109.1 103.0 94.7 92.1 98.7 93.2 98.4 97.1 96.7
2006 102.8 104.0 101.2 99.3 109.2 102.3 93.5 90.4 98.1 91.6 98.6 96.7 96.0
2007 106.3 107.0 103.5 101.0 112.8 104.5 94.5 89.6 101.9 92.0 100.9 98.3 97.3
2008 110.2 109.9 105.7 104.9 117.6 107.0 94.9 88.4 105.1 91.3 102.4 98.4 97.5
2009 111.7 110.8 106.8 108.5 120.7 108.1 95.2 89.2 104.5 92.0 101.9 98.6 97.9
2010 104.5 103.0 98.6 101.0 112.0 99.1 92.5 88.7 98.1 88.1 98.8 94.3 92.5
2011 104.2 102.1 96.7 99.2 112.8 98.6 92.1 88.5 97.5 87.3 98.2 93.5 91.9
2012 98.5 96.8 91.2 93.5 107.6 93.8 90.0 88.3 92.4 84.7 95.9 90.5 88.9
2013 102.1 99.9 94.2 96.3 112.3 96.8 92.3 88.8 97.4 86.6 98.1 92.3 90.9
2014 102.3 99.2 94.2 96.5 114.7 97.2 92.9 89.6 97.6 87.3 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.5 89.5 85.5 85.9 106.2 88.6 89.7 90.2 88.8 83.5 94.4 87.8 87.0
2016 95.2 91.5 87.9 p 87.1 110.2 90.6 90.6 90.7 90.4 84.9 95.0 88.8 88.1
2017 97.5 93.4 89.1 p 87.8 112.6 91.8 91.8 90.8 93.3 85.7 96.3 89.9 88.9
2018 100.0 95.6 90.6 p 89.4 117.4 95.0 93.1 91.0 96.3 86.7 97.7 91.2 90.8
2019 98.1 93.2 88.9 p 86.8 115.6 92.4 92.2 91.2 93.5 85.8 96.4 89.9 89.4
2020 99.7 93.6 89.5 p 87.4 119.5 93.9 92.3 91.5 93.4 86.4 96.4 90.1 90.2
2021 99.6 93.5 p 88.7 p 85.7 120.9 94.3 93.4 92.0 95.4 86.8 97.4 90.7 91.0
2022 95.5 p 90.7 p 83.7 p 81.0 116.8 p 90.8 92.1 91.9 92.3 85.2 96.0 89.2 p 89.1
2021 Feb. 100.7 94.5 90.2 p 87.5 121.7 95.1 93.3 91.6 95.7 87.0 97.9 91.2 91.5
Mar. 100.3 94.2 121.4 94.9 97.7 91.1 91.4
Apr. 100.6 94.3 122.1 95.2 97.9 91.2 91.7
May 100.8 94.4 89.4 p 86.3 122.4 95.3 93.2 91.5 95.8 86.6 98.0 91.3 91.7
June 100.3 93.8 121.7 94.6 98.0 91.1 91.5
July 99.7 93.6 121.0 94.3 97.7 91.0 91.3
Aug. 99.4 93.2 p 88.5 p 85.5 120.6 93.9 93.7 92.3 95.7 87.0 97.4 90.7 90.9
Sep. 99.5 93.3 120.6 93.8 97.3 90.6 90.7
Oct. 98.5 92.4 119.6 93.1 96.7 90.0 90.2
Nov. 97.6 91.8 p 86.6 p 83.5 119.0 92.6 93.4 92.6 94.6 86.4 96.1 89.4 89.7
Dec. 97.1 91.2 119.2 92.4 95.7 88.9 89.4
2022 Jan. 96.6 91.1 118.7 p 92.2 96.0 89.0 p 89.4
Feb. 96.9 91.6 p 84.9 p 82.3 119.1 p 92.6 92.8 92.1 93.7 85.7 96.1 89.1 p 89.5
Mar. 95.9 91.4 118.6 p 92.7 96.3 89.5 p 90.0
Apr. 95.2 90.0 116.6 p 90.2 96.1 89.0 p 88.9
May 95.6 90.4 p 83.5 p 80.7 116.4 p 90.1 92.2 91.8 92.6 84.9 96.5 89.6 p 89.3
June 95.9 90.6 116.7 p 90.2 95.7 88.8 p 88.5
July 94.1 89.1 114.7 p 88.9 94.9 88.0 p 87.6
Aug. 93.6 88.8 p 81.9 p 79.4 114.2 p 88.6 91.5 91.9 90.7 84.7 94.5 87.7 p 87.3
Sep. 94.2 p 89.8 114.6 p 89.3 96.0 89.2 p 88.7
Oct. 94.8 p 91.1 115.5 p 90.6 96.1 89.8 p 89.4
Nov. 96.0 p 92.0 p 84.5 p 81.6 117.2 p 91.8 92.1 91.8 92.4 85.5 97.1 90.7 p 90.4
Dec. 97.0 p 92.3 119.2 p 92.6 96.2 89.7 p 89.8
2023 Jan. 97.3 p 92.5 119.9 p 92.9 97.4 90.3 p 90.4
Feb. 97.3 p 92.6 p 86.3 p 83.9 120.1 p 93.1 92.7 91.4 94.5 85.9 97.6 90.5 p 90.6
Mar. 97.5 p 92.8 120.5 p 93.3 98.1 91.0 p 91.1
Apr. 98.6 p 93.6 122.3 p 94.5 98.6 p 91.6 p 92.0
May 98.1 p 93.0 ... ... 121.7 p 93.8 … … … … 98.0 p 91.1 p 91.4
June 98.3 p 93.2 122.5 p 94.4 p98.3 p 91.4 p 92.0
July 99.3 p 94.2 124.5 p 95.8 p98.3 p 91.7 p 92.6
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the curren-
cy concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's price
competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective exchange
rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. The
weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more detailed in-
formation on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the Deutsche
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 The calculations are
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following 18 countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania,
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United
States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates were used.
2 Includes countries belonging to the extended EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition) and additionally the following 23 countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zea-
land, Peru, Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan,Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and United Arab Emirates. The ECB has suspended the
publication and calculation of the euro foreign exchange reference rate against Russian
rouble with effect from March 2, 2022 until further notice. For the calculation of
effective exchange rates, an indicative rate is used for the Russian Federation from that
date. It is calculated from the daily RUB/USD rates determined by the Bank of Russia in
conjunction with the respective ECB's euro foreign exchange reference rate to the US
dollar.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from 2001 including
Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from
2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, from
2015 including Lithuania, from 2023 including Croatia) as well as Canada, Denmark,
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.
5 Euro area countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the extended
EER group of trading partners (fixed comosition).  6 Euro area countries (current compo-
sition) and countries belonging to the broad EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition).

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website, as are also the Statistical Series, with a 
changed basic structure and advanced options for using data.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
A list of the articles published in the period from 
2010 to 2022 is available on the Bundesbank’s 
website.
Monthly Report articles
November 2022
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2022
– Outlook for the German economy for 2023 
to 2025
– Rise in energy prices, the exchange rate of 
the euro and Germany’s price competitive -
ness
– Access to cash in Germany – results of a rep -
resentative public survey
January 2023
– From the monetary pillar to the monetary 
and financial analysis– Term structures in economic analysis
– Mobile payment usage in Germany
– Access to cash in Germany: analyses of the 
spatial availability of cash withdrawal facil -
ities
February 2023
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2023
– German balance of payments in 2022
– The impact of digitalisation on labour prod -
uctivity growth
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2021
April 2023
– Money market conditions and remuneration 
of government  deposits
– Household wealth and finances in  Germany: 
Results of the 2021 household wealth survey
– Turning point in payments
– Sustainability risks in banking supervision
May 2023
– The current economic situation in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
85•

June 2023
– Arduous recovery amid high and only grad -
ually easing inflation – outlook for the Ger -
man economy up to 2025
– Developments in bank interest rates in Ger -
many during the period of monetary policy 
tightening
– The growing significance of central govern -
ment’s off-budget entities
July 2023
– Digital money: options for the financial in -
dustry
– Cross- border liquidity flows – the role of the 
banking system in the German balance of 
payments
– Economic developments in emerging market 
economies: old problems and new chal -
lenges
August 2023
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, January 20231,2
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
January 20232
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131
Discussion Paperso
04/2023  
Shocks to transition risk05/2023  
Time-varying shock return correlation, news 
shocks, and business cycles
06/2023  
Asset allocation with recursive parameter up -
dating and macroeconomic regime identifiers
07/2023  
The rollout of internal credit risk model: Impli -
cations for the novel partial-use philosophy
08/2023  
Pricing the Bund term structure with linear re -
gressions – without an observable short rate
09/ 2023  
Banks of a feather: The informational advan -
tage of being alike
10/ 2023  
On the empirical relevance of the exchange rate 
as a shock absorber at the zero lower bound
11/ 2023  
Banks’ net interest margin and changes in the 
term structure
12/ 2023  
Long- term deposit funding and demand for 
central bank funds: Evidence from targeted 
longer- term refinancing operations
13/2023  
Mental accounting and the marginal propensity 
to consume
14/2023  
Shadow- rate VARs
15/2023  
Convenient but risky government bonds
16/2023  
Corporate taxes, productivity, and business 
dynamism
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
87•

17/ 2023  
The pass- through from inflation perceptions to 
inflation expectations
18/ 2023  
Monetary policy rules under bounded rational -
ity
19/ 2023  
The state- dependent impact of changes in bank 
capital requirements
20/ 2023  
Forecasting banknote circulation during the 
COVID-19 pandemic using structural time series 
models
21/2023  
Effects of the ECB’s communication on govern -
ment bond spreads
22/2023  
Learning monetary policy strategies at the ef -
fective lower bound with sudden surprisesBanking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, 
January  20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2023  
88•

