Monthly Report
February 2023
Vol. 75  
No 2
We value your opinion!
We would like to tailor our Monthly Report publication more precisely to the needs of our 
readers . You can help us do this by participating in a short survey.
Link to the survey: https://www.bundesbank.de/survey-mr

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 33512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 p.m. on 17 February 2023.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
2

Contents
The current economic situation  
in Germany  ...............................................................................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  7
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  13
Croatia adopts the euro  .....................................................................................................  20
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  25
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  26
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  39
Spillovers from UK government bond yields to European government bonds  
in the autumn of 2022  .......................................................................................................  43
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  51
House prices in Germany in 2022  .......................................................................................  59
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  64Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
6

Overview
Economic outlook somewhat 
brighter, high inflationary 
pressures persist
Global economy growing 
moderately  amidst improving 
sentiment
The global economy continued to see only 
moderate growth in the final quarter of 2022 
owing to various headwinds. The main factors 
behind this slowdown were high inflation rates, 
the continued tightening of monetary policy in 
many industrial countries and the European en -
ergy crisis triggered by Russia’s war on Ukraine. 
Accordingly, there was weak economic mo -
mentum in the euro area, although it was 
somewhat stronger than had been expected 
just a few weeks ago. In the United States, 
gross domestic product (GDP) rose markedly in 
the fourth quarter, but the underlying eco -
nomic momentum also remained subdued. In 
China, economic growth was initially halted by 
fresh lockdowns and then by a massive wave 
of infections after all of the containment meas -
ures were suddenly lifted. At the turn of the 
year, sentiment amongst entrepreneurs and 
consumers worldwide brightened slightly, with 
recessionary fears receding somewhat. This is 
likely to have been helped by the distinct eas -
ing of the European energy crisis. Inflationary 
pressures also relented somewhat. Finally, the 
end of the zero- COVID policy in China is likely 
to pave the way for economic recovery.
Further fall in prices for energy 
commodities
European gas and electricity prices fell signifi -
cantly in the reporting period. This was partly 
due to the fact that the gas storage facilities re -
main well filled owing to mild winter tempera -
tures, high imports of liquefied natural gas and 
the efforts of enterprises and consumers to curb usage. International crude oil prices also 
declined somewhat thanks to the abundant 
supply on the world market. Russia is evidently 
still managing to redirect its oil exports away 
from sanctioning countries and towards China 
and India.
Strong consumer price 
inflation  eases somewhat
As energy commodity prices abated, consumer 
price inflation in industrial countries also weak -
ened slightly. Headline inflation in this group of 
countries fell to 7.6% in December 2022; it had 
been almost 1 percentage point higher three 
months earlier. Looking ahead, lower energy 
prices are likely to dampen inflation further. 
Producer prices for intermediate goods in the 
manufacturing sector dropped recently in most 
industrial countries. This is likely to curb price 
inflation for goods in particular. However, the 
underlying inflationary pressures may prove to 
be more persistent given the robust labour 
market situation and high wage growth. Infla -
tion excluding energy and food has so far re -
treated only tentatively to 5.4%.
Financial markets shaped by 
very high inflation
Persistently high inflation rates also shaped de -
velopments in the international financial mar -
kets. Central banks continued to tighten glob -
ally, although they have now been taking 
smaller interest rate steps to raise policy rates in 
the context of more restrictive monetary policy 
stances. The Federal Reserve, for example, has 
adjusted the key interest rate upwards in three 
additional steps since the end of September, 
but most recently by only 25 basis points in 
February. The Eurosystem, too, reduced the 
size of its increments from the previous level of 
75 basis points; the steps in December and Subdued global 
economic activ -
ity, but senti -
ment brightened 
at turn of the 
year
Prices of energy 
commodities fell 
significantly in 
some casesDecline in 
inflation  rates, 
underlying infla -
tion persistently 
high
Financial mar -
kets focusing on 
high inflation 
rates and differ -
ing economic 
outlooksDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
7

most recently in February 2023 were each in -
creases of 50 basis points. Since the beginning 
of the year, market participants have increas -
ingly had the impression that inflation could fall 
faster throughout the year than initially as -
sumed. This impression was aided by the publi -
cation of inflation figures that were lower than 
in previous months and, in some cases, lower 
than expected. This was the main reason why 
long- term yields in the sovereign bond markets 
initially all but ceased their upward trajectory 
that they had begun at the start of 2021. As 
the economic outlook clouded over, they even 
declined in the United Kingdom compared with 
the end of September, whilst in the United 
States they remained virtually unchanged. By 
contrast, yields in the euro area were bolstered 
by energy markets stabilising, economic pro -
spects improving throughout the single cur -
rency area and China moving away from its 
zero- COVID policy. Equity markets saw strong 
price gains, especially in the euro area. The 
brighter economic outlook and the market’s 
assessment of declining upside risks to the in -
flation outlook increased risk appetite and in -
vestor optimism. The first quarter saw the euro 
appreciate in effective terms and against the 
US dollar, likewise benefiting from the marked 
improvement in the domestic economic out -
look as viewed by the market.
Eurosystem continues course 
of significant and steady 
interest  rate rises
The Governing Council of the ECB raised the 
three key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points 
at both its December 2022 meeting and its 
February 2023 meeting. It will stay the course 
in raising interest rates significantly at a steady 
pace, and keep them at levels that are suffi -
ciently restrictive to ensure a timely return of in -
flation to the 2% medium- term target. In view 
of the underlying inflationary pressures, the 
Governing Council intends to raise interest 
rates by another 50 basis points at its monetary 
policy meeting in March and will then evaluate the subsequent path of its monetary policy. Its 
future policy rate decisions will continue to be 
data- dependent and follow a meeting- by- 
meeting approach.
Furthermore, in December 2022 the Governing 
Council decided on the principles for normalis -
ing monetary policy securities holdings. From 
the beginning of March 2023 onwards, the 
asset purchase programme (APP) portfolio will 
be reduced by €15 billion per month on aver -
age until the end of the second quarter of 
2023. The subsequent pace will be determined 
over time and regularly reassessed. The Gov -
erning Council supplemented this in February 
with a decision on the technical modalities.
Supply- side and demand- side 
factors weaken credit growth
With monetary policy being tightened, growth 
in the broad monetary aggregate M3 dimin -
ished sharply in the fourth quarter of 2022. The 
rise in money and capital market yields in -
creased the opportunity costs of holding 
money, prompting investors to make shifts in 
their portfolios, both out of the monetary ag -
gregate M3 and within it. On the supply side, a 
sharp decline in loans to the non- financial pri -
vate sector in the euro area dampened monet -
ary growth. Demand for loans on the part of 
enterprises and households was weakened in 
particular by uncertainty surrounding the eco -
nomic outlook and higher financing costs. In 
addition, credit growth is likely to have been 
subdued by the ongoing tightening of banks’ 
lending policies, which according to the Bank 
Lending Survey (BLS) continued in the quarter 
under review. The banks surveyed by the BLS 
again mainly put this tightening down to what 
they viewed as an increase in credit risk.Monetary pol -
icy: ECB Govern -
ing Council 
raises key inter -
est rates again 
twice and …… decides to 
scale back APP 
reinvestments
Sharp decline in 
lending weakens 
monetary 
growth in the 
euro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
8

German economic output 
down in Q4 2022
German economic output was lower in the 
fourth quarter of 2022 than in the previous 
quarter. According to the Federal Statistical Of -
fice’s flash estimate, GDP decreased by 0.2% 
on the quarter after seasonal adjustment, 
which would mean the decline in economic 
output was milder than anticipated in the De -
cember projection. The situation in the energy 
markets eased markedly over the course of the 
quarter and prices for energy commodities 
moderated. Furthermore, output in the manu -
facturing sector remained more resilient than 
expected overall. This was partly due to supply 
bottlenecks easing further and the well- filled 
order books making up for the decline in new 
orders. The automotive industry, in particular, 
stepped up production markedly in the final 
quarter of 2022. This more or less offset the 
decline in output in energy- intensive sectors. 
Meanwhile, high inflation eroded consumer 
purchasing power and real sales in the retail 
sector dropped considerably. Private consump -
tion is therefore likely to have contracted mark -
edly. Construction activity also weakened fur -
ther, mainly as a result of falling demand for 
construction services. Demand for these ser -
vices is suffering due to the high construction 
prices, reduced household purchasing power 
and increased financing costs.
These factors contributed to a slowdown in 
lending to the domestic private sector and, 
above all, to non- financial corporations. Al -
though part of this was swingback coming 
after the exceptionally strong growth in lend -
ing in the preceding quarters, the tighter finan -
cing conditions and the uncertain macroeco -
nomic environment, which dampened enter -
prises’ willingness to invest, also played a key 
role. Extensive return flows from government 
assistance loans to energy companies, mainly 
stemming from the restructuring of govern -
ment support, were a further aspect. Lending 
to households also continued to lose momen -
tum in the fourth quarter. Households’ demand for housing loans, in particular, declined com -
pared with the previous quarters.
The labour market improved again in the final 
quarter of 2022. Employment rose slightly in 
the fourth quarter, after recording next to no 
growth in the third quarter. Unemployment re -
mained stable at a low level. This meant that 
the expectations expressed in the December 
projection were exceeded. Despite the reces -
sionary outlook and sharp increase in the min -
imum wage, robust labour market develop -
ments were already anticipated. The short- term 
outlook is also more favourable at present than 
it was just a few months ago.
High wage increases agreed in 
recent wage agreements
Although the fourth quarter of 2022 saw a 
continued moderate increase in negotiated 
wages, the most recent wage agreements 
were once again significantly higher than in 
previous years. It is noteworthy that a growing 
number of (tax- free and social contribution-  
exempt) inflation compensation bonuses have 
been agreed in some sectors in addition to the 
increase in scheduled rates of pay. Unsched -
uled renegotiations of current wage agree -
ments took place to this end in a handful of 
branches. At present, wage demands are also 
exceptionally high by historical standards. The 
old, moderate wage agreements from the 
period before inflation was high will expire this 
year. The significant wage increases set out in 
the new collective wage agreements will in -
creasingly be reflected in higher growth in ne -
gotiated wages overall.
This year’s pay round will be shaped by high in -
flation and labour shortages on the one hand, 
and by the sluggish economic activity at present 
and uncertainties due to geopolitical risks, on 
the other. Furthermore, negotiations will be 
made more difficult by the restricted scope for 
wage distribution. This is because Germany is 
losing purchasing power and wealth due to the German eco -
nomic output 
lower in Q4 
2022 than in Q3
German banks’ 
lending to 
domestic private 
sector signifi -
cantly weakerLabour market 
developments 
more favourable 
than expected
Recent wage 
agreements 
again contain 
significantly 
larger wage 
increases than in 
previous years
Second- round 
effects helping 
prolong the 
period of high 
inflation ratesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
9

country being a net importer of energy, which 
is now massively more expensive. The impact 
of high rates of inflation is already clearly dis -
cernible in the latest wage agreements. Marked 
second- round effects on prices are to be ex -
pected. They will help ensure that inflation re -
mains well above the medium- term target of 
2% for the euro area for an extended period of 
time.
Peak level of inflation 
exceeded  in Q4
The sharp rise in consumer prices also con -
tinued in the fourth quarter of 2022. Between 
October and December, the Harmonised Index 
of Consumer Prices (HICP) increased by an aver -
age of 2.6% on the quarter in seasonally ad -
justed terms, thereby exceeding the growth of 
2.1% recorded in the third quarter. The re -
newed increase in momentum was mainly 
driven by the additional surge in prices for ser -
vices. First, the temporary introduction of the 
€9 travel ticket in the early summer no longer 
had a dampening effect. Second, the statutory 
minimum wage was raised substantially in Oc -
tober. By contrast, the energy component lost 
some momentum as a result of the govern -
ment covering advance payments for gas in 
December (immediate assistance) and because 
of declining crude oil prices. Compared with 
the previous year, the HICP rate increased by 
1.4 percentage points to 10.8% in the fourth 
quarter, while the rate excluding energy and 
food grew from 3.8% to 5.2%.
The HICP rate is estimated to have fallen from 
9.6% in December 2022 to 9.2% in January 
2023. Detailed information on the adjustment 
of the underlying basket of goods will only be 
known once the final figures have been pub -
lished on 22 February 2023. The HICP weight -
ing scheme may have changed markedly as the 
further decline in inflation came as a surprise. 
Based on the old weighting scheme, a signifi -
cant increase would have been expected due 
to the absence of the dampening effect gener -ated by December’s immediate assistance 
scheme. The electricity and gas price brakes, 
which are already captured in the price statis -
tics in January, will probably be of less signifi -
cance. The inflation rate is likely to fall further 
in the coming months. For instance, the sharp 
rise in energy prices in the previous year will no 
longer impact the calculation of the rate in 
March. However, the underlying pressure on 
prices is likely to decline only tentatively from 
an exceptionally high level over the next few 
months.
Economic activity picking up 
slightly following a renewed 
decline in GDP in Q1
Economic output is likely to be lower again in 
the first quarter of 2023 than in the previous 
quarter. On the one hand, a gas shortage is no 
longer to be expected. In addition, the electri -
city and gas price brakes are mitigating the in -
crease in energy costs for households and en -
terprises. Tensions in the energy markets and 
uncertainty have eased considerably. This is 
likely to benefit primarily business investment, 
but also industrial production. The latter should 
remain relatively robust in the first quarter amid 
supply bottlenecks continuing to ease and well- 
filled order books. On the other hand, indus -
trial production started out from a depressed 
level in 2023 following the marked decline in 
December 2022. This also applies to exports, 
which are being dampened by declining for -
eign demand as well. Moreover, inflation re -
mains high and continues to eat into house -
holds’ purchasing power. Private consumption 
is therefore also likely to decline at the begin -
ning of 2023. Lastly, construction activity will 
probably continue to slow down.
Although there could be a gradual pick- up over 
the remainder of the year, no major improve -
ment is yet in sight. All in all, from today’s per -
spective, Germany’s economic output is likely 
to decline slightly on average in 2023 but per -Strong price 
increases in Q4 
2022, too
Inflation rate 
down slightly 
further in Janu -
ary and likely to 
fall further in the 
coming monthsGerman eco -
nomic output 
likely to be 
lower again in 
Q1 2023 than 
in Q4 2022
Slight pick- up 
over the remain -
der of the year, 
but no major 
improvement yetDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
10

form a little better than expected in the De -
cember projection.
Government deficit to rise 
again in 2023
The pandemic drawing to an end, new fiscal 
support measures and high inflation are all 
shaping government finances. Last year, relief 
outweighed burdens and the deficit ratio fell by 
1 percentage point on the year to 2.6%. The 
current budget plans set the stage for a re -
newed rise in the deficit ratio this year. The vol -
ume of temporary support measures remains 
high, primarily as a result of the broadly based 
electricity and gas price brakes. Their cost 
hinges on prices for final energy consumption, 
which are more stable; there will probably be a 
lag before the unexpected fall in prices on the 
energy markets is reflected in prices for final 
consumption. Overall, expenditure is likely to 
rise much more sharply than revenue. This is 
due, amongst other things, to the fact that 
high inflation is further driving up the cost of 
government tangible goods purchases and in -
vestment. In addition, spending on defence 
and climate policy will probably rise signifi -
cantly. By contrast, given the boom in profit-  
related taxes last year, government revenue 
now appears likely to grow at a much slower 
pace.
Falling deficit in 2024, off- 
budget  entities also significant 
in the medium term
The temporary support measures will probably 
largely come to an end next year, leading to a 
significant decline in the deficit. However, it is 
unlikely to fall back down to the regular bor -
rowing limits under the debt brake any time 
soon. Although central government’s core 
budget will start to comply with the limit again 
in 2023, during the period covered by the 
medium- term financial plan there are still con -
siderable deficits in its off- budget entities, es -pecially the Climate Policy Fund and the Armed 
Forces Fund. Moreover, the state governments 
built up substantial buffers during the crisis 
years. Over the next few years, these will prob -
ably not be used solely for upcoming repay -
ments but for other purposes, too. Deficits at 
the state government level therefore also ap -
pear to be on the cards.
Off- budget entities with large reserves or credit 
authorisations make it more difficult to gain an 
overview of budgetary planning. For example, 
central government envisages that its core 
budget deficit will fall significantly to around 
€85 billion in 2023 but, when combined with 
the off- budget entities, its deficit is set to rise 
sharply to €230 billion. The plans extending to 
2026 issued in the summer of 2022 point to a 
stable overall central government deficit of 
around €70 billion over the medium term. The 
core budget then accounts for only one- fifth 
(€14 billion) of this figure. For 2023, the plans 
for central government’s off- budget entities 
are still largely transparent. However, hardly 
any specific figures are budgeted for the fol -
lowing years.
Limit deficits, strengthen fiscal 
rules again
Last year, there was a swift fiscal policy re -
sponse to the fallout of the war in Ukraine and 
the high inflation rates. The support measures 
were broadly based and largely financed with 
new debt. This is part of the reason why the 
deficit is set to rise in the highly inflationary en -
vironment. A growing deficit, in and of itself, 
makes it more difficult for monetary policy to 
lower inflation. In principle, this would suggest 
that it would be appropriate to confine assis -
tance payments, as far as possible, to those in 
need, and ensure timely counterfinancing. Posi -
tive fiscal surprises should not be interpreted as 
additional fiscal scope. Instead, they should re -
sult in lower deficits.Deficit ratio set 
to increase this 
year
Deficits smaller 
but still marked 
in medium term: 
climate and 
defence expend -
iture, in particu -
lar, largely 
credit- financedOverview of 
budgetary plan -
ning made more 
difficult by off- 
budget entities 
with large scope 
for deficits
Support meas -
ures are rela -
tively broadly 
based and 
largely financed 
with new debtDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
11

It is important to apply the fiscal rules effect -
ively again in the future. If they continue to be 
stretched, they will forfeit their binding effect 
and credibility and will no longer act as a safe -
guard for sound public finances. If the debt 
brake is seen as requiring amendment, it should 
be reformed transparently and, if necessary, the 
changes written into Germany’s Basic Law. The 
Bundesbank has made reform proposals to this 
effect.
The EU fiscal rules are designed to ensure 
sound public finances in the individual Member 
States. They are thus essential for a stability-  
oriented monetary union. The European Com -mission’s reform proposal of November 2022 is 
unconvincing in this respect: in place of shared 
standard limits, it envisages rules that can be 
adapted individually for each country, which 
would pose a substantial threat to the object -
ive of the fiscal framework. This could be 
avoided if the reform debate were instead fo -
cused on adjusting the existing rules in a man -
ner conducive to maintaining stability. In its lat -
est Annual Economic Report, the Federal Gov -
ernment outlined its ideas for a reform of the 
framework, arguing in favour of considerably 
stricter fiscal rules than the European Commis -
sion’s proposals envisage.Apply fiscal rules 
effectively 
again: in Ger -
many and …
… in the EUDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
12

Global and European setting
Global economic 
 developments
The global economy continued to see only 
moderate growth in the final quarter of 2022 
owing to various headwinds. The main factors 
behind this slowdown were high inflation rates, 
the continued tightening of monetary policy in 
many industrial countries and the European en -
ergy crisis triggered by Russia’s war on Ukraine. 
Accordingly, there was weak economic mo -
mentum in the euro area and in the United 
Kingdom. In the United States, gross domestic 
product (GDP) rose markedly in the fourth 
quarter, but the underlying economic momen -
tum remained subdued there too. In China, 
economic growth was initially halted by fresh 
lockdowns and then by a massive wave of in -
fections after all of the containment measures 
were suddenly lifted. At the global level, the 
subdued economic activity was mainly the re -
sult of weakening aggregate demand. Global 
industrial output fell distinctly in the fourth 
quarter as a consequence. Activity in the ser -
vices sector was probably also muted, as indi -
cated by the results of surveys among purchas -
ing managers.
At the turn of 2022-23, sentiment amongst 
entrepreneurs and consumers worldwide 
brightened slightly. This is probably due in part 
to the distinct easing of the European energy 
crisis. Inflationary pressures also relented some -
what. Finally, the end of the zero- COVID policy 
in China is likely to pave the way for the coun -
try’s economic recovery. Against this backdrop, 
the prices of some non- energy commodities 
picked up somewhat of late, especially those of 
industrial metals.
By contrast, energy prices have fallen signifi -
cantly in recent months. The efforts of Euro -
pean gas consumers to cut back on usage bore 
fruit. That, along with comparatively mild win -
ter temperatures and high imports of liquefied natural gas, means that Europe is likely to 
emerge from the winter with its gas storage 
facilities  well filled. European wholesale gas 
prices thus fell sharply. At the Dutch TTF trading 
point, a megawatt hour of gas recently cost 
€52, which is around 40% less than in Novem -
ber 2022. Forward prices for future deliveries 
and gas prices in other regions of the world 
both followed a similar pattern. Crude oil prices 
abated somewhat, partly owing to the persist -
ently high level of Russian crude oil exports. 
Russia is still managing to redirect its oil exports 
away from sanctioning countries towards 
others, notably China and India. As this report 
went to press, the price of a barrel of Brent 
crude oil stood at US$84. Forward prices sug -
gest further slight declines are on the cards.
As energy commodity prices abated, consumer 
price inflation in industrial countries also weak -Subdued global 
economic 
activity 
Sentiment 
brightened 
slightly at turn 
of the year
Energy prices 
much lowerGlobal economic indicators*
Sources: CPB, national data, Haver Analytics, S&P Global and 
Bundesbank calculations. * Groups of countries vary due to dif-
ferences in data availability. 1 Components for output (manu-
facturing) and business activity (services).
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 23859095100105110Seasonally adjusted
2030405060Industrial production
Q4 2019 = 100, log scale
Purchasing managers' indices1
Diffusion index, lin scale
Manufacturing
ServiceseDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
13

ened slightly. Headline inflation in this group of 
countries fell to 7.6% in December 2022; it had 
been almost 1 percentage point higher three 
months earlier. Looking ahead, lower prices for 
energy commodities are likely to dampen infla -
tion further. Producer prices for intermediate 
goods in the manufacturing sector have fallen 
recently in most advanced economies. This is 
likely to curb inflation for goods in particular. 
However, the underlying inflationary pressures 
may prove to be more persistent given the ro -
bust labour market situation and high wage 
growth. Inflation excluding energy and food 
has so far retreated only tentatively to 5.4%.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) also ex -
pects to see elevated inflation in the medium 
term, as forecast in the regular update to its 
World Economic Outlook in January.1 Inflation 
rates in the advanced economies are still likely 
to be above the monetary policy targets come 
the end of 2024. At the same time, the IMF 
staff raised their forecast for global GDP growth 
in 2023 slightly to 2.9%. The end of the zero- 
COVID policy in China and the easing of the 
European energy crisis were key motivating 
factors behind the upward revision. That said, 
the IMF continued to warn of risks to global 
growth. It also cautioned that there was still a 
danger of inflation expectations de- anchoring, 
which could prompt a further tightening of 
monetary policy.
China
In China, economic developments at the end of 
2022 were largely shaped by the country’s pol -
icy for dealing with COVID-19. As late as No -
vember, the authorities had still responded to 
smaller- scale outbreaks in various parts of the 
country with stringent restrictions. In Decem -
ber, they then unexpectedly abandoned the 
strict zero- COVID policy which had been in 
force for nearly three years. This move was fol -
lowed by a huge wave of infections, and eco -Decline in 
inflation  rates, 
underlying price 
pressures per -
sistently high
IMF raises its 
global growth 
forecast for 
2023 slightly 
and expects ele -
vated inflation 
rates over the 
medium term
Economic stag -
nation in Q4Commodity prices
Sources:  Bloomberg  Finance  L.P.,  Haver  Analytics,  ICE  and 
HWWI. • Latest figures: Average of 1 to 10 February 2023, or 
1 to 16 February 2023 for crude oil and natural gas. 1 Price for 
the front-month futures contract.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 202320406080100120Monthly averages
04080120160200240
Natural gas (TTF)1
in euro per MWh, reduced scaleCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
80100120140160
Industrial commodities
2018 = 100, US$ basis
Sources:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  national  data. 
* EU, Canada, Japan, Norway, Switzerland, the United King-
dom and the United States. 1 Consumer prices excluding en-
ergy and food; additionally excluding alcoholic beverages and 
tobacco  products  for  the  EU,  Norway,  Switzerland  and  the 
United Kingdom.
Deutsche BundesbankConsumer prices in industrial countries*
0123456789
+++++++++Year-on-year percentage change
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022Headline Core rate1
1 See International Monetary Fund (2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
14

nomic life was once again severely disrupted. 
Averaged over the final quarter of 2022, real 
GDP stagnated compared with the previous 
quarter, in seasonally adjusted terms. In year-  
on- year terms, it rose by 2.9%. On the expend -
iture side, private consumption, in particular, is 
likely to have flagged. In addition, exports of 
goods fell away steeply as consumption cooled 
in major advanced economies. Given the slug -
gish performance of the real economy, con -
sumer price rises remained muted; inflation 
stood at 2.1% in January.
Now that the wave of infections has subsided, 
the Chinese economy is likely to rebound to 
some extent over the next few months. How -
ever, a prolonged, robust upswing does not 
look likely from today’s perspective. For one 
thing, household incomes in China suffered 
heavily during the pandemic. This limits the 
scope for catch- up effects in terms of private 
consumption. For another, the crisis that has 
been simmering for some time now in the mac -
roeconomically significant housing market 
looks set to continue. At the end of 2022, the 
number of new construction starts fell to its 
lowest level in many years. This suggests that 
construction activity will remain depressed over 
the coming months.
Other selected emerging 
 market economies
India’s economy probably continued on its 
growth trajectory as 2022 drew to a close. Al -
though official GDP data are not yet available, 
the results of purchasing managers’ surveys 
point to sustained strong economic expansion. 
This means that India is likely to have been one 
of the fastest- growing major economies last 
year, propelled primarily by the robust growth 
of the significant domestic market. At the same 
time, multinationals increasingly utilised the 
country as a base for exports. Consumer price 
inflation cooled markedly to 6.1% in the fourth 
quarter, as food prices increased less sharply. 
With core inflation still high, the Indian central bank raised its policy rate by 25 basis points to 
6.5% in February 2023.
In Brazil, economic activity appears to have re -
mained feeble in the final quarter of 2022, fol -
lowing a distinct slowdown in economic 
growth in the third quarter. The restrictive mon -
etary policy pursued by the country’s central 
bank is likely to have been the chief drag. Be -
sides investment, it likely also weighed on pri -
vate consumption, as households’ expenditure 
on debt servicing shot up dramatically. That 
said, the central bank did succeed in reining in 
the rise in consumer prices. The inflation rate 
fell to 6.1%, compared with 8.6% in the previ -
ous quarter. The Brazilian central bank left the 
policy rate unchanged at 13.75%.
According to an estimate prepared by the Rus -
sian central bank, the country’s economic out -
put contracted by 2.5% over 2022 as a whole. 
Revenues from energy exports were very high 
at times and armaments production expanded, 
both of which prevented a more severe slump. 
The available indicators suggest that the macro -
economic contraction may have continued at 
the end of the year. The mounting labour short -
age due to the partial mobilisation ordered in 
September probably played a part. In addition, 
there was a marked decrease in revenue from 
oil and gas exports, chiefly owing to the sharp Recovery likely 
to be bumpy
India’s economy 
still on growth 
trajectory Economy lack -
lustre in Brazil
Recession prob -
ably continued 
in RussiaChina: Household consumption and 
disposable income*
5678910
2019 2020 2021 2022
Sources:  National  Bureau  of  Statistics  of  China  and  Bundes-
bank calculations. * Original data decumulated and seasonally 
adjusted.
Deutsche BundesbankThousands of yuan, per capita basis, log scale
–14%–9%
ConsumptionDisposable income
Pre-pandemic trend
(2015–2019)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
15

fall in oil and gas prices beginning in mid- 2022. 
In recent times, Russia has evidently also had to 
accept distinct price markdowns against com -
parable international oil types when selling oil. 
This is likely to be connected to the European 
Union’s oil embargo, which came into force in 
December. Amid these developments, the rou -
ble’s value has fallen significantly in recent 
months. Consumer price inflation has con -
tinued to weaken, and stood at an annual rate 
of 11.8% in January 2023. The central bank left 
its policy rate unchanged at 7.5%.
United States
Following a setback in the first half of the year, 
the US economy finished 2022 in solid shape. 
The fourth quarter saw GDP rise by 0.7% on 
the preceding quarter after price and seasonal 
adjustment. Firms’ efforts to re- stock their in -
ventories were a key factor supporting growth. 
A variety of headwinds meant that the under -
lying economic momentum remained subdued. 
Under the influence of high interest rates, the 
downturn in housing construction continued. 
Latterly, trade and industry barely expanded 
their investment at all. In addition, export busi -
ness waned somewhat, given the gloomier 
state of the global economy. Imports fell even 
more strongly, though. Consumer reticence in -
creased over the course of the quarter. Before 
that, the personal saving rate had dropped 
close to historical lows.
At the beginning of the new year, many house -
holds found their scope for spending increasing 
again markedly, partly due to the cooling of 
consumer price inflation. The annual rate of the 
consumer price index (CPI) fell to 6.4% up to 
January. In addition, many social security bene -
fits were adjusted to accommodate the soaring 
cost of living. On top of that, the robust labour 
market continued to support consumption ac -
tivity. In January, job creation proceeded briskly 
and the unemployment rate fell to its lowest 
level in the last 50 years. As a result, there was 
barely any let- up in wage growth. In view of the persistently high domestic price pressures, 
the central bank continued its policy of tighten -
ing. In December 2022 and February 2023, it 
increased the target range for the federal funds 
rate by a total of 75 basis points, making it 
4.50% to 4.75%.
Japan
The Japanese economy shifted onto a course 
of modest growth in the fourth quarter. Ac -
cording to the initial official estimate, real GDP 
in the final quarter of 2022 rose by a seasonally 
adjusted 0.2% on the previous quarter. Private 
consumption increased markedly thanks to the 
easing of the pandemic. The Japanese govern -
ment also stimulated domestic tourism by 
means of subsidies and opened up the borders 
for travellers. As a result, exports of services 
rose and total exports grew significantly. By 
contrast, imports faltered. Investment also de -
clined. With the economy in rather good shape 
overall, the seasonally adjusted unemployment 
rate fell slightly to 2.5%. The annual CPI rate 
rose to 4.0% in December, its highest figure in 
more than 30 years. The weakness of the yen 
was a key contributor to this development. At 
the end of 2022, the Japanese central bank 
widened the target band for ten- year govern -
ment bond yields under its yield curve control 
policy; it nevertheless held fast to its expansion -
ary stance overall. It remained of the opinion 
that consumer price inflation was not yet self- 
sustaining.
United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, the economy was stag -
nant at the end of the year. Output in both the 
manufacturing sector and the services sector 
– which occupies a key position in the coun -
try’s economy  – remained at their summer 
levels. Gross value added generated by con -
sumer facing services was still well short of its 
pre- pandemic level. Activity in the construction 
sector did, at least, exhibit a slight rise. In keep -Solid end to the 
year
Robust labour 
market bolster -
ing economic 
activityModerate GDP 
growth
Economy stag -
nating and infla -
tion rates still 
very highDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
16

ing with the economy’s lacklustre perform -
ance, sentiment among firms continued to de -
teriorate. The Purchasing Managers’ Index for 
the whole economy slid further below the ex -
pansion threshold in January. By contrast, the 
situation on the labour market remained fa -
vourable, although the unemployment rate 
rose slightly to 3.8% up to December. Wage 
growth weakened marginally to 5.9% on the 
year. At the beginning of 2023, consumer price 
inflation likewise fell only slightly to 10.1%. 
Against this backdrop, the Bank of England 
continued its tightening of monetary policy 
and lifted its policy rate by 50 basis points in 
both December and February, taking it to 4%.
Poland
Poland’s real GDP contracted significantly in 
the fourth quarter, dropping by 2.4% in sea -
sonally adjusted terms. Whilst industrial output 
saw a marked recovery from November on -
wards as supply chain problems eased, losses in 
purchasing power due to strong consumer 
price inflation increasingly took their toll on pri -
vate consumption. Labour market develop -
ments remained positive, however. Unemploy -
ment dropped to 2.9% in December. Against 
the backdrop of high inflation and low un -
employment, the average wage in the corpor -
ate sector rose by 10.3% on the year. Although 
the increase in consumer prices weakened 
slightly in December, especially as energy prices 
stabilised, the core rate continued upwards to 
11.5%. According to preliminary estimates, 
headline inflation rose again to 17.2% in Janu -
ary after the tax cuts for fuels expired. Expect -
ing the international setting to deteriorate, the 
central bank left its policy rates unchanged.
Macroeconomic trends in the 
euro area
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, eco -
nomic growth in the euro area largely came to 
a halt in the fourth quarter of 2022.2 Sharp price increases, in particular, were a drag on 
economic activity. Nevertheless, the euro area 
economy held up better than many had feared 
just a few weeks prior. One reason for this was 
the marked easing of the energy crisis, mainly 
owing to favourable weather conditions, sav -
ings made by enterprises and households and 
the increased supply of liquid gas. In addition, 
prices eased somewhat at upstream stages of 
production and supply chain problems con -
tinued to diminish. The impact of this could be 
observed in the motor vehicle industry in par -
ticular. Finally, in many places, fiscal relief pack -
ages partially propped up economic activity.
Private consumption declined markedly in the 
fourth quarter. Despite supportive fiscal meas -
ures, households’ purchasing power suffered Decline in eco -
nomic activity, 
with inflation 
still strong
Economic 
output  virtually 
unchanged in 
the final quarterDistinct reduc -
tion in private 
consumptionReal GDP in selected industrial countries
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Cabinet Office of Japan, 
Office for National Statistics, Statistics Poland and Bundesbank 
calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 20229095100105110Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, log scale
United KingdomUnited States
9095100105
9095100105
PolandJapan
80859095100
2 Although real GDP rose by 0.1% in seasonally adjusted 
terms, this was due, amongst other things, to GDP growth 
of 3.5% in Ireland resulting from the strategic activities of 
multinationals.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
17

from the sharp rise in consumer prices. As a re -
sult, retail sales continued to decline in price-  
adjusted terms and turnover in the hotel and 
restaurant sector fell. By contrast, new car 
registrations rose, probably owing to the im -
proved availability of vehicles. Overall weak pri -
vate consumption is in line with depressed con -
sumer confidence – which did, however, 
brighten somewhat. Households probably cut 
their energy consumption markedly owing to 
high prices, the threat of energy shortages and 
mostly mild temperatures.
Investment probably continued to rise in the 
fourth quarter, although the pace of growth 
likely declined significantly.3 Investment in ma -
chinery and equipment, in particular, is likely to 
have increased again. At the very least, the 
sales of capital goods producers in the euro 
area rose markedly in price- adjusted terms. 
Registrations of commercial motor vehicles also 
continued to recover. Investment in informa -
tion and communication technologies and in -
tellectual property is also likely to have grown 
again. By contrast, according to initial country 
data, construction investment probably de -
clined once more.
According to foreign trade statistics, euro area 
exports of goods to non- euro area countries in -
creased in the final quarter in price- adjusted 
terms after having declined in the third quarter. 
Growth was broadly based across product 
classes and was strongest among capital 
goods. Given the continued sharp rise in prices, 
there was an even larger increase in terms of 
value. This was particularly true of exports of 
goods to the United States and Switzerland, al -
though exports to the United Kingdom also in -
creased somewhat. By contrast, exports to 
China fell significantly. According to current ac -
count statistics, exports of services to non- euro 
area countries fell for the first time in just over 
two years. Imports of goods declined both in 
price- adjusted terms and in terms of value. In 
particular, considerably fewer intermediate 
goods were imported.Despite the energy crisis in Europe, manufac -
turing output rose slightly in the fourth quarter. 
Production activity was restricted further in 
energy- intensive sectors such as the chemicals 
industry, however, with output having fallen by 
just under 20% since the beginning of last year. 
By contrast, the production of capital goods in -
creased and motor vehicle production con -
tinued to close in on its pre- pandemic level as 
supply chain problems eased. Consumer goods 
production also increased again, with the 
pharmaceutical industry playing a key role in 
this regard. Capacity utilisation remained virtu -
ally unchanged between October and January, 
still slightly exceeding its long-  term average. 
The rise in industrial producer prices weakened 
considerably at the current end, but remained 
exceptionally strong at just over 20% on the 
year.
Construction activity, which is particularly sensi -
tive to interest rates, is likely to have weakened 
further in the autumn. Construction output in -
creased only slightly against the backdrop of a 
decline in the number of building permits for 
private dwellings. Complaints about shortages 
of personnel and materials subsided. Instead, 
concerns about weak demand have become 
more pressing.
It is likely that economic output in the services 
sectors barely increased in the final quarter. The 
output of services certainly remained virtually 
unchanged overall in October and November. 
Business activity in the hotel and restaurant 
sector and in real estate services declined. 
There was still a small increase in the informa -
tion and communication sector as well as in 
transport and business- related services.
Economic growth slowed in the fourth quarter 
in the vast majority of member countries. This 
was primarily down to strong inflation, the 
tense situation in the energy markets and fad -Investment likely 
up once again
Exports up 
moderately Manufacturing 
output up 
slightly
Construction 
activity increas -
ingly weaker
Expansion in the 
services sectors 
came to a 
standstill
Slowdown wide -
spread across 
member coun -
tries
3 Excluding Ireland, where the statistical recording of in -
vestment has been strongly influenced by the strategic ac -
tivities of multinationals for several years now. See Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2018).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
18

ing catch- up effects following the loosening of 
pandemic- related restrictions.
According to preliminary estimates, economic 
growth in France slowed to 0.1% by year’s end. 
Private consumption in particular showed a sig -
nificant drop. Exports also declined. By con -
trast, investment increased markedly, although 
it lost momentum. In particular, spending on 
means of transport did not maintain its high 
pace from the previous quarter. Expenditure on 
construction stagnated again. Imports recorded 
a substantial decline.
According to the statistical office’s flash esti -
mate, economic output in Italy fell slightly by 
0.1% in the fourth quarter. Industrial output de -
creased markedly, especially in several energy-  
intensive sectors. Given the erosion of their 
purchasing power, households probably cut 
back their spending significantly. There was still 
growth in the construction sector, but less than 
previously.
In Spain, preliminary estimates show GDP 
growth of 0.2%, as in the previous quarter. 
Economic momentum was thus considerably 
weaker when compared with the first half of 
2022. There was nevertheless a small increase 
in both services and manufacturing, although 
construction output fell. Private consumption 
was hampered considerably by weak purchas -
ing power and investment declined markedly. 
The slump in domestic demand was accom -
panied by a sharp decline in imports.
Economic output also increased moderately in 
Belgium, Portugal and Latvia in the fourth quar -
ter. Real GDP increased quite strongly in the 
Netherlands and – owing to the strategic activ -
ities of multinationals – very strongly in Ireland. 
By contrast, economic activity declined some -
what in Finland and significantly in Austria and 
Lithuania.
The euro area labour market remained robust 
in the fourth quarter of 2022. The unemploy -
ment rate remained at a record low of 6.6% in December. Employment increased again on the 
quarter. According to the surveys, labour short -
ages in industry and among service providers 
remained considerable, but declined some -
what. Wage growth is likely to have been 
around as strong as it was in previous quarters 
(4.5% on average year on year). While this was 
still well below inflation, it went beyond what 
would be considered compatible with price sta -
bility in the medium term given the very mod -
est productivity gains.
Euro area consumer prices increased exception -
ally sharply in the last quarter of 2022, too, ris -
ing by no less than 2.3% on the quarter in sea -Growth in the 
French economy 
slowed further
Italian economy 
showing slight 
decline in GDP
Low GDP 
growth in Spain, 
but marked 
deterioration 
in economic 
activity
Marked differ -
ences in the 
smaller member 
countriesLabour market 
remains robust, 
wage growth 
lower than 
inflation 
Inflationary 
pressures still 
very strong in 
2022 Q4Aggregate output in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 2022Real GDP, Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
log scale
80859095100105
758085909510080859095100105
Italy
SpainEuro area
France859095100105
of which:Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
19

Croatia adopts the euro
On 1  January 2023, Croatia adopted the 
euro as legal tender and became the 20th 
member of the euro area. Croatia’s journey 
to the euro began when it joined the Euro-
pean Union (EU) in 2013, pledging to adopt 
the euro and meet the required legal and 
economic convergence criteria. Joining the 
Exchange Rate Mechanism II (ERM II) in July 
2020 was an important step in this pro-
cess.1
After Croatia joined the EU, its economic 
output rose almost continuously until the 
slump triggered by the coronavirus crisis. 
This hit Croatia hard, partly because of the 
major role played by tourism in its econ-
omy. However, activity in industry, construc-
tion and information and communication 
services rebounded in the second half of 
2020. Together with the recovery in tour-ism, this provided a strong boost to growth. 
Real GDP exceeded its pre- crisis level by 
more than 10% in the third quarter of 2022.
This strong recovery also led to a signifi  cant 
improvement in the labour market situ-
ation, with the unemployment rate falling 
to 6.4% by December 2022. The rate, how-
ever, remains above pre-crisis levels and is in 
fact higher than in most other central and 
eastern European EU Member States.
Overall, Croatia’s economic output has 
grown by just under 30% since the country 
joined the EU. This corresponds to an aver-
age growth rate of 2.5% per annum. Eco-
nomic growth was also accompanied by 
signifi  cant progress toward convergence. 
Calculated at purchasing power parities, 
GDP per capita stood at 61% of the EU 
average when Croatia joined the EU, and at 
70% in 2021. This put Croatia ahead of 
Greece, for example, but signifi  cantly be-
hind Slovenia, which achieved 90% of the 
EU average in 2021.2
Suffi   cient price stability is a key criteria for 
joining the euro area. Croatia has been very 
successful in this regard for a long time. Up 
to mid- 2021, HICP infl  ation was mostly 
below 2%. This was helped by the fact that 
the Croatian central bank stabilised the ex-
change rate of the kuna against the euro. It 
was only in the wake of the economic re-
covery after the coronavirus crisis and the 
surge in energy and food prices that con-
sumer prices rose considerably, as was the 
1 This was also accompanied by a commitment to join 
the Banking Union and implement various measures in 
the areas of banking supervision, anti- money launder-
ing and the compilation of statistics. See European 
Central Bank (2020).
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022).Economic development in Croatia
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 2295100105110115120125130Quarterly
–15–10–50+5+10+15+20
Lin scale
Year-on-year change2015=100, adjusted for
seasonal and calendar effects, log scale
Real GDP
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
20

case in other European countries. In No-
vember 2022, infl  ation reached its highest 
level yet, at 13%. Although this was higher 
than the euro area average, it was lower 
than in the other central and eastern Euro-
pean EU Member States, with the exception 
of Slovenia.
Fears recently emerged that the introduc-
tion of the euro as legal tender and the 
rounding of prices in the new currency 
could lead to a further surge in prices. To 
address this problem, displaying prices in 
both currencies has been mandatory ac-
cording to the national implementation 
plan for the introduction of the euro since 
September 2022 and will remain so until 
the end of 2023.3 A study by the Croatian 
central bank concludes that converting 
prices to “attractive” fi  gures in euro could 
lead to additional price increases that would 
strengthen consumer price infl  ation by up 
to 0.5 percentage point. However, in the 
current inflationary environment, such 
prices could also be achieved within the 
framework of regular price adjustments.4 
The Eurostat fl  ash estimate put consumer 
price infl  ation in January 2023 at 12.7%, 
just as in December 2022.
Joining the euro area and simultaneously 
becoming part of the Schengen area should 
boost Croatia’s competitiveness and eco-
nomic growth over the medium term. Trav-
ellers from the euro area, who account for 
a large share of the tourist industry’s clients, 
will no longer have to pay for currency ex-
change or border controls. However, the 
real economic impact of the introduction of 
the euro should not be overestimated ei-
ther, as Croatia had already effectively sta-
bilised the exchange rate with the euro be-
forehand.
Addressing the Croatian economy’s struc-
tural problems will be the more pressing issue. These include its heavy reliance on 
tourism, which makes a direct contribution 
to GDP of more than one- tenth, and an in-
direct contribution of one- quarter.5 There is 
also a pronounced shortage of skilled work-
ers. The free mobility of labour within the 
European Union triggered a strong wave of 
emigration, which saw the working age 
population decline from over 2.8 million in 
2015 to under 2.6 million in 2021.
In addition, public sector capacity to absorb 
EU funding should be increased, especially 
in the area of public investment manage-
ment.6 However, supply chain adjustments 
are likely to provide Croatia with opportun-
3 See Hrvatska Narodna Banka (2020) and Croatian 
Parliament (2022).
4 According to the study, rounding could increase 
prices for food by up to 2.2%, for non- alcoholic bever-
ages by 2.6% and for alcoholic beverages by 1.8%. 
See: Hrvatska Narodna Banka (2022).
5 See International Monetary Fund (2021).
6 See International Monetary Fund (2021).Unemployment and consumer prices
in Croatia
Sources:  Eurostat  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 ILO  defini-
tion, seasonally adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 202205101520
–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14Unemployment rate1
Enlarged scale
HICP
Year-on-year change%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
21

sonally adjusted terms as measured by the Har -
monised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP). Both 
energy and food prices continued to rise 
sharply. Inflationary pressure on services actu -
ally intensified, with only industrial goods see -
ing it ease somewhat. The annual inflation rate 
reached a new high of 10% in the fourth quar -
ter. The core inflation rate did the same, rising 
considerably to 5.1%.
As a whole, the year 2022 was characterised by 
exceptionally strong inflation. The first signs 
were already evident in the summer of 2021, 
when the inflation rate exceeded 2% for the 
first time in a long period. The unexpectedly 
rapid recovery following the pandemic- induced 
economic slump initially pushed energy prices 
up. In addition, demand for other industrial 
goods rose sharply worldwide, as many ser -
vices had only been available to a limited ex -
tent owing to the pandemic. This surge in de -
mand was not always directly met, supply 
chains already disrupted by the pandemic con -tinued to come under pressure and prices at 
the upstream stages increased considerably. 
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine pushed energy 
prices up further, especially in Europe. This also 
had an effect on food prices and intensified 
cost pressures in industry and for service pro -
viders. As a result of all these developments, 
consumer prices rose by an average of 8.4% in 
2022, compared with 2.6% in 2021. Inflation 
increased considerably in all euro area coun -
tries. It grew particularly strongly in countries 
with a high dependence on energy imports. In 
some cases, measures to ease the burden on 
consumers slowed the rise in prices. The high -
est inflation rates were recorded in the Baltic 
countries, at almost 20%. France recorded the 
lowest rate at 5.9%, mainly owing to govern -
ment measures to dampen the rise in energy 
prices.
Eurostat’s estimate put euro area inflation at 
8.5% in January 2023, representing a 0.7 per -
centage point decline compared with Decem -Historically high 
inflation rates in 
2022ities for investment by EU trading partners. 
Capital market reforms would be helpful in 
making it more attractive to foreign invest-
ors.7
Funds from the Recovery and Resilience 
Plan under the European Union’s NextGen-
erationEU programme should help tackle 
the structural problems. The national imple-
mentation plan approved by the European 
Commission and the European Council pro-
vides for grants of up to €6.3 billion for 
Croatia by 2026. This comes to around 11% 
of the country’s annual GDP . Of this 
amount, €2.2 billion has already been paid 
out. The funds are to be used to invest in 
the energy transition and in digital trans-
formation.8 This is also likely to ease the 
burden on public fi  nances. Although the 
annual budget defi  cit has remained below 
3% of GDP of late (except in 2020, during the coronavirus crisis), government debt 
stood at over 75% of GDP in 2021.
7 See OECD (2021).
8 Croatia has a fairly good energy supply. 70% of its 
electricity is already produced from renewable energy 
sources. Moreover, since 2021, it has had an LNG ter-
minal that can cover the country’s entire gas needs.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
22

ber. However, this figure is subject to substan -
tial uncertainty, as the Federal Statistical Office 
was unable to provide an estimate for Ger -
many due to a technical malfunction. There -
fore, the preliminary euro area result included a 
value estimated for Germany by Eurostat. Ac -
cording to the flash estimate, inflation in the 
euro area weakened mainly as a result of lower 
energy prices. By contrast, the core rate re -
mained at the unusually high level of 5.2%. 
The final HICP figures will be published on 
23  February together with the new HICP 
weights for 2023. The latter are generally de -
rived from the consumption structure of 2022.4 
It is not yet possible to assess the extent to 
which the reporting of the inflation rate was in -
fluenced by the changed weights. The new 
country weights for 2023, including the newest 
euro area member, Croatia, will also first be 
published alongside the final HICP figures for 
January.
Economic output in the euro area is unlikely to 
rise much in the current quarter, either. Accord -
ing to surveys, sentiment has improved in all 
sectors and among consumers, and expect -
ations have brightened. The situation in the en -
ergy markets is much less tense than it was just 
a few weeks ago. It is highly likely that a supply 
shortage can be avoided this winter. The labour 
market is still in good shape and the employ -
ment outlook is still tilted to the upside. Never -
theless, there is some evidence against a 
marked improvement in economic activity in 
the short term. Consumer price inflation has 
only eased slightly so far and consumer confi -
dence therefore remains very low. For enter -
prises, while the previously very pronounced 
shortage of materials and labour has eased 
considerably, the lack of demand has become a 
more pressing issue. Stronger impetus from outside the euro area is not expected for the 
time being. Moreover, uncertainty remains high 
owing to the ongoing war in Ukraine and the 
medium-  term outlook for energy supply.According to the 
flash estimate, 
price dynamics 
weakened in 
January due to 
energy but 
remained 
high for core 
components  
No economic 
upturn expected 
in the current 
quarter
List of references
Croatian Parliament (2022), Croatian Parliament passes law on adoption of the euro as legal 
tender  , May 2022, https://www.sabor.hr/en/press/news/croatian-parliament-passes-law-adoption-  
euro-legal-tenderContributions to the euro area
inflation rate (HICP)
Sources: Eurostat, ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 20232024681012
–++++++
Food
Services
Industrial products excluding energy
Energy
HICP (%)Contributions in percentage points
Sentiment indicators for the euro area*
Sources: European Commission and Bundesbank calculations. 
* Deviations from the respective average since 2000.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 20236050403020100102030
––––––+++Seasonally adjusted
Manufacturing
Services sectorConstruction
Consumer
4 On top of this, there will also be a larger adjustment for 
Germany. See p. 57 of this report.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
23

Deutsche Bundesbank (2022), The central and eastern European EU Member States between the 
coronavirus crisis and the war in Ukraine, Monthly Report, August 2022, pp. 20-22.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national economic 
statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65-78
European Central Bank (2020), Communiqué on Croatia, July 2020, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/
press/pr/date/2020/html/ecb.pr200710_1~88c0f764e7.en.html
Hrvatska Narodna Banka (2022), Possible Effects of the Rounding of Food Product Prices on Infla -
tion when Adopting the Euro, December 2022, https://www.hnb.hr/en/-/possible-effects-of-the-  
rounding-of-food-product-prices-on-inflation-when-adopting-the-euro
Hrvatska Narodna Banka (2020), The National Plan for the Changeover from the Croatian Kuna to 
the Euro under Public Consultation, November 2020, https://www.hnb.hr/en/-/the-national-  
plan-for-the-changeover-from-the-croatian-kuna-to-the-euro-under-public-consultation
International Monetary Fund (2023), World Economic Outlook Update: Inflation Peaking amid Low 
Growth, January 2023.
International Monetary Fund (2021), REPUBLIC OF CROATIA Staff Report for the 2021 Article IV 
Consultation, IMF Country Report, No 21/ 205, September 2021.
OECD (2021), OECD Capital Market Review Croatia: Capital market reforms for recovery and im -
proved business dynamics in Croatia, OECD Capital Market Series.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
24

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
The Governing Council of the European Central 
Bank (ECB) decided at its December 2022 meet -
ing to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 
50 basis points and, based on the substantial 
upward revision to the inflation outlook, com -
municated that it expects to raise them further. 
The Governing Council judges that interest rates 
will still have to rise significantly at a steady 
pace to reach levels that are sufficiently restrict -
ive to ensure a timely return of inflation to the 
2% medium- term target. Keeping interest rates 
at restrictive levels will over time reduce infla -
tion by dampening demand and will also guard 
against the risk of a persistent upward shift in 
inflation expectations.
February 2023 saw the Governing Council raise 
the key ECB interest rates yet again by 50 basis 
points. That decision took the interest rate on 
the deposit facility – currently the most import -
ant rate for money market rates – to the cur -
rent level of 2.5% and the interest rates on the 
main refinancing operations and the marginal 
lending facility to 3% and 3.25%, respectively. 
The Governing Council furthermore reiterated 
its commitment to staying the course in raising 
interest rates significantly at a steady pace. In 
view of the underlying inflation pressures, the 
Governing Council intends to raise interest 
rates by another 50 basis points in March and 
will then evaluate the subsequent path of its 
monetary policy. In any event, future policy rate 
decisions will continue to be data- dependent 
and follow a meeting- by- meeting approach.
The Governing Council also used its December 
2022 meeting to announce principles for nor -
malising the Eurosystem’s monetary policy 
securities holdings. The key ECB interest rates 
are the primary tool for setting the monetary policy stance. From the beginning of March 
2023 onwards, the asset purchase programme 
(APP) portfolio will decline at a measured and 
predictable pace, as the Eurosystem will not re -
invest all of the principal payments from matur -
ing securities. The decline will amount to €15 
billion per month on average until the end of 
the second quarter of 2023 and its subsequent 
pace will be determined over time. The Gov -
erning Council will regularly reassess the pace 
of the APP portfolio reduction to ensure it re -
mains consistent with the overall monetary pol -
icy strategy and stance, to preserve market 
functioning, and to maintain firm control over 
short-  term money market conditions. At its 
February meeting, the Governing Council con -
firmed these parameters and decided on the 
technical modalities.1 Reinvestments will be 
conducted broadly in line with current practice. 
The remaining reinvestment amounts will be al -
located proportionally to the share of redemp -
tions across each constituent programme of 
the APP .
Lastly, the Governing Council announced in De -
cember 2022 that it intends to review its oper -
ational framework for steering short- term inter -
est rates by the end of 2023. This will provide ECB Governing 
Council decides 
to raise key 
interest rates by 
a further 50 
basis points in 
December …
… and again in 
February
ECB Governing 
Council decides 
to reduce 
monetary  policy 
securities 
holdings Review of 
framework for 
steering interest 
rates
Money market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. • = Aver-
age 1 to 10 February 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022 20230.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
–+++++++% p.a.
Marginal lending rate
Three-month EURIBOR1Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rate
€STR1
1 For further details, see European Central Bank (2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
25

Money market management and liquidity needs
In the reporting period from 2  November 
2022 to 7 February 2023,1 excess liquidity in 
the Eurosystem decreased signifi  cantly by a 
total of €578.5 billion to an average of 
€4,079.2 billion. This decline was mainly 
driven by repayments under the third series of 
targeted longer- term refi  nancing operations 
(TLTRO III). Following the repayment in 
Novem ber, average excess liquidity initially 
only fell by €89.5 billion to €4,568.1 billion in 
the seventh reserve maintenance period of 
2022 (November- December), and, after the 
December repayment, decreased by a further 
€488.9 billion in the eighth reserve mainten-
ance period of the year. The decline in total 
liquidity also led to the use of the deposit fa-
cility falling by €469.9 billion to €4,051.6 bil-
lion.
Compared with the sixth reserve maintenance 
period of 2022, liquidity needs in the euro 
area stemming from autonomous factors (see 
the table below) fell by €249.4 billion to an 
average of €1,999.6 billion in the eighth re-serve maintenance period of that year. This 
counteracted an even sharper decline in ex-
cess liquidity. This development was chiefl  y at-
tributable to a signifi  cant decrease in govern-
ment deposits, which fell by €163.9 billion to 
€372.8 billion (with a decline of €49.8 billion 
to €77.8 billion taking place in Germany). 
Moreover, the reduction in the combined 
total of net foreign reserve assets and other 
factors, which are considered together owing 
to liquidity- neutral valuation effects, contrib-
uted to liquidity needs decreasing by €87.4 
billion. Other factors comprise non- monetary 
policy deposits, which include deposits by for-
eign central banks, amongst other things. The 
steep decline in net banknote issuance from 
the previous reporting period ground to a 
halt, which is likely to be partly attributable to 
1 Here, the averages of the eighth reserve mainten-
ance period of 2022 (December 2022- February 2023) 
are compared with the averages of the sixth reserve 
maintenance period of 2022 (September- November 
2022).
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2022 2022/2023
2 Nov.
to
20 Dec.21 Dec.
to
7 Feb.
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) +   2.9 –   4.8
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  44.2 + 119.7
3. Net foreign assets 1 +   4.6 –  20.0
4. Other factors 1 +  37.5 +  65.3
Total +  89.2 + 160.2
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations –   2.1 –   0.7
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations – 171.7 – 643.8
c) Other operations –   2.2 –   4.0
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility +   0.0 +   0.1
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  31.5 + 469.9
Total – 207.5 – 178.5
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) – 118.2 –  18.2
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –   2.3 –   1.4
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
26

the seasonal effect of the Christmas period. 
Net banknote issuance rose by €1.9 billion to 
€1,565.6 billion (in Germany, it increased by 
€3.4 billion to €898.0 billion). Over the period 
under review, the minimum reserve require-
ment in the Eurosystem climbed by €3.7 bil-
lion to €168.1 billion, which also marginally 
increased the need for central bank liquidity. 
In Germany, the reserve requirement went up 
by €2.2 billion to €46.5 billion.
Following the discontinuation of net pur-
chases under the asset purchase programmes 
as of 1  July 2022, only reinvestments have 
been made under the asset purchase pro-
gramme (APP) and the pandemic emergency 
purchase programme (PEPP). Overall, i.e. also 
taking account of the discontinued pro-
grammes, holdings of monetary policy assets 
decreased by €6.1 billion during the period 
under review as a result of revaluations and 
short maturities. As at 10 February 2023, the 
balance sheet holdings of the asset purchase 
programmes amounted to €4,945.2 billion 
(see the adjacent table). The average out-
standing tender volume in the euro area de-
creased sharply by €818.3 billion to €1,304.5 
billion during the observation period. Two of 
the TLTRO III special redemption dates that 
were agreed upon in October fell during the 
period under review (value dates: 23 Novem-
ber 2022 and 25 January 2023). Repayments 
totalling €296.3 billion and €62.7 billion were 
made in November 2022 and January 2023 
respectively. In addition, regular repayments 
with a value date of 21 December 2022 were 
made in the amount of €447.5 billion. At the 
same time, the outstanding tender volume 
decreased by a further €51.9 billion when the 
TLTRO III.2 operations matured in December. 
Moreover, during the period under review, 
liquidity amounting to €1.1 billion was repaid 
at maturity under the pandemic emergency 
longer- term refi  nancing operations (PELTROs). 
As a result, no more repayments are outstand-
ing. The volume in the regular main refi  nan-
cing operations and three- month tenders re-
mained at a very low level, with a slight rise in 
demand over the year- end period. In Ger-
many, these early repayments caused the out-
standing volume of all refi  nancing operations to fall by €169.0 billion to an average of 
€232.4 billion at last count. German banks’ 
share in the outstanding volume of Euro-
system refi  nancing operations was thus 
equivalent to around 17.8%, which was 
1.1  percentage points less than in the 
September- November 2022 reserve mainten-
ance period.
After the Eurosystem raised its key interest 
rates by 75 basis points in the seventh reserve 
maintenance period of 2022 and by 50 basis 
points in the eighth reserve maintenance 
period of 2022, there was a corresponding 
rise in overnight rates in the euro money mar-
ket (see the chart on p. 28).Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as at
10 Feb. 2023
Active programmes 1
PSPP – 3.3 2,590.5
CBPP3 + 2.2 301.6
CSPP – 0.4 343.4
ABSPP – 1.6 20.8
PEPP – 2.6 1,686.0
Completed programmes 
SMP – 0.4 2.9
CBPP1 + 0.0 0.0
CBPP2 + 0.0 0.0
1 Changes due to net purchases, maturities, reinvestments 
and amortisation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankAutonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing  (liquidity-absorbing)  factors  are  preceded  by  a  positive 
(negative)  sign.  1 Including  end-of-quarter  liquidity-neutral 
valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 20221,8001,5001,20090060030003006009001,200
––––––++++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
27

Over the period under review, the unsecured 
euro short- term rate (€STR) mirrored the pol-
icy rate increases almost exactly, standing at 
1.40% and 1.90% on average in the respect-
ive reserve maintenance periods. The average 
spread between €STR and the deposit facility 
rate widened by 1 basis point to 10 basis 
points during the period under review. Fol-
lowing a substantial increase in turnover in 
the preceding observation period, average 
turnover rose by a further €2.7 billion to €66.5 
billion in the seventh reserve maintenance 
period of 2022. There was a noticeable de-
cline to €57.5 billion in the eighth reserve 
maintenance period of 2022, which was 
driven by lower levels of liquidity on public 
holidays and the last day of the year. At the end of the year, turnover fell to €21.9 billion 
and €STR decreased by 1.5 basis points to 
1.89%. However, the market returned to its 
usual level the next trading day.
In the secured money market, a signifi  cant 
rise in both transaction volumes and interest 
rates was seen on the GC Pooling trading 
platform. As a result, the spreads between 
both baskets and the deposit facility rate have 
been narrowing again since the summer of 
2022. In the ECB basket, overnight trades 
were executed at an average of 1.37% in the 
seventh reserve maintenance period of 2022 
and an average of 1.86% in the eighth reserve 
maintenance period of 2022, with the latter 
average being distorted by the decline on the 
last day of the year. Excluding this end- of- year 
effect, the average rate would have been 
1.91% in the eighth reserve maintenance 
period of 2022. This would have decreased 
the 13 basis point spread to the deposit facil-
ity rate in the preceding period to 9 basis 
points. In the ECB EXTended basket, which 
has a broader selection of securities with 
lower rating requirements for concluding repo 
transactions, overnight trading took place at a 
rate of 1.45% in the seventh reserve mainten-
ance period of 2022 and 1.96% in the eighth 
reserve maintenance period of 2022. No 
transactions took place on the last day of the 
year, meaning that the average was not dis-
torted downwards. Following low turnovers 
of €0.7 billion in the ECB basket and €2.2 bil-
lion in the ECB EXTended basket during the 
seventh reserve maintenance period of 2022, 
liquidity- driven secured turnover on the GC 
Pooling platform rose substantially in the 
eighth reserve maintenance period of the 
year, to €4.1 billion and €3.9 billion respect-
ively, although markedly lower turnover was 
recorded on public holidays and the last day 
of the year.
For the fi  rst reserve maintenance period of 
2023, which is still ongoing, it can be seen 
that the rise in the Eurosystem’s key interest 
rates is, once again, being almost fully passed 
on to the observed overnight rates.Deposit facility rate, money market rates 
and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Central 
bank balance minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the 
deposit facility. 2 With effect from 14 September 2022, the ECB 
Governing Council set the multiplier for the exemption allowance 
to zero.
Deutsche BundesbankSep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb.
2022 20230.500.51.01.52.02.5
–+++++Daily data
% p.a.
€ bn
01,0002,0003,0004,0005,000Excess liquidity1
Mean value for the reserve maintenance periodECB EXTended basket€STR
STOXX GC Pooling Overnight
GermanyEuro areaAllowances (two-tier system) 2ECB basketDeposit facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
28

information regarding the endpoint of the bal -
ance sheet normalisation process.
The December 2022 decisions came against 
the backdrop of inflation that is still far too 
high and projected to stay above the target for 
too long. Eurosystem staff once again signifi -
cantly revised their inflation projections up -
wards in December. They saw average inflation 
reaching 8.4% in 2022 before decreasing to 
6.3% in 2023. Inflation is projected to average 
3.4% one year later, in 2024, and still come to 
2.3% one year after that, in 2025. The Govern -
ing Council assessed that the risks to the infla -
tion outlook were primarily on the upside in 
December. In February 2023, the Governing 
Council noted that the risks to the inflation 
outlook had become more balanced, especially 
in the near term, but were still tilted to the up -
side. Price pressures remained strong despite a 
decline in inflation to 8.5%, with the decline 
being mainly attributable to a renewed sharp 
drop in energy prices. Inflation excluding en -ergy and food remained at 5.2% in January. 
Other indicators of underlying inflation were 
also still high.
The euro short- term rate (€STR) once again 
moved almost entirely in step with the two key 
interest rate hikes totalling 100 basis points 
during the reporting period, closing the period 
under review at 2.401%. The three-  month 
EURIBOR likewise continued to rise significantly, 
ending the period at 2.654%, up by around 85 
basis points on mid- November.
Money market forward rates are continuing to 
signal further key interest rate increases even 
after the Governing Council’s February meet -
ing. For the next monetary policy meeting in 
March, market participants are almost fully pri -
cing in an interest rate step of 50 basis points. 
The money market forward curve is currently 
expected to peak in mid- 2023 at around 3.5%, 
which is significantly (roughly 60 basis points) 
up on mid- November. The Governing Council’s Inflation still far 
too high and 
projected to 
stay above tar -
get for too long€STR rises in line 
with policy rate 
hikes
Money market 
forward rates 
pricing in further 
interest rate 
stepsOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2305001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,0005,5006,0006,5007,0007,500€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period1
Third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III)
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II)
First series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO I)Pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs)
Additional longer-term refinancing operationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
29

statement following the December 2022 meet -
ing signalling further key interest rate increases 
at a steady pace is likely to have played a key 
role in this regard. Given the high uncertainty, 
however, the forward curve remained highly 
volatile, fluctuating primarily in response to in -
coming economic data as well as communica -
tions by the major central banks, the latter 
being used by market participants to continu -
ally reassess the future path of inflation.
The ECB Survey of Monetary Analysts (SMA) 
conducted ahead of the February meeting also 
shows that more interest rate hikes are ex -
pected. Respondents to the survey conducted 
prior to the February meeting were likewise ex -
pecting a median interest rate hike of 50 basis 
points in March plus an interest rate step of 25 
basis points in May, which would take the 
interest rate on the deposit facility to 3.25%.
Monetary policy securities holdings have seen 
little change since mid-  November. Aggregate 
holdings reported under both purchase pro -
grammes are currently being influenced only by 
the smoothing over time of reinvestments and 
by the use of amortised cost accounting.2 On 
10 February, the Eurosystem was holding assets 
totalling €3,256.3 billion as part of the APP 
(see the box entitled “Money market manage -
ment and liquidity needs” on pp. 26 ff. for a 
breakdown of the holdings by individual pro -
gramme). The Eurosystem will not reinvest all 
of the principal payments from maturing secur -
ities as from the beginning of March, which 
means the APP portfolio will decline gradually. 
Asset holdings reported under the pandemic 
emergency purchase programme (PEPP) came 
to €1,686 billion on the same day. The Govern -
ing Council will continue to apply flexibility 
with regard to PEPP reinvestments, with a view 
to countering risks to the monetary policy 
transmission mechanism related to the pan -
demic.
Excess liquidity has fallen significantly since mid- 
November, dropping by around €575 billion to 
€4,157 billion at the end of the period under re -view. The decline is mainly attributable to large 
voluntary repayments under the third series of 
targeted longer- term refinancing operations 
(TLTRO III). Modification of the TLTRO terms and 
conditions in October created noticeably 
stronger incentives to make voluntary early re -
payments. On aggregate, banks repaid around 
€806 billion ahead of schedule during the 
period under review. However, developments in 
autonomous factors had a counter-  effect on 
excess liquidity (see the box on pp. 26 ff.).
Monetary developments in 
the euro area
With the monetary policy stance tightening, 
growth in the broad monetary aggregate M3 
weakened sharply in the fourth quarter of 
2022, with the annual growth rate falling sig -
nificantly to 4.1% at the end of December. 
Tighter monetary policy drove up money and 
capital market yields, increasing the opportun -
ity costs of holding money. This prompted in -
vestors to shift their portfolios both out of and 
within the monetary aggregate M3. From the 
perspective of the counterparts, a sharp decline 
in loans to the non-  financial private sector 
crimped monetary growth as uncertainty sur -
rounding the economic outlook plus higher 
financing costs in particular dampened enter -
prises’ and households’ demand for loans. 
Credit growth is also likely to have been sub -
dued by the ongoing tightening of banks’ lend -
ing policies, which the latest Bank Lending Sur -
vey (BLS) found to have continued into the re -
porting quarter in the form of more restrictive 
credit standards. The banks surveyed by the 
BLS, meanwhile, mainly put the tightening 
down to what they saw as an increase in credit 
risk.
In terms of money holdings, there were con -
tinued portfolio shifts out of low- interest highly More interest 
rate hikes 
expected, SMA 
shows
Little change 
in securities 
holdings
Excess liquidity 
down markedlyMonetary 
growth down 
in Q4
2 In particular, the difference between the acquisition and 
redemption value is amortised over the security’s residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and measured 
at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
30

liquid deposits into higher-  interest deposits 
with somewhat longer investment horizons 
(see the table on p. 32). In a particularly striking 
development, overnight deposits declined 
sharply, registering their first decline overall 
since spring 2011.3 The accumulation of cash 
holdings came to a standstill as well. Instead, 
investors – first and foremost non- financial cor -
porations and households – added significantly 
to their stocks of short- term time deposits. 
Moreover, France saw substantial inflows into 
money market funds, a broadly popular form 
of investment in that country that had fallen 
out of favour during the low interest rate 
period. With market rates picking up as the 
Eurosystem raised its key interest rates, invest -
ments like money market funds and short- term 
time deposits came back into vogue as a source 
of returns compared with overnight deposits.
Overall, however, the strong build- up of other 
short- term deposits failed to offset the sharp 
decline in overnight deposits, lowering the 
monetary aggregate M3 on balance. In part, 
this was because private non- banks invested to 
a degree in longer-  term MFI sector liabilities, 
which do not count towards the money supply. 
Their demand centred around longer- term 
bank debt securities because of the signifi -
cantly superior yields they offered over de -
posits.
Besides the increase in opportunity costs, an -
other key factor driving the decline in the 
money supply in the fourth quarter was the 
sharp drop in loans to the euro area private 
sector. The turnaround was particularly pro -
nounced in the case of loans to non- financial 
corporations, where the strong flows of net 
lending observed previously came almost to a 
standstill in the fourth quarter. Net lending 
contracted throughout the euro area in a re -
flection of two factors: first, the negative im -
pact on loan demand of the increased cost of Shifts out of 
overnight 
deposits in 
particular  into 
short- term time 
deposits
Banks’ longer- 
term funding 
instruments in 
demand as well
Net lending to 
non- financial 
corporations 
came to a 
standstill owing 
to demand and 
supply- side 
factor sMonetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 20222024681012
–++++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14
02468
++++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining 
counterpartsLonger-term 
financial liabilities1Net external assets
Credit to the private
sector2
Financial corporations3
Non-financial corporations4
Households5Contribution of components 
in percentage points
Securities-based lending to general governmentPercentage change
in M3
Percentage change
in M3
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector2Contribution of counterparts in percentage points
Contribution of sectors in percentage points
3 The scale of this decline is distorted to a degree by a one- 
off effect. A clearing house placed a large temporary de -
posit with the Eurosystem in September and reversed it 
again in October; see European Central Bank (2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
31

funds and the uncertain outlook for the econ -
omy; and second, the continued tightening of 
credit standards identified by the BLS is also 
likely to be gradually having a dampening ef -
fect on lending. The downward movement was 
amplified by a one- off effect from Germany. 
The second and third quarters saw the KfW 
Group grant large- volume, government-  
guaranteed loans to enterprises from the en -
ergy sector to safeguard the energy supply, 
some of which were repaid in the fourth quar -
ter (for further details see p. 35). These devel -
opments depressed the annual growth rate of 
loans to non- financial corporations in the euro 
area by 2½ percentage points in the quarter 
under review to 6.3% at year- end.4
Responses by banks participating in the BLS 
substantiate the view that both a decline in 
loan demand and a decrease in the loan supply 
were behind the weakening of credit growth. 
For the first time since the first quarter of 2021, 
they saw firms’ demand for loans decrease in 
the fourth quarter of 2022. BLS banks regarded 
the increase in the general level of interest rates 
and the decrease in financing needs related to 
fixed investment as the main factors dampen -
ing demand. Loan demand was impacted posi -
tively by higher financing needs related to in -
ventories and working capital, though the im -
pact here was smaller than in the previous two quarters. BLS banks also observed a decrease in 
demand for long- term loans, while demand for 
short- term loans remained broadly unchanged.
With regard to lending policy, BLS data show 
that euro area banks tightened their credit 
standards again in the fourth quarter. The sur -
veyed banks once again cited elevated credit 
risk as the main reason for these adjustments. 
In particular, they highlighted the deteriorated 
economic situation, the economic outlook as 
well as sector- specific and firm- specific factors. 
Regarding their own behaviour, banks reported 
a further decrease in their risk tolerance. In 
addition, the higher cost of funds and balance 
sheet constraints on the bank side also contrib -
uted to the tightening of credit standards.
In the case of loans to households, the slow -
down observed since the second quarter of 
2022 continued to intensify (see the chart on 
p. 33). In particular, issuance of loans for house 
purchase, which is the most significant com -
ponent, fell sharply in the fourth quarter. Their 
annual growth rate declined to 4.4% at the 
end of the year, thus standing 1  percentage Decrease in 
demand due to 
higher rates and 
lower financing 
needs related to 
fixed investment, 
BLS banks reportAccording to 
BLS, credit 
standards in 
corporate busi -
ness tightened 
again
Loans to house -
holds for house 
purchase again 
weaker than 
in previous 
quarters  …Consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q3 2022 Q4 2022
Holdings against central government 2 – 115.0 41.0
Monetary aggregate M3 341.3 –  78.7
Components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 128.0 – 358.9
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) 182.4 225.3
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 30.9 54.8
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities –   4.1 51.3
Capital and reserves 45.2 7.8
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities –  49.3 43.6Assets Q3 2022 Q4 2022
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 223.9 –  3.9
Loans 233.6 – 36.0
Loans, adjusted 1 238.0 5.5
Securities –  9.7 32.1
Credit to general government 
in the euro area – 36.4 45.8
Loans 1.9 4.8
Securities – 38.3 41.0
Net external assets – 26.3 47.3
Other counterparts of M3 60.9 – 75.7
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche Bundesbank
4 The annual growth rate was also dampened by a base ef -
fect. Lending to non- financial corporations was unusually 
high in the fourth quarter of 2021 because of the end of 
the reference period for obtaining special interest rate con -
ditions in the TLTRO III operations.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
32

point lower than in the previous year despite 
the high level of inflation, which also affected 
construction prices. A major factor behind this 
decline is the development of interest rates on 
loans for house purchase, which had risen by 
1½ percentage points over the same period. 
The BLS banks also observed a considerable 
slowdown in the demand for housing loans in 
the fourth quarter. They attributed this to the 
higher interest rate level, lower consumer con -
fidence, and clouded outlook in the housing 
market.
Similarly to loans to enterprises, the BLS indi -
cated that credit standards for loans to house -
holds for house purchase were also tightened 
again mainly as a result of elevated credit risk. 
This was attributable not only to the deterior -
ation in the general economic situation and the 
bleaker outlook in the housing market, but also 
to the decline in borrowers’ creditworthiness. 
In addition, some banks stated that other fac -
tors relevant for this tightening were reduced 
risk tolerance, higher cost of funds, and greater 
balance sheet constraints.
Net growth in consumer credit and other lend -
ing to households persisted at a low level in the 
fourth quarter of 2022. For the same period, 
the banks surveyed by the BLS reported a de -
cline in newly negotiated consumer credit and 
other lending. According to the assessments by 
the BLS banks, the reasons for the decline in 
demand were, in particular, the higher general 
interest rate level, the decrease in consumer 
confidence, and a lower propensity to pur -
chase. The respondent banks also reported that 
they had tightened their credit standards for 
consumer credit and other lending. As was the 
case for loans for house purchase, they attrib -
uted this mainly to their perception of in -
creased credit risk.
While lending saw hardly any expansion in the 
fourth quarter, securitised lending had a larger 
positive effect on monetary growth. The Euro -
system only reinvested principal payments, hav -
ing discontinued its net purchases of govern -ment and corporate bonds in mid- 2022. Euro 
area commercial banks, however, added to 
their holdings of securities. Amongst other fac -
tors, this reflected improved risk assessments in 
the capital market due to positive economic 
developments.5… and credit 
standards tight -
ened again 
according to BLS
Net growth in 
consumer credit 
and other lend -
ing to house -
holds at a low 
level
Monetary 
growth sup -
ported by 
inflows to 
securitised 
 lendingMFI loans to the private non-financial 
sector in the euro area*
20020406080100120140
–+++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank... France
... Italy... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
020406080 To households3To non-financial corporations1
Total2
5 An additional role was played by the comprehensive pur -
chases of loan securitisations. In the fourth quarter of 
2022, the banking sector took larger volumes of loans 
from their balance sheets, securitised them, and then par -
tially repurchased these securitisations. On the consoli -
dated balance sheet of the MFI sector, this is reflected in a 
difference between the adjusted and unadjusted loans to 
private non- MFIs as well as in an increase in securitised 
lending to private non- MFIs by the MFI sector (see the 
table on p. 32).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
33

In addition to net purchases of securities, in -
flows of funds from abroad supported monet -
ary growth in the final quarter of the year. 
Against the background of slightly lower prices 
for energy and commodity imports, the euro 
area’s current account balance vis- à- vis the rest 
of the world recovered and achieved a surplus 
in November. This contributed to perceptible 
growth in the MFI sector’s net external pos -
ition. Nevertheless, it remained lower than the 
high levels seen in 2019, i.e. before the out -
break of the COVID-  19 pandemic. The financial 
account provided only weak positive impetus. 
Both residents and non- residents sold off secur -
ities from issuers in the respective other cur -
rency area on balance.German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 domestic customers
In contrast to the strong expansion of deposit 
business in the previous quarter, domestic cus -
tomers’ bank deposits grew only moderately in 
the fourth quarter. As was the case in the euro 
area as a whole, short- term time deposits re -
munerated at close- to- market interest rates 
once again saw significant growth. However, 
at the same time, overnight deposits and short- 
term savings deposits decreased considerably. 
It appears that investors are trying to benefit 
from the higher interest rates in the money 
market by rebalancing into time deposits. Dur -
ing the quarter under review, such behaviour 
was particularly evident among households 
and non- financial corporations. This develop -
ment was driven by the fact that the interest 
rates on deposits with maturities of up to two 
years have risen significantly more sharply than 
those on overnight deposits and short- term 
savings deposits (see the adjacent chart). Re -
gardless of the current interest rate conditions, 
domestic insurance corporations and pension 
funds continued to reduce their long- term 
bank deposits, as they have been doing for 
more than seven years now.
In the fourth quarter, German banks’ lending 
business with domestic customers grew at a 
considerably weaker pace than in the previous 
quarters. However, it should be taken into ac -
count that the growth in loans to domestic 
non- banks had been exceptionally strong in the 
two preceding quarters due to the impact of 
the energy crisis and the government stabilisa -
tion measures. In this context, the current de -
velopments represent a countermovement to a 
certain degree. Alongside the loans to the do -
mestic private sector, German banks also 
granted loans to domestic general government 
again for the first time in more than four quar -
ters. Here, in addition to granting loans, they 
also increased their securities- based lending to 
general government.Recovery in 
current  account 
balance sup -
ports MFI sec -
tor’s net exter -
nal positionDeposit business 
characterised by 
rising interest 
rates and 
rebalancing 
Lending business 
with non- banks 
significantly 
weakerInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 202210123
–+++% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits 
redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
34

The significant slowdown in lending to the do -
mestic private sector was mainly attributable to 
loans to non- financial corporations, which saw 
hardly any net growth during the reporting 
quarter. This was due to short-  term loans de -
clining sharply on balance. By contrast, 
medium- term and long- term loans to non-  
financial corporations continued to grow mark -
edly in net terms. However, this growth was 
considerably weaker than it had been in the 
preceding quarters.
The current weak growth in loans to non-  
financial corporations is a reflection of multiple 
factors. Alongside the tighter financing condi -
tions and the uncertain macroeconomic envir -
onment –  which, in and of itself, dampened 
the propensity to invest amongst enterprises – 
it was also largely a result of a one- off effect. 
This was caused, in particular, by the Federal 
Government’s purchase of equity capital in two 
major energy supply companies, which was 
conducted to ensure the continuity of the en -
ergy supply in Germany. Due to these govern -
ment capital injections, parts of the loans previ -
ously granted by KfW Group were converted 
into general government equity, which explains 
part of the decline in loans.6 Furthermore, the 
easing in energy prices and global supply chains 
is also likely to have dampened enterprises’ 
short- term financing needs.
The results of the BLS are largely in line with 
these assessments. For instance, for the fourth 
quarter, the surveyed banks reported that loan 
demand had fallen significantly on balance for 
the first time since 2013. The banks stated that 
the main reasons for the fall in demand were 
the higher general level of interest rates and 
the lower financing needs related to fixed in -
vestment. Alongside the high degree of uncer -
tainty surrounding future economic develop -
ments, high inflation and the associated rises in 
the prices of investment projects are likely to 
have contributed to enterprises’ reluctance to 
invest. By contrast, financing needs related to  
inventories and working capital continued to 
provide positive stimulus for demand. Accord -ing to bank data, higher working capital costs 
led to a rise in financing needs, especially 
amongst energy- intensive enterprises. How -
ever, the increase was significantly smaller than 
in the previous two quarters.
At the same time, the banks surveyed by the 
BLS tightened their credit standards for corpor -
ate lending on balance and also reported 
stricter credit terms and conditions overall. 
They pointed to the rise in credit risk as the 
main reason for this tightening. Similarly to the 
euro area as a whole, they attributed this pri -
marily to the deterioration in the general eco -
nomic situation and economic outlook, par -
ticularly as a result of the war against Ukraine 
and rising energy costs, but also to sector-  
specific and firm- specific factors. Moreover, for 
the first time since the start of the pandemic, Lending to non- 
financial corpor -
ations sees 
countermove -
ment to excep -
tionally high 
level of lending
Slowdown in 
loans to non- 
financial corpor -
ations due to 
one- off effect, 
amongst others
Higher lending 
rates and lower 
financing needs 
for fixed invest -
ment are 
important fac -
tors for decline 
in demandCredit standards 
and terms and 
conditions tight -
ened once againMFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2022
Q3 Q4
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 35.5 – 28.7
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years 60.5 52.7
over 2 years – 0.9 –  4.3
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months – 8.2 – 13.7
over 3 months – 0.3 0.8
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans 0.1 2.8
Securities – 7.8 1.6
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 78.9 20.4
of which: to households 3 19.3 11.3
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 55.2 0.2
Securities 11.8 2.7
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter data, 
adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, 
households and general government excluding central govern-
ment. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including 
non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4 Non- fi  nancial cor-
porations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6 For details, see Federal Ministry of Finance (2022) and 
Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action 
(2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
35

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q1 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 20231.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.0
–300+30+60–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2015 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 2300.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
030++
3003060
–++Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
0.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
36

equity costs and banks’ costs related to their 
capital positions also made a small contribution 
to the tightening of standards.
Lending business with domestic households 
continued to lose momentum in the fourth 
quarter. In this context, households exhibited 
considerably less demand for loans for house 
purchase than in the previous quarters. Further -
more, they markedly reduced their consumer 
and other borrowing overall. High inflation, the 
uncertainty surrounding the war against 
Ukraine and its repercussions, further increases 
in the cost of funds, and higher construction 
prices dampened household demand for bank 
loans.
The bank supply side also had a restrictive im -
pact again in the fourth quarter. Banks justified 
these stringent requirements primarily based 
on what they perceived to be elevated credit 
risk. In particular, the deterioration in the gen -
eral economic situation and the economic out -
look, as well as the bleaker outlook in the hous -
ing market, contributed to the tightening. 
Here, the restrictive impact stemming from the 
general economic situation and economic out -
look was weaker than in the previous quarter, 
while the bleaker outlook in the real estate 
market had a greater effect in terms of tighten -
ing. However, the decline in borrowers’ credit -
worthiness also had a restrictive impact.
According to the BLS, the credit standards and 
terms and conditions for consumer credit and 
other lending to households were also tight -
ened again in the fourth quarter of 2022. 
Moreover, as the cost of funds for consumer 
credit and other lending continued to rise sig -
nificantly, there was a marked overall decline in 
households’ propensity to purchase and, con -
sequently, their demand for consumer credit 
and other lending.
For the fourth quarter of 2022, the surveyed 
German banks reported that there was little 
change in funding conditions overall.The surveyed banks reported that the levels of 
their non- performing loan (NPL) ratios (per -
centage ratio of (gross) NPLs to the gross book 
value of loans) made a marginal contribution to 
the tightening of their lending policies in the 
second half of 2022. For the first half of 2023, 
banks are expecting their NPL ratios to have a 
slightly more restrictive impact on their lending 
policies.
In the second half of 2022, German banks 
tightened their lending policies in nearly all of 
the surveyed sectors of the economy. They set 
stricter standards, especially in the manufactur -
ing sector and, within this sector, primarily for Growth in loans 
for house pur -
chase continued 
to weaken
Financing condi -
tions for loans 
for house pur -
chase signifi -
cantly more 
restrictive
Demand for 
consumer credit 
and other lend -
ing also in 
decline
Hardly any 
change in fund -
ing environment 
of German banksLevel of NPL 
ratio had mar -
ginal restrictive 
impact on 
changes to 
lending  policy
Lending policies 
tightened in 
almost all sur -
veyed economic 
sectors2018 2019 2020 2021 202202468Year-on-year change, end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic 
non-financial private sector
202468101214
–+++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchaseTotal,
percentage changeLoan contributions 
in percentage pointsTotal,
percentage changeUp to 1 yearMaturity contributions in percentage points
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 yearsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
37

energy- intensive enterprises, as well as in the 
residential real estate sector. The institutions 
are planning further tightening measures over the next six months, though they stated that 
these are likely to be less severe than in the 
second half of 2022.
List of references
European Central Bank (2023), ECB decides on detailed modalities for reducing asset purchase 
programme holdings, press release of 2 February 2023.
European Central Bank (2022), Monetary developments in the euro area: October 2022, press 
release  of 28 November 2022.
Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action (2022), European Commission approves 
equity capital for reorientation of SEFE, press release of 20 December 2022.
Federal Ministry of Finance (2022), Einstieg des Bundes bei Energieversorger Uniper SE vollzogen, 
press release of 22 December 2022.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
38

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Persistently high inflation rates also shaped de -
velopments in the international financial mar -
kets. Central banks around the world continued 
to tighten monetary policy, although they 
started to raise key interest rates in smaller in -
crements in an environment in which the mon -
etary policy stance has a more restrictive effect. 
The Federal Reserve, for example, has raised its 
key interest rate in three additional steps since 
the end of September 2022, but its most recent 
hike, in February 2023, was just 25 basis points. 
The Eurosystem, too, reduced the size of its in -
crements from previously 75 basis points: the 
interest rate hikes in December and most re -
cently in February 2023 were 50 basis points 
each. Since the beginning of the year, market 
participants have increasingly gained the im -
pression that inflation could fall faster over the 
course of the year than initially assumed. This 
was based in part on the publication of inflation 
figures that were down on the levels recorded 
in previous months and, in some cases, lower 
than expected. This was the main reason why 
long- term yields in the government bond mar -
kets initially all but ceased the upward trajec -
tory that they had embarked upon at the start 
of 2021. As the economic outlook clouded over, 
they even declined in the United Kingdom as 
compared with the end of September. In the 
United States, they remained virtually un -
changed. By contrast, yields in the euro area 
were supported by stabilising energy markets, 
improving economic prospects for the euro 
area and China abandoning its zero- COVID pol -
icy. Equity markets rose sharply, especially in the 
euro area. The brighter economic outlook and 
the market’s belief in declining upside risks to 
the inflation outlook increased investors’ risk 
appetite and optimism. In the first quarter of 
2023, the euro appreciated in effective terms 
and against the US dollar and also benefited 
from the domestic economic outlook brighten -
ing noticeably in the market’s view.Exchange rates
As of the end of the third quarter of 2022, the 
euro appreciated significantly, especially against 
the US dollar. At the beginning of this period, 
the euro’s recovery was still driven largely by re -
ceding energy risks and the growing expect -
ation that the Federal Reserve would slow the 
pace of rate hikes at its December meeting. 
The publication of minutes from a Federal 
Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting and 
statements by Fed Chair Jerome Powell re -
inforced this impression until mid- December 
and gave the euro further impetus. Thereafter, 
however, the euro moved sideways against the 
US dollar and closed the year at US$1.07 
against the euro.
At the beginning of January, the euro/ US dollar 
exchange rate experienced more movement 
again. Following a short-  lived depreciation of 
the single currency, sparked by lower than ex -
pected German inflation rates and an associ -
ated dampening of expectations of rising inter -
est rates in the euro area, sentiment turned 
back in favour of the euro. This was triggered 
by the publication of the ISM Purchasing Man -
agers’ Index for the US services sector, which 
suggested a marked decline in economic activ -
ity. This caused the value of the euro to rise 
sharply against the US dollar. The euro con -
tinued to appreciate against the US dollar 
thereafter, too. The main reason for this appre -
ciation was that a series of surprisingly favour -
able economic data meant that the market 
took a more positive view of the economic out -
look for the euro area than before. Another 
factor was that market participants’ fears about 
the economic burdens caused by Russia’s war 
of aggression against Ukraine and the energy 
crisis in the euro area had already eased be -
forehand. Unlike in the preceding quarters, 
relative monetary policy in the two currency 
areas played only a minor role in exchange rate 
developments. The euro lost some ground Financial mar -
kets have their 
sights on high 
inflation rates 
and diverging 
economic 
prospects Euro up mark -
edly against the 
US dollarDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
39

against the US dollar towards the end of the 
reporting period, when surprisingly favourable 
data were published for the US economy, too. 
As this report went to press, the euro stood at 
US$1.07 again. It thus gained 9.8% in value as 
compared with the end of September 2022. 
Such strong appreciation is unusual and was 
last observed for this currency pair over a simi -
lar period in September 2017.
The euro came under pressure against the 
pound sterling in November. Reports of gross 
domestic product (GDP) in the United Kingdom 
having declined by less than expected in the 
third quarter and of a surprisingly significant rise in the inflation rate supported existing ex -
pectations that the Bank of England would 
raise its key interest rates again in December. 
As a result, the euro depreciated against the 
pound sterling until mid- December. This started 
to reverse when the Governing Council of the 
ECB said, following the December interest rate 
increase, that it expected to raise interest rates 
significantly further at its first monetary policy 
meetings in the new year. This triggered a re -
covery of the euro, which then traded more or 
less sideways in the new year. As this report 
went to press, the single currency was trading 
at £0.89, around 0.7% higher than at the end 
of September.
Following the Bank of Japan’s December meet -
ing, the yen appreciated noticeably against the 
euro and other currencies. This was the result 
of the unexpected decision to expand the tar -
get range for interest rates on ten- year Japan -
ese government bonds, which the markets 
viewed as a first step in a process of monetary 
policy tightening. As a direct consequence of 
this decision, the yield gap of Japanese bonds 
versus euro area and US bonds narrowed. 
However, the yen ceded some of the gains 
again after the Bank of Japan, at its January 
meeting, disappointed expectations that it 
would send further tightening signals. As this 
report went to press, the euro was trading at 
¥143. It was consequently some 1.6% above its 
value at the end of September.
On a weighted average against the currencies 
of the broader group of countries, the euro has 
appreciated by 3.2% on balance since the be -
ginning of the fourth quarter of 2022.1 In add -
ition to the aforementioned growth against the 
US dollar, the euro’s appreciation was driven, 
first and foremost, by gains against the ren -
minbi. The main reason for these gains was 
that the strict enforcement of drastic restric -
tions to contain COVID-  19 infections had Euro gains 
slightly against 
pound sterling 
and …… the Japanese 
yen
Euro stronger in 
effective termsExchange rate of the euro
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Calculated 
against the currencies of 18 countries. A rise in values indicates 
an appreciation of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankSOND J FMAM J J A SOND J F
2021 2022 20230.951.001.051.101.151.20
125130135140145150
0.820.850.880.91
9296100104Daily data, log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
... yen
... pound sterling
Nominal effective exchange rate1
Q1 1999 = 100
1 With the accession of Croatia to the euro area on 1 Janu -
ary 2023, the group of countries against whose currencies 
the effective euro is calculated narrowed from 19 to 18.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
40

weighed on the Chinese economy and thus on 
the renminbi on a broad basis until they were 
lifted in December. By contrast, the euro lost 
ground, in particular against some central Euro -
pean currencies. The appreciation of the euro is 
tending to dampen import prices and is helping 
to contain the high inflationary pressure in the 
euro area.
Securities markets and 
portfolio  transactions
Bond market
In the major currency areas, nominal govern -
ment bond yields have been mixed on balance 
since the end of September, amid significant 
volatility. In response to still unexpectedly high 
inflation data and a brightening macroeco -
nomic outlook in the euro area, yields there 
rose markedly at first. In the United States, by 
contrast, there were growing signs of an eco -
nomic slowdown, causing yields there to sink. 
Furthermore, the dynamics of inflation, which 
lost some breadth, dampened yield develop -
ments in the United States. Against this back -
drop, monetary policymakers on both sides of 
the Atlantic continued to tighten monetary pol -
icy. In particular at its December meeting, the 
Governing Council of the ECB sent strong re -
strictive monetary policy signals. It made it 
clear that key interest rates would have to rise 
further and at a steady pace to reach levels that 
were sufficiently restrictive to ensure a timely 
return of inflation to the 2% target.
At the turn of the year, market participants in -
creasingly gained the impression that inflation 
could have peaked in the euro area, too, and 
that inflation could fall to close to 2% faster 
than previously expected. This was based in 
part on the publication of a lower than ex -
pected HICP inflation rate for December 2022. 
This reassessment by the market put pressure 
on yields. With the labour market still very ro -
bust and a further improvement in economic 
indicators, however, market participants like -wise saw a higher probability that a recession 
might not materialise. On balance, the GDP-  
weighted yield on ten- year euro area bonds 
rose by 20 basis points to 3.1%, while yields on 
ten- year US Treasuries barely changed in the 
period under review (+3 basis points to 3.9%). 
Accordingly, the yield spread between the two 
currency areas narrowed by 17 basis points to 
0.8 percentage point.
In the period under review, yields on ten- year 
UK gilts fell significantly by 60 basis points to 
3.5%. One important reason for this decline in 
yields was that the Bank of England announced 
at the end of September that it would inter -
vene in the gilt market. This was a response to 
the sharp rise in yields, which was triggered by 
the UK government’s unfunded tax cut plans 
and which the central bank viewed as a threat 
to the stability of the financial system (see also 
the box on pp. 43 f.). In addition, the Bank of 
England published an inflation forecast that 
had been revised down significantly, something Yields in the 
euro area and 
the United 
States subject 
to significant 
volatility
Ten- year yields 
with net gains 
in the euro 
area, virtually 
unchanged in 
the United 
States …… and down 
in the United 
KingdomBond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual ma-
turity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022 20231012345
–+++++% p. a., daily data
Euro area
Germany
United States
Japan
United KingdomDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
41

which market participants interpreted as mean -
ing that the Bank of England might end its on -
going tightening cycle in the course of the year 
and might potentially lower policy rates again 
as early as the end of 2023.
In December, the Bank of Japan surprised mar -
ket participants with the announcement that it 
would widen the tolerance range around its 
yield target by 25 basis points. Thereupon, the 
yield on ten-  year Japanese bonds rose by 26 
basis points to 0.5%. Since then, the yield has 
remained at the upper end of the yield target 
range of 0 to ±50 basis points. The Bank of 
Japan cited the aim of combatting the dysfunc -
tion in the government bond market as the 
reason behind this decision. The markets saw 
this as the beginning of a monetary policy 
tightening cycle.
In the reporting period, yields on ten- year 
Bunds rose (by 37 basis points to 2.5%). At the 
end of December, they stood at more than 
2.6%, their highest level in over ten years. The 
implied volatility of options on futures con -
tracts for Bunds – a metric that reflects uncer -
tainty about future price developments – fell 
during the reporting period. This reflects a 
slight decline in economic imponderables and 
the fact that uncertainty about the inflation 
outlook eased for market participants.In the reporting period, the Bund yield curve 
shifted upwards significantly, particularly at the 
short end. Yields on bonds with a residual ma -
turity of one year stood at 2.9%, a level last 
seen at the beginning of October 2008. Al -
though yields on ten- year Bunds also rose, they 
were lower than short- term yields at the end of 
the reporting period. The yield curve has there -
fore inverted. A model breakdown of the yield 
curve suggests that market participants expect 
a slightly higher trajectory for short- term inter -
est rates than they did at the end of Septem -
ber. The term premia that investors demand as 
compensation for assuming price risk when 
purchasing long- term bonds also rose slightly 
over the period under review.
The rise in the term premium can be explained 
to a large extent by the sharp decline in the 
scarcity premium for Federal securities. The 
scarcity premium corresponds to the yield 
spread between ten- year Federal securities and 
maturity-  matched overnight index swaps 
(OISs). This spread narrowed by 40 basis 
points.2 An important factor in this was the 
Finance Agency’s decision in October to in -
crease its own holdings of Federal securities by 
just over €50 billion in order to be able to lend 
particularly sought- after securities in the repo 
market – especially over the turn of the year. In 
addition, the Federal Government announced 
significantly higher issuance than planned. The 
supply of Federal securities is thus set to grow, 
which contributed to a further narrowing of 
the yield spread. Overall, however, notwith -
standing the overall increase in the supply of 
Federal securities, the scarcity premium re -
mained elevated by historical standards.
The yield spread between ten- year Bunds and 
ten- year government bonds issued by other 
euro area countries (GDP- weighted average) 
narrowed by 24 basis points to 0.9 percentage 
point compared with the end of September. 
This left the spread still moderately above its Higher yields in 
Japan
Ten- year Bund 
yield upGerman yield 
curve markedly 
higher at short 
end and 
inverted overall
Scarcity pre -
mium for Fed -
eral securities 
down
Euro area yield 
spreads 
 narrowerYield curve in the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero coupon bonds (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities. 
Deutsche Bundesbank0123456789 1 01.21.51.82.12.42.73.0
Residual maturity in years%
30 September 202231 December 2022 16 February 2023
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023) and Baltzer et al. 
(2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
42

Spillovers from UK government bond yields to European 
government bonds in the autumn of 2022
Last autumn, the announcement of un-
funded tax cuts by the government of the 
United Kingdom (UK) caused a surge in 
yields on UK government bonds (gilts). This 
sudden rise was deemed by the Bank of 
England (BoE) to be a threat to fi  nancial sta-
bility, prompting it to intervene in the gilt 
market despite its tightening of monetary 
policy. The BoE’s temporary purchases of 
long- term gilts and other support measures 
then helped to calm the market turmoil. 
This experience illustrates how sensitively 
fi  nancial markets react to overly expansion-
ary, unfunded fi  scal policy measures in a 
setting of excessive infl  ation and monetary 
policy tightening. For the Eurosystem’s 
monetary policy, it is also relevant to know 
whether and to what extent the soaring gilt 
yields spilled over to other European gov-
ernment bond yields via international inter-
est rate linkages.
Empirical relevance of spillovers
In order to measure any possible spillovers 
from gilt yields to government bonds issued 
by individual euro area countries, time- 
varying “directional” spillovers are calcu-
lated as in Diebold and Yilmaz (2012).1 
These gauge the intensity of spillovers be-
tween government bond yields, capturing 
both simultaneous and lagged relation-
ships. The model, estimated over a rolling 
three- month window, uses the ten- year 
government bond yields (measured in dif-
ferences) of Germany, France, Greece, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain and the United 
Kingdom (daily data).
The results indicate that spillovers from the 
gilt market were relevant for all government 
bonds included in the model. Up to mid- 
September 2022, moreover, German and 
Dutch government bonds experienced dis-
tinctly stronger spillovers than Italian or 
Greek government bonds. This probably re-
fl  ects the fact that gilts and the government 
bonds of core European countries have a 
similar credit quality and liquidity over the 
longer term, which is part of the reason why 
they have similar term premiums and thus a 
close relationship between their yields.
When gilt yields soared in the second half 
of September, spillovers to Italian and Greek 
1 These spillovers are based on a time- varying VAR 
model and on the forecast error variance of the vari-
ables calculated over a given time horizon: the forecast 
error variance of the yields is calculated using general-
ised impulse response functions, and a forecast hori-
zon of ten days is selected. See Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2020) for a more detailed summary of the estimation 
approach of Diebold and Yilmaz.Yields on ten-year government bonds
Deutsche BundesbankAug. Sep. Oct.
20220.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0Daily data
% p.a. United Kingdom
ItalyGreece
GermanyNetherlandsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
43

government bonds increased visibly, while 
they remained almost constant for German 
Bunds and Dutch government bonds. This 
suggests that concerns about the UK’s pub-
lic fi  nances also affected Italy and Greece to 
some extent. Market participants may, at 
times, have feared that Italy or Greece 
might also overstep their narrow fi  scal 
bounds. At the same time, relevant liquidity 
indicators showed liquidity in the European 
government bond markets to be satisfac-
tory.2 There was thus no sign of any note-
worthy liquidity spillovers from gilts or of 
impaired market functioning.
On balance, however, any concerns that 
may have arisen about Italian or Greek pub-
lic fi  nances remained limited. First, the esti-
mated spillovers to these countries’ govern-
ment bonds remained consistently smaller 
than the corresponding spillovers to Bunds, 
which are regarded as safe. Second, the 
spillovers to Italian and, in particular, Greek government bonds quickly receded again 
after peaking at the end of September, des-
pite the turmoil on the gilt market taking 
some time to subside. Viewed as a whole, 
this suggests that, irrespective of the tight-
ening of monetary policy in both currency 
areas, the higher gilt yields had a demon-
strable impact on Italian and Greek govern-
ment bond yields, but that this was limited 
and short- lived. After the UK government 
reversed the planned tax cuts and changed 
its fi  scal policy course in October, causing 
gilt yields to fall, the spillovers from the gilt 
market to European government bond mar-
kets then receded signifi  cantly. This would 
indicate that market participants regarded 
the decline in gilt yields primarily as a 
country- specifi  c development without any 
wider relevance for the euro area.
Another interesting fi  nding is that, through-
out the period under consideration, spill-
overs from gilt yields to Dutch government 
bonds remained somewhat weaker than 
those to Bund yields. Within the euro area, 
it is primarily in the Netherlands that pen-
sion funds play an important role. However, 
the risk that, much like in the UK, pension 
funds in the Netherlands might amplify ris-
ing government bond yields by making fi  re 
sales of government bonds appears not to 
have been viewed as a major concern by 
the markets. There are two likely explan-
ations for this, which are certainly mutually 
compatible: one, the sound state of Dutch 
public fi  nances and, two, a comparatively 
low susceptibility to fi  re sales of govern-
ment bonds. Possible reasons for this are 
that Dutch pension funds –  measured 
against the entire euro area government 
bond market – hold comparatively few gov-
ernment bonds and are relatively unlever-
aged.3
2 This is illustrated, for example, by the stable order 
book liquidity of futures contracts for European gov-
ernment bonds.
3 See Bank for International Settlements (2022).Spillover effects of ten-year gilts on 
European government bond yields*
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations. * Calculated 
over a rolling three-month window following the approach of 
Diebold and Yilmaz (2012).
Deutsche BundesbankAug. Sep. Oct.
2022789101112131415Daily data
% p.a.
Italy GreeceGermany NetherlandsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
44

five- year average (0.8 percentage point). The 
narrowing yield spread mainly reflected lower 
risk premia in the context of an increase in in -
vestors’ risk appetite and improved economic 
prospects in the euro area. The declining scar -
city premium for Federal securities contributed 
to a narrowing of yield spreads in the euro 
area.
At the end of the reporting period, market-  
based short- term inflation expectations for the 
euro area were still very significantly above the 
2% definition of price stability and close to 
levels seen at the beginning of the fourth quar -
ter of 2022. Two phases can be distinguished 
within the reporting period. Initially, against the 
backdrop of surprisingly high inflation figures in 
the euro area for October and November, mar -
ket participants made further upward revisions 
to their inflation expectations, which peaked in 
November 2022. After that, the market’s infla -
tion expectations began to reverse. For ex -
ample, the publication of euro area inflation 
figures for December 2022 contributed to the 
market pricing in the possibility that inflation 
could fall to close to 2% faster than previously 
expected. The surprisingly mild winter and the 
associated marked decline in energy prices, es -
pecially for electricity and gas, supported this 
downward revision. The market assessment 
therefore conflicts with the December 2022 
Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections. 
From a monetary policy perspective, there is a 
risk that market participants are underestimat -
ing the persistence of the inflation process and 
giving too low a weighting in their assessments 
to the risks arising from the current phase of 
high inflation. The longer the period of inflation 
persists, the greater the likelihood that house -
holds and firms will no longer be guided by the 
2% definition of price stability when setting 
their wages and prices. As an annual average, 
market participants are expecting an inflation 
rate of 5.7% for 2023 and 2.6% for 2024. 
Survey-  based inflation expectations calculated 
by Consensus Economics put inflation at 5.5% 
for 2023 and 2.4% for 2024.Given that the inflation risk situation remains 
tense, it is unsurprising that longer- term infla -
tion expectations continued to rise. The five-  
year forward inflation rate five years ahead, 
which is derived from inflation swaps, stood at 
2.4% at last count, up 29 basis points from the 
end of September 2022. The quarterly survey-  
based inflation expectations calculated by Con -
sensus Economics for the euro area six to ten 
years ahead stood at 2.0% in January, down 
slightly on the figure for October. Conse -
quently, the difference between market- based 
and survey- based long- term inflation expect -
ations widened to 0.4 percentage point. This 
difference is often seen as a risk premium that 
expresses market participants’ concern about 
higher inflation rates over the longer term. An 
easing in the inflation process is therefore cur -
rently only being priced in by the market in the 
short term.
Five- year market- based US forward inflation 
rates in five years rose by a similar magnitude, Market partici -
pants expected 
high inflation 
rates to persist 
in the short term
Rise in longer- 
term inflation 
expectationsShort-term HICP paths for the euro area
01234567891011
+++++++++++%
2021 2022 2023 2024
Sources: Fenics Market Data, Consensus Economics, Eurostat 
and Bundesbank calculations. 1 On 21 February 2022, Russia 
recognised  the  independence  of  parts  of  the  Donetsk  and 
Luhansk regions within Ukrainian territory. 2 HICP excluding 
tobacco.
Deutsche BundesbankSurvey averages from 
Consensus EconomicsForward inflation rates
derived from inflation swaps
Actual
annual HICP230 September 2022
9 January 20239 January 2023 21 February 20221
16 February 2023Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
45

climbing 22 basis points to 2.6%, while survey- 
based inflation expectations calculated by Con -
sensus Economics remained unchanged at 
2.2%. The inflation risk premium as the differ -
ence between market- based and survey- based 
inflation expectations is thus also positive in the 
United States and has risen.
Yields on BBB- rated European corporate bonds 
with residual maturities of between seven and 
ten years declined quite substantially compared 
with the end of the third quarter of 2022. At 
90 basis points, the decrease in yields for bonds 
issued by financial corporations – which tend 
to be relatively highly leveraged – was greater 
than that recorded for non- financial corporate 
bonds (46 basis points). Since the yields on 
maturity- matched Bunds rose slightly over the 
same period, yield spreads in the corporate 
sector narrowed significantly overall – by 130 
basis points for financial corporations and 87 
basis points for non- financial corporations. 
Compared with the end of September, the spreads on high- yield bonds fell even more 
considerably (-220 basis points). Despite the 
tightening of monetary policy, financial condi -
tions in the financial markets partly improved 
here over the reporting period. Together with 
the implied volatility in the equity and bond 
markets, which was also down, this points to a 
marked increase in investors’ risk appetite and 
to diminishing concerns about a severe reces -
sion. In line with this, the credit default premia 
for enterprises without an investment- grade 
rating also declined (iTraxx Crossover, five years: 
-247 basis points). Measured by yield spreads, 
financing costs for European enterprises across 
all rating categories were nevertheless still sig -
nificantly above their respective five- year aver -
ages.
At €397 billion, gross issuance in the German 
bond market in the fourth quarter of 2022 was 
down somewhat on the previous quarter’s fig -
ure (€438 billion). Net of redemptions and 
changes in issuers’ holdings of their own debt 
securities, domestic issuers increased their cap -
ital market borrowing by just €½ billion. The 
outstanding volume of foreign debt securities 
in the German market fell by €10½ billion in 
the fourth quarter. On balance, the total out -
standing volume of bonds in Germany thus 
shrank by €10 billion in the quarter under re -
view.
In the final quarter of 2022, the public sector 
issued bonds to the tune of €24 billion net, fol -
lowing net redemptions totalling €21½ billion 
in the previous three-  month period. The Fed -
eral government (including the resolution 
agency classified as part of central government) 
issued mainly ten- year, seven- year and 30- year 
Bunds in the amount of €31 billion overall. This 
contrasted with net redemptions of five- year 
Federal notes (Bobls) amounting to €10 billion. 
State and local governments redeemed debt 
securities worth €1½ billion on balance.
Domestic credit institutions reduced their cap -
ital market debt in the quarter under review by 
€19 billion, following net issuance of €28 bil -Increase in 
longer- term 
inflation expect -
ations in the 
United States, 
as well
Corporate bond 
yields down 
 significantlyLow net issu -
ance of German 
debt securities
Net public 
 sector issuance
Fall in credit 
institutions’ cap -
ital market debtYield spreads of corporate bonds
in the euro area*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBoxx indices with a residual maturity of seven 
to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022 20230100200300400500600700800900
100200300400High yield1
BBB2
AA2
By sector
BBB financial 
corporations2
BBB non-financial corporations2By rating categoryBasis points, daily dataDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
46

lion in the third quarter. The vast majority of re -
demptions were of debt securities issued by 
specialised credit institutions (€28½ billion). By 
contrast, other bank securities that can be 
structured flexibly and mortgage Pfandbriefe 
recorded net issuance to the tune of €6 billion 
and €5 billion, respectively.
In the final quarter of 2022, domestic enter -
prises redeemed bonds worth a net €4½ bil -
lion, following net issuance amounting to €17 
billion in the previous quarter. On balance, the 
bulk of these redemptions concerned struc -
tured products with short maturities (less than 
one year).
In the fourth quarter of 2022, domestic non-  
banks expanded their bond portfolios by €28 
billion net, purchasing exclusively domestic 
paper (€30½ billion). The Bundesbank also ac -
quired debt securities worth €1½ billion net, 
largely under the Eurosystem’s asset purchase 
programmes; on balance, these debt securities 
consisted exclusively of domestic paper issued 
by the public sector. By contrast, foreign invest -
ors and domestic credit institutions sold debt 
securities amounting to €25 billion and €14 bil -
lion net, respectively.
Equity market
International equity markets recorded signifi -
cant gains in some cases compared with the 
end of the third quarter of 2022. This was due, 
in particular, to better than expected economic 
developments, improved sentiment in the euro 
area and the anticipated recovery as a result of 
the reopening of the Chinese economy follow -
ing the coronavirus pandemic. In the euro area, 
reports of sizeable deliveries of liquid gas and 
high gas storage levels were among the factors 
to additionally boost investor optimism, caus -
ing concerns about an energy crisis to fade into 
the background. This increased confidence that 
a recession could be avoided. In addition, the 
change in the market assessment of the short- 
term inflation outlook described above contrib -uted to market participants speculating that 
the restrictive monetary policy stance would 
not persist as long, which, taken in isolation, 
had a boosting effect on prices. This more posi -
tive sentiment amongst investors led to signifi -
cantly increased risk appetite, which also re -
sulted in less uncertainty about future price de -
velopments, as reflected in the relevant volatil -
ity indices. On balance, the CDAX and the 
EURO STOXX recorded marked gains from the 
end of September, up 29.4% and 26.6%, re -
spectively. They thus rose significantly more 
strongly than the prices of US equities 
(S&P 500), which nevertheless also recorded 
significant gains of 14.1%. In the United King -
dom, equity prices also rose sharply (FTSE 100: 
16.2%); the Japanese Nikkei index increased by 
6.8%.
Bank shares on both sides of the Atlantic con -
siderably outperformed their respective overall 
markets. Stocks of European banks rose by a 
significant 48.9% on their level at the end of Net redemption 
of corporate 
bonds
Purchases of 
debt securities
International 
equity markets 
up significantly
Bank stocks out -
perform market 
as a wholeInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2021 2022
Q4 Q3 Q4
Debt securities
Residents 43.0 10.1 15.3
Credit institutions – 27.9 8.0 – 14.1
of which:
Foreign debt securities – 15.0 –  3.4 –  7.2
Deutsche Bundesbank 58.3 – 17.5 1.6
Other sectors 12.5 19.6 27.8
of which:
Domestic debt securities 9.5 32.8 30.7
Non-residents – 42.9 –  3.8 – 25.1
Shares
Residents 37.7 27.3 4.9
Credit institutions 2.3 –  2.5 –  3.3
of which:
Domestic shares –  0.1 –  0.5 –  1.0
Non-banks 35.4 29.8 8.1
of which:
Domestic shares 26.2 34.2 18.8
Non-residents –  7.5 6.6 4.0
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 56.7 13.6 11.9
Investment in retail funds 11.6 –  2.5 1.4
of which:
Equity funds 2.7 –  0.7 2.7
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
47

the third quarter of 2022. The prices of bank 
stocks listed in the US S&P 500 went up by 
19.9%. One important reason for the price 
gains is the recent significant increase in credit 
institutions’ revenue from net interest income 
resulting from a larger maturity transformation 
contribution following the interest rate turn -
around. The reported profits for the final quar -
ter of 2022 were also significantly better than 
expected for both US and European banks. On 
the basis of this very good earnings situation, 
analysts revised their earnings expectations for 
the European banking sector upwards to a sig -
nificant extent in the reporting period.
Equity valuation levels saw similar develop -
ments on both sides of the Atlantic during the 
reporting period. According to the Bundes -
bank’s dividend discount model, the strong 
price increases in both currency areas were re -
flected, above all, in a lower risk premium. In 
this environment, market participants were 
therefore prepared to hold equities for lower risk compensation. Both the implied cost of 
equity and earnings yields fell compared with 
their levels at the end of September. However, 
for the EURO STOXX they are still close to the 
long- term averages, indicating that the stock 
market valuation is still comparatively moder -
ate. For the S&P 500, by contrast, the implied 
cost of equity was close to its all- time low. The 
earnings yield was somewhat higher, but still 
significantly below the long- term average. As 
such, valuation appears to be comparatively 
high for the S&P 500.
German stock corporations raised €22 billion in 
new funds on balance in the reporting quarter 
(previous quarter: €40½ billion). The outstand -
ing volume of foreign shares in the German 
market shrank by €13 billion over the same 
period. On balance, equities were purchased 
by resident non- banks (€8 billion) and foreign 
investors (€4 billion). By contrast, domestic 
credit institutions downsized their equity port -
folios by €3½ billion in net terms.
Mutual funds
In the fourth quarter of 2022, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded a net inflow of 
€13½ billion, compared with €11 billion in the 
previous quarter. On balance, specialised funds 
reserved for institutional investors were by far 
the primary beneficiaries (€12 billion). Of the 
various asset classes, mixed securities funds, in 
particular, registered significant net inflows of 
capital (€15½ billion), but open- end real estate 
funds also recorded inflows (€5 billion). The 
outstanding volume of foreign mutual fund 
shares in Germany rose by €17½ billion in the 
period under review. Mutual fund shares were 
bought on balance almost exclusively by do -
mestic non- banks, which added €28½ billion 
worth of fund shares to their portfolios. Do -
mestic credit institutions expanded their equity 
portfolios by €2½ billion in net terms. On bal -
ance, non- resident investors were only margin -
ally active in the German market.Valuations up 
on both sides of 
the AtlanticEquity market 
funding
Sales and pur -
chases of 
mutual fund 
sharesEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankBank indicesBeginning of 2020 = 100, log scale, daily data
Total market indices
6580100120140160
506080100120
2020 2021 2022 2023Euro area
(EURO STOXX)Japan
(Nikkei 225)United States
(S&P 500)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
48

Direct investment
Against the backdrop of high inflation and di -
verging economic prospects in the major cur -
rency areas, transactions in cross- border port -
folio investment resulted in net capital exports 
of €14½ billion in the fourth quarter of 2022. 
Direct investment, too, led to capital outflows 
(€21½ billion).
Enterprises domiciled in Germany expanded 
their direct investment abroad by €13½ billion 
on balance between October and December 
2022, compared with €52 billion in the previ -
ous three months. They boosted their equity 
capital in foreign subsidiaries by €28½ billion, 
with reinvested earnings accounting for just 
over one- third of this increase. By contrast, 
firms resident in Germany reduced their lending 
volume with affiliated group entities abroad by 
€15 billion. This was done exclusively through 
financial loans. Considerable volumes of direct 
investment funds flowed from Germany to 
France (€13½ billion), the Netherlands (€7 bil -
lion) and Ireland (€5½ billion). By contrast, Ger -
man enterprises scaled back their direct invest -
ment in the United Kingdom (€22 billion).
Foreign enterprises lowered their direct invest -
ment in Germany by €8 billion in the fourth 
quarter (following an increase of €22½ billion 
in the previous quarter). They reduced their vol -
ume of intra- group loans issued to German en -
terprises by €11½ billion, mainly relying on 
financial loans to do so. However, they boosted 
their equity capital in German subsidiaries by 
€3½ billion. Particularly high outflows of direct 
investment were recorded from the United 
Kingdom (€21 billion) and the Netherlands 
(€6½ billion). By contrast, enterprises from the 
United States (€8 billion) and Ireland (€6½ bil -
lion) boosted their direct investment funds in 
Germany.Direct invest -
ment sees net 
capital exports
German direct 
investment 
abroad results in 
capital exports
Foreign direct 
investment in 
Germany sees 
capital outflowsMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2021 2022
Q4 Q3 Q4p
I. Current account +  61.0 + 19.0 + 47.4 
1. Goods +  38.4 + 21.6 + 31.8 
2. Services –   4.2 – 21.4 –  9.0 
3. Primary income +  42.0 + 35.1 + 43.2 
4. Secondary income –  15.2 – 16.4 – 18.6 
II. Capital account –   0.4 –  4.7 –  4.0 
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) +  86.3 +  5.8 + 61.3 
1. Direct investment +  32.9 + 29.6 + 21.3 
Domestic investment 
abroad +  38.8 + 52.2 + 13.5 
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country +   5.9 + 22.6 –  7.8 
2. Portfolio investment +  95.4 – 26.5 + 14.3 
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities +  42.0 – 25.5 –  8.1 
Shares 1 +  12.9 –  8.2 – 15.3 
Investment fund shares 2+  39.9 –  0.1 + 17.5 
of which:
Money market fund 
shares +  14.0 –  0.7 + 10.7 
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 –  10.4 –  1.5 +  5.7 
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 –   0.4 – 15.7 – 16.1 
of which:
Denominated in euro 5 – – 
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities –  53.3 +  1.0 – 22.4 
Shares 1 –   7.6 +  6.4 +  2.9 
Investment fund shares –   2.8 –  1.6 –  0.2 
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 –   6.1 –  6.8 – 25.0 
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 –  36.8 +  3.0 –  0.2 
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 6 –  32.9 – 11.2 +  5.0 
3. Financial derivatives 7 +  18.9 + 15.2 –  2.1 
4. Other investment 8 –  61.1 – 13.2 + 26.9 
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 9 +  99.4 – 26.1 + 84.3 
Enterprises and 
 households 10 –  44.5 – 23.3 + 17.9 
General government +   1.0 – 11.4 +  8.3 
Bundesbank – 117.1 + 47.6 – 83.5 
5. Reserve assets +   0.3 +  0.8 +  0.8 
IV. Errors and omissions 11 +  25.8 –  8.5 + 17.9 
1  Including participation certifi  cates. 2  Including reinvested 
earnings. 3  Short- term: original maturity of up to one year. 
4 Long- term: original maturity of more than one year or unlim-
ited. 5  Including outstanding foreign Deutsche  Mark bonds. 
6 Including bonds issued by the former Federal Railways, the 
former Federal Post Offi   ce and the former Treuhand agency. 
7  Balance of transactions arising from options and fi  nancial 
futures  contracts as well as employee stock options. 8 Includes, 
in particular, loans and trade credits as well as currency and de-
posits. 9 Excluding the Bundesbank. 10  Includes the following 
sectors: fi  nancial corporations (excluding monetary fi  nancial in-
stitutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and 
non- profi  t institutions serving households. 11  Statistical errors 
and omissions resulting from the difference between the bal-
ance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current 
account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
49

List of references
Baltzer, M., K. Schlepper and C. Speck (2022), The Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes, 
securities lending and Bund specialness, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper No 39/ 2022.
Bank for International Settlements, BIS Quarterly Review, December 2022, p. 8.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023), Term structures in economic analysis, Monthly Report, January 
2023, pp. 53-74.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020), Global financial interconnectedness and spillovers between the G20 
countries, Monthly Report, September 2020, pp. 59-62.
Diebold, F. X. and K. Yilmaz (2012), Better to give than to receive: Predictive directional measure -
ment of volatility spillovers, International Journal of Forecasting, Vol. 28, pp. 57-66.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
50

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
German economic output was lower in the 
fourth quarter of 2022 than in the previous 
quarter. According to the Federal Statistical Of -
fice’s flash estimate, real gross domestic prod -
uct (GDP) decreased by 0.2% on the quarter 
after seasonal adjustment,1 making the decline 
in economic output milder than had been an -
ticipated in the December projection.2 The situ -
ation in the energy markets eased markedly 
over the course of the quarter and energy com -
modity prices moderated. Moreover, output in 
the manufacturing sector remained more resili -
ent than expected overall. This was supported 
by the fact that supply bottlenecks eased fur -
ther and well- filled order books absorbed the 
decline in demand. The automotive industry, in 
particular, stepped up production markedly in 
the final quarter of the year. This more or less 
offset the decline in output in energy- intensive 
sectors. Meanwhile, high inflation eroded con -
sumer purchasing power, and sales in the retail 
sector dropped considerably in terms of quan -
tity. Private consumption is therefore likely to 
have fallen markedly even though motor ve -
hicle registrations were up steeply.3 Construc -
tion activity also weakened further despite an 
easing of material shortages. This is mainly due 
to falling demand for construction services, 
which are suffering from the effects of high 
construction prices, reduced household pur -
chasing power and increased financing costs. 
Economic output is likely to contract again in 
the first quarter of 2023.
Real exports of goods increased in the fourth 
quarter of 2022, but this growth was dimin -ished by a sharp decline in December. In terms 
of value, however, exports fell somewhat over -
all due to lower export prices. In particular, 
fewer goods were exported to China, the Rus -
sian Federation and, to a lesser extent, to cen -
tral and eastern European countries outside the 
euro area and the United States than in the 
previous quarter. In addition, nominal exports 
to the OPEC countries fell sharply. On the other 
hand, exports to the United Kingdom and 
Japan were significantly higher. Broken down 
by sector, price- adjusted exports of intermedi -
ate goods declined, while those of capital and 
consumer goods increased. Exports of chemical 
products, which have been affected severely by 
the energy crisis owing to their energy- intensive 
production, fell particularly substantially. By 
contrast, exports of pharmaceutical products, 
machinery, motor vehicles and other vehicles 
were up considerably.German eco -
nomic output in 
Q4 2022 lower 
than in previous 
quarterExports up in 
real terms yet 
declining in 
nominal terms
Aggregate output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Price 
and calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 20229698100102104106108
–12–8–40+4+8+12Adjusted for price, seasonal and calendar effects
2015 = 100, log scale
Gross domestic product
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
1 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this 
text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, pro -
vided they can be verified and quantified.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022).
3 Anticipatory effects were probably also at work here, as 
since January 2023 government subsidies for purchases of 
plug- in hybrids and purely electric vehicles have been 
scrapped and reduced, respectively.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
51

Enterprises probably expanded their investment 
in equipment again in the fourth quarter of 
2022. In addition to the further easing of sup -
ply bottlenecks, the decline in uncertainty 
caused by the easing of tensions in the energy 
markets may have fostered investment. Senti -
ment among producers of capital goods 
– measured in terms of the ifo business climate 
index – was still very gloomy in October but 
brightened strongly over the course of the 
quarter. Both the production and sales of cap -
ital goods in Germany increased markedly com -
pared with the third quarter. Moreover, enter -
prises invested more heavily in their vehicle 
fleets. According to data from the German As -sociation of the Automotive Industry (VDA), 
there was a considerable rise in the number of 
registrations of commercial vehicles.
Construction investment is likely to have con -
tinued its downward trend in the fourth quar -
ter of 2022, also owing to further increases in 
construction prices and financing costs as well 
as high inflation. Construction output also de -
clined significantly. Nevertheless, according to 
data available up to November, revenue in the 
main construction sector went up significantly, 
although this is likely to be attributable in part 
to high price increases. Investment in commer -
cial and public buildings is likely to have been 
more buoyant than that in housing construc -
tion.
Private consumption is likely to have gone 
down distinctly in the fourth quarter of 2022 
after rising considerably in the third quarter. 
High inflation and uncertainty about energy 
supply, in particular, caused consumers to exer -
cise restraint in their purchasing behaviour. For 
example, real retail sales (excluding motor ve -
hicles) fell steeply compared with the previous 
quarter. Price- adjusted accommodation and 
food services revenue likewise dropped sharply. 
Moreover, according to the GfK survey, con -
sumer sentiment reached a new record low in 
the fourth quarter of 2022, and for a time the 
propensity to save was higher than it had been 
for more than a decade. Nevertheless, motor 
vehicle trade is likely to have mitigated the de -
cline in private consumption. This is indicated 
by new motor vehicle registrations, which, ac -
cording to data provided by the VDA, rose con -
siderably towards the end of the year. House -
holds were probably particularly aware that 
government subsidies for plug- in hybrid and 
purely electric vehicles partly expired at the end 
of the year.
Imports of goods fell markedly in real terms in 
the fourth quarter of 2022. The value of im -
ports even dropped very significantly, mainly 
owing to a considerable fall in energy import 
prices. Imports from China and the United Commercial 
investment in 
machinery and 
equipment prob -
ably continued 
to riseConstruction 
investment 
probably 
declined slightly
Private con -
sumption prob -
ably lower in Q4
Imports of 
goods clearly 
down in nom -
inal terms due 
to considerably 
lower energy 
import prices8090100110Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 20228090100110
100110120Seasonally and calendar adjusted, quarterly data
to euro area 
countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted18090100110
€ bnto non-euro area 
countriesof which:MonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
52

Kingdom were down substantially. In particular, 
significantly fewer goods were imported from 
Russia again, partly owing to the complete cut- 
off of gas deliveries. By contrast, imports from 
the OPEC countries, the newly industrialised 
countries of Asia and Japan increased. Broken 
down by sector, price- adjusted imports of cap -
ital and consumer goods were higher, whilst 
imports of intermediate goods remained at the 
previous quarter’s level overall. Imports of 
chemical and pharmaceutical products, in par -
ticular, declined. By contrast, considerably more 
electrical equipment, motor vehicles and ma -
chinery were imported.
Sectoral trends
Industrial production in the fourth quarter of 
2022 remained unchanged on the quarter after 
seasonal adjustment. On the one hand, the 
high energy costs continue to be a drag, with 
output in the energy- intensive sectors of the 
economy contracting sharply once again. The 
production of chemical products, for example, 
fell by more than one- tenth, but the manufac -
ture of paper and cardboard as well as of metal 
(including its processing) also declined sharply. 
In addition to the resultant steep fall in the pro -
duction of intermediate goods, fewer con -
sumer goods were produced as well. On the 
other hand, industry benefited from further 
easing of supply bottlenecks and full order 
books. This was probably beneficial for the 
automotive industry, in particular, which ex -
panded its production particularly strongly. 
Owing to the strong increase generated by the 
automotive industry, the production of capital 
goods rose substantially overall. Excluding 
motor vehicles and the energy- intensive sec -
tors, industrial production fell slightly in the 
final quarter of 2022.
After seasonal adjustment, construction output 
decreased significantly once again in the fourth 
quarter of 2022. December 2022, in particular, 
saw a substantial decline, possibly related to 
the unusually cold weather in the first half of the month. Production in the finishing trades 
dropped even more considerably than in the 
main construction sector. While output in 
building construction fell markedly, it increased 
by almost the same magnitude in civil engin -
eering. The unfavourable underlying conditions 
created by high construction prices, high head -
line inflation and rising funding costs damp -
ened demand for construction services. Ac -
cording to ifo Institute surveys, the share of 
construction enterprises complaining of a lack 
of orders therefore increased again signifi -
cantly. Supply- side bottlenecks also persisted. 
To wit, in the autumn quarter, many enterprises 
in the main construction sector reported that 
their activity had been hampered by a lack of 
staff or a shortage of materials. Equipment util -
isation continued to decline.
Economic activity in the services sector prob -
ably decreased in the fourth quarter of 2022. 
Services production fell markedly compared 
with the third quarter according to data avail -Industrial pro -
duction robust 
in Q4 thanks to 
full order books 
and easing of 
supply bottle -
necks
Construction 
activity weak -
ened furtherEconomic 
activity  in the 
services sector 
probably 
declinedOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 202280859095100105110
1001051101151201251301351402015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data, log scale
MonthlyIndustry
Main constructionIndustry excluding
automotive
Construction1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
53

able up to November. Accommodation and 
food service activities, in particular, experienced 
a sharp decline. Price- adjusted sales also 
dropped significantly here. In wholesale and re -
tail trade (excluding motor vehicles), real sales 
likewise decreased markedly. This gloomy pic -
ture is also reflected in the ifo current business 
situation index for the services sector, which, in 
the final quarter of 2022, was well below the 
third- quarter level. Nevertheless, trade in motor 
vehicles was brisk, according to the VDA data 
on passenger car registrations.
Labour market
The labour market continued to improve in the 
fourth quarter of 2022. Employment rose 
slightly in the fourth quarter after recording 
next to no growth in the third quarter. Un -
employment remained stable at a low level. 
This meant that the expectations expressed in 
the December projection were exceeded. Des -
pite the recessionary outlook and sharp in -
crease in the minimum wage, robust labour 
market developments were already anticipated 
back then. The short- term outlook is also more 
favourable at present than it was just a few 
months ago.
On an average of the reporting quarter, sea -
sonally adjusted total employment was up by 
only 107,000 people, or just over 0.2%, from 
the previous quarter’s level. However, the in -
crease in the number of persons working in 
low- paid part- time jobs was surprising. Owing 
to the often low hourly wages, the sharp in -
crease in the minimum wage in October 2022 
could have led to a reduction in the number of 
“mini jobs”. However, persistent labour short -
ages in some services sectors and high inflation 
rates seem to have strongly tempered the im -
pact of the minimum wage increase. The num -
ber of low- paid part- time workers has only a 
small impact on the total number of hours 
worked in the economy, however, owing to 
their small number of weekly working hours. 
The decline in self- employment eased, at least.Employment subject to social security contribu -
tions, which has been the main driver of em -
ployment growth in Germany for some time 
now, increased only comparatively moderately 
after seasonal adjustment. On an average of 
October and November, the number of em -
ployees exceeded the previous quarter’s level 
by 61,000, representing an increase of just 
under 0.2%. The relatively low growth affected 
nearly all sectors of the economy. Only IT and 
business- related services – excluding temporary 
agency employment, which declined further – 
bucked the trend by growing significantly.
In addition, enterprises have resumed making 
somewhat greater use of short- time work since 
September to soften the effects of a weak 
economy. In August of last year, following the 
lifting of pandemic restrictions, short- time work 
hit a preliminary low. According to initial ex -
trapolations of data by the Federal Employment 
Agency up until November 2022, at that time 
just over 200,000 people were drawing short- 
time working benefits, more than twice as 
many as in August. As growth was from a low 
level, this still means that relatively few employ -
ees are affected, despite the slight increase in 
uptake. A further significant increase since then 
is unlikely; the number of registrations for 
short- time work went back down in January.
In seasonally adjusted terms, registered un -
employment remained roughly at the level of 
the third quarter. The unemployment rate held 
steady at 5.5%. This was also the case in Janu -
ary 2023 when the Federal Employment Agency 
recorded 2.50 million unemployed persons. 
However, this was around 30,000 fewer than 
two months earlier. This slight decline at the 
current end was confined to unemployment 
among those receiving the basic welfare allow -
ance. This is less a cyclical recovery, though, but 
instead due in considerable measure to the fact 
that a growing number of Ukrainians have 
begun to attend language and integration 
courses. In the third quarter, the number of un -
employed persons receiving the basic welfare al -
lowance had risen markedly as a result of the in -Labour market 
developments 
more favourable 
than expected
Low- paid part- 
time employ -
ment up 
unexpectedly Employment 
subject to social 
security contri -
butions grew 
only slightly 
and …
… short- time 
work used to 
somewhat 
greater extent 
again
Underemploy -
ment broadly 
constantDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
54

corporation of Ukrainian refugees into the Ger -
man social security system. Total underemploy -
ment excluding Ukrainian refugees is currently a 
better reflection of economic developments. It 
has remained broadly constant lately.4
The outlook for the labour market has bright -
ened in recent months. The employment bar -
ometers of the ifo Institute and the Institute for 
Employment Research (IAB) are currently tilted 
in favour of plans to expand the workforce in 
the short term. The number of vacant jobs sub -
ject to social security contributions reported to 
the Federal Employment Agency stabilised in 
January. In the course of the second half of 
2022, it declined slowly, although the number 
of vacancies still remained high. The IAB survey 
on unemployment over the next three months 
improved considerably in January. It is now in 
positive territory, which is consistent with the 
expectation of falling unemployment.
Wages and prices
The fourth quarter of 2022 saw a continued 
moderate increase in negotiated wages. In -
cluding additional benefits, they were up by 
2.0% on the year in the fourth quarter, com -
pared with 2.5% in the quarter before. It should 
be noted that the fourth- quarter growth rate 
was depressed by deferred bonus payments. 
Excluding bonus payments, at 2.4% the year-  
on- year increase in negotiated wages in the 
fourth quarter was marginally stronger than in 
the third quarter. Older wage agreements from 
before the period of high inflation still domin -
ated. Actual earnings are likely to have once 
again risen more strongly than negotiated 
wages in the last three months of the year. This 
would be consistent with the significantly lower 
take- up of short- time work compared with the 
previous year and the substantial increase in 
the general statutory minimum wage to €12 
per hour on 1 October 2022.Leading indica -
tors mostly 
improved
Negotiated 
wages con -
tinued to rise 
moderately, 
actual earnings 
up more 
stronglyLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 23Jan.43.544.044.545.045.546.0
31.031.532.032.533.033.534.034.535.0–1,000–5000+500+1,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–600–400–2000+200+400+600Jan.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Jan.Million
Million
Million500700900Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployment
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies2EmployedJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Oct.-
Nov.
4 See Statistics provided by the Federal Employment 
Agency (2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
55

The most recent wage agreements were signifi -
cantly higher than in previous years. It is note -
worthy that a growing number of agreements 
in some sectors included inflation compensa -
tion bonuses in addition to the increase in 
scheduled rates of pay.5 Unscheduled renegoti -
ations of current wage agreements took place 
to this end in a handful of sectors. The wage 
agreements still in place for insurers and in the 
main construction sector, for example, had in -
flation compensation bonuses added. These 
are attractive to employees as they increase 
wages by a greater percentage in net than in 
gross terms and this benefits low pay grades in 
particular. For firms, a combination of relatively 
moderate permanent wage increases and tem -
porary wage components, such as inflation 
compensation bonuses, may appear more ad -
vantageous in the medium term than offering 
only permanent pay rises.
Current wage demands are unusually high by 
historical standards. The trade union ver.di is calling for a 10.5%6 increase in wages for the 
public sector at the central and local govern -
ment level as well as for the paper and card -
board manufacturing industry for a period of 
12 months, and is demanding as much as 15% 
for the Deutsche Post. In the textile and cloth -
ing industry, the IG Metall trade union is also 
asking for an unusually high wage increase of 
8%. The same is true of the German Railway 
and Transport Union’s demand that Deutsche 
Bahn increases wages by 12%, but at least by 
€650 per month.
The old, moderate wage agreements from be -
fore the high inflation period began will expire 
this year. The significant wage increases set out 
in the new collective wage agreements will in -
creasingly be reflected in higher growth in ne -
gotiated wages overall. This year’s pay round 
for just under 11 million wage earners will pre -
dominantly feature negotiations in the services 
sectors. They will be shaped by high inflation 
and labour shortages on the one hand, and by 
the currently sluggish economy as well as un -
certainties due to geopolitical risks on the 
other. Furthermore, negotiations will be made 
more difficult by the restricted scope for wage 
distribution. This is because Germany is losing 
purchasing power and wealth due to the coun -
try being a net importer of energy, the prices of 
which have gone up massively. The impact of 
high rates of inflation is already clearly discern -
ible in the latest wage agreements. Marked 
second- round effects on prices are foresee -
able.7 Viewed in isolation, they will play a part 
in prolonging the period over which inflation Recent wage 
agreements 
again contain 
significantly 
larger wage 
increasesUnusually high 
wage demands 
from trade 
unions
Second- round 
effects contrib -
ute to prolong -
ing the period of 
high inflation 
rates
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 20221012345
–+++++Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Percentage
points
–2–10+1+2%
Wage drift1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 Wage drift 
is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual ear-
nings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche Bundesbank
5 Lawmakers gave employers the option of granting their 
employees up to €3,000 as a special tax- free and social 
contribution- exempt bonus any time between 26 October 
2022 and the end of December 2024 to compensate for 
high inflation. This relief measure, referred to as the infla -
tion compensation bonus, can be paid out in a lump sum 
or in multiple instalments.
6 In addition, a minimum of €500 more per month is being 
demanded for employees of central and local government. 
This should benefit those in low and middle pay grades in 
particular.
7 In this context, second- round effects are price effects re -
sulting from an inflation shock, which trigger reactions in 
wages and/ or inflation expectations, and then feed back 
into inflation. See European Central Bank (2004).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
56

remains well above the medium- term target of 
2% for the euro area.
The steep rise in consumer prices continued in 
the fourth quarter of 2022 as well. Between 
October and December, the Harmonised Index 
of Consumer Prices (HICP) increased by an aver -
age of 2.6% on the quarter in seasonally ad -
justed terms, thereby exceeding the growth of 
2.1% recorded in the third quarter. The re -
newed increase in momentum was mainly 
driven by the further surge in prices for ser -
vices. First, the temporary introduction of the 
€9 travel ticket in early summer no longer had 
a dampening effect. Second, the statutory min -
imum wage was raised substantially in October. 
Prices for industrial goods rose at roughly the 
same pace as in the previous quarter, despite 
the fact that producer prices for industrial 
goods have not been quite as dynamic since 
October. Food prices, too, continued to rise 
steeply on a broad basis in the fourth quarter. 
The energy component lost some momentum 
as a result of the government covering advance 
payments for gas in December (“immediate as -
sistance”) and declining crude oil prices.
The annual HICP rate rose by 1.4 percentage 
points to 10.8% in the fourth quarter. Follow -
ing the record high of 11.6% in October, the in -
flation rate cooled slightly to 11.3% in Novem -
ber. In December, it saw a stronger dip to 9.6% 
owing to the government’s assumption of ad -
vance payments for gas and district heating.8 
The rate excluding energy and food also picked 
up steeply in the fourth quarter, climbing from 
3.8% to 5.2%. This put it well above its long- 
term average.
The HICP rate is estimated to have fallen from 
9.6% to 9.2% in January.9 Detailed information 
on the adjustment of the underlying basket of 
goods will only be known once the final figures 
have been published on 22 February 2023. The 
HICP weighting scheme may have changed 
markedly10 as the further decline in inflation 
came as a surprise. Based on the old weighting 
scheme, a significant increase would have been expected due to the absence of the dampening 
effect generated by December’s immediate as -
sistance. The electricity and gas price brakes, 
which are already captured in the price statis -
tics in January, will probably be of less signifi -
cance, by contrast.
The inflation rate is likely to fall in the coming 
months. In March, for instance, the steep rise 
in energy prices in the previous year will no 
longer feed into the calculation of the rate. 
Wholesale electricity and gas prices recently fell 
quite significantly in some cases, but they are 
still at an exceptionally high level and, more -
over, there is likely to be delayed pass- through 
to end consumers. Without the price brakes, 
the consumer prices for electricity and gas in -
cluded in the price statistics would probably 
have been raised even further. In general, there 
is a high degree of uncertainty about energy 
price developments. However, the underlying 
pressure on prices is likely to decline only tenta -
tively over the next few months from an excep -
tionally high level.
Order books and outlook
Economic output is likely to be lower again in 
the first quarter of 2023 than in the previous 
quarter. On the one hand, a gas shortage is no 
longer to be expected.11 In addition, the electri -
city and gas price brakes are reducing energy 
costs for households and enterprises. Tensions 
in the energy markets and uncertainty have Strong price 
increases in Q4 
2022, too
Inflation down 
somewhat in 
November and 
December 2022 
after record high 
in October
Further slight 
drop in inflation 
in JanuaryInflation will 
cool in coming 
months; under -
lying price pres -
sures remain 
high
German eco -
nomic output 
likely to be 
lower again in 
Q1 2023 than in 
previous quarter
8 This measure is likely to have dampened the HICP rate by 
around 1½ percentage points according to Bundesbank 
calculations.
9 The rate according to the national consumer price index 
(CPI) was 8.7%, up from 8.6%.
10 The weights of the HICP components are updated at 
the beginning of each year. This year, however, they could 
change more strongly than in previous years. The stronger 
price dynamics of the past few months entail greater dis -
persion among the sub- components. Moreover, the CPI is 
being rebased to base year 2020, which may also lead to 
major adjustments in the HICP .
11 The Federal Network Agency considers the gas supply 
situation to be less tight than at the beginning of the win -
ter half- year. Current gas inventories are significantly higher 
than the previous year’s levels. See Federal Network 
Agency (2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
57

eased considerably. This is likely to benefit pri -
marily business investment, but also industrial 
production. The latter should remain relatively 
robust in the first quarter, too, in light of the 
further easing of supply bottlenecks and well-  
filled order books.12 On the other hand, indus -
trial production started out from a depressed 
level in 2023 following the significant contrac -
tion in December 2022. This applies, inter alia, 
to exports as well, which are likewise being 
dampened by declining foreign demand. More -
over, inflation remains high and continues to 
eat into households’ purchasing power. In add -
ition, car purchases will not receive any further 
boost due to the reduced government subsid -
isation of electric vehicles. Private consumption 
is therefore likely to decline at the beginning of 
2023 as well, thus curbing activity in the 
consumer- related services sectors. Finally, con -
struction activity will probably continue to cool 
down in view of high construction prices, lower 
purchasing power and increased financing 
costs.Although there could be a gradual pick- up over 
the remainder of the year, no major improve -
ment is yet in sight. All in all, from today’s per -
spective, Germany’s economic output is likely 
to decline slightly on average in 2023 but per -
form a little better than expected in the De -
cember projection.13
The ifo Institute’s business climate index rose 
for the fourth time in succession in January 
2023. Business expectations improved in all 
sectors of the economy – significantly in some 
cases – and exceeded the respective average of 
the fourth quarter.14 This is likely to be a reflec -
tion of the easing of tension in the energy mar -Slight pick- up 
over remainder 
of the year, 
but no major 
improvement yet
Enterprises more 
confident going 
into the new 
yearPrice developments at economic stages as classified for HICP purposes
–40–200+20+40+60+80+100Year-on-year percentage change
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
1 Bundesbank calculations (in euro) based on daily prices in USD as quoted by Bloomberg Finance L.P. 2 Including beverages and to-
bacco products.  3 ECB calculations of DG AGRI prices based on the European Commission’s farm gate and wholesale prices. 4 Analog-
ous to HICP classification “non-energy industrial goods”; Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.
Deutsche Bundesbank10010203040
–++++
505101520
–++++
–20–100+10+20+30+40+50Crude oil price1 (right-hand scale)
HICP – food2Producer prices for food in the euro area3 (right-hand scale)HICP – energy
3036912
–++++
–30+3+6+9+12
HICP – non-energy industrial goods Industrial producer prices4Jan.
Jan.Jan.
12 This is also backed up by the fact that export expect -
ations and production plans picked up in January from a 
low level, according to data from the ifo Institute.
13 The December projection had still predicted a distinct 
year- on- year drop of 0.5% in calendar- adjusted real GDP in 
2023. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022).
14 The early summer survey conducted by the German 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry also reveals a distinct 
decrease in pessimism among firms.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
58

House prices in Germany in 2022
The steep upward pressure on house prices 
persisted up until the middle of 2022 before 
prices receded in the second half of the 
year. High infl  ation and increased fi  nancing 
costs were the main drivers behind the end 
of the property boom, as fi  nancing scope 
tightened for many prospective buyers and 
housing demand eased. On the other hand, 
price pressures were created by the massive 
rise in construction prices and the deceler-
ation in the expansion of housing supply. 
Given the fact that price increases were still 
sizeable in the fi  rst half of the year, house 
prices in Germany were roughly just as 
overvalued as previously on an annual aver-
age.1
Residential real estate prices rose by 9.0% 
in Germany as a whole in 2022 according 
to data provided by the Association of Ger-
man Pfandbrief Banks (vdp). The bulk of the 
price growth took place in the fi  rst half of 
the year, while prices dwindled in the 
second half of the year. The Destatis House 
Price Index published by the Federal Statis-
tical Offi   ce was likewise up by a signifi  cant 
8.6% on an average of the fi  rst three quar-
ters of 2022 compared with the same 
period of the previous year. However, prices 
in the third quarter remained virtually un-
changed relative to the preceding quarter. 
Hypoport AG’s Europace house price index 
(EPX) indicates that house prices in Ger-
many rose by 7.7% on average in 2022 yet, 
in the fourth quarter, dropped below their 
level at the end of 2021. All three indicators 
therefore signal that the years of upswing 
in the residential real estate market are 
over.
According to calculations based on annual 
data provided by bulwiengesa AG for 127 
German towns and cities, house prices in-creased by 6.0% on an annual average in 
2022, which is somewhat weaker than in 
the past. At 6.2%, house price infl  ation in 
the seven major cities was also down on 
the year.2 The quarterly data gathered by 
vdp also show that, at 7.9%, residential 
property prices rose more slowly in the 
seven major cities in the reporting year than 
one year earlier. Furthermore, prices in 
these cities declined at an above- average 
rate in the fi  nal quarter.
In contrast to prices, rents for new lettings 
in Germany increased at an accelerated rate 
over the course of the year, up from 3.7% 
in the fi  rst quarter to 6.5% in the fi  nal quar-
ter year- on- year according to vdp data. On 
an annual average, rents for new lettings 
saw the strongest rise since the start of the 
property market upswing at the beginning 
of the last decade. Calculations based on 
data provided by both bulwiengesa AG and 
vdp show that rents in towns and cities, in-
cluding major cities, went up more strongly 
than in the previous two years.
The key determinants of demand in the 
housing market developed only moderately 
last year. Households’ disposable income 
was up strongly by just over 7%, yet high 
infl  ation more than offset this contribution 
to purchasing power. In addition, the inter-
est on mortgage loans rose sharply to an 
annual average of 2.6%. This signifi  cantly 
increased the cost of credit- fi  nanced resi-
dential property purchases and is likely to 
1 This box deals with residential property price devel-
opments in the context of the real economy. To assess 
them from a fi  nancial stability perspective, it is also ne-
cessary to take into account aspects connected with 
mortgage fi  nancing.
2 The seven major cities are Berlin, Cologne, Düssel-
dorf, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, Munich and Stutt-
gart.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
59

have severely dampened demand for resi-
dential real estate. On balance, the afford-
ability of residential real estate deteriorated 
signifi  cantly and was below its level prior to 
the outbreak of the fi  nancial and economic 
crisis of 2008-09.3
The expansion in the supply of housing also 
clearly lost momentum. A scarcity of raw 
materials and building materials, on top of 
the existing labour shortages, caused the 
prices of construction materials to soar. The 
sharp rise in construction prices has made 
new builds fi  nancially less attractive than 
existing properties. Furthermore, the rapid 
and massive increase in prices for construc-
tion materials has hampered the calculation 
of construction projects. As a result, the 
number of cancelled construction projects 
shot up in 2022.4 Overall, it is likely that 
fewer dwellings were completed than the 
almost 295,000 units in the previous year. 
The number of new permits for housing 
construction also declined over the course 
of the year and, at an estimated 355,000 
units, was down on the year.
Overvaluations of residential real estate did 
not decrease on average in 2022. The fall in 
house prices in the second half of the year 
only partially counteracted the price in-
creases which remained very steep up until 
the middle of the year. According to current 
estimates, real estate prices in urban areas 
were between 25% and 40% above the 
level suggested by the socio- demographic 
and economic fundamentals.5 On an an-
nual average, the price- rent ratio for hous-
3 See the Bundesbank’s system of indicators for the 
German residential property market, which is available 
at https://www.bundesbank.de/en/statistics/sets- of- 
indicators/system-of-indicators- for-the-german- 
residential-property-market/system-of-indicators- 
for-the-german-residential-property-market-795268.
4 See ifo Institute (2022).
5 For an explanation of the underlying panel estima-
tion approach used, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a).Price indices for housing
1 Weighted by transaction. Bundesbank calculations based on 
price  data  provided  by  bulwiengesa  AG.  2 Berlin,  Cologne, 
Düsseldorf, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, Munich and Stutt-
gart.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 222010 = 100, annual data, log scale
100110120130140160180200220240260
95100110120130140 140160180200
95100110120130140160 160180200220240
100110120130140160180200
Destatis house price indexHypoport AG composite indexvdp price index for
owner-occupied housingDeutsche Bundesbank1
Quarterlyof which:
7 major cities2Total
127 towns and citiesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
60

kets and the reduced uncertainty this has pro -
duced. Even so, enterprises remained predom -
inantly pessimistic. However, the assessment of 
the current business situation in the ifo survey 
did not change overall compared with the pre -
vious quarter; enterprises are still satisfied on 
the whole. In the manufacturing and trade sec -
tors, they even rated their business situation 
somewhat better in January than in the fourth 
quarter of 2022. By contrast, construction firms 
and service providers, especially in the trans -
port and logistics sector and in hotel and res -
taurant services, considered their situation to 
be somewhat worse.
There were further steep declines in industrial 
orders in the fourth quarter of 2022. Orders 
from abroad fell particularly sharply, but slightly 
fewer new orders were received from within 
Germany as well. This decrease related to all 
categories of goods. Producers of capital 
goods, in particular, saw a steep drop in orders, 
but producers of intermediate and consumer goods also received markedly fewer orders. 
Order intake fell in almost all sectors. Only 
manufacturers of motor vehicles and motor ve -
hicle parts and of pharmaceutical products ex -
perienced an increase in new orders. The re -
ceding demand was absorbed by the well- filled 
order books. In combination with further eas -
ing of supply bottlenecks, the order backlog, 
which is still large according to ifo Institute sur -
veys, is likely to continue to support industrial 
production in the coming months.
Construction activity is likely to continue to 
slow down at the beginning of 2023. Accord -
ing to surveys conducted by the ifo Institute, 
construction firms assessed their business situ -
ation in January to be somewhat worse than in 
the previous quarter.15 Expectations did Industrial new 
orders down 
steeply; high 
order backlog a 
buffer against 
declining 
demandConstruction 
activity likely to 
weaken furthering units in towns and cities was still just 
over 30% above its longer- term mean, and 
in the seven major cities, around 40% 
above its longer- term mean. Both in terms 
of the price- income ratio and according to 
estimation results for the long- run relation-
ship between real estate prices, incomes 
and interest rates, housing prices in Ger-
many stood at between 20% and 30% 
above the benchmark.6
6 For an explanation of the valuation approaches 
used, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b).
15 The mild weather in January is likely to have lent a boost 
to the start of 2023. There may even have been catch- up 
effects following the depressed level of construction out -
put in the first half of December owing to the unusually 
cold weather.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
61

brighten slightly, but a large majority of firms 
still feel pessimistic about the future. Demand 
for construction work declined further. Last Oc -
tober and November – the most recent months 
for which data are available  – slightly fewer 
new orders were recorded again than the aver -
age for the third quarter. In the first three quar -
ters of 2022, order intake had already shrunk 
considerably in some cases quarter on quarter. 
The number of building permits granted also 
continued to decline steeply. Moreover, the im -
pairment of construction activity caused by a 
shortage of orders, as surveyed by the ifo Insti -
tute, increased slightly again compared with 
the average for the fourth quarter of 2022. By 
contrast, reports of construction activity being 
hampered due to a shortage of labour and ma -
terials were significantly lower in January. The 
share of firms affected remained high from a 
long- term perspective, however.
Household final consumption expenditure will 
probably continue to fall in the first quarter of 
2023. This is largely due to high inflation, which 
is continuing to reduce consumers’ purchasing 
power. On top of this, there are withdrawal ef -
fects relating to motor vehicle purchases fol -
lowing the boost from subsidies at the end of 
the previous quarter. Motor vehicle registra -
tions had already fallen sharply in January. The 
consumer climate index compiled by market re -
search institution GfK continued the tentative 
upward trend it has charted since its trough in 
October 2022, but remained at a very low 
level. The propensity to purchase actually de -
creased compared with the fourth quarter of 
2022. According to ifo Institute surveys, retail 
firms considered their situation in January to be 
distinctly better than in the fourth quarter, but 
nevertheless continued to rate their business 
situation as generally poor. In the hotel and res -
taurant services, by contrast, enterprises were 
somewhat less satisfied with their current situ -
ation than in the fourth quarter. Business ex -
pectations improved in both sectors, but re -
mained predominantly pessimistic.Private con -
sumption likely 
to continue to 
weigh on eco -
nomic output 
for nowDemand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022758090100110120
–30–20–100+10+20+30+40+50
708090100110120130
8090100110120
100110120130140
–20–100+10+20Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data
DomesticInternationalLog scale
of which:Log scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Main construction 
orders
%%TotalMonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
62

List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022), Outlook for the German economy for 2023 to 2025, Monthly 
Report , December 2022, pp. 17-44.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), Two models for estimating residential property prices in Germany, 
Monthly Report, October 2020, pp. 73-74.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), The protracted rise in residential property prices in Germany from 
a macroeconomic perspective: transmission channels and fundamental determinants, Monthly 
Report , October 2020, pp. 67-85.
European Central Bank (2004), Oil prices and the euro area economy, Monthly Bulletin, 11/ 2004, 
pp. 53-54.
Federal Network Agency (2023), Current status of gas supply in Germany, available at https://
www.bundesnetzagentur.de/EN/Areas/Energy/SecurityOfSupply/GasSupply/start.html
ifo Institute (2022), More and More Cancellations in German Residential Construction, press 
release  of 11 October 2022.
Statistics provided by the Federal Employment Agency (2023), Berichte: Blickpunkt Arbeitsmarkt – 
Monatsbericht zum Arbeits- und Ausbildungsmarkt, January 2023, p. 13.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
63

Public finances*
General government budget
2022 as a whole1
Last year, government finances were shaped by 
the pandemic drawing to an end, new fiscal 
support measures and high inflation. Com -
pared with the previous year, relief outweighed 
burdens, and the deficit ratio fell by 1 percent -
age point to 2.6%. Extensive new fiscal policy 
measures were taken in 2022, chiefly to miti -
gate the effects of the energy crisis. Of these, 
the payments to gas trading companies (in par -
ticular Uniper), energy price allowances for em -
ployed persons and pension recipients as well 
as the first stage of the gas price brake consti -
tuted the largest strains on the budget. How -
ever, pandemic- related assistance fell sharply 
(with, above all, lower short- time working 
benefits and fewer transfers being made to en -
terprises). In addition, taxes and social contri -
butions rose on the back of the economic re -
covery. Support measures aside, high inflation 
also alleviated the pressure on government 
budgets at first by boosting nominal private 
consumption, for instance – an important tax 
reference variable. By contrast, expenditure is 
yet to demonstrate a broad- based response.2
However, inflation was quickly and directly re -
flected in higher financing costs for inflation-  
linked Federal securities. In addition, the rate of 
interest on new debt and old debt that was 
rolled over rose.3 Nevertheless, the average 
rate of interest on government debt remained 
relatively low (around 1%). In relation to gross 
domestic product (GDP), interest expenditure 
grew only slightly, from 0.6% to 0.7%.
The debt ratio is likely to have fallen consider -
ably last year. This is mainly due to the sharp in -
crease in nominal GDP in the denominator. 
Moreover, central government did not finance 
its deficit solely from new debt. Instead, it also 
used cash reserves that had been accumulated during the pandemic. The results for end- 2022 
are not yet available. The debt ratio had fallen 
to 66.6% by the end of the third quarter, down 
from 68.6% at the end of 2021.
2023 and medium- term 
 outlook
The current budget plans set the stage for a re -
newed rise in the deficit ratio in 2023. There is 
a high degree of uncertainty, amongst other 
things, about the costs of the electricity and 
gas price brakes. These depend on the prices at 
which utility companies sell electricity and gas 
(before deducting central government trans -
fers). The development of these prices is diffi -
cult to estimate. There will probably be a lag 
before the unexpected fall in prices on the en -
ergy markets is reflected in sales prices. This is 
because suppliers are likely to have procured 
the bulk of their energy supplies at higher 
prices and mostly adjust their sales prices only 
at infrequent intervals.
There are many reasons why expenditure is 
likely to rise more sharply than revenue. The 
volume of temporary support measures is ex -
pected to remain high, primarily as a result of 
the above- mentioned energy price brakes: 
these are estimated to amount to €83 billion 
net, or around 2% of GDP (after drawing on Deficit develop -
ments in 2022 
shaped by pan -
demic drawing 
to an end, new 
fiscal support 
measures and 
high inflation
Interest expend -
iture driven up 
by inflation and 
interest rate 
reversal, but still 
low
Debt ratio likely 
to have fallen 
considerably for 
2022 as a wholeDeficit ratio 
projected  to 
increase in 2023
Expenditure 
growth probably 
stronger, rev -
enue growth 
weaker
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. This is followed by reporting on budgetary 
developments (government finance statistics), provided 
that the corresponding annual results are available.
1 It is not yet possible to gauge the impact that certain 
temporary measures have had on the deficit for 2022. This 
article therefore does not contain the usual comments on 
the structural development of the general government 
budget.
2 For information on the typical impact of inflation on gov -
ernment finances, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a).
3 In principle, the national accounts record interest ex -
penditure on an accruals basis. This expenditure is then less 
prone to fluctuation due to premia and discounts when 
securities are issued in the national accounts than it is in 
the central government budget.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
64

revenue from electricity sales). At the same 
time, high inflation and the interest rate rever -
sal will probably be increasingly reflected in ris -
ing expenditure. Moreover, central government 
is planning significant additional spending on 
defence and climate policy. Government rev -
enue now appears likely to develop at a slower 
pace overall. Gross wages and salaries – a par -
ticularly significant item – are set to continue 
growing dynamically. This is true even before 
factoring in the tax and social contribution- free 
inflation compensation bonuses that employers 
are paying to their employees. However, there 
is some evidence to suggest that the develop -
ment of profit- related taxes will be more mod -
erate than the previous year’s high level.
At present, the deficit ratio looks set to decline 
substantially further in 2024. As things stand, 
temporary support measures will largely have 
been phased out by then. The structural deficit 
ratio could be roughly 1% in 2024 (structural: 
excluding cyclical influences and temporary 
measures). Even if central government and 
state governments comply with the regular 
limits under the debt brake, general govern -
ment is expected to record similar structural 
deficits going forward. This is because central 
government is still planning major deficits with 
no direct limits in off- budget entities, especially 
for climate protection and the armed forces. In 
addition, the federal states also built up sub -
stantial buffers during the pandemic. Over the 
next few years, these will probably not be used 
solely for upcoming repayments but for other 
purposes, too. Deficits at the state government 
level therefore also appear to be on the cards. 
The pension insurance scheme is likewise ex -
pected to record a deficit: its extensive reserves 
are sufficient to bridge the foreseeable funding 
gaps for a number of years. By contrast, at the 
current contribution rate, the Federal Employ -
ment Agency could see significant surpluses.Limit deficits
Last year, there was a swift fiscal policy re -
sponse to the fallout of the war in Ukraine and 
the high inflation rates. The support measures 
implemented to mitigate the impact of rising 
energy prices chiefly preserve the incentives to 
save energy. However, they are broadly based 
and the government largely finances them with 
new debt. This is part of the reason why the 
government deficit is set to rise in the already 
highly inflationary environment. A growing def -
icit, in and of itself, makes it more difficult for 
monetary policy to lower inflation. In principle, In the medium 
term, deficits 
still marked: 
climate  and 
defence expend -
iture, in particu -
lar, largely 
credit- financed
Support meas -
ures broadly 
based and 
largely financed 
with new debtGeneral government fiscal ratios *
* General government budget as defined in the national ac-
counts. 1 Taxes and social contributions plus customs duties 
and bank levies to the Single Resolution Fund.
Deutsche Bundesbank4445464748495051
54321012
–––––++As a percentage of GDP
ExpenditureRevenue
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022Fiscal balance40414243
Taxes and social contributions 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
65

this would suggest that it would be appropriate 
to confine assistance payments, as far as pos -
sible, to those in need, and ensure timely coun -
terfinancing. Positive fiscal surprises should not 
be interpreted as additional fiscal scope. If, for 
example, support measures were to cost less or 
revenue were to rise by more than planned, this 
should then result in lower deficits.
Strengthen fiscal rules again
It is important to apply the fiscal rules effect -
ively again in the future. If they continue to be 
stretched, they will forfeit their binding effect 
and credibility and will no longer act as a safe -
guard for sound public finances. If the debt 
brake is seen as requiring amendment, it should 
be reformed transparently and, if necessary, the 
changes written into Germany’s Basic Law. The 
Bundesbank has made reform proposals to this 
effect.4
The European committees are currently dis -
cussing a reform of the EU fiscal rules. It is es -
sential that the Member States agree on effect -
ive rules to rapidly reduce high debt ratios, in 
particular, as sound public finances are a key 
foundation for a stability- oriented monetary 
union. The European Commission’s reform pro -
posal of November 2022 is unconvincing in this respect. In place of effective standards, it envis -
ages fiscal targets that can be adapted ex -
tremely flexibly by each country. The European 
Commission intends to negotiate these targets 
with each individual country and over a period 
of several years. In addition to fiscal sustainabil -
ity, the targets are to take into account numer -
ous other aspects. They would have to be de -
termined using long- term calculations, which 
are necessarily strongly assumption- driven and 
can therefore be adapted. In addition, the 
Commission would grant considerable discre -
tion. As a result, it may no longer be possible to 
understand how the fiscal targets are derived 
and evaluate whether the countries are on 
track to meeting them. Overall, this would pose 
a substantial threat to the existing framework. 
This could be avoided if the reform debate 
were instead focused on adjusting the existing 
rules in a manner conducive to maintaining sta -
bility.5 In its latest Annual Economic Report, the 
Federal Government outlined its ideas for a re -
form of the framework, arguing in favour of 
considerably stricter fiscal rules than the Euro -
pean Commission’s proposals envisage.
Budgetary development of 
central, state and local 
 government
Tax revenue
2022 as a whole
Tax revenue6 rose dynamically in 2022, up by 
7% on the previous year (see the chart above 
and the table on p. 67), and growing just as 
sharply as nominal GDP . This constitutes a sur -
prise to the upside on the official tax estimate 
of last October in the order of €5½ billion, or 
½ percentage point of the growth rate.7Apply fiscal rules 
effectively again
Reform of EU 
fiscal  rules under 
discussion, 
direction 
worrying Tax revenue rose 
dynamically in 
2022 – tax esti -
mate somewhat 
exceededTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Comprises joint taxes as 
well as central government taxes and state government taxes. 
Including EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs 
duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022201510505101520
––––++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figures
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b).
5 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2019, 2021a).
6 Including EU shares in German tax revenue, but exclud -
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the year as a whole.
7 For more details on the official tax estimate, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2022c), pp. 61ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
66

Specifically, VAT increased by 13½%, contribut -
ing more than 60% to the rise in tax revenue. 
This is clearly disproportionate to its weight in 
the tax mix. In the wake of sharp price in -
creases, the nominal macroeconomic reference 
variables private consumption and housing 
construction grew dynamically. Furthermore, 
additional revenue resulting from some corona -
virus support measures being phased out out -
weighed shortfalls from other legislative 
changes.8
Profit- related taxes were up by 7½%. Non-  
assessed taxes on earnings (income tax on divi -
dends), assessed income tax and corporation 
tax contributed in roughly equal measure to 
this increase. Advance payments of assessed 
income tax and corporation tax – major rev -
enue items – rose dynamically. Various legisla -
tive changes, notably the possibility of faster 
tax write- offs (for instance, for investments in 
electronic data processing) reduced revenue.Wage tax receipts were up by 4%, driven 
chiefly by a decline in short- time work. On the 
other hand, various tax measures significantly 
reduced revenue.9 The energy price allowance 
for employed persons, which was paid out 
from September onwards, proved a major 
strain, reducing wage tax revenue by around 
€10 billion. Without this one- off measure, it 
would have risen by 8½%.
Outlook for 2023
For 2023, the official tax estimate, including le -
gislative changes made in the interim, foresees 
an increase of 3% (including local government 
taxes). The surprisingly favourable revenue level 
for 2022 is likely to spill over into the current 
year. The macroeconomic assumptions in the 
Annual Economic Report, taken in isolation, VAT increased 
sharply
Profit- related 
taxes rose 
dynamically – 
despite substan -
tial tax- reducing 
measuresWage tax made 
moderate contri -
bution to 
growth – tax- 
reducing meas -
ures proved 
major strain
Tax estimate: 
revenue growth 
much weaker in 
2023Tax revenue
 
Type of taxYear as a wholeEstimate 
for 2022 1Q4
2021 2022 2021 2022
Year- on- year changeYear- on- 
year 
change %Year- on- year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total 2 761.0 814.9 + 53.9 +  7.1 +  6.4 219.8 221.5 +  1.6 +  0.7
of which:
Wage tax 3 218.4 227.2 +  8.8 +  4.0 +  3.4 62.9 67.2 +  4.3 +  6.8
Profi  t- related taxes 151.9 162.9 + 11.0 +  7.3 +  5.1 45.9 42.4 –  3.4 –  7.5
Assessed income tax 4 72.3 77.4 +  5.1 +  7.0 +  4.5 22.2 21.7 –  0.5 –  2.2
Corporation tax 5 42.1 46.3 +  4.2 + 10.0 +  5.2 13.2 13.2 –  0.0 –  0.2
Non- assessed taxes 
on earnings 27.4 32.6 +  5.2 + 19.0 + 19.4 7.9 6.4 –  1.5 – 18.4
Withholding tax on 
interest income and 
capital gains 10.0 6.6 –  3.5 – 34.6 – 30.2 2.6 1.1 –  1.5 – 56.8
VAT6 250.8 284.9 + 34.0 + 13.6 + 13.0 68.8 72.3 +  3.5 +  5.1
Other consumption- 
related taxes 7 90.6 88.4 –  2.2 –  2.4 –  1.8 27.8 26.1 –  1.6 –  5.9
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates and Bundesbank calculations. 1  According to offi   cial tax 
estimate of October 2022. 2 Comprises joint taxes as well as central government taxes and state government taxes. Including EU shares 
in German tax revenue, including customs duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Child benefi  ts and subsidies for 
supplementary private pension plans deducted from revenue. 4 Employee refunds and research grants deducted from revenue. 5 Re-
search grants deducted from revenue. 6 VAT and import VAT. 7 Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, 
air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lottery, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
8 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022d), p. 67.
9 For more detailed information, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2022c), p. 61.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
67

also suggest a slight upward revision of the 
growth rate.
Changes in legislation will throttle revenue 
growth this year. This is mainly due to compen -
sation of bracket creep: the legislator adjusted 
the income tax scale for 2023 in order to com -
pensate for the high bracket creep in 2022.10 
Child benefit was raised, too – especially for 
the first two children, but also for the third 
child. The reduced VAT rate for natural gas and 
district heating will be another significant fac -
tor dampening revenue growth. By contrast, 
the fact that major support measures from 
2022 have come to an end – above all the en -
ergy price allowance for employed persons, but 
also the fuel tax rebate – will boost revenue 
growth.Central government finances
Central government budget:  
2022 as a whole
Central government posted a high deficit of 
€116 billion in 2022, yet it was €100 billion 
down on 2021. However, this figure does not 
include deficits recorded by off- budget entities, 
which previously had large surpluses. Including 
those off- budget entities for which figures are 
available, the deficit actually climbed by €7½ 
billion to stand at €147 billion (see the table on 
p. 69, items 3 and 21; the following item num -
bers also refer to this table).11
In the core budget, revenue was up by 8% 
(+€29 billion) on the year. This was mainly due 
to much higher tax revenue. By contrast, ex -
penditure fell sharply, by 12% (-€70 billion). 
Transfers to off- budget entities alone declined 
by €72 billion. The year before had seen a high 
transfer to the Climate Fund (end- 2021) and 
pre-financing of the Flood Assistance Fund. In 
addition, there was a sharp decline in 
coronavirus-  related transfers for enterprises 
(-€35 billion). Conversely, interest payments 
rose (+€11 billion). Current transfers to the so -
cial security funds went up by €4 billion. On 
the one hand, coronavirus refunds to the health 
fund (for example, for tests for the general 
public) increased and the effect of the central 
government funds for the energy price allow -Tax measures to 
throttle revenue 
in 20232022: sharp 
drop in core 
budget deficit – 
but up some -
what if off- 
budget entities 
included
Expenditure 
sharply declin -
ing on the 
wholeFiscal balance of central government 
budget *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Feder-
al Ministry of Finance. * Excluding off-budget entities. Not ad-
justed for financial transactions or cyclical effects. 
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410050050
––+
–250–200–150–100–500+50
2022
20212020Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20202021€ billion
2022
10 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2022e).
11 Central government off- budget entities that use the 
single- entry system and for which data are available when 
the quarterly reports are concluded (see pp. 73 f.) are fac -
tored into the calculations here. These include, in particu -
lar, (i) the Economic Stabilisation Fund for Energy Assis -
tance (ESF- E), (ii) the off- budget entities that were included 
in the debt brake prior to the change made in 2022 and (iii) 
the Armed Forces Fund (items 16, 17 and 20). The report -
ing group also includes (iv) the other funds shown in the 
central government budget’s borrowing plan (funds for 
making provisions for repayment and for extending child -
care, item 18) as well as (v) other entities that publish quar -
terly data early, in particular the precautionary funds for 
civil servants’ pensions and the Economic Stabilisation 
Fund, excluding the ESF- E (item 19), but not SoFFin, which 
refinances the bad bank FMSW. Furthermore, FMSW, the 
fund for the disposal of nuclear energy waste, the motor -
way company and the development aid company GIZ, in 
particular, are excluded.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
68

Key central government budget data*
€ billion
Item Actual 2021Target 2022 
with ESF-E 1Provisional 
actual 2022 Target 2023
1.Expenditure of central government budget (CGB) 2 556.6 495.8 480.7 476.3
of which:
1.a Investment 45.8 51.5 46.2 71.5
1.b Global spending increases/ cuts – –   6.5 – –   6.9
2.Revenue of CGB 2,3 341.0 356.2 364.7 389.9
of which:
2.a Tax revenue 4 313.5 328.4 337.2 358.1
2.b Global revenue increases/ shortfalls – –   1.0 – –   4.9
3.Fiscal balance of CGB (2.-1.) – 215.6 – 139.6 – 116.0 –  86.4
4.Coin seigniorage of CGB 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.2
5.Transfer to (–) / withdrawal from reserves (+) in CGB – 0.5 0.5 40.5
6.Net borrowing (–) / repayment (+) of CGB (3.+4.+5.) – 215.4 – 138.9 – 115.4 –  45.6
7.Cyclical component in the budget procedure 5 –  14.3 –   7.9 –   2.2 –  15.3
8.Balance of fi  nancial transactions of CGB 3.0 –   2.8 –   4.1 –  17.7
9.Structural net borrowing (–) / repayment (+) of CGB (6.-7.-8.) – 204.1 – 128.2 – 109.1 –  12.6
10. Amount exceeding limit in CGB (13.-9.) 192.0 115.7 96.6 –
11. Amount exceeding limit incl. ESF-E (10.-15.) 192.0 315.7 276.0 –
12. Memo item: Amount exceeding limit with balance of off-budget 
entities  (10.-16.-17.) 123.0 162.9 121.9 142.5
13. Standard upper limit: Structural net borrowing (0.35% of GDP) 6 –  12.1 –  12.5 –  12.5 –  12.6
14. Structural balance of CGB (3.-7.-8.) – 204.3 – 128.9 – 109.7 –  53.4
14.a As before, with estimate of potential output acc. to 2023 Annual 
Economic Report – 208.6 – 134.0 – 109.2 –  59.5
15. Structural net borrowing of ESF-E – – 200.0 – 179.4 –
16. Defi  cit of ESF-E – –  35.1 –  30.2 – 121.2
16.a ESF-E funds remaining thereafter – 164.9 169.8 48.6
17. Balance of special funds (SFs) relevant to the debt brake prior to 2022 7 69.0 –  12.0 4.9 –  21.4
17.a Climate and Transformation Fund 53.9 –   6.5 5.3 –  14.1
17.b Relief Fund (2013 fl  ood) –   0.2 –   0.5 –   0.2 –   0.2
17.c Fund to Promote Municipal Investment –   1.0 –   1.2 –   0.7 –   1.0
17.d Digitalisation Fund 0.2 –   0.2 2.1 –   2.7
17.e Fund for Primary School- Age Childcare Provision 0.5 –   0.4 –   0.1 –   0.4
17.f Relief Fund (2021 fl  ood) 15.6 –   3.2 –   1.6 –   3.0
18. Balance of SFs for making provisions for repayment and for extending 
childcare 7 0.9 4.2 4.4 5.5
19. Balance of other SFs without own constitutional rules 8 6.3 . –   9.9 .
20. Balance of Armed Forces SF – –   0.1 – –   8.4
20.a Borrowing authorisation remaining thereafter – 99.9 100.0 91.6
21. Balance of CGB and SFs (3.+16.+17.+18.+19.+20.) – 139.4 – 182.7 – 146.8 – 231.7
22. Reserves of SFs for 16. and 17. 112.2 265.1 286.9 144.4
23. Central government assets in civil servants’ pension reserve and civil 
servants’ pension fund 9 28.1 . . .
24. Level of general reserves of CGB 48.2 48.2 48.2 7.7
25. Balance on control account 47.7 47.7 47.7 47.7
26. Total outstanding repayment amount including Armed Forces SF 
(from 11. and 18.) 261.6 577.4 537.6 546.0
27. Total outstanding repayment amount from NGEU transfers e,10 14 36 30 54
* Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. For methodological notes, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2016) and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022d), p. 71. 1 ESF-E: Economic Stabilisation Fund for Energy. Defi  cit and reserves updated in line with reserves 
fi  gures in budget plan for 2023, structural net borrowing including fi  nancial transactions (still to be specifi  ed). 2 Excluding transfers to/
withdrawals from reserves and including net tax revenue (see footnote 4). 3 Excluding coin seigniorage. 4 After deduction of supplemen-
tary central government transfers, shares of energy tax revenue, compensation under the 2009 reform of motor vehicle tax and budget-
ary recovery assistance to federal states. 5 For 2021 fi  nal settlement, for 2022 according to budget plan and actual fi  gures from January, 
for 2023 according to budget plan. 6 Based on gross domestic product in the year before the comprehensive budget is prepared. 
7 Budgeted fi  gures for 2022 and 2023 from borrowing plan. 8 Entities with quarterly data, but excluding data on budgeted results in 
central government’s borrowing plan. Above all, ESF (excluding ESF-E), civil servants’ pension reserve and civil servants’ pension fund, but 
excluding SoFFin, which refi  nances central government’s bad bank (FMSW). 9 Market values according to central government balance 
sheet for 2021. Continuous infl  ows; withdrawals from the fund planned from 2030, from reserves from 2032. 10  Actual NGEU fi  gure for 
2021 as well as budgeted fi  gures and estimates, each multiplied by Germany’s share of 25½% in EU gross national income.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
69

ance for pension recipients was also felt. On 
the other hand, central government no longer 
had to make extensive transfers to the Federal 
Employment Agency to offset the deficit, as it 
had done in 2021. Assistance to other coun -
tries rose by €4 billion, in all probability mainly 
to Ukraine. By contrast, the new assistance 
provided for enterprises under the energy cost- 
containment programme had barely any im -
pact.
The deficit in the core budget was €24 billion 
lower than in the budget plan. Additional tax 
receipts of €8½ billion were recorded on the 
revenue side. Expenditure was €15 billion lower 
on balance than the amount envisaged in the 
budget plan. Spending was down, especially 
on transfers made to enterprises to compen -
sate for the pandemic and high energy costs. 
However, central government offloaded signifi -
cant burdens from the energy crisis to the Eco -
nomic Stabilisation Fund (mainly to the ESF- E, 
item 16 and p. 73).
Central government’s debt brake relates to the 
structural net borrowing of the core budget 
and off-  budget entities.12 This means that the 
ESF- E must also be included. For the core 
budget, structural net borrowing amounted to 
€109 billion (item 9). The structural figure is de -
termined by deducting the net acquisition of 
financial assets of €4 billion and the cyclical 
burden of €2 billion (items 7 and 8). With the 
escape clause activated, the core budget al -
ready exceeded the standard ceiling (of €13 bil -
lion at the end of the period under review) by 
almost €97 billion. In addition – and also under 
an activated escape clause – the ESF- E likewise 
reported structural net borrowing, of €179 bil -
lion (item 15). This comes from its net borrow -
ing of €200 billion less the acquisition of shares 
in and capital injections to gas trading com -
panies. The Federal Ministry of Finance deducts 
these payments as financial transactions in its 
accounts. However, from an economic per -
spective, this approach is unconvincing. These 
are ultimately payments to offset losses and do 
not lead to the formation of financial assets, and precisely this should be the precondition 
for excluding any associated new debt from 
the debt brake. Consequently, the national ac -
counts do not record these payments as finan -
cial transactions, but rather as deficit- increasing 
capital transfers.
Central government budget:  
2023 budget plan
The 2023 core budget, together with the ESF- 
E, is to comply again with the ceiling for net 
borrowing imposed under the debt brake. 
However, this can only be achieved by using 
the large reserves in the central government 
budget (item 5) and, above all, in the ESF- E 
(change compared with actual 2022 in item 
16a). In total, central government plans a def -
icit of €232 billion (item 21) in 2023, including 
its off- budget entities.13 It intends to finance 
this as follows:
– structural net borrowing in the core budget 
according to the standard debt brake limit 
of €13 billion;
– net borrowing for cyclical burdens and 
financial transactions in the core budget of 
€33 billion;
– recourse to core budget reserves in the 
amount of €41 billion;
– recourse to credit-  financed reserves of the 
ESF- E in the amount of €121 billion;Compared with 
figures in budget 
plan, core 
budget deficit 
significantly 
lower, but new 
burdens off -
loaded to off- 
budget entities
Borrowing far 
above limit 
imposed under 
debt brakeCentral govern -
ment to formally 
comply with 
debt brake in 
2023, but over -
all deficit very 
high …
12 At the beginning of 2022, central government changed 
the way in which it calculates the structural results for the 
debt brake. Off-  budget entities that do not obtain finan -
cing by means of their own borrowing authorisations (e.g. 
the Climate Fund) are now excluded from the debt brake. 
Previously, their budget balances were counted towards 
the debt brake. This meant that pre-financing via emer -
gency loans was not possible. See also Deutsche Bundes -
bank (2022d), p. 71.
13 This includes the budgeted figures of central govern -
ment’s off- budget entities in accordance with the core 
budget borrowing plan. Compared with the actual bal -
ances shown in item 21, it does not include, above all, the 
precautionary funds for civil servants’ pensions or the ESF, 
excluding the ESF- E.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
70

– recourse to reserves of other special funds 
included, in particular the Climate Fund, in 
the total amount of €16 billion;
– net borrowing for the Armed Forces Fund of 
€8½ billion, which is not included in the 
debt brake as a result of a constitutional 
amendment.
As a result, central government thus formally 
complies with the standard debt brake limit in 
2023, but is planning a very high and sharply 
rising deficit: for the core budget and those 
off- budget entities with budget figures, the 
combined deficit is expected to be €85 billion 
higher than the result for 2022 (item 21). The 
fiscal policy stance is therefore expansionary. 
However, the macroeconomic environment is 
shaped by high inflationary pressures and a 
tightening of monetary policy.
However, as in previous years, the core budget 
and the larger off- budget entities could fare 
more favourably overall than planned. As far as 
the core budget is concerned, interest expend -
iture, for one, could be lower (for information 
on off- budget entities, see p. 74). Central gov -
ernment foresees high discounts when new 
debt instruments are issued.14 From the current 
perspective, these appear cautious. By con -
trast, the more favourable than planned core 
budget outturn for 2022 is likely to have little 
impact on the current year. For example, tax 
revenue in 2022 developed roughly as ex -
pected when the 2023 budget plan was final -
ised. The alleviating effect that lower pandemic 
and energy crisis- related expenditure had on 
the 2022 core budget will not continue. This 
expenditure will either be phased out on sched -
ule almost completely or has been offloaded to 
off- budget entities by central government.
Central government budget:  
outlook as of 2024
For 2024, the Federal Ministry of Finance ex -
pects a need for consolidation vis- à- vis the fig -
ures budgeted in the summer of 2022.15 The old budget plan fully exhausted the debt brake 
limit. This meant that it did not leave any scope 
for the budgetary burdens that are now loom -
ing. Although the last tax estimate of autumn 
2022 projected additional revenue of €16 bil -
lion for central government in 2024, shortfalls 
as a result of measures taken in the interim are 
higher. On balance, this will result in revenue 
shortfalls that outweigh previous provisions. 
The most recent changes envisaged by the Fed -
eral Ministry of Finance, especially for tax de -
ductibility of write-  downs, would therefore 
have to be offset by counterfinancing. In add -
ition, given rising prices, higher expenditure ap -
propriations – by a significant margin in some 
cases – would appear reasonable, especially for 
spending on personnel and purchases of tan -
gible goods. According to the new Annual Eco -… and even 
rising  sharply 
compared with 
2022 – central 
government  
finances thus on 
expansionary 
course
More favourable 
budgetary 
developments 
possible – in the 
core budget, for 
example, for 
interest rates For 2024, 
finance ministry 
already sees 
need for 
consolidation  
vis- à- vis previous 
plansPlanned central government deficit for 
2023, broken down by type of financing
1 Net borrowing. 2  Including coin seigniorage.
Deutsche Bundesbank0306090120150180210240€ billion
Climate Fund, etc.Armed Forces Fund
CyclicalOff-budget
entities
ReservesOff-budget 
entities 
NB1
StructuralCore budget
Reserves2Economic 
Stabilisation Fund
for Energy
Financial assets
Core budget
NB1
14 If central government were to book this part of interest 
expenditure on an accruals basis, too, this would bypass 
the erratic impact of premia and discounts on interest ex -
penditure. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), pp. 47 ff.
15 See Federal Ministry of Finance (2023), p. 2.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
71

nomic Report, higher cyclical burdens will cre -
ate additional scope of €4 billion. However, it 
seems questionable whether this is sufficient to 
offset the additional burdens.
The need for consolidation is set to increase 
significantly going forward. This may already 
be apparent in the benchmark figures up to 
2027, which are due in March. The benchmark 
figures are based on an adjusted tax estimate. 
The general expectation is that these figures 
will put revenue higher than in the fiscal plan 
from 2022. However, there will also be a need 
for financing if the government continues to 
compensate for bracket creep in the income 
tax scale. In addition, in contrast to the previ -
ous fiscal plan, the Bundesbank cannot be ex -
pected to make any profit distributions in the 
coming years. At the end of the new planning 
phase for the benchmark figures, in particular, 
there is a risk of considerable gaps in the core 
budget. This is because the scope in off- budget 
entities created by means of borrowing will be 
exhausted in the medium term. As the funding 
needs for defence and climate protection are 
likely to persist, the core budget would then 
have to step in and finance them. Extrapolating 
the figures, this amounts to around €50 billion 
per year.
In subsequent years, additional substantial 
financing burdens will follow. Repayment of 
emergency borrowing during the coronavirus 
crisis and of EU borrowing allocated to Next -
GenerationEU will begin as of 2028. Together, 
these will place a burden on the central gov -
ernment budget in the amount of €15 billion 
per year. As of 2031, there will be an additional 
annual repayment burden of €9 billion for the 
Armed Forces Fund and the ESF- E. This does 
not include ongoing debt servicing, which will 
put increasing pressure on the core budget. 
Furthermore, after the middle of this decade, 
considerable additional demographic burdens 
from the pension insurance scheme will have 
to be factored into the central government 
budget. Nevertheless, the Federal Government 
intends to maintain the guaranteed minimum threshold for the replacement rate for pensions 
beyond 2025 (see p. 77).
The Climate Fund’s funding is at risk. The Fed -
eral Constitutional Court ruled in December 
that the Fund may make use of pandemic-  
related emergency borrowing for the time 
being. However, if the outcome of the main 
proceedings brought to court is that this has 
caused borrowing by central government to be 
excessive, central government would subse -
quently be forced to correct this. It is therefore 
still unclear whether central government will 
have to finance the Climate Fund from else -
where (at the same time, however, the corres -
ponding part of the repayment burden from 
2028 would then be eliminated).
Looking ahead, it can be seen that central gov -
ernment has created some breathing room in 
its core budget only temporarily. In doing so, it 
has increased the squeeze on the budget in 
subsequent years. For example, the burden of 
debt servicing will grow: there will be interest 
to pay on the emergency borrowing, and bor -
rowing made possible by activation of the es -
cape clause as well as borrowing for the Armed 
Forces Fund will later have to be repaid out of 
the central government budget. Furthermore, 
climate and defence policy will have to be 
financed in the medium term without making 
use of pandemic- related emergency borrowing 
or special borrowing for the Armed Forces 
Fund. Central government has merely shelved 
its decisions on these matters. To make it easier 
for households and enterprises to plan ahead, 
the Federal Government should explain as soon 
as possible how it ultimately intends to finance 
the burdens and close the gaps. To achieve 
this, either expenditure needs to be repriori -
tised or an agreement on higher levies needs to 
be reached. For a debt brake to be effective, it 
is important not to overuse the escape clause. 
This essentially suggests that it would be ap -
propriate to confine assistance payments, as far 
as possible, to those in need, and counterfi -
nance them in a timely manner. If there are 
signs of budgetary relief, as is currently the case Upcoming 
benchmark 
figures  up to 
2027 signal 
major chal -
lenges for 
defence and 
 climate protec -
tion ahead
Thereafter, 
further  budget 
strains due to 
debt repayments 
and demo -
graphic changeRuling by Fed -
eral Constitu -
tional Court on 
use of emer -
gency borrow -
ing by Climate 
Fund still 
pending 
Government 
should publish 
rather than 
shelve plans for 
financing out -
standing 
burdens Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
72

with the energy price brakes (see p.  74), it 
would be logical not to spend this relief else -
where. This would also be a useful contribution 
from fiscal policy in the current highly inflation -
ary environment.
Central government off- budget entities: 
results  for 2022 as a whole and …
The central government off- budget entities in -
cluded in this report recorded a large deficit to -
talling €31 billion last year (see the table on 
p. 69, items 16 to 20). By contrast, there was 
still a surplus of €76 billion for 2021, as the 
central government budget had pre- financed 
the Climate Fund and Flood Assistance Fund 
(2021 Flood Relief Fund). The following is a 
breakdown for 2022:
– At €30 billion, the ESF- E recorded the main 
deficit. The Fund acquired or recapitalised 
gas trading companies at risk of bankruptcy 
for a total of €21 billion. In addition, it paid 
€9 billion in December gas and district heat -
ing bills for all households and many enter -
prises.
– The remaining part of the ESF also recorded 
a large deficit of €14 billion. Payments for 
loans taken out significantly exceeded loan 
repayments received. Although there is no 
breakdown indicating whether these loans 
were used for the purpose of coronavirus 
assistance or energy crisis assistance, the lat -
ter appears to have caused the deficit: when 
authorisation for coronavirus assistance 
ended in the summer of 2022, there was still 
a surplus of €3 billion.
– At €1½ billion, the Flood Assistance Fund’s 
deficit again remained fairly small. It there -
fore still has reserves of €14 billion.
– Meanwhile, the Climate Fund recorded a 
surplus of €5½ billion (budget estimate: def -
icit of €6½ billion). On balance, only half of 
the projected expenditure amount of €28 
billion was spent. First, spending on some programmes was very limited. Second, the 
Fund did not provide the planned amount of 
€3 billion to compensate for the reduction 
in the EEG levy in the electricity price at the 
start of 2022. The Fund’s surplus was broadly 
in line with the (ultimately credit- financed) 
central government grant last year. Its finan -
cial reserves thus rose to €91 billion.
– The precautionary funds for civil servants’ 
pensions recorded surpluses amounting to 
€3 billion. The surpluses were around as 
large as in previous years.Large deficit 
from measures 
taken in 
response to 
energy crisisFiscal balances of central government's 
off-budget entities*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Only entities using a single-entry ac-
counting  system,  i.e.  excluding,  in  particular,  the  bad  bank 
FMS Wertmanagement and also SoFFin, which uses a single-
entry accounting system and which refinances FMS Wertman-
agement. 1 Precautionary fund for final payments of inflation-
indexed Federal securities. 2 Climate and Transformation Fund; 
up to 2022, Energy and Climate Fund. 3 Relief fund for 2021 
flood.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022604020020406080
–––++++€ billion, quarterly figures
OtherFund for inflation-indexed securities1
Economic Stabilisation Fund
Flood Relief Fund 3Climate Fund 2
Total
–60–40–200+20+40+60+80Cumulated from start of yearDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
73

– The surplus of the precautionary fund for 
final payments of inflation- indexed Federal 
securities amounted to €5 billion. Central 
government provided funds, with disburse -
ments not being reflected in the Fund’s bal -
ance until a later date.16
– The Armed Forces Fund had no spending in 
2022. However, contractual obligations in 
the order of €10 billion appear to have been 
entered into at the expense of later years.
Following last year’s deficit of €30 billion, the 
ESF- E still has €170 billion in funds from emer -
gency borrowing from 2022. The funds are 
now available without budget legislators hav -
ing declared an emergency for the current year. 
In addition, they approved the emergency bor -
rowing before budgeting the funds in detail. In 
this respect, the approach is similar to the pre- 
financing of the Climate Fund with the second 
supplementary budget for 2021.
… outlook for 2023
The deficits of the central government off-  
budget entities included in this report are ex -
pected to increase considerably this year. Ac -
cording to the central government budget fig -
ures for 2023, they will reach €145 billion (see 
the table on p. 69, items 16 to 18 and 20). The 
economic plan of the ESF- E alone envisages a 
deficit of €121 billion. It is difficult to gauge 
how much the now lower gas prices will re -
duce the ESF- E’s expenditure. Where supply 
prices for consumers have already been set in 
advance by the suppliers, the Fund’s expend -
iture on the gas price brake will not fall. Where 
gas trading companies receiving support are 
now obtaining replacement gas for resold de -
liveries from Russia more cheaply, the Fund will 
save on capital injections. It still seems very un -
certain what financing contribution will be 
made by skimming off the high revenues from 
electricity producers – not least due to different 
price levels exempt from skimming.The Climate Fund’s economic plan envisages a 
deficit of €14 billion. This plan includes add -
itional, unspecified revenue of €6 billion. In 
fact, revenue was already €2 billion below 
budget estimates in 2022. If greater use is 
made of spending programmes than last year, 
a significant deficit appears feasible.
A deficit of just over €8 billion is projected for 
the Armed Forces Fund. It remains to be seen 
to what extent major projects will be imple -
mented this year.
In the case of the precautionary fund for final 
payments of inflation- indexed Federal secur -
ities, the surplus is set to increase slightly, with 
planned additional revenue exceeding the esti -
mated burdens from a maturing bond. It would 
thus largely offset the planned deficits in the 
Flood Assistance Fund and Digitalisation Fund.
Hardly any figures budgeted for off- budget 
entities in later years, but large deficits 
expected 
For the following years, transparency regarding 
the central government off- budget entities in -
cluded in this report continues to decrease. So 
far, the government has only published the Cli -
mate Fund’s financial planning up to 2026 from 
last summer. Its deficit estimates increase fur -
ther for a time and remain significant until 
2026. In the case of the Armed Forces Fund, 
the deficit is expected to grow even more 
sharply. By contrast, the ESF- E is likely to signifi -
cantly reduce its deficit. There is not yet any 
consumer relief enshrined in law for 2024. Re -
cent decreases in energy prices also suggest 
that the approved scope for borrowing will not 
be exhausted even if the price brakes are ex -
tended until the end of April 2024.High emergency 
borrowing to 
pre- finance 
ESF-E
In 2023, very 
large expected 
deficit for ESF- E 
and …… significant 
expected deficits 
for Climate 
Fund …
… and Armed 
Forces Fund
Other off- budget 
entities expected 
to close 2023 
broadly bal -
anced overall
In medium term, 
large deficit 
expected for 
Armed Forces 
Fund and 
Climate  Fund, 
whereas strain 
on ESF- E will 
dissipate
16 In the national accounts, however, expenditure in the 
core budget for this Fund already counts as current interest 
expenditure and is reflected in the general government fis -
cal balance.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
74

State government budgets17
2022 as a whole
State government core budgets closed 2022 
with a large surplus of €14 billion. In the previ -
ous year, they had recorded a small surplus of 
€1 billion (before closing entries, e.g. to allo -
cate funds to off- budget entities).
Revenue in the core budgets rose significantly, 
up by 5% over the year as a whole. This was 
driven by strong tax revenue (+10%). By con -
trast, receipts from public administrations fell 
sharply (-9½%). This was due to the pandemic 
coming to an end. As a result, for example, 
central government’s coronavirus assistance, 
which was channelled through state govern -
ment budgets (mainly transfers to enterprises), 
decreased. At 2½%, expenditure growth was 
only half as strong as growth in revenue.
Including their off- budget entities, the federal 
states are also likely to have closed last year 
with a large surplus (consolidated annual fig -
ures are still pending). After three quarters, a 
consolidated surplus of €26 billion was re -
corded. The very large surplus in the core 
budgets was countered by only a small deficit 
in the off- budget entities. In the final quarter of 
2022, some federal states directed sizeable 
amounts into special funds.18 The deficit in the 
core budgets in the fourth quarter (-€14 billion) 
is therefore likely to be accompanied by a sig -
nificant surplus in the off- budget entities. In 
this respect, the consolidated balance of core 
budgets and off- budget entities for 2022 as a 
whole is set to still far exceed the balance of 
core budgets alone.
Outlook for 2023
The federal states’ finances are expected to de -
teriorate this year. The latest tax estimate and 
legislative changes made in the interim suggest 
that their tax revenue will see little further 
growth. By contrast, expenditure is likely to in -
crease more sharply. Personnel expenditure, for instance, looks set to rise further. Staffing levels 
will be stepped up and pay will be raised, in 
some cases markedly: some federal states will 
gradually bring in higher salaries for teaching 
staff at primary schools in the future, for ex -
ample. Transfers to local governments will 
probably also increase dynamically. Federal 
states are expected to provide more funds, not 
least for the expansion of childcare and for 
refugees from Ukraine. Moreover, it is likely 
that the sharp rise in prices will gradually have 
a stronger impact on federal states’ tangible 
goods purchases.
At present, however, it is not expected that the 
federal states as a whole will fall into deficit in 
2023. They went into this year in a very favour -Substantial 
improvement in 
state govern -
ment core 
budgets: large 
surplus in 2022
Strong growth 
in tax revenue, 
drop in 
pandemic- 
related transfers
Probably even 
higher surplus 
when factoring 
in off- budget 
entities
Federal states’ 
finances 
expected to 
deteriorate this 
year, …… but they are 
still unlikely to 
run a deficitState government fiscal balance
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 
1 Figure calculated using monthly cash statistics from the Fe-
deral Ministry of Finance; quarterly data are not yet available. 
2 Core budgets and off-budget entities together.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q430201001020
–––++
2020Quarterly figures
2022
2021€ billion
Cumulated from start of year 2
20201
–40–30–20–100+10+20+30
2022
2021Off-budget entitiesCore budgets
17 The information on the core budgets is based on the 
monthly cash statistics.
18 Some supplementary budgets envisaged pre-  financing 
crisis funds. Under these budgets, €5 billion flowed into 
the corresponding pot in North Rhine-  Westphalia, €3 bil -
lion in Saarland and €1 billion in Schleswig- Holstein.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
75

able starting position. In addition, it is largely 
central government that is financing the meas -
ures intended to cushion the impact of the en -
ergy crisis and high inflation on households and 
enterprises.
Some federal states will activate escape 
clauses again in 2023
Federal states have been topping up their re -
serves in recent years. One factor in this was 
that fiscal balances were better than planned. 
In some cases, reserves were also formed from 
emergency borrowing.19 Some federal states 
have already decided to activate the escape 
clauses for their debt brakes in the context of 
the war in Ukraine.
This year, for example, Bremen is choosing a 
path similar to the one taken by Saarland20 at 
the end of last year: a supplementary budget 
for 2023 is set to allow for large- scale emer -
gency borrowing (€3 billion). Both Bremen and 
Saarland are already highly indebted. They 
therefore receive extensive budgetary recovery 
assistance from central government. It was 
agreed that this assistance would be used in 
part to bring down debt. In Bremen, the 
planned emergency borrowing would increase 
debt by €4,400 per capita. Some of the funds 
are to be made available until 2027 for meas -
ures to address the climate or energy crisis. To 
date, there are only plans for how a small por -
tion of these funds are to be used. Such an ap -
proach severely limits the binding effect of the 
debt brake.21 The Stability Council had already 
recognised that there was a looming budgetary 
emergency in Bremen before the government 
presented the supplementary budget, and has 
therefore called for a restructuring programme. 
Bremen’s already very high debt and its repay -
ment obligation following central govern -
ment’s budgetary recovery assistance suggest 
that new debt should be treated with extreme 
caution.Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
2022 as a whole
The German statutory pension insurance 
scheme recorded a surplus of €3 billion in 2022 
(preliminary data). This constitutes a year- on- 
year improvement of just over €1½ billion. This 
is chiefly due to the fact that contribution re -
ceipts grew strongly. Thanks to the surplus, the 
sustainability reserve reached €43 billion at the 
end of 2022. At just under 1.7 times the 
scheme’s monthly expenditure, it is around 
€37 billion above the statutory minimum of 0.2 
times its monthly expenditure.
Revenue went up by 4½% on the year. There 
was a strong 5½% rise in contribution receipts, 
bolstered by the decline in short- time work. At 
2%, central government funds increased mod -
erately. They are tied largely to the wage devel -
opments of the previous year, which were very 
weak owing to the pandemic. Expenditure rose 
by just over 3½%. On average across the year, 
pensions increased by 3%. The number of pen -
sions paid continued to grow only moderately. 
Expenditure on basic pension top- ups went up 
sharply due to the pension insurance scheme 
having also retroactively paid out some top- ups 
for 2021. At €1 billion, however, it was almost 
€½ billion lower than expected.
Outlook for 2023
The pension insurance scheme’s finances are 
expected to deteriorate this year. However, it 
could close 2023 broadly balanced. Revenue 
will grow significantly. That said, it will rise more Federal states 
with large 
reserves – 
formed in part 
from emergency 
borrowing
Large- scale 
emergency 
borrowing  for 
Bremen this year 
despite already 
very high debt 
and repayment 
agreementsSignificant sur -
plus in 2022
Contribution 
receipts grew 
strongly, pen -
sions rose by an 
annual average 
of 3%
Broadly bal -
anced result 
expected in 
2023
19 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022f).
20 At the end of 2022, the highly indebted federal state of 
Saarland pre- financed a special fund on a large scale using 
emergency borrowing. This is intended to enable invest -
ment in the transformation of the regional economic struc -
ture over a period of ten years. For more detailed informa -
tion, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2022f), p. 26.
21 See also Independent Advisory Board to the Stability 
Council (2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
76

slowly than wages and salaries owing to enter -
prises paying out social contribution- exempt in -
flation compensation bonuses. Expenditure will 
climb sharply until the middle of the year due to 
the large pension adjustment of mid-2022 in 
the amount of 5½% on average across Ger -
many. Pension expenditure is then likely to in -
crease more slowly as of July 2023. According 
to the 2022 pension insurance report, pensions 
will be adjusted by a national average of around 
3½%. On an annual average, they will thus 
grow by around 4½%. In addition, the number 
of pensions paid will go up.
Challenging outlook
Demographic trends will put greater pressure 
on the pension insurance scheme from the 
mid- 2020s onwards. This is also illustrated by 
the Federal Government’s pension insurance 
report from the end of 2022, which runs until 
2036. According to the report, the contribution 
rate will rise sharply even though the replace -
ment rate will fall significantly. Compared with 
the 2021 report, however, the core variables of 
the pension insurance scheme are set to de -
velop more favourably. The main reason for this 
is that the Federal Government now assumes 
stronger migration and a somewhat weaker in -
crease in life expectancy. In addition, pensions 
will grow more slowly because legislators have 
since adjusted the pension formula to keep the 
replacement rate22 at a minimum threshold of 
48%. Without this measure, pensions would 
have temporarily gone up by just over 2%. Ac -
cording to the pension insurance report, the 
contribution rate will jump in 2027 from its cur -
rent level of 18.6% to 19.3%. Thereafter, it is 
set to rise to 21.3% by 2036. The replacement 
rate will remain broadly stable at 48% until 
2025. Under the law as it currently stands, the 
rate then no longer being guaranteed will 
cause it to fall to 45% by 2036. However, the 
Federal Government intends to maintain the 
minimum threshold even after 2025. The con -
tribution rate and central government grants 
would thus have to rise more sharply than al -
ready currently envisaged.23Federal Employment Agency
2022 as a whole
In 2022, the Federal Employment Agency 
posted a small surplus of €½ billion.24 A con -In medium to 
long term, 
demographic 
developments 
will put pressure 
on pension 
financesFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final  annual  figures  differ  from  the  total  of  the  reported  
quarterly figures as the latter are not revised.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4420246
––+++
–8–6–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202220212020
2022
202020212020 2021 202202468
2020 2021 202202468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
22 An individual’s statutory pension entitlement divided by 
pre- retirement earnings, after deduction of social contribu -
tions.
23 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022g).
24 In the core budget, i.e. excluding the civil servants’ pen -
sion fund. Owing to the coronavirus crisis, the fund also re -
ceived no transfers in 2022. As a result, it posted a deficit 
of €½ billion. Its holdings were down to €8 billion at the 
end of the year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
77

siderable deficit of €22 billion had been re -
corded in the preceding year owing to the pan -
demic (before the payment of central govern -
ment grants). The pay- as- you- go sub- schemes 
for insolvency benefit and winter employment 
compensation posted a surplus of just over 
€½ billion in 2022. At the end of 2022, they 
thus had reserves totalling slightly less than 
€3½ billion. A small deficit of €½ billion was 
recorded in the core budget of the Federal Em -
ployment Agency, which is financed by contri -
butions. Its reserves had been exhausted. The 
Federal Government therefore covered the def -
icit with loans that are to be repaid this year.Revenue rose by 5½%. Contribution receipts 
increased even more sharply, climbing by 7%, 
mainly owing to declining short- time work and 
higher employment. Revenue from insolvency 
benefit contributions fell by 18%. At the start 
of 2022, the corresponding contribution rate 
decreased by one- quarter to 0.09%.
Expenditure was more than one- third lower 
than in the previous year. Spending on un -
employment benefits fell by 15% (-€3 billion), 
whilst expenditure on short- time work fell by as 
much as 82%, or €17 billion. The Federal Em -
ployment Agency spent 4½% less on active la -
bour market policy measures. Starting from a 
historical low in the previous year, insolvency 
benefit increased by 8½%.
Outlook for 2023
The Federal Employment Agency foresees a 
marked improvement in its financial situation 
this year: in its budget plan, it estimates a sur -
plus of €2½ billion in its core budget (excluding 
transfers to the civil servants’ pension fund of 
just over €½ billion).25 This plan is based on 
central government’s projection from autumn 
2022, according to which the contribution 
base will increase significantly. Additionally, the 
contribution rate went up by 0.2 percentage 
point at the start of the year, to 2.6%. It had 
been temporarily lowered starting in 2019. The 
idea behind this was to prevent the sizeable re -
serves at that time from becoming even larger. 
The fact that the insolvency benefit contribu -
tion rate will decrease further to 0.06% will 
have a dampening effect on revenue. Overall, 
revenue is expected to increase by 12½% on 
the year (compared with the annual result for 
2022, which was not yet available when the 
budget was drawn up). At the same time, the 
Federal Employment Agency is anticipating sig -
nificantly higher spending: it foresees add -
itional expenditure of 11% on unemployment Only a small 
central govern -
ment loan for 
Federal Employ -
ment Agency in 
2022Revenue from 
contributions 
rose significantly
Expenditure 
down sharply: 
declining short- 
time work and 
unemployment
Larger surplus 
planned for 
2023Finances of the 
Federal Employment Agency*
Source: Federal Employment Agency. * Including transfers to 
the civil servants' pension fund and before payment of central 
government grants.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410505
––+
–30–25–20–15–10–50+5Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202220212020
2021202020222020 2021 2022–400+40+80+120+160
2020 2021 20224004080120160
–++++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
25 Repayment of the central government loan (like pay -
ments by central government to balance the budget in the 
past) will not affect the budget balance.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
78

benefits, a major expenditure item. The main 
reason for this is that per capita benefits will in -
crease. In addition, the Federal Employment 
Agency calculates that spending on active la -
bour market policy measures will be consider -
ably higher.
As things stand, the Federal Employment Agen -
cy’s surplus will be larger than planned this 
year. The figures budgeted for active labour 
market policy measures appear to be too high – as has often been the case in the past. 
However, everything depends on how the la -
bour market develops. The Annual Economic 
Report now holds out the prospect of im -
proved macroeconomic activity. This is likely to 
ease the burden on the Federal Employment 
Agency on balance. However, it is uncertain to 
what extent enterprises are paying social 
contribution- exempt inflation compensation 
bonuses to their employees.As things stand, 
balance will be 
better
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), The typical impact of inflation on government finances, Monthly 
Report, August 2022, pp. 63-64.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b), Central government’s debt brake: options for stability- oriented 
further  development, Monthly Report, April 2022, pp. 49-66.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c), Public finances, Monthly Report, November 2022, pp. 59-76.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022d), Public finances, Monthly Report, February 2022, pp. 62-80.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022e), Inflation- induced bracket creep in the income tax scale, Monthly 
Report, June 2022, pp. 63-73.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022f), State government finances in 2021: surplus and additional reserves 
from emergency borrowing, Monthly Report, October 2022, pp. 13-33.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022g), Pension insurance scheme: long- term scenarios and reform op -
tions, Monthly Report, June 2022, pp. 47-61.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), Public debate on the review of the EU economic governance, 
Bundesbank contribution, October to December 2021, https://www.bundesbank.de/resource/blob
/884874/6fbc73f386fe4e3091bcba4055f7fc93/mL/2021-12-22-public-debate-eu-economic- 
governance-download.pdf
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), Federal debt: allocate premia on accruals basis in budgetary inter -
est expenditure, Monthly Report, June 2021, pp. 47-51.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), European Stability and Growth Pact: individual reform options, 
Monthly Report, April 2019, pp. 77-90.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Key central government budget data in connection with the debt 
brake, Monthly Report, February 2016, pp. 68-69.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
79

Federal Ministry of Finance (2023), Aufstellungsrundschreiben zum Bundeshaushalt 2024 , p. 2, 
https://www.bundeshaushalt.de/static/daten/2024/soll/Aufstellungsrundschreiben-2024.pdf
Independent Advisory Board to the Stability Council (2022), 19. Stellungnahme zur Einhaltung der 
Obergrenze für das strukturelle gesamtstaatliche Finanzierungsdefizit, December 2022, https://
www.stabilitaetsrat.de/DE/Beirat/Dokumente/Dokumente_node.htmlDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
80

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43 •
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
3•

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Maastricht debt by creditor  .........................................................................................  63 •
13. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78 •
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81 •
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 €STR  5,73 month
EURIBOR  6,7Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  8
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2021 May 11.7 8.4 8.6 8.8 6.3 2.9 – 1.0 – 0.56 – 0.54 0.2
June 11.7 8.2 8.3 8.3 6.0 3.3 – 0.6 – 0.56 – 0.54 0.2
July 11.0 7.6 7.8 8.1 5.8 3.1 – 0.5 – 0.57 – 0.55 0.0
Aug. 11.1 7.8 8.0 7.8 5.5 2.8 – 0.8 – 0.57 – 0.55 – 0.1
Sep. 11.1 7.6 7.5 7.8 5.6 3.3 – 0.7 – 0.57 – 0.55 0.1
Oct. 10.7 7.5 7.7 7.5 5.6 3.6 – 0.3 – 0.57 – 0.55 0.2
Nov. 10.1 7.1 7.4 7.3 5.8 3.7 – 0.5 – 0.57 – 0.57 0.2
Dec. 9.8 6.9 6.9 6.9 6.1 3.9 – 0.5 – 0.58 – 0.58 0.1
2022 Jan. 9.1 6.8 6.5 6.6 6.2 4.3 – 0.3 – 0.58 – 0.56 0.4
Feb. 9.0 6.7 6.4 6.4 6.2 4.4 – 0.6 – 0.58 – 0.53 0.8
Mar. 8.8 6.6 6.3 6.2 6.1 4.4 – 0.7 – 0.58 – 0.50 0.9
Apr. 8.2 6.3 6.1 6.0 6.4 5.0 – 0.1 – 0.58 – 0.45 1.4
May 7.9 6.0 5.8 5.9 6.2 5.1 0.0 – 0.59 – 0.39 1.7
June 7.2 6.0 5.8 5.8 6.3 5.4 – 0.0 – 0.58 – 0.24 2.2
July 6.8 5.9 5.7 5.9 5.9 5.4 – 0.1 – 0.51 0.04 1.9
Aug. 6.8 6.3 6.1 6.0 5.7 5.7 – 0.1 – 0.09 0.40 1.8
Sep. 5.6 6.2 6.3 5.8 5.5 5.7 – 0.1 0.36 1.01 2.6
Oct. 3.8 5.2 5.1 5.4 5.1 5.3 – 0.4 0.66 1.43 3.0
Nov. 2.4 4.6 4.8 4.7 4.8 5.2 0.2 1.37 1.83 2.7
Dec. 0.6 3.7 4.1 ... 3.9 4.4 0.6 1.57 2.06 2.8
2023 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.90 2.35 2.9
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 EuroShort-Term Rate.  6 Euro interbank offered rate.  7 See also footnotes to Table VI.4, p.
43●. 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries included: DE,
FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT, GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2021 May +11,655 +26,792 +31,896 + 5,619 +79,738 – 7,115 –47,669 + 1,323 1.2146 100.8 94.4
June +30,929 +31,423 +67,526 –11,569 +44,284 – 2,680 +32,294 + 5,198 1.2047 100.3 93.8
July +36,184 +34,230 +27,732 +46,148 – 8,774 +18,412 –27,716 – 337 1.1822 99.7 93.5
Aug. +20,453 +17,141 +30,743 +61,459 +12,932 + 2,203 –167,932 +122,082 1.1772 99.4 93.2
Sep. +33,113 +22,270 +14,640 +13,409 +14,477 + 2,664 –17,314 + 1,404 1.1770 99.5 93.3
Oct. + 6,509 +12,929 +16,507 +28,579 +20,476 +13,355 –49,072 + 3,170 1.1601 98.5 92.4
Nov. +13,798 +14,908 – 3,655 + 4,881 +56,566 +25,649 –91,292 + 540 1.1414 97.6 91.7
Dec. +21,918 + 9,975 +13,623 +25,582 + 5,571 + 1,183 –17,890 – 822 1.1304 97.1 91.2
2022 Jan. – 9,368 – 9,807 + 9,160 –16,757 +86,510 + 3,703 –61,974 – 2,320 1.1314 96.6 91.2
Feb. – 764 + 3,533 + 4,907 +26,530 –25,164 – 2,785 + 4,800 + 1,527 1.1342 96.9 91.7
Mar. + 5,422 + 4,220 –20,555 + 4,465 –109,688 – 2,488 +87,250 – 95 1.1019 95.9 91.4
Apr. –16,578 –11,525 –43,946 + 3,614 +18,095 +27,513 –92,461 – 707 1.0819 95.2 90.0
May –29,900 – 5,063 +40,312 +114,016 + 6,577 + 1,532 –83,024 + 1,211 1.0579 95.6 90.4
June – 4,416 – 5,973 +28,343 – 5,306 –65,951 – 144 +97,929 + 1,815 1.0566 95.9 90.6
July –20,764 –13,084 + 7,802 –12,876 +36,528 +11,603 –29,091 + 1,638 1.0179 94.1 89.1
Aug. –31,641 –27,420 – 7,980 –30,019 –60,878 +14,903 +65,850 + 2,164 1.0128 93.6 88.8
Sep. –22,025 –10,296 –49,979 +24,899 –154,050 +17,624 +57,955 + 3,592 0.9904 94.2 p 89.8
Oct. – 4,496 – 1,840 +14,200 + 7,558 –48,008 + 7,165 +43,710 + 3,775 0.9826 94.8 p 91.0
Nov. +13,411 + 9,257 –13,070 + 2,849 – 9,305 + 2,879 –10,050 + 557 1.0201 96.0 p 91.9
Dec. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0589 97.0 p 92.2
2023 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0769 97.3 p 92.2
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also Tables
XII.10 and 11, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Bundesbank cal-culation. Vis-á-vis the currencies of the extended EER group of tranding partners (fixed
composition).  4 Based on consumer price indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Croatia Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2020 –6.1 –5.4 –3.7 –0.6 –2.4 –7.8 –9.0 6.2 –9.0 –8.6 –2.2
2021 5.3 6.1 2.6 8.0 3.0 6.8 8.4 13.6 6.7 13.1 4.1
2022 ... ... 1.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2021 Q3 4.0 4.8 1.8 8.4 3.2 3.7 12.4 10.4 4.5 16.7 4.5
Q4 4.8 6.1 1.2 7.4 3.1 4.8 8.2 13.8 5.9 12.2 2.7
2022 Q1 5.5 5.2 3.9 4.5 4.0 4.8 9.3 11.8 6.1 7.8 5.6
Q2 4.4 4.0 1.7 0.4 2.7 4.3 7.5 12.4 4.7 8.7 2.9
Q3 2.4 1.9 1.3 –2.4 1.5 1.0 2.1 10.9 2.4 5.2 –0.5
Q4 1.9 ... 0.5 ... ... 0.2 ... 13.5 ... ... ...
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2020 –7.7 –3.8 –9.6 –2.8 –3.2 –10.9 –2.1 14.5 –11.4 –3.4 –1.8
2021 8.0 16.8 4.7 6.8 4.2 5.9 10.4 16.4 12.2 6.4 6.5
2022 0.8 –0.8 p–0.5 –2.0 3.8 0.0 2.4 p 2.9 0.4 1.6 0.8
2021 Q3 5.9 19.4 2.5 7.2 4.6 2.6 9.9 27.6 4.9 3.1 6.3
Q4 0.3 11.2 –1.2 5.6 7.4 –0.4 11.9 –18.2 4.6 4.0 3.5
2022 Q1 –0.2 6.4 –1.2 4.1 4.7 0.0 4.9 –15.0 1.4 3.0 4.0
Q2 0.4 –5.1 –1.3 2.8 7.9 0.1 3.1 –7.3 2.0 2.5 3.6
Q3 1.7 –3.6 1.6 –4.8 3.7 0.4 3.6 4.0 –0.0 2.4 –2.6
Q4 1.5 –0.4 p–1.1 –9.8 –0.5 –0.3 –1.8 p 32.4 –1.8 –1.5 –1.2
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2020 74.6 75.5 77.3 67.7 76.9 73.8 71.0 69.1 53.4 67.8 72.1
2021 81.4 80.1 84.9 78.1 81.2 81.1 75.6 78.0 76.5 75.0 75.3
2022 82.2 79.1 85.2 71.7 81.0 81.8 75.9 79.8 78.4 77.0 75.0
2021 Q4 82.6 81.1 85.4 85.2 82.6 82.0 77.3 81.0 77.8 76.3 76.7
2022 Q1 82.8 80.0 86.0 71.7 82.0 82.7 76.8 79.1 78.6 77.9 75.5
Q2 82.6 80.1 84.9 69.7 80.3 82.2 76.7 81.2 78.5 79.9 75.6
Q3 81.8 78.9 85.0 73.8 80.7 81.7 74.6 79.2 78.5 75.9 75.7
Q4 81.4 77.2 84.9 71.5 80.8 80.6 75.5 79.8 77.9 74.3 73.3
2023 Q1 81.3 76.7 84.6 71.5 79.1 80.2 74.8 79.2 77.8 77.6 72.6
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2020 e 7.8 5.6 3.6 7.0 7.8 7.8 16.3 5.6 9.2 7.5 8.1
2021 e 7.7 e 6.3 3.6 e 6.2 e 7.7 e 7.9 e 14.8 e 6.3 e 9.5 e 7.7 e 7.6
2022 e 6.7 e 5.5 p 3.0 e 5.6 e 6.8 e 7.3 e 12.4 e 4.5 e 8.1 e 6.6 e 7.0
2022 Aug. 6.7 5.4 3.0 5.7 7.2 7.2 12.4 4.4 7.9 6.6 7.0
Sep. 6.7 5.4 3.0 5.2 7.3 7.1 11.9 4.4 7.9 6.6 7.1
Oct. 6.6 5.4 3.0 5.4 6.4 7.1 11.6 4.5 7.9 6.5 7.1
Nov. 6.6 5.5 3.0 5.6 6.7 7.0 11.6 4.5 7.8 6.5 7.1
Dec. 6.6 5.5 2.9 5.7 7.2 7.1 11.6 4.4 7.8 6.4 7.1
2023 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.4 ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2020 0.3 0.4 5 0.4 –0.6 0.4 0.5 –1.3 –0.5 –0.1 0.0 0.1
2021 2.6 3.2 5 3.2 4.5 2.1 2.1 0.6 2.4 1.9 2.7 3.2
2022 8.4 10.3 8.7 19.4 7.2 5.9 9.3 8.1 8.7 10.7 17.2
2022 Aug. 9.1 10.5 8.8 25.2 7.9 6.6 11.2 9.0 9.1 12.6 21.4
Sep. 9.9 12.1 10.9 24.1 8.4 6.2 12.1 8.6 9.4 12.6 22.0
Oct. 10.6 13.1 11.6 22.5 8.4 7.1 9.5 9.4 12.6 12.7 21.7
Nov. 10.1 10.5 11.3 21.4 9.1 7.1 8.8 9.0 12.6 13.0 21.7
Dec. 9.2 10.2 9.6 17.5 8.8 6.7 7.6 8.2 12.3 12.7 20.7
2023 Jan. 6e 8.5 e 7.5 e 9.2 e 18.8 e 8.0 e 7.0 e 7.2 e 7.7 e 10.9 e 12.5 21.4
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
2020 –7.0 –9.0 –4.3 –5.5 –5.5 –9.0 –9.9 –5.0 –9.5 –7.3 –4.3
2021 –5.1 –5.6 –3.7 –2.4 –2.7 –6.5 –7.5 –1.7 –7.2 –2.6 –7.0
2022 ... ... –2.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
2019 83.9 97.6 58.9 8.5 64.9 97.4 180.6 57.0 134.1 71.0 36.5
2020 97.0 112.0 68.0 18.5 74.8 115.0 206.3 58.4 154.9 87.0 42.0
2021 95.4 109.2 68.6 17.6 72.4 112.8 194.5 55.4 150.3 78.4 43.6
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
–0.0 –0.8 –8.6 –3.9 –6.5 –8.3 –3.4 –4.3 –11.3 –4.4 2020
6.0 5.1 11.7 4.9 4.6 5.5 3.0 8.2 5.5 6.6 2021
... ... ... 4.5 ... ... ... ... 5.5 ... 2022
5.6 2.0 15.8 5.4 5.4 5.3 1.4 5.1 4.2 8.2 2021 Q3
6.5 4.0 13.4 6.2 6.0 6.7 1.3 10.5 6.6 6.9 Q4
4.8 3.0 8.3 6.7 9.2 11.3 2.9 10.2 6.8 6.7 2022 Q1
1.7 1.6 9.4 5.2 6.1 7.9 1.3 8.6 6.8 5.9 Q2
1.8 2.9 5.2 3.1 1.7 5.0 1.4 3.3 5.1 5.5 Q3
–0.4 ... ... 3.0 ... ... 1.1 0.2 3.4 4.6 Q4
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
–1.9 –10.8 –0.3 –3.9 –5.9 –7.3 –9.1 –5.2 –9.8 –7.3 2020
20.2 8.4 –0.2 5.0 11.3 3.5 10.4 10.2 7.5 6.4 2021
9.4 p –1.4 p 3.2 p 2.4 p 7.3 0.1 –4.7 p 1.7 p 3.0 ... 2022
17.6 3.6 –0.0 6.8 9.1 –3.8 0.9 6.2 1.9 4.5 2021 Q3
24.2 3.0 –5.4 4.4 10.4 –1.7 3.9 7.9 1.8 1.0 Q4
23.5 0.2 –2.4 1.9 11.3 –2.9 –1.7 6.4 1.7 3.3 2022 Q1
9.2 –1.7 –5.9 4.8 9.8 2.0 –4.8 3.0 5.2 3.1 Q2
10.0 –0.1 9.8 2.2 6.5 1.3 –3.4 2.3 4.6 –0.7 Q3
–2.5 p –3.8 p 12.1 p 0.9 p 2.2 0.1 –8.8 p –4.7 p 0.6 ... Q4
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
73.0 72.5 70.7 78.3 79.5 74.9 79.5 78.4 74.4 51.5 2020
76.7 82.0 76.8 82.4 87.1 79.2 82.2 84.5 77.8 51.3 2021
77.4 80.8 64.7 83.7 87.7 81.9 83.3 84.9 78.7 58.2 2022
78.6 81.8 75.2 83.7 88.7 80.2 82.1 85.3 79.2 55.0 2021 Q4
78.3 81.9 62.9 84.0 88.4 81.8 82.8 86.5 78.8 55.5 2022 Q1
78.2 79.9 64.6 84.2 88.9 82.5 83.9 85.2 80.0 58.5 Q2
76.8 81.4 67.6 83.9 87.9 81.5 83.5 84.0 78.9 58.5 Q3
76.1 79.8 63.6 82.6 85.6 81.6 83.0 84.0 77.2 60.4 Q4
70.2 74.3 65.7 83.0 87.1 81.5 80.2 83.1 77.1 59.9 2023 Q1
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
8.6 6.8 4.4 3.9 5.4 6.9 6.7 5.0 15.5 7.6 2020
e 7.1 e 5.4 e 3.4 e 4.2 e 6.2 e 6.6 e 6.9 e 4.8 e 14.8 e 7.5 2021
e 5.9 e 4.5 e 3.0 e 3.6 e 4.8 e 6.1 e 6.1 e 4.1 e 13.0 e 6.8 2022
5.9 4.4 2.9 3.8 5.2 6.0 6.0 4.0 12.7 7.0 2022 Aug.
6.0 4.5 3.0 3.8 5.1 6.1 6.0 4.0 12.9 6.9 Sep.
6.1 4.6 3.1 3.7 4.6 6.1 5.9 4.1 12.9 6.9 Oct.
5.9 4.6 3.2 3.6 5.5 6.5 5.9 4.1 13.0 7.5 Nov.
5.8 4.6 3.2 3.5 5.0 6.7 5.8 4.0 13.1 7.7 Dec.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2023 Jan.
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
1.1 0.0 0.8 1.1 1.4 –0.1 2.0 –0.3 –0.3 –1.1 2020
4.6 3.5 0.7 2.8 2.8 0.9 2.8 2.0 3.0 2.3 2021
18.9 8.2 6.1 11.6 8.6 8.1 12.1 9.3 8.3 8.1 2022
21.1 8.6 7.0 13.7 9.3 9.3 13.4 11.5 10.5 9.6 2022 Aug.
22.5 8.8 7.4 17.1 11.0 9.8 13.6 10.6 9.0 9.0 Sep.
22.1 8.8 7.4 16.8 11.6 10.6 14.5 10.3 7.3 8.6 Oct.
21.4 7.3 7.2 11.3 11.2 10.2 15.1 10.8 6.7 8.1 Nov.
20.0 6.2 7.3 11.0 10.5 9.8 15.0 10.8 5.5 7.6 Dec.
18.5 5.8 e 6.7 p 8.4 ... 8.6 e 14.9 9.9 5.9 e 6.8 2023 Jan.
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
–7.0 –3.4 –9.4 –3.7 –8.0 –5.8 –5.4 –7.7 –10.1 –5.8 2020
–1.0 0.8 –7.8 –2.6 –5.9 –2.9 –5.5 –4.7 –6.9 –1.7 2021
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2022
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
35.8 22.4 40.7 48.5 70.6 116.6 48.0 65.4 98.2 90.4 2019
46.3 24.5 53.3 54.7 82.9 134.9 58.9 79.6 120.4 113.5 2020
43.7 24.5 56.3 52.4 82.3 125.5 62.2 74.5 118.3 101.0 2021
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of valueadded tax between July and December 2020.  6 Including Croatia from 2023 onwards.
7 According to Maastricht Treaty definition. Euro area aggregate excluding Croatia.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2021 May 124.9 48.3 15.2 76.6 77.6 2.6 24.5 21.8 –23.5 –1.2 –0.2 –15.1 –6.9
June 94.5 37.2 0.8 57.3 58.6 9.2 –74.4 –83.7 26.8 –6.1 –0.4 –4.2 37.6
July 112.9 56.0 8.1 56.8 50.3 – 4.2 74.3 78.6 3.1 –4.7 –0.6 9.3 –0.8
Aug. 35.0 –16.7 –7.8 51.7 60.9 – 4.7 141.2 146.0 –5.9 –7.3 –0.4 –7.0 8.9
Sep. 107.4 72.9 3.6 34.5 43.2 –40.1 –58.2 –18.1 16.6 –4.5 –0.4 8.3 13.2
Oct. 80.7 68.3 21.4 12.3 18.5 – 7.6 194.4 202.0 11.4 –10.7 –0.7 16.8 6.0
Nov. 156.1 89.3 –3.7 66.8 67.5 –26.6 14.9 41.5 –7.0 –10.6 –0.7 1.8 2.5
Dec. 53.0 27.8 20.3 25.2 22.7 –56.5 –205.4 –149.0 4.5 18.0 –0.8 –25.0 12.2
2022 Jan. 166.4 91.4 –10.2 75.0 64.7 0.7 136.2 135.5 –18.2 –14.8 –0.1 9.3 –12.7
Feb. 109.5 43.0 2.0 66.5 73.8 –12.3 83.0 95.3 –21.6 –12.6 –0.4 –3.5 –5.1
Mar. 158.4 113.2 26.4 45.3 36.0 – 2.0 –20.9 –18.9 –0.1 2.8 –0.7 –21.8 19.6
Apr. 112.1 96.9 20.1 15.2 5.2 –99.1 –79.1 20.0 8.7 –10.5 –0.2 1.4 17.9
May 107.1 65.1 –18.8 42.1 49.5 –58.3 40.2 98.6 –16.1 3.1 –3.3 –21.2 5.3
June 114.9 82.3 –9.0 32.6 33.5 102.7 –25.9 –128.6 23.0 –4.9 –0.4 1.1 27.3
July 30.4 59.3 –2.9 –28.9 –28.8 –11.9 63.5 75.4 0.1 –11.5 –0.4 –3.7 15.7
Aug. –11.2 25.6 –18.8 –36.8 –31.2 46.9 69.4 22.5 –10.0 –22.1 0.7 2.0 9.3
Sep. 87.8 84.0 –0.0 3.8 2.5 –52.9 –200.3 –147.4 17.7 –16.4 –0.4 3.6 30.8
Oct. –12.9 –0.3 –6.1 –12.6 –9.6 – 5.0 170.2 175.1 –11.2 –14.8 –0.0 11.7 –8.1
Nov. 92.8 83.9 31.0 8.9 14.2 7.4 –48.2 –55.6 34.0 1.6 –0.1 35.1 –2.7
Dec. –127.8 –95.9 –4.0 –31.9 –40.6 7.0 –247.0 –254.0 32.5 9.9 –0.1 1.2 21.4
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2021 May 33.4 16.8 3.2 16.6 18.9 –35.0 –10.9 24.1 –10.3 –2.8 –0.1 –7.3 0.0
June 30.0 8.7 2.4 21.4 22.3 –36.1 –5.3 30.8 3.2 –3.4 –0.2 –7.3 14.1
July 42.9 22.4 2.2 20.4 18.4 42.8 –14.6 –57.4 5.1 –1.8 –0.3 4.3 2.8
Aug. 28.5 16.6 1.6 11.9 15.7 –18.0 18.2 36.2 2.0 –0.5 –0.2 0.9 1.9
Sep. 33.1 16.7 5.4 16.4 16.5 –92.2 –0.7 91.5 3.8 –2.2 –0.2 2.6 3.6
Oct. 37.8 34.7 7.2 3.0 –0.6 47.0 47.6 0.7 18.6 1.4 –0.2 15.6 1.8
Nov. 54.0 28.5 3.4 25.4 28.0 –59.0 –4.2 54.8 5.0 –0.6 –0.2 4.7 1.1
Dec. 12.8 10.9 6.8 2.0 4.7 –122.9 –47.1 75.8 –2.3 9.1 –0.2 –13.2 2.0
2022 Jan. 40.4 31.0 1.4 9.4 7.5 111.9 72.2 –39.7 –4.0 –1.1 –0.8 12.6 –14.8
Feb. 32.7 27.6 3.4 5.2 7.2 16.0 21.9 5.9 5.1 –1.3 –0.2 7.0 –0.4
Mar. 37.0 23.3 4.1 13.7 12.9 –44.2 –22.2 22.0 6.1 –2.0 –0.2 4.1 4.2
Apr. 19.0 18.9 2.7 0.1 –4.5 19.1 –13.0 –32.1 4.4 –2.7 –0.2 3.2 4.1
May 39.1 28.5 3.5 10.6 13.5 –29.8 –0.9 28.9 2.0 –2.4 –0.1 2.0 2.5
June 32.6 25.5 –4.1 7.1 4.8 –22.4 –9.4 13.0 3.8 –3.1 –0.2 –3.8 10.8
July 18.2 30.6 10.6 –12.4 –13.4 42.7 4.3 –38.5 9.3 –2.0 –0.2 8.5 3.0
Aug. 26.0 39.4 –0.2 –13.4 –11.4 –50.3 6.7 57.1 3.0 –0.0 –0.1 0.8 2.3
Sep. 21.5 23.1 0.1 –1.7 –4.5 –27.4 1.6 29.0 4.1 –0.3 –0.0 –0.6 5.0
Oct. 12.8 10.5 –0.2 2.3 1.9 45.1 20.4 –24.7 –7.6 –1.2 0.2 3.2 –9.8
Nov. 25.4 26.2 1.4 –0.9 0.8 38.0 8.9 –29.1 9.8 1.9 0.2 7.1 0.6
Dec. –29.1 –20.6 –2.3 –8.5 –8.4 –41.0 –72.6 –31.5 –0.7 –4.0 0.4 –1.8 4.7
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
– 8.5 48.9 0.0 110.7 116.3 116.6 13.2 103.4 –10.9 10.7 – 4.8 –8.9 8.1 2021 May
16.8 –4.3 0.0 65.4 79.5 111.5 10.5 101.1 –34.4 2.3 – 2.2 –8.4 – 4.6 June
0.4 –55.8 0.0 159.9 122.2 111.7 14.6 97.1 10.7 – 0.3 8.7 22.6 7.4 July
26.6 –10.6 0.0 27.6 32.7 32.2 1.7 30.5 –3.1 3.6 –11.6 5.3 – 6.2 Aug.
6.5 –0.8 0.0 29.0 58.2 73.7 5.3 68.4 –16.3 0.8 14.8 –31.1 2.9 Sep.
– 2.4 –72.9 0.0 137.6 86.4 73.0 6.8 66.2 18.3 – 5.0 11.5 31.5 7.5 Oct.
–48.5 84.8 0.0 96.3 84.3 102.0 6.0 95.9 –18.3 0.7 – 5.0 26.2 – 5.2 Nov.
–44.5 –22.2 0.0 76.2 106.0 104.7 20.6 84.1 –2.3 3.6 –33.4 –6.7 – 7.0 Dec.
68.1 90.8 0.0 –15.2 –17.6 –53.5 1.0 –54.5 23.3 12.6 57.2 –23.2 8.6 2022 Jan.
44.6 32.6 0.0 41.1 69.7 75.5 9.1 66.4 –13.8 8.0 9.4 –37.2 – 0.3 Feb.
13.7 51.6 0.0 94.6 109.0 88.6 22.5 66.1 16.3 4.0 –17.6 –3.4 – 2.1 Mar.
–22.1 –95.7 0.0 99.5 61.7 60.5 11.2 49.3 –1.1 2.3 25.1 20.2 16.5 Apr.
–28.9 48.0 0.0 52.7 62.4 66.3 7.8 58.6 –15.9 11.9 4.7 –10.1 – 5.1 May
69.6 71.1 0.0 69.1 75.5 48.2 6.6 41.6 24.1 3.1 –32.5 –1.0 11.1 June
–31.2 –112.1 0.0 155.0 122.2 70.4 8.6 61.8 46.7 5.1 23.7 –2.0 18.0 July
–80.3 55.5 0.0 86.4 78.9 27.5 –4.6 32.1 41.3 10.1 –22.6 6.8 7.4 Aug.
7.3 –40.5 0.0 60.1 56.3 –42.9 –1.6 –41.3 99.8 – 0.5 –19.5 –8.4 22.3 Sep.
– 5.4 64.5 0.0 –62.1 –77.7 –157.6 –0.4 –157.2 84.9 – 5.0 4.5 33.7 –26.1 Oct.
–10.5 –15.3 0.0 75.7 21.8 –28.8 –3.5 –25.2 58.8 – 8.3 27.4 27.0 16.5 Nov.
–84.4 –48.8 0.0 3.5 14.7 –59.6 11.6 –71.2 59.5 14.8 –46.5 4.8 7.2 Dec.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
18.8 – 44.9 3.0 2.9 34.8 27.8 2.8 0.6 1.7 – 0.1 2.0 2021 May
6.0 – 14.0 3.1 2.3 – 1.2 7.1 – 8.0 – 0.4 – 0.2 0.1 0.3 June
– 12.0 75.2 4.2 3.7 17.4 21.2 – 4.1 – 0.3 0.6 – 0.1 0.1 July
0.7 – 13.2 2.9 0.2 21.0 20.4 – 1.6 – 0.3 0.1 0.0 2.3 Aug.
7.1 – 77.3 4.6 0.8 7.3 7.6 – 1.3 – 0.6 1.5 – 0.0 0.1 Sep.
– 3.9 53.7 3.3 1.6 16.4 3.9 13.0 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.4 Oct.
7.2 – 42.3 3.7 1.2 25.0 40.9 – 12.3 – 0.1 – 4.7 – 0.3 1.4 Nov.
27.8 –135.3 5.3 4.5 – 0.4 – 12.8 9.1 1.6 – 0.3 0.3 1.7 Dec.
– 38.1 166.0 1.3 0.8 28.4 22.4 9.3 0.3 – 1.2 0.0 – 2.4 2022 Jan.
2.5 14.4 3.0 2.2 26.8 23.3 1.1 0.3 1.1 0.1 0.8 Feb.
– 0.1 – 13.2 5.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 7.4 8.4 – 1.6 0.5 0.2 – 0.1 Mar.
– 3.0 32.9 3.4 2.3 3.7 – 3.4 10.4 – 0.4 – 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.6 Apr.
22.5 – 30.3 3.4 2.7 15.1 22.5 – 7.4 – 1.2 0.4 0.2 0.7 May
14.9 – 37.5 3.7 0.5 29.0 19.6 7.5 – 1.6 0.6 – 0.0 2.9 June
– 38.2 55.3 – 5.3 9.1 34.6 5.7 23.6 – 1.7 4.3 0.1 2.6 July
– 24.1 – 71.1 – 11.7 12.5 67.9 56.8 13.9 – 2.4 – 1.8 – 0.1 1.4 Aug.
4.7 – 1.1 3.3 0.3 – 13.6 – 56.8 45.1 – 5.3 – 2.6 0.1 6.0 Sep.
5.1 65.9 0.1 0.1 – 5.4 – 32.1 36.8 – 3.3 – 0.2 0.1 – 6.7 Oct.
22.6 13.6 – 0.0 – 0.3 17.3 12.6 4.3 – 5.5 3.2 0.0 2.7 Nov.
– 16.1 – 28.9 2.1 2.4 – 24.5 – 37.5 19.3 – 4.1 – 2.0 0.1 – 0.3 Dec.
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2020 Nov. 30,749.4 20,292.0 14,457.7 12,090.4 1,542.2 825.0 5,834.4 1,003.4 4,831.0 6,331.0 4,126.4
Dec. 30,438.8 20,266.1 14,438.3 12,042.9 1,532.2 863.2 5,827.8 990.2 4,837.6 6,108.9 4,063.8
2021 Jan. 30,643.8 20,387.8 14,466.2 12,067.8 1,535.8 862.6 5,921.6 999.4 4,922.1 6,299.8 3,956.2
Feb. 30,546.3 20,463.6 14,500.5 12,090.1 1,541.1 869.3 5,963.1 992.4 4,970.6 6,300.7 3,782.0
Mar. 30,827.0 20,653.7 14,576.8 12,185.3 1,512.6 879.0 6,076.9 993.3 5,083.5 6,360.7 3,812.6
Apr. 30,752.9 20,667.2 14,566.6 12,169.2 1,509.7 887.7 6,100.6 1,007.2 5,093.4 6,396.3 3,689.5
May 30,890.4 20,788.2 14,612.8 12,198.6 1,521.6 892.6 6,175.5 1,006.2 5,169.2 6,434.1 3,668.1
June 30,991.0 20,890.7 14,652.8 12,234.6 1,530.0 888.3 6,237.8 1,004.8 5,233.1 6,400.0 3,700.3
July 31,313.8 21,028.7 14,708.3 12,278.0 1,543.6 886.7 6,320.4 1,011.3 5,309.1 6,504.2 3,781.0
Aug. 31,438.1 21,047.9 14,684.9 12,261.1 1,533.4 890.4 6,363.1 1,002.3 5,360.8 6,653.5 3,736.6
Sep. 31,473.8 21,133.9 14,757.6 12,331.3 1,534.9 891.4 6,376.3 993.6 5,382.7 6,620.6 3,719.3
Oct. 31,778.8 21,201.7 14,817.7 12,379.4 1,548.1 890.3 6,384.0 987.7 5,396.3 6,825.2 3,751.9
Nov. 32,193.0 21,381.2 14,911.2 12,478.0 1,542.2 891.0 6,470.0 985.8 5,484.2 6,917.3 3,894.5
Dec. 31,777.5 21,384.4 14,917.1 12,462.9 1,567.2 887.0 6,467.3 988.5 5,478.8 6,738.8 3,654.3
2022 Jan. 32,405.1 21,564.5 15,039.5 12,601.7 1,553.3 884.5 6,525.0 999.2 5,525.8 6,909.7 3,930.9
Feb. 32,589.1 21,620.3 15,066.9 12,636.6 1,553.7 876.6 6,553.3 991.8 5,561.5 7,007.2 3,961.7
Mar. 32,936.3 21,736.9 15,175.9 12,721.8 1,587.5 866.7 6,561.0 1,001.4 5,559.6 6,994.9 4,204.5
Apr. 33,568.9 21,763.8 15,253.7 12,805.1 1,597.6 851.1 6,510.0 1,011.3 5,498.8 7,062.0 4,743.1
May 33,481.3 21,815.9 15,304.2 12,877.8 1,568.3 858.1 6,511.7 1,003.9 5,507.7 7,012.0 4,653.5
June 33,884.9 21,884.1 15,371.8 12,971.6 1,569.1 831.1 6,512.4 1,003.0 5,509.4 7,063.4 4,937.3
July 33,877.0 21,983.2 15,450.1 13,042.3 1,578.7 829.2 6,533.1 1,003.0 5,530.1 7,216.8 4,677.0
Aug. 34,342.2 21,870.5 15,457.6 13,078.2 1,553.8 825.7 6,412.9 996.9 5,416.1 7,301.6 5,170.0
Sep. 34,620.0 21,900.6 15,557.0 13,190.3 1,545.0 821.7 6,343.6 998.1 5,345.5 7,241.3 5,478.1
Oct. 34,551.5 21,889.9 15,551.6 13,189.1 1,533.0 829.6 6,338.3 995.1 5,343.2 7,336.5 5,325.1
Nov. 34,220.7 22,010.3 15,626.4 13,226.9 1,559.1 840.4 6,383.9 990.1 5,393.8 7,197.2 5,013.2
Dec. 33,943.3 21,785.9 15,509.5 13,121.8 1,551.7 835.9 6,276.5 998.7 5,277.8 6,870.8 5,286.6
German contribution (€ billion)
2020 Nov. 7,240.5 4,841.7 3,688.6 3,213.7 214.3 260.6 1,153.1 290.2 862.9 1,261.9 1,136.9
Dec. 7,172.5 4,839.4 3,695.5 3,216.4 214.7 264.5 1,143.9 286.4 857.4 1,224.1 1,109.1
2021 Jan. 7,220.7 4,865.5 3,705.9 3,224.4 216.4 265.1 1,159.6 286.5 873.1 1,307.6 1,047.6
Feb. 7,182.0 4,885.0 3,724.3 3,238.8 217.4 268.1 1,160.7 283.8 877.0 1,305.0 991.9
Mar. 7,233.5 4,939.8 3,761.1 3,273.4 217.3 270.4 1,178.7 282.6 896.1 1,315.4 978.3
Apr. 7,228.4 4,946.1 3,760.5 3,270.3 217.6 272.6 1,185.6 285.7 899.9 1,333.6 948.6
May 7,228.0 4,977.5 3,777.2 3,283.3 219.5 274.4 1,200.3 283.4 916.9 1,329.8 920.7
June 7,277.1 5,009.8 3,786.4 3,290.4 220.8 275.2 1,223.4 282.3 941.1 1,325.1 942.1
July 7,362.7 5,062.4 3,808.5 3,310.2 221.9 276.4 1,253.9 284.4 969.5 1,317.4 982.9
Aug. 7,395.2 5,087.3 3,824.6 3,325.1 221.4 278.1 1,262.8 280.8 982.0 1,336.0 971.9
Sep. 7,398.6 5,110.8 3,840.8 3,336.4 224.7 279.7 1,270.1 280.7 989.4 1,335.1 952.6
Oct. 7,461.0 5,147.0 3,874.5 3,363.5 228.6 282.4 1,272.5 284.4 988.0 1,385.2 928.8
Nov. 7,575.0 5,210.7 3,904.2 3,389.9 229.0 285.3 1,306.4 280.7 1,025.7 1,396.4 967.9
Dec. 7,475.8 5,212.1 3,914.7 3,393.2 237.0 284.5 1,297.4 278.0 1,019.5 1,355.9 907.8
2022 Jan. 7,787.0 5,243.9 3,944.7 3,422.9 235.8 286.0 1,299.2 279.9 1,019.3 1,433.6 1,109.5
Feb. 7,871.3 5,262.9 3,968.5 3,445.2 238.0 285.3 1,294.3 277.8 1,016.5 1,464.4 1,144.0
Mar. 7,997.7 5,280.7 3,990.2 3,464.4 240.6 285.2 1,290.6 278.6 1,012.0 1,447.5 1,269.5
Apr. 8,259.4 5,278.9 4,008.0 3,481.9 240.1 286.1 1,270.9 283.2 987.7 1,464.0 1,516.5
May 8,228.4 5,304.5 4,034.5 3,506.0 240.8 287.7 1,270.0 280.3 989.7 1,445.0 1,479.0
June 8,413.5 5,322.6 4,058.9 3,537.6 237.8 283.5 1,263.7 282.5 981.2 1,466.1 1,624.8
July 8,287.9 5,375.0 4,096.1 3,560.3 252.7 283.2 1,278.8 283.6 995.2 1,481.5 1,431.4
Aug. 8,546.0 5,364.5 4,132.0 3,600.0 249.1 282.9 1,232.5 281.5 951.0 1,492.4 1,689.0
Sep. 8,857.6 5,356.3 4,153.9 3,624.8 246.1 283.0 1,202.4 284.3 918.1 1,502.4 1,998.8
Oct. 8,826.7 5,366.0 4,163.6 3,634.6 245.9 283.1 1,202.4 284.8 917.5 1,509.0 1,951.8
Nov. 8,653.9 5,402.0 4,189.2 3,656.3 249.8 283.1 1,212.8 283.4 929.4 1,502.4 1,749.6
Dec. 8,625.8 5,345.4 4,166.2 3,636.9 246.1 283.2 1,179.2 283.2 896.0 1,416.8 1,863.6
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,349.9 14,811.5 13,525.7 13,620.1 8,357.4 755.9 179.6 1,885.7 2,402.5 39.0 2020 Nov.
1,370.7 14,766.3 13,614.0 13,722.2 8,459.4 765.5 176.9 1,877.6 2,404.2 38.5 Dec.
1,373.3 14,872.0 13,629.3 13,750.9 8,505.4 742.0 173.8 1,870.6 2,421.0 38.1 2021 Jan.
1,380.6 14,956.2 13,676.9 13,806.2 8,569.5 732.1 169.2 1,865.1 2,432.5 37.7 Feb.
1,391.1 15,069.4 13,750.1 13,906.8 8,650.5 751.0 164.3 1,858.8 2,444.8 37.4 Mar.
1,399.6 15,059.6 13,774.0 13,934.7 8,726.8 730.6 159.5 1,827.5 2,453.0 37.3 Apr.
1,412.8 15,146.7 13,870.1 14,017.4 8,810.9 724.0 155.5 1,826.2 2,463.6 37.1 May
1,423.2 15,232.5 13,934.1 14,082.1 8,909.3 697.4 150.4 1,822.0 2,466.2 36.8 June
1,437.6 15,334.8 14,016.7 14,185.1 9,006.8 705.3 153.6 1,817.0 2,466.2 36.3 July
1,439.2 15,385.0 14,038.0 14,195.4 9,029.8 706.2 151.2 1,809.9 2,462.4 35.9 Aug.
1,444.5 15,439.0 14,071.8 14,236.3 9,090.4 700.2 140.0 1,806.7 2,463.3 35.6 Sep.
1,450.3 15,502.7 14,137.6 14,310.5 9,166.1 707.1 148.0 1,795.5 2,458.8 34.9 Oct.
1,456.3 15,517.2 14,187.3 14,344.1 9,223.4 697.0 143.3 1,786.3 2,459.8 34.3 Nov.
1,477.0 15,569.9 14,300.4 14,454.8 9,316.4 704.9 131.3 1,805.2 2,463.5 33.6 Dec.
1,477.9 15,633.5 14,273.6 14,465.7 9,292.5 706.6 135.3 1,820.2 2,478.2 32.9 2022 Jan.
1,487.0 15,728.2 14,320.4 14,502.8 9,353.5 688.4 134.3 1,807.7 2,486.2 32.7 Feb.
1,509.6 15,832.8 14,407.9 14,592.2 9,432.1 703.7 123.5 1,809.6 2,491.1 32.2 Mar.
1,520.7 15,872.4 14,460.5 14,650.2 9,493.9 705.4 123.5 1,802.0 2,493.3 32.1 Apr.
1,528.5 15,887.5 14,506.5 14,677.9 9,535.0 685.0 120.2 1,803.2 2,505.6 28.9 May
1,535.1 16,033.4 14,566.6 14,743.3 9,576.9 704.9 123.4 1,800.2 2,509.4 28.5 June
1,543.7 16,115.9 14,669.9 14,869.0 9,667.1 740.9 127.1 1,791.0 2,514.8 28.1 July
1,539.1 16,100.9 14,732.1 14,924.4 9,693.1 781.5 125.9 1,770.0 2,525.0 28.9 Aug.
1,537.5 16,196.6 14,782.4 15,033.5 9,685.1 913.3 125.5 1,756.3 2,524.8 28.5 Sep.
1,537.1 16,091.9 14,704.3 14,932.8 9,518.4 992.5 130.3 1,741.6 2,522.3 27.6 Oct.
1,533.6 16,081.5 14,719.4 14,914.2 9,454.7 1,042.0 134.6 1,740.9 2,514.5 27.6 Nov.
1,545.2 16,004.1 14,770.3 14,936.7 9,397.7 1,097.1 134.7 1,749.5 2,530.0 27.6 Dec.
German contribution (€ billion)
306.6 4,260.2 3,961.8 3,804.4 2,507.7 157.7 30.6 549.0 531.8 27.6 2020 Nov.
312.2 4,228.5 3,954.1 3,801.5 2,500.9 160.3 31.0 548.8 533.1 27.3 Dec.
313.1 4,218.7 3,980.7 3,829.7 2,541.7 147.0 31.0 548.5 534.8 26.8 2021 Jan.
314.6 4,245.1 3,990.0 3,837.4 2,555.8 141.0 31.1 547.0 536.0 26.4 Feb.
317.3 4,264.3 4,011.8 3,863.4 2,579.8 145.1 31.7 544.6 536.1 26.1 Mar.
319.9 4,262.2 4,013.0 3,874.5 2,594.4 143.0 31.9 542.5 536.8 25.8 Apr.
322.8 4,308.8 4,040.3 3,895.1 2,613.5 146.0 32.2 540.4 537.4 25.7 May
325.1 4,311.0 4,035.3 3,890.5 2,619.4 139.3 31.9 537.5 537.0 25.5 June
328.8 4,313.9 4,047.3 3,911.3 2,645.8 136.0 31.4 536.0 536.7 25.2 July
329.0 4,333.1 4,065.2 3,923.1 2,659.1 135.6 31.3 535.7 536.4 25.0 Aug.
329.8 4,340.5 4,064.1 3,919.8 2,662.1 132.2 31.2 533.6 535.8 24.8 Sep.
331.4 4,354.3 4,080.9 3,950.3 2,681.4 143.0 31.1 534.8 535.5 24.6 Oct.
332.6 4,390.5 4,107.1 3,968.0 2,710.9 132.5 30.3 534.6 535.5 24.3 Nov.
337.1 4,425.2 4,113.0 3,968.5 2,691.5 141.2 30.1 544.6 537.0 24.1 Dec.
337.9 4,418.1 4,139.2 4,006.8 2,737.3 135.4 29.7 543.6 537.4 23.4 2022 Jan.
340.1 4,444.1 4,161.0 4,017.1 2,752.3 132.4 29.4 542.3 537.7 23.1 Feb.
344.3 4,441.6 4,159.0 4,014.6 2,755.3 130.7 29.3 540.4 536.0 22.9 Mar.
346.7 4,445.6 4,158.1 4,019.8 2,754.8 140.0 29.4 537.7 535.1 22.7 Apr.
349.4 4,478.3 4,170.7 4,016.7 2,769.9 125.8 29.7 534.8 533.9 22.6 May
349.9 4,517.1 4,194.6 4,031.6 2,787.1 127.8 30.1 531.9 532.3 22.4 June
359.0 4,507.6 4,222.4 4,070.3 2,813.6 142.1 31.0 530.6 530.6 22.3 July
371.5 4,552.6 4,289.4 4,135.2 2,870.1 153.3 30.6 530.7 528.3 22.2 Aug.
371.8 4,541.5 4,267.4 4,135.1 2,834.9 193.7 30.9 530.3 523.0 22.2 Sep.
371.8 4,546.8 4,270.2 4,140.4 2,804.0 233.2 31.6 529.3 519.8 22.4 Oct.
371.5 4,578.7 4,283.7 4,146.3 2,806.0 240.1 32.1 531.0 514.4 22.6 Nov.
374.0 4,534.7 4,261.2 4,119.7 2,764.9 259.9 34.4 527.1 510.4 23.0 Dec.
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2020 Nov. 733.0 458.4 307.1 64.6 17.8 46.1 19.4 3.3 247.9 247.8 610.3 2,025.2 1,406.4
Dec. 604.8 439.3 294.7 60.3 17.2 44.8 19.0 3.3 228.0 227.9 625.9 1,995.5 1,386.3
2021 Jan. 683.2 437.8 294.4 58.9 17.4 44.1 19.2 3.8 253.5 253.5 644.4 1,990.9 1,369.7
Feb. 713.6 436.4 296.4 54.3 19.0 43.9 19.2 3.7 256.3 256.2 613.7 2,004.4 1,369.6
Mar. 733.1 429.6 295.4 52.1 16.4 43.2 18.9 3.7 243.5 243.4 609.1 2,005.5 1,357.4
Apr. 700.9 424.0 293.9 48.5 16.2 42.9 18.9 3.6 252.5 252.4 617.9 1,991.6 1,350.5
May 692.4 436.9 308.3 47.7 15.9 42.4 19.1 3.5 247.4 247.4 608.4 1,980.7 1,339.4
June 709.2 441.2 314.0 46.6 16.3 42.0 18.8 3.5 245.8 245.8 600.0 1,984.2 1,332.5
July 709.6 440.1 313.9 45.6 16.6 42.0 18.6 3.5 254.6 254.5 622.6 1,999.3 1,334.0
Aug. 736.1 453.5 329.1 43.9 17.0 42.0 18.0 3.4 243.0 243.0 627.9 1,988.5 1,334.0
Sep. 742.6 460.1 334.6 46.3 16.6 41.3 18.1 3.3 260.8 260.7 596.8 2,011.7 1,343.3
Oct. 740.3 451.9 323.3 48.1 18.0 41.6 17.7 3.3 272.2 272.2 628.3 2,038.4 1,355.8
Nov. 691.5 481.6 349.8 50.3 19.1 41.7 17.5 3.3 267.7 267.6 654.5 2,046.8 1,355.2
Dec. 646.7 468.4 337.4 49.7 19.4 41.1 17.6 3.2 234.3 233.1 647.7 2,019.9 1,346.8
2022 Jan. 711.0 456.9 307.3 67.4 19.6 41.2 17.6 3.8 291.8 291.6 624.5 2,049.0 1,351.2
Feb. 755.6 469.9 314.1 73.5 19.8 41.3 17.6 3.7 301.3 301.1 587.2 2,044.7 1,358.5
Mar. 769.7 470.9 304.7 82.5 20.5 42.4 17.3 3.4 283.8 283.6 583.8 2,026.7 1,358.5
Apr. 747.7 474.5 306.7 83.4 21.2 42.6 17.2 3.4 310.1 309.9 604.0 2,073.8 1,362.7
May 718.8 490.8 316.7 88.4 22.3 43.3 16.8 3.3 313.0 312.9 593.9 2,038.0 1,337.6
June 788.4 501.8 325.2 90.9 22.9 43.3 16.2 3.2 281.2 281.1 592.9 2,069.3 1,361.0
July 757.2 489.8 302.8 100.4 24.2 42.9 16.2 3.3 306.0 305.9 590.8 2,090.8 1,360.8
Aug. 676.9 499.6 309.1 104.6 24.0 42.5 16.1 3.2 283.8 283.7 597.5 2,113.5 1,375.0
Sep. 684.3 478.8 281.7 111.2 24.5 42.3 16.0 3.2 264.7 264.7 589.1 2,154.2 1,415.2
Oct. 678.9 480.2 287.2 109.2 24.3 41.5 14.7 3.2 268.8 268.8 622.8 2,130.7 1,416.3
Nov. 668.8 498.6 306.2 109.2 25.1 40.8 14.2 3.2 295.4 295.4 649.7 2,159.2 1,441.3
Dec. 584.2 483.2 295.8 103.5 27.1 40.3 13.5 3.0 248.3 248.3 654.5 2,155.5 1,467.3
German contribution (€ billion)
2020 Nov. 212.1 243.7 131.6 57.3 14.0 38.0 2.5 0.2 9.1 9.1 2.4 515.5 296.1
Dec. 189.2 237.8 131.9 52.8 13.5 36.8 2.5 0.2 12.2 12.2 2.5 503.3 290.1
2021 Jan. 148.9 240.1 136.5 51.6 13.5 35.8 2.4 0.2 8.4 8.4 2.4 503.3 284.6
Feb. 164.3 243.4 142.8 47.3 15.2 35.5 2.5 0.2 6.0 6.0 2.4 510.0 288.4
Mar. 161.9 239.0 144.4 44.9 12.7 34.4 2.4 0.2 11.0 11.0 2.9 523.3 289.8
Apr. 154.6 233.1 142.4 41.5 12.5 34.1 2.4 0.2 7.6 7.6 2.8 524.3 296.2
May 173.3 240.3 150.8 41.0 12.5 33.4 2.4 0.2 9.2 9.2 2.2 518.0 293.2
June 179.3 241.2 152.9 39.9 13.0 32.8 2.4 0.2 9.0 9.0 2.3 515.5 294.6
July 167.3 235.3 148.0 38.9 13.3 32.5 2.4 0.2 9.6 9.6 2.2 518.3 295.1
Aug. 168.1 241.8 155.7 37.3 13.9 32.4 2.4 0.2 9.7 9.7 2.2 522.4 303.1
Sep. 175.2 245.6 158.2 39.8 13.4 31.7 2.3 0.2 11.2 11.2 2.2 530.1 305.5
Oct. 171.3 232.7 142.7 40.9 14.8 31.8 2.3 0.2 10.8 10.8 2.1 547.9 316.4
Nov. 178.4 244.1 155.2 38.8 16.1 31.6 2.2 0.2 6.1 6.1 1.8 556.5 324.8
Dec. 206.2 250.5 161.9 39.1 16.4 30.7 2.3 0.2 5.8 4.8 2.1 547.6 316.3
2022 Jan. 168.1 243.3 139.1 54.6 16.5 30.7 2.2 0.2 4.7 4.7 2.2 562.8 325.1
Feb. 170.6 256.3 147.8 59.2 16.3 30.6 2.2 0.2 5.8 5.8 2.3 572.5 338.8
Mar. 170.6 256.4 137.6 68.8 17.0 30.7 2.2 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.4 581.5 354.8
Apr. 167.6 258.2 137.6 70.0 17.6 30.6 2.2 0.2 4.4 4.4 2.2 596.5 357.3
May 190.1 271.4 144.2 75.3 18.5 31.1 2.2 0.2 4.8 4.8 2.4 596.8 359.0
June 205.0 280.5 147.7 80.5 19.0 31.0 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.3 604.2 362.6
July 166.8 270.4 128.3 89.0 20.2 30.6 2.2 0.1 9.8 9.8 2.4 613.8 369.1
Aug. 142.7 274.6 129.4 92.2 20.4 30.4 2.2 0.1 8.0 8.0 2.3 625.7 384.5
Sep. 147.4 259.1 109.0 96.6 20.8 30.3 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.4 640.0 395.3
Oct. 152.5 253.9 108.1 93.1 20.5 30.1 2.1 0.1 5.2 5.2 2.5 633.9 398.1
Nov. 175.5 256.9 114.7 88.9 21.5 29.8 1.9 0.1 8.3 8.3 2.5 634.2 402.6
Dec. 159.4 255.6 117.1 83.1 23.8 29.6 1.8 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.6 630.8 409.0
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
– 1.5 17.4 2,009.2 4,868.1 2,995.8 – 44.2 3,884.8 0.0 10,166.7 13,628.2 14,352.7 6,979.2 174.0 2020 Nov.
– 4.6 16.9 1,983.2 4,671.6 3,020.5 – 11.3 3,771.5 0.0 10,278.7 13,743.9 14,473.5 6,967.9 176.0 Dec.
1.9 15.7 1,973.3 4,821.4 2,998.4 – 10.2 3,700.0 0.0 10,326.2 13,783.0 14,549.2 6,928.3 177.5 2021 Jan.
13.8 16.4 1,974.2 4,872.9 2,953.0 – 10.8 3,520.1 0.0 10,398.6 13,849.5 14,602.6 6,877.6 176.8 Feb.
– 0.7 16.9 1,989.3 4,944.3 2,967.6 15.9 3,580.6 0.0 10,485.9 13,957.5 14,692.1 6,899.9 173.1 Mar.
6.5 16.6 1,968.5 4,989.3 2,948.0 10.5 3,484.0 0.0 10,569.8 14,020.5 14,779.7 6,827.9 173.5 Apr.
14.8 15.9 1,950.0 4,995.9 2,968.5 53.4 3,476.5 0.0 10,684.1 14,133.9 14,886.4 6,827.9 176.1 May
10.6 16.1 1,957.6 4,964.4 2,979.9 57.4 3,503.6 0.0 10,802.7 14,222.4 14,961.9 6,841.7 180.3 June
16.9 17.1 1,965.4 5,051.0 3,024.8 38.9 3,550.3 0.0 10,915.0 14,344.9 15,122.0 6,888.9 180.9 July
11.9 16.3 1,960.4 5,201.1 3,024.5 29.8 3,499.0 0.0 10,956.4 14,379.2 15,151.6 6,876.1 182.3 Aug.
14.0 17.9 1,979.8 5,226.5 2,997.6 16.1 3,480.9 0.0 11,032.9 14,441.4 15,188.3 6,864.3 187.4 Sep.
21.2 17.8 1,999.5 5,426.3 2,999.7 – 22.8 3,483.7 0.0 11,103.9 14,525.7 15,323.3 6,874.5 188.2 Oct.
19.3 17.8 2,009.6 5,510.3 3,037.4 21.6 3,681.3 0.0 11,195.2 14,606.3 15,419.8 6,912.5 189.7 Nov.
12.5 18.0 1,989.4 5,375.7 3,024.4 54.2 3,374.4 0.0 11,299.6 14,712.2 15,496.3 6,896.8 195.0 Dec.
22.2 18.0 2,008.7 5,548.2 2,999.9 62.3 3,717.9 0.0 11,250.1 14,698.4 15,486.3 6,906.7 196.0 2022 Jan.
33.6 5.4 2,005.7 5,634.3 2,995.4 55.2 3,755.7 0.0 11,327.9 14,769.4 15,527.5 6,886.4 195.0 Feb.
30.8 6.2 1,989.8 5,624.2 3,006.9 81.4 3,987.1 0.0 11,417.9 14,880.1 15,623.9 6,884.4 195.1 Mar.
39.0 16.2 2,018.6 5,759.4 2,986.3 46.6 4,395.5 0.0 11,494.6 14,962.6 15,747.3 6,885.0 197.2 Apr.
34.0 15.6 1,988.4 5,813.4 2,924.7 59.4 4,322.9 0.0 11,555.4 15,017.5 15,791.5 6,791.8 199.0 May
47.8 14.4 2,007.0 5,734.2 2,916.7 76.1 4,646.0 0.0 11,612.1 15,104.3 15,874.1 6,799.0 199.4 June
15.1 16.4 2,059.3 5,862.8 2,978.1 75.0 4,313.9 0.0 11,693.5 15,241.1 15,996.1 6,902.7 203.9 July
16.7 19.0 2,077.8 5,914.8 2,903.3 94.1 4,795.3 0.0 11,714.4 15,315.2 16,074.7 6,825.7 196.7 Aug.
35.5 19.6 2,099.1 5,898.0 2,862.6 19.2 5,098.1 0.0 11,678.0 15,415.4 16,176.3 6,792.0 195.9 Sep.
3.8 24.1 2,102.8 6,041.5 2,836.4 42.6 4,979.7 0.0 11,516.0 15,332.1 16,107.2 6,753.1 196.0 Oct.
23.9 22.8 2,112.5 5,879.5 2,872.2 58.7 4,690.9 0.0 11,472.1 15,333.7 16,164.3 6,797.0 199.7 Nov.
26.6 24.0 2,104.9 5,552.4 2,819.3 56.8 4,907.2 0.0 11,403.7 15,335.7 16,151.4 6,744.6 191.1 Dec.
German contribution (€ billion)
10.0 7.1 498.4 923.3 780.2 –1,109.5 1,859.4 470.7 2,639.3 3,433.2 3,461.8 1,893.5 0.0 2020 Nov.
9.0 6.6 487.7 985.7 787.5 –1,192.0 1,844.9 473.1 2,632.8 3,426.1 3,456.4 1,888.4 0.0 Dec.
7.8 6.8 488.7 1,026.4 778.3 –1,113.3 1,796.5 474.2 2,678.2 3,458.5 3,483.9 1,878.3 0.0 2021 Jan.
7.4 7.5 495.1 1,007.6 756.3 –1,095.7 1,750.3 476.5 2,698.6 3,471.7 3,494.9 1,860.6 0.0 Feb.
8.1 6.8 508.4 1,080.1 754.4 –1,144.4 1,742.0 479.0 2,724.1 3,497.0 3,525.7 1,868.2 0.0 Mar.
7.8 6.6 510.0 1,029.5 759.2 –1,074.2 1,717.0 479.7 2,736.8 3,505.0 3,529.7 1,871.8 0.0 Apr.
9.6 6.7 501.7 1,051.5 768.2 –1,126.5 1,696.6 482.8 2,764.3 3,535.8 3,563.5 1,869.6 0.0 May
9.8 6.9 498.8 1,088.8 775.4 –1,149.4 1,724.5 485.9 2,772.3 3,535.7 3,563.7 1,870.2 0.0 June
9.8 7.0 501.5 1,031.5 795.8 –1,075.6 1,767.0 490.0 2,793.9 3,552.6 3,581.2 1,891.2 0.0 July
12.7 6.5 503.2 1,068.1 793.5 –1,088.4 1,754.6 492.9 2,814.8 3,571.7 3,602.8 1,889.9 0.0 Aug.
13.1 7.0 510.1 1,165.5 781.6 –1,156.2 1,723.6 497.5 2,820.3 3,575.1 3,608.5 1,881.9 0.0 Sep.
13.3 7.2 527.5 1,165.8 783.9 –1,110.5 1,706.6 500.8 2,824.1 3,591.6 3,625.0 1,902.8 0.0 Oct.
14.5 7.4 534.6 1,227.7 803.0 –1,154.8 1,744.2 504.5 2,866.1 3,621.4 3,651.2 1,928.3 0.0 Nov.
16.1 7.5 524.0 1,305.6 796.1 –1,297.0 1,690.3 509.8 2,853.4 3,619.4 3,651.0 1,919.7 0.0 Dec.
13.6 7.7 541.5 1,271.1 778.4 –1,169.6 1,919.3 511.1 2,876.4 3,652.3 3,680.4 1,917.7 0.0 2022 Jan.
14.7 7.5 550.4 1,275.8 774.8 –1,172.9 1,969.0 514.2 2,900.0 3,677.2 3,707.4 1,921.4 0.0 Feb.
14.8 7.3 559.5 1,299.3 781.2 –1,190.8 2,076.2 520.0 2,892.9 3,677.0 3,707.8 1,934.7 0.0 Mar.
14.6 7.1 574.8 1,284.0 769.2 –1,168.1 2,325.6 523.3 2,892.4 3,686.8 3,715.1 1,935.2 0.0 Apr.
14.9 7.3 574.6 1,307.0 748.6 –1,199.2 2,289.8 526.8 2,914.0 3,699.5 3,728.9 1,911.8 0.0 May
18.7 6.6 578.9 1,317.0 743.1 –1,255.4 2,479.8 530.5 2,934.8 3,726.6 3,759.7 1,907.5 0.0 June
21.2 6.8 585.8 1,287.5 779.7 –1,189.6 2,276.7 525.2 2,941.9 3,757.1 3,797.3 1,949.2 0.0 July
21.8 7.6 596.2 1,349.3 739.6 –1,271.6 2,540.1 513.5 2,999.5 3,826.5 3,866.3 1,919.1 0.0 Aug.
27.5 8.1 604.3 1,385.2 711.9 –1,287.1 2,858.3 516.8 2,944.0 3,811.2 3,854.6 1,899.2 0.0 Sep.
19.1 9.7 605.0 1,355.1 693.8 –1,215.2 2,804.7 516.8 2,912.1 3,812.3 3,848.8 1,880.8 0.0 Oct.
20.8 11.2 602.2 1,310.2 714.6 –1,191.2 2,596.7 516.8 2,920.8 3,819.7 3,862.5 1,900.3 0.0 Nov.
19.8 11.7 599.3 1,268.7 690.0 –1,234.0 2,726.7 518.9 2,882.0 3,795.5 3,835.8 1,869.1 0.0 Dec.
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2021 Jan. 848.6 0.3 1,792.6 0.0 3,712.9 586.9 0.0 1,429.4 530.3 778.4 3,029.4 5,045.7
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 834.9 0.4 1,792.4 0.0 3,825.1 598.0 0.0 1,433.4 595.8 667.9 3,157.7 5,189.1
Apr. 816.7 0.3 2,054.6 0.0 3,951.4 676.4 0.0 1,447.7 644.5 633.4 3,421.1 5,545.2
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 809.8 0.2 2,107.0 0.0 4,092.7 706.5 0.0 1,465.8 586.7 659.1 3,591.7 5,763.9
July 821.7 0.1 2,196.0 0.0 4,244.5 736.6 0.0 1,485.8 652.3 734.5 3,653.1 5,875.5
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 826.7 0.2 2,213.2 0.0 4,378.9 766.6 0.0 1,499.9 635.7 790.4 3,726.2 5,992.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 835.1 0.2 2,209.9 0.0 4,512.3 738.5 0.0 1,507.4 671.3 833.7 3,806.5 6,052.4
Dec. 839.2 0.2 2,208.8 0.0 4,655.6 745.0 0.0 1,521.4 628.3 965.7 3,843.3 6,109.7
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 877.7 0.3 2,201.5 0.0 4,750.2 734.2 0.0 1,540.6 582.0 1,160.5 3,812.3 6,087.1
Mar. 887.2 0.3 2,201.3 0.0 4,842.0 746.0 0.0 1,550.6 642.6 1,091.1 3,900.8 6,197.3
Apr. 913.2 0.4 2,199.8 0.0 4,889.2 714.9 0.0 1,575.9 667.8 1,116.7 3,927.3 6,218.1
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 934.2 0.5 2,198.8 0.0 4,939.1 681.3 0.0 1,591.5 624.1 1,129.1 4,046.1 6,319.0
July 943.7 1.0 2,149.4 0.0 4,958.8 678.7 0.0 1,604.0 667.6 1,158.0 3,943.3 6,226.0
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 950.1 1.7 2,124.9 0.0 4,954.8 707.0 0.0 1,585.3 553.9 1,249.2 3,936.1 6,228.5
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 955.8 4.0 2,118.8 0.0 4,948.3 4,490.0 0.0 1,563.7 536.7 1,104.4 332.0 6,385.7
Dec. 960.4 1.9 1,947.1 0.0 4,946.1 4,521.5 0.0 1,560.8 492.5 1,066.9 213.8 6,296.2
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deutsche Bundesbank
2021 Jan. 208.3 0.1 341.1 0.0 791.3 178.9 0.0 347.3 189.4 – 252.8 878.0 1,404.2
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 205.3 0.1 341.0 0.0 816.9 177.5 0.0 348.3 172.7 – 298.0 962.8 1,488.6
Apr. 198.0 0.0 407.3 0.0 845.8 203.0 0.0 351.7 187.4 – 300.4 1,008.9 1,563.5
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 194.3 0.0 420.5 0.0 884.3 208.5 0.0 356.8 187.3 – 301.9 1,046.7 1,612.0
July 197.4 0.0 434.3 0.0 918.5 204.2 0.0 362.0 206.8 – 270.8 1,046.2 1,612.4
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 199.0 0.1 436.7 0.0 950.8 210.7 0.0 365.0 204.3 – 240.8 1,045.3 1,621.0
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 200.3 0.1 439.1 0.0 978.5 204.4 0.0 367.4 217.7 – 235.2 1,061.6 1,633.3
Dec. 201.3 0.0 440.3 0.0 1,015.8 206.4 0.0 370.9 220.4 – 219.4 1,077.1 1,654.4
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 212.4 0.3 421.7 0.0 1,034.0 204.5 0.0 374.6 205.6 – 165.1 1,048.8 1,627.9
Mar. 215.6 0.1 421.7 0.0 1,057.9 211.8 0.0 378.1 191.1 – 193.7 1,108.0 1,698.0
Apr. 223.9 0.1 420.8 0.0 1,068.7 197.7 0.0 384.9 196.7 – 189.1 1,123.3 1,705.9
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 230.4 0.1 420.2 0.0 1,087.4 189.9 0.0 388.0 196.9 – 183.1 1,147.4 1,725.3
July 231.7 0.3 409.1 0.0 1,084.3 185.8 0.0 390.3 214.9 – 175.4 1,109.7 1,685.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 232.1 0.3 403.6 0.0 1,076.8 228.5 0.0 379.5 157.9 – 161.8 1,108.8 1,716.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 231.7 0.8 400.5 0.0 1,071.5 1,304.0 0.0 379.0 127.2 – 231.4 125.9 1,808.8
Dec. 232.4 0.5 352.5 0.0 1,079.2 1,346.6 0.0 378.8 121.0 – 242.4 60.5 1,785.9
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
–16.5 – 0.2 +38.2 ± 0.0 +98.2 +51.5 ± 0.0 +25.5 –116.7 +90.7 +68.7 +145.7 2021 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
–13.7 + 0.1 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +112.2 +11.1 ± 0.0 + 4.0 +65.5 –110.5 +128.3 +143.4 Mar.
–18.2 – 0.1 +262.2 ± 0.0 +126.3 +78.4 ± 0.0 +14.3 +48.7 –34.5 +263.4 +356.1 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
– 6.9 – 0.1 +52.4 ± 0.0 +141.3 +30.1 ± 0.0 +18.1 –57.8 +25.7 +170.6 +218.7 June
+11.9 – 0.1 +89.0 ± 0.0 +151.8 +30.1 ± 0.0 +20.0 +65.6 +75.4 +61.4 +111.6 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 5.0 + 0.1 +17.2 ± 0.0 +134.4 +30.0 ± 0.0 +14.1 –16.6 +55.9 +73.1 +117.3 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 8.4 ± 0.0 – 3.3 ± 0.0 +133.4 –28.1 ± 0.0 + 7.5 +35.6 +43.3 +80.3 +59.6 Nov.
+ 4.1 ± 0.0 – 1.1 ± 0.0 +143.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 +14.0 –43.0 +132.0 +36.8 +57.3 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+38.5 + 0.1 – 7.3 ± 0.0 +94.6 –10.8 ± 0.0 +19.2 –46.3 +194.8 –31.0 –22.6 Feb.
+ 9.5 ± 0.0 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +91.8 +11.8 ± 0.0 +10.0 +60.6 –69.4 +88.5 +110.2 Mar.
+26.0 + 0.1 – 1.5 ± 0.0 +47.2 –31.1 ± 0.0 +25.3 +25.2 +25.6 +26.5 +20.8 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+21.0 + 0.1 – 1.0 ± 0.0 +49.9 –33.6 ± 0.0 +15.6 –43.7 +12.4 +118.8 +100.9 June
+ 9.5 + 0.5 –49.4 ± 0.0 +19.7 – 2.6 ± 0.0 +12.5 +43.5 +28.9 –102.8 –93.0 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 6.4 + 0.7 –24.5 ± 0.0 – 4.0 +28.3 ± 0.0 –18.7 –113.7 +91.2 – 7.2 + 2.5 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 5.7 + 2.3 – 6.1 ± 0.0 – 6.5 +3,783.0 ± 0.0 –21.6 –17.2 –144.8 –3,604.1 +157.2 Nov.
+ 4.6 – 2.1 –171.7 ± 0.0 – 2.2 +31.5 ± 0.0 – 2.9 –44.2 –37.5 –118.2 –89.5 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
Deutsche Bundesbank
– 4.7 – 0.2 + 7.1 + 0.0 +22.6 +12.3 ± 0.0 + 6.1 –28.5 +41.7 – 6.7 +11.7 2021 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
– 3.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 +25.6 – 1.4 ± 0.0 + 1.0 –16.7 –45.2 +84.8 +84.4 Mar.
– 7.3 – 0.1 +66.3 + 0.0 +28.8 +25.5 ± 0.0 + 3.4 +14.7 – 2.4 +46.0 +74.9 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
– 3.7 + 0.0 +13.2 + 0.0 +38.6 + 5.5 ± 0.0 + 5.1 –0.1 – 1.5 +37.9 +48.5 June
+ 3.1 – 0.0 +13.8 – 0.0 +34.2 – 4.3 ± 0.0 + 5.2 +19.4 +31.1 – 0.5 + 0.4 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 1.6 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.0 +32.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 + 3.0 –2.5 +29.9 – 0.9 + 8.6 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.4 – 0.0 +27.8 – 6.4 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +13.4 + 5.7 +16.3 +12.3 Nov.
+ 1.0 – 0.1 + 1.2 – 0.0 +37.3 + 2.1 ± 0.0 + 3.5 +2.7 +15.7 +15.6 +21.1 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+11.1 + 0.2 –18.6 + 0.0 +18.2 – 2.0 ± 0.0 + 3.7 –14.7 +54.3 –28.3 –26.6 Feb.
+ 3.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 +23.9 + 7.4 ± 0.0 + 3.5 –14.5 –28.6 +59.2 +70.1 Mar.
+ 8.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.0 +10.8 –14.2 ± 0.0 + 6.8 +5.6 + 4.6 +15.2 + 7.9 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+ 6.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 – 0.0 +18.7 – 7.7 ± 0.0 + 3.0 +0.2 + 6.0 +24.1 +19.4 June
+ 1.3 + 0.2 –11.1 – 0.0 – 3.1 – 4.1 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +18.0 + 7.7 –37.7 –39.5 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 0.4 + 0.0 – 5.5 – 0.0 – 7.5 +42.7 ± 0.0 –10.8 –57.1 +13.5 – 0.9 +31.0 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
– 0.5 + 0.5 – 3.1 + 0.0 – 5.3 +1,075.5 ± 0.0 – 0.6 –30.7 –69.6 –982.9 +92.0 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.4 –48.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 +42.7 ± 0.0 – 0.1 –6.2 –11.0 –65.4 –22.9 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2022 July 15 8,765.7 604.3 519.5 226.6 292.9 27.0 10.3 10.3 –
22 8,768.3 604.3 520.3 226.6 293.7 26.3 10.2 10.2 –
29 8,764.5 604.3 521.1 226.6 294.5 25.7 10.3 10.3 –
Aug. 5 8,746.0 604.3 520.5 226.6 293.9 26.8 9.8 9.8 –
12 8,747.8 604.3 520.7 226.6 294.1 26.6 9.9 9.9 –
19 8,750.7 604.3 521.4 226.6 294.7 26.5 9.9 9.9 –
26 8,750.0 604.3 523.4 227.1 296.3 25.4 10.0 10.0 –
Sep. 2 8,756.8 604.3 523.8 227.6 296.2 25.3 10.4 10.4 –
9 8,759.1 604.3 525.5 227.8 297.8 23.8 10.5 10.5 –
16 8,756.9 604.3 526.6 227.8 298.8 24.0 10.7 10.7 –
23 8,777.4 604.3 528.0 227.8 300.2 23.3 11.2 11.2 –
30 8,810.1 592.8 544.7 234.6 310.1 25.6 10.8 10.8 –
Oct. 7 8,772.0 592.8 545.3 234.6 310.7 25.8 10.7 10.7 –
14 8,778.1 592.8 547.2 234.6 312.6 24.9 10.4 10.4 –
21 8,774.8 592.8 548.5 235.2 313.3 25.4 10.8 10.8 –
28 8,770.7 592.8 549.2 236.0 313.2 25.7 11.4 11.4 –
Nov. 4 8,761.7 592.8 553.0 237.3 315.7 23.2 11.4 11.4 –
11 8,764.7 592.8 550.9 237.3 313.5 25.2 11.4 11.4 –
18 8,769.1 592.8 549.2 237.4 311.8 25.8 11.3 11.3 –
25 8,471.4 592.8 549.8 238.1 311.7 26.3 11.3 11.3 –
Dec. 2 8,470.9 592.8 549.8 238.5 311.4 25.6 11.1 11.1 –
9 8,480.2 592.9 552.1 238.5 313.6 23.4 11.2 11.2 –
16 8,477.2 592.9 551.5 238.3 313.2 23.3 11.1 11.1 –
23 7,985.5 592.9 552.2 239.2 313.0 23.8 14.1 14.1 –
30 7,955.8 592.9 523.2 228.5 294.7 20.4 14.1 14.1 –
2023 Jan. 6 7,968.0 593.0 526.0 229.7 296.3 20.6 11.9 11.9 –
13 7,972.1 593.0 525.6 229.7 295.9 20.9 12.5 12.5 –
20 7,959.2 593.0 523.3 230.0 293.3 19.4 12.4 12.4 –
27 7,894.0 593.0 519.5 229.9 289.6 18.5 12.1 12.1 –
Feb. 3 7,875.4 593.0 511.1 230.0 281.1 16.9 12.0 12.0 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2022 July 15 2,946.9 187.6 93.3 57.7 35.7 0.0 – – –
22 2,941.3 187.6 93.4 57.7 35.7 0.0 – – –
29 2,964.1 187.6 93.1 57.6 35.5 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
Aug. 5 2,998.7 187.6 93.1 57.6 35.5 0.0 – – –
12 3,024.8 187.6 92.9 57.7 35.2 0.0 – – –
19 3,028.6 187.6 93.1 57.7 35.5 0.0 – – –
26 3,060.0 187.6 93.5 57.7 35.9 0.0 – – –
Sep. 2 3,042.0 187.6 93.2 57.9 35.4 0.0 – – –
9 3,020.3 187.6 93.0 57.9 35.2 0.0 – – –
16 3,036.5 187.6 93.7 57.9 35.9 0.0 – – –
23 3,014.7 187.6 94.3 57.9 36.5 0.0 – – –
30 3,064.3 184.0 97.2 59.6 37.6 0.0 – – –
Oct. 7 3,057.7 184.0 97.5 59.6 37.9 0.0 – – –
14 3,060.7 184.0 97.4 59.6 37.8 0.0 – – –
21 3,026.3 184.0 97.3 59.6 37.7 0.0 – – –
28 3,037.7 184.0 97.6 59.7 37.9 0.0 – – –
Nov. 4 3,053.2 184.0 98.1 60.2 37.9 0.0 – – –
11 3,053.5 184.0 98.1 60.2 37.9 0.0 – – –
18 3,045.4 184.0 98.1 60.2 37.9 0.0 – – –
25 2,959.7 184.0 98.3 60.2 38.1 0.0 – – –
Dec. 2 2,950.5 184.0 98.3 60.5 37.8 0.0 – – –
9 2,968.1 184.0 98.3 60.5 37.8 0.0 – – –
16 2,971.8 184.0 98.2 60.5 37.7 0.0 – – –
23 2,875.6 184.0 98.1 60.8 37.3 0.0 2.9 2.9 –
30 2,905.7 184.0 92.5 58.0 34.4 0.0 3.4 3.4 –
2023 Jan. 6 2,836.4 184.0 92.2 58.0 34.2 0.0 – – –
13 2,817.4 184.0 92.2 58.1 34.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
20 2,787.2 184.0 92.4 58.1 34.4 0.0 – – –
27 2,765.8 184.0 92.2 58.0 34.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
Feb. 3 2,791.4 184.0 92.0 58.1 34.0 0.0 – – –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
2,125.5 0.9 2,124.6 – – – – 28.8 5,119.3 4,953.9 165.4 21.7 309.4 2022 July 15
2,125.6 1.0 2,124.6 – – 0.0 – 27.6 5,123.3 4,956.7 166.6 21.7 309.1 22
2,125.8 1.1 2,124.7 – – 0.0 – 30.8 5,125.6 4,958.9 166.8 21.7 299.2 29
2,125.6 0.9 2,124.7 – – – – 15.2 5,117.9 4,952.2 165.7 21.7 304.2 Aug. 5
2,125.6 0.9 2,124.7 – – 0.0 – 15.5 5,119.7 4,953.4 166.4 21.7 303.7 12
2,125.5 0.8 2,124.7 – – – – 13.2 5,123.8 4,956.7 167.2 21.7 304.4 19
2,125.5 0.7 2,124.7 – – 0.0 – 12.9 5,123.1 4,955.5 167.6 21.7 303.8 26
2,129.3 3.9 2,125.4 – – 0.0 – 14.8 5,122.4 4,956.5 165.9 21.7 304.9 Sep. 2
2,129.1 3.7 2,125.4 – – – – 13.7 5,121.5 4,955.3 166.3 21.7 309.0 9
2,129.3 3.9 2,125.4 – – – – 22.4 5,112.4 4,945.7 166.7 21.7 305.5 16
2,129.1 3.7 2,125.4 – – – – 32.0 5,116.9 4,949.9 167.1 21.7 310.9 23
2,120.8 4.5 2,116.0 – – 0.3 – 32.2 5,109.5 4,943.0 166.5 21.7 351.8 30
2,119.7 3.7 2,116.0 – – 0.0 – 19.3 5,109.9 4,943.6 166.2 21.7 326.8 Oct. 7
2,119.7 3.6 2,116.0 – – 0.0 – 17.7 5,120.2 4,953.3 166.9 21.7 323.3 14
2,119.7 3.6 2,116.0 – – – – 13.3 5,118.3 4,951.0 167.3 21.7 324.3 21
2,120.9 4.6 2,116.3 – – – – 16.1 5,111.0 4,946.9 164.2 21.7 321.8 28
2,119.4 3.1 2,116.3 – – – – 19.6 5,104.1 4,942.1 162.1 21.7 316.5 Nov. 4
2,117.8 1.5 2,116.3 – – 0.0 – 16.3 5,108.3 4,945.1 163.2 21.7 320.1 11
2,117.9 1.6 2,116.3 – – 0.0 – 17.2 5,113.5 4,949.8 163.7 21.7 319.7 18
1,821.8 1.8 1,820.0 – – 0.0 – 19.4 5,109.0 4,944.3 164.7 21.7 319.1 25
1,822.9 2.6 1,820.2 – – – – 18.8 5,111.8 4,946.3 165.5 21.7 316.3 Dec. 2
1,821.6 1.4 1,820.2 – – – – 18.8 5,118.2 4,952.3 165.9 21.7 320.3 9
1,821.7 1.5 1,820.2 – – – – 29.1 5,106.2 4,940.8 165.4 21.7 319.8 16
1,322.9 1.3 1,321.4 – – 0.2 – 26.6 5,109.3 4,944.1 165.3 21.7 322.1 23
1,324.3 2.4 1,321.4 – – 0.5 – 31.1 5,102.2 4,937.2 165.0 21.6 325.9 30
1,322.5 1.1 1,321.4 – – – – 31.8 5,123.7 4,942.3 181.5 21.6 316.8 2023 Jan. 6
1,322.4 1.0 1,321.4 – – – – 24.8 5,129.3 4,949.7 179.6 21.6 322.0 13
1,322.3 0.8 1,321.4 – – – – 28.8 5,116.8 4,938.4 178.5 21.6 321.6 20
1,259.2 1.2 1,258.0 – – 0.0 – 28.6 5,123.4 4,945.1 178.3 21.6 318.1 27
1,258.8 0.8 1,258.0 – – 0.0 – 25.8 5,116.6 4,940.6 176.0 21.5 319.6 Feb. 3
Deutsche Bundesbank
403.8 0.3 403.6 – – 0.0 – 5.6 1,079.4 1,079.4 – 4.4 1,172.7 2022 July 15
403.9 0.4 403.6 – – 0.0 – 5.2 1,075.7 1,075.7 – 4.4 1,171.1 22
404.0 0.4 403.6 – – 0.0 – 0.6 1,077.2 1,077.2 – 4.4 1,197.1 29
403.7 0.1 403.6 – – 0.0 – 0.3 1,077.7 1,077.7 – 4.4 1,231.8 Aug. 5
403.8 0.2 403.6 – – 0.0 – 0.2 1,078.5 1,078.5 – 4.4 1,257.4 12
403.8 0.2 403.6 – – 0.0 – 0.1 1,079.1 1,079.1 – 4.4 1,260.5 19
403.7 0.1 403.6 – – 0.0 – 0.1 1,076.1 1,076.1 – 4.4 1,294.4 26
404.5 0.8 403.7 – – 0.0 – 0.3 1,078.5 1,078.5 – 4.4 1,273.4 Sep. 2
403.9 0.3 403.7 – – 0.0 – 0.0 1,073.5 1,073.5 – 4.4 1,257.7 9
404.1 0.5 403.7 – – 0.0 – 2.5 1,069.5 1,069.5 – 4.4 1,274.6 16
404.2 0.5 403.7 – – 0.0 – 3.2 1,069.8 1,069.8 – 4.4 1,251.1 23
400.7 1.4 399.3 – – 0.0 – 3.5 1,072.2 1,072.2 – 4.4 1,302.1 30
399.8 0.5 399.3 – – 0.0 – 3.0 1,067.0 1,067.0 – 4.4 1,302.0 Oct. 7
399.9 0.6 399.3 – – 0.0 – 2.5 1,070.4 1,070.4 – 4.4 1,302.0 14
399.9 0.7 399.3 – – 0.0 – 2.5 1,071.9 1,071.9 – 4.4 1,266.2 21
401.0 1.7 399.3 – – 0.0 – 2.9 1,075.2 1,075.2 – 4.4 1,272.7 28
399.7 0.5 399.3 – – 0.0 – 2.3 1,077.9 1,077.9 – 4.4 1,286.7 Nov. 4
399.7 0.4 399.3 – – 0.0 – 2.6 1,078.9 1,078.9 – 4.4 1,285.8 11
399.8 0.6 399.3 – – 0.0 – 3.2 1,081.1 1,081.1 – 4.4 1,274.6 18
318.0 0.5 317.4 – – 0.0 – 2.8 1,079.1 1,079.1 – 4.4 1,273.0 25
318.4 0.9 317.4 – – 0.0 – 3.5 1,080.9 1,080.9 – 4.4 1,260.9 Dec. 2
317.6 0.2 317.4 – – 0.0 – 3.1 1,082.8 1,082.8 – 4.4 1,277.7 9
317.6 0.1 317.4 – – 0.0 – 3.7 1,072.9 1,072.9 – 4.4 1,290.8 16
236.4 0.4 235.9 – – 0.2 – 4.9 1,073.8 1,073.8 – 4.4 1,270.9 23
237.5 1.1 235.9 – – 0.5 – 8.3 1,073.0 1,073.0 – 4.4 1,302.6 30
236.1 0.2 235.9 – – 0.0 – 4.5 1,074.5 1,074.5 – 4.4 1,240.6 2023 Jan. 6
236.0 0.2 235.9 – – 0.0 – 3.7 1,077.5 1,077.5 – 4.4 1,219.4 13
236.0 0.2 235.9 – – 0.0 – 4.4 1,077.1 1,077.1 – 4.4 1,188.8 20
222.6 0.5 222.1 – – 0.0 – 5.2 1,080.2 1,080.2 – 4.4 1,177.1 27
222.3 0.2 222.1 – – 0.0 – 4.9 1,081.5 1,081.5 – 4.4 1,202.1 Feb. 3

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2022 July 15 8,765.7 1,608.7 4,622.9 3,910.3 710.3 – – 2.3 49.8 – 835.3 646.0 189.3
22 8,768.3 1,606.8 4,605.1 3,904.4 698.5 – – 2.2 50.9 – 843.5 656.8 186.7
29 8,764.5 1,600.9 4,568.6 3,855.5 711.1 – – 2.1 60.5 – 844.2 641.9 202.2
Aug. 5 8,746.0 1,595.8 4,625.6 3,959.7 664.1 – – 1.8 53.0 – 744.3 546.8 197.5
12 8,747.8 1,591.9 4,642.2 3,975.0 665.5 – – 1.7 52.9 – 738.6 543.6 194.9
19 8,750.7 1,584.0 4,598.5 3,941.0 655.6 – – 1.8 49.4 – 784.5 583.8 200.7
26 8,750.0 1,578.0 4,572.8 3,922.3 648.6 – – 1.8 47.9 – 813.3 595.6 217.7
Sep. 2 8,756.8 1,575.5 4,707.9 4,035.2 670.7 – – 2.0 51.5 – 692.8 504.8 187.9
9 8,759.1 1,573.6 4,803.0 3,806.8 994.3 – – 1.8 55.9 – 626.9 472.8 154.1
16 8,756.9 1,569.3 4,816.5 548.1 4,266.6 – – 1.8 72.2 – 655.8 518.1 137.7
23 8,777.4 1,564.9 4,810.4 403.4 4,405.2 – – 1.8 63.4 – 678.5 543.1 135.4
30 8,810.1 1,566.0 4,698.7 318.3 4,378.2 – – 2.3 76.4 – 768.0 557.2 210.7
Oct. 7 8,772.0 1,562.4 4,880.3 251.4 4,626.7 – – 2.1 62.3 – 618.0 483.8 134.2
14 8,778.1 1,561.9 4,854.2 232.2 4,619.7 – – 2.3 54.1 – 668.3 541.1 127.2
21 8,774.8 1,559.8 4,841.5 215.6 4,623.0 – – 2.9 59.7 – 676.4 551.0 125.4
28 8,770.7 1,562.9 4,801.3 231.0 4,567.5 – – 2.8 53.7 – 706.8 578.0 128.8
Nov. 4 8,761.7 1,562.5 4,859.1 240.2 4,616.1 – – 2.8 49.0 – 626.1 499.6 126.5
11 8,764.7 1,560.1 4,909.8 215.0 4,692.0 – – 2.8 48.5 – 623.3 502.4 120.8
18 8,769.1 1,558.2 4,853.3 211.5 4,638.9 – – 2.8 49.0 – 681.5 568.4 113.1
25 8,471.4 1,557.7 4,553.5 203.4 4,348.5 – – 1.6 45.6 – 675.3 558.8 116.5
Dec. 2 8,470.9 1,560.1 4,665.7 190.2 4,474.0 – – 1.6 43.1 – 577.6 450.8 126.8
9 8,480.2 1,563.4 4,675.6 197.9 4,476.1 – – 1.6 48.9 – 558.4 431.2 127.2
16 8,477.2 1,564.9 4,647.4 203.8 4,441.9 – – 1.6 47.5 – 547.5 427.8 119.7
23 7,985.5 1,571.6 4,198.7 193.1 4,004.4 – – 1.2 58.4 – 484.4 371.4 113.0
30 7,955.8 1,572.0 3,998.9 218.9 3,778.8 – – 1.2 78.3 – 564.6 436.8 127.8
2023 Jan. 6 7,968.0 1,572.5 4,288.8 202.3 4,085.3 – – 1.2 53.7 – 433.6 327.0 106.6
13 7,972.1 1,566.2 4,300.0 172.5 4,126.2 – – 1.2 57.5 – 472.5 369.3 103.2
20 7,959.2 1,561.5 4,337.7 175.1 4,161.3 – – 1.3 45.1 – 471.7 367.7 104.0
27 7,894.0 1,559.0 4,268.9 176.0 4,091.7 – – 1.3 39.0 – 497.7 398.1 99.6
Feb. 3 7,875.4 1,557.6 4,282.8 202.2 4,079.3 – – 1.3 39.2 – 454.3 353.4 100.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
2022 July 15 2,946.9 391.6 1,280.1 1,077.7 200.3 – – 2.1 19.1 – 275.6 212.4 63.2
22 2,941.3 389.4 1,295.5 1,080.1 213.4 – – 2.0 21.0 – 253.9 195.1 58.8
29 2,964.1 388.3 1,285.6 1,076.5 207.1 – – 2.0 22.2 – 245.3 175.5 69.8
Aug. 5 2,998.7 383.3 1,317.4 1,091.8 223.7 – – 1.8 20.4 – 231.9 164.9 67.0
12 3,024.8 379.7 1,340.9 1,116.0 223.2 – – 1.7 23.0 – 232.2 161.9 70.2
19 3,028.6 373.2 1,317.7 1,101.0 214.9 – – 1.7 19.8 – 262.1 183.1 79.0
26 3,060.0 370.7 1,348.4 1,133.9 212.7 – – 1.8 22.3 – 253.3 153.5 99.8
Sep. 2 3,042.0 382.4 1,381.1 1,148.7 230.5 – – 1.8 22.8 – 218.4 140.3 78.2
9 3,020.3 382.1 1,392.6 1,101.0 289.9 – – 1.8 29.1 – 191.7 121.5 70.2
16 3,036.5 381.5 1,406.2 254.0 1,150.5 – – 1.8 30.5 – 212.1 140.1 72.0
23 3,014.7 380.6 1,402.6 174.9 1,225.9 – – 1.8 23.3 – 181.8 116.0 65.8
30 3,064.3 379.8 1,424.3 107.7 1,314.7 – – 1.9 21.8 – 196.3 129.9 66.4
Oct. 7 3,057.7 377.2 1,473.7 79.0 1,392.9 – – 1.8 23.7 – 161.1 101.0 60.0
14 3,060.7 377.6 1,450.5 67.8 1,380.8 – – 2.0 17.1 – 192.6 138.0 54.6
21 3,026.3 377.4 1,437.9 55.4 1,379.7 – – 2.8 18.9 – 176.1 124.7 51.4
28 3,037.7 379.1 1,432.3 59.4 1,370.1 – – 2.8 19.7 – 190.7 139.7 51.0
Nov. 4 3,053.2 378.9 1,436.8 74.0 1,360.0 – – 2.8 13.7 – 182.4 132.3 50.1
11 3,053.5 378.1 1,472.4 55.0 1,414.6 – – 2.8 15.9 – 168.3 124.3 43.9
18 3,045.4 377.6 1,433.2 53.9 1,376.5 – – 2.7 16.1 – 199.0 155.1 43.9
25 2,959.7 377.5 1,366.1 55.9 1,308.6 – – 1.6 14.1 – 177.5 131.1 46.4
Dec. 2 2,950.5 378.8 1,394.0 50.6 1,341.8 – – 1.6 13.1 – 155.2 102.0 53.1
9 2,968.1 380.1 1,403.8 59.2 1,343.1 – – 1.6 17.8 – 143.9 91.3 52.6
16 2,971.8 381.6 1,359.1 59.3 1,298.2 – – 1.6 13.9 – 161.1 111.3 49.9
23 2,875.6 383.9 1,283.1 53.2 1,228.8 – – 1.1 12.8 – 138.9 94.5 44.4
30 2,905.7 381.3 1,200.1 66.6 1,132.3 – – 1.2 21.3 – 177.6 132.5 45.1
2023 Jan. 6 2,836.4 377.2 1,287.0 64.7 1,221.1 – – 1.2 14.3 – 102.6 66.8 35.8
13 2,817.4 375.9 1,292.0 45.3 1,245.4 – – 1.2 21.0 – 114.3 81.8 32.5
20 2,787.2 374.7 1,312.9 45.4 1,266.3 – – 1.2 13.9 – 85.0 53.8 31.3
27 2,765.8 374.3 1,289.8 44.4 1,244.2 – – 1.2 12.7 – 101.0 72.4 28.6
Feb. 3 2,791.4 374.9 1,322.2 64.9 1,256.0 – – 1.3 13.6 – 91.1 61.0 30.2
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
397.2 11.5 5.9 5.9 – 184.9 326.2 – 608.5 114.8 2022 July 15
412.1 11.3 6.0 6.0 – 184.9 324.3 – 608.5 114.8 22
442.2 11.5 5.7 5.7 – 184.9 322.7 – 608.5 114.8 29
476.1 11.3 5.9 5.9 – 184.9 325.6 – 608.5 114.8 Aug. 5
473.7 11.1 5.8 5.8 – 184.9 323.3 – 608.5 114.8 12
484.8 11.4 6.2 6.2 – 184.9 323.7 – 608.5 114.8 19
489.8 11.4 6.7 6.7 – 184.9 321.8 – 608.5 114.8 26
478.6 11.3 6.4 6.4 – 184.9 324.7 – 608.5 114.8 Sep. 2
447.8 11.7 5.9 5.9 – 184.9 326.1 – 608.5 114.7 9
391.9 11.1 6.5 6.5 – 184.9 325.3 – 608.5 114.7 16
407.5 11.0 7.0 7.0 – 184.9 326.5 – 608.5 114.7 23
440.3 11.6 6.8 6.8 – 189.9 326.1 – 611.7 114.7 30
392.3 11.5 6.9 6.9 – 189.9 321.9 – 611.7 114.7 Oct. 7
385.1 11.5 6.9 6.9 – 189.9 319.7 – 611.7 114.7 14
384.8 11.9 6.1 6.1 – 189.9 318.3 – 611.7 114.7 21
391.0 12.2 6.1 6.1 – 189.9 320.3 – 611.7 114.7 28
410.8 12.5 5.8 5.8 – 189.9 319.6 – 611.7 114.7 Nov. 4
368.4 12.5 5.8 5.8 – 189.9 320.1 – 611.7 114.7 11
365.2 12.6 5.7 5.7 – 189.9 327.3 – 611.7 114.7 18
383.3 12.7 5.5 5.5 – 189.9 321.5 – 611.7 114.7 25
372.5 12.2 5.6 5.6 – 189.9 318.0 – 611.7 114.6 Dec. 2
379.9 12.2 5.9 5.9 – 189.9 319.7 – 611.7 114.6 9
413.6 12.6 5.3 5.3 – 189.9 322.2 – 611.7 114.6 16
430.2 12.5 5.1 5.1 – 189.9 308.5 – 611.7 114.6 23
540.7 11.7 4.7 4.7 – 181.1 302.7 – 586.4 114.6 30
424.8 11.0 4.8 4.8 – 182.4 292.5 – 588.7 115.3 2023 Jan. 6
378.3 11.0 4.8 4.8 – 182.4 295.0 – 588.7 115.8 13
342.6 11.4 4.6 4.6 – 182.4 297.8 – 588.7 115.8 20
328.3 11.3 5.0 5.0 – 182.4 297.4 – 588.7 116.4 27
339.0 11.0 4.8 4.8 – 182.4 298.7 – 589.1 116.4 Feb. 3
Deutsche Bundesbank
167.6 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 48.0 40.9 530.5 187.1 5.7 2022 July 15
168.5 0.4 0.2 0.2 – 48.0 41.2 530.5 187.1 5.7 22
214.6 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 48.0 41.7 525.2 187.1 5.7 29
237.4 0.4 0.1 0.1 – 48.0 41.8 525.2 187.1 5.7 Aug. 5
240.8 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 48.0 41.8 525.2 187.1 5.7 12
247.3 0.4 0.3 0.3 – 48.0 41.9 525.2 187.1 5.7 19
256.2 0.4 0.8 0.8 – 48.0 41.9 525.2 187.1 5.7 26
240.0 0.4 0.2 0.2 – 48.0 42.4 513.5 187.1 5.7 Sep. 2
226.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 – 48.0 43.2 513.5 187.1 5.7 9
207.6 0.4 0.6 0.6 – 48.0 43.3 513.5 187.1 5.7 16
227.2 0.4 1.1 1.1 – 48.0 43.3 513.5 187.1 5.7 23
241.7 0.6 0.6 0.6 – 49.3 41.8 516.8 185.6 5.7 30
221.4 0.6 0.7 0.7 – 49.3 42.0 516.8 185.6 5.7 Oct. 7
222.7 0.6 0.5 0.5 – 49.3 41.8 516.8 185.6 5.7 14
216.3 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 41.7 516.8 185.6 5.7 21
216.3 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 41.6 516.8 185.6 5.7 28
241.0 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 42.5 516.8 185.6 5.7 Nov. 4
218.8 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 42.0 516.8 185.6 5.7 11
219.7 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 41.6 516.8 185.6 5.7 18
226.6 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 39.9 516.8 185.6 5.7 25
210.1 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 41.4 516.8 185.6 5.7 Dec. 2
223.4 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 41.0 516.8 185.6 5.7 9
257.2 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 40.9 516.8 185.6 5.7 16
260.4 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 39.0 516.8 185.6 5.7 23
333.6 0.1 – – – 47.0 38.5 518.9 181.7 5.7 30
261.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 47.0 37.8 521.6 181.7 5.7 2023 Jan. 6
220.7 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 47.0 37.3 521.6 181.7 5.7 13
207.3 0.3 0.0 0.0 – 47.0 37.0 521.6 181.7 5.7 20
195.1 0.3 0.1 0.1 – 47.0 34.1 523.8 181.7 5.7 27
198.2 0.3 0.0 0.0 – 47.0 35.5 521.2 181.7 5.7 Feb. 3
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 10,519.9 20.0 2,937.4 2,433.9 2,170.9 263.0 503.6 360.2 143.3 4,584.8 4,079.5 3,703.3 3,365.6
2021 Mar. 9,261.9 45.7 2,904.5 2,419.8 2,145.0 274.8 484.8 351.2 133.6 4,245.8 3,762.0 3,347.6 3,038.5
Apr. 9,269.2 44.9 2,935.1 2,441.4 2,168.7 272.8 493.7 360.0 133.7 4,236.4 3,756.9 3,347.0 3,036.8
May 9,277.1 45.7 2,974.7 2,485.3 2,212.9 272.4 489.4 355.6 133.9 4,246.1 3,772.8 3,363.3 3,049.8
June 9,293.7 46.5 2,959.9 2,469.9 2,197.4 272.5 490.0 356.7 133.3 4,253.7 3,772.0 3,370.7 3,056.9
July 9,321.9 46.8 2,943.6 2,448.2 2,178.3 269.9 495.3 361.1 134.2 4,270.2 3,788.1 3,386.0 3,071.8
Aug. 9,319.3 46.9 2,950.1 2,457.4 2,188.5 268.8 492.8 359.5 133.3 4,283.3 3,799.4 3,400.4 3,085.0
Sep. 9,325.3 47.4 2,952.3 2,472.9 2,203.6 269.3 479.4 344.9 134.5 4,303.0 3,812.2 3,409.8 3,093.8
Oct. 9,395.0 47.8 2,979.8 2,490.1 2,221.1 269.0 489.7 356.2 133.5 4,322.0 3,832.5 3,437.3 3,117.5
Nov. 9,495.5 48.1 3,008.0 2,519.5 2,253.4 266.1 488.5 355.4 133.1 4,352.1 3,856.4 3,459.8 3,138.9
Dec. 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 Jan. 9,717.0 47.7 3,029.2 2,522.4 2,258.2 264.2 506.8 375.0 131.8 4,378.1 3,875.3 3,484.8 3,162.4
Feb. 9,842.7 47.7 3,082.6 2,564.8 2,299.1 265.8 517.8 383.9 133.9 4,396.3 3,889.1 3,504.4 3,181.6
Mar. 9,962.9 50.0 3,066.9 2,546.2 2,281.9 264.3 520.7 387.1 133.7 4,426.8 3,916.4 3,526.5 3,204.1
Apr. 10,268.8 51.0 3,112.2 2,578.0 2,313.7 264.2 534.2 400.5 133.8 4,434.6 3,929.2 3,546.3 3,223.8
May 10,258.0 50.0 3,122.7 2,592.6 2,326.2 266.4 530.1 397.8 132.3 4,460.3 3,949.5 3,567.4 3,244.7
June 10,428.9 51.8 3,096.5 2,570.9 2,306.2 264.7 525.6 394.1 131.5 4,494.4 3,969.5 3,589.6 3,268.8
July 10,267.9 42.3 3,086.0 2,557.4 2,291.5 266.0 528.6 396.8 131.8 4,528.3 4,008.2 3,627.9 3,293.6
Aug. 10,627.2 23.6 3,166.4 2,625.3 2,359.2 266.1 541.1 409.1 132.0 4,555.4 4,039.2 3,664.4 3,331.1
Sep. 11,063.0 20.7 3,268.0 2,714.2 2,442.2 272.0 553.7 419.7 134.0 4,579.6 4,057.2 3,685.0 3,351.1
Oct. 11,036.0 20.0 3,259.8 2,696.8 2,424.2 272.6 563.0 416.3 146.7 4,591.1 4,077.8 3,699.7 3,365.9
Nov. 10,762.4 19.1 3,180.1 2,630.6 2,360.1 270.5 549.5 403.2 146.2 4,610.5 4,089.4 3,715.1 3,379.3
Dec. 10,519.9 20.0 2,937.4 2,433.9 2,170.9 263.0 503.6 360.2 143.3 4,584.8 4,079.5 3,703.3 3,365.6
Changes 3
2014 206.8 0.4 –126.2 –128.6 –95.3 –33.4 2.4 7.2 – 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2021 207.2 2.2 161.3 155.6 156.4 – 0.8 5.7 11.7 – 5.9 175.7 154.6 173.7 155.9
2022 1,155.5 –29.7 149.4 104.7 101.7 3.0 44.8 32.2 12.6 240.8 222.1 235.9 218.8
2021 Apr. 21.2 – 0.8 33.6 23.0 24.6 – 1.6 10.6 10.5 0.2 – 8.8 – 5.2 – 0.1 – 1.1
May 10.7 0.8 38.9 44.1 44.4 – 0.3 – 5.2 – 5.5 0.3 10.4 16.0 15.7 13.0
June 5.3 0.9 –17.1 –16.3 –15.8 – 0.5 – 0.8 – 0.2 – 0.6 7.3 – 0.5 7.6 6.7
July 26.3 0.2 –15.0 –19.5 –17.5 – 2.0 4.5 4.4 0.1 17.3 16.4 15.6 15.3
Aug. – 3.9 0.2 6.7 9.3 10.3 – 1.0 – 2.6 – 1.7 – 0.9 13.2 11.2 14.7 13.4
Sep. 3.0 0.4 0.1 14.4 13.9 0.5 –14.4 – 15.6 1.3 19.8 13.0 9.4 8.8
Oct. 70.4 0.5 27.7 17.3 17.6 – 0.3 10.5 11.4 – 1.0 19.2 20.6 28.0 24.1
Nov. 95.5 0.3 26.6 29.2 32.2 – 3.0 – 2.5 – 2.1 – 0.5 30.6 25.2 22.1 21.0
Dec. –326.2 1.6 –218.7 –186.4 –183.6 – 2.8 –32.2 – 31.2 – 1.0 – 0.9 4.7 9.4 9.1
2022 Jan. 340.3 – 1.9 238.6 189.0 186.9 2.1 49.6 49.7 – 0.1 28.1 15.4 16.2 14.9
Feb. 128.5 – 0.0 52.7 41.4 39.7 1.7 11.3 9.1 2.2 20.4 15.8 21.3 20.9
Mar. 119.7 2.2 –15.5 –18.4 –17.2 – 1.2 2.9 3.0 – 0.1 31.4 27.6 22.2 22.6
Apr. 283.1 1.0 41.6 30.8 30.8 0.0 10.8 10.6 0.2 7.5 12.8 19.7 19.4
May 1.1 – 1.0 12.4 15.3 12.8 2.5 – 2.9 – 1.5 – 1.3 27.4 21.2 21.6 21.3
June 178.6 1.7 –28.2 –22.2 –20.6 – 1.6 – 6.0 – 5.3 – 0.6 32.9 19.9 22.0 23.7
July –177.9 – 9.5 –12.8 –14.2 –15.0 0.8 1.4 1.4 0.0 29.7 36.0 36.0 22.6
Aug. 359.0 –18.7 83.5 71.7 70.7 1.0 11.8 11.3 0.4 28.1 31.4 36.5 37.5
Sep. 428.4 – 2.9 99.8 88.6 82.4 6.2 11.3 9.0 2.3 27.0 17.2 19.5 18.7
Oct. –19.3 – 0.7 – 6.7 –17.0 –17.7 0.6 10.3 – 2.4 12.7 12.4 21.1 15.3 15.5
Nov. –245.9 – 0.9 –75.9 –65.0 –63.0 – 2.0 –10.9 – 10.5 – 0.5 21.4 13.0 17.1 15.1
Dec. –240.1 0.9 –240.0 –195.3 –188.0 – 7.2 –44.8 – 42.1 – 2.6 –25.7 – 9.3 –11.5 –13.4
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 2021
337.7 376.2 247.9 128.3 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,136.7 882.4 1,841.0 2022
309.1 414.4 249.3 165.1 483.8 339.4 232.3 144.4 28.9 115.5 1,105.7 855.5 960.1 2021 Mar.
310.2 409.9 251.0 158.9 479.5 339.8 232.3 139.7 30.3 109.4 1,122.5 876.2 930.3 Apr.
313.5 409.5 250.6 158.9 473.2 339.1 231.9 134.1 28.4 105.7 1,108.3 862.4 902.3 May
313.8 401.4 249.1 152.3 481.7 339.4 231.8 142.3 28.8 113.5 1,111.0 864.8 922.5 June
314.2 402.2 251.3 150.8 482.0 344.2 236.6 137.8 28.6 109.2 1,097.1 849.1 964.3 July
315.4 398.9 248.0 150.9 484.0 346.1 238.8 137.9 28.3 109.6 1,084.8 839.7 954.2 Aug.
316.0 402.4 248.3 154.1 490.7 352.5 241.7 138.2 27.9 110.3 1,087.9 840.8 934.8 Sep.
319.9 395.1 249.7 145.4 489.5 356.0 244.3 133.4 30.3 103.2 1,134.6 889.6 910.9 Oct.
320.9 396.5 247.8 148.8 495.7 361.6 249.6 134.1 28.5 105.6 1,137.3 892.4 950.0 Nov.
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 Dec.
322.4 390.6 246.9 143.6 502.7 377.7 260.4 125.0 28.5 96.5 1,171.3 925.2 1,090.8 2022 Jan.
322.8 384.8 244.7 140.0 507.2 381.4 262.7 125.8 28.6 97.2 1,190.1 939.6 1,125.9 Feb.
322.3 390.0 245.2 144.8 510.4 379.5 259.4 130.9 29.0 101.9 1,169.2 921.9 1,249.9 Mar.
322.5 382.9 246.5 136.4 505.4 378.8 257.8 126.7 32.2 94.4 1,174.5 926.0 1,496.5 Apr.
322.7 382.1 244.5 137.7 510.9 383.7 260.7 127.1 31.4 95.7 1,166.1 917.3 1,458.8 May
320.9 379.9 244.9 135.0 524.9 388.1 268.4 136.8 33.2 103.6 1,182.4 925.1 1,603.8 June
334.3 380.3 245.8 134.5 520.2 383.8 266.0 136.4 33.4 103.0 1,199.9 941.5 1,411.5 July
333.3 374.8 243.4 131.4 516.2 387.1 268.6 129.1 33.7 95.4 1,211.7 952.6 1,670.0 Aug.
333.9 372.2 244.5 127.7 522.4 390.5 273.1 132.0 35.4 96.6 1,220.9 961.0 1,973.8 Sep.
333.8 378.1 246.0 132.1 513.3 385.7 268.4 127.6 34.4 93.2 1,234.2 975.7 1,930.8 Oct.
335.9 374.2 246.3 127.9 521.1 394.0 276.5 127.1 32.7 94.4 1,224.6 963.4 1,728.1 Nov.
337.7 376.2 247.9 128.3 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,136.7 882.4 1,841.0 Dec.
Changes 3
15.5 –12.3 –15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 – 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
17.8 –19.1 – 6.1 –13.1 21.1 35.5 22.6 –14.3 – 1.1 –13.2 71.7 84.9 –203.7 2021
17.1 –13.7 2.8 –16.5 18.6 20.0 23.8 – 1.4 2.6 – 3.9 1.8 –12.9 793.2 2022
1.0 – 5.0 1.7 – 6.7 – 3.6 0.9 0.7 – 4.5 1.5 – 6.0 26.0 29.0 –28.8 2021 Apr.
2.7 0.4 – 0.3 0.7 – 5.6 – 0.1 0.3 – 5.5 – 1.9 – 3.6 –11.4 –11.4 –28.0 May
0.8 – 8.1 – 1.4 – 6.7 7.8 – 0.4 – 0.6 8.2 0.4 7.7 – 5.7 – 5.3 19.9 June
0.4 0.7 2.3 – 1.5 1.0 5.6 4.8 – 4.7 – 0.2 – 4.5 –15.0 –16.5 38.7 July
1.2 – 3.4 – 3.5 0.1 1.9 1.8 2.2 0.1 – 0.3 0.4 –13.1 –10.0 –10.8 Aug.
0.6 3.6 0.3 3.2 6.8 6.3 2.9 0.5 – 0.4 0.9 0.1 – 1.5 –17.4 Sep.
3.9 – 7.4 1.2 – 8.7 – 1.4 3.5 2.6 – 4.8 2.3 – 7.2 47.6 49.5 –24.6 Oct.
1.1 3.0 – 0.9 4.0 5.5 4.8 4.4 0.6 – 1.6 2.2 – 4.5 – 3.6 42.4 Nov.
0.3 – 4.7 – 2.6 – 2.2 – 5.6 0.9 – 5.3 – 6.5 – 0.1 – 6.3 –45.9 –41.0 –62.3 Dec.
1.3 – 0.8 1.8 – 2.6 12.7 14.8 16.0 – 2.1 0.2 – 2.2 72.3 66.7 3.3 2022 Jan.
0.5 – 5.5 – 2.1 – 3.4 4.6 3.7 2.5 0.9 0.1 0.8 20.6 15.8 34.9 Feb.
– 0.4 5.5 0.5 5.0 3.8 – 1.7 – 3.3 5.5 0.4 5.1 –22.2 –19.2 123.7 Mar.
0.2 – 6.8 1.4 – 8.2 – 5.3 – 1.6 – 2.7 – 3.7 3.2 – 6.9 –13.8 –14.2 246.6 Apr.
0.3 – 0.4 – 2.0 1.6 6.2 5.4 3.3 0.8 – 0.8 1.7 – 1.0 – 2.0 –36.6 May
– 1.7 – 2.1 0.4 – 2.5 13.0 3.0 6.1 10.0 1.9 8.1 –10.0 –18.2 182.3 June
13.4 0.0 0.9 – 0.8 – 6.3 – 5.2 – 2.9 – 1.1 0.1 – 1.3 7.8 8.0 –193.2 July
– 1.0 – 5.1 – 2.3 – 2.8 – 3.3 3.4 2.5 – 6.7 0.4 – 7.0 7.2 6.5 258.9 Aug.
0.8 – 2.4 1.1 – 3.5 9.9 3.3 4.0 6.6 1.7 4.8 0.7 0.1 303.7 Sep.
– 0.3 5.9 1.4 4.4 – 8.7 – 4.4 – 4.6 – 4.3 – 1.0 – 3.3 19.7 20.4 –44.0 Oct.
2.0 – 4.1 0.0 – 4.1 8.4 9.2 9.6 – 0.8 – 1.7 0.9 8.8 4.8 –199.3 Nov.
1.9 2.2 1.7 0.4 –16.4 –10.0 – 6.7 – 6.4 – 1.9 – 4.5 –88.2 –81.6 112.9 Dec.
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 10,519.9 1,617.3 1,231.3 386.0 4,344.0 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.5 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.9 84.5
2021 Mar. 9,261.9 1,634.1 1,336.6 297.6 4,068.3 3,876.2 2,569.2 744.7 212.3 562.3 536.2 142.2 71.0
Apr. 9,269.2 1,659.9 1,344.1 315.8 4,079.3 3,886.3 2,588.3 735.3 205.8 562.7 536.9 143.0 70.2
May 9,277.1 1,661.1 1,353.0 308.1 4,103.8 3,909.2 2,614.0 732.0 205.0 563.2 537.5 146.4 70.4
June 9,293.7 1,670.8 1,357.4 313.4 4,088.4 3,890.3 2,605.4 722.3 198.1 562.6 537.1 151.3 76.7
July 9,321.9 1,682.5 1,362.0 320.4 4,110.8 3,918.9 2,638.6 718.3 196.7 562.0 536.8 146.4 74.0
Aug. 9,319.3 1,686.5 1,365.8 320.7 4,119.2 3,925.6 2,648.6 715.5 194.1 561.5 536.6 147.8 74.7
Sep. 9,325.3 1,667.9 1,354.2 313.6 4,108.9 3,913.6 2,640.2 712.7 194.3 560.7 535.9 148.8 77.1
Oct. 9,395.0 1,690.9 1,364.7 326.2 4,140.0 3,942.6 2,657.0 725.5 206.4 560.1 535.6 151.4 78.1
Nov. 9,495.5 1,718.6 1,374.9 343.8 4,154.1 3,956.1 2,678.9 717.4 200.2 559.8 535.5 151.4 82.5
Dec. 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 Jan. 9,717.0 1,725.2 1,363.7 361.5 4,195.2 3,979.5 2,686.4 732.3 215.9 560.7 537.4 166.7 86.2
Feb. 9,842.7 1,743.7 1,369.7 374.0 4,209.7 3,993.9 2,699.7 733.4 217.5 560.8 537.7 169.3 90.1
Mar. 9,962.9 1,737.5 1,367.8 369.8 4,212.3 3,990.1 2,690.3 740.9 226.7 559.0 536.1 177.7 99.4
Apr. 10,268.8 1,766.8 1,384.4 382.3 4,223.7 4,003.6 2,700.1 745.6 234.6 557.9 535.2 175.5 93.4
May 10,258.0 1,765.9 1,393.7 372.2 4,236.1 4,013.3 2,718.3 738.4 229.4 556.5 534.0 176.2 97.1
June 10,428.9 1,744.4 1,384.7 359.7 4,235.0 4,008.2 2,708.8 744.7 238.3 554.7 532.4 180.5 102.7
July 10,267.9 1,772.1 1,383.3 388.9 4,267.6 4,041.3 2,722.8 765.6 259.2 552.9 530.7 179.5 99.0
Aug. 10,627.2 1,785.7 1,403.5 382.2 4,322.0 4,089.0 2,760.7 777.8 272.2 550.5 528.3 185.0 103.0
Sep. 11,063.0 1,814.5 1,415.7 398.8 4,342.6 4,105.7 2,748.5 812.0 306.6 545.2 523.1 191.1 102.4
Oct. 11,036.0 1,837.4 1,419.0 418.4 4,359.6 4,122.0 2,741.6 838.3 334.6 542.1 519.8 190.0 92.4
Nov. 10,762.4 1,773.7 1,345.0 428.7 4,401.0 4,132.6 2,752.4 843.3 344.7 536.8 514.3 193.1 97.3
Dec. 10,519.9 1,617.3 1,231.3 386.0 4,344.0 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.5 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.9 84.5
Changes 4
2014 206.8 –28.4 –32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 –32.1 3.1 – 2.4 – 2.4 – 2.5 – 0.0
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2021 207.2 133.4 103.4 30.0 107.3 96.2 141.4 –45.8 –23.3 0.6 3.9 16.6 13.6
2022 1,155.5 –19.1 –106.7 87.6 207.3 164.4 59.5 132.4 147.7 –27.5 –26.3 18.1 12.8
2021 Apr. 21.2 27.6 8.3 19.3 12.5 11.2 20.1 – 9.4 – 6.5 0.4 0.7 1.2 – 0.6
May 10.7 0.6 9.1 – 8.5 24.9 23.2 26.0 – 3.2 – 0.7 0.5 0.6 3.5 0.3
June 5.3 8.2 3.7 4.4 –16.6 –19.8 – 9.4 – 9.8 – 7.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 4.5 6.1
July 26.3 14.4 7.4 7.0 22.3 28.6 33.2 – 4.1 – 1.4 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 4.9 – 3.1
Aug. – 3.9 3.9 3.7 0.2 7.8 6.5 9.9 – 2.8 – 2.6 – 0.5 – 0.3 0.9 0.2
Sep. 3.0 –19.5 –11.7 – 7.8 – 7.3 – 8.9 – 6.5 – 1.6 0.4 – 0.8 – 0.6 0.7 2.7
Oct. 70.4 24.1 11.2 12.9 31.1 29.1 16.8 12.9 12.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 2.5 1.1
Nov. 95.5 26.4 9.6 16.7 12.9 12.5 21.1 – 8.4 – 6.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.3 4.2
Dec. –326.2 –90.4 –36.3 –54.1 –24.3 –24.3 –29.6 3.9 3.7 1.4 1.6 2.4 –11.9
2022 Jan. 340.3 93.8 23.2 70.6 64.3 47.0 36.5 10.9 11.9 – 0.4 0.3 12.6 15.3
Feb. 128.5 19.3 6.1 13.2 14.2 14.6 13.4 1.1 1.6 0.1 0.3 2.2 3.5
Mar. 119.7 – 6.6 – 2.1 – 4.5 2.2 – 4.2 – 9.7 7.3 9.2 – 1.8 – 1.6 8.3 9.3
Apr. 283.1 25.1 15.6 9.5 8.0 11.0 7.5 4.1 7.2 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 3.1 – 6.6
May 1.1 0.7 9.8 – 9.1 13.6 10.6 18.9 – 6.9 – 5.0 – 1.3 – 1.2 1.0 3.9
June 178.6 –24.2 – 9.7 –14.5 – 2.8 – 6.6 –10.7 5.9 8.5 – 1.8 – 1.6 4.1 5.6
July –177.9 24.6 – 1.6 26.2 29.3 30.8 13.0 19.6 19.9 – 1.8 – 1.7 – 2.0 – 3.9
Aug. 359.0 15.5 23.0 – 7.5 53.6 47.1 37.2 12.4 12.9 – 2.4 – 2.4 5.3 3.8
Sep. 428.4 25.2 11.7 13.5 19.0 15.4 –13.3 34.0 34.1 – 5.3 – 5.3 5.6 – 0.9
Oct. –19.3 24.2 3.8 20.3 17.2 16.2 – 7.3 26.6 28.2 – 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.7 – 9.7
Nov. –245.9 –60.3 –73.0 12.7 45.6 21.3 14.3 12.2 10.1 – 5.3 – 5.4 – 3.2 5.4
Dec. –240.1 –156.3 –113.5 –42.7 –57.0 –38.8 –40.3 5.2 9.0 – 3.7 – 4.1 –12.2 –12.9
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 2021
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.4 67.1 3.4 2.7 1,184.7 40.5 803.4 747.1 1,817.3 2022
68.7 22.0 2.5 2.3 49.9 48.9 6.7 2.9 1,090.4 21.5 833.7 712.0 913.8 2021 Mar.
70.3 23.2 2.5 2.3 50.0 48.6 5.1 2.9 1,091.8 21.0 839.1 705.9 885.3 Apr.
73.5 26.7 2.5 2.3 48.2 46.6 6.0 2.3 1,087.7 23.5 854.7 702.7 858.8 May
72.0 25.9 2.5 2.3 46.9 45.6 4.5 2.3 1,084.6 23.8 836.9 725.4 880.7 June
69.9 22.9 2.5 2.3 45.5 44.3 6.0 2.3 1,087.2 23.5 800.0 719.2 913.9 July
70.7 24.0 2.5 2.3 45.8 44.0 7.4 2.3 1,089.9 25.5 790.7 725.0 898.4 Aug.
69.2 22.4 2.5 2.2 46.6 45.2 7.3 2.2 1,100.5 25.1 840.1 735.9 862.6 Sep.
70.9 23.4 2.4 2.2 46.1 45.2 7.4 2.2 1,118.0 24.6 866.7 729.5 840.3 Oct.
66.4 17.4 2.4 2.2 46.6 45.5 4.2 2.1 1,123.9 26.0 883.1 736.5 872.8 Nov.
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 Dec.
78.1 20.3 2.4 2.2 48.9 45.5 3.0 2.3 1,126.9 25.3 907.4 721.2 1,036.0 2022 Jan.
76.8 19.8 2.4 2.2 46.4 42.8 2.4 2.4 1,141.1 26.2 945.9 717.7 1,080.0 Feb.
75.9 19.0 2.4 2.2 44.5 42.1 2.8 2.5 1,148.9 25.9 926.4 736.8 1,195.6 Mar.
79.8 22.5 2.4 2.2 44.6 42.2 2.3 2.3 1,161.1 26.3 939.2 734.6 1,438.9 Apr.
76.8 19.9 2.3 2.1 46.6 42.8 1.9 2.5 1,164.1 27.7 958.5 732.3 1,396.8 May
75.5 19.1 2.3 2.1 46.2 43.0 2.0 2.5 1,164.7 32.2 945.7 752.0 1,582.6 June
78.1 23.2 2.3 2.1 46.8 44.0 4.2 2.5 1,177.1 35.9 926.6 743.6 1,374.2 July
79.7 24.3 2.3 2.1 47.9 44.0 4.8 2.4 1,183.7 38.6 950.2 741.8 1,636.6 Aug.
86.4 31.2 2.3 2.1 45.9 43.3 3.2 2.5 1,203.3 45.8 987.2 758.0 1,951.6 Sep.
95.4 39.7 2.2 2.1 47.6 44.9 4.0 2.6 1,202.6 39.4 980.8 751.8 1,897.2 Oct.
93.5 31.3 2.2 2.0 75.4 71.1 4.7 2.6 1,202.3 42.2 939.7 747.3 1,691.1 Nov.
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.4 67.1 3.4 2.7 1,184.7 40.5 803.4 747.1 1,817.3 Dec.
Changes 4
– 2.3 – 1.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.8 – 3.4 – 0.6 –63.7 – 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
3.1 – 8.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 – 5.0 – 7.9 0.3 40.6 6.9 124.9 16.6 –207.9 2021
5.5 8.6 – 0.3 – 0.2 24.8 23.2 1.1 0.4 59.3 10.2 41.6 5.0 860.0 2022
1.8 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 2.2 – 0.1 7.3 – 0.4 11.1 – 3.7 –31.3 2021 Apr.
3.2 3.5 – 0.0 0.0 – 1.8 – 1.9 0.9 – 0.1 – 2.7 2.5 17.0 – 2.8 –27.1 May
– 1.6 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.3 – 1.0 – 1.5 0.1 – 7.7 0.2 –22.7 20.9 24.6 June
– 1.8 – 2.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.4 – 1.3 1.5 – 0.1 2.3 – 0.2 –37.2 – 5.4 28.5 July
0.7 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.3 – 0.2 1.4 – 0.0 2.2 2.0 – 9.9 5.6 –14.9 Aug.
– 1.9 – 1.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.8 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 7.0 – 0.5 45.5 10.0 –32.4 Sep.
1.5 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 17.3 – 0.5 27.1 – 6.4 –22.8 Oct.
– 4.5 – 6.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.7 0.4 – 3.2 – 0.1 1.7 1.4 11.7 5.9 40.3 Nov.
14.3 5.4 0.0 0.0 – 2.4 – 2.0 – 2.0 0.2 –14.2 1.4 –127.3 – 4.6 –63.4 Dec.
– 2.7 – 2.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 4.7 2.0 0.7 – 0.0 13.4 – 2.3 146.6 –18.3 39.8 2022 Jan.
– 1.3 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.5 – 2.7 – 0.5 0.1 15.0 1.0 39.4 – 3.2 44.2 Feb.
– 1.0 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.6 0.3 0.2 6.9 – 0.3 –20.7 19.0 118.4 Mar.
3.6 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 3.4 0.2 0.4 – 5.8 252.8 Apr.
– 2.9 – 2.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.0 0.6 – 0.4 0.2 6.4 1.4 23.9 – 1.0 –42.4 May
– 1.5 – 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.4 0.2 0.1 – 0.0 – 4.8 4.3 – 6.3 17.6 199.0 June
1.9 3.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.5 1.1 2.1 0.1 9.1 3.5 –24.8 –10.5 –207.8 July
1.6 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 0.0 0.6 – 0.1 4.1 2.7 20.1 – 3.1 268.3 Aug.
6.5 6.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.7 – 1.6 0.1 15.8 7.0 31.8 14.9 323.1 Sep.
9.1 8.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.7 1.6 0.8 0.1 1.8 – 6.3 – 2.8 – 5.3 –55.3 Oct.
– 8.6 – 8.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 27.5 25.8 0.8 0.0 7.4 2.4 –29.9 – 1.1 –208.4 Nov.
0.7 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 6.1 – 4.1 – 1.3 0.1 –19.4 – 3.5 –136.1 1.9 128.1 Dec.
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
24•
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
End of
monthNumber of
reporting
institu-
tionsBalance
sheet
total  1Cash in
hand and
credit
balances
with
central
banks TotalBalances
and
loansSecurities
issued by
banks Totalfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more than
1 year BillsSecurities
issued by
non-banksPartici-
pating
interestsOther
assets  1
All categories of banks  
2022 July 1,425 10,330.6 1,127.2 2,702.9 2,227.8 471.4 4,874.4 464.5 3,690.2 0.3 703.2 96.2 1,529.9
Aug. 1,417 10,690.2 1,150.7 2,746.8 2,270.5 471.6 4,907.5 484.8 3,714.3 0.2 690.9 95.8 1,789.3
Sep. 1,407 11,124.8 144.9 3,861.7 3,377.0 479.0 4,929.2 492.3 3,732.3 0.3 688.2 96.3 2,092.8
Oct. 1,395 11,098.4 106.9 3,888.9 3,402.1 482.0 4,945.2 486.2 3,754.6 0.3 687.4 96.4 2,061.0
Nov. 1,390 10,826.0 108.4 3,798.1 3,314.4 479.3 4,964.5 494.3 3,762.5 0.2 691.3 96.2 1,858.8
Dec. 1,386 10,582.3 88.0 3,498.3 3,028.0 467.6 4,930.1 467.2 3,762.8 0.2 682.2 96.2 1,969.7
Commercial banks 6
2022 Nov. 244 4,957.0 54.5 1,786.7 1,703.3 82.6 1,572.4 315.9 1,019.9 0.2 227.2 31.4 1,512.0
Dec. 241 4,849.0 34.3 1,618.6 1,540.5 77.4 1,562.4 308.8 1,023.8 0.2 220.3 31.1 1,602.7
   Big banks 7
2022 Nov. 3 2,525.9 37.1 712.3 682.0 30.3 722.8 142.6 453.6 0.0 122.2 26.1 1,027.7
Dec. 3 2,496.5 12.0 659.8 631.3 28.5 720.9 139.9 454.4 0.1 121.8 25.9 1,077.8
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2022 Nov. 135 1,955.0 13.2 756.7 705.3 50.9 708.7 123.6 482.0 0.1 99.0 4.6 471.8
Dec. 133 1,870.8 17.4 635.4 587.4 47.5 700.3 119.9 484.5 0.1 92.2 4.5 513.2
   Branches of foreign banks
2022 Nov. 106 476.0 4.3 317.8 316.1 1.4 140.9 49.7 84.2 0.0 6.0 0.7 12.4
Dec. 105 481.8 4.9 323.4 321.8 1.4 141.2 49.0 84.9 0.0 6.4 0.7 11.7
Landesbanken
2022 Nov. 6 952.6 1.9 385.1 334.1 50.7 430.9 47.0 344.2 0.0 36.9 9.4 125.4
Dec. 6 890.6 2.2 317.1 267.4 49.5 426.7 41.7 345.6 0.0 34.8 9.4 135.2
Savings banks
2022 Nov. 362 1,588.6 27.7 305.4 185.7 119.5 1,215.2 52.9 987.6 – 174.4 15.5 24.8
Dec. 362 1,571.0 25.8 291.2 172.8 118.2 1,214.5 51.5 988.3 – 174.3 15.7 23.9
Credit cooperatives 
2022 Nov. 733 1,179.2 17.2 236.0 120.7 114.3 878.1 33.1 720.8 0.0 124.2 19.6 28.3
Dec. 733 1,172.8 19.7 225.2 112.8 111.8 879.8 33.2 721.7 0.0 124.9 19.6 28.4
Mortgage banks
2022 Nov. 9 227.8 1.2 22.9 16.1 6.6 197.9 2.7 180.5 – 14.6 0.1 5.5
Dec. 8 223.4 0.2 19.7 13.2 6.4 198.0 3.0 180.4 – 14.6 0.1 5.3
Building and loan associations
2022 Nov. 18 259.6 0.4 46.0 30.6 15.4 209.0 1.3 184.5 . 23.2 0.3 3.9
Dec. 18 259.7 0.4 45.6 30.2 15.4 209.6 1.3 185.4 . 22.9 0.3 3.9
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2022 Nov. 18 1,661.4 5.6 1,015.9 923.9 90.1 461.0 41.5 325.0 – 90.8 20.0 158.9
Dec. 18 1,615.7 5.4 980.8 890.9 88.8 439.1 27.6 317.6 – 90.4 20.0 170.3
Memo item:    Foreign banks 8
2022 Nov. 141 2,455.6 13.2 985.3 950.6 34.1 684.0 169.9 402.0 0.1 106.6 3.6 769.5
Dec. 138 2,404.8 16.1 875.1 843.2 31.4 669.1 157.7 404.7 0.1 99.5 3.6 840.9
   of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2022 Nov. 35 1,979.6 8.9 667.6 634.5 32.7 543.1 120.2 317.8 0.1 100.6 2.9 757.1
Dec. 33 1,923.0 11.3 551.7 521.3 30.0 528.0 108.7 319.8 0.1 93.2 2.9 829.2
* Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3.  1 Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial
instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning ofSection 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read
in conjunction with Section 35 (1) number 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are classified
under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting date. Trading
portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, in
Tables I.1 to I.3.  2 For building and loan associations: including deposits under savings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
25•
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4
TotalSight
depositsTime
deposits TotalSight
depositsfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more
than
1 year  2Memo 
item:
Liabilities
arising
from
repos  3 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeBank
savings
bondsBearer
debt
securities
out-
standing  5Capital
including
published
reserves,
partici-
pation
rights
capital,
funds for
general
banking
risksOther
liabi-
lities  1End of
month
All categories of banks 
2,490.7 743.1 1,747.6 4,476.6 2,950.6 296.0 647.2 65.6 558.6 535.9 24.2 1,274.3 586.4 1,502.6 2022 July
2,523.9 746.9 1,777.0 4,534.7 2,998.1 309.1 646.3 70.2 556.1 533.5 25.1 1,276.5 587.5 1,767.5 Aug.
2,585.3 788.2 1,797.1 4,559.0 2,987.1 354.5 640.7 64.0 550.7 528.1 26.1 1,309.4 588.6 2,082.6 Sep.
2,607.9 795.7 1,812.2 4,570.2 2,968.7 385.1 640.5 64.3 547.6 524.8 28.3 1,299.9 588.5 2,032.0 Oct.
2,495.8 747.5 1,748.3 4,619.6 3,003.0 395.9 646.8 68.4 542.2 519.3 31.7 1,291.9 590.1 1,828.5 Nov.
2,230.0 616.9 1,613.1 4,533.0 2,917.3 394.0 648.2 48.6 538.5 515.1 34.9 1,269.4 590.9 1,958.9 Dec.
Commercial banks 6
1,332.8 568.2 764.5 1,817.9 1,257.3 220.1 235.2 65.3 94.7 91.3 10.7 186.8 200.1 1,419.4 2022 Nov.
1,151.9 461.6 690.3 1,787.7 1,217.5 230.1 235.0 45.8 93.3 89.8 11.7 191.3 201.4 1,516.8 Dec.
Big banks 7   
491.4 192.0 299.4 873.2 588.5 124.0 79.2 31.6 80.4 77.7 1.1 139.4 73.7 948.2 2022 Nov.
422.3 156.2 266.1 850.2 562.7 131.0 76.1 21.2 79.4 76.5 1.1 143.5 73.6 1,006.9 Dec.
Regional banks and other commercial banks   
570.5 239.9 330.6 769.5 545.2 67.4 133.4 33.7 14.0 13.4 9.5 46.9 111.1 457.0 2022 Nov.
451.5 158.9 292.6 762.8 530.9 71.2 136.5 24.7 13.6 13.0 10.6 47.3 112.4 496.8 Dec.
Branches of foreign banks   
270.9 136.4 134.5 175.3 123.6 28.7 22.6 – 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.4 15.2 14.2 2022 Nov.
278.2 146.5 131.7 174.6 123.9 28.0 22.3 – 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.5 15.3 13.1 Dec.
Landesbanken
277.7 54.1 223.6 308.4 166.8 66.5 69.5 0.5 5.4 5.3 0.2 191.9 43.1 131.5 2022 Nov.
250.1 29.6 220.5 263.9 137.3 51.4 69.7 0.3 5.3 5.2 0.3 189.0 43.2 144.3 Dec.
Savings banks
195.0 3.8 191.1 1,187.2 869.3 21.4 14.0 – 267.5 251.9 15.0 16.6 137.4 52.5 2022 Nov.
177.3 3.2 174.1 1,185.3 865.8 23.1 14.2 – 265.7 250.0 16.6 16.7 137.4 54.3 Dec.
Credit cooperatives
175.6 2.7 172.9 857.9 626.6 32.9 18.8 – 174.2 170.3 5.4 8.6 101.4 35.7 2022 Nov.
165.3 3.3 162.0 861.0 625.4 36.5 19.5 – 173.7 169.6 5.9 8.6 101.7 36.2 Dec.
Mortgage banks
53.3 3.8 49.6 53.5 2.5 5.3 45.7 0.1 – – . 103.4 10.4 7.1 2022 Nov.
51.2 3.8 47.4 53.1 2.3 5.0 45.8 0.1 – – . 102.9 9.5 6.7 Dec.
Building and loan associations
39.3 3.2 36.1 193.1 3.9 1.4 187.3 – 0.5 0.5 0.1 5.1 12.1 9.9 2022 Nov.
38.6 2.7 36.0 194.6 3.8 1.4 188.8 – 0.5 0.5 0.1 5.2 12.3 9.0 Dec.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
422.2 111.7 310.5 201.7 76.7 48.3 76.3 2.4 – – . 779.6 85.6 172.4 2022 Nov.
395.5 112.8 282.7 187.3 65.3 46.5 75.2 2.4 – – . 755.7 85.6 191.5 Dec.
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
809.2 378.6 430.5 750.3 539.2 90.5 100.4 35.8 16.4 16.1 3.9 44.6 96.3 755.2 2022 Nov.
699.2 304.9 394.2 734.6 521.5 97.2 95.5 25.7 15.8 15.5 4.6 45.3 95.2 830.5 Dec.
 of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9   
538.3 242.2 296.0 575.1 415.7 61.8 77.7 35.8 16.1 15.8 3.8 44.2 81.1 740.9 2022 Nov.
421.0 158.4 262.6 560.0 397.6 69.2 73.1 25.7 15.5 15.2 4.6 44.8 79.9 817.4 Dec.
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Included in time deposits.  4 Excluding deposits
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).  5 Including subordinated
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
6 Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”.  7 Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner
Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische
Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
notes in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, Table I.3, banking group “Big banks “).
8 Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories
of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”.
9 Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in
other banking categories.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
26•
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)      
PeriodCash in
hand
(euro area
banknotes
and
coins)Credit
balances
with the
Bundes-
bank TotalCredit
balances
and loans BillsNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total Loans BillsTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money mar-
ket paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued
by non-
banks  1
End of year or month *
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.8 3,613.3 0.2 2.7 399.7
2021 July 46.3 1,059.2 1,372.0 1,118.1 0.0 0.8 253.2 10.3 3,725.3 3,322.9 0.2 6.1 396.2
Aug. 46.5 1,015.2 1,425.2 1,172.4 0.0 0.8 252.1 10.3 3,736.4 3,332.8 0.1 5.7 397.8
Sep. 47.1 1,054.9 1,399.9 1,147.7 0.0 0.7 251.5 10.3 3,749.8 3,341.9 0.1 4.4 403.3
Oct. 47.6 1,052.4 1,419.3 1,167.7 0.0 0.7 250.9 10.3 3,770.2 3,366.9 0.2 5.0 398.0
Nov. 47.9 1,068.7 1,432.2 1,183.6 – 0.7 248.0 10.0 3,794.0 3,386.4 0.2 5.6 401.9
Dec. 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 Jan. 47.4 1,066.0 1,439.2 1,191.8 – 0.7 246.7 10.1 3,812.8 3,409.0 0.2 3.1 400.5
Feb. 47.2 1,094.0 1,453.6 1,204.6 – 0.3 248.7 10.0 3,826.5 3,426.0 0.2 5.0 395.3
Mar. 49.5 1,086.3 1,442.6 1,195.1 – 0.3 247.3 10.0 3,853.8 3,449.0 0.2 3.3 401.3
Apr. 50.4 1,200.5 1,360.3 1,112.8 – 0.6 246.9 9.9 3,866.6 3,470.0 0.2 3.5 392.9
May 49.4 1,122.8 1,452.7 1,202.9 – 0.7 249.1 9.9 3,886.7 3,488.9 0.2 3.2 394.4
June 51.1 1,090.9 1,462.8 1,214.8 – 0.8 247.2 9.8 3,906.6 3,513.4 0.2 3.7 389.3
July 41.6 1,084.2 1,454.9 1,206.8 – 0.8 247.2 9.8 3,945.0 3,539.1 0.2 3.6 402.2
Aug. 23.1 1,126.7 1,480.7 1,232.0 – 1.3 247.5 9.9 3,976.0 3,574.3 0.1 3.9 397.7
Sep. 20.4 122.4 2,573.9 2,319.2 – 1.4 253.2 9.8 3,993.6 3,595.3 0.2 3.6 394.5
Oct. 19.7 86.6 2,592.3 2,337.0 – 1.5 253.7 10.0 4,014.1 3,611.6 0.2 4.3 398.0
Nov. 18.8 88.4 2,524.4 2,271.2 – 1.5 251.7 11.1 4,025.7 3,625.3 0.2 3.6 396.7
Dec. 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.8 3,613.3 0.2 2.7 399.7
Changes *
2014 +0.4 – 4.3 –119.3 – 87.1 +0.0 + 0.4 –32.6 +0.1 +36.7 +20.6 –0.1 – 0.6 +16.8
2015 +0.3 + 73.7 – 80.7 – 4.3 –0.0 – 0.4 –75.9 –0.1 +68.9 +54.1 –0.0 – 0.3 +15.1
2016 +6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 – – 0.9 –17.9 +0.4 +43.7 +62.8 –0.1 – 0.1 –18.9
2017 +6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 –0.0 + 0.0 –20.1 –0.1 +57.0 +70.2 +0.0 + 0.4 –13.6
2018 +8.5 + 24.0 – 81.0 – 76.6 +0.0 + 0.1 – 4.4 +3.8 +71.5 +105.4 –0.1 – 0.5 –33.2
2019 +2.8 + 59.7 – 63.0 – 61.1 –0.0 – 0.2 – 1.6 –1.4 +126.7 +129.1 +0.1 + 3.1 – 5.5
2020 +4.1 +316.4 +201.2 +191.6 –0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 +4.3 +123.2 +123.6 –0.1 + 0.7 – 1.0
2021 +2.2 +111.8 + 44.1 + 46.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – 2.0 +1.5 +152.2 +147.8 +0.0 – 2.2 + 6.6
2022 –29.6 –836.6 +938.0 +938.1 – + 0.2 – 0.3 +1.7 +216.7 +220.1 –0.1 + 0.1 – 3.3
2021 July +0.2 + 15.3 – 35.1 – 33.1 – – 0.0 – 1.9 +0.1 +16.1 +17.2 +0.0 + 0.3 – 1.4
Aug. +0.2 – 43.8 + 53.4 + 54.4 – + 0.1 – 1.1 –0.0 +10.9 + 9.7 –0.0 – 0.5 + 1.7
Sep. +0.6 + 39.7 – 26.2 – 25.5 +0.0 – 0.1 – 0.6 –0.0 +13.5 + 9.2 +0.0 – 1.2 + 5.4
Oct. +0.5 – 2.4 + 19.5 + 20.0 +0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 –0.1 +20.5 +25.1 +0.0 + 0.6 – 5.2
Nov. +0.3 + 16.6 + 12.9 + 15.9 –0.0 – 0.0 – 2.9 –0.3 +25.5 +20.4 +0.0 + 0.6 + 4.5
Dec. +1.6 –163.6 – 22.4 – 19.6 – – 0.1 – 2.7 +0.3 + 4.3 + 6.2 +0.1 – 3.0 + 0.9
2022 Jan. –2.0 +161.0 + 27.8 + 26.3 – + 0.1 + 1.4 –0.3 +14.7 +16.6 –0.1 + 0.5 – 2.3
Feb. –0.2 + 28.0 + 13.1 + 11.5 – – 0.4 + 2.0 –0.1 +15.1 +18.4 +0.0 + 1.9 – 5.2
Mar. +2.3 – 7.8 – 10.9 – 9.5 – – 0.0 – 1.4 –0.0 +27.3 +23.0 –0.0 – 1.7 + 6.0
Apr. +0.9 +114.2 – 82.3 – 82.3 – + 0.3 – 0.4 –0.0 +13.1 +21.3 +0.0 + 0.2 – 8.4
May –1.0 – 77.7 + 92.4 + 90.0 – + 0.1 + 2.3 –0.0 +20.1 +18.9 –0.1 – 0.3 + 1.5
June +1.7 – 31.9 + 10.1 + 11.9 – + 0.1 – 1.9 –0.1 +19.9 +24.5 –0.0 + 0.5 – 5.1
July –9.5 – 6.8 – 7.5 – 7.6 – + 0.1 – 0.0 –0.1 +36.1 +23.5 +0.0 – 0.1 +12.7
Aug. –18.5 + 42.5 + 29.0 + 28.3 – + 0.2 + 0.5 +0.1 +30.9 +35.1 –0.0 + 0.3 – 4.5
Sep. –2.7 –1,004.3 +1,092.9 +1,087.0 – + 0.2 + 5.7 –0.0 +16.5 +19.9 +0.1 – 0.3 – 3.2
Oct. –0.7 – 35.8 + 18.5 + 17.8 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +0.2 +20.7 +16.6 –0.0 + 0.7 + 3.5
Nov. –0.8 + 1.8 – 67.6 – 65.5 – – 0.0 – 2.1 +1.1 +12.0 +13.9 –0.0 – 0.7 – 1.3
Dec. +1.0 – 19.9 –177.4 –169.9 – – 0.5 – 7.0 +1.0 – 9.6 –11.7 +0.0 – 0.9 + 3.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange ofequalisation claims (see also footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the
exchange of equalisation claims.  3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt
securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
27•
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Equalisa-
tion
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in
domestic
banks
and
enterprises TotalSight
deposits
4Time
deposits
4Redis-
counted
bills  5Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
de-
positsTime
deposits
6Savings
de-
posits  7Bank
savings
bonds  8Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
– 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013
– 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
– 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
– 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
– 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
– 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
– 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 2021
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.8 0.0 15.7 4,162.2 2,720.8 873.5 533.2 34.7 35.9 2022
– 25.1 78.1 1,360.7 136.1 1,224.5 0.0 15.9 3,964.6 2,646.0 730.7 562.0 25.9 34.5 2021 July
– 25.2 78.2 1,364.7 135.3 1,229.4 0.0 16.1 3,971.0 2,656.0 727.8 561.5 25.6 34.3 Aug.
– 25.2 79.0 1,353.8 128.9 1,224.9 0.0 16.2 3,960.3 2,647.9 726.1 560.7 25.5 34.1 Sep.
– 25.1 79.0 1,363.6 132.9 1,230.7 0.0 16.2 3,989.1 2,664.3 739.3 560.1 25.3 33.9 Oct.
– 25.2 79.1 1,373.9 135.2 1,238.6 0.0 16.3 4,002.4 2,685.9 731.8 559.9 24.8 33.6 Nov.
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 Dec.
– 25.7 78.6 1,363.7 137.2 1,226.5 0.0 16.4 4,025.9 2,690.9 750.0 560.8 24.2 33.9 2022 Jan.
– 25.7 78.7 1,369.7 140.5 1,229.2 0.0 16.6 4,037.8 2,704.5 748.5 560.9 23.9 33.8 Feb.
– 25.8 78.7 1,367.7 137.7 1,230.1 0.0 16.5 4,033.7 2,695.6 755.2 559.0 23.9 33.8 Mar.
– 25.9 78.7 1,384.4 140.6 1,243.8 0.0 16.7 4,046.7 2,705.6 759.4 557.9 23.8 33.8 Apr.
– 26.2 78.6 1,393.7 142.7 1,251.0 0.0 17.1 4,056.8 2,724.3 752.1 556.6 23.8 33.6 May
– 26.1 78.8 1,384.7 147.1 1,237.6 0.0 16.9 4,051.8 2,714.4 758.8 554.8 23.8 33.4 June
– 25.9 80.3 1,383.3 134.3 1,249.0 0.0 16.6 4,086.4 2,729.0 780.4 553.0 24.1 33.0 July
– 25.9 79.8 1,403.5 136.0 1,267.5 – 16.5 4,134.3 2,766.8 792.0 550.6 25.0 33.0 Aug.
– 25.8 80.2 1,415.7 149.2 1,266.5 0.0 16.7 4,149.9 2,755.6 823.1 545.2 25.9 33.2 Sep.
– 25.8 80.4 1,419.0 138.1 1,280.9 0.0 16.1 4,168.4 2,748.7 849.3 542.2 28.1 33.6 Oct.
– 25.9 80.2 1,345.0 135.4 1,209.6 0.0 16.1 4,205.6 2,767.9 869.3 536.9 31.5 34.8 Nov.
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.8 0.0 15.7 4,162.2 2,720.8 873.5 533.2 34.7 35.9 Dec.
Changes *
– –1.9 +2.0 –29.0 + 2.2 –31.2 –0.0 –0.6 +69.7 +107.9 –25.3 – 2.4 –10.6 –2.0 2014
– –2.1 –4.3 –46.6 + 3.3 –50.0 +0.0 –1.3 +106.5 +156.2 –28.3 –11.3 –10.1 –1.6 2015
– –1.3 +1.5 – 1.7 + 0.3 – 2.0 +0.0 –0.5 +104.7 +124.5 – 6.9 – 7.9 –5.0 –0.5 2016
– –0.0 –1.6 +11.0 –18.4 +29.4 –0.0 –0.5 +103.1 +142.8 –27.5 – 5.6 –6.7 +0.4 2017
– –1.0 +3.1 –25.0 – 3.1 –21.9 +0.0 –0.4 +117.7 +139.3 –10.8 – 4.3 –6.5 +3.9 2018
– –0.7 +0.1 – 8.6 + 1.6 –10.2 +0.0 –0.3 +122.5 +155.8 –25.7 – 3.4 –4.1 –1.4 2019
– +5.7 –3.3 +313.4 +23.2 +290.2 –0.0 +8.2 +221.6 +273.7 –32.7 –14.5 –4.9 +1.9 2020
– +2.3 +1.0 +105.2 – 7.4 +112.6 +0.0 +3.3 +95.3 +144.3 –46.2 + 0.7 –3.5 –0.2 2021
– –0.1 +1.7 –104.6 + 8.8 –113.4 –0.0 –0.6 +191.8 +65.8 +143.4 –27.5 +10.1 +1.7 2022
– +0.1 +0.1 + 6.6 + 3.5 + 3.1 – +0.1 +28.2 +33.9 – 5.0 – 0.6 –0.2 –0.1 2021 July
– +0.2 +0.1 + 4.1 – 0.8 + 4.9 –0.0 +0.2 + 6.4 +10.0 – 2.9 – 0.5 –0.2 –0.2 Aug.
– +0.0 +0.7 –10.6 – 6.4 – 4.2 +0.0 +0.1 – 6.7 – 5.4 – 0.3 – 0.8 –0.2 –0.2 Sep.
– –0.1 +0.1 +10.5 + 4.0 + 6.5 +0.0 +0.0 +28.8 +16.4 +13.2 – 0.6 –0.2 –0.2 Oct.
– +0.1 +0.1 +10.2 + 2.3 + 7.9 – +0.1 +13.3 +21.5 – 7.6 – 0.2 –0.3 –0.3 Nov.
– +0.5 +0.1 –35.4 –18.0 –17.4 –0.0 +0.0 –25.9 –31.2 + 4.1 + 1.4 –0.2 +0.6 Dec.
– –0.0 –0.6 +23.5 +18.3 + 5.2 –0.0 +0.0 +49.6 +36.3 +14.1 – 0.4 –0.4 –0.3 2022 Jan.
– +0.0 +0.1 + 6.0 + 3.3 + 2.7 –0.0 +0.2 +11.9 +13.6 – 1.6 + 0.1 –0.2 –0.2 Feb.
– +0.1 +0.0 – 1.9 – 2.8 + 0.8 – –0.0 – 4.1 – 9.0 + 6.6 – 1.8 +0.0 – Mar.
– +0.2 –0.0 +16.7 + 3.0 +13.7 – +0.2 +13.0 + 9.5 + 4.2 – 0.6 –0.1 +0.0 Apr.
– +0.3 –0.1 + 9.4 + 2.2 + 7.2 –0.0 +0.3 +10.1 +18.8 – 7.3 – 1.3 +0.0 –0.2 May
– –0.1 +0.2 – 9.0 + 4.4 –13.4 –0.0 –0.2 – 5.0 – 9.9 + 6.7 – 1.8 –0.0 –0.1 June
– –0.2 +1.5 – 1.1 –12.4 +11.2 – –0.3 +33.5 +14.3 +20.7 – 1.8 +0.3 –0.5 July
– –0.0 +0.1 +23.3 + 1.8 +21.6 –0.0 –0.1 +48.1 +37.8 +11.8 – 2.4 +0.9 +0.0 Aug.
– –0.0 +0.4 +12.2 +13.2 – 0.9 +0.0 +0.1 +15.6 –11.4 +31.3 – 5.3 +0.9 +0.2 Sep.
– –0.0 +0.1 + 3.5 –10.9 +14.4 +0.0 –0.5 +17.4 – 8.0 +26.2 – 3.1 +2.2 +0.4 Oct.
– +0.1 –0.1 –73.9 – 2.6 –71.3 –0.0 –0.1 +45.3 +20.9 +26.3 – 5.3 +3.4 +1.3 Nov.
– –0.3 +0.1 –113.2 – 8.6 –104.7 –0.0 –0.4 –43.4 –47.1 + 4.2 – 3.7 +3.2 +1.1 Dec.
including subordinated liabilities.  4 Including liabilities arising from monetary policy
operations with the Bundesbank.  5 Own acceptances and promissory notes
outstanding.  6 Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  7 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8).  8 Including liabilities
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
28•
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)    
Credit balances and loans, bills Loans and bills
PeriodCash in
hand
(non-
euro area
banknotes
and
coins) Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued by
non-banks
End of year or month *
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 914.3 616.8 173.5 443.3 14.9 282.6
2021 July 0.4 1,139.3 910.4 651.3 259.1 1.9 227.0 3.8 867.2 565.0 158.4 406.6 13.1 289.2
Aug. 0.4 1,125.9 899.8 647.9 251.8 1.6 224.5 3.7 867.4 566.7 158.7 407.9 15.3 285.5
Sep. 0.3 1,113.1 885.7 634.6 251.1 1.1 226.3 3.6 876.0 569.3 156.6 412.7 15.1 291.6
Oct. 0.3 1,166.7 940.5 672.2 268.2 0.9 225.3 3.5 878.0 579.6 164.1 415.5 17.7 280.6
Nov. 0.3 1,164.8 940.3 674.7 265.6 0.8 223.7 3.4 888.2 585.6 164.4 421.2 14.3 288.3
Dec. 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 Jan. 0.3 1,200.2 977.7 714.1 263.6 1.2 221.3 3.5 911.6 610.7 187.0 423.7 10.3 290.7
Feb. 0.5 1,222.3 998.7 734.3 264.4 1.6 222.0 3.6 923.5 615.2 191.4 423.7 9.4 298.9
Mar. 0.5 1,224.2 999.2 729.8 269.4 1.0 224.1 3.6 906.5 597.4 171.8 425.6 10.3 298.9
Apr. 0.6 1,229.5 1,003.6 734.1 269.6 1.6 224.3 3.6 914.4 612.0 180.9 431.1 13.1 289.2
May 0.6 1,222.8 996.5 730.7 265.8 1.7 224.7 3.6 914.3 609.9 182.1 427.9 13.5 290.9
June 0.6 1,232.7 1,007.2 742.2 265.0 2.2 223.3 3.6 929.1 612.4 181.1 431.2 13.7 303.0
July 0.6 1,248.0 1,021.1 748.0 273.1 2.7 224.2 3.5 929.4 615.7 177.0 438.7 12.7 301.0
Aug. 0.5 1,266.1 1,038.5 756.2 282.4 3.4 224.2 3.4 931.5 624.9 183.9 441.0 13.4 293.2
Sep. 0.3 1,287.8 1,057.9 771.9 286.0 4.2 225.8 3.8 935.5 629.4 185.2 444.2 12.4 293.7
Oct. 0.3 1,296.6 1,065.2 787.3 277.9 3.1 228.3 3.4 931.2 629.3 182.0 447.3 12.5 289.5
Nov. 0.2 1,273.7 1,043.2 766.3 276.9 2.9 227.6 3.5 938.8 631.7 187.5 444.2 12.5 294.6
Dec. 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 914.3 616.8 173.5 443.3 14.9 282.6
Changes *
2014 –0.0 +86.1 +80.1 +63.2 +16.8 +0.7 +5.3 –0.6 +5.7 –10.2 –12.8 +2.7 – 1.8 +17.7
2015 +0.1 –91.8 –86.0 –82.2 –3.8 –6.7 +0.8 –0.1 –6.1 –9.2 –6.5 –2.7 + 1.1 +2.0
2016 +0.0 –25.5 –14.5 –38.2 +23.7 –0.7 –10.3 –0.0 +17.4 +28.9 +10.1 +18.8 – 3.0 –8.5
2017 +0.0 –57.2 –48.7 –61.5 +12.8 +0.0 –8.5 +0.6 –4.7 +13.0 +8.6 +4.4 + 0.7 –18.4
2018 +0.0 +49.6 +34.0 +57.7 –23.7 +0.2 +15.3 +0.7 +18.3 +28.3 +3.2 +25.2 – 0.4 –9.7
2019 –0.0 –4.1 –11.3 –21.9 +10.7 +0.8 +6.3 +0.7 +26.8 +19.9 +12.7 +7.3 + 3.0 +3.8
2020 –0.0 –32.0 –22.4 –6.6 –15.8 +0.9 –10.5 +0.3 +34.4 +14.7 +9.0 +5.7 + 3.6 +16.1
2021 +0.0 +52.8 +71.1 +68.9 +2.2 –2.5 –15.8 –0.5 +37.8 +39.7 +29.8 +9.9 – 3.2 +1.4
2022 –0.1 +21.7 +20.4 +17.9 +2.6 +1.3 –0.0 +0.2 +37.0 +37.0 +16.8 +20.2 + 6.7 –6.7
2021 July +0.0 –21.8 –20.5 –15.7 –4.8 –0.6 –0.7 –0.1 +12.9 +13.0 +11.7 +1.4 + 2.6 –2.8
Aug. –0.0 –13.9 –11.2 –3.6 –7.6 –0.2 –2.5 –0.1 –0.1 +1.4 +0.3 +1.1 + 2.2 –3.8
Sep. –0.1 –18.7 –19.8 –17.0 –2.9 –0.6 +1.7 –0.1 +10.0 +4.6 +1.2 +3.4 – 0.2 +5.6
Oct. +0.0 +54.3 +55.5 +38.3 +17.3 –0.1 –1.1 –0.1 +1.5 +9.9 +7.6 +2.3 + 2.6 –11.0
Nov. –0.0 –5.7 –3.9 +0.2 –4.0 –0.1 –1.8 –0.1 +5.4 +1.8 +1.1 +0.7 – 3.4 +7.1
Dec. –0.0 –65.7 –64.3 –60.9 –3.5 –0.5 –0.9 +0.0 –17.8 –14.0 –12.7 –1.4 – 6.3 +2.5
2022 Jan. +0.1 +95.8 +96.6 +97.4 –0.8 +0.8 –1.7 +0.1 +37.7 +36.2 +34.8 +1.4 + 2.3 –0.7
Feb. +0.2 +23.2 +22.1 +20.8 +1.2 +0.4 +0.7 +0.0 +12.7 +5.2 +4.6 +0.5 – 0.8 +8.4
Mar. –0.0 –0.0 –1.5 –5.8 +4.3 –0.6 +2.1 +0.0 –18.3 –18.9 –20.1 +1.2 + 0.8 –0.2
Apr. +0.1 –9.7 –10.2 –4.6 –5.6 +0.6 –0.1 +0.0 –1.7 +6.8 +6.8 +0.0 + 2.8 –11.3
May +0.0 –1.1 –1.8 –0.1 –1.7 +0.1 +0.5 +0.0 +3.7 +1.1 +2.2 –1.1 + 0.4 +2.2
June +0.0 –15.4 –14.4 –10.3 –4.1 +0.5 –1.6 +0.0 +9.7 –1.7 –2.3 +0.6 + 0.2 +11.2
July –0.0 +8.4 +7.3 +1.7 +5.6 +0.5 +0.7 –0.1 –4.7 –0.7 –5.3 +4.6 – 1.1 –2.9
Aug. –0.1 +13.9 +13.2 +6.0 +7.2 +0.7 –0.0 –0.2 +0.1 +7.7 +6.3 +1.4 + 0.7 –8.4
Sep. –0.2 +15.0 +12.6 +11.8 +0.8 +0.8 +1.6 +0.4 +3.2 +1.4 –0.2 +1.6 – 1.0 +2.9
Oct. +0.0 +13.4 +11.9 +18.2 –6.3 –1.0 +2.5 –0.3 –2.2 +1.4 –2.9 +4.3 + 0.0 –3.6
Nov. –0.1 –9.4 –8.7 –13.4 +4.7 –0.2 –0.4 +0.1 +16.5 +9.7 +5.5 +4.2 – 0.0 +6.8
Dec. –0.0 –112.4 –106.8 –104.0 –2.8 –1.2 –4.4 +0.2 –19.9 –11.2 –12.7 +1.5 + 2.4 –11.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequentrevisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
29•
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Time deposits (including bank
savings bonds)Time deposits (including
savings deposits and bank
savings bonds)
Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in foreign
banks
and
enter-
prises TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 2013
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 – 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 2021
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.8 196.5 174.3 84.1 90.2 0.1 2022
11.2 16.0 981.6 525.0 456.6 304.9 151.7 – 292.2 151.7 140.5 79.3 61.2 0.1 2021 July
11.2 16.3 969.4 513.0 456.4 293.0 163.5 0.0 298.4 158.9 139.6 78.8 60.8 0.1 Aug.
11.2 16.3 1,003.9 528.2 475.8 315.7 160.1 – 306.0 164.0 142.0 81.5 60.4 0.1 Sep.
11.2 16.3 1,031.2 550.5 480.7 320.4 160.3 0.0 320.9 169.8 151.1 83.3 67.8 0.1 Oct.
11.3 16.4 1,068.2 565.4 502.8 335.0 167.9 0.0 315.5 171.3 144.2 75.5 68.7 0.1 Nov.
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 Dec.
11.1 16.1 1,098.5 635.9 462.7 321.8 140.8 0.0 339.9 177.2 162.7 82.1 80.5 0.1 2022 Jan.
11.1 16.0 1,130.4 640.4 490.0 349.8 140.2 0.0 361.2 194.5 166.7 87.0 79.7 0.1 Feb.
11.1 15.7 1,113.8 632.7 481.1 349.8 131.3 0.0 361.6 200.0 161.6 82.0 79.6 0.1 Mar.
11.1 15.7 1,113.7 600.6 513.2 381.7 131.4 0.0 384.6 201.5 183.2 102.6 80.6 0.1 Apr.
11.1 15.7 1,127.5 640.4 487.1 351.4 135.7 0.0 382.0 217.1 164.9 85.0 79.9 0.2 May
11.0 15.9 1,100.2 625.5 474.7 340.6 134.1 0.0 387.6 222.7 164.9 82.5 82.4 0.3 June
10.6 15.8 1,107.4 608.8 498.6 359.0 139.6 0.0 390.2 221.6 168.6 87.5 81.1 0.3 July
10.6 15.8 1,120.4 610.9 509.5 360.5 149.0 0.0 400.4 231.3 169.2 87.4 81.8 0.2 Aug.
10.6 15.9 1,169.6 639.0 530.6 373.0 157.6 0.0 409.1 231.4 177.7 95.7 82.0 0.2 Sep.
10.6 15.9 1,188.9 657.6 531.3 372.1 159.2 0.0 401.8 220.0 181.8 100.0 81.8 0.2 Oct.
10.6 15.8 1,150.7 612.1 538.7 385.9 152.7 – 414.1 235.1 179.0 91.2 87.7 0.1 Nov.
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.8 196.5 174.3 84.1 90.2 0.1 Dec.
Changes *
+ 0.1 – 3.8 +76.3 +47.8 +28.5 +39.0 –10.5 –0.0 –43.6 –8.3 –35.3 –30.7 –4.6 +0.2 2014
– 0.6 – 6.1 –15.4 +40.6 –56.0 –48.6 – 7.4 –0.0 –26.5 –13.9 –12.6 +0.3 –13.0 –0.0 2015
– 0.1 – 1.5 +82.7 +51.0 +31.7 +27.0 + 4.7 –0.0 +3.5 –3.1 +6.7 +5.9 +0.8 –0.0 2016
– 1.0 – 4.1 –15.5 +25.2 –40.8 –43.2 + 2.4 ±0.0 +31.8 +11.0 +20.8 +15.6 +5.2 –0.4 2017
– 0.2 – 2.2 –23.9 –23.4 – 0.4 + 2.1 – 2.6 –0.0 –11.9 –0.2 –11.8 –5.7 –6.0 –0.2 2018
– 0.3 – 0.9 – 9.5 –49.4 +39.8 +28.0 +11.8 –0.0 –0.8 +2.1 –2.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.0 2019
– 0.2 – 3.9 +83.8 +87.8 – 4.1 –34.7 +30.6 – +23.6 +13.8 +9.8 +7.1 +2.8 +0.0 2020
– 0.2 – 0.8 +136.6 +19.8 +116.8 +89.2 +27.6 +0.0 +22.7 +6.4 +16.3 +0.0 +16.3 –0.0 2021
– 0.7 – 1.0 +85.8 +29.1 +56.7 +69.6 –13.0 –0.0 +68.2 +49.0 +19.2 +13.9 +5.3 +0.0 2022
– 0.1 – 0.5 –34.8 –14.6 –20.2 –30.6 +10.4 – +1.3 +2.9 –1.6 –0.3 –1.3 +0.0 2021 July
+ 0.0 + 0.2 –12.8 –12.3 – 0.5 –12.2 +11.7 +0.0 +5.7 +6.7 –1.1 –0.6 –0.5 –0.0 Aug.
– 0.0 + 0.0 +30.5 +12.9 +17.6 +21.4 – 3.9 –0.0 +6.7 +4.9 +1.7 +2.3 –0.6 +0.0 Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 +27.9 +22.7 + 5.2 + 5.1 + 0.2 +0.0 +14.7 +5.8 +9.0 +1.6 +7.4 –0.0 Oct.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 +32.3 +12.5 +19.9 +13.0 + 6.9 – –6.3 +0.8 –7.1 –8.4 +1.3 –0.0 Nov.
– 0.1 + 0.2 –155.0 –110.1 –44.9 –34.0 –10.9 – –27.7 –29.6 +1.9 –7.0 +8.9 +0.0 Dec.
– 0.0 – 0.6 +180.8 +178.4 + 2.4 +19.3 –16.9 – +50.8 +34.9 +16.0 +13.1 +2.9 –2022 Jan.
+ 0.0 – 0.0 +33.4 +5.7 +27.8 +28.3 – 0.5 – +21.2 +17.0 +4.2 +5.0 –0.8 – Feb.
– 0.1 – 0.3 –18.3 –8.5 – 9.8 – 0.7 – 9.1 – –0.1 +5.3 –5.4 –5.3 –0.1 –0.0 Mar.
+ 0.0 – 0.1 –13.2 –39.6 +26.4 +27.6 – 1.1 – +19.2 –0.6 +19.8 +19.1 +0.6 – Apr.
– 0.0 + 0.0 +18.7 +42.5 –23.8 –28.6 + 4.8 – –1.1 +16.4 –17.5 –16.9 –0.5 +0.1 May
– 0.1 + 0.1 –21.2 –5.8 –15.4 –13.0 – 2.4 – +3.5 +4.7 –1.2 –3.4 +2.2 +0.0 June
– 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 –20.0 +19.7 +16.2 + 3.5 +0.0 +0.1 –2.2 +2.3 +4.0 –1.8 –0.0 July
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.7 +0.3 + 9.4 + 0.3 + 9.2 –0.0 +8.9 +9.1 –0.2 –0.7 +0.5 –0.0 Aug.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 +42.5 +25.4 +17.2 + 9.4 + 7.7 – +6.9 –0.7 +7.5 +7.5 –0.0 +0.0 Sep.
– + 0.0 +22.6 +20.5 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 1.9 – –5.9 –10.8 +5.0 +4.9 +0.1 –0.1 Oct.
– 0.0 – 0.0 –24.1 –41.3 +17.2 +17.4 – 0.2 –0.0 +5.3 +13.1 –7.9 –7.4 –0.5 –0.0 Nov.
– 0.2 – 0.0 –145.0 –128.3 –16.7 – 6.9 – 9.8 – –40.7 –37.2 –3.5 –6.2 +2.7 –0.0 Dec.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
30•
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Short-term lending Medium- and long-term   Lending to domestic
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
Periodincluding 
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claimsexcluding 
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claims Total TotalLoans
and
billsNegotiable
money
market
paper Total LoansTreasury
bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 – 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 4,015.8 3,613.4 296.6 279.9 279.6 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2021 July 3,725.3 3,323.0 248.2 221.0 220.2 0.8 27.2 21.9 5.3 3,477.1 3,102.5
Aug. 3,736.4 3,332.9 245.0 221.1 220.4 0.7 23.9 18.9 4.9 3,491.5 3,116.8
Sep. 3,749.8 3,342.1 247.8 224.5 223.8 0.7 23.4 19.6 3.7 3,501.9 3,123.2
Oct. 3,770.2 3,367.1 256.5 232.5 231.9 0.6 24.0 19.5 4.4 3,513.7 3,142.9
Nov. 3,794.0 3,386.5 255.6 232.9 232.3 0.6 22.7 17.7 5.0 3,538.4 3,164.9
Dec. 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 Jan. 3,812.8 3,409.2 262.6 242.3 241.7 0.6 20.3 17.8 2.5 3,550.2 3,180.4
Feb. 3,826.5 3,426.2 267.4 246.9 246.1 0.8 20.5 16.3 4.2 3,559.1 3,195.3
Mar. 3,853.8 3,449.2 273.6 254.8 254.0 0.8 18.9 16.3 2.5 3,580.1 3,209.5
Apr. 3,866.6 3,470.2 277.5 257.9 257.0 0.9 19.6 17.1 2.5 3,589.1 3,226.2
May 3,886.7 3,489.1 280.1 262.5 261.5 1.0 17.6 15.4 2.2 3,606.6 3,242.6
June 3,906.6 3,513.5 290.8 271.4 270.5 0.9 19.5 16.6 2.8 3,615.7 3,255.8
July 3,945.0 3,539.3 291.4 271.8 270.9 0.8 19.6 16.8 2.8 3,653.7 3,293.5
Aug. 3,976.0 3,574.4 305.0 287.3 286.4 0.8 17.7 14.7 3.1 3,671.0 3,314.3
Sep. 3,993.6 3,595.5 311.0 292.8 292.2 0.6 18.2 15.2 3.0 3,682.6 3,329.1
Oct. 4,014.1 3,611.8 308.7 288.9 288.4 0.5 19.9 16.1 3.8 3,705.3 3,347.5
Nov. 4,025.7 3,625.4 310.7 292.9 292.6 0.4 17.7 14.5 3.2 3,715.0 3,359.0
Dec. 4,015.8 3,613.4 296.6 279.9 279.6 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
Changes *
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 – 11.6 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 0.0 – 7.1 – 6.5 – 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 – 5.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.8 – 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 – 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 – 12.1 – 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 8.6 – 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 – 19.6 – 19.8 – 19.8 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2021 + 152.2 + 147.8 + 8.8 + 13.8 + 13.8 – 0.1 – 4.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 + 143.4 + 157.9
2022 + 216.7 + 220.0 + 47.6 + 48.5 + 48.5 + 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.9 + 0.0 + 169.1 + 184.8
2021 July + 16.1 + 17.2 – 2.0 – 4.2 – 4.3 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 18.1 + 19.5
Aug. + 10.9 + 9.7 – 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 3.3 – 2.9 – 0.4 + 14.1 + 14.2
Sep. + 13.5 + 9.3 + 3.3 + 3.7 + 3.8 – 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.7 – 1.2 + 10.2 + 6.2
Oct. + 20.5 + 25.1 + 8.7 + 8.1 + 8.2 – 0.1 + 0.5 – 0.2 + 0.7 + 11.8 + 19.8
Nov. + 25.5 + 20.5 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 2.4 + 0.0 – 1.2 – 1.8 + 0.6 + 24.4 + 19.9
Dec. + 4.3 + 6.3 – 5.8 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 5.2 – 2.5 – 2.7 + 10.1 + 9.8
2022 Jan. + 14.7 + 16.5 + 12.9 + 10.1 + 9.8 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 1.8 + 5.8
Feb. + 15.1 + 18.4 + 6.2 + 6.0 + 5.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 1.5 + 1.7 + 9.0 + 14.9
Mar. + 27.3 + 23.0 + 6.2 + 7.9 + 7.9 – 0.0 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 + 21.0 + 14.2
Apr. + 13.1 + 21.4 + 3.9 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 9.3 + 17.0
May + 20.1 + 18.8 + 2.6 + 4.6 + 4.5 + 0.0 – 2.0 – 1.7 – 0.3 + 17.5 + 16.4
June + 19.9 + 24.5 + 10.8 + 8.9 + 9.0 – 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 9.1 + 13.2
July + 36.1 + 23.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 35.8 + 35.6
Aug. + 30.9 + 35.1 + 13.7 + 15.5 + 15.5 + 0.0 – 1.9 – 2.1 + 0.3 + 17.2 + 20.8
Sep. + 16.5 + 20.0 + 4.8 + 4.4 + 4.6 – 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 11.7 + 14.8
Oct. + 20.7 + 16.6 – 2.0 – 3.6 – 3.5 – 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 22.7 + 18.5
Nov. + 12.0 + 13.9 + 2.2 + 4.4 + 4.5 – 0.1 – 2.1 – 1.5 – 0.6 + 9.7 + 11.8
Dec. – 9.6 – 11.7 – 13.9 – 12.8 – 12.7 – 0.0 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.9 + 4.2 + 1.9
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
31•
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
TotalMedium-
termLong-
term SecuritiesMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalMedium-
termLong-
termSecur-
ities  1Equal-
isation
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 – 2.7 2013
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 – 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 – 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 – 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 – 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 – 1.4 2018
2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 – 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 2020
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 2021
3,085.9 348.8 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 2022
2,851.4 310.7 2,540.8 251.0 24.0 374.6 229.5 14.9 214.6 145.1 – 1.1 2021 July
2,864.5 311.5 2,553.1 252.2 24.2 374.7 229.1 14.7 214.4 145.6 – 1.1 Aug.
2,870.0 310.1 2,559.9 253.2 24.2 378.7 228.7 14.3 214.4 150.1 – 1.0 Sep.
2,885.5 313.5 2,572.0 257.4 24.1 370.9 230.2 14.6 215.6 140.7 – 1.0 Oct.
2,906.5 315.6 2,590.9 258.4 24.2 373.5 230.0 14.5 215.6 143.5 – 1.0 Nov.
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 Dec.
2,920.6 312.8 2,607.8 259.8 24.7 369.8 229.1 13.9 215.2 140.7 – 1.0 2022 Jan.
2,935.4 313.8 2,621.6 259.9 24.6 363.8 228.5 13.9 214.5 135.4 – 1.1 Feb.
2,950.1 316.1 2,633.9 259.4 24.7 370.7 228.8 13.7 215.1 141.8 – 1.1 Mar.
2,966.8 317.3 2,649.5 259.4 24.9 362.9 229.5 13.7 215.8 133.5 – 1.0 Apr.
2,983.1 319.7 2,663.4 259.5 25.1 364.0 229.1 13.7 215.4 134.9 – 1.0 May
2,998.2 322.2 2,675.9 257.6 25.0 360.0 228.2 13.6 214.6 131.7 – 1.0 June
3,022.5 327.7 2,694.9 271.0 24.9 360.2 229.0 13.5 215.5 131.2 – 1.0 July
3,044.6 335.4 2,709.1 269.8 24.9 356.6 228.7 13.5 215.2 127.9 – 1.0 Aug.
3,058.8 339.5 2,719.3 270.2 24.8 353.5 229.3 13.8 215.4 124.3 – 1.0 Sep.
3,077.4 344.8 2,732.7 270.1 24.8 357.8 229.9 13.8 216.1 127.9 – 1.0 Oct.
3,086.6 344.9 2,741.7 272.4 24.8 356.0 231.7 13.9 217.8 124.3 – 1.0 Nov.
3,085.9 348.8 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 Dec.
Changes *
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 +12.5 – 1.8 – 4.1 – 8.5 – 5.1 – 3.4 + 4.3 – – 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 +14.8 – 2.1 – 6.6 – 6.9 – 4.8 – 2.0 + 0.2 – + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 – 0.9 – 30.9 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 3.3 –23.6 – – 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 +15.8 + 0.1 – 39.9 –10.6 – 1.3 – 9.3 –29.4 – – 0.1 2017
+108.7 +19.3 + 89.4 – 6.7 – 0.9 – 37.1 –10.5 – 2.7 – 7.8 –26.6 – – 0.0 2018
+126.0 +18.9 +107.2 + 6.8 – 0.8 – 17.8 – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 –12.3 – + 0.1 2019
+145.0 + 9.4 +135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 – 2.8 – 1.1 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 1.7 – – 0.4 2020
+140.1 + 5.6 +134.5 +17.8 + 2.3 – 14.6 – 3.3 – 1.3 – 2.0 –11.3 – – 0.0 2021
+169.9 +33.5 +136.4 +14.9 – 0.1 – 15.7 + 2.5 – 0.7 + 3.3 –18.2 – – 0.0 2022
+ 19.2 + 0.2 + 19.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 – 1.7 – – 0.0 2021 July
+ 13.0 + 0.8 + 12.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.4 + 0.5 – – 0.0 Aug.
+ 5.2 – 1.4 + 6.6 + 1.0 – 0.0 + 4.0 – 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.0 + 4.4 – + 0.0 Sep.
+ 15.6 + 3.5 + 12.1 + 4.1 – 0.1 – 7.9 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 – 9.4 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 18.9 + 4.4 + 14.5 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 4.4 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 1.0 + 3.5 – – 0.0 Nov.
+ 9.3 – 1.1 + 10.4 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 – + 0.0 Dec.
+ 4.9 – 1.7 + 6.6 + 0.8 – 0.0 – 4.0 – 0.8 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 3.2 – – 0.0 2022 Jan.
+ 14.8 + 1.0 + 13.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 6.0 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.6 – 5.3 – – 0.0 Feb.
+ 14.7 + 2.3 + 12.4 – 0.5 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 0.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 + 6.5 – – 0.0 Mar.
+ 17.0 + 1.5 + 15.6 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 7.7 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 – 8.4 – – 0.0 Apr.
+ 16.4 + 2.5 + 13.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.1 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.3 + 1.4 – – 0.0 May
+ 15.1 + 2.5 + 12.6 – 1.9 – 0.1 – 4.1 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 3.2 – – 0.0 June
+ 22.5 + 4.4 + 18.1 +13.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.5 – – 0.0 July
+ 22.0 + 7.7 + 14.3 – 1.2 – 0.0 – 3.6 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 3.3 – + 0.0 Aug.
+ 14.3 + 4.0 + 10.4 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 0.5 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 3.6 – + 0.0 Sep.
+ 18.6 + 5.3 + 13.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.6 – 0.0 + 0.6 + 3.6 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 9.4 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 2.4 + 0.0 – 2.1 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.4 – 3.6 – + 0.0 Nov.
+ 0.3 + 4.0 – 3.7 + 1.6 – 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.4 – – 0.0 Dec.

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
February 2023
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2020 2,993.0 1,601.8 1,565.6 1,285.1 280.5 1,623.4 443.3 146.7 123.4 82.7 135.8 55.3 59.8 176.0
2021         Dec. 3,147.5 1,591.4 1,678.2 1,373.0 305.2 1,701.5 477.2 146.1 128.3 98.0 140.4 55.9 55.6 186.3
2022         Mar. 3,204.0 1,613.7 1,701.0 1,391.9 309.0 1,742.4 485.1 150.9 134.3 101.3 145.3 56.3 54.9 193.2
         June 3,268.7 1,636.4 1,731.4 1,412.8 318.5 1,784.8 494.5 160.2 132.6 104.4 153.4 57.0 56.4 200.2
         Sep. 3,351.0 1,659.4 1,758.3 1,433.0 325.2 1,845.3 503.1 163.6 147.5 107.3 163.3 56.9 64.9 202.3
         Dec. 3,365.4 1,676.5 1,773.9 1,448.0 325.8 1,852.4 509.1 160.0 137.7 108.8 155.1 56.3 65.2 211.9
 Short-term lending
2020 221.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 192.1 4.6 29.0 6.9 16.0 37.0 3.6 6.1 31.6
2021         Dec. 231.8 − 6.9 − 6.9 202.7 4.4 31.6 9.1 18.0 36.4 3.3 3.9 35.0
2022         Mar. 254.0 − 7.0 − 7.0 224.1 4.5 36.5 14.0 19.5 39.3 3.6 4.1 38.0
         June 270.5 − 7.0 − 7.0 239.5 4.6 44.7 11.6 20.1 42.2 3.9 4.3 42.2
         Sep. 292.2 − 7.4 − 7.4 260.7 4.9 46.2 24.4 21.1 45.3 3.6 4.2 42.2
         Dec. 279.6 − 7.4 − 7.4 249.1 5.0 41.6 12.1 20.8 44.7 3.3 3.8 49.8
 Medium-term lending
2020 310.5 − 38.5 − 38.5 230.4 18.5 30.2 5.4 14.8 19.3 4.8 15.0 51.4
2021         Dec. 314.5 − 40.5 − 40.5 239.5 20.6 28.3 5.4 19.3 20.8 4.3 12.3 52.0
2022         Mar. 316.1 − 40.8 − 40.8 242.2 21.0 28.9 5.6 20.0 22.0 4.2 11.7 53.1
         June 322.2 − 42.0 − 42.0 249.2 22.2 29.1 5.8 21.0 22.3 4.3 13.3 53.7
         Sep. 339.5 − 43.2 − 43.2 265.9 23.1 30.5 6.0 21.6 23.4 4.3 22.2 54.4
         Dec. 348.8 − 43.4 − 43.4 275.8 23.5 31.2 6.5 22.2 24.3 4.1 23.0 56.2
 Long-term lending
2020 2,461.4 1,601.8 1,519.1 1,285.1 234.0 1,201.0 420.2 87.5 111.2 51.8 79.4 47.0 38.7 93.0
2021         Dec. 2,601.2 1,591.4 1,630.9 1,373.0 257.8 1,259.3 452.2 86.2 113.8 60.8 83.2 48.3 39.4 99.3
2022         Mar. 2,633.9 1,613.7 1,653.1 1,391.9 261.2 1,276.0 459.6 85.5 114.8 61.8 84.0 48.4 39.2 102.1
         June 2,675.9 1,636.4 1,682.3 1,412.8 269.5 1,296.0 467.7 86.5 115.2 63.4 88.9 48.8 38.8 104.4
         Sep. 2,719.3 1,659.4 1,707.6 1,433.0 274.6 1,318.6 475.1 86.8 117.1 64.7 94.6 49.0 38.6 105.6
         Dec. 2,737.1 1,676.5 1,723.1 1,448.0 275.1 1,327.5 480.6 87.2 119.0 65.8 86.1 48.9 38.4 105.9
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2021         Q4 + 54.1 + 18.0 + 28.6 + 18.9 + 9.7 + 34.9 + 9.0 + 2.2 + 5.9 + 1.5 + 3.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 3.7
2022         Q1 + 57.9 + 17.9 + 22.0 + 16.6 + 5.3 + 42.0 + 7.0 + 4.8 + 6.3 + 3.2 + 4.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 8.9
         Q2 + 65.0 + 22.2 + 29.9 + 20.5 + 9.4 + 42.7 + 9.1 + 9.4 − 1.7 + 3.2 + 8.2 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 7.1
         Q3 + 79.0 + 23.4 + 26.9 + 20.5 + 6.4 + 58.5 + 8.6 + 2.5 + 14.9 + 2.7 + 9.6 − 0.1 + 8.5 + 2.0
         Q4 + 16.4 + 17.2 + 15.4 + 14.8 + 0.6 + 8.8 + 5.9 − 3.2 − 9.8 + 1.5 − 8.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 10.2
 Short-term lending
2021         Q4 + 10.3 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 10.5 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 1.0
2022         Q1 + 23.5 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 22.7 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 2.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 4.4
         Q2 + 16.6 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 15.4 + 0.1 + 8.2 − 2.4 + 0.6 + 2.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 4.2
         Q3 + 20.2 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 19.8 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 12.8 + 0.9 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1
         Q4 − 11.8 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 10.8 + 0.1 − 4.2 − 12.3 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 7.8
 Medium-term lending
2021         Q4 + 6.8 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 8.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 3.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5
2022         Q1 + 1.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.2
         Q2 + 6.4 − + 1.2 − + 1.2 + 7.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.9
         Q3 + 16.1 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 16.1 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 8.9 + 0.8
         Q4 + 9.2 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 9.9 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 1.9
 Long-term lending
2021         Q4 + 37.0 + 18.0 + 28.4 + 18.9 + 9.5 + 16.4 + 8.4 + 0.6 + 1.8 − 3.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 2.2
2022         Q1 + 32.7 + 17.9 + 21.5 + 16.6 + 4.9 + 16.5 + 6.5 − 0.7 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 3.4
         Q2 + 42.0 + 22.2 + 28.7 + 20.5 + 8.1 + 19.9 + 7.9 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 1.5 + 4.9 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 2.1
         Q3 + 42.7 + 23.4 + 25.7 + 20.5 + 5.2 + 22.6 + 7.4 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 5.7 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 1.2
         Q4 + 19.0 + 17.2 + 15.3 + 14.8 + 0.5 + 9.7 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 2.0 + 1.1 − 8.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
February 2023
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
843.7 286.6 53.8 204.1 464.0 47.9 1,353.4 1,118.3 235.2 177.4 6.7 16.2 4.0 2020
890.8 308.6 63.8 207.9 483.8 48.3 1,429.3 1,196.6 232.7 184.1 6.9 16.7 4.4 2021          Dec.
906.2 315.6 66.2 209.8 489.1 49.1 1,444.9 1,211.4 233.5 184.4 7.1 16.8 4.4 2022          Mar.
920.4 322.8 68.0 211.5 494.9 49.4 1,467.0 1,232.4 234.6 184.6 7.3 16.9 4.5          June939.6 329.1 71.2 215.5 500.0 54.1 1,488.6 1,250.6 238.0 187.3 7.5 17.1 4.6          Sep.957.5 334.0 79.9 218.2 501.7 54.1 1,495.8 1,260.1 235.7 185.9 7.1 17.3 4.6          Dec.
Short-term lending
61.9 15.7 9.6 10.5 20.9 3.7 28.6 3.4 25.2 1.3 6.7 0.6 0.0 202065.5 14.5 13.0 10.0 19.7 3.8 28.6 2.5 26.1 1.4 6.9 0.5 0.0 2021          Dec.
69.2 15.3 14.0 10.5 20.3 4.4 29.2 2.5 26.7 1.6 7.1 0.7 0.0 2022          Mar.
70.5 15.9 13.7 11.1 20.8 4.5 30.3 2.5 27.9 1.7 7.3 0.7 0.0          June73.8 15.8 14.9 11.2 20.9 5.3 30.8 2.5 28.3 1.7 7.5 0.6 0.0          Sep.73.0 16.1 15.6 10.8 20.4 5.0 29.9 2.4 27.5 1.7 7.1 0.6 −          Dec.
Medium-term lending
89.6 20.4 11.8 24.5 32.0 3.5 79.6 20.0 59.6 56.1 − 0.5 0.0 202097.0 23.1 15.2 27.1 30.0 3.3 74.4 19.8 54.6 50.6 − 0.6 0.1 2021          Dec.
96.8 22.8 15.5 27.2 30.0 3.2 73.4 19.7 53.7 49.6 − 0.5 0.1 2022          Mar.
99.8 24.1 17.1 26.6 29.9 3.2 72.5 19.8 52.7 48.6 − 0.5 0.1          June
103.6 25.2 17.7 27.5 30.4 6.4 73.0 20.1 52.9 48.7 − 0.5 0.1          Sep.108.2 25.4 20.1 28.4 30.1 6.5 72.3 19.8 52.5 48.0 − 0.6 0.1          Dec.
Long-term lending
692.3 250.5 32.4 169.1 411.1 40.7 1,245.3 1,094.9 150.4 120.0 − 15.1 4.0 2020728.4 271.1 35.6 170.8 434.1 41.3 1,326.3 1,174.3 152.0 132.1 − 15.6 4.3 2021          Dec.
740.2 277.5 36.8 172.1 438.8 41.4 1,342.3 1,189.2 153.1 133.2 − 15.6 4.4 2022          Mar.
750.0 282.8 37.3 173.8 444.2 41.7 1,364.2 1,210.1 154.1 134.4 − 15.7 4.4          June762.2 288.0 38.5 176.7 448.7 42.5 1,384.8 1,228.0 156.7 137.0 − 15.9 4.5          Sep.776.2 292.6 44.2 179.0 451.1 42.6 1,393.5 1,237.9 155.6 136.2 − 16.1 4.6          Dec.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 18.8 + 7.3 + 4.2 + 2.8 + 5.2 − 0.6 + 18.8 + 19.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 2021          Q4
+ 14.9 + 6.7 + 2.4 + 1.7 + 5.0 + 0.7 + 15.8 + 14.9 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2022          Q1
+ 14.4 + 7.4 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 5.8 + 0.4 + 22.2 + 20.8 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 18.3 + 6.2 + 3.1 + 3.9 + 4.3 + 0.2 + 20.4 + 18.2 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3+ 18.6 + 4.7 + 8.9 + 2.6 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 7.5 + 9.5 − 2.0 − 1.3 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
Short-term lending
+ 3.4 − 1.1 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2021          Q4
+ 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2022          Q1
+ 1.4 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2+ 3.1 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 −          Q3− 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
Medium-term lending
+ 1.7 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 1.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2021          Q4
− 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.0 2022          Q1
+ 3.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2+ 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3+ 4.6 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.6 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
Long-term lending
+ 13.6 + 7.2 + 0.4 + 2.7 + 6.2 + 0.1 + 20.4 + 19.9 + 0.5 + 1.2 − + 0.3 + 0.1 2021          Q4
+ 11.5 + 6.3 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 4.5 + 0.1 + 16.2 + 15.0 + 1.2 + 1.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2022          Q1
+ 10.0 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 1.8 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 22.0 + 20.8 + 1.3 + 1.4 − + 0.1 + 0.1          Q2+ 12.0 + 5.2 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 20.0 + 18.2 + 1.7 + 1.7 − + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3+ 14.7 + 4.4 + 5.9 + 2.1 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.9 − 0.9 − 0.7 − + 0.2 + 0.1          Q4
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
34•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic non-banks, total                        End of year or month *
2020 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2021 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2022 4,162.2 2,720.8 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.7 35.9 18.5 3.9
2022 Jan. 4,025.9 2,690.9 750.0 175.9 574.1 49.5 524.6 560.8 24.2 33.9 17.1 1.1
Feb. 4,037.8 2,704.5 748.5 175.5 573.0 48.7 524.3 560.9 23.9 33.8 17.1 1.2
Mar. 4,033.7 2,695.6 755.2 183.4 571.7 49.2 522.5 559.0 23.9 33.8 17.2 1.6
Apr. 4,046.7 2,705.6 759.4 189.8 569.6 50.1 519.5 557.9 23.8 33.8 17.3 1.1
May 4,056.8 2,724.3 752.1 183.3 568.7 51.2 517.5 556.6 23.8 33.6 17.1 0.8
June 4,051.8 2,714.4 758.8 194.7 564.1 49.0 515.1 554.8 23.8 33.4 17.2 0.7
July 4,086.4 2,729.0 780.4 213.7 566.7 50.9 515.8 553.0 24.1 33.0 17.3 1.2
Aug. 4,134.3 2,766.8 792.0 226.8 565.1 50.4 514.7 550.6 25.0 33.0 17.5 1.4
Sep. 4,149.9 2,755.6 823.1 263.8 559.3 45.5 513.8 545.2 25.9 33.2 18.3 1.0
Oct. 4,168.4 2,748.7 849.3 290.1 559.3 45.6 513.7 542.2 28.1 33.6 18.3 1.6
Nov. 4,205.6 2,767.9 869.3 309.6 559.7 46.8 512.9 536.9 31.5 34.8 18.4 4.4
Dec. 4,162.2 2,720.8 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.7 35.9 18.5 3.9
Changes *
2021 + 95.3 +144.3 – 46.2 – 27.3 –18.9 + 1.5 –20.5 + 0.7 – 3.5 – 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.2
2022 +191.8 + 65.8 +143.4 +152.5 – 9.1 + 0.6 – 9.7 –27.5 +10.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6
2022 Jan. + 49.6 + 36.3 + 14.1 + 15.0 – 0.9 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.2
Feb. + 11.9 + 13.6 – 1.6 – 0.4 – 1.2 – 0.8 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
Mar. – 4.1 – 9.0 + 6.6 + 7.9 – 1.3 + 0.5 – 1.8 – 1.8 + 0.0 – + 0.0 + 0.3
Apr. + 13.0 + 9.5 + 4.2 + 6.4 – 2.2 + 0.8 – 3.0 – 0.6 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5
May + 10.1 + 18.8 – 7.3 – 6.5 – 0.9 + 1.1 – 2.0 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
June – 5.0 – 9.9 + 6.7 + 11.3 – 4.6 – 2.2 – 2.5 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1
July + 33.5 + 14.3 + 20.7 + 18.5 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 0.6 – 1.8 + 0.3 – 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5
Aug. + 48.1 + 37.8 + 11.8 + 13.1 – 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.9 – 2.4 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2
Sep. + 15.6 – 11.4 + 31.3 + 37.0 – 5.7 – 4.9 – 0.8 – 5.3 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.8 – 0.4
Oct. + 17.4 – 8.0 + 26.2 + 26.3 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 2.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.5
Nov. + 45.3 + 20.9 + 26.3 + 18.7 + 7.7 + 1.3 + 6.4 – 5.3 + 3.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 2.9
Dec. – 43.4 – 47.1 + 4.2 + 5.2 – 1.0 + 3.7 – 4.7 – 3.7 + 3.2 + 1.1 + 0.0 – 0.6
Domestic government End of year or month *
2020 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 –
2021 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2022 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
2022 Jan. 233.5 88.5 139.2 59.2 80.0 24.0 56.0 2.5 3.3 25.5 2.0 –
Feb. 237.9 91.4 140.7 61.0 79.7 23.7 56.0 2.5 3.3 25.5 2.0 –
Mar. 241.0 85.2 150.0 69.7 80.3 24.4 56.0 2.4 3.4 25.5 2.0 –
Apr. 243.7 86.2 151.8 70.8 80.9 25.0 55.9 2.4 3.4 25.6 2.0 –
May 255.6 91.4 158.4 76.1 82.2 25.9 56.3 2.4 3.4 25.6 2.0 –
June 254.9 84.8 164.2 84.6 79.7 23.3 56.3 2.4 3.5 25.4 2.0 –
July 258.3 78.0 174.5 93.0 81.5 24.6 57.0 2.4 3.4 25.4 1.9 –
Aug. 272.6 89.1 177.8 96.2 81.5 24.8 56.7 2.4 3.4 25.5 1.9 –
Sep. 273.0 86.6 180.6 104.6 76.0 20.0 56.1 2.3 3.5 25.7 1.9 –
Oct. 271.2 86.8 178.6 101.2 77.4 19.6 57.8 2.3 3.5 25.7 1.9 –
Nov. 304.5 106.0 192.8 109.6 83.2 20.8 62.4 2.1 3.7 26.6 1.9 2.4
Dec. 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
Changes *
2021 – 17.9 + 3.4 – 20.8 – 17.7 – 3.0 + 2.9 – 6.0 – 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.4 – 0.0 + 1.0
2022 + 69.1 + 0.2 + 69.2 + 64.7 + 4.5 – 0.9 + 5.4 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.5 – 0.1 + 1.4
2022 Jan. + 23.4 + 6.1 + 17.4 + 17.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – – 0.3 – 0.0 – 1.0
Feb. + 4.3 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.7 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 –
Mar. + 3.2 – 6.2 + 9.4 + 8.7 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 –
Apr. + 2.7 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 –
May + 11.5 + 5.2 + 6.2 + 5.2 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 –
June – 0.7 – 6.6 + 5.9 + 8.5 – 2.6 – 2.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 –
July + 3.5 – 6.7 + 10.3 + 8.4 + 1.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 –
Aug. + 14.3 + 11.1 + 3.2 + 3.2 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 –
Sep. + 0.4 – 2.4 + 2.8 + 8.3 – 5.5 – 4.9 – 0.6 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 –
Oct. – 1.9 + 0.2 – 2.1 – 3.4 + 1.3 – 0.4 + 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 –
Nov. + 33.0 + 19.2 + 13.9 + 8.3 + 5.6 + 1.0 + 4.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.0 + 2.4
Dec. – 24.7 – 23.5 – 1.1 – 2.8 + 1.7 + 2.4 – 0.7 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.0 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities.
2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
35•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont´d)
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic enterprises and households                            End of year or month *
2020 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2021 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2022 3,882.4 2,638.3 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
2022 Jan. 3,792.4 2,602.4 610.8 116.6 494.1 25.5 468.6 558.3 20.8 8.4 15.0 1.1
Feb. 3,799.9 2,613.1 607.8 114.5 493.3 24.9 468.3 558.4 20.6 8.2 15.1 1.2
Mar. 3,792.7 2,610.4 605.1 113.7 491.4 24.8 466.6 556.6 20.5 8.2 15.2 1.6
Apr. 3,802.9 2,619.4 607.6 119.0 488.6 25.1 463.6 555.5 20.4 8.2 15.2 1.1
May 3,801.2 2,632.9 593.7 107.2 486.5 25.3 461.2 554.2 20.4 8.0 15.1 0.8
June 3,796.9 2,629.7 594.5 110.1 484.4 25.6 458.8 552.4 20.3 8.0 15.2 0.7
July 3,828.1 2,650.9 605.9 120.7 485.2 26.3 458.9 550.6 20.7 7.6 15.4 1.2
Aug. 3,861.7 2,677.7 614.2 130.6 483.6 25.6 458.0 548.2 21.6 7.5 15.6 1.4
Sep. 3,876.9 2,669.0 642.5 159.2 483.3 25.5 457.7 542.9 22.5 7.5 16.3 1.0
Oct. 3,897.2 2,661.9 670.8 188.9 481.9 25.9 455.9 539.9 24.6 7.9 16.4 1.6
Nov. 3,901.1 2,661.9 676.5 200.0 476.5 26.0 450.5 534.8 27.8 8.3 16.4 2.1
Dec. 3,882.4 2,638.3 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
Changes *
2021 +113.2 +140.9 – 25.5 – 9.6 –15.9 – 1.4 –14.5 + 0.9 – 3.1 – 0.6 + 2.8 + 0.2
2022 +122.7 + 65.6 + 74.2 + 87.8 –13.6 + 1.4 –15.1 –27.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.3
2022 Jan. + 26.2 + 30.2 – 3.3 – 2.3 – 1.0 – 0.4 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.8
Feb. + 7.5 + 10.7 – 3.0 – 2.1 – 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2
Mar. – 7.4 – 2.7 – 2.8 – 0.8 – 2.0 – 0.1 – 1.9 – 1.8 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3
Apr. + 10.3 + 8.5 + 2.5 + 5.3 – 2.8 + 0.2 – 3.0 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.5
May – 1.4 + 13.5 – 13.6 – 11.7 – 1.9 + 0.2 – 2.1 – 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
June – 4.2 – 3.2 + 0.8 + 2.9 – 2.1 + 0.4 – 2.4 – 1.8 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1
July + 30.0 + 21.0 + 10.4 + 10.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 – 0.1 – 1.8 + 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.5
Aug. + 33.8 + 26.7 + 8.6 + 9.8 – 1.2 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 2.4 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2
Sep. + 15.1 – 8.9 + 28.5 + 28.7 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 5.3 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.8 – 0.4
Oct. + 19.2 – 8.2 + 28.3 + 29.7 – 1.4 + 0.4 – 1.8 – 3.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.5
Nov. + 12.2 + 1.7 + 12.4 + 10.3 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 1.8 – 5.1 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.5
Dec. – 18.7 – 23.7 + 5.3 + 8.0 – 2.7 + 1.4 – 4.0 – 3.6 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.6
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2020 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2021 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2022 1,193.7 783.6 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.5 1.9 13.5 1.5
2022 Jan. 1,170.4 795.8 361.6 85.3 276.4 15.9 260.4 5.1 7.8 2.4 12.2 1.1
Feb. 1,165.1 793.2 359.0 83.4 275.6 15.4 260.2 5.2 7.8 2.2 12.2 1.2
Mar. 1,171.9 802.1 356.9 82.7 274.2 15.5 258.7 5.2 7.8 2.3 12.3 1.6
Apr. 1,165.3 792.4 360.0 88.0 272.0 16.0 256.1 5.2 7.7 2.3 12.4 1.1
May 1,165.6 806.0 346.7 76.4 270.4 16.3 254.1 5.1 7.7 2.3 12.3 0.8
June 1,158.9 798.2 347.9 78.6 269.3 16.9 252.3 5.1 7.7 2.3 12.4 0.7
July 1,168.8 797.0 358.8 88.5 270.3 17.5 252.8 5.1 7.9 1.9 12.5 1.2
Aug. 1,205.4 826.9 365.4 96.1 269.3 16.8 252.4 5.1 8.0 1.9 12.6 1.4
Sep. 1,215.7 815.8 386.8 117.9 268.9 16.6 252.3 5.0 8.1 1.9 13.4 1.0
Oct. 1,232.8 809.3 410.4 143.0 267.4 16.7 250.7 4.9 8.2 1.9 13.3 1.6
Nov. 1,223.9 805.3 405.5 144.1 261.4 16.2 245.1 4.7 8.4 1.9 13.3 2.1
Dec. 1,193.7 783.6 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.5 1.9 13.5 1.5
Changes *
2021 + 28.5 + 47.1 – 16.8 – 1.2 –15.7 + 0.5 –16.2 – 0.5 – 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.2
2022 + 56.1 + 17.7 + 38.8 + 52.1 –13.3 + 1.0 –14.3 – 0.9 + 0.6 – 0.5 + 1.0 + 1.3
2022 Jan. + 27.8 + 30.8 – 2.6 – 2.1 – 0.5 + 0.1 – 0.7 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.8
Feb. – 5.3 – 2.6 – 2.7 – 1.9 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
Mar. + 6.6 + 8.8 – 2.2 – 0.7 – 1.5 + 0.0 – 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3
Apr. – 6.6 – 9.6 + 3.2 + 5.4 – 2.2 + 0.4 – 2.6 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5
May – 0.5 + 12.6 – 13.0 – 11.7 – 1.4 + 0.3 – 1.7 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2
June – 6.7 – 7.8 + 1.2 + 2.2 – 1.1 + 0.6 – 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1
July + 8.8 – 1.4 + 10.0 + 9.3 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.5
Aug. + 36.6 + 29.9 + 6.6 + 7.6 – 1.0 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2
Sep. + 10.2 – 11.4 + 21.6 + 21.8 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.4
Oct. + 16.0 – 7.6 + 23.6 + 25.1 – 1.5 + 0.1 – 1.5 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.5
Nov. – 0.5 – 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 – 0.3 + 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.5
Dec. – 30.4 – 21.7 – 8.5 – 3.3 – 5.2 + 0.6 – 5.7 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.6
4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
36•
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2  
by creditor group by creditor group 
Domestic households Domestic households
PeriodDeposits of
domestic
households
and
non-profit
institutions,
total Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individualsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tions Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individuals
End of year or month *
2020 2,539.5 1,713.8 1,672.7 291.1 1,215.4 166.2 41.1 258.6 245.1 19.3 190.5 35.2
2021 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2022 2,688.7 1,854.7 1,809.9 307.3 1,342.5 160.1 44.8 284.7 268.7 31.2 200.5 37.1
2022 July 2,659.3 1,853.9 1,807.6 317.0 1,328.2 162.4 46.3 247.1 234.8 19.3 181.0 34.4
Aug. 2,656.3 1,850.8 1,803.8 320.0 1,323.2 160.5 47.0 248.8 235.7 19.8 181.7 34.1
Sep. 2,661.2 1,853.3 1,805.7 314.2 1,329.9 161.5 47.6 255.7 242.0 21.8 185.8 34.4
Oct. 2,664.4 1,852.6 1,807.1 317.1 1,329.7 160.3 45.5 260.4 246.5 23.1 188.8 34.6
Nov. 2,677.2 1,856.7 1,812.3 312.1 1,340.3 159.9 44.4 271.0 256.9 27.4 194.4 35.1
Dec. 2,688.7 1,854.7 1,809.9 307.3 1,342.5 160.1 44.8 284.7 268.7 31.2 200.5 37.1
Changes *
2021 + 84.7 +93.8 +90.3 +17.3 +73.7 – 0.6 + 3.5 – 8.6 – 7.2 – 1.1 – 4.7 –1.3
2022 + 66.5 +48.0 +47.8 – 1.5 +54.1 – 4.7 + 0.1 +35.4 +31.4 +12.9 +17.2 +1.2
2022 July + 21.3 +22.4 +22.7 + 8.9 +12.5 + 1.2 – 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 –0.1
Aug. – 2.8 – 3.2 – 3.9 + 3.0 – 5.1 – 1.9 + 0.7 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.8 –0.1
Sep. + 4.9 + 2.5 + 1.9 – 5.8 + 6.7 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 6.9 + 6.3 + 2.0 + 4.0 +0.3
Oct. + 3.2 – 0.6 + 1.5 + 2.9 – 0.3 – 1.2 – 2.1 + 4.7 + 4.5 + 1.3 + 3.0 +0.2
Nov. + 12.8 + 4.0 + 5.2 – 5.0 +10.6 – 0.4 – 1.1 +10.6 +10.5 + 4.3 + 5.7 +0.5
Dec. + 11.7 – 2.0 – 2.4 – 4.9 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 +13.8 +11.9 + 3.8 + 6.8 +1.3
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional.Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
marked.  1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
€ billion
Deposits    
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
PeriodDomestic
government,
total TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans
End of year or month *
2020 229.5 48.6 4.8 7.2 36.5 0.0 11.3 46.5 21.2 11.4 13.2 0.7 14.1
2021 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2022 279.8 67.1 8.0 24.3 34.7 0.1 11.4 53.7 17.1 25.1 10.9 0.5 15.9
2022 July 258.3 44.0 5.7 4.2 34.0 0.1 11.5 65.7 17.2 36.8 11.2 0.5 13.9
Aug. 272.6 44.0 5.6 4.3 34.0 0.1 11.5 65.7 16.0 38.1 11.1 0.5 14.0
Sep. 273.0 43.3 6.7 8.3 28.2 0.1 11.6 71.2 19.4 40.5 10.8 0.5 14.1
Oct. 271.2 44.9 6.2 8.5 30.2 0.1 11.5 67.2 19.4 36.8 10.5 0.5 14.2
Nov. 304.5 71.1 14.6 21.3 35.1 0.1 11.5 63.3 24.0 28.5 10.4 0.5 15.0
Dec. 279.8 67.1 8.0 24.3 34.7 0.1 11.4 53.7 17.1 25.1 10.9 0.5 15.9
Changes *
2021 –17.9 –5.0 –0.5 –4.1 –0.4 +0.0 +0.3 +1.0 +0.6 +2.3 –1.8 –0.1 +0.0
2022 +69.1 +23.2 +3.6 +21.0 –1.4 –0.0 –0.3 +6.2 –4.6 +11.3 –0.4 –0.1 +1.8
2022 July + 3.5 +1.1 +0.2 –0.1 +1.0 – –0.1 +2.8 –0.8 +3.8 –0.1 –0.0 +0.1
Aug. +14.3 +0.0 –0.1 +0.1 +0.0 +0.0 +0.0 +0.0 –1.2 +1.4 –0.2 –0.0 +0.1
Sep. + 0.4 –0.7 +1.1 +4.0 –5.8 –0.0 +0.0 +5.5 +3.4 +2.4 –0.3 +0.0 +0.2
Oct. – 1.9 +1.6 –0.6 +0.2 +2.0 –0.0 –0.0 –4.0 –0.0 –3.7 –0.2 –0.0 +0.0
Nov. +33.0 +25.8 +8.2 +12.7 +4.9 – –0.0 –3.8 +4.6 –8.3 –0.1 +0.0 +0.8
Dec. –24.7 –4.1 –6.6 +3.0 –0.5 –0.0 –0.2 –9.7 –6.8 –3.3 +0.5 –0.0 +0.9
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and DeutscheTelekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”.
Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date
are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
37•
IV. Banks
Savings deposits  3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year  2
of which:
Domestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsup to and
including
1 year Totalup to and
including
2 yearsmore than
2 years TotalDomestic
householdsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsBank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)  5Liabilities
arising
from repos Period
End of year or month *
13.5 40.1 218.5 12.0 206.5 552.0 545.7 6.3 15.1 6.7 2.7 –2020
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 –2021
16.0 67.2 217.5 10.6 206.9 526.8 521.8 5.1 22.5 6.8 3.1 –2022
12.3 32.3 214.8 8.8 206.1 545.5 539.7 5.7 12.8 5.6 2.9 –2022 July
13.2 34.5 214.4 8.8 205.6 543.1 537.4 5.7 13.5 5.6 2.9 – Aug.
13.7 41.3 214.4 8.9 205.5 537.9 532.3 5.6 14.3 5.6 3.0 – Sep.
13.9 45.9 214.5 9.3 205.2 535.1 529.5 5.5 16.3 5.9 3.0 – Oct.
14.1 55.9 215.1 9.8 205.3 530.1 524.8 5.3 19.4 6.4 3.1 – Nov.
16.0 67.2 217.5 10.6 206.9 526.8 521.8 5.1 22.5 6.8 3.1 – Dec.
Changes *
– 1.4 – 8.4 – 0.2 –1.9 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 1.5 –0.1 – 1.9 –0.6 + 0.2 –2021
+ 4.0 + 35.7 – 0.3 +0.5 – 0.8 –26.1 –25.0 –1.1 + 9.2 +0.7 + 0.3 –2022
+ 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.3 +0.0 – 0.4 – 1.8 – 1.7 –0.1 + 0.2 –0.1 + 0.0 –2022 July
+ 0.8 + 2.2 – 0.2 +0.1 – 0.3 – 2.3 – 2.3 –0.1 + 0.7 –0.1 + 0.0 – Aug.
+ 0.6 + 6.8 + 0.0 +0.2 – 0.1 – 5.2 – 5.1 –0.1 + 0.8 +0.0 + 0.0 – Sep.
+ 0.2 + 4.6 + 0.1 +0.3 – 0.3 – 2.9 – 2.8 –0.1 + 2.0 +0.3 + 0.0 – Oct.
+ 0.2 + 10.0 + 0.7 +0.5 + 0.1 – 5.0 – 4.7 –0.3 + 3.1 +0.4 + 0.1 – Nov.
+ 1.9 + 11.3 + 2.5 +0.8 + 1.7 – 3.2 – 3.1 –0.2 + 3.1 +0.4 + 0.0 – Dec.
registered debt securities.  2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Table IV.12).  3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsofootnote 2).  4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2,4Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
68.5 43.2 8.0 12.4 4.9 0.0 66.0 10.9 32.9 21.4 0.8 –2020
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 –2021
79.9 49.1 12.5 13.8 4.4 0.0 79.2 8.3 44.9 25.5 0.6 –2022
67.0 41.2 7.7 13.7 4.4 0.0 81.6 13.9 44.3 22.6 0.7 –2022 July
76.2 48.9 9.1 13.8 4.4 0.0 86.7 18.6 44.7 22.6 0.7 – Aug.
72.1 45.0 9.5 13.2 4.4 0.0 86.5 15.5 46.3 23.9 0.7 – Sep.
70.1 42.7 9.6 13.3 4.5 0.0 89.0 18.6 46.3 23.4 0.7 – Oct.
75.4 46.1 11.3 13.6 4.5 0.0 94.6 21.4 48.6 24.0 0.6 – Nov.
79.9 49.1 12.5 13.8 4.4 0.0 79.2 8.3 44.9 25.5 0.6 – Dec.
Changes *
+2.8 +5.6 – 2.0 –0.2 – 0.5 – –16.8 –2.2 –13.9 –0.6 + 0.1 –2021
+10.1 +0.8 + 7.9 +1.3 + 0.1 – +29.6 +0.3 +24.5 +4.9 – 0.2 –2022
–3.1 –4.0 + 0.5 +0.5 – – + 2.7 –2.1 + 4.3 +0.6 – 0.1 –2022 July
+9.1 +7.6 + 1.4 +0.1 + 0.0 – + 5.1 +4.7 + 0.4 +0.0 + 0.0 – Aug.
–4.1 –3.9 + 0.4 –0.6 + 0.0 – – 0.2 –3.1 + 1.6 +1.3 – – Sep.
–2.0 –2.3 + 0.1 +0.2 + 0.0 – + 2.5 +3.1 + 0.0 –0.6 – 0.0 – Oct.
+5.4 +3.5 + 1.7 +0.1 + 0.0 – + 5.6 +2.8 + 2.3 +0.7 – 0.1 – Nov.
+4.4 +3.0 + 1.3 +0.2 – 0.1 – –15.4 –13.1 – 3.7 +1.5 – 0.0 – Dec.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Federal Railways Fund,
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund,
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund.  2 Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities.  3 Including deposits under savings and loan
contracts.  4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
38•
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months'
noticeat more than 3
months' notice
Period Total Total Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeMemo
item:
Interest
credited
on
savings
depositsnon-banks,
total Totalof which:
With
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsforeign
non-banks
End of year or month *
2020 566.8 560.6 533.3 288.0 27.3 18.0 6.3 5.7 1.8 30.2 28.3 22.1 1.9
2021 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 1.5 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2022 538.5 533.2 510.3 254.2 22.9 14.2 5.3 4.8 1.4 34.9 34.7 20.8 0.2
2022 Aug. 556.1 550.6 528.4 257.1 22.2 13.3 5.6 5.1 0.1 25.1 25.0 19.2 0.2
Sep. 550.7 545.2 523.1 252.7 22.1 13.3 5.5 5.0 0.1 26.1 25.9 19.4 0.2
Oct. 547.6 542.2 519.8 252.4 22.3 13.6 5.4 5.0 0.1 28.3 28.1 19.8 0.2
Nov. 542.2 536.9 514.4 250.4 22.5 13.8 5.3 4.9 0.1 31.7 31.5 20.4 0.2
Dec. 538.5 533.2 510.3 254.2 22.9 14.2 5.3 4.8 0.7 34.9 34.7 20.8 0.2
Changes *
2021 +0.3 +0.7 +3.9 –18.5 –3.2 –3.2 –0.4 –0.3 . –5.2 –3.5 –2.3 –1.7
2022 –28.1 –27.5 –26.4 –14.6 –1.2 –0.6 –0.6 –0.6 . +10.2 +10.1 +1.3 +0.1
2022 Aug. –2.5 –2.4 –2.3 –2.3 –0.1 –0.0 –0.1 –0.1 . +0.9 +0.9 +0.3 +0.0
Sep. –5.4 –5.3 –5.3 –4.3 –0.0 –0.0 –0.1 –0.1 . +1.0 +0.9 +0.2 +0.0
Oct. –3.1 –3.1 –3.3 –0.4 +0.2 +0.3 –0.1 –0.1 . +2.2 +2.2 +0.4 +0.0
Nov. –5.4 –5.3 –5.4 –2.0 +0.2 +0.2 –0.1 –0.1 . +3.4 +3.4 +0.6 +0.0
Dec. –3.7 –3.7 –4.1 +3.9 +0.4 +0.4 –0.1 –0.1 . +3.2 +3.2 +0.4 +0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified as timedeposits.  2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
basic rate of interest.  3 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
securities.
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
of which:
with maturities ofNon-negotiable
bearer debt
securities and
money market
paper  6 Subordinated
up to
and including 1 yearmore than 1 year up to
and including 2 years
Period TotalFloating
rate
bonds  1Zero
coupon
bonds  1,2Foreign
currency
bonds  3,4Certifi-
cates
of
deposit Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5more
than
2 years Totalof which:
with
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsnegotiable
debt
securitiesnon-
negotiable
debt
securities
End of year or month *
2020 1,119.0 117.1 12.7 313.6 89.4 94.3 1.5 23.8 3.1 1,000.9 1.1 0.9 34.8 0.4
2021 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2022 1,231.5 92.8 15.0 307.8 88.6 98.6 1.4 26.6 3.4 1,106.4 0.8 0.7 37.8 0.1
2022 Aug. 1,239.1 96.8 16.7 336.8 98.9 109.9 2.1 21.6 4.1 1,107.7 0.9 0.8 37.4 0.1
Sep. 1,271.1 96.1 16.9 353.1 117.9 128.8 1.9 23.1 3.9 1,119.3 0.8 0.8 38.2 0.1
Oct. 1,261.8 95.5 15.6 335.7 102.2 111.5 1.8 25.1 3.9 1,125.1 0.9 0.8 38.1 0.1
Nov. 1,253.8 93.6 14.8 323.5 95.9 105.3 1.7 26.4 3.7 1,122.0 0.9 0.8 38.1 0.1
Dec. 1,231.5 92.8 15.0 307.8 88.6 98.6 1.4 26.6 3.4 1,106.4 0.8 0.7 37.8 0.1
Changes *
2021 +54.0 –10.3 +0.8 +17.6 +9.4 +12.6 + 0.4 –5.9 +1.3 +47.3 +0.4 +0.3 –0.2 –0.3
2022 +59.1 –12.7 +1.1 –23.6 –9.9 –8.3 – 0.5 +8.5 –1.1 +58.9 –0.1 +0.1 +3.5 –
2022 Aug. + 1.3 –1.2 +0.5 –8.0 –6.1 –5.5 + 0.0 +3.8 –0.1 +3.0 –0.0 –0.0 +0.9 –
Sep. +32.0 –0.7 +0.2 +16.3 +19.0 +18.9 – 0.2 +1.5 –0.2 +11.6 –0.1 –0.1 +0.8 –
Oct. – 9.4 –0.6 –1.4 –17.4 –15.5 –17.2 – 0.1 +2.0 +0.0 +5.8 +0.0 +0.0 –0.1 –
Nov. – 8.0 –1.9 –0.7 –12.3 –6.3 –6.2 – 0.1 +1.3 –0.2 –3.1 +0.0 –0.0 +0.0 –
Dec. –22.2 –0.7 +0.2 –15.6 –7.3 –6.8 – 0.3 +0.2 –0.3 –15.6 –0.1 –0.1 –0.3 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies.  2 Issue value when
floated.  3 Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreigncurrencies.  4 Bonds denominated in non-euro area currencies.  5 Negotiable bearer debt
securities and money market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%.
6 Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see
also Table IV.10, footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
39•
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks
(MFIs)  6Deposits of non-
banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans
End of
year/monthNum-
ber
of
associ-
ationsBalance
sheet
total  1Credit
bal-
ances
and
loans
(ex-
cluding
building
loans)  2Building
loans  3Bank
debt
secur-
ities  4Loans
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsInterim
and
bridging
loansOther
building
loansSecur- 
ities (in-
cluding
Treasury
bills
and
Treasury
discount
paper)  5Deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight
and time
depositsDeposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight and
time de-
posits  7Bearer
debt
secur-
ities
out-
stand-
ingCapital
(includ-
ing pub-
lished
re-
serves)  8Memo
item:
New
con-
tracts
entered
into in
year or
month  9
All building and loan associations
2022 18 259.7 30.6 0.0 15.4 11.1 135.0 40.5 22.9 2.5 36.1 185.3 9.3 5.2 12.3 91.3
2022 Oct. 18 259.6 31.6 0.0 15.3 10.7 134.3 40.2 23.4 2.8 36.3 183.9 9.2 5.1 12.1 8.4
Nov. 18 259.6 31.0 0.0 15.4 10.9 134.5 40.4 23.2 2.6 36.7 183.8 9.2 5.1 12.1 8.8
Dec. 18 259.7 30.6 0.0 15.4 11.1 135.0 40.5 22.9 2.5 36.1 185.3 9.3 5.2 12.3 10.3
Private building and Ioan associations
2022 Oct. 10 183.2 16.9 – 7.3 7.8 104.5 34.2 9.8 1.6 33.6 119.1 8.9 5.1 8.2 5.7
Nov. 10 183.1 16.3 – 7.6 7.9 104.6 34.3 9.6 1.5 33.8 119.1 8.8 5.1 8.2 5.8
Dec. 10 183.1 16.0 – 7.6 8.0 105.1 34.4 9.4 1.4 33.3 119.9 8.9 5.2 8.3 7.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2022 Oct. 8 76.4 14.7 0.0 8.0 3.0 29.8 6.0 13.6 1.2 2.8 64.8 0.3 – 3.9 2.7
Nov. 8 76.5 14.7 0.0 7.8 3.0 29.9 6.1 13.6 1.1 2.9 64.8 0.4 – 3.9 3.0
Dec. 8 76.6 14.6 0.0 7.8 3.1 30.0 6.0 13.5 1.1 2.8 65.4 0.4 – 3.9 3.3
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Capital promised Capital disbursed Changes in deposits
under savings and
loan contracts AllocationsDisbursement
commitments
outstanding at
end of periodInterest and
repayments
received on
building loans  11
Deposits under
savings and
loan contractsLoans under
savings and
loan contracts  10
PeriodAmounts
paid into
savings
and
loan ac-
counts  10Interest
credited
on
deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsRepay-
ments
of
deposits
under
cancelled
savings
and
loan
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Net
alloca-
tions  12 Total Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loans Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loansNewly
granted
interim
and
bridging
loans
and
other
building
loans Totalof
which:
Under
alloc-
ated
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Repay-
ments
during
quarterMemo
item:
Housing
bonuses
re-
ceived  13
All building and loan associations
2022 27.5 2.0 8.7 51.5 30.7 48.5 20.2 4.1 5.3 3.8 23.0 16.4 6.7 5.4 ... 0.2
2022 Oct. 2.2 0.1 0.7 3.9 2.7 3.8 1.7 0.4 0.5 0.4 1.6 18.0 6.6 0.4 0.0
Nov. 2.3 0.1 0.6 4.0 3.0 4.1 2.0 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.6 17.2 6.7 0.4 0.0
Dec. 2.5 1.4 0.6 3.6 2.8 3.9 1.8 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.5 16.4 6.7 0.4 ... 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2022 Oct. 1.4 0.0 0.4 2.8 1.9 2.9 1.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.2 12.8 3.6 0.3 0.0
Nov. 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.7 2.0 2.9 1.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.3 12.2 3.6 0.3 0.0
Dec. 1.6 0.9 0.3 2.6 1.9 2.9 1.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.2 11.5 3.6 0.3 ... 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2022 Oct. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 5.2 3.1 0.1 0.0
Nov. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.3 1.0 1.2 0.6 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.4 5.0 3.1 0.1 0.0
Dec. 0.8 0.5 0.2 1.0 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.9 3.1 0.1 ... 0.0
* Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures for
the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 See Table IV.2,
footnote 1.  2 Including claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from
registered debt securities and central bank credit balances.  3 Loans under savings and
loan contracts and interim and bridging loans.  4 Including money market paper and
small amounts of other securities issued by banks.  5 Including equalisation claims.
6 Including liabilities to building and loan associations.  7 Including small amounts of
savings deposits.  8 Including participation rights capital and fund for general bankingrisks. 9 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
new contracts.  10 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital disbursed".  11 Including housing
bonuses credited.  12 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans.  13 The amounts already
credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into
savings and loan accounts" and "Interest and repayments received on building loans".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2019 52 198 1,453.0 407.3 389.2 216.0 173.2 18.1 534.3 436.1 19.7 416.4 98.2 511.5 361.7
2020 50 206 1,552.2 376.7 364.0 213.2 150.8 12.7 504.8 409.6 14.3 395.3 95.2 670.7 523.6
2021 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2022 Feb. 50 209 1,634.4 566.4 551.9 379.5 172.4 14.5 539.7 464.4 13.2 451.1 75.3 528.3 384.8
Mar. 50 208 1,674.9 564.7 550.5 369.7 180.8 14.2 540.1 461.4 13.5 447.9 78.7 570.1 421.1
Apr. 50 208 1,784.0 556.5 542.2 370.7 171.5 14.3 552.8 474.5 13.3 461.2 78.3 674.7 529.5
May 50 208 1,759.2 551.2 537.3 369.0 168.3 13.9 554.0 477.6 13.1 464.5 76.4 653.9 514.9
June 51 211 1,741.0 516.8 502.8 338.8 164.0 13.9 553.5 480.7 12.1 468.6 72.8 670.7 524.4
July 52 211 1,688.6 503.1 488.6 327.5 161.1 14.5 555.8 484.9 11.0 474.0 70.8 629.7 454.0
Aug. 50 208 1,735.3 497.8 483.0 328.4 154.6 14.8 569.2 497.0 11.1 485.9 72.2 668.3 503.1
Sep. 50 208 1,889.5 536.3 522.4 354.4 168.0 13.9 563.5 488.9 10.6 478.3 74.6 789.8 632.4
Oct. 50 207 1,873.5 533.0 519.9 359.7 160.2 13.1 562.1 487.8 11.2 476.5 74.4 778.4 625.8
Nov. 50 207 1,757.8 511.2 498.6 347.3 151.3 12.6 548.7 475.2 10.5 464.7 73.6 697.9 526.6
Changes *
2020 –2 +9 +104.2 –20.3 –15.5 –2.8 –12.7 –4.8 +0.2 –1.0 –5.4 +4.4 +1.2 +164.2 +179.6
2021 +1 +1 –48.4 +87.3 +87.1 +84.9 +2.2 +0.3 –26.2 –6.5 –1.3 –5.1 –19.7 –136.9 –128.1
2022 Mar. – –1 +40.1 –2.0 –1.7 –9.9 +8.1 –0.3 –1.0 –4.3 +0.2 –4.6 +3.3 + 41.5 +35.7
Apr. – – +106.5 –13.1 –13.1 +1.0 –14.2 +0.1 –1.3 +0.7 –0.1 +0.8 –2.0 +102.0 +104.5
May – – –24.0 –3.4 –3.0 –1.6 –1.5 –0.4 +6.5 +7.8 –0.3 +8.1 –1.3 – 19.9 –13.4
June +1 +3 –19.9 –36.9 –36.9 –30.2 –6.6 +0.0 –8.4 –4.0 –1.0 –3.1 –4.4 + 15.1 + 7.4
July +1 – –53.4 –15.9 –16.5 –11.3 –5.2 +0.5 –4.8 –2.0 –1.2 –0.8 –2.7 – 42.0 –71.9
Aug. –2 –3 +51.8 –6.6 –6.9 +0.9 –7.8 +0.3 +9.0 +8.0 +0.1 +7.9 +1.0 + 37.8 +47.9
Sep. ±0 – +153.1 +36.7 +37.6 +26.0 +11.6 –0.9 –11.9 –13.7 –0.5 –13.2 +1.8 +120.3 +128.5
Oct. ±0 –1 –15.2 –1.6 –0.8 +5.3 –6.1 –0.8 +3.0 +2.7 +0.6 +2.1 +0.3 – 10.6 – 6.0
Nov. ±0 – –113.5 –17.9 –17.5 –12.4 –5.0 –0.4 –0.4 –0.8 –0.8 –0.0 +0.5 – 78.3 –97.0
Foreign subsidiaries                                           End of year or month *
2019 15 41 235.2 52.5 46.7 18.3 28.4 5.7 139.0 116.1 14.4 101.7 22.9 43.7 0.0
2020 12 36 229.5 44.8 39.9 17.4 22.5 4.9 139.7 114.4 13.1 101.4 25.3 44.9 0.0
2021 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2022 Feb. 12 35 245.7 46.2 41.4 21.1 20.3 4.8 140.6 117.7 12.7 105.0 22.9 58.9 0.0
Mar. 12 35 249.3 45.9 40.9 20.6 20.3 5.0 143.4 119.7 12.9 106.8 23.7 60.0 0.0
Apr. 12 35 253.6 49.4 44.1 21.5 22.6 5.3 145.3 121.6 12.8 108.8 23.7 58.8 0.0
May 12 35 256.5 48.5 43.6 19.6 24.1 4.9 147.7 123.9 13.2 110.8 23.8 60.2 0.0
June 12 35 258.0 50.3 44.6 21.5 23.1 5.7 148.9 125.1 13.1 112.0 23.8 58.8 0.0
July 11 34 256.6 47.8 42.1 19.7 22.4 5.7 150.6 126.0 13.0 113.0 24.7 58.2 0.0
Aug. 11 34 263.5 48.4 42.8 19.7 23.0 5.6 150.1 125.5 13.2 112.3 24.6 64.9 0.0
Sep. 11 33 260.5 53.0 47.9 20.8 27.1 5.2 149.3 126.0 13.1 112.9 23.3 58.2 0.0
Oct. 11 33 258.2 53.0 47.0 19.3 27.7 6.0 149.1 127.0 13.3 113.7 22.0 56.1 0.0
Nov. 11 33 258.2 58.1 49.5 19.4 30.1 8.6 148.4 127.0 13.4 113.6 21.4 51.7 0.0
Changes *
2020 –3 –5 –0.8 –5.3 –5.0 –1.0 –4.0 –0.3 +3.3 +0.8 –1.3 +2.1 +2.4 + 1.2 ± 0.0
2021 ±0 –1 +12.0 +3.8 +2.8 +3.4 –0.5 +1.0 –2.5 –0.5 –0.5 –0.0 –2.1 + 10.8 ± 0.0
2022 Mar. – – +3.2 –0.5 –0.7 –0.5 –0.2 +0.2 +2.6 +1.8 +0.2 +1.6 +0.8 + 1.1 ± 0.0
Apr. – – +1.4 +2.0 +2.1 +1.0 +1.1 –0.1 +0.5 +0.6 –0.1 +0.6 –0.0 – 1.1 ± 0.0
May – – +4.0 –0.3 –0.1 –1.9 +1.9 –0.3 +2.9 +2.8 +0.3 +2.5 +0.1 + 1.4 ± 0.0
June – – –0.3 +0.8 +0.2 +2.0 –1.8 +0.6 +0.3 +0.3 –0.0 +0.3 +0.0 – 1.4 ± 0.0
July –1 –1 –2.8 –3.2 –3.1 –1.9 –1.2 –0.1 +1.0 +0.2 –0.2 +0.3 +0.8 – 0.6 ± 0.0
Aug. – – +5.9 +0.2 +0.3 +0.1 +0.2 –0.1 –0.9 –0.9 +0.3 –1.1 –0.1 + 6.7 ± 0.0
Sep. – –1 –4.4 +3.9 +4.5 +1.0 +3.5 –0.6 –1.5 –0.2 –0.1 –0.1 –1.3 – 6.7 ± 0.0
Oct. – – –1.2 +0.6 –0.4 –1.5 +1.1 +1.0 +0.3 +1.5 +0.2 +1.4 –1.2 – 2.1 ± 0.0
Nov. – – +1.7 +5.4 +2.6 +0.1 +2.6 +2.8 +0.7 +1.4 +0.1 +1.2 –0.7 – 4.4 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated fromthe flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always
to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
894.1 613.6 453.2 160.4 280.5 12.7 10.1 2.7 267.8 94.6 53.4 410.9 361.1 2019
872.2 588.5 431.8 156.7 283.7 11.7 10.2 1.5 272.0 61.5 49.9 568.6 523.1 2020
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 2021
1,079.5 664.5 466.8 197.6 415.0 9.8 8.1 1.7 405.2 82.7 51.8 420.4 383.8 2022 Feb.
1,087.0 663.1 462.8 200.3 423.9 10.7 9.0 1.7 413.2 80.7 52.3 454.9 418.8 Mar.
1,075.8 655.6 453.6 202.0 420.1 10.5 8.7 1.8 409.7 88.6 53.3 566.4 526.8 Apr.
1,059.1 633.0 437.3 195.7 426.1 10.5 8.7 1.7 415.6 90.4 52.9 556.8 512.4 May
1,035.8 630.0 447.9 182.1 405.8 10.7 8.9 1.8 395.1 84.1 53.4 567.7 521.9 June
1,045.4 634.6 458.7 175.9 410.8 10.6 8.8 1.8 400.2 81.3 53.9 507.9 452.6 July
1,050.7 639.8 470.6 169.1 411.0 11.3 9.5 1.8 399.6 88.1 54.6 541.9 500.5 Aug.
1,072.5 661.9 480.1 181.8 410.6 11.3 9.5 1.9 399.3 89.6 55.4 672.1 629.1 Sep.
1,054.2 645.1 466.6 178.5 409.1 10.7 8.9 1.8 398.4 85.7 66.2 667.4 622.7 Oct.
1,041.1 639.9 457.8 182.1 401.2 10.2 8.6 1.6 391.0 82.6 65.5 568.6 523.8 Nov.
Changes *
– 9.2 –13.3 –21.4 + 8.1 + 4.1 – 1.0 + 0.3 – 1.4 + 5.1 –28.1 – 3.5 +157.6 + 162.0 2020
+71.1 +43.1 +31.0 +12.0 + 28.1 – 3.6 – 3.9 + 0.3 +31.7 + 0.1 + 1.4 –130.8 – 119.7 2021
+ 7.0 –1.8 –4.0 +2.2 + 8.8 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 7.9 – 2.4 +0.5 + 34.5 + 35.0 2022 Mar.
–15.2 –11.0 –9.2 –1.8 – 4.2 – 0.2 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 4.0 + 5.3 +0.9 +108.8 + 108.0 Apr.
–10.4 –16.5 –12.5 –4.1 + 6.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 6.2 + 2.7 –0.4 – 13.3 – 14.4 May
–26.9 –6.4 +10.6 –17.0 –20.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 –20.7 – 8.0 +0.5 + 10.9 + 9.5 June
+ 6.6 +1.9 +10.8 –8.9 + 4.7 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 4.8 – 3.9 +0.5 – 59.8 – 69.3 July
+ 3.4 +3.4 +11.9 –8.6 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 – 0.7 + 6.0 +0.6 + 39.9 + 48.0 Aug.
+19.3 +19.8 +9.4 +10.4 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.3 +0.8 +130.2 + 128.5 Sep.
–15.9 –14.5 –13.4 –1.1 – 1.4 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.8 – 3.0 +10.9 – 4.7 – 6.4 Oct.
– 7.9 –0.5 –8.8 +8.3 – 7.4 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 6.9 – 0.9 –0.8 – 98.8 – 98.9 Nov.
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
165.7 68.7 36.6 32.1 97.0 6.6 3.9 2.7 90.4 16.0 22.1 31.4 0.0 2019
163.4 59.6 34.1 25.5 103.8 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.1 16.6 20.3 29.2 0.0 2020
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 2021
180.9 66.3 33.7 32.7 114.5 7.4 5.0 2.4 107.1 15.8 19.8 29.3 0.0 2022 Feb.
184.0 66.5 34.2 32.3 117.5 7.5 5.1 2.4 110.0 15.7 19.8 29.8 0.0 Mar.
187.8 70.6 36.1 34.4 117.2 7.2 4.8 2.4 110.0 15.5 19.9 30.3 0.0 Apr.
190.9 70.3 36.3 34.1 120.5 7.2 4.8 2.4 113.3 15.3 20.1 30.2 0.0 May
190.7 68.9 35.9 33.0 121.7 7.4 5.1 2.3 114.3 16.0 20.3 31.0 0.0 June
189.6 66.3 35.0 31.4 123.3 7.7 5.4 2.4 115.5 15.6 20.2 31.2 0.0 July
194.4 67.0 36.3 30.7 127.5 8.1 5.7 2.3 119.4 15.3 20.4 33.3 0.0 Aug.
191.4 68.3 37.1 31.2 123.0 7.7 5.3 2.3 115.4 14.8 20.0 34.4 0.0 Sep.
188.7 68.1 37.5 30.6 120.6 7.4 5.1 2.3 113.2 13.8 20.3 35.4 0.0 Oct.
190.2 68.8 38.7 30.1 121.5 7.1 4.8 2.3 114.4 13.1 20.4 34.4 0.0 Nov.
Changes *
+ 1.4 – 7.3 – 2.5 – 4.8 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.3 + 8.7 + 0.6 – 1.8 – 1.0 ± 0.0 2020
+12.1 + 3.2 – 1.1 + 4.3 + 8.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 2021
+ 2.8 +0.1 +0.5 –0.5 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 2.7 – 0.1 +0.1 + 0.4 ± 0.0 2022 Mar.
+ 1.6 +3.1 +1.9 +1.2 – 1.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.2 – 0.2 +0.1 – 0.1 ± 0.0 Apr.
+ 3.8 +0.1 +0.1 –0.0 + 3.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.8 – 0.2 +0.2 + 0.1 ± 0.0 May
– 1.5 –2.0 –0.4 –1.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.7 +0.2 + 0.4 ± 0.0 June
– 2.0 –3.0 –1.0 –2.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.4 –0.1 – 0.3 ± 0.0 July
+ 4.1 +0.4 +1.3 –0.9 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 3.4 – 0.3 +0.2 + 1.9 ± 0.0 Aug.
– 4.1 +1.0 +0.8 +0.1 – 5.1 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 4.7 – 0.5 –0.4 + 0.7 ± 0.0 Sep.
– 2.0 +0.0 +0.4 –0.4 – 2.0 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.7 – 1.0 +0.3 + 1.4 ± 0.0 Oct.
+ 2.7 +0.6 +1.2 –0.6 + 2.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 2.4 – 0.7 +0.1 – 0.4 ± 0.0 Nov.
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and
other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.  4 Excluding
subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of negotiable andnon-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Including subordinated
liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 3,656.9 0.1
p 2022 Dec. 16,788.9 167.9 ... ... ... ...
2023 Jan. . . . . . .
p Feb. ... ... ... ... ... ...
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
p 2022 Dec. 4,664,630 27.8 46,646 46,512 54,848 8,337 5
2023 Jan. . . . . . . .
p Feb. 4,465,360 ... 44,654 44,519 ... ... ...
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2022 Dec. 9,814 7,396 3,216 14,465 8,295 117 2,471
2023 Jan. . . . . . . .
Feb. 9,341 6,898 3,064 13,926 8,356 111 2,343
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2022 Dec. 3,352,177 12,609 566,227 543,694 116,094
2023 Jan. . . . . .
Feb. 3,335,657 15,268 425,253 534,845 106,281
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 5 of the
Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum
reserve requirements (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies,
pursuant to Article 6(1)(a)).  3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2%between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at
1%. 4 Article 6(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the
application of minimum reserve requirements.  5 Average credit balances of credit
institutions at national central banks.  6 Average credit balances less required reserves
after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.  7 Required reserves after deduction of the
lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2007 Mar. 14 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 2002 Jan. 1 2.57 2009 Jan. 1 1.62
June 13 3.00 – 4.00 5.00 Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 July 1 2.47 July 1 0.12
2008 July 9 3.25 – 4.25 5.25 2014 June 11 -0.10 0.15 – 0.40 2003 Jan. 1 1.97 2011 July 1 0.37
Oct. 8 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 Sep. 10 -0.20 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 1.22
Oct. 9 3.25 3.75 – 4.25 2012 Jan. 1 0.12
Nov. 12 2.75 3.25 – 3.75 2015 Dec. 9 -0.30 0.05 – 0.30 2004 Jan. 1 1.14
Dec. 10 2.00 2.50 – 3.00 July 1 1.13 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
2016 Mar. 16 -0.40 0.00 – 0.25 July 1 – 0.38
2009 Jan. 21 1.00 2.00 – 3.00 2005 Jan. 1 1.21
Mar. 11 0.50 1.50 – 2.50 2019 Sep. 18 -0.50 0.00 – 0.25 July 1 1.17 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
Apr. 8 0.25 1.25 – 2.25 July 1 – 0.73
May 13 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2022 Jul. 27 0.00 0.50 – 0.75 2006 Jan. 1 1.37
Sep. 14 0.75 1.25 – 1.50 July 1 1.95 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
2011 Apr. 13 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 Nov. 2 1.50 2.00 – 2.25
July 13 0.75 1.50 – 2.25 Dec. 21 2.00 2.50 – 2.75 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2016 July 1 – 0.88
Nov. 9 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 July 1 3.19
Dec. 14 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2023 Feb. 8 2.50 3.00 – 3.25 2023 Jan. 1 1.62
2008 Jan. 1 3.32
2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 July 1 3.19
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2023 Jan. 4 1 122 1 122 2.50 - - - 7
Jan. 11 955 955 2.50 - - - 7
Jan. 18 849 849 2.50 - - - 7
Jan. 25 1 241 1 241 2.50 - - - 7
Feb. 1 784 784 2.50 - - - 7
Feb. 8 978 978 3.00 - - - 7
Feb. 15 797 797 3.00 - - - 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2022 Dec. 22 1 288 1 288 2      … - - - 98
2023 Jan. 26 775 775 2      … - - - 91
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month *
% per annum
EURIBOR  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 EONIA  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2022 July – 0.511 . – 0.46 – 0.31 0.04 0.47 0.99
Aug. – 0.085 . – 0.07 0.02 0.40 0.84 1.25
Sep. 0.355 . 0.42 0.57 1.01 1.60 2.23
Oct. 0.656 . 0.70 0.92 1.43 2.00 2.63
Nov. 1.368 . 1.38 1.42 1.83 2.32 2.83
Dec. 1.568 . 1.60 1.72 2.06 2.56 3.02
2023 Jan. 1.902 . 1.89 1.98 2.35 2.86 3.34
* Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor anyone
else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the EURIBOR.
1 Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank
operations; calculated by the European Central Bank from January 4th 1999 until
September 30th 2019 based on real turnover according to the act/360 method. SinceOctober 1st 2019 calculated as Euro Short-Term Rate (€STR) + 8.5 basis points spread.
2 Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters since 30
December 1998 according to the act/360 method. Administrator for EONIA and
EURIBOR: European Money Markets Institute (EMMI)

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 Dec. 0.18 41,979 0.91 220,289 – 0.37 75,038 0.74 22,966
2022 Jan. 0.18 41,157 0.90 220,225 – 0.31 72,404 0.73 23,078
Feb. 0.18 40,586 0.90 220,056 – 0.30 71,560 0.71 23,680
Mar. 0.17 40,201 0.89 219,655 – 0.28 68,341 0.74 24,011
Apr. 0.18 39,503 0.88 219,264 – 0.27 73,001 0.73 23,471
May 0.19 39,659 0.87 218,855 – 0.20 65,198 0.73 23,335
June 0.19 39,682 0.87 218,128 – 0.10 66,308 0.78 23,397
July 0.24 40,392 0.86 217,843 0.04 72,141 0.86 24,213
Aug. 0.30 42,949 0.86 217,606 0.17 79,349 0.92 24,813
Sep. 0.46 50,096 0.86 217,608 0.52 95,994 0.97 24,605
Oct. 0.67 56,389 0.85 217,771 0.76 116,977 1.00 24,179
Nov. 0.94 69,368 0.85 218,426 1.13 121,576 1.00 23,542
Dec. 1.16 84,157 0.86 220,531 1.39 123,664 1.02 22,570
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 Dec. 2.02 3,547 1.52 26,755 1.75 1,454,553 6.60 44,914 3.32 78,679 3.28 327,421
2022 Jan. 2.02 3,690 1.52 26,583 1.74 1,457,059 6.69 44,473 3.32 78,019 3.27 328,346
Feb. 2.02 3,559 1.52 26,620 1.73 1,464,103 6.61 44,903 3.32 77,521 3.26 328,991
Mar. 2.10 3,620 1.53 26,670 1.71 1,473,852 6.59 46,226 3.33 77,518 3.25 328,996
Apr. 2.08 3,636 1.54 26,766 1.71 1,483,015 6.52 45,715 3.33 77,073 3.25 329,959
May 2.15 3,584 1.55 26,874 1.70 1,492,093 6.51 46,567 3.33 76,658 3.25 330,295
June 2.19 3,573 1.58 26,899 1.70 1,500,141 6.59 47,810 3.36 76,324 3.27 330,379
July 2.28 3,687 1.70 27,244 1.70 1,508,724 6.58 46,813 3.39 77,074 3.27 333,017
Aug. 2.43 3,713 1.76 27,275 1.70 1,515,561 6.75 47,402 3.41 76,990 3.29 334,182
Sep. 2.61 3,627 1.86 27,290 1.70 1,522,592 6.95 48,339 3.46 77,011 3.32 333,384
Oct. 3.06 3,689 2.06 27,325 1.72 1,528,186 7.39 47,749 3.53 76,686 3.42 333,308
Nov. 3.35 3,604 2.21 27,320 1.73 1,533,123 7.51 47,012 3.60 75,908 3.46 333,366
Dec. 3.66 3,497 2.37 26,984 1.74 1,535,824 7.73 47,253 3.68 76,069 3.49 331,719
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 Dec. 1.82 161,611 1.56 202,457 1.59 822,730
2022 Jan. 1.81 166,574 1.57 202,813 1.58 824,650
Feb. 1.80 172,663 1.56 202,563 1.58 830,564
Mar. 1.90 179,074 1.58 204,001 1.57 832,210
Apr. 1.91 180,007 1.58 206,200 1.57 838,405
May 1.87 184,783 1.62 208,824 1.58 842,912
June 1.94 189,986 1.65 213,733 1.64 846,768
July 2.07 194,397 1.69 218,875 1.66 854,793
Aug. 2.24 209,826 1.74 226,447 1.68 861,022
Sep. 2.63 211,369 2.00 230,393 1.80 865,922
Oct. 3.05 209,961 2.26 237,078 1.92 874,758
Nov. 3.49 213,334 2.49 236,253 1.96 879,122
Dec. 3.70 194,750 2.83 238,592 2.01 872,917
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 Dec. – 0.01 1,806,993 – 0.07 2,327 0.20 204 0.51 721 0.08 536,715 0.14 24,116
2022 Jan. – 0.01 1,806,352 0.11 2,132 0.22 363 0.36 642 0.08 537,038 0.14 23,363
Feb. – 0.02 1,819,881 0.06 2,167 0.25 226 0.33 564 0.07 537,327 0.13 23,136
Mar. – 0.02 1,808,690 0.12 2,044 0.28 258 0.38 824 0.07 535,696 0.13 22,897
Apr. – 0.02 1,826,796 0.14 1,974 0.39 292 0.46 694 0.07 534,800 0.13 22,686
May – 0.02 1,827,315 0.14 2,052 0.52 574 0.66 1,023 0.07 533,590 0.14 22,562
June – 0.02 1,831,910 0.17 2,490 0.71 357 0.80 891 0.08 531,943 0.14 22,408
July – 0.00 1,854,420 0.31 3,227 0.83 776 0.75 1,128 0.07 530,302 0.15 22,255
Aug. 0.00 1,852,118 0.49 4,742 1.04 925 0.95 1,582 0.08 527,959 0.16 22,201
Sep. 0.01 1,854,045 0.84 7,457 1.49 915 1.29 1,289 0.09 522,685 0.19 22,155
Oct. 0.01 1,853,933 1.06 10,188 1.89 1,332 1.49 1,549 0.11 519,453 0.27 22,383
Nov. 0.02 1,858,811 1.34 17,255 1.99 1,783 1.70 1,958 0.13 514,161 0.33 22,556
Dec. 0.07 1,857,240 1.53 20,197 2.01 1,738 1.52 2,137 0.16 510,188 0.40 22,970
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2021 Dec. – 0.14 585,718 – 0.58 43,578 – 0.07 836 0.19 1,004
2022 Jan. – 0.14 596,648 – 0.50 38,323 – 0.18 311 0.28 1,033
Feb. – 0.14 594,874 – 0.48 30,745 0.03 234 0.63 1,123
Mar. – 0.15 607,552 – 0.50 42,187 0.09 417 1.09 1,069
Apr. – 0.15 600,726 – 0.49 42,722 0.37 633 1.12 182
May – 0.15 609,181 – 0.44 41,476 0.44 1,240 1.35 513
June – 0.15 600,646 – 0.36 43,089 0.91 687 2.27 742
July – 0.07 604,802 – 0.11 26,039 1.15 678 1.90 1,466
Aug. – 0.01 636,259 0.07 51,099 0.92 467 . .
Sep. 0.03 615,838 0.62 73,349 1.93 494 2.75 1,111
Oct. 0.04 617,742 0.81 99,703 1.34 707 1.89 146
Nov. 0.10 612,760 1.43 90,346 2.66 631 1.94 189
Dec. 0.11 602,312 1.66 65,813 2.94 734 2.42 254
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2021 Dec. 5.35 5.36 6,927 6.04 1,221 6.75 465 4.31 2,445 5.84 4,017
2022 Jan. 5.53 5.54 8,604 6.19 1,862 7.29 383 4.29 2,643 6.01 5,578
Feb. 5.41 5.45 8,372 6.14 1,641 7.31 378 4.28 2,652 5.90 5,343
Mar. 5.34 5.38 10,208 6.24 1,935 7.28 397 4.08 3,481 5.97 6,330
Apr. 5.70 5.64 8,523 6.35 1,682 7.93 316 4.46 2,654 6.08 5,553
May 5.81 5.77 9,788 6.51 1,924 8.04 332 4.56 3,067 6.24 6,390
June 5.99 5.95 9,509 6.79 1,926 8.50 307 4.66 3,054 6.46 6,149
July 6.15 6.12 9,064 6.97 1,771 8.76 314 4.80 2,968 6.65 5,782
Aug. 6.33 6.31 8,927 7.25 1,765 8.79 349 4.92 2,931 6.88 5,647
Sep. 6.43 6.43 8,562 7.37 1,613 8.64 346 4.96 2,922 7.09 5,294
Oct. 6.74 6.75 7,362 7.57 1,339 8.79 366 5.28 2,546 7.43 4,450
Nov. 6.81 6.87 7,913 7.92 1,330 7.51 385 5.37 2,868 7.74 4,659
Dec. 6.70 6.80 7,033 7.69 1,091 7.64 464 5.36 2,846 7.79 3,723
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2021 Dec. 1.64 5,757 1.48 1,144 1.58 2,326 2.45 860 1.44 2,571
2022 Jan. 1.62 4,552 1.48 1,288 1.54 1,914 2.32 622 1.49 2,016
Feb. 1.76 4,173 1.60 859 1.69 1,560 2.55 514 1.62 2,099
Mar. 1.87 5,992 1.61 1,247 1.70 2,149 2.43 724 1.85 3,119
Apr. 2.03 4,980 1.70 1,170 1.82 1,829 2.33 760 2.10 2,391
May 2.32 4,277 2.03 913 1.84 1,387 2.89 628 2.46 2,262
June 2.39 5,035 1.96 1,196 1.81 1,990 3.04 717 2.68 2,328
July 2.62 4,606 1.97 1,195 2.06 1,980 3.24 629 2.97 1,997
Aug. 2.94 4,474 2.33 777 2.24 1,627 3.48 730 3.30 2,117
Sep. 2.95 4,255 2.51 1,090 2.60 2,250 3.39 610 3.33 1,395
Oct. 3.40 3,728 2.68 1,190 3.06 1,805 4.00 541 3.61 1,382
Nov. 3.78 3,938 3.28 947 3.52 1,808 4.18 746 3.90 1,384
Dec. 3.90 5,403 3.44 1,200 3.86 3,026 4.24 762 3.80 1,615
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2021 Dec. 1.73 3,787 . . 1.76 1,495 2.48 564 1.47 1,728
2022 Jan. 1.71 2,950 . . 1.64 1,227 2.38 455 1.54 1,268
Feb. 1.88 2,728 . . 1.92 970 2.68 380 1.64 1,378
Mar. 1.96 3,879 . . 1.84 1,414 2.58 512 1.88 1,953
Apr. 2.13 3,210 . . 1.92 1,079 2.42 577 2.16 1,554
May 2.40 2,886 . . 2.00 928 2.95 493 2.48 1,465
June 2.50 3,461 . . 2.06 1,239 3.13 538 2.62 1,684
July 2.76 2,994 . . 2.21 1,252 3.36 474 3.08 1,268
Aug. 2.94 2,573 . . 2.38 1,063 3.68 435 3.19 1,075
Sep. 3.09 2,843 . . 2.76 1,446 3.53 465 3.37 932
Oct. 3.44 2,570 . . 3.05 1,244 4.19 405 3.63 921
Nov. 3.91 2,684 . . 3.69 1,175 4.32 563 3.94 946
Dec. 4.11 3,777 . . 4.10 2,187 4.51 554 3.89 1,036
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2021 Dec. 1.37 1.32 23,851 1.27 3,446 1.80 2,383 1.39 1,661 1.16 8,614 1.34 11,194
2022 Jan. 1.39 1.35 25,085 1.33 4,969 1.83 2,527 1.35 1,706 1.19 8,661 1.37 12,191
Feb. 1.49 1.45 26,299 1.43 4,706 1.86 2,270 1.45 1,606 1.29 9,322 1.48 13,100
Mar. 1.69 1.65 32,270 1.63 6,216 1.93 2,704 1.65 1,987 1.50 11,809 1.71 15,770
Apr. 1.98 1.94 25,813 1.90 4,946 2.01 2,323 1.88 1,703 1.81 10,024 2.04 11,763
May 2.29 2.25 27,272 2.20 4,758 2.10 2,491 2.10 1,834 2.12 10,907 2.42 12,041
June 2.62 2.57 22,990 2.46 3,897 2.19 2,461 2.45 1,663 2.46 8,659 2.77 10,208
July 2.85 2.80 21,054 2.48 3,828 2.33 2,814 2.64 1,592 2.73 8,023 3.04 8,626
Aug. 2.89 2.84 18,491 2.57 3,215 2.55 2,488 2.78 1,512 2.74 6,880 3.04 7,610
Sep. 3.08 3.01 16,113 2.81 2,719 2.73 2,186 2.93 1,366 2.96 5,969 3.18 6,593
Oct. 3.31 3.25 14,926 2.79 3,204 2.90 2,522 3.23 1,363 3.19 5,433 3.48 5,607
Nov. 3.67 3.60 13,557 3.32 2,689 3.40 2,330 3.75 1,209 3.51 4,846 3.75 5,172
Dec. 3.59 3.51 13,514 3.17 2,756 3.57 2,620 3.73 1,267 3.41 4,837 3.52 4,790
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2021 Dec. . 1.25 10,265 . . 1.70 783 1.22 727 1.09 3,784 1.31 4,971
2022 Jan. . 1.28 11,005 . . 1.75 942 1.18 861 1.13 4,087 1.33 5,115
Feb. . 1.37 11,593 . . 1.74 749 1.28 826 1.24 4,366 1.43 5,652
Mar. . 1.57 14,566 . . 1.80 936 1.54 974 1.46 5,637 1.64 7,019
Apr. . 1.86 11,672 . . 1.88 804 1.71 831 1.77 4,658 1.96 5,379
May . 2.20 12,086 . . 1.96 839 2.08 856 2.11 5,030 2.34 5,361
June . 2.49 10,285 . . 2.08 865 2.37 774 2.41 4,073 2.67 4,573
July . 2.69 9,711 . . 2.19 1,031 2.51 802 2.63 3,794 2.91 4,084
Aug. . 2.74 8,203 . . 2.36 820 2.63 711 2.68 3,215 2.92 3,457
Sep. . 2.90 7,168 . . 2.54 746 2.80 638 2.84 2,725 3.05 3,059
Oct. . 3.15 6,622 . . 2.78 916 3.20 661 3.10 2,482 3.31 2,563
Nov. . 3.47 6,083 . . 3.22 806 3.62 563 3.42 2,402 3.57 2,312
Dec. . 3.43 5,975 . . 3.46 923 3.64 554 3.36 2,213 3.42 2,285
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2021 Dec. 7.11 36,163 6.93 28,124 14.94 4,165 2.73 76,261 2.75 75,914
2022 Jan. 7.20 36,030 6.97 28,433 14.97 4,110 2.61 81,598 2.62 81,290
Feb. 7.08 36,335 6.95 28,225 14.96 4,103 2.62 85,173 2.63 84,843
Mar. 7.14 37,360 7.02 29,314 14.94 4,076 2.71 87,104 2.72 86,709
Apr. 7.00 36,819 6.91 28,444 14.96 4,100 2.65 88,202 2.66 87,834
May 6.96 37,636 6.98 28,730 14.89 4,143 2.63 89,402 2.65 88,972
June 7.01 38,876 7.02 30,004 14.84 4,192 2.66 93,301 2.67 92,870
July 7.04 37,549 6.98 28,881 14.80 4,246 2.68 93,897 2.69 93,495
Aug. 7.17 38,113 7.17 29,170 14.94 4,305 2.73 96,714 2.74 96,288
Sep. 7.31 39,138 7.36 30,018 14.97 4,359 3.04 97,298 3.05 96,819
Oct. 7.78 38,898 7.74 30,031 15.66 4,479 3.39 97,186 3.40 96,732
Nov. 8.44 38,580 8.20 27,368 15.61 6,475 3.74 97,850 3.76 97,371
Dec. 8.70 38,607 8.53 27,501 15.55 6,516 3.99 94,823 4.00 94,417
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2021 Dec. 1.20 105,525 1.32 29,572 1.94 10,348 2.28 1,529 1.45 1,817 1.05 71,028 1.40 5,515 1.18 15,288
2022 Jan. 1.29 64,813 1.26 21,030 1.80 8,812 2.39 1,280 1.53 1,443 1.14 44,620 1.49 1,821 1.27 6,837
Feb. 1.32 66,898 1.22 18,910 1.78 9,056 2.55 1,205 1.63 1,445 1.13 42,295 1.71 3,088 1.42 9,809
Mar. 1.50 99,725 1.39 29,044 1.78 10,692 2.54 1,571 1.83 1,981 1.38 68,399 1.77 5,314 1.65 11,768
Apr. 1.53 74,483 1.51 19,771 1.82 9,033 2.63 1,388 2.19 1,883 1.31 47,761 1.79 3,673 1.91 10,745
May 1.49 78,588 1.73 18,948 1.82 9,416 2.82 1,358 2.31 1,703 1.17 53,228 2.65 3,419 2.16 9,464
June 2.19 123,645 1.58 28,803 1.88 10,561 2.97 1,465 2.59 1,483 2.16 94,434 2.35 4,558 2.43 11,144
July 1.89 80,810 1.76 22,550 1.95 10,057 3.12 1,435 2.91 1,400 1.66 53,206 2.43 3,997 2.50 10,715
Aug. 1.97 87,373 1.54 20,380 2.17 9,306 3.36 1,327 2.96 1,241 1.80 64,748 2.47 2,987 2.56 7,764
Sep. 2.67 99,740 2.23 28,861 2.60 10,891 3.85 1,435 3.19 1,075 2.61 75,992 2.99 3,670 2.96 6,677
Oct. 2.86 88,486 2.60 25,332 3.12 10,741 4.26 1,591 3.55 989 2.67 64,795 3.83 3,917 3.34 6,453
Nov. 3.14 76,430 3.14 20,220 3.53 10,542 4.71 1,587 3.80 1,046 2.94 51,493 3.51 3,923 3.33 7,839
Dec. 3.45 107,295 3.42 32,608 3.91 11,997 4.98 1,855 3.81 1,138 3.35 75,618 3.57 6,585 3.25 10,102
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2021 Dec. 1.27 18,534 . . 1.69 438 1.93 113 1.23 430 1.20 11,302 1.73 1,948 1.18 4,303
2022 Jan. 1.25 10,159 . . 1.66 371 1.54 102 1.35 406 1.19 7,044 1.20 386 1.37 1,850
Feb. 1.60 9,498 . . 1.66 296 1.98 87 1.37 318 1.63 4,798 1.85 1,166 1.46 2,833
Mar. 1.40 14,380 . . 1.71 503 2.07 120 1.63 444 1.15 9,349 2.56 1,117 1.63 2,847
Apr. 1.72 9,355 . . 1.92 325 2.15 113 1.93 481 1.53 5,242 1.68 817 2.07 2,377
May 2.02 9,121 . . 1.95 385 2.43 114 2.20 461 1.81 5,246 3.02 726 2.14 2,189
June 1.90 13,721 . . 1.89 490 2.69 127 2.43 458 1.49 8,720 2.72 1,076 2.72 2,850
July 2.00 11,739 . . 2.03 487 2.84 102 2.67 398 1.64 7,081 2.99 1,130 2.41 2,541
Aug. 2.20 7,929 . . 2.25 501 2.97 91 2.74 319 2.02 4,945 2.99 603 2.30 1,470
Sep. . . . . 2.86 608 3.37 78 3.01 299 . . 3.16 1,131 2.99 1,712
Oct. 2.82 10,559 . . 3.01 572 3.48 95 3.32 261 2.71 7,209 3.43 750 2.82 1,672
Nov. 3.50 9,542 . . 3.45 462 3.93 93 3.49 269 3.56 6,290 3.81 739 3.12 1,689
Dec. 3.41 17,202 . . 3.72 588 4.08 126 3.41 291 3.41 10,703 4.20 1,417 3.08 4,077
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 4
2020 Q1 2,426.8 318.2 452.0 364.1 383.1 738.2 4.5 68.5 38.6 59.6
Q2 2,517.5 317.0 460.5 371.9 409.4 788.7 4.3 68.5 38.7 58.5
Q3 2,547.1 311.1 472.9 373.8 411.3 809.5 4.4 67.1 39.0 58.0
Q4 2,587.4 301.7 478.9 370.6 425.4 841.0 4.7 68.1 38.2 58.7
2021 Q1 2,575.3 292.4 466.8 361.7 437.8 844.7 3.9 72.0 38.9 57.2
Q2 2,591.4 280.5 466.5 361.3 449.6 864.5 3.4 72.6 39.0 54.1
Q3 2,633.2 271.8 471.3 358.3 464.4 882.1 3.3 87.9 38.4 55.8
Q4 2,649.9 261.4 468.7 355.1 472.9 903.3 3.2 85.1 40.8 59.4
2022 Q1 2,541.0 244.9 441.0 333.9 469.7 860.3 2.7 87.8 41.1 59.6
Q2 2,367.9 217.7 394.2 306.5 464.2 793.6 3.0 85.7 41.3 61.6
Q3 2,300.6 205.1 377.2 290.6 463.7 767.8 4.0 84.5 41.6 66.2
    Life insurance
2020 Q1 1,295.7 191.4 231.0 220.6 62.0 538.1 2.2 13.9 20.3 16.3
Q2 1,347.1 192.3 234.4 223.6 64.4 577.0 2.8 13.7 20.3 18.5
Q3 1,369.2 188.4 241.6 225.7 66.1 592.6 3.0 13.6 20.6 17.6
Q4 1,395.8 183.5 242.7 229.9 70.2 616.5 3.3 14.3 20.8 14.5
2021 Q1 1,361.2 170.4 231.5 219.6 74.3 614.3 2.1 14.2 21.5 13.2
Q2 1,371.7 164.4 231.3 219.4 78.0 627.2 2.0 14.1 21.5 13.8
Q3 1,386.6 159.1 232.2 214.8 87.7 642.8 1.9 13.4 20.8 13.8
Q4 1,400.8 152.4 232.7 211.8 93.5 658.0 1.7 14.6 21.9 14.3
2022 Q1 1,312.9 137.6 211.8 193.6 99.9 619.4 0.9 13.9 22.1 13.8
Q2 1,200.2 121.8 182.3 174.0 104.4 563.2 0.9 13.5 22.2 18.0
Q3 1,151.2 111.9 170.5 163.3 107.1 540.9 1.1 12.2 22.4 21.7
    Non-life insurance
2020 Q1 669.3 111.1 131.3 79.8 80.0 186.9 0.3 38.7 12.0 29.3
Q2 685.4 111.8 134.4 82.4 81.1 197.0 0.4 39.5 12.1 26.7
Q3 693.0 109.3 137.6 83.3 82.7 203.1 0.4 38.5 12.1 26.3
Q4 703.1 105.9 139.5 84.5 85.1 210.2 0.5 37.6 12.7 27.3
2021 Q1 716.8 108.1 139.5 83.6 88.7 215.1 0.4 40.0 12.8 28.6
Q2 720.3 103.3 140.4 83.5 90.6 221.6 0.4 40.4 12.8 27.3
Q3 727.5 98.8 140.2 83.8 93.9 223.3 0.4 46.6 12.9 27.8
Q4 732.4 94.7 139.9 84.8 97.8 227.8 0.3 44.7 14.0 28.4
2022 Q1 721.4 91.9 134.1 81.0 98.9 224.6 0.2 46.0 14.0 30.7
Q2 681.9 82.6 124.1 75.1 99.0 213.2 0.1 44.3 14.1 29.5
Q3 663.9 77.4 119.5 70.7 99.9 209.1 0.1 43.4 14.1 29.6
    Reinsurance 5
2020 Q1 461.7 15.7 89.8 63.7 241.0 13.3 1.9 15.9 6.3 14.1
Q2 485.0 12.9 91.7 65.9 264.0 14.6 1.1 15.2 6.3 13.3
Q3 485.0 13.5 93.7 64.9 262.6 13.7 1.0 15.0 6.3 14.2
Q4 488.5 12.3 96.7 56.3 270.2 14.3 1.0 16.3 4.7 16.9
2021 Q1 497.3 13.9 95.8 58.5 274.7 15.4 1.4 17.7 4.7 15.3
Q2 499.4 12.8 94.8 58.4 280.9 15.6 1.0 18.1 4.6 13.1
Q3 519.0 13.9 98.9 59.6 282.7 16.1 1.0 28.0 4.7 14.2
Q4 516.7 14.3 96.1 58.6 281.6 17.5 1.1 25.9 4.9 16.6
2022 Q1 506.6 15.5 95.1 59.3 271.0 16.3 1.6 27.9 5.0 15.0
Q2 485.7 13.2 87.8 57.5 260.8 17.3 1.9 27.9 5.1 14.2
Q3 485.5 15.7 87.2 56.6 256.6 17.7 2.7 28.9 5.1 14.9
Pension funds 6
2020 Q1 601.0 92.2 56.8 48.9 9.4 362.0 0.1 11.3 17.6 2.7
Q2 626.0 91.8 58.8 49.8 9.8 383.4 0.1 11.3 18.3 2.8
Q3 638.5 91.1 59.6 50.2 10.1 394.7 0.2 11.6 18.5 2.5
Q4 662.9 88.9 60.6 49.5 10.3 419.5 0.2 11.9 18.8 3.1
2021 Q1 664.3 86.2 58.7 48.6 10.8 427.9 0.2 12.1 17.6 2.3
Q2 683.2 85.0 60.2 49.3 11.3 445.1 0.1 12.1 17.8 2.3
Q3 689.8 82.9 60.4 48.8 11.8 453.6 0.1 12.2 17.8 2.2
Q4 709.8 82.1 60.0 48.7 11.3 473.5 0.1 12.4 18.4 3.2
2022 Q1 687.7 76.4 56.9 46.3 12.1 462.6 0.0 12.9 18.4 2.1
Q2 661.3 71.3 53.3 43.3 12.5 447.6 0.0 12.5 18.5 2.3
Q3 645.4 68.6 52.3 41.0 12.9 436.5 0.0 13.1 18.6 2.4
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including
registered bonds, borrowers' note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including de-
posits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrowers' note
loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables and claims ofpension funds on pension managers.  4 Valuation of listed securities at the correspond-
ing consistent price from the ESCB's securities database.  5 Not including the reinsur-
ance business conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  6 The term "pen-
sion funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of
Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational
pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  4
Insurance corporations
2020 Q1 2,426.8 31.8 82.4 464.3 1,721.8 1,483.2 238.6 2.4 124.1 –
Q2 2,517.5 33.1 82.2 505.3 1,767.6 1,527.7 239.9 1.9 127.3 –
Q3 2,547.1 34.3 80.0 515.7 1,785.5 1,549.1 236.4 1.7 129.9 –
Q4 2,587.4 36.6 79.7 540.4 1,799.0 1,579.2 219.8 1.6 130.2 –
2021 Q1 2,575.3 34.8 81.4 551.7 1,778.7 1,541.3 237.4 2.5 126.2 –
Q2 2,591.4 33.0 81.3 558.9 1,793.7 1,556.4 237.3 2.2 122.2 –
Q3 2,633.2 35.4 82.8 567.3 1,818.0 1,569.1 248.9 2.5 127.0 –
Q4 2,649.9 36.1 82.0 579.7 1,821.1 1,578.4 242.7 2.5 128.6 –
2022 Q1 2,541.0 34.4 82.2 563.8 1,728.4 1,474.6 253.8 4.0 128.3 –
Q2 2,367.9 33.7 78.8 542.5 1,578.9 1,331.1 247.8 5.9 128.1 –
Q3 2,300.6 33.9 73.7 539.1 1,513.1 1,268.8 244.3 7.2 133.5 –
    Life insurance
2020 Q1 1,295.7 3.6 19.3 114.2 1,117.8 1,117.8 – 0.6 40.3 –
Q2 1,347.1 3.8 19.2 129.8 1,150.3 1,150.3 – 0.5 43.4 –
Q3 1,369.2 3.9 19.5 136.8 1,164.7 1,164.7 – 0.5 43.7 –
Q4 1,395.8 3.9 20.7 142.8 1,185.6 1,185.6 – 0.5 42.2 –
2021 Q1 1,361.2 3.3 19.9 143.1 1,154.3 1,154.3 – 1.0 39.6 –
Q2 1,371.7 3.3 20.4 144.2 1,164.9 1,164.9 – 1.0 37.9 –
Q3 1,386.6 3.3 19.3 148.1 1,176.4 1,176.4 – 1.1 38.4 –
Q4 1,400.8 3.3 20.7 148.2 1,185.5 1,185.5 – 0.9 42.2 –
2022 Q1 1,312.9 3.2 19.9 142.8 1,103.6 1,103.6 – 1.4 42.1 –
Q2 1,200.2 3.1 19.1 141.5 988.5 988.5 – 2.6 45.4 –
Q3 1,151.2 3.0 17.0 138.3 942.8 942.8 – 2.9 47.2 –
    Non-life insurance
2020 Q1 669.3 1.3 9.8 141.9 468.2 344.4 123.8 0.1 48.0 –
Q2 685.4 1.3 9.5 149.3 478.1 355.6 122.5 0.1 47.1 –
Q3 693.0 1.2 9.6 151.9 482.1 362.3 119.8 0.1 48.1 –
Q4 703.1 1.3 9.7 157.9 482.9 368.7 114.2 0.0 51.2 –
2021 Q1 716.8 1.2 10.6 162.8 491.6 362.6 129.0 0.1 50.5 –
Q2 720.3 1.2 10.5 166.4 493.6 366.3 127.3 0.1 48.4 –
Q3 727.5 1.2 10.5 169.2 499.0 367.9 131.2 0.2 47.5 –
Q4 732.4 1.4 10.8 176.2 493.0 367.6 125.4 0.2 50.9 –
2022 Q1 721.4 1.3 11.8 174.1 483.8 347.2 136.6 0.3 50.1 –
Q2 681.9 1.2 11.1 168.8 452.7 323.1 129.7 0.5 47.6 –
Q3 663.9 1.2 10.6 169.7 431.8 308.1 123.8 0.5 50.0 –
    Reinsurance 5
2020 Q1 461.7 26.9 53.3 208.1 135.9 21.0 114.9 1.7 35.8 –
Q2 485.0 28.1 53.5 226.2 139.1 21.8 117.4 1.3 36.8 –
Q3 485.0 29.2 50.9 227.0 138.7 22.1 116.6 1.0 38.1 –
Q4 488.5 31.4 49.3 239.6 130.4 24.8 105.6 1.0 36.7 –
2021 Q1 497.3 30.2 50.9 245.8 132.8 24.4 108.4 1.4 36.2 –
Q2 499.4 28.5 50.4 248.3 135.2 25.2 110.0 1.1 35.9 –
Q3 519.0 30.9 53.0 250.1 142.7 24.9 117.8 1.3 41.1 –
Q4 516.7 31.4 50.5 255.3 142.6 25.3 117.3 1.4 35.5 –
2022 Q1 506.6 30.0 50.4 246.8 140.9 23.8 117.2 2.3 36.1 –
Q2 485.7 29.3 48.6 232.2 137.7 19.5 118.2 2.8 35.1 –
Q3 485.5 29.7 46.2 231.1 138.5 18.0 120.5 3.8 36.3 –
Pension funds 6
2020 Q1 601.0 – 1.6 22.6 497.5 496.9 – 0.3 8.8 70.3
Q2 626.0 – 1.6 25.6 507.3 506.7 – 0.3 8.9 82.4
Q3 638.5 – 1.6 27.3 511.4 510.8 – 0.3 8.9 88.9
Q4 662.9 – 1.6 28.4 528.5 527.9 – 0.3 9.0 95.1
2021 Q1 664.3 – 1.6 28.8 529.3 528.1 – 0.3 8.6 95.8
Q2 683.2 – 1.8 31.1 536.5 534.8 – 0.2 9.3 104.3
Q3 689.8 – 1.8 31.5 541.1 538.9 – 0.2 9.3 106.0
Q4 709.8 – 1.9 31.8 560.5 557.6 – 0.1 9.2 106.4
2022 Q1 687.7 – 2.0 32.3 555.0 552.2 – 0.1 9.6 88.7
Q2 661.3 – 1.9 32.4 553.4 550.6 – 0.1 9.3 64.0
Q3 645.4 – 2.0 32.3 548.3 545.4 – 0.1 10.0 52.6
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Including deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered
bonds, borrowers' note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension
funds on pension managers and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical re-
serves "life" taking account of transitional measures. Health insurance is also included inthe "non-life insurance" sector.  4 Own funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth"
and "Shares and other equity".  5 Not including the reinsurance business conducted by
primary insurers, which is included there.  6 Valuation at book values. The term "pension
funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of
Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational
pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2011 33,649 13,575 –46,796 850 59,521 20,075 – 23,876 – 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 64,775 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,408 – 12,124 – 11,951 74,483 14,366
2015 33,024 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 69,034 116,493 – 66,330 121,164 61,659 – 83,471
2016 71,380 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 43,951 164,148 – 58,012 187,500 34,660 – 92,768
2017 54,840 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 43,277 137,907 – 71,454 161,012 48,349 – 83,067
2018 64,682 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 48,052 93,103 – 24,417 67,328 50,192 – 28,421
2019 136,117 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 67,581 59,013 8,059 2,408 48,546 77,104
2020 437,976 374,034 14,462 88,703 270,870 63,941 274,979 18,955 226,887 29,138 162,996
2021 283,684 221,648 31,941 19,754 169,953 62,036 310,838 – 41,852 245,198 107,492 – 27,154
2022 171,336 155,136 59,332 34,156 61,648 16,200 178,738 2,928 49,774 126,037 – 7,402
2022 Jan. 49,962 25,410 9,976 6,559 8,876 24,552 40,530 – 2,870 14,990 28,409 9,432
Feb. 32,181 27,557 10,598 3,056 13,902 4,624 25,329 8,057 14,793 2,478 6,852
Mar. 62,964 43,608 23,278 7,972 12,358 19,356 46,555 6,811 10,709 29,035 16,409
Apr. – 17,423 – 2,212 – 3,140 707 222 – 15,211 – 2,285 – 16,927 13,068 1,574 – 15,138
May 23,669 23,911 4,066 4,901 14,944 – 242 25,954 5,485 14,400 6,069 – 2,285
June 23,509 12,731 5,517 – 1,563 8,777 10,778 17,236 8,471 – 2,289 11,054 6,273
July – 18,346 –13,509 – 7,536 11,041 –17,014 – 4,838 – 7,253 10,710 – 13,670 – 4,293 – 11,094
Aug. 14,787 22,057 2,780 2,225 17,052 – 7,270 – 3,497 – 10,189 – 726 7,418 18,284
Sep. 9,838 15,007 32,705 3,897 –21,595 – 5,170 20,841 7,491 – 3,147 16,497 – 11,004
Oct. – 11,558 – 3,868 – 6,143 – 2,570 4,846 – 7,690 8,166 4,260 3,619 287 – 19,724
Nov. 34,626 36,891 2,672 5,087 29,133 – 2,265 2,380 193 4,041 – 1,854 32,246
Dec. – 32,871 –32,448 –15,440 – 7,156 – 9,852 – 423 4,783 – 18,564 – 6,015 29,362 – 37,655
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 – 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 – 449
2015 44,165 7,668 36,497 34,437 – 5,421 39,858 9,728
2016 30,896 4,409 26,487 31,037 – 5,143 36,180 – 141
2017 51,571 15,570 36,001 49,913 7,031 42,882 1,658
2018 54,883 16,188 38,695 83,107 – 11,184 94,291 – 28,224
2019 46,021 9,076 36,945 33,675 – 1,119 34,794 12,346
2020 83,859 17,771 66,088 115,960 27 115,933 – 32,101
2021 125,541 49,066 76,475 124,105 10,869 113,236 1,436
2022 36,519 65,880 – 29,361 40,382 – 8,262 48,644 – 3,863
2022 Jan. 6,155 396 5,760 9,711 2,076 7,635 – 3,556
Feb. – 5,455 628 – 6,084 – 4,539 – 1,599 – 2,940 – 916
Mar. 9,478 359 9,119 14,188 – 1,736 15,924 – 4,710
Apr. 6,207 150 6,056 9,419 477 8,942 – 3,212
May 3,197 1,411 1,786 3,880 1,600 2,280 – 684
June – 25,843 894 – 26,737 – 24,422 – 3,308 – 21,114 – 1,421
July – 2,467 1,374 – 3,841 – 704 – 2,145 1,441 – 1,763
Aug. – 917 87 – 1,003 1,736 165 1,571 – 2,653
Sep. 37,243 38,800 – 1,557 26,230 – 529 26,759 11,013
Oct. – 2,899 609 – 3,508 – 5,121 – 1,588 – 3,533 2,222
Nov. – 7,747 247 – 7,994 – 11,003 1,414 – 12,417 3,256
Dec. 19,567 20,925 – 1,358 21,006 – 3,089 24,095 – 1,440
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,870,084 778,411 39,548 18,327 643,380 77,156 184,206 907,466
2021 1,658,004 795,271 41,866 17,293 648,996 87,116 139,775 722,958
2022 1,683,765 861,989 66,811 11,929 700,062 83,188 170,180 651,596
2022 Apr. 129,238 68,828 3,091 140 59,957 5,640 8,317 52,093
May 139,081 71,010 3,777 1,809 60,594 4,830 15,238 52,833
June 141,105 74,361 5,924 770 62,377 5,290 12,335 54,408
July 148,625 72,487 5,291 348 59,203 7,645 21,763 54,375
Aug. 130,730 77,533 5,282 110 66,372 5,769 10,735 42,462
Sep. 160,306 96,922 10,333 2,847 73,938 9,804 18,913 44,471
Oct. 172,464 59,445 5,875 1,086 45,698 6,786 11,037 101,982
Nov. 152,777 70,448 2,969 91 55,905 11,482 20,625 61,705
Dec. 81,091 49,026 2,329 979 39,181 6,538 12,036 20,028
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 658,521 165,097 28,500 7,427 90,839 38,330 77,439 415,985
2021 486,335 171,799 30,767 6,336 97,816 36,880 64,234 250,303
2022 485,300 164,864 41,052 7,139 91,143 25,530 56,503 263,932
2022 Apr. 28,734 13,879 1,926 50 10,089 1,814 1,050 13,805
May 33,822 12,448 3,173 1,264 6,238 1,774 4,423 16,950
June 37,845 7,517 2,676 500 2,342 1,999 4,128 26,200
July 47,135 12,838 2,626 250 8,760 1,201 13,373 20,925
Aug. 26,950 13,947 2,158 – 10,235 1,555 1,178 11,825
Sep. 48,333 19,382 7,086 1,821 7,209 3,267 8,100 20,850
Oct. 85,086 9,230 3,570 77 4,885 697 2,507 73,350
Nov. 34,411 7,379 1,895 – 2,006 3,478 9,336 17,696
Dec. 6,573 2,256 54 4 711 1,488 317 4,000
Net sales 5
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 473,795 28,147 8,661 8,816 22,067 – 11,398 49,536 396,113
2021 210,231 52,578 17,821 7,471 22,973 4,314 35,531 122,123
2022 136,724 37,833 23,894 – 8,449 15,944 6,444 30,592 68,299
2022 Apr. – 16,610 – 4,444 720 – 310 – 4,339 – 515 – 1,343 – 10,823
May 24,352 3,706 685 1,774 1,967 – 721 3,607 17,039
June 8,820 3,351 1,834 150 1,840 – 474 – 411 5,880
July – 9,336 – 9,581 1,183 – 4,070 – 7,083 390 11,189 – 10,945
Aug. 14,436 1,720 4,546 – 1,290 – 778 – 758 – 119 12,836
Sep. 4,494 29,823 5,512 30 19,988 4,293 3,795 – 29,123
Oct. 44,009 – 8,997 3,797 – 1,764 – 9,843 – 1,187 – 4,111 57,117
Nov. 37,459 – 2,300 – 2,165 – 944 – 2,680 3,488 6,015 33,744
Dec. – 41,578 – 22,368 – 3,643 – 2,747 – 16,193 216 – 1,905 – 17,306
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,545,200 2 1,174,817 183,980 55,959 687,710 2 247,169 2 379,342 1,991,040
2021 3,781,975 1,250,777 202,385 63,496 731,068 253,828 414,791 2,116,406
2022 3,931,782 1,302,975 225,854 55,150 761,044 260,928 441,692 2,187,116
2022 Apr. 3,852,799 1,311,863 214,466 63,960 776,664 256,773 424,076 2,116,860
May 3,870,240 1,309,630 214,981 65,720 773,798 255,131 427,180 2,133,430
June 3,888,933 1,319,854 216,989 65,910 781,469 255,486 427,460 2,141,620
July 3,884,902 1,318,884 218,402 61,866 781,839 256,776 439,064 2,126,954
Aug. 3,902,580 1,323,750 222,515 60,585 785,306 255,344 439,457 2,139,374
Sep. 3,913,133 1,357,666 228,228 60,631 808,553 260,254 443,512 2,111,954
Oct. 3,954,338 1,345,723 231,901 58,854 796,028 258,940 438,743 2,169,872
Nov. 3,981,275 1,333,432 229,589 57,912 784,494 261,438 444,010 2,203,833
Dec. 3,931,782 1,302,975 225,854 55,150 761,044 260,928 441,692 2,187,116
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-December 2022
bis unter 2   1 192 746   461 698   58 800   19 837   310 843   72 218   78 301   652 748 
 2 bis unter 4    724 821   306 580   60 022   13 309   167 794   65 454   79 355   338 886 
 4 bis unter 6    633 803   229 502   50 857   9 869   120 795   47 981   73 638   330 663 
6 bis unter 8    373 186   118 121   28 935   5 159   61 620   22 407   39 701   215 364 
 8 bis unter 10    291 416   80 759   13 686   2 565   44 759   19 749   33 238   177 419 
 10 bis unter 15    235 951   61 355   9 118   3 964   38 539   9 734   31 699   142 898 
 15 bis unter 20    126 857   14 323   3 585    358   8 211   2 168   14 007   98 527 
 20 und darüber    353 002   30 637    851    87   8 482   21 217   91 754   230 611 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,673 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,775 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,872 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,635 1,963,588
2021 186,580 4,152 9,561 672 35 – 326 – 212 – 5,578 2,301,942
2022 199,789 13,183 15,861 224 371 – 29 – 293 – 2,952 1,858,963
2022 Apr. 186,971 25 47 1 –– 0 – 4 – 19 2,007,353
May 187,056 84 215 42 0 – 0 – 0 – 172 2,004,018
June 187,396 340 138 29 328 –– 108 – 47 1,744,789
July 186,233 – 1,194 120 39 –– 1 – 25 – 1,326 1,847,025
Aug. 185,545 – 688 42 – –– 0 – 32 – 698 1,769,546
Sep. 185,966 419 488 – –– 7 –– 62 1,635,277
Oct. 186,402 420 532 1 –– 0 –– 112 1,777,136
Nov. 186,351 – 57 31 13 0 0 0 – 102 1,918,565
Dec. 199,789 13,437 13,584 0 0 0 0 – 147 1,858,963
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields and indices on German securities
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  4 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-
MFIs)German
bond
index
(REX)iBoxx
€ Germany 
price indexCDAX
share price
indexGerman
share
index
(DAX)
Period % per annumAverage
daily rateEnd-1998
= 100End-1987
= 100End-1987
= 1,000
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2019 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2020 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7 146.15 113.14 586.72 13,718.78
2021 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9 144.23 108.88 654.20 15,884.86
2022 1.5 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.9 1.9 3.3 125.74 88.43 525.64 13,923.59
2022 June 1.9 1.5 1.4 1.4 2.1 2.3 3.8 133.21 96.13 494.98 12,783.77
July 1.5 1.2 1.0 1.1 1.9 2.0 3.7 137.14 100.13 519.98 13,484.05
Aug. 1.5 1.1 1.0 1.0 1.9 1.9 3.3 131.87 94.89 493.47 12,834.96
Sep. 2.3 1.9 1.7 1.8 2.7 2.6 4.3 127.98 91.15 458.93 12,114.36
Oct. 2.7 2.3 2.1 2.2 3.2 3.1 4.9 127.58 90.65 498.00 13,253.74
Nov. 2.6 2.2 2.1 2.1 3.0 2.9 4.4 127.52 92.43 544.52 14,397.04
Dec. 2.5 2.2 2.1 2.1 3.0 2.9 4.2 125.74 88.43 525.64 13,923.59
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 End of year or month.  3 Source: Deutsche Börse
AG. 4 Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for futures contracts;
calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 – 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 –1,340 – 379 –2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 –7,576 – 694 47,050 1,984 7,035
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,521 144,075 819 –1,745 143,256 44,266 –3,840
2016 156,985 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 37,615 163,934 2,877 –3,172 161,057 40,787 –6,947
2017 153,756 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 58,834 156,282 4,938 1,048 151,344 57,786 –2,526
2018 132,033 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 28,339 138,713 2,979 –2,306 135,734 30,645 –6,680
2019 176,254 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 53,708 180,772 2,719 – 812 178,053 54,520 –4,519
2020 178,613 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 62,585 176,751 336 –1,656 176,415 64,241 1,862
2021 261,295 157,861 41,016 482 31,023 7,841 116,845 103,434 264,055 13,154 254 250,901 103,180 –2,760
2022 101,777 79,022 6,057 482 444 5,071 72,991 22,755 104,484 3,190 –1,457 101,294 24,212 –2,706
2022 June 3,171 4,539 – 191 – 8 – 428 389 4,730 –1,368 2,907 –1,186 – 72 4,093 –1,296 264
July 3,330 2,810 – 965 76 –1,427 386 3,775 520 5,076 1,176 74 3,900 446 –1,746
Aug. 7,540 6,943 – 206 – 103 – 252 116 7,152 597 7,570 – 498 – 77 8,068 674 – 31
Sep. 177 1,349 –1,343 64 –1,577 288 2,712 –1,172 25 – 320 – 294 345 – 878 152
Oct. 4,922 3,974 342 119 35 267 3,631 948 5,676 20 – 306 5,656 1,254 – 754
Nov. –1,464 –2,635 612 – 2 400 190 –3,247 1,171 – 793 499 22 –1,292 1,149 – 671
Dec. 27,370 11,942 431 108 – 17 322 11,513 15,429 26,168 1,905 – 532 24,263 15,961 1,203
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2021 2022
 Item 2019 2020 2021 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 17.93 96.81 40.12 –25.36 19.57 24.11 14.83 –27.36 50.83
   Debt securities –2.37 2.99 3.11 1.90 1.58 1.16 0.64 –0.10 3.52
     Short-term debt securities –1.29 1.27 2.27 0.77 0.26 1.12 0.39 –1.94 3.00
     Long-term debt securities –1.08 1.72 0.85 1.13 1.32 0.05 0.25 1.84 0.53
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –0.58 1.38 1.34 0.87 1.75 –0.64 0.34 0.98 1.65
         Non-financial corporations 0.49 –0.17 0.74 0.62 0.59 –0.57 0.17 –0.17 0.74
         Financial corporations –0.64 0.12 1.08 0.48 0.58 0.56 0.44 0.73 0.66
         General government –0.43 1.44 –0.48 –0.24 0.58 –0.63 –0.27 0.43 0.25
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –1.79 1.61 1.78 1.03 –0.17 1.80 0.31 –1.08 1.88
   Loans –1.48 –9.64 50.74 6.50 13.71 30.75 5.46 17.93 31.93
     Short-term loans 12.60 –7.30 38.13 7.92 11.64 22.52 –2.62 13.03 28.08
     Long-term loans –14.08 –2.34 12.61 –1.42 2.07 8.23 8.08 4.90 3.85
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors –26.03 –1.13 10.10 0.01 0.18 16.16 7.85 2.51 14.13
         Non-financial corporations –28.14 –12.27 7.11 –3.40 –1.21 13.38 2.44 5.52 8.47
         Financial corporations 1.86 10.57 2.38 3.26 1.24 2.63 5.41 –3.01 5.66
         General government 0.25 0.57 0.61 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.00 0.00 0.00
       Loans to the rest of the world 24.55 –8.51 40.64 6.49 13.53 14.59 –2.39 15.42 17.80
   Equity and investment fund shares 123.65 114.98 162.28 38.42 29.52 46.58 48.66 39.95 2.27
     Equity 114.64 102.20 140.50 31.49 26.79 38.29 46.49 41.80 4.57
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 6.18 –77.97 15.33 4.92 –18.27 16.59 6.03 7.40 34.33
         Non-financial corporations 4.62 –78.06 16.89 5.32 –18.80 18.30 5.58 7.12 34.91
         Financial corporations 1.55 0.09 –1.56 –0.41 0.54 –1.70 0.46 0.28 –0.58
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 7.40 5.01 5.09 –0.87 4.64 0.68 –0.75 3.22 0.09
       Other equity  1 101.07 175.16 120.08 27.45 40.42 21.02 41.21 31.18 –29.85
     Investment fund shares 9.00 12.77 21.78 6.92 2.74 8.29 2.17 –1.85 –2.30
       Money market fund shares 1.78 3.79 0.66 –0.19 –0.41 1.73 –1.22 –0.42 –1.12
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 7.22 8.99 21.12 7.11 3.15 6.56 3.39 –1.43 –1.18
   Insurance technical reserves 1.81 2.76 2.87 0.80 0.61 0.69 –0.11 7.84 5.00
   Financial derivatives –0.62 –27.52 15.55 2.29 0.44 –1.09 20.91 27.96 11.65
   Other accounts receivable –67.63 44.69 67.85 –13.71 15.40 56.79 7.27 –32.89 –37.65
   Total 71.28 225.07 342.52 10.82 80.83 158.99 97.66 33.32 67.56
 External financing
   Debt securities 20.52 36.89 20.86 8.92 10.29 –1.12 10.95 3.77 1.37
     Short-term securities 4.88 –4.40 2.51 1.23 3.50 –1.02 3.85 1.21 –2.70
       Long-term securities 15.64 41.29 18.35 7.69 6.79 –0.10 7.10 2.56 4.07
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 6.61 18.12 9.16 3.29 2.14 1.78 5.64 1.64 0.20
           Non-financial corporations 0.49 –0.17 0.74 0.62 0.59 –0.57 0.17 –0.17 0.74
           Financial corporations 5.31 19.86 9.11 2.75 1.78 2.61 5.34 1.87 –0.74
           General government 0.47 –0.22 0.09 0.03 0.02 –0.10 –0.01 –0.08 0.01
           Households 0.34 –1.35 –0.79 –0.12 –0.26 –0.15 0.14 0.01 0.19
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 13.91 18.77 11.71 5.63 8.15 –2.89 5.31 2.13 1.17
   Loans 89.83 84.69 93.90 –10.96 22.96 53.41 33.48 38.50 83.21
     Short-term loans 33.43 –7.17 50.98 –8.60 14.96 21.18 25.21 15.73 46.66
     Long-term loans 56.40 91.85 42.92 –2.37 8.00 32.23 8.26 22.77 36.56
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 36.58 36.77 67.64 –14.40 9.35 40.87 33.49 31.42 70.06
         Non-financial corporations –28.14 –12.27 7.11 –3.40 –1.21 13.38 2.44 5.52 8.47
         Financial corporations 64.38 13.37 46.48 –15.99 7.96 23.52 28.83 21.64 34.79
         General government 0.35 35.66 14.05 5.00 2.60 3.97 2.22 4.26 26.79
       Loans from the rest of the world 53.25 47.92 26.26 3.43 13.61 12.55 –0.01 7.08 13.16
   Equity 11.69 60.37 61.44 8.50 17.93 20.38 3.11 7.97 1.38
     Listed shares of domestic sectors –24.77 –62.25 26.38 8.02 –21.41 24.50 12.93 10.15 33.33
       Non-financial corporations 4.62 –78.06 16.89 5.32 –18.80 18.30 5.58 7.12 34.91
       Financial corporations –33.41 3.47 –2.37 1.52 –3.23 –0.68 5.19 –1.41 –4.46
       General government –0.01 0.26 –0.09 –0.07 –0.00 0.04 0.18 0.24 0.25
       Households 4.03 12.08 11.96 1.25 0.63 6.84 1.98 4.20 2.63
     Listed shares of the rest of the world –1.16 10.09 18.94 –1.16 31.69 –6.62 –12.77 –3.13 5.93
     Other equity  1 37.61 112.54 16.11 1.64 7.65 2.50 2.95 0.95 –37.89
   Insurance technical reserves 7.55 5.83 4.25 1.06 1.06 1.06 1.06 1.06 1.06
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options –1.38 0.54 14.32 8.20 3.93 0.93 –2.28 –0.27 3.37
   Other accounts payable 8.87 14.40 147.36 8.52 29.78 60.40 27.03 27.52 24.98
   Total 137.08 202.72 342.14 24.25 85.94 135.07 73.35 78.55 115.37
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2021 2022
 Item 2019 2020 2021 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 578.6 717.6 721.9 693.5 706.4 721.9 726.8 692.7 760.2
   Debt securities 49.6 51.5 54.3 51.7 53.3 54.3 53.4 51.3 53.7
     Short-term debt securities 3.7 4.8 7.1 5.7 6.0 7.1 7.5 5.6 8.6
     Long-term debt securities 45.9 46.7 47.2 46.0 47.3 47.2 45.9 45.6 45.0
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 21.1 22.1 23.3 22.3 24.0 23.3 23.0 23.0 24.1
         Non-financial corporations 5.0 4.7 5.3 5.3 5.9 5.3 5.2 4.9 5.5
         Financial corporations 13.6 13.4 14.5 13.4 14.0 14.5 14.6 14.7 14.9
         General government 2.6 4.0 3.5 3.6 4.1 3.5 3.2 3.5 3.6
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 28.4 29.4 31.0 29.4 29.3 31.0 30.4 28.2 29.6
   Loans 731.9 725.0 778.8 732.8 747.6 778.8 785.7 807.9 841.7
     Short-term loans 568.5 566.1 605.2 570.5 582.8 605.2 603.8 619.4 649.7
     Long-term loans 163.5 158.9 173.5 162.2 164.7 173.5 181.9 188.5 192.1
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 414.5 413.4 423.5 407.1 407.3 423.5 431.3 433.8 448.0
         Non-financial corporations 339.9 327.6 334.7 322.5 321.3 334.7 337.2 342.7 351.1
         Financial corporations 67.3 77.8 80.2 76.3 77.6 80.2 85.6 82.6 88.3
         General government 7.4 7.9 8.5 8.2 8.4 8.5 8.5 8.5 8.5
       Loans to the rest of the world 317.4 311.7 355.3 325.6 340.2 355.3 354.4 374.0 393.8
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,448.8 2,559.7 2,913.1 2,813.6 2,871.5 2,913.1 2,838.7 2,765.4 2,729.0
     Equity 2,258.8 2,354.9 2,672.9 2,589.5 2,644.1 2,672.9 2,606.4 2,547.9 2,517.2
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 342.0 307.0 393.0 383.5 371.5 393.0 350.1 305.0 307.5
         Non-financial corporations 332.9 298.9 384.9 375.0 361.7 384.9 342.4 298.2 301.7
         Financial corporations 9.0 8.1 8.0 8.5 9.8 8.0 7.7 6.8 5.7
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 52.3 66.6 71.5 69.4 71.0 71.5 66.5 66.3 64.9
       Other equity  1 1,864.5 1,981.3 2,208.5 2,136.6 2,201.5 2,208.5 2,189.8 2,176.6 2,144.8
     Investment fund shares 190.0 204.7 240.2 224.1 227.5 240.2 232.3 217.5 211.8
       Money market fund shares 3.2 7.0 7.6 6.3 5.9 7.6 6.4 6.0 4.9
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 186.8 197.7 232.6 217.8 221.6 232.6 225.9 211.5 207.0
   Insurance technical reserves 59.2 62.1 64.8 63.6 64.1 64.8 64.8 72.8 71.0
   Financial derivatives 31.6 31.1 106.0 52.0 106.6 106.0 147.9 164.5 199.0
   Other accounts receivable 1,251.0 1,237.4 1,458.4 1,340.7 1,392.2 1,458.4 1,506.4 1,542.2 1,566.1
   Total 5,150.5 5,384.3 6,097.2 5,747.9 5,941.7 6,097.2 6,123.8 6,096.8 6,220.8
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 204.7 238.3 252.3 249.3 256.1 252.3 245.3 229.7 226.7
     Short-term securities 11.9 7.1 9.6 7.2 10.6 9.6 13.4 14.7 12.0
     Long-term securities 192.9 231.2 242.7 242.1 245.5 242.7 231.8 215.1 214.7
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 77.7 96.0 100.6 99.5 99.7 100.6 98.6 92.6 90.4
         Non-financial corporations 5.0 4.7 5.3 5.3 5.9 5.3 5.2 4.9 5.5
         Financial corporations 57.8 78.1 83.2 81.2 81.2 83.2 81.8 76.8 73.9
         General government 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3
         Households 14.4 12.8 11.8 12.5 12.1 11.8 11.2 10.6 10.7
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 127.0 142.3 151.7 149.8 156.4 151.7 146.7 137.1 136.3
   Loans 2,201.8 2,280.1 2,384.5 2,303.0 2,329.1 2,384.5 2,424.0 2,471.3 2,560.1
     Short-term loans 838.3 825.0 879.6 842.2 857.6 879.6 906.5 927.4 978.6
     Long-term loans 1,363.5 1,455.2 1,504.9 1,460.8 1,471.5 1,504.9 1,517.5 1,543.9 1,581.5
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,381.2 1,414.4 1,483.6 1,433.4 1,443.6 1,483.6 1,521.6 1,553.1 1,624.6
         Non-financial corporations 339.9 327.6 334.7 322.5 321.3 334.7 337.2 342.7 351.1
         Financial corporations 974.9 983.8 1,032.1 1,000.7 1,009.5 1,032.1 1,065.5 1,087.3 1,123.6
         General government 66.4 103.0 116.8 110.2 112.7 116.8 119.0 123.2 149.9
       Loans from the rest of the world 820.6 865.7 900.9 869.6 885.5 900.9 902.4 918.2 935.5
   Equity 3,096.8 3,260.9 3,689.0 3,640.3 3,645.9 3,689.0 3,391.9 2,994.2 2,840.2
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 734.1 739.9 924.8 896.0 882.4 924.8 840.1 734.0 713.8
       Non-financial corporations 332.9 298.9 384.9 375.0 361.7 384.9 342.4 298.2 301.7
       Financial corporations 158.0 171.9 210.2 202.9 196.9 210.2 194.3 161.9 160.5
       General government 51.8 56.3 69.9 71.8 70.6 69.9 70.0 70.7 61.4
       Households 191.3 212.8 259.7 246.3 253.2 259.7 233.3 203.2 190.2
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 958.6 995.6 1,126.3 1,125.8 1,119.2 1,126.3 984.0 795.2 709.6
     Other equity  1 1,404.2 1,525.5 1,637.9 1,618.4 1,644.2 1,637.9 1,567.9 1,465.0 1,416.8
   Insurance technical reserves 277.3 283.1 287.4 285.3 286.3 287.4 288.4 289.5 290.6
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 68.8 83.3 137.7 80.3 134.4 137.7 144.3 138.6 163.1
   Other accounts payable 1,301.4 1,286.7 1,551.0 1,382.8 1,454.2 1,551.0 1,581.7 1,612.6 1,699.6
   Total 7,150.8 7,432.5 8,301.9 7,940.9 8,106.0 8,301.9 8,075.7 7,736.0 7,780.2
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2021 2022
 Item 2019 2020 2021 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 146.74 213.31 145.45 53.10 11.94 32.10 11.62 31.99 35.76
     Currency 35.26 61.94 59.84 16.47 14.98 15.72 13.47 12.35 13.42
     Deposits 111.49 151.36 85.61 36.63 –3.04 16.38 –1.85 19.65 22.34
       Transferable deposits 111.01 165.34 90.84 37.70 2.69 16.35 –0.99 23.73 20.48
       Time deposits 5.95 1.29 –5.09 –1.06 –3.92 –0.17 1.21 –0.48 9.18
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –5.47 –15.26 –0.13 –0.01 –1.81 0.20 –2.07 –3.61 –7.32
   Debt securities –1.86 –5.94 –5.89 –1.30 –1.32 –0.62 2.81 4.85 5.35
     Short-term debt securities –0.53 0.08 0.31 0.22 –0.10 0.03 –0.02 0.05 0.18
     Long-term debt securities –1.33 –6.02 –6.20 –1.52 –1.22 –0.64 2.83 4.79 5.18
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –2.93 –2.56 –3.70 –1.26 –0.99 –0.39 2.26 3.77 3.76
         Non-financial corporations 0.21 –1.32 –0.83 –0.13 –0.25 –0.16 0.08 –0.02 0.21
         Financial corporations –2.23 –1.26 –2.57 –1.02 –0.66 –0.23 2.34 3.18 2.94
         General government –0.92 0.02 –0.30 –0.11 –0.08 0.00 –0.16 0.61 0.61
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.07 –3.38 –2.19 –0.04 –0.32 –0.23 0.55 1.08 1.60
   Equity and investment fund shares 49.20 90.18 136.55 31.66 34.68 42.10 30.54 22.10 9.13
     Equity 18.92 48.53 31.76 7.28 7.57 14.30 7.82 9.85 3.99
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 6.61 16.05 14.21 2.20 2.34 6.29 2.70 5.54 3.36
         Non-financial corporations 3.52 11.92 12.64 1.58 1.82 6.12 1.97 3.90 2.68
         Financial corporations 3.09 4.14 1.58 0.62 0.52 0.17 0.74 1.64 0.67
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 7.45 23.29 10.87 3.55 3.78 5.26 3.48 2.33 –0.44
       Other equity  1 4.86 9.19 6.68 1.54 1.46 2.76 1.64 1.98 1.07
     Investment fund shares 30.28 41.65 104.79 24.38 27.11 27.80 22.72 12.25 5.14
       Money market fund shares –0.32 0.09 0.18 –0.07 –0.01 0.18 –0.02 0.28 0.11
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 30.60 41.56 104.61 24.46 27.12 27.62 22.74 11.97 5.03
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 17.95 18.34 20.31 5.58 3.73 5.60 5.67 5.74 5.77
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 37.76 47.65 51.92 11.14 13.30 11.07 10.16 8.32 7.29
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 37.31 33.71 27.36 3.79 7.54 10.57 11.25 7.95 9.27
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 –14.28 –10.43 –0.43 –2.74 5.08 –24.42 12.94 –10.38 –7.56
   Total 272.82 386.82 375.26 101.23 74.96 76.41 84.98 70.57 65.01
 External financing
   Loans 82.57 83.92 98.63 27.53 30.68 23.70 20.34 28.10 25.75
     Short-term loans 1.02 –5.61 0.86 0.79 1.21 –1.61 0.66 1.09 0.74
     Long-term loans 81.55 89.52 97.77 26.74 29.46 25.31 19.68 27.01 25.01
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 68.58 85.69 100.35 26.54 29.34 25.77 19.20 26.81 23.17
       Consumer loans 14.42 –4.29 –0.89 –0.09 2.38 –2.04 0.23 0.91 2.59
       Entrepreneurial loans –0.43 2.51 –0.82 1.08 –1.04 –0.04 0.91 0.38 –0.01
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 73.41 83.17 94.32 27.19 28.38 23.91 20.70 27.94 24.46
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 9.16 0.75 4.31 0.34 2.30 –0.21 –0.37 0.16 1.29
       Loans from general government and rest of the world –0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 –0.01 –0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.73 0.01 0.90 0.01 0.25 0.63 –0.94 0.68 1.10
   Total 83.30 83.93 99.53 27.54 30.93 24.33 19.40 28.78 26.85
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2021 2022
 Item 2019 2020 2021 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 2,647.4 2,860.4 3,005.1 2,961.9 2,973.0 3,005.1 3,016.4 3,047.4 3,083.0
     Currency 262.6 324.5 384.4 353.7 368.6 384.4 397.8 410.2 423.6
     Deposits 2,384.8 2,535.8 2,620.8 2,608.3 2,604.4 2,620.8 2,618.6 2,637.2 2,659.4
       Transferable deposits 1,509.1 1,674.1 1,764.4 1,746.0 1,748.1 1,764.4 1,763.5 1,786.7 1,807.3
       Time deposits 301.6 302.8 297.6 301.9 297.8 297.6 298.5 298.0 306.9
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 574.2 558.9 558.8 560.4 558.6 558.8 556.7 552.6 545.3
     Debt securities 121.4 113.3 109.6 111.6 110.1 109.6 109.5 107.8 110.4
       Short-term debt securities 1.6 1.6 1.8 1.9 1.8 1.8 1.7 1.7 1.9
       Long-term debt securities 119.8 111.7 107.8 109.7 108.3 107.8 107.7 106.1 108.4
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 81.5 76.7 75.3 76.5 75.3 75.3 75.2 74.7 76.1
           Non-financial corporations 12.4 10.9 9.8 10.5 10.2 9.8 9.4 8.9 8.9
           Financial corporations 66.6 63.3 63.2 63.7 62.9 63.2 63.8 63.3 64.2
           General government 2.5 2.6 2.2 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.0 2.5 3.0
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 40.0 36.6 34.3 35.1 34.8 34.3 34.3 33.1 34.3
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,388.2 1,541.0 1,901.6 1,746.3 1,794.3 1,901.6 1,840.4 1,696.6 1,656.6
     Equity 708.0 806.5 969.1 904.8 923.8 969.1 926.8 847.5 823.7
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 223.9 243.3 296.0 280.0 287.1 296.0 271.0 236.7 223.2
         Non-financial corporations 182.3 204.0 250.4 236.9 244.3 250.4 224.7 195.7 183.3
         Financial corporations 41.6 39.2 45.6 43.1 42.7 45.6 46.3 41.1 39.9
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 136.3 180.6 249.3 216.5 223.3 249.3 241.1 214.1 210.2
       Other equity  1 347.8 382.6 423.8 408.3 413.4 423.8 414.7 396.7 390.2
     Investment fund shares 680.3 734.6 932.5 841.5 870.5 932.5 913.6 849.1 833.0
       Money market fund shares 2.3 2.3 2.5 2.3 2.3 2.5 2.5 2.8 2.9
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 678.0 732.2 930.0 839.2 868.2 930.0 911.1 846.3 830.1
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 393.8 412.2 432.5 423.2 426.9 432.5 438.2 443.9 435.5
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,069.1 1,112.1 1,162.2 1,138.7 1,151.6 1,162.2 1,172.5 1,180.0 1,166.0
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 924.5 956.8 986.2 966.1 973.6 986.2 993.4 995.4 996.6
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 29.6 27.9 27.5 28.2 28.5 27.5 25.8 27.5 27.3
   Total 6,574.2 7,023.7 7,624.7 7,376.0 7,458.0 7,624.7 7,596.2 7,498.5 7,475.5
 Liabilities
   Loans 1,837.9 1,924.6 2,023.5 1,969.5 2,000.5 2,023.5 2,041.2 2,069.0 2,097.0
     Short-term loans 59.0 53.2 53.0 54.4 55.6 53.0 53.7 54.8 55.8
     Long-term loans 1,778.9 1,871.3 1,970.5 1,915.1 1,944.9 1,970.5 1,987.5 2,014.2 2,041.2
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,358.7 1,448.2 1,548.5 1,493.8 1,523.0 1,548.5 1,565.3 1,592.2 1,615.5
       Consumer loans 231.4 226.1 224.5 224.4 226.7 224.5 224.9 225.5 228.1
       Entrepreneurial loans 247.7 250.2 250.5 251.2 250.8 250.5 251.1 251.4 253.4
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,741.6 1,824.6 1,920.3 1,867.3 1,896.1 1,920.3 1,941.0 1,968.8 1,995.3
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 96.3 99.9 103.2 102.2 104.4 103.2 100.2 100.2 101.7
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 19.4 19.5 20.3 19.5 19.7 20.3 19.4 20.1 21.2
   Total 1,857.2 1,944.0 2,043.8 1,988.9 2,020.2 2,043.8 2,060.6 2,089.1 2,118.2
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
58•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
General
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
fundsGeneral
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus 1
2016 +36.4 +13.7 +7.7 +6.3 +8.7 +1.2 +0.4 +0.2 +0.2 +0.3
2017 +43.7 + 7.9 +13.9 +10.7 +11.1 +1.3 +0.2 +0.4 +0.3 +0.3
2018 +65.6 +21.0 +12.0 +16.7 +16.0 +1.9 +0.6 +0.4 +0.5 +0.5
p 2019 +53.2 +21.4 +14.0 +8.6 +9.2 +1.5 +0.6 +0.4 +0.2 +0.3
p 2020 –147.6 –87.4 –30.9 +5.5 –34.8 –4.3 –2.6 –0.9 +0.2 –1.0
p 2021 –134.3 –145.9 +2.8 +4.6 +4.3 –3.7 –4.1 +0.1 +0.1 +0.1
pe 2022 –101.6 –117.6 +3.8 +7.5 +4.7 –2.6 –3.0 +0.1 +0.2 +0.1
p 2020 H1 –48.6 –27.3 –9.4 +0.5 –12.4 –2.9 –1.6 –0.6 +0.0 –0.8
pH2 –98.9 –60.1 –21.4 +5.1 –22.4 –5.6 –3.4 –1.2 +0.3 –1.3
p 2021 H1 –75.6 –60.7 –4.0 +1.5 –12.4 –4.3 –3.5 –0.2 +0.1 –0.7
pH2 –58.6 –85.2 +6.8 +3.1 +16.7 –3.1 –4.6 +0.4 +0.2 +0.9
pe 2022 H1 – 6.5 –36.3 +17.8 +4.5 +7.5 –0.3 –1.9 +0.9 +0.2 +0.4
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2016 2,161.6 1,365.6 642.3 166.2 1.2 69.0 43.6 20.5 5.3 0.0
2017 2,111.8 1,349.9 614.9 163.1 0.8 64.6 41.3 18.8 5.0 0.0
2018 2,063.6 1,322.9 600.9 155.9 0.7 61.3 39.3 17.9 4.6 0.0
p 2019 2,046.6 1,299.7 610.0 153.6 0.7 58.9 37.4 17.6 4.4 0.0
p 2020 2,315.2 1,512.9 660.9 154.8 7.5 68.0 44.4 19.4 4.5 0.2
p 2021 2,471.6 1,667.2 662.7 156.2 0.4 68.6 46.3 18.4 4.3 0.0
p 2021 Q1 2,345.6 1,538.7 665.4 154.7 16.2 69.0 45.2 19.6 4.5 0.5
pQ2 2,397.7 1,589.1 667.8 155.6 21.2 68.7 45.5 19.1 4.5 0.6
pQ3 2,430.8 1,617.3 672.4 154.9 24.3 68.6 45.6 19.0 4.4 0.7
pQ4 2,471.6 1,667.2 662.7 156.2 0.4 68.6 46.3 18.4 4.3 0.0
p 2022 Q1 2,475.7 1,671.9 662.0 155.7 3.1 67.4 45.5 18.0 4.2 0.1
pQ2 2,514.9 1,710.9 659.8 157.6 3.3 67.2 45.7 17.6 4.2 0.1
pQ3 2,527.3 1,744.3 641.4 158.4 3.7 66.6 45.9 16.9 4.2 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The deficit/surplus in
accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. In connection with
the publication of the 2022 annual figures, no revised figures were released for the firsthalf of the year. Therefore, the 2022 half-year figures are not directly compatible with
the annual figures.  2 Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four
preceding quarters.
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts *
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total TaxesSocial con-
tributions Other TotalSocial
benefitsCompen-
sation of
employeesInter-
mediate
consumptionGross
capital
formation Interest OtherDeficit/
surplusMemo item:
Total tax
burden  1
€ billion
2016 1,426.7 739.2 524.3 163.3 1,390.4 754.5 240.7 162.5 68.1 37.3 127.2 +36.4 1,270.4
2017 1,486.9 773.3 549.5 164.2 1,443.3 784.8 250.6 169.5 71.6 33.8 132.9 +43.7 1,329.5
2018 1,557.2 808.1 572.6 176.6 1,491.6 805.6 260.3 176.4 78.5 31.2 139.7 +65.6 1,387.7
p 2019 1,615.8 834.3 598.2 183.4 1,562.6 845.6 273.2 187.2 84.4 27.4 144.8 +53.2 1,439.6
p 2020 1,569.1 783.1 608.1 177.8 1,716.6 904.8 284.3 209.4 93.2 21.5 203.4 –147.6 1,398.2
p 2021 1,711.7 887.6 633.7 190.5 1,846.0 940.9 294.4 227.2 93.4 20.8 269.3 –134.3 1,528.8
pe 2022 1,817.0 955.5 665.7 195.8 1,918.6 974.5 306.8 237.5 102.2 25.6 272.1 –101.6 1,630.9
As a percentage of GDP
2016 45.5 23.6 16.7 5.2 44.4 24.1 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.2 4.1 +1.2 40.5
2017 45.5 23.7 16.8 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 +1.3 40.7
2018 46.3 24.0 17.0 5.2 44.3 23.9 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.1 +1.9 41.2
p 2019 46.5 24.0 17.2 5.3 45.0 24.3 7.9 5.4 2.4 0.8 4.2 +1.5 41.4
p 2020 46.1 23.0 17.9 5.2 50.4 26.6 8.3 6.1 2.7 0.6 6.0 –4.3 41.1
p 2021 47.5 24.6 17.6 5.3 51.3 26.1 8.2 6.3 2.6 0.6 7.5 –3.7 42.4
pe 2022 47.1 24.8 17.3 5.1 49.7 25.3 8.0 6.2 2.6 0.7 7.1 –2.6 42.3
Percentage growth rates
2016 +4.5 +4.8 +4.6 +2.9 +4.1 +4.5 +3.3 +6.2 +5.6 –11.7 +4.9 . +4.7
2017 +4.2 +4.6 +4.8 +0.5 +3.8 +4.0 +4.1 +4.3 +5.1 –9.3 +4.5 . +4.7
2018 +4.7 +4.5 +4.2 +7.6 +3.3 +2.6 +3.9 +4.1 +9.7 –7.8 +5.1 . +4.4
p 2019 +3.8 +3.2 +4.5 +3.8 +4.8 +5.0 +5.0 +6.1 +7.5 –12.2 +3.7 . +3.7
p 2020 –2.9 –6.1 +1.7 –3.0 +9.9 +7.0 +4.0 +11.8 +10.4 –21.5 +40.5 . –2.9
p 2021 +9.1 +13.3 +4.2 +7.1 +7.5 +4.0 +3.6 +8.5 +0.2 –3.4 +32.4 . +9.3
pe 2022 +6.1 +7.7 +5.1 +2.8 +3.9 +3.6 +4.2 +4.6 +9.4 +23.0 +1.0 . +6.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office.  * Figures in accordance with ESA 2010.  1 Taxes and
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution Fund.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
59•
X. Public finances in Germany
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3
Period Total  4 TaxesFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5 Total  4Person-
nel
expend-
itureCurrent
grants InterestFixed
asset
forma-
tionFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5Deficit/
surplusRev-
enue  6Expend-
itureDeficit/
surplusRev-
enueExpend-
itureDeficit/
surplus
2016 859.7 705.8 8.8 842.8 251.3 320.8 43.3 48.3 11.7 +16.8 601.8 594.8 +7.1 1,352.5 1,328.6 +23.9
2017 897.6 734.5 7.7 867.8 261.5 327.2 41.9 51.7 13.8 +29.8 631.5 622.0 +9.5 1,414.9 1,375.6 +39.3
2018 949.2 776.3 6.0 904.0 272.4 337.3 39.1 55.1 16.1 +45.2 656.2 642.5 +13.6 1,488.1 1,429.3 +58.8
2019 1,007.7 799.4 11.0 973.9 285.9 348.9 33.5 62.2 16.8 +33.7 685.0 676.7 +8.3 1,571.2 1,529.2 +42.0
2020 944.3 739.9 13.7 1,109.7 299.4 422.0 25.8 68.6 59.9 –165.4 719.5 747.8 –28.3 1,516.2 1,709.9 –193.7
2021 1,105.4 833.3 25.3 1,239.9 310.7 530.8 21.0 69.3 26.1 –134.5 769.2 777.1 –6.5 1,701.5 1,844.0 –142.4
P 2020 Q1 244.8 197.5 2.5 236.4 72.9 90.5 11.9 12.0 2.6 +8.4 168.3 175.7 –7.4 380.0 379.1 +0.9
PQ2 215.6 158.1 2.7 275.4 72.2 119.1 8.6 15.4 3.4 –59.8 175.9 187.0 –11.1 358.1 429.0 –70.9
PQ3 227.5 181.4 4.0 282.1 72.4 102.0 1.4 18.3 34.3 –54.5 181.1 195.0 –13.9 369.9 438.3 –68.4
PQ4 259.3 201.9 4.5 315.4 81.4 109.1 5.9 22.8 19.6 –56.1 186.0 189.6 –3.5 410.6 470.2 –59.6
P 2021 Q1 240.7 185.3 4.3 300.6 75.5 130.8 7.3 11.1 14.6 –59.9 182.4 196.3 –13.9 385.2 458.9 –73.8
PQ2 267.0 195.8 7.5 297.1 74.8 122.7 10.7 15.2 10.5 –30.2 185.9 197.0 –11.1 414.1 455.3 –41.2
PQ3 270.9 210.7 7.4 290.2 75.8 121.6 – 0.4 16.5 10.4 –19.3 183.4 191.9 –8.6 413.5 441.4 –27.8
PQ4 332.9 237.7 6.1 347.8 84.1 148.0 3.1 26.4 – 9.4 –14.9 197.3 190.4 +6.9 492.6 500.6 –8.0
P 2022 Q1 278.0 224.0 5.0 279.1 79.6 116.3 5.5 11.9 7.0 –1.0 193.8 199.8 –6.0 430.1 437.2 –7.1
PQ2 287.8 224.6 5.1 294.0 77.8 125.9 10.6 15.3 5.9 –6.2 199.9 196.7 +3.2 444.5 447.5 –3.1
PQ3 272.2 207.0 13.3 303.2 78.1 116.5 10.8 17.7 10.8 –31.0 194.0 197.6 –3.6 422.9 457.5 –34.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data.  1 Annual fig-
ures based on the quarterly figures of the Federal Statistical Office, core budgets and
off-budget entities which are assigned to the general government sector.  2 The annual
figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all pro-
visional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated.  3 The develop-
ment of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statisticalchangeovers.  4 Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state
and local government.  5 On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as dis-
posals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted.  6 Excluding central govern-
ment liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency.
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2016 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 380.2 372.0 + 8.2 247.1 241.7 + 5.4
2017 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 396.7 385.5 +11.3 258.5 247.7 +10.7
2018 374.4 363.5 +10.9 419.6 399.8 +19.9 270.0 260.1 + 9.8
2019 382.5 369.2 +13.3 436.3 419.3 +17.0 282.4 276.7 + 5.7
2020 341.4 472.1 –130.7 455.5 489.0 –33.6 295.2 293.2 + 2.0
2021 370.3 585.9 –215.6 509.3 508.7 + 0.5 308.0 303.4 + 4.6
2020 Q1 92.3 90.4 + 1.9 105.6 99.7 + 5.9 57.9 67.7 – 9.8
Q2 70.8 114.8 –44.0 108.2 128.0 –19.8 69.4 69.4 + 0.1
Q3 83.7 105.4 –21.7 112.9 113.7 – 0.8 67.5 72.6 – 5.1
Q4 94.5 161.5 –67.0 127.4 146.3 –18.9 100.3 83.5 +16.8
2021 Q1 75.0 127.5 –52.5 113.7 120.7 – 7.1 61.1 69.7 – 8.6
Q2 86.4 123.5 –37.1 122.8 122.0 + 0.8 74.6 71.7 + 2.9
Q3 93.9 128.7 –34.7 125.9 120.2 + 5.7 74.6 74.9 – 0.3
Q4 115.1 206.3 –91.2 145.6 144.5 + 1.2 97.6 87.0 +10.6
2022 Q1 94.7 114.0 –19.3 134.6 122.7 +11.9 68.4 73.8 – 5.4
Q2 99.7 123.5 –23.7 133.2 123.6 + 9.6 81.0 77.3 + 3.7
Q3 89.0 127.8 –38.7 126.1 121.4 + 4.7 81.1 80.3 + 0.8
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office data and Bundesbank
calculations.  1 Any amounts of the Bundesbank's profit distribution exceeding the
reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government'sspecial funds are not included here.  2 Including the local authority level of the city
states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg.  3 Data of core budgets and off-budget entities
which are assigned to the general government sector.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
60•
X. Public finances in Germany
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Period Total TotalCentral
government  1State
government  1 European Union  2Local
government  3Balance of
untransferred
tax shares  4Memo item:
Amounts deducted
in the Federal
budget  5
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,836
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 – 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,911 632,268 313,381 286,065 32,822 107,916 – 274 30,266
2021 833,337 706,978 342,988 325,768 38,222 125,000 + 1,359 29,321
2022 ... 760,321 372,121 349,583 38,617 ... ... 34,911
2021 Q1 189,316 159,271 72,814 73,137 13,320 19,882 + 10,163 6,887
Q2 191,931 163,158 81,129 74,024 8,005 29,609 – 835 7,438
Q3 211,364 180,378 87,603 84,312 8,464 29,726 + 1,260 7,823
Q4 240,726 204,171 101,442 94,295 8,433 45,784 – 9,229 7,173
2022 Q1 224,006 189,158 92,112 87,240 9,806 24,772 + 10,077 7,261
Q2 224,538 190,982 94,153 86,852 9,977 34,149 – 594 11,576
Q3 205,544 174,232 84,078 80,020 10,133 33,618 – 2,306 7,953
Q4 ... 205,950 101,778 95,471 8,702 ... ... 8,121
2021 Dec. . 103,273 55,460 46,618 1,195 . . 2,518
2022 Dec. . 100,688 50,377 47,747 2,563 . . 3,374
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers,
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern-
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these amounts
which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget.  2 Customs duties andshares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government
tax revenue.  3 Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin, Bremen and
Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms.  4 Difference between local
government's share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in
the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local govern-
ment in the same period.  5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1.
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
€ million
Joint taxes
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7
Period Total  1 TotalWage
tax 3Assessed
income
tax 4Corpora-
tion tax  5Invest-
ment
income
tax 6 TotalDomestic
VATImport
VATLocal
business
tax
trans-
fers  8Central
govern-
ment
taxes  9State
govern-
ment
taxes  9EU
customs
dutiesMemo
item:
Local
govern-
ment
share in
joint
taxes
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,376 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,734 50,107
2021 760,953 370,296 218,407 72,342 42,124 37,423 250,800 187,631 63,169 4,951 98,171 31,613 5,122 53,976
2022 814,886 390,111 227,205 77,411 46,334 39,161 284,850 198,201 86,649 6,347 96,652 30,097 6,829 54,565
2021 Q1 171,974 86,381 50,854 17,826 10,203 7,498 54,795 45,403 9,392 252 21,712 7,757 1,076 12,703
Q2 175,242 84,505 50,783 14,347 8,860 10,515 57,634 43,399 14,235 1,215 23,210 7,398 1,281 12,085
Q3 193,910 90,619 53,857 17,973 9,853 8,936 69,528 49,052 20,476 1,189 23,469 7,813 1,292 13,532
Q4 219,827 108,791 62,913 22,196 13,208 10,474 68,843 49,777 19,066 2,295 29,780 8,645 1,473 15,656
2022 Q1 203,130 96,245 56,206 20,915 11,178 7,946 73,584 54,234 19,350 615 22,252 8,975 1,459 13,972
Q2 204,740 101,822 60,363 17,194 11,246 13,019 67,763 46,755 21,008 1,521 24,441 7,564 1,630 13,758
Q3 185,552 82,392 43,431 17,598 10,724 10,639 71,164 49,323 21,841 1,471 21,657 7,115 1,753 11,320
Q4 221,464 109,652 67,205 21,704 13,186 7,557 72,339 47,889 24,451 2,740 28,302 6,444 1,987 15,514
2021 Dec. 111,534 65,550 28,118 19,759 11,404 6,268 27,016 16,976 10,040 1,034 14,480 2,909 545 8,262
2022 Dec. 108,846 66,440 29,555 19,929 12,468 4,488 24,073 15,788 8,285 1,255 14,169 2,237 672 8,158
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations.  1 This total, unlike
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of untrans-
ferred tax shares.  2 Respective percentage share of central, state and local government
in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and
non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on interest income and
capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12.  3 After deducting child benefits
and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans.  4 After deducting employeerefunds and research grants.  5 After deducting research grants.  6 Final withholding tax
on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings.  7 The allocation
of revenue to central, state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular
intervals, is regulated in Section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percent-
age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2022: 46.6:50.5:2.8.
The EU share is deducted from central government's share.  8 Respective percentage
share of central and state government for 2022: 41.4:58.6.  9 For the breakdown, see
Table X. 7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
61•
X. Public finances in Germany
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
of which:
PeriodEnergy
taxSoli-
darity
surchargeTobacco
taxInsurance
taxMotor
vehicle
taxElectri-
city taxAlcohol
tax OtherTax on
the acqui-
sition of
land and
buildingsInherit-
ance
taxBetting
and
lottery
tax Other TotalLocal
business
tax 2Real
property
taxes
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,654
2017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 – 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,966
2018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,203
2019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,651 14,553 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2021 37,120 11,028 14,733 14,980 9,546 6,691 2,089 1,984 18,335 9,824 2,333 1,121 77,335 61,251 14,985
2022 33,667 11,978 14,229 15,672 9,499 6,830 2,191 2,585 17,122 9,226 2,569 1,180 ... ... ...
2021 Q1 4,126 3,171 2,585 6,776 2,567 1,692 395 400 4,716 2,110 578 353 17,594 13,798 3,503
Q2 8,717 2,546 4,053 2,843 2,469 1,640 528 413 4,231 2,374 538 255 17,904 13,692 4,034
Q3 9,532 2,338 3,636 2,911 2,381 1,618 514 538 4,571 2,457 516 269 18,643 14,215 4,133
Q4 14,745 2,972 4,458 2,449 2,130 1,741 651 633 4,816 2,884 700 244 23,194 19,546 3,316
2022 Q1 4,452 2,840 2,372 7,175 2,594 1,785 531 503 5,061 2,827 701 385 21,492 17,454 3,577
Q2 9,092 3,518 3,648 2,872 2,433 1,722 505 651 4,406 2,238 661 259 21,318 16,839 4,077
Q3 7,103 2,571 3,742 3,059 2,325 1,598 549 710 4,100 2,138 596 281 21,463 16,792 4,249
Q4 13,020 3,049 4,467 2,567 2,147 1,725 606 722 3,555 2,023 611 254 ... ... ...
2021 Dec. 7,984 2,059 1,936 730 645 612 289 225 1,680 906 234 90 . . .
2022 Dec. 7,542 2,151 2,018 759 638 582 255 224 1,259 682 202 93 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 For the sum total, see Table X. 6.  2 Including revenue from offshore wind
farms.
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  3
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions  2Payments
from
central
government TotalPension
paymentsPen-
sioners'
health
insuranceDeficit/
surplus Total Deposits  4SecuritiesEquity
interests,
mortgages
and other
loans  5Real
estateMemo
item:
Adminis-
trative
assets
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 –2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,147
2017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 +529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,032
2018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 +4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,008
2019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 +1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 303 56 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 –3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 344 55 3,901
2021 348,679 245,185 102,772 347,486 296,343 22,734 +1,192 42,014 40,320 1,241 400 52 3,807
p 2022 362,939 258,217 104,029 360,029 308,556 23,786 +2,911 46,082 44,186 1,399 446 51 3,767
2020 Q1 80,578 55,999 24,436 82,622 70,829 5,346 –2,045 40,840 38,636 1,848 300 56 3,966
Q2 82,098 57,515 24,413 82,875 70,889 5,346 –777 39,779 37,975 1,446 304 55 3,949
Q3 82,689 58,109 24,418 86,497 74,054 5,591 –3,808 36,898 35,197 1,333 313 55 3,925
Q4 88,978 64,375 24,412 86,605 73,879 5,576 +2,373 39,847 38,186 1,286 321 55 3,916
2021 Q1 83,066 57,351 25,542 86,048 73,799 5,600 –2,982 36,888 35,326 1,166 342 54 3,887
Q2 86,386 60,666 25,545 86,486 73,905 5,679 –100 36,941 35,554 988 345 53 3,871
Q3 85,535 59,941 25,468 87,123 74,453 5,718 –1,588 36,041 34,670 973 345 53 3,840
Q4 92,818 67,211 25,415 87,385 74,556 5,730 +5,432 41,974 40,310 1,241 370 52 3,835
2022 Q1 86,684 60,599 25,937 86,841 74,568 5,734 –157 41,784 39,952 1,367 399 65 3,783
Q2 90,040 63,978 25,879 87,138 74,644 5,756 +2,903 44,425 42,441 1,513 406 65 3,761
Q3 89,284 62,891 26,218 92,606 79,400 6,127 –3,322 41,548 39,767 1,315 415 51 3,775
Q4 96,931 70,750 25,995 93,444 79,944 6,170 +3,487 46,082 44,186 1,399 446 51 3,767
Sources: German pension insurance scheme and Bundesbank calculations.  * Excluding
the German pension insurance scheme for mining, railway and maritime industries. The
final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as
the latter are not revised.  1 Including financial compensation payments. Excluding in-vestment spending and proceeds.  2 Including contributions for recipients of govern-
ment cash benefits.  3 Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
quarter.  4 Including cash.  5 Excluding loans to other social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
62•
X. Public finance in Germany
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total  1Contri-
butionsInsolvency
compen-
sation levyGovernment
funds TotalUnemploy-
ment
benefit  2Short-time
working
benefits  3Job
promotion  4Insolvency
benefit
paymentAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  5Deficit/
surplusMemo item:
Deficit-
offsetting
grant or
loan from
central
government
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 – 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 595 5,314 +5,463 –
2017 37,819 32,501 882 – 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 687 6,444 +5,952 –
2018 39,335 34,172 622 – 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 588 8,129 +6,228 –
2019 35,285 29,851 638 – 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 842 6,252 +2,131 –
2020 33,678 28,236 630 – 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 1,214 6,076 –27,335 6,913
2021 35,830 29,571 1,302 – 57,570 19,460 21,003 7,475 493 6,080 –21,739 16,935
2022 37,831 31,651 1,062 – 37,530 16,588 3,865 7,125 534 6,256 + 300 423
2020 Q1 8,123 6,851 153 – 9,301 4,469 392 1,934 235 1,470 –1,179 –
Q2 7,906 6,691 151 – 17,005 4,869 7,977 1,793 254 1,407 –9,099 –
Q3 8,350 6,934 153 – 18,619 5,737 8,637 1,701 472 1,414 –10,269 –
Q4 9,299 7,760 174 – 16,088 5,543 5,712 1,957 251 1,785 –6,789 6,913
2021 Q1 8,228 6,747 289 – 18,260 5,956 8,006 1,935 184 1,391 –10,033 –
Q2 8,830 7,301 324 – 16,720 5,029 7,495 1,912 108 1,452 –7,890 –
Q3 8,791 7,290 330 – 12,042 4,447 3,631 1,744 91 1,452 –3,251 –
Q4 9,982 8,234 359 – 10,547 4,028 1,871 1,884 110 1,785 – 565 16,935
2022 Q1 8,827 7,374 251 – 10,685 4,424 2,087 1,821 135 1,412 –1,858 –
Q2 9,327 7,857 262 – 9,457 4,091 1,215 1,794 147 1,450 – 130 –
Q3 9,278 7,740 261 – 8,401 4,056 408 1,621 107 1,506 + 877 –
Q4 10,398 8,679 289 – 8,987 4,016 156 1,889 145 1,888 +1,411 423
Source: Federal Employment Agency and Bundesbank calculations.  * Including transfers
to the civil servants' pension fund.  1 Excluding central government deficit-offsetting
grant or loan.  2 Unemployment benefit in case of unemployment.  3 Including seasonal
short-time working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, re-
structuring measures and refunds of social contributions.  4 Vocational training, meas-ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, integration, compensation top-up pay-
ments and promotion of business start-ups.  5 Including collection charges to other
social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the
basic allowance for job seekers.
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions Central
government
funds  2 TotalHospital
treatmentPharma-
ceuticalsMedical
treatmentDental
treatment  3Remedies
and
therapeutic
appliancesSickness
benefitsAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  4Deficit/
surplus
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 757
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 +3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 +2,654
2019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 –1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 –6,110
2021 289,270 249,734 36,977 294,602 82,748 46,199 45,075 16,335 20,163 16,612 11,735 –5,332
2020 Q1 61,949 57,419 3,625 66,438 20,049 11,086 10,806 3,804 4,470 4,061 2,816 –4,489
Q2 68,108 58,096 9,359 69,487 17,674 10,492 10,908 3,389 3,986 4,143 2,980 –1,378
Q3 70,130 59,403 10,151 71,063 20,913 10,567 11,642 3,774 4,852 3,829 2,970 – 934
Q4 68,645 62,672 4,805 67,987 19,887 10,729 11,019 3,891 4,725 3,920 3,039 + 658
2021 Q1 72,970 59,338 13,303 72,660 19,631 11,175 11,564 4,069 4,564 4,287 2,967 + 310
Q2 71,964 61,819 9,965 74,492 20,287 11,275 11,536 4,219 5,085 4,120 2,850 –2,529
Q3 70,592 61,899 7,942 73,569 20,748 11,756 10,730 4,060 5,085 4,004 2,849 –2,977
Q4 74,020 66,678 5,767 73,209 21,340 12,043 11,252 4,062 5,290 4,200 3,109 + 810
2022 Q1 79,253 62,142 17,049 81,493 20,550 11,891 11,847 4,286 5,216 4,574 3,510 –2,240
Q2 79,112 64,611 14,280 79,269 21,080 12,053 12,085 4,249 5,335 4,457 2,958 – 158
Q3 75,516 65,242 9,804 75,011 21,164 12,221 11,545 3,956 5,352 4,441 2,996 + 505
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as the latter are not
revised. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensationscheme.  2 Federal grant and liquidity assistance.  3 Including dentures.  4 Net, i.e. after
deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contributions incurred by other
social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
63•
X. Public finances in Germany
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period Total Contributions TotalNon-cash
care benefitsInpatient
care total  2Nursing
benefitContributions to
pension insur-
ance scheme  3Administrative
expenditureDeficit/
surplus
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 4,904 13,539 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,235
2017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 – 2,557
2018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 – 3,315
2019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2021 52,573 49,764 53,903 9,573 16,511 13,865 3,070 2,024 – 1,330
2020 Q1 11,693 11,473 11,444 2,186 4,214 3,067 633 489 + 249
Q2 11,921 11,732 11,816 2,051 4,015 3,173 664 468 + 105
Q3 13,924 11,938 12,890 2,263 4,087 3,249 682 500 + 1,033
Q4 13,079 12,746 12,927 2,306 4,177 3,403 716 481 + 152
2021 Q1 12,093 11,831 13,344 2,355 3,971 3,387 725 512 – 1,251
Q2 12,933 12,329 13,521 2,287 4,030 3,421 745 510 – 587
Q3 12,624 12,294 13,390 2,393 4,182 3,466 783 509 – 767
Q4 14,853 13,242 13,595 2,475 4,270 3,646 788 503 + 1,258
2022 Q1 12,912 12,412 14,739 2,564 4,974 3,572 775 529 – 1,827
Q2 15,350 12,951 14,827 2,464 5,026 3,698 795 548 + 523
Q3 13,708 13,021 15,387 2,638 5,197 3,755 802 542 – 1,679
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  * The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the
latter are not revised.  1 Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund.  2 In-cluding benefits for short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter alia.
3 For non-professional carers.
12. Maastricht debt by creditor
€ million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Bundesbank Domestic MFIsOther domestic
financial corporations Other domestic creditors Foreign creditors
of which: of which: of which: of which: of which: Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities
2016 2,161,570 205,391 191,880 585,456 223,408 211,514 111,843 48,630 14,181 1,110,578 1,012,274
2017 2,111,751 319,159 305,301 539,181 194,619 180,105 81,126 45,106 10,456 1,028,201 941,749
2018 2,063,571 364,731 350,487 496,314 167,505 186,345 89,793 44,124 8,724 972,057 892,224
2019 2,046,638 366,562 352,025 458,336 158,119 183,669 88,727 48,735 7,224 989,336 908,795
2020 2,315,216 522,392 507,534 493,679 157,829 191,079 99,688 40,605 8,372 1,067,461 996,569
2021 2,471,628 716,004 700,921 485,156 144,646 191,656 103,125 40,621 7,436 1,038,191 969,174
2020 Q1 2,091,520 371,076 356,469 469,822 163,765 185,852 92,853 49,812 7,746 1,014,958 935,552
Q2 2,261,026 424,141 409,393 535,844 172,258 186,264 93,879 49,928 8,600 1,064,848 984,002
Q3 2,334,627 468,723 453,952 508,090 167,755 189,464 97,649 51,771 8,100 1,116,577 1,046,063
Q4 2,315,216 522,392 507,534 493,679 157,829 191,079 99,688 40,605 8,372 1,067,461 996,569
2021 Q1 2,345,586 561,443 546,539 468,094 162,962 190,044 99,241 51,828 8,060 1,074,177 1,010,735
Q2 2,397,710 620,472 605,429 470,564 151,184 189,839 99,581 43,263 7,700 1,073,571 1,008,687
Q3 2,430,788 669,659 654,600 472,510 152,069 191,531 101,702 44,537 8,069 1,052,552 987,778
Q4 2,471,628 716,004 700,921 485,156 144,646 191,656 103,125 40,621 7,436 1,038,191 969,174
p 2022 Q1 2,475,736 737,978 722,843 469,107 143,409 193,909 105,978 39,384 6,959 1,035,357 969,143
pQ2 2,514,916 759,385 744,213 472,697 134,000 202,461 115,357 43,043 8,086 1,037,329 971,582
pQ3 2,527,294 741,360 726,147 502,894 126,864 202,421 116,411 41,063 8,986 1,039,556 969,077
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
64•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
General government
2016 2,161,570 15,491 69,715 1,483,871 96,254 496,239 . .
2017 2,111,751 14,298 48,789 1,484,462 87,799 476,403 . .
2018 2,063,571 14,680 52,572 1,456,160 77,410 462,748 . .
2019 2,046,638 14,449 56,350 1,458,540 62,288 455,011 . .
2020 Q1 2,091,520 11,410 84,162 1,472,222 72,560 451,167 . .
Q2 2,261,026 13,120 134,275 1,533,857 131,335 448,438 . .
Q3 2,334,627 11,886 190,945 1,582,574 101,669 447,553 . .
Q4 2,315,216 14,486 173,851 1,596,141 82,437 448,301 . .
2021 Q1 2,345,586 12,200 190,021 1,637,515 61,278 444,571 . .
Q2 2,397,710 12,901 182,659 1,689,922 69,010 443,218 . .
Q3 2,430,788 13,319 192,480 1,711,739 69,831 443,420 . .
Q4 2,471,628 17,743 195,420 1,729,881 86,437 442,146 . .
p 2022 Q1 2,475,736 15,655 172,881 1,775,452 69,481 442,267 . .
pQ2 2,514,916 17,750 161,918 1,811,320 76,663 447,265 . .
pQ3 2,527,294 22,567 150,009 1,797,476 81,934 475,308 . .
Central government
2016 1,365,579 15,491 55,208 1,123,853 50,004 121,022 556 8,567
2017 1,349,948 14,298 36,297 1,131,896 47,761 119,696 1,131 10,618
2018 1,322,907 14,680 42,246 1,107,140 42,057 116,784 933 9,975
2019 1,299,727 14,449 38,480 1,101,866 28,617 116,315 605 10,301
2020 Q1 1,327,538 11,410 56,680 1,103,934 38,714 116,799 605 8,125
Q2 1,473,699 13,120 109,221 1,139,510 95,489 116,360 585 7,037
Q3 1,536,634 11,886 166,564 1,178,687 62,933 116,564 605 11,731
Q4 1,512,875 14,486 154,498 1,180,683 46,811 116,396 609 14,545
2021 Q1 1,538,718 12,200 167,484 1,212,495 29,817 116,722 602 22,947
Q2 1,589,070 12,901 165,373 1,259,206 34,965 116,626 643 29,461
Q3 1,617,263 13,319 170,961 1,280,586 35,919 116,478 687 31,390
Q4 1,667,150 17,743 176,428 1,300,416 56,744 115,818 640 8,083
p 2022 Q1 1,671,870 15,655 155,119 1,340,340 40,701 120,055 531 10,453
pQ2 1,710,931 17,750 147,674 1,373,617 46,312 125,578 604 10,554
pQ3 1,744,254 22,567 144,987 1,369,630 54,775 152,296 768 13,205
State government
2016 642,291 – 14,515 361,996 20,482 245,298 11,273 1,694
2017 614,936 – 12,543 354,688 19,628 228,076 14,038 2,046
2018 600,899 – 10,332 351,994 18,977 219,596 14,035 1,891
2019 609,950 – 17,873 360,495 18,767 212,816 14,934 1,826
2020 Q1 623,720 – 27,484 372,021 16,000 208,216 12,297 1,783
Q2 645,700 – 25,056 398,404 16,916 205,324 11,070 2,085
Q3 656,207 – 24,382 408,310 19,836 203,679 11,717 2,090
Q4 660,917 – 19,354 419,862 18,624 203,078 11,946 1,410
2021 Q1 665,415 – 22,538 429,641 14,933 198,303 10,959 1,998
Q2 667,802 – 17,287 435,726 17,844 196,945 12,466 2,047
Q3 672,433 – 21,521 436,506 17,374 197,033 11,421 2,119
Q4 662,728 – 18,994 434,930 13,851 194,953 12,443 1,766
p 2022 Q1 661,971 – 17,765 440,766 13,534 189,906 11,700 1,935
pQ2 659,846 – 14,247 443,413 14,876 187,310 11,451 1,777
pQ3 641,437 – 5,024 433,509 15,043 187,861 14,102 2,207
Local government
2016 166,205 – – 2,404 27,002 136,798 1,819 431
2017 163,124 – – 3,082 24,572 135,471 1,881 466
2018 155,930 – 1 3,046 20,425 132,458 1,884 497
2019 153,634 – – 2,996 19,079 131,559 1,856 532
2020 Q1 154,200 – – 3,128 19,739 131,333 1,825 508
Q2 154,368 – – 3,094 19,728 131,546 2,085 350
Q3 155,532 – – 2,961 20,610 131,960 2,107 339
Q4 154,834 – – 3,366 18,033 133,435 1,404 330
2021 Q1 154,659 – – 3,121 17,480 134,058 2,010 320
Q2 155,643 – – 3,121 18,475 134,048 2,071 313
Q3 154,910 – – 3,000 17,649 134,261 2,127 306
Q4 156,230 – – 3,241 17,255 135,734 1,768 293
p 2022 Q1 155,675 – – 3,052 16,075 136,548 1,933 315
pQ2 157,636 – – 2,902 16,190 138,544 1,823 361
pQ3 158,350 – – 2,856 16,181 139,313 2,253 358
For footnotes see end of table.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
65•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont´d)
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:   2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
Social security funds
2016 1,232 – – – 562 670 89 3,044
2017 807 – – – 262 545 15 3,934
2018 704 – – – 388 316 16 4,506
2019 738 – – – 375 363 16 4,753
2020 Q1 806 – – – 287 519 16 4,328
Q2 1,015 – – – 581 433 16 4,284
Q3 4,640 – – – 4,210 430 3,956 4,226
Q4 7,480 – – – 7,128 352 6,931 4,606
2021 Q1 16,220 – – – 15,985 235 15,853 4,160
Q2 21,234 – – – 20,995 239 20,860 4,220
Q3 24,288 – – – 24,053 235 23,872 4,292
Q4 392 – – – 131 261 19 4,729
p 2022 Q1 3,104 – – – 2,863 240 2,720 4,181
pQ2 3,321 – – – 3,078 242 2,939 4,124
pQ3 3,687 – – – 3,439 247 3,311 4,665
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office and
the Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency.  1 Particularly liabilities resulting
from coins in circulation.  2 Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt vis-à-visother government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on the
market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated between
different government subsectors.
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
€ million
Currency and deposits  2Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3
Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total  1 Total  1Federal
day bond Total  1Conventional
Federal
bonds
(Bunds)Conventional
Federal
notes
(Bobls)Conventional
Federal
Treasury
notes
(Schätze)  4Treasury
discount
paper
(Bubills)  5Federal
savings
notesGreen
Federal
securitiesInflation-
linked
Federal
securities  6Capital
indexation
of inflation-
linked
securities Loans  1
2007 987,909 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 102,083 37,385 10,287 . 13,464 506 63,650
2008 1,019,905 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 105,684 40,795 9,649 . 19,540 1,336 78,685
2009 1,086,173 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 113,637 104,409 9,471 . 24,730 1,369 63,121
2010 1,337,160 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 126,220 85,867 8,704 . 35,906 2,396 242,251
2011 1,346,869 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 130,648 58,297 8,208 . 44,241 3,961 215,109
2012 1,390,377 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 117,719 56,222 6,818 . 52,119 5,374 203,467
2013 1,392,735 10,582 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 110,029 50,004 4,488 . 51,718 4,730 190,127
2014 1,398,472 12,146 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 103,445 27,951 2,375 . 63,245 5,368 180,123
2015 1,371,933 13,949 1,070 1,188,463 663,296 232,387 96,389 18,536 1,305 . 74,495 5,607 169,521
2016 1,365,579 15,491 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 95,727 23,609 737 . 66,464 3,602 171,026
2017 1,349,948 14,298 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 91,013 10,037 289 . 72,855 4,720 167,457
2018 1,322,907 14,680 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 86,009 12,949 48 . 64,647 5,139 158,841
2019 1,299,727 14,449 –1,140,346 719,747 174,719 89,230 13,487 . . 69,805 6,021 144,932
2020 1,512,875 14,486 .1,335,181 801,910 179,560 98,543 113,141 . 9,876 58,279 3,692 163,208
2021 1,667,150 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 172,562
2020 Q1 1,327,538 11,410 .1,160,614 721,343 182,095 91,084 23,572 . . 71,028 5,310 155,514
Q2 1,473,699 13,120 .1,248,731 774,587 178,329 95,622 79,987 . . 56,061 3,752 211,849
Q3 1,536,634 11,886 .1,345,251 790,288 191,388 99,276 127,478 . 6,050 57,144 3,737 179,497
Q4 1,512,875 14,486 .1,335,181 801,910 179,560 98,543 113,141 . 9,876 58,279 3,692 163,208
2021 Q1 1,538,718 12,200 .1,379,979 814,864 189,935 103,910 134,800 . 11,026 60,687 3,857 146,538
Q2 1,589,070 12,901 .1,424,579 861,455 184,413 104,997 139,451 . 16,526 62,569 5,056 151,591
Q3 1,617,263 13,319 .1,451,547 869,195 198,692 105,398 146,533 . 19,824 63,851 5,456 152,397
Q4 1,667,150 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 172,562
p 2022 Q1 1,671,870 15,655 .1,495,459 911,280 204,534 108,702 140,427 . 23,961 67,776 7,809 160,756
pQ2 1,710,931 17,750 .1,521,291 937,949 198,472 111,343 138,495 . 29,425 70,217 11,209 171,890
pQ3 1,744,254 22,567 .1,514,617 918,838 208,509 111,675 137,740 . 35,527 71,498 12,879 207,070
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, and
Bundesbank calculations.  1 Comprises all of central government, i.e. all off-budget en-
tities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned bad bank FMS
Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government from an economic
perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) 2010.  2 Particularly liabilitiesresulting from coins in circulation.  3 Issuances by the Federal Republic of Germany. Ex-
cluding issuers' holdings of own securities but including those held by other govern-
ment entities.  4 Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency (expired
in 2011).  5 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014).  6 Excluding
inflation-induced indexation of capital.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2021 2022
2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 1.Vj. 2.Vj. 3.Vj. 4.Vj. 1.Vj. 2.Vj. 3.Vj.
Item Index 2015=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 100.4 104.9 105.0 –7.2 4.5 0.0 –0.9 20.2 2.6 –1.1 1.0 –0.2 0.8
Construction 102.1 100.7 98.3 2.0 –1.4 –2.3 –5.5 4.1 2.3 –6.1 4.0 –3.9 –5.4
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 101.0 103.9 108.0 –7.5 2.8 4.0 –6.8 11.5 3.2 4.1 9.0 5.7 2.7
Information and communication 120.8 125.2 129.6 0.1 3.6 3.6 0.9 7.0 3.9 2.9 3.3 2.5 2.3
Financial and insurance activities 98.9 99.1 101.6 3.6 0.3 2.4 0.8 –0.2 –0.1 0.6 4.1 4.1 5.0
Real estate activities 102.2 103.1 104.2 0.4 0.9 1.0 –0.2 3.1 0.2 0.7 1.6 1.1 0.5
Business services  1 105.1 109.8 112.6 –5.0 4.4 2.6 –4.7 13.0 6.5 4.4 6.2 2.1 0.6
Public services, education and health 105.4 107.6 110.2 –1.1 2.0 2.5 –1.1 8.6 –0.2 1.6 2.5 0.9 3.0
Other services 91.2 91.5 97.3 –11.6 0.4 6.3 –11.0 9.0 1.5 4.3 8.2 8.3 1.5
Gross value added 102.8 105.6 107.5 –3.9 2.7 1.8 –2.7 10.7 2.2 1.2 3.6 1.7 1.4
Gross domestic product  2 103.2 105.9 107.9 –3.7 2.6 1.9 –2.3 10.6 1.8 1.2 3.9 1.7 1.2
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 101.1 101.5 106.3 –5.7 0.4 4.6 –8.7 6.5 1.4 3.1 8.4 6.8 2.0
Government consumption 113.8 118.1 119.4 4.0 3.8 1.1 3.4 8.5 2.1 1.4 4.3 –0.1 1.4
Machinery and equipment 100.8 104.3 106.9 –11.0 3.5 2.5 1.1 20.8 –2.1 –2.6 0.8 0.8 6.3
Premises 112.9 112.9 111.0 3.9 0.0 –1.6 –2.0 4.4 0.6 –3.2 3.0 –3.8 –2.6
Other investment  4 116.3 117.6 120.0 –3.3 1.0 2.1 –2.0 4.1 1.6 0.7 1.7 1.8 2.4
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . –0.3 0.5 0.6 0.5 –0.4 1.0 0.9 –0.7 0.7 0.9
Domestic demand 106.1 108.1 111.8 –3.0 1.9 3.4 –3.6 7.1 2.3 2.4 5.1 3.9 2.5
Net exports  6 . . . –0.8 0.8 –1.3 1.1 3.8 –0.3 –1.0 –0.9 –2.0 –1.2
     Exports 101.0 110.8 114.3 –9.3 9.7 3.2 –0.2 28.2 7.4 7.2 3.5 2.1 4.9
     Imports 107.6 117.3 125.1 –8.5 9.0 6.7 –2.9 20.6 9.3 11.1 6.3 7.2 8.3
Gross domestic product  2 103.2 105.9 107.9 –3.7 2.6 1.9 –2.3 10.6 1.8 1.2 3.9 1.7 1.2
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,713.5 1,773.8 1,985.0 –5.1 3.5 11.9 –7.0 8.3 5.3 7.9 13.8 13.8 9.4
Government consumption 748.0 797.5 848.5 6.4 6.6 6.4 6.3 7.9 6.2 6.1 9.1 5.8 6.2
Machinery and equipment 217.5 229.4 251.8 –9.8 5.5 9.8 2.5 22.6 –0.3 0.2 6.2 7.7 14.7
Premises 384.8 416.7 476.0 5.9 8.3 14.2 –0.1 9.5 12.8 10.3 18.2 14.2 12.5
Other investment  4 133.8 137.7 144.0 –2.8 2.9 4.6 –0.6 5.8 3.4 2.9 5.6 5.0 4.9
Changes in inventories  5 16.1 55.1 77.6 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,213.8 3,410.2 3,782.9 –1.9 6.1 10.9 –1.9 9.3 7.8 9.4 12.5 12.7 10.6
Net exports 191.7 191.6 75.4 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,464.8 1,693.9 1,953.7 –9.6 15.6 15.3 0.8 33.3 15.1 17.1 15.3 16.1 18.5
     Imports 1,273.1 1,502.4 1,878.3 –10.6 18.0 25.0 –2.1 30.0 20.3 26.7 25.6 28.7 30.9
Gross domestic product  2 3,405.4 3,601.8 3,858.3 –2.0 5.8 7.1 –0.6 11.5 6.3 6.3 8.6 7.7 5.8
 IV. Prices (2015=100)
Private consumption 105.7 109.0 116.6 0.6 3.1 6.9 1.8 1.7 3.8 4.7 5.0 6.6 7.3
Gross domestic product 109.1 112.4 118.2 1.8 3.1 5.1 1.7 0.9 4.4 5.0 4.6 5.9 4.6
Terms of trade 102.8 100.1 95.5 2.0 –2.6 –4.6 0.2 –3.5 –2.7 –4.2 –5.7 –5.3 –6.5
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,853.9 1,918.0 2,023.4 –0.1 3.5 5.5 –0.7 5.1 4.7 4.6 6.6 5.6 4.6
Entrepreneurial and property income 717.7 825.4 820.2 –4.6 15.0 –0.6 7.3 39.9 9.7 10.5 2.4 –4.0 2.4
National income 2,571.6 2,743.4 2,843.5 –1.4 6.7 3.6 1.8 13.4 6.2 6.1 5.2 2.8 4.0
Memo item: Gross national income 3,505.7 3,729.5 3,987.3 –2.4 6.4 6.9 –0.1 11.9 7.3 6.9 8.9 7.2 5.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2022. Initial annual
results for 2022: figures computed in January 2023.  1 Professional, scientific, technical,
administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added plus taxes on prod-
ucts (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit institutions servinghouseholds.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware and entertain-
ment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net increase in valu-
ables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy Total Inter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2015 = 100
% of total  1   100      14,04      6,37      79,59      29,45      36,98 2.27      10,89      10,31      9,95      12,73      14,16
Period
2019 102.9 112.7 90.4 102.2 101.8 102.6 106.2 101.0 102.8 106.5 103.4 94.9
2020 95.0 116.1 84.4 92.2 94.9 88.2 97.6 97.2 90.6 98.5 89.5 75.9
2021 98.4 114.3 87.1 96.6 102.7 90.5 103.6 99.1 98.9 108.7 95.9 73.9
x 2022 97.8 112.6 85.0 96.2 99.5 92.0 105.7 99.5 96.4 113.5 96.4 76.5
2021 Q4 101.5 124.8 93.5 97.9 98.9 95.1 108.7 102.8 95.9 109.5 102.2 74.3
2022 Q1 96.0 98.7 95.2 95.6 103.2 87.4 104.0 100.9 98.7 109.9 90.5 73.2
Q2 97.5 114.9 82.5 95.6 102.0 89.5 106.0 97.1 98.1 111.3 94.2 74.5
r Q3 97.8 116.4 79.2 96.0 99.5 91.4 105.5 99.9 95.9 117.0 96.3 75.0
x Q4 99.8 120.1 83.0 97.6 93.2 99.8 107.1 100.2 92.9 115.9 104.5 83.5
2021 Dec. 96.5 123.2 95.2 91.8 87.8 93.9 98.8 94.3 82.7 104.9 108.4 65.5
2022 Jan. 90.1 82.4 98.5 90.7 100.0 81.4 96.5 95.8 94.1 103.2 81.9 70.4
Feb. 94.9 97.1 94.5 94.5 101.2 87.9 105.0 96.7 97.5 107.8 89.0 78.5
Mar. 103.0 116.7 92.6 101.5 108.4 92.9 110.6 110.2 104.4 118.6 100.7 70.6
Apr. 96.1 112.3 89.2 93.7 101.7 85.8 106.4 95.9 97.5 108.4 89.5 70.7
May 96.1 113.9 80.8 94.2 101.3 87.4 103.8 95.9 97.5 109.4 91.5 73.1
June 100.4 118.6 77.4 99.0 102.9 95.3 107.7 99.5 99.4 116.0 101.5 79.6
2,r July 99.1 120.5 81.9 96.7 102.2 91.7 102.0 97.4 97.6 115.3 95.4 75.5
2,r Aug. 91.3 110.6 77.6 89.1 95.3 81.4 97.9 96.4 89.9 112.2 89.0 60.2
r Sep. 102.9 118.2 78.0 102.2 101.1 101.2 116.6 105.8 100.1 123.4 104.5 89.3
x Oct. 101.5 122.7 80.4 99.4 100.2 96.7 112.2 104.0 100.5 117.8 98.6 83.8
x Nov. 105.3 124.5 84.5 103.6 100.4 105.5 113.9 104.0 99.8 123.1 105.7 95.4
x,p Dec. 92.7 113.1 84.2 89.8 78.9 97.2 95.2 92.7 78.3 106.8 109.3 71.4
Annual percentage change
2019 – 2.3 + 3.4 – 7.2 – 2.9 – 3.5 – 1.9 ± 0.0 – 5.5 – 4.3 – 2.3 – 2.9 – 5.0
2020 – 7.7 + 3.0 – 6.6 – 9.8 – 6.8 –14.0 – 8.1 – 3.8 –11.9 – 7.5 –13.4 –20.0
2021 + 3.6 – 1.6 + 3.2 + 4.8 + 8.2 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 2.0 + 9.2 +10.4 + 7.2 – 2.6
x 2022 – 0.6 – 1.5 – 2.4 – 0.4 – 3.1 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 0.4 – 2.5 + 4.4 + 0.5 + 3.5
2021 Q4 – 1.8 – 4.6 + 1.9 – 1.5 + 0.7 – 4.9 + 2.1 + 3.8 + 0.4 + 4.0 + 3.7 –19.4
2022 Q1 – 0.4 + 4.2 + 3.1 – 1.5 – 0.8 – 4.6 + 3.2 + 5.5 – 1.5 + 2.4 – 0.8 –13.7
Q2 – 1.5 – 2.7 + 0.8 – 1.4 – 3.2 – 0.8 + 2.9 + 0.6 – 3.4 + 2.3 – 1.3 – 0.4
r Q3 + 0.9 – 2.5 – 1.7 + 1.9 – 2.7 + 7.5 + 3.6 – 1.7 – 2.1 + 7.3 + 1.7 +21.5
x Q4 – 1.6 – 3.8 –11.2 – 0.3 – 5.8 + 4.9 – 1.5 – 2.5 – 3.1 + 5.8 + 2.3 +12.5
2021 Dec. – 2.4 –10.3 + 3.4 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 2.4 + 2.4 + 1.8 – 1.9 + 4.7 + 1.7 –12.3
2022 Jan. + 1.2 + 9.4 + 0.8 ± 0.0 – 0.3 – 1.3 + 1.2 + 4.6 – 0.4 + 2.8 + 1.2 – 8.0
Feb. + 2.7 + 9.7 + 8.9 + 1.1 + 1.8 – 2.0 + 6.3 + 8.4 + 0.9 + 3.3 + 0.7 – 6.9
Mar. – 4.5 – 3.1 + 0.1 – 5.1 – 3.6 – 9.5 + 2.3 + 3.9 – 4.5 + 1.2 – 3.5 –24.4
Apr. – 2.7 – 3.3 + 2.6 – 3.1 – 2.7 – 6.5 + 4.5 + 5.0 – 3.6 + 1.1 – 5.2 –13.1
May – 1.7 – 2.8 – 0.7 – 1.6 – 3.8 ± 0.0 + 3.5 – 0.8 – 2.9 + 2.1 – 1.4 + 2.4
June – 0.1 – 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 – 3.0 + 4.3 + 0.8 – 2.0 – 3.9 + 3.7 + 2.6 +11.2
2,r July – 1.3 – 2.6 + 5.3 – 1.4 – 3.2 + 0.8 – 0.3 – 3.6 – 3.7 + 5.1 – 2.6 + 2.6
2,r Aug. + 1.3 – 1.9 – 3.2 + 2.5 – 2.6 + 9.3 + 7.0 – 1.9 – 1.4 + 7.3 + 2.9 +30.9
r Sep. + 2.8 – 3.0 – 6.8 + 4.7 – 2.4 +12.8 + 4.3 + 0.3 – 1.1 + 9.4 + 4.9 +36.1
x Oct. – 0.6 – 0.9 –12.7 + 0.4 – 4.1 + 5.5 – 0.6 – 2.1 – 1.0 + 6.6 + 2.4 +14.2
x Nov. – 0.5 – 2.3 – 9.2 + 0.6 – 3.9 + 5.8 – 0.5 – 3.5 – 3.5 + 8.8 + 3.8 +13.7
x,p Dec. – 3.9 – 8.2 –11.6 – 2.2 –10.1 + 3.5 – 3.6 – 1.7 – 5.3 + 1.8 + 0.8 + 9.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2015.  2 Influenced by a change in holiday dates.  x Provisional;estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the
Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction
industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2019 104.9 – 5.1 103.5 – 7.2 105.4 – 4.2 107.0 – 2.8 123.3 + 3.7 101.7 – 5.0
2020 97.2 – 7.3 97.9 – 5.4 95.6 – 9.3 105.8 – 1.1 124.4 + 0.9 99.6 – 2.1
2021 119.3 +22.7 124.6 +27.3 116.3 +21.7 117.5 +11.1 146.5 +17.8 107.9 + 8.3
p 2022 126.1 + 5.7 138.3 +11.0 118.1 + 1.5 130.3 +10.9 163.3 +11.5 119.4 +10.7
2021 Dec. 123.7 +13.9 120.2 +18.2 127.0 +11.8 114.5 +11.6 148.9 +13.4 103.2 +10.7
2022 Jan. 131.2 +19.7 143.7 +19.2 124.1 +20.8 127.5 +16.1 152.9 + 8.1 119.2 +19.9
Feb. 128.3 +15.4 136.7 +16.3 122.6 +14.0 132.6 +21.1 149.8 +14.3 126.9 +23.8
Mar. 140.1 + 8.2 152.7 +13.3 131.4 + 3.4 146.5 +19.4 182.6 +23.3 134.7 +17.8
Apr. 125.1 + 6.5 143.5 +13.5 111.9 – 0.9 139.0 +26.2 185.7 +14.2 123.6 +33.2
May 123.9 + 8.8 139.3 +13.2 113.5 + 4.8 131.0 +15.0 178.2 +13.4 115.5 +16.0
June 129.5 + 2.3 143.2 +12.2 120.1 – 4.2 137.6 + 4.2 171.3 +13.2 126.5 + 0.6
July 127.6 – 0.4 144.2 +12.7 118.2 – 8.0 121.6 – 4.5 150.3 – 0.5 112.0 – 6.3
Aug. 114.4 + 7.5 127.6 +10.4 105.4 + 5.3 121.7 + 9.4 157.8 +16.5 109.7 + 6.2
Sep. 123.2 + 0.5 131.7 + 6.0 116.5 – 5.0 135.1 +18.5 166.0 +19.3 124.9 +18.2
Oct. 125.5 + 7.1 133.5 + 6.9 119.9 + 6.9 130.1 + 8.6 175.2 +23.5 115.2 + 2.5
Nov. 123.4 – 1.5 135.0 + 1.6 115.4 – 4.5 129.5 + 4.0 148.9 – 0.5 123.1 + 5.9
p Dec. 121.1 – 2.1 128.3 + 6.7 117.9 – 7.2 111.2 – 2.9 141.1 – 5.2 101.3 – 1.8
From the domestic market
2019 101.2 – 5.6 99.1 – 8.7 103.0 – 3.4 101.2 – 1.7 116.2 + 1.3 96.2 – 2.7
2020 94.9 – 6.2 94.1 – 5.0 95.2 – 7.6 98.0 – 3.2 105.5 – 9.2 95.4 – 0.8
2021 115.5 +21.7 119.6 +27.1 113.1 +18.8 108.0 +10.2 114.8 + 8.8 105.6 +10.7
p 2022 122.6 + 6.1 135.3 +13.1 112.2 – 0.8 119.7 +10.8 124.0 + 8.0 118.3 +12.0
2021 Dec. 119.1 +21.3 111.4 +17.3 127.7 +25.1 105.5 +16.1 101.9 – 2.0 106.7 +23.4
2022 Jan. 122.2 +18.4 137.7 +21.0 109.9 +15.7 116.5 +20.1 106.0 – 4.5 120.1 +30.1
Feb. 123.4 +14.4 132.1 +17.2 116.0 +10.6 122.9 +22.5 115.6 + 5.2 125.4 +29.1
Mar. 137.4 + 8.6 148.2 +13.7 128.9 + 2.5 132.0 +20.7 135.9 + 3.6 130.7 +28.1
Apr. 124.8 +12.6 139.8 +19.3 110.5 + 3.7 135.2 +32.2 134.0 + 4.5 135.6 +45.0
May 123.2 + 9.7 136.5 +15.0 112.6 + 3.7 118.5 +17.6 141.8 +16.7 110.6 +17.9
June 126.8 – 0.7 138.1 +10.4 117.1 –10.3 127.3 + 2.7 135.2 +15.5 124.6 – 1.3
July 124.5 – 3.3 144.5 +14.6 109.6 –17.0 110.6 – 8.8 123.7 + 6.6 106.1 –13.8
Aug. 109.8 + 5.1 124.1 +11.3 97.8 – 0.6 108.3 + 2.2 121.1 + 9.2 104.0 – 0.4
Sep. 120.2 + 9.3 128.7 + 9.2 111.8 + 7.2 127.6 +23.9 123.7 +16.6 128.9 +26.4
Oct. 119.9 + 3.7 131.4 + 6.7 109.7 – 0.3 122.4 +10.9 123.6 +15.8 122.0 + 9.2
Nov. 122.4 + 2.5 133.8 + 5.6 112.2 – 1.4 125.4 + 8.7 125.6 + 6.8 125.3 + 9.3
p Dec. 116.5 – 2.2 128.4 +15.3 110.2 –13.7 90.1 –14.6 102.0 + 0.1 86.1 –19.3
From abroad
2019 107.6 – 4.8 108.3 – 5.5 106.9 – 4.6 111.5 – 3.5 129.1 + 5.6 105.9 – 6.6
2020 98.9 – 8.1 102.0 – 5.8 95.9 –10.3 111.8 + 0.3 139.5 + 8.1 102.8 – 2.9
2021 122.2 +23.6 130.1 +27.5 118.1 +23.1 124.8 +11.6 171.9 +23.2 109.6 + 6.6
p 2022 128.8 + 5.4 141.5 + 8.8 121.6 + 3.0 138.5 +11.0 195.0 +13.4 120.2 + 9.7
2021 Dec. 127.1 + 9.1 129.7 +19.1 126.5 + 4.9 121.5 + 8.8 186.8 +21.9 100.5 + 2.1
2022 Jan. 138.1 +20.7 150.1 +17.4 132.6 +23.6 136.1 +13.6 190.6 +14.9 118.5 +13.0
Feb. 132.0 +16.1 141.6 +15.4 126.5 +15.9 140.1 +20.2 177.4 +19.8 128.0 +20.1
Mar. 142.1 + 7.8 157.6 +13.0 132.9 + 3.9 157.8 +18.6 220.2 +36.2 137.7 +11.2
Apr. 125.3 + 2.3 147.5 + 8.1 112.8 – 3.3 142.0 +22.2 227.3 +19.5 114.5 +24.1
May 124.5 + 8.1 142.4 +11.3 114.1 + 5.6 140.7 +13.5 207.5 +11.6 119.2 +14.6
June 131.6 + 4.6 148.7 +14.2 121.9 – 0.4 145.6 + 5.3 200.3 +12.0 127.9 + 2.2
July 130.0 + 1.8 143.9 +10.8 123.4 – 2.3 130.1 – 1.4 171.7 – 4.1 116.6 – 0.1
Aug. 117.9 + 9.3 131.4 + 9.4 109.9 + 8.7 132.0 +14.6 187.4 +20.7 114.1 +11.4
Sep. 125.5 – 5.0 134.9 + 2.9 119.3 –10.8 140.9 +15.0 200.1 +20.8 121.8 +12.2
Oct. 129.7 + 9.5 135.8 + 7.1 126.1 +11.1 136.0 + 7.1 216.7 +27.3 110.0 – 2.7
Nov. 124.2 – 4.3 136.4 – 2.2 117.4 – 6.1 132.7 + 0.9 167.7 – 4.4 121.5 + 3.5
p Dec. 124.6 – 2.0 128.2 – 1.2 122.6 – 3.1 127.5 + 4.9 172.5 – 7.7 113.0 +12.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2018 135.0 +10.3 131.7 +7.0 137.1 +11.4 128.7 +4.2 125.2 +2.7 138.9 +14.2 136.1 +13.6 132.6 +6.1
2019 146.2 +8.3 145.3 +10.3 150.4 +9.7 142.5 +10.7 138.8 +10.9 147.2 +6.0 148.1 +8.8 141.3 +6.6
2020 145.6 –0.4 144.2 –0.8 160.8 +6.9 130.3 –8.6 141.5 +1.9 147.3 +0.1 139.6 –5.7 143.3 +1.4
2021 159.0 +9.2 164.1 +13.8 174.3 +8.4 156.6 +20.2 158.7 +12.2 153.0 +3.9 161.6 +15.8 146.7 +2.4
2021 Nov. 145.3 +4.1 143.0 –2.7 159.5 –5.0 132.6 +0.3 127.3 –4.6 148.0 +13.0 159.5 +10.9 120.4 +2.4
Dec. 185.3 +24.3 205.7 +41.1 196.2 +3.5 173.7 +50.3 356.7 +213.4 161.5 +5.6 186.9 +38.2 176.7 +25.9
2022 Jan. 142.8 +6.9 145.4 +4.1 165.7 +13.7 134.0 –8.1 121.0 +24.2 139.9 +10.6 149.1 –1.0 121.7 +14.1
Feb. 155.7 +8.7 161.0 +8.1 176.0 +9.1 158.3 +7.5 121.8 +6.7 149.5 +9.4 165.3 +15.3 132.4 +0.2
Mar. 209.5 +32.6 208.8 +32.9 219.4 +25.1 201.7 +42.4 200.5 +29.6 210.4 +32.3 217.4 +44.0 194.5 +25.2
Apr. 164.2 +2.5 157.6 –0.4 178.1 –3.8 142.5 +2.2 146.2 +4.5 171.9 +5.9 153.9 +3.9 167.6 +5.5
May 175.9 +10.6 172.4 +5.8 182.1 –1.1 163.4 +11.4 173.9 +12.8 180.0 +16.7 170.8 +13.3 178.0 +16.3
June 175.2 +6.4 166.3 +0.7 177.9 +0.2 153.3 –4.4 176.5 +23.8 185.6 +13.2 177.5 +6.4 171.0 +10.8
July 180.6 +12.9 179.1 +6.4 171.1 –4.5 177.7 +8.6 211.0 +40.2 182.3 +21.4 190.1 +19.9 175.5 +17.1
Aug. 157.2 –1.1 148.3 –8.7 145.1 –13.2 143.2 –12.3 178.2 +23.7 167.5 +8.2 156.0 –1.6 165.9 +7.4
Sep. 164.2 –9.3 159.4 –15.7 162.5 –15.1 154.0 –20.3 169.7 +2.6 169.8 –1.1 166.1 –13.9 163.2 +1.3
Oct. 161.8 +2.0 144.9 –14.2 148.3 –12.3 139.8 –18.6 152.6 –2.9 181.4 +23.6 172.4 +0.5 157.9 +14.8
Nov. 148.3 +2.1 134.8 –5.7 130.9 –17.9 127.1 –4.1 176.3 +38.5 164.0 +10.8 155.2 –2.7 150.9 +25.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2019 115.0 +3.9 111.0 +3.3 112.2 +2.4 106.7 +1.0 108.9 +1.7 107.1 +4.0 118.8 +5.7 138.4 +8.4
2020 121.4 +5.6 115.9 +4.4 121.4 +8.2 81.9 –23.2 106.9 –1.8 117.1 +9.3 125.4 +5.6 169.0 +22.1
3 2021 124.7 +2.7 116.7 +0.7 121.7 +0.2 78.1 –4.6 95.4 –10.8 110.5 –5.6 135.2 +7.8 189.9 +12.4
2022 134.4 +7.8 115.8 –0.8 128.4 +5.5 102.7 +31.5 107.4 +12.6 123.0 +11.3 145.1 +7.3 188.5 –0.7
2021 Dec. 145.4 +4.6 134.3 +1.4 137.5 –3.1 97.8 +40.5 147.6 +9.1 122.0 +1.6 155.8 +9.5 219.7 +0.0
2022 Jan. 121.1 +17.9 111.3 +13.9 116.2 +0.6 72.3 +259.7 111.7 +84.0 112.0 +92.8 139.2 +12.4 182.1 –1.2
Feb. 118.8 +14.3 108.1 +10.1 114.8 +0.3 72.5 +219.4 96.7 +54.5 113.1 +67.6 131.5 +5.7 171.8 –2.8
Mar. 137.9 +6.4 122.7 +0.3 132.2 +0.1 93.6 +61.1 101.4 +19.9 136.6 +11.4 146.2 +7.8 192.7 –5.6
Apr. 132.6 +10.0 116.6 +3.1 127.1 +2.3 102.0 +157.6 94.1 +32.9 131.8 +23.9 139.7 +6.2 181.6 –5.0
May 133.8 +6.8 115.9 –1.2 127.6 +0.7 109.3 +75.4 89.5 +21.6 129.7 +14.7 140.4 +8.2 181.5 –8.0
June 130.6 +0.5 112.4 –7.8 126.9 +4.3 105.2 –7.1 92.8 –3.7 119.3 –5.4 141.7 +7.3 174.3 –4.8
July 135.5 +8.0 116.0 –1.4 130.9 +8.5 105.6 +2.7 100.4 –0.7 121.9 ±0.0 149.2 +9.4 181.8 +13.9
Aug. 130.1 +6.1 110.5 –3.9 126.2 +10.0 98.1 –2.4 98.4 –2.5 114.2 –3.7 143.1 +6.9 172.9 +4.2
Sep. 133.3 +10.6 111.8 –0.4 125.3 +11.9 116.2 +16.1 108.6 +6.1 118.9 +4.9 145.3 +10.9 186.5 +9.1
Oct. 138.5 +6.3 115.0 –4.7 132.7 +11.0 116.0 +0.9 111.8 +2.4 125.6 –0.2 146.3 +3.7 192.8 +1.3
Nov. 148.2 +5.7 123.5 –4.9 133.7 +10.1 117.0 +11.3 136.9 +1.3 130.0 +0.2 157.3 +7.0 235.3 +0.1
Dec. 151.9 +4.5 126.0 –6.2 146.6 +6.6 124.0 +26.8 146.7 –0.6 123.0 +0.8 160.9 +3.3 208.6 –5.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2021 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2018 44,866 +1.4 32,964 +2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2019 45,276 +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 72,267 827 7 5.0 774
2020 44,914 –0.8 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2021 44,980 +0.1 33,897 +0.9 9,344 23,602 702 4,101 1,852 1,744 2,613 999 5.7 706
2022 845,570 8 +1.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,418 808 5.3 845
2019 Q4 45,565 +0.7 33,924 +1.4 9,551 23,388 738 4,522 161 105 2,204 811 4.8 729
2020 Q1 45,133 +0.5 33,642 +1.3 9,439 23,284 686 4,458 1,219 949 2,385 960 5.2 683
Q2 44,723 –1.1 33,415 +0.1 9,387 23,137 640 4,235 5,399 5,388 2,770 1,154 6.0 593
Q3 44,809 –1.3 33,424 –0.4 9,359 23,171 640 4,273 2,705 2,691 2,904 1,266 6.3 583
Q4 44,993 –1.3 33,836 –0.3 9,395 23,518 676 4,194 2,433 2,361 2,722 1,167 5.9 595
2021 Q1 44,514 –1.4 33,568 –0.2 9,294 23,376 665 4,051 3,473 3,157 2,878 1,248 6.3 586
Q2 44,812 +0.2 33,718 +0.9 9,322 23,446 697 4,066 2,164 2,143 2,691 1,024 5.9 658
Q3 45,157 +0.8 33,929 +1.5 9,347 23,606 719 4,161 935 915 2,545 920 5.5 774
Q4 45,437 +1.0 34,374 +1.6 9,415 23,982 727 4,125 835 762 2,341 802 5.1 804
2022 Q1 r45,183 r +1.5 34,242 +2.0 9,348 23,943 715 4,061 1,033 792 2,417 874 5.3 818
Q2 r45,496 r +1.5 34,401 +2.0 9,372 24,056 718 4,112 337 324 2,311 777 9 5.0 864
Q3 r45,671 r +1.1 1034,520 10+1.7 109,406 1024,131 10 724 104,158 ... 10 92 2,501 804 5.5 880
Q4 845,929 8 +1.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,443 778 5.3 817
2019 Sep. 45,523 +0.8 33,938 +1.5 9,583 23,341 754 4,517 84 75 2,234 808 4.9 787
Oct. 45,598 +0.8 33,966 +1.4 9,567 23,398 748 4,510 111 102 2,204 795 4.8 764
Nov. 45,627 +0.7 33,968 +1.4 9,559 23,423 742 4,532 124 115 2,180 800 4.8 736
Dec. 45,469 +0.6 33,740 +1.4 9,474 23,344 694 4,531 247 97 2,227 838 4.9 687
2020 Jan. 45,154 +0.6 33,608 +1.4 9,432 23,255 689 4,471 382 133 2,426 985 5.3 668
Feb. 45,169 +0.6 33,624 +1.3 9,427 23,278 683 4,461 439 134 2,396 971 5.3 690
Mar. 45,077 +0.2 33,648 +1.1 9,440 23,290 675 4,350 2,834 2,580 2,335 925 5.1 691
Apr. 44,808 –0.7 33,430 +0.1 9,396 23,141 643 4,194 6,007 5,995 2,644 1,093 5.8 626
May 44,672 –1.3 33,328 –0.3 9,367 23,083 624 4,206 5,726 5,715 2,813 1,172 6.1 584
June 44,688 –1.4 33,323 –0.3 9,355 23,084 629 4,260 4,464 4,452 2,853 1,197 6.2 570
July 44,699 –1.4 33,233 –0.4 9,322 23,024 635 4,302 3,319 3,306 2,910 1,258 6.3 573
Aug. 44,737 –1.3 33,482 –0.4 9,367 23,218 642 4,266 2,551 2,537 2,955 1,302 6.4 584
Sep. 44,990 –1.2 33,792 –0.4 9,421 23,454 656 4,240 2,244 2,229 2,847 1,238 6.2 591
Oct. 45,076 –1.1 33,862 –0.3 9,410 23,530 671 4,229 2,037 2,021 2,760 1,183 6.0 602
Nov. 45,030 –1.3 33,899 –0.2 9,400 23,559 696 4,166 2,405 2,386 2,699 1,152 5.9 601
Dec. 44,873 –1.3 33,700 –0.1 9,327 23,478 666 4,134 2,856 2,676 2,707 1,166 5.9 581
2021 Jan. 44,489 –1.5 33,515 –0.3 9,282 23,347 657 4,045 3,638 3,294 2,901 1,298 6.3 566
Feb. 44,486 –1.5 33,521 –0.3 9,281 23,343 662 4,026 3,766 3,358 2,904 1,270 6.3 583
Mar. 44,567 –1.1 33,636 –0.0 9,309 23,397 685 4,032 3,016 2,818 2,827 1,177 6.2 609
Apr. 44,676 –0.3 33,689 +0.8 9,324 23,427 687 4,039 2,583 2,560 2,771 1,091 6.0 629
May 44,796 +0.3 33,747 +1.3 9,326 23,461 703 4,067 2,342 2,320 2,687 1,020 5.9 654
June 44,963 +0.6 33,802 +1.4 9,324 23,504 716 4,151 1,568 1,548 2,614 961 5.7 693
July 45,027 +0.7 33,731 +1.5 9,304 23,458 715 4,194 1,088 1,068 2,590 956 5.6 744
Aug. 45,096 +0.8 33,994 +1.5 9,358 23,658 722 4,153 857 838 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. 45,347 +0.8 34,323 +1.6 9,432 23,903 726 4,123 859 839 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. 45,434 +0.8 34,369 +1.5 9,425 23,965 724 4,123 780 762 2,377 814 5.2 809
Nov. 45,490 +1.0 34,449 +1.6 9,423 24,039 739 4,133 767 750 2,317 789 5.1 808
Dec. 45,386 +1.1 34,284 +1.7 9,364 23,980 708 4,112 957 772 2,330 803 5.1 794
2022 Jan. r45,111 r +1.4 34,176 +2.0 9,332 23,900 711 4,048 1,123 847 2,462 903 5.4 792
Feb. r45,172 r +1.5 34,243 +2.2 9,346 23,939 719 4,049 1,087 803 2,428 884 5.3 822
Mar. r45,266 r +1.6 34,334 +2.1 9,369 23,999 719 4,061 888 727 2,362 835 5.1 839
Apr. r45,378 r +1.6 34,368 +2.0 9,366 24,037 713 4,091 453 439 2,309 800 5.0 852
May r45,513 r +1.6 34,445 +2.1 9,376 24,089 719 4,131 318 305 2,260 771 9 4.9 865
June r45,598 r +1.4 34,445 +1.9 9,376 24,084 724 4,164 241 228 2,363 761 5.2 877
July r45,556 r +1.2 34,322 +1.8 9,361 23,988 718 4,176 115 102 2,470 801 5.4 881
Aug. r45,599 r +1.1 1034,568 10+1.7 109,418 1024,166 10 726 104,150 ... 10 76 2,547 827 5.6 887
Sep. r45,857 r +1.1 1034,895 10+1.7 109,499 1024,397 10 733 104,135 ... 10 100 2,486 782 5.4 873
Oct. r45,957 r +1.2 1034,891 10+1.5 109,489 1024,412 10 734 104,163 ... 10 138 2,442 764 5.3 846
Nov. r45,985 r +1.1 1034,926 10+1.4 109,484 1024,455 10 741 104,181 ... 10 208 2,434 770 5.3 823
Dec. 845,844 8 +1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,454 799 5.4 781
2023 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,616 911 5.7 764
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed
persons in the legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).8 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office.  9 From May 2022, calcu-
lated on the basis of new labour force figures.  10 Unadjusted figures estimated by the
Federal Employment Agency. In 2020 and 2021, the estimated values for Germany de-
viated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1% for employees subject to social con-
tributions, by a maximum of 0.9% for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contri-
butions, and by a maximum of 28,1% for cyclically induced short-time work.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which: Indices of
foreign trade pricesHWWI
Index of World Market
Prices of Raw Materials  4
of which:
Total Food  1,2Non-
energy
industrial
goods  1Energy  1Services  1Actual
rents
for
housingMemo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  3Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  3Exports Imports Energy  5Other raw
materials  6
Period 2015 = 100 2020 = 100
Index level
2019 105.5 108.4 104.2 103.7 105.7 106.1 105.3 115.3 104.8 111.5 102.4 101.7 150.2 98.7
2020 7 105.8 7110.9 7104.1 799.0 7106.9 107.6 7 105.8 7117.0 103.8 108.0 101.7 97.3 100.0 100.0
2021 7 109.2 7114.1 7106.7 7109.0 7109.0 109.0 7 109.1 7127.0 114.7 117.5 107.4 110.4 220.7 137.6
2022 118.7 126.2 112.7 146.8 112.2 110.8 117.7 148.3 152.4 8156.2 123.1 139.4 430.8 164.0
2021 Mar. 107.9 113.1 105.7 106.2 107.6 108.6 107.5 107.9 114.0 104.1 103.6 150.3 130.4
Apr. 108.4 114.5 105.8 106.1 108.3 108.7 108.2 108.8 115.9 104.9 105.0 154.1 134.3
May 108.7 114.2 106.3 106.7 108.7 108.9 108.7 125.1 110.4 118.5 105.6 106.8 168.3 144.9
June 109.1 114.1 106.5 107.6 109.1 108.9 109.1 111.8 117.7 106.4 108.5 183.0 142.3
July 7 109.7 7114.4 7106.4 7109.0 7110.2 109.1 7 110.1 113.9 117.2 107.7 110.9 204.8 141.9
Aug. 7 109.8 7114.4 7106.5 7109.4 7110.3 109.2 7 110.1 7129.4 115.6 118.7 108.5 112.4 217.6 138.9
Sep. 7 110.1 7114.4 7107.6 7110.1 7109.9 109.3 7 110.1 118.3 117.4 109.5 113.9 256.1 136.3
Oct. 7 110.7 7114.5 7108.0 7114.6 7110.0 109.5 7 110.7 122.8 120.7 111.0 118.2 352.7 143.0
Nov. 7 111.0 7114.9 7108.4 7116.7 7109.5 109.5 7 110.5 7132.2 123.8 125.6 111.9 121.7 304.4 143.0
Dec. 7 111.3 7115.7 7108.6 7115.0 7110.3 109.6 7 111.1 130.0 127.2 113.0 121.8 352.9 148.3
2022 Jan. 112.3 117.2 108.4 123.7 109.8 109.9 111.5 132.8 8129.2 115.0 127.0 327.8 157.0
Feb. 113.3 118.2 109.1 127.4 110.2 110.0 112.5 138.1 134.6 133.4 116.1 128.6 336.0 166.5
Mar. 116.1 119.1 110.4 146.1 110.6 110.2 115.3 141.2 153.6 120.7 135.9 504.2 185.4
Apr. 116.9 122.2 111.3 142.7 111.7 110.4 116.2 145.2 162.3 121.7 138.3 407.8 184.8
May 118.2 124.2 112.3 146.7 112.0 110.6 117.3 147.9 147.5 160.7 122.4 139.5 366.8 178.9
June 118.1 125.4 112.5 147.8 111.0 110.8 117.4 148.4 157.5 123.5 140.9 389.3 169.6
July 119.0 127.6 112.6 147.8 112.1 110.9 118.4 156.3 156.5 126.0 142.9 449.8 158.0
Aug. 119.5 129.1 113.0 148.6 112.2 111.1 118.8 151.7 168.6 159.8 128.7 149.1 534.2 159.4
Sep. 122.1 130.9 114.5 158.8 113.9 111.2 121.1 172.5 164.7 127.9 147.8 528.5 157.4
Oct. 123.5 132.2 115.8 164.5 114.3 111.4 122.2 165.2 166.5 125.5 146.0 442.1 154.4
Nov. 123.5 133.6 116.3 163.5 113.7 111.6 121.6 155.4 158.7 165.7 124.9 139.4 425.7 149.5
Dec. 122.0 134.6 116.6 143.9 114.8 111.7 120.6 158.1 165.0 125.0 137.1 435.7 147.0
2023 Jan. e 122.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 306.4 148.8
Annual percentage change
2019 +1.4 +1.6 +1.1 +1.4 +1.5 +1.5 +1.4 +4.7 +1.1 +2.3 +0.5 –1.0 –13.7 –1.2
2020 7 +0.4 7+2.3 7–0.1 7–4.5 7+1.2 +1.4 7 +0.5 7+1.4 –1.0 –3.1 –0.7 –4.3 –33.4 +1.3
2021 7 +3.2 7+2.9 7+2.5 7+10.1 7+2.0 +1.3 7 +3.1 7+8.6 +10.5 +8.8 +5.6 +13.5 +120.7 +37.6
2022 +8.7 +10.6 +5.6 +34.7 +2.9 +1.7 +7.9 +16.8 +32.9 8+32.9 +14.6 +26.3 +95.2 +19.2
2021 Mar. +2.0 +1.9 +0.5 +4.5 +2.0 +1.2 +1.7 +3.7 +0.3 +2.2 +6.9 +79.1 +36.1
Apr. +2.1 +2.0 +0.4 +7.6 +1.5 +1.2 +2.0 +5.2 +2.8 +3.3 +10.3 +128.3 +45.0
May +2.4 +1.5 +0.9 +9.5 +1.9 +1.3 +2.5 +5.7 +7.2 +8.6 +4.2 +11.8 +127.4 +56.0
June +2.1 +1.2 +1.6 +9.0 +0.9 +1.2 +2.3 +8.5 +7.0 +5.0 +12.9 +113.0 +51.2
July 7 +3.1 7+3.8 7+3.8 7+11.2 7+0.7 +1.3 7 +3.8 +10.4 +9.0 +6.3 +15.0 +126.0 +48.1
Aug. 7 +3.4 7+3.9 7+3.8 7+12.1 7+1.2 +1.3 7 +3.9 7+11.8 +12.0 +13.3 +7.2 +16.5 +127.1 +41.2
Sep. 7 +4.1 7+4.1 7+3.9 7+13.6 7+1.8 +1.4 7 +4.1 +14.2 +13.4 +8.1 +17.7 +163.7 +31.7
Oct. 7 +4.6 7+3.9 7+3.9 7+18.1 7+2.2 +1.4 7 +4.5 +18.4 +16.3 +9.5 +21.7 +241.4 +36.3
Nov. 7 +6.0 7+4.2 7+4.2 7+21.6 7+3.8 +1.3 7 +5.2 7+14.0 +19.2 +20.9 +9.9 +24.7 +178.0 +33.5
Dec. 7 +5.7 7+5.3 7+5.0 7+18.1 7+3.2 +1.3 7 +5.3 +24.2 +22.1 +10.9 +24.0 +189.7 +32.1
2022 Jan. +5.1 +4.4 +3.1 +20.6 +2.7 +1.4 +4.9 +25.0 8+21.0 +11.9 +26.9 +131.5 +30.2
Feb. +5.5 +4.6 +3.4 +22.4 +2.7 +1.4 +5.1 +13.9 +25.9 +22.5 +12.4 +26.3 +130.1 +33.5
Mar. +7.6 +5.3 +4.4 +37.6 +2.8 +1.5 +7.3 +30.9 +34.7 +15.9 +31.2 +235.5 +42.2
Apr. +7.8 +6.7 +5.2 +34.5 +3.1 +1.6 +7.4 +33.5 +40.0 +16.0 +31.7 +164.6 +37.6
May +8.7 +8.8 +5.6 +37.5 +3.0 +1.6 +7.9 +18.2 +33.6 +35.6 +15.9 +30.6 +117.9 +23.5
June +8.2 +9.9 +5.6 +37.4 +1.7 +1.7 +7.6 +32.7 +33.8 +16.1 +29.9 +112.7 +19.2
July +8.5 +11.5 +5.8 +35.6 +1.7 +1.6 +7.5 +37.2 +33.5 +17.0 +28.9 +119.6 +11.3
Aug. +8.8 +12.8 +6.1 +35.8 +1.7 +1.7 +7.9 +17.2 +45.8 +34.6 +18.6 +32.7 +145.5 +14.8
Sep. +10.9 +14.4 +6.4 +44.2 +3.6 +1.7 +10.0 +45.8 +40.3 +16.8 +29.8 +106.4 +15.5
Oct. +11.6 +15.5 +7.2 +43.5 +3.9 +1.7 +10.4 +34.5 +37.9 +13.1 +23.5 +25.3 +8.0
Nov. +11.3 +16.3 +7.3 +40.1 +3.8 +1.9 +10.0 +17.5 +28.2 +31.9 +11.6 +14.5 +39.8 +4.5
Dec. +9.6 +16.3 +7.4 +25.1 +4.1 +1.9 +8.6 +21.6 +29.7 +10.6 +12.6 +23.5 –0.9
2023 Jan. e +9.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... –6.5 –5.2
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw Materi-
als: HWWI.  1 The last data point is at times based on the Bundesbank’s own estimates.
2 Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco.  3 Excluding value added tax.  4 For the eu-ro area, in euro.  5 Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas.  6 Food, beverages and tobac-
co as well as industrial raw materials.  7 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value
added tax between July and December 2020.  8 From January 2022 onwards provisio-
nal figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.5 4.2 1,273.8 4.0 1,782.3 2.8 179.4 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.2
2017 1,395.4 4.3 932.5 4.0 441.8 3.6 1,374.3 3.9 1,905.2 3.5 202.8 8.0 10.6
2018 1,462.7 4.8 976.1 4.7 455.2 3.0 1,431.3 4.1 1,976.6 3.7 223.2 10.1 11.3
2019 1,524.4 4.2 1,022.0 4.7 476.7 4.7 1,498.7 4.7 2,023.6 2.4 218.2 – 2.3 10.8
2020 1,514.9 – 0.6 1,020.0 – 0.2 524.6 10.0 1,544.6 3.1 2,050.1 1.3 336.6 54.3 16.4
2021 1,570.6 3.7 1,062.6 4.2 532.8 1.6 1,595.4 3.3 2,089.9 1.9 316.0 – 6.1 15.1
2021 Q2 377.1 5.8 250.7 6.8 134.9 2.2 385.6 5.2 514.9 3.5 84.8 –15.3 16.5
Q3 393.0 5.1 271.6 5.5 131.2 – 1.8 402.8 3.0 520.4 1.7 54.4 –21.2 10.4
Q4 438.5 4.9 295.8 5.0 129.0 – 2.6 424.8 2.6 532.5 2.7 61.2 –25.0 11.5
2022 Q1 388.5 7.3 261.3 6.9 134.2 – 2.6 395.5 3.5 539.8 3.4 77.3 –33.2 14.3
Q2 400.3 6.2 263.9 5.3 131.1 – 2.8 395.1 2.5 546.0 6.0 56.4 –33.5 10.3
Q3 412.5 5.0 285.8 5.2 138.7 5.8 424.5 5.4 564.1 8.4 54.0 – 0.6 9.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2022.  * Households in-
cluding non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees'
contributions to the social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension
payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social
benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plusmonetary social benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed
income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit
institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related
taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company
pension funds.  6 Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving
as a percentage of disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change
2015 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.5 2.5
2017 104.4 2.2 104.4 2.2 104.5 2.3 104.6 2.4 105.1 2.6
2018 107.6 3.0 107.5 3.0 107.4 2.8 107.5 2.8 108.4 3.2
2019 110.7 2.9 110.6 2.9 110.1 2.5 110.2 2.5 111.7 3.0
2020 113.0 2.1 112.9 2.1 112.2 1.9 112.3 2.0 111.6 – 0.1
2021 114.7 1.5 114.7 1.6 114.1 1.7 114.1 1.6 115.3 3.3
2022 117.8 2.7 117.7 2.6 116.5 2.1 116.5 2.1 . .
2021 Q3 117.8 1.0 117.7 1.0 116.4 1.4 114.2 1.4 115.1 4.0
Q4 127.3 1.6 127.3 1.6 127.3 2.5 114.8 1.8 127.2 3.7
2022 Q1 110.6 4.3 110.5 4.3 107.8 1.6 115.3 1.6 113.2 5.4
Q2 109.7 2.0 109.7 1.9 109.0 2.1 116.4 2.1 116.0 4.3
Q3 120.8 2.5 120.7 2.5 119.3 2.5 116.7 2.2 119.2 3.6
Q4 130.0 2.1 129.9 2.0 129.9 2.0 117.5 2.4 . .
2022 June 108.8 – 0.3 108.7 – 0.4 108.9 2.2 116.5 2.2 . .
July 144.0 3.4 143.9 3.4 139.9 3.2 116.6 2.2 . .
Aug. 109.2 1.9 109.2 1.9 109.1 2.2 116.7 2.2 . .
Sep. 109.1 2.0 109.0 2.0 109.1 2.0 116.8 2.0 . .
Oct. 109.8 0.9 109.7 0.9 109.6 0.7 117.3 2.3 . .
Nov. 167.8 2.6 167.7 2.5 167.9 2.5 117.4 2.2 . .
Dec. 112.3 2.4 112.2 2.4 112.1 2.5 117.8 2.6 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
November 2022.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
3 2018 2,589.0 1,536.7 540.8 610.8 288.5 1,052.3 249.5 234.7 172.6 789.8 1,799.2 925.7 558.7 873.4 257.5 205.0
2019 2,800.6 1,769.7 586.3 737.1 333.4 1,030.9 257.5 237.6 168.4 821.0 1,979.6 1,091.2 676.3 888.4 289.8 207.6
2020 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.5 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.3 857.0 304.4 196.1
2021 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 368.7 1,320.4 272.1 262.8 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 391.8 238.0
2020 H2 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.5 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.3 857.0 304.4 196.1
2021 H1 3,017.6 1,877.0 649.3 745.0 343.8 1,140.6 256.2 242.3 238.5 906.9 2,110.7 1,178.6 763.1 932.1 330.3 206.9
H2 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 368.7 1,320.4 272.1 262.8 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 391.8 238.0
p 2022 H1 3,593.6 2,108.1 719.1 796.3 387.5 1,485.5 322.4 286.4 225.4 1,075.4 2,518.2 1,237.0 847.9 1,281.2 430.7 262.5
As a percentage of total assets
3 2018 100.0 59.4 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.6 9.6 9.1 6.7 30.5 69.5 35.8 21.6 33.7 10.0 7.9
2019 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.2 31.7 10.4 7.4
2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2021 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.2 40.1 8.3 8.0 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 11.9 7.2
2020 H2 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2021 H1 100.0 62.2 21.5 24.7 11.4 37.8 8.5 8.0 7.9 30.1 70.0 39.1 25.3 30.9 10.9 6.9
H2 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.2 40.1 8.3 8.0 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 11.9 7.2
p 2022 H1 100.0 58.7 20.0 22.2 10.8 41.3 9.0 8.0 6.3 29.9 70.1 34.4 23.6 35.7 12.0 7.3
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
3 2018 2,149.3 1,215.4 388.1 472.9 277.5 933.9 234.5 188.6 139.2 636.7 1,512.6 760.2 442.4 752.3 236.2 152.5
2019 2,302.9 1,396.4 419.6 565.4 319.7 906.5 243.8 188.5 136.8 662.2 1,640.7 887.5 523.8 753.2 257.5 158.0
2020 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.0 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.2 1,628.7 904.7 536.9 724.0 267.3 149.8
2021 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 347.4 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.1 356.4 184.0
2020 H2 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.0 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.2 1,628.7 904.7 536.9 724.0 267.3 149.8
2021 H1 2,392.8 1,398.3 416.6 551.0 322.5 994.6 240.6 190.9 190.1 703.5 1,689.4 892.3 543.2 797.1 294.2 162.1
H2 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 347.4 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.1 356.4 184.0
p 2022 H1 2,898.3 1,582.5 462.4 583.8 362.8 1,315.9 303.6 222.5 177.2 830.9 2,067.4 945.2 616.6 1,122.2 389.8 207.6
As a percentage of total assets
3 2018 100.0 56.6 18.1 22.0 12.9 43.5 10.9 8.8 6.5 29.6 70.4 35.4 20.6 35.0 11.0 7.1
2019 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.3 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2021 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.2 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 13.6 7.0
2020 H2 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2021 H1 100.0 58.4 17.4 23.0 13.5 41.6 10.1 8.0 7.9 29.4 70.6 37.3 22.7 33.3 12.3 6.8
H2 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.2 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 13.6 7.0
p 2022 H1 100.0 54.6 16.0 20.1 12.5 45.4 10.5 7.7 6.1 28.7 71.3 32.6 21.3 38.7 13.5 7.2
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
3 2018 439.7 321.3 152.7 137.9 11.0 118.3 14.9 46.1 33.3 153.1 286.6 165.5 116.3 121.1 21.3 52.5
2019 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2021 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 56.5 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 53.9
2020 H2 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2021 H1 624.7 478.7 232.6 194.0 21.3 146.1 15.5 51.4 48.4 203.4 421.3 286.4 219.9 135.0 36.1 44.8
H2 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 56.5 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 53.9
p 2022 H1 695.3 525.7 256.7 212.5 24.8 169.6 18.8 63.8 48.2 244.5 450.8 291.8 231.4 159.0 40.9 54.9
As a percentage of total assets
3 2018 100.0 73.1 34.7 31.4 2.5 26.9 3.4 10.5 7.6 34.8 65.2 37.6 26.5 27.6 4.8 11.9
2019 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2021 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.5 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 8.1
2020 H2 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2021 H1 100.0 76.6 37.2 31.1 3.4 23.4 2.5 8.2 7.8 32.6 67.4 45.8 35.2 21.6 5.8 7.2
H2 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.5 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 8.1
p 2022 H1 100.0 75.6 36.9 30.6 3.6 24.4 2.7 9.2 6.9 35.2 64.8 42.0 33.3 22.9 5.9 7.9
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.  3 From H1 2018 or 2018 onwards: significant
changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  2 Distribution  2
RevenuesOperating income
before depreciation
and amortisation
(EBITDA  1 )Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartileOperating
income (EBIT)Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4€ billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % % € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % %
Total
2014 1,564.3 1.0 198.7 5.0 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.4 109.3 8.6 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.2 11.1
2015 1,633.9 6.9 195.9 – 1.1 12.0 – 1.0 6.3 10.6 17.8 91.5 – 16.4 5.6 – 1.5 1.8 6.7 11.3
2016 1,624.3 – 0.4 214.4 7.8 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.7 9.0 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,719.3 5.1 243.4 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.0 11.0 18.0 141.9 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.1
6 2018 1,706.8 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,764.6 2.6 233.6 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.2 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.6 5.8 11.8
2020 1,632.8 – 8.8 213.6 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 17.9 52.1 – 41.0 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 4.9 10.5
2021 1,994.7 20.4 297.7 37.7 14.9 1.9 7.8 13.4 19.9 161.5 212.5 8.1 5.0 2.9 8.2 12.2
2017 H2 878.5 3.5 117.4 14.6 13.4 1.3 6.9 12.0 19.2 63.0 38.2 7.2 1.8 3.2 7.4 12.4
6 2018 H1 848.2 – 0.1 120.8 – 2.1 14.2 – 0.3 5.1 10.6 18.2 72.7 – 5.3 8.6 – 0.5 1.7 6.4 12.5
H2 869.4 1.4 114.4 0.5 13.2 – 0.1 6.3 11.2 18.0 58.0 – 7.6 6.7 – 0.6 2.1 6.8 12.5
2019 H1 861.3 2.7 112.3 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.5 11.8 18.6 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 903.7 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.6 11.8 20.0 52.0 – 11.4 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.5
2020 H1 744.5 – 14.4 78.2 – 34.1 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 8.8
H2 888.4 – 3.3 135.4 17.1 15.2 2.8 7.6 13.2 19.8 44.2 8.7 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.6
2021 H1 920.0 20.3 151.5 87.2 16.5 5.9 7.4 12.6 19.5 84.5 . 9.2 8.3 2.3 7.8 12.2
H2 1,075.6 20.4 146.4 8.1 13.6 – 1.6 7.9 13.2 20.8 77.0 73.1 7.2 2.2 2.9 7.7 13.4
p 2022 H1 1,149.7 23.5 161.0 4.8 14.0 – 2.5 6.1 11.5 18.4 84.9 – 1.6 7.4 – 1.9 1.6 6.4 11.8
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2014 1,220.0 1.0 152.2 5.9 12.5 0.6 5.8 10.1 15.5 85.2 9.8 7.0 0.6 1.7 6.0 10.6
2015 1,309.7 7.0 149.0 – 2.6 11.4 – 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.3 69.1 – 19.7 5.3 – 1.8 2.2 6.6 10.4
2016 1,295.9 – 0.8 161.9 6.3 12.5 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 84.8 4.2 6.5 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,395.9 5.5 187.5 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.5 40.6 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,367.7 1.0 175.7 – 1.5 12.9 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 16.0 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.8 6.9 11.4
2019 1,410.9 2.0 168.1 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.8 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.7 10.1
2020 1,285.2 – 9.4 143.6 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 5.7 10.6 16.5 29.1 – 48.1 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.3 9.8
2021 1,585.8 22.4 208.9 45.9 13.2 2.1 7.9 12.8 17.9 118.6 325.6 7.5 5.4 2.8 7.8 11.1
2017 H2 701.4 3.7 86.0 14.2 12.3 1.1 7.0 11.7 16.9 46.2 45.5 6.6 1.9 3.6 7.2 10.8
6 2018 H1 681.9 – 0.1 94.9 – 3.4 13.9 – 0.5 7.0 10.9 16.7 60.0 – 5.9 8.8 – 0.6 2.9 6.8 11.5
H2 695.4 2.1 83.1 0.7 12.0 – 0.2 6.2 11.1 16.2 42.1 – 8.7 6.1 – 0.7 2.0 6.4 11.4
2019 H1 689.9 2.4 83.3 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.9 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.8 6.0 9.5
H2 721.0 1.7 84.8 0.3 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.7 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.1
2020 H1 580.6 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.4 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 14.9 0.2 – 101.7 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.1 7.8
H2 704.6 – 3.0 94.6 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.0 12.1 18.6 28.9 19.7 4.1 1.1 0.3 6.0 10.5
2021 H1 731.9 24.0 111.2 126.9 15.2 6.9 8.2 12.6 18.6 66.7 . 9.1 9.3 2.9 7.9 12.1
H2 854.2 21.1 97.7 3.8 11.4 – 1.9 7.8 12.3 17.5 51.9 80.7 6.1 2.0 2.6 7.0 11.5
p 2022 H1 923.4 23.8 110.9 – 2.5 12.0 – 3.2 7.7 11.5 16.3 59.0 – 14.2 6.4 – 2.8 2.3 6.4 10.4
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2014 344.2 0.8 46.5 1.8 13.5 0.1 6.0 12.3 22.6 24.1 4.3 7.0 0.2 2.6 6.3 13.7
2015 324.1 6.1 46.9 4.0 14.5 – 0.3 5.9 11.1 22.1 22.3 – 3.8 6.9 – 0.7 1.3 6.7 13.9
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.3 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.5 12.2
2021 408.9 13.0 88.8 21.6 21.7 1.6 7.6 15.0 24.0 42.8 79.7 10.5 3.9 3.0 9.2 15.6
2017 H2 177.1 2.5 31.5 15.6 17.8 2.0 6.6 12.5 24.6 16.8 21.6 9.5 1.5 2.9 7.8 17.9
6 2018 H1 166.3 0.2 25.9 2.8 15.6 0.4 3.8 9.5 22.7 12.6 – 1.9 7.6 – 0.2 – 0.9 4.7 15.3
H2 174.0 – 1.3 31.3 – 0.0 18.0 0.2 6.7 11.3 25.6 15.9 – 4.6 9.1 – 0.3 2.2 7.0 17.8
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
H2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.5 13.3
2021 H1 188.1 7.7 40.3 26.1 21.5 3.1 6.9 12.6 24.5 17.8 119.9 9.5 4.8 0.9 6.9 13.6
H2 221.4 17.9 48.7 18.2 22.0 0.1 9.4 16.5 24.7 25.1 59.1 11.3 3.0 3.8 9.5 17.7
p 2022 H1 226.3 22.0 50.1 25.3 22.2 0.6 4.6 11.6 20.9 25.9 46.4 11.5 1.9 – 0.5 6.3 13.5
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted re-
turn on sales.  3 Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year fig-ures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  4 Adjusted
for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and in the
reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical Series Seasonally adjusted
business statistics.  5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.  6 From H1 2018 or
2018 onwards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with pre-
vious periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2022
Item 2019 2020 2021 Q1 Q2 Q3 September October November  p
I.Current Account +274,072 +188,715 +288,681 – 4,710 –50,894 –74,430 –22,025 – 4,496 +13,411
1.Goods
Receipts 2,391,225 2,186,895 2,508,334 678,774 726,378 745,649 266,615 261,454 271,916
Expenditure  2,082,442 1,844,858 2,218,075 680,827 748,938 796,449 276,911 263,294 262,659
Balance +308,783 +342,038 +290,259 – 2,054 –22,561 –50,800 –10,296 – 1,840 + 9,257
2.Services
Receipts 1,017,051 874,787 1,011,875 271,716 301,186 323,465 108,731 106,158 101,373
Expenditure  983,596 890,415 920,099 243,595 258,163 307,877 108,475 98,235 91,305
Balance +33,456 –15,628 +91,776 +28,122 +43,023 +15,590 + 256 + 7,923 +10,068
3.Primary income
Receipts 878,662 719,224 825,878 203,759 223,007 212,738 76,393 68,234 73,580
Expenditure  799,268 699,098 760,042 191,480 257,798 209,714 75,273 66,513 64,995
Balance +79,392 +20,127 +65,840 +12,279 –34,790 + 3,025 + 1,121 + 1,721 + 8,585
4.Secondary income
Receipts 123,566 127,112 150,864 35,686 42,172 36,170 12,758 11,793 11,539
Expenditure  271,125 284,932 310,055 78,744 78,739 78,413 25,863 24,092 26,037
Balance –147,560 –157,820 –159,191 –43,058 –36,567 –42,243 –13,105 –12,299 –14,499
II.Capital account –26,436 + 3,415 +45,816 + 7,773 +104,051 + 3,222 + 1,339 + 1,674 + 3,450
III.Financial account  1 +199,077 +182,731 +313,941 – 6,488 +24,709 –50,157 –49,979 +14,200 –13,070
1.Direct investment +64,432 –197,486 +294,689 +14,238 +112,324 –17,996 +24,899 + 7,558 + 2,849
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +43,613 –116,606 +162,013 +56,614 +64,449 +68,707 + 1,540 + 4,595 +15,732
By non-resident units of
the euro area  –20,818 +80,883 –132,674 +42,377 –47,875 +86,702 –23,359 – 2,962 +12,883
2.Portfolio investment –138,253 +530,060 +317,164 –48,342 –41,279 –178,400 –154,050 –48,008 – 9,305
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +435,232 +686,301 +790,249 –17,960 –127,429 –184,430 –118,247 –10,424 +43,471
Equity and
investment fund shares +63,391 +319,816 +369,550 –16,552 –61,254 –107,744 –56,795 –18,876 – 2,631
Short-term
debt securities  + 6,403 +120,830 +119,474 –61,204 –69,520 –51,570 –59,653 +12,928 +30,269
Long-term
debt securities  +365,436 +245,652 +301,229 +59,795 + 3,343 –25,116 – 1,799 – 4,476 +15,832
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  +573,487 +156,239 +473,083 +30,382 –86,151 – 6,030 +35,803 +37,585 +52,776
Equity and
investment fund shares +330,676 +166,846 +667,112 –48,860 –11,141 –15,974 –23,373 +70,366 +13,417
Short-term
debt securities  –27,515 +114,269 +32,178 +81,293 –81,013 –32,430 +26,499 –37,985 +24,811
Long-term
debt securities  +270,324 –124,879 –226,204 – 2,052 + 6,002 +42,374 +32,677 + 5,203 +14,548
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options + 7,219 +18,890 +68,591 – 1,570 +28,901 +44,130 +17,624 + 7,165 + 2,879
4.Other investment +259,684 –181,927 –496,562 +30,076 –77,556 +94,714 +57,955 +43,710 –10,050
Eurosystem +143,398 –206,704 –444,600 +186,548 – 3,005 +66,052 +67,418 +45,194 +13,928
General government + 4,818 –15,761 –71,715 – 152 –29,299 –22,437 – 9,020 + 3,366 –20,902
MFIs  2 +189,827 +19,340 –126,784 –234,208 –93,345 –37,095 –77,992 + 4,324 –12,192
Enterprises and households –78,362 +21,193 +146,536 +77,888 +48,093 +88,195 +77,550 – 9,173 + 9,117
5.Reserve assets + 5,999 +13,193 +130,061 – 888 + 2,319 + 7,394 + 3,592 + 3,775 + 557
IV.Net errors and omissions –48,560 – 9,400 –20,557 – 9,549 –28,445 +21,051 –29,293 +17,022 –29,932
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Increase: + / decrease: -.2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Zeit Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 – 3,947 – 29,122 + 24,063 – 34,147 – 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 – 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 – 6,605 – 17,642 + 54,524 – 34,764 – 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 – 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 – 6,209 – 25,255 + 51,306 – 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 – 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 – 9,357 – 29,930 + 69,087 – 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 – 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 – 11,388 – 30,774 + 65,658 – 38,703 – 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 – 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 – 12,523 – 39,321 + 63,284 – 43,413 – 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 210,906 + 219,629 – 14,296 – 25,303 + 57,752 – 41,172 + 2,936 + 240,258 – 2,564 + 26,416
2015 + 260,286 + 248,394 – 15,405 – 18,516 + 69,262 – 38,854 – 48 + 234,392 – 2,213 – 25,845
2016 + 266,689 + 252,409 – 19,921 – 20,987 + 76,199 – 40,931 + 2,142 + 261,123 + 1,686 – 7,708
2017 + 255,814 + 255,077 – 13,613 – 23,994 + 76,404 – 51,673 – 2,936 + 276,697 – 1,269 + 23,819
2018 + 267,729 + 221,983 – 22,985 – 15,806 + 111,890 – 50,338 + 580 + 246,928 + 392 – 21,381
2019 + 262,903 + 215,456 – 30,887 – 18,100 + 115,359 – 49,811 – 887 + 186,317 – 544 – 75,700
2020 + 238,741 + 189,963 – 7,246 + 2,725 + 98,780 – 52,727 – 5,829 + 216,515 – 51 – 16,397
2021 + 264,954 + 194,963 + 3,091 – 2,107 + 127,142 – 55,044 – 588 + 314,750 + 31,892 + 50,383
p 2022 + 145,090 + 115,920 + 11,359 – 39,383 + 131,646 – 63,092 – 13,941 + 217,004 + 4,426 + 85,855
2020 Q1 + 62,570 + 52,090 – 2,656 – 2,238 + 27,396 – 14,679 – 608 + 33,152 + 133 – 28,810
Q2 + 37,621 + 28,076 – 1,806 + 5,190 + 13,563 – 9,209 + 55 + 25,747 + 243 – 11,929
Q3 + 62,788 + 55,716 – 695 – 5,827 + 23,501 – 10,601 – 1,493 + 65,414 – 1,276 + 4,118
Q4 + 75,762 + 54,082 – 2,089 + 5,599 + 34,320 – 18,238 – 3,783 + 92,203 + 848 + 20,223
2021 Q1 + 76,516 + 58,643 + 1,200 + 3,264 + 31,911 – 17,302 – 322 + 106,919 + 385 + 30,725
Q2 + 65,741 + 48,853 – 194 + 6,415 + 18,806 – 8,332 – 1,755 + 84,594 + 58 + 20,608
Q3 + 61,739 + 49,114 – 34 – 7,569 + 34,408 – 14,214 + 1,890 + 36,922 + 31,199 – 26,707
Q4 + 60,958 + 38,353 + 2,119 – 4,217 + 42,017 – 15,196 – 401 + 86,314 + 250 + 25,757
2022 Q1 + 54,430 + 35,793 + 3,132 – 1,716 + 37,191 – 16,836 – 1,459 + 94,003 + 2,200 + 41,031
Q2 + 24,259 + 26,711 + 8,139 – 7,258 + 16,119 – 11,313 – 3,775 + 55,875 + 597 + 35,390
Q3 + 18,970 + 21,641 – 473 – 21,443 + 35,140 – 16,368 – 4,672 + 5,820 + 784 – 8,478
p Q4 + 47,430 + 31,775 + 560 – 8,966 + 43,196 – 18,575 – 4,035 + 61,307 + 845 + 17,912
2020 July + 20,883 + 20,319 – 330 – 2,709 + 7,024 – 3,751 – 1,005 + 14,644 – 611 – 5,234
Aug. + 16,852 + 13,976 + 38 – 2,543 + 8,850 – 3,432 + 412 + 30,512 – 611 + 13,248
Sep. + 25,053 + 21,421 – 404 – 575 + 7,627 – 3,419 – 900 + 20,258 – 53 – 3,895
Oct. + 24,773 + 20,389 – 415 + 782 + 8,128 – 4,527 – 1,386 + 25,983 + 140 + 2,596
Nov. + 22,799 + 18,384 + 164 + 2,120 + 9,835 – 7,541 – 2,266 + 23,695 + 89 + 3,162
Dec. + 28,191 + 15,308 – 1,838 + 2,697 + 16,356 – 6,171 – 132 + 42,524 + 618 + 14,466
2021 Jan. + 20,841 + 15,161 + 301 + 891 + 11,043 – 6,253 – 461 + 22,458 + 743 + 2,078
Feb. + 20,958 + 18,375 + 44 + 1,152 + 9,043 – 7,612 – 1,457 + 52,644 + 102 + 33,143
Mar. + 34,716 + 25,107 + 855 + 1,220 + 11,825 – 3,436 + 1,596 + 31,817 – 460 – 4,496
Apr. + 23,767 + 16,589 + 83 + 3,049 + 7,840 – 3,711 – 691 + 35,418 – 251 + 12,342
May + 16,512 + 15,224 – 160 + 2,349 + 675 – 1,735 – 366 + 14,146 + 211 – 2,000
June + 25,462 + 17,040 – 117 + 1,017 + 10,291 – 2,887 – 698 + 35,029 + 98 + 10,266
July + 20,980 + 18,951 – 451 – 2,445 + 9,978 – 5,504 – 534 + 5,325 + 102 – 15,122
Aug. + 16,712 + 12,506 + 645 – 3,483 + 11,952 – 4,264 + 506 + 20,653 + 31,254 + 3,436
Sep. + 24,047 + 17,657 – 229 – 1,641 + 12,478 – 4,446 + 1,917 + 10,944 – 158 – 15,021
Oct. + 16,282 + 15,148 + 1,117 – 5,570 + 11,830 – 5,126 + 424 + 21,714 + 261 + 5,007
Nov. + 20,888 + 14,647 + 893 – 137 + 12,051 – 5,673 – 1,062 + 48,411 + 963 + 28,585
Dec. + 23,788 + 8,558 + 109 + 1,490 + 18,135 – 4,396 + 237 + 16,190 – 974 – 7,835
2022 Jan. + 14,593 + 7,876 + 1,230 – 338 + 13,126 – 6,072 – 106 + 55,703 + 309 + 41,216
Feb. + 21,989 + 16,212 + 1,885 + 765 + 10,445 – 5,432 – 1,295 + 28,963 + 1,161 + 8,269
Mar. + 17,849 + 11,705 + 17 – 2,144 + 13,620 – 5,332 – 58 + 9,337 + 730 – 8,454
Apr. + 9,914 + 5,272 + 2,759 – 1,170 + 10,496 – 4,684 – 1,272 + 6,877 + 83 – 1,765
May + 750 + 10,195 + 4,324 – 2,570 – 5,858 – 1,016 – 2,772 + 1,400 + 161 + 3,422
June + 13,595 + 11,244 + 1,056 – 3,519 + 11,481 – 5,612 + 269 + 47,597 + 353 + 33,734
July + 6,395 + 8,582 + 323 – 7,195 + 11,595 – 6,587 – 2,149 – 14,985 – 484 – 19,231
Aug. + 880 + 2,904 – 618 – 8,939 + 12,679 – 5,763 – 947 + 28,020 + 81 + 28,086
Sep. + 11,695 + 10,155 – 177 – 5,308 + 10,866 – 4,018 – 1,576 – 7,215 + 1,187 – 17,333
Oct. + 5,671 + 6,290 – 141 – 6,878 + 11,615 – 5,356 – 1,864 + 23,649 + 672 + 19,843
Nov. + 17,452 + 13,277 + 580 – 1,805 + 12,528 – 6,548 – 2,199 – 19,808 + 425 – 35,061
p Dec. + 24,307 + 12,208 + 121 – 283 + 19,053 – 6,671 + 28 + 57,466 – 252 + 33,131
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: + / net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2022
Group of countries/country 
2020 2021 
2022 July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec.
All countries  1 Exports 1,206,928 1,379,346 1,574,543 127,644 128,755 142,305 135,574 143,643 124,416
Imports 1,026,502 1,204,050 1,494,847 123,204 128,826 134,395 130,576 132,361 114,696
Balance +180,427 +175,296 +79,696 + 4,440 – 71 + 7,910 + 4,998 +11,282 + 9,720
   I. European countries Exports 824,921 949,744 1,072,380 86,824 86,089 96,049 92,297 98,285 82,677
Imports 682,477 803,687 969,771 81,129 83,274 87,197 82,927 83,754 74,566
Balance +142,444 +146,057 +102,609 + 5,695 + 2,815 + 8,852 + 9,370 +14,531 + 8,112
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 635,741 751,322 859,777 70,060 68,704 76,890 74,211 77,486 66,196
Imports 546,655 638,064 739,041 60,664 60,362 66,953 65,540 65,127 56,715
Balance +89,087 +113,259 +120,737 + 9,396 + 8,342 + 9,937 + 8,672 +12,359 + 9,481
          Euro area (19)       Exports 441,853 522,026 600,185 49,719 46,820 53,851 51,655 53,779 46,745
          countries Imports 371,211 438,294 508,783 42,042 41,206 46,542 44,738 43,704 38,692
Balance +70,643 +83,732 +91,402 + 7,677 + 5,614 + 7,308 + 6,917 +10,075 + 8,053
          of which:
               Austria Exports 60,118 72,385 88,913 7,583 7,868 8,250 7,654 7,928 6,597
  Imports 40,454 47,492 57,701 5,232 4,982 5,286 5,040 4,980 4,436
Balance +19,663 +24,893 +31,213 + 2,351 + 2,886 + 2,963 + 2,614 + 2,948 + 2,161
               Belgium and Exports 48,824 58,080 69,116 6,490 5,817 6,285 5,763 5,801 5,350
               Luxembourg Imports 39,584 55,726 66,305 5,716 5,154 7,517 5,667 5,298 5,058
Balance + 9,240 + 2,354 + 2,811 + 774 + 663 – 1,232 + 95 + 503 + 292
               France Exports 90,910 102,741 116,082 9,450 8,861 10,413 10,116 10,525 9,358
  Imports 56,364 61,921 69,751 5,590 5,304 5,940 6,099 6,235 5,730
Balance +34,546 +40,820 +46,332 + 3,859 + 3,557 + 4,473 + 4,017 + 4,290 + 3,628
               Italy Exports 60,634 75,526 87,414 7,074 5,738 7,713 7,510 7,713 6,792
  Imports 53,906 65,389 72,326 6,168 5,337 5,981 6,572 6,453 5,693
Balance + 6,728 +10,137 +15,088 + 906 + 401 + 1,731 + 938 + 1,260 + 1,099
               Netherlands Exports 84,579 101,050 110,630 9,120 8,732 9,174 9,580 10,142 9,133
  Imports 87,024 105,113 122,960 10,345 10,870 10,645 11,344 10,314 8,800
Balance – 2,445 – 4,063 –12,330 – 1,226 – 2,138 – 1,471 – 1,764 – 173 + 333
               Spain  Exports 37,618 43,932 48,805 3,958 3,547 4,330 4,398 4,693 3,579
  Imports 31,281 34,180 37,387 2,892 2,379 3,282 3,119 3,731 2,824
Balance + 6,337 + 9,752 +11,418 + 1,066 + 1,168 + 1,048 + 1,279 + 962 + 755
          Other EU Member  Exports 193,888 229,296 259,592 20,340 21,884 23,039 22,557 23,707 19,451
          States  Imports 175,444 199,770 230,257 18,622 19,156 20,410 20,802 21,423 18,022
Balance +18,444 +29,526 +29,334 + 1,719 + 2,728 + 2,629 + 1,755 + 2,284 + 1,428
      2. Other European Exports 189,180 198,421 212,603 16,764 17,385 19,159 18,086 20,799 16,481
          countries Imports 135,822 165,623 230,730 20,465 22,912 20,245 17,388 18,627 17,851
Balance +53,358 +32,798 –18,127 – 3,701 – 5,527 – 1,086 + 698 + 2,172 – 1,370
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 56,265 60,638 70,594 5,818 5,826 6,406 5,964 6,394 5,713
  Imports 45,556 49,247 55,225 4,540 4,654 4,397 4,537 4,904 4,439
Balance +10,708 +11,391 +15,369 + 1,278 + 1,171 + 2,009 + 1,427 + 1,490 + 1,274
               United Kingdom Exports 67,086 65,002 73,447 5,755 5,905 6,547 6,322 7,802 5,043
  Imports 35,018 32,245 37,544 3,226 3,113 3,675 2,981 3,280 2,748
Balance +32,068 +32,757 +35,903 + 2,529 + 2,792 + 2,872 + 3,341 + 4,522 + 2,295
   II. Non-European  Exports 380,292 427,430 497,104 40,299 42,130 45,748 42,786 44,930 41,361
       countries Imports 343,270 399,604 523,843 41,978 45,462 47,084 47,494 48,431 39,976
Balance +37,022 +27,827 –26,740 – 1,679 – 3,332 – 1,336 – 4,708 – 3,501 + 1,385
       1. Africa Exports 20,086 23,068 26,406 2,105 2,283 2,299 2,743 2,191 2,269
Imports 18,758 26,241 33,369 2,708 2,656 2,836 2,742 3,096 2,730
Balance + 1,328 – 3,173 – 6,963 – 603 – 373 – 537 + 1– 905 – 460
       2. America Exports 141,375 167,735 210,477 17,182 18,044 20,322 18,568 19,368 16,624
  Imports 94,005 101,525 129,912 10,734 12,010 11,849 11,841 11,896 10,664
Balance +47,370 +66,210 +80,564 + 6,448 + 6,035 + 8,473 + 6,727 + 7,472 + 5,960
           of which:
               United States  Exports 103,476 121,980 156,051 12,379 13,331 15,321 13,922 14,391 12,322
  Imports 67,694 72,316 91,731 7,753 8,340 8,252 8,195 8,522 7,646
Balance +35,782 +49,664 +64,320 + 4,626 + 4,991 + 7,069 + 5,726 + 5,869 + 4,676
       3. Asia Exports 208,146 224,897 246,219 19,851 20,712 21,982 20,396 22,044 21,164
  Imports 226,646 267,604 353,148 27,685 30,297 31,851 32,204 32,881 26,217
Balance –18,500 –42,707 –106,929 – 7,834 – 9,585 – 9,869 –11,808 –10,838 – 5,053
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 25,882 26,090 29,635 2,344 2,721 2,993 2,602 2,851 2,807
  Imports 6,721 7,509 12,328 1,097 895 1,248 1,112 1,896 1,024
Balance +19,161 +18,582 +17,307 + 1,247 + 1,826 + 1,745 + 1,490 + 956 + 1,783
               Japan  Exports 17,396 18,245 20,505 1,579 1,684 1,806 1,851 1,758 1,670
Imports 21,427 23,477 25,205 1,954 2,144 2,265 2,273 2,406 1,914
Balance – 4,032 – 5,232 – 4,699 – 376 – 460 – 459 – 421 – 648 – 244
               People's Republic  Exports 95,840 103,564 106,799 8,870 8,901 9,006 8,517 9,287 8,256
               of China  2 Imports 117,373 142,964 191,055 14,678 15,988 16,736 17,286 17,022 14,064
Balance –21,533 –39,400 –84,256 – 5,808 – 7,087 – 7,730 – 8,768 – 7,735 – 5,808
               New industrial countries Exports 50,590 55,295 63,237 5,177 5,355 5,608 5,235 5,529 5,614
               and emerging markets  Imports 48,222 55,441 69,982 5,322 5,834 6,421 6,601 6,596 5,108
               of Asia  3 Balance + 2,368 – 146 – 6,745 – 145 – 479 – 813 – 1,365 – 1,067 + 506
       4. Oceania and Exports 10,685 11,731 14,002 1,160 1,091 1,145 1,078 1,327 1,304
           polar regions Imports 3,861 4,233 7,414 851 499 547 707 558 365
Balance + 6,824 + 7,497 + 6,588 + 309 + 591 + 598 + 372 + 770 + 939
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. EU excl. UK.  1 Including fuel and other supplies for ships andaircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.  3 Brunei
Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Zeit Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2018 – 15,806 – 2,044 – 44,543 + 10,060 + 17,219 – 7,060 + 723 + 3,322 + 671 +112,223 – 1,004
2019 – 18,100 – 72 – 45,947 + 10,999 + 18,299 – 9,697 – 2,984 + 3,489 + 846 +115,462 – 949
2020 + 2,725 – 9,392 – 14,678 + 10,239 + 17,546 – 7,107 – 4,382 + 3,363 + 3,234 + 97,017 – 1,471
2021 – 2,107 – 12,067 – 24,345 + 8,737 + 31,878 – 7,515 – 8,523 + 3,513 + 2,605 +126,518 – 1,981
p 2022 – 39,383 – 14,754 – 47,846 + 9,341 + 25,432 – 10,052 – 9,962 + 3,626 + 2,196 +133,614 – 4,165
2021 Q2 + 6,415 – 2,075 – 2,136 + 2,589 + 8,007 – 1,329 – 1,164 + 914 + 494 + 21,185 – 2,873
Q3 – 7,569 – 2,259 – 13,539 + 1,221 + 9,080 – 2,169 – 2,331 + 946 – 77 + 35,676 – 1,192
Q4 – 4,217 – 4,551 – 8,639 + 2,676 + 9,035 – 1,539 – 3,592 + 769 + 864 + 38,089 + 3,064
2022 Q1 – 1,716 – 5,053 – 4,636 + 2,257 + 7,972 – 3,304 – 1,720 + 949 + 1,234 + 37,216 – 1,260
Q2 – 7,258 – 1,607 – 12,055 + 2,874 + 6,058 – 1,919 – 2,735 + 948 + 320 + 19,595 – 3,796
Q3 – 21,443 – 4,758 – 18,583 + 1,729 + 5,162 – 3,180 – 3,619 + 986 – 175 + 36,868 – 1,553
p Q4 – 8,966 – 3,336 – 12,571 + 2,481 + 6,240 – 1,649 – 1,888 + 743 + 818 + 39,935 + 2,443
2022 Feb. + 765 – 1,490 – 1,249 + 714 + 2,773 – 875 – 232 + 322 + 434 + 10,426 – 415
Mar. – 2,144 – 1,822 – 2,246 + 649 + 2,485 – 1,089 – 1,030 + 316 + 362 + 13,697 – 439
Apr. – 1,170 – 805 – 2,247 + 912 + 2,189 – 1,203 – 707 + 288 + 68 + 11,054 – 625
May – 2,570 – 576 – 3,777 + 847 + 1,854 – 718 – 1,028 + 303 + 102 – 3,546 – 2,414
June – 3,519 – 226 – 6,032 + 1,115 + 2,015 + 1 – 1,000 + 357 + 150 + 12,087 – 756
July – 7,195 – 1,092 – 5,781 + 532 + 1,414 – 1,354 – 1,335 + 323 – 79 + 12,167 – 493
Aug. – 8,939 – 2,501 – 7,049 + 622 + 1,388 – 719 – 1,281 + 314 – 48 + 13,273 – 547
Sep. – 5,308 – 1,165 – 5,753 + 575 + 2,360 – 1,107 – 1,004 + 350 – 48 + 11,427 – 513
Oct. – 6,878 – 642 – 8,511 + 493 + 1,989 – 986 – 11 + 331 + 237 + 11,994 – 616
Nov. – 1,805 – 1,092 – 2,405 + 801 + 1,722 – 309 – 1,351 + 326 + 216 + 12,887 – 575
p Dec. – 283 – 1,602 – 1,655 + 1,187 + 2,530 – 354 – 526 + 86 + 366 + 15,053 + 3,634
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Zeit Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2018 – 50,338 – 28,710 – 10,186 + 10,230 – 21,627 .+ 5,142 + 580 + 3,349 – 2,769
2019 – 49,811 – 28,986 – 10,728 + 11,742 – 20,825 .+ 5,431 – 887 + 3,028 – 3,915
2020 – 52,727 – 34,127 – 12,239 + 10,929 – 18,600 .+ 5,908 – 5,829 + 380 – 6,209
2021 – 55,044 – 37,607 – 8,072 + 11,423 – 17,437 .+ 6,170 – 588 + 3,191 – 3,779
p 2022 – 63,092 – 39,704 – 15,377 + 13,943 – 23,388 .+ 6,393 – 13,941 – 10,755 – 3,186
2021 Q2 – 8,332 – 4,756 – 1,240 + 5,207 – 3,577 .+ 1,543 – 1,755 – 1,578 – 177
Q3 – 14,214 – 9,993 – 3,036 + 2,056 – 4,221 .+ 1,543 + 1,890 + 2,918 – 1,028
Q4 – 15,196 – 10,814 – 4,077 + 1,987 – 4,382 .+ 1,543 – 401 + 1,728 – 2,129
2022 Q1 – 16,836 – 10,543 – 2,803 + 2,458 – 6,293 .+ 1,598 – 1,459 – 1,892 + 433
Q2 – 11,313 – 5,184 – 2,465 + 7,315 – 6,129 + 1,603 + 1,598 – 3,775 – 3,027 – 748
Q3 – 16,368 – 10,996 – 3,163 + 2,112 – 5,372 + 1,603 + 1,598 – 4,672 – 3,593 – 1,080
p Q4 – 18,575 – 12,980 – 6,947 + 2,058 – 5,595 .+ 1,598 – 4,035 – 2,244 – 1,790
2022 Feb. – 5,432 – 3,940 – 836 + 940 – 1,492 .+ 533 – 1,295 – 1,257 – 38
Mar. – 5,332 – 2,266 – 568 + 1,065 – 3,067 .+ 533 – 58 – 343 + 285
Apr. – 4,684 – 2,757 – 420 + 1,117 – 1,928 + 534 + 533 – 1,272 – 790 – 482
May – 1,016 + 1,344 – 458 + 4,973 – 2,361 + 534 + 533 – 2,772 – 2,363 – 409
June – 5,612 – 3,772 – 1,587 + 1,225 – 1,840 + 535 + 533 + 269 + 126 + 142
July – 6,587 – 4,578 – 1,697 + 432 – 2,008 + 535 + 533 – 2,149 – 1,653 – 496
Aug. – 5,763 – 4,094 – 1,196 + 418 – 1,669 + 534 + 533 – 947 – 716 – 231
Sep. – 4,018 – 2,324 – 270 + 1,262 – 1,694 + 534 + 533 – 1,576 – 1,223 – 353
Oct. – 5,356 – 3,603 – 1,544 + 515 – 1,754 + 534 + 533 – 1,864 – 1,255 – 609
Nov. – 6,548 – 4,705 – 1,803 + 408 – 1,843 .+ 533 – 2,199 – 1,533 – 666
p Dec. – 6,671 – 4,673 – 3,600 + 1,134 – 1,999 .+ 533 + 28 + 543 – 515
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2022
Item 2020  2021  2022  p Q2 Q3  Q4 p October November December  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +739,081 +844,810 +351,068 +114,464 +147,678 –115,956 –12,430 +32,998 –136,524
1.Direct investment +119,458 +163,651 +164,470 +53,963 +52,192 +13,521 +20,627 – 171 – 6,934
Equity +90,170 +113,012 +93,683 +24,419 +11,793 +28,285 +23,646 + 5,072 – 433
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +21,039 +55,475 +54,389 +13,306 +11,488 + 8,798 + 7,066 + 4,186 – 2,454
Debt instruments +29,288 +50,638 +70,787 +29,545 +40,398 –14,764 – 3,019 – 5,243 – 6,501
2.Portfolio investment +191,740 +221,477 +27,691 + 1,603 –25,544 – 8,098 –10,601 – 7,245 + 9,748
Shares  2 +65,214 +56,007 –11,264 + 4,986 – 8,210 –15,268 – 3,860 – 6,151 – 5,257
Investment fund shares  3 +62,585 +103,434 +22,755 + 1,293 – 56 +17,548 + 948 + 1,171 +15,429
Short-term  4
debt securities + 3,852 – 6,256 + 3,323 – 2,152 – 1,546 + 5,693 – 2,216 – 1,203 + 9,112
Long-term   5
debt securities +60,089 +68,292 +12,877 – 2,523 –15,731 –16,071 – 5,473 – 1,062 – 9,536
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +96,276 +60,977 +34,359 +10,694 +15,231 – 2,132 + 5,885 + 2,611 –10,628
4.Other investment  7 +331,659 +366,813 +120,122 +47,606 +105,014 –120,091 –29,012 +37,378 –128,457
MFIs  8 – 4,522 +112,866 .–19,411 +42,205 .+13,088 .–118,107
Short-term + 3,526 +99,548 +34,920 – 7,349 +20,786 –109,792 +14,621 – 7,284 –117,129
Long-term – 8,048 +13,318 +24,515 –12,061 +21,411 + 6,486 – 1,533 + 9,060 – 1,040
Enterprises and
households  9 +90,994 +138,858 .+30,105 +22,423 .– 8,330 +30,554 .
Short-term +45,448 +124,088 +49,917 +24,008 +16,274 –33,930 –11,554 +28,044 –50,420
Long-term +45,545 +14,770 + 5,988 + 6,097 – 1,414 – 260 + 839 + 177 – 1,276
General government + 2,076 – 8,305 .–10,764 .+ 661 + 3,622 + 825 – 3,787
Short-term + 3,461 – 7,502 .–10,180 .+ 920 + 3,661 + 1,111 – 3,852
Long-term – 1,385 – 803 – 1,957 – 584 – 635 – 258 – 41 – 283 + 66
Bundesbank +243,112 +123,394 .+47,675 . .–37,393 . .
5.Reserve assets – 51 +31,892 + 4,426 + 597 + 784 + 845 + 672 + 425 – 252
II.Net foreign investment in the
reporting country (increase: +) +522,566 +530,060 +134,063 +58,590 +141,858 –177,264 –36,080 +52,806 –193,990
1.Direct investment +122,929 +61,833 +68,053 +13,168 +22,626 – 7,815 + 9,405 +15,720 –32,940
Equity +43,862 +36,972 +14,721 + 5,410 + 954 + 3,673 + 1,327 + 1,491 + 855
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 1,880 + 4,787 + 3,448 + 1,347 – 2,134 + 950 + 1,287 – 454 + 117
Debt instruments +79,068 +24,861 +53,333 + 7,758 +21,673 –11,488 + 8,078 +14,229 –33,795
2.Portfolio investment +148,877 –33,617 –15,866 –15,738 + 999 –22,411 –18,046 +33,527 –37,892
Shares  2 –15,982 – 3,703 – 5,758 – 5,940 + 6,438 + 2,943 + 2,431 + 1,951 – 1,440
Investment fund shares  3 + 1,862 – 2,760 – 2,706 + 1,352 – 1,625 – 222 – 754 – 671 + 1,203
Short-term  4
debt securities +83,707 +25,027 –44,053 – 7,004 – 6,833 –24,972 –17,751 +10,200 –17,421
Long-term   5
debt securities +79,290 –52,181 +36,648 – 4,145 + 3,017 – 160 – 1,973 +22,046 –20,234
3.Other investment  7 +250,760 +501,843 +81,877 +61,159 +118,233 –147,038 –27,438 + 3,560 –123,159
MFIs  8 +108,323 +159,384 .+ 6,112 +68,326 .+17,100 . .
Short-term +74,805 +115,401 +160,911 + 2,551 +48,862 –181,466 +15,194 –18,051 –178,609
Long-term +33,517 +43,984 – 7,775 + 3,561 +19,463 – 6,078 + 1,906 – 712 – 7,272
Enterprises and
households  9 +39,313 +120,200 .+39,341 +45,732 .–27,786 +21,752 .
Short-term +18,361 +115,536 +12,934 +37,724 +45,489 –52,760 –35,409 +21,253 –38,604
Long-term +20,952 + 4,663 +10,930 + 1,618 – 587 + 7,290 + 6,916 + 394 – 20
General government – 7,817 – 4,537 .– 641 .– 7,600 + 680 + 269 – 8,549
Short-term – 7,664 – 2,186 – 3,607 – 760 + 2,649 – 7,574 + 837 + 182 – 8,593
Long-term – 153 – 2,351 .+ 119 . . .+ 91 .
Bundesbank +110,941 +226,796 .+16,347 . .–17,432 . .
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +216,515 +314,750 +217,004 +55,875 + 5,820 +61,307 +23,649 –19,808 +57,466
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see Statistical series, direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities 3ä,  4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 663,320 497,651
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2020 Aug. 1,358,137 230,309 177,973 14,129 7,423 30,784 1,071,521 1,056,231 56,307 600,390 757,747
Sep. 1,414,933 227,150 173,979 14,293 7,632 31,246 1,131,686 1,115,189 56,097 649,781 765,151
Oct. 1,346,367 227,767 174,433 14,346 7,656 31,332 1,061,498 1,047,327 57,102 619,445 726,922
Nov. 1,347,202 212,286 159,737 14,193 7,535 30,820 1,078,270 1,060,263 56,647 625,921 721,282
Dec. 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 Jan. 1,348,921 219,860 166,494 14,115 8,061 31,190 1,072,140 1,054,994 56,921 638,042 710,879
Feb. 1,328,303 210,619 157,313 14,119 8,047 31,140 1,060,378 1,043,746 57,306 616,473 711,830
Mar. 1,364,046 209,400 155,323 14,367 7,966 31,744 1,098,486 1,081,989 56,160 647,647 716,400
Apr. 1,307,161 210,799 158,143 14,085 7,836 30,735 1,041,472 1,024,734 54,890 604,863 702,299
May 1,370,231 221,201 168,678 14,037 7,809 30,677 1,093,721 1,076,918 55,309 621,827 748,404
June 1,384,834 213,600 159,995 14,326 8,094 31,184 1,115,447 1,101,897 55,787 670,632 714,202
July 1,319,694 219,775 165,984 14,345 8,104 31,343 1,042,015 1,024,970 57,903 657,905 661,789
Aug. 1,360,722 250,742 165,757 45,091 8,174 31,720 1,053,653 1,037,259 56,327 699,773 660,949
Sep. 1,431,909 246,908 160,943 45,606 8,267 32,092 1,130,558 1,115,126 54,443 746,128 685,781
Oct. 1,388,160 250,340 164,602 45,719 8,449 31,570 1,083,141 1,066,604 54,678 735,595 652,564
Nov. 1,456,861 258,815 170,460 46,375 8,405 33,575 1,142,719 1,127,545 55,327 773,217 683,644
Dec. 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 Jan. 1,479,694 261,965 173,362 46,931 8,504 33,168 1,163,561 1,149,868 54,168 807,889 671,805
Feb. 1,491,552 273,726 184,255 46,854 8,711 33,905 1,164,098 1,149,722 53,729 774,786 716,766
Mar. 1,516,744 277,782 187,779 47,375 8,663 33,965 1,184,501 1,169,952 54,462 808,690 708,055
Apr. 1,491,558 288,953 196,274 48,617 8,799 35,263 1,148,681 1,135,400 53,923 790,221 701,337
May 1,505,419 278,174 186,481 48,031 8,681 34,980 1,173,376 1,159,716 53,869 805,179 700,240
June 1,566,099 281,157 187,573 48,712 8,948 35,923 1,232,176 1,216,530 52,767 826,280 739,819
July 1,514,570 280,910 185,950 49,465 9,086 36,409 1,179,431 1,166,155 54,229 810,881 703,689
Aug. 1,590,572 280,160 184,794 49,614 9,300 36,451 1,258,187 1,245,014 52,225 842,576 747,996
Sep. 1,613,008 281,258 184,022 50,287 9,358 37,592 1,281,266 1,266,647 50,483 829,129 783,879
Oct. 1,569,272 274,421 178,101 49,675 9,527 37,119 1,243,873 1,230,005 50,977 811,035 758,237
Nov. 1,577,175 277,458 183,052 49,168 9,315 35,923 1,248,088 1,233,980 51,629 810,314 766,861
Dec. 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 Jan. 1,508,507 281,692 190,062 48,256 9,437 33,938 1,176,042 1,162,354 50,772 793,716 714,791
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2019 963,967 227,688 736,279 502,594 233,685 217,370 16,314 1,305,705 167,656 1,138,048 927,650 210,399 134,768 75,630
2020 1,021,200 248,779 772,421 544,059 228,362 211,891 16,471 1,394,364 171,998 1,222,366 1,012,503 209,863 129,098 80,766
2021 1,152,509 260,321 892,188 604,424 287,764 270,847 16,917 1,548,984 218,886 1,330,098 1,066,016 264,082 175,351 88,730
p 2022 1,232,675 251,857 980,818 661,948 318,870 289,264 29,606 1,607,074 174,307 1,432,767 1,139,934 292,833 189,258 103,576
2022 July 1,278,059 263,838 1,014,221 670,948 343,273 313,123 30,151 1,651,392 211,988 1,439,404 1,126,247 313,157 207,607 105,549
Aug. 1,354,989 272,669 1,082,320 736,951 345,370 315,253 30,117 1,733,100 233,330 1,499,769 1,181,732 318,037 212,527 105,510
Sep. 1,342,815 262,308 1,080,508 711,722 368,786 338,666 30,120 1,719,489 213,694 1,505,795 1,166,409 339,387 234,067 105,320
Oct. 1,325,896 274,400 1,051,495 686,029 365,467 335,167 30,299 1,698,692 205,452 1,493,240 1,165,880 327,359 221,864 105,496
Nov. 1,295,761 297,265 998,497 675,665 322,832 292,486 30,346 1,687,224 209,367 1,477,857 1,185,597 292,261 187,722 104,539
p Dec. 1,232,675 251,857 980,818 661,948 318,870 289,264 29,606 1,607,074 174,307 1,432,767 1,139,934 292,833 189,258 103,576
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2019 572,324 176,847 395,476 304,605 90,871 82,120 8,752 836,863 91,122 745,740 660,385 85,355 62,692 22,664
2020 609,449 187,703 421,746 332,983 88,763 79,780 8,983 884,904 95,716 789,188 702,991 86,197 61,357 24,841
2021 660,768 198,911 461,857 350,591 111,266 102,689 8,578 978,060 153,424 824,636 713,878 110,758 84,237 26,521
p 2022 703,663 192,412 511,251 387,897 123,354 109,914 13,440 991,655 125,880 865,775 750,939 114,836 82,671 32,165
2022 July 731,384 212,349 519,035 376,509 142,526 129,216 13,310 1,022,914 147,814 875,100 741,511 133,588 101,399 32,190
Aug. 747,731 213,111 534,620 391,171 143,449 129,991 13,458 1,065,471 173,966 891,505 756,559 134,946 102,673 32,273
Sep. 734,791 196,791 538,000 387,336 150,665 137,106 13,559 1,060,660 157,933 902,727 757,924 144,804 112,571 32,233
Oct. 743,891 211,455 532,436 381,027 151,409 137,681 13,728 1,054,674 147,845 906,829 766,823 140,006 107,624 32,382
Nov. 743,226 232,326 510,900 384,098 126,801 113,000 13,801 1,047,707 143,641 904,065 785,355 118,711 86,820 31,890
p Dec. 703,663 192,412 511,251 387,897 123,354 109,914 13,440 991,655 125,880 865,775 750,939 114,836 82,671 32,165
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2019 391,643 50,841 340,803 197,989 142,814 135,251 7,563 468,842 76,534 392,308 267,265 125,043 72,077 52,967
2020 411,751 61,076 350,675 211,076 139,599 132,112 7,487 509,460 76,282 433,178 309,512 123,666 67,741 55,925
2021 491,741 61,410 430,331 253,833 176,498 168,158 8,340 570,924 65,462 505,463 352,138 153,324 91,115 62,210
p 2022 529,012 59,445 469,567 274,050 195,517 179,351 16,166 615,419 48,427 566,992 388,995 177,997 106,587 71,410
2022 July 546,675 51,488 495,186 294,439 200,748 183,907 16,841 628,478 64,174 564,304 384,736 179,568 106,208 73,360
Aug. 607,258 59,558 547,700 345,779 201,921 185,262 16,659 667,628 59,364 608,264 425,173 183,091 109,854 73,237
Sep. 608,025 65,517 542,508 324,387 218,121 201,560 16,561 658,829 55,761 603,068 408,485 194,583 121,496 73,087
Oct. 582,005 62,945 519,059 305,002 214,058 197,487 16,571 644,018 57,607 586,411 399,057 187,353 114,240 73,113
Nov. 552,536 64,938 487,597 291,567 196,031 179,486 16,545 639,518 65,725 573,792 400,242 173,550 100,902 72,649
p Dec. 529,012 59,445 469,567 274,050 195,517 179,351 16,166 615,419 48,427 566,992 388,995 177,997 106,587 71,410
Euro area (19)
2019 493,062 158,102 334,960 264,834 70,127 62,531 7,595 761,144 70,561 690,584 624,607 65,977 48,775 17,202
2020 522,933 166,846 356,087 287,662 68,425 60,750 7,674 799,046 74,101 724,945 658,931 66,014 47,100 18,914
2021 553,838 176,279 377,560 289,330 88,230 80,844 7,386 896,256 131,735 764,521 675,868 88,653 68,232 20,421
p 2022 595,582 . . . 94,785 82,751 12,034 902,425 . . . 88,483 63,432 25,051
2022 July 620,871 194,739 426,132 310,274 115,858 103,880 11,978 938,353 128,484 809,869 700,797 109,072 84,082 24,990
Aug. 632,469 197,783 434,687 317,577 117,110 104,948 12,162 979,675 154,215 825,461 715,036 110,424 85,330 25,094
Sep. 619,777 180,059 439,717 316,792 122,925 110,605 12,320 973,219 139,263 833,956 716,221 117,735 92,939 24,796
Oct. 630,395 191,218 439,177 316,837 122,339 109,887 12,453 968,402 128,472 839,929 726,504 113,425 88,437 24,988
Nov. 630,715 . . . 97,183 84,721 12,462 956,485 . . . 90,516 65,720 24,796
p Dec. 595,582 . . . 94,785 82,751 12,034 902,425 . . . 88,483 63,432 25,051
Extra-Euro area (19)
2019 470,905 69,586 401,319 237,761 163,558 154,839 8,719 544,560 97,096 447,465 303,043 144,422 85,993 58,428
2020 498,267 81,933 416,334 256,397 159,937 151,141 8,796 595,318 97,897 497,421 353,572 143,849 81,997 61,852
2021 598,671 84,042 514,629 315,094 199,535 190,003 9,532 652,728 87,151 565,577 390,148 175,429 107,119 68,309
p 2022 637,092 79,400 557,693 333,608 224,085 206,513 17,572 704,649 69,793 634,856 430,505 204,350 125,826 78,524
2022 July 657,188 69,098 588,090 360,674 227,415 209,243 18,173 713,039 83,504 629,535 425,450 204,085 123,525 80,560
Aug. 722,520 74,887 647,633 419,374 228,259 210,304 17,955 753,424 79,116 674,308 466,696 207,613 127,197 80,416
Sep. 723,039 82,248 640,791 394,930 245,860 228,061 17,800 746,270 74,431 671,839 450,188 221,651 141,128 80,524
Oct. 695,501 83,182 612,319 369,191 243,127 225,281 17,846 730,290 76,980 653,310 439,376 213,934 133,427 80,507
Nov. 665,046 84,774 580,272 354,623 225,649 207,765 17,884 730,739 85,800 644,939 443,194 201,745 122,002 79,743
p Dec. 637,092 79,400 557,693 333,608 224,085 206,513 17,572 704,649 69,793 634,856 430,505 204,350 125,826 78,524
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2021 1.5749 1.4826 7.6282 7.4370 129.88 10.1633 10.1465 1.0811 0.85960 1.1827
2022 1.5167 1.3695 7.0788 7.4396 138.03 10.1026 10.6296 1.0047 0.85276 1.0530
2021 Sep. 1.6087 1.4910 7.6007 7.4361 129.66 10.1861 10.1710 1.0857 0.85683 1.1770
Oct. 1.5669 1.4436 7.4500 7.4398 131.21 9.8143 10.0557 1.0708 0.84694 1.1601
Nov. 1.5615 1.4339 7.2927 7.4373 130.12 9.9661 10.0459 1.0522 0.84786 1.1414
Dec. 1.5781 1.4463 7.1993 7.4362 128.80 10.1308 10.2726 1.0408 0.84875 1.1304
2022 Jan. 1.5770 1.4282 7.1922 7.4411 130.01 10.0070 10.3579 1.0401 0.83503 1.1314
Feb. 1.5825 1.4422 7.1957 7.4408 130.66 10.0544 10.5342 1.0461 0.83787 1.1342
Mar. 1.4946 1.3950 6.9916 7.4404 130.71 9.7367 10.5463 1.0245 0.83638 1.1019
Apr. 1.4663 1.3652 6.9605 7.4391 136.61 9.6191 10.3175 1.0211 0.83655 1.0819
May 1.4995 1.3588 7.0830 7.4405 136.24 10.1453 10.4956 1.0355 0.84969 1.0579
June 1.5044 1.3537 7.0734 7.4392 141.57 10.2972 10.6005 1.0245 0.85759 1.0566
July 1.4856 1.3180 6.8538 7.4426 139.17 10.1823 10.5752 0.9876 0.84955 1.0179
Aug. 1.4550 1.3078 6.8884 7.4393 136.85 9.8309 10.5021 0.9690 0.84499 1.0128
Sep. 1.4820 1.3187 6.9508 7.4366 141.57 10.1697 10.7840 0.9640 0.87463 0.9904
Oct. 1.5474 1.3477 7.0687 7.4389 144.73 10.3919 10.9503 0.9791 0.87058 0.9826
Nov. 1.5455 1.3708 7.3171 7.4387 145.12 10.3357 10.8798 0.9842 0.86892 1.0201
Dec. 1.5685 1.4379 7.3859 7.4377 142.82 10.4480 10.9859 0.9865 0.86950 1.0589
2023 Jan. 1.5523 1.4474 7.3173 7.4383 140.54 10.7149 11.2051 0.9961 0.88212 1.0769
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  
2023 January 1 Croatia Croatian kuna HRK 7.53450  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2023
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the  Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
extended EER group of trading partners  1broad EER group of
trading partners  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
27 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  527 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.1 95.9 96.2 96.6 95.9 97.9 99.6 95.7 97.6 98.3 98.1 97.8
2000 87.0 86.8 86.0 85.7 88.1 86.1 91.9 97.5 85.4 91.1 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.5 87.1 86.6 84.5 90.2 86.9 91.7 96.6 86.0 90.5 93.0 91.7 91.0
2002 89.8 90.2 89.6 88.1 94.5 90.5 92.3 95.7 88.3 91.0 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.4 101.4 100.8 99.2 106.4 101.6 95.8 94.8 97.5 95.3 97.0 96.7 96.8
2004 104.2 105.3 103.8 102.4 110.9 105.4 96.1 93.6 99.9 95.6 98.5 98.2 98.4
2005 102.8 104.0 101.8 100.6 109.1 103.0 94.7 92.0 98.7 93.2 98.4 97.1 96.7
2006 102.8 104.0 101.2 99.5 109.2 102.3 93.5 90.4 98.0 91.6 98.6 96.7 96.0
2007 106.3 107.0 103.5 101.2 112.8 104.5 94.5 89.7 101.9 92.0 100.9 98.3 97.3
2008 110.2 109.9 105.7 105.1 117.6 107.0 94.9 88.4 105.1 91.3 102.4 98.4 97.5
2009 111.7 110.8 106.8 108.7 120.7 108.1 95.2 89.2 104.5 92.0 101.9 98.6 97.9
2010 104.5 103.0 98.6 101.2 112.0 99.1 92.5 88.7 98.1 88.1 98.8 94.3 92.5
2011 104.2 102.1 96.7 99.4 112.8 98.6 92.1 88.5 97.5 87.3 98.2 93.5 91.9
2012 98.5 96.8 91.2 93.6 107.6 93.8 90.0 88.3 92.4 84.7 95.9 90.5 88.9
2013 102.1 99.9 94.2 96.5 112.3 96.8 92.3 88.8 97.4 86.6 98.1 92.3 90.9
2014 102.3 99.2 94.2 96.6 114.7 97.2 92.9 89.6 97.6 87.3 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.5 89.5 85.6 86.0 106.2 88.6 89.7 90.3 88.8 83.6 94.4 87.8 87.0
2016 95.2 91.5 87.9 p 87.3 110.2 90.6 90.6 90.7 90.4 84.9 95.0 88.8 88.1
2017 97.5 93.4 89.1 p 88.0 112.6 91.8 91.9 90.8 93.3 85.7 96.3 89.9 88.9
2018 100.0 95.6 90.6 p 89.6 117.4 95.0 93.2 91.0 96.3 86.7 97.7 91.2 90.8
2019 98.1 93.2 88.9 p 87.1 115.6 92.4 92.2 91.2 93.5 85.8 96.4 89.9 89.4
2020 99.7 93.6 89.5 p 87.8 119.5 93.9 92.3 91.5 93.4 86.4 96.4 90.1 90.2
2021 99.6 93.5 p 88.8 p 86.2 120.9 94.3 93.4 92.0 95.4 86.8 97.4 90.7 91.0
2022 95.5 p 90.7 ... ... 116.8 p 90.8 … … … … p96.0 p 89.2 p 89.1
2020 Aug. 101.5 94.9 90.3 p 88.8 122.6 95.9 92.4 91.1 94.2 86.7 97.0 90.7 91.2
Sep. 101.6 94.9 122.6 95.8 96.8 90.7 91.1
Oct. 101.3 94.8 122.6 95.7 96.7 90.6 91.0
Nov. 100.6 94.3 90.5 p 88.1 121.8 95.2 93.1 91.4 95.4 86.9 96.5 90.1 90.5
Dec. 101.8 95.3 123.1 96.0 97.0 90.5 90.9
2021 Jan. 101.4 95.3 122.6 96.0 98.0 91.4 91.7
Feb. 100.7 94.6 90.2 p 88.2 121.7 95.2 93.4 91.8 95.7 87.0 98.0 91.3 91.5
Mar. 100.3 94.2 121.4 94.9 97.7 91.1 91.4
Apr. 100.6 94.4 122.1 95.2 97.9 91.3 91.7
May 100.8 94.4 89.5 p 86.7 122.4 95.3 93.2 91.4 95.8 86.6 98.0 91.3 91.8
June 100.3 93.8 121.7 94.6 97.9 91.1 91.5
July 99.7 93.5 121.0 94.2 97.7 91.0 91.2
Aug. 99.4 93.2 p 88.7 p 85.8 120.6 93.9 93.7 92.3 95.7 87.0 97.3 90.6 90.9
Sep. 99.5 93.3 120.6 93.8 97.4 90.7 90.8
Oct. 98.5 92.4 119.6 93.1 96.7 90.0 90.2
Nov. 97.6 91.7 p 86.8 p 84.2 119.0 92.6 93.4 92.6 94.5 86.5 96.2 89.5 89.8
Dec. 97.1 91.2 119.2 92.4 95.8 89.0 89.5
2022 Jan. 96.6 91.2 118.7 p 92.3 96.0 89.0 p 89.5
Feb. 96.9 91.7 p 84.9 p 82.8 119.1 p 92.7 92.7 92.2 93.4 85.5 96.1 89.1 p 89.5
Mar. 95.9 91.4 118.6 p 92.7 96.3 89.5 p 90.0
Apr. 95.2 90.0 116.6 p 90.3 96.1 89.0 p 88.9
May 95.6 90.4 p 83.4 p 81.3 116.4 p 90.1 91.9 91.6 92.3 84.8 96.6 89.6 p 89.3
June 95.9 90.6 116.7 p 90.2 95.7 88.8 p 88.4
July 94.1 89.1 114.7 p 88.9 94.9 88.0 p 87.6
Aug. 93.6 88.8 p 81.9 p 80.0 114.2 p 88.6 91.5 92.0 90.6 84.6 94.5 87.7 p 87.3
Sep. 94.2 p 89.8 114.6 p 89.3 96.0 89.2 p 88.7
Oct. 94.8 p 91.0 115.5 p 90.6 96.1 p 89.8 p 89.4
Nov. 96.0 p 91.9 ... ... 117.2 p 91.7 … … … … 97.2 p 90.7 p 90.5
Dec. 97.0 p 92.2 119.2 p 92.5 p96.3 p 89.8 p 89.8
2023 Jan. 97.3 p 92.2 119.9 p 92.7 p96.3 p 89.5 p 89.6
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the curren-
cy concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's price
competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective exchange
rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. The
weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more detailed in-
formation on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the Deutsche
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 The calculations are
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following 18 countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania,
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United
States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates were used.
2 Includes countries belonging to the extended EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition) and additionally the following 23 countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zea-
land, Peru, Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan,Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and United Arab Emirates. The ECB has suspended the
publication and calculation of the euro foreign exchange reference rate against Russian
rouble with effect from March 2, 2022 until further notice. For the calculation of
effective exchange rates, an indicative rate is used for the Russian Federation from that
date. It is calculated from the daily RUB/USD rates determined by the Bank of Russia in
conjunction with the respective ECB's euro foreign exchange reference rate to the US
dollar.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from 2001 including
Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from
2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, from
2015 including Lithuania, from 2023 including Croatia) as well as Canada, Denmark,
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.
5 Euro area countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the extended
EER group of trading partners (fixed comosition).  6 Euro area countries (current compo-
sition) and countries belonging to the broad EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition).

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website, as are also the Statistical Series, with a 
changed basic structure and advanced options for using data.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
A list of the articles published in the period from 
2010 to 2022 is available on the Bundesbank’s 
website.
Monthly Report articles
June 2022
– Outlook for the German economy for 2022 
to 2024
– Pension insurance scheme: long- term scen -
arios and reform options
– Inflation-  induced bracket creep in the in -
come tax scale
– Public finances in the euro area: current de -
velopments and  challenges
– The Bundesbank’s surveys of firms – applica -
tions for assessing the financial situation in 
the corporate sectorJuly 2022
– Distributional Wealth Accounts for house -
holds in Germany – results and use cases
– Factors influencing international portfolio 
flows
– Cross- border interoperability of central bank 
digital currency
– Government debt in the euro area: develop -
ments in creditor structure
August 2022
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2022
– Negative interest rate policy period and 
pandemic  as reflected in the Bank Lending 
Survey
– Productivity effects of reallocation in the cor -
porate sector during the COVID-  19 crisis
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2021
– The role of the International Monetary Fund 
in preventing and managing crises
October 2022
– State government finances in 2021: Surplus   
and additional reserves from emergency bor -
rowingDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
85•

– Member States’ financial relationships with 
the EU budget and the Next Generation EU 
off-budget entity in 2021
– The validity of interest parity in times of crisis
– Market conditions for Bunds in the context 
of monetary policy purchases and height -
ened uncertainty
November 2022
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2022
– Outlook for the German economy for 2023 
to 2025
– Rise in energy prices, the exchange rate of 
the euro and Germany’s price competitive -
ness
– Access to cash in Germany – results of a rep -
resentative public survey
January 2023
– From the monetary pillar to the monetary 
and financial analysis
– Term structures in economic analysis
– Mobile payment usage in Germany
– Access to cash in Germany: analyses of the 
spatial availability of cash withdrawal facil -
ities
February 2023
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, January 20221,2
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
January 20222
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131
Discussion Paperso
41/ 2022  
Who creates and who bears flow externalities 
in mutual funds?42/ 2022  
Robust real rate rules
43/ 2022  
The global financial cycle and macroeconomic 
tail risks
44/ 2022  
Chinese supply chain shocks
45/2022  
A nonlinear generalization of the Country-  
Product- Dummy method
46/2022  
What drives inflation? Disentangling demand 
and supply factors
47/2022  
On the macroeconomic effects of reinvest -
ments in asset purchase programmes
48/2022  
Real interest rates, bank borrowing, and fragility
49/2022  
Estimating the impact of quality adjustment on 
consumer price inflation
50/ 2022  
Score- based calibration testing for multivariate 
forecast distributions
51/ 2022  
The preferential treatment of green bonds
52/ 2022  
Bayesian VARs and prior calibration in times of 
COVID-  19
01/ 2023  
Make- up strategies with incomplete markets 
and bounded rationality
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
87•

02/2023  
Households’ expectations and regional COVID-19 
dynamics
03/2023  
Inflation expectations in the wake of the war in 
Ukraine
04/2023  
Shocks to transition risk
05/2023  
Time-varying shock return correlation, news 
shocks, and business cycles
06/2023  
Asset allocation with recursive parameter up -
dating and macroeconomic regime identifiers
07/2023  
The rollout of internal credit risk model: Impli -
cations for the novel partial-use philosophyBanking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, 
January  20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2023  
88•

