Monthly Report
May 2023
Vol. 75  
No 5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 33512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 16 p.m. on 22 May 2023.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  7
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  13
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  22
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  23
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  35
Developments in the free float of Federal securities  ............................................................  39
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  49
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  57Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
6

Overview
Activity stagnating and infla -
tion still too high in Germany
Global economy makes solid 
start to 2023, outlook rather 
subdued
The global economy got off to a solid start in 
2023. Stimuli for growth came primarily from 
China, where real gross domestic product 
(GDP) rose significantly after the end of the 
country’s zero- COVID policy. At the same time, 
economic activity in the euro area picked up 
again, partly thanks to a distinct easing of the 
situation in energy markets. Fears of a reces -
sion have so far proven unfounded in the 
United States, too, with moderate economic 
growth continuing, driven by consumers’ readi -
ness to spend.
Despite the solid start to the year, the global 
economic environment is likely to remain chal -
lenging. While the upturn in China is set to 
continue at a moderate pace, stubbornly high 
inflation and tighter monetary policy are putt -
ing the brakes on activity in almost all advanced 
economies. Added to this are risks stemming 
from the recent turmoil in the banking system, 
especially in the United States.
Global inflationary pressures 
easing only slightly
Falling energy prices and base effects led to a 
decline in consumer inflation rates around the 
world. Annual inflation in the group of ad -
vanced economies dropped to 6.0% by April. 
However, underlying price pressures have 
barely subsided thus far. In April, the annual 
rate of change in consumer prices excluding 
energy and food stood at 5.5%. Price growth 
remained high in the services sector, in particu -
lar, where costs are strongly influenced by 
wage developments. It also remains to be seen whether further energy price relief can be ex -
pected in the near future. In the wake of the 
decision by OPEC and its partners to signifi -
cantly cut crude oil production from May on -
wards, there is a risk that the oil market will be 
undersupplied in the second half of 2023.
Financial markets coping well 
with US bank turmoil
Since the beginning of the year, international 
financial markets have been contending with 
persistently high inflation rates and bouts of 
distinct tension as a result of the bank turmoil 
in the United States. Major central banks tight -
ened their monetary policy stance further at 
the start of the first quarter in view of the infla -
tion outlook. They also signalled that further 
interest rate rises would be necessary in order 
to ensure a timely decrease in inflation. The 
collapse of several US regional banks led to 
concerns about the stability of the financial sys -
tem from mid- March onwards. Market uncer -
tainty soared amid fears of contagion effects, 
triggering a flight to safe assets which signifi -
cantly reduced yields on safe securities. At the 
same time, market participants revised their ex -
pectations about the paths of policy rates 
downwards – especially for the United States. 
Markets assumed that the US regional banking 
crisis could lead to deteriorated financing con -
ditions there over a longer period. By contrast, 
the collapse of Switzerland’s Credit Suisse was 
only a temporary strain on the international 
financial system.
As the reporting period progressed, the spill -
over effects on international financial markets 
emanating from the United States receded 
again. In combination with favourable eco -
nomic releases, especially for the euro area, a 
growing appetite for risk and further policy rate 
hikes, this stabilised bond yields on both sides 
of the Atlantic. In equity markets, as well, the Solid start to 
year for global 
economy
Global eco -
nomic activity 
remains sub -
dued, with 
increased down -
side risks
Inflation rates 
coming down, 
but underlying 
price pressures 
still highPersistently high 
inflation rates 
and bouts of 
distinct tension 
in US regional 
banking system 
are focus of 
financial 
markets Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
7

bank turmoil had only a temporary and com -
paratively moderate impact; overall, both the 
broad Euro Stoxx index and European bank 
equity prices recorded marked gains. The euro 
has also been trading more strongly on balance 
in the year to date, including against the US 
dollar and the Japanese yen. It thus continued 
its effective appreciation from the final quarter 
of 2022.
Eurosystem continues raising 
key interest rates and …
At its monetary policy meeting in March 2023, 
the Governing Council of the ECB raised the 
three key ECB interest rates by another 50 basis 
points each. In May, it decided to raise interest 
rates again, but reduced the pace to 25 basis 
points. The Governing Council stated that its 
future decisions will ensure that the policy rates 
will be raised to levels sufficiently restrictive to 
achieve a timely return of inflation to the 2% 
medium-  term target and will be kept at those 
levels for as long as necessary. The Governing 
Council will continue to follow a data-  
dependent approach to determining the ap -
propriate level and duration of restriction. Fur -
ther policy rate decisions will be based on the 
assessment of the inflation outlook in light of 
the incoming economic and financial data, the 
dynamics of underlying inflation and the 
strength of monetary policy transmission.
… decides to discontinue 
reinvestments  under the APP
The Governing Council of the ECB also decided 
in May that it will keep reducing the Eurosys -
tem’s asset purchase programme (APP) port -
folio at a measured and predictable pace. In 
line with these principles, the Governing Coun -
cil expects to discontinue the reinvestments 
under the APP as of July 2023.Rising interest rates lead to 
portfolio rebalancing and 
dampens loan demand
As the monetary policy stance tightened, 
growth in the broad monetary aggregate M3 
continued to weaken substantially in the first 
quarter of 2023. The increase in money and 
capital market yields led to large- scale portfolio 
shifts by the money- holding sectors away from 
highly liquid, low- interest deposits into higher- 
yielding forms of investment, including longer- 
term bank debt securities. On the supply side, 
the reduction in bond holdings and weak bank 
lending to the private sector slowed monetary 
growth. First, the subdued economic outlook 
and the increased financing costs had a damp -
ening effect on loan demand from enterprises 
and households. Second, banks’ tighter lend -
ing policies braked loan growth. According to 
the Bank Lending Survey (BLS), the surveyed 
banks continued to tighten their credit stand -
ards in the first quarter as planned at the be -
ginning of the year, pointing to the rise in credit 
risk as the main justification. By contrast, the 
turmoil in the US and Swiss banking sectors in 
March had no discernible impact on the lend -
ing policies of banks in the euro area.
German economy stagnated 
in Q1
The German economy moved sideways in the 
first quarter of 2023, having shrunk in the pre -
vious quarter. According to the Federal Statis -
tical Office’s flash estimate, real GDP remained 
unchanged on the quarter after seasonal ad -
justment. High inflation weighed on private 
consumption expenditure and consumption-  
related service providers. Government con -
sumption declined as well, with the phasing 
out of pandemic- related expenditure likely to 
have played a key role. By contrast, the easing 
in energy markets, high order backlog and di -
minishing supply bottlenecks gave a boost to 
industry. Exports of goods picked up again, 
too. Construction activity benefited from the Monetary 
policy : ECB Gov -
erning Council 
raises key inter -
est rates twice 
and …
… decides to 
discontinue APP 
reinvestmentsTightening of 
lending policies 
continues as 
planned, no 
noticeable 
impact from 
bank turmoil
German econ -
omy flatlined in 
Q1 2023Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
8

relatively mild weather conditions at the begin -
ning of the year, while high construction prices 
and increased financing costs weighed on de -
mand for construction work. Economic output 
in the first quarter was somewhat weaker over -
all than recently expected. This is notably be -
cause, after making a buoyant start to the year, 
industrial activity suffered a setback in March 
that noticeably curbed output growth in the 
first quarter. New orders, which had picked up 
previously, also fell back significantly in March, 
with intermittent signs that demand for indus -
trial products might bounce back failing to ma -
terialise.
In the labour market, the marked increase in 
employment seen in the autumn continued 
into the first quarter of 2023. Unemployment 
also came in somewhat higher in recent 
months, however, and there was a further slow 
decline in the number of vacancies. Leading in -
dicators point to only fairly minor improve -
ments in what otherwise remains a robust la -
bour market in the coming months.
Lending weakens further
Against this backdrop, lending to the domestic 
private sector tailed off further in Germany, 
too. Loans to non- financial corporations re -
mained weak. Two factors were at play here. 
First, firms once again redeemed a fairly sub -
stantial portion of the short- term loans they 
had taken out in the previous year to counter 
the supply bottlenecks and high energy prices. 
Second, the subdued economic outlook and 
tighter financing conditions put a damper on 
demand for longer- term loans. Lending to 
households likewise continued to lose momen -
tum in the first quarter. In view of the elevated 
construction prices, the continued rise in finan -
cing costs and the loss of purchasing power 
brought about by the high inflation, demand 
fell for loans for house purchase in particular.Significantly stronger rise 
in wages
Negotiated wages rose considerably more 
strongly in the first quarter than they did in the 
autumn. The most recent wage agreements, 
for example those in central and local govern -
ment and at Deutsche Post, also came in at 
above average levels and exceeded the wage 
increases agreed last year. These agreements 
have made greater use of inflation compensa -
tion bonuses in combination with a rise in 
scheduled rates of pay.
Inflation, which is now broad- based and rather 
persistent, is increasingly leaving its mark on 
wage rises. Employers in areas not bound by 
collective labour contracts are also making 
greater use of the possibility of paying inflation 
compensation bonuses. With regard to the cur -
rent wage rounds, the expected improvement 
in economic activity and reduced uncertainty 
surrounding the energy supply are providing 
tailwinds for efforts to do more than hitherto 
to offset past real wage losses. There is much 
to suggest that firms will pass on part of the in -
creased wage costs through their prices as the 
year progresses.
Underlying price pressures 
remain  very high
Consumer prices (HICP) rose less sharply at the 
beginning of the year than in the preceding 
quarters. On average for the months of January 
to March 2023, they increased by a seasonally 
adjusted 0.9%, compared with 2.6% in the 
final quarter of 2022. Looking at the year- on- 
year figures, the inflation rate declined from 
10.8% to 8.8% in the first quarter of 2023. In -
flation mainly receded because energy prices 
dropped again during the quarter for the first 
time in two years. The price dynamics of the 
non- energy components of inflation remained 
very high, however. Excluding volatile compon -
ents such as energy, food, travel services and 
clothing, the inflation rate rose significantly in Labour market 
very robust
German banks’ 
lending to 
domestic private 
sector tails off 
furtherRecent wage 
agreements 
higher than in 
previous year
Second- round 
effects on prices 
to be expected
High inflation 
eased some -
what in first 
quarter on back 
of lower energy 
pricesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
9

the second quarter, climbing from 5.0% to 
5.8%.
In April, inflation barely came down from its 
very high level and thus remained higher than 
expected, with consumer prices rising by 7.6% 
on the year, after 7.8% in March.1 The core rate 
excluding energy and food fell only slightly, 
dropping from 5.9% in March to 5.6%, which 
left it well above expectations. In the coming 
months, the inflation rate is expected to con -
tinue to decline, albeit only very gradually, in 
line with flattening price developments at up -
stream stages of the economy. The still excep -
tionally high price increases for non- energy 
components, the continued perceptible price 
pressures along supply chains, and the robust 
wage growth are counteracting the dampen -
ing impact of falling energy prices.
Slight increase in GDP 
expected  in the second quarter
Economic output is expected to rise again 
slightly in the second quarter of 2023. Dimin -
ishing supply bottlenecks, large order backlogs 
and lower energy prices are all supporting the 
continued recovery in industry. This is also likely 
to bolster exports, especially as global activity 
has regained some momentum. Despite con -
tinued high inflation, robust wage increases 
should at least mean households’ real net in -
come does not fall any further. Private con -
sumption is therefore likely to stagnate, more 
or less. Construction, on the other hand, looks 
set to see output decline. The sharply lower de -
mand is likely to take its toll and the tailwinds 
once provided by the mild weather conditions 
will fade.
Public finances in 2023 far 
brighter than planned
Germany has so far weathered the energy crisis 
better than the adverse scenarios were predict -
ing. Public finances are faring better as well. In particular, the lower energy prices are reducing 
the cost to government of the energy price 
brakes and the assistance provided for gas 
trading companies. As things stand today, the 
deficit ratio is likely to remain broadly un -
changed at around 2½% this year. By contrast, 
last autumn’s plans foresaw a significant in -
crease to over 4%.
Deficits still financed via 
emergency  loans in the 
medium  term, too
As things stand today, the deficit ratio will fall 
to somewhere between 1% and 1½% next 
year, mainly because the temporary support 
measures created in the wake of the energy cri -
sis will for the most part expire. In the medium 
term, the deficit ratio could move sideways. 
However, central government is discussing new 
budgetary burdens, such as higher defence 
spending and subsidies for cheaper industrial 
electricity. It has not yet agreed on a new finan -
cial framework from 2024 onwards.
While it is true that central government and 
most federal states are no longer making for -
mal use of the debt brake escape clause, cen -
tral and state governments have created scope 
– by means of the Armed Forces Fund and un -
allocated emergency loans – to run up substan -
tial deficits in the medium term that far exceed 
the standard limits of the debt brake. A Federal 
Constitutional Court ruling on coronavirus 
emergency loans in the Climate Fund is pend -
ing. This ruling could also provide general indi -
cations as to the extent to which it is permis -
sible to fund future deficits upfront using emer -
gency loans.Inflation rate still 
high in April and 
falling only 
gradually
Economic out -
put expected to 
rise again 
slightly in 
second quarter 
of 2023
Public finances 
in 2023 proving 
to be far brighter 
than plannedDeficit to decline 
in 2024 before 
moving broadly 
sideways, but 
new budgetary 
burdens 
discussed 
Debt brake 
escape clauses 
to take effect in 
medium term
1 The CPI figure was 7.2%, after 7.4%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
10

Transparency of central 
govern ment’s finances 
diminished 
It is becoming increasingly difficult to keep 
track of central government finances and their 
interaction with the debt brake. Transparency 
has deteriorated. Central government is patting 
itself on the back for complying with the debt 
brake again in the current year, but at the same 
time, it is budgeting for a very high deficit of 
€231 billion, of which €146 billion is in its off- 
budget entities. Some of the borrowing au -
thorisations, justified using the coronavirus cri -
sis or the energy crisis, were formally exhausted 
in 2021 and 2022; the bulk of the funds, how -
ever, were parked initially. The deficits of the 
Armed Forces Fund, for which parliaments 
have enshrined dedicated borrowing authorisa -
tions in the Basic Law, do not count towards 
the debt brake. Furthermore, central govern -
ment does not report what obligations will be 
added this year under new EU borrowing for 
Next Generation EU (NGEU). Only NGEU rev -
enue has been included.
Do not rebudget savings from 
crisis measures
The budgetary burdens arising from energy 
price brakes and payments to gas trading com -
panies are likely to be significantly lower than 
planned. This is because lower energy prices 
ease the burden on the private sector; the fiscal 
measures that follow on from this are corres -
pondingly cheaper. Much like automatic stabil -
isers, the costs to government respond auto -
matically to economic developments, so if def -
icits are lower as a result, this is not an expres -
sion of a more restrictive fiscal policy.
It would not be appropriate for the economy 
as a whole for the new borrowing originally 
budgeted for energy price assistance –  but 
which is no longer needed – to now be used 
elsewhere. This would increase the degree of 
fiscal expansion, which is likely to in turn in -crease inflationary pressures. In the current en -
vironment, the fiscal policy stance should not 
make the task of monetary policy more diffi -
cult. This is another reason why Germany and 
the other euro area Member States should limit 
deficits. Broad- based crisis assistance should be 
phased out in a timely manner.
Reinforce the binding effect of 
fiscal rules
There is no doubt that climate change, the en -
ergy transition and the geopolitical situation 
will put policymakers to a stiff test for quite 
some time. Debt- limiting fiscal rules do not pre -
vent government from taking action. They do, 
however, force it to set priorities. This means 
scaling back less important expenditure or gen -
erating additional revenue. Sound public 
finances are not at odds with forward- looking 
government activity – far from it. Rather, they 
are its basis, ensuring that government is able 
to act even in crises.
The debt brake makes for a comparatively re -
strictive borrowing framework, so there does 
appear to be scope for a stability- oriented re -
form; one which leaves somewhat greater 
room for manoeuvre as long as the debt ratio 
is relatively low. At the same time, however, 
such a reform should strengthen the binding 
effect of the rules again, which has diminished 
over the past few years. Only when fiscal rules 
are as binding as they are intended to be will 
they prevent fiscal policymakers from repeat -
edly passing on the costs of their decisions to 
future generations and putting monetary policy 
under pressure.
The European fiscal rules are designed to safe -
guard sound public finances in EU Member 
States. This is important for stability- oriented 
monetary policy in particular. At the end of 
April, the European Commission presented 
draft regulations for a reform of the fiscal rules. 
On the whole, these proposals threaten to 
weaken the rules considerably. This increases Federal budget 
now only par -
tially reflects 
central govern -
ment finances
Low energy 
prices automat -
ically reduce 
deficit
To avoid making 
monetary policy 
more difficult, 
do not rebudget 
resources left 
over from crisis 
assistanceReliably safe -
guard govern -
ment’s ability 
to act
Debt brake 
needs to be 
more binding 
once again, 
possibly with a 
somewhat 
broader regular 
borrowing 
framework
EU fiscal rules at 
risk of being 
weakenedDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
11

the risk that Member States will be slow to re -
duce high debt ratios. The proposed reform en -
visages less uniform fiscal rules and more bilat -
eral scope for negotiation. It would see the 
European Commission working with individual 
countries to stake out multi- year adjustment 
plans, with reform and investment projects 
allowing deadlines to be extended. Macroeco -
nomic and fiscal surveillance procedures would 
become interconnected, giving the European 
Commission an even more central role to play 
in fiscal surveillance and granting it a higher de -
gree of discretion. However, the European Commission has a broad remit and pursues 
more than just the objective of fiscal sound -
ness. This will inevitably lead to conflicts of 
interest. The new country- specific targets are 
mainly the result of complex and highly 
assumption- driven sustainability calculations. 
This will not make the new rules any easier to 
comprehend. Public perception could sour as a 
result, thus eliminating a key oversight pillar. 
Member States’ negotiations on the European 
Commission’s legislative proposals are ongoing 
and they are still able to amend them.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
12

Global and European setting
Global economic 
developments 
The global economy got off to a solid start in 
2023. Stimuli for growth came primarily from 
China, where real gross domestic product 
(GDP) rose significantly after the end of the 
country’s zero- COVID policy. At the same time, 
economic activity in the euro area picked up 
again, partly thanks to a distinct easing of the 
situation in the energy markets. In the United 
Kingdom, economic output also improved 
slightly in the first quarter. Fears of a recession 
have so far proven unfounded in the United 
States, too, with moderate economic growth 
continuing, driven by consumers’ readiness to 
spend.
Despite the solid start to the year, the global 
economic environment is likely to remain chal -
lenging. While the upturn in China is set to 
continue at a moderate pace, stubbornly high 
inflation and tighter monetary policy are putt -
ing the brakes on activity in almost all advanced 
economies. The recent turmoil in the banking 
system, particularly in the United States, intro -
duced another element of uncertainty lately. 
Initial indicators suggest that the financial sys -
tem and the real economy may prove resilient. 
Surveys of international banks have so far not 
shown a material tightening of their lending 
policies. Sentiment among consumers and en -
terprises did not deteriorate significantly, either. 
According to purchasing managers, global 
business conditions have even improved some -
what since February, and they continue to as -
sess the outlook as favourable. Overall, how -
ever, the risks to the global economic outlook 
are likely to be tilted even further to the down -
side in the light of the turmoil in the banking 
industry.The International Monetary Fund (IMF) pre -
sented a similar economic picture in April.1 In 
its projection, it assumes that the impact of the 
turmoil in the banking industry will be very 
limited. The revisions compared with the Janu -
ary projection were accordingly small. Global 
GDP is therefore expected to grow moderately 
by 2.8% this year. The expansion could be a lit -
tle bit more vigorous in the coming year. In 
most economies, consumer price inflation is 
likely to remain markedly above monetary pol -
icy target in 2024, too. At the same time, the 
IMF stressed the dangers of more adverse de -
velopments. According to an alternative scen -
ario classified as plausible, real GDP growth in 
the major advanced economies could be al -
most ½ percentage point lower this year given 
a moderate additional tightening of financing 
conditions. In the rather unlikely event of a dra -
matic escalation of financial market stress, 
much larger losses would have to be expected. 
With regard to consumer prices, the IMF em -
phasised the upside risks. Substantial wage in -
creases and higher commodity prices could 
dampen the expected decline in inflation rates.
That said, commodity prices have continued to 
fall recently. The price reductions for industrial Solid start to 
year for global 
economy
Global eco -
nomic activity 
remains sub -
dued, with 
elevated  down -
side risksIMF likewise 
emphasises 
cyclical  risks
Global purchasing managers' indices*
Source: S&P Global. * For the economy as a whole.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 20232030405060Diffusion indices, seasonally adjusted
40506070Output
Future output
1 See International Monetary Fund (2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
13

commodities and food products tended to be 
small. Crude oil prices fell somewhat more 
sharply. As this report went to press, the price 
of a barrel of Brent crude oil stood at US$76. 
This was mainly due to uncertain demand pro -
spects and high Russian crude oil exports. By 
contrast, the surprise decision by OPEC and its partners to cut production distinctly as from 
May propped up prices. Forward quotations 
currently suggest that oil prices will continue to 
fall. However, the prospect of a distinctly un -
dersupplied oil market in the second half of 
2023 could also cause prices to rise.2 Inter -
national gas prices likewise fell in the reporting 
period, mainly because global demand for 
liquefied natural gas (LNG) fell short of expect -
ations. A megawatt hour of gas in Europe (TTF) 
currently costs €29, which is around 45% less 
than in February. This represents a decline by 
about three- quarters from its previous year’s 
average, which had been marked by concerns 
about supply.
Falling energy prices and base effects led to a 
decline in consumer inflation rates around the 
world. Annual inflation in the group of ad -
vanced economies dropped to 6.0% by April. 
This is just under 1.5 percentage points lower 
than three months earlier. However, underlying 
price pressures have barely subsided thus far. In 
April, the annual rate of change in consumer 
prices excluding energy and food stood at 
5.5%. Price growth remained high in the ser -
vices sector, in particular, where costs are 
strongly influenced by wage developments.
China
In China, economic activity rebounded sub -
stantially following the end of the zero- COVID 
policy. In the first quarter of 2023, real GDP 
rose by a seasonally adjusted 2.2% on the 
quarter. Consumption of services, in particular, 
rose sharply. However, household consumption 
expenditure has remained well below its pre-  
pandemic trend. Exports to South- East Asia 
and, in particular, to Russia rose considerably 
on the year. By contrast, sales to the major ad -
vanced economies tended to remain weak.
In the current quarter, the recovery is likely to 
continue at a moderate pace. Surveys point to Further decline 
in commodity 
prices recentlyInflation rates 
coming down, 
but underlying 
price pressures 
still high
Considerable 
economic 
recovery  …Energy prices
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Haver Analytics. • Latest 
figures: Average of 1 to 19 May 2023. 1 Price for the front-
month futures contract.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 202320406080100120Monthly averages
04080120160200240 Reduced scale
Natural gas (TTF)1
Euro per MWhCrude oil (Brent)
US$ per barrel
Sources:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  national  data. 
* EU, Canada, Japan, Norway, Switzerland, the United King-
dom and the United States. 1 Consumer prices excluding en-
ergy and food; additionally excluding alcoholic beverages and 
tobacco  products  for  the  EU,  Norway,  Switzerland  and  the 
United Kingdom.
Deutsche BundesbankConsumer prices in industrial countries*
0123456789
+++++++++Year-on-year percentage change
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023Headline Core rate1
2 See International Energy Agency (2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
14

persistent optimism in the services sector. Con -
sumers are also benefiting from exceptionally 
low inflation rates. Both headline consumer 
price inflation and core inflation were below 
1% in April. By contrast, the situation in Chi -
nese industry appears to have deteriorated sig -
nificantly as of late. As private consumption is 
likely to remain at the heart of the recovery, no 
major economic stimulus is expected to radiate 
to the rest of the world.
Other selected emerging 
market  economies
India’s economy picked up steam again after 
cooling off slightly in the final quarter of 2022. 
Industrial production was up by 4% on the year 
in the first quarter. In addition, surveys show 
that services sector activity has remained very 
buoyant. Consumer price inflation stayed virtu -
ally unchanged at 6.2% in the first quarter, 
thus holding steady above the Reserve Bank of 
India’s target corridor. Following a 25 basis 
point increase in February, the central bank left 
its policy rate at 6.5%.
In Brazil, economic activity at the beginning of 
the year was probably listless. In the fourth 
quarter of 2022, real GDP fell by 0.2% on the 
quarter. This was probably due, not least, to 
the strong tightening of monetary policy. In -
dustrial output continued to stagnate in the 
first quarter. Adjusted for changes in prices, re -
tail sales, by contrast, were markedly higher 
than their previous quarter’s level. Annual con -
sumer price inflation continued to decelerate to 
5.3%. The central bank left its policy rate un -
changed at 13.75%.
Russia’s economy appears to have recovered to 
some degree from the sharp slump at the out -
break of the war against Ukraine. According to 
the flash estimate prepared by Rosstat, real 
GDP in the first quarter was 1.9% lower on the 
year, compared with a gap of 2.7% in the 
fourth quarter of 2022. An expansionary fiscal 
policy designed to jump- start arms production is likely to have been a factor here. Moreover, 
the availability of foreign intermediate goods 
appears to have improved again. At all events, 
deliveries of goods to Russia by China and Rus -
sia’s neighbours have risen sharply in recent 
months.3 Lastly, Russian oil exports continued 
to hold up surprisingly well despite the tighten -
ing of western energy sanctions, particularly 
owing to persistently high deliveries to China 
and India. Consumer price inflation slowed 
substantially to 2.3% by April. This was due, 
among other things, to a strong base effect, 
following a massive rise in inflation immedi -
ately after the start of the war. The central 
bank left its policy rate unchanged at 7.5%.
United States
The US economy remained on a moderate 
growth path at the beginning of the year. Ac -
cording to a preliminary estimate, in the first 
quarter real GDP rose by a seasonally adjusted 
0.3% on the quarter. Domestic final demand, 
which is often used as a measure of economic 
activity, expanded even more vigorously. This 
was mainly due to strong growth in private 
consumption. Households took advantage of … is likely to 
continue at a 
moderate pace
Growth in India 
more dynamic
Macroeconomic 
slowdown prob -
ably continued 
in Brazil
Russia’s econ -
omy probably 
recovering 
somewhatModerate GDP 
growthChina: Household consumption and 
disposable income*
567891011
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Sources:  National  Bureau  of  Statistics  of  China  and  Bundes-
bank calculations. * Original data decumulated and seasonally 
adjusted.
Deutsche BundesbankThousands of yuan, per capita basis, log scale
– 9%– 8%
ConsumptionDisposable income
Pre-pandemic trend
(2015-2019)
3 Re- exports of western products may also have contrib -
uted to the substantial exports by Russia’s neighbours.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
15

the scope for spending afforded by robust 
growth in disposable income. The renewed 
marked expansion in government demand also 
contributed markedly to GDP growth. The in -
vestment picture was less favourable, especially 
in view of slumping industrial activity and the 
ongoing tightening of monetary policy. Never -
theless, gross fixed capital formation in indus -
trial sectors increased slightly and the down -
turn in housing investment, which is particu -
larly sensitive to interest rates, lost momentum. 
Private sector inventory management damp -
ened GDP growth considerably. The process of 
restocking retail inventories that had been 
heavily depleted by the pandemic now appears 
to be all but finished.
The tighter monetary policy has started to leave 
marks on the labour market. Although the un -
employment rate remained exceptionally low 
up until April, employment growth was down 
recently and the number of job openings fell. 
In addition, wage growth declined to some de -gree but remained high by longer-  term stand -
ards. Against this backdrop, underlying con -
sumer price inflation was persistently steep. 
Core consumer price inflation fell only slightly 
to 5.5% up until April. Nevertheless, thanks to 
cheaper energy, annual headline inflation fell to 
4.9%.
Against this background, the Federal Reserve 
continued to tighten monetary policy with 
interest rate hikes of 25 basis points in March 
and May. It declared that the monetary policy 
stance would be “data dependent” going for -
ward. The extent to which credit conditions for 
households and businesses are tightening as a 
result of the recent strains in the US banking 
sector was also a factor.4
Japan
The Japanese economy regained its dynamism 
in the first quarter. Seasonally and price-  
adjusted real GDP rose by 0.4% quarter- on- 
quarter after having still stagnated in the final 
quarter of 2022. Private consumption con -
tinued to recover. In addition to catching- up ef -
fects following the end of the pandemic, gov -
ernment support measures to cushion the high 
energy costs played a role. Business investment 
increased markedly. By contrast, exports fell 
significantly amidst subdued demand. Imports 
also contracted markedly. The labour market 
situation remained favourable, although the 
unemployment rate rose to 2.8% in March. 
This year’s spring pay rounds are likely to result 
in far greater wage growth than in previous 
years, which could cause the steep boost, by 
Japanese standards, in consumer prices to be -
come entrenched. The year- on- year increase in 
the CPI, at 3.5% in April, was markedly lower 
than at the beginning of the year, yet this was 
mainly due to government energy support 
measures. Despite the still relatively high infla -
tion rate, the Bank of Japan maintained its ex -Slow normalisa -
tion of labour 
market, con -
tinued steep 
inflationMonetary policy 
tightening con -
tinued up to 
May
Economy grew 
againLabour market indicators 
for the United States
Source:  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  and  Bundesbank  calcula-
tions. 1 Number of job openings as a percentage of the total 
number of occupied posts and number of job openings.
Deutsche Bundesbank2021 2022 2023100200300400500600700800Three-month moving averages, seasonally adjusted
345678Job growth
Month-on-month change, in thousands
Job openings rate1
%Memo item:
Mean 2010-2019
4 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
(2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
16

tremely accommodative stance at the end of 
April.
United Kingdom
The United Kingdom’s economic situation re -
mained subdued at the beginning of the year. 
According to a preliminary estimate, real GDP 
increased by only 0.1% on the quarter. In par -
ticular, the services sector, which is important 
for the economy as a whole, remained listless, 
with strikes by, amongst others, public workers 
also playing a role. By contrast, the manufac -
turing and construction sectors saw distinct 
growth. Against the backdrop of the weaken -
ing of economic activity, the unemployment 
rate continued to rise to 3.9%. Wage growth 
declined slightly but, at around 6% on the year, 
was still quite high. The annual rate of the Har -
monised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) re -
mained in double digits in March, at +10.1%. 
Against this background, the Bank of England 
maintained its restrictive stance, raising its pol -
icy rate in March and May by a total of 50 basis 
points to 4.50%.
Poland
The Polish economy expanded again slightly in 
the first quarter of 2023. Seasonally adjusted 
real GDP rose by 3.9% quarter- on- quarter, fol -
lowing a 2.3% contraction a quarter earlier. 
However, inflation remained strong, causing 
purchasing power to continue to decline; this 
weighed on domestic demand. The volume of 
retail sales declined markedly in the first quar -
ter, and industrial output fell very significantly. 
Sentiment indicators also improved only mar -
ginally and remained well below their longer-  
term average. On the other hand, the labour 
market held up well. Unemployment, at 2.8% 
in March, remained near its all- time low. Wages 
grew substantially again, up by 12.6% in year- 
on- year terms. Consumer price inflation de -
clined only slightly, to 14.7%. Food prices, in 
particular, continued to surge. Core inflation excluding energy and food fell only slightly to 
12.2%. The central bank left its policy rate un -
changed at 6.75%.
Macroeconomic trends 
in the euro area
The euro area economy expanded again slightly 
in the first quarter of 2023. According to Euro -
stat’s flash estimate, seasonally and price-  
adjusted GDP rose by 0.1% compared with the 
preceding quarter, in which it had declined 
somewhat. Excluding Ireland, whose GDP is 
heavily influenced by the strategic activities of 
multinationals, the increase came to 0.2%.5 At 
the beginning of the year, the euro area econ -
omy thus proved more robust than had been 
anticipated just a few weeks earlier. One major Economy still 
subdued
Recovery in eco -
nomic output
Real GDP rose 
again slightlyReal GDP in selected industrial countries
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Cabinet Office of Japan, 
Office for National Statistics, Statistics Poland and Bundesbank 
calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 20239095100105110Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, log scale
United KingdomUnited States
9095100105110
9095100105
PolandJapan
7580859095100
5 Ireland’s GDP fell by 2.7% on the quarter. For more infor -
mation on the issues surrounding Ireland’s GDP , see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
17

reason for this was the easing of tensions in 
the European energy markets, which caused 
energy prices to fall. However, the increase in 
GDP at the beginning of the year was probably 
also partly due to a process of normalisation – 
in some sectors, factors such as spells of cold 
winter weather and high levels of sick leave 
had led to a sharp decline in activity in Decem -
ber. The weakening of these adverse factors 
was particularly beneficial to the construction 
sector. Industry benefited mainly from the im -
proved availability of intermediate inputs and 
the easing on energy markets. Investment is 
likely to have increased, too.
Private consumption, on the other hand, con -
tinued to suffer at the start of the year from the 
sharp rise in consumer prices and the associ -
ated losses in purchasing power. Consumer 
confidence remained depressed and precau -
tionary saving gained further ground. Private 
consumption therefore probably fell again. In 
any case, retail sales once again declined in 
price- adjusted terms and new car registrations 
also decreased markedly. Only the accommo -
dation and food services sector is likely to have 
recorded growth.
Gross fixed capital formation grew again some -
what in the first quarter,6 probably driven 
largely by investment in machinery and equip -
ment. In January and February, capital goods 
producers’ domestic sales once again expanded 
on the quarter after price adjustment. The pro -
longed upward trend in investment in informa -
tion and communication technologies and in -
tellectual property seems to have continued. 
Construction investment is likely to have risen, 
too. In any case, construction activity expanded 
vigorously in January and February, probably 
mainly due to the continuation of projects that 
were already under way. Rising financing costs 
are increasingly dampening new construction 
activity. The number of building permits for 
residential buildings declined up to the end of 
last year, and demand for housing loans fell 
once again in the first quarter.Euro area exports of goods to third countries 
probably increased slightly in the first quarter 
after price adjustment. The easing of various 
burdens on industry is likely to have played a 
role here. However, falling export prices saw 
export revenue decline somewhat. Broken 
down by region, exports to China increased 
considerably in line with the economic recovery 
taking place there. By contrast, exports to the 
United Kingdom – and especially to the United 
States  – were noticeably more subdued. Ac -
cording to balance of payments data, exports 
of services rose very significantly at the begin -
ning of the year. One major reason for this 
growth is likely to be the ongoing recovery in 
international tourism. Imports of goods from 
third countries decreased markedly in the first 
quarter in price- adjusted terms. In view of fall -
ing prices for energy products and other inter -
mediate inputs, expenditure on imports de -
creased even more significantly.
Output in the manufacturing sector diminished 
somewhat in the first quarter. This was mainly 
due to a sharp decline in Ireland, although the 
other countries saw an increase overall. Falling 
energy prices improved the profitability of out -
put in the chemicals industry and other energy- 
intensive sectors. The easing of supply bottle -
necks stimulated production, especially in the 
automotive industry. By contrast, production of 
consumer goods slackened slightly in line with 
weak consumer demand. Capacity utilisation 
remained close to its long- term average. Indus -
trial producer prices eased in some cases. Prices 
for intermediate goods even fell fairly signifi -
cantly on the quarter. By contrast, producer 
prices for capital and consumer goods con -
tinued to rise almost unabated.
Activity in the services sector is likely to have 
improved somewhat at the beginning of the 
year. The hotel and restaurant sector, in par -Private con -
sumption fell 
again, …
… but invest -
ment increasedGoods trade 
with third coun -
tries up again in 
price- adjusted 
terms
Manufacturing 
output increased 
in the euro area 
(excluding 
Ireland )
Rebound for 
service  providers
6 Excluding Ireland. For several years now, the statistical re -
cording of investment as a whole, and of investment in in -
tellectual property in particular, has been strongly influ -
enced by the strategic planning of multinational enterprises 
in that country. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
18

ticular, continued to recover. Following a de -
cline in the previous quarter, a number of 
business- related service providers also appear 
to have stepped up their business activity again 
in the wake of the increase in industrial activity. 
The growth seen in the information and com -
munication sector in the previous quarters is 
likely to have continued.
In a number of euro area countries, GDP 
growth exceeded expectations in the first quar -
ter. Some of these countries benefited particu -
larly strongly from the ongoing recovery in 
tourism. In other countries, the burdens result -
ing from Russia’s war on Ukraine continued to 
have an impact. The erosion of purchasing 
power weighed on households throughout the 
euro area.
According to the preliminary estimate, real GDP 
in France rose by 0.2% in the first quarter, hav -
ing stagnated in the previous quarter. This 
growth was mainly driven by buoyant foreign 
trade resulting from the renewed pick- up in 
international tourism. Exports of transport 
equipment also rose steeply. Domestic demand 
remained weak, however. Although private 
consumption did not fall any further, invest -
ment in buildings as well as in machinery and 
equipment declined markedly. On the supply 
side, there was robust expansion in industry. 
Refineries recovered from the strike- related 
losses in the autumn, and electricity production 
rose significantly after several nuclear power 
plants were restarted. The production of trans -
port equipment also saw considerable growth. 
By contrast, there was a decline in activity 
among service providers and, above all, in the 
construction sector.
Macroeconomic activity in Italy rebounded sub -
stantially at the beginning of the year. Accord -
ing to preliminary data, real GDP increased by 
0.5%, having fallen slightly in the previous 
quarter. Impetus came from both domestic de -
mand and foreign trade, which was probably 
boosted by the revival of international tourism, 
in particular. Falling energy prices, persistently upbeat labour market conditions and rising 
wages probably contributed to a slight increase 
in private consumption. Against this backdrop, 
industry and service providers both saw an in -
crease in output.
According to the preliminary estimate, real GDP 
in Spain grew by 0.5% in the first quarter of 
2023 compared with the previous three 
months, in which it had expanded by a similar 
amount. Economic output has now almost re -
turned to its pre-  pandemic level. Growth was 
driven by significantly higher investment and a 
boost in exports. This was mainly due to ex -
ports of services, with tourism playing an im -GDP growth 
higher than 
expected in 
a number of 
member 
countries 
Moderate 
growth in the 
French economy
Substantial 
rebound in 
 Italy’s real GDPMarked rise in 
GDP in SpainAggregate output in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 2023Real GDP, Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
log scale
80859095100105
758085909510080859095100105
Italy
SpainEuro area
France859095100105
of which:Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
19

portant role. By contrast, private consumption 
fell again markedly. Despite the relatively posi -
tive labour market situation and easing infla -
tion, real wages are likely to have fallen once 
more. Consumer confidence remained well 
below its long- term average, and the propen -
sity to save probably rose again. On the supply 
side, the construction and trade sectors ex -
hibited very substantial expansion.
Real GDP increased markedly, especially in Por -
tugal, but also in Slovenia. It rose moderately in 
Belgium and Slovakia. In Austria and the Neth -
erlands, macroeconomic activity declined. The 
situation in Estonia and Lithuania remained strained, whereas economic output in Latvia 
picked up again somewhat.
The economic downturn continued to have lit -
tle impact on the labour market. The number 
of people in employment actually rose more 
sharply in the first quarter than in the previous 
quarters, and the unemployment rate fell to 
6.5% in March. Only in the industrial sector did 
the labour shortage decline somewhat. At the 
same time, the employment outlook in this sec -
tor deteriorated slightly. Wage growth in the 
first quarter, at between 4% and 5%, was 
probably as strong as in previous periods and 
thus still significantly stronger than in preced -
ing years. The main reasons for this are likely to 
be high inflation and the resulting loss of pur -
chasing power; at the same time, wages are an 
important cost factor.
The strong consumer price inflation eased sig -
nificantly in the first quarter. Annual HICP infla -
tion fell by 2 percentage points to 8.0%, chiefly 
owing to the decrease in energy prices. This 
was due to lower prices for natural gas, electri -
city and petroleum products, but also to fiscal 
relief measures.7 All the main components of 
the HICP except energy increased at more or 
less the same rate as in the previous quarter. 
For food, this was mainly due to marked in -
creases in the prices of dairy products, fats, 
meat products and cereals.
Price growth also remained high for non-  
energy industrial goods and services. Core in -
flation excluding energy and food rose by 
0.4 percentage point to an average of 5.5% in 
the first quarter. In March, it reached a new re -
cord high of 5.7%. Inflation rates for durable 
industrial goods such as passenger cars and 
furniture were particularly high of late. The 
Differences 
between the 
smaller member 
countriesLabour market 
situation 
remains 
favourable 
Decline in infla -
tion thanks to 
lower energy 
prices
Core inflation 
reaches record 
highLabour market in the euro area
6789
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Number of 
vacancies as a percentage of the total number of occupied 
posts and the number of job vacancies.
Deutsche Bundesbank156159162165168
1.52.02.53.03.5Unemployment rateSeasonally adjusted
Million%
Job vacancy rate1Employment
%
–6–30+3+6+9Gross wages and salaries per capita
Year-on-year percentage change
7 Since January, the electricity and gas price brakes have 
been taken into account when measuring inflation in Ger -
many. In comparison to the previous year, energy price in -
flation was additionally dampened by a significant decline 
in HICP weightings in Germany. For more information, see 
p. 54.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
20

prices of services for recreation activities also 
rose particularly steeply.
In April 2023, euro area annual inflation rose by 
0.1 percentage point to 7%. A base effect in 
the case of energy and a somewhat stronger 
price dynamic for services more than offset the 
slightly weaker rise in prices for industrial goods 
and food. Although the core rate fell by 0.1 per -
centage point to 5.6%, it remained exception -
ally high.
Economic output in the euro area is set to ex -
pand slightly in the current quarter, too. How -
ever, there are no signs of a meaningful im -
provement in economic activity. Lower prices 
for intermediate inputs and energy products as 
well as the rapid easing of supply chains are 
supporting production on the supply side. 
However, demand is likely to remain subdued. 
In addition to downbeat global economic activ -
ity, this is due to rising financing costs, which is 
slowing down investment and construction ac -
tivity in particular. The significant wage in -
creases on the horizon are likely to offset the 
losses in household purchasing power. At the 
same time, however, fiscal support measures 
are being phased out. Therefore, private con -sumption is unlikely to provide any major stimu -
lus in the near future. In any case, consumer 
confidence remained depressed despite some 
improvement. Surveys for the industrial and 
services sectors also suggest that there will be 
only a modest expansion in the second quarter. 
The business climate in the manufacturing sec -
tor even deteriorated again of late. By contrast, 
sentiment among service providers remained 
brighter. Labour shortages remained the main 
obstacle to production here.Inflation 
remained strong 
in April
Slight increase 
in GDP also 
expected for the 
current quarter
List of references
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2023), Transcript of Chair Powell’s Press Con -
ference, 3 May 2023, https://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20230503.
pdf
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national economic 
statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65-78.
International Energy Agency (2023), Oil Market Report, May 2023.
International Monetary Fund (2023), World Economic Outlook: A Rocky Recovery, April 2023.Contributions to the euro area
inflation rate (HICP)
Sources: Eurostat, ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 20232024681012
–++++++
HICP (%)Contributions in percentage points
Energy
Excluding energy and foodFoodDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
21

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
At its monetary policy meeting in March 2023, 
the Governing Council of the ECB decided to 
increase the three key ECB interest rates by an -
other 50 basis points each, in line with its de -
termination to ensure the timely return of infla -
tion to the 2% medium- term target. According 
to the new ECB staff macroeconomic projec -
tions finalised in March, inflation is projected to 
remain too high for too long. ECB staff revised 
down the baseline path for headline inflation, 
but this was mainly owing to a smaller contri -
bution from energy prices than previously ex -
pected, whilst underlying price pressures re -
mained strong. Even so, ECB staff saw headline 
inflation averaging 5.3% in 2023, 2.9% in 2024 
and 2.1% in 2025. Financial market tensions 
surrounding the March meeting led to an ele -
vated level of uncertainty, which, in the Gov -
erning Council’s view, reinforced the import -
ance of a data- dependent approach to policy 
rate decisions. Future policy rate decisions will 
also be based on the assessment of the infla -
tion outlook in light of the incoming economic 
and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy 
transmission.
In May 2023, the ECB Governing Council raised 
the key interest rates yet again, but reduced 
the size of the step to 25 basis points. The two 
key interest rate hikes brought the interest rate 
on the deposit facility – currently the most im -
portant rate for money market rates  – to 
3.25%, and the interest rates on the main refi -
nancing operations and the marginal lending 
facility to their present levels of 3.75% and 
4.0%, respectively. The key interest rate hike in 
May came against the backdrop of ongoing 
high inflationary pressures. Overall, the ECB 
Governing Council noted that the incoming in -
formation broadly supported the assessment of 
the medium- term inflation outlook that the 
Governing Council had formed at its March 
meeting. At the same time, the Governing 
Council observed that the past rate increases 
were being transmitted forcefully to euro area 
financing and monetary conditions, while 
stressing that the lags and strength of transmis -
sion to the real economy remained uncertain.
The ECB Governing Council stated that its fu -
ture decisions will ensure that the policy rates 
will be brought to levels sufficiently restrictive 
to achieve a timely return of inflation to the 2% 
medium-  term target and will be kept at those 
levels for as long as necessary. The Governing 
Council will continue to follow a data-  
dependent approach to determining the ap -
propriate level and duration of restriction.
The ECB Governing Council furthermore con -
firmed in May that the key ECB interest rates 
remained its primary tool for setting the mon -
etary policy stance. In parallel, the Governing 
Council will keep reducing the Eurosystem’s 
asset purchase programme (APP) portfolio at a 
measured and predictable pace. In line with 
these principles, the Governing Council expects ECB Governing 
Council decides 
to increase key 
interest rates by 
50 basis points 
in March …… and a further 
25 basis points 
in May
Future decisions 
aim to ensure 
sufficiently 
restrictive policy 
rate level
ECB Governing 
Council decides 
to completely 
discontinue APP 
reinvestmentsKey ECB interest rates and money 
market interest rates in the euro area
Source:  ECB.  1 Monthly  averages.  • =  Average 1 to 
19 May 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022 2023101234
–++++% p.a.
Marginal lending rate
€STR1Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
22

Money market management and liquidity needs
In the reporting period from 8  February 
2023 to 9 May 2023,1 excess liquidity in the 
Eurosystem decreased by a total of €66.2 
billion to an average of €4,013.0 billion, 
though remained at a high level. The de-
cline was mainly driven by early repayments 
and maturing securities under the third ser-
ies of targeted longer- term refi  nancing op-
erations (TLTRO III). Shrinkage in the out-
standing volume under the asset purchase 
programmes also contributed to bringing 
liquidity down, albeit to a lesser extent.
Compared with the eighth reserve mainten-
ance period of 2022, liquidity needs in the 
euro area stemming from autonomous fac-
tors (see the table below) fell by €153.6 bil-
lion to an average of €1,846.0 billion in the 
second reserve maintenance period of 
2023. This had a liquidity- boosting effect 
and thus counteracted an even sharper de-cline in excess liquidity. Having climbed by 
€135.7 billion, the signifi  cant rise in the 
combined total of net foreign assets and 
other factors, which are considered to-
gether owing to liquidity- neutral valuation 
effects, was the main factor behind this de-
velopment. The liquidity- providing effect 
was mainly the result of the drop in non- 
monetary policy deposits, which are 
counted among the other factors. This in-
cludes, in particular, deposits from foreign 
central banks, which fell by €96.6 billion, 
with a substantial portion attributable to 
the decline in deposits held in Germany. 
The €12.2 billion reduction in government 
deposits held with the Eurosystem (of which 
€4.4 billion in Germany) also had a liquidity- 
1 The averages of the second reserve maintenance 
period of 2023 (March 2023- May 2023) are compared 
here with the averages of the eighth reserve mainten-
ance period of 2022 (December 2022- February 2023).
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2023
8 Feb.
to
21 Mar.22 Mar.
to
9 May
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) +  11.7 –   5.9
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) –   7.4 +  19.6
3. Net foreign assets 1 –  23.6 +  28.2
4. Other factors 1 + 139.8 –   8.7
Total + 120.5 +  33.2
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations –   0.3 +   0.5
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –  70.0 – 115.6
c) Other operations –   3.1 –  33.4
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility –   0.1 +   0.1
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  51.4 + 107.0
Total – 124.9 –  41.4
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) –   4.5 –   8.3
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) +   3.4 –   1.2
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
23

providing effect. Net banknote issuance in 
the Eurosystem declined somewhat overall 
by €5.7 billion to €1,559.8 billion, likewise 
expanding liquidity. In Germany, by con-
trast, a small increase of €2.2 billion took 
net issuance to €900.3 billion. Over the 
period under review, the minimum reserve 
requirement in the Eurosystem fell by €2.1 
billion to €165.8 billion, which marginally 
decreased the need for central bank liquid-
ity. In Germany, the reserve requirement 
went down by €1.0 billion to €45.5 billion.
In terms of the purchase programmes, the 
main infl  uencing factor was the scaling down of the asset purchase programme 
(APP). Since 1 March 2023, the APP port-
folio has been trimmed by an average of 
€15 billion per month, while reinvestment 
under the pandemic emergency purchase 
programme (PEPP) has remained un-
changed. Overall, holdings of monetary 
policy assets decreased by €36.5 billion in 
the period under review. As at 12  May 
2023, the balance sheet holdings of the 
asset purchase programmes amounted to 
€4,900.1 billion (see the adjacent table).2 
The average outstanding tender volume in 
the euro area decreased by €185.4 billion 
to €1,119.2 billion during the period under 
review. One of the TLTRO III special redemp-
tion dates that were agreed upon in Octo-
ber 2022 fell within the period under review 
(value date: 22  February 2023) and saw 
repay ments of €36.6 billion. In addition, 
€87.7 billion was voluntarily repaid ahead of 
schedule on a regular repayment date 
(value date: 29 March). At the same time, 
the outstanding tender volume decreased 
by a further €32.2 billion when the TLTRO III.3 
operations matured in March. The volume 
under the regular main refi  nancing oper-
ations and three- month tenders remained 
at a very low level, though there was a 
slight uptick in demand for the main refi  -
nancing operations of late. In Germany, the 
average outstanding volume of all refi  nan-
cing operations fell to an average of €200.9 
billion in the period under review. Special 
repayments under the TLTRO III in February, 
which amounted to €13.9 billion, as well as 
the €9.4 billion stemming from scheduled 
maturing securities and early repayments in 
March, both played a role here. German 
banks’ share in the outstanding volume of 
Eurosystem refi  nancing operations was 
around 18%, which was almost the same Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as at
12 May 2023
Active programmes 1
PSPP – 21.8 2,559.0
CBPP3 –  3.5 299.1
CSPP –  2.3 341.7
ABSPP –  3.0 18.5
PEPP –  5.9 1,678.8
Completed programmes 
SMP +  0.0 2.9
CBPP1 +  0.0 0.0
CBPP2 +  0.0 0.0
1 Changes due to net purchases, maturities, reinvestments 
and amortisation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank
2 In addition to the effects of reduced reinvestment 
under the APP , holdings were also shaped by revalu-
ations and the smoothing of reinvestments under both 
programmes.Autonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing  (liquidity-absorbing)  factors  are  preceded  by  a  positive 
(negative)  sign.  1 Including  end-of-quarter  liquidity-neutral 
valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 20231,8001,5001,20090060030003006009001,200
––––––++++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
24

as in the eighth reserve maintenance period 
of 2022.
The Eurosystem’s policy rate hikes of 50 
basis points each in February and March 
2023 were passed on in the euro money 
market and led to a corresponding increase 
in overnight rates in the fi  rst and second re-
serve maintenance periods (see the adja-
cent chart).
Over the period under review, the un-
secured euro short- term rate (€STR) mir-
rored the policy rate increases almost 
exactly, standing at 2.40% and 2.90% on 
average in the respective reserve mainten-
ance periods. Accordingly, the spread be-
tween the €STR and the deposit facility rate 
remained constant at around 10 basis 
points. After declining in the eighth reserve 
maintenance period of 2022 due to year- 
end effects, money market turnover in-
creased signifi  cantly again in the period 
under review. The €STR volume averaged 
€62.9 billion in the fi  rst reserve mainten-
ance period of 2023 and went down slightly 
to €62.5 billion in the subsequent reserve 
maintenance period due to a number of 
public holidays and the end of the fi  rst 
quarter of 2023. In the secured money mar-
ket, interest rates on the GC Pooling trading 
platform also rose following the policy rate 
hikes. Overnight transactions in the ECB 
basket were executed at an average of 
2.43% in the fi  rst reserve maintenance 
period of 2023 and 2.89% in the subse-
quent reserve maintenance period. This 
meant that the spread over the deposit fa-
cility rate initially narrowed to 7 basis points 
and then grew to 11 basis points. In the 
ECB EXTended basket, which has a broader 
selection of securities with lower rating re-
quirements for concluding repo transac-
tions, overnight trading took place at rates 
of 2.47% and 2.95%, respectively, during 
the period under review. At the same time, the volumes traded in the ECB EXTended 
basket continued to rise, with the average 
volume exceeding turnover in the ECB bas-
ket in both reserve maintenance periods.
In the third reserve maintenance period of 
2023, which is currently under way, it ap-
pears the interest rate increases are again 
being almost fully passed on to the €STR.Deposit facility rate, money market rates 
and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Central 
bank balance minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the 
deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche BundesbankDec. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May
2022 202300.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
+++++++Daily data
% p.a.
0€ bn
3,0004,0005,000 Excess liquidity1
Mean value for the reserve
maintenance period2ECB EXTended basket€STR
STOXX GC Pooling Overnight
ECB basketDeposit facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
25

to discontinue the reinvestments under the APP 
as of July 2023.
The ECB Governing Council continues to see 
significant upside risks to the inflation outlook. 
These include existing pipeline pressures, for 
example. A lasting rise in inflation expectations 
to a level above 2%, or higher than anticipated 
increases in wages or profit margins if there is a 
continued mismatch between supply and de -
mand, could also drive inflation higher, includ -
ing over the medium term. The downside risks 
to inflation, meanwhile, include renewed finan -
cial market tensions or a weakening of de -
mand. The latter could potentially arise due, for 
example, to a more marked slowing of bank 
lending or a stronger than projected transmis -
sion of monetary policy.
The euro short- term rate (€STR) once again 
moved almost entirely in line with the two key 
interest rate hikes totalling 75 basis points dur -
ing the reporting period, closing at 3.147%.Following the May meeting of the Governing 
Council, money market forward rates are pri -
cing in at least one more increase in key inter -
est rates of 25 basis points. The money market 
forward curve is currently expected to peak in 
the second half of 2023 at around 3.6%, which 
is roughly 45 basis points up on the present 
level. Compared with mid- February, the for -
ward curve has thus increased by around 10 
basis points. However, it has fluctuated strongly 
at times since then, with the peak moving be -
tween 3.0% and 4.1%. This significant volatility 
was attributable mainly to bouts of financial 
market turbulence and mounting signs that in -
flation was becoming more entrenched.
The ECB Survey of Monetary Analysts (SMA) 
conducted ahead of the May meeting showed 
that analysts were still expecting to see three 
further interest rate hikes. The 25 basis point 
hike in May matched expectations. SMA par -
ticipants expected further hikes at both the 
June and July monetary policy meetings, also Still significant 
upside risks to 
inflation outlook
€STR moves in 
line with key 
interest rate 
hikesMoney market 
forward rates 
pricing in 
another interest 
rate step
More interest 
rate hikes 
expected, 
SMA showsOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 202305001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,0005,5006,0006,5007,0007,500€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period1
Third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III)
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II)
First series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO I)Pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs)
Additional longer-term refinancing operationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
26

by a median of 25 basis points each, which 
would then bring the deposit facility rate to 
3.75%.
Monetary policy securities holdings have been 
in slight decline since mid- February. Since the 
beginning of March, an average of €15 billion 
of the APP holdings has not been reinvested 
each month. On 12 May 2023, the Eurosystem 
was holding APP assets totalling €3,218.4 bil -
lion (see the remarks on p. 24 for a breakdown 
of the holdings by individual programme). 
Asset holdings reported under the pandemic 
emergency purchase programme (PEPP) came 
to €1,678.9 billion on the same day. The ECB 
Governing Council will continue applying flexi -
bility in reinvesting redemptions coming due in 
the PEPP portfolio, with a view to countering 
risks to the monetary policy transmission mech -
anism related to the pandemic. The aggregate 
holdings reported under both purchase pro -
grammes continued to be influenced by the 
smoothing over time of reinvestments and by 
the use of amortised cost accounting.1
Excess liquidity has continued to contract since 
mid- February, falling by around €60 billion. At 
last count, it came to €4,097 billion. This de -
cline was mainly attributable to maturing secur -
ities and further voluntary repayments under 
the third series of targeted longer- term refinan -
cing operations (TLTRO III). Reduced reinvest -
ments of APP holdings also caused excess 
liquidity to shrink. Developments in autono -
mous factors had a counter- effect, however 
(see the box on pp. 23 ff.).
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
As the monetary policy stance tightened, 
growth in the broad monetary aggregate M3 
continued to weaken sharply in the first quarter 
of 2023. The annual growth rate fell to 2½% at 
the end of March (see the chart on p. 28). The 
increase in money and capital market yields 
brought about by the tightening triggered sub -stantial portfolio shifts by money- holding sec -
tors into higher-  yielding forms of investment, 
such as longer- term bank debt securities, which 
are not included in the money supply. On the 
supply side, the ongoing reduction of the Euro -
system’s balance sheet combined with weak 
bank lending caused monetary growth to slow. 
The subdued economic outlook and increased 
financing costs weakened demand for loans to 
non- financial corporations and households. 
Tighter lending policies are also likely to have 
dampened loan growth. Banks responding to 
the latest Bank Lending Survey (BLS) mainly at -
tributed the further tightening of credit stand -
ards in the reporting quarter to their perception 
of greater credit risk. By contrast, the turmoil in 
the US and Swiss banking sectors in March had 
no discernible impact on credit and deposit 
growth in the first quarter.
Deposit growth was driven instead by differ -
ences in the yields offered by various forms of 
investment, which widened further as Euro -
system key interest rates continued to be 
raised. Against this backdrop, money- holding 
sectors continued to shift their portfolios out of 
highly liquid, low- interest deposits into higher- 
yielding forms of investment with somewhat 
longer investment horizons (see the table on 
p.  29). Overnight deposits in particular were 
once again reduced sharply, with investors 
–  primarily non- financial corporations and 
households  – preferring to carry on adding 
substantially to their stocks of short- term time 
deposits. Short- term bank debt securities and 
money market fund shares, too, attracted in -
creased demand. Overall, however, the strong 
build- up of other short- term assets was unable 
to offset the sharp decline in overnight de -
posits, with the result that the monetary aggre -
gate M3 contracted on balance in the report -
ing quarter for the second time in succession.APP holdings in 
decline since 
March
Excess liquidity 
down again
Monetary 
growth weakens 
sharplyShifts out of 
overnight 
deposits in 
particular  into 
short- term time 
deposits
1 In particular, the difference between the acquisition and 
redemption value is amortised over the security’s residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and measured 
at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
27

Investors shifting funds into longer- term bank 
deposits and bank bonds, which do not count 
towards the money supply, was one reason for 
the decline in money holdings. The superior 
yields compared to deposits offered by longer- 
term bank debt securities in particular meant 
that these assets attracted more demand than 
ever since the financial crisis. In arithmetical 
terms, the increase in these items (which count 
towards longer- term financial liabilities) offset 
the decline in M3, which meant that the 
money- holding sectors did not withdraw any 
funds on balance from the MFI sector in the 
first quarter.
Alongside investors’ preference for longer- term 
investments, the main reason for the drop in 
M3 was the net reduction of credit. On bal -
ance, lending to non- banks in the euro area 
was negative in the quarter under review for 
the first time since 2014. This was primarily be -
cause the MFI sector scaled back its securitised 
lending to domestic non- banks on a fairly sub -
stantial scale. Since the beginning of March, 
the Eurosystem has downsized its APP portfolio 
by an average of €15 billion every month. In 
addition, commercial banks’ bond holdings 
also fell on balance. This was possibly due to 
fairly low net issuance volumes in the corporate 
sector of late combined with an uptick in de -
mand for corporate and government bonds in 
other sectors.
Inflows to loans to the domestic private sector, 
having slumped in the previous quarter, re -
corded a further decline in the first quarter, 
though they did remain slightly positive. One 
particularly striking development was the turn -
around in loans to non- financial corporations, 
where the brisk net lending activity observed 
into the third quarter of 2022 came to an al -
most complete standstill. The slowdown in this 
loan category played out across the entire euro 
area. Despite the slowdown, banks in Germany 
and France were still reporting net inflows in 
the first quarter, but credit institutions in Spain 
and Italy, where lending had already been 
weaker of late, registered minor outflows on Longer- term 
assets offered 
by banks also 
highly sought 
after by 
investors 
Securitised 
lending  reduced 
fairly substan -
tially
Net loans to 
non- financial 
corporations 
came to a 
standstill …Monetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 202342024681012
––++++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14
02468
++++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining 
counterpartsLonger-term 
financial liabilities1Net external assets
Credit to the private sector2
Financial corporations3
Non-financial corporations4
Households5Contribution of components 
in percentage points
Securities-based lending to general governmentPercentage
change
in M3
Percentage
change
in M3
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector2Contribution of counterparts in percentage points
Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
28

aggregate (see the chart on p. 30). The annual 
growth rate for the euro area fell from just 
under 9% at the end of September 2022 to 
5¼% at the end of March.
One major factor behind the weak lending ac -
tivity was the substantial redemptions of the 
short-  term loans that firms had taken out in 
2022 to cover their high liquidity needs stem -
ming from supply chain issues and tension in 
energy markets. Inflows to long- term loans 
were low as well, just as they had been in the 
previous quarter. This would suggest than de -
mand for investment financing was weak in 
light of the uncertain economic situation and 
increased interest rates. The continued tighten -
ing of credit standards reported by BLS banks is 
also likely to have put a damper on lending ac -
tivity. Another contributory factor was a one-  
off effect from Germany. The first quarter saw 
the redemption of another portion of the large- 
volume, government- guaranteed loans that the 
KfW Group had granted to enterprises from 
the energy sector in the second and third quar -
ters of 2022.
Responses by banks participating in the BLS 
substantiate this view. The surveyed institutions 
reported a decline in demand in this loan cat -
egory in the first quarter that was again greater 
than the one they had observed in the previous quarter. BLS banks regarded the increase in the 
general level of interest rates and the decreas -
ing financing needs related to fixed investment 
as the main factors behind the decline. Unlike 
in the previous quarters, financing needs re -
lated to inventories and working capital, mean -
while, stopped buoying demand.
BLS data indicate that euro area banks once 
again substantially tightened their credit stand -
ards for loans to enterprises in the first quarter. 
The surveyed banks yet again cited elevated 
credit risk as the most important reason for 
their adjustments. In particular, the BLS banks 
highlighted the perceived deterioration in the 
economic situation, the economic outlook, as 
well as sector- specific and firm- specific factors. 
Regarding their own behaviour, the banks re -
ported that their risk tolerance had decreased 
further and reiterated that the deteriorations in 
their liquidity positions were another factor on 
the bank side. The rejection rate for loans to 
enterprises rose further in the first quarter. The 
BLS provided no indication either for the euro 
area as a whole or for Germany that the tur -
moil experienced by the banking sector in 
March had impacted negatively on banks’ lend -
ing policies, thereby reinforcing the transmis -
sion of monetary policy.… as a result of 
demand- side 
and supply- side 
factorsBLS banks 
attribute  
decrease in 
demand to 
higher interest 
rates and lower 
financing needs 
for fixed invest -
ment …
… and tight -
ened their credit 
standards again 
for loans to 
enterprisesConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q4 2022 Q1 2023
Holdings against central government 2 41.0 – 110.1
Monetary aggregate M3 –  78.8 –  64.3
Components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) – 360.9 – 367.3
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) 226.3 246.8
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 55.8 56.2
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 63.6 89.2
Capital and reserves 20.7 9.4
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities 42.9 79.8Assets Q4 2022  Q1 2023
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 3.6 – 11.9
Loans – 31.6 6.2
Loans, adjusted 1 10.1 2.9
Securities 35.2 – 18.1
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 45.1 – 78.2
Loans 4.2 – 18.2
Securities 41.0 – 60.0
Net external assets 51.8 75.3
Other counterparts of M3 – 74.6 – 70.4
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
29

Lending to households weakened for the 
fourth consecutive quarter. Net inflows into 
consumer credit eased moderately in the first 
quarter and other lending decreased on bal -
ance. The main factor, however, was the con -
siderable slowdown in housing loans, which 
are the most significant component in terms of 
volume. Net inflows into this loan category 
shrank in the four largest euro area countries. 
Annual growth in loans for house purchase 
contracted to 3¼% at the end of March, which 
represents a drop of just over 2  percentage 
points on the year. One key factor behind the 
decline in loan demand was the change in 
lending rates for loans for house purchase, which rose by 2  percentage points over the 
same period. Another was that the uptick in 
construction prices fuelled by the high inflation 
combined with persistently high housing prices 
in the euro area dragged on loan demand. The 
BLS banks, too, observed another strong drop 
in demand for housing loans, which they at -
tributed to the increased level of interest rates, 
the gloomy outlook in the housing market, and 
the decline in consumer confidence.
BLS data indicate that euro area banks also 
tightened their credit standards for housing 
loans once again. This is another loan category 
in which the surveyed banks reported tighten -
ing their credit standards primarily on account 
of their perceptions of higher credit risk. This 
assessment was based not just on the deterior -
ation in the general economic situation and the 
bleaker outlook in the housing market, but also 
the decline in borrowers’ creditworthiness. Re -
duced risk tolerance and deteriorations in their 
liquidity positions were other reasons cited by 
the banks.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business with domestic 
customers continued to weaken in the first 
quarter of 2023. Whilst investors’ interest in 
short- term time deposits increased significantly 
once again, the strong growth in this market 
segment was almost entirely offset by a corres -
ponding reduction in overnight deposits and 
short- term savings deposits. These shifts repre -
sent investors’ –  especially households’ and 
non- financial corporations’ – response to a fur -
ther widening of the yield spread between 
short- term time deposits remunerating at close- 
to- market rates and other short- term bank de -
posits (see the chart on p.  31). Against this 
backdrop, the overnight deposits and short-  
term savings deposits held by domestic private 
sectors fell steeply overall.Lending to 
households for 
house purchase 
weakened sig -
nificantly …… and credit 
standards tight -
ened again, BLS 
banks report
Deposit business 
characterised by 
rebalancing as a 
result of rising 
interest rates …MFI loans to the private non-financial 
sector in the euro area*
20020406080100120140
–+++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank... France
... Italy... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
–200+20+40+60+80 To households3To non-financial corporations1
Total2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
30

As part of the yield- driven portfolio rebalan -
cing, domestic investors likewise showed 
slightly more interest in long- term bank de -
posits – for the first time in more than eight 
years. On the one hand, households upped 
their long- term time deposits and savings de -
posits. On the other hand, financial corpor -
ations, which are generally more yield-  
conscious than households and non- financial 
corporations, continued to reduce their long-  
term time deposits, as they have been doing 
for more than 13 years now, but to a consider -
ably lesser degree. Overall, this development 
suggests that, in the current environment of 
rising interest rates, longer- term bank deposits 
are also gradually benefiting from the higher 
opportunity costs of holding liquid funds. In 
addition to these shifts within deposits, funds 
also flowed into other forms of investment, 
particularly bank debt securities, amongst 
others, motivated by considerations of yield.
German banks’ lending business with domestic 
customers also weakened further in the first 
quarter of 2023, but, unlike in the euro area, 
remained in positive territory overall. Lending 
to both the domestic private sector and to do -
mestic general government was down. The 
slight increase in loans granted to general gov -
ernment was offset on balance by a similar de -
crease in securities- based lending to this sector.
The subdued lending to the domestic private 
sector stemmed primarily from relatively weak 
lending to non- financial corporations. As in the 
previous quarter, this was chiefly due to enter -
prises stepping up their repayments of short-  
term loans. This included ongoing repayments 
of large- volume, government- guaranteed assis -
tance loans that had been granted to enter -
prises from the energy sector. By contrast, 
long-  term loans to non-  financial corporations 
once again increased markedly and were thus 
able to offset the substantial decline in short-  
term maturities.
On aggregate, it is likely that the current devel -
opments in loans to non- financial corporations are a reflection of several factors and are driven 
by both demand- side and supply- side factors. 
In addition to lower energy prices and easing 
supply bottlenecks, demand for loans is cur -
rently also being dampened by the now signifi -
cantly higher lending rates as well as the uncer -
tainty surrounding the economic outlook. 
Moreover, the banks in Germany surveyed by 
the BLS have been reporting tighter credit 
standards since the summer of 2022 and this is 
also likely to be gradually having an impact on 
lending.
The banks responding to the BLS cited higher 
interest rates and lower financing needs related 
to fixed investment as the main reasons for the 
decline in loan demand. By contrast, financing 
needs related to inventories and working cap -
ital continued to provide positive stimulus for 
demand.
At the same time, the BLS data suggest that 
banks in Germany tightened their credit stand -… with a slight 
pick- up in inter -
est in long- term 
bank deposits
Lending business 
with non- banks 
again weaker
Lending to 
non- financial 
corporations 
sees divergent 
developments 
in individual 
maturitiesSlowdown in 
loans to non- 
financial corpor -
ations driven by 
demand- side 
and supply- side 
factors
Higher lending 
rates and lower 
financing needs 
for fixed invest -
ment key to 
declining 
demandInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 202310123
–+++% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 months
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsSavings deposits redeemable at notice of ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
31

ards for corporate lending again on balance 
– albeit to a lesser extent than in the previous 
quarter – and reported stricter credit terms and 
conditions overall. Similarly to the euro area as 
a whole, the German BLS banks attributed the 
restrictive nature of their lending policies pri -
marily to the deterioration in the general eco -
nomic situation and outlook as well as to 
industry- specific and firm- specific factors. 
Equity costs or banks’ costs related to their 
capital positions, which still had a restrictive im -
pact on the standards in the previous survey, 
have ceased to contribute to the tightening of 
standards in the past three months.While the previously booming corporate lend -
ing business abruptly collapsed in the autumn 
of 2022, the slowdown in lending to house -
holds started earlier – in the spring of 2022 – 
and was much more gradual. Lending business 
with domestic households continued to lose 
momentum in the reporting quarter, too. In 
this context, households again exhibited lower 
demand for loans for house purchase than in 
the previous quarters. High inflation, a signifi -
cant rise in construction prices and further in -
creases in the costs of funds dampened house -
hold demand for construction and bank loans. 
According to the MFI interest rate statistics, 
interest rates on loans for house purchase con -
tinued to rise in the first quarter, reaching 3.8% 
at the end of the period under review.
The bank supply side also had a restrictive im -
pact on loans for house purchase in the first 
quarter. The BLS data suggest that banks in 
Germany tightened their credit standards in the 
area of loans to households for house purchase 
on balance again in the first quarter. Compared 
to the tightening in the previous three quarters, 
the current tightening of standards was less 
pronounced, as was the case for loans to en -
terprises. In this loan category, too, banks justi -
fied more stringent requirements primarily 
based on their perception of elevated credit 
risk.
By contrast, credit terms and conditions in the 
area of loans to households for house purchase 
were eased again for the first time since the 
start of the war against Ukraine. Banks cited 
heightened competition in particular as the 
reason for easing credit terms and conditions 
overall and narrowing margins.
According to the BLS, banks’ lending policies 
for consumer credit and other lending to 
households were also tightened again in the 
first quarter of 2023. Moreover, as the cost of 
funds for consumer credit and other lending to 
households continued to rise, their demand for 
these products declined noticeably overall.Credit standards 
tightened to 
lesser extent 
than in previous 
quarterGrowth in loans 
for house pur -
chase continued 
to weaken
Credit standards 
for loans for 
house purchase 
more restrictive
Demand for 
consumer credit 
and other 
lending  also in 
decline overall2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 202302468Year-on-year change, end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic 
private non-financial sector
202468101214
–+++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchaseTotal,
percentage changeLoan contributions 
in percentage pointsTotal,
percentage changeUp to 1 yearMaturity contributions in percentage points
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 yearsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
32

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q2 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 20231.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.5
–300+30+60–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2015 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 230.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
30030
–+
30030
–+Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
33

In light of the conditions in financial markets, 
the surveyed German banks reported that their 
funding situations had deteriorated slightly 
compared with the previous quarter, including 
as regards the issuance of medium- term to 
long- term debt securities.
The changes in the stocks of securities held by 
the Eurosystem for monetary policy purposes 
that arise as a result of net purchases or incom -
plete reinvestments barely impacted on banks’ 
liquidity positions and their profitability over the past six months. By contrast, the effect on 
banks’ market financing conditions was nega -
tive. This is likely to reflect the discontinuation 
of net asset purchases as of July 2022 and the 
reduction in reinvestments since March 2023. 
The changes in the monetary policy portfolios 
did not lead to any changes in banks’ credit 
standards and credit terms and conditions for 
loans to the private sector, though. They did, 
however, contribute to a decline in the volumes 
of loans for house purchase as well as con -
sumer credit and other lending.
According to the banks, TLTRO III again had a 
positive impact on their financial situations in 
the winter half- year (October 2022 to March 
2023), despite the fact that no further oper -
ations have been conducted since December 
2021. The operations contributed directly or in -
directly to more comfortable liquidity positions 
and increases in profitability. They also helped 
improve banks’ ability to fulfil regulatory and 
supervisory requirements. Compared with the 
summer half- year (April to September 2022), 
these influences diminished significantly, how -
ever. Banks reported that the TLTRO III oper -
ations have not had any noteworthy impact on 
their credit standards, credit terms and condi -
tions, or lending volumes over the past six 
months.
The Eurosystem’s key interest rate hikes have 
had, overall, a positive impact on banks’ profit -
ability over the past six months. While they 
strained net non- interest income, this was 
more than offset by a marked improvement in 
net interest income.Funding environ -
ment deterior -
ated slightly for 
German banks
Securities held 
for monetary 
policy purposes 
impacted nega -
tively on banks’ 
market financing 
conditionsContinued posi -
tive effects of 
TLTRO III on 
banks’ financial 
situations
Positive impact 
of Eurosystem 
key interest rate 
decisions on 
banks’ profit -
abilityMFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2022 2023
Q4 Q1
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight – 28.9 – 84.0
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years 52.3 104.2
over 2 years –  4.4 2.7
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months – 13.7 – 24.9
over 3 months 0.8 4.0
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans 1.9 0.9
Securities 1.8 –  0.6
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 21.8 18.7
of which: to households 3 12.0 8.8
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 0.8 1.9
Securities 2.5 0.3
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. Adjusted for statistical 
changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, households and gen-
eral government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted for 
loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institutions 
serving households. 4   Non- fi  nancial corporations and quasi- 
corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
34

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Since the beginning of the year, international 
financial markets have been contending with 
persistently high inflation rates and bouts of 
distinct tension, particularly in the US regional 
banking system. At the start of the first quarter, 
major central banks tightened their monetary 
policy stance in view of the inflation outlook, 
which continues to be above the 2% definition 
of price stability over the projection horizon up 
to 2025. They also indicated that further inter -
est rate rises were necessary in order to ensure 
a timely decrease in inflation. The collapse of 
several US regional banks led to concerns emer -
ging about the stability of the financial system 
from mid- March onwards. Market uncertainty 
soared amid fears of contagion effects, trigger -
ing a flight to safety which significantly re -
duced yields on safe securities. At the same 
time, market participants made downward re -
visions to their expectations about the paths of 
policy rates – especially for the United States. 
Markets assumed that the US regional banking 
crisis could lead to deteriorated financing con -
ditions there over a longer period. By contrast, 
the collapse of the major Swiss bank Credit Su -
isse was only a temporary strain on the inter -
national financial system. As the reporting 
period progressed, the spillover effects on 
international financial markets emanating from 
the United States receded. Together with fa -
vourable economic reports, especially for the 
euro area, as well as growing risk appetite and 
further policy rate hikes, this stabilised bond 
yields on both sides of the Atlantic. In the 
equity markets, as well, the bank turmoil had 
only a temporary and comparatively moderate 
impact; overall, both the broad EURO STOXX 
index and European bank equity prices re -
corded marked gains. The euro has also been 
trading more strongly on balance since the turn 
of the year, including against the US dollar and 
the Japanese yen. It thus continued its effective 
appreciation from the final quarter of 2022.Exchange rates
The main reason for the euro’s appreciation 
against the US dollar in the year to date was 
the growing divergence in the monetary policy 
outlook on both sides of the Atlantic as viewed 
by the market. However, following the euro’s 
initial marked appreciation against the US dol -
lar at the beginning of the year, the market 
picked up on monetary policy tightening sig -
nals from the Federal Reserve in February and 
early March, which temporarily weighed on the 
euro. Surprisingly robust US economic data and 
unexpectedly high inflation figures formed the 
background to these developments. The col -
lapse of several US regional banks led market 
participants to make significant downward re -
visions from mid- March onwards to the ex -
pected tightening of the Fed’s monetary policy 
stance. Nevertheless, interest rate expectations 
in the euro area, which had also fallen for a 
time in connection with the banking turmoil, 
rose again rapidly in view of persistently high 
inflation rates. This contrasted with an unex -
pectedly sharp decline in inflation rates re -
ported for the United States in April, which fur -
ther dampened expectations of interest rate in -
creases there. As a result, the euro area’s mon -
etary policy outlook compared to that for the 
United States was estimated to be more re -
strictive than before. This along with the publi -
cation of better- than- expected economic indi -
cators from the euro area buoyed the euro, 
causing it to reach its highest level against the 
US dollar in more than a year at the beginning 
of May. However, the subsequent publication 
of robust US economic data resulted in the 
euro once again falling below this mark, trad -
ing at US$1.08 as this report went to press. 
Since the beginning of the year, the euro has 
appreciated by 1.3%.
The euro recorded particularly large gains 
against the yen. The relative monetary policy 
stance of the two respective central banks was Financial mar -
kets focusing on 
persistently high 
inflation rates 
and bouts of 
distinct tension 
in US regional 
banking systemEuro up against 
US dollar
Euro gains 
significantly  
against yen, …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
35

a key factor in this, too. The yen was burdened 
above all by the Japanese central bank’s new 
Governor announcing his intention to maintain 
the ultra- loose monetary policy of his predeces -
sor. Moreover, the marked losses of the yen, 
which usually tends to appreciate in times of 
heightened tension in the international finan -
cial markets, suggest that the foreign exchange 
market, too, regarded the recent banking tur -
moil as being regionally confined to the United 
States. As this report went to press, the euro 
was trading at ¥150, which was some 6.3% 
above its value at the end of December.By contrast, the euro depreciated against the 
pound sterling. Despite a series of policy rate 
hikes by the Bank of England to 4.5%, the UK 
inflation rate was still in double- digit territory at 
the end of the period under review and was 
also higher than expected. At the same time, 
economic growth surprised on the upside. 
Both of these factors dampened nascent ex -
pectations of a flatter interest rate path in the 
United Kingdom and buoyed the pound. As 
this report went to press, the euro was trading 
at £0.87, around 2.1% lower than at the end of 
December.
On a weighted average against the currencies 
of the broader group of countries, the euro has 
appreciated by 0.8% on balance since the be -
ginning of the year. In addition to the afore -
mentioned gains against the US dollar and the 
yen, the euro’s gains of around 3.0% against 
the renminbi and 6.6% against the won pro -
vided the greatest contributions to the euro’s 
appreciation in effective terms. By contrast, the 
euro depreciated against the currencies of 
some central and eastern European countries.
Securities markets and 
portfolio  transactions
Bond market
Overall, nominal government bond yields have 
declined since the beginning of the year in 
both the United States and the euro area. 
These developments were largely shaped by 
changes in the monetary policy outlook on 
both sides of the Atlantic. For the case of the 
United States, market participants adjusted 
their expected path of policy rates by anticipat -
ing an earlier end to the tightening cycle and 
pricing in marked downside risks to the policy 
outlook from the third quarter of 2023 on -
wards, which put pressure on government 
bond yields worldwide. This revision of expect -
ations was mainly due to the tensions in the US 
regional banking system that emerged in 
March, which also impacted the European … but depreci -
ates against 
pound sterling
Euro stronger in 
effective terms
Yields on ten- 
year govern -
ment bonds 
down in euro 
area and United 
StatesExchange rate of the euro
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Calculated 
against the currencies of 18 countries. A rise in values indicates 
an appreciation of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankD J FMAM J J A S OND J FMAM
2021 2022 20230.951.001.051.101.15
125130135140145150
0.820.850.880.91
9296100104Daily data, log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
... yen
... pound sterling
Nominal effective exchange rate1
Q1 1999 = 100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
36

financial markets for a time. In the euro area, 
however, the predominantly brighter economic 
outlook and the perception of persistent infla -
tion dynamics –  if viewed in isolation  – also 
exerted upward pressure on yields, limiting the 
spillover effects from the United States. While 
the Fed, like the Eurosystem, continued to 
tighten its monetary policy in the reporting 
period, it increased policy rates to a lesser ex -
tent than the Eurosystem. Moreover, at its 
meeting in May, the ECB Governing Council an -
nounced that it expects the reinvestment of 
maturing securities purchased under the asset 
purchase programme (APP) to be completely 
discontinued as of the second half of the year.
Yields on US as well as European government 
bonds rose initially until early March. A contrib -
uting factor was that, given the slow decline in 
inflation rates, market participants initially as -
sumed that a higher level of policy rates would 
likely be required over a longer period in both 
currency areas. However, the US regional bank -
ing turmoil and related fears of contagion ef -
fects triggered a flight to safety, putting strong 
pressure on government bond yields. In view of 
a temporary sharp increase in general uncer -
tainty, market participants made downward re -
visions to their expectations about the policy 
rate path, especially for the United States and, 
to a lesser extent, also for the euro area. One 
possible explanation for this is that market par -
ticipants believed the pressure on the US bank -
ing system could reinforce the transmission of 
monetary policy in the United States and 
thereby reduce the extent of necessary policy 
rate hikes. This was reflected in significantly 
higher interest rate uncertainty for a time, as 
was shown, for example, by the increase in the 
implied volatility of Bund yields. The easing of 
financial market tensions as of the end of 
March, continuing positive economic reports, 
especially in the euro area, and a greater risk 
appetite returning amongst investors caused 
yields to rise again. Over the entire reporting 
period, however, the GDP-  weighted yield on 
ten- year euro area bonds fell by 19 basis points US regional 
banking turmoil 
dampens yieldsPolicy rates in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Refinitiv. 1 Based on swap contracts covering 
scheduled ECB Governing Council meeting days.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND
2023%
2.02.53.03.54.04.5
Realised deposit facility rateImplied deposit facility rate1
9 January 20237 March 202319 May 2023
Policy rates in the United States
Sources: ECB and Refinitiv. 1 Based on federal funds futures 
contracts covering scheduled FOMC meeting days.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND
2023%
4.04.55.05.56.0Implied effective federal funds rate1
Realised effective federal funds rate9 January 20237 March 202319 May 2023
Decomposition of ten-year yields on 
Bunds and US Treasuries*
Sources: Bundesbank calculations following the methodology 
of Adrian et al. (2013). Database for US Treasury yields follow-
ing the methodology of Gürkaynak et al. (2007). * Cumulated 
changes since 31 December 2021.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND J FMAM
2022 20230123% p.a., daily data
0123
United StatesGermanyYield Expectations component
Term premiumDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
37

to 3.1%, while yields on ten- year US Treasuries 
fell by 20 basis points to 3.7%.
In the United Kingdom, the yields on ten-  year 
gilts rose markedly in the period under review 
(+33 basis points to 4.0%). In view of still unex -
pectedly high inflation rates, wages rising sur -
prisingly fast and positive signals from real 
economic  leading indicators, market partici -
pants expected further policy rate hikes by the 
Bank of England. In Japan, yields on ten- year 
Japanese government bonds fell slightly to 
0.4% (-2 basis points). They therefore remain 
within the target range, which was doubled by 
25 basis points in December and since then has 
stood at between -50 and +50 basis points. At 
its April meeting, the Japanese central bank did 
not change its monetary policy stance.
The yield on ten- year Bunds fell in the period 
under review (-14 basis points to 2.4%), amid a 
temporary significant increase in the fluctuation 
range. According to a model breakdown of the 
yield curve, the decline in yields largely reflects 
a decline in the term premia that investors de -
mand for assuming price risks when purchasing 
long- term bonds. This is due to a marked de -
cline in real term premia, whereas inflation risk 
premia increased somewhat (see the remarks 
on p. 42). The lower term premia, which are in 
keeping with the likewise lower US term pre -
mia, point to priced- out upside risks and, at the 
same time, to growing downside risks in the 
interest rate outlook.
The yield spread between ten- year Bunds and 
maturity- matched bonds issued by the Kredit -
anstalt für Wiederaufbau  (KfW) initially moved 
sideways, before rising visibly in March. This 
spread reflects the liquidity premium that mar -
ket participants pay for the higher liquidity of 
Bunds. Its temporary rise reflects the tensions 
in the banking sector, which increased demand 
for the more liquid Bunds compared with KfW 
bonds. With financial market uncertainty falling 
significantly as of the end of March, the liquid -
ity premium narrowed again visibly and was 
only slightly higher at the end of the period under review than it was at the beginning of 
the year. The scarcity premium for Bunds, as 
measured by the yield spread between ten- year 
Bunds and maturity matched overnight index 
swaps (OIS), moved in parallel with the liquidity 
premium. At the end of the reporting period, it 
was also slightly higher than its end- December 
level.
The yield spread between ten- year Bunds and 
ten- year government bonds of other euro area 
countries (GDP-  weighted average) narrowed 
slightly compared with the beginning of the 
year to 95 basis points. It was noteworthy that 
the tensions in the banking sector in March 
were reflected in the government spreads only 
temporarily and only to a weak extent. This is 
relevant in light of the sovereign- bank nexus, 
through which a distressed banking system 
can, in principle, fuel doubts about a country’s 
solvency (and vice versa). For example, the yield 
spreads for Italy, where the sovereign- bank 
nexus is comparatively entrenched, actually 
narrowed at an above- average extent in the re -
porting period. This suggests that market par -
ticipants did not consider the temporary uncer -
tainty in the banking system to stem from 
country- specific European causes. Both the in -
creased risk appetite and the improved eco -
nomic outlook are likely to have contributed to 
the, on balance, somewhat narrower yield 
spreads. The discontinuation of reinvestments 
of maturing securities under the APP , which the 
ECB Governing Council expects from July 2023, 
did not visibly affect yield spreads.
At the end of the reporting period, market-  
based short- term inflation expectations for the 
euro area were at a similarly high level to that 
seen at the beginning of the year, after tem -
porarily falling to just slightly above 2% as a re -
sult of the banking turmoil. Once concerns 
about the euro banking system had dissipated 
rapidly, markets revised their inflation expect -
ations, as measured by the forward inflation 
curve, upwards again over the entire ten- year 
horizon. This upward revision was driven, 
amongst other things, by new historical highs Yields up in the 
United Kingdom 
and virtually 
unchanged in 
Japan
Lower yield on 
ten-year Bunds
Liquidity 
premium  some -
what higherSlight narrowing 
of yield spreads 
in euro area
Market partici -
pants expected 
high inflation 
rates to persistDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
38

Developments in the free fl  oat of Federal securities
Their high credit quality and liquidity make 
Federal securities (Bunds) an important 
benchmark for pricing other fi  nancial instru-
ments in the euro area. A necessary condi-
tion to fulfi  l this benchmark function is a 
suffi   ciently large free fl  oat – recent develop-
ments in the free fl  oat will be discussed in 
more detail in the following sections.1 Gen-
erally speaking, free fl  oat refers to the share 
of a securities issue that is freely available to 
market participants for trading. A suffi   -
ciently large free fl  oat is a prerequisite for 
good tradability and market liquidity. It 
allows new, relevant information to enter 
the bond price formation process quickly 
and effi   ciently.
A frequently used approach for quantifying 
the free fl  oat is based on market partici-
pants’ securities holdings data. For the euro 
area, this measure can be approximated 
using the Eurosystem’s Securities Holdings 
Statistics by Sector (SHSS).2 Free fl  oat com-
prises the sum of relevant securities hold-
ings in the private sector. The holdings of 
insurance corporations and pension funds 
– which are classed as strategic investors, 
are subject to strict regulatory requirements 
and which generally hold securities to ma-
turity – are not considered free fl  oat. Public 
sector investors, such as central banks, also 
tend to hold securities over the long term. 
The holdings of this group of investors are 
likewise not considered free fl  oat. In meth-odological terms, free fl  oat can be meas-
ured both in absolute amounts and as a 
percentage of the total volume of outstand-
ing bonds.
The Eurosystem’s impact on the free 
fl  oat
The Eurosystem’s public sector purchase 
programme (PSPP), which was launched at 
the beginning of 2015, largely involved euro 
area government bonds and thus also Fed-
eral securities. Up until the end of 2019, the 
Federal Government’s net issuance fl  uctu-
ated around the zero mark, meaning that 
the total volume of outstanding bonds re-
mained virtually unchanged. The monetary 
policy purchases therefore resulted in other 
holders reducing their holdings and the 
Eurosystem becoming the largest single in-
vestor in Federal securities over the course 
of the programme. Provided the sellers 
were not strategic investors with a long- 
term horizon, the asset purchases reduced 
the free fl  oat accordingly.3 If free fl  oat is re-
corded in absolute terms at nominal values 
(€ billion), it reached its lowest level to date, 
1 See also previous analyses of the change in the 
holder structure of Federal securities in Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2018, 2022a). For more information on 
their impact on the market for Federal securities, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b).
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2015).
3 In order to counteract a shortage of Federal secur-
ities, the conditions for the purchase programmes 
were adjusted and securities lending against cash col-
lateral was introduced at the end of 2016; see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c).Federal securities: outstanding volume 
and Bundesbank holdings
1 Includes the Finance Agency’s proprietary holdings. 2 Exclus-
ively holdings held by the Bundesbank.
Deutsche Bundesbank€ bn
03006009001,2001,5001,800
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022PEPP
PSPPOutstanding volume1
Purchased holdings2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
39

€420 billion, in the fourth quarter of 2019 – 
in relation to the observation period from 
the end of 2014. At 36%, the relative meas-
ure of free fl  oat also briefl  y recorded a low.
In response to the coronavirus pandemic, 
the ECB Governing Council introduced an 
additional purchase programme – the pan-demic emergency purchase programme 
(PEPP)  – which likewise included govern-
ment debt securities.4 At the same time, 
substantial fi  scal support measures were 
taken by the government, leading to higher 
government expenditure, which was 
fi  nanced in part by additional issuance of 
Federal securities. On balance, net new is-
suance by the Federal Government has ex-
ceeded the Eurosystem’s net purchase vol-
ume since the beginning of 2020. As a re-
sult, the two methods for measuring free 
fl  oat outlined above have shown different 
developments in recent years. Measured in 
absolute terms, free fl  oat increased signifi  -
cantly on balance to €568 billion at the end 
of 2022. This meant it was higher than be-
fore the start of the monetary policy pur-
chase programmes. When interpreting 
these fi  gures, it must be borne in mind that 
the total outstanding volume of Federal 
securities has grown by almost one- half 
since the end of 2019. However, when 
4 This is a temporary asset purchase programme of pri-
vate and public sector securities implemented to coun-
ter the threats posed by the extraordinary economic 
and market conditions during the pandemic on the 
ability of the Eurosystem to fulfi  l its mandate. It was 
launched on 26 March 2020 and ran in addition to the 
asset purchase programme (APP). Its envelope was ex-
panded over the programme’s lifetime to a total of 
€1,850 billion.
Holder structure of Federal securities in free fl  oat*
Holdings
Item2014 2019 2022
€ bn % € bn % € bn %
Free fl  oat, total 542.4 45.6 420.3 35.7 568.2 33.3
Domestic private investors 1 63.1 5.3 40.7 3.5 60.2 3.5
Financial investors 1 51.7 4.4 37.2 3.2 52.4 3.1
Non- fi  nancial investors 11.3 1.0 3.5 0.3 7.8 0.5
Private investors from the euro area excluding 
 Germany 1 128.7 10.8 78.4 6.7 128.0 7.5
Financial investors 1 124.3 10.5 76.6 6.5 122.3 7.2
Non- fi  nancial investors 4.4 0.4 1.8 0.1 5.7 0.3
Private investors from non- euro area countries 350.7 29.5 301.2 25.6 380.0 22.3
Sources: ESCB (SHSS database), Bundesbank calculations. * Holdings at year- end based on nominal values. Securities issued by 
FMS Wertpapiermanagement and central government’s off-budget entities are not included. 1 The holdings of insurance cor-
porations and pension funds as strategic long- term investors are deducted.
Deutsche BundesbankFederal securities in free float*
Sources: ESCB (SHSS database) and Bundesbank calculations. 
* End-of-quarter values based on nominal values. Securities is-
sued  by  FMS  Wertpapiermanagement  and  central  govern-
ment’s off-budget entities are not included. 1 Total private sec-
tor holdings, excluding euro area insurance corporations and 
pension funds. For non-euro area countries, the entire private 
sector is considered free float as insurance corporations and 
pension funds are not reported separately. Only holdings re-
corded in the SHSS database are included. 2 Free float in rela-
tion to the outstanding volume of Federal securities counted, 
including the Finance Agency's own holdings.
Deutsche Bundesbank14 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022283236404448€ bn
420460500540580
%Absolute free float1
Relative free float2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
40

viewed in relative terms in relation to the 
total outstanding volume, free fl  oat con-
tinued to decline on balance, chiefl  y be-
cause the Eurosystem substantially in-
creased its holdings of Federal securities 
again in the context of the PEPP . The rela-
tive measure of free fl  oat reached its lowest 
level to date in the fi  rst quarter of 2022, at 
just under 29%. There has been a slight re-
bound since then, which is not least associ-
ated with the end of net purchases under 
the PEPP . At 33%, however, the fi  gure was 
signifi  cantly lower at the end of 2022 than 
the fi  gure of 46% recorded before the start 
of the purchase programmes.5
Breakdown of free fl  oat
The SHSS allows the free fl  oat to be broken 
down more precisely into the regions in 
which investors are resident. Private invest-
ors from non- euro area countries contrib-
ute the largest share. At the end of 2022, 
their share of the total outstanding volume 
of Federal securities amounted to 22%, 
which corresponds to roughly two- thirds of 
total free fl  oat. A further breakdown into 
fi  nancial and non- fi  nancial investors is pos-
sible for investors from the euro area and 
Germany. Insurance corporations and pen-
sion funds are deducted from the group of 
fi  nancial investors since they are considered 
strategic investors as outlined above.6 Look-
ing at private investors in the euro area, 
Federal securities are held almost exclusively 
by fi  nancial investors. This breakdown has 
also hardly changed over time. It is striking 
that, at the end of 2022, fi  nancial investors’ 
absolute holdings were roughly back at the 
levels that were attributed to their port-
folios before the start of the purchase pro-
grammes. By contrast, there has been a de-
cline in the percentage share accounted for 
by fi  nancial euro area investors measured in 
terms of the total outstanding volume.Signifi  cant shift among fi  nancial investors
Looking at fi  nancial investors in the euro 
area, it is clear that banks, in particular, 
have withdrawn from Federal securities 
compared with the end of 2014. The invest-
ment fund sector has taken their place. This 
development can be attributed to various 
reasons. On the one hand, new regulatory 
requirements or changing business models, 
for example, may have led to altered invest-
ment behaviour.7 A further reason could be 
5 For information on the monetary policy effects of 
the purchase programmes on the yield curve, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023). The programmes pri-
marily took effect through a change in the free fl  oat of 
government bonds and thus the aggregate duration 
risk on the balance sheets of securities holders outside 
of the Eurosystem.
6 This breakdown is not possible for non- euro area 
countries, which means that insurance corporations 
and pension funds cannot be deducted from the free 
fl  oat for these countries.
7 For instance, greater regulatory requirements may 
have caused banks to reduce their market- making ac-
tivity; see the empirical study on corporate bonds by 
Haselmann et al. (2022).Composition of free float: 
selected financial sectors*
Sources: ESCB (SHSS database) and Bundesbank calculations. 
* Free float as total private sector holdings excluding euro area 
insurance corporations and pension funds. For non-euro area 
countries, the entire private sector is considered free float as 
insurance  corporations  and  pension  funds  are  not  reported 
separately. Only holdings recorded in the SHSS database are in-
cluded.
Deutsche Bundesbank20144048121620242832
–++++++++%
Euro area
of which:
GermanyEuro area
of which:
Germany
2019 2022Banks Investment fundsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
41

in the euro area core inflation rate, i.e. the in -
flation rate excluding energy and food price de -
velopments. Markets therefore expect inflation 
to persist for a longer period of time and to re -
main above the Eurosystem’s 2% definition of 
price stability over the next two years (2024: 
2.5%; 2025: 2.3%). In contrast to their assess -
ments for the United States, market partici -
pants only tentatively believed that the turmoil 
in the banking sector could amplify the trans -
mission of monetary policy in the euro area 
and thus significantly reduce the need for pol -
icy rate hikes. Survey-  based inflation expect -
ations calculated by Consensus Economics put 
inflation at 5.5% for 2023 and 2.4% for 2024.
Longer- term inflation expectations remained 
high and are currently at levels last seen in 
2012. The five- year forward inflation rate five 
years ahead, which is derived from inflation 
swaps, stood at 2.5% at last count, up 10 basis 
points from the end of December 2022. Against 
the backdrop of inflation releases in early March 2023, the rate rose to a worrying level 
of 2.6%. The quarterly survey- based inflation 
expectations calculated by Consensus Econom -
ics for the euro area six to ten years ahead re -
mained virtually unchanged and thus closer to 
the 2% inflation target. Consequently, the dif -
ference between market- based and survey-  
based long- term inflation expectations widened 
moderately. This difference can largely be re -
garded as an inflation risk premium in this con -
text. Market participants are therefore still con -
cerned that inflation dynamics could unexpect -
edly be above the inflation target in the me -
dium and long term. Uncertainty regarding the 
inflation outlook thus remained high, which 
was also reflected in the probabilities of future 
inflation rates derived from inflation options.
Market-  based five- year US forward inflation 
rates five years ahead rose by 5 basis points 
from their level at the beginning of the year to 
2.6%. Survey- based inflation expectations six 
to ten years ahead calculated by Consensus Rise in longer- 
term inflation 
expectations
Longer- term 
market- based 
and survey- 
based inflation 
expectations in 
the United 
States risingthat European banks have used their access 
to the deposit facility in recent years. Given 
that the interest rate on many Federal secur-
ities was lower than the deposit facility rate 
over extended periods of time, this facility 
gave them a more attractive alternative to 
holding high- quality liquid assets.8 In view 
of the shift in the interest rate environment, 
it remains to be seen whether banks will re-
turn to being more signifi  cant investors in 
Federal securities in the long term. At the 
end of 2022, their share was less than 1% 
of the total outstanding volume.
8 The special role of Federal securities is also evident 
from the fact that, in the secured short- term money 
market, an interest rate reduction is granted if German 
Federal securities are provided as collateral. For infor-
mation on this repo specialness in connection with the 
asset purchase programmes, see Baltzer et al. (2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
42

Economics grew by 7 basis points to 2.3%. The 
inflation risk premium as the difference be -
tween market- based and survey- based inflation 
expectations remained positive in the United 
States, too.
Yields on BBB- rated European corporate bonds 
with residual maturities of between seven and 
ten years have declined slightly in the year to 
date, for both financial and non- financial cor -
porations (-7 basis points in each case). With 
yields on matched- maturity Bunds also down, 
the spreads of financial and non- financial cor -
porate bonds widened moderately. By contrast, 
spreads on high- yield bonds fell (-27 basis 
points). Given the banking turmoil in March 
and the associated temporary decline in risk 
appetite, spreads had widened in the mean -
time. However, their increase remained rela -
tively moderate, even for comparatively risky 
high- yield bonds. As stress in the banking sec -
tor eased and implied volatility in the bond 
markets came down, however, concerns about 
the debt sustainability of enterprises with lower 
credit ratings, in particular, also receded notice -
ably. This was likewise reflected in falling credit 
default premia for sub- investment- grade com -
panies (iTraxx Crossover (five years): -40 basis 
points). Measured by yield spreads, financing 
costs for European enterprises in all rating cat -
egories were nevertheless still significantly 
above their respective five- year averages.
Gross issuance in the German bond market in 
the first quarter of 2023 was significantly higher 
than in the preceding three- month period. 
Overall, German borrowers issued paper to the 
tune of €473½ billion, up from €397 billion in 
the previous three months. Net of redemptions 
and changes in issuers’ own holdings, domestic 
issuers ramped up their capital market borrow -
ing by €78½ billion. The outstanding volume 
of foreign debt securities in the German market 
rose by €64 billion in the first quarter. On bal -
ance, the total outstanding volume of bonds in 
Germany thus climbed by €142½ billion in the 
quarter under review.Domestic credit institutions upped their capital 
market debt by €47½ billion in the reporting 
quarter, following net redemptions of €19 bil -
lion in the previous three- month period. The 
primary instruments used were debt securities 
issued by specialised credit institutions as well 
as other bank debt securities that can be struc -
tured flexibly (€20½ billion and €20 billion re -
spectively), and, to a lesser extent, mortgage 
Pfandbriefe (€5½ billion).
In the first quarter of 2023, the public sector is -
sued bonds to the tune of €30 billion net, fol -
lowing €24 billion in the previous three- month 
period. Central government (including the reso -
lution agency that is classified as part of it) is -
sued mainly five- year Federal notes (Bobls, 
€15½ billion), but also Federal bonds (Bunds) 
with a maturity of 30 years (€8½ billion), seven 
years (€7½ billion) and ten years (€7 billion) as 
well as two- year Treasury notes (Schätze, €7 
billion). Meanwhile, there were net redemp -
tions of Treasury discount paper (Bubills) Corporate bond 
yields down
Significant net 
issuance of 
German  debt 
securitiesRise in credit 
institutions’ 
capital  market 
debt
Net public 
sector  issuanceForward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Refinitiv, Consensus Economics and Bun-
desbank calculations. * Derived from the fixed cash flow ari-
sing from inflation swaps which is swapped for the actual an-
nual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro area 
and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised over 
the next five or ten years. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022 20231.41.82.22.63.0% p.a., weekly averages
Five-year forward inflation rate in 
five years derived from swapsConsensus Economics
inflation expectations 
in six to ten years
United StatesEuro area
0.81.21.62.02.42.8Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
43

amounting to €17 billion. On balance, state 
and local governments were only marginally 
active in the capital market.
In the quarter under review, domestic enter -
prises issued bonds worth €1 billion net, fol -
lowing net redemptions amounting to €3½ bil -
lion in the previous quarter. The primary issuers 
here were non- financial corporations (€1½ bil -
lion), which, on balance, issued mainly long-  
term debt securities.
All investor groups acquired debt securities in 
the first quarter of 2023, with foreign investors 
purchasing German debt securities worth a net 
€57½ billion. Domestic non- banks expanded 
their bond portfolio by €52 billion on balance, 
with their focus mainly on foreign securities. 
The Bundesbank acquired bonds in the amount 
of €1 billion net – predominantly under the Eu -
rosystem’s asset purchase programmes. Do -
mestic credit institutions added bonds worth €32 billion net to their portfolios, most of 
which were foreign paper on balance.
Equity market
The international equity markets were domin -
ated by monetary policy expectations, spells of 
uncertainty in the banking sector and robust 
economic signals as well as an overall increase 
in risk appetite. At the beginning of the year, 
market participants’ hopes that inflationary 
pressures could soon ease and that a sharp 
economic downturn could be avoided sent 
prices sharply higher. However, persistently 
high inflation figures subsequently lent support 
to expectations that stronger monetary policy 
tightening would be necessary and resulted in 
higher interest rates. This slowed the initially 
strong upward movement in the international 
equity markets and led to prices moving side -
ways up until the beginning of March.
The takeover of Silicon Valley Bank by the US 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) 
and the collapse of other US regional banks in 
March then triggered concerns about a US 
banking crisis, which also spilled over to the 
European equity markets. The accompanying 
flight to safety put prices under pressure across 
the board, causing them to lose some of their 
previous gains. In addition, uncertainty about 
future price developments, as measured by the 
implied volatility of the broad equity indices, 
spiked sharply higher for a time. In this environ -
ment, US banks made very extensive use of the 
Fed’s liquidity facilities, which ultimately re -
duced concerns about potential contagion ef -
fects from financial market developments. At 
the same time, investors turned their attention 
back to expectations for business activity and 
interest rates. In the euro area, in particular, 
predominantly favourable economic signals led 
to a further easing of tensions, a renewed in -
crease in risk appetite and rising prices. On bal -
ance, the CDAX and the EURO STOXX chalked 
up marked gains in the year to date, of +13.4% 
and +13.0%, respectively. Growth was slightly Net issuance of 
corporate bonds
Purchases of 
debt securitiesInternational 
equity markets 
with gains
Turmoil placing 
temporary 
damper on 
pricesInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2022 2023
Q1 Q4 Q1
Debt securities
Residents 69.2 42.2 85.4
Credit institutions 12.0 – 14.1 32.1
of which:
Foreign debt securities 12.3 –  7.2 27.9
Deutsche Bundesbank 40.5 1.6 1.1
Other sectors 16.8 54.7 52.2
of which:
Domestic debt securities 23.4 32.5 15.0
Non-residents 33.3 – 25.8 57.3
Shares
Residents 13.0 3.5 15.7
Credit institutions –  1.3 –  3.3 9.4
of which:
Domestic shares –  0.7 –  1.0 – 0.8
Non-banks 14.2 6.7 6.2
of which:
Domestic shares 12.4 11.2 9.9
Non-residents – 10.3 4.0 – 4.8
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 31.8 11.9 14.9
Investment in retail funds 3.9 1.4 5.8
of which:
Equity funds 0.0 2.7 4.8
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
44

smaller for US equities (S&P 500) and UK shares 
(FTSE 100), at 9.2% and 4.1%, respectively; the 
Japanese Nikkei index climbed by 18.1%.
European bank shares moved higher overall in 
March despite the US banking turmoil. In Janu -
ary and February, the prices of European bank 
stocks, especially, but also of US bank stocks 
rose very sharply, something that was driven in 
part by expectations of higher bank earnings in 
an environment of rising interest rates. These 
expectations reflect the fact that monetary pol -
icy tightening causes interest margins to widen 
if deposit rates rise more slowly than lending 
rates.
The collapse of Silicon Valley Bank and emer -
ging concerns about the stability of US regional 
banks not only put US bank shares under con -
siderable pressure in March, but also had a 
marked knock- on effect on European bank 
stocks. Some market participants probably 
feared at times that fast rising interest rates 
and/ or rapid policy rate hikes could also bring 
about challenges for European banks. How -
ever, the fact that markets for bank shares sub -
sequently calmed and prices recovered showed 
that market participants did not interpret spe -
cific difficulties faced by individual credit institu -
tions as an indication of a systemic crisis. The 
collapse of the major Swiss bank Credit Suisse 
also sent uncertainty significantly higher initially. 
However, Switzerland’s government- brokered 
deal quickly calmed the markets. Overall, the 
view that the European banking sector is stable 
prevailed in the market. Unexpectedly favour -
able quarterly results from large US banks, 
which benefited significantly from the higher 
margins in interest business, also helped to sta -
bilise prices. As a result, European bank shares 
have appreciated by 8.9% since the beginning 
of the year, thus moderately underperforming 
the market as a whole. By contrast, US bank 
shares significantly underperformed the broad- 
based S&P 500 and lost 12.9% on balance.
The valuations of European and US equities 
have risen in the year to date. This is evident in the earnings yield based on the business out -
look for the next 12 months, which declined 
for both the EURO STOXX and the S&P 500. In 
addition, the implied cost of equity declined for 
both indices; this metric can be calculated 
using a dividend discount model and also takes 
into account the medium- term earnings out -
look and the risk- free interest rate. The equity 
risk premium, which likewise declined in the 
euro area, also provided a particularly import -
ant explanation for the positive developments 
in the prices of European equities, while short 
and medium-  term earnings expectations 
changed comparatively little. In a long- term 
comparison, both the equity risk premium and 
the implied cost of equity suggest a relatively 
high valuation for European and US equities.
On balance, funding in the German stock mar -
ket totalled €4 billion in the reporting quarter, 
compared with €14 billion in the preceding 
quarter. The volume of foreign shares in the 
German market rose by €6½ billion over the Bank stocks 
underperform 
market as a 
whole
Bank shares 
recover after 
turmoil
Valuations up 
on both sides of 
the Atlantic
Equity market 
fundingEquity market
Sources: Refinitiv and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankBank indicesBeginning of 2020 = 100, log scale, daily data
Total market indices
6580100120140160
506080100120
2020 2021 2022 2023Euro area
(EURO STOXX)Japan
(Nikkei 225)United States
(S&P 500)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
45

same period. On balance, domestic credit insti -
tutions were the main buyers of equities (€9½ 
billion). Domestic non- banks added €6 billion 
net to their equity portfolios, while foreign in -
vestors reduced their equity exposure in Ger -
many by €5 billion on balance.
Mutual funds
In the first quarter of 2023, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded inflows of €21 bil -
lion, compared with €13½ billion in the previ -
ous quarter. On balance, specialised funds re -
served for institutional investors were by far the 
greatest beneficiaries (€15 billion). Of the vari -
ous asset classes, mixed securities funds, in par -
ticular, registered significant inflows of capital 
(€6 billion), with bond funds (€4½ billion), 
equity funds (€3½ billion) and open- end real 
estate funds (€3 billion) also attracting capital. 
The outstanding volume of foreign mutual 
fund shares in Germany rose by €11 billion in 
the period under review. Mutual fund shares 
were bought on balance almost exclusively by 
domestic non- banks, which added fund shares 
worth €36½ billion net to their portfolios. 
Most of these shares were issued by domestic 
mutual funds. Non- resident investors expanded 
their domestic fund portfolio by €1 billion net, 
while domestic credit institutions sold mutual 
fund shares to the tune of €5½ billion on bal -
ance.
Direct investment
In the environment, described above, of per -
sistently high inflation rates and temporary 
concerns about a US regional banking crisis, 
transactions in Germany’s cross- border port -
folio investment led to net capital exports of 
€26 billion in the first quarter of 2023. Direct 
investment, too, resulted in capital outflows 
(€44 billion).
Enterprises domiciled in Germany expanded 
their direct investment abroad by €30½ billion Sales and 
purchases  of 
mutual fund 
shares
Direct invest -
ment sees net 
capital exportsMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2022 2023
Q1 Q4 Q1p
I. Current account +  59.5 +  53.1 + 71.8
1. Goods +  34.4 +  30.5 + 57.4
2. Services +   3.0 –   5.6 –  6.9
3. Primary income +  40.4 +  47.9 + 40.2
4. Secondary income –  18.2 –  19.7 – 19.0
II. Capital account –   3.0 –   5.0 – 10.7
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) +  78.8 + 103.7 + 98.0
1. Direct investment +  16.9 +  25.8 + 44.1
Domestic investment 
abroad +  44.7 +  10.3 + 30.6
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country +  27.9 –  15.6 – 13.5
2. Portfolio investment –   3.9 +  47.2 + 25.8
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities +  17.9 +  24.0 + 79.1
Shares 1 –   0.7 –   9.4 +  4.1
Investment fund shares 2+  12.6 +  18.5 + 11.0
of which:
Money market fund 
shares –   3.0 +  10.7 +  0.5
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 +   4.7 +   5.1 +  7.6
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 +   1.3 +   9.7 + 56.4
of which:
Denominated in euro 5–   6.3 +   7.5 + 56.0
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities +  21.8 –  23.2 + 53.3
Shares 1 –   9.2 +   2.9 –  4.9
Investment fund shares –   2.3 –   0.3 +  0.9
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 –   5.8 –  24.7 +  1.7
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 +  39.1 –   1.1 + 55.5
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 6 +  16.9 +   4.1 + 47.5
3. Financial derivatives 7 +  17.1 –   2.1 + 20.6
4. Other investment 8 +  46.6 +  31.9 +  7.3
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 9 – 126.2 +  84.3 – 42.5
Enterprises and 
 households 10 +  69.3 +  23.1 + 19.9
General government –   6.0 +   8.0 +  8.3
Bundesbank + 109.5 –  83.5 + 21.7
5. Reserve assets +   2.2 +   0.8 +  0.2
IV. Errors and omissions 11 +  22.3 +  55.6 + 36.9
1  Including participation certifi  cates. 2  Including reinvested 
earnings. 3  Short- term: original maturity of up to one year. 
4 Long- term: original maturity of more than one year or unlim-
ited. 5  Including outstanding foreign Deutsche  Mark bonds. 
6 Including bonds issued by the former Federal Railways, the 
former Federal Post Offi   ce and the former Treuhand agency. 
7  Balance of transactions arising from options and fi  nancial 
futures  contracts as well as employee stock options. 8 Includes, 
in particular, loans and trade credits as well as currency and de-
posits. 9 Excluding the Bundesbank. 10  Includes the following 
sectors: fi  nancial corporations (excluding monetary fi  nancial in-
stitutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and 
non- profi  t institutions serving households. 11  Statistical errors 
and omissions resulting from the difference between the bal-
ance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current 
account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
46

on balance between January and March 2023, 
compared with €10½ billion in the previous 
three months. They boosted, in particular, their 
equity capital in non- resident subsidiaries by 
€25 billion – around two-  thirds of which con -
stituted reinvested earnings. The volume of 
loans granted by firms resident in Germany to 
affiliated group entities abroad rose by a smaller 
amount, namely €5½ billion. Overall, German 
enterprises only issued financial loans. Signifi -
cant volumes of German foreign direct invest -
ment flowed to the Netherlands (€8½ billion), 
the United Kingdom (€6½ billion) and China 
(€4½ billion).
Foreign enterprises reduced their direct invest -
ment in Germany by €13½ billion in the first quarter (following a reduction of €15½ billion 
in the previous quarter). Intra- group lending to 
German enterprises was dominated by repay -
ments (€25½ billion), especially for financial 
loans. By contrast, foreign enterprises upped 
their equity capital in German subsidiaries by 
€12½ billion. Particularly large return flows of 
direct investment funds were observed vis- à- vis 
Ireland (€9½ billion), the Netherlands (€8½ bil -
lion) and Luxembourg (€6 billion), all of which 
are major holding locations. Conversely, enter -
prises from the United Kingdom stepped up 
their investment in Germany (€9½ billion).Higher German 
direct invest -
ment abroad 
results in capital 
exportsForeign direct 
investment in 
Germany yields 
capital outflows
List of references
Adrian, T., R. K. Crump and E. Mönch (2013), Pricing the term structure with linear regressions, 
Journal of Financial Economics 110 (1), 2013, pp. 110-138.
Baltzer, M., K. Schlepper and C. Speck (2022), The Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes, 
securities lending and Bund specialness, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper No 39/ 2022.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023), Term structures in economic analysis, Monthly Report, January 
2023, pp. 53-74.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), Holder structure and free float of Federal securities, Monthly 
Report , May 2022, pp. 40-43.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b), Market conditions for Bunds in the context of monetary policy 
purchases and heightened uncertainty, Monthly Report, October 2022, pp. 71-97.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c), Changes in the secured money market, Monthly Report, January 
2022, pp. 15-31.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), The market for Federal securities: holder structure and the main 
drivers of yield movements, Monthly Report, July 2018, pp. 15-38.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2015), Securities holdings statistics for analysing holdings of securities in 
Germany and Europe: methodology and results, Monthly Report, March 2015, pp. 95-107.
Gürkaynak, R. S., B. Sack and J. H. Wright (2007), The U. S. Treasury yield curve: 1961 to the 
present, Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (8), 2007, pp. 2291-2304.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
47

Haselmann, R. F. H., T. K. Kick, S. Singla and V. Vig (2022), Capital Regulation, Market- Making, and 
Liquidity, Goethe University Frankfurt, Center for Advanced Studies on the Foundations of Law and 
Finance (LawFin), LawFin Working Paper 44.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
48

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
The German economy flatlined in the first quar -
ter of 2023, after having shrunk in the previous 
quarter. According to the Federal Statistical Of -
fice’s flash estimate, real gross domestic prod -
uct (GDP) remained unchanged on the quarter 
after seasonal adjustment.1 High inflation 
weighed on private consumption expenditure 
and consumption- related service providers. 
Government consumption declined as well.2 
The phasing out of pandemic- related expend -
iture is likely to have played a key role in this. 
By contrast, the easing in energy markets, high 
order backlog, and diminishing supply bottle -
necks gave a boost to industry. Exports of 
goods picked up again, too. Construction activ -
ity benefited from the relatively mild weather 
conditions at the beginning of the year, while 
high construction prices and increased finan -
cing costs continued to weigh on demand for 
construction work. Economic output in the first 
quarter was somewhat weaker overall than re -
cently had been expected.3 This is notably be -
cause, after making a buoyant start to the year, 
industrial activity suffered a setback in March 
that markedly curbed output growth in the first 
quarter. New orders, which had picked up pre -
viously, also went back down significantly in 
March. Intermittent signs that demand for in -
dustrial products might bounce back failed to 
materialise.
Economic activity in detail
High inflation weighed on consumers’ purchas -
ing power. In the first quarter, there is likely to 
have been a significant dip in private consump -tion expenditure as well as in the economic ac -
tivity of consumption- related service providers, 
as signalled by price- adjusted sales, which were 
distinctly lower in the retail trade sector and 
stagnant in the restaurant and hotel sector. Car 
purchases were also considerably lower. This is 
indicated by the number of new private car 
registrations, which dropped sharply according 
to the German Association of the Automotive 
Industry (VDA). Part of the reason for this was 
the phasing out of some government subsidies 
for plug- in hybrids and fully electric vehicles at 
the end of last year. The services sector as a 
whole is unlikely to have provided any impetus 
for growth in the first quarter. According to the 
data available up to February, price- adjusted 
wholesale sales fell and services production (ex -German econ -
omy flatlined in 
Q1 2023High inflation 
weighed on 
private  con -
sumption and 
consumption- 
related service 
providers
Aggregate output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Price 
and calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 239698100102104106108
–12–8–40+4+8+12Adjusted for price, seasonal and calendar effects
2015 = 100, log scale
Gross domestic product
%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
1 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this 
text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, pro -
vided they can be verified and quantified. According to re -
vised data, real GDP in the fourth quarter of 2022 fell by a 
seasonally adjusted 0.5% on the previous quarter.
2 See Federal Statistical Office (2023).
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
49

cluding trade) stagnated.4 The ifo Institute’s 
survey of the business situation in the services 
sector (excluding trade), which held steady in 
the first quarter at the previous quarter’s aver -
age, paints a similar picture.
Seasonally adjusted industrial output rose 
steeply in the first quarter. Surveys conducted 
by the ifo Institute and S&P Global indicate that 
bottlenecks in the supply of intermediate goods 
eased further, allowing more of the high order 
backlog to be processed. This benefited the 
automotive industry in particular. The increase 
in output was also boosted by declining whole -
sale energy prices. A number of energy-  
intensive sectors, such as the chemicals indus -
try and the manufacture of basic metals, 
stepped up their production substantially. In 
other such sectors, however, there have not yet 
been any overall signs of easing. Production in 
the paper and glass industries continued to de -
cline significantly, for example. At the end of 
the quarter, industrial output experienced a strong setback across sectors. This may have 
been due, in part, to a renewed increase in 
sickness rates, according to data from com -
pany health insurance funds. Above all, though, 
domestic and foreign demand for industrial 
goods, which had previously risen steeply, 
tailed off again distinctly in March. This was 
also reflected in a major month- on- month de -
cline in exports of goods. Overall, however, real 
exports of goods were up somewhat in the first 
quarter.
The easing in energy markets and lessening of 
supply bottlenecks are also likely to have pro -
vided a boost to business investment. However, 
this was counteracted by the further deterior -
ation in financing conditions. Manufacturers of 
capital goods experienced a distinct rise in 
price- adjusted domestic sales. By contrast, 
price- adjusted imports of capital goods de -
clined. Enterprises invested less in their vehicle 
fleets, as indicated by the sharp drop in domes -
tic sales of motor vehicles. According to data 
from the German Association of the Automo -
tive Industry, motor vehicle registrations by 
commercial owners were down steeply.
Seasonally adjusted output in the finishing 
trades as well as the main construction sector 
picked up substantially in the first quarter. The 
mild weather in January and February was one 
particular factor behind this increase. In March, 
construction output fell sharply on the month, 
partly because the tailwinds previously pro -
vided by the weather effect had faded. It is 
notable that the level of output in the main 
construction sector was still so high, given that 
demand is being severely depressed at present 
by higher construction prices and financing 
costs. This is reflected in order intake, for ex -
ample: averaged over January and February, it 
was clearly down on the fourth quarter of 
2022 and just over 18% lower than its level Easing supply 
bottlenecks and 
lower energy 
prices supported 
industrial output 
and exports …… and also 
commercial 
investment in 
machinery and 
equipment
Mild weather in 
Q1 benefited 
construction 
output and 
investmentOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2380859095100105110
1001051101151201251301351402015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data, log scale
MonthlyIndustry
Main constructionIndustry excluding
automotive
Construction1
4 Services production encompasses the economic sectors 
of transportation and storage; restaurants and hotels; in -
formation and communication; real estate activities; pro -
fessional, scientific, and technical activities; and business 
and support services.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
50

one year earlier. According to the ifo Institute, 
the share of firms with a shortage of orders 
also went up further in the first quarter, and 
the reach of order books contracted signifi -
cantly. In line with output, the existing order 
backlog probably also led to an increase in con -
struction investment in the first quarter.
Labour market
In the labour market, the marked increase in 
employment seen in the autumn continued 
into the first quarter of 2023. Unemployment 
also came in somewhat higher in recent 
months, however, and there was a further slow 
decline in the number of vacancies. Leading in -
dicators point to only fairly minor improve -
ments in what otherwise remains a robust la -
bour market in the coming months.
The favourable developments are broadly 
based across different forms of employment. 
Averaged over the reporting quarter, seasonally 
adjusted total employment was up by 150,000 
persons, or just over 0.3%, from the previous 
quarter’s level. The majority of new jobs are 
likely to be subject to social security contribu -
tions. That said, the number of people in exclu -
sively low- paid part- time work also continued 
to grow considerably up to February 2023, the 
last month for which data are available. The 
number of such workers only began to recover 
from the pandemic- related slump in the second 
quarter of 2022. Given the declining trend that 
had already set in before the pandemic, how -
ever, it is not expected to return to pre- crisis 
levels. In the case of self- employment, on the 
other hand, the protracted downward trend is 
continuing, albeit at a relatively slow pace at 
present.
Employment subject to social security contri -
butions already grew more strongly in the first 
two months of the first quarter of 2023 than 
in each of the two preceding quarters. Aver -
aged over January and February, the figure for 
the fourth quarter of 2022 was exceeded by 90,000 employees subject to social security 
contributions, an increase of 0.3%. The ma -
jority of this growth was in the services sec -
tors. A particularly large number of jobs were 
created in business- related services (excluding 
temporary agency employment) as well as in 
the IT sector and the restaurant and hotel sec -
tor. By contrast, employment declined in the 
wholesale and retail trade, which is suffering 
from consumers’ reluctance to buy owing to 
the high rates of inflation. Strains such as 
comparatively high energy prices are still evi -
dent in the manufacturing sector, where em -
ployment stagnated. There was also a drop in 
the number of temporary workers subject to 
social security contributions, who are often 
employed in the manufacturing sector. More -
over, the moderate increase in short- time 
work for economic reasons took place largely 
in the manufacturing sector, although notifi -
cations of short- time working arrangements 
recently declined again.
Compared with the previous quarter, regis -
tered unemployment went up only marginally 
in the reporting quarter, and the unemploy -
ment rate held steady at 5.5% in seasonally 
adjusted terms. However, in March and April, 
the total number of unemployed persons in -
creased by 43,000 and the unemployment 
rate climbed by 0.1 percentage point to 5.6%. 
In April, the Federal Employment Agency re -
corded 2.57 million persons as unemployed, 
which was around 276,000 more than in April 
2022. Unemployment was up over the past six 
months not only among those receiving insur -
ance benefits under the statutory unemploy -
ment insurance scheme, which is probably due 
in part to the current weak activity in some 
sectors of the German economy. It also in -
creased among persons receiving the basic 
welfare allowance, which includes refugees 
from Ukraine.
The large influx of people –  not only from 
Ukraine – is leading to an expansion in the ac -
tive labour force as efforts are made to inte -
grate them into the labour market. This can Labour market 
very robust
Favourable 
developments in 
employment 
subject to social 
security contri -
butions and 
low- paid part- 
time work
Employment 
subject to social 
security contri -
butions grew 
more strongly 
in Q1 than in 
second half of 
2022Slight rise in 
unemployment 
due to weak 
activity in some 
economic 
sectors  …
… as well as 
integration of 
refugees into 
labour marketDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
51

cause both employment and registered un -
employment to rise, as is currently the case. 
The majority of the year- on- year increase in un -
employment is attributable to the inclusion of 
Ukrainian refugees in the statistics.5 At present, 
185,000 more Ukrainian nationals are regis -
tered as unemployed than one year earlier.6 On 
top of this, a considerable share of job- seeking 
Ukrainians in Germany are attending language 
and integration courses. Since these individuals 
are not available to the labour market, they are 
not counted in the unemployment figures. 
However, it is to be expected that some of 
them will complete their courses in the next 
few months and will initially register as un -
employed. This effect is likely to explain part of 
the unemployment growth seen over the past 
two months.
Although the outlook for the labour market is 
slightly positive overall, it has not brightened 
further in recent months. Over the past few 
months, the employment barometers of the ifo 
Institute and the Institute for Employment Re -
search (IAB) have been broadly stable in slightly 
positive territory, which suggests that a some -
what higher number of people can be ex -
pected to be recruited than dismissed in the 
next three months. The number of vacancies 
subject to social security contributions reported 
to the Federal Employment Agency and the 
Agency’s job index have both declined of late. 
Even so, both indicators are still at a compara -
tively high level. The IAB’s survey indicator of 
unemployment developments over the next 
three months fell significantly in April and is 
now in neutral territory.Leading indica -
tors of employ -
ment largely 
unchanged in 
slightly positive 
territoryLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 23Apr.43.544.044.545.045.546.0
31.031.532.032.533.033.534.034.535.0–1,000–5000+500+1,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–600–400–2000+200+400+600Apr.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Apr.Million
Million
Million500700900Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployment
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies2EmployedJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Jan.-
Feb.
5 One year ago, refugees from Ukraine had not yet been 
integrated into the German social security system and 
therefore were not counted in the unemployment statis -
tics.
6 See Statistics provided by the Federal Employment 
Agency (2023), p. 13.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
52

Wages and prices
Negotiated wages rose considerably more 
strongly in the winter of 2023 than they had in 
the autumn. Including additional benefits, they 
were up by 3.9% on the year in the first quar -
ter, compared with 2.0% in the quarter before. 
In this context, bonus payments, such as infla -
tion compensation bonuses, caused the growth 
rate to rise sharply in the winter.7 However, 
even excluding bonus payments, negotiated 
wages rose by 2.7% on the year in the report -
ing quarter, representing slightly stronger 
growth than in the fourth quarter, which saw 
growth of 2.4%. In the first quarter of 2023, as 
in the preceding quarters, growth in actual 
earnings is likely to have significantly exceeded 
growth in negotiated wages. One factor con -
tributing to this development was that inflation 
compensation bonuses were also paid out by 
enterprises that are not bound by collective 
agreements; another was that aggregate 
wages adjusted, with a time lag, to the rise in 
the minimum wage to €12 per hour as of Oc -
tober 2022.
The latest wage agreements exceeded the 
wage increases agreed upon last year. For tem -
porary work, an annualised wage increase of 
7% was agreed upon; this is primarily attribut -
able to the adjustment of the sector- specific 
wage structure to the sharp rise in the min -
imum wage as of October. In the central and 
local government areas of the public sector, the 
annualised increase in wages of 6.3% was 
higher than in all of this sector’s agreements 
from the past 15 years.8 For Deutsche Post, 
too, the agreed annualised wage increase of 
6.1% was above average. Macroeconomic de -
velopments – specifically high inflation, grow -
ing labour shortages, and the expected im -
provement in economic activity this year  – 
played an important role in this context. At 
Deutsche Post, employees also considered it 
important to have a notable participation in the 
group’s good profits. In both of the agree -
ments, inflation compensation bonuses were 
paid out in the maximum amount and dis -bursed over several months. As of March and 
April 2024, respectively, scheduled rates of pay 
will be increased substantially. Furthermore, re -
cent wage agreements in other sectors (e.g. 
automobile trade and service, textiles and 
clothing) exhibit a combination of large infla -
tion compensation bonuses and significant, 
long- term wage increases.
The high wage agreements in the public sector 
are likely to be seen as a strong signal for on -
going wage negotiations. This applies, for ex -
ample, to retail trade as well as wholesale and 
foreign trade, where wage demands are un -
usually high, at 16% and 13%, respectively, Rise in negoti -
ated wages and 
actual earnings 
Recent wage 
agreements 
higher than in 
previous year
Additional high 
wage agree -
ments likely2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 20231012345
–+++++Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Percentage
points
–2–10+1+2%
Q1
Wage drift1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 Wage drift 
is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual ear-
nings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche Bundesbank
7 In terms of wage growth, the wage- boosting effect of in -
flation compensation bonuses was offset by the negative 
base effect of the coronavirus bonus in the amount of 
€1,300 that was disbursed by the public sector of the Fed -
eral states in March 2022.
8 Calculated for a notional recipient of the agreed basic 
pay rate (pay grade 5). The increases in wages are relatively 
high for low pay grades due to the large bonus payments 
and agreed base amount; for higher pay grades, however, 
the increases are smaller in percentage terms.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
53

over a term of 12 months. Given the high infla -
tion, robust labour market situation, and antici -
pated improvement in economic activity, high 
wage settlements are to be expected in the 
coming months as well.
Inflation, which is now broad- based and ra -
ther persistent, is increasingly leaving its mark 
on wage increases. This is reflected, first, by 
the fact that the option of paying out infla -
tion compensation bonuses is being utilised 
in recent wage agreements to an increasingly 
large degree. These bonuses are also being 
paid out in sectors that are not bound by col -
lective wage agreements. Second, the new 
agreements that have been concluded thus 
far, particularly for 2023, include very strong 
rises in negotiated wages that are greater 
than had been expected. In 2023 and 2024, 
they could result in gross real wage increases 
in the metal- working and electrical engineer -
ing industries or the public sector, for ex -
ample. With regard to the current rounds of 
wage negotiations, the expected improve -
ment in economic activity and reduced uncer -
tainty surrounding the supply of energy are 
providing tailwinds for efforts to do more 
than has been done thus far to offset past 
real wage losses. There is much to suggest 
that firms will pass on part of the increased 
wage costs through their prices as the year 
progresses.
Consumer prices (HICP) rose less sharply at the 
beginning of the year than in the preceding 
quarters. Averaged across January to March 
2023, they increased by a seasonally adjusted 
0.9%, compared with 2.6% in the autumn. 
Looking at the year- on- year figures, the infla -
tion rate declined in the first quarter of the year 
from 10.8% to 8.8%. Inflation receded mainly 
because energy prices declined over the course 
of the quarter for the first time in two years. In 
addition, one- off effects contributed to the 
lower inflation rate. First, the year- on- year rate 
was dampened – in arithmetical terms – due to 
the sharp rise in energy prices resulting from 
the Russian invasion of Ukraine one year ago. Second, the annual update of HICP weights re -
duced the share of energy in the basket of 
goods, which subdued the rate of inflation.9 Fi-
nally, the implementation of the electricity and 
gas price brakes provided some relief.
The price dynamics of the non- energy compon -
ents remained very high, however. The prices 
of non- energy industrial goods increased at a 
similar rate to that in the previous quarter, 
while the prices of food products – particularly 
those resulting from energy- intensive produc -
tion processes – and services rose more sharply. 
Excluding volatile components such as energy, 
food, travel services and clothing, the inflation 
rate rose significantly in the spring, climbing 
from 5.0% to 5.8%.10 It thus exceeded the 
core rate (5.5%), which does not include the 
prices of energy or food.
In April, inflation barely fell from its very high 
level and thus remained higher than expected. 
Consumer prices climbed by 7.6% on the year, 
compared with 7.8% in March.11 In this con -
text, energy prices again rose somewhat more 
sharply than in the preceding month. By con -
trast, the inflation rate for food, services, and 
industrial goods decreased slightly. Accordingly, 
the rate excluding energy and food fell only 
slightly from 5.9% in March to 5.6% and re -
mained well above expectations.
In the coming months, the inflation rate is likely 
to continue to decline in line with the flatten -Second- round 
effects on prices 
to be expected
High inflation 
eased some -
what in winter 
due to lower 
energy pricesStrong rise in 
rate excluding 
volatile com -
ponents
Inflation rate still 
at high level in 
April
9 The HICP weights are based on the weights of the na -
tional consumer price index (CPI), which were rebased to 
2020 at the beginning of the year. In the 2019 to 2021 re -
porting years, which were used as the basis of the calcula -
tion, energy expenditure was lower on average than in the 
previous base year of 2015. See Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2023b).
10 Due to a change in methodology, the annual rate of in -
flation for the prices of travel services is only of limited in -
formative value up until the end of 2023. Price collection 
for package holidays and flights was changed when the 
CPI was rebased to 2020. While the CPI was revised up 
until 2020, the HICP contains a methodological break for 
the affected price series. This is now apparent when com -
paring the annual rates of inflation for travel services in the 
CPI and the HICP . See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b).
11 The CPI figure was 7.2%, compared with 7.4% in the 
previous month.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
54

ing of prices at the upstream stages of the 
economy. However, given that inflation for 
non- energy components – particularly food – 
remains exceptionally high, this will occur only 
very gradually. In addition, price pressures 
along supply chains have waned somewhat, 
but are still having an impact. Furthermore, the 
strong wage growth is likely to contribute to 
the underlying price pressures over the remain -
der of the year. These factors are offsetting the 
effect of falling energy prices.
Order books and outlook
Economic output is expected to rise again 
slightly in the second quarter of 2023. Dimin -
ishing supply bottlenecks, large order backlogs, 
and lower energy prices are all supporting the 
continued recovery in industry. This is also likely 
to bolster exports, especially as global activity 
has regained some momentum. Despite con -
tinued high inflation, robust wage increases should at least mean that households’ real net 
income does not fall any further. Private con -
sumption is therefore likely to more or less 
stagnate. Construction, on the other hand, 
looks set to see declining output. The sharply 
lower demand is likely to take its toll and the 
tailwinds once provided by the mild weather 
conditions will fade.
Sentiment amongst enterprises and consumers, 
which continued to brighten in April, was also 
indicative of a cautiously optimistic outlook. 
The most recent rise in the ifo business climate 
index, however, was due to a significant im -
provement in business expectations. By con -
trast, the situation was considered somewhat 
less favourable. While the business climate in 
manufacturing and services (excluding trade) 
was positive, sentiment in the main construc -
tion sector and the trade sector remained, on 
balance, in negative territory. Although the GfK 
consumer climate index also improved, it was 
still at a low level.Inflation likely 
to abate only 
slowly over the 
year
Economic out -
put expected 
to rise again 
slightly in 
second quarter 
of 2023Brighter senti -
ment amongst 
enterprises and 
consumersPrice developments at economic stages as classified for HICP purposes
–40–200+20+40+60+80+100Year-on-year percentage change
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
1 Eurostat. 2 Bundesbank calculations (in euro) based on daily prices in USD as quoted by Bloomberg Finance L.P. 3 Including bever-
ages and tobacco products.  4 ECB calculations of DG AGRI prices based on the European Commission’s farm gate and wholesale 
prices. 5 Analogous to HICP classification “non-energy industrial goods”; Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Stat-
istical Office.
Deutsche Bundesbank10010203040
–++++
505101520
–++++
–20–100+10+20+30+40+50Crude oil price2 (right-hand scale)
HICP – food1, 3Producer prices for food in the euro area4 (right-hand scale)HICP – energy1
3036912
–++++
–30+3+6+9+12
HICP – non-energy industrial goods1Industrial producer prices5Apr.
Apr.Apr.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
55

In the second quarter, industry is likely to re -
main on a moderate course of recovery, even 
without any new major demand stimulus. On 
average over the first quarter, the number of 
incoming industrial orders was, due to the 
downturn in March, only marginally higher 
than in the previous quarter. This increase was 
also mainly attributable to the manufacture of 
other transport equipment, which is not par -
ticularly representative of industry as a whole. 
However, orders on hand and the reach of 
orders remained exceptionally high of late. As, 
according to surveys by the ifo Institute and 
S&P Global, supply bottlenecks continued to 
ease in April, industrial enterprises were able to 
process their order backlogs more quickly. 
Short- term production planning and export ex -
pectations in the manufacturing sector, which 
continued to improve according to surveys by 
the ifo Institute, are also indicative of better in -
dustrial activity.Industry set for 
further recovery 
due to good 
order situation 
and improved 
export outlook
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), Commentaries, Economic conditions, Monthly Report, March 
2023, p. 5.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), Impact of the new HICP/ CPI weights on inflation developments in 
Germany, Monthly Report, March 2023, pp. 8-11.
Federal Statistical Office (2023), Gross domestic product stagnant in 1st quarter of 2023, press 
release  No 169 of 28 April 2023, https://www.destatis.de/EN/Press/2023/04/PE23_169_811.html
Statistics provided by the Federal Employment Agency (2023), Berichte: Blickpunkt Arbeitsmarkt – 
Monatsbericht zum Arbeits- und Ausbildungsmarkt, Nuremberg, April 2023.Demand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 23758090100110120
–30–150+15+30+45+60
100110120130140
–30–150+15+30Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data
Log scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Log scale
Main construction orders
%%MonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
56

Public finances*
General government budget
2023 as a whole
Germany has so far weathered the energy crisis 
better than adverse scenarios were predicting. 
Government finances are faring better as well. 
In particular, the lower energy prices are de -
creasing the costs to government for the en -
ergy price brakes and the assistance provided 
for gas trading companies. As things stand 
today, the deficit ratio is likely to remain broadly 
unchanged at around 2½% this year. By con -
trast, last autumn’s plans foresaw a significant 
increase to over 4%.1
This year will bring with it both significant relief 
and burdens for government finances com -
pared with 2022. Government revenue is likely 
to see continued robust growth. This is be -
cause it is largely dependent on gross wages 
and salaries (less bonuses exempt from social 
contributions) and nominal private consump -
tion. Another alleviating factor is the fact that, 
having had a considerable effect on govern -
ment finances last year, the impact of corona -
virus response measures is now negligible. 
Looking at the support measures implemented 
in response to the energy crisis and high infla -
tion, on the one hand, the one- off burdens 
from 2022 no longer apply. Examples of these 
include the energy price allowances, immediate 
assistance for gas and heating bills and possibly 
also the support provided to gas trading com -
panies. On the other hand, the broad- based 
energy price brakes and further assistance from 
the Economic Stabilisation Fund for Energy As -
sistance (ESF- E) have come into play in 2023. 
Beyond support measures of this nature, the 
Federal Government is planning significant 
additional spending on defence and climate 
change mitigation this year. Interest expend -
iture will also rise sharply. This year’s adjust -
ment of the income tax scale to account for in -flation will probably largely eliminate bracket 
creep in the current year.2
Outlook for 2024 
and the medium term
As things stand today, the deficit ratio will fall 
to somewhere between 1% and 1½% next 
year, mainly because the temporary support 
measures created in response to the energy cri -
sis will have expired for the most part. As of 
2025, the deficit ratio could move sideways. 
However, the Federal Government is discussing 
new budgetary burdens, such as higher de -
fence spending and subsidies for cheaper in -
dustrial electricity. It has not yet agreed on a 
new financial framework for 2024 onwards.
Medium- term deficits will arise not least in spe -
cial funds. The purpose of these funds is to 
finance spending on defence and in connec -
tion with climate change mitigation and energy 
transformation through additional borrowing.3 
In some cases, there are still plans or the option 
remains open to use emergency borrowing 
that was approved between 2020 and 2022. 
Some federal states have recently activated the 
escape clause in their debt brakes to create 
long- term financial leeway. In addition, limited 
structural deficits in core budgets are compat -
ible with the debt brakes. This is also true for Government 
finances in 2023 
far better than 
planned
Both significant 
relief and bur -
dens compared 
with 2022Deficit to decline 
in 2024 before 
moving 
sideways 
Use of emer -
gency borrow -
ing from recent 
years still 
planned in 
medium term
* The section entitled “General government budget” relates  
to data from the national accounts and the Maastricht 
debt ratio. This is followed by reporting on budgetary de -
velopments (government finance statistics) where data for 
the first quarter of 2023 are available.
1 See Stability Council (2022).
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a) for more information 
on how bracket creep is usually offset.
3 In some cases, the plan is that they use reserves built up 
from debt- financed central government grants. The related 
central government loans are only recorded in the budget, 
and the reserves are corresponding counter- entries without 
any cash resources. It is only when cash expenditure needs 
to be financed that central government takes out loans on 
the capital market to this end.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
57

the federal states, not least in connection with 
reserves.
In view of the deficits, debt is likely to rise fur -
ther. If fiscal policy remains unchanged, how -
ever, the debt ratio will probably decline and 
could return to around 60% in the medium 
term (2022: 66.3%). This is mainly due to the 
fact that growth in nominal gross domestic 
product (GDP) in the ratio’s denominator is 
stronger than debt growth. In addition, the 
government is likely to reduce debt in connec -
tion with coronavirus assistance loans and bad 
bank portfolios. It should be noted, though, 
that Germany is also required to pay for EU 
debt without this being visible in the German 
debt ratio. Under NextGenerationEU (NGEU), 
the European Union is borrowing to make 
grants to the Member States. This EU debt is to 
be repaid jointly by the Member States starting 
in 2028. Based on Germany’s regular share of 
financing, this will result in a cumulative burden 
of 2¼% of GDP for the country by the end of 
2026.
Fiscal surveillance is in need of 
improvement
Effective fiscal surveillance needs to take ac -
count of current developments. Instead, both 
the latest stability programme from April and 
the Stability Council’s deliberations at the start 
of May were based largely on the outdated fig -
ures projected in summer and autumn 2022. 
Such an outdated projection is unsuitable for 
fiscal surveillance – something that has also 
been pointed out by the Independent Advisory 
Board to the Stability Council.4
Do not rebudget savings from 
crisis measures
The budgetary burdens arising from energy 
price brakes and payments to gas trading com -
panies are likely to be significantly lower than 
planned. This is due to lower energy prices eas -ing the burden on the private sector, with the 
fiscal measures associated with the burden be -
coming correspondingly cheaper. Much like 
automatic stabilisers, the costs to government 
of these measures respond automatically to 
economic developments, so if deficits are lower 
as a result, this is not an expression of a more 
restrictive fiscal policy.
It would not be appropriate for the economy 
as a whole for the new borrowing originally 
budgeted for energy price assistance –  but 
which is no longer needed – to now be used 
elsewhere. This would increase the degree of 
fiscal expansion, which would be likely, in turn, 
to increase inflationary pressures. In the current 
environment, the fiscal policy stance should 
not make the task of monetary policy more dif -
ficult. This is another reason why Germany and 
the other euro area Member States should limit 
their deficits. Broad- based crisis assistance 
should be phased out in a timely manner. In 
this context, it would not be advisable to ex -
tend the energy price brakes beyond the end of 
2023.
Reinforce the binding effect of 
fiscal rules
Whilst it is true that central government and 
most state governments are no longer officially 
making use of the debt brake escape clause, 
fiscal policy will effectively be financed by ex -
ceptional means in the medium term as well. 
Specifically, central government and state gov -
ernments have created scope – by means of 
the Armed Forces Fund and unallocated emer -
gency borrowing – to run up considerable def -
icits in the medium term. With respect to the 
pandemic- related emergency borrowing of 
2021, the Federal Constitutional Court is exam -
ining whether central government was allowed 
to put aside resources that were left over in the 
Climate Fund. This ruling could also provide Debt ratio will 
fall towards 
60% in medium 
term
Fiscal surveil -
lance requires 
current projec -
tions
Crisis assistance 
cheaper because 
energy prices 
are lower than 
expectedTo avoid making 
monetary policy 
more difficult, 
do not rebudget 
resources that 
are left over
Debt brake 
escape clause 
planned for 
medium term
4 See Independent Advisory Board to the Stability Council 
(2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
58

general indications as to the extent to which it 
is permissible to fund future deficits upfront 
using emergency borrowing.
There is no doubt that climate change, the en -
ergy transition and the geopolitical situation 
will put policymakers to a stiff test for quite 
some time. Debt- limiting fiscal rules do not pre -
vent the government from taking action. They 
do, however, force it to set priorities. This 
means scaling back less important expenditure 
or generating additional revenue. Sound gov -
ernment finances are not at odds with forward- 
looking government activity – far from it. Ra -
ther, they are its basis, and they ensure that the 
government is able to act even in crises.
The debt brake makes for a comparatively re -
strictive borrowing framework, so there does 
appear to be scope for a stability- oriented re -
form; one which leaves somewhat greater fis -
cal space as long as the debt ratio is relatively 
low. At the same time, however, such a reform 
should strengthen the binding effect of the 
rules again, which has diminished over the past 
few years.5 Otherwise, it can be expected that 
fiscal policy will repeatedly pass on the costs of 
its decisions to future generations and put 
monetary policy under pressure.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
First quarter of 2023
Over the first three months of 2023, tax rev -
enue6 fell on the year (-1½%, or -€3½ billion; 
see the chart above and the table on p. 60). 
Cuts in wage and income tax and VAT, in par -
ticular, had a dampening effect. Otherwise, 
revenue would have increased slightly.
In the absence of tax cuts, revenue from wage 
tax would probably have risen by around 5½%. Owing to various tax cuts, it actually fell by 1%. 
In particular, the tax scale was adjusted to last 
year’s high inflation rate at the start of this 
year.7 In addition, the basic income tax allow -
ance and employees’ standard deduction for 
income-  related expenses were raised in mid-  
2022. This measure had an impact in year- on- 
year terms. In addition, it has been possible to 
fully deduct contributions to the pension insur -
ance scheme since the start of this year. Fur -
thermore, spending on child benefits rose 
sharply overall, as these were raised as the year 
began. This reduced the growth rate for wage 
tax because child benefit payments are de -
ducted from wage tax revenue. Lastly, the re -
cently observed increase in gross wages and 
salaries will yield less wage tax revenue growth 
than usual: in 2023 and 2024, temporary add -
itional wage payments totalling up to €3,000 
are tax- exempt.
Profit- related taxes fell by 3%. Advance pay -
ments for the current year, which are particu -
larly important for revenue, remained stable. At 
the same time, however, tax payments for pre -Reliably safe -
guard govern -
ment’s ability 
to act
Debt brake 
needs to be 
more binding 
once again, 
possibly with a 
somewhat 
broader regular 
borrowing 
framework
Tax revenue fell 
in Q1 – changes 
in tax law bring 
considerable 
strainWage tax: tax 
cuts and raising 
of child benefits 
significantly 
reduced growth
Revenue from 
profit- related 
taxes fell by 3%Tax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Comprises joint taxes as 
well as central government taxes and state government taxes. 
Including EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs 
duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2021 2022 2023505101520
–++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figures
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b).
6 Including EU shares in German tax revenue. Receipts 
from local government taxes are not included. These were 
not yet known for the quarter under review.
7 Some of the measures mentioned are not fully included 
in the data from the first quarter, as wage tax is recorded 
with a lag.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
59

vious years decreased. In addition, more taxes 
that had already been paid were reimbursed.
Receipts from VAT were at around the same 
level as in the first quarter of last year. The tem -
porary cut in the VAT rate on natural gas and 
district heating up to the end of March 2024 
played a major role in this. Also, the prior year’s 
level was elevated – previously deferred VAT 
payments had been finally made in that year. In 
the absence of those two factors, revenue 
would probably have risen significantly.
Real estate acquisition tax fell by just over one- 
third (-€1½ billion). This corresponds to half of the decline in total tax revenue. Revenue has 
been dwindling to an increasing extent since 
mid- 2022. The number and value of transac -
tions are the determining factors behind real 
estate acquisition tax. Several drivers are likely 
to be reflected here. For example, high inflation 
and significantly greater financing costs are 
making residential real estate less affordable. In 
addition, construction is faced with supply- side 
barriers such as persistent shortages of mater -
ials and labour. As a result, real estate activity 
has slowed.
Official tax estimate: solid tax revenue 
growth up to 2027
According to the latest official tax estimate, tax 
revenue will rise by 3% on the year in 2023. 
The compensation for bracket creep in the in -
come tax scale, in particular, dampens revenue 
growth considerably. As usual, bracket creep 
from the previous year is offset.8 The VAT rate 
cut on natural gas and district heating, higher 
child benefits and tax- free inflation compensa -
tion bonuses also weigh significantly on rev -
enue. The fact that revenue continues to rise at 
a steady pace is due to the reference variables 
for tax revenue seeing dynamic growth as a re -
sult of high price increases. This applies not 
least to gross wages and salaries per employee. 
In the projection, profit- related taxes rise less 
than entrepreneurial and investment income. 
This part of the tax estimate was largely based 
on the subdued cash developments over the 
course of the year to date.
Revenue growth is expected to be 4½% in 
2024. Projected profit- related taxes will con -
tinue to increase at a subdued pace. However, 
nominal private consumption and, above all, 
wages will see ongoing dynamic growth. More -
over, changes in tax law will have hardly any 
curbing effect on growth: although the income VAT stagnated, 
due in part to 
temporary cut in 
rate on natural 
gas and district 
heatingOn balance, 
real estate 
acquisition tax 
accounted for 
half of decline 
in total tax 
revenue 
Tax estimate: 
tax revenue 
growth of 3% 
this year
Growth of 4½% 
in 2024Tax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 Estimate 
for 
2023 1 2022 2023
€ billionYear-
on-year 
change 
%Year-
on-year 
change 
%
Tax revenue, total 2 203.1 199.8 –  1.7 +  2.9
of which:
Wage tax 3 56.2 55.7 –  1.0 +  6.1
Profi  t-related taxes 40.0 38.8 –  3.1 +  2.9
Assessed income 
tax4 20.9 19.7 –  5.7 +  0.8
Corporation tax 5 11.2 10.7 –  4.3 +  0.4
Non- assessed 
taxes on earnings 5.1 6.6 + 27.6 + 12.9
Withholding tax 
on interest 
income  and 
capital  gains 2.8 1.8 – 36.2 –  4.7
VAT6 73.6 73.5 –  0.1 +  1.6
Other 
consumption-related 
taxes 7 20.5 21.3 +  3.9 +  5.0
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Working Party on Tax Revenue  
Estimates and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial 
tax estimate of May 2023. 2 Comprises joint taxes as well as 
central government taxes and state government taxes. Including 
EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs duties, but 
excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Child benefi  ts 
and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans deducted 
from revenue. 4  Employee refunds and research grants de-
ducted from revenue. 5  Research grants deducted from rev-
enue. 6 VAT and import VAT. 7 Taxes on energy, tobacco, insur-
ance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, air traffi   c, coffee, spark-
ling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lotter-
ies, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
8 The tax scale shift for 2023 is based on inflation in 2022, 
which was estimated in autumn 2022. For more informa -
tion on the concept of the report on inflation- induced 
bracket creep and inflation- related adjustments to the in -
come tax scale, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), p. 66.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
60

tax scale will be lowered significantly in 2024, 
eliminating the bracket creep of the previous 
year, the temporarily reduced VAT rate on nat -
ural gas and district heating will return to the 
regular rate at the end of March 2024. There 
will also be additional revenue from the accel -
erated write- offs of previous years; these had 
depressed revenue, in particular up to 2022. 
Correspondingly fewer write- offs will now be 
made, which will raise tax revenue. In addition, 
fewer tax- free inflation compensation bonuses 
look set to be paid than in the previous year.
According to the tax estimate, revenue is pro -
jected to rise by an average of 4% in the years 
2025 to 2027. In 2025, revenue growth will be 
stronger, at 5%, mainly because there will be 
no burdens arising from changes in tax law: ac -
celerated write- offs will continue to generate 
additional revenue. In addition, the regular VAT 
rate on natural gas and district heating will 
then apply again throughout the full year. From 
2026 onwards, changes in tax law will play no major role. The projection is therefore a fairly 
direct reflection of the assumptions regarding 
macroeconomic developments and progressive 
taxation. Growth of 3½% is envisaged.
However, growth from 2025 is likely to be 
overstated. The basic income tax allowance will 
probably be raised further in order to keep the 
minimum subsistence level tax- free. Moreover, 
growth will be throttled to a greater extent if 
legislators compensate for bracket creep, as 
they have done in previous years.
Comparison with autumn estimate: 
revenue  shortfalls due to tax cuts
Compared with the autumn 2022 tax estimate, 
there are significant revenue shortfalls. They 
will increase from around ½% of GDP (-€17 bil -
lion) in 2023 to roughly ¾% of GDP from 2024. 
This is mainly due to tax cuts that have been 
agreed in the meantime. These largely com -
prise compensation for bracket creep, the in -Average growth 
of 4% as of 
2025Adjustment to 
rising minimum 
subsistence level 
and any com -
pensation for 
bracket creep 
not taken into 
account from 
2025
Estimate signifi -
cantly lower 
than autumn 
estimate, mainly 
because com -
pensation for 
bracket creep 
is only now 
includedOffi   cial tax estimate fi  gures and the Federal Government’s macroeconomic projections
 
Item 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027
Tax revenue 1
€ billion 895.7 920.6 962.2 1,009.3 1,046.2 1,078.5
% of GDP 23.2 22.4 22.5 23.0 23.2 23.2
Year-on-year change (%) 7.5 2.8 4.5 4.9 3.7 3.1
Revision compared with previous tax estimate 
(€ billion) 8.1 – 16.8 – 30.8 – 32.5 – 32.3 – 36.3
of which: Revision due to new changes in tax 
law . – 23.3 – 34.4 – 35.8 – 37.8 – 38.9
Memo item:
Revenue shortfalls if bracket creep is 
compensated  for in same manner as previously 2 . . . –  4.6 –  8.8 – 13.2
Real GDP growth (%)
Spring projection (April 2023) 1.8 0.4 1.6 0.8 0.8 0.8
Autumn projection (October 2022) 1.4 –  0.4 2.3 0.8 0.8 0.8
Nominal GDP growth (%)
Spring projection (April 2023) 7.4 6.1 4.0 2.8 2.8 2.8
Autumn projection (October 2022) 7.0 5.3 4.7 2.7 2.7 2.7
Sources: Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates and Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action. 1 Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue, including customs duties, including receipts from local government taxes. 2 Since 2014, the income tax scale has 
shifted year after year, usually in line with the estimated infl  ation of the previous year. The fi  gures shown here are the revenue shortfalls 
that will result if this practice is continued. The calculations are roughly estimated; they are based on the Federal Government’s current 
spring projection and wage tax receipts based on current tax estimates (according to the national accounts). The basic income tax allow-
ance also shifts in line with the infl  ation rate of the previous year.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
61

crease in child benefits and the previous full tax 
deductibility of contributions to the statutory 
pension insurance scheme. Excluding the tax 
cuts, however, the new estimate foresees mod -
erate additional revenue.
Central government finances
Overview of 2023
The central government deficit including off-  
budget entities9 was considerably higher at the 
start of 2023 than it was one year ago. It rose 
by €33 billion to €52 billion. The deficit in the 
core budget was only moderately higher (at 
€21 billion). However, the ESF- E alone recorded 
a deficit of €26 billion. This was the result of 
the energy price brakes and further assistance, 
which central government funded upfront in 
2022 via the escape clause.
Central government anticipates a very large 
deficit of €232 billion this year. Its off- budget 
entities account for €146 billion of this sum.10 
The deficit is likely to be significantly lower, 
though. This is due to more favourable devel -
opments, amongst other things in the area of 
energy price assistance.
Central government budget: first quarter of 
2023
In the core budget, revenue was up by 1½% 
(+€1½ billion) on the year. Central government 
tax revenue increased only slightly. Total ex -
penditure rose somewhat more sharply, climb -
ing by 2½% (+€3 billion). Interest expenditure 
delivered a strong growth contribution (up by 
just over €8½ billion). The increase here was 
due almost entirely to discounts. These are 
highly volatile because central government im -
mediately records them in full rather than allo -
cating them over the term on an accruals 
basis.11 Higher interest rates led to sharp mark -
downs in some cases for the usual tap issues of 
long- dated bonds. This is because some of 
them still carry very low coupons. In addition, central government paid out a loan to a new 
fund intended to tackle climate change and 
pandemics at the International Monetary Fund 
(€6½ billion). Besides that, expenditure on the 
basic allowance for job seekers (civic allow -
ance, formerly unemployment benefit II) was 
up by one- fifth (+€2 billion). Around half of this 
is likely to be attributable to refugees from 
Ukraine. They have been eligible to receive 
these benefits since June 2022. In addition, 
central government expanded benefits at the 
start of the year. By contrast, payments to so -
cial security funds fell sharply (-€8½ billion). For 
example, special payments to the statutory 
health insurance scheme, e.g. for coronavirus 
tests for the general public, decreased. Further -
more, a smaller deficit offset for the Federal 
Employment Agency brought relief. Whereas 
central government paid €4 billion in 
coronavirus- related transfers for enterprises a 
year ago, there were now funds flowing back 
(negative expenditure of €1½ billion).
Central government budget: 2023 as a 
whole
The deficit of €86 billion estimated in central 
government’s core budget remains easily at -
tainable. Specifically, the latest tax estimate en -
visages additional revenue of almost €7 billion 
compared with the budget plan (including pro -
jected global revenue shortfalls). Central gov -
ernment’s provisions for the pay agreement for 
salaried employees and associated pay rises for Sharp increase 
in total deficit in 
Q1, due mainly 
to emergency 
energy measures
Very large deficit 
expected for 
year as a whole, 
but much more 
favourable out -
come likely
Virtually stag -
nant tax rev -
enue and mod -
erate increase in 
expenditure 
amid numerous 
special factorsCentral govern -
ment’s budget -
ary objective for 
2023 is easily 
attainable
9 This includes off- budget entities that use the single- entry 
system and for which quarterly data are available (see p. 64). 
These comprise, in particular, (i) the Economic Stabilisation 
Fund for Energy Assistance (ESF- E), (ii) the off- budget en -
tities relevant to the debt brake up to 2021 and (iii) the 
Armed Forces Fund (see Deutsche Bundesbank (2023), 
table on p. 69, items 16, 17 and 19). In addition, the re -
porting group for off-  budget entities includes, above all, 
(iv) the other funds shown in the central government budg -
et’s borrowing plan (for making provisions for repayment 
and for expanding childcare, both item 18) as well as (v) 
the precautionary funds for civil servants’ pensions. In par -
ticular, the bad bank FMSW, the fund for the disposal of 
nuclear energy waste, the motorway company and the de -
velopment aid company GIZ are excluded.
10 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023), p. 69.
11 For a proposal on recording premia on an accruals basis, 
a less volatile accounting procedure, see Deutsche Bundes -
bank (2021a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
62

civil servants proved very generous. Possible 
additional expenditure on the civic allowance 
could thus be covered. Moreover, with cou -
pons of new securities measured in line with 
the market, interest expenditure could be con -
siderably lower than the budgeted figure.
Central government plans up to 2027
The central government budget is also ex -
pected to comply with the borrowing limit im -
posed under the debt brake in the years to 
come. However, the government was unable 
to agree on key figures for the budget in line 
with the debt brake and postponed the Federal 
Cabinet decision on the draft budget and fiscal 
plan up to 2027 that had been scheduled for 
21 June.
In actual fact, the central government budget is 
stretched. The last fiscal plan fully exhausted 
the debt brake limit. While the current tax esti -
mate foresees additional revenue and the cyc -
lical component of the spring projection ex -
pands the scope of borrowing somewhat for 
2024, the old fiscal plan envisaged profit distri -
bution by the Bundesbank, which is expected 
not to take place for a number of years. In add -
ition, there have been stronger than projected 
price increases in the meantime. The pay agree -
ment for salaried employees and associated 
pay rises for civil servants will also result in 
markedly higher spending than in the old fiscal 
plan. Moreover, new policy priorities have not 
yet been accounted for, among them defence 
spending. In the longer term, financial pressure 
will intensify sharply. By then, off- budget en -
tities will have exhausted their scope for def -
icits, repayment burdens will be high and 
demographic change will increasingly weigh on 
central government finances.12
Financing pressure could mount earlier. The 
Federal Constitutional Court is deliberating 
whether to restrict the upfront funding of the 
Climate Fund using emergency borrowing.13 
Legislators purposefully tightened the Basic 
Law’s escape clause upon introduction of the debt brake in 2009. Previously, the clause had 
made permanent additional borrowing all too 
easy. The second supplementary budget for 
2021 falls within the context of the escape 
clause. This is because it was as part of this 
budget that legislators released €60 billion in 
unallocated pandemic-  related emergency bor -
rowing for future climate change mitigation 
measures. Legislators did not specify the meas -
ures to be financed using these funds, nor did 
they set an expiration date for the funds.14 As 
was the case last year, the Climate Fund is ul -
timately unlikely to need the funds this year ei -
ther. In this respect, it is not clear that the 
coronavirus crisis has directly led to an increase 
in borrowing requirements. At the same time, 
the court’s decision could provide guidelines Government 
failed to agree 
on key figures
Strained finan -
cial situation as 
early as next 
year, as well as 
large additional 
burdens in 
longer term
Federal Constitu -
tional Court to 
decide on emer -
gency borrow -
ing to finance 
Climate Fund 
upfrontFiscal balance of central government 
budget *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Feder-
al Ministry of Finance. * Excluding off-budget entities. Not ad-
justed for financial transactions or cyclical effects. 
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4–250–200–150–100–500100500
––
2023
20212021Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
2022€ billion
20222023
12 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023), pp. 71ff.
13 Oral proceedings are scheduled for 21 June 2023.
14 In tandem with the 2022 Budget Act, the Bundestag 
postponed the repayment plans previously adopted and 
extended them considerably. This approach severs the link 
between granting emergency borrowing and drawing up a 
repayment plan.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
63

for the ESF- E. In 2022, it received its own emer -
gency borrowing authorisations of €200 billion 
and used them in full – in large part to fill a re -
serve with €170 billion. State governments, 
too, are funding sizeable deficits in future fiscal 
years upfront using the escape clause.
Off- budget entities: first quarter and out -
look for 2023 as a whole
Central government’s off- budget entities15 re-
corded a large deficit totalling €31 billion 
(2022: +€½ billion) in the first quarter of 2023:– The ESF- E recorded a deficit of €26 billion 
for payments in connection with the energy 
price brakes and supplementary assistance. 
Deficit growth will scarcely maintain its mo -
mentum over the course of the year, though. 
For example, the skimming of extraordinary 
revenues from high electricity prices will 
ease the strain on the ESF- E as the year pro -
gresses. Moreover, suppliers recently cut 
prices, which will reduce spending on the 
energy price brakes.
– The precautionary fund for final payments of 
inflation- indexed Federal securities recorded 
a deficit of €3½ billion. This was mainly due 
to payments for an inflation- indexed Federal 
bond that had to be redeemed in mid-  April. 
As the year goes on, however, upcoming 
transfers from central government budget 
to the fund should lead to a relatively large 
surplus.16
– As in the previous year, the Climate Fund re -
corded a deficit of €1½ billion. It therefore 
does not appear to be a foregone conclu -
sion that it will record the large deficit of 
€14 billion that was forecast for this year 
(previous year’s result excluding the transfer 
from central government is roughly bal -
anced).
– The Armed Forces Fund reported initial ex -
penditure and thus a deficit of almost €1 bil -
lion. In order to make full use of the €8½ bil -
lion in its economic plan, its flow of expend -
iture would have to accelerate considerably 
further.
The ESF- E deficit will be the determining factor 
in the annual result of the off- budget entities 
Large deficit 
from measures 
taken in 
response to 
energy crisisFiscal balances of central government's 
off-budget entities*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Only entities using a single-entry ac-
counting  system,  i.e.  excluding,  in  particular,  the  bad  bank 
FMS Wertmanagement and also deficits from refinancing FMS 
Wertmanagement  incurred  by  SoFFin,  which  uses  a  single-
entry accounting system. 1 Precautionary fund for final pay-
ments  of  inflation-indexed  Federal  securities.  2 Founded  in 
2020 for coronavirus assistance; expanded in autumn 2022 to 
cover  energy  price  assistance.  3 Climate  and  Transformation 
Fund; up to 2022, Energy and Climate Fund. 4 In particular, 
special  funds  for  reconstruction  aid  to  cover  flood  damage, 
civil  servants'  pensions,  digitalisation,  expansion  of  childcare 
services and local government investment.
Deutsche Bundesbank2021 2022 2023604020020406080
–––++++€ billion, quarterly figures
Other4Fund for inflation-indexed securities1
Economic Stabilisation Fund2
Armed Forces FundClimate Fund3
Total
–60–40–200+20+40+60+80Cumulated from start of year
15 According to data from the Federal Ministry of Finance, 
i.e. excluding bad banks and other entities that use com -
mercial double- entry bookkeeping.
16 The national accounts already include expenditure from 
the core budget to fill up this fund as current interest ex -
penditure. As a result, it is not the repayment in April that 
affects the general government national accounts balance 
but the transfer from the core budget, which is up sharply 
compared with the previous year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
64

as a whole. As things stand today, its deficit is 
likely to remain significantly below the pro -
jected figure of €121 billion.
State government budgets17
Core budgets in the first quarter of 2023
State government core budgets closed the first 
quarter with a deficit of €3 billion. In the same 
quarter of the previous year, they had posted a 
surplus of €14 billion. Revenue fell by 12%, 
with taxes decreasing significantly. However, it 
appears that not all taxes received by the state 
governments for the first quarter have yet been 
recorded in their budgets.18 In addition, the 
central government payments to state govern -
ments for business aid were discontinued. Des -
pite the smaller amounts of business aid to be 
forwarded, expenditure still went up slightly. 
This was mainly due to increased transfers to 
public administrations, especially to local gov -
ernments. Furthermore, a reserve appears to 
have been created in an off- budget entity in 
Schleswig- Holstein. Significantly higher interest 
payments also contributed to expenditure 
growth.
Core budgets and off- budget entities in 
2023 as a whole
The state government core budgets and off-  
budget entities combined could slip into a def -
icit this year (2022: surplus of €10½ billion). 
According to the new tax estimate, their tax 
revenue will decline slightly. On the expend -
iture side, the significant item of personnel ex -
penditure is likely to go up markedly. This is 
mainly due to general pay rises, but also to the 
planned increase in staffing levels. In addition, 
some federal states will gradually raise the sal -
aries of teaching staff at primary schools. The 
transfers to local governments are likely to con -
tinue rising over the year as a whole. Further -
more, some federal states could significantly 
boost their expenditure on climate change miti -
gation, energy price assistance or other eco -nomic assistance. At the very least, the relevant 
state parliaments have authorised their govern -
ments to do so.
State government debt brakes
Some federal states have recently activated the 
escape clause in their debt brakes to create 
long- term financial leeway.19 The parties in the 
new Berlin state government are also planning 
to do this. In their coalition agreement, a debt- 
financed special fund of €5 billion has been ESF- E deficit in 
2023 likely to 
remain signifi -
cantly below 
projected figure
Core budgets 
deteriorated sig -
nificantly in Q1
Deficit possible 
for core budgets 
and off- budget 
entities com -
bined for year 
as a wholeNumerous debt- 
financed, long- 
term transform -
ation funds 
hamper effective 
debt brakeState government fiscal balance
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 
1 Figure calculated using monthly cash statistics from the Fe-
deral Ministry of Finance; quarterly data are not yet available. 
2 Core budgets and off-budget entities together.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4201001020
––++
2021Quarterly figures
2023
2022€ billion
Cumulated from start of year 21
–100+10+20+30
2022
2021Off-budget entitiesCore budgets
17 The figures for the quarter under review are based on 
the monthly cash statistics for the core budgets.
18 The difference between taxes collected in the tax statis -
tics and the monthly state government budget statistics 
amounted to around €5 billion in the first quarter of 2023, 
compared with -€½ billion in the first quarter of 2022. See 
the April issue of the Monthly Report of the Federal Minis -
try of Finance for the distribution of taxes collected in the 
first quarter across the levels of government (for the report -
ing quarter, see Federal Ministry of Finance (2023), p. 42), 
and the monthly cash statistics of the federal states’ core 
budgets for the state government taxes collected.
19 For details on Bremen and Saarland specifically, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023), p. 76.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
65

agreed. This sum is intended to finance meas -
ures for energy savings in the buildings sector, 
renewable energy, green mobility and eco -
nomic transformation. However, the measures 
have not yet been fleshed out or priced. If the 
measures are deemed successful at the end of 
2024, the parties intend to top up the special 
fund to €10 billion. Such resources will effect -
ively suspend the standard limit under the debt 
brake for a number of years.20 Ultimately, this 
will severely impair the binding effect of the 
debt brake, meaning that the latter will hardly 
be in a position to effectively limit debt.Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
First quarter of 2023
The statutory pension insurance scheme re -
corded a deficit of €1 billion in the first quarter 
of 2023. In the same quarter of 2022, its 
budget had still been broadly balanced. Pen -
sions were raised substantially in mid- 2022. 
This is the main reason why expenditure rose 
by 6½%. Total revenue grew by 5½% on the 
same quarter of the previous year. Contribution 
receipts increased by as much as 6%.
2023 as a whole
The surplus looks likely to fall over the year as a 
whole: the high annual average pension in -
crease could cause the surplus to decline sig -
nificantly from the €3 billion recorded last year. 
Averaged across the year, individual pensions 
will see growth of 5%, which is noticeably 
stronger than in the previous year (3%). At 
mid- year, they will rise by just over 4½% 
(4.39% in western Germany and 5.86% in 
eastern Germany). This increase is mainly due 
to high wage growth in 2022, in which the 
increased  minimum wage played a role. As 
wages went up more sharply in eastern Ger -
many, the rise in pensions will be 1½ percent -
age points stronger in that region. This means 
that they will already match the level in west -
ern Germany this year – one year earlier than 
the statutory requirement. By contrast, the sus -
tainability factor dampened the pension in -
crease in both regions. In simplified terms, this 
factor thus takes into account the climbing 
ratio of pensions to contributions. The grad -
ually accelerating rise in the number of pen -
sions is already amplifying spending pressures Deficit in Q1 
following  sub -
stantial pension 
increase in 
mid- 2022
2023: previous 
year’s surplus 
likely to decline 
significantlyFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final  annual  figures  differ  from  the  total  of  the  reported  
quarterly figures as the latter are not revised.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4420246
––+++
–6–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202320222021
2022
2023
20212021 2022 202302468
2021 2022 202302468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
20 The coalition agreement does not set out a structurally 
balanced budget for Berlin until the two- year budget of 
2028-29. In addition, the coalition parties are examining 
the possibility of debt- financing individual state institutions 
without this counting towards the debt brake. For more in -
formation on fiscal policy plans, see CDU and SPD Berlin 
(2023), pp. 125-131.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
66

this year. On the revenue side, contributions are 
likely to see robust growth. Social contribution- 
exempt inflation compensation bonuses are 
having a marked dampening effect.
Medium- term outlook
Following this year’s pension adjustment, the 
replacement rate is just above the 48% thresh -
old. However, the contribution rate to the long- 
term care insurance scheme is also set to rise 
by 0.35 percentage point at mid- year, a factor 
not taken into account by the Federal Govern -
ment. This slightly reduces the replacement 
rate and thus the distance to the threshold. The 
reason for this is that pension recipients pay 
the entire contribution to the long- term care 
insurance scheme themselves. By contrast, em -
ployees’ contributions are paid in part by em -
ployers. Therefore, the higher contribution rate 
is weighing on pensions more strongly in the 
numerator of the replacement rate than on 
wages in the denominator. The effect on the 
replacement rate is minimal, at less than 
0.1  percentage point this year. However, it 
would make sense if, in the future, the govern -
ment took into account the repercussions of a 
law coming into force at the same time.
Next year, the threshold for the replacement 
rate is likely to take effect for the first time. 
Pensions would then rise more sharply than ex -
pected on the basis of the adjustment formula. 
Funding pressures will be increased significantly 
further by the Federal Government’s future 
plans, according to which the replacement rate 
will not fall below 48% after 2025, either. The 
contribution rate and central government 
grants would then have to rise more sharply 
than currently envisaged.21
Federal Employment Agency
First quarter of 2023
The Federal Employment Agency reported a 
broadly balanced result for the first quarter of 2023.22 This was an improvement of almost €2 
billion compared with the same quarter of the 
previous year. Expenditure on short- time work, 
in particular, fell sharply (-70%). By contrast, 
spending on unemployment benefits grew by 
7%, partly because the number of benefit re -
cipients rose. Overall, expenditure fell by 7%, 
however. Revenue climbed substantially, by 
11%. Of this, 9 percentage points were attrib -
utable to a rise of 0.2 percentage point in the 
contribution rate. Shortly before the pandemic, Replacement 
rate: distance to 
threshold nar -
rowing because 
of higher long- 
term care contri -
bution rate
Growing 
pressure  on 
pension  finances
Federal Employ -
ment Agency 
had broadly 
balanced  result 
in Q1Finances of the 
Federal Employment Agency*
Source: Federal Employment Agency. * Including transfers to 
the civil servants' pension fund and before payment of central 
government grants.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410505
––+
–25–20–15–10–50+5Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202320222021
20212023
20222021 2022 2023–400+40+80+120
2021 2022 20234004080120
–+++Revenue Expenditure
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
€ billion
21 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c).
22 In the core budget, i.e. excluding the civil servants’ pen -
sion fund. Transfers to the fund are recorded as expend -
iture, lowering the core budget balance.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
67

central government legislators had lowered it 
to 2.4% until 2022. This step was intended to 
prevent a continued rise in the very high re -
serves at that time.
2023 as a whole
The Federal Employment Agency’s finances are 
likely to improve further this year. Overall, a sig -
nificant surplus is on the cards. This could be 
markedly higher than the figure planned by the 
Federal Employment Agency (€2 billion).23 Ac-
cording to the Federal Government’s spring 
projection, developments in the economy as a 
whole are likely to be more favourable. As in 
the preceding years, the expenditure estimates 
for active labour market policy also suggest 
that there will be a distinct reduction in spend -
ing.
The reform of the EU’s fiscal 
rules
The process of reforming the 
EU’s fiscal rules is underway
On 26 April 2023, the European Commission 
(hereinafter “the Commission”) presented legis -
lative proposals to implement a reform of the 
EU’s fiscal rules. These proposals are highly 
complex, and numerous details remain unre -
solved. Further negotiations are planned and 
adjustments are likely to be made. The main 
features of the proposals are presented below 
and subsequently evaluated. In addition, sug -
gestions for amendment are made to address 
selected points of criticism. Overall, the reform 
proposals threaten to weaken rather than 
strengthen the EU’s fiscal rules compared with 
the status quo prior to their suspension in 
2020.
The EU’s fiscal rules are intended to safeguard 
sound public finances in EU Member States. 
This is key, in particular, to ensuring a stability- 
oriented monetary policy. The Bundesbank 
therefore advocates stringent fiscal rules. It has submitted reform proposals to various bod -
ies.24 From the Bundesbank’s point of view, it is 
essential that the rules lay out reliable guide 
rails for sound public finances. It is therefore 
important that the rules have a clear focus on 
the objective of sound public finances. This 
should not be traded off against other policy 
objectives. The existing fiscal framework should 
thus be fortified with more binding, ex ante 
quantitative requirements. The rules should be 
implemented transparently and monitored in a 
clear and comprehensible manner.
The key features of the 
Commis sion’s legislative 
proposals 
The Commission’s reform proposals aim to 
continue ensuring that Member States pursue 
a sustainable fiscal policy in the medium term. 
The rules are intended both to assure budget -
ary discipline and promote sustainable growth. 
Fiscal targets are intermingled with macroeco -
nomic targets to a much greater extent than 
before. The macroeconomic imbalances pro -
cedure is to be integrated into fiscal surveil -
lance. The rules leave room for interpretation 
on a number of points. Requirements are de -
termined via relatively complicated procedures, 
and results are based on a large number of as -
sumptions. The proposals envisage country-  
specific objectives. Furthermore, the Commis -
sion plans to give Member States more scope 
in the design of the adjustment paths taken to 
meet these objectives. It hopes that this will 
increase  a sense of national responsibility for 
compliance with the rules (national ownership). 
The key features of the proposed rules are out -
lined below. Taken in their entirety, however, 
the proposals are more complex and, at times, 
ambiguous.Significant 
surplus  on the 
cards for 2023
Planned reform 
threatens to 
weaken EU’s 
fiscal  rules
Bundesbank 
advocates strin -
gent fiscal rulesCommission pro -
poses complex 
procedure
23 This year, the Federal Employment Agency will have to 
repay a central government loan of €½ billion from 2022. 
As was the case for the payment of the loan to the Federal 
Employment Agency in 2022, repayment will not affect the 
Federal Employment Agency’s balance.
24 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
68

Multiannual fiscal adjustment plans to play 
a pivotal role in the rules
In future, the Commission and the Member 
States are to negotiate an appropriate country- 
specific fiscal trajectory, which should take into 
account the initial situation of each Member 
State and fulfil various conditions. However, 
the Council will continue making decisions on 
the final fiscal requirements based on a pro -
posal from the Commission.
Multiannual fiscal adjustment plans setting out 
the trajectory towards a sound fiscal position 
are to play a pivotal role in these bilateral 
agreements. The Commission will assess 
whether a fiscal position is sufficiently sound 
on the basis of its debt sustainability analysis. 
As a rule, the adjustment plans are to span four 
years. Within this period, Member States are 
expected to achieve a sound budgetary pos -
ition. However, they may also request and be 
granted an extended adjustment period of up 
to seven years, provided that this is under -
pinned by a set of reform and investment com -
mitments assessed positively by the Commis -
sion. The adjustment plans are intended to en -
sure that Member States achieve a sound fiscal 
position by the end of the adjustment period. 
Furthermore, debt ratios exceeding 60% are to 
be reduced. If its deficit ratio is above 3% (un -
less only slightly and temporarily), a Member 
State is expected to achieve a correction of at 
least 0.5% of GDP per year (this probably refers 
to an improvement in the structural deficit).
On a country- by- country basis, the Commission 
determines the fiscal position deemed to be 
sound and which the country is expected to 
achieve by the end of the adjustment plan. This 
is based on its debt sustainability analysis, 
which itself is founded on numerous assump -
tions (including longer-  term fiscal and eco -
nomic developments and interest rate assump -
tions). Using this analysis, the Commission cal -
culates a target for the structural primary bal -
ance25 at the end of the adjustment period that 
is consistent with a sound fiscal position.26 The level of the structural primary balance should 
be sufficiently ambitious to keep the deficit 
ratio below 3% for a period of ten years after 
the period covered by the plan. In addition, 
high debt ratios are expected to be reduced 
adequately.
A country- specific fiscal target is then intended 
to ensure that the Member State in question 
achieves the aforementioned target for the 
structural primary balance by the end of the 
adjustment period. The fiscal target is a cap on 
the path of net primary expenditure over time. 
Broadly speaking, net primary expenditure 
comprises all expenditure apart from interest 
expenditure and cyclical influences. The term 
“net” implies that post- adoption adjustments 
on the revenue side have to be offset via pri -
mary expenditure (for example, tax cuts will 
then lead to a more ambitious expenditure 
path). The Member State must set the annual 
targets for net primary expenditure in the ad -
justment plan in such a way that, based on a 
realistic fiscal projection, it will achieve the pre -
viously determined sound fiscal position. The 
Member State must not backload the fiscal ad -
justment effort to the end of the adjustment 
period. In any case, average growth in net pri -
mary expenditure should, a priori, be slower 
than that in GDP over the medium term (unless 
the country’s debt ratio is below 60%). If an 
excessive deficit procedure (EDP) is opened dur -
ing the adjustment period, the Member State 
concerned must fulfil additional requirements. 
In that case, it must potentially also adjust the 
agreed expenditure path.Commission and 
Member States 
to agree on 
fiscal  trajectory
Multiannual 
fiscal  adjustment 
plans intended 
to produce 
sound budget -
ary positions
Commission’s 
debt sustain-
ability analysis 
as a measure of 
sound fiscal 
position Net primary 
expenditure is 
key target and 
control variable
25 Structural primary balance: the general government fis -
cal balance is adjusted for cyclical influences, other tempor -
ary influences and interest expenditure in relation to GDP .
26 The legislative proposals envisage a secure fiscal pos -
ition at the end of the adjustment period: the structural pri -
mary balance achieved should ensure that, for a ten- year 
trajectory beyond the plan’s horizon, the debt ratio is put 
on a “plausibly” downward path or stays at “prudent” 
levels and that the deficit ratio is maintained below 3%, 
based on the assumption that fiscal policies remain un -
changed. Projected changes in ageing- related costs are 
added to the deficit. Rising ageing- related costs thus in -
crease the deficit requirements. Rules- based adjustments to 
social security contributions, such as those applied in Ger -
many, will probably not be taken into account.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
69

In principle, whether or not a country complies 
with the fiscal rule during the adjustment 
period is measured exclusively by its net pri -
mary expenditure path, which would usually be 
determined at the outset. The Member State 
must not deviate upward from the agreed ex -
penditure path. By contrast, less favourable de -
velopments in other parts of the budget or in 
medium- term growth are not considered when 
assessing whether the rule has been met. In 
other words, in these cases the Member State 
may fail to meet the agreed objective of a 
sound budget while still complying with the 
rule. On the one hand, an expenditure- based 
rule of this kind has a steadying effect on fiscal 
policy because the government does not have 
to react to unexpected developments apart 
from those in net primary expenditure. As a 
rule, net primary expenditure is something gov -
ernments are well able to control. On the other 
hand, this set- up also accepts that the Member 
State may fall significantly short of the actual 
budgetary objective. The projections used to 
calculate the net primary expenditure path thus 
play an important role. These should therefore 
be as accurate as possible and should not regu -
larly have an optimistic bias.
Viewed in more detail, net primary expenditure 
comprises general government expenditure ex -
cluding interest expenditure (hence “primary”). 
Cyclical unemployment expenditure is likewise 
excluded. If cyclical deficits or surpluses arise 
elsewhere as a result of fluctuations in revenue 
or labour market-  related expenditure, they do 
not need to be corrected. Negative develop -
ments are excused, and more positive develop -
ments do not result in fiscal discretionary 
power. In this way, fiscal policy can automatic -
ally have a stabilising effect across the eco -
nomic cycle. In addition, expenditure funded 
by EU transfers is excluded from net primary 
expenditure. This means that only nationally-  
financed expenditure is relevant for fiscal sur -
veillance. Moreover, if, during the adjustment 
period, a government decides on fiscal meas -
ures affecting the revenue side that have not 
yet been included, this is usually taken into ac -count (hence “net”). For example, if a govern -
ment raises taxes, this increases the permissible 
net primary expenditure; if it lowers taxes, less 
net primary expenditure is permitted.
The adjustment plans agreed with the Commis -
sion form the basis for regular fiscal surveil -
lance. Member States are to submit annual 
progress reports during the adjustment period. 
The Commission will examine these reports 
and keep track of any deviations from the 
agreed net primary expenditure path on a no -
tional control account. The legislative proposals 
do not indicate what has to be done about the 
shortfalls recorded on this account. However, 
they are to play a role in decisions regarding 
the opening of an EDP . If an EDP is to be 
opened during the adjustment period, no more 
detailed new agreements need to be made. 
Moreover, the requirements of the EDP must 
be taken into account. Towards the end of the 
adjustment period, Member States will negoti -
ate new adjustment plans with the Commis -
sion for the years that follow.
A much simpler procedure is to apply for Mem -
ber States with a deficit ratio below 3% and a 
debt ratio below 60%. These countries are ex -
pected to submit a four- year plan, which the 
Commission then assesses for plausibility. At 
the end of the plan, the Member State in ques -
tion is expected to have reached a target for its 
structural primary balance. This requirement is 
intended to ensure that the country maintains 
its sound fiscal position.
Specific requirements for an EDP
EDPs remain linked to the Maastricht criteria of 
a deficit ratio of 3% or a debt ratio of 60%. As 
a preliminary step towards an EDP , the Com -
mission can first issue an early warning. This is 
possible if there is an increased risk that a coun -
try’s net primary expenditure will increase more 
than was agreed or if the deficit ratio threatens 
to rise above 3%. The consequences of such an 
early warning are unclear, however.Rule compliance 
is measured by 
net primary 
expenditure
Calculating net 
primary expend -
iture is complexRegular fiscal 
surveillance 
based on adjust -
ment plans
Simplified 
procedure  for 
countries with 
low debt levels
Early warning a 
preliminary step 
towards an EDPDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
70

The Commission can initiate an EDP in two 
cases: if a country’s deficit is too high, or if its 
debt ratio is too high.
– As before, a deficit-  based EDP is to be 
opened if the deficit ratio rises above the 3% 
reference value. In that case, the Member 
State must, as a rule, correct its fiscal bal -
ance by at least 0.5% of GDP per year. This 
continues to apply until its deficit ratio falls 
below the 3% reference value. There are 
exceptions  , however. For example, the pro -
posals specify that a temporary breach of 
the deficit ratio that remains close to the ref -
erence value should not lead to the opening 
of a deficit- based EDP . This was also the case 
under the existing rules, with deviations of 
up to 0.5% of GDP and of a maximum of 
one year being tolerated. It is unclear 
whether clear quantitative requirements will 
continue to apply in future.
– In future, debt- based EDPs are intended pri -
marily to target Member States with a sub -
stantial public debt challenge. This means 
that the Commission can initiate a proced -
ure if the deficit ratio is below 3% but the 
debt ratio is above 60%. As a rule, a proced -
ure should usually be opened if a Member 
State with a substantial public debt chal -
lenge deviates from the agreed adjustment 
path for net primary expenditure. However, 
there is also no clear definition of what con -
stitutes a substantial public debt challenge.27 
The Commission is to conduct a comprehen -
sive assessment of whether or not to open a 
procedure and to take into account a wide 
range of country- specific factors.
The procedural steps for possible sanctions re -
main unchanged (such as the procedural steps 
and the voting rules in the Council). However, 
the Commission wants to de- constrain the 
Council’s use of sanctions in EDPs. The sanc -
tions are therefore to be set at lower amounts. 
0.05% of GDP is to fall due given six months of 
non- compliance. The sanctions are to be ter -
minated once the Council considers that the Member State has taken effective action. As 
the sanctions can only be imposed for a max -
imum of five years, they are limited to 0.5% of 
a country’s GDP per procedure.
EDPs may be suspended if the Council activates 
one of two escape clauses on the basis of a 
proposal from the Commission. The general es -
cape clause can be activated in the event of a 
severe economic downturn in the euro area or 
in the EU. The country- specific escape clause 
can be activated in the case of exceptional cir -
cumstances outside the control of the govern -
ment with a major impact on the public 
finances of an individual Member State.
Further selected aspects of the reform 
proposals 
On request, Member States are to be permitted 
to revise the endorsed adjustment plans before 
the deadline expires. This is possible, first, if the 
original path is no longer feasible due to ob -
jective circumstances. However, it is unclear 
what is actually meant by this term. Second, 
following a change of government, the new 
government can submit a new adjustment 
plan. However, the time horizon of the original 
path is likely to remain unchanged in both 
cases. By contrast, there is no obligation for a 
country to amend its adjustment plan if it be -
comes apparent that it will not meet the target 
for a sound fiscal position despite following the 
endorsed net primary expenditure path. If de -
velopments in other parts of the budget or in 
the medium- term growth path are significantly 
less favourable than previously expected, this is 
excused under the rules – as long as no EDP is 
opened.
The role of independent national fiscal institu -
tions is to be expanded. So far, they have primar -Deficit- based or 
debt- based EDP
Procedure for 
deficits above 
3% of GDP
Procedure for 
debts above 
60% of GDP
Financial 
sanctions Escape clauses 
may suspend 
EDPs
Adjustment 
plans can be 
renegotiated 
given a change 
of government, 
for example
27 This is to be based primarily on the results of the Com -
mission’s most recent fiscal sustainability report. However, 
the Commission does not publish aggregated risk values 
for the individual countries. Instead, it reports risk values 
for the short, medium and long term. In some cases, these 
vary very widely for individual countries. It is unclear what 
risk value the Commission intends to consider.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
71

ily monitored compliance with national fiscal 
rules. In future, they will be more closely involved 
in monitoring compliance with the EU’s fiscal 
rules and will oversee the implementation of na -
tional adjustment plans. To this end, they are to 
assess, for example, their governments’ macro -
economic assumptions and fiscal forecasts. If a 
Member State deviates from the agreed net ex -
penditure path, the fiscal institutions are to ana -
lyse the factors relevant to this deviation.
In order to improve the data quality of their 
statistics, Member States will be required, 
where appropriate, to fundamentally modern -
ise their national accounts. They are to intro -
duce integrated, comprehensive and nationally 
harmonised accruals accounting by 2030. This 
will necessitate coherent accounting rules and 
procedures as well as integrated data collection 
and processing systems. Particularly large ad -
justments would need to be made in Germany, 
as it currently lacks a harmonised national ac -
counting system. Moreover, the cameralistic 
accounting system that is still predominantly in 
use today does not capture revenue and ex -
penditure entirely on an accruals basis.
Assessment
Overall, the Bundesbank considers the Com -
mission’s proposals to weaken rather than 
strengthen the fiscal rules (for specific examples 
of their weaknesses, see the box on pp. 73 f.). 
The achievement of a rapid reduction in high 
debt ratios seems questionable. However, there 
are also welcome elements to the Commis -
sion’s proposals. The commitment to sound 
public finances and the Maastricht criteria set 
out in the EU Treaty is important (3% deficit 
and 60% debt ratio). The increased require -
ments for statistics and the underlying account -
ing systems are also welcome, for example. 
Moreover, the close involvement of national fis -
cal institutions could have a positive impact.
The Commission’s proposals fail to achieve the 
objective of making the rules simpler, more transparent and less discretionary, for a number 
of reasons. First, the proposals envisage fewer 
uniform fiscal rules and more scope for bilateral 
negotiations. Second, structural policy object -
ives are intermingled with fiscal policy object -
ives and the two are traded off against each 
other. There is a great deal of scope for inter -
pretation and discretion. This threatens to re -
duce the binding effect of the fiscal rules even 
further.
The current objective of close- to- balance struc -
tural budgetary positions, which is relatively 
transparent for all Member States, is to be re -
moved and replaced by new country- specific 
targets, which are mainly derived from complex 
and highly assumption- driven sustainability cal -
culations. Furthermore, reform and investment 
projects are to be incorporated into the 
country- specific fiscal requirements, potentially 
by extending the adjustment period signifi -
cantly.
Calculating net primary expenditure, a central 
reference point for monitoring the rules, is not 
straightforward either. This, in turn, relies on a 
number of assumptions and estimates, includ -
ing with regard to changes in tax law and 
medium- term growth. All of this is fraught with 
high uncertainty. In the past, growth rates and 
the additional revenue generated by tax in -
creases have often been overestimated. Given 
such overly optimistic estimates, a country may 
fail to meet the structural primary balance tar -
get at the end of the adjustment period even 
though it is following the endorsed net primary 
expenditure path. As such inaccurate assess -
ments can build up over a period of up to 
seven years, the fiscal position achieved at the 
end of the adjustment period may sometimes 
deviate significantly from the agreed level. This 
means, for example, that it is impossible to rule 
out the possibility that, while still complying 
with the rules, a country’s structural deficit or 
debt ratio will rise significantly over an ex -
tended period of time. It would only be pos -
sible to open an EDP if a country exceeded the 
3% deficit limit.Closer 
involvement  of 
independent 
national fiscal 
institutions
Member States 
to introduce 
harmonised 
accruals 
accounting
Rules at risk of 
being weakenedFewer uniform 
rules and more 
bilateral scope 
for negotiation 
render rules less 
binding
Clear require -
ments for struc -
tural budget 
balances 
replaced by 
complex targets 
derived from 
assumption- 
driven sustain -
ability calcula -
tions
Calculating net 
primary expend -
iture not 
straightforward; 
substantial devi -
ations from 
sound fiscal pos -
ition a risk in the 
medium termDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
72

Examples of weaknesses in the reform proposals and more 
stringent design options
This box outlines examples of individual 
weaknesses identifi  ed in the reform pro-
posals. For each weakness, alternative de-
sign options are given that could be used to 
selectively apply the rules more stringently. 
It would also be crucial to limit the substan-
tial discretionary leeway inherent in the 
rules, amongst other things.
– The proposals envisage the Member 
States being able to extend the adjust-
ment period if they commit to appropri-
ate reforms and investment. This is likely 
to signifi  cantly reduce the required de-
gree of annual adjustment towards a 
sound fi  scal position, in some cases. 
However, the impact of reforms and in-
vestment on growth is generally highly 
uncertain and often subject to debate. 
Any expected positive effects of the re-
forms are already taken into account in 
the projections and sustainability calcula-
tions anyway. This option should there-
fore be removed and the adjustment 
period limited to a maximum of four 
years across the board.
– The agreed target for a Member State’s 
structural primary balance at the end of 
the adjustment period may not be ambi-
tious enough to guarantee an adequate 
safety buffer against an excessive defi  cit. 
However, the requirements should en-
sure that there is a suffi   cient safety buf-
fer in place that takes account of poten-
tial cyclical fl  uctuations. With this aim in 
mind, a new design option could use, as 
a starting point, the European Commis-
sion’s existing approach based on min-
imum benchmarks, which is also in-
tended to prevent excessive defi  cits.– The planned rules do not adequately en-
sure a genuine improvement in Member 
States’ fi  scal positions. A country’s struc-
tural primary balance may still deterior-
ate signifi  cantly even if it adheres to the 
agreed adjustment path. This may occur 
if, for example, revenue developments 
are structurally weaker than was as-
sumed in the adjustment plan. If this is 
the case, a new adjustment plan should 
be drawn up at an early stage in order to 
at least prevent a Member State from 
moving away from a sound fi  scal pos-
ition.
– Where a highly indebted country devi-
ates from the adjustment path, the re-
form proposals do not clearly state that 
this will lead to the opening of a debt- 
based excessive defi  cit procedure (EDP). 
This is likely to be at the European Com-
mission’s discretion, fi  rst and foremost. It 
would be better to automatically open a 
debt- based EDP as from a certain debt 
ratio in the event that a country fails to 
adhere to its net primary expenditure 
path (e.g. above 90%).
– The reform proposals do not clearly spe-
cify the requirements that a country must 
fulfi  l in a debt- based EDP . The adjust-
ment path in a debt- based EDP should 
ensure a reliable and marked fall in the 
debt ratio. In any case, the country should 
be obliged to return to its previously 
agreed net primary expenditure path.
– The proposals specify that a temporary 
breach of the 3% defi  cit ratio that re-
mains close to the reference value should 
not lead to the opening of a defi  cit- 
based EDP . The wording of this exception Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
73

The derivation of country- specific fiscal targets 
is likely to be difficult for the general public to 
understand. The same is true of decisions about 
whether a country has complied with the rules: 
there are numerous exemptions and discretion -
ary powers, making it unclear when Member 
States will be deemed to have failed to meet 
the requirements and what the consequences 
will be. In addition, Member States can renego -
tiate their adjustment plans. Moreover, they are 
under no obligation to respond if they fail to 
meet the requirements. All of this means that 
the rules can be interpreted loosely and thus 
no longer provide clear guide rails for national 
governments, independent fiscal institutions 
and the general public. This weakens their 
binding effect.
In the area of fiscal surveillance, the proposals 
allow the Commission even more leeway than 
before to interpret the rules in different ways. 
The Commission has a wide range of tasks and pursues other aims in addition to fiscal object -
ives. This will inevitably lead to conflicts of 
interest and weaken the focus of the fiscal rules 
on sound public finances. This raises the ques -
tion of whether the Commission is well suited 
to a pivotal role in implementing and monitor -
ing fiscal rules.
The reform proposals aim to give Member 
States more national ownership of their fiscal 
path. In this respect, they make the fiscal rules 
more flexible. This makes it all the more import -
ant for Member States to remain responsible 
for independently maintaining the confidence 
of capital markets and limiting risk premiums 
on their financing costs.
The Commission’s legislative proposals are still 
under negotiation among the Member States 
and may yet be amended. Germany’s Federal 
Minister of Finance has indicated that he feels 
improvements are needed.Binding effect of 
rules weakened 
by their com -
plexity and lack 
of clarityWith its 
widerange of 
policy tasks, 
Commission not 
well suited to 
role of monitor -
ing body
Greater national 
ownership
Adjustments 
still possible 
during  ongoing 
negotiationsto the rules is vague and leaves room for 
interpretation. It would be preferable to 
always open a defi  cit- based EDP when a 
country’s defi  cit ratio reaches 3.5% of 
GDP or is expected to exceed the 3% 
ceiling for longer than one year. This is 
also the approach that has been taken 
up to now.
– It is unclear whether a new adjustment 
plan has to be drawn up when an EDP is 
opened. In order to keep a constant eye 
on sustainability, a new adjustment plan 
(generally with a timeframe of four years) 
should be drawn up every time an EDP is 
opened, setting out a binding path to-
wards a sound fi  scal position at the end 
of the adjustment period.
– The EU’s NextGenerationEU programme 
(NGEU), which was launched during the 
pandemic, entails joint borrowing at the EU level to fi  nance grants, inter alia. These 
debts ultimately weigh on the Member 
States, as they have to repay them just 
like national debt. However, the reform 
proposals do not take these joint EU debts 
into account. The corresponding future 
burdens on Member States should be 
considered in the fi  scal rules. This applies 
not only to the NGEU, but also to any fur-
ther debt incurred jointly at the EU level in 
future (although it is enshrined in law that 
such joint debts are only possible in ex-
ceptional cases). Crucially, Eurostat should 
also report EU- level borrowing in line with 
the Maastricht requirements for govern-
ment debt. These joint EU debts could be 
allocated to each Member State accord-
ing to its share in the EU’s gross national 
income (not as part of the national ac-
counts, but rather with respect to the 
debt ratios upon which the rules are 
based).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
74

List of references
CDU and SPD Berlin (2023), Das Beste für Berlin, coalition agreement 2023-2026.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023), Public finances, Monthly Report, February 2023, pp. 64-80.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), Inflation- induced bracket creep in the income tax scale, Monthly 
Report, June 2022, pp. 63-73.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b), Central government’s debt brake: options for stability- oriented 
further  development, Monthly Report, April 2022, pp. 49-66.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c), Pension insurance scheme: long- term scenarios and reform options , 
Monthly Report, June 2022, pp. 47-61.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), Federal debt: allocate premia on accruals basis in budgetary inter -
est expenditure, Monthly Report, June 2021, pp. 47-51.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), Bundesbank contribution to the public debate on the review of the 
EU economic governance (October to December 2021), http://www.bundesbank.de/content/  
884870 , December 2021.
Federal Ministry of Finance (2023), Aktuelle Wirtschafts- und Finanzlage, Monthly Report, April 
2023, pp. 37-71.
Independent Advisory Board of the Stability Council (2023), 20. Stellungnahme zur Einhaltung der 
Obergrenze für das strukturelle gesamtstaatliche Finanzierungsdefizit nach § 51 Absatz 2 HGrG, 
May 2023.
Stability Council (2022), Beschluss zur Einhaltung der Obergrenze des strukturellen gesamtstaat -
lichen Finanzierungsdefizits nach § 51 Absatz 2 des Haushaltsgrundsätzegesetzes gemäß § 7 Sta -
bilitätsratsgesetz , December 2022.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
75

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
76

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43 •
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
3•

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Maastricht debt by creditor  .........................................................................................  63 •
13. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78 •
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81 •
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 €STR  5,6Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  7
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2021 Aug. 11.1 7.8 8.0 7.8 5.5 2.8 – 0.8 – 0.57 – 0.1
Sep. 11.1 7.6 7.6 7.8 5.6 3.3 – 0.7 – 0.57 0.1
Oct. 10.7 7.5 7.7 7.6 5.6 3.6 – 0.3 – 0.57 0.2
Nov. 10.1 7.1 7.4 7.3 5.8 3.7 – 0.5 – 0.57 0.2
Dec. 9.8 6.9 6.9 6.9 6.1 3.9 – 0.5 – 0.58 0.1
2022 Jan. 9.2 6.8 6.6 6.6 6.2 4.4 – 0.3 – 0.58 0.4
Feb. 9.2 6.8 6.5 6.4 6.3 4.4 – 0.6 – 0.58 0.8
Mar. 8.8 6.6 6.3 6.3 6.1 4.4 – 0.7 – 0.58 0.9
Apr. 8.3 6.3 6.1 6.1 6.4 5.0 – 0.1 – 0.58 1.4
May 8.0 6.1 5.8 5.9 6.2 5.1 0.0 – 0.59 1.7
June 7.3 6.0 5.8 5.8 6.3 5.4 – 0.0 – 0.58 2.2
July 6.8 5.9 5.7 5.9 5.9 5.4 – 0.1 – 0.51 1.9
Aug. 6.8 6.3 6.2 6.0 5.7 5.7 – 0.1 – 0.09 1.8
Sep. 5.7 6.2 6.3 5.8 5.5 5.7 – 0.1 0.36 2.6
Oct. 3.8 5.2 5.1 5.4 5.1 5.3 – 0.4 0.66 3.0
Nov. 2.4 4.7 4.8 4.7 4.8 5.2 0.2 1.37 2.7
Dec. 0.6 3.7 4.1 4.1 3.9 4.4 0.8 1.57 2.8
2023 Jan. – 0.8 2.9 3.4 3.5 3.0 3.7 1.5 1.90 2.9
Feb. – 2.7 2.0 2.9 2.9 2.5 3.3 2.0 2.28 3.0
Mar. – 4.2 1.4 2.5 ... 2.0 2.8 2.5 2.57 3.1
Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.90 3.0
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 EuroShort-Term Rate.  6 See also footnotes to Table VI.3, p. 43●. 7 GDP-weighted yield on
ten-year government bonds. Countries included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT,
GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assetsReference
rate 
vis-á-vis the
US dollar Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2021 Aug. +21,405 +16,159 +30,406 +61,944 +12,674 + 2,197 –168,492 +122,083 1.1772 99.4 93.2
Sep. +33,502 +21,257 +14,579 +13,397 +14,567 + 2,644 –17,434 + 1,405 1.1770 99.5 93.3
Oct. + 5,924 +12,022 +16,478 +28,482 +21,398 +13,325 –49,898 + 3,172 1.1601 98.5 92.4
Nov. +13,292 +14,033 – 2,931 + 4,913 +58,318 +25,655 –92,360 + 542 1.1414 97.6 91.8
Dec. +21,466 + 9,146 + 9,400 +25,447 + 2,529 + 1,197 –18,954 – 820 1.1304 97.1 91.2
2022 Jan. –10,524 –10,969 + 9,866 –17,278 +88,810 + 3,695 –63,040 – 2,321 1.1314 96.6 91.1
Feb. – 1,895 + 2,208 + 4,432 +26,209 –24,175 – 2,799 + 3,670 + 1,527 1.1342 96.9 91.6
Mar. + 4,023 + 2,522 –24,004 + 4,056 –111,299 – 2,509 +85,843 – 95 1.1019 95.9 91.4
Apr. –17,723 –13,042 –43,807 + 3,212 +16,713 +27,480 –90,504 – 708 1.0819 95.2 90.0
May –30,935 – 6,631 +41,344 +113,831 + 7,367 + 1,488 –82,552 + 1,210 1.0579 95.6 90.4
June – 4,923 – 7,439 +31,503 – 5,794 –64,436 – 170 +100,089 + 1,814 1.0566 95.9 90.6
July –19,890 –14,744 + 6,588 –13,230 +37,107 +11,567 –30,491 + 1,636 1.0179 94.1 89.2
Aug. –31,059 –29,371 – 8,893 –30,114 –60,204 +14,805 +64,456 + 2,163 1.0128 93.6 88.8
Sep. –21,530 –11,723 –50,455 +24,589 –152,621 +17,547 +56,440 + 3,591 0.9904 94.2 p 89.8
Oct. –19,893 – 9,007 +16,800 – 1,551 –19,801 + 797 +33,424 + 3,930 0.9826 94.8 p 91.1
Nov. + 1,049 + 6,630 –29,780 + 2,902 –54,229 + 10 +21,024 + 513 1.0201 96.0 p 92.0
Dec. +16,772 + 6,782 +60,308 +19,479 +59,168 – 9,147 –13,803 + 4,612 1.0589 97.0 p 92.3
2023 Jan. – 705 – 4,874 + 8,968 –17,332 + 8,729 + 9,654 +16,540 – 8,622 1.0769 97.3 p 92.5
Feb. +21,271 +29,395 – 5,211 +34,286 –43,351 +11,197 + 4,041 –11,384 1.0715 97.3 p 92.6
Mar. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0706 97.5 p 92.7
Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0968 98.6 p 93.8
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also Tables
XII. 9 and 11, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Bundesbank cal-culation. Vis-á-vis the currencies of the extended EER group of tranding partners (fixed
composition).  4 Based on consumer price indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Croatia Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2020 –6.1 –5.4 –3.7 –0.6 –2.4 –7.8 –9.0 6.2 –9.0 –8.5 –2.3
2021 5.4 6.3 2.6 8.0 3.0 6.8 8.4 13.6 7.0 13.1 4.3
2022 3.5 3.2 1.8 –1.3 2.1 2.6 5.9 12.0 3.7 6.2 2.8
2021 Q4 4.9 6.3 1.2 7.4 3.1 4.8 8.2 13.8 6.3 12.3 4.5
2022 Q1 5.5 5.3 4.1 2.9 4.2 4.8 8.5 11.7 6.4 7.8 6.6
Q2 4.4 4.1 1.7 –0.3 3.2 4.4 7.4 12.6 5.1 8.7 3.5
Q3 2.5 2.1 1.3 –2.9 1.6 1.0 3.9 11.6 2.4 5.3 0.6
Q4 1.8 1.6 0.2 –4.1 –0.4 0.1 4.5 12.0 1.0 3.5 1.2
2023 Q1 1.3 ... 0.2 ... ... 1.1 ... 6.4 ... ... 0.7
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2020 –7.7 –3.8 –9.6 –2.8 –3.2 –10.9 –2.1 14.5 –11.4 –3.4 –1.8
2021 8.9 16.8 4.7 12.8 4.2 5.9 10.4 28.3 12.2 6.4 6.5
2022 2.2 –0.7 p–0.5 –2.3 4.1 –0.1 2.4 18.9 0.4 1.6 0.8
2021 Q4 2.5 11.2 –1.2 11.8 7.4 –0.5 11.9 7.4 4.6 4.0 3.6
2022 Q1 1.6 6.4 –1.2 4.3 5.8 –0.3 4.9 7.6 1.5 3.0 4.0
Q2 2.0 –5.1 –1.3 2.5 8.1 –0.1 3.1 14.9 2.1 2.5 3.6
Q3 3.3 –3.6 1.6 –5.0 3.6 0.2 3.6 21.0 0.0 2.4 –2.7
Q4 2.1 –0.2 p–0.9 –10.4 –0.6 –0.3 –1.8 29.8 –2.2 –1.5 –1.2
2023 Q1 0.4 –3.2 p 0.8 –9.4 1.3 –0.6 1.9 p 8.4 –1.5 –1.7 –5.9
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2020 74.5 75.6 77.3 67.7 76.9 73.8 71.0 69.1 53.4 67.8 72.1
2021 81.4 80.1 84.9 78.1 81.2 81.1 75.6 78.0 76.5 75.0 75.3
2022 82.2 79.1 85.2 71.7 81.0 81.8 75.9 79.8 78.4 77.0 75.0
2022 Q1 82.4 80.1 86.0 71.6 81.9 82.7 76.8 79.1 78.6 77.9 75.5
Q2 82.5 80.1 84.9 69.8 80.4 82.2 76.8 81.2 78.5 79.9 75.6
Q3 82.3 78.9 85.0 73.8 80.8 81.7 74.6 79.2 78.5 75.9 75.7
Q4 81.4 77.2 84.9 71.5 80.8 80.6 75.5 79.8 77.8 74.3 73.3
2023 Q1 81.0 76.8 84.6 71.4 79.0 81.0 74.8 79.2 77.7 77.6 72.7
Q2 81.2 77.4 84.2 70.7 76.3 81.9 73.7 ... 77.2 78.2 73.8
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2020 7.9 5.6 3.6 7.0 7.8 7.8 16.3 5.6 9.2 7.6 8.1
2021 7.7 e 6.3 3.6 e 6.2 e 7.7 e 7.9 e 14.8 e 6.3 e 9.5 e 7.7 e 7.6
2022 6.7 e 5.5 p 3.1 e 5.6 e 6.8 e 7.3 e 12.5 e 4.5 e 8.1 e 6.8 e 6.9
2022 Nov. 6.7 5.7 3.0 5.4 6.7 7.1 11.8 4.5 7.9 6.7 6.9
Dec. 6.7 5.8 3.0 5.3 7.2 7.1 11.8 4.4 7.9 6.6 6.8
2023 Jan. 6.6 5.8 2.9 5.2 7.0 7.1 10.2 4.3 8.0 6.5 6.8
Feb. 6.6 5.8 2.9 5.3 6.6 7.0 11.3 4.1 7.9 6.3 6.7
Mar. 6.5 5.9 2.8 5.4 6.5 6.9 10.9 4.0 7.8 6.2 6.5
Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.9 ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2020 0.3 0.4 5 0.4 –0.6 0.4 0.5 –1.3 –0.5 –0.1 0.0 0.1
2021 2.6 3.2 5 3.2 4.5 2.1 2.1 0.6 2.4 1.9 2.7 3.2
2022 8.4 10.3 8.7 19.4 7.2 5.9 9.3 8.1 8.7 10.7 17.2
2022 Nov. 10.1 10.5 11.3 21.4 9.1 7.1 8.8 9.0 12.6 13.0 21.7
Dec. 9.2 10.2 9.6 17.5 8.8 6.7 7.6 8.2 12.3 12.7 20.7
2023 Jan. 6 8.6 7.4 9.2 18.6 7.9 7.0 7.3 7.5 10.7 12.5 21.4
Feb. 8.5 5.4 9.3 17.8 8.0 7.3 6.5 8.1 9.8 11.7 20.1
Mar. 6.9 4.9 7.8 15.6 6.7 6.7 5.4 7.0 8.1 10.5 17.2
Apr. 7.0 3.3 7.6 13.2 6.3 6.9 4.5 6.3 8.7 8.9 15.0
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
2020 –7.1 –9.0 –4.3 –5.5 –5.6 –9.0 –9.7 –5.0 –9.7 –7.3 –4.4
2021 –5.3 –5.5 –3.7 –2.4 –2.8 –6.5 –7.1 –1.6 –9.0 –2.5 –7.1
2022 –3.6 –3.9 –2.6 –0.9 –0.9 –4.7 –2.3 1.6 –8.0 0.4 –4.4
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
2020 97.2 112.0 68.7 18.5 74.7 114.6 206.3 58.4 154.9 87.0 42.0
2021 95.4 109.1 69.3 17.6 72.6 112.9 194.6 55.4 149.9 78.4 43.7
2022 91.5 105.1 66.3 18.4 73.0 111.6 171.3 44.7 144.4 68.4 40.8
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
–0.0 –0.8 –8.6 –3.9 –6.5 –8.3 –3.3 –4.3 –11.3 –4.4 2020
6.0 5.1 11.8 4.9 4.6 5.5 4.9 8.2 5.5 6.6 2021
1.9 1.5 6.9 4.5 5.0 6.7 1.7 5.4 5.5 5.6 2022
6.5 4.0 13.4 6.2 6.0 6.7 3.1 10.5 6.6 6.9 2021 Q4
4.8 2.9 8.2 6.3 9.4 11.4 3.0 10.2 6.8 6.7 2022 Q1
1.7 2.2 9.4 5.2 6.4 8.0 1.3 8.6 6.9 5.9 Q2
1.8 3.7 5.3 3.4 2.1 5.0 1.3 3.3 5.1 5.5 Q3
–0.3 –2.3 4.7 3.2 2.6 2.9 1.2 0.2 3.3 4.6 Q4
–3.7 ... ... 1.9 ... ... 0.9 0.7 4.1 3.4 2023 Q1
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
–1.9 –10.8 –0.3 –3.9 –5.9 –7.3 –8.1 –5.2 –9.8 –7.3 2020
20.2 8.4 –0.2 5.0 11.4 3.5 10.3 10.2 7.5 6.4 2021
9.4 –1.2 3.1 2.5 7.4 –0.0 –3.6 1.3 3.0 1.3 2022
24.2 2.9 –5.4 4.4 10.5 –1.7 3.4 7.9 1.8 1.2 2021 Q4
23.5 0.0 –2.4 2.1 11.3 –2.9 –2.6 6.4 1.7 3.3 2022 Q1
9.2 –1.6 –5.9 4.5 9.8 2.0 –3.0 2.8 5.0 3.5 Q2
10.0 –0.1 9.7 2.2 6.5 1.3 –1.7 2.0 4.6 –1.0 Q3
–2.5 –3.2 11.6 1.1 2.5 –0.3 –7.0 –5.8 0.7 –0.5 Q4
–11.9 p –4.5 p 14.3 p –3.8 p 0.4 0.9 –3.5 p –4.6 p 1.4 ... 2023 Q1
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
73.0 72.5 70.7 78.3 79.5 74.9 79.5 78.4 74.4 51.5 2020
76.7 82.0 76.8 82.4 87.1 79.2 82.2 84.5 77.8 51.2 2021
77.3 80.8 64.7 83.7 87.7 81.9 83.3 84.9 78.7 58.2 2022
78.3 81.9 62.9 84.0 88.4 81.9 82.8 86.5 78.8 55.4 2022 Q1
78.2 79.9 64.6 84.3 88.9 82.5 83.9 85.1 80.0 58.6 Q2
76.7 81.4 67.6 83.9 87.9 81.6 83.5 84.0 78.9 58.5 Q3
76.1 79.8 63.6 82.6 85.6 81.6 83.0 84.0 77.2 60.4 Q4
69.9 74.3 65.7 83.0 87.1 81.6 80.2 83.1 77.1 59.8 2023 Q1
70.6 75.5 53.3 82.6 86.4 83.6 84.0 83.9 76.3 60.7 Q2
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
8.6 6.8 4.4 3.9 5.4 6.9 6.7 5.0 15.5 7.6 2020
e 7.1 e 5.4 e 3.4 e 4.2 e 6.2 e 6.6 e 6.9 e 4.8 e 14.8 e 7.5 2021
e 5.9 e 4.5 e 2.9 e 3.6 e 4.8 e 6.1 e 6.2 e 4.0 e 13.0 e 6.8 2022
6.1 4.7 2.9 3.6 5.5 6.5 6.1 3.6 13.0 7.2 2022 Nov.
6.1 4.7 2.9 3.5 4.9 6.7 6.1 3.4 13.0 7.3 Dec.
6.4 4.8 3.0 3.6 5.1 7.0 6.0 3.3 12.9 7.3 2023 Jan.
6.5 4.7 3.0 3.5 5.0 6.9 6.0 3.2 12.9 7.2 Feb.
6.4 4.7 2.9 3.5 4.5 6.9 6.0 3.2 12.8 6.8 Mar.
... ... ... 3.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... Apr.
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
1.1 0.0 0.8 1.1 1.4 –0.1 2.0 –0.3 –0.3 –1.1 2020
4.6 3.5 0.7 2.8 2.8 0.9 2.8 2.0 3.0 2.3 2021
18.9 8.2 6.1 11.6 8.6 8.1 12.1 9.3 8.3 8.1 2022
21.4 7.3 7.2 11.3 11.2 10.2 15.1 10.8 6.7 8.1 2022 Nov.
20.0 6.2 7.3 11.0 10.5 9.8 15.0 10.8 5.5 7.6 Dec.
18.5 5.8 6.8 8.4 11.6 8.6 15.1 9.9 5.9 6.8 2023 Jan.
17.2 4.8 7.0 8.9 11.0 8.6 15.4 9.4 6.0 6.7 Feb.
15.2 2.9 7.1 4.5 9.2 8.0 14.8 10.4 3.1 6.1 Mar.
13.3 2.7 6.4 5.8 9.5 6.9 14.0 9.2 3.8 3.9 Apr.
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
–6.5 –3.4 –9.7 –3.7 –8.0 –5.8 –5.4 –7.7 –10.1 –5.8 2020
–1.2 0.7 –7.8 –2.4 –5.8 –2.9 –5.4 –4.6 –6.9 –2.0 2021
–0.6 0.2 –5.8 0.0 –3.2 –0.4 –2.0 –3.0 –4.8 2.1 2022
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
46.3 24.5 52.9 54.7 82.9 134.9 58.9 79.6 120.4 113.8 2020
43.7 24.5 55.1 52.5 82.3 125.4 61.0 74.5 118.3 101.2 2021
38.4 24.6 53.4 51.0 78.4 113.9 57.8 69.9 113.2 86.5 2022
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of valueadded tax between July and December 2020.  6 Including Croatia from 2023 onwards.
7 According to Maastricht Treaty definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2021 Aug. 35.3 –16.4 –7.5 51.7 60.9 – 4.8 141.0 145.8 –5.9 –7.3 –0.4 –7.0 8.9
Sep. 107.1 72.5 3.7 34.6 43.3 –39.2 –59.0 –19.8 16.6 –4.5 –0.4 8.3 13.2
Oct. 81.0 68.7 21.3 12.3 18.4 – 5.1 195.0 200.1 11.5 –10.7 –0.7 16.8 6.0
Nov. 156.4 89.5 –3.5 66.9 67.5 –30.4 15.1 45.5 –7.0 –10.6 –0.7 1.8 2.5
Dec. 52.7 27.6 20.1 25.1 22.6 –56.9 –205.6 –148.7 4.3 18.0 –0.8 –25.1 12.1
2022 Jan. 173.3 98.0 –10.2 75.3 64.8 – 1.0 141.4 142.3 –18.8 –14.8 –0.1 9.3 –13.3
Feb. 110.9 44.4 2.0 66.5 73.8 –13.7 82.3 95.9 –21.4 –12.6 –0.4 –3.5 –5.0
Mar. 149.8 104.5 26.4 45.3 36.0 3.0 –23.7 –26.7 0.3 2.8 –0.7 –21.8 19.9
Apr. 112.0 96.8 20.2 15.2 5.2 –99.3 –79.2 20.1 8.7 –10.5 –0.2 1.4 17.9
May 107.2 65.1 –18.8 42.1 49.5 –58.2 40.4 98.6 –16.1 3.1 –3.2 –21.2 5.3
June 116.2 83.6 –8.9 32.6 33.5 102.6 –25.9 –128.5 23.0 –4.8 –0.4 1.0 27.1
July 29.8 58.6 –3.0 –28.8 –28.8 –11.6 63.7 75.4 0.5 –11.7 –0.4 –3.6 16.1
Aug. –10.7 26.1 –18.8 –36.8 –31.2 46.9 69.4 22.5 –10.5 –22.1 0.8 1.9 8.9
Sep. 86.6 83.1 –0.0 3.4 2.2 –53.0 –199.8 –146.8 17.6 –16.4 –0.4 3.6 30.8
Oct. –12.1 0.1 –6.1 –12.1 –9.2 – 0.6 169.5 170.2 –11.3 –14.7 0.0 11.5 –8.1
Nov. 93.0 83.9 31.0 9.0 14.3 14.4 –40.6 –54.9 33.6 1.7 –0.1 34.6 –2.6
Dec. –122.1 –89.0 –0.9 –33.1 –41.2 0.2 –257.0 –257.2 45.3 10.0 –0.1 1.0 34.3
2023 Jan. –10.3 –1.2 –14.6 –9.1 –3.9 12.7 125.6 112.9 32.6 –6.1 1.8 57.5 –20.7
Feb. 7.2 –13.3 3.4 20.5 29.5 7.3 0.8 –6.5 13.8 –1.3 1.3 10.0 3.8
Mar. 30.6 35.5 6.5 –4.9 –9.0 78.1 113.8 35.7 31.6 10.8 1.0 9.3 10.6
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2021 Aug. 28.5 16.6 1.6 11.9 15.7 –18.0 18.2 36.2 2.0 –0.5 –0.2 0.9 1.9
Sep. 33.1 16.7 5.4 16.4 16.5 –92.2 –0.7 91.5 3.8 –2.2 –0.2 2.6 3.6
Oct. 37.8 34.7 7.2 3.0 –0.6 47.0 47.6 0.7 18.6 1.4 –0.2 15.6 1.8
Nov. 54.0 28.5 3.4 25.4 28.0 –59.0 –4.2 54.8 5.0 –0.6 –0.2 4.7 1.1
Dec. 12.8 10.9 6.8 2.0 4.7 –122.9 –47.1 75.8 –2.3 9.1 –0.2 –13.2 2.0
2022 Jan. 40.4 31.0 1.4 9.4 7.5 111.9 72.2 –39.7 –4.0 –1.1 –0.8 12.6 –14.8
Feb. 32.7 27.6 3.4 5.2 7.2 16.0 21.9 5.9 5.1 –1.3 –0.2 7.0 –0.4
Mar. 37.0 23.3 4.1 13.7 12.9 –44.2 –22.2 22.0 6.1 –2.0 –0.2 4.1 4.2
Apr. 19.0 18.9 2.7 0.1 –4.5 19.1 –13.0 –32.1 4.4 –2.7 –0.2 3.2 4.1
May 39.1 28.5 3.5 10.6 13.5 –29.8 –0.9 28.9 2.0 –2.4 –0.1 2.0 2.5
June 32.6 25.5 –4.1 7.1 4.8 –22.4 –9.4 13.0 3.8 –3.1 –0.2 –3.8 10.8
July 18.2 30.6 10.6 –12.4 –13.4 42.7 4.3 –38.5 9.3 –2.0 –0.2 8.5 3.0
Aug. 26.0 39.4 –0.2 –13.4 –11.4 –50.3 6.7 57.1 3.0 –0.0 –0.1 0.8 2.3
Sep. 21.5 23.1 0.1 –1.7 –4.5 –27.4 1.6 29.0 4.1 –0.3 –0.0 –0.6 5.0
Oct. 12.8 10.5 –0.2 2.3 1.9 45.1 20.4 –24.7 –7.6 –1.2 0.2 3.2 –9.8
Nov. 25.4 26.2 1.4 –0.9 0.8 38.0 8.9 –29.1 9.8 1.9 0.2 7.1 0.6
Dec. –28.8 –19.6 –2.4 –9.3 –8.2 –37.1 –71.9 –34.8 –0.5 –3.7 0.4 –1.9 4.8
2023 Jan. 27.5 16.9 –0.2 10.7 8.9 63.0 29.8 –33.3 –14.3 2.7 1.0 3.1 –21.0
Feb. 9.2 8.3 –0.2 0.9 1.8 58.4 –2.0 –60.3 3.3 0.6 1.2 –2.1 3.5
Mar. 4.7 8.1 6.4 –3.3 –3.7 –12.5 10.2 22.7 15.5 6.0 1.6 4.4 3.5
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
26.6 –10.5 0.0 27.7 32.7 32.2 1.7 30.5 –3.1 3.6 –11.6 5.4 – 6.2 2021 Aug.
6.5 –1.7 0.0 30.6 58.2 73.7 5.3 68.4 –16.3 0.8 14.8 –31.1 4.5 Sep.
– 2.4 –72.0 0.0 139.4 86.4 73.0 6.8 66.2 18.3 – 5.0 11.5 33.3 7.4 Oct.
–48.5 84.7 0.0 92.9 84.3 102.0 6.0 95.9 –18.3 0.7 – 5.0 24.5 – 6.9 Nov.
–44.5 –21.9 0.0 75.5 106.0 104.7 20.6 84.1 –2.3 3.6 –33.4 –7.4 – 7.1 Dec.
68.1 88.8 0.0 – 7.2 – 7.2 –43.1 1.0 –44.0 23.3 12.6 57.2 –26.2 9.1 2022 Jan.
44.6 32.3 0.0 41.3 70.0 75.8 9.1 66.6 –13.8 8.0 9.4 –37.1 – 0.4 Feb.
13.7 51.7 0.0 90.6 101.8 81.6 22.5 59.1 16.3 4.0 –17.6 –0.2 – 2.2 Mar.
–22.1 –96.2 0.0 99.7 61.8 60.6 11.2 49.5 –1.1 2.3 25.1 20.2 16.5 Apr.
–28.9 48.2 0.0 52.6 62.4 66.3 7.8 58.6 –15.9 11.9 4.7 –10.1 – 5.2 May
69.6 72.4 0.0 69.1 75.4 48.2 6.6 41.6 24.1 3.1 –32.5 –1.0 11.1 June
–31.2 –112.9 0.0 155.1 122.2 70.4 8.6 61.8 46.7 5.1 23.7 –2.0 18.0 July
–80.3 56.5 0.0 86.3 78.8 27.5 –4.6 32.1 41.3 10.0 –22.6 6.8 7.4 Aug.
7.3 –41.4 0.0 59.7 56.4 –42.8 –1.4 –41.3 99.8 – 0.6 –19.5 –8.4 21.7 Sep.
– 5.4 65.2 0.0 –57.7 –77.1 –157.5 –0.4 –157.1 85.3 – 5.0 4.4 36.7 –25.3 Oct.
–10.4 –3.3 0.0 71.2 21.8 –29.1 –3.5 –25.5 59.1 – 8.3 27.4 22.3 16.6 Nov.
–84.4 –62.8 0.0 3.5 13.0 –61.5 11.6 –73.1 59.8 14.8 –46.5 2.8 10.8 Dec.
–38.7 119.3 0.0 –128.6 –146.7 –228.6 –13.2 –215.3 75.6 6.2 35.1 8.6 – 7.9 2023 Jan.
20.3 23.4 0.0 –42.8 –63.2 –134.9 –3.5 –131.4 71.8 0.0 – 2.2 –6.8 29.1 Feb.
30.6 33.6 0.0 15.4 12.9 –99.1 3.8 –103.0 118.6 – 6.6 –25.7 20.1 5.8 Mar.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
0.7 – 13.2 2.9 0.2 21.0 20.4 – 1.6 – 0.3 0.1 0.0 2.3 2021 Aug.
7.1 – 77.3 4.6 0.8 7.3 7.6 – 1.3 – 0.6 1.5 – 0.0 0.1 Sep.
– 3.9 53.7 3.3 1.6 16.4 3.9 13.0 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.4 Oct.
7.2 – 42.3 3.7 1.2 25.0 40.9 – 12.3 – 0.1 – 4.7 – 0.3 1.4 Nov.
27.8 –135.3 5.3 4.5 – 0.4 – 12.8 9.1 1.6 – 0.3 0.3 1.7 Dec.
– 38.1 166.0 1.3 0.8 28.4 22.4 9.3 0.3 – 1.2 0.0 – 2.4 2022 Jan.
2.5 14.4 3.0 2.2 26.8 23.3 1.1 0.3 1.1 0.1 0.8 Feb.
– 0.1 – 13.2 5.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 7.4 8.4 – 1.6 0.5 0.2 – 0.1 Mar.
– 3.0 32.9 3.4 2.3 3.7 – 3.4 10.4 – 0.4 – 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.6 Apr.
22.5 – 30.3 3.4 2.7 15.1 22.5 – 7.4 – 1.2 0.4 0.2 0.7 May
14.9 – 37.5 3.7 0.5 29.0 19.6 7.5 – 1.6 0.6 – 0.0 2.9 June
– 38.2 55.3 – 5.3 9.1 34.6 5.7 23.6 – 1.7 4.3 0.1 2.6 July
– 24.1 – 71.1 – 11.7 12.5 67.9 56.8 13.9 – 2.4 – 1.8 – 0.1 1.4 Aug.
4.7 – 1.1 3.3 0.3 – 13.6 – 56.8 45.1 – 5.3 – 2.6 0.1 6.0 Sep.
5.1 65.9 0.1 0.1 – 5.4 – 32.1 36.8 – 3.3 – 0.2 0.1 – 6.7 Oct.
22.6 13.6 – 0.0 – 0.3 17.3 12.6 4.3 – 5.5 3.2 0.0 2.7 Nov.
– 16.3 – 24.6 2.1 2.4 – 24.6 – 37.6 19.0 – 4.1 – 2.0 0.1 0.0 Dec.
– 42.9 147.9 2.3 – 5.1 – 0.2 – 37.1 38.4 – 6.5 – 0.1 – 0.2 5.4 2023 Jan.
12.9 50.9 1.1 – 0.7 0.4 – 33.2 32.6 – 8.0 1.3 – 0.1 7.8 Feb.
27.1 – 35.2 2.3 0.8 – 15.2 – 45.6 31.8 – 10.4 – 0.3 0.3 9.0 Mar.
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2021 Feb. 30,542.0 20,464.0 14,500.9 12,090.1 1,541.5 869.3 5,963.1 992.4 4,970.6 6,296.0 3,782.0
Mar. 30,824.2 20,654.0 14,577.1 12,185.2 1,512.9 879.0 6,076.9 993.3 5,083.6 6,357.6 3,812.6
Apr. 30,750.3 20,667.4 14,566.8 12,169.2 1,509.9 887.7 6,100.6 1,007.2 5,093.4 6,393.5 3,689.5
May 30,888.3 20,788.3 14,612.9 12,198.6 1,521.7 892.6 6,175.5 1,006.2 5,169.2 6,432.0 3,668.1
June 30,989.4 20,890.5 14,652.6 12,234.6 1,529.8 888.3 6,237.8 1,004.8 5,233.1 6,398.7 3,700.3
July 31,313.9 21,028.4 14,708.1 12,278.0 1,543.4 886.7 6,320.4 1,011.3 5,309.1 6,504.5 3,781.0
Aug. 31,438.2 21,047.9 14,684.9 12,261.1 1,533.4 890.4 6,363.1 1,002.3 5,360.8 6,653.6 3,736.6
Sep. 31,472.9 21,133.7 14,757.3 12,330.9 1,535.1 891.4 6,376.4 993.6 5,382.8 6,619.9 3,719.3
Oct. 31,778.8 21,201.7 14,817.8 12,379.4 1,548.1 890.3 6,384.0 987.7 5,396.3 6,825.2 3,751.9
Nov. 32,193.4 21,381.5 14,911.5 12,478.0 1,542.5 891.0 6,470.1 985.8 5,484.2 6,917.4 3,894.5
Dec. 31,777.4 21,384.4 14,917.2 12,462.9 1,567.3 887.0 6,467.2 988.5 5,478.8 6,738.7 3,654.2
2022 Jan. 32,417.4 21,571.9 15,046.9 12,609.0 1,553.3 884.6 6,525.0 999.2 5,525.8 6,914.5 3,931.1
Feb. 32,602.2 21,629.0 15,075.7 12,645.3 1,553.8 876.6 6,553.3 991.8 5,561.5 7,011.4 3,961.8
Mar. 32,937.7 21,737.1 15,176.1 12,722.0 1,587.5 866.7 6,561.0 1,001.4 5,559.6 6,996.1 4,204.5
Apr. 33,570.4 21,764.2 15,254.1 12,805.3 1,597.7 851.1 6,510.1 1,011.3 5,498.8 7,063.0 4,743.2
May 33,482.8 21,816.2 15,304.5 12,878.2 1,568.2 858.1 6,511.7 1,003.9 5,507.7 7,013.2 4,653.5
June 33,886.6 21,886.0 15,373.6 12,973.4 1,569.1 831.1 6,512.4 1,003.0 5,509.4 7,064.6 4,936.0
July 33,878.3 21,984.6 15,451.6 13,043.7 1,578.6 829.2 6,533.1 1,003.0 5,530.1 7,216.9 4,676.7
Aug. 34,343.4 21,872.4 15,459.5 13,080.1 1,553.8 825.7 6,412.9 996.9 5,416.1 7,301.6 5,169.4
Sep. 34,619.6 21,901.4 15,558.1 13,191.4 1,545.0 821.7 6,343.3 998.1 5,345.2 7,241.7 5,476.5
Oct. 34,552.1 21,891.6 15,553.2 13,190.6 1,533.0 829.6 6,338.5 995.2 5,343.3 7,336.9 5,323.6
Nov. 34,226.9 22,012.5 15,628.2 13,228.7 1,559.1 840.4 6,384.2 990.2 5,394.0 7,207.8 5,006.7
Dec. 33,866.0 21,793.1 15,515.9 13,124.8 1,555.4 835.8 6,277.2 998.9 5,278.3 6,873.2 5,199.7
2023 Jan. 33,830.4 21,883.6 15,552.9 13,171.7 1,545.4 835.8 6,330.6 1,000.3 5,330.4 6,981.7 4,965.1
Feb. 34,116.2 21,860.0 15,542.8 13,157.3 1,541.0 844.5 6,317.2 991.3 5,325.9 7,002.7 5,253.5
Mar. 33,955.3 21,915.6 15,568.7 13,174.2 1,546.2 848.2 6,347.0 995.4 5,351.6 7,105.3 4,934.4
German contribution (€ billion)
2021 Feb. 7,182.0 4,885.0 3,724.3 3,238.8 217.4 268.1 1,160.7 283.8 877.0 1,305.0 991.9
Mar. 7,233.5 4,939.8 3,761.1 3,273.4 217.3 270.4 1,178.7 282.6 896.1 1,315.4 978.3
Apr. 7,228.4 4,946.1 3,760.5 3,270.3 217.6 272.6 1,185.6 285.7 899.9 1,333.6 948.6
May 7,228.0 4,977.5 3,777.2 3,283.3 219.5 274.4 1,200.3 283.4 916.9 1,329.8 920.7
June 7,277.1 5,009.8 3,786.4 3,290.4 220.8 275.2 1,223.4 282.3 941.1 1,325.1 942.1
July 7,362.7 5,062.4 3,808.5 3,310.2 221.9 276.4 1,253.9 284.4 969.5 1,317.4 982.9
Aug. 7,395.2 5,087.3 3,824.6 3,325.1 221.4 278.1 1,262.8 280.8 982.0 1,336.0 971.9
Sep. 7,398.6 5,110.8 3,840.8 3,336.4 224.7 279.7 1,270.1 280.7 989.4 1,335.1 952.6
Oct. 7,461.0 5,147.0 3,874.5 3,363.5 228.6 282.4 1,272.5 284.4 988.0 1,385.2 928.8
Nov. 7,575.0 5,210.7 3,904.2 3,389.9 229.0 285.3 1,306.4 280.7 1,025.7 1,396.4 967.9
Dec. 7,475.8 5,212.1 3,914.7 3,393.2 237.0 284.5 1,297.4 278.0 1,019.5 1,355.9 907.8
2022 Jan. 7,787.0 5,243.9 3,944.7 3,422.9 235.8 286.0 1,299.2 279.9 1,019.3 1,433.6 1,109.5
Feb. 7,871.3 5,262.9 3,968.5 3,445.2 238.0 285.3 1,294.3 277.8 1,016.5 1,464.4 1,144.0
Mar. 7,997.7 5,280.7 3,990.2 3,464.4 240.6 285.2 1,290.6 278.6 1,012.0 1,447.5 1,269.5
Apr. 8,259.4 5,278.9 4,008.0 3,481.9 240.1 286.1 1,270.9 283.2 987.7 1,464.0 1,516.5
May 8,228.4 5,304.5 4,034.5 3,506.0 240.8 287.7 1,270.0 280.3 989.7 1,445.0 1,479.0
June 8,413.5 5,322.6 4,058.9 3,537.6 237.8 283.5 1,263.7 282.5 981.2 1,466.1 1,624.8
July 8,287.9 5,375.0 4,096.1 3,560.3 252.7 283.2 1,278.8 283.6 995.2 1,481.5 1,431.4
Aug. 8,546.0 5,364.5 4,132.0 3,600.0 249.1 282.9 1,232.5 281.5 951.0 1,492.4 1,689.0
Sep. 8,857.6 5,356.3 4,153.9 3,624.8 246.1 283.0 1,202.4 284.3 918.1 1,502.4 1,998.8
Oct. 8,826.7 5,366.0 4,163.6 3,634.6 245.9 283.1 1,202.4 284.8 917.5 1,509.0 1,951.8
Nov. 8,653.9 5,402.0 4,189.2 3,656.3 249.8 283.1 1,212.8 283.4 929.4 1,502.4 1,749.6
Dec. 8,626.1 5,345.2 4,165.8 3,636.7 245.9 283.2 1,179.4 283.2 896.1 1,417.3 1,863.7
2023 Jan. 8,561.4 5,377.1 4,178.3 3,652.7 245.9 279.7 1,198.8 285.0 913.9 1,443.8 1,740.5
Feb. 8,712.0 5,371.7 4,186.6 3,662.2 243.6 280.9 1,185.1 284.0 901.1 1,443.9 1,896.4
Mar. 8,573.1 5,388.1 4,193.6 3,661.9 252.1 279.6 1,194.5 284.2 910.3 1,457.2 1,727.8
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,380.6 14,956.2 13,676.9 13,806.2 8,569.5 732.1 169.2 1,865.1 2,432.5 37.7 2021 Feb.
1,391.1 15,069.4 13,750.1 13,906.8 8,650.5 751.0 164.3 1,858.8 2,444.8 37.4 Mar.
1,399.6 15,059.6 13,774.0 13,934.7 8,726.8 730.6 159.5 1,827.5 2,453.0 37.3 Apr.
1,412.8 15,146.7 13,870.1 14,017.4 8,810.9 724.0 155.5 1,826.2 2,463.6 37.1 May
1,423.2 15,232.5 13,934.1 14,082.1 8,909.3 697.4 150.4 1,822.0 2,466.2 36.8 June
1,437.6 15,334.8 14,016.7 14,185.1 9,006.8 705.3 153.6 1,817.0 2,466.2 36.3 July
1,439.2 15,385.0 14,038.0 14,195.4 9,029.8 706.2 151.2 1,809.9 2,462.4 35.9 Aug.
1,444.5 15,439.0 14,071.8 14,236.3 9,090.4 700.2 140.0 1,806.7 2,463.3 35.6 Sep.
1,450.3 15,502.7 14,137.6 14,310.5 9,166.1 707.1 148.0 1,795.5 2,458.8 34.9 Oct.
1,456.3 15,517.2 14,187.3 14,344.1 9,223.4 697.0 143.3 1,786.3 2,459.8 34.3 Nov.
1,477.0 15,569.9 14,300.4 14,454.8 9,316.4 704.9 131.3 1,805.2 2,463.5 33.6 Dec.
1,477.9 15,643.3 14,276.5 14,476.1 9,302.9 706.6 135.3 1,820.2 2,479.3 31.8 2022 Jan.
1,487.0 15,738.3 14,324.2 14,512.8 9,363.6 688.4 134.3 1,807.7 2,487.3 31.6 Feb.
1,509.6 15,835.8 14,410.3 14,595.2 9,435.1 703.7 123.5 1,809.6 2,492.1 31.2 Mar.
1,520.7 15,875.5 14,463.0 14,653.3 9,497.0 705.4 123.5 1,802.0 2,494.3 31.0 Apr.
1,528.5 15,890.6 14,508.9 14,681.0 9,538.2 684.9 120.2 1,803.2 2,506.6 27.9 May
1,535.1 16,036.6 14,569.2 14,746.5 9,580.0 704.8 123.4 1,800.3 2,510.4 27.5 June
1,543.7 16,115.9 14,669.9 14,869.0 9,667.1 740.9 127.1 1,791.0 2,515.8 27.1 July
1,539.1 16,100.9 14,732.1 14,924.4 9,693.1 781.5 125.9 1,770.0 2,526.0 28.0 Aug.
1,537.7 16,196.6 14,782.4 15,033.5 9,685.1 913.3 125.5 1,756.3 2,525.7 27.6 Sep.
1,537.2 16,092.6 14,704.9 14,933.5 9,518.5 993.0 130.3 1,741.7 2,522.3 27.6 Oct.
1,533.7 16,083.0 14,720.6 14,915.5 9,454.9 1,042.8 134.6 1,741.1 2,514.5 27.6 Nov.
1,545.3 15,995.0 14,763.6 14,927.3 9,386.9 1,099.4 133.9 1,749.5 2,530.0 27.6 Dec.
1,533.4 15,877.1 14,667.4 14,845.0 9,228.4 1,163.3 146.0 1,746.5 2,532.0 28.7 2023 Jan.
1,529.9 15,843.8 14,624.9 14,773.3 9,084.6 1,223.1 157.2 1,746.6 2,531.8 30.1 Feb.
1,533.7 15,891.8 14,649.2 14,788.3 8,992.6 1,310.6 173.6 1,757.0 2,523.3 31.1 Mar.
German contribution (€ billion)
314.6 4,245.1 3,990.0 3,837.4 2,555.8 141.0 31.1 547.0 536.0 26.4 2021 Feb.
317.3 4,264.3 4,011.8 3,863.4 2,579.8 145.1 31.7 544.6 536.1 26.1 Mar.
319.9 4,262.2 4,013.0 3,874.5 2,594.4 143.0 31.9 542.5 536.8 25.8 Apr.
322.8 4,308.8 4,040.3 3,895.1 2,613.5 146.0 32.2 540.4 537.4 25.7 May
325.1 4,311.0 4,035.3 3,890.5 2,619.4 139.3 31.9 537.5 537.0 25.5 June
328.8 4,313.9 4,047.3 3,911.3 2,645.8 136.0 31.4 536.0 536.7 25.2 July
329.0 4,333.1 4,065.2 3,923.1 2,659.1 135.6 31.3 535.7 536.4 25.0 Aug.
329.8 4,340.5 4,064.1 3,919.8 2,662.1 132.2 31.2 533.6 535.8 24.8 Sep.
331.4 4,354.3 4,080.9 3,950.3 2,681.4 143.0 31.1 534.8 535.5 24.6 Oct.
332.6 4,390.5 4,107.1 3,968.0 2,710.9 132.5 30.3 534.6 535.5 24.3 Nov.
337.1 4,425.2 4,113.0 3,968.5 2,691.5 141.2 30.1 544.6 537.0 24.1 Dec.
337.9 4,418.1 4,139.2 4,006.8 2,737.3 135.4 29.7 543.6 537.4 23.4 2022 Jan.
340.1 4,444.1 4,161.0 4,017.1 2,752.3 132.4 29.4 542.3 537.7 23.1 Feb.
344.3 4,441.6 4,159.0 4,014.6 2,755.3 130.7 29.3 540.4 536.0 22.9 Mar.
346.7 4,445.6 4,158.1 4,019.8 2,754.8 140.0 29.4 537.7 535.1 22.7 Apr.
349.4 4,478.3 4,170.7 4,016.7 2,769.9 125.8 29.7 534.8 533.9 22.6 May
349.9 4,517.1 4,194.6 4,031.6 2,787.1 127.8 30.1 531.9 532.3 22.4 June
359.0 4,507.6 4,222.4 4,070.3 2,813.6 142.1 31.0 530.6 530.6 22.3 July
371.5 4,552.6 4,289.4 4,135.2 2,870.1 153.3 30.6 530.7 528.3 22.2 Aug.
371.8 4,541.5 4,267.4 4,135.1 2,834.9 193.7 30.9 530.3 523.0 22.2 Sep.
371.8 4,546.8 4,270.2 4,140.4 2,804.0 233.2 31.6 529.3 519.8 22.4 Oct.
371.5 4,578.7 4,283.7 4,146.3 2,806.0 240.1 32.1 531.0 514.4 22.6 Nov.
374.0 4,534.2 4,260.8 4,119.2 2,764.3 260.2 34.1 527.1 510.4 23.0 Dec.
368.9 4,489.3 4,257.7 4,126.0 2,749.9 286.6 36.9 529.6 499.1 24.0 2023 Jan.
368.1 4,496.6 4,250.9 4,106.5 2,706.5 314.2 39.1 530.3 491.2 25.2 Feb.
369.0 4,505.7 4,236.9 4,090.4 2,667.5 336.5 42.4 536.3 481.0 26.8 Mar.
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2021 Feb. 713.6 436.4 296.4 54.3 19.0 43.9 19.2 3.7 256.3 256.2 614.0 2,000.0 1,369.6
Mar. 733.1 429.6 295.4 52.1 16.4 43.2 18.9 3.7 243.5 243.4 609.3 2,002.8 1,358.7
Apr. 700.9 424.0 293.9 48.5 16.2 42.9 18.9 3.6 252.5 252.4 618.2 1,989.0 1,350.5
May 692.4 436.9 308.3 47.7 15.9 42.4 19.1 3.5 247.4 247.4 608.6 1,978.6 1,339.4
June 709.2 441.2 314.0 46.6 16.3 42.0 18.8 3.5 245.8 245.8 600.5 1,982.6 1,333.7
July 709.6 440.1 313.9 45.6 16.6 42.0 18.6 3.5 254.6 254.5 622.6 1,999.4 1,334.0
Aug. 736.1 453.5 329.1 43.9 17.0 42.0 18.0 3.4 243.0 243.0 628.1 1,988.5 1,334.0
Sep. 742.6 460.1 334.6 46.3 16.6 41.3 18.1 3.3 260.8 260.7 597.0 2,013.4 1,344.0
Oct. 740.3 451.9 323.3 48.1 18.0 41.6 17.7 3.3 272.2 272.2 630.3 2,040.1 1,356.4
Nov. 691.5 481.6 349.8 50.3 19.1 41.7 17.5 3.3 267.7 267.6 654.8 2,046.7 1,355.2
Dec. 646.7 468.4 337.4 49.7 19.4 41.1 17.6 3.2 234.3 233.1 647.5 2,019.7 1,346.7
2022 Jan. 711.0 456.2 306.6 67.4 19.6 41.2 17.6 3.8 291.8 291.6 621.2 2,049.2 1,351.3
Feb. 755.6 469.9 314.1 73.5 19.8 41.3 17.6 3.7 301.3 301.1 584.0 2,044.8 1,358.6
Mar. 769.7 470.9 304.7 82.5 20.5 42.4 17.3 3.4 283.8 283.6 583.8 2,026.7 1,358.5
Apr. 747.7 474.5 306.7 83.4 21.2 42.6 17.2 3.4 310.1 309.9 604.0 2,073.8 1,362.7
May 718.8 490.8 316.7 88.4 22.3 43.3 16.8 3.3 313.0 312.9 593.9 2,038.0 1,337.6
June 788.4 501.8 325.2 90.9 22.9 43.3 16.2 3.2 281.2 281.1 592.9 2,069.3 1,360.9
July 757.2 489.8 302.8 100.4 24.2 42.9 16.2 3.3 306.0 305.9 590.8 2,090.9 1,361.0
Aug. 676.9 499.6 309.1 104.6 24.0 42.5 16.1 3.2 283.8 283.7 597.5 2,113.5 1,375.0
Sep. 684.3 478.8 281.7 111.2 24.5 42.3 16.0 3.2 264.8 264.7 589.1 2,153.6 1,415.1
Oct. 679.0 480.2 287.2 109.2 24.3 41.5 14.7 3.2 268.8 268.8 625.8 2,130.8 1,416.5
Nov. 668.9 498.6 306.2 109.2 25.1 40.8 14.2 3.2 295.4 295.4 648.0 2,159.2 1,441.3
Dec. 584.2 483.5 296.0 103.6 27.2 40.2 13.5 3.0 248.3 248.3 650.9 2,166.7 1,474.5
2023 Jan. 551.4 480.7 283.1 113.0 27.5 40.6 12.8 3.7 284.0 284.0 659.5 2,205.4 1,509.8
Feb. 572.2 498.4 297.4 115.1 28.7 40.3 13.2 3.7 281.6 281.5 652.7 2,259.1 1,531.3
Mar. 603.0 500.5 288.5 125.6 28.4 39.6 14.7 3.6 255.3 255.2 672.8 2,259.6 1,550.4
German contribution (€ billion)
2021 Feb. 164.3 243.4 142.8 47.3 15.2 35.5 2.5 0.2 6.0 6.0 2.4 510.0 288.4
Mar. 161.9 239.0 144.4 44.9 12.7 34.4 2.4 0.2 11.0 11.0 2.9 523.3 289.8
Apr. 154.6 233.1 142.4 41.5 12.5 34.1 2.4 0.2 7.6 7.6 2.8 524.3 296.2
May 173.3 240.3 150.8 41.0 12.5 33.4 2.4 0.2 9.2 9.2 2.2 518.0 293.2
June 179.3 241.2 152.9 39.9 13.0 32.8 2.4 0.2 9.0 9.0 2.3 515.5 294.6
July 167.3 235.3 148.0 38.9 13.3 32.5 2.4 0.2 9.6 9.6 2.2 518.3 295.1
Aug. 168.1 241.8 155.7 37.3 13.9 32.4 2.4 0.2 9.7 9.7 2.2 522.4 303.1
Sep. 175.2 245.6 158.2 39.8 13.4 31.7 2.3 0.2 11.2 11.2 2.2 530.1 305.5
Oct. 171.3 232.7 142.7 40.9 14.8 31.8 2.3 0.2 10.8 10.8 2.1 547.9 316.4
Nov. 178.4 244.1 155.2 38.8 16.1 31.6 2.2 0.2 6.1 6.1 1.8 556.5 324.8
Dec. 206.2 250.5 161.9 39.1 16.4 30.7 2.3 0.2 5.8 4.8 2.1 547.6 316.3
2022 Jan. 168.1 243.3 139.1 54.6 16.5 30.7 2.2 0.2 4.7 4.7 2.2 562.8 325.1
Feb. 170.6 256.3 147.8 59.2 16.3 30.6 2.2 0.2 5.8 5.8 2.3 572.5 338.8
Mar. 170.6 256.4 137.6 68.8 17.0 30.7 2.2 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.4 581.5 354.8
Apr. 167.6 258.2 137.6 70.0 17.6 30.6 2.2 0.2 4.4 4.4 2.2 596.5 357.3
May 190.1 271.4 144.2 75.3 18.5 31.1 2.2 0.2 4.8 4.8 2.4 596.8 359.0
June 205.0 280.5 147.7 80.5 19.0 31.0 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.3 604.2 362.6
July 166.8 270.4 128.3 89.0 20.2 30.6 2.2 0.1 9.8 9.8 2.4 613.8 369.1
Aug. 142.7 274.6 129.4 92.2 20.4 30.4 2.2 0.1 8.0 8.0 2.3 625.7 384.5
Sep. 147.4 259.1 109.0 96.6 20.8 30.3 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.4 640.0 395.3
Oct. 152.5 253.9 108.1 93.1 20.5 30.1 2.1 0.1 5.2 5.2 2.5 633.9 398.1
Nov. 175.5 256.9 114.7 88.9 21.5 29.8 1.9 0.1 8.3 8.3 2.5 634.2 402.6
Dec. 159.2 255.8 117.3 83.2 23.9 29.6 1.8 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.6 631.2 409.3
2023 Jan. 116.4 246.9 99.4 92.2 23.8 29.8 1.6 0.1 6.1 6.1 2.4 639.6 417.9
Feb. 129.3 260.8 110.3 94.6 24.6 29.7 1.5 0.1 7.5 7.5 2.3 651.5 427.1
Mar. 156.5 258.8 102.2 101.4 24.1 29.6 1.4 0.1 7.2 7.2 2.6 658.2 440.3
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
10.7 16.4 1,973.0 4,872.6 2,953.0 – 10.8 3,520.1 0.0 10,398.6 13,849.5 14,599.8 6,876.3 176.8 2021 Feb.
– 3.4 16.9 1,989.3 4,944.1 2,967.6 15.9 3,580.6 0.0 10,485.9 13,957.5 14,689.6 6,899.9 173.1 Mar.
4.9 16.6 1,967.5 4,989.0 2,948.0 10.5 3,484.0 0.0 10,569.8 14,020.5 14,778.4 6,826.9 173.5 Apr.
13.2 15.9 1,949.5 4,995.8 2,968.5 53.4 3,476.5 0.0 10,684.1 14,133.9 14,884.9 6,827.3 176.1 May
8.1 16.1 1,958.5 4,963.9 2,979.9 57.4 3,503.6 0.0 10,802.7 14,222.4 14,959.9 6,842.7 180.3 June
17.0 17.1 1,965.3 5,051.0 3,024.8 38.9 3,550.3 0.0 10,915.0 14,344.9 15,122.1 6,888.8 180.9 July
12.0 16.3 1,960.3 5,201.0 3,024.5 29.9 3,499.0 0.0 10,956.4 14,379.2 15,151.9 6,876.0 182.3 Aug.
15.9 17.7 1,979.7 5,224.6 2,997.6 15.2 3,480.9 0.0 11,032.9 14,441.4 15,190.2 6,864.2 187.4 Sep.
23.0 17.6 1,999.5 5,422.6 2,999.7 – 22.8 3,483.7 0.0 11,103.9 14,525.7 15,327.0 6,874.5 188.2 Oct.
19.3 17.8 2,009.6 5,510.6 3,037.4 21.5 3,681.3 0.0 11,195.2 14,606.3 15,420.1 6,912.5 189.7 Nov.
12.3 18.0 1,989.3 5,376.2 3,024.2 54.3 3,374.4 0.0 11,299.6 14,712.2 15,495.8 6,896.5 195.0 Dec.
22.0 18.5 2,008.7 5,556.3 3,000.1 59.4 3,718.2 0.0 11,259.9 14,709.2 15,494.2 6,905.8 196.0 2022 Jan.
33.4 5.7 2,005.7 5,643.1 2,995.6 52.2 3,755.8 0.0 11,337.9 14,780.5 15,535.6 6,885.6 195.0 Feb.
30.7 6.2 1,989.8 5,625.1 3,007.1 78.6 3,987.2 0.0 11,420.9 14,884.1 15,628.0 6,883.5 195.1 Mar.
39.0 16.2 2,018.6 5,760.4 2,986.5 43.6 4,395.7 0.0 11,497.8 14,966.8 15,751.5 6,884.1 197.2 Apr.
34.0 15.6 1,988.4 5,814.3 2,924.9 56.5 4,323.1 0.0 11,558.5 15,021.7 15,795.7 6,791.0 199.0 May
47.8 14.4 2,007.0 5,735.2 2,916.9 74.0 4,645.3 0.0 11,615.3 15,108.4 15,878.2 6,798.3 199.4 June
15.1 16.4 2,059.4 5,862.8 2,978.5 76.2 4,313.3 0.0 11,693.5 15,242.1 15,997.1 6,902.2 203.9 July
16.7 19.0 2,077.8 5,914.8 2,903.3 95.3 4,795.3 0.0 11,714.4 15,316.1 16,075.7 6,824.8 196.7 Aug.
35.0 19.5 2,099.1 5,898.6 2,862.6 19.0 5,097.7 0.0 11,678.2 15,416.4 16,176.8 6,791.1 195.9 Sep.
3.9 24.0 2,102.8 6,038.2 2,836.4 42.5 4,979.8 0.0 11,516.3 15,332.8 16,111.0 6,753.3 196.0 Oct.
23.9 22.9 2,112.5 5,881.0 2,872.2 68.8 4,685.6 0.0 11,472.5 15,334.9 16,163.8 6,797.3 199.7 Nov.
32.2 23.3 2,111.2 5,552.9 2,834.3 58.3 4,814.4 0.0 11,394.5 15,328.0 16,144.8 6,765.9 192.2 Dec.
18.1 28.0 2,159.3 5,634.2 2,879.2 83.3 4,674.4 0.0 11,214.9 15,230.7 16,064.8 6,858.0 191.1 2023 Jan.
47.0 30.4 2,181.7 5,669.3 2,829.1 79.4 4,971.4 0.0 11,082.6 15,172.7 16,029.7 6,831.5 191.8 Feb.
51.6 32.1 2,175.9 5,656.1 2,909.7 88.5 4,687.8 0.0 10,976.8 15,176.1 16,035.6 6,917.0 184.9 Mar.
German contribution (€ billion)
7.4 7.5 495.1 1,007.6 756.3 –1,095.7 1,750.3 476.5 2,698.6 3,471.7 3,494.9 1,860.6 0.0 2021 Feb.
8.1 6.8 508.4 1,080.1 754.4 –1,144.4 1,742.0 479.0 2,724.1 3,497.0 3,525.7 1,868.2 0.0 Mar.
7.8 6.6 510.0 1,029.5 759.2 –1,074.2 1,717.0 479.7 2,736.8 3,505.0 3,529.7 1,871.8 0.0 Apr.
9.6 6.7 501.7 1,051.5 768.2 –1,126.5 1,696.6 482.8 2,764.3 3,535.8 3,563.5 1,869.6 0.0 May
9.8 6.9 498.8 1,088.8 775.4 –1,149.4 1,724.5 485.9 2,772.3 3,535.7 3,563.7 1,870.2 0.0 June
9.8 7.0 501.5 1,031.5 795.8 –1,075.6 1,767.0 490.0 2,793.9 3,552.6 3,581.2 1,891.2 0.0 July
12.7 6.5 503.2 1,068.1 793.5 –1,088.4 1,754.6 492.9 2,814.8 3,571.7 3,602.8 1,889.9 0.0 Aug.
13.1 7.0 510.1 1,165.5 781.6 –1,156.2 1,723.6 497.5 2,820.3 3,575.1 3,608.5 1,881.9 0.0 Sep.
13.3 7.2 527.5 1,165.8 783.9 –1,110.5 1,706.6 500.8 2,824.1 3,591.6 3,625.0 1,902.8 0.0 Oct.
14.5 7.4 534.6 1,227.7 803.0 –1,154.8 1,744.2 504.5 2,866.1 3,621.4 3,651.2 1,928.3 0.0 Nov.
16.1 7.5 524.0 1,305.6 796.1 –1,297.0 1,690.3 509.8 2,853.4 3,619.4 3,651.0 1,919.7 0.0 Dec.
13.6 7.7 541.5 1,271.1 778.4 –1,169.6 1,919.3 511.1 2,876.4 3,652.3 3,680.4 1,917.7 0.0 2022 Jan.
14.7 7.5 550.4 1,275.8 774.8 –1,172.9 1,969.0 514.2 2,900.0 3,677.2 3,707.4 1,921.4 0.0 Feb.
14.8 7.3 559.5 1,299.3 781.2 –1,190.8 2,076.2 520.0 2,892.9 3,677.0 3,707.8 1,934.7 0.0 Mar.
14.6 7.1 574.8 1,284.0 769.2 –1,168.1 2,325.6 523.3 2,892.4 3,686.8 3,715.1 1,935.2 0.0 Apr.
14.9 7.3 574.6 1,307.0 748.6 –1,199.2 2,289.8 526.8 2,914.0 3,699.5 3,728.9 1,911.8 0.0 May
18.7 6.6 578.9 1,317.0 743.1 –1,255.4 2,479.8 530.5 2,934.8 3,726.6 3,759.7 1,907.5 0.0 June
21.2 6.8 585.8 1,287.5 779.7 –1,189.6 2,276.7 525.2 2,941.9 3,757.1 3,797.3 1,949.2 0.0 July
21.8 7.6 596.2 1,349.3 739.6 –1,271.6 2,540.1 513.5 2,999.5 3,826.5 3,866.3 1,919.1 0.0 Aug.
27.5 8.1 604.3 1,385.2 711.9 –1,287.1 2,858.3 516.8 2,944.0 3,811.2 3,854.6 1,899.2 0.0 Sep.
19.1 9.7 605.0 1,355.1 693.8 –1,215.2 2,804.7 516.8 2,912.1 3,812.3 3,848.8 1,880.8 0.0 Oct.
20.8 11.2 602.2 1,310.2 714.6 –1,191.2 2,596.7 516.8 2,920.8 3,819.7 3,862.5 1,900.3 0.0 Nov.
20.2 11.7 599.3 1,265.7 690.1 –1,230.4 2,726.5 518.9 2,881.6 3,795.1 3,835.9 1,869.2 0.0 Dec.
24.0 13.1 602.4 1,226.5 689.1 –1,117.5 2,625.9 521.2 2,849.3 3,789.5 3,835.2 1,874.9 0.0 2023 Jan.
29.3 15.8 606.4 1,171.8 668.4 –1,073.2 2,787.2 522.2 2,816.8 3,782.0 3,836.8 1,860.1 0.0 Feb.
36.4 17.5 604.3 1,187.7 700.6 –1,129.6 2,640.8 524.5 2,769.6 3,756.4 3,820.1 1,897.7 0.0 Mar.
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2021 Apr. 816.7 0.3 2,054.6 0.0 3,951.4 676.4 0.0 1,447.7 644.5 633.4 3,421.1 5,545.2
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 809.8 0.2 2,107.0 0.0 4,092.7 706.5 0.0 1,465.8 586.7 659.1 3,591.7 5,763.9
July 821.7 0.1 2,196.0 0.0 4,244.5 736.6 0.0 1,485.8 652.3 734.5 3,653.1 5,875.5
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 826.7 0.2 2,213.2 0.0 4,378.9 766.6 0.0 1,499.9 635.7 790.4 3,726.2 5,992.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 835.1 0.2 2,209.9 0.0 4,512.3 738.5 0.0 1,507.4 671.3 833.7 3,806.5 6,052.4
Dec. 839.2 0.2 2,208.8 0.0 4,655.6 745.0 0.0 1,521.4 628.3 965.7 3,843.3 6,109.7
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 877.7 0.3 2,201.5 0.0 4,750.2 734.2 0.0 1,540.6 582.0 1,160.5 3,812.3 6,087.1
Mar. 887.2 0.3 2,201.3 0.0 4,842.0 746.0 0.0 1,550.6 642.6 1,091.1 3,900.8 6,197.3
Apr. 913.2 0.4 2,199.8 0.0 4,889.2 714.9 0.0 1,575.9 667.8 1,116.7 3,927.3 6,218.1
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 934.2 0.5 2,198.8 0.0 4,939.1 681.3 0.0 1,591.5 624.1 1,129.1 4,046.1 6,319.0
July 943.7 1.0 2,149.4 0.0 4,958.8 678.7 0.0 1,604.0 667.6 1,158.0 3,943.3 6,226.0
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 950.1 1.7 2,124.9 0.0 4,954.8 707.0 0.0 1,585.3 553.9 1,249.2 3,936.1 6,228.5
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 955.8 4.0 2,118.8 0.0 4,948.3 4,490.0 0.0 1,563.7 536.7 1,104.4 332.0 6,385.7
Dec. 960.4 1.9 1,947.1 0.0 4,946.1 4,521.5 0.0 1,560.8 492.5 1,066.9 213.8 6,296.2
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 940.4 1.2 1,303.3 0.1 4,942.1 4,051.6 0.0 1,565.6 372.8 1,001.6 195.6 5,812.7
Mar. 916.8 0.9 1,233.3 0.0 4,939.0 4,103.0 0.0 1,553.9 380.2 861.8 191.1 5,848.0
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deutsche Bundesbank
2021 Apr. 198.0 0.0 407.3 0.0 845.8 203.0 0.0 351.7 187.4 – 300.4 1,008.9 1,563.5
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 194.3 0.0 420.5 0.0 884.3 208.5 0.0 356.8 187.3 – 301.9 1,046.7 1,612.0
July 197.4 0.0 434.3 0.0 918.5 204.2 0.0 362.0 206.8 – 270.8 1,046.2 1,612.4
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 199.0 0.1 436.7 0.0 950.8 210.7 0.0 365.0 204.3 – 240.8 1,045.3 1,621.0
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 200.3 0.1 439.1 0.0 978.5 204.4 0.0 367.4 217.7 – 235.2 1,061.6 1,633.3
Dec. 201.3 0.0 440.3 0.0 1,015.8 206.4 0.0 370.9 220.4 – 219.4 1,077.1 1,654.4
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 212.4 0.3 421.7 0.0 1,034.0 204.5 0.0 374.6 205.6 – 165.1 1,048.8 1,627.9
Mar. 215.6 0.1 421.7 0.0 1,057.9 211.8 0.0 378.1 191.1 – 193.7 1,108.0 1,698.0
Apr. 223.9 0.1 420.8 0.0 1,068.7 197.7 0.0 384.9 196.7 – 189.1 1,123.3 1,705.9
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 230.4 0.1 420.2 0.0 1,087.4 189.9 0.0 388.0 196.9 – 183.1 1,147.4 1,725.3
July 231.7 0.3 409.1 0.0 1,084.3 185.8 0.0 390.3 214.9 – 175.4 1,109.7 1,685.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 232.1 0.3 403.6 0.0 1,076.8 228.5 0.0 379.5 157.9 – 161.8 1,108.8 1,716.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 231.7 0.8 400.5 0.0 1,071.5 1,304.0 0.0 379.0 127.2 – 231.4 125.9 1,808.8
Dec. 232.4 0.5 352.5 0.0 1,079.2 1,346.6 0.0 378.8 121.0 – 242.4 60.5 1,785.9
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 229.8 0.4 231.9 0.1 1,076.8 1,234.6 0.0 377.2 77.8 – 205.4 54.8 1,666.7
Mar. 228.9 0.4 212.8 0.0 1,077.0 1,263.7 0.0 374.5 69.2 – 242.5 54.2 1,692.4
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
–18.2 – 0.1 +262.2 ± 0.0 +126.3 +78.4 ± 0.0 +14.3 +48.7 –34.5 +263.4 +356.1 2021 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
– 6.9 – 0.1 +52.4 ± 0.0 +141.3 +30.1 ± 0.0 +18.1 –57.8 +25.7 +170.6 +218.7 June
+11.9 – 0.1 +89.0 ± 0.0 +151.8 +30.1 ± 0.0 +20.0 +65.6 +75.4 +61.4 +111.6 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 5.0 + 0.1 +17.2 ± 0.0 +134.4 +30.0 ± 0.0 +14.1 –16.6 +55.9 +73.1 +117.3 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 8.4 ± 0.0 – 3.3 ± 0.0 +133.4 –28.1 ± 0.0 + 7.5 +35.6 +43.3 +80.3 +59.6 Nov.
+ 4.1 ± 0.0 – 1.1 ± 0.0 +143.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 +14.0 –43.0 +132.0 +36.8 +57.3 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+38.5 + 0.1 – 7.3 ± 0.0 +94.6 –10.8 ± 0.0 +19.2 –46.3 +194.8 –31.0 –22.6 Feb.
+ 9.5 ± 0.0 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +91.8 +11.8 ± 0.0 +10.0 +60.6 –69.4 +88.5 +110.2 Mar.
+26.0 + 0.1 – 1.5 ± 0.0 +47.2 –31.1 ± 0.0 +25.3 +25.2 +25.6 +26.5 +20.8 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+21.0 + 0.1 – 1.0 ± 0.0 +49.9 –33.6 ± 0.0 +15.6 –43.7 +12.4 +118.8 +100.9 June
+ 9.5 + 0.5 –49.4 ± 0.0 +19.7 – 2.6 ± 0.0 +12.5 +43.5 +28.9 –102.8 –93.0 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 6.4 + 0.7 –24.5 ± 0.0 – 4.0 +28.3 ± 0.0 –18.7 –113.7 +91.2 – 7.2 + 2.5 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 5.7 + 2.3 – 6.1 ± 0.0 – 6.5 +3,783.0 ± 0.0 –21.6 –17.2 –144.8 –3,604.1 +157.2 Nov.
+ 4.6 – 2.1 –171.7 ± 0.0 – 2.2 +31.5 ± 0.0 – 2.9 –44.2 –37.5 –118.2 –89.5 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
–20.0 – 0.7 –643.8 + 0.1 – 4.0 –469.9 ± 0.0 + 4.8 –119.7 –65.3 –18.2 –483.5 Feb.
–23.6 – 0.3 –70.0 – 0.1 – 3.1 +51.4 ± 0.0 –11.7 +7.4 –139.8 – 4.5 +35.3 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
Deutsche Bundesbank
– 7.3 – 0.1 +66.3 + 0.0 +28.8 +25.5 ± 0.0 + 3.4 +14.7 – 2.4 +46.0 +74.9 2021 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
– 3.7 + 0.0 +13.2 + 0.0 +38.6 + 5.5 ± 0.0 + 5.1 –0.1 – 1.5 +37.9 +48.5 June
+ 3.1 – 0.0 +13.8 – 0.0 +34.2 – 4.3 ± 0.0 + 5.2 +19.4 +31.1 – 0.5 + 0.4 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 1.6 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.0 +32.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 + 3.0 –2.5 +29.9 – 0.9 + 8.6 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.4 – 0.0 +27.8 – 6.4 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +13.4 + 5.7 +16.3 +12.3 Nov.
+ 1.0 – 0.1 + 1.2 – 0.0 +37.3 + 2.1 ± 0.0 + 3.5 +2.7 +15.7 +15.6 +21.1 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+11.1 + 0.2 –18.6 + 0.0 +18.2 – 2.0 ± 0.0 + 3.7 –14.7 +54.3 –28.3 –26.6 Feb.
+ 3.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 +23.9 + 7.4 ± 0.0 + 3.5 –14.5 –28.6 +59.2 +70.1 Mar.
+ 8.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.0 +10.8 –14.2 ± 0.0 + 6.8 +5.6 + 4.6 +15.2 + 7.9 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+ 6.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 – 0.0 +18.7 – 7.7 ± 0.0 + 3.0 +0.2 + 6.0 +24.1 +19.4 June
+ 1.3 + 0.2 –11.1 – 0.0 – 3.1 – 4.1 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +18.0 + 7.7 –37.7 –39.5 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 0.4 + 0.0 – 5.5 – 0.0 – 7.5 +42.7 ± 0.0 –10.8 –57.1 +13.5 – 0.9 +31.0 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
– 0.5 + 0.5 – 3.1 + 0.0 – 5.3 +1,075.5 ± 0.0 – 0.6 –30.7 –69.6 –982.9 +92.0 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.4 –48.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 +42.7 ± 0.0 – 0.1 –6.2 –11.0 –65.4 –22.9 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
– 2.5 – 0.1 –120.6 + 0.1 – 2.4 –112.0 ± 0.0 – 1.6 –43.2 +37.0 – 5.6 –119.3 Feb.
– 1.0 + 0.0 –19.1 – 0.0 + 0.2 +29.1 ± 0.0 – 2.7 –8.6 –37.1 – 0.7 +25.7 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2022 Oct. 21 8,774.8 592.8 548.5 235.2 313.3 25.4 10.8 10.8 –
28 8,770.7 592.8 549.2 236.0 313.2 25.7 11.4 11.4 –
Nov. 4 8,761.7 592.8 553.0 237.3 315.7 23.2 11.4 11.4 –
11 8,764.7 592.8 550.9 237.3 313.5 25.2 11.4 11.4 –
18 8,769.1 592.8 549.2 237.4 311.8 25.8 11.3 11.3 –
25 8,471.4 592.8 549.8 238.1 311.7 26.3 11.3 11.3 –
Dec. 2 8,470.9 592.8 549.8 238.5 311.4 25.6 11.1 11.1 –
9 8,480.2 592.9 552.1 238.5 313.6 23.4 11.2 11.2 –
16 8,477.2 592.9 551.5 238.3 313.2 23.3 11.1 11.1 –
23 7,985.5 592.9 552.2 239.2 313.0 23.8 14.1 14.1 –
30 7,955.8 592.9 523.2 228.5 294.7 20.4 14.1 14.1 –
2023 Jan. 6 7,968.0 593.0 526.0 229.7 296.3 20.6 11.9 11.9 –
13 7,972.1 593.0 525.6 229.7 295.9 20.9 12.5 12.5 –
20 7,959.2 593.0 523.3 230.0 293.3 19.4 12.4 12.4 –
27 7,894.0 593.0 519.5 229.9 289.6 18.5 12.1 12.1 –
Feb. 3 7,875.4 593.0 511.1 230.0 281.1 16.9 12.0 12.0 –
10 7,872.2 593.0 503.7 230.2 273.5 17.1 12.3 12.3 –
17 7,873.6 593.0 505.3 230.2 275.0 16.6 12.3 12.3 –
24 7,839.4 593.0 507.8 230.5 277.3 15.6 12.4 12.4 –
Mar. 3 7,830.8 593.0 507.6 230.5 277.1 15.1 12.1 12.1 –
10 7,829.4 593.0 506.6 230.5 276.1 15.4 12.5 12.5 –
17 7,831.9 593.0 507.7 230.5 277.2 14.8 13.0 13.0 –
24 7,835.9 593.0 508.7 230.5 278.2 14.0 14.0 14.0 –
31 7,729.6 632.9 501.7 229.1 272.6 15.2 13.6 13.6 –
Apr. 7 7,729.3 632.9 501.5 229.1 272.4 14.4 12.7 12.7 –
14 7,730.9 632.9 501.8 229.1 272.7 13.9 12.6 12.6 –
21 7,714.2 632.9 498.8 229.1 269.6 15.7 12.6 12.6 –
28 7,719.8 632.9 499.0 229.4 269.6 14.2 12.9 12.9 –
May 5 7,716.9 632.9 500.7 230.3 270.5 13.2 12.8 12.8 –
12 7,728.5 632.9 499.0 230.4 268.7 14.5 12.9 12.9 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2022 Oct. 21 3,026.3 184.0 97.3 59.6 37.7 0.0 – – –
28 3,037.7 184.0 97.6 59.7 37.9 0.0 – – –
Nov. 4 3,053.2 184.0 98.1 60.2 37.9 0.0 – – –
11 3,053.5 184.0 98.1 60.2 37.9 0.0 – – –
18 3,045.4 184.0 98.1 60.2 37.9 0.0 – – –
25 2,959.7 184.0 98.3 60.2 38.1 0.0 – – –
Dec. 2 2,950.5 184.0 98.3 60.5 37.8 0.0 – – –
9 2,968.1 184.0 98.3 60.5 37.8 0.0 – – –
16 2,971.8 184.0 98.2 60.5 37.7 0.0 – – –
23 2,875.6 184.0 98.1 60.8 37.3 0.0 2.9 2.9 –
30 2,905.7 184.0 92.5 58.0 34.4 0.0 3.4 3.4 –
2023 Jan. 6 2,836.4 184.0 92.2 58.0 34.2 0.0 – – –
13 2,817.4 184.0 92.2 58.1 34.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
20 2,787.2 184.0 92.4 58.1 34.4 0.0 – – –
27 2,765.8 184.0 92.2 58.0 34.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
Feb. 3 2,791.4 184.0 92.0 58.1 34.0 0.0 – – –
10 2,772.5 184.0 92.1 58.1 34.0 0.0 – – –
17 2,760.1 184.0 91.8 58.1 33.7 0.0 – – –
24 2,709.2 184.0 92.9 58.1 34.9 0.0 – – –
Mar. 3 2,736.1 184.0 92.3 58.1 34.2 0.0 – – –
10 2,725.7 184.0 92.0 58.1 33.9 0.0 – – –
17 2,738.8 184.0 92.3 58.1 34.3 0.0 – – –
24 2,713.8 184.0 92.5 58.1 34.4 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
31 2,775.1 196.4 91.7 57.4 34.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
Apr. 7 2,723.0 196.4 91.6 57.4 34.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 –
14 2,718.4 196.4 91.6 57.4 34.2 0.0 – – –
21 2,673.2 196.4 91.8 57.4 34.3 0.0 – – –
28 2,675.9 196.4 91.8 57.4 34.4 0.0 – – –
May 5 2,683.5 196.4 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 – – –
12 2,699.7 196.4 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
2,119.7 3.6 2,116.0 – – – – 13.3 5,118.3 4,951.0 167.3 21.7 324.3 2022 Oct. 21
2,120.9 4.6 2,116.3 – – – – 16.1 5,111.0 4,946.9 164.2 21.7 321.8 28
2,119.4 3.1 2,116.3 – – – – 19.6 5,104.1 4,942.1 162.1 21.7 316.5 Nov. 4
2,117.8 1.5 2,116.3 – – 0.0 – 16.3 5,108.3 4,945.1 163.2 21.7 320.1 11
2,117.9 1.6 2,116.3 – – 0.0 – 17.2 5,113.5 4,949.8 163.7 21.7 319.7 18
1,821.8 1.8 1,820.0 – – 0.0 – 19.4 5,109.0 4,944.3 164.7 21.7 319.1 25
1,822.9 2.6 1,820.2 – – – – 18.8 5,111.8 4,946.3 165.5 21.7 316.3 Dec. 2
1,821.6 1.4 1,820.2 – – – – 18.8 5,118.2 4,952.3 165.9 21.7 320.3 9
1,821.7 1.5 1,820.2 – – – – 29.1 5,106.2 4,940.8 165.4 21.7 319.8 16
1,322.9 1.3 1,321.4 – – 0.2 – 26.6 5,109.3 4,944.1 165.3 21.7 322.1 23
1,324.3 2.4 1,321.4 – – 0.5 – 31.1 5,102.2 4,937.2 165.0 21.6 325.9 30
1,322.5 1.1 1,321.4 – – – – 31.8 5,123.7 4,942.3 181.5 21.6 316.8 2023 Jan. 6
1,322.4 1.0 1,321.4 – – – – 24.8 5,129.3 4,949.7 179.6 21.6 322.0 13
1,322.3 0.8 1,321.4 – – – – 28.8 5,116.8 4,938.4 178.5 21.6 321.6 20
1,259.2 1.2 1,258.0 – – 0.0 – 28.6 5,123.4 4,945.1 178.3 21.6 318.1 27
1,258.8 0.8 1,258.0 – – 0.0 – 25.8 5,116.6 4,940.6 176.0 21.5 319.6 Feb. 3
1,259.0 1.0 1,258.0 – – 0.1 – 27.6 5,121.5 4,945.2 176.3 21.5 316.5 10
1,258.8 0.8 1,258.0 – – 0.0 – 35.4 5,119.0 4,942.6 176.5 21.5 311.6 17
1,222.2 1.2 1,220.9 – – 0.0 – 36.2 5,121.0 4,942.9 178.2 21.5 309.7 24
1,221.8 0.8 1,220.9 – – 0.0 – 29.5 5,116.0 4,937.6 178.3 21.5 314.1 Mar. 3
1,221.8 0.9 1,220.9 – – – – 25.8 5,115.3 4,936.4 178.9 21.5 317.4 10
1,221.9 1.0 1,220.9 – – 0.0 – 40.2 5,108.7 4,930.1 178.5 21.5 311.1 17
1,222.0 1.0 1,220.9 – – 0.1 – 45.3 5,106.3 4,928.2 178.2 21.5 311.1 24
1,102.4 1.7 1,100.5 – – 0.2 – 41.1 5,087.5 4,909.7 177.9 21.5 313.8 31
1,101.7 1.2 1,100.5 – – 0.0 – 36.9 5,093.2 4,914.8 178.4 21.5 314.5 Apr. 7
1,102.1 1.6 1,100.5 – – – – 35.7 5,083.8 4,905.1 178.7 21.5 326.6 14
1,102.0 1.5 1,100.5 – – 0.0 – 37.1 5,076.0 4,895.0 181.0 21.5 317.6 21
1,102.6 1.9 1,100.4 – – 0.2 – 33.1 5,078.5 4,895.7 182.8 21.5 325.2 28
1,101.6 1.2 1,100.4 – – 0.0 – 37.1 5,072.9 4,892.5 180.4 21.5 324.3 May 5
1,101.8 1.3 1,100.4 – – – – 37.2 5,081.4 4,900.1 181.2 21.5 327.5 12
Deutsche Bundesbank
399.9 0.7 399.3 – – 0.0 – 2.5 1,071.9 1,071.9 – 4.4 1,266.2 2022 Oct. 21
401.0 1.7 399.3 – – 0.0 – 2.9 1,075.2 1,075.2 – 4.4 1,272.7 28
399.7 0.5 399.3 – – 0.0 – 2.3 1,077.9 1,077.9 – 4.4 1,286.7 Nov. 4
399.7 0.4 399.3 – – 0.0 – 2.6 1,078.9 1,078.9 – 4.4 1,285.8 11
399.8 0.6 399.3 – – 0.0 – 3.2 1,081.1 1,081.1 – 4.4 1,274.6 18
318.0 0.5 317.4 – – 0.0 – 2.8 1,079.1 1,079.1 – 4.4 1,273.0 25
318.4 0.9 317.4 – – 0.0 – 3.5 1,080.9 1,080.9 – 4.4 1,260.9 Dec. 2
317.6 0.2 317.4 – – 0.0 – 3.1 1,082.8 1,082.8 – 4.4 1,277.7 9
317.6 0.1 317.4 – – 0.0 – 3.7 1,072.9 1,072.9 – 4.4 1,290.8 16
236.4 0.4 235.9 – – 0.2 – 4.9 1,073.8 1,073.8 – 4.4 1,270.9 23
237.5 1.1 235.9 – – 0.5 – 8.3 1,073.0 1,073.0 – 4.4 1,302.6 30
236.1 0.2 235.9 – – 0.0 – 4.5 1,074.5 1,074.5 – 4.4 1,240.6 2023 Jan. 6
236.0 0.2 235.9 – – 0.0 – 3.7 1,077.5 1,077.5 – 4.4 1,219.4 13
236.0 0.2 235.9 – – 0.0 – 4.4 1,077.1 1,077.1 – 4.4 1,188.8 20
222.6 0.5 222.1 – – 0.0 – 5.2 1,080.2 1,080.2 – 4.4 1,177.1 27
222.3 0.2 222.1 – – 0.0 – 4.9 1,081.5 1,081.5 – 4.4 1,202.1 Feb. 3
222.5 0.4 222.1 – – 0.1 – 7.7 1,084.1 1,084.1 – 4.4 1,177.6 10
222.4 0.3 222.1 – – 0.0 – 7.8 1,078.1 1,078.1 – 4.4 1,171.5 17
208.9 0.7 208.2 – – 0.0 – 7.8 1,075.4 1,075.4 – 4.4 1,135.7 24
208.6 0.4 208.2 – – 0.0 – 9.2 1,077.8 1,077.8 – 4.4 1,159.8 Mar. 3
208.6 0.4 208.2 – – 0.0 – 7.3 1,072.3 1,072.3 – 4.4 1,157.0 10
208.6 0.4 208.2 – – 0.0 – 7.4 1,072.3 1,072.3 – 4.4 1,169.7 17
208.7 0.6 208.2 – – – – 8.5 1,071.0 1,071.0 – 4.4 1,144.2 24
199.6 0.8 198.8 – – 0.1 – 7.1 1,072.4 1,072.4 – 4.4 1,203.2 31
199.2 0.4 198.8 – – 0.0 – 8.3 1,074.3 1,074.3 – 4.4 1,148.8 Apr. 7
199.2 0.5 198.8 – – 0.0 – 8.4 1,066.2 1,066.2 – 4.4 1,152.0 14
199.3 0.5 198.8 – – 0.0 – 7.8 1,057.6 1,057.6 – 4.4 1,115.9 21
200.2 1.1 198.9 – – 0.2 – 9.0 1,059.2 1,059.2 – 4.4 1,114.8 28
199.7 0.8 198.9 – – 0.0 – 8.2 1,061.6 1,061.6 – 4.4 1,121.4 May 5
199.7 0.8 198.9 – – – – 5.7 1,064.2 1,064.2 – 4.4 1,137.4 12

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2022 Oct. 21 8,774.8 1,559.8 4,841.5 215.6 4,623.0 – – 2.9 59.7 – 676.4 551.0 125.4
28 8,770.7 1,562.9 4,801.3 231.0 4,567.5 – – 2.8 53.7 – 706.8 578.0 128.8
Nov. 4 8,761.7 1,562.5 4,859.1 240.2 4,616.1 – – 2.8 49.0 – 626.1 499.6 126.5
11 8,764.7 1,560.1 4,909.8 215.0 4,692.0 – – 2.8 48.5 – 623.3 502.4 120.8
18 8,769.1 1,558.2 4,853.3 211.5 4,638.9 – – 2.8 49.0 – 681.5 568.4 113.1
25 8,471.4 1,557.7 4,553.5 203.4 4,348.5 – – 1.6 45.6 – 675.3 558.8 116.5
Dec. 2 8,470.9 1,560.1 4,665.7 190.2 4,474.0 – – 1.6 43.1 – 577.6 450.8 126.8
9 8,480.2 1,563.4 4,675.6 197.9 4,476.1 – – 1.6 48.9 – 558.4 431.2 127.2
16 8,477.2 1,564.9 4,647.4 203.8 4,441.9 – – 1.6 47.5 – 547.5 427.8 119.7
23 7,985.5 1,571.6 4,198.7 193.1 4,004.4 – – 1.2 58.4 – 484.4 371.4 113.0
30 7,955.8 1,572.0 3,998.9 218.9 3,778.8 – – 1.2 78.3 – 564.6 436.8 127.8
2023 Jan. 6 7,968.0 1,572.5 4,288.8 202.3 4,085.3 – – 1.2 53.7 – 433.6 327.0 106.6
13 7,972.1 1,566.2 4,300.0 172.5 4,126.2 – – 1.2 57.5 – 472.5 369.3 103.2
20 7,959.2 1,561.5 4,337.7 175.1 4,161.3 – – 1.3 45.1 – 471.7 367.7 104.0
27 7,894.0 1,559.0 4,268.9 176.0 4,091.7 – – 1.3 39.0 – 497.7 398.1 99.6
Feb. 3 7,875.4 1,557.6 4,282.8 202.2 4,079.3 – – 1.3 39.2 – 454.3 353.4 100.8
10 7,872.2 1,555.7 4,320.4 180.6 4,138.6 – – 1.3 34.4 – 452.5 356.1 96.4
17 7,873.6 1,554.2 4,333.7 165.0 4,167.4 – – 1.3 32.6 – 466.6 372.5 94.1
24 7,839.4 1,553.8 4,285.3 172.0 4,112.0 – – 1.3 29.5 – 496.1 402.5 93.6
Mar. 3 7,830.8 1,554.0 4,310.5 170.7 4,138.5 – – 1.3 37.1 – 455.8 361.6 94.2
10 7,829.4 1,553.4 4,336.5 176.9 4,158.3 – – 1.3 29.7 – 444.8 354.8 90.0
17 7,831.9 1,554.5 4,175.9 234.9 3,939.8 – – 1.3 33.6 – 570.5 425.4 145.1
24 7,835.9 1,553.3 4,223.7 174.9 4,047.5 – – 1.3 37.0 – 510.0 418.0 92.1
31 7,729.6 1,556.6 4,034.3 197.4 3,836.6 – – 0.4 61.1 – 497.4 400.9 96.5
Apr. 7 7,729.3 1,563.7 4,167.8 158.7 4,008.7 – – 0.4 36.0 – 442.4 350.8 91.6
14 7,730.9 1,561.1 4,172.9 155.7 4,016.8 – – 0.4 35.4 – 446.7 356.9 89.8
21 7,714.2 1,558.8 4,181.6 164.9 4,016.3 – – 0.4 31.9 – 442.2 354.7 87.5
28 7,719.8 1,563.6 4,163.5 181.2 3,981.9 – – 0.4 35.3 – 471.3 381.1 90.2
May 5 7,716.9 1,563.6 4,271.2 204.8 4,066.1 – – 0.3 37.0 – 362.4 275.9 86.5
12 7,728.5 1,562.2 4,302.7 171.2 4,131.2 – – 0.3 39.5 – 352.4 265.1 87.3
Deutsche Bundesbank
2022 Oct. 21 3,026.3 377.4 1,437.9 55.4 1,379.7 – – 2.8 18.9 – 176.1 124.7 51.4
28 3,037.7 379.1 1,432.3 59.4 1,370.1 – – 2.8 19.7 – 190.7 139.7 51.0
Nov. 4 3,053.2 378.9 1,436.8 74.0 1,360.0 – – 2.8 13.7 – 182.4 132.3 50.1
11 3,053.5 378.1 1,472.4 55.0 1,414.6 – – 2.8 15.9 – 168.3 124.3 43.9
18 3,045.4 377.6 1,433.2 53.9 1,376.5 – – 2.7 16.1 – 199.0 155.1 43.9
25 2,959.7 377.5 1,366.1 55.9 1,308.6 – – 1.6 14.1 – 177.5 131.1 46.4
Dec. 2 2,950.5 378.8 1,394.0 50.6 1,341.8 – – 1.6 13.1 – 155.2 102.0 53.1
9 2,968.1 380.1 1,403.8 59.2 1,343.1 – – 1.6 17.8 – 143.9 91.3 52.6
16 2,971.8 381.6 1,359.1 59.3 1,298.2 – – 1.6 13.9 – 161.1 111.3 49.9
23 2,875.6 383.9 1,283.1 53.2 1,228.8 – – 1.1 12.8 – 138.9 94.5 44.4
30 2,905.7 381.3 1,200.1 66.6 1,132.3 – – 1.2 21.3 – 177.6 132.5 45.1
2023 Jan. 6 2,836.4 377.2 1,287.0 64.7 1,221.1 – – 1.2 14.3 – 102.6 66.8 35.8
13 2,817.4 375.9 1,292.0 45.3 1,245.4 – – 1.2 21.0 – 114.3 81.8 32.5
20 2,787.2 374.7 1,312.9 45.4 1,266.3 – – 1.2 13.9 – 85.0 53.8 31.3
27 2,765.8 374.3 1,289.8 44.4 1,244.2 – – 1.2 12.7 – 101.0 72.4 28.6
Feb. 3 2,791.4 374.9 1,322.2 64.9 1,256.0 – – 1.3 13.6 – 91.1 61.0 30.2
10 2,772.5 375.0 1,340.8 52.9 1,286.6 – – 1.3 9.2 – 79.0 52.2 26.8
17 2,760.1 374.8 1,325.5 44.6 1,279.6 – – 1.3 9.5 – 98.9 72.2 26.6
24 2,709.2 374.7 1,301.2 45.3 1,254.6 – – 1.3 8.6 – 92.0 66.5 25.5
Mar. 3 2,736.1 374.2 1,318.6 45.9 1,271.5 – – 1.3 13.2 – 94.8 70.6 24.2
10 2,725.7 374.4 1,333.4 50.2 1,281.9 – – 1.3 8.2 – 78.7 55.5 23.2
17 2,738.8 374.9 1,275.0 62.5 1,211.3 – – 1.2 10.5 – 127.7 103.7 24.0
24 2,713.8 374.7 1,276.1 48.7 1,226.2 – – 1.2 9.1 – 104.1 80.2 24.0
31 2,775.1 374.3 1,256.6 53.3 1,203.0 – – 0.3 18.4 – 125.6 100.9 24.7
Apr. 7 2,723.0 377.3 1,283.3 38.8 1,244.1 – – 0.3 10.7 – 102.0 77.7 24.3
14 2,718.4 376.1 1,289.6 37.7 1,251.5 – – 0.3 12.3 – 96.4 73.8 22.7
21 2,673.2 375.4 1,265.2 42.6 1,222.3 – – 0.3 10.4 – 80.4 60.3 20.1
28 2,675.9 376.0 1,262.9 50.9 1,211.7 – – 0.3 12.4 – 91.7 68.5 23.2
May 5 2,683.5 375.9 1,298.9 66.2 1,232.5 – – 0.3 13.0 – 70.5 50.6 19.9
12 2,699.7 376.3 1,317.2 46.8 1,270.1 – – 0.3 11.8 – 74.1 53.8 20.3
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
384.8 11.9 6.1 6.1 – 189.9 318.3 – 611.7 114.7 2022 Oct. 21
391.0 12.2 6.1 6.1 – 189.9 320.3 – 611.7 114.7 28
410.8 12.5 5.8 5.8 – 189.9 319.6 – 611.7 114.7 Nov. 4
368.4 12.5 5.8 5.8 – 189.9 320.1 – 611.7 114.7 11
365.2 12.6 5.7 5.7 – 189.9 327.3 – 611.7 114.7 18
383.3 12.7 5.5 5.5 – 189.9 321.5 – 611.7 114.7 25
372.5 12.2 5.6 5.6 – 189.9 318.0 – 611.7 114.6 Dec. 2
379.9 12.2 5.9 5.9 – 189.9 319.7 – 611.7 114.6 9
413.6 12.6 5.3 5.3 – 189.9 322.2 – 611.7 114.6 16
430.2 12.5 5.1 5.1 – 189.9 308.5 – 611.7 114.6 23
540.7 11.7 4.7 4.7 – 181.1 302.7 – 586.4 114.6 30
424.8 11.0 4.8 4.8 – 182.4 292.5 – 588.7 115.3 2023 Jan. 6
378.3 11.0 4.8 4.8 – 182.4 295.0 – 588.7 115.8 13
342.6 11.4 4.6 4.6 – 182.4 297.8 – 588.7 115.8 20
328.3 11.3 5.0 5.0 – 182.4 297.4 – 588.7 116.4 27
339.0 11.0 4.8 4.8 – 182.4 298.7 – 589.1 116.4 Feb. 3
311.5 10.9 5.1 5.1 – 182.4 293.7 – 589.1 116.4 10
289.6 10.9 5.0 5.0 – 182.4 293.0 – 589.1 116.4 17
278.8 10.8 6.1 6.1 – 182.4 290.9 – 589.1 116.4 24
280.7 10.3 5.6 5.6 – 182.4 284.6 – 589.1 120.7 Mar. 3
275.2 10.3 5.3 5.3 – 182.4 282.0 – 589.1 120.7 10
305.0 10.4 5.4 5.4 – 182.4 284.3 – 589.1 120.7 17
316.5 10.9 5.3 5.3 – 182.4 286.9 – 589.1 120.8 24
357.4 11.1 5.3 5.3 – 180.3 283.8 – 622.2 120.2 31
305.8 11.2 5.3 5.3 – 180.3 274.6 – 622.2 120.2 Apr. 7
298.1 11.6 5.1 5.1 – 180.3 277.4 – 622.2 120.2 14
287.2 11.6 5.1 5.1 – 180.3 273.2 – 622.2 120.2 21
271.6 11.0 5.5 5.5 – 180.3 275.5 – 622.2 120.2 28
265.4 11.0 5.2 5.2 – 180.3 278.5 – 622.2 120.2 May 5
255.7 11.3 5.1 5.1 – 180.3 277.0 – 622.2 120.2 12
Deutsche Bundesbank
216.3 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 41.7 516.8 185.6 5.7 2022 Oct. 21
216.3 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 41.6 516.8 185.6 5.7 28
241.0 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 42.5 516.8 185.6 5.7 Nov. 4
218.8 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 42.0 516.8 185.6 5.7 11
219.7 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 41.6 516.8 185.6 5.7 18
226.6 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 39.9 516.8 185.6 5.7 25
210.1 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 41.4 516.8 185.6 5.7 Dec. 2
223.4 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 41.0 516.8 185.6 5.7 9
257.2 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 40.9 516.8 185.6 5.7 16
260.4 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 49.3 39.0 516.8 185.6 5.7 23
333.6 0.1 – – – 47.0 38.5 518.9 181.7 5.7 30
261.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 47.0 37.8 521.6 181.7 5.7 2023 Jan. 6
220.7 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 47.0 37.3 521.6 181.7 5.7 13
207.3 0.3 0.0 0.0 – 47.0 37.0 521.6 181.7 5.7 20
195.1 0.3 0.1 0.1 – 47.0 34.1 523.8 181.7 5.7 27
198.2 0.3 0.0 0.0 – 47.0 35.5 521.2 181.7 5.7 Feb. 3
177.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 – 47.0 35.3 521.2 181.7 5.7 10
160.3 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 47.0 35.3 521.2 181.7 5.7 17
141.3 0.2 0.9 0.9 – 47.0 34.7 521.2 181.7 5.7 24
141.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 47.0 36.4 522.2 181.7 5.5 Mar. 3
138.4 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 47.0 35.9 522.2 181.7 5.5 10
158.7 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 47.0 35.4 522.2 181.7 5.5 17
158.4 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 47.0 34.8 522.2 181.7 5.5 24
196.8 0.2 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 33.4 524.5 193.2 5.5 31
147.6 0.2 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 32.1 524.5 193.2 5.5 Apr. 7
142.6 0.2 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 31.4 524.5 193.2 5.5 14
141.7 0.2 0.2 0.2 – 46.5 30.0 524.5 193.2 5.5 21
131.2 0.1 0.3 0.3 – 46.5 29.6 526.4 193.2 5.5 28
122.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 31.3 526.4 193.2 5.5 May 5
114.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 34.4 526.4 193.2 5.5 12
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2021 June 9,293.7 46.5 2,959.9 2,469.9 2,197.4 272.5 490.0 356.7 133.3 4,253.7 3,772.0 3,370.7 3,056.9
July 9,321.9 46.8 2,943.6 2,448.2 2,178.3 269.9 495.3 361.1 134.2 4,270.2 3,788.1 3,386.0 3,071.8
Aug. 9,319.3 46.9 2,950.1 2,457.4 2,188.5 268.8 492.8 359.5 133.3 4,283.3 3,799.4 3,400.4 3,085.0
Sep. 9,325.3 47.4 2,952.3 2,472.9 2,203.6 269.3 479.4 344.9 134.5 4,303.0 3,812.2 3,409.8 3,093.8
Oct. 9,395.0 47.8 2,979.8 2,490.1 2,221.1 269.0 489.7 356.2 133.5 4,322.0 3,832.5 3,437.3 3,117.5
Nov. 9,495.5 48.1 3,008.0 2,519.5 2,253.4 266.1 488.5 355.4 133.1 4,352.1 3,856.4 3,459.8 3,138.9
Dec. 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 Jan. 9,717.0 47.7 3,029.2 2,522.4 2,258.2 264.2 506.8 375.0 131.8 4,378.1 3,875.3 3,484.8 3,162.4
Feb. 9,842.7 47.7 3,082.6 2,564.8 2,299.1 265.8 517.8 383.9 133.9 4,396.3 3,889.1 3,504.4 3,181.6
Mar. 9,962.9 50.0 3,066.9 2,546.2 2,281.9 264.3 520.7 387.1 133.7 4,426.8 3,916.4 3,526.5 3,204.1
Apr. 10,268.8 51.0 3,112.2 2,578.0 2,313.7 264.2 534.2 400.5 133.8 4,434.6 3,929.2 3,546.3 3,223.8
May 10,258.0 50.0 3,122.7 2,592.6 2,326.2 266.4 530.1 397.8 132.3 4,460.3 3,949.5 3,567.4 3,244.7
June 10,428.9 51.8 3,096.5 2,570.9 2,306.2 264.7 525.6 394.1 131.5 4,494.4 3,969.5 3,589.6 3,268.8
July 10,267.9 42.3 3,086.0 2,557.4 2,291.5 266.0 528.6 396.8 131.8 4,528.3 4,008.2 3,627.9 3,293.6
Aug. 10,627.2 23.6 3,166.4 2,625.3 2,359.2 266.1 541.1 409.1 132.0 4,555.4 4,039.2 3,664.4 3,331.1
Sep. 11,063.0 20.7 3,268.0 2,714.2 2,442.2 272.0 553.7 419.7 134.0 4,579.6 4,057.2 3,685.0 3,351.1
Oct. 11,036.0 20.0 3,259.8 2,696.8 2,424.2 272.6 563.0 416.3 146.7 4,591.1 4,077.8 3,699.7 3,365.9
Nov. 10,762.4 19.1 3,180.1 2,630.6 2,360.1 270.5 549.5 403.2 146.2 4,610.5 4,089.4 3,715.1 3,379.3
Dec. 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 18.2 3,085.7 2,550.5 2,288.2 262.3 535.1 383.8 151.4 4,600.1 4,080.1 3,706.1 3,372.3
Feb. 10,760.9 18.0 3,085.7 2,541.4 2,274.9 266.5 544.3 390.6 153.8 4,614.2 4,094.2 3,714.7 3,381.3
Mar. 10,553.5 17.9 3,041.2 2,497.7 2,229.3 268.4 543.5 391.2 152.3 4,620.7 4,094.7 3,718.2 3,386.0
Changes 3
2014 206.8 0.4 –126.2 –128.6 –95.3 –33.4 2.4 7.2 – 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2021 207.2 2.2 161.3 155.6 156.4 – 0.8 5.7 11.7 – 5.9 175.7 154.6 173.7 155.9
2022 1,170.5 –29.7 149.5 103.7 100.5 3.2 45.8 33.1 12.7 242.4 223.1 237.5 220.6
2021 July 26.3 0.2 –15.0 –19.5 –17.5 – 2.0 4.5 4.4 0.1 17.3 16.4 15.6 15.3
Aug. – 3.9 0.2 6.7 9.3 10.3 – 1.0 – 2.6 – 1.7 – 0.9 13.2 11.2 14.7 13.4
Sep. 3.0 0.4 0.1 14.4 13.9 0.5 –14.4 – 15.6 1.3 19.8 13.0 9.4 8.8
Oct. 70.4 0.5 27.7 17.3 17.6 – 0.3 10.5 11.4 – 1.0 19.2 20.6 28.0 24.1
Nov. 95.5 0.3 26.6 29.2 32.2 – 3.0 – 2.5 – 2.1 – 0.5 30.6 25.2 22.1 21.0
Dec. –326.2 1.6 –218.7 –186.4 –183.6 – 2.8 –32.2 – 31.2 – 1.0 – 0.9 4.7 9.4 9.1
2022 Jan. 340.3 – 1.9 238.6 189.0 186.9 2.1 49.6 49.7 – 0.1 28.1 15.4 16.2 14.9
Feb. 128.5 – 0.0 52.7 41.4 39.7 1.7 11.3 9.1 2.2 20.4 15.8 21.3 20.9
Mar. 119.7 2.2 –15.5 –18.4 –17.2 – 1.2 2.9 3.0 – 0.1 31.4 27.6 22.2 22.6
Apr. 283.1 1.0 41.6 30.8 30.8 0.0 10.8 10.6 0.2 7.5 12.8 19.7 19.4
May 1.1 – 1.0 12.4 15.3 12.8 2.5 – 2.9 – 1.5 – 1.3 27.4 21.2 21.6 21.3
June 178.6 1.7 –28.2 –22.2 –20.6 – 1.6 – 6.0 – 5.3 – 0.6 32.9 19.9 22.0 23.7
July –177.9 – 9.5 –12.8 –14.2 –15.0 0.8 1.4 1.4 0.0 29.7 36.0 36.0 22.6
Aug. 359.0 –18.7 83.5 71.7 70.7 1.0 11.8 11.3 0.4 28.1 31.4 36.5 37.5
Sep. 428.4 – 2.9 99.8 88.6 82.4 6.2 11.3 9.0 2.3 27.0 17.2 19.5 18.7
Oct. –19.3 – 0.7 – 6.7 –17.0 –17.7 0.6 10.3 – 2.4 12.7 12.4 21.1 15.3 15.5
Nov. –245.9 – 0.9 –75.9 –65.0 –63.0 – 2.0 –10.9 – 10.5 – 0.5 21.4 13.0 17.1 15.1
Dec. –225.1 0.9 –240.0 –196.2 –189.2 – 7.1 –43.8 – 41.2 – 2.6 –24.0 – 8.4 – 9.9 –11.6
2023 Jan. 87.5 – 1.8 155.0 122.2 119.3 2.8 32.8 24.0 8.9 22.8 6.5 8.1 8.0
Feb. 167.0 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 9.1 –13.4 4.3 8.3 5.8 2.5 13.4 13.6 7.9 8.3
Mar. –207.4 – 0.0 –44.7 –43.7 –45.5 1.8 – 0.9 0.6 – 1.5 7.2 1.6 4.6 5.9
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 2021
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 2022
313.8 401.4 249.1 152.3 481.7 339.4 231.8 142.3 28.8 113.5 1,111.0 864.8 922.5 2021 June
314.2 402.2 251.3 150.8 482.0 344.2 236.6 137.8 28.6 109.2 1,097.1 849.1 964.3 July
315.4 398.9 248.0 150.9 484.0 346.1 238.8 137.9 28.3 109.6 1,084.8 839.7 954.2 Aug.
316.0 402.4 248.3 154.1 490.7 352.5 241.7 138.2 27.9 110.3 1,087.9 840.8 934.8 Sep.
319.9 395.1 249.7 145.4 489.5 356.0 244.3 133.4 30.3 103.2 1,134.6 889.6 910.9 Oct.
320.9 396.5 247.8 148.8 495.7 361.6 249.6 134.1 28.5 105.6 1,137.3 892.4 950.0 Nov.
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 Dec.
322.4 390.6 246.9 143.6 502.7 377.7 260.4 125.0 28.5 96.5 1,171.3 925.2 1,090.8 2022 Jan.
322.8 384.8 244.7 140.0 507.2 381.4 262.7 125.8 28.6 97.2 1,190.1 939.6 1,125.9 Feb.
322.3 390.0 245.2 144.8 510.4 379.5 259.4 130.9 29.0 101.9 1,169.2 921.9 1,249.9 Mar.
322.5 382.9 246.5 136.4 505.4 378.8 257.8 126.7 32.2 94.4 1,174.5 926.0 1,496.5 Apr.
322.7 382.1 244.5 137.7 510.9 383.7 260.7 127.1 31.4 95.7 1,166.1 917.3 1,458.8 May
320.9 379.9 244.9 135.0 524.9 388.1 268.4 136.8 33.2 103.6 1,182.4 925.1 1,603.8 June
334.3 380.3 245.8 134.5 520.2 383.8 266.0 136.4 33.4 103.0 1,199.9 941.5 1,411.5 July
333.3 374.8 243.4 131.4 516.2 387.1 268.6 129.1 33.7 95.4 1,211.7 952.6 1,670.0 Aug.
333.9 372.2 244.5 127.7 522.4 390.5 273.1 132.0 35.4 96.6 1,220.9 961.0 1,973.8 Sep.
333.8 378.1 246.0 132.1 513.3 385.7 268.4 127.6 34.4 93.2 1,234.2 975.7 1,930.8 Oct.
335.9 374.2 246.3 127.9 521.1 394.0 276.5 127.1 32.7 94.4 1,224.6 963.4 1,728.1 Nov.
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 Dec.
333.8 374.0 250.3 123.7 520.1 393.5 280.2 126.6 30.2 96.4 1,161.9 904.0 1,719.2 2023 Jan.
333.5 379.5 248.2 131.3 520.0 393.3 279.2 126.8 31.3 95.4 1,167.6 904.4 1,875.3 Feb.
332.2 376.5 248.9 127.6 526.0 397.5 275.7 128.4 30.9 97.5 1,168.6 902.6 1,705.1 Mar.
Changes 3
15.5 –12.3 –15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 – 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
17.8 –19.1 – 6.1 –13.1 21.1 35.5 22.6 –14.3 – 1.1 –13.2 71.7 84.9 –203.7 2021
16.9 –14.4 1.9 –16.3 19.3 20.7 24.4 – 1.4 2.6 – 3.9 15.0 – 0.8 793.3 2022
0.4 0.7 2.3 – 1.5 1.0 5.6 4.8 – 4.7 – 0.2 – 4.5 –15.0 –16.5 38.7 2021 July
1.2 – 3.4 – 3.5 0.1 1.9 1.8 2.2 0.1 – 0.3 0.4 –13.1 –10.0 –10.8 Aug.
0.6 3.6 0.3 3.2 6.8 6.3 2.9 0.5 – 0.4 0.9 0.1 – 1.5 –17.4 Sep.
3.9 – 7.4 1.2 – 8.7 – 1.4 3.5 2.6 – 4.8 2.3 – 7.2 47.6 49.5 –24.6 Oct.
1.1 3.0 – 0.9 4.0 5.5 4.8 4.4 0.6 – 1.6 2.2 – 4.5 – 3.6 42.4 Nov.
0.3 – 4.7 – 2.6 – 2.2 – 5.6 0.9 – 5.3 – 6.5 – 0.1 – 6.3 –45.9 –41.0 –62.3 Dec.
1.3 – 0.8 1.8 – 2.6 12.7 14.8 16.0 – 2.1 0.2 – 2.2 72.3 66.7 3.3 2022 Jan.
0.5 – 5.5 – 2.1 – 3.4 4.6 3.7 2.5 0.9 0.1 0.8 20.6 15.8 34.9 Feb.
– 0.4 5.5 0.5 5.0 3.8 – 1.7 – 3.3 5.5 0.4 5.1 –22.2 –19.2 123.7 Mar.
0.2 – 6.8 1.4 – 8.2 – 5.3 – 1.6 – 2.7 – 3.7 3.2 – 6.9 –13.8 –14.2 246.6 Apr.
0.3 – 0.4 – 2.0 1.6 6.2 5.4 3.3 0.8 – 0.8 1.7 – 1.0 – 2.0 –36.6 May
– 1.7 – 2.1 0.4 – 2.5 13.0 3.0 6.1 10.0 1.9 8.1 –10.0 –18.2 182.3 June
13.4 0.0 0.9 – 0.8 – 6.3 – 5.2 – 2.9 – 1.1 0.1 – 1.3 7.8 8.0 –193.2 July
– 1.0 – 5.1 – 2.3 – 2.8 – 3.3 3.4 2.5 – 6.7 0.4 – 7.0 7.2 6.5 258.9 Aug.
0.8 – 2.4 1.1 – 3.5 9.9 3.3 4.0 6.6 1.7 4.8 0.7 0.1 303.7 Sep.
– 0.3 5.9 1.4 4.4 – 8.7 – 4.4 – 4.6 – 4.3 – 1.0 – 3.3 19.7 20.4 –44.0 Oct.
2.0 – 4.1 0.0 – 4.1 8.4 9.2 9.6 – 0.8 – 1.7 0.9 8.8 4.8 –199.3 Nov.
1.8 1.5 0.9 0.6 –15.6 – 9.3 – 6.2 – 6.4 – 1.9 – 4.5 –75.0 –69.5 112.9 Dec.
0.1 – 1.6 2.3 – 3.9 16.3 9.4 10.0 6.9 – 0.6 7.5 33.4 27.8 –121.8 2023 Jan.
– 0.4 5.6 – 2.0 7.7 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.4 0.5 1.1 – 0.7 – 1.7 – 6.6 156.4 Feb.
– 1.3 – 3.0 0.8 – 3.7 5.6 4.1 – 3.5 1.5 – 0.4 1.9 0.4 – 2.0 –170.2 Mar.
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2021 June 9,293.7 1,670.8 1,357.4 313.4 4,088.4 3,890.3 2,605.4 722.3 198.1 562.6 537.1 151.3 76.7
July 9,321.9 1,682.5 1,362.0 320.4 4,110.8 3,918.9 2,638.6 718.3 196.7 562.0 536.8 146.4 74.0
Aug. 9,319.3 1,686.5 1,365.8 320.7 4,119.2 3,925.6 2,648.6 715.5 194.1 561.5 536.6 147.8 74.7
Sep. 9,325.3 1,667.9 1,354.2 313.6 4,108.9 3,913.6 2,640.2 712.7 194.3 560.7 535.9 148.8 77.1
Oct. 9,395.0 1,690.9 1,364.7 326.2 4,140.0 3,942.6 2,657.0 725.5 206.4 560.1 535.6 151.4 78.1
Nov. 9,495.5 1,718.6 1,374.9 343.8 4,154.1 3,956.1 2,678.9 717.4 200.2 559.8 535.5 151.4 82.5
Dec. 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 Jan. 9,717.0 1,725.2 1,363.7 361.5 4,195.2 3,979.5 2,686.4 732.3 215.9 560.7 537.4 166.7 86.2
Feb. 9,842.7 1,743.7 1,369.7 374.0 4,209.7 3,993.9 2,699.7 733.4 217.5 560.8 537.7 169.3 90.1
Mar. 9,962.9 1,737.5 1,367.8 369.8 4,212.3 3,990.1 2,690.3 740.9 226.7 559.0 536.1 177.7 99.4
Apr. 10,268.8 1,766.8 1,384.4 382.3 4,223.7 4,003.6 2,700.1 745.6 234.6 557.9 535.2 175.5 93.4
May 10,258.0 1,765.9 1,393.7 372.2 4,236.1 4,013.3 2,718.3 738.4 229.4 556.5 534.0 176.2 97.1
June 10,428.9 1,744.4 1,384.7 359.7 4,235.0 4,008.2 2,708.8 744.7 238.3 554.7 532.4 180.5 102.7
July 10,267.9 1,772.1 1,383.3 388.9 4,267.6 4,041.3 2,722.8 765.6 259.2 552.9 530.7 179.5 99.0
Aug. 10,627.2 1,785.7 1,403.5 382.2 4,322.0 4,089.0 2,760.7 777.8 272.2 550.5 528.3 185.0 103.0
Sep. 11,063.0 1,814.5 1,415.7 398.8 4,342.6 4,105.7 2,748.5 812.0 306.6 545.2 523.1 191.1 102.4
Oct. 11,036.0 1,837.4 1,419.0 418.4 4,359.6 4,122.0 2,741.6 838.3 334.6 542.1 519.8 190.0 92.4
Nov. 10,762.4 1,773.7 1,345.0 428.7 4,401.0 4,132.6 2,752.4 843.3 344.7 536.8 514.3 193.1 97.3
Dec. 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 1,642.4 1,231.2 411.2 4,392.0 4,124.2 2,706.4 895.1 397.6 522.7 498.8 188.7 94.3
Feb. 10,760.9 1,633.5 1,226.0 407.5 4,391.4 4,113.2 2,670.6 926.7 428.4 515.9 490.8 191.2 97.2
Mar. 10,553.5 1,618.0 1,210.5 407.6 4,368.3 4,092.1 2,625.3 959.6 462.2 507.2 480.5 197.9 98.8
Changes 4
2014 206.8 –28.4 –32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 –32.1 3.1 – 2.4 – 2.4 – 2.5 – 0.0
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2021 207.2 133.4 103.4 30.0 107.3 96.2 141.4 –45.8 –23.3 0.6 3.9 16.6 13.6
2022 1,170.5 –15.6 –105.9 90.3 208.9 165.9 60.6 132.8 148.1 –27.5 –26.3 18.4 12.8
2021 July 26.3 14.4 7.4 7.0 22.3 28.6 33.2 – 4.1 – 1.4 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 4.9 – 3.1
Aug. – 3.9 3.9 3.7 0.2 7.8 6.5 9.9 – 2.8 – 2.6 – 0.5 – 0.3 0.9 0.2
Sep. 3.0 –19.5 –11.7 – 7.8 – 7.3 – 8.9 – 6.5 – 1.6 0.4 – 0.8 – 0.6 0.7 2.7
Oct. 70.4 24.1 11.2 12.9 31.1 29.1 16.8 12.9 12.1 – 0.6 – 0.4 2.5 1.1
Nov. 95.5 26.4 9.6 16.7 12.9 12.5 21.1 – 8.4 – 6.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.3 4.2
Dec. –326.2 –90.4 –36.3 –54.1 –24.3 –24.3 –29.6 3.9 3.7 1.4 1.6 2.4 –11.9
2022 Jan. 340.3 93.8 23.2 70.6 64.3 47.0 36.5 10.9 11.9 – 0.4 0.3 12.6 15.3
Feb. 128.5 19.3 6.1 13.2 14.2 14.6 13.4 1.1 1.6 0.1 0.3 2.2 3.5
Mar. 119.7 – 6.6 – 2.1 – 4.5 2.2 – 4.2 – 9.7 7.3 9.2 – 1.8 – 1.6 8.3 9.3
Apr. 283.1 25.1 15.6 9.5 8.0 11.0 7.5 4.1 7.2 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 3.1 – 6.6
May 1.1 0.7 9.8 – 9.1 13.6 10.6 18.9 – 6.9 – 5.0 – 1.3 – 1.2 1.0 3.9
June 178.6 –24.2 – 9.7 –14.5 – 2.8 – 6.6 –10.7 5.9 8.5 – 1.8 – 1.6 4.1 5.6
July –177.9 24.6 – 1.6 26.2 29.3 30.8 13.0 19.6 19.9 – 1.8 – 1.7 – 2.0 – 3.9
Aug. 359.0 15.5 23.0 – 7.5 53.6 47.1 37.2 12.4 12.9 – 2.4 – 2.4 5.3 3.8
Sep. 428.4 25.2 11.7 13.5 19.0 15.4 –13.3 34.0 34.1 – 5.3 – 5.3 5.6 – 0.9
Oct. –19.3 24.2 3.8 20.3 17.2 16.2 – 7.3 26.6 28.2 – 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.7 – 9.7
Nov. –245.9 –60.3 –73.0 12.7 45.6 21.3 14.3 12.2 10.1 – 5.3 – 5.4 – 3.2 5.4
Dec. –225.1 –152.7 –112.7 –40.0 –55.4 –37.3 –39.2 5.6 9.4 – 3.7 – 4.1 –11.9 –12.8
2023 Jan. 87.5 23.3 0.0 23.3 49.1 30.9 –10.4 46.7 44.0 – 5.5 – 6.4 8.2 10.1
Feb. 167.0 –10.3 – 5.6 – 4.7 – 1.8 –11.8 –36.4 31.3 30.7 – 6.7 – 7.9 2.1 2.7
Mar. –207.4 –15.1 –15.1 0.1 –23.0 –21.0 –44.7 32.5 33.2 – 8.7 –10.3 6.7 1.6
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 2021
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 2022
72.0 25.9 2.5 2.3 46.9 45.6 4.5 2.3 1,084.6 23.8 836.9 725.4 880.7 2021 June
69.9 22.9 2.5 2.3 45.5 44.3 6.0 2.3 1,087.2 23.5 800.0 719.2 913.9 July
70.7 24.0 2.5 2.3 45.8 44.0 7.4 2.3 1,089.9 25.5 790.7 725.0 898.4 Aug.
69.2 22.4 2.5 2.2 46.6 45.2 7.3 2.2 1,100.5 25.1 840.1 735.9 862.6 Sep.
70.9 23.4 2.4 2.2 46.1 45.2 7.4 2.2 1,118.0 24.6 866.7 729.5 840.3 Oct.
66.4 17.4 2.4 2.2 46.6 45.5 4.2 2.1 1,123.9 26.0 883.1 736.5 872.8 Nov.
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 Dec.
78.1 20.3 2.4 2.2 48.9 45.5 3.0 2.3 1,126.9 25.3 907.4 721.2 1,036.0 2022 Jan.
76.8 19.8 2.4 2.2 46.4 42.8 2.4 2.4 1,141.1 26.2 945.9 717.7 1,080.0 Feb.
75.9 19.0 2.4 2.2 44.5 42.1 2.8 2.5 1,148.9 25.9 926.4 736.8 1,195.6 Mar.
79.8 22.5 2.4 2.2 44.6 42.2 2.3 2.3 1,161.1 26.3 939.2 734.6 1,438.9 Apr.
76.8 19.9 2.3 2.1 46.6 42.8 1.9 2.5 1,164.1 27.7 958.5 732.3 1,396.8 May
75.5 19.1 2.3 2.1 46.2 43.0 2.0 2.5 1,164.7 32.2 945.7 752.0 1,582.6 June
78.1 23.2 2.3 2.1 46.8 44.0 4.2 2.5 1,177.1 35.9 926.6 743.6 1,374.2 July
79.7 24.3 2.3 2.1 47.9 44.0 4.8 2.4 1,183.7 38.6 950.2 741.8 1,636.6 Aug.
86.4 31.2 2.3 2.1 45.9 43.3 3.2 2.5 1,203.3 45.8 987.2 758.0 1,951.6 Sep.
95.4 39.7 2.2 2.1 47.6 44.9 4.0 2.6 1,202.6 39.4 980.8 751.8 1,897.2 Oct.
93.5 31.3 2.2 2.0 75.4 71.1 4.7 2.6 1,202.3 42.2 939.7 747.3 1,691.1 Nov.
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 Dec.
92.3 30.4 2.2 2.0 79.1 73.8 3.9 2.5 1,205.2 47.4 890.6 728.9 1,719.6 2023 Jan.
91.8 30.0 2.2 1.9 87.0 82.5 5.0 2.4 1,221.5 55.6 901.8 724.9 1,880.4 Feb.
97.0 28.5 2.1 1.9 78.3 73.3 4.7 2.6 1,231.5 64.9 863.1 734.6 1,730.6 Mar.
Changes 4
– 2.3 – 1.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.8 – 3.4 – 0.6 –63.7 – 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
3.1 – 8.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 – 5.0 – 7.9 0.3 40.6 6.9 124.9 16.6 –207.9 2021
5.8 8.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 24.6 23.0 1.2 0.4 67.2 12.6 45.6 5.0 857.7 2022
– 1.8 – 2.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.4 – 1.3 1.5 – 0.1 2.3 – 0.2 –37.2 – 5.4 28.5 2021 July
0.7 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.3 – 0.2 1.4 – 0.0 2.2 2.0 – 9.9 5.6 –14.9 Aug.
– 1.9 – 1.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.8 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 7.0 – 0.5 45.5 10.0 –32.4 Sep.
1.5 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 17.3 – 0.5 27.1 – 6.4 –22.8 Oct.
– 4.5 – 6.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.7 0.4 – 3.2 – 0.1 1.7 1.4 11.7 5.9 40.3 Nov.
14.3 5.4 0.0 0.0 – 2.4 – 2.0 – 2.0 0.2 –14.2 1.4 –127.3 – 4.6 –63.4 Dec.
– 2.7 – 2.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 4.7 2.0 0.7 – 0.0 13.4 – 2.3 146.6 –18.3 39.8 2022 Jan.
– 1.3 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.5 – 2.7 – 0.5 0.1 15.0 1.0 39.4 – 3.2 44.2 Feb.
– 1.0 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.6 0.3 0.2 6.9 – 0.3 –20.7 19.0 118.4 Mar.
3.6 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 3.4 0.2 0.4 – 5.8 252.8 Apr.
– 2.9 – 2.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.0 0.6 – 0.4 0.2 6.4 1.4 23.9 – 1.0 –42.4 May
– 1.5 – 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.4 0.2 0.1 – 0.0 – 4.8 4.3 – 6.3 17.6 199.0 June
1.9 3.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.5 1.1 2.1 0.1 9.1 3.5 –24.8 –10.5 –207.8 July
1.6 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 0.0 0.6 – 0.1 4.1 2.7 20.1 – 3.1 268.3 Aug.
6.5 6.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.7 – 1.6 0.1 15.8 7.0 31.8 14.9 323.1 Sep.
9.1 8.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.7 1.6 0.8 0.1 1.8 – 6.3 – 2.8 – 5.3 –55.3 Oct.
– 8.6 – 8.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 27.5 25.8 0.8 0.0 7.4 2.4 –29.9 – 1.1 –208.4 Nov.
1.0 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 6.3 – 4.3 – 1.3 0.1 –11.5 – 1.2 –132.1 1.9 125.9 Dec.
– 1.9 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.9 6.9 0.5 – 0.2 22.4 6.6 95.0 –17.6 –85.0 2023 Jan.
– 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 7.9 8.7 1.2 – 0.1 13.0 8.1 6.9 – 5.0 163.2 Feb.
5.2 – 1.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 8.8 – 9.2 – 0.4 0.3 8.8 8.2 –38.7 11.0 –150.3 Mar.
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
24•
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
End of
monthNumber of
reporting
institu-
tionsBalance
sheet
total  1Cash in
hand and
credit
balances
with
central
banks TotalBalances
and
loansSecurities
issued by
banks Totalfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more than
1 year BillsSecurities
issued by
non-banksPartici-
pating
interestsOther
assets  1
All categories of banks  
2022 Oct. 1,395 11,098.4 106.9 3,888.9 3,402.1 482.0 4,945.2 486.2 3,754.6 0.3 687.4 96.4 2,061.0
Nov. 1,390 10,826.0 108.4 3,798.1 3,314.4 479.3 4,964.5 494.3 3,762.5 0.2 691.3 96.2 1,858.8
Dec. 1,386 10,581.5 88.0 3,498.3 3,028.0 467.6 4,929.3 466.5 3,762.8 0.2 682.2 96.2 1,969.7
2023 Jan. 1,384 10,650.7 109.2 3,638.9 3,161.2 474.0 4,957.2 489.6 3,766.4 0.2 676.6 95.7 1,849.6
Feb. 1,385 10,825.7 74.4 3,673.4 3,187.8 481.7 4,976.6 485.3 3,779.4 0.2 693.0 96.1 2,005.1
Mar. 1,385 10,617.1 72.8 3,630.5 3,143.2 483.4 4,983.5 488.6 3,776.8 0.2 701.1 96.4 1,833.9
Commercial banks 6
2023 Feb. 242 5,008.1 30.1 1,713.6 1,628.6 84.4 1,602.5 325.9 1,029.0 0.1 237.2 31.1 1,631.0
Mar. 242 4,840.3 27.2 1,688.4 1,600.9 87.0 1,612.0 326.2 1,030.1 0.1 248.2 31.1 1,481.5
   Big banks 7
2023 Feb. 3 2,568.1 13.6 700.2 668.7 31.6 729.0 149.3 456.6 0.0 117.6 25.9 1,099.2
Mar. 3 2,429.3 12.1 678.7 646.4 32.3 736.0 149.3 456.6 0.0 125.0 26.0 976.5
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2023 Feb. 133 1,955.4 12.5 683.9 631.9 51.5 734.3 130.5 486.8 0.1 113.0 4.5 520.2
Mar. 133 1,931.1 11.1 686.9 632.9 53.4 735.0 129.2 487.5 0.1 116.8 4.4 493.7
   Branches of foreign banks
2023 Feb. 106 484.6 3.9 329.4 328.0 1.3 139.1 46.1 85.6 – 6.6 0.7 11.5
Mar. 106 479.9 3.9 322.8 321.5 1.3 141.1 47.7 86.1 – 6.4 0.7 11.4
Landesbanken
2023 Feb. 6 991.1 1.4 408.6 355.8 52.5 432.9 44.1 347.4 0.0 36.4 9.5 138.7
Mar. 6 967.9 2.4 392.1 339.5 52.5 433.9 47.0 346.9 0.0 34.8 9.6 130.0
Savings banks
2023 Feb. 360 1,556.2 22.8 277.1 157.6 119.4 1,214.0 53.7 990.0 – 170.0 16.2 26.1
Mar. 360 1,552.6 23.2 274.3 154.8 119.3 1,213.5 54.1 990.3 – 168.7 16.2 25.4
Credit cooperatives 
2023 Feb. 733 1,160.9 14.5 216.5 104.3 111.5 880.7 34.0 724.2 0.0 122.5 19.7 29.5
Mar. 733 1,157.3 14.6 212.0 100.2 111.0 881.4 34.1 725.6 0.0 121.6 19.7 29.6
Mortgage banks
2023 Feb. 8 226.1 0.1 21.4 14.8 6.5 199.0 3.4 180.7 – 14.8 0.1 5.5
Mar. 8 227.9 0.1 23.7 17.1 6.5 198.6 3.3 180.4 – 14.9 0.1 5.3
Building and loan associations
2023 Feb. 18 260.7 0.3 46.9 31.4 15.5 209.6 1.2 185.6 . 22.8 0.3 3.7
Mar. 18 260.6 0.2 46.1 30.7 15.5 210.2 1.3 186.2 . 22.8 0.3 3.8
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2023 Feb. 18 1,622.5 5.3 989.4 895.3 91.9 438.0 23.0 322.5 – 89.4 19.3 170.6
Mar. 18 1,610.6 5.1 994.0 900.1 91.5 433.8 22.5 317.2 – 90.2 19.4 158.2
Memo item:    Foreign banks 8
2023 Feb. 139 2,506.7 11.3 926.4 890.6 35.3 697.0 165.0 406.4 0.1 120.0 3.6 868.4
Mar. 139 2,448.2 11.3 925.5 887.8 37.2 700.3 164.6 408.9 0.1 122.9 3.5 807.6
   of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2023 Feb. 33 2,022.1 7.4 597.0 562.6 34.0 557.8 118.9 320.8 0.1 113.4 2.9 856.9
Mar. 33 1,968.3 7.3 602.7 566.3 35.9 559.2 116.9 322.8 0.1 116.6 2.9 796.1
* Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3.  1 Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial
instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning ofSection 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read
in conjunction with Section 35 (1) number 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are classified
under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting date. Trading
portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, in
Tables I.1 to I.3.  2 For building and loan associations: including deposits under savings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
25•
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4
TotalSight
depositsTime
deposits TotalSight
depositsfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more
than
1 year  2Memo 
item:
Liabilities
arising
from
repos  3 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeBank
savings
bondsBearer
debt
securities
out-
standing  5Capital
including
published
reserves,
partici-
pation
rights
capital,
funds for
general
banking
risksOther
liabi-
lities  1End of
month
All categories of banks 
2,607.9 795.7 1,812.2 4,570.2 2,968.7 385.1 640.5 64.3 547.6 524.8 28.3 1,299.9 588.5 2,032.0 2022 Oct.
2,495.8 747.5 1,748.3 4,619.6 3,003.0 395.9 646.8 68.4 542.2 519.3 31.7 1,291.9 590.1 1,828.5 Nov.
2,230.1 616.9 1,613.1 4,532.2 2,916.6 394.4 647.9 48.6 538.5 515.1 34.9 1,269.4 591.1 1,958.7 Dec.
2,320.7 743.7 1,576.9 4,604.7 2,936.3 448.4 651.3 71.7 527.9 503.5 40.9 1,287.5 592.6 1,845.1 2023 Jan.
2,312.9 740.8 1,572.0 4,615.5 2,906.1 486.7 655.8 78.5 521.1 495.5 45.8 1,296.2 592.4 2,008.6 Feb.
2,270.4 713.0 1,557.4 4,579.8 2,856.6 496.6 662.4 76.8 512.3 485.1 52.1 1,312.4 596.4 1,858.0 Mar.
Commercial banks 6
1,220.7 571.9 648.7 1,817.4 1,212.6 266.9 235.6 77.2 87.7 83.0 14.6 200.2 203.8 1,566.0 2023 Feb.
1,196.6 544.5 652.0 1,803.3 1,196.2 263.3 241.3 74.4 86.5 80.9 15.9 201.3 205.4 1,433.7 Mar.
Big banks 7   
448.2 192.6 255.6 864.6 553.3 159.9 75.6 41.2 74.7 70.6 1.1 149.9 73.5 1,031.8 2023 Feb.
432.1 175.7 256.4 847.3 538.7 157.7 75.9 35.0 74.1 69.1 1.1 150.3 74.7 924.9 Mar.
Regional banks and other commercial banks   
491.6 220.3 271.3 777.4 536.4 78.2 136.6 36.0 12.7 12.1 13.5 49.9 114.9 521.6 2023 Feb.
488.1 218.8 269.3 781.1 534.9 76.0 143.3 39.5 12.2 11.5 14.8 50.6 115.4 495.8 Mar.
Branches of foreign banks   
280.8 159.0 121.8 175.4 122.9 28.8 23.4 – 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.4 15.4 12.7 2023 Feb.
276.3 150.0 126.3 174.8 122.6 29.7 22.1 – 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.3 15.4 13.1 Mar.
Landesbanken
278.2 49.1 229.1 321.9 161.1 84.2 71.0 1.3 5.2 5.1 0.5 199.1 42.6 149.3 2023 Feb.
268.3 51.6 216.7 313.3 154.0 82.9 70.8 2.1 5.1 5.0 0.5 201.1 43.1 142.2 Mar.
Savings banks
180.0 4.3 175.7 1,169.7 840.7 33.0 14.3 – 259.2 243.2 22.4 17.9 137.4 51.3 2023 Feb.
179.7 3.8 175.9 1,165.3 828.2 41.5 14.6 – 254.8 238.6 26.2 18.1 137.4 52.0 Mar.
Credit cooperatives
165.3 3.5 161.7 851.1 607.1 46.2 21.5 – 168.6 163.8 7.8 8.6 101.8 34.2 2023 Feb.
165.8 3.8 162.0 846.4 595.7 54.0 22.5 – 165.4 160.1 8.9 8.1 101.9 35.1 Mar.
Mortgage banks
49.7 3.8 45.9 55.2 3.4 5.4 46.4 – – – . 105.3 8.8 7.1 2023 Feb.
50.6 3.5 47.1 56.4 3.4 6.6 46.4 0.2 – – . 104.9 8.9 7.1 Mar.
Building and loan associations
38.0 3.5 34.5 195.3 3.8 1.7 189.2 – 0.5 0.5 0.1 6.1 12.4 8.9 2023 Feb.
37.5 3.1 34.4 195.5 4.0 1.9 189.0 – 0.5 0.4 0.2 6.1 12.6 8.8 Mar.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
381.1 104.7 276.4 204.8 77.3 49.3 77.9 0.0 – – . 759.1 85.6 191.9 2023 Feb.
372.0 102.8 269.2 199.6 75.1 46.3 77.8 0.1 – – . 772.8 86.9 179.2 Mar.
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
745.6 382.0 363.6 742.2 513.2 111.5 96.2 39.4 14.5 14.2 6.8 49.3 97.6 872.0 2023 Feb.
739.4 370.9 368.5 746.6 511.8 112.3 101.2 44.6 13.7 13.4 7.6 49.2 98.8 814.1 Mar.
 of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9   
464.9 223.0 241.8 566.8 390.3 82.7 72.9 39.4 14.2 13.9 6.7 48.9 82.2 859.3 2023 Feb.
463.1 220.9 242.2 571.8 389.1 82.6 79.1 44.6 13.4 13.1 7.6 48.8 83.4 801.0 Mar.
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Included in time deposits.  4 Excluding deposits
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).  5 Including subordinated
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
6 Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”.  7 Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner
Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische
Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
notes in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, Table I.3, banking group “Big banks “).
8 Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories
of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”.
9 Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in
other banking categories.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
26•
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)      
PeriodCash in
hand
(euro area
banknotes
and
coins)Credit
balances
with the
Bundes-
bank TotalCredit
balances
and loans BillsNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total Loans BillsTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money mar-
ket paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued
by non-
banks  1
End of year or month *
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2021 Oct. 47.6 1,052.4 1,419.3 1,167.7 0.0 0.7 250.9 10.3 3,770.2 3,366.9 0.2 5.0 398.0
Nov. 47.9 1,068.7 1,432.2 1,183.6 – 0.7 248.0 10.0 3,794.0 3,386.4 0.2 5.6 401.9
Dec. 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 Jan. 47.4 1,066.0 1,439.2 1,191.8 – 0.7 246.7 10.1 3,812.8 3,409.0 0.2 3.1 400.5
Feb. 47.2 1,094.0 1,453.6 1,204.6 – 0.3 248.7 10.0 3,826.5 3,426.0 0.2 5.0 395.3
Mar. 49.5 1,086.3 1,442.6 1,195.1 – 0.3 247.3 10.0 3,853.8 3,449.0 0.2 3.3 401.3
Apr. 50.4 1,200.5 1,360.3 1,112.8 – 0.6 246.9 9.9 3,866.6 3,470.0 0.2 3.5 392.9
May 49.4 1,122.8 1,452.7 1,202.9 – 0.7 249.1 9.9 3,886.7 3,488.9 0.2 3.2 394.4
June 51.1 1,090.9 1,462.8 1,214.8 – 0.8 247.2 9.8 3,906.6 3,513.4 0.2 3.7 389.3
July 41.6 1,084.2 1,454.9 1,206.8 – 0.8 247.2 9.8 3,945.0 3,539.1 0.2 3.6 402.2
Aug. 23.1 1,126.7 1,480.7 1,232.0 – 1.3 247.5 9.9 3,976.0 3,574.3 0.1 3.9 397.7
Sep. 20.4 122.4 2,573.9 2,319.2 – 1.4 253.2 9.8 3,993.6 3,595.3 0.2 3.6 394.5
Oct. 19.7 86.6 2,592.3 2,337.0 – 1.5 253.7 10.0 4,014.1 3,611.6 0.2 4.3 398.0
Nov. 18.8 88.4 2,524.4 2,271.2 – 1.5 251.7 11.1 4,025.7 3,625.3 0.2 3.6 396.7
Dec. 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2023 Jan. 18.0 89.5 2,443.6 2,198.1 – 1.0 244.5 12.7 4,016.2 3,622.4 0.1 4.3 389.4
Feb. 17.8 52.2 2,471.9 2,222.2 – 1.0 248.8 12.8 4,030.2 3,629.4 0.1 2.9 397.9
Mar. 17.7 53.5 2,426.8 2,175.1 – 1.0 250.7 12.6 4,030.5 3,634.7 0.1 4.3 391.4
Changes *
2014 +0.4 – 4.3 –119.3 – 87.1 +0.0 + 0.4 –32.6 +0.1 +36.7 +20.6 –0.1 – 0.6 +16.8
2015 +0.3 + 73.7 – 80.7 – 4.3 –0.0 – 0.4 –75.9 –0.1 +68.9 +54.1 –0.0 – 0.3 +15.1
2016 +6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 – – 0.9 –17.9 +0.4 +43.7 +62.8 –0.1 – 0.1 –18.9
2017 +6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 –0.0 + 0.0 –20.1 –0.1 +57.0 +70.2 +0.0 + 0.4 –13.6
2018 +8.5 + 24.0 – 81.0 – 76.6 +0.0 + 0.1 – 4.4 +3.8 +71.5 +105.4 –0.1 – 0.5 –33.2
2019 +2.8 + 59.7 – 63.0 – 61.1 –0.0 – 0.2 – 1.6 –1.4 +126.7 +129.1 +0.1 + 3.1 – 5.5
2020 +4.1 +316.4 +201.2 +191.6 –0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 +4.3 +123.2 +123.6 –0.1 + 0.7 – 1.0
2021 +2.2 +111.8 + 44.1 + 46.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – 2.0 +1.5 +152.2 +147.8 +0.0 – 2.2 + 6.6
2022 –29.6 –836.6 +938.0 +938.1 – + 0.2 – 0.3 +1.7 +216.7 +220.1 –0.1 + 0.1 – 3.3
2021 Oct. +0.5 – 2.4 + 19.5 + 20.0 +0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 –0.1 +20.5 +25.1 +0.0 + 0.6 – 5.2
Nov. +0.3 + 16.6 + 12.9 + 15.9 –0.0 – 0.0 – 2.9 –0.3 +25.5 +20.4 +0.0 + 0.6 + 4.5
Dec. +1.6 –163.6 – 22.4 – 19.6 – – 0.1 – 2.7 +0.3 + 4.3 + 6.2 +0.1 – 3.0 + 0.9
2022 Jan. –2.0 +161.0 + 27.8 + 26.3 – + 0.1 + 1.4 –0.3 +14.7 +16.6 –0.1 + 0.5 – 2.3
Feb. –0.2 + 28.0 + 13.1 + 11.5 – – 0.4 + 2.0 –0.1 +15.1 +18.4 +0.0 + 1.9 – 5.2
Mar. +2.3 – 7.8 – 10.9 – 9.5 – – 0.0 – 1.4 –0.0 +27.3 +23.0 –0.0 – 1.7 + 6.0
Apr. +0.9 +114.2 – 82.3 – 82.3 – + 0.3 – 0.4 –0.0 +13.1 +21.3 +0.0 + 0.2 – 8.4
May –1.0 – 77.7 + 92.4 + 90.0 – + 0.1 + 2.3 –0.0 +20.1 +18.9 –0.1 – 0.3 + 1.5
June +1.7 – 31.9 + 10.1 + 11.9 – + 0.1 – 1.9 –0.1 +19.9 +24.5 –0.0 + 0.5 – 5.1
July –9.5 – 6.8 – 7.5 – 7.6 – + 0.1 – 0.0 –0.1 +36.1 +23.5 +0.0 – 0.1 +12.7
Aug. –18.5 + 42.5 + 29.0 + 28.3 – + 0.2 + 0.5 +0.1 +30.9 +35.1 –0.0 + 0.3 – 4.5
Sep. –2.7 –1,004.3 +1,092.9 +1,087.0 – + 0.2 + 5.7 –0.0 +16.5 +19.9 +0.1 – 0.3 – 3.2
Oct. –0.7 – 35.8 + 18.5 + 17.8 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +0.2 +20.7 +16.6 –0.0 + 0.7 + 3.5
Nov. –0.8 + 1.8 – 67.6 – 65.5 – – 0.0 – 2.1 +1.1 +12.0 +13.9 –0.0 – 0.7 – 1.3
Dec. +1.0 – 19.9 –177.4 –169.9 – – 0.5 – 7.0 +1.0 – 9.6 –11.7 +0.0 – 0.9 + 2.9
2023 Jan. –1.8 + 22.2 + 96.7 + 96.7 – + 0.0 – 0.1 +0.6 + 0.6 + 9.2 –0.1 + 1.6 –10.3
Feb. –0.2 – 37.4 + 28.6 + 24.3 – + 0.0 + 4.3 +0.2 +13.3 + 6.3 –0.0 – 1.5 + 8.5
Mar. –0.1 + 1.3 – 45.1 – 47.0 – + 0.0 + 1.9 –0.1 + 0.9 + 6.0 +0.0 + 1.4 – 6.5
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange ofequalisation claims (see also footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the
exchange of equalisation claims.  3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt
securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
27•
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Equalisa-
tion
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in
domestic
banks
and
enterprises TotalSight
deposits
4Time
deposits
4Redis-
counted
bills  5Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
de-
positsTime
deposits
6Savings
de-
posits  7Bank
savings
bonds  8Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
– 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013
– 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
– 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
– 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
– 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
– 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
– 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 2021
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 2022
– 25.1 79.0 1,363.6 132.9 1,230.7 0.0 16.2 3,989.1 2,664.3 739.3 560.1 25.3 33.9 2021 Oct.
– 25.2 79.1 1,373.9 135.2 1,238.6 0.0 16.3 4,002.4 2,685.9 731.8 559.9 24.8 33.6 Nov.
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 Dec.
– 25.7 78.6 1,363.7 137.2 1,226.5 0.0 16.4 4,025.9 2,690.9 750.0 560.8 24.2 33.9 2022 Jan.
– 25.7 78.7 1,369.7 140.5 1,229.2 0.0 16.6 4,037.8 2,704.5 748.5 560.9 23.9 33.8 Feb.
– 25.8 78.7 1,367.7 137.7 1,230.1 0.0 16.5 4,033.7 2,695.6 755.2 559.0 23.9 33.8 Mar.
– 25.9 78.7 1,384.4 140.6 1,243.8 0.0 16.7 4,046.7 2,705.6 759.4 557.9 23.8 33.8 Apr.
– 26.2 78.6 1,393.7 142.7 1,251.0 0.0 17.1 4,056.8 2,724.3 752.1 556.6 23.8 33.6 May
– 26.1 78.8 1,384.7 147.1 1,237.6 0.0 16.9 4,051.8 2,714.4 758.8 554.8 23.8 33.4 June
– 25.9 80.3 1,383.3 134.3 1,249.0 0.0 16.6 4,086.4 2,729.0 780.4 553.0 24.1 33.0 July
– 25.9 79.8 1,403.5 136.0 1,267.5 – 16.5 4,134.3 2,766.8 792.0 550.6 25.0 33.0 Aug.
– 25.8 80.2 1,415.7 149.2 1,266.5 0.0 16.7 4,149.9 2,755.6 823.1 545.2 25.9 33.2 Sep.
– 25.8 80.4 1,419.0 138.1 1,280.9 0.0 16.1 4,168.4 2,748.7 849.3 542.2 28.1 33.6 Oct.
– 25.9 80.2 1,345.0 135.4 1,209.6 0.0 16.1 4,205.6 2,767.9 869.3 536.9 31.5 34.8 Nov.
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 Dec.
– 25.6 80.0 1,231.2 142.6 1,088.7 0.0 15.6 4,199.7 2,722.8 913.5 522.7 40.6 36.9 2023 Jan.
– 25.6 80.2 1,226.0 140.7 1,085.3 0.0 15.6 4,197.1 2,687.7 947.9 516.0 45.5 37.2 Feb.
– 24.6 80.3 1,210.4 137.0 1,073.3 0.0 15.2 4,167.4 2,639.8 968.6 507.2 51.7 36.4 Mar.
Changes *
– –1.9 +2.0 –29.0 + 2.2 –31.2 –0.0 –0.6 +69.7 +107.9 –25.3 – 2.4 –10.6 –2.0 2014
– –2.1 –4.3 –46.6 + 3.3 –50.0 +0.0 –1.3 +106.5 +156.2 –28.3 –11.3 –10.1 –1.6 2015
– –1.3 +1.5 – 1.7 + 0.3 – 2.0 +0.0 –0.5 +104.7 +124.5 – 6.9 – 7.9 –5.0 –0.5 2016
– –0.0 –1.6 +11.0 –18.4 +29.4 –0.0 –0.5 +103.1 +142.8 –27.5 – 5.6 –6.7 +0.4 2017
– –1.0 +3.1 –25.0 – 3.1 –21.9 +0.0 –0.4 +117.7 +139.3 –10.8 – 4.3 –6.5 +3.9 2018
– –0.7 +0.1 – 8.6 + 1.6 –10.2 +0.0 –0.3 +122.5 +155.8 –25.7 – 3.4 –4.1 –1.4 2019
– +5.7 –3.3 +313.4 +23.2 +290.2 –0.0 +8.2 +221.6 +273.7 –32.7 –14.5 –4.9 +1.9 2020
– +2.3 +1.0 +105.2 – 7.4 +112.6 +0.0 +3.3 +95.3 +144.3 –46.2 + 0.7 –3.5 –0.2 2021
– –0.1 +1.7 –104.6 + 8.8 –113.4 –0.0 –0.6 +191.8 +65.8 +143.4 –27.5 +10.1 +1.7 2022
– –0.1 +0.1 +10.5 + 4.0 + 6.5 +0.0 +0.0 +28.8 +16.4 +13.2 – 0.6 –0.2 –0.2 2021 Oct.
– +0.1 +0.1 +10.2 + 2.3 + 7.9 – +0.1 +13.3 +21.5 – 7.6 – 0.2 –0.3 –0.3 Nov.
– +0.5 +0.1 –35.4 –18.0 –17.4 –0.0 +0.0 –25.9 –31.2 + 4.1 + 1.4 –0.2 +0.6 Dec.
– –0.0 –0.6 +23.5 +18.3 + 5.2 –0.0 +0.0 +49.6 +36.3 +14.1 – 0.4 –0.4 –0.3 2022 Jan.
– +0.0 +0.1 + 6.0 + 3.3 + 2.7 –0.0 +0.2 +11.9 +13.6 – 1.6 + 0.1 –0.2 –0.2 Feb.
– +0.1 +0.0 – 1.9 – 2.8 + 0.8 – –0.0 – 4.1 – 9.0 + 6.6 – 1.8 +0.0 – Mar.
– +0.2 –0.0 +16.7 + 3.0 +13.7 – +0.2 +13.0 + 9.5 + 4.2 – 0.6 –0.1 +0.0 Apr.
– +0.3 –0.1 + 9.4 + 2.2 + 7.2 –0.0 +0.3 +10.1 +18.8 – 7.3 – 1.3 +0.0 –0.2 May
– –0.1 +0.2 – 9.0 + 4.4 –13.4 –0.0 –0.2 – 5.0 – 9.9 + 6.7 – 1.8 –0.0 –0.1 June
– –0.2 +1.5 – 1.1 –12.4 +11.2 – –0.3 +33.5 +14.3 +20.7 – 1.8 +0.3 –0.5 July
– –0.0 +0.1 +23.3 + 1.8 +21.6 –0.0 –0.1 +48.1 +37.8 +11.8 – 2.4 +0.9 +0.0 Aug.
– –0.0 +0.4 +12.2 +13.2 – 0.9 +0.0 +0.1 +15.6 –11.4 +31.3 – 5.3 +0.9 +0.2 Sep.
– –0.0 +0.1 + 3.5 –10.9 +14.4 +0.0 –0.5 +17.4 – 8.0 +26.2 – 3.1 +2.2 +0.4 Oct.
– +0.1 –0.1 –73.9 – 2.6 –71.3 –0.0 –0.1 +45.3 +20.9 +26.3 – 5.3 +3.4 +1.3 Nov.
– –0.3 +0.1 –113.2 – 8.5 –104.7 –0.0 –0.4 –43.4 –47.1 + 4.2 – 3.7 +3.2 +1.1 Dec.
– –0.0 –0.4 – 0.3 + 5.8 – 6.1 +0.0 –0.1 +37.6 – 2.9 +40.0 – 5.5 +6.0 +1.0 2023 Jan.
– –0.0 +0.2 – 5.2 – 1.9 – 3.4 – –0.0 – 2.5 –35.0 +34.4 – 6.7 +4.8 +0.4 Feb.
– –0.3 +0.1 –15.2 – 3.7 –11.5 – –0.4 –29.6 –47.3 +20.2 – 8.7 +6.2 –0.1 Mar.
including subordinated liabilities.  4 Including liabilities arising from monetary policy
operations with the Bundesbank.  5 Own acceptances and promissory notes
outstanding.  6 Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  7 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8).  8 Including liabilities
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
28•
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)    
Credit balances and loans, bills Loans and bills
PeriodCash in
hand
(non-
euro area
banknotes
and
coins) Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued by
non-banks
End of year or month *
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2021 Oct. 0.3 1,166.7 940.5 672.2 268.2 0.9 225.3 3.5 878.0 579.6 164.1 415.5 17.7 280.6
Nov. 0.3 1,164.8 940.3 674.7 265.6 0.8 223.7 3.4 888.2 585.6 164.4 421.2 14.3 288.3
Dec. 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 Jan. 0.3 1,200.2 977.7 714.1 263.6 1.2 221.3 3.5 911.6 610.7 187.0 423.7 10.3 290.7
Feb. 0.5 1,222.3 998.7 734.3 264.4 1.6 222.0 3.6 923.5 615.2 191.4 423.7 9.4 298.9
Mar. 0.5 1,224.2 999.2 729.8 269.4 1.0 224.1 3.6 906.5 597.4 171.8 425.6 10.3 298.9
Apr. 0.6 1,229.5 1,003.6 734.1 269.6 1.6 224.3 3.6 914.4 612.0 180.9 431.1 13.1 289.2
May 0.6 1,222.8 996.5 730.7 265.8 1.7 224.7 3.6 914.3 609.9 182.1 427.9 13.5 290.9
June 0.6 1,232.7 1,007.2 742.2 265.0 2.2 223.3 3.6 929.1 612.4 181.1 431.2 13.7 303.0
July 0.6 1,248.0 1,021.1 748.0 273.1 2.7 224.2 3.5 929.4 615.7 177.0 438.7 12.7 301.0
Aug. 0.5 1,266.1 1,038.5 756.2 282.4 3.4 224.2 3.4 931.5 624.9 183.9 441.0 13.4 293.2
Sep. 0.3 1,287.8 1,057.9 771.9 286.0 4.2 225.8 3.8 935.5 629.4 185.2 444.2 12.4 293.7
Oct. 0.3 1,296.6 1,065.2 787.3 277.9 3.1 228.3 3.4 931.2 629.3 182.0 447.3 12.5 289.5
Nov. 0.2 1,273.7 1,043.2 766.3 276.9 2.9 227.6 3.5 938.8 631.7 187.5 444.2 12.5 294.6
Dec. 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2023 Jan. 0.2 1,195.3 963.1 700.1 263.0 2.7 229.5 4.0 941.0 633.6 190.9 442.7 20.1 287.3
Feb. 0.2 1,201.5 965.7 701.9 263.8 2.9 232.9 4.2 946.4 635.5 190.5 444.9 15.8 295.1
Mar. 0.2 1,203.8 968.2 704.1 264.0 2.9 232.7 4.3 953.0 630.8 187.8 443.0 12.5 309.8
Changes *
2014 –0.0 +86.1 +80.1 +63.2 +16.8 +0.7 +5.3 –0.6 +5.7 –10.2 –12.8 +2.7 – 1.8 +17.7
2015 +0.1 –91.8 –86.0 –82.2 –3.8 –6.7 +0.8 –0.1 –6.1 –9.2 –6.5 –2.7 + 1.1 +2.0
2016 +0.0 –25.5 –14.5 –38.2 +23.7 –0.7 –10.3 –0.0 +17.4 +28.9 +10.1 +18.8 – 3.0 –8.5
2017 +0.0 –57.2 –48.7 –61.5 +12.8 +0.0 –8.5 +0.6 –4.7 +13.0 +8.6 +4.4 + 0.7 –18.4
2018 +0.0 +49.6 +34.0 +57.7 –23.7 +0.2 +15.3 +0.7 +18.3 +28.3 +3.2 +25.2 – 0.4 –9.7
2019 –0.0 –4.1 –11.3 –21.9 +10.7 +0.8 +6.3 +0.7 +26.8 +19.9 +12.7 +7.3 + 3.0 +3.8
2020 –0.0 –32.0 –22.4 –6.6 –15.8 +0.9 –10.5 +0.3 +34.4 +14.7 +9.0 +5.7 + 3.6 +16.1
2021 +0.0 +52.8 +71.1 +68.9 +2.2 –2.5 –15.8 –0.5 +37.8 +39.7 +29.8 +9.9 – 3.2 +1.4
2022 –0.1 +21.7 +20.4 +17.9 +2.6 +1.3 –0.0 +0.2 +37.0 +37.0 +16.8 +20.2 + 6.7 –6.7
2021 Oct. +0.0 +54.3 +55.5 +38.3 +17.3 –0.1 –1.1 –0.1 +1.5 +9.9 +7.6 +2.3 + 2.6 –11.0
Nov. –0.0 –5.7 –3.9 +0.2 –4.0 –0.1 –1.8 –0.1 +5.4 +1.8 +1.1 +0.7 – 3.4 +7.1
Dec. –0.0 –65.7 –64.3 –60.9 –3.5 –0.5 –0.9 +0.0 –17.8 –14.0 –12.7 –1.4 – 6.3 +2.5
2022 Jan. +0.1 +95.8 +96.6 +97.4 –0.8 +0.8 –1.7 +0.1 +37.7 +36.2 +34.8 +1.4 + 2.3 –0.7
Feb. +0.2 +23.2 +22.1 +20.8 +1.2 +0.4 +0.7 +0.0 +12.7 +5.2 +4.6 +0.5 – 0.8 +8.4
Mar. –0.0 –0.0 –1.5 –5.8 +4.3 –0.6 +2.1 +0.0 –18.3 –18.9 –20.1 +1.2 + 0.8 –0.2
Apr. +0.1 –9.7 –10.2 –4.6 –5.6 +0.6 –0.1 +0.0 –1.7 +6.8 +6.8 +0.0 + 2.8 –11.3
May +0.0 –1.1 –1.8 –0.1 –1.7 +0.1 +0.5 +0.0 +3.7 +1.1 +2.2 –1.1 + 0.4 +2.2
June +0.0 –15.4 –14.4 –10.3 –4.1 +0.5 –1.6 +0.0 +9.7 –1.7 –2.3 +0.6 + 0.2 +11.2
July –0.0 +8.4 +7.3 +1.7 +5.6 +0.5 +0.7 –0.1 –4.7 –0.7 –5.3 +4.6 – 1.1 –2.9
Aug. –0.1 +13.9 +13.2 +6.0 +7.2 +0.7 –0.0 –0.2 +0.1 +7.7 +6.3 +1.4 + 0.7 –8.4
Sep. –0.2 +15.0 +12.6 +11.8 +0.8 +0.8 +1.6 +0.4 +3.2 +1.4 –0.2 +1.6 – 1.0 +2.9
Oct. +0.0 +13.4 +11.9 +18.2 –6.3 –1.0 +2.5 –0.3 –2.2 +1.4 –2.9 +4.3 + 0.0 –3.6
Nov. –0.1 –9.4 –8.7 –13.4 +4.7 –0.2 –0.4 +0.1 +16.5 +9.7 +5.5 +4.2 – 0.0 +6.8
Dec. –0.0 –112.4 –106.8 –104.0 –2.8 –1.2 –4.4 +0.2 –19.9 –11.2 –12.7 +1.5 + 2.4 –11.1
2023 Jan. –0.0 +48.2 +40.6 +46.3 –5.7 +1.1 +6.5 +0.3 +30.0 +19.5 +18.6 +0.9 + 5.3 +5.2
Feb. +0.0 +0.6 –2.8 –1.2 –1.6 +0.1 +3.3 +0.2 +1.6 –1.2 –1.3 +0.1 – 4.4 +7.2
Mar. –0.0 +9.2 +9.2 +6.2 +3.0 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 +11.2 –1.1 –1.5 +0.4 – 3.3 +15.5
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequentrevisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
29•
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Time deposits (including bank
savings bonds)Time deposits (including
savings deposits and bank
savings bonds)
Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in foreign
banks
and
enter-
prises TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 2013
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 – 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 2021
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 2022
11.2 16.3 1,031.2 550.5 480.7 320.4 160.3 0.0 320.9 169.8 151.1 83.3 67.8 0.1 2021 Oct.
11.3 16.4 1,068.2 565.4 502.8 335.0 167.9 0.0 315.5 171.3 144.2 75.5 68.7 0.1 Nov.
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 Dec.
11.1 16.1 1,098.5 635.9 462.7 321.8 140.8 0.0 339.9 177.2 162.7 82.1 80.5 0.1 2022 Jan.
11.1 16.0 1,130.4 640.4 490.0 349.8 140.2 0.0 361.2 194.5 166.7 87.0 79.7 0.1 Feb.
11.1 15.7 1,113.8 632.7 481.1 349.8 131.3 0.0 361.6 200.0 161.6 82.0 79.6 0.1 Mar.
11.1 15.7 1,113.7 600.6 513.2 381.7 131.4 0.0 384.6 201.5 183.2 102.6 80.6 0.1 Apr.
11.1 15.7 1,127.5 640.4 487.1 351.4 135.7 0.0 382.0 217.1 164.9 85.0 79.9 0.2 May
11.0 15.9 1,100.2 625.5 474.7 340.6 134.1 0.0 387.6 222.7 164.9 82.5 82.4 0.3 June
10.6 15.8 1,107.4 608.8 498.6 359.0 139.6 0.0 390.2 221.6 168.6 87.5 81.1 0.3 July
10.6 15.8 1,120.4 610.9 509.5 360.5 149.0 0.0 400.4 231.3 169.2 87.4 81.8 0.2 Aug.
10.6 15.9 1,169.6 639.0 530.6 373.0 157.6 0.0 409.1 231.4 177.7 95.7 82.0 0.2 Sep.
10.6 15.9 1,188.9 657.6 531.3 372.1 159.2 0.0 401.8 220.0 181.8 100.0 81.8 0.2 Oct.
10.6 15.8 1,150.7 612.1 538.7 385.9 152.7 – 414.1 235.1 179.0 91.2 87.7 0.1 Nov.
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 Dec.
10.4 15.6 1,089.4 601.2 488.3 344.5 143.8 – 405.1 213.5 191.5 101.9 89.6 0.2 2023 Jan.
10.4 15.8 1,086.8 600.1 486.7 345.1 141.6 – 418.4 218.4 200.0 109.9 90.1 0.2 Feb.
10.4 15.9 1,060.0 576.0 484.0 329.3 154.7 – 412.5 216.8 195.7 98.9 96.9 0.3 Mar.
Changes *
+ 0.1 – 3.8 +76.3 +47.8 +28.5 +39.0 –10.5 –0.0 –43.6 –8.3 –35.3 –30.7 –4.6 +0.2 2014
– 0.6 – 6.1 –15.4 +40.6 –56.0 –48.6 – 7.4 –0.0 –26.5 –13.9 –12.6 +0.3 –13.0 –0.0 2015
– 0.1 – 1.5 +82.7 +51.0 +31.7 +27.0 + 4.7 –0.0 +3.5 –3.1 +6.7 +5.9 +0.8 –0.0 2016
– 1.0 – 4.1 –15.5 +25.2 –40.8 –43.2 + 2.4 ±0.0 +31.8 +11.0 +20.8 +15.6 +5.2 –0.4 2017
– 0.2 – 2.2 –23.9 –23.4 – 0.4 + 2.1 – 2.6 –0.0 –11.9 –0.2 –11.8 –5.7 –6.0 –0.2 2018
– 0.3 – 0.9 – 9.5 –49.4 +39.8 +28.0 +11.8 –0.0 –0.8 +2.1 –2.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.0 2019
– 0.2 – 3.9 +83.8 +87.8 – 4.1 –34.7 +30.6 – +23.6 +13.8 +9.8 +7.1 +2.8 +0.0 2020
– 0.2 – 0.8 +136.6 +19.8 +116.8 +89.2 +27.6 +0.0 +22.7 +6.4 +16.3 +0.0 +16.3 –0.0 2021
– 0.7 – 1.0 +85.8 +29.1 +56.7 +69.6 –13.0 –0.0 +68.2 +49.0 +19.2 +13.9 +5.3 +0.0 2022
+ 0.0 + 0.1 +27.9 +22.7 + 5.2 + 5.1 + 0.2 +0.0 +14.7 +5.8 +9.0 +1.6 +7.4 –0.0 2021 Oct.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 +32.3 +12.5 +19.9 +13.0 + 6.9 – –6.3 +0.8 –7.1 –8.4 +1.3 –0.0 Nov.
– 0.1 + 0.2 –155.0 –110.1 –44.9 –34.0 –10.9 – –27.7 –29.6 +1.9 –7.0 +8.9 +0.0 Dec.
– 0.0 – 0.6 +180.8 +178.4 + 2.4 +19.3 –16.9 – +50.8 +34.9 +16.0 +13.1 +2.9 –2022 Jan.
+ 0.0 – 0.0 +33.4 +5.7 +27.8 +28.3 – 0.5 – +21.2 +17.0 +4.2 +5.0 –0.8 – Feb.
– 0.1 – 0.3 –18.3 –8.5 – 9.8 – 0.7 – 9.1 – –0.1 +5.3 –5.4 –5.3 –0.1 –0.0 Mar.
+ 0.0 – 0.1 –13.2 –39.6 +26.4 +27.6 – 1.1 – +19.2 –0.6 +19.8 +19.1 +0.6 – Apr.
– 0.0 + 0.0 +18.7 +42.5 –23.8 –28.6 + 4.8 – –1.1 +16.4 –17.5 –16.9 –0.5 +0.1 May
– 0.1 + 0.1 –21.2 –5.8 –15.4 –13.0 – 2.4 – +3.5 +4.7 –1.2 –3.4 +2.2 +0.0 June
– 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 –20.0 +19.7 +16.2 + 3.5 +0.0 +0.1 –2.2 +2.3 +4.0 –1.8 –0.0 July
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.7 +0.3 + 9.4 + 0.3 + 9.2 –0.0 +8.9 +9.1 –0.2 –0.7 +0.5 –0.0 Aug.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 +42.5 +25.4 +17.2 + 9.4 + 7.7 – +6.9 –0.7 +7.5 +7.5 –0.0 +0.0 Sep.
– + 0.0 +22.6 +20.5 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 1.9 – –5.9 –10.8 +5.0 +4.9 +0.1 –0.1 Oct.
– 0.0 – 0.0 –24.1 –41.3 +17.2 +17.4 – 0.2 –0.0 +5.3 +13.1 –7.9 –7.4 –0.5 –0.0 Nov.
– 0.2 – 0.0 –145.0 –128.3 –16.7 – 6.9 – 9.8 – –40.7 –37.2 –3.5 –6.2 +2.7 –0.0 Dec.
– 0.0 – 0.1 +93.8 +122.3 –28.4 –30.8 + 2.4 – +35.9 +18.1 +17.8 +17.9 –0.1 +0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 – 7.0 –3.5 – 3.5 – 0.9 – 2.6 – +11.6 +4.1 +7.5 +7.2 +0.3 +0.1 Feb.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 –21.8 –21.5 – 0.3 –13.9 +13.6 – –3.9 –0.8 –3.1 –10.0 +7.0 +0.1 Mar.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
30•
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Short-term lending Medium- and long-term   Lending to domestic
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
Periodincluding 
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claimsexcluding 
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claims Total TotalLoans
and
billsNegotiable
money
market
paper Total LoansTreasury
bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 – 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2021 Oct. 3,770.2 3,367.1 256.5 232.5 231.9 0.6 24.0 19.5 4.4 3,513.7 3,142.9
Nov. 3,794.0 3,386.5 255.6 232.9 232.3 0.6 22.7 17.7 5.0 3,538.4 3,164.9
Dec. 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 Jan. 3,812.8 3,409.2 262.6 242.3 241.7 0.6 20.3 17.8 2.5 3,550.2 3,180.4
Feb. 3,826.5 3,426.2 267.4 246.9 246.1 0.8 20.5 16.3 4.2 3,559.1 3,195.3
Mar. 3,853.8 3,449.2 273.6 254.8 254.0 0.8 18.9 16.3 2.5 3,580.1 3,209.5
Apr. 3,866.6 3,470.2 277.5 257.9 257.0 0.9 19.6 17.1 2.5 3,589.1 3,226.2
May 3,886.7 3,489.1 280.1 262.5 261.5 1.0 17.6 15.4 2.2 3,606.6 3,242.6
June 3,906.6 3,513.5 290.8 271.4 270.5 0.9 19.5 16.6 2.8 3,615.7 3,255.8
July 3,945.0 3,539.3 291.4 271.8 270.9 0.8 19.6 16.8 2.8 3,653.7 3,293.5
Aug. 3,976.0 3,574.4 305.0 287.3 286.4 0.8 17.7 14.7 3.1 3,671.0 3,314.3
Sep. 3,993.6 3,595.5 311.0 292.8 292.2 0.6 18.2 15.2 3.0 3,682.6 3,329.1
Oct. 4,014.1 3,611.8 308.7 288.9 288.4 0.5 19.9 16.1 3.8 3,705.3 3,347.5
Nov. 4,025.7 3,625.4 310.7 292.9 292.6 0.4 17.7 14.5 3.2 3,715.0 3,359.0
Dec. 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2023 Jan. 4,016.2 3,622.5 303.2 282.5 281.9 0.5 20.7 17.0 3.8 3,713.1 3,360.2
Feb. 4,030.2 3,629.5 297.8 279.9 279.2 0.7 18.0 15.8 2.2 3,732.4 3,371.2
Mar. 4,030.5 3,634.8 305.3 285.3 284.7 0.7 19.9 16.3 3.6 3,725.2 3,369.0
Changes *
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 – 11.6 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 0.0 – 7.1 – 6.5 – 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 – 5.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.8 – 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 – 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 – 12.1 – 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 8.6 – 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 – 19.6 – 19.8 – 19.8 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2021 + 152.2 + 147.8 + 8.8 + 13.8 + 13.8 – 0.1 – 4.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 + 143.4 + 157.9
2022 + 216.7 + 220.0 + 47.6 + 48.5 + 48.5 + 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.9 + 0.0 + 169.1 + 184.8
2021 Oct. + 20.5 + 25.1 + 8.7 + 8.1 + 8.2 – 0.1 + 0.5 – 0.2 + 0.7 + 11.8 + 19.8
Nov. + 25.5 + 20.5 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 2.4 + 0.0 – 1.2 – 1.8 + 0.6 + 24.4 + 19.9
Dec. + 4.3 + 6.3 – 5.8 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 5.2 – 2.5 – 2.7 + 10.1 + 9.8
2022 Jan. + 14.7 + 16.5 + 12.9 + 10.1 + 9.8 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 1.8 + 5.8
Feb. + 15.1 + 18.4 + 6.2 + 6.0 + 5.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 1.5 + 1.7 + 9.0 + 14.9
Mar. + 27.3 + 23.0 + 6.2 + 7.9 + 7.9 – 0.0 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 + 21.0 + 14.2
Apr. + 13.1 + 21.4 + 3.9 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 9.3 + 17.0
May + 20.1 + 18.8 + 2.6 + 4.6 + 4.5 + 0.0 – 2.0 – 1.7 – 0.3 + 17.5 + 16.4
June + 19.9 + 24.5 + 10.8 + 8.9 + 9.0 – 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 9.1 + 13.2
July + 36.1 + 23.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 35.8 + 35.6
Aug. + 30.9 + 35.1 + 13.7 + 15.5 + 15.5 + 0.0 – 1.9 – 2.1 + 0.3 + 17.2 + 20.8
Sep. + 16.5 + 20.0 + 4.8 + 4.4 + 4.6 – 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 11.7 + 14.8
Oct. + 20.7 + 16.6 – 2.0 – 3.6 – 3.5 – 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 22.7 + 18.5
Nov. + 12.0 + 13.9 + 2.2 + 4.4 + 4.5 – 0.1 – 2.1 – 1.5 – 0.6 + 9.7 + 11.8
Dec. – 9.6 – 11.7 – 13.9 – 12.8 – 12.7 – 0.0 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.9 + 4.2 + 1.8
2023 Jan. + 0.6 + 9.2 + 6.7 + 2.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 4.1 + 2.6 + 1.4 – 6.1 + 0.3
Feb. + 13.3 + 6.3 – 6.0 – 3.2 – 3.3 + 0.1 – 2.8 – 1.2 – 1.6 + 19.3 + 11.0
Mar. + 0.9 + 6.0 + 7.4 + 5.5 + 5.5 – 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.4 – 6.5 – 1.7
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
31•
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
TotalMedium-
termLong-
term SecuritiesMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalMedium-
termLong-
termSecur-
ities  1Equal-
isation
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 – 2.7 2013
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 – 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 – 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 – 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 – 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 – 1.4 2018
2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 – 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 2020
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 2021
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 2022
2,885.5 313.5 2,572.0 257.4 24.1 370.9 230.2 14.6 215.6 140.7 – 1.0 2021 Oct.
2,906.5 315.6 2,590.9 258.4 24.2 373.5 230.0 14.5 215.6 143.5 – 1.0 Nov.
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 Dec.
2,920.6 312.8 2,607.8 259.8 24.7 369.8 229.1 13.9 215.2 140.7 – 1.0 2022 Jan.
2,935.4 313.8 2,621.6 259.9 24.6 363.8 228.5 13.9 214.5 135.4 – 1.1 Feb.
2,950.1 316.1 2,633.9 259.4 24.7 370.7 228.8 13.7 215.1 141.8 – 1.1 Mar.
2,966.8 317.3 2,649.5 259.4 24.9 362.9 229.5 13.7 215.8 133.5 – 1.0 Apr.
2,983.1 319.7 2,663.4 259.5 25.1 364.0 229.1 13.7 215.4 134.9 – 1.0 May
2,998.2 322.2 2,675.9 257.6 25.0 360.0 228.2 13.6 214.6 131.7 – 1.0 June
3,022.5 327.7 2,694.9 271.0 24.9 360.2 229.0 13.5 215.5 131.2 – 1.0 July
3,044.6 335.4 2,709.1 269.8 24.9 356.6 228.7 13.5 215.2 127.9 – 1.0 Aug.
3,058.8 339.5 2,719.3 270.2 24.8 353.5 229.3 13.8 215.4 124.3 – 1.0 Sep.
3,077.4 344.8 2,732.7 270.1 24.8 357.8 229.9 13.8 216.1 127.9 – 1.0 Oct.
3,086.6 344.9 2,741.7 272.4 24.8 356.0 231.7 13.9 217.8 124.3 – 1.0 Nov.
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 Dec.
3,090.3 349.9 2,740.4 269.9 24.6 352.9 233.4 13.8 219.5 119.5 – 1.0 2023 Jan.
3,102.0 355.3 2,746.7 269.2 24.5 361.2 232.5 13.7 218.8 128.7 – 1.1 Feb.
3,101.3 354.8 2,746.5 267.8 23.6 356.2 232.6 13.6 219.0 123.6 – 1.0 Mar.
Changes *
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 +12.5 – 1.8 – 4.1 – 8.5 – 5.1 – 3.4 + 4.3 – – 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 +14.8 – 2.1 – 6.6 – 6.9 – 4.8 – 2.0 + 0.2 – + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 – 0.9 – 30.9 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 3.3 –23.6 – – 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 +15.8 + 0.1 – 39.9 –10.6 – 1.3 – 9.3 –29.4 – – 0.1 2017
+108.7 +19.3 + 89.4 – 6.7 – 0.9 – 37.1 –10.5 – 2.7 – 7.8 –26.6 – – 0.0 2018
+126.0 +18.9 +107.2 + 6.8 – 0.8 – 17.8 – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 –12.3 – + 0.1 2019
+145.0 + 9.4 +135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 – 2.8 – 1.1 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 1.7 – – 0.4 2020
+140.1 + 5.6 +134.5 +17.8 + 2.3 – 14.6 – 3.3 – 1.3 – 2.0 –11.3 – – 0.0 2021
+169.9 +33.5 +136.4 +14.9 – 0.1 – 15.7 + 2.5 – 0.7 + 3.3 –18.2 – – 0.0 2022
+ 15.6 + 3.5 + 12.1 + 4.1 – 0.1 – 7.9 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 – 9.4 – – 0.0 2021 Oct.
+ 18.9 + 4.4 + 14.5 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 4.4 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 1.0 + 3.5 – – 0.0 Nov.
+ 9.3 – 1.1 + 10.4 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 – + 0.0 Dec.
+ 4.9 – 1.7 + 6.6 + 0.8 – 0.0 – 4.0 – 0.8 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 3.2 – – 0.0 2022 Jan.
+ 14.8 + 1.0 + 13.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 6.0 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.6 – 5.3 – – 0.0 Feb.
+ 14.7 + 2.3 + 12.4 – 0.5 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 0.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 + 6.5 – – 0.0 Mar.
+ 17.0 + 1.5 + 15.6 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 7.7 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 – 8.4 – – 0.0 Apr.
+ 16.4 + 2.5 + 13.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.1 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.3 + 1.4 – – 0.0 May
+ 15.1 + 2.5 + 12.6 – 1.9 – 0.1 – 4.1 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 3.2 – – 0.0 June
+ 22.5 + 4.4 + 18.1 +13.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.5 – – 0.0 July
+ 22.0 + 7.7 + 14.3 – 1.2 – 0.0 – 3.6 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 3.3 – + 0.0 Aug.
+ 14.3 + 4.0 + 10.4 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 0.5 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 3.6 – + 0.0 Sep.
+ 18.6 + 5.3 + 13.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.6 – 0.0 + 0.6 + 3.6 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 9.4 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 2.4 + 0.0 – 2.1 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.4 – 3.6 – + 0.0 Nov.
+ 0.3 + 4.0 – 3.7 + 1.6 – 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.4 – – 0.0 Dec.
+ 4.4 + 1.2 + 3.3 – 4.2 + 0.0 – 6.4 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 6.1 – – 0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 11.7 + 5.4 + 6.4 – 0.7 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.7 + 9.2 – + 0.1 Feb.
– 0.3 – 0.5 + 0.2 – 1.4 – 0.3 – 4.8 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.3 – 5.1 – – 0.0 Mar.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
32•
IV. Banks
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
billion €
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios)  1
of which:
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Period TotalMortgage
loans,
total TotalMortgage
loans
secured
by
residen-
tial real
estateOther
housing
loans Totalof which:
Housing
loansManufac-
turingElectricity,
gas and
water
supply;
refuse
disposal,          
mining
and
quarryingConstruc-
tionWhole-
sale and
retail
trade;
repair of
motor                
vehicles
and
motor-
cyclesAgri-
culture,
forestry,
fishing
and
aqua-
cultureTransport-
ation and
storage;
post and                      
telecom-
munica-
tionsFinancial
intermedi-
ation
(excluding
MFIs) and
insurance   
com-
panies
Lending, total                                                 End of year or quarter *
2021 3,147.5 1,591.4 1,678.2 1,373.0 305.2 1,701.5 477.2 146.1 128.3 98.0 140.4 55.9 55.6 186.3
2022 Q1 3,204.0 1,613.7 1,701.0 1,391.9 309.0 1,742.4 485.1 150.9 134.3 101.3 145.3 56.3 54.9 193.2
Q2 3,268.7 1,636.4 1,731.4 1,412.8 318.5 1,784.8 494.5 160.2 132.6 104.4 153.4 57.0 56.4 200.2
Q3 3,351.0 1,659.4 1,758.3 1,433.0 325.2 1,845.3 503.1 163.6 147.5 107.3 163.3 56.9 64.9 202.3
Q4 3,365.3 1,676.5 1,773.9 1,448.0 325.8 1,852.2 509.1 160.0 137.7 108.8 155.1 56.3 65.2 211.9
2023 Q1 3,385.9 1,687.3 1,779.0 1,457.3 321.7 1,872.3 512.9 162.8 137.8 110.9 157.7 56.1 63.1 222.8
Short-term lending
2021 231.8 – 6.9 – 6.9 202.7 4.4 31.6 9.1 18.0 36.4 3.3 3.9 35.0
2022 Q1 254.0 – 7.0 – 7.0 224.1 4.5 36.5 14.0 19.5 39.3 3.6 4.1 38.0
Q2 270.5 – 7.0 – 7.0 239.5 4.6 44.7 11.6 20.1 42.2 3.9 4.3 42.2
Q3 292.2 – 7.4 – 7.4 260.7 4.9 46.2 24.4 21.1 45.3 3.6 4.2 42.2
Q4 279.4 – 7.4 – 7.4 248.9 5.0 41.6 12.1 20.8 44.7 3.3 3.8 49.8
2023 Q1 284.7 – 7.6 – 7.6 253.9 5.3 43.4 8.1 21.9 46.8 3.4 3.7 54.0
Medium-term lending
2021 314.5 – 40.5 – 40.5 239.5 20.6 28.3 5.4 19.3 20.8 4.3 12.3 52.0
2022 Q1 316.1 – 40.8 – 40.8 242.2 21.0 28.9 5.6 20.0 22.0 4.2 11.7 53.1
Q2 322.2 – 42.0 – 42.0 249.2 22.2 29.1 5.8 21.0 22.3 4.3 13.3 53.7
Q3 339.5 – 43.2 – 43.2 265.9 23.1 30.5 6.0 21.6 23.4 4.3 22.2 54.4
Q4 348.7 – 43.4 – 43.4 275.8 23.5 31.2 6.5 22.2 24.3 4.1 23.0 56.2
2023 Q1 354.8 – 42.8 – 42.8 283.5 23.7 32.5 9.2 22.4 24.8 4.1 21.0 59.3
Long-term lending
2021 2,601.2 1,591.4 1,630.9 1,373.0 257.8 1,259.3 452.2 86.2 113.8 60.8 83.2 48.3 39.4 99.3
2022 Q1 2,633.9 1,613.7 1,653.1 1,391.9 261.2 1,276.0 459.6 85.5 114.8 61.8 84.0 48.4 39.2 102.1
Q2 2,675.9 1,636.4 1,682.3 1,412.8 269.5 1,296.0 467.7 86.5 115.2 63.4 88.9 48.8 38.8 104.4
Q3 2,719.3 1,659.4 1,707.6 1,433.0 274.6 1,318.6 475.1 86.8 117.1 64.7 94.6 49.0 38.6 105.6
Q4 2,737.1 1,676.5 1,723.1 1,448.0 275.1 1,327.5 480.6 87.2 119.0 65.8 86.1 48.9 38.4 105.9
2023 Q1 2,746.5 1,687.3 1,728.6 1,457.3 271.3 1,335.0 483.9 86.9 120.5 66.6 86.1 48.6 38.4 109.5
Lending, total                                                 Change during quarter *
2022 Q1 +57.9 +17.9 +22.0 +16.6 + 5.3 +42.0 + 7.0 + 4.8 + 6.3 + 3.2 + 4.7 + 0.4 – 1.1 + 8.9
Q2 +65.0 +22.2 +29.9 +20.5 + 9.4 +42.7 + 9.1 + 9.4 – 1.7 + 3.2 + 8.2 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 7.1
Q3 +79.0 +23.4 +26.9 +20.5 + 6.4 +58.5 + 8.6 + 2.5 +14.9 + 2.7 + 9.6 – 0.1 + 8.5 + 2.0
Q4 +16.5 +17.2 +15.4 +14.8 + 0.6 + 8.9 + 5.9 – 3.2 – 9.9 + 1.4 – 2.7 – 0.6 + 0.3 +10.2
2023 Q1 +20.4 +11.1 + 4.8 + 8.5 – 3.7 +19.9 + 3.4 + 2.8 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 2.5 – 0.2 – 2.1 +10.6
Short-term lending
2022 Q1 +23.5 – + 0.1 – + 0.1 +22.7 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 2.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 4.4
Q2 +16.6 – + 0.0 – + 0.0 +15.4 + 0.1 + 8.2 – 2.4 + 0.6 + 2.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 4.2
Q3 +20.2 – + 0.3 – + 0.3 +19.8 + 0.3 + 0.7 +12.8 + 0.9 + 2.8 – 0.3 – 0.2 + 0.1
Q4 –11.8 – – 0.0 – – 0.0 –10.8 + 0.1 – 4.3 –12.3 – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 7.8
2023 Q1 + 4.6 – + 0.2 – + 0.2 + 4.5 + 0.3 + 1.8 – 4.0 + 1.1 + 2.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 3.9
Medium-term lending
2022 Q1 + 1.7 – + 0.3 – + 0.3 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 1.2 – 0.0 – 0.7 + 1.2
Q2 + 6.4 – + 1.2 – + 1.2 + 7.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.9
Q3 +16.1 – + 0.9 – + 0.9 +16.1 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 1.1 – 0.0 + 8.9 + 0.8
Q4 + 9.3 – + 0.1 – + 0.1 +10.0 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 0.8 + 1.9
2023 Q1 + 6.1 – – 0.5 – – 0.5 + 7.7 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 2.0 + 3.0
Long-term lending
2022 Q1 +32.7 +17.9 +21.5 +16.6 + 4.9 +16.5 + 6.5 – 0.7 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 – 0.6 + 3.4
Q2 +42.0 +22.2 +28.7 +20.5 + 8.1 +19.9 + 7.9 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 1.5 + 4.9 + 0.3 – 0.3 + 2.1
Q3 +42.7 +23.4 +25.7 +20.5 + 5.2 +22.6 + 7.4 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 5.7 + 0.3 – 0.2 + 1.2
Q4 +19.0 +17.2 +15.3 +14.8 + 0.5 + 9.7 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 1.1 – 3.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.5
2023 Q1 + 9.8 +11.1 + 5.0 + 8.5 – 3.4 + 7.8 + 2.8 – 0.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 3.7
* Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
33•
IV. Banks
Lending to employees and other individualsLending to
non-profit institutions
Services sector (including the professions) Memo items: Other lending
of which: of which:
TotalHousing
enterprisesHolding
companiesOther
real
estate
activitiesLending
to self-
employed
persons  2Lending
to craft
enterprises TotalHousing
loans TotalInstalment
loans  3Debit
balances
on wage,
salary
and
pension
accounts Totalof which:
Housing
loans   Period
End of year or quarter *                                   Lending, total
890.8 308.6 63.8 207.9 483.8 48.3 1,429.3 1,196.6 232.7 184.1 6.9 16.7 4.4 2021
906.2 315.6 66.2 209.8 489.1 49.1 1,444.9 1,211.4 233.5 184.4 7.1 16.8 4.4 2022 Q1
920.4 322.8 68.0 211.5 494.9 49.4 1,467.0 1,232.4 234.6 184.6 7.3 16.9 4.5 Q2
939.6 329.1 71.2 215.5 500.0 54.1 1,488.6 1,250.6 238.0 187.3 7.5 17.1 4.6 Q3
957.4 334.0 79.9 218.2 501.7 54.1 1,495.8 1,260.1 235.7 185.9 7.1 17.3 4.6 Q4
961.1 336.3 78.6 220.4 503.4 54.2 1,496.2 1,261.4 234.7 185.5 7.3 17.5 4.7 2023 Q1
Short-term lending
65.5 14.5 13.0 10.0 19.7 3.8 28.6 2.5 26.1 1.4 6.9 0.5 0.0 2021
69.2 15.3 14.0 10.5 20.3 4.4 29.2 2.5 26.7 1.6 7.1 0.7 0.0 2022 Q1
70.5 15.9 13.7 11.1 20.8 4.5 30.3 2.5 27.9 1.7 7.3 0.7 0.0 Q2
73.8 15.8 14.9 11.2 20.9 5.3 30.8 2.5 28.3 1.7 7.5 0.6 0.0 Q3
73.0 16.1 15.6 10.8 20.4 5.0 29.9 2.4 27.5 1.7 7.1 0.6 – Q4
72.5 16.5 14.9 11.6 21.0 5.3 30.2 2.3 27.9 2.1 7.3 0.6 –2023 Q1
Medium-term lending
97.0 23.1 15.2 27.1 30.0 3.3 74.4 19.8 54.6 50.6 – 0.6 0.1 2021
96.8 22.8 15.5 27.2 30.0 3.2 73.4 19.7 53.7 49.6 – 0.5 0.1 2022 Q1
99.8 24.1 17.1 26.6 29.9 3.2 72.5 19.8 52.7 48.6 – 0.5 0.1 Q2
103.6 25.2 17.7 27.5 30.4 6.4 73.0 20.1 52.9 48.7 – 0.5 0.1 Q3
108.2 25.4 20.1 28.4 30.1 6.5 72.3 19.8 52.5 48.0 – 0.6 0.1 Q4
110.3 25.3 21.4 29.0 30.3 6.4 70.8 19.0 51.8 47.3 – 0.5 0.1 2023 Q1
Long-term lending
728.4 271.1 35.6 170.8 434.1 41.3 1,326.3 1,174.3 152.0 132.1 – 15.6 4.3 2021
740.2 277.5 36.8 172.1 438.8 41.4 1,342.3 1,189.2 153.1 133.2 – 15.6 4.4 2022 Q1
750.0 282.8 37.3 173.8 444.2 41.7 1,364.2 1,210.1 154.1 134.4 – 15.7 4.4 Q2
762.2 288.0 38.5 176.7 448.7 42.5 1,384.8 1,228.0 156.7 137.0 – 15.9 4.5 Q3
776.2 292.6 44.2 179.0 451.1 42.6 1,393.5 1,237.9 155.6 136.2 – 16.1 4.6 Q4
778.3 294.6 42.4 179.7 452.1 42.5 1,395.1 1,240.1 155.1 136.1 – 16.4 4.6 2023 Q1
Change during quarter *                                    Lending, total
+14.9 + 6.7 + 2.4 + 1.7 + 5.0 + 0.7 +15.8 +14.9 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2022 Q1
+14.4 + 7.4 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 5.8 + 0.4 +22.2 +20.8 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
+18.3 + 6.2 + 3.1 + 3.9 + 4.3 + 0.2 +20.4 +18.2 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 Q3
+13.3 + 4.9 + 3.5 + 2.4 + 2.1 – 0.1 + 7.5 + 9.5 – 2.0 – 1.3 – 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 Q4
+ 4.0 + 2.5 – 1.4 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 2023 Q1
Short-term lending
+ 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2022 Q1
+ 1.4 + 0.6 – 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 – 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.0 Q2
+ 3.1 – 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 – Q3
– 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.0 Q4
– 0.5 + 0.4 – 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 –2023 Q1
Medium-term lending
– 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 0.9 – 0.9 – – 0.1 – 0.0 2022 Q1
+ 3.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.9 + 0.1 – 1.0 – 1.1 – + 0.0 – 0.0 Q2
+ 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – + 0.0 + 0.0 Q3
+ 4.6 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.6 – + 0.0 – 0.0 Q4
+ 2.1 – 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.8 – 0.8 – 0.7 – – 0.0 –2023 Q1
Long-term lending
+11.5 + 6.3 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 4.5 + 0.1 +16.2 +15.0 + 1.2 + 1.3 – + 0.0 + 0.0 2022 Q1
+10.0 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 1.8 + 5.4 + 0.3 +22.0 +20.8 + 1.3 + 1.4 – + 0.1 + 0.1 Q2
+12.0 + 5.2 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 4.3 + 0.3 +20.0 +18.2 + 1.7 + 1.7 – + 0.2 + 0.1 Q3
+ 9.3 + 4.6 + 0.5 + 1.9 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.9 – 0.9 – 0.7 – + 0.2 + 0.1 Q4
+ 2.5 + 2.2 – 2.0 + 0.8 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – + 0.1 + 0.1 2023 Q1
are not specially marked.  1 Excluding fiduciary loans.  2 Including sole proprietors. 3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
34•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic non-banks, total                        End of year or month *
2020 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2021 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2022 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.6 35.9 18.5 3.9
2022 Apr. 4,046.7 2,705.6 759.4 189.8 569.6 50.1 519.5 557.9 23.8 33.8 17.3 1.1
May 4,056.8 2,724.3 752.1 183.3 568.7 51.2 517.5 556.6 23.8 33.6 17.1 0.8
June 4,051.8 2,714.4 758.8 194.7 564.1 49.0 515.1 554.8 23.8 33.4 17.2 0.7
July 4,086.4 2,729.0 780.4 213.7 566.7 50.9 515.8 553.0 24.1 33.0 17.3 1.2
Aug. 4,134.3 2,766.8 792.0 226.8 565.1 50.4 514.7 550.6 25.0 33.0 17.5 1.4
Sep. 4,149.9 2,755.6 823.1 263.8 559.3 45.5 513.8 545.2 25.9 33.2 18.3 1.0
Oct. 4,168.4 2,748.7 849.3 290.1 559.3 45.6 513.7 542.2 28.1 33.6 18.3 1.6
Nov. 4,205.6 2,767.9 869.3 309.6 559.7 46.8 512.9 536.9 31.5 34.8 18.4 4.4
Dec. 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.6 35.9 18.5 3.9
2023 Jan. 4,199.7 2,722.8 913.5 351.2 562.3 52.1 510.2 522.7 40.6 36.9 18.6 2.1
Feb. 4,197.1 2,687.7 947.9 381.5 566.4 54.2 512.3 516.0 45.5 37.2 18.7 2.9
Mar. 4,167.4 2,639.8 968.6 402.4 566.3 55.7 510.6 507.2 51.7 36.4 18.7 3.3
Changes *
2021 + 95.3 +144.3 – 46.2 – 27.3 –18.9 + 1.5 –20.5 + 0.7 – 3.5 – 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.2
2022 +191.8 + 65.8 +143.4 +152.5 – 9.1 + 0.6 – 9.7 –27.5 +10.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6
2022 Apr. + 13.0 + 9.5 + 4.2 + 6.4 – 2.2 + 0.8 – 3.0 – 0.6 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5
May + 10.1 + 18.8 – 7.3 – 6.5 – 0.9 + 1.1 – 2.0 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
June – 5.0 – 9.9 + 6.7 + 11.3 – 4.6 – 2.2 – 2.5 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1
July + 33.5 + 14.3 + 20.7 + 18.5 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 0.6 – 1.8 + 0.3 – 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5
Aug. + 48.1 + 37.8 + 11.8 + 13.1 – 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.9 – 2.4 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2
Sep. + 15.6 – 11.4 + 31.3 + 37.0 – 5.7 – 4.9 – 0.8 – 5.3 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.8 – 0.4
Oct. + 17.4 – 8.0 + 26.2 + 26.3 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 2.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.5
Nov. + 45.3 + 20.9 + 26.3 + 18.7 + 7.7 + 1.3 + 6.4 – 5.3 + 3.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 2.9
Dec. – 43.4 – 47.1 + 4.2 + 5.2 – 1.0 + 3.7 – 4.7 – 3.7 + 3.2 + 1.1 + 0.0 – 0.6
2023 Jan. + 37.6 – 2.9 + 40.0 + 36.4 + 3.6 + 1.6 + 2.0 – 5.5 + 6.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 – 1.8
Feb. – 2.5 – 35.0 + 34.4 + 30.3 + 4.1 + 2.1 + 2.0 – 6.7 + 4.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.8
Mar. – 29.6 – 47.3 + 20.2 + 20.3 – 0.1 + 1.5 – 1.6 – 8.7 + 6.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.3
Domestic government End of year or month *
2020 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 –
2021 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2022 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
2022 Apr. 243.7 86.2 151.8 70.8 80.9 25.0 55.9 2.4 3.4 25.6 2.0 –
May 255.6 91.4 158.4 76.1 82.2 25.9 56.3 2.4 3.4 25.6 2.0 –
June 254.9 84.8 164.2 84.6 79.7 23.3 56.3 2.4 3.5 25.4 2.0 –
July 258.3 78.0 174.5 93.0 81.5 24.6 57.0 2.4 3.4 25.4 1.9 –
Aug. 272.6 89.1 177.8 96.2 81.5 24.8 56.7 2.4 3.4 25.5 1.9 –
Sep. 273.0 86.6 180.6 104.6 76.0 20.0 56.1 2.3 3.5 25.7 1.9 –
Oct. 271.2 86.8 178.6 101.2 77.4 19.6 57.8 2.3 3.5 25.7 1.9 –
Nov. 304.5 106.0 192.8 109.6 83.2 20.8 62.4 2.1 3.7 26.6 1.9 2.4
Dec. 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
2023 Jan. 299.4 94.5 199.3 114.4 84.9 23.1 61.8 1.8 3.8 27.5 1.9 0.3
Feb. 317.8 101.4 211.0 123.3 87.6 23.9 63.8 1.7 3.8 27.5 1.9 1.3
Mar. 308.9 92.6 211.0 123.9 87.1 23.4 63.7 1.6 3.8 26.8 1.9 1.1
Changes *
2021 – 17.9 + 3.4 – 20.8 – 17.7 – 3.0 + 2.9 – 6.0 – 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.4 – 0.0 + 1.0
2022 + 69.1 + 0.2 + 69.2 + 64.7 + 4.5 – 0.9 + 5.4 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.5 – 0.1 + 1.4
2022 Apr. + 2.7 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 –
May + 11.5 + 5.2 + 6.2 + 5.2 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 –
June – 0.7 – 6.6 + 5.9 + 8.5 – 2.6 – 2.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 –
July + 3.5 – 6.7 + 10.3 + 8.4 + 1.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 –
Aug. + 14.3 + 11.1 + 3.2 + 3.2 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 –
Sep. + 0.4 – 2.4 + 2.8 + 8.3 – 5.5 – 4.9 – 0.6 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 –
Oct. – 1.9 + 0.2 – 2.1 – 3.4 + 1.3 – 0.4 + 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 –
Nov. + 33.0 + 19.2 + 13.9 + 8.3 + 5.6 + 1.0 + 4.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.0 + 2.4
Dec. – 24.7 – 23.5 – 1.1 – 2.8 + 1.7 + 2.4 – 0.7 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.0 –
2023 Jan. + 19.7 + 11.9 + 7.7 + 7.6 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 2.1
Feb. + 18.3 + 6.8 + 11.6 + 8.9 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 1.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.1
Mar. – 8.9 – 8.8 – 0.1 + 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities.
2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
35•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont´d)
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic enterprises and households                            End of year or month *
2020 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2021 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2022 3,882.2 2,638.1 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
2022 Apr. 3,802.9 2,619.4 607.6 119.0 488.6 25.1 463.6 555.5 20.4 8.2 15.2 1.1
May 3,801.2 2,632.9 593.7 107.2 486.5 25.3 461.2 554.2 20.4 8.0 15.1 0.8
June 3,796.9 2,629.7 594.5 110.1 484.4 25.6 458.8 552.4 20.3 8.0 15.2 0.7
July 3,828.1 2,650.9 605.9 120.7 485.2 26.3 458.9 550.6 20.7 7.6 15.4 1.2
Aug. 3,861.7 2,677.7 614.2 130.6 483.6 25.6 458.0 548.2 21.6 7.5 15.6 1.4
Sep. 3,876.9 2,669.0 642.5 159.2 483.3 25.5 457.7 542.9 22.5 7.5 16.3 1.0
Oct. 3,897.2 2,661.9 670.8 188.9 481.9 25.9 455.9 539.9 24.6 7.9 16.4 1.6
Nov. 3,901.1 2,661.9 676.5 200.0 476.5 26.0 450.5 534.8 27.8 8.3 16.4 2.1
Dec. 3,882.2 2,638.1 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
2023 Jan. 3,900.2 2,628.3 714.2 236.8 477.4 29.0 448.4 520.9 36.8 9.4 16.7 1.9
Feb. 3,879.3 2,586.4 737.0 258.2 478.8 30.3 448.5 514.3 41.7 9.7 16.8 1.6
Mar. 3,858.5 2,547.3 757.6 278.4 479.2 32.3 446.9 505.7 47.9 9.7 16.9 2.2
Changes *
2021 +113.2 +140.9 – 25.5 – 9.6 –15.9 – 1.4 –14.5 + 0.9 – 3.1 – 0.6 + 2.8 + 0.2
2022 +122.7 + 65.6 + 74.2 + 87.8 –13.6 + 1.4 –15.1 –27.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.3
2022 Apr. + 10.3 + 8.5 + 2.5 + 5.3 – 2.8 + 0.2 – 3.0 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.5
May – 1.4 + 13.5 – 13.6 – 11.7 – 1.9 + 0.2 – 2.1 – 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
June – 4.2 – 3.2 + 0.8 + 2.9 – 2.1 + 0.4 – 2.4 – 1.8 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1
July + 30.0 + 21.0 + 10.4 + 10.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 – 0.1 – 1.8 + 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.5
Aug. + 33.8 + 26.7 + 8.6 + 9.8 – 1.2 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 2.4 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2
Sep. + 15.1 – 8.9 + 28.5 + 28.7 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 5.3 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.8 – 0.4
Oct. + 19.2 – 8.2 + 28.3 + 29.7 – 1.4 + 0.4 – 1.8 – 3.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.5
Nov. + 12.2 + 1.7 + 12.4 + 10.3 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 1.8 – 5.1 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.5
Dec. – 18.7 – 23.7 + 5.4 + 8.0 – 2.7 + 1.4 – 4.0 – 3.6 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.6
2023 Jan. + 17.9 – 14.9 + 32.3 + 28.7 + 3.6 + 1.7 + 1.9 – 5.3 + 5.8 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.3
Feb. – 20.8 – 41.9 + 22.8 + 21.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 6.6 + 4.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.3
Mar. – 20.7 – 38.5 + 20.3 + 19.7 + 0.6 + 2.0 – 1.4 – 8.6 + 6.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2020 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2021 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2022 1,193.5 783.4 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.6 1.9 13.5 1.5
2022 Apr. 1,165.3 792.4 360.0 88.0 272.0 16.0 256.1 5.2 7.7 2.3 12.4 1.1
May 1,165.6 806.0 346.7 76.4 270.4 16.3 254.1 5.1 7.7 2.3 12.3 0.8
June 1,158.9 798.2 347.9 78.6 269.3 16.9 252.3 5.1 7.7 2.3 12.4 0.7
July 1,168.8 797.0 358.8 88.5 270.3 17.5 252.8 5.1 7.9 1.9 12.5 1.2
Aug. 1,205.4 826.9 365.4 96.1 269.3 16.8 252.4 5.1 8.0 1.9 12.6 1.4
Sep. 1,215.7 815.8 386.8 117.9 268.9 16.6 252.3 5.0 8.1 1.9 13.4 1.0
Oct. 1,232.8 809.3 410.4 143.0 267.4 16.7 250.7 4.9 8.2 1.9 13.3 1.6
Nov. 1,223.9 805.3 405.5 144.1 261.4 16.2 245.1 4.7 8.4 1.9 13.3 2.1
Dec. 1,193.5 783.4 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.6 1.9 13.5 1.5
2023 Jan. 1,220.2 792.5 414.7 156.8 257.9 17.1 240.8 4.3 8.7 2.0 13.5 1.9
Feb. 1,199.2 761.5 424.4 166.8 257.6 17.0 240.6 4.3 9.1 2.0 13.6 1.6
Mar. 1,189.9 747.3 429.1 174.0 255.2 16.7 238.4 4.1 9.3 1.9 13.6 2.2
Changes *
2021 + 28.5 + 47.1 – 16.8 – 1.2 –15.7 + 0.5 –16.2 – 0.5 – 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.2
2022 + 56.2 + 17.7 + 38.8 + 52.1 –13.3 + 1.0 –14.3 – 0.9 + 0.6 – 0.5 + 1.0 + 1.3
2022 Apr. – 6.6 – 9.6 + 3.2 + 5.4 – 2.2 + 0.4 – 2.6 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5
May – 0.5 + 12.6 – 13.0 – 11.7 – 1.4 + 0.3 – 1.7 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2
June – 6.7 – 7.8 + 1.2 + 2.2 – 1.1 + 0.6 – 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1
July + 8.8 – 1.4 + 10.0 + 9.3 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.5
Aug. + 36.6 + 29.9 + 6.6 + 7.6 – 1.0 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2
Sep. + 10.2 – 11.4 + 21.6 + 21.8 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.4
Oct. + 16.0 – 7.6 + 23.6 + 25.1 – 1.5 + 0.1 – 1.5 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.5
Nov. – 0.5 – 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 – 0.3 + 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.5
Dec. – 30.3 – 21.7 – 8.5 – 3.3 – 5.2 + 0.6 – 5.7 – 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.6
2023 Jan. + 26.5 + 9.0 + 17.4 + 15.9 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 1.3 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3
Feb. – 21.0 – 31.0 + 9.7 + 10.0 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.3
Mar. – 6.6 – 11.8 + 5.1 + 6.9 – 1.8 – 0.2 – 1.6 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.5
4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
36•
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2  
by creditor group by creditor group 
Domestic households Domestic households
PeriodDeposits of
domestic
households
and
non-profit
institutions,
total Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individualsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tions Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individuals
End of year or month *
2020 2,539.5 1,713.8 1,672.7 291.1 1,215.4 166.2 41.1 258.6 245.1 19.3 190.5 35.2
2021 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2022 2,688.7 1,854.7 1,809.9 307.3 1,342.5 160.1 44.8 284.8 268.7 31.2 200.5 37.1
2022 Oct. 2,664.4 1,852.6 1,807.1 317.1 1,329.7 160.3 45.5 260.4 246.5 23.1 188.8 34.6
Nov. 2,677.2 1,856.7 1,812.3 312.1 1,340.3 159.9 44.4 271.0 256.9 27.4 194.4 35.1
Dec. 2,688.7 1,854.7 1,809.9 307.3 1,342.5 160.1 44.8 284.8 268.7 31.2 200.5 37.1
2023 Jan. 2,680.0 1,835.8 1,791.8 305.3 1,329.4 157.1 44.0 299.5 282.9 34.5 210.1 38.3
Feb. 2,680.1 1,824.9 1,780.9 300.0 1,325.3 155.6 44.0 312.6 295.4 38.1 218.1 39.2
Mar. 2,668.6 1,799.9 1,754.4 290.0 1,310.9 153.5 45.5 328.5 309.7 42.2 227.2 40.2
Changes *
2021 + 84.7 +93.8 +90.3 +17.3 +73.7 – 0.6 + 3.5 – 8.6 – 7.2 – 1.1 – 4.7 –1.3
2022 + 66.5 +48.0 +47.8 – 1.5 +54.1 – 4.7 + 0.1 +35.4 +31.4 +12.9 +17.2 +1.2
2022 Oct. + 3.2 – 0.6 + 1.5 + 2.9 – 0.3 – 1.2 – 2.1 + 4.7 + 4.5 + 1.3 + 3.0 +0.2
Nov. + 12.8 + 4.0 + 5.2 – 5.0 +10.6 – 0.4 – 1.1 +10.6 +10.5 + 4.3 + 5.7 +0.5
Dec. + 11.6 – 2.0 – 2.4 – 4.9 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 +13.8 +11.9 + 3.8 + 6.8 +1.3
2023 Jan. – 8.6 –23.9 –23.1 – 1.9 –18.1 – 3.0 – 0.8 +14.9 +14.2 + 3.4 + 9.6 +1.2
Feb. + 0.1 –10.9 –10.9 – 5.3 – 4.1 – 1.5 – 0.0 +13.1 +12.5 + 3.6 + 8.0 +0.9
Mar. – 14.1 –26.8 –26.3 –10.4 –14.4 – 1.5 – 0.5 +15.2 +14.1 + 4.0 + 9.1 +1.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional.Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
marked.  1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
€ billion
Deposits    
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
PeriodDomestic
government,
total TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans
End of year or month *
2020 229.5 48.6 4.8 7.2 36.5 0.0 11.3 46.5 21.2 11.4 13.2 0.7 14.1
2021 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2022 279.8 66.8 7.9 24.2 34.6 0.1 11.4 53.8 17.1 25.2 10.9 0.5 15.9
2022 Oct. 271.2 44.9 6.2 8.5 30.2 0.1 11.5 67.2 19.4 36.8 10.5 0.5 14.2
Nov. 304.5 71.1 14.6 21.3 35.1 0.1 11.5 63.3 24.0 28.5 10.4 0.5 15.0
Dec. 279.8 66.8 7.9 24.2 34.6 0.1 11.4 53.8 17.1 25.2 10.9 0.5 15.9
2023 Jan. 299.4 73.8 15.5 23.7 34.6 0.0 11.4 65.6 22.2 31.3 11.6 0.5 16.1
Feb. 317.8 82.5 16.4 29.5 36.6 0.0 11.4 70.3 24.2 34.2 11.4 0.5 16.1
Mar. 308.9 73.3 13.4 23.3 36.6 0.0 11.4 67.7 22.7 33.5 11.1 0.5 15.4
Changes *
2021 –17.9 –5.0 –0.5 –4.1 –0.4 +0.0 +0.3 +1.0 +0.6 +2.3 –1.8 –0.1 +0.0
2022 +69.1 +23.0 +3.5 +20.9 –1.4 –0.0 –0.3 +6.4 –4.6 +11.3 –0.3 –0.1 +1.8
2022 Oct. – 1.9 +1.6 –0.6 +0.2 +2.0 –0.0 –0.0 –4.0 –0.0 –3.7 –0.2 –0.0 +0.0
Nov. +33.0 +25.8 +8.2 +12.7 +4.9 – –0.0 –3.8 +4.6 –8.3 –0.1 +0.0 +0.8
Dec. –24.7 –4.3 –6.7 +2.9 –0.5 –0.0 –0.2 –9.6 –6.8 –3.3 +0.6 –0.0 +0.9
2023 Jan. +19.7 +6.9 +7.5 –0.6 –0.0 –0.0 +0.0 +11.9 +5.1 +6.1 +0.7 +0.0 +0.1
Feb. +18.3 +8.7 +0.9 +5.8 +2.0 –0.0 +0.0 +4.7 +2.0 +2.9 –0.2 –0.0 +0.0
Mar. – 8.9 –9.2 –3.0 –6.2 –0.0 –0.0 +0.0 –2.5 –1.4 –0.7 –0.4 –0.0 –0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and DeutscheTelekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”.
Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date
are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
37•
IV. Banks
Savings deposits  3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year  2
of which:
Domestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsup to and
including
1 year Totalup to and
including
2 yearsmore than
2 years TotalDomestic
householdsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsBank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)  5Liabilities
arising
from repos Period
End of year or month *
13.5 40.1 218.5 12.0 206.5 552.0 545.7 6.3 15.1 6.7 2.7 –2020
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 –2021
16.0 67.2 217.5 10.6 206.9 526.8 521.8 5.1 22.4 6.8 3.1 –2022
13.9 45.9 214.5 9.3 205.2 535.1 529.5 5.5 16.3 5.9 3.0 –2022 Oct.
14.1 55.9 215.1 9.8 205.3 530.1 524.8 5.3 19.4 6.4 3.1 – Nov.
16.0 67.2 217.5 10.6 206.9 526.8 521.8 5.1 22.4 6.8 3.1 – Dec.
16.6 80.0 219.5 12.0 207.5 516.6 511.7 4.9 28.1 7.4 3.2 –2023 Jan.
17.2 91.4 221.3 13.3 207.9 510.0 505.2 4.8 32.6 7.8 3.2 – Feb.
18.8 104.5 224.1 15.5 208.5 501.5 496.9 4.6 38.6 7.8 3.3 – Mar.
Changes *
– 1.4 – 8.4 – 0.2 –1.9 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 1.5 –0.1 – 1.9 –0.6 + 0.2 –2021
+ 4.0 + 35.7 – 0.3 +0.5 – 0.8 –26.1 –25.0 –1.1 + 9.2 +0.7 + 0.3 –2022
+ 0.2 + 4.6 + 0.1 +0.3 – 0.3 – 2.9 – 2.8 –0.1 + 2.0 +0.3 + 0.0 –2022 Oct.
+ 0.2 + 10.0 + 0.7 +0.5 + 0.1 – 5.0 – 4.7 –0.3 + 3.1 +0.4 + 0.1 – Nov.
+ 1.9 + 11.3 + 2.5 +0.8 + 1.7 – 3.2 – 3.1 –0.2 + 3.0 +0.4 + 0.0 – Dec.
+ 0.7 + 12.8 + 2.1 +1.4 + 0.6 – 5.3 – 5.0 –0.2 + 5.7 +0.7 + 0.1 –2023 Jan.
+ 0.6 + 11.3 + 1.8 +1.4 + 0.4 – 6.6 – 6.5 –0.1 + 4.5 +0.3 + 0.0 – Feb.
+ 1.1 + 12.8 + 2.4 +2.2 + 0.2 – 8.5 – 8.3 –0.2 + 5.9 –0.0 + 0.0 – Mar.
registered debt securities.  2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Table IV.12).  3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsofootnote 2).  4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2,4Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
68.5 43.2 8.0 12.4 4.9 0.0 66.0 10.9 32.9 21.4 0.8 –2020
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 –2021
80.0 49.2 12.5 13.8 4.4 0.0 79.2 8.3 44.9 25.5 0.6 –2022
70.1 42.7 9.6 13.3 4.5 0.0 89.0 18.6 46.3 23.4 0.7 –2022 Oct.
75.4 46.1 11.3 13.6 4.5 0.0 94.6 21.4 48.6 24.0 0.6 – Nov.
80.0 49.2 12.5 13.8 4.4 0.0 79.2 8.3 44.9 25.5 0.6 – Dec.
71.4 39.5 13.6 13.9 4.4 0.0 88.8 17.3 45.9 24.8 0.7 –2023 Jan.
76.6 42.9 15.4 14.0 4.3 0.0 88.5 17.9 44.3 25.7 0.7 – Feb.
73.9 39.1 16.6 14.0 4.2 0.0 94.0 17.4 50.5 25.4 0.7 – Mar.
Changes *
+2.8 +5.6 – 2.0 –0.2 – 0.5 – –16.8 –2.2 –13.9 –0.6 + 0.1 –2021
+10.2 +0.9 + 7.9 +1.3 + 0.1 – +29.6 +0.3 +24.5 +4.9 – 0.2 –2022
–2.0 –2.3 + 0.1 +0.2 + 0.0 – + 2.5 +3.1 + 0.0 –0.6 – 0.0 –2022 Oct.
+5.4 +3.5 + 1.7 +0.1 + 0.0 – + 5.6 +2.8 + 2.3 +0.7 – 0.1 – Nov.
+4.5 +3.1 + 1.3 +0.2 – 0.1 – –15.4 –13.1 – 3.7 +1.5 – 0.0 – Dec.
–8.7 –9.7 + 1.1 +0.0 – 0.0 – + 9.5 +9.1 + 1.1 –0.6 + 0.0 –2023 Jan.
+5.2 +3.4 + 1.8 +0.1 – 0.1 – – 0.3 +0.5 – 1.6 +0.8 – 0.0 – Feb.
–2.6 –3.8 + 1.2 +0.1 – 0.1 – + 5.4 –0.5 + 6.2 –0.3 + 0.0 – Mar.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Federal Railways Fund,
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund,
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund.  2 Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities.  3 Including deposits under savings and loan
contracts.  4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
38•
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months'
noticeat more than 3
months' notice
Period Total Total Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeMemo
item:
Interest
credited
on
savings
depositsnon-banks,
total Totalof which:
With
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsforeign
non-banks
End of year or month *
2020 566.8 560.6 533.3 288.0 27.3 18.0 6.3 5.7 1.8 30.2 28.3 22.1 1.9
2021 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 1.5 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2022 538.5 533.2 510.3 254.2 22.9 14.2 5.3 4.8 1.4 34.9 34.6 20.8 0.2
2022 Nov. 542.2 536.9 514.4 250.4 22.5 13.8 5.3 4.9 0.1 31.7 31.5 20.4 0.2
Dec. 538.5 533.2 510.3 254.2 22.9 14.2 5.3 4.8 0.7 34.9 34.6 20.8 0.2
2023 Jan. 527.9 522.7 498.8 237.1 23.9 15.5 5.2 4.7 0.1 40.9 40.6 21.5 0.3
Feb. 521.1 516.0 490.9 233.4 25.1 16.7 5.1 4.6 0.1 45.8 45.5 22.1 0.3
Mar. 512.3 507.2 480.6 229.4 26.7 18.4 5.0 4.5 0.1 52.1 51.7 22.9 0.4
Changes *
2021 +0.3 +0.7 +3.9 –18.5 –3.2 –3.2 –0.4 –0.3 . –5.2 –3.5 –2.3 –1.7
2022 –28.1 –27.5 –26.4 –14.6 –1.2 –0.6 –0.6 –0.6 . +10.2 +10.1 +1.3 +0.1
2022 Nov. –5.4 –5.3 –5.4 –2.0 +0.2 +0.2 –0.1 –0.1 . +3.4 +3.4 +0.6 +0.0
Dec. –3.7 –3.7 –4.1 +3.9 +0.4 +0.4 –0.1 –0.1 . +3.2 +3.2 +0.4 +0.0
2023 Jan. –5.6 –5.5 –6.5 –12.6 +1.0 +1.2 –0.1 –0.1 . +6.0 +6.0 +0.7 +0.0
Feb. –6.8 –6.7 –7.9 –3.8 +1.2 +1.3 –0.1 –0.1 . +4.9 +4.8 +0.6 +0.0
Mar. –8.8 –8.7 –10.3 –3.9 +1.6 +1.7 –0.1 –0.1 . +6.3 +6.2 +0.8 +0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified as timedeposits.  2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
basic rate of interest.  3 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
securities.
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
of which:
with maturities ofNon-negotiable
bearer debt
securities and
money market
paper  6 Subordinated
up to
and including 1 yearmore than 1 year up to
and including 2 years
Period TotalFloating
rate
bonds  1Zero
coupon
bonds  1,2Foreign
currency
bonds  3,4Certifi-
cates
of
deposit Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5more
than
2 years Totalof which:
with
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsnegotiable
debt
securitiesnon-
negotiable
debt
securities
End of year or month *
2020 1,119.0 117.1 12.7 313.6 89.4 94.3 1.5 23.8 3.1 1,000.9 1.1 0.9 34.8 0.4
2021 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2022 1,231.5 92.8 15.0 307.8 88.6 98.6 1.4 26.6 3.4 1,106.4 0.8 0.7 37.8 0.1
2022 Nov. 1,253.8 93.6 14.8 323.5 95.9 105.3 1.7 26.4 3.7 1,122.0 0.9 0.8 38.1 0.1
Dec. 1,231.5 92.8 15.0 307.8 88.6 98.6 1.4 26.6 3.4 1,106.4 0.8 0.7 37.8 0.1
2023 Jan. 1,249.7 91.3 15.6 305.4 89.9 101.3 1.3 28.4 3.5 1,120.0 0.9 0.8 37.8 0.1
Feb. 1,258.2 94.2 14.2 300.3 84.7 98.4 1.4 31.9 3.6 1,127.9 0.9 0.8 38.0 0.1
Mar. 1,274.7 86.0 14.3 300.0 95.3 111.6 1.4 34.2 3.6 1,128.9 0.8 0.8 37.7 0.1
Changes *
2021 +54.0 –10.3 +0.8 +17.6 +9.4 +12.6 + 0.4 –5.9 +1.3 +47.3 +0.4 +0.3 –0.2 –0.3
2022 +59.1 –12.7 +1.1 –23.6 –9.9 –8.3 – 0.5 +8.5 –1.1 +58.9 –0.1 +0.1 +3.5 –
2022 Nov. – 8.0 –1.9 –0.7 –12.3 –6.3 –6.2 – 0.1 +1.3 –0.2 –3.1 +0.0 –0.0 +0.0 –
Dec. –22.2 –0.7 +0.2 –15.6 –7.3 –6.8 – 0.3 +0.2 –0.3 –15.6 –0.1 –0.1 –0.3 –
2023 Jan. +18.2 –1.6 +0.6 –2.4 +1.3 +2.8 – 0.1 +1.9 +0.1 +13.6 +0.0 +0.1 –0.0 –
Feb. + 8.5 +3.0 –0.2 –5.1 –6.5 –2.9 + 0.0 +3.4 +0.1 +7.9 +0.0 +0.0 +0.3 –
Mar. +16.5 –8.2 +0.1 –0.3 +10.6 +13.2 + 0.0 +2.3 +0.0 +1.0 –0.0 +0.0 –0.3 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies.  2 Issue value when
floated.  3 Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreigncurrencies.  4 Bonds denominated in non-euro area currencies.  5 Negotiable bearer debt
securities and money market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%.
6 Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see
also Table IV.10, footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
39•
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks
(MFIs)  6Deposits of non-
banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans
End of
year/monthNum-
ber
of
associ-
ationsBalance
sheet
total  1Credit
bal-
ances
and
loans
(ex-
cluding
building
loans)  2Building
loans  3Bank
debt
secur-
ities  4Loans
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsInterim
and
bridging
loansOther
building
loansSecur- 
ities (in-
cluding
Treasury
bills
and
Treasury
discount
paper)  5Deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight
and time
depositsDeposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight and
time de-
posits  7Bearer
debt
secur-
ities
out-
stand-
ingCapital
(includ-
ing pub-
lished
re-
serves)  8Memo
item:
New
con-
tracts
entered
into in
year or
month  9
All building and loan associations
2022 18 259.7 30.6 0.0 15.4 11.1 135.0 40.5 22.9 2.5 36.1 185.3 9.3 5.2 12.3 91.3
2023 Jan. 18 260.0 31.2 0.0 15.3 11.4 134.8 40.5 22.8 2.4 35.6 185.6 9.6 5.6 12.4 9.1
Feb. 18 260.7 31.6 0.0 15.5 11.7 134.8 40.3 22.8 2.3 35.7 185.6 9.7 6.1 12.4 8.8
Mar. 18 260.6 30.8 0.0 15.5 12.0 135.1 40.4 22.8 2.0 35.5 185.4 10.1 6.1 12.6 9.5
Private building and Ioan associations
2023 Jan. 10 183.3 16.5 0.0 7.7 8.2 104.8 34.5 9.2 1.4 32.9 120.0 9.2 5.6 8.5 6.0
Feb. 10 184.0 17.0 0.0 7.8 8.3 104.8 34.3 9.2 1.2 33.1 119.9 9.3 6.1 8.5 6.1
Mar. 10 183.8 16.3 0.0 7.9 8.5 105.0 34.4 9.2 1.1 32.8 119.6 9.8 6.1 8.7 6.4
Public building and Ioan associations
2023 Jan. 8 76.6 14.7 0.0 7.7 3.2 30.0 6.1 13.6 1.0 2.7 65.6 0.3 – 3.9 3.1
Feb. 8 76.7 14.6 0.0 7.7 3.3 30.0 6.0 13.6 1.0 2.6 65.7 0.3 – 3.9 2.7
Mar. 8 76.7 14.5 0.0 7.6 3.5 30.1 6.1 13.6 1.0 2.6 65.8 0.3 – 3.9 3.1
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Capital promised Capital disbursed Changes in deposits
under savings and
loan contracts AllocationsDisbursement
commitments
outstanding at
end of periodInterest and
repayments
received on
building loans  11
Deposits under
savings and
loan contractsLoans under
savings and
loan contracts  10
PeriodAmounts
paid into
savings
and
loan ac-
counts  10Interest
credited
on
deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsRepay-
ments
of
deposits
under
cancelled
savings
and
loan
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Net
alloca-
tions  12 Total Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loans Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loansNewly
granted
interim
and
bridging
loans
and
other
building
loans Totalof
which:
Under
alloc-
ated
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Repay-
ments
during
quarterMemo
item:
Housing
bonuses
re-
ceived  13
All building and loan associations
2022 27.5 2.0 8.7 51.5 30.7 48.5 20.2 4.1 5.3 3.8 23.0 16.4 6.7 5.4 4.1 0.2
2023 Jan. 2.5 0.0 0.6 3.5 2.8 3.7 1.7 0.3 0.6 0.4 1.3 15.8 6.7 0.4 0.0
Feb. 2.3 0.1 0.5 4.0 3.1 3.8 2.0 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.2 15.5 6.9 0.4 0.0
Mar. 2.3 0.1 0.6 4.6 3.4 4.5 2.3 0.4 0.7 0.3 1.5 15.2 6.9 0.4 ... 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2023 Jan. 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.5 2.0 2.7 1.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.0 11.0 3.7 0.3 0.0
Feb. 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.8 2.1 2.9 1.5 0.2 0.4 0.3 1.0 10.6 3.7 0.3 0.0
Mar. 1.5 0.1 0.3 3.4 2.4 3.3 1.7 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.2 10.4 3.7 0.3 ... 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2023 Jan. 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.8 3.1 0.1 0.0
Feb. 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.2 1.0 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.9 3.2 0.1 0.0
Mar. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.3 1.0 1.2 0.6 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.8 3.2 0.1 ... 0.0
* Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures for
the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 See Table IV.2,
footnote 1.  2 Including claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from
registered debt securities and central bank credit balances.  3 Loans under savings and
loan contracts and interim and bridging loans.  4 Including money market paper and
small amounts of other securities issued by banks.  5 Including equalisation claims.
6 Including liabilities to building and loan associations.  7 Including small amounts of
savings deposits.  8 Including participation rights capital and fund for general bankingrisks. 9 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
new contracts.  10 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital disbursed".  11 Including housing
bonuses credited.  12 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans.  13 The amounts already
credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into
savings and loan accounts" and "Interest and repayments received on building loans".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2020 50 206 1,552.2 376.7 364.0 213.2 150.8 12.7 504.8 409.6 14.3 395.3 95.2 670.7 523.6
2021 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2022 47 202 1,625.5 461.8 447.4 315.6 131.8 14.4 516.7 447.7 9.7 437.9 69.0 647.0 513.3
2022 May 50 208 1,759.2 551.2 537.3 369.0 168.3 13.9 554.0 477.6 13.1 464.5 76.4 653.9 514.9
June 51 211 1,741.0 516.8 502.8 338.8 164.0 13.9 553.5 480.7 12.1 468.6 72.8 670.7 524.4
July 52 211 1,688.6 503.1 488.6 327.5 161.1 14.5 555.8 484.9 11.0 474.0 70.8 629.7 454.0
Aug. 50 208 1,735.3 497.8 483.0 328.4 154.6 14.8 569.2 497.0 11.1 485.9 72.2 668.3 503.1
Sep. 50 208 1,889.5 536.3 522.4 354.4 168.0 13.9 563.5 488.9 10.6 478.3 74.6 789.8 632.4
Oct. 50 207 1,873.5 533.0 519.9 359.7 160.2 13.1 562.1 487.8 11.2 476.5 74.4 778.4 625.8
Nov. 50 207 1,757.8 511.2 498.6 347.3 151.3 12.6 548.7 475.2 10.5 464.7 73.6 697.9 526.6
Dec. 47 202 1,625.5 461.8 447.4 315.6 131.8 14.4 516.7 447.7 9.7 437.9 69.0 647.0 513.3
2023 Jan. 47 201 1,638.4 503.3 488.3 346.1 142.2 14.9 510.1 439.4 9.5 429.9 70.7 625.0 462.3
Feb. 47 200 1,663.9 493.1 477.4 337.8 139.6 15.6 509.2 440.0 9.6 430.5 69.2 661.6 509.3
Changes *
2021 +1 +1 –48.4 +87.3 +87.1 +84.9 +2.2 +0.3 –26.2 –6.5 –1.3 –5.1 –19.7 –136.9 –128.1
2022 –4 –5 +124.1 –13.3 –14.3 +17.8 –32.1 +1.0 +6.7 +17.5 –3.2 +20.6 –10.8 +108.1 +103.0
2022 June +1 +3 –19.9 –36.9 –36.9 –30.2 –6.6 +0.0 –8.4 –4.0 –1.0 –3.1 –4.4 + 15.1 + 7.4
July +1 – –53.4 –15.9 –16.5 –11.3 –5.2 +0.5 –4.8 –2.0 –1.2 –0.8 –2.7 – 42.0 –71.9
Aug. –2 –3 +51.8 –6.6 –6.9 +0.9 –7.8 +0.3 +9.0 +8.0 +0.1 +7.9 +1.0 + 37.8 +47.9
Sep. ±0 – +153.1 +36.7 +37.6 +26.0 +11.6 –0.9 –11.9 –13.7 –0.5 –13.2 +1.8 +120.3 +128.5
Oct. ±0 –1 –15.2 –1.6 –0.8 +5.3 –6.1 –0.8 +3.0 +2.7 +0.6 +2.1 +0.3 – 10.6 – 6.0
Nov. ±0 – –113.5 –17.9 –17.5 –12.4 –5.0 –0.4 –0.4 –0.8 –0.8 –0.0 +0.5 – 78.3 –97.0
Dec. –3 –5 –131.0 –46.9 –48.7 –31.7 –17.0 +1.8 –23.6 –19.9 –0.7 –19.2 –3.7 – 49.6 –11.9
2023 Jan. ±0 –1 +13.3 +42.5 +42.0 +30.5 +11.5 +0.5 –2.7 –4.8 –0.3 –4.6 +2.1 – 21.6 –50.4
Feb. ±0 –1 +24.5 –11.7 –12.4 –8.3 –4.1 +0.7 –5.7 –3.7 +0.1 –3.8 –2.0 + 35.6 +46.2
Foreign subsidiaries                                           End of year or month *
2020 12 36 229.5 44.8 39.9 17.4 22.5 4.9 139.7 114.4 13.1 101.4 25.3 44.9 0.0
2021 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2022 11 32 256.7 61.5 52.0 20.5 31.4 9.5 145.8 124.5 13.3 111.2 21.3 49.4 0.0
2022 May 12 35 256.5 48.5 43.6 19.6 24.1 4.9 147.7 123.9 13.2 110.8 23.8 60.2 0.0
June 12 35 258.0 50.3 44.6 21.5 23.1 5.7 148.9 125.1 13.1 112.0 23.8 58.8 0.0
July 11 34 256.6 47.8 42.1 19.7 22.4 5.7 150.6 126.0 13.0 113.0 24.7 58.2 0.0
Aug. 11 34 263.5 48.4 42.8 19.7 23.0 5.6 150.1 125.5 13.2 112.3 24.6 64.9 0.0
Sep. 11 33 260.5 53.0 47.9 20.8 27.1 5.2 149.3 126.0 13.1 112.9 23.3 58.2 0.0
Oct. 11 33 258.2 53.0 47.0 19.3 27.7 6.0 149.1 127.0 13.3 113.7 22.0 56.1 0.0
Nov. 11 33 258.2 58.1 49.5 19.4 30.1 8.6 148.4 127.0 13.4 113.6 21.4 51.7 0.0
Dec. 11 32 256.7 61.5 52.0 20.5 31.4 9.5 145.8 124.5 13.3 111.2 21.3 49.4 0.0
2023 Jan. 11 32 253.0 60.0 49.9 20.0 29.9 10.1 145.3 124.5 13.3 111.3 20.7 47.8 0.0
Feb. 11 32 254.8 60.7 50.6 22.4 28.2 10.1 146.1 125.4 13.4 111.9 20.7 47.9 0.0
Changes *
2021 ±0 –1 +12.0 +3.8 +2.8 +3.4 –0.5 +1.0 –2.5 –0.5 –0.5 –0.0 –2.1 + 10.8 ± 0.0
2022 –1 –3 +6.5 +8.2 +5.2 –0.2 +5.6 +2.8 +5.0 +6.9 +0.7 +6.3 –1.9 – 6.5 ± 0.0
2022 June – – –0.3 +0.8 +0.2 +2.0 –1.8 +0.6 +0.3 +0.3 –0.0 +0.3 +0.0 – 1.4 ± 0.0
July –1 –1 –2.8 –3.2 –3.1 –1.9 –1.2 –0.1 +1.0 +0.2 –0.2 +0.3 +0.8 – 0.6 ± 0.0
Aug. – – +5.9 +0.2 +0.3 +0.1 +0.2 –0.1 –0.9 –0.9 +0.3 –1.1 –0.1 + 6.7 ± 0.0
Sep. – –1 –4.4 +3.9 +4.5 +1.0 +3.5 –0.6 –1.5 –0.2 –0.1 –0.1 –1.3 – 6.7 ± 0.0
Oct. – – –1.2 +0.6 –0.4 –1.5 +1.1 +1.0 +0.3 +1.5 +0.2 +1.4 –1.2 – 2.1 ± 0.0
Nov. – – +1.7 +5.4 +2.6 +0.1 +2.6 +2.8 +0.7 +1.4 +0.1 +1.2 –0.7 – 4.4 ± 0.0
Dec. – –1 +0.2 +4.1 +3.0 +1.2 +1.8 +1.1 –1.7 –1.6 –0.2 –1.5 –0.0 – 2.2 ± 0.0
2023 Jan. – – –2.7 –1.0 –1.7 –0.6 –1.2 +0.7 –0.0 +0.6 –0.0 +0.6 –0.6 – 1.6 ± 0.0
Feb. – – +0.6 +0.3 +0.4 +2.4 –2.1 –0.1 +0.2 +0.2 +0.2 +0.0 –0.0 + 0.1 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated fromthe flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always
to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
872.2 588.5 431.8 156.7 283.7 11.7 10.2 1.5 272.0 61.5 49.9 568.6 523.1 2020
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 2021
943.4 573.6 435.2 138.5 369.8 10.4 8.9 1.5 359.4 61.7 63.1 557.4 512.9 2022
1,059.1 633.0 437.3 195.7 426.1 10.5 8.7 1.7 415.6 90.4 52.9 556.8 512.4 2022 May
1,035.8 630.0 447.9 182.1 405.8 10.7 8.9 1.8 395.1 84.1 53.4 567.7 521.9 June
1,045.4 634.6 458.7 175.9 410.8 10.6 8.8 1.8 400.2 81.3 53.9 507.9 452.6 July
1,050.7 639.8 470.6 169.1 411.0 11.3 9.5 1.8 399.6 88.1 54.6 541.9 500.5 Aug.
1,072.5 661.9 480.1 181.8 410.6 11.3 9.5 1.9 399.3 89.6 55.4 672.1 629.1 Sep.
1,054.2 645.1 466.6 178.5 409.1 10.7 8.9 1.8 398.4 85.7 66.2 667.4 622.7 Oct.
1,041.1 639.9 457.8 182.1 401.2 10.2 8.6 1.6 391.0 82.6 65.5 568.6 523.8 Nov.
943.4 573.6 435.2 138.5 369.8 10.4 8.9 1.5 359.4 61.7 63.1 557.4 512.9 Dec.
985.2 595.5 432.8 162.6 389.7 9.5 8.3 1.2 380.2 85.2 63.2 504.8 462.6 2023 Jan.
960.9 578.2 420.7 157.5 382.7 9.0 7.8 1.2 373.7 87.3 63.5 552.1 509.9 Feb.
Changes *
+71.1 +43.1 +31.0 +12.0 + 28.1 – 3.6 – 3.9 + 0.3 +31.7 + 0.1 + 1.4 –130.8 – 119.7 2021
– 6.2 –64.2 –22.2 –42.0 + 58.0 + 2.3 + 2.6 – 0.3 +55.7 – 6.3 +11.8 +119.0 + 109.5 2022
–26.9 –6.4 +10.6 –17.0 –20.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 –20.7 – 8.0 +0.5 + 10.9 + 9.5 2022 June
+ 6.6 +1.9 +10.8 –8.9 + 4.7 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 4.8 – 3.9 +0.5 – 59.8 – 69.3 July
+ 3.4 +3.4 +11.9 –8.6 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 – 0.7 + 6.0 +0.6 + 39.9 + 48.0 Aug.
+19.3 +19.8 +9.4 +10.4 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.3 +0.8 +130.2 + 128.5 Sep.
–15.9 –14.5 –13.4 –1.1 – 1.4 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.8 – 3.0 +10.9 – 4.7 – 6.4 Oct.
– 7.9 –0.5 –8.8 +8.3 – 7.4 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 6.9 – 0.9 –0.8 – 98.8 – 98.9 Nov.
–94.3 –63.2 –22.6 –40.6 –31.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 –31.3 –19.6 –2.4 – 11.2 – 10.9 Dec.
+43.3 +23.2 –2.3 +25.5 +20.1 – 0.8 – 0.6 – 0.2 +20.9 +24.0 +0.1 – 52.5 – 50.3 2023 Jan.
–26.5 –19.3 –12.2 –7.1 – 7.2 – 0.5 – 0.5 + 0.0 – 6.7 + 1.1 +0.4 + 47.2 + 47.3 Feb.
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
163.4 59.6 34.1 25.5 103.8 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.1 16.6 20.3 29.2 0.0 2020
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 2021
189.4 67.5 38.6 28.9 122.0 6.9 4.6 2.3 115.1 13.5 20.1 33.7 0.0 2022
190.9 70.3 36.3 34.1 120.5 7.2 4.8 2.4 113.3 15.3 20.1 30.2 0.0 2022 May
190.7 68.9 35.9 33.0 121.7 7.4 5.1 2.3 114.3 16.0 20.3 31.0 0.0 June
189.6 66.3 35.0 31.4 123.3 7.7 5.4 2.4 115.5 15.6 20.2 31.2 0.0 July
194.4 67.0 36.3 30.7 127.5 8.1 5.7 2.3 119.4 15.3 20.4 33.3 0.0 Aug.
191.4 68.3 37.1 31.2 123.0 7.7 5.3 2.3 115.4 14.8 20.0 34.4 0.0 Sep.
188.7 68.1 37.5 30.6 120.6 7.4 5.1 2.3 113.2 13.8 20.3 35.4 0.0 Oct.
190.2 68.8 38.7 30.1 121.5 7.1 4.8 2.3 114.4 13.1 20.4 34.4 0.0 Nov.
189.4 67.5 38.6 28.9 122.0 6.9 4.6 2.3 115.1 13.5 20.1 33.7 0.0 Dec.
186.2 66.7 38.5 28.2 119.6 7.0 4.5 2.5 112.6 12.8 20.1 33.9 0.0 2023 Jan.
187.2 69.3 40.3 29.1 117.9 6.9 4.4 2.5 110.9 12.7 20.2 34.7 0.0 Feb.
Changes *
+12.1 + 3.2 – 1.1 + 4.3 + 8.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 2021
+ 7.7 + 1.4 + 5.6 – 4.2 + 6.3 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 6.7 – 2.9 – 0.2 + 2.2 ± 0.0 2022
– 1.5 –2.0 –0.4 –1.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.7 +0.2 + 0.4 ± 0.0 2022 June
– 2.0 –3.0 –1.0 –2.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.4 –0.1 – 0.3 ± 0.0 July
+ 4.1 +0.4 +1.3 –0.9 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 3.4 – 0.3 +0.2 + 1.9 ± 0.0 Aug.
– 4.1 +1.0 +0.8 +0.1 – 5.1 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 4.7 – 0.5 –0.4 + 0.7 ± 0.0 Sep.
– 2.0 +0.0 +0.4 –0.4 – 2.0 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.7 – 1.0 +0.3 + 1.4 ± 0.0 Oct.
+ 2.7 +0.6 +1.2 –0.6 + 2.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 2.4 – 0.7 +0.1 – 0.4 ± 0.0 Nov.
+ 0.4 –0.9 –0.1 –0.8 + 1.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.3 –0.2 – 0.3 ± 0.0 Dec.
– 2.6 –0.6 –0.1 –0.5 – 2.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 2.1 – 0.7 +0.0 + 0.5 ± 0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 0.1 +2.4 +1.8 +0.6 – 2.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 2.2 – 0.1 +0.1 + 0.5 ± 0.0 Feb.
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and
other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.  4 Excluding
subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of negotiable andnon-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Including subordinated
liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 3,656.9 0.1
2022 16,843.0 168.4 168.0 195.6 28.1 0.0
2023 Feb. 16,497.9 165.0 164.6 191.1 26.4 0.0
p Mar. 16,616.9 166.2 165.8 182.8 ... ...
Apr. . . . . . .
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
2022 4,664,630 27.7 46,646 46,512 54,848 8,337 5
2023 Feb. 4,465,360 27.1 44,654 44,519 54,170 9,651 1
p Mar. 4,561,926 27.5 45,619 45,485 50,103 4,618 4
Apr. . . . . . . .
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2022 9,814 7,396 3,216 14,465 8,295 117 2,471
2023 Feb. 9,341 6,898 3,064 13,926 8,356 111 2,343
Mar. 9,464 7,045 3,130 14,526 8,291 116 2,468
Apr. . . . . . . .
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2022 3,352,177 12,609 566,227 543,694 116,094
2023 Feb. 3,335,658 15,268 425,253 534,846 106,281
Mar. 3,392,359 13,044 477,719 524,019 110,215
Apr. . . . . .
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 5 of the
Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum
reserve requirements (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies,
pursuant to Article 6(1)(a)).  3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2%between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at
1%. 4 Article 6(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the
application of minimum reserve requirements.  5 Average credit balances of credit
institutions at national central banks.  6 Average credit balances less required reserves
after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.  7 Required reserves after deduction of the
lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2007 Mar. 14 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 2002 Jan. 1 2.57 2009 Jan. 1 1.62
June 13 3.00 – 4.00 5.00 Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 July 1 2.47 July 1 0.12
2008 July 9 3.25 – 4.25 5.25 2014 June 11 – 0.10 0.15 – 0.40 2003 Jan. 1 1.97 2011 July 1 0.37
Oct. 8 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 Sep. 10 – 0.20 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 1.22
Oct. 9 3.25 3.75 – 4.25 2012 Jan. 1 0.12
Nov. 12 2.75 3.25 – 3.75 2015 Dec. 9 – 0.30 0.05 – 0.30 2004 Jan. 1 1.14
Dec. 10 2.00 2.50 – 3.00 July 1 1.13 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
2016 Mar. 16 – 0.40 0.00 – 0.25 July 1 – 0.38
2009 Jan. 21 1.00 2.00 – 3.00 2005 Jan. 1 1.21
Mar. 11 0.50 1.50 – 2.50 2019 Sep. 18 – 0.50 0.00 – 0.25 July 1 1.17 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
Apr. 8 0.25 1.25 – 2.25 July 1 – 0.73
May 13 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2022 Jul. 27 0.00 0.50 – 0.75 2006 Jan. 1 1.37
Sep. 14 0.75 1.25 – 1.50 July 1 1.95 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
2011 Apr. 13 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 Nov. 2 1.50 2.00 – 2.25
July 13 0.75 1.50 – 2.25 Dec. 21 2.00 2.50 – 2.75 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2016 July 1 – 0.88
Nov. 9 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 July 1 3.19
Dec. 14 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2023 Feb. 8 2.50 3.00 – 3.25 2023 Jan. 1 1.62
2008 Jan. 1 3.32
2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 July 1 3.19
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2023 Apr. 5 1 167 1 167 3.50 – – – 7
Apr. 12 1 622 1 622 3.50 – – – 7
Apr. 19 1 535 1 535 3.50 – – – 7
Apr. 26 1 933 1 933 3.50 – – – 7
May 3 1 176 1 176 3.50 – – – 7
May 10 1 327 1 327 3.75 – – – 7
May 17 1 410 1 410 3.75 – – – 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2023 Feb. 23 577 577 2      … – – – 98
Mar. 30 743 743 2      … – – – 91
Apr. 27 716 716 2      … – – – 91
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month
% per annum
EURIBOR ®  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2022 Sep. 0.355 0.42 0.57 1.01 1.60 2.23
Oct. 0.656 0.70 0.92 1.43 2.00 2.63
Nov. 1.368 1.38 1.42 1.83 2.32 2.83
Dec. 1.568 1.60 1.72 2.06 2.56 3.02
2023 Jan. 1.902 1.89 1.98 2.35 2.86 3.34
Feb. 2.275 2.30 2.37 2.64 3.14 3.53
Mar. 2.572 2.57 2.71 2.91 3.27 3.65
Apr. 2.900 2.88 2.96 3.18 3.52 3.76
1 Euro Short-Term Rate: on the basis of individual euro-denominated transactions
conducted and settled on the previous business day, the European Central Bank
publishes the €STR since 2 October 2019. T Monthly averages are calculations by
Deutsche Bundesbank. ransactions are reported by euro area banks subject to reporting
obligations in compliance with Money Market Statistical Reporting Regulation.2 Monthly averages are own calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank based on Euribor ®
daily rates calculated by the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). The monthly
data are unweighted averages. Information on the methodology of Euribor ® daily
rates administered by EMMI is available here:
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/benchmarks/euribor/methodology/

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Mar. 0.17 40,201 0.89 219,655 – 0.28 68,341 0.74 24,011
Apr. 0.18 39,503 0.88 219,264 – 0.27 73,001 0.73 23,471
May 0.19 39,659 0.87 218,855 – 0.20 65,198 0.73 23,335
June 0.19 39,682 0.87 218,128 – 0.10 66,308 0.78 23,397
July 0.24 40,392 0.86 217,843 0.04 72,141 0.86 24,213
Aug. 0.30 42,949 0.86 217,606 0.17 79,349 0.92 24,813
Sep. 0.46 50,096 0.86 217,608 0.52 95,994 0.97 24,605
Oct. 0.67 56,389 0.85 217,771 0.76 116,977 1.00 24,179
Nov. 0.94 69,368 0.85 218,426 1.13 121,576 1.00 23,542
Dec. 1.16 84,147 0.86 220,466 1.39 123,678 1.02 22,605
2023 Jan. 1.37 103,036 0.87 221,773 1.67 131,363 1.05 23,299
Feb. 1.57 119,894 0.87 222,671 1.98 140,254 1.07 23,409
Mar. 1.77 140,238 0.88 224,034 2.29 148,563 1.10 22,153
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Mar. 2.10 3,620 1.53 26,670 1.71 1,473,852 6.59 46,226 3.33 77,518 3.25 328,996
Apr. 2.08 3,636 1.54 26,766 1.71 1,483,015 6.52 45,715 3.33 77,073 3.25 329,959
May 2.15 3,584 1.55 26,874 1.70 1,492,093 6.51 46,567 3.33 76,658 3.25 330,295
June 2.19 3,573 1.58 26,899 1.70 1,500,141 6.59 47,810 3.36 76,324 3.27 330,379
July 2.28 3,687 1.70 27,244 1.70 1,508,724 6.58 46,813 3.39 77,074 3.27 333,017
Aug. 2.43 3,713 1.76 27,275 1.70 1,515,561 6.75 47,402 3.41 76,990 3.29 334,182
Sep. 2.61 3,627 1.86 27,290 1.70 1,522,592 6.95 48,339 3.46 77,011 3.32 333,384
Oct. 3.06 3,689 2.06 27,325 1.72 1,528,186 7.39 47,749 3.53 76,686 3.42 333,308
Nov. 3.35 3,604 2.21 27,320 1.73 1,533,123 7.51 47,012 3.60 75,908 3.46 333,366
Dec. 3.66 3,497 2.37 26,984 1.74 1,535,823 7.73 47,250 3.68 76,467 3.49 331,711
2023 Jan. 4.10 3,550 2.52 26,527 1.76 1,534,684 8.20 46,598 3.78 75,973 3.55 332,207
Feb. 4.32 3,429 2.64 26,317 1.77 1,536,492 8.44 47,291 3.84 75,755 3.59 332,184
Mar. 4.45 3,493 2.77 26,266 1.78 1,540,366 8.67 48,144 3.94 75,854 3.64 330,260
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Mar. 1.90 179,074 1.58 204,001 1.57 832,210
Apr. 1.91 180,007 1.58 206,200 1.57 838,405
May 1.87 184,783 1.62 208,824 1.58 842,912
June 1.94 189,986 1.65 213,733 1.64 846,768
July 2.07 194,397 1.69 218,875 1.66 854,793
Aug. 2.24 209,826 1.74 226,447 1.68 861,022
Sep. 2.63 211,369 2.00 230,393 1.80 865,922
Oct. 3.05 209,961 2.26 237,078 1.92 874,758
Nov. 3.49 213,334 2.49 236,253 1.96 879,122
Dec. 3.70 192,635 2.83 240,161 2.01 872,949
2023 Jan. 4.04 199,612 3.07 241,498 2.05 876,315
Feb. 4.28 194,396 3.22 246,124 2.07 878,910
Mar. 4.66 193,455 3.45 245,138 2.13 876,386
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Mar. – 0.02 1,808,690 0.12 2,044 0.28 258 0.38 824 0.07 535,696 0.13 22,897
Apr. – 0.02 1,826,796 0.14 1,974 0.39 292 0.46 694 0.07 534,800 0.13 22,686
May – 0.02 1,827,315 0.14 2,052 0.52 574 0.66 1,023 0.07 533,590 0.14 22,562
June – 0.02 1,831,910 0.17 2,490 0.71 357 0.80 891 0.08 531,943 0.14 22,408
July – 0.00 1,854,420 0.31 3,227 0.83 776 0.75 1,128 0.07 530,302 0.15 22,255
Aug. 0.00 1,852,118 0.49 4,742 1.04 925 0.95 1,582 0.08 527,959 0.16 22,201
Sep. 0.01 1,854,045 0.84 7,457 1.49 915 1.29 1,289 0.09 522,685 0.19 22,155
Oct. 0.01 1,853,933 1.06 10,188 1.89 1,332 1.49 1,549 0.11 519,453 0.27 22,383
Nov. 0.02 1,858,811 1.34 17,255 1.99 1,783 1.70 1,958 0.13 514,161 0.33 22,556
Dec. 0.07 1,857,241 1.53 20,197 2.01 1,738 1.52 2,138 0.16 510,188 0.40 22,970
2023 Jan. 0.09 1,839,201 1.68 26,082 2.14 2,941 1.97 2,504 0.20 498,875 0.53 23,945
Feb. 0.12 1,828,243 1.95 25,533 2.24 2,346 2.09 1,853 0.26 490,990 0.67 25,179
Mar. 0.17 1,803,489 2.19 29,637 2.36 3,672 2.07 2,186 0.30 480,790 0.84 26,746
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2022 Mar. – 0.15 607,552 – 0.50 42,187 0.09 417 1.09 1,069
Apr. – 0.15 600,726 – 0.49 42,722 0.37 633 1.12 182
May – 0.15 609,181 – 0.44 41,476 0.44 1,240 1.35 513
June – 0.15 600,646 – 0.36 43,089 0.91 687 2.27 742
July – 0.07 604,802 – 0.11 26,039 1.15 678 1.90 1,466
Aug. – 0.01 636,259 0.07 51,099 0.92 467 . .
Sep. 0.03 615,838 0.62 73,349 1.93 494 2.75 1,111
Oct. 0.04 617,742 0.81 99,703 1.34 707 1.89 146
Nov. 0.10 612,760 1.43 90,346 2.66 631 1.94 189
Dec. 0.11 601,728 1.66 65,813 2.94 734 2.42 252
2023 Jan. 0.19 595,205 1.96 89,287 2.92 671 2.41 89
Feb. 0.28 580,954 2.31 100,034 3.09 539 2.17 238
Mar. 0.44 566,784 2.58 89,895 2.95 723 2.62 292
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2022 Mar. 5.34 5.38 10,208 6.24 1,935 7.28 397 4.08 3,481 5.97 6,330
Apr. 5.70 5.64 8,523 6.35 1,682 7.93 316 4.46 2,654 6.08 5,553
May 5.81 5.77 9,788 6.51 1,924 8.04 332 4.56 3,067 6.24 6,390
June 5.99 5.95 9,509 6.79 1,926 8.50 307 4.66 3,054 6.46 6,149
July 6.15 6.12 9,064 6.97 1,771 8.76 314 4.80 2,968 6.65 5,782
Aug. 6.33 6.31 8,927 7.25 1,765 8.79 349 4.92 2,931 6.88 5,647
Sep. 6.43 6.43 8,562 7.37 1,613 8.64 346 4.96 2,922 7.09 5,294
Oct. 6.74 6.75 7,362 7.57 1,339 8.79 366 5.28 2,546 7.43 4,450
Nov. 6.81 6.87 7,913 7.92 1,330 7.51 385 5.37 2,868 7.74 4,659
Dec. 6.62 6.71 7,270 7.69 1,091 7.64 465 5.26 3,083 7.79 3,722
2023 Jan. 7.49 7.54 8,159 8.43 1,607 7.95 406 6.01 2,728 8.34 5,025
Feb. 7.56 7.52 7,505 8.42 1,364 8.96 307 6.13 2,664 8.24 4,534
Mar. 7.74 7.70 8,784 8.62 1,592 8.64 327 6.39 3,150 8.42 5,308
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2022 Mar. 1.87 5,992 1.61 1,247 1.70 2,149 2.43 724 1.85 3,119
Apr. 2.03 4,980 1.70 1,170 1.82 1,829 2.33 760 2.10 2,391
May 2.32 4,277 2.03 913 1.84 1,387 2.89 628 2.46 2,262
June 2.39 5,035 1.96 1,196 1.81 1,990 3.04 717 2.68 2,328
July 2.62 4,606 1.97 1,195 2.06 1,980 3.24 629 2.97 1,997
Aug. 2.94 4,474 2.33 777 2.24 1,627 3.48 730 3.30 2,117
Sep. 2.95 4,255 2.51 1,090 2.60 2,250 3.39 610 3.33 1,395
Oct. 3.40 3,728 2.68 1,190 3.06 1,805 4.00 541 3.61 1,382
Nov. 3.78 3,938 3.28 947 3.52 1,808 4.18 746 3.90 1,384
Dec. 3.90 5,403 3.43 1,210 3.86 3,026 4.24 762 3.80 1,615
2023 Jan. 4.10 3,906 3.74 1,286 3.98 2,082 4.55 621 4.07 1,203
Feb. 4.35 3,065 4.03 814 4.36 1,467 4.83 508 4.10 1,090
Mar. 4.56 4,848 4.29 1,293 4.66 2,384 4.87 761 4.28 1,703
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2022 Mar. 1.96 3,879 . . 1.84 1,414 2.58 512 1.88 1,953
Apr. 2.13 3,210 . . 1.92 1,079 2.42 577 2.16 1,554
May 2.40 2,886 . . 2.00 928 2.95 493 2.48 1,465
June 2.50 3,461 . . 2.06 1,239 3.13 538 2.62 1,684
July 2.76 2,994 . . 2.21 1,252 3.36 474 3.08 1,268
Aug. 2.94 2,573 . . 2.38 1,063 3.68 435 3.19 1,075
Sep. 3.09 2,843 . . 2.76 1,446 3.53 465 3.37 932
Oct. 3.44 2,570 . . 3.05 1,244 4.19 405 3.63 921
Nov. 3.91 2,684 . . 3.69 1,175 4.32 563 3.94 946
Dec. 4.11 3,777 . . 4.10 2,187 4.51 554 3.89 1,036
2023 Jan. 4.18 2,830 . . 4.06 1,489 4.75 465 4.07 876
Feb. 4.44 2,297 . . 4.47 1,105 4.94 411 4.15 781
Mar. 4.69 3,540 . . 4.75 1,818 5.13 567 4.37 1,155
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2022 Mar. 1.69 1.65 32,270 1.63 6,216 1.93 2,704 1.65 1,987 1.50 11,809 1.71 15,770
Apr. 1.98 1.94 25,813 1.90 4,946 2.01 2,323 1.88 1,703 1.81 10,024 2.04 11,763
May 2.29 2.25 27,272 2.20 4,758 2.10 2,491 2.10 1,834 2.12 10,907 2.42 12,041
June 2.62 2.57 22,990 2.46 3,897 2.19 2,461 2.45 1,663 2.46 8,659 2.77 10,208
July 2.85 2.80 21,054 2.48 3,828 2.33 2,814 2.64 1,592 2.73 8,023 3.04 8,626
Aug. 2.89 2.84 18,491 2.57 3,215 2.55 2,488 2.78 1,512 2.74 6,880 3.04 7,610
Sep. 3.08 3.01 16,113 2.81 2,719 2.73 2,186 2.93 1,366 2.96 5,969 3.18 6,593
Oct. 3.31 3.25 14,926 2.79 3,204 2.90 2,522 3.23 1,363 3.19 5,433 3.48 5,607
Nov. 3.67 3.60 13,557 3.32 2,689 3.40 2,330 3.75 1,209 3.51 4,846 3.75 5,172
Dec. 3.60 3.52 13,514 3.17 2,756 3.57 2,620 3.74 1,267 3.41 4,837 3.55 4,790
2023 Jan. 3.73 3.66 12,735 3.47 3,076 3.95 2,244 3.80 1,196 3.45 4,531 3.70 4,764
Feb. 3.85 3.79 12,055 3.73 2,724 4.16 2,097 3.99 1,207 3.60 4,229 3.74 4,522
Mar. 3.95 3.88 15,258 3.76 3,248 4.44 2,459 4.10 1,524 3.64 5,387 3.80 5,889
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2022 Mar. . 1.57 14,566 . . 1.80 936 1.54 974 1.46 5,637 1.64 7,019
Apr. . 1.86 11,672 . . 1.88 804 1.71 831 1.77 4,658 1.96 5,379
May . 2.20 12,086 . . 1.96 839 2.08 856 2.11 5,030 2.34 5,361
June . 2.49 10,285 . . 2.08 865 2.37 774 2.41 4,073 2.67 4,573
July . 2.69 9,711 . . 2.19 1,031 2.51 802 2.63 3,794 2.91 4,084
Aug. . 2.74 8,203 . . 2.36 820 2.63 711 2.68 3,215 2.92 3,457
Sep. . 2.90 7,168 . . 2.54 746 2.80 638 2.84 2,725 3.05 3,059
Oct. . 3.15 6,622 . . 2.78 916 3.20 661 3.10 2,482 3.31 2,563
Nov. . 3.47 6,083 . . 3.22 806 3.62 563 3.42 2,402 3.57 2,312
Dec. . 3.43 5,975 . . 3.46 923 3.64 554 3.36 2,213 3.42 2,285
2023 Jan. . 3.51 5,615 . . 3.85 813 3.66 584 3.38 2,136 3.47 2,082
Feb. . 3.64 5,134 . . 4.04 763 3.84 556 3.49 1,928 3.58 1,887
Mar. . 3.74 6,733 . . 4.30 841 4.05 752 3.56 2,520 3.65 2,620
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Mar. 7.14 37,360 7.02 29,314 14.94 4,076 2.71 87,104 2.72 86,709
Apr. 7.00 36,819 6.91 28,444 14.96 4,100 2.65 88,202 2.66 87,834
May 6.96 37,636 6.98 28,730 14.89 4,143 2.63 89,402 2.65 88,972
June 7.01 38,876 7.02 30,004 14.84 4,192 2.66 93,301 2.67 92,870
July 7.04 37,549 6.98 28,881 14.80 4,246 2.68 93,897 2.69 93,495
Aug. 7.17 38,113 7.17 29,170 14.94 4,305 2.73 96,714 2.74 96,288
Sep. 7.31 39,138 7.36 30,018 14.97 4,359 3.04 97,298 3.05 96,819
Oct. 7.78 38,898 7.74 30,031 15.66 4,479 3.39 97,186 3.40 96,732
Nov. 8.44 38,580 8.20 27,368 15.61 6,475 3.74 97,850 3.76 97,371
Dec. 8.70 38,597 8.53 27,493 15.55 6,515 3.99 94,611 4.01 94,205
2023 Jan. 9.16 38,116 8.95 27,199 16.34 6,480 4.31 98,205 4.32 97,791
Feb. 9.40 38,538 9.32 27,356 16.60 6,475 4.63 98,285 4.65 97,859
Mar. 9.56 39,288 9.54 28,288 16.58 6,390 5.08 98,116 5.11 97,652
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2022 Mar. 1.50 99,725 1.39 29,044 1.78 10,692 2.54 1,571 1.83 1,981 1.38 68,399 1.77 5,314 1.65 11,768
Apr. 1.53 74,483 1.51 19,771 1.82 9,033 2.63 1,388 2.19 1,883 1.31 47,761 1.79 3,673 1.91 10,745
May 1.49 78,588 1.73 18,948 1.82 9,416 2.82 1,358 2.31 1,703 1.17 53,228 2.65 3,419 2.16 9,464
June 2.19 123,645 1.58 28,803 1.88 10,561 2.97 1,465 2.59 1,483 2.16 94,434 2.35 4,558 2.43 11,144
July 1.89 80,810 1.76 22,550 1.95 10,057 3.12 1,435 2.91 1,400 1.66 53,206 2.43 3,997 2.50 10,715
Aug. 1.97 87,373 1.54 20,380 2.17 9,306 3.36 1,327 2.96 1,241 1.80 64,748 2.47 2,987 2.56 7,764
Sep. 2.67 99,740 2.23 28,861 2.60 10,891 3.85 1,435 3.19 1,075 2.61 75,992 2.99 3,670 2.96 6,677
Oct. 2.86 88,486 2.60 25,332 3.12 10,741 4.26 1,591 3.55 989 2.67 64,795 3.83 3,917 3.34 6,453
Nov. 3.14 76,430 3.14 20,220 3.53 10,542 4.71 1,587 3.80 1,046 2.94 51,493 3.51 3,923 3.33 7,839
Dec. 3.45 107,068 3.42 32,607 3.91 11,995 4.98 1,854 3.81 1,138 3.35 75,616 3.55 6,334 3.25 10,131
2023 Jan. 3.59 81,688 3.66 23,420 4.41 10,450 5.10 1,586 3.88 1,021 3.42 60,491 3.85 2,968 3.24 5,172
Feb. 3.88 85,530 3.83 19,830 4.84 10,275 5.58 1,480 4.06 863 3.70 64,785 4.07 2,789 3.66 5,338
Mar. 4.36 102,184 4.20 29,587 5.18 12,826 5.70 2,212 4.13 1,223 4.24 70,037 4.41 5,308 3.91 10,578
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2022 Mar. 1.40 14,380 . . 1.71 503 2.07 120 1.63 444 1.15 9,349 2.56 1,117 1.63 2,847
Apr. 1.72 9,355 . . 1.92 325 2.15 113 1.93 481 1.53 5,242 1.68 817 2.07 2,377
May 2.02 9,121 . . 1.95 385 2.43 114 2.20 461 1.81 5,246 3.02 726 2.14 2,189
June 1.90 13,721 . . 1.89 490 2.69 127 2.43 458 1.49 8,720 2.72 1,076 2.72 2,850
July 2.00 11,739 . . 2.03 487 2.84 102 2.67 398 1.64 7,081 2.99 1,130 2.41 2,541
Aug. 2.20 7,929 . . 2.25 501 2.97 91 2.74 319 2.02 4,945 2.99 603 2.30 1,470
Sep. . . . . 2.86 608 3.37 78 3.01 299 . . 3.16 1,131 2.99 1,712
Oct. 2.82 10,559 . . 3.01 572 3.48 95 3.32 261 2.71 7,209 3.43 750 2.82 1,672
Nov. 3.50 9,542 . . 3.45 462 3.93 93 3.49 269 3.56 6,290 3.81 739 3.12 1,689
Dec. 3.41 17,202 . . 3.72 588 4.08 126 3.41 291 3.41 10,703 4.20 1,417 3.08 4,077
2023 Jan. 3.80 9,477 . . 4.00 553 3.72 123 3.33 318 3.92 6,635 4.01 652 3.07 1,196
Feb. 3.93 8,371 . . 4.34 400 4.37 96 3.61 208 4.03 6,148 3.87 514 3.20 1,005
Mar. 4.15 14,365 . . 4.60 641 4.73 117 3.62 332 4.22 10,350 4.11 1,117 3.64 1,808
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 4
2020 Q2 2,517.5 317.0 460.5 371.9 409.4 788.7 4.3 68.5 38.7 58.5
Q3 2,547.1 311.1 472.9 373.8 411.3 809.5 4.4 67.1 39.0 58.0
Q4 2,587.4 301.7 478.9 370.6 425.4 841.0 4.7 68.1 38.2 58.7
2021 Q1 2,575.3 292.4 466.8 361.7 437.8 844.7 3.9 72.0 38.9 57.2
Q2 2,591.4 280.5 466.5 361.3 449.6 864.5 3.4 72.6 39.0 54.1
Q3 2,633.2 271.8 471.3 358.3 464.4 882.1 3.3 87.9 38.4 55.8
Q4 2,649.9 261.4 468.7 355.1 472.9 903.3 3.2 85.1 40.8 59.4
2022 Q1 2,541.0 244.9 441.0 333.9 469.7 860.3 2.7 87.8 41.1 59.6
Q2 2,367.9 217.7 394.2 306.5 464.2 793.6 3.0 85.7 41.3 61.6
Q3 2,300.4 205.1 377.2 290.5 463.7 767.8 4.0 84.5 41.6 66.2
Q4 2,288.6 193.6 381.4 281.5 467.2 766.6 3.4 79.7 38.8 76.4
    Life insurance
2020 Q2 1,347.1 192.3 234.4 223.6 64.4 577.0 2.8 13.7 20.3 18.5
Q3 1,369.2 188.4 241.6 225.7 66.1 592.6 3.0 13.6 20.6 17.6
Q4 1,395.8 183.5 242.7 229.9 70.2 616.5 3.3 14.3 20.8 14.5
2021 Q1 1,361.2 170.4 231.5 219.6 74.3 614.3 2.1 14.2 21.5 13.2
Q2 1,371.7 164.4 231.3 219.4 78.0 627.2 2.0 14.1 21.5 13.8
Q3 1,386.6 159.1 232.2 214.8 87.7 642.8 1.9 13.4 20.8 13.8
Q4 1,400.8 152.4 232.7 211.8 93.5 658.0 1.7 14.6 21.9 14.3
2022 Q1 1,312.9 137.6 211.8 193.6 99.9 619.4 0.9 13.9 22.1 13.8
Q2 1,200.2 121.8 182.3 174.0 104.4 563.2 0.9 13.5 22.2 18.0
Q3 1,151.2 112.0 170.5 163.2 107.1 541.0 1.1 12.2 22.4 21.7
Q4 1,140.7 105.7 174.9 157.2 111.7 537.6 1.1 11.2 19.6 21.6
    Non-life insurance
2020 Q2 685.4 111.8 134.4 82.4 81.1 197.0 0.4 39.5 12.1 26.7
Q3 693.0 109.3 137.6 83.3 82.7 203.1 0.4 38.5 12.1 26.3
Q4 703.1 105.9 139.5 84.5 85.1 210.2 0.5 37.6 12.7 27.3
2021 Q1 716.8 108.1 139.5 83.6 88.7 215.1 0.4 40.0 12.8 28.6
Q2 720.3 103.3 140.4 83.5 90.6 221.6 0.4 40.4 12.8 27.3
Q3 727.5 98.8 140.2 83.8 93.9 223.3 0.4 46.6 12.9 27.8
Q4 732.4 94.7 139.9 84.8 97.8 227.8 0.3 44.7 14.0 28.4
2022 Q1 721.4 91.9 134.1 81.0 98.9 224.6 0.2 46.0 14.0 30.7
Q2 681.9 82.6 124.1 75.1 99.0 213.2 0.1 44.3 14.1 29.5
Q3 663.7 77.4 119.4 70.6 99.9 209.1 0.1 43.4 14.1 29.6
Q4 663.6 74.5 118.4 69.5 99.9 212.6 0.2 42.8 14.2 31.5
    Reinsurance 5
2020 Q2 485.0 12.9 91.7 65.9 264.0 14.6 1.1 15.2 6.3 13.3
Q3 485.0 13.5 93.7 64.9 262.6 13.7 1.0 15.0 6.3 14.2
Q4 488.5 12.3 96.7 56.3 270.2 14.3 1.0 16.3 4.7 16.9
2021 Q1 497.3 13.9 95.8 58.5 274.7 15.4 1.4 17.7 4.7 15.3
Q2 499.4 12.8 94.8 58.4 280.9 15.6 1.0 18.1 4.6 13.1
Q3 519.0 13.9 98.9 59.6 282.7 16.1 1.0 28.0 4.7 14.2
Q4 516.7 14.3 96.1 58.6 281.6 17.5 1.1 25.9 4.9 16.6
2022 Q1 506.6 15.5 95.1 59.3 271.0 16.3 1.6 27.9 5.0 15.0
Q2 485.7 13.2 87.8 57.5 260.8 17.3 1.9 27.9 5.1 14.2
Q3 485.6 15.7 87.2 56.6 256.7 17.7 2.7 28.9 5.1 14.9
Q4 484.3 13.3 88.0 54.9 255.6 16.4 2.1 25.7 5.0 23.2
Pension funds 6
2020 Q2 626.0 91.8 58.8 49.8 9.8 383.4 0.1 11.3 18.3 2.8
Q3 638.5 91.1 59.6 50.2 10.1 394.7 0.2 11.6 18.5 2.5
Q4 662.9 88.9 60.6 49.5 10.3 419.5 0.2 11.9 18.8 3.1
2021 Q1 664.3 86.2 58.7 48.6 10.8 427.9 0.2 12.1 17.6 2.3
Q2 683.2 85.0 60.2 49.3 11.3 445.1 0.1 12.1 17.8 2.3
Q3 689.8 82.9 60.4 48.8 11.8 453.6 0.1 12.2 17.8 2.2
Q4 709.8 82.1 60.0 48.7 11.3 473.5 0.1 12.4 18.4 3.2
2022 Q1 687.7 76.4 56.9 46.3 12.1 462.6 0.0 12.9 18.4 2.1
Q2 661.3 71.3 53.3 43.3 12.5 447.6 0.0 12.5 18.5 2.3
Q3 645.4 68.5 52.3 41.2 12.9 436.6 0.0 13.1 18.6 2.4
Q4 651.0 68.6 54.4 41.3 13.2 438.8 0.0 13.1 18.6 3.1
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including
registered bonds, borrowers' note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including de-
posits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrowers' note
loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables and claims ofpension funds on pension managers.  4 Valuation of listed securities at the correspond-
ing consistent price from the ESCB's securities database.  5 Not including the reinsur-
ance business conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  6 The term "pen-
sion funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of
Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational
pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  4
Insurance corporations
2020 Q2 2,517.5 33.1 82.2 505.3 1,767.6 1,527.7 239.9 1.9 127.3 –
Q3 2,547.1 34.3 80.0 515.7 1,785.5 1,549.1 236.4 1.7 129.9 –
Q4 2,587.4 36.6 79.7 540.4 1,799.0 1,579.2 219.8 1.6 130.2 –
2021 Q1 2,575.3 34.8 81.4 551.7 1,778.7 1,541.3 237.4 2.5 126.2 –
Q2 2,591.4 33.0 81.3 558.9 1,793.7 1,556.4 237.3 2.2 122.2 –
Q3 2,633.2 35.4 82.8 567.3 1,818.0 1,569.1 248.9 2.5 127.0 –
Q4 2,649.9 36.1 82.0 579.7 1,821.1 1,578.4 242.7 2.5 128.6 –
2022 Q1 2,541.0 34.4 82.2 563.8 1,728.4 1,474.6 253.8 4.0 128.3 –
Q2 2,367.9 33.7 78.8 542.5 1,578.9 1,331.1 247.8 5.9 128.1 –
Q3 2,300.4 33.9 73.7 538.9 1,513.1 1,268.9 244.2 7.2 133.6 –
Q4 2,288.6 32.1 70.3 545.1 1,495.0 1,256.6 238.4 5.4 140.5 –
    Life insurance
2020 Q2 1,347.1 3.8 19.2 129.8 1,150.3 1,150.3 – 0.5 43.4 –
Q3 1,369.2 3.9 19.5 136.8 1,164.7 1,164.7 – 0.5 43.7 –
Q4 1,395.8 3.9 20.7 142.8 1,185.6 1,185.6 – 0.5 42.2 –
2021 Q1 1,361.2 3.3 19.9 143.1 1,154.3 1,154.3 – 1.0 39.6 –
Q2 1,371.7 3.3 20.4 144.2 1,164.9 1,164.9 – 1.0 37.9 –
Q3 1,386.6 3.3 19.3 148.1 1,176.4 1,176.4 – 1.1 38.4 –
Q4 1,400.8 3.3 20.7 148.2 1,185.5 1,185.5 – 0.9 42.2 –
2022 Q1 1,312.9 3.2 19.9 142.8 1,103.6 1,103.6 – 1.4 42.1 –
Q2 1,200.2 3.1 19.1 141.5 988.5 988.5 – 2.6 45.4 –
Q3 1,151.2 3.0 17.0 138.1 942.9 942.9 – 2.9 47.2 –
Q4 1,140.7 2.8 16.5 137.0 932.2 932.2 – 2.1 50.0 –
    Non-life insurance
2020 Q2 685.4 1.3 9.5 149.3 478.1 355.6 122.5 0.1 47.1 –
Q3 693.0 1.2 9.6 151.9 482.1 362.3 119.8 0.1 48.1 –
Q4 703.1 1.3 9.7 157.9 482.9 368.7 114.2 0.0 51.2 –
2021 Q1 716.8 1.2 10.6 162.8 491.6 362.6 129.0 0.1 50.5 –
Q2 720.3 1.2 10.5 166.4 493.6 366.3 127.3 0.1 48.4 –
Q3 727.5 1.2 10.5 169.2 499.0 367.9 131.2 0.2 47.5 –
Q4 732.4 1.4 10.8 176.2 493.0 367.6 125.4 0.2 50.9 –
2022 Q1 721.4 1.3 11.8 174.1 483.8 347.2 136.6 0.3 50.1 –
Q2 681.9 1.2 11.1 168.8 452.7 323.1 129.7 0.5 47.6 –
Q3 663.7 1.2 10.5 169.7 431.7 308.0 123.7 0.5 50.0 –
Q4 663.6 1.2 10.5 171.6 426.8 307.5 119.3 0.4 53.2 –
    Reinsurance 5
2020 Q2 485.0 28.1 53.5 226.2 139.1 21.8 117.4 1.3 36.8 –
Q3 485.0 29.2 50.9 227.0 138.7 22.1 116.6 1.0 38.1 –
Q4 488.5 31.4 49.3 239.6 130.4 24.8 105.6 1.0 36.7 –
2021 Q1 497.3 30.2 50.9 245.8 132.8 24.4 108.4 1.4 36.2 –
Q2 499.4 28.5 50.4 248.3 135.2 25.2 110.0 1.1 35.9 –
Q3 519.0 30.9 53.0 250.1 142.7 24.9 117.8 1.3 41.1 –
Q4 516.7 31.4 50.5 255.3 142.6 25.3 117.3 1.4 35.5 –
2022 Q1 506.6 30.0 50.4 246.8 140.9 23.8 117.2 2.3 36.1 –
Q2 485.7 29.3 48.6 232.2 137.7 19.5 118.2 2.8 35.1 –
Q3 485.6 29.7 46.2 231.1 138.5 18.0 120.5 3.8 36.4 –
Q4 484.3 28.2 43.4 236.5 136.0 16.9 119.1 2.9 37.3 –
Pension funds 6
2020 Q2 626.0 – 1.6 25.6 507.3 506.7 – 0.3 8.9 82.4
Q3 638.5 – 1.6 27.3 511.4 510.8 – 0.3 8.9 88.9
Q4 662.9 – 1.6 28.4 528.5 527.9 – 0.3 9.0 95.1
2021 Q1 664.3 – 1.6 28.8 529.3 528.1 – 0.3 8.6 95.8
Q2 683.2 – 1.8 31.1 536.5 534.8 – 0.2 9.3 104.3
Q3 689.8 – 1.8 31.5 541.1 538.9 – 0.2 9.3 106.0
Q4 709.8 – 1.9 31.8 560.5 557.6 – 0.1 9.2 106.4
2022 Q1 687.7 – 2.0 32.3 555.0 552.2 – 0.1 9.6 88.7
Q2 661.3 – 1.9 32.4 553.4 550.6 – 0.1 9.3 64.0
Q3 645.4 – 2.0 32.3 548.4 545.5 – 0.1 10.0 52.6
Q4 651.0 – 2.0 32.8 552.0 549.2 – 0.1 9.7 54.4
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Including deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered
bonds, borrowers' note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension
funds on pension managers and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical re-
serves "life" taking account of transitional measures. Health insurance is also included inthe "non-life insurance" sector.  4 Own funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth"
and "Shares and other equity".  5 Not including the reinsurance business conducted by
primary insurers, which is included there.  6 Valuation at book values. The term "pension
funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of
Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational
pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2011 33,649 13,575 –46,796 850 59,521 20,075 – 23,876 – 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 58,735 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 90,697 44,384 – 12,124 – 11,951 68,459 14,351
2015 15,219 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 51,229 99,225 – 66,330 121,164 44,391 – 84,006
2016 68,998 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 41,569 161,776 – 58,012 187,500 32,288 – 92,778
2017 51,034 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 39,471 134,192 – 71,454 161,012 44,634 – 83,158
2018 78,657 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 62,027 107,155 – 24,417 67,328 64,244 – 28,499
2019 139,611 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 71,075 60,195 8,059 2,408 49,728 79,416
2020 451,409 374,034 14,462 88,703 270,870 77,374 285,318 18,955 226,887 39,476 166,091
2021 233,453 221,648 31,941 19,754 169,953 11,805 255,702 – 41,852 245,198 52,356 – 22,249
2022 155,940 156,190 59,322 35,221 61,648 – 219 155,609 2,915 49,774 102,920 331
2022 Apr. – 9,782 – 2,212 – 3,140 707 222 – 7,570 2,561 – 16,927 13,068 6,420 – 12,343
May 22,147 23,911 4,066 4,901 14,944 – 1,763 24,117 5,485 14,400 4,233 – 1,970
June 16,927 12,731 5,517 – 1,563 8,777 4,196 8,848 8,471 – 2,289 2,665 8,079
July – 17,525 –13,509 – 7,536 11,041 –17,014 – 4,016 – 6,403 10,710 – 13,670 – 3,443 – 11,122
Aug. 15,672 22,057 2,780 2,225 17,052 – 6,385 – 3,617 – 10,189 – 726 7,298 19,289
Sep. 9,558 15,007 32,705 3,897 –21,595 – 5,449 18,638 7,491 – 3,147 14,294 – 9,080
Oct. – 1,614 – 3,868 – 6,143 – 2,570 4,846 2,254 17,813 4,260 3,619 9,934 – 19,427
Nov. 45,419 36,891 2,672 5,087 29,133 8,528 13,173 193 4,041 8,940 32,246
Dec. – 27,425 –31,394 –15,450 – 6,091 – 9,853 4,001 11,231 – 18,577 – 6,015 35,823 – 38,656
2023 Jan. 58,333 26,856 19,250 4,335 3,270 31,477 41,346 10,522 7,783 23,041 16,987
Feb. 24,581 11,680 5,466 – 1,673 7,886 12,901 25,280 13,504 – 4,961 16,736 – 699
Mar. 59,698 39,987 22,802 – 1,707 18,892 19,712 18,735 8,064 – 1,710 12,382 40,963
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 – 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,337 11,991 5,346 2,851
2014 43,488 18,778 24,710 43,930 17,203 26,727 – 443
2015 56,979 7,668 49,311 46,721 – 5,421 52,142 10,258
2016 39,133 4,409 34,724 39,265 – 5,143 44,408 – 132
2017 52,932 15,570 37,362 51,270 7,031 44,239 1,662
2018 61,400 16,188 45,212 89,624 – 11,184 100,808 – 28,224
2019 54,830 9,076 45,754 43,070 – 1,119 44,189 11,759
2020 72,321 17,771 54,550 105,483 27 105,456 – 33,162
2021 115,746 49,066 66,681 102,927 10,869 92,058 12,819
2022 – 14,234 20,624 – 34,858 – 7,006 – 8,262 1,256 – 7,228
2022 Apr. 926 150 775 7,486 477 7,009 – 6,560
May 5,101 1,411 3,690 5,756 1,600 4,156 – 655
June – 25,124 894 – 26,018 – 23,703 – 3,308 – 20,395 – 1,421
July – 2,745 1,374 – 4,119 – 2,030 – 2,145 115 – 715
Aug. – 1,603 87 – 1,690 1,049 165 884 – 2,652
Sep. – 986 1,166 – 2,152 – 12,004 – 529 – 11,475 11,018
Oct. – 1,785 154 – 1,939 – 4,007 – 1,588 – 2,419 2,222
Nov. – 5,647 247 – 5,894 – 8,903 1,414 – 10,317 3,256
Dec. 14,926 13,758 1,169 16,366 – 3,089 19,455 – 1,440
2023 Jan. 6,525 133 6,393 8,105 2,935 5,170 – 1,580
Feb. 4,863 2,371 2,492 6,098 4,494 1,604 – 1,235
Mar. – 556 1,696 – 2,252 1,460 1,985 – 525 – 2,016
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,870,084 778,411 39,548 18,327 643,380 77,156 184,206 907,466
2021 1,658,004 795,271 41,866 17,293 648,996 87,116 139,775 722,958
2022 1,683,265 861,989 66,811 11,929 700,062 83,188 169,680 651,596
2022 July 148,625 72,487 5,291 348 59,203 7,645 21,763 54,375
Aug. 130,730 77,533 5,282 110 66,372 5,769 10,735 42,462
Sep. 160,306 96,922 10,333 2,847 73,938 9,804 18,913 44,471
Oct. 172,464 59,445 5,875 1,086 45,698 6,786 11,037 101,982
Nov. 152,777 70,448 2,969 91 55,905 11,482 20,625 61,705
Dec. 80,590 49,026 2,329 979 39,181 6,538 11,536 20,028
2023 Jan. 132,817 74,019 10,797 929 52,888 9,405 14,710 44,088
Feb. 155,676 81,678 2,245 1,729 63,385 14,319 12,146 61,853
Mar. 190,536 99,945 1,252 60 89,794 8,840 11,160 79,431
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 658,521 165,097 28,500 7,427 90,839 38,330 77,439 415,985
2021 486,335 171,799 30,767 6,336 97,816 36,880 64,234 250,303
2022 485,287 164,864 41,052 7,139 91,143 25,530 56,491 263,932
2022 July 47,135 12,838 2,626 250 8,760 1,201 13,373 20,925
Aug. 26,950 13,947 2,158 – 10,235 1,555 1,178 11,825
Sep. 48,333 19,382 7,086 1,821 7,209 3,267 8,100 20,850
Oct. 85,086 9,230 3,570 77 4,885 697 2,507 73,350
Nov. 34,411 7,379 1,895 – 2,006 3,478 9,336 17,696
Dec. 6,561 2,256 54 4 711 1,488 304 4,000
2023 Jan. 47,131 21,923 4,927 529 14,197 2,271 3,408 21,800
Feb. 51,443 14,927 820 310 10,272 3,525 3,065 33,450
Mar. 46,975 14,091 1,147 – 11,809 1,136 1,658 31,225
Net sales 5
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 473,795 28,147 8,661 8,816 22,067 – 11,398 49,536 396,113
2021 210,231 52,578 17,821 7,471 22,973 4,314 35,531 122,123
2022 135,853 36,883 23,894 – 9,399 15,944 6,444 30,671 68,299
2022 July – 9,336 – 9,581 1,183 – 4,070 – 7,083 390 11,189 – 10,945
Aug. 14,436 1,720 4,546 – 1,290 – 778 – 758 – 119 12,836
Sep. 4,494 29,823 5,512 30 19,988 4,293 3,795 – 29,123
Oct. 44,009 – 8,997 3,797 – 1,764 – 9,843 – 1,187 – 4,111 57,117
Nov. 37,459 – 2,300 – 2,165 – 944 – 2,680 3,488 6,015 33,744
Dec. – 42,448 – 23,318 – 3,643 – 3,697 – 16,193 216 – 1,825 – 17,306
2023 Jan. 24,590 14,006 6,314 – 1,551 4,428 4,815 3,554 7,030
Feb. 9,644 2,700 – 2,433 1,512 – 2,861 6,482 – 2,541 9,486
Mar. 46,027 19,996 – 2,032 – 1,517 18,339 5,206 – 1,616 27,647
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,545,200 2 1,174,817 183,980 55,959 687,710 2 247,169 2 379,342 1,991,040
2021 3,781,975 1,250,777 202,385 63,496 731,068 253,828 414,791 2,116,406
2022 3,930,390 1,302,028 225,854 54,199 761,047 260,928 441,234 2,187,127
2022 July 3,884,902 1,318,884 218,402 61,866 781,839 256,776 439,064 2,126,954
Aug. 3,902,580 1,323,750 222,515 60,585 785,306 255,344 439,457 2,139,374
Sep. 3,913,133 1,357,666 228,228 60,631 808,553 260,254 443,512 2,111,954
Oct. 3,954,338 1,345,723 231,901 58,854 796,028 258,940 438,743 2,169,872
Nov. 3,981,275 1,333,432 229,589 57,912 784,494 261,438 444,010 2,203,833
Dec. 3,930,390 1,302,028 225,854 54,199 761,047 260,928 441,234 2,187,127
2023 Jan. 3,948,426 1,313,581 232,105 52,647 763,260 265,568 444,529 2,190,316
Feb. 3,963,852 1,320,844 229,851 54,180 764,148 272,666 442,389 2,200,618
Mar. 4,005,377 1,335,453 227,451 52,890 777,702 277,410 440,368 2,229,557
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-March 2023
bis unter 2   1 225 753   484 396   61 273   18 778   317 385   86 960   79 830   661 527 
 2 bis unter 4    718 024   306 011   63 852   15 511   157 866   68 783   79 211   332 802 
 4 bis unter 6    651 533   234 585   51 007   6 705   132 819   44 054   70 962   345 985 
6 bis unter 8    417 742   129 540   25 004   4 603   73 804   26 129   43 535   244 667 
 8 bis unter 10    252 722   75 328   13 269   3 048   40 812   18 199   29 179   148 214 
 10 bis unter 15    239 516   60 473   8 757   3 801   38 317   9 598   32 141   146 902 
 15 bis unter 20    128 971   14 536   3 525    357   8 478   2 176   13 959   100 477 
 20 und darüber    371 116   30 584    765    87   8 221   21 511   91 551   248 982 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,673 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,775 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,872 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,635 1,963,588
2021 186,580 4,152 9,561 672 35 – 326 – 212 – 5,578 2,301,942
2022 199,789 12,272 14,950 224 371 – 29 – 293 – 2,952 1,858,963
2022 July 186,233 – 1,194 120 39 –– 1 – 25 – 1,326 1,847,025
Aug. 185,545 – 688 42 – –– 0 – 32 – 698 1,769,546
Sep. 186,436 – 36 33 – –– 7 –– 62 1,635,332
Oct. 186,402 – 36 76 1 –– 0 –– 112 1,777,136
Nov. 186,351 – 57 31 13 0 0 0 – 102 1,918,565
Dec. 199,789 13,437 13,584 0 0 0 0 – 147 1,858,963
2023 Jan. 199,778 – 11 16 – – –– 0 – 27 2,027,004
Feb. 198,334 162 149 0 50 0 – 0 – 37 2,064,749
Mar. 198,157 – 185 178 0 0 0 0 – 363 2,080,189
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields and indices on German securities
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  4 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-
MFIs)German
bond
index
(REX)iBoxx
€ Germany 
price indexCDAX
share price
indexGerman
share
index
(DAX)
Period % per annumAverage
daily rateEnd-1998
= 100End-1987
= 100End-1987
= 1,000
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2019 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2020 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7 146.15 113.14 586.72 13,718.78
2021 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9 144.23 108.88 654.20 15,884.86
2022 1.5 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.9 1.9 3.3 125.74 88.43 525.64 13,923.59
2022 Sep. 2.3 1.9 1.7 1.8 2.7 2.6 4.3 127.98 91.15 458.93 12,114.36
Oct. 2.7 2.3 2.1 2.2 3.2 3.1 4.9 127.58 90.65 498.00 13,253.74
Nov. 2.6 2.2 2.1 2.1 3.0 2.9 4.4 127.52 92.43 544.52 14,397.04
Dec. 2.5 2.2 2.1 2.1 3.0 2.9 4.2 125.74 88.43 525.64 13,923.59
2023 Jan. 2.7 2.3 2.2 2.2 3.1 2.9 4.1 125.97 89.91 581.65 15,128.27
Feb. 2.8 2.5 2.4 2.4 3.2 3.1 4.1 123.74 87.57 583.92 15,365.14
Mar. 2.9 2.6 2.4 2.4 3.3 3.2 4.4 125.99 89.48 587.20 15,522.40
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 End of year or month.  3 Source: Deutsche Börse
AG. 4 Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for futures contracts;
calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 – 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 –1,340 – 379 –2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 –7,576 – 694 47,050 1,984 7,035
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 137,294 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 39,583 141,134 819 –1,745 140,315 41,328 –3,841
2015 189,802 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 43,665 181,932 7,362 494 174,570 43,171 7,870
2016 149,288 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 29,919 156,236 2,877 –3,172 153,359 33,091 –6,948
2017 148,214 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 53,292 150,740 4,938 1,048 145,802 52,244 –2,526
2018 108,293 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 4,599 114,973 2,979 –2,306 111,994 6,905 –6,680
2019 171,666 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 49,120 176,210 2,719 – 812 173,491 49,932 –4,544
2020 151,960 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 35,932 150,998 336 –1,656 150,662 37,588 962
2021 274,261 157,861 41,016 482 31,023 7,841 116,845 116,401 282,694 13,154 254 269,540 116,147 –8,433
2022 112,637 79,022 6,057 482 444 5,071 72,991 33,614 115,872 3,170 –1,459 112,702 35,073 –3,235
2022 Sep. – 59 1,349 –1,343 64 –1,577 288 2,712 –1,408 – 211 – 320 – 294 109 –1,114 152
Oct. 6,384 3,974 342 119 35 267 3,631 2,410 7,234 20 – 306 7,214 2,716 – 850
Nov. 911 –2,635 612 – 2 400 190 –3,247 3,546 1,581 499 22 1,082 3,524 – 671
Dec. 24,523 11,942 431 108 – 17 322 11,513 12,581 23,320 1,885 – 534 21,435 13,115 1,203
2023 Jan. 14,093 8,014 2,506 – 218 2,185 557 5,508 6,079 13,890 –4,078 – 672 17,968 6,751 203
Feb. 13,837 10,533 2,090 – 167 2,077 137 8,444 3,304 12,862 – 426 – 507 13,288 3,811 975
Mar. 3,779 2,204 1,226 300 814 164 984 1,576 4,030 –1,018 – 416 5,048 1,992 – 251
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2021 2022
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 96.82 46.19 67.90 21.38 26.03 13.90 –26.90 51.95 28.96
   Debt securities 2.99 3.11 4.12 1.58 1.16 0.64 –0.10 3.52 0.05
     Short-term debt securities 1.27 2.27 1.23 0.26 1.12 0.39 –1.94 3.00 –0.22
     Long-term debt securities 1.72 0.85 2.89 1.32 0.05 0.25 1.84 0.53 0.27
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.38 1.34 3.40 1.75 –0.64 0.34 0.98 1.65 0.43
         Non-financial corporations –0.17 0.74 0.87 0.59 –0.57 0.17 –0.17 0.74 0.14
         Financial corporations 0.12 1.08 1.78 0.58 0.56 0.44 0.73 0.66 –0.05
         General government 1.44 –0.48 0.74 0.58 –0.63 –0.27 0.43 0.25 0.34
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.61 1.78 0.72 –0.17 1.80 0.31 –1.08 1.88 –0.38
   Loans –7.35 63.01 44.18 20.25 35.29 4.29 16.30 31.37 –7.78
     Short-term loans –4.27 44.68 27.96 19.16 18.60 2.69 12.28 27.97 –14.97
     Long-term loans –3.09 18.34 16.22 1.09 16.69 1.60 4.02 3.40 7.19
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors –0.12 10.10 22.99 0.18 16.16 8.25 2.92 14.54 –2.72
         Non-financial corporations –12.27 7.11 23.94 –1.21 13.38 2.44 5.52 8.47 7.51
         Financial corporations 11.58 2.38 –1.29 1.24 2.63 5.73 –2.68 5.98 –10.31
         General government 0.57 0.61 0.34 0.15 0.15 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08
       Loans to the rest of the world –7.23 52.92 21.18 20.07 19.13 –3.96 13.38 16.83 –5.07
   Equity and investment fund shares 101.62 163.24 123.73 30.13 44.16 42.09 50.04 4.53 27.07
     Equity 88.85 141.46 123.84 27.39 35.87 39.91 51.89 6.81 25.22
       Listed shares of domestic sectors –77.97 15.33 44.06 –18.27 16.59 6.03 7.40 34.33 –3.70
         Non-financial corporations –78.06 16.89 43.77 –18.80 18.30 5.58 7.12 34.91 –3.84
         Financial corporations 0.09 –1.56 0.29 0.54 –1.70 0.46 0.28 –0.58 0.13
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 5.01 5.11 5.53 4.64 0.70 –0.26 3.16 0.08 2.55
       Other equity  1 161.80 121.03 74.25 41.02 18.58 34.13 41.33 –27.60 26.38
     Investment fund shares 12.77 21.78 –0.11 2.74 8.29 2.17 –1.85 –2.28 1.85
       Money market fund shares 3.79 0.66 –0.38 –0.41 1.73 –1.22 –0.42 –1.12 2.37
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 8.99 21.12 0.27 3.15 6.56 3.39 –1.44 –1.16 –0.53
   Insurance technical reserves 0.37 18.01 2.72 4.40 4.47 5.32 –0.90 –0.68 –1.03
   Financial derivatives –27.54 15.54 33.92 0.43 –1.09 21.29 28.29 11.90 –27.56
   Other accounts receivable 59.30 71.37 28.93 11.71 53.23 –9.79 –33.89 –52.36 124.97
   Total 226.22 380.47 305.50 89.88 163.26 77.75 32.83 50.23 144.68
 External financing
   Debt securities 36.89 20.86 14.13 10.29 –1.12 10.95 3.77 1.37 –1.96
     Short-term securities –4.40 2.51 –0.36 3.50 –1.02 3.85 1.21 –2.73 –2.69
       Long-term securities 41.29 18.35 14.49 6.79 –0.10 7.10 2.56 4.10 0.72
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 18.12 9.16 5.92 2.14 1.78 5.65 1.64 0.20 –1.57
           Non-financial corporations –0.17 0.74 0.87 0.59 –0.57 0.17 –0.17 0.74 0.14
           Financial corporations 19.86 9.11 4.52 1.78 2.61 5.35 1.87 –0.74 –1.96
           General government –0.22 0.09 –0.07 0.02 –0.10 –0.01 –0.08 0.01 0.01
           Households –1.35 –0.79 0.59 –0.26 –0.15 0.14 0.01 0.19 0.25
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 18.77 11.71 8.20 8.15 –2.89 5.30 2.13 1.17 –0.40
   Loans 97.05 136.81 180.68 33.14 71.41 34.17 41.22 66.97 38.32
     Short-term loans –2.80 81.44 105.49 23.97 29.93 29.25 21.81 46.53 7.90
     Long-term loans 99.85 55.37 75.19 9.17 41.48 4.92 19.41 20.44 30.42
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 38.70 78.60 157.12 11.71 40.62 37.30 36.34 59.24 24.24
         Non-financial corporations –12.27 7.11 23.94 –1.21 13.38 2.44 5.52 8.47 7.51
         Financial corporations 15.29 57.70 117.87 9.79 24.28 33.34 28.05 36.48 20.01
         General government 35.68 13.79 15.31 3.13 2.96 1.52 2.78 14.29 –3.28
       Loans from the rest of the world 58.34 58.21 23.55 21.43 30.79 –3.14 4.87 7.73 14.08
   Equity 60.37 61.44 17.34 17.93 20.38 3.11 8.64 3.50 2.08
     Listed shares of domestic sectors –62.25 26.38 57.11 –21.41 24.50 12.93 10.15 33.33 0.70
       Non-financial corporations –78.06 16.89 43.77 –18.80 18.30 5.58 7.12 34.91 –3.84
       Financial corporations 3.47 –2.37 2.33 –3.23 –0.68 5.19 –1.41 –4.46 3.01
       General government 0.26 –0.09 0.76 –0.00 0.04 0.18 0.24 0.25 0.10
       Households 12.08 11.96 10.24 0.63 6.84 1.98 4.21 2.63 1.43
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 10.09 18.94 –7.67 31.69 –6.62 –12.77 –2.46 8.05 –0.50
     Other equity  1 112.54 16.11 –32.10 7.65 2.50 2.95 0.95 –37.89 1.88
   Insurance technical reserves 5.83 4.25 4.25 1.06 1.06 1.06 1.06 1.06 1.06
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.54 14.32 –10.64 3.93 0.93 –2.28 –0.27 3.37 –11.45
   Other accounts payable 22.28 136.29 70.37 27.37 49.28 15.54 13.55 22.06 19.21
   Total 222.96 373.98 276.12 93.72 141.95 62.55 67.97 98.33 47.27
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2021 2022
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 717.4 727.5 795.3 710.3 727.5 731.7 698.7 767.4 795.3
   Debt securities 51.5 54.3 53.8 53.3 54.3 53.4 51.3 53.7 53.8
     Short-term debt securities 4.8 7.1 8.4 6.0 7.1 7.5 5.6 8.6 8.4
     Long-term debt securities 46.7 47.2 45.5 47.3 47.2 45.9 45.7 45.1 45.5
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 22.1 23.3 24.7 24.0 23.3 23.0 23.0 24.1 24.7
         Non-financial corporations 4.7 5.3 5.8 5.9 5.3 5.2 4.9 5.5 5.8
         Financial corporations 13.4 14.5 15.0 14.0 14.5 14.6 14.7 14.9 15.0
         General government 4.0 3.5 3.9 4.1 3.5 3.2 3.5 3.6 3.9
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 29.4 31.0 29.2 29.3 31.0 30.4 28.2 29.7 29.2
   Loans 725.1 780.5 827.2 744.4 780.5 785.9 806.5 840.9 827.2
     Short-term loans 571.1 611.2 640.8 592.4 611.2 614.9 629.8 660.0 640.8
     Long-term loans 154.0 169.2 186.3 152.0 169.2 171.0 176.7 180.9 186.3
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 412.5 422.6 445.5 406.4 422.6 430.8 433.7 448.3 445.5
         Non-financial corporations 327.6 334.7 358.7 321.3 334.7 337.2 342.7 351.1 358.7
         Financial corporations 76.9 79.3 78.0 76.7 79.3 85.0 82.4 88.3 78.0
         General government 7.9 8.5 8.9 8.4 8.5 8.6 8.7 8.8 8.9
       Loans to the rest of the world 312.7 357.9 381.6 338.0 357.9 355.1 372.7 392.6 381.6
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,572.0 2,920.7 2,720.9 2,894.5 2,920.7 2,844.7 2,785.3 2,756.7 2,720.9
     Equity 2,367.2 2,680.6 2,506.0 2,667.0 2,680.6 2,612.4 2,567.8 2,544.8 2,506.0
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 307.0 393.0 331.8 371.5 393.0 350.1 305.0 307.5 331.8
         Non-financial corporations 298.9 384.9 324.4 361.7 384.9 342.4 298.2 301.7 324.4
         Financial corporations 8.1 8.0 7.4 9.8 8.0 7.7 6.8 5.7 7.4
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 66.6 71.5 69.7 71.0 71.5 67.0 66.8 65.4 69.7
       Other equity  1 1,993.6 2,216.1 2,104.5 2,224.5 2,216.1 2,195.3 2,196.0 2,172.0 2,104.5
     Investment fund shares 204.7 240.2 214.9 227.5 240.2 232.3 217.5 211.9 214.9
       Money market fund shares 7.0 7.6 7.2 5.9 7.6 6.4 6.0 4.9 7.2
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 197.7 232.6 207.7 221.6 232.6 225.9 211.5 207.0 207.7
   Insurance technical reserves 62.1 64.8 42.2 64.1 64.8 48.1 45.8 43.7 42.2
   Financial derivatives 30.9 106.0 92.4 106.6 106.0 147.8 164.4 199.0 92.4
   Other accounts receivable 1,243.9 1,456.5 1,524.8 1,395.3 1,456.5 1,490.3 1,514.3 1,524.9 1,524.8
   Total 5,403.0 6,110.3 6,056.6 5,968.6 6,110.3 6,101.9 6,066.3 6,186.3 6,056.6
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 238.3 252.3 228.6 256.1 252.3 245.3 229.7 226.7 228.6
     Short-term securities 7.1 9.6 9.3 10.6 9.6 13.4 14.7 12.0 9.3
     Long-term securities 231.2 242.7 219.4 245.5 242.7 231.8 215.1 214.7 219.4
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 96.0 100.6 91.0 99.7 100.6 98.6 92.6 90.4 91.0
         Non-financial corporations 4.7 5.3 5.8 5.9 5.3 5.2 4.9 5.5 5.8
         Financial corporations 78.1 83.2 73.6 81.2 83.2 81.8 76.8 73.9 73.6
         General government 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3
         Households 12.8 11.8 11.3 12.1 11.8 11.2 10.6 10.7 11.3
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 142.3 151.7 137.7 156.4 151.7 146.7 137.1 136.2 137.7
   Loans 2,270.6 2,403.7 2,588.1 2,331.7 2,403.7 2,440.0 2,485.6 2,559.6 2,588.1
     Short-term loans 830.0 903.1 1,011.3 872.4 903.1 933.5 959.1 1,010.1 1,011.3
     Long-term loans 1,440.5 1,500.6 1,576.8 1,459.4 1,500.6 1,506.5 1,526.5 1,549.5 1,576.8
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,391.8 1,470.8 1,628.0 1,431.9 1,470.8 1,508.8 1,542.7 1,603.2 1,628.0
         Non-financial corporations 327.6 334.7 358.7 321.3 334.7 337.2 342.7 351.1 358.7
         Financial corporations 962.2 1,020.5 1,138.7 998.0 1,020.5 1,054.9 1,080.5 1,118.3 1,138.7
         General government 102.0 115.5 130.6 112.5 115.5 116.8 119.5 133.8 130.6
       Loans from the rest of the world 878.8 932.9 960.2 899.9 932.9 931.1 942.9 956.4 960.2
   Equity 3,260.9 3,689.0 2,988.1 3,645.9 3,689.0 3,391.9 2,994.2 2,843.1 2,988.1
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 739.9 924.8 760.6 882.4 924.8 840.1 733.4 691.5 760.6
       Non-financial corporations 298.9 384.9 324.4 361.7 384.9 342.4 298.2 301.7 324.4
       Financial corporations 171.9 210.2 151.2 196.9 210.2 194.3 161.9 138.2 151.2
       General government 56.3 69.9 69.2 70.6 69.9 70.0 70.7 61.4 69.2
       Households 212.8 259.7 215.7 253.2 259.7 233.3 202.6 190.2 215.7
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 995.6 1,126.3 823.9 1,119.2 1,126.3 984.0 795.8 731.9 823.9
     Other equity  1 1,525.5 1,637.9 1,403.6 1,644.2 1,637.9 1,567.9 1,465.0 1,419.7 1,403.6
   Insurance technical reserves 283.1 287.4 291.6 286.3 287.4 288.4 289.5 290.6 291.6
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 83.4 137.9 63.1 134.9 137.9 143.5 137.1 161.0 63.1
   Other accounts payable 1,275.8 1,525.4 1,620.2 1,446.1 1,525.4 1,546.3 1,565.3 1,649.7 1,620.2
   Total 7,412.2 8,295.8 7,779.8 8,101.2 8,295.8 8,055.4 7,701.3 7,730.7 7,779.8
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2021 2022
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 213.31 146.16 106.06 12.03 32.62 10.65 27.21 32.96 35.24
     Currency 61.94 60.55 44.57 15.06 16.24 13.55 11.39 13.58 6.05
     Deposits 151.36 85.61 61.48 –3.04 16.38 –2.90 15.81 19.37 29.20
       Transferable deposits 165.34 90.84 47.63 2.69 16.35 –0.99 23.73 20.48 4.41
       Time deposits 1.29 –5.09 29.80 –3.92 –0.17 0.16 –4.31 6.22 27.73
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –15.26 –0.13 –15.94 –1.81 0.20 –2.07 –3.61 –7.32 –2.95
   Debt securities –5.94 –5.89 25.07 –1.32 –0.62 2.81 4.85 5.36 12.06
     Short-term debt securities 0.08 0.31 1.98 –0.10 0.03 –0.02 0.05 0.17 1.77
     Long-term debt securities –6.02 –6.20 23.09 –1.22 –0.64 2.83 4.80 5.18 10.28
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –2.56 –3.70 20.31 –0.99 –0.39 2.26 3.77 3.76 10.52
         Non-financial corporations –1.32 –0.83 0.50 –0.25 –0.16 0.08 –0.02 0.21 0.23
         Financial corporations –1.26 –2.57 17.47 –0.66 –0.23 2.34 3.18 2.94 9.01
         General government 0.02 –0.30 2.35 –0.08 0.00 –0.16 0.61 0.61 1.29
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –3.38 –2.19 4.76 –0.32 –0.23 0.55 1.08 1.60 1.53
   Equity and investment fund shares 90.18 136.54 77.42 34.68 42.10 30.54 22.26 9.12 15.50
     Equity 48.53 31.76 26.97 7.57 14.30 7.82 10.01 3.98 5.16
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 16.05 14.21 12.31 2.34 6.29 2.70 5.55 3.36 0.71
         Non-financial corporations 11.92 12.64 9.91 1.82 6.12 1.97 3.90 2.68 1.36
         Financial corporations 4.14 1.58 2.40 0.52 0.17 0.74 1.64 0.67 –0.66
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 23.29 10.87 8.68 3.77 5.26 3.47 2.46 –0.45 3.20
       Other equity  1 9.19 6.68 5.97 1.46 2.76 1.64 2.01 1.07 1.26
     Investment fund shares 41.65 104.79 50.45 27.11 27.80 22.72 12.25 5.14 10.34
       Money market fund shares 0.09 0.18 0.82 –0.01 0.18 –0.02 0.28 0.12 0.44
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 41.56 104.61 49.63 27.12 27.62 22.74 11.97 5.02 9.90
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 18.34 20.31 3.40 3.73 5.60 5.60 –0.84 –0.55 –0.81
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 47.71 51.63 32.72 13.23 11.00 6.52 5.87 12.28 8.03
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 33.70 27.36 53.67 7.54 10.57 15.29 14.45 10.52 13.42
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 –10.48 –0.85 –9.65 5.07 –24.87 13.62 –3.18 –4.42 –15.67
   Total 386.82 375.26 288.68 74.96 76.41 85.03 70.61 65.26 67.78
 External financing
   Loans 83.92 98.63 84.92 30.68 23.70 20.34 28.10 25.95 10.53
     Short-term loans –5.61 0.86 2.60 1.21 –1.61 0.66 1.09 0.74 0.11
     Long-term loans 89.52 97.77 82.33 29.46 25.31 19.67 27.01 25.22 10.43
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 85.69 100.35 80.94 29.34 25.77 19.20 26.81 23.37 11.56
       Consumer loans –4.29 –0.89 4.60 2.38 –2.04 0.23 0.91 2.59 0.87
       Entrepreneurial loans 2.51 –0.83 –0.61 –1.04 –0.04 0.91 0.39 –0.01 –1.90
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 83.17 94.32 82.56 28.38 23.91 20.70 27.94 24.46 9.45
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 0.75 4.31 2.36 2.30 –0.21 –0.37 0.16 1.49 1.08
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.00 –0.00 –0.00 0.00 –0.00 –0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.01 0.90 3.92 0.25 0.63 –0.94 0.68 1.10 3.08
   Total 83.93 99.53 88.84 30.93 24.32 19.40 28.78 27.05 13.61
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2021 2022
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 2,860.4 3,005.5 3,113.7 2,973.2 3,005.5 3,017.2 3,047.2 3,083.7 3,113.7
     Currency 324.5 385.1 429.6 368.8 385.1 398.6 410.0 423.6 429.6
     Deposits 2,535.8 2,620.5 2,684.1 2,604.4 2,620.5 2,618.6 2,637.2 2,660.1 2,684.1
       Transferable deposits 1,674.1 1,764.4 1,811.7 1,748.1 1,764.4 1,763.5 1,786.7 1,807.3 1,811.7
       Time deposits 302.8 297.3 330.1 297.8 297.3 298.5 297.9 307.6 330.1
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 558.9 558.8 542.3 558.6 558.8 556.7 552.6 545.3 542.3
     Debt securities 113.3 109.6 125.1 110.1 109.6 109.5 107.8 110.4 125.1
       Short-term debt securities 1.6 1.8 3.9 1.8 1.8 1.7 1.7 1.9 3.9
       Long-term debt securities 111.7 107.8 121.2 108.3 107.8 107.7 106.1 108.5 121.2
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 76.7 75.3 88.4 75.3 75.3 75.2 74.7 76.1 88.4
           Non-financial corporations 10.9 9.8 9.5 10.2 9.8 9.4 8.9 8.9 9.5
           Financial corporations 63.3 63.2 74.6 62.9 63.2 63.8 63.3 64.2 74.6
           General government 2.6 2.2 4.2 2.2 2.2 2.0 2.5 3.0 4.2
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 36.6 34.3 36.7 34.8 34.3 34.3 33.1 34.3 36.7
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,536.4 1,900.5 1,726.9 1,787.9 1,900.5 1,841.4 1,694.5 1,661.2 1,726.9
     Equity 801.8 968.0 875.0 917.4 968.0 927.8 845.3 828.2 875.0
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 243.3 296.0 255.9 287.1 296.0 271.0 236.1 223.2 255.9
         Non-financial corporations 204.0 250.4 208.0 244.3 250.4 224.7 195.1 183.3 208.0
         Financial corporations 39.2 45.6 47.9 42.7 45.6 46.3 41.0 39.9 47.9
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 180.6 249.3 213.8 223.3 249.3 241.1 210.7 210.2 213.8
       Other equity  1 378.0 422.7 405.3 407.1 422.7 415.7 398.5 394.8 405.3
     Investment fund shares 734.6 932.5 851.9 870.5 932.5 913.6 849.3 833.0 851.9
       Money market fund shares 2.3 2.5 3.3 2.3 2.5 2.5 2.8 2.9 3.3
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 732.2 930.0 848.6 868.2 930.0 911.1 846.5 830.1 848.6
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 412.2 432.5 45.2 426.9 432.5 51.3 48.9 46.8 45.2
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,112.1 1,162.2 1,094.8 1,151.6 1,162.2 1,278.4 1,157.0 1,103.2 1,094.8
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 956.8 986.2 1,120.1 973.6 986.2 1,124.0 1,114.8 1,110.6 1,120.1
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 27.9 27.5 27.8 28.5 27.5 25.8 27.5 27.3 27.8
   Total 7,019.0 7,624.0 7,253.7 7,451.8 7,624.0 7,447.5 7,197.8 7,143.2 7,253.7
 Liabilities
   Loans 1,923.8 2,024.4 2,112.2 2,000.5 2,024.4 2,045.5 2,074.7 2,103.0 2,112.2
     Short-term loans 53.2 53.0 55.5 55.6 53.0 53.7 54.8 55.8 55.5
     Long-term loans 1,870.6 1,971.4 2,056.6 1,944.9 1,971.4 1,991.8 2,020.0 2,047.2 2,056.6
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,447.5 1,549.4 1,632.7 1,523.0 1,549.4 1,569.5 1,597.9 1,621.5 1,632.7
       Consumer loans 226.1 224.5 228.9 226.7 224.5 224.9 225.5 228.1 228.9
       Entrepreneurial loans 250.2 250.5 250.6 250.8 250.5 251.1 251.3 253.4 250.6
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,824.6 1,920.3 2,004.0 1,896.1 1,920.3 1,941.0 1,968.8 1,995.3 2,004.0
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 99.1 104.1 108.2 104.4 104.1 104.5 106.0 107.6 108.2
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 19.5 20.3 24.3 19.7 20.3 19.4 20.1 21.2 24.3
   Total 1,943.3 2,044.7 2,136.5 2,020.2 2,044.7 2,064.9 2,094.9 2,124.2 2,136.5
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
58•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
General
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
fundsGeneral
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus 1
2016 +36.4 +13.7 +7.7 +6.3 +8.7 +1.2 +0.4 +0.2 +0.2 +0.3
2017 +43.7 + 7.9 +13.9 +10.7 +11.1 +1.3 +0.2 +0.4 +0.3 +0.3
2018 +65.6 +21.0 +12.0 +16.7 +16.0 +1.9 +0.6 +0.4 +0.5 +0.5
p 2019 +53.2 +21.4 +14.0 +8.6 +9.2 +1.5 +0.6 +0.4 +0.2 +0.3
p 2020 –147.6 –87.4 –30.9 +5.5 –34.8 –4.3 –2.6 –0.9 +0.2 –1.0
p 2021 –134.3 –145.9 +2.8 +4.6 +4.3 –3.7 –4.1 +0.1 +0.1 +0.1
pe 2022 –101.3 –129.2 +12.4 +8.8 +6.7 –2.6 –3.3 +0.3 +0.2 +0.2
p 2021 H1 –75.6 –60.7 –4.0 +1.5 –12.4 –4.3 –3.5 –0.2 +0.1 –0.7
pH2 –58.6 –85.2 +6.8 +3.1 +16.7 –3.1 –4.6 +0.4 +0.2 +0.9
pe 2022 H1 – 5.0 –36.4 +18.0 +5.9 +7.5 –0.3 –1.9 +1.0 +0.3 +0.4
peH2 –96.3 –92.8 –5.6 +3.0 –0.8 –4.9 –4.7 –0.3 +0.1 –0.0
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2016 2,161.6 1,365.6 642.3 166.2 1.2 69.0 43.6 20.5 5.3 0.0
2017 2,130.5 1,361.7 616.8 168.3 0.8 65.2 41.7 18.9 5.2 0.0
2018 2,083.4 1,334.7 603.1 161.7 0.7 61.9 39.7 17.9 4.8 0.0
p 2019 2,068.8 1,312.7 612.6 160.3 0.7 59.6 37.8 17.6 4.6 0.0
p 2020 2,339.9 1,527.1 664.3 162.0 7.5 68.7 44.8 19.5 4.8 0.2
p 2021 2,494.6 1,679.8 665.1 164.1 0.4 69.3 46.6 18.5 4.6 0.0
p 2022 2,563.1 1,776.9 636.6 171.2 2.2 66.3 45.9 16.5 4.4 0.1
p 2021 Q1 2,368.9 1,552.6 667.5 162.0 16.2 69.7 45.7 19.6 4.8 0.5
pQ2 2,418.8 1,602.7 667.8 163.2 21.2 69.3 45.9 19.1 4.7 0.6
pQ3 2,452.5 1,630.6 673.1 162.6 24.3 69.2 46.0 19.0 4.6 0.7
pQ4 2,494.6 1,679.8 665.1 164.1 0.4 69.3 46.6 18.5 4.6 0.0
p 2022 Q1 2,498.8 1,684.9 664.0 163.7 3.1 67.9 45.8 18.0 4.4 0.1
pQ2 2,536.6 1,724.1 660.2 165.8 3.3 67.7 46.0 17.6 4.4 0.1
pQ3 2,551.5 1,757.8 644.9 165.6 3.7 67.0 46.2 16.9 4.4 0.1
pQ4 2,563.1 1,776.9 636.6 171.2 2.2 66.3 45.9 16.5 4.4 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The deficit/surplus in
accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition.  2 Quarterly GDP
ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters.
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts *
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total TaxesSocial con-
tributions Other TotalSocial
benefitsCompen-
sation of
employeesInter-
mediate
consumptionGross
capital
formation Interest OtherDeficit/
surplusMemo item:
Total tax
burden  1
€ billion
2016 1,426.7 739.2 524.3 163.3 1,390.4 754.5 240.7 162.5 68.1 37.3 127.2 +36.4 1,270.4
2017 1,486.9 773.3 549.5 164.2 1,443.3 784.8 250.6 169.5 71.6 33.8 132.9 +43.7 1,329.5
2018 1,557.2 808.1 572.6 176.6 1,491.6 805.6 260.3 176.4 78.5 31.2 139.7 +65.6 1,387.7
p 2019 1,615.8 834.3 598.2 183.4 1,562.6 845.6 273.2 187.2 84.4 27.4 144.8 +53.2 1,439.6
p 2020 1,569.1 783.1 608.1 177.8 1,716.6 904.8 284.3 209.4 93.2 21.5 203.4 –147.6 1,398.2
p 2021 1,711.7 887.6 633.7 190.5 1,846.0 940.9 294.4 227.2 93.4 20.8 269.3 –134.3 1,528.8
pe 2022 1,820.8 957.5 665.8 197.5 1,922.1 974.2 306.7 236.9 101.6 26.1 276.5 –101.3 1,633.3
As a percentage of GDP
2016 45.5 23.6 16.7 5.2 44.4 24.1 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.2 4.1 +1.2 40.5
2017 45.5 23.7 16.8 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 +1.3 40.7
2018 46.3 24.0 17.0 5.2 44.3 23.9 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.1 +1.9 41.2
p 2019 46.5 24.0 17.2 5.3 45.0 24.3 7.9 5.4 2.4 0.8 4.2 +1.5 41.4
p 2020 46.1 23.0 17.9 5.2 50.4 26.6 8.3 6.1 2.7 0.6 6.0 –4.3 41.1
p 2021 47.5 24.6 17.6 5.3 51.3 26.1 8.2 6.3 2.6 0.6 7.5 –3.7 42.4
pe 2022 47.1 24.8 17.2 5.1 49.7 25.2 7.9 6.1 2.6 0.7 7.2 –2.6 42.2
Percentage growth rates
2016 +4.5 +4.8 +4.6 +2.9 +4.1 +4.5 +3.3 +6.2 +5.6 –11.7 +4.9 . +4.7
2017 +4.2 +4.6 +4.8 +0.5 +3.8 +4.0 +4.1 +4.3 +5.1 –9.3 +4.5 . +4.7
2018 +4.7 +4.5 +4.2 +7.6 +3.3 +2.6 +3.9 +4.1 +9.7 –7.8 +5.1 . +4.4
p 2019 +3.8 +3.2 +4.5 +3.8 +4.8 +5.0 +5.0 +6.1 +7.5 –12.2 +3.7 . +3.7
p 2020 –2.9 –6.1 +1.7 –3.0 +9.9 +7.0 +4.0 +11.8 +10.4 –21.5 +40.5 . –2.9
p 2021 +9.1 +13.3 +4.2 +7.1 +7.5 +4.0 +3.6 +8.5 +0.2 –3.4 +32.4 . +9.3
pe 2022 +6.4 +7.9 +5.1 +3.7 +4.1 +3.5 +4.2 +4.3 +8.8 +25.8 +2.7 . +6.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office.  * Figures in accordance with ESA 2010.  1 Taxes and
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution Fund.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
59•
X. Public finances in Germany
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3
Period Total  4 TaxesFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5 Total  4Person-
nel
expend-
itureCurrent
grants InterestFixed
asset
forma-
tionFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5Deficit/
surplusRev-
enue  6Expend-
itureDeficit/
surplusRev-
enueExpend-
itureDeficit/
surplus
2016 859.7 705.8 8.8 842.8 251.3 320.8 43.3 48.3 11.7 +16.8 601.8 594.8 +7.1 1,352.5 1,328.6 +23.9
2017 897.6 734.5 7.7 867.8 261.5 327.2 41.9 51.7 13.8 +29.8 631.5 622.0 +9.5 1,414.9 1,375.6 +39.3
2018 949.2 776.3 6.0 904.0 272.4 337.3 39.1 55.1 16.1 +45.2 656.2 642.5 +13.6 1,488.1 1,429.3 +58.8
2019 1,007.7 799.4 11.0 973.9 285.9 348.9 33.5 62.2 16.8 +33.7 685.0 676.7 +8.3 1,571.2 1,529.2 +42.0
2020 944.3 739.9 13.7 1,109.7 299.4 422.0 25.8 68.6 59.9 –165.4 719.5 747.8 –28.3 1,516.2 1,709.9 –193.7
2021 1,105.4 833.3 25.3 1,239.9 310.7 530.7 21.0 69.3 26.1 –134.5 769.2 777.1 –6.5 1,701.5 1,844.0 –142.4
P 2020 Q1 244.8 197.5 2.5 236.4 72.9 90.5 11.9 12.0 2.6 +8.4 168.3 175.7 –7.4 380.0 379.1 +0.9
PQ2 215.6 158.1 2.7 275.4 72.2 119.1 8.6 15.4 3.4 –59.8 175.9 187.0 –11.1 358.1 429.0 –70.9
PQ3 227.5 181.4 4.0 282.1 72.4 101.9 1.4 18.3 34.3 –54.5 181.1 195.0 –13.9 369.9 438.3 –68.4
PQ4 259.3 201.9 4.5 315.4 81.4 109.2 5.9 22.8 19.6 –56.1 186.0 189.6 –3.5 410.6 470.2 –59.6
P 2021 Q1 240.7 185.3 4.3 300.6 75.5 130.8 7.3 11.1 14.6 –59.9 182.4 196.3 –13.9 385.2 458.9 –73.8
PQ2 267.0 195.8 7.5 297.1 74.8 122.7 10.7 15.2 10.5 –30.2 185.9 197.0 –11.1 414.1 455.3 –41.2
PQ3 270.9 210.7 7.4 290.2 75.8 116.3 – 0.4 16.5 10.4 –19.3 183.4 191.9 –8.6 413.5 441.4 –27.8
PQ4 332.9 237.7 6.1 347.8 84.1 153.4 3.1 26.4 – 9.4 –14.9 197.3 190.4 +6.9 492.6 500.6 –8.0
P 2022 Q1 278.0 224.0 5.0 279.1 79.6 116.8 5.5 11.9 7.0 –1.0 193.8 199.8 –6.0 430.1 437.2 –7.1
PQ2 287.8 224.6 5.1 294.0 77.8 126.4 10.6 15.3 5.9 –6.2 199.9 196.7 +3.2 444.5 447.5 –3.1
PQ3 272.2 207.0 13.3 303.2 78.1 117.0 10.8 17.7 10.8 –31.0 194.0 197.6 –3.6 422.9 457.5 –34.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data.  1 Annual fig-
ures based on the quarterly figures of the Federal Statistical Office, core budgets and
off-budget entities which are assigned to the general government sector.  2 The annual
figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all pro-
visional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated.  3 The develop-
ment of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statisticalchangeovers.  4 Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state
and local government.  5 On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as dis-
posals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted.  6 Excluding central govern-
ment liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency.
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2016 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 380.2 372.0 + 8.2 247.1 241.7 + 5.4
2017 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 396.7 385.5 +11.3 258.5 247.7 +10.7
2018 374.4 363.5 +10.9 419.6 399.8 +19.9 270.0 260.1 + 9.8
2019 382.5 369.2 +13.3 436.3 419.3 +17.0 282.4 276.7 + 5.7
2020 341.4 472.1 –130.7 455.5 489.0 –33.6 295.2 293.2 + 2.0
2021 370.3 585.9 –215.6 509.3 508.7 + 0.5 308.0 303.4 + 4.6
2022 399.6 515.6 –116.0 534.3 523.7 +10.6 328.5 325.8 + 2.7
2020 Q1 92.3 90.4 + 1.9 105.6 99.7 + 5.9 57.9 67.7 – 9.8
Q2 70.8 114.8 –44.0 108.2 128.0 –19.8 69.4 69.4 + 0.1
Q3 83.7 105.4 –21.7 112.9 113.7 – 0.8 67.5 72.6 – 5.1
Q4 94.5 161.5 –67.0 127.4 146.3 –18.9 100.3 83.5 +16.8
2021 Q1 75.0 127.5 –52.5 113.7 120.7 – 7.1 61.1 69.7 – 8.6
Q2 86.4 123.5 –37.1 122.8 122.0 + 0.8 74.6 71.7 + 2.9
Q3 93.9 128.7 –34.7 125.9 120.2 + 5.7 74.6 74.9 – 0.3
Q4 115.1 206.3 –91.2 145.6 144.5 + 1.2 97.6 87.0 +10.6
2022 Q1 94.7 114.0 –19.3 134.6 122.7 +11.9 68.4 73.8 – 5.4
Q2 99.7 123.5 –23.7 133.2 123.6 + 9.6 81.0 77.3 + 3.7
Q3 89.0 127.8 –38.7 126.1 121.4 + 4.7 81.1 80.3 + 0.8
Q4 116.1 150.4 –34.2 139.1 154.6 –15.5 98.0 94.5 + 3.5
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office data and Bundesbank
calculations.  1 Any amounts of the Bundesbank's profit distribution exceeding the
reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government'sspecial funds are not included here.  2 Including the local authority level of the city
states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg.  3 Data of core budgets and off-budget entities
which are assigned to the general government sector.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
60•
X. Public finances in Germany
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Period Total TotalCentral
government  1State
government  1 European Union  2Local
government  3Balance of
untransferred
tax shares  4Memo item:
Amounts deducted
in the Federal
budget  5
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,836
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 – 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,911 632,268 313,381 286,065 32,822 107,916 – 274 30,266
2021 833,337 706,978 342,988 325,768 38,222 125,000 + 1,359 29,321
2022 895,854 760,321 372,121 349,583 38,617 134,146 + 1,387 34,911
2021 Q1 189,316 159,271 72,814 73,137 13,320 19,882 + 10,163 6,887
Q2 191,931 163,158 81,129 74,024 8,005 29,609 – 835 7,438
Q3 211,364 180,378 87,603 84,312 8,464 29,726 + 1,260 7,823
Q4 240,726 204,171 101,442 94,295 8,433 45,784 – 9,229 7,173
2022 Q1 224,006 189,158 92,112 87,240 9,806 24,772 + 10,077 7,261
Q2 224,538 190,982 94,153 86,852 9,977 34,149 – 594 11,576
Q3 205,544 174,232 84,078 80,020 10,133 33,618 – 2,306 7,953
Q4 241,767 205,950 101,778 95,471 8,702 41,607 – 5,790 8,121
2023 Q1 ... 186,173 93,366 83,536 9,271 ... ... 7,665
2022 Mar. . 76,345 38,282 35,628 2,434 . . 2,366
2023 Mar. . 75,314 37,714 34,255 3,345 . . 2,555
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers,
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern-
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these amounts
which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget.  2 Customs duties andshares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government
tax revenue.  3 Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin, Bremen and
Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms.  4 Difference between local
government's share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in
the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local govern-
ment in the same period.  5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1.
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
€ million
Joint taxes
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7
Period Total  1 TotalWage
tax 3Assessed
income
tax 4Corpora-
tion tax  5Invest-
ment
income
tax 6 TotalDomestic
VATImport
VATLocal
business
tax
trans-
fers  8Central
govern-
ment
taxes  9State
govern-
ment
taxes  9EU
customs
dutiesMemo
item:
Local
govern-
ment
share in
joint
taxes
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,376 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,734 50,107
2021 760,953 370,296 218,407 72,342 42,124 37,423 250,800 187,631 63,169 4,951 98,171 31,613 5,122 53,976
2022 814,886 390,111 227,205 77,411 46,334 39,161 284,850 198,201 86,649 6,347 96,652 30,097 6,829 54,565
2021 Q1 171,974 86,381 50,854 17,826 10,203 7,498 54,795 45,403 9,392 252 21,712 7,757 1,076 12,703
Q2 175,242 84,505 50,783 14,347 8,860 10,515 57,634 43,399 14,235 1,215 23,210 7,398 1,281 12,085
Q3 193,910 90,619 53,857 17,973 9,853 8,936 69,528 49,052 20,476 1,189 23,469 7,813 1,292 13,532
Q4 219,827 108,791 62,913 22,196 13,208 10,474 68,843 49,777 19,066 2,295 29,780 8,645 1,473 15,656
2022 Q1 203,130 96,245 56,206 20,915 11,178 7,946 73,584 54,234 19,350 615 22,252 8,975 1,459 13,972
Q2 204,740 101,822 60,363 17,194 11,246 13,019 67,763 46,755 21,008 1,521 24,441 7,564 1,630 13,758
Q3 185,552 82,392 43,431 17,598 10,724 10,639 71,164 49,323 21,841 1,471 21,657 7,115 1,753 11,320
Q4 221,464 109,652 67,205 21,704 13,186 7,557 72,339 47,889 24,451 2,740 28,302 6,444 1,987 15,514
2023 Q1 199,764 94,453 55,669 19,728 10,700 8,357 73,522 52,197 21,325 370 23,110 6,815 1,494 13,591
2022 Mar. 82,408 47,977 17,995 17,495 9,379 3,108 22,338 12,357 9,981 5 8,179 3,423 487 6,063
2023 Mar. 81,174 47,305 17,171 17,210 9,550 3,374 22,192 11,340 10,851 3 8,642 2,576 457 5,860
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations.  1 This total, unlike
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of untrans-
ferred tax shares.  2 Respective percentage share of central, state and local government
in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and
non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on interest income and
capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12.  3 After deducting child benefits
and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans.  4 After deducting employeerefunds and research grants.  5 After deducting research grants.  6 Final withholding tax
on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings.  7 The allocation
of revenue to central, state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular
intervals, is regulated in Section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percent-
age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2022: 46.6:50.5:2.8.
The EU share is deducted from central government's share.  8 Respective percentage
share of central and state government for 2022: 41.4:58.6.  9 For the breakdown, see
Table X. 7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
61•
X. Public finances in Germany
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
of which:
PeriodEnergy
taxSoli-
darity
surchargeTobacco
taxInsurance
taxMotor
vehicle
taxElectri-
city taxAlcohol
tax OtherTax on
the acqui-
sition of
land and
buildingsInherit-
ance
taxBetting
and
lottery
tax Other TotalLocal
business
tax 2Real
property
taxes
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,654
2017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 – 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,966
2018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,203
2019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,651 14,553 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2021 37,120 11,028 14,733 14,980 9,546 6,691 2,089 1,984 18,335 9,824 2,333 1,121 77,335 61,251 14,985
2022 33,667 11,978 14,229 15,672 9,499 6,830 2,191 2,585 17,122 9,226 2,569 1,180 87,315 70,382 15,282
2021 Q1 4,126 3,171 2,585 6,776 2,567 1,692 395 400 4,716 2,110 578 353 17,594 13,798 3,503
Q2 8,717 2,546 4,053 2,843 2,469 1,640 528 413 4,231 2,374 538 255 17,904 13,692 4,034
Q3 9,532 2,338 3,636 2,911 2,381 1,618 514 538 4,571 2,457 516 269 18,643 14,215 4,133
Q4 14,745 2,972 4,458 2,449 2,130 1,741 651 633 4,816 2,884 700 244 23,194 19,546 3,316
2022 Q1 4,452 2,840 2,372 7,175 2,594 1,785 531 503 5,061 2,827 701 385 21,492 17,454 3,577
Q2 9,092 3,518 3,648 2,872 2,433 1,722 505 651 4,406 2,238 661 259 21,318 16,839 4,077
Q3 7,103 2,571 3,742 3,059 2,325 1,598 549 710 4,100 2,138 596 281 21,463 16,792 4,249
Q4 13,020 3,049 4,467 2,567 2,147 1,725 606 722 3,555 2,023 611 254 23,043 19,298 3,380
2023 Q1 4,362 2,888 2,669 7,637 2,632 1,749 530 643 3,362 2,368 666 420 ... ... ...
2022 Mar. 2,547 1,677 1,086 986 948 652 131 154 1,857 1,114 214 238 . . .
2023 Mar. 2,728 1,679 1,318 946 1,022 606 147 197 1,169 943 194 270 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 For the sum total, see Table X. 6.  2 Including revenue from offshore wind
farms.
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  3
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions  2Payments
from
central
government TotalPension
paymentsPen-
sioners'
health
insuranceDeficit/
surplus Total Deposits  4SecuritiesEquity
interests,
mortgages
and other
loans  5Real
estateMemo
item:
Adminis-
trative
assets
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 –2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,147
2017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 +529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,032
2018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 +4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,008
2019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 +1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 303 56 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 –3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 344 55 3,901
2021 348,679 245,185 102,772 347,486 296,343 22,734 +1,192 42,014 40,320 1,241 400 52 3,807
p 2022 362,939 258,217 104,029 360,029 308,556 23,786 +2,911 46,082 44,186 1,399 446 51 3,767
2020 Q1 80,578 55,999 24,436 82,622 70,829 5,346 –2,045 40,840 38,636 1,848 300 56 3,966
Q2 82,098 57,515 24,413 82,875 70,889 5,346 –777 39,779 37,975 1,446 304 55 3,949
Q3 82,689 58,109 24,418 86,497 74,054 5,591 –3,808 36,898 35,197 1,333 313 55 3,925
Q4 88,978 64,375 24,412 86,605 73,879 5,576 +2,373 39,847 38,186 1,286 321 55 3,916
2021 Q1 83,066 57,351 25,542 86,048 73,799 5,600 –2,982 36,888 35,326 1,166 342 54 3,887
Q2 86,386 60,666 25,545 86,486 73,905 5,679 –100 36,941 35,554 988 345 53 3,871
Q3 85,535 59,941 25,468 87,123 74,453 5,718 –1,588 36,041 34,670 973 345 53 3,840
Q4 92,818 67,211 25,415 87,385 74,556 5,730 +5,432 41,974 40,310 1,241 370 52 3,835
2022 Q1 86,684 60,599 25,937 86,841 74,568 5,734 –157 41,784 39,952 1,367 399 65 3,783
Q2 90,040 63,978 25,879 87,138 74,644 5,756 +2,903 44,425 42,441 1,513 406 65 3,761
Q3 89,284 62,891 26,218 92,606 79,400 6,127 –3,322 41,548 39,767 1,315 415 51 3,775
Q4 96,931 70,750 25,995 93,444 79,944 6,170 +3,487 46,082 44,186 1,399 446 51 3,767
2023 Q1 91,370 64,171 26,972 92,422 79,330 6,142 –1,052 45,109 43,030 1,569 460 51 3,724
Sources: German pension insurance scheme and Bundesbank calculations.  * Excluding
the German pension insurance scheme for mining, railway and maritime industries. The
final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as
the latter are not revised.  1 Including financial compensation payments. Excluding in-vestment spending and proceeds.  2 Including contributions for recipients of govern-
ment cash benefits.  3 Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
quarter.  4 Including cash.  5 Excluding loans to other social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
62•
X. Public finance in Germany
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total  1Contri-
butionsInsolvency
compen-
sation levyGovernment
funds TotalUnemploy-
ment
benefit  2Short-time
working
benefits  3Job
promotion  4Insolvency
benefit
paymentAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  5Deficit/
surplusMemo item:
Deficit-
offsetting
grant or
loan from
central
government
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 – 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 595 5,314 +5,463 –
2017 37,819 32,501 882 – 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 687 6,444 +5,952 –
2018 39,335 34,172 622 – 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 588 8,129 +6,228 –
2019 35,285 29,851 638 – 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 842 6,252 +2,131 –
2020 33,678 28,236 630 – 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 1,214 6,076 –27,335 6,913
2021 35,830 29,571 1,302 – 57,570 19,460 21,003 7,475 493 6,080 –21,739 16,935
2022 37,831 31,651 1,062 – 37,530 16,588 3,865 7,125 534 6,256 + 300 423
2020 Q1 8,123 6,851 153 – 9,301 4,469 392 1,934 235 1,470 –1,179 –
Q2 7,906 6,691 151 – 17,005 4,869 7,977 1,793 254 1,407 –9,099 –
Q3 8,350 6,934 153 – 18,619 5,737 8,637 1,701 472 1,414 –10,269 –
Q4 9,299 7,760 174 – 16,088 5,543 5,712 1,957 251 1,785 –6,789 6,913
2021 Q1 8,228 6,747 289 – 18,260 5,956 8,006 1,935 184 1,391 –10,033 –
Q2 8,830 7,301 324 – 16,720 5,029 7,495 1,912 108 1,452 –7,890 –
Q3 8,791 7,290 330 – 12,042 4,447 3,631 1,744 91 1,452 –3,251 –
Q4 9,982 8,234 359 – 10,547 4,028 1,871 1,884 110 1,785 – 565 16,935
2022 Q1 8,827 7,374 251 – 10,685 4,424 2,087 1,821 135 1,412 –1,858 –
Q2 9,327 7,857 262 – 9,457 4,091 1,215 1,794 147 1,450 – 130 –
Q3 9,278 7,740 261 – 8,401 4,056 408 1,621 107 1,506 + 877 –
Q4 10,398 8,679 289 – 8,987 4,016 156 1,889 145 1,888 +1,411 423
2023 Q1 9,836 8,442 178 – 9,942 4,727 592 1,858 376 1,550 – 106 –
Source: Federal Employment Agency and Bundesbank calculations.  * Including transfers
to the civil servants' pension fund.  1 Excluding central government deficit-offsetting
grant or loan.  2 Unemployment benefit in case of unemployment.  3 Including seasonal
short-time working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, re-
structuring measures and refunds of social contributions.  4 Vocational training, meas-ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, integration, compensation top-up pay-
ments and promotion of business start-ups.  5 Including collection charges to other
social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the
basic allowance for job seekers.
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions Central
government
funds  2 TotalHospital
treatmentPharma-
ceuticalsMedical
treatmentDental
treatment  3Remedies
and
therapeutic
appliancesSickness
benefitsAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  4Deficit/
surplus
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 757
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 +3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 +2,654
2019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 –1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 –6,110
2021 289,270 249,734 36,977 294,602 82,748 46,199 45,075 16,335 20,163 16,612 11,735 –5,332
p 2022 315,392 262,379 50,223 310,668 84,453 48,408 47,193 16,801 21,344 17,958 12,611 +4,725
2020 Q1 61,949 57,419 3,625 66,438 20,049 11,086 10,806 3,804 4,470 4,061 2,816 –4,489
Q2 68,108 58,096 9,359 69,487 17,674 10,492 10,908 3,389 3,986 4,143 2,980 –1,378
Q3 70,130 59,403 10,151 71,063 20,913 10,567 11,642 3,774 4,852 3,829 2,970 – 934
Q4 68,645 62,672 4,805 67,987 19,887 10,729 11,019 3,891 4,725 3,920 3,039 + 658
2021 Q1 72,970 59,338 13,303 72,660 19,631 11,175 11,564 4,069 4,564 4,287 2,967 + 310
Q2 71,964 61,819 9,965 74,492 20,287 11,275 11,536 4,219 5,085 4,120 2,850 –2,529
Q3 70,592 61,899 7,942 73,569 20,748 11,756 10,730 4,060 5,085 4,004 2,849 –2,977
Q4 74,020 66,678 5,767 73,209 21,340 12,043 11,252 4,062 5,290 4,200 3,109 + 810
2022 Q1 79,253 62,142 17,049 81,493 20,550 11,891 11,847 4,286 5,216 4,574 3,510 –2,240
Q2 79,112 64,611 14,280 79,269 21,080 12,053 12,085 4,249 5,335 4,457 2,958 – 158
Q3 75,516 65,242 9,804 75,011 21,164 12,221 11,545 3,956 5,352 4,441 2,996 + 505
Q4 81,512 70,384 9,091 74,894 21,659 12,242 11,717 4,310 5,442 4,486 3,148 +6,617
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as the latter are not
revised. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensationscheme.  2 Federal grant and liquidity assistance.  3 Including dentures.  4 Net, i.e. after
deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contributions incurred by other
social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
63•
X. Public finances in Germany
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period Total Contributions TotalNon-cash
care benefitsInpatient
care total  2Nursing
benefitContributions to
pension insur-
ance scheme  3Administrative
expenditureDeficit/
surplus
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 4,904 13,539 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,235
2017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 – 2,557
2018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 – 3,315
2019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2021 52,573 49,764 53,903 9,573 16,511 13,865 3,070 2,024 – 1,330
p 2022 57,783 52,451 60,030 10,247 20,478 14,917 3,209 2,148 – 2,247
2020 Q1 11,693 11,473 11,444 2,186 4,214 3,067 633 489 + 249
Q2 11,921 11,732 11,816 2,051 4,015 3,173 664 468 + 105
Q3 13,924 11,938 12,890 2,263 4,087 3,249 682 500 + 1,033
Q4 13,079 12,746 12,927 2,306 4,177 3,403 716 481 + 152
2021 Q1 12,093 11,831 13,344 2,355 3,971 3,387 725 512 – 1,251
Q2 12,933 12,329 13,521 2,287 4,030 3,421 745 510 – 587
Q3 12,624 12,294 13,390 2,393 4,182 3,466 783 509 – 767
Q4 14,853 13,242 13,595 2,475 4,270 3,646 788 503 + 1,258
2022 Q1 12,912 12,412 14,739 2,564 4,974 3,572 775 529 – 1,827
Q2 15,350 12,951 14,827 2,464 5,026 3,698 795 548 + 523
Q3 13,708 13,021 15,387 2,638 5,197 3,755 802 542 – 1,679
Q4 15,813 14,067 15,078 2,581 5,281 3,892 837 528 + 735
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  * The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the
latter are not revised.  1 Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund.  2 In-cluding benefits for short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter alia.
3 For non-professional carers.
12. Maastricht debt by creditor
€ million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Bundesbank Domestic MFIsOther domestic
financial corporations Other domestic creditors Foreign creditors
of which: of which: of which: of which: of which: Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities
2016 2,161,570 205,391 191,880 585,456 223,408 211,514 111,843 48,630 14,181 1,110,578 1,012,274
2017 2,130,519 319,159 305,301 557,950 194,620 180,105 81,126 45,106 10,456 1,028,199 941,748
2018 2,083,367 364,731 350,487 516,113 167,505 186,345 89,793 44,124 8,724 972,054 892,224
2019 2,068,810 366,562 352,025 480,190 158,119 183,669 88,727 48,738 7,224 989,652 908,794
2020 2,339,934 522,392 507,534 517,602 157,828 191,079 99,688 41,093 8,372 1,067,768 996,570
2021 2,494,587 716,004 700,921 509,199 144,646 191,656 103,125 39,444 7,436 1,038,284 969,176
p 2022 2,563,081 741,363 726,147 521,043 126,890 211,216 126,370 43,796 8,972 1,045,662 980,484
2020 Q1 2,114,285 371,076 356,469 492,264 163,767 185,852 92,853 49,820 7,746 1,015,272 935,548
Q2 2,284,382 424,141 409,393 558,877 172,258 186,264 93,879 49,942 8,600 1,065,157 983,998
Q3 2,358,574 468,723 453,952 531,714 167,754 189,464 97,649 51,791 8,100 1,116,882 1,046,058
Q4 2,339,934 522,392 507,534 517,602 157,828 191,079 99,688 41,093 8,372 1,067,768 996,570
2021 Q1 2,368,916 561,443 546,539 491,994 162,960 190,044 99,241 50,869 8,060 1,074,566 1,010,738
Q2 2,418,789 620,472 605,429 494,443 151,182 189,839 99,581 39,995 7,700 1,074,040 1,008,690
Q3 2,452,516 669,659 654,600 496,369 152,068 191,531 101,702 41,857 8,069 1,053,100 987,782
Q4 2,494,587 716,004 700,921 509,199 144,646 191,656 103,125 39,444 7,436 1,038,284 969,176
p 2022 Q1 2,498,760 737,978 722,843 493,359 143,410 193,909 105,978 37,842 6,959 1,035,672 969,145
pQ2 2,536,603 759,385 744,213 497,518 133,999 202,461 115,357 39,891 8,086 1,037,347 971,585
pQ3 2,551,520 741,360 726,147 528,509 126,865 202,427 116,416 39,610 8,986 1,039,614 969,073
pQ4 2,563,081 741,363 726,147 521,043 126,890 211,216 126,370 43,796 8,972 1,045,662 980,484
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
64•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
General government
2016 2,161,570 15,491 69,715 1,483,871 96,254 496,239 . .
2017 2,130,519 14,298 48,789 1,484,462 88,841 494,129 . .
2018 2,083,367 14,680 52,572 1,456,160 79,171 480,783 . .
2019 2,068,810 14,449 56,350 1,458,540 64,464 475,007 . .
2020 Q1 2,114,285 11,410 84,160 1,472,222 74,813 471,680 . .
Q2 2,284,382 13,120 134,272 1,533,857 133,665 469,468 . .
Q3 2,358,574 11,886 190,939 1,582,574 104,075 469,099 . .
Q4 2,339,934 14,486 173,851 1,596,141 85,384 470,072 . .
2021 Q1 2,368,916 12,283 190,022 1,637,516 62,725 466,371 . .
Q2 2,418,789 13,065 182,660 1,689,923 69,272 463,869 . .
Q3 2,452,516 13,565 192,481 1,711,741 70,629 464,100 . .
Q4 2,494,587 17,743 195,420 1,729,884 88,684 462,855 . .
p 2022 Q1 2,498,760 15,676 172,881 1,775,454 70,285 464,464 . .
pQ2 2,536,603 17,793 161,918 1,811,322 75,954 469,616 . .
pQ3 2,551,520 22,631 150,016 1,797,472 82,941 498,460 . .
pQ4 2,563,081 16,985 150,704 1,818,159 92,781 484,452 . .
Central government
2016 1,365,579 15,491 55,208 1,123,853 50,004 121,022 556 8,567
2017 1,361,680 14,298 36,297 1,131,896 48,305 130,885 1,131 10,618
2018 1,334,661 14,680 42,246 1,107,140 43,067 127,528 933 9,975
2019 1,312,675 14,449 38,480 1,101,866 29,956 127,924 605 10,301
2020 Q1 1,340,794 11,410 56,679 1,103,934 40,120 128,652 605 8,119
Q2 1,487,263 13,120 109,217 1,139,510 96,960 128,457 585 7,026
Q3 1,550,507 11,886 166,559 1,178,687 64,470 128,905 605 11,713
Q4 1,527,062 14,486 154,498 1,180,683 48,414 128,981 609 14,521
2021 Q1 1,552,615 12,283 167,485 1,212,495 31,284 129,068 602 22,929
Q2 1,602,675 13,065 165,374 1,259,206 36,297 128,734 643 29,448
Q3 1,630,577 13,565 170,962 1,280,586 37,116 128,348 687 31,382
Q4 1,679,842 17,743 176,428 1,300,416 57,806 127,448 640 8,080
p 2022 Q1 1,684,879 15,676 155,119 1,340,340 41,903 131,841 531 10,451
pQ2 1,724,097 17,793 147,674 1,373,617 47,652 137,362 604 10,552
pQ3 1,757,787 22,631 144,987 1,369,630 56,254 164,285 768 13,203
pQ4 1,776,883 16,985 146,974 1,391,710 71,867 149,348 8,826 9,159
State government
2016 642,291 – 14,515 361,996 20,482 245,298 11,273 1,694
2017 616,790 – 12,543 354,688 19,790 229,769 14,038 2,046
2018 603,143 – 10,332 351,994 19,250 221,567 14,035 1,891
2019 612,559 – 17,873 360,495 19,076 215,115 14,934 1,826
2020 Q1 626,402 – 27,484 372,021 16,329 210,568 12,292 1,783
Q2 648,455 – 25,056 398,404 17,267 207,728 11,059 2,085
Q3 659,035 – 24,382 408,310 20,208 206,136 11,701 2,090
Q4 664,284 – 19,354 419,862 19,481 205,587 11,924 1,410
2021 Q1 667,504 – 22,538 429,641 14,367 200,958 10,942 1,998
Q2 667,750 – 17,287 435,726 16,169 198,568 12,454 2,047
Q3 673,140 – 21,521 436,506 16,312 198,801 11,414 2,119
Q4 665,104 – 18,994 434,930 14,313 196,866 12,441 1,766
p 2022 Q1 663,981 – 17,765 440,766 12,390 193,061 11,697 1,935
pQ2 660,246 – 14,247 443,413 12,056 190,530 11,449 1,777
pQ3 644,911 – 5,031 433,503 14,826 191,552 14,099 2,200
pQ4 636,554 – 3,732 432,252 11,782 188,788 11,704 1,701
Local government
2016 166,205 – – 2,404 27,002 136,798 1,819 431
2017 168,305 – – 3,082 24,909 140,314 1,881 466
2018 161,729 – 1 3,046 20,903 137,779 1,884 497
2019 160,250 – – 2,996 19,607 137,647 1,856 532
2020 Q1 161,020 – – 3,128 20,257 137,636 1,824 508
Q2 161,393 – – 3,094 20,236 138,063 2,084 350
Q3 162,760 – – 2,961 21,108 138,691 2,106 339
Q4 161,974 – – 3,366 18,520 140,088 1,402 330
2021 Q1 161,985 – – 3,121 18,025 140,839 2,009 320
Q2 163,157 – – 3,121 19,079 140,957 2,070 313
Q3 162,609 – – 3,000 18,311 141,298 2,127 306
Q4 164,118 – – 3,241 17,978 142,899 1,768 293
p 2022 Q1 163,678 – – 3,052 16,821 143,804 1,933 315
pQ2 165,754 – – 2,902 16,961 145,891 1,823 361
pQ3 165,560 – – 2,856 15,926 146,778 2,247 358
pQ4 171,150 – – 2,883 18,210 150,057 1,748 470
For footnotes see end of table.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
65•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont´d)
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:   2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
Social security funds
2016 1,232 – – – 562 670 89 3,044
2017 807 – – – 262 545 15 3,934
2018 704 – – – 388 316 16 4,506
2019 738 – – – 375 363 16 4,753
2020 Q1 806 – – – 287 519 16 4,328
Q2 1,015 – – – 581 433 16 4,284
Q3 4,640 – – – 4,210 430 3,956 4,226
Q4 7,480 – – – 7,128 352 6,931 4,606
2021 Q1 16,220 – – – 15,985 235 15,853 4,160
Q2 21,234 – – – 20,995 239 20,860 4,220
Q3 24,288 – – – 24,053 235 23,872 4,292
Q4 392 – – – 131 261 19 4,729
p 2022 Q1 3,104 – – – 2,863 240 2,720 4,181
pQ2 3,320 – – – 3,078 242 2,939 4,124
pQ3 3,686 – – – 3,439 247 3,311 4,665
pQ4 2,196 – – – 1,589 607 1,424 12,372
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office and
the Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency.  1 Particularly liabilities resulting
from coins in circulation.  2 Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt vis-à-visother government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on the
market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated between
different government subsectors.
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
€ million
Currency and deposits  2Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3
Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total  1 Total  1Federal
day bond Total  1Conventional
Federal
bonds
(Bunds)Conventional
Federal
notes
(Bobls)Conventional
Federal
Treasury
notes
(Schätze)  4Treasury
discount
paper
(Bubills)  5Federal
savings
notesGreen
Federal
securitiesInflation-
linked
Federal
securities  6Capital
indexation
of inflation-
linked
securities Loans  1
2007 987,909 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 102,083 37,385 10,287 . 13,464 506 63,650
2008 1,019,905 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 105,684 40,795 9,649 . 19,540 1,336 78,685
2009 1,086,173 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 113,637 104,409 9,471 . 24,730 1,369 63,121
2010 1,337,160 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 126,220 85,867 8,704 . 35,906 2,396 242,251
2011 1,346,869 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 130,648 58,297 8,208 . 44,241 3,961 215,109
2012 1,390,377 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 117,719 56,222 6,818 . 52,119 5,374 203,467
2013 1,392,735 10,582 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 110,029 50,004 4,488 . 51,718 4,730 190,127
2014 1,398,472 12,146 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 103,445 27,951 2,375 . 63,245 5,368 180,123
2015 1,371,933 13,949 1,070 1,188,463 663,296 232,387 96,389 18,536 1,305 . 74,495 5,607 169,521
2016 1,365,579 15,491 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 95,727 23,609 737 . 66,464 3,602 171,026
2017 1,361,680 14,298 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 91,013 10,037 289 . 72,855 4,720 179,190
2018 1,334,661 14,680 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 86,009 12,949 48 . 64,647 5,139 170,595
2019 1,312,675 14,449 –1,140,346 719,747 174,719 89,230 13,487 . . 69,805 6,021 157,880
2020 1,527,062 14,486 .1,335,181 801,910 179,560 98,543 113,141 . 9,876 58,279 3,692 177,395
2021 1,679,842 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 185,255
p 2022 1,776,883 16,985 .1,538,683 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 221,215
2020 Q1 1,340,794 11,410 .1,160,613 721,343 182,095 91,084 23,572 . . 71,028 5,310 168,772
Q2 1,487,263 13,120 .1,248,728 774,587 178,329 95,622 79,987 . . 56,061 3,752 225,416
Q3 1,550,507 11,886 .1,345,246 790,288 191,388 99,276 127,478 . 6,050 57,144 3,737 193,375
Q4 1,527,062 14,486 .1,335,181 801,910 179,560 98,543 113,141 . 9,876 58,279 3,692 177,395
2021 Q1 1,552,615 12,283 .1,379,980 814,864 189,935 103,910 134,800 . 11,026 60,687 3,857 160,352
Q2 1,602,675 13,065 .1,424,579 861,455 184,413 104,997 139,451 . 16,526 62,569 5,056 165,031
Q3 1,630,577 13,565 .1,451,549 869,195 198,692 105,398 146,533 . 19,824 63,851 5,456 165,464
Q4 1,679,842 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 185,255
p 2022 Q1 1,684,879 15,676 .1,495,459 911,280 204,534 108,702 140,427 . 23,961 67,776 7,809 173,744
pQ2 1,724,097 17,793 .1,521,291 937,949 198,472 111,343 138,495 . 29,425 70,217 11,209 185,014
pQ3 1,757,787 22,631 .1,514,617 918,838 208,509 111,675 137,740 . 35,527 71,498 12,879 220,539
pQ4 1,776,883 16,985 .1,538,683 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 221,215
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, and
Bundesbank calculations.  1 Comprises all of central government, i.e. all off-budget en-
tities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned bad bank FMS
Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government from an economic
perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) 2010.  2 Particularly liabilitiesresulting from coins in circulation.  3 Issuances by the Federal Republic of Germany. Ex-
cluding issuers' holdings of own securities but including those held by other govern-
ment entities.  4 Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency (expired
in 2011).  5 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014).  6 Excluding
inflation-induced indexation of capital.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2021 2022
2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Item Index 2015=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 100.4 104.9 104.9 –7.2 4.5 –0.0 20.2 2.6 –1.1 1.1 –0.1 0.9 –1.9
Construction 102.1 100.7 97.8 2.0 –1.4 –2.9 4.1 2.3 –6.1 4.5 –3.4 –4.6 –6.2
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 101.0 103.9 108.0 –7.5 2.8 4.0 11.5 3.2 4.1 9.1 5.8 2.4 –0.7
Information and communication 120.8 125.2 129.6 0.1 3.6 3.5 7.0 3.9 2.9 3.4 2.9 4.0 3.7
Financial and insurance activities 98.9 99.1 101.3 3.6 0.3 2.2 –0.2 –0.1 0.6 2.3 2.1 2.5 1.8
Real estate activities 102.2 103.1 104.3 0.4 0.9 1.1 3.1 0.2 0.7 1.6 1.2 0.7 1.0
Business services  1 105.1 109.8 112.7 –5.0 4.4 2.7 13.0 6.5 4.4 6.5 2.3 1.0 1.1
Public services, education and health 105.4 107.6 110.2 –1.1 2.0 2.4 8.6 –0.2 1.6 2.4 0.8 2.8 3.7
Other services 91.2 91.5 97.1 –11.6 0.4 6.1 9.0 1.5 4.3 8.5 8.3 2.3 5.9
Gross value added 102.8 105.6 107.5 –3.9 2.7 1.8 10.7 2.2 1.2 3.6 1.7 1.4 0.4
Gross domestic product  2 103.2 105.9 107.8 –3.7 2.6 1.8 10.6 1.8 1.2 3.9 1.7 1.3 0.3
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 101.1 101.5 105.9 –5.7 0.4 4.3 6.5 1.4 3.1 8.5 7.0 2.1 0.4
Government consumption 113.8 118.1 119.5 4.0 3.8 1.2 8.5 2.1 1.4 4.2 –0.1 0.2 0.5
Machinery and equipment 100.8 104.3 107.7 –11.0 3.5 3.3 20.8 –2.1 –2.6 0.7 0.7 8.9 3.1
Premises 112.9 112.9 110.9 3.9 0.0 –1.7 4.4 0.6 –3.2 3.4 –3.4 –1.7 –4.9
Other investment  4 116.3 117.6 120.0 –3.3 1.0 2.1 4.1 1.6 0.7 1.7 1.8 2.4 2.5
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . –0.3 0.5 0.5 –0.4 1.0 0.9 –0.7 0.3 1.2 0.9
Domestic demand 106.1 108.1 111.5 –3.0 1.9 3.1 7.1 2.3 2.4 5.0 3.6 2.9 1.0
Net exports  6 . . . –0.8 0.8 –1.2 3.8 –0.3 –1.0 –0.9 –1.7 –1.5 –0.6
     Exports 101.0 110.8 113.9 –9.3 9.7 2.9 28.2 7.4 7.2 3.6 2.4 5.1 0.5
     Imports 107.6 117.3 124.3 –8.5 9.0 6.0 20.6 9.3 11.1 6.3 6.9 9.2 1.9
Gross domestic product  2 103.2 105.9 107.8 –3.7 2.6 1.8 10.6 1.8 1.2 3.9 1.7 1.3 0.3
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,713.5 1,773.8 1,978.9 –5.1 3.5 11.6 8.3 5.3 7.9 13.8 14.1 9.5 9.3
Government consumption 748.0 797.5 848.4 6.4 6.6 6.4 7.9 6.2 6.1 9.1 5.8 5.4 5.3
Machinery and equipment 217.5 229.4 253.7 –9.8 5.5 10.6 22.6 –0.3 0.2 6.2 7.6 17.4 11.2
Premises 384.8 416.7 474.6 5.9 8.3 13.9 9.5 12.8 10.3 18.7 14.7 13.3 9.4
Other investment  4 133.8 137.7 144.0 –2.8 2.9 4.6 5.8 3.4 2.9 5.6 5.0 4.9 3.1
Changes in inventories  5 16.1 55.1 87.9 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,213.8 3,410.2 3,787.5 –1.9 6.1 11.1 9.3 7.8 9.4 12.8 12.7 11.2 7.9
Net exports 191.7 191.6 79.5 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,464.8 1,693.9 1,946.6 –9.6 15.6 14.9 33.3 15.1 17.1 15.4 16.4 18.6 9.8
     Imports 1,273.1 1,502.4 1,867.1 –10.6 18.0 24.3 30.0 20.3 26.7 25.6 28.3 31.7 13.1
Gross domestic product  2 3,405.4 3,601.8 3,867.1 –2.0 5.8 7.4 11.5 6.3 6.3 8.9 8.0 6.1 6.5
 IV. Prices (2015=100)
Private consumption 105.7 109.0 116.5 0.6 3.1 6.9 1.7 3.8 4.7 5.0 6.6 7.3 8.8
Gross domestic product 109.1 112.4 118.6 1.8 3.1 5.5 0.9 4.4 5.0 4.9 6.2 4.8 6.2
Terms of trade 102.8 100.1 95.4 2.0 –2.6 –4.7 –3.5 –2.7 –4.2 –5.7 –5.3 –6.4 –1.6
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,853.9 1,918.0 2,029.8 –0.1 3.5 5.8 5.1 4.7 4.6 6.6 5.6 4.8 6.3
Entrepreneurial and property income 717.7 825.4 828.7 –4.6 15.0 0.4 39.9 9.7 10.5 3.6 –2.7 4.0 –3.9
National income 2,571.6 2,743.4 2,858.5 –1.4 6.7 4.2 13.4 6.2 6.1 5.6 3.2 4.5 3.5
Memo item: Gross national income 3,505.7 3,729.5 3,998.9 –2.4 6.4 7.2 11.9 7.3 6.9 9.2 7.6 6.0 6.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2023.  1 Professional,
scientific, technical, administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit insti-tutions serving households.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware
and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net in-
crease in valuables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy Total Inter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2015 = 100
% of total  1   100      14.04      6.37      79.60      29.44      36.96 2.28      10.92      10.27      9.95      12.73      14.14
Period
2019 102.9 112.7 90.4 102.2 101.8 102.6 106.2 101.0 102.8 106.5 103.4 94.9
2020 95.0 116.1 84.4 92.2 94.9 88.2 97.6 97.2 90.6 98.5 89.5 75.9
2021 98.4 114.3 87.1 96.6 102.7 90.5 103.6 99.1 98.9 108.7 95.9 73.9
x 2022 97.8 112.6 85.1 96.2 99.5 92.1 105.7 99.6 96.4 113.5 96.6 76.4
2022 Q1 96.0 98.7 95.2 95.6 103.2 87.4 104.0 100.9 98.7 109.9 90.5 73.2
Q2 97.5 114.9 82.5 95.6 102.0 89.5 106.0 97.1 98.1 111.3 94.2 74.5
Q3 97.8 116.4 79.2 96.0 99.5 91.4 105.5 99.9 95.9 117.0 96.3 75.0
x Q4 100.0 120.2 83.6 97.8 93.1 100.1 107.5 100.6 92.8 116.0 105.6 83.1
x 2023 Q1 96.4 97.4 85.5 97.2 98.4 95.7 102.9 97.6 96.7 117.6 92.9 90.1
2022 Mar. 103.0 116.7 92.6 101.5 108.4 92.9 110.6 110.2 104.4 118.6 100.7 70.6
Apr. 96.1 112.3 89.2 93.7 101.7 85.8 106.4 95.9 97.5 108.4 89.5 70.7
May 96.1 113.9 80.8 94.2 101.3 87.4 103.8 95.9 97.5 109.4 91.5 73.1
June 100.4 118.6 77.4 99.0 102.9 95.3 107.7 99.5 99.4 116.0 101.5 79.6
2 July 99.1 120.6 81.9 96.7 102.2 91.7 102.0 97.4 97.6 115.3 95.4 75.5
2 Aug. 91.3 110.5 77.6 89.1 95.3 81.4 97.9 96.4 89.9 112.2 89.0 60.2
Sep. 102.9 118.2 78.0 102.2 101.1 101.2 116.6 105.8 100.1 123.4 104.5 89.3
x Oct. 101.5 122.7 80.4 99.4 100.2 96.7 112.2 104.0 100.5 117.8 98.6 83.8
x Nov. 105.3 124.4 84.5 103.6 100.4 105.5 113.9 104.0 99.8 123.1 105.7 95.4
x Dec. 93.3 113.5 85.8 90.3 78.8 98.2 96.3 93.7 78.1 107.2 112.5 70.0
x 2023 Jan. 88.7 82.0 89.1 89.9 94.3 85.0 92.7 94.2 91.4 108.6 83.4 78.5
x Feb. 95.6 97.5 82.1 96.4 97.1 96.4 101.6 93.2 95.3 116.1 91.9 94.1
x,p Mar. 104.9 112.6 85.4 105.2 103.8 105.7 114.3 105.4 103.3 128.0 103.3 97.7
Annual percentage change
2019 – 2.3 + 3.4 – 7.2 – 2.9 – 3.5 – 1.9 ± 0.0 – 5.5 – 4.3 – 2.3 – 2.9 – 5.0
2020 – 7.7 + 3.0 – 6.6 – 9.8 – 6.8 –14.0 – 8.1 – 3.8 –11.9 – 7.5 –13.4 –20.0
2021 + 3.6 – 1.6 + 3.2 + 4.8 + 8.2 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 2.0 + 9.2 +10.4 + 7.2 – 2.6
x 2022 – 0.6 – 1.5 – 2.3 – 0.4 – 3.1 + 1.8 + 2.0 + 0.5 – 2.5 + 4.4 + 0.7 + 3.4
2022 Q1 – 0.4 + 4.2 + 3.1 – 1.5 – 0.8 – 4.6 + 3.2 + 5.5 – 1.5 + 2.4 – 0.8 –13.7
Q2 – 1.5 – 2.7 + 0.8 – 1.4 – 3.2 – 0.8 + 2.9 + 0.6 – 3.4 + 2.3 – 1.3 – 0.4
Q3 + 0.9 – 2.5 – 1.7 + 1.9 – 2.7 + 7.5 + 3.6 – 1.7 – 2.1 + 7.3 + 1.7 +21.5
x Q4 – 1.4 – 3.7 –10.6 – 0.2 – 5.9 + 5.3 – 1.2 – 2.1 – 3.2 + 6.0 + 3.4 +11.8
x 2023 Q1 + 0.4 – 1.4 –10.2 + 1.7 – 4.7 + 9.5 – 1.1 – 3.3 – 2.0 + 7.0 + 2.6 +23.1
2022 Mar. – 4.5 – 3.1 + 0.1 – 5.1 – 3.6 – 9.5 + 2.3 + 3.9 – 4.5 + 1.2 – 3.5 –24.4
Apr. – 2.7 – 3.3 + 2.6 – 3.1 – 2.7 – 6.5 + 4.5 + 5.0 – 3.6 + 1.1 – 5.2 –13.1
May – 1.7 – 2.8 – 0.7 – 1.6 – 3.8 ± 0.0 + 3.5 – 0.8 – 2.9 + 2.1 – 1.4 + 2.4
June – 0.1 – 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 – 3.0 + 4.3 + 0.8 – 2.0 – 3.9 + 3.7 + 2.6 +11.2
2 July – 1.3 – 2.5 + 5.3 – 1.4 – 3.2 + 0.8 – 0.3 – 3.6 – 3.7 + 5.1 – 2.6 + 2.6
2 Aug. + 1.3 – 2.0 – 3.2 + 2.5 – 2.6 + 9.3 + 7.0 – 1.9 – 1.4 + 7.3 + 2.9 +30.9
Sep. + 2.8 – 3.0 – 6.8 + 4.7 – 2.4 +12.8 + 4.3 + 0.3 – 1.1 + 9.4 + 4.9 +36.1
x Oct. – 0.6 – 0.9 –12.7 + 0.4 – 4.1 + 5.5 – 0.6 – 2.1 – 1.0 + 6.6 + 2.4 +14.2
x Nov. – 0.5 – 2.4 – 9.2 + 0.6 – 3.9 + 5.8 – 0.5 – 3.5 – 3.5 + 8.8 + 3.8 +13.7
x Dec. – 3.3 – 7.9 – 9.9 – 1.6 –10.3 + 4.6 – 2.5 – 0.6 – 5.6 + 2.2 + 3.8 + 6.9
x 2023 Jan. – 1.6 – 0.5 – 9.5 – 0.9 – 5.7 + 4.4 – 3.9 – 1.7 – 2.9 + 5.2 + 1.8 +11.5
x Feb. + 0.7 + 0.4 –13.1 + 2.0 – 4.1 + 9.7 – 3.2 – 3.6 – 2.3 + 7.7 + 3.3 +19.9
x,p Mar. + 1.8 – 3.5 – 7.8 + 3.6 – 4.2 +13.8 + 3.3 – 4.4 – 1.1 + 7.9 + 2.6 +38.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2015.  2 Influenced by a change in holiday dates.  x Provisional;estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the
Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction
industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2019 104.9 – 5.1 103.5 – 7.2 105.4 – 4.2 107.0 – 2.8 123.3 + 3.7 101.7 – 5.0
2020 97.2 – 7.3 97.9 – 5.4 95.6 – 9.3 105.7 – 1.2 124.4 + 0.9 99.6 – 2.1
2021 119.3 +22.7 124.6 +27.3 116.3 +21.7 117.4 +11.1 146.5 +17.8 107.9 + 8.3
2022 126.2 + 5.8 138.4 +11.1 118.3 + 1.7 129.0 + 9.9 164.8 +12.5 117.2 + 8.6
2022 Mar. 138.9 + 7.2 153.1 +13.6 129.2 + 1.6 145.5 +18.6 193.8 +30.8 129.6 +13.5
Apr. 123.4 + 5.1 142.9 +13.1 109.7 – 2.8 136.4 +23.9 188.7 +16.1 119.1 +28.3
May 123.9 + 8.8 139.4 +13.3 113.8 + 5.1 127.5 +11.9 178.8 +13.8 110.6 +11.0
June 129.3 + 2.1 142.4 +11.6 120.4 – 4.1 136.0 + 3.0 168.3 +11.2 125.3 – 0.2
July 127.7 – 0.3 143.7 +12.4 118.9 – 7.5 120.7 – 5.2 149.9 – 0.7 111.0 – 7.1
Aug. 114.5 + 7.6 128.3 +11.0 104.9 + 4.8 122.2 + 9.9 161.0 +18.9 109.4 + 5.9
Sep. 123.6 + 0.8 132.0 + 6.3 117.1 – 4.6 134.4 +17.9 166.4 +19.5 123.9 +17.2
Oct. 125.5 + 7.1 134.9 + 8.1 119.3 + 6.3 128.9 + 7.6 173.5 +22.3 114.2 + 1.5
Nov. 124.4 – 0.7 135.4 + 1.9 117.0 – 3.1 129.4 + 3.9 149.6 – 0.1 122.8 + 5.7
Dec. 121.3 – 1.9 127.6 + 6.2 118.6 – 6.5 112.0 – 2.2 139.8 – 6.2 102.9 – 0.2
2023 Jan. 125.8 – 5.3 139.2 – 3.5 118.1 – 6.9 122.2 – 3.3 135.6 –11.9 117.8 + 0.3
Feb. 128.9 + 0.1 133.7 – 2.1 126.3 + 1.9 125.8 – 2.4 154.0 + 0.1 116.6 – 3.4
p Mar. 130.3 – 6.2 137.6 –10.1 125.5 – 2.9 132.7 – 8.8 168.0 –13.3 121.0 – 6.6
From the domestic market
2019 101.2 – 5.6 99.1 – 8.7 103.0 – 3.4 101.2 – 1.7 116.2 + 1.3 96.1 – 2.8
2020 94.9 – 6.2 94.1 – 5.0 95.1 – 7.7 98.0 – 3.2 105.5 – 9.2 95.4 – 0.7
2021 115.5 +21.7 119.5 +27.0 113.1 +18.9 108.0 +10.2 114.9 + 8.9 105.6 +10.7
2022 122.7 + 6.2 135.4 +13.3 112.6 – 0.4 118.2 + 9.4 125.0 + 8.8 115.9 + 9.8
2022 Mar. 138.4 + 9.3 148.7 +13.9 130.8 + 4.0 130.3 +19.1 142.8 + 8.7 126.1 +23.7
Apr. 123.6 +11.7 138.5 +18.2 109.8 + 3.1 130.5 +27.6 137.7 + 7.4 128.0 +36.9
May 122.4 + 9.0 136.3 +14.9 112.0 + 3.1 113.3 +12.4 138.0 +13.7 104.9 +11.8
June 125.6 – 1.6 137.0 + 9.5 116.0 –11.1 124.7 + 0.6 127.4 + 8.7 123.8 – 2.0
July 124.5 – 3.3 143.9 +14.1 110.1 –16.7 110.4 – 9.0 124.7 + 7.5 105.6 –14.2
Aug. 110.2 + 5.5 124.9 +12.0 97.9 – 0.5 108.2 + 2.1 121.3 + 9.4 103.7 – 0.7
Sep. 120.6 + 9.6 128.8 + 9.2 112.9 + 8.2 125.7 +21.9 123.5 +16.3 126.4 +23.9
Oct. 120.5 + 4.2 133.8 + 8.8 108.9 – 1.0 121.7 +10.1 123.7 +15.9 121.0 + 8.2
Nov. 123.2 + 3.2 134.4 + 6.1 113.3 – 0.4 125.7 + 8.9 128.2 + 9.0 124.9 + 9.0
Dec. 115.4 – 3.0 127.5 +14.5 108.6 –14.9 92.1 –12.7 99.3 – 2.6 89.7 –15.9
2023 Jan. 121.5 – 2.6 137.3 – 1.0 110.5 – 3.0 105.0 –10.7 105.7 – 9.0 104.8 –11.3
Feb. 125.8 + 2.0 133.3 + 0.8 121.4 + 4.3 111.8 – 5.6 113.6 – 3.4 111.2 – 6.3
p Mar. 131.2 – 5.2 136.9 – 7.9 128.1 – 2.1 119.1 – 8.6 132.9 – 6.9 114.4 – 9.3
From abroad
2019 107.6 – 4.8 108.3 – 5.5 106.9 – 4.6 111.5 – 3.5 129.0 + 5.6 105.9 – 6.6
2020 98.9 – 8.1 102.0 – 5.8 95.9 –10.3 111.8 + 0.3 139.6 + 8.2 102.8 – 2.9
2021 122.2 +23.6 130.1 +27.5 118.2 +23.3 124.8 +11.6 171.9 +23.1 109.6 + 6.6
2022 128.8 + 5.4 141.6 + 8.8 121.8 + 3.0 137.4 +10.1 196.8 +14.5 118.2 + 7.8
2022 Mar. 139.2 + 5.6 157.8 +13.1 128.2 + 0.2 157.3 +18.3 234.8 +45.1 132.3 + 7.0
Apr. 123.2 + 0.6 147.6 + 8.2 109.6 – 6.1 140.9 +21.3 229.7 +20.8 112.2 +21.6
May 125.0 + 8.5 142.8 +11.7 114.9 + 6.3 138.5 +11.7 211.7 +13.9 114.9 +10.4
June 132.1 + 4.9 148.2 +13.8 123.0 + 0.4 144.7 + 4.7 201.2 +12.5 126.4 + 1.0
July 130.2 + 2.0 143.4 +10.4 124.2 – 1.7 128.6 – 2.5 170.2 – 4.9 115.1 – 1.4
Aug. 117.7 + 9.1 132.0 + 9.9 109.1 + 7.9 133.0 +15.5 193.0 +24.4 113.7 +11.0
Sep. 125.9 – 4.8 135.4 + 3.3 119.6 –10.6 141.2 +15.4 200.9 +21.2 121.9 +12.4
Oct. 129.3 + 9.1 136.0 + 7.3 125.5 +10.6 134.5 + 5.9 213.6 +25.5 109.0 – 3.6
Nov. 125.3 – 3.5 136.5 – 2.2 119.2 – 4.6 132.3 + 0.6 166.8 – 5.0 121.2 + 3.2
Dec. 125.7 – 1.1 127.7 – 1.5 124.6 – 1.5 127.4 + 4.9 172.4 – 7.8 113.0 +12.5
2023 Jan. 129.1 – 7.3 141.2 – 6.0 122.7 – 8.9 135.6 + 1.7 159.7 –13.3 127.8 + 9.3
Feb. 131.3 – 1.2 134.2 – 5.0 129.2 + 0.6 136.7 – 0.2 186.5 + 1.9 120.7 – 1.2
p Mar. 129.7 – 6.8 138.3 –12.4 124.0 – 3.3 143.2 – 9.0 196.3 –16.4 126.0 – 4.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2019 146.2 +8.2 145.3 +10.3 150.4 +9.7 142.6 +10.8 138.9 +10.9 147.1 +5.9 148.1 +8.8 141.3 +6.6
2020 145.6 –0.4 144.2 –0.8 160.8 +6.9 130.2 –8.7 141.5 +1.9 147.3 +0.1 139.6 –5.7 143.3 +1.4
2021 159.0 +9.2 164.1 +13.8 174.3 +8.4 156.6 +20.3 158.5 +12.0 153.0 +3.9 161.5 +15.7 146.7 +2.4
2022 166.8 +4.9 161.7 –1.5 167.7 –3.8 155.0 –1.0 166.8 +5.2 172.7 +12.9 171.9 +6.4 160.5 +9.4
2022 Feb. 155.7 +8.7 161.0 +8.1 176.0 +9.1 158.2 +7.5 121.8 +6.7 149.5 +9.3 165.2 +15.2 132.5 +0.3
Mar. 209.5 +32.7 208.5 +32.9 219.4 +25.1 201.2 +42.4 200.0 +29.6 210.6 +32.4 217.2 +43.9 194.6 +25.2
Apr. 164.2 +2.5 157.7 –0.4 178.1 –3.8 142.7 +2.3 146.4 +4.7 171.8 +5.9 154.0 +4.0 167.5 +5.5
May 175.9 +10.6 172.1 +5.5 182.1 –1.1 163.0 +11.0 173.5 +12.4 180.2 +16.9 170.7 +13.1 178.1 +16.5
June 175.2 +6.4 166.3 +0.7 177.9 +0.2 153.3 –4.3 176.6 +24.0 185.6 +13.1 177.5 +6.5 171.0 +10.7
July 180.6 +12.9 179.3 +6.5 171.1 –4.5 178.0 +8.7 211.5 +40.4 182.1 +21.2 190.1 +19.9 175.4 +17.0
Aug. 157.2 –1.1 148.2 –8.8 145.1 –13.2 143.0 –12.4 178.0 +23.6 167.6 +8.3 155.9 –1.6 165.9 +7.4
Sep. 164.2 –9.3 159.4 –15.6 162.5 –15.1 153.9 –20.3 169.5 +2.6 169.9 –1.1 166.1 –13.8 163.2 +1.3
Oct. 161.8 +2.0 145.1 –14.1 148.3 –12.3 140.2 –18.4 153.0 –2.7 181.2 +23.4 172.5 +0.5 157.8 +14.8
Nov. 148.3 +2.1 134.7 –5.7 130.9 –17.9 127.0 –4.2 176.1 +38.6 164.0 +10.7 155.2 –2.7 150.9 +25.3
Dec. 166.0 –10.4 162.2 –21.0 154.8 –21.1 165.5 –4.4 174.5 –50.9 170.4 +5.4 188.6 +1.0 146.9 –16.8
2023 Jan. 132.2 –7.4 125.7 –13.6 126.8 –23.5 128.4 –4.3 112.1 –7.5 139.7 –0.1 145.8 –2.3 119.8 –1.6
Feb. 151.8 –2.5 130.4 –19.0 127.4 –27.6 133.0 –15.9 130.9 +7.5 176.6 +18.1 167.6 +1.5 148.5 +12.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2019 115.0 +3.9 111.0 +3.3 112.2 +2.4 106.7 +1.0 108.9 +1.7 107.1 +4.0 118.8 +5.7 138.4 +8.4
2020 121.4 +5.6 115.9 +4.4 121.4 +8.2 81.9 –23.2 106.9 –1.8 117.1 +9.3 125.4 +5.6 169.0 +22.1
2021 124.7 +2.7 116.7 +0.7 121.7 +0.2 78.1 –4.6 95.4 –10.8 110.4 –5.7 135.2 +7.8 189.9 +12.4
3 2022 134.3 +7.7 115.8 –0.8 128.3 +5.4 102.5 +31.2 107.6 +12.8 122.9 +11.3 144.9 +7.2 188.6 –0.7
2022 Mar. 137.7 +6.2 122.4 +0.1 132.1 ±0.0 93.2 +60.4 101.4 +19.9 136.2 +11.2 145.9 +7.7 192.2 –5.9
Apr. 132.3 +9.7 116.4 +2.9 127.0 +2.3 101.7 +156.8 93.9 +32.8 131.5 +23.6 139.5 +6.1 181.0 –5.3
May 133.8 +6.8 115.9 –1.2 127.5 +0.6 109.2 +75.3 89.5 +21.8 129.9 +14.9 140.1 +7.9 180.9 –8.3
June 130.7 +0.6 112.5 –7.7 126.9 +4.3 105.2 –7.1 92.7 –3.8 119.5 –5.2 141.5 +7.1 174.6 –4.6
July 135.5 +8.0 116.1 –1.3 130.9 +8.5 105.6 +2.7 100.2 –0.9 122.1 +0.2 149.0 +9.3 182.0 +14.0
Aug. 130.1 +6.0 110.6 –3.9 126.2 +10.0 98.1 –2.4 98.5 –2.4 114.4 –3.5 142.7 +6.6 173.1 +4.3
Sep. 133.4 +10.7 111.9 –0.3 125.3 +11.9 116.3 +16.2 108.7 +6.2 119.1 +5.0 145.0 +10.7 186.7 +9.2
Oct. 138.6 +6.5 115.0 –4.6 132.7 +11.0 116.0 +0.9 111.9 +2.5 126.0 +0.1 146.0 +3.5 193.2 +1.5
Nov. 148.4 +5.8 123.6 –4.8 133.6 +10.0 116.7 +11.0 137.0 +1.3 130.1 +0.2 157.2 +6.9 236.3 +0.5
Dec. 152.4 +4.7 126.5 –5.9 146.9 +6.8 124.9 +28.0 149.2 +0.9 122.9 +0.7 162.0 +4.0 210.3 –4.3
2023 Jan. 124.9 +3.6 104.3 –6.0 123.6 +6.4 84.7 +19.0 111.8 +0.3 109.5 –1.3 140.6 +1.3 171.9 –5.3
Feb. 123.1 +4.1 101.5 –5.8 123.9 +8.0 80.9 +12.4 100.2 +3.7 109.0 –2.9 136.8 +4.4 166.0 –3.0
Mar. 138.0 +0.2 112.5 –8.1 138.1 +4.5 98.3 +5.5 104.0 +2.6 130.9 –3.9 146.8 +0.6 183.2 –4.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2022 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2018 44,866 +1.4 32,964 +2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2019 45,276 +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 72,267 827 7 5.0 774
2020 44,914 –0.8 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2021 44,980 +0.1 33,897 +0.9 9,344 23,602 702 4,101 1,852 1,744 2,613 999 5.7 706
2022 r45,573 r +1.3 834,510 8+1.8 89,400 824,137 8 722 84,126 ... 8 337 2,418 808 5.3 845
2020 Q1 45,133 +0.5 33,642 +1.3 9,439 23,284 686 4,458 1,219 949 2,385 960 5.2 683
Q2 44,723 –1.1 33,415 +0.1 9,387 23,137 640 4,235 5,399 5,388 2,770 1,154 6.0 593
Q3 44,809 –1.3 33,424 –0.4 9,359 23,171 640 4,273 2,705 2,691 2,904 1,266 6.3 583
Q4 44,993 –1.3 33,836 –0.3 9,395 23,518 676 4,194 2,433 2,361 2,722 1,167 5.9 595
2021 Q1 44,514 –1.4 33,568 –0.2 9,294 23,376 665 4,051 3,473 3,157 2,878 1,248 6.3 586
Q2 44,812 +0.2 33,718 +0.9 9,322 23,446 697 4,066 2,164 2,143 2,691 1,024 5.9 658
Q3 45,157 +0.8 33,929 +1.5 9,347 23,606 719 4,161 935 915 2,545 920 5.5 774
Q4 45,437 +1.0 34,374 +1.6 9,415 23,982 727 4,125 835 762 2,341 802 5.1 804
2022 Q1 r45,183 r +1.5 34,242 +2.0 9,348 23,943 715 4,061 1,033 792 2,417 874 5.3 818
Q2 r45,496 r +1.5 34,401 +2.0 9,372 24,056 718 4,112 337 324 2,311 777 9 5.0 864
Q3 r45,676 r +1.1 34,522 +1.7 9,405 24,133 724 4,159 103 92 2,501 804 5.5 880
Q4 r45,934 r +1.1 834,874 8+1.5 89,476 824,417 8 731 84,171 ... 8 139 2,443 778 5.3 817
2023 Q1 1045,629 10 +1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,610 900 5.7 773
2019 Dec. 45,469 +0.6 33,740 +1.4 9,474 23,344 694 4,531 247 97 2,227 838 4.9 687
2020 Jan. 45,154 +0.6 33,608 +1.4 9,432 23,255 689 4,471 382 133 2,426 985 5.3 668
Feb. 45,169 +0.6 33,624 +1.3 9,427 23,278 683 4,461 439 134 2,396 971 5.3 690
Mar. 45,077 +0.2 33,648 +1.1 9,440 23,290 675 4,350 2,834 2,580 2,335 925 5.1 691
Apr. 44,808 –0.7 33,430 +0.1 9,396 23,141 643 4,194 6,007 5,995 2,644 1,093 5.8 626
May 44,672 –1.3 33,328 –0.3 9,367 23,083 624 4,206 5,726 5,715 2,813 1,172 6.1 584
June 44,688 –1.4 33,323 –0.3 9,355 23,084 629 4,260 4,464 4,452 2,853 1,197 6.2 570
July 44,699 –1.4 33,233 –0.4 9,322 23,024 635 4,302 3,319 3,306 2,910 1,258 6.3 573
Aug. 44,737 –1.3 33,482 –0.4 9,367 23,218 642 4,266 2,551 2,537 2,955 1,302 6.4 584
Sep. 44,990 –1.2 33,792 –0.4 9,421 23,454 656 4,240 2,244 2,229 2,847 1,238 6.2 591
Oct. 45,076 –1.1 33,862 –0.3 9,410 23,530 671 4,229 2,037 2,021 2,760 1,183 6.0 602
Nov. 45,030 –1.3 33,899 –0.2 9,400 23,559 696 4,166 2,405 2,386 2,699 1,152 5.9 601
Dec. 44,873 –1.3 33,700 –0.1 9,327 23,478 666 4,134 2,856 2,676 2,707 1,166 5.9 581
2021 Jan. 44,489 –1.5 33,515 –0.3 9,282 23,347 657 4,045 3,638 3,294 2,901 1,298 6.3 566
Feb. 44,486 –1.5 33,521 –0.3 9,281 23,343 662 4,026 3,766 3,358 2,904 1,270 6.3 583
Mar. 44,567 –1.1 33,636 –0.0 9,309 23,397 685 4,032 3,016 2,818 2,827 1,177 6.2 609
Apr. 44,676 –0.3 33,689 +0.8 9,324 23,427 687 4,039 2,583 2,560 2,771 1,091 6.0 629
May 44,796 +0.3 33,747 +1.3 9,326 23,461 703 4,067 2,342 2,320 2,687 1,020 5.9 654
June 44,963 +0.6 33,802 +1.4 9,324 23,504 716 4,151 1,568 1,548 2,614 961 5.7 693
July 45,027 +0.7 33,731 +1.5 9,304 23,458 715 4,194 1,088 1,068 2,590 956 5.6 744
Aug. 45,096 +0.8 33,994 +1.5 9,358 23,658 722 4,153 857 838 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. 45,347 +0.8 34,323 +1.6 9,432 23,903 726 4,123 859 839 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. 45,434 +0.8 34,369 +1.5 9,425 23,965 724 4,123 780 762 2,377 814 5.2 809
Nov. 45,490 +1.0 34,449 +1.6 9,423 24,039 739 4,133 767 750 2,317 789 5.1 808
Dec. 45,386 +1.1 34,284 +1.7 9,364 23,980 708 4,112 957 772 2,330 803 5.1 794
2022 Jan. r45,111 r +1.4 34,176 +2.0 9,332 23,900 711 4,048 1,123 847 2,462 903 5.4 792
Feb. r45,172 r +1.5 34,243 +2.2 9,346 23,939 719 4,049 1,087 803 2,428 884 5.3 822
Mar. r45,266 r +1.6 34,334 +2.1 9,369 23,999 719 4,061 888 727 2,362 835 5.1 839
Apr. r45,378 r +1.6 34,368 +2.0 9,366 24,037 713 4,091 453 439 2,309 800 5.0 852
May r45,513 r +1.6 34,445 +2.1 9,376 24,089 719 4,131 318 305 2,260 771 9 4.9 865
June r45,598 r +1.4 34,445 +1.9 9,376 24,084 724 4,164 241 228 2,363 761 5.2 877
July r45,556 r +1.2 34,322 +1.8 9,361 23,988 718 4,176 115 102 2,470 801 5.4 881
Aug. r45,612 r +1.1 34,571 +1.7 9,417 24,169 725 4,151 87 76 2,547 827 5.6 887
Sep. r45,861 r +1.1 34,899 +1.7 9,499 24,401 733 4,136 108 97 2,486 782 5.4 873
Oct. r45,953 r +1.1 34,893 +1.5 9,489 24,414 734 4,161 134 124 2,442 764 5.3 846
Nov. r45,979 r +1.1 834,916 8+1.4 89,480 824,450 8 740 84,186 ... 8 149 2,434 770 5.3 823
Dec. r45,871 r +1.1 834,725 8+1.3 89,417 824,371 8 706 84,194 ... 8 143 2,454 799 5.4 781
2023 Jan. r45,554 r +1.0 834,567 8+1.1 89,384 824,253 8 699 84,150 ... 8 141 2,616 911 5.7 764
Feb. r45,619 r +1.0 834,614 8+1.1 89,394 824,289 8 695 84,165 ... 8 162 2,620 910 5.7 778
Mar. 1045,715 10 +1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,594 878 5.7 777
Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,586 855 5.7 773
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed
persons in the legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).8 Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2020 and 2021,
the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1%
for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.9% for persons
solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 28,1% for
cyclically induced short-time work.  9 From May 2022, calculated on the basis of new la-
bour force figures.  10 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which: Indices of
foreign trade pricesHWWI
Index of World Market
Prices of Raw Materials  4
of which:
Total Food  1,2Non-
energy
industrial
goods  1Energy  1 Services  1Actual
rents
for
housingMemo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  3Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  3Exports Imports Energy  5Other raw
materials  6
Period 2015 = 100 2020 = 100 2015 = 100 2020 = 100
Index level
2020 7 105.8 7110.9 7104.1 7 99.0 7106.9 107.6 7 100.0 7117.0 103.8 108.0 101.7 97.3 100.0 100.0
2021 7 109.2 7114.1 7106.7 7109.0 7109.0 109.0 7 103.1 7127.0 114.7 117.5 107.4 110.4 220.7 137.6
2022 118.7 126.2 112.7 146.8 112.2 110.8 110.2 148.3 152.4 8156.2 123.1 139.4 430.8 164.0
2021 June 109.1 114.1 106.5 107.6 109.1 108.9 102.9 111.8 117.7 106.4 108.5 183.0 142.3
July 7 109.7 7114.4 7106.4 7109.0 7110.2 109.1 7 103.4 113.9 117.2 107.7 110.9 204.8 141.9
Aug. 7 109.8 7114.4 7106.5 7109.4 7110.3 109.2 7 103.5 7129.4 115.6 118.7 108.5 112.4 217.6 138.9
Sep. 7 110.1 7114.4 7107.6 7110.1 7109.9 109.3 7 103.8 118.3 117.4 109.5 113.9 256.1 136.3
Oct. 7 110.7 7114.5 7108.0 7114.6 7110.0 109.5 7 104.3 122.8 120.7 111.0 118.2 352.7 143.0
Nov. 7 111.0 7114.9 7108.4 7116.7 7109.5 109.5 7 104.5 7132.2 123.8 125.6 111.9 121.7 304.4 143.0
Dec. 7 111.3 7115.7 7108.6 7115.0 7110.3 109.6 7 104.7 130.0 127.2 113.0 121.8 352.9 148.3
2022 Jan. 112.3 117.2 108.4 123.7 109.8 109.9 105.2 132.8 129.2 115.0 127.0 327.8 157.0
Feb. 113.3 118.2 109.1 127.4 110.2 110.0 106.0 138.1 134.6 133.4 116.1 128.6 336.0 166.5
Mar. 116.1 119.1 110.4 146.1 110.6 110.2 108.1 141.2 153.6 120.7 135.9 504.2 185.4
Apr. 116.9 122.2 111.3 142.7 111.7 110.4 108.8 145.2 162.3 121.7 138.3 407.8 184.8
May 118.2 124.2 112.3 146.7 112.0 110.6 109.8 147.9 147.5 160.7 122.4 139.5 366.8 178.9
June 118.1 125.4 112.5 147.8 111.0 110.8 109.8 148.4 157.5 123.5 140.9 389.3 169.6
July 119.0 127.6 112.6 147.8 112.1 110.9 110.3 156.3 156.5 126.0 142.9 449.8 158.0
Aug. 119.5 129.1 113.0 148.6 112.2 111.1 110.7 151.7 168.6 159.8 128.7 149.1 534.2 159.4
Sep. 122.1 130.9 114.5 158.8 113.9 111.2 112.7 172.5 8164.7 127.9 147.8 528.5 157.4
Oct. 123.5 132.2 115.8 164.5 114.3 111.4 113.5 165.2 166.5 125.5 146.0 442.1 154.4
Nov. 123.5 133.6 116.3 163.5 113.7 111.6 113.7 155.4 158.7 165.7 124.9 139.4 425.7 149.5
Dec. 122.0 134.6 116.6 143.9 114.8 111.7 113.2 158.1 165.1 125.0 137.1 435.7 147.0
2023 Jan. 122.6 136.7 116.4 154.8 113.8 112.1 114.3 154.8 161.9 124.0 135.4 306.4 148.8
Feb. 123.8 139.5 117.0 154.9 115.0 112.2 115.2 159.7 152.8 160.6 123.8 132.2 277.2 150.8
Mar. 125.1 141.3 118.3 155.0 116.1 112.5 116.1 150.6 155.3 123.5 130.8 247.1 146.2
Apr. 125.8 141.1 119.0 156.1 117.1 112.6 116.6 151.1 ... ... ... 248.0 143.2
Annual percentage change
2020 7 +0.4 7+2.3 7–0.1 7–4.5 7+1.2 +1.4 7 +0.5 7+1.4 –1.0 –3.1 –0.7 –4.3 –33.4 +1.3
2021 7 +3.2 7+2.9 7+2.5 7+10.1 7+2.0 +1.3 7 +3.1 7+8.6 +10.5 +8.8 +5.6 +13.5 +120.7 +37.6
2022 +8.7 +10.6 +5.7 +34.7 +2.9 +1.7 +6.9 +16.8 +32.9 8+32.9 +14.6 +26.3 +95.2 +19.2
2021 June +2.1 +1.2 +1.6 +9.0 +0.9 +1.2 +2.4 +8.5 +7.0 +5.0 +12.9 +113.0 +51.2
July 7 +3.1 7+3.8 7+3.8 7+11.2 7+0.7 +1.3 7 +3.7 +10.4 +9.0 +6.3 +15.0 +126.0 +48.1
Aug. 7 +3.4 7+3.9 7+3.8 7+12.1 7+1.2 +1.3 7 +3.8 7+11.8 +12.0 +13.3 +7.2 +16.5 +127.1 +41.2
Sep. 7 +4.1 7+4.1 7+3.9 7+13.6 7+1.8 +1.4 7 +4.1 +14.2 +13.4 +8.1 +17.7 +163.7 +31.7
Oct. 7 +4.6 7+3.9 7+3.9 7+18.1 7+2.2 +1.4 7 +4.4 +18.4 +16.3 +9.5 +21.7 +241.4 +36.3
Nov. 7 +6.0 7+4.2 7+4.2 7+21.6 7+3.8 +1.3 7 +4.8 7+14.0 +19.2 +20.9 +9.9 +24.7 +178.0 +33.5
Dec. 7 +5.7 7+5.3 7+5.0 7+18.1 7+3.2 +1.3 7 +4.9 +24.2 +22.1 +10.9 +24.0 +189.7 +32.1
2022 Jan. +5.1 +4.4 +3.1 +20.6 +2.7 +1.4 +4.2 +25.0 +21.0 +11.9 +26.9 +131.5 +30.2
Feb. +5.5 +4.6 +3.4 +22.4 +2.7 +1.4 +4.3 +13.9 +25.9 +22.5 +12.4 +26.3 +130.1 +33.5
Mar. +7.6 +5.3 +4.4 +37.6 +2.8 +1.5 +5.9 +30.9 +34.7 +15.9 +31.2 +235.5 +42.2
Apr. +7.8 +6.7 +5.2 +34.5 +3.1 +1.6 +6.3 +33.5 +40.0 +16.0 +31.7 +164.6 +37.6
May +8.7 +8.8 +5.6 +37.5 +3.0 +1.6 +7.0 +18.2 +33.6 +35.6 +15.9 +30.6 +117.9 +23.5
June +8.2 +9.9 +5.6 +37.4 +1.7 +1.7 +6.7 +32.7 +33.8 +16.1 +29.9 +112.7 +19.2
July +8.5 +11.5 +5.8 +35.6 +1.7 +1.6 +6.7 +37.2 +33.5 +17.0 +28.9 +119.6 +11.3
Aug. +8.8 +12.8 +6.1 +35.8 +1.7 +1.7 +7.0 +17.2 +45.8 +34.6 +18.6 +32.7 +145.5 +14.8
Sep. +10.9 +14.4 +6.4 +44.2 +3.6 +1.7 +8.6 +45.8 8+40.3 +16.8 +29.8 +106.4 +15.5
Oct. +11.6 +15.5 +7.2 +43.5 +3.9 +1.7 +8.8 +34.5 +37.9 +13.1 +23.5 +25.3 +8.0
Nov. +11.3 +16.3 +7.3 +40.1 +3.8 +1.9 +8.8 +17.5 +28.2 +31.9 +11.6 +14.5 +39.8 +4.5
Dec. +9.6 +16.3 +7.4 +25.1 +4.1 +1.9 +8.1 +21.6 +29.8 +10.6 +12.6 +23.5 –0.9
2023 Jan. +9.2 +16.6 +7.4 +25.1 +3.6 +2.0 +8.7 +16.6 +25.3 +7.8 +6.6 –6.5 –5.2
Feb. +9.3 +18.0 +7.2 +21.6 +4.4 +2.0 +8.7 +15.6 +13.5 +20.4 +6.6 +2.8 –17.5 –9.4
Mar. +7.8 +18.6 +7.2 +6.1 +5.0 +2.1 +7.4 +6.7 +1.1 +2.3 –3.8 –51.0 –21.1
Apr. +7.6 +15.5 +6.9 +9.4 +4.8 +2.0 +7.2 +4.1 ... ... ... –39.2 –22.5
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw Materi-
als: HWWI.  1 The last data point is at times based on the Bundesbank’s own estimates.
2 Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco.  3 Excluding value added tax.  4 For the eu-ro area, in euro.  5 Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas.  6 Food, beverages and tobac-
co as well as industrial raw materials.  7 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value
added tax between July and December 2020.  8 From September 2022 onwards, provi-
sional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.5 4.2 1,273.8 4.0 1,782.3 2.8 179.4 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.2
2017 1,395.4 4.3 932.5 4.0 441.8 3.6 1,374.3 3.9 1,905.2 3.5 202.8 8.0 10.6
2018 1,462.7 4.8 976.1 4.7 455.2 3.0 1,431.3 4.1 1,976.6 3.7 223.2 10.1 11.3
2019 1,524.4 4.2 1,022.0 4.7 476.7 4.7 1,498.7 4.7 2,023.6 2.4 218.2 – 2.3 10.8
2020 1,514.9 – 0.6 1,020.0 – 0.2 524.6 10.0 1,544.6 3.1 2,050.1 1.3 336.6 54.3 16.4
2021 1,570.6 3.7 1,062.6 4.2 532.8 1.6 1,595.4 3.3 2,089.9 1.9 316.0 – 6.1 15.1
2022 1,670.0 6.3 1,128.8 6.2 538.5 1.1 1,667.3 4.5 2,233.2 6.9 254.2 –19.6 11.4
2021 Q3 393.0 5.1 271.6 5.5 131.2 – 1.8 402.8 3.0 520.4 1.7 54.4 –21.2 10.4
Q4 438.5 4.9 295.8 5.0 129.0 – 2.6 424.8 2.6 532.5 2.7 61.2 –25.0 11.5
2022 Q1 388.4 7.3 261.2 6.8 134.2 – 2.6 395.4 3.4 541.4 3.7 78.8 –31.9 14.5
Q2 400.4 6.2 263.9 5.3 131.1 – 2.8 395.0 2.4 548.0 6.4 57.2 –32.6 10.4
Q3 412.7 5.0 285.8 5.2 137.5 4.8 423.3 5.1 566.3 8.8 55.9 2.8 9.9
Q4 468.5 6.8 317.9 7.5 135.7 5.2 453.6 6.8 577.5 8.4 62.4 2.0 10.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2023.  * Households in-
cluding non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees'
contributions to the social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension
payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social
benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plusmonetary social benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed
income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit
institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related
taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company
pension funds.  6 Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving
as a percentage of disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change
2015 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.5 2.5
2017 104.5 2.3 104.5 2.3 104.6 2.3 104.7 2.4 105.1 2.6
2018 107.6 3.0 107.6 3.0 107.5 2.8 107.6 2.8 108.4 3.2
2019 110.8 3.0 110.8 3.0 110.3 2.6 110.4 2.6 111.7 3.0
2020 113.2 2.1 113.2 2.2 112.5 2.0 112.6 2.0 111.6 – 0.1
2021 114.9 1.5 114.9 1.5 114.4 1.6 114.3 1.5 115.3 3.3
2022 117.9 2.7 117.9 2.6 116.7 2.1 116.7 2.1 120.7 4.7
2021 Q4 127.5 1.5 127.5 1.5 127.5 2.3 115.0 1.7 127.2 3.7
2022 Q1 110.8 4.2 110.8 4.2 108.0 1.5 115.5 1.5 113.2 5.4
Q2 109.9 2.0 109.9 1.9 109.3 2.1 116.6 2.2 116.0 4.3
Q3 120.9 2.6 120.9 2.5 119.5 2.5 116.9 2.2 119.3 3.6
Q4 130.1 2.0 130.1 2.0 130.1 2.0 117.8 2.4 134.2 5.5
2023 Q1 115.1 3.9 115.1 3.9 110.9 2.6 118.6 2.7 . .
2022 Sep. 109.3 2.1 109.3 2.0 109.4 2.0 117.0 2.1 . .
Oct. 110.0 0.9 110.0 0.9 109.9 0.8 117.6 2.4 . .
Nov. 167.9 2.6 167.9 2.5 168.0 2.5 117.6 2.2 . .
Dec. 112.4 2.4 112.4 2.4 112.3 2.5 118.1 2.6 . .
2023 Jan. 115.9 6.8 115.9 6.7 110.9 2.7 118.6 2.7 . .
Feb. 117.7 6.5 117.6 6.5 110.9 2.7 118.6 2.7 . .
Mar. 111.8 – 1.4 111.8 – 1.4 110.9 2.6 118.7 2.7 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February
2023.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
3 2018 2,589.0 1,536.7 540.8 610.8 288.5 1,052.3 249.5 234.7 172.6 789.8 1,799.2 925.7 558.7 873.4 257.5 205.0
2019 2,800.6 1,769.7 586.3 737.1 333.4 1,030.9 257.5 237.6 168.4 821.0 1,979.6 1,091.2 676.3 888.4 289.8 207.6
2020 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.5 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.3 857.0 304.4 196.1
2021 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 368.7 1,320.4 272.1 262.8 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 391.8 238.0
2020 H2 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.5 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.3 857.0 304.4 196.1
2021 H1 3,017.6 1,877.0 649.3 745.0 343.8 1,140.6 256.2 242.3 238.5 906.9 2,110.7 1,178.6 763.1 932.1 330.3 206.9
H2 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 368.7 1,320.4 272.1 262.8 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 391.8 238.0
p 2022 H1 3,593.6 2,108.1 719.1 796.3 387.5 1,485.5 322.4 286.4 225.4 1,075.4 2,518.2 1,237.0 847.9 1,281.2 430.7 262.5
As a percentage of total assets
3 2018 100.0 59.4 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.6 9.6 9.1 6.7 30.5 69.5 35.8 21.6 33.7 10.0 7.9
2019 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.2 31.7 10.4 7.4
2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2021 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.2 40.1 8.3 8.0 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 11.9 7.2
2020 H2 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2021 H1 100.0 62.2 21.5 24.7 11.4 37.8 8.5 8.0 7.9 30.1 70.0 39.1 25.3 30.9 10.9 6.9
H2 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.2 40.1 8.3 8.0 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 11.9 7.2
p 2022 H1 100.0 58.7 20.0 22.2 10.8 41.3 9.0 8.0 6.3 29.9 70.1 34.4 23.6 35.7 12.0 7.3
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
3 2018 2,149.3 1,215.4 388.1 472.9 277.5 933.9 234.5 188.6 139.2 636.7 1,512.6 760.2 442.4 752.3 236.2 152.5
2019 2,302.9 1,396.4 419.6 565.4 319.7 906.5 243.8 188.5 136.8 662.2 1,640.7 887.5 523.8 753.2 257.5 158.0
2020 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.0 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.2 1,628.7 904.7 536.9 724.0 267.3 149.8
2021 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 347.4 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.1 356.4 184.0
2020 H2 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.0 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.2 1,628.7 904.7 536.9 724.0 267.3 149.8
2021 H1 2,392.8 1,398.3 416.6 551.0 322.5 994.6 240.6 190.9 190.1 703.5 1,689.4 892.3 543.2 797.1 294.2 162.1
H2 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 347.4 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.1 356.4 184.0
p 2022 H1 2,898.3 1,582.5 462.4 583.8 362.8 1,315.9 303.6 222.5 177.2 830.9 2,067.4 945.2 616.6 1,122.2 389.8 207.6
As a percentage of total assets
3 2018 100.0 56.6 18.1 22.0 12.9 43.5 10.9 8.8 6.5 29.6 70.4 35.4 20.6 35.0 11.0 7.1
2019 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.3 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2021 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.2 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 13.6 7.0
2020 H2 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2021 H1 100.0 58.4 17.4 23.0 13.5 41.6 10.1 8.0 7.9 29.4 70.6 37.3 22.7 33.3 12.3 6.8
H2 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.2 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 13.6 7.0
p 2022 H1 100.0 54.6 16.0 20.1 12.5 45.4 10.5 7.7 6.1 28.7 71.3 32.6 21.3 38.7 13.5 7.2
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
3 2018 439.7 321.3 152.7 137.9 11.0 118.3 14.9 46.1 33.3 153.1 286.6 165.5 116.3 121.1 21.3 52.5
2019 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2021 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 56.5 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 53.9
2020 H2 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2021 H1 624.7 478.7 232.6 194.0 21.3 146.1 15.5 51.4 48.4 203.4 421.3 286.4 219.9 135.0 36.1 44.8
H2 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 56.5 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 53.9
p 2022 H1 695.3 525.7 256.7 212.5 24.8 169.6 18.8 63.8 48.2 244.5 450.8 291.8 231.4 159.0 40.9 54.9
As a percentage of total assets
3 2018 100.0 73.1 34.7 31.4 2.5 26.9 3.4 10.5 7.6 34.8 65.2 37.6 26.5 27.6 4.8 11.9
2019 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2021 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.5 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 8.1
2020 H2 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2021 H1 100.0 76.6 37.2 31.1 3.4 23.4 2.5 8.2 7.8 32.6 67.4 45.8 35.2 21.6 5.8 7.2
H2 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.5 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 8.1
p 2022 H1 100.0 75.6 36.9 30.6 3.6 24.4 2.7 9.2 6.9 35.2 64.8 42.0 33.3 22.9 5.9 7.9
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.  3 From H1 2018 or 2018 onwards: significant
changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  2 Distribution  2
RevenuesOperating income
before depreciation
and amortisation
(EBITDA  1 )Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartileOperating
income (EBIT)Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4€ billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % % € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % %
Total
2014 1,564.3 1.0 198.7 5.0 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.4 109.3 8.6 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.2 11.1
2015 1,633.9 6.9 195.9 – 1.1 12.0 – 1.0 6.3 10.6 17.8 91.5 – 16.4 5.6 – 1.5 1.8 6.7 11.3
2016 1,624.3 – 0.4 214.4 7.8 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.7 9.0 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,719.3 5.1 243.4 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.0 11.0 18.0 141.9 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.1
6 2018 1,706.8 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,764.6 2.6 233.6 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.2 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.6 5.8 11.8
2020 1,632.8 – 8.8 213.6 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 17.9 52.1 – 41.0 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 4.9 10.5
2021 1,994.7 20.4 297.7 37.7 14.9 1.9 7.8 13.4 19.9 161.5 212.5 8.1 5.0 2.9 8.2 12.2
2017 H2 878.5 3.5 117.4 14.6 13.4 1.3 6.9 12.0 19.2 63.0 38.2 7.2 1.8 3.2 7.4 12.4
6 2018 H1 848.2 – 0.1 120.8 – 2.1 14.2 – 0.3 5.1 10.6 18.2 72.7 – 5.3 8.6 – 0.5 1.7 6.4 12.5
H2 869.4 1.4 114.4 0.5 13.2 – 0.1 6.3 11.2 18.0 58.0 – 7.6 6.7 – 0.6 2.1 6.8 12.5
2019 H1 861.3 2.7 112.3 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.5 11.8 18.6 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 903.7 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.6 11.8 20.0 52.0 – 11.4 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.5
2020 H1 744.5 – 14.4 78.2 – 34.1 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 8.8
H2 888.4 – 3.3 135.4 17.1 15.2 2.8 7.6 13.2 19.8 44.2 8.7 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.6
2021 H1 920.0 20.3 151.5 87.2 16.5 5.9 7.4 12.6 19.5 84.5 . 9.2 8.3 2.3 7.8 12.2
H2 1,075.6 20.4 146.4 8.1 13.6 – 1.6 7.9 13.2 20.8 77.0 73.1 7.2 2.2 2.9 7.7 13.4
p 2022 H1 1,149.7 23.5 161.0 4.8 14.0 – 2.5 6.1 11.5 18.4 84.9 – 1.6 7.4 – 1.9 1.6 6.4 11.8
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2014 1,220.0 1.0 152.2 5.9 12.5 0.6 5.8 10.1 15.5 85.2 9.8 7.0 0.6 1.7 6.0 10.6
2015 1,309.7 7.0 149.0 – 2.6 11.4 – 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.3 69.1 – 19.7 5.3 – 1.8 2.2 6.6 10.4
2016 1,295.9 – 0.8 161.9 6.3 12.5 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 84.8 4.2 6.5 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,395.9 5.5 187.5 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.5 40.6 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,367.7 1.0 175.7 – 1.5 12.9 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 16.0 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.8 6.9 11.4
2019 1,410.9 2.0 168.1 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.8 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.7 10.1
2020 1,285.2 – 9.4 143.6 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 5.7 10.6 16.5 29.1 – 48.1 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.3 9.8
2021 1,585.8 22.4 208.9 45.9 13.2 2.1 7.9 12.8 17.9 118.6 325.6 7.5 5.4 2.8 7.8 11.1
2017 H2 701.4 3.7 86.0 14.2 12.3 1.1 7.0 11.7 16.9 46.2 45.5 6.6 1.9 3.6 7.2 10.8
6 2018 H1 681.9 – 0.1 94.9 – 3.4 13.9 – 0.5 7.0 10.9 16.7 60.0 – 5.9 8.8 – 0.6 2.9 6.8 11.5
H2 695.4 2.1 83.1 0.7 12.0 – 0.2 6.2 11.1 16.2 42.1 – 8.7 6.1 – 0.7 2.0 6.4 11.4
2019 H1 689.9 2.4 83.3 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.9 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.8 6.0 9.5
H2 721.0 1.7 84.8 0.3 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.7 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.1
2020 H1 580.6 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.4 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 14.9 0.2 – 101.7 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.1 7.8
H2 704.6 – 3.0 94.6 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.0 12.1 18.6 28.9 19.7 4.1 1.1 0.3 6.0 10.5
2021 H1 731.9 24.0 111.2 126.9 15.2 6.9 8.2 12.6 18.6 66.7 . 9.1 9.3 2.9 7.9 12.1
H2 854.2 21.1 97.7 3.8 11.4 – 1.9 7.8 12.3 17.5 51.9 80.7 6.1 2.0 2.6 7.0 11.5
p 2022 H1 923.4 23.8 110.9 – 2.5 12.0 – 3.2 7.7 11.5 16.3 59.0 – 14.2 6.4 – 2.8 2.3 6.4 10.4
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2014 344.2 0.8 46.5 1.8 13.5 0.1 6.0 12.3 22.6 24.1 4.3 7.0 0.2 2.6 6.3 13.7
2015 324.1 6.1 46.9 4.0 14.5 – 0.3 5.9 11.1 22.1 22.3 – 3.8 6.9 – 0.7 1.3 6.7 13.9
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.3 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.5 12.2
2021 408.9 13.0 88.8 21.6 21.7 1.6 7.6 15.0 24.0 42.8 79.7 10.5 3.9 3.0 9.2 15.6
2017 H2 177.1 2.5 31.5 15.6 17.8 2.0 6.6 12.5 24.6 16.8 21.6 9.5 1.5 2.9 7.8 17.9
6 2018 H1 166.3 0.2 25.9 2.8 15.6 0.4 3.8 9.5 22.7 12.6 – 1.9 7.6 – 0.2 – 0.9 4.7 15.3
H2 174.0 – 1.3 31.3 – 0.0 18.0 0.2 6.7 11.3 25.6 15.9 – 4.6 9.1 – 0.3 2.2 7.0 17.8
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
H2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.5 13.3
2021 H1 188.1 7.7 40.3 26.1 21.5 3.1 6.9 12.6 24.5 17.8 119.9 9.5 4.8 0.9 6.9 13.6
H2 221.4 17.9 48.7 18.2 22.0 0.1 9.4 16.5 24.7 25.1 59.1 11.3 3.0 3.8 9.5 17.7
p 2022 H1 226.3 22.0 50.1 25.3 22.2 0.6 4.6 11.6 20.9 25.9 46.4 11.5 1.9 – 0.5 6.3 13.5
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted re-
turn on sales.  3 Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year fig-ures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  4 Adjusted
for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and in the
reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical Series Seasonally adjusted
business statistics.  5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.  6 From H1 2018 or
2018 onwards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with pre-
vious periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2022 2023
Item 2020 2021 2022 Q2 Q3  Q4 December January  r February  p
I.Current Account +183,194 +284,610 –136,528 –53,581 –72,479 – 2,072 +16,772 – 705 +21,271
1.Goods
Receipts 2,179,754 2,500,116 2,915,084 723,620 743,458 772,154 244,852 233,973 245,720
Expenditure  1,846,662 2,220,650 2,999,872 750,732 799,297 767,752 238,071 238,847 216,325
Balance +333,091 +279,466 –84,784 –27,112 –55,838 + 4,405 + 6,782 – 4,874 +29,395
2.Services
Receipts 876,740 1,015,401 1,227,830 302,169 326,480 327,371 115,421 100,354 93,199
Expenditure  888,747 916,663 1,108,461 257,135 304,769 303,269 105,241 89,947 86,598
Balance –12,006 +98,738 +119,372 +45,035 +21,712 +24,103 +10,180 +10,407 + 6,601
3.Primary income
Receipts 719,931 826,715 901,559 223,207 212,785 261,553 102,289 76,676 70,207
Expenditure  701,137 762,099 911,740 258,343 209,108 252,487 89,861 71,084 69,018
Balance +18,796 +64,618 –10,181 –35,136 + 3,676 + 9,067 +12,428 + 5,592 + 1,189
4.Secondary income
Receipts 128,376 152,109 159,328 42,428 36,468 44,499 17,789 13,535 12,410
Expenditure  285,062 310,319 320,261 78,795 78,496 84,144 30,406 25,365 28,324
Balance –156,685 –158,208 –160,936 –36,368 –42,029 –39,646 –12,618 –11,830 –15,914
II.Capital account + 4,537 +47,356 +136,384 +104,431 + 3,624 +20,279 +12,396 – 1,595 + 3,270
III.Financial account  1 +180,459 +312,080 +13,902 +29,040 –52,760 +47,328 +60,308 + 8,968 – 5,211
1.Direct investment –197,021 +297,726 +126,311 +111,249 –18,755 +20,830 +19,479 –17,332 +34,286
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  –118,567 +164,218 –190,314 +64,010 +67,994 –377,876 –262,822 – 1,155 +41,382
By non-resident units of
the euro area  +78,455 –133,509 –316,625 –47,238 +86,749 –398,706 –282,300 +16,178 + 7,096
2.Portfolio investment +527,748 +316,362 –277,600 –40,356 –175,718 –14,862 +59,168 + 8,729 –43,351
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +686,703 +789,273 –235,075 –126,831 –183,977 +93,565 +52,857 +50,585 + 6,203
Equity and
investment fund shares +320,089 +368,439 –189,474 –61,322 –107,833 – 3,740 + 8,299 +46,474 – 8,555
Short-term
debt securities  +120,686 +119,469 –122,568 –68,724 –51,900 +59,106 +38,719 –24,962 –18,466
Long-term
debt securities  +245,925 +301,369 +76,969 + 3,216 –24,244 +38,199 + 5,839 +29,072 +33,225
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  +158,955 +472,913 +42,528 –86,475 – 8,257 +108,427 – 6,311 +41,856 +49,555
Equity and
investment fund shares +166,698 +666,629 +54,675 –11,041 –15,776 +130,267 +11,269 – 6,336 +10,720
Short-term
debt securities  +114,088 +27,795 –58,307 –82,476 –33,561 –26,319 –15,661 + 4,021 –23,806
Long-term
debt securities  –121,829 –221,511 +46,160 + 7,042 +41,080 + 4,479 – 1,919 +44,171 +62,640
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options +18,550 +68,325 +62,764 +28,798 +43,919 – 8,340 – 9,147 + 9,654 +11,197
4.Other investment –182,004 –500,408 +84,556 –72,967 +90,405 +40,645 –13,803 +16,540 + 4,041
Eurosystem –207,309 –442,693 +180,600 – 2,440 +65,795 –67,926 –127,398 +170,735 +55,522
General government –16,648 –69,600 –46,688 –30,012 –22,489 + 5,550 +21,430 +11,319 – 8,063
MFIs  2 +18,378 –128,864 –297,229 –88,936 –41,400 +70,979 +77,481 –111,586 –24,849
Enterprises and households – 1,035 +119,498 +250,410 +35,497 +93,321 +43,793 +18,601 –53,927 –18,569
5.Reserve assets +13,182 +130,076 +17,872 + 2,316 + 7,390 + 9,055 + 4,612 – 8,622 –11,384
IV.Net errors and omissions – 7,270 –19,887 +14,048 –21,810 +16,095 +29,121 +31,140 +11,268 –29,752
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Increase: + / decrease: -.2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Zeit Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 – 3,947 – 29,122 + 24,063 – 34,147 – 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 – 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 – 6,605 – 17,642 + 54,524 – 34,764 – 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 – 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 – 6,209 – 25,255 + 51,306 – 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 – 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 – 9,357 – 29,930 + 69,087 – 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 – 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 – 11,388 – 30,774 + 65,658 – 38,703 – 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 – 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 – 12,523 – 39,321 + 63,284 – 43,413 – 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 211,477 + 219,629 – 14,296 – 25,303 + 58,646 – 41,495 + 3,255 + 230,931 – 2,564 + 16,200
2015 + 259,781 + 248,394 – 15,405 – 18,516 + 69,324 – 39,420 + 265 + 237,733 – 2,213 – 22,313
2016 + 270,200 + 252,409 – 19,921 – 20,987 + 77,258 – 38,480 + 2,451 + 258,906 + 1,686 – 13,744
2017 + 255,964 + 255,077 – 13,613 – 23,994 + 77,046 – 52,165 – 2,653 + 268,306 – 1,269 + 14,996
2018 + 267,609 + 221,983 – 22,985 – 15,806 + 112,389 – 50,958 + 914 + 242,889 + 392 – 25,634
2019 + 283,849 + 219,548 – 32,263 – 13,553 + 128,602 – 50,747 – 3,705 + 200,312 – 544 – 79,832
2020 + 240,239 + 191,031 – 8,907 + 7,418 + 96,014 – 54,224 – 9,120 + 191,481 – 51 – 39,638
2021 + 278,689 + 194,388 + 4,757 + 4,802 + 138,545 – 59,046 – 1,179 + 248,551 + 31,892 – 28,959
2022 + 162,300 + 111,887 + 9,999 – 30,769 + 150,017 – 68,835 – 18,644 + 219,819 + 4,426 + 76,164
2020 Q2 + 37,569 + 27,704 – 2,216 + 6,000 + 13,287 – 9,423 – 914 + 14,699 + 243 – 21,955
Q3 + 62,279 + 55,197 – 933 – 4,752 + 22,659 – 10,824 – 2,450 + 66,302 – 1,276 + 6,473
Q4 + 76,342 + 55,114 – 2,996 + 7,417 + 32,628 – 18,816 – 4,181 + 84,069 + 848 + 11,908
2021 Q1 + 77,373 + 57,527 + 679 + 5,095 + 32,650 – 17,899 – 834 + 72,025 + 385 – 4,514
Q2 + 67,702 + 48,292 + 868 + 7,141 + 21,166 – 8,897 – 2,336 + 87,467 + 58 + 22,101
Q3 + 65,695 + 49,316 + 145 – 5,830 + 37,736 – 15,527 + 1,985 + 16,702 + 31,199 – 50,977
Q4 + 67,919 + 39,252 + 3,064 – 1,604 + 46,994 – 16,723 + 7 + 72,358 + 250 + 4,432
2022 Q1 + 59,495 + 34,428 + 3,927 + 2,953 + 40,362 – 18,249 – 3,021 + 78,775 + 2,200 + 22,301
Q2 + 30,314 + 27,027 + 7,766 – 5,459 + 22,259 – 13,513 – 4,780 + 67,323 + 597 + 41,790
Q3 + 19,402 + 19,911 – 361 – 22,661 + 39,507 – 17,356 – 5,860 – 30,017 + 784 – 43,559
Q4 + 53,089 + 30,520 – 1,333 – 5,603 + 47,889 – 19,718 – 4,984 + 103,737 + 845 + 55,633
p 2023 Q1 + 71,792 + 57,443 + 650 – 6,863 + 40,221 – 19,009 – 10,673 + 98,044 + 224 + 36,925
2020 Oct. + 24,808 + 20,377 – 679 + 1,302 + 7,678 – 4,550 – 1,718 + 26,041 + 140 + 2,951
Nov. + 22,669 + 18,297 – 64 + 2,739 + 9,198 – 7,565 – 2,526 + 21,982 + 89 + 1,839
Dec. + 28,866 + 16,440 – 2,253 + 3,375 + 15,752 – 6,702 + 62 + 36,045 + 618 + 7,118
2021 Jan. + 21,402 + 15,161 + 200 + 1,554 + 11,132 – 6,445 – 667 + 17,047 + 743 – 3,688
Feb. + 22,176 + 18,147 + 39 + 1,739 + 9,312 – 7,022 – 1,596 + 22,939 + 102 + 2,360
Mar. + 33,795 + 24,219 + 441 + 1,802 + 12,206 – 4,432 + 1,430 + 32,038 – 460 – 3,186
Apr. + 24,445 + 16,424 + 441 + 3,520 + 8,407 – 3,905 – 897 + 29,252 – 251 + 5,705
May + 16,786 + 14,730 – 102 + 2,453 + 1,511 – 1,908 – 528 + 23,514 + 211 + 7,257
June + 26,471 + 17,139 + 530 + 1,168 + 11,248 – 3,084 – 911 + 34,700 + 98 + 9,140
July + 21,623 + 18,516 – 472 – 1,848 + 10,917 – 5,962 – 487 + 1,156 + 102 – 19,980
Aug. + 18,381 + 12,984 + 897 – 3,024 + 13,086 – 4,665 + 532 + 17,522 + 31,254 – 1,391
Sep. + 25,690 + 17,816 – 280 – 958 + 13,733 – 4,901 + 1,939 – 1,977 – 158 – 29,606
Oct. + 18,128 + 15,135 + 1,038 – 4,720 + 13,280 – 5,567 + 506 + 13,955 + 261 – 4,680
Nov. + 22,113 + 14,414 + 759 + 138 + 13,670 – 6,108 – 1,007 + 33,852 + 963 + 12,746
Dec. + 27,678 + 9,704 + 1,266 + 2,978 + 20,043 – 5,048 + 508 + 24,551 – 974 – 3,634
2022 Jan. + 16,678 + 6,950 + 803 + 1,719 + 14,181 – 6,173 – 417 + 29,438 + 309 + 13,177
Feb. + 23,232 + 15,092 + 1,472 + 2,076 + 11,673 – 5,609 – 1,637 + 48,042 + 1,161 + 26,446
Mar. + 19,585 + 12,386 + 1,653 – 842 + 14,508 – 6,467 – 968 + 1,295 + 730 – 17,322
Apr. + 11,312 + 5,271 + 2,536 – 962 + 12,425 – 5,421 – 1,556 + 19,988 + 83 + 10,232
May + 3,577 + 11,096 + 4,323 – 2,009 – 3,881 – 1,628 – 2,724 + 893 + 161 + 40
June + 15,424 + 10,661 + 906 – 2,488 + 13,715 – 6,464 – 501 + 46,441 + 353 + 31,518
July + 7,714 + 7,849 + 382 – 6,224 + 13,001 – 6,912 – 2,321 – 23,333 – 484 – 28,726
Aug. + 509 + 2,096 – 567 – 9,706 + 14,077 – 5,957 – 1,261 + 16,672 + 81 + 17,424
Sep. + 11,179 + 9,967 – 176 – 6,731 + 12,429 – 4,486 – 2,277 – 23,355 + 1,187 – 32,257
Oct. + 7,875 + 6,243 – 34 – 5,996 + 13,076 – 5,447 – 2,212 + 42,339 + 672 + 36,676
Nov. + 19,595 + 13,428 + 731 – 1,016 + 13,661 – 6,479 – 2,129 – 2,163 + 425 – 19,630
Dec. + 25,618 + 10,849 – 2,030 + 1,409 + 21,152 – 7,792 – 643 + 63,561 – 252 + 38,586
2023 Jan. + 16,964 + 11,678 + 233 – 1,534 + 12,362 – 5,542 – 4,700 + 10,584 – 341 – 1,679
r Feb. + 22,466 + 18,505 – 163 – 2,175 + 12,175 – 6,039 – 1,789 + 30,325 + 143 + 9,648
p Mar. + 32,363 + 27,259 + 579 – 3,154 + 15,684 – 7,427 – 4,183 + 57,135 + 423 + 28,955
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: + / net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2022 2023
Group of countries/country 
2020 2021 
2022 Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar.
All countries  1 Exports 1,206,928 1,379,346 1,576,759 135,644 144,133 124,649 126,219 132,470 145,708
Imports 1,026,502 1,204,050 1,494,194 130,680 132,338 113,881 116,250 115,489 123,205
Balance +180,427 +175,296 +82,565 + 4,964 +11,795 +10,769 + 9,969 +16,981 +22,503
   I. European countries Exports 824,921 949,744 1,074,150 92,298 98,635 82,699 88,267 90,613 98,255
Imports 682,477 803,687 966,398 82,414 82,944 73,138 72,379 75,957 80,599
Balance +142,444 +146,057 +107,752 + 9,883 +15,691 + 9,561 +15,888 +14,656 +17,656
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 635,741 751,322 861,163 74,212 77,490 66,198 71,309 72,969 76,915
Imports 546,655 638,064 735,869 64,794 64,683 56,030 56,356 62,258 65,614
Balance +89,087 +113,259 +125,294 + 9,418 +12,808 +10,168 +14,953 +10,711 +11,301
          Euro area (20)       Exports 445,225 525,992 605,888 52,043 54,274 47,137 50,864 51,825 54,263
          countries Imports 372,855 440,248 507,461 44,149 43,216 38,250 38,035 41,327 43,755
Balance +72,370 +85,744 +98,426 + 7,894 +11,059 + 8,887 +12,829 +10,497 +10,508
          of which:
               Austria Exports 60,118 72,385 88,736 7,550 7,753 6,639 6,645 6,851 7,431
  Imports 40,454 47,492 57,632 5,009 4,943 4,424 4,096 4,756 5,151
Balance +19,663 +24,893 +31,104 + 2,541 + 2,810 + 2,214 + 2,549 + 2,095 + 2,279
               Belgium and Exports 48,824 58,080 69,656 5,812 6,059 5,396 5,630 5,994 6,052
               Luxembourg Imports 39,584 55,726 66,447 5,694 5,263 5,146 4,454 4,757 4,950
Balance + 9,240 + 2,354 + 3,209 + 117 + 797 + 250 + 1,176 + 1,238 + 1,101
               France Exports 90,910 102,741 116,025 10,084 10,454 9,281 9,837 10,175 10,561
  Imports 56,364 61,921 69,351 6,014 6,094 5,648 5,206 6,212 6,506
Balance +34,546 +40,820 +46,674 + 4,069 + 4,360 + 3,633 + 4,631 + 3,963 + 4,055
               Italy Exports 60,634 75,526 87,495 7,513 7,692 6,801 7,584 7,837 7,979
  Imports 53,906 65,389 72,302 6,590 6,420 5,617 5,253 6,152 6,831
Balance + 6,728 +10,137 +15,192 + 923 + 1,272 + 1,184 + 2,331 + 1,685 + 1,148
               Netherlands Exports 84,579 101,050 110,651 9,565 10,123 9,074 10,225 9,391 9,898
  Imports 87,024 105,113 119,508 10,669 9,711 8,261 9,321 8,744 9,586
Balance – 2,445 – 4,063 – 8,857 – 1,104 + 412 + 813 + 904 + 647 + 312
               Spain  Exports 37,618 43,932 49,036 4,422 4,730 3,591 4,171 4,464 4,762
  Imports 31,281 34,180 37,332 3,103 3,719 2,800 3,069 3,353 3,566
Balance + 6,337 + 9,752 +11,703 + 1,320 + 1,012 + 792 + 1,102 + 1,111 + 1,196
          Other EU Member  Exports 190,517 225,331 255,275 22,168 23,216 19,061 20,445 21,144 22,652
          States  Imports 173,800 197,815 228,407 20,645 21,467 17,780 18,321 20,931 21,859
Balance +16,717 +27,515 +26,868 + 1,524 + 1,749 + 1,281 + 2,124 + 213 + 793
      2. Other European Exports 189,180 198,421 212,987 18,086 21,144 16,501 16,958 17,644 21,340
          countries Imports 135,822 165,623 230,529 17,621 18,261 17,108 16,023 13,698 14,986
Balance +53,358 +32,798 –17,542 + 465 + 2,883 – 607 + 935 + 3,945 + 6,355
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 56,265 60,638 70,633 5,967 6,411 5,715 5,602 5,700 6,489
  Imports 45,556 49,247 55,268 4,538 4,925 4,444 4,470 4,045 4,644
Balance +10,708 +11,391 +15,365 + 1,430 + 1,486 + 1,271 + 1,132 + 1,655 + 1,845
               United Kingdom Exports 67,086 65,002 73,796 6,320 8,144 5,045 6,049 6,303 7,498
  Imports 35,018 32,245 37,977 3,086 3,351 2,847 3,221 3,094 3,433
Balance +32,068 +32,757 +35,819 + 3,234 + 4,793 + 2,198 + 2,828 + 3,209 + 4,066
   II. Non-European  Exports 380,292 427,430 497,553 42,855 45,074 41,573 37,588 41,551 47,086
       countries Imports 343,270 399,604 526,786 48,150 49,290 40,641 43,755 39,358 42,423
Balance +37,022 +27,827 –29,233 – 5,295 – 4,216 + 932 – 6,167 + 2,193 + 4,663
       1. Africa Exports 20,086 23,068 26,455 2,759 2,221 2,278 2,062 2,300 2,563
Imports 18,758 26,241 33,600 2,805 3,138 2,794 3,015 2,524 2,949
Balance + 1,328 – 3,173 – 7,145 – 46 – 917 – 517 – 953 – 224 – 386
       2. America Exports 141,375 167,735 210,653 18,605 19,389 16,727 16,418 17,876 20,510
  Imports 94,005 101,525 130,772 12,091 12,182 10,957 11,602 10,230 12,024
Balance +47,370 +66,210 +79,881 + 6,514 + 7,206 + 5,770 + 4,816 + 7,647 + 8,487
           of which:
               United States  Exports 103,476 121,980 156,210 13,959 14,396 12,416 11,995 13,145 14,467
  Imports 67,694 72,316 92,497 8,391 8,753 7,904 8,325 7,307 8,860
Balance +35,782 +49,664 +63,713 + 5,567 + 5,643 + 4,512 + 3,670 + 5,838 + 5,607
       3. Asia Exports 208,146 224,897 246,422 20,413 22,125 21,255 18,080 20,030 22,638
  Imports 226,646 267,604 354,982 32,546 33,448 26,472 28,515 25,969 26,883
Balance –18,500 –42,707 –108,560 –12,133 –11,323 – 5,217 –10,435 – 5,939 – 4,244
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 25,882 26,090 29,660 2,607 2,854 2,824 2,407 2,650 3,100
  Imports 6,721 7,509 12,809 1,224 1,965 1,116 1,396 1,106 1,508
Balance +19,161 +18,582 +16,851 + 1,383 + 889 + 1,708 + 1,011 + 1,543 + 1,592
               Japan  Exports 17,396 18,245 20,514 1,850 1,766 1,672 1,649 1,752 1,917
Imports 21,427 23,477 25,290 2,279 2,439 1,939 2,096 2,124 2,406
Balance – 4,032 – 5,232 – 4,775 – 428 – 672 – 267 – 447 – 373 – 489
               People's Republic  Exports 95,840 103,564 106,852 8,515 9,329 8,258 7,284 7,904 8,946
               of China  2 Imports 117,373 142,964 191,723 17,433 17,223 14,109 14,584 13,031 12,978
Balance –21,533 –39,400 –84,871 – 8,918 – 7,894 – 5,851 – 7,300 – 5,127 – 4,032
               New industrial countries Exports 50,590 55,295 63,366 5,252 5,560 5,693 4,677 5,387 5,944
               and emerging markets  Imports 48,222 55,441 70,448 6,636 6,840 5,207 5,773 5,647 5,828
               of Asia  3 Balance + 2,368 – 146 – 7,082 – 1,384 – 1,281 + 485 – 1,096 – 260 + 116
       4. Oceania and Exports 10,685 11,731 14,022 1,078 1,339 1,313 1,028 1,345 1,375
           polar regions Imports 3,861 4,233 7,431 708 522 417 623 635 569
Balance + 6,824 + 7,497 + 6,591 + 370 + 817 + 897 + 405 + 710 + 806
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. Euro area incl. Croatia.  1 Including fuel and other supplies forships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.
3 Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Zeit Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2018 – 15,806 – 2,044 – 44,543 + 10,059 + 17,219 – 7,060 + 723 + 3,322 + 671 +112,410 – 692
2019 – 13,553 + 3,607 – 45,947 + 10,755 + 18,368 – 9,763 – 2,948 + 3,489 + 492 +128,990 – 880
2020 + 7,418 – 5,302 – 14,678 + 10,051 + 17,665 – 7,770 – 4,426 + 3,368 + 3,196 + 94,205 – 1,387
2021 + 4,802 – 6,635 – 24,323 + 8,306 + 32,834 – 8,466 – 9,361 + 3,531 + 2,664 +137,881 – 1,999
2022 – 30,769 – 8,643 – 54,977 + 9,464 + 31,406 – 11,241 – 10,085 + 4,078 + 1,993 +152,926 – 4,902
2021 Q3 – 5,830 – 931 – 13,518 + 1,084 + 9,484 – 2,457 – 2,546 + 953 – 71 + 38,996 – 1,189
Q4 – 1,604 – 3,073 – 8,636 + 2,551 + 9,344 – 1,551 – 3,757 + 763 + 824 + 43,098 + 3,071
2022 Q1 + 2,953 – 2,849 – 6,117 + 1,996 + 11,530 – 3,704 – 1,520 + 1,063 + 1,288 + 40,527 – 1,453
Q2 – 5,459 – 187 – 13,270 + 2,270 + 7,307 – 2,182 – 2,722 + 1,062 + 425 + 25,841 – 4,007
Q3 – 22,661 – 3,727 – 23,112 + 2,159 + 5,874 – 3,429 – 3,712 + 1,100 – 82 + 41,295 – 1,705
Q4 – 5,603 – 1,880 – 12,478 + 3,039 + 6,695 – 1,926 – 2,131 + 853 + 362 + 45,264 + 2,263
p 2023 Q1 – 6,863 – 3,086 – 8,001 + 1,765 + 5,428 – 3,661 – 3,069 + 1,061 + 1,234 + 40,663 – 1,675
2022 May – 2,009 – 300 – 4,200 + 861 + 2,205 – 824 – 934 + 307 + 132 – 1,524 – 2,490
June – 2,488 + 276 – 5,938 + 576 + 2,455 – 88 – 996 + 463 + 192 + 14,348 – 825
July – 6,224 – 777 – 6,034 + 804 + 1,542 – 1,446 – 1,287 + 326 – 54 + 13,614 – 559
Aug. – 9,706 – 2,244 – 8,760 + 676 + 1,673 – 783 – 1,335 + 317 – 22 + 14,668 – 569
Sep. – 6,731 – 706 – 8,318 + 679 + 2,659 – 1,199 – 1,090 + 457 – 7 + 13,013 – 577
Oct. – 5,996 – 315 – 8,419 + 642 + 2,127 – 1,050 – 108 + 335 + 93 + 13,662 – 680
Nov. – 1,016 – 836 – 2,407 + 956 + 1,859 – 371 – 1,446 + 327 + 74 + 14,226 – 639
Dec. + 1,409 – 729 – 1,652 + 1,441 + 2,710 – 505 – 577 + 192 + 194 + 17,376 + 3,582
2023 Jan. – 1,534 – 637 – 2,326 + 771 + 1,928 – 1,434 – 1,302 + 391 + 449 + 12,557 – 644
r Feb. – 2,175 – 1,101 – 2,334 + 542 + 946 – 910 – 398 + 351 + 409 + 12,290 – 524
p Mar. – 3,154 – 1,348 – 3,341 + 452 + 2,554 – 1,317 – 1,369 + 319 + 376 + 15,815 – 507
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Zeit Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2018 – 50,958 – 33,109 – 10,849 + 9,753 – 17,848 .+ 5,142 + 914 + 3,349 – 2,435
2019 – 50,747 – 30,251 – 11,473 + 11,591 – 20,496 .+ 5,431 – 3,705 – 298 – 3,407
2020 – 54,224 – 36,074 – 13,498 + 10,767 – 18,150 .+ 5,908 – 9,120 – 3,418 – 5,702
2021 – 59,046 – 36,974 – 11,303 + 11,888 – 22,072 .+ 6,170 – 1,179 – 392 – 787
2022 – 68,835 – 41,923 – 17,878 + 14,041 – 26,913 .+ 7,149 – 18,644 – 14,397 – 4,247
2021 Q3 – 15,527 – 9,973 – 4,119 + 2,158 – 5,554 .+ 1,543 + 1,985 + 1,985 – 1
Q4 – 16,723 – 11,058 – 5,349 + 2,135 – 5,664 .+ 1,543 + 7 + 963 – 956
2022 Q1 – 18,249 – 10,960 – 3,153 + 2,477 – 7,288 .+ 1,719 – 3,021 – 2,865 – 156
Q2 – 13,513 – 5,957 – 3,247 + 7,339 – 7,556 + 2,357 + 1,810 – 4,780 – 3,988 – 792
Q3 – 17,356 – 11,401 – 3,727 + 2,138 – 5,955 + 1,841 + 1,810 – 5,860 – 4,533 – 1,326
Q4 – 19,718 – 13,604 – 7,751 + 2,086 – 6,113 .+ 1,810 – 4,984 – 3,011 – 1,973
p 2023 Q1 – 19,009 – 10,868 – 3,352 + 2,584 – 8,141 .+ 1,731 – 10,673 – 9,912 – 761
2022 May – 1,628 + 1,154 – 609 + 4,982 – 2,782 + 741 + 603 – 2,724 – 2,650 – 73
June – 6,464 – 4,155 – 2,056 + 1,232 – 2,308 + 741 + 603 – 501 – 214 – 287
July – 6,912 – 4,701 – 1,865 + 441 – 2,211 + 614 + 603 – 2,321 – 1,950 – 371
Aug. – 5,957 – 4,111 – 1,275 + 426 – 1,847 + 613 + 603 – 1,261 – 1,028 – 233
Sep. – 4,486 – 2,589 – 587 + 1,271 – 1,897 + 613 + 603 – 2,277 – 1,555 – 722
Oct. – 5,447 – 3,509 – 1,505 + 524 – 1,938 + 610 + 600 – 2,212 – 1,559 – 653
Nov. – 6,479 – 4,468 – 1,623 + 417 – 2,010 .+ 600 – 2,129 – 1,846 – 283
Dec. – 7,792 – 5,628 – 4,623 + 1,145 – 2,165 .+ 611 – 643 + 394 – 1,037
2023 Jan. – 5,542 – 3,794 – 1,910 + 654 – 1,749 .+ 603 – 4,700 – 4,169 – 532
r Feb. – 6,039 – 3,879 – 923 + 991 – 2,161 .+ 564 – 1,789 – 1,776 – 13
p Mar. – 7,427 – 3,195 – 519 + 940 – 4,232 + 566 + 564 – 4,183 – 3,967 – 216
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2022 2023
Item 2020 2021 2022 Q3 Q4 r Q1 p January February  r March  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +724,008 +819,754 +320,200 +111,380 –73,938 +126,924 +25,996 +23,106 +77,822
1.Direct investment +134,017 +180,852 +169,006 +54,790 +10,260 +30,604 –13,805 +28,056 +16,354
Equity +89,898 +121,136 +114,061 +18,184 +32,688 +25,126 – 1,003 +12,079 +14,050
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +17,533 +59,185 +69,943 +17,110 +12,154 +16,722 – 2,444 +10,491 + 8,675
Debt instruments +44,119 +59,716 +54,945 +36,607 –22,429 + 5,479 –12,802 +15,976 + 2,304
2.Portfolio investment +166,417 +174,958 +16,697 –26,789 +23,963 +79,127 +42,177 +18,519 +18,430
Shares  2 +53,110 +46,753 –16,698 – 9,893 – 9,357 + 4,079 + 4,621 + 2,315 – 2,857
Investment fund shares  3 +35,932 +116,401 +33,614 – 1,045 +18,537 +10,958 + 6,079 + 3,304 + 1,576
Short-term  4
debt securities +10,507 – 107 +12,340 + 2,183 + 5,126 + 7,640 + 7,930 – 587 + 296
Long-term   5
debt securities +66,867 +11,912 –12,559 –18,034 + 9,657 +56,450 +23,547 +13,488 +19,415
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +94,579 +60,178 +42,677 +14,786 – 2,054 +20,575 + 9,376 + 8,170 + 3,029
4.Other investment  7 +329,046 +371,874 +87,394 +67,808 –106,951 – 3,606 –11,411 –31,781 +39,586
MFIs  8 – 4,313 +112,903 +59,476 +42,210 –103,228 +65,821 +61,298 – 1,009 + 5,532
Short-term + 3,683 +99,380 +34,961 +20,786 –109,790 +68,467 +65,936 + 326 + 2,205
Long-term – 8,021 +13,204 +24,474 +21,411 + 6,490 – 2,676 – 4,641 – 1,304 + 3,269
Enterprises and
households  9 +88,179 +143,700 +38,708 –14,817 –13,419 +26,898 +33,176 +17,034 –23,311
Short-term +44,218 +113,230 +15,881 –20,699 –21,086 +22,483 +31,252 +16,633 –25,402
Long-term +22,325 –13,944 – 7,625 – 2,019 – 244 + 638 + 191 – 42 + 488
General government + 2,069 – 8,123 –24,958 – 8,675 + 645 + 9,388 + 8,391 – 2,117 + 3,114
Short-term + 3,461 – 7,256 –23,451 – 8,600 + 920 + 3,236 + 2,261 – 2,051 + 3,025
Long-term – 2,485 – 2,327 – 2,883 – 617 – 274 + 4,330 + 4,448 – 207 + 89
Bundesbank +243,112 +123,394 +14,167 +49,090 + 9,051 –105,713 –114,275 –45,689 +54,251
5.Reserve assets – 51 +31,892 + 4,426 + 784 + 845 + 224 – 341 + 143 + 423
II.Net foreign investment in the
reporting country (increase: +) +532,526 +571,203 +100,381 +141,397 –177,676 +28,881 +15,411 – 7,218 +20,688
1.Direct investment +138,902 +80,483 +43,725 +25,215 –15,589 –13,455 –18,053 + 9,096 – 4,499
Equity +45,841 +41,374 +14,811 + 3,507 + 3,618 +12,287 + 8,177 + 2,509 + 1,601
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 707 + 7,659 + 7,123 – 1,096 + 1,344 + 6,166 + 2,744 + 2,271 + 1,151
Debt instruments +93,061 +39,109 +28,914 +21,708 –19,207 –25,742 –26,230 + 6,588 – 6,100
2.Portfolio investment +150,014 –28,581 – 7,600 + 4,948 –23,214 +53,292 +15,609 – 1,011 +38,694
Shares  2 –17,040 + 2,101 – 4,695 + 7,486 + 2,941 – 4,886 – 1,581 – 1,288 – 2,018
Investment fund shares  3 + 962 – 8,433 – 3,235 – 1,624 – 318 + 927 + 203 + 975 – 251
Short-term  4
debt securities +84,459 +29,313 –37,218 – 4,041 –24,696 + 1,708 – 6,619 –11,485 +19,812
Long-term   5
debt securities +81,632 –51,563 +37,548 + 3,128 – 1,142 +55,542 +23,605 +10,786 +21,151
3.Other investment  7 +243,611 +519,301 +64,255 +111,234 –138,873 –10,956 +17,855 –15,303 –13,508
MFIs  8 +108,426 +161,287 +152,946 +68,279 –187,546 +108,354 +129,667 + 4,610 –25,923
Short-term +74,908 +115,265 +160,854 +48,862 –181,523 +88,506 +127,680 + 7,119 –46,293
Long-term +33,579 +46,044 – 7,910 +19,417 – 6,025 +19,847 + 1,987 – 2,510 +20,369
Enterprises and
households  9 +32,084 +135,961 + 6,958 +38,589 –36,507 + 7,034 +14,387 +31,487 –38,839
Short-term +14,969 +99,877 – 9,271 +37,273 –46,236 – 293 +10,507 +29,356 –40,156
Long-term +13,511 +12,382 + 8,907 – 398 + 8,020 + 6,109 + 3,481 + 1,785 + 843
General government – 7,840 – 4,742 – 4,931 + 2,837 – 7,399 + 1,078 – 732 – 447 + 2,257
Short-term – 7,557 – 2,134 – 2,478 + 2,843 – 7,371 + 1,683 – 264 – 287 + 2,234
Long-term – 280 – 2,605 – 2,451 – 6– 25 – 605 – 468 – 160 + 23
Bundesbank +110,941 +226,796 –90,717 + 1,528 +92,579 –127,423 –125,467 –50,953 +48,997
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +191,481 +248,551 +219,819 –30,017 +103,737 +98,044 +10,584 +30,325 +57,135
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see Statistical series, direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities 3ä,  4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 663,320 497,651
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2020 Nov. 1,347,202 212,286 159,737 14,193 7,535 30,820 1,078,270 1,060,263 56,647 625,921 721,282
Dec. 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 Jan. 1,348,921 219,860 166,494 14,115 8,061 31,190 1,072,140 1,054,994 56,921 638,042 710,879
Feb. 1,328,303 210,619 157,313 14,119 8,047 31,140 1,060,378 1,043,746 57,306 616,473 711,830
Mar. 1,364,046 209,400 155,323 14,367 7,966 31,744 1,098,486 1,081,989 56,160 647,647 716,400
Apr. 1,307,161 210,799 158,143 14,085 7,836 30,735 1,041,472 1,024,734 54,890 604,863 702,299
May 1,370,231 221,201 168,678 14,037 7,809 30,677 1,093,721 1,076,918 55,309 621,827 748,404
June 1,384,834 213,600 159,995 14,326 8,094 31,184 1,115,447 1,101,897 55,787 670,632 714,202
July 1,319,694 219,775 165,984 14,345 8,104 31,343 1,042,015 1,024,970 57,903 657,905 661,789
Aug. 1,360,722 250,742 165,757 45,091 8,174 31,720 1,053,653 1,037,259 56,327 699,773 660,949
Sep. 1,431,909 246,908 160,943 45,606 8,267 32,092 1,130,558 1,115,126 54,443 746,128 685,781
Oct. 1,388,160 250,340 164,602 45,719 8,449 31,570 1,083,141 1,066,604 54,678 735,595 652,564
Nov. 1,456,861 258,815 170,460 46,375 8,405 33,575 1,142,719 1,127,545 55,327 773,217 683,644
Dec. 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 Jan. 1,479,694 261,965 173,362 46,931 8,504 33,168 1,163,561 1,149,868 54,168 807,889 671,805
Feb. 1,491,552 273,726 184,255 46,854 8,711 33,905 1,164,098 1,149,722 53,729 774,786 716,766
Mar. 1,516,744 277,782 187,779 47,375 8,663 33,965 1,184,501 1,169,952 54,462 808,690 708,055
Apr. 1,491,558 288,953 196,274 48,617 8,799 35,263 1,148,681 1,135,400 53,923 790,221 701,337
May 1,505,419 278,174 186,481 48,031 8,681 34,980 1,173,376 1,159,716 53,869 805,179 700,240
June 1,566,099 281,157 187,573 48,712 8,948 35,923 1,232,176 1,216,530 52,767 826,280 739,819
July 1,514,570 280,910 185,950 49,465 9,086 36,409 1,179,431 1,166,155 54,229 810,881 703,689
Aug. 1,590,572 280,160 184,794 49,614 9,300 36,451 1,258,187 1,245,014 52,225 842,576 747,996
Sep. 1,613,008 281,258 184,022 50,287 9,358 37,592 1,281,266 1,266,647 50,483 829,129 783,879
Oct. 1,569,272 274,421 178,101 49,675 9,527 37,119 1,243,873 1,230,005 50,977 811,035 758,237
Nov. 1,577,175 277,458 183,052 49,168 9,315 35,923 1,248,088 1,233,980 51,629 810,314 766,861
Dec. 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 Jan. 1,508,507 281,692 190,062 48,256 9,437 33,938 1,176,042 1,162,354 50,772 793,716 714,791
Feb. 1,455,724 276,016 183,755 48,582 9,480 34,199 1,130,353 1,114,888 49,356 743,006 712,718
Mar. 1,522,539 288,131 196,405 48,039 9,373 34,314 1,184,604 1,170,620 49,804 791,478 731,061
Apr. 1,431,180 285,667 194,679 47,642 9,297 34,049 1,096,324 1,081,284 49,189 726,986 704,194
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2019 968,277 227,767 740,510 503,698 236,812 220,465 16,348 1,312,974 167,925 1,145,050 932,555 212,495 136,829 75,666
2020 1,030,962 244,325 786,637 546,252 240,385 213,568 26,816 1,419,220 172,112 1,247,108 1,028,217 218,891 130,165 88,726
2021 1,163,639 256,764 906,875 616,964 289,911 261,752 28,159 1,576,549 215,064 1,361,485 1,105,049 256,436 159,446 96,990
2022 1,232,675 251,857 980,818 661,948 318,870 289,264 29,606 1,607,074 174,307 1,432,767 1,139,934 292,833 189,258 103,576
2022 Oct. 1,281,085 274,390 1,006,695 683,885 322,810 292,519 30,291 1,658,622 206,413 1,452,209 1,166,448 285,761 180,165 105,597
Nov. 1,295,966 297,264 998,701 675,537 323,164 292,839 30,325 1,687,102 209,363 1,477,739 1,185,376 292,363 187,812 104,551
Dec. 1,232,675 251,857 980,818 661,948 318,870 289,264 29,606 1,607,074 174,307 1,432,767 1,139,934 292,833 189,258 103,576
2023 Jan. 1,251,083 289,266 961,817 652,943 308,874 279,086 29,788 1,595,520 187,666 1,407,854 1,127,741 280,113 174,233 105,880
r Feb. 1,288,815 294,730 994,085 681,436 312,649 282,699 29,950 1,639,386 203,036 1,436,350 1,158,439 277,911 170,382 107,529
p Mar. 1,259,663 286,066 973,597 651,688 321,909 291,440 30,469 1,588,450 183,739 1,404,711 1,117,114 287,596 181,218 106,378
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2019 573,453 176,913 396,539 304,545 91,994 83,227 8,768 841,017 91,513 749,504 663,166 86,337 63,664 22,674
2020 612,885 185,565 427,320 333,594 93,725 80,717 13,008 899,482 97,582 801,899 712,252 89,647 61,761 27,886
2021 660,557 194,046 466,511 358,320 108,191 95,340 12,851 988,142 151,193 836,949 733,188 103,761 74,174 29,587
2022 703,663 192,412 511,251 387,897 123,354 109,914 13,440 991,655 125,880 865,775 750,939 114,836 82,671 32,165
2022 Oct. 718,133 211,408 506,725 381,964 124,761 111,049 13,711 1,029,240 147,964 881,275 769,032 112,244 79,855 32,388
Nov. 743,211 232,326 510,885 383,976 126,910 113,126 13,784 1,047,533 143,638 903,896 785,134 118,761 86,869 31,892
Dec. 703,663 192,412 511,251 387,897 123,354 109,914 13,440 991,655 125,880 865,775 750,939 114,836 82,671 32,165
2023 Jan. 738,136 233,031 505,105 382,294 122,811 109,204 13,607 987,775 118,557 869,217 756,471 112,746 79,879 32,867
r Feb. 748,489 237,252 511,237 385,937 125,300 111,832 13,468 981,655 119,121 862,533 747,403 115,130 81,543 33,588
p Mar. 745,033 231,717 513,316 382,777 130,539 116,583 13,956 971,036 114,270 856,766 737,605 119,161 86,400 32,761
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2019 394,824 50,853 343,971 199,153 144,818 137,238 7,580 471,958 76,412 395,546 269,388 126,157 73,165 52,992
2020 418,077 58,760 359,317 212,658 146,659 132,851 13,808 519,738 74,530 445,208 315,965 129,244 68,404 60,840
2021 503,082 62,718 440,364 258,644 181,720 166,411 15,309 588,407 63,871 524,536 371,861 152,675 85,271 67,403
2022 529,012 59,445 469,567 274,050 195,517 179,351 16,166 615,419 48,427 566,992 388,995 177,997 106,587 71,410
2022 Oct. 562,951 62,982 499,970 301,921 198,049 181,470 16,580 629,382 58,449 570,933 397,416 173,518 100,309 73,208
Nov. 552,755 64,939 487,816 291,562 196,254 179,714 16,541 639,569 65,725 573,843 400,242 173,601 100,943 72,659
Dec. 529,012 59,445 469,567 274,050 195,517 179,351 16,166 615,419 48,427 566,992 388,995 177,997 106,587 71,410
2023 Jan. 512,946 56,235 456,712 270,649 186,063 169,882 16,181 607,745 69,108 538,637 371,270 167,367 94,353 73,014
r Feb. 540,325 57,477 482,848 295,498 187,350 170,867 16,483 657,732 83,915 573,817 411,036 162,781 88,839 73,942
p Mar. 514,630 54,349 460,281 268,911 191,370 174,858 16,513 617,414 69,469 547,945 379,509 168,435 94,818 73,617
Euro area (20)
2019 494,383 158,182 336,201 264,821 71,380 63,742 7,638 764,929 71,012 693,917 626,886 67,031 49,802 17,229
2020 526,584 164,691 361,893 288,485 73,408 61,662 11,746 812,136 75,869 736,267 666,749 69,518 47,547 21,971
2021 555,081 172,032 383,050 297,861 85,189 73,511 11,678 904,888 129,783 775,105 693,366 81,739 58,280 23,459
2022 597,491 173,395 424,096 328,761 95,336 83,244 12,092 903,757 105,435 798,322 709,668 88,654 63,579 25,075
2022 Oct. 605,861 192,201 413,659 317,537 96,122 83,627 12,495 943,983 129,565 814,419 728,571 85,848 60,822 25,026
Nov. 632,740 213,577 419,163 321,329 97,834 85,330 12,504 957,816 124,639 833,176 742,433 90,743 65,899 24,845
Dec. 597,491 173,395 424,096 328,761 95,336 83,244 12,092 903,757 105,435 798,322 709,668 88,654 63,579 25,075
2023 Jan. 638,359 216,337 422,022 326,150 95,872 83,620 12,252 901,298 99,420 801,878 715,508 86,370 60,792 25,578
r Feb. 644,861 220,008 424,854 328,128 96,725 84,652 12,074 893,319 100,251 793,068 705,928 87,140 61,107 26,033
p Mar. 640,704 214,855 425,849 324,931 100,918 88,376 12,542 882,282 95,099 787,183 697,365 89,817 64,390 25,428
Extra-Euro area (20)
2019 473,894 69,585 404,309 238,877 165,432 156,723 8,709 548,045 . . . 145,464 87,027 58,437
2020 504,378 79,634 424,743 257,766 166,977 151,907 15,070 607,084 96,243 510,840 361,467 149,373 82,618 66,755
2021 608,558 84,732 523,826 319,103 204,723 188,241 16,481 671,661 85,281 586,380 411,683 174,697 101,165 73,532
2022 635,184 . . . 223,535 206,021 17,514 703,317 . . . 204,179 125,679 78,501
2022 Oct. 675,224 . . . 226,688 208,891 17,796 714,639 . . . 199,913 119,342 80,571
Nov. 663,226 . . . 225,330 207,510 17,820 729,286 . . . 201,619 121,913 79,707
Dec. 635,184 . . . 223,535 206,021 17,514 703,317 . . . 204,179 125,679 78,501
2023 Jan. 612,724 . . . 213,002 195,466 17,535 694,222 . . . 193,743 113,441 80,302
r Feb. 643,953 . . . . . . 746,067 . . . 190,771 109,275 81,497
p Mar. 618,959 . . . . . . 706,168 . . . 197,779 116,829 80,950
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2021 1.5749 1.4826 7.6282 7.4370 129.88 10.1633 10.1465 1.0811 0.85960 1.1827
2022 1.5167 1.3695 7.0788 7.4396 138.03 10.1026 10.6296 1.0047 0.85276 1.0530
2021 Dec. 1.5781 1.4463 7.1993 7.4362 128.80 10.1308 10.2726 1.0408 0.84875 1.1304
2022 Jan. 1.5770 1.4282 7.1922 7.4411 130.01 10.0070 10.3579 1.0401 0.83503 1.1314
Feb. 1.5825 1.4422 7.1957 7.4408 130.66 10.0544 10.5342 1.0461 0.83787 1.1342
Mar. 1.4946 1.3950 6.9916 7.4404 130.71 9.7367 10.5463 1.0245 0.83638 1.1019
Apr. 1.4663 1.3652 6.9605 7.4391 136.61 9.6191 10.3175 1.0211 0.83655 1.0819
May 1.4995 1.3588 7.0830 7.4405 136.24 10.1453 10.4956 1.0355 0.84969 1.0579
June 1.5044 1.3537 7.0734 7.4392 141.57 10.2972 10.6005 1.0245 0.85759 1.0566
July 1.4856 1.3180 6.8538 7.4426 139.17 10.1823 10.5752 0.9876 0.84955 1.0179
Aug. 1.4550 1.3078 6.8884 7.4393 136.85 9.8309 10.5021 0.9690 0.84499 1.0128
Sep. 1.4820 1.3187 6.9508 7.4366 141.57 10.1697 10.7840 0.9640 0.87463 0.9904
Oct. 1.5474 1.3477 7.0687 7.4389 144.73 10.3919 10.9503 0.9791 0.87058 0.9826
Nov. 1.5455 1.3708 7.3171 7.4387 145.12 10.3357 10.8798 0.9842 0.86892 1.0201
Dec. 1.5685 1.4379 7.3859 7.4377 142.82 10.4480 10.9859 0.9865 0.86950 1.0589
2023 Jan. 1.5523 1.4474 7.3173 7.4383 140.54 10.7149 11.2051 0.9961 0.88212 1.0769
Feb. 1.5514 1.4400 7.3244 7.4447 142.38 10.9529 11.1725 0.9905 0.88550 1.0715
Mar. 1.6034 1.4649 7.3807 7.4456 143.01 11.2858 11.2276 0.9908 0.88192 1.0706
Apr. 1.6389 1.4792 7.5561 7.4518 146.51 11.5187 11.3370 0.9846 0.88115 1.0968
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  
2023 January 1 Croatia Croatian kuna HRK 7.53450  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2023
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the  Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
extended EER group of trading partners  1broad EER group of
trading partners  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
27 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  527 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.1 95.9 96.2 96.6 95.9 97.9 99.6 95.7 97.6 98.3 98.1 97.8
2000 87.0 86.8 86.0 85.7 88.1 86.1 91.9 97.5 85.4 91.1 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.5 87.1 86.6 84.5 90.2 86.9 91.7 96.6 86.0 90.5 93.0 91.7 91.0
2002 89.8 90.2 89.6 88.1 94.5 90.5 92.3 95.7 88.3 91.0 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.4 101.4 100.8 99.2 106.4 101.6 95.9 94.8 97.5 95.3 97.0 96.7 96.8
2004 104.2 105.3 103.8 102.4 110.9 105.4 96.1 93.6 99.9 95.6 98.5 98.2 98.4
2005 102.8 104.0 101.8 100.6 109.1 103.0 94.7 92.0 98.7 93.2 98.4 97.1 96.7
2006 102.8 104.0 101.2 99.5 109.2 102.3 93.5 90.4 98.1 91.6 98.6 96.7 96.0
2007 106.3 107.0 103.5 101.2 112.8 104.5 94.5 89.7 102.0 92.0 100.9 98.3 97.3
2008 110.2 109.9 105.7 105.1 117.6 107.0 94.9 88.4 105.1 91.3 102.4 98.4 97.5
2009 111.7 110.8 106.8 108.7 120.7 108.1 95.2 89.2 104.5 92.0 101.9 98.6 97.9
2010 104.5 103.0 98.6 101.2 112.0 99.1 92.5 88.7 98.1 88.1 98.8 94.3 92.5
2011 104.2 102.1 96.7 99.4 112.8 98.6 92.1 88.4 97.5 87.3 98.2 93.5 91.9
2012 98.5 96.8 91.2 93.6 107.6 93.8 90.0 88.3 92.4 84.7 95.9 90.5 88.9
2013 102.1 99.9 94.2 96.5 112.3 96.8 92.3 88.8 97.4 86.6 98.1 92.3 90.9
2014 102.3 99.2 94.2 96.7 114.7 97.2 92.9 89.6 97.6 87.3 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.5 89.5 85.5 86.0 106.2 88.6 89.7 90.3 88.8 83.6 94.4 87.8 87.0
2016 95.2 91.5 87.9 p 87.3 110.2 90.6 90.6 90.7 90.4 84.9 95.0 88.8 88.1
2017 97.5 93.4 89.1 p 88.0 112.6 91.8 91.9 90.8 93.3 85.7 96.3 89.9 88.9
2018 100.0 95.6 90.6 p 89.6 117.4 95.0 93.2 91.0 96.3 86.7 97.7 91.2 90.8
2019 98.1 93.2 88.9 p 87.0 115.6 92.4 92.2 91.2 93.5 85.8 96.4 89.9 89.4
2020 99.7 93.6 89.4 p 87.8 119.5 93.9 92.3 91.5 93.4 86.4 96.4 90.1 90.2
2021 99.6 93.5 p 88.6 p 86.0 120.9 94.3 93.4 92.0 95.4 86.8 97.4 90.7 91.0
2022 95.5 p 90.7 p 83.7 p 81.4 116.8 p 90.8 92.2 92.0 92.3 85.3 96.0 89.2 p 89.1
2020 Nov. 100.6 94.3 90.5 p 87.9 121.8 95.2 93.1 91.4 95.5 86.9 96.5 90.1 90.5
Dec. 101.8 95.2 123.1 96.0 97.0 90.5 90.9
2021 Jan. 101.4 95.2 122.6 96.0 97.9 91.3 91.7
Feb. 100.7 94.5 90.1 p 88.0 121.7 95.1 93.4 91.8 95.7 87.0 98.0 91.2 91.5
Mar. 100.3 94.2 121.4 94.9 97.7 91.1 91.4
Apr. 100.6 94.3 122.1 95.2 97.9 91.3 91.7
May 100.8 94.4 89.4 p 86.5 122.4 95.3 93.2 91.4 95.8 86.6 98.0 91.3 91.7
June 100.3 93.8 121.7 94.7 97.9 91.1 91.5
July 99.7 93.6 121.0 94.3 97.7 91.0 91.3
Aug. 99.4 93.2 p 88.5 p 85.7 120.6 93.9 93.7 92.3 95.7 87.0 97.4 90.7 90.9
Sep. 99.5 93.3 120.6 93.8 97.3 90.6 90.7
Oct. 98.5 92.4 119.6 93.1 96.7 90.0 90.2
Nov. 97.6 91.8 p 86.6 p 83.6 119.0 92.6 93.4 92.6 94.6 86.5 96.1 89.4 89.7
Dec. 97.1 91.2 119.2 92.4 95.7 88.9 89.4
2022 Jan. 96.6 91.1 118.7 p 92.2 95.9 89.0 p 89.4
Feb. 96.9 91.6 p 84.9 p 82.7 119.1 p 92.6 92.9 92.3 93.6 85.7 96.1 89.1 p 89.5
Mar. 95.9 91.4 118.6 p 92.7 96.3 89.5 p 90.0
Apr. 95.2 90.0 116.6 p 90.3 96.1 89.0 p 88.9
May 95.6 90.4 p 83.4 p 81.1 116.4 p 90.1 92.1 91.8 92.5 85.0 96.5 89.6 p 89.2
June 95.9 90.6 116.7 p 90.2 95.7 88.8 p 88.5
July 94.1 89.2 114.7 p 88.9 94.9 88.0 p 87.6
Aug. 93.6 88.8 p 81.8 p 79.9 114.2 p 88.6 91.6 92.1 90.8 84.7 94.5 87.7 p 87.3
Sep. 94.2 p 89.8 114.6 p 89.3 96.0 89.2 p 88.7
Oct. 94.8 p 91.1 115.5 p 90.6 96.1 89.8 p 89.4
Nov. 96.0 p 92.0 p 84.5 p 81.8 117.2 p 91.8 92.2 92.0 92.5 85.7 97.1 90.7 p 90.4
Dec. 97.0 p 92.3 119.2 p 92.6 96.2 89.7 p 89.8
2023 Jan. 97.3 p 92.5 119.9 p 92.9 p97.4 p 90.3 p 90.4
Feb. 97.3 p 92.6 ... ... 120.1 p 93.1 … … … … p97.6 p 90.5 p 90.6
Mar. 97.5 p 92.7 120.5 p 93.3 p98.1 p 91.0 p 91.2
Apr. 98.6 p 93.8 122.3 p 94.6 p98.6 p 91.6 p 92.0
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the curren-
cy concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's price
competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective exchange
rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. The
weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more detailed in-
formation on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the Deutsche
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 The calculations are
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following 18 countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania,
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United
States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates were used.
2 Includes countries belonging to the extended EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition) and additionally the following 23 countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zea-
land, Peru, Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan,Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and United Arab Emirates. The ECB has suspended the
publication and calculation of the euro foreign exchange reference rate against Russian
rouble with effect from March 2, 2022 until further notice. For the calculation of
effective exchange rates, an indicative rate is used for the Russian Federation from that
date. It is calculated from the daily RUB/USD rates determined by the Bank of Russia in
conjunction with the respective ECB's euro foreign exchange reference rate to the US
dollar.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from 2001 including
Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from
2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, from
2015 including Lithuania, from 2023 including Croatia) as well as Canada, Denmark,
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.
5 Euro area countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the extended
EER group of trading partners (fixed comosition).  6 Euro area countries (current compo-
sition) and countries belonging to the broad EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition).

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website, as are also the Statistical Series, with a 
changed basic structure and advanced options for using data.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
A list of the articles published in the period from 
2010 to 2022 is available on the Bundesbank’s 
website.
Monthly Report articles
August 2022
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2022
– Negative interest rate policy period and 
pandemic  as reflected in the Bank Lending 
Survey
– Productivity effects of reallocation in the cor -
porate sector during the COVID-  19 crisis
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2021
– The role of the International Monetary Fund 
in preventing and managing crisesOctober 2022
– State government finances in 2021: Surplus   
and additional reserves from emergency bor -
rowing
– Member States’ financial relationships with 
the EU budget and the Next Generation EU 
off-budget entity in 2021
– The validity of interest parity in times of crisis
– Market conditions for Bunds in the context 
of monetary policy purchases and height -
ened uncertainty
November 2022
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2022
– Outlook for the German economy for 2023 
to 2025
– Rise in energy prices, the exchange rate of 
the euro and Germany’s price competitive -
ness
– Access to cash in Germany – results of a rep -
resentative public survey
January 2023
– From the monetary pillar to the monetary 
and financial analysis
– Term structures in economic analysis
– Mobile payment usage in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
85•

– Access to cash in Germany: analyses of the 
spatial availability of cash withdrawal facil -
ities
February 2023
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2023
– German balance of payments in 2022
– The impact of digitalisation on labour prod -
uctivity growth
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2021
April 2023
– Money market conditions and remuneration 
of government  deposits
– Household wealth and finances in  Germany: 
Results of the 2021 household wealth survey
– Turning point in payments
– Sustainability risks in banking supervision
May 2023
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, January 20221,2
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
January 20222
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131
Discussion Paperso
48/2022  
Real interest rates, bank borrowing, and fragility49/2022  
Estimating the impact of quality adjustment on 
consumer price inflation
50/ 2022  
Score- based calibration testing for multivariate 
forecast distributions
51/ 2022  
The preferential treatment of green bonds
52/ 2022  
Bayesian VARs and prior calibration in times of 
COVID-  19
01/ 2023  
Make- up strategies with incomplete markets 
and bounded rationality
02/2023  
Households’ expectations and regional COVID-19 
dynamics
03/2023  
Inflation expectations in the wake of the war in 
Ukraine
04/2023  
Shocks to transition risk
05/2023  
Time-varying shock return correlation, news 
shocks, and business cycles
06/2023  
Asset allocation with recursive parameter up -
dating and macroeconomic regime identifiers
07/2023  
The rollout of internal credit risk model: Impli -
cations for the novel partial-use philosophy
08/2023  
Pricing the Bund term structure with linear re -
gressions – without an observable short rate
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
87•

09/ 2023  
Banks of a feather: The informational advan -
tage of being alike
10/ 2023  
On the empirical relevance of the exchange rate 
as a shock absorber at the zero lower bound
11/ 2023  
Banks’ net interest margin and changes in the 
term structure
12/ 2023  
Long- term deposit funding and demand for 
central bank funds: Evidence from targeted 
longer- term refinancing operations
13/2023  
Mental accounting and the marginal propensity 
to consume
14/2023  
Shadow- rate VARsBanking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, 
January  20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2023  
88•

