Monthly Report
November 2023
Vol. 75  
No 11

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 33512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 a.m. on 17 November 2023.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  7
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  13
Factors driving European gas prices ....................................................................................  20
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  25
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  26
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  38
Recalculated weights for indicators of the German  economy’s price competitiveness  .........  40
Inflation risks based on inflation options: current developments in the euro area  ...............  45
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  53
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  61
Federal Constitutional Court issues ruling on debt brake  .....................................................  69
The plan to introduce a generational capital fund to ease pressures on the pension 
scheme’s finances  ...............................................................................................................  79Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
6

Overview
Muted economic activity 
amid declining but still high 
inflation
Global economic activity 
maintains  muted upward trend
Global economic activity remained divided in 
the third quarter. Euro area economic growth 
continued to be sluggish. By contrast, eco -
nomic growth in the United States and China 
picked up significantly, driven mainly by buoy -
ant private consumption. This also boosted 
global economic growth, albeit probably only 
temporarily. The tightening of monetary policy 
in many regions of the world, the high energy 
prices and the specific structural challenges in 
China continue to be a drag on the global 
economy.
In the third quarter, the global economy bene -
fited from improved industrial performance, in 
particular. Global industrial output probably 
rose again markedly following the weak pre -
ceding quarter. However, there is still no sign of 
any sustained improvement in industrial activ -
ity. Instead, business surveys are pointing to a 
drop in new orders and weak demand overall. 
Looking at the services sector, too, the situ -
ation and outlook have recently been assessed 
as muted in many places. There is no indication 
of a global recession, though: labour markets 
remain robust, inflation rates are dropping, and 
real wages are going back up. On the whole, 
there are mounting signs of a “soft landing”: 
despite a process of disinflation that is being 
driven by tighter monetary policy, the global 
economy is still showing muted growth.Inflation pressures continuing 
to ease, but considerable risks 
to the outlook
Inflation continued on its gradual downward 
trajectory. In the group of advanced econ -
omies, consumer price inflation had fallen to 
3.4% by October. Underlying price pressures 
likewise eased. The core inflation rate (i.e. ex -
cluding energy and food) dropped to 4.1% in 
October. However, the risks to future consumer 
price developments remain tilted to the upside. 
They are emanating, not least, from persist -
ently high wage growth. In addition, energy 
markets have once again taken centre stage. 
The armed conflict in the Middle East has so far 
had no major impact on crude oil prices. Should 
the conflict severely impair extraction in the re -
gion, however, prices are likely to rise consider -
ably. Given well- stocked storage facilities and a 
subdued economic outlook, the risks to the 
European gas supply appear markedly lower 
than a year ago. They have not disappeared al -
together, though.
International financial markets 
caught between high inflation 
and diverging economic 
 prospects
International financial markets were character -
ised by continued high but declining inflation 
rates. In addition, diverging economic pro -
spects in the major currency areas shaped gen -
eral events in the financial markets. In this en -
vironment, central banks in these areas initially 
continued to tighten their monetary policy. The 
US Federal Reserve raised its policy rate by 25 
basis points in July, but has left it unchanged 
since then. After two further interest rate 
moves of 25 basis points each in July and Sep -
tember, the Governing Council of the ECB also 
decided at its most recent meeting in October 
not to raise key interest rates any further for Global growth 
muted
Signs of “soft 
landing”Consumer price 
inflation con -
tinuing to ease 
in advanced 
economies, but 
considerable 
risks
Yields rose in 
environment 
shaped by 
continued  high 
inflation and 
diverging eco -
nomic prospectsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
7

the time being. Overall, however, both central 
banks stressed the need to leave policy rates at 
a restrictive level for a sufficiently extended 
period of time and kept open the option of fur -
ther policy rate hikes depending on the infla -
tion situation. In this environment, market par -
ticipants increasingly felt that key interest rates 
might remain at a restrictive level for an ex -
tended period of time. Given robust US eco -
nomic data and a labour market that had been 
resilient for months, this market view was par -
ticularly pronounced for the Fed’s policy rate 
outlook.
The “higher- for- longer” interest rate scenario 
initially led to rising nominal and real interest 
rates in both currency areas. In the euro area, 
however, the increase in yields was weaker due 
to subdued growth prospects. These develop -
ments were reflected in a depreciation of the 
euro against the US dollar during the third 
quarter of 2023. Since the end of September, 
there has also been growing concern among 
market participants that US fiscal deficits could 
be higher in the future. This reinforced the rise 
in yields on US Treasuries, which also spilled 
over to the euro area through international 
interest rate linkages, albeit to a somewhat 
lesser extent. Towards the end of the period 
under review, there were diverging develop -
ments in the financial markets. The tighter 
financial conditions caused market participants 
to price higher downside risks to economic ac -
tivity into their medium-  term policy rate out -
look. The somewhat weaker US labour market 
data and the better- than- expected US inflation 
data have intensified the decline in yields and 
have been putting pressure on the US dollar 
since the beginning of November.
The markets for risky asset classes followed the 
general interest rate trend. Overall, rising real 
interest rates and diminishing risk appetite on 
the part of investors led to valuation losses in 
some cases. In this environment, yield spreads 
on the government bond markets, in particular, 
widened at times. Looking at euro area govern -
ment bonds, Italian paper experienced spread widening, driven by upwardly revised forecasts 
of Italy’s fiscal deficit. Prices in the equity mar -
kets showed little change following temporary, 
in some cases distinct, losses.
Eurosystem raises key interest 
rates further
The ECB Governing Council’s interest rate in -
crease in September 2023 was based on its up -
dated assessment of the inflation outlook, the 
underlying inflation dynamics and the strength 
of monetary policy transmission. Although real -
ised inflation was continuing to decline, infla -
tion was still expected to remain too high for 
too long. On the basis of its assessment in Sep -
tember, the Governing Council then held that, 
thanks to the interest rate hikes, the key inter -
est rates had reached levels that would make a 
substantial contribution to the timely return of 
inflation to the target. For this to happen, 
though, the key interest rate levels would have 
be maintained for a sufficiently long duration.
In October 2023, the Governing Council there -
fore left key interest rates unchanged for the 
first time since it began raising interest rates in 
July 2022. Incoming information since the Sep -
tember meeting has broadly confirmed its pre -
vious assessment of the medium- term inflation 
outlook. The Governing Council will continue 
to follow a data- dependent approach to deter -
mining the appropriate level and duration of 
restriction.
Supply- side and demand- side 
factors weakening credit 
dynamics  in the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 declined 
further in the third quarter of 2023, pushing 
the year- on- year growth rate into negative ter -
ritory for the first time in the history of monet -
ary union. The steep drop in monetary dynam -
ics reflects how money holding has adapted to 
the changed interest rate environment: in par -Yields on euro 
area govern -
ment bonds rose 
at different ratesMonetary 
policy : ECB 
Governing  
Council raises 
key interest rates 
by 25 basis 
points in 
September  …
… and 
leaves them 
unchanged in 
October
Annual M3 
growth becomes 
negative and 
lending 
stagnates Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
8

ticular, the persistent rise in interest rates is en -
couraging the money- holding sectors to shift 
their relatively low-  yielding M3 investments 
away from M3 and into higher- yielding forms 
of investment. On the output side, the ongoing 
reduction of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet 
combined with stagnant bank lending were a 
drag on M3 growth. The slowdown in lending 
was attributable to demand- side and supply-  
side factors alike: higher financing costs and a 
gloomier economic outlook dampened the de -
mand for lending on the part of non- financial 
corporations and households whilst, according 
to the latest Bank Lending Survey (BLS), banks 
continued to tighten their lending policies, pri -
marily owing to heightened credit risk.
Economic output in Germany 
down slightly in the third 
quarter
The German economy is still navigating through 
choppy waters. Economic output declined 
slightly in the third quarter of 2023. According 
to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, 
real gross domestic product (GDP) was a sea -
sonally adjusted 0.1% lower than in the previ -
ous quarter, during which it had increased 
somewhat according to revised data.1 Industry 
also suffered in the third quarter from weak 
foreign demand and the fallout from the prior 
energy price shock. Increased financing costs 
continued to dampen private investment, 
thereby also weighing on domestic demand for 
industrial goods and, in particular, construction 
work. Furthermore, the order backlog de -
creased further, absorbing the decline in de -
mand in both sectors to an ever smaller de -
gree. As a result, output in these areas de -
clined. Real exports of goods also fell. More -
over, private consumption remained lacklustre. 
Despite strong wage increases, declining infla -
tion rates and stable employment, consumers 
still held back on additional spending. The ser -
vices sector, by contrast, proved quite robust in 
this difficult environment.Lending in Germany tails off 
further
Lending tailed off further in the third quarter, 
with loans to non- financial corporations even 
recording outflows on balance. This was due, 
for one thing, to the now significantly higher 
lending rates, the subdued demand for goods 
and services both from within Germany and 
abroad and the uncertain economic outlook. 
For another, the German banks surveyed in the 
BLS continued to tighten their lending policies, 
mainly owing to heightened credit risk. Lend -
ing to households likewise lost further momen -
tum. High inflation, increased construction 
prices and the further rise in financing costs, in 
particular, dampened demand for loans for 
house purchase. At the same time, BLS banks 
tightened their credit standards and terms and 
conditions for loans in this segment, too.
Labour market remains robust
The robust labour market continued to stabilise 
economic activity in Germany. Despite the 
slight decline in economic output, employment 
in the third quarter remained at the high level 
recorded in the previous quarter, having risen 
steeply in the first half of the year. Unemploy -
ment increased moderately in the third quarter, 
but somewhat more sharply in October. The 
number of vacancies declined slightly, but re -
mained at a high level. This meant that the still 
very tight situation in the labour market – ex -
pressed by the ratio of vacancies to unemployed 
persons – eased only slightly. No significant de -
crease in employment is projected for the 
fourth quarter, either.
At 4.7%, negotiated wages were up even more 
sharply in the third quarter of 2023 than in the German econ -
omy still navi -
gating through 
choppy watersGerman banks’ 
lending to 
domestic private 
sector tails off 
further
Labour market 
stable
1 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this 
text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, pro -
vided they can be verified and quantified. The flash esti -
mate also included some revisions for previous quarters. 
Overall, this results in a somewhat higher level of economic 
activity than previously reported.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
9

second quarter. As before, high social 
contribution- exempt inflation compensation 
bonuses played a key role here. Actual earn -
ings, in turn, are likely to have seen a signifi -
cantly stronger increase than negotiated wages 
in the third quarter of 2023. The most recent 
wage agreements again contained large pay 
rises for the most part. The trade unions also 
made high wage demands for the sectors that 
were in negotiations in the fourth quarter.
Inflation rate down consider -
ably at the end of the period 
under review on account of 
base effects
Consumer prices as measured by the Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices rose somewhat 
more slowly in the third quarter of 2023 than in 
the previous quarter. Averaged over July to 
September 2023, they increased by a season -
ally adjusted 0.8% (second quarter: 1.0%). In a 
year- on- year comparison, the inflation rate was 
down markedly once again in the third quarter 
of 2023, from 6.9% to 5.7%. The sharp rise in 
energy prices in the third quarter of 2022 gen -
erated a dampening base effect, because, for 
the first time, it was no longer included in the 
year- on- year rate. By contrast, the core rate 
(excluding energy and food) actually rose 
slightly to 5.8%, although this was due to one- 
off effects.
In October, the inflation rate fell considerably 
once more, to 3.0%. It had already dropped 
sharply to 4.3% in September, chiefly due to 
the fact that at the same time the previous 
year, the fuel rebate and the €9 local public 
transport ticket had come to an end and en -
ergy had become significantly more expensive. 
In October, too, the energy price-  related base 
effect had a dampening impact. As a result, the 
core rate (excluding energy and food) de -
creased less sharply, from 4.8% to 4.2%. The 
rate of inflation is likely to hover around its cur -
rent level over the next few months. In the case 
of food and other goods, declining price pres -sures along supply chains and exerted by com -
modity prices will probably dampen inflation 
further. By contrast, the comparatively high up -
ward pressure on prices in the services sector is 
expected to continue for a while, partly in the 
context of strong wage growth. In addition, 
the contribution of the energy component is 
likely to become positive again over the com -
ing months as the dampening base effects dis -
appear and the carbon price charged on fossil 
fuels is raised at the turn of the year. From the 
current perspective, inflation could temporarily 
rise above 4% again in December, as the price- 
lowering Act on Emergency Aid for Natural Gas 
Heating for End Consumers (Erdgas-  Wärme-  
Soforthilfegesetz)  adopted at the end of 2022 
will now have a price- driving base effect.
German economy set to 
recover  only arduously from 
period of weakness
The German economy is set to recover only ar -
duously from the period of weakness that has 
persisted since the outbreak of Russia’s war 
against Ukraine. Economic output is likely to 
once again decline slightly in the fourth quarter 
of 2023. However, it could then go back up 
somewhat in the first quarter of 2024. Domes -
tic economic activity is expected to gradually 
start picking up speed, as households’ real net 
income is anticipated to rise further on the 
back of large wage rises and easing price pres -
sures. Even if households initially hold back on 
spending for a while longer, it is likely that they 
will therefore gradually consume more again in 
real terms. Industry is still operating under ad -
verse conditions. Weak foreign demand and 
the fallout from the earlier energy price shock 
are continuing to curb its output. Moreover, 
the drawdown of existing order books is prob -
ably providing less and less of a boost to out -
put. Yet tentative signs of a slight improvement 
after the turn of the year are beginning to 
emerge. For instance, the underlying trend in 
new orders suggests that foreign demand may 
have bottomed out. In addition, enterprises’ Negotiated 
wages up 
sharply in Q3; 
actual earnings 
up even more 
sharply
Inflation rate 
drops markedly 
in Q3 2023, 
partly due to 
base effects
Following a con -
siderable decline 
in October, infla -
tion rate likely to 
hover around its 
current level in 
coming monthsEconomic out -
put likely to 
decline again 
slightly in Q4 
2023, but could 
then pick up 
somewhat in 
Q1 2024Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
10

business expectations for the next six months 
as surveyed by the ifo Institute have recently 
brightened, albeit only slightly. In the construc -
tion sector, however, there is no short-term im -
provement on the horizon yet. The rise in 
financing and construction costs is continuing 
to weigh heavily on demand for construction 
services, and output in this sector is expected 
to decline.
German government finances 
continue to recover
Government finances are continuing to recover 
further in 2023. This is a potentially surprising 
development given that there has been no let- 
up in burdens stemming from the energy crisis 
and weak economic growth: the government is 
still providing substantial assistance to soften 
the blow of the energy crisis on firms and 
households. Tax developments are also weak 
this year, and higher prices are increasingly 
being reflected in government spending. How -
ever, these factors are outweighed by the fact 
that coronavirus response measures, which 
were in place last year, are now no longer a 
factor and nominal GDP is continuing to see 
highly dynamic growth. The deficit ratio and 
the debt ratio are thus expected to decline fur -
ther this year (2022: 2½% and 66%, respect -
ively).
Developments next year will partly depend on 
how central and state governments amend 
their plans following the ruling of the Federal 
Constitutional Court (see next section for de -
tails). As things currently stand, the deficit is ex -
pected to continue to decline, as energy price 
measures are scheduled to expire. As central 
government finances the lion’s share of these 
measures, it also stands to benefit the most 
from the decline. However, central government 
is planning significant additional spending else -
where, especially in the Armed Forces Fund. 
Moreover, high inflation is set to have a lagged 
impact on central, state and local government 
budgets. The social security funds could still close the year with a surplus. This is due in part 
to higher contribution rates for long- term care 
insurance and probably also for health insur -
ance.
Federal Constitutional Court 
rules on debt brake
In mid- November 2023, the Federal Constitu -
tional Court issued a far- reaching ruling on the 
debt brake enshrined in Germany’s Basic Law. 
The ruling concerns central government’s 
second supplementary budget for 2021. How -
ever, it also establishes general principles and 
thus has a wider impact on central and state 
government finances. The ruling underscores 
the objective of the debt brake, namely to limit 
government debt, and precludes a loose inter -
pretation of the constitutional requirements. It 
is now up to fiscal policymakers to adjust their 
plans with this in mind, in part with a view to 
eliminating uncertainties.
The ruling strengthens the binding effect of the 
debt brake. To ensure that debt is curbed in 
line with the constitutional provisions, the Con -
stitutional Court has issued clear rules on the 
use of the escape clause. These state that legis -
lators may not use the escape clause to pre -
fund future budgets. Yet this does not mean 
that measures currently planned in this context 
have to be scrapped. However, it will be neces -
sary to either reprioritise on the expenditure 
side or make adjustments on the revenue side 
to balance government expenditure and rev -
enue.
Ultimately, only binding fiscal rules can safe -
guard sound government finances. Fiscal rules 
should not be bypassed. This does not preclude 
a stability- oriented reform of the rules. There 
would be a case for moderately expanding the 
regular borrowing framework if, for example, 
the debt ratio is below the Maastricht refer -
ence value of 60%. Reform requires a majority 
large enough to amend the constitution. Con -
cerns that the debt brake is too restrictive can Government 
finances con -
tinue to recover 
in 2023 without 
strain of tempor -
ary coronavirus 
response 
measures 
Expiring crisis 
measures reduce 
deficit further 
in 2024, but 
expansionary 
stance in other 
areasFederal 
Constitutional  
Court issues far- 
reaching ruling 
on debt brake
Escape clause 
may not be 
used to prefund 
future budgets
Ruling strength -
ens binding 
effect of debt 
brakeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
11

be addressed in this manner. By contrast, at -
tempts to water down the debt brake during 
budget execution are not appropriate. This, in particular, has been made clear by the Federal 
Constitutional Court’s ruling.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
12

Global and European setting
Global economic 
developments
Global economic activity remained divided in 
the third quarter. Euro area economic growth 
remained weak. In the United Kingdom, eco -
nomic output stagnated, and in Japan, real 
gross domestic product (GDP) declined mark -
edly. By contrast, economic growth in the 
world’s two largest economies, the United 
States and China, picked up significantly, driven 
mainly by buoyant private consumption. This 
also boosted global economic growth, albeit 
probably only temporarily. The tightening of 
monetary policy in many regions of the world, 
the high energy prices and the specific struc -
tural challenges in China continue to be a drag 
on the global economy.1
In the third quarter, the global economy bene -
fited from, in particular, improved industrial 
performance. Global industrial output probably 
rose again markedly following the weak pre -
ceding quarter. However, there is no sign of 
any sustained improvement in industrial activ -
ity. Instead, business surveys are pointing to a 
drop in new orders and weak demand overall. 
Looking at the services sector, too, the situ -
ation and outlook have recently been assessed 
as muted in many places. There is no indication 
of a global recession, though: labour markets 
remain robust, inflation rates are dropping, and 
real wages are going back up. On the whole, 
there are mounting signs of a “soft landing”: 
despite a process of disinflation that is being 
driven by tighter monetary policy, the global 
economy is still showing muted growth.
Inflation continued on its gradual downward 
trajectory. In the group of advanced econ -
omies, consumer price inflation had fallen to 3.4% by October. Three months earlier, the 
year- on- year rate of the consumer price index 
(CPI) had been as high as 4.3%. Underlying 
price pressures likewise eased. Core inflation 
excluding energy and food fell in October to 
4.1%. However, the risks to future consumer 
price developments remain tilted to the upside. 
They are emanating, not least, from persist -
ently high wage growth. In addition, energy 
markets have once again recently taken centre 
stage.
Crude oil prices were distinctly elevated in re -
cent months before falling again towards the 
end of the reporting period. The temporary 
price increase was driven primarily by Saudi 
Arabia and Russia cutting output. By contrast, 
the armed conflict in the Middle East has hardly 
boosted prices – even despite the region’s im -Global growth 
probably picked 
up only tempor -
arily
Signs of “soft 
landing”Consumer price 
inflation con -
tinuing to ease 
in advanced 
economies
Energy com -
modity prices up 
slightly in recent 
months
Global economic indicators*
Sources: CPB, national data, Haver Analytics, S&P Global and 
Bundesbank calculations. * Groups of countries vary due to dif-
ferences in data availability. 1 Components for output (manu-
facturing) and business activity (services).
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 2023859095100105110Seasonally adjusted
2030405060Industrial production
December 2019 = 100, log scale
Purchasing managers' indices1
Diffusion index, lin scale
Manufacturing
Servicese
1 These include frictions in the rebalancing of the Chinese 
economic model, demographic strains and the persistent 
problems in the real estate market. See Deutsche Bundes -
bank (2021, 2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
13

mense importance for global oil production.2 
This is because, to date, the conflict has not 
had any adverse impact on extraction. Were 
this to change, however, prices could rise con -
siderably.3 As this report went to press, Brent 
crude oil cost US$78 per barrel, markedly lower 
than its August figure. By contrast, European TTF natural gas prices have picked up some -
what since August. Not only supply concerns 
but also the seasonal increase in global de -
mand for natural gas played a role. Given well- 
stocked storage facilities and a somewhat sub -
dued economic outlook, chances are good that 
drastic price spikes can be avoided in the cur -
rent heating season, though (see the box on 
pp. 20 f.). The prices of non- energy commod -
ities, such as food and industrial metals, have 
changed only slightly overall recently.
In the October edition of its World Economic 
Outlook, the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF), too, warned of possible rises in com -
modity prices caused by geopolitical shocks.4 
Renewed commodity price surges, the Fund ex -
plained, would jeopardise the global economic 
recovery and the disinflation process. The IMF 
staff saw further downside risks to the global 
economy as a result of the intensification of the 
real estate crisis in China and unsustainably 
high debts in many countries. However, the 
staff largely upheld its global economic out -
look. Following global GDP growth of 3% this 
year, the global economy is likely to continue 
to expand at a similarly moderate clip in 2024. 
Consumer price inflation in the advanced econ -
omies is likely to continue to decline, albeit at a 
slower pace than previously. Even for the final 
quarter of 2024, the IMF still expects inflation 
to be 2.6%.
China
In China, the economy markedly regained its 
footing in the third quarter. Economic output 
grew by 1.3% in seasonally and price- adjusted 
terms compared with the previous quarter. The 
increase in growth was driven to a major ex -
tent by domestic demand. Relative to the mod -IMF global 
economic  out -
look remains 
subdued
Economic 
growth strength -
ened …Energy prices
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Haver Analytics. • Latest 
figures: Average of 1 to 16 November 2023. 1 Price for the 
front-month futures contract.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 202320406080100120Monthly averages
04080120160200240 Reduced scale
Natural gas (TTF)1
in euro per MWhCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrelSources:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  national  data. 
* EU, Canada, Japan, Norway, Switzerland, the United King-
dom and the United States. 1 Consumer prices excluding en-
ergy and food; additionally excluding alcoholic beverages and 
tobacco  products  for  the  EU,  Norway,  Switzerland  and  the 
United Kingdom.
Deutsche BundesbankConsumer prices in industrial countries*
0123456789
+++++++++Year-on-year percentage change
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023Headline Core rate1
2 According to the US Energy Information Administration, 
this economic area accounted for some 33% of global 
crude oil production.
3 For example, the World Bank warned of a significant 
surge in oil prices should the conflict escalate and constrain 
regional oil production. See World Bank (2023).
4 See International Monetary Fund (2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
14

erate income growth, households’ propensity 
to spend was similar to pre- pandemic levels. 
The fact that the labour market situation has 
recently brightened somewhat probably played 
a role. In addition, the housing market situ -
ation did not deteriorate any further. This was 
supported by regulatory and monetary policy 
easing measures.
At the beginning of the final quarter of the 
year, the Chinese economy did not appear to 
have quite been able to maintain its sound 
pace of expansion. Business sentiment likewise 
clouded over somewhat. Nominal dynamics re -
mained correspondingly subdued. In October, 
core inflation was only 0.6%. Owing to the 
sharp fall in food prices, headline consumer 
prices were even down slightly on the year. 
However, additional government spending is 
likely to lend a further boost to economic activ -
ity in the coming months.5
Other selected emerging 
market  economies
In all likelihood, the Indian economy main -
tained its buoyant expansion trajectory in the 
third quarter. Industrial output growth even ac -
celerated further on the year. Consumers were 
also increasingly confident about the sustain -
ability of the recovery. This is likely to have 
been helped by the fact that inflation went 
back down significantly in recent months. In 
October, consumer prices were up by 4.9% on 
the year and thus within the Reserve Bank of 
India’s target corridor. Core inflation excluding 
energy and food declined further, and food 
price inflation eased recently as well. However, 
unusually low rainfall during the monsoon sea -
son, which is of central importance to agricul -
ture, harbours upside risks to prices for the 
coming months. The Reserve Bank of India held 
its policy rate steady at 6.5% throughout the 
third quarter and also at its most recent meet -
ing in October.On the other hand, the Brazilian economy 
probably lost momentum overall in the third 
quarter. Industrial output stagnated compared 
with the previous quarter, and sentiment in the 
services sector likewise deteriorated markedly 
according to purchasing managers’ surveys. 
Price- adjusted retail sales rose moderately, des -
pite the fact that inflation picked up markedly 
again. As a result of a significant increase in 
fuel prices, the year-  on- year rate of the con -
sumer price index rose to 5.2% by September. 
In October, it went down only slightly. Indica -
tors of underlying price pressures continued to 
decline through the end of the reporting 
period. Against this backdrop, the Central Bank 
of Brazil cut its policy rate in September and 
again in November by a total of 100 basis 
points to 12.25%.… and probably 
also sound at 
year’s end
Persistently 
buoyant growth 
in IndiaEconomic activ -
ity in Brazil loses 
momentumConsumption in China
5,0005,5006,0006,5007,000
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China and Bundesbank 
calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankQuarterly data, seasonally adjusted
Pre-pandemic trend
(2015 - 2019)
Pandemic/zero-COVID policy+28+30+32+34+36Consumption expenditure
per capita basisYuan
Personal savings
as a percentage of disposable income%
5 The adjustment of the central government’s budget ap -
proved in October envisages additional borrowing amount -
ing to 0.8% of GDP for the current year. Local govern -
ments were also granted greater flexibility timing- wise 
when it comes to the application of the budgetary rules.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
15

In recent months, the Russian economy ap -
pears to have recovered further from the sharp 
slump at the start of the war in Ukraine. Ac -
cording to Rosstat’s flash estimate, real GDP 
rose by 5.5% on the year in the third quarter. 
The sharp increase in government expenditure 
since the beginning of the war has supported, 
above all, arms production. In addition, despite 
the continuing Western sanctions, industry has 
been managing for some time now to acquire 
a growing quantity of foreign intermediate 
goods again. These are coming into Russia 
mainly out of China and other neighbouring 
countries. This is another reason why the busi -
ness climate has improved markedly. As a result 
of higher energy prices, the trade surplus, 
which had previously fallen sharply, increased 
somewhat in the summer months. In terms of 
volume, Russia’s crude oil exports likewise did 
not decline any further over the last quarter. In 
order to circumvent the US$60 per barrel price 
cap on Russian crude oil in western industrial -
ised countries, large segments of crude oil ex -
ports are probably being shipped predomin -
antly to Asia without western insurance. Con -
sumer price inflation rose in October to 6.7%. 
This was partly due to the weak rouble and 
mounting labour shortages. The central bank 
continued to tighten its monetary policy, rais -
ing its policy rate since September by 300 basis 
points to 15%. It also imposed capital controls 
to shore up the rouble.
United States
In the United States, quarterly GDP growth in -
creased significantly to 1.2% in the third quar -
ter. This was mainly due to robust domestic ac -
tivity. Households again consumed significantly 
more after already markedly increasing their 
consumption in the first half of the year. Gov -
ernment demand likewise continued to sup -
port economic growth, and firms stockpiled. 
Despite comparatively unfavourable financing 
conditions, private residential investment 
picked up for the first time since the first quar -
ter of 2021 after having fallen by around one- fifth on the heels of the monetary policy tight -
ening. By contrast, the hitherto strong growth 
in gross fixed capital formation in industrial sec -
tors ground to a halt. Exports and imports rose 
markedly.
Economic growth in the United States is set to 
decelerate in the fourth quarter. Since October, 
households have been required to repay stu -
dent loans again; these obligations had been 
suspended during the pandemic. That is likely 
to curb private consumption. The persistently 
restrictive financing conditions are a further 
drag.
The year- on- year consumer price index rate fell 
to 3.2% in October, after having temporarily 
picked up somewhat owing to the petering out 
of base effects and rising energy prices. The 
core inflation rate excluding energy and food 
dropped to 4.0%. The fact that labour market 
utilisation is persistently high and wage growth 
is decelerating only slowly could hamper the 
process of further disinflation. Against this 
background, the members of the US Federal 
Open Market Committee raised their medium- 
term projections for the fed funds rate dis -
tinctly,6 but held their target range steady at 
between 5.25% and 5.5% in September and 
November.
Japan
Japanese economic output declined markedly 
in the third quarter following buoyant growth 
in the first half of the year. According to the 
initial estimate, real GDP in the third quarter fell 
by a seasonally adjusted 0.5% on the previous 
quarter. The decline in GDP was driven by vola -
tile inventory changes. However, gross fixed 
capital formation also declined again. Private 
consumption stagnated despite government 
energy subsidies and buoyant wage growth 
over the past few months. Exports expanded Russia’s econ -
omy still on 
path to recovery
GDP grew 
strongly 
in Q3, …… yet probably 
less dynamically 
in Q4
Disinflation 
process  is 
progressing 
Marked decline 
in GDP
6 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
(2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
16

only moderately, whereas imports rose mark -
edly. Despite the economic downturn, the la -
bour market remained robust. The unemploy -
ment rate remained extremely low, standing at 
2.6% in September. Consumer price inflation 
continued to decline, but was still quite high in 
September at 3% on the year. Against this 
background, the Bank of Japan announced at 
the end of October that it would regard a cap 
on ten- year government bond yields as a refer -
ence.
United Kingdom
In the third quarter, the United Kingdom’s eco -
nomic output held steady at the level of the 
previous quarter, with the weak economy evi -
dent across a broad range of sectors. Activity in 
the manufacturing and construction sectors 
was sluggish. This likely reflects the tightening 
of financing conditions caused by the tighter 
monetary policy. In addition, renewed strikes in 
healthcare, railways and education were a drag 
on activity in the services sector. Gross value 
added in this sector even contracted somewhat 
in the third quarter. There are no signs yet that 
the economy will recover anytime soon. Busi -
ness sentiment remained subdued. The labour 
market situation deteriorated. The unemploy -
ment rate was up distinctly as of late to 4.3%. 
That said, however, wage growth was excep -
tionally high and exceeded the annual growth 
rate of consumer prices, which dropped to 
4.6% in October, mainly as a result of falling 
energy prices. Core inflation declined markedly 
to 5.6%. Against this backdrop, the Bank of 
England left its policy rate unchanged in Sep -
tember and November but did not rule out fur -
ther interest rate increases.
Poland
In Poland, seasonally adjusted real GDP in the 
third quarter rose by 1.4% from the second 
quarter, in which it had risen by 0.3%. Domes -
tic demand also recovered as of late. Real retail sales and industrial production increased mark -
edly. The labour market remained robust. The 
unemployment rate remained near its all- time 
low in September, too, though employment 
did not increase any further towards the end of 
the reporting period. Wages continued to grow 
strongly and, in the corporate sector, were up 
by 10% year- on- year. Consumer price inflation 
continued to fall considerably in October to 
6.6%. Core inflation excluding energy and food 
declined only to 8.0%. The National Bank of 
Poland cut its policy rate in two moves to 
5.75%.
Macroeconomic trends in the 
euro area
Euro area economic growth remained weak in 
the third quarter. According to Eurostat’s flash 
estimate, seasonally adjusted real GDP fell by 
0.1% in the third quarter. If Ireland (where eco -
nomic output fluctuates strongly owing to the GDP stagnant
Increase in GDPContinued weak 
euro area 
growthReal GDP in selected industrial countries
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Cabinet Office of Japan, 
Office for National Statistics, Statistics Poland and Bundesbank 
calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 20239095100105110Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, log scale
United KingdomUnited States
9095100105110
9095100105
PolandJapan
7580859095100105Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
17

strategic activities of multinational enterprises) 
is excluded, it instead stagnated. In the two 
preceding quarters, euro area economic output 
–  likewise excluding Ireland  – had grown 
slightly. A number of factors contributed to the 
ongoing weakness in growth, including weak 
external demand, monetary policy tightening 
and the after- effects of supply shocks, particu -
larly in the energy markets. This affected all ex -
penditure components, albeit to varying de -
grees. On the production side, industry re -
mained in a slump while services again in -
creased slightly. The macroeconomic outlook 
for the near future remains subdued, as bur -
dens are easing only slowly.
Private consumption may well have increased 
slightly in the third quarter. This is likely to have 
been driven by a further increase in real dispos -
able income, which, unlike in the previous two 
quarters, also had an impact on expenditure. 
Growth was probably particularly pronounced 
in the consumption of services, in particular 
hospitality services. In addition, the number of 
new motor vehicle registrations rose markedly. 
The now significantly better availability of new 
motor vehicles and the promotion of the pur -
chase of electric vehicles in various euro area 
countries are likely to have played an important 
role here. By contrast, price- adjusted retail sales 
fell quite significantly. Stronger expansion of 
private consumption was counterbalanced by a 
further deterioration in consumer confidence, 
as consumers assessed the further trajectory of 
the general economic situation and their own 
financial situation less favourably. Households’ 
saving ratios are likely to have continued to 
markedly exceed their pre- pandemic level.
Investment probably expanded again slightly in 
the third quarter.7 Expenditure on information 
and communication technologies and intellec -
tual property is likely to have further increased. 
Growth in investment in other equipment is 
also likely to have occurred, driven by increased 
availability of vehicles and increased investment 
in climate change mitigation, digitalisation and 
defence. In any case, capital goods producers’ domestic sales rose significantly in July and Au -
gust after price adjustment. By contrast, con -
struction investment is likely to have fallen 
again overall. Construction output declined 
somewhat in July and August. Housing con -
struction, in particular, is likely to have experi -
enced a significant decline. Industrial construc -
tion, which benefited from infrastructure pro -
jects in the energy sector and the arena of cli -
mate change mitigation, appears to have held 
up better.
Euro area exports of goods to third countries 
probably decreased again in the third quarter 
after price adjustment. In addition to the weak -
ness in economic activity in various regions, 
there was also the impact of the appreciation 
of the euro in the first half of the year. At the 
same time, according to European Commission 
surveys, the competitive position of euro area 
enterprises deteriorated very significantly. 
Going by region, exports to China and the 
United Kingdom in particular saw distinct 
drops, whilst exports to the United States in -
creased substantially. According to balance of 
payments data, exports of services probably fell 
for the first time in this year. Imports of goods 
from third countries decreased even more 
strongly in the third quarter in price- adjusted 
terms. Import prices also fell.
The decline in the manufacturing sector con -
tinued in the third quarter. The contraction in 
output was broadly based, but was strongest in 
capital goods and intermediate inputs. While 
there are signs this is bottoming out in particu -
larly energy- dependent sectors such as chem -
ical manufacturing, motor vehicle production 
was cut back again for the first time since the 
beginning of 2021. Weak export business 
played a key role here. Exports to third coun -
tries fell particularly sharply in price- adjusted 
terms. By contrast, European Commission sur -Private con -
sumption 
restrained
Further increase 
in investmentPersistently 
weak trade in 
goods with third 
countries
Continued 
decline in 
manufacturing 
7 Excluding Ireland, where, for several years now, the stat -
istical recording of investment as a whole, and of invest -
ment in intellectual property in particular, has been strongly 
influenced by the strategic activities of multinational enter -
prises. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
18

veys indicate that barriers to production caused 
by material shortages are unlikely to be signifi -
cant. Labour shortages had also eased some -
what. On the other hand, the high costs of 
intermediate inputs could continue to have a 
dampening effect. Whilst industrial producer 
prices, like import prices, declined on a quarter- 
on- quarter basis, energy and intermediate in -
puts are still significantly more expensive than 
they were two years ago. Capacity utilisation 
fell further below the long-  term average be -
tween July and October.
Services activity is likely to have weakened 
again in the third quarter. The catch- up effects 
in tourism are dissipating at an increased rate. 
At the same time, the upward momentum in 
some commercial services and in the real estate 
sector flattened out markedly. By contrast, the 
information and communication sector prob -
ably continued its strong expansion.
The weak growth rate in the euro area is 
broadly based in regional terms. In most euro 
area countries, growth slowed in the third 
quarter, though heterogeneity remained pro -
nounced. This was mainly due to differences in 
the economic structure, particularly concerning 
the importance of manufacturing and foreign 
trade. In addition, there were differences in 
household purchasing power which were 
themselves partly the result of differences in 
wage and price developments.
According to a preliminary estimate, economic 
growth in France slowed significantly from 
0.6% to 0.1% in the third quarter. This slow -
down was largely driven by foreign trade. Ex -
ports of goods and services fell markedly, while 
domestic demand increased. This was particu -
larly true of private consumption. However, in -
vestment likewise increased more strongly, es -
pecially in machinery and equipment. Manu -
facturing output fell somewhat, and the ser -
vices sector lost considerable momentum. 
Construction output stagnated following two 
quarters that saw a decline.According to preliminary data, Italy saw macro -
economic activity stagnate in the third quarter 
after it fell by 0.4% in the previous quarter. For -
eign trade had a supporting effect here. Ex -
ports probably held up quite well. By contrast, 
domestic demand dampened economic growth 
again. Construction investment, in particular, is 
likely to have fallen further. Fiscal support 
measures are gradually reaching the end of 
their lifespans. On the output side, industrial 
production picked up again after several weak 
quarters. However, service provider activity 
stagnated.Greater gloom 
among service 
providers
Slowdown in 
GDP growth in 
most euro area 
countries
Growth in the 
French economy 
loses momen -
tumStagnating eco -
nomic output in 
ItalyAggregate output in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 2023Real GDP, Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
log scale
80859095100105
105
758085909510080859095100105
Italy
SpainEuro area
France859095100105
of which:Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
19

Factors driving European gas prices
As the 2023-24 heating season gets under 
way, natural gas costs only around half as 
much in Europe as it did the year before. 
This is probably due not only to the decline 
in gas consumption and the reduced reli-
ance on supplies from Russia but also to the 
state of the gas storage facilities, which are 
almost full.
An analysis of the movements in the Euro-
pean TTF natural gas price using a structural 
vector autoregressive (SVAR) model illus-
trates the signifi  cance of these various 
drivers.1 According to the estimation, the 
sharp rise in prices as of the start of 2021 
was driven primarily by supply- side factors2 
which, even before the war in Ukraine 
began, were pushing up the price of gas. 
This is a refl  ection of the fact that the Rus-
sian natural gas company Gazprom was al-ready delivering signifi  cantly less gas to the 
EU than normal in 2021.3 Demand- side fac-
tors also played an important role, however. 
As the economy recovered, global demand 
for gas picked up following the pandemic- 
induced slump. Furthermore, in a number 
of countries, weather conditions interfered 
with electricity generation from alternative 
sources, such as hydropower, and gas was 
used to make up some of the shortfall.4
After the start of the war in Ukraine, further 
cuts to Russian gas supplies and concerns 
about a complete halt to deliveries gave 
prices an additional upward push. To be 
sure, the curbing of consumption by indus-
try and households brought a degree of 
demand- side relief. At the same time, how-
ever, a comparatively large amount of gas 
was used for the purposes of generating 
electricity, partly to compensate for French 
nuclear power plants being temporarily off-
line.5 Come the end of the 2021-22 winter 
half- year, European gas storage facilities 
were largely exhausted, meaning that they 
practically required complete restocking in 
preparation for the 2022-23 heating sea-
son.6 As a result of these developments, the 
1 The model comprises four seasonally adjusted indi-
cators for the EU: the TTF gas price adjusted for infl  a-
tion (as measured by the Harmonised Index of Con-
sumer Prices), gas storage levels, gas imports and gas 
consumption. Sign restrictions are used to identify two 
demand shocks (immediate consumption and stockpil-
ing) as well as a supply shock. The choice of sign re-
strictions is based on Kilian and Murphy (2014), who 
examined the role of similar drivers for oil prices. The 
model is estimated using monthly data for the period 
from February 2011 to September 2023.
2 An empirical study for the German gas market also 
came to a similar conclusion. See Güntner et al. (2023).
3 See ENTSOG (2023).
4 See International Energy Agency (2021).
5 See International Energy Agency (2022).
6 An EU regulation stipulates that underground gas 
storage facilities should be fi  lled to at least 90% of 
their capacity at Member State level by 1 November of 
each year. See Council of the European Union (2022).Historical decomposition of the change 
in the European TTF gas price*
10050050100150200250300350
––+++++++Year-on-year changes, percentage point deviations from the 
model-implied mean, monthly data
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Sources: ICE, Eurostat, Gas Infrastructure Europe and Bundes-
bank calculations. * Contributions of identified shocks are de-
rived from a structural VAR model with sign restrictions.
Deutsche BundesbankResidual shockDemand (stockpiling)Demand (immediate consumption)Supply
TotalContributions of shocksDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
20

In Spain, economic growth weakened only 
slightly. According to a preliminary estimate, in 
the third quarter of 2023 real GDP rose by 
0.3% on the quarter. This was due mainly to 
strong stimuli from private consumption, driven 
by the robust increase in disposable income 
and the early easing of price increases. Un -
employment also remains at a historical low. By 
contrast, expenditure on investment declined, 
mainly owing to a marked drop in construction 
investment. Foreign trade also declined mark -
edly, with exports falling more sharply than im -
ports.
Belgium, Latvia and Cyprus saw marked in -
creases in real GDP , while Slovakia recorded a 
small increase. Economic output contracted in 
the remaining euro area countries. Activity de -
clined very significantly in Ireland, Austria and 
Finland; moderate declines were recorded in 
the Netherlands, Portugal, Lithuania and Es -
tonia.The labour market situation remained favour -
able overall. The unemployment rate rose slightly 
in September but, at 6.5%, remains very low 
for the euro area. In addition, the number of 
persons in employment rose again markedly. 
Enterprises are expecting continued increases 
in job creation in the coming months as well. 
Wage growth is likely to have weakened slightly 
in the third quarter. At an expected 4% to 5% 
on the year, it nevertheless continues to signifi -
cantly exceed pre- pandemic rates. Given the 
persistently tight labour markets and the con -
siderable decline in real wages over the past 
two years, wage pressures are likely to remain 
high for the time being.
In the third quarter, consumer price inflation 
picked up again slightly, having weakened sig -
nificantly in the two preceding quarters. The 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) 
rose markedly by a seasonally adjusted 1.0% 
compared with the second quarter. This was 
due to both increased energy prices and the Further marked 
increase in GDP 
in Spain
Marked differ -
ences among 
the smaller euro 
area countries, 
tooLabour market 
situation 
remains 
favourable 
Somewhat 
stronger infla -
tionary pressure 
again in Q3TTF rose to a peak of €314 per megawatt 
hour in August 2022, around 15 times the 
average price of the previous decade.
According to the estimation, weaker de-
mand for gas was the main reason behind 
the price declines seen since last winter. 
This was probably driven, in particular, by 
efforts on the part of industry, households 
and power companies to cut usage, which 
were helped along by favourable weather 
conditions. Supply- side disruptions also 
subsided. For example, a major liquefi  ed 
natural gas (LNG) terminal in the United 
States resumed operations.
Thanks to ongoing savings efforts and al-
most full gas storage facilities, there is a 
good chance that drastic price spikes can 
be avoided in the 2023-24 heating season. 
That said, a particularly cold winter could 
drive up gas consumption and gas prices. A total halt to deliveries from Russia would 
present another risk.7 Supply tensions in the 
global gas market are unlikely to see a last-
ing easing until the global LNG supply 
undergoes the marked expansion which 
– on the basis of investment activity over 
the past few years – the International En-
ergy Agency is reckoning with come 2026.8
7 Russia still accounted for 15% of European gas im-
ports via pipeline in 2023. In the case of LNG imports, 
the share recently stood at around 12%. See Zach-
mann et al. (2023).
8 See International Energy Agency (2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
21

persistent high price dynamics for other goods 
and services.
On an average of the third quarter, annual in -
flation fell by 1.2 percentage points to 5.0%. A 
base effect played an important role here, as 
energy prices had risen particularly sharply one year previously. Prices for food and other goods 
no longer increased as strongly as in the previ -
ous year, owing to the decline in commodity 
prices and reduced price increases at the up -
stream stages. By contrast, the annual growth 
rate of services prices increased slightly.8 Never -
theless, core inflation excluding energy and 
food fell markedly by 0.4 percentage point to 
5.1%. Other measures of underlying inflation, 
such as the core rate excluding the volatile 
components of travel and clothing, also de -
clined somewhat. However, they were also still 
significantly above their longer- term average.
In October, consumer prices increased only 
marginally in seasonally adjusted terms. Whilst 
industrial goods prices stagnated, energy price 
reductions almost completely offset increases 
in prices for food and services. As expected, in -
flation in the euro area fell significantly on the 
year, dropping by 1.4  percentage points to 
2.9%. This was partly due to the exceptionally 
sharp rise in energy prices in October of last 
year. The core rate fell again slightly to 4.2%.
The growth outlook for the euro area will re -
main subdued for the time being. The global 
economy is not currently expected to provide 
any major stimulus, and the dampening effects 
of the tightening of financing conditions are in -
creasingly being felt domestically. This applies 
mainly to housing investment, but also to other 
expenditure categories. Private consumption is 
likely to be slow to regain its footing. Although 
the sharp rise in wages will lead to a marked 
increase in household purchasing power as the 
inflation rate declines, the renewed deterior -
ation in consumer confidence in the third quar -
ter suggests that the appetite for saving re -
mains strong. Corporate surveys also suggest 
weak growth will persist. The macroeconomic 
business climate deteriorated further in Octo -
ber. Although the industrial sector now ap -
pears to have bottomed out, sentiment among Inflation rate 
down sharply, 
also due to one- 
off effects; core 
inflation rate still 
high
Inflation rate 
continued sharp 
decline in Octo -
ber, as expected
Growth not 
expected to 
increase in near 
futureLabour market in the euro area
6810
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission and Bundesbank cal-
culations. 1 Deflated using the consumption deflator.
Deutsche Bundesbank5075100125
630369
––+++ Gross wages and salaries per capita
Year-on-year
changeUnemployment rateSeasonally adjusted
%%
Employment expectations (EU Commission)
long-term average
949698100102Real gross wages and salaries per capita1
Q1 2019 = 100, log scaleOct.
Underlying inflation in the euro area
Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations. 1 exE = HICP 
excluding energy, exEuF = HICP excluding energy and unpro-
cessed food, exEF = HICP excluding energy and food, exEFTC = 
HICP  excluding  energy,  food,  travel  and  clothing,  Trim10  = 
mean trimmed by 10%, Trim30 = mean trimmed by 30%.
Deutsche BundesbankHICP exEF
HICP exEFTC
Range of indicators 
of underlying inflation
(exE, exEuF, exEF, exEFTC
Trim10, Trim30, median)1
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 202320246810
–+++++ HICP
8 This was also due to the upward base effect caused by 
the temporary introduction of the €9 ticket in Germany in 
the summer of 2022. See p. 58.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
22

service providers and the construction sector 
has deteriorated throughout the reporting 
period.
A perceptible increase in growth is only to be 
expected once the various pressures have 
eased. This should be the case next year. The bulk of the monetary policy tightening needed 
to contain inflation is likely to be behind us. 
The expected growth in real disposable income 
is set to boost private consumption perceptibly. 
Foreign demand is also likely to provide stronger 
impetus again.Improvement 
likely next year
List of references
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2023), FOMC Projections materials, 
accessible version, 20  September 2023, https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/
fomcprojtabl20230920.htm
Council of the European Union (2022), Regulation (EU) 2022/1032 of the European Parliament and 
of the Council amending Regulations (EU) 2017/1938 and (EC) No 715/2009 with regard to gas 
storage, 29 June 2022.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023), Economic developments in emerging market economies: old prob -
lems and new challenges, Monthly Report, July 2023, pp. 57-69.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), The potential effects of a sharp downturn on the Chinese real estate 
market, Monthly Report, November 2021, pp. 14 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national economic 
statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65-78.
ENTSOG (2023), Transmission capacity map, https://transparency.entsog.eu/#/map
Güntner, J., M. Reif and M. Wolters (2023), Sudden stop: supply and demand shocks in the German  
natural gas market, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper, forthcoming.
International Energy Agency (2023), Medium-  Term Gas Report 2023.
International Energy Agency (2022), Gas Market Report, Q4 2022.
International Energy Agency (2021), Gas Market Report, Q4 2021.
International Monetary Fund (2023), World Economic Outlook: Navigating Global Divergences, 
October 2023.
Kilian, L. and D. P. M. Murphy (2014), The role of inventories and speculative trading in the global 
market for crude oil, Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 29(3), pp. 454-478.
World Bank (2023), Commodity Markets Outlook: Under the Shadow of Geopolitical Risks, Octo -
ber 2023.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
23

Zachmann, G., G. Sgaravatti and B. McWilliams (2023), European natural gas imports, Bruegel 
Datasets, https://www.bruegel.org/dataset/european-natural-gas-importsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
24

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
At its monetary policy meeting in September 
2023, the ECB Governing Council decided to 
raise its three key interest rates by 25 basis 
points each. The interest rate on the deposit 
facility, which is currently the most significant 
for money market rates, now stands at 4%. 
The interest rates on the main refinancing oper -
ations and the marginal lending facility stand at 
4.5% and 4.75%, respectively. The hike in inter -
est rates is intended to reinforce progress to -
wards a timely return of inflation to the 
medium- term target of 2%. This decision re -
flected the Governing Council’s current assess -
ment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of 
underlying inflation, and the strength of mon -
etary policy transmission. Whilst actual inflation 
continued to decline, the September projec -
tions – like the previous ones – still expect it to 
remain too high for too long. The new projec -
tions now put headline inflation at 5.6% for 
2023, 3.2% for 2024, and 2.1% for 2025. Com -
pared with the June projections, the ECB’s ex -
perts have thus revised the path of headline 
inflation upwards for both 2023 and 2024, and 
slightly downwards for 2025. Although most of 
the indicators for the underlying price pressures 
had started to ease, they remained high. The 
projections for inflation excluding energy and 
food were revised marginally downwards com -
pared with the June projections. The Governing 
Council assessed that financing conditions had 
tightened further and were increasingly damp -
ening demand, which is an important factor in 
bringing inflation back to target.
On the basis of its assessment in September, 
the ECB Governing Council held that, thanks to 
the interest rate hikes, the key interest rates 
had reached levels that would make a substan -
tial contribution to the timely return of inflation 
to target. For this to happen, these key interest 
rate levels would have be maintained for a suf -ficiently long duration. The Governing Council 
will continue to follow a data-  dependent ap -
proach to determining the appropriate level 
and duration of restriction. In particular, inter -
est rate decisions will continue to be based on 
assessments of the inflation outlook, the dy -
namics of underlying inflation, and the strength 
of monetary policy transmission.
In October 2023, the ECB Governing Council 
left its key interest rates unchanged for the first 
time since it began raising interest rates in July 
2022. Incoming information since the Septem -
ber meeting has broadly confirmed its assess -
ment of the medium- term inflation outlook. In 
September, there was a marked decline in the 
rate of inflation, which was attributable in part 
to strong base effects. Most measures of 
underlying inflation also continued to decline. 
However, the Governing Council still expects 
inflation to stay too high for too long. Further -
more, the upside risks to inflation from previ -
ous months remain. These risks include a last -
ing rise in inflation expectations above the 
ECB’s target and higher than anticipated in -
creases in wages or profit margins. In addition, 
the heightened geopolitical tensions could 
drive up energy prices in the near term, while ECB Governing 
Council raises 
key interest rates 
by 25 bps in 
September
Future interest 
rate decisions 
continue to 
follow  data- 
dependent 
approachKey interest 
rates unchanged 
in October
Key ECB interest rates and money 
market interest rates in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Monthly averages. • = Average 1 to 10 Novem-
ber 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank2021 2022 20231012345
–+++++% p.a.
Marginal lending rate
€STR1Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
25

Money market management and liquidity needs
In the reporting period from 2 August 2023 
to 31 October 2023,1 excess liquidity in the 
Eurosystem decreased by a total of €129.3 
billion to an average of €3,587.4 billion, 
though it remained at a high level. The de-
cline was driven mainly by early repayments 
and maturing securities under the third ser-
ies of targeted longer- term refi  nancing op-
erations (TLTRO III) as well as the decrease in 
the outstanding volume under the asset 
purchase programmes.
Compared with the fourth reserve mainten-
ance period of 2023 (June- August 2023), 
liquidity needs in the euro area stemming 
from autonomous factors (see the table 
below) fell by a signifi  cant €124.6 billion to 
an average of €1,539.6 billion in the sixth 
reserve maintenance period of 2023 
(September- October 2023). Without this 
liquidity- providing development, excess 
liquidity would have contracted even more sharply. The signifi  cant rise of €80.7 billion 
in the combined total of net foreign assets 
and other factors, which are considered to-
gether owing to liquidity- neutral valuation 
effects, was the main factor behind the de-
clining liquidity needs. This was due inter 
alia to the fall in non- monetary policy de-
posits, which are included in the other fac-
tors. These include, in particular, deposits 
from foreign central banks, which decreased 
by €34.6 billion. Deposits held in Germany 
fell by €20.2 billion. In addition, the €31.6 
billion decline in government deposits (with 
Germany accounting for €21.2 billion of 
that number) and the €12.3 billion drop in 
banknotes in circulation in the Eurosystem 
to €1,554.7 billion likewise had a liquidity- 
1 The averages of the sixth reserve maintenance period 
of 2023 (September- October 2023) are compared with 
the averages of the fourth reserve maintenance period 
of 2023 (June- August 2023).
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2023
2 Aug.
to
19 Sep.20 Sep.
to
31 Oct.
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) +  2.8 +  9.5
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) + 31.9 –  0.2
3. Net foreign assets 1 –  3.5 +  6.9
4. Other factors 1 + 36.7 + 40.5
Total + 67.9 + 56.7
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations –  5.3 +  2.5
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations – 81.0 – 85.6
c) Other operations – 41.8 – 43.3
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility +  0.0 +  0.0
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 57.0 + 70.0
Total – 71.1 – 56.4
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) –  3.1 +  0.3
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –  0.2 +  0.7
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
26

providing effect. In Germany, meanwhile, 
net banknote issuance rose by €4.9 billion 
to €912.8 billion. Over the period under re-
view, the minimum reserve requirement in 
the Eurosystem fell by €0.6 billion to €164.5 
billion, marginally decreasing the need for 
central bank liquidity. In Germany, the re-
serve requirement remained unchanged at 
€44.9 billion. Minimum reserves held with 
the Eurosystem were remunerated at 0.00% 
for the fi  rst time in the sixth reserve main-
tenance period of 2023. This did not change 
the manner in which institutions went 
about meeting their minimum reserve re-
quirements on aggregate either in Germany 
or in the euro area as a whole. Of the cen-
tral bank liquidity of euro area banks, 95% 
(96% in Germany) was held in the deposit 
facility.
The average outstanding tender volume in 
the euro area decreased by €168.8 billion 
to €523.5 billion during the period under 
review. The maturity date for TLTRO III.5 
and a voluntary early repayment option for 
the TLTRO III.6 to TLTRO III.10 operations fell 
within the period under review, on 27 Sep-
tember 2023. A total of €101.0 billion was 
repaid on that date. The volume under the 
regular main refi  nancing operations and 
three- month tenders rose slightly for a time 
after the TLTRO III.5 operations reached ma-
turity, but has recently been declining again 
and has remained low overall. In Germany, 
the average outstanding volume of all refi  -
nancing operations fell by €46.4 billion to 
€97.6 billion in the period under review. 
This was mainly due to maturities and vol-
untary early repayments under the TLTRO III 
operations in September, amounting to 
€41.2 billion. German banks’ share in the 
outstanding volume of Eurosystem refi  nan-
cing operations thus came to around 19%, 
which was roughly 2  percentage points 
lower than in the fourth reserve mainten-
ance period of 2023.The scaling down of the asset purchase 
programme (APP) portfolio had the greatest 
impact on the overall amount of securities 
held for monetary policy purposes. Since 
1 July 2023, reinvestments under the APP 
have been discontinued, while reinvest-
ments under the pandemic emergency pur-
chase programme (PEPP) have remained 
unchanged. Overall, holdings of monetary 
policy assets decreased by €85.0 billion in 
the period under review. As at 3 November 
2023, the balance sheet holdings of the 
asset purchase programmes amounted to Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as at
3 Nov. 2023
Active programmes 1
PSPP – 64.4 2,424.9
CBPP3 –  5.6 287.5
CSPP –  7.7 327.8
ABSPP –  2.1 14.4
PEPP –  5.2 1,667.6
Completed programmes 
SMP +  0.0 2.4
CBPP1 +  0.0 0.0
CBPP2 +  0.0 0.0
1 Changes due to net purchases, maturities, reinvestments 
and amortisation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankAutonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing factors are preceded by a positive sign. Liquidity-absorbing 
factors are preceded by a negative sign. 1 Including end-of-
quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2021 2022 20231,8001,5001,20090060030003006009001,200
––––––++++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther
factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
27

€4,724.6 billion (see the table on p. 27) and 
thus remained at a high level.2
The Eurosystem’s key interest rate hikes of 
25 basis points each in July and September 
2023 resulted in a correspondingly higher 
level of overnight rates in the euro money 
market in the fi  fth (August- September) and 
sixth reserve maintenance periods of 2023. 
Overnight rates were not affected, on the 
other hand, by maturities and repayments 
of TLTRO III operations or by the remuner-
ation of government deposits with the 
Bundesbank being reduced to 0% as of 
1 October 2023.The unsecured euro short- term rate (€STR) 
mirrored all of the key interest rate increases 
over the period under review. With the 
spread over the deposit facility rate remain-
ing constant at 10 basis points, the €STR 
stood at 3.65% and 3.90% on average in 
the respective reserve maintenance periods. 
The slight decline in transaction volumes 
that was already in evidence in the previous 
reporting period continued, with the €STR 
volume averaging €60.1 billion in the fi  fth 
reserve maintenance period of 2023 and 
€58.2 billion in the sixth. End- of- month ef-
fects had a stronger impact on the €STR in 
the sixth reserve maintenance period than 
in the past, with day- on- day declines of 2.6 
basis points at end- September and 1.7 basis 
points at end- October.
Secured overnight transactions on Eurex 
Repo’s GC Pooling trading platform saw the 
spread over the deposit facility rate decline 
again during the period under review. ECB 
basket transactions were traded at an aver-
age of 3.70% in the fi  fth reserve mainten-
ance period of 2023 and of 3.93% in the 
sixth. By contrast, overnight rates in the ECB 
EXTended basket, which has a broader se-
lection of securities with lower rating re-
quirements for concluding repo transac-
tions, remained closer to the deposit facility 
rate, standing at 3.73% and 3.96%, re-
spectively. The spread between the ECB 
basket and the EXTended basket was nar-
rower than in the previous period under re-
view, at 3 basis points. Trading volumes 
averaged €5.0 billion in the ECB basket and 
€4.6 billion in the ECB EXTended basket in 
the period under review, up on the previous 
reporting period. The interest rates men-
tioned above remained virtually unchanged 
as the new reserve maintenance period (the 
seventh, for November- December 2023) 
got underway.
2 In addition to the termination of reinvestments 
under the APP , holdings were also shaped by revalu-
ations and the smoothing of reinvestments under both 
programmes.Deposit facility rate, money market rates 
and excess liquidity
Sources:  ECB,  Eurex  Repo  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 Central bank balance minus the minimum reserve require-
ment plus the deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still 
ongoing.
Deutsche BundesbankJune July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov.
20233.003.253.503.754.00
+++++Daily data
€ bn% p.a.
2,0003,0004,0005,000 Excess liquidity1
Mean value for 
the reserve
maintenance period2ECB EXTended basket€STR
STOXX GC Pooling Overnight
ECB basketDeposit facility rate
0Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
28

making the medium- term outlook more uncer -
tain. The Governing Council therefore also re -
iterated that it would continue to take a data- 
dependent approach to future interest rate de -
cisions.
The euro short- term rate (€STR) once again 
moved almost entirely in line with the key inter -
est rate hike of 25 basis points in September. It 
stood most recently at 3.903% and thus re -
mained around 10 basis points below the de -
posit facility rate.
At present, market participants consider the 
interest rate on the deposit facility, which cur -
rently stands at 4%, to have peaked. Accord -
ingly, the ECB Survey of Monetary Analysts 
(SMA) conducted ahead of the October meet -
ing shows that no further interest rate hikes are 
expected. The decision made by the ECB Gov -
erning Council in October was therefore in line 
with expectations. Money market forward 
rates are also not pricing in any additional interest rate steps at present and suggest that 
key interest rates will remain at their current 
levels until mid- 2024. However, especially for 
longer maturities, money market forward rates 
are currently lower than they were before the 
October meeting of the Governing Council, as 
market participants are pricing in greater down -
side risks to the path of interest rates.
Monetary policy asset holdings continued to 
decline overall during the reporting period. As 
before, this development is attributable to 
assets under the asset purchase programme 
(APP) that are maturing and not being re -
invested. On 3 November, the Eurosystem held 
assets totalling €3,054.6 billion as part of the 
APP (see the box entitled “Money market man -
agement and liquidity needs” on pp. 26 ff. for a 
breakdown of the holdings by individual pro -
gramme). Asset holdings reported under the 
pandemic emergency purchase programme 
(PEPP) came to €1,667.6 billion on the same 
day. The ECB Governing Council will continue €STR moves in 
line with Sep -
tember key 
interest rate hike
Money market 
forward rates 
and surveys not 
indicative of any 
further interest 
rate increasesContinued 
reduction in APP 
holdingsOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 202305001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,0005,5006,0006,5007,0007,500€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period1
Third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations
(TLTRO III)
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations
(TLTRO II)
First series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations
(TLTRO I)Pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs)
Additional longer-term refinancing operationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
29

applying flexibility in reinvesting redemptions 
coming due in the PEPP portfolio, with a view 
to countering risks to the monetary policy 
transmission mechanism related to the pan -
demic. The aggregate holdings reported under 
both purchase programmes was also influ -
enced by the smoothing over time of reinvest -
ments and by the use of amortised cost ac -
counting.1
Excess liquidity has contracted significantly 
since mid-  August, falling by around €92 billion 
overall. At last count, it came to €3,552 billion. 
An additional final maturity and a voluntary re -
payment date under the third series of targeted 
longer- term refinancing operations (TLTRO III) 
contributed to this decline. Maturing assets 
under the APP also caused excess liquidity to 
shrink further. However, a decline in the 
liquidity- absorbing autonomous factors had an 
opposing effect and, taken in isolation, in -
creased excess liquidity (see the box on 
pp. 26 ff.).
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 declined 
once again in the third quarter of 2023. As a 
result, its year- on- year growth rate turned 
negative for the first time since the start of 
monetary union; at the end of September, it 
stood at -1.2% (see the chart on p. 31). The 
sharp decline in monetary growth reflects the 
adjustment of money holdings to the changed 
interest rate environment. In particular, the sus -
tained rise in interest rates motivated the 
money- holding sectors to shift their relatively 
low- interest- bearing M3 investments into 
higher- interest- bearing forms of investment 
outside of M3. As for the counterparts of 
money, the ongoing reduction of the Eurosys -
tem’s balance sheet alongside stagnant bank 
lending were a drag on M3 growth. The slow -
down in lending was attributable to both 
demand- side and supply- side factors: demand 
for loans by households and non- financial cor -porations was dampened by the rise in finan -
cing costs and the weak economic outlook, 
while the banks participating in the latest round 
of the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) reported that 
they had tightened their lending policies fur -
ther due to increased credit risk.
The monetary aggregate M3 recorded net out -
flows again in the third quarter (see the table 
on p. 32). However, these were smaller than in 
the preceding quarters. This was mainly due to 
the fact that financial enterprises built up short- 
term bank deposits on balance, partially in re -
sponse to a lower appetite for risk in the finan -
cial markets and a corresponding reduction in 
riskier assets. In addition, households barely 
scaled back their M3 deposits any more in net 
terms, but instead mainly reallocated their 
assets within M3. As in the previous quarters, 
households and non- financial corporations 
shifted large volumes of overnight deposits into 
short- term time deposits; households also con -
tinued to reduce their short- term savings de -
posits. The key reason for these portfolio ad -
justments is likely to be the slow pass- through 
of higher money market rates to the interest 
rates on overnight deposits and short- term sav -
ings deposits. This made these types of deposit 
relatively unattractive compared with time de -
posits.
However, there were also portfolio shifts into 
non- M3 forms of investment. As TLTRO loans 
are gradually being repaid, financing via longer- 
term deposits and debt instruments has re -
gained importance among banks. The yields 
associated with these forms of financing were 
also more attractive, especially in comparison 
with those on short- term M3 deposits. As a re -
sult, the money- holding sectors again de -
manded longer- term deposits and, in particu -
lar, longer- term bank debt securities on a larger 
scale in the third quarter, too. Data from the 
financial accounts suggest that households, in Excess liquidity 
down again
Annual M3 
growth turns 
negativeOvernight 
deposits 
reduced further 
in favour of 
short- term time 
deposits
Portfolio shifts 
into non- M3 
assets
1 In particular, the difference between the acquisition and 
redemption value is amortised over the security’s residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and measured 
at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
30

particular, invested their savings, including in 
assets outside of the banking sector, such as 
government bonds. By contrast, it seems that 
non- financial corporations used the funds ob -
tained from reducing their M3 deposits to a 
lesser extent for portfolio rebalancing. Instead, 
it is likely that they used the freed- up liquidity 
reserves to fund their increased expenditure or 
to pay down debt.
Alongside domestic households, non- resident 
investors also continued to demand euro area 
bonds on a larger scale during the reporting 
quarter. As a result, domestic non- banks re -
corded net inflows of funds from portfolio in -
vestment with non- residents. At the same time, 
the euro area current account surplus widened 
once again. Inflows of funds from abroad led 
to an increase in the MFI sector’s net external 
assets and, taken in isolation, bolstered monet -
ary growth. On balance, however, the damp -
ening effects on M3 growth prevailed during 
the reporting quarter.
In the third quarter, the reduction in the money 
stock coincided with only a slight increase in 
lending in the euro area. While loans and 
securitised lending to the private sector rose 
slightly, credit to general government con -
tinued to decline. This was a consequence of 
the gradual reduction of the Eurosystem’s APP 
portfolio, which accelerated further in July, 
when reinvestments under the APP were com -
pletely discontinued.
Lending to the private non- financial sector in 
the euro area stagnated. Loans to non- financial 
corporations even declined to a small degree in 
net terms. Among the four largest euro area 
Member States, only banks in France recorded 
net growth in this loan category, while banks in 
Germany, Italy and Spain posted negative bal -
ances. For the euro area as a whole, the annual 
growth rate for loans to enterprises fell to 0.2% 
by the end of September, after having been at 
a multi- year high of 8.9% one year ago.Increasing 
investment out -
side of M3 and 
rise in net exter -
nal assets offset 
impact on M3
Further reduc -
tion in securi -
tised lending to 
general govern -
ment
Marginal reduc -
tion in lending 
to non- financial 
corporations …Monetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source:  ECB.  1 Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation  as 
well as for positions arising from notional cash pooling services 
provided by MFIs. 2 Denoted with a negative sign because, per 
se,  an  increase  curbs  M3  growth.  3 Non-monetary  financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 20238642024681012
––––++++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14
02468
++++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining 
counterpartsLonger-term 
financial liabilities2Net external assets
Credit to the private sector1
Financial corporations3
Non-financial corporations4
Households5Contribution of components 
in percentage points
Securities-based lending 
to general governmentPercentage
change
in M3
Percentage
change
in M3
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector1Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points
Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
31

The sluggishness of loans to non- financial cor -
porations was attributable mainly to the weak 
state of the economy and the changed interest 
rate environment in the euro area. First, the 
higher financing costs amongst euro area 
banks led them to raise their lending rates fur -
ther. This dampened demand for credit. 
Second, banks responded to the deterioration 
in the risk situation among borrowers by tight -
ening their credit standards again. Alongside 
the current tightening of credit standards, 
rounds of tightening from previous quarters are 
also likely to have dampened lending.
Enterprises, too, responded to the macroeco -
nomic environment. There was again a decline 
in their demand for short- term loans (see the 
chart on p. 33) and they were more inclined to 
finance their increased expenditure using their 
own funds rather than by taking on new loans 
at elevated costs. This is consistent with the 
fact that non- financial corporations liquidated 
low- interest deposits in net terms over recent 
quarters. At the same time, in line with their 
weaker investment – particularly in construc -
tion  – enterprises only moderately expanded 
their uptake of long- term loans.
According to the euro area banks surveyed as 
part of the BLS, the third quarter of 2023 saw 
demand for loans to enterprises decline for the fourth time in succession. The decrease in de -
mand for loans was equally strong for both 
large enterprises and small and medium-  sized 
enterprises (SMEs). Once again, it was signifi -
cantly sharper than banks had anticipated in 
the previous quarter. Banks are expecting a fur -
ther fall in demand for loans in the fourth quar -
ter of 2023, too. They indicated that the in -
crease in the general level of interest rates and 
the decline in financing needs related to fixed 
investment were again the main drivers of the 
weak loan dynamics in the third quarter.
In the third quarter, the banks surveyed in the 
BLS continued to tighten their credit standards 
for loans to enterprises to roughly the same de -
gree as in the quarter before. Once again, they 
cited elevated credit risk as the main reason for 
their adjustments, highlighting industry- specific 
and firm- specific factors above all. However, 
the subdued economic situation and weak eco -
nomic outlook also played a part in the tight -
ening. By contrast, BLS data suggest that bank- 
related factors such as risk tolerance or banks’ 
liquidity position played a smaller role in the 
tightening of credit standards.
Bank lending to households was weak, as it 
had been in the previous quarter, registering 
only a slight inflow on balance. Adjusted for 
loan sales and securitisation, loans for house … driven by 
supply- side 
 factors …
… and demand- 
side factorsRise in interest 
rates and declin -
ing financing 
needs related to 
fixed investment 
main reasons 
for sharp drop 
in demand, 
according to BLS
Further tighten -
ing of credit 
standards for 
loans to enter -
prises owing to 
greater credit 
riskConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q2 2023 Q3 2023
Holdings against central government 2 – 102.1 –  25.1
Monetary aggregate M3 –  47.0 –   4.3
Components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) – 259.1 – 165.6
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) 190.4 151.7
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 21.7 9.7
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 94.1 92.4
Capital and reserves 13.5 22.2
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities 80.6 70.2Assets Q2 2023  Q3 2023
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 10.7 26.6
Loans – 29.6 21.7
Loans, adjusted 1 4.3 19.7
Securities 40.3 4.9
Credit to general government 
in the euro area – 85.4 – 13.1
Loans –  9.6 4.7
Securities – 75.8 – 17.8
Net external assets 91.5 117.1
Other counterparts of M3 – 71.9 – 67.6
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
32

purchase, which are the most important loan 
category in terms of volume, once again 
showed only a small increase. At the same 
time, there was a rise in net outflows in other 
lending (including loans to sole proprietor -
ships). Only consumer credit continued to ex -
pand distinctly. On aggregate, the annual 
growth rate of loans to households fell to 0.8% 
at the end of September, leaving it just under 
4 percentage points down on the multi- year 
high recorded in mid- 2022.
This is consistent with the fact that the banks 
surveyed in the BLS reported a further decline 
in households’ demand for loans in the third 
quarter. Loans for house purchase in particular 
experienced another sharp drop in demand, 
the surveyed banks reported. The BLS banks 
estimate that demand will probably continue 
to decrease in the fourth quarter. The surveyed 
banks cited the increased general level of inter -
est rates, the decline in consumer confidence 
and, in the case of housing loans, the weak 
housing market prospects as the main reasons 
for the decline in households’ financing needs 
in the third quarter. The BLS does not ask re -
spondents about the impact of inflation, which 
is also likely to have contributed to the weak -
ening of loan growth, particularly where loans 
for house purchase are concerned. The high 
inflation rates over the past two years have re -
duced households’ real financial assets and real 
disposable income. In addition, the sharp rise 
in construction prices and the fact that house 
prices are still high are weighing on demand 
for housing loans.
Banks’ lending policies were another drag on 
loan growth. The banks surveyed in the BLS re -
ported that they had tightened their credit 
standards for housing loans again and to a 
similar extent as in the previous quarter. This 
was also due to bank- related factors such as 
lower risk tolerance. However, as with loans to 
enterprises, the surveyed banks reported that 
they had primarily tightened their standards 
here based on a perceived increase in credit 
risk. Alongside the deterioration in the general economic situation and bleaker housing mar -
ket prospects, the decline in borrowers’ credit -
worthiness played a role here.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business with domestic 
customers grew only moderately in the third 
quarter of 2023. Short- term time deposits were 
expanded substantially again. However, their 
increase was largely driven by shifts from over -
night deposits and short- term savings deposits Lending to 
households 
weak, especially 
with regard to 
loans for house 
purchase
Demand for 
loans to house -
holds dampened 
by interest rate 
level, inflation 
and house 
prices …
… while banks 
tightened their 
credit standards 
further
Only moderate 
growth in 
deposit busi -
ness, with 
households 
making the larg -
est contribution2019 2020 2021 2022 2023–300+30+60+90+120€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjustedMFI loans to the private non-financial 
sector in the euro area*
1209060300306090120150180
––––++++++
Households2Non-financial corporations1
* Aggregates adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well 
as  for  positions  arising  from  notional  cash  pooling  services 
provided by MFIs. 1 Non-financial corporations and quasi-cor-
porations.  2 Including  non-profit  institutions  serving  house-
holds.
Deutsche BundesbankOther lendingConsumer credit
Loans for house purchaseUp to 1 year Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 years TotalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
33

as investors, especially households, responded 
to the further increase in the yield spread be -
tween short- term time deposits remunerated 
at close- to- market rates and other short- term 
bank deposits (see the chart above). At the 
same time, households also built up their 
longer- term bank deposits given the higher re -
muneration on these, too.
By contrast, the build- up of deposits by non-  
financial corporations was comparatively small, 
as shown by the fact that non- financial corpor -
ations increased their short- term time deposits 
less strongly than in the previous quarters, 
whilst at the same time reducing their other 
short and long- term bank deposits. All in all, 
this development suggests a reduction in this 
sector’s net receipts, which should be viewed 
in the context of high costs and weak domestic 
and foreign demand.
Financial corporations, meanwhile, reduced 
their deposits with domestic banks across all categories in the third quarter. In the current 
environment, the investment behaviour of this 
traditionally more yield- conscious sector is likely 
to be motivated by shifts toward higher- yield 
forms of investment.
German banks’ lending business with domestic 
private customers also continued to weaken in 
the third quarter of 2023. This was because 
banks reduced their holdings of securities is -
sued by the private sector on balance, whilst 
inflows of loans remained sluggish on the back 
of subdued growth in lending to both house -
holds and non- financial corporations.
Unlike in the previous quarter, banks actually 
recorded a slight decline in their lending busi -
ness with domestic non- financial corporations 
in the reporting quarter. This was due to net 
redemptions of short and medium- term loans 
with maturities of up to five years. This decline 
was no longer primarily attributable to repay -
ments of loans granted by the KfW Group to 
enterprises in the energy sector last year; in -
stead, it was more broadly based across the 
categories of banks. By contrast, longer- term 
loans to non- financial corporations grew mod -
erately again, with credit cooperatives and sav -
ings banks accounting for the bulk of this in -
crease.
On aggregate, the current developments in 
loans to non- financial corporations reflect mul -
tiple factors and may possibly be driven by 
both demand- side and supply- side factors. On 
the one hand, the now significantly higher 
lending rates, subdued demand for goods and 
services both from within Germany and abroad, 
and the uncertain economic outlook are cur -
rently dampening demand for loans. BLS data 
substantiate this view, with survey respondents 
citing the higher general level of interest rates 
and lower financing needs related to fixed in -
vestment as the main reasons for the perceived 
further decline in loan demand.
On the other hand, lending policies also had a 
dampening effect on lending in the reporting Build-up of 
deposits by non- 
financial corpor -
ations weak 
againDeposits by 
financial corpor -
ations show 
shifts into 
higher- interest 
forms of invest -
ment
Growth in lend -
ing business 
with private 
customers  
declined again
Lending to non- 
financial corpor -
ations negative, 
but different 
developments 
in individual 
maturities
Higher lending 
rates and lower 
financing needs 
for fixed invest -
ment dampen -
ing loan 
demand
Lending policies 
tightened furtherInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 202310123
–+++% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3+4Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
34

quarter, with BLS banks reporting that, on bal -
ance, they had tightened their credit standards 
for loans to enterprises again – to the same ex -
tent as in the previous quarter – and that their 
credit terms and conditions were stricter over -
all. Just a quarter earlier, the banks had still pro -
fessed unwillingness to meaningfully tighten 
their credit standards any further. The banks 
cited the increased credit risk in terms of 
industry-  specific and firm-  specific factors, the 
subdued economic situation and the economic 
outlook as the main reasons for their more re -
strictive lending policies.
Lending to domestic households also remained 
weak in the third quarter, with households 
once again showing less demand for loans for 
house purchase and making noticeable repay -
ments on their consumer credit and other bor -
rowing overall. High inflation, elevated con -
struction prices and further increases in finan -
cing costs dampened household demand for 
construction work and thus bank loans. Ac -
cording to the MFI interest rate statistics, the 
interest rates on long- term loans for house pur -
chase continued to rise slightly on aggregate in 
the third quarter, reaching just under 4% at the 
end of the period under review.
In addition to lending rates, banks also made 
their lending policies more restrictive again in 
the third quarter. According to the BLS, credit 
standards for loans to households for house 
purchase were tightened again on balance, al -
beit less sharply than in the previous quarter. 
Banks justified the more stringent requirements 
based on their perception of elevated credit 
risk, especially given the weak economic situ -
ation and subdued economic outlook. Credit 
terms and conditions were also tightened for 
loans to households for house purchase. This 
took place on a similar scale to the previous 
quarter, but was reflected exclusively in the 
widening of margins on riskier loans. Margins 
on average- risk loans, meanwhile, were nar -
rowed owing to competition.According to the BLS, credit standards for con -
sumer credit and other lending to households 
were also tightened again in the third quarter 
of 2023. Moreover, as the financing costs for 
the already comparatively expensive consumer 
credit and other lending to households rose 
further, their demand for these products de -
clined noticeably overall.
Against the backdrop of conditions in financial 
markets, the German banks surveyed as part of 
the BLS reported virtually no change in their 
funding situation compared with the previous 
quarter. Only their access to deposits deterior -
ated.Growth in loans 
for house pur -
chase continued 
to weaken
Financing condi -
tions for hous -
ing loans more 
restrictive on the 
whole
Demand for 
consumer credit 
and other lend -
ing also in 
decline overall
German banks’ 
access to 
deposits has 
deteriorated2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 202302468Year-on-year change, end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic 
private non-financial sector
202468101214
–+++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchaseTotal,
percentage changeLoan contributions 
in percentage pointsTotal,
percentage changeUp to 1 yearMaturity contributions in percentage points
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 yearsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
35

Bank conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q4 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 20231.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.5
–300+30+60–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2015 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 230.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
30030
–+
30030
–+Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
36

The Eurosystem’s key interest rate hikes have 
had, overall, a positive impact on the respond -
ent banks’ profitability over the past six months. 
They were a drag on non- interest income, but 
net interest income improved markedly. For the 
next six months, the banks expect the key 
interest rate decisions to have a far smaller im -
pact on their profitability than in the previous 
six months.
Changes in the Eurosystem’s monetary policy 
asset portfolio have had barely any effect on 
the profitability of the interviewed banks over 
the past six months. By contrast, the impact on 
banks’ market financing conditions and liquid -
ity positions was negative. This probably re -
flects the discontinuation of reinvestments of 
maturing securities under the APP since July 
2023.
The effects of the TLTRO  III operations on 
banks’ financial situation continued to peter 
out over the past six months, with banks now 
reporting a positive impact only on their liquid -
ity position.Positive impact 
of Eurosystem 
key interest rate 
decisions on 
banks’ profit -
ability
Monetary policy 
asset portfolio 
impacted nega -
tively on banks’ 
market financing 
conditions
Positive impact 
of TLTRO III now 
perceptible only 
in banks’ liquid -
ity positionMFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2023
Q2 Q3
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight – 48.1 – 47.6
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years 88.0 72.9
over 2 years 3.0 –  0.9
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months – 29.2 – 28.7
over 3 months 5.9 8.6
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans –  0.1 3.7
Securities –  2.3 0.3
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 5.2 5.3
of which: to households 3 1.4 1.1
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 3.7 –  1.4
Securities 2.4 –  2.0
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. Adjusted for statistical 
changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, households and gen-
eral government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted for 
loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institutions 
serving households. 4   Non- fi  nancial corporations and quasi- 
corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
37

Financial markets
Financial market setting
International financial markets were shaped by 
still high but declining inflation rates. In add -
ition, divergent economic prospects for the 
major currency areas left their mark on finan -
cial market developments in general. In this en -
vironment, central banks there initially con -
tinued their course of monetary policy tighten -
ing. While the US Federal Reserve raised its key 
interest rate by 25 basis points in July, it has 
since left it unchanged. After two further inter -
est rate moves of 25 basis points each in July 
and September, the Governing Council of the 
ECB also decided at its most recent meeting in 
October not to raise key interest rates any fur -
ther for the time being. Overall, however, both 
central banks stressed the need to leave policy 
rates at a restrictive level for a sufficient period 
of time and kept open the option of further 
increases in key interest rates depending on the 
inflation situation. In this environment, market 
participants increasingly took the view that key 
interest rates could remain at a restrictive level 
for an extended period of time. Given robust 
US economic data and the fact that the labour 
market had been resilient for months, this mar -
ket view was particularly pronounced in rela -
tion to the Fed’s policy rate outlook.
The higher- for- longer interest rate scenario ini -
tially led to rising nominal and real interest 
rates in both currency areas. In the euro area, 
however, the increase in yields was weaker 
given subdued growth prospects. These devel -
opments were reflected in a depreciation of the 
euro against the US dollar during the third 
quarter of 2023. Since the end of September, 
there has also been mounting concern among 
market participants that US fiscal deficits could 
be higher in the future. This reinforced the rise 
in yields on US Treasuries, which also spilled 
over to the euro area through international 
interest rate linkages, albeit in a somewhat 
weaker form. Towards the end of the period under review, the financial markets experienced 
divergent developments. The tighter financial 
conditions caused market participants to price 
in higher downside risks to economic growth in 
their medium-  term policy rate outlook. The 
somewhat weaker US labour market data and 
the lower US inflation data have, since the be -
ginning of November, intensified the decline in 
yields and hurt the US dollar.
The markets for risky asset classes followed the 
general interest rate trend. Overall, rising real 
interest rates and diminishing risk appetite on 
the part of investors led to valuations falling in 
some cases. In this environment, yield spreads 
on the government bond markets, in particular, 
temporarily widened. Looking at euro area 
government bonds, Italian paper experienced 
spread widening, driven by upward revisions to 
forecasts of Italy’s fiscal deficit. Equity markets 
traded little changed on balance after tempor -
ary, and in some cases distinct, losses.
Exchange rates
The euro progressively lost value against the US 
dollar from mid-  July to the first week of Octo -
ber and fell to its lowest level since December 
2022, trading at less than US$1.05. The euro’s 
depreciation was mainly attributable to market 
participants’ growing expectation that the Fed -
eral Reserve might raise key interest rates again 
at the end of the year and that it would not 
implement any rate cuts until later next year. 
The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) 
revised up its interest rate projections in Sep -
tember, confirming the expectation that US 
rates will remain higher for longer. The re -
assessment of the Fed’s monetary policy stance 
had previously already been fuelled by the pub -
lication of a series of US economic data that 
surprised positively. By contrast, economic data 
for the euro area were predominantly less 
favour  able than expected in the market. The Yields rose amid 
continued high 
inflation and 
divergent eco -
nomic prospects
Euro area gov -
ernment bond 
yields rose at 
different rates
Euro slightly 
down against 
the US dollarDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
38

gloomier economic outlook in the single cur -
rency area additionally weighed on the euro’s 
exchange rate against the US dollar.
Since the beginning of October, the euro has 
been trading against the US dollar in a narrow 
range around US$1.06 without any clear trend. 
On the one hand, US government bond yields 
temporarily spiked so strongly higher during 
this period that the Fed pointed out in this con -
text that persistently tighter financing condi -
tions could have an impact on monetary policy. 
On the other hand, higher than expected US 
inflation figures and initially still surprisingly fa -
vourable US economic data supported existing 
expectations of rising interest rates in October. 
However, at the beginning of November, a dis -
appointing US labour market report caused 
sentiment in the foreign exchange markets to 
turn against the US dollar. The publication of 
new data showing that US inflation rates had 
come down unexpectedly clearly put an add -
itional damper on the US currency. Moreover, 
there is little evidence thus far to suggest that 
the recent escalation of the Middle East crisis 
has put significant upward pressure on the US 
dollar through net capital inflows. At last count, 
the euro was trading at US$1.08, which means 
that it has depreciated by 0.2% since the end 
of June.
As of the beginning of the second half of the 
year, the euro appreciated on balance against 
the pound sterling. In September, in particular, 
the pound came under pressure against the 
euro and other currencies, after the Bank of 
England decided to leave policy rates un -
changed. By contrast, as the inflation rate in 
the United Kingdom was still exceptionally high 
in terms of the Bank of England’s inflation tar -
get and by international standards, most obser -
vers had expected a renewed rate hike by the 
UK central bank. Weaker than expected eco -
nomic data subsequently intensified economic 
concerns in the United Kingdom, also dampen -
ing interest rate expectations there. Overall, 
this weighed on the pound sterling. As this re -
port went to press, the euro was trading at £0.88 and thus 2.0% higher than at the end of 
June.
Against the backdrop of still sizeable yield 
spreads, the euro also posted gains against the 
yen. From mid-  August, the single currency had 
moved in a relatively narrow band around ¥158 
with no discernible trend. At the end of Octo -
ber, however, the Bank of Japan further loos -
ened its yield curve control policy, having al -
ready raised the ceiling it sets on ten- year gov -
ernment bond yields by 50 basis points to 1% 
at the end of July of this year. As part of the 
October decision, the target of 1% will no 
longer be applied as a rigid cap but as a refer -Euro up against 
the pound 
sterling  on 
 balance …
… and against 
the yenExchange rate of the euro
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Calculated 
against the currencies of 18 countries. A rise in values indicates 
an appreciation of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankJ J A S OND J FMAM J J A S ON
2022 20230.951.001.051.101.15
165
125130135140145150155160
0.820.850.880.91
9296100104Daily data, log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
... yen
... pound sterling
Nominal effective exchange rate1
Q1 1999 = 100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
39

Recalculated weights for indicators of the German 
 economy’s price competitiveness
Indicators of price competitiveness are 
commonly given as the relative price or cost 
developments of a country compared with 
the weighted average of major trading 
partners.1 In this context, prices or costs in 
different currency areas are converted into 
a single currency using nominal exchange 
rates in order to ensure comparability. The 
Bundesbank continually calculates and pub-
lishes such indicators of price competitive-
ness for Germany.2 These indicators are de-
signed and calculated in the same way as 
the real effective exchange rate of the 
euro.3
The weight assigned to an individual part-
ner country in the indicator is calculated 
using the intensity of its trade links4 with 
the base country in question. The weights 
are adjusted regularly every three years 
based on current trade statistics.5 In order 
to take account of current developments in 
foreign trade, a routine recalculation of the 
weighting schemes also took place recently. 
Prior to the latest adjustment, the weights 
for all indicator series from 2016 onwards 
were based on trade data for the years 
2016 to 2018.6 By contrast, the recalculated 
indicators from 2019 use weights derived 
from trade relations prevailing between 
2019 and 2021.
The recalculated weights used to calculate 
the price competitiveness indicator of the 
German economy against a broad group of 
60 trading partners are shown in the table 
on p. 41. The weights from the previous cal-
culation periods are also shown for this 
group of countries. They were revised in 
view of the improved availability of data in 
the wake of the recalculation. The weights 
for indicators vis- à- vis narrower groups of 
countries can be determined by simply re-
scaling the weights calculated for the broad 
group.For most countries, the current weights 
(basis: 2019 to 2021) differ only slightly 
from those of the previous period (basis: 
2016 to 2018). Primarily China and Poland, 
but also Ireland and the Netherlands, have 
markedly increased in importance for Ger-
man foreign trade. China, however, still has 
the highest trade weight of all of Germany’s 
trading partners.7 Marked declines can be 
observed for the United Kingdom and 
France, in particular, and to a lesser extent 
also for Spain and the United States. The 
United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the 
European Union is likely to have been one 
factor that caused a reduction in the rela-
tive intensity of trade links with Germany. 
However, given that the shifts in weights 
caused by the recalculation remained rela-
tively small overall, they do not have any 
perceptible impact on developments in the 
indicator of Germany’s price competitive-
ness.
1 For details on a current assessment of price competi-
tiveness in Germany and the euro area using these and 
other indicators, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a).
2 See, for example, Table XII.11 in the Statistical Sec-
tion of this Monthly Report.
3 The calculation method is described in detail in 
Schmitz et al. (2012).
4 Trade links take account of trade in goods as well as 
trade in services. They include not only the direct trade 
fl  ows between the base country in question and a re-
spective partner country, but also competitive relation-
ships between these two countries in third markets 
(third- market effects).
5 Given that the calculated index series are thus based 
on different weighting schemes at different time 
periods, they are chain linked. This avoids inherent 
breaks in the sets of indicators of price competitive-
ness.
6 The latest regular adjustments to the weights are 
collated in Deutsche Bundesbank (2020).
7 For one, China’s export sector benefi  ted from the 
shift in demand away from contact- intensive services 
towards goods during the coronavirus pandemic in 
2020. For another, China was able to almost fully meet 
the global increase in demand for pandemic- related 
products, such as protective equipment, by ramping 
up production capacity. See Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
40

Weighting scheme for the price competitiveness indicator of the German 
economy  against a broad group of 60 trading partners
‰, as at September 2023
Group of countries/countryUp to 
1997 11998
to
20002001
to
20032004
to
20062007
to
20092010
to
20122013
to
20152016
to
2018From 
2019 2
Narrow group of countries 796.0 788.7 764.3 724.8 692.2 657.6 648.2 641.8 628.4
Austria 51.8 48.0 46.8 46.5 45.5 44.0 43.4 43.0 41.5
Belgium 51.7 46.2 49.1 51.2 50.6 44.8 41.4 40.5 41.1
Canada 7.7 8.6 8.7 8.3 7.8 8.1 8.3 7.5 6.9
Croatia 2.7 2.2 2.7 3.0 2.9 2.4 2.5 2.8 2.9
Cyprus 1.0 0.8 0.7 0.9 1.0 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.9
Denmark 17.8 15.7 16.0 15.2 15.0 12.9 13.0 12.7 12.6
Estonia 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.1 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.6
Finland 9.7 10.5 10.4 10.1 10.6 8.3 8.0 8.3 8.1
France 105.2 101.5 95.2 87.6 83.7 83.8 81.2 73.7 67.6
Greece 8.9 7.8 6.8 6.6 6.3 4.6 4.2 4.1 3.9
Ireland 10.9 15.5 16.1 15.2 14.1 12.9 13.5 16.4 21.7
Italy 84.7 78.4 74.4 69.5 64.5 57.8 52.6 52.7 51.4
Japan 50.0 47.1 40.3 36.6 32.7 31.8 26.0 25.7 23.8
Latvia 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.2
Lithuania 0.9 1.1 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.8 2.1 2.3 2.8
Luxembourg 5.8 5.6 6.1 7.1 7.3 7.2 7.8 8.3 9.9
Malta 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.8 1.1 1.3
Netherlands 68.5 67.3 65.0 66.6 67.1 67.2 65.7 68.9 71.8
Norway 7.5 7.0 6.9 7.0 7.2 6.2 5.5 4.8 4.7
Portugal 10.5 10.2 9.4 8.0 7.5 6.7 6.6 7.0 7.2
Slovakia 4.1 5.6 7.2 8.6 9.8 10.9 12.0 12.2 12.5
Slovenia 4.2 4.2 4.2 4.2 4.5 4.5 4.6 4.8 5.4
Spain 42.9 43.1 41.6 41.3 39.6 34.0 32.5 33.6 31.3
Sweden 21.6 20.5 18.6 19.5 19.0 18.3 17.8 16.7 16.2
Switzerland 47.0 42.6 43.4 41.7 41.7 42.3 42.3 40.6 39.4
United Kingdom 81.3 82.2 78.2 71.5 62.7 57.9 60.3 57.4 49.3
United States 98.0 115.1 112.9 94.4 86.7 85.7 93.2 93.6 91.4
Countries additionally 
included  in the extended 
group 106.6 119.5 142.3 173.2 198.5 224.0 235.6 246.4 265.5
Australia 4.4 4.0 4.1 4.1 4.4 5.1 4.6 4.4 4.0
Bulgaria 1.1 1.3 1.8 2.3 2.6 2.6 2.9 3.2 3.5
China 21.5 25.9 37.0 53.4 69.9 91.4 97.2 98.6 110.0
Czech Republic 14.4 18.3 22.2 24.6 27.6 28.9 29.5 32.2 32.9
Hong Kong SAR 13.0 12.0 12.1 12.6 11.5 11.6 11.0 10.7 9.8
Hungary 9.1 14.5 16.5 17.8 17.3 16.2 17.7 18.6 19.3
Korea, Republic of 13.8 11.6 12.7 16.9 16.2 16.2 15.8 15.7 16.0
Poland 16.6 19.7 22.4 27.3 32.8 34.2 37.0 41.3 47.2
Romania 3.2 3.6 4.6 6.3 8.1 9.0 10.9 12.6 13.0
Singapore 9.5 8.6 8.9 7.9 8.1 8.8 9.0 9.1 9.8
Countries additionally 
included  in the broad group 97.4 91.8 93.4 102.0 109.3 118.4 116.2 111.8 106.1
Algeria 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.6 0.7 0.6 0.5
Argentina 2.0 1.8 1.2 1.1 1.5 2.1 1.8 1.6 1.2
Brazil 7.2 6.7 5.8 6.5 7.8 8.5 7.1 5.9 5.2
Chile 1.5 1.2 1.1 1.7 2.0 2.1 1.8 1.5 1.4
Columbia 1.0 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.8 0.8
Iceland 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.4
India 6.3 5.4 5.9 7.7 10.3 12.1 11.8 12.4 12.8
Indonesia 5.4 3.7 3.3 3.0 2.9 3.4 3.4 3.2 2.9
Israel 4.0 4.1 3.6 3.0 3.0 3.3 3.2 3.3 3.3
Malaysia 6.2 5.5 5.6 5.2 5.2 5.8 5.9 6.0 5.9
Mexico 4.5 7.0 7.3 6.7 7.2 7.7 8.3 9.2 9.1
Morocco 1.3 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.4 1.6 1.6
New Zealand 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.9 0.9 1.0 0.8
Peru 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6
Philippines 2.5 2.8 3.0 2.5 2.1 2.0 2.5 2.5 2.4
Russian Federation 11.6 9.1 10.8 14.1 17.1 18.5 16.3 12.9 12.1
Saudi Arabia 1.9 1.8 2.3 2.7 3.1 3.4 3.9 3.1 2.8
South Africa 5.5 5.1 5.4 6.1 5.8 5.9 5.2 5.2 4.8
Taiwan 10.7 11.4 10.2 9.2 7.7 8.3 8.1 8.6 9.2
Thailand 6.4 4.8 4.9 4.8 5.3 5.8 6.0 6.3 5.5
Turkey 13.3 13.5 14.0 16.1 15.5 16.6 17.7 16.3 15.1
Ukraine 1.9 1.7 2.2 3.0 3.4 3.1 2.4 2.2 2.5
United Arab Emirates 2.0 2.1 2.7 4.1 4.6 5.0 5.8 6.5 5.2
Total 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0
1 Basis: 1995 to 1997. 2 Basis: 2019 to 2021.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
41

ence rate and thus more flexibly. However, the 
subsequent rise in yields was reversed shortly 
afterwards. As a consequence, the euro gained 
against the yen. As this report went to press, 
the euro stood at ¥164, which was 4.4% above 
its level at the end of the second quarter.
Compared with the beginning of the second 
half of 2023, the value of the euro as a 
weighted average against the currencies of 18 
major trading partners rose by 0.2% on bal -
ance. In addition to the above- mentioned gains 
against the pound sterling and the yen, the 
main factors driving this effective appreciation 
of the euro were its appreciation against the Canadian dollar and central European curren -
cies. This was partly offset by the single cur -
rency’s losses against the Swedish krona and 
the Swiss franc. An appreciation of the euro 
tends to reduce import prices and thus damp -
ens inflationary pressures in the euro area.
Securities markets and 
portfolio  transactions
Bond market
As of the middle of the year, global yields on 
long- dated government bonds, with the excep -
tion of UK government bonds, rose perceptibly 
in some cases. Interest rates in the United 
States went up more than in the euro area. In 
an environment marked by a robust macroeco -
nomic outlook for the United States, market 
participants mainly revised their view in favour 
of higher- for- longer US policy rates, having ex -
pected significantly earlier policy rate cuts in 
the first half of the year. As of the end of Sep -
tember, market participants’ concerns about 
persistently high US fiscal deficits also grew. 
This led to increased selling pressure in the US 
government bond market and was accompan -
ied by rising yields. The Eurosystem also further 
tightened its monetary policy stance, raising 
key interest rates by 25 basis points each in July 
and September. At their meetings in October 
and the beginning of November respectively, 
the ECB Governing Council and the FOMC left 
key interest rates unchanged. At the same 
time, they stressed that they would pursue a 
data- dependent approach to determining the 
level and duration of restriction. Overall, gloom -
ier growth prospects meant that the general 
interest rate dynamics in the euro area were 
weaker than in the United States.1
The restrictive stimulus from long- term interest 
rates was mainly reflected in an increase in real Euro somewhat 
stronger in 
effective termsYields on ten- 
year govern -
ment bonds up 
in the euro area 
and the United 
States Implied policy rate cuts in 2024*
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations. * Calculated 
as the difference between the €STR/SOFR forward rate at the 
end of December 2023 and the end of December 2024.
Deutsche BundesbankJ A SON
20231801601401201008060
–––––––In basis points, moving five-day average
Euro area
United StatesReal interest rates*
Sources:  Bloomberg,  Refinitiv  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Calculated  from  the  difference  between  nominal  ten-year 
overnight index swaps and inflation-indexed swaps with the 
same maturity.
Deutsche BundesbankFMAM J J A S ON
202300.51.01.52.0
++++%, daily data
Euro area
United States
1 According to Consensus Economics surveys, growth ex -
pectations for gross domestic product (GDP) for the com -
ing year were revised from 0.9% to 0.6% between July and 
October.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
42

interest rates. Measured by the difference be -
tween ten- year overnight index swaps (OIS) 
and inflation- linked swaps with the same ma -
turity, the real interest rate rose markedly from 
mid- September onwards (+27 basis points). 
Given a decline in market- based inflation com -
pensation (-22 basis points), the nominal in -
crease in yields was therefore, on balance, ex -
clusively driven by real interest rates. In the 
United States, the ten- year real interest rate 
even rose by 49 basis points, with inflation 
compensation virtually unchanged on balance. 
Against the backdrop of these impressions, the 
notion that the end of the interest rate hike 
cycle could have been reached in the major 
currency areas has recently become established 
among market participants. Looking at the 
medium- term policy rate outlook, market price 
developments recently signalled heightened 
downside risks to economic growth, after the 
rise in long- term interest rates seen up until the 
end of October had a tightening effect (see the 
lower chart). The recently somewhat weaker 
labour market and inflation data in the United 
States amplified these trends. Real interest rates 
have also come back down of late.
Ten- year US Treasuries were yielding 4.5% as 
this report went to press, 61 basis points higher 
than mid- year. In the same period, yields on 
ten- year Federal bonds (Bunds) rose by 20 basis 
points to 2.6%. According to a model break -
down of the yield curve, higher term premia 
especially have helped drive up yields. The in -
creased term premia are evidence that invest -
ors are demanding more compensation for the 
risk associated with the uncertainty about 
longer- term interest rate developments going 
forward. The rise in Bund yields was almost ex -
clusively attributable to the interlinkage with 
US interest rates (see the upper chart). Yields 
were driven, in particular, by the path of US 
policy rates, which was expected to be more 
restrictive, although there was somewhat of a 
reversal towards the end of the period under 
review.Euro area yield 
increase driven 
exclusively by 
real interest 
rates
Higher term pre -
mia are a major 
factor in the rise 
in Federal bond 
yieldsHistorical decomposition of ten-year 
German Federal bonds
Sources: Refinitiv and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Based on a 
VAR model with sign restrictions (see Brandt et al., 2021). Es-
timation period: January 1999 to August 2023.
Deutsche BundesbankJuly Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov.
202330201001020304050607080
–––++++++++Cumulated change since 31 March 2023 in basis points,
daily data
Global risk appetite
US macroContribution of shocks1
Change in yield 
on ten-year
German Federal bondsUS monetary policy
Euro area macroEuro area monetary policy
Spreads of ten-year government bonds 
over German Federal bonds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022 2023050100150200250300350400450Basis points, daily data
Italy
Spain
Ireland FranceGreece
PortugalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
43

The increase in long- term yields driven by 
higher term premia was also reflected in the 
yield curve. According to the yield curve de -
rived from Federal securities, yields rose from 
mid- year onwards, especially for maturities of 
more than six years. As a result, the curve, 
which was initially flat in this maturity range, 
assumed a positive slope. By contrast, in the 
shorter- term maturity segment of up to five 
years, the yield curve became more inverted in 
an environment of recently increasing down -
side risks to the medium- term policy rate out -
look. Yields on two- year securities decreased 
by 14 basis points.
In the United Kingdom, the Bank of England 
raised its key interest rate by 25 basis points to 
5.25% in August in response to an inflation 
rate that was still well above the inflation tar -
get and has kept it at this level ever since. After 
temporarily spiking higher, ten- year gilt yields 
were trading lower, at 4.2%, as this report 
went to press (-25 basis points) than in mid-  2023. By contrast, yields on ten- year Japanese 
government bonds rose significantly (+39 basis 
points to 0.8%). This was partly due to the Jap -
anese central bank’s monetary policy, with the 
Bank increasing the flexibility of its yield curve 
control in July and again in October (see also 
the box on pp. 40 f.). Yields on ten- year bonds 
are currently at a level last observed in 2013.
While the end of the reinvestment phase of the 
asset purchase programme (APP) in July 2023 
did not lead to any widening of yield spreads, 
euro area government bond yields widened 
fairly significantly at times in the context of 
higher real interest rates and investors’ declin -
ing risk appetite. Highly indebted issuers inter -
mittently suffered fairly pronounced spread 
widening. Reflecting the upward revision of 
Italian fiscal deficit forecasts, ten-  year Italian 
paper saw spreads widen by 9 basis points. 
Overall, since the end of the second quarter, 
the GDP- weighted average yield on ten- year 
euro area government bonds has risen by virtu -
ally the same magnitude as that of German 
Federal securities with the same maturity.
Market participants had at the beginning of the 
reporting period largely already anticipated the 
marked decline in euro area inflation data in 
the course of 2023. They continue to expect an 
average inflation rate of 5.5% for 2023. In the 
reporting period, the implied forward inflation 
rates for 2024 are currently lower, at 2.3%. 
Market participants therefore expect inflation 
to exceed the Eurosystem’s 2% definition of 
price stability again in 2024. In the medium 
term, market- based inflation compensation, 
which was already above 2%, temporarily rose 
significantly higher still during the summer. In 
the context of the tightening of financial condi -
tions and the publication of inflation data for 
October and November, it declined again, ul -
timately bringing it somewhat lower on bal -
ance. In October, survey- based inflation ex -
pectations calculated by Consensus Economics 
put inflation at 5.6% for 2023 and 2.5% for 
2024.Yield curve 
shows higher 
yields for 
longer- dated 
Federal secur -
ities
Yields higher in 
Japan, lower in 
the United 
Kingdom Yield spreads in 
the euro area 
virtually 
unchanged
Market partici -
pants expect 
inflation rates to 
remain high in 
the short to 
medium termForward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Refinitiv, Consensus Economics and Bun-
desbank calculations. * Derived from the fixed cash flow ari-
sing from inflation swaps which is swapped for the actual an-
nual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro area 
and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised over 
the next five or ten years. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022 20231.41.82.22.63.0% p.a., weekly averages
Five-year forward inflation rate in 
five years derived from swapsConsensus Economics
inflation expectations 
in six to ten years
United StatesEuro area
0.81.21.62.02.42.8Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
44

Infl  ation risks based on infl  ation options: 
current developments in the euro area
With infl  ation rates having persistently been 
too high in the euro area, the Eurosystem is 
closely monitoring changes in the various 
measures of infl  ation expectations. For one 
thing, infl  ation expectations play a key role 
in the spending decisions of households 
and enterprises and thus also in assessing 
the effectiveness of monetary policy. Fur-
thermore, analysing infl  ation expectations 
provides important information on the de-
gree to which said expectations are an-
chored to the infl  ation target and thus on 
the credibility of monetary policy. Alongside 
surveys among professional forecasters, 
households and enterprises, fi  nancial mar-
ket instruments are also available. These 
allow a timely assessment of the compensa-
tion that investors demand for future infl  a-
tion. This infl  ation compensation can be 
measured, for instance, using infl  ation 
swaps (see the chart on p. 44). Besides pure 
infl  ation expectations (central tendency), in-
fl  ation compensation encompasses other 
variables that infl  uence prices, including, in 
particular, the infl  ation risk premium. Risk- 
averse investors are compensated by the in-
fl  ation risk premium for the perceived un-
certainty of future infl  ation developments.1
Moreover, analysing infl  ation options pro-
vides up- to- date information on the prob-
ability distributions for future infl  ation de-
velopments as priced in by fi  nancial market 
participants. In particular, it is possible to 
analyse the probability of the 2% infl  ation 
target being missed in one direction or an-
other from a fi  nancial market perspective or 
how likely investors believe the occurrence 
of extreme infl  ation events to be.2
Market participants’ risk assessment can be 
measured by their willingness to pay for certain hedging transactions which they 
conduct using options. Infl  ation options are 
used by investors to hedge against certain 
infl  ation events. Buyers of options are com-
pensated if the realised infl  ation rate is 
above (cap) or below (fl  oor) a certain 
threshold over a set period. By comparing 
the different options, statistical methods 
can be used to derive probability distribu-
tions on future infl  ation.3
It is important to emphasise that these 
probabilities derived from option prices 
generally do not only contain market par-
ticipants’ assessment of the actual likeli-
hood of a certain event. They also contain 
information on how valuable market par-
ticipants deem certain payouts to be for 
various infl  ation events. Probabilities based 
on fi  nancial market prices therefore always 
refl  ect market participants’ risk preferences 
as well. Risk- averse market participants as-
sign “bad infl  ation events” higher probabil-
ities of occurrence. They are thus prepared 
to pay a higher option price in the form of 
an infl  ation risk premium as a hedge against 
these unfavourable infl  ation events, which 
must be taken into account when analysing 
and interpreting the derived probabilities.
Infl  ation probabilities for individual years in 
the future can be determined using year- 
1 For information on the economic determination of 
infl  ation risk premia, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2023b).
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2015). For technical de-
tails on determining market- based probabilities from 
infl  ation options, see Bundesbank (2015) and Schar-
nagl and Stapf (2015).
3 The method for determining risk- neutral density 
functions is based on the approach by Breeden and 
Litzenberger (1978). To determine the implied volatility 
curve, an interpolation procedure based on a stochas-
tic volatility model (SABR model) by Hagan et al. (2002) 
is used.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
45

on- year infl  ation options.4 For this option 
type, a payout is made not only at maturity 
but also annually if the infl  ation rate was 
above or below the threshold in the last 12 
months. This ultimately allows density func-
tions for annual forward infl  ation rates to 
be calculated and the forward infl  ation path derived from infl  ation swaps to be supple-
mented by a market- based uncertainty 
band.5
The development of the density functions 
calculated based on year- on- year options 
shows that the distribution of future infl  a-
tion rates has changed signifi  cantly in re-
cent years (see the adjacent chart). In mid- 
2020, during the pandemic, the one- year 
forward infl  ation rate in two years’ time 
(1y2y) was still just under 1% on average. At 
the same time, the narrow distribution indi-
cated that market participants were quite 
certain of a low infl  ation environment in the 
medium term, with infl  ation rates of above 
2% being very unlikely. When infl  ation 
began to rise in 2021, this market assess-
ment changed rapidly. For instance, the 
considerable shift in distribution to the right 
signals that, in the medium term, market 
participants considered infl  ation rates of 
over 2% to be increasingly likely as the year 
went on.
These developments also spread to longer- 
term horizons. The lower chart shows the 
probabilities for various ranges of the one- 
year infl  ation rate starting in fi  ve years’ and 
nine years’ time. The probability mass of in-
fl  ation rates of over 2% increased markedly 
for this time horizon, too. Not only did the 
probability of extreme events with very high 
infl  ation rates above 3% increase, but the 
probability of values between 2% and 3% 
also increased considerably in some cases.
4 By contrast, traditional zero coupon infl  ation options 
offer only an average of the probabilities over several 
years (see Deutsche Bundesbank (2015)). Traditional in-
fl  ation options have a longer history. They are also re-
garded as more liquid in the market, meaning they 
have greater information quality. However, the aver-
aging approach in traditional infl  ation options masks 
crucial information for monetary policymakers about 
the path that is covered by the average. This justifi  es 
the recourse to year- on- year options.
5 For the euro area, options and swaps are based on 
the HICP infl  ation rate excluding tobacco (HICPxT).Risk-neutral density function* over a 
period of one year in two years' time
Sources:  Bloomberg,  BGC  Partners  and  Bundesbank  calcula-
tions.  * Risk-neutral  density  functions,  derived  from  year-on-
year inflation options with maturities of one to ten years, on the 
euro area HICP excluding tobacco (HICPxT).
Deutsche Bundesbank– 3 – 2 – 1 0 + 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6012345as at 31 October 2023
Density value
Average inflation rate p.a.31 Oct 2022
31 Oct 202330 June 2020
Inflation probabilities*
Sources:  Bloomberg,  BGC  Partners  and  Bundesbank  calcula-
tions.  * Risk-neutral  density  functions,  derived  from  year-on-
year inflation options with maturities of one to ten years, on the 
euro area HICP excluding tobacco (HICPxT).
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 2023smoothed over five trading days, as at 31 October 2023
020406080100
20406080100
0>3%
For one year in nine years' timeFor one year in five years' time
2-3% <1% 1-2%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
46

The long- term inflation compensation de -
manded by investors remains significantly ele -
vated. The five- year forward inflation rate five 
years ahead derived from inflation swaps lat -
terly stood at 2.4%. However, it temporarily 
reached 2.7% in July and August, marking the 
highest level since 2010. This is likely to have 
been chiefly due to persistently high core infla -
tion in the euro area and international spillover 
effects. In particular, the unexpectedly robust 
US economy put upward pressure on market-  
based inflation expectations in the euro area. 
Over the remainder of the period under review, 
the long- term forward inflation rates moved 
back down to 2.4% (5y5y forward rate). The 
aforementioned tightening impulse caused by 
higher long- term real interest rates is likely to 
have contributed to this decline. Quarterly 
survey- based inflation expectations calculated 
by Consensus Economics for the euro area six 
to ten years ahead remained virtually un -
changed. They were still close to the inflation 
target of 2% in October, too. Consequently, the difference between market- based and 
survey- based long- term inflation expectations 
remains significantly elevated. This difference 
serves as an indicator of the inflation risk pre -
mium. Similarly, option- implied probabilities 
and estimates from term structure models sug -
gest that the risk of high future inflation re -
mains relevant for investors despite the decline 
in actual inflation. As a result, they are willing 
to pay a premium in order to hedge against 
such unfavourable scenarios (see the box on 
pp. 45ff.).
Market-  based five- year US forward inflation 
rates five years ahead rose slightly to 2.7% (+7 
basis points). Quarterly survey- based inflation 
expectations six to ten years ahead calculated 
by Consensus Economics remained unchanged 
at 2.2% in October. The inflation risk premium, 
measured as the difference between market-  
based and survey- based inflation expectations, 
therefore increased in the United States in the 
period under review.Market partici -
pants continue 
to hedge 
against long- 
term upside risks 
to inflation
Long- term infla -
tion expect -
ations up in the 
United States; 
survey data 
unchangedOverall, market participants are expecting a 
continuous decline in the infl  ation rate in 
the coming year, with an expected value of 
above 2% (see the adjacent chart). More-
over, the one- year forward probabilities for 
the infl  ation rate show that market partici-
pants tend to fear the infl  ation rate will be 
above the infl  ation target rather than below 
it in the coming years. Infl  ation risks there-
fore remain tilted to the upside from a mar-
ket perspective and are not distributed sym-
metrically around the infl  ation target. Mar-
ket participants remain willing to buy infl  a-
tion swaps or options to hedge against 
unexpectedly high infl  ation. The markets 
therefore continue to perceive a risk that in-
fl  ation could persist above the defi  nition of 
price stability in the longer term.6
6 For a detailed discussion on using the entire distribu-
tion of future types of infl  ation based on infl  ation op-
tions to assess the risk of infl  ation expectations be-
coming unanchored, see Reis (2021) and Hilscher et al. 
(2022).Evolution of the forward inflation rate*
Sources:  Bloomberg,  BGC  Partners  and  Bundesbank  calcula-
tions.* Risk-neutral probability intervals, derived from year-on- 
year inflation options with maturities of one to ten years, on 
the euro area HICP excluding tobacco (HICPxT).
Deutsche Bundesbank2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 202902468Inflation rate as a percentage, as at 31 October 2023
Forward inflationRealised inflation
20% to
80% quantile
Inflation targetDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
47

Yields on BBB- rated European corporate bonds 
and high- yield bonds with residual maturities 
of between seven and ten years also rose ini -
tially in the wake of the increase in real interest 
rates, but fell again towards the end of the 
period under review. Within the BBB rating cat -
egory, bond yields of non- financial corpor -
ations rose marginally by 3 basis points on bal -
ance, while those of financial corporations fell 
by 18 basis points. However, spreads on Bunds 
narrowed for both of these bond categories 
after having widened for a time. The yield 
spreads on high- yield bonds remained un -
changed on balance. Overall, corporate bond 
markets proved robust against the rise in inter -
est rates.
At €391 billion, gross issuance in the German 
bond market in the third quarter of 2023 was 
down considerably on the previous quarter’s 
figure (€465½ billion). Net of redemptions and 
changes in issuers’ holdings of their own debt 
securities, domestic issuers ramped up their capital market borrowing by €47 billion. The 
outstanding volume of foreign debt securities 
in the German market rose slightly in the third 
quarter, up €1½ billion. On balance, the total 
outstanding volume of bonds in Germany thus 
climbed by €48½ billion in the quarter under 
review.
In the third quarter of 2023, the public sector 
issued bonds to the tune of €46½ billion net, 
following €26½ billion in the previous three-  
month period. Central Government (including 
the resolution agency classified as part of it) is -
sued mainly five- year Federal notes (Bobls: 
€15½ billion), Federal Treasury discount paper 
(Bubills: €13 billion) and 30- year Federal bonds 
(Bunds: €11 billion). State and local govern -
ments issued bonds worth €½ billion net.
In the quarter under review, domestic enter -
prises issued bonds worth €5 billion net, fol -
lowing net issuance on virtually the same scale 
in the previous quarter. On balance, long- term 
paper made up the bulk of this issuance. The 
lion’s share of these issues was accounted for 
by insurance companies (€3 billion), but non-  
financial corporations also issued bonds worth 
€1½ billion on balance.
The third quarter saw domestic credit institu -
tions slightly reduce their capital market debt 
by €4 billion, following net issuance of €21 bil -
lion in the second quarter. Redemptions mostly 
affected debt securities issued by specialised 
credit institutions (-€5½ billion) and other bank 
debt securities that can be structured flexibly 
(-€1 billion). These redemptions were partly 
offset by net issuance of mortgage Pfandbriefe 
amounting to €2½ billion.
Foreign investors were the main buyers in the 
third quarter, acquiring German bonds worth 
€61½ billion net. Domestic non-  banks ex -
panded their bond portfolios by €23½ billion 
on balance, with foreign securities (€13½ bil -
lion) making up the bulk of their purchases. By 
contrast, domestic credit institutions sold debt 
securities in the amount of €16 billion net. The Corporate bond 
yield spreads 
wider at times
Net issuance of 
German debt 
securitiesNet public 
sector  issuance
Net issuance of 
corporate bonds
Fall in credit 
institutions’ 
capital  market 
debt
Purchases of 
debt securitiesInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2022 2023
Q3 Q2 Q3
Debt securities
Residents 8.6 62.8 – 12.9
Credit institutions 8.0 17.2 – 16.2
of which:
Foreign debt securities –  3.4 16.3 – 10.4
Deutsche Bundesbank – 17.5 – 23.8 – 20.1
Other sectors 18.1 69.4 23.4
of which:
Domestic debt securities 29.9 35.2 9.7
Non-residents –  0.9 38.9 61.6
Shares
Residents – 13.0 6.4 10.2
Credit institutions –  2.5 –  2.6 0.9
of which:
Domestic shares –  0.5 0.5 0.3
Non-banks – 10.5 9.0 9.3
of which:
Domestic shares –  4.5 10.1 3.6
Non-residents 7.7 –  6.3 –  1.3
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 13.6 4.0 12.1
Investment in retail funds –  2.5 1.2 1.1
of which:
Equity funds –  0.7 0.8 1.6
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
48

Bundesbank’s bond portfolio decreased by €20 
billion net, mainly due to maturing securities 
from holdings under the Eurosystem’s purchase 
programmes.
Equity market
As of the middle of the year, prices on the 
international equity markets initially declined 
significantly, but part of these losses were able 
to be recovered by the end of the reporting 
period. The EuroStoxx fell comparatively sharply 
(-2.3%) on the back of news of weak macro 
data in the euro area. Although the rise in 
interest rates in the United States was stronger 
than in the euro area, the S&P 500 was able to 
record slight gains (+1.3%) given the robust US 
economy and the long period of positive sig -
nals from the US labour market. Amid diver -
gent earnings expectations from analyst sur -
veys (IBES), the implied return on equity re -
quired by investors on both sides of the Atlan -
tic increased by around ⅓ percentage point.
Japanese equities also made slight gains on 
balance (Nikkei index: +0.7%), after falling for a 
time on the back of downward revisions to 
market expectations for GDP growth in Japan. 
By contrast, equities in the United Kingdom re -
corded slight losses (broad FTSE: -1.4%).
Contrary to overall market developments in the 
euro area, bank stocks recorded price gains of 
5.9%. The fact that these stocks have been 
able to buck the general trend since the end of 
June is probably chiefly due to the fact that ris -
ing interest rates tend to increase interest mar -
gins. The earnings outlook for euro area banks 
has improved accordingly. By contrast, US bank 
stocks recorded less substantial gains of +3%. 
The reporting season for the third quarter was 
significantly weaker than expected for US 
banks, and a decline in demand for credit is 
also likely to have made investors see things 
more pessimistically.Looking at the performance of the other sec -
tors represented in the EuroStoxx, only a few 
have developed positively alongside bank 
stocks, including first and foremost energy sec -
tor stocks (+10%). This is probably partly due to 
the price of oil rising markedly higher for a 
while compared with the middle of the year. By 
contrast, prices of consumer and industrial 
stocks fell against the backdrop of the sharp 
rise in interest rates.
The crisis in the Middle East triggered by the 
Hamas terrorist attacks on Israel has so far had 
no noticeable impact on international equity 
markets. For example, uncertainty about future 
equity price developments, which can be meas -
ured by the implied volatility of broad equity 
indices, remained at a comparatively low level 
on both sides of the Atlantic.
German stock corporations raised €2½ billion 
in new funds on balance in the reporting quar -
ter (previous quarter: €4 billion). The volume of Little change in 
equity markets 
on balance
Equity markets 
up in Japan and 
down in the 
United Kingdom
Bank stocks post 
gainsEnergy stocks up 
considerably
Crisis in the 
Middle  East has 
had no impact 
on uncertainty 
in equity mar -
kets thus far
Equity market 
fundingEquity market
Sources: Refinitiv and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankBank indicesBeginning of 2020 = 100, log scale, daily data
Total market indices
6580100120140160
506080100120
2020 2021 2022 2023Euro area
(EURO STOXX)Japan
(Nikkei 225)United States
(S&P 500)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
49

foreign shares in the German market rose by 
€6 billion over the same period. On balance, 
equities were purchased chiefly by domestic 
non- banks (€9½ billion) and domestic credit in -
stitutions (€1 billion). By contrast, foreign in -
vestors downsized their equity portfolios by 
€1½ billion in net terms.
Mutual fund shares
In the third quarter of 2023, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded a net inflow of 
€13½ billion, compared with €5 billion in the 
previous quarter. On balance, specialised funds 
reserved for institutional investors were by far 
the primary beneficiaries (€12 billion). Of the 
various asset classes, mixed securities funds, in 
particular, registered significant inflows of cap -
ital (€9½ billion), with open- end real estate 
funds (€2½ billion), funds of funds (€1½ bil -
lion) and money market funds (€½ billion) also 
attracting capital. The outstanding volume of 
foreign mutual fund shares in Germany rose by 
€9 billion in the period under review. Mutual 
fund shares were bought on balance almost 
exclusively by domestic non- banks, which 
added €24 billion worth of fund shares to their 
portfolios. Most of these shares were issued by 
domestic mutual funds. Non- resident investors 
trimmed their share portfolios in Germany by 
€1½ billion net.
Direct investment
Transactions in cross- border portfolio invest -
ment resulted in net capital imports of €48 bil -
lion in the third quarter of 2023. Monetary pol -
icy decisions of the major central banks and 
predominantly subdued economic prospects in 
many countries formed the background to this 
development. In this environment, direct in -
vestment recorded net capital exports of €21 
billion, following net capital exports of €13½ 
billion in the second quarter.Sales and 
purchases  of 
mutual fund 
shares
Direct invest -
ment sees net 
capital exportsMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2022 2023
Q3 Q2 Q3p
I. Current account + 23.0 + 58.9 + 69.7
1. Goods + 23.0 + 55.9 + 62.0
2. Services – 22.2 – 14.3 – 24.7
3. Primary income + 39.5 + 26.7 + 46.4
4. Secondary income – 17.4 –  9.3 – 14.1
II. Capital account –  5.9 –  4.0 –  3.5
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) – 30.0 + 63.8 + 52.7
1. Direct investment + 29.6 + 13.5 + 20.9
Domestic investment 
abroad + 54.8 + 34.9 + 17.3
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country + 25.2 + 21.4 –  3.6
2. Portfolio investment – 31.7 + 16.5 – 47.9
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities – 26.8 + 49.3 + 10.7
Shares 1 –  9.9 –  4.6 +  0.1
Investment fund shares 2–  1.0 +  4.7 +  9.0
of which:
Money market fund 
shares –  0.7 +  1.7 +  2.1
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 +  2.2 +  2.9 –  0.7
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 – 18.0 + 46.3 +  2.3
of which:
Denominated in euro 5 –  6.1 + 35.4 +  3.4
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities +  4.9 + 32.9 + 58.6
Shares 1 +  7.5 –  5.0 –  1.4
Investment fund shares –  1.6 –  1.1 –  1.6
Short-term debt 
 securities 3 –  4.0 + 10.0 –  2.1
Long-term debt 
 securities 4 +  3.1 + 29.0 + 63.7
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 6 – 11.1 + 23.7 + 39.3
3. Financial derivatives 7 + 14.8 + 11.3 + 13.0
4. Other investment 8 – 43.4 + 21.5 + 67.5
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 9 – 26.1 + 10.8 + 56.1
Enterprises and 
 households 10 – 53.4 + 38.4 + 33.6
General government – 11.5 –  2.8 –  4.6
Bundesbank + 47.6 – 24.9 – 17.6
5. Reserve assets +  0.8 +  1.1 –  0.8
IV. Errors and omissions 11 – 47.1 +  8.9 – 13.4
1  Including participation certifi  cates. 2  Including reinvested 
earnings. 3  Short- term: original maturity of up to one year. 
4 Long- term: original maturity of more than one year or unlim-
ited. 5  Including outstanding foreign Deutsche  Mark bonds. 
6 Including bonds issued by the former Federal Railways, the 
former Federal Post Offi   ce and the former Treuhand agency. 
7  Balance of transactions arising from options and fi  nancial 
futures  contracts as well as employee stock options. 8 Includes, 
in particular, loans and trade credits as well as currency and de-
posits. 9 Excluding the Bundesbank. 10  Includes the following 
sectors: fi  nancial corporations (excluding monetary fi  nancial in-
stitutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and 
non- profi  t institutions serving households. 11  Statistical errors 
and omissions resulting from the difference between the bal-
ance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current 
account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
50

Enterprises domiciled in Germany expanded 
their direct investment abroad by €17½ billion 
on balance between July and September 2023, 
compared with €35 billion in the previous three 
months. They injected their foreign affiliates 
with additional equity capital (€21½ billion), 
the vast majority of which was attributable to 
reinvested profits. By contrast, redemptions 
predominated in intra- group lending (€4½ bil -
lion). However, this only concerned trade 
credits; additional funding was granted via 
loans. Direct investment flows to other EU 
countries were comparatively high (€23 billion). 
Relatively large amounts of direct investment 
were made above all in the Netherlands (€5½ 
billion), Denmark (€4½ billion) and Luxem -
bourg (€3½ billion). By contrast, the United 
States (€7½ billion) and China (€2 billion) re -
corded larger return flows of funds in the third 
quarter of 2023.
In the third quarter, foreign enterprises reduced 
their direct investment in Germany by €3½ bil -
lion (following inflows of €21½ billion in the 
previous quarter). This was down to redemp -
tions predominating in intra- group lending 
(€3½ billion). In this direction, too, only the 
volume of trade credits declined, while foreign 
enterprises granted additional funds to domes -
tic subsidiaries via loans. On balance, foreign 
investors made virtually no changes to their 
equity capital in German affiliates. Particularly large return flows of direct investment funds 
were recorded in the Netherlands (€19 billion), 
China (€3 billion) and the United States (€2½ 
billion). By contrast, enterprises from Switzer -
land (€8½ billion), the United Kingdom (€7 bil -
lion) and France (€3 billion) considerably 
boosted their direct investment in Germany.
Overall, although enterprises domiciled in Ger -
many have expanded their foreign direct in -
vestment in 2023 to date, this expansion has 
only been half as strong as in the same period 
of the previous year. For example, the cumula -
tive direct investment abroad up to September 
amounted to €80 billion, compared with 
€158½ billion between January and September 
2022. Developments in foreign direct invest -
ment in Germany were also noticeably weaker, 
increasing by €7½ billion on balance between 
January and September 2023, compared with 
€59½ billion in the same period of the previous 
year. According to an initial assessment by the 
United Nations Conference on Trade and De -
velopment (UNCTAD), data for the first half of 
2023 point to a continued downturn in cross- 
border direct investment worldwide.2 UNCTAD 
had already found evidence of a slowdown in 
global direct investment flows for 2022.3German direct 
investment 
abroad predom -
inantly results in 
capital exports
Foreign direct 
investment in 
Germany pre -
dominantly 
results in capital 
outflowsCumulative data 
up to September 
thus far indicate 
a slowdown for 
2023 on the 
year
List of references
Breeden, D. T. and R. H. Litzenberger (1978), Prices of state- contingent claims implicit in option 
prices, Journal of Business, pp. 621-651.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), Is price competitiveness favourable in Germany and the euro area?, 
Monthly Report, October 2023, pp. 13-38.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), Term structures in economic analysis, Monthly Report, January 
2023, pp. 53-74.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), The reasons for the Chinese economy’s comparatively good per -
formance in the pandemic, Monthly Report, October 2021, pp. 46-47.2 See United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop -
ment (2023a).
3 See United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop -
ment (2023b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
51

Deutsche Bundesbank (2020), Recalculated weights for indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness, Monthly Report, August 2020, pp. 49-52.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2015), Inflation expectations: newer instruments, current developments 
and key determinants, Monthly Report, June 2015, pp. 45-60.
Hagan, P . S., D. Kumar, A. S. Lesniewski and D. E. Woodward (2002), Managing smile risk, The 
Best of Wilmott, 1, pp. 249-296.
Hilscher, J., A. Raviv and R. Reis (2022), How likely is an inflation disaster?, CEPR Discussion Paper, 
No 17224.
Reis, R. (2022), Losing the inflation anchor, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2021 (2), 
pp. 307-379.
Scharnagl, M. and J. Stapf (2015), Inflation, deflation, and uncertainty: What drives euro area 
option- implied inflation expectations, and are they still anchored in the sovereign debt crisis?, Eco -
nomic Modelling, Vol. 48, 248-269.
Schmitz, M., M. De Clercq, M. Fidora, B. Lauro and C. Pinheiro (2012), Revisiting the Effective 
Exchange  Rates of the Euro, ECB Occasional Paper Series, No 134.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (2023a), available at https://unctad.org/
news/world-investment-forum-2023-ends-strong-call-greater-private-and-public-investment
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (2023b), World Investment Report 2023.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
52

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
The German economy is still navigating through 
choppy waters. Economic output declined 
slightly in the third quarter of 2023. According 
to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, 
real gross domestic product (GDP) was a sea -
sonally adjusted 0.1% lower than in the previ -
ous quarter, during which it had increased 
somewhat according to revised data.1 Industry 
also suffered in the third quarter from weak 
foreign demand and the fallout from the prior 
energy price shock. Increased financing costs 
continued to dampen private investment, 
thereby also weighing on domestic demand for 
industrial goods and, in particular, construction 
work. Furthermore, order backlogs decreased 
further, absorbing less and less of the decline in 
demand in both sectors. As a result, output in 
these areas contracted. Real exports of goods 
also fell. Moreover, private consumption re -
mained sluggish. Despite strong wage in -
creases, declining inflation rates and stable em -
ployment, consumers still held back on add -
itional spending. The services sector, by con -
trast, proved to be quite robust in this difficult 
environment.
Economic activity in detail
Seasonally adjusted industrial output declined 
steeply in the third quarter, with the downturn 
broadly based. Even sectors that had bolstered 
activity in previous quarters, such as the manu -
facture of information processing equipment 
and, in particular, motor vehicle production, ex -
perienced a substantial slump. Output in the 
energy- intensive sectors ceased its downward movement, instead moving sideways. The 
weak domestic and foreign demand for indus -
trial products has thus also become more evi -
dent in production levels overall. One factor 
behind this was likely that order backlogs were 
being steadily reduced and acting as less and 
less of a buffer. According to the ifo Institute, 
the share of industrial firms complaining of in -
sufficient demand continued to grow signifi -
cantly and recently stood at 36%. Supply- side 
problems, particularly bottlenecks in the supply 
of intermediate goods, have faded much more 
into the background, however. Persistently 
weak foreign demand and the impact of the 
preceding energy price shock, which hit Ger -
many especially hard due, inter alia, to the high 
weight of energy- intensive sectors, are proving 
challenging for the export- oriented industrial 
sector, in particular. Price- adjusted exports of German 
economy  still 
navigating 
choppy waters
Steep decline in 
industrial output 
and goods 
exportsAggregate output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Price 
and calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 239698100102104106108
–12–8–40+4+8+12Adjusted for price, seasonal and calendar effects
2015 = 100, log scale
Gross domestic product
% Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
1 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this 
text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, pro -
vided they can be verified and quantified. The flash esti -
mate also included revisions for the previous quarters in 
some cases. Overall, this results in a somewhat higher level 
of economic activity than previously reported.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
53

goods declined at a similar rate to industrial 
output in the third quarter.
Commercial investment in machinery and 
equipment is likely to have fallen somewhat in 
the third quarter. Weak industrial activity and 
higher financing costs made firms more reluc -
tant to invest, as indicated by price- adjusted 
imports of capital goods as well as by price-  
adjusted domestic sales of capital goods, both 
of which declined. Investment in motor ve -
hicles and machinery continued to have a bol -
stering effect here. Price- adjusted domestic 
sales in these areas picked up markedly. This is 
also consistent with the strong increase in com -
mercial vehicle registrations according to the 
German Association of the Automotive Indus -
try (VDA). However, this was driven by anticipa -
tory effects relating to commercial electric cars 
ahead of the reduced government subsidy as 
from September.2Construction investment is also likely to have 
declined in the third quarter. In any case, con -
struction output fell somewhat in seasonally 
adjusted terms. Output remained virtually un -
changed in the finishing trades, but saw a sharp 
contraction in the main construction sector, 
primarily in building construction. The strongly 
depressed demand for construction work 
owing to increased financing costs and high 
construction prices is having a growing impact 
here. As measured by order intake in the main 
construction sector, this demand did increase 
on average over July and August (the latest 
months for which data are available) but, even 
so, it remained at a low level, especially in 
housing construction. There is still no improve -
ment in sight in this segment, either, as the 
number of building permits fell sharply up until 
last report. The remaining backlog of orders 
prevented an even stronger decline in con -
struction output. According to ifo Institute sur -
veys, the reach of order books is still high over -
all, but more and more construction firms were 
complaining of a lack of orders. Order cancella -
tions also rose to levels not seen for a long 
while.
Private consumption probably remained slug -
gish in the third quarter. Despite rising real 
wages, households’ mood for spending re -
mained subdued and they were reluctant to 
make purchases. Price- adjusted sales fell in al -
most all areas of the retail sector. They were 
also down in the accommodation and food 
services sector. Moreover, current account fig -
ures for travel indicate that consumers cut back 
somewhat on their travel expenditure. By con -
trast, car purchases supported private con -
sumption. According to data from the German 
Association of the Automotive Industry, new 
private car registrations saw a marked uptick, 
unlike motor vehicle production. The services 
sector proved to be fairly robust in this difficult 
environment. Even though the ifo Institute re -
ports that assessments of the current situation Commercial 
investment in 
machinery and 
equipment 
probably  down 
somewhatIncreased finan -
cing costs and 
high construc -
tion prices 
driving  down 
construction 
investment and 
output
Private con -
sumption still 
sluggish, but 
services sector 
fairly robustOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2380859095100105110
1001051101151201251301351402015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data, log scale
MonthlyIndustry
Industry excluding
energy-intensive
sectors
Main constructionConstruction1
2 See German Association of the Automotive Industry 
(2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
54

are deteriorating, when averaged over July and 
August output in the services sectors (excluding 
trade) was up distinctly on the previous quarter. 
Motor vehicle trade benefited not only from 
the increase in private registrations, but also 
from the high number of commercial registra -
tions. By contrast, wholesale trade (excluding 
motor vehicles), which is more closely linked to 
developments in industry, was struggling with 
a decline in sales.
Labour market
The robust labour market continued to stabilise 
economic activity in Germany. Despite the 
slight decline in economic output, employment 
in the third quarter remained at the high level 
recorded in the previous quarter, having risen 
strongly in the first half of the year. Unemploy -
ment was up moderately in the third quarter, 
but somewhat more sharply in October. The 
number of vacancies declined slightly, but re -
mained at a high level. This means that the still 
very tight labour market –  expressed by the 
ratio of vacancies to unemployed persons  – 
eased only slightly. The employment outlook 
did not deteriorate any further in October and 
remained stable, meaning that no notable de -
crease in employment is expected in the fourth 
quarter, either.
Given the tension between the current weak 
economy and a structurally very tight labour 
market, employment barely increased in Ger -
many in the third quarter. Averaged over the 
reporting quarter, seasonally adjusted total 
employment  was up by just 8,000 persons 
(+0.0%) from the previous quarter’s level. The 
most important  forms of employment – self-  
employment, low- paid part- time employment 
and employment subject to social security con -
tributions  – were more or less stagnant. For 
employment subject to social security contribu -
tions, the Federal Employment Agency’s initial 
sectoral estimates are available up to August. 
They show that adverse cyclical factors were 
predominant in temporary employment, manu -Labour market 
stable
Employment 
growth in some 
services sectors 
offsetting 
decline in manu -
facturing and 
tradeLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023Oct.44.044.545.045.546.0
32.032.533.033.534.034.535.0–1,000–5000+500+1,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–600–400–2000+200+400+600Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Oct.Oct.Million
Million
Million500700900Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployment
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies2EmployedJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Jul./
Aug.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
55

facturing, construction and trade, each of 
which saw a slight drop in employment. How -
ever, growth in services sectors which are 
barely affected by cyclical factors or are bene -
fiting from structural change completely made 
up for this. These include, in particular, human 
health and social work, the public sector, edu -
cation and training, as well as the IT sector and 
qualified business services. The number of em -
ployees in short- time work for economic rea -
sons initially saw a distinct decline in the third 
quarter. This was mainly because the last re -
maining arrangements for easier access to 
short- time work during the pandemic expired 
at the end of June. The latest data on new 
registrations point to a moderate increase in 
short- time work over the coming months, 
however.
Registered unemployment saw a further slight 
uptick in the third quarter. Looking at the quar -
terly average, the Federal Employment Agency 
recorded around 47,000 more persons as un -
employed compared with the previous quarter 
in seasonally adjusted terms. The unemploy -
ment rate climbed by 0.1 percentage point to 
5.7%. In October, unemployment rose signifi -
cantly to 2.68 million persons, pushing the un -
employment rate up to 5.8%. The year- on- year 
increase of around 165,000 persons is likely to 
be explained by cyclical factors for the most 
part. The cyclical weakness that has persisted 
for just over a year now is chiefly reflected in 
the higher unemployment among those receiv -
ing insurance benefits under the statutory un -
employment insurance scheme, which has 
gone up by 97,000 persons. However, some of 
the increase is still attributable to the gradual 
integration of numerous immigrants into the 
labour market. This is primarily apparent in the 
higher level of unemployment among recipi -
ents of citizens’ basic income.
Employment and unemployment have risen in 
tandem in the preceding quarters. This is be -
cause of an expansion in the labour force. 
Major immigration in the past few quarters 
– from Ukraine in 2022, for example – is cur -rently increasing the domestic supply of labour, 
which is in fact shrinking due to demographic 
factors. According to the Federal Employment 
Agency, the labour force3 grew by more than 
half a million persons (+566,000) year on year 
up to April 2023, the latest month for which 
data are available. The number of Germans in 
the labour force decreased by around 82,000. 
By contrast, in arithmetical terms almost 
650,000 non- German nationals were addition -
ally integrated into the labour market in some 
form within the space of 12 months. The num -
ber of unemployed foreign nationals grew by 
around 250,000 in the same period, but the 
number of those in work actually went up by 
400,000. The latter almost exclusively took 
jobs subject to social security contributions. 
Given the large proportion of refugees among 
recent immigrants and the particular challenges 
in labour market integration associated with 
this, this snapshot is proof of the high demand 
on the German labour market. In addition, 
there are immigrants who are undertaking pre -
paratory measures such as integration and lan -
guage courses or labour market policy meas -
ures but are not yet counted among the labour 
force.
Leading indicators of employment suggest that 
the current stable developments are set to con -
tinue over the next few months. According to 
the ifo Institute’s employment barometer, re -
cruitment plans for the next three months in 
trade and industry were marginally improved in 
October, but still point to a slight decline in em -
ployment. The equivalent barometer of the In -
stitute for Employment Research (IAB) – which 
covers all economic sectors – remained virtually 
unchanged in slightly positive territory. The 
Federal Employment Agency’s job index was 
also unchanged at last report. The number of Further slight 
uptick in 
unemployment
Immigration 
paramount to 
labour supplyLeading indica -
tors suggest 
continuation of 
current stable 
labour market 
developments
3 To differentiate by nationality, the limited reference figure 
of employed persons in the Federal Employment Agency’s 
statistics is used, which includes only workers subject to 
social security contributions and low- paid part- time em -
ployees as well as the unemployed. In particular, self-  
employed persons and civil servants cannot be included in 
this figure. The statistics also have a relatively long time lag 
of six months.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
56

vacancies barely decreased in October follow -
ing the declines of previous months. The num -
ber of jobs available remains high. Nonethe -
less, unemployment is likely to go up again in 
the coming months according to the un -
employment survey conducted by the Institute 
for Employment Research.
Wages and prices
Negotiated wages were up even more sharply 
in the third quarter of 2023 than in the second 
quarter. Including additional benefits, they in -
creased by a robust 4.7% on the year in the 
third quarter, compared with 3.9% in the prior 
quarter. As in the first two quarters of this year, 
large social contribution- exempt inflation com -
pensation bonuses played a key role.4 How -
ever, even excluding these bonus payments, 
negotiated wages rose by 3.0% on the year in 
the third quarter, representing markedly 
stronger growth than in the second quarter 
(2.5%). This shows that the permanent wage 
increases negotiated in the more recent wage 
agreements were also higher than those in the 
old agreements concluded before the current 
period of high inflation. These more recent 
agreements are becoming increasingly import -
ant. Actual earnings, in turn, are likely to have 
seen a significantly stronger rise than negoti -
ated wages in the third quarter of 2023.
The most recent wage agreements again con -
tained large pay rises for the most part. For ex -
ample, the pay settlement agreed between 
Deutsche Bahn and the German Railway and 
Transport Union comprises a wage increase of 
7.6% over a term of 12 months. Negotiations 
in the retail sector as well as in wholesale and 
foreign trade, which were launched back in 
April, have still not been concluded, nor is it 
likely that the wage dispute will be resolved in 
a timely manner. Therefore, at the recommen -
dation of the German Retail Federation, several 
retailers took advance action to voluntarily raise 
their scheduled rates of pay by 5.3% from 
1  October 2023. This is considerably lower than trade union ver.di’s wage demands of 
16% over a 12- month term. In the wholesale 
sector, employers offered permanent wage in -
creases of 5.1% after four months with a pay 
freeze, which is also far removed from the 13% 
wage rise being demanded.
By historical standards, the trade unions also 
made high wage demands for the other sec -
tors that were in negotiations in the fourth 
quarter: a 10.5% wage increase over a 12-  
month term, but at least €500 per month, in 
state government, and a rise of 8.5% plus a 
social component in the wood and plastics pro -
cessing industry. In the iron and steel industry, 
the IG Metall trade union is likewise calling for 
a wage increase of 8.5% over a 12- month term Negotiated 
wages up 
sharply in Q3; 
even stronger 
rise in actual 
earnings
Wage agree -
ments deliver 
large pay rises 
again; still no 
deal struck for 
tradeWage demands 
remain high2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023101234567
–+++++++Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Percentage
points
–2–10+1+2+3%
H1Wage drift1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 Wage drift 
is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual ear-
nings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche BundesbankQ3
H1
4 The timing of inflation compensation bonus payouts var -
ied in the third quarter: for example, according to the Bun -
desbank’s negotiated pay rate statistics, a large one- off in -
flation compensation bonus was paid in the automobile 
trade and service sector in July, while monthly bonus pay -
ments have been made in central and local government 
since July.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
57

and, in addition, a reduction in collectively 
agreed weekly working hours from 35 to 32 
hours with no cut in pay. Corporate profits also 
continued to increase, however. According to 
the profit margin indicator, which corresponds 
to the ratio of the gross value added deflator to 
unit labour costs, profit margins in the second 
quarter – the most recent quarter for which fig -
ures are available  – rose by a seasonally ad -
justed 1.1% on the year. In an environment of 
gradually declining price dynamics, profit mar -
gins should also normalise over time.
Consumer prices as measured by the Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) rose 
somewhat more slowly in the third quarter of 
2023 than in the previous quarter. Averaged 
over July to September 2023, they increased by 
a seasonally adjusted 0.8% (second quarter: 
1.0%). In particular, the rise in food and non-  
energy industrial goods prices was not as large 
as in previous quarters. This tallies with devel -
opments in commodity prices and at the up -stream stages of production. By contrast, the 
steep upward pressure on prices in services 
continued virtually unabated. Energy prices 
even rose significantly again in the third quarter 
after falling in the previous two quarters. 
Nevertheless, looking at the year- on- year fig -
ures, the inflation rate continued to decline 
markedly in the third quarter of 2023, dropping 
from 6.9% to 5.7%. The sharp rise in energy 
prices in the third quarter of 2022 had a damp -
ening effect here.5 By contrast, the core rate 
(excluding energy and food) actually edged up -
wards slightly, climbing 0.2 percentage point to 
5.8%, although this was due to one- off effects. 
Even additionally excluding the volatile com -
ponents of clothing and travel services, the in -
flation rate was at a high level (5.5%).Inflation rate 
down markedly 
in Q3 2023, 
partly due to 
base effectsPrice developments at economic stages as classified for HICP purposes
–60–40–200+20+40+60+80+100Year-on-year percentage change
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
1 Eurostat. 2 Bundesbank calculations (in euro) based on daily prices in USD as quoted by Bloomberg Finance L.P. 3 Including bever-
ages and tobacco products.  4 ECB calculations of DG AGRI prices based on the European Commission’s farm-gate and wholesale mar-
ket prices. 5 Analogous to HICP classification “non-energy industrial goods”; Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal 
Statistical Office.
Deutsche Bundesbank10010203040
–++++
505101520
–++++
–20–100+10+20+30+40+50Crude oil price2 (right-hand scale)
HICP – food1,3Producer prices for food in the euro area4 (right-hand scale)HICP – energy1
3036912
–++++
–30+3+6+9+12
HICP – non-energy industrial goods1Industrial producer prices5Oct
5 This dampening base effect even compensated for the 
one- off effect driving services inflation, which rose again 
on the year. It is related to the €9 local public transport 
ticket introduced as part of a temporary relief package last 
year. Like the fuel tax rebate, this had pushed the inflation 
rate down considerably from June to August 2022 and ex -
pired at the start of September 2022.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
58

In October, consumer prices fell by a seasonally 
adjusted 0.2% on the month, having risen by 
0.3% in September. This is mainly due to lower 
energy prices. However, food and services in -
flation also eased. The inflation rate saw an -
other significant year- on- year drop, decreasing 
from 4.3% to 3.0%.6 In October, too, the en -
ergy price- related base effect had a dampening 
impact. As a result, the core rate (excluding en -
ergy and food) decreased less sharply, from 
4.8% to 4.2%. However, it remains far above 
the historical average and exceeds headline in -
flation.
The inflation rate is likely to fluctuate sideways 
in the coming months. In the case of food and 
other goods, declining price pressures along 
supply chains and exerted by commodity prices 
will probably further dampen inflation. By con -
trast, the comparatively high upward pressure 
on prices in the services sector is expected to 
continue for a while, partly in the context of 
strong wage growth. In addition, the contribu -
tion of the energy component is likely to be -
come positive again over the coming months 
as the dampening base effects disappear and 
the carbon price charged on fossil fuels is raised 
at the turn of the year. In December, there will 
also be a significant price- driving effect as a re -
sult of the price- lowering Act on Emergency 
Aid for Natural Gas Heating for End Consumers 
(Erdgas-  Wärme-  Soforthilfegesetz)  adopted at 
the end of 2022. From the current perspective, 
inflation could therefore temporarily rise above 
4% again.
Orders received and outlook
The German economy is set to recover only ar -
duously from the period of weakness that has 
persisted since the outbreak of Russia’s war of 
aggression against Ukraine. Economic output is 
likely to once again decline slightly in the fourth 
quarter of 2023. However, it could then go 
back up somewhat in the first quarter of 2024. 
Domestic economic activity is expected to 
gradually start picking up speed, as house -holds’ real net income is anticipated to rise fur -
ther on the back of large wage rises and easing 
price pressures. Even if households hold back 
on spending for a while longer, it is likely that 
they will therefore gradually consume more 
again in real terms. Industry is still operating 
under adverse conditions. Weak foreign de -
mand and the fallout from the earlier energy 
price shock are continuing to curb its output. In 
addition, the boosting effects of drawing down 
existing order books are likely to diminish fur -
ther. Yet tentative signs of a slight improve -
ment after the turn of the year are beginning 
to emerge. For instance, the underlying trend 
in new orders suggests that foreign demand 
may have bottomed out. In addition, enter -
prises’ business expectations for the next six 
months as surveyed by the ifo Institute have 
recently brightened, albeit only slightly. In the 
construction sector, however, there is no short- 
term improvement on the horizon yet. The rise 
in financing and construction costs is continu -
ing to weigh heavily on demand for construc -
tion services, and output is expected to decline. 
Although the reach of order backlogs is still at 
a high level, it is declining rapidly. As a result, 
order backlogs are becoming less and less of a 
cushion against depressed demand and the 
many cancellations, especially in housing con -
struction.
Industrial output is likely to dampen macroeco -
nomic developments again in the fourth quar -
ter of 2023. Motor vehicle production could 
provide a boost, as indicated by higher produc -
tion figures for October according to the Ger -
man Association of the Automotive Industry. 
Overall, however, demand for industrial goods 
remained weak until recently. New orders in 
the third quarter of 2023 fell sharply on the 
quarter. However, this was mainly due to a lack 
of large orders. Even excluding large orders, 
there was still a decline, but its pace was mark -Continued 
significant  drop 
in inflation rate 
in October; core 
rate persistently 
high and above 
headline infla -
tion
Inflation likely to 
fluctuate around 
its present value 
in coming 
months
Economic out -
put likely to 
decline slightly 
again in 
Q4 2023, but 
could then pick 
up somewhat in 
Q1 2024Industry still in 
weak phase, but 
tentative signs 
of slight 
improvement 
after turn of 
year beginning 
to emerge
6 The rate according to the national consumer price index 
(CPI) was 3.8%, down from 4.5%. As the share of energy 
in the CPI is significantly lower than in the policy- relevant 
HICP , the sharp decline in energy prices was less heavily 
pronounced in the CPI.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
59

edly slower. New orders from abroad excluding 
large orders remained virtually unchanged, and 
those received from outside the euro area even 
rose slightly. In terms of the underlying trend, this may mean that foreign demand has bot -
tomed out. This is consistent with the fact that 
ifo export expectations for the manufacturing 
sector for the next three months have stabil -
ised, albeit at a low level. Moreover, according 
to ifo Institute surveys, industrial firms were 
slightly less pessimistic in October with regard 
to the expected business situation over the 
next six months. However, they scaled back 
their short- term production plans once again. 
So, all in all, tentative signs of a slight improve -
ment after the turn of the year are beginning 
to emerge.
The underlying trend in private consumption is 
likely to be pointing upwards in the current 
winter half- year. The labour market is proving 
broadly resilient to the slowdown in economic 
activity, wages are rising steeply and the infla -
tion rate is declining. However, it is likely that 
households are still not yet dedicating all of 
their rising real income to higher consumer 
spending. This is because consumer sentiment 
remains poor. The consumer climate index 
forecast by the market research institute GfK 
for November deteriorated further. On the 
other hand, motor vehicle purchases will prob -
ably contribute positively to consumption, as 
has recently been the case. According to the 
German Association of the Automotive Indus -
try, private car registrations rose again in Octo -
ber. Surveys by the ifo Institute for consumption- 
related service providers also indicate that 
households are gradually becoming more will -
ing to spend. Business expectations in the retail 
sector have thus improved in recent months.Private con -
sumption should 
gradually bene -
fit from rising 
real wages
List of references
German Association of the Automotive industry (2023), Car production in Germany is weakening, 
press release of 5 October 2023, available at https://www.vda.de/en/press/press-releases/2023/  
231005_PM_Market-Data-GermanyDemand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 23758090100110120
–30–150+15+30+45+60
100110120130140
–30–150+15+30Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data
Log scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Log scale
Main construction orders
%%Monthly
Total
Excluding large 
ordersDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
60

Public finances*
General government budget
2023 as a whole and outlook 
for 2024
Government finances are continuing to recover 
further in 2023. This is a potentially surprising 
development given that there has been no let- 
up in burdens stemming from the energy crisis 
and weak economic growth. However, these 
factors are outweighed by the fact that budget -
ary burdens brought about by coronavirus re -
sponse measures are now no longer a factor 
and that nominal gross domestic product (GDP) 
is continuing to see highly dynamic growth. 
Overall, the deficit ratio could be around 2%, 
compared with 2.5% last year. The debt ratio 
will also continue to decline on account of the 
strong dynamics in nominal GDP (denominator 
effect). By mid- 2023, the debt ratio had already 
fallen markedly to 64.6% from around 66% at 
the end of 2022.
Now that coronavirus response measures have 
come to an end, their strain on the govern -
ment budget is easing; the resulting relief is 
likely to amount to 1¼% of GDP . Such elapsing 
measures include, in particular, healthcare 
spending and business aid from central govern -
ment, which raised the deficit considerably last 
year and play virtually no role in the current 
year. Other influences will have a neutral effect 
on the deficit or increase it when taken in isol -
ation.
– Government expenditure on temporary as -
sistance during the energy crisis could be 
slightly higher in 2023 than in 2022 (1½% of 
GDP). In the current year, energy price 
brakes constitute the largest spending items. 
Moreover, considerable shortfalls in revenue 
are occurring due to the fact that portions 
of the wages being paid out are inflation 
compensation bonuses that are exempt 
from social contributions. Last year, transfers made to gas trading companies, energy 
price allowances and emergency natural gas 
heating aid represented the largest out -
flows.
– The economic cycle is having only a slight 
impact on deficit developments. This is 
mainly due to the robust labour market: un -
employment is rising fairly moderately, and 
employment is actually experiencing rather 
positive developments. In addition, gross 
wages and salaries are growing significantly. 
However, following a sharp rise last year, 
profit- related taxes are developing much 
more slowly than one would expect from 
the macroeconomic variables.
– Although permanent tax cuts will bring 
down revenue (in particular compensation 
for bracket creep in 2022), the additional re -
ceipts generated by progressive taxation in 
the current year and higher contribution 
rates to the health, long- term care and un -
employment insurance schemes will be on a 
similar scale.
– On the expenditure side, interest expend -
iture is rising steeply and weighing on the 
budget (departing from a low starting level). 
This is mainly due to the elevated financing 
costs of inflation- linked securities. The higher 
interest rates are not yet making themselves 
felt to such a great extent; they are set to 
weigh on the budgets mainly via larger inter -
est payments on follow- up financing. Some 
other government expenditure items are 
likely to increase more sharply, with a time 
lag, owing to high inflation.1Government 
finances 
continuing  to 
recover in 2023 
since temporary 
coronavirus 
response meas -
ures phased 
out; …
… other influ -
ences have a 
neutral effect 
on the deficit 
or increase it, 
taken in 
isolation 
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. This is followed by reporting on budgetary 
developments (government finance statistics) in the areas 
for which data are available for the third quarter of 2023.
1 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), 
pp. 63 f.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
61

Developments next year will also depend on 
how central and state governments amend 
their plans following the ruling of the Federal 
Constitutional Court (see pp. 69 ff.). Irrespect -
ive of the ruling, however, the deficit is already 
expected to continue to decline due to de -
creased budgetary burdens arising from the en -
ergy price measures. As central government 
finances the lion’s share of these measures, it 
also stands to benefit the most from the de -
cline. However, central government is planning 
significant additional spending elsewhere, es -
pecially in the Armed Forces Fund. Moreover, 
high inflation is set to have a lagged impact on 
central, state and local government budgets. In 
particular, increased prices will be reflected 
considerably later in the state governments’ 
personnel expenditure, a major spending item, 
than in revenue. The social security funds could 
again close the year with a surplus. Overall, 
their expenditure will probably rise dynamically. 
However, the reference variables for contribu -
tions are expected to see considerable growth, 
too. Moreover, the higher contribution rate for 
the long- term care insurance scheme since 
mid- 2023 and the probable rise in contribution 
rates to the health insurance institutions will 
generate additional revenue.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government 
Tax revenue
Third quarter of 2023
Tax revenue rose sharply by 12½% in the third 
quarter.2 This increase is predominantly attrib -
utable to the fact that large temporary tax cuts 
from the previous year no longer apply (primar -
ily the energy price allowance). Even without 
these temporary tax cuts from the previous 
year, though, tax revenue would probably have 
seen solid growth.The phased- out temporary tax cuts of the pre -
vious year primarily concerned wage tax, where 
receipts surged by 30%. For example, in the 
third quarter of 2022, employees received the 
energy price allowance of €300 financed from 
wage tax revenue. Persons entitled to child 
benefits received a bonus child benefit pay -
ment. In addition, income tax cuts at mid- year 
2022 were offset retroactively at that point in 
time. They thus reduced tax revenue dispropor -
tionately in the third quarter of the previous 
year. The resulting surge in revenue was damp -
ened by significant permanent legislative 
changes that entered into force in 2023. The 
most important factor was that legislators ad -
justed the income tax rate to compensate for 
the high bracket creep of the previous year. 
Furthermore, additional one-  off wage pay -
ments of up to a total of €3,000 will count as 
tax- exempt inflation compensation bonuses 
until the end of 2024. This year’s tax cuts and 
the phased- out temporary tax cuts of the previ -
ous year are concealing a still positive under -
lying trend: even without these influences, in -
come from wage tax would probably have 
risen significantly.
Revenue from VAT rose dynamically (+7%). 
However, this rise was due not only to price 
effects but also to the retroactive recording of 
tax payments received in other EU countries. In 
line with the “one- stop shop” procedure for 
transactions conducted in Germany, these pay -
ments were reported centrally in the seller’s 
country of registration. They were then trans -
ferred to the Federal Central Tax Office, which 
subsequently passed revenue on to the re -
spective federal states.3 Tax revenue from this 
procedure came to just over €2.8 billion and 
was particularly high in July. Adjusted for this, 
the growth in VAT would likely have stood at 
3%.Expiring crisis 
measures reduce 
deficit further 
in 2024, but 
expansionary 
stance in other 
areas
Solid trend in 
tax revenue – 
furthermore, 
strong growth 
due to phasing- 
out of 2022 
temporary tax 
cutsStrong growth in 
wage tax due to 
one- off effects
VAT sees add -
itional revenue 
from “one- stop 
shop” procedure
2 Including EU shares in German tax revenue, but exclud -
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.
3 See also Federal Ministry of Finance (2023a), pp. 58 f.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
62

Tax estimate: significant revenue growth in 
2024 and 2025 reduced due to foreseeable 
tax cuts not included in the tax estimate
According to the latest official tax estimate, tax 
revenue will rise by 2½% on the year in 2023. 
Changes in tax legislation are expected to curb 
this expansion sharply on balance.4 Particular 
factors weighing on revenue are compensation 
for the extensive bracket creep of the previous 
year, the reduced VAT rate on natural gas and 
district heating, the increase in child benefits 
and the exemption from tax of the inflation 
compensation bonuses. Compounding these 
factors is a strong decline in real estate acquisi -
tion tax. This is likely reflecting, in particular, 
the rise in financing costs that is resulting in 
decreased real estate purchases and falling 
prices. Profit- related taxes increase only slightly in the projection, an assessment that is based 
on the subdued cash developments over the 
course of the year to date. The fact that tax 
revenue is still climbing markedly overall is due, 
in particular, to the dynamic growth in nominal 
private consumption and gross wages and sal -Subdued tax 
growth in 2023 
on account of 
sharp tax cutsTax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 to Q3Estimate 
for 2023 1Q3
2022 2023 2022 2023
€ billionYear-on-year 
changeYear-
on-year 
change
in % € billionYear-on-year 
change
€ billion % € billion %
Tax revenue, total 2 593.4 608.5 + 15.1 +  2.5 +  2.2 185.6 208.7 + 23.2 + 12.5
of which:
Wage tax 3 160.0 171.6 + 11.6 +  7.2 +  4.7 43.4 56.4 + 12.9 + 29.8
Profi  t-related taxes 120.5 120.6 +  0.2 +  0.1 +  0.1 39.0 42.5 +  3.5 +  9.0
Assessed income tax 4 55.7 52.2 –  3.5 –  6.3 –  5.8 17.6 17.0 –  0.6 –  3.3
Corporation tax 5 33.1 33.0 –  0.1 –  0.4 –  0.4 10.7 9.9 –  0.8 –  7.7
Non- assessed taxes on 
earnings 26.2 29.8 +  3.6 + 13.8 + 12.7 9.4 13.4 +  3.9 + 41.8
Withholding tax on inter-
est income  and capital  
gains 5.4 5.7 +  0.2 +  3.9 + 11.3 1.2 2.2 +  1.0 + 80.2
VAT6 212.5 216.9 +  4.4 +  2.1 +  2.9 71.2 76.1 +  4.9 +  6.9
Other consumption-related 
taxes 7 62.3 66.2 +  3.9 +  6.2 +  5.4 20.0 22.9 +  3.0 + 14.8
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Working Party on Tax Revenue  Estimates and Bundesbank calculations. 1  According to offi   cial tax 
estimate of October 2023. 2 Comprises joint taxes as well as central government taxes and state government taxes. Including EU shares 
in German tax revenue, including customs duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Child benefi  ts and subsidies for 
supplementary private pension plans deducted from revenue. 4  Employee refunds and research grants deducted from revenue. 5  Research 
grants deducted from revenue. 6 VAT and import VAT. 7 Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, air traf-
fi  c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lotteries, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Tax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Comprises joint taxes as 
well as central government taxes and state government taxes. 
Including EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs 
duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2021 2022 2023505101520
–++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figures
4 As a general rule, the tax estimate is based on the current 
legal situation; planned legislative changes are therefore 
not included. See p. 64.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
63

aries. This reflects the high price increases. In -
flation compensation bonuses aside, however, 
wages are still rising significantly. In addition, 
the phasing- out of the energy price allowances 
(paid out at the expense of tax revenue) is sup -
porting tax growth.
For 2024, the tax estimate projects revenue 
growth of 5%. The main reason for this is that 
nominal macroeconomic reference variables 
for tax revenue will increase significantly. Fur -
thermore, fewer tax- exempt inflation compen -
sation bonuses are expected to be paid out 
than in 2023. Legislative changes will have a 
broadly neutral impact on growth: although 
the income tax rate will also fall considerably in 
2024 in order to compensate for bracket creep 
from 2023,5 bracket creep in that year is likely 
to be far more than offset, and the tax rate will 
thus be lowered to a greater degree than envis -
aged in view of inflation in 2024. According to 
the projection, the reduced VAT rate on natural 
gas and district heating will return to its regular 
level at the end of March 2024. Not least, the 
accelerated write- offs of previous years will 
support growth, having dampened it up to 
2023. As from 2024, correspondingly fewer 
write- offs will then be made, boosting growth.
According to the tax estimate, revenue in 2025 
will be up by 5½% – slightly more than in 2024. 
The growth of nominal aggregate tax reference 
variables, including bracket creep, will only re -
sult in a tax increase of 4%. However, this in -
crease will be heightened by the fact that bur -
dens resulting from legislative changes will be 
lower than in preceding years: it will no longer 
be possible to disburse wage components as 
tax- exempt inflation compensation bonuses, 
and accelerated write- offs from previous years 
will continue to bolster revenue. Last but not 
least, the standard VAT rate on natural gas and 
district heating will then apply again for the 
whole year.
Compared with this official tax estimate, how -
ever, planned legislative changes could slow 
growth. For example, from 2024, the planned Growth Opportunities Act will accelerate write- 
offs for enterprises again, in particular (see also 
the table on p. 65). Furthermore, the electricity 
tax for enterprises in the manufacturing sector 
is to be lowered. These two changes would re -
duce the growth rate in 2024 by ½ percentage 
point to 4.7%. Moreover, if legislators continue 
to compensate for bracket creep from 2025 
onwards, growth in that year will fall more 
sharply than in 2024 – by 1 percentage point to 
4½%. However, this is also due to the fact that 
revenue shortfalls will increase markedly on ac -
count of the Growth Opportunities Act. How -
ever, the final deliberations on the Federal Gov -
ernment’s budget plan for 2024 have not yet 
been concluded (see also pp. 69 ff. for informa -
tion on the Federal Constitutional Court’s rul -
ing, which still needs to be considered).
Revenue is projected to rise by an average of 
3½% over the period from 2026 to 2028, with 
the incorporated legislative changes no longer 
playing any major role. The growth is therefore 
a fairly direct reflection of the assumptions re -
garding macroeconomic developments and 
progressive taxation.
Estimate for 2023 and 2024 largely 
confirmed  – slight upward revisions from 
2025 onwards
The new tax estimate largely confirms the fig -
ures for the current and coming year in the tax 
estimate from May. For one thing, cash receipts 
up to and including September 2023 were 
somewhat lower than had been expected in 
spring, particularly in the case of profit- related 
taxes. Furthermore, higher shortfalls are now 
anticipated from tax- free inflation compensa -
tion bonuses. By contrast, revised assumptions 
about nominal growth in the macroeconomic 
tax reference variables result in increasing add -
itional revenue, taken in isolation. The esti -
mated figures for 2025 onwards are markedly 
higher (+¼% of GDP). However, the elevated 
price increases that are now assumed mean Significant 
growth expected 
in 2024 – 
impact of legis -
lative changes 
almost neutral
Significant 
growth also 
projected  for 
2025 on the 
back of legisla -
tive changesDistinct revenue 
shortfalls envis -
aged due to 
planned legisla -
tive changes
Growth of 3½% 
projected from 
2026 onwards
Tax estimate 
from May 
largely con -
firmed
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
64

that no additional budgetary leeway is likely to 
be provided.
Central government finances
Overview: central government including 
off- budget entities
The central government deficit including off-  
budget entities6 was considerably lower in the 
third quarter of 2023 than it was one year ago, 
falling by €26 billion to €8½ billion. The deficit 
in the core budget plummeted, while the sur -
plus of the off- budget entities decreased some -
what.
For the year as a whole, the budget plan (from 
the end of 2022) envisages a very large deficit 
of €232 billion, of which €146 billion is attrib -
utable to the off- budget entities.7 In its Octo -
ber outlook for European budget surveillance, 
the Federal Government expects a significantly lower overall deficit of €157 billion,8 citing re -
duced energy price support needs as the rea -
son for this. However, the deficit calculation 
still appears to be rather cautious.
According to the draft budget for 2024 from 
late summer, central governments’ total deficit 
should fall to €86 billion. With a deficit of €18 
Q3 2023: overall 
deficit down 
considerably
2023 as a 
whole: very 
large deficit 
planned, but 
considerably 
more favourable 
outcome likelyOﬃ   cial tax estimate fi  gures and the Federal Government’s macroeconomic projections
 
Item 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028
Tax revenue1
€ billion 916.1 964.1 1,017.1 1,054.5 1,088.3 1,124.0
% of GDP 22.2 22.4 22.8 23.0 23.1 23.3
Year-on-year change (%) 2.3 5.2 5.5 3.7 3.2 3.3
Revision compared with previous tax estimate 
(€ billion) – 4.5 1.9 7.8 8.3 9.8 .
Memo item: Revenue shortfalls resulting from 
prospective  tax relief (€ billion)
Planned Growth Opportunities Act . – 1.4 – 7.9 – 10.2 –  7.8 –  4.3
Revenue shortfalls if bracket creep as from 
2025 is compensated for in same manner as 
previously 2 . . – 5.0 –  9.3 – 13.7 – 18.2
Real GDP growth (%)
Autumn projection (October 2023) – 0.4 1.3 1.5 0.6 0.6 0.6
Spring projection (April 2023) 0.4 1.6 0.8 0.8 0.8 .
Nominal GDP growth (%)
Autumn projection (October 2023) 6.5 4.4 3.5 2.7 2.7 2.7
Spring projection (April 2023) 6.1 4.0 2.8 2.8 2.8 .
Sources: Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates and Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action. 1 Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue, including customs duties, including receipts from local government taxes. 2 Since 2014, the income tax scale has 
been shifted year after year, usually in line with the estimated infl  ation of the previous year. The fi  gures shown here are the revenue short-
falls that will result if this practice is continued. The calculations are roughly estimated and are based on the Federal Government’s current 
autumn projection and wage tax receipts based on current tax estimates (according to the national accounts). The basic income tax 
allowance  also shifts in line with the infl  ation rate of the previous year.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6 Central government off- budget entities that use the 
single-  entry system and for which data for the reporting 
quarter are already available are included here (see 
pp. 68 f.). These comprise, in particular, (i) the Economic 
Stabilisation Fund for Energy Assistance (ESF- E), (ii) the off- 
budget entities formerly included in the debt brake up to 
2021 and (iii) the Armed Forces Fund (see items 16, 17 and 
20 in the table on p. 67). In addition, the reporting group 
for off- budget entities includes, above all, (iv) other funds 
shown in the central government budget’s borrowing plan 
plus planned figures (for making provisions for repayment 
and for extending childcare, item 18, ibid.), as well as (v) 
entities without published planned figures (thus not count -
ing towards the planned deficit), such as the precautionary 
funds for civil servants’ pensions (item 19, ibid.). In particu -
lar, the bad bank FMSW, the fund for the disposal of nu -
clear energy waste, the motorway company and the devel -
opment aid company GIZ are completely excluded.
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), p. 69.
8 See Federal Ministry of Finance (2023b), p. 52.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
65

billion, the core budget made full use of the 
scope for borrowing afforded by the debt 
brake. In addition, a deficit of €68 billion was 
planned in special funds. Following the ruling 
of the Federal Constitutional Court (see the box 
on pp. 69 ff.), the plans are currently being re -
vised. The final deliberations have not yet been 
concluded and the planned deficits for 2024 
cannot therefore yet be quantified.
Central government budget (core budget): 
third quarter and 2023 as a whole
In the core budget, the deficit fell very sharply 
to €10 billion in the third quarter, compared 
with almost €39 billion in the same quarter of 
2022. Bolstered by tax receipts, revenue surged 
by 19% (+€17 billion). Total expenditure saw a 
steep decline of 9% (-€12 billion), with the 
phased- out transfers to the Climate Fund ac -
counting for €6 billion of this decline. Pandemic- 
related burdens also expired, primarily pay -ments made to the social security funds (-€5 
billion) and to enterprises (-€3½ billion).
The deficit in the core budget could be signifi -
cantly lower this year than estimated in the 
budget (€86 billion). Revenue from the EU off- 
budget entity for pandemic relief (NGEU) is set 
to result in losses relative to the budget plan. 
Just under €11 billion had been planned in, but 
only €4 billion has been requested thus far.9 
However, the latest tax estimate anticipates 
additional revenue of €3 billion compared with 
the budget plan (taking into account the pre -
cautionary estimates for changes in tax legisla -
tion). On the expenditure side, €10 billion is 
earmarked for a generational capital fund. As a 
decision on the legal framework for this is still 
pending, it is not yet certain that these funds 
will actually be paid out. After the third quarter, 
further relief appears possible, not least in the 
areas of operating expenses, personnel10 and 
some grant items. Interest expenditure, on the 
other hand, could reach its high projected level. 
For instance, the Federal Ministry of Finance is 
tap issuing long- dated bonds with coupons 
well below the market rate in order to achieve 
the intended circulation volume. The govern -
ment books the discounts to the issue price 
and the redemption amount immediately and 
in full. This is now placing a heavy strain on re -
ported interest expenditure, making it more 
likely to fluctuate quite sharply.11
In order to comply with the debt brake limit in 
the core budget, the deficit would have to re -
main €9 billion below the budgeted figure, ac -
cording to the latest projection from autumn 
(excluding changes in financial transactions or 
higher withdrawals from reserves). This is due 
to the way in which central government calcu -
lates the cyclical effects it deducts from the 
debt brake when implementing the budget. Plans for 2024 
not yet finalised 
following Fed -
eral Constitu -
tional Court 
ruling 
Core budget in 
Q3: increased 
tax revenue 
and declining 
expenditure 
brought deficit 
down very 
sharplyCentral govern -
ment budget for 
2023 could 
close much 
more favourably 
than planned
Deficit target 
would have to 
be significantly 
undershot to 
comply with 
debt brakeFiscal balance of central government 
budget *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Feder-
al Ministry of Finance. * Excluding off-budget entities. Not ad-
justed for financial transactions or cyclical effects. 1 Excluding 
the transfer of €60 billion from the core budget to  the Climate 
Fund, which the Federal Constitutional Court deemed  unconsti-
tutional in its ruling of 15 November 2023.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4–200–150–100–500100500
––
2023
20212021Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
2022€ billion
20222023
1
9 See Federal Ministry of Finance (2023c).
10 The €3 billion in provisions exceeds the approved remu -
neration adjustments.
11 For information on a proposed recording method that 
would solve these problems, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2021a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
66

Key central government budget data*
€ billion
Item Actual 2022 Target 2023Draft 2024
As at 
18 Aug. 
2023As at 
17 Nov. 
2023
1.Expenditure of central government budget (CGB) 1 480.7 476.3 445.7
of which:
1.a Investment 46.2 71.5 54.2
1.b Global spending increases/ cuts – –   6.9 –  9.7
2.Revenue of CGB 1,2364.7 389.9 427.7
of which:
2.a Tax revenue 3 337.2 358.1 375.3
2.b Global revenue increases/ shortfalls – –   4.9 1.4
3.Fiscal balance (2.-1.) – 116.0 –  86.4 – 18.0
4.Coin seigniorage of CGB 0.1 0.2 0.1
5.Transfer to (–) / withdrawal from reserves (+) in CGB 0.5 40.5 1.4
6.Net borrowing (–) / repayment (+) of CGB (3.+4.+5.) – 115.4 –  45.6 – 16.6
7.Cyclical component in the budget procedure 4–   1.8 –  15.3 –  2.4 – 7.7
8.Balance of fi  nancial transactions of CGB –   4.1 –  17.7 –  0.6
9.Structural net borrowing (–) / repayment (+) (6.-7.-8.) – 109.5 –  12.6 – 13.5
10. Amount exceeding limit in CGB (13.-9.) 97.0 – –
11. Amount exceeding limit incl. Economic Stabilisation Fund for  Energy 
Assistance (ESF-E) (10.-15.) 276.4 – –
12. Memo item: Amount exceeding limit with balance of off-budget 
entities  (10.-16a.-17.) 101.7 127.3 51.5
13. Standard upper limit: Structural net borrowing (0.35% of GDP) 5–  12.5 –  12.6 – 13.5
14. Structural balance of CGB (3.-7.-8.) – 110.1 –  53.4 – 15.0
14.a As before, with estimate of potential output acc. to 2023 autumn 
forecast – 111.2 –  57.5 –  9.7
15. Structural net borrowing of ESF-E – 179.4
16. Defi  cit of ESF-E –  30.2 – 121.2 – 13.9
16.a Defi  cit of ESF-E excluding fi  nancial transactions –   9.7 – 106.0 – 13.9
16.b ESF funds remaining thereafter 169.8 48.6 34.7
17. Balance of special funds (SFs) relevant to the debt brake prior to 2022 64.9 –  21.4 – 37.6
17.a Climate and Transformation Fund 5.3 –  14.1 – 29.2
17.b 2013 Flood Relief Fund –   0.2 –   0.2 –  0.2
17.c Fund to Promote Municipal Investment –   0.7 –   1.0 –  0.9
17.d Digitalisation Fund 2.1 –   2.7 –  4.2
17.e Fund for Primary School- Age Childcare Provision –   0.1 –   0.4 –  0.4
17.f 2021 Flood Relief Fund –   1.6 –   3.0 –  2.7
18. Balance of SFs for making provisions for repayment and for extending  
childcare 4.4 5.5 3.0
19. Balance of other SFs without own constitutional rules 7–   9.9
20. Balance of Armed Forces Fund – –   8.4 – 19.2
20.a Borrowing authorisation remaining thereafter 100.0 91.6 72.4
21. Balance of CGB and SFs (3.+16.+17.+18.+19.+20.) – 146.8 – 231.7 – 85.7
22. Reserves of SFs for 16. and 17. 286.9 144.4 92.9
23. Central government assets in civil servants’ pension reserves and pen-
sion fund 8 26.3
24. Level of general reserves 48.2 7.7 6.3
25. Balance on control account 47.7 47.7 47.7
26. Total outstanding repayment amount including Armed Forces Fund 
(from 11. and 20.) 538.0 546.4 565.6
27. Total outstanding repayment amount from NGEU grants e,930 38 61
* Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. Data prior to the ruling of the Federal Constitutional Court of 15 
November 2023. For methodological notes, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2016). 1 Excluding transfers to/withdrawals from reserves and 
including net tax revenue (see footnote 3). 2 Excluding coin seigniorage. 3 After deduction of supplementary central government trans-
fers, shares of energy tax revenue, compensation under the 2009 reform of motor vehicle tax and budgetary recovery assistance to fed-
eral states. 4 For 2022 according to the September 2023 fi  gures, for 2023 according to the budget plan, and for the years thereafter 
according to the 2023 spring and autumn forecasts. 5  Based on GDP in the year before the (comprehensive) budget is prepared. 
6 Budgeted fi  gures for 2023 and 2024 (August) from borrowing plan. 7 Entities with quarterly data, but excluding data on results in bor-
rowing plan. Above all, ESF (excluding ESF-E) and pension provisions. 8 Market values according to central government balance sheet for 
2022. Continuous infl  ows; withdrawals from the fund planned from 2030, from reserves from 2032. 9 NGEU budgeted fi  gures and esti-
mates, each multiplied by Germany’s share of 25½% in EU gross national income.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
67

What is significant is that price inflation is 
stronger than planned, meaning that nominal 
GDP will rise more strongly in the new projec -
tion than was assumed when the budget was 
being drawn up. This stronger increase will re -
duce the cyclical burden considered (item 7 in 
the table on p. 67). Accordingly, the debt brake 
borrowing ceiling is more ambitious, as the 
government is allowed to take out fewer loans 
labelled as cyclical borrowing. If the debt brake 
limit cannot be complied with once the budget 
is implemented, the excess will be recorded in 
the control account as a debit entry. Thus far, 
there have only been credit entries in the con -
trol account, with a balance of almost €48 bil -
lion being built up between 2016 and 2019 
(item 25 in the table on p.  67). The escape 
clause was in force from 2020 to 2022. Net 
borrowing above the limit was therefore com -
patible with the debt brake, but tied to a spe -
cific repayment plan.
Draft central government budget for 2024
In its draft budget from the summer (“Draft 
2024” column, “As at 18  Aug. 2023” in the 
table on p. 67), the Federal Government cut 
net borrowing sharply to €17 billion relative to 
the 2023 budget plan. At the same time, far 
fewer funds were scheduled to be withdrawn 
from the reserve (item 5, ibid.), with the result 
that the deficit in the 2024 core budget (item 
3, ibid.) should decline even more strongly than 
net borrowing. However, sharply rising deficits 
were planned in the Climate Fund and the Fed -
eral Armed Forces Fund (items 17.a and 20, 
ibid.).12
The Bundestag’s Budget Committee intended 
to finalise its draft budget in mid- November. 
However, following the Federal Constitutional 
Court’s recent ruling on the second supple -
mentary central government budget for 2021 
(for more on this, see the box on pp. 69 ff.), the 
final deliberations were postponed beyond the 
date that this Monthly Report went to press.Off- budget entities: third quarter and 
outlook  for 2023 as a whole
Central government’s off- budget entities13 
posted a surplus of €1½ billion in the third 
quarter of 2023 (see the chart on p. 72). In the 
same quarter of the previous year – prior to the 
launch of the credit- financed energy assistance 
branch of the Economic Stabilisation Fund 
(ESF-E) – this had amounted to €4 billion.
– The ESF- E’s deficit remained at €3 billion in 
the third quarter. Once again, owing to the 
lack of data, the deficits of the ESF- E cannot 
be attributed to individual assistance pro -
grammes. In arithmetical terms, the deficit 
corresponds to the payments made by cen -
tral government to stabilise grid fees. Ac -
cording to this, the energy price brakes less 
the (apparently small- scale) skimming of 
extraordinary revenues earned by electricity 
producers no longer strained the ESF- E. The 
rest of the ESF recorded a higher surplus 
from repayments of loans to enterprises. 
This improvement almost offset the deficit in 
the ESF- E.
– The Climate Fund recorded a reduced sur -
plus owing to the absence of the central 
government grant. Revenue from emission 
allowances offset most of the burdens.
For 2023 as a whole, the deficit in off- budget 
entities will be considerably lower than planned 
at the end of 2022 (€146 billion), with all three 
of the major special funds (the ESF-  E, the Cli -
mate Fund and the Armed Forces Fund) seeing 
more favourable developments. All in all, the 
deficit of central government’s off- budget en -
tities could be somewhat lower than in the pre -
vious year (€31 billion).14Summer draft 
budget: core 
budget deficit 
expected to fall 
very significantly
Final 
deliberations  
postponed fol -
lowing Federal 
Constitutional 
Court rulingSurplus due to 
return flows 
from corporate 
loans and 
revenue  from 
emission allow -
ances; energy 
price support 
only slightly 
significant 
Deficits in off- 
budget entities 
remain consider -
ably below 
planned figure 
in 2023
12 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b).
13 According to data from the Federal Ministry of Finance, 
i.e. excluding bad banks and other entities that use com -
mercial double- entry bookkeeping.
14 See footnote 6 on p. 65 for the off- budget entities in -
cluded in this section.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
68

Federal Constitutional Court issues ruling on debt brake
Overview
In mid- November 2023, the Federal Consti-
tutional Court issued a far- reaching ruling 
on the debt brake enshrined in Germany’s 
Basic Law. The ruling concerns central gov-
ernment’s second supplementary budget 
for 2021. However, it also establishes gen-
eral principles and thus has a wider impact 
on central and state government fi  nances. 
The ruling underscores the objective of the 
debt brake, namely to limit government 
debt, and precludes a loose interpretation 
of the constitutional requirements. It is now 
up to fi  scal policymakers to adjust their 
plans with this in mind, in part with a view 
to eliminating uncertainties.
The ruling strengthens the binding effect of 
the debt brake. To ensure that debt is 
curbed in line with the constitutional provi-
sions, the Court has issued clear rules on 
the use of the escape clause. These state 
that legislators may not use the escape 
clause to prefund future budgets. Yet this 
does not mean that measures currently 
planned in this context have to be scrapped. 
However, it will be necessary to either repri-
oritise on the expenditure side or make ad-
justments on the revenue side to balance 
government expenditure and revenue.
Ultimately, only binding fi  scal rules can safe-
guard sound government fi  nances. Fiscal 
rules should not be bypassed. This does not 
preclude a stability- oriented reform of the 
rules. There would be a case for moderately 
expanding the regular borrowing frame-
work if the debt ratio is below the Maas-
tricht reference value of 60%. This requires 
a majority large enough to amend the con-
stitution and must be in line with the rules 
of the fi  scal compact.Ruling on second supplementary budget 
for 2021 with clarifi  cations on debt 
brake
Specifi  cally, the Court declared central gov-
ernment’s second supplementary budget 
for 2021 unconstitutional. This judgement 
directly reduces the scope for defi  cit within 
the Climate and Transformation Fund (Cli-
mate Fund) by €60 billion. In addition, the 
Court revisited, in particular, the defi  nition 
of the debt brake escape clause in Germa-
ny’s Basic Law. According to this clause, the 
legislator may issue emergency borrowing 
authorisations only if a link between the cri-
sis situation and the debt- fi  nanced meas-
ures is established. Moreover, the govern-
ment may use the borrowing entitlements 
only in the year for which the legislator has 
identifi  ed a crisis situation. In principle, this 
also applies if the funds have been trans-
ferred to special funds.1
The Court has underscored the need to 
draw up budgets for one year at a time (an-
nuality of budgeting), limit the use of 
budgetary authorisations to the respective 
year (annuality of entitlements) and book 
items reaching maturity in that year. It 
noted that the annual borrowing limit im-
posed under the debt brake also includes 
those central government special funds that 
do not have their own borrowing author-
isation. This was the case prior to the 
changeover applying as of the 2021 annual 
accounts. Since then, central government 
has been including transfers from the core 
budget to a special fund in its calculations 
for the borrowing limit; defi  cits to arise in 
this special fund in later years are then not 
1 The Bundesbank has already drawn attention to this 
issue (see Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), p. 38), going 
on to explain that using emergency borrowing too 
widely considerably weakens the binding effect of the 
debt brake; see Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), p. 39.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
69

taken into account in the debt brake.2 It 
would appear that this practice now also 
needs to change.
The ruling and clarifi  cations on the debt 
brake in the Basic Law are far- reaching. 
Both central government and numerous 
federal states have extensive reserves from 
emergency borrowing and plan to use the 
reserves to fund measures (see below). Al-
though the Court ruling directly concerned 
only the topping up of the Climate Fund via 
the second supplementary budget for 2021, 
other cases will probably also need to be 
addressed. Just how the plans will be ad-
justed was still the subject of intense de-
bate as this report went to press. To avoid 
legal risks in the fi  nancing of government 
projects, it is advisable to take note of the 
Court’s clear indications outlining the inten-
tion of the debt brake. This will also create 
planning certainty for both citizens and 
fi  rms.
Impact on central government
The Court ruling initially has a direct impact 
on central government’s plans for the Cli-
mate Fund, immediately undoing the €60 
billion transfer of borrowing authorisations 
booked to reserves. This leaves the Climate 
Fund with a formal reserve of just €31 bil-
lion, predominantly stemming from authori-
sations for emergency borrowing.
Central government has also used the es-
cape clause to top up reserves of other spe-
cial funds and has already planned how to 
spend the amounts. Particular mention 
should be made of borrowing authorisa-
tions of €200 billion, which central govern-
ment assigned to the Economic Stabilisa-
tion Fund for Energy (ESF- E) in 2022 via the 
escape clause. By the end of 2022, just over 
€30 billion of this amount had been used 
for expenditure and the remainder was 
booked to the reserve. A large structural 
defi  cit of €106 billion is planned for the 
ESF- E this year, especially for the energy price brakes (see item 16.a in the table on 
p. 67), which is budgeted to be fi  nanced 
from the reserve. Actual expenditure on the 
measures in the ESF- E is likely to be much 
lower. In order to limit legal uncertainties, it 
would be appropriate to adjust the plans 
for 2023 in a timely manner. In the original 
plans, there was economic justifi  cation for 
using emergency borrowing in 2023. The 
energy crisis had a strong impact at the turn 
of the year and the outlook was extremely 
uncertain.
For the coming year, central government 
has so far envisaged a defi  cit of €29 billion 
for the Climate Fund. Further large defi  cits 
were planned for the following years. This 
would have depleted the Climate Fund’s re-
serve, which had been formed via the es-
cape clause. As soon as the ruling was is-
sued, central government immediately 
postponed the budget plan for this major 
fund.
According to the current status of plans, 
further defi  cits were envisaged in 2024 in 
the ESF- E (€14 billion) as well as in the Digi-
talisation Fund, Flood Relief Fund, Fund to 
Promote Municipal Investment and the 
Fund for Primary School- Age Childcare Pro-
vision (€8½ billion together; items 17.b to 
17.f in the table). The defi  cits are set to be 
offset using reserve funds. With the excep-
tion of the 2013 Flood Relief Fund and the 
Fund to Promote Municipal Investment, the 
reserves can be attributed to emergency 
borrowing from previous years.
Irrespective of this, it must be clarifi  ed how 
central government’s plans, including for 
the special funds, comply with the borrow-
ing limit of 0.35% of gross domestic prod-
uct. The Court has made it clear that the 
core budget and off- budget entities (includ-
ing those that do not have their own bor-
rowing authorisations) must be considered 
2 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2022c).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
70

in a consolidated manner. As the plans 
stood in August 2023 (including the Cli-
mate Fund), these entities (items 16.a and 
17 in the table) recorded additional defi  cits 
of €52 billion.
By contrast, the Armed Forces Fund, which 
is scheduled to run a defi  cit of €19 billion in 
2024 (item 20 in the table), is not affected 
by the ruling: this fund is specifi  cally en-
shrined in the Basic Law together with its 
own scope for borrowing, and explicit rules 
state that it is not subject to the debt brake.
Possible consequences for the federal 
states
The ruling is also expected to have an im-
pact on the federal states. Many federal 
states are planning to use reserves from 
previous years’ emergency borrowing. 
There is no offi   cial overview of the amount 
of reserves that the individual states have 
formed from emergency borrowing. The 
Bundesbank has employed makeshift calcu-
lations in this area, most recently to record 
new reserves from emergency borrowing 
for 2022.3 Some federal states are planning 
to build up additional reserves from emer-
gency borrowing this year and next year, 
too. Adding these plans to the Bundes-
bank’s makeshift calculations suggests that 
the total amount of reserves fi  nanced via 
emergency borrowing could be in the order 
of €30 billion.
Apply the debt brake more strictly
The ruling concerns the government’s 
scope for borrowing, not individual meas-
ures. It is the requirement to strictly limit the 
timeframe for emergency borrowing, which 
the Court deemed particularly important, 
that is signifi  cant in practical terms. In those 
areas where the scope for borrowing is re-
duced, the government must set clear pri-
orities: it is essential to clarify which ex-
penditure takes priority and, given the 
limited scope for borrowing, which levies have to be raised. CO₂ certifi  cates are one 
climate policy instrument that can be used 
to explicitly address climate change targets 
and, at the same time, bring in revenue.
It is not yet possible to say exactly how cen-
tral and state government will respond to 
the ruling. However, the ruling demon-
strates that the debt brake will have to be 
applied more stringently going forward. To 
this end, effective fi  scal rules in Europe and 
Germany are essential to support a stability- 
oriented monetary policy. The aim must be 
to ensure that the rules reliably limit defi  cits 
and debt and suffi   ciently safeguard sound 
government fi  nances, thus shielding mon-
etary policy from fi  scal pressure. However, 
fi  scal policymakers should have a vested 
interest here, too, as sound government 
fi  nances ensure that the government re-
mains able to act, not least in times of crisis.
The debt brake defi  nes the regular borrow-
ing framework more narrowly than the EU 
rules. On the whole, its regular borrowing 
limit has been considerably strengthened 
again and it would seem in keeping with 
stability policy to moderately shift its anchor 
and thus expand the borrowing limit some-
what. The debt ratio could also be stabilised 
below the reference value of 60% even if 
defi  cits were to rise moderately. This would 
enable investment, in particular, to be taken 
into account, too. The Bundesbank made 
proposals for a stability- oriented reform last 
year.4 While changes require a broad con-
sensus and a majority in the Bundestag and 
the Bundesrat that is large enough to 
amend the constitution, this is the right 
way to address concerns that the debt 
brake is too restrictive. By contrast, at-
tempts to water down the debt brake dur-
ing budget execution are not appropriate. 
This, in particular, has been made clear by 
the Court ruling.
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c).
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022d).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
71

– After three quarters, the ESF- E recorded a 
deficit of €32 billion; it is set to record only 
around one- third of the projected €121 bil -
lion deficit for the year as a whole.
– The deficit of the Climate Fund up to the 
end of September amounts to €2 billion, 
whereas the economic plan budgeted in 
€14 billion for 2023. A large portion of the 
planned revenue from emission allowances 
is still outstanding. Moreover, there has 
been no significant increase in spending 
pressures thus far, either.– The outflow from the Armed Forces Fund 
has accelerated recently. Nevertheless, with 
a deficit of €3 billion up to the end of Sep -
tember, the planned deficit of €8½ billion 
appears rather generous.
– The deficit pressure has also remained within 
limits for the smaller special funds, with the 
2021 Flood Assistance Fund accounting for 
only €1 billion thus far (target in borrowing 
plan: €3 billion) and a little under €½ billion 
attributable to the Digitalisation Fund (tar -
get: just over €2½ billion) to date.15
– The special funds, for which the central gov -
ernment budget does not report any 
planned figures, have so far recorded net 
surpluses (ESF excluding ESF- E: €10 billion; 
pension funds: €2½ billion).
Plans for 2024
In the summer, the Federal Government pro -
vided more specific plans, at least for the three 
major special funds.
– The deficit in the Armed Forces Fund was set 
to rise substantially to €19 billion, not least 
by outsourcing the majority of procurement 
expenditure from the core budget. This con -
stituted a revision of the original concept of 
strictly reserving the special fund for larger 
additional purchases.
– For the Climate Fund, the plans envisaged a 
sharply increased deficit of €29 billion, with 
the Fund not only taking on expenditure in 
the area of microelectronics from the core 
budget but also, in 2024 and beyond, finan -
cing extensive spending on the railway net -
work and support for chip manufacturers. 
Furthermore, the plans specified that the Cli -Government 
plans from sum -
mer envisage 
high deficit for 
off- budget 
entitiesFiscal balances of central government's 
off-budget entities*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Only entities using a single-entry ac-
counting  system,  i.e.  excluding,  in  particular,  the  bad  bank 
FMS Wertmanagement and, until the end of 2022, also SoFFin, 
which uses a single-entry accounting system and whose defi-
cits refinanced the bad bank's debts. 1 Precautionary fund for 
final payments of inflation-indexed Federal securities. 2 Climate 
and  Transformation  Fund;  up  to  2022,  Energy  and  Climate 
Fund.  3 Excluding  the  transfer  of  €60  billion  from  the  core 
budget to the Climate Fund, which the Federal Constitutional 
Court deemed unconstitutional in its ruling of 15 November 
2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank2021 2022 2023604020020
–––+€ billion, quarterly figures
OtherFund for inflation-indexed securities1
Economic Stabilisation Fund
Armed Forces FundClimate Fund 2
Total
–60–40–200+20+40 Cumulated over the year
33
15 With the planned dissolution of the fund, the central 
government budget is set to receive a substantially higher 
amount from the fund’s reserve accordingly. However, 
these funds ultimately stem from emergency borrowing 
during the coronavirus pandemic. It would therefore be lo -
gical to use the fund’s reserve to repay emergency borrow -
ing.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
72

mate Fund would pay out large subsidies to 
compensate for the fact that the EEG levy 
on the price of electricity was revoked in 
mid- 2022.
– With regard to the ESF- E, the Government 
intended to extend the price brakes until 
April 2024, as planned in autumn 2022, ear -
marking €14 billion for this purpose, includ -
ing the associated interest burden.
– In addition, the Government announced 
that it would dissolve the Digitalisation Fund 
and transfer the remaining reserves to the 
central government budget. This relief for 
the core budget meant that, conversely, the 
Fund was set to record a further deficit of €4 
billion.
Following the Federal Constitutional Court rul -
ing (see the box on pp. 69 ff. for information), 
the Bundestag’s Budget Committee postponed 
its final deliberations. It remains to be seen 
how large the adjustments to the plans from 
the summer will be.
State government budgets16
Core budgets in Q3 2023
State government core budgets recorded a sur -
plus in the third quarter of 2023, as they had a 
year earlier. At €6 billion, it was €2 billion 
higher than in the third quarter of 2022 owing 
to a one- off effect. Revenue rose by 3½% on 
the year thanks to tax receipts. By contrast, rev -
enue from public administrations saw a de -
cline. Central government allocated lower 
funds for transfers to enterprises in response to 
the coronavirus pandemic. However, in Lower 
Saxony, a sum of €2 billion was directed from 
the coronavirus special fund to the core budget, 
which it then used to repay emergency loans 
and thus improve its balance by the amount 
received. At 2%, expenditure rose at a weaker 
pace than revenue. Nonetheless, personnel ex -
penditure grew significantly, at 5½%. Some state governments had already made substan -
tial adjustments to civil servants’ pay in the 
summer.
Core budgets and off- budget entities in 
2023
The core budgets and off- budget entities of the 
state governments combined saw a consider -
able deterioration in their balance in the first 
half of 2023. At €3½ billion, the surplus was 
€18 billion lower than in the first half of 2022. 
A deficit appears possible for 2023 as a whole, 
following the large surplus recorded for the 
previous year (2022: +€12½ billion). The tax 
estimate projects a slight decline in state gov -
ernment tax revenue for this year. This is due, 
in particular, to the sharp fall in revenue from 
real estate acquisition tax, which accrues to the Plans not yet 
finalised follow -
ing court ruling
Surplus in Q3 
ultimately 
unchanged from 
previous yearCore budgets 
and off- budget 
entities in 2023 
as a whole: 
balance  deteri -
orating consid -
erably from 
large surplusState government fiscal balance
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 
1 Figure calculated using monthly cash statistics from the Fe-
deral Ministry of Finance; quarterly data are not yet available. 
2 Core budgets and off-budget entities together.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4201001020
––++
2021Quarterly figures
2023
2022€ billion
Cumulated from start of year 2
20231
–100+10+20+30
2022
2021Off-budget entitiesCore budgets
16 For the reporting quarter, the quarterly data on state 
governments are based on the monthly cash statistics for 
the core budgets. Information on off- budget entities is so 
far only available until mid- year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
73

federal states. Transfers from central govern -
ment are also on the decline. By contrast, ex -
penditure is rising. This is due in part to the 
lagged reflection of inflation in higher expend -
iture. In addition, there were plans to spend 
funds originally set aside by state governments 
as part of their crisis management strategy. 
Revenue and expenditure are increasing par -
ticularly in off- budget entities because local 
public transport companies have been allo -
cated to the general government sector since 
the second quarter of 2023.17Ruling of the Federal Constitutional Court 
also significant for state governments
Many federal states formed reserves from 
emergency loans.18 These are earmarked for 
financing projects in future years. The Federal 
Constitutional Court’s ruling on the debt brake 
escape clause suggests that it would also be 
advisable for state governments to adjust any 
comparable plans (for more details, see 
pp. 69 ff.).
Social security funds
Federal Employment Agency
Q3 2023
The Federal Employment Agency posted a sur -
plus of €1 billion in the third quarter of 2023.19 
Its balance thus remained broadly unchanged 
on the year. Revenue and expenditure both 
rose substantially. The growth in contribution 
receipts was somewhat stronger still, at 14%. 
Of this, around 9 percentage points were at -
tributable to the contribution rate rising by 
0.2 percentage point to 2.6% at the beginning 
of the year. By contrast, other revenue was 
dampened by the fall in the insolvency benefit 
contribution rate by one- third to 0.06%. Rev -
enue increased by 12% overall.
Expenditure also grew substantially by 11%, or 
€1 billion. This was in spite of the dampening 
effect of sharply declining expenditure on 
short- time work. However, spending on un -
employment benefit saw a steep rise of 16%, 
or €½ billion. This was mainly due to an in -
crease in the number of recipients. Expenditure 
on active labour market policy grew by 10%. In Federal Constitu -
tional Court 
ruling  with 
implications for  
state govern -
ments
Federal Employ -
ment Agency: 
surplus in Q3 – 
balance 
unchanged 
year on year
Substantial 
expenditure 
growthFinances of the 
Federal Employment Agency*
Source: Federal Employment Agency. * Including transfers to 
the civil servants' pension fund and before payment of central 
government grants.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410505
––+
–25–20–15–10–50+5Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202320222021
20212023
20222021 2022 2023–400+40+80+120
2021 2022 20234004080120
–+++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
17 Local transport companies are the responsibility of state 
governments in some cases and of local governments in 
others. See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), pp. 8 f. for 
information on the statistical reclassification.
18 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), pp. 39 ff.
19 In the core budget, i.e. excluding the civil servants’ pen -
sion fund. Transfers to the fund lower the core budget bal -
ance.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
74

addition, transfers were made to the civil ser -
vants’ pension fund again, after being tempor -
arily suspended during the pandemic.
2023 as a whole
The Federal Employment Agency is expected to 
record a significant surplus for the year as a 
whole, following a small surplus in 2022. At €3 
billion, this could be almost twice as high as 
envisaged in the budget plan.20 For the first 
three quarters, the Federal Employment Agency 
recorded a surplus of €1½ billion (previous 
year: -€1 billion). As with the statutory pension 
insurance scheme, a surplus is usually expected 
in the final quarter owing to contributions paid 
on seasonal bonuses.
Outlook for 2024
The Federal Employment Agency’s finances are 
expected to improve further next year. Accord -
ing to the Federal Government’s macroeco -
nomic assumptions in its autumn projection, 
revenue will continue to grow strongly. By con -
trast, expenditure is likely to rise more slowly. 
Although the Federal Government expects un -
employment to increase slightly, in previous 
years, expenditure on active labour market pol -
icy has often remained well below the appro -
priations. The Federal Employment Agency’s 
final balance is therefore likely to be better 
than originally planned once again.
Pension insurance scheme
Q3 2023
In the third quarter, the finances of the statu -
tory pension insurance scheme were un -
changed on the previous year. As usual, a def -
icit was recorded in the third quarter. This year, 
it amounted to €4 billion. However, it was 
around €½ billion higher than in the third quar -
ter of 2022, when the balance was improved 
by back-  payments of central government 
grants. Total revenue rose by 5%. Contribution receipts grew somewhat more strongly (5½%), 
although social contribution- exempt inflation 
compensation bonuses actually had a marked 
dampening effect. Expenditure increased in line 
with contribution receipts. Pensions rose by just 
over 4½% on average across Germany.21 The 
number of pensions saw only moderate Significant 
surplus  on the 
cards for 2023 
as a whole
Rising surplus 
foreseeable for 
2024
Finances of the 
pension insur -
ance scheme 
unchanged in 
Q3 2023Finances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final  annual  figures  differ  from  the  total  of  the  reported  
quarterly figures as the latter are not revised.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4420246
––+++
–6–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202320222021
2022
2023
20212021 2022 202302468
2021 2022 202302468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
20 The repayment of a €½ billion loan to central govern -
ment is assessed as an appropriation of the annual net 
profit and is not included in the balance. The Federal Em -
ployment Agency needed the loan in 2022 because a def -
icit of €½ billion had been incurred in the (contribution-  
funded) core budget (excluding the pay- as- you- go areas of 
insolvency benefit and winter construction).
21 For more information on the pension increase, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023e), p. 66.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
75

growth. In addition, higher supplementary con -
tribution rates to the statutory health insurance 
scheme are placing a strain on the pension in -
surance scheme. The pension insurance scheme 
and pensioners contribute in equal parts to the 
financing of these supplementary contribu -
tions.
2023 as a whole
For 2023 as a whole, the statutory pension in -
surance scheme could once again close with a 
surplus (2022: +€3½ billion). This could amount 
to around €1½ billion. At the end of the third 
quarter, the statutory pension insurance scheme still had a deficit of just over €2½ bil -
lion. The pension insurance scheme usually re -
cords high contribution receipts in the fourth 
quarter, primarily as a result of contributions on 
seasonal bonuses. A large surplus is therefore 
likely in the final quarter. Social contribution-  
exempt inflation compensation bonuses will 
probably have little impact on this. The surplus 
in the final quarter is likely to be higher this 
year than in the same quarter of 2022. This is 
due to the fact that there are no longer any 
retroactive payments of basic pension top-  ups 
due this year (still almost €1 billion at the end 
of 2022).
The pension insurance scheme will thus close 
the year with a significantly better balance than 
was expected in the pension insurance report 
in autumn 2022, when the Federal Govern -
ment still expected a deficit of €1 billion. The 
improvement in the balance is due to the fact 
that the contribution base is growing much 
more strongly than was assumed at that time. 
The sustainability reserve could rise to almost 
€45 billion. This would amount to just under 
1.7 times the scheme’s monthly expenditure 
and would therefore be well above the statu -
tory minimum of 0.2 times its monthly expend -
iture.
Outlook for 2024
Based on the Federal Government’s autumn 
projection, the finances of the statutory pen -
sion insurance scheme are unlikely to change 
much at all next year. Another surplus, as is 
projected, would lead to a further rise in the 
sustainability reserve. Contribution receipts will 
probably continue to grow strongly. As earn -
ings rose sharply last year, central government 
funds, which are largely tied to them, are also 
likely to increase by around 5% in 2024. How -
ever, the Federal Government is planning to cut 
these funds by €½ billion on an ad hoc basis in 
order to ease the burden on the central gov -
ernment budget. Growth in pension expend -
iture could be similarly strong to that in 2023 
(just under 5½%).2023 as a 
whole: another 
surplus appears 
likelyBalance signifi -
cantly better 
than expected
2024: finances 
largely 
unchangedNet migration
02004006008001,0001,2001,400
2019 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70
Sources: Federal Statistical Office (2019, 2022).
Deutsche BundesbankThousands of people
Actual
2019 projection2022 projectionFederal Statistical Office
Population size
7879808182838485
2019 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70
Sources: Federal Statistical Office (2019, 2022).
Deutsche BundesbankMillions of people
2019 projectionFederal Statistical Office
2022 projectionActualDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
76

Longer- term outlook
In the future, demographic developments will 
place considerable pressures on the finances of 
the statutory pension insurance scheme. The 
population assumptions of the Federal Statis -
tical Office, which were adjusted at the end of 
2022, suggest that the ratio of older to younger 
persons is rising less sharply,22 somewhat redu -
cing the likely financing burdens on the statu -
tory pension insurance scheme. However, the 
Bundesbank’s updated simulations show that 
financial pressures remain high.23
The now more favourable outlook is largely 
due to the changes in assumptions about mor -
tality and migration.
– Assumed life expectancy is lower than in the 
previous projection. The Federal Statistical 
Office now puts the remaining life expect -
ancy of 65 year- olds at 22¼ years in 2060. 
That is around ¾ year lower than in the last 
population projection in 2019.
– Net migration is expected to be higher, es -
pecially until the beginning of the 2030s. 
However, it remains elevated in the longer 
run, too. Viewed in isolation, migration thus 
more or less compensates for the dampen -
ing effect of low birth rates. The population is even projected to rise further for a time, 
before falling back to the level recorded at 
the beginning of 2020 (see the chart on 
p. 76).
The new assumptions also envisage a sharp rise 
in the old- age dependency ratio. Nonetheless, 
it is lower than previously expected. The old-  
age dependency ratio is the ratio of older per -
sons to those of working age.24 It is currently 
35%, meaning that there are 35 persons of re -
tirement age for every 100 persons of working 
age. By 2070, the old- age dependency ratio 
will rise to around 46% (see the chart above).
In addition to the old- age dependency ratio, 
the structural characteristics (age, gender and 
average income or pension level) of contribu -
tion payers and pensioners are key factors in 
the development of the statutory pension in -
surance scheme’s finances. With regard to mi -Despite more 
favourable 
assumptions, 
pressures on 
pension finances 
remain high
Updated 
assumptions on 
life expectancy 
and migrationOld- age 
dependency 
ratio still rising 
sharply but less 
than previously 
expected
Crucial to pen -
sion insurance 
scheme’s 
finances: labour 
market integra -
tion of immi -
grantsOld-age dependency ratio given rise in retirement age to 67
Sources: Federal Statistical Office (2019, 2022).
Deutsche Bundesbank2000 05 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70%
253035404550
2022 projection2019 projection
22 See Federal Statistical Office (2022).
23 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019, 2022e) and Schön 
(2020) for more information on the demographic burdens 
facing the pension insurance scheme, and on the simula -
tions. Answers to frequently asked questions on the reports 
can be found in Deutsche Bundesbank (2023f).
24 The assumed working lifespan extends from the age of 
20 up to the current retirement age. The old- age depend -
ency ratio is calculated based on the assumptions of the 
second (middle) variant of the population projection. The 
second variant was also used for the other two demo -
graphic factors: birth rate and life expectancy.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
77

gration, relevant factors include the age of im -
migrants and emigrants, how they integrate 
into the labour market and the amount that 
they earn there.25 Taken in isolation, the entry 
of immigrants into the labour market has a 
positive pre- financing effect on the pay- as- you- 
go pension system: it increases contribution re -
ceipts and makes more funds available to 
finance current pensions. However, it also gen -
erates new pension entitlements, which will 
have to be financed in the future.
Simulations for (i) the current legal 
situation , (ii) government plans and 
(iii) a continued rise in the retirement age
The new assumptions provide a more favour -
able financial outlook for the statutory pension 
insurance scheme. Yet financing pressures re -
main high, as the simulations show (see the 
chart above).
In the current legal situation, the thresholds 
safeguarding a minimum replacement rate of 
48% and a maximum contribution rate of 20% 
will expire in 2025. The demographic burdens 
are then distributed relatively broadly across 
the three variables replacement rate, contribu -
tion rate and central government funds. Irre -
spective of the thresholds, the statutory retire -
ment age continues rising until the beginning of the 2030s, up to 67. Simulation (i) shows a 
fall in the replacement rate from 48% to 44% 
by 2040, and a further decline to 43% by 2070. 
Accordingly, the contribution rate rises by 
3 percentage points to 21½% by 2040 (2070: 
22½%). Central government funds also in -
crease significantly relative to value added. 
They are largely tied to the contribution rate, as 
well as to the average wage.
In its coalition agreement, the Federal Govern -
ment26 stipulated that the replacement rate of 
48% should be safeguarded on a permanent 
basis. However, no draft legislation to this ef -
fect has yet been issued. Simulation (ii) looks at 
these plans. Taken in isolation, the constant 
More favourable 
outlook, but 
financing pres -
sures remain 
high
(i) Current legal 
situation: contri -
bution rate and 
central govern -
ment funds rise; 
replacement 
rate falls(ii) Minimum 
threshold for 
replacement 
rate causes con -
tribution rate 
and central gov -
ernment funds 
to rise more 
sharply againSimulation: current legal situation and government plans
1 To better capture the scale of the additional financing needs, these are expressed in percentage points of the standard VAT rate (see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019, 2022e)). In the current legal situation, the additional financing needs in the central government budget 
up to 2070 are around 2 percentage points as things stand. With a minimum threshold for the replacement rate, the financing needs 
rise to the equivalent of 3 percentage points of the standard VAT rate.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 30 40 50 60 7043444546474849%
Current legal situation Government plans: keeping replacement rate at minimum threshold of 48%
Replacement rate after
45 years of contributions
2020 30 40 50 60 703.54.04.55.0Central government funds¹
relative to value added
2020 30 40 50 60 701819202122232425Contribution rate
25 Simulations of pension finances are based, amongst 
other things, on assumptions regarding the age- specific la -
bour force participation of immigrants and emigrants. 
Taken in isolation, the pension insurance scheme benefits 
from the assumed relatively youthful age structure of immi -
grants: the vast majority of immigrants are of younger 
working age. In the Bundesbank’s pension model, the in -
come and age profile for the labour force participation of 
immigrants corresponds to that of persons already resident 
in Germany. If, for example, the labour force participation 
of immigrants is (initially) lower, the dampening effect on 
the contribution rate is also weaker. The age- specific labour 
force participation of labour market- oriented immigrants, 
e.g. from other EU countries, is generally broadly the same 
as for the domestic population. Labour force participation 
is lower for immigrants from non- EU countries (a high per -
centage of whom are refugees). This is probably due not 
least to temporary employment bans and the considerably 
more involved process of labour market integration.
26 See Federal Government of Germany (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
78

The plan to introduce a generational capital fund to ease 
pressures on the pension scheme’s fi  nances
The Federal Government of Germany is 
planning to introduce a new scheme known 
as the “generational capital fund” in order 
to reduce the funding pressures resulting 
from demographic change.1 No specifi  c de-
cisions have been made yet in this regard. 
In essence, the Federal Government intends 
to build up debt- fi  nanced capital stock, 
which should then generate a return that is 
higher than the fi  nancing costs of the add-
itional central government debt. The result-
ing net income would be paid into the 
statutory pension insurance scheme as add-
itional central government grants from the 
mid- 2030s onwards. The higher these add-
itional grants are, the lower the rise in the 
contribution rate, and thus the resulting in-
crease in regular central government funds, 
will be. A lower contribution rate also ultim-
ately leads to higher pension payments as a 
result of the pension adjustment formula: a 
reduction in the contribution burden is ef-
fectively passed on to pensioners with the 
next annual adjustment. Pensions then rise 
more signifi  cantly.
The generational capital fund differs funda-
mentally from many capital- based pension 
funds in other countries in that it will be 
fi  nanced mainly through new debt. These 
countries fi  nance their capital- funded pen-
sion components mostly from contributions 
or from existing state assets. In Sweden, for 
example, insured persons make their own 
contributions to accumulate individual en-
titlements in a capital market- based fund. 
Norway has the world’s largest sovereign 
wealth fund in relation to national GDP 
(330%), fi  nanced by the country’s oil and 
gas revenues.2Long- term positive equity risk premium 
plausible, considerable uncertainty over 
time
In principle, it is plausible to assume that 
the generational capital fund can achieve 
positive net returns in the long term. This 
assumption is supported by theoretical con-
siderations and the results seen in past dec-
ades. For example, expectations for returns 
on the equity market are generally higher 
than the interest rate expectations for risk- 
free Bunds (Federal bonds). This is because 
equities carry higher risk and their returns 
fl  uctuate to a greater extent. Studies show 
that, on average, equity portfolios have 
generated a higher return (equity risk pre-
mium) than government bonds over long 
investment periods.3 Simple calculations 
show that in the period from 1969 to 2022, 
an investment strategy in a global equity 
portfolio, assuming annual rolling refi  nan-
cing via German government bonds, gener-
ated a return advantage averaging 1.9% 
annually for fi  nancing via ten- year govern-
ment bonds and 3.1% annually for fi  nan-
cing via one- year government bonds.4 The 
reason for the differences in returns is the 
higher government bond yields associated 
with longer maturities. The historically 
achievable equity risk premium is sensitive 
to the respective investment period and 
1 For more information, see Federal Ministry of Finance 
(2023d) and Federal Government (2021).
2 For a broader overview of sovereign wealth funds, 
see Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs 
(2022).
3 See Damodaran (2023) and Dimson et al. (2023). A 
comparison of countries shows that the equity risk 
premium was between 1.8% and 6.3% in the period 
from 1900 to 2017. The equity risk premium tends to 
fall over time.
4 See Damodaran (2023). Difference between the 
geometric average of the MSCI World share yield (per-
formance index less withholding tax, in euro) and the 
average current yield of one- year and ten- year German 
government bonds.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
79

starting point.5 For example, the equity risk 
premium fl  uctuated between -2.1% and 
8.3% over a rolling investment period of 15 
years between 1969 and 2022.6
Ultimately, the level of the future equity risk 
premium cannot be quantifi  ed reliably, as it 
is uncertain and depends on many factors. 
For example, it is diffi   cult to estimate the 
extent to which long- term trends such as 
digitalisation, decarbonisation or a frag-
mentation of global trade will infl  uence the 
risk- return ratio of equities compared to 
German government bonds in the future.
The net returns on the generational capital 
fund will depend on the portfolio selected. 
The aforementioned yield advantages relate 
to broadly diversifi  ed international equity 
investments; this history is not relevant for 
other investment objectives. For example, 
government agencies could impose invest-
ment guidelines that defi  ne other, second-
ary economic policy objectives in which re-
turns might not be the sole focus. This 
would run counter to the purpose of the 
generational capital fund, which is to ease 
the fi  nancial burden on the pension insur-
ance scheme to the greatest degree pos-
sible. Norway, for example, requires its sov-
ereign wealth fund to make investments 
exclusively outside Norway in order to pre-
vent national economic policy objectives 
from infl  uencing investment decisions.7
In addition to the return on equity, the net 
returns on the generational capital fund de-
pend on government fi  nancing conditions. 
This makes confi  dence in sound public 
fi  nances more important, as the gener-
ational capital fund model would become 
less attractive if the creditworthiness of the 
state fell and risk premia reduced or elimin-
ated the positive difference in returns. Cred-
ible and binding budget rules can contrib-
ute to confi  dence in sound public fi  nances. 
However, the generational capital fund, in 
and of itself, increases national debt. The higher the national debt, the greater the 
subsequent rise in interest expenditure.8
Although the equity risk premium is likely to 
be positive on a long- term average, it may 
also be temporarily negative over time. The 
length of a phase with negative equity risk 
premia depends primarily on the macro-
economic environment. Negative net in-
come and some capital losses would then 
also be possible. The overall structure and, 
in particular, the distribution policy should 
take this into account. It should be borne in 
mind that the investment horizon is rela-
tively short, with the fi  rst withdrawal planned 
in just over a decade, making risk smooth-
ing more diffi   cult in the early disbursement 
phase.
Buffers could be created in order to enable 
special grants to be paid to the pension in-
surance scheme as steadily as possible and 
to minimise risks to central government 
fi  nances as far as possible. The fund could 
then draw on this buffer in the event of un-
favourable net returns on the generational 
capital fund. In order to create a buffer, the 
distributions from the fund to the pension 
insurance scheme would initially need to be 
set conservatively. Precautions would have 
to be taken in the event that the buffer is 
exhausted. If distributions were then to 
continue, the value of the fund could fall 
below the amount of debt incurred by cen-
tral government in this context. In any 
5 In addition, the development of the EUR/ USD ex-
change rate is also relevant for the equity risk pre-
mium, as the MSCI World (net index) is denominated 
in US dollars.
6 The return on the MSCI World (performance index 
less withholding tax, in euro) was consistently positive 
over an investment period of 15 years, averaging be-
tween 1.8% and 14.6% p.a.
7 For more information, see Freudenberg (2017).
8 Administrative costs also play a signifi  cant role in the 
net return. They may be lower for capital stock man-
aged by the state than for profi  t- oriented private fund 
offerings. However, with relatively standardised invest-
ment products, the administrative costs and therefore 
the margins in a competitive private market are also 
likely to be relatively limited.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
80

event, in such a case it would make sense 
to count further disbursements towards the 
debt brake applicable to the central govern-
ment budget. It would also have to be as-
sessed whether the recent ruling by the 
Federal Constitutional Court has an impact 
on how the generational capital fund is to 
be taken into account under the debt brake 
rules (for information on the ruling, see 
pp. 69 ff.).
The generational capital fund is intended to 
ease the fi  nancial burden on the pension in-
surance scheme in the long term and ap-
parently not to pursue any other economic 
policy objectives. In order to ensure that the 
generational capital fund remains bound 
to  this purpose, its fundamental features 
should be enshrined institutionally. Writing 
these into the Basic Law would provide 
relatively strong protection. Future amend-
ments would then require a broad parlia-
mentary majority.9
Funding contribution to pension 
insurance  scheme probably limited
Discussions are underway about the possi-
bility of endowing a capital stock with 
around €180 billion by the mid- 2030s; the 
fund would then probably be equivalent to 
3% of nominal GDP . The 2023 central gov-
ernment budget envisages an initial alloca-
tion of €10 billion to the generational cap-
ital fund. According to earlier press re-
ports,10 a further €12 billion could fl  ow into 
the fund each year from 2024, which will 
be dynamically adjusted by 3%. In addition, 
central government shares worth €15 bil-
lion will apparently be transferred to the 
generational capital fund.11
Overall, the planned generational capital 
fund is unlikely to relieve much of the 
demographic funding pressure on the pen-
sion insurance scheme: the Bundesbank’s 
simulations show that, in the current legal 
situation, the contribution rate is set to rise by just under 3 percentage points by 2035. 
Under the government’s plan (minimum 
threshold of 48%), it increases even more, 
by almost 4½ percentage points. However, 
the generational capital fund is only ex-
pected to ease the burden on pension in-
surance scheme fi  nances as from the mid- 
2030s. It would alleviate the fi  nancial pres-
sures relating to the retirement of the baby 
boomers just after the contribution rates 
have already risen sharply. If the equity risk 
premium were in the range of 1% to 5%, 
the contribution rate could be reduced by 
between 0.1 percentage point and ½ per-
centage point (with the planned fund vol-
ume and corresponding distributions).12
Overall, the generational capital fund offers 
opportunities for the pension insurance 
scheme, but also entails risks. Four param-
eters remain crucial for pension insurance 
scheme fi  nances: overall pension level, re-
tirement age, contribution rate and central 
government funds. Positive macroeconomic 
developments in Germany will remain the 
key factor in the real value of pension bene-
fi  ts.
9 For example, Saxony has enshrined its Provident 
Fund for Pension Obligations in its state constitution 
(Article 95(7)).
10 See Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (2023) and 
Specht (2023). No further allocations were budgeted 
in the Federal Government’s medium- term fi  nancial 
plan from the summer. The fi  nal deliberations on the 
2024 central government budget have not yet been 
concluded.
11 However, this means that the central government 
budget will permanently forego the resulting income.
12 In its 2022 report, the Social Advisory Council cal-
culated that with a net return of 2%, capital stock of 
around €850 billion would be required to reduce the 
contribution rate by 1 percentage point from the mid- 
2030s (see Deutscher Bundestag (2022)). By contrast, 
the German Council of Economic Experts recently esti-
mated a net return of 5% for the generational capital 
fund. According to their report, capital stock of €450 
billion would be required to reduce the contribution 
rate by 1  percentage point (see German Council of 
Economic Experts (2023)).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
81

– and thus permanently higher – replacement 
rate would significantly increase financing pres -
sures: here, the contribution rate rises by just 
under 2 percentage points versus the current 
legal situation to almost 23½% in 2040. By 
2070, the contribution rate rises to almost 
25%. As central government funds are largely 
tied to the contribution rate, they likewise 
grow more strongly.
Simulation (iii) includes the elements in (ii) and 
also links the statutory retirement age after 
2031 to the assumed life expectancy. The start -
ing point is the simulation outlined above with 
a minimum threshold of 48% for the replace -
ment rate.27 The rising retirement age signifi -
cantly reduces the financial pressures caused by 
the threshold, especially from the end of the 
2030s. In line with the higher net migration, 
the simulation also assumes that the larger 
population of working age has a positive 
macroeconomic impact: additional employ -
ment broadens the contribution base and in -creases value added. Combined with a lower 
number of pensions, this reduces financial pres -
sures. This effect gradually increases, gathering 
momentum primarily in the 2040s. As a result, 
the contribution rate and central government 
funds tend to follow the trajectory seen in the 
current legal situation (i.e. the trajectory ob -
served in Simulation (i)). However, the contribu -
tion rate in 2070 is still around 4 percentage 
points higher than it is today.
Although there are still strong pressures on 
pension finances based on the updated popu -
lation projection, these are lower than in previ -
ous simulations: (i) in the current legal situ -
ation, the replacement rate in 2070 is now 
around 2½ percentage points higher than in 
the previous Bundesbank simulation. The con -
tribution rate in 2070 is 2½ percentage points 
lower. (ii) In a scenario with a permanent min -
imum threshold of 48%, the easing of finances 
is even greater, as the threshold has less pres -
sure to absorb. The contribution rate in 2070 is 
then around 4½ percentage points lower than 
in previous simulations, although it is still just 
under 25%. (iii) Given the combination of a 
minimum threshold and a retirement age that 
rises after 2031, the contribution rate is now 
just over 4 percentage points lower than be -
fore.
The Federal Government is planning to intro -
duce a new scheme known as the “gener -
ational capital fund” to lower demographic 
financing pressures from the mid- 2030s on -
wards. As things stand, however, this is unlikely 
to play a key part in reducing the pressures on 
the contribution rate (for more information on 
the generational capital fund, see pp. 79 ff.).(iii) Life 
expectancy- 
linked retirement 
age and thresh -
old significantly 
dampen finan -
cing pressuresMuch less 
unfavourable 
results given 
new demo -
graphic 
assumptions 
Generational 
capital fund 
unlikely to play 
a key part in 
reducing fore -
seeable financial 
pressures Simulation: indexation of retirement age
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 30 40 50 60 70%
Central government funds
relative to value addedContribution rate
1820222426
3.54.04.55.0Current legal situation
Keeping replacement rate at 
minimum threshold of 48% and raising 
statutory retirement ageGovernment plans: keeping replacement 
rate at minimum threshold of 48%
27 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2019, 
2022e). The retirement age rises in such a way that the 
average ratio of pension years to contribution years re -
mains broadly stable from 2031 onwards. In its latest re -
port, the German Council of Economic Experts recom -
mended linking the retirement age to life expectancy. The 
2:1 rule proposed in that document results in a somewhat 
lower retirement age in 2070 (see German Council of Eco -
nomic Experts (2023), pp. 313-317).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
82

List of references
Damodaran, A. (2023), Equity Risk Premiums (ERP): Determinants, Estimation and Implications – 
The 2023 Edition, March 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), Public finances, Monthly Report, February 2023, pp. 64-80.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), Public finances, Monthly Report, August 2023, pp. 62-74.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), State government finances in 2022: high surplus overall, some 
states still making extensive recourse to emergency borrowing, Monthly Report, October 2023, 
pp. 39-63.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), Public finances, Monthly Report, October 2023, pp. 8-9.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023e), Public finances, Monthly Report, May 2023, pp. 57-75.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023f), Häufig gestellte Fragen zum Thema Rentenversicherung in Monats -
berichten der Deutschen Bundesbank, November 2023, available at https://www.bundesbank.de/
de/publikationen/suche/haeufig-gestellte-fragen-zum-thema-rentenversicherung-in- 
monatsberichten-der-deutschen-bundesbank-892742
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), The typical impact of inflation on government finances, Monthly 
Report, August 2022, pp. 63-64.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b), Inflation- induced bracket creep in the income tax scale, Monthly 
Report, June 2022, pp. 63-73.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c), Public finances, Monthly Report, February 2022, pp. 62-80.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022d), Central government’s debt brake: options for stability- oriented 
further development, Monthly Report, April 2022, pp. 49-66.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022e), Pension insurance scheme: long- term scenarios and reform 
options , Monthly Report, June 2022, pp. 47-61.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), Federal debt: allocate premia on accruals basis in budgetary inter -
est expenditure, Monthly Report, June 2021, pp. 47-51.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), State government finances in 2020: deficit due to temporary 
effects  of pandemic, escape clauses also used to build reserves, Monthly Report, October 2021, 
pp. 15-42.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), Long- term outlook for the statutory pension insurance scheme, 
Monthly Report, October 2019, pp. 53-81.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Key central government budget data in connection with the debt 
brake, Monthly Report, February 2016, pp. 68-69.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
83

Deutscher Bundestag (2022), Unterrichtung durch die Bundesregierung, Bericht der Bundes -
regierung über die gesetzliche Rentenversicherung, insbesondere über die Entwicklung der Ein -
nahmen und Ausgaben, der Nachhaltigkeitsrücklage sowie des jeweils erforderlichen Beitragssatzes 
in den künftigen 15 Kalenderjahren (Rentenversicherungsbericht 2022) mit Gutachten des Sozial -
beirats, Drucksache 20/ 4825, December 2022.
Dimson, E., P . Marsh and M. Staunton (2023), Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns Yearbook 
2023 Summary Edition, Credit Suisse Research Institute, February 2023.
Federal Court of Auditors (2023), Bericht nach § 88 Absatz 2 BHO an das Bundesministerium der 
Finanzen über die Sondervermögen des Bundes und die damit verbundenen Auswirkungen auf die 
Haushaltstransparenz sowie die Funktionsfähigkeit der Schuldenregel, Bericht Gz.: I 2 - 0002060, 
August 2023.
Federal Government of Germany (2021), Mehr Fortschritt wagen – Bündnis für Freiheit, Gerechtig -
keit und Nachhaltigkeit, Koalitionsvertrag 2021-2025 zwischen SPD, Bündnis 90/ Die Grünen und 
FDP , December 2021.
Federal Ministry of Finance (2023a), Steuereinnahmen und konjunkturelles Umfeld im Juli 2023, 
Monthly Report, August 2023, pp. 53-62.
Federal Ministry of Finance (2023b), Entwicklung der öffentlichen Finanzen in Deutschland – 
„Deutsche Haushaltsplanung 2024“, Monthly Report, October 2023, pp. 48-53.
Federal Ministry of Finance (2023c), Deutschland stellt ersten Zahlungsantrag im Rahmen der 
Aufbau- und Resilienzfazilität, press release No 17/ 2023, September 2023.
Federal Ministry of Finance (2023d), Das Generationenkapital: für Gerechtigkeit und solide Staats -
finanzen, Monthly Report, January 2023, pp. 8-10.
Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (2022), Forschungsbericht 609, Staatsfonds im inter -
nationalen Vergleich, Kurzexpertise, November 2022.
Federal Statistical Office (2022), A changing population: assumptions and results of the 15th co -
ordinated population projection, December 2022.
Federal Statistical Office (2019), A changing population: assumptions and results of the 14th co -
ordinated population projection, June 2019.
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (2023), Rentenreform droht Kosten explodieren zu lassen, Das 
„Rentenpaket II“ ist fast fertig, doch Ökonomen schlagen bei Habeck Alarm – wegen unbezahl -
barer Lasten, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 11 August 2023, p. 17.
Freudenberg,  C. (2017), Staatliche Fonds und Alterssicherung: Erfahrungen anderer Länder, 
Deutsche Rentenversicherung, 3/ 2017, pp. 292-313.
German Council of Economic Experts (2023), Overcoming sluggish growth – investing in the 
future , Annual Report 2023-2024, November 2023.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
84

Schön, M. (2020), Long- term outlook for the German statutory pension system, Deutsche Bundes -
bank Discussion Paper No 22/ 2020.
Specht, F. (2023), Gewagte Wette auf die Zukunft. Viele Milliarden fließen in die neue kapital-
gedeckte  Rentensäule. Wer trägt das Risiko?, Handelsblatt, 9 August 2023, pp. 14-15.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
85

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
86

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43 •
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields on German securities  .........................................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
3•

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Maastricht debt by creditor  .........................................................................................  63 •
13. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78 •
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81 •
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 €STR  5,6Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  7
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2022 Feb. 9.2 6.8 6.5 6.4 6.3 4.4 – 0.6 – 0.58 0.8
Mar. 8.8 6.6 6.3 6.3 6.1 4.4 – 0.8 – 0.58 0.9
Apr. 8.3 6.3 6.1 6.1 6.4 5.0 – 0.2 – 0.58 1.4
May 8.0 6.1 5.8 5.9 6.2 5.1 – 0.1 – 0.59 1.7
June 7.3 6.0 5.8 5.8 6.3 5.4 – 0.2 – 0.58 2.2
July 6.8 5.9 5.7 5.9 5.9 5.4 – 0.2 – 0.51 1.9
Aug. 6.8 6.3 6.2 6.0 5.7 5.7 – 0.4 – 0.09 1.8
Sep. 5.7 6.2 6.3 5.8 5.5 5.7 – 0.4 0.36 2.6
Oct. 3.8 5.2 5.1 5.4 5.1 5.3 – 0.7 0.66 3.0
Nov. 2.4 4.7 4.8 4.7 4.8 5.2 – 0.1 1.37 2.7
Dec. 0.6 3.8 4.1 4.1 3.9 4.4 0.5 1.57 2.8
2023 Jan. – 0.8 2.9 3.4 3.5 3.0 3.7 1.2 1.90 2.9
Feb. – 2.7 2.0 2.9 2.9 2.5 3.3 1.8 2.28 3.0
Mar. – 4.2 1.4 2.5 2.4 2.0 2.9 2.3 2.57 3.1
Apr. – 5.2 0.9 1.9 1.9 1.4 2.4 2.4 2.90 3.0
May – 6.4 0.3 1.4 1.0 0.9 2.3 3.1 3.08 3.0
June – 8.0 – 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 1.6 3.4 3.24 3.0
July – 9.1 – 1.4 – 0.4 – 0.4 0.1 1.3 3.8 3.40 3.1
Aug. – 10.4 – 2.4 – 1.3 – 1.0 – 0.2 0.7 4.4 3.64 3.2
Sep. – 9.9 – 2.2 – 1.2 ... – 0.4 0.4 4.9 3.75 3.3
Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.90 3.5
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 EuroShort-Term Rate.  6 See also footnotes to Table VI.3, p. 43●. 7 GDP-weighted yield on
ten-year government bonds. Countries included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT,
GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assetsReference
rate 
vis-á-vis the
US dollar Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2022 Feb. + 9,036 + 8,468 +40,598 +45,379 – 8,013 – 4,253 + 5,961 + 1,524 1.1342 96.8 91.7
Mar. + 4,911 + 669 –20,792 +24,447 –140,125 + 1,891 +93,088 – 94 1.1019 95.8 91.5
Apr. –15,938 –13,674 –50,203 +21,629 +40,017 +26,151 –137,243 – 756 1.0819 95.0 90.1
May –29,322 – 7,870 +74,015 +120,742 +36,979 + 2,563 –87,435 + 1,165 1.0579 95.4 90.5
June – 4,576 – 8,748 + 7,334 + 7,896 –100,873 + 6,264 +92,140 + 1,906 1.0566 95.7 90.7
July –12,890 –13,561 +19,962 –10,178 +46,302 + 9,912 –27,708 + 1,634 1.0179 93.9 89.2
Aug. –26,568 –30,991 –19,877 –36,092 –60,734 +14,523 +60,269 + 2,158 1.0128 93.4 88.9
Sep. – 5,398 –13,237 –24,983 +82,999 –166,454 +13,762 +41,241 + 3,470 0.9904 93.9 89.9
Oct. –14,552 – 8,014 +17,131 +10,657 –38,667 + 3,663 +37,555 + 3,923 0.9826 94.5 91.3
Nov. + 5,781 + 6,848 –18,139 – 5,967 –26,937 + 4,351 + 9,899 + 515 1.0201 95.7 92.3
Dec. +15,170 + 9,187 +66,107 +27,823 +67,658 – 7,823 –26,407 + 4,855 1.0589 96.8 92.6
2023 Jan. –11,450 –13,621 + 9,250 – 795 +30,484 – 2,482 – 9,210 – 8,747 1.0769 97.1 92.8
Feb. +12,774 +22,117 –18,894 +32,093 –25,632 +12,383 –26,391 –11,347 1.0715 97.0 93.0
Mar. +31,242 +40,550 +44,846 + 3,466 –102,298 + 5,702 +136,330 + 1,646 1.0706 97.3 93.2
Apr. + 8,747 + 7,698 + 6,603 – 4,249 +65,646 – 1,474 –51,452 – 1,868 1.0968 98.4 p 94.1
May – 6,248 +16,180 –10,763 –57,786 +48,740 + 7,352 –10,423 + 1,353 1.0868 98.0 p 93.6
June +37,376 +32,660 +72,618 +81,656 –47,633 –11,016 +47,222 + 2,389 1.0840 98.2 p 93.8
July +26,942 +28,082 + 6,767 –29,355 +12,883 – 831 +23,676 + 394 1.1058 99.2 p 95.0
Aug. +30,672 +25,477 +42,505 + 8,422 – 559 + 9,009 +24,362 + 1,273 1.0909 99.0 p 95.1
Sep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0684 98.5 p 94.7
Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0563 98.0 p 94.2
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also Tables
XII. 9 and 11, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Bundesbank cal-culation. Vis-á-vis the currencies of the extended EER group of tranding partners (fixed
composition).  4 Based on consumer price indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Croatia Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2020 –6.1 –5.3 –3.8 –1.0 –2.4 –7.5 –9.3 6.6 –9.0 –8.6 –3.5
2021 5.9 6.9 3.2 7.2 3.2 6.4 8.4 15.1 8.3 13.8 6.7
2022 3.4 3.0 1.8 –0.5 1.6 2.5 5.6 9.4 3.7 6.4 3.4
2022 Q2 4.1 3.8 1.6 0.2 2.7 4.1 7.4 9.3 5.0 9.3 4.4
Q3 2.4 2.0 1.2 –0.5 1.2 1.2 3.9 9.4 2.5 5.5 0.8
Q4 1.8 1.4 0.2 –4.2 –0.7 0.3 4.5 10.2 1.3 3.2 1.6
2023 Q1 1.2 1.7 0.2 –3.7 0.5 1.2 1.8 1.1 2.3 1.6 –0.0
Q2 0.5 1.3 –0.4 –2.9 –0.5 0.6 2.8 –0.7 0.0 2.6 –1.1
Q3 0.1 ... –0.8 –2.5 ... 0.3 ... –4.7 ... ... –0.1
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2020 –7.7 –3.8 –9.6 –2.8 –3.2 –10.9 –2.1 14.5 –11.5 –3.4 –1.8
2021 8.9 16.8 4.6 12.8 4.2 5.9 10.4 28.3 12.2 6.4 6.5
2022 2.3 –0.7 –0.3 –2.3 4.0 –0.2 2.5 18.9 0.4 1.6 0.8
2022 Q2 2.0 –5.1 –1.3 2.5 8.0 –0.2 3.1 14.9 2.1 2.5 3.6
Q3 3.4 –3.6 1.9 –5.0 3.5 0.2 3.9 21.0 0.0 2.5 –2.6
Q4 2.2 –0.2 –0.6 –10.4 –0.6 –0.4 –1.7 29.8 –2.2 –1.4 –1.2
2023 Q1 0.3 –2.9 0.4 –9.7 1.0 –0.5 2.2 7.8 –1.5 –1.7 –6.0
Q2 –1.2 –4.3 –0.3 –14.3 –2.9 1.5 1.0 4.2 –3.9 0.0 –6.7
Q3 –4.8 –7.5 p–3.1 –11.4 ... 0.9 ... ... –2.6 –0.4 –5.3
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2021 81.4 80.1 84.9 78.1 81.2 81.1 75.7 78.0 76.5 75.0 75.3
2022 82.2 79.1 85.2 71.7 81.0 81.8 75.9 79.8 78.4 77.0 75.0
2023 80.5 75.7 83.4 67.3 76.6 81.1 75.2 ... 76.9 ... 72.9
2022 Q3 81.9 78.9 85.1 74.7 80.7 81.7 74.5 79.2 78.4 75.8 75.7
Q4 81.4 77.2 84.9 71.5 80.8 80.6 75.5 79.8 77.9 74.5 73.3
2023 Q1 81.4 76.7 84.6 71.0 79.0 81.0 74.8 79.2 77.4 77.6 72.6
Q2 81.2 77.3 84.2 70.0 76.3 82.0 73.8 ... 77.4 78.1 73.8
Q3 80.0 75.0 82.9 63.5 77.4 80.6 76.3 ... 76.9 78.4 72.7
Q4 79.4 73.9 81.9 64.7 73.7 80.7 75.9 ... 75.9 74.7 72.3
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2020 7.9 5.6 3.6 7.0 7.8 7.8 16.3 5.7 9.2 7.6 8.1
2021 7.7 e 6.3 3.6 e 6.2 e 7.7 e 7.9 e 14.8 e 6.3 e 9.6 e 7.6 e 7.6
2022 6.8 e 5.6 p 3.1 e 5.6 e 6.8 e 7.3 e 12.5 e 4.5 e 8.1 e 6.8 e 6.9
2023 May 6.5 5.6 3.0 6.7 7.1 7.3 11.1 4.1 7.6 6.4 6.4
June 6.4 5.6 3.0 7.1 7.2 7.3 11.1 4.4 7.4 6.6 6.6
July 6.5 5.5 3.0 7.5 7.4 7.4 10.7 4.4 7.6 6.7 6.6
Aug. 6.4 5.5 3.0 7.3 7.3 7.3 10.6 4.5 7.3 6.7 6.6
Sep. 6.5 5.6 3.0 7.4 7.4 7.3 10.0 4.7 7.4 6.8 6.6
Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.8 ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2020 0.3 0.4 5 0.4 –0.6 0.4 0.5 –1.3 –0.5 –0.1 0.0 0.1
2021 2.6 3.2 5 3.2 4.5 2.1 2.1 0.6 2.4 1.9 2.7 3.2
2022 8.4 10.3 8.7 19.4 7.2 5.9 9.3 8.1 8.7 10.7 17.2
2023 May 6 6.1 2.7 6.3 11.2 5.0 6.0 4.1 5.4 8.0 8.3 12.3
June 5.5 1.6 6.8 9.0 4.1 5.3 2.8 4.8 6.7 8.3 8.1
July 5.3 1.7 6.5 6.2 4.2 5.1 3.5 4.6 6.3 8.0 6.6
Aug. 5.2 2.4 6.4 4.3 3.1 5.7 3.5 4.9 5.5 8.4 5.6
Sep. 4.3 0.7 4.3 3.9 3.0 5.7 2.4 5.0 5.6 7.4 3.6
Oct. e 2.9 e–1.7 3.0 e 5.0 2.4 4.5 3.8 3.6 e 1.9 6.7 2.3
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
2020 –7.1 –8.9 –4.3 –5.4 –5.6 –9.0 –9.7 –5.0 –9.6 –7.3 –4.5
2021 –5.2 –5.4 –3.6 –2.5 –2.8 –6.5 –7.0 –1.5 –8.8 –2.5 –7.2
2022 –3.6 –3.5 –2.5 –1.0 –0.8 –4.8 –2.4 1.7 –8.0 0.1 –4.6
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
2020 97.2 111.8 68.8 18.6 74.7 114.6 207.0 58.1 154.9 86.8 42.2
2021 94.7 108.0 69.0 17.8 72.5 112.9 195.0 54.4 147.1 78.1 44.0
2022 90.9 104.3 66.1 18.5 73.3 111.8 172.6 44.4 141.7 68.2 41.0
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
–0.0 –0.9 –8.1 –3.9 –6.6 –8.3 –3.3 –4.2 –11.2 –3.4 2020
6.3 7.2 12.3 6.2 4.2 5.7 4.8 8.2 6.4 9.9 2021
2.4 1.4 6.9 4.3 4.8 6.8 1.7 2.5 5.8 5.1 2022
2.4 2.3 9.9 5.2 6.5 8.2 1.4 4.4 6.9 6.7 2022 Q2
2.1 2.1 4.7 3.0 2.0 5.0 1.5 0.9 5.5 4.2 Q3
0.1 –2.3 5.3 2.9 1.8 3.1 1.2 –0.2 3.8 2.3 Q4
–2.4 –1.6 5.0 1.9 1.9 2.6 0.5 1.0 4.5 3.0 2023 Q1
0.7 –1.7 3.9 –0.2 –1.3 1.9 1.5 1.6 2.1 2.2 Q2
0.1 ... ... –0.6 ... ... 1.1 1.1 1.4 2.5 Q3
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
–1.9 –10.8 –0.3 –3.9 –5.9 –7.3 –8.5 –5.2 –9.8 –7.3 2020
20.2 8.4 0.1 5.0 11.2 3.5 10.3 10.2 7.5 6.4 2021
9.4 –1.3 2.8 2.6 6.9 –0.0 –3.9 1.2 3.0 1.1 2022
9.2 –1.6 –4.0 4.7 8.4 2.0 –3.1 2.8 5.0 3.0 2022 Q2
10.0 –0.3 7.7 2.4 5.5 1.3 –1.5 1.7 4.6 –1.0 Q3
–2.5 –3.3 10.0 1.3 2.8 –0.3 –8.4 –5.7 0.7 –0.4 Q4
–11.7 –4.4 13.7 –3.6 1.0 1.3 –3.4 –3.4 1.6 –1.4 2023 Q1
–0.4 –6.9 7.5 –9.4 –0.4 –4.9 0.6 –4.2 –2.1 0.4 Q2
... p –7.3 ... ... ... –4.7 ... ... p –2.2 ... Q3
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
76.7 82.0 76.8 82.4 87.1 79.2 82.2 84.5 77.8 51.3 2021
77.4 80.8 64.7 83.7 87.7 81.9 83.3 85.0 78.7 58.2 2022
68.8 73.1 68.1 81.9 85.3 81.7 82.1 83.2 76.9 61.6 2023
76.8 81.4 67.6 83.9 87.9 81.6 83.5 84.1 78.9 58.2 2022 Q3
76.1 79.8 63.6 82.6 85.7 81.6 83.0 84.1 77.2 60.5 Q4
69.7 74.3 65.7 82.9 87.1 81.5 80.2 83.1 77.1 59.8 2023 Q1
70.6 75.5 53.3 82.5 86.3 83.5 84.0 83.9 76.3 60.9 Q2
67.1 72.0 69.4 81.3 84.6 80.9 83.0 83.0 76.2 62.7 Q3
67.9 70.5 84.1 80.9 83.2 80.9 81.0 82.6 77.8 63.1 Q4
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
8.6 6.8 4.4 3.9 5.4 6.9 6.7 5.0 15.5 7.6 2020
e 7.1 e 5.4 e 3.4 e 4.2 e 6.2 e 6.6 e 6.9 e 4.8 e 14.8 e 7.5 2021
e 5.9 e 4.6 e 2.9 e 3.6 e 4.8 e 6.1 e 6.2 e 4.0 e 13.0 e 6.8 2022
6.1 5.0 2.6 3.5 4.7 6.4 5.9 3.8 11.9 6.1 2023 May
5.8 5.2 2.5 3.5 5.1 6.4 5.8 3.7 11.9 6.2 June
6.4 5.2 2.5 3.6 5.7 6.4 5.8 3.6 11.9 6.6 July
6.1 5.4 2.7 3.6 5.3 6.4 5.8 3.5 11.9 6.6 Aug.
6.2 5.6 2.8 3.7 5.5 6.5 5.8 3.6 12.0 6.2 Sep.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Oct.
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
1.1 0.0 0.8 1.1 1.4 –0.1 2.0 –0.3 –0.3 –1.1 2020
4.6 3.5 0.7 2.8 2.8 0.9 2.8 2.0 3.0 2.3 2021
18.9 8.2 6.1 11.6 8.6 8.1 12.1 9.3 8.3 8.1 2022
10.7 2.0 6.3 6.8 8.7 5.4 12.3 8.1 2.9 3.6 2023 May
8.2 1.0 6.2 6.4 7.8 4.7 11.3 6.6 1.6 2.8 June
7.2 2.0 5.6 5.3 7.0 4.3 10.3 5.7 2.1 2.4 July
6.4 3.5 5.0 3.4 7.5 5.3 9.6 6.1 2.4 3.1 Aug.
4.1 3.4 4.9 –0.3 5.7 4.8 9.0 7.1 3.3 4.3 Sep.
3.1 2.1 4.2 –1.0 e 4.9 3.2 7.8 6.6 3.5 3.6 Oct.
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
–6.5 –3.4 –9.6 –3.7 –8.0 –5.8 –5.4 –7.6 –10.1 –5.7 2020
–1.1 0.6 –7.5 –2.2 –5.8 –2.9 –5.2 –4.6 –6.7 –1.9 2021
–0.7 –0.3 –5.7 –0.1 –3.5 –0.3 –2.0 –3.0 –4.7 2.4 2022
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
46.2 24.6 52.2 54.7 83.0 134.9 58.9 79.6 120.3 114.9 2020
43.4 24.5 54.0 51.7 82.5 124.5 61.1 74.4 116.8 99.3 2021
38.1 24.7 52.3 50.1 78.4 112.4 57.8 72.3 111.6 85.6 2022
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of valueadded tax between July and December 2020.  6 Including Croatia from 2023 onwards.
7 According to Maastricht Treaty definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2022 Feb. 110.9 44.4 2.0 66.5 73.8 –13.7 82.3 95.9 –24.6 –12.6 –0.4 –3.5 –8.1
Mar. 149.8 104.5 26.4 45.3 36.0 3.0 –23.7 –26.7 –2.2 2.8 –0.7 –21.8 17.5
Apr. 112.0 96.8 20.2 15.2 5.2 –99.3 –79.2 20.1 5.5 –10.5 –0.2 1.5 14.7
May 107.2 65.1 –18.8 42.1 49.5 –58.2 40.4 98.6 –17.8 3.1 –3.2 –21.2 3.6
June 116.2 83.6 –8.8 32.6 33.5 102.6 –25.9 –128.5 20.3 –4.8 –0.4 1.0 24.4
July 29.8 58.6 –3.0 –28.8 –28.8 –11.6 63.7 75.4 4.6 –11.7 –0.4 –3.6 20.3
Aug. –10.7 26.1 –18.8 –36.8 –31.2 46.9 69.4 22.5 –15.8 –22.1 0.8 1.9 3.6
Sep. 86.6 83.1 –0.1 3.4 2.2 –53.1 –199.8 –146.7 12.9 –16.4 –0.4 3.6 26.1
Oct. –12.5 0.1 –6.1 –12.6 –9.7 – 0.8 169.5 170.3 –11.3 –14.7 0.0 11.5 –8.1
Nov. 93.0 83.9 31.0 9.0 14.3 14.6 –40.6 –55.2 35.8 1.7 –0.1 34.6 –0.4
Dec. –122.3 –89.1 –1.0 –33.2 –41.2 – 0.0 –257.1 –257.1 43.9 10.0 –0.1 1.1 32.8
2023 Jan. –10.1 –0.7 –14.3 –9.5 –4.2 11.7 126.6 114.9 31.4 –6.2 1.8 57.5 –21.8
Feb. 7.6 –13.3 3.2 20.9 29.8 8.3 0.5 –7.8 12.7 –1.3 1.3 10.0 2.8
Mar. 33.8 41.0 11.7 –7.2 –9.7 74.9 112.0 37.1 30.2 10.8 1.0 5.9 12.5
Apr. – 9.4 24.0 30.8 –33.4 –29.1 –25.5 –36.2 –10.7 10.5 9.3 1.0 4.0 –3.8
May 3.6 49.0 33.8 –45.4 –49.6 18.9 44.9 25.9 35.5 –0.6 2.1 26.7 7.4
June 3.0 –11.4 –12.2 14.3 21.2 116.5 15.8 –100.7 43.6 1.2 2.6 27.1 12.8
July –46.6 6.8 5.2 –53.4 –53.0 32.6 108.0 75.3 32.6 0.9 2.5 17.4 11.7
Aug. –56.1 –66.8 –12.4 10.8 13.4 34.4 62.1 27.7 21.6 –2.3 3.5 11.3 9.2
Sep. 39.4 35.0 –1.0 4.4 3.1 59.3 –108.5 –167.8 49.8 15.5 3.0 20.0 11.3
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2022 Feb. 32.7 27.6 3.4 5.2 7.2 16.0 21.9 5.9 5.1 –1.3 –0.2 7.0 –0.4
Mar. 37.0 23.3 4.1 13.7 12.9 –44.2 –22.2 22.0 6.1 –2.0 –0.2 4.1 4.2
Apr. 19.0 18.9 2.7 0.1 –4.5 19.1 –13.0 –32.1 4.4 –2.7 –0.2 3.2 4.1
May 39.1 28.5 3.5 10.6 13.5 –29.8 –0.9 28.9 2.0 –2.4 –0.1 2.0 2.5
June 32.6 25.5 –4.1 7.1 4.8 –22.4 –9.4 13.0 3.8 –3.1 –0.2 –3.8 10.8
July 18.2 30.6 10.6 –12.4 –13.4 42.7 4.3 –38.5 9.3 –2.0 –0.2 8.5 3.0
Aug. 26.0 39.4 –0.2 –13.4 –11.4 –50.3 6.7 57.1 3.0 –0.0 –0.1 0.8 2.3
Sep. 21.5 23.1 0.1 –1.7 –4.5 –27.4 1.6 29.0 4.1 –0.3 –0.0 –0.6 5.0
Oct. 12.8 10.5 –0.2 2.3 1.9 45.1 20.4 –24.7 –7.6 –1.2 0.2 3.2 –9.8
Nov. 25.4 26.2 1.4 –0.9 0.8 38.0 8.9 –29.1 9.8 1.9 0.2 7.1 0.6
Dec. –28.8 –19.6 –2.4 –9.3 –8.2 –37.1 –71.9 –34.8 –0.5 –3.7 0.4 –1.9 4.8
2023 Jan. 27.5 16.9 –0.2 10.7 8.9 63.0 29.8 –33.3 –14.3 2.7 1.0 3.1 –21.0
Feb. 9.2 8.3 –0.2 0.9 1.8 58.4 –2.0 –60.3 3.3 0.6 1.2 –2.1 3.5
Mar. 4.8 8.1 6.4 –3.4 –3.7 –12.4 10.5 23.0 15.5 6.0 1.6 4.4 3.5
Apr. – 3.7 13.0 1.2 –16.7 –20.2 62.7 –15.2 –77.9 5.0 2.0 1.5 –3.0 4.5
May 5.0 11.3 –1.3 –6.3 –4.7 9.6 16.5 6.9 16.9 2.7 2.2 6.1 5.8
June 1.5 –1.9 4.1 3.4 5.4 7.6 –6.6 –14.3 9.7 –0.9 2.7 –0.3 8.2
July 5.1 6.8 –1.1 –1.7 –4.7 34.0 8.3 –25.7 24.9 –0.3 3.0 10.2 12.0
Aug. – 6.8 –5.0 –6.1 –1.8 0.3 25.7 –5.3 –31.0 6.6 –2.7 2.7 0.2 6.4
Sep. – 6.4 3.3 0.8 –9.7 –13.3 – 0.6 –2.9 –2.4 21.2 0.1 2.9 11.6 6.6
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
44.6 35.4 0.0 41.3 70.0 75.8 9.1 66.6 –13.8 8.0 9.4 –37.1 – 0.4 2022 Feb.
13.7 54.2 0.0 90.6 101.8 81.6 22.5 59.1 16.3 4.0 –17.6 –0.2 – 2.2 Mar.
–22.1 –93.0 0.0 99.7 61.8 60.6 11.2 49.5 –1.1 2.3 25.1 20.2 16.5 Apr.
–28.9 50.0 0.0 52.6 62.4 66.3 7.8 58.6 –15.9 11.9 4.7 –10.1 – 5.2 May
69.6 75.1 0.0 69.1 75.4 48.2 6.6 41.6 24.1 3.1 –32.5 –1.0 11.1 June
–31.2 –117.1 0.0 155.1 122.2 70.4 8.6 61.8 46.7 5.1 23.7 –2.0 18.0 July
–80.3 61.7 0.0 86.3 78.8 27.5 –4.6 32.1 41.3 10.0 –22.6 6.8 7.4 Aug.
7.3 –36.7 0.0 59.6 56.4 –42.8 –1.4 –41.3 99.8 – 0.6 –19.5 –8.4 21.6 Sep.
– 5.4 64.8 0.0 –57.8 –77.1 –157.4 –0.4 –157.1 85.4 – 5.0 4.4 36.7 –25.4 Oct.
–10.5 –5.6 0.0 71.6 22.1 –28.8 –3.5 –25.2 59.2 – 8.3 27.4 22.3 16.6 Nov.
–84.5 –61.4 0.0 3.3 13.1 –61.5 11.6 –73.1 59.8 14.8 –46.5 2.8 10.5 Dec.
–38.7 121.6 0.0 –130.6 –146.9 –229.1 –13.2 –215.8 76.0 6.2 35.1 6.6 – 7.8 2023 Jan.
20.3 25.1 0.0 –42.1 –63.1 –135.2 –3.5 –131.7 72.1 0.0 – 2.2 –6.4 29.4 Feb.
30.5 33.8 0.0 16.7 9.7 –104.1 3.9 –108.0 119.3 – 5.5 –25.7 20.6 9.6 Mar.
–26.5 –29.0 0.0 9.1 –18.2 –52.5 4.1 –56.6 45.7 –11.4 6.7 21.6 0.2 Apr.
–104.5 102.8 0.0 –30.4 –38.9 –87.9 1.7 –89.7 52.5 – 3.5 29.6 –5.4 4.0 May
24.6 44.9 0.0 11.5 22.6 –61.2 3.1 –64.3 94.4 –10.7 –11.2 –1.6 – 3.6 June
–29.4 –1.7 0.0 – 0.6 –28.2 –90.8 3.0 –93.8 72.8 –10.2 4.1 9.7 – 0.9 July
–20.2 6.5 0.0 –42.1 –44.9 –101.7 –7.6 –94.1 80.6 –23.8 4.4 9.6 0.8 Aug.
35.0 –14.5 0.0 39.0 44.7 –13.1 –3.9 – 9.2 79.4 –21.6 – 5.8 0.1 –10.5 Sep.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
2.5 14.4 3.0 2.2 26.8 23.3 1.1 0.3 1.1 0.1 0.8 2022 Feb.
– 0.1 – 13.2 5.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 7.4 8.4 – 1.6 0.5 0.2 – 0.1 Mar.
– 3.0 32.9 3.4 2.3 3.7 – 3.4 10.4 – 0.4 – 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.6 Apr.
22.5 – 30.3 3.4 2.7 15.1 22.5 – 7.4 – 1.2 0.4 0.2 0.7 May
14.9 – 37.5 3.7 0.5 29.0 19.6 7.5 – 1.6 0.6 – 0.0 2.9 June
– 38.2 55.3 – 5.3 9.1 34.6 5.7 23.6 – 1.7 4.3 0.1 2.6 July
– 24.1 – 71.1 – 11.7 12.5 67.9 56.8 13.9 – 2.4 – 1.8 – 0.1 1.4 Aug.
4.7 – 1.1 3.3 0.3 – 13.6 – 56.8 45.1 – 5.3 – 2.6 0.1 6.0 Sep.
5.1 65.9 0.1 0.1 – 5.4 – 32.1 36.8 – 3.3 – 0.2 0.1 – 6.7 Oct.
22.6 13.6 – 0.0 – 0.3 17.3 12.6 4.3 – 5.5 3.2 0.0 2.7 Nov.
– 16.3 – 24.6 2.1 2.4 – 24.6 – 37.6 19.0 – 4.1 – 2.0 0.1 0.0 Dec.
– 42.9 147.9 2.3 – 5.1 – 0.2 – 37.1 38.4 – 6.5 – 0.1 – 0.2 5.4 2023 Jan.
12.9 50.9 1.1 – 0.7 0.4 – 33.2 32.6 – 8.0 1.3 – 0.1 7.8 Feb.
27.1 – 34.8 2.3 0.9 – 15.5 – 45.7 31.8 – 10.4 – 0.2 0.3 8.7 Mar.
– 39.0 86.7 1.9 0.7 6.3 – 11.7 25.3 – 10.2 0.7 0.2 1.9 Apr.
– 11.8 2.8 2.6 0.9 6.7 – 6.2 18.4 – 10.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 5.1 May
– 9.8 8.4 1.7 1.1 0.8 – 29.2 36.7 – 10.0 – 0.3 – 0.0 3.6 June
– 6.4 20.0 1.6 1.3 0.7 – 21.8 31.5 – 10.3 0.3 0.3 0.8 July
7.4 – 1.5 2.9 – 1.9 6.4 – 21.1 30.4 – 11.2 1.1 0.1 7.1 Aug.
– 11.6 – 10.8 3.6 – 1.7 – 5.8 – 13.5 17.8 – 8.6 – 1.0 0.1 – 0.6 Sep.
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2021 Aug. 31,438.2 21,047.9 14,684.9 12,261.1 1,533.4 890.4 6,363.1 1,002.3 5,360.8 6,653.6 3,736.6
Sep. 31,472.9 21,133.7 14,757.3 12,330.9 1,535.1 891.4 6,376.4 993.6 5,382.8 6,619.9 3,719.3
Oct. 31,778.8 21,201.7 14,817.8 12,379.4 1,548.1 890.3 6,384.0 987.7 5,396.3 6,825.2 3,751.9
Nov. 32,193.4 21,381.5 14,911.5 12,478.0 1,542.5 891.0 6,470.1 985.8 5,484.2 6,917.4 3,894.5
Dec. 31,777.4 21,384.4 14,917.2 12,462.9 1,567.3 887.0 6,467.2 988.5 5,478.8 6,738.7 3,654.2
2022 Jan. 32,417.1 21,571.9 15,046.9 12,609.0 1,553.3 884.6 6,525.0 999.2 5,525.8 6,914.5 3,930.7
Feb. 32,601.8 21,629.0 15,075.7 12,645.3 1,553.8 876.6 6,553.3 991.8 5,561.5 7,011.4 3,961.5
Mar. 32,937.3 21,737.1 15,176.1 12,722.0 1,587.5 866.7 6,561.0 1,001.4 5,559.6 6,996.1 4,204.1
Apr. 33,570.1 21,764.2 15,254.1 12,805.3 1,597.7 851.1 6,510.1 1,011.3 5,498.8 7,063.0 4,742.9
May 33,482.5 21,816.2 15,304.5 12,878.2 1,568.2 858.1 6,511.7 1,003.9 5,507.7 7,013.2 4,653.1
June 33,886.1 21,886.0 15,373.6 12,973.4 1,569.1 831.1 6,512.4 1,003.0 5,509.4 7,064.5 4,935.5
July 33,877.7 21,984.6 15,451.6 13,043.7 1,578.6 829.2 6,533.1 1,003.0 5,530.1 7,216.9 4,676.2
Aug. 34,342.9 21,872.4 15,459.5 13,080.1 1,553.8 825.7 6,412.9 996.9 5,416.1 7,301.6 5,168.9
Sep. 34,619.1 21,901.4 15,558.1 13,191.3 1,545.0 821.7 6,343.3 998.1 5,345.2 7,241.7 5,476.0
Oct. 34,551.1 21,891.6 15,553.1 13,190.6 1,533.0 829.6 6,338.5 995.2 5,343.3 7,336.9 5,322.6
Nov. 34,226.4 22,012.4 15,628.2 13,228.7 1,559.1 840.4 6,384.2 990.2 5,394.0 7,207.7 5,006.2
Dec. 33,866.7 21,792.9 15,515.8 13,124.7 1,555.4 835.7 6,277.1 998.9 5,278.2 6,873.2 5,200.6
2023 Jan. 33,828.5 21,883.6 15,553.3 13,171.9 1,545.6 835.8 6,330.3 1,000.3 5,330.0 6,982.8 4,962.1
Feb. 34,114.8 21,860.4 15,543.2 13,157.8 1,540.9 844.6 6,317.2 991.3 5,325.9 7,003.0 5,251.4
Mar. 33,955.0 21,921.1 15,575.4 13,175.7 1,552.2 847.4 6,345.7 995.3 5,350.4 7,101.3 4,932.7
Apr. 33,927.4 21,905.4 15,597.8 13,165.3 1,566.3 866.2 6,307.6 991.1 5,316.5 7,025.7 4,996.4
May 34,141.1 21,918.8 15,650.2 13,184.8 1,596.0 869.3 6,268.6 995.4 5,273.2 7,160.2 5,062.1
June 34,046.3 21,910.7 15,632.8 13,177.9 1,584.4 870.4 6,277.9 988.5 5,289.4 7,070.0 5,065.5
July 34,181.2 21,860.2 15,636.4 13,175.0 1,586.3 875.1 6,223.8 988.2 5,235.5 7,156.2 5,164.8
Aug. 34,234.9 21,806.2 15,569.2 13,119.6 1,576.8 872.8 6,237.0 986.1 5,250.8 7,254.6 5,174.2
Sep. 34,372.0 21,792.0 15,597.6 13,151.8 1,575.3 870.4 6,194.5 987.4 5,207.0 7,195.7 5,384.3
German contribution (€ billion)
2021 Aug. 7,395.2 5,087.3 3,824.6 3,325.1 221.4 278.1 1,262.8 280.8 982.0 1,336.0 971.9
Sep. 7,398.6 5,110.8 3,840.8 3,336.4 224.7 279.7 1,270.1 280.7 989.4 1,335.1 952.6
Oct. 7,461.0 5,147.0 3,874.5 3,363.5 228.6 282.4 1,272.5 284.4 988.0 1,385.2 928.8
Nov. 7,575.0 5,210.7 3,904.2 3,389.9 229.0 285.3 1,306.4 280.7 1,025.7 1,396.4 967.9
Dec. 7,475.8 5,212.1 3,914.7 3,393.2 237.0 284.5 1,297.4 278.0 1,019.5 1,355.9 907.8
2022 Jan. 7,787.0 5,243.9 3,944.7 3,422.9 235.8 286.0 1,299.2 279.9 1,019.3 1,433.6 1,109.5
Feb. 7,871.3 5,262.9 3,968.5 3,445.2 238.0 285.3 1,294.3 277.8 1,016.5 1,464.4 1,144.0
Mar. 7,997.7 5,280.7 3,990.2 3,464.4 240.6 285.2 1,290.6 278.6 1,012.0 1,447.5 1,269.5
Apr. 8,259.4 5,278.9 4,008.0 3,481.9 240.1 286.1 1,270.9 283.2 987.7 1,464.0 1,516.5
May 8,228.4 5,304.5 4,034.5 3,506.0 240.8 287.7 1,270.0 280.3 989.7 1,445.0 1,479.0
June 8,413.5 5,322.6 4,058.9 3,537.6 237.8 283.5 1,263.7 282.5 981.2 1,466.1 1,624.8
July 8,287.9 5,375.0 4,096.1 3,560.3 252.7 283.2 1,278.8 283.6 995.2 1,481.5 1,431.4
Aug. 8,546.0 5,364.5 4,132.0 3,600.0 249.1 282.9 1,232.5 281.5 951.0 1,492.4 1,689.0
Sep. 8,857.6 5,356.3 4,153.9 3,624.8 246.1 283.0 1,202.4 284.3 918.1 1,502.4 1,998.8
Oct. 8,826.7 5,366.0 4,163.6 3,634.6 245.9 283.1 1,202.4 284.8 917.5 1,509.0 1,951.8
Nov. 8,653.9 5,402.0 4,189.2 3,656.3 249.8 283.1 1,212.8 283.4 929.4 1,502.4 1,749.6
Dec. 8,626.1 5,345.2 4,165.8 3,636.7 245.9 283.2 1,179.4 283.2 896.1 1,417.3 1,863.7
2023 Jan. 8,561.4 5,377.1 4,178.3 3,652.7 245.9 279.7 1,198.8 285.0 913.9 1,443.8 1,740.5
Feb. 8,712.0 5,371.7 4,186.6 3,662.2 243.6 280.9 1,185.1 284.0 901.1 1,443.9 1,896.4
Mar. 8,573.5 5,388.1 4,193.6 3,661.9 252.1 279.6 1,194.5 284.2 910.3 1,457.2 1,728.2
Apr. 8,559.3 5,383.7 4,206.2 3,672.7 252.4 281.1 1,177.5 287.7 889.8 1,435.7 1,739.8
May 8,614.3 5,389.9 4,217.4 3,685.4 252.1 279.9 1,172.6 286.1 886.4 1,468.3 1,756.1
June 8,647.9 5,387.4 4,215.9 3,679.0 255.5 281.4 1,171.5 284.2 887.4 1,433.5 1,826.9
July 8,779.6 5,390.2 4,222.0 3,685.7 255.6 280.6 1,168.3 287.2 881.1 1,439.0 1,950.5
Aug. 8,776.6 5,383.7 4,215.6 3,685.5 249.4 280.6 1,168.1 285.0 883.0 1,442.2 1,950.7
Sep. 8,834.2 5,362.3 4,216.4 3,686.3 248.5 281.5 1,145.9 288.6 857.4 1,446.3 2,025.6
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,439.2 15,385.0 14,038.0 14,195.4 9,029.8 706.2 151.2 1,809.9 2,462.4 35.9 2021 Aug.
1,444.5 15,439.0 14,071.8 14,236.3 9,090.4 700.2 140.0 1,806.7 2,463.3 35.6 Sep.
1,450.3 15,502.7 14,137.6 14,310.5 9,166.1 707.1 148.0 1,795.5 2,458.8 34.9 Oct.
1,456.3 15,517.2 14,187.3 14,344.1 9,223.4 697.0 143.3 1,786.3 2,459.8 34.3 Nov.
1,477.0 15,569.9 14,300.4 14,454.8 9,316.4 704.9 131.3 1,805.2 2,463.5 33.6 Dec.
1,477.9 15,643.3 14,276.5 14,476.1 9,302.9 706.6 135.3 1,820.2 2,479.3 31.8 2022 Jan.
1,487.0 15,738.3 14,324.2 14,512.8 9,363.6 688.4 134.3 1,807.7 2,487.3 31.6 Feb.
1,509.6 15,835.8 14,410.3 14,595.2 9,435.1 703.7 123.5 1,809.6 2,492.1 31.2 Mar.
1,520.7 15,875.5 14,463.0 14,653.3 9,497.0 705.4 123.5 1,802.0 2,494.3 31.0 Apr.
1,528.5 15,890.6 14,508.9 14,681.0 9,538.2 684.9 120.2 1,803.2 2,506.6 27.9 May
1,535.1 16,036.6 14,569.2 14,746.5 9,580.0 704.8 123.4 1,800.3 2,510.4 27.5 June
1,543.7 16,115.9 14,670.0 14,869.0 9,667.1 741.0 127.1 1,791.0 2,515.8 27.1 July
1,539.1 16,100.9 14,732.1 14,924.4 9,693.1 781.5 125.9 1,770.0 2,526.0 28.0 Aug.
1,537.7 16,196.6 14,782.4 15,033.5 9,685.1 913.3 125.5 1,756.3 2,525.7 27.6 Sep.
1,537.2 16,092.6 14,705.0 14,933.6 9,518.6 993.0 130.3 1,741.7 2,522.3 27.6 Oct.
1,533.7 16,083.0 14,720.8 14,915.7 9,455.0 1,042.9 134.6 1,741.1 2,514.5 27.6 Nov.
1,545.3 15,995.0 14,763.8 14,927.6 9,387.1 1,099.5 133.9 1,749.5 2,530.0 27.6 Dec.
1,533.4 15,876.9 14,667.4 14,845.0 9,228.1 1,163.7 146.1 1,746.4 2,532.0 28.7 2023 Jan.
1,529.9 15,843.6 14,625.0 14,773.2 9,083.9 1,223.7 157.3 1,746.5 2,531.8 30.0 Feb.
1,533.8 15,891.7 14,649.1 14,788.4 8,989.9 1,311.7 174.0 1,756.9 2,524.7 31.1 Mar.
1,537.9 15,848.6 14,649.0 14,784.4 8,939.1 1,345.9 187.8 1,765.7 2,513.9 32.2 Apr.
1,539.7 15,719.4 14,618.2 14,757.9 8,859.3 1,386.7 199.8 1,766.9 2,510.9 34.3 May
1,542.7 15,760.6 14,649.0 14,755.9 8,755.3 1,455.6 218.6 1,768.3 2,517.0 41.1 June
1,545.9 15,695.6 14,618.8 14,725.0 8,662.6 1,511.5 231.9 1,768.5 2,506.8 43.6 July
1,538.3 15,645.9 14,594.2 14,693.0 8,577.6 1,578.6 240.5 1,765.9 2,483.2 47.1 Aug.
1,534.3 15,754.9 14,653.5 14,765.5 8,569.1 1,647.3 254.2 1,783.0 2,461.8 50.2 Sep.
German contribution (€ billion)
329.0 4,333.1 4,065.2 3,923.1 2,659.1 135.6 31.3 535.7 536.4 25.0 2021 Aug.
329.8 4,340.5 4,064.1 3,919.8 2,662.1 132.2 31.2 533.6 535.8 24.8 Sep.
331.4 4,354.3 4,080.9 3,950.3 2,681.4 143.0 31.1 534.8 535.5 24.6 Oct.
332.6 4,390.5 4,107.1 3,968.0 2,710.9 132.5 30.3 534.6 535.5 24.3 Nov.
337.1 4,425.2 4,113.0 3,968.5 2,691.5 141.2 30.1 544.6 537.0 24.1 Dec.
337.9 4,418.1 4,139.2 4,006.8 2,737.3 135.4 29.7 543.6 537.4 23.4 2022 Jan.
340.1 4,444.1 4,161.0 4,017.1 2,752.3 132.4 29.4 542.3 537.7 23.1 Feb.
344.3 4,441.6 4,159.0 4,014.6 2,755.3 130.7 29.3 540.4 536.0 22.9 Mar.
346.7 4,445.6 4,158.1 4,019.8 2,754.8 140.0 29.4 537.7 535.1 22.7 Apr.
349.4 4,478.3 4,170.7 4,016.7 2,769.9 125.8 29.7 534.8 533.9 22.6 May
349.9 4,517.1 4,194.6 4,031.6 2,787.1 127.8 30.1 531.9 532.3 22.4 June
359.0 4,507.6 4,222.4 4,070.3 2,813.6 142.1 31.0 530.6 530.6 22.3 July
371.5 4,552.6 4,289.4 4,135.2 2,870.1 153.3 30.6 530.7 528.3 22.2 Aug.
371.8 4,541.5 4,267.4 4,135.1 2,834.9 193.7 30.9 530.3 523.0 22.2 Sep.
371.8 4,546.8 4,270.2 4,140.4 2,804.0 233.2 31.6 529.3 519.8 22.4 Oct.
371.5 4,578.7 4,283.7 4,146.3 2,806.0 240.1 32.1 531.0 514.4 22.6 Nov.
374.0 4,534.2 4,260.8 4,119.2 2,764.3 260.2 34.1 527.1 510.4 23.0 Dec.
368.9 4,489.3 4,257.7 4,126.0 2,749.9 286.6 36.9 529.6 499.1 24.0 2023 Jan.
368.1 4,496.6 4,250.9 4,106.5 2,706.5 314.2 39.1 530.3 491.2 25.2 Feb.
369.0 4,505.7 4,236.8 4,090.4 2,667.4 336.4 42.4 536.3 481.0 26.8 Mar.
369.8 4,473.0 4,248.0 4,104.2 2,660.3 360.2 46.1 538.3 471.0 28.3 Apr.
370.7 4,469.7 4,256.0 4,103.8 2,647.5 373.8 50.3 540.9 460.8 30.5 May
371.7 4,460.3 4,259.3 4,096.2 2,616.5 400.5 54.1 541.0 450.9 33.2 June
373.1 4,455.4 4,259.2 4,106.1 2,603.8 426.9 57.6 540.8 440.7 36.2 July
371.2 4,460.4 4,259.8 4,101.7 2,577.8 455.8 61.5 538.1 429.6 38.9 Aug.
369.4 4,448.7 4,258.2 4,103.9 2,568.4 468.0 66.2 538.5 421.1 41.8 Sep.
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2021 Aug. 736.1 453.5 329.1 43.9 17.0 42.0 18.0 3.4 243.0 243.0 628.1 1,988.5 1,334.0
Sep. 742.6 460.1 334.6 46.3 16.6 41.3 18.1 3.3 260.8 260.7 597.0 2,013.4 1,344.0
Oct. 740.3 451.9 323.3 48.1 18.0 41.6 17.7 3.3 272.2 272.2 630.3 2,040.1 1,356.4
Nov. 691.5 481.6 349.8 50.3 19.1 41.7 17.5 3.3 267.7 267.6 654.8 2,046.7 1,355.2
Dec. 646.7 468.4 337.4 49.7 19.4 41.1 17.6 3.2 234.3 233.1 647.5 2,019.7 1,346.8
2022 Jan. 711.0 456.2 306.6 67.4 19.6 41.2 17.6 3.8 291.8 291.6 621.2 2,049.2 1,351.4
Feb. 755.6 469.9 314.1 73.5 19.8 41.3 17.6 3.7 301.3 301.1 584.0 2,044.8 1,358.7
Mar. 769.7 470.9 304.7 82.5 20.5 42.4 17.3 3.4 283.8 283.6 583.8 2,026.7 1,358.6
Apr. 747.7 474.5 306.7 83.4 21.2 42.6 17.2 3.4 310.1 309.9 604.0 2,073.8 1,362.8
May 718.8 490.8 316.7 88.4 22.3 43.3 16.8 3.3 313.0 312.9 593.9 2,038.0 1,337.7
June 788.4 501.8 325.2 90.9 22.9 43.3 16.2 3.2 281.2 281.1 592.9 2,069.3 1,361.0
July 757.2 489.8 302.8 100.4 24.2 42.9 16.2 3.3 306.0 305.9 590.8 2,090.9 1,361.1
Aug. 676.9 499.6 309.1 104.6 24.0 42.5 16.1 3.2 283.8 283.7 597.5 2,113.5 1,375.1
Sep. 684.3 478.8 281.7 111.2 24.5 42.3 16.0 3.2 264.8 264.7 589.1 2,153.5 1,415.1
Oct. 678.9 480.2 287.2 109.2 24.3 41.5 14.7 3.2 268.8 268.8 625.8 2,130.5 1,416.5
Nov. 668.8 498.6 306.2 109.2 25.1 40.8 14.2 3.2 295.4 295.4 648.0 2,159.0 1,441.3
Dec. 584.0 483.5 296.0 103.6 27.2 40.2 13.5 3.0 248.3 248.3 650.9 2,166.2 1,474.6
2023 Jan. 551.2 480.7 283.1 113.0 27.5 40.6 12.8 3.7 284.0 284.0 657.6 2,205.1 1,510.3
Feb. 572.0 498.4 297.4 115.1 28.7 40.3 13.2 3.7 281.6 281.5 651.2 2,259.1 1,531.4
Mar. 602.7 500.6 288.6 125.7 28.4 39.6 14.7 3.6 255.3 255.2 671.9 2,257.1 1,551.2
Apr. 576.2 488.0 277.8 123.3 29.7 39.4 14.2 3.6 261.7 261.3 693.5 2,253.0 1,560.9
May 471.6 489.9 277.1 126.8 29.2 39.4 13.8 3.5 291.9 287.8 688.0 2,298.5 1,590.5
June 496.1 508.6 287.8 134.7 29.4 39.3 14.0 3.4 280.4 280.3 678.9 2,314.0 1,600.9
July 466.6 504.0 281.1 137.6 28.4 39.4 14.0 3.5 284.1 283.4 688.7 2,401.9 1,646.6
Aug. 446.4 506.5 282.9 138.6 28.0 39.6 13.9 3.4 288.9 288.9 698.2 2,421.2 1,656.9
Sep. 481.5 507.9 285.0 136.7 29.3 39.7 13.8 3.3 281.7 281.7 698.4 2,445.4 1,673.2
German contribution (€ billion)
2021 Aug. 168.1 241.8 155.7 37.3 13.9 32.4 2.4 0.2 9.7 9.7 2.2 522.4 303.1
Sep. 175.2 245.6 158.2 39.8 13.4 31.7 2.3 0.2 11.2 11.2 2.2 530.1 305.5
Oct. 171.3 232.7 142.7 40.9 14.8 31.8 2.3 0.2 10.8 10.8 2.1 547.9 316.4
Nov. 178.4 244.1 155.2 38.8 16.1 31.6 2.2 0.2 6.1 6.1 1.8 556.5 324.8
Dec. 206.2 250.5 161.9 39.1 16.4 30.7 2.3 0.2 5.8 4.8 2.1 547.6 316.3
2022 Jan. 168.1 243.3 139.1 54.6 16.5 30.7 2.2 0.2 4.7 4.7 2.2 562.8 325.1
Feb. 170.6 256.3 147.8 59.2 16.3 30.6 2.2 0.2 5.8 5.8 2.3 572.5 338.8
Mar. 170.6 256.4 137.6 68.8 17.0 30.7 2.2 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.4 581.5 354.8
Apr. 167.6 258.2 137.6 70.0 17.6 30.6 2.2 0.2 4.4 4.4 2.2 596.5 357.3
May 190.1 271.4 144.2 75.3 18.5 31.1 2.2 0.2 4.8 4.8 2.4 596.8 359.0
June 205.0 280.5 147.7 80.5 19.0 31.0 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.3 604.2 362.6
July 166.8 270.4 128.3 89.0 20.2 30.6 2.2 0.1 9.8 9.8 2.4 613.8 369.1
Aug. 142.7 274.6 129.4 92.2 20.4 30.4 2.2 0.1 8.0 8.0 2.3 625.7 384.5
Sep. 147.4 259.1 109.0 96.6 20.8 30.3 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.4 640.0 395.3
Oct. 152.5 253.9 108.1 93.1 20.5 30.1 2.1 0.1 5.2 5.2 2.5 633.9 398.1
Nov. 175.5 256.9 114.7 88.9 21.5 29.8 1.9 0.1 8.3 8.3 2.5 634.2 402.6
Dec. 159.2 255.8 117.3 83.2 23.9 29.6 1.8 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.6 631.2 409.3
2023 Jan. 116.4 246.9 99.4 92.2 23.8 29.8 1.6 0.1 6.1 6.1 2.4 639.6 417.9
Feb. 129.3 260.8 110.3 94.6 24.6 29.7 1.5 0.1 7.5 7.5 2.3 651.5 427.1
Mar. 156.4 258.8 102.2 101.4 24.1 29.6 1.4 0.1 7.2 7.2 2.6 658.0 440.3
Apr. 117.4 251.4 97.3 97.8 25.4 29.5 1.3 0.1 7.9 7.9 2.7 654.9 446.8
May 105.6 260.2 104.8 99.5 25.0 29.7 1.2 0.1 7.7 7.7 2.6 670.6 458.1
June 95.9 268.2 106.1 106.5 24.9 29.5 1.1 0.1 7.3 7.3 2.6 671.6 452.8
July 89.5 259.9 96.6 109.1 23.7 29.5 0.9 0.1 7.6 7.6 2.9 679.9 457.6
Aug. 96.8 261.9 100.9 107.1 23.3 29.6 0.9 0.1 8.7 8.7 3.0 688.8 469.0
Sep. 85.2 259.5 97.5 107.0 24.5 29.6 0.8 0.1 7.8 7.8 3.0 705.7 470.0
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
12.0 16.3 1,960.3 5,201.0 3,024.5 29.9 3,499.0 0.0 10,956.4 14,379.2 15,151.9 6,876.0 182.3 2021 Aug.
15.9 17.7 1,979.7 5,224.6 2,997.6 15.2 3,480.9 0.0 11,032.9 14,441.4 15,190.2 6,864.2 187.4 Sep.
23.0 17.6 1,999.5 5,422.6 2,999.7 – 22.8 3,483.7 0.0 11,103.9 14,525.7 15,327.0 6,874.5 188.2 Oct.
19.3 17.8 2,009.6 5,510.6 3,037.4 21.5 3,681.3 0.0 11,195.2 14,606.3 15,420.1 6,912.5 189.7 Nov.
12.3 18.0 1,989.3 5,376.2 3,026.8 54.3 3,371.8 0.0 11,299.6 14,712.2 15,495.8 6,899.2 195.0 Dec.
22.0 18.5 2,008.7 5,556.3 3,001.7 59.2 3,716.5 0.0 11,259.9 14,709.2 15,494.2 6,907.4 196.0 2022 Jan.
33.4 5.7 2,005.7 5,643.1 2,994.0 52.1 3,757.2 0.0 11,337.9 14,780.5 15,535.6 6,883.9 195.0 Feb.
30.7 6.2 1,989.8 5,625.1 3,003.0 78.5 3,991.1 0.0 11,420.9 14,884.1 15,628.0 6,879.4 195.1 Mar.
39.0 16.2 2,018.6 5,760.4 2,979.2 43.4 4,402.9 0.0 11,497.8 14,966.8 15,751.5 6,876.8 197.2 Apr.
34.0 15.6 1,988.4 5,814.3 2,915.9 56.3 4,332.0 0.0 11,558.5 15,021.7 15,795.7 6,782.0 199.0 May
47.8 14.4 2,007.0 5,735.2 2,905.2 73.8 4,656.7 0.0 11,615.3 15,108.4 15,878.2 6,786.6 199.4 June
15.1 16.4 2,059.5 5,862.8 2,970.9 75.9 4,320.6 0.0 11,693.5 15,242.2 15,997.1 6,894.6 203.9 July
16.7 19.0 2,077.8 5,914.8 2,890.5 94.9 4,808.0 0.0 11,714.4 15,316.1 16,075.7 6,812.0 196.7 Aug.
34.9 19.5 2,099.1 5,898.7 2,845.0 19.0 5,114.8 0.0 11,678.2 15,416.4 16,176.7 6,773.5 195.9 Sep.
3.8 24.0 2,102.8 6,038.5 2,819.3 42.1 4,996.2 0.0 11,516.3 15,332.9 16,110.8 6,736.2 196.0 Oct.
23.7 22.8 2,112.5 5,881.3 2,857.3 68.8 4,700.0 0.0 11,472.6 15,335.1 16,163.8 6,782.4 199.7 Nov.
31.7 23.2 2,111.2 5,553.4 2,817.9 59.6 4,830.2 0.0 11,394.6 15,328.2 16,144.6 6,749.5 192.2 Dec.
17.8 27.9 2,159.4 5,636.4 2,861.7 85.2 4,688.3 0.0 11,214.6 15,230.8 16,062.6 6,840.5 191.1 2023 Jan.
46.9 30.4 2,181.8 5,670.9 2,810.9 81.4 4,986.3 0.0 11,082.0 15,172.8 16,028.2 6,813.2 191.8 Feb.
54.0 30.4 2,172.6 5,657.4 2,893.1 89.6 4,705.3 0.0 10,971.3 15,173.5 16,033.0 6,897.0 182.0 Mar.
50.2 32.9 2,169.9 5,623.3 2,885.4 99.1 4,724.9 0.0 10,914.3 15,151.9 16,036.8 6,896.2 182.4 Apr.
55.9 32.6 2,210.0 5,719.5 2,908.2 169.0 4,806.9 0.0 10,833.9 15,124.1 16,019.7 6,962.4 180.8 May
51.0 32.8 2,230.2 5,583.1 2,885.5 149.7 4,851.3 0.0 10,741.1 15,133.1 16,007.6 6,967.9 178.0 June
47.8 34.2 2,319.9 5,595.9 2,907.5 103.1 4,958.5 0.0 10,647.4 15,100.4 16,001.3 7,082.4 180.5 July
51.1 33.5 2,336.6 5,655.4 2,926.1 122.9 4,938.0 0.0 10,553.1 15,058.6 15,964.4 7,118.9 176.9 Aug.
37.5 36.9 2,371.0 5,539.7 2,886.2 107.7 5,123.7 0.0 10,545.0 15,110.8 16,011.9 7,133.4 179.3 Sep.
German contribution (€ billion)
12.7 6.5 503.2 1,068.1 793.5 –1,088.4 1,754.6 492.9 2,814.8 3,571.7 3,602.8 1,889.9 0.0 2021 Aug.
13.1 7.0 510.1 1,165.5 781.6 –1,156.2 1,723.6 497.5 2,820.3 3,575.1 3,608.5 1,881.9 0.0 Sep.
13.3 7.2 527.5 1,165.8 783.9 –1,110.5 1,706.6 500.8 2,824.1 3,591.6 3,625.0 1,902.8 0.0 Oct.
14.5 7.4 534.6 1,227.7 803.0 –1,154.8 1,744.2 504.5 2,866.1 3,621.4 3,651.2 1,928.3 0.0 Nov.
16.1 7.5 524.0 1,305.6 796.1 –1,297.0 1,690.3 509.8 2,853.4 3,619.4 3,651.0 1,919.7 0.0 Dec.
13.6 7.7 541.5 1,271.1 778.4 –1,169.6 1,919.3 511.1 2,876.4 3,652.3 3,680.4 1,917.7 0.0 2022 Jan.
14.7 7.5 550.4 1,275.8 774.8 –1,172.9 1,969.0 514.2 2,900.0 3,677.2 3,707.4 1,921.4 0.0 Feb.
14.8 7.3 559.5 1,299.3 781.2 –1,190.8 2,076.2 520.0 2,892.9 3,677.0 3,707.8 1,934.7 0.0 Mar.
14.6 7.1 574.8 1,284.0 769.2 –1,168.1 2,325.6 523.3 2,892.4 3,686.8 3,715.1 1,935.2 0.0 Apr.
14.9 7.3 574.6 1,307.0 748.6 –1,199.2 2,289.8 526.8 2,914.0 3,699.5 3,728.9 1,911.8 0.0 May
18.7 6.6 578.9 1,317.0 743.1 –1,255.4 2,479.8 530.5 2,934.8 3,726.6 3,759.7 1,907.5 0.0 June
21.2 6.8 585.8 1,287.5 779.7 –1,189.6 2,276.7 525.2 2,941.9 3,757.1 3,797.3 1,949.2 0.0 July
21.8 7.6 596.2 1,349.3 739.6 –1,271.6 2,540.1 513.5 2,999.5 3,826.5 3,866.3 1,919.1 0.0 Aug.
27.5 8.1 604.3 1,385.2 711.9 –1,287.1 2,858.3 516.8 2,944.0 3,811.2 3,854.6 1,899.2 0.0 Sep.
19.1 9.7 605.0 1,355.1 693.8 –1,215.2 2,804.7 516.8 2,912.1 3,812.3 3,848.8 1,880.8 0.0 Oct.
20.8 11.2 602.2 1,310.2 714.6 –1,191.2 2,596.7 516.8 2,920.8 3,819.7 3,862.5 1,900.3 0.0 Nov.
20.2 11.7 599.3 1,265.7 690.1 –1,230.4 2,726.5 518.9 2,881.6 3,795.1 3,835.9 1,869.2 0.0 Dec.
24.0 13.1 602.4 1,226.5 689.1 –1,117.5 2,625.9 521.2 2,849.3 3,789.5 3,835.2 1,874.9 0.0 2023 Jan.
29.3 15.8 606.4 1,171.8 668.4 –1,073.2 2,787.2 522.2 2,816.8 3,782.0 3,836.8 1,860.1 0.0 Feb.
36.2 17.5 604.3 1,188.0 700.6 –1,129.7 2,641.2 524.5 2,769.6 3,756.4 3,819.8 1,897.7 0.0 Mar.
37.0 18.5 599.4 1,107.1 704.2 –1,028.5 2,637.8 526.4 2,757.6 3,759.4 3,825.5 1,899.8 0.0 Apr.
41.2 19.5 609.9 1,122.5 715.6 –1,036.9 2,662.4 529.0 2,752.3 3,762.8 3,833.9 1,926.7 0.0 May
44.6 19.2 607.9 1,099.9 709.8 –1,026.8 2,723.1 530.7 2,722.6 3,760.6 3,834.2 1,921.6 0.0 June
44.5 19.9 615.4 1,070.7 724.0 –996.4 2,835.7 532.2 2,700.4 3,759.3 3,834.2 1,946.1 0.0 July
51.0 20.6 617.2 1,044.4 734.2 –998.8 2,835.9 535.1 2,678.7 3,756.9 3,840.1 1,958.1 0.0 Aug.
48.6 22.5 634.6 1,048.3 722.8 –1,000.6 2,898.6 538.7 2,665.9 3,753.4 3,835.3 1,967.4 0.0 Sep.
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2021 Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 835.1 0.2 2,209.9 0.0 4,512.3 738.5 0.0 1,507.4 671.3 833.7 3,806.5 6,052.4
Dec. 839.2 0.2 2,208.8 0.0 4,655.6 745.0 0.0 1,521.4 628.3 965.7 3,843.3 6,109.7
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 877.7 0.3 2,201.5 0.0 4,750.2 734.2 0.0 1,540.6 582.0 1,160.5 3,812.3 6,087.1
Mar. 887.2 0.3 2,201.3 0.0 4,842.0 746.0 0.0 1,550.6 642.6 1,091.1 3,900.8 6,197.3
Apr. 913.2 0.4 2,199.8 0.0 4,889.2 714.9 0.0 1,575.9 667.8 1,116.7 3,927.3 6,218.1
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 934.2 0.5 2,198.8 0.0 4,939.1 681.3 0.0 1,591.5 624.1 1,129.1 4,046.1 6,319.0
July 943.7 1.0 2,149.4 0.0 4,958.8 678.7 0.0 1,604.0 667.6 1,158.0 3,943.3 6,226.0
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 950.1 1.7 2,124.9 0.0 4,954.8 707.0 0.0 1,585.3 553.9 1,249.2 3,936.1 6,228.5
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 955.8 4.0 2,118.8 0.0 4,948.3 4,490.0 0.0 1,563.7 536.7 1,104.4 332.0 6,385.7
Dec. 960.4 1.9 1,947.1 0.0 4,946.1 4,521.5 0.0 1,560.8 492.5 1,066.9 213.8 6,296.2
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 940.4 1.2 1,303.3 0.1 4,942.1 4,051.6 0.0 1,565.6 372.8 1,001.6 195.6 5,812.7
Mar. 916.8 0.9 1,233.3 0.0 4,939.0 4,103.0 0.0 1,553.9 380.2 861.8 191.1 5,848.0
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 945.0 1.4 1,117.7 0.1 4,905.6 3,996.1 0.0 1,559.8 360.6 870.5 182.7 5,738.6
June 948.2 1.6 1,100.5 0.1 4,884.1 4,126.4 0.0 1,563.7 256.4 806.6 181.6 5,871.7
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 927.8 10.9 682.0 0.1 4,853.0 3,704.4 0.0 1,567.0 254.4 770.5 177.4 5,448.9
Sep. 924.3 5.6 601.0 0.1 4,811.2 3,647.4 0.0 1,564.2 222.5 733.8 174.3 5,386.0
Oct. 931.2 8.1 515.4 0.1 4,767.9 3,577.4 0.0 1,554.7 222.7 693.3 174.6 5,306.7
Deutsche Bundesbank
2021 Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 200.3 0.1 439.1 0.0 978.5 204.4 0.0 367.4 217.7 – 235.2 1,061.6 1,633.3
Dec. 201.3 0.0 440.3 0.0 1,015.8 206.4 0.0 370.9 220.4 – 219.4 1,077.1 1,654.4
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 212.4 0.3 421.7 0.0 1,034.0 204.5 0.0 374.6 205.6 – 165.1 1,048.8 1,627.9
Mar. 215.6 0.1 421.7 0.0 1,057.9 211.8 0.0 378.1 191.1 – 193.7 1,108.0 1,698.0
Apr. 223.9 0.1 420.8 0.0 1,068.7 197.7 0.0 384.9 196.7 – 189.1 1,123.3 1,705.9
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 230.4 0.1 420.2 0.0 1,087.4 189.9 0.0 388.0 196.9 – 183.1 1,147.4 1,725.3
July 231.7 0.3 409.1 0.0 1,084.3 185.8 0.0 390.3 214.9 – 175.4 1,109.7 1,685.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 232.1 0.3 403.6 0.0 1,076.8 228.5 0.0 379.5 157.9 – 161.8 1,108.8 1,716.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 231.7 0.8 400.5 0.0 1,071.5 1,304.0 0.0 379.0 127.2 – 231.4 125.9 1,808.8
Dec. 232.4 0.5 352.5 0.0 1,079.2 1,346.6 0.0 378.8 121.0 – 242.4 60.5 1,785.9
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 229.8 0.4 231.9 0.1 1,076.8 1,234.6 0.0 377.2 77.8 – 205.4 54.8 1,666.7
Mar. 228.9 0.4 212.8 0.0 1,077.0 1,263.7 0.0 374.5 69.2 – 242.5 54.2 1,692.4
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 239.2 0.7 200.2 0.1 1,066.1 1,228.0 0.0 375.7 73.4 – 221.1 50.1 1,653.9
June 241.7 0.7 198.9 0.1 1,056.8 1,256.3 0.0 377.2 54.7 – 241.8 52.0 1,685.4
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 236.2 1.5 142.4 0.1 1,048.8 1,175.5 0.0 377.5 49.9 – 222.5 48.4 1,601.5
Sep. 234.5 0.8 131.2 0.1 1,041.3 1,177.8 0.0 377.3 40.1 – 235.4 48.0 1,603.1
Oct. 235.7 1.3 96.3 0.0 1,024.0 1,151.1 0.0 374.9 28.7 – 245.4 47.9 1,574.0
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
. . . . . . . . . . . .2021 Oct.
+ 8.4 ± 0.0 – 3.3 ± 0.0 +133.4 –28.1 ± 0.0 + 7.5 +35.6 +43.3 +80.3 +59.6 Nov.
+ 4.1 ± 0.0 – 1.1 ± 0.0 +143.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 +14.0 –43.0 +132.0 +36.8 +57.3 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+38.5 + 0.1 – 7.3 ± 0.0 +94.6 –10.8 ± 0.0 +19.2 –46.3 +194.8 –31.0 –22.6 Feb.
+ 9.5 ± 0.0 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +91.8 +11.8 ± 0.0 +10.0 +60.6 –69.4 +88.5 +110.2 Mar.
+26.0 + 0.1 – 1.5 ± 0.0 +47.2 –31.1 ± 0.0 +25.3 +25.2 +25.6 +26.5 +20.8 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+21.0 + 0.1 – 1.0 ± 0.0 +49.9 –33.6 ± 0.0 +15.6 –43.7 +12.4 +118.8 +100.9 June
+ 9.5 + 0.5 –49.4 ± 0.0 +19.7 – 2.6 ± 0.0 +12.5 +43.5 +28.9 –102.8 –93.0 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 6.4 + 0.7 –24.5 ± 0.0 – 4.0 +28.3 ± 0.0 –18.7 –113.7 +91.2 – 7.2 + 2.5 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 5.7 + 2.3 – 6.1 ± 0.0 – 6.5 +3,783.0 ± 0.0 –21.6 –17.2 –144.8 –3,604.1 +157.2 Nov.
+ 4.6 – 2.1 –171.7 ± 0.0 – 2.2 +31.5 ± 0.0 – 2.9 –44.2 –37.5 –118.2 –89.5 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
–20.0 – 0.7 –643.8 + 0.1 – 4.0 –469.9 ± 0.0 + 4.8 –119.7 –65.3 –18.2 –483.5 Feb.
–23.6 – 0.3 –70.0 – 0.1 – 3.1 +51.4 ± 0.0 –11.7 +7.4 –139.8 – 4.5 +35.3 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+28.2 + 0.5 –115.6 + 0.1 –33.4 –106.9 ± 0.0 + 5.9 –19.6 + 8.7 – 8.4 –109.4 May
+ 3.2 + 0.2 –17.2 ± 0.0 –21.5 +130.3 ± 0.0 + 3.9 –104.2 –63.9 – 1.1 +133.1 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
–20.4 + 9.3 –418.5 ± 0.0 –31.1 –422.0 ± 0.0 + 3.3 –2.0 –36.1 – 4.2 –422.8 Aug.
– 3.5 – 5.3 –81.0 ± 0.0 –41.8 –57.0 ± 0.0 – 2.8 –31.9 –36.7 – 3.1 –62.9 Sep.
+ 6.9 + 2.5 –85.6 ± 0.0 –43.3 –70.0 ± 0.0 – 9.5 +0.2 –40.5 + 0.3 –79.3 Oct.
Deutsche Bundesbank
. . . . . . . . . . . .2021 Oct.
+ 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.4 – 0.0 +27.8 – 6.4 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +13.4 + 5.7 +16.3 +12.3 Nov.
+ 1.0 – 0.1 + 1.2 – 0.0 +37.3 + 2.1 ± 0.0 + 3.5 +2.7 +15.7 +15.6 +21.1 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+11.1 + 0.2 –18.6 + 0.0 +18.2 – 2.0 ± 0.0 + 3.7 –14.7 +54.3 –28.3 –26.6 Feb.
+ 3.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 +23.9 + 7.4 ± 0.0 + 3.5 –14.5 –28.6 +59.2 +70.1 Mar.
+ 8.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.0 +10.8 –14.2 ± 0.0 + 6.8 +5.6 + 4.6 +15.2 + 7.9 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+ 6.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 – 0.0 +18.7 – 7.7 ± 0.0 + 3.0 +0.2 + 6.0 +24.1 +19.4 June
+ 1.3 + 0.2 –11.1 – 0.0 – 3.1 – 4.1 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +18.0 + 7.7 –37.7 –39.5 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 0.4 + 0.0 – 5.5 – 0.0 – 7.5 +42.7 ± 0.0 –10.8 –57.1 +13.5 – 0.9 +31.0 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
– 0.5 + 0.5 – 3.1 + 0.0 – 5.3 +1,075.5 ± 0.0 – 0.6 –30.7 –69.6 –982.9 +92.0 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.4 –48.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 +42.7 ± 0.0 – 0.1 –6.2 –11.0 –65.4 –22.9 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
– 2.5 – 0.1 –120.6 + 0.1 – 2.4 –112.0 ± 0.0 – 1.6 –43.2 +37.0 – 5.6 –119.3 Feb.
– 1.0 + 0.0 –19.1 – 0.0 + 0.2 +29.1 ± 0.0 – 2.7 –8.6 –37.1 – 0.7 +25.7 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+10.3 + 0.2 –12.7 + 0.0 –11.0 –35.7 ± 0.0 + 1.2 +4.1 +21.4 – 4.1 –38.5 May
+ 2.6 + 0.1 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 9.3 +28.3 ± 0.0 + 1.4 –18.7 –20.7 + 1.9 +31.5 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
– 5.6 + 0.8 –56.5 – 0.0 – 8.0 –80.8 ± 0.0 + 0.4 –4.7 +19.3 – 3.5 –83.9 Aug.
– 1.7 – 0.7 –11.2 + 0.0 – 7.5 + 2.3 ± 0.0 – 0.2 –9.8 –13.0 – 0.4 + 1.6 Sep.
+ 1.2 + 0.5 –35.0 – 0.0 –17.3 –26.7 ± 0.0 – 2.4 –11.5 – 9.9 – 0.0 –29.1 Oct.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2023 Apr. 14 7,730.9 632.9 501.8 229.1 272.7 13.9 12.6 12.6 –
21 7,714.2 632.9 498.8 229.1 269.6 15.7 12.6 12.6 –
28 7,719.8 632.9 499.0 229.4 269.6 14.2 12.9 12.9 –
May 5 7,716.9 632.9 500.7 230.3 270.5 13.2 12.8 12.8 –
12 7,728.5 632.9 499.0 230.4 268.7 14.5 12.9 12.9 –
19 7,730.1 632.9 500.6 230.4 270.2 13.7 12.9 12.9 –
26 7,713.7 632.8 500.2 230.4 269.9 13.9 13.8 13.8 –
June 2 7,712.7 632.8 500.8 230.5 270.3 13.9 13.4 13.4 –
9 7,714.4 632.8 500.5 231.0 269.6 14.1 13.4 13.4 –
16 7,709.7 632.8 502.4 231.0 271.4 13.1 13.7 13.7 –
23 7,710.6 632.8 500.3 231.1 269.2 14.8 13.8 13.8 –
30 7,219.7 609.3 497.5 229.1 268.5 13.3 15.8 15.8 –
July 7 7,206.9 609.3 499.1 229.1 270.0 12.1 13.9 13.9 –
14 7,205.5 609.3 497.7 229.0 268.6 13.7 14.1 14.1 –
21 7,186.9 609.3 496.6 228.9 267.6 14.3 14.2 14.2 –
28 7,189.3 609.3 497.8 229.0 268.8 12.9 14.2 14.2 –
Aug. 4 7,164.6 609.3 497.0 229.1 267.9 14.0 14.1 14.1 –
11 7,166.5 609.3 498.2 229.6 268.6 13.3 14.2 14.2 –
18 7,153.1 609.3 498.7 230.0 268.7 13.6 14.3 14.3 –
25 7,154.9 609.3 497.9 230.0 268.0 13.9 14.3 14.3 –
Sep. 1 7,168.2 609.3 498.7 231.3 267.4 14.2 14.1 14.1 –
8 7,153.1 609.3 498.3 231.3 267.1 14.3 14.0 14.0 –
15 7,135.7 609.3 497.2 231.3 265.9 14.7 14.2 14.2 –
22 7,142.0 609.3 497.3 231.3 266.0 14.5 14.5 14.5 –
29 7,066.5 613.3 502.4 234.2 268.2 15.4 14.2 14.2 –
Oct. 6 7,057.1 613.3 504.0 234.2 269.8 14.9 14.6 14.6 –
13 7,056.7 613.3 504.8 234.2 270.6 14.5 14.6 14.6 –
20 7,038.0 613.3 504.9 234.0 270.8 14.5 14.6 14.6 –
27 7,019.7 613.3 506.1 234.1 271.9 14.0 14.9 14.9 –
Nov. 3 7,001.6 613.3 506.4 234.2 272.1 13.6 14.8 14.8 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2023 Apr. 14 2,718.4 196.4 91.6 57.4 34.2 0.0 – – –
21 2,673.2 196.4 91.8 57.4 34.3 0.0 – – –
28 2,675.9 196.4 91.8 57.4 34.4 0.0 – – –
May 5 2,683.5 196.4 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 – – –
12 2,699.7 196.4 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
19 2,675.2 196.4 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
26 2,689.2 196.3 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
June 2 2,675.0 196.3 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 – – –
9 2,664.6 196.3 92.3 58.2 34.1 0.0 – – –
16 2,671.3 196.3 92.3 58.2 34.1 0.0 – – –
23 2,646.6 196.3 92.4 58.2 34.2 0.0 – – –
30 2,590.6 189.0 91.8 57.9 33.9 0.0 1.9 1.9 –
July 7 2,569.4 189.0 91.8 57.9 33.8 0.0 – – –
14 2,551.9 189.0 91.7 57.9 33.9 0.0 – – –
21 2,550.2 189.0 91.7 57.9 33.8 0.0 – – –
28 2,547.0 189.0 91.7 57.9 33.8 0.0 – – –
Aug. 4 2,562.8 189.0 91.9 58.0 33.9 0.0 – – –
11 2,552.0 189.0 91.6 58.0 33.7 0.0 – – –
18 2,559.4 189.0 92.2 58.2 34.0 0.0 – – –
25 2,550.9 189.0 92.0 58.2 33.7 0.0 – – –
Sep. 1 2,577.3 189.0 91.9 58.2 33.6 0.0 – – –
8 2,561.7 189.0 91.9 58.2 33.7 0.0 – – –
15 2,551.1 189.0 91.7 58.2 33.5 0.0 – – –
22 2,528.2 189.0 91.8 58.2 33.6 0.0 – – –
29 2,510.1 190.2 92.3 58.9 33.3 0.0 – – –
Oct. 6 2,506.6 190.2 92.3 58.9 33.4 0.0 – – –
13 2,504.5 190.2 92.5 58.9 33.6 0.0 – – –
20 2,509.3 190.2 92.7 58.9 33.8 0.0 – – –
27 2,512.0 190.2 93.1 58.9 34.2 0.0 – – –
Nov. 3 2,535.6 190.2 93.3 59.0 34.3 0.0 – – –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
1,102.1 1.6 1,100.5 – – – – 35.7 5,083.8 4,905.1 178.7 21.5 326.6 2023 Apr. 14
1,102.0 1.5 1,100.5 – – 0.0 – 37.1 5,076.0 4,895.0 181.0 21.5 317.6 21
1,102.6 1.9 1,100.4 – – 0.2 – 33.1 5,078.5 4,895.7 182.8 21.5 325.2 28
1,101.6 1.2 1,100.4 – – 0.0 – 37.1 5,072.9 4,892.5 180.4 21.5 324.3 May 5
1,101.8 1.3 1,100.4 – – – – 37.2 5,081.4 4,900.1 181.2 21.5 327.5 12
1,101.9 1.4 1,100.4 – – – – 38.2 5,076.8 4,895.2 181.6 21.5 331.7 19
1,102.6 2.0 1,100.4 – – 0.1 – 37.7 5,064.0 4,879.3 184.7 21.5 327.3 26
1,103.2 2.5 1,100.7 – – – – 37.7 5,067.3 4,881.1 186.2 21.5 322.2 June 2
1,102.1 1.3 1,100.7 – – 0.1 – 36.4 5,066.9 4,880.2 186.7 21.5 326.8 9
1,101.9 1.2 1,100.7 – – 0.1 – 42.1 5,054.0 4,867.8 186.2 21.5 328.3 16
1,102.0 1.2 1,100.7 – – 0.1 – 43.1 5,052.9 4,866.2 186.7 21.5 329.4 23
616.7 18.6 598.0 – – 0.2 – 42.6 5,045.1 4,858.9 186.2 21.0 358.4 30
610.5 12.5 598.0 – – 0.0 – 41.9 5,047.8 4,860.1 187.7 21.0 351.2 July 7
609.9 11.8 598.0 – – 0.1 – 33.6 5,050.5 4,860.6 189.9 21.0 355.8 14
608.1 10.0 598.0 – – 0.1 – 38.2 5,031.5 4,841.8 189.8 21.0 353.7 21
611.7 11.0 600.4 – – 0.2 – 33.9 5,027.2 4,837.3 189.8 21.0 361.4 28
607.8 7.4 600.4 – – 0.0 – 35.6 5,011.7 4,822.4 189.4 21.0 354.1 Aug. 4
606.1 5.7 600.4 – – 0.0 – 29.3 5,014.2 4,824.7 189.4 21.0 361.1 11
605.9 5.2 600.4 – – 0.3 – 30.2 4,999.3 4,808.8 190.5 21.0 360.8 18
606.4 5.9 600.4 – – 0.0 – 28.3 4,999.8 4,808.3 191.6 21.0 364.0 25
608.9 7.0 601.9 – – 0.1 – 31.1 5,001.9 4,809.5 192.4 21.0 369.1 Sep. 1
605.8 3.9 601.9 – – 0.0 – 24.5 5,003.0 4,810.2 192.7 21.0 362.9 8
605.9 4.0 601.9 – – 0.0 – 27.2 4,986.1 4,793.2 192.9 21.0 360.2 15
605.9 4.0 601.9 – – 0.0 – 33.4 4,984.5 4,789.2 195.3 21.0 361.6 22
509.8 11.4 498.5 – – – – 35.2 4,976.4 4,779.8 196.6 21.0 378.7 29
506.3 7.8 498.5 – – 0.0 – 23.4 4,977.6 4,777.8 199.8 21.0 382.0 Oct. 6
506.0 7.5 498.5 – – 0.0 – 26.9 4,974.1 4,772.9 201.2 21.0 381.6 13
506.2 7.7 498.5 – – 0.0 – 24.6 4,957.0 4,754.0 203.0 21.0 382.0 20
506.6 10.5 495.8 – – 0.3 – 24.5 4,936.6 4,734.6 202.0 21.0 382.7 27
504.0 8.1 495.8 – – – – 25.8 4,925.3 4,724.6 200.7 21.0 377.5 Nov. 3
Deutsche Bundesbank
199.2 0.5 198.8 – – 0.0 – 8.4 1,066.2 1,066.2 – 4.4 1,152.0 2023 Apr. 14
199.3 0.5 198.8 – – 0.0 – 7.8 1,057.6 1,057.6 – 4.4 1,115.9 21
200.2 1.1 198.9 – – 0.2 – 9.0 1,059.2 1,059.2 – 4.4 1,114.8 28
199.7 0.8 198.9 – – 0.0 – 8.2 1,061.6 1,061.6 – 4.4 1,121.4 May 5
199.7 0.8 198.9 – – – – 5.7 1,064.2 1,064.2 – 4.4 1,137.4 12
199.6 0.7 198.9 – – – – 8.4 1,055.8 1,055.8 – 4.4 1,118.6 19
199.7 0.8 198.9 – – 0.1 – 8.8 1,057.1 1,057.1 – 4.4 1,130.9 26
199.9 1.0 198.9 – – – – 7.6 1,058.4 1,058.4 – 4.4 1,116.5 June 2
199.5 0.5 198.9 – – 0.1 – 9.1 1,057.0 1,057.0 – 4.4 1,105.9 9
199.5 0.5 198.9 – – 0.1 – 11.3 1,050.0 1,050.0 – 4.4 1,117.5 16
199.5 0.5 198.9 – – 0.1 – 10.3 1,050.5 1,050.5 – 4.4 1,093.3 23
134.0 2.8 131.1 – – 0.2 – 10.3 1,048.1 1,048.1 – 4.4 1,111.0 30
132.6 1.5 131.1 – – 0.0 – 11.6 1,048.8 1,048.8 – 4.4 1,091.2 July 7
132.5 1.3 131.1 – – 0.1 – 9.8 1,048.9 1,048.9 – 4.4 1,075.6 14
132.5 1.3 131.1 – – 0.1 – 11.4 1,047.8 1,047.8 – 4.4 1,073.4 21
133.2 1.7 131.2 – – 0.2 – 12.3 1,048.6 1,048.6 – 4.4 1,067.8 28
132.1 0.9 131.2 – – 0.0 – 11.5 1,049.2 1,049.2 – 4.4 1,084.6 Aug. 4
131.9 0.7 131.2 – – 0.0 – 12.0 1,050.2 1,050.2 – 4.4 1,072.9 11
131.8 0.2 131.2 – – 0.3 – 13.0 1,039.8 1,039.8 – 4.4 1,089.1 18
132.2 1.0 131.2 – – 0.0 – 10.0 1,038.8 1,038.8 – 4.4 1,084.5 25
132.5 1.3 131.2 – – 0.1 – 12.0 1,039.5 1,039.5 – 4.4 1,107.9 Sep. 1
131.9 0.6 131.2 – – 0.0 – 10.2 1,039.7 1,039.7 – 4.4 1,094.5 8
131.8 0.6 131.2 – – 0.0 – 9.7 1,030.6 1,030.6 – 4.4 1,093.8 15
131.9 0.7 131.2 – – 0.0 – 11.3 1,027.8 1,027.8 – 4.4 1,071.9 22
91.3 2.0 89.3 – – – – 9.6 1,027.0 1,027.0 – 4.4 1,095.4 29
90.3 1.1 89.3 – – – – 9.6 1,027.2 1,027.2 – 4.4 1,092.5 Oct. 6
90.3 1.0 89.3 – – 0.0 – 11.6 1,020.4 1,020.4 – 4.4 1,095.0 13
90.4 1.1 89.3 – – 0.0 – 10.9 1,019.4 1,019.4 – 4.4 1,101.2 20
91.4 1.8 89.2 – – 0.3 – 11.6 1,019.8 1,019.8 – 4.4 1,101.4 27
90.2 0.9 89.2 – – 0.0 – 11.5 1,020.6 1,020.6 – 4.4 1,125.3 Nov. 3

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2023 Apr. 14 7,730.9 1,561.1 4,172.9 155.7 4,016.8 – – 0.4 35.4 – 446.7 356.9 89.8
21 7,714.2 1,558.8 4,181.6 164.9 4,016.3 – – 0.4 31.9 – 442.2 354.7 87.5
28 7,719.8 1,563.6 4,163.5 181.2 3,981.9 – – 0.4 35.3 – 471.3 381.1 90.2
May 5 7,716.9 1,563.6 4,271.2 204.8 4,066.1 – – 0.3 37.0 – 362.4 275.9 86.5
12 7,728.5 1,562.2 4,302.7 171.2 4,131.2 – – 0.3 39.5 – 352.4 265.1 87.3
19 7,730.1 1,562.2 4,280.8 156.3 4,124.2 – – 0.3 40.8 – 375.4 289.9 85.4
26 7,713.7 1,563.6 4,290.6 155.7 4,134.6 – – 0.3 39.5 – 349.4 261.5 87.9
June 2 7,712.7 1,565.5 4,321.5 157.5 4,163.7 – – 0.3 40.7 – 327.4 233.4 94.1
9 7,714.4 1,565.5 4,343.6 162.5 4,180.7 – – 0.3 37.4 – 318.3 228.0 90.3
16 7,709.7 1,564.4 4,309.6 193.6 4,115.6 – – 0.3 37.2 – 337.6 239.8 97.8
23 7,710.6 1,563.8 4,289.7 185.2 4,104.4 – – 0.1 41.0 – 351.1 255.9 95.2
30 7,219.7 1,566.1 3,751.3 174.5 3,576.8 – – 0.0 51.9 – 353.0 258.1 94.9
July 7 7,206.9 1,568.2 3,836.7 166.9 3,669.8 – – 0.0 34.3 – 318.4 230.9 87.6
14 7,205.5 1,568.8 3,827.8 156.4 3,671.4 – – 0.0 32.3 – 338.9 250.6 88.2
21 7,186.9 1,567.7 3,791.3 157.3 3,634.0 – – 0.0 33.9 – 346.8 260.8 86.0
28 7,189.3 1,569.0 3,770.2 185.1 3,585.1 – – 0.0 32.8 – 370.5 281.6 88.9
Aug. 4 7,164.6 1,569.4 3,818.4 168.0 3,650.3 – – 0.0 30.9 – 305.9 219.0 86.9
11 7,166.5 1,569.6 3,821.8 177.2 3,644.6 – – 0.0 33.2 – 311.2 224.6 86.5
18 7,153.1 1,567.0 3,812.6 149.5 3,663.0 – – 0.0 33.7 – 305.5 219.0 86.5
25 7,154.9 1,563.1 3,815.8 148.6 3,667.1 – – 0.0 35.1 – 313.6 227.8 85.8
Sep. 1 7,168.2 1,562.3 3,821.1 163.6 3,657.5 – – 0.0 37.2 – 311.9 220.8 91.1
8 7,153.1 1,560.5 3,841.8 159.4 3,682.4 – – 0.0 37.5 – 299.0 214.2 84.8
15 7,135.7 1,558.7 3,813.2 223.3 3,589.9 – – 0.0 33.7 – 316.1 232.1 84.1
22 7,142.0 1,556.2 3,823.4 162.6 3,660.8 – – 0.0 38.7 – 310.3 228.0 82.4
29 7,066.5 1,557.6 3,640.8 173.8 3,467.0 – – 0.0 46.2 – 350.0 262.1 87.9
Oct. 6 7,057.1 1,556.9 3,756.3 153.2 3,603.1 – – 0.0 33.1 – 289.1 211.5 77.7
13 7,056.7 1,554.6 3,763.4 161.0 3,602.3 – – 0.0 35.6 – 305.2 224.1 81.1
20 7,038.0 1,551.7 3,749.9 162.5 3,587.3 – – 0.0 35.5 – 293.0 217.3 75.7
27 7,019.7 1,552.4 3,733.7 200.4 3,533.3 – – 0.0 35.9 – 285.6 205.2 80.4
Nov. 3 7,001.6 1,553.2 3,716.4 167.1 3,549.3 – – 0.0 37.6 – 281.4 200.5 80.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
2023 Apr. 14 2,718.4 376.1 1,289.6 37.7 1,251.5 – – 0.3 12.3 – 96.4 73.8 22.7
21 2,673.2 375.4 1,265.2 42.6 1,222.3 – – 0.3 10.4 – 80.4 60.3 20.1
28 2,675.9 376.0 1,262.9 50.9 1,211.7 – – 0.3 12.4 – 91.7 68.5 23.2
May 5 2,683.5 375.9 1,298.9 66.2 1,232.5 – – 0.3 13.0 – 70.5 50.6 19.9
12 2,699.7 376.3 1,317.2 46.8 1,270.1 – – 0.3 11.8 – 74.1 53.8 20.3
19 2,675.2 377.2 1,300.0 39.7 1,260.0 – – 0.3 11.7 – 78.3 58.6 19.7
26 2,689.2 378.4 1,302.1 38.7 1,263.1 – – 0.3 11.3 – 91.3 71.1 20.2
June 2 2,675.0 376.6 1,314.2 38.7 1,275.3 – – 0.3 11.7 – 69.5 48.2 21.2
9 2,664.6 377.3 1,306.8 45.3 1,261.2 – – 0.3 11.5 – 71.6 49.8 21.8
16 2,671.3 377.7 1,312.0 58.1 1,253.6 – – 0.3 9.1 – 72.2 47.7 24.6
23 2,646.6 377.3 1,285.3 52.8 1,232.4 – – 0.0 10.6 – 73.5 51.0 22.5
30 2,590.6 376.6 1,202.5 49.1 1,153.3 – – 0.0 14.4 – 71.8 48.1 23.7
July 7 2,569.4 377.7 1,228.2 42.2 1,185.9 – – 0.0 10.6 – 64.6 42.1 22.5
14 2,551.9 378.0 1,201.0 41.8 1,159.2 – – 0.0 7.7 – 78.2 57.6 20.6
21 2,550.2 377.5 1,209.1 42.2 1,166.9 – – 0.0 9.1 – 65.8 45.0 20.8
28 2,547.0 378.6 1,193.6 59.1 1,134.4 – – 0.0 8.4 – 74.7 54.0 20.7
Aug. 4 2,562.8 378.1 1,227.7 51.2 1,176.5 – – 0.0 6.8 – 57.1 37.9 19.2
11 2,552.0 378.2 1,221.6 63.1 1,158.4 – – 0.0 8.4 – 55.9 35.8 20.1
18 2,559.4 377.9 1,222.5 35.6 1,186.9 – – 0.0 9.4 – 60.4 40.3 20.0
25 2,550.9 377.7 1,223.6 34.7 1,188.8 – – 0.0 9.3 – 56.8 38.4 18.5
Sep. 1 2,577.3 375.8 1,244.3 42.7 1,201.6 – – 0.0 10.9 – 59.0 38.7 20.3
8 2,561.7 376.6 1,235.5 41.5 1,194.0 – – 0.0 9.4 – 56.2 37.6 18.5
15 2,551.1 376.8 1,208.2 66.8 1,141.4 – – 0.0 7.4 – 70.2 52.5 17.8
22 2,528.2 376.4 1,206.6 44.8 1,161.8 – – 0.0 9.8 – 56.6 38.4 18.3
29 2,510.1 374.6 1,149.6 48.6 1,101.0 – – 0.0 11.7 – 53.8 35.1 18.7
Oct. 6 2,506.6 375.0 1,201.7 40.2 1,161.5 – – 0.0 7.8 – 39.0 24.7 14.3
13 2,504.5 374.6 1,193.8 40.4 1,153.4 – – 0.0 8.0 – 45.5 29.3 16.1
20 2,509.3 374.1 1,210.3 40.7 1,169.6 – – 0.0 7.5 – 36.1 21.0 15.1
27 2,512.0 374.6 1,205.4 57.0 1,148.4 – – 0.0 7.0 – 39.7 24.0 15.7
Nov. 3 2,535.6 373.5 1,230.9 47.9 1,183.0 – – 0.0 6.8 – 36.7 20.5 16.2
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
298.1 11.6 5.1 5.1 – 180.3 277.4 – 622.2 120.2 2023 Apr. 14
287.2 11.6 5.1 5.1 – 180.3 273.2 – 622.2 120.2 21
271.6 11.0 5.5 5.5 – 180.3 275.5 – 622.2 120.2 28
265.4 11.0 5.2 5.2 – 180.3 278.5 – 622.2 120.2 May 5
255.7 11.3 5.1 5.1 – 180.3 277.0 – 622.2 120.2 12
252.4 11.4 7.0 7.0 – 180.3 277.6 – 622.2 120.2 19
253.1 11.4 7.6 7.6 – 180.3 275.7 – 622.2 120.2 26
245.4 11.7 7.5 7.5 – 180.3 270.3 – 622.2 120.2 June 2
237.8 12.2 7.1 7.1 – 180.3 269.8 – 622.2 120.2 9
248.5 12.5 7.1 7.1 – 180.3 270.3 – 622.2 120.2 16
252.0 13.0 6.7 6.7 – 180.3 270.6 – 622.2 120.2 23
300.3 13.4 6.6 6.6 – 178.4 281.5 – 597.0 120.2 30
258.8 13.5 6.5 6.5 – 178.4 274.9 – 597.0 120.2 July 7
250.5 13.6 6.0 6.0 – 178.4 272.1 – 597.0 120.2 14
257.1 13.5 6.7 6.7 – 178.4 274.2 – 597.0 120.2 21
255.9 13.8 4.4 4.4 – 178.4 277.1 – 597.0 120.2 28
253.5 13.7 3.8 3.8 – 178.4 273.4 – 597.0 120.2 Aug. 4
245.7 13.9 4.5 4.5 – 178.4 271.0 – 597.0 120.2 11
245.9 14.3 6.3 6.3 – 178.4 272.4 – 597.0 120.2 18
238.9 14.5 5.5 5.5 – 178.4 272.7 – 597.0 120.2 25
242.4 14.3 4.3 4.3 – 178.4 279.1 – 597.0 120.2 Sep. 1
233.9 13.9 3.1 3.1 – 178.4 267.7 – 597.0 120.2 8
234.2 13.8 3.5 3.5 – 178.4 266.8 – 597.0 120.2 15
232.7 13.9 4.3 4.3 – 178.4 266.9 – 597.0 120.2 22
273.5 13.6 3.9 3.9 – 180.7 275.7 – 604.2 120.2 29
228.3 14.5 3.2 3.2 – 180.7 270.4 – 604.2 120.2 Oct. 6
208.3 14.8 3.3 3.3 – 180.7 266.4 – 604.2 120.2 13
215.5 15.5 4.1 4.1 – 180.7 267.7 – 604.2 120.2 20
222.3 15.7 4.2 4.2 – 180.7 264.7 – 604.2 120.2 27
226.5 15.6 3.9 3.9 – 180.7 262.0 – 604.2 120.2 Nov. 3
Deutsche Bundesbank
142.6 0.2 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 31.4 524.5 193.2 5.5 2023 Apr. 14
141.7 0.2 0.2 0.2 – 46.5 30.0 524.5 193.2 5.5 21
131.2 0.1 0.3 0.3 – 46.5 29.6 526.4 193.2 5.5 28
122.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 31.3 526.4 193.2 5.5 May 5
114.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 34.4 526.4 193.2 5.5 12
101.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 35.0 526.4 193.2 5.5 19
99.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 35.2 526.4 193.2 5.5 26
94.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 34.5 529.0 193.2 5.5 June 2
88.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 34.6 529.0 193.2 5.5 9
91.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 34.7 529.0 193.2 5.5 16
90.7 0.1 0.1 0.1 – 46.5 34.8 529.0 193.2 5.5 23
122.0 0.2 – – – 46.0 35.4 530.7 185.5 5.5 30
85.1 0.2 – – – 46.0 35.4 530.7 185.5 5.5 July 7
83.7 0.2 – – – 46.0 35.4 530.7 185.5 5.5 14
85.2 0.1 – – – 46.0 35.5 530.7 185.5 5.5 21
88.1 0.1 – – – 46.0 35.7 530.7 185.5 5.5 28
88.4 0.1 0.2 0.2 – 46.0 35.0 532.2 185.5 5.5 Aug. 4
83.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.0 35.1 532.2 185.5 5.5 11
82.7 0.1 0.5 0.5 – 46.0 36.5 532.2 185.5 5.5 18
76.6 0.1 0.5 0.5 – 46.0 37.0 532.2 185.5 5.5 25
77.9 0.1 0.2 0.2 – 46.0 36.7 535.1 185.5 5.5 Sep. 1
74.9 0.1 0.2 0.2 – 46.0 36.5 535.1 185.5 5.5 8
79.4 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 46.0 36.8 535.1 185.5 5.5 15
69.5 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.0 36.9 535.1 185.5 5.5 22
104.8 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.3 538.7 187.4 5.5 29
67.6 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.1 538.7 187.4 5.5 Oct. 6
67.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.2 538.7 187.4 5.5 13
65.7 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.2 538.7 187.4 5.5 20
69.6 0.1 0.2 0.2 – 46.6 37.1 538.7 187.4 5.5 27
71.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.5 540.2 187.4 5.5 Nov. 3
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2021 Dec. 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 Jan. 9,717.0 47.7 3,029.2 2,522.4 2,258.2 264.2 506.8 375.0 131.8 4,378.1 3,875.3 3,484.8 3,162.4
Feb. 9,842.7 47.7 3,082.6 2,564.8 2,299.1 265.8 517.8 383.9 133.9 4,396.3 3,889.1 3,504.4 3,181.6
Mar. 9,962.9 50.0 3,066.9 2,546.2 2,281.9 264.3 520.7 387.1 133.7 4,426.8 3,916.4 3,526.5 3,204.1
Apr. 10,268.8 51.0 3,112.2 2,578.0 2,313.7 264.2 534.2 400.5 133.8 4,434.6 3,929.2 3,546.3 3,223.8
May 10,258.0 50.0 3,122.7 2,592.6 2,326.2 266.4 530.1 397.8 132.3 4,460.3 3,949.5 3,567.4 3,244.7
June 10,428.9 51.8 3,096.5 2,570.9 2,306.2 264.7 525.6 394.1 131.5 4,494.4 3,969.5 3,589.6 3,268.8
July 10,267.9 42.3 3,086.0 2,557.4 2,291.5 266.0 528.6 396.8 131.8 4,528.3 4,008.2 3,627.9 3,293.6
Aug. 10,627.2 23.6 3,166.4 2,625.3 2,359.2 266.1 541.1 409.1 132.0 4,555.4 4,039.2 3,664.4 3,331.1
Sep. 11,063.0 20.7 3,268.0 2,714.2 2,442.2 272.0 553.7 419.7 134.0 4,579.6 4,057.2 3,685.0 3,351.1
Oct. 11,036.0 20.0 3,259.8 2,696.8 2,424.2 272.6 563.0 416.3 146.7 4,591.1 4,077.8 3,699.7 3,365.9
Nov. 10,762.4 19.1 3,180.1 2,630.6 2,360.1 270.5 549.5 403.2 146.2 4,610.5 4,089.4 3,715.1 3,379.3
Dec. 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 18.2 3,085.7 2,550.5 2,288.2 262.3 535.1 383.8 151.4 4,600.1 4,080.1 3,706.1 3,372.3
Feb. 10,760.9 18.0 3,085.7 2,541.4 2,274.9 266.5 544.3 390.6 153.8 4,614.2 4,094.2 3,714.7 3,381.3
Mar. 10,553.8 17.9 3,041.3 2,497.8 2,229.3 268.4 543.5 391.2 152.3 4,620.6 4,094.7 3,718.2 3,386.0
Apr. 10,564.3 18.9 3,047.7 2,507.0 2,237.3 269.7 540.7 384.5 156.2 4,630.5 4,096.8 3,721.7 3,390.4
May 10,653.7 18.2 3,091.2 2,550.3 2,279.7 270.6 541.0 383.4 157.5 4,642.2 4,103.4 3,733.0 3,400.9
June 10,577.7 17.7 2,967.0 2,434.5 2,166.3 268.2 532.5 371.5 161.0 4,646.7 4,108.0 3,734.5 3,397.1
July 10,743.2 17.2 3,002.4 2,456.4 2,188.8 267.6 546.0 384.8 161.2 4,651.1 4,114.5 3,738.2 3,402.0
Aug. 10,735.3 17.5 2,994.8 2,455.6 2,187.1 268.4 539.2 377.9 161.4 4,649.4 4,111.7 3,733.9 3,400.6
Sep. 10,737.3 18.0 2,916.1 2,371.6 2,106.3 265.3 544.5 382.5 161.9 4,649.9 4,113.1 3,735.7 3,401.7
Changes 3
2014 206.8 0.4 –126.2 –128.6 –95.3 –33.4 2.4 7.2 – 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2021 207.2 2.2 161.3 155.6 156.4 – 0.8 5.7 11.7 – 5.9 175.7 154.6 173.7 155.9
2022 1,170.5 –29.7 149.5 103.7 100.5 3.2 45.8 33.1 12.7 242.4 223.1 237.5 220.6
2022 Jan. 340.3 – 1.9 238.6 189.0 186.9 2.1 49.6 49.7 – 0.1 28.1 15.4 16.2 14.9
Feb. 128.5 – 0.0 52.7 41.4 39.7 1.7 11.3 9.1 2.2 20.4 15.8 21.3 20.9
Mar. 119.7 2.2 –15.5 –18.4 –17.2 – 1.2 2.9 3.0 – 0.1 31.4 27.6 22.2 22.6
Apr. 283.1 1.0 41.6 30.8 30.8 0.0 10.8 10.6 0.2 7.5 12.8 19.7 19.4
May 1.1 – 1.0 12.4 15.3 12.8 2.5 – 2.9 – 1.5 – 1.3 27.4 21.2 21.6 21.3
June 178.6 1.7 –28.2 –22.2 –20.6 – 1.6 – 6.0 – 5.3 – 0.6 32.9 19.9 22.0 23.7
July –177.9 – 9.5 –12.8 –14.2 –15.0 0.8 1.4 1.4 0.0 29.7 36.0 36.0 22.6
Aug. 359.0 –18.7 83.5 71.7 70.7 1.0 11.8 11.3 0.4 28.1 31.4 36.5 37.5
Sep. 428.4 – 2.9 99.8 88.6 82.4 6.2 11.3 9.0 2.3 27.0 17.2 19.5 18.7
Oct. –19.3 – 0.7 – 6.7 –17.0 –17.7 0.6 10.3 – 2.4 12.7 12.4 21.1 15.3 15.5
Nov. –245.9 – 0.9 –75.9 –65.0 –63.0 – 2.0 –10.9 – 10.5 – 0.5 21.4 13.0 17.1 15.1
Dec. –225.1 0.9 –240.0 –196.2 –189.2 – 7.1 –43.8 – 41.2 – 2.6 –24.0 – 8.4 – 9.9 –11.6
2023 Jan. 87.5 – 1.8 155.0 122.2 119.3 2.8 32.8 24.0 8.9 22.8 6.5 8.1 8.0
Feb. 167.0 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 9.1 –13.4 4.3 8.3 5.8 2.5 13.4 13.6 7.9 8.3
Mar. –195.2 – 0.1 –42.8 –43.2 –45.0 1.8 0.4 1.9 – 1.5 8.2 2.0 5.0 6.2
Apr. 16.7 1.0 7.7 9.8 8.1 1.7 – 2.1 – 6.0 3.9 11.0 3.0 4.2 5.1
May 91.9 – 0.7 41.9 42.2 41.3 0.9 – 0.2 – 1.6 1.3 12.3 6.8 11.5 10.6
June –65.9 – 0.5 –121.0 –113.5 –112.5 – 1.1 – 7.5 – 11.0 3.5 4.7 5.5 2.5 – 1.7
July 170.6 – 0.5 34.6 22.2 22.7 – 0.6 12.4 12.2 0.2 6.0 7.6 4.7 5.8
Aug. –15.1 0.3 – 7.6 – 1.1 – 1.9 0.8 – 6.5 – 6.6 0.1 – 0.5 – 2.4 – 3.9 – 1.0
Sep. 5.2 0.6 –78.6 –83.9 –80.8 – 3.1 5.3 4.6 0.7 3.3 3.7 4.1 3.4
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 2021
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 2022
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 2021 Dec.
322.4 390.6 246.9 143.6 502.7 377.7 260.4 125.0 28.5 96.5 1,171.3 925.2 1,090.8 2022 Jan.
322.8 384.8 244.7 140.0 507.2 381.4 262.7 125.8 28.6 97.2 1,190.1 939.6 1,125.9 Feb.
322.3 390.0 245.2 144.8 510.4 379.5 259.4 130.9 29.0 101.9 1,169.2 921.9 1,249.9 Mar.
322.5 382.9 246.5 136.4 505.4 378.8 257.8 126.7 32.2 94.4 1,174.5 926.0 1,496.5 Apr.
322.7 382.1 244.5 137.7 510.9 383.7 260.7 127.1 31.4 95.7 1,166.1 917.3 1,458.8 May
320.9 379.9 244.9 135.0 524.9 388.1 268.4 136.8 33.2 103.6 1,182.4 925.1 1,603.8 June
334.3 380.3 245.8 134.5 520.2 383.8 266.0 136.4 33.4 103.0 1,199.9 941.5 1,411.5 July
333.3 374.8 243.4 131.4 516.2 387.1 268.6 129.1 33.7 95.4 1,211.7 952.6 1,670.0 Aug.
333.9 372.2 244.5 127.7 522.4 390.5 273.1 132.0 35.4 96.6 1,220.9 961.0 1,973.8 Sep.
333.8 378.1 246.0 132.1 513.3 385.7 268.4 127.6 34.4 93.2 1,234.2 975.7 1,930.8 Oct.
335.9 374.2 246.3 127.9 521.1 394.0 276.5 127.1 32.7 94.4 1,224.6 963.4 1,728.1 Nov.
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 Dec.
333.8 374.0 250.3 123.7 520.1 393.5 280.2 126.6 30.2 96.4 1,161.9 904.0 1,719.2 2023 Jan.
333.5 379.5 248.2 131.3 520.0 393.3 279.2 126.8 31.3 95.4 1,167.6 904.4 1,875.3 Feb.
332.2 376.5 248.9 127.6 526.0 397.5 275.7 128.4 30.9 97.5 1,168.5 902.6 1,705.4 Mar.
331.2 375.1 250.9 124.2 533.7 405.8 280.9 128.0 32.3 95.7 1,149.9 883.9 1,717.3 Apr.
332.1 370.5 249.8 120.7 538.7 407.7 284.6 131.0 31.9 99.1 1,177.7 912.0 1,724.4 May
337.4 373.4 248.7 124.7 538.7 403.1 279.6 135.6 31.0 104.5 1,150.6 886.7 1,795.7 June
336.2 376.4 252.1 124.3 536.6 407.3 282.8 129.3 30.7 98.7 1,156.3 895.0 1,916.3 July
333.3 377.9 249.5 128.4 537.7 404.5 282.9 133.2 31.1 102.1 1,157.7 899.2 1,915.9 Aug.
334.1 377.4 252.0 125.4 536.8 404.7 282.5 132.1 32.1 100.0 1,163.6 902.7 1,989.6 Sep.
Changes 3
15.5 –12.3 –15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 – 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
17.8 –19.1 – 6.1 –13.1 21.1 35.5 22.6 –14.3 – 1.1 –13.2 71.7 84.9 –203.7 2021
16.9 –14.4 1.9 –16.3 19.3 20.7 24.4 – 1.4 2.6 – 3.9 15.0 – 0.8 793.3 2022
1.3 – 0.8 1.8 – 2.6 12.7 14.8 16.0 – 2.1 0.2 – 2.2 72.3 66.7 3.3 2022 Jan.
0.5 – 5.5 – 2.1 – 3.4 4.6 3.7 2.5 0.9 0.1 0.8 20.6 15.8 34.9 Feb.
– 0.4 5.5 0.5 5.0 3.8 – 1.7 – 3.3 5.5 0.4 5.1 –22.2 –19.2 123.7 Mar.
0.2 – 6.8 1.4 – 8.2 – 5.3 – 1.6 – 2.7 – 3.7 3.2 – 6.9 –13.8 –14.2 246.6 Apr.
0.3 – 0.4 – 2.0 1.6 6.2 5.4 3.3 0.8 – 0.8 1.7 – 1.0 – 2.0 –36.6 May
– 1.7 – 2.1 0.4 – 2.5 13.0 3.0 6.1 10.0 1.9 8.1 –10.0 –18.2 182.3 June
13.4 0.0 0.9 – 0.8 – 6.3 – 5.2 – 2.9 – 1.1 0.1 – 1.3 7.8 8.0 –193.2 July
– 1.0 – 5.1 – 2.3 – 2.8 – 3.3 3.4 2.5 – 6.7 0.4 – 7.0 7.2 6.5 258.9 Aug.
0.8 – 2.4 1.1 – 3.5 9.9 3.3 4.0 6.6 1.7 4.8 0.7 0.1 303.7 Sep.
– 0.3 5.9 1.4 4.4 – 8.7 – 4.4 – 4.6 – 4.3 – 1.0 – 3.3 19.7 20.4 –44.0 Oct.
2.0 – 4.1 0.0 – 4.1 8.4 9.2 9.6 – 0.8 – 1.7 0.9 8.8 4.8 –199.3 Nov.
1.8 1.5 0.9 0.6 –15.6 – 9.3 – 6.2 – 6.4 – 1.9 – 4.5 –75.0 –69.5 112.9 Dec.
0.1 – 1.6 2.3 – 3.9 16.3 9.4 10.0 6.9 – 0.6 7.5 33.4 27.8 –121.8 2023 Jan.
– 0.4 5.6 – 2.0 7.7 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.4 0.5 1.1 – 0.7 – 1.7 – 6.6 156.4 Feb.
– 1.2 – 3.0 0.8 – 3.7 6.1 4.6 – 3.0 1.5 – 0.4 1.9 9.6 6.5 –170.1 Mar.
– 1.0 – 1.2 2.1 – 3.3 8.0 8.5 5.4 – 0.5 1.4 – 1.9 –14.9 –15.4 11.9 Apr.
0.9 – 4.7 – 1.2 – 3.5 5.4 2.1 3.9 3.4 – 0.4 3.7 28.3 28.1 10.1 May
4.2 3.0 – 1.1 4.1 – 0.9 – 5.5 – 5.9 4.6 – 0.9 5.5 – 9.4 – 8.3 60.3 June
– 1.2 3.0 3.4 – 0.4 – 1.7 4.4 3.4 – 6.1 – 0.3 – 5.7 10.3 12.6 120.4 July
– 2.8 1.5 – 2.6 4.1 1.9 – 1.9 1.0 3.8 0.5 3.4 – 5.1 – 1.9 – 2.2 Aug.
0.7 – 0.3 2.6 – 2.9 – 0.4 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.9 1.0 – 2.0 6.4 3.7 73.6 Sep.
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2021 Dec. 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 Jan. 9,717.0 1,725.2 1,363.7 361.5 4,195.2 3,979.5 2,686.4 732.3 215.9 560.7 537.4 166.7 86.2
Feb. 9,842.7 1,743.7 1,369.7 374.0 4,209.7 3,993.9 2,699.7 733.4 217.5 560.8 537.7 169.3 90.1
Mar. 9,962.9 1,737.5 1,367.8 369.8 4,212.3 3,990.1 2,690.3 740.9 226.7 559.0 536.1 177.7 99.4
Apr. 10,268.8 1,766.8 1,384.4 382.3 4,223.7 4,003.6 2,700.1 745.6 234.6 557.9 535.2 175.5 93.4
May 10,258.0 1,765.9 1,393.7 372.2 4,236.1 4,013.3 2,718.3 738.4 229.4 556.5 534.0 176.2 97.1
June 10,428.9 1,744.4 1,384.7 359.7 4,235.0 4,008.2 2,708.8 744.7 238.3 554.7 532.4 180.5 102.7
July 10,267.9 1,772.1 1,383.3 388.9 4,267.6 4,041.3 2,722.8 765.6 259.2 552.9 530.7 179.5 99.0
Aug. 10,627.2 1,785.7 1,403.5 382.2 4,322.0 4,089.0 2,760.7 777.8 272.2 550.5 528.3 185.0 103.0
Sep. 11,063.0 1,814.5 1,415.7 398.8 4,342.6 4,105.7 2,748.5 812.0 306.6 545.2 523.1 191.1 102.4
Oct. 11,036.0 1,837.4 1,419.0 418.4 4,359.6 4,122.0 2,741.6 838.3 334.6 542.1 519.8 190.0 92.4
Nov. 10,762.4 1,773.7 1,345.0 428.7 4,401.0 4,132.6 2,752.4 843.3 344.7 536.8 514.3 193.1 97.3
Dec. 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 1,642.4 1,231.2 411.2 4,392.0 4,124.2 2,706.4 895.1 397.6 522.7 498.8 188.7 94.3
Feb. 10,760.9 1,633.5 1,226.0 407.5 4,391.4 4,113.2 2,670.6 926.7 428.4 515.9 490.8 191.2 97.2
Mar. 10,553.8 1,618.0 1,210.4 407.6 4,368.3 4,092.1 2,625.3 959.7 462.3 507.2 480.5 197.9 98.8
Apr. 10,564.3 1,632.8 1,227.7 405.1 4,370.1 4,099.8 2,620.9 980.3 482.3 498.6 470.4 199.5 93.6
May 10,653.7 1,622.7 1,229.8 392.9 4,384.2 4,108.2 2,613.0 1,004.7 504.1 490.6 460.2 201.6 97.9
June 10,577.7 1,530.6 1,149.6 381.0 4,378.1 4,110.1 2,586.3 1,040.5 541.1 483.3 450.2 196.6 90.9
July 10,743.2 1,563.0 1,159.8 403.2 4,382.4 4,116.2 2,569.6 1,070.7 572.0 475.9 439.9 197.0 90.2
Aug. 10,735.3 1,549.2 1,162.1 387.0 4,388.3 4,124.6 2,555.7 1,101.4 603.4 467.5 428.7 191.6 87.5
Sep. 10,737.3 1,500.0 1,112.7 387.3 4,384.2 4,126.5 2,545.5 1,119.2 620.4 461.8 420.1 193.4 89.5
Changes 4
2014 206.8 –28.4 –32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 –32.1 3.1 – 2.4 – 2.4 – 2.5 – 0.0
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2021 207.2 133.4 103.4 30.0 107.3 96.2 141.4 –45.8 –23.3 0.6 3.9 16.6 13.6
2022 1,170.5 –15.6 –105.9 90.3 208.9 165.9 60.6 132.8 148.1 –27.5 –26.3 18.4 12.8
2022 Jan. 340.3 93.8 23.2 70.6 64.3 47.0 36.5 10.9 11.9 – 0.4 0.3 12.6 15.3
Feb. 128.5 19.3 6.1 13.2 14.2 14.6 13.4 1.1 1.6 0.1 0.3 2.2 3.5
Mar. 119.7 – 6.6 – 2.1 – 4.5 2.2 – 4.2 – 9.7 7.3 9.2 – 1.8 – 1.6 8.3 9.3
Apr. 283.1 25.1 15.6 9.5 8.0 11.0 7.5 4.1 7.2 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 3.1 – 6.6
May 1.1 0.7 9.8 – 9.1 13.6 10.6 18.9 – 6.9 – 5.0 – 1.3 – 1.2 1.0 3.9
June 178.6 –24.2 – 9.7 –14.5 – 2.8 – 6.6 –10.7 5.9 8.5 – 1.8 – 1.6 4.1 5.6
July –177.9 24.6 – 1.6 26.2 29.3 30.8 13.0 19.6 19.9 – 1.8 – 1.7 – 2.0 – 3.9
Aug. 359.0 15.5 23.0 – 7.5 53.6 47.1 37.2 12.4 12.9 – 2.4 – 2.4 5.3 3.8
Sep. 428.4 25.2 11.7 13.5 19.0 15.4 –13.3 34.0 34.1 – 5.3 – 5.3 5.6 – 0.9
Oct. –19.3 24.2 3.8 20.3 17.2 16.2 – 7.3 26.6 28.2 – 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.7 – 9.7
Nov. –245.9 –60.3 –73.0 12.7 45.6 21.3 14.3 12.2 10.1 – 5.3 – 5.4 – 3.2 5.4
Dec. –225.1 –152.7 –112.7 –40.0 –55.4 –37.3 –39.2 5.6 9.4 – 3.7 – 4.1 –11.9 –12.8
2023 Jan. 87.5 23.3 0.0 23.3 49.1 30.9 –10.4 46.7 44.0 – 5.5 – 6.4 8.2 10.1
Feb. 167.0 –10.3 – 5.6 – 4.7 – 1.8 –11.8 –36.4 31.3 30.7 – 6.7 – 7.9 2.1 2.7
Mar. –195.2 –13.4 –14.7 1.3 –21.7 –20.0 –44.1 32.8 33.5 – 8.7 –10.3 7.1 1.8
Apr. 16.7 15.5 17.5 – 1.9 2.4 8.1 – 4.1 20.8 20.2 – 8.6 –10.1 1.8 – 5.1
May 91.9 –10.1 2.1 –12.1 13.1 8.4 – 7.9 24.3 21.7 – 8.0 –10.2 1.1 4.2
June –65.9 –90.3 –79.4 –11.0 – 6.3 1.5 –26.3 35.0 36.1 – 7.3 – 9.9 – 4.7 – 6.9
July 170.6 31.5 10.4 21.1 4.9 6.5 –16.4 30.2 31.0 – 7.3 –10.3 0.6 – 0.7
Aug. –15.1 –13.3 2.8 –16.1 6.4 7.9 –13.6 30.0 30.7 – 8.5 –11.2 – 4.4 – 2.4
Sep. 5.2 –49.2 –49.4 0.2 – 4.1 1.9 –10.2 17.8 17.3 – 5.7 – 8.6 1.8 1.9
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 2021
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 2022
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 2021 Dec.
78.1 20.3 2.4 2.2 48.9 45.5 3.0 2.3 1,126.9 25.3 907.4 721.2 1,036.0 2022 Jan.
76.8 19.8 2.4 2.2 46.4 42.8 2.4 2.4 1,141.1 26.2 945.9 717.7 1,080.0 Feb.
75.9 19.0 2.4 2.2 44.5 42.1 2.8 2.5 1,148.9 25.9 926.4 736.8 1,195.6 Mar.
79.8 22.5 2.4 2.2 44.6 42.2 2.3 2.3 1,161.1 26.3 939.2 734.6 1,438.9 Apr.
76.8 19.9 2.3 2.1 46.6 42.8 1.9 2.5 1,164.1 27.7 958.5 732.3 1,396.8 May
75.5 19.1 2.3 2.1 46.2 43.0 2.0 2.5 1,164.7 32.2 945.7 752.0 1,582.6 June
78.1 23.2 2.3 2.1 46.8 44.0 4.2 2.5 1,177.1 35.9 926.6 743.6 1,374.2 July
79.7 24.3 2.3 2.1 47.9 44.0 4.8 2.4 1,183.7 38.6 950.2 741.8 1,636.6 Aug.
86.4 31.2 2.3 2.1 45.9 43.3 3.2 2.5 1,203.3 45.8 987.2 758.0 1,951.6 Sep.
95.4 39.7 2.2 2.1 47.6 44.9 4.0 2.6 1,202.6 39.4 980.8 751.8 1,897.2 Oct.
93.5 31.3 2.2 2.0 75.4 71.1 4.7 2.6 1,202.3 42.2 939.7 747.3 1,691.1 Nov.
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 Dec.
92.3 30.4 2.2 2.0 79.1 73.8 3.9 2.5 1,205.2 47.4 890.6 728.9 1,719.6 2023 Jan.
91.8 30.0 2.2 1.9 87.0 82.5 5.0 2.4 1,221.5 55.6 901.8 724.9 1,880.4 Feb.
97.0 28.5 2.1 1.9 78.2 73.3 4.7 2.6 1,231.2 64.6 863.1 734.8 1,731.0 Mar.
103.7 33.9 2.1 1.9 70.8 65.9 5.4 2.8 1,235.3 67.3 856.2 735.7 1,726.0 Apr.
101.6 30.7 2.1 1.8 74.4 62.4 6.0 2.6 1,257.3 72.3 888.2 746.9 1,745.8 May
103.6 32.5 2.0 1.8 71.4 64.0 4.8 2.6 1,253.9 75.7 853.4 749.6 1,804.7 June
104.8 33.2 2.0 1.7 69.2 61.5 6.5 2.9 1,262.0 76.3 855.0 757.2 1,914.3 July
102.0 32.4 2.0 1.7 72.2 61.5 5.8 3.0 1,271.3 83.5 840.0 765.2 1,912.5 Aug.
102.0 32.6 2.0 1.7 64.3 60.0 4.9 3.0 1,280.8 82.7 825.8 765.1 1,973.5 Sep.
Changes 4
– 2.3 – 1.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.8 – 3.4 – 0.6 –63.7 – 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
3.1 – 8.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 – 5.0 – 7.9 0.3 40.6 6.9 124.9 16.6 –207.9 2021
5.8 8.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 24.6 23.0 1.2 0.4 67.2 12.6 45.6 5.0 857.7 2022
– 2.7 – 2.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 4.7 2.0 0.7 – 0.0 13.4 – 2.3 146.6 –18.3 39.8 2022 Jan.
– 1.3 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.5 – 2.7 – 0.5 0.1 15.0 1.0 39.4 – 3.2 44.2 Feb.
– 1.0 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.6 0.3 0.2 6.9 – 0.3 –20.7 19.0 118.4 Mar.
3.6 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 3.4 0.2 0.4 – 5.8 252.8 Apr.
– 2.9 – 2.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.0 0.6 – 0.4 0.2 6.4 1.4 23.9 – 1.0 –42.4 May
– 1.5 – 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.4 0.2 0.1 – 0.0 – 4.8 4.3 – 6.3 17.6 199.0 June
1.9 3.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.5 1.1 2.1 0.1 9.1 3.5 –24.8 –10.5 –207.8 July
1.6 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 0.0 0.6 – 0.1 4.1 2.7 20.1 – 3.1 268.3 Aug.
6.5 6.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.7 – 1.6 0.1 15.8 7.0 31.8 14.9 323.1 Sep.
9.1 8.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.7 1.6 0.8 0.1 1.8 – 6.3 – 2.8 – 5.3 –55.3 Oct.
– 8.6 – 8.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 27.5 25.8 0.8 0.0 7.4 2.4 –29.9 – 1.1 –208.4 Nov.
1.0 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 6.3 – 4.3 – 1.3 0.1 –11.5 – 1.2 –132.1 1.9 125.9 Dec.
– 1.9 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.9 6.9 0.5 – 0.2 22.4 6.6 95.0 –17.6 –85.0 2023 Jan.
– 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 7.9 8.7 1.2 – 0.1 13.0 8.1 6.9 – 5.0 163.2 Feb.
5.3 – 1.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 8.8 – 9.2 – 0.3 0.3 13.6 9.2 –33.8 11.2 –151.2 Mar.
6.9 5.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.4 – 7.4 0.7 0.1 5.7 2.7 – 4.9 1.8 – 4.7 Apr.
– 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 3.6 – 3.5 0.6 – 0.1 23.4 6.5 32.0 9.4 23.5 May
2.1 2.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.0 1.6 – 1.1 – 0.0 0.4 4.1 –28.3 3.6 56.2 June
1.2 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.1 – 2.5 1.7 0.3 10.2 0.7 4.2 8.1 109.7 July
– 2.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.9 – 0.0 – 0.7 0.1 7.0 7.1 –18.9 7.2 – 2.8 Aug.
– 0.1 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.9 – 1.5 – 0.9 0.1 10.4 0.1 –14.2 – 1.0 64.2 Sep.
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
24•
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
End of
monthNumber of
reporting
institu-
tionsBalance
sheet
total  1Cash in
hand and
credit
balances
with
central
banks TotalBalances
and
loansSecurities
issued by
banks Totalfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more than
1 year BillsSecurities
issued by
non-banksPartici-
pating
interestsOther
assets  1
All categories of banks
2023 Apr. 1,384 10,627.8 74.6 3,618.8 3,128.7 485.3 4,991.8 492.5 3,782.2 0.2 699.8 96.9 1,845.7
May 1,383 10,716.8 68.0 3,694.9 3,203.2 487.4 5,004.1 490.7 3,797.9 0.2 698.6 97.4 1,852.5
June 1,375 10,639.8 70.5 3,543.4 3,053.2 485.6 5,003.9 478.6 3,795.4 0.2 711.0 97.4 1,924.6
July 1,370 10,805.6 87.6 3,563.9 3,073.6 485.0 5,011.3 486.5 3,804.7 0.1 700.4 97.3 2,045.4
Aug. 1,361 10,797.6 64.9 3,589.1 3,099.2 485.0 5,001.5 468.1 3,812.6 0.1 702.0 96.6 2,045.6
Sep. 1,353 10,799.7 68.2 3,507.9 3,022.3 481.1 5,006.9 477.4 3,809.0 0.1 700.8 96.7 2,119.9
Commercial banks 6
2023 Aug. 240 5,048.9 23.1 1,686.3 1,596.4 89.5 1,612.1 308.2 1,045.7 0.1 249.1 30.9 1,696.5
Sep. 240 5,076.4 24.5 1,651.8 1,564.6 86.9 1,618.5 314.8 1,043.9 0.1 249.6 31.0 1,750.7
Big banks 7
2023 Aug. 3 2,524.3 10.4 676.6 642.4 34.2 743.3 153.4 456.0 0.0 129.7 25.3 1,068.6
Sep. 3 2,579.9 12.1 661.5 628.7 32.8 749.4 157.6 455.2 0.0 132.3 25.2 1,131.7
Regional banks and other commercial banks
2023 Aug. 131 2,008.7 9.1 664.5 612.2 51.9 718.9 108.7 495.8 0.1 110.5 4.1 612.1
Sep. 131 2,000.2 9.1 666.6 615.6 50.7 717.5 108.9 495.7 0.1 108.1 4.2 603.0
Branches of foreign banks
2023 Aug. 106 516.0 3.6 345.2 341.8 3.4 149.9 46.1 93.9 – 8.9 1.6 15.8
Sep. 106 496.3 3.3 323.7 320.3 3.4 151.7 48.3 93.0 – 9.2 1.6 16.0
Landesbanken
2023 Aug. 6 936.4 2.4 363.7 310.1 52.6 435.8 45.3 347.2 0.0 38.1 9.6 124.9
Sep. 6 917.1 2.2 340.3 286.8 52.6 434.2 46.1 346.4 0.0 36.3 9.6 130.7
Savings banks
2023 Aug. 354 1,556.7 21.4 273.0 155.5 117.6 1,220.2 54.0 998.0 – 167.7 16.3 25.8
Sep. 354 1,545.1 21.7 262.9 145.9 116.9 1,219.2 54.3 997.1 – 167.2 16.3 25.1
Credit cooperatives
2023 Aug. 718 1,162.0 13.0 209.6 100.1 109.1 887.6 33.9 735.0 0.0 118.8 20.0 31.8
Sep. 711 1,158.0 14.9 202.7 93.7 108.7 888.5 34.7 735.1 0.0 118.7 20.0 31.8
Mortgage banks
2023 Aug. 7 222.1 0.1 16.5 9.8 6.8 199.8 3.5 181.7 – 14.5 0.1 5.6
Sep. 7 221.4 0.1 15.4 8.8 6.6 200.4 3.4 182.3 – 14.7 0.1 5.3
Building and loan associations
2023 Aug. 18 259.1 0.2 42.5 26.7 15.8 212.1 1.2 188.6 . 22.2 0.3 4.0
Sep. 17 258.8 0.2 41.7 25.9 15.8 212.7 1.2 189.4 . 22.2 0.3 4.0
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2023 Aug. 18 1,612.3 4.7 997.4 900.6 93.7 433.9 22.0 316.3 0.0 91.6 19.4 157.0
Sep. 18 1,622.8 4.6 993.1 896.6 93.5 433.3 22.8 314.7 0.0 92.2 19.4 172.4
Memo item:    Foreign banks 8
2023 Aug. 137 2,544.9 9.8 876.7 839.2 37.1 692.1 145.8 419.2 0.1 120.9 3.4 963.0
Sep. 137 2,547.8 10.7 862.9 826.1 36.5 691.5 146.3 417.8 0.1 120.3 3.5 979.2
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2023 Aug. 31 2,028.9 6.2 531.5 497.4 33.7 542.2 99.7 325.3 0.1 112.0 1.8 947.2
Sep. 31 2,051.5 7.4 539.2 505.8 33.1 539.9 97.9 324.8 0.1 111.1 1.9 963.2
* Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3.  1 Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial
instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning ofSection 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read
in conjunction with Section 35 (1) number 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are classified
under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting date. Trading
portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, in
Tables I.1 to I.3.  2 For building and loan associations: including deposits under savings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
25•
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4
TotalSight
depositsTime
deposits TotalSight
depositsfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more
than
1 year  2Memo
item:
Liabilities
arising
from
repos  3 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeBank
savings
bondsBearer
debt
securities
out-
standing  5Capital
including
published
reserves,
partici-
pation
rights
capital,
funds for
general
banking
risksOther
liabi-
lities  1End of
month
All categories of banks
2,270.3 681.4 1,588.9 4,590.6 2,840.7 520.8 666.9 82.4 503.5 474.9 58.7 1,308.3 598.5 1,860.2 2023 Apr.
2,288.9 733.9 1,554.9 4,608.9 2,843.2 531.5 672.8 86.6 495.5 464.5 65.9 1,342.1 603.8 1,873.2 May
2,175.4 699.0 1,476.4 4,587.8 2,806.5 548.2 672.4 73.8 488.1 454.5 72.6 1,332.1 608.1 1,936.3 June
2,212.3 717.1 1,495.1 4,591.2 2,786.2 572.0 672.6 81.2 480.7 444.1 79.7 1,335.1 610.3 2,056.7 July
2,184.0 705.0 1,479.0 4,596.2 2,766.9 597.8 667.8 78.9 472.2 432.8 91.4 1,346.6 610.8 2,060.0 Aug.
2,118.8 674.3 1,444.5 4,593.2 2,764.3 593.6 671.1 80.8 466.5 424.2 97.8 1,351.5 611.6 2,124.5 Sep.
Commercial banks 6
1,146.7 543.4 603.3 1,851.4 1,186.1 315.7 239.3 77.3 84.5 69.8 25.8 205.2 212.6 1,633.0 2023 Aug.
1,111.3 515.5 595.7 1,868.7 1,203.1 312.5 241.0 79.0 85.2 67.9 26.8 204.7 213.1 1,678.6 Sep.
Big banks 7
420.0 179.8 240.1 858.6 522.5 184.5 72.9 41.3 74.4 60.5 4.2 153.8 79.6 1,012.2 2023 Aug.
416.5 182.0 234.5 864.8 525.4 186.5 73.5 39.3 75.4 58.9 4.1 152.6 79.7 1,066.3 Sep.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
450.8 211.1 239.7 786.7 522.5 87.1 145.8 36.0 9.8 9.0 21.6 50.6 115.9 604.6 2023 Aug.
439.8 204.8 235.0 798.9 537.2 82.9 146.5 39.7 9.5 8.7 22.7 51.3 116.3 593.9 Sep.
Branches of foreign banks
275.9 152.5 123.4 206.1 141.1 44.1 20.6 0.0 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.8 17.0 16.2 2023 Aug.
255.0 128.7 126.3 205.0 140.5 43.1 21.0 0.0 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.7 17.0 18.5 Sep.
Landesbanken
250.4 50.5 200.0 294.2 144.7 73.1 71.1 1.2 4.6 4.6 0.6 208.8 43.1 139.9 2023 Aug.
220.9 37.8 183.1 298.3 149.4 71.2 72.3 1.0 4.6 4.6 0.8 212.3 43.1 142.5 Sep.
Savings banks
176.2 4.8 171.4 1,163.9 794.4 71.6 15.7 – 233.7 216.5 48.5 20.1 140.9 55.7 2023 Aug.
171.0 5.3 165.7 1,155.5 781.6 75.4 16.1 – 229.9 212.6 52.5 20.6 141.0 57.1 Sep.
Credit cooperatives
164.2 3.6 160.6 847.2 563.4 89.3 29.5 – 149.0 141.4 16.0 8.0 105.1 37.6 2023 Aug.
161.3 4.4 156.9 845.3 555.3 95.4 31.0 – 146.4 138.7 17.2 8.0 105.2 38.2 Sep.
Mortgage banks
41.8 3.5 38.2 56.3 2.8 7.1 46.5 0.3 – – . 107.7 8.9 7.4 2023 Aug.
41.6 3.7 37.9 56.2 2.5 7.2 46.5 0.6 – – . 107.1 8.9 7.6 Sep.
Building and loan associations
37.5 3.8 33.7 193.7 3.6 2.0 187.5 – 0.4 0.4 0.2 6.1 13.0 8.8 2023 Aug.
37.1 3.7 33.4 193.6 3.7 2.2 187.2 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 6.1 13.0 9.1 Sep.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
367.2 95.3 271.8 189.5 71.9 39.0 78.3 0.2 – – . 790.8 87.2 177.7 2023 Aug.
375.6 103.9 271.8 175.6 68.7 29.5 77.1 0.2 – – . 792.8 87.3 191.5 Sep.
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
680.5 364.7 315.7 759.1 501.1 134.5 101.5 42.2 10.7 10.2 11.3 50.1 100.3 954.9 2023 Aug.
658.8 333.1 325.7 766.9 508.5 132.9 103.0 47.5 10.3 9.9 12.1 50.7 100.6 970.8 Sep.
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
404.5 212.2 192.3 553.0 360.0 90.4 80.9 42.2 10.4 10.0 11.2 49.4 83.3 938.7 2023 Aug.
403.8 204.4 199.4 562.0 368.0 89.8 82.1 47.5 10.1 9.7 12.0 50.0 83.5 952.3 Sep.
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Included in time deposits.  4 Excluding deposits
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).  5 Including subordinated
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
6 Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”.  7 Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner
Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische
Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
notes in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, Table I.3, banking group “Big banks “).
8 Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories
of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”.
9 Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in
other banking categories.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
26•
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
PeriodCash in
hand
(euro area
banknotes
and
coins)Credit
balances
with the
Bundes-
bank TotalCredit
balances
and loans BillsNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total Loans BillsTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money mar-
ket paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued
by non-
banks  1
End of year or month *
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2022 Apr. 50.4 1,200.5 1,360.3 1,112.8 – 0.6 246.9 9.9 3,866.6 3,470.0 0.2 3.5 392.9
May 49.4 1,122.8 1,452.7 1,202.9 – 0.7 249.1 9.9 3,886.7 3,488.9 0.2 3.2 394.4
June 51.1 1,090.9 1,462.8 1,214.8 – 0.8 247.2 9.8 3,906.6 3,513.4 0.2 3.7 389.3
July 41.6 1,084.2 1,454.9 1,206.8 – 0.8 247.2 9.8 3,945.0 3,539.1 0.2 3.6 402.2
Aug. 23.1 1,126.7 1,480.7 1,232.0 – 1.3 247.5 9.9 3,976.0 3,574.3 0.1 3.9 397.7
Sep. 20.4 122.4 2,573.9 2,319.2 – 1.4 253.2 9.8 3,993.6 3,595.3 0.2 3.6 394.5
Oct. 19.7 86.6 2,592.3 2,337.0 – 1.5 253.7 10.0 4,014.1 3,611.6 0.2 4.3 398.0
Nov. 18.8 88.4 2,524.4 2,271.2 – 1.5 251.7 11.1 4,025.7 3,625.3 0.2 3.6 396.7
Dec. 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2023 Jan. 18.0 89.5 2,443.6 2,198.1 – 1.0 244.5 12.7 4,016.2 3,622.4 0.1 4.3 389.4
Feb. 17.8 52.2 2,471.9 2,222.2 – 1.0 248.8 12.8 4,030.2 3,629.4 0.1 2.9 397.9
Mar. 17.7 53.5 2,426.8 2,175.1 – 1.0 250.7 12.6 4,030.5 3,634.7 0.1 4.3 391.4
Apr. 18.7 54.2 2,434.7 2,182.3 – 1.1 251.3 12.7 4,032.5 3,641.2 0.1 3.2 388.1
May 18.1 48.7 2,483.6 2,230.4 – 0.8 252.4 12.7 4,039.0 3,650.5 0.1 2.2 386.2
June 17.5 51.6 2,366.1 2,114.1 – 0.9 251.0 12.7 4,042.1 3,645.6 0.1 2.9 393.5
July 17.0 69.9 2,369.8 2,118.4 – 1.1 250.3 12.8 4,048.7 3,653.9 0.1 3.2 391.6
Aug. 17.3 46.7 2,392.0 2,139.7 – 1.2 251.1 12.9 4,046.7 3,649.9 0.1 2.5 394.2
Sep. 17.9 49.6 2,305.0 2,056.1 – 1.0 247.8 12.9 4,048.1 3,653.5 0.1 3.4 391.1
Changes *
2014 +0.4 – 4.3 –119.3 – 87.1 +0.0 + 0.4 –32.6 +0.1 +36.7 +20.6 –0.1 – 0.6 +16.8
2015 +0.3 + 73.7 – 80.7 – 4.3 –0.0 – 0.4 –75.9 –0.1 +68.9 +54.1 –0.0 – 0.3 +15.1
2016 +6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 – – 0.9 –17.9 +0.4 +43.7 +62.8 –0.1 – 0.1 –18.9
2017 +6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 –0.0 + 0.0 –20.1 –0.1 +57.0 +70.2 +0.0 + 0.4 –13.6
2018 +8.5 + 24.0 – 81.0 – 76.6 +0.0 + 0.1 – 4.4 +3.8 +71.5 +105.4 –0.1 – 0.5 –33.2
2019 +2.8 + 59.7 – 63.0 – 61.1 –0.0 – 0.2 – 1.6 –1.4 +126.7 +129.1 +0.1 + 3.1 – 5.5
2020 +4.1 +316.4 +201.2 +191.6 –0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 +4.3 +123.2 +123.6 –0.1 + 0.7 – 1.0
2021 +2.2 +111.8 + 44.1 + 46.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – 2.0 +1.5 +152.2 +147.8 +0.0 – 2.2 + 6.6
2022 –29.6 –836.6 +938.0 +938.1 – + 0.2 – 0.3 +1.7 +216.7 +220.1 –0.1 + 0.1 – 3.3
2022 Apr. +0.9 +114.2 – 82.3 – 82.3 – + 0.3 – 0.4 –0.0 +13.1 +21.3 +0.0 + 0.2 – 8.4
May –1.0 – 77.7 + 92.4 + 90.0 – + 0.1 + 2.3 –0.0 +20.1 +18.9 –0.1 – 0.3 + 1.5
June +1.7 – 31.9 + 10.1 + 11.9 – + 0.1 – 1.9 –0.1 +19.9 +24.5 –0.0 + 0.5 – 5.1
July –9.5 – 6.8 – 7.5 – 7.6 – + 0.1 – 0.0 –0.1 +36.1 +23.5 +0.0 – 0.1 +12.7
Aug. –18.5 + 42.5 + 29.0 + 28.3 – + 0.2 + 0.5 +0.1 +30.9 +35.1 –0.0 + 0.3 – 4.5
Sep. –2.7 –1,004.3 +1,092.9 +1,087.0 – + 0.2 + 5.7 –0.0 +16.5 +19.9 +0.1 – 0.3 – 3.2
Oct. –0.7 – 35.8 + 18.5 + 17.8 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +0.2 +20.7 +16.6 –0.0 + 0.7 + 3.5
Nov. –0.8 + 1.8 – 67.6 – 65.5 – – 0.0 – 2.1 +1.1 +12.0 +13.9 –0.0 – 0.7 – 1.3
Dec. +1.0 – 19.9 –177.4 –169.9 – – 0.5 – 7.0 +1.0 – 9.6 –11.7 +0.0 – 0.9 + 2.9
2023 Jan. –1.8 + 22.2 + 96.7 + 96.7 – + 0.0 – 0.1 +0.6 + 0.6 + 9.2 –0.1 + 1.6 –10.3
Feb. –0.2 – 37.4 + 28.6 + 24.3 – + 0.0 + 4.3 +0.2 +13.3 + 6.3 –0.0 – 1.5 + 8.5
Mar. –0.1 + 1.3 – 45.1 – 47.0 – + 0.0 + 1.9 –0.1 + 0.9 + 6.0 +0.0 + 1.4 – 6.5
Apr. +1.0 + 0.7 + 7.8 + 7.2 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +0.1 + 2.1 + 6.5 +0.0 – 1.2 – 3.2
May –0.7 – 5.5 + 48.9 + 48.1 – – 0.3 + 1.1 –0.0 + 6.5 + 9.4 +0.0 – 1.0 – 1.9
June –0.5 + 2.9 –116.9 –115.7 – + 0.1 – 1.3 +0.0 + 4.4 – 3.7 –0.0 + 0.7 + 7.4
July –0.5 + 18.4 + 3.7 + 4.3 – + 0.2 – 0.8 +0.1 + 6.6 + 8.3 –0.0 + 0.2 – 1.9
Aug. +0.3 – 23.2 + 22.2 + 21.3 – + 0.1 + 0.8 +0.1 – 1.9 – 4.0 +0.0 – 0.6 + 2.7
Sep. +0.6 + 2.8 – 87.0 – 83.6 – – 0.2 – 3.3 +0.1 + 1.3 + 3.6 +0.0 + 0.9 – 3.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange ofequalisation claims (see also footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the
exchange of equalisation claims.  3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt
securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
27•
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Equalisa-
tion
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in
domestic
banks
and
enterprises TotalSight
deposits
4Time
deposits
4Redis-
counted
bills  5Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
de-
positsTime
deposits
6Savings
de-
posits  7Bank
savings
bonds  8Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
– 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013
– 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
– 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
– 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
– 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
– 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
– 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 2021
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 2022
– 25.9 78.7 1,384.4 140.6 1,243.8 0.0 16.7 4,046.7 2,705.6 759.4 557.9 23.8 33.8 2022 Apr.
– 26.2 78.6 1,393.7 142.7 1,251.0 0.0 17.1 4,056.8 2,724.3 752.1 556.6 23.8 33.6 May
– 26.1 78.8 1,384.7 147.1 1,237.6 0.0 16.9 4,051.8 2,714.4 758.8 554.8 23.8 33.4 June
– 25.9 80.3 1,383.3 134.3 1,249.0 0.0 16.6 4,086.4 2,729.0 780.4 553.0 24.1 33.0 July
– 25.9 79.8 1,403.5 136.0 1,267.5 – 16.5 4,134.3 2,766.8 792.0 550.6 25.0 33.0 Aug.
– 25.8 80.2 1,415.7 149.2 1,266.5 0.0 16.7 4,149.9 2,755.6 823.1 545.2 25.9 33.2 Sep.
– 25.8 80.4 1,419.0 138.1 1,280.9 0.0 16.1 4,168.4 2,748.7 849.3 542.2 28.1 33.6 Oct.
– 25.9 80.2 1,345.0 135.4 1,209.6 0.0 16.1 4,205.6 2,767.9 869.3 536.9 31.5 34.8 Nov.
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 Dec.
– 25.6 80.0 1,231.2 142.6 1,088.7 0.0 15.6 4,199.7 2,722.8 913.5 522.7 40.6 36.9 2023 Jan.
– 25.6 80.2 1,226.0 140.7 1,085.3 0.0 15.6 4,197.1 2,687.7 947.9 516.0 45.5 37.2 Feb.
– 24.6 80.3 1,210.4 137.0 1,073.4 0.0 15.2 4,167.4 2,639.8 968.6 507.2 51.7 36.4 Mar.
– 24.7 80.9 1,227.7 140.8 1,086.9 0.0 15.2 4,167.3 2,632.0 978.5 498.6 58.3 36.5 Apr.
– 24.7 81.1 1,229.8 137.8 1,091.9 0.0 15.1 4,172.9 2,623.9 993.0 490.6 65.4 36.6 May
– 24.4 81.2 1,149.6 134.0 1,015.6 0.0 14.6 4,176.3 2,600.9 1,020.0 483.3 72.1 36.5 June
– 24.4 81.0 1,159.8 134.8 1,025.0 0.0 14.6 4,180.2 2,582.2 1,042.9 475.9 79.1 36.7 July
– 24.4 80.3 1,162.1 138.5 1,023.7 0.0 14.5 4,188.4 2,568.4 1,061.7 467.5 90.7 36.9 Aug.
– 24.2 80.4 1,112.7 137.4 975.3 0.0 14.1 4,189.3 2,558.0 1,072.5 461.8 97.0 37.1 Sep.
Changes *
– –1.9 +2.0 –29.0 + 2.2 –31.2 –0.0 –0.6 +69.7 +107.9 –25.3 – 2.4 –10.6 –2.0 2014
– –2.1 –4.3 –46.6 + 3.3 –50.0 +0.0 –1.3 +106.5 +156.2 –28.3 –11.3 –10.1 –1.6 2015
– –1.3 +1.5 – 1.7 + 0.3 – 2.0 +0.0 –0.5 +104.7 +124.5 – 6.9 – 7.9 –5.0 –0.5 2016
– –0.0 –1.6 +11.0 –18.4 +29.4 –0.0 –0.5 +103.1 +142.8 –27.5 – 5.6 –6.7 +0.4 2017
– –1.0 +3.1 –25.0 – 3.1 –21.9 +0.0 –0.4 +117.7 +139.3 –10.8 – 4.3 –6.5 +3.9 2018
– –0.7 +0.1 – 8.6 + 1.6 –10.2 +0.0 –0.3 +122.5 +155.8 –25.7 – 3.4 –4.1 –1.4 2019
– +5.7 –3.3 +313.4 +23.2 +290.2 –0.0 +8.2 +221.6 +273.7 –32.7 –14.5 –4.9 +1.9 2020
– +2.3 +1.0 +105.2 – 7.4 +112.6 +0.0 +3.3 +95.3 +144.3 –46.2 + 0.7 –3.5 –0.2 2021
– –0.1 +1.7 –104.6 + 8.8 –113.4 –0.0 –0.6 +191.8 +65.8 +143.4 –27.5 +10.1 +1.7 2022
– +0.2 –0.0 +16.7 + 3.0 +13.7 – +0.2 +13.0 + 9.5 + 4.2 – 0.6 –0.1 +0.0 2022 Apr.
– +0.3 –0.1 + 9.4 + 2.2 + 7.2 –0.0 +0.3 +10.1 +18.8 – 7.3 – 1.3 +0.0 –0.2 May
– –0.1 +0.2 – 9.0 + 4.4 –13.4 –0.0 –0.2 – 5.0 – 9.9 + 6.7 – 1.8 –0.0 –0.1 June
– –0.2 +1.5 – 1.1 –12.4 +11.2 – –0.3 +33.5 +14.3 +20.7 – 1.8 +0.3 –0.5 July
– –0.0 +0.1 +23.3 + 1.8 +21.6 –0.0 –0.1 +48.1 +37.8 +11.8 – 2.4 +0.9 +0.0 Aug.
– –0.0 +0.4 +12.2 +13.2 – 0.9 +0.0 +0.1 +15.6 –11.4 +31.3 – 5.3 +0.9 +0.2 Sep.
– –0.0 +0.1 + 3.5 –10.9 +14.4 +0.0 –0.5 +17.4 – 8.0 +26.2 – 3.1 +2.2 +0.4 Oct.
– +0.1 –0.1 –73.9 – 2.6 –71.3 –0.0 –0.1 +45.3 +20.9 +26.3 – 5.3 +3.4 +1.3 Nov.
– –0.3 +0.1 –113.2 – 8.5 –104.7 –0.0 –0.4 –43.4 –47.1 + 4.2 – 3.7 +3.2 +1.1 Dec.
– –0.0 –0.4 – 0.3 + 5.8 – 6.1 +0.0 –0.1 +37.6 – 2.9 +40.0 – 5.5 +6.0 +1.0 2023 Jan.
– –0.0 +0.2 – 5.2 – 1.9 – 3.4 – –0.0 – 2.5 –35.0 +34.4 – 6.7 +4.8 +0.4 Feb.
– –0.3 +0.1 –15.2 – 3.7 –11.5 – –0.4 –29.6 –47.3 +20.2 – 8.7 +6.2 –0.1 Mar.
– +0.0 +1.1 +17.3 + 3.8 +13.5 –0.0 –0.0 – 0.1 – 7.9 + 9.8 – 8.6 +6.6 +0.0 Apr.
– +0.0 +0.2 + 2.1 – 3.0 + 5.0 –0.0 –0.1 + 5.6 – 7.9 +14.5 – 8.0 +7.1 +0.1 May
– –0.4 +0.1 –79.7 – 3.7 –76.0 +0.0 –0.5 + 2.3 –23.0 +26.0 – 7.3 +6.7 –0.1 June
– +0.0 –0.1 +10.2 + 0.8 + 9.4 – –0.0 + 3.8 –18.7 +22.8 – 7.3 +7.0 +0.2 July
– +0.1 –0.8 + 3.1 + 3.9 – 0.8 +0.0 –0.1 + 8.2 –13.2 +21.3 – 8.5 +8.5 +0.2 Aug.
– –0.2 +0.1 –49.4 – 1.1 –48.3 –0.0 –0.4 + 0.9 –10.5 +10.7 – 5.7 +6.3 +0.2 Sep.
including subordinated liabilities.  4 Including liabilities arising from monetary policy
operations with the Bundesbank.  5 Own acceptances and promissory notes
outstanding.  6 Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  7 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8).  8 Including liabilities
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
28•
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Credit balances and loans, bills Loans and bills
PeriodCash in
hand
(non-
euro area
banknotes
and
coins) Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued by
non-banks
End of year or month *
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2022 Apr. 0.6 1,229.5 1,003.6 734.1 269.6 1.6 224.3 3.6 914.4 612.0 180.9 431.1 13.1 289.2
May 0.6 1,222.8 996.5 730.7 265.8 1.7 224.7 3.6 914.3 609.9 182.1 427.9 13.5 290.9
June 0.6 1,232.7 1,007.2 742.2 265.0 2.2 223.3 3.6 929.1 612.4 181.1 431.2 13.7 303.0
July 0.6 1,248.0 1,021.1 748.0 273.1 2.7 224.2 3.5 929.4 615.7 177.0 438.7 12.7 301.0
Aug. 0.5 1,266.1 1,038.5 756.2 282.4 3.4 224.2 3.4 931.5 624.9 183.9 441.0 13.4 293.2
Sep. 0.3 1,287.8 1,057.9 771.9 286.0 4.2 225.8 3.8 935.5 629.4 185.2 444.2 12.4 293.7
Oct. 0.3 1,296.6 1,065.2 787.3 277.9 3.1 228.3 3.4 931.2 629.3 182.0 447.3 12.5 289.5
Nov. 0.2 1,273.7 1,043.2 766.3 276.9 2.9 227.6 3.5 938.8 631.7 187.5 444.2 12.5 294.6
Dec. 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2023 Jan. 0.2 1,195.3 963.1 700.1 263.0 2.7 229.5 4.0 941.0 633.6 190.9 442.7 20.1 287.3
Feb. 0.2 1,201.5 965.7 701.9 263.8 2.9 232.9 4.2 946.4 635.5 190.5 444.9 15.8 295.1
Mar. 0.2 1,203.8 968.2 704.1 264.0 2.9 232.7 4.3 953.0 630.8 187.8 443.0 12.5 309.8
Apr. 0.2 1,184.1 946.5 681.7 264.8 3.6 234.0 4.2 959.3 633.6 191.7 441.9 13.9 311.8
May 0.2 1,211.3 972.8 706.0 266.8 3.4 235.1 4.2 965.1 638.1 193.4 444.7 14.6 312.4
June 0.2 1,177.3 939.1 681.7 257.4 3.6 234.6 4.3 961.8 628.4 181.4 447.0 15.8 317.6
July 0.2 1,194.1 955.3 694.8 260.5 4.1 234.7 4.3 962.7 637.4 190.4 447.0 16.4 308.9
Aug. 0.2 1,197.1 959.5 693.8 265.7 3.7 233.9 4.3 954.8 630.9 181.3 449.6 16.2 307.8
Sep. 0.2 1,203.0 966.2 687.6 278.6 3.5 233.3 4.2 958.8 633.0 183.8 449.2 16.1 309.7
Changes *
2014 –0.0 +86.1 +80.1 +63.2 +16.8 +0.7 +5.3 –0.6 +5.7 –10.2 –12.8 +2.7 – 1.8 +17.7
2015 +0.1 –91.8 –86.0 –82.2 –3.8 –6.7 +0.8 –0.1 –6.1 –9.2 –6.5 –2.7 + 1.1 +2.0
2016 +0.0 –25.5 –14.5 –38.2 +23.7 –0.7 –10.3 –0.0 +17.4 +28.9 +10.1 +18.8 – 3.0 –8.5
2017 +0.0 –57.2 –48.7 –61.5 +12.8 +0.0 –8.5 +0.6 –4.7 +13.0 +8.6 +4.4 + 0.7 –18.4
2018 +0.0 +49.6 +34.0 +57.7 –23.7 +0.2 +15.3 +0.7 +18.3 +28.3 +3.2 +25.2 – 0.4 –9.7
2019 –0.0 –4.1 –11.3 –21.9 +10.7 +0.8 +6.3 +0.7 +26.8 +19.9 +12.7 +7.3 + 3.0 +3.8
2020 –0.0 –32.0 –22.4 –6.6 –15.8 +0.9 –10.5 +0.3 +34.4 +14.7 +9.0 +5.7 + 3.6 +16.1
2021 +0.0 +52.8 +71.1 +68.9 +2.2 –2.5 –15.8 –0.5 +37.8 +39.7 +29.8 +9.9 – 3.2 +1.4
2022 –0.1 +21.7 +20.4 +17.9 +2.6 +1.3 –0.0 +0.2 +37.0 +37.0 +16.8 +20.2 + 6.7 –6.7
2022 Apr. +0.1 –9.7 –10.2 –4.6 –5.6 +0.6 –0.1 +0.0 –1.7 +6.8 +6.8 +0.0 + 2.8 –11.3
May +0.0 –1.1 –1.8 –0.1 –1.7 +0.1 +0.5 +0.0 +3.7 +1.1 +2.2 –1.1 + 0.4 +2.2
June +0.0 –15.4 –14.4 –10.3 –4.1 +0.5 –1.6 +0.0 +9.7 –1.7 –2.3 +0.6 + 0.2 +11.2
July –0.0 +8.4 +7.3 +1.7 +5.6 +0.5 +0.7 –0.1 –4.7 –0.7 –5.3 +4.6 – 1.1 –2.9
Aug. –0.1 +13.9 +13.2 +6.0 +7.2 +0.7 –0.0 –0.2 +0.1 +7.7 +6.3 +1.4 + 0.7 –8.4
Sep. –0.2 +15.0 +12.6 +11.8 +0.8 +0.8 +1.6 +0.4 +3.2 +1.4 –0.2 +1.6 – 1.0 +2.9
Oct. +0.0 +13.4 +11.9 +18.2 –6.3 –1.0 +2.5 –0.3 –2.2 +1.4 –2.9 +4.3 + 0.0 –3.6
Nov. –0.1 –9.4 –8.7 –13.4 +4.7 –0.2 –0.4 +0.1 +16.5 +9.7 +5.5 +4.2 – 0.0 +6.8
Dec. –0.0 –112.4 –106.8 –104.0 –2.8 –1.2 –4.4 +0.2 –19.9 –11.2 –12.7 +1.5 + 2.4 –11.1
2023 Jan. –0.0 +48.2 +40.6 +46.3 –5.7 +1.1 +6.5 +0.3 +30.0 +19.5 +18.6 +0.9 + 5.3 +5.2
Feb. +0.0 +0.6 –2.8 –1.2 –1.6 +0.1 +3.3 +0.2 +1.6 –1.2 –1.3 +0.1 – 4.4 +7.2
Mar. –0.0 +9.2 +9.2 +6.2 +3.0 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 +11.2 –1.1 –1.5 +0.4 – 3.3 +15.5
Apr. +0.0 –17.0 –19.0 –20.9 +1.9 +0.7 +1.3 –0.1 +8.2 +4.4 +4.5 –0.1 + 1.5 +2.4
May +0.0 +16.9 +16.2 +18.0 –1.8 –0.2 +0.9 –0.0 +1.5 +1.4 +1.3 +0.1 + 0.6 –0.5
June +0.0 –17.7 –17.6 –9.9 –7.6 +0.2 –0.3 +0.1 –1.9 –8.7 –11.1 +2.4 + 1.2 +5.6
July –0.0 +18.4 +17.7 +13.9 +3.9 +0.5 +0.2 +0.0 +3.0 +10.5 +9.6 +0.9 + 0.7 –8.2
Aug. –0.0 +0.0 +1.3 –2.2 +3.5 –0.4 –0.9 –0.0 –10.2 –8.3 –9.8 +1.5 – 0.3 –1.6
Sep. +0.0 –1.0 –0.1 –10.2 +10.1 –0.2 –0.7 –0.0 –0.1 –1.2 +1.3 –2.5 – 0.1 +1.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequentrevisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
29•
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Time deposits (including bank
savings bonds)Time deposits (including
savings deposits and bank
savings bonds)
Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in foreign
banks
and
enter-
prises TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 2013
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 – 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 2021
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 2022
11.1 15.7 1,113.7 600.6 513.2 381.7 131.4 0.0 384.6 201.5 183.2 102.6 80.6 0.1 2022 Apr.
11.1 15.7 1,127.5 640.4 487.1 351.4 135.7 0.0 382.0 217.1 164.9 85.0 79.9 0.2 May
11.0 15.9 1,100.2 625.5 474.7 340.6 134.1 0.0 387.6 222.7 164.9 82.5 82.4 0.3 June
10.6 15.8 1,107.4 608.8 498.6 359.0 139.6 0.0 390.2 221.6 168.6 87.5 81.1 0.3 July
10.6 15.8 1,120.4 610.9 509.5 360.5 149.0 0.0 400.4 231.3 169.2 87.4 81.8 0.2 Aug.
10.6 15.9 1,169.6 639.0 530.6 373.0 157.6 0.0 409.1 231.4 177.7 95.7 82.0 0.2 Sep.
10.6 15.9 1,188.9 657.6 531.3 372.1 159.2 0.0 401.8 220.0 181.8 100.0 81.8 0.2 Oct.
10.6 15.8 1,150.7 612.1 538.7 385.9 152.7 – 414.1 235.1 179.0 91.2 87.7 0.1 Nov.
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 Dec.
10.4 15.6 1,089.4 601.2 488.3 344.5 143.8 – 405.1 213.5 191.5 101.9 89.6 0.2 2023 Jan.
10.4 15.8 1,086.8 600.1 486.7 345.1 141.6 – 418.4 218.4 200.0 109.9 90.1 0.2 Feb.
10.4 15.9 1,060.0 576.0 484.0 329.3 154.7 – 412.5 216.8 195.7 98.9 96.9 0.3 Mar.
10.4 15.9 1,042.6 540.6 502.0 343.8 158.2 – 423.3 208.8 214.6 116.6 97.9 0.3 Apr.
10.4 16.1 1,059.1 596.1 462.9 299.9 163.0 0.0 436.0 219.3 216.7 116.7 100.0 0.3 May
10.2 16.0 1,025.8 565.0 460.8 302.6 158.2 0.0 411.5 205.6 205.9 107.3 98.6 0.4 June
10.2 16.1 1,052.4 582.3 470.1 311.1 159.0 0.0 411.0 204.0 207.0 107.9 99.1 0.3 July
10.2 16.1 1,021.8 566.5 455.3 294.3 161.1 – 407.7 198.5 209.2 112.0 97.2 0.3 Aug.
10.2 16.1 1,006.0 536.9 469.1 293.9 175.2 – 403.9 206.3 197.6 100.2 97.4 0.4 Sep.
Changes *
+ 0.1 – 3.8 +76.3 +47.8 +28.5 +39.0 –10.5 –0.0 –43.6 –8.3 –35.3 –30.7 –4.6 +0.2 2014
– 0.6 – 6.1 –15.4 +40.6 –56.0 –48.6 – 7.4 –0.0 –26.5 –13.9 –12.6 +0.3 –13.0 –0.0 2015
– 0.1 – 1.5 +82.7 +51.0 +31.7 +27.0 + 4.7 –0.0 +3.5 –3.1 +6.7 +5.9 +0.8 –0.0 2016
– 1.0 – 4.1 –15.5 +25.2 –40.8 –43.2 + 2.4 ±0.0 +31.8 +11.0 +20.8 +15.6 +5.2 –0.4 2017
– 0.2 – 2.2 –23.9 –23.4 – 0.4 + 2.1 – 2.6 –0.0 –11.9 –0.2 –11.8 –5.7 –6.0 –0.2 2018
– 0.3 – 0.9 – 9.5 –49.4 +39.8 +28.0 +11.8 –0.0 –0.8 +2.1 –2.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.0 2019
– 0.2 – 3.9 +83.8 +87.8 – 4.1 –34.7 +30.6 – +23.6 +13.8 +9.8 +7.1 +2.8 +0.0 2020
– 0.2 – 0.8 +136.6 +19.8 +116.8 +89.2 +27.6 +0.0 +22.7 +6.4 +16.3 +0.0 +16.3 –0.0 2021
– 0.7 – 1.0 +85.8 +29.1 +56.7 +69.6 –13.0 –0.0 +68.2 +49.0 +19.2 +13.9 +5.3 +0.0 2022
+ 0.0 – 0.1 –13.2 –39.6 +26.4 +27.6 – 1.1 – +19.2 –0.6 +19.8 +19.1 +0.6 –2022 Apr.
– 0.0 + 0.0 +18.7 +42.5 –23.8 –28.6 + 4.8 – –1.1 +16.4 –17.5 –16.9 –0.5 +0.1 May
– 0.1 + 0.1 –21.2 –5.8 –15.4 –13.0 – 2.4 – +3.5 +4.7 –1.2 –3.4 +2.2 +0.0 June
– 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 –20.0 +19.7 +16.2 + 3.5 +0.0 +0.1 –2.2 +2.3 +4.0 –1.8 –0.0 July
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.7 +0.3 + 9.4 + 0.3 + 9.2 –0.0 +8.9 +9.1 –0.2 –0.7 +0.5 –0.0 Aug.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 +42.5 +25.4 +17.2 + 9.4 + 7.7 – +6.9 –0.7 +7.5 +7.5 –0.0 +0.0 Sep.
– + 0.0 +22.6 +20.5 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 1.9 – –5.9 –10.8 +5.0 +4.9 +0.1 –0.1 Oct.
– 0.0 – 0.0 –24.1 –41.3 +17.2 +17.4 – 0.2 –0.0 +5.3 +13.1 –7.9 –7.4 –0.5 –0.0 Nov.
– 0.2 – 0.0 –145.0 –128.3 –16.7 – 6.9 – 9.8 – –40.7 –37.2 –3.5 –6.2 +2.7 –0.0 Dec.
– 0.0 – 0.1 +93.8 +122.3 –28.4 –30.8 + 2.4 – +35.9 +18.1 +17.8 +17.9 –0.1 +0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 – 7.0 –3.5 – 3.5 – 0.9 – 2.6 – +11.6 +4.1 +7.5 +7.2 +0.3 +0.1 Feb.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 –21.8 –21.5 – 0.3 –13.9 +13.6 – –3.9 –0.8 –3.1 –10.0 +7.0 +0.1 Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 –15.3 –34.3 +19.0 +15.2 + 3.8 – +11.7 –7.7 +19.3 +18.1 +1.2 –0.0 Apr.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 +10.1 +52.6 –42.5 –46.3 + 3.8 +0.0 +9.2 +9.5 –0.3 –1.2 +0.9 –0.0 May
– 0.2 – 0.0 –26.4 –26.1 – 0.3 + 3.9 – 4.2 – –23.1 –13.1 –9.9 –8.7 –1.2 +0.1 June
– 0.0 + 0.1 +27.3 +17.2 +10.1 + 9.0 + 1.1 – +0.4 –1.3 +1.7 +1.1 +0.6 –0.0 July
+ 0.0 – 0.0 –32.6 –16.4 –16.2 –17.9 + 1.7 –0.0 –4.3 –5.9 +1.6 +3.6 –2.0 –0.0 Aug.
– 0.0 – 0.0 –21.0 –32.3 +11.4 – 2.2 +13.5 – –5.7 +7.1 –12.8 –12.8 +0.0 +0.0 Sep.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
30•
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Short-term lending Medium- and long-term Lending to domestic
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
Periodincluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claimsexcluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claims Total TotalLoans
and
billsNegotiable
money
market
paper Total LoansTreasury
bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 – 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2022 Apr. 3,866.6 3,470.2 277.5 257.9 257.0 0.9 19.6 17.1 2.5 3,589.1 3,226.2
May 3,886.7 3,489.1 280.1 262.5 261.5 1.0 17.6 15.4 2.2 3,606.6 3,242.6
June 3,906.6 3,513.5 290.8 271.4 270.5 0.9 19.5 16.6 2.8 3,615.7 3,255.8
July 3,945.0 3,539.3 291.4 271.8 270.9 0.8 19.6 16.8 2.8 3,653.7 3,293.5
Aug. 3,976.0 3,574.4 305.0 287.3 286.4 0.8 17.7 14.7 3.1 3,671.0 3,314.3
Sep. 3,993.6 3,595.5 311.0 292.8 292.2 0.6 18.2 15.2 3.0 3,682.6 3,329.1
Oct. 4,014.1 3,611.8 308.7 288.9 288.4 0.5 19.9 16.1 3.8 3,705.3 3,347.5
Nov. 4,025.7 3,625.4 310.7 292.9 292.6 0.4 17.7 14.5 3.2 3,715.0 3,359.0
Dec. 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2023 Jan. 4,016.2 3,622.5 303.2 282.5 281.9 0.5 20.7 17.0 3.8 3,713.1 3,360.2
Feb. 4,030.2 3,629.5 297.8 279.9 279.2 0.7 18.0 15.8 2.2 3,732.4 3,371.2
Mar. 4,030.5 3,634.8 305.0 285.1 284.4 0.7 19.9 16.3 3.6 3,725.5 3,369.3
Apr. 4,032.5 3,641.3 304.1 283.3 282.8 0.6 20.8 18.2 2.6 3,728.4 3,374.4
May 4,039.0 3,650.6 299.7 281.0 280.2 0.8 18.7 17.4 1.3 3,739.3 3,388.0
June 4,042.1 3,645.7 300.3 280.5 279.6 0.9 19.8 17.8 2.0 3,741.8 3,388.7
July 4,048.7 3,653.9 299.4 277.4 276.6 0.9 21.9 19.6 2.3 3,749.3 3,395.5
Aug. 4,046.7 3,650.0 289.5 270.8 270.1 0.7 18.6 16.8 1.8 3,757.2 3,398.6
Sep. 4,048.1 3,653.6 297.2 275.5 274.8 0.6 21.7 19.0 2.7 3,751.0 3,395.8
Changes *
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 – 11.6 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 0.0 – 7.1 – 6.5 – 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 – 5.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.8 – 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 – 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 – 12.1 – 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 8.6 – 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 – 19.6 – 19.8 – 19.8 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2021 + 152.2 + 147.8 + 8.8 + 13.8 + 13.8 – 0.1 – 4.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 + 143.4 + 157.9
2022 + 216.7 + 220.0 + 47.6 + 48.5 + 48.5 + 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.9 + 0.0 + 169.1 + 184.8
2022 Apr. + 13.1 + 21.4 + 3.9 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 9.3 + 17.0
May + 20.1 + 18.8 + 2.6 + 4.6 + 4.5 + 0.0 – 2.0 – 1.7 – 0.3 + 17.5 + 16.4
June + 19.9 + 24.5 + 10.8 + 8.9 + 9.0 – 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 9.1 + 13.2
July + 36.1 + 23.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 35.8 + 35.6
Aug. + 30.9 + 35.1 + 13.7 + 15.5 + 15.5 + 0.0 – 1.9 – 2.1 + 0.3 + 17.2 + 20.8
Sep. + 16.5 + 20.0 + 4.8 + 4.4 + 4.6 – 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 11.7 + 14.8
Oct. + 20.7 + 16.6 – 2.0 – 3.6 – 3.5 – 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 22.7 + 18.5
Nov. + 12.0 + 13.9 + 2.2 + 4.4 + 4.5 – 0.1 – 2.1 – 1.5 – 0.6 + 9.7 + 11.8
Dec. – 9.6 – 11.7 – 13.9 – 12.8 – 12.7 – 0.0 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.9 + 4.2 + 1.8
2023 Jan. + 0.6 + 9.2 + 6.7 + 2.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 4.1 + 2.6 + 1.4 – 6.1 + 0.3
Feb. + 13.3 + 6.3 – 6.0 – 3.2 – 3.3 + 0.1 – 2.8 – 1.2 – 1.6 + 19.3 + 11.0
Mar. + 0.9 + 6.0 + 7.6 + 5.7 + 5.7 – 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.4 – 6.7 – 1.8
Apr. + 2.1 + 6.5 – 0.9 – 1.7 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.9 – 1.1 + 3.0 + 5.1
May + 6.5 + 9.4 – 4.4 – 2.3 – 2.6 + 0.3 – 2.1 – 0.8 – 1.2 + 10.9 + 13.6
June + 4.4 – 3.7 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 + 0.9
July + 6.6 + 8.3 – 1.0 – 3.1 – 3.1 – 0.0 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 7.5 + 6.9
Aug. – 1.9 – 4.0 – 9.9 – 6.6 – 6.5 – 0.2 – 3.3 – 2.8 – 0.5 + 8.0 + 3.1
Sep. + 1.3 + 3.7 + 7.7 + 4.6 + 4.7 – 0.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 – 6.4 – 2.9
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
31•
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
TotalMedium-
termLong-
term SecuritiesMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalMedium-
termLong-
termSecur-
ities  1Equal-
isation
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 – 2.7 2013
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 – 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 – 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 – 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 – 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 – 1.4 2018
2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 – 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 2020
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 2021
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 2022
2,966.8 317.3 2,649.5 259.4 24.9 362.9 229.5 13.7 215.8 133.5 – 1.0 2022 Apr.
2,983.1 319.7 2,663.4 259.5 25.1 364.0 229.1 13.7 215.4 134.9 – 1.0 May
2,998.2 322.2 2,675.9 257.6 25.0 360.0 228.2 13.6 214.6 131.7 – 1.0 June
3,022.5 327.7 2,694.9 271.0 24.9 360.2 229.0 13.5 215.5 131.2 – 1.0 July
3,044.6 335.4 2,709.1 269.8 24.9 356.6 228.7 13.5 215.2 127.9 – 1.0 Aug.
3,058.8 339.5 2,719.3 270.2 24.8 353.5 229.3 13.8 215.4 124.3 – 1.0 Sep.
3,077.4 344.8 2,732.7 270.1 24.8 357.8 229.9 13.8 216.1 127.9 – 1.0 Oct.
3,086.6 344.9 2,741.7 272.4 24.8 356.0 231.7 13.9 217.8 124.3 – 1.0 Nov.
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 Dec.
3,090.3 349.9 2,740.4 269.9 24.6 352.9 233.4 13.8 219.5 119.5 – 1.0 2023 Jan.
3,102.0 355.3 2,746.7 269.2 24.5 361.2 232.5 13.7 218.8 128.7 – 1.1 Feb.
3,101.5 354.8 2,746.7 267.8 23.6 356.2 232.6 13.6 219.0 123.6 – 1.0 Mar.
3,107.6 355.6 2,752.0 266.8 23.6 354.0 232.7 13.9 218.8 121.2 – 1.0 Apr.
3,120.7 360.8 2,760.0 267.2 23.7 351.4 232.4 13.6 218.8 119.0 – 1.0 May
3,117.4 360.0 2,757.5 271.3 23.3 353.1 230.9 13.4 217.6 122.2 – 1.0 June
3,125.3 362.1 2,763.3 270.2 23.4 353.8 232.4 13.5 218.9 121.4 – 1.0 July
3,130.4 362.8 2,767.6 268.2 23.4 358.6 232.6 13.8 218.8 126.0 – 1.0 Aug.
3,126.8 359.5 2,767.3 269.0 23.2 355.1 233.0 13.7 219.4 122.1 – 1.0 Sep.
Changes *
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 +12.5 – 1.8 – 4.1 – 8.5 – 5.1 – 3.4 + 4.3 – – 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 +14.8 – 2.1 – 6.6 – 6.9 – 4.8 – 2.0 + 0.2 – + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 – 0.9 – 30.9 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 3.3 –23.6 – – 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 +15.8 + 0.1 – 39.9 –10.6 – 1.3 – 9.3 –29.4 – – 0.1 2017
+108.7 +19.3 + 89.4 – 6.7 – 0.9 – 37.1 –10.5 – 2.7 – 7.8 –26.6 – – 0.0 2018
+126.0 +18.9 +107.2 + 6.8 – 0.8 – 17.8 – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 –12.3 – + 0.1 2019
+145.0 + 9.4 +135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 – 2.8 – 1.1 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 1.7 – – 0.4 2020
+140.1 + 5.6 +134.5 +17.8 + 2.3 – 14.6 – 3.3 – 1.3 – 2.0 –11.3 – – 0.0 2021
+169.9 +33.5 +136.4 +14.9 – 0.1 – 15.7 + 2.5 – 0.7 + 3.3 –18.2 – – 0.0 2022
+ 17.0 + 1.5 + 15.6 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 7.7 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 – 8.4 – – 0.0 2022 Apr.
+ 16.4 + 2.5 + 13.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.1 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.3 + 1.4 – – 0.0 May
+ 15.1 + 2.5 + 12.6 – 1.9 – 0.1 – 4.1 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 3.2 – – 0.0 June
+ 22.5 + 4.4 + 18.1 +13.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.5 – – 0.0 July
+ 22.0 + 7.7 + 14.3 – 1.2 – 0.0 – 3.6 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 3.3 – + 0.0 Aug.
+ 14.3 + 4.0 + 10.4 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 0.5 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 3.6 – + 0.0 Sep.
+ 18.6 + 5.3 + 13.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.6 – 0.0 + 0.6 + 3.6 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 9.4 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 2.4 + 0.0 – 2.1 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.4 – 3.6 – + 0.0 Nov.
+ 0.3 + 4.0 – 3.7 + 1.6 – 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.4 – – 0.0 Dec.
+ 4.4 + 1.2 + 3.3 – 4.2 + 0.0 – 6.4 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 6.1 – – 0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 11.7 + 5.4 + 6.4 – 0.7 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.7 + 9.2 – + 0.1 Feb.
– 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.0 – 1.4 – 0.3 – 4.8 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.3 – 5.1 – – 0.0 Mar.
+ 6.1 + 0.8 + 5.3 – 1.0 + 0.0 – 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 – 0.2 – 2.3 – + 0.0 Apr.
+ 13.2 + 5.2 + 8.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 2.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.3 – – 0.0 May
– 3.2 – 1.3 – 2.0 + 4.1 – 0.3 + 1.8 – 1.5 – 0.2 – 1.2 + 3.2 – – 0.0 June
+ 8.0 + 1.8 + 6.2 – 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 1.3 – 0.8 – – 0.0 July
+ 5.1 + 0.8 + 4.3 – 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 + 4.6 – – 0.0 Aug.
– 3.6 – 3.3 – 0.3 + 0.7 – 0.2 – 3.5 + 0.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 – 3.9 – – 0.0 Sep.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
32•
IV. Banks
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
billion €
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios)  1
of which:
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Period TotalMortgage
loans,
total TotalMortgage
loans
secured
by
residen-
tial real
estateOther
housing
loans Totalof which:
Housing
loansManufac-
turingElectricity,
gas and
water
supply;
refuse
disposal,          
mining
and
quarryingConstruc-
tionWhole-
sale and
retail
trade;
repair of
motor                
vehicles
and
motor-
cyclesAgri-
culture,
forestry,
fishing
and
aqua-
cultureTransport-
ation and
storage;
post and                      
telecom-
munica-
tionsFinancial
intermedi-
ation
(excluding
MFIs) and
insurance   
com-
panies
Lending, total                                                 End of year or quarter *
2021 3,147.5 1,591.4 1,678.2 1,373.0 305.2 1,701.5 477.2 146.1 128.3 98.0 140.4 55.9 55.6 186.3
2022 Q3 3,351.0 1,659.4 1,758.3 1,433.0 325.2 1,845.3 503.1 163.6 147.5 107.3 163.3 56.9 64.9 202.3
Q4 3,365.3 1,676.5 1,773.9 1,448.0 325.8 1,852.2 509.1 160.0 137.7 108.8 155.1 56.3 65.2 211.9
2023 Q1 3,385.9 1,687.3 1,779.0 1,457.3 321.7 1,872.4 512.9 162.8 138.1 110.9 157.5 56.1 63.1 222.8
Q2 3,397.0 1,701.4 1,787.6 1,471.4 316.3 1,879.4 517.7 162.6 137.7 112.5 159.2 56.3 61.9 221.5
Q3 3,401.6 1,735.7 1,797.1 1,505.7 291.5 1,878.2 522.3 160.0 134.7 113.3 159.5 56.4 61.3 222.9
Short-term lending
2021 231.8 – 6.9 – 6.9 202.7 4.4 31.6 9.1 18.0 36.4 3.3 3.9 35.0
2022 Q3 292.2 – 7.4 – 7.4 260.7 4.9 46.2 24.4 21.1 45.3 3.6 4.2 42.2
Q4 279.4 – 7.4 – 7.4 248.9 5.0 41.6 12.1 20.8 44.7 3.3 3.8 49.8
2023 Q1 284.4 – 7.6 – 7.6 253.6 5.3 43.4 8.1 21.9 46.5 3.4 3.7 54.0
Q2 279.6 – 7.6 – 7.6 248.9 5.4 42.3 7.7 22.6 46.8 3.8 3.6 50.4
Q3 274.8 – 7.5 – 7.5 244.4 5.4 40.4 5.6 22.6 47.2 3.8 3.8 51.3
Medium-term lending
2021 314.5 – 40.5 – 40.5 239.5 20.6 28.3 5.4 19.3 20.8 4.3 12.3 52.0
2022 Q3 339.5 – 43.2 – 43.2 265.9 23.1 30.5 6.0 21.6 23.4 4.3 22.2 54.4
Q4 348.7 – 43.4 – 43.4 275.8 23.5 31.2 6.5 22.2 24.3 4.1 23.0 56.2
2023 Q1 354.8 – 42.8 – 42.8 283.5 23.7 32.5 9.2 22.4 24.8 4.1 21.0 59.3
Q2 360.0 – 42.8 – 42.8 289.3 24.1 34.0 8.0 22.8 26.9 4.1 19.1 61.3
Q3 359.5 – 42.8 – 42.8 289.2 24.5 34.7 5.8 23.0 26.9 4.1 18.2 62.4
Long-term lending
2021 2,601.2 1,591.4 1,630.9 1,373.0 257.8 1,259.3 452.2 86.2 113.8 60.8 83.2 48.3 39.4 99.3
2022 Q3 2,719.3 1,659.4 1,707.6 1,433.0 274.6 1,318.6 475.1 86.8 117.1 64.7 94.6 49.0 38.6 105.6
Q4 2,737.1 1,676.5 1,723.1 1,448.0 275.1 1,327.5 480.6 87.2 119.0 65.8 86.1 48.9 38.4 105.9
2023 Q1 2,746.7 1,687.3 1,728.6 1,457.3 271.3 1,335.3 483.9 86.9 120.8 66.6 86.1 48.6 38.4 109.5
Q2 2,757.5 1,701.4 1,737.2 1,471.4 265.9 1,341.2 488.2 86.3 122.1 67.1 85.5 48.5 39.2 109.7
Q3 2,767.3 1,735.7 1,746.8 1,505.7 241.2 1,344.7 492.4 85.0 123.3 67.7 85.4 48.5 39.2 109.1
Lending, total                                                 Change during quarter *
2022 Q3 +79.0 +23.4 +26.9 +20.5 + 6.4 +58.5 + 8.6 + 2.5 +14.9 + 2.7 + 9.6 – 0.1 + 8.5 + 2.0
Q4 +16.5 +17.2 +15.4 +14.8 + 0.6 + 8.9 + 5.9 – 3.2 – 9.9 + 1.4 – 2.7 – 0.6 + 0.3 +10.2
2023 Q1 +20.4 +11.3 + 4.8 + 8.6 – 3.8 +19.9 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 2.1 – 0.2 – 2.1 +10.6
Q2 +12.4 +11.5 + 9.1 +11.5 – 2.4 + 8.2 + 5.3 – 0.1 – 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.2
Q3 + 4.6 +11.7 + 9.5 +11.3 – 1.8 – 1.5 + 4.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.6 + 1.3
Short-term lending
2022 Q3 +20.2 – + 0.3 – + 0.3 +19.8 + 0.3 + 0.7 +12.8 + 0.9 + 2.8 – 0.3 – 0.2 + 0.1
Q4 –11.8 – – 0.0 – – 0.0 –10.8 + 0.1 – 4.3 –12.3 – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 7.8
2023 Q1 + 4.7 – + 0.2 – + 0.2 + 4.7 + 0.3 + 1.8 – 4.0 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 3.9
Q2 – 3.7 – – 0.0 – – 0.0 – 3.6 + 0.1 – 1.1 – 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.4
Q3 – 4.8 – – 0.1 – – 0.1 – 4.8 – 0.0 – 1.9 – 2.1 – 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.9
Medium-term lending
2022 Q3 +16.1 – + 0.9 – + 0.9 +16.1 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 1.1 – 0.0 + 8.9 + 0.8
Q4 + 9.3 – + 0.1 – + 0.1 +10.0 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 0.8 + 1.9
2023 Q1 + 6.1 – – 0.5 – – 0.5 + 7.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 2.0 + 3.0
Q2 + 4.7 – – 0.0 – – 0.0 + 5.4 + 0.4 + 1.6 – 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.0 – 0.0 – 1.6 + 2.1
Q3 – 0.8 – – 0.0 – – 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.7 – 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.9 + 1.1
Long-term lending
2022 Q3 +42.7 +23.4 +25.7 +20.5 + 5.2 +22.6 + 7.4 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 5.7 + 0.3 – 0.2 + 1.2
Q4 +19.0 +17.2 +15.3 +14.8 + 0.5 + 9.7 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 1.1 – 3.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.5
2023 Q1 + 9.6 +11.3 + 5.1 + 8.6 – 3.5 + 7.6 + 2.9 – 0.3 + 1.7 + 0.8 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 3.7
Q2 +11.3 +11.5 + 9.1 +11.5 – 2.4 + 6.4 + 4.8 – 0.6 + 1.3 + 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1
Q3 +10.2 +11.7 + 9.6 +11.3 – 1.7 + 3.8 + 4.1 – 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.6
* Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
33•
IV. Banks
Lending to employees and other individualsLending to
non-profit institutions
Services sector (including the professions) Memo items: Other lending
of which: of which:
TotalHousing
enterprisesHolding
companiesOther
real
estate
activitiesLending
to self-
employed
persons  2Lending
to craft
enterprises TotalHousing
loans TotalInstalment
loans  3Debit
balances
on wage,
salary
and
pension
accounts Totalof which:
Housing
loans   Period
End of year or quarter *                                   Lending, total
890.8 308.6 63.8 207.9 483.8 48.3 1,429.3 1,196.6 232.7 184.1 6.9 16.7 4.4 2021
939.6 329.1 71.2 215.5 500.0 54.1 1,488.6 1,250.6 238.0 187.3 7.5 17.1 4.6 2022 Q3
957.4 334.0 79.9 218.2 501.7 54.1 1,495.8 1,260.1 235.7 185.9 7.1 17.3 4.6 Q4
961.2 336.3 78.6 220.4 503.4 54.2 1,496.2 1,261.4 234.7 185.5 7.3 17.4 4.7 2023 Q1
967.7 340.4 78.1 220.8 504.3 55.0 1,500.1 1,265.2 234.9 186.0 7.3 17.5 4.7 Q2
970.1 344.0 76.3 222.5 505.0 54.6 1,505.9 1,270.1 235.7 186.9 7.3 17.5 4.7 Q3
Short-term lending
65.5 14.5 13.0 10.0 19.7 3.8 28.6 2.5 26.1 1.4 6.9 0.5 0.0 2021
73.8 15.8 14.9 11.2 20.9 5.3 30.8 2.5 28.3 1.7 7.5 0.6 0.0 2022 Q3
73.0 16.1 15.6 10.8 20.4 5.0 29.9 2.4 27.5 1.7 7.1 0.6 – Q4
72.5 16.5 14.9 11.6 21.0 5.3 30.2 2.3 27.9 2.1 7.3 0.6 –2023 Q1
71.7 16.5 14.2 11.0 21.0 6.7 30.1 2.2 27.9 2.3 7.3 0.6 – Q2
69.7 16.2 13.2 11.6 20.6 6.5 29.9 2.1 27.8 2.2 7.3 0.6 – Q3
Medium-term lending
97.0 23.1 15.2 27.1 30.0 3.3 74.4 19.8 54.6 50.6 – 0.6 0.1 2021
103.6 25.2 17.7 27.5 30.4 6.4 73.0 20.1 52.9 48.7 – 0.5 0.1 2022 Q3
108.2 25.4 20.1 28.4 30.1 6.5 72.3 19.8 52.5 48.0 – 0.6 0.1 Q4
110.3 25.3 21.4 29.0 30.3 6.4 70.8 19.0 51.8 47.3 – 0.5 0.1 2023 Q1
113.1 25.9 22.0 29.5 30.9 6.2 70.1 18.6 51.5 46.9 – 0.6 0.1 Q2
113.9 26.5 20.9 30.9 31.1 6.2 69.7 18.2 51.5 46.9 – 0.6 0.1 Q3
Long-term lending
728.4 271.1 35.6 170.8 434.1 41.3 1,326.3 1,174.3 152.0 132.1 – 15.6 4.3 2021
762.2 288.0 38.5 176.7 448.7 42.5 1,384.8 1,228.0 156.7 137.0 – 15.9 4.5 2022 Q3
776.2 292.6 44.2 179.0 451.1 42.6 1,393.5 1,237.9 155.6 136.2 – 16.1 4.6 Q4
778.4 294.6 42.4 179.7 452.1 42.5 1,395.1 1,240.1 155.1 136.1 – 16.3 4.6 2023 Q1
782.8 298.0 41.9 180.3 452.3 42.1 1,399.9 1,244.4 155.5 136.8 – 16.3 4.6 Q2
786.5 301.3 42.3 180.0 453.3 41.9 1,406.3 1,249.8 156.4 137.8 – 16.4 4.6 Q3
Change during quarter *                                    Lending, total
+18.3 + 6.2 + 3.1 + 3.9 + 4.3 + 0.2 +20.4 +18.2 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 2022 Q3
+13.3 + 4.9 + 3.5 + 2.4 + 2.1 – 0.1 + 7.5 + 9.5 – 2.0 – 1.3 – 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 Q4
+ 4.1 + 2.5 – 1.4 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.3 – 0.8 – 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 2023 Q1
+ 6.2 + 4.1 – 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
+ 2.1 + 3.6 – 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.5 – 0.4 + 6.1 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 0.8 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 Q3
Short-term lending
+ 3.1 – 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 –2022 Q3
– 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.0 Q4
– 0.1 + 0.4 – 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 – –2023 Q1
– 1.0 + 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.6 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – Q2
– 2.3 – 0.3 – 1.0 + 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – + 0.0 + 0.0 2022 Q3
+ 4.6 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.6 – + 0.0 – 0.0 Q4
+ 2.1 – 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.8 – 0.7 – 0.7 – – 0.0 –2023 Q1
+ 2.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.4 – + 0.0 – 0.0 Q2
+ 0.5 + 0.6 – 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.1 – + 0.1 – 0.0 Q3
Long-term lending
+12.0 + 5.2 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 4.3 + 0.3 +20.0 +18.2 + 1.7 + 1.7 – + 0.2 + 0.1 2022 Q3
+ 9.3 + 4.6 + 0.5 + 1.9 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.9 – 0.9 – 0.7 – + 0.2 + 0.1 Q4
+ 2.1 + 2.2 – 2.0 + 0.8 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 – + 0.1 + 0.1 2023 Q1
+ 4.9 + 3.4 – 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 4.8 + 4.3 + 0.5 + 0.7 – + 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
+ 3.9 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.9 – 0.2 + 6.4 + 5.5 + 0.9 + 1.0 – + 0.0 + 0.0 Q3
are not specially marked.  1 Excluding fiduciary loans.  2 Including sole proprietors. 3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
34•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
2020 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2021 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2022 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.6 35.9 18.5 3.9
2022 Oct. 4,168.4 2,748.7 849.3 290.1 559.3 45.6 513.7 542.2 28.1 33.6 18.3 1.6
Nov. 4,205.6 2,767.9 869.3 309.6 559.7 46.8 512.9 536.9 31.5 34.8 18.4 4.4
Dec. 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.6 35.9 18.5 3.9
2023 Jan. 4,199.7 2,722.8 913.5 351.2 562.3 52.1 510.2 522.7 40.6 36.9 18.6 2.1
Feb. 4,197.1 2,687.7 947.9 381.5 566.4 54.2 512.3 516.0 45.5 37.2 18.7 2.9
Mar. 4,167.4 2,639.8 968.6 402.4 566.3 55.7 510.6 507.2 51.7 36.4 18.7 3.3
Apr. 4,167.3 2,632.0 978.5 408.7 569.7 59.4 510.3 498.6 58.3 36.5 18.9 3.0
May 4,172.9 2,623.9 993.0 419.3 573.6 61.7 511.9 490.6 65.4 36.6 20.4 4.1
June 4,176.3 2,600.9 1,020.0 445.4 574.6 64.4 510.2 483.3 72.1 36.5 20.3 2.8
July 4,180.2 2,582.2 1,042.9 468.5 574.4 65.8 508.6 475.9 79.1 36.7 19.9 3.5
Aug. 4,188.4 2,568.4 1,061.7 490.2 571.6 67.3 504.3 467.5 90.7 36.9 19.9 4.7
Sep. 4,189.3 2,558.0 1,072.5 497.7 574.8 71.5 503.3 461.8 97.0 37.1 19.9 6.5
Changes *
2021 + 95.3 +144.3 – 46.2 – 27.3 –18.9 + 1.5 –20.5 + 0.7 – 3.5 – 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.2
2022 +191.8 + 65.8 +143.4 +152.5 – 9.1 + 0.6 – 9.7 –27.5 +10.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6
2022 Oct. + 17.4 – 8.0 + 26.2 + 26.3 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 2.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.5
Nov. + 45.3 + 20.9 + 26.3 + 18.7 + 7.7 + 1.3 + 6.4 – 5.3 + 3.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 2.9
Dec. – 43.4 – 47.1 + 4.2 + 5.2 – 1.0 + 3.7 – 4.7 – 3.7 + 3.2 + 1.1 + 0.0 – 0.6
2023 Jan. + 37.6 – 2.9 + 40.0 + 36.4 + 3.6 + 1.6 + 2.0 – 5.5 + 6.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 – 1.8
Feb. – 2.5 – 35.0 + 34.4 + 30.3 + 4.1 + 2.1 + 2.0 – 6.7 + 4.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.8
Mar. – 29.6 – 47.3 + 20.2 + 20.3 – 0.1 + 1.5 – 1.6 – 8.7 + 6.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.3
Apr. – 0.1 – 7.9 + 9.8 + 6.4 + 3.4 + 3.7 – 0.3 – 8.6 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.2
May + 5.6 – 7.9 + 14.5 + 10.5 + 3.9 + 2.3 + 1.6 – 8.0 + 7.1 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.1
June + 2.3 – 23.0 + 26.0 + 25.4 + 0.7 + 2.4 – 1.7 – 7.3 + 6.7 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.3
July + 3.8 – 18.7 + 22.8 + 23.1 – 0.3 + 1.4 – 1.7 – 7.3 + 7.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7
Aug. + 8.2 – 13.2 + 21.3 + 21.3 + 0.0 + 1.9 – 1.8 – 8.5 + 8.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.2
Sep. + 0.9 – 10.5 + 10.7 + 8.0 + 2.7 + 3.9 – 1.2 – 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.8
Domestic government End of year or month *
2020 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 –
2021 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2022 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
2022 Oct. 271.2 86.8 178.6 101.2 77.4 19.6 57.8 2.3 3.5 25.7 1.9 –
Nov. 304.5 106.0 192.8 109.6 83.2 20.8 62.4 2.1 3.7 26.6 1.9 2.4
Dec. 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
2023 Jan. 299.4 94.5 199.3 114.4 84.9 23.1 61.8 1.8 3.8 27.5 1.9 0.3
Feb. 317.8 101.4 211.0 123.3 87.6 23.9 63.8 1.7 3.8 27.5 1.9 1.3
Mar. 308.9 92.6 211.0 123.9 87.1 23.4 63.7 1.6 3.8 26.8 1.9 1.1
Apr. 295.1 85.4 204.4 116.3 88.1 24.7 63.4 1.5 3.8 26.8 1.9 1.4
May 300.1 92.2 202.7 115.0 87.7 24.3 63.4 1.3 3.9 26.8 1.9 1.7
June 308.1 95.9 207.0 119.2 87.7 24.2 63.5 1.2 4.0 26.6 1.8 0.5
July 298.3 85.7 207.5 121.1 86.4 23.0 63.4 1.1 4.0 26.7 1.8 0.8
Aug. 305.6 95.1 205.4 119.3 86.1 22.8 63.3 1.0 4.1 26.6 1.9 2.2
Sep. 304.9 94.2 205.6 119.5 86.2 23.9 62.2 0.9 4.2 26.4 1.8 3.8
Changes *
2021 – 17.9 + 3.4 – 20.8 – 17.7 – 3.0 + 2.9 – 6.0 – 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.4 – 0.0 + 1.0
2022 + 69.1 + 0.2 + 69.2 + 64.7 + 4.5 – 0.9 + 5.4 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.5 – 0.1 + 1.4
2022 Oct. – 1.9 + 0.2 – 2.1 – 3.4 + 1.3 – 0.4 + 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 –
Nov. + 33.0 + 19.2 + 13.9 + 8.3 + 5.6 + 1.0 + 4.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.0 + 2.4
Dec. – 24.7 – 23.5 – 1.1 – 2.8 + 1.7 + 2.4 – 0.7 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.0 –
2023 Jan. + 19.7 + 11.9 + 7.7 + 7.6 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 2.1
Feb. + 18.3 + 6.8 + 11.6 + 8.9 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 1.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.1
Mar. – 8.9 – 8.8 – 0.1 + 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.2
Apr. – 14.1 – 7.1 – 6.9 – 7.9 + 1.0 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.2
May + 5.0 + 6.6 – 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.4
June + 8.0 + 3.8 + 4.2 + 4.2 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.3
July – 9.8 – 10.2 + 0.5 + 1.8 – 1.3 – 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 – + 0.4
Aug. + 7.3 + 9.3 – 2.1 – 1.8 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.4
Sep. – 0.7 – 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.2 – 1.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.6
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities.
2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
35•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont´d)
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
2020 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2021 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2022 3,882.2 2,638.1 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
2022 Oct. 3,897.2 2,661.9 670.8 188.9 481.9 25.9 455.9 539.9 24.6 7.9 16.4 1.6
Nov. 3,901.1 2,661.9 676.5 200.0 476.5 26.0 450.5 534.8 27.8 8.3 16.4 2.1
Dec. 3,882.2 2,638.1 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
2023 Jan. 3,900.2 2,628.3 714.2 236.8 477.4 29.0 448.4 520.9 36.8 9.4 16.7 1.9
Feb. 3,879.3 2,586.4 737.0 258.2 478.8 30.3 448.5 514.3 41.7 9.7 16.8 1.6
Mar. 3,858.5 2,547.3 757.6 278.4 479.2 32.3 446.9 505.7 47.9 9.7 16.9 2.2
Apr. 3,872.2 2,546.5 774.1 292.5 481.6 34.7 446.9 497.1 54.5 9.7 17.0 1.7
May 3,872.8 2,531.8 790.2 304.3 485.9 37.4 448.5 489.2 61.5 9.8 18.5 2.4
June 3,868.2 2,505.0 813.1 326.1 486.9 40.2 446.7 482.0 68.1 9.9 18.5 2.3
July 3,881.9 2,496.5 835.4 347.4 488.0 42.8 445.2 474.9 75.1 10.0 18.0 2.7
Aug. 3,882.8 2,473.4 856.4 370.9 485.5 44.5 441.0 466.5 86.6 10.3 18.0 2.4
Sep. 3,884.4 2,463.8 866.9 378.3 488.6 47.5 441.1 460.9 92.9 10.7 18.1 2.7
Changes *
2021 +113.2 +140.9 – 25.5 – 9.6 –15.9 – 1.4 –14.5 + 0.9 – 3.1 – 0.6 + 2.8 + 0.2
2022 +122.7 + 65.6 + 74.2 + 87.8 –13.6 + 1.4 –15.1 –27.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.3
2022 Oct. + 19.2 – 8.2 + 28.3 + 29.7 – 1.4 + 0.4 – 1.8 – 3.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.5
Nov. + 12.2 + 1.7 + 12.4 + 10.3 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 1.8 – 5.1 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.5
Dec. – 18.7 – 23.7 + 5.4 + 8.0 – 2.7 + 1.4 – 4.0 – 3.6 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.6
2023 Jan. + 17.9 – 14.9 + 32.3 + 28.7 + 3.6 + 1.7 + 1.9 – 5.3 + 5.8 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.3
Feb. – 20.8 – 41.9 + 22.8 + 21.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 6.6 + 4.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.3
Mar. – 20.7 – 38.5 + 20.3 + 19.7 + 0.6 + 2.0 – 1.4 – 8.6 + 6.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5
Apr. + 14.0 – 0.7 + 16.7 + 14.3 + 2.4 + 2.4 – 0.0 – 8.5 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5
May + 0.6 – 14.6 + 16.1 + 11.8 + 4.3 + 2.7 + 1.6 – 7.9 + 7.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.7
June – 5.6 – 26.8 + 21.8 + 21.1 + 0.7 + 2.4 – 1.8 – 7.2 + 6.6 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1
July + 13.7 – 8.5 + 22.3 + 21.3 + 1.0 + 2.6 – 1.6 – 7.2 + 7.0 + 0.1 – 0.5 + 0.3
Aug. + 0.9 – 22.5 + 23.4 + 23.1 + 0.4 + 2.1 – 1.8 – 8.4 + 8.4 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.3
Sep. + 1.6 – 9.6 + 10.5 + 7.9 + 2.6 + 2.7 – 0.1 – 5.6 + 6.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2020 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2021 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2022 1,193.5 783.4 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.6 1.9 13.5 1.5
2022 Oct. 1,232.8 809.3 410.4 143.0 267.4 16.7 250.7 4.9 8.2 1.9 13.3 1.6
Nov. 1,223.9 805.3 405.5 144.1 261.4 16.2 245.1 4.7 8.4 1.9 13.3 2.1
Dec. 1,193.5 783.4 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.6 1.9 13.5 1.5
2023 Jan. 1,220.2 792.5 414.7 156.8 257.9 17.1 240.8 4.3 8.7 2.0 13.5 1.9
Feb. 1,199.2 761.5 424.4 166.8 257.6 17.0 240.6 4.3 9.1 2.0 13.6 1.6
Mar. 1,192.4 749.3 429.7 174.1 255.5 16.8 238.8 4.1 9.3 1.9 13.6 2.2
Apr. 1,190.6 743.1 433.9 178.0 255.9 17.4 238.6 4.0 9.6 2.0 13.7 1.7
May 1,189.3 742.5 433.2 175.7 257.5 17.9 239.6 3.9 9.7 2.0 15.2 2.4
June 1,181.8 726.7 441.4 185.1 256.2 18.3 237.9 3.8 9.9 2.0 15.1 2.3
July 1,189.1 727.3 447.9 192.7 255.3 18.6 236.7 3.7 10.1 2.1 14.6 2.7
Aug. 1,189.2 719.9 452.0 202.1 249.9 18.0 231.9 3.7 13.6 2.2 14.6 2.4
Sep. 1,187.8 719.1 451.5 200.9 250.6 18.7 231.9 3.6 13.6 2.2 14.6 2.7
Changes *
2021 + 28.5 + 47.1 – 16.8 – 1.2 –15.7 + 0.5 –16.2 – 0.5 – 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.2
2022 + 56.2 + 17.7 + 38.8 + 52.1 –13.3 + 1.0 –14.3 – 0.9 + 0.6 – 0.5 + 1.0 + 1.3
2022 Oct. + 16.0 – 7.6 + 23.6 + 25.1 – 1.5 + 0.1 – 1.5 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.5
Nov. – 0.5 – 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 – 0.3 + 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.5
Dec. – 30.3 – 21.7 – 8.5 – 3.3 – 5.2 + 0.6 – 5.7 – 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.6
2023 Jan. + 26.5 + 9.0 + 17.4 + 15.9 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 1.3 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3
Feb. – 21.0 – 31.0 + 9.7 + 10.0 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.3
Mar. – 6.6 – 11.8 + 5.1 + 6.9 – 1.8 – 0.2 – 1.6 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.5
Apr. – 1.6 – 6.2 + 4.5 + 4.1 + 0.4 + 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5
May – 1.2 – 0.5 – 0.7 – 2.3 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 1.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.7
June – 8.5 – 15.9 + 7.3 + 8.9 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1
July + 7.2 + 0.6 + 6.5 + 7.5 – 1.1 + 0.3 – 1.4 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.3
Aug. + 0.1 – 6.8 + 6.6 + 9.1 – 2.5 – 0.3 – 2.2 – 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.3
Sep. – 1.3 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
36•
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2
by creditor group by creditor group
Domestic households Domestic households
PeriodDeposits of
domestic
households
and
non-profit
institutions,
total Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individualsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tions Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individuals
End of year or month *
2020 2,539.5 1,713.8 1,672.7 291.1 1,215.4 166.2 41.1 258.6 245.1 19.3 190.5 35.2
2021 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2022 2,688.7 1,854.7 1,809.9 307.3 1,342.5 160.1 44.8 284.8 268.7 31.2 200.5 37.1
2023 Apr. 2,681.6 1,803.5 1,761.0 291.7 1,315.1 154.3 42.4 340.2 321.6 45.2 235.5 40.9
May 2,683.5 1,789.3 1,746.6 290.0 1,304.9 151.7 42.7 357.0 337.2 48.7 246.6 41.9
June 2,686.4 1,778.3 1,736.0 282.4 1,302.6 151.1 42.3 371.7 351.9 52.1 256.8 43.1
July 2,692.8 1,769.2 1,728.2 285.8 1,293.2 149.1 41.0 387.5 367.2 56.1 267.2 43.9
Aug. 2,693.7 1,753.5 1,712.7 283.5 1,282.3 146.9 40.8 404.4 383.5 59.5 278.8 45.1
Sep. 2,696.6 1,744.6 1,703.7 275.8 1,280.8 147.1 40.9 415.3 394.0 61.2 286.9 46.0
Changes *
2021 + 84.7 +93.8 +90.3 +17.3 +73.7 – 0.6 + 3.5 – 8.6 – 7.2 – 1.1 – 4.7 –1.3
2022 + 66.5 +48.0 +47.8 – 1.5 +54.1 – 4.7 + 0.1 +35.4 +31.4 +12.9 +17.2 +1.2
2023 Apr. + 15.6 + 5.5 + 6.6 + 1.6 + 4.1 + 0.9 – 1.1 +12.2 +11.9 + 3.0 + 8.2 +0.8
May + 1.9 –14.1 –14.4 – 1.8 –10.3 – 2.4 + 0.3 +16.8 +15.5 + 3.5 +11.1 +1.0
June + 2.9 –10.9 –10.4 – 7.6 – 2.2 – 0.6 – 0.5 +14.5 +14.7 + 3.3 +10.1 +1.3
July + 6.5 – 9.1 – 7.8 + 3.4 – 9.3 – 1.9 – 1.2 +15.8 +15.2 + 4.0 +10.4 +0.9
Aug. + 0.8 –15.7 –15.4 – 2.3 –11.0 – 2.2 – 0.3 +16.8 +16.3 + 3.4 +11.6 +1.2
Sep. + 2.9 – 8.9 – 9.1 – 7.7 – 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 +11.0 +10.6 + 1.7 + 8.0 +0.9
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional.Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
marked.  1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
€ billion
Deposits
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
PeriodDomestic
government,
total TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans
End of year or month *
2020 229.5 48.6 4.8 7.2 36.5 0.0 11.3 46.5 21.2 11.4 13.2 0.7 14.1
2021 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2022 279.8 66.8 7.9 24.2 34.6 0.1 11.4 53.8 17.1 25.2 10.9 0.5 15.9
2023 Apr. 295.1 65.9 10.3 19.2 36.4 0.0 11.4 61.6 18.2 32.1 10.9 0.5 15.4
May 300.1 62.4 9.7 16.4 36.2 0.0 11.4 59.5 18.6 29.6 10.8 0.5 15.5
June 308.1 64.0 13.8 13.8 36.5 0.0 11.1 70.0 23.9 34.9 10.7 0.5 15.5
July 298.3 61.5 11.6 13.5 36.3 0.0 11.1 68.5 21.6 35.9 10.7 0.4 15.5
Aug. 305.6 61.5 11.8 13.5 36.2 0.0 11.2 65.2 22.1 32.1 10.6 0.4 15.4
Sep. 304.9 60.0 11.1 13.7 35.1 0.0 11.1 72.0 25.0 36.0 10.6 0.4 15.2
Changes *
2021 –17.9 –5.0 –0.5 –4.1 –0.4 +0.0 +0.3 +1.0 +0.6 +2.3 –1.8 –0.1 +0.0
2022 +69.1 +23.0 +3.5 +20.9 –1.4 –0.0 –0.3 +6.4 –4.6 +11.3 –0.3 –0.1 +1.8
2023 Apr. –14.1 –7.4 –3.1 –4.0 –0.2 – –0.0 –6.4 –4.5 –1.7 –0.2 +0.0 +0.0
May + 5.0 –3.5 –0.5 –2.8 –0.1 –0.0 –0.0 –2.1 +0.5 –2.5 –0.1 –0.0 +0.1
June + 8.0 +1.6 +4.1 –2.7 +0.2 – –0.2 +10.5 +5.3 +5.3 –0.1 –0.0 +0.0
July – 9.8 –2.5 –2.1 –0.2 –0.1 – +0.0 –1.4 –2.3 +1.0 –0.1 –0.0 +0.0
Aug. + 7.3 –0.0 +0.2 –0.1 –0.2 +0.0 +0.0 –3.3 +0.6 –3.8 –0.1 +0.0 –0.1
Sep. – 0.7 –1.5 –0.7 +0.3 –1.1 –0.0 –0.0 +6.8 +2.9 +3.9 – –0.0 –0.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and DeutscheTelekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”.
Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date
are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
37•
IV. Banks
Savings deposits  3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year  2
of which:
Domestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsup to and
including
1 year Totalup to and
including
2 yearsmore than
2 years TotalDomestic
householdsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsBank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)  5Liabilities
arising
from repos Period
End of year or month *
13.5 40.1 218.5 12.0 206.5 552.0 545.7 6.3 15.1 6.7 2.7 –2020
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 –2021
16.0 67.2 217.5 10.6 206.9 526.8 521.8 5.1 22.4 6.8 3.1 –2022
18.6 114.5 225.7 17.3 208.4 493.1 488.6 4.5 44.9 7.7 3.3 –2023 Apr.
19.9 128.7 228.4 19.5 208.8 485.3 481.0 4.4 51.8 7.7 3.3 – May
19.7 141.0 230.7 21.9 208.8 478.2 474.0 4.2 58.2 7.8 3.4 – June
20.3 154.8 232.7 24.1 208.6 471.1 467.1 4.0 65.0 7.9 3.4 – July
20.9 168.7 235.6 26.6 209.0 462.8 458.9 3.9 73.0 8.2 3.4 – Aug.
21.3 177.3 238.0 28.9 209.1 457.3 453.5 3.8 79.3 8.5 3.4 – Sep.
Changes *
– 1.4 – 8.4 – 0.2 –1.9 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 1.5 –0.1 – 1.9 –0.6 + 0.2 –2021
+ 4.0 + 35.7 – 0.3 +0.5 – 0.8 –26.1 –25.0 –1.1 + 9.2 +0.7 + 0.3 –2022
+ 0.3 + 10.2 + 2.0 +1.8 + 0.2 – 8.4 – 8.3 –0.1 + 6.3 –0.0 + 0.0 –2023 Apr.
+ 1.3 + 14.1 + 2.7 +2.2 + 0.5 – 7.8 – 7.6 –0.2 + 7.0 –0.0 + 0.0 – May
– 0.1 + 12.2 + 2.3 +2.4 – 0.1 – 7.1 – 7.0 –0.1 + 6.3 +0.1 + 0.0 – June
+ 0.6 + 13.8 + 2.1 +2.3 – 0.2 – 7.1 – 6.9 –0.2 + 6.8 +0.1 + 0.0 – July
+ 0.6 + 14.0 + 2.9 +2.5 + 0.4 – 8.3 – 8.2 –0.1 + 8.0 +0.3 + 0.0 – Aug.
+ 0.4 + 8.6 + 2.4 +2.3 + 0.2 – 5.5 – 5.4 –0.1 + 6.3 +0.3 + 0.0 – Sep.
registered debt securities.  2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Table IV.12).  3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsofootnote 2).  4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2,4Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
68.5 43.2 8.0 12.4 4.9 0.0 66.0 10.9 32.9 21.4 0.8 –2020
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 –2021
80.0 49.2 12.5 13.8 4.4 0.0 79.2 8.3 44.9 25.5 0.6 –2022
73.6 38.7 16.8 14.1 4.0 0.0 94.0 18.4 48.2 26.7 0.7 –2023 Apr.
80.2 43.7 18.2 14.3 4.0 0.0 98.1 20.1 50.8 26.4 0.8 – May
75.1 38.3 18.6 14.1 4.0 0.0 99.0 19.9 51.9 26.4 0.7 – June
70.8 34.3 18.5 14.2 3.9 0.0 97.4 18.2 53.2 25.3 0.7 – July
78.9 40.8 20.1 14.2 3.8 0.0 100.0 20.4 53.7 25.1 0.9 – Aug.
75.0 37.4 19.7 14.2 3.7 0.0 97.9 20.7 50.0 26.3 0.9 – Sep.
Changes *
+2.8 +5.6 – 2.0 –0.2 – 0.5 – –16.8 –2.2 –13.9 –0.6 + 0.1 –2021
+10.2 +0.9 + 7.9 +1.3 + 0.1 – +29.6 +0.3 +24.5 +4.9 – 0.2 –2022
–0.3 –0.4 + 0.2 +0.1 – 0.2 – – 0.1 +1.0 – 2.3 +1.3 – 0.0 –2023 Apr.
+6.5 +5.0 + 1.4 +0.2 – 0.1 – + 4.1 +1.7 + 2.6 –0.3 + 0.0 – May
–5.1 –5.4 + 0.4 –0.1 + 0.0 – + 0.9 –0.2 + 1.1 –0.0 – 0.0 – June
–4.3 –4.0 – 0.2 +0.1 – 0.1 – – 1.6 –1.7 + 1.3 –1.2 – 0.0 – July
+8.1 +6.5 + 1.6 +0.0 – 0.0 – + 2.6 +2.1 + 0.5 –0.1 + 0.1 – Aug.
–3.9 –3.4 – 0.4 –0.0 – 0.1 – – 2.1 +0.3 – 3.6 +1.2 + 0.0 – Sep.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Federal Railways Fund,
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund,
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund.  2 Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities.  3 Including deposits under savings and loan
contracts.  4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
38•
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months'
noticeat more than 3
months' notice
Period Total Total Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeMemo
item:
Interest
credited
on
savings
depositsnon-banks,
total Totalof which:
With
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsforeign
non-banks
End of year or month *
2020 566.8 560.6 533.3 288.0 27.3 18.0 6.3 5.7 1.8 30.2 28.3 22.1 1.9
2021 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 1.5 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2022 538.5 533.2 510.3 254.2 22.9 14.2 5.3 4.8 1.4 34.9 34.6 20.8 0.2
2023 May 495.5 490.6 460.2 210.0 30.4 22.3 4.9 4.3 0.1 65.9 65.4 24.5 0.5
June 488.1 483.3 450.2 206.0 33.0 25.1 4.8 4.2 0.1 72.6 72.1 25.4 0.5
July 480.7 475.9 439.9 202.7 36.0 28.2 4.8 4.2 0.1 79.7 79.1 26.1 0.6
Aug. 472.2 467.5 428.8 198.2 38.7 30.9 4.7 4.1 0.1 91.4 90.7 29.6 0.6
Sep. 466.5 461.8 420.2 195.2 41.6 33.9 4.7 4.0 0.1 97.8 97.0 30.3 0.7
Changes *
2021 +0.3 +0.7 +3.9 –18.5 –3.2 –3.2 –0.4 –0.3 . –5.2 –3.5 –2.3 –1.7
2022 –28.1 –27.5 –26.4 –14.6 –1.2 –0.6 –0.6 –0.6 . +10.2 +10.1 +1.3 +0.1
2023 May –8.1 –8.0 –10.2 –4.2 +2.2 +2.2 –0.1 –0.1 . +7.2 +7.1 +0.9 +0.1
June –7.4 –7.3 –9.9 –4.0 +2.6 +2.8 –0.1 –0.1 . +6.7 +6.7 +0.8 +0.1
July –7.4 –7.3 –10.3 –3.3 +3.0 +3.1 –0.0 –0.1 . +7.1 +7.0 +0.8 +0.1
Aug. –8.5 –8.5 –11.2 –4.5 +2.7 +2.8 –0.0 –0.1 . +8.6 +8.5 +1.0 +0.1
Sep. –5.7 –5.7 –8.6 –3.0 +2.9 +3.0 –0.0 –0.1 . +6.4 +6.3 +0.6 +0.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified as timedeposits.  2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
basic rate of interest.  3 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
securities.
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
of which:
with maturities ofNon-negotiable
bearer debt
securities and
money market
paper  6 Subordinated
up to
and including 1 yearmore than 1 year up to
and including 2 years
Period TotalFloating
rate
bonds  1Zero
coupon
bonds  1,2Foreign
currency
bonds  3,4Certifi-
cates
of
deposit Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5more
than
2 years Totalof which:
with
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsnegotiable
debt
securitiesnon-
negotiable
debt
securities
End of year or month *
2020 1,119.0 117.1 12.7 313.6 89.4 94.3 1.5 23.8 3.1 1,000.9 1.1 0.9 34.8 0.4
2021 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2022 1,231.5 92.8 15.0 307.8 88.6 98.6 1.4 26.6 3.4 1,106.4 0.8 0.7 37.8 0.1
2023 May 1,305.4 85.9 13.4 299.8 104.6 121.4 1.5 35.8 3.8 1,148.3 0.8 0.8 36.7 0.1
June 1,294.5 84.0 14.7 299.6 98.4 118.1 1.4 35.9 3.3 1,140.5 0.5 0.5 37.7 0.1
July 1,297.0 84.0 15.9 298.6 91.1 112.8 1.5 36.7 3.4 1,147.5 0.5 0.5 38.2 0.1
Aug. 1,308.5 82.6 15.4 298.3 98.5 121.4 1.6 37.4 3.5 1,149.7 0.5 0.5 38.2 0.1
Sep. 1,314.3 82.7 14.4 310.5 90.8 114.0 1.5 39.5 3.5 1,160.9 0.5 0.5 37.2 0.1
Changes *
2021 +54.0 –10.3 +0.8 +17.6 +9.4 +12.6 + 0.4 –5.9 +1.3 +47.3 +0.4 +0.3 –0.2 –0.3
2022 +59.1 –12.7 +1.1 –23.6 –9.9 –8.3 – 0.5 +8.5 –1.1 +58.9 –0.1 +0.1 +3.5 –
2023 May +34.7 +0.1 –0.2 +17.0 +13.1 +14.3 + 0.1 +2.6 +0.1 +17.8 +0.0 +0.0 –0.9 –
June – 9.5 –1.2 +1.3 –0.2 –6.2 –3.2 + 0.0 +0.7 –0.0 –7.1 –0.0 –0.0 +1.0 –
July + 2.5 –0.0 +1.2 –1.0 –7.3 –5.3 + 0.1 +0.8 +0.1 +7.0 –0.0 –0.0 +0.5 –
Aug. +11.5 –1.4 –0.4 –0.3 +7.4 +8.7 + 0.1 +0.7 +0.1 +2.2 +0.0 +0.0 +0.0 –
Sep. + 5.9 +0.1 –1.0 +12.2 –7.6 –7.5 – 0.0 +2.1 –0.0 +11.2 +0.0 +0.0 –1.0 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies.  2 Issue value when
floated.  3 Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreigncurrencies.  4 Bonds denominated in non-euro area currencies.  5 Negotiable bearer debt
securities and money market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%.
6 Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see
also Table IV.10, footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
39•
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks
(MFIs)  6Deposits of non-
banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans
End of
year/monthNum-
ber
of
associ-
ationsBalance
sheet
total  1Credit
bal-
ances
and
loans
(ex-
cluding
building
loans)  2Building
loans  3Bank
debt
secur-
ities  4Loans
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsInterim
and
bridging
loansOther
building
loansSecur-
ities (in-
cluding
Treasury
bills
and
Treasury
discount
paper)  5Deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight
and time
depositsDeposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight and
time de-
posits  7Bearer
debt
secur-
ities
out-
stand-
ingCapital
(includ-
ing pub-
lished
re-
serves)  8Memo
item:
New
con-
tracts
entered
into in
year or
month  9
All building and loan associations
2022 18 259.7 30.6 0.0 15.4 11.1 135.0 40.5 22.9 2.5 36.1 185.3 9.3 5.2 12.3 91.3
2023 July 18 259.5 28.0 0.1 15.8 13.6 134.9 40.8 22.3 1.5 36.0 183.9 10.3 6.1 13.0 8.0
Aug. 18 259.1 26.8 0.1 15.8 14.0 134.9 41.0 22.2 1.4 36.1 183.6 10.1 6.1 13.0 7.8
Sep. 17 258.8 25.9 0.1 15.8 14.5 135.0 41.1 22.2 1.4 35.7 183.3 10.3 6.1 13.0 7.3
Private building and Ioan associations
2023 July 10 182.8 13.7 0.1 8.5 9.5 104.7 34.7 8.9 0.7 33.1 118.5 9.9 6.1 8.9 5.3
Aug. 10 182.0 12.5 0.1 8.6 9.7 104.6 34.9 8.9 0.7 32.8 118.2 9.8 6.1 8.9 5.2
Sep. 10 181.7 11.7 0.1 8.6 9.9 104.7 35.0 8.9 0.6 32.3 117.9 10.0 6.1 8.9 4.8
Public building and Ioan associations
2023 July 8 76.7 14.2 0.0 7.3 4.2 30.2 6.1 13.4 0.8 2.9 65.5 0.3 – 4.1 2.7
Aug. 8 77.1 14.3 0.0 7.2 4.3 30.3 6.1 13.3 0.8 3.3 65.4 0.3 – 4.1 2.6
Sep. 7 77.1 14.2 0.0 7.2 4.5 30.3 6.1 13.2 0.8 3.4 65.3 0.3 – 4.1 2.5
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Capital promised Capital disbursed Changes in deposits
under savings and
loan contracts AllocationsDisbursement
commitments
outstanding at
end of periodInterest and
repayments
received on
building loans  11
Deposits under
savings and
loan contractsLoans under
savings and
loan contracts  10
PeriodAmounts
paid into
savings
and
loan ac-
counts  10Interest
credited
on
deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsRepay-
ments
of
deposits
under
cancelled
savings
and
loan
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Net
alloca-
tions  12 Total Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loans Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loansNewly
granted
interim
and
bridging
loans
and
other
building
loans Totalof
which:
Under
alloc-
ated
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Repay-
ments
during
quarterMemo
item:
Housing
bonuses
re-
ceived  13
All building and loan associations
2022 27.5 2.0 8.7 51.5 30.7 48.5 20.2 4.1 5.3 3.8 23.0 16.4 6.7 5.4 4.1 0.2
2023 July 2.1 0.1 0.5 4.6 3.5 4.4 2.3 0.4 0.8 0.4 1.3 14.1 7.2 0.4 0.0
Aug. 2.2 0.1 0.5 4.6 3.4 4.2 2.2 0.4 0.8 0.4 1.3 13.8 7.2 0.4 0.0
Sep. 2.1 0.1 0.5 4.2 3.2 4.1 2.1 0.4 0.7 0.4 1.3 13.4 7.2 0.4 ... 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2023 July 1.3 0.1 0.3 3.2 2.4 3.2 1.6 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.0 9.5 3.9 0.3 0.0
Aug. 1.4 0.1 0.3 3.2 2.3 3.0 1.5 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.0 9.2 3.9 0.3 0.0
Sep. 1.4 0.1 0.3 2.9 2.2 2.9 1.5 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.0 9.0 4.0 0.3 ... 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2023 July 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.4 1.2 1.3 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.3 0.1 0.0
Aug. 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.1 1.2 0.6 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.3 0.1 0.0
Sep. 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.2 1.0 1.2 0.6 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.4 3.3 0.1 ... 0.0
* Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures for
the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 See Table IV.2,
footnote 1.  2 Including claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from
registered debt securities and central bank credit balances.  3 Loans under savings and
loan contracts and interim and bridging loans.  4 Including money market paper and
small amounts of other securities issued by banks.  5 Including equalisation claims.
6 Including liabilities to building and loan associations.  7 Including small amounts of
savings deposits.  8 Including participation rights capital and fund for general bankingrisks. 9 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
new contracts.  10 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital disbursed".  11 Including housing
bonuses credited.  12 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans.  13 The amounts already
credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into
savings and loan accounts" and "Interest and repayments received on building loans".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2020 50 206 1,552.2 376.7 364.0 213.2 150.8 12.7 504.8 409.6 14.3 395.3 95.2 670.7 523.6
2021 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2022 47 202 1,625.5 461.8 447.4 315.6 131.8 14.4 516.7 447.7 9.7 437.9 69.0 647.0 513.3
2022 Nov. 50 207 1,757.8 511.2 498.6 347.3 151.3 12.6 548.7 475.2 10.5 464.7 73.6 697.9 526.6
Dec. 47 202 1,625.5 461.8 447.4 315.6 131.8 14.4 516.7 447.7 9.7 437.9 69.0 647.0 513.3
2023 Jan. 47 201 1,638.4 503.3 488.3 346.1 142.2 14.9 510.1 439.4 9.5 429.9 70.7 625.0 462.3
Feb. 47 200 1,663.9 493.1 477.4 337.8 139.6 15.6 509.2 440.0 9.6 430.5 69.2 661.6 509.3
Mar. 47 199 1,565.2 471.2 454.2 313.9 140.3 17.0 500.4 432.5 9.3 423.2 67.9 593.7 437.7
Apr. 47 196 1,566.1 470.6 453.1 312.2 141.0 17.4 499.2 432.1 8.6 423.5 67.1 596.3 440.8
May 47 201 1,616.3 478.9 459.4 310.3 149.1 19.5 506.8 434.7 6.3 428.3 72.1 630.7 462.3
June 47 200 1,623.2 466.6 447.7 298.0 149.7 18.9 496.6 426.5 6.1 420.4 70.1 660.1 492.7
July 48 202 1,649.4 491.3 471.2 319.0 152.2 20.1 496.6 423.3 5.9 417.4 73.3 661.6 491.4
Aug. 48 202 1,663.5 483.7 463.8 312.6 151.2 19.9 499.1 424.2 6.1 418.1 74.9 680.8 502.7
Changes *
2021 +1 +1 –48.4 +87.3 +87.1 +84.9 +2.2 +0.3 –26.2 –6.5 –1.3 –5.1 –19.7 –136.9 –128.1
2022 –4 –5 +124.1 –13.3 –14.3 +17.8 –32.1 +1.0 +6.7 +17.5 –3.2 +20.6 –10.8 +108.1 +103.0
2022 Dec. –3 –5 –131.0 –46.9 –48.7 –31.7 –17.0 +1.8 –23.6 –19.9 –0.7 –19.2 –3.7 – 49.6 –11.9
2023 Jan. ±0 –1 +13.3 +42.5 +42.0 +30.5 +11.5 +0.5 –2.7 –4.8 –0.3 –4.6 +2.1 – 21.6 –50.4
Feb. ±0 –1 +24.5 –11.7 –12.4 –8.3 –4.1 +0.7 –5.7 –3.7 +0.1 –3.8 –2.0 + 35.6 +46.2
Mar. ±0 –1 –97.4 –20.0 –21.3 –24.0 +2.6 +1.3 –2.9 –2.3 –0.3 –2.0 –0.7 – 66.6 –70.4
Apr. ±0 –3 +1.3 +0.4 –0.0 –1.7 +1.6 +0.5 +1.6 +2.1 –0.7 +2.8 –0.5 + 3.1 + 3.5
May ±0 +5 +48.9 +5.8 +3.8 –1.9 +5.7 +2.1 +0.6 –3.7 –2.3 –1.4 +4.3 + 33.0 +20.1
June ±0 –1 +7.8 –10.5 –9.9 –12.3 +2.4 –0.6 –6.1 –4.5 –0.3 –4.2 –1.6 + 30.3 +31.2
July +1 +2 +22.9 +24.1 +22.8 +19.5 +3.3 +1.2 +1.3 –2.2 –0.2 –2.0 +3.5 + 1.7 – 0.7
Aug. ±0 – +13.4 –8.7 –8.5 –6.4 –2.1 –0.2 –0.7 –1.9 +0.2 –2.1 +1.2 + 18.5 +10.7
Foreign subsidiaries                                           End of year or month *
2020 12 36 229.5 44.8 39.9 17.4 22.5 4.9 139.7 114.4 13.1 101.4 25.3 44.9 0.0
2021 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2022 11 32 256.7 61.5 52.0 20.5 31.4 9.5 145.8 124.5 13.3 111.2 21.3 49.4 0.0
2022 Nov. 11 33 258.2 58.1 49.5 19.4 30.1 8.6 148.4 127.0 13.4 113.6 21.4 51.7 0.0
Dec. 11 32 256.7 61.5 52.0 20.5 31.4 9.5 145.8 124.5 13.3 111.2 21.3 49.4 0.0
2023 Jan. 11 32 253.0 60.0 49.9 20.0 29.9 10.1 145.3 124.5 13.3 111.3 20.7 47.8 0.0
Feb. 11 32 254.8 60.7 50.6 22.4 28.2 10.1 146.1 125.4 13.4 111.9 20.7 47.9 0.0
Mar. 11 32 253.9 62.2 51.7 20.7 31.0 10.5 146.5 126.2 13.3 112.9 20.2 45.2 0.0
Apr. 11 31 250.9 64.4 53.3 22.4 30.9 11.1 145.3 125.6 13.0 112.6 19.8 41.2 0.0
May 11 31 250.9 59.3 48.8 21.5 27.2 10.5 146.2 126.3 12.8 113.5 19.9 45.5 0.0
June 12 32 253.3 64.2 52.8 22.4 30.4 11.5 146.6 126.7 12.7 113.9 19.9 42.5 0.0
July 12 31 253.4 63.6 52.2 23.0 29.3 11.4 147.4 126.9 12.9 114.1 20.5 42.4 0.0
Aug. 12 31 252.8 62.8 52.2 21.9 30.3 10.6 146.0 125.6 12.7 112.9 20.4 44.1 0.0
Changes *
2021 ±0 –1 +12.0 +3.8 +2.8 +3.4 –0.5 +1.0 –2.5 –0.5 –0.5 –0.0 –2.1 + 10.8 ± 0.0
2022 –1 –3 +6.5 +8.2 +5.2 –0.2 +5.6 +2.8 +5.0 +6.9 +0.7 +6.3 –1.9 – 6.5 ± 0.0
2022 Dec. – –1 +0.2 +4.1 +3.0 +1.2 +1.8 +1.1 –1.7 –1.6 –0.2 –1.5 –0.0 – 2.2 ± 0.0
2023 Jan. – – –2.7 –1.0 –1.7 –0.6 –1.2 +0.7 –0.0 +0.6 –0.0 +0.6 –0.6 – 1.6 ± 0.0
Feb. – – +0.6 +0.3 +0.4 +2.4 –2.1 –0.1 +0.2 +0.2 +0.2 +0.0 –0.0 + 0.1 ± 0.0
Mar. – – +0.4 +2.0 +1.5 –1.7 +3.2 +0.6 +1.1 +1.6 –0.1 +1.7 –0.5 – 2.7 ± 0.0
Apr. – –1 –2.7 +2.2 +1.6 +1.7 –0.1 +0.6 –0.8 –0.4 –0.3 –0.1 –0.5 – 4.1 ± 0.0
May – – –1.5 –5.7 –4.9 –0.8 –4.1 –0.7 –0.1 –0.3 –0.2 –0.0 +0.1 + 4.3 ± 0.0
June +1 +1 +3.2 +5.3 +4.2 +0.9 +3.3 +1.0 +0.9 +0.9 –0.0 +0.9 +0.0 – 3.0 ± 0.0
July – –1 +0.6 –0.5 –0.4 +0.6 –1.0 –0.1 +1.2 +0.7 +0.1 +0.5 +0.6 – 0.1 ± 0.0
Aug. – – –1.2 –1.0 –0.2 –1.0 +0.8 –0.9 –1.8 –1.7 –0.2 –1.5 –0.1 + 1.7 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated fromthe flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always
to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
872.2 588.5 431.8 156.7 283.7 11.7 10.2 1.5 272.0 61.5 49.9 568.6 523.1 2020
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 2021
943.4 573.6 435.2 138.5 369.8 10.4 8.9 1.5 359.4 61.7 63.1 557.4 512.9 2022
1,041.1 639.9 457.8 182.1 401.2 10.2 8.6 1.6 391.0 82.6 65.5 568.6 523.8 2022 Nov.
943.4 573.6 435.2 138.5 369.8 10.4 8.9 1.5 359.4 61.7 63.1 557.4 512.9 Dec.
985.2 595.5 432.8 162.6 389.7 9.5 8.3 1.2 380.2 85.2 63.2 504.8 462.6 2023 Jan.
960.9 578.2 420.7 157.5 382.7 9.0 7.8 1.2 373.7 87.3 63.5 552.1 509.9 Feb.
950.4 574.0 425.9 148.1 376.3 7.8 6.6 1.2 368.6 71.7 63.4 479.7 439.4 Mar.
940.7 561.4 407.2 154.2 379.3 7.5 6.3 1.2 371.8 79.9 62.9 482.6 442.1 Apr.
958.9 576.0 416.7 159.4 382.9 7.8 6.5 1.2 375.1 81.4 63.4 512.7 462.9 May
946.8 571.3 412.7 158.6 375.5 7.8 6.6 1.2 367.7 68.6 65.2 542.6 493.9 June
966.6 577.8 416.3 161.5 388.8 7.7 6.5 1.2 381.0 76.1 65.1 541.7 492.8 July
965.4 581.8 423.8 158.0 383.5 8.3 7.0 1.3 375.3 78.9 65.4 553.8 503.1 Aug.
Changes *
+71.1 +43.1 +31.0 +12.0 + 28.1 – 3.6 – 3.9 + 0.3 +31.7 + 0.1 + 1.4 –130.8 – 119.7 2021
– 6.2 –64.2 –22.2 –42.0 + 58.0 + 2.3 + 2.6 – 0.3 +55.7 – 6.3 +11.8 +119.0 + 109.5 2022
–94.3 –63.2 –22.6 –40.6 –31.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 –31.3 –19.6 –2.4 – 11.2 – 10.9 2022 Dec.
+43.3 +23.2 –2.3 +25.5 +20.1 – 0.8 – 0.6 – 0.2 +20.9 +24.0 +0.1 – 52.5 – 50.3 2023 Jan.
–26.5 –19.3 –12.2 –7.1 – 7.2 – 0.5 – 0.5 + 0.0 – 6.7 + 1.1 +0.4 + 47.2 + 47.3 Feb.
– 7.8 –1.8 +5.2 –7.0 – 6.0 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 5.8 –14.3 –0.2 – 72.3 – 70.5 Mar.
– 8.3 –11.4 –18.7 +7.3 + 3.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 3.4 + 8.6 –0.5 + 2.9 + 2.7 Apr.
+15.1 +11.7 +9.4 +2.3 + 3.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 0.1 +0.5 + 30.0 + 20.8 May
– 9.8 –2.5 –3.9 +1.4 – 7.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 7.3 –11.9 +1.9 + 29.9 + 31.0 June
+17.8 +5.9 +1.7 +4.3 +11.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 +12.0 + 8.0 –0.1 – 1.4 – 1.1 July
– 2.6 +2.9 +7.6 –4.8 – 5.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 5.8 + 2.2 +0.3 + 12.1 + 10.3 Aug.
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
163.4 59.6 34.1 25.5 103.8 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.1 16.6 20.3 29.2 0.0 2020
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 2021
189.4 67.5 38.6 28.9 122.0 6.9 4.6 2.3 115.1 13.5 20.1 33.7 0.0 2022
190.2 68.8 38.7 30.1 121.5 7.1 4.8 2.3 114.4 13.1 20.4 34.4 0.0 2022 Nov.
189.4 67.5 38.6 28.9 122.0 6.9 4.6 2.3 115.1 13.5 20.1 33.7 0.0 Dec.
186.2 66.7 38.5 28.2 119.6 7.0 4.5 2.5 112.6 12.8 20.1 33.9 0.0 2023 Jan.
187.2 69.3 40.3 29.1 117.9 6.9 4.4 2.5 110.9 12.7 20.2 34.7 0.0 Feb.
186.6 71.2 42.2 29.1 115.4 6.8 4.3 2.5 108.5 12.3 20.3 34.8 0.0 Mar.
183.5 71.0 44.0 27.0 112.5 6.9 4.5 2.5 105.6 12.2 20.2 35.0 0.0 Apr.
183.9 71.2 43.6 27.6 112.8 6.9 4.4 2.5 105.9 12.1 20.6 34.3 0.0 May
185.6 71.9 45.4 26.5 113.7 6.6 4.2 2.4 107.1 10.6 20.5 36.6 0.0 June
187.9 72.3 47.0 25.3 115.6 6.8 4.4 2.4 108.8 10.5 20.5 34.4 0.0 July
185.5 70.6 46.0 24.7 114.8 6.6 4.2 2.4 108.2 10.3 20.6 36.4 0.0 Aug.
Changes *
+12.1 + 3.2 – 1.1 + 4.3 + 8.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 2021
+ 7.7 + 1.4 + 5.6 – 4.2 + 6.3 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 6.7 – 2.9 – 0.2 + 2.2 ± 0.0 2022
+ 0.4 –0.9 –0.1 –0.8 + 1.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.3 –0.2 – 0.3 ± 0.0 2022 Dec.
– 2.6 –0.6 –0.1 –0.5 – 2.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 2.1 – 0.7 +0.0 + 0.5 ± 0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 0.1 +2.4 +1.8 +0.6 – 2.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 2.2 – 0.1 +0.1 + 0.5 ± 0.0 Feb.
+ 0.3 +2.2 +1.9 +0.3 – 1.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 1.8 – 0.4 +0.0 + 0.4 ± 0.0 Mar.
– 2.7 –0.1 +1.8 –1.9 – 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 2.7 – 0.1 –0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 Apr.
– 0.6 –0.3 –0.4 +0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.0 +0.4 – 1.2 ± 0.0 May
+ 2.3 +1.0 +1.8 –0.9 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 1.6 – 1.6 –0.1 + 2.5 ± 0.0 June
+ 2.7 +0.6 +1.6 –1.1 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 – 0.0 +0.0 – 2.1 ± 0.0 July
– 2.9 –1.9 –1.0 –0.8 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.2 +0.1 + 1.8 ± 0.0 Aug.
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and
other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.  4 Excluding
subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of negotiable andnon-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Including subordinated
liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 3,656.9 0.1
2022 16,843.0 168.4 168.0 195.6 28.1 0.0
p 2023 Sep. 16,488.4 164.9 164.6 174.6 ... ...
Oct. . . . . . .
p Nov. ... ... ... ... ... ...
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
2022 4,664,630 27.7 46,646 46,512 54,848 8,337 5
p 2023 Sep. 4,502,706 27.3 45,027 44,896 47,933 3,037 0
Oct. . . . . . . .
p Nov. 4,471,738 ... 44,717 44,587 ... ... ...
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2022 9,814 7,396 3,216 14,465 8,295 117 2,471
2023 Sep. 9,134 7,194 3,276 14,221 8,172 145 2,366
Oct. . . . . . . .
Nov. 9,268 7,182 3,194 14,061 8,152 145 2,248
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2022 3,352,177 12,609 566,227 543,694 116,094
2023 Sep. 3,399,988 2,017 458,628 476,479 126,979
Oct. . . . . .
Nov. 3,419,899 2,345 423,373 462,063 130,302
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 5 of the
Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum
reserve requirements (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies,
pursuant to Article 6(1)(a)).  3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2%between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at
1%. 4 Article 6(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the
application of minimum reserve requirements.  5 Average credit balances of credit
institutions at national central banks.  6 Average credit balances less required reserves
after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.  7 Required reserves after deduction of the
lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 2022 July 27 0.00 0.50 – 0.75 2006 Jan. 1 1.37 2012 Jan. 1 0.12
Sep. 14 0.75 1.25 – 1.50 July 1 1.95
2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 Nov. 2 1.50 2.00 – 2.25 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 Dec. 21 2.00 2.50 – 2.75 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 July 1 – 0.38
July 1 3.19
2014 June 11 – 0.10 0.15 – 2023 Feb. 8 2.50 3.00 – 3.25 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
Sep. 10 – 0.20 0.05 – 2.00 Mar. 22 3.00 3.50 – 3.75 2008 Jan. 1 3.32 July 1 – 0.73
2.25 May 10 3.25 3.75 – 4.00 July 1 3.19
2015 Dec. 9 – 0.30 0.05 – 2.00 June 21 3.50 4.00 – 4.25 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Aug. 2 3.75 4.25 – 4.50 2009 Jan. 1 1.62
2016 Mar. 16 – 0.40 0.00 – 0.25 Sep. 20 4.00 4.50 – 4.75 July 1 0.12 2016 July 1 – 0.88
2019 Sep. 18 – 0.50 0.00 – 0.25 2011 July 1 0.37 2023 Jan. 1 1.62
July 1 3.12
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2023 Oct. 4 7 797 7 797 4.50 – – – 7
Oct. 11 7 498 7 498 4.50 – – – 7
Oct. 18 7 677 7 677 4.50 – – – 7
Oct. 25 10 490 10 490 4.50 – – – 7
Nov. 1 8 127 8 127 4.50 – – – 7
Nov. 8 6 850 6 850 4.50 – – – 7
Nov. 15 7 105 7 105 4.50 – – – 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2023 July 27 3 165 3 165 2   4.33 – – − 91
Aug. 31 2 205 2 205 2      … – – − 91
Sep. 28 1 903 1 903 2      … – – − 84
Oct. 26 540 540 2      … – – − 97
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month *
% per annum
EURIBOR ®  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2023 Mar. 2.572 2.57 2.71 2.91 3.27 3.65
Apr. 2.900 2.88 2.96 3.18 3.52 3.76
May 3.080 3.09 3.15 3.37 3.68 3.86
June 3.238 3.25 3.34 3.54 3.83 4.01
July 3.402 3.40 3.47 3.67 3.94 4.15
Aug. 3.642 3.63 3.63 3.78 3.94 4.07
Sep. 3.747 3.75 3.76 3.88 4.03 4.15
Oct. 3.901 3.88 3.86 3.97 4.12 4.16
* Publication does not establish an entitlement to provision of the rates. The Deutsche
Bundesbank reserves the right to cease publishing the information on its website in
future. All data are supplied without liability. No explicit or implicit assurances or
guarantees are made as to the up-to-dateness, accuracy, timeliness, completeness,
marketability or suitability of the data as interest rates or reference interest rates.
Neither the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI), nor Euribor EBF, nor Euribor
ACI, nor the Euribor Panel Banks, nor the Euribor Steering Committee, nor the
European Central Bank, nor Reuters, nor the Deutsche Bundesbank can be held liable
for any irregularity or inaccuracy, incompleteness or late provision of the money market
rates. With regard to the €STR please consider the European Central Bank's disclaimer,
which also applies for the Deutsche Bundesbank's publication:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/financial_markets_and_interest_rates/euro_short-
term_rate/html/index.en.html1 Euro Short-Term Rate: On the basis of individual euro-denominated transactions
conducted and settled on the previous business day, the European Central Bank
publishes the €STR since 2 October 2019. Transactions are reported by euro area banks
subject to reporting obligations in compliance with Money Market Statistical Reporting
Regulation. Monthly averages are calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank.  2 Monthly
averages are own calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank based on Euribor® daily rates
calculated by the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). These are unweighted
averages. Information on the methodology of Euribor® daily rates are available below.
Please be aware that commercial use of these data is only possible with a licence
agreement with the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). Information on its
terms of use are available under the link below.
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/terms-of-use
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/benchmarks/euribor/

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Sep. 0.46 50,096 0.86 217,608 0.52 95,994 0.97 24,605
Oct. 0.67 56,389 0.85 217,771 0.76 116,977 1.00 24,179
Nov. 0.94 69,368 0.85 218,426 1.13 121,576 1.00 23,542
Dec. 1.16 84,147 0.86 220,466 1.39 123,678 1.02 22,605
2023 Jan. 1.37 103,036 0.87 221,773 1.67 131,363 1.05 23,299
Feb. 1.57 119,894 0.87 222,671 1.98 140,254 1.07 23,409
Mar. 1.77 140,046 0.88 223,661 2.29 148,756 1.09 22,527
Apr. 1.91 157,796 0.89 224,586 2.44 155,233 1.12 22,140
May 2.07 180,323 0.90 225,884 2.65 153,693 1.17 22,199
June 2.23 200,501 0.91 226,645 2.86 162,035 1.20 22,133
July 2.37 222,529 0.92 227,182 3.01 168,874 1.24 21,619
Aug. 2.52 246,001 0.94 228,521 3.15 180,132 1.27 21,610
Sep. 2.61 262,537 0.95 229,285 3.27 181,385 1.28 21,507
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Sep. 2.61 3,627 1.86 27,290 1.70 1,522,592 6.95 48,339 3.46 77,011 3.32 333,384
Oct. 3.06 3,689 2.06 27,325 1.72 1,528,186 7.39 47,749 3.53 76,686 3.42 333,308
Nov. 3.35 3,604 2.21 27,320 1.73 1,533,123 7.51 47,012 3.60 75,908 3.46 333,366
Dec. 3.66 3,497 2.37 26,984 1.74 1,535,823 7.73 47,250 3.68 76,467 3.49 331,711
2023 Jan. 4.10 3,550 2.52 26,527 1.76 1,534,684 8.20 46,598 3.78 75,973 3.55 332,207
Feb. 4.32 3,429 2.64 26,317 1.77 1,536,492 8.44 47,291 3.84 75,755 3.59 332,184
Mar. 4.45 3,493 2.77 26,266 1.78 1,540,365 8.67 48,137 3.94 75,854 3.64 330,164
Apr. 4.72 3,490 2.94 26,102 1.79 1,542,767 8.86 47,023 4.05 75,742 3.72 330,568
May 4.93 3,423 3.03 25,960 1.81 1,544,206 9.12 47,513 4.14 75,472 3.77 330,677
June 5.10 3,298 3.13 25,865 1.82 1,546,102 9.25 48,284 4.24 76,260 3.83 329,576
July 5.34 3,413 3.26 25,712 1.83 1,548,159 9.45 47,192 4.35 76,468 3.90 330,500
Aug. 5.41 3,391 3.33 25,573 1.85 1,550,499 9.55 47,277 4.45 76,654 3.95 330,602
Sep. 5.49 3,233 3.38 25,315 1.86 1,553,577 9.72 47,688 4.54 76,662 3.99 329,681
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Sep. 2.63 211,369 2.00 230,393 1.80 865,922
Oct. 3.05 209,961 2.26 237,078 1.92 874,758
Nov. 3.49 213,334 2.49 236,253 1.96 879,122
Dec. 3.70 192,635 2.83 240,161 2.01 872,949
2023 Jan. 4.04 199,612 3.07 241,498 2.05 876,315
Feb. 4.28 194,396 3.22 246,124 2.07 878,910
Mar. 4.66 193,205 3.45 245,152 2.13 876,723
Apr. 4.98 194,154 3.65 247,337 2.19 879,353
May 5.19 194,261 3.76 252,289 2.22 885,481
June 5.42 193,968 3.95 250,107 2.29 883,229
July 5.62 194,789 4.09 251,312 2.35 887,112
Aug. 5.72 188,564 4.17 251,445 2.37 889,482
Sep. 5.89 187,448 4.29 249,045 2.41 887,673
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Sep. 0.01 1,854,045 0.84 7,457 1.49 915 1.29 1,289 0.09 522,685 0.19 22,155
Oct. 0.01 1,853,933 1.06 10,188 1.89 1,332 1.49 1,549 0.11 519,453 0.27 22,383
Nov. 0.02 1,858,811 1.34 17,255 1.99 1,783 1.70 1,958 0.13 514,161 0.33 22,556
Dec. 0.07 1,857,241 1.53 20,197 2.01 1,738 1.52 2,138 0.16 510,188 0.40 22,970
2023 Jan. 0.09 1,839,201 1.68 26,082 2.14 2,941 1.97 2,504 0.20 498,875 0.53 23,945
Feb. 0.12 1,828,243 1.95 25,533 2.24 2,346 2.09 1,853 0.26 490,990 0.67 25,179
Mar. 0.17 1,801,473 2.19 29,674 2.36 3,672 2.07 2,194 0.30 480,790 0.84 26,746
Apr. 0.22 1,807,037 2.33 28,088 2.47 3,409 2.35 2,055 0.35 470,731 0.96 28,261
May 0.30 1,792,902 2.58 35,359 2.67 4,281 2.39 2,371 0.39 460,587 1.13 30,499
June 0.34 1,782,329 2.78 34,870 2.91 4,260 2.53 1,999 0.43 450,713 1.28 33,163
July 0.41 1,773,505 2.94 38,938 2.98 3,412 2.59 2,044 0.50 440,519 1.48 36,162
Aug. 0.51 1,757,994 3.12 46,037 3.15 4,422 2.81 2,374 0.55 429,372 1.62 38,895
Sep. 0.55 1,748,821 3.22 40,232 3.30 3,611 2.92 1,787 0.59 420,872 1.76 41,824
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2022 Sep. 0.03 615,838 0.62 73,349 1.93 494 2.75 1,111
Oct. 0.04 617,742 0.81 99,703 1.34 707 1.89 146
Nov. 0.10 612,760 1.43 90,346 2.66 631 1.94 189
Dec. 0.11 601,728 1.66 65,813 2.94 734 2.42 252
2023 Jan. 0.19 595,205 1.96 89,287 2.92 671 2.41 89
Feb. 0.28 580,954 2.31 100,034 3.09 539 2.17 238
Mar. 0.44 568,777 2.58 89,971 2.95 723 2.62 292
Apr. 0.48 558,564 2.82 79,535 3.14 655 2.83 210
May 0.55 558,743 3.01 81,462 2.86 625 2.64 225
June 0.63 548,727 3.20 88,967 3.48 703 2.90 206
July 0.72 551,199 3.34 79,832 3.53 614 3.26 252
Aug. 0.81 548,242 3.50 89,027 3.46 570 2.93 210
Sep. 0.92 547,593 3.64 95,610 3.63 807 2.96 287
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2022 Sep. 6.43 6.43 8,562 7.37 1,613 8.64 346 4.96 2,922 7.09 5,294
Oct. 6.74 6.75 7,362 7.57 1,339 8.79 366 5.28 2,546 7.43 4,450
Nov. 6.81 6.87 7,913 7.92 1,330 7.51 385 5.37 2,868 7.74 4,659
Dec. 6.62 6.71 7,270 7.69 1,091 7.64 465 5.26 3,083 7.79 3,722
2023 Jan. 7.49 7.54 8,159 8.43 1,607 7.95 406 6.01 2,728 8.34 5,025
Feb. 7.56 7.52 7,505 8.42 1,364 8.96 307 6.13 2,664 8.24 4,534
Mar. 7.74 7.70 8,778 8.62 1,592 8.71 322 6.39 3,150 8.42 5,306
Apr. 8.10 7.99 7,348 8.87 1,351 9.77 278 6.69 2,551 8.62 4,519
May 8.13 8.07 8,269 9.00 1,505 9.98 296 6.79 2,819 8.66 5,154
June 8.05 7.99 9,277 9.15 1,568 10.32 316 6.62 3,493 8.72 5,468
July 8.40 8.35 8,628 9.32 1,609 10.92 295 7.04 2,974 8.94 5,359
Aug. 8.46 8.43 8,818 9.46 1,689 10.65 288 7.13 3,011 9.02 5,518
Sep. 8.53 8.44 7,939 9.53 1,530 10.20 274 7.15 2,779 9.07 4,885
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2022 Sep. 2.95 4,255 2.51 1,090 2.60 2,250 3.39 610 3.33 1,395
Oct. 3.40 3,728 2.68 1,190 3.06 1,805 4.00 541 3.61 1,382
Nov. 3.78 3,938 3.28 947 3.52 1,808 4.18 746 3.90 1,384
Dec. 3.90 5,403 3.43 1,210 3.86 3,026 4.24 762 3.80 1,615
2023 Jan. 4.10 3,906 3.74 1,286 3.98 2,082 4.55 621 4.07 1,203
Feb. 4.35 3,065 4.03 814 4.36 1,467 4.83 508 4.10 1,090
Mar. 4.56 4,852 4.29 1,293 4.66 2,388 4.87 761 4.28 1,703
Apr. 4.64 3,803 4.45 1,210 4.76 1,767 4.92 744 4.31 1,292
May 4.83 3,400 4.62 997 5.08 1,511 5.10 710 4.37 1,179
June 4.93 4,341 4.68 1,388 5.26 1,974 5.19 892 4.33 1,475
July 4.96 4,086 4.54 1,161 5.39 1,766 5.12 933 4.31 1,387
Aug. 5.16 3,430 5.02 882 5.72 1,290 5.24 910 4.50 1,230
Sep. 5.23 3,522 5.07 811 5.76 1,489 5.29 844 4.54 1,189
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2022 Sep. 3.09 2,843 . . 2.76 1,446 3.53 465 3.37 932
Oct. 3.44 2,570 . . 3.05 1,244 4.19 405 3.63 921
Nov. 3.91 2,684 . . 3.69 1,175 4.32 563 3.94 946
Dec. 4.11 3,777 . . 4.10 2,187 4.51 554 3.89 1,036
2023 Jan. 4.18 2,830 . . 4.06 1,489 4.75 465 4.07 876
Feb. 4.44 2,297 . . 4.47 1,105 4.94 411 4.15 781
Mar. 4.69 3,544 . . 4.75 1,822 5.13 567 4.37 1,155
Apr. 4.77 2,657 . . 4.90 1,207 5.01 575 4.44 875
May 4.98 2,473 . . 5.28 1,072 5.24 547 4.44 854
June 5.04 3,178 . . 5.36 1,535 5.36 633 4.35 1,010
July 5.09 2,963 . . 5.48 1,337 5.48 592 4.37 1,034
Aug. 5.30 2,381 . . 5.91 934 5.55 551 4.53 896
Sep. 5.32 2,455 . . 5.80 1,093 5.57 520 4.55 842
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2022 Sep. 3.08 3.01 16,113 2.81 2,719 2.73 2,186 2.93 1,366 2.96 5,969 3.18 6,593
Oct. 3.31 3.25 14,926 2.79 3,204 2.90 2,522 3.23 1,363 3.19 5,433 3.48 5,607
Nov. 3.67 3.60 13,557 3.32 2,689 3.40 2,330 3.75 1,209 3.51 4,846 3.75 5,172
Dec. 3.60 3.52 13,514 3.17 2,756 3.57 2,620 3.74 1,267 3.41 4,837 3.55 4,790
2023 Jan. 3.73 3.66 12,735 3.47 3,076 3.95 2,244 3.80 1,196 3.45 4,531 3.70 4,764
Feb. 3.85 3.79 12,055 3.73 2,724 4.16 2,097 3.99 1,207 3.60 4,229 3.74 4,522
Mar. 3.95 3.88 15,260 3.76 3,248 4.44 2,459 4.10 1,524 3.64 5,388 3.80 5,889
Apr. 3.98 3.93 12,999 4.06 2,870 4.63 2,109 4.23 1,276 3.70 4,471 3.77 5,144
May 3.99 3.94 13,657 3.92 2,945 4.82 2,148 4.27 1,359 3.66 5,038 3.76 5,112
June 4.12 4.06 13,983 4.28 2,565 5.05 2,301 4.38 1,450 3.73 4,986 3.84 5,246
July 4.08 4.02 14,335 4.03 2,845 5.20 1,949 4.37 1,469 3.71 5,352 3.82 5,564
Aug. 4.19 4.14 14,386 4.43 2,611 5.29 2,198 4.53 1,388 3.81 5,275 3.89 5,525
Sep. 4.17 4.12 12,286 4.32 2,017 5.40 1,523 4.48 1,171 3.89 4,534 3.85 5,058
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2022 Sep. . 2.90 7,168 . . 2.54 746 2.80 638 2.84 2,725 3.05 3,059
Oct. . 3.15 6,622 . . 2.78 916 3.20 661 3.10 2,482 3.31 2,563
Nov. . 3.47 6,083 . . 3.22 806 3.62 563 3.42 2,402 3.57 2,312
Dec. . 3.43 5,975 . . 3.46 923 3.64 554 3.36 2,213 3.42 2,285
2023 Jan. . 3.51 5,615 . . 3.85 813 3.66 584 3.38 2,136 3.47 2,082
Feb. . 3.64 5,134 . . 4.04 763 3.84 556 3.49 1,928 3.58 1,887
Mar. . 3.74 6,734 . . 4.30 841 4.05 752 3.56 2,520 3.65 2,621
Apr. . 3.79 5,967 . . 4.61 824 4.02 601 3.59 2,141 3.62 2,401
May . 3.82 5,821 . . 4.68 789 4.14 629 3.59 2,225 3.66 2,178
June . 3.85 6,185 . . 4.81 836 4.13 648 3.61 2,314 3.67 2,387
July . 3.88 6,592 . . 5.08 729 4.20 661 3.63 2,384 3.72 2,818
Aug. . 3.96 6,467 . . 5.10 767 4.29 637 3.73 2,399 3.75 2,664
Sep. . 3.93 5,704 . . 5.36 540 4.32 551 3.78 2,092 3.65 2,521
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Sep. 7.31 39,138 7.36 30,018 14.97 4,359 3.04 97,298 3.05 96,819
Oct. 7.78 38,898 7.74 30,031 15.66 4,479 3.39 97,186 3.40 96,732
Nov. 8.44 38,580 8.20 27,368 15.61 6,475 3.74 97,850 3.76 97,371
Dec. 8.70 38,597 8.53 27,493 15.55 6,515 3.99 94,611 4.01 94,205
2023 Jan. 9.16 38,116 8.95 27,199 16.34 6,480 4.31 98,205 4.32 97,791
Feb. 9.40 38,538 9.32 27,356 16.60 6,475 4.63 98,285 4.65 97,859
Mar. 9.56 39,280 9.54 28,281 16.58 6,390 5.08 98,123 5.11 97,659
Apr. 9.78 38,352 9.76 27,177 17.13 6,407 5.44 99,534 5.47 99,094
May 9.98 38,906 10.10 27,431 17.19 6,478 5.61 99,175 5.63 98,709
June 10.11 39,692 10.30 28,067 17.23 6,528 5.83 99,351 5.86 98,897
July 10.32 38,818 10.48 27,182 17.58 6,580 6.00 98,185 6.03 97,770
Aug. 10.39 39,026 10.60 27,146 17.79 6,611 6.11 94,939 6.14 94,514
Sep. 10.59 39,549 10.75 27,977 17.86 6,629 6.25 95,468 6.28 95,004
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2022 Sep. 2.67 99,740 2.23 28,861 2.60 10,891 3.85 1,435 3.19 1,075 2.61 75,992 2.99 3,670 2.96 6,677
Oct. 2.86 88,486 2.60 25,332 3.12 10,741 4.26 1,591 3.55 989 2.67 64,795 3.83 3,917 3.34 6,453
Nov. 3.14 76,430 3.14 20,220 3.53 10,542 4.71 1,587 3.80 1,046 2.94 51,493 3.51 3,923 3.33 7,839
Dec. 3.45 107,068 3.42 32,607 3.91 11,995 4.98 1,854 3.81 1,138 3.35 75,616 3.55 6,334 3.25 10,131
2023 Jan. 3.59 81,688 3.66 23,420 4.41 10,450 5.10 1,586 3.88 1,021 3.42 60,491 3.85 2,968 3.24 5,172
Feb. 3.88 85,530 3.83 19,830 4.84 10,275 5.58 1,480 4.06 863 3.70 64,785 4.07 2,789 3.66 5,338
Mar. 4.36 102,182 4.20 29,585 5.18 12,826 5.70 2,212 4.13 1,223 4.24 70,035 4.41 5,308 3.91 10,578
Apr. 4.45 73,584 4.46 23,051 5.24 9,722 5.84 1,572 4.32 999 4.36 51,380 4.18 3,476 3.77 6,435
May 4.65 79,772 4.62 21,546 5.37 11,322 6.13 1,607 4.22 1,060 4.59 55,568 4.00 3,590 4.00 6,625
June 4.88 100,910 4.89 33,256 5.58 12,583 6.39 1,760 4.31 1,219 4.85 72,375 4.70 4,371 3.95 8,602
July 5.06 85,629 4.88 28,176 6.39 10,764 6.54 1,838 4.35 1,167 4.91 61,061 5.32 3,989 3.94 6,810
Aug. 5.11 73,312 5.15 21,335 6.01 10,015 6.63 1,698 4.46 999 5.06 51,942 4.47 3,017 3.95 5,641
Sep. 5.16 83,318 5.30 25,702 6.04 10,804 6.76 1,689 4.35 959 5.09 60,497 5.03 3,077 4.10 6,292
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2022 Sep. . . . . 2.86 608 3.37 78 3.01 299 . . 3.16 1,131 2.99 1,712
Oct. 2.82 10,559 . . 3.01 572 3.48 95 3.32 261 2.71 7,209 3.43 750 2.82 1,672
Nov. 3.50 9,542 . . 3.45 462 3.93 93 3.49 269 3.56 6,290 3.81 739 3.12 1,689
Dec. 3.41 17,202 . . 3.72 588 4.08 126 3.41 291 3.41 10,703 4.20 1,417 3.08 4,077
2023 Jan. . . . . 4.00 553 3.72 123 . . 3.92 6,635 4.01 652 3.07 1,196
Feb. 3.93 8,371 . . 4.34 400 4.37 96 3.61 208 4.03 6,148 3.87 514 3.20 1,005
Mar. 4.15 14,364 . . 4.60 641 4.73 117 3.62 331 4.22 10,350 4.11 1,117 3.64 1,808
Apr. 4.48 10,295 . . 4.88 452 4.52 120 3.81 269 4.71 6,760 4.81 541 3.69 2,153
May . . . . 5.06 456 4.80 108 3.80 268 . . 4.37 876 3.77 1,623
June . . . . 5.14 573 4.75 99 3.87 340 . . 5.16 1,293 3.75 1,183
July 4.86 11,078 . . 5.44 489 4.91 126 3.98 325 4.87 6,823 5.86 1,544 3.94 1,771
Aug. 5.08 9,797 . . 5.58 425 5.01 122 3.85 279 5.45 6,747 4.32 890 3.79 1,334
Sep. . . . . 5.63 450 5.28 109 3.88 253 . . 5.19 1,187 3.76 1,487
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 
2020 Q4 2,605.6 301.7 485.5 370.6 425.0 853.2 4.7 68.1 38.2 58.7
2021 Q1 2,592.3 292.4 470.7 361.7 437.4 858.1 3.9 71.9 38.9 57.2
Q2 2,609.9 280.5 470.3 361.2 449.2 879.6 3.4 72.5 38.9 54.2
Q3 2,653.1 271.7 474.2 358.2 463.4 899.8 3.3 87.8 38.3 56.3
Q4 2,667.2 261.3 468.6 355.1 472.4 921.6 3.2 85.0 40.8 59.3
2022 Q1 2,547.3 243.7 440.2 333.2 468.7 870.5 2.7 87.5 41.0 59.8
Q2 2,369.7 215.6 390.3 305.5 462.5 803.5 3.0 85.5 41.3 62.5
Q3 2,296.2 202.0 369.9 289.1 461.2 776.7 4.0 84.2 41.4 67.6
Q4 2,274.7 189.5 373.7 279.7 465.8 772.2 3.4 79.5 38.7 72.2
2023 Q1 2,326.9 201.7 380.8 280.2 472.3 790.3 3.6 85.2 38.5 74.4
Q2 2,329.4 195.1 383.2 279.5 474.2 798.8 3.6 84.0 38.1 73.0
    Life insurance
2020 Q4 1,406.7 183.5 246.4 229.9 70.2 623.8 3.3 14.3 20.8 14.5
2021 Q1 1,372.8 170.4 234.3 219.6 74.3 623.1 2.1 14.2 21.5 13.2
Q2 1,384.9 164.4 234.1 219.4 78.0 637.6 2.0 14.1 21.5 13.8
Q3 1,400.1 159.2 233.8 214.8 87.7 654.6 1.9 13.4 20.8 13.8
Q4 1,411.1 152.4 231.9 211.8 93.4 669.1 1.7 14.6 21.9 14.3
2022 Q1 1,317.7 136.8 211.5 193.1 99.7 626.1 0.9 13.9 22.0 13.8
Q2 1,202.1 120.5 180.3 173.1 104.2 569.4 0.9 13.6 22.1 17.9
Q3 1,149.6 110.2 166.6 162.1 107.0 546.4 1.1 12.3 22.3 21.7
Q4 1,130.1 103.6 170.5 155.6 111.4 540.0 1.1 11.5 19.5 16.8
2023 Q1 1,147.9 105.1 170.4 155.6 113.3 553.4 1.0 12.1 19.4 17.5
Q2 1,153.6 102.9 171.7 154.8 114.3 559.4 1.0 12.1 19.3 18.1
    Non-life insurance
2020 Q4 709.4 105.9 141.9 84.5 85.1 214.2 0.5 37.5 12.7 27.3
2021 Q1 721.2 108.1 140.2 83.6 88.7 218.9 0.4 40.0 12.8 28.6
Q2 724.6 103.3 141.0 83.4 90.5 225.7 0.4 40.3 12.7 27.2
Q3 733.1 98.7 141.0 83.8 93.7 228.4 0.4 46.4 12.8 27.7
Q4 738.4 94.6 140.1 84.7 97.5 234.3 0.3 44.6 14.0 28.4
2022 Q1 722.4 91.4 133.4 80.8 98.5 227.7 0.2 45.7 13.9 30.7
Q2 681.6 81.9 122.0 74.8 98.6 216.5 0.1 44.0 14.1 29.5
Q3 661.1 76.2 116.0 70.3 99.2 212.2 0.1 43.1 14.1 29.7
Q4 659.0 72.7 115.2 69.1 99.8 215.5 0.2 42.4 14.2 30.1
2023 Q1 687.2 81.3 121.2 69.5 102.7 219.8 0.1 45.2 14.2 33.2
Q2 686.3 77.5 123.8 69.9 102.9 222.1 0.1 45.0 14.1 30.9
    Reinsurance 4
2020 Q4 489.5 12.3 97.2 56.3 269.7 15.2 1.0 16.3 4.7 16.9
2021 Q1 498.4 13.9 96.3 58.5 274.4 16.2 1.4 17.7 4.7 15.3
Q2 500.4 12.8 95.2 58.4 280.7 16.4 1.0 18.1 4.6 13.2
Q3 519.9 13.9 99.3 59.6 282.0 16.7 1.0 28.0 4.7 14.8
Q4 517.7 14.3 96.6 58.6 281.4 18.2 1.1 25.9 4.9 16.7
2022 Q1 507.1 15.5 95.3 59.3 270.4 16.7 1.6 27.9 5.0 15.3
Q2 486.0 13.2 88.0 57.5 259.6 17.6 1.9 27.9 5.1 15.1
Q3 485.5 15.6 87.3 56.7 255.1 18.1 2.7 28.8 5.1 16.2
Q4 485.6 13.2 88.0 55.0 254.6 16.7 2.1 25.7 5.0 25.3
2023 Q1 491.8 15.3 89.2 55.0 256.3 17.1 2.4 27.8 4.8 23.7
Q2 489.5 14.7 87.6 54.8 256.9 17.2 2.5 26.9 4.8 24.0
Pension funds 5
2020 Q4 662.9 88.9 60.6 49.5 10.3 419.5 0.2 11.9 18.8 3.1
2021 Q1 664.3 86.1 58.7 48.6 10.8 427.9 0.2 12.1 17.6 2.3
Q2 683.2 85.0 60.2 49.3 11.2 445.2 0.1 12.1 17.8 2.3
Q3 689.8 82.9 60.4 48.9 11.8 453.6 0.1 12.2 17.8 2.2
Q4 709.9 82.1 60.0 48.7 11.2 473.5 0.1 12.4 18.5 3.3
2022 Q1 689.0 75.7 56.6 46.2 11.9 465.3 0.0 12.5 18.5 2.2
Q2 664.2 70.2 52.8 43.2 12.3 452.2 0.0 12.4 18.6 2.5
Q3 654.6 67.6 51.8 42.0 12.7 446.0 0.0 13.2 18.7 2.6
Q4 660.9 67.3 53.0 41.8 12.8 450.2 0.0 13.6 18.8 3.4
2023 Q1 666.3 65.8 56.6 42.0 13.6 453.5 0.0 13.5 18.8 2.6
Q2 673.3 67.9 59.1 42.5 13.7 455.2 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including
registered bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrower's note
loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables and claims ofpension funds on pension managers.  4 Not including the reinsurance business
conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 The term "pension funds"
refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts.
Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension
schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  6
Insurance corporations
2020 Q4 2,605.6 36.6 79.7 540.4 1,798.9 1,579.2 219.8 1.6 148.5 –
2021 Q1 2,592.3 34.8 81.4 551.7 1,778.6 1,541.3 237.3 2.5 143.4 –
Q2 2,609.9 33.0 81.3 558.7 1,793.5 1,556.3 237.1 2.2 141.1 –
Q3 2,653.1 35.4 82.8 567.0 1,817.7 1,569.1 248.7 2.5 147.6 –
Q4 2,667.2 36.0 81.9 579.3 1,820.7 1,578.3 242.3 2.5 146.8 –
2022 Q1 2,547.3 34.4 82.1 563.1 1,725.9 1,472.6 253.3 4.0 137.7 –
Q2 2,369.7 33.6 78.7 541.6 1,574.4 1,326.8 247.5 6.0 135.3 –
Q3 2,296.2 33.8 73.6 537.4 1,506.0 1,262.3 243.7 7.4 138.0 –
Q4 2,274.7 32.3 70.1 543.7 1,486.5 1,248.7 237.8 5.6 136.5 –
2023 Q1 2,326.9 33.1 71.2 544.7 1,539.1 1,277.1 261.9 4.4 134.4 –
Q2 2,329.4 33.2 68.3 546.4 1,543.5 1,283.7 259.8 4.5 133.5 –
    Life insurance
2020 Q4 1,406.7 3.9 20.7 142.8 1,185.6 1,185.6 – 0.5 53.2 –
2021 Q1 1,372.8 3.3 19.9 143.1 1,154.3 1,154.3 – 1.0 51.2 –
Q2 1,384.9 3.3 20.4 144.2 1,164.9 1,164.9 – 1.0 51.1 –
Q3 1,400.1 3.3 19.3 148.1 1,176.4 1,176.4 – 1.1 51.9 –
Q4 1,411.1 3.3 20.7 148.2 1,185.5 1,185.5 – 0.9 52.5 –
2022 Q1 1,317.7 3.2 19.9 142.9 1,101.6 1,101.6 – 1.4 48.8 –
Q2 1,202.1 3.1 19.0 141.4 984.5 984.5 – 2.7 51.3 –
Q3 1,149.6 3.0 17.0 138.0 936.9 936.9 – 3.1 51.8 –
Q4 1,130.1 2.7 16.6 136.0 924.9 924.9 – 2.3 47.7 –
2023 Q1 1,147.9 2.8 17.8 133.0 945.8 945.8 – 1.9 46.6 –
Q2 1,153.6 2.7 17.5 133.8 950.9 950.9 – 1.8 46.9 –
    Non-life insurance
2020 Q4 709.4 1.3 9.7 158.0 482.9 368.7 114.2 0.0 57.6 –
2021 Q1 721.2 1.2 10.6 162.7 491.5 362.6 128.9 0.1 55.1 –
Q2 724.6 1.2 10.5 166.2 493.4 366.2 127.1 0.1 53.1 –
Q3 733.1 1.2 10.5 168.9 498.7 367.8 130.9 0.2 53.7 –
Q4 738.4 1.4 10.7 175.8 492.6 367.6 125.0 0.2 57.8 –
2022 Q1 722.4 1.3 11.7 173.1 483.0 347.1 135.9 0.3 53.0 –
Q2 681.6 1.2 11.1 167.6 451.9 322.7 129.2 0.5 49.2 –
Q3 661.1 1.2 10.5 167.9 430.4 307.4 123.0 0.5 50.5 –
Q4 659.0 1.2 10.4 170.2 425.1 306.7 118.4 0.4 51.7 –
2023 Q1 687.2 1.2 10.7 173.0 451.0 314.4 136.7 0.4 51.0 –
Q2 686.3 1.2 10.6 174.3 450.9 317.0 133.9 0.3 49.0 –
    Reinsurance 4
2020 Q4 489.5 31.4 49.3 239.6 130.4 24.8 105.6 1.0 37.7 –
2021 Q1 498.4 30.2 50.9 245.8 132.8 24.4 108.4 1.4 37.2 –
Q2 500.4 28.5 50.4 248.3 135.2 25.2 110.0 1.1 36.9 –
Q3 519.9 30.9 53.0 250.1 142.7 24.9 117.8 1.3 42.0 –
Q4 517.7 31.4 50.5 255.3 142.6 25.3 117.3 1.4 36.5 –
2022 Q1 507.1 30.0 50.4 247.2 141.3 23.9 117.4 2.3 35.9 –
Q2 486.0 29.3 48.6 232.6 138.0 19.6 118.4 2.8 34.7 –
Q3 485.5 29.7 46.2 231.5 138.7 18.0 120.7 3.8 35.7 –
Q4 485.6 28.4 43.1 237.5 136.5 17.1 119.4 2.9 37.1 –
2023 Q1 491.8 29.2 42.8 238.7 142.2 17.0 125.3 2.1 36.8 –
Q2 489.5 29.3 40.2 238.3 141.7 15.8 125.9 2.4 37.6 –
Pension funds 5
2020 Q4 662.9 – 1.6 28.4 528.5 527.9 – 0.3 9.0 95.1
2021 Q1 664.3 – 1.7 29.1 530.3 529.2 – 0.3 9.0 94.0
Q2 683.2 – 1.8 31.3 536.7 535.0 – 0.2 9.2 104.0
Q3 689.8 – 1.9 31.9 539.8 537.6 – 0.2 9.3 106.8
Q4 709.9 – 1.9 32.0 560.2 557.3 – 0.1 8.9 106.8
2022 Q1 689.0 – 2.0 26.8 559.0 556.8 – 0.1 11.2 89.9
Q2 664.2 – 1.8 23.4 559.7 558.1 – 0.1 11.6 67.7
Q3 654.6 – 1.9 21.2 561.1 560.2 – 0.1 13.0 57.2
Q4 660.9 – 1.8 24.3 580.8 580.5 – 0.1 11.5 42.5
2023 Q1 666.3 – 1.8 24.8 580.2 579.9 – 0.1 11.5 47.9
Q2 673.3 – 1.8 24.7 585.3 584.9 – 0.1 11.6 49.9
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Including deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered
bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension
funds on pension managers and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical
reserves "life" taking account of transitional measures. Health insurance is also includedin the "non-life insurance" sector.  4 Not including the reinsurance business conducted
by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 Valuation at book values. The term "pen-
sion funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of
Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational
pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.  6 Own
funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth" and "Shares and other equity".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2011 33,649 13,575 –46,796 850 59,521 20,075 – 23,876 – 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 58,735 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 90,697 44,384 – 12,124 – 11,951 68,459 14,351
2015 15,219 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 51,229 99,225 – 66,330 121,164 44,391 – 84,006
2016 68,998 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 41,569 161,776 – 58,012 187,500 32,288 – 92,778
2017 51,034 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 39,471 134,192 – 71,454 161,012 44,634 – 83,158
2018 78,657 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 62,027 107,155 – 24,417 67,328 64,244 – 28,499
2019 139,611 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 71,075 60,195 8,059 2,408 49,728 79,416
2020 451,409 374,034 14,462 88,703 270,870 77,374 285,318 18,955 226,887 39,476 166,091
2021 233,453 221,648 31,941 19,754 169,953 11,805 255,702 – 41,852 245,198 52,356 – 22,249
2022 155,940 156,190 59,322 35,221 61,648 – 219 155,609 2,915 49,774 102,920 331
2022 Oct. – 1,614 – 3,868 – 6,143 – 2,570 4,846 2,254 17,813 4,260 3,619 9,934 – 19,427
Nov. 45,419 36,891 2,672 5,087 29,133 8,528 13,173 193 4,041 8,940 32,246
Dec. – 27,425 –31,394 –15,450 – 6,091 – 9,853 4,001 11,231 – 18,577 – 6,015 35,823 – 38,656
2023 Jan. 58,333 26,856 19,250 4,335 3,270 31,477 41,346 10,522 7,783 23,041 16,987
Feb. 24,581 11,680 5,466 – 1,673 7,886 12,901 25,280 13,504 – 4,961 16,736 – 699
Mar. 59,563 39,989 22,802 – 1,704 18,892 19,573 18,732 8,063 – 1,710 12,379 40,831
Apr. 8,074 – 4,404 – 1,130 – 3,176 – 97 12,477 12,253 – 747 – 13,293 26,292 – 4,179
May 49,437 34,077 28,468 3,010 2,599 15,359 12,041 1,206 – 1,655 12,490 37,395
June 44,247 22,910 – 6,490 5,312 24,089 21,337 38,527 16,773 – 8,853 30,607 5,720
July 25,644 27,889 981 – 79 26,987 – 2,245 – 629 – 8,514 324 7,561 26,273
Aug. 14,632 10,967 10,278 – 1,708 2,397 3,665 975 503 – 9,067 9,539 13,657
Sep. 8,436 8,273 –15,203 6,538 16,938 163 – 13,230 – 8,195 – 11,311 6,276 21,666
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 – 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,337 11,991 5,346 2,851
2014 43,488 18,778 24,710 43,930 17,203 26,727 – 443
2015 56,979 7,668 49,311 46,721 – 5,421 52,142 10,258
2016 39,133 4,409 34,724 39,265 – 5,143 44,408 – 132
2017 52,932 15,570 37,362 51,270 7,031 44,239 1,662
2018 61,400 16,188 45,212 89,624 – 11,184 100,808 – 28,224
2019 54,830 9,076 45,754 43,070 – 1,119 44,189 11,759
2020 72,321 17,771 54,550 105,483 27 105,456 – 33,162
2021 115,746 49,066 66,681 102,927 10,869 92,058 12,819
2022 – 14,234 27,792 – 34,858 – 7,006 – 8,262 1,256 – 7,228
2022 Oct. – 1,785 154 – 1,939 – 4,007 – 1,588 – 2,419 2,222
Nov. – 5,647 247 – 5,894 – 8,903 1,414 – 10,317 3,256
Dec. 14,926 20,925 1,169 16,366 – 3,089 19,455 – 1,440
2023 Jan. 6,525 133 6,393 8,105 2,935 5,170 – 1,580
Feb. 4,863 2,371 2,492 6,098 4,494 1,604 – 1,235
Mar. – 1,346 1,696 – 3,042 650 1,985 – 1,335 – 1,996
Apr. 5,001 2,576 2,426 6,321 3,235 3,086 – 1,320
May – 708 592 – 1,299 377 – 2,497 2,874 – 1,084
June – 4,220 1,067 – 5,287 – 278 – 3,322 3,044 – 3,942
July 4,330 478 3,852 1,499 – 136 1,635 2,831
Aug. 440 1,474 – 1,034 3,509 – 893 4,402 – 3,069
Sep. 4,106 687 3,419 5,206 1,963 3,243 – 1,100
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,870,084 778,411 39,548 18,327 643,380 77,156 184,206 907,466
2021 1,658,004 795,271 41,866 17,293 648,996 87,116 139,775 722,958
2022 1,683,265 861,989 66,811 11,929 700,062 83,188 169,680 651,596
2022 Dec. 80,590 49,026 2,329 979 39,181 6,538 11,536 20,028
2023 Jan. 132,817 74,019 10,797 929 52,888 9,405 14,710 44,088
Feb. 155,676 81,678 2,245 1,729 63,385 14,319 12,146 61,853
Mar. 190,528 99,938 1,252 60 89,786 8,840 11,158 79,431
Apr. 129,401 69,020 2,954 543 60,740 4,783 10,608 49,772
May 169,866 97,645 4,531 760 83,511 8,844 16,336 55,885
June 171,957 84,953 3,264 1,556 70,601 9,532 21,526 65,478
July 121,578 53,812 2,876 130 43,776 7,031 14,133 53,632
Aug. 142,211 82,749 3,085 1,013 71,729 6,922 10,064 49,397
Sep. 131,903 62,175 3,337 550 51,645 6,643 18,722 51,007
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 658,521 165,097 28,500 7,427 90,839 38,330 77,439 415,985
2021 486,335 171,799 30,767 6,336 97,816 36,880 64,234 250,303
2022 485,287 164,864 41,052 7,139 91,143 25,530 56,491 263,932
2022 Dec. 6,561 2,256 54 4 711 1,488 304 4,000
2023 Jan. 47,131 21,923 4,927 529 14,197 2,271 3,408 21,800
Feb. 51,443 14,927 820 310 10,272 3,525 3,065 33,450
Mar. 46,975 14,091 1,147 – 11,809 1,136 1,658 31,225
Apr. 33,709 10,326 2,769 500 6,367 690 2,683 20,700
May 49,315 14,703 2,898 – 9,458 2,347 4,527 30,085
June 53,960 12,885 2,664 498 9,123 600 10,475 30,600
July 34,145 10,133 430 2 7,964 1,736 2,298 21,715
Aug. 36,582 12,501 2,383 1,000 8,182 936 1,656 22,425
Sep. 40,747 8,599 2,250 – 5,117 1,232 8,741 23,407
Net sales 5
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 473,795 28,147 8,661 8,816 22,067 – 11,398 49,536 396,113
2021 210,231 52,578 17,821 7,471 22,973 4,314 35,531 122,123
2022 135,853 36,883 23,894 – 9,399 15,944 6,444 30,671 68,299
2022 Dec. – 42,448 – 23,318 – 3,643 – 3,697 – 16,193 216 – 1,825 – 17,306
2023 Jan. 24,590 14,006 6,314 – 1,551 4,428 4,815 3,554 7,030
Feb. 9,644 2,700 – 2,433 1,512 – 2,861 6,482 – 2,541 9,486
Mar. 46,022 19,989 – 2,032 – 1,517 18,332 5,206 – 1,614 27,647
Apr. – 26,464 – 2,812 1,244 – 5 – 3,074 – 976 – 3,714 – 19,938
May 40,674 26,575 1,932 254 20,562 3,826 2,259 11,840
June 25,517 – 7,752 – 509 11 – 9,065 1,811 7,559 25,710
July 30,229 700 – 53 110 – 502 1,146 – 734 30,263
Aug. 15,869 9,610 2,930 541 7,387 – 1,249 – 1,791 8,050
Sep. 5,029 – 14,450 28 – 809 – 11,906 – 1,763 8,179 11,300
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,545,200 2 1,174,817 183,980 55,959 687,710 2 247,169 2 379,342 1,991,040
2021 3,781,975 1,250,777 202,385 63,496 731,068 253,828 414,791 2,116,406
2022 3,930,390 1,302,028 225,854 54,199 761,047 260,928 441,234 2,187,127
2022 Dec. 3,930,390 1,302,028 225,854 54,199 761,047 260,928 441,234 2,187,127
2023 Jan. 3,948,426 1,313,581 232,105 52,647 763,260 265,568 444,529 2,190,316
Feb. 3,963,852 1,320,844 229,851 54,180 764,148 272,666 442,389 2,200,618
Mar. 4,005,403 1,335,447 227,451 52,890 777,696 277,410 440,399 2,229,557
Apr. 3,977,194 1,330,812 228,764 52,910 772,714 276,424 436,591 2,209,790
May 4,027,974 1,364,889 230,966 53,237 799,875 280,811 439,299 2,223,786
June 4,052,214 1,354,415 230,474 53,223 788,438 282,281 446,780 2,251,019
July 4,077,718 1,354,010 231,454 53,389 786,384 282,783 446,064 2,277,644
Aug. 4,095,643 1,365,614 234,566 53,961 795,808 281,279 444,711 2,285,319
Sep. 4,109,854 1,357,321 234,598 53,128 789,561 280,034 453,140 2,299,393
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-September 2023
bis unter 2   1 239 809   493 534   61 469   20 268   319 640   92 157   87 442   658 833 
 2 bis unter 4    757 971   329 125   73 301   13 156   170 851   71 817   82 227   346 619 
 4 bis unter 6    619 859   218 528   48 859   8 768   118 973   41 929   66 575   334 756 
6 bis unter 8    452 294   131 802   23 564   4 455   77 215   26 568   44 763   275 728 
 8 bis unter 10    279 693   81 142   15 498   2 368   47 630   15 647   30 039   168 512 
 10 bis unter 15    239 827   57 432   7 721   3 793   37 074   8 844   29 716   152 679 
 15 bis unter 20    113 859   14 581   3 418    233   8 827   2 104   14 340   84 938 
 20 und darüber    406 542   31 176    769    87   9 352   20 969   98 037   277 329 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,673 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,775 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,872 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,635 1,963,588
2021 186,580 4,152 9,561 672 35 – 326 – 212 – 5,578 2,301,942
2022 199,789 12,272 14,950 224 371 – 29 – 293 – 2,952 1,858,963
2022 Dec. 199,789 13,437 13,584 – – – –– 147 1,858,963
2023 Jan. 199,778 – 11 16 – – –– 0 – 27 2,027,004
Feb. 198,334 162 149 – 50 –– 0 – 37 2,064,749
Mar. 198,157 – 185 178 – – – –– 363 2,080,189
Apr. 198,426 267 431 – –– 0 – 6 – 157 2,086,578
May 198,497 71 153 – –– 0 –– 82 2,048,166
June 198,505 8 422 – –– 262 – 17 – 135 2,061,065
July 198,406 – 99 52 – –– 0 – 89 – 62 2,113,570
Aug. 198,654 210 452 – –– 1 – 24 – 217 2,038,560
Sep. 198,328 – 325 280 3 –– 201 – 10 – 397 1,966,858
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields on German securities
Issue yields Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1
Public debt securities Public debt securities Bank debt securities
Listed Federal securities
Total Totalof which:
Listed Federal
debt securitiesBank debt 
securities Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  2 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)
Period % per annum
2011 2.7 2.5 2.3 3.0 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3
2012 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7
2013 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4
2014 1.2 1.1 0.9 1.3 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0
2015 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4
2016 0.4 0.1 – 0.1 0.6 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1
2017 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.6 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7
2018 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5
2019 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.3 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5
2020 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.5 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7
2021 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9
2022 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.9 1.5 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.9 1.9 3.3
2023 Feb. 2.86 2.67 2.67 3.33 2.82 2.52 2.41 2.37 3.21 3.07 4.15
Mar. 2.78 2.53 2.53 3.13 2.89 2.55 2.43 2.38 3.33 3.15 4.39
Apr. 2.89 2.47 2.47 3.06 2.84 2.53 2.40 2.36 3.29 3.11 4.19
May 2.80 2.41 2.41 3.16 2.82 2.50 2.37 2.34 3.26 3.11 4.17
June 2.89 2.55 2.55 3.31 2.88 2.58 2.46 2.38 3.32 3.12 4.24
July 2.98 2.61 2.61 3.64 2.97 2.67 2.55 2.46 3.43 3.24 4.25
Aug. 2.92 2.58 2.58 3.42 3.01 2.71 2.60 2.55 3.44 3.31 4.27
Sep. 3.18 2.75 2.75 3.57 3.11 2.82 2.71 2.66 3.51 3.42 4.39
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 Only debt securities eligible as underlying
instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 – 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 –1,340 – 379 –2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 –7,576 – 694 47,050 1,984 7,035
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 137,294 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 39,583 141,134 819 –1,745 140,315 41,328 –3,841
2015 189,802 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 43,665 181,932 7,362 494 174,570 43,171 7,870
2016 149,288 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 29,919 156,236 2,877 –3,172 153,359 33,091 –6,948
2017 148,214 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 53,292 150,740 4,938 1,048 145,802 52,244 –2,526
2018 108,293 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 4,599 114,973 2,979 –2,306 111,994 6,905 –6,680
2019 171,666 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 49,120 176,210 2,719 – 812 173,491 49,932 –4,544
2020 151,960 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 35,932 150,998 336 –1,656 150,662 37,588 962
2021 274,261 157,861 41,016 482 31,023 7,841 116,845 116,401 282,694 13,154 254 269,540 116,147 –8,433
2022 112,637 79,022 6,057 482 444 5,071 72,991 33,614 115,872 3,170 –1,459 112,702 35,073 –3,235
2023 Feb. 13,837 10,533 2,090 – 167 2,077 137 8,444 3,304 12,862 – 426 – 507 13,288 3,811 975
Mar. 3,720 2,204 1,226 300 814 164 984 1,516 3,966 –1,018 – 416 4,984 1,932 – 246
Apr. 3,367 1,130 297 146 – 61 235 833 2,237 3,340 – 247 96 3,587 2,141 28
May 8,348 6,261 1,228 – 144 1,301 21 5,035 2,087 8,074 – 49 42 8,123 2,045 274
June –1,800 –2,213 – 312 – 31 – 628 271 –1,901 413 – 437 85 – 19 – 522 432 –1,363
July 11,189 6,405 433 280 69 90 5,972 4,784 12,136 – 437 – 167 12,573 4,951 – 947
Aug. 5,374 4,731 13 115 – 107 – 40 4,720 643 5,225 132 – 129 5,093 772 149
Sep. 5,693 2,115 702 61 785 – 115 1,411 3,577 6,481 361 106 6,120 3,471 – 788
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2022 2023
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 96.82 46.19 67.90 13.90 –26.90 51.95 28.96 –25.80 –13.01
   Debt securities 2.99 2.81 4.10 0.63 –0.10 3.52 0.05 4.44 1.80
     Short-term debt securities 1.27 2.29 1.23 0.39 –1.94 3.00 –0.22 1.92 1.13
     Long-term debt securities 1.72 0.52 2.87 0.24 1.84 0.52 0.26 2.52 0.67
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.38 1.31 3.40 0.34 0.98 1.65 0.43 3.82 2.76
         Non-financial corporations –0.17 0.72 0.87 0.17 –0.17 0.74 0.14 0.76 –0.33
         Financial corporations 0.12 1.08 1.78 0.44 0.73 0.66 –0.05 1.44 1.44
         General government 1.44 –0.48 0.74 –0.27 0.43 0.25 0.34 1.63 1.66
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.61 1.50 0.70 0.29 –1.08 1.88 –0.38 0.61 –0.97
   Loans –7.34 63.05 44.18 4.29 16.30 31.37 –7.78 28.55 13.87
     Short-term loans –4.27 44.68 27.96 2.69 12.28 27.97 –14.97 20.00 11.12
     Long-term loans –3.07 18.37 16.22 1.60 4.02 3.40 7.19 8.55 2.75
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors –0.10 10.13 23.00 8.25 2.92 14.54 –2.72 37.02 9.58
         Non-financial corporations –12.27 7.11 23.94 2.44 5.52 8.47 7.51 29.88 7.51
         Financial corporations 11.58 2.38 –1.29 5.73 –2.68 5.98 –10.31 7.13 2.07
         General government 0.58 0.64 0.34 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.00 0.00
       Loans to the rest of the world –7.24 52.92 21.18 –3.97 13.39 16.83 –5.07 –8.46 4.29
   Equity and investment fund shares 101.16 166.47 116.57 40.14 47.22 2.48 26.73 0.02 32.05
     Equity 88.39 144.71 116.52 38.03 49.03 4.72 24.74 –1.29 29.74
       Listed shares of domestic sectors –77.97 15.33 44.06 6.03 7.40 34.33 –3.70 –10.48 –0.27
         Non-financial corporations –78.06 16.89 43.77 5.58 7.12 34.91 –3.84 –10.41 –0.31
         Financial corporations 0.09 –1.56 0.29 0.46 0.28 –0.58 0.13 –0.07 0.05
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 5.01 8.32 4.99 –2.02 3.61 0.30 3.10 –7.55 0.63
       Other equity  1 161.34 121.06 67.47 34.02 38.02 –29.91 25.34 16.74 29.38
     Investment fund shares 12.78 21.77 0.05 2.11 –1.82 –2.24 1.99 1.32 2.31
       Money market fund shares 3.79 0.66 –0.38 –1.22 –0.42 –1.12 2.37 –0.80 –0.41
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 8.99 21.11 0.43 3.33 –1.40 –1.12 –0.38 2.12 2.72
   Insurance technical reserves 0.37 18.01 1.61 4.99 –1.20 –1.00 –1.18 6.37 –1.08
   Financial derivatives –27.54 15.54 28.86 21.27 28.28 10.09 –30.78 –0.57 –4.39
   Other accounts receivable 55.69 62.27 25.76 –14.66 –33.90 –56.98 131.30 89.19 –11.00
   Total 222.16 374.33 288.98 70.56 29.70 41.42 147.30 102.20 18.25
 External financing
   Debt securities 36.89 20.86 14.16 10.95 3.77 1.37 –1.93 1.38 2.44
     Short-term securities –4.40 2.51 –0.36 3.85 1.21 –2.73 –2.69 –0.16 –0.70
       Long-term securities 41.29 18.35 14.52 7.10 2.56 4.10 0.76 1.54 3.14
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 18.06 9.11 5.88 5.65 1.62 0.19 –1.58 1.74 0.57
           Non-financial corporations –0.17 0.72 0.87 0.17 –0.17 0.74 0.14 0.76 –0.33
           Financial corporations 19.80 9.09 4.48 5.34 1.86 –0.75 –1.97 0.41 –0.22
           General government –0.22 0.09 –0.07 –0.01 –0.08 0.01 0.01 –0.00 –0.07
           Households –1.35 –0.79 0.59 0.15 0.01 0.19 0.24 0.57 1.19
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 18.83 11.75 8.28 5.30 2.15 1.18 –0.35 –0.36 1.88
   Loans 96.70 135.14 187.95 34.17 40.97 79.93 32.89 15.44 34.24
     Short-term loans –2.81 81.64 85.32 28.24 21.69 47.79 –12.40 4.26 16.89
     Long-term loans 99.51 53.50 102.63 5.92 19.28 32.14 45.28 11.19 17.35
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 38.35 76.93 164.39 37.30 36.10 72.19 18.80 49.05 20.59
         Non-financial corporations –12.27 7.11 23.94 2.44 5.52 8.47 7.51 29.88 7.51
         Financial corporations 14.97 56.66 119.56 33.11 27.62 37.13 21.70 27.24 17.88
         General government 35.65 13.16 20.89 1.75 2.96 26.59 –10.41 –8.07 –4.81
       Loans from the rest of the world 58.34 58.21 23.55 –3.14 4.87 7.73 14.08 –33.61 13.65
   Equity 60.37 61.44 14.81 3.11 8.99 3.48 –0.77 –6.03 3.51
     Listed shares of domestic sectors –62.25 26.44 57.12 12.97 10.14 33.32 0.70 –13.04 –4.93
       Non-financial corporations –78.06 16.89 43.77 5.58 7.12 34.91 –3.84 –10.41 –0.31
       Financial corporations 3.46 –2.39 2.29 5.17 –1.43 –4.47 3.01 –0.63 –4.60
       General government 0.26 –0.09 0.76 0.18 0.24 0.25 0.10 –1.18 –0.21
       Households 12.08 12.04 10.30 2.04 4.21 2.63 1.43 –0.82 0.20
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 10.09 18.88 –9.58 –12.81 –2.09 8.05 –2.73 1.29 7.17
     Other equity  1 112.54 16.11 –32.73 2.95 0.95 –37.89 1.26 5.72 1.26
   Insurance technical reserves 5.83 4.26 3.53 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.89 0.88 0.88
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.54 14.32 –14.10 –2.28 –0.27 1.80 –13.34 –3.57 –2.86
   Other accounts payable 23.46 138.61 65.83 14.23 12.43 20.81 18.36 10.94 4.56
   Total 223.80 374.63 272.18 61.06 66.77 108.26 36.10 19.03 42.77
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2022 2023
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 717.4 727.5 795.3 731.7 698.7 767.4 795.3 744.3 652.6
   Debt securities 51.5 54.3 53.8 53.4 51.3 53.7 53.8 58.8 60.4
     Short-term debt securities 4.8 7.1 8.4 7.5 5.6 8.6 8.4 10.3 11.3
     Long-term debt securities 46.7 47.2 45.5 45.9 45.7 45.0 45.5 48.5 49.1
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 22.1 23.3 24.7 23.0 23.0 24.1 24.7 28.7 31.4
         Non-financial corporations 4.7 5.3 5.8 5.2 4.9 5.5 5.8 6.5 6.2
         Financial corporations 13.4 14.5 15.0 14.6 14.7 14.9 15.0 16.6 18.0
         General government 4.0 3.5 3.9 3.2 3.5 3.6 3.9 5.6 7.2
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 29.4 31.0 29.2 30.4 28.2 29.6 29.2 30.1 29.0
   Loans 725.1 780.5 827.2 785.9 806.5 840.9 827.2 855.2 869.0
     Short-term loans 571.1 611.2 640.8 614.9 629.8 660.0 640.8 660.1 670.7
     Long-term loans 154.1 169.3 186.4 171.0 176.7 180.9 186.4 195.1 198.3
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 412.5 422.6 445.6 430.9 433.8 448.3 445.6 482.6 492.2
         Non-financial corporations 327.6 334.7 358.7 337.2 342.7 351.1 358.7 388.5 396.0
         Financial corporations 76.9 79.3 78.0 85.0 82.4 88.3 78.0 85.2 87.2
         General government 7.9 8.6 8.9 8.7 8.8 8.8 8.9 8.9 8.9
       Loans to the rest of the world 312.7 357.9 381.6 355.1 372.7 392.6 381.6 372.6 376.8
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,567.8 2,860.0 2,611.9 2,774.6 2,700.9 2,670.7 2,611.9 2,691.8 2,713.8
     Equity 2,363.1 2,619.8 2,399.3 2,542.4 2,483.4 2,458.8 2,399.3 2,472.6 2,488.3
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 307.0 393.0 331.2 350.1 305.0 307.5 331.2 361.1 354.8
         Non-financial corporations 298.9 384.9 324.4 342.4 298.2 301.7 324.4 353.7 347.0
         Financial corporations 8.1 8.0 6.7 7.7 6.8 5.7 6.7 7.4 7.8
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 66.6 74.7 72.3 68.5 68.7 67.5 72.3 66.9 67.1
       Other equity  1 1,989.5 2,152.2 1,995.8 2,123.8 2,109.7 2,083.8 1,995.8 2,044.6 2,066.4
     Investment fund shares 204.7 240.2 212.6 232.3 217.5 211.9 212.6 219.2 225.4
       Money market fund shares 7.0 7.6 7.2 6.4 6.0 4.9 7.2 6.5 6.1
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 197.8 232.6 205.4 225.9 211.5 207.0 205.4 212.7 219.3
   Insurance technical reserves 62.1 64.8 41.0 47.8 45.2 42.8 41.0 47.3 46.3
   Financial derivatives 30.9 106.0 92.2 147.8 164.4 199.0 92.2 65.6 57.6
   Other accounts receivable 1,242.9 1,452.5 1,525.7 1,491.2 1,519.3 1,533.8 1,525.7 1,581.3 1,578.2
   Total 5,397.9 6,045.6 5,947.1 6,032.4 5,986.3 6,108.2 5,947.1 6,044.3 5,978.0
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 238.3 252.3 228.7 245.3 229.7 226.7 228.7 231.2 234.8
     Short-term securities 7.1 9.6 9.3 13.4 14.7 12.0 9.3 9.1 8.4
     Long-term securities 231.2 242.7 219.4 231.8 215.1 214.7 219.4 222.1 226.4
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 96.1 100.6 90.7 98.6 92.5 90.3 90.7 93.2 94.0
         Non-financial corporations 4.7 5.3 5.8 5.2 4.9 5.5 5.8 6.5 6.2
         Financial corporations 78.2 83.2 73.4 81.7 76.7 73.8 73.4 74.4 74.3
         General government 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3
         Households 12.8 11.8 11.3 11.2 10.6 10.7 11.3 11.9 13.3
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 142.3 151.7 137.9 146.7 137.2 136.4 137.9 138.0 140.8
   Loans 2,269.5 2,401.7 2,593.9 2,437.9 2,483.5 2,570.7 2,593.9 2,607.7 2,634.6
     Short-term loans 830.0 903.3 992.0 932.9 958.5 1,010.9 992.0 994.3 1,011.4
     Long-term loans 1,439.5 1,498.4 1,601.9 1,505.1 1,525.0 1,559.7 1,601.9 1,613.4 1,623.2
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,390.7 1,468.8 1,633.7 1,506.8 1,540.6 1,614.2 1,633.7 1,680.0 1,699.3
         Non-financial corporations 327.6 334.7 358.7 337.2 342.7 351.1 358.7 388.5 396.0
         Financial corporations 961.3 1,019.4 1,139.8 1,053.4 1,078.8 1,117.4 1,139.8 1,164.0 1,180.7
         General government 101.9 114.7 135.3 116.2 119.1 145.7 135.3 127.4 122.5
       Loans from the rest of the world 878.8 932.9 960.2 931.1 942.9 956.4 960.2 927.7 935.3
   Equity 3,260.9 3,689.0 2,981.1 3,391.9 2,994.2 2,843.1 2,981.1 3,264.2 3,259.2
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 739.9 924.8 760.4 840.0 733.9 691.4 760.4 854.7 821.7
       Non-financial corporations 298.9 384.9 324.4 342.4 298.2 301.7 324.4 353.7 347.0
       Financial corporations 171.9 210.3 151.1 194.3 161.8 138.1 151.1 182.0 165.2
       General government 56.3 69.9 69.2 70.0 70.7 61.4 69.2 78.9 75.3
       Households 212.8 259.7 215.7 233.3 203.2 190.2 215.7 240.1 234.2
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 995.6 1,126.3 824.1 984.0 795.3 732.0 824.1 942.3 976.1
     Other equity  1 1,525.5 1,637.9 1,396.6 1,567.9 1,465.0 1,419.7 1,396.6 1,467.2 1,461.4
   Insurance technical reserves 283.1 287.4 290.9 288.3 289.2 290.0 290.9 291.8 292.7
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 83.4 137.9 73.3 146.2 142.4 169.0 73.3 44.7 39.5
   Other accounts payable 1,276.0 1,524.8 1,603.9 1,547.4 1,565.3 1,654.8 1,603.9 1,600.9 1,620.8
   Total 7,411.2 8,293.2 7,771.7 8,057.0 7,704.3 7,754.3 7,771.7 8,040.5 8,081.6
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2022 2023
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 213.31 146.18 111.83 10.74 27.31 33.06 40.72 –15.43 26.07
     Currency 61.94 60.57 44.97 13.64 11.50 13.69 6.15 2.80 3.94
     Deposits 151.36 85.61 66.86 –2.90 15.81 19.37 34.57 –18.23 22.13
       Transferable deposits 165.34 90.84 47.63 –0.99 23.73 20.48 4.41 –60.51 –18.16
       Time deposits 1.29 –5.09 35.17 0.16 –4.31 6.22 33.10 45.80 43.27
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –15.26 –0.13 –15.94 –2.07 –3.61 –7.32 –2.95 –3.52 –2.99
   Debt securities –5.94 –5.89 25.03 2.86 4.85 5.36 11.96 29.77 20.93
     Short-term debt securities 0.08 0.31 2.01 –0.01 0.06 0.17 1.79 7.86 6.18
     Long-term debt securities –6.02 –6.20 23.02 2.87 4.80 5.18 10.17 21.91 14.75
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –2.55 –3.70 20.31 2.27 3.77 3.76 10.52 25.63 17.09
         Non-financial corporations –1.32 –0.83 0.50 0.08 –0.02 0.21 0.23 0.53 1.12
         Financial corporations –1.25 –2.57 17.47 2.34 3.18 2.94 9.01 21.58 13.07
         General government 0.02 –0.30 2.35 –0.16 0.61 0.61 1.29 3.53 2.90
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –3.38 –2.19 4.72 0.60 1.08 1.60 1.44 4.14 3.84
   Equity and investment fund shares 90.20 136.69 78.32 31.08 22.22 9.21 15.82 13.49 11.26
     Equity 48.53 31.80 27.12 8.07 9.88 3.98 5.19 1.32 0.78
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 16.06 14.29 12.38 2.78 5.54 3.36 0.70 0.04 0.25
         Non-financial corporations 11.92 12.71 9.97 2.02 3.90 2.68 1.36 –1.10 0.29
         Financial corporations 4.14 1.58 2.42 0.76 1.64 0.67 –0.66 1.14 –0.04
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 23.29 10.83 8.73 3.61 2.35 –0.45 3.22 0.53 –0.08
       Other equity  1 9.19 6.69 6.00 1.68 1.99 1.07 1.26 0.75 0.62
     Investment fund shares 41.67 104.88 51.20 23.01 12.33 5.23 10.63 12.17 10.48
       Money market fund shares 0.09 0.19 0.82 –0.01 0.28 0.12 0.44 0.44 1.47
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 41.58 104.70 50.38 23.03 12.05 5.11 10.19 11.74 9.00
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 18.34 20.31 –0.49 4.49 –1.86 –1.31 –1.81 6.44 –0.79
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 47.71 51.63 31.70 6.57 5.62 12.12 7.39 1.45 0.66
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 33.69 27.32 48.64 15.46 12.58 8.64 11.97 13.86 5.43
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 –10.46 –0.23 –2.13 16.03 0.41 0.85 –19.43 22.68 –4.62
   Total 386.85 376.00 292.89 87.24 71.14 67.91 66.60 72.26 58.94
 External financing
   Loans 83.95 98.17 83.67 20.37 27.92 25.87 9.50 2.65 5.85
     Short-term loans –5.61 0.86 2.59 0.66 1.09 0.74 0.10 0.74 –0.28
     Long-term loans 89.55 97.31 81.08 19.71 26.83 25.14 9.40 1.91 6.13
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 85.72 99.89 79.69 19.24 26.63 23.30 10.53 2.89 6.08
       Consumer loans –4.29 –0.89 4.60 0.23 0.91 2.59 0.87 0.54 1.26
       Entrepreneurial loans 2.51 –0.83 –0.61 0.91 0.39 –0.01 –1.90 –0.78 –1.49
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 83.17 94.32 82.56 20.70 27.94 24.46 9.45 1.80 4.69
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 0.78 3.85 1.11 –0.33 –0.02 1.41 0.05 0.85 1.16
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.00 –0.00 –0.00 –0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.01 0.90 2.97 –0.94 0.80 1.18 1.93 –0.55 –0.40
   Total 83.96 99.07 86.65 19.43 28.73 27.06 11.43 2.10 5.45
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2022 2023
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 2,860.4 3,005.6 3,119.4 3,017.4 3,047.4 3,084.0 3,119.4 3,102.9 3,129.0
     Currency 324.5 385.1 430.1 398.7 410.2 423.9 430.1 432.9 436.8
     Deposits 2,535.8 2,620.5 2,689.4 2,618.6 2,637.2 2,660.1 2,689.4 2,670.0 2,692.2
       Transferable deposits 1,674.1 1,764.4 1,811.7 1,763.5 1,786.7 1,807.3 1,811.7 1,756.0 1,737.7
       Time deposits 302.8 297.3 335.4 298.5 297.9 307.6 335.4 380.2 423.7
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 558.9 558.8 542.3 556.7 552.6 545.3 542.3 533.8 530.8
     Debt securities 113.3 109.6 125.1 109.5 107.8 110.4 125.1 156.9 177.8
       Short-term debt securities 1.6 1.8 3.9 1.7 1.8 1.9 3.9 11.7 18.1
       Long-term debt securities 111.7 107.8 121.2 107.8 106.1 108.4 121.2 145.2 159.7
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 76.7 75.3 88.4 75.2 74.7 76.1 88.4 116.1 133.1
           Non-financial corporations 10.9 9.8 9.5 9.4 8.9 8.9 9.5 10.1 11.4
           Financial corporations 63.3 63.2 74.6 63.8 63.3 64.1 74.6 98.2 111.0
           General government 2.6 2.2 4.2 2.0 2.5 3.0 4.2 7.8 10.7
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 36.6 34.3 36.7 34.3 33.1 34.3 36.7 40.8 44.7
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,536.6 1,900.6 1,730.9 1,841.6 1,699.9 1,661.2 1,730.9 1,824.7 1,866.3
     Equity 801.9 967.8 874.9 927.9 850.5 828.2 874.9 931.6 943.4
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 243.3 296.0 255.8 271.0 236.8 223.2 255.8 282.1 277.3
         Non-financial corporations 204.0 250.4 207.9 224.7 195.7 183.3 207.9 231.5 225.7
         Financial corporations 39.2 45.6 47.9 46.3 41.1 39.9 47.9 50.6 51.5
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 180.6 249.2 213.7 241.1 214.1 210.2 213.7 227.3 239.6
       Other equity  1 378.0 422.6 405.3 415.7 399.7 394.8 405.3 422.2 426.6
     Investment fund shares 734.8 932.7 856.0 913.8 849.3 833.0 856.0 893.1 922.9
       Money market fund shares 2.3 2.5 3.3 2.5 2.8 2.9 3.3 3.7 5.2
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 732.4 930.2 852.7 911.3 846.5 830.1 852.7 889.4 917.7
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 412.2 432.5 41.3 50.2 46.8 44.0 41.3 47.5 46.6
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,112.1 1,162.2 1,087.1 1,276.4 1,152.8 1,096.9 1,087.1 1,112.5 1,119.5
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 956.8 986.1 1,117.7 1,123.7 1,114.3 1,109.9 1,117.7 1,126.6 1,124.8
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 27.9 27.5 26.5 26.0 27.8 27.5 26.5 27.0 27.7
   Total 7,019.3 7,623.9 7,248.0 7,444.8 7,196.8 7,133.9 7,248.0 7,398.1 7,491.7
 Liabilities
   Loans 1,923.8 2,024.3 2,111.8 2,045.4 2,074.6 2,102.7 2,111.8 2,114.5 2,120.2
     Short-term loans 53.2 53.0 55.5 53.7 54.8 55.8 55.5 56.6 56.4
     Long-term loans 1,870.6 1,971.3 2,056.3 1,991.7 2,019.8 2,047.0 2,056.3 2,057.9 2,063.8
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,447.5 1,549.3 1,632.3 1,569.5 1,597.8 1,621.3 1,632.3 1,636.2 1,642.1
       Consumer loans 226.1 224.5 228.9 224.9 225.5 228.1 228.9 229.7 230.8
       Entrepreneurial loans 250.2 250.5 250.6 251.1 251.3 253.4 250.6 248.6 247.3
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,824.6 1,920.3 2,004.0 1,941.0 1,968.8 1,995.3 2,004.0 2,005.8 2,010.5
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 99.1 104.0 107.8 104.4 105.8 107.4 107.8 108.8 109.7
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 19.5 20.3 23.4 19.4 20.3 21.5 23.4 22.9 22.5
   Total 1,943.3 2,044.6 2,135.2 2,064.8 2,094.9 2,124.2 2,135.2 2,137.4 2,142.6
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
58•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
General
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
fundsGeneral
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus 1
2017 +43.7 + 7.9 +13.9 +10.7 +11.1 +1.3 +0.2 +0.4 +0.3 +0.3
2018 +65.6 +21.0 +12.0 +16.7 +16.0 +1.9 +0.6 +0.4 +0.5 +0.5
2019 +53.0 +21.5 +14.0 +8.4 +9.1 +1.5 +0.6 +0.4 +0.2 +0.3
p 2020 –147.7 –87.1 –32.6 +6.9 –34.8 –4.3 –2.6 –1.0 +0.2 –1.0
p 2021 –129.7 –144.2 +5.6 +6.2 +2.6 –3.6 –4.0 +0.2 +0.2 +0.1
p 2022 –96.9 –124.3 +14.4 +4.7 +8.3 –2.5 –3.2 +0.4 +0.1 +0.2
p 2021 H1 –75.9 –61.0 –3.0 +1.3 –13.2 –4.3 –3.5 –0.2 +0.1 –0.8
pH2 –53.8 –83.2 +8.7 +4.9 +15.8 –2.9 –4.4 +0.5 +0.3 +0.8
p 2022 H1 – 4.6 –36.2 +18.2 +5.8 +7.7 –0.2 –1.9 +1.0 +0.3 +0.4
pH2 –92.3 –88.0 –3.8 –1.1 +0.6 –4.7 –4.4 –0.2 –0.1 +0.0
pe 2023 H1 –42.1 –39.2 –3.1 –6.8 +7.0 –2.1 –1.9 –0.2 –0.3 +0.3
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2017 2,130.3 1,361.5 616.8 168.3 0.8 65.2 41.7 18.9 5.2 0.0
2018 2,083.7 1,334.5 603.2 162.2 0.7 61.9 39.7 17.9 4.8 0.0
2019 2,069.9 1,312.3 612.7 161.4 0.9 59.6 37.8 17.6 4.6 0.0
p 2020 2,340.8 1,526.5 664.4 163.2 7.6 68.8 44.8 19.5 4.8 0.2
p 2021 2,495.5 1,679.3 665.3 165.3 0.6 69.0 46.4 18.4 4.6 0.0
p 2022 2,561.7 1,776.0 634.2 172.2 2.8 66.1 45.8 16.4 4.4 0.1
p 2021 Q1 2,369.9 1,552.1 667.7 163.2 16.4 69.6 45.6 19.6 4.8 0.5
pQ2 2,419.8 1,602.1 667.9 164.3 21.4 69.1 45.8 19.1 4.7 0.6
pQ3 2,453.5 1,630.1 673.4 163.8 24.4 68.9 45.8 18.9 4.6 0.7
pQ4 2,495.5 1,679.3 665.3 165.3 0.6 69.0 46.4 18.4 4.6 0.0
p 2022 Q1 2,499.1 1,684.3 663.4 164.9 3.4 67.6 45.6 17.9 4.5 0.1
pQ2 2,537.4 1,723.4 660.2 166.8 3.7 67.4 45.8 17.5 4.4 0.1
pQ3 2,551.3 1,757.0 643.8 166.6 4.2 66.8 46.0 16.9 4.4 0.1
pQ4 2,561.7 1,776.0 634.2 172.2 2.8 66.1 45.8 16.4 4.4 0.1
p 2023 Q1 2,586.7 1,798.4 631.8 173.1 3.5 65.7 45.7 16.0 4.4 0.1
pQ2 2,585.2 1,805.7 623.3 172.9 2.7 64.6 45.1 15.6 4.3 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The deficit/surplus in
accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition.  2 Quarterly GDP
ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters.
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts *
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total TaxesSocial con-
tributions Other TotalSocial
benefitsCompen-
sation of
employeesInter-
mediate
consumptionGross
capital
formation Interest OtherDeficit/
surplusMemo item:
Total tax
burden  1
€ billion
2017 1,486.9 773.3 549.5 164.2 1,443.3 784.8 250.6 169.5 71.6 33.8 132.9 +43.7 1,329.5
2018 1,557.2 808.1 572.6 176.6 1,491.6 805.6 260.3 176.4 78.5 31.2 139.7 +65.6 1,387.7
2019 1,616.5 834.7 598.2 183.6 1,563.4 846.2 273.6 187.4 84.2 27.4 144.5 +53.0 1,440.0
p 2020 1,569.9 781.7 608.1 180.1 1,717.6 904.5 285.2 211.3 92.9 21.7 201.9 –147.7 1,396.7
p 2021 1,712.9 889.0 632.1 191.8 1,842.6 941.1 295.4 226.6 92.5 21.1 266.0 –129.7 1,528.7
p 2022 1,821.2 955.9 666.8 198.6 1,918.1 974.0 307.9 238.4 100.9 26.5 270.4 –96.9 1,633.4
As a percentage of GDP
2017 45.5 23.7 16.8 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 +1.3 40.7
2018 46.3 24.0 17.0 5.2 44.3 23.9 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.1 +1.9 41.2
2019 46.5 24.0 17.2 5.3 45.0 24.4 7.9 5.4 2.4 0.8 4.2 +1.5 41.4
p 2020 46.1 23.0 17.9 5.3 50.5 26.6 8.4 6.2 2.7 0.6 5.9 –4.3 41.0
p 2021 47.3 24.6 17.5 5.3 50.9 26.0 8.2 6.3 2.6 0.6 7.4 –3.6 42.3
p 2022 47.0 24.7 17.2 5.1 49.5 25.1 7.9 6.1 2.6 0.7 7.0 –2.5 42.1
Percentage growth rates
2017 +4.2 +4.6 +4.8 +0.5 +3.8 +4.0 +4.1 +4.3 +5.1 –9.3 +4.5 . +4.7
2018 +4.7 +4.5 +4.2 +7.6 +3.3 +2.6 +3.9 +4.1 +9.7 –7.8 +5.1 . +4.4
2019 +3.8 +3.3 +4.5 +4.0 +4.8 +5.1 +5.1 +6.2 +7.2 –12.0 +3.5 . +3.8
p 2020 –2.9 –6.3 +1.6 –1.9 +9.9 +6.9 +4.2 +12.7 +10.4 –20.8 +39.7 . –3.0
p 2021 +9.1 +13.7 +3.9 +6.5 +7.3 +4.1 +3.6 +7.2 –0.5 –3.1 +31.7 . +9.4
p 2022 +6.3 +7.5 +5.5 +3.6 +4.1 +3.5 +4.3 +5.2 +9.0 +25.8 +1.7 . +6.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office.  * Figures in accordance with ESA 2010.  1 Taxes and
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution Fund.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
59•
X. Public finances in Germany
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3
Period Total  4 TaxesFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5 Total  4Person-
nel
expend-
itureCurrent
grants InterestFixed
asset
forma-
tionFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5Deficit/
surplusRev-
enue  6Expend-
itureDeficit/
surplusRev-
enueExpend-
itureDeficit/
surplus
2016 859.7 705.8 8.8 842.8 251.3 320.8 43.3 48.3 11.7 +16.8 601.8 594.8 +7.1 1,352.5 1,328.6 +23.9
2017 897.6 734.5 7.7 867.8 261.5 327.2 41.9 51.7 13.8 +29.8 631.5 622.0 +9.5 1,414.9 1,375.6 +39.3
2018 949.2 776.3 6.0 904.0 272.4 337.3 39.1 55.1 16.1 +45.2 656.2 642.5 +13.6 1,488.1 1,429.3 +58.8
2019 1,007.7 799.4 11.0 973.9 285.9 348.9 33.5 62.2 16.8 +33.7 685.0 676.7 +8.3 1,571.2 1,529.2 +42.0
2020 944.3 739.9 13.7 1,109.7 299.4 422.0 25.8 68.6 59.9 –165.4 719.5 747.8 –28.3 1,516.2 1,709.9 –193.7
2021 1,105.4 833.3 25.3 1,239.9 310.7 530.8 21.0 69.3 26.1 –134.5 769.2 777.1 –7.9 1,701.6 1,844.0 –142.4
P 2022 1,145.2 895.9 32.4 1,287.0 325.7 499.6 33.5 72.5 79.3 –141.8 800.6 794.8 +5.9 1,773.0 1,908.9 –135.9
2021 Q1 240.7 185.3 4.3 300.6 75.5 130.8 7.3 11.1 14.6 –59.9 P182.4 P196.3 P–13.9 P385.2 P458.9 P–73.8
Q2 267.0 195.8 7.5 297.1 74.8 122.7 10.7 15.2 10.5 –30.2 P185.9 P197.0 P–11.1 P414.1 P455.3 P–41.2
Q3 270.9 210.7 7.4 290.2 75.8 116.3 – 0.4 16.5 10.4 –19.3 P183.4 P191.9 P–8.6 P413.5 P441.4 P–27.8
Q4 332.9 237.7 6.1 347.8 84.1 153.4 3.1 26.4 – 9.4 –14.9 P197.3 P190.4 P+6.9 P492.6 P500.6 P–8.0
2022 Q1 278.2 224.0 5.0 279.3 79.6 116.8 5.5 11.9 7.0 – 1.0 P193.8 P199.8 P–6.0 P430.3 P437.3 P–7.1
Q2 288.0 224.6 5.1 294.2 77.8 126.4 10.6 15.3 5.9 – 6.2 P199.9 P196.7 P+3.2 P444.7 P447.7 P–3.1
Q3 272.3 207.0 13.3 303.4 78.1 117.0 10.8 17.7 10.8 –31.0 P194.0 P197.6 P–3.6 P423.1 P457.7 P–34.6
Q4 314.6 244.5 9.0 409.6 89.7 139.0 6.5 27.5 55.6 –95.0 P210.5 P198.1 P+12.4 P481.8 P564.4 P–82.5
2023 Q1 281.9 215.4 9.3 331.8 81.3 131.6 20.1 13.6 17.8 –49.9 P195.4 P200.8 P–5.4 P441.7 P497.0 P–55.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data.  1 Annual fig-
ures based on the quarterly figures of the Federal Statistical Office, core budgets and
off-budget entities which are assigned to the general government sector.  2 The annual
figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all pro-
visional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated.  3 The develop-
ment of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statisticalchangeovers.  4 Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state
and local government.  5 On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as dis-
posals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted.  6 Excluding central govern-
ment liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency.
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2016 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 380.2 372.0 + 8.2 247.1 241.7 + 5.4
2017 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 396.7 385.5 +11.3 258.5 247.7 +10.7
2018 374.4 363.5 +10.9 419.6 399.8 +19.9 270.0 260.1 + 9.8
2019 382.5 369.2 +13.3 436.3 419.3 +17.0 282.4 276.7 + 5.7
2020 341.4 472.1 –130.7 455.5 489.0 –33.6 295.2 293.2 + 2.0
2021 370.3 585.9 –215.6 509.3 508.7 + 0.5 308.0 303.4 + 4.6
2022 399.6 515.6 –116.0 534.8 522.5 +12.3 328.5 325.8 + 2.7
2021 Q1 75.0 127.5 –52.5 113.7 120.7 – 7.1 61.1 69.7 – 8.6
Q2 86.4 123.5 –37.1 122.8 122.0 + 0.8 74.6 71.7 + 2.9
Q3 93.9 128.7 –34.7 125.9 120.2 + 5.7 74.6 74.9 – 0.3
Q4 115.1 206.3 –91.2 145.6 144.5 + 1.2 97.6 87.0 +10.6
2022 Q1 94.7 114.0 –19.3 134.6 122.7 +11.9 68.4 73.8 – 5.4
Q2 99.7 123.5 –23.7 133.2 123.6 + 9.6 81.0 77.3 + 3.7
Q3 89.0 127.8 –38.7 126.1 121.4 + 4.7 81.1 80.3 + 0.8
Q4 116.1 150.4 –34.2 139.6 153.4 –13.8 98.0 94.5 + 3.5
2023 Q1 96.2 116.9 –20.7 121.0 122.3 – 1.3 73.3 81.0 – 7.7
Q2 101.8 119.8 –18.0 138.5 133.6 + 4.9 87.0 86.6 + 0.4
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office data and Bundesbank
calculations.  1 Any amounts of the Bundesbank's profit distribution exceeding the
reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government'sspecial funds are not included here.  2 Including the local authority level of the city
states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg.  3 Data of core budgets and off-budget entities
which are assigned to the general government sector.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
60•
X. Public finances in Germany
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Period Total TotalCentral
government  1State
government  1 European Union  2Local
government  3Balance of
untransferred
tax shares  4Memo item:
Amounts deducted
in the Federal
budget  5
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,836
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 – 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,911 632,268 313,381 286,065 32,822 107,916 – 274 30,266
2021 833,337 706,978 342,988 325,768 38,222 125,000 + 1,359 29,321
2022 895,854 760,321 372,121 349,583 38,617 134,146 + 1,387 34,911
2021 Q1 189,316 159,271 72,814 73,137 13,320 19,882 + 10,163 6,887
Q2 191,931 163,158 81,129 74,024 8,005 29,609 – 835 7,438
Q3 211,364 180,378 87,603 84,312 8,464 29,726 + 1,260 7,823
Q4 240,726 204,171 101,442 94,295 8,433 45,784 – 9,229 7,173
2022 Q1 224,006 189,158 92,112 87,240 9,806 24,772 + 10,077 7,261
Q2 224,538 190,982 94,153 86,852 9,977 34,149 – 594 11,576
Q3 205,544 174,232 84,078 80,020 10,133 33,618 – 2,306 7,953
Q4 241,767 205,950 101,778 95,471 8,702 41,607 – 5,790 8,121
2023 Q1 220,950 186,173 93,366 83,536 9,271 26,505 + 8,271 7,665
Q2 221,225 186,597 94,492 82,961 9,144 35,152 – 525 8,959
Q3 ... 195,334 98,626 87,824 8,884 ... ... 8,678
2022 Sep. . 66,745 32,551 30,738 3,455 . . 2,373
2023 Sep. . 74,690 37,728 33,970 2,992 . . 2,626
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers,
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern-
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these amounts
which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget.  2 Customs duties andshares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government
tax revenue.  3 Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin, Bremen and
Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms.  4 Difference between local
government's share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in
the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local govern-
ment in the same period.  5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1.
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
€ million
Joint taxes
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7
Period Total  1 TotalWage
tax 3Assessed
income
tax 4Corpora-
tion tax  5Invest-
ment
income
tax 6 TotalDomestic
VATImport
VATLocal
business
tax
trans-
fers  8Central
govern-
ment
taxes  9State
govern-
ment
taxes  9EU
customs
dutiesMemo
item:
Local
govern-
ment
share in
joint
taxes
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,376 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,734 50,107
2021 760,953 370,296 218,407 72,342 42,124 37,423 250,800 187,631 63,169 4,951 98,171 31,613 5,122 53,976
2022 814,886 390,111 227,205 77,411 46,334 39,161 284,850 198,201 86,649 6,347 96,652 30,097 6,829 54,565
2021 Q1 171,974 86,381 50,854 17,826 10,203 7,498 54,795 45,403 9,392 252 21,712 7,757 1,076 12,703
Q2 175,242 84,505 50,783 14,347 8,860 10,515 57,634 43,399 14,235 1,215 23,210 7,398 1,281 12,085
Q3 193,910 90,619 53,857 17,973 9,853 8,936 69,528 49,052 20,476 1,189 23,469 7,813 1,292 13,532
Q4 219,827 108,791 62,913 22,196 13,208 10,474 68,843 49,777 19,066 2,295 29,780 8,645 1,473 15,656
2022 Q1 203,130 96,245 56,206 20,915 11,178 7,946 73,584 54,234 19,350 615 22,252 8,975 1,459 13,972
Q2 204,740 101,822 60,363 17,194 11,246 13,019 67,763 46,755 21,008 1,521 24,441 7,564 1,630 13,758
Q3 185,552 82,392 43,431 17,598 10,724 10,639 71,164 49,323 21,841 1,471 21,657 7,115 1,753 11,320
Q4 221,464 109,652 67,205 21,704 13,186 7,557 72,339 47,889 24,451 2,740 28,302 6,444 1,987 15,514
2023 Q1 199,764 94,453 55,669 19,728 10,700 8,357 73,522 52,197 21,325 370 23,110 6,815 1,494 13,591
Q2 199,993 98,917 59,538 15,467 12,406 11,506 67,260 47,855 19,405 1,499 24,740 6,142 1,435 13,396
Q3 208,722 98,832 56,370 17,010 9,902 15,550 76,093 56,986 19,106 1,583 24,665 6,160 1,389 13,388
2022 Sep. 71,161 36,801 7,741 16,856 10,535 1,668 23,746 16,749 6,997 1 7,579 2,365 669 4,416
2023 Sep. 80,597 46,034 17,382 16,976 9,906 1,771 23,747 17,707 6,040 2 8,571 1,856 387 5,907
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations.  1 This total, unlike
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of untrans-
ferred tax shares.  2 Respective percentage share of central, state and local government
in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and
non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on interest income and
capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12.  3 After deducting child benefits
and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans.  4 After deducting employeerefunds and research grants.  5 After deducting research grants.  6 Final withholding tax
on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings.  7 The allocation
of revenue to central, state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular
intervals, is regulated in Section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percent-
age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2022: 46.6:50.5:2.8.
The EU share is deducted from central government's share.  8 Respective percentage
share of central and state government for 2022: 41.4:58.6.  9 For the breakdown, see
Table X. 7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
61•
X. Public finances in Germany
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
of which:
PeriodEnergy
taxSoli-
darity
surchargeTobacco
taxInsurance
taxMotor
vehicle
taxElectri-
city taxAlcohol
tax OtherTax on
the acqui-
sition of
land and
buildingsInherit-
ance
taxBetting
and
lottery
tax Other TotalLocal
business
tax 2Real
property
taxes
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,654
2017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 – 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,966
2018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,203
2019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,651 14,553 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2021 37,120 11,028 14,733 14,980 9,546 6,691 2,089 1,984 18,335 9,824 2,333 1,121 77,335 61,251 14,985
2022 33,667 11,978 14,229 15,672 9,499 6,830 2,191 2,585 17,122 9,226 2,569 1,180 87,315 70,382 15,282
2021 Q1 4,126 3,171 2,585 6,776 2,567 1,692 395 400 4,716 2,110 578 353 17,594 13,798 3,503
Q2 8,717 2,546 4,053 2,843 2,469 1,640 528 413 4,231 2,374 538 255 17,904 13,692 4,034
Q3 9,532 2,338 3,636 2,911 2,381 1,618 514 538 4,571 2,457 516 269 18,643 14,215 4,133
Q4 14,745 2,972 4,458 2,449 2,130 1,741 651 633 4,816 2,884 700 244 23,194 19,546 3,316
2022 Q1 4,452 2,840 2,372 7,175 2,594 1,785 531 503 5,061 2,827 701 385 21,492 17,454 3,577
Q2 9,092 3,518 3,648 2,872 2,433 1,722 505 651 4,406 2,238 661 259 21,318 16,839 4,077
Q3 7,103 2,571 3,742 3,059 2,325 1,598 549 710 4,100 2,138 596 281 21,463 16,792 4,249
Q4 13,020 3,049 4,467 2,567 2,147 1,725 606 722 3,555 2,023 611 254 23,043 19,298 3,380
2023 Q1 4,362 2,888 2,669 7,637 2,632 1,749 530 643 3,362 2,368 666 420 21,555 17,471 3,610
Q2 8,796 3,649 3,830 3,091 2,475 1,669 517 712 2,937 2,323 615 267 22,731 18,117 4,192
Q3 9,477 2,607 3,879 3,309 2,339 1,749 532 773 2,997 2,302 577 284 ... ... ...
2022 Sep. 2,117 1,604 1,385 812 695 541 181 244 1,355 718 189 102 . . .
2023 Sep. 3,077 1,572 1,260 875 773 583 167 265 892 656 203 104 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 For the sum total, see Table X. 6.  2 Including revenue from offshore wind
farms.
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  3
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions  2Payments
from
central
government TotalPension
paymentsPen-
sioners'
health
insuranceDeficit/
surplus Total Deposits  4SecuritiesEquity
interests,
mortgages
and other
loans  5Real
estateMemo
item:
Adminis-
trative
assets
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 –2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,147
2017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 +529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,032
2018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 +4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,008
2019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 +1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 303 56 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 –3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 344 55 3,901
2021 348,679 245,185 102,772 347,486 296,343 22,734 +1,192 42,014 40,320 1,241 400 52 3,807
2022 363,871 258,269 104,876 360,436 308,168 23,792 +3,435 46,087 44,181 1,399 457 51 3,746
2021 Q1 83,066 57,351 25,542 86,048 73,799 5,600 –2,982 36,888 35,326 1,166 342 54 3,887
Q2 86,386 60,666 25,545 86,486 73,905 5,679 –100 36,941 35,554 988 345 53 3,871
Q3 85,535 59,941 25,468 87,123 74,453 5,718 –1,588 36,041 34,670 973 345 53 3,840
Q4 92,818 67,211 25,415 87,385 74,556 5,730 +5,432 41,974 40,310 1,241 370 52 3,835
2022 Q1 86,684 60,599 25,937 86,841 74,568 5,734 –157 41,784 39,952 1,367 399 65 3,783
Q2 90,040 63,978 25,879 87,138 74,644 5,756 +2,903 44,425 42,441 1,513 406 65 3,761
Q3 89,284 62,891 26,218 92,606 79,400 6,127 –3,322 41,548 39,767 1,315 415 51 3,775
Q4 96,931 70,750 25,995 93,444 79,944 6,170 +3,487 46,082 44,186 1,399 446 51 3,767
2023 Q1 91,370 64,171 26,972 92,422 79,330 6,142 –1,052 45,109 43,030 1,569 460 51 3,724
Q2 94,735 67,459 26,942 92,585 79,177 6,165 +2,151 47,245 45,043 1,693 461 48 3,705
Q3 93,776 66,300 26,950 97,619 83,549 6,513 –3,843 44,354 42,208 1,632 481 34 3,703
Sources: German pension insurance scheme and Bundesbank calculations.  * Excluding
the German pension insurance scheme for mining, railway and maritime industries. The
final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as
the latter are not revised.  1 Including financial compensation payments. Excluding in-vestment spending and proceeds.  2 Including contributions for recipients of govern-
ment cash benefits.  3 Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
quarter.  4 Including cash.  5 Excluding loans to other social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
62•
X. Public finance in Germany
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total  1Contri-
butionsInsolvency
compen-
sation levyGovernment
funds TotalUnemploy-
ment
benefit  2Short-time
working
benefits  3Job
promotion  4Insolvency
benefit
paymentAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  5Deficit/
surplusMemo item:
Deficit-
offsetting
grant or
loan from
central
government
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 – 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 595 5,314 +5,463 –
2017 37,819 32,501 882 – 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 687 6,444 +5,952 –
2018 39,335 34,172 622 – 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 588 8,129 +6,228 –
2019 35,285 29,851 638 – 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 842 6,252 +2,131 –
2020 33,678 28,236 630 – 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 1,214 6,076 –27,335 6,913
2021 35,830 29,571 1,302 – 57,570 19,460 21,003 7,475 493 6,080 –21,739 16,935
2022 37,831 31,651 1,062 – 37,530 16,588 3,865 7,125 534 6,256 + 300 423
2021 Q1 8,228 6,747 289 – 18,260 5,956 8,006 1,935 184 1,391 –10,033 –
Q2 8,830 7,301 324 – 16,720 5,029 7,495 1,912 108 1,452 –7,890 –
Q3 8,791 7,290 330 – 12,042 4,447 3,631 1,744 91 1,452 –3,251 –
Q4 9,982 8,234 359 – 10,547 4,028 1,871 1,884 110 1,785 – 565 16,935
2022 Q1 8,827 7,374 251 – 10,685 4,424 2,087 1,821 135 1,412 –1,858 –
Q2 9,327 7,857 262 – 9,457 4,091 1,215 1,794 147 1,450 – 130 –
Q3 9,278 7,740 261 – 8,401 4,056 408 1,621 107 1,506 + 877 –
Q4 10,398 8,679 289 – 8,987 4,016 156 1,889 145 1,888 +1,411 423
2023 Q1 9,836 8,442 178 – 9,942 4,727 592 1,858 376 1,550 – 106 –
Q2 10,387 8,976 186 – 9,661 4,604 380 1,902 271 1,689 + 726 –
Q3 10,361 8,804 182 – 9,351 4,712 141 1,775 284 1,691 +1,010 –
Source: Federal Employment Agency and Bundesbank calculations.  * Including transfers
to the civil servants' pension fund.  1 Excluding central government deficit-offsetting
grant or loan.  2 Unemployment benefit in case of unemployment.  3 Including seasonal
short-time working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, re-
structuring measures and refunds of social contributions.  4 Vocational training, meas-ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, integration, compensation top-up pay-
ments and promotion of business start-ups.  5 Including collection charges to other
social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the
basic allowance for job seekers.
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions Central
government
funds  2 TotalHospital
treatmentPharma-
ceuticalsMedical
treatmentDental
treatment  3Remedies
and
therapeutic
appliancesSickness
benefitsAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  4Deficit/
surplus
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 757
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 +3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 +2,654
2019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 –1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 –6,110
2021 289,270 249,734 36,977 294,602 82,748 46,199 45,058 16,335 20,163 16,612 11,727 –5,332
2022 315,248 262,367 50,223 310,594 85,061 48,354 46,379 16,737 21,259 17,947 12,418 +4,654
2021 Q1 72,970 59,338 13,303 72,660 19,631 11,175 11,564 4,069 4,564 4,287 2,967 + 310
Q2 71,964 61,819 9,965 74,492 20,287 11,275 11,536 4,219 5,085 4,120 2,850 –2,529
Q3 70,592 61,899 7,942 73,569 20,748 11,756 10,730 4,060 5,085 4,004 2,849 –2,977
Q4 74,020 66,678 5,767 73,209 21,340 12,043 11,252 4,062 5,290 4,200 3,109 + 810
2022 Q1 79,253 62,142 17,049 81,493 20,550 11,891 11,847 4,286 5,216 4,574 3,510 –2,240
Q2 79,112 64,611 14,280 79,269 21,080 12,053 11,753 4,249 5,335 4,457 2,958 – 158
Q3 75,516 65,242 9,804 75,011 21,164 12,221 11,384 3,956 5,352 4,441 2,996 + 505
Q4 81,512 70,384 9,091 74,894 21,659 12,242 11,566 4,310 5,442 4,486 3,148 +6,617
2023 Q1 73,718 66,513 6,759 77,593 22,196 12,209 12,012 4,370 5,621 4,927 3,169 –3,875
Q2 73,722 68,792 4,495 76,031 22,326 12,284 11,762 4,476 5,762 4,682 3,166 –2,309
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as the latter are not
revised. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensationscheme.  2 Federal grant and liquidity assistance.  3 Including dentures.  4 Net, i.e. after
deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contributions incurred by other
social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
63•
X. Public finances in Germany
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period Total Contributions TotalNon-cash
care benefitsInpatient
care total  2Nursing
benefitContributions to
pension insur-
ance scheme  3Administrative
expenditureDeficit/
surplus
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 4,904 13,539 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,235
2017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 – 2,557
2018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 – 3,315
2019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2021 52,573 49,764 53,903 9,573 16,511 13,865 3,070 2,024 – 1,330
2022 57,944 52,604 60,100 10,405 20,542 14,872 3,223 2,166 – 2,156
2021 Q1 12,093 11,831 13,344 2,355 3,971 3,387 725 512 – 1,251
Q2 12,933 12,329 13,521 2,287 4,030 3,421 745 510 – 587
Q3 12,624 12,294 13,390 2,393 4,182 3,466 783 509 – 767
Q4 14,853 13,242 13,595 2,475 4,270 3,646 788 503 + 1,258
2022 Q1 12,912 12,412 14,739 2,564 4,974 3,572 775 529 – 1,827
Q2 15,350 12,951 14,827 2,464 5,026 3,698 795 548 + 523
Q3 13,708 13,021 15,387 2,638 5,197 3,755 802 542 – 1,679
Q4 15,813 14,067 15,078 2,581 5,281 3,892 837 528 + 735
2023 Q1 14,283 13,169 14,698 2,876 5,377 3,846 843 570 – 415
Q2 14,227 13,668 14,392 2,745 5,539 3,940 869 561 – 165
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  * The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the
latter are not revised.  1 Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund.  2 In-cluding benefits for short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter alia.
3 For non-professional carers.
12. Maastricht debt by creditor
€ million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Bundesbank Domestic MFIsOther domestic
financial corporations Other domestic creditors Foreign creditors
of which: of which: of which: of which: of which: Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities
2016 2,161,570 205,391 191,880 585,375 223,407 211,515 111,843 48,712 14,182 1,110,577 1,012,273
2017 2,130,325 319,159 305,301 546,063 194,619 180,104 81,125 56,798 10,456 1,028,201 941,750
2018 2,083,675 364,731 350,487 504,476 167,506 186,346 89,794 56,071 8,725 972,052 892,222
2019 2,069,889 366,562 352,025 468,957 158,119 183,714 88,771 61,050 7,225 989,606 908,749
2020 2,340,849 522,392 507,534 505,373 157,828 191,231 99,840 54,238 8,373 1,067,615 996,417
2021 2,495,538 716,004 700,921 497,968 144,646 191,580 103,049 51,633 7,435 1,038,353 969,245
2022 2,561,675 742,514 727,298 509,106 128,892 210,888 126,042 58,444 10,782 1,040,723 975,545
2021 Q1 2,369,872 561,444 546,540 480,026 162,961 190,136 99,333 63,796 8,060 1,074,470 1,010,641
Q2 2,419,762 620,473 605,430 482,767 151,182 189,993 99,735 52,647 7,699 1,073,882 1,008,532
Q3 2,453,545 669,659 654,600 484,986 152,068 191,571 101,742 54,275 8,070 1,053,054 987,736
Q4 2,495,538 716,004 700,921 497,968 144,646 191,580 103,049 51,633 7,435 1,038,353 969,245
2022 Q1 2,499,123 737,978 722,843 481,772 143,411 194,096 106,165 50,834 6,959 1,034,442 967,915
Q2 2,537,417 759,385 744,213 485,392 133,999 202,680 115,576 53,648 8,086 1,036,311 970,548
Q3 2,551,283 741,360 726,147 515,161 126,865 202,278 116,268 53,765 8,987 1,038,718 968,178
Q4 2,561,675 742,514 727,298 509,106 128,892 210,888 126,042 58,444 10,782 1,040,723 975,545
p 2023 Q1 2,586,725 741,587 726,326 480,745 129,372 208,933 124,776 63,130 16,123 1,092,330 1,029,400
pQ2 2,585,237 719,981 704,639 459,051 126,047 209,149 124,765 64,680 20,887 1,132,377 1,069,277
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
64•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
General government
2016 2,161,570 15,491 69,715 1,483,871 96,254 496,239 . .
2017 2,130,325 14,298 48,789 1,484,462 88,841 493,935 . .
2018 2,083,675 14,680 52,572 1,456,160 79,171 481,091 . .
2019 2,069,889 14,449 56,350 1,458,540 64,464 476,086 . .
2020 2,340,849 14,486 173,851 1,596,141 85,384 470,987 . .
2021 Q1 2,369,872 12,283 190,039 1,637,496 62,705 467,348 . .
Q2 2,419,762 13,065 182,676 1,689,902 69,170 464,949 . .
Q3 2,453,545 13,565 192,489 1,711,727 70,496 465,268 . .
Q4 2,495,538 17,743 195,421 1,729,876 88,481 464,017 . .
2022 Q1 2,499,123 15,676 172,809 1,774,484 70,930 465,223 . .
Q2 2,537,417 17,793 161,844 1,810,578 76,484 470,718 . .
Q3 2,551,283 22,631 149,825 1,796,620 82,049 500,158 . .
Q4 2,561,675 16,985 150,371 1,818,189 112,199 463,933 . .
p 2023 Q1 2,586,725 14,913 145,595 1,880,403 83,390 462,424 . .
pQ2 2,585,237 14,829 154,379 1,891,236 66,907 457,886 . .
Central government
2016 1,365,579 15,491 55,208 1,123,853 50,004 121,022 556 8,567
2017 1,361,492 14,298 36,297 1,131,896 48,305 130,696 1,131 10,618
2018 1,334,500 14,680 42,246 1,107,140 43,067 127,367 933 9,975
2019 1,312,338 14,449 38,480 1,101,866 29,956 127,587 605 10,301
2020 1,526,491 14,486 154,498 1,180,683 48,414 128,410 609 14,521
2021 Q1 1,552,060 12,283 167,485 1,212,495 31,284 128,513 604 22,929
Q2 1,602,137 13,065 165,374 1,259,206 36,297 128,195 647 29,448
Q3 1,630,056 13,565 170,962 1,280,586 37,116 127,826 693 31,382
Q4 1,679,310 17,743 176,428 1,300,416 57,779 126,943 618 8,078
2022 Q1 1,684,290 15,676 155,123 1,340,340 41,680 131,472 576 10,430
Q2 1,723,415 17,793 147,681 1,373,616 47,196 137,129 623 10,491
Q3 1,757,005 22,631 144,999 1,369,628 55,559 164,188 828 13,101
Q4 1,775,982 16,985 146,989 1,391,638 93,352 127,017 8,815 9,011
p 2023 Q1 1,798,377 14,913 140,499 1,456,147 59,981 126,837 3,664 10,500
pQ2 1,805,711 14,829 150,168 1,471,888 42,105 126,722 2,889 11,235
State government
2016 642,291 – 14,515 361,996 20,482 245,298 11,273 1,694
2017 616,785 – 12,543 354,688 19,790 229,764 14,038 2,046
2018 603,166 – 10,332 351,994 19,250 221,590 14,035 1,891
2019 612,698 – 17,873 360,495 19,076 215,254 14,934 1,826
2020 664,421 – 19,354 419,862 19,481 205,724 11,924 1,410
2021 Q1 667,651 – 22,556 429,623 14,375 201,097 10,942 1,995
Q2 667,940 – 17,304 435,709 16,178 198,750 12,454 2,041
Q3 673,373 – 21,528 436,499 16,334 199,012 11,414 2,110
Q4 665,250 – 18,994 434,930 14,074 197,252 12,441 1,772
2022 Q1 663,427 – 17,688 439,767 12,533 193,438 11,634 1,915
Q2 660,169 – 14,166 442,621 12,404 190,979 11,393 1,742
Q3 643,827 – 4,828 432,653 14,873 191,472 14,067 2,147
Q4 634,152 – 3,384 432,186 9,881 188,702 11,585 1,719
p 2023 Q1 631,772 – 5,099 429,985 10,929 185,759 11,918 2,360
pQ2 623,344 – 4,215 424,818 11,664 182,648 13,336 2,041
Local government
2016 166,205 – – 2,404 27,002 136,798 1,819 431
2017 168,305 – – 3,082 24,909 140,314 1,881 466
2018 162,175 – 1 3,046 20,903 138,225 1,884 497
2019 161,367 – – 2,996 19,607 138,763 1,856 532
2020 163,163 – – 3,366 18,520 141,276 1,402 330
2021 Q1 163,189 – – 3,121 17,998 142,070 2,009 325
Q2 164,321 – – 3,121 18,969 142,231 2,070 323
Q3 163,772 – – 3,000 18,156 142,616 2,127 321
Q4 165,316 – – 3,241 18,011 144,064 1,813 313
2022 Q1 164,860 – – 3,052 17,532 144,276 1,884 349
Q2 166,840 – – 2,902 17,566 146,373 1,724 370
Q3 166,624 – – 2,856 15,623 148,145 2,098 392
Q4 172,244 – – 2,896 17,917 151,431 1,614 399
p 2023 Q1 173,058 – – 2,883 17,102 153,073 2,163 422
pQ2 172,862 – – 2,988 17,667 152,207 1,746 748
For footnotes see end of table.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
65•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont´d)
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:   2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
Social security funds
2016 1,232 – – – 562 670 89 3,044
2017 807 – – – 262 545 15 3,934
2018 704 – – – 388 316 16 4,506
2019 899 – – – 375 524 16 4,753
2020 7,641 – – – 7,128 513 6,931 4,606
2021 Q1 16,381 – – – 15,985 395 15,853 4,160
Q2 21,395 – – – 20,995 400 20,860 4,220
Q3 24,449 – – – 24,053 395 23,872 4,292
Q4 553 – – – 131 422 19 4,729
2022 Q1 3,378 – – – 2,883 496 2,739 4,140
Q2 3,690 – – – 3,098 592 2,958 4,095
Q3 4,151 – – – 3,459 692 3,330 4,683
Q4 2,755 – – – 608 2,147 1,442 12,328
p 2023 Q1 3,527 – – – 1,411 2,116 2,263 6,728
pQ2 2,733 – – – 591 2,142 1,442 5,389
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office and
the Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency.  1 Particularly liabilities resulting
from coins in circulation.  2 Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt vis-à-visother government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on the
market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated between
different government subsectors.
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
€ million
Currency and deposits  2Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3
Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total  1 Total  1Federal
day bond Total  1Conventional
Federal
bonds
(Bunds)Conventional
Federal
notes
(Bobls)Conventional
Federal
Treasury
notes
(Schätze)  4Treasury
discount
paper
(Bubills)  5Federal
savings
notesGreen
Federal
securitiesInflation-
linked
Federal
securities  6Capital
indexation
of inflation-
linked
securities Loans  1
2007 987,909 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 102,083 37,385 10,287 . 13,464 506 63,650
2008 1,019,905 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 105,684 40,795 9,649 . 19,540 1,336 78,685
2009 1,086,173 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 113,637 104,409 9,471 . 24,730 1,369 63,121
2010 1,337,160 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 126,220 85,867 8,704 . 35,906 2,396 242,251
2011 1,346,869 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 130,648 58,297 8,208 . 44,241 3,961 215,109
2012 1,390,377 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 117,719 56,222 6,818 . 52,119 5,374 203,467
2013 1,392,735 10,582 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 110,029 50,004 4,488 . 51,718 4,730 190,127
2014 1,398,472 12,146 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 103,445 27,951 2,375 . 63,245 5,368 180,123
2015 1,371,933 13,949 1,070 1,188,463 663,296 232,387 96,389 18,536 1,305 . 74,495 5,607 169,521
2016 1,365,579 15,491 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 95,727 23,609 737 . 66,464 3,602 171,026
2017 1,361,492 14,298 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 91,013 10,037 289 . 72,855 4,720 179,001
2018 1,334,500 14,680 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 86,009 12,949 48 . 64,647 5,139 170,435
2019 1,312,338 14,449 –1,140,346 719,747 174,719 89,230 13,487 . . 69,805 6,021 157,543
2020 1,526,491 14,486 .1,335,181 801,910 179,560 98,543 113,141 . 9,876 58,279 3,692 176,824
2021 1,679,310 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 184,722
2022 1,775,982 16,985 .1,538,628 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 220,369
2021 Q1 1,552,060 12,283 .1,379,980 814,864 189,935 103,910 134,800 . 11,026 60,687 3,857 159,797
Q2 1,602,137 13,065 .1,424,579 861,455 184,413 104,997 139,451 . 16,526 62,569 5,056 164,492
Q3 1,630,056 13,565 .1,451,549 869,195 198,692 105,398 146,533 . 19,824 63,851 5,456 164,942
Q4 1,679,310 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 184,722
2022 Q1 1,684,290 15,676 .1,495,463 911,280 204,534 108,702 140,427 . 23,961 67,776 7,809 173,152
Q2 1,723,415 17,793 .1,521,297 937,949 198,472 111,343 138,495 . 29,425 70,217 11,209 184,325
Q3 1,757,005 22,631 .1,514,627 918,838 208,509 111,675 137,740 . 35,527 71,498 12,879 219,747
Q4 1,775,982 16,985 .1,538,628 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 220,369
p 2023 Q1 1,798,377 14,913 .1,596,646 987,363 213,514 120,904 127,143 . 39,459 73,591 15,497 186,818
pQ2 1,805,711 14,829 .1,622,056 1,007,004 211,742 124,160 139,012 . 50,243 59,227 13,604 168,826
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, and
Bundesbank calculations.  1 Comprises all of central government, i.e. all off-budget en-
tities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned bad bank FMS
Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government from an economic
perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) 2010.  2 Particularly liabilitiesresulting from coins in circulation.  3 Issuances by the Federal Republic of Germany. Ex-
cluding issuers' holdings of own securities but including those held by other govern-
ment entities.  4 Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency (expired
in 2011).  5 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014).  6 Excluding
inflation-induced indexation of capital.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2021 2022 2023
2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Item Index 2015=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 100.8 108.2 107.6 –7.0 7.4 –0.5 1.6 0.7 –0.9 0.3 –2.1 0.4 –2.0
Construction 102.8 97.4 94.1 2.5 –5.3 –3.3 –9.6 4.3 –3.7 –4.9 –7.0 –1.5 –0.1
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 101.6 102.8 106.3 –7.1 1.2 3.3 3.1 8.3 5.1 1.6 –0.9 0.5 –2.8
Information and communication 120.7 130.1 136.5 0.2 7.8 5.0 7.2 5.1 4.1 6.8 3.8 3.2 3.0
Financial and insurance activities 94.4 100.8 105.0 –0.9 6.8 4.2 5.5 4.6 3.0 2.9 6.3 2.2 –1.4
Real estate activities 101.3 102.6 103.5 0.2 1.4 0.8 1.6 1.6 1.2 0.8 –0.3 1.1 0.7
Business services  1 104.9 109.7 112.5 –5.1 4.6 2.6 4.8 6.7 1.5 1.0 1.0 0.2 0.5
Public services, education and health 105.5 106.8 109.6 –1.2 1.2 2.7 1.5 2.6 2.4 2.5 3.1 1.5 –0.5
Other services 90.2 90.3 95.7 –12.8 0.2 6.0 2.9 8.8 7.5 2.4 5.7 1.9 1.1
Gross value added 102.7 106.1 107.9 –4.0 3.3 1.7 2.0 3.7 1.7 1.3 0.3 0.7 –0.7
Gross domestic product  2 103.0 106.3 108.2 –3.8 3.2 1.8 1.6 4.3 1.6 1.2 0.2 0.1 –0.6
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 100.9 102.4 106.4 –5.9 1.5 3.9 4.1 8.4 6.0 1.8 0.2 0.2 –1.2
Government consumption 113.9 117.5 119.3 4.1 3.1 1.6 1.5 4.5 1.6 0.1 0.1 –3.4 –3.1
Machinery and equipment 100.6 103.4 107.5 –11.1 2.8 4.0 –3.0 0.9 0.7 9.5 4.9 7.1 4.4
Premises 112.9 110.0 108.0 3.9 –2.6 –1.8 –5.9 3.2 –3.6 –1.6 –4.8 –3.4 –0.7
Other investment  4 114.3 116.7 115.8 –4.0 2.1 –0.7 1.4 –1.6 –1.3 –1.3 1.0 –0.8 –0.3
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . –0.2 0.9 0.7 1.2 –0.4 0.2 1.7 1.3 0.2 0.4
Domestic demand 105.8 108.4 111.8 –3.1 2.5 3.2 2.9 5.3 3.2 3.1 1.2 –0.4 –0.7
Net exports  6 . . . –1.0 0.9 –1.2 –1.1 –0.7 –1.5 –1.8 –0.9 0.3 0.1
     Exports 102.0 111.8 115.5 –9.3 9.7 3.3 7.3 4.6 3.7 5.3 –0.2 1.8 –1.6
     Imports 108.4 118.0 125.9 –8.3 8.9 6.6 11.5 7.1 7.8 10.3 1.8 1.2 –1.8
Gross domestic product  2 103.0 106.3 108.2 –3.8 3.2 1.8 1.6 4.3 1.6 1.2 0.2 0.1 –0.6
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,708.7 1,785.5 1,979.3 –5.3 4.5 10.9 8.8 13.4 12.8 9.3 8.5 8.3 5.7
Government consumption 749.6 796.8 850.9 6.6 6.3 6.8 5.9 9.3 6.5 5.7 5.8 2.0 4.9
Machinery and equipment 217.1 227.5 253.4 –10.0 4.8 11.4 –0.3 6.4 7.6 18.1 13.1 15.1 11.2
Premises 384.6 406.5 463.5 5.9 5.7 14.0 7.9 18.8 14.8 13.3 9.9 10.8 7.0
Other investment  4 131.4 136.5 139.3 –3.5 3.8 2.1 3.5 2.3 2.0 1.9 2.2 1.6 2.4
Changes in inventories  5 14.6 69.4 114.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,206.1 3,422.2 3,800.5 –1.9 6.7 11.1 10.1 12.9 12.2 11.3 8.1 5.5 4.5
Net exports 197.6 195.3 76.3 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,479.8 1,710.3 1,974.2 –9.6 15.6 15.4 17.2 16.6 17.8 19.0 9.1 6.5 –1.0
     Imports 1,282.2 1,515.0 1,897.9 –10.4 18.2 25.3 27.9 26.8 29.6 33.3 13.4 4.2 –5.4
Gross domestic product  2 3,403.7 3,617.5 3,876.8 –2.0 6.3 7.2 6.5 9.1 7.7 5.8 6.2 6.6 6.5
 IV. Prices (2015=100)
Private consumption 105.7 108.8 116.1 0.6 3.0 6.7 4.5 4.6 6.4 7.4 8.3 8.1 6.9
Gross domestic product 109.2 112.5 118.4 1.9 3.0 5.3 4.8 4.6 6.0 4.5 6.0 6.5 7.2
Terms of trade 102.8 99.8 95.0 2.0 –2.9 –4.9 –4.7 –5.9 –5.5 –6.5 –1.9 1.6 4.5
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,853.6 1,918.3 2,023.6 –0.1 3.5 5.5 4.6 6.8 5.5 4.3 5.4 6.6 7.1
Entrepreneurial and property income 712.1 851.0 867.4 –7.1 19.5 1.9 16.6 4.6 –0.5 3.8 –0.6 10.9 8.3
National income 2,565.7 2,769.3 2,890.9 –2.2 7.9 4.4 7.8 6.1 3.7 4.2 3.7 8.0 7.4
Memo item: Gross national income 3,500.9 3,756.8 4,027.6 –2.9 7.3 7.2 7.8 9.6 7.6 5.8 6.0 6.4 6.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2023.  1 Professional, sci-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added plus
taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit institu-tions serving households.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware
and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net in-
crease in valuables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy Total Inter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2015 = 100
% of total  1   100      14.04      6.37      79.60      29.44      36.96 2.28      10.92      10.27      9.95      12.73      14.14
Period
2019 102.9 112.7 90.4 102.2 101.8 102.6 106.2 101.0 102.8 106.5 103.4 94.9
2020 95.0 116.2 84.4 92.2 94.9 88.2 97.6 97.2 90.6 98.5 89.5 75.9
2021 98.4 114.3 87.0 96.5 102.6 90.5 103.6 99.1 98.9 108.7 95.9 73.9
2022 97.9 112.5 85.5 96.3 99.5 92.3 105.4 99.6 96.5 114.0 96.7 76.7
2022 Q3 98.0 116.5 79.7 96.2 99.8 91.6 105.4 100.0 95.9 117.9 96.5 75.2
Q4 100.3 119.9 84.3 98.0 93.2 100.3 106.9 101.4 93.0 116.9 105.7 83.0
2023 Q1 95.9 96.7 85.1 96.7 98.0 95.8 104.7 95.0 95.8 117.6 92.9 90.4
r Q2 97.3 114.8 66.2 96.7 96.4 97.3 99.2 95.0 96.1 115.9 95.9 88.6
x Q3 95.6 116.8 62.1 94.5 94.6 93.9 96.6 95.9 93.0 117.0 95.4 78.7
2022 Sep. 103.4 118.1 78.7 102.8 102.2 101.6 116.6 105.9 100.3 126.1 104.6 89.6
Oct. 101.6 121.8 80.8 99.7 100.4 96.7 111.5 105.3 100.7 118.6 98.4 83.7
Nov. 105.8 124.0 85.1 104.2 100.6 106.2 113.6 104.9 100.1 124.2 106.3 95.4
Dec. 93.4 113.9 86.9 90.2 78.6 98.0 95.7 93.9 78.2 108.0 112.3 69.9
2023 Jan. 88.0 80.1 89.2 89.3 93.7 84.7 94.2 92.0 90.3 108.4 83.2 78.3
Feb. 95.1 97.0 82.2 95.8 96.6 96.1 103.2 91.4 94.1 115.9 91.8 93.9
Mar. 104.7 113.0 83.9 105.0 103.6 106.5 116.6 101.5 102.9 128.6 103.7 99.1
r Apr. 96.4 113.4 73.1 95.2 96.1 94.6 101.4 93.8 96.0 113.5 92.3 86.9
r May 96.5 114.7 64.2 95.8 95.8 96.8 95.9 92.8 95.4 114.2 93.8 90.3
r June 99.0 116.4 61.2 99.0 97.2 100.6 100.2 98.4 96.8 120.1 101.6 88.5
2,x July 97.3 122.6 64.1 95.5 96.2 94.4 97.3 97.2 94.4 115.9 95.7 79.4
2,x Aug. 89.8 110.1 61.1 88.5 91.6 84.3 89.6 94.0 88.9 113.5 86.1 67.3
x,p Sep. 99.6 117.7 61.2 99.4 95.9 102.9 103.0 96.4 95.6 121.5 104.5 89.3
Annual percentage change
2019 – 2.3 + 3.5 – 7.2 – 2.9 – 3.5 – 1.9 ± 0.0 – 5.5 – 4.2 – 2.3 – 2.9 – 5.0
2020 – 7.7 + 3.1 – 6.6 – 9.8 – 6.8 –14.0 – 8.1 – 3.8 –11.9 – 7.5 –13.4 –20.0
2021 + 3.6 – 1.6 + 3.1 + 4.7 + 8.1 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 2.0 + 9.2 +10.4 + 7.2 – 2.6
2022 – 0.5 – 1.6 – 1.7 – 0.2 – 3.0 + 2.0 + 1.7 + 0.5 – 2.4 + 4.9 + 0.8 + 3.8
2022 Q3 + 1.2 – 2.4 – 1.1 + 2.1 – 2.5 + 7.7 + 3.5 – 1.6 – 2.0 + 8.1 + 1.9 +21.9
Q4 – 1.2 – 4.0 – 9.8 + 0.1 – 5.7 + 5.5 – 1.7 – 1.3 – 3.1 + 6.7 + 3.4 +11.8
2023 Q1 + 0.1 – 2.1 –10.8 + 1.3 – 5.0 + 9.5 + 0.9 – 4.8 – 3.1 + 7.0 + 2.6 +23.2
r Q2 – 0.2 – 0.1 –20.0 + 1.1 – 5.3 + 8.6 – 6.0 – 2.3 – 2.1 + 4.2 + 1.9 +18.0
x Q3 – 2.5 + 0.3 –22.0 – 1.8 – 5.2 + 2.5 – 8.3 – 4.1 – 3.1 – 0.8 – 1.1 + 4.6
2022 Sep. + 3.3 – 3.0 – 5.9 + 5.3 – 1.4 +13.4 + 4.4 + 0.4 – 0.9 +11.8 + 5.0 +36.6
Oct. – 0.5 – 1.5 –12.3 + 0.6 – 3.9 + 5.5 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.8 + 7.2 + 2.2 +14.0
Nov. ± 0.0 – 2.7 – 8.6 + 1.2 – 3.7 + 6.5 – 0.8 – 2.6 – 3.2 + 9.8 + 4.4 +13.7
Dec. – 3.1 – 7.8 – 8.7 – 1.6 –10.3 + 4.5 – 3.1 – 0.3 – 5.7 + 2.8 + 3.6 + 6.7
2023 Jan. – 1.7 – 2.1 – 9.8 – 1.0 – 6.0 + 4.8 – 1.4 – 3.2 – 4.2 + 5.6 + 2.5 +11.7
Feb. + 0.4 + 0.2 –13.2 + 1.5 – 4.5 + 9.0 – 1.3 – 4.0 – 3.6 + 7.2 + 2.8 +18.9
Mar. + 1.4 – 3.9 – 9.5 + 3.2 – 4.5 +14.0 + 5.0 – 7.1 – 1.7 + 8.2 + 2.5 +39.4
r Apr. + 0.8 + 1.1 –18.1 + 2.1 – 5.1 +10.6 – 3.8 – 1.3 – 1.4 + 5.5 + 3.7 +22.2
r May + 0.1 + 0.6 –20.7 + 1.4 – 5.4 +10.4 – 8.6 – 4.0 – 2.2 + 3.4 + 2.3 +22.4
r June – 1.6 – 1.9 –21.2 – 0.2 – 5.4 + 5.1 – 5.6 – 1.5 – 2.6 + 3.8 ± 0.0 +10.3
2,x July – 1.8 + 1.3 –22.0 – 1.1 – 5.9 + 3.2 – 4.0 – 0.2 – 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 4.6
2,x Aug. – 1.9 – 0.3 –21.8 – 0.8 – 3.6 + 3.2 – 8.8 – 2.8 – 1.2 + 1.3 – 3.7 +11.8
x,p Sep. – 3.7 – 0.3 –22.2 – 3.3 – 6.2 + 1.3 –11.7 – 9.0 – 4.7 – 3.6 – 0.1 – 0.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2015.  2 Influenced by a change in holiday dates.  x Provisional;estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the
Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction
industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2019 104.9 – 5.1 103.5 – 7.2 105.4 – 4.2 107.0 – 2.7 123.3 + 3.7 101.7 – 5.0
2020 97.2 – 7.3 97.9 – 5.4 95.6 – 9.3 105.7 – 1.2 124.4 + 0.9 99.6 – 2.1
2021 119.3 +22.7 124.6 +27.3 116.3 +21.7 117.4 +11.1 146.5 +17.8 107.9 + 8.3
2022 126.2 + 5.8 138.4 +11.1 118.3 + 1.7 129.0 + 9.9 164.8 +12.5 117.2 + 8.6
2022 Sep. 123.7 + 0.9 132.0 + 6.2 117.1 – 4.6 134.4 +17.9 166.3 +19.5 123.9 +17.2
Oct. 125.5 + 7.1 134.8 + 8.0 119.3 + 6.3 129.0 + 7.7 173.6 +22.3 114.2 + 1.5
Nov. 124.4 – 0.7 135.4 + 1.9 117.0 – 3.1 129.4 + 3.9 149.6 ± 0.0 122.8 + 5.7
Dec. 121.3 – 1.9 127.6 + 6.2 118.6 – 6.5 112.0 – 2.1 139.7 – 6.2 102.9 – 0.2
2023 Jan. 125.8 – 5.3 139.2 – 3.5 118.1 – 6.9 122.2 – 3.4 135.6 –11.9 117.8 + 0.3
Feb. 128.9 + 0.1 133.7 – 2.1 126.3 + 1.9 125.8 – 2.4 154.0 + 0.1 116.6 – 3.4
Mar. 130.2 – 6.3 138.7 – 9.4 124.8 – 3.4 132.5 – 8.9 168.5 –13.0 120.6 – 6.9
Apr. 115.9 – 6.1 128.6 –10.0 107.6 – 1.9 118.6 –13.0 156.4 –17.1 106.1 –10.9
May 121.4 – 2.0 124.5 –10.8 120.1 + 5.5 117.1 – 8.2 133.2 –25.5 111.8 + 1.2
June 136.6 + 5.6 128.4 – 9.8 142.7 +18.5 128.6 – 5.4 153.1 – 9.0 120.6 – 3.8
July 116.3 – 8.9 120.0 –16.4 113.1 – 4.9 123.6 + 2.4 128.6 –14.3 122.1 +10.0
Aug. 107.4 – 6.2 112.0 –12.8 102.1 – 2.7 127.4 + 4.3 151.2 – 6.1 119.6 + 9.3
p Sep. 118.6 – 4.1 120.1 – 9.0 117.4 + 0.3 121.2 – 9.8 151.4 – 9.0 111.4 –10.1
From the domestic market
2019 101.2 – 5.6 99.1 – 8.7 103.0 – 3.4 101.2 – 1.7 116.2 + 1.3 96.2 – 2.7
2020 94.9 – 6.2 94.2 – 4.9 95.1 – 7.7 97.9 – 3.3 105.5 – 9.2 95.4 – 0.8
2021 115.5 +21.7 119.6 +27.0 113.1 +18.9 108.0 +10.3 114.9 + 8.9 105.6 +10.7
2022 122.7 + 6.2 135.4 +13.2 112.6 – 0.4 118.2 + 9.4 125.0 + 8.8 115.9 + 9.8
2022 Sep. 120.7 + 9.7 128.9 + 9.2 112.9 + 8.2 125.7 +21.9 123.5 +16.3 126.4 +23.9
Oct. 120.4 + 4.2 133.7 + 8.7 108.9 – 1.0 121.8 +10.2 123.7 +15.9 121.1 + 8.3
Nov. 123.2 + 3.2 134.4 + 6.1 113.3 – 0.4 125.7 + 8.9 128.2 + 9.0 124.8 + 8.9
Dec. 115.5 – 3.0 127.6 +14.4 108.6 –14.9 92.1 –12.6 99.3 – 2.6 89.7 –15.9
2023 Jan. 121.5 – 2.6 137.4 – 0.9 110.5 – 3.0 105.0 –10.7 105.7 – 9.0 104.8 –11.3
Feb. 125.8 + 2.0 133.3 + 0.8 121.4 + 4.3 111.8 – 5.6 113.6 – 3.4 111.2 – 6.3
Mar. 130.1 – 6.0 137.0 – 7.9 126.0 – 3.7 118.6 – 8.9 133.1 – 6.8 113.7 – 9.8
Apr. 117.5 – 4.9 132.5 – 4.3 106.9 – 2.6 102.9 –21.1 118.9 –13.7 97.5 –23.9
May 122.9 + 0.3 124.7 – 8.6 124.0 +10.7 104.9 – 7.3 110.5 –19.9 103.0 – 1.7
June 125.2 – 0.3 120.3 –12.2 132.6 +14.3 104.3 –16.4 103.1 –19.1 104.7 –15.4
July 114.4 – 8.1 118.2 –17.8 112.2 + 1.9 107.2 – 3.0 107.4 –13.9 107.1 + 1.3
Aug. 105.0 – 4.7 112.5 –10.0 98.5 + 0.6 106.2 – 1.8 112.0 – 7.7 104.3 + 0.6
p Sep. 107.5 –10.9 112.2 –13.0 103.4 – 8.4 108.4 –13.8 120.4 – 2.5 104.4 –17.4
From abroad
2019 107.6 – 4.8 108.3 – 5.5 106.9 – 4.6 111.5 – 3.5 129.0 + 5.6 105.9 – 6.6
2020 98.9 – 8.1 102.0 – 5.8 95.9 –10.3 111.8 + 0.3 139.6 + 8.2 102.8 – 2.9
2021 122.2 +23.6 130.1 +27.5 118.2 +23.3 124.8 +11.6 171.9 +23.1 109.6 + 6.6
2022 128.8 + 5.4 141.6 + 8.8 121.8 + 3.0 137.4 +10.1 196.8 +14.5 118.2 + 7.8
2022 Sep. 125.9 – 4.8 135.4 + 3.3 119.6 –10.6 141.2 +15.4 200.8 +21.1 121.9 +12.4
Oct. 129.3 + 9.1 136.0 + 7.3 125.5 +10.6 134.6 + 6.0 213.8 +25.6 109.0 – 3.6
Nov. 125.3 – 3.5 136.5 – 2.2 119.2 – 4.6 132.3 + 0.6 166.8 – 4.9 121.2 + 3.2
Dec. 125.7 – 1.1 127.7 – 1.5 124.6 – 1.5 127.4 + 4.9 172.2 – 7.8 113.0 +12.5
2023 Jan. 129.1 – 7.3 141.2 – 6.0 122.7 – 8.9 135.5 + 1.6 159.7 –13.4 127.8 + 9.3
Feb. 131.3 – 1.2 134.2 – 5.0 129.2 + 0.6 136.7 – 0.2 186.5 + 1.9 120.7 – 1.2
Mar. 130.3 – 6.4 140.5 –11.0 124.0 – 3.3 143.2 – 8.9 196.9 –16.1 125.9 – 4.8
Apr. 114.6 – 7.0 124.3 –15.8 108.1 – 1.4 130.7 – 7.2 186.6 –18.8 112.7 + 0.4
May 120.3 – 3.8 124.2 –13.0 117.7 + 2.4 126.5 – 8.7 151.4 –28.4 118.5 + 3.1
June 145.2 + 9.9 137.1 – 7.5 148.8 +21.0 147.5 + 1.9 193.4 – 3.9 132.7 + 5.0
July 117.8 – 9.5 122.0 –14.9 113.6 – 8.5 136.4 + 6.1 145.6 –14.5 133.5 +16.0
Aug. 109.2 – 7.2 111.4 –15.6 104.2 – 4.5 143.9 + 8.2 182.8 – 5.2 131.3 +15.5
p Sep. 127.1 + 1.0 128.6 – 5.0 125.9 + 5.3 131.2 – 7.1 176.3 –12.2 116.7 – 4.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2019 146.2 +8.2 145.3 +10.3 150.4 +9.7 142.6 +10.8 138.9 +10.9 147.1 +5.9 148.1 +8.8 141.3 +6.6
2020 145.6 –0.4 144.2 –0.8 160.8 +6.9 130.2 –8.7 141.5 +1.9 147.3 +0.1 139.6 –5.7 143.3 +1.4
2021 159.0 +9.2 164.1 +13.8 174.3 +8.4 156.6 +20.3 158.5 +12.0 153.0 +3.9 161.5 +15.7 146.7 +2.4
2022 166.8 +4.9 161.7 –1.5 167.7 –3.8 155.0 –1.0 166.8 +5.2 172.7 +12.9 171.9 +6.4 160.5 +9.4
2022 Aug. 157.2 –1.1 148.2 –8.8 145.1 –13.2 143.0 –12.4 178.0 +23.6 167.6 +8.3 155.9 –1.6 165.9 +7.4
Sep. 164.2 –9.3 159.4 –15.6 162.5 –15.1 153.9 –20.3 169.5 +2.6 169.9 –1.1 166.1 –13.8 163.2 +1.3
Oct. 161.8 +2.0 145.1 –14.1 148.3 –12.3 140.2 –18.4 153.0 –2.7 181.3 +23.5 172.5 +0.5 157.9 +14.8
Nov. 148.3 +2.1 134.7 –5.7 130.9 –17.9 127.0 –4.2 176.1 +38.6 164.0 +10.7 155.2 –2.7 150.9 +25.3
Dec. 166.0 –10.3 162.2 –21.0 154.8 –21.1 165.5 –4.4 174.5 –50.9 170.4 +5.4 188.6 +1.0 146.9 –16.8
2023 Jan. 132.2 –7.4 125.7 –13.6 126.8 –23.5 128.4 –4.3 112.1 –7.5 139.7 –0.1 145.8 –2.3 119.8 –1.6
Feb. 151.8 –2.5 130.4 –19.0 127.4 –27.6 133.0 –15.9 130.9 +7.5 176.6 +18.1 167.6 +1.5 148.5 +12.1
Mar. 192.7 –8.0 179.4 –14.0 155.1 –29.3 197.2 –2.0 193.1 –3.5 208.2 –1.1 216.9 –0.1 187.8 –3.5
Apr. 169.9 +3.5 147.6 –6.4 144.6 –18.8 141.6 –0.8 179.7 +22.7 195.9 +14.0 178.4 +15.8 175.6 +4.8
May 176.1 +0.1 153.5 –10.8 153.9 –15.5 147.4 –9.6 175.1 +0.9 202.4 +12.3 187.5 +9.8 176.5 –0.8
June 181.0 +3.3 164.1 –1.3 165.3 –7.1 135.5 –11.6 266.8 +51.1 200.6 +8.1 178.6 +0.6 193.1 +12.9
July 194.4 +7.6 170.9 –4.7 160.9 –6.0 166.2 –6.6 221.6 +4.8 221.7 +21.7 190.6 +0.3 219.1 +24.8
Aug. 191.7 +21.9 153.7 +3.7 140.4 –3.2 156.6 +9.5 186.4 +4.7 235.8 +40.7 241.5 +54.9 165.7 –0.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2019 114.9 +3.8 111.0 +3.3 112.2 +2.4 106.7 +1.0 108.9 +1.7 107.1 +4.0 118.8 +5.7 138.4 +8.3
2020 121.4 +5.7 115.9 +4.4 121.3 +8.1 81.9 –23.2 106.9 –1.8 117.1 +9.3 125.4 +5.6 168.6 +21.8
2021 124.7 +2.7 116.7 +0.7 121.7 +0.3 78.1 –4.6 95.4 –10.8 110.4 –5.7 135.2 +7.8 190.1 +12.8
3 2022 134.4 +7.8 115.9 –0.7 128.3 +5.4 102.9 +31.8 107.9 +13.1 122.9 +11.3 144.8 +7.1 188.9 –0.6
2022 Sep. 133.0 +10.4 111.7 –0.4 124.5 +11.2 117.1 +17.0 108.6 +6.1 118.6 +4.6 144.4 +10.2 189.2 +11.4
Oct. 137.9 +5.8 114.6 –5.1 132.0 +10.3 115.9 +1.0 111.9 +2.5 125.5 –0.2 145.6 +3.2 193.4 +0.1
Nov. 146.4 +4.5 122.0 –6.1 132.4 +9.1 115.7 +10.1 134.9 –0.2 130.2 +0.4 153.2 +4.2 233.4 –0.1
Dec. 151.6 +4.1 126.0 –6.3 147.2 +6.9 124.2 +27.3 147.7 –0.1 125.9 +3.2 157.4 +1.0 213.1 –4.4
2023 Jan. 124.3 +2.1 103.7 –7.1 123.0 +4.7 84.7 +18.0 110.7 –0.8 106.3 –2.7 139.2 –2.0 173.4 –3.0
Feb. 123.3 +2.7 101.7 –6.6 123.4 +6.4 83.3 +14.0 99.4 +2.4 108.0 –4.3 134.9 –0.3 169.1 –0.3
Mar. 139.5 +0.8 114.0 –7.2 137.9 +5.3 99.8 +4.7 106.4 +3.7 129.4 –4.9 149.4 –0.3 188.8 –0.6
Apr. 137.9 +3.9 112.1 –3.9 137.5 +8.2 107.8 +6.0 94.8 –0.2 126.4 –3.3 143.5 +2.1 182.0 –1.4
May 141.3 +4.8 114.8 –1.7 140.1 +9.7 113.3 +3.0 91.9 +0.9 127.9 –1.3 147.1 +3.3 183.7 +1.1
June 138.0 +5.3 112.2 –0.6 137.1 +8.3 117.3 +11.1 95.2 +0.7 120.3 +0.1 147.6 +5.4 178.3 +2.1
July 139.5 +3.0 113.7 –1.9 140.2 +7.3 109.0 +3.1 97.5 –2.7 118.2 –3.4 152.0 +3.3 181.2 –2.2
Aug. 132.7 +2.2 107.9 –2.3 133.1 +5.4 101.9 +3.8 96.8 –2.2 111.3 –1.9 144.5 +3.7 169.9 –1.8
Sep. 132.6 –0.3 107.1 –4.1 132.5 +6.4 103.2 –11.9 100.5 –7.5 111.4 –6.1 147.2 +1.9 171.5 –9.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2022 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2018 44,866 +1.4 32,964 +2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2019 45,276 +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 72,267 827 7 5.0 774
2020 44,915 –0.8 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2021 44,984 +0.2 33,897 +0.9 9,344 23,602 702 4,101 1,852 1,744 2,613 999 5.7 706
2022 45,596 +1.4 34,507 +1.8 9,400 24,135 721 4,125 426 337 2,418 808 5.3 845
2020 Q3 44,809 –1.3 33,424 –0.4 9,359 23,171 640 4,273 2,705 2,691 2,904 1,266 6.3 583
Q4 44,994 –1.3 33,836 –0.3 9,395 23,518 676 4,194 2,433 2,361 2,722 1,167 5.9 595
2021 Q1 44,518 –1.4 33,568 –0.2 9,294 23,376 665 4,051 3,473 3,157 2,878 1,248 6.3 586
Q2 44,815 +0.2 33,718 +0.9 9,322 23,446 697 4,066 2,164 2,143 2,691 1,024 5.9 658
Q3 45,161 +0.8 33,929 +1.5 9,347 23,606 719 4,161 935 915 2,545 920 5.5 774
Q4 45,443 +1.0 34,374 +1.6 9,415 23,982 727 4,125 835 762 2,341 802 5.1 804
2022 Q1 45,199 +1.5 34,242 +2.0 9,348 23,943 715 4,061 1,033 792 2,417 874 5.3 818
Q2 45,519 +1.6 34,401 +2.0 9,372 24,056 718 4,112 337 324 2,311 777 5.0 864
Q3 45,707 +1.2 34,522 +1.7 9,405 24,133 724 4,159 103 92 2,501 804 5.5 880
Q4 45,959 +1.1 34,864 +1.4 9,475 24,409 730 4,166 229 139 2,443 778 5.3 817
2023 Q1 r45,643 r +1.0 34,614 +1.1 9,395 24,288 696 4,152 430 153 2,610 900 5.7 773
Q2 r45,915 r +0.9 834,700 8+0.9 89,410 824,351 8 687 84,207 ... 8 147 2,561 839 9 5.6 770
Q3 1046,044 10 +0.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,647 885 5.7 768
2020 June 44,688 –1.4 33,323 –0.3 9,355 23,084 629 4,260 4,464 4,452 2,853 1,197 6.2 570
July 44,699 –1.4 33,233 –0.4 9,322 23,024 635 4,302 3,319 3,306 2,910 1,258 6.3 573
Aug. 44,737 –1.3 33,482 –0.4 9,367 23,218 642 4,266 2,551 2,537 2,955 1,302 6.4 584
Sep. 44,991 –1.2 33,792 –0.4 9,421 23,454 656 4,240 2,244 2,229 2,847 1,238 6.2 591
Oct. 45,076 –1.1 33,862 –0.3 9,410 23,530 671 4,229 2,037 2,021 2,760 1,183 6.0 602
Nov. 45,031 –1.3 33,899 –0.2 9,400 23,559 696 4,166 2,405 2,386 2,699 1,152 5.9 601
Dec. 44,874 –1.3 33,700 –0.1 9,327 23,478 666 4,134 2,856 2,676 2,707 1,166 5.9 581
2021 Jan. 44,493 –1.5 33,515 –0.3 9,282 23,347 657 4,045 3,638 3,294 2,901 1,298 6.3 566
Feb. 44,490 –1.5 33,521 –0.3 9,281 23,343 662 4,026 3,766 3,358 2,904 1,270 6.3 583
Mar. 44,570 –1.1 33,636 –0.0 9,309 23,397 685 4,032 3,016 2,818 2,827 1,177 6.2 609
Apr. 44,680 –0.3 33,689 +0.8 9,324 23,427 687 4,039 2,583 2,560 2,771 1,091 6.0 629
May 44,799 +0.3 33,747 +1.3 9,326 23,461 703 4,067 2,342 2,320 2,687 1,020 5.9 654
June 44,966 +0.6 33,802 +1.4 9,324 23,504 716 4,151 1,568 1,548 2,614 961 5.7 693
July 45,030 +0.7 33,731 +1.5 9,304 23,458 715 4,194 1,088 1,068 2,590 956 5.6 744
Aug. 45,101 +0.8 33,994 +1.5 9,358 23,658 722 4,153 857 838 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. 45,352 +0.8 34,323 +1.6 9,432 23,903 726 4,123 859 839 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. 45,440 +0.8 34,369 +1.5 9,425 23,965 724 4,123 780 762 2,377 814 5.2 809
Nov. 45,496 +1.0 34,449 +1.6 9,423 24,039 739 4,133 767 750 2,317 789 5.1 808
Dec. 45,393 +1.2 34,284 +1.7 9,364 23,980 708 4,112 957 772 2,330 803 5.1 794
2022 Jan. 45,126 +1.4 34,176 +2.0 9,332 23,900 711 4,048 1,123 847 2,462 903 5.4 792
Feb. 45,187 +1.6 34,243 +2.2 9,346 23,939 719 4,049 1,087 803 2,428 884 5.3 822
Mar. 45,284 +1.6 34,334 +2.1 9,369 23,999 719 4,061 888 727 2,362 835 5.1 839
Apr. 45,399 +1.6 34,368 +2.0 9,366 24,037 713 4,091 453 439 2,309 800 5.0 852
May 45,536 +1.6 34,445 +2.1 9,376 24,089 719 4,131 318 305 2,260 771 4.9 865
June 45,623 +1.5 34,445 +1.9 9,376 24,084 724 4,164 241 228 2,363 761 5.2 877
July 45,584 +1.2 34,322 +1.8 9,361 23,988 718 4,176 115 102 2,470 801 5.4 881
Aug. 45,643 +1.2 34,571 +1.7 9,417 24,169 725 4,151 87 76 2,547 827 5.6 887
Sep. 45,894 +1.2 34,899 +1.7 9,499 24,401 733 4,136 108 97 2,486 782 5.4 873
Oct. 45,990 +1.2 34,893 +1.5 9,489 24,414 734 4,161 134 124 2,442 764 5.3 846
Nov. 46,006 +1.1 34,897 +1.3 9,478 24,435 738 4,179 156 147 2,434 770 5.3 823
Dec. 45,882 +1.1 34,705 +1.2 9,414 24,357 704 4,182 397 146 2,454 799 5.4 781
2023 Jan. r45,572 r +1.0 34,550 +1.1 9,381 24,240 697 4,138 451 145 2,616 911 5.7 764
Feb. r45,637 r +1.0 34,601 +1.0 9,392 24,279 692 4,148 441 157 2,620 910 5.7 778
Mar. r45,720 r +1.0 34,679 +1.0 9,412 24,332 692 4,157 398 159 2,594 878 5.7 777
Apr. r45,819 r +0.9 34,685 +0.9 9,410 24,342 684 4,188 146 139 2,586 855 5.7 773
May r45,925 r +0.9 834,725 8+0.8 89,413 824,369 8 687 84,222 ... 8 143 2,544 829 9 5.5 767
June r46,002 r +0.8 834,703 8+0.7 89,403 824,355 8 689 84,267 ... 8 160 2,555 833 5.5 769
July r45,968 r +0.8 834,579 8+0.7 89,382 824,259 8 686 84,280 ... 8 114 2,617 878 5.7 772
Aug. r45,973 r +0.7 834,789 8+0.6 89,424 824,427 8 684 84,222 ... 8 122 2,696 910 5.8 771
Sep. 1046,191 10 +0.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,627 869 5.7 761
Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,607 861 5.7 749
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed
persons in the legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).8 Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2021 and 2022,
the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1%
for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.5% for persons
solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 61,3% for
cyclically induced short-time work.  9 From May 2023, calculated on the basis of new la-
bour force figures.  10 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which: Indices of
foreign trade prices
of which:
Total Food  1,2Non-
energy
industrial
goods  1 Energy  1 Services  1Actual
rents
for
housingMemo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  3Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  3 Exports Imports
Period 2015 = 100 2020 = 100 2015 = 100
Index level
2020 4 105.8 4 110.9 4 104.1 4 99.0 4 106.9 107.6 4 100.0 4 117.0 103.8 108.0 101.7 97.3
2021 4 109.2 4 114.1 4 106.7 4 109.0 4 109.0 109.0 4 103.1 4 127.0 114.7 117.5 107.4 110.4
2022 118.7 126.2 112.7 146.8 112.2 110.8 110.2 148.3 152.4 156.3 123.1 139.4
2021 Dec. 4 111.3 4 115.7 4 108.6 4 115.0 4 110.3 109.6 4 104.7 130.0 127.2 113.0 121.8
2022 Jan. 112.3 117.2 108.4 123.7 109.8 109.9 105.2 132.8 129.2 115.0 127.0
Feb. 113.3 118.2 109.1 127.4 110.2 110.0 106.0 138.1 134.6 133.4 116.1 128.6
Mar. 116.1 119.1 110.4 146.1 110.6 110.2 108.1 141.2 153.6 120.7 135.9
Apr. 116.9 122.2 111.3 142.7 111.7 110.4 108.8 145.2 162.3 121.7 138.3
May 118.2 124.2 112.3 146.7 112.0 110.6 109.8 147.9 147.5 160.7 122.4 139.5
June 118.1 125.4 112.5 147.8 111.0 110.8 109.8 148.4 157.5 123.5 140.9
July 119.0 127.6 112.6 147.8 112.1 110.9 110.3 156.3 156.5 126.0 142.9
Aug. 119.5 129.1 113.0 148.6 112.2 111.1 110.7 151.7 168.6 159.8 128.7 149.1
Sep. 122.1 130.9 114.5 158.8 113.9 111.2 112.7 172.5 163.8 127.9 147.8
Oct. 123.5 132.2 115.8 164.5 114.3 111.4 113.5 165.2 166.7 125.5 146.0
Nov. 123.5 133.6 116.3 163.5 113.7 111.6 113.7 155.4 158.7 165.9 124.9 139.4
Dec. 122.0 134.6 116.6 143.9 114.8 111.7 113.2 158.1 165.3 125.0 137.1
2023 Jan. 122.6 136.7 116.4 154.8 113.8 112.1 114.3 154.8 5 162.1 124.0 135.4
Feb. 123.8 139.5 117.0 154.9 115.0 112.2 115.2 159.7 152.8 160.8 123.8 132.2
Mar. 125.1 141.3 118.3 155.0 116.1 112.5 116.1 150.6 155.5 123.5 130.8
Apr. 125.8 141.1 119.0 156.1 117.1 112.6 116.6 151.1 152.0 123.0 128.6
May 125.6 141.1 119.3 154.0 116.9 112.8 116.5 161.0 149.0 148.7 122.5 126.8
June 126.1 141.2 119.5 153.7 117.8 113.0 116.8 148.6 149.8 122.4 124.8
July 126.7 141.2 118.8 153.6 119.6 113.2 117.1 147.0 150.9 122.0 124.1
Aug. 127.2 141.0 119.2 156.5 119.8 113.5 117.5 161.6 147.4 150.8 122.1 124.6
Sep. 127.4 141.5 120.1 157.6 119.3 113.6 117.8 147.1 144.9 122.6 126.6
Oct. 127.2 141.6 120.5 154.7 119.1 113.7 117.8 ... ... ... ...
Annual percentage change
2020 4 +0.4 4+ 2.3 4– 0.1 4– 4.5 4+ 1.2 + 1.4 4 +0.5 4+ 1.4 – 1.0 – 3.1 – 0.7 – 4.3
2021 4 +3.2 4+ 2.9 4+ 2.5 4+ 10.1 4+ 2.0 + 1.3 4 +3.1 4+ 8.6 +10.5 + 8.8 + 5.6 +13.5
2022 +8.7 + 10.6 + 5.7 + 34.7 + 2.9 + 1.7 +6.9 +16.8 +32.9 +33.0 +14.6 +26.3
2021 Dec. 4 +5.7 4+ 5.3 4+ 5.0 4+ 18.1 4+ 3.2 + 1.3 4 +4.9 +24.2 +22.1 +10.9 +24.0
2022 Jan. +5.1 + 4.4 + 3.1 + 20.6 + 2.7 + 1.4 +4.2 +25.0 +21.0 +11.9 +26.9
Feb. +5.5 + 4.6 + 3.4 + 22.4 + 2.7 + 1.4 +4.3 +13.9 +25.9 +22.5 +12.4 +26.3
Mar. +7.6 + 5.3 + 4.4 + 37.6 + 2.8 + 1.5 +5.9 +30.9 +34.7 +15.9 +31.2
Apr. +7.8 + 6.7 + 5.2 + 34.5 + 3.1 + 1.6 +6.3 +33.5 +40.0 +16.0 +31.7
May +8.7 + 8.8 + 5.6 + 37.5 + 3.0 + 1.6 +7.0 +18.2 +33.6 +35.6 +15.9 +30.6
June +8.2 + 9.9 + 5.6 + 37.4 + 1.7 + 1.7 +6.7 +32.7 +33.8 +16.1 +29.9
July +8.5 + 11.5 + 5.8 + 35.6 + 1.7 + 1.6 +6.7 +37.2 +33.5 +17.0 +28.9
Aug. +8.8 + 12.8 + 6.1 + 35.8 + 1.7 + 1.7 +7.0 +17.2 +45.8 +34.6 +18.6 +32.7
Sep. +10.9 + 14.4 + 6.4 + 44.2 + 3.6 + 1.7 +8.6 +45.8 +39.5 +16.8 +29.8
Oct. +11.6 + 15.5 + 7.2 + 43.5 + 3.9 + 1.7 +8.8 +34.5 +38.1 +13.1 +23.5
Nov. +11.3 + 16.3 + 7.3 + 40.1 + 3.8 + 1.9 +8.8 +17.5 +28.2 +32.1 +11.6 +14.5
Dec. +9.6 + 16.3 + 7.4 + 25.1 + 4.1 + 1.9 +8.1 +21.6 +30.0 +10.6 +12.6
2023 Jan. +9.2 + 16.6 + 7.4 + 25.1 + 3.6 + 2.0 +8.7 +16.6 5+25.5 + 7.8 + 6.6
Feb. +9.3 + 18.0 + 7.2 + 21.6 + 4.4 + 2.0 +8.7 +15.6 +13.5 +20.5 + 6.6 + 2.8
Mar. +7.8 + 18.6 + 7.2 + 6.1 + 5.0 + 2.1 +7.4 + 6.7 + 1.2 + 2.3 – 3.8
Apr. +7.6 + 15.5 + 6.9 + 9.4 + 4.8 + 2.0 +7.2 + 4.1 – 6.3 + 1.1 – 7.0
May +6.3 + 13.6 + 6.2 + 5.0 + 4.4 + 2.0 +6.1 + 8.9 + 1.0 – 7.5 + 0.1 – 9.1
June +6.8 + 12.6 + 6.2 + 4.0 + 6.1 + 2.0 +6.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 0.9 –11.4
July +6.5 + 10.7 + 5.5 + 3.9 + 6.7 + 2.1 +6.2 – 6.0 – 3.6 – 3.2 –13.2
Aug. +6.4 + 9.2 + 5.5 + 5.3 + 6.8 + 2.2 +6.1 + 6.5 –12.6 – 5.6 – 5.1 –16.4
Sep. +4.3 + 8.1 + 4.9 – 0.8 + 4.7 + 2.2 +4.5 –14.7 –11.5 – 4.1 –14.3
Oct. +3.0 + 7.1 + 4.1 – 6.0 + 4.2 + 2.1 +3.8 ... ... ... ...
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office.  1 The last data point is at times based on the Bun-
desbank’s own estimates.  2 Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco.  3 Excluding va-lue added tax.  4 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value added tax between July
and December 2020.  5 From January 2023 onwards, provisional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.5 4.2 1,273.8 4.0 1,782.3 2.8 179.4 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.2
2017 1,395.4 4.3 932.5 4.0 441.8 3.6 1,374.3 3.9 1,905.2 3.5 202.8 8.0 10.6
2018 1,462.7 4.8 976.1 4.7 455.2 3.0 1,431.3 4.1 1,976.6 3.7 223.2 10.1 11.3
2019 1,524.7 4.2 1,021.8 4.7 477.5 4.9 1,499.3 4.8 2,024.4 2.4 219.8 – 1.5 10.9
2020 1,515.3 – 0.6 1,021.1 – 0.1 523.9 9.7 1,545.0 3.0 2,046.9 1.1 338.2 53.9 16.5
2021 1,571.3 3.7 1,062.9 4.1 534.1 1.9 1,597.0 3.4 2,098.5 2.5 313.0 – 7.5 14.9
2022 1,661.8 5.8 1,118.8 5.3 541.8 1.4 1,660.6 4.0 2,227.5 6.1 248.2 –20.7 11.1
2022 Q1 389.3 7.5 261.8 7.0 134.8 – 2.3 396.6 3.7 542.4 3.7 77.5 –31.5 14.3
Q2 399.3 5.8 262.3 4.6 132.0 – 2.4 394.3 2.2 544.2 5.0 55.9 –34.3 10.3
Q3 410.2 4.3 282.7 4.1 138.5 5.3 421.2 4.5 565.8 8.4 54.6 1.3 9.6
Q4 463.0 5.5 312.0 5.4 136.6 5.5 448.6 5.5 575.1 7.4 60.2 – 1.1 10.5
2023 Q1 416.6 7.0 285.7 9.1 143.9 6.8 429.7 8.4 581.3 7.2 77.8 0.3 13.4
Q2 429.5 7.6 287.5 9.6 141.6 7.3 429.1 8.8 580.7 6.7 64.7 15.7 11.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2023.  * Households in-
cluding non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees'
contributions to the social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension
payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social
benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plusmonetary social benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed
income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit
institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related
taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company
pension funds.  6 Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving
as a percentage of disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change
2015 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.3 2.3 102.5 2.5
2017 104.5 2.3 104.5 2.3 104.6 2.3 104.7 2.4 105.1 2.6
2018 107.6 3.0 107.6 3.0 107.5 2.8 107.6 2.8 108.4 3.2
2019 110.8 3.0 110.8 3.0 110.6 2.9 110.4 2.6 111.7 3.0
2020 113.2 2.1 113.2 2.2 112.9 2.0 112.6 2.0 111.6 – 0.1
2021 114.9 1.5 114.9 1.5 114.7 1.6 114.3 1.5 115.3 3.3
2022 117.9 2.7 117.9 2.6 117.3 2.2 116.7 2.1 120.1 4.1
2022 Q2 109.9 2.0 109.9 1.9 109.3 2.1 116.6 2.1 115.6 4.0
Q3 120.9 2.5 120.9 2.5 120.9 2.5 116.9 2.2 118.5 2.9
Q4 130.1 2.0 130.0 2.0 130.0 2.0 117.8 2.4 132.6 4.2
2023 Q1 115.1 3.9 115.1 3.8 111.7 2.6 118.6 2.7 120.1 5.9
Q2 114.2 3.9 114.2 3.9 112.0 2.5 119.5 2.5 123.3 6.7
Q3 126.5 4.7 126.5 4.7 124.7 3.2 120.4 3.0 . .
2023 Mar. 111.8 – 1.5 111.8 – 1.5 110.9 2.6 118.7 2.7 . .
Apr. 112.3 2.5 112.3 2.5 112.0 2.4 119.2 2.4 . .
May 113.0 1.6 113.0 1.6 111.8 2.3 119.2 2.2 . .
June 117.4 7.7 117.3 7.7 112.3 2.9 120.1 2.9 . .
July 150.9 4.9 150.8 4.9 148.8 3.6 120.3 3.0 . .
Aug. 114.2 4.3 114.2 4.3 112.8 3.0 120.4 3.0 . .
Sep. 114.6 4.8 114.5 4.8 112.7 3.0 120.5 3.0 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August
2023.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2019 2,800.6 1,769.7 586.3 737.1 333.4 1,030.9 257.5 237.6 168.4 821.0 1,979.6 1,091.2 676.3 888.4 289.8 207.6
2020 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.6 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.4 857.0 304.4 196.1
2021 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 367.9 1,320.4 272.1 261.5 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 391.8 236.7
p 2022 3,432.3 2,057.2 713.5 804.4 368.5 1,375.1 326.0 268.1 244.3 1,133.7 2,298.6 1,195.7 760.3 1,102.8 331.7 273.2
2021 H1 3,017.6 1,877.0 649.3 745.0 343.7 1,140.6 256.2 242.3 238.5 906.9 2,110.7 1,178.6 763.1 932.1 330.3 206.9
H2 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 367.9 1,320.4 272.1 261.5 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 391.8 236.7
2022 H1 3,593.6 2,108.1 719.1 796.3 387.5 1,485.5 322.4 284.8 225.4 1,075.4 2,518.2 1,237.0 847.9 1,281.2 430.7 260.7
pH2 3,432.3 2,057.2 713.5 804.4 368.5 1,375.1 326.0 268.1 244.3 1,133.7 2,298.6 1,195.7 760.3 1,102.8 331.7 273.2
As a percentage of total assets
2019 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.2 31.7 10.4 7.4
2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2021 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.2 40.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 11.9 7.2
p 2022 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 10.7 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
2021 H1 100.0 62.2 21.5 24.7 11.4 37.8 8.5 8.0 7.9 30.1 70.0 39.1 25.3 30.9 10.9 6.9
H2 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.2 40.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 11.9 7.2
2022 H1 100.0 58.7 20.0 22.2 10.8 41.3 9.0 7.9 6.3 29.9 70.1 34.4 23.6 35.7 12.0 7.3
pH2 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 10.7 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2019 2,302.9 1,396.4 419.6 565.4 319.7 906.5 243.8 188.5 136.8 662.2 1,640.7 887.5 523.8 753.2 257.5 158.0
2020 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.1 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.3 1,628.8 904.7 537.0 724.0 267.3 149.8
2021 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 346.6 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.2 356.3 184.0
p 2022 2,731.4 1,538.5 461.6 591.8 346.7 1,192.9 307.5 209.0 186.4 880.2 1,851.2 912.8 534.4 938.5 291.1 215.0
2021 H1 2,392.8 1,398.3 416.6 551.0 322.5 994.6 240.6 190.9 190.1 703.5 1,689.4 892.3 543.2 797.1 294.2 162.1
H2 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 346.6 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.2 356.3 184.0
2022 H1 2,898.3 1,582.5 462.4 583.8 362.8 1,315.9 303.6 222.5 177.2 830.9 2,067.4 945.2 616.6 1,122.2 389.8 207.6
pH2 2,731.4 1,538.5 461.6 591.8 346.7 1,192.9 307.5 209.0 186.4 880.2 1,851.2 912.8 534.4 938.5 291.1 215.0
As a percentage of total assets
2019 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.3 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2021 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.2 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 13.6 7.0
p 2022 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 12.7 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
2021 H1 100.0 58.4 17.4 23.0 13.5 41.6 10.1 8.0 7.9 29.4 70.6 37.3 22.7 33.3 12.3 6.8
H2 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.2 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 13.6 7.0
2022 H1 100.0 54.6 16.0 20.1 12.5 45.4 10.5 7.7 6.1 28.7 71.3 32.6 21.3 38.7 13.5 7.2
pH2 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 12.7 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2019 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2021 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 55.2 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 52.6
p 2022 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
2021 H1 624.7 478.7 232.6 194.1 21.2 146.1 15.5 51.4 48.4 203.4 421.3 286.4 219.9 135.0 36.1 44.8
H2 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 55.2 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 52.6
2022 H1 695.3 525.7 256.7 212.5 24.8 169.6 18.8 62.2 48.2 244.5 450.8 291.8 231.4 159.0 40.9 53.1
pH2 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
As a percentage of total assets
2019 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2021 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.3 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 7.9
p 2022 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
2021 H1 100.0 76.6 37.2 31.1 3.4 23.4 2.5 8.2 7.8 32.6 67.4 45.8 35.2 21.6 5.8 7.2
H2 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.3 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 7.9
2022 H1 100.0 75.6 36.9 30.6 3.6 24.4 2.7 9.0 6.9 35.2 64.8 42.0 33.3 22.9 5.9 7.6
pH2 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  2 Distribution  2
RevenuesOperating income
before depreciation
and amortisation
(EBITDA  1 )Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartileOperating
income (EBIT)Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4€ billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % % € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % %
Total
2015 1,633.9 6.9 195.9 – 1.1 12.0 – 1.0 6.3 10.6 17.8 91.5 – 16.4 5.6 – 1.5 1.8 6.7 11.3
2016 1,624.3 – 0.4 214.4 7.8 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.7 9.0 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,719.3 5.1 243.4 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.0 11.0 18.0 141.9 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.1
6 2018 1,706.8 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,764.6 2.6 233.6 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.2 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.6 5.8 11.8
2020 1,632.8 – 8.8 213.6 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 17.9 52.1 – 41.0 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 4.9 10.5
2021 1,994.7 20.4 297.7 37.7 14.9 1.9 7.8 13.4 19.9 161.5 212.6 8.1 5.0 2.9 8.2 12.2
p 2022 2,430.3 20.8 324.6 7.8 13.4 – 1.6 6.2 11.8 18.4 170.8 4.0 7.0 – 1.1 1.6 6.5 12.4
2018 H1 848.2 – 0.1 120.8 – 2.1 14.2 – 0.3 5.1 10.6 18.2 72.7 – 5.3 8.6 – 0.5 1.7 6.4 12.5
H2 869.4 1.4 114.4 0.5 13.2 – 0.1 6.3 11.2 18.0 58.0 – 7.6 6.7 – 0.6 2.1 6.8 12.5
2019 H1 861.3 2.7 112.3 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.5 11.8 18.6 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 903.7 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.6 11.8 20.0 52.0 – 11.4 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.5
2020 H1 744.5 – 14.4 78.2 – 34.1 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 8.8
H2 888.4 – 3.3 135.4 17.1 15.2 2.8 7.6 13.2 19.8 44.2 8.6 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.6
2021 H1 920.0 20.3 151.5 87.2 16.5 5.9 7.4 12.6 19.5 84.5 . 9.2 8.3 2.3 7.8 12.2
H2 1,075.6 20.4 146.4 8.1 13.6 – 1.6 7.9 13.2 20.8 77.0 73.1 7.2 2.2 2.9 7.7 13.4
2022 H1 1,149.7 23.5 161.0 4.8 14.0 – 2.5 6.1 11.5 18.4 84.9 – 1.6 7.4 – 1.9 1.6 6.4 11.8
pH2 1,282.4 18.4 163.7 10.9 12.8 – 0.9 5.5 11.6 18.9 86.0 10.2 6.7 – 0.5 1.7 6.7 12.9
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2015 1,309.7 7.0 149.0 – 2.6 11.4 – 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.3 69.1 – 19.7 5.3 – 1.8 2.2 6.6 10.4
2016 1,295.9 – 0.8 161.9 6.3 12.5 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 84.8 4.2 6.5 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,395.9 5.5 187.5 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.5 40.6 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,367.7 1.0 175.7 – 1.5 12.9 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 16.0 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.8 6.9 11.4
2019 1,410.9 2.0 168.1 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.8 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.7 10.1
2020 1,285.2 – 9.4 143.6 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 5.7 10.6 16.5 29.1 – 48.1 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.3 9.8
2021 1,585.8 22.4 208.9 45.9 13.2 2.1 7.9 12.8 17.9 118.6 325.8 7.5 5.4 2.8 7.8 11.1
p 2022 1,956.4 21.6 222.7 4.6 11.4 – 1.9 6.8 11.3 16.4 117.1 – 4.0 6.0 – 1.6 1.8 6.3 10.7
2018 H1 681.9 – 0.1 94.9 – 3.4 13.9 – 0.5 7.0 10.9 16.7 60.0 – 5.9 8.8 – 0.6 2.9 6.8 11.5
H2 695.4 2.1 83.1 0.7 12.0 – 0.2 6.2 11.1 16.2 42.1 – 8.7 6.1 – 0.7 2.0 6.4 11.4
2019 H1 689.9 2.4 83.3 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.9 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.8 6.0 9.5
H2 721.0 1.7 84.8 0.3 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.7 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.1
2020 H1 580.6 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.4 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 14.9 0.2 – 101.7 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.1 7.8
H2 704.6 – 3.0 94.6 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.0 12.1 18.6 28.9 19.6 4.1 1.1 0.3 6.0 10.4
2021 H1 731.9 24.0 111.2 126.9 15.2 6.9 8.2 12.6 18.6 66.7 . 9.1 9.3 2.9 7.9 12.1
H2 854.2 21.1 97.7 3.8 11.4 – 1.9 7.8 12.3 17.5 51.9 80.8 6.1 2.0 2.6 7.0 11.5
2022 H1 923.4 23.8 110.9 – 2.5 12.0 – 3.3 7.7 11.5 16.3 59.0 – 14.2 6.4 – 2.8 2.3 6.4 10.4
pH2 1,034.8 19.7 112.0 12.8 10.8 – 0.7 5.9 10.7 16.7 58.2 9.3 5.6 – 0.5 1.3 6.3 11.4
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2015 324.1 6.1 46.9 4.0 14.5 – 0.3 5.9 11.1 22.1 22.3 – 3.8 6.9 – 0.7 1.3 6.7 13.9
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.3 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.5 12.2
2021 408.9 13.0 88.8 21.6 21.7 1.6 7.6 15.0 24.0 42.8 79.7 10.5 3.9 3.0 9.2 15.6
p 2022 473.9 17.4 101.9 15.3 21.5 – 0.4 5.2 13.1 22.8 53.8 26.4 11.3 0.8 1.0 6.9 14.4
2018 H1 166.3 0.2 25.9 2.8 15.6 0.4 3.8 9.5 22.7 12.6 – 1.9 7.6 – 0.2 – 0.9 4.7 15.3
H2 174.0 – 1.3 31.3 – 0.0 18.0 0.2 6.7 11.3 25.6 15.9 – 4.6 9.1 – 0.3 2.2 7.0 17.8
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
H2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.5 13.3
2021 H1 188.1 7.7 40.3 26.1 21.5 3.1 6.9 12.6 24.5 17.8 119.9 9.5 4.8 0.9 6.9 13.6
H2 221.4 17.9 48.7 18.2 22.0 0.1 9.4 16.5 24.7 25.1 59.1 11.3 3.0 3.8 9.5 17.7
2022 H1 226.3 22.0 50.1 25.3 22.2 0.6 4.6 11.6 20.9 25.9 46.4 11.5 1.9 – 0.5 6.3 13.5
pH2 247.6 13.4 51.8 7.0 20.9 – 1.3 5.2 14.1 24.0 27.8 12.1 11.2 – 0.1 2.2 7.5 15.4
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted re-
turn on sales.  3 Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year fig-ures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  4 Adjusted
for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and in the
reporting sample. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics,
p. 6. 5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.  6 From 2018 onwards: significant
changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2022 2023
Item 2020 2021 2022 Q4  Q1  Q2  June July  r August  p
I.Current Account +203,643 +349,732 –79,173 + 6,400 +32,567 +39,876 +37,376 +26,942 +30,672
1.Goods
Receipts 2,176,527 2,501,971 2,948,338 781,782 739,302 724,232 256,880 237,401 230,969
Expenditure  1,843,734 2,224,666 3,030,270 773,760 690,256 667,695 224,221 209,318 205,492
Balance +332,793 +277,305 –81,931 + 8,022 +49,046 +56,537 +32,660 +28,082 +25,477
2.Services
Receipts 883,923 1,035,941 1,263,669 330,147 296,670 321,373 113,861 110,235 108,110
Expenditure  891,717 928,525 1,113,422 304,282 281,263 278,823 96,385 94,533 95,732
Balance – 7,794 +107,416 +150,247 +25,865 +15,406 +42,550 +17,477 +15,702 +12,378
3.Primary income
Receipts 737,663 880,948 988,093 271,562 267,200 317,063 115,539 87,945 90,477
Expenditure  701,246 756,492 967,620 260,366 257,177 342,596 116,099 91,713 85,441
Balance +36,418 +124,457 +20,473 +11,196 +10,023 –25,533 – 561 – 3,768 + 5,036
4.Secondary income
Receipts 128,895 159,503 165,471 45,445 39,715 45,829 15,202 12,974 11,868
Expenditure  286,669 318,948 333,433 84,128 81,624 79,508 27,401 26,050 24,087
Balance –157,774 –159,445 –167,961 –38,682 –41,908 –33,679 –12,199 –13,075 –12,219
II.Capital account + 4,715 +50,738 +154,861 +24,775 + 5,062 + 3,843 + 5,224 + 1,792 + 4,005
III.Financial account  1 +218,710 +410,464 +79,038 +65,099 +35,203 +68,458 +72,618 + 6,767 +42,505
1.Direct investment –172,841 +384,178 +291,655 +32,513 +34,765 +19,622 +81,656 –29,355 + 8,422
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  –33,195 +332,065 –16,704 –249,803 +50,038 –98,117 – 7,417 –10,251 + 8,669
By non-resident units of
the euro area  +139,646 –52,113 –308,359 –282,315 +15,273 –117,739 –89,073 +19,104 + 248
2.Portfolio investment +537,369 +307,455 –299,066 + 2,054 –97,446 +66,753 –47,633 +12,883 – 559
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +692,274 +782,483 –238,576 +90,836 +63,545 +203,476 +98,701 +40,370 +23,566
Equity and
investment fund shares +326,378 +362,157 –196,170 – 4,283 +27,237 +28,317 + 9,742 +19,952 –19,652
Short-term
debt securities  +125,603 +118,607 –110,943 +56,881 –57,604 +88,355 +44,619 + 8,027 +34,984
Long-term
debt securities  +240,293 +301,718 +68,538 +38,238 +93,912 +86,805 +44,340 +12,391 + 8,234
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  +154,905 +475,028 +60,490 +88,782 +160,991 +136,723 +146,334 +27,487 +24,126
Equity and
investment fund shares +181,256 +640,342 +34,545 +115,984 +23,685 +20,144 +42,369 –18,019 +34,074
Short-term
debt securities  +116,258 +35,539 –66,432 –24,960 – 2,500 – 5,702 +22,952 + 2,762 –14,185
Long-term
debt securities  –142,609 –200,853 +92,377 – 2,242 +139,806 +122,282 +81,013 +42,744 + 4,237
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options +19,645 +63,813 +72,167 + 191 +15,603 – 5,138 –11,016 – 831 + 9,009
4.Other investment –178,645 –475,354 – 3,696 +21,047 +100,729 –14,653 +47,222 +23,676 +24,362
Eurosystem –212,253 –443,530 +175,031 –69,811 +167,665 +78,208 –41,665 +39,423 +16,787
General government –15,747 –80,426 –49,550 + 6,009 + 5,929 + 5,738 + 8,625 – 2,697 – 273
MFIs  2 +24,491 –130,433 –282,827 +69,939 – 3,850 –61,820 +83,344 + 5,478 + 568
Enterprises and households +24,863 +179,034 +153,651 +14,911 –69,015 –36,779 – 3,083 –18,528 + 7,279
5.Reserve assets +13,183 +130,371 +17,978 + 9,293 –18,447 + 1,875 + 2,389 + 394 + 1,273
IV.Net errors and omissions +10,352 + 9,994 + 3,350 +33,924 – 2,426 +24,739 +30,018 –21,967 + 7,828
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Increase: + / decrease: -.2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Zeit Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 – 3,947 – 29,122 + 24,063 – 34,147 – 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 – 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 – 6,605 – 17,642 + 54,524 – 34,764 – 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 – 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 – 6,209 – 25,255 + 51,306 – 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 – 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 – 9,357 – 29,930 + 69,087 – 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 – 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 – 11,388 – 30,774 + 65,658 – 38,703 – 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 – 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 – 12,523 – 39,321 + 63,284 – 43,413 – 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 211,477 + 219,629 – 14,296 – 25,303 + 58,646 – 41,495 + 3,255 + 230,931 – 2,564 + 16,200
2015 + 259,781 + 248,394 – 15,405 – 18,516 + 69,324 – 39,420 + 265 + 237,733 – 2,213 – 22,313
2016 + 270,200 + 252,409 – 19,921 – 20,987 + 77,258 – 38,480 + 2,451 + 258,906 + 1,686 – 13,744
2017 + 255,964 + 255,077 – 13,613 – 23,994 + 77,046 – 52,165 – 2,653 + 268,306 – 1,269 + 14,996
2018 + 267,609 + 221,983 – 22,985 – 15,806 + 112,389 – 50,958 + 914 + 242,889 + 392 – 25,634
2019 + 283,849 + 219,548 – 32,263 – 13,553 + 128,602 – 50,747 – 3,705 + 200,312 – 544 – 79,832
2020 + 240,239 + 191,031 – 8,907 + 7,418 + 96,014 – 54,224 – 9,120 + 191,481 – 51 – 39,638
2021 + 278,689 + 194,388 + 4,757 + 4,802 + 138,545 – 59,046 – 1,179 + 248,551 + 31,892 – 28,959
2022 + 170,937 + 120,791 + 9,999 – 31,036 + 150,017 – 68,835 – 18,644 + 227,707 + 4,426 + 75,414
2020 Q4 + 76,342 + 55,114 – 2,996 + 7,417 + 32,628 – 18,816 – 4,181 + 84,069 + 848 + 11,908
2021 Q1 + 77,373 + 57,527 + 679 + 5,095 + 32,650 – 17,899 – 834 + 72,025 + 385 – 4,514
Q2 + 67,702 + 48,292 + 868 + 7,141 + 21,166 – 8,897 – 2,336 + 87,467 + 58 + 22,101
Q3 + 65,695 + 49,316 + 145 – 5,830 + 37,736 – 15,527 + 1,985 + 16,702 + 31,199 – 50,977
Q4 + 67,919 + 39,252 + 3,064 – 1,604 + 46,994 – 16,723 + 7 + 72,358 + 250 + 4,432
2022 Q1 + 60,119 + 34,968 + 3,927 + 3,038 + 40,362 – 18,249 – 3,021 + 78,775 + 2,200 + 21,677
Q2 + 31,086 + 27,654 + 7,766 – 5,314 + 22,259 – 13,513 – 4,780 + 67,323 + 597 + 41,017
Q3 + 22,958 + 22,987 – 361 – 22,180 + 39,507 – 17,356 – 5,860 – 30,017 + 784 – 47,115
Q4 + 56,774 + 35,182 – 1,333 – 6,579 + 47,889 – 19,718 – 4,984 + 111,625 + 845 + 59,835
2023 Q1 + 69,937 + 55,177 – 1,396 – 6,692 + 41,057 – 19,605 – 11,325 + 99,813 + 224 + 41,200
Q2 + 58,912 + 55,857 – 983 – 14,337 + 26,742 – 9,349 – 4,047 + 63,794 + 1,096 + 8,929
p Q3 + 69,666 + 62,007 – 1,926 – 24,711 + 46,432 – 14,062 – 3,535 + 52,731 – 790 – 13,400
2021 Apr. + 24,445 + 16,424 + 441 + 3,520 + 8,407 – 3,905 – 897 + 29,252 – 251 + 5,705
May + 16,786 + 14,730 – 102 + 2,453 + 1,511 – 1,908 – 528 + 23,514 + 211 + 7,257
June + 26,471 + 17,139 + 530 + 1,168 + 11,248 – 3,084 – 911 + 34,700 + 98 + 9,140
July + 21,623 + 18,516 – 472 – 1,848 + 10,917 – 5,962 – 487 + 1,156 + 102 – 19,980
Aug. + 18,381 + 12,984 + 897 – 3,024 + 13,086 – 4,665 + 532 + 17,522 + 31,254 – 1,391
Sep. + 25,690 + 17,816 – 280 – 958 + 13,733 – 4,901 + 1,939 – 1,977 – 158 – 29,606
Oct. + 18,128 + 15,135 + 1,038 – 4,720 + 13,280 – 5,567 + 506 + 13,955 + 261 – 4,680
Nov. + 22,113 + 14,414 + 759 + 138 + 13,670 – 6,108 – 1,007 + 33,852 + 963 + 12,746
Dec. + 27,678 + 9,704 + 1,266 + 2,978 + 20,043 – 5,048 + 508 + 24,551 – 974 – 3,634
2022 Jan. + 16,392 + 6,644 + 803 + 1,740 + 14,181 – 6,173 – 417 + 29,438 + 309 + 13,462
Feb. + 23,856 + 15,694 + 1,472 + 2,099 + 11,673 – 5,609 – 1,637 + 48,042 + 1,161 + 25,823
Mar. + 19,871 + 12,630 + 1,653 – 801 + 14,508 – 6,467 – 968 + 1,295 + 730 – 17,608
Apr. + 11,144 + 5,057 + 2,536 – 917 + 12,425 – 5,421 – 1,556 + 19,988 + 83 + 10,400
May + 3,390 + 10,859 + 4,323 – 1,959 – 3,881 – 1,628 – 2,724 + 893 + 161 + 227
June + 16,551 + 11,738 + 906 – 2,438 + 13,715 – 6,464 – 501 + 46,441 + 353 + 30,391
July + 8,854 + 8,855 + 382 – 6,089 + 13,001 – 6,912 – 2,321 – 23,333 – 484 – 29,866
Aug. + 1,581 + 3,017 – 567 – 9,555 + 14,077 – 5,957 – 1,261 + 16,672 + 81 + 16,352
Sep. + 12,523 + 11,116 – 176 – 6,536 + 12,429 – 4,486 – 2,277 – 23,355 + 1,187 – 33,601
Oct. + 9,648 + 7,306 – 34 – 5,287 + 13,076 – 5,447 – 2,212 + 44,969 + 672 + 37,533
Nov. + 20,246 + 15,140 + 731 – 2,077 + 13,661 – 6,479 – 2,129 + 466 + 425 – 17,650
Dec. + 26,881 + 12,736 – 2,030 + 785 + 21,152 – 7,792 – 643 + 66,191 – 252 + 39,953
2023 Jan. + 16,964 + 11,678 + 233 – 1,534 + 12,362 – 5,542 – 4,700 + 12,744 – 341 + 481
Feb. + 22,466 + 18,505 – 163 – 2,175 + 12,175 – 6,039 – 1,789 + 32,485 + 143 + 11,808
Mar. + 30,508 + 24,994 – 1,466 – 2,983 + 16,520 – 8,023 – 4,835 + 54,584 + 423 + 28,911
Apr. + 22,352 + 16,296 + 301 – 3,330 + 14,455 – 5,069 – 640 – 11,298 + 88 – 33,010
May + 8,169 + 15,803 + 281 – 6,134 – 1,421 – 79 – 2,309 + 15,902 + 45 + 10,042
June + 28,392 + 23,757 – 1,566 – 4,874 + 13,709 – 4,200 – 1,099 + 59,190 + 962 + 31,897
July + 18,704 + 19,175 – 2,709 – 8,304 + 13,294 – 5,460 – 4,341 – 1,399 – 118 – 15,762
Aug. + 22,830 + 20,345 + 1,567 – 10,346 + 17,385 – 4,554 – 686 + 31,610 – 107 + 9,467
p Sep. + 28,132 + 22,488 – 784 – 6,061 + 15,753 – 4,047 + 1,492 + 22,519 – 566 – 7,105
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: + / net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2023
Group of countries/country 
2020 2021 
2022 Apr. May June July Aug. Sep.
All countries  1 Exports 1,206,928 1,379,346 1,594,034 122,555 131,330 139,298 126,120 123,613 129,262
Imports 1,026,502 1,204,050 1,505,434 108,941 117,890 117,142 108,084 107,623 110,056
Balance +180,427 +175,296 +88,600 +13,615 +13,441 +22,156 +18,036 +15,990 +19,206
   I. European countries Exports 824,921 949,744 1,091,554 84,165 89,377 93,794 84,233 82,364 88,606
Imports 682,477 803,687 973,063 69,684 76,986 76,267 69,888 68,332 71,221
Balance +142,444 +146,057 +118,492 +14,481 +12,391 +17,526 +14,345 +14,032 +17,385
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 635,741 751,322 878,642 68,566 71,589 75,513 67,382 65,691 71,378
Imports 546,655 638,064 737,668 57,125 62,937 62,896 57,342 56,111 58,625
Balance +89,087 +113,259 +140,974 +11,440 + 8,652 +12,617 +10,040 + 9,580 +12,753
          Euro area (20)       Exports 445,225 525,992 617,068 48,238 50,204 53,198 47,805 44,841 49,807
          countries Imports 372,855 440,248 506,865 38,021 42,274 41,794 38,420 37,405 38,536
Balance +72,370 +85,744 +110,203 +10,217 + 7,930 +11,405 + 9,385 + 7,436 +11,271
          of which:
               Austria Exports 60,118 72,385 90,270 6,493 6,663 6,857 6,363 6,335 6,650
  Imports 40,454 47,492 58,137 4,476 4,814 4,838 4,391 4,260 4,489
Balance +19,663 +24,893 +32,134 + 2,017 + 1,849 + 2,019 + 1,972 + 2,074 + 2,161
               Belgium and Exports 48,824 58,080 70,933 5,402 5,677 6,123 5,321 5,519 5,467
               Luxembourg Imports 39,584 55,726 67,071 4,601 5,237 4,979 4,331 5,160 4,637
Balance + 9,240 + 2,354 + 3,861 + 800 + 441 + 1,144 + 990 + 359 + 830
               France Exports 90,910 102,741 118,168 9,587 9,724 10,648 9,363 8,441 9,936
  Imports 56,364 61,921 69,969 5,562 5,964 6,214 5,556 5,172 5,715
Balance +34,546 +40,820 +48,198 + 4,025 + 3,761 + 4,435 + 3,807 + 3,269 + 4,221
               Italy Exports 60,634 75,526 89,191 6,531 7,169 7,536 6,933 5,386 7,194
  Imports 53,906 65,389 73,177 5,743 6,272 6,379 6,246 5,067 5,711
Balance + 6,728 +10,137 +16,014 + 788 + 897 + 1,157 + 687 + 320 + 1,483
               Netherlands Exports 84,579 101,050 112,261 9,302 9,182 9,691 8,885 8,660 9,214
  Imports 87,024 105,113 114,998 8,058 8,996 9,338 8,503 8,193 8,242
Balance – 2,445 – 4,063 – 2,737 + 1,245 + 187 + 353 + 382 + 467 + 972
               Spain  Exports 37,618 43,932 49,935 4,227 4,608 4,737 4,492 3,745 4,517
  Imports 31,281 34,180 37,756 3,060 3,777 3,298 3,037 2,847 2,927
Balance + 6,337 + 9,752 +12,178 + 1,167 + 831 + 1,438 + 1,455 + 898 + 1,590
          Other EU Member  Exports 190,517 225,331 261,574 20,328 21,384 22,315 19,576 20,850 21,571
          States  Imports 173,800 197,815 230,803 19,104 20,663 21,102 18,921 18,706 20,089
Balance +16,717 +27,515 +30,772 + 1,223 + 721 + 1,213 + 655 + 2,144 + 1,481
      2. Other European Exports 189,180 198,421 212,912 15,599 17,788 18,280 16,851 16,673 17,228
          countries Imports 135,822 165,623 235,395 12,558 14,049 13,371 12,547 12,221 12,596
Balance +53,358 +32,798 –22,483 + 3,041 + 3,739 + 4,909 + 4,305 + 4,452 + 4,633
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 56,265 60,638 70,611 4,913 5,556 5,750 5,283 5,427 5,495
  Imports 45,556 49,247 55,723 3,733 4,669 4,566 3,997 4,009 4,455
Balance +10,708 +11,391 +14,888 + 1,180 + 887 + 1,185 + 1,286 + 1,418 + 1,040
               United Kingdom Exports 67,086 65,002 73,764 5,615 6,475 6,814 6,250 5,788 6,470
  Imports 35,018 32,245 40,314 2,948 3,261 3,112 2,902 2,798 3,216
Balance +32,068 +32,757 +33,449 + 2,667 + 3,214 + 3,701 + 3,347 + 2,990 + 3,255
   II. Non-European  Exports 380,292 427,430 497,428 38,027 41,572 45,128 41,479 40,789 40,162
       countries Imports 343,270 399,604 531,409 39,166 40,785 40,751 38,040 39,133 38,671
Balance +37,022 +27,827 –33,982 – 1,139 + 787 + 4,377 + 3,439 + 1,656 + 1,491
       1. Africa Exports 20,086 23,068 26,462 2,078 2,716 3,035 2,207 2,302 2,268
Imports 18,758 26,241 34,213 2,771 2,958 2,890 2,224 2,318 2,638
Balance + 1,328 – 3,173 – 7,751 – 693 – 242 + 145 – 17 – 17 – 370
       2. America Exports 141,375 167,735 210,652 16,352 17,241 19,182 18,483 17,992 17,831
  Imports 94,005 101,525 131,979 10,602 10,635 10,550 10,546 10,713 10,075
Balance +47,370 +66,210 +78,673 + 5,750 + 6,606 + 8,631 + 7,938 + 7,279 + 7,756
           of which:
               United States  Exports 103,476 121,980 156,208 11,954 12,494 13,864 13,620 13,036 13,082
  Imports 67,694 72,316 93,338 7,780 7,562 7,613 7,531 7,795 7,569
Balance +35,782 +49,664 +62,871 + 4,174 + 4,931 + 6,251 + 6,089 + 5,242 + 5,514
       3. Asia Exports 208,146 224,897 246,289 18,594 20,431 21,706 19,649 19,469 19,181
  Imports 226,646 267,604 357,702 25,221 26,577 26,896 24,742 25,642 25,574
Balance –18,500 –42,707 –111,413 – 6,628 – 6,146 – 5,190 – 5,093 – 6,174 – 6,394
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 25,882 26,090 29,648 2,329 2,389 2,687 2,513 2,605 2,846
  Imports 6,721 7,509 13,304 1,577 1,597 1,244 1,102 1,360 1,448
Balance +19,161 +18,582 +16,344 + 752 + 791 + 1,442 + 1,412 + 1,245 + 1,398
               Japan  Exports 17,396 18,245 20,511 1,537 1,660 1,799 1,750 1,567 1,630
Imports 21,427 23,477 25,413 2,103 2,077 2,328 2,008 2,093 2,258
Balance – 4,032 – 5,232 – 4,902 – 565 – 416 – 529 – 258 – 526 – 627
               People's Republic  Exports 95,840 103,564 106,762 7,742 8,725 8,829 8,275 8,235 7,541
               of China  2 Imports 117,373 142,964 192,830 12,025 12,912 13,796 12,327 12,963 12,480
Balance –21,533 –39,400 –86,068 – 4,283 – 4,187 – 4,967 – 4,053 – 4,728 – 4,939
               New industrial countries Exports 50,590 55,295 63,344 4,875 4,812 5,896 4,869 4,742 5,005
               and emerging markets  Imports 48,222 55,441 71,012 5,848 6,113 5,611 5,263 5,123 5,350
               of Asia  3 Balance + 2,368 – 146 – 7,668 – 973 – 1,302 + 285 – 394 – 381 – 345
       4. Oceania and Exports 10,685 11,731 14,024 1,003 1,184 1,205 1,140 1,027 882
           polar regions Imports 3,861 4,233 7,515 571 615 415 528 459 383
Balance + 6,824 + 7,497 + 6,510 + 432 + 569 + 790 + 611 + 568 + 499
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. Euro area incl. Croatia.  1 Including fuel and other supplies forships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.
3 Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Zeit Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2018 – 15,806 – 2,044 – 44,543 + 10,059 + 17,219 – 7,060 + 723 + 3,322 + 671 +112,410 – 692
2019 – 13,553 + 3,607 – 45,947 + 10,755 + 18,368 – 9,763 – 2,948 + 3,489 + 492 +128,990 – 880
2020 + 7,418 – 5,302 – 14,678 + 10,051 + 17,665 – 7,770 – 4,426 + 3,368 + 3,196 + 94,205 – 1,387
2021 + 4,802 – 6,635 – 24,323 + 8,306 + 32,834 – 8,466 – 9,361 + 3,531 + 2,664 +137,881 – 1,999
2022 – 31,036 – 8,643 – 55,244 + 9,464 + 31,406 – 11,241 – 10,085 + 4,078 + 1,993 +152,926 – 4,902
2022 Q1 + 3,038 – 2,849 – 6,033 + 1,996 + 11,530 – 3,704 – 1,520 + 1,063 + 1,288 + 40,527 – 1,453
Q2 – 5,314 – 187 – 13,125 + 2,270 + 7,307 – 2,182 – 2,722 + 1,062 + 425 + 25,841 – 4,007
Q3 – 22,180 – 3,727 – 22,632 + 2,159 + 5,874 – 3,429 – 3,712 + 1,100 – 82 + 41,295 – 1,705
Q4 – 6,579 – 1,880 – 13,454 + 3,039 + 6,695 – 1,926 – 2,131 + 853 + 362 + 45,264 + 2,263
2023 Q1 – 6,692 – 2,788 – 8,001 + 1,777 + 5,263 – 3,682 – 3,001 + 1,051 + 1,224 + 41,509 – 1,676
Q2 – 14,337 – 1,754 – 14,337 + 2,074 + 4,748 – 2,553 – 4,963 + 776 + 393 + 29,351 – 3,002
p Q3 – 24,711 – 2,759 – 23,750 + 2,118 + 4,896 – 3,462 – 4,493 + 815 – 57 + 47,885 – 1,397
2022 Nov. – 2,077 – 836 – 3,469 + 956 + 1,859 – 371 – 1,446 + 327 + 74 + 14,226 – 639
Dec. + 785 – 729 – 2,276 + 1,441 + 2,710 – 505 – 577 + 192 + 194 + 17,376 + 3,582
2023 Jan. – 1,534 – 637 – 2,326 + 771 + 1,928 – 1,434 – 1,302 + 391 + 449 + 12,557 – 644
Feb. – 2,175 – 1,101 – 2,334 + 542 + 946 – 910 – 398 + 351 + 409 + 12,290 – 524
Mar. – 2,983 – 1,050 – 3,341 + 463 + 2,388 – 1,338 – 1,301 + 309 + 366 + 16,661 – 507
Apr. – 3,330 – 452 – 3,406 + 553 + 2,362 – 1,519 – 1,599 + 227 + 104 + 14,820 – 469
May – 6,134 – 707 – 5,027 + 677 + 1,127 – 1,234 – 1,685 + 220 + 111 – 666 – 867
June – 4,874 – 595 – 5,904 + 843 + 1,259 + 199 – 1,679 + 328 + 178 + 15,197 – 1,666
July – 8,304 – 624 – 6,694 + 624 + 1,031 – 1,588 – 1,762 + 204 – 57 + 13,783 – 433
Aug. – 10,346 – 1,075 – 8,867 + 804 + 789 – 1,111 – 1,753 + 301 – 17 + 17,905 – 503
p Sep. – 6,061 – 1,059 – 8,189 + 690 + 3,075 – 763 – 978 + 310 + 17 + 16,197 – 461
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Zeit Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2018 – 50,958 – 33,109 – 10,849 + 9,753 – 17,848 .– 5,142 + 914 + 3,349 – 2,435
2019 – 50,747 – 30,251 – 11,473 + 11,591 – 20,496 .– 5,431 – 3,705 – 298 – 3,407
2020 – 54,224 – 36,074 – 13,498 + 10,767 – 18,150 .– 5,908 – 9,120 – 3,418 – 5,702
2021 – 59,046 – 36,974 – 11,303 + 11,888 – 22,072 .– 6,170 – 1,179 – 392 – 787
2022 – 68,835 – 41,923 – 17,878 + 14,041 – 26,913 .– 7,149 – 18,644 – 14,397 – 4,247
2022 Q1 – 18,249 – 10,960 – 3,153 + 2,477 – 7,288 – 1,995 – 1,719 – 3,021 – 2,865 – 156
Q2 – 13,513 – 5,957 – 3,247 + 7,339 – 7,556 .– 1,810 – 4,780 – 3,988 – 792
Q3 – 17,356 – 11,401 – 3,727 + 2,138 – 5,955 .– 1,810 – 5,860 – 4,533 – 1,326
Q4 – 19,718 – 13,604 – 7,751 + 2,086 – 6,113 .– 1,810 – 4,984 – 3,011 – 1,973
2023 Q1 – 19,605 – 10,860 – 3,352 + 2,580 – 8,744 .– 1,731 – 11,325 – 10,563 – 762
Q2 – 9,349 – 3,481 – 1,697 + 7,492 – 5,868 .– 1,691 – 4,047 – 3,083 – 964
p Q3 – 14,062 – 8,470 – 2,186 + 2,039 – 5,592 .– 1,691 – 3,535 – 2,273 – 1,262
2022 Nov. – 6,479 – 4,468 – 1,623 + 417 – 2,010 – 619 – 600 – 2,129 – 1,846 – 283
Dec. – 7,792 – 5,628 – 4,623 + 1,145 – 2,165 – 616 – 611 – 643 + 394 – 1,037
2023 Jan. – 5,542 – 3,794 – 1,910 + 654 – 1,749 – 604 – 603 – 4,700 – 4,169 – 532
Feb. – 6,039 – 3,879 – 923 + 991 – 2,161 – 564 – 564 – 1,789 – 1,776 – 13
Mar. – 8,023 – 3,188 – 519 + 935 – 4,835 .– 564 – 4,835 – 4,618 – 217
Apr. – 5,069 – 3,264 – 1,060 + 1,070 – 1,806 .– 564 – 640 – 182 – 458
May – 79 + 1,974 – 254 + 5,166 – 2,053 .– 564 – 2,309 – 2,114 – 195
June – 4,200 – 2,191 – 383 + 1,256 – 2,010 .– 564 – 1,099 – 787 – 312
July – 5,460 – 3,498 – 911 + 536 – 1,962 .– 564 – 4,341 – 3,670 – 671
Aug. – 4,554 – 2,818 – 823 + 381 – 1,736 – 565 – 564 – 686 – 434 – 252
p Sep. – 4,047 – 2,154 – 452 + 1,122 – 1,894 .– 564 + 1,492 + 1,832 – 340
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2023
Item 2020 2021 2022 Q1  Q2  Q3 p July August  September  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +724,008 +819,754 +328,088 +129,843 +38,191 +47,630 +10,914 + 5,579 +31,137
1.Direct investment +134,017 +180,852 +169,006 +27,888 +34,896 +17,310 – 2,724 – 1,657 +21,691
Equity +89,898 +121,136 +114,061 +23,029 +23,725 +21,666 + 2,224 + 7,527 +11,916
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +17,533 +59,185 +69,943 +16,481 +14,343 +19,446 + 5,715 + 7,101 + 6,630
Debt instruments +44,119 +59,716 +54,945 + 4,859 +11,172 – 4,357 – 4,947 – 9,184 + 9,775
2.Portfolio investment +166,417 +174,958 +16,697 +78,923 +49,343 +10,696 + 4,410 + 3,132 + 3,154
Shares  2 +53,110 +46,753 –16,698 + 4,072 – 4,568 + 108 + 1,871 – 1,176 – 586
Investment fund shares  3 +35,932 +116,401 +33,614 +10,899 + 4,737 + 9,005 + 4,784 + 643 + 3,577
Short-term  4
debt securities +10,507 – 107 +12,340 + 7,640 + 2,892 – 718 + 101 – 791 – 28
Long-term   5
debt securities +66,867 +11,912 –12,559 +56,312 +46,281 + 2,300 – 2,346 + 4,456 + 191
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +94,579 +60,178 +42,677 +20,246 +11,251 +13,039 – 1,284 +12,347 + 1,976
4.Other investment  7 +329,046 +371,874 +95,282 + 2,562 –58,395 + 7,376 +10,629 – 8,136 + 4,882
MFIs  8 – 4,313 +112,903 +59,476 +65,798 –23,037 +20,160 +27,525 – 6,309 – 1,056
Short-term + 3,683 +99,380 +34,961 +68,459 –18,346 + 2,348 +22,686 –11,639 – 8,699
Long-term – 8,021 +13,204 +24,474 – 2,691 – 4,705 +17,791 + 4,829 + 5,325 + 7,637
Enterprises and
households  9 +88,179 +143,700 +46,596 +33,033 +64,871 +11,773 + 1,238 – 5,867 +16,402
Short-term +44,218 +113,230 +23,769 +28,685 +60,315 + 8,844 – 409 – 6,184 +15,436
Long-term +22,325 –13,944 – 7,625 + 594 + 563 + 959 + 632 – 92 + 419
General government + 2,069 – 8,123 –24,958 + 9,444 – 2,659 – 1,717 + 26 – 1,660 – 82
Short-term + 3,461 – 7,256 –23,451 + 3,286 – 1,897 – 1,571 – 41 – 1,488 – 42
Long-term – 2,485 – 2,327 – 2,883 + 4,337 – 1,000 – 625 – 411 – 172 – 41
Bundesbank +243,112 +123,394 +14,167 –105,713 –97,571 –22,840 –18,159 + 5,700 –10,382
5.Reserve assets – 51 +31,892 + 4,426 + 224 + 1,096 – 790 – 118 – 107 – 566
II.Net foreign investment in the
reporting country (increase: +) +532,526 +571,203 +100,381 +30,030 –25,603 – 5,101 +12,312 –26,031 + 8,618
1.Direct investment +138,902 +80,483 +43,725 –10,209 +21,404 – 3,631 – 6,741 – 1,327 + 4,437
Equity +45,841 +41,374 +14,811 +13,182 + 3,229 – 200 – 4,134 + 1,619 + 2,315
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 707 + 7,659 + 7,123 + 5,976 – 4,384 + 1,753 – 549 + 721 + 1,581
Debt instruments +93,061 +39,109 +28,914 –23,391 +18,174 – 3,431 – 2,607 – 2,945 + 2,122
2.Portfolio investment +150,014 –28,581 – 7,600 +53,182 +32,870 +58,638 +28,152 +10,733 +19,753
Shares  2 –17,040 + 2,101 – 4,695 – 4,868 – 5,005 – 1,371 + 2,827 – 3,072 – 1,125
Investment fund shares  3 + 962 – 8,433 – 3,235 + 932 – 1,061 – 1,587 – 947 + 149 – 788
Short-term  4
debt securities +84,459 +29,313 –37,218 + 1,551 + 9,964 – 2,124 + 657 + 5,827 – 8,608
Long-term   5
debt securities +81,632 –51,563 +37,548 +55,568 +28,973 +63,719 +25,616 + 7,830 +30,274
3.Other investment  7 +243,611 +519,301 +64,255 –12,943 –79,877 –60,108 – 9,099 –35,437 –15,572
MFIs  8 +108,426 +161,287 +152,946 +108,354 –33,858 –35,890 +27,647 –36,794 –26,743
Short-term +74,908 +115,265 +160,854 +88,506 –37,871 –50,804 +25,907 –36,478 –40,233
Long-term +33,579 +46,044 – 7,910 +19,847 + 4,015 +14,912 + 1,740 – 317 +13,489
Enterprises and
households  9 +32,084 +135,961 + 6,958 + 5,051 +26,516 –21,849 – 9,234 + 4,428 –17,044
Short-term +14,969 +99,877 – 9,271 – 711 +20,334 –23,965 – 9,272 + 3,006 –17,700
Long-term +13,511 +12,382 + 8,907 + 4,498 + 4,758 + 776 – 500 + 928 + 348
General government – 7,840 – 4,742 – 4,931 + 1,074 + 143 + 2,892 + 1,127 – 762 + 2,527
Short-term – 7,557 – 2,134 – 2,478 + 1,683 + 143 + 3,157 + 1,324 – 701 + 2,534
Long-term – 280 – 2,605 – 2,451 – 609 + 0– 75 – 6– 62 – 7
Bundesbank +110,941 +226,796 –90,717 –127,423 –72,678 – 5,260 –28,640 – 2,309 +25,688
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +191,481 +248,551 +227,707 +99,813 +63,794 +52,731 – 1,399 +31,610 +22,519
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see Statistical series, direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities  3 4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 663,320 497,651
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2021 May 1,370,231 221,201 168,678 14,037 7,809 30,677 1,093,721 1,076,918 55,309 621,827 748,404
June 1,384,834 213,600 159,995 14,326 8,094 31,184 1,115,447 1,101,897 55,787 670,632 714,202
July 1,319,694 219,775 165,984 14,345 8,104 31,343 1,042,015 1,024,970 57,903 657,905 661,789
Aug. 1,360,722 250,742 165,757 45,091 8,174 31,720 1,053,653 1,037,259 56,327 699,773 660,949
Sep. 1,431,909 246,908 160,943 45,606 8,267 32,092 1,130,558 1,115,126 54,443 746,128 685,781
Oct. 1,388,160 250,340 164,602 45,719 8,449 31,570 1,083,141 1,066,604 54,678 735,595 652,564
Nov. 1,456,861 258,815 170,460 46,375 8,405 33,575 1,142,719 1,127,545 55,327 773,217 683,644
Dec. 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 Jan. 1,479,694 261,965 173,362 46,931 8,504 33,168 1,163,561 1,149,868 54,168 807,889 671,805
Feb. 1,491,552 273,726 184,255 46,854 8,711 33,905 1,164,098 1,149,722 53,729 774,786 716,766
Mar. 1,516,744 277,782 187,779 47,375 8,663 33,965 1,184,501 1,169,952 54,462 808,690 708,055
Apr. 1,491,558 288,953 196,274 48,617 8,799 35,263 1,148,681 1,135,400 53,923 790,221 701,337
May 1,505,419 278,174 186,481 48,031 8,681 34,980 1,173,376 1,159,716 53,869 805,179 700,240
June 1,566,099 281,157 187,573 48,712 8,948 35,923 1,232,176 1,216,530 52,767 826,280 739,819
July 1,514,570 280,910 185,950 49,465 9,086 36,409 1,179,431 1,166,155 54,229 810,881 703,689
Aug. 1,590,572 280,160 184,794 49,614 9,300 36,451 1,258,187 1,245,014 52,225 842,576 747,996
Sep. 1,613,008 281,258 184,022 50,287 9,358 37,592 1,281,266 1,266,647 50,483 829,129 783,879
Oct. 1,569,272 274,421 178,101 49,675 9,527 37,119 1,243,873 1,230,005 50,977 811,035 758,237
Nov. 1,577,175 277,458 183,052 49,168 9,315 35,923 1,248,088 1,233,980 51,629 810,314 766,861
Dec. 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 Jan. 1,508,507 281,692 190,062 48,256 9,437 33,938 1,176,042 1,162,354 50,772 793,716 714,791
Feb. 1,455,724 276,016 183,755 48,582 9,480 34,199 1,130,353 1,114,888 49,356 743,006 712,718
Mar. 1,522,539 288,131 196,405 48,039 9,373 34,314 1,184,604 1,170,620 49,804 791,478 731,061
Apr. 1,431,180 285,667 194,679 47,642 9,297 34,049 1,096,324 1,081,284 49,189 726,986 704,194
May 1,435,049 290,368 197,915 48,658 9,379 34,416 1,095,750 1,081,900 48,931 701,467 733,582
June 1,416,292 280,820 188,991 48,618 9,292 33,919 1,087,034 1,068,747 48,438 718,324 697,969
July 1,399,374 282,438 191,458 48,368 9,184 33,429 1,068,875 1,052,218 48,061 689,447 709,927
Aug. 1,406,665 284,364 192,914 48,979 9,218 33,253 1,074,575 1,056,420 47,725 687,342 719,322
Sep. 1,393,337 282,490 190,232 49,647 9,278 33,333 1,064,193 1,048,059 46,654 713,662 679,675
Oct. 1,415,403 295,288 202,630 49,531 9,256 33,871 1,074,627 1,058,985 45,488 688,966 726,437
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2019 968,277 227,767 740,510 503,698 236,812 220,465 16,348 1,312,974 167,925 1,145,050 932,555 212,495 136,829 75,666
2020 1,030,962 244,325 786,637 546,252 240,385 213,568 26,816 1,419,220 172,112 1,247,108 1,028,217 218,891 130,165 88,726
2021 1,163,639 256,764 906,875 616,964 289,911 261,752 28,159 1,576,549 215,064 1,361,485 1,105,049 256,436 159,446 96,990
2022 1,232,675 251,857 980,818 661,948 318,870 289,264 29,606 1,607,074 174,307 1,432,767 1,139,934 292,833 189,258 103,576
2023 Apr. 1,287,498 326,535 960,963 657,274 303,689 273,260 30,429 1,627,060 207,609 1,419,450 1,142,227 277,223 170,765 106,458
May 1,291,982 337,758 954,224 650,906 303,318 271,538 31,780 1,634,912 222,301 1,412,611 1,136,125 276,486 170,424 106,061
June 1,330,191 353,858 976,333 665,732 310,602 278,874 31,727 1,640,255 203,806 1,436,449 1,152,362 284,087 176,562 107,525
July 1,325,269 357,212 968,057 667,962 300,095 268,536 31,560 1,626,265 202,796 1,423,469 1,150,603 272,866 165,200 107,666
Aug. 1,312,101 353,215 958,886 667,907 290,980 259,478 31,501 1,630,134 206,965 1,423,169 1,157,253 265,916 157,918 107,998
p Sep. 1,342,172 358,353 983,819 682,469 301,349 269,729 31,620 1,618,317 194,655 1,423,662 1,149,060 274,602 168,220 106,383
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2019 573,453 176,913 396,539 304,545 91,994 83,227 8,768 841,017 91,513 749,504 663,166 86,337 63,664 22,674
2020 612,885 185,565 427,320 333,594 93,725 80,717 13,008 899,482 97,582 801,899 712,252 89,647 61,761 27,886
2021 660,557 194,046 466,511 358,320 108,191 95,340 12,851 988,142 151,193 836,949 733,188 103,761 74,174 29,587
2022 703,663 192,412 511,251 387,897 123,354 109,914 13,440 991,655 125,880 865,775 750,939 114,836 82,671 32,165
2023 Apr. 783,061 262,600 520,462 394,679 125,782 111,680 14,102 996,850 119,224 877,627 762,940 114,686 81,522 33,165
May 789,513 280,245 509,267 385,234 124,033 109,647 14,386 985,185 124,431 860,754 747,268 113,487 81,388 32,099
June 807,519 288,895 518,624 392,072 126,552 112,044 14,508 1,015,255 128,117 887,137 768,463 118,675 86,648 32,027
July 807,953 290,841 517,111 396,243 120,869 106,293 14,576 997,716 118,205 879,511 767,757 111,754 79,410 32,344
Aug. 799,774 286,857 512,916 395,782 117,135 102,618 14,517 997,918 122,139 875,779 768,727 107,052 74,940 32,112
p Sep. 814,187 289,484 524,703 403,945 120,757 106,148 14,609 1,002,511 130,352 872,159 758,993 113,166 80,677 32,489
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2019 394,824 50,853 343,971 199,153 144,818 137,238 7,580 471,958 76,412 395,546 269,388 126,157 73,165 52,992
2020 418,077 58,760 359,317 212,658 146,659 132,851 13,808 519,738 74,530 445,208 315,965 129,244 68,404 60,840
2021 503,082 62,718 440,364 258,644 181,720 166,411 15,309 588,407 63,871 524,536 371,861 152,675 85,271 67,403
2022 529,012 59,445 469,567 274,050 195,517 179,351 16,166 615,419 48,427 566,992 388,995 177,997 106,587 71,410
2023 Apr. 504,437 63,935 440,502 262,595 177,907 161,580 16,327 630,209 88,386 541,824 379,287 162,537 89,244 73,293
May 502,469 57,512 444,957 265,671 179,286 161,892 17,394 649,727 97,870 551,857 388,858 162,999 89,036 73,963
June 522,673 64,963 457,710 273,660 184,050 166,831 17,219 625,000 75,689 549,311 383,899 165,412 89,914 75,498
July 517,316 66,370 450,946 271,720 179,226 162,242 16,984 628,549 84,591 543,958 382,846 161,112 85,790 75,322
Aug. 512,327 66,357 445,970 272,125 173,845 156,860 16,985 632,216 84,826 547,390 388,526 158,864 82,978 75,886
p Sep. 527,985 68,869 459,116 278,524 180,592 163,582 17,011 615,807 64,303 551,504 390,067 161,437 87,543 73,894
Euro area (20)
2019 494,383 158,182 336,201 264,821 71,380 63,742 7,638 764,929 71,012 693,917 626,886 67,031 49,802 17,229
2020 526,584 164,691 361,893 288,485 73,408 61,662 11,746 812,136 75,869 736,267 666,749 69,518 47,547 21,971
2021 555,081 172,032 383,050 297,861 85,189 73,511 11,678 904,888 129,783 775,105 693,366 81,739 58,280 23,459
2022 597,491 173,395 424,096 328,761 95,336 83,244 12,092 903,757 105,435 798,322 709,668 88,654 63,579 25,075
2023 Apr. 679,900 246,187 433,713 336,129 97,584 84,845 12,739 909,076 99,419 809,658 723,243 86,415 60,837 25,578
May 686,342 262,375 423,967 327,377 96,590 83,622 12,967 896,990 105,532 791,459 705,854 85,604 61,181 24,423
June 702,858 272,835 430,023 331,855 98,168 85,070 13,098 924,605 108,954 815,652 725,476 90,176 65,920 24,256
July 705,172 275,142 430,030 335,723 94,306 81,133 13,173 910,691 100,225 810,466 725,283 85,183 60,654 24,529
Aug. 697,670 270,789 426,881 335,841 91,040 77,968 13,072 911,291 103,710 807,580 726,079 81,501 57,115 24,386
p Sep. 709,229 271,707 437,522 344,147 93,375 80,211 13,164 910,368 109,670 800,698 714,729 85,969 61,406 24,563
Extra-Euro area (20)
2019 473,894 69,585 404,309 238,877 165,432 156,723 8,709 548,045 . . . 145,464 87,027 58,437
2020 504,378 79,634 424,743 257,766 166,977 151,907 15,070 607,084 96,243 510,840 361,467 149,373 82,618 66,755
2021 608,558 84,732 523,826 319,103 204,723 188,241 16,481 671,661 85,281 586,380 411,683 174,697 101,165 73,532
2022 635,184 . . . 223,535 206,021 17,514 703,317 . . . 204,179 125,679 78,501
2023 Apr. 607,598 . . . . . . 717,983 . . . 190,808 109,928 80,880
May 605,640 . . . 206,729 187,916 18,813 737,921 . . . 190,881 109,243 81,638
June 627,333 . . . 212,434 193,805 18,629 715,649 . . . 193,911 110,642 83,269
July 620,097 . . . 205,789 187,402 18,386 715,574 . . . 187,682 104,546 83,137
Aug. 614,431 . . . 199,939 181,510 18,429 718,843 . . . 184,415 100,803 83,612
p Sep. 632,943 . . . 207,975 189,519 18,456 707,950 . . . 188,633 106,814 81,819
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2021 1.5749 1.4826 7.6282 7.4370 129.88 10.1633 10.1465 1.0811 0.85960 1.1827
2022 1.5167 1.3695 7.0788 7.4396 138.03 10.1026 10.6296 1.0047 0.85276 1.0530
2022 June 1.5044 1.3537 7.0734 7.4392 141.57 10.2972 10.6005 1.0245 0.85759 1.0566
July 1.4856 1.3180 6.8538 7.4426 139.17 10.1823 10.5752 0.9876 0.84955 1.0179
Aug. 1.4550 1.3078 6.8884 7.4393 136.85 9.8309 10.5021 0.9690 0.84499 1.0128
Sep. 1.4820 1.3187 6.9508 7.4366 141.57 10.1697 10.7840 0.9640 0.87463 0.9904
Oct. 1.5474 1.3477 7.0687 7.4389 144.73 10.3919 10.9503 0.9791 0.87058 0.9826
Nov. 1.5455 1.3708 7.3171 7.4387 145.12 10.3357 10.8798 0.9842 0.86892 1.0201
Dec. 1.5685 1.4379 7.3859 7.4377 142.82 10.4480 10.9859 0.9865 0.86950 1.0589
2023 Jan. 1.5523 1.4474 7.3173 7.4383 140.54 10.7149 11.2051 0.9961 0.88212 1.0769
Feb. 1.5514 1.4400 7.3244 7.4447 142.38 10.9529 11.1725 0.9905 0.88550 1.0715
Mar. 1.6034 1.4649 7.3807 7.4456 143.01 11.2858 11.2276 0.9908 0.88192 1.0706
Apr. 1.6389 1.4792 7.5561 7.4518 146.51 11.5187 11.3370 0.9846 0.88115 1.0968
May 1.6346 1.4687 7.5948 7.4485 148.93 11.7330 11.3697 0.9751 0.87041 1.0868
June 1.6157 1.4414 7.7653 7.4492 153.15 11.7164 11.6766 0.9764 0.85861 1.0840
July 1.6423 1.4618 7.9482 7.4508 155.94 11.3474 11.6343 0.9663 0.85856 1.1058
Aug. 1.6818 1.4703 7.9096 7.4522 157.96 11.4127 11.8117 0.9588 0.85892 1.0909
Sep. 1.6622 1.4458 7.7967 7.4566 157.80 11.4525 11.8417 0.9600 0.86158 1.0684
Oct. 1.6637 1.4474 7.7200 7.4604 158.04 11.6284 11.6472 0.9547 0.86798 1.0563
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  
2023 January 1 Croatia Croatian kuna HRK 7.53450  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2023
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the  Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
extended EER group of trading partners  1broad EER group of
trading partners  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
27 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  527 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.1 95.8 96.1 96.5 95.9 97.9 99.6 95.7 97.7 98.3 98.1 97.8
2000 87.0 86.8 85.9 85.6 88.0 86.1 92.0 97.5 85.5 91.1 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.4 87.1 86.6 84.5 90.1 86.9 91.7 96.6 86.0 90.5 93.0 91.7 91.1
2002 89.7 90.3 89.8 88.2 94.4 90.6 92.3 95.7 88.4 91.0 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.5 101.6 101.1 99.4 106.5 101.7 95.9 94.8 97.5 95.3 97.0 96.7 96.9
2004 104.3 105.6 104.3 102.8 111.0 105.6 96.2 93.6 100.0 95.6 98.5 98.2 98.5
2005 102.9 104.3 102.3 101.0 109.1 103.2 94.8 92.1 98.8 93.3 98.5 97.2 96.8
2006 102.9 104.3 101.8 100.0 109.3 102.6 93.6 90.4 98.2 91.6 98.6 96.8 96.0
2007 106.5 107.3 104.1 101.8 112.9 104.8 94.6 89.6 102.1 92.0 100.9 98.3 97.4
2008 110.4 110.3 106.3 105.8 117.8 107.3 95.0 88.4 105.3 91.4 102.4 98.5 97.6
2009 111.9 111.1 107.4 109.3 120.8 108.3 95.3 89.2 104.7 92.1 101.9 98.6 97.9
2010 104.6 103.3 99.1 101.8 112.1 99.3 92.5 88.7 98.3 88.2 98.8 94.3 92.5
2011 104.4 102.4 97.2 100.0 112.9 98.8 92.1 88.4 97.7 87.4 98.2 93.5 91.9
2012 98.6 97.0 91.6 94.1 107.6 94.0 90.1 88.3 92.6 84.7 95.9 90.5 88.9
2013 102.2 100.1 94.7 97.0 112.4 97.0 92.4 88.8 97.6 86.7 98.1 92.3 90.9
2014 102.4 99.5 94.7 97.2 114.7 97.4 93.0 89.6 97.9 87.4 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.5 89.7 86.0 86.4 106.1 88.7 89.8 90.2 89.1 83.6 94.3 87.8 86.9
2016 95.2 91.6 88.3 p 87.6 110.1 90.7 90.7 90.7 90.7 85.0 95.0 88.8 88.1
2017 97.5 93.6 89.5 p 88.4 112.5 92.0 92.0 90.8 93.6 85.7 96.3 89.9 88.9
2018 100.0 95.8 91.1 p 90.0 117.3 95.2 93.3 91.0 96.7 86.8 97.7 91.2 90.8
2019 98.1 93.3 89.3 p 87.4 115.5 92.5 92.3 91.2 93.9 85.9 96.4 89.9 89.4
2020 99.7 93.7 90.1 p 88.5 119.2 93.9 92.5 91.5 93.9 86.6 96.4 90.1 90.1
2021 99.6 93.7 p 89.4 p 86.7 120.5 94.3 93.6 91.9 96.1 86.9 97.4 90.6 90.9
2022 95.3 90.8 p 84.4 p 81.8 116.1 p 90.9 92.3 91.7 93.0 85.3 95.9 89.1 p 89.0
2021 May 100.9 94.6 90.1 p 87.2 122.1 95.3 93.5 91.4 96.5 86.8 98.1 91.3 91.6
June 100.3 94.1 121.3 94.7 97.9 91.0 91.3
July 99.8 93.8 120.6 94.3 97.8 91.0 91.2
Aug. 99.4 93.5 p 89.2 p 86.5 120.2 93.9 93.8 92.0 96.3 87.0 97.4 90.6 90.8
Sep. 99.5 93.6 120.1 93.9 97.3 90.6 90.6
Oct. 98.5 92.7 119.2 93.1 96.7 90.0 90.1
Nov. 97.6 91.9 p 87.4 p 84.5 118.4 92.6 93.6 92.5 95.2 86.5 96.2 89.4 89.7
Dec. 97.0 91.4 118.6 92.4 95.7 88.9 89.3
2022 Jan. 96.6 91.4 118.2 p 92.2 96.0 88.9 p 89.3
Feb. 96.8 91.7 p 85.8 p 83.1 118.5 p 92.6 93.0 92.0 94.3 85.8 96.1 89.0 p 89.4
Mar. 95.8 91.5 117.9 p 92.6 96.3 89.5 p 89.9
Apr. 95.0 90.1 116.0 p 90.3 96.1 88.9 p 88.9
May 95.4 90.5 p 84.2 p 81.5 115.8 p 90.2 92.3 91.5 93.2 84.9 96.5 89.5 p 89.2
June 95.7 90.7 116.1 p 90.3 95.7 88.7 p 88.4
July 93.9 89.2 114.1 p 88.9 94.9 87.9 p 87.6
Aug. 93.4 88.9 p 82.5 p 80.2 113.6 p 88.7 91.6 91.6 91.3 84.7 94.5 87.6 p 87.3
Sep. 93.9 89.9 113.9 p 89.4 95.9 89.1 p 88.6
Oct. 94.5 91.3 114.8 p 90.8 96.0 89.7 p 89.3
Nov. 95.7 92.3 p 85.1 p 82.5 116.6 p 92.0 92.5 91.8 93.2 85.8 97.0 90.6 p 90.3
Dec. 96.8 92.6 118.6 p 92.8 96.2 89.7 p 89.7
2023 Jan. 97.1 92.8 119.2 p 93.1 97.4 90.3 p 90.3
Feb. 97.0 93.0 p 86.9 p 84.6 119.3 p 93.4 93.2 91.6 95.4 86.2 97.6 90.4 p 90.5
Mar. 97.3 93.2 119.7 p 93.6 98.0 90.9 p 91.1
Apr. 98.4 p 94.1 121.5 p 94.8 98.5 p 91.5 p 91.9
May 98.0 p 93.6 p 88.1 p 85.1 120.9 p 94.2 94.1 92.4 96.7 87.3 97.9 p 91.0 p 91.2
June 98.2 p 93.8 121.8 p 94.7 98.3 p 91.4 p 91.9
July 99.2 p 95.0 123.7 p 96.2 98.4 p 91.8 p 92.5
Aug. 99.0 p 95.1 ... ... 123.7 p 96.2 … … … … 98.2 p 91.8 p 92.4
Sep. 98.5 p 94.7 123.0 p 95.5 98.0 p 91.7 p 92.1
Oct. 98.0 p 94.2 122.5 p 95.1 p97.5 p 91.1 p 91.5
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the curren-
cy concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's price
competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective exchange
rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. The
weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more detailed in-
formation on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the Deutsche
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 The calculations are
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following 18 countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania,
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United
States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates were used.
2 Includes countries belonging to the extended EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition) and additionally the following 23 countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zea-
land, Peru, Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan,Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and United Arab Emirates. The ECB has suspended the
publication and calculation of the euro foreign exchange reference rate against Russian
rouble with effect from March 2, 2022 until further notice. For the calculation of
effective exchange rates, an indicative rate is used for the Russian Federation from that
date. It is calculated from the daily RUB/USD rates determined by the Bank of Russia in
conjunction with the respective ECB's euro foreign exchange reference rate to the US
dollar.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from 2001 including
Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from
2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, from
2015 including Lithuania, from 2023 including Croatia) as well as Canada, Denmark,
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.
5 Euro area countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the extended
EER group of trading partners (fixed comosition).  6 Euro area countries (current compo-
sition) and countries belonging to the broad EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition).

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website, as are also the Statistical Series, with a 
changed basic structure and advanced options for using data.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
A list of the articles published in the period from 
2010 to 2022 is available on the Bundesbank’s 
website.
Monthly Report articles
January 2023
– From the monetary pillar to the monetary 
and financial analysis
– Term structures in economic analysis
– Mobile payment usage in Germany
– Access to cash in Germany: analyses of the 
spatial availability of cash withdrawal facil -
ities
February 2023
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2023
– German balance of payments in 2022– The impact of digitalisation on labour prod -
uctivity growth
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2021
April 2023
– Money market conditions and remuneration 
of government  deposits
– Household wealth and finances in  Germany: 
Results of the 2021 household wealth survey
– Turning point in payments
– Sustainability risks in banking supervision
May 2023
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2023
– Arduous recovery amid high and only grad -
ually easing inflation – outlook for the Ger -
man economy up to 2025
– Developments in bank interest rates in Ger -
many during the period of monetary policy 
tightening
– The growing significance of central govern -
ment’s off-budget entities
July 2023
– Digital money: options for the financial in -
dustryDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
85•

– Cross- border liquidity flows – the role of the 
banking system in the German balance of 
payments
– Economic developments in emerging market 
economies: old problems and new chal -
lenges
August 2023
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2023
– Germany as a business location: selected as -
pects of current dependencies and medium- 
term challenges
– Heterogeneous impact of monetary policy in 
the euro area?
– Models for short- term economic fore casting 
during the recent crises
– Member States’ financial relationships with 
the EU budget and the NextGenerationEU 
off- budget entity in 2022
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2022
October 2023
– Is price competitiveness favourable in Ger -
many and the euro area?
– State government finances in 2022: high sur -
plus overall, some states still making exten -
sive recourse to emergency borrowing
November 2023
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, January 20231,2
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
January 20232
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131
Discussion Paperso
12/ 2023  
Long- term deposit funding and demand for 
central bank funds: Evidence from targeted 
longer- term refinancing operations13/2023  
Mental accounting and the marginal propensity 
to consume
14/2023  
Shadow- rate VARs
15/2023  
Convenient but risky government bonds
16/2023  
Corporate taxes, productivity, and business 
dynamism
17/ 2023  
The pass- through from inflation perceptions to 
inflation expectations
18/ 2023  
Monetary policy rules under bounded rational -
ity
19/ 2023  
The state- dependent impact of changes in bank 
capital requirements
20/ 2023  
Forecasting banknote circulation during the 
COVID-19 pandemic using structural time series 
models
21/2023  
Effects of the ECB’s communication on govern -
ment bond spreads
22/2023  
Learning monetary policy strategies at the ef -
fective lower bound with sudden surprises
23/ 2023  
Capital reallocation under climate policy uncer -
tainty
24/ 2023  
Towards seasonal adjustment of infra- monthly 
time series with JDemetra+
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
87•

25/ 2023  
Precision- based sampling for state space models 
that have no measurement error
26/2023  
Effects of bank capital requirements on lending 
by banks and non-bank financial institutions
27/2023  
Forceful or persistent: How the ECB’s new infla -
tion target affects households’ inflation expect -
ations
28/2023  
Energy prices and inflation expectations: Evi -
dence from households and firms
29/2023  
Effects of mergers on network models of the 
finan cial systemBanking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, 
January  20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2023  
88•

