Monthly Report – 
August 2024
Vol. 76 No 8

Table of Content
Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
Global and European setting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
Monetary policy and banking business  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43
Financial markets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  66
The German economy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  78
Public finances  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  96

3Overview
Monthly Report – August 2024

Overview
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 41 Global economy and international financial markets
1.1 Global economy on moderate growth path
The global economy continued to expand moderately in the spring, albeit with 
regional differences. In China, flagging domestic demand depressed economic 
growth. In the euro area, the growth seen at the beginning of the year continued. 
However, there is no sign of a strong, broad-based upswing. In the United States, by 
contrast, economic activity remained fairly buoyant. Economic growth there was even 
somewhat stronger than at the beginning of the year.
Global industrial activity continued to pick up in the second quarter, but the short-
term outlook has recently deteriorated again somewhat.  Industrial output rose 
significantly, particularly in the United States and Japan. The global industrial recovery 
thus broadened. The euro area remained a key exception. There, output continued to 
decline in the second quarter. Global trade increased in line with global industrial 
output. According to the results of recent surveys of purchasing managers, however, 
the global industrial recovery may have stalled of late. Industrial output probably 
barely inched upwards in July, and new orders fell.
1.2 Disinflation continuing to progress at only a slow pace
Disinflation in the advanced economies is continuing to progress at only a slow pace.
Up to July, the year-on-year rate of consumer price inflation in that group of countries 
contracted to 2.7%. Three months earlier, it had stood at 3.0%. Efforts to contain core 
inflation achieved similarly modest progress. The inflation rate excluding energy and 
food stood at 3.0% in July, compared with 3.3% in April. A near-term return to the price 
stability targets is not yet on the cards. In labour-intensive services, in particular, 
upward pressure on prices remained stubbornly high, due in part to the persistently 
buoyant wage growth in many places.

Overview
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 51.3 Growing expectations of interest rate cuts and diminishing risk 
appetite in financial markets
Improved US inflation data as well as unexpectedly weaker economic signals 
reinforced expectations in international financial markets of rapid interest rate 
cuts. This had not been the case in the spring, when – in light of stalling disinflation and 
a robust economic environment, at least in the United States – market participants 
successively shifted their assessments of when a phase of interest rate cutting would 
begin in the United States and the euro area into the future. Since the beginning of the 
third quarter, there have been increasing changes in the financial market environment. 
Backed by the Federal Reserve’s assessment that progress had now been made in 
tackling US inflation, market participants adjusted their outlook for key interest rates, in 
. Later on, unexpectedly weaker labour market data some cases significantly downward
from the United States reinforced this market dynamic. Due to their interlinkages with 
 interest rates, key interest rate expectations in the euro area fell, too. Overall, long-US
term yields developed heterogeneously. For instance, yields fell in the United States, 
while they hardly changed on balance in the euro area. These developments caused the 
euro to appreciate against the US dollar. By contrast, given rising yields in Japan, the 
euro depreciated against the yen in net terms.
Risky assets – including shares, in particular – came under pressure as the economic 
outlook clouded over and investors’ risk appetite diminished. With heightened 
financial market volatility, international equity markets temporarily incurred significant 
price losses in some cases. As risk appetite amongst investors declined, the yield 
spreads on long-term government bonds and corporate bonds widened slightly overall. 
Against this backdrop, investors demanded somewhat greater risk compensation for 
bonds with low credit quality. Subsequently, however, the surge in financial market 
volatility at the beginning of August caused by poorer  labour market data quickly US
abated. Developments in international equity markets since the beginning of the 
second quarter exhibit marked regional differences. The United States and the United 
Kingdom saw slight price gains on balance, while the euro area and Japan recorded 
losses.

Overview
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 62 Monetary policy and banking business
2.1  Governing Council lowers key interest rates after nine months ECB
of unchanged rates
At its monetary policy meeting in June 2024, the Governing Council of the ECB 
lowered the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points each. Amongst other 
reasons, the Governing Council justified the cut in key interest rates based on the fact 
that inflation had fallen by more than 2.5 percentage points since September 2023 and 
that the inflation outlook had improved markedly. At the same time, however, it 
emphasised that domestic price pressures remained strong as wage growth was 
elevated. Accordingly, inflation is likely to stay above target well into next year. 
However, it is then expected to fall to 2.0% at the end of 2025. Alongside its interest 
rate decision, the Governing Council also confirmed that it will reduce the holdings of 
securities under the pandemic emergency purchase programme  by €7.5 billion ( ) PEPP
per month on average over the second half of the year.
Following the interest rate cut in June, the ECB Governing Council left its key 
interest rates unchanged in July, stressing that it would not pre-commit to a 
particular rate path for the future. The Governing Council will keep policy rates 
sufficiently restrictive for as long as necessary. It will continue to follow a data-
dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate level and 
duration of restriction. In particular, its interest rate decisions will be based on its 
assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial 
data, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy 
transmission. In this context, the  President notably emphasised at the press ECB
conference that the September interest rate decision, too, would be determined solely 
on the basis of all the data received by then.
2.2 Demand for bank loans in the euro area remains subdued
The broad monetary aggregate M3 saw significant growth in the second quarter of 
2024.  The recovery in monetary growth observed since the fourth quarter of 2023 thus 

Overview
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 7continued, with the annual rate coming to 2.2% at the end of June. This development is 
a reflection of households and enterprises completing the process of reallocating their 
portfolios in response to the rises in interest rates in 2022 and 2023. With the end of 
the interest rake hiking phase and the decline in capital market yields that has been 
observed since then, households and enterprises increasingly scaled back the volume 
of assets they shifted out of short-term bank deposits into non-M3 forms of 
investment. On the counterpart side, monetary growth was driven primarily by high 
demand among non-resident investors for euro area securities. Bank loans to non-
financial corporations and households expanded only marginally on balance. According 
to the Bank Lending Survey  this came about because demand for loans was still ( ),BLS
subdued overall: credit standards were barely tightened any further or were even 
moderately eased in some cases.

Overview
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 83 German economy treading water
3.1 German economic output down slightly in second quarter
Contrary to expectations, German economic output fell slightly in the second 
quarter of 2024.  According to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, seasonally 
adjusted real gross domestic product  declined by 0.1% on the previous quarter. ( ) GDP
This preliminary result is very likely to be revised because important statistics for trade 
and services, which are included in the  estimate, are currently being published GDP
with a time lag and are not yet available for the last few months.  had increased by GDP
0.2% in the first quarter. According to the flash estimate, particularly investment in new 
machinery and equipment and in new buildings dropped. Construction activity had 
been expected to normalise following an increase boosted by weather-related factors 
in the first quarter. However, there were other key headwinds besides these that 
persisted into the second quarter. Demand for industrial products from abroad 
remained weak, for example. Higher financing costs and heightened economic and 
political uncertainty dampened investment. Private consumers remained worried, 
which meant that the steep increases in wages have still not translated into an equally 
brisk uptick in consumption.
It was an environment in which credit developments also remained moribund. 
Lending to non-financial corporations moved sideways again on aggregate. Lending 
business with domestic households was also weak in the second quarter of 2024. 
Although housing loans were up on the second half of 2023, the rise was not as 
significant as in the previous quarter. Furthermore, banks’ lending policies had a 
dampening effect.
The labour market remained relatively stable despite the sluggish economic 
recovery.  Employment rose moderately in the second quarter of 2024. However, the 
increase was not strong enough to fully absorb the number of workers available to the 
labour market, which is rising as a result of immigration. This is why the number of 
unemployed persons also went up somewhat. The ongoing economic weakness was 
also reflected in a moderate increase in short-time work and a slow decline in job 
vacancies. Not much change is expected in this development in the near future.

Overview
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 93.2 Strong trend growth in wages continues
Negotiated wages continued to rise significantly in the second quarter of 2024. 
Inflation compensation bonuses that had been paid out in the previous year were 
discontinued, which dampened the year-on-year rate. Excluding these bonus 
payments, however, negotiated wages rose by 4.2% on the year in the second quarter, 
representing markedly stronger growth than in the first quarter. Permanent wage 
increases are gaining in importance. From a long-term perspective, the high growth in 
actual earnings is continuing.
High pay increases were likewise agreed in recent wage negotiations. In annualised 
terms, wage growth ranged between 4% and 6% in almost all sectors that concluded 
new collective agreements in the second quarter. High new pay deals are also pending 
in the forthcoming negotiations. The wage demands being made by trade unions are 
still high, currently ranging from 7% to 19% for 12-month agreements. Wage demands 
in services stand out in particular at present. Trade unions are looking to achieve 
lasting compensation for the real wage losses accumulated over the past three years. 
The still high willingness to strike and widespread shortage of labour suggest that 
wage increases will continue to be comparatively substantial in the future.
3.3 Disinflation process stalls temporarily
In the second quarter of 2024, inflation did not decline any further on the quarter.  
As in the first quarter, consumer prices  went up markedly in the second quarter, ( ) HICP
with a seasonally adjusted quarter-on-quarter rise of 0.8%. This was mainly due to the 
continued steep growth in the prices of services. The prices of some services were 
probably adjusted with some delay in response to cost increases that built up over a 
longer period of time. For non-energy industrial goods, meanwhile, inflation came to a 
standstill. Looking at the year-on-year figure, the disinflation process slowed further. 
The inflation rate declined only slightly from 2.7% in the first quarter to 2.6% in the 
second quarter. The rate excluding energy and food likewise saw only a slight drop, 
falling from 3.4% to 3.2%. However, here, the decline was slowed by a base effect: the 
rate for May 2024 did not include the dampening effect on the previous year’s rate 
resulting from the introduction of the Deutschlandticket in May 2023.
Headline inflation actually rose slightly on the year in July, while the core rate 
remained unchanged.  The latter remained at 3.3%. Headline inflation, however, rose 
slightly from 2.5% to 2.6%. After seasonal adjustment, consumer prices were up 

Overview
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 10moderately in July on the month, with price inflation for services continuing to display 
above-average growth.
From today’s perspective, inflation rates are expected to temporarily return to 
somewhat higher levels towards the end of the year.  The previously negative energy 
inflation rates will then turn positive. This is mainly due to the decline in energy prices 
in the final quarter of 2023. However, the currently depressed profit margins for 
refined petroleum products could also gradually creep up again. Core inflation is also 
likely to remain at an elevated level due to continued strong wage pressures.
3.4 German economy continues to struggle against headwinds
Economic output could increase slightly in the third quarter of 2024.  Private 
consumption is likely to grow, as are service providers. Consumer restraint appears to 
be more persistent than assumed, for example, in the June Forecast for Germany, with 
the saving ratio likely to rise again in the third quarter. Nevertheless, the favourable 
framework conditions should be increasingly reflected in growing household 
expenditure as disposable incomes rise significantly in price-adjusted terms. By 
contrast, the weakness in industry – and also in construction – is likely to continue. 
Foreign demand could remain frail amid the recent slowdown in global industrial 
activity. Moreover, industrial enterprises are navigating a difficult competitive 
environment. Exports and investment in machinery and equipment are therefore also 
likely to fall short of the expectations from the most recent Forecast for Germany. 
Overall, economic output is likely to expand only slightly. This will further delay the 
expected slow uptick in economic activity. However, as things stand today, a recession 
in the sense of a significant, broad-based and prolonged decline in economic output is 
not to be expected absent new negative shocks.

Overview
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 114 German public finances: deficit shrinks moderately
The general government deficit ratio is expected to decline moderately in 2024 and 
2025. This is the result not of a restrictive austerity policy, but of the discontinuation 
of crisis assistance. On balance, the general government deficit ratio could range 
between 1½% and 2% of  in 2025, having stood at 2.4% in 2023. The same period GDP
will see around 1½% of  in burdens from temporary crisis assistance measures GDP
being taken out of the budget. The expiry of the energy price brakes in 2024 should do 
the most to relieve pressure on the government budget. The inflation compensation 
bonuses, which are exempt from tax and social security contributions, will 
subsequently expire in 2025 as well. On balance, these will be replaced by pay 
components subject to tax and social security contributions, which will generate 
additional revenue. In other areas, however, the budgets are likely to deteriorate. For 
example, the high inflation rates of recent years are still reflected in additional 
expenditure on the likes of administration and general costs or employee 
compensation. Pension expenditure will also rise significantly. Furthermore, the Federal 
Government announced new, in some cases deficit-increasing measures as part of its 
growth initiative.
The central government deficit is also likely to shrink.  The Federal Government is 
budgeting for a total deficit of €113 billion for the core budget and off-budget entities 
in 2024. This is expected to decline to €87 billion in 2025. However, current 
expectations put the federal deficit in 2024 significantly below the planned figure. As 
things stand today, the Armed Forces Fund and Climate and Transformation Fund, in 
particular, will turn out more favourably. By contrast, deficits could be higher in 2025. 
For example, the more favourable developments in 2024 could open up more scope for 
deficits for 2025 (via higher reserves). In addition, the Federal Government’s draft 
budget estimates are fairly tight, and relatively high savings are to be achieved in the 
course of implementing the budget (a residuum spending cut).
In order to expand the scope of the debt brake, Deutsche Bahn is to receive 
additional equity instead of grants. This raises questions from an economic 
perspective and further distances the debt brake from the EU fiscal rules. Overall, 
Deutsche Bahn is to receive injections of €10½ billion in capital from central 
government’s core budget in 2025 for infrastructure investment. This is €4½ billion 
more than initially decided in July. Whether the switch will be adequate from an 
economic perspective depends on whether an appropriate return is to be expected on 

Overview
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 12the equity capital. It would not make good sense if central government’s return turned 
out to be financed by central government itself via future burdens on the federal 
budget (e.g. via higher federal grants). In any case, it would be important to make it 
transparent how Deutsche Bahn intends to generate the return in the future with the 
new equity. This switch in how Deutsche Bahn is financed distances the debt brake 
further from the  rules it is supposed to safeguard. The  rules refer to the general EU EU
government sector as defined in the national accounts. This includes the infrastructure 
component of Deutsche Bahn. Its investments therefore increase the national accounts 
deficit, irrespective of whether central government books financial transactions (such 
as capital injections) or grants in the core budget.
For sound public finances, it is important that the debt brake retains its binding 
effect. Reform that moderately increased a binding credit limit would be acceptable, 
however.  In this context, the Bundesbank has proposed a moderate increase in the 
credit limit if the debt ratio is below 60%. A capped golden rule could be used to open 
up targeted, limited additional scope to borrow for net investment as well.
Germany remains tasked with rigorously tackling its economic policy challenges. 
The Federal Government’s growth initiative is addressing the right issues in many 
cases. Its goals include incentivising employment and investment, a reliable energy 
supply, and efficient, less bureaucratic public administration. However, some of the 
prospective measures do not match the goals, and in some cases more far-reaching 
steps are needed. For example, additional partial tax subsidies make tax law more 
complicated and more susceptible to creative tax practices, add red tape, and stress the 
country’s public finances. One strategy that works in the opposite direction would be to 
limit or eliminate tax exemptions and reductions combined with a lowering of general 
tax rates. One easily understood measure would be if employees no longer had to pay 
unemployment and pension insurance contributions after they reach the statutory 
retirement age. This is because, for these employees, the employer contribution 
represents a special levy in some cases under the existing system. In the interests of 
keeping older people in jobs, it would make sense to remove some of the incentives for 
early retirement. Even if the statutory retirement age after 2030 becomes linked to life 
expectancy, this would support a longer working life. These measures would alleviate 
the strong demographic pressure on pension finances and the federal budget.
The new EU fiscal rules are facing their first test: budgetary requirements must be 
sufficiently ambitious to promote sound public finances in the euro area.  The stated 
objective of the rules is to lower high deficit and debt ratios. This is because sound 
public finances in the Member States are important for a stability-oriented euro area. 
They increase its crisis resilience and support the monetary policy of the Eurosystem. 

Overview
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 13The onus continues to be on the European Commission and  to ensure that ECOFIN
fiscal requirements are sufficiently ambitious. The budget limits for the first planning 
periods will be agreed by the autumn.

14Global and European 
setting
Monthly Report – August 2024

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 151 Global economy on moderate growth path
The global economy continued to expand moderately in the second quarter of 2024, 
albeit with regional differences. In China, flagging domestic demand dampened 
economic growth. In the euro area, the growth seen at the beginning of the year 
continued. However, there is no sign of a strong, broad-based upswing. By contrast, 
economic activity in the United States and the United Kingdom remained fairly buoyant. 
In Japan, real gross domestic product  expanded considerably after three weak ( ) GDP
quarters.
Global industrial activity continued to pick up in the second quarter, but the short-
term outlook has recently deteriorated somewhat.  Industrial output rose 
significantly, particularly in the United States and Japan. Vibrant output growth 
continued in the group of emerging market economies. The global industrial recovery 
thus broadened. The euro area remained a key exception. There, output continued to 
decline in the second quarter. Global trade increased in sync with global industrial 


Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 16output. According to the latest results of the survey among purchasing managers, 
however, the global industrial recovery may have recently stalled. Industrial output 
probably barely inched upwards in July, and new orders fell.
Many commodity prices declined given the slightly more muted outlook for 
industrial activity of late.  Only European gas prices have risen markedly in the last 
weeks in the light of escalation in the war between Russia and Ukraine and in the 
Middle East. Prices for industrial commodities have fallen markedly since June. Crude 
oil prices also declined. In the first half of August, a barrel of Brent crude oil cost US$82 
on average, and thus somewhat less than in May. Concerns about a possible slowdown 
in global economic activity likely counteracted price-supporting factors such as the 
ongoing cuts in production by  and its partners and tensions in the Middle East. OPEC
Despite the recent decline, most commodity prices still exceeded their previous year’s 
levels. This also held true of food commodity prices. The record-high global 
temperatures of the past 12 months are likely to have contributed to this (see 
supplementary information on the impact of seasonal temperature anomalies on 
global food commodity prices).


Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 17Supplementary information
The impact of seasonal temperature anomalies on 
global food commodity prices
Record peaks in global temperatures in the summer months of 2023 and 2024 may 
have contributed to the persistently high global market prices for food 
commodities. According to the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (
), global summer temperatures last year exceeded their long-term average by NOAA
more than 1.5°C for the first time since records began.  For the summer of 2024, 
Such unusually high temperatures are expected to be somewhat higher still.  
temperatures may potentially correlate with crop failures in some regions of the world 
and are therefore a possible reason for the currently high food prices.  In any case, 
having risen sharply from mid-2021 onwards in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic 
and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, global food commodity prices remain well above their 
pre-pandemic levels. At last report, they were still almost one-third above the level 
recorded in 2019, whereas a greater normalisation of food commodity prices might 
actually have been expected given the fall in fertiliser and energy prices and robust 
Ukrainian grain exports. 1) 
 2) 
 3) 
1 These are temperature anomalies over global land surfaces. The long-term average refers to the summer 
months (June, July and August) from 1901 to 2000; see National Centers for Environmental Information (2024).
2 [2]
3 High global average temperatures can be accompanied by strong, sustained local heatwaves, which have a 
negative impact on crop yields. See Schlenker and Roberts (2009), Faccia et al. (2021) and Kotz et al. (2024). 
There might also be an accumulation of other extreme weather events, such as droughts, floods or storms, 
which could place an additional strain on agricultural production. See Lesk et al. (2016) and Bilal and Känzig 
(2024).

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 18Time series analyses show that above-average summer temperatures do indeed 
often correlate with a marked increase in global market prices for food 
commodities.  This is true, at least, of temperature anomalies over the land surfaces 
of the northern hemisphere. If summer temperatures there are half a degree higher  
than the average of the previous ten years, as was approximately the case in 2023, for 
example, this is estimated to be associated with a rise in global market prices for food 
commodities that is around 15 percentage points higher in the first six months 
following the temperature anomaly.  Prices then remain at this elevated level for an 
extended period of time.
 4) 
 5) 
 6) 
4 The effects were estimated using local projections. The rates of change in global food commodity prices are 
regressed on temperature anomalies in the summer months over the land surfaces of the northern 
hemisphere. The temperature anomalies are calculated using the deviation of the average temperature in the 
summer months (June to August) from its average over the previous ten years. The estimation spans the 
period from 1992 to 2023. In addition to the main equation for the aggregate food commodity price index, 
further equations were estimated for individual foods. For a discussion of the estimation approach, see Jordà 
(2005).
5 Temperature anomalies in the autumn months (September, October and November) are also likely to have an 
impact on global food prices, albeit to a lesser extent. By contrast, extreme temperatures in the southern 
hemisphere or over the oceans do not appear to have a comparable effect on global food commodity prices.
6 When interpreting the effects, it is important to note that food commodity prices generally fluctuate quite 
strongly. For instance, the annual rate of change in the years from 1992 to 2023 was between ‑28% and +31%.

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 19Grain prices, in particular, seem to react strongly to temperature anomalies. 
Examples include the prices of wheat, barley, oats, millet or maize. However, a 
correlation of that kind is evident for soybeans and some vegetable oils as well. By 
contrast, no significant effects are identified for other foodstuffs such as rice, or luxury 
crops such as sugar, coffee or cocoa.
The price increases are probably primarily due to crop failures. Higher summer 
temperatures in the northern hemisphere generally appear to correlate with reduced 
food production.  Accordingly, growth in the global production of various food  
commodities was rather weak in 2023, and initial estimates indicate that global grain 
stocks declined slightly.
The high summer temperatures in 2023 are therefore likely to have contributed to 
the persistently high global food commodity prices. The very high temperatures that 
are currently again being observed will probably further bolster prices. This could also 
somewhat impede the global disinflation process.
 7) 
 8) 
7 This suggests at least a statistically significant, negative correlation between temperature anomalies in the 
northern hemisphere during the summer months and the rates of growth in global food production 
(according to data from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations).
8 See United States Department of Agriculture (2024) and International Grains Council (2024).

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 20 
Disinflation in the advanced economies is continuing to progress at only a slow pace.
Up to July, the year-on-year rate of consumer price inflation in that group of countries 
declined to 2.7%. Three months earlier, it had stood at 3.0%. Efforts to contain core 
inflation achieved similarly modest progress. The inflation rate excluding energy and 
food stood at 3.0% in July, compared with 3.3% in April. A near-term return to the price 
stability targets is not yet on the cards because of, in particular, continued lively wage 
growth in many places. In labour-intensive services, upward pressure on prices 
remained stubbornly high through the end of the reporting period.
The International Monetary Fund ( )IMF  also recently stressed risks to the further 
disinflation process.  In the regular update of its World Economic Outlook in July, the 
 staff essentially confirmed their April economic picture.  The  left the global IMF IMF
economic growth projection for the current year unchanged at 3.2%. For the coming 
year, it has projected similarly modest growth of the global economy. At the same time, 
the staff revised its inflation forecast for the advanced economies upwards somewhat 
for this year and next. In this group of countries, inflation is thus likely to remain 
 1) 
 2) 
1 For an analysis of the current disinflation process, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2024).
2 See International Monetary Fund (2024).

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 21slightly above 2% in 2025. The  also stressed that the risks to the price projection IMF
were tilted to the upside. It cited as the main risk factors, in addition to persistently 
strong wage growth, potentially disappointing productivity developments and an 
escalation of trade disputes.
1.1 Weaker, two-speed economic activity in China
The Chinese economy was unable to maintain the pace of growth it showed at the 
start of the year.  According to the official estimate, in the second quarter seasonally 
adjusted real  growth halved to 0.7% compared with the previous quarter. At 4.7%, GDP
the annual rate was also markedly lower than before. This was mainly due to the 
subdued dynamics of private consumption. Retail sales in the second quarter were only 
2.6% higher than a year earlier, and services consumption also probably continued to 
lose steam. Against this backdrop, the rise in consumer prices remained extremely 
subdued: the consumer price index  rose by just 0.3% year-on-year. The weakness ()CPI
in private consumption is also likely to be related to the severe housing market crisis, 
which has continued in recent months. The Chinese economy remained on a growth 
path despite the many pressures because, in particular, export business continued to 
flourish persistently. Thus, economic development in China has remained at two 
speeds of late.
China’s export economy is coming under increasing pressure.  Its industry recently 
significantly expanded its production capacity for high-end goods. Given that domestic 
demand was rather sluggish as well, it made inroads into foreign markets and put 
pressure on established providers there. Several trading partners have accused China 
of giving its enterprises unfair competitive advantages through subsidies. Most 
recently, the  and  announced the rollout of additional tariffs on Chinese USA EU
imports, including electric vehicles. China’s government rejected the criticism and 
intends to stay its industrial policy course. In order to boost domestic demand, it 
announced further economic policy stimulus in recent weeks. The central bank eased 
its monetary policy somewhat in July.

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 221.2 Other large emerging market economies with roses and thorns
The strong economic upswing in India continued. In the first quarter, up to which 
national accounts are available, real  rose by just under 8% on the year. According GDP
to the latest indicators, the rapid expansion is likely to have continued and appears to 
have spread across large parts of the Indian economy. At 4.9% in the second quarter, 
consumer price inflation was almost as high as in the previous quarter. This meant that 
inflation remained in the upper range of the target corridor of the Reserve Bank of 
India, which left the key interest rate unchanged at 6.5%.
In Brazil, economic activity is likely to have lost momentum again in the second 
quarter. The Brazilian economy had gotten 2024 off to quite a good start: in the first 
quarter, real  rose by 0.8% on the quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. According GDP
to the available indicators, the pace appears to have slowed somewhat in the second 
quarter. Massive flooding in parts of the country, which temporarily led to severe 
economic disruptions, is likely to have been one of several factors. Average consumer 


Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 23price inflation over the second quarter dropped to 3.9%. It thus remained within the 
monetary policy target corridor. In May, the central bank reduced the policy rate by 25 
basis points to 10.5%.
In Russia, the economy continued to expand strongly despite growing supply-side 
bottlenecks.  According to data from Rosstat, real  rose by 4.0% year-on-year in the GDP
second quarter. The upswing in the Russian economy is being driven mainly by rising 
government spending, especially in armaments. Wages picked up very strongly as a 
result of increasing labour market bottlenecks – at last report, the unemployment rate 
was 2.5% in seasonally adjusted terms. This boosted private consumption, which 
further drove economic activity. All in all, there are mounting signs that the Russian 
economy is overheating. Consumer price inflation continued to accelerate in July to 
9.1%. The central bank has therefore hiked its policy rate by 200 basis points to 18%.
1.3 Continued robust economic activity in the United States
The US economy remained in good shape in the second quarter.  Real  grew by GDP
0.7% on the quarter after seasonal adjustment after seeing even more modest growth 
in the first quarter. Domestic activity was the driving force behind the growth. Private 
households maintained their sizeable appetite for spending. In fact, enterprises 
actually increased their expenditure on machinery and equipment and on inventories 
relatively sharply. Government demand likewise picked up markedly. By contrast, the 
persistently unfavourable financing conditions in the construction sector made 
themselves felt. Commercial construction investment fell, as did investment in private 
residential construction. Imports increased significantly against the backdrop of 
buoyant domestic demand.
The US economy is likely to markedly lose momentum over the remainder of the 
year.  Given the largely depleted pandemic-era excess savings, households are likely to 
be adjusting more strongly to moderate real income growth. Labour market utilisation, 
which had been very high, already began to decline from the beginning of the year. 
Enterprises advertised fewer vacancies, but at the same time it was increasingly easier 
for them to fill vacancies. The increased influx of workers from abroad is likely to have 
been a factor here. The solid employment growth that had occurred for a long time has 
recently weakened significantly, and the previously strong wage growth has also eased. 
Overall, the indicators suggest a moderation of economic activity. However, there are 
no signs of a hard landing.
The slowdown in wage growth is reducing enterprises’ cost pressures and is set to 
foster the continued process of disinflation.  Between April and July, the year-on-year 

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 24rate of consumer price inflation fell by 0.5 percentage point, but remained high at 2.9%. 
Core inflation (excluding energy and food) was even slightly above that. Against this 
backdrop, the Federal Reserve continued to refrain from lowering policy rates for the 
time being.
1.4 Japan’s economic output recovered somewhat after a period of 
weakness
Japan’s economic output increased significantly in the second quarter.  According to 
initial estimates,  grew by 0.8% in seasonally and price-adjusted terms following GDP
three weak quarters. Motor vehicle production, which had slumped in the first quarter 
due to a production stoppage at one manufacturer,  made good progress towards 
recovery, alongside a corresponding recovery in industrial production. Exports also 
rose somewhat. Private gross fixed capital formation increased markedly, and 
 3) 
3 A Japanese motor vehicle manufacturer that had manipulated the results of safety tests had to halt production 
for several months. As a result, Japanese motor vehicle production fell by 17% in the first quarter. In May, the 
affected manufacturer resumed production.

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 25households increased their consumption expenditure considerably. Consumers 
benefited from the fact that this year’s high wage rounds took effect and that real 
wages recently rose significantly. Driven by the wage growth and the depreciation of 
the yen, which made imports more expensive, headline inflation remained high by 
Japanese standards. In June, consumer prices were up by 2.8% year-on-year. Excluding 
energy and food, this figure stood at 1.9%. In July the Bank of Japan therefore raised its 
policy rate, the target corridor of which had previously been between 0% and 0.1%, to 
0.25%.
1.5 United Kingdom economy regains its footing
The British economy continued to expand vigorously in the spring.  In the second 
quarter, economic output rose by 0.6% compared with the winter quarter in seasonally 
and price-adjusted terms. This was mainly due to the further increase in activity in the 
services sector. By contrast, construction activity once again fell somewhat. The still 
unfavourable financing conditions and unusually heavy rainfall at the beginning of the 
quarter made themselves felt. Manufacturing, too, was not able to capitalise on its 
strong previous quarter. However, consistent with the positive momentum in economic 
activity overall, the Composite Purchasing Managers’ Index remained clearly in 
expansionary territory until July. Consumer sentiment continued to improve, with real 
income increases in recent months likely to have played an important role. Consumer 
price inflation has barely changed recently. In July, the annual rate of the Harmonised 
Index of Consumer Prices  stood at 2.2%. At 3.3%, the core rate, which excludes ( ) HICP
energy and food, was still quite high. Nevertheless, in August the Bank of England cut 
its key interest rate by 25 basis points for the first time since March 2020 owing to the 
success of the disinflation process to date.
1.6 Economic recovery in Poland strengthens
In Poland, the economic recovery strengthened in the second quarter.  Industrial and 
service production rose significantly. On the expenditure side, the recovery in economic 
activity continues to be driven by the rise in private consumption, which is supported by 
the robust labour market situation and significant wage increases amidst a general 
subsiding of upward pressure on prices. Similar factors also boosted economic activity 
in the other central and eastern European  Member States (see supplementary EU
information “Fresh momentum for convergence in central and eastern Europe 20 years 
after  accession?”). The unemployment rate rose only slightly in the second quarter EU
and gross wages in the corporate sector rose by 11% on the year. The expiry of support 

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 26measures is likely to have a temporary dampening effect. In April, the limited-time  VAT
exemption for basic foodstuffs (yet which had been extended once already) expired, 
leaving a clear, temporary mark on retail sales. In contrast to private consumption, 
investment is likely to have fallen once again. Construction output recently fell short of 
the level of the first quarter. As a result of the phasing-out of support measures, 
consumer price inflation increased from 2.0% in March to 2.6% in June, but remained 
within the monetary policy target corridor.  inflation excluding energy and food HICP
fell further to 3.6%. The central bank left its policy rate unchanged at 5.75%.

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 27Supplementary information
Fresh momentum for convergence in central and 
eastern Europe 20 years after EU accession?
Economic activity in the central and eastern European EU Member States gradually 
recovered over the course of 2023.  The central and eastern European  Member EU
States have been significantly affected by the economic impact of Russia’s war against 
Ukraine.  The resulting period of weakness extended into 2023 and has dissipated 
only gradually. The recovery in private consumption was a key factor behind the 
economic improvement. Against the backdrop of declining inflation and, in some cases, 
very strong wage increases combined with employment growth, households’ 
purchasing power bounced back. Exports, by contrast, increased only slowly. Demand 
from the euro area remained weak and price competitiveness had deteriorated. 
Investment activity continued to be supported by various infrastructure projects.  
Overall, the real gross domestic product  of this group of countries rose by 0.6% ( ) GDP
in 2023, compared with 0.5% in the  as a whole. The atypically low annual average EU
 growth rate for this group of countries was mainly the result of the weak second GDP
half of 2022. The year-on-year change in the fourth quarter of 2023 was significantly 
more favourable, coming to 1.2%.
The economic situation improved in most central and eastern European EU Member 
States.  Nearly every country whose economic output had declined over the course of 
2022 due to the outbreak of the war and the energy crisis, including Poland and 
Hungary, recovered from recession. The situation also generally improved in the Baltic 
countries. Only Estonia saw continued economic decline. In the Czech Republic, which 
had not been as severely affected by the crisis in 2022, economic performance 
stagnated throughout 2023. The southern countries, especially Romania, Bulgaria and 
Croatia, benefited from buoyant tourism business and also from the relocation of 
production and transport chains as a result of Russia’s war against Ukraine. It is in this 
context that investment in maritime infrastructure was also stepped up. 1) 
 2) 
 3) 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023).
2 This is due to the fact that 2023 was the last year in which  funds from the 2014‑2020 programming period EU
could be allocated; see European Commission (2024a).
3 See European Commission (2022, 2023a and 2024b).

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 28Consumer price inflation moderated significantly in the central and eastern 
European EU Member States.  Inflation in this group of countries, measured by the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices  fell from its peak in February 2023 (just ( ), HICP
over 16%) to 6.1% at the end of 2023 and then further to 3.3% in June 2024. Inflation 
rates in these countries initially spiked sharply higher after the outbreak of the energy 
crisis, not least because energy and food account for a particularly large share of 
consumption expenditure in these countries. Conversely, the later decline in energy 
prices also had a strong impact on consumer prices. The still subdued overall 
consumption environment is also likely to have had a dampening effect on inflation. 
The average inflation rate of the central and eastern European  Member States EU
recently exceeded that of the euro area by only around 1 percentage point. However, 
the range of inflation rates remained high, ranging from 1.0% in Lithuania to 5.3% in 
Romania. Core inflation excluding energy and food also declined, but had only 
contracted to 4.7% by June 2024.
Domestic price pressures remained high in the face of tight labour markets in most 
central and eastern European EU Member States.  Inflation dynamics have recently 
been increasingly driven by domestic factors and, in particular, by sharply rising labour 
costs. Wages, as measured by compensation per employee, rose by 13.1% on average 
in 2023, up from 11.9% in the previous year. At 12.9% in the first quarter of 2024, the 
rate of expansion remained very high on the year, mainly owing to further rising 
growth rates in Poland and Croatia. In most other countries, by contrast, wage growth 


Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 29moderated somewhat. At the same time, productivity rose only moderately. Cost 
competitiveness therefore deteriorated markedly in a number of countries. The high 
wage pressures are likely to largely be due to the previous erosion of purchasing 
power. However, some countries have now seen real wages clearly exceed their pre-
energy crisis levels. In addition to the remarkably strong increase in minimum wages in 
several countries at the beginning of 2024, the high labour market tightness in this 
group of countries is likely to have contributed to this state of affairs.  In any case, the 
situation in labour markets has seen little decline since the first quarter of 2024. The 
unemployment rate  remained extremely low by historical standards, despite the spell 
of economic weakness.
Some of the central banks in non-euro area central and eastern European EU 
Member States had already begun to cautiously cut interest rates last year.  They 
had previously responded rather early to the mounting inflation with significant 
tightening. Poland's central bank was the first to lower its key interest rate in 
September 2023, followed by Hungary's. Others followed later. But even so, interest 
rates, just like inflation rates, are in some cases still well above those in the euro area 
and the rest of the  As a result, several countries failed to meet the necessary .EU
conditions for adopting the euro in the June 2024 convergence assessment. Bulgaria, in 
particular, had been looking to adopt the euro at the beginning of 2025.  Although the 
Bulgarian lev is firmly pegged to the euro under a currency board arrangement, the 
country failed to meet the price stability criterion. Public finances improved in most 
central and eastern European  countries, partly due to the phasing out of pandemic-EU
related support measures and the gradual reduction of assistance measures meant to 
cushion high energy and food prices. However, several countries did not comply with 
 budgetary rules. These came back into effect in April of this year, having been EU
suspended during the pandemic. As a result, the European Commission recommended 
opening the Excessive Deficit Procedure  against Poland, Hungary and Slovakia. ( )EDP
Economic convergence of the central and eastern European EU Member States 
came to a standstill for the first time in 2023. This was mainly due to the severe 
economic impact of Russia's war against Ukraine on these countries. In the three Baltic 
states, there were even noticeable real income losses compared with the  average. EU
The relative income position in Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary remained 
virtually unchanged. Convergence advanced further in other countries, including 
Romania, Bulgaria and Croatia. 4) 
 5) 
 6) 
 7) 
4 See Lübker and Schulten (2024), p. 14.
5 Using the  definition.ILO
6 See European Commission (2024c).
7 See European Commission (2024d).

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 30In the 20 years since the major Eastern enlargement of the ,EU convergence 
progress has been significant. At the time of enlargement in 2004,   per capita GDP
for this group of countries, calculated in purchasing power parities, stood at just under 
58% of the  average at the time. It was just under 70% ten years later, and just over EU
80% in 2023. It is noteworthy that there were no significant setbacks in convergence 
either during the global financial and economic crisis of 2008‑09 or during the - COVID
19 crisis and the difficult period that followed. Empirical evaluations suggest that 
almost one-third of the current standard of living in this group of countries can be 
attributed to  accession. This corresponds to around half of the increase in  per EU GDP
capita between 2004 and 2019.  The major Eastern enlargement of the  can thus be EU
regarded as a considerable success in economic terms. 8) 
 9) 
8 Romania and Bulgaria joined the  in 2007 and Croatia in 2013.EU
9 See Grassi (2024). According to the study, this increase came without cost to existing members.

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 31The convergence process in the central and eastern European EU Member States is 
expected to make noticeable progress again after taking a breather in 2023. This 
assertion is supported by the uptick in  growth in this group of countries since the GDP
beginning of the year. This shows that the underlying forces that propelled economic 
growth in the years before have lost none of their power. The considerable  funding EU
the central and eastern European countries are receiving, not least from the newly 
created  instrument, is also playing a role here. NGEU
In the medium term, however, the convergence process of the central and eastern 
European EU Member States is likely to lose momentum, mainly due to 
demographic pressures.  Populations in central and eastern European  Member EU
States are shrinking and ageing particularly quickly.  A contraction in labour supply 
and depressed productivity growth due to ageing, coupled with mounting pressure on 
public finances driven in part by demographic factors, are likely to significantly slow 
economic growth and thus also the convergence process. The problem is exacerbated 
 10) 
 11) 
10 See European Commission (2024e).
11 According to the European Commission’s projections, the  population will decline by 4% by 2070. In the EU
central and eastern European  Member States, except Estonia and the Czech Republic, the decline will be EU
stronger, especially in Latvia, Lithuania, Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania, where a decline of more than one-fifth 
is expected. Accordingly, the old-age dependency ratio (the ratio of the older population to the working 
population) will rise sharply in these countries (see European Commission, 2024f).

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 32by the fact that this group of countries is facing the demographic challenges at an 
earlier stage of development than many advanced economies. However, there are 
certainly ways to counteract the productivity-dampening effects of demographic 
change. This includes, above all, improving institutional conditions. In recent years, 
however, there have actually been some noticeable setbacks here. At least, that is what 
the World Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicators  on regulatory quality, 
government effectiveness, control of corruption and the rule of law are showing for 
Bulgaria, Poland and Hungary. By contrast, framework conditions in the Czech Republic 
and Romania improved recently, albeit from a depressed level. 12) 
12 See Kaufmann and Kraay (2023).

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 332 Continued moderate expansion in the euro area
In the euro area, the moderate expansion of economic output continued in the 
second quarter of 2024, and there are no signs yet of a strong, broad-based 
upswing. According to ’s flash estimate,  rose by 0.3% on the quarter in Eurostat GDP
price and seasonally adjusted terms, as it had done in the first quarter. Growth was 
driven primarily by services. By contrast, the period of sluggishness in manufacturing 
continued. The impetus from the global economy appears to have had barely any 
impact on euro area industry. There is no sign of any improvement in this area for the 
current quarter, either. Services activity is still holding up well, despite a certain 
slowdown. The notable divergence of economic activity, which has been ongoing since 
the beginning of 2023, therefore appears to be continuing.
Private consumption continued to recover.  Retail sales increased markedly in price-
adjusted terms, and expenditure on services probably also rose again. By contrast, the 
number of new car registrations declined again. Marked gains in purchasing power are 
likely to have been the key factor behind rising household demand. Labour income 
grew strongly, whilst inflation eased. As hitherto, though, only part of these gains in 
purchasing power probably fed through to expenditure. The saving rate had already 
risen significantly again in the first quarter, and the propensity to save remained high 
according to surveys.
Investment activity probably declined.  Construction investment, in particular, is 
likely to have fallen in the second quarter in seasonally adjusted terms, after having 
benefited from the exceptionally mild winter weather in the previous quarter. 
Construction output fell markedly in April and May compared with the average of the 
first quarter. There is also likely to have been a decline in investment in machinery and 
equipment across much of the euro area, given the persistent slump in industry. 
Capital goods producers’ domestic sales decreased in April and May after price 
adjustment. By contrast, expenditure on information and communication technologies 
and on intellectual property is likely to have risen further as the trend to go digital 
continued. 4) 
4 Excluding Ireland. For several years now, the statistical recording of investment as a whole and of investment 
in intellectual property in particular, has been strongly influenced by the strategic planning of multinational 
enterprises in that country. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 34Exports probably markedly lost steam in the second quarter, despite buoyant global 
trade. Exports of capital goods are likely to have fallen once again, and the increase in 
exports of intermediate goods probably slowed distinctly. Exports of goods thus 
continued to lag behind rising global demand. One major reason for this loss of market 
share is likely to be the deterioration in the competitiveness of euro area industry. 
Industrial enterprises have been assessing their competitiveness in global markets as 
not good for some time in European Commission surveys. In addition to the burden of 
high energy costs, product range effects are probably also a factor here, especially in 
the automotive sector. By country, exports to China, in particular, probably declined 
markedly, whilst exports to the United States and the United Kingdom increased. Euro 
area services exports are likely to have risen again, albeit less strongly than before, 
according to balance of payments data. Imports of goods from third countries probably 
increased notably in the second quarter, primarily imports of non-durable consumer 
products, which is probably associated with the recovery in private consumption.
In manufacturing, the slump continued and industrial capacity utilisation fell 
further below its long-term average. Production of intermediate and capital goods 
contracted in the second quarter. By contrast, consumer goods production, including 
the manufacture of motor vehicles, recovered somewhat after the decline in the 
previous quarter. In addition to the weakness in competition in international markets, 
the subdued investment activity in the euro area was also important here. Producer 
price pressures remain low. Producer and import prices of intermediate products fell 
year-on-year through the end of the reporting period but have been rising again 


Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 35month-on-month since March. For finished products, price growth weakened year-on-
year and remained subdued month-on-month.
Expansion in the services sector continued. While the activities of the information and 
communication sector, in particular, probably picked up markedly, the activities of 
business service providers also probably saw a similar rise. Business activity seems to 
have levelled off again only in the hotel and restaurant sector. According to European 
Commission surveys, a shortage of labour continues to weigh on the services sector.
In most Member States, economic growth continued in the second quarter. 
However, there were still considerable disparities. Economic growth took place mainly 
in countries where tourism plays a major role and where substantial projects are 
funded by the European Recovery Fund. Conversely, the ongoing weakness in 
manufacturing dampened growth in countries with a high industrial share, including, 
above all, Germany.
In France, economic output rose markedly again in the second quarter. According to 
preliminary estimates, real  increased by 0.3%, as in the previous quarter. GDP
 5) 
5 For more, see the article “ ”. The German Economy

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 36Economic growth was largely driven by strong exports. Tourism was also buoyant. 
Domestic demand remained muted, however. Although investment rose somewhat for 
the first time in three quarters, private consumption stagnated again, with a marked 
increase in demand for services but weak goods consumption. On the supply side, 
business developments in the services sector remained buoyant. The hotel and 
restaurant sector gained significant momentum after making a weak start to the year, 
and activity in business services and in the information and communication sector 
remained high. By contrast, industry and construction activity contracted.
In Italy, economic activity increased once again. According to preliminary estimates, 
real  rose by 0.2%, following an increase of 0.3% in the previous quarter. The main GDP
boost was delivered by an uptick in domestic demand. Private consumption and 
investment are likely to have increased slightly. By contrast, goods exports probably 
fell, which also reflects the weakness of Italian industry. As in the previous quarter, 
industrial output declined. By contrast, service providers’ activity rose.
Spain’s strong upswing continued.  According to preliminary estimates, real  GDP
picked up by 0.8%, as in the previous quarter already. Growth was driven by an 
increase in private consumption and higher investment. In addition, exports once again 
rose markedly. On the other hand, imports fell slightly. On the supply side, 
manufacturing and services output increased significantly. By contrast, activity in the 
construction sector pretty much treaded water.
In almost all smaller Member States, economic output continued to rise in the 
second quarter. Real  rose significantly in Cyprus, Ireland, Lithuania, and the GDP
Netherlands. Belgium, Estonia, Finland, Slovakia and Slovenia saw moderate growth. In 
Austria and Portugal the economy stagnated, while activity declined significantly in 
Latvia.
The labour market situation remained favourable in the second quarter.  The 
unemployment rate remained close to its all-time low at 6.5% in June, and the number 
of employees rose again slightly. At the same time, labour market tightness eased 
further, as the job vacancy rate fell, a European Commission indicator showed that 
labour hoarding declined somewhat,  and employment expectations for the next 
three months diminished. Wage growth was also comparatively high in the second 
quarter, however, at a projected figure of between 4% and 5% on the year. 6) 
6 Labour hoarding is said to happen when an enterprise states that employment will remain unchanged or will 
increase while at the same time expecting output to decline; see European Commission (2023b).

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 37Inflation barely eased in the second quarter and remained elevated.  Measured by 
the  consumer prices rose by 0.6% on the quarter in seasonally adjusted terms, , HICP
corresponding to an annualised rate of 2.4%. The continued comparatively strong 
inflation was driven by the persistent strong upward dynamics in services prices, where 
the strong wage growth has had a particularly profound impact. By contrast, food 
prices rose only slightly. For non-energy industrial goods, inflation came to a complete 
standstill. Energy prices, having still risen slightly in the first quarter, fell somewhat.
Price inflation remained virtually unchanged year-on-year, too. At 2.5% in the second 
quarter, the inflation rate was only slightly lower than in the previous quarter (2.6%). 
Services prices made by far the largest contribution year-on-year here, too. Here, 
inflation has remained entrenched at around 4% since the end of 2023. It is therefore 
significantly higher than for the other components of the  and also markedly HICP
stronger than its long-run average. By contrast, price dynamics for food and non-
energy industrial goods weakened distinctly. At 2.6% and 0.7%, respectively, inflation 
rates here were roughly the same as their long-run averages. This suggests that the 
disinflation process for goods is largely complete. After falling on the year for four 
quarters, energy prices have now reached a level similar to those of the previous year. 
Core inflation excluding energy and food continued to fall somewhat, dropping from 
3.1% to 2.8%.
Although the inflation rate rose slightly again in July, it is initially set to decline 
somewhat thereafter.  According to ’s estimate, inflation rose in July to 2.6% Eurostat


Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 38from 2.5% in June. Energy prices, in particular, rose more strongly than before. 
Concerning the other components, inflation was roughly as strong as before. The core 
inflation rate therefore held steady at 2.9%. As expected, the disinflation process thus 
took a breather. Over the next few months, however, the inflation rate is likely to 
temporarily decline again somewhat before then probably going back up in the final 
months of this year. These fluctuations are mainly attributable to base effects from 
energy. Only at the beginning of 2025 should the generally downward trend in inflation 
re-emerge more prominently.
In the current quarter, the macroeconomic recovery in the euro area could continue 
at roughly the same pace as before.  Private consumption can be expected to carry on 
supporting the underlying upward economic trend. Consumer confidence, at least, 
improved steadily until July. Households, in particular, assessed their financial situation 
better. Their willingness to make bigger-ticket purchases has also risen significantly 
recently. In industry, on the other hand, the signs continue to point towards 
contraction. Sentiment has declined, probably because of the deterioration in the 
competitive position of euro area firms and a certain increase in gloom regarding 
global industrial activity. The outlook for the construction sector remained subdued. 
According to surveys, orders declined once again and the number of building permits 
for residential buildings remained entrenched at a low level. By contrast, the services 
sector is set to continue its expansion, even if the generally upbeat sentiment has 


Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 39eased somewhat. A strong and broad-based upswing will probably only occur once 
industry overcomes its pronounced period of weakness and private consumption picks 
up even more momentum.
 

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 40List of references
Bilal, A. and D. R. Känzig (2024), The Macroeconomic Impact of Climate Change: Global 
vs. Local Temperature,  Working Paper No 32450. NBER
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024), The global disinflation process and its costs, Monthly 
Report, July 2024 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023), The central and eastern European  Member States EU
between decelerating growth and persistent inflation, Monthly Report, August 2023, 
pp. 18‑20.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national 
economic statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65‑78.
European Commission (2024a), European Economic Forecast, Spring 2024, Institutional 
Paper 286.
European Commission (2024b), Commission approves €126 million Romanian State aid 
scheme to support ports facing increased trade flows due to Russia’s war against 
Ukraine, press release, 11 January 2024.
European Commission (2024c), Convergence Report 2024, Institutional Paper 294.
European Commission (2024d), Report prepared in accordance with Article 126(3) of the 
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, 19 June 2024.
European Commission (2024e), Mid-Term Evaluation of the Recovery & Resilience 
Facility. Strengthening our Union through ambitious reforms & investments, 
Institutional Paper 269.
European Commission (2024f), 2024 Ageing Report. Economic and Budgetary 
Projections for the  Member States (2022‑2070), April 2024.EU
European Commission (2023a), InvestEU:  extends €50 million loan for a new grain EIB
terminal at Bulgaria’s Black Sea port of Varna, press release, 27 June 2023.

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 41European Commission (2023b), European Business Cycle Indicators – A new survey-
based labour hoarding indicator. 2nd Quarter 2023, European Economy Technical 
Paper 066, pp. 20‑29.
European Commission (2022), Projects of Common Interest in energy infrastructure in 
the Central and South-Eastern region, December 2022.
Faccia, D., M. Parker and L. Stracca (2021), Feeling the heat: extreme temperatures and 
price stability,  Working Paper No 2626.ECB
Grassi, B. (2024), The  Miracle: When 75 Million Reach High Income,  Discussion EU CEPR
Paper No 19114.
International Grains Council (2024), Grain Market Report, July 2024.
International Monetary Fund (2024), World Economic Outlook Update: The Global 
Economy in a Sticky Spot, July 2024.
Jordà, Ò. (2005), Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections, 
American Economic Review, Vol. 95(1), pp. 161‑182.
Kaufmann D. and A. Kraay (2023), The Worldwide Governance Indicators, 2023 update .
Kotz, M., F. Kuik, E. Lis and C. Nickel (2024), Global warming and heat extremes to 
enhance inflationary pressures, Communications, Earth & Environment, Vol. 5(116).
Lesk, C., P. Rowhani and N. Ramankutty (2016), Influence of extreme weather disasters 
on global crop production, Nature, Vol. 529, pp. 84‑87.
Lübker, M. and T. Schulten (2024), -WSI Mindestlohnbericht 2024: Reale Zugewinne 
durch die Umsetzung der Europäischen Mindestlohnrichtlinie, Wirtschafts- und 
Sozialwissenschaftliches Institut,  Report, No 93.
National Centers for Environmental Information (2024), Climate at a Glance: Global 
Time Series, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, July 2024, accessed on 
23 July 2024.
Schlenker, W. and M. J. Roberts (2009), Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe 
damages to U.S. crop yields under climate change, Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, Vol. 106(37), pp. 15594‑15598.
The Copernicus Climate Change Service (2024), June 2024 marks 12th month of global 
temperature reaching 1.5°C above pre-industrial, press release, 4 July 2024.

Global and European setting
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 42The Copernicus Climate Change Service (2023), Summer 2023: The Hottest on Record, 
press release, 5 September 2023
United States Department of Agriculture (2024), World Agricultural Supply and Demand 
Estimates, 12 August 2024.

43Monetary policy and 
banking business
Monthly Report – August 2024

Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 441 Monetary policy and money market developments
At its monetary policy meeting in June 2024, the Governing Council of the ECB 
lowered the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points each.  Since then, the 
interest rate on the deposit facility has stood at 3.75%. The interest rates on the main 
refinancing operations and the marginal lending facility are 4.25% and 4.5%, 
respectively. Amongst other reasons, the Governing Council justified the cut in key 
interest rates based on the fact that inflation had fallen by more than 2.5 percentage 
points since September 2023 and that the inflation outlook had improved markedly. At 
the same time, however, it emphasised that domestic price pressures remained strong 
as wage growth was elevated. Accordingly, inflation is likely to stay above target well 
into next year. The new Eurosystem staff projections from June for both headline and 
core inflation have been revised up for 2024 and 2025 compared with the March 
projections. Staff now see headline inflation averaging 2.5% in 2024, 2.2% in 2025 and 
an unchanged 1.9% in 2026. 
The Governing Council stressed that it would not pre-commit to a particular rate 
path.  After being added in April, the reference to a possible reduction of the level of 


Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 45monetary policy restriction was removed from the Governing Council’s communication. 
The Governing Council is determined to ensure that inflation returns to its 2% medium-
term target in a timely manner, and will keep policy rates sufficiently restrictive for as 
long as necessary to achieve this aim. It will continue to follow a data-dependent and 
meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate level and duration of 
restriction. In particular, its interest rate decisions will be based on its assessment of 
the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial data, the dynamics 
of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. 
In addition, the Governing Council confirmed its announcement from December 
2023 concerning the holdings of securities under the pandemic emergency 
purchase programme ( PEPP ). Over the second half of the year, the  holdings will PEPP
be reduced by €7.5 billion per month on average. The modalities for reducing these 
holdings will be broadly in line with those followed under the asset purchase 
programme ( ).APP
In July, the Governing Council kept the three key ECB interest rates unchanged and 
made it clear that its interest rate decision in September was open.  The incoming 
information broadly supported the Governing Council’s previous assessment of the 
medium-term inflation outlook. While some measures of underlying inflation had 
ticked up in May owing to one-off factors, most measures had either remained stable 
or edged down in June. The Governing Council reiterated that it would follow a data-
dependent approach to its future interest rate decisions. In this context, the  ECB
President notably emphasised at the press conference that the September interest rate 
decision, too, would be determined solely on the basis of all the data received by then. 
A further interest rate reduction in September should therefore not be taken as a given.
Short-term money market rates moved completely in line with the reduction in key 
interest rates.  Following the 25 basis point cut in key interest rates in June, the euro 
short-term rate ( ) closed the reporting period at 3.664%, which was around 9 basis €STR
points below the new level of the deposit facility rate.
In their baseline scenario, market participants are still expecting to see two 
additional rate cuts over the remainder of 2024.  The Eurosystem’s Survey of 
Monetary Analysts conducted ahead of the July meeting showed that a large majority of 
participants were expecting further rate cuts of 25 basis points in both September and 
December. Money market forward rates, having fluctuated fairly strongly as economic 
data were published in the United States, are currently pricing in somewhat more than 
two additional interest rate cuts for this year. An interest rate step of 25 basis points is 
currently priced in almost entirely for the September meeting.

Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 46Monetary policy securities holdings shrank further in the reporting period since mid-
May.  This was again because  assets matured and were not reinvested. On APP
9 August, aggregate Eurosystem holdings of assets under the  amounted to APP
€2,801.2 billion (a breakdown of these holdings by individual asset purchase 
programme can be found in the supplementary information entitled “Money market 
management and liquidity needs”). Asset holdings reported under the pandemic 
emergency purchase programme ( ) came to €1,652.7 billion on the same day. PEPP
Excess liquidity declined further.  At last count, it stood at €3,085 billion. The 
contraction was due, in part, to final maturities and voluntary repayments under the 
third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations ( ). Maturing  TLTRO  III APP
assets likewise caused excess liquidity to shrink. Excess liquidity was also influenced by 
developments in autonomous factors (see the supplementary information).

Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 47Supplementary information
Money market management and liquidity needs
In the reporting period from 17 April 2024 to 23 July 2024,  excess liquidity in the 
Eurosystem decreased by a total of €225.3 billion to an average of €3,119.4 billion, 
though it remained at a high level. This decline was driven mainly by voluntary early 
repayments and maturing securities under the third series of targeted longer-term 
refinancing operations ( ) as well as the decrease in the outstanding volume of TLTRO  III
bonds under the asset purchase programmes.
Compared with the second reserve maintenance period of 2024 (March-April 2024), 
liquidity needs in the Eurosystem stemming from autonomous factors (see Table 2.1) 
fell by €21.7 billion to an average of €1,323.6 billion in the fourth reserve maintenance 
period of 2024 (June-July 2024). Without this liquidity-providing effect, excess liquidity 
would have contracted even more sharply. The decline in liquidity needs was caused, 
first, by the decrease in government deposits (-€22.6 billion) and, second, by the 
increase of €12.5 billion (of which €8.5 billion was attributable to Germany) in the sum 
of net foreign assets and other factors, which are considered together owing to 
liquidity-neutral valuation effects. By contrast, the €13.4 billion rise in banknote 
circulation had a liquidity-absorbing effect. In Germany, net banknote issuance 
increased by €10.0 billion to €929.7 billion. Over the period under review, the minimum 
reserve requirement in the Eurosystem rose by €0.3 billion to €161.9 billion, which 
marginally raised the need for central bank liquidity. In Germany, the reserve 
requirement went up by €0.4 billion to €44.5 billion. Euro area commercial banks held 
95% of their central bank liquidity in the deposit facility (in Germany: 96%).  1) 
1 The averages of the fourth reserve maintenance period of 2024 (June-July 2024) are compared here with the 
averages of the second reserve maintenance period of 2024 (March-April 2024).

Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 48Table 2.1: Factors determining bank liquidity1
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-a-vis the previous period
Item 2024
17 Apr. to 11 June
I. Provision (+) or absorption (–) of central bank balances due to changes in autonomous factors  
1. Banknotes in circulation (increase: –) 
   2. Government deposits with the Eurosystem (increase: –) + 18.3
   3. Net foreign assets2 + 28.9
   4. Other factors2 − 18.0
Total + 23.8
II. Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market operations
      a) Main refinancing operations 
      b) Longer-term refinancing operations  - 100.3
      c) Other operations − 48.8
   2. Standing facilities
      a) Marginal lending facility 
      b)  Deposit facility (increase: –)  + 123.9
Total − 25.5


Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 49III. Change in credit institutions’ current accounts (I. + II.)
IV. Change in the minimum reserve requirement (increase: –)
1 For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 and 15 of the Statistical Section of this Monthly Report. 2
 Including end-of-quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank
The average outstanding tender volume in the euro area decreased by €141.5 billion to 
€110.7 billion during the reporting period. The maturity date for  III.8 and a TLTRO
voluntary early repayment option for the  III.9 and  III.10 operations fell TLTRO TLTRO
within the period under review, on 26 June 2024. A total of €64.5 billion matured and 
was repaid on that date. The volume under the regular main refinancing operations 
and three-month tenders remained low overall. However, there were temporary rises 
in the volume under the main tender at the end of  III.8 and at the half-year TLTRO
mark. In Germany, the average outstanding volume of all refinancing operations fell by 
€24.7 billion to €16.4 billion in the period under review. This was due to maturities and 
voluntary early repayments under  III in June, which amounted to €7.3 billion. TLTRO
German banks’ share in the outstanding volume of Eurosystem refinancing operations 
thus came to around 15%, which was roughly 1 percentage point lower than in the 
second reserve maintenance period of 2024.
The scaling-down of the asset purchase programme ( ) portfolio had the greatest APP
impact on the overall amount of securities held for monetary policy purposes. Overall, 
holdings of monetary policy assets decreased by an average of €105.2 billion between 
the second and fourth reserve maintenance periods of 2024. As at 2 August 2024, the 
balance sheet holdings of the asset purchase programmes totalled €4,454.8 billion (see 
Table 2.2) and thus remained at a high level.  Of the liquidity provided by monetary 
policy instruments, 98% stemmed from purchase programmes and only 2% from 
refinancing operations.  2) 
2 In addition to the termination of reinvestments under the , holdings were also shaped by revaluations and APP
the smoothing of reinvestments under the pandemic emergency purchase programme ( ). PEPP

Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 50Table 2.2: Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
Programmes  Change across the two reserve periods Balance sheet holdings as at 2 August 2024
Active programmes1  
PEPP − 4.7 1,652.2
Completed programmes  
APP − 100.3 2,801.4
PSPP − 78.3 2,227.3
CBPP3 − 9.7 262.4
   CSPP − 10.3 303.0
ABSPP − 2.0 8.7
SMP − 0.2 1.3
1 Changes due to maturities, reinvestments and amortisation adjustments. 
Deutsche Bundesbank


Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 51In an environment of falling Eurosystem policy rates and a moderate decline in excess 
liquidity, the gap between overnight rates in the euro money market and the deposit 
facility rate narrowed marginally. The unsecured euro short-term rate ( ) was set at €STR
an average of 3.91% in the third reserve maintenance period of 2024, unchanged from 
the previous two reserve maintenance periods. In the fourth reserve maintenance 
period of 2024, the average rate dropped to 3.66%, triggered by the Eurosystem’s 
interest rate cut of 25 basis points in June. The transmission of monetary policy 
stimulus to the  was thus smooth and complete. The spread between the deposit €STR
facility rate and the  remained constant in the third reserve maintenance period of €STR
2024 compared with the previous period, standing at an average of 9.3 basis points, 
whilst it narrowed to an average of 8.75 basis points in the fourth reserve maintenance 
period of 2024. Trading volumes contracted again. On average, €49.4 billion was traded 
in the third reserve maintenance period of 2024 and €54.7 billion was traded in the 
fourth reserve maintenance period of 2024. In the previous two periods, trading 
averaged €55.5 billion. The slight downward trend since the peak in trading volumes in 
the spring of 2023 thus continued.  fixing was down by around 2 basis points at €STR
both end-April and end-May. With a day-on-day decline of 0.6 basis point at the end of 
the quarter at end-June, the impact on the  fixing was weaker. €STR
On Eurex Repo’s GC Pooling trading platform, the spread between secured overnight 
transaction rates and the deposit facility rate narrowed marginally during the period 
under review amid persistently high transaction volumes. As in the previous two 
periods, the  basket traded at an average of 3.97% in the third reserve maintenance ECB
period of 2024. In the fourth reserve maintenance period of 2024, the rate fell to 3.73% 
as a result of the policy rate cut. In the  EXTended basket, which has a broader ECB
selection of securities with lower rating requirements for concluding repo transactions, 
the spread against the deposit facility rate remained constant at average rates of 3.99% 
and 3.74%. The volume of transactions in the  basket increased again, reaching an ECB
average of €9.6 billion. By contrast, the volume in the  EXTended basket decreased ECB
to €3.5 billion.

Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 52


Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 532 Monetary developments in the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 saw significant growth in the second quarter of 
2024.  The recovery in monetary growth observed since the fourth quarter of 2023 thus 
continued, with the annual rate coming to 2.2% at the end of June (see Chart 2.5). This 
development is a reflection of households and enterprises in the euro area completing 
the process of reallocating their portfolios in response to the general rise in interest 
rates that began in 2022. With the phase of interest rate hiking at an end and rates 
expected to decline, an increasingly smaller volume of funds was moved out of short-
term bank deposits into non-M3 forms of investment. On the counterpart side, 
monetary growth was driven primarily by high demand for euro area securities among 
non-resident investors. Bank loans to the private non-financial sector expanded only 
marginally on balance. According to the Bank Lending Survey ( ), this came about BLS
because demand for loans was still subdued overall, while credit standards were barely 
tightened any further or were even moderately eased in some cases.

Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 54The money holdings of private non-banks rose for the third quarter in succession. 
Growth in the reporting quarter was spread broadly across the sub-components. 
Overnight deposits were stocked up again on balance, especially by non-financial 
corporations, after six quarters of significant outflows, whilst inflows into higher-
yielding short-term time deposits lost traction. Consistent with this, rates on time 
deposits were already in noticeable decline as of January 2024, while the uptick in 
overnight deposit rates only came to a standstill in June. This marked the end of the 
intra-M3 shifts that had characterised the past quarters. There was continued demand 
among households for short-term time deposits, though, but only to a lesser degree. 
Non-financial corporations, meanwhile, preferred to invest their surplus earnings in 
highly liquid overnight deposits. Furthermore, private non-banks added to their stocks 
of money market fund shares because of the comparatively attractive remuneration 
offered by this form of investment. 
Table 2.3: Consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area1 


Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 55Quarter-on-quarter changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Assets Q1 2024 Q2 2024 Liabilities
Claims on private non- s in the euro areaMFI 60.9 14.0 Holdings against central government2
   
  Loans 24.9 36.0 Monetary aggregate M3
  Loans, adjusted3 37.5 47.5 Components:
  Securities 35.9 -22.0  Currency in circulation and overnight deposits (M1)
   Other short-term deposits (M2-M1)
Claims on general government in the euro area -75.1 -4.0  Marketable instruments (M3-M2)
  Loans -16.4 2.7 Longer-term financial liabilities
  Securities -58.7 -6.7  
   Capital and reserves
Net external assets 133.8 158.2  Other longer-term financial liabilities
Other counterparts of M3 -8.1 59.8  
1 Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations.  Including central government deposits with the 2 MFI
sector and securities issued by the  sector held by central governments. MFI 3
Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash pooling services provided by s.MFI
Deutsche Bundesbank
The dampening impact of longer-term financial liabilities on M3 receded.  With both 
interest rates and yields down, private non-banks exhibited less demand for longer-
term bank deposits and bank debt securities. Furthermore, net issuance of longer-term 
bank debt securities contracted in the second quarter of 2024. This is related to the 
almost fully repaid  III loans and, as a result, the significantly reduced demand TLTRO
among banks for high-volume follow-up financing. Taken in isolation, both 
developments supported monetary growth. 
On the counterpart side, strong inflows from abroad were the main factor driving 
monetary growth.  The latest balance of payments statistics data indicate that, in 
particular, the surplus from domestic non-banks’ portfolio investment with non-
residents played a key role in this regard, with non-resident investors acquiring a 
considerable volume of euro area government bonds in net terms. Tailwinds for these 
purchases were provided by lively net issuance by euro area sovereigns. The phasing-
out of the Eurosystem’s asset purchases for monetary policy purposes furthermore 
allowed other sectors to replenish their exposures in this segment. In addition, there 
was growing interest among non-resident investors for euro area bonds, shares and 
investment fund shares. Additionally, the euro area’s current account surplus with the 
rest of the world, which remains high, bolstered the  sector’s net external position. MFI

Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 56MFI sector claims on domestic non-banks rose only moderately, meanwhile.  Growth 
in this item was buoyed by bank loans to the domestic private sector. By contrast, the 
 sector reduced its securities claims on non-banks in net terms, chiefly because the MFI
Eurosystem continued to scale back its holdings of domestic corporate bonds. 
There are still no signs of a lasting recovery in loans to non-financial corporations. 
On balance, banks increased their loans to non-financial corporations markedly in the 
second quarter of 2024. In practice, however, significant growth was confined to the 
short-term loans with maturities of up to one year that had been reduced on a similar 
scale in the previous quarter (see Chart 2.6). Longer-term loans, by contrast, which are 
usually linked more closely to corporate investment activity, almost came to a standstill. 
The availability of internal funds is likely to have dampened corporate demand for loans 
in addition to the still relatively high level of interest. In the Survey on the Access to 
Finance of Enterprises ( ), most firms reported that they did not apply for a bank SAFE
loan as they had adequate internal funds at their disposal. Moreover, given the 
favourable market environment in the second quarter, enterprises with direct access to 
capital markets made greater use of their scope to issue debt securities and equity as a 
means of raising capital. On aggregate, it would appear that these sources of funding 
were sufficient to finance the still weak investment activity.
The banks surveyed in the BLS are expecting corporate demand for loans to rise in 
the third quarter.  The banks surveyed in the  reported that enterprises’ demand BLS
for loans in the second quarter had contracted once again compared with the 
preceding quarter, but noted that the decline was not as strong as it had been in the 
previous six quarters. The general level of interest rates and the reduced financing 
needs for fixed investment were once again the main reasons cited by the BLS
 respondents for the slowdown. 
Banks’ lending policies for loans to non-financial corporations were tightened only 
marginally in the reporting quarter.  In the second quarter, the banks surveyed in the 
 made their credit standards for loans to non-financial corporations more restrictive BLS
once again on balance, albeit only marginally and to a lesser extent than they had been 
planning in the previous quarter. This tightening primarily affected long-term loans and 
was mainly attributed to the banks’ reduced risk tolerance. According to the banks, a 
deterioration in credit quality, as measured inter alia by the percentage of non-
performing loans in their loan portfolios (the  ratio), also had a restrictive effect on NPL
their credit standards in the first half of 2024. 

Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 57Growth in loans to households levelled off at a low level.  Loans grew to a similar 
degree as in the previous quarter, which meant their general recovery did not pick up 
any further pace. Demand for loans for house purchase was buoyed by lending rates 
that have been in slight decline since the beginning of the year. The banks surveyed in 
the  reported that demand in this loan category had picked up markedly for the first BLS
time in around two years. The surveyed bank managers attributed the increase 
primarily to households’ more upbeat assessment of housing market prospects, 
including expected house price developments. Furthermore, the general level of 
interest rates also stopped having a dampening effect on demand for loans for the first 
time in two years. For the third quarter, the surveyed banks are expecting to see 
demand rise further.
According to BLS data, the increased level of competition was conducive to granting 
loans for house purchase.  Given the pressure from their competitors, the surveyed 
banks eased their credit standards for this loan category for the second time in 
succession. In addition, the  banks reported that the rejection rate had gone down BLS
for the first time in three years. 
Consumer credit and other lending also rose slightly on balance in the second 
quarter.  As was the case with loans for house purchase, this loan category likewise saw 
its first uptick in demand in two years, according to the banks surveyed in the , who BLS
reported that consumer confidence and spending on durable consumer goods had 


Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 58gone up. At the same time, the  banks made their credit standards more restrictive, BLS
but to a lesser extent than in the previous quarter, mainly due to their perception of 
increased credit risk and their reduced risk tolerance.

Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 593 German banks’ deposit and lending business with 
domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business with domestic non-banks saw moderate growth in 
the second quarter of 2024.  Over the course of the reversal of monetary policy interest 
rates, the opportunity costs of holding money declined and the yield spread across 
deposit types narrowed as well (see Chart 2.7). The drop in overnight deposits then 
came to a standstill overall in the reporting quarter, while growth in short-term time 
deposits slowed significantly. Only households, which tend to respond relatively 
sluggishly to changes in interest rates, continued to scale back their comparatively low-
yielding short-term savings deposits and, to a small extent, their overnight deposits, 
but to a significantly lesser extent than in previous quarters. For the corporate sector, 
meanwhile, it was no longer worthwhile to reallocate deposits due to changes in 
interest rates. Non-financial corporations added distinctly to their overnight deposits, 
bringing their investment volumes closer to pre-pandemic levels. Financial corporations 
reduced their overnight deposits moderately, but did not shift them into other types of 
deposits. 


Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 60German banks’ lending business with domestic customers grew moderately in the 
second quarter of 2024.  Growth here was driven primarily by bank lending to general 
government, with both loans and securitised lending expanding markedly on balance. 
Lending to the private sector, by contrast, saw little change on aggregate, with slight 
inflows to loans being counterbalanced by similarly sized outflows from securities 
issued by the private sector. Financial corporations in particular increased their loan-
based financing, while banks’ lending business with the private non-financial sector 
stagnated. 
Lending business with domestic households moved sideways in the reporting 
quarter, after registering marginal inflows one quarter earlier.  On the one hand, 
consumer credit and other lending recorded net outflows that were larger than in the 
previous quarter. On the other, the brisker growth in the granting of housing loans 
observed in the previous quarter subsided again. Compared with the second half of 
2023, however, lending business for housing loans has grown on aggregate since the 
beginning of the year (see Chart 2.8). Consistent with this, interest rates on loans for 
house purchase have edged lower in the year to date, and the banks surveyed in the 
 observed another slight uptick in demand on balance in the second quarter of BLS
2024. Alongside the level of interest rates, they attributed this primarily to households’ 
brighter assessment of housing market prospects. 
Banks in Germany continued to tighten their credit standards for loans to 
households on balance in the second quarter of 2024.  Unlike in the euro area, where 


Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 61credit standards for loans to households for house purchase were eased, the German 
banks surveyed in the  once again reported a stronger tightening of their credit BLS
standards than in the previous quarter. They attributed this to their perception of 
elevated credit risk resulting primarily from a deterioration in borrowers’ 
creditworthiness. At the same time, banks eased their credit terms and conditions. In 
particular, they narrowed their margins irrespective of indicators of credit quality. 
Owing to the banks’ perception of higher credit risk, lending policies for consumer 
credit and other lending were likewise adjusted restrictively overall. 
Lending to non-financial corporations once again remained broadly unchanged on 
aggregate.  Short-term loans with maturities of less than one year increased slightly, as 
did loans with maturities of over five years. The latter had already been expanding over 
the past quarters. By contrast, loans with medium-term maturities declined, meaning 
that loans to enterprises moved sideways on aggregate (see Chart 2.9). 
The financing needs of the German non-financial corporate sector are being 
dampened by various factors.  For one thing, non-financial corporations still face 
relatively high financing costs (see Chart 2.10). Taken in isolation, this is weighing on 
demand for external financing. For another, the uncertain economic outlook and the 
ample stock of internal funds overall are dragging on their financing needs.  
 1) 
1 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a, 2024b).

Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 62BLS data, however, suggest that demand for loans to enterprises is gradually picking 
up.Contrary to expectations in the previous quarter, the banks surveyed in the   BLS
 reported an increase in demand for loans to enterprises for Germany for the first time 
in almost two years and are expecting it to rise further in the third quarter of 2024. 
Unlike the data from the balance sheet statistics, this assessment is based not on the 
loans that have been disbursed, but on the loan applications that have been received 
by banks. To the extent that these applications are approved, the uptick in loan 
demand should also feed through into loan volumes. The banks surveyed in the BLS
 attributed the brisker demand to higher financing needs for fixed investment as well 
as for inventories and working capital. 
Lending policies for loans to enterprises were tightened only marginally.  According 
to  data, banks in Germany tightened their credit standards for loans to enterprises BLS
only marginally in the second quarter, meaning that the current round of tightening 
was not as pronounced as in the previous quarter. The banks attributed their more 
restrictive lending policies to their reduced risk tolerance. At the same time, the banks 
surveyed in the  reported that the deterioration in credit quality (measured inter BLS
alia by the  ratio) had had a restrictive impact on their credit standards for loans to NPL
enterprises in the first half of 2024 (see Chart 2.10). They tightened their credit terms 
and conditions marginally as well. In the coming quarter, the banks are planning to 
tighten their lending policies to a similar extent.
Table 2.4: Banks in Germany: changes in lending and deposits


Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 63Quarter-on-quarter changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted1
        2024
Item Q1
Deposits of domestic non- MFIs2  
  Overnight
  With an agreed maturity of
    up to 2 years
    over 2 years
  Redeemable at notice of
    up to 3 months
    over 3 months
Lending
  to domestic general government
    Loans
    Securities
  to domestic enterprises and households
    Loans3
    of which:
      to households4
      to non-financial corporations5
    Securities
1 Banks including money market funds. End-of-quarter data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 2
Enterprises, households (including non-profit institutions serving households) and general government (excluding central government). 
 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation.  Including non-profit institutions serving households.  3 4 5
Non-financial corporations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank
The BLS banks judged that climate-related risks and measures to cope with climate 
change have had a restrictive impact on credit standards for loans to enterprises 
over the past 12 months.  According to an ad hoc question added to the current round 
of the , the more a firm contributed to climate change, the greater that restrictive BLS
impact was. Over the next twelve months, the banks are expecting climate change to 
have further restrictive effects on their lending policies for loans to “brown” firms and 
those in transition to “green”. In the case of “green” firms, on the other hand, the 
reporting banks are expecting to see an easing effect. Over the last 12 months, 
demand from “green” firms for loans from German banks was stimulated by the impact 
of climate change, while this was not the case for the other firms. The banks are 
expecting to see the topic of climate change produce demand-enhancing effects 
among firms in transition as well over the next 12 months.

Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 64The other ad hoc questions in the BLS do not point to any exceptional bank-side 
restrictions.  Given the conditions in financial markets, the German banks reported that 
their funding situation had improved somewhat against the previous quarter. In 
particular, financing via medium-term to long-term debt securities had improved. 
German banks also reported that developments in excess liquidity held with the 
Eurosystem over the past six months had had no significant impact on their lending 
activity. By their account, that is unlikely to change in the next six months.

Monetary policy and banking business
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 65List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a), Commentary: Economic conditions, Monthly Report, July 
2024.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), Developments in loans to enterprises in Germany since 
the start of the monetary policy tightening cycle, Monthly Report, July 2024.
 

66Financial markets
Monthly Report – August 2024

Financial markets
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 671 Financial market environment
Improved US inflation data and unexpectedly weaker economic signals reinforced 
expectations in the international financial markets of rapid interest rate cuts. The 
situation was different in the spring, when – in light of stalling disinflation and a robust 
economic environment, at least in the United States market participants had – 
successively shifted their expectations of when a phase of interest rate cuts would 
begin in the United States and the euro area into the future. Since the beginning of the 
third quarter, there have been increasing changes in the financial market environment. 
Backed by the Federal Reserve’s assessment that progress had now been made in 
tackling US inflation, market participants adjusted their outlook for key interest rates, in 
. As a result, unexpectedly weaker labour market some cases significantly downward
data from the United States reinforced this market dynamic. Due to their interlinkages 
with  interest rates, key interest rate expectations in the euro area fell, too. Overall, US
developments in long-term yields were mixed. For instance, yields in the United States 
fell, while yields in the euro area barely changed on balance. seThe  developments 
caused the euro to appreciate against the  dollar By contrast US . , the euro depreciated 
on balance rising against the yen in an environment of yields in Japan.
Risky assets  – including shares, in particular – came under pressure due to the more 
As a result, pessimistic economic outlook and a decline in investors’ risk appetite. 
international equity markets had to contend with substantial price losses in some cases  
for a time amid heightened financial market volatility. As risk appetite amongst 
investors declined, the yield spreads on long-term government bonds and corporate 
bonds widened slightly overall. Against this backdrop, investors demanded somewhat 
greater risk compensation for bonds with low credit quality. However, the surge in 
financial market volatility at the beginning of August caused by poorer  labour US
market data quickly abated. Developments in international equity markets since the 
beginning of the second quarter exhibit marked regional differences. Whereas price 
gains were recorded in the United States and the United Kingdom on balance, losses 
were registered in the euro area and Japan. 

Financial markets
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 682 Exchange rates
On balance, the euro has appreciated against the US dollar since the start of the 
second quarter of 2024. The impact of i in mpetus arising from monetary policy the two 
areas euro/  dollar exchange rate overshadowed currency  on the US   the effects of 
on the part France's increasing risk aversion of market participants. The dissolution of 
National Assembly by the French president in the aftermath of the European elections 
marked alone led to a  decline in risk appetite for European assets. The level of 
later uncertainty also spread globally in the wake of increasing tensions in the Middle 
which, all else being equal, supported United States East,  net capital flows to the and, 
The euro was buoyed by increased expectations of interest rate hence, the US dollar. 
cuts in the United States from the end of March, the effects of which only spilled over to 
the euro area to a lesser extent. behind A decisive factor the changing monetary policy 
United States the fact that there have been growing outlook in the was indications of a 
since June slowdown in the US economy . For instance, consumer price inflation in the 
United States on multiple occasions, and  turned out lower than originally expected US
were surprisingly weak By until labour market data published in August . contrast, 
recently, proved inflationary pressure in the euro area  to be more persistent than 


Financial markets
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 69As this report went to press expected by market participants. , the euro was trading at 
$10 9 with US 1. , up by 1. % compared the end of the first quarter of 2024.
The euro exchange rate against the pound sterling remained almost unchanged on 
balance . Surprisingly high inflation figures in the United Kingdom, which, in the eyes of 
market participants, lowered the probability of monetary policy being eased soon in 
that country, contributed to the euro losing ground against the British pound until mid-
June. For one-and-a-half months, the exchange rate then predominantly moved 
sideways within a narrow band of between £0.84 and £0.85. Early in August, however, a 
tight decision led the Bank of England to cut its key interest rate by 25 basis points, 
after  inflation figures had previously turned out surprisingly low. The euro UK
subsequently appreciated again against the pound sterling. It was most recently 
trading at £0.86, resulting in an almost unchanged rate compared to the end of the first 
quarter of 2024 (+0.1%).
The euro depreciated against the yen on balance, even though it had reached an all-
time high against the currency in July.  In view of the significant interest advantage of 
the euro area over  Japan, the euro still managed to register fairly continual value gains 
during the second quarter. This trend was interrupted only temporarily, partly due to 
in May foreign exchange interventions by the Japanese authorities, which – as officially 
the month ¥. . On confirmed at the end of  – purchased 98 trillion to prop up the currency
11 July, the euro reached a new all-time high of ¥175. This was subsequently followed 
by a robust countermovement, however. Renewed foreign exchange interventions by 
¥ the Japanese authorities, officially reported to have purchased a further 5.5 trillion in 
 Shortly afterwards, the Japanese July, were a probable trigger for the yen’s rapid gains.
central bank decided to increase its key interest rate to 0.25%, which served to slightly 
tighten the interest differential between the two currency areas. The central bank also 
announced plans to lower the purchase volume of Japanese government bonds. Finally, 
it announced its intention to raise interest rates further if the economy developed as 
expected. This likewise helped strengthen the yen. In principle, the substantial gains by 
the yen impair the profitability of currency carry trades, in the course of which funds 
are borrowed in yen and invested abroad. If the relevant positions are closed for this 
reason, this causes additional upward pressure on the yen. Most recently, the euro was 
up against the yen again, partly in view of the statements made by the Bank of Japan 
that it will not raise key interest rates when financial and capital markets are unstable. 
As this report went to press, the euro was trading at ¥162, thus bringing it back to 7.6% 
below its previous peak. Since end-March 2024, the euro has depreciated against the 
yen by 0.8% on balance.
On a weighted average against the currencies of 18 major trading partners, the 
euro has gained slightly on balance since the beginning of April 2024 (+0.4%). The 
euro not only recorded gains against the  dollar, but also against the Canadian dollar US

Financial markets
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 70(+2.9%), for instance. By contrast, alongside depreciating the euro was against the yen, 
also down markedly against the Swiss franc in particular (-2.3%). While the Swiss 
National Bank’s surprising 25 basis point reduction of its key interest rate in June led to 
the euro recording temporary gains, the latter nevertheless depreciated against the 
Swiss franc on balance during the reporting period. This reflected the role of the Swiss 
franc as a safe-haven currency in times of heightened uncertainty.  Overall, however, 
the gains mentioned previously predominated, meaning that the euro appreciated 
slightly on balance in effective terms. 1) 
1 Not only does a safe-haven currency appreciate in uncertain times, it also provides a hedge during times of 
financial market stress if the impact of swings in carry-trade activities are taken into account. According to 
estimates by Hossfeld and MacDonald (2015), the Swiss franc fulfils this definition.

Financial markets
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 713 Securities market
3.1 Bond market
Government bond yields in the United States declined amidst increasing 
expectations of interest rate cuts and the weakening economic outlook.  Persistently 
high key interest rates dominated the  government bond markets leading into US
spring, as the disinflation process initially ground to a halt. Market expectations of key 
interest rate cuts for 2024 subsequently rose again significantly amid declining 
inflationary pressure and a cooling labour market. Contributory factors included the 
communication from the July meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee ( ), FOMC  
 The futures markets which emphasised the progress made in combatting inflation.
recently signalled key interest rate cuts of 95 basis points for the United States by the 
end of 2024. As a result, the nominal yields of ten-year  Treasuries declined by 29 US
basis points to 4% on balance.


Financial markets
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 72In the context of the ECB Governing Council’s monetary policy communication, 
market participants adjusted their expectations of interest rate cuts in the euro 
At its June meeting, the area less significantly than was the case in the United States. 
Governing Council lowered its key interest rates by 25 basis points in view of the 
decline in the inflation rate observed since 2023. At the same time, the Governing 
Council referred to the persistent domestic price pressures and the data dependance of 
its approach going forward. Moreover, several members stressed that the June interest 
rate decision was not to be considered a signal of a transition to a phase of successive 
key interest rate cuts.  According to model-based analyses, the confirmation of this 
communication at the Governing Council’s meeting in July and the latest unexpected 
upside developments in inflation data for the euro area in July contributed to the 
expansionary monetary policy impetus from the United States being transferred to the 
euro area only to a weak extent. Overall, the expected deposit facility rate derived from 
money market rates remained virtually unchanged at a level of 3.1% for the end of 
2024; however, expectations of interest rate cuts increased up to the end of the first 
quarter of 2025. The weighted yield on ten-year euro area bonds remained - GDP
unchanged at 2.8%, meaning the  yield advantage tightened.US
Yields on ten-year Federal bonds (Bunds) declined slightly by 4 basis points to 2.3%. 
A decomposition of the yield curve of Federal securities shows that the contribution to 
yield movements made by the rise in term premia curbed that of lower interest rate 


Financial markets
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 73expectations, as investors demanded a higher interest rate premium in return for 
taking on interest rate risk. Overall, the yield curve of Federal securities flattened 
during the reporting period as yields fell, particularly at the short end.
Yield spreads on European government bonds widened slightly as market 
participants’ risk appetite declined. Accordingly, the average yield spread as 
measured by the weighted euro area bond yield on matched-maturity Federal - GDP
securities was up by 5 basis points. By contrast, ten-year French government bonds 
registered stronger increases of 22 basis points, reflecting the ongoing political 
uncertainty regarding the majority in the French parliament as well as concerns about 
future French fiscal policy. Following the announcement of early parliamentary 
elections, yield spreads had temporarily widened somewhat more strongly – investors' 
 increased demand for Federal securities also played a role in this (safe-haven effect).
Overall, however, the impact remained limited, and there were no signs of market 
functioning being impaired.
Government bond yields in the United Kingdom flatlined in accordance with 
developments in the euro area and the United States, whereas, in Japan, they rose 
as a result of the Bank of Japan’s continued monetary tightening process. In view of 
progress made in combatting inflation, at its August meeting, the Bank of England 
lowered key interest rates for the first time since 2020 by a total of 25 basis points. At 
the same time, it noted that a number of indicators continued to suggest a persistent 
inflation process. Accordingly, market participants revised their interest rate 
expectations downward only slightly. The yields of ten-year gilts were unperturbed by 


Financial markets
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 74these developments and remained at 4%. By contrast, the Bank of Japan raised its key 
interest rate by 15 basis points in July, continuing its monetary policy tightening to 
combat inflation. In addition, the Bank of Japan decided to reduce its government bond 
purchases by half. As a result, yields of ten-year Japanese government bonds climbed 
by 12 basis points to 0.8%.
Market-based inflation indicators in the euro area declined substantially, 
particularly towards the end of the reporting period, indicating a speedy return to 
the 2% definition of price stability. Inflation compensation for the euro area, which is 
calculated from inflation swaps, fell significantly at the end of July and the beginning of 
August, dropping to 2.3% for the current year. It was recently projected at 1.9% for 
2025. Accordingly, market-based inflation indicators are below the Eurosystem's 
projections – unlike the situation at the end of March. This was probably due to the 
economic outlook recently deteriorating and declining oil prices.
In the medium to long term, market participants perceive a slightly lower risk of the 
inflation target being overshot . This is indicated by the preference-weighted 
probabilities for future inflation rates derived from inflation options. Market 
participants recently assigned a probability of 41% to the scenario of the average 
inflation rate exceeding 2% over the next five years (-11 percentage points compared 
with end-March). Accordingly, the five-year inflation compensation based on inflation 
swaps fell to just under 2% (-0.2 percentage point). Longer-term market-based inflation 
compensation has likewise eased slightly since end-March. The five-year forward 
inflation rate five years ahead recently stood at 2.2%, 0.2 percentage point lower than 


Financial markets
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 75at the end of March. Market-based longer-term inflation expectations thus approached 
the survey-based inflation expectations of Consensus Economics, which are close to the 
2% target according to the quarterly survey from July. Consequently, the difference 
between market and survey-based inflation expectations (which can be interpreted as a 
measure of the inflation risk premium) narrowed; overall, however, it remains positive 
over these long horizons. Investors therefore remain willing to pay a premium to 
hedge against unexpectedly high inflation scenarios. As in the case of the euro area, 
market-based five-year forward inflation rates in five years also fell in the United States 
to 2.4% (-0.2 percentage point).
European corporate bond yields recorded slightly higher risk premia owing to 
diminishing risk appetite among market participants.  Overall, yields on corporate 
bonds with a rating of up to BBB with residual maturities of between seven and ten 
years remained unchanged, whereas bonds from the high-yield segment with all 
maturities declined moderately. Spreads widened as yields on matched-maturity 
Federal securities declined somewhat more strongly. Yield spreads on corporate bonds 
with a rating of up to BBB increased slightly, while investors demanded a higher 
premium for high-yield bonds in the context of the decline in risk appetite outlined 
above. In the face of the higher financial market volatility triggered by the negative 
economic impulses in the United States, the yield spreads proved to be relatively 
robust. Overall, the financing costs of European enterprises, as measured by yield 
spreads, were recently close to or below their respective five-year averages for all 
rating classes.
3.2 Equity market
The international equity markets registered losses in some cases given the weaker 
assessment of the economic situation and investors’ risk appetite declining.   US
equity prices continued their upward trend from the previous quarter in view of an 
initially robust economic outlook at the beginning of the second quarter. Amid rising 
earnings growth expectations, they reached a new peak in July, measured according to 
the  500 index. A substantial contribution in this regard was made by firms in the S&P
technology sector, which account for a relatively high weighting in the  500 Index. S&P
However, towards the end of the reporting period, weak  economic data along with a US
substantial decline in risk appetite and increased financial market volatility triggered a 
sharp correction, which had an effect on global equity markets. Moreover, subdued 
quarterly figures of some major technology firms exerted downward pressure on 
prices. Following a speedy recovery from this abrupt increase in volatility, the  500 S&P
recorded a plus of 5.5%. In the euro area, notable equity price losses recorded by 
French companies weighed on the performance of the equity markets. This reflected 

Financial markets
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 76the political uncertainly that had still not fully subsided at last report. Since the end of 
March, European and German equity prices, as measured by the EURO STOXX and CDAX
 fell significantly by 4.8% and 4.0%, respectively. By contrast,  equities, as measured , UK
by the  100 index, were up by 5.0%. FTSE
Japanese equities saw a particularly sharp price decline towards the end of the 
reporting period.  While Japanese equity prices showed a marked increase until mid-
July, they have since declined significantly. The expected slowdown in  economic US
activity, growing expectations of  interest rate cuts and the willingness signalled by US
the Bank of Japan to raise interest rates further are likely to have been contributory 
factors. The ensuing appreciation of the yen was a burden on Japanese export-oriented 
firms, in particular. At the beginning of August, the Nikkei index experienced the 
sharpest stock market slump since October 1987, with prices partially recovering in the 
aftermath. The Nikkei index was down by 9.0% over the entire reporting period.
European and US bank stocks performed similarly overall to equity indices for the 
markets as a whole . The fact that market participants continue to expect still elevated 
interest margins, due to the deterioration in expectations of interest rate cuts, is likely 
to have contributed to this. Overall, prices of  bank equities recorded a US
comparatively moderate increase of 2.4%. Although European bank equities fell by 
2.0% on balance, the declines are smaller when compared with European equity 
markets as a whole.
European and US equity valuations have declined since the end of March. This is 
indicated by higher equity risk premia and the implied cost of equity in both currency 
areas. The implied cost of equity is derived from a dividend discount model that also 
takes into account enterprises’ medium-term earnings outlook and the path of risk-free 
interest rates. The medium-term earnings prospects measured on the basis of analysts' 
estimates and therefore only available with a time lag, rose in the reporting period, 
particularly for the  500, but also for the EURO STOXX.S&P

Financial markets
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 77List of references
Hossfeld, O. and R. MacDonald (2015), Carry funding and safe haven currencies: A 
threshold regression approach, Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 59, pp. 
185‑202.

78The German economy
Monthly Report – August 2024

The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 791 German economic output declines slightly in the 
second quarter
Contrary to expectations, German economic output fell slightly in the second 
quarter of 2024.  According to the flash estimate of the Federal Statistical Office, real 
gross domestic product  recorded a quarter-on-quarter decline of 0.1 % on a ( ) GDP
seasonally adjusted basis.  This preliminary figure is highly likely to be revised as key 
statistics for trade and services, which feed into the  estimate, are currently being GDP
published with a time lag and are not yet available for the past few months.  had GDP
grown by 0.2 % in the first quarter. According to the flash estimate, investment in 
machinery and equipment and in new buildings declined in particular. Construction 
had been expected to normalise following a rise in activity for weather-related reasons 
in the first quarter. However, there were other key headwinds besides these that 
persisted into the second quarter. For example, foreign demand for industrial products 
remained weak. Higher financing costs and greater economic and political uncertainty 
acted as a drag on investment. Consumers still appeared to be unsettled, with the 
effect that the strong increases in wages still failed to feed through into an equally 
robust upturn in consumer spending. 1) 
1 GDP saw substantial growth of 1.4 % in nominal terms, however. Seasonal adjustment here and in the 
remainder of this text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, provided they can be verified and 
quantified. The flash estimate also included revisions of figures for previous quarters, in some cases dating 
back to 1991 due to a general revision of the national accounts. See Federal Statistical Office (2024a).

The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 80


The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 812 Industrial activity remains weak, probably only muted 
uptick in consumption
Industrial production and goods exports resumed their downward trend in the 
second quarter of 2024, despite evidence of stabilising demand.  Industrial 
production fell again in the second quarter when viewed on a seasonally adjusted 
basis, thereby continuing a negative trend that had been interrupted only in the first 
quarter. Production of intermediate and capital goods declined more strongly than that 
of consumer goods. Among intermediate goods, the manufacture of electrical 
equipment again saw a particularly strong decline. By contrast, energy-intensive 
sectors, the vast majority of which are assigned to the category of intermediate goods 
producers, recorded an increase, just as in the previous quarter. In particular, 
production in the chemicals industry recorded a further strong increase. Energy-
intensive sectors have thereby turned around a downward trend dating back to the 
start of 2022, which was triggered by what were at times huge increases in energy 
prices.  The weakness of capital goods production was once again driven heavily by 
developments in mechanical engineering. By contrast, automotive (and automotive 
parts) manufacturers recorded an increase in production for the first time in more than 
a year. Given the weakness of production, real goods exports also recorded a 
significant seasonally adjusted decline in the second quarter. Industrial activity 
continues to suffer from weak demand as well. While new orders in Germany's 
industrial sector did increase noticeably as a basic trend – i.e. excluding volatile large 
orders – they continue to come in at a low level. And according to the  Institute, the ifo
proportion of businesses suffering from a shortage of orders rose once again in July 
and now stands at 43.6 %.
Investment in machinery and equipment acted as a distinct drag on economic 
activity in the second quarter. As was the case in previous quarters, high financing 
costs and economic policy uncertainties weighed on the investment activity of German 
enterprises. In addition, the lack of orders in the manufacturing sector is having an 
increasingly negative effect on the degree of capacity utilisation. According to surveys 
conducted by the  Institute, capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sector declined ifo 2) 
 3) 2 That said, the production level of energy-intensive economic sectors remains more than 10 % below the 
equivalent figure recorded prior to the start of Russia’s war against Ukraine.

The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 82to just 77.5 % in July,  some 6 percentage points below its long-term average. Another 
indicator of distinctly weaker investment in machinery and equipment can be found in 
the price-adjusted domestic sales of capital goods producers. On a seasonally adjusted 
basis, their decrease represented a further acceleration of the decline recorded in the 
previous quarter, and proved to be broadly based across sectors. According to data 
available up until May, price-adjusted imports of capital goods stagnated, and were 
therefore unable to compensate for the decline in domestic sales.
Alongside the decline in construction investment, value added in the construction 
sector also shrank. Following a slight expansion in the previous quarter, seasonally 
adjusted construction output fell again somewhat in the second quarter, coming in at a 
level similar to the final quarter of 2023. This upward and downward movement was 
largely driven by weather influences. Construction output in the first quarter of the year 
had benefited from exceptionally mild weather conditions. A corresponding counter-
movement in the second quarter is then likely to have contributed to the decline in 
output, as indicated by the  Institute survey on hindrances to construction activity ifo
due to weather conditions. The previous divergence in the economic momentum of the 
building construction and civil engineering sectors did not extend into the second 
quarter. Both sectors recorded similarly strong declines in production. At the same 
time, building construction enjoyed a somewhat more favourable development in 
demand. Based on new orders, it caught up a little to civil engineering. The latter's 
order intake had merely stagnated in a quarter-on-quarter comparison. Like the 
industrial sector, construction is also suffering from weak demand. Ongoing high 
construction and financing costs are making themselves felt here. For example, the 
average effective interest rate for loans to households for house purchase stood at 
4.0 % in June, which was slightly higher than in the previous quarter. Averaged over 
April and May, the main construction sector as a whole saw a slight increase in order 
intake compared to the prior quarter. However, new orders remained far below the 
level recorded in the first quarter of 2022. In residential construction, too, which had 
previously recorded a particularly strong slump in demand, significantly more orders 
were received in April and May than in the first quarter. However, according to surveys 
conducted by the  Institute, the proportion of firms in the main construction sector ifo
reporting a shortage of orders stood at 38 % in July, only just below the recently 
recorded peaks. Furthermore, the number of construction permits once again 
experienced a strong decline in the second quarter as a whole, including in residential 
construction. 3) 
3 The corresponding question is asked in the  Institute surveys on a quarterly basis only. The results are ifo
always published in the first month of the quarter.

The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 83According to the relevant indicators, which are currently available only with a 
significant time lag, private consumption probably remained subdued despite 
favourable conditions, whereas service providers may have seen further moderate 
growth.  Key statistics for trade and the services sector are currently available only with 
significant time lags. The reason for this is a revision of the reporting system.  The 
published sales figures in the retail and wholesale trade and the hotel and restaurant 
sector currently go no further than April. Where production figures for the services 
sector are concerned, there are no monthly figures available at all for the second 
quarter. This makes it much more difficult to evaluate economic developments in the 
sectors concerned. For this reason, the  figure released in the flash estimate for the GDP
second quarter of the year is subject to a high likelihood of revision. Nonetheless, it can 
be said with some confidence that the key props of consumer spending in previous 
quarters – namely the robust labour market and strong growth in real 
incomes – continued their supportive role in the second quarter too. Even so, 
consumers remained uncertain, as indicated by the continued high propensity to save 
according to the  survey. Although income expectations did rise noticeably in the GfK
second quarter, the propensity to purchase barely increased as a result. That said, 
following a significant decline in the previous quarter, there was a slight increase in the 
 4) 
4 See Federal Statistical Office (2024b).

The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 84number of new private vehicle registrations. This was also facilitated by the slight 
recovery in new registrations of electric vehicles (from a low level). These had 
experienced a slump at the turn of the year following the expiry of a subsidy for private 
owners. Where the retail trade is concerned, the price-adjusted sales figures available 
up until April at least point to a positive start to the second quarter. By contrast, sales in 
the hotel and restaurant sector were somewhat below the prior-quarter average in 
April. All in all, private consumption is likely to have increased slightly, but at the same 
time probably continued to lag behind growth in real incomes. In the services sector, 
on the other hand, the moderate upward trend evident in the first quarter looks to 
have Institute business climate index continued, as indicated by the corresponding ifo 
and the  Global Purchasing Managers’ Index. Furthermore, production in the S&P
services sector benefited from a favourable starting position in the second quarter, as 
its level in March had been significantly higher than the average for the first quarter as 
a whole.

The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 853 Little growth  in labour market
The labour market remained relatively stable despite the sluggish economic 
recovery.  Employment rose moderately in the second quarter of 2024. However, the 
rise was not powerful enough to fully absorb the migration-driven growth of the labour 
force. Accordingly, the number of unemployed also rose slightly. The persistent 
weakness of the economy was also reflected in a moderate increase in short-time work 
and a gradual decline in the number of vacancies. Little is likely to change in this 
respect in the short term.
Germany’s working population increased slightly in the second quarter.  On average, 
the seasonally adjusted number of employed persons was up by 54,000 compared with 
the first quarter of 2024, an increase of 0.1 %.  The declining trend in self-employment 
– which has persisted for some time now – continued, and there was barely any change 
in purely low-paid part-time employment. Job growth was primarily attributable to jobs 
subject to social security contributions.
At the same time, the two-speed developments across sectors evident in previous 
quarters continued.  As a result of demographic change and the transformation of 
energy supply, it is above all the areas of basic public services that have benefited from 
increased demand for employees subject to social security contributions. These include 
health and social services, the public sector, the education sector, and energy and 
water supply. The level of employment was likewise higher than in the first quarter in a 
number of other services sectors, particularly accommodation and food services  
along with qualified business services. 5) 
 6) 
5 As part of the 2024 general revision of the national accounts, employment activity at the workplace has been 
revised upwards since 1991. With the publication of the data for the month of June 2024, the working 
population figures for the first half of 2024 are now around ¼% higher than previously. However, the 
underlying economic development of employment has not experienced any noteworthy change. See Federal 
Statistical Office (2024c).
6 The men’s European Football Championship in Germany did not play a role here. On the one hand, the data on 
employment subject to social security contributions only extend to May 2024, while on the other, the 
European Football Championship is likely to have mainly created short-term, low-paid jobs in this area.

The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 86The weakness of the economy, which dates back more than two years now, is 
having an impact on demand for labour, above all in the manufacturing and 
construction sectors.  To start with, the core workforces were largely retained, with any 
adjustments effected through the reduced use of temporary agency work. But for the 
last year or so, the number of employed persons subject to social security contributions 
has also been declining in both these sectors of the economy. That said, the decline has 
been moderate as, even within manufacturing, a number of sectors are doing well and 
building up headcount. Disaggregated sectoral data is only available up until the end of 
2023. This shows that headcount increased substantially over the course of 2023 by 
between 2½% and 5 % in the manufacture of data processing equipment and 
electronics, other transport equipment, the repair and installation of machinery, and 
pharmaceutical goods. In addition, there was a notable increase in employment in 
mechanical engineering. By contrast, energy-intensive sectors of the economy 
experienced job losses to a certain degree. Furthermore, employment declined 
noticeably last year in the manufacture of metal products, rubber and plastic goods, as 
well as in a number of consumer-related industries. This is likely to be down to 
structural as well as economic reasons. In the manufacturing sector in particular, short-
being used as an adjustment instrument to bridge periods of time work is additionally 
weak demand. In April, 2.8 % of all manufacturing employees subject to social security 


The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 87contributions were affected by this phenomenon. Short-time work was virtually non-
existent in the rest of the economy.
Registered unemployment once again increased slightly.  In the second quarter, an 
average of 2.76 million persons were unemployed when viewed on a seasonally 
adjusted basis, or around 46,000 persons more than in the first quarter of 2024. The 
unemployment rate remained unchanged at 5.9 %, partly because of an increase in the 
number of people in work. In July, the ranks of the unemployed were swelled by a 
further 18,000 people compared to the previous month, taking the unemployment rate 
to 6.0 %. The increase of recent months is primarily attributable to more people 
covered by the statutory unemployment insurance scheme, which is influenced by 
cyclical factors. By contrast, refugees from Ukraine – most of whom would receive the 
basic welfare allowance – made virtually no contribution to the rise in unemployment. 
Here there has been progress in labour market integration, with the number of people 
moving into employment having improved noticeably in recent months.
According to the leading indicators, the next few months are unlikely to dispel the 
sluggishness of labour market developments.  The  employment barometer for the IAB
overall economy remains in slightly positive territory. This points to a slight increase in 
employment in keeping with developments over recent months. Although the 
recruitment plans of trade and industry for the next three months – as ascertained by 
the  Institute in its surveys – have shown signs of bottoming out for some months ifo
now, they remain slightly in the negative zone. Both apply to the manufacturing sector 
in particular. In trade, the negative trend development of the corresponding leading 
indicator has yet to be broken. By contrast, service providers (excluding trade) are 
intending to increase headcount slightly overall. The number of vacant positions 
reported to the Federal Employment Agency continues to decline. In particular, growth 
in newly posted job offers is extremely weak. As firms have largely refrained from 
letting staff go during the prolonged phase of economic weakness, the need to recruit 
is not great. Although the aggregate job supply as gleaned by the  through IAB
company surveys has likewise declined over the last few quarters, it remains at an 
extremely high level in a historical comparison. Just like the significant amount of time 
it takes for vacant positions to be filled, this points to persistent difficulties in 
recruitment, as well as relatively tight conditions in at least some labour sub-markets 
for certain specialist personnel. Where the number of unemployed is concerned, the 
increase may at least slow down. The  unemployment barometer has recovered IAB
somewhat recently but remains just in negative territory.

The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 884 Strong trend growth in wages continues
Negotiated rates of pay rose significantly in the second quarter of 2024 as well. 
Negotiated rates of pay, including ancillary agreements, recorded a year-on-year 
increase of 3.1 % in the second quarter, following on from a previous rise of 6.2 %. This 
was above all driven by the effects of high tax and social contribution-free inflation 
compensation bonuses from the previous year, which significantly increased the rate in 
the first quarter and dampened it strongly in the second quarter.  If these special 
payments are stripped out of calculations, negotiated rates of pay recorded a year-on-
year increase of 4.2 % in the second quarter, significantly more than in the first quarter 
(3.0 %). Permanent wage increases are becoming increasingly significant.
Actual earnings likewise increased strongly . This is indicated by the steep increase in 
gross monthly earnings apparent in the earnings survey of the Federal Statistical 
Office, the figures for which are available up to and including June 2024.  The high 
actual earnings growth by long-term standards is continuing. 7) 
 8) 
7 Wage growth in the second quarter was strongly dampened above all by a negative base effect in the central 
and local government areas of the public sector, as well as in energy supply. Here the high inflation 
compensation bonuses paid in June 2023 reduced wages compared to the prior year.
8 These statistics only include the nominal wages of full-time employees. In this survey too, the base effect of 
inflation compensation bonuses paid to public sector and energy supply employees in the previous year 
dampened the growth rate.

The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 89High wage increases were also agreed in the latest round of collective wage 
agreements. The wage increase in annualised terms in almost all sectors that 
concluded a new collective wage agreement in the second quarter amounted to 
4 % and 6 %.  The chemicals industry (along with private banks) was at the between  
lower end of the range, and the main construction sector was at the upper end. It 
should be stressed that the most recent settlements in these three sectors, which are 
high in a longer-term comparison, comprise exclusively permanent wage increases and 
no longer include inflation compensation bonuses. In retail as well as wholesale and 
foreign trade, hefty wage increases were agreed following negotiations that were 
drawn out over the best part of a year (5.0 % and 4.8 % per annum respectively). 
However, the agreed inflation compensation bonuses and backpayments of retroactive 
wage increases will only be paid out in the third quarter, when they will then contribute 
to a high aggregate growth rate for negotiated rates of pay.
High wage settlements are likely in impending negotiations too.  Union wage 
demands remain high and currently lie between 7 % and 19 % for a period of twelve 
months. The demands of the trade union  Metall for the metals and electrical IG
industry are at the lower end of the spectrum in the current round of collective wage 
 9) 
9 For someone earning the agreed basic pay rate. Owing to base amounts and inflation compensation bonuses, 
the increase can be higher in lower pay grades and lower in higher ones.

The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 90negotiations, whereas those in system catering are at the upper end. Wage demands 
are particularly striking in the services sector at present.  Over the last three years, 
real wage losses have accumulated in both the manufacturing and services sectors. For 
this reason, unions are looking for lasting real wage compensation. Given that inflation 
compensation bonuses are only tax and social contribution-free up until the end of 
2024, the unions are now switching their focus to permanent wage increases. With the 
willingness to strike having been pronounced up until now and labour shortages still a 
widespread phenomenon, there is good reason to believe that wage increases will 
remain comparatively high going forward. 10) 
10 Alongside roughly 19 % in system catering, these amount to 12.5 % for public banks and around 16 % in the 
building cleaning trade (in each case relating to the agreed basic pay rate).

The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 915 Disinflation process grinds to a halt for now
Price inflation did not record a further quarter-on-quarter decline in the second 
quarter of 2024.  On a seasonally adjusted basis, consumer prices  rose markedly ( ) HICP
quarter on quarter in the second quarter, just as they had in the first quarter, with the 
latest rise amounting to 0.8 %. The main driver of this increase was the continued 
strong rise in the price of services. The prices of certain services, such as social services 
and insurance, were probably adjusted after a certain time lag in line with cost 
increases that built up over a prolonged period of time. Rents were also raised in 
excess of the long-term average again. Food prices increased at a similar rate to recent 
quarters, i.e. only moderately overall. In the case of non-energy industrial goods, by 
contrast, price inflation fizzled out. This also applies if clothing and footwear – the prices 
of which typically fluctuate strongly – are excluded from calculations. This was offset by 
the fact that energy prices once again rose markedly. Over the previous two quarters, 
by contrast, the cost of energy had declined. For one thing, oil prices picked up again, 
with the impact of this rise being exacerbated somewhat by the depreciation of the 
euro. For another, the temporary cut in the rate of  for gas and district heating VAT
expired in April.
The disinflation process slowed further in a year-on-year analysis. Headline inflation 
declined only slightly, from 2.7 % in the first quarter to 2.6 % in the second quarter.  
The core rate excluding energy and food also declined only slightly, from 3.4 % to 3.2 %. 
However, this fall was slowed by a base effect: the rate for May 2024 no longer included 
the dampening effect on the prior-year rate as a result of the introduction of the 
“Deutschlandticket” in May 2023.
In July the annual inflation rate actually increased slightly, while the core rate 
remained unchanged.  The latter held steady at 3.3 %. By contrast, the headline 
inflation rate increased slightly from 2.5 % to 2.6 %.  Compared to the previous 
month, consumer prices rose moderately in July on a seasonally adjusted basis. 
Although energy prices rose, the increase was less than might have been expected 
given the distinct increase in crude oil prices. This may have been attributable to a  11) 
 12) 
11 According to the national Consumer Price Index  the corresponding rate amounted to 2.3 %, down from (),CPI
2.5 %.
12 According to the national Consumer Price Index, the rate likewise drifted up slightly from 2.2 % to 2.3 %.

The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 92compression of the profit margins on refined petroleum products. Prices for non-
energy industrial goods and food likewise only went up to the usual extent. By contrast, 
services recorded another above average price increase.
From today’s perspective, inflation rates are expected to temporarily return to 
slightly higher levels towards the end of the year.  The previous negative inflation 
rates for energy will then flip into positive territory. This is mainly explained by the 
decline in energy prices in the final quarter of 2023. However, the currently depressed 
profit margins for refined petroleum products could also gradually creep up again. 
Core inflation can likewise be expected to remain at an elevated level given the 
persistently strong pressure on wages.


The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 936 German economy continues to face headwinds
Economic output could increase slightly in the third quarter of 2024.  Just like activity 
in the services sector, consumer spending can be expected to rise. While it is true that 
consumer restraint appears to be more ingrained than had been assumed in the 
forecast for Germany from June 2024,  and the saving rate is still likely to go up in the 
third quarter, the favourable parameters established by significant price-adjusted 
increases in disposable incomes should increasingly feed through into rising household 
expenditure. By contrast, the weakness in industry – as well as in construction – is likely 
to persist. Given the most recent deterioration in the outlook for global industrial 
activity, foreign demand could remain weak. Moreover, industrial firms are operating in 
a difficult competitive environment. Against this backdrop, both exports and 
investment in machinery and equipment are also expected to fall short of the 
expectations set out in the last forecast for Germany. All in all, economic output will 
probably expand only slightly. This will delay the anticipated gradual strengthening of 
the economy even further. On the other hand, the prospect of a recession – i.e. a sharp, 
broad-based and persistent decline in economic output – looks unlikely from the 
current standpoint, as long as no new negative shocks occur.
Consumer spending and the services sector should provide some support to the 
economy.  Households' increasing scope for spending should translate into higher 
consumer spending, if only hesitantly. The GfK’s consumer climate index for July was 
above the average of the prior quarter, thereby continuing its upward trend of recent 
months. Most notably, income expectations have once again risen significantly. The 
propensity to buy likewise increased – albeit from a low level. In a mirror development, 
the propensity to save has declined slightly (from a high level) against the prior-quarter 
average. However, consumer uncertainty is likely to continue to dampen any uptick in 
household spending. Economic and political uncertainty is high and rose further at the 
start of the third quarter.  This may partly explain why vehicle registrations declined 
significantly in July compared to the average of the second quarter, according to the  13) 
 14) 
13 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024).
14 Key uncertainties can be found in connection with geopolitical conflicts, economic policy, and recently also 
financial market turbulence. For a measure of economic policy uncertainty, see for example the index of Baker 
et al. (2016) compiled on the basis of newspaper articles. This recorded another significant rise in July, and is 
currently at its second-highest level since the start of calculations in 1993.

The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 94German Association of the Automotive Industry. At the same time, the surveys of the ifo
Institute pointed to a deterioration in the business situation and business expectations 
of retailers. By contrast, there has at least been something of an improvement in the 
business situation of the hotel and restaurant sector. Overall, therefore, consumer 
spending is likely to increase only slightly in the third quarter of the year. The services 
sector could likewise record moderate growth in the third quarter. According to the  ifo
Institute, the business situation of service providers in July remained more or less at the 
improved level of the previous quarter, while the corresponding Purchasing Managers’ 
Index of  Global remained above the growth threshold.S&P
By contrast, industry is likely to be the main drag on economic activity for the time 
being.  According to  Institute surveys, the business situation and the expectations of ifo
firms in the manufacturing sector deteriorated relatively sharply in July. At the start of 
the third quarter, short-term export expectations and production plans were also lower 
than in the previous quarter, thereby pointing to a continuation of the current spell of 
weakness in industry. On the other hand, order intake in industry provided a glimmer 
of hope: this rose significantly in June following five successive months of decline. If 
volatile large orders are excluded, there was even a quarter-on-quarter increase after 
two years of negative growth rates. Energy-intensive industry is also seeing positive 
developments. For example, manufacturers of chemical products recorded a fourth 
consecutive quarter-on-quarter increase in their order intake. Overall, however, 
Germany’s industrial sector can be expected to remain weak in the third quarter, too.


The German economy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 95List of references
Baker, S., N. Bloom and S. Davies (2016), Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty, The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 131, Issue 4, pp. 1593–1636.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024), Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly 
regaining its footing ‒ outlook up to 2026, Monthly Report, June 2024 .
Federal Statistical Office (2024a), Gross domestic product in the 2nd quarter of 2024 
down 0.1% on the previous quarter, press release no 289 of 30 July 2024 .
Federal Statistical Office (2024b), Verschiebung der monatlichen Statistiken im Handel 
und im Dienstleistungsbereich .
Federal Statistical Office (2024c), Employment slightly up in June 2024, press release no 
293 of 31 July 2024 .
 

96Public finances
Monthly Report – August 2024

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 971 General government budget
1.1 Outlook for 2024 and 2025
Germany’s deficit ratio is likely to decline moderately in 2024 and 2025 – not as a 
result of an austerity policy, but rather due to crisis assistance coming to an end. 
The deficit ratio stood at 2.4 % in 2023,  with temporary burdens from crisis assistance 
still amounting to around 1½% of gross domestic product  In 2024 and 2025, ( ). GDP
these burdens will come to an end. In other areas, however, the budgets are likely to 
deteriorate. Terminated crisis assistance aside, the budgetary stance is rather loose. In 
this respect, Germany is not pursuing an austerity policy.
In 2024, the expiry of the energy price brakes should do the most to relieve pressure 
on the government budget.  During the crisis, amid fluctuating energy prices, these 
acted as automatic stabilisers: in 2024, gas and electricity prices at the upstream stages 
are likely to be substantially lower again; the absence of the energy price brakes will 
probably have only a minimal impact on economic growth in this respect. This phased-
out relief is being offset by deficit-increasing developments elsewhere. In particular, 
the high inflation rates of recent years are still reflected in additional government 
expenditure. For instance, tangible asset purchases and public sector wages are seeing 
dynamic growth. Pension benefits are also rising significantly. By contrast, weak 
economic developments are weighing less on government budgets than the real  GDP
outlook suggests: the macroeconomic reference variables for taxes and social 
contributions are still growing significantly in nominal terms. In addition, the labour 
market is broadly stable.
In 2025, the deficit ratio is likely to decline as the tax and social contribution-exempt 
inflation compensation bonuses will have come to an end. This will generate 
additional government revenue.  This is because, in net terms, bonuses will be 
replaced with wage components subject to taxes and social contributions. However, the  1) 
 2) 
1 The section entitled “General government budget” relates to data from the national accounts and Maastricht 
debt. This is followed by reporting on budgetary developments (government finance statistics) in the areas for 
which data are available for the second quarter of 2024.
2 For more details, see . Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a)

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 98Federal Government, with its recent budgetary decisions, has announced new and in 
some cases deficit-increasing measures.
Overall, the general government deficit ratio as per the national accounts could be 
between 1½% and 2 % next year.  This is not at odds with the fact that central 
government and presumably almost all federal states are planning to comply with their 
debt brakes without making recourse to the escape clause. This is because the debt 
brake allows for higher deficits, amongst other things, if sufficient reserves are 
available.  In addition, outside the scope of the debt brake, there will be a deficit in the 
Armed Forces Fund, which central government puts at ½% of  Other off-budget . GDP
entities outside the scope of the debt brake can also run deficits in the national 
accounts (such as, for example, the infrastructure component of Deutsche Bahn, which 
is included in the general government sector; see the supplementary information 
). Furthermore, central government and most Financial transactions and the debt brake
federal states can absorb cyclical deficits beyond structural borrowing limits.
In view of the expected deficits and nominal GDP  growth rates, the debt ratio is 
expected to continue declining towards 60 %.  The debt ratio amounted to 63.4 % at 
the end of the first quarter of 2024, having stood at 63.6 % at the close of 2023.
1.2 Address challenges
Germany is facing major challenges, particularly with regard to demographic and 
geopolitical developments and climate change. The government is therefore called 
upon to facilitate the necessary adjustments by establishing appropriate framework 
conditions. Most recently, the Federal Government presented a growth initiative, the 
objective of which reflects major challenges. The package of measures aims to 
strengthen incentives for employment and investment and to improve the framework 
conditions for reliable energy provision. The aim of the initiative is to make public 
administration more efficient and digital and to reduce bureaucratic burdens on the 
economy. Many measures address appropriate issues. However, a number of details 
still need to be clarified; the new special rules are not entirely in line with the aim of 
reducing bureaucracy, and in some cases, further-reaching steps are needed (see also 
 and Federal Government plans tax concessions Reform options to strengthen the 
). In some key areas, state and local governments have joint or potential labour force
primary responsibility. These areas include education, essential parts of infrastructure, 
approvals of renewable energy systems and construction and tax law matters. 3) 
3 Financing a deficit from reserves reduces net borrowing in the budget but does not reduce the deficit.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 99Accomplishing these tasks whilst ensuring sound government finances poses a 
particular political challenge. Political compromises are often found more quickly 
when new debt is incurred, as such debt does not constrict government budgets until 
further down the line. However, this is precisely what engenders the risk of rising debt 
ratios and ever-increasing interest burdens. To prevent this, the debt brake sets a 
binding borrowing limit. Once the limit is exhausted, new budgetary burdens need to 
be covered directly, either by generating higher revenue or making savings elsewhere. 
Growth-friendly reforms have a positive impact on government budgets and the debt 
burden. However, these effects are only felt in the medium to longer term, for the most 
part, and are difficult to gauge. For reliable budget planning, it seems advisable to 
make more cautious assumptions, or else larger budget gaps might emerge further 
down the line. A strong fiscal policy shift would then be needed to plug these gaps, and 
fiscal policy would become erratic.
An effective debt brake is important for sound government finances; however, the 
scope for borrowing under the debt brake could afford to be somewhat larger if the 
debt ratio is low.  A moderately increased borrowing limit given a debt ratio below 60 % 
can be well justified as long as the debt brake is applied consistently. As part of such a 
reform, scope for borrowing could also be reserved for particularly important tasks. In 
this vein, the Bundesbank outlined a capped golden rule to create targeted additional 
scope for net government investment. A moderately increased borrowing limit that is 
consistently binding can continue to effectively safeguard sound government finances 
and the 60 % reference value for the debt ratio. By contrast, if the existing limit is 
undermined, it loses its binding effect. The debt brake would then be at risk of 
becoming redundant.
The new EU fiscal rules are facing their first test: budgetary requirements must be 
sufficiently ambitious to promote sound public finances in the euro area.  The stated 
objective of the rules is to lower high deficit and debt ratios. This is because sound 
public finances in the Member States are important for a stability-oriented euro area. 
They increase its crisis resilience and support the monetary policy of the Eurosystem. 
During the reform of the rules, a great deal of emphasis was placed on national 
ownership. To this end, Member States have a certain degree of scope to set their own 
country-specific budgetary limits. In return for this, however, they should feel more 
tightly bound to the borrowing limit than before. A stronger binding effect is desirable 
here. At the same time, the commitments made must also be ambitious enough to 
achieve the budgetary objectives. The European Commission and  remain ECOFIN
responsible for ensuring this. Budgetary limits for the next four or seven years will be 
agreed by this autumn, allowing for an assessment of how the new rules perform in 
their first test.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 1002 Budgetary development of central, state and local 
government
2.1 Tax revenue
2.1.1 Second quarter and 2024 as a whole
Tax revenue increased by 5½% in the second quarter.  Growth was fairly broad-based 
across the major items wage tax and  Revenue from the taxation of dividends and .VAT
of interest income also rose sharply. These increases were attenuated by declines in 
corporation tax, assessed income tax and electricity tax. Revenue from electricity tax 
declined because legislators provided significant relief for energy-intensive enterprises 
as from the start of the year.


Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 101Table 5.1: Tax revenue
Type of taxH1 Estimate
for 20241Q2
2023 2024 2023
€ billionYear-on-year
changeYear-on-year
change
€ billion
€ billion % %
Tax revenue
Total2 399.8 414.0 + 14.3 + 3.6 + 4.1 200.0
of which:
Wage tax3 115.2 119.8 + 4.5 + 3.9 + 6.6 59.5
Profit-related taxes 78.2 83.6 + 5.4 + 7.0 + 0.7 39.4
Assessed income tax4 35.2 33.9 − 1.3 − 3.6 − 2.4 15.5
Corporation tax5 23.1 20.5 − 2.6 − 11.3 − 4.9 12.4
Non-assessed taxes on earnings 16.4 19.4 + 3.0 + 18.2 − 12.3 9.8
Withholding tax on interest income and capital gains 3.5 9.8 + 6.3 + 181.9 + 115.3 1.7
VAT6 140.8 144.9 + 4.1 + 2.9 + 5.0 67.3
Other consumption-related taxes7 43.3 43.8 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 1.8 22.0
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates and Bundesbank calculations.  According to official 1
tax estimate of May 2024.  Comprises joint taxes as well as central government taxes and state government taxes. Including  2 EU
shares in German tax revenue, including customs duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes.  Child benefits and 3
subsidies for supplementary private pension plans deducted from revenue.  Employee refunds and research grants deducted from 4
revenue.  Research grants deducted from revenue.   and import   Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, 5 6VAT .VAT 7
electricity, alcohol, air traffic, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lotteries, beer and fire protection.
Wage tax revenue grew at a similar rate to total revenue, although tax cuts slowed 
this down.  In particular, income tax brackets were adjusted rightwards to compensate 
for the bracket creep of the previous year. Without tax cuts, revenue would probably 
have increased roughly twice as fast.
Revenue from profit-related taxes rose dynamically by 10 %. Intra-year shifts appear 
to have been a major contributor to this.  On balance, the growth was attributable 
solely to non-assessed taxes on earnings (+€4 billion). These are income tax payments 
on dividends, which – in Germany – are often paid following annual general meetings of 
enterprises. These payments sometimes shift between quarters from year to year. 
Following the surge in the second quarter, a decline is expected in the third quarter. 
Withholding tax on interest income and capital gains also continued to rise extremely 
sharply. The increase is likely to be primarily attributable to a significant increase in 
interest income. This is because the interest rate level was higher than in the previous 

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 102year – especially for deposits. The structure of deposits also changed, shifting towards 
higher-interest-bearing securities. By contrast, revenue from assessed income tax and 
corporation tax decreased. Advance payments of these major revenue items for the 
current year fell slightly (income tax) or rose slightly (corporation tax). At the same 
time, higher repayments for previous years reduced the result.
Revenue from VAT rose by 6 %, bolstered by VAT rate cuts coming to an end.  The 
reduced tax rate on restaurant meals returned to normal at the end of 2023. Natural 
gas and district heating rate cuts expired at the end of the first quarter of 2024.  is VAT
paid with a delay of up to two months. The return to standard rates may therefore have 
had a marked impact on revenue for the first time in the second quarter.
For 2024 as a whole, the official tax estimate figures from May (+4 %, excluding local 
government taxes) are still achievable.  For this to be the case, revenue will have to 
increase more strongly in the second half of the year than it did in the first (+3½%). A 
more pronounced acceleration than in the first half of the year is expected for the 
significant wage tax item. This is because, relative to the previous year, taxable wage 
components are likely to increasingly replace tax-free inflation compensation bonuses. 
In the case of  the fact that the aforementioned return to standard rates is now ,VAT
boosting receipts throughout the entire half-year would suggest an acceleration. 
However, an elevated prior-year figure will have a dampening effect: in the second half 
of 2023, significant  payments from other  countries were recorded retroactively. VAT EU
 This is unlikely to be repeated in the second half of 2024. It is difficult to predict how 
strong these opposing effects will be. For non-assessed taxes on earnings, the Working 
Group on Tax Estimates anticipates that revenue in the second half of the year will be 
significantly lower than in the previous year. However, following the surprisingly strong 
second quarter, the result for the year as a whole could be somewhat higher than 
estimated.
2.1.2 Federal Government plans tax concessions
In its growth initiative, the Federal Government has outlined measures including 
tax incentives for investment and employment. Financially speaking, the most 
important component is the compensation for inflation-induced bracket creep in 2025 
and 2026. This will offset the increase in the tax burden caused by the inflation of the 
respective previous year. In this context, it is a constitutional requirement to make 
regular increases to the basic income tax allowance, which keep the minimum  4) 
 5) 
4 For the official tax estimate, see . Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b)
5 See , p. 62. Deutsche Bundesbank (2023)

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 103subsistence level tax-free. In addition, it has been customary for a number of years to 
shift the other tax brackets to the right.  However, as in 2023 and 2024, this will not 
apply to the top tax bracket. In addition, the government intends to extend declining-
balance depreciation until 2028 and raise the depreciation rate from 20 % to 25 %. In 
principle, this measure appears to be suitable for temporarily supporting business 
investment. Stronger tax depreciation options shift tax revenue into later years, first 
and foremost: greater tax depreciation means lower taxable profits (lower tax 
payments) at the start of an asset’s useful life. In later years, tax depreciation will then 
be lower and tax payments will be higher.
Furthermore, the Federal Government is proposing that supplements for overtime 
work be exempted from tax and social contributions. Although strengthening 
incentives for employment is generally desired, it is questionable whether, overall, 
further special tax advantages are beneficial. At the very least, equal taxation according 
to ability to pay is precluded if some incomes receive preferential treatment. Tax law 
will also become more complicated and more vulnerable to manipulation if the division 
of working hours into overtime and regular working hours affects tax payments. 
Moreover, this is not in line with the aim of reducing red tape. One strategy that works 
in the opposite direction would be to limit or eliminate income tax exemptions and 
relief and, in return, move income tax brackets to the right: currently, for example, 
supplements for work on Sundays and public holidays as well as night work are exempt 
from income tax. Some pension provisions are also tax-privileged. In the case of 
another government proposal, the situation is different: employees who work beyond 
the statutory retirement age will no longer be expected to pay unemployment and 
pension insurance contributions from their wages. This makes sense, as the employer 
contribution has thus far been a special levy for such employees (see Reform options to 
). strengthen the potential labour force
For 2025 as a whole, the official tax estimate anticipated a growth rate of + 4½% ‒ 
but with the planned measures, it is likely to be lower. The Federal Cabinet has 
already passed some measures, such as the aforementioned compensation for bracket 
creep and accelerated depreciation. Added to these are, amongst other things, higher 
child benefits and child tax allowances. The Federal Government is also planning to 
raise the income tax allowances for 2024 again. It therefore does not anticipate tax 
revenue shortfalls until 2025. Further tax measures under the growth initiative are 
likely to reduce revenue, too. The shortfalls associated with the measures as a whole  6) 
6 See also  for information on the usual compensation for bracket creep. Deutsche Bundesbank (2022)

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 104will become greater over the following years, because the income tax brackets will then 
have been shifted to the right again and revenue losses caused by accelerated 
depreciation will increase over a number of years.
2.2 Central government finances
2.2.1 Second quarter and 2024 as a whole
The deficit of central government including off-budget entities was markedly higher 
in the second quarter of 2024 than in the same quarter of the previous year.  It 
increased from €5 billion to €13 billion. In the core budget, the deficit fell steeply from 
€18 billion to €5 billion, with one-off effects contributing significantly to this. In the off-
budget entities, however, the result deteriorated even more sharply, by €21 billion, with 
the Climate Fund being the hardest hit.
The core budget deficit decreased, primarily owing to a steep decline in interest 
expenditure. As a result of declining inflation, considerably less needed to be spent on 
inflation-indexed federal securities. Moreover, for calendar-related reasons, extensive 
mid-year interest payments will only be booked in the third quarter of this year (2023: 
in the second quarter). Lower transfers to the  budget and higher privatisation EU
proceeds also eased pressure on the budget. By contrast, expenditure increases 
brought about by the first tranche of capital contributions to Deutsche Bahn, the civic 
allowance and personnel spending had a negative impact.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 105In the off-budget entities, the result deteriorated sharply.  All of the major entities 
contributed to this:
In the Climate Fund, the deficit rose sharply by €8 billion to €9½ billion. This was 
chiefly attributable to subsidies for green electricity. This year, funding for the 
Renewable Energy Sources Act (  –  ) came out of Erneuerbare-Energien-Gesetz EEG
the Climate Fund’s coffers for the first time. Up to mid-2022, consumers were 
paying a levy on the price of electricity, which went towards subsidising 
renewable energies. This created an extensive reserve, as the estimated proceeds 
for green electricity were significantly exceeded. This reserve covered the need 
for subsidies up to the end of 2023. Starting this year, funding is coming from the 
Climate Fund. In addition, the Climate Fund was burdened by a year-on-year 
decline of €½ billion in revenue from European and national emission allowances.
The surplus in the fund for inflation-indexed federal securities fell by €6 billion to 
€2 billion, as the core budget provided fewer grants against a backdrop of lower 
year-on-year inflation. The grants cover the costs incurred by the redemption of a 
security at a later date. The provision initially results in a surplus for the fund. 
Upon redemption, the fund then pays out and a deficit arises.


Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 106The surplus in the Economic Stabilisation Fund  was also down (by €3½ billion ()ESF
to €1 billion). Revenue fell as fewer assistance loans that the fund had granted 
during the crisis years were repaid. Less significant was the fact that the fund’s 
spending on energy price assistance came to an end.
In the Armed Forces Fund, the deficit climbed by €2½ billion to €3 billion. This 
increase reflects additional spending on procurement. Interest expenditure has 
been largely non-existent to date.
For the current year as a whole, the Federal Government is now planning to run a 
total deficit of €113 billion in the core budget and off-budget entities  (actual 2023: 
€88 billion; for this and the following figures, see Table 5.2). For the core budget, the 
government decided on a draft supplementary budget that adds €11 billion to the 
current planned deficit, taking it to €61 billion. The planned deficit for the off-budget 
entities remains unchanged at €52 billion. That of the Climate Fund remains at €29 
billion, and as before the fund is to cover this with reserves. What has been newly 
decided, however, is a central government grant to the Climate Fund to compensate for 
additional burdens compared with previous plans. As previously planned, the Armed 
Forces Fund is to finance a planned deficit of €20 billion using credit.
Table 5.2: Key central government budget data1
€ billion
Actual 2023 Target 2024


Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 107Item
1. Expenditure of central government budget ( ) CGB2 457.1
of which:
1.a Investment 55.0
1.b Global spending increases/cuts -
2. Revenue of CGB2,4 392.2
of which:
2.a Tax revenue5 356.1
2.b Global revenue increases/shortfalls -
3. Fiscal balance of  (2.-1.) CGB − 64.9
4. Coin seigniorage of CGB 0.2
5. Transfer to (-)/withdrawal from (+) reserves in CGB 37.5
6. Net borrowing (-)/repayment (+) of  (3.+4.+5.) CGB − 27.2
7. Cyclical component in the budget procedure6 − 7.1
8. Balance of financial transactions of CGB − 7.7
9. Structural net borrowing (-)/repayment (+) (6.-7.-8.) − 12.4
10. Amount exceeding limit in  (13.-9.) CGB7 1.4
11. Amount exceeding limit incl. E (10.-15.)-ESF 42.9
12. Memo item: Amount exceeding limit with balance of off-budget entities (10.-16.-17.) 46.4
13.Standard upper limit: Structural net borrowing (0.35 % of ) GDP8− 12.6
14. Structural balance of  (3.-7.-8.) CGB − 50.2
14.a As before, with estimate of potential output acc. to 2024 spring forecast − 48.2
15. Structural net borrowing of E-ESF − 41.5
16. Deficit of E-ESF − 41.5
17. Balance of special funds ( ) relevant to the debt brake prior to 2022SFs9 − 3.5
17.a Climate and Transformation Fund − 1.7
17.b 2013 Flood Relief Fund − 0.2
17.c Fund to Promote Municipal Investment − 0.6
17.d Digitalisation Fund − 1.1
17.e Fund for Primary School-Age Childcare Provision 0.0
17.f 2021 Flood Relief Fund 0.0
18. Balance of  for making provisions for repayment and for extending childcareSFs 4.0
19. Balance of other  without own constitutional rulesSFs10 23.9
20. Balance of Armed Forces Fund (from 2026: e) − 5.8
20.a Borrowing authorisation remaining thereafter (from 2026: e) 94.2
21. Balance of  and  (3.+16.+17.+18.+19.+20.) CGB SFs − 87.8

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 10822. Reserves of  for 17.SFs 38.3
23. Central government assets in civil servants’ pension reserves and pension fund12 33.3
24. Level of general reserves 10.7
25. Balance on control account 49.2
26. Total outstanding repayment amount including Armed Forces Fund  (from 2026: e)13 340.7
27. Total outstanding repayment amount from  grants (e) NGEU14 46
1 Sources: Deutscher Bundestag, Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. For methodological notes, see .  Excluding transfers to Deutsche Bundesbank (2016) 2
/withdrawals from reserves and including net tax revenue (see footnote 5). Global spending cut for recording discounts on an accruals basis not included.  Excluding coin 3 4
seigniorage. After deduction of supplementary central government transfers, shares of energy tax revenue, compensation under the 2009 reform of motor vehicle tax and 5 
budgetary recovery assistance to federal states.  For 2023 according to the 2023 budget accounts, for Target 2024 according to 2023 autumn projection, for Draft 6
supplementary budget 2024 amended by lower  growth according to the 2024 spring projection.  Calculated: -€0.18 billion. Recorded: €1.37 billion. Corresponds to actual GDP 7
payment to the 2021 Flood Relief Fund, for which the escape clause was activated. Difference between the two amounts credited to the control account.  Based on  in the 8 GDP
year before the (comprehensive) budget is prepared.  Draft supplementary budget 2024 and Draft 2025 from respective borrowing plans.  Entities with quarterly data, but 9  10
with no figures in borrowing plan. Above all,  (excluding E) and pension provisions.  Of which: Climate Fund taken into account with €0.0 billion. For information on the ESF -ESF 11
Climate Fund in 2025, see . Market values according to central government balance sheet for 2023. Continuous inflows; withdrawals from the fund planned from Plans for 2025  12 
2030, from reserves from 2032.  Extrapolation of the previous year’s figures with items 11 and 20; in Actual 2023, including change in the control account, following removal of 13
reserves from emergency borrowing.   budgeted figures and estimates, each multiplied by Germany’s share of 25 % in  gross national income. 14NGEU EU
The 2024 draft supplementary budget for the core budget increases the level of net 
borrowing permitted because the cyclical adjustment was updated. The resulting 
leeway is being used to provide more resources to the Climate Fund. The 
government updates the cyclical component according to the usual procedure.  As 
nominal  growth is lower than originally expected (-1½ percentage points), the GDP
notional cyclical burden is just over €11 billion higher (see item 7 in the table). The  
borrowing limit under the debt brake is accordingly higher. Since estimated burdens 
are hardly greater than budgeted figures on balance, additional fiscal space is created: 
the tax revenue estimates are even somewhat higher (item 2.a plus 2.b in the table). 
This is because weaker nominal  has barely any impact on the tax estimate. In GDP
addition, the Federal Government is budgeting for additional revenue: it evidently 
expects that it will have to transfer much less to the  budget than indicated by the EU
tax estimate. Additional expenditure of €3½ billion is estimated for the civic allowance, 
but provisions for personnel expenditure were reduced somewhat. The remaining 
scope covers a new grant of just over €10 billion to the Climate Fund. This will mainly 
compensate for the fund’s higher subsidies to support renewable energy. It will also 
cover the fund’s revenue losses following a drop in the price of  emission allowances.EU
From today’s perspective, the core budget could see a more favourable outturn in 
2024 than projected in the draft supplementary budget. At mid-year, privatisation  7) 
 8) 
7 See . Deutsche Bundesbank (2011), p. 27
8 For more on the draft supplementary budget, see Federal Ministry of Finance (2024).

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 109proceeds were €3½ billion higher than the budget estimate. In addition, lower 
expenditure on interest and tangible asset purchases, for example, looks possible. On 
the other hand, if the estimated  revenue (€13 billion) is not received before the NGEU
close of the year, this would be a burden on the 2024 budget. However, central 
government should be able to avoid this by swiftly applying to the  for the funds.  EU
The supplementary budget looks set to be adopted at the beginning of November. By 
then, most major deviations from previous budgetary estimates are likely to be 
foreseeable. It thus seems appropriate to update the plan in line with the draft. 
Additionally, the Federal Government’s autumn projection should be available by then. 
This will then also be the basis for a new cyclical component.  The supplementary 
budget provides the option of recording interest expenditure on an accruals basis from 
2024 already. This is planned from 2025 onwards in any case. Seeing as discounts of €9 
billion are estimated for this year, switching to accruals-based accounting would 
provide budgetary relief in 2024.  The switch was proposed by the Bundesbank, 
amongst others, because it depicts the true economic nature of interest burdens and 
facilitates consistent budgetary management.
The deficit of the off-budget entities could be far lower than planned in 2024.  The 
draft supplementary budget for 2024 also contains no budget figures for the  This .ESF
fund is likely to generate significant surpluses from repayments of assistance loans. 
The Armed Forces Fund is also likely to have a better outturn than indicated by the 
budget. Its outflows had only come to just over one-quarter of the budgeted annual 
amount by mid-year. The contractual obligations for 2024 reported at the end of 2023 
also indicate that the fund will post a smaller deficit than planned. The deficit of the  
Climate Fund likewise looks set to be considerably smaller than estimated (€29 billion). 
It may remain roughly at the level of €15 billion from the first half-year. This is because  9) 
 10) 
 11) 
 12) 
9 Ultimately, central government will have to prove that it has met targets. This is obviously expected given that 
 revenue is included in the budget. NGEU
10 According to the Bundesbank’s forecast for Germany from last June, nominal  will grow more strongly in GDP
2024 than estimated in the draft supplementary budget. Based on that, the scope for borrowing would 
expand less than currently envisaged by the Federal Government.
11 Discounts occur when central government issues debt instruments with low coupons. Switching to accruals-
based accounting would mean that discounts are no longer a burden in the year of issue only, but are 
allocated over the entire term of the instrument. The same procedure applies for premium payments: the 
previous interest relief recorded in the year of issue is allocated over the entire term of the debt instrument in 
question. See . Deutsche Bundesbank (2021)
12 These obligations of the core budget (in the “Military procurement of the defence ministry” section of the 
budget) and the special fund together amount to only €12 billion. This is only a little more than half the total 
procurement planned for defence. Only a small portion of this procurement is to be paid for out of the core 
budget as from 2024.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 110its revenue from emission allowances is mainly received in the second half of the year, 
which is also when the newly planned transfer from central government will provide 
relief. This transfer is expected to fill up the fund’s reserves on balance, allowing it to 
run further deficits in future.
2.2.2 Plans for 2025
Last year’s fiscal planning for 2025 contained only a moderate gap, but this has 
gradually widened. In summer 2023, the Federal Government cited an unspecified 
need for €5 billion in order to comply with the borrowing limit under the debt brake. 
Another €6 billion was added in the budget planning for 2024, as those plans showed 
there would be virtually no reserves left for 2025. In addition, the revenue estimates 
according to the May tax estimate were revised downwards by €4 billion. Moreover, 
following the Federal Constitutional Court’s ruling, the interest accrued by the dissolved 
Economic Stabilisation Fund for Energy Assistance E) and the funding needs of the (-ESF
2021 Flood Relief Fund (a combined amount of around €5 billion) had to be financed 
out of the core budget. Offsetting this was €8 billion owing to higher cyclical burdens, 
which raised the borrowing limit under the debt brake. This left a gap of €12 billion. 
Regardless of this, a number of ministries stated significantly higher expenditure than 
in the old fiscal plan during consultation on the 2025 draft budget. The Finance Minister 
also intended to further compensate for bracket creep in the income tax scale. Finally, it 
was unclear how the Climate Fund is to continue running with part of its reserves 
struck from the books.
The draft central government budget for 2025 complies with the borrowing limit 
(see Table 5.2). However, some questions still remain, and planning is much tighter 
than previously. Key data and required measures:
Net borrowing of €51 billion is planned.
Under the debt brake, structural new borrowing of just over €14 billion is 
permitted.
Borrowing to offset cyclical burdens of €10 billion is also possible according 
to the spring estimate.
There are plans to acquire financial assets worth €27 billion net, which can 
likewise be credit-financed. A large proportion of this – just over €12 

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 111billion – is attributable to the generational capital fund, followed by capital 
contributions to Deutsche Bahn. At €10½ billion next year, these are set to 
be almost twice as high as in 2024.
The core budget is set to fully take over from the Climate Fund in providing 
funding under the Renewable Energy Sources Act. An amount of €16 billion is 
earmarked for this in 2025 in the core budget – and this accordingly eases the 
financial pressure on the Climate Fund.
The draft budget takes account of the growth initiative:
Tax revenue shortfalls from related measures (including compensation for 
bracket creep) are accounted for by a global revenue shortfall of €7½ billion.
Meanwhile, a global revenue increase apparently amounting to €6 billion 
stemming from higher growth due to the initiative is envisaged as 
budgetary relief. There was no further explanation of how this estimate 
came about. Increased revenue from stronger growth only creates leeway 
under the debt brake if it results from higher potential GDP  (otherwise it is 
considered cyclical and cannot then be used to finance other projects). 
However, a sharp short-term rise in potential GDP  is unusual and does not 
seem likely here.
Likewise due to the initiative, central government estimates a reduction in 
spending of just over €4½ billion on the civic allowance as compared with 
the draft supplementary budget for 2024. This would be a 16 % decrease 
and therefore seems very ambitious.
The growth initiative still needs to be coordinated with the federal states. 
They will be financially affected by the tax cuts as well and usually call for 
further compensation in such cases.
Relief for central government is expected to come from Germany’s contributions 
to the .EU These look likely to be €8 billion lower than in the May tax estimate.  In 
accounting terms, this will be reflected in higher central government tax revenue 
(and is budgeted for in a global revenue increase). Past budget estimates have 
contained extensive buffers. As things stand today, the revised estimate broadly 
lines up with the latest  budget plans.EU 13) 
13 The capital contribution was already increased this year – by €4½ billion to €5½ billion. It thus replaces the 
investment grants paid to Deutsche Bahn, which were originally to be paid via the Climate Fund from 2024 
onwards.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 112Revenue of €3 billion is set to come from the liquidation of the Economic 
Stabilisation Fund for Energy Assistance. As its expenditure was financed using 
emergency borrowing, use of the funds in the 2025 budget would raise questions.
The government intends to record interest expenditure on an accruals basis from 
2025 onwards, which makes sense economically (see the above section on 2024). 
This is initially budgeted for as a global spending cut (i.e. as an amount that still 
needs to be saved during budget implementation). In the draft budget, this 
reduces net borrowing by €7½ billion.
The government is additionally budgeting for a large global spending cut in a 
collective item in the “General financial administration” section (residuum 
spending cut). An amount of around €8 billion was typical here recently (just 
under 2 % of total expenditure); in the draft budget for 2025, it is now €12 billion. 
The Federal Government is seeking to further reduce this gap by the time the 
budget has been adopted. At the same time, the Finance Minister pointed out 
that the estimates in the draft budget for 2025 are tighter than in previous 
budgets. It is therefore likely to be more difficult to make global spending cuts 
during the implementation phase. Even with a normal-sized residuum spending 
cut, the need to make savings in the implementation phase is thus more 
ambitious than it initially appears.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 1131.  
2.  Supplementary information
Financial transactions and the debt brake
The Federal Government had in the meantime reviewed whether the scope of the 
debt brake could be extended by having central government issue loans instead of 
grants to Deutsche Bahn  and Autobahn GmbH . The aim was to reduce the residuum 
spending cut and thus the need for consolidation from €17 billion originally in the July 
plans to €8 billion (for more on the residuum spending cut, see ). Plans for 2025
After the review, however, the Federal Government refrained from taking this 
course of action. It is now planning new financial transactions with Deutsche Bahn . 
These amount to €7½ billion.  The initially estimated residuum spending cut is reduced 
by the amount in which central government is converting a grant to  Deutsche Bahn
into a capital contribution (€4½ billion). In addition, central government is to grant a 
new loan to  (€3 billion) to provide interest relief. This does not reduce Deutsche Bahn
the residuum spending cut, because the additional loan is offset by higher borrowing 
needs in order to finance it. Specifically:
The government agreed to convert further grants to Deutsche Bahn  in the 
amount of €4½ billion for infrastructure investment into capital contributions.  
Overall,  is now set to receive capital contributions of €10½ billion Deutsche Bahn
in 2025 (previously €6 billion was budgeted for 2025). The capital is expected to 
yield an appropriate return for the central government budget. The Federal 
Government has stated that it is currently in talks with  about how Deutsche Bahn
this can be ensured. If, instead of grants,  receives capital that Deutsche Bahn
yields a return for central government, this will, ceteris paribus, reduce future 
leeway for . Deutsche Bahn
Deutsche Bahn  is to receive a loan of €3 billion from the core budget and thus 
be relieved of interest burdens.  Depending on the maturity, the interest that 
 pays on its issues will be up to 1 percentage point higher than Deutsche Bahn
what central government pays on its issues.  The central government loan will 
have a term of 34 years and an interest rate of 1.5 %. The Federal Government’s  1) 
1 The premium on 30-year instruments is currently around 0.8 percentage point.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 114grounds for this decision is that the average interest on central government debt 
is currently 1.5 %.  However, central government will have to borrow new funds 
for the loan, and central government’s financing costs for 30-year federal bonds 
(Bunds) currently stand at 2½%. Thus,  will receive considerable Deutsche Bahn
support, and this measure is likely to place a burden on future central 
government budgets on balance.
Converting investment grants into capital contributions raises questions from an 
economic perspective. It also means that the debt brake is further removed from 
the EU fiscal rules it is supposed to safeguard.
Central government currently provides investment grants to the infrastructure 
component of Deutsche Bahn . According to the 2023 budget accounts, it had also 
made extensive grant commitments going beyond 2025. Unlike this kind of grant, 
a capital contribution (like a loan) does not, per se, trigger any need for action in 
order to comply with the debt brake. This is because it constitutes the acquisition 
of financial assets (financial transaction), exempting it from the debt brake. This 
reduces the need for consolidation at the central government level. Deutsche 
Bahn , on the other hand, has higher requirements and its future financial scope 
is smaller than in the case of pure grants.
This raises the question of whether, from an economic point of view, it makes 
sense to record capital contributions instead of grants. To this end, the additional 
capital would have to yield an appropriate return. At present, however, it is not 
apparent how the infrastructure component of Deutsche Bahn  is to generate 
such returns in the future. The switch would reduce its scope for spending or 
leave it needing to generate higher revenues. It would not make good sense if 
central government’s return were, in fact, financed by central government itself 
via future outflows from the central government budget (for example, via higher 
central government grants). In any case, it would be important to make it 
transparent how Deutsche Bahn  intends to generate future returns using the 
new capital.
It should also be borne in mind that another purpose of the debt brake is to 
ensure compliance with EU fiscal rules. The EU rules concern the general 
government sector as defined in the national accounts. In the national accounts, 
the infrastructure component of Deutsche Bahn  belongs to the general  2) 
2 According to information from the Federal Government, the current average interest on the  Deutsche Bahn
debt in question amounts to 3 %. Differences between this and central government’s average interest rate can 
result from generally higher financing costs, but also from different debt structures and different times at 
which funds were borrowed.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 115government sector, more precisely to central government. Investment in 
Deutsche Bahn  infrastructure thus increases the central (and general) 
government deficit in the national accounts. This is irrespective of whether a 
grant or a capital contribution is recorded in the core budget – both constitute 
transactions within central government in the national accounts. 3) 
3 When the infrastructure component of  was still recorded outside the general government Deutsche Bahn
sector, capital contributions from central government to  were shown in the national accounts as a Deutsche Bahn
deficit-increasing capital transfer. In addition,  also belongs to the general government sector in Autobahn GmbH
the national accounts: investments in it therefore also increase the central government deficit in the national 
accounts, irrespective of whether the core budget does this by issuing a loan or grants.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 116Central government is planning for the off-budget entities’ overall deficit to decline 
significantly in 2025. The plans for the Climate Fund are key to this.
Armed Forces Fund:  Germany’s defence spending is set to exceed ’s agreed NATO
2 % of  (around €88 billion), as was the case in 2024. The largest contributions GDP
will come from the core budget, followed by the Armed Forces Fund.  The fund’
s estimated expenditure for 2025 is moderately higher than for 2024. This is 
expected to increase its deficit from the €20 billion planned this year to €22 
billion. The fund is set to use this to finance €21 billion in procurement; the 
procurement section of the core budget contains an added €2½ billion. However, 
in order to ultimately achieve the  target, procurement processes need to NATO
accelerate significantly: commitments for 2025 totalling €3 billion were entered 
into in the 2023 fiscal year. This meant that the authorisations were far from 
being fully utilised.  For 2025 as a whole, commitments from procurement 
contracts only amounted to just under €13 billion. They are thus well below the 
spending limits. It therefore appears that spending limits and appropriations for 
commitments are not so much the source of bottlenecks as the utilisation of 
those authorisations.
Climate Fund:  The financial plan for the Climate Fund from summer 2023 had 
envisaged a deficit of €28 billion for 2025 (2024: €29 billion), which was to be 
financed out of reserves. However, according to the plan for 2024, the reserves 
will be largely depleted this year. This would mean that there would be virtually 
no more reserves available to cover a deficit in 2025. To ease the burden on the 
fund, the government now intends to shift just over half of the deficit planned 
back in 2023 to the core budget. It intends to take over the provision of funding 
under the Renewable Energy Sources Act.  In addition, investment spending 
was budgeted more tightly. The Climate Fund’s plan for 2025 also contains global 
spending cuts of €9 billion and global revenue increases of €3 billion. This may 
reflect the expectation that, overall, the Climate Fund will have lower outflows 
and will actually still have substantial reserves at the end of this year (for more on 
developments in 2024, see ). The Climate Second quarter and 2024 as a whole 14) 
 15) 
 16) 
14 Expenditure of €53 billion is planned in the defence section of the core budget. The government does not 
provide specifics of the other budget items that are counted towards the  spending target. Overall, the NATO
items to be added are likely to be in the region of €15 billion, including military aid for Ukraine.
15 The authorised volume for procurement in the core budget and the Armed Forces Fund for 2025 had stood at 
€5 billion. In addition, commitment appropriations of €44 billion not tied to a specific year were left unused in 
the fund.
16 To ease the pressure on the Climate Fund, central government’s core budget had already taken on additional 
investment grants to Deutsche Bahn from 2024 onwards that had previously been budgeted to come from the 
Climate Fund. Under the 2025 budget, however, some of the investment grants to be received by Deutsche 
Bahn will now take the form of capital contributions (see above).

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 117Fund could then use these reserves to finance a deficit in 2025. This is consistent 
with the fact that central government’s borrowing plan for 2025 contains 
borrowing of €12 billion to finance the Climate Fund’s expenditure.
Other:  Even beyond the above, the planned deficit of the off-budget entities will 
decline: in 2024, the Digitalisation Fund is making a one-off payment of €4 billion 
to the core budget. This puts the fund in deficit; that deficit will not exist in 2025.
From the current standpoint, both the deficit of central government and its off-
budget entities in 2024 as well as the deficit reduction this year could be smaller 
than planned  (for more on planned developments in the general government deficit in 
2025, see ). According to the plans, the deficit of central Outlook for 2024 and 2025
government (core budget and off-budget entities combined) will shrink by €26 billion to 
€87 billion.  In reality, however, a smaller reduction looks to be on the cards. For one 
thing, a lower deficit than envisaged appears possible for the starting year of 2024. For 
another, if the 2024 outturn is more favourable, there will be larger reserves available 
to finance deficits in 2025. Overall, it remains to be seen for 2025 whether any 
remaining global spending cuts, global revenue increases and savings on the civic 
allowance will actually materialise. Moreover, central government could end up having 
to shoulder greater burdens in the wake of negotiations with state governments about 
the growth initiative. What is more, the Federal Constitutional Court announced that 
this year it will be hearing a constitutional complaint about the solidarity surcharge of 
1995 in its amended version from 2021 onwards. This represents a revenue-side risk.
2.2.3 Outlook for subsequent years
Planning for the subsequent years 2026 to 2028 indicates large gaps in the budget. 
In the final year of the fiscal plan, the resources of the Armed Forces Fund are 
exhausted. The core budget must then cover the Armed Forces Fund’s credit-financed 
expenditure in the context of the debt brake in order to comply with  NATO
commitments. In the medium-term fiscal plan from summer 2023, the Federal 
Government had already identified an unspecified need for action amounting to €5 
billion per year for 2026 and 2027. Added to this were revenue shortfalls of more than 
€7 billion annually based on the May tax estimate. In addition, growing revenue 
shortfalls stemming from the announced tax measures will have to be absorbed. At the 
same time, central government will obtain no further relief from switching the 
accounting method for discounts. Central government will also have to cover funding 
under the Renewable Energy Sources Act out of the core budget (in the order of €15  17) 
17 A deficit of €12 billion for the Climate Fund is included, which was derived from the credit financing overview.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 118billion annually). Central government’s greater involvement will ease the burden on the 
Climate Fund, but in order to provide relief for the core budget, in turn, central 
government appears to have budgeted that it will draw sizeable revenue from the 
Climate Fund from 2027 onwards. However, it is still unclear how the fund is to finance 
this and its other large-scale projects in the medium term.
In the new fiscal plan, expenditure appropriations of most ministries are nominally 
frozen up to 2028. Aside from the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, strong 
increases are envisaged only for debt service and defence.
As regards labour and social affairs, there is strong growth in central government 
funds for the statutory pension insurance scheme. The Federal Government’s 
plans envision a significant increase in the contribution rate for the statutory 
pension insurance scheme in 2028. This will drive strong growth in central 
government funds, as they are largely linked to that rate. This already includes 
the additional pressure on central government funds arising from the planned 
pension package, which is set to extend the threshold for the replacement rate 
beyond 2025. As a result, the contribution rate will rise more strongly in 2028 and 
central government funds will see greater growth thereafter as well.
Expenditure on debt service will increase in the final two years especially. The first 
emergency loans will be due for repayment in 2028. There is no indication as to 
which part of the increase in expenditure is attributable to these. The Finance 
Minister had announced that the repayment plan might be extended once again 
and that much less would be repaid than previously planned (just over €9 billion).
Defence spending in the core budget will go up by around half in 2028, to €80 
billion. This will put considerable pressure to adjust on other sections of the 
budget.
Overall, the Federal Government announced a need for action amounting to €13 
billion in 2026 and 2027. This will see a very strong rise to €39 billion in 2028. The 
need for action is reflected in the global spending cuts contained in the fiscal plan. 
Adjustments are likely to be required in the Climate Fund, too. However, no new fiscal 
plan has been decided for the fund yet. On the whole, fiscal planning is marked by 
significant funding shortages. The Federal Government has postponed decisions on 
how to resolve them.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 1192.3 State government budgets
2.3.1 Developments so far in 2024 and outlook to 2025
The development of state government finances up to the middle of this year was 
significantly influenced by special factors in North Rhine-Westphalia.  In a deviation 
from the year before, the state shifted the issuance of grants for basic funding of 
universities from the second to the first quarter.  The state government budget also 
received €3 billion back from its coronavirus special fund in the second quarter, around 
twice as much as in the previous year. The core budget balance improved as a result 
(North Rhine-Westphalia used the funds to repay loans).
State government core budgets and off-budget entities recorded an increased 
deficit in the first quarter, chiefly on account of the aforementioned one-off effect.  
At €4½ billion, the deficit was €3½ billion larger than one year earlier – excluding the 
 18) 
 19) 
18 Payments from the state government budget to universities (off-budget entities) should actually have a 
neutral impact on the state government’s finances as a whole. However, universities record the revenue as 
being distributed evenly across the year. The payment date therefore affects the state’s quarterly result.
19 The coronavirus special fund, financed by means of emergency borrowing, therefore has €2½ billion left for 
loan repayments. See also . Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b)

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 120one-off effect stemming from payments to universities in North Rhine-Westphalia, it 
was only €1 billion larger.
In the second quarter, core budgets increased their surplus to €4 billion, but 
excluding one-off effects, the result deteriorated  (results for off-budget entities are 
not yet available). The balance improved by €1½ billion compared with the same 
quarter of the previous year. Revenue went up by 2½%. Although tax revenue saw 
barely any increase, revenue from public administrations grew sharply (+6 %) due to the 
payout from the coronavirus special fund in North Rhine-Westphalia. Core budget 
spending saw muted growth, climbing by 1 %. Personnel expenditure rose strongly 
(+6 %) as a result of wage adjustments. North Rhine-Westphalia’s move to bring 
university grants forward to the first quarter curbed expenditure increases, however.
For the year as a whole, the outturn for the core budgets and off-budget entities 
combined is expected to deteriorate slightly  (2023: deficit of just over €½ billion). 
According to the spring tax estimate, state government tax revenue will go up by 3 %. 
However, transfers to local government look set to rise more sharply. Growth in the 
major expenditure item personnel expenditure is likely to be slower in the second half 
of the year than in the first, when inflation compensation bonuses were being paid out. 
That said, it is still expected to increase at a significantly stronger pace than tax 
revenue over the year as a whole.
As things stand today, the federal states’ financial situation is expected to improve 
somewhat next year. According to the tax estimate, tax revenue will rise by 4 %. If the 
tax measures from the Federal Government’s growth initiative are implemented, this 
will also result in revenue shortfalls for the federal states. However, central government 
is also planning to boost the quality of childcare over an extended period of time, which 
would alleviate some of the pressure on state governments. Personnel expenditure is 
expected to grow at a significantly slower pace than in the current year. Looking at 
transfers to local government, the fact that 2023 tax revenue to be accounted for 
retroactively was lower than planned is likely to bring some relief.
2.3.2 Federal states’ debt brakes still lack clarity
Following the ruling of the Federal Constitutional Court, some federal states have 
adjusted their budget plans for 2024; some have declared a state of emergency in 
order to justify additional borrowing under their debt brakes. Bremen, Schleswig-
Holstein, Saxony-Anhalt and Saarland once again declared a state of emergency in 
order to enact authorisations for new emergency borrowing. The grounds they gave 
for doing so were the ongoing effects of the pandemic and the consequences of the 
Russian war of aggression against Ukraine. Schleswig-Holstein also cited flood damage.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 121Meanwhile, Brandenburg’s second supplementary budget for 2024 no longer 
provides for new emergency borrowing. The reason for this is a ruling by the state’s 
constitutional court. It decided at the end of June that the recourse made to 
emergency borrowing in the state’s original two-year budget of 2023‑24 was invalid. 
The state is not required to adjust those measures that have already been 
implemented. However, it appears that the conditions attached to emergency 
borrowing were too stringent for the government to use it for outstanding measures. 
The state parliament instead adopted a second 2024 supplementary budget, which 
now uses reserves for this purpose. State constitutional courts are currently examining 
the use of emergency borrowing in Bavaria, North Rhine-Westphalia and Saxony. There 
also appear to be plans in Bremen and Schleswig-Holstein to examine this.
North Rhine-Westphalia is amending how it applies its debt brake: it will take 
account of cyclical effects in the future and will take on cyclical debt for the first 
time this year. The state’s debt brake already allows for cyclical new borrowing, but 
North Rhine-Westphalia has not yet made use of this option. Its draft supplementary 
budget now justifies borrowing authorisations of €2 billion in response to cyclical 
burdens. This is consistent with the economic slack estimated by the Federal 
Government in April 2024. Under the state’s debt brake, cyclical borrowing will be 
repaid using future cyclical increases in revenue. Such additional revenue will then not 
be available for other expenditure. In this respect, the arrangement protects against 
procyclical fiscal policy.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 1223 Social security funds
3.1 Pension insurance scheme
3.1.1 Outlook for 2024 and 2025
The statutory pension insurance scheme recorded a surplus of just over €1½ billion 
in the second quarter of 2024. This was €½ billion lower than in the previous year, as 
central government cut its funds and the number of pensions paid grew markedly. 
Rising by 5½%, revenue went up sharply. Excluding central government’s funding cut, 


Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 123the rise would have been just under ½ percentage point higher. At 6 %, expenditure 
growth was even stronger: in addition to the pension adjustment of just over 4½% in 
mid-2023, this was also because the number of pensions paid rose markedly.
Looking at 2024 as a whole, a balanced budget appears possible for the pension 
insurance scheme (previous year: +€1½ billion).  The surplus shrank by €1 billion year 
on year in the first half of 2024. However, the outlook for the second half of the year is 
less negative. In particular, earnings subject to compulsory contributions are expected 
to increasingly take the place of tax and social contribution-exempt inflation 
compensation bonuses. Contributions are therefore likely to grow significantly more 
strongly in the second half of the year. At 4½%, the pension adjustment in July was also 
slightly weaker than in the previous year. These two factors are likely to markedly 
outweigh the additional expenditure on pensions for reduced earning capacity. Since 
July 2024, the pension insurance scheme has been paying a flat-rate supplement to 
persons who began drawing their reduced earning capacity pensions between 2001 
and 2018. This supplement is expected to cost almost €1½ billion in the second half of 
the year. As in the first half of the year, the reduction in central government funds will 
lower the budget balance by just over €½ billion.
A deficit is expected next year.  This is because expenditure is likely to see further fairly 
dynamic growth. The pension adjustment in mid-2025 is expected to be on a par with 
this year’s and, due to demographic factors, the number of pensions paid is set to 
increase markedly. This will be accompanied by additional expenditure of another 
almost €1½ billion on the supplement to pensions for reduced earning capacity that 
was introduced in 2024. Contribution receipts are also likely to grow at a continued 
strong pace, partly on account of tax and social contribution-exempt inflation 
compensation bonuses no longer being paid out (see above). However, central 
government’s draft budget for 2025 envisages an ad hoc cut of just over €1 billion in 
central government funds (see ). Central government had already Plans for 2025
reduced its funding by just over €1 billion per year for the years 2024 to 2027 in order 
to relieve the pressure on its budget. Such ad hoc cuts in central government funding 
based on its budgetary situation will ultimately put pressure on future contribution 
payers, as the pension insurance scheme’s reserves are being depleted more quickly. 
Overall, confidence in the pension insurance scheme could be strengthened if central 
government made funds available subject to clear rules. 20) 
 21) 
20 For information on demographic developments, see . Deutsche Bundesbank (2023)
21 One approach would be to align central government funding with the non-contribution-related benefits of 
the pension insurance scheme in a rule-based manner; see also  and Social Advisory Deutsche Bundesbank (2024c)
Council (2023).

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 1243.1.2 Reform options to strengthen the potential labour force
The Federal Government intends to make working beyond the statutory retirement 
age more financially attractive. It intends to completely exempt employees’ wages 
and salaries from contributions to the pension and unemployment insurance schemes 
once they have passed the statutory retirement age. At present, only the employee 
contribution is no longer payable in such circumstances. Government plans would see 
remuneration generally being paid to the insured person in full in future, i.e. without 
deducting the employer contribution either. This makes sense, as the employer 
contribution has thus far been a special levy for such employees: employees do not 
initially accrue any additional entitlements in this way. They can acquire additional 
entitlements exclusively in the statutory pension insurance scheme (not in the 
unemployment insurance scheme) by insuring themselves on a voluntary basis. If they 
do so, they must pay both the employer and employee contributions to the statutory 
pension insurance scheme. This option should remain in place if the change is 
implemented.
In addition, the Federal Government plans to give employees who postpone their 
retirement the choice between two types of pension benefits in future:
As is the case now, they can receive regular supplements to their later monthly 
pension payments. Alternatively, they could opt for a social contribution-exempt 
pension deferral bonus in future.
A one-off payment of pension entitlements would be incompatible with the pay-
as-you-go pension insurance scheme: pension entitlements would then be paid 
out early. This would result in expenditure rising more strongly at the current end 
under otherwise identical conditions.
Giving insured persons options will tend to increase overall expenditure. This is 
because insured persons will choose the option that is likely to be the most 
beneficial for them. More complex rules will also increase the need to seek advice.
Under the plans, the bonus will also be tax-free. Special tax advantages make 
taxation more complex and the tax base more patchy and create incentives for 
tax planning (see ). Federal Government plans tax concessions
Overall, there is a strong case for not giving this special employment status and 
advance pension payments preferential tax treatment over other employment and 
pensions. A plausible move would be to remove any disincentives or obstacles to 
employment beyond the statutory retirement age. To this end, the supplements, in 
particular, would have to be formulated appropriately in actuarial terms.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 125It would be advisable to dismantle existing early retirement incentives and to link 
the statutory retirement age after 2030 to life expectancy.  At present, full pensions 
without any deductions after 45 years of contributions are a financial incentive for early 
retirement, and the deductions for early retirement could be set too low.  Moreover, 
there are no plans to raise the statutory retirement age further after 2030. The latter 
will lead to an ever-decreasing ratio of years of employment to years of retirement as 
life expectancy rises. It would make more sense to change these two factors rather 
than to combat them with special tax advantages. This would mean ending the option 
of early retirement without any deductions and applying deductions that are 
appropriate in actuarial terms. After 2030, the statutory retirement age could be linked 
to life expectancy. These measures will consistently promote longer working lives as life 
expectancy increases. They will support economic growth and the government revenue 
base and curb pension expenditure. In this way, they will reduce the funding pressure 
on the statutory pension insurance scheme and the central government budget, in 
particular. This will be all the more important if the minimum threshold for the 
replacement rate is extended beyond 2025. The reason for this is that it would further 
increase the pressure on the contribution rate and central government finances. 
Meanwhile, generational capital will bring in only a small amount of additional revenue, 
and this will not be until 2035 onwards. 22) 
 23) 
22 See Pimpertz (2023) for details on deductions in the event of early retirement.
23 For information on the longer-term development of pension funding, see . Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b)

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 1263.2 Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency reported a small deficit in the second quarter of 
2024. In the same quarter of the previous year, it had posted a surplus of just over 
€½ billion.  This was due to a sharp increase in expenditure, particularly on 
unemployment benefits (+18 %) and active labour market policy (+14 %). Spending on 
insolvency benefit was less extensive. However, starting from the already highly 
elevated level of the previous year, it ramped up further still. This resulted in a deficit of 
just under €½ billion for insolvency benefit in the second quarter of 2024. 
Administrative expenditure also shot up, with the Federal Employment Agency raising 
transfers to its civil servants’ pension fund sharply.  At 6 %, Federal Employment 
Agency revenue also grew substantially, but to a much lesser extent than expenditure.
The Federal Employment Agency may run a surplus for the year as a whole. In year-
on-year terms (2023: +€3 billion), however, this will constitute a significant 
deterioration. According to the plans, revenue will increase by 5½%. This is consistent 
with the growth after the first half of the year. In the second half of the year, 
contributions could increase somewhat more strongly, with earnings subject to 
 24) 
24 As usual, the fund is disregarded here. The larger transfer increases its surplus.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 127compulsory contributions increasingly taking the place of tax and social contribution-
exempt inflation compensation bonuses. However, expenditure is likely to continue 
rising at a significantly stronger pace than revenue: the increase in unemployment 
benefits is not yet letting up and active labour market policy expenditure remains high.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 128List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a), German government budget in times of 
, Monthly Report, February 2024, pp. crisis – developments in the period 2020 to 2023
59‑64.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), , Monthly Report, May 2024. Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024c), , Monthly Report, February 2024, pp. Public finances
57‑82.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023), , Monthly Report, November 2023, pp. Public finance
61‑85.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022), , Inflation-induced bracket creep in the income tax scale
Monthly Report, June 2022, pp. 63‑73.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), Federal debt: allocate premia on accruals basis in 
, Monthly Report, June 2021, pp. 47‑51. budgetary interest expenditure
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Key central government budget data in connection with 
, Monthly Report, February 2016, pp. 68‑69. the debt brake
Deutsche Bundesbank (2011), The debt brake in Germany – key aspects and 
, Monthly Report, October 2011, pp. 15‑39. implementation
Deutscher Bundestag (2024), Entwurf eines Gesetzes über die Feststellung des 
Bundeshaushaltsplans für das Haushaltsjahr 2025, Drucksache 20/12400 .
Federal Ministry of Finance (2024), Bundesregierung gleicht Mehrbedarfe im 
Kernhaushalt 2024 sowie im Klima- und Transformationsfonds aus , press release No 12
/2024, July 2024.
Pimpertz, J. (2023), „Versicherungsmathematisch faire” Abschläge bei vorgezogenem 
Rentenbezug – eine systematische Betrachtung der Budget-, Belastungs- und 
Anreizneutralität, in -IWTrends , Vol. 49, No 4, January 2023, pp. 85‑105.
Social Advisory Council (2023), Gutachten des Sozialbeirats, Jahresgutachten 2023, 
November 2023.

Public finances
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – August 2024 129

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
024 
1•  2 August

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes  bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20•
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
2• 024   2 August

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43•
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
5. Yields on German securities  .........................................................................................  53•
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54•
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55•
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56•
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58•
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58•
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59•
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59•
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60•
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
024 
3•  2 August

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61•
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61•
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62•
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62•
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63•
12. Maastricht debt by creditor  .........................................................................................  63•
13. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64•
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66•
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67•
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68•
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69•
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69•
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70•
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71•
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72•
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72•
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73•
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75•
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76•
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77•
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78•
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78•
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79•
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80•
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81•
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82•
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic   and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82•
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
4•  024   2 August

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 €STR  5,6Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  7
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2022 Nov. 2.1 4.5 4.6 4.4 4.8 5.2 0.2 1.37 2.7
Dec. 0.2 3.4 3.8 3.8 3.9 4.4 0.9 1.57 2.8
2023 Jan. – 1.3 2.5 3.0 3.1 3.0 3.7 1.6 1.90 2.9
Feb. – 3.1 1.7 2.5 2.5 2.6 3.3 2.1 2.28 3.0
Mar. – 4.7 1.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.9 2.5 2.57 3.1
Apr. – 5.7 0.5 1.4 1.5 1.4 2.4 2.6 2.90 3.0
May – 7.0 – 0.1 0.9 0.9 0.9 2.3 3.3 3.08 3.0
June – 8.0 – 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.4 1.6 3.5 3.24 3.0
July – 9.1 – 1.4 – 0.4 – 0.4 0.1 1.3 3.9 3.40 3.1
Aug. – 10.4 – 2.4 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.1 0.7 4.4 3.64 3.2
Sep. – 9.9 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 1.2 – 0.4 0.4 4.7 3.75 3.3
Oct. – 10.0 – 2.2 – 1.0 – 1.0 – 0.5 0.4 5.3 3.90 3.5
Nov. – 9.5 – 1.9 – 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.7 0.2 5.0 3.90 3.3
Dec. – 8.5 – 0.9 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.4 0.4 4.6 3.90 2.7
2024 Jan. – 8.6 – 1.1 0.1 0.2 – 0.4 0.4 5.1 3.90 2.8
Feb. – 7.8 – 0.6 0.4 0.5 – 0.3 0.8 5.0 3.91 2.9
Mar. – 6.6 – 0.2 0.9 0.9 – 0.2 0.8 5.1 3.91 2.9
Apr. – 5.9 0.1 1.3 1.2 0.0 0.8 5.0 3.91 3.0
May – 5.0 0.6 1.5 1.7 – 0.1 0.5 4.6 3.91 3.0
June – 3.4 1.3 2.2 ... 0.2 0.8 4.5 3.75 3.1
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.66 3.0
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 EuroShort-Term Rate.  6 See also footnotes to Table VI.3, p. 43●. 7 GDP-weighted yield on
ten-year government bonds. Countries included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT,
GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assetsReference
rate 
vis-á-vis the
US dollar Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2022 Nov. +11,675 + 5,514 –22,018 –32,401 –32,225 + 3,494 +38,596 + 518 1.0201 95.7 92.2
Dec. +30,757 + 9,240 +63,792 +79,964 +52,268 –16,673 –56,575 + 4,808 1.0589 96.8 92.6
2023 Jan. –16,127 –14,473 + 1,049 –14,373 +22,276 – 5,068 + 6,861 – 8,646 1.0769 97.1 92.8
Feb. +14,206 +20,610 –10,152 +34,568 –39,111 + 8,732 – 2,988 –11,354 1.0715 97.0 93.1
Mar. +30,270 +38,987 +68,146 + 9,148 –92,070 – 3,321 +152,937 + 1,453 1.0706 97.3 93.2
Apr. + 8,277 + 7,348 – 6,231 –29,333 +67,239 – 1,507 –40,769 – 1,863 1.0968 98.4 94.2
May –10,717 +15,447 –18,078 –58,134 +43,581 + 7,018 –11,903 + 1,360 1.0868 98.0 93.6
June +32,406 +32,585 +75,618 +82,370 –42,091 –10,329 +43,283 + 2,385 1.0840 98.2 93.8
July +25,549 +21,945 +39,707 –29,594 +51,761 – 8,097 +25,239 + 398 1.1058 99.2 95.0
Aug. +25,057 +21,746 +10,921 + 1,863 – 6,851 + 3,823 +10,784 + 1,301 1.0909 99.0 95.0
Sep. +32,885 +28,144 +43,576 +17,411 –57,369 + 3,176 +84,232 – 3,874 1.0684 98.5 94.6
Oct. +14,816 +14,159 +44,847 + 3,358 –12,005 +17,054 +32,902 + 3,538 1.0563 98.0 94.1
Nov. +32,629 +33,319 +28,445 + 1,836 +19,914 + 1,072 + 4,246 + 1,376 1.0808 98.7 94.6
Dec. +40,473 +28,842 +47,040 –13,043 –48,162 + 4,853 +101,916 + 1,476 1.0903 98.2 93.9
2024 Jan. +26,745 +26,779 +39,945 + 9,663 –19,839 +11,982 +37,318 + 821 1.0905 98.4 94.4
Feb. +35,523 +36,897 +14,865 +49,381 –13,543 +11,358 –33,197 + 866 1.0795 98.1 94.1
Mar. +43,103 +38,121 +57,195 + 9,244 +17,800 –11,891 +42,574 – 532 1.0872 98.8 94.8
Apr. +32,618 +32,675 +13,621 +33,257 –22,165 + 6,592 – 4,867 + 804 1.0728 98.6 p 94.5
May + 9,585 +31,591 +25,997 +20,171 – 825 – 2,822 + 7,830 + 1,642 1.0812 98.9 p 94.8
June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0759 98.5 p 94.5
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0844 99.0 p 95.2
see also Tables XII. 9 and 11, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.
3 Bundesbank calculation. Vis-á-vis the currencies of the extended EER group oftranding partners (fixed composition).  4 Based on consumer price indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Croatia Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2021 6.1 6.9 3.6 7.2 2.8 6.9 8.4 16.2 8.3 13.0 6.7
2022 3.5 3.0 1.7 –0.5 1.3 2.6 5.6 8.6 4.0 7.0 3.0
2023 0.4 1.4 –0.3 –3.0 –1.2 0.9 2.0 –5.5 0.9 3.1 –0.3
2023 Q1 1.3 1.7 0.6 –3.9 0.2 1.4 2.1 –0.2 2.5 2.9 0.7
Q2 0.5 1.3 –0.4 –2.7 –1.0 0.8 3.0 –3.9 0.4 3.8 –0.6
Q3 0.1 1.3 –0.7 –2.8 –2.1 0.5 1.9 –8.4 0.4 1.4 –0.6
Q4 0.2 1.2 –0.4 –2.7 –1.6 1.0 1.1 –9.1 0.5 4.4 –0.5
2024 Q1 0.5 1.3 –0.8 –2.1 –1.6 1.3 1.9 –4.7 0.7 3.9 0.1
Q2 0.6 ... 0.3 –1.7 ... 0.7 ... –1.4 ... ... 0.1
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2021 8.8 16.8 4.6 12.8 4.3 5.5 10.4 28.3 12.3 6.3 6.6
2022 2.3 –0.7 –0.3 –2.3 4.0 0.0 2.5 18.9 0.3 1.6 0.8
2023 –2.3 –5.4 –1.9 –8.8 –2.4 0.6 2.3 –7.2 –2.0 –0.1 –3.6
2023 Q1 0.7 –2.9 0.9 –7.9 0.3 –0.8 2.3 7.8 –0.7 –1.7 –4.3
Q2 –1.0 –4.3 –0.4 –12.9 –3.8 1.2 1.2 4.2 –3.5 0.1 –7.4
Q3 –4.9 –6.9 –3.5 –9.8 –2.9 0.5 –0.2 –21.6 –2.5 –0.4 –2.4
Q4 –4.0 –7.4 –4.5 –4.3 –3.2 1.8 6.0 –12.8 –1.5 1.6 –0.1
2024 Q1 –4.7 –6.5 –5.6 –7.0 –3.2 0.3 3.6 –19.4 –3.5 –4.0 –0.3
Q2 –3.5 –1.8 p–5.0 –3.1 –3.0 –1.2 9.4 p–10.5 –3.0 –4.6 –4.6
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2021 81.5 80.1 84.9 78.1 81.2 81.1 75.6 78.0 77.1 75.0 75.3
2022 82.2 79.0 85.2 71.7 81.0 81.8 75.9 79.8 78.9 77.0 75.0
2023 80.7 75.7 83.4 67.3 76.6 81.2 75.2 ... 77.5 77.2 72.9
2023 Q2 81.3 77.2 84.2 70.7 76.4 82.0 73.7 ... 78.0 78.2 73.7
Q3 80.2 75.0 82.9 62.6 77.4 80.6 76.3 ... 77.4 78.4 72.7
Q4 79.6 73.9 81.9 64.6 73.6 81.3 75.9 ... 76.5 74.7 72.3
2024 Q1 79.2 74.0 81.3 65.6 73.3 80.9 73.4 ... 75.5 75.9 71.4
Q2 78.9 74.4 80.2 65.8 74.6 80.7 81.1 ... 76.0 74.2 73.0
Q3 77.7 74.4 77.4 64.9 76.4 81.6 78.2 ... 75.5 73.8 72.1
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2021 7.8 e 6.3 3.6 e 6.2 e 7.7 e 7.9 e 14.8 e 6.3 e 9.5 e 7.6 e 7.6
2022 6.7 e 5.5 p 3.1 e 5.6 e 6.8 e 7.3 e 12.5 e 4.5 e 8.1 e 6.7 e 6.9
2023 6.6 e 5.5 p 3.0 e 6.4 e 7.2 e 7.3 e 11.1 e 4.3 e 7.7 e 6.1 e 6.5
2024 Feb. 6.5 5.7 3.3 7.6 7.7 7.4 11.3 4.1 7.3 5.5 6.9
Mar. 6.5 5.7 3.3 7.6 8.5 7.4 10.6 4.2 7.1 5.5 6.8
Apr. 6.4 5.8 3.3 7.5 8.3 7.3 10.4 4.3 6.9 5.4 6.8
May 6.4 5.9 3.4 7.4 8.2 7.4 10.3 4.4 6.9 5.3 6.7
June 6.5 5.9 3.4 7.4 8.4 7.4 9.6 4.5 7.0 5.3 6.7
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.7 ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2021 2.6 3.2 5 3.2 4.5 2.1 2.1 0.6 2.4 1.9 2.7 3.2
2022 8.4 10.3 8.7 19.4 7.2 5.9 9.3 8.1 8.7 10.7 17.2
2023 6 5.4 2.3 6.0 9.1 4.3 5.7 4.2 5.2 5.9 8.4 9.1
2024 Feb. 2.6 3.6 2.7 4.4 1.1 3.2 3.1 2.3 0.8 4.8 0.6
Mar. 2.4 3.8 2.3 4.1 0.6 2.4 3.4 1.7 1.2 4.9 1.0
Apr. 2.4 4.9 2.4 3.1 0.6 2.4 3.2 1.6 0.9 4.7 1.1
May 2.6 4.9 2.8 3.1 0.4 2.6 2.4 2.0 0.8 4.3 0.0
June 2.5 5.4 2.5 2.8 0.5 2.5 2.5 1.5 0.9 3.5 1.5
July 2.6 5.4 2.6 3.5 0.6 2.7 3.0 1.5 1.6 3.3 0.8
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
2021 –5.2 –5.4 –3.6 –2.5 –2.8 –6.6 –7.0 –1.5 –8.7 –2.5 –7.2
2022 –3.7 –3.6 –2.5 –1.0 –0.4 –4.8 –2.5 1.7 –8.6 0.1 –4.6
2023 –3.6 –4.4 –2.4 –3.4 –2.7 –5.5 –1.6 1.7 –7.4 –0.7 –2.2
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
2021 94.8 107.9 69.0 17.8 72.6 113.0 195.0 54.4 147.1 77.5 44.4
2022 90.8 104.3 66.1 18.5 73.5 111.9 172.7 44.4 140.5 67.8 41.8
2023 88.6 105.2 63.6 19.6 75.8 110.6 161.9 43.7 137.3 63.0 43.6
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
6.3 7.2 12.5 6.3 4.2 5.7 4.8 8.2 6.4 9.9 2021
2.4 1.4 8.1 5.0 4.8 6.8 1.9 2.5 5.8 5.1 2022
–0.3 –1.1 5.7 0.1 –0.8 2.3 1.6 1.6 2.5 2.5 2023
–2.4 –1.3 6.3 1.9 2.2 2.7 0.2 1.1 4.5 3.0 2023 Q1
0.8 –0.4 5.0 –0.3 –1.7 2.1 1.8 1.7 2.1 2.2 Q2
0.3 –1.9 7.2 –0.7 –2.0 2.0 2.0 1.3 1.5 2.6 Q3
–0.2 –0.8 4.4 –0.5 –1.5 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.0 2.1 Q4
3.0 –0.4 4.6 –0.6 –1.2 1.5 2.7 2.1 2.5 3.5 2024 Q1
1.9 ... ... 0.8 ... ... 1.9 0.7 3.3 3.6 Q2
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
20.1 8.4 –0.9 4.0 11.2 3.9 10.6 9.9 7.8 6.0 2021
9.3 –1.3 1.5 2.6 5.7 0.6 –4.4 2.1 2.9 2.6 2022
–5.2 –5.7 7.3 –0.0 –0.7 –3.1 0.4 –4.9 –1.1 2.2 2023
–11.7 –4.4 15.9 3.1 2.2 1.4 –2.9 –3.4 0.7 0.3 2023 Q1
0.1 –6.9 7.8 –0.6 –0.4 –5.2 0.3 –3.4 –2.1 1.3 Q2
–5.5 –7.7 2.1 –0.7 –1.5 –4.9 1.1 –8.9 –1.8 2.8 Q3
–3.2 –3.8 4.5 –1.8 –3.1 –3.5 3.4 –4.1 –1.2 4.0 Q4
–0.8 –4.3 –2.4 –2.5 –4.9 1.2 1.3 –2.9 1.3 4.2 2024 Q1
0.0 p –2.6 p 4.0 p –2.4 p –4.3 0.9 2.0 p –2.8 p 0.1 p 6.3 Q2
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
76.7 82.0 76.8 82.4 87.1 79.1 82.2 84.5 77.8 51.3 2021
77.8 80.7 64.7 83.7 87.7 81.9 83.3 84.9 78.7 58.2 2022
68.4 73.1 68.1 81.9 85.3 81.7 82.1 83.1 76.9 61.7 2023
69.2 75.5 53.3 82.5 86.2 83.5 84.0 83.9 76.3 60.9 2023 Q2
68.0 72.0 69.4 81.3 84.7 80.9 83.0 82.8 76.2 63.0 Q3
68.5 70.5 84.1 80.9 83.3 80.9 81.0 82.4 77.8 63.2 Q4
70.6 74.8 75.6 78.8 84.0 81.0 80.1 80.6 77.2 65.1 2024 Q1
70.3 75.3 76.4 79.6 83.3 81.2 77.6 80.8 77.7 63.5 Q2
71.5 76.0 81.4 77.7 81.7 81.3 81.3 81.6 77.9 63.0 Q3
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
e 7.2 e 5.4 e 3.8 e 4.2 e 6.2 e 6.8 e 6.9 e 4.8 e 15.0 e 7.5 2021
e 5.9 e 4.6 e 3.5 e 3.6 e 4.8 e 6.2 e 6.2 e 4.0 e 13.0 e 6.8 2022
e 6.9 e 5.2 e 3.1 e 3.5 e 5.1 e 6.5 e 5.9 e 3.7 e 12.2 e 6.1 2023
7.5 5.6 3.0 3.7 4.7 6.6 5.6 3.3 11.8 5.5 2024 Feb.
7.5 5.6 3.0 3.6 4.9 6.5 5.6 3.3 11.7 5.0 Mar.
7.5 5.6 3.1 3.7 4.8 6.4 5.6 3.3 11.7 4.5 Apr.
7.7 5.7 3.2 3.6 5.1 6.5 5.5 3.2 11.6 4.2 May
8.2 5.7 3.1 3.6 5.3 6.7 5.5 3.1 11.5 4.4 June
... ... ... 3.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... July
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
4.6 3.5 0.7 2.8 2.8 0.9 2.8 2.0 3.0 2.3 2021
18.9 8.2 6.1 11.6 8.6 8.1 12.1 9.3 8.3 8.1 2022
8.7 2.9 5.6 4.1 7.7 5.3 11.0 7.2 3.4 3.9 2023
1.1 3.2 3.0 2.7 4.0 2.3 3.8 3.4 2.9 2.1 2024 Feb.
0.4 3.2 2.7 3.1 4.1 2.6 2.7 3.4 3.3 1.6 Mar.
0.4 3.0 2.4 2.6 3.4 2.3 2.4 3.0 3.4 2.1 Apr.
0.9 3.2 2.3 2.7 3.3 3.8 2.6 2.5 3.8 3.0 May
1.0 2.8 2.2 3.4 3.1 3.1 2.4 1.6 3.6 3.0 June
1.1 2.7 2.3 3.5 2.9 2.7 3.0 1.4 2.9 2.4 July
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
–1.1 0.5 –7.6 –2.2 –5.8 –2.9 –5.2 –4.6 –6.7 –1.8 2021
–0.6 –0.3 –5.5 –0.1 –3.3 –0.3 –1.7 –3.0 –4.7 2.7 2022
–0.8 –1.3 –4.9 –0.3 –2.7 1.2 –4.9 –2.5 –3.6 3.1 2023
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
43.4 24.5 53.9 51.7 82.5 124.5 61.1 74.4 116.8 99.3 2021
38.1 24.7 51.6 50.1 78.4 112.4 57.7 72.5 111.6 85.6 2022
38.3 25.7 50.4 46.5 77.8 99.1 56.0 69.2 107.7 77.3 2023
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of valueadded tax between July and December 2020.  6 Including Croatia from 2023 onwards.
7 According to Maastricht Treaty definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2022 Nov. 93.8 84.8 31.8 9.0 14.3 15.1 –40.3 –55.3 31.6 1.4 0.2 34.0 –3.9
Dec. –121.1 –87.9 –0.5 –33.1 –41.3 2.5 –254.6 –257.1 50.9 11.0 0.1 0.7 39.1
2023 Jan. – 9.9 –0.4 –15.9 –9.5 –4.1 12.5 127.9 115.4 28.0 –6.4 2.2 57.3 –25.1
Feb. 7.9 –12.9 3.3 20.8 29.8 6.8 –1.4 –8.2 15.5 –1.1 1.6 10.3 4.7
Mar. 29.9 37.1 11.7 –7.2 –9.7 74.4 111.8 37.3 27.9 10.3 1.3 5.8 10.6
Apr. – 5.6 27.9 29.5 –33.5 –29.3 –21.2 –21.7 –0.5 10.5 9.4 1.4 3.9 –4.2
May – 0.2 45.5 33.2 –45.7 –50.0 4.4 22.2 17.8 31.8 –0.5 2.4 27.1 2.8
June 5.1 –9.1 –12.3 14.3 21.1 109.5 13.5 –96.1 43.6 1.2 2.8 26.8 12.8
July –45.5 7.0 5.2 –52.5 –52.1 37.0 109.0 72.0 29.1 0.9 2.9 18.9 6.5
Aug. –56.2 –67.0 –12.2 10.7 13.4 31.4 61.8 30.4 20.8 –2.4 4.0 9.3 9.9
Sep. 36.9 33.5 –1.6 3.5 2.6 62.7 –106.7 –169.4 43.3 15.3 5.0 11.2 11.9
Oct. –33.7 6.0 –10.4 –39.7 –39.3 54.6 49.4 –5.2 23.8 –9.3 4.7 26.3 2.2
Nov. 38.1 46.9 –1.1 –8.8 –4.8 59.0 51.3 –7.7 17.1 –4.7 5.6 22.6 –6.3
Dec. –58.8 –47.2 2.7 –11.6 –20.5 26.4 –100.2 –126.5 25.5 12.5 5.9 4.5 2.6
2024 Jan. – 8.8 –1.5 25.7 –7.3 –7.0 118.0 111.8 –6.3 66.1 –3.6 7.0 61.3 1.4
Feb. 38.9 38.2 6.8 0.7 11.2 –15.6 98.2 113.8 6.1 0.8 4.8 15.8 –15.2
Mar. 56.1 48.1 4.1 8.0 8.3 64.2 96.6 32.4 39.6 5.0 3.0 34.4 –2.8
Apr. 32.1 23.6 1.2 8.5 4.4 45.3 7.5 –37.7 1.2 –7.4 2.5 19.7 –13.6
May –24.6 –6.7 –1.3 –17.9 –15.1 43.7 73.5 29.8 9.2 2.2 1.7 –0.5 5.8
June 66.9 50.8 –4.2 16.1 13.0 72.0 –7.0 –79.0 38.7 4.1 1.1 3.6 30.0
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2022 Nov. 25.4 26.2 1.4 –0.9 0.8 38.0 8.9 –29.1 9.8 1.9 0.2 7.1 0.6
Dec. –28.8 –19.6 –2.4 –9.3 –8.2 –37.1 –71.9 –34.8 –0.5 –3.7 0.4 –1.9 4.8
2023 Jan. 27.5 16.9 –0.2 10.7 8.9 63.0 29.8 –33.3 –14.3 2.7 1.0 3.1 –21.0
Feb. 9.2 8.3 –0.2 0.9 1.8 58.4 –2.0 –60.3 3.3 0.6 1.2 –2.1 3.5
Mar. 4.8 8.1 6.4 –3.4 –3.7 –12.4 10.5 23.0 15.5 6.0 1.6 4.4 3.5
Apr. – 3.7 13.0 1.2 –16.7 –20.2 62.7 –15.2 –77.9 5.0 2.0 1.5 –3.0 4.5
May 5.0 11.3 –1.3 –6.3 –4.7 9.6 16.5 6.9 16.9 2.7 2.2 6.1 5.8
June 1.5 –1.9 4.1 3.4 5.4 7.6 –6.6 –14.3 9.7 –0.9 2.7 –0.3 8.2
July 5.1 6.8 –1.1 –1.7 –4.7 34.0 8.3 –25.7 24.9 –0.3 3.0 10.2 12.0
Aug. – 6.8 –5.0 –6.1 –1.8 0.3 25.7 –5.3 –31.0 6.6 –2.7 2.7 0.2 6.4
Sep. – 8.2 1.7 0.8 –9.9 –13.3 – 0.1 –2.8 –2.7 21.1 0.1 2.9 11.6 6.4
Oct. – 2.0 0.1 –0.2 –2.1 –5.2 16.2 4.9 –11.3 11.8 –0.1 3.0 5.9 3.0
Nov. 12.2 13.1 –1.1 –0.8 1.8 13.7 –3.4 –17.1 10.6 3.7 3.4 1.0 2.4
Dec. –18.0 –11.1 2.5 –6.9 –5.1 –17.4 –10.6 6.8 8.8 3.2 2.5 1.7 1.4
2024 Jan. 11.1 2.0 –0.5 9.1 6.7 74.5 20.7 –53.7 –1.8 –0.1 2.5 12.7 –17.0
Feb. 10.6 20.2 6.8 –9.6 –7.6 –17.0 40.0 57.1 –6.9 –1.6 2.4 7.7 –15.3
Mar. 8.3 4.3 0.5 4.0 2.0 6.6 4.2 –2.4 –5.3 1.7 1.7 2.4 –11.1
Apr. –13.5 –3.7 –3.9 –9.8 –13.1 41.3 4.2 –37.1 16.0 2.0 0.9 11.2 1.9
May 5.4 14.6 5.7 –9.2 –7.8 17.6 35.0 17.4 19.8 2.7 0.5 5.5 11.1
June 4.2 –4.1 –2.7 8.3 5.1 –25.0 –15.5 9.4 19.7 –0.7 0.4 –2.0 22.0
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
–10.2 1.1 0.0 70.1 20.9 –30.6 –3.5 –27.1 58.8 – 7.3 27.4 22.3 16.4 2022 Nov.
–84.6 –64.2 0.0 2.7 12.5 –61.6 11.6 –73.2 60.8 13.3 –46.5 2.8 10.4 Dec.
–38.8 129.3 0.0 –133.7 –149.8 –232.0 –13.3 –218.7 76.0 6.1 35.0 6.8 – 8.1 2023 Jan.
20.3 21.2 0.0 –42.0 –63.4 –135.7 –3.5 –132.1 72.2 0.0 – 2.2 –6.4 29.8 Feb.
31.3 30.7 0.0 16.9 10.2 –103.9 3.9 –107.8 119.6 – 5.5 –25.7 20.6 9.4 Mar.
–27.2 –10.5 0.0 – 0.8 –17.9 –52.1 4.1 –56.3 45.6 –11.4 6.7 11.5 0.2 Apr.
–104.4 87.0 0.0 –30.4 –44.9 –94.3 1.7 –96.0 52.9 – 3.5 29.6 1.5 4.2 May
24.5 44.9 0.0 6.6 22.3 –60.9 3.1 –64.0 94.4 –11.2 –11.2 –6.2 – 3.7 June
–29.1 6.1 0.0 0.3 –28.3 –91.0 3.0 –94.1 73.3 –10.6 4.1 10.6 – 0.9 July
–20.0 5.3 0.0 –43.4 –45.1 –101.9 –7.6 –94.2 81.1 –24.3 4.4 8.4 0.8 Aug.
35.1 –14.7 0.0 46.5 44.6 –11.6 –3.1 – 8.5 79.8 –23.6 – 5.8 –0.7 – 2.1 Sep.
–28.5 61.3 0.0 –44.9 –87.9 –169.1 –4.4 –164.8 102.9 –21.7 25.2 18.8 8.4 Oct.
–48.4 44.9 0.0 76.2 54.4 18.3 –2.9 21.3 48.8 –12.7 22.3 16.9 –10.2 Nov.
14.4 –223.9 0.0 166.9 166.2 71.7 13.8 57.9 75.8 18.7 –27.1 14.4 – 2.1 Dec.
18.9 146.1 0.0 –132.5 –181.6 –238.2 –17.1 –221.1 61.0 – 4.4 27.2 30.8 1.8 2024 Jan.
9.1 4.7 0.0 1.2 15.0 –31.1 –0.9 –30.3 55.8 – 9.6 5.2 –11.4 – 5.4 Feb.
–26.8 –26.5 0.0 121.6 103.7 57.9 5.2 52.7 46.7 – 0.8 23.9 15.7 – 9.2 Mar.
23.9 41.2 0.0 25.4 –24.0 –18.6 2.5 –21.0 –2.0 – 3.4 6.5 22.6 6.0 Apr.
–24.3 17.2 0.0 21.6 48.1 32.2 2.8 29.4 10.0 5.9 – 3.5 –21.5 – 6.0 May
4.1 –64.5 0.0 137.2 147.0 136.5 7.0 129.6 12.4 – 1.9 8.7 11.8 – 6.9 June
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
22.6 13.6 – 0.0 – 0.3 17.3 12.6 4.3 – 5.5 3.2 0.0 2.7 2022 Nov.
– 16.3 – 24.6 2.1 2.4 – 24.6 – 37.6 19.0 – 4.1 – 2.0 0.1 0.0 Dec.
– 42.9 147.9 2.3 – 5.1 – 0.2 – 37.1 38.4 – 6.5 – 0.1 – 0.2 5.4 2023 Jan.
12.9 50.9 1.1 – 0.7 0.4 – 33.2 32.6 – 8.0 1.3 – 0.1 7.8 Feb.
27.1 – 34.8 2.3 0.9 – 15.5 – 45.7 31.8 – 10.4 – 0.2 0.3 8.7 Mar.
– 39.0 86.7 1.9 0.7 6.3 – 11.7 25.3 – 10.2 0.7 0.2 1.9 Apr.
– 11.8 2.8 2.6 0.9 6.7 – 6.2 18.4 – 10.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 5.1 May
– 9.8 8.4 1.7 1.1 0.8 – 29.2 36.7 – 10.0 – 0.3 – 0.0 3.6 June
– 6.4 20.0 1.6 1.3 0.7 – 21.8 31.5 – 10.3 0.3 0.3 0.8 July
7.4 – 1.5 2.9 – 1.9 6.4 – 21.1 30.4 – 11.2 1.1 0.1 7.1 Aug.
– 11.6 – 12.1 3.6 – 1.7 – 5.7 – 13.3 17.8 – 8.6 – 1.0 0.1 – 0.7 Sep.
– 2.4 2.9 1.5 – 0.5 1.9 – 31.2 38.8 – 9.4 0.8 – 0.1 3.0 Oct.
– 9.5 13.9 1.1 – 0.4 11.1 9.4 11.7 – 10.5 1.1 0.1 – 0.8 Nov.
7.7 – 62.1 2.4 2.8 10.2 – 6.6 25.1 – 5.0 – 1.2 0.1 – 2.2 Dec.
– 6.7 108.3 – 7.4 3.7 – 14.3 – 47.5 37.6 – 9.1 3.0 0.1 1.4 2024 Jan.
– 2.3 0.0 2.4 – 0.6 2.7 – 18.3 27.1 – 7.4 1.0 0.0 0.3 Feb.
2.0 – 2.1 2.9 0.7 20.3 2.8 24.9 – 5.8 – 1.5 0.2 – 0.3 Mar.
– 2.9 23.7 1.8 1.5 – 9.1 – 4.4 6.1 – 5.5 – 0.3 0.2 – 5.2 Apr.
3.5 – 26.8 2.4 0.4 26.5 27.6 5.0 – 4.1 – 0.3 0.1 – 1.8 May
– 4.3 – 39.9 1.6 1.7 3.8 1.3 2.2 – 4.5 0.8 0.1 3.8 June
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2022 May 33,482.1 21,815.9 15,304.1 12,878.2 1,567.8 858.1 6,511.7 1,003.9 5,507.8 7,013.2 4,653.1
June 33,885.7 21,885.6 15,373.2 12,973.4 1,568.7 831.1 6,512.4 1,003.0 5,509.4 7,064.5 4,935.5
July 33,877.3 21,984.3 15,451.1 13,043.7 1,578.2 829.2 6,533.1 1,003.0 5,530.1 7,216.9 4,676.2
Aug. 34,342.9 21,872.4 15,459.5 13,080.1 1,553.7 825.7 6,413.0 996.9 5,416.1 7,301.6 5,168.9
Sep. 34,619.4 21,901.4 15,558.0 13,191.3 1,544.9 821.7 6,343.4 998.1 5,345.2 7,241.7 5,476.3
Oct. 34,548.3 21,890.7 15,552.2 13,190.1 1,532.8 829.3 6,338.6 995.2 5,343.3 7,334.6 5,322.9
Nov. 34,224.5 22,011.6 15,627.3 13,228.2 1,559.0 840.1 6,384.3 990.3 5,394.1 7,206.4 5,006.5
Dec. 33,866.7 21,792.5 15,515.2 13,123.9 1,556.0 835.4 6,277.3 999.1 5,278.2 6,873.4 5,200.8
2023 Jan. 33,815.3 21,883.8 15,553.4 13,173.2 1,544.6 835.6 6,330.3 1,000.3 5,330.0 6,983.9 4,947.6
Feb. 34,097.1 21,862.6 15,545.4 13,159.9 1,541.0 844.6 6,317.2 991.3 5,325.9 7,001.6 5,232.9
Mar. 33,934.8 21,919.3 15,573.5 13,173.8 1,552.3 847.4 6,345.7 995.4 5,350.4 7,099.4 4,916.1
Apr. 33,944.5 21,908.6 15,601.1 13,168.5 1,566.4 866.2 6,307.6 991.1 5,316.5 7,038.3 4,997.6
May 34,131.2 21,919.4 15,651.0 13,186.0 1,595.6 869.4 6,268.4 995.4 5,273.0 7,150.8 5,061.1
June 34,042.4 21,915.1 15,637.2 13,182.3 1,584.4 870.4 6,277.9 988.5 5,289.4 7,065.9 5,061.3
July 34,176.0 21,866.8 15,642.2 13,180.8 1,586.3 875.1 6,224.6 988.2 5,236.4 7,153.2 5,156.0
Aug. 34,228.2 21,811.6 15,573.8 13,123.8 1,576.8 873.2 6,237.8 986.1 5,251.7 7,251.4 5,165.2
Sep. 34,370.6 21,796.4 15,601.8 13,156.3 1,574.6 870.9 6,194.7 987.3 5,207.4 7,195.5 5,378.7
Oct. 34,329.7 21,755.0 15,598.6 13,167.0 1,555.6 876.0 6,156.4 984.1 5,172.3 7,262.4 5,312.3
Nov. 34,125.9 21,851.5 15,660.3 13,220.8 1,558.5 881.0 6,191.3 980.8 5,210.4 7,251.7 5,022.7
Dec. 33,753.2 21,858.4 15,626.8 13,177.4 1,552.1 897.3 6,231.6 989.4 5,242.2 7,143.2 4,751.7
2024 Jan. 33,827.8 21,825.7 15,622.8 13,145.8 1,569.4 907.5 6,202.9 987.6 5,215.3 7,293.2 4,709.0
Feb. 34,001.3 21,839.7 15,653.7 13,167.9 1,569.7 916.2 6,185.9 977.4 5,208.5 7,382.6 4,779.0
Mar. 34,218.2 21,914.2 15,704.4 13,208.5 1,567.2 928.6 6,209.9 976.9 5,232.9 7,546.0 4,758.1
Apr. 34,395.0 21,918.4 15,721.9 13,231.2 1,562.4 928.3 6,196.5 980.4 5,216.1 7,598.3 4,878.2
May 34,359.6 21,895.2 15,720.8 13,231.6 1,559.5 929.6 6,174.4 977.7 5,196.7 7,641.2 4,823.2
June 34,364.8 21,974.0 15,778.2 13,296.8 1,563.8 917.6 6,195.8 981.0 5,214.9 7,685.9 4,704.8
German contribution (€ billion)
2022 May 8,228.4 5,304.5 4,034.5 3,506.0 240.8 287.7 1,270.0 280.3 989.7 1,445.0 1,479.0
June 8,413.5 5,322.6 4,058.9 3,537.6 237.8 283.5 1,263.7 282.5 981.2 1,466.1 1,624.8
July 8,287.9 5,375.0 4,096.1 3,560.3 252.7 283.2 1,278.8 283.6 995.2 1,481.5 1,431.4
Aug. 8,546.0 5,364.5 4,132.0 3,600.0 249.1 282.9 1,232.5 281.5 951.0 1,492.4 1,689.0
Sep. 8,857.6 5,356.3 4,153.9 3,624.8 246.1 283.0 1,202.4 284.3 918.1 1,502.4 1,998.8
Oct. 8,826.7 5,366.0 4,163.6 3,634.6 245.9 283.1 1,202.4 284.8 917.5 1,509.0 1,951.8
Nov. 8,653.9 5,402.0 4,189.2 3,656.3 249.8 283.1 1,212.8 283.4 929.4 1,502.4 1,749.6
Dec. 8,626.1 5,345.2 4,165.8 3,636.7 245.9 283.2 1,179.4 283.2 896.1 1,417.3 1,863.7
2023 Jan. 8,561.4 5,377.1 4,178.3 3,652.7 245.9 279.7 1,198.8 285.0 913.9 1,443.8 1,740.5
Feb. 8,712.0 5,371.7 4,186.6 3,662.2 243.6 280.9 1,185.1 284.0 901.1 1,443.9 1,896.4
Mar. 8,573.5 5,388.1 4,193.6 3,661.9 252.1 279.6 1,194.5 284.2 910.3 1,457.2 1,728.2
Apr. 8,559.3 5,383.7 4,206.2 3,672.7 252.4 281.1 1,177.5 287.7 889.8 1,435.7 1,739.8
May 8,614.3 5,389.9 4,217.4 3,685.4 252.1 279.9 1,172.6 286.1 886.4 1,468.3 1,756.1
June 8,647.9 5,387.4 4,215.9 3,679.0 255.5 281.4 1,171.5 284.2 887.4 1,433.5 1,826.9
July 8,779.6 5,390.2 4,222.0 3,685.7 255.6 280.6 1,168.3 287.2 881.1 1,439.0 1,950.5
Aug. 8,776.6 5,383.7 4,215.6 3,685.5 249.4 280.6 1,168.1 285.0 883.0 1,442.2 1,950.7
Sep. 8,834.2 5,362.1 4,216.4 3,686.3 248.5 281.5 1,145.8 288.4 857.4 1,446.5 2,025.5
Oct. 8,844.5 5,360.6 4,215.5 3,685.5 247.9 282.1 1,145.1 291.6 853.5 1,461.4 2,022.6
Nov. 8,661.3 5,385.7 4,228.0 3,697.3 248.4 282.3 1,157.8 289.7 868.1 1,446.0 1,829.6
Dec. 8,491.7 5,384.9 4,217.3 3,682.2 247.9 287.2 1,167.6 287.1 880.5 1,432.1 1,674.6
2024 Jan. 8,532.9 5,390.7 4,218.3 3,682.5 246.2 289.6 1,172.4 289.5 882.9 1,463.2 1,679.1
Feb. 8,600.8 5,391.4 4,236.7 3,694.8 250.2 291.7 1,154.7 287.7 867.0 1,502.2 1,707.2
Mar. 8,586.9 5,404.4 4,241.0 3,697.7 246.0 297.3 1,163.4 289.8 873.7 1,524.9 1,657.5
Apr. 8,673.8 5,380.1 4,235.7 3,697.3 244.1 294.3 1,144.4 293.1 851.3 1,544.0 1,749.8
May 8,644.6 5,383.0 4,248.9 3,704.9 246.6 297.4 1,134.1 291.8 842.3 1,573.2 1,688.4
June 8,574.0 5,393.0 4,244.8 3,703.4 247.7 293.7 1,148.2 295.0 853.2 1,566.2 1,614.8
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,528.5 15,949.6 14,569.6 14,740.8 9,597.9 684.9 120.2 1,803.2 2,506.6 27.9 2022 May
1,535.1 16,099.7 14,633.8 14,810.3 9,643.8 704.8 123.4 1,800.3 2,510.4 27.5 June
1,543.7 16,183.5 14,738.8 14,937.4 9,735.4 741.0 127.1 1,791.0 2,515.8 27.1 July
1,539.1 16,161.1 14,793.6 14,985.4 9,754.1 781.5 125.9 1,770.0 2,526.0 28.0 Aug.
1,537.7 16,198.7 14,785.5 15,036.3 9,688.0 913.3 125.5 1,756.3 2,525.7 27.6 Sep.
1,537.2 16,095.0 14,708.1 14,936.4 9,507.1 992.6 130.1 1,741.6 2,522.9 42.1 Oct.
1,533.7 16,084.4 14,722.6 14,917.3 9,441.8 1,042.2 134.2 1,740.7 2,516.0 42.3 Nov.
1,545.3 15,996.8 14,766.2 14,929.6 9,373.7 1,099.5 133.9 1,750.1 2,530.0 42.4 Dec.
1,533.4 15,876.1 14,667.2 14,844.5 9,206.0 1,165.1 146.4 1,746.7 2,532.0 48.2 2023 Jan.
1,529.9 15,842.9 14,625.3 14,773.4 9,061.7 1,225.3 157.6 1,747.0 2,531.8 49.9 Feb.
1,533.8 15,891.9 14,649.7 14,788.7 8,967.7 1,313.9 174.0 1,756.9 2,524.8 51.4 Mar.
1,537.9 15,848.9 14,650.2 14,784.8 8,918.2 1,346.2 187.9 1,765.8 2,513.9 52.8 Apr.
1,539.7 15,718.0 14,618.0 14,756.7 8,834.7 1,387.5 200.1 1,768.2 2,511.0 55.2 May
1,542.7 15,760.5 14,649.9 14,755.8 8,755.6 1,455.8 218.3 1,768.4 2,499.8 58.0 June
1,545.9 15,696.0 14,619.8 14,725.4 8,662.9 1,512.2 231.6 1,768.5 2,489.2 60.9 July
1,538.3 15,646.8 14,595.4 14,694.0 8,578.0 1,579.2 240.9 1,765.9 2,465.1 65.0 Aug.
1,535.2 15,756.0 14,654.7 14,766.5 8,569.2 1,647.6 255.2 1,782.7 2,441.7 70.1 Sep.
1,530.8 15,636.6 14,576.9 14,702.2 8,421.3 1,736.5 275.6 1,773.4 2,420.5 74.9 Oct.
1,527.9 15,648.3 14,645.5 14,759.2 8,426.3 1,776.1 286.2 1,782.0 2,408.0 80.6 Nov.
1,541.7 15,822.6 14,816.0 14,927.5 8,489.3 1,826.8 302.1 1,795.3 2,427.3 86.7 Dec.
1,524.1 15,687.2 14,668.3 14,801.5 8,295.5 1,879.2 317.0 1,793.6 2,423.4 92.8 2024 Jan.
1,523.2 15,709.3 14,689.3 14,792.0 8,241.0 1,924.1 325.3 1,790.1 2,413.7 97.8 Feb.
1,528.4 15,792.0 14,786.0 14,897.9 8,297.0 1,964.2 327.5 1,795.6 2,412.7 100.9 Mar.
1,530.9 15,779.5 14,757.1 14,898.9 8,292.0 1,977.6 328.2 1,788.1 2,409.6 103.5 Apr.
1,533.7 15,825.0 14,818.5 14,959.5 8,320.8 1,999.3 328.7 1,789.7 2,415.8 105.2 May
1,540.7 15,990.5 14,964.2 15,083.9 8,423.3 2,019.4 325.7 1,795.0 2,414.1 106.4 June
German contribution (€ billion)
349.4 4,478.3 4,170.7 4,016.7 2,769.9 125.8 29.7 534.8 533.9 22.6 2022 May
349.9 4,517.1 4,194.6 4,031.6 2,787.1 127.8 30.1 531.9 532.3 22.4 June
359.0 4,507.6 4,222.4 4,070.3 2,813.6 142.1 31.0 530.6 530.6 22.3 July
371.5 4,552.6 4,289.4 4,135.2 2,870.1 153.3 30.6 530.7 528.3 22.2 Aug.
371.8 4,541.5 4,267.4 4,135.1 2,834.9 193.7 30.9 530.3 523.0 22.2 Sep.
371.8 4,546.8 4,270.2 4,140.4 2,804.0 233.2 31.6 529.3 519.8 22.4 Oct.
371.5 4,578.7 4,283.7 4,146.3 2,806.0 240.1 32.1 531.0 514.4 22.6 Nov.
374.0 4,534.2 4,260.8 4,119.2 2,764.3 260.2 34.1 527.1 510.4 23.0 Dec.
368.9 4,489.3 4,257.7 4,126.0 2,749.9 286.6 36.9 529.6 499.1 24.0 2023 Jan.
368.1 4,496.6 4,250.9 4,106.5 2,706.5 314.2 39.1 530.3 491.2 25.2 Feb.
369.0 4,505.7 4,236.8 4,090.4 2,667.4 336.4 42.4 536.3 481.0 26.8 Mar.
369.8 4,473.0 4,248.0 4,104.2 2,660.3 360.2 46.1 538.3 471.0 28.3 Apr.
370.7 4,469.7 4,256.0 4,103.8 2,647.5 373.8 50.3 540.9 460.8 30.5 May
371.7 4,460.3 4,259.3 4,096.2 2,616.5 400.5 54.1 541.0 450.9 33.2 June
373.1 4,455.4 4,259.2 4,106.1 2,603.8 426.9 57.6 540.8 440.7 36.2 July
371.2 4,460.4 4,259.8 4,101.7 2,577.8 455.8 61.5 538.1 429.6 38.9 Aug.
369.4 4,448.9 4,258.5 4,104.2 2,568.6 468.0 66.2 538.5 421.1 41.8 Sep.
369.0 4,447.4 4,259.3 4,129.3 2,553.2 507.9 73.1 538.5 411.7 44.8 Oct.
368.6 4,454.3 4,281.0 4,149.1 2,561.8 515.9 79.5 542.6 401.2 48.3 Nov.
371.4 4,470.1 4,290.9 4,150.5 2,539.8 532.4 84.0 547.3 396.2 50.8 Dec.
375.1 4,448.1 4,271.5 4,150.1 2,502.4 569.5 89.5 548.1 387.2 53.4 2024 Jan.
374.5 4,447.8 4,273.8 4,147.4 2,481.0 590.5 94.7 545.6 379.8 55.8 Feb.
375.2 4,475.1 4,300.5 4,166.8 2,483.2 607.5 97.0 547.6 374.1 57.4 Mar.
376.6 4,471.9 4,300.6 4,182.7 2,486.3 620.9 98.9 549.6 368.6 58.4 Apr.
377.0 4,506.4 4,331.5 4,204.0 2,501.4 626.2 100.7 552.3 364.5 58.9 May
378.6 4,503.4 4,332.6 4,196.2 2,501.6 619.0 102.4 553.9 360.1 59.2 June
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2022 May 717.1 491.8 317.7 88.4 22.3 43.3 16.8 3.3 313.0 312.9 593.9 2,037.7 1,337.4
June 786.9 502.5 326.0 90.9 22.9 43.3 16.2 3.2 281.2 281.1 592.9 2,068.9 1,360.7
July 755.9 490.3 303.3 100.4 24.2 42.9 16.2 3.3 306.0 305.9 590.8 2,090.6 1,360.7
Aug. 675.5 500.1 309.7 104.6 24.0 42.5 16.1 3.2 283.8 283.7 597.5 2,113.5 1,375.1
Sep. 683.2 479.1 282.0 111.2 24.5 42.3 16.0 3.2 264.8 264.7 589.1 2,153.5 1,415.1
Oct. 678.1 480.5 287.5 109.2 24.3 41.5 14.7 3.2 268.2 268.2 625.8 2,129.7 1,415.7
Nov. 668.3 498.9 306.5 109.2 25.1 40.8 14.2 3.2 294.8 294.8 648.0 2,159.0 1,441.3
Dec. 583.5 483.7 296.2 103.6 27.2 40.2 13.5 3.0 247.7 247.7 650.9 2,166.2 1,474.6
2023 Jan. 550.6 480.9 283.2 113.2 27.5 40.6 12.8 3.7 283.3 283.3 657.7 2,204.8 1,510.1
Feb. 570.9 498.6 297.5 115.2 28.7 40.3 13.2 3.7 281.6 281.5 651.3 2,259.2 1,531.4
Mar. 602.4 500.8 288.6 125.8 28.4 39.6 14.7 3.7 255.3 255.2 672.0 2,257.0 1,551.1
Apr. 575.3 488.8 278.5 123.3 29.7 39.4 14.2 3.7 261.7 261.3 683.4 2,253.1 1,561.0
May 470.7 490.6 277.9 126.7 29.3 39.4 13.8 3.6 291.9 287.8 685.0 2,298.9 1,589.9
June 495.1 509.5 288.6 134.7 29.4 39.3 13.8 3.6 280.4 280.3 678.8 2,312.7 1,600.2
July 466.0 504.6 281.7 137.7 28.4 39.4 13.9 3.6 284.1 283.4 689.4 2,402.1 1,645.9
Aug. 446.0 506.9 283.2 138.6 28.0 39.6 13.8 3.5 288.9 288.9 698.0 2,419.3 1,655.7
Sep. 481.2 508.2 285.3 136.7 29.3 39.7 13.8 3.4 281.7 281.7 697.3 2,442.9 1,668.7
Oct. 452.7 481.7 266.6 131.0 28.5 39.2 13.1 3.3 306.8 306.6 716.2 2,501.6 1,704.8
Nov. 404.4 484.6 274.9 127.5 27.2 38.9 13.0 3.2 328.5 328.4 733.2 2,497.5 1,704.9
Dec. 418.8 476.3 265.6 128.4 28.4 38.6 12.4 3.1 320.5 320.5 746.5 2,490.7 1,706.5
2024 Jan. 437.3 448.4 238.5 127.8 28.4 37.5 12.2 4.0 345.4 343.4 777.5 2,534.9 1,737.0
Feb. 446.3 470.9 260.7 130.6 26.1 38.1 11.7 3.8 348.0 347.2 766.2 2,545.8 1,756.7
Mar. 419.6 474.5 258.7 135.5 26.9 37.7 12.0 3.7 372.0 371.2 781.9 2,569.9 1,767.7
Apr. 442.7 437.9 232.4 129.8 22.6 37.7 11.8 3.7 378.6 372.2 804.7 2,600.7 1,782.4
May 418.5 447.1 244.2 127.8 22.2 37.7 11.6 3.6 374.8 366.0 784.7 2,586.1 1,778.2
June 422.7 484.0 275.4 133.7 22.8 37.2 11.4 3.5 384.0 383.9 797.9 2,589.3 1,777.2
German contribution (€ billion)
2022 May 190.1 271.4 144.2 75.3 18.5 31.1 2.2 0.2 4.8 4.8 2.4 596.8 359.0
June 205.0 280.5 147.7 80.5 19.0 31.0 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.3 604.2 362.6
July 166.8 270.4 128.3 89.0 20.2 30.6 2.2 0.1 9.8 9.8 2.4 613.8 369.1
Aug. 142.7 274.6 129.4 92.2 20.4 30.4 2.2 0.1 8.0 8.0 2.3 625.7 384.5
Sep. 147.4 259.1 109.0 96.6 20.8 30.3 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.4 640.0 395.3
Oct. 152.5 253.9 108.1 93.1 20.5 30.1 2.1 0.1 5.2 5.2 2.5 633.9 398.1
Nov. 175.5 256.9 114.7 88.9 21.5 29.8 1.9 0.1 8.3 8.3 2.5 634.2 402.6
Dec. 159.2 255.8 117.3 83.2 23.9 29.6 1.8 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.6 631.2 409.3
2023 Jan. 116.4 246.9 99.4 92.2 23.8 29.8 1.6 0.1 6.1 6.1 2.4 639.6 417.9
Feb. 129.3 260.8 110.3 94.6 24.6 29.7 1.5 0.1 7.5 7.5 2.3 651.5 427.1
Mar. 156.4 258.8 102.2 101.4 24.1 29.6 1.4 0.1 7.2 7.2 2.6 658.0 440.3
Apr. 117.4 251.4 97.3 97.8 25.4 29.5 1.3 0.1 7.9 7.9 2.7 654.9 446.8
May 105.6 260.2 104.8 99.5 25.0 29.7 1.2 0.1 7.7 7.7 2.6 670.6 458.1
June 95.9 268.2 106.1 106.5 24.9 29.5 1.1 0.1 7.3 7.3 2.6 671.6 452.8
July 89.5 259.9 96.6 109.1 23.7 29.5 0.9 0.1 7.6 7.6 2.9 679.9 457.6
Aug. 96.8 261.9 100.9 107.1 23.3 29.6 0.9 0.1 8.7 8.7 3.0 688.8 469.0
Sep. 85.2 259.5 97.5 107.0 24.5 29.6 0.8 0.1 7.8 7.8 3.0 705.6 470.0
Oct. 82.8 235.3 81.6 99.3 24.1 29.4 0.7 0.1 8.5 8.5 2.9 713.0 476.3
Nov. 73.3 231.8 81.2 97.7 22.7 29.2 0.7 0.1 9.6 9.6 3.0 706.2 471.0
Dec. 81.1 238.6 84.9 100.3 23.9 28.6 0.7 0.1 8.4 8.4 3.2 699.9 476.8
2024 Jan. 74.4 223.6 75.5 95.6 24.0 27.8 0.7 0.1 11.4 11.4 3.3 717.4 486.5
Feb. 72.0 228.4 78.6 98.8 21.6 28.6 0.6 0.1 12.4 12.4 3.3 727.1 494.5
Mar. 74.0 234.4 79.3 103.5 22.5 28.3 0.6 0.1 11.0 10.9 3.5 727.8 501.4
Apr. 71.2 218.0 72.0 97.9 19.3 28.2 0.6 0.1 10.6 10.6 3.7 737.0 505.8
May 74.7 227.7 83.8 96.1 18.9 28.2 0.6 0.1 10.3 10.3 3.8 738.4 508.7
June 70.5 236.7 85.4 103.0 19.9 27.7 0.5 0.1 11.1 11.1 4.0 741.2 506.2
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
34.0 15.6 1,988.1 5,795.4 2,915.9 16.2 4,332.0 0.0 11,619.4 15,082.6 15,856.6 6,781.6 199.3 2022 May
47.8 14.4 2,006.6 5,719.5 2,905.3 26.4 4,656.6 0.0 11,680.1 15,173.2 15,943.0 6,786.4 199.6 June
15.1 16.4 2,059.1 5,863.1 2,970.9 8.3 4,320.5 0.0 11,762.6 15,311.3 16,066.2 6,894.3 204.2 July
16.7 19.0 2,077.8 5,915.0 2,890.6 34.5 4,807.9 0.0 11,776.2 15,378.0 16,137.5 6,812.1 197.0 Aug.
34.9 19.5 2,099.1 5,899.0 2,845.2 16.9 5,114.7 0.0 11,681.6 15,419.9 16,180.2 6,773.7 196.2 Sep.
3.8 24.0 2,102.0 6,038.8 2,819.4 38.2 4,996.0 0.0 11,505.4 15,322.1 16,100.0 6,749.8 196.4 Oct.
23.7 22.8 2,112.5 5,881.3 2,857.4 66.3 4,699.5 0.0 11,459.9 15,323.0 16,151.7 6,796.8 200.1 Nov.
31.7 23.2 2,111.2 5,553.5 2,820.5 58.0 4,827.9 0.0 11,381.7 15,315.5 16,131.8 6,767.5 192.7 Dec.
17.6 27.8 2,159.4 5,636.6 2,862.7 86.0 4,674.6 0.0 11,192.9 15,211.1 16,042.8 6,861.4 191.6 2023 Jan.
47.0 30.4 2,181.8 5,670.8 2,811.6 79.8 4,970.0 0.0 11,060.3 15,153.2 16,008.8 6,834.3 192.2 Feb.
54.0 30.4 2,172.6 5,657.4 2,893.9 82.5 4,691.0 0.0 10,949.5 15,154.1 16,013.5 6,918.2 182.5 Mar.
50.1 32.9 2,170.0 5,633.4 2,886.1 110.4 4,729.6 0.0 10,894.5 15,132.7 16,007.4 6,917.8 182.9 Apr.
56.0 32.8 2,210.1 5,722.1 2,903.2 155.5 4,817.0 0.0 10,807.7 15,099.1 15,990.6 6,979.6 178.5 May
49.8 33.0 2,229.9 5,584.4 2,880.3 147.2 4,855.3 0.0 10,742.3 15,116.8 15,989.8 6,979.6 178.0 June
47.0 34.0 2,321.1 5,594.1 2,898.4 102.5 4,963.5 0.0 10,648.3 15,083.9 15,984.3 7,092.0 180.5 July
50.1 33.3 2,335.8 5,656.5 2,917.4 122.1 4,940.9 0.0 10,553.8 15,042.0 15,946.1 7,127.4 176.9 Aug.
45.1 36.4 2,361.4 5,541.0 2,878.4 113.5 5,124.6 0.0 10,547.2 15,094.2 16,001.0 7,135.8 180.3 Sep.
54.5 36.6 2,410.5 5,511.8 2,906.2 121.7 5,098.1 0.0 10,375.9 15,003.5 15,954.5 7,207.5 179.6 Oct.
45.2 35.9 2,416.4 5,446.4 2,935.7 165.3 4,843.2 0.0 10,387.7 15,047.8 16,020.2 7,256.9 180.8 Nov.
46.0 34.8 2,409.9 5,299.3 3,003.4 56.1 4,472.4 0.0 10,446.0 15,199.4 16,192.2 7,336.9 177.4 Dec.
40.6 36.1 2,458.2 5,334.6 2,992.5 105.8 4,526.0 0.0 10,212.3 15,026.4 16,060.2 7,378.5 180.3 2024 Jan.
33.7 36.3 2,475.8 5,447.5 2,955.4 99.1 4,606.7 0.0 10,181.6 15,039.0 16,057.8 7,361.0 182.7 Feb.
22.5 40.1 2,507.3 5,482.7 3,020.9 106.6 4,563.9 0.0 10,239.5 15,142.8 16,181.3 7,466.1 179.9 Mar.
28.3 39.5 2,532.9 5,462.7 3,020.8 107.5 4,709.6 0.0 10,222.5 15,122.1 16,209.6 7,486.7 187.4 Apr.
18.4 42.4 2,525.3 5,463.8 3,023.3 104.4 4,663.9 0.0 10,251.6 15,177.0 16,238.2 7,484.8 173.0 May
12.6 41.5 2,535.2 5,420.3 3,062.9 70.5 4,508.8 0.0 10,392.9 15,340.7 16,394.1 7,540.2 174.4 June
German contribution (€ billion)
14.9 7.3 574.6 1,307.0 748.6 –1,199.2 2,289.8 526.8 2,914.0 3,699.5 3,728.9 1,911.8 0.0 2022 May
18.7 6.6 578.9 1,317.0 743.1 –1,255.4 2,479.8 530.5 2,934.8 3,726.6 3,759.7 1,907.5 0.0 June
21.2 6.8 585.8 1,287.5 779.7 –1,189.6 2,276.7 525.2 2,941.9 3,757.1 3,797.3 1,949.2 0.0 July
21.8 7.6 596.2 1,349.3 739.6 –1,271.6 2,540.1 513.5 2,999.5 3,826.5 3,866.3 1,919.1 0.0 Aug.
27.5 8.1 604.3 1,385.2 711.9 –1,287.1 2,858.3 516.8 2,944.0 3,811.2 3,854.6 1,899.2 0.0 Sep.
19.1 9.7 605.0 1,355.1 693.8 –1,215.2 2,804.7 516.8 2,912.1 3,812.3 3,848.8 1,880.8 0.0 Oct.
20.8 11.2 602.2 1,310.2 714.6 –1,191.2 2,596.7 516.8 2,920.8 3,819.7 3,862.5 1,900.3 0.0 Nov.
20.2 11.7 599.3 1,265.7 690.1 –1,230.4 2,726.5 518.9 2,881.6 3,795.1 3,835.9 1,869.2 0.0 Dec.
24.0 13.1 602.4 1,226.5 689.1 –1,117.5 2,625.9 521.2 2,849.3 3,789.5 3,835.2 1,874.9 0.0 2023 Jan.
29.3 15.8 606.4 1,171.8 668.4 –1,073.2 2,787.2 522.2 2,816.8 3,782.0 3,836.8 1,860.1 0.0 Feb.
36.2 17.5 604.3 1,188.0 700.6 –1,129.7 2,641.2 524.5 2,769.6 3,756.4 3,819.8 1,897.7 0.0 Mar.
37.0 18.5 599.4 1,107.1 704.2 –1,028.5 2,637.8 526.4 2,757.6 3,759.4 3,825.5 1,899.8 0.0 Apr.
41.2 19.5 609.9 1,122.5 715.6 –1,036.9 2,662.4 529.0 2,752.3 3,762.8 3,833.9 1,926.7 0.0 May
44.6 19.2 607.9 1,099.9 709.8 –1,026.8 2,723.1 530.7 2,722.6 3,760.6 3,834.2 1,921.6 0.0 June
44.5 19.9 615.4 1,070.7 724.0 –996.4 2,835.7 532.2 2,700.4 3,759.3 3,834.2 1,946.1 0.0 July
51.0 20.6 617.2 1,044.4 734.2 –998.8 2,835.9 535.1 2,678.7 3,756.9 3,840.1 1,958.1 0.0 Aug.
48.5 22.6 634.5 1,048.4 722.8 –1,000.9 2,898.6 538.7 2,666.2 3,753.7 3,835.5 1,967.4 0.0 Sep.
49.7 24.4 639.0 1,035.9 735.9 –998.0 2,898.7 540.2 2,634.8 3,751.7 3,837.2 1,987.9 0.0 Oct.
49.6 23.6 633.1 1,012.0 753.5 –983.0 2,705.7 541.3 2,643.0 3,760.7 3,846.5 2,006.8 0.0 Nov.
45.9 25.0 629.0 1,016.2 778.6 –1,034.8 2,550.2 543.7 2,624.7 3,762.2 3,844.6 2,034.5 0.0 Dec.
46.9 25.6 645.0 967.8 758.4 –959.8 2,586.3 536.2 2,577.9 3,744.3 3,831.5 2,032.8 0.0 2024 Jan.
46.4 26.4 654.4 1,024.7 731.1 –992.0 2,646.3 538.6 2,559.6 3,745.7 3,834.2 2,015.6 0.0 Feb.
45.7 26.7 655.4 1,022.6 744.6 –988.1 2,590.4 541.5 2,562.4 3,767.6 3,854.5 2,033.5 0.0 Mar.
40.9 26.3 669.7 987.7 747.2 –960.2 2,676.0 543.3 2,558.3 3,764.4 3,846.0 2,053.2 0.0 Apr.
39.6 25.8 673.1 1,001.7 746.9 –986.7 2,623.7 545.7 2,585.2 3,792.3 3,871.8 2,059.4 0.0 May
43.7 25.7 671.9 1,015.4 777.5 –1,013.2 2,534.6 547.3 2,587.0 3,792.0 3,876.4 2,090.4 0.0 June
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2022 July 943.7 1.0 2,149.4 0.0 4,958.8 678.7 0.0 1,604.0 667.6 1,158.0 3,943.3 6,226.0
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 950.1 1.7 2,124.9 0.0 4,954.8 707.0 0.0 1,585.3 553.9 1,249.2 3,936.1 6,228.5
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 955.8 4.0 2,118.8 0.0 4,948.3 4,490.0 0.0 1,563.7 536.7 1,104.4 332.0 6,385.7
Dec. 960.4 1.9 1,947.1 0.0 4,946.1 4,521.5 0.0 1,560.8 492.5 1,066.9 213.8 6,296.2
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 940.4 1.2 1,303.3 0.1 4,942.1 4,051.6 0.0 1,565.6 372.8 1,001.6 195.6 5,812.7
Mar. 916.8 0.9 1,233.3 0.0 4,939.0 4,103.0 0.0 1,553.9 380.2 861.8 191.1 5,848.0
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 945.0 1.4 1,117.7 0.1 4,905.6 3,996.1 0.0 1,559.8 360.6 870.5 182.7 5,738.6
June 948.2 1.6 1,100.5 0.1 4,884.1 4,126.4 0.0 1,563.7 256.4 806.6 181.6 5,871.7
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 927.8 10.9 682.0 0.1 4,853.0 3,704.4 0.0 1,567.0 254.4 770.5 177.4 5,448.9
Sep. 924.3 5.6 601.0 0.1 4,811.2 3,647.4 0.0 1,564.2 222.5 733.8 174.3 5,386.0
Oct. 931.2 8.1 515.4 0.1 4,767.9 3,577.4 0.0 1,554.7 222.7 693.3 174.6 5,306.7
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 933.3 7.3 495.9 0.0 4,715.0 3,548.8 0.0 1,551.1 194.1 685.3 172.0 5,271.9
2024 Jan. 958.3 7.9 396.2 0.1 4,686.8 3,487.4 0.0 1,556.7 168.4 666.3 170.5 5,214.6
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 966.5 4.8 397.3 0.0 4,646.4 3,490.9 0.0 1,543.2 168.5 643.8 168.6 5,202.7
Apr. 1,002.8 2.8 249.4 0.0 4,599.5 3,337.9 0.0 1,546.1 137.8 664.3 168.4 5,052.3
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 1,031.7 2.5 149.1 0.0 4,550.7 3,214.0 0.0 1,551.5 119.5 682.3 166.7 4,932.1
July 1,063.7 5.7 104.9 0.0 4,494.3 3,113.2 0.0 1,559.5 115.2 712.7 168.1 4,840.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
2022 July 231.7 0.3 409.1 0.0 1,084.3 185.8 0.0 390.3 214.9 – 175.4 1,109.7 1,685.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 232.1 0.3 403.6 0.0 1,076.8 228.5 0.0 379.5 157.9 – 161.8 1,108.8 1,716.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 231.7 0.8 400.5 0.0 1,071.5 1,304.0 0.0 379.0 127.2 – 231.4 125.9 1,808.8
Dec. 232.4 0.5 352.5 0.0 1,079.2 1,346.6 0.0 378.8 121.0 – 242.4 60.5 1,785.9
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 229.8 0.4 231.9 0.1 1,076.8 1,234.6 0.0 377.2 77.8 – 205.4 54.8 1,666.7
Mar. 228.9 0.4 212.8 0.0 1,077.0 1,263.7 0.0 374.5 69.2 – 242.5 54.2 1,692.4
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 239.2 0.7 200.2 0.1 1,066.1 1,228.0 0.0 375.7 73.4 – 221.1 50.1 1,653.9
June 241.7 0.7 198.9 0.1 1,056.8 1,256.3 0.0 377.2 54.7 – 241.8 52.0 1,685.4
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 236.2 1.5 142.4 0.1 1,048.8 1,175.5 0.0 377.5 49.9 – 222.5 48.4 1,601.5
Sep. 234.5 0.8 131.2 0.1 1,041.3 1,177.8 0.0 377.3 40.1 – 235.4 48.0 1,603.1
Oct. 235.7 1.3 96.3 0.0 1,024.0 1,151.1 0.0 374.9 28.7 – 245.4 47.9 1,574.0
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 236.8 0.7 89.2 0.0 1,016.7 1,171.3 0.0 373.5 18.9 – 267.7 47.3 1,592.1
2024 Jan. 243.9 0.9 69.5 0.1 1,005.8 1,127.3 0.0 379.3 19.8 – 253.3 47.0 1,553.6
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 246.5 0.7 69.3 0.0 996.7 1,164.4 0.0 379.2 16.3 – 293.4 46.7 1,590.3
Apr. 257.8 0.7 40.4 0.0 983.5 1,122.4 0.0 379.4 17.1 – 282.5 45.9 1,547.7
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 265.9 0.6 21.3 0.0 970.0 1,102.8 0.0 380.9 13.5 – 285.8 46.3 1,530.0
July 275.7 0.7 15.7 0.0 954.3 1,092.8 0.0 383.0 12.1 – 287.6 46.1 1,521.9
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
+ 9.5 + 0.5 –49.4 ± 0.0 +19.7 – 2.6 ± 0.0 +12.5 +43.5 +28.9 –102.8 –93.0 2022 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 6.4 + 0.7 –24.5 ± 0.0 – 4.0 +28.3 ± 0.0 –18.7 –113.7 +91.2 – 7.2 + 2.5 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 5.7 + 2.3 – 6.1 ± 0.0 – 6.5 +3,783.0 ± 0.0 –21.6 –17.2 –144.8 –3,604.1 +157.2 Nov.
+ 4.6 – 2.1 –171.7 ± 0.0 – 2.2 +31.5 ± 0.0 – 2.9 –44.2 –37.5 –118.2 –89.5 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
–20.0 – 0.7 –643.8 + 0.1 – 4.0 –469.9 ± 0.0 + 4.8 –119.7 –65.3 –18.2 –483.5 Feb.
–23.6 – 0.3 –70.0 – 0.1 – 3.1 +51.4 ± 0.0 –11.7 +7.4 –139.8 – 4.5 +35.3 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+28.2 + 0.5 –115.6 + 0.1 –33.4 –106.9 ± 0.0 + 5.9 –19.6 + 8.7 – 8.4 –109.4 May
+ 3.2 + 0.2 –17.2 ± 0.0 –21.5 +130.3 ± 0.0 + 3.9 –104.2 –63.9 – 1.1 +133.1 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
–20.4 + 9.3 –418.5 ± 0.0 –31.1 –422.0 ± 0.0 + 3.3 –2.0 –36.1 – 4.2 –422.8 Aug.
– 3.5 – 5.3 –81.0 ± 0.0 –41.8 –57.0 ± 0.0 – 2.8 –31.9 –36.7 – 3.1 –62.9 Sep.
+ 6.9 + 2.5 –85.6 ± 0.0 –43.3 –70.0 ± 0.0 – 9.5 +0.2 –40.5 + 0.3 –79.3 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 2.1 – 0.8 –19.5 – 0.1 –52.9 –28.6 ± 0.0 – 3.6 –28.6 – 8.0 – 2.6 –34.8 Dec.
+25.0 + 0.6 –99.7 + 0.1 –28.2 –61.4 ± 0.0 + 5.6 –25.7 –19.0 – 1.5 –57.3 2024 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
+ 8.2 – 3.1 + 1.1 – 0.1 –40.4 + 3.5 ± 0.0 –13.5 +0.1 –22.5 – 1.9 –11.9 Mar.
+36.3 – 2.0 –147.9 ± 0.0 –46.9 –153.0 ± 0.0 + 2.9 –30.7 +20.5 – 0.2 –150.4 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+28.9 – 0.3 –100.3 ± 0.0 –48.8 –123.9 ± 0.0 + 5.4 –18.3 +18.0 – 1.7 –120.2 June
+32.0 + 3.2 –44.2 ± 0.0 –56.4 –100.8 ± 0.0 + 8.0 –4.3 +30.4 + 1.4 –91.3 July
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 1.3 + 0.2 –11.1 – 0.0 – 3.1 – 4.1 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +18.0 + 7.7 –37.7 –39.5 2022 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 0.4 + 0.0 – 5.5 – 0.0 – 7.5 +42.7 ± 0.0 –10.8 –57.1 +13.5 – 0.9 +31.0 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
– 0.5 + 0.5 – 3.1 + 0.0 – 5.3 +1,075.5 ± 0.0 – 0.6 –30.7 –69.6 –982.9 +92.0 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.4 –48.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 +42.7 ± 0.0 – 0.1 –6.2 –11.0 –65.4 –22.9 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
– 2.5 – 0.1 –120.6 + 0.1 – 2.4 –112.0 ± 0.0 – 1.6 –43.2 +37.0 – 5.6 –119.3 Feb.
– 1.0 + 0.0 –19.1 – 0.0 + 0.2 +29.1 ± 0.0 – 2.7 –8.6 –37.1 – 0.7 +25.7 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+10.3 + 0.2 –12.7 + 0.0 –11.0 –35.7 ± 0.0 + 1.2 +4.1 +21.4 – 4.1 –38.5 May
+ 2.6 + 0.1 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 9.3 +28.3 ± 0.0 + 1.4 –18.7 –20.7 + 1.9 +31.5 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
– 5.6 + 0.8 –56.5 – 0.0 – 8.0 –80.8 ± 0.0 + 0.4 –4.7 +19.3 – 3.5 –83.9 Aug.
– 1.7 – 0.7 –11.2 + 0.0 – 7.5 + 2.3 ± 0.0 – 0.2 –9.8 –13.0 – 0.4 + 1.6 Sep.
+ 1.2 + 0.5 –35.0 – 0.0 –17.3 –26.7 ± 0.0 – 2.4 –11.5 – 9.9 – 0.0 –29.1 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 1.1 – 0.6 – 7.1 – 0.0 – 7.3 +20.1 ± 0.0 – 1.4 –9.8 –22.3 – 0.7 +18.1 Dec.
+ 7.1 + 0.2 –19.7 + 0.0 –10.9 –44.0 ± 0.0 + 5.8 +0.9 +14.3 – 0.3 –38.5 2024 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
+ 2.6 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 9.0 +37.2 ± 0.0 – 0.2 –3.5 –40.1 – 0.3 +36.7 Mar.
+11.3 + 0.0 –28.9 – 0.0 –13.3 –42.0 ± 0.0 + 0.3 +0.7 +10.9 – 0.8 –42.6 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+ 8.1 – 0.1 –19.2 – 0.0 –13.4 –19.6 ± 0.0 + 1.5 –3.5 – 3.2 + 0.4 –17.7 June
+ 9.7 + 0.1 – 5.5 + 0.0 –15.7 –10.0 ± 0.0 + 2.0 –1.4 – 1.8 – 0.2 – 8.2 July
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2024 Jan. 19 6,889.3 649.1 498.8 229.1 269.6 14.5 15.2 15.2 –
26 6,887.6 649.1 499.1 229.6 269.5 14.9 15.8 15.8 –
Feb. 2 6,865.4 649.1 499.5 230.0 269.5 14.7 16.0 16.0 –
9 6,861.4 649.1 499.6 229.9 269.7 14.7 15.0 15.0 –
16 6,842.7 649.1 500.4 229.9 270.5 14.5 15.4 15.4 –
23 6,830.9 649.1 500.8 229.9 270.9 14.6 16.1 16.1 –
Mar. 1 6,820.0 649.1 501.3 229.8 271.5 13.8 15.1 15.1 –
8 6,813.2 649.1 499.9 229.6 270.3 15.1 15.4 15.4 –
15 6,815.6 649.1 501.4 229.6 271.8 13.9 15.6 15.6 –
22 6,810.0 649.1 498.2 229.1 269.1 15.7 15.7 15.7 –
29 6,619.7 711.2 504.7 231.5 273.2 15.1 15.9 15.9 –
Apr. 5 6,585.3 711.2 506.1 231.5 274.7 14.1 15.7 15.7 –
12 6,596.7 711.2 505.5 231.4 274.1 14.9 16.6 16.6 –
19 6,593.2 711.1 505.4 231.3 274.1 14.8 16.2 16.2 –
26 6,598.9 711.1 505.0 231.7 273.3 15.3 16.4 16.4 –
May 3 6,582.1 711.1 505.6 231.6 273.9 15.1 16.6 16.6 –
10 6,581.0 711.1 505.4 232.1 273.2 15.3 16.3 16.3 –
17 6,562.4 711.1 505.7 232.2 273.5 15.1 17.0 17.0 –
24 6,577.7 711.1 506.6 232.2 274.4 14.6 17.7 17.7 –
31 6,560.7 711.1 506.7 232.6 274.2 13.8 16.8 16.8 –
June 7 6,541.6 711.1 507.3 232.6 274.8 14.3 17.2 17.2 –
14 6,534.5 711.1 507.1 232.4 274.7 14.6 16.5 16.5 –
21 6,536.8 711.1 506.1 232.4 273.8 15.5 17.1 17.1 –
28 6,522.0 757.5 510.2 232.4 277.8 14.1 17.0 17.0 –
July 5 6,497.7 757.5 510.2 232.4 277.8 15.0 16.9 16.9 –
12 6,494.5 757.5 510.0 232.4 277.5 15.5 16.7 16.7 –
19 6,478.3 757.5 508.6 232.5 276.2 16.3 17.1 17.1 –
26 6,475.5 757.5 507.0 232.4 274.6 16.3 17.2 17.2 –
Aug. 2 6,468.7 757.5 507.3 232.9 274.4 16.9 17.8 17.8 –
9 6,462.2 757.5 506.8 232.9 273.9 17.3 17.4 17.4 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2024 Jan. 19 2,483.0 201.3 90.3 57.7 32.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
26 2,497.5 201.3 90.5 57.8 32.8 0.0 0.5 0.5 –
Feb. 2 2,512.4 201.3 90.9 57.9 33.0 0.0 0.7 0.7 –
9 2,508.1 201.3 91.2 57.9 33.3 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
16 2,518.7 201.3 91.6 57.8 33.9 0.0 1.4 1.4 –
23 2,500.9 201.3 92.3 57.6 34.7 0.0 1.9 1.9 –
Mar. 1 2,504.7 201.3 92.2 57.5 34.6 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
8 2,496.1 201.3 91.8 57.5 34.3 0.0 1.2 1.2 –
15 2,481.0 201.3 91.8 57.5 34.3 0.0 1.3 1.3 –
22 2,478.2 201.3 91.5 57.5 34.0 0.0 1.1 1.1 –
29 2,447.7 220.6 92.2 57.8 34.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 –
Apr. 5 2,448.6 220.6 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 0.8 0.8 –
12 2,439.1 220.6 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 1.2 1.2 –
19 2,423.9 220.5 92.6 57.8 34.8 0.0 0.8 0.8 –
26 2,413.4 220.5 92.1 57.8 34.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
May 3 2,446.6 220.5 92.1 57.9 34.2 0.0 1.0 1.0 –
10 2,458.4 220.5 92.1 57.9 34.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 –
17 2,442.2 220.5 91.5 57.9 33.6 0.0 1.2 1.2 –
24 2,461.4 220.5 91.7 57.9 33.8 0.0 1.7 1.7 –
31 2,425.5 220.5 92.0 58.2 33.8 0.0 1.0 1.0 –
June 7 2,439.1 220.5 92.2 58.2 34.0 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
14 2,420.5 220.5 92.4 58.2 34.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
21 2,436.8 220.5 92.4 58.2 34.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
28 2,447.3 234.9 93.3 58.2 35.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
July 5 2,466.7 234.9 93.2 58.1 35.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
12 2,462.3 234.9 92.8 58.1 34.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
19 2,418.0 234.9 92.6 58.1 34.5 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
26 2,416.5 234.9 92.3 58.1 34.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
Aug. 2 2,425.8 234.9 92.2 58.2 34.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 –
9 2,409.2 234.9 92.1 58.2 33.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
402.1 5.9 396.2 – – – – 25.0 4,877.2 4,671.2 206.0 20.9 386.5 2024 Jan. 19
401.8 5.6 396.2 – – – – 24.0 4,880.9 4,673.4 207.5 20.9 381.1 26
403.3 6.4 396.9 – – – – 30.4 4,866.7 4,661.9 204.9 20.9 364.8 Feb. 2
401.7 4.7 396.9 – – – – 21.0 4,866.2 4,663.9 202.3 20.9 373.2 9
401.3 4.3 396.9 – – 0.0 – 20.4 4,848.7 4,646.7 202.0 20.9 372.0 16
401.5 4.5 396.9 – – 0.0 – 26.6 4,847.3 4,644.6 202.7 20.9 354.1 23
403.4 5.3 398.0 – – 0.0 – 37.2 4,830.7 4,628.7 202.0 20.9 348.5 Mar. 1
401.6 3.6 398.0 – – – – 23.7 4,832.7 4,630.1 202.5 20.9 354.8 8
400.4 2.4 398.0 – – – – 27.9 4,829.7 4,624.7 204.9 20.9 356.8 15
400.0 2.0 398.0 – – – – 35.1 4,824.3 4,618.1 206.2 20.9 350.9 22
156.2 5.9 150.3 – – – – 34.4 4,802.6 4,595.0 207.6 20.8 358.7 29
152.5 2.2 150.3 – – – – 23.0 4,789.3 4,579.4 209.9 20.8 352.5 Apr. 5
151.7 1.4 150.3 – – – – 21.7 4,795.6 4,582.8 212.8 20.8 358.6 12
151.9 1.6 150.3 – – 0.0 – 24.5 4,786.6 4,571.4 215.1 20.8 361.8 19
154.8 4.5 150.3 – – 0.0 – 26.7 4,788.5 4,572.6 215.9 20.8 360.2 26
151.4 2.0 149.4 – – – – 27.1 4,777.4 4,562.2 215.2 20.8 356.8 May 3
151.1 1.7 149.4 – – – – 21.7 4,782.2 4,566.6 215.6 20.8 357.0 10
150.6 1.2 149.4 – – – – 20.0 4,763.2 4,547.2 216.0 20.8 358.7 17
150.8 1.3 149.4 – – – – 26.2 4,765.5 4,548.2 217.4 20.8 364.3 24
152.0 4.9 147.1 – – – – 35.4 4,740.1 4,522.4 217.7 20.8 363.9 31
149.5 2.3 147.1 – – – – 28.0 4,739.7 4,521.4 218.3 20.8 353.7 June 7
149.3 2.2 147.1 – – – – 26.9 4,732.4 4,513.3 219.1 20.8 355.8 14
151.4 4.3 147.1 – – – – 33.9 4,729.6 4,510.5 219.1 20.8 351.2 21
95.0 11.1 83.8 – – 0.1 – 32.5 4,714.7 4,496.0 218.7 20.8 360.1 28
90.6 6.7 83.8 – – 0.1 – 28.4 4,707.1 4,489.0 218.1 20.8 351.2 July 5
89.2 5.3 83.8 – – 0.0 – 22.3 4,707.3 4,488.7 218.6 20.8 355.1 12
88.5 4.7 83.8 – – – – 20.1 4,691.8 4,472.5 219.3 20.8 357.5 19
88.2 4.4 83.8 – – – – 24.4 4,685.6 4,465.5 220.0 20.8 358.4 26
90.8 5.5 85.4 – – – – 34.0 4,675.3 4,454.8 220.5 20.8 348.2 Aug. 2
87.1 1.8 85.4 – – – – 27.9 4,675.6 4,455.3 220.3 20.8 351.7 9
Deutsche Bundesbank
70.1 0.6 69.5 – – – – 8.7 1,001.6 1,001.6 – 4.4 1,106.5 2024 Jan. 19
70.2 0.7 69.5 – – – – 8.6 1,002.2 1,002.2 – 4.4 1,119.6 26
70.1 0.8 69.3 – – – – 9.2 1,002.2 1,002.2 – 4.4 1,133.5 Feb. 2
69.7 0.4 69.3 – – – – 7.4 1,002.3 1,002.3 – 4.4 1,130.8 9
69.9 0.5 69.3 – – 0.0 – 5.5 994.2 994.2 – 4.4 1,150.3 16
70.1 0.7 69.3 – – 0.0 – 9.2 992.7 992.7 – 4.4 1,129.0 23
70.4 1.1 69.3 – – 0.0 – 10.8 993.3 993.3 – 4.4 1,131.4 Mar. 1
69.9 0.6 69.3 – – – – 10.1 994.0 994.0 – 4.4 1,123.4 8
69.8 0.4 69.3 – – – – 10.1 989.1 989.1 – 4.4 1,113.2 15
69.8 0.5 69.3 – – – – 11.9 987.7 987.7 – 4.4 1,110.4 22
22.8 1.6 21.2 – – – – 13.0 987.0 987.0 – 4.4 1,107.0 29
21.7 0.5 21.2 – – – – 8.8 974.4 974.4 – 4.4 1,125.9 Apr. 5
21.6 0.4 21.2 – – – – 9.1 975.0 975.0 – 4.4 1,115.2 12
21.6 0.4 21.2 – – 0.0 – 9.9 973.4 973.4 – 4.4 1,100.7 19
22.3 1.1 21.2 – – 0.0 – 11.6 974.8 974.8 – 4.4 1,087.3 26
21.8 0.5 21.3 – – – – 11.7 975.7 975.7 – 4.4 1,119.3 May 3
21.6 0.3 21.3 – – – – 8.4 977.3 977.3 – 4.4 1,133.4 10
21.6 0.3 21.3 – – – – 7.0 964.3 964.3 – 4.4 1,131.7 17
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.1 965.0 965.0 – 4.4 1,145.3 24
22.4 1.1 21.3 – – – – 11.2 965.8 965.8 – 4.4 1,108.2 31
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.0 965.1 965.1 – 4.4 1,123.3 June 7
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.3 957.2 957.2 – 4.4 1,112.9 14
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.3 955.5 955.5 – 4.4 1,130.6 21
14.5 1.5 13.0 – – – – 10.4 955.5 955.5 – 4.4 1,133.9 28
13.7 0.6 13.0 – – 0.1 – 9.9 953.3 953.3 – 4.4 1,156.9 July 5
13.7 0.8 13.0 – – 0.0 – 9.4 952.0 952.0 – 4.4 1,154.7 12
13.5 0.5 13.0 – – – – 6.1 950.5 950.5 – 4.4 1,115.6 19
13.6 0.6 13.0 – – – – 8.8 950.7 950.7 – 4.4 1,111.3 26
14.2 1.0 13.2 – – – – 12.3 949.9 949.9 – 4.4 1,116.9 Aug. 2
13.6 0.4 13.2 – – – – 11.5 950.0 950.0 – 4.4 1,102.5 9

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2024 Jan. 19 6,889.3 1,548.8 3,666.6 162.3 3,504.3 – – 0.0 35.7 – 259.9 181.5 78.5
26 6,887.6 1,545.5 3,678.6 174.2 3,504.3 – – 0.0 36.3 – 257.0 178.9 78.0
Feb. 2 6,865.4 1,545.2 3,676.9 167.8 3,509.1 – – 0.0 33.8 – 239.2 162.3 76.9
9 6,861.4 1,544.3 3,655.9 153.8 3,502.0 – – 0.0 33.7 – 257.6 182.7 74.9
16 6,842.7 1,543.3 3,640.2 153.9 3,486.2 – – 0.0 32.0 – 264.3 187.4 76.9
23 6,830.9 1,541.7 3,678.6 154.5 3,524.0 – – 0.0 31.7 – 231.0 155.4 75.6
Mar. 1 6,820.0 1,542.7 3,657.1 163.1 3,493.9 – – 0.0 33.3 – 228.4 150.6 77.8
8 6,813.2 1,543.4 3,662.1 198.0 3,464.1 – – 0.0 33.1 – 229.9 148.2 81.6
15 6,815.6 1,542.9 3,660.0 156.3 3,503.8 – – 0.0 35.1 – 234.2 149.3 84.9
22 6,810.0 1,543.8 3,675.2 150.7 3,524.5 – – 0.0 35.6 – 212.3 135.2 77.1
29 6,619.7 1,550.3 3,379.5 169.7 3,209.8 – – 0.0 37.5 – 226.1 142.6 83.6
Apr. 5 6,585.3 1,547.8 3,392.0 161.7 3,230.3 – – 0.0 33.3 – 219.1 140.7 78.3
12 6,596.7 1,546.4 3,416.7 185.5 3,231.2 – – 0.0 31.3 – 205.3 127.0 78.3
19 6,593.2 1,546.2 3,415.2 170.0 3,245.2 – – 0.0 31.9 – 201.1 119.4 81.7
26 6,598.9 1,548.6 3,416.3 153.7 3,262.6 – – 0.0 32.1 – 204.7 123.9 80.8
May 3 6,582.1 1,553.2 3,391.0 153.2 3,237.9 – – 0.0 32.9 – 197.5 118.3 79.3
10 6,581.0 1,553.3 3,399.0 152.6 3,246.3 – – 0.0 31.9 – 194.3 115.1 79.2
17 6,562.4 1,552.9 3,376.8 152.0 3,224.8 – – 0.0 32.4 – 195.9 117.3 78.6
24 6,577.7 1,551.2 3,372.8 151.9 3,220.9 – – 0.0 33.7 – 201.7 120.2 81.5
31 6,560.7 1,553.4 3,322.2 168.7 3,153.5 – – 0.0 36.3 – 210.6 131.8 78.8
June 7 6,541.6 1,553.8 3,350.0 196.9 3,153.1 – – – 33.4 – 199.9 106.1 93.9
14 6,534.5 1,554.2 3,351.7 173.7 3,177.9 – – – 32.9 – 185.9 107.6 78.3
21 6,536.8 1,555.7 3,345.0 152.3 3,192.8 – – – 33.3 – 188.6 111.8 76.8
28 6,522.0 1,559.9 3,237.5 170.2 3,067.3 – – – 36.1 – 205.1 125.7 79.4
July 5 6,497.7 1,562.2 3,255.2 160.8 3,094.3 – – – 33.7 – 193.3 115.9 77.4
12 6,494.5 1,563.0 3,260.4 154.0 3,106.4 – – – 32.8 – 195.3 117.7 77.7
19 6,478.3 1,563.4 3,223.4 192.3 3,031.2 – – – 32.1 – 202.8 125.0 77.8
26 6,475.5 1,564.1 3,218.5 186.4 3,032.1 – – – 32.6 – 211.8 132.6 79.3
Aug. 2 6,468.7 1,566.1 3,224.7 159.7 3,065.1 – – 0.0 35.4 – 199.5 119.9 79.6
9 6,462.2 1,567.1 3,244.2 157.0 3,087.2 – – 0.0 33.8 – 192.5 114.3 78.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
2024 Jan. 19 2,483.0 378.8 1,174.7 39.0 1,135.7 – – 0.0 6.6 – 29.6 17.4 12.2
26 2,497.5 377.8 1,182.8 51.5 1,131.2 – – 0.0 7.2 – 28.5 15.6 12.9
Feb. 2 2,512.4 379.1 1,206.7 46.2 1,160.5 – – 0.0 5.5 – 29.5 17.2 12.4
9 2,508.1 379.8 1,203.6 41.9 1,161.6 – – 0.0 5.8 – 29.3 17.3 12.0
16 2,518.7 379.8 1,214.8 40.4 1,174.4 – – 0.0 5.2 – 31.9 20.6 11.3
23 2,500.9 379.4 1,221.1 40.6 1,180.5 – – 0.0 5.2 – 26.0 15.2 10.8
Mar. 1 2,504.7 378.1 1,225.2 43.1 1,182.1 – – 0.0 5.2 – 27.5 16.2 11.3
8 2,496.1 379.0 1,219.4 60.4 1,159.0 – – 0.0 5.3 – 25.1 13.1 12.0
15 2,481.0 379.0 1,204.6 45.3 1,159.3 – – 0.0 6.7 – 26.6 15.1 11.5
22 2,478.2 379.6 1,198.2 40.0 1,158.1 – – 0.0 6.7 – 26.0 15.1 10.9
29 2,447.7 379.8 1,141.0 45.0 1,095.9 – – 0.0 8.3 – 29.1 16.0 13.1
Apr. 5 2,448.6 379.2 1,154.1 40.4 1,113.7 – – 0.0 6.8 – 29.2 18.0 11.3
12 2,439.1 379.3 1,146.2 58.0 1,088.1 – – 0.0 5.4 – 31.8 20.1 11.6
19 2,423.9 379.6 1,131.7 43.8 1,087.8 – – 0.0 5.1 – 28.2 15.5 12.7
26 2,413.4 380.5 1,119.4 40.6 1,078.8 – – 0.0 5.4 – 31.0 19.9 11.1
May 3 2,446.6 380.8 1,160.5 41.9 1,118.6 – – 0.0 5.4 – 23.8 11.9 11.9
10 2,458.4 381.6 1,171.6 39.5 1,132.0 – – 0.0 4.9 – 22.9 12.0 10.9
17 2,442.2 382.2 1,151.9 38.5 1,113.4 – – 0.0 4.6 – 23.3 11.7 11.6
24 2,461.4 381.5 1,169.8 38.3 1,131.4 – – 0.0 4.6 – 24.3 11.7 12.6
31 2,425.5 380.6 1,122.8 43.4 1,079.5 – – 0.0 5.5 – 29.5 16.9 12.6
June 7 2,439.1 380.9 1,149.7 63.1 1,086.6 – – – 5.1 – 22.9 11.8 11.2
14 2,420.5 381.3 1,122.6 44.6 1,078.0 – – – 4.9 – 23.0 11.3 11.7
21 2,436.8 381.8 1,138.0 40.7 1,097.4 – – – 5.1 – 25.7 14.2 11.5
28 2,447.3 382.2 1,124.4 45.5 1,078.9 – – – 6.1 – 25.2 11.8 13.4
July 5 2,466.7 383.4 1,157.9 41.1 1,116.8 – – – 4.5 – 24.4 12.5 11.9
12 2,462.3 384.3 1,157.1 39.8 1,117.2 – – – 4.0 – 23.2 11.7 11.5
19 2,418.0 384.9 1,117.6 63.0 1,054.6 – – – 3.2 – 21.9 10.1 11.8
26 2,416.5 385.4 1,112.9 45.0 1,067.9 – – – 3.1 – 22.2 10.2 12.0
Aug. 2 2,425.8 384.2 1,116.4 44.7 1,071.7 – – 0.0 4.9 – 22.0 8.9 13.1
9 2,409.2 385.1 1,099.6 40.7 1,058.9 – – 0.0 4.9 – 22.1 9.8 12.3
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
186.5 17.2 2.3 2.3 – 177.1 239.9 – 635.0 120.3 2024 Jan. 19
185.9 17.0 1.8 1.8 – 177.1 233.3 – 634.8 120.3 26
192.5 17.3 1.7 1.7 – 177.1 226.7 – 634.9 120.1 Feb. 2
189.9 17.6 2.3 2.3 – 177.1 228.0 – 634.9 120.1 9
187.0 17.5 2.9 2.9 – 177.1 235.8 – 634.9 107.6 16
190.6 17.4 3.7 3.7 – 177.1 218.9 – 634.9 105.2 23
197.2 16.8 4.4 4.4 – 177.1 222.8 – 634.9 105.3 Mar. 1
191.6 17.0 3.6 3.6 – 177.1 215.2 – 634.9 105.3 8
189.1 17.1 3.9 3.9 – 177.1 215.9 – 634.9 105.3 15
188.1 16.4 4.9 4.9 – 177.1 216.4 – 634.9 105.3 22
199.5 15.9 6.4 6.4 – 178.5 221.8 – 702.9 101.1 29
180.9 16.2 5.2 5.2 – 178.5 208.4 – 702.9 101.1 Apr. 5
183.7 16.6 5.7 5.7 – 178.5 208.4 – 702.9 101.1 12
184.4 15.6 6.6 6.6 – 178.5 210.7 – 702.9 100.0 19
183.6 15.5 7.2 7.2 – 178.5 209.6 – 702.9 99.9 26
196.6 15.6 6.4 6.4 – 178.5 207.5 – 702.9 99.9 May 3
194.5 14.7 6.6 6.6 – 178.5 205.4 – 702.9 99.7 10
195.7 14.9 6.4 6.4 – 178.5 206.3 – 702.9 99.7 17
203.6 15.0 6.8 6.8 – 178.5 211.8 – 702.9 99.7 24
218.9 13.8 6.7 6.7 – 178.5 217.6 – 702.9 99.7 31
195.6 14.6 6.7 6.7 – 178.5 206.4 – 702.9 99.7 June 7
202.7 15.0 6.7 6.7 – 178.5 204.4 – 702.9 99.7 14
206.0 15.3 5.0 5.0 – 178.5 206.7 – 702.9 99.7 21
221.8 15.0 5.3 5.3 – 179.0 212.1 – 750.4 99.7 28
200.8 15.8 5.7 5.7 – 179.0 201.9 – 750.4 99.7 July 5
191.2 16.2 5.2 5.2 – 179.0 201.3 – 750.4 99.7 12
202.6 16.4 4.6 4.6 – 179.0 203.8 – 750.4 99.7 19
194.4 15.5 4.1 4.1 – 179.0 205.5 – 750.4 99.7 26
192.3 15.7 4.0 4.0 – 179.0 201.9 – 750.4 99.6 Aug. 2
175.6 15.7 3.6 3.6 – 179.0 200.7 – 750.4 99.6 9
Deutsche Bundesbank
69.4 0.0 0.1 0.1 – 45.7 38.6 536.7 197.1 5.5 2024 Jan. 19
71.7 0.0 0.1 0.1 – 45.7 39.1 541.9 197.1 5.5 26
68.7 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.7 38.3 536.2 197.1 5.5 Feb. 2
65.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 45.7 38.5 536.2 197.1 5.5 9
61.9 0.0 1.0 1.0 – 45.7 39.5 536.2 197.1 5.5 16
63.9 0.0 1.5 1.5 – 45.7 21.5 536.2 197.1 3.2 23
61.4 0.0 1.3 1.3 – 45.7 21.4 538.6 197.1 3.2 Mar. 1
60.6 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 45.7 21.4 538.6 197.1 3.2 8
57.3 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 45.7 21.6 538.6 197.1 3.2 15
60.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 45.7 21.8 538.6 197.1 3.2 22
61.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 20.5 541.5 216.6 3.2 29
50.9 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 20.6 541.5 216.6 3.2 Apr. 5
47.7 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 20.9 541.5 216.6 3.2 12
50.0 0.0 1.1 1.1 – 46.1 20.9 541.5 216.6 3.2 19
48.0 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 46.1 21.0 541.5 216.6 3.2 26
46.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.1 20.4 543.3 216.6 3.2 May 3
47.3 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.1 20.5 543.3 216.6 3.2 10
49.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 46.1 21.9 543.3 216.6 3.2 17
50.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 21.5 543.3 216.6 3.2 24
53.6 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 21.5 545.7 216.6 3.2 31
46.8 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 21.7 545.7 216.6 3.2 June 7
55.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.1 21.9 545.7 216.6 3.2 14
52.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 46.1 22.0 545.7 216.6 3.2 21
61.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 46.2 19.5 547.3 231.1 3.2 28
49.0 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 46.2 19.2 547.3 231.1 3.2 July 5
46.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 46.2 19.3 547.3 231.1 3.2 12
43.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.4 547.3 231.1 3.2 19
45.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.7 547.3 231.1 3.2 26
48.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.0 550.2 231.1 3.2 Aug. 2
47.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.1 550.2 231.1 3.2 9
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2023 10,321.0 18.7 2,884.4 2,349.7 2,081.8 267.9 534.7 374.6 160.1 4,651.2 4,109.2 3,729.7 3,395.7
2022 Sep. 11,063.0 20.7 3,268.0 2,714.2 2,442.2 272.0 553.7 419.7 134.0 4,579.6 4,057.2 3,685.0 3,351.1
Oct. 11,036.0 20.0 3,259.8 2,696.8 2,424.2 272.6 563.0 416.3 146.7 4,591.1 4,077.8 3,699.7 3,365.9
Nov. 10,762.4 19.1 3,180.1 2,630.6 2,360.1 270.5 549.5 403.2 146.2 4,610.5 4,089.4 3,715.1 3,379.3
Dec. 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 18.2 3,085.7 2,550.5 2,288.2 262.3 535.1 383.8 151.4 4,600.1 4,080.1 3,706.1 3,372.3
Feb. 10,760.9 18.0 3,085.7 2,541.4 2,274.9 266.5 544.3 390.6 153.8 4,614.2 4,094.2 3,714.7 3,381.3
Mar. 10,553.8 17.9 3,041.3 2,497.8 2,229.3 268.4 543.5 391.2 152.3 4,620.6 4,094.7 3,718.2 3,386.0
Apr. 10,564.3 18.9 3,047.7 2,507.0 2,237.3 269.7 540.7 384.5 156.2 4,630.5 4,096.8 3,721.7 3,390.4
May 10,653.7 18.2 3,091.2 2,550.3 2,279.7 270.6 541.0 383.4 157.5 4,642.2 4,103.4 3,733.0 3,400.9
June 10,577.7 17.7 2,967.0 2,434.5 2,166.3 268.2 532.5 371.5 161.0 4,646.7 4,108.0 3,734.5 3,397.1
July 10,743.2 17.2 3,002.4 2,456.4 2,188.8 267.6 546.0 384.8 161.2 4,651.1 4,114.5 3,738.2 3,402.0
Aug. 10,735.3 17.5 2,994.8 2,455.6 2,187.1 268.4 539.2 377.9 161.4 4,649.4 4,111.7 3,733.9 3,400.6
Sep. 10,737.5 18.0 2,916.4 2,371.6 2,106.3 265.3 544.8 382.8 162.0 4,649.8 4,113.1 3,735.7 3,401.7
Oct. 10,797.9 17.5 2,980.6 2,430.9 2,165.6 265.3 549.7 387.7 162.1 4,653.7 4,116.8 3,736.3 3,401.6
Nov. 10,610.8 16.9 2,987.1 2,438.4 2,168.4 270.0 548.7 386.5 162.2 4,666.3 4,123.1 3,740.9 3,406.9
Dec. 10,321.0 18.7 2,884.4 2,349.7 2,081.8 267.9 534.7 374.6 160.1 4,651.2 4,109.2 3,729.7 3,395.7
2024 Jan. 10,454.3 16.3 2,979.1 2,420.8 2,144.5 276.3 558.2 394.5 163.7 4,665.4 4,113.3 3,729.2 3,393.3
Feb. 10,584.8 16.3 3,012.3 2,441.5 2,160.1 281.4 570.8 406.8 163.9 4,675.8 4,120.6 3,736.2 3,399.3
Mar. 10,509.6 17.6 2,957.6 2,389.6 2,105.8 283.8 568.1 403.0 165.1 4,695.4 4,126.2 3,741.0 3,401.3
Apr. 10,598.5 16.6 2,959.3 2,382.9 2,097.2 285.7 576.4 412.6 163.8 4,690.1 4,127.5 3,741.6 3,402.0
May 10,578.7 16.7 2,951.3 2,378.9 2,092.4 286.5 572.4 406.9 165.5 4,701.4 4,135.1 3,747.0 3,406.5
June 10,491.1 16.7 2,936.5 2,378.3 2,093.0 285.3 558.2 393.5 164.7 4,712.0 4,142.7 3,747.4 3,408.4
Changes 3
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2021 207.2 2.2 161.3 155.6 156.4 – 0.8 5.7 11.7 – 5.9 175.7 154.6 173.7 155.9
2022 1,170.5 –29.7 149.5 103.7 100.5 3.2 45.8 33.1 12.7 242.4 223.1 237.5 220.6
2023 –133.8 – 1.3 –41.5 –76.2 –86.2 10.0 34.7 17.2 17.5 84.5 44.6 40.5 41.3
2022 Oct. –19.3 – 0.7 – 6.7 –17.0 –17.7 0.6 10.3 – 2.4 12.7 12.4 21.1 15.3 15.5
Nov. –245.9 – 0.9 –75.9 –65.0 –63.0 – 2.0 –10.9 – 10.5 – 0.5 21.4 13.0 17.1 15.1
Dec. –225.1 0.9 –240.0 –196.2 –189.2 – 7.1 –43.8 – 41.2 – 2.6 –24.0 – 8.4 – 9.9 –11.6
2023 Jan. 87.5 – 1.8 155.0 122.2 119.3 2.8 32.8 24.0 8.9 22.8 6.5 8.1 8.0
Feb. 167.0 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 9.1 –13.4 4.3 8.3 5.8 2.5 13.4 13.6 7.9 8.3
Mar. –195.2 – 0.1 –42.8 –43.2 –45.0 1.8 0.4 1.9 – 1.5 8.2 2.0 5.0 6.2
Apr. 16.7 1.0 7.7 9.8 8.1 1.7 – 2.1 – 6.0 3.9 11.0 3.0 4.2 5.1
May 91.9 – 0.7 41.9 42.2 41.3 0.9 – 0.2 – 1.6 1.3 12.3 6.8 11.5 10.6
June –65.9 – 0.5 –121.0 –113.5 –112.5 – 1.1 – 7.5 – 11.0 3.5 4.7 5.5 2.5 – 1.7
July 170.6 – 0.5 34.6 22.2 22.7 – 0.6 12.4 12.2 0.2 6.0 7.6 4.7 5.8
Aug. –15.1 0.3 – 7.6 – 1.1 – 1.9 0.8 – 6.5 – 6.6 0.1 – 0.5 – 2.4 – 3.9 – 1.0
Sep. 1.6 0.6 –78.5 –83.9 –80.8 – 3.1 5.3 4.7 0.7 1.6 2.3 2.7 2.0
Oct. 68.3 – 0.5 64.7 59.5 59.5 0.0 5.1 5.1 0.1 5.1 4.6 1.5 0.9
Nov. –174.8 – 0.6 8.2 7.9 3.2 4.7 0.3 0.3 0.0 13.7 7.3 6.4 7.2
Dec. –286.4 1.8 –102.9 –89.1 –86.8 – 2.3 –13.8 – 11.6 – 2.2 –13.7 –12.3 –10.1 –10.1
2024 Jan. 123.8 – 2.4 90.9 68.6 61.1 7.6 22.3 18.9 3.3 15.1 5.4 0.8 0.1
Feb. 132.1 0.0 33.5 20.9 15.7 5.3 12.5 12.3 0.2 11.2 7.4 7.3 6.3
Mar. –75.2 1.3 –55.0 –52.0 –54.3 2.4 – 3.0 – 3.9 0.9 20.1 6.2 5.5 2.8
Apr. 86.9 – 1.1 1.5 – 6.7 – 8.6 1.9 8.2 9.2 – 1.1 – 3.8 1.9 1.4 1.2
May –11.7 0.2 – 7.0 – 3.7 – 4.6 0.9 – 3.3 – 5.0 1.7 12.5 8.4 6.3 5.5
June –86.4 – 0.0 –14.8 – 0.7 1.3 – 2.0 –14.0 – 13.4 – 0.6 11.7 8.2 1.1 2.5
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 2021
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 2022
334.0 379.5 254.3 125.2 542.0 411.1 283.5 130.9 28.4 102.5 1,134.5 876.1 1,632.3 2023
333.9 372.2 244.5 127.7 522.4 390.5 273.1 132.0 35.4 96.6 1,220.9 961.0 1,973.8 2022 Sep.
333.8 378.1 246.0 132.1 513.3 385.7 268.4 127.6 34.4 93.2 1,234.2 975.7 1,930.8 Oct.
335.9 374.2 246.3 127.9 521.1 394.0 276.5 127.1 32.7 94.4 1,224.6 963.4 1,728.1 Nov.
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 Dec.
333.8 374.0 250.3 123.7 520.1 393.5 280.2 126.6 30.2 96.4 1,161.9 904.0 1,719.2 2023 Jan.
333.5 379.5 248.2 131.3 520.0 393.3 279.2 126.8 31.3 95.4 1,167.6 904.4 1,875.3 Feb.
332.2 376.5 248.9 127.6 526.0 397.5 275.7 128.4 30.9 97.5 1,168.5 902.6 1,705.4 Mar.
331.2 375.1 250.9 124.2 533.7 405.8 280.9 128.0 32.3 95.7 1,149.9 883.9 1,717.3 Apr.
332.1 370.5 249.8 120.7 538.7 407.7 284.6 131.0 31.9 99.1 1,177.7 912.0 1,724.4 May
337.4 373.4 248.7 124.7 538.7 403.1 279.6 135.6 31.0 104.5 1,150.6 886.7 1,795.7 June
336.2 376.4 252.1 124.3 536.6 407.3 282.8 129.3 30.7 98.7 1,156.3 895.0 1,916.3 July
333.3 377.9 249.5 128.4 537.7 404.5 282.9 133.2 31.1 102.1 1,157.7 899.2 1,915.9 Aug.
334.1 377.4 252.0 125.4 536.7 404.7 282.5 132.0 32.0 100.0 1,163.8 902.7 1,989.5 Sep.
334.7 380.5 255.1 125.4 537.0 405.6 282.9 131.4 32.0 99.4 1,165.8 909.5 1,980.1 Oct.
334.0 382.2 254.4 127.8 543.2 412.1 288.2 131.1 30.9 100.2 1,153.0 895.0 1,787.6 Nov.
334.0 379.5 254.3 125.2 542.0 411.1 283.5 130.9 28.4 102.5 1,134.5 876.1 1,632.3 Dec.
335.9 384.2 256.3 127.9 552.0 414.9 287.1 137.1 28.8 108.3 1,167.8 911.4 1,625.8 2024 Jan.
336.9 384.5 254.8 129.6 555.2 420.3 293.8 134.9 28.5 106.4 1,205.6 942.8 1,674.7 Feb.
339.7 385.2 257.2 128.0 569.2 426.8 294.6 142.5 28.1 114.4 1,211.2 942.8 1,627.7 Mar.
339.7 385.8 259.9 126.0 562.7 422.4 294.1 140.3 28.8 111.4 1,218.9 947.8 1,713.6 Apr.
340.5 388.1 259.6 128.5 566.3 429.9 296.6 136.4 27.8 108.6 1,247.8 977.8 1,661.5 May
339.0 395.2 262.6 132.7 569.3 425.5 293.2 143.8 28.0 115.8 1,237.3 964.0 1,588.6 June
Changes 3
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
17.8 –19.1 – 6.1 –13.1 21.1 35.5 22.6 –14.3 – 1.1 –13.2 71.7 84.9 –203.7 2021
16.9 –14.4 1.9 –16.3 19.3 20.7 24.4 – 1.4 2.6 – 3.9 15.0 – 0.8 793.3 2022
– 0.9 4.1 6.4 – 2.3 39.9 28.3 15.1 11.7 – 2.4 14.1 42.6 34.1 –218.1 2023
– 0.3 5.9 1.4 4.4 – 8.7 – 4.4 – 4.6 – 4.3 – 1.0 – 3.3 19.7 20.4 –44.0 2022 Oct.
2.0 – 4.1 0.0 – 4.1 8.4 9.2 9.6 – 0.8 – 1.7 0.9 8.8 4.8 –199.3 Nov.
1.8 1.5 0.9 0.6 –15.6 – 9.3 – 6.2 – 6.4 – 1.9 – 4.5 –75.0 –69.5 112.9 Dec.
0.1 – 1.6 2.3 – 3.9 16.3 9.4 10.0 6.9 – 0.6 7.5 33.4 27.8 –121.8 2023 Jan.
– 0.4 5.6 – 2.0 7.7 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.4 0.5 1.1 – 0.7 – 1.7 – 6.6 156.4 Feb.
– 1.2 – 3.0 0.8 – 3.7 6.1 4.6 – 3.0 1.5 – 0.4 1.9 9.6 6.5 –170.1 Mar.
– 1.0 – 1.2 2.1 – 3.3 8.0 8.5 5.4 – 0.5 1.4 – 1.9 –14.9 –15.4 11.9 Apr.
0.9 – 4.7 – 1.2 – 3.5 5.4 2.1 3.9 3.4 – 0.4 3.7 28.3 28.1 10.1 May
4.2 3.0 – 1.1 4.1 – 0.9 – 5.5 – 5.9 4.6 – 0.9 5.5 – 9.4 – 8.3 60.3 June
– 1.2 3.0 3.4 – 0.4 – 1.7 4.4 3.4 – 6.1 – 0.3 – 5.7 10.3 12.6 120.4 July
– 2.8 1.5 – 2.6 4.1 1.9 – 1.9 1.0 3.8 0.5 3.4 – 5.1 – 1.9 – 2.2 Aug.
0.7 – 0.3 2.6 – 2.9 – 0.7 0.4 – 0.3 – 1.1 0.9 – 2.0 6.6 3.7 71.3 Sep.
0.7 3.0 3.1 – 0.0 0.5 1.1 0.5 – 0.5 0.0 – 0.6 3.9 8.3 – 5.0 Oct.
– 0.8 0.9 – 1.5 2.4 6.4 6.7 5.8 – 0.3 – 1.2 0.9 – 3.0 – 5.3 –193.1 Nov.
– 0.1 – 2.2 0.7 – 2.8 – 1.4 – 0.9 – 4.4 – 0.5 – 2.5 2.0 –15.2 –15.5 –156.4 Dec.
0.7 4.6 2.0 2.6 9.7 3.5 3.4 6.2 0.4 5.8 25.3 27.8 – 5.1 2024 Jan.
1.0 0.1 – 1.7 1.8 3.9 6.0 7.4 – 2.1 – 0.3 – 1.8 38.2 31.8 49.2 Feb.
2.7 0.7 2.4 – 1.6 13.9 6.4 1.0 7.6 – 0.4 7.9 5.4 – 0.2 –47.1 Mar.
0.1 0.6 2.6 – 2.0 – 5.8 – 4.0 – 0.4 – 1.8 0.7 – 2.5 4.6 1.8 85.7 Apr.
0.8 2.1 – 0.4 2.5 4.1 8.0 2.9 – 3.9 – 1.1 – 2.8 34.2 34.8 –51.5 May
– 1.4 7.1 3.0 4.2 3.5 – 3.9 – 3.2 7.4 0.2 7.2 –10.4 –13.8 –73.0 June
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2023 10,321.0 1,489.3 1,099.9 389.4 4,419.1 4,174.5 2,530.0 1,198.7 693.4 445.9 395.3 186.3 75.9
2022 Sep. 11,063.0 1,814.5 1,415.7 398.8 4,342.6 4,105.7 2,748.5 812.0 306.6 545.2 523.1 191.1 102.4
Oct. 11,036.0 1,837.4 1,419.0 418.4 4,359.6 4,122.0 2,741.6 838.3 334.6 542.1 519.8 190.0 92.4
Nov. 10,762.4 1,773.7 1,345.0 428.7 4,401.0 4,132.6 2,752.4 843.3 344.7 536.8 514.3 193.1 97.3
Dec. 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 1,642.4 1,231.2 411.2 4,392.0 4,124.2 2,706.4 895.1 397.6 522.7 498.8 188.7 94.3
Feb. 10,760.9 1,633.5 1,226.0 407.5 4,391.4 4,113.2 2,670.6 926.7 428.4 515.9 490.8 191.2 97.2
Mar. 10,553.8 1,618.0 1,210.4 407.6 4,368.3 4,092.1 2,625.3 959.7 462.3 507.2 480.5 197.9 98.8
Apr. 10,564.3 1,632.8 1,227.7 405.1 4,370.1 4,099.8 2,620.9 980.3 482.3 498.6 470.4 199.5 93.6
May 10,653.7 1,622.7 1,229.8 392.9 4,384.2 4,108.2 2,613.0 1,004.7 504.1 490.6 460.2 201.6 97.9
June 10,577.7 1,530.6 1,149.6 381.0 4,378.1 4,110.1 2,586.3 1,040.5 541.1 483.3 450.2 196.6 90.9
July 10,743.2 1,563.0 1,159.8 403.2 4,382.4 4,116.2 2,569.6 1,070.7 572.0 475.9 439.9 197.0 90.2
Aug. 10,735.3 1,549.2 1,162.1 387.0 4,388.3 4,124.6 2,555.7 1,101.4 603.4 467.5 428.7 191.6 87.5
Sep. 10,737.5 1,500.0 1,112.7 387.3 4,384.5 4,126.8 2,545.8 1,119.2 620.4 461.8 420.1 193.4 89.5
Oct. 10,797.9 1,530.0 1,132.1 398.0 4,398.0 4,135.1 2,528.3 1,151.4 653.5 455.4 410.8 198.1 88.2
Nov. 10,610.8 1,547.2 1,136.6 410.5 4,414.1 4,158.1 2,538.2 1,171.5 670.5 448.3 400.3 197.0 89.8
Dec. 10,321.0 1,489.3 1,099.9 389.4 4,419.1 4,174.5 2,530.0 1,198.7 693.4 445.9 395.3 186.3 75.9
2024 Jan. 10,454.3 1,538.7 1,125.8 412.8 4,411.2 4,162.0 2,484.1 1,238.6 733.2 439.4 386.3 189.6 81.6
Feb. 10,584.8 1,553.3 1,134.8 418.5 4,408.0 4,160.5 2,466.4 1,259.7 753.8 434.4 378.9 191.6 82.1
Mar. 10,509.6 1,495.3 1,083.4 411.9 4,436.4 4,186.1 2,467.5 1,288.2 781.6 430.3 373.2 191.5 82.7
Apr. 10,598.5 1,520.0 1,094.3 425.7 4,435.0 4,186.5 2,463.4 1,297.4 789.0 425.7 367.7 191.0 84.1
May 10,578.7 1,503.4 1,088.4 415.0 4,464.9 4,209.9 2,484.8 1,303.0 793.5 422.2 363.7 196.0 88.3
June 10,491.1 1,479.4 1,067.5 411.9 4,469.5 4,211.8 2,481.9 1,311.8 800.8 418.1 359.1 197.6 92.0
Changes 4
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2021 207.2 133.4 103.4 30.0 107.3 96.2 141.4 –45.8 –23.3 0.6 3.9 16.6 13.6
2022 1,170.5 –15.6 –105.9 90.3 208.9 165.9 60.6 132.8 148.1 –27.5 –26.3 18.4 12.8
2023 –133.8 –133.9 –138.4 4.5 89.6 93.4 –172.3 347.9 338.5 –82.3 –109.9 7.1 – 7.1
2022 Oct. –19.3 24.2 3.8 20.3 17.2 16.2 – 7.3 26.6 28.2 – 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.7 – 9.7
Nov. –245.9 –60.3 –73.0 12.7 45.6 21.3 14.3 12.2 10.1 – 5.3 – 5.4 – 3.2 5.4
Dec. –225.1 –152.7 –112.7 –40.0 –55.4 –37.3 –39.2 5.6 9.4 – 3.7 – 4.1 –11.9 –12.8
2023 Jan. 87.5 23.3 0.0 23.3 49.1 30.9 –10.4 46.7 44.0 – 5.5 – 6.4 8.2 10.1
Feb. 167.0 –10.3 – 5.6 – 4.7 – 1.8 –11.8 –36.4 31.3 30.7 – 6.7 – 7.9 2.1 2.7
Mar. –195.2 –13.4 –14.7 1.3 –21.7 –20.0 –44.1 32.8 33.5 – 8.7 –10.3 7.1 1.8
Apr. 16.7 15.5 17.5 – 1.9 2.4 8.1 – 4.1 20.8 20.2 – 8.6 –10.1 1.8 – 5.1
May 91.9 –10.1 2.1 –12.1 13.1 8.4 – 7.9 24.3 21.7 – 8.0 –10.2 1.1 4.2
June –65.9 –90.3 –79.4 –11.0 – 6.3 1.5 –26.3 35.0 36.1 – 7.3 – 9.9 – 4.7 – 6.9
July 170.6 31.5 10.4 21.1 4.9 6.5 –16.4 30.2 31.0 – 7.3 –10.3 0.6 – 0.7
Aug. –15.1 –13.3 2.8 –16.1 6.4 7.9 –13.6 30.0 30.7 – 8.5 –11.2 – 4.4 – 2.4
Sep. 1.6 –49.2 –49.4 0.2 – 3.9 2.2 – 9.9 17.8 17.3 – 5.7 – 8.6 1.8 1.9
Oct. 68.3 30.9 19.9 11.0 13.8 8.5 –17.4 32.3 33.1 – 6.4 – 9.4 4.7 – 1.2
Nov. –174.8 18.9 5.1 13.8 17.5 23.9 10.6 20.4 17.2 – 7.1 –10.5 – 0.7 2.1
Dec. –286.4 –67.4 –47.2 –20.3 16.0 27.3 3.4 26.4 23.1 – 2.5 – 5.0 –10.5 –13.8
2024 Jan. 123.8 48.2 25.6 22.5 – 8.9 –13.2 –46.4 39.8 39.6 – 6.5 – 9.1 3.0 5.5
Feb. 132.1 14.8 9.0 5.8 – 3.2 – 1.5 –17.7 21.1 20.7 – 5.0 – 7.3 2.0 0.4
Mar. –75.2 –57.9 –51.4 – 6.6 28.4 25.6 1.2 28.5 27.8 – 4.1 – 5.7 – 0.1 0.6
Apr. 86.9 24.2 10.9 13.4 – 1.7 0.2 – 4.3 9.1 7.3 – 4.6 – 5.5 – 0.6 1.3
May –11.7 –15.1 – 5.1 –10.1 30.5 23.9 21.8 5.5 4.4 – 3.5 – 4.0 5.1 4.3
June –86.4 –22.2 –18.9 – 3.3 2.7 0.1 – 2.9 7.1 7.3 – 4.2 – 4.5 1.6 3.7
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 2021
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 2022
108.4 37.8 2.0 1.6 58.3 52.0 5.0 3.2 1,279.0 80.5 723.0 784.8 1,617.7 2023
86.4 31.2 2.3 2.1 45.9 43.3 3.2 2.5 1,203.3 45.8 987.2 758.0 1,951.6 2022 Sep.
95.4 39.7 2.2 2.1 47.6 44.9 4.0 2.6 1,202.6 39.4 980.8 751.8 1,897.2 Oct.
93.5 31.3 2.2 2.0 75.4 71.1 4.7 2.6 1,202.3 42.2 939.7 747.3 1,691.1 Nov.
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 Dec.
92.3 30.4 2.2 2.0 79.1 73.8 3.9 2.5 1,205.2 47.4 890.6 728.9 1,719.6 2023 Jan.
91.8 30.0 2.2 1.9 87.0 82.5 5.0 2.4 1,221.5 55.6 901.8 724.9 1,880.4 Feb.
97.0 28.5 2.1 1.9 78.2 73.3 4.7 2.6 1,231.2 64.6 863.1 734.8 1,731.0 Mar.
103.7 33.9 2.1 1.9 70.8 65.9 5.4 2.8 1,235.3 67.3 856.2 735.7 1,726.0 Apr.
101.6 30.7 2.1 1.8 74.4 62.4 6.0 2.6 1,257.3 72.3 888.2 746.9 1,745.8 May
103.6 32.5 2.0 1.8 71.4 64.0 4.8 2.6 1,253.9 75.7 853.4 749.6 1,804.7 June
104.8 33.2 2.0 1.7 69.2 61.5 6.5 2.9 1,262.0 76.3 855.0 757.2 1,914.3 July
102.0 32.4 2.0 1.7 72.2 61.5 5.8 3.0 1,271.3 83.5 840.0 765.2 1,912.5 Aug.
102.0 32.6 2.0 1.7 64.3 60.0 4.9 3.0 1,280.7 82.6 825.8 765.1 1,973.5 Sep.
107.9 37.8 2.0 1.6 64.8 59.7 6.2 2.9 1,288.5 84.7 843.9 755.9 1,972.3 Oct.
105.2 34.5 2.0 1.6 59.1 55.1 6.6 3.0 1,286.3 83.6 805.3 769.5 1,778.8 Nov.
108.4 37.8 2.0 1.6 58.3 52.0 5.0 3.2 1,279.0 80.5 723.0 784.8 1,617.7 Dec.
106.1 35.6 1.9 1.6 59.5 50.5 9.1 3.3 1,304.0 83.0 775.3 756.5 1,656.1 2024 Jan.
107.6 39.2 1.9 1.5 55.9 49.5 10.0 3.3 1,316.2 83.3 831.9 749.6 1,712.5 Feb.
106.8 37.5 1.9 1.5 58.8 49.9 9.1 3.5 1,320.0 82.7 834.2 756.2 1,655.0 Mar.
105.0 35.6 1.9 1.5 57.4 49.2 9.5 3.7 1,324.9 77.3 821.9 746.5 1,736.9 Apr.
105.8 34.8 1.9 1.5 59.0 49.5 8.7 3.8 1,327.0 75.7 832.8 756.7 1,681.4 May
103.7 33.2 1.9 1.4 60.1 49.5 9.3 4.0 1,326.6 79.1 825.3 787.0 1,590.1 June
Changes 4
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
3.1 – 8.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 – 5.0 – 7.9 0.3 40.6 6.9 124.9 16.6 –207.9 2021
5.8 8.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 24.6 23.0 1.2 0.4 67.2 12.6 45.6 5.0 857.7 2022
14.4 6.7 – 0.2 – 0.4 –10.9 –14.8 1.8 0.5 110.6 43.1 –55.7 43.3 –189.9 2023
9.1 8.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.7 1.6 0.8 0.1 1.8 – 6.3 – 2.8 – 5.3 –55.3 2022 Oct.
– 8.6 – 8.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 27.5 25.8 0.8 0.0 7.4 2.4 –29.9 – 1.1 –208.4 Nov.
1.0 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 6.3 – 4.3 – 1.3 0.1 –11.5 – 1.2 –132.1 1.9 125.9 Dec.
– 1.9 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.9 6.9 0.5 – 0.2 22.4 6.6 95.0 –17.6 –85.0 2023 Jan.
– 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 7.9 8.7 1.2 – 0.1 13.0 8.1 6.9 – 5.0 163.2 Feb.
5.3 – 1.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 8.8 – 9.2 – 0.3 0.3 13.6 9.2 –33.8 11.2 –151.2 Mar.
6.9 5.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.4 – 7.4 0.7 0.1 5.7 2.7 – 4.9 1.8 – 4.7 Apr.
– 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 3.6 – 3.5 0.6 – 0.1 23.4 6.5 32.0 9.4 23.5 May
2.1 2.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.0 1.6 – 1.1 – 0.0 0.4 4.1 –28.3 3.6 56.2 June
1.2 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.1 – 2.5 1.7 0.3 10.2 0.7 4.2 8.1 109.7 July
– 2.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.9 – 0.0 – 0.7 0.1 7.0 7.1 –18.9 7.2 – 2.8 Aug.
– 0.1 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.9 – 1.5 – 0.9 0.1 10.3 0.0 –14.2 – 1.0 60.4 Sep.
5.9 5.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.3 1.4 – 0.1 8.3 2.2 19.1 – 4.6 – 0.4 Oct.
– 2.8 – 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 5.7 – 4.6 0.4 0.1 2.0 – 1.0 –32.8 14.8 –195.8 Nov.
3.3 3.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 3.1 – 1.6 0.1 – 5.6 – 3.0 –80.1 15.3 –163.0 Dec.
– 2.5 – 2.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.2 – 1.5 4.1 0.1 21.1 2.4 48.0 –29.3 40.5 2024 Jan.
1.5 3.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.6 – 1.0 0.8 0.0 12.5 0.2 56.7 – 6.4 57.0 Feb.
– 0.7 – 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.9 0.5 – 0.9 0.2 3.6 – 0.6 2.0 6.6 –57.1 Mar.
– 1.9 – 2.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.4 – 0.8 0.4 0.2 3.6 – 5.4 –14.2 –10.0 84.4 Apr.
0.8 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.5 0.3 – 0.8 0.1 4.2 – 1.6 13.9 10.7 –55.2 May
– 2.1 – 1.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.0 – 0.1 0.6 0.2 0.3 4.1 – 7.5 29.7 –90.2 June
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
24•
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
End of
monthNumber of
reporting
institu-
tionsBalance
sheet
total  1Cash in
hand and
credit
balances
with
central
banks TotalBalances
and
loansSecurities
issued by
banks Totalfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more than
1 year BillsSecurities
issued by
non-banksPartici-
pating
interestsOther
assets  1
All categories of banks
2024 Jan. 1,335 10,534.7 89.9 3,537.5 3,042.7 491.0 5,033.8 476.4 3,822.3 0.1 719.0 96.8 1,776.6
Feb. 1,334 10,669.6 64.3 3,622.7 3,122.5 496.3 5,056.1 485.2 3,829.4 0.1 726.6 96.2 1,830.3
Mar. 1,333 10,597.2 65.1 3,580.4 3,074.4 502.4 5,068.9 480.5 3,829.3 0.1 743.3 96.5 1,786.4
Apr. 1,330 10,690.1 63.1 3,575.2 3,068.4 503.7 5,078.4 493.8 3,832.7 0.1 733.6 97.0 1,876.4
May 1,330 10,674.3 60.6 3,599.9 3,089.2 507.2 5,088.1 495.0 3,838.3 0.1 737.5 97.2 1,828.4
June 1,326 10,588.5 63.9 3,567.3 3,058.2 505.9 5,102.0 500.3 3,835.7 0.1 748.2 97.4 1,757.9
Commercial banks 6
2024 May 239 4,957.4 21.9 1,724.2 1,626.5 97.1 1,677.3 334.1 1,057.9 0.1 276.6 30.5 1,503.5
June 239 4,864.2 23.9 1,684.5 1,587.3 96.7 1,686.1 333.8 1,058.0 0.1 285.4 30.5 1,439.4
Big banks 7
2024 May 3 2,466.0 9.8 716.4 676.0 40.4 769.4 164.8 449.4 0.0 150.7 24.8 945.7
June 3 2,407.5 10.8 697.5 656.5 41.0 777.8 170.2 449.0 0.0 154.4 24.7 896.7
Regional banks and other commercial banks
2024 May 127 2,005.9 8.9 702.8 649.3 53.2 750.9 122.6 509.1 0.1 115.8 4.8 538.4
June 127 1,949.8 9.8 662.6 610.2 52.3 749.7 115.5 509.1 0.1 121.1 4.8 522.8
Branches of foreign banks
2024 May 109 485.4 3.2 305.0 301.3 3.5 157.0 46.7 99.5 – 10.1 0.9 19.4
June 109 506.9 3.3 324.4 320.6 3.4 158.6 48.1 100.0 – 9.9 0.9 19.8
Landesbanken
2024 May 6 900.7 2.5 341.9 284.8 56.8 434.3 46.6 345.0 0.0 38.5 9.6 112.4
June 6 900.2 2.2 345.7 288.2 57.3 433.6 48.5 342.2 0.0 39.1 9.6 109.1
Savings banks
2024 May 352 1,555.5 19.3 273.4 153.0 120.3 1,220.1 54.1 998.0 – 167.8 16.7 26.0
June 352 1,555.4 20.5 272.5 152.8 119.7 1,220.7 54.3 998.3 – 168.0 16.7 25.1
Credit cooperatives
2024 May 694 1,182.8 11.6 220.9 109.6 111.0 898.1 34.9 745.3 0.0 117.8 20.5 31.7
June 690 1,179.1 12.5 215.4 105.1 110.0 898.8 35.8 745.7 0.0 117.2 20.6 31.8
Mortgage banks
2024 May 7 222.1 0.1 18.7 11.3 7.4 197.7 2.7 181.4 – 13.5 0.1 5.5
June 7 220.3 0.2 17.2 9.8 7.4 197.6 2.9 181.4 – 13.3 0.1 5.2
Building and loan associations
2024 May 14 258.6 0.1 40.1 24.5 15.7 214.4 1.2 192.4 . 20.7 0.2 3.7
June 14 258.6 0.2 39.5 23.9 15.7 214.7 1.3 192.9 . 20.5 0.2 4.0
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2024 May 18 1,597.2 5.1 980.6 879.5 98.9 446.3 21.2 318.3 0.0 102.4 19.6 145.6
June 18 1,610.5 4.6 992.5 891.3 99.1 450.6 23.8 317.2 0.0 104.7 19.6 143.2
Memo item:    Foreign banks 8
2024 May 140 2,420.6 9.4 865.3 822.9 41.7 741.9 159.2 436.6 0.1 139.4 2.8 801.2
June 140 2,359.3 10.3 845.9 804.7 40.7 743.6 159.4 435.3 0.1 141.8 2.8 756.8
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2024 May 31 1,935.1 6.2 560.3 521.6 38.3 584.9 112.4 337.1 0.1 129.3 1.9 781.8
June 31 1,852.4 7.0 521.6 484.1 37.3 585.0 111.4 335.3 0.1 131.9 1.9 737.0
* Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3.  1 Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial
instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning ofSection 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read
in conjunction with Section 35 (1) number 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are classified
under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting date. Trading
portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, in
Tables I.1 to I.3.  2 For building and loan associations: including deposits under savings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
25•
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4
TotalSight
depositsTime
deposits TotalSight
depositsfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more
than
1 year  2Memo
item:
Liabilities
arising
from
repos  3 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeBank
savings
bondsBearer
debt
securities
out-
standing  5Capital
including
published
reserves,
partici-
pation
rights
capital,
funds for
general
banking
risksOther
liabi-
lities  1End of
month
All categories of banks
2,105.4 675.4 1,430.0 4,625.9 2,697.1 647.0 685.4 88.1 444.0 390.0 152.5 1,379.1 611.0 1,813.2 2024 Jan.
2,160.6 695.9 1,464.7 4,639.5 2,690.2 668.5 683.4 97.3 439.0 382.6 158.4 1,386.3 610.9 1,872.3 Feb.
2,124.4 661.5 1,462.9 4,647.7 2,672.0 692.5 686.5 79.1 434.9 376.8 161.8 1,400.3 615.4 1,809.3 Mar.
2,124.0 685.4 1,438.5 4,659.1 2,682.6 695.3 685.0 90.9 430.2 371.3 166.0 1,393.5 619.0 1,894.5 Apr.
2,122.4 712.2 1,410.2 4,684.0 2,709.0 692.6 687.4 87.4 426.7 367.2 168.4 1,395.6 626.0 1,846.3 May
2,100.7 708.1 1,392.6 4,679.2 2,698.6 697.9 689.0 86.5 422.5 362.6 171.1 1,408.0 638.9 1,761.7 June
Commercial banks 6
1,147.9 552.0 595.9 1,928.8 1,181.9 360.9 248.2 85.3 86.1 55.9 51.7 219.0 219.2 1,442.6 2024 May
1,137.2 543.1 594.1 1,909.9 1,169.3 353.9 250.0 85.0 85.1 54.6 51.7 219.2 223.5 1,374.3 June
Big banks 7
439.8 192.8 247.0 880.9 528.0 200.1 70.9 44.7 78.1 48.8 3.9 164.2 83.6 897.5 2024 May
426.9 181.8 245.1 878.8 527.9 196.3 73.6 45.8 77.2 47.5 3.8 165.6 87.2 848.9 June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
483.2 246.7 236.5 828.3 509.4 109.7 153.7 40.5 7.7 6.9 47.8 53.2 118.1 523.2 2024 May
457.2 226.5 230.7 816.8 499.1 109.7 152.7 39.2 7.6 6.8 47.8 52.0 119.1 504.7 June
Branches of foreign banks
225.0 112.5 112.5 219.6 144.6 51.1 23.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 1.5 17.4 21.9 2024 May
253.2 134.9 118.3 214.3 142.4 47.9 23.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 1.6 17.2 20.7 June
Landesbanken
209.2 37.8 171.4 301.0 153.9 72.4 68.2 0.9 4.3 4.3 2.1 228.9 44.2 117.4 2024 May
209.6 44.7 164.9 303.5 155.3 73.6 68.2 0.8 4.3 4.3 2.2 228.5 44.2 114.5 June
Savings banks
153.5 3.2 150.4 1,172.0 762.1 97.4 20.2 – 203.6 184.9 88.7 23.4 143.3 63.2 2024 May
151.0 4.4 146.5 1,173.6 762.2 98.4 20.5 – 201.5 182.8 91.0 23.8 148.0 59.0 June
Credit cooperatives
156.7 2.6 154.1 867.1 534.0 132.0 43.4 – 132.3 121.7 25.4 9.0 107.7 42.3 2024 May
154.5 2.7 151.8 866.4 531.4 133.7 44.3 – 131.2 120.6 25.8 9.0 111.2 38.0 June
Mortgage banks
42.4 3.3 39.1 54.6 2.3 5.8 46.5 0.4 – – . 108.5 9.2 7.4 2024 May
41.4 3.3 38.1 54.6 2.5 6.0 46.1 0.3 – – . 107.7 9.2 7.4 June
Building and loan associations
37.5 2.8 34.7 192.5 4.1 2.9 185.0 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 7.5 13.1 7.9 2024 May
37.6 3.0 34.7 192.2 4.1 3.0 184.6 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 7.6 13.2 8.0 June
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
375.1 110.5 264.6 168.0 70.6 21.1 76.0 0.9 – – . 799.2 89.4 165.4 2024 May
369.4 106.9 262.6 179.0 73.8 29.4 75.4 0.4 – – . 812.1 89.5 160.5 June
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
679.9 363.2 316.7 797.8 501.4 153.4 108.0 47.0 7.8 7.4 27.2 51.1 103.5 788.3 2024 May
683.6 364.9 318.6 777.1 488.9 145.8 107.6 45.8 7.2 6.8 27.5 51.4 104.6 742.6 June
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
454.9 250.6 204.2 578.3 356.8 102.3 84.4 47.0 7.6 7.2 27.2 49.5 86.1 766.4 2024 May
430.3 230.0 200.3 562.8 346.6 97.9 83.9 45.8 6.9 6.6 27.5 49.8 87.4 722.0 June
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Included in time deposits.  4 Excluding deposits
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).  5 Including subordinated
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
6 Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”.  7 Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner
Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische
Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
notes in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, Table I.3, banking group “Big banks “).
8 Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories
of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”.
9 Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in
other banking categories.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
26•
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
PeriodCash in
hand
(euro area
banknotes
and
coins)Credit
balances
with the
Bundes-
bank TotalCredit
balances
and loans BillsNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total Loans BillsTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money mar-
ket paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued
by non-
banks  1
End of year or month *
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2023 18.5 52.0 2,280.7 2,029.3 – 0.8 250.6 24.2 4,044.1 3,649.9 0.1 0.9 393.3
2023 Jan. 18.0 89.5 2,443.6 2,198.1 – 1.0 244.5 12.7 4,016.2 3,622.4 0.1 4.3 389.4
Feb. 17.8 52.2 2,471.9 2,222.2 – 1.0 248.8 12.8 4,030.2 3,629.4 0.1 2.9 397.9
Mar. 17.7 53.5 2,426.8 2,175.1 – 1.0 250.7 12.6 4,030.5 3,634.7 0.1 4.3 391.4
Apr. 18.7 54.2 2,434.7 2,182.3 – 1.1 251.3 12.7 4,032.5 3,641.2 0.1 3.2 388.1
May 18.1 48.7 2,483.6 2,230.4 – 0.8 252.4 12.7 4,039.0 3,650.5 0.1 2.2 386.2
June 17.5 51.6 2,366.1 2,114.1 – 0.9 251.0 12.7 4,042.1 3,645.6 0.1 2.9 393.5
July 17.0 69.9 2,369.8 2,118.4 – 1.1 250.3 12.8 4,048.7 3,653.9 0.1 3.2 391.6
Aug. 17.3 46.7 2,392.0 2,139.7 – 1.2 251.1 12.9 4,046.7 3,649.9 0.1 2.5 394.2
Sep. 17.9 49.6 2,305.0 2,056.1 – 1.0 247.8 12.9 4,048.1 3,653.5 0.1 3.4 391.1
Oct. 17.4 62.2 2,351.7 2,102.8 – 0.8 248.0 13.1 4,051.9 3,656.6 0.1 3.0 392.2
Nov. 16.7 45.5 2,375.9 2,122.3 – 0.9 252.7 13.3 4,057.9 3,661.2 0.1 3.1 393.6
Dec. 18.5 52.0 2,280.7 2,029.3 – 0.8 250.6 24.2 4,044.1 3,649.9 0.1 0.9 393.3
2024 Jan. 16.1 73.1 2,330.7 2,070.9 – 0.8 259.0 28.1 4,048.3 3,649.5 0.0 1.4 397.4
Feb. 16.2 47.5 2,376.9 2,112.0 – 0.8 264.1 31.6 4,055.7 3,654.0 0.1 0.5 401.2
Mar. 17.5 46.9 2,325.4 2,058.2 – 0.7 266.5 34.3 4,061.0 3,658.4 0.1 0.5 402.1
Apr. 16.4 46.0 2,319.4 2,050.6 – 0.7 268.1 38.0 4,062.1 3,661.7 0.0 1.7 398.6
May 16.6 43.4 2,317.7 2,048.2 – 0.8 268.7 41.5 4,069.5 3,666.0 0.1 1.2 402.2
June 16.5 46.6 2,313.9 2,045.6 – 0.8 267.5 44.4 4,076.9 3,670.9 0.1 1.1 404.8
Changes *
2015 +0.3 + 73.7 – 80.7 – 4.3 –0.0 – 0.4 –75.9 –0.1 +68.9 +54.1 –0.0 – 0.3 +15.1
2016 +6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 – – 0.9 –17.9 +0.4 +43.7 +62.8 –0.1 – 0.1 –18.9
2017 +6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 –0.0 + 0.0 –20.1 –0.1 +57.0 +70.2 +0.0 + 0.4 –13.6
2018 +8.5 + 24.0 – 81.0 – 76.6 +0.0 + 0.1 – 4.4 +3.8 +71.5 +105.4 –0.1 – 0.5 –33.2
2019 +2.8 + 59.7 – 63.0 – 61.1 –0.0 – 0.2 – 1.6 –1.4 +126.7 +129.1 +0.1 + 3.1 – 5.5
2020 +4.1 +316.4 +201.2 +191.6 –0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 +4.3 +123.2 +123.6 –0.1 + 0.7 – 1.0
2021 +2.2 +111.8 + 44.1 + 46.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – 2.0 +1.5 +152.2 +147.8 +0.0 – 2.2 + 6.6
2022 –29.6 –836.6 +938.0 +938.1 – + 0.2 – 0.3 +1.7 +216.7 +220.1 –0.1 + 0.1 – 3.3
2023 –1.3 – 15.3 – 65.5 – 71.2 – – 0.2 + 5.9 +1.9 +30.9 +39.0 –0.1 – 1.8 – 6.2
2023 Jan. –1.8 + 22.2 + 96.7 + 96.7 – + 0.0 – 0.1 +0.6 + 0.6 + 9.2 –0.1 + 1.6 –10.3
Feb. –0.2 – 37.4 + 28.6 + 24.3 – + 0.0 + 4.3 +0.2 +13.3 + 6.3 –0.0 – 1.5 + 8.5
Mar. –0.1 + 1.3 – 45.1 – 47.0 – + 0.0 + 1.9 –0.1 + 0.9 + 6.0 +0.0 + 1.4 – 6.5
Apr. +1.0 + 0.7 + 7.8 + 7.2 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +0.1 + 2.1 + 6.5 +0.0 – 1.2 – 3.2
May –0.7 – 5.5 + 48.9 + 48.1 – – 0.3 + 1.1 –0.0 + 6.5 + 9.4 +0.0 – 1.0 – 1.9
June –0.5 + 2.9 –116.9 –115.7 – + 0.1 – 1.3 +0.0 + 4.4 – 3.7 –0.0 + 0.7 + 7.4
July –0.5 + 18.4 + 3.7 + 4.3 – + 0.2 – 0.8 +0.1 + 6.6 + 8.3 –0.0 + 0.2 – 1.9
Aug. +0.3 – 23.2 + 22.2 + 21.3 – + 0.1 + 0.8 +0.1 – 1.9 – 4.0 +0.0 – 0.6 + 2.7
Sep. +0.6 + 2.8 – 87.0 – 83.6 – – 0.2 – 3.3 +0.1 + 1.3 + 3.7 +0.0 + 0.9 – 3.2
Oct. –0.5 + 12.7 + 46.8 + 46.8 – – 0.2 + 0.2 +0.2 + 3.7 + 3.0 –0.0 – 0.4 + 1.1
Nov. –0.6 – 16.7 + 24.2 + 19.5 – + 0.1 + 4.6 +0.1 + 6.1 + 4.7 +0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3
Dec. +1.8 + 6.5 – 95.5 – 93.3 – – 0.1 – 2.0 +0.6 –12.7 –10.3 –0.0 – 2.2 – 0.2
2024 Jan. –2.4 + 21.1 + 48.6 + 40.3 – – 0.0 + 8.4 +3.9 + 4.0 – 0.5 –0.0 + 0.5 + 4.0
Feb. +0.0 – 25.6 + 46.3 + 41.2 – – 0.0 + 5.1 +3.4 + 6.7 + 3.7 +0.0 – 0.9 + 3.8
Mar. +1.3 – 0.6 – 51.5 – 53.8 – – 0.1 + 2.3 +2.8 + 5.3 + 4.4 +0.0 – 0.1 + 0.9
Apr. –1.1 – 0.8 – 5.9 – 7.5 – + 0.0 + 1.6 +3.7 + 1.1 + 3.3 –0.0 + 1.3 – 3.5
May +0.2 – 2.7 – 1.7 – 2.4 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +3.5 + 7.4 + 4.3 +0.0 – 0.5 + 3.6
June –0.0 + 3.2 – 3.8 – 1.9 – – 0.0 – 1.9 +2.9 + 7.4 + 4.9 –0.0 – 0.1 + 2.6
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange ofequalisation claims (see also footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the
exchange of equalisation claims.  3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt
securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
27•
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Equalisa-
tion
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in
domestic
banks
and
enterprises TotalSight
deposits
4Time
deposits
4Redis-
counted
bills  5Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
de-
positsTime
deposits
6Savings
de-
posits  7Bank
savings
bonds  8Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
– 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
– 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
– 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
– 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
– 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
– 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 2021
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 2022
– 23.8 80.3 1,099.9 137.9 962.0 0.0 13.5 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 445.9 142.2 50.1 2023
– 25.6 80.0 1,231.2 142.6 1,088.7 0.0 15.6 4,199.7 2,722.8 913.5 522.7 40.6 36.9 2023 Jan.
– 25.6 80.2 1,226.0 140.7 1,085.3 0.0 15.6 4,197.1 2,687.7 947.9 516.0 45.5 37.2 Feb.
– 24.6 80.3 1,210.4 137.0 1,073.4 0.0 15.2 4,167.4 2,639.8 968.6 507.2 51.7 36.4 Mar.
– 24.7 80.9 1,227.7 140.8 1,086.9 0.0 15.2 4,167.3 2,632.0 978.5 498.6 58.3 36.5 Apr.
– 24.7 81.1 1,229.8 137.8 1,091.9 0.0 15.1 4,172.9 2,623.9 993.0 490.6 65.4 36.6 May
– 24.4 81.2 1,149.6 134.0 1,015.6 0.0 14.6 4,176.3 2,600.9 1,020.0 483.3 72.1 36.5 June
– 24.4 81.0 1,159.8 134.8 1,025.0 0.0 14.6 4,180.2 2,582.2 1,042.9 475.9 79.1 36.7 July
– 24.4 80.3 1,162.1 138.5 1,023.7 0.0 14.5 4,188.4 2,568.4 1,061.7 467.5 90.7 36.9 Aug.
– 24.2 80.4 1,112.7 137.4 975.3 0.0 14.1 4,189.3 2,558.0 1,072.5 461.8 97.0 37.1 Sep.
– 24.1 80.3 1,132.1 136.7 995.4 0.0 14.0 4,198.0 2,544.5 1,086.5 455.4 111.6 37.3 Oct.
– 24.0 80.6 1,136.6 140.0 996.7 0.0 14.0 4,217.3 2,552.9 1,085.6 448.3 130.5 37.6 Nov.
– 23.8 80.3 1,099.9 137.9 962.0 0.0 13.5 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 445.9 142.2 50.1 Dec.
– 23.7 80.3 1,125.8 155.3 970.5 0.0 13.4 4,216.3 2,496.8 1,128.7 439.4 151.4 54.5 2024 Jan.
– 23.7 80.1 1,134.8 161.4 973.4 0.0 13.3 4,213.6 2,478.3 1,143.5 434.4 157.3 57.5 Feb.
– 23.5 80.3 1,083.4 159.4 924.0 0.0 12.8 4,239.0 2,479.2 1,168.8 430.3 160.7 60.2 Mar.
– 23.4 80.8 1,094.3 160.6 933.8 0.0 12.7 4,239.6 2,475.4 1,173.6 425.8 164.8 63.7 Apr.
– 23.5 81.0 1,088.4 158.0 930.5 0.0 12.7 4,263.3 2,497.0 1,176.9 422.2 167.2 66.9 May
– 23.2 81.1 1,067.5 158.5 909.0 0.0 12.3 4,264.7 2,494.2 1,182.5 418.1 170.0 68.9 June
Changes *
– –2.1 –4.3 –46.6 + 3.3 –50.0 +0.0 –1.3 +106.5 +156.2 –28.3 –11.3 –10.1 –1.6 2015
– –1.3 +1.5 – 1.7 + 0.3 – 2.0 +0.0 –0.5 +104.7 +124.5 – 6.9 – 7.9 –5.0 –0.5 2016
– –0.0 –1.6 +11.0 –18.4 +29.4 –0.0 –0.5 +103.1 +142.8 –27.5 – 5.6 –6.7 +0.4 2017
– –1.0 +3.1 –25.0 – 3.1 –21.9 +0.0 –0.4 +117.7 +139.3 –10.8 – 4.3 –6.5 +3.9 2018
– –0.7 +0.1 – 8.6 + 1.6 –10.2 +0.0 –0.3 +122.5 +155.8 –25.7 – 3.4 –4.1 –1.4 2019
– +5.7 –3.3 +313.4 +23.2 +290.2 –0.0 +8.2 +221.6 +273.7 –32.7 –14.5 –4.9 +1.9 2020
– +2.3 +1.0 +105.2 – 7.4 +112.6 +0.0 +3.3 +95.3 +144.3 –46.2 + 0.7 –3.5 –0.2 2021
– –0.1 +1.7 –104.6 + 8.8 –113.4 –0.0 –0.6 +191.8 +65.8 +143.4 –27.5 +10.1 +1.7 2022
– –1.2 +0.6 –139.9 – 8.9 –131.0 ±0.0 –2.3 +76.6 –172.0 +226.4 –82.3 +104.5 +3.5 2023
– –0.0 –0.4 – 0.3 + 5.8 – 6.1 +0.0 –0.1 +37.6 – 2.9 +40.0 – 5.5 +6.0 +1.0 2023 Jan.
– –0.0 +0.2 – 5.2 – 1.9 – 3.4 – –0.0 – 2.5 –35.0 +34.4 – 6.7 +4.8 +0.4 Feb.
– –0.3 +0.1 –15.2 – 3.7 –11.5 – –0.4 –29.6 –47.3 +20.2 – 8.7 +6.2 –0.1 Mar.
– +0.0 +1.1 +17.3 + 3.8 +13.5 –0.0 –0.0 – 0.1 – 7.9 + 9.8 – 8.6 +6.6 +0.0 Apr.
– +0.0 +0.2 + 2.1 – 3.0 + 5.0 –0.0 –0.1 + 5.6 – 7.9 +14.5 – 8.0 +7.1 +0.1 May
– –0.4 +0.1 –79.7 – 3.7 –76.0 +0.0 –0.5 + 2.3 –23.0 +26.0 – 7.3 +6.7 –0.1 June
– +0.0 –0.1 +10.2 + 0.8 + 9.4 – –0.0 + 3.8 –18.7 +22.8 – 7.3 +7.0 +0.2 July
– +0.1 –0.8 + 3.1 + 3.9 – 0.8 +0.0 –0.1 + 8.2 –13.2 +21.3 – 8.5 +8.5 +0.2 Aug.
– –0.2 +0.1 –49.4 – 1.1 –48.3 –0.0 –0.4 + 0.9 –10.5 +10.7 – 5.7 +6.3 +0.2 Sep.
– –0.1 –0.1 +19.9 – 0.7 +20.6 –0.0 –0.1 + 8.7 –13.4 +14.0 – 6.4 +14.6 +0.3 Oct.
– –0.1 +0.3 + 4.6 + 3.3 + 1.3 +0.0 –0.0 +19.3 + 8.5 – 1.0 – 7.1 +18.8 +0.3 Nov.
– –0.2 –0.2 –47.3 –12.5 –34.8 –0.0 –0.5 +22.3 – 0.7 +13.7 – 2.5 +11.8 +1.2 Dec.
– –0.1 –0.1 +26.0 +17.4 + 8.6 +0.0 –0.1 –12.7 –44.1 +28.7 – 6.5 +9.2 +4.4 2024 Jan.
– –0.0 –0.2 + 8.9 + 6.1 + 2.9 –0.0 –0.1 – 2.8 –18.4 +14.8 – 5.0 +5.9 +3.0 Feb.
– –0.2 +0.3 –51.4 – 1.9 –49.5 – –0.5 +25.5 + 0.9 +25.3 – 4.1 +3.4 +2.6 Mar.
– –0.1 +0.4 +11.0 + 1.2 + 9.8 – –0.1 + 0.6 – 3.8 + 4.8 – 4.6 +4.2 +3.5 Apr.
– +0.0 +0.2 – 5.3 – 2.6 – 2.7 – –0.1 +23.7 +21.7 + 3.1 – 3.5 +2.4 +3.2 May
– –0.2 +0.1 –18.9 + 0.5 –19.4 – –0.4 – 0.4 – 2.7 + 3.7 – 4.2 +2.8 +2.0 June
including subordinated liabilities.  4 Including liabilities arising from monetary policy
operations with the Bundesbank.  5 Own acceptances and promissory notes
outstanding.  6 Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  7 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8).  8 Including liabilities
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
28•
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Credit balances and loans, bills Loans and bills
PeriodCash in
hand
(non-
euro area
banknotes
and
coins) Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued by
non-banks
End of year or month *
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2023 0.2 1,166.9 934.7 652.0 282.7 3.1 229.2 6.1 960.4 627.3 174.9 452.4 12.3 320.8
2023 Jan. 0.2 1,195.3 963.1 700.1 263.0 2.7 229.5 4.0 941.0 633.6 190.9 442.7 20.1 287.3
Feb. 0.2 1,201.5 965.7 701.9 263.8 2.9 232.9 4.2 946.4 635.5 190.5 444.9 15.8 295.1
Mar. 0.2 1,203.8 968.2 704.1 264.0 2.9 232.7 4.3 953.0 630.8 187.8 443.0 12.5 309.8
Apr. 0.2 1,184.1 946.5 681.7 264.8 3.6 234.0 4.2 959.3 633.6 191.7 441.9 13.9 311.8
May 0.2 1,211.3 972.8 706.0 266.8 3.4 235.1 4.2 965.1 638.1 193.4 444.7 14.6 312.4
June 0.2 1,177.3 939.1 681.7 257.4 3.6 234.6 4.3 961.8 628.4 181.4 447.0 15.8 317.6
July 0.2 1,194.1 955.3 694.8 260.5 4.1 234.7 4.3 962.7 637.4 190.4 447.0 16.4 308.9
Aug. 0.2 1,197.1 959.5 693.8 265.7 3.7 233.9 4.3 954.8 630.9 181.3 449.6 16.2 307.8
Sep. 0.2 1,203.3 966.5 687.9 278.6 3.5 233.3 4.2 958.8 633.0 183.8 449.2 16.1 309.7
Oct. 0.2 1,212.3 975.9 689.7 286.2 3.6 232.8 4.2 956.8 635.7 188.7 447.0 14.6 306.5
Nov. 0.2 1,190.3 954.5 674.0 280.5 3.3 232.4 4.2 971.3 645.4 194.5 450.9 15.3 310.6
Dec. 0.2 1,166.9 934.7 652.0 282.7 3.1 229.2 6.1 960.4 627.3 174.9 452.4 12.3 320.8
2024 Jan. 0.2 1,206.8 971.9 684.9 287.0 2.8 232.0 6.1 985.5 649.3 196.9 452.4 14.6 321.6
Feb. 0.2 1,245.8 1,010.7 724.3 286.4 3.0 232.2 6.9 1,000.4 660.7 204.4 456.3 14.2 325.4
Mar. 0.2 1,255.0 1,016.4 732.9 283.5 2.7 236.0 7.0 1,007.9 651.5 191.9 459.6 15.3 341.2
Apr. 0.2 1,255.8 1,018.0 729.5 288.5 2.2 235.6 7.4 1,016.3 664.8 206.3 458.5 16.5 335.0
May 0.2 1,282.2 1,041.2 755.0 286.2 2.5 238.5 7.5 1,018.6 667.3 207.9 459.4 16.1 335.2
June 0.2 1,253.4 1,012.8 723.8 289.0 2.3 238.3 7.2 1,025.1 665.2 207.3 457.9 16.5 343.4
Changes *
2015 +0.1 –91.8 –86.0 –82.2 –3.8 –6.7 +0.8 –0.1 –6.1 –9.2 –6.5 –2.7 + 1.1 +2.0
2016 +0.0 –25.5 –14.5 –38.2 +23.7 –0.7 –10.3 –0.0 +17.4 +28.9 +10.1 +18.8 – 3.0 –8.5
2017 +0.0 –57.2 –48.7 –61.5 +12.8 +0.0 –8.5 +0.6 –4.7 +13.0 +8.6 +4.4 + 0.7 –18.4
2018 +0.0 +49.6 +34.0 +57.7 –23.7 +0.2 +15.3 +0.7 +18.3 +28.3 +3.2 +25.2 – 0.4 –9.7
2019 –0.0 –4.1 –11.3 –21.9 +10.7 +0.8 +6.3 +0.7 +26.8 +19.9 +12.7 +7.3 + 3.0 +3.8
2020 –0.0 –32.0 –22.4 –6.6 –15.8 +0.9 –10.5 +0.3 +34.4 +14.7 +9.0 +5.7 + 3.6 +16.1
2021 +0.0 +52.8 +71.1 +68.9 +2.2 –2.5 –15.8 –0.5 +37.8 +39.7 +29.8 +9.9 – 3.2 +1.4
2022 –0.1 +21.7 +20.4 +17.9 +2.6 +1.3 –0.0 +0.2 +37.0 +37.0 +16.8 +20.2 + 6.7 –6.7
2023 –0.0 +32.6 +24.9 +10.2 +14.7 +1.4 +6.3 +0.5 +51.5 +14.8 +5.2 +9.6 – 2.6 +39.3
2023 Jan. –0.0 +48.2 +40.6 +46.3 –5.7 +1.1 +6.5 +0.3 +30.0 +19.5 +18.6 +0.9 + 5.3 +5.2
Feb. +0.0 +0.6 –2.8 –1.2 –1.6 +0.1 +3.3 +0.2 +1.6 –1.2 –1.3 +0.1 – 4.4 +7.2
Mar. –0.0 +9.2 +9.2 +6.2 +3.0 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 +11.2 –1.1 –1.5 +0.4 – 3.3 +15.5
Apr. +0.0 –17.0 –19.0 –20.9 +1.9 +0.7 +1.3 –0.1 +8.2 +4.4 +4.5 –0.1 + 1.5 +2.4
May +0.0 +16.9 +16.2 +18.0 –1.8 –0.2 +0.9 –0.0 +1.5 +1.4 +1.3 +0.1 + 0.6 –0.5
June +0.0 –17.7 –17.6 –9.9 –7.6 +0.2 –0.3 +0.1 –1.9 –8.7 –11.1 +2.4 + 1.2 +5.6
July –0.0 +18.4 +17.7 +13.9 +3.9 +0.5 +0.2 +0.0 +3.0 +10.5 +9.6 +0.9 + 0.7 –8.2
Aug. –0.0 +0.0 +1.3 –2.2 +3.5 –0.4 –0.9 –0.0 –10.2 –8.3 –9.8 +1.5 – 0.3 –1.6
Sep. +0.0 –1.0 –0.0 –10.1 +10.1 –0.2 –0.7 –0.0 –0.1 –1.2 +1.3 –2.5 – 0.1 +1.1
Oct. +0.0 +10.3 +10.6 +2.6 +8.0 +0.1 –0.4 –0.1 –0.7 +3.8 +5.2 –1.4 – 1.6 –3.0
Nov. – –14.4 –13.9 –11.5 –2.4 –0.2 –0.3 +0.0 +18.7 +12.9 +7.6 +5.3 + 0.8 +5.0
Dec. –0.0 –21.0 –17.6 –21.0 +3.4 –0.3 –3.2 +0.0 –9.7 –17.2 –19.2 +2.0 – 3.0 +10.5
2024 Jan. +0.0 +34.0 +31.6 +29.7 +1.9 –0.2 +2.7 –0.0 +21.4 +19.0 +21.0 –2.0 + 2.2 +0.1
Feb. –0.0 +39.2 +38.9 +39.6 –0.7 +0.1 +0.2 +0.9 +15.8 +12.3 +7.5 +4.8 – 0.3 +3.8
Mar. –0.0 +9.1 +5.6 +8.7 –3.0 –0.3 +3.8 +0.1 +7.7 –9.1 –12.5 +3.4 + 1.0 +15.7
Apr. +0.0 –1.5 –0.8 –4.7 +4.0 –0.4 –0.3 +0.4 +7.1 +12.3 +14.0 –1.6 + 1.2 –6.4
May –0.0 +30.1 +26.8 +27.6 –0.9 +0.3 +3.0 +0.0 +4.4 +4.1 +2.3 +1.8 – 0.4 +0.7
June +0.0 –33.6 –33.1 –34.1 +1.0 –0.2 –0.3 –0.2 +3.4 –4.6 –1.6 –3.1 + 0.4 +7.7
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequentrevisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
29•
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Time deposits (including bank
savings bonds)Time deposits (including
savings deposits and bank
savings bonds)
Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in foreign
banks
and
enter-
prises TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 – 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 2021
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 2022
10.7 16.7 923.8 469.5 454.3 288.1 166.2 – 380.6 176.2 204.4 104.9 99.5 1.1 2023
10.4 15.6 1,089.4 601.2 488.3 344.5 143.8 – 405.1 213.5 191.5 101.9 89.6 0.2 2023 Jan.
10.4 15.8 1,086.8 600.1 486.7 345.1 141.6 – 418.4 218.4 200.0 109.9 90.1 0.2 Feb.
10.4 15.9 1,060.0 576.0 484.0 329.3 154.7 – 412.5 216.8 195.7 98.9 96.9 0.3 Mar.
10.4 15.9 1,042.6 540.6 502.0 343.8 158.2 – 423.3 208.8 214.6 116.6 97.9 0.3 Apr.
10.4 16.1 1,059.1 596.1 462.9 299.9 163.0 0.0 436.0 219.3 216.7 116.7 100.0 0.3 May
10.2 16.0 1,025.8 565.0 460.8 302.6 158.2 0.0 411.5 205.6 205.9 107.3 98.6 0.4 June
10.2 16.1 1,052.4 582.3 470.1 311.1 159.0 0.0 411.0 204.0 207.0 107.9 99.1 0.3 July
10.2 16.1 1,021.8 566.5 455.3 294.3 161.1 – 407.7 198.5 209.2 112.0 97.2 0.3 Aug.
10.2 16.1 1,006.0 536.9 469.1 293.9 175.2 – 403.9 206.3 197.6 100.2 97.4 0.4 Sep.
10.2 16.6 1,021.8 558.9 462.9 288.0 174.9 – 423.2 207.0 216.2 117.4 98.8 0.3 Oct.
10.4 16.4 1,003.7 538.0 465.7 291.0 174.6 – 412.5 206.3 206.3 107.1 99.2 0.3 Nov.
10.7 16.7 923.8 469.5 454.3 288.1 166.2 – 380.6 176.2 204.4 104.9 99.5 1.1 Dec.
10.7 16.4 979.5 520.1 459.5 284.6 174.9 – 409.6 200.3 209.3 110.6 98.6 0.7 2024 Jan.
10.7 15.9 1,025.8 534.6 491.2 311.3 179.9 0.0 425.9 211.9 214.1 117.4 96.6 2.0 Feb.
10.7 15.9 1,041.0 502.1 538.9 370.9 168.1 0.0 408.7 192.8 215.9 118.1 97.7 2.6 Mar.
10.8 16.1 1,029.6 524.9 504.8 329.8 175.0 0.0 419.4 207.2 212.3 114.6 97.7 3.2 Apr.
10.8 16.0 1,034.0 554.2 479.7 315.8 163.9 0.0 420.7 212.0 208.7 109.3 99.4 4.0 May
10.6 16.0 1,033.2 549.6 483.6 315.3 168.3 0.0 414.4 204.4 210.1 111.0 99.0 4.5 June
Changes *
– 0.6 – 6.1 –15.4 +40.6 –56.0 –48.6 – 7.4 –0.0 –26.5 –13.9 –12.6 +0.3 –13.0 –0.0 2015
– 0.1 – 1.5 +82.7 +51.0 +31.7 +27.0 + 4.7 –0.0 +3.5 –3.1 +6.7 +5.9 +0.8 –0.0 2016
– 1.0 – 4.1 –15.5 +25.2 –40.8 –43.2 + 2.4 ±0.0 +31.8 +11.0 +20.8 +15.6 +5.2 –0.4 2017
– 0.2 – 2.2 –23.9 –23.4 – 0.4 + 2.1 – 2.6 –0.0 –11.9 –0.2 –11.8 –5.7 –6.0 –0.2 2018
– 0.3 – 0.9 – 9.5 –49.4 +39.8 +28.0 +11.8 –0.0 –0.8 +2.1 –2.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.0 2019
– 0.2 – 3.9 +83.8 +87.8 – 4.1 –34.7 +30.6 – +23.6 +13.8 +9.8 +7.1 +2.8 +0.0 2020
– 0.2 – 0.8 +136.6 +19.8 +116.8 +89.2 +27.6 +0.0 +22.7 +6.4 +16.3 +0.0 +16.3 –0.0 2021
– 0.7 – 1.0 +85.8 +29.1 +56.7 +69.6 –13.0 –0.0 +68.2 +49.0 +19.2 +13.9 +5.3 +0.0 2022
+ 0.2 + 1.1 –66.1 –4.6 –61.4 –86.9 +25.4 ±0.0 +11.6 –18.3 +29.9 +20.9 +9.0 +0.1 2023
– 0.0 – 0.1 +93.8 +122.3 –28.4 –30.8 + 2.4 – +35.9 +18.1 +17.8 +17.9 –0.1 +0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 – 7.0 –3.5 – 3.5 – 0.9 – 2.6 – +11.6 +4.1 +7.5 +7.2 +0.3 +0.1 Feb.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 –21.8 –21.5 – 0.3 –13.9 +13.6 – –3.9 –0.8 –3.1 –10.0 +7.0 +0.1 Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 –15.3 –34.3 +19.0 +15.2 + 3.8 – +11.7 –7.7 +19.3 +18.1 +1.2 –0.0 Apr.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 +10.1 +52.6 –42.5 –46.3 + 3.8 +0.0 +9.2 +9.5 –0.3 –1.2 +0.9 –0.0 May
– 0.2 – 0.0 –26.4 –26.1 – 0.3 + 3.9 – 4.2 – –23.1 –13.1 –9.9 –8.7 –1.2 +0.1 June
– 0.0 + 0.1 +27.3 +17.2 +10.1 + 9.0 + 1.1 – +0.4 –1.3 +1.7 +1.1 +0.6 –0.0 July
+ 0.0 – 0.0 –32.6 –16.4 –16.2 –17.9 + 1.7 –0.0 –4.3 –5.9 +1.6 +3.6 –2.0 –0.0 Aug.
– 0.0 – 0.0 –21.0 –32.3 +11.4 – 2.2 +13.5 – –5.7 +7.1 –12.8 –12.8 +0.0 +0.0 Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.5 +17.0 +22.8 – 5.8 – 5.6 – 0.2 – +19.6 +0.9 +18.7 +17.3 +1.4 –0.1 Oct.
+ 0.2 – 0.1 –12.9 –18.4 + 5.5 + 4.9 + 0.6 – –8.6 +0.6 –9.2 –9.8 +0.6 –0.0 Nov.
+ 0.3 + 0.3 –77.4 –67.0 –10.4 – 2.3 – 8.2 – –31.3 –29.7 –1.5 –1.8 +0.3 –0.0 Dec.
+ 0.0 – 0.4 +51.4 +48.7 + 2.8 – 5.2 + 8.0 – +27.8 +23.6 +4.3 +5.3 –1.0 –0.4 2024 Jan.
+ 0.0 – 0.4 +46.4 +14.5 +31.9 +26.7 + 5.2 +0.0 +16.4 +11.5 +4.9 +6.8 –1.9 +1.4 Feb.
+ 0.0 – 0.0 +15.1 –32.4 +47.6 +59.5 –11.9 – –17.3 –19.1 +1.8 +0.7 +1.1 +0.5 Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 –13.1 +22.2 –35.3 –41.9 + 6.6 – +10.1 +14.1 –4.0 –4.3 +0.3 +0.7 Apr.
– 0.0 – 0.0 + 7.1 +30.5 –23.5 –12.9 –10.6 – +2.3 +5.3 –3.0 –4.8 +1.8 +0.8 May
– 0.2 + 0.0 – 4.6 –6.3 + 1.8 – 1.9 + 3.6 – –7.5 –8.2 +0.7 +1.2 –0.5 +0.5 June

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
30•
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Short-term lending Medium- and long-term Lending to domestic
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
Periodincluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claimsexcluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claims Total TotalLoans
and
billsNegotiable
money
market
paper Total LoansTreasury
bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 – 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2023 4,044.1 3,649.9 279.0 264.2 264.0 0.3 14.8 14.2 0.6 3,765.1 3,401.1
2023 Jan. 4,016.2 3,622.5 303.2 282.5 281.9 0.5 20.7 17.0 3.8 3,713.1 3,360.2
Feb. 4,030.2 3,629.5 297.8 279.9 279.2 0.7 18.0 15.8 2.2 3,732.4 3,371.2
Mar. 4,030.5 3,634.8 305.0 285.1 284.4 0.7 19.9 16.3 3.6 3,725.5 3,369.3
Apr. 4,032.5 3,641.3 304.1 283.3 282.8 0.6 20.8 18.2 2.6 3,728.4 3,374.4
May 4,039.0 3,650.6 299.7 281.0 280.2 0.8 18.7 17.4 1.3 3,739.3 3,388.0
June 4,042.1 3,645.7 300.3 280.5 279.6 0.9 19.8 17.8 2.0 3,741.8 3,388.7
July 4,048.7 3,653.9 299.4 277.4 276.6 0.9 21.9 19.6 2.3 3,749.3 3,395.5
Aug. 4,046.7 3,650.0 289.5 270.8 270.1 0.7 18.6 16.8 1.8 3,757.2 3,398.6
Sep. 4,048.1 3,653.6 297.2 275.5 274.8 0.6 21.7 19.0 2.7 3,751.0 3,395.8
Oct. 4,051.9 3,656.7 293.6 270.9 270.3 0.6 22.7 20.3 2.4 3,758.3 3,401.0
Nov. 4,057.9 3,661.3 291.1 272.0 271.4 0.7 19.0 16.6 2.4 3,766.9 3,404.2
Dec. 4,044.1 3,649.9 279.0 264.2 264.0 0.3 14.8 14.2 0.6 3,765.1 3,401.1
2024 Jan. 4,048.3 3,649.5 281.0 263.3 262.7 0.6 17.7 16.8 0.8 3,767.3 3,401.5
Feb. 4,055.7 3,654.0 281.5 267.3 266.8 0.5 14.2 14.1 0.0 3,774.3 3,404.7
Mar. 4,061.0 3,658.5 289.2 273.3 272.6 0.7 15.9 16.1 – 0.2 3,771.8 3,403.2
Apr. 4,062.1 3,661.8 289.3 270.4 269.6 0.8 18.9 18.0 0.9 3,772.8 3,406.5
May 4,069.5 3,666.1 288.4 271.4 270.5 0.9 17.0 16.7 0.3 3,781.1 3,410.7
June 4,076.9 3,670.9 294.3 273.8 273.0 0.7 20.5 20.1 0.4 3,782.6 3,408.6
Changes *
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 – 5.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.8 – 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 – 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 – 12.1 – 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 8.6 – 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 – 19.6 – 19.8 – 19.8 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2021 + 152.2 + 147.8 + 8.8 + 13.8 + 13.8 – 0.1 – 4.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 + 143.4 + 157.9
2022 + 216.7 + 220.0 + 47.6 + 48.5 + 48.5 + 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.9 + 0.0 + 169.1 + 184.8
2023 + 30.9 + 38.9 – 15.3 – 14.5 – 14.4 – 0.1 – 0.8 + 0.9 – 1.7 + 46.2 + 42.3
2023 Jan. + 0.6 + 9.2 + 6.7 + 2.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 4.1 + 2.6 + 1.4 – 6.1 + 0.3
Feb. + 13.3 + 6.3 – 6.0 – 3.2 – 3.3 + 0.1 – 2.8 – 1.2 – 1.6 + 19.3 + 11.0
Mar. + 0.9 + 6.0 + 7.6 + 5.7 + 5.7 – 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.4 – 6.7 – 1.8
Apr. + 2.1 + 6.5 – 0.9 – 1.7 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.9 – 1.1 + 3.0 + 5.1
May + 6.5 + 9.4 – 4.4 – 2.3 – 2.6 + 0.3 – 2.1 – 0.8 – 1.2 + 10.9 + 13.6
June + 4.4 – 3.7 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 + 0.9
July + 6.6 + 8.3 – 1.0 – 3.1 – 3.1 – 0.0 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 7.5 + 6.9
Aug. – 1.9 – 4.0 – 9.9 – 6.6 – 6.5 – 0.2 – 3.3 – 2.8 – 0.5 + 8.0 + 3.1
Sep. + 1.3 + 3.7 + 7.7 + 4.6 + 4.7 – 0.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 – 6.4 – 2.9
Oct. + 3.7 + 3.0 – 3.5 – 4.6 – 4.5 – 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 – 0.3 + 7.2 + 5.2
Nov. + 6.1 + 4.7 – 2.3 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 3.7 – 3.7 + 0.0 + 8.4 + 3.8
Dec. – 12.7 – 10.3 – 11.0 – 7.8 – 7.4 – 0.4 – 3.2 – 1.3 – 1.8 – 1.7 – 2.9
2024 Jan. + 4.0 – 0.5 + 1.9 – 0.9 – 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3
Feb. + 6.7 + 3.7 + 0.4 + 3.9 + 4.0 – 0.1 – 3.5 – 2.7 – 0.8 + 6.3 + 2.7
Mar. + 5.3 + 4.4 + 6.6 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 2.0 – 0.2 – 1.3 – 0.3
Apr. + 1.1 + 3.3 + 0.1 – 2.8 – 3.0 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 3.4
May + 7.4 + 4.3 – 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 – 1.9 – 1.3 – 0.6 + 8.3 + 4.3
June + 7.4 + 4.9 + 5.9 + 2.4 + 2.5 – 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 1.5 – 2.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
31•
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
TotalMedium-
termLong-
term SecuritiesMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalMedium-
termLong-
termSecur-
ities  1Equal-
isation
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 – 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 – 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 – 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 – 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 – 1.4 2018
2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 – 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 2020
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 2021
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 2022
3,131.7 361.0 2,770.7 269.4 22.8 364.0 240.0 14.1 225.9 124.0 – 1.0 2023
3,090.3 349.9 2,740.4 269.9 24.6 352.9 233.4 13.8 219.5 119.5 – 1.0 2023 Jan.
3,102.0 355.3 2,746.7 269.2 24.5 361.2 232.5 13.7 218.8 128.7 – 1.1 Feb.
3,101.5 354.8 2,746.7 267.8 23.6 356.2 232.6 13.6 219.0 123.6 – 1.0 Mar.
3,107.6 355.6 2,752.0 266.8 23.6 354.0 232.7 13.9 218.8 121.2 – 1.0 Apr.
3,120.7 360.8 2,760.0 267.2 23.7 351.4 232.4 13.6 218.8 119.0 – 1.0 May
3,117.4 360.0 2,757.5 271.3 23.3 353.1 230.9 13.4 217.6 122.2 – 1.0 June
3,125.3 362.1 2,763.3 270.2 23.4 353.8 232.4 13.5 218.9 121.4 – 1.0 July
3,130.4 362.8 2,767.6 268.2 23.4 358.6 232.6 13.8 218.8 126.0 – 1.0 Aug.
3,126.8 359.5 2,767.3 269.0 23.2 355.1 233.0 13.7 219.4 122.1 – 1.0 Sep.
3,131.2 360.7 2,770.5 269.8 23.1 357.3 234.8 13.8 221.0 122.4 – 1.0 Oct.
3,135.5 361.4 2,774.1 268.7 23.0 362.7 237.8 14.1 223.8 124.8 – 1.0 Nov.
3,131.7 361.0 2,770.7 269.4 22.8 364.0 240.0 14.1 225.9 124.0 – 1.0 Dec.
3,130.5 359.5 2,771.0 271.0 22.7 365.8 239.4 13.8 225.6 126.4 – 1.0 2024 Jan.
3,132.4 357.0 2,775.4 272.3 22.7 369.6 240.7 14.1 226.6 128.9 – 1.0 Feb.
3,128.6 354.1 2,774.5 274.6 22.5 368.7 241.1 14.3 226.8 127.5 – 1.0 Mar.
3,132.3 353.4 2,779.0 274.2 22.4 366.3 241.9 14.3 227.5 124.4 – 1.0 Apr.
3,135.9 353.3 2,782.6 274.8 22.4 370.4 242.9 14.5 228.4 127.5 – 1.0 May
3,135.3 352.2 2,783.1 273.3 22.2 374.0 242.5 14.6 227.8 131.5 – 1.0 June
Changes *
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 +14.8 – 2.1 – 6.6 – 6.9 – 4.8 – 2.0 + 0.2 – + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 – 0.9 – 30.9 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 3.3 –23.6 – – 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 +15.8 + 0.1 – 39.9 –10.6 – 1.3 – 9.3 –29.4 – – 0.1 2017
+108.7 +19.3 + 89.4 – 6.7 – 0.9 – 37.1 –10.5 – 2.7 – 7.8 –26.6 – – 0.0 2018
+126.0 +18.9 +107.2 + 6.8 – 0.8 – 17.8 – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 –12.3 – + 0.1 2019
+145.0 + 9.4 +135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 – 2.8 – 1.1 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 1.7 – – 0.4 2020
+140.1 + 5.6 +134.5 +17.8 + 2.3 – 14.6 – 3.3 – 1.3 – 2.0 –11.3 – – 0.0 2021
+169.9 +33.5 +136.4 +14.9 – 0.1 – 15.7 + 2.5 – 0.7 + 3.3 –18.2 – – 0.0 2022
+ 46.9 +11.0 + 35.9 – 4.7 – 1.1 + 3.9 + 5.5 ± 0.0 + 5.5 – 1.5 – – 0.0 2023
+ 4.4 + 1.2 + 3.3 – 4.2 + 0.0 – 6.4 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 6.1 – – 0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 11.7 + 5.4 + 6.4 – 0.7 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.7 + 9.2 – + 0.1 Feb.
– 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.0 – 1.4 – 0.3 – 4.8 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.3 – 5.1 – – 0.0 Mar.
+ 6.1 + 0.8 + 5.3 – 1.0 + 0.0 – 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 – 0.2 – 2.3 – + 0.0 Apr.
+ 13.2 + 5.2 + 8.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 2.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.3 – – 0.0 May
– 3.2 – 1.3 – 2.0 + 4.1 – 0.3 + 1.8 – 1.5 – 0.2 – 1.2 + 3.2 – – 0.0 June
+ 8.0 + 1.8 + 6.2 – 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 1.3 – 0.8 – – 0.0 July
+ 5.1 + 0.8 + 4.3 – 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 + 4.6 – – 0.0 Aug.
– 3.6 – 3.3 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.2 – 3.5 + 0.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 – 3.9 – – 0.0 Sep.
+ 4.4 + 1.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 – 0.1 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.3 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 4.8 + 0.2 + 4.6 – 1.1 – 0.1 + 4.7 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 2.4 – + 0.0 Nov.
– 3.5 – 0.4 – 3.2 + 0.7 – 0.2 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.9 – 0.9 – – 0.0 Dec.
– 1.3 – 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.6 – 0.1 + 1.8 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 2.4 – + 0.0 2024 Jan.
+ 1.4 – 2.5 + 4.0 + 1.3 – + 3.5 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 2.5 – – 0.0 Feb.
– 2.6 – 2.5 – 0.1 + 2.3 – 0.2 – 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 1.4 – + 0.0 Mar.
+ 3.7 – 0.8 + 4.5 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 2.4 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 – 3.1 – + 0.0 Apr.
+ 3.8 – 0.1 + 3.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 3.1 – + 0.0 May
– 0.6 – 1.2 + 0.5 – 1.4 – 0.2 + 3.6 – 0.4 + 0.2 – 0.6 + 4.0 – – 0.0 June

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
32•
IV. Banks
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
billion €
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios)  1
of which:
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Period TotalMortgage
loans,
total TotalMortgage
loans
secured
by
residen-
tial real
estateOther
housing
loans Totalof which:
Housing
loansManufac-
turingElectricity,
gas and
water
supply;
refuse
disposal,          
mining
and
quarryingConstruc-
tionWhole-
sale and
retail
trade;
repair of
motor                
vehicles
and
motor-
cyclesAgri-
culture,
forestry,
fishing
and
aqua-
cultureTransport-
ation and
storage;
post and                      
telecom-
munica-
tionsFinancial
intermedi-
ation
(excluding
MFIs) and
insurance   
com-
panies
Lending, total                                                 End of year or quarter *
2022 3,365.3 1,676.5 1,773.9 1,448.0 325.8 1,852.2 509.1 160.0 137.7 108.8 155.1 56.3 65.2 211.9
2023 Q2 3,397.0 1,701.4 1,787.6 1,471.4 316.3 1,879.4 517.7 162.6 137.7 112.5 159.2 56.3 61.9 221.5
Q3 3,401.6 1,735.7 1,797.1 1,505.7 291.5 1,878.2 522.3 160.0 134.7 113.3 159.5 56.4 61.3 223.0
Q4 3,395.7 1,740.5 1,801.7 1,512.0 289.7 1,872.8 525.7 154.6 136.1 113.3 160.2 56.0 61.5 218.1
2024 Q1 3,401.2 1,753.5 1,802.8 1,524.4 278.5 1,879.2 527.2 155.3 138.3 113.5 159.4 56.3 58.7 219.4
Q2 3,408.4 1,762.5 1,808.4 1,531.5 276.9 1,884.0 529.6 155.7 143.8 114.1 159.0 56.4 52.0 219.2
Short-term lending
2022 279.4 . 7.4 . 7.4 248.9 5.0 41.6 12.1 20.8 44.7 3.3 3.8 49.8
2023 Q2 279.6 . 7.6 . 7.6 248.9 5.4 42.3 7.7 22.6 46.8 3.8 3.6 50.4
Q3 274.8 . 7.5 . 7.5 244.4 5.4 40.4 5.6 22.6 47.2 3.8 3.8 51.3
Q4 264.0 . 7.4 . 7.4 233.9 5.3 37.2 5.1 22.2 46.8 3.5 4.5 47.2
2024 Q1 272.6 . 7.6 . 7.6 243.4 5.6 39.7 6.2 23.1 48.0 4.0 4.6 48.2
Q2 273.0 . 7.5 . 7.5 244.4 5.5 40.4 6.2 23.3 48.0 4.1 4.4 47.0
Medium-term lending
2022 348.7 . 43.4 . 43.4 275.8 23.5 31.2 6.5 22.2 24.3 4.1 23.0 56.2
2023 Q2 360.0 . 42.8 . 42.8 289.3 24.1 34.0 8.0 22.8 26.9 4.1 19.1 61.3
Q3 359.5 . 42.8 . 42.8 289.2 24.5 34.7 5.8 23.0 26.9 4.1 18.2 62.5
Q4 361.0 . 41.9 . 41.9 291.2 24.3 34.0 6.0 23.1 28.2 4.2 18.6 61.3
2024 Q1 354.1 . 40.8 . 40.8 285.1 24.1 32.9 5.8 22.5 27.3 4.1 15.6 61.6
Q2 352.2 . 40.0 . 40.0 284.1 23.8 33.2 10.9 22.1 27.5 4.2 9.4 61.4
Long-term lending
2022 2,737.1 1,676.5 1,723.1 1,448.0 275.1 1,327.5 480.6 87.2 119.0 65.8 86.1 48.9 38.4 105.9
2023 Q2 2,757.5 1,701.4 1,737.2 1,471.4 265.9 1,341.2 488.2 86.3 122.1 67.1 85.5 48.5 39.2 109.7
Q3 2,767.3 1,735.7 1,746.8 1,505.7 241.2 1,344.7 492.4 85.0 123.3 67.7 85.3 48.5 39.2 109.1
Q4 2,770.7 1,740.5 1,752.5 1,512.0 240.5 1,347.7 496.1 83.4 125.1 68.0 85.2 48.3 38.5 109.7
2024 Q1 2,774.5 1,753.5 1,754.4 1,524.4 230.1 1,350.7 497.5 82.8 126.3 68.0 84.1 48.1 38.5 109.7
Q2 2,783.1 1,762.5 1,760.9 1,531.5 229.4 1,355.5 500.3 82.0 126.7 68.7 83.5 48.1 38.2 110.8
Lending, total                                                 Change during quarter *
2023 Q2 +12.4 +11.5 + 9.1 +11.5 – 2.4 + 8.2 + 5.3 – 0.1 – 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.2
Q3 + 4.7 +10.9 + 9.2 +11.2 – 2.0 – 1.4 + 4.2 – 2.5 – 2.9 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.6 + 1.3
Q4 – 4.9 + 5.6 + 4.8 + 7.0 – 2.2 – 4.6 + 3.4 – 5.5 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 – 0.5 + 0.7 – 4.9
2024 Q1 + 4.9 + 6.5 + 1.9 + 7.7 – 5.8 + 5.8 + 2.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 0.3 – 1.0 + 0.3 – 2.7 + 1.3
Q2 + 7.3 + 8.9 + 5.6 + 7.1 – 1.6 + 4.5 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 – 0.7 + 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.4
Short-term lending
2023 Q2 – 3.7 . – 0.0 . – 0.0 – 3.6 + 0.1 – 1.1 – 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.4
Q3 – 4.8 . – 0.1 . – 0.1 – 4.7 – 0.0 – 1.9 – 2.1 – 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.9
Q4 –10.6 . – 0.2 . – 0.2 –10.2 – 0.1 – 3.1 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 4.1
2024 Q1 + 7.4 . + 0.2 . + 0.2 + 8.4 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.0
Q2 + 0.5 . – 0.0 . – 0.0 + 1.0 – 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.3
Medium-term lending
2023 Q2 + 4.7 . – 0.0 . – 0.0 + 5.4 + 0.4 + 1.6 – 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.0 – 0.0 – 1.6 + 2.1
Q3 – 0.8 . – 0.2 . – 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.9 + 1.1
Q4 + 1.0 . – 0.8 . – 0.8 + 1.7 – 0.3 – 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 – 1.3
2024 Q1 – 6.5 . – 1.2 . – 1.2 – 5.7 – 0.4 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.6 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 2.9 + 0.4
Q2 – 2.0 . – 0.8 . – 0.8 – 1.3 – 0.3 + 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 1.0 – 0.3
Long-term lending
2023 Q2 +11.3 +11.5 + 9.1 +11.5 – 2.4 + 6.4 + 4.8 – 0.6 + 1.3 + 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1
Q3 +10.3 +10.9 + 9.5 +11.2 – 1.7 + 3.8 + 4.0 – 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.6
Q4 + 4.7 + 5.6 + 5.7 + 7.0 – 1.3 + 3.9 + 3.8 – 1.6 + 1.8 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.6
2024 Q1 + 4.0 + 6.5 + 2.9 + 7.7 – 4.7 + 3.1 + 2.4 – 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.2
Q2 + 8.9 + 8.9 + 6.4 + 7.1 – 0.7 + 4.7 + 2.6 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.7 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.4 + 1.2
* Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
33•
IV. Banks
Lending to employees and other individualsLending to
non-profit institutions
Services sector (including the professions) Memo items: Other lending
of which: of which:
TotalHousing
enterprisesHolding
companiesOther
real
estate
activitiesLending
to self-
employed
persons  2Lending
to craft
enterprises TotalHousing
loans TotalInstalment
loans  3Debit
balances
on wage,
salary
and
pension
accounts Totalof which:
Housing
loans   Period
End of year or quarter *                                   Lending, total
957.4 334.0 79.9 218.2 501.7 54.1 1,495.8 1,260.1 235.7 185.9 7.1 17.3 4.6 2022
967.7 340.4 78.1 220.8 504.3 55.0 1,500.1 1,265.2 234.9 186.0 7.3 17.5 4.7 2023 Q2
970.0 344.0 76.3 222.5 505.0 54.6 1,505.9 1,270.1 235.7 186.9 7.3 17.5 4.7 Q3
973.0 346.8 75.8 223.7 504.8 54.3 1,505.7 1,271.3 234.4 185.6 7.1 17.2 4.7 Q4
978.2 348.4 78.2 222.6 505.4 55.0 1,505.1 1,271.0 234.1 186.1 7.0 17.0 4.6 2024 Q1
983.7 351.7 77.1 222.5 506.4 55.0 1,507.5 1,274.2 233.3 186.4 7.0 16.9 4.7 Q2
Short-term lending
73.0 16.1 15.6 10.8 20.4 5.0 29.9 2.4 27.5 1.7 7.1 0.6 –2022
71.7 16.5 14.2 11.0 21.0 6.7 30.1 2.2 27.9 2.3 7.3 0.6 –2023 Q2
69.7 16.2 13.2 11.6 20.6 6.5 29.9 2.1 27.8 2.2 7.3 0.6 – Q3
67.4 16.0 12.6 11.3 20.6 5.7 29.5 2.1 27.5 2.2 7.1 0.6 0.0 Q4
69.7 15.1 14.5 11.4 20.9 6.9 28.8 2.0 26.8 1.9 7.0 0.5 0.0 2024 Q1
70.9 15.3 14.1 11.3 20.7 7.2 28.1 2.1 26.1 2.0 7.0 0.5 0.0 Q2
Medium-term lending
108.2 25.4 20.1 28.4 30.1 6.5 72.3 19.8 52.5 48.0 . 0.6 0.1 2022
113.1 25.9 22.0 29.5 30.9 6.2 70.1 18.6 51.5 46.9 . 0.6 0.1 2023 Q2
113.9 26.5 20.8 30.9 31.1 6.2 69.7 18.2 51.5 46.9 . 0.6 0.1 Q3
115.9 26.0 21.4 32.2 31.2 6.4 69.4 17.5 51.8 47.1 . 0.4 0.1 Q4
115.3 25.9 21.1 31.7 31.0 6.1 68.6 16.7 51.9 47.0 . 0.4 0.1 2024 Q1
115.3 25.4 21.1 31.9 31.0 6.1 67.7 16.2 51.6 46.6 . 0.4 0.1 Q2
Long-term lending
776.2 292.6 44.2 179.0 451.1 42.6 1,393.5 1,237.9 155.6 136.2 . 16.1 4.6 2022
782.8 298.0 41.9 180.3 452.3 42.1 1,399.9 1,244.4 155.5 136.8 . 16.3 4.6 2023 Q2
786.5 301.3 42.3 180.0 453.3 41.9 1,406.3 1,249.8 156.4 137.8 . 16.4 4.6 Q3
789.7 304.8 41.8 180.1 453.0 42.3 1,406.8 1,251.7 155.1 136.3 . 16.2 4.6 Q4
793.2 307.3 42.6 179.5 453.5 41.9 1,407.7 1,252.3 155.4 137.2 . 16.0 4.6 2024 Q1
797.5 311.0 41.9 179.2 454.7 41.7 1,411.6 1,255.9 155.7 137.8 . 16.0 4.6 Q2
Change during quarter *                                    Lending, total
+ 6.2 + 4.1 – 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 2023 Q2
+ 2.1 + 3.5 – 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.5 – 0.4 + 6.0 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 Q3
+ 3.4 + 2.7 – 0.4 + 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.3 – 1.3 – 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 Q4
+ 5.0 + 1.3 + 2.4 – 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 2024 Q1
+ 5.5 + 3.1 – 1.1 + 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 3.4 – 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 Q2
Short-term lending
– 1.0 + 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.6 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 –2023 Q2
– 2.3 – 0.3 – 1.0 + 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – Q3
– 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 Q4
+ 2.3 – 0.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.2 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 –2024 Q1
+ 1.3 + 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.7 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 2.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.4 . + 0.0 – 0.0 2023 Q2
+ 0.5 + 0.6 – 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.1 . + 0.1 – 0.0 Q3
+ 2.0 – 0.5 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.2 . – 0.2 + 0.0 Q4
– 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 0.8 + 0.1 – 0.1 . – – 0.0 2024 Q1
– 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 . + 0.0 – 0.0 Q2
Long-term lending
+ 4.9 + 3.4 – 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 4.8 + 4.3 + 0.5 + 0.7 . + 0.1 + 0.0 2023 Q2
+ 3.9 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 – 0.2 + 6.4 + 5.5 + 0.9 + 1.0 . + 0.0 + 0.0 Q3
+ 3.3 + 3.5 – 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.9 – 1.0 – 1.2 . – 0.1 – 0.0 Q4
+ 3.2 + 2.3 + 0.8 – 0.6 + 0.4 – 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.0 . – 0.2 – 0.1 2024 Q1
+ 4.3 + 3.4 – 0.7 + 1.6 + 1.0 – 0.2 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 0.4 + 0.8 . – 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
are not specially marked.  1 Excluding fiduciary loans.  2 Including sole proprietors. 3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
34•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
2021 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2022 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.6 35.9 18.5 3.9
2023 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 514.7 585.4 80.5 504.9 445.9 142.2 50.1 20.3 2.9
2023 July 4,180.2 2,582.2 1,042.9 468.5 574.4 65.8 508.6 475.9 79.1 36.7 19.9 3.5
Aug. 4,188.4 2,568.4 1,061.7 490.2 571.6 67.3 504.3 467.5 90.7 36.9 19.9 4.7
Sep. 4,189.3 2,558.0 1,072.5 497.7 574.8 71.5 503.3 461.8 97.0 37.1 19.9 6.5
Oct. 4,198.0 2,544.5 1,086.5 510.9 575.6 74.6 501.0 455.4 111.6 37.3 19.9 6.3
Nov. 4,217.3 2,552.9 1,085.6 506.9 578.6 76.7 501.9 448.3 130.5 37.6 20.8 6.4
Dec. 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 514.7 585.4 80.5 504.9 445.9 142.2 50.1 20.3 2.9
2024 Jan. 4,216.3 2,496.8 1,128.7 540.7 588.0 84.3 503.8 439.4 151.4 54.5 20.4 4.9
Feb. 4,213.6 2,478.3 1,143.5 555.4 588.1 85.1 503.0 434.4 157.3 57.5 20.4 5.0
Mar. 4,239.0 2,479.2 1,168.8 578.6 590.2 87.3 502.9 430.3 160.7 60.2 20.3 4.5
Apr. 4,239.6 2,475.4 1,173.6 584.9 588.8 84.9 503.8 425.8 164.8 63.7 20.3 4.4
May 4,263.3 2,497.0 1,176.9 587.4 589.5 85.1 504.3 422.2 167.2 66.9 20.4 4.8
June 4,264.7 2,494.2 1,182.5 591.0 591.5 86.7 504.8 418.1 170.0 68.9 20.4 4.5
Changes *
2022 +191.8 + 65.8 +143.4 +152.5 – 9.1 + 0.6 – 9.7 –27.5 +10.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6
2023 + 76.6 –172.0 +226.4 +198.4 +28.0 +29.9 – 1.9 –82.3 +104.5 + 3.5 + 1.8 – 1.0
2023 July + 3.8 – 18.7 + 22.8 + 23.1 – 0.3 + 1.4 – 1.7 – 7.3 + 7.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7
Aug. + 8.2 – 13.2 + 21.3 + 21.3 + 0.0 + 1.9 – 1.8 – 8.5 + 8.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.2
Sep. + 0.9 – 10.5 + 10.7 + 8.0 + 2.7 + 3.9 – 1.2 – 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.8
Oct. + 8.7 – 13.4 + 14.0 + 13.2 + 0.8 + 3.1 – 2.3 – 6.4 +14.6 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 19.3 + 8.5 – 1.0 – 4.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 – 7.1 +18.8 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.2
Dec. + 22.3 – 0.7 + 13.7 + 7.7 + 6.0 + 4.0 + 2.0 – 2.5 +11.8 + 1.2 – 0.4 – 3.5
2024 Jan. – 12.7 – 44.1 + 28.7 + 26.1 + 2.6 + 3.8 – 1.1 – 6.5 + 9.2 + 4.4 + 0.0 + 2.0
Feb. – 2.8 – 18.4 + 14.8 + 14.7 + 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.8 – 5.0 + 5.9 + 3.0 – 0.0 + 0.1
Mar. + 25.5 + 0.9 + 25.3 + 23.2 + 2.1 + 2.2 – 0.2 – 4.1 + 3.4 + 2.6 – 0.1 – 0.5
Apr. + 0.6 – 3.8 + 4.8 + 6.3 – 1.4 – 2.4 + 1.0 – 4.6 + 4.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 – 0.1
May + 23.7 + 21.7 + 3.1 + 2.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 3.5 + 2.4 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.4
June – 0.4 – 2.7 + 3.7 + 3.6 + 0.2 + 1.6 – 1.4 – 4.2 + 2.8 + 2.0 + 0.0 – 0.3
Domestic government End of year or month *
2021 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2022 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
2023 286.9 91.2 190.5 105.6 84.9 23.3 61.6 0.9 4.4 26.6 1.4 0.2
2023 July 298.3 85.7 207.5 121.1 86.4 23.0 63.4 1.1 4.0 26.7 1.8 0.8
Aug. 305.6 95.1 205.4 119.3 86.1 22.8 63.3 1.0 4.1 26.6 1.9 2.2
Sep. 304.9 94.2 205.6 119.5 86.2 23.9 62.2 0.9 4.2 26.4 1.8 3.8
Oct. 291.0 92.3 193.5 108.0 85.6 23.5 62.0 0.9 4.2 26.2 1.8 2.9
Nov. 285.2 92.5 187.5 103.7 83.8 22.1 61.7 0.9 4.4 26.0 1.8 2.2
Dec. 286.9 91.2 190.5 105.6 84.9 23.3 61.6 0.9 4.4 26.6 1.4 0.2
2024 Jan. 272.5 84.9 182.5 98.4 84.1 23.4 60.7 0.8 4.3 26.5 1.3 1.0
Feb. 276.6 87.8 183.7 101.4 82.4 21.0 61.3 0.8 4.3 26.7 1.3 1.2
Mar. 283.2 89.0 189.1 106.1 83.0 22.0 61.1 0.8 4.3 26.9 1.3 1.3
Apr. 266.2 81.6 179.4 99.9 79.5 18.7 60.8 0.8 4.4 26.9 1.3 0.3
May 274.8 92.1 177.5 98.4 79.1 18.4 60.7 0.7 4.5 27.0 1.3 0.8
June 284.5 95.3 184.1 104.9 79.2 19.4 59.8 0.7 4.4 26.8 1.3 0.9
Changes *
2022 + 69.1 + 0.2 + 69.2 + 64.7 + 4.5 – 0.9 + 5.4 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.5 – 0.1 + 1.4
2023 + 6.5 + 8.7 – 1.7 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 – 2.2
2023 July – 9.8 – 10.2 + 0.5 + 1.8 – 1.3 – 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 – + 0.4
Aug. + 7.3 + 9.3 – 2.1 – 1.8 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.4
Sep. – 0.7 – 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.2 – 1.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.6
Oct. – 14.0 – 1.9 – 12.2 – 11.5 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.9
Nov. – 5.8 + 0.2 – 6.2 – 4.4 – 1.8 – 1.4 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.7
Dec. + 1.7 – 1.3 + 2.9 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.4 – 2.0
2024 Jan. – 14.4 – 6.3 – 8.0 – 7.2 – 0.8 + 0.1 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.8
Feb. + 4.1 + 2.9 + 1.2 + 3.0 – 1.8 – 2.4 + 0.6 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3
Mar. + 6.6 + 1.2 + 5.4 + 4.7 + 0.7 + 0.9 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.1
Apr. – 17.0 – 7.3 – 9.7 – 6.2 – 3.5 – 3.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 1.0
May + 8.6 + 10.5 – 1.9 – 1.5 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.5
June + 9.6 + 3.2 + 6.5 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 1.0 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities.
2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
35•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont´d)
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
2021 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2022 3,882.2 2,638.1 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
2023 3,942.1 2,449.6 909.6 409.1 500.5 57.2 443.3 445.0 137.9 23.5 19.0 2.7
2023 July 3,881.9 2,496.5 835.4 347.4 488.0 42.8 445.2 474.9 75.1 10.0 18.0 2.7
Aug. 3,882.8 2,473.4 856.4 370.9 485.5 44.5 441.0 466.5 86.6 10.3 18.0 2.4
Sep. 3,884.4 2,463.8 866.9 378.3 488.6 47.5 441.1 460.9 92.9 10.7 18.1 2.7
Oct. 3,907.1 2,452.2 892.9 402.9 490.0 51.0 439.0 454.5 107.4 11.2 18.1 3.4
Nov. 3,932.1 2,460.5 898.0 403.2 494.8 54.5 440.3 447.5 126.1 11.6 19.0 4.2
Dec. 3,942.1 2,449.6 909.6 409.1 500.5 57.2 443.3 445.0 137.9 23.5 19.0 2.7
2024 Jan. 3,943.8 2,411.9 946.2 442.3 503.9 60.8 443.1 438.6 147.1 28.0 19.1 4.0
Feb. 3,937.0 2,390.6 959.8 454.0 505.8 64.1 441.7 433.6 153.0 30.9 19.0 3.8
Mar. 3,955.8 2,390.3 979.6 472.5 507.2 65.4 441.8 429.6 156.4 33.2 19.0 3.1
Apr. 3,973.4 2,393.8 994.2 485.0 509.2 66.2 443.0 425.0 160.5 36.8 19.0 4.1
May 3,988.5 2,404.8 999.4 489.0 510.4 66.7 443.7 421.5 162.7 39.9 19.1 4.1
June 3,980.3 2,398.9 998.4 486.1 512.2 67.3 445.0 417.4 165.6 42.1 19.2 3.7
Changes *
2022 +122.7 + 65.6 + 74.2 + 87.8 –13.6 + 1.4 –15.1 –27.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.3
2023 + 70.0 –180.7 +228.1 +200.1 +28.1 +29.8 – 1.7 –81.2 +103.8 + 3.5 + 2.4 + 1.2
2023 July + 13.7 – 8.5 + 22.3 + 21.3 + 1.0 + 2.6 – 1.6 – 7.2 + 7.0 + 0.1 – 0.5 + 0.3
Aug. + 0.9 – 22.5 + 23.4 + 23.1 + 0.4 + 2.1 – 1.8 – 8.4 + 8.4 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.3
Sep. + 1.6 – 9.6 + 10.5 + 7.9 + 2.6 + 2.7 – 0.1 – 5.6 + 6.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2
Oct. + 22.7 – 11.6 + 26.1 + 24.7 + 1.5 + 3.5 – 2.0 – 6.4 +14.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.7
Nov. + 25.1 + 8.3 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 1.3 – 7.0 +18.7 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.9
Dec. + 20.7 + 0.6 + 10.8 + 5.9 + 4.9 + 2.8 + 2.1 – 2.4 +11.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 – 1.5
2024 Jan. + 1.7 – 37.8 + 36.7 + 33.3 + 3.4 + 3.7 – 0.2 – 6.5 + 9.2 + 4.5 + 0.1 + 1.2
Feb. – 6.8 – 21.3 + 13.6 + 11.7 + 1.9 + 3.3 – 1.4 – 5.0 + 5.9 + 2.8 – 0.0 – 0.2
Mar. + 18.9 – 0.3 + 19.9 + 18.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 4.1 + 3.4 + 2.4 – 0.1 – 0.6
Apr. + 17.6 + 3.5 + 14.6 + 12.5 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.2 – 4.6 + 4.1 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 1.0
May + 15.0 + 11.3 + 5.0 + 3.9 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 3.5 + 2.3 + 3.1 + 0.1 – 0.0
June – 10.0 – 5.9 – 2.8 – 2.9 + 0.1 + 0.6 – 0.5 – 4.1 + 2.8 + 2.2 + 0.0 – 0.4
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2021 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2022 1,193.5 783.4 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.6 1.9 13.5 1.5
2023 1,194.6 723.0 453.9 204.3 249.6 19.0 230.6 3.3 14.4 2.5 15.5 2.7
2023 July 1,189.1 727.3 447.9 192.7 255.3 18.6 236.7 3.7 10.1 2.1 14.6 2.7
Aug. 1,189.2 719.9 452.0 202.1 249.9 18.0 231.9 3.7 13.6 2.2 14.6 2.4
Sep. 1,187.8 719.1 451.5 200.9 250.6 18.7 231.9 3.6 13.6 2.2 14.6 2.7
Oct. 1,209.6 727.6 464.5 215.8 248.7 19.2 229.5 3.5 14.0 2.3 14.6 3.4
Nov. 1,213.9 738.9 457.4 208.5 248.9 19.0 229.8 3.5 14.2 2.3 15.5 4.2
Dec. 1,194.6 723.0 453.9 204.3 249.6 19.0 230.6 3.3 14.4 2.5 15.5 2.7
2024 Jan. 1,203.8 714.6 471.4 223.4 248.0 19.1 228.9 3.3 14.5 2.5 15.4 4.0
Feb. 1,183.1 697.1 468.1 221.6 246.5 19.1 227.4 3.2 14.7 2.7 15.4 3.8
Mar. 1,191.0 697.0 476.0 229.7 246.3 19.3 227.0 3.2 14.7 2.8 15.2 3.1
Apr. 1,197.7 700.0 479.7 232.5 247.1 19.1 228.1 3.2 14.8 2.9 15.3 4.1
May 1,203.1 709.0 475.9 228.2 247.7 19.4 228.3 3.2 15.0 3.0 15.3 4.1
June 1,183.4 697.2 467.8 218.5 249.3 19.5 229.8 3.2 15.1 3.0 15.3 3.7
Changes *
2022 + 56.2 + 17.7 + 38.8 + 52.1 –13.3 + 1.0 –14.3 – 0.9 + 0.6 – 0.5 + 1.0 + 1.3
2023 + 11.1 – 48.0 + 57.5 + 63.0 – 5.5 + 2.0 – 7.6 – 1.1 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.0 + 1.2
2023 July + 7.2 + 0.6 + 6.5 + 7.5 – 1.1 + 0.3 – 1.4 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.3
Aug. + 0.1 – 6.8 + 6.6 + 9.1 – 2.5 – 0.3 – 2.2 – 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.3
Sep. – 1.3 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
Oct. + 21.8 + 8.5 + 13.0 + 14.9 – 1.9 + 0.5 – 2.4 – 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.7
Nov. + 4.4 + 11.2 – 7.0 – 7.2 + 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.4 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.9
Dec. – 8.7 – 4.4 – 4.3 – 4.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.5
2024 Jan. + 9.2 – 8.5 + 17.5 + 19.1 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.2
Feb. – 20.7 – 17.5 – 3.3 – 1.8 – 1.5 – 0.0 – 1.5 – 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
Mar. + 7.8 – 0.1 + 7.9 + 8.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.6
Apr. + 6.7 + 3.0 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 – 0.2 + 1.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0
May + 5.5 + 9.2 – 3.9 – 4.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0
June – 21.5 – 11.8 – 9.8 – 9.7 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.4
4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
36•
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2
by creditor group by creditor group
Domestic households Domestic households
PeriodDeposits of
domestic
households
and
non-profit
institutions,
total Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individualsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tions Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individuals
End of year or month *
2021 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2022 2,688.7 1,854.7 1,809.9 307.3 1,342.5 160.1 44.8 284.8 268.7 31.2 200.5 37.1
2023 2,747.5 1,726.6 1,685.2 270.9 1,271.0 143.4 41.3 455.7 434.0 67.6 317.3 49.2
2024 Jan. 2,740.1 1,697.3 1,656.3 268.0 1,248.0 140.4 41.0 474.8 453.1 71.2 331.3 50.7
Feb. 2,753.9 1,693.5 1,652.1 265.9 1,247.2 139.0 41.4 491.7 469.9 74.0 344.0 52.0
Mar. 2,764.9 1,693.3 1,652.0 261.1 1,252.7 138.1 41.3 503.6 481.4 75.5 352.8 53.2
Apr. 2,775.8 1,693.8 1,652.7 265.5 1,251.1 136.1 41.1 514.5 492.2 76.4 361.7 54.1
May 2,785.4 1,695.8 1,653.6 266.0 1,251.8 135.9 42.2 523.6 500.8 77.5 368.6 54.7
June 2,796.9 1,701.7 1,660.3 262.2 1,262.0 136.1 41.4 530.5 507.8 78.3 374.5 55.0
Changes *
2022 + 66.5 +48.0 +47.8 – 1.5 +54.1 – 4.7 + 0.1 +35.4 +31.4 +12.9 +17.2 +1.2
2023 + 58.9 –132.7 –129.2 –36.7 –76.8 –15.7 – 3.5 +170.6 +164.9 +36.1 +116.5 +12.2
2024 Jan. – 7.5 –29.3 –29.0 – 2.9 –23.1 – 3.0 – 0.3 +19.2 +19.1 + 3.6 +14.0 +1.5
Feb. + 13.8 – 3.8 – 4.2 – 2.0 – 0.7 – 1.4 + 0.4 +16.9 +16.8 + 2.8 +12.7 +1.3
Mar. + 11.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 4.8 + 5.5 – 0.8 – 0.1 +11.9 +11.5 + 1.5 + 8.8 +1.2
Apr. + 10.9 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 4.3 – 1.7 – 2.0 – 0.2 +10.9 +10.8 + 0.8 + 8.6 +1.4
May + 9.5 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.7 – 0.2 + 1.0 + 9.0 + 8.5 + 1.1 + 6.8 +0.6
June + 11.5 + 5.9 + 6.7 – 3.8 +10.3 + 0.2 – 0.8 + 7.0 + 7.0 + 0.8 + 5.9 +0.3
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional.Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
marked.  1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
€ billion
Deposits
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
PeriodDomestic
government,
total TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans
End of year or month *
2021 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2022 279.8 66.8 7.9 24.2 34.6 0.1 11.4 53.8 17.1 25.2 10.9 0.5 15.9
2023 286.9 52.0 9.8 6.7 35.5 0.0 11.6 51.9 19.7 21.9 9.9 0.4 15.1
2024 Jan. 272.5 50.5 10.8 4.2 35.4 0.0 11.6 55.7 22.3 24.0 9.1 0.3 14.9
Feb. 276.6 49.5 10.1 4.0 35.3 0.0 11.7 57.9 21.1 26.7 9.7 0.4 14.9
Mar. 283.2 49.9 10.6 4.0 35.3 0.0 11.9 63.1 20.8 32.5 9.4 0.4 15.0
Apr. 266.2 49.2 10.4 3.5 35.2 0.0 11.9 54.2 18.1 27.4 8.3 0.4 15.0
May 274.8 49.5 10.5 3.8 35.1 0.0 11.9 54.3 21.3 24.5 8.2 0.4 15.1
June 284.5 49.5 11.5 3.4 34.6 0.0 11.7 66.7 25.3 33.2 7.8 0.4 15.1
Changes *
2022 +69.1 +23.0 +3.5 +20.9 –1.4 –0.0 –0.3 +6.4 –4.6 +11.3 –0.3 –0.1 +1.8
2023 + 6.5 –14.8 +1.9 –17.6 +0.9 –0.0 +0.2 –2.0 +2.9 –3.7 –1.0 –0.1 –0.1
2024 Jan. –14.4 –1.5 +1.0 –2.5 –0.1 –0.0 +0.0 +3.8 +2.5 +2.0 –0.8 –0.0 –0.2
Feb. + 4.1 –1.0 –0.7 –0.2 –0.1 +0.0 +0.1 +2.2 –1.2 +2.8 +0.6 +0.0 +0.0
Mar. + 6.6 +0.5 +0.4 +0.0 –0.0 +0.0 +0.2 +5.2 –0.3 +5.7 –0.2 +0.0 +0.0
Apr. –17.0 –0.8 –0.2 –0.5 –0.1 –0.0 –0.0 –8.9 –2.7 –5.0 –1.2 +0.0 +0.0
May + 8.6 +0.3 +0.1 +0.3 –0.1 +0.0 –0.0 +0.1 +3.1 –2.9 –0.1 –0.0 +0.1
June + 9.6 –0.1 +1.0 –0.4 –0.6 –0.0 –0.2 +12.4 +4.1 +8.7 –0.4 –0.0 +0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and DeutscheTelekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”.
Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date
are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
37•
IV. Banks
Savings deposits  3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year  2
of which:
Domestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsup to and
including
1 year Totalup to and
including
2 yearsmore than
2 years TotalDomestic
householdsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsBank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)  5Liabilities
arising
from repos Period
End of year or month *
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 –2021
16.0 67.2 217.5 10.6 206.9 526.8 521.8 5.1 22.4 6.8 3.1 –2022
21.6 204.7 251.0 38.2 212.7 441.8 438.4 3.4 123.5 21.0 3.5 –2023
21.7 218.9 255.9 41.7 214.2 435.3 432.0 3.3 132.6 25.5 3.6 –2024 Jan.
21.8 232.4 259.3 45.0 214.3 430.4 427.2 3.2 138.3 28.2 3.7 – Feb.
22.2 242.8 260.8 46.1 214.8 426.3 423.2 3.2 141.7 30.5 3.7 – Mar.
22.3 252.5 262.1 47.1 215.0 421.8 418.7 3.1 145.6 33.8 3.8 – Apr.
22.8 260.9 262.7 47.3 215.4 418.3 415.2 3.1 147.7 36.9 3.8 – May
22.8 267.6 262.9 47.8 215.1 414.2 411.2 3.0 150.4 39.0 3.8 – June
Changes *
+ 4.0 + 35.7 – 0.3 +0.5 – 0.8 –26.1 –25.0 –1.1 + 9.2 +0.7 + 0.3 –2022
+ 5.7 +137.0 +33.6 +27.8 + 5.8 –80.1 –78.4 –1.7 +101.1 +2.9 + 0.4 –2023
+ 0.0 + 14.2 + 5.0 +3.5 + 1.5 – 6.4 – 6.3 –0.1 + 9.1 +4.5 + 0.1 –2024 Jan.
+ 0.1 + 13.5 + 3.4 +3.3 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.9 –0.1 + 5.7 +2.7 + 0.1 – Feb.
+ 0.4 + 10.3 + 1.6 +1.1 + 0.5 – 4.1 – 4.0 –0.1 + 3.4 +2.3 + 0.0 – Mar.
+ 0.1 + 9.7 + 1.2 +1.1 + 0.2 – 4.5 – 4.5 –0.1 + 4.0 +3.3 + 0.1 – Apr.
+ 0.5 + 8.3 + 0.7 +0.2 + 0.4 – 3.5 – 3.5 –0.0 + 2.1 +3.0 + 0.0 – May
+ 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.2 +0.5 – 0.3 – 4.1 – 4.0 –0.1 + 2.7 +2.2 + 0.0 – June
registered debt securities.  2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Table IV.12).  3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsofootnote 2).  4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2,4Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 –2021
80.0 49.2 12.5 13.8 4.4 0.0 79.2 8.3 44.9 25.5 0.6 –2022
83.3 45.6 19.8 14.1 3.8 0.0 99.6 16.1 57.2 25.3 1.0 –2023
73.1 35.5 19.8 14.0 3.7 0.0 93.2 16.2 50.4 25.5 1.0 –2024 Jan.
77.5 39.4 20.1 14.2 3.7 0.0 91.8 17.1 50.5 23.2 1.0 – Feb.
73.1 35.4 20.0 14.1 3.7 0.0 97.1 22.2 49.6 24.2 1.0 – Mar.
71.6 34.9 19.1 13.9 3.7 0.0 91.2 18.2 49.8 22.1 1.0 – Apr.
77.8 40.6 19.8 13.7 3.7 0.0 93.2 19.7 50.3 22.1 1.1 – May
72.8 36.2 19.3 13.7 3.7 0.0 95.5 22.3 49.0 23.2 1.0 – June
Changes *
+10.2 +0.9 + 7.9 +1.3 + 0.1 – +29.6 +0.3 +24.5 +4.9 – 0.2 –2022
+3.2 –3.8 + 7.3 +0.3 – 0.6 – +20.2 +7.8 +12.4 –0.3 + 0.3 –2023
–10.2 –10.1 + 0.0 –0.1 – 0.1 – – 6.5 +0.2 – 6.8 +0.2 – 0.0 –2024 Jan.
+4.3 +3.9 + 0.3 +0.2 – 0.0 – – 1.4 +0.9 + 0.1 –2.4 + 0.0 – Feb.
–4.4 –4.0 – 0.1 –0.2 – 0.0 – + 5.3 +5.1 – 0.9 +1.1 – 0.0 – Mar.
–1.5 –0.4 – 0.9 –0.1 + 0.0 – – 5.8 –4.0 + 0.2 –2.1 + 0.0 – Apr.
+6.2 +5.7 + 0.7 –0.2 + 0.0 – + 2.0 +1.5 + 0.4 –0.1 + 0.1 – May
–5.0 –4.4 – 0.5 –0.0 – 0.0 – + 2.3 +2.6 – 1.3 +1.1 – 0.1 – June
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Federal Railways Fund,
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund,
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund.  2 Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities.  3 Including deposits under savings and loan
contracts.  4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
38•
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months'
noticeat more than 3
months' notice
Period Total Total Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeMemo
item:
Interest
credited
on
savings
depositsnon-banks,
total Totalof which:
With
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsforeign
non-banks
End of year or month *
2021 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 1.5 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2022 538.5 533.2 510.3 254.2 22.9 14.2 5.3 4.8 1.4 34.9 34.6 20.8 0.2
2023 450.5 445.9 395.3 187.1 50.6 43.0 4.6 3.8 2.6 143.2 142.2 35.5 1.0
2024 Feb. 439.0 434.4 379.0 180.9 55.5 48.3 4.5 3.7 0.1 158.4 157.3 37.9 1.1
Mar. 434.9 430.3 373.2 178.5 57.1 50.0 4.5 3.6 0.1 161.8 160.7 38.8 1.1
Apr. 430.2 425.8 367.7 176.3 58.0 51.0 4.5 3.6 0.1 166.0 164.8 39.5 1.1
May 426.7 422.2 363.7 174.7 58.6 51.5 4.5 3.5 0.1 168.4 167.2 40.0 1.1
June 422.5 418.1 359.2 172.6 58.9 51.9 4.4 3.5 0.2 171.1 170.0 40.6 1.2
Changes *
2022 –28.1 –27.5 –26.4 –14.6 –1.2 –0.6 –0.6 –0.6 . +10.2 +10.1 +1.3 +0.1
2023 –83.0 –82.3 –110.0 –52.3 +27.7 +28.8 –0.7 –1.1 . +105.2 +104.5 +12.2 +0.7
2024 Feb. –5.0 –5.0 –7.3 –3.0 +2.4 +2.4 –0.0 –0.0 . +5.9 +5.9 +1.1 +0.0
Mar. –4.1 –4.1 –5.7 –2.4 +1.7 +1.7 –0.0 –0.1 . +3.4 +3.4 +0.9 –0.0
Apr. –4.6 –4.6 –5.5 –2.1 +0.9 +1.0 –0.0 –0.0 . +4.2 +4.2 +0.7 +0.0
May –3.6 –3.5 –4.0 –1.7 +0.5 +0.5 –0.0 –0.1 . +2.4 +2.4 +0.5 +0.0
June –4.2 –4.2 –4.5 –2.1 +0.3 +0.4 –0.0 –0.0 . +2.8 +2.8 +0.6 +0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified as timedeposits.  2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
basic rate of interest.  3 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
securities.
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
of which:
with maturities ofNon-negotiable
bearer debt
securities and
money market
paper  6 Subordinated
up to
and including 1 yearmore than 1 year up to
and including 2 years
Period TotalFloating
rate
bonds  1Zero
coupon
bonds  1,2Foreign
currency
bonds  3,4Certifi-
cates
of
deposit Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5more
than
2 years Totalof which:
with
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsnegotiable
debt
securitiesnon-
negotiable
debt
securities
End of year or month *
2021 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2022 1,231.5 92.8 15.0 307.8 88.6 98.6 1.4 26.6 3.4 1,106.4 0.8 0.7 37.8 0.1
2023 1,327.5 85.8 15.7 312.6 101.2 122.9 1.3 43.7 3.4 1,160.9 0.0 0.0 37.5 0.1
2024 Feb. 1,348.7 90.2 17.1 306.7 83.6 104.7 1.5 48.7 3.7 1,195.3 0.0 0.0 37.7 0.1
Mar. 1,362.4 93.1 17.3 310.4 93.6 114.0 1.4 49.0 3.7 1,199.4 0.0 0.0 37.9 0.1
Apr. 1,355.4 95.1 16.7 304.7 75.2 93.0 1.4 53.0 3.8 1,209.4 0.0 0.0 38.1 0.1
May 1,357.0 96.8 16.3 303.2 73.6 91.1 1.5 53.1 3.9 1,212.8 0.0 0.0 38.6 0.1
June 1,369.3 95.9 15.9 320.9 90.4 107.3 1.5 53.2 3.7 1,208.9 0.1 0.0 38.7 0.1
Changes *
2022 +59.1 –12.7 +1.1 –23.6 –9.9 –8.3 – 0.5 +8.5 –1.1 +58.9 –0.1 +0.1 +3.5 –
2023 +97.0 –6.3 +1.4 +4.4 +11.4 +24.5 – 0.0 +17.7 +0.6 +54.8 +0.0 +0.1 –0.3 –
2024 Feb. + 7.3 +1.2 +0.4 –3.5 –3.3 –5.3 + 0.1 +0.4 +0.1 +12.1 +0.0 – –0.1 –
Mar. +13.7 +2.9 +0.2 +3.7 +10.0 +9.3 – 0.1 +0.4 –0.0 +4.1 –0.0 –0.0 +0.2 –
Apr. – 7.0 +2.0 –0.6 –5.7 –18.5 –21.0 + 0.0 +3.9 +0.1 +10.0 +0.0 +0.0 +0.3 –
May + 1.6 +1.7 –0.3 –1.5 –1.6 –2.4 + 0.0 +0.6 +0.1 +3.4 –0.0 –0.0 +0.4 –0.0
June +12.3 –0.9 –0.5 +17.7 +16.8 +16.1 – 0.0 +0.1 –0.2 –3.9 +0.1 – +0.1 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies.  2 Issue value when
floated.  3 Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreigncurrencies.  4 Bonds denominated in non-euro area currencies.  5 Negotiable bearer debt
securities and money market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%.
6 Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see
also Table IV.10, footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
39•
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks
(MFIs)  6Deposits of non-
banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans
End of
year/monthNum-
ber
of
associ-
ationsBalance
sheet
total  1Credit
bal-
ances
and
loans
(ex-
cluding
building
loans)  2Building
loans  3Bank
debt
secur-
ities  4Loans
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsInterim
and
bridging
loansOther
building
loansSecur-
ities (in-
cluding
Treasury
bills
and
Treasury
discount
paper)  5Deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight
and time
depositsDeposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight and
time de-
posits  7Bearer
debt
secur-
ities
out-
stand-
ingCapital
(includ-
ing pub-
lished
re-
serves)  8Memo
item:
New
con-
tracts
entered
into in
year or
month  9
All building and loan associations
2023 15 259.5 25.6 0.1 15.9 15.7 135.0 41.3 21.8 1.2 36.8 183.2 10.7 6.6 13.0 98.2
2024 Apr. 14 258.1 24.2 0.2 15.6 17.5 134.2 41.5 21.1 1.0 36.3 180.9 11.5 7.5 13.1 6.4
May 14 258.6 24.4 0.2 15.7 17.9 134.1 41.6 20.7 0.9 36.6 180.7 11.8 7.5 13.1 6.2
June 14 258.6 23.8 0.2 15.7 18.3 134.1 41.8 20.5 0.9 36.7 180.4 11.9 7.6 13.2 6.3
Private building and Ioan associations
2024 Apr. 9 182.0 10.6 0.2 8.7 11.7 104.0 35.4 8.9 0.3 33.2 116.0 11.1 7.5 9.0 4.2
May 9 182.5 10.7 0.2 8.9 11.9 103.9 35.5 8.8 0.3 33.4 115.8 11.3 7.5 9.0 4.0
June 9 183.1 10.5 0.2 9.0 12.2 103.8 35.6 8.9 0.3 34.0 115.6 11.4 7.6 9.0 3.9
Public building and Ioan associations
2024 Apr. 5 76.1 13.5 0.0 6.9 5.8 30.2 6.1 12.2 0.7 3.1 65.0 0.4 – 4.1 2.3
May 5 76.1 13.8 0.0 6.8 6.0 30.2 6.2 11.9 0.7 3.1 64.9 0.5 – 4.1 2.3
June 5 75.5 13.3 0.0 6.7 6.1 30.2 6.2 11.6 0.6 2.7 64.7 0.5 – 4.2 2.3
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Capital promised Capital disbursed Changes in deposits
under savings and
loan contracts AllocationsDisbursement
commitments
outstanding at
end of periodInterest and
repayments
received on
building loans  11
Deposits under
savings and
loan contractsLoans under
savings and
loan contracts  10
PeriodAmounts
paid into
savings
and
loan ac-
counts  10Interest
credited
on
deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsRepay-
ments
of
deposits
under
cancelled
savings
and
loan
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Net
alloca-
tions  12 Total Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loans Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loansNewly
granted
interim
and
bridging
loans
and
other
building
loans Totalof
which:
Under
alloc-
ated
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Repay-
ments
during
quarterMemo
item:
Housing
bonuses
re-
ceived  13
All building and loan associations
2023 27.0 1.9 6.4 52.0 40.3 49.9 25.9 4.2 8.7 4.4 15.3 12.6 7.3 4.9 4.1 0.2
2024 Apr. 2.1 0.1 0.5 4.9 3.8 4.6 2.5 0.4 0.9 0.4 1.2 12.2 7.3 0.5 . 0.0
May 2.4 0.1 0.5 4.5 3.5 4.1 2.2 0.4 0.8 0.4 1.1 12.2 7.4 0.5 . 0.0
June 2.1 0.1 0.5 4.4 3.3 3.9 2.1 0.3 0.8 0.3 1.1 12.2 7.5 0.5 . 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2024 Apr. 1.4 0.1 0.3 3.5 2.6 3.3 1.7 0.4 0.6 0.3 0.9 8.0 4.0 0.3 . 0.0
May 1.5 0.0 0.2 3.1 2.3 2.9 1.5 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.9 7.9 4.1 0.3 . 0.0
June 1.3 0.0 0.2 2.9 2.1 2.7 1.4 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.8 7.8 4.1 0.3 . 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2024 Apr. 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.5 1.2 1.3 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.3 3.3 0.1 . 0.0
May 0.9 0.0 0.2 1.5 1.2 1.2 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.3 3.4 0.1 . 0.0
June 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.5 1.1 1.3 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.3 3.4 0.1 . 0.0
* Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures for
the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 See Table IV.2,
footnote 1.  2 Including claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from
registered debt securities and central bank credit balances.  3 Loans under savings and
loan contracts and interim and bridging loans.  4 Including money market paper and
small amounts of other securities issued by banks.  5 Including equalisation claims.
6 Including liabilities to building and loan associations.  7 Including small amounts of
savings deposits.  8 Including participation rights capital and fund for general bankingrisks. 9 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
new contracts.  10 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital disbursed".  11 Including housing
bonuses credited.  12 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans.  13 The amounts already
credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into
savings and loan accounts" and "Interest and repayments received on building loans".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2021 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2022 47 202 1,625.5 461.8 447.4 315.6 131.8 14.4 516.7 447.7 9.7 437.9 69.0 647.0 513.3
2023 47 200 1,544.2 457.5 437.7 304.4 133.3 19.8 507.9 421.0 5.4 415.6 86.9 578.8 417.0
2023 Aug. 48 202 1,663.5 483.7 463.8 312.6 151.2 19.9 499.1 424.2 6.1 418.1 74.9 680.8 502.7
Sep. 48 201 1,680.8 488.5 468.9 315.9 153.1 19.6 496.6 420.9 6.4 414.5 75.7 695.7 513.6
Oct. 48 201 1,693.0 477.0 457.2 306.9 150.3 19.8 499.7 420.5 6.0 414.5 79.2 716.3 529.9
Nov. 47 200 1,622.2 468.5 448.3 304.7 143.6 20.2 507.9 422.9 5.7 417.2 85.0 645.8 462.2
Dec. 47 200 1,544.2 457.5 437.7 304.4 133.3 19.8 507.9 421.0 5.4 415.6 86.9 578.8 417.0
2024 Jan. 47 200 1,580.2 471.1 450.1 310.0 140.1 21.0 518.6 425.0 5.1 419.9 93.6 590.5 402.9
Feb. 47 200 1,620.1 486.0 464.7 322.5 142.2 21.3 517.5 424.8 5.0 419.9 92.7 616.7 425.7
Mar. 47 199 1,634.7 506.6 483.8 327.2 156.6 22.8 523.9 431.4 5.1 426.3 92.6 604.1 428.8
Apr. 47 199 1,668.0 499.4 474.9 325.7 149.3 24.4 520.3 432.4 4.8 427.5 88.0 648.2 477.1
May 47 199 1,647.4 504.5 482.0 330.9 151.1 22.4 528.0 440.3 4.9 435.5 87.7 614.9 439.2
Changes *
2022 –4 –5 +124.1 –13.3 –14.3 +17.8 –32.1 +1.0 +6.7 +17.5 –3.2 +20.6 –10.8 +108.1 +103.0
2023 ±0 –2 –83.7 –2.7 –8.1 –12.1 +4.0 +5.4 –1.4 –20.2 –4.4 –15.8 +18.8 – 68.1 –94.4
2023 Sep. ±0 –1 +16.1 +2.8 +3.1 +3.3 –0.1 –0.3 –8.4 –8.7 +0.4 –9.0 +0.3 + 13.7 + 9.7
Oct. ±0 – +12.3 –11.0 –11.2 –8.9 –2.3 +0.2 +4.4 +0.7 –0.4 +1.2 +3.6 + 20.8 +16.6
Nov. –1 –1 –69.3 –6.3 –6.8 –2.2 –4.5 +0.5 +14.6 +8.2 –0.3 +8.5 +6.4 – 69.0 –66.3
Dec. ±0 – –77.5 –10.0 –9.6 +0.3 –9.9 –0.4 +2.6 +0.5 –0.3 +0.8 +2.1 – 67.5 –44.7
2024 Jan. ±0 – +35.3 +12.4 +11.3 +5.6 +5.6 +1.1 +5.7 –0.4 –0.3 –0.1 +6.1 + 11.1 –15.1
Feb. ±0 – +39.9 +15.1 +14.8 +12.5 +2.3 +0.3 –1.0 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 –0.9 + 26.2 +22.8
Mar. ±0 –1 +14.4 +20.6 +19.1 +4.7 +14.4 +1.5 +6.2 +6.3 +0.2 +6.2 –0.1 – 12.6 + 3.0
Apr. ±0 – +32.9 –7.5 –9.2 –1.5 –7.7 +1.6 –5.4 –0.6 –0.3 –0.3 –4.8 + 43.7 +48.1
May ±0 – –19.9 +6.2 +8.2 +5.2 +3.0 –2.0 +10.8 +10.8 +0.0 +10.7 +0.0 – 32.6 –37.5
Foreign subsidiaries 8                                           End of year or month *
2021 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2022 11 32 256.7 61.5 52.0 20.5 31.4 9.5 145.8 124.5 13.3 111.2 21.3 49.4 0.0
2023 12 31 264.0 74.5 63.9 25.7 38.2 10.6 146.4 125.2 11.9 113.4 21.1 43.1 0.0
2023 Mar. 11 32 253.9 62.2 51.7 20.7 31.0 10.5 146.5 126.2 13.3 112.9 20.2 45.2 0.0
Apr. 11 31 250.9 64.4 53.3 22.4 30.9 11.1 145.3 125.6 13.0 112.6 19.8 41.2 0.0
May 11 31 250.9 59.3 48.8 21.5 27.2 10.5 146.2 126.3 12.8 113.5 19.9 45.5 0.0
June 12 32 253.3 64.2 52.8 22.4 30.4 11.5 146.6 126.7 12.7 113.9 19.9 42.5 0.0
July 12 31 253.4 63.6 52.2 23.0 29.3 11.4 147.4 126.9 12.9 114.1 20.5 42.4 0.0
Aug. 12 31 252.8 62.8 52.2 21.9 30.3 10.6 146.0 125.6 12.7 112.9 20.4 44.1 0.0
Sep. 12 31 256.2 66.4 56.0 25.0 31.0 10.5 146.7 125.8 12.3 113.5 20.9 43.0 0.0
Oct. 12 31 257.4 65.8 56.0 24.5 31.5 9.8 146.8 126.2 12.0 114.2 20.6 44.8 0.0
Nov. 12 31 259.9 66.9 57.7 23.6 34.1 9.3 147.8 126.9 12.1 114.8 20.9 45.2 0.0
Dec. 12 31 264.0 74.5 63.9 25.7 38.2 10.6 146.4 125.2 11.9 113.4 21.1 43.1 0.0
Changes *
2022 –1 –3 +6.5 +8.2 +5.2 –0.2 +5.6 +2.8 +5.0 +6.9 +0.7 +6.3 –1.9 – 6.5 ± 0.0
2023 +1 –1 +8.7 +13.5 +12.2 +5.2 +7.1 +1.2 +1.5 +1.7 –1.4 +3.1 –0.2 – 6.3 ± 0.0
2023 Apr. – –1 –2.7 +2.2 +1.6 +1.7 –0.1 +0.6 –0.8 –0.4 –0.3 –0.1 –0.5 – 4.1 ± 0.0
May – – –1.5 –5.7 –4.9 –0.8 –4.1 –0.7 –0.1 –0.3 –0.2 –0.0 +0.1 + 4.3 ± 0.0
June +1 +1 +3.2 +5.3 +4.2 +0.9 +3.3 +1.0 +0.9 +0.9 –0.0 +0.9 +0.0 – 3.0 ± 0.0
July – –1 +0.6 –0.5 –0.4 +0.6 –1.0 –0.1 +1.2 +0.7 +0.1 +0.5 +0.6 – 0.1 ± 0.0
Aug. – – –1.2 –1.0 –0.2 –1.0 +0.8 –0.9 –1.8 –1.7 –0.2 –1.5 –0.1 + 1.7 ± 0.0
Sep. – – +2.2 +3.2 +3.5 +3.0 +0.5 –0.2 –0.0 –0.5 –0.4 –0.1 +0.5 – 1.0 ± 0.0
Oct. – – +1.4 –0.6 +0.1 –0.4 +0.5 –0.7 +0.2 +0.5 –0.3 +0.8 –0.3 + 1.8 ± 0.0
Nov. – – +3.8 +1.5 +2.0 –0.9 +2.9 –0.4 +1.8 +1.5 +0.1 +1.5 +0.3 + 0.4 ± 0.0
Dec. – – +4.5 +7.7 +6.3 +2.1 +4.2 +1.4 –1.1 –1.3 –0.2 –1.1 +0.3 – 2.0 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from
the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are alwaysto be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 2021
943.4 573.6 435.2 138.5 369.8 10.4 8.9 1.5 359.4 61.7 63.1 557.4 512.9 2022
943.5 554.5 422.6 131.9 389.0 10.6 9.5 1.2 378.4 64.1 66.1 470.5 418.3 2023
965.4 581.8 423.8 158.0 383.5 8.3 7.0 1.3 375.3 78.9 65.4 553.8 503.1 2023 Aug.
963.9 571.6 418.7 152.9 392.3 11.0 9.6 1.4 381.3 84.4 66.0 566.5 513.9 Sep.
958.1 572.8 421.2 151.6 385.3 11.0 9.5 1.4 374.3 82.9 66.0 586.0 530.5 Oct.
958.5 561.4 414.6 146.8 397.0 11.5 10.3 1.2 385.5 81.2 65.9 516.6 463.3 Nov.
943.5 554.5 422.6 131.9 389.0 10.6 9.5 1.2 378.4 64.1 66.1 470.5 418.3 Dec.
967.4 573.0 433.0 140.0 394.4 11.0 9.8 1.2 383.4 88.2 69.1 455.4 404.8 2024 Jan.
984.5 586.5 443.4 143.1 398.0 10.7 9.7 1.0 387.3 88.5 69.2 477.9 427.6 Feb.
997.2 587.3 442.4 144.9 409.9 11.3 10.3 1.0 398.6 86.3 69.4 481.8 431.6 Mar.
978.9 576.4 435.8 140.6 402.5 11.1 10.1 1.0 391.4 88.0 69.2 531.8 479.3 Apr.
998.2 591.9 449.7 142.1 406.3 14.8 13.9 1.0 391.5 85.8 69.0 494.4 443.4 May
Changes *
– 6.2 –64.2 –22.2 –42.0 + 58.0 + 2.3 + 2.6 – 0.3 +55.7 – 6.3 +11.8 +119.0 + 109.5 2022
+ 1.2 –17.0 –13.8 – 3.1 + 18.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 – 0.3 +16.9 + 3.9 + 3.0 – 88.0 – 94.5 2023
– 4.2 –12.7 –5.1 –7.6 + 8.4 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 5.7 + 4.2 +0.6 + 12.8 + 10.8 2023 Sep.
– 5.2 +1.7 +2.5 –0.8 – 6.9 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 6.9 – 1.3 +0.0 + 19.4 + 16.6 Oct.
+ 3.1 –8.9 –6.6 –2.3 +12.0 + 0.5 + 0.8 – 0.3 +11.5 – 0.2 –0.2 – 69.3 – 67.1 Nov.
–13.7 –5.9 +8.4 –14.3 – 7.9 – 0.9 – 0.9 + 0.0 – 7.0 –16.6 +0.2 – 46.7 – 45.0 Dec.
+22.3 +17.2 +10.4 +6.8 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 4.8 +23.5 +3.0 – 15.1 – 13.5 2024 Jan.
+17.2 +13.7 +10.5 +3.2 + 3.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 +0.1 + 22.5 + 22.8 Feb.
+12.7 +0.7 –1.0 +1.8 +11.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 +11.4 – 2.3 +0.1 + 4.0 + 4.0 Mar.
–18.8 –11.4 –6.6 –4.8 – 7.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 7.3 + 1.3 –0.2 + 50.0 + 47.7 Apr.
+20.5 +16.6 +13.9 +2.7 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 3.7 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 1.5 –0.2 – 37.4 – 35.9 May
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries 8
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 2021
189.4 67.5 38.6 28.9 122.0 6.9 4.6 2.3 115.1 13.5 20.1 33.7 0.0 2022
195.9 76.0 51.2 24.8 119.9 6.4 4.0 2.4 113.4 12.1 20.8 35.3 0.0 2023
186.6 71.2 42.2 29.1 115.4 6.8 4.3 2.5 108.5 12.3 20.3 34.8 0.0 2023 Mar.
183.5 71.0 44.0 27.0 112.5 6.9 4.5 2.5 105.6 12.2 20.2 35.0 0.0 Apr.
183.9 71.2 43.6 27.6 112.8 6.9 4.4 2.5 105.9 12.1 20.6 34.3 0.0 May
185.6 71.9 45.4 26.5 113.7 6.6 4.2 2.4 107.1 10.6 20.5 36.6 0.0 June
187.9 72.3 47.0 25.3 115.6 6.8 4.4 2.4 108.8 10.5 20.5 34.4 0.0 July
185.5 70.6 46.0 24.7 114.8 6.6 4.2 2.4 108.2 10.3 20.6 36.4 0.0 Aug.
188.2 74.1 49.1 25.1 114.1 6.7 4.3 2.4 107.4 11.3 20.5 36.0 0.0 Sep.
189.3 73.1 48.3 24.8 116.2 6.5 4.1 2.4 109.7 11.6 20.8 35.8 0.0 Oct.
192.1 73.7 48.4 25.3 118.4 6.5 4.1 2.4 111.8 11.6 20.8 35.4 0.0 Nov.
195.9 76.0 51.2 24.8 119.9 6.4 4.0 2.4 113.4 12.1 20.8 35.3 0.0 Dec.
Changes *
+ 7.7 + 1.4 + 5.6 – 4.2 + 6.3 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 6.7 – 2.9 – 0.2 + 2.2 ± 0.0 2022
+ 7.6 + 8.9 +12.6 – 3.8 – 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.1 – 0.8 – 1.4 + 0.7 + 1.8 ± 0.0 2023
– 2.7 –0.1 +1.8 –1.9 – 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 2.7 – 0.1 –0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 2023 Apr.
– 0.6 –0.3 –0.4 +0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.0 +0.4 – 1.2 ± 0.0 May
+ 2.3 +1.0 +1.8 –0.9 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 1.6 – 1.6 –0.1 + 2.5 ± 0.0 June
+ 2.7 +0.6 +1.6 –1.1 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 – 0.0 +0.0 – 2.1 ± 0.0 July
– 2.9 –1.9 –1.0 –0.8 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.2 +0.1 + 1.8 ± 0.0 Aug.
+ 1.9 +3.2 +3.1 +0.1 – 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 1.4 + 1.0 –0.1 – 0.7 ± 0.0 Sep.
+ 1.2 –1.0 –0.8 –0.2 + 2.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.2 +0.3 – 0.2 ± 0.0 Oct.
+ 3.7 +0.9 +0.1 +0.8 + 2.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.1 +0.0 – 0.0 ± 0.0 Nov.
+ 4.1 +2.4 +2.8 –0.4 + 1.7 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.4 +0.0 + 0.0 ± 0.0 Dec.
and other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.
4 Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of
negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Includingsubordinated liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.  8 The collection of data
regarding foreign subsidiaries matured in 12/2023.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 3,656.9 0.1
2022 16,843.0 168.4 168.0 195.6 28.1 0.0
2023 16,261.6 162.6 162.3 170.5 8.2 0.0
2024 May . . . . . .
p June 16,226.6 162.3 161.9 168.1 6.2 0.0
p July 16,253.3 162.5 162.2 ... ... ...
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
2022 4,664,630 27.7 46,646 46,512 54,848 8,337 5
2023 4,483,853 27.6 44,839 44,709 47,008 2,299 0
2024 May . . . . . . .
p June 4,465,934 27.5 44,659 44,530 46,088 1,558 0
p July 4,495,004 27.7 44,950 44,821 ... ... ...
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2022 9,814 7,396 3,216 14,465 8,295 117 2,471
2023 9,282 7,417 3,170 14,061 8,178 148 2,118
2024 May . . . . . . .
June 9,301 7,441 3,018 14,154 8,266 140 2,031
July 9,356 7,660 2,870 14,292 8,316 138 2,022
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2022 3,352,177 12,609 566,227 543,694 116,094
2023 3,447,513 968 420,839 455,493 125,531
2024 May . . . . .
June 3,503,135 1,963 393,765 425,000 124,033
July 3,532,041 1,276 401,017 421,384 122,530
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 5 of the
Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum
reserve requirements (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies,
pursuant to Article 6(1)(a)).  3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2%between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at
1%. 4 Article 6(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the
application of minimum reserve requirements.  5 Average credit balances of credit
institutions at national central banks.  6 Average credit balances less required reserves
after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.  7 Required reserves after deduction of the
lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 2022 July 27 0.00 0.50 – 0.75 2008 Jan. 1 3.32 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
Sep. 14 0.75 1.25 – 1.50 July 1 3.19 July 1 – 0.73
2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 Nov. 2 1.50 2.00 – 2.25
Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 Dec. 21 2.00 2.50 – 2.75 2009 Jan. 1 1.62 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
July 1 0.12
2014 June 11 – 0.10 0.15 – 0.40 2023 Feb. 8 2.50 3.00 – 3.25 2016 July 1 – 0.88
Sep. 10 – 0.20 0.05 – 0.30 Mar. 22 3.00 3.50 – 3.75 2011 July 1 0.37
May 10 3.25 3.75 – 4.00 2023 Jan. 1 1.62
2015 Dec. 9 – 0.30 0.05 – 0.30 June 21 3.50 4.00 – 4.25 2012 Jan. 1 0.12 July 1 3.12
Aug. 2 3.75 4.25 – 4.50
2016 Mar. 16 – 0.40 0.00 – 0.25 Sep. 20 4.00 4.50 – 4.75 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13 2024 Jan. 1 3.62
July 1 – 0.38 July 1 3.37
2019 Sep. 18 – 0.50 0.00 – 0.25 2024 June 12 3.75 4.25 – 4.50
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2024 Jul. 10 5 334 5 334 4.25 – – – 7
Jul. 17 4 687 4 687 4.25 – – – 7
Jul. 24 4 392 4 392 4.25 – – – 7
Jul. 31 5 475 5 475 4.25 – – – 7
Aug. 7 1 762 1 762 4.25 – – – 7
Aug. 14 1 866  1 866 4.25 – – – 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2024 May 2 355 355 2   4.36 – – − 90
May 29 1 170 1 170 2      … – – − 91
Jun. 26 5 877 5 877 2      … – – − 91
Jul. 31 1 881 1 881 2      … – – − 91
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month
% per annum
EURIBOR ®  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2023 Dec. 3.902 3.858 3.858 3.935 3.927 3.679
2024 Jan. 3.904 3.874 3.869 3.925 3.892 3.609
Feb. 3.907 3.878 3.868 3.923 3.901 3.671
Mar. 3.907 3.873 3.853 3.923 3.895 3.718
Apr. 3.908 3.868 3.853 3.885 3.838 3.703
May 3.907 3.881 3.816 3.813 3.787 3.680
June 3.749 3.681 3.635 3.725 3.715 3.650
July 3.663 3.611 3.618 3.685 3.644 3.526
* Publication does not establish an entitlement to provision of the rates. The Deutsche
Bundesbank reserves the right to cease publishing the information on its website in
future. All data are supplied without liability. No explicit or implicit assurances or
guarantees are made as to the up-to-dateness, accuracy, timeliness, completeness,
marketability or suitability of the data as interest rates or reference interest rates.
Neither the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI), nor Euribor EBF, nor Euribor
ACI, nor the Euribor Panel Banks, nor the Euribor Steering Committee, nor the
European Central Bank, nor Reuters, nor the Deutsche Bundesbank can be held liable
for any irregularity or inaccuracy, incompleteness or late provision of the money market
rates. With regard to the €STR please consider the European Central Bank's disclaimer,
which also applies for the Deutsche Bundesbank's publication:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/financial_markets_and_interest_rates/euro_short-
term_rate/html/index.en.html
1 Euro Short-Term Rate: On the basis of individual euro-denominated transactions
conducted and settled on the previous business day, the European Central Bankpublishes the €STR since 2 October 2019. Transactions are reported by euro area banks
subject to reporting obligations in compliance with Money Market Statistical Reporting
Regulation. Monthly averages are calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank.  2 Monthly
averages are own calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank based on Euribor® daily rates
calculated by the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). These are unweighted
averages. Information on the methodology of Euribor® daily rates are available below.
Please be aware that commercial use of these data is only possible with a licence
agreement with the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). Information on its
terms of use are available under the link below. Values calculated from November 2023
onwards with three decimal places. Previous values calculated with two decimal places.
For technical reasons, these values are also displayed with three decimal places and the
third decimal place is filled with a 0. Up to and including October 2023 all values
calculated and published with two decimal places
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/terms-of-use
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/benchmarks/euribor/

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 June 2.23 200,501 0.91 226,645 2.86 162,035 1.20 22,133
July 2.37 222,529 0.92 227,182 3.01 168,874 1.24 21,619
Aug. 2.52 246,001 0.94 228,521 3.15 180,132 1.27 21,610
Sep. 2.61 262,537 0.95 229,285 3.27 181,385 1.28 21,507
Oct. 2.76 288,227 0.97 230,966 3.39 197,527 1.32 21,449
Nov. 2.88 315,984 1.01 233,972 3.43 193,442 1.39 21,232
Dec. 2.96 338,959 1.04 237,917 3.47 190,801 1.43 21,697
2024 Jan. 3.01 364,579 1.06 240,513 3.51 204,092 1.46 21,689
Feb. 3.04 385,969 1.08 241,610 3.54 205,657 1.48 20,732
Mar. 3.06 400,182 1.09 242,659 3.56 212,882 1.56 20,688
Apr. 3.08 414,278 1.11 243,548 3.54 213,659 1.62 20,719
May 3.09 424,087 1.12 244,423 3.50 211,340 1.75 20,827
June 3.07 433,304 1.15 244,949 3.42 200,180 1.83 21,079
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 June 5.10 3,298 3.13 25,865 1.82 1,546,102 9.25 48,284 4.24 76,260 3.83 329,576
July 5.34 3,413 3.26 25,712 1.83 1,548,159 9.45 47,192 4.35 76,468 3.90 330,500
Aug. 5.41 3,391 3.33 25,573 1.85 1,550,499 9.55 47,277 4.45 76,654 3.95 330,602
Sep. 5.49 3,233 3.38 25,315 1.86 1,553,618 9.72 47,706 4.54 76,662 3.99 329,641
Oct. 5.57 3,312 3.50 25,212 1.87 1,554,344 9.95 47,325 4.65 76,583 4.06 329,490
Nov. 5.70 3,294 3.58 24,792 1.89 1,556,410 9.99 46,653 4.74 76,885 4.09 328,941
Dec. 5.62 3,198 3.64 24,499 1.90 1,556,523 10.01 47,390 4.81 77,044 4.13 326,980
2024 Jan. 5.66 3,354 3.69 24,060 1.91 1,554,763 10.16 46,574 4.89 76,552 4.18 327,358
Feb. 5.70 3,250 3.72 23,819 1.92 1,555,595 10.18 46,259 4.97 76,486 4.22 327,721
Mar. 5.68 3,184 3.75 23,540 1.93 1,558,297 10.05 47,109 4.90 76,985 4.26 326,829
Apr. 5.65 3,289 3.78 23,271 1.94 1,559,197 10.13 45,949 4.97 76,906 4.30 327,227
May 5.55 3,400 3.81 23,042 1.95 1,561,200 10.13 46,181 5.13 77,092 4.34 327,336
June 5.58 3,272 3.84 22,914 1.97 1,564,022 10.18 46,114 5.22 76,708 4.37 326,275
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 June 5.42 193,968 3.95 250,107 2.29 883,229
July 5.62 194,789 4.09 251,312 2.35 887,112
Aug. 5.72 188,564 4.17 251,445 2.37 889,482
Sep. 5.89 187,448 4.29 248,998 2.41 887,643
Oct. 6.05 186,407 4.42 251,931 2.45 889,648
Nov. 5.97 187,977 4.45 253,976 2.48 892,391
Dec. 6.05 180,730 4.50 255,561 2.51 891,507
2024 Jan. 6.06 183,005 4.53 255,411 2.52 893,128
Feb. 6.00 184,401 4.64 253,221 2.55 896,388
Mar. 6.03 189,482 4.62 249,544 2.56 895,185
Apr. 5.97 188,827 4.72 248,341 2.58 897,166
May 5.92 188,826 4.74 249,224 2.59 899,489
June 5.88 192,014 4.74 248,615 2.59 896,416
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 June 0.34 1,782,329 2.78 34,870 2.91 4,260 2.53 1,999 0.43 450,713 1.28 33,163
July 0.41 1,773,505 2.94 38,938 2.98 3,412 2.59 2,044 0.50 440,519 1.48 36,162
Aug. 0.51 1,757,994 3.12 46,037 3.15 4,422 2.81 2,374 0.55 429,372 1.62 38,895
Sep. 0.55 1,748,975 3.22 40,232 3.30 3,611 2.92 1,787 0.59 420,872 1.76 41,824
Oct. 0.56 1,728,935 3.40 51,187 3.46 5,558 2.99 2,743 0.64 411,490 1.94 44,837
Nov. 0.59 1,726,394 3.46 57,743 3.40 6,243 3.18 4,292 0.67 400,980 2.09 48,268
Dec. 0.60 1,731,513 3.37 49,974 3.25 4,896 3.17 4,389 0.69 396,006 2.17 50,818
2024 Jan. 0.62 1,702,116 3.27 56,368 3.13 5,846 2.80 3,300 0.71 386,987 2.25 53,387
Feb. 0.58 1,698,248 3.28 55,090 3.04 5,651 2.65 2,339 0.72 379,659 2.30 55,755
Mar. 0.60 1,698,313 3.27 47,316 2.94 3,332 2.53 2,296 0.74 373,900 2.35 57,421
Apr. 0.60 1,698,724 3.21 52,193 2.95 3,789 2.76 2,954 0.75 368,393 2.38 58,350
May 0.60 1,701,051 3.22 50,351 2.91 3,284 2.43 1,947 0.76 364,344 2.41 58,880
June 0.59 1,707,016 3.11 47,602 2.90 3,065 2.51 1,838 0.76 359,875 2.43 59,236
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2023 June 0.63 548,727 3.20 88,967 3.48 703 2.90 206
July 0.72 551,199 3.34 79,832 3.53 614 3.26 252
Aug. 0.81 548,242 3.50 89,027 3.46 570 2.93 210
Sep. 0.92 548,230 3.64 95,610 3.63 807 2.96 287
Oct. 0.97 551,400 3.74 95,412 3.78 752 2.97 266
Nov. 1.02 556,270 3.73 99,933 3.71 820 3.30 418
Dec. 1.02 553,882 3.71 92,454 3.47 855 2.98 343
2024 Jan. 1.05 535,302 3.71 91,219 3.20 419 2.81 401
Feb. 1.03 524,848 3.70 94,014 3.16 527 2.90 239
Mar. 1.00 525,597 3.74 109,409 3.29 609 3.60 538
Apr. 1.01 527,442 3.74 109,540 3.46 815 3.68 573
May 1.06 535,774 3.71 99,982 3.58 1,720 3.63 1,543
June 1.00 531,125 3.56 101,044 3.46 1,187 3.51 968
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2023 June 8.05 7.99 9,277 9.15 1,568 10.32 316 6.62 3,493 8.72 5,468
July 8.40 8.35 8,628 9.32 1,609 10.92 295 7.04 2,974 8.94 5,359
Aug. 8.46 8.43 8,818 9.46 1,689 10.65 288 7.13 3,011 9.02 5,518
Sep. 8.57 8.47 8,036 9.53 1,530 10.21 274 7.18 2,798 9.11 4,964
Oct. 8.66 8.55 8,347 9.62 1,655 9.43 288 7.21 2,893 9.24 5,166
Nov. 8.72 8.55 8,130 9.70 1,626 8.45 329 7.29 2,863 9.29 4,938
Dec. 8.69 8.25 6,106 9.28 905 7.99 298 7.22 2,491 9.04 3,317
2024 Jan. 8.73 8.49 8,062 9.55 1,563 7.86 261 7.30 2,718 9.16 5,082
Feb. 8.56 8.34 8,245 9.24 1,308 7.86 262 7.24 2,909 8.99 5,073
Mar. 8.27 8.03 8,190 9.21 1,250 8.15 260 6.87 3,173 8.79 4,757
Apr. 8.34 8.07 9,080 9.32 1,348 7.46 320 6.91 3,581 8.91 5,180
May 8.46 8.16 8,491 9.36 1,229 7.04 328 7.09 3,330 8.97 4,833
June 8.32 8.06 8,395 9.19 1,234 7.59 272 6.95 3,359 8.86 4,763
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2023 June 4.93 4,341 4.68 1,388 5.26 1,974 5.19 892 4.33 1,475
July 4.96 4,086 4.54 1,161 5.39 1,766 5.12 933 4.31 1,387
Aug. 5.16 3,430 5.02 882 5.72 1,290 5.24 910 4.50 1,230
Sep. 5.24 3,526 5.08 814 5.76 1,489 5.29 848 4.54 1,189
Oct. 5.45 3,348 5.37 1,068 5.95 1,483 5.57 724 4.73 1,141
Nov. 5.43 3,152 5.13 765 5.90 1,345 5.53 764 4.76 1,043
Dec. 5.20 4,287 5.21 988 5.77 1,719 5.12 1,234 4.54 1,334
2024 Jan. 5.23 3,673 5.02 1,102 5.78 1,717 5.26 823 4.38 1,133
Feb. 5.13 2,997 5.13 703 5.73 1,237 5.24 675 4.36 1,085
Mar. 4.91 3,987 5.08 953 5.68 1,522 5.16 814 4.07 1,651
Apr. 5.05 3,544 4.99 1,093 5.67 1,314 5.26 891 4.30 1,339
May 4.99 3,199 5.00 881 5.48 1,288 5.19 749 4.32 1,162
June 4.98 3,716 5.01 860 5.55 1,484 5.23 838 4.23 1,394
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2023 June 5.04 3,178 . . 5.36 1,535 5.36 633 4.35 1,010
July 5.09 2,963 . . 5.48 1,337 5.48 592 4.37 1,034
Aug. 5.30 2,381 . . 5.91 934 5.55 551 4.53 896
Sep. 5.32 2,459 . . 5.80 1,094 5.57 523 4.55 842
Oct. 5.52 2,472 . . 6.03 1,094 5.67 547 4.74 831
Nov. 5.52 2,249 . . 6.06 900 5.60 587 4.82 762
Dec. 5.42 2,861 . . 5.93 1,256 5.58 660 4.63 945
2024 Jan. 5.33 2,814 . . 5.88 1,335 5.34 656 4.42 823
Feb. 5.22 2,274 . . 5.82 908 5.40 573 4.40 793
Mar. 4.96 3,188 . . 5.75 1,215 5.25 700 4.05 1,273
Apr. 5.08 2,756 . . 5.70 962 5.39 760 4.27 1,034
May 5.09 2,320 . . 5.57 859 5.34 643 4.38 818
June 5.08 2,850 . . 5.67 1,115 5.35 683 4.29 1,052
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2023 June 4.12 4.06 13,983 4.28 2,565 5.05 2,301 4.38 1,450 3.73 4,986 3.84 5,246
July 4.08 4.02 14,335 4.03 2,845 5.20 1,949 4.37 1,469 3.71 5,352 3.82 5,564
Aug. 4.19 4.14 14,386 4.43 2,611 5.29 2,198 4.53 1,388 3.81 5,275 3.89 5,525
Sep. 4.17 4.12 12,286 4.32 2,017 5.40 1,523 4.48 1,171 3.89 4,534 3.85 5,058
Oct. 4.22 4.18 13,831 4.39 2,853 5.53 1,989 4.53 1,403 3.85 5,304 3.90 5,136
Nov. 4.27 4.22 13,473 4.56 2,236 5.62 1,723 4.61 1,588 3.92 4,936 3.92 5,225
Dec. 4.12 4.05 12,151 4.32 2,055 5.56 1,576 4.44 1,553 3.80 4,349 3.65 4,672
2024 Jan. 3.90 3.85 14,667 4.10 2,844 5.44 1,862 4.08 1,584 3.56 5,397 3.55 5,825
Feb. 3.92 3.88 14,245 4.30 2,429 5.41 1,783 4.04 1,612 3.59 5,153 3.61 5,697
Mar. 3.88 3.83 15,439 4.01 2,258 5.28 1,739 4.09 1,755 3.55 5,414 3.61 6,530
Apr. 3.91 3.86 16,793 4.21 2,754 5.45 1,869 4.06 1,868 3.57 6,234 3.64 6,822
May 3.96 3.91 15,403 4.19 2,277 5.44 1,828 4.14 1,480 3.60 6,051 3.69 6,044
June 3.99 3.95 16,291 4.33 2,186 5.51 2,034 4.19 1,475 3.66 6,163 3.68 6,618
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2023 June . 3.85 6,185 . . 4.81 836 4.13 648 3.61 2,314 3.67 2,387
July . 3.88 6,592 . . 5.08 729 4.20 661 3.63 2,384 3.72 2,818
Aug. . 3.96 6,467 . . 5.10 767 4.29 637 3.73 2,399 3.75 2,664
Sep. . 3.93 5,704 . . 5.36 540 4.32 551 3.78 2,092 3.65 2,521
Oct. . 4.01 6,207 . . 5.44 769 4.38 587 3.73 2,335 3.76 2,516
Nov. . 4.02 6,174 . . 5.50 669 4.45 728 3.80 2,170 3.70 2,607
Dec. . 3.86 5,588 . . 5.39 612 4.29 609 3.73 1,935 3.47 2,432
2024 Jan. . 3.69 7,051 . . 5.34 706 3.96 746 3.44 2,461 3.45 3,138
Feb. . 3.70 6,827 . . 5.33 717 3.82 764 3.43 2,314 3.50 3,032
Mar. . 3.66 7,324 . . 5.00 737 3.91 762 3.43 2,491 3.49 3,334
Apr. . 3.74 7,898 . . 5.48 783 3.88 853 3.48 2,770 3.53 3,492
May . 3.77 6,873 . . 5.35 740 3.97 677 3.48 2,483 3.57 2,973
June . 3.78 7,745 . . 5.43 844 4.03 682 3.54 2,777 3.52 3,442
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 June 10.11 39,692 10.30 28,067 17.23 6,528 5.83 99,351 5.86 98,897
July 10.32 38,818 10.48 27,182 17.58 6,580 6.00 98,185 6.03 97,770
Aug. 10.39 39,026 10.60 27,146 17.79 6,611 6.11 94,939 6.14 94,514
Sep. 10.59 39,548 10.75 27,976 17.86 6,629 6.25 95,468 6.28 95,004
Oct. 10.82 39,186 11.02 27,570 18.09 6,656 6.42 94,418 6.45 93,913
Nov. 10.80 38,416 10.95 26,932 18.18 6,614 6.41 95,688 6.44 95,191
Dec. 10.76 39,266 11.03 27,422 18.17 6,609 6.49 92,617 6.52 92,164
2024 Jan. 11.03 38,673 11.19 27,497 18.22 6,534 6.48 93,839 6.51 93,367
Feb. 11.06 38,233 11.22 27,163 18.29 6,460 6.47 95,704 6.50 95,225
Mar. 10.88 39,566 11.17 27,767 18.66 6,459 6.48 97,035 6.51 96,538
Apr. 11.00 38,415 11.19 27,036 18.65 6,438 6.37 96,481 6.40 95,979
May 10.95 38,754 11.23 27,112 18.66 6,427 6.38 96,257 6.41 95,778
June 10.96 38,787 11.09 27,550 18.67 6,425 6.32 98,856 6.35 98,366
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2023 June 4.88 100,910 4.89 33,256 5.58 12,583 6.39 1,760 4.31 1,219 4.85 72,375 4.70 4,371 3.95 8,602
July 5.06 85,629 4.88 28,176 6.39 10,764 6.54 1,838 4.35 1,167 4.91 61,061 5.32 3,989 3.94 6,810
Aug. 5.11 73,312 5.15 21,335 6.01 10,015 6.63 1,698 4.46 999 5.06 51,942 4.47 3,017 3.95 5,641
Sep. 5.16 83,317 5.30 25,702 6.04 10,804 6.76 1,689 4.35 959 5.09 60,497 5.03 3,077 4.10 6,291
Oct. 5.39 76,734 5.27 24,750 6.35 10,963 6.93 1,781 4.61 912 5.30 54,862 5.02 3,674 4.11 4,542
Nov. 5.17 79,316 5.28 22,467 6.27 10,430 6.87 1,838 4.50 936 5.07 56,524 4.66 3,644 4.10 5,944
Dec. 5.19 108,487 5.34 31,589 6.07 11,245 6.60 2,020 4.33 1,115 5.28 76,500 4.63 7,141 3.79 10,466
2024 Jan. 5.16 75,818 5.37 22,554 5.81 10,279 6.48 1,856 4.21 932 5.18 54,103 4.51 3,830 3.64 4,818
Feb. 5.06 72,892 5.36 18,973 5.77 10,256 6.77 1,809 4.19 879 5.19 49,631 3.29 6,114 3.85 4,203
Mar. 5.19 94,238 5.42 27,803 5.64 12,574 6.70 1,930 4.24 1,017 5.27 67,328 4.29 5,644 3.79 5,745
Apr. 5.20 79,786 5.35 23,180 5.67 9,851 6.60 3,249 4.20 1,118 5.24 56,030 4.40 4,605 3.84 4,933
May 5.10 82,546 5.27 20,970 5.67 10,468 6.62 3,568 4.24 961 5.13 57,369 4.12 4,985 3.69 5,195
June 5.05 99,686 5.11 30,799 5.61 10,052 6.58 4,052 4.26 984 5.07 71,081 4.49 6,869 3.75 6,648
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2023 June . . . . 5.14 573 4.75 99 3.87 340 . . 5.16 1,293 3.75 1,183
July 4.86 11,078 . . 5.44 489 4.91 126 3.98 325 4.87 6,823 5.86 1,544 3.94 1,771
Aug. 5.08 9,797 . . 5.58 425 5.01 122 3.85 279 5.45 6,747 4.32 890 3.79 1,334
Sep. . . . . 5.63 450 5.28 109 3.88 253 . . 5.19 1,187 3.76 1,487
Oct. 5.05 12,103 . . 5.66 508 5.14 140 3.95 213 5.21 8,840 5.38 1,005 3.73 1,397
Nov. 4.69 10,586 . . 5.73 353 4.83 107 3.88 250 4.90 7,211 4.51 1,045 3.74 1,620
Dec. 4.83 15,673 . . 5.55 459 5.01 139 3.82 291 5.22 10,040 4.81 1,915 3.45 2,829
2024 Jan. 4.78 8,277 . . 5.69 446 4.64 150 3.68 250 5.04 5,880 4.09 707 3.41 844
Feb. 4.87 7,393 . . 5.68 351 4.70 113 3.60 231 5.16 5,054 4.55 846 3.45 798
Mar. 5.03 11,566 . . 5.74 412 4.91 99 3.75 277 5.24 8,292 5.35 1,271 3.39 1,215
Apr. 4.81 8,922 . . 5.61 457 4.90 159 3.69 272 4.93 5,989 5.13 1,001 3.77 1,044
May 4.79 8,862 . . 5.64 356 4.62 151 3.76 247 5.13 5,522 4.71 1,249 3.46 1,337
June 4.97 12,577 . . 5.61 392 4.68 173 3.55 251 5.34 7,255 4.86 2,681 3.73 1,825
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 
2021 Q3 2,653.1 271.7 474.2 358.2 463.4 899.8 3.3 87.8 38.3 56.3
Q4 2,667.2 261.3 468.6 355.1 472.4 921.6 3.2 85.0 40.8 59.3
2022 Q1 2,547.3 243.7 440.2 333.2 468.7 870.5 2.7 87.5 41.0 59.8
Q2 2,369.7 215.6 390.3 305.5 462.5 803.5 3.0 85.5 41.3 62.5
Q3 2,296.2 202.0 369.9 289.1 461.2 776.7 4.0 84.2 41.4 67.6
Q4 2,274.7 189.5 373.7 279.7 465.8 772.2 3.4 79.5 38.7 72.2
2023 Q1 2,326.9 201.7 380.8 280.2 472.3 790.3 3.6 85.2 38.5 74.4
Q2 2,330.1 194.7 383.3 280.0 474.3 799.0 3.6 84.1 38.1 73.0
Q3 2,305.3 186.0 376.1 273.3 480.9 783.5 3.7 88.9 38.2 74.7
Q4 2,408.4 190.2 405.6 291.0 499.7 822.6 3.3 79.0 34.2 83.0
2024 Q1 2,477.5 193.6 412.6 289.5 502.9 847.6 3.7 97.0 35.1 95.5
    Life insurance
2021 Q3 1,400.1 159.2 233.8 214.8 87.7 654.6 1.9 13.4 20.8 13.8
Q4 1,411.1 152.4 231.9 211.8 93.4 669.1 1.7 14.6 21.9 14.3
2022 Q1 1,317.7 136.8 211.5 193.1 99.7 626.1 0.9 13.9 22.0 13.8
Q2 1,202.1 120.5 180.3 173.1 104.2 569.4 0.9 13.6 22.1 17.9
Q3 1,149.6 110.2 166.6 162.1 107.0 546.4 1.1 12.3 22.3 21.7
Q4 1,130.1 103.6 170.5 155.6 111.4 540.0 1.1 11.5 19.5 16.8
2023 Q1 1,147.9 105.1 170.4 155.6 113.3 553.4 1.0 12.1 19.4 17.5
Q2 1,153.6 102.8 171.7 154.9 114.3 559.4 1.0 12.1 19.3 18.1
Q3 1,120.9 97.6 162.9 149.1 115.7 545.2 1.5 11.8 19.1 18.0
Q4 1,180.4 101.5 178.7 161.0 116.6 574.7 1.4 10.3 16.6 19.5
2024 Q1 1,193.5 98.4 176.5 156.1 115.6 594.3 1.4 10.2 16.6 24.3
    Non-life insurance
2021 Q3 733.1 98.7 141.0 83.8 93.7 228.4 0.4 46.4 12.8 27.7
Q4 738.4 94.6 140.1 84.7 97.5 234.3 0.3 44.6 14.0 28.4
2022 Q1 722.4 91.4 133.4 80.8 98.5 227.7 0.2 45.7 13.9 30.7
Q2 681.6 81.9 122.0 74.8 98.6 216.5 0.1 44.0 14.1 29.5
Q3 661.1 76.2 116.0 70.3 99.2 212.2 0.1 43.1 14.1 29.7
Q4 659.0 72.7 115.2 69.1 99.8 215.5 0.2 42.4 14.2 30.1
2023 Q1 687.2 81.3 121.2 69.5 102.7 219.8 0.1 45.2 14.2 33.2
Q2 687.1 77.2 123.9 70.3 103.1 222.4 0.1 45.1 14.1 30.9
Q3 679.6 73.6 122.3 68.6 104.5 221.2 0.1 45.6 14.3 29.4
Q4 708.0 74.9 131.9 74.1 109.0 230.1 0.1 43.9 13.0 31.1
2024 Q1 748.8 81.0 139.5 75.2 110.6 234.6 0.1 55.8 13.9 38.0
    Reinsurance 4
2021 Q3 519.9 13.9 99.3 59.6 282.0 16.7 1.0 28.0 4.7 14.8
Q4 517.7 14.3 96.6 58.6 281.4 18.2 1.1 25.9 4.9 16.7
2022 Q1 507.1 15.5 95.3 59.3 270.4 16.7 1.6 27.9 5.0 15.3
Q2 486.0 13.2 88.0 57.5 259.6 17.6 1.9 27.9 5.1 15.1
Q3 485.5 15.6 87.3 56.7 255.1 18.1 2.7 28.8 5.1 16.2
Q4 485.6 13.2 88.0 55.0 254.6 16.7 2.1 25.7 5.0 25.3
2023 Q1 491.8 15.3 89.2 55.0 256.3 17.1 2.4 27.8 4.8 23.7
Q2 489.5 14.7 87.6 54.8 256.9 17.2 2.5 26.9 4.8 24.0
Q3 504.9 14.8 90.9 55.5 260.7 17.1 2.1 31.6 4.8 27.3
Q4 520.0 13.7 95.0 55.9 274.1 17.8 1.8 24.7 4.6 32.4
2024 Q1 535.3 14.2 96.6 58.1 276.6 18.7 2.2 31.0 4.6 33.2
Pension funds 5
2021 Q3 689.8 82.9 60.4 48.9 11.8 453.6 0.1 12.2 17.8 2.2
Q4 709.9 82.1 60.0 48.7 11.3 473.5 0.1 12.4 18.5 3.3
2022 Q1 689.8 75.8 56.7 46.2 12.0 465.9 0.0 12.4 18.5 2.2
Q2 665.9 70.3 52.9 43.3 12.5 453.5 0.0 12.3 18.6 2.5
Q3 657.0 67.7 52.0 42.1 12.9 448.1 0.0 12.9 18.7 2.6
Q4 664.0 67.3 54.6 41.9 13.6 451.3 0.0 13.1 18.8 3.5
2023 Q1 671.5 66.4 56.9 42.3 13.6 457.9 0.0 12.9 18.7 2.7
Q2 678.7 67.5 58.9 42.7 13.4 462.0 0.0 12.9 18.7 2.6
Q3 675.9 67.1 60.3 42.3 13.5 458.2 0.1 12.9 18.7 2.8
Q4 703.5 70.1 67.7 44.0 13.5 472.6 0.1 13.2 18.9 3.4
2024 Q1 712.1 70.6 69.8 44.2 13.6 480.3 0.1 12.4 18.6 2.6
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including
registered bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrower's note
loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables and claims ofpension funds on pension managers.  4 Not including the reinsurance business
conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 The term "pension funds"
refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts.
Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension
schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  6
Insurance corporations
2021 Q3 2,653.1 35.4 82.8 567.0 1,817.7 1,569.1 248.7 2.5 147.6 –
Q4 2,667.2 36.0 81.9 579.3 1,820.7 1,578.3 242.3 2.5 146.8 –
2022 Q1 2,547.3 34.4 82.1 563.1 1,725.9 1,472.6 253.3 4.0 137.7 –
Q2 2,369.7 33.6 78.7 541.6 1,574.4 1,326.8 247.5 6.0 135.3 –
Q3 2,296.2 33.8 73.6 537.4 1,506.0 1,262.3 243.7 7.4 138.0 –
Q4 2,274.7 32.3 70.1 543.7 1,486.5 1,248.7 237.8 5.6 136.5 –
2023 Q1 2,326.9 33.1 71.2 544.7 1,539.1 1,277.1 261.9 4.4 134.4 –
Q2 2,330.1 33.2 68.4 546.7 1,543.8 1,283.7 260.1 4.5 133.6 –
Q3 2,305.3 35.3 76.8 549.1 1,505.3 1,245.0 260.3 4.8 134.1 –
Q4 2,408.4 30.5 73.2 569.8 1,586.6 1,325.4 261.2 4.1 144.1 –
2024 Q1 2,477.5 30.6 78.1 575.0 1,642.4 1,345.5 296.9 3.7 147.8 –
    Life insurance
2021 Q3 1,400.1 3.3 19.3 148.1 1,176.4 1,176.4 – 1.1 51.9 –
Q4 1,411.1 3.3 20.7 148.2 1,185.5 1,185.5 – 0.9 52.5 –
2022 Q1 1,317.7 3.2 19.9 142.9 1,101.6 1,101.6 – 1.4 48.8 –
Q2 1,202.1 3.1 19.0 141.4 984.5 984.5 – 2.7 51.3 –
Q3 1,149.6 3.0 17.0 138.0 936.9 936.9 – 3.1 51.8 –
Q4 1,130.1 2.7 16.6 136.0 924.9 924.9 – 2.3 47.7 –
2023 Q1 1,147.9 2.8 17.8 133.0 945.8 945.8 – 1.9 46.6 –
Q2 1,153.6 2.7 17.5 133.8 950.9 950.9 – 1.8 46.9 –
Q3 1,120.9 2.7 16.8 134.1 917.2 917.2 – 2.5 47.6 –
Q4 1,180.4 0.8 17.7 133.3 977.7 977.7 – 2.0 48.8 –
2024 Q1 1,193.5 0.8 17.5 128.8 994.3 994.3 – 1.7 50.2 –
    Non-life insurance
2021 Q3 733.1 1.2 10.5 168.9 498.7 367.8 130.9 0.2 53.7 –
Q4 738.4 1.4 10.7 175.8 492.6 367.6 125.0 0.2 57.8 –
2022 Q1 722.4 1.3 11.7 173.1 483.0 347.1 135.9 0.3 53.0 –
Q2 681.6 1.2 11.1 167.6 451.9 322.7 129.2 0.5 49.2 –
Q3 661.1 1.2 10.5 167.9 430.4 307.4 123.0 0.5 50.5 –
Q4 659.0 1.2 10.4 170.2 425.1 306.7 118.4 0.4 51.7 –
2023 Q1 687.2 1.2 10.7 173.0 451.0 314.4 136.7 0.4 51.0 –
Q2 687.1 1.2 10.6 174.6 451.2 317.0 134.2 0.3 49.1 –
Q3 679.6 1.7 10.9 173.8 444.2 312.6 131.5 0.4 48.7 –
Q4 708.0 0.6 12.5 180.2 461.3 333.6 127.7 0.3 53.3 –
2024 Q1 748.8 0.6 13.4 184.6 494.4 337.1 157.3 0.3 55.5 –
    Reinsurance 4
2021 Q3 519.9 30.9 53.0 250.1 142.7 24.9 117.8 1.3 42.0 –
Q4 517.7 31.4 50.5 255.3 142.6 25.3 117.3 1.4 36.5 –
2022 Q1 507.1 30.0 50.4 247.2 141.3 23.9 117.4 2.3 35.9 –
Q2 486.0 29.3 48.6 232.6 138.0 19.6 118.4 2.8 34.7 –
Q3 485.5 29.7 46.2 231.5 138.7 18.0 120.7 3.8 35.7 –
Q4 485.6 28.4 43.1 237.5 136.5 17.1 119.4 2.9 37.1 –
2023 Q1 491.8 29.2 42.8 238.7 142.2 17.0 125.3 2.1 36.8 –
Q2 489.5 29.3 40.2 238.3 141.7 15.8 125.9 2.4 37.6 –
Q3 504.9 31.0 49.2 241.2 143.9 15.2 128.7 1.9 37.8 –
Q4 520.0 29.1 43.0 256.3 147.7 14.2 133.5 1.8 42.0 –
2024 Q1 535.3 29.1 47.2 261.6 153.7 14.1 139.6 1.7 42.0 –
Pension funds 5
2021 Q3 689.8 – 1.9 31.9 539.8 537.6 – 0.2 9.3 106.8
Q4 709.9 – 1.9 32.0 560.2 557.3 – 0.1 8.9 106.8
2022 Q1 689.8 – 2.0 33.5 559.7 556.9 – 0.1 9.5 85.1
Q2 665.9 – 1.8 33.5 561.0 558.4 – 0.1 9.0 60.4
Q3 657.0 – 1.9 34.7 563.1 560.6 – 0.1 9.7 47.5
Q4 664.0 – 1.8 34.5 576.4 573.9 – 0.1 9.4 41.8
2023 Q1 671.5 – 1.8 35.5 577.3 574.9 – 0.1 9.5 47.3
Q2 678.7 – 1.8 35.7 582.0 579.6 – 0.1 9.6 49.5
Q3 675.9 – 1.9 35.0 583.7 581.5 – 0.1 9.7 45.6
Q4 703.5 – 1.9 35.0 597.0 594.8 – 0.1 9.9 59.6
2024 Q1 712.1 – 1.9 36.0 600.0 597.7 – 0.1 9.6 64.6
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Including deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered
bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension
funds on pension managers and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical
reserves "life" taking account of transitional measures. Health insurance is also includedin the "non-life insurance" sector.  4 Not including the reinsurance business conducted
by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 Valuation at book values. The term "pen-
sion funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of
Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational
pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.  6 Own
funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth" and "Shares and other equity".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 58,735 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 90,697 44,384 – 12,124 – 11,951 68,459 14,351
2015 15,219 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 51,229 99,225 – 66,330 121,164 44,391 – 84,006
2016 68,998 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 41,569 161,776 – 58,012 187,500 32,288 – 92,778
2017 51,034 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 39,471 134,192 – 71,454 161,012 44,634 – 83,158
2018 78,657 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 62,027 107,155 – 24,417 67,328 64,244 – 28,499
2019 139,611 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 71,075 60,195 8,059 2,408 49,728 79,416
2020 451,481 374,034 14,462 88,703 270,870 77,446 280,820 18,955 226,887 34,978 170,661
2021 230,854 221,648 31,941 19,754 169,953 9,205 243,497 – 41,852 245,198 40,150 – 12,643
2022 150,974 156,190 59,322 35,221 61,648 – 5,216 143,527 2,915 49,774 90,839 7,447
2023 289,352 158,228 88,018 –11,899 82,109 131,124 126,229 32,163 – 59,817 153,883 163,123
2023 July 28,670 27,889 981 – 79 26,987 781 2,548 – 8,514 324 10,738 26,122
Aug. 17,661 10,967 10,278 – 1,708 2,397 6,694 3,128 503 – 9,067 11,691 14,533
Sep. 19,604 16,310 – 7,089 6,461 16,938 3,294 – 4,880 – 8,020 – 11,311 14,451 24,484
Oct. – 20,618 –19,390 1,677 –10,955 –10,113 – 1,227 – 13,989 – 4,855 – 6,759 – 2,375 – 6,628
Nov. 28,453 18,861 9,439 – 3,337 12,759 9,592 9,557 10,752 – 5,186 3,992 18,896
Dec. – 20,319 –27,517 4,368 – 8,386 –23,499 7,199 – 8,134 – 7,024 – 5,130 4,020 – 12,185
2024 Jan. 30,652 25,509 8,437 6,301 10,771 5,143 6,259 17,106 – 7,128 – 3,718 24,392
Feb. 19,146 11,577 6,463 – 957 6,070 7,569 3,675 7,562 – 9,079 5,191 15,471
Mar. 42,591 15,188 13,915 3,072 – 1,799 27,402 19,477 16,349 – 4,776 7,905 23,113
Apr. – 27,913 –25,395 –10,665 6,215 –20,946 – 2,518 – 31,713 – 4,492 – 12,041 – 15,181 3,800
May 27,055 22,035 1,836 696 19,503 5,020 17,293 3,605 – 9,394 23,082 9,761
June 27,142 12,925 8,184 2,710 2,031 14,217 – 3,067 12,203 – 10,121 – 5,149 30,209
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,337 11,991 5,346 2,851
2014 43,488 18,778 24,710 43,930 17,203 26,727 – 443
2015 56,979 7,668 49,311 46,721 – 5,421 52,142 10,258
2016 39,133 4,409 34,724 39,265 – 5,143 44,408 – 132
2017 52,932 15,570 37,362 51,270 7,031 44,239 1,662
2018 61,400 16,188 45,212 89,624 – 11,184 100,808 – 28,224
2019 54,830 9,076 45,754 43,070 – 1,119 44,189 11,759
2020 78,464 17,771 60,693 111,570 27 111,543 – 33,106
2021 115,933 49,066 66,868 102,921 10,869 92,052 13,012
2022 – 6,275 27,792 – 34,066 2,997 – 8,262 11,259 – 9,272
2023 41,999 36,898 5,101 52,912 14,650 38,262 – 10,913
2023 July 6,873 478 6,396 3,534 – 136 3,670 3,340
Aug. 766 1,474 – 707 3,833 – 893 4,726 – 3,067
Sep. – 4,577 687 – 5,265 – 3,470 1,962 – 5,432 – 1,107
Oct. 564 583 – 18 3,007 – 88 3,095 – 2,442
Nov. 591 301 290 – 2,437 538 – 2,975 3,028
Dec. 27,982 24,942 3,039 26,378 6,437 19,941 1,604
2024 Jan. 282 351 – 69 2,171 – 1,361 3,532 – 1,888
Feb. – 856 206 – 1,062 – 626 4,247 – 4,873 – 230
Mar. 7,233 4,679 2,554 9,297 6,657 2,640 – 2,064
Apr. 1,852 1,546 306 2,664 – 2,481 5,145 – 812
May 5,034 474 4,561 4,416 3,531 885 619
June 892 292 600 – 57 – 4,084 4,027 948
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,870,084 778,411 39,548 18,327 643,380 77,156 184,206 907,466
2021 1,658,004 795,271 41,866 17,293 648,996 87,116 139,775 722,958
2022 1,683,265 861,989 66,811 11,929 700,062 83,188 169,680 651,596
2023 1,705,524 937,757 45,073 12,633 782,969 97,082 153,128 614,639
2023 July 121,578 53,812 2,876 130 43,776 7,031 14,133 53,632
Aug. 142,211 82,749 3,085 1,013 71,729 6,922 10,064 49,397
Sep. 152,408 82,679 3,337 550 71,155 7,637 18,722 51,007
Oct. 132,402 83,350 1,697 2,557 71,328 7,769 10,151 38,901
Nov. 125,657 72,915 7,203 1,354 57,521 6,837 8,850 43,892
Dec. 81,025 55,000 1,834 1,453 46,549 5,164 4,722 21,302
2024 Jan. 151,286 89,021 6,405 1,630 70,605 10,380 14,833 47,433
Feb. 148,430 79,876 3,301 2,051 63,439 11,086 7,181 61,373
Mar. 124,684 62,659 5,081 608 45,393 11,577 11,709 50,316
Apr. 150,134 84,574 5,951 1,213 66,287 11,124 13,211 52,349
May 143,782 78,455 1,463 1,027 66,133 9,832 12,237 53,091
June 115,640 55,822 3,127 887 45,597 6,211 10,682 49,136
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 658,521 165,097 28,500 7,427 90,839 38,330 77,439 415,985
2021 486,335 171,799 30,767 6,336 97,816 36,880 64,234 250,303
2022 485,287 164,864 41,052 7,139 91,143 25,530 56,491 263,932
2023 482,193 155,790 28,294 4,664 101,059 21,772 44,272 282,132
2023 July 34,145 10,133 430 2 7,964 1,736 2,298 21,715
Aug. 36,582 12,501 2,383 1,000 8,182 936 1,656 22,425
Sep. 40,995 8,847 2,250 – 5,127 1,470 8,741 23,407
Oct. 37,642 15,411 262 20 11,876 3,253 2,456 19,775
Nov. 35,532 13,641 6,703 600 4,135 2,203 2,541 19,350
Dec. 14,764 6,401 1,040 1,205 2,551 1,605 763 7,600
2024 Jan. 55,105 23,961 5,330 537 14,875 3,219 8,244 22,900
Feb. 53,198 21,778 1,920 1,251 15,159 3,448 1,870 29,550
Mar. 44,606 12,428 4,590 606 4,928 2,304 6,478 25,700
Apr. 47,632 18,861 3,459 1,026 9,789 4,587 5,921 22,850
May 45,810 13,637 328 1,027 9,717 2,564 5,248 26,925
June 28,240 5,229 1,022 852 2,049 1,305 3,162 19,850
Net sales 5
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 473,795 28,147 8,661 8,816 22,067 – 11,398 49,536 396,113
2021 210,231 52,578 17,821 7,471 22,973 4,314 35,531 122,123
2022 135,853 36,883 23,894 – 9,399 15,944 6,444 30,671 68,299
2023 190,577 78,764 10,184 – 791 46,069 23,303 – 34 111,848
2023 July 30,229 700 – 53 110 – 502 1,146 – 734 30,263
Aug. 15,869 9,610 2,930 541 7,387 – 1,249 – 1,791 8,050
Sep. 12,991 – 6,384 28 – 809 – 4,706 – 897 8,074 11,300
Oct. – 7,927 – 1,596 – 2,527 – 1,529 – 895 3,356 – 2,197 – 4,135
Nov. 30,649 13,427 4,984 904 7,149 391 – 4,018 21,239
Dec. – 11,217 10,301 308 1,288 9,314 – 609 – 4,873 – 16,644
2024 Jan. 4,841 4,209 – 569 1,400 – 2,865 6,243 4,372 – 3,740
Feb. 12,862 7,348 1,102 1,691 – 522 5,078 – 2,312 7,827
Mar. 17,943 13,538 1,459 – 498 8,865 3,713 3,784 620
Apr. – 9,914 – 10,653 2,897 – 1,562 – 14,334 2,346 4,972 – 4,233
May 5,787 2,720 – 2,643 77 2,782 2,505 3,598 – 532
June 13,923 8,066 – 486 – 207 9,726 – 967 2,279 3,578
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,545,200 2 1,174,817 183,980 55,959 687,710 2 247,169 2 379,342 1,991,040
2021 3,781,975 1,250,777 202,385 63,496 731,068 253,828 414,791 2,116,406
2022 3,930,390 1,302,028 225,854 54,199 761,047 260,928 441,234 2,187,127
2023 4,131,592 1,384,958 237,099 54,312 806,808 286,739 441,742 2,304,892
2023 July 4,077,718 1,354,010 231,454 53,389 786,384 282,783 446,064 2,277,644
Aug. 4,095,643 1,365,614 234,566 53,961 795,808 281,279 444,711 2,285,319
Sep. 4,117,795 1,365,365 234,599 53,128 796,782 280,856 453,037 2,299,393
Oct. 4,110,219 1,362,975 231,537 52,084 794,730 284,623 450,654 2,296,591
Nov. 4,139,444 1,373,679 236,596 53,034 798,461 285,588 446,199 2,319,566
Dec. 4,131,592 1,384,958 237,099 54,312 806,808 286,739 441,742 2,304,892
2024 Jan. 4,140,092 1,394,649 236,671 55,735 808,508 293,736 446,559 2,298,884
Feb. 4,152,812 1,401,409 237,658 57,450 807,692 298,609 444,310 2,307,093
Mar. 4,173,121 1,415,363 239,096 56,960 816,963 302,344 448,012 2,309,746
Apr. 4,169,790 1,408,556 242,090 55,474 805,788 305,203 453,941 2,307,292
May 4,175,267 1,409,122 239,361 55,574 807,179 307,007 457,302 2,308,844
June 4,196,111 1,421,506 239,078 55,370 820,248 306,810 460,121 2,314,485
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-June 2024
up to under 2 1 221 981   521 127   67 168   16 445   323 483   114 031   91 622   609 233 
2 to under 4  807 087   350 984   72 058   17 359   187 350   74 216   85 007   371 096 
4 to under 6  632 318   220 204   44 768   8 518   126 312   40 606   72 136   339 977 
6 to under 8  408 609   137 023   22 308   3 690   81 770   29 255   38 929   232 657 
8 to under 10  315 817   91 380   22 527   5 802   47 321   15 730   28 665   195 773 
10 to under 15  242 428   54 584   7 385   3 196   34 479   9 523   29 590   158 254 
15 to under 20  121 182   15 219   2 055    232   10 615   2 316   17 611   88 353 
20 and above  446 689   30 987    809    128   8 918   21 133   96 561   319 141 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,673 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,775 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,872 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,635 1,963,588
2021 186,580 4,152 9,561 672 35 – 326 – 212 – 5,578 2,301,942
2022 199,789 12,272 14,950 224 371 – 29 – 293 – 2,952 1,858,963
2023 182,246 – 15,984 3,377 3 50 – 564 – 2,515 – 16,335 2,051,675
2023 July 198,406 – 99 52 – –– 0 – 89 – 62 2,113,570
Aug. 198,654 210 452 – –– 1 – 24 – 217 2,038,560
Sep. 198,328 – 325 280 3 –– 201 – 10 – 397 1,966,858
Oct. 198,522 194 504 – –– 100 – 2 – 208 1,852,180
Nov. 198,456 – 67 62 0 0 0 0 – 129 2,002,568
Dec. 182,246 – 16,210 677 0 0 0 – 2,366 – 14,521 2,051,675
2024 Jan. 182,103 – 144 42 0 0 – 0 – 115 – 71 2,061,708
Feb. 181,987 – 117 48 0 0 – 2 – 25 – 138 2,126,888
Mar. 182,100 113 344 0 0 – 7 – 5 – 218 2,213,065
Apr. 181,805 – 295 126 0 0 – 4 – 4 – 414 2,159,884
May 181,553 – 322 187 – – –– 328 – 180 2,159,986
June 181,236 – 317 31 8 0 – 9 – 73 – 274 2,135,158
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields on German securities
Issue yields Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1
Public debt securities Public debt securities Bank debt securities
Listed Federal securities
Total Totalof which:
Listed Federal
debt securitiesBank debt 
securities Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  2 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)
Period % per annum
2012 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7
2013 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4
2014 1.2 1.1 0.9 1.3 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0
2015 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4
2016 0.4 0.1 – 0.1 0.6 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1
2017 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.6 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7
2018 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5
2019 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.3 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5
2020 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.5 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7
2021 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9
2022 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.9 1.5 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.9 1.9 3.3
2023 2.9 2.6 2.5 3.4 2.9 2.6 2.5 2.4 3.3 3.2 4.2
2023 July 2.98 2.61 2.61 3.64 2.97 2.67 2.55 2.46 3.43 3.24 4.25
Aug. 2.92 2.58 2.58 3.42 3.01 2.71 2.60 2.55 3.44 3.31 4.27
Sep. 3.18 2.75 2.75 3.57 3.11 2.82 2.71 2.66 3.51 3.42 4.39
Oct. 3.18 2.86 2.86 3.66 3.25 2.96 2.84 2.82 3.66 3.63 4.56
Nov. 3.01 2.61 2.61 3.53 3.02 2.75 2.64 2.60 3.40 3.37 4.23
Dec. 3.01 2.44 2.44 3.67 2.52 2.26 2.15 2.10 2.91 2.92 3.63
2024 Jan. 2.81 2.44 2.44 2.87 2.57 2.32 2.22 2.17 2.94 2.97 3.67
Feb. 2.71 2.47 2.47 3.05 2.72 2.48 2.39 2.33 3.09 3.10 3.74
Mar. 2.94 2.56 2.56 3.10 2.73 2.49 2.41 2.35 3.07 3.02 3.73
Apr. 3.05 2.61 2.61 3.12 2.81 2.58 2.50 2.45 3.15 3.14 3.74
May 3.08 2.70 2.70 3.18 2.88 2.66 2.58 2.52 3.19 3.20 3.84
June 2.92 2.64 2.64 3.31 2.86 2.63 2.55 2.48 3.17 3.26 3.87
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 Only debt securities eligible as underlying
instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 137,294 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 39,583 141,134 819 –1,745 140,315 41,328 –3,841
2015 189,802 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 43,665 181,932 7,362 494 174,570 43,171 7,870
2016 149,288 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 29,919 156,236 2,877 –3,172 153,359 33,091 –6,948
2017 148,214 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 53,292 150,740 4,938 1,048 145,802 52,244 –2,526
2018 108,293 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 4,599 114,973 2,979 –2,306 111,994 6,905 –6,680
2019 171,666 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 49,120 176,210 2,719 – 812 173,491 49,932 –4,544
2020 157,349 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 41,321 156,421 336 –1,656 156,085 42,977 928
2021 280,746 157,861 41,016 482 31,023 7,841 116,845 122,885 289,169 13,154 254 276,015 122,631 –8,423
2022 108,741 79,022 6,057 482 444 5,071 72,991 29,718 111,948 3,170 –1,459 108,778 31,177 –3,207
2023 67,941 44,484 5,969 460 4,951 723 38,461 23,457 69,924 –4,778 –2,054 74,702 25,511 –1,984
2023 July 10,274 6,405 433 280 69 90 5,972 3,870 11,200 – 437 – 167 11,637 4,037 – 926
Aug. 4,460 4,731 13 115 – 107 – 40 4,720 – 271 4,311 132 – 129 4,179 – 142 149
Sep. 4,757 2,115 702 61 785 – 115 1,411 2,641 5,562 362 106 5,200 2,535 – 805
Oct. –2,603 –2,394 –1,269 – 130 – 843 – 139 –1,186 – 209 –2,712 814 – 113 –3,526 – 96 108
Nov. 219 –3,273 592 93 807 – 276 –3,865 3,493 1,322 95 – 288 1,227 3,781 –1,102
Dec. 10,428 10,971 –1,536 156 –1,448 – 182 12,506 – 543 9,666 – 11 13 9,677 – 556 762
2024 Jan. 23,814 10,382 – 457 141 – 406 – 19 10,839 13,431 24,111 1,999 196 22,112 13,235 – 298
Feb. 1,751 –1,458 –1,095 23 – 688 – 430 – 363 3,209 2,272 60 162 2,212 3,047 – 521
Mar. 2,573 –2,329 –1,070 188 – 610 – 455 –1,259 4,902 2,221 358 – 426 1,863 5,328 352
Apr. 15,151 10,159 742 220 1,063 – 481 9,417 4,992 14,331 442 226 13,889 4,766 821
May 8,797 378 210 137 479 – 463 172 8,419 9,214 233 – 46 8,981 8,465 – 416
June 10,171 1,653 461 161 493 – 241 1,190 8,507 9,652 74 – 31 9,578 8,538 519
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2022 2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 45.36 67.77 –0.75 23.78 –22.94 –12.62 24.29 10.52 –15.53
   Debt securities 2.81 4.10 6.70 0.05 4.49 1.79 1.67 –1.25 5.80
     Short-term debt securities 2.29 1.23 1.62 –0.22 2.00 1.06 –0.15 –1.29 2.51
     Long-term debt securities 0.52 2.87 5.08 0.26 2.49 0.73 1.82 0.04 3.29
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.31 3.40 6.68 0.43 3.81 2.76 0.42 –0.32 3.02
         Non-financial corporations 0.72 0.86 –0.03 0.13 0.76 –0.34 –0.48 0.03 0.65
         Financial corporations 1.08 1.79 3.19 –0.04 1.43 1.43 0.28 0.06 0.92
         General government –0.48 0.74 3.51 0.34 1.63 1.66 0.62 –0.40 1.45
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.50 0.70 0.02 –0.38 0.68 –0.98 1.25 –0.93 2.77
   Loans 67.49 46.20 84.87 –11.70 32.33 7.60 18.91 26.03 38.21
     Short-term loans 47.34 24.94 69.68 –18.66 23.26 8.20 16.65 21.57 28.20
     Long-term loans 20.15 21.26 15.19 6.95 9.07 –0.60 2.26 4.46 10.02
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 10.10 27.15 81.44 –3.46 37.72 7.91 17.45 18.36 30.78
         Non-financial corporations 7.11 23.94 71.35 7.51 29.88 7.51 14.72 19.24 17.94
         Financial corporations 3.33 1.46 11.89 –9.63 7.34 2.27 3.04 –0.75 9.12
         General government –0.34 1.75 –1.81 –1.35 0.50 –1.87 –0.30 –0.13 3.71
       Loans to the rest of the world 57.40 19.05 3.43 –8.24 –5.38 –0.31 1.45 7.67 7.44
   Equity and investment fund shares 145.48 104.11 37.76 24.34 –12.63 28.67 8.53 13.18 31.63
     Equity 123.72 104.06 34.30 22.35 –13.35 26.34 7.21 14.10 25.82
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 15.33 44.06 –14.32 –3.71 –10.51 –0.27 4.72 –8.26 3.45
         Non-financial corporations 16.89 43.79 –13.91 –3.82 –10.45 –0.32 5.06 –8.21 2.43
         Financial corporations –1.56 0.27 –0.41 0.11 –0.07 0.05 –0.34 –0.05 1.02
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 8.32 2.56 –25.42 2.99 –20.50 0.31 –9.40 4.17 2.88
       Other equity  1 100.07 57.44 74.03 23.07 17.66 26.30 11.88 18.19 19.49
     Investment fund shares 21.77 0.05 3.46 1.99 0.72 2.33 1.33 –0.92 5.80
       Money market fund shares 0.66 –0.38 –0.58 2.37 –0.80 –0.41 0.59 0.04 –0.53
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 21.11 0.43 4.04 –0.38 1.52 2.74 0.74 –0.95 6.33
   Insurance technical reserves 19.52 1.60 4.81 –1.17 6.55 0.02 –0.09 –1.67 12.32
   Financial derivatives 15.54 28.93 –1.07 –30.76 3.95 0.70 14.01 –19.73 4.26
   Other accounts receivable 64.45 18.33 79.55 130.88 88.87 –9.40 –52.95 53.04 76.18
   Total 360.65 271.05 211.86 135.43 100.63 16.75 14.36 80.11 152.87
 External financing
   Debt securities 20.86 14.16 0.35 –1.93 1.38 2.44 1.57 –5.04 6.82
     Short-term securities 2.51 –0.36 –4.68 –2.69 –0.16 –0.70 –0.84 –2.99 1.01
       Long-term securities 18.35 14.52 5.03 0.76 1.54 3.14 2.41 –2.05 5.80
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 9.11 5.85 0.60 –1.61 1.62 0.50 0.56 –2.08 2.04
           Non-financial corporations 0.72 0.86 –0.03 0.13 0.76 –0.34 –0.48 0.03 0.65
           Financial corporations 9.09 4.46 –2.89 –1.99 0.29 –0.28 –0.08 –2.82 1.02
           General government 0.09 –0.07 –0.11 0.01 0.00 –0.07 –0.04 –0.00 0.01
           Households –0.79 0.60 3.62 0.24 0.57 1.18 1.16 0.71 0.36
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 11.75 8.31 –0.25 –0.32 –0.25 1.94 1.02 –2.96 4.78
   Loans 138.35 176.99 46.79 28.41 15.49 21.40 5.48 4.43 24.82
     Short-term loans 77.99 73.18 22.58 –16.64 7.16 13.36 2.82 –0.75 18.82
     Long-term loans 60.36 103.82 24.21 45.05 8.33 8.04 2.66 5.18 6.00
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 76.20 155.70 81.00 15.04 50.10 16.67 10.98 3.25 31.77
         Non-financial corporations 7.11 23.94 71.35 7.51 29.88 7.51 14.72 19.24 17.94
         Financial corporations 55.94 110.61 30.27 17.77 27.60 13.60 1.32 –12.24 18.99
         General government 13.16 21.15 –20.63 –10.25 –7.38 –4.44 –5.06 –3.75 –5.16
       Loans from the rest of the world 62.15 21.29 –34.21 13.38 –34.61 4.72 –5.50 1.18 –6.95
   Equity 61.44 16.99 2.98 1.42 –4.77 7.18 1.91 –1.33 15.77
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 26.44 57.01 –27.67 0.59 –13.76 –5.08 1.80 –10.64 –7.77
       Non-financial corporations 16.89 43.79 –13.91 –3.82 –10.45 –0.32 5.06 –8.21 2.43
       Financial corporations –2.39 2.17 –8.32 2.89 –0.69 –4.56 –1.88 –1.19 –9.73
       General government –0.09 0.76 –1.12 0.10 –0.88 –0.21 –0.04 0.01 0.05
       Households 12.04 10.29 –4.32 1.42 –1.75 0.01 –1.33 –1.24 –0.53
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 18.88 –9.46 13.66 –2.61 2.00 7.38 1.84 2.45 10.75
     Other equity  1 16.11 –30.55 16.99 3.43 6.98 4.88 –1.73 6.86 12.80
   Insurance technical reserves 4.26 3.53 3.53 0.89 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.89 0.88
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 14.32 –14.10 10.22 –13.34 1.58 2.08 2.72 3.85 0.62
   Other accounts payable 139.60 64.69 59.45 20.47 10.76 3.01 3.48 42.20 –1.52
   Total 378.83 262.27 123.33 35.91 25.31 36.98 16.04 44.99 47.38
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2022 2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 726.6 794.5 710.5 794.5 746.4 654.8 732.5 710.5 638.3
   Debt securities 54.3 53.8 62.1 53.8 58.9 60.5 62.1 62.1 68.2
     Short-term debt securities 7.1 8.4 9.8 8.4 10.4 11.2 11.1 9.8 12.7
     Long-term debt securities 47.2 45.5 52.3 45.5 48.5 49.3 51.1 52.3 55.5
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 23.3 24.7 32.2 24.7 28.7 31.4 31.9 32.2 35.4
         Non-financial corporations 5.3 5.8 5.8 5.8 6.5 6.2 5.7 5.8 6.5
         Financial corporations 14.5 15.0 18.8 15.0 16.6 18.0 18.3 18.8 19.9
         General government 3.5 3.9 7.6 3.9 5.6 7.2 7.8 7.6 9.0
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 31.0 29.2 29.9 29.2 30.2 29.1 30.3 29.9 32.7
   Loans 803.0 852.9 935.7 852.9 884.0 891.0 911.2 935.7 975.2
     Short-term loans 612.9 640.1 708.2 640.1 662.4 669.9 687.5 708.2 736.9
     Long-term loans 190.1 212.7 227.5 212.7 221.6 221.1 223.7 227.5 238.3
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 439.8 467.0 548.4 467.0 504.7 512.6 530.1 548.4 579.2
         Non-financial corporations 334.7 358.7 430.0 358.7 388.5 396.0 410.8 430.0 447.9
         Financial corporations 82.8 84.2 96.1 84.2 91.6 93.8 96.9 96.1 105.2
         General government 22.4 24.1 22.3 24.1 24.6 22.7 22.4 22.3 26.0
       Loans to the rest of the world 363.2 385.9 387.3 385.9 379.3 378.3 381.1 387.3 396.0
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,852.2 2,607.8 2,693.3 2,607.8 2,681.7 2,705.4 2,657.2 2,693.3 2,780.1
     Equity 2,612.0 2,395.2 2,457.7 2,395.2 2,463.0 2,480.0 2,431.2 2,457.7 2,531.0
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 393.0 331.8 334.5 331.8 361.1 354.8 330.1 334.5 359.7
         Non-financial corporations 384.9 324.5 326.7 324.5 353.9 347.0 322.9 326.7 351.0
         Financial corporations 8.0 7.4 7.8 7.4 7.2 7.8 7.2 7.8 8.6
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 74.7 69.8 48.0 69.8 51.6 51.4 41.5 48.0 51.4
       Other equity  1 2,144.3 1,993.6 2,075.2 1,993.6 2,050.4 2,073.8 2,059.5 2,075.2 2,120.0
     Investment fund shares 240.2 212.6 235.6 212.6 218.6 225.4 226.0 235.6 249.1
       Money market fund shares 7.6 7.2 6.9 7.2 6.5 6.1 6.8 6.9 6.4
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 232.6 205.4 228.7 205.4 212.1 219.3 219.3 228.7 242.7
   Insurance technical reserves 64.8 41.1 44.6 41.1 47.3 46.6 45.8 44.6 55.0
   Financial derivatives 105.9 92.2 33.4 92.2 65.1 56.9 44.7 33.4 35.0
   Other accounts receivable 1,454.4 1,518.1 1,629.7 1,518.1 1,572.4 1,568.3 1,597.2 1,629.7 1,674.8
   Total 6,061.2 5,960.5 6,109.3 5,960.5 6,055.7 5,983.4 6,050.8 6,109.3 6,226.6
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 252.3 228.7 239.7 228.7 231.2 234.8 234.8 239.7 247.0
     Short-term securities 9.6 9.3 4.5 9.3 9.1 8.4 7.5 4.5 5.6
     Long-term securities 242.7 219.4 235.2 219.4 222.1 226.4 227.3 235.2 241.4
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 100.6 91.0 96.4 91.0 93.5 94.2 94.2 96.4 102.3
         Non-financial corporations 5.3 5.8 5.8 5.8 6.5 6.2 5.7 5.8 6.5
         Financial corporations 83.2 73.5 74.8 73.5 74.4 74.4 73.9 74.8 79.3
         General government 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3
         Households 11.8 11.4 15.5 11.4 12.2 13.3 14.4 15.5 16.2
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 151.7 137.7 143.3 137.7 137.7 140.6 140.7 143.3 144.7
   Loans 2,429.1 2,613.8 2,654.5 2,613.8 2,626.0 2,646.5 2,653.8 2,654.5 2,681.0
     Short-term loans 904.0 981.3 999.7 981.3 986.5 999.5 1,003.8 999.7 1,017.8
     Long-term loans 1,525.1 1,632.5 1,654.8 1,632.5 1,639.5 1,646.9 1,649.9 1,654.8 1,663.2
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,483.9 1,640.0 1,718.9 1,640.0 1,689.1 1,705.3 1,715.8 1,718.9 1,751.8
         Non-financial corporations 334.7 358.7 430.0 358.7 388.5 396.0 410.8 430.0 447.9
         Financial corporations 1,034.5 1,145.7 1,174.0 1,145.7 1,172.1 1,185.3 1,186.6 1,174.0 1,193.2
         General government 114.7 135.7 115.0 135.7 128.5 123.9 118.4 115.0 110.6
       Loans from the rest of the world 945.1 973.8 935.5 973.8 936.9 941.1 938.0 935.5 929.2
   Equity 3,689.0 2,983.3 3,216.9 2,983.3 3,267.6 3,266.2 3,114.0 3,216.9 3,384.0
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 924.8 761.4 807.6 761.4 855.9 821.5 778.6 807.6 851.9
       Non-financial corporations 384.9 324.5 326.7 324.5 353.9 347.0 322.9 326.7 351.0
       Financial corporations 210.3 151.2 173.2 151.2 182.3 165.2 167.9 173.2 173.5
       General government 69.9 69.2 76.0 69.2 78.9 75.3 70.9 76.0 83.0
       Households 259.7 216.4 231.7 216.4 240.9 234.0 216.8 231.7 244.3
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 1,126.3 823.1 951.1 823.1 941.1 976.2 910.3 951.1 1,029.2
     Other equity  1 1,637.9 1,398.8 1,458.2 1,398.8 1,470.6 1,468.5 1,425.1 1,458.2 1,502.9
   Insurance technical reserves 287.4 290.9 294.5 290.9 291.8 292.7 293.6 294.5 295.3
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 137.4 73.3 30.5 73.3 44.7 39.5 15.0 30.5 28.1
   Other accounts payable 1,526.5 1,601.6 1,677.0 1,601.6 1,596.7 1,610.6 1,674.1 1,677.0 1,656.3
   Total 8,321.7 7,791.5 8,113.0 7,791.5 8,058.1 8,090.3 7,985.3 8,113.0 8,291.7
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2022 2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 145.09 110.33 90.46 41.11 –10.65 25.45 13.52 62.14 33.12
     Currency 59.48 44.15 14.18 6.15 2.94 3.37 2.53 5.34 0.95
     Deposits 85.61 66.18 76.28 34.96 –13.59 22.08 11.00 56.80 32.17
       Transferable deposits 90.84 47.63 –129.98 4.41 –60.51 –18.16 –32.67 –18.65 –33.47
       Time deposits –5.09 34.49 184.51 33.49 50.43 43.22 42.53 48.32 61.89
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –0.13 –15.94 21.75 –2.95 –3.52 –2.99 1.14 27.12 3.75
   Debt securities –5.89 25.03 65.16 11.96 29.74 20.44 14.29 0.69 8.76
     Short-term debt securities 0.31 2.01 11.75 1.79 7.99 5.68 2.12 –4.04 –1.03
     Long-term debt securities –6.20 23.02 53.40 10.17 21.74 14.76 12.17 4.73 9.79
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –3.70 20.31 53.95 10.52 25.57 16.76 11.99 –0.36 6.58
         Non-financial corporations –0.83 0.50 3.41 0.23 0.52 1.11 1.09 0.68 0.32
         Financial corporations –2.57 17.47 42.65 9.01 21.52 12.75 9.33 –0.94 6.31
         General government –0.30 2.35 7.88 1.29 3.52 2.90 1.57 –0.10 –0.05
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –2.19 4.72 11.21 1.44 4.17 3.69 2.30 1.05 2.18
   Equity and investment fund shares 136.69 78.09 36.31 15.59 12.05 9.93 8.70 5.63 15.39
     Equity 31.80 26.89 0.25 4.97 0.11 0.36 0.80 –1.02 1.72
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 14.29 12.38 –4.63 0.70 –0.91 0.02 –1.43 –2.31 –1.13
         Non-financial corporations 12.71 9.96 –3.59 1.36 –2.03 0.10 –0.41 –1.25 –0.52
         Financial corporations 1.58 2.42 –1.04 –0.66 1.12 –0.08 –1.02 –1.07 –0.62
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 10.83 8.55 2.89 3.04 0.44 –0.21 1.73 0.92 2.09
       Other equity  1 6.69 5.96 1.99 1.23 0.57 0.56 0.50 0.37 0.77
     Investment fund shares 104.88 51.19 36.07 10.62 11.94 9.57 7.91 6.65 13.67
       Money market fund shares 0.19 0.82 4.39 0.44 0.43 1.47 1.67 0.82 1.48
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 104.70 50.37 31.68 10.18 11.50 8.10 6.24 5.83 12.20
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 20.31 –0.39 1.15 –1.69 5.43 –0.96 –1.07 –2.26 10.98
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 51.74 31.33 –11.47 7.29 0.85 0.55 –2.15 –10.71 0.14
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 27.32 48.64 41.98 11.96 14.04 5.55 11.97 10.42 3.78
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 0.76 0.04 33.14 –19.50 20.65 –0.31 13.68 –0.87 14.75
   Total 376.00 293.06 256.73 66.72 72.10 60.66 58.94 65.03 86.91
 External financing
   Loans 98.17 83.71 14.40 9.52 2.49 5.68 6.31 –0.07 0.25
     Short-term loans 0.86 2.59 –0.90 0.10 0.74 –0.28 –0.50 –0.86 –0.80
     Long-term loans 97.31 81.12 15.30 9.42 1.75 5.96 6.80 0.79 1.05
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 99.89 79.73 18.85 10.55 2.73 5.91 6.43 3.79 1.78
       Consumer loans –0.89 4.60 1.44 0.87 0.54 1.26 1.66 –2.02 –0.41
       Entrepreneurial loans –0.83 –0.61 –5.89 –1.90 –0.78 –1.49 –1.78 –1.84 –1.13
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 94.32 82.56 12.26 9.45 1.80 4.69 6.41 –0.64 –0.24
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 3.85 1.15 2.14 0.07 0.68 0.99 –0.10 0.57 0.49
       Loans from general government and rest of the world –0.00 –0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.90 3.08 2.09 2.03 –0.57 –0.33 0.51 2.47 1.52
   Total 99.07 86.79 16.49 11.55 1.92 5.35 6.82 2.41 1.76
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2022 2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 3,007.3 3,119.7 3,219.2 3,119.7 3,107.9 3,133.4 3,148.7 3,219.2 3,254.0
     Currency 386.8 431.0 445.2 431.0 433.9 437.3 439.8 445.2 446.1
     Deposits 2,620.5 2,688.7 2,774.1 2,688.7 2,674.0 2,696.1 2,708.8 2,774.1 2,807.9
       Transferable deposits 1,764.4 1,811.7 1,686.3 1,811.7 1,756.0 1,737.7 1,705.0 1,686.3 1,652.9
       Time deposits 297.3 334.8 528.7 334.8 384.2 427.6 471.9 528.7 592.2
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 558.8 542.3 559.1 542.3 533.8 530.8 531.9 559.1 562.8
     Debt securities 109.6 125.0 198.2 125.0 157.1 177.7 192.5 198.2 209.0
       Short-term debt securities 1.8 3.9 12.5 3.9 11.9 15.9 16.4 12.5 18.5
       Long-term debt securities 107.8 121.1 185.7 121.1 145.2 161.8 176.1 185.7 190.5
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 75.3 88.4 147.8 88.4 116.1 133.0 144.6 147.8 154.6
           Non-financial corporations 9.8 9.7 13.5 9.7 10.4 11.4 12.4 13.5 14.1
           Financial corporations 63.2 74.5 122.0 74.5 98.0 110.9 120.0 122.0 128.2
           General government 2.2 4.2 12.3 4.2 7.8 10.7 12.2 12.3 12.3
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 34.3 36.6 50.4 36.6 41.0 44.7 47.9 50.4 54.4
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,900.6 1,725.3 1,930.8 1,725.3 1,824.2 1,864.9 1,837.0 1,930.8 2,064.6
     Equity 967.8 869.3 968.1 869.3 931.1 943.0 921.8 968.1 1,027.4
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 296.0 255.9 279.2 255.9 282.1 277.0 262.5 279.2 299.5
         Non-financial corporations 250.4 208.7 223.9 208.7 232.3 225.6 209.5 223.9 236.4
         Financial corporations 45.6 47.2 55.3 47.2 49.9 51.3 53.0 55.3 63.1
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 249.2 209.3 247.9 209.3 227.3 239.5 235.7 247.9 270.1
       Other equity  1 422.6 404.1 441.0 404.1 421.7 426.6 423.6 441.0 457.8
     Investment fund shares 932.7 856.0 962.6 856.0 893.1 921.9 915.2 962.6 1,037.2
       Money market fund shares 2.5 3.3 7.8 3.3 3.7 5.2 7.0 7.8 9.3
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 930.2 852.7 954.8 852.7 889.4 916.7 908.2 954.8 1,027.9
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 432.5 41.4 43.7 41.4 47.2 46.1 45.0 43.7 53.6
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,162.2 1,087.1 1,141.3 1,087.1 1,108.4 1,111.8 1,077.0 1,141.3 1,158.6
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 986.1 1,117.7 1,161.3 1,117.7 1,132.1 1,139.8 1,141.2 1,161.3 1,167.8
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 27.5 26.5 35.5 26.5 26.9 27.6 26.8 35.5 37.9
   Total 7,625.7 7,242.6 7,730.0 7,242.6 7,403.8 7,501.3 7,468.1 7,730.0 7,945.5
 Liabilities
   Loans 2,024.3 2,111.8 2,128.7 2,111.8 2,114.4 2,119.9 2,126.7 2,128.7 2,128.3
     Short-term loans 53.0 55.5 55.1 55.5 56.6 56.4 55.9 55.1 54.4
     Long-term loans 1,971.3 2,056.3 2,073.5 2,056.3 2,057.8 2,063.5 2,070.9 2,073.5 2,073.9
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,549.3 1,632.3 1,654.5 1,632.3 1,636.1 1,641.8 1,648.8 1,654.5 1,655.6
       Consumer loans 224.5 228.9 230.0 228.9 229.7 230.8 232.1 230.0 229.6
       Entrepreneurial loans 250.5 250.6 244.2 250.6 248.6 247.3 245.9 244.2 243.2
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,920.3 2,004.0 2,016.3 2,004.0 2,005.8 2,010.5 2,016.9 2,016.3 2,016.2
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 104.0 107.8 112.4 107.8 108.6 109.4 109.9 112.4 112.2
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 20.3 23.5 25.9 23.5 23.0 22.8 23.3 25.9 27.4
   Total 2,044.6 2,135.4 2,154.5 2,135.4 2,137.4 2,142.6 2,150.1 2,154.5 2,155.7
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
58•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
General
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
fundsGeneral
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus 1
2017 +43.7 + 7.9 +13.9 +10.7 +11.1 +1.3 +0.2 +0.4 +0.3 +0.3
2018 +65.6 +21.0 +12.0 +16.7 +16.0 +1.9 +0.6 +0.4 +0.5 +0.5
2019 +53.0 +21.5 +14.0 +8.4 +9.1 +1.5 +0.6 +0.4 +0.2 +0.3
p 2020 –147.7 –87.1 –32.6 +6.9 –34.8 –4.3 –2.6 –1.0 +0.2 –1.0
p 2021 –129.7 –144.2 +5.6 +6.2 +2.6 –3.6 –4.0 +0.2 +0.2 +0.1
p 2022 –96.9 –124.3 +14.4 +4.7 +8.3 –2.5 –3.2 +0.4 +0.1 +0.2
pe 2023 –99.1 –90.5 –5.3 –12.1 +8.8 –2.4 –2.2 –0.1 –0.3 +0.2
p 2022 H1 – 4.6 –36.2 +18.2 +5.8 +7.7 –0.2 –1.9 +1.0 +0.3 +0.4
pH2 –92.3 –88.0 –3.8 –1.1 +0.6 –4.7 –4.4 –0.2 –0.1 +0.0
pe 2023 H1 –37.9 –43.3 –2.2 –2.9 +10.4 –1.9 –2.1 –0.1 –0.1 +0.5
peH2 –61.2 –47.2 –3.0 –9.2 –1.7 –2.9 –2.2 –0.1 –0.4 –0.1
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2017 2,130.3 1,361.5 616.8 168.3 0.8 65.2 41.7 18.9 5.2 0.0
2018 2,083.7 1,334.5 603.2 162.2 0.7 61.9 39.7 17.9 4.8 0.0
2019 2,069.9 1,312.3 612.7 161.4 0.9 59.6 37.8 17.6 4.6 0.0
p 2020 2,340.8 1,526.5 664.4 163.2 7.6 68.8 44.8 19.5 4.8 0.2
p 2021 2,495.5 1,679.3 665.3 165.3 0.6 69.0 46.4 18.4 4.6 0.0
p 2022 2,561.7 1,776.0 634.2 172.2 2.8 66.1 45.8 16.4 4.4 0.1
p 2023 2,622.7 1,850.1 623.1 177.7 2.6 63.6 44.9 15.1 4.3 0.1
p 2022 Q1 2,499.1 1,684.3 663.4 164.9 3.4 67.6 45.6 17.9 4.5 0.1
pQ2 2,537.4 1,723.4 660.2 166.8 3.7 67.4 45.8 17.5 4.4 0.1
pQ3 2,551.3 1,757.0 643.8 166.6 4.2 66.8 46.0 16.9 4.4 0.1
pQ4 2,561.7 1,776.0 634.2 172.2 2.8 66.1 45.8 16.4 4.4 0.1
p 2023 Q1 2,587.2 1,798.7 632.0 173.0 3.5 65.6 45.6 16.0 4.4 0.1
pQ2 2,586.5 1,806.1 624.2 172.8 2.7 64.6 45.1 15.6 4.3 0.1
pQ3 2,627.2 1,848.6 621.6 175.5 3.8 64.6 45.5 15.3 4.3 0.1
pQ4 2,622.7 1,850.1 623.1 177.7 2.6 63.6 44.9 15.1 4.3 0.1
p 2024 Q1 2,635.9 1,856.3 630.8 180.6 3.0 63.4 44.6 15.2 4.3 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The deficit/surplus in
accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition.  2 Quarterly GDP
ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters.
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts *
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total TaxesSocial con-
tributions Other TotalSocial
benefitsCompen-
sation of
employeesInter-
mediate
consumptionGross
capital
formation Interest OtherDeficit/
surplusMemo item:
Total tax
burden  1
€ billion
2017 1,486.9 773.3 549.5 164.2 1,443.3 784.8 250.6 169.5 71.6 33.8 132.9 +43.7 1,329.5
2018 1,557.2 808.1 572.6 176.6 1,491.6 805.6 260.3 176.4 78.5 31.2 139.7 +65.6 1,387.7
2019 1,616.5 834.7 598.2 183.6 1,563.4 846.2 273.6 187.4 84.2 27.4 144.5 +53.0 1,440.0
p 2020 1,569.9 781.7 608.1 180.1 1,717.6 904.5 285.2 211.3 92.9 21.7 201.9 –147.7 1,396.7
p 2021 1,712.9 889.0 632.1 191.8 1,842.6 941.1 295.4 226.6 92.5 21.1 266.0 –129.7 1,528.7
p 2022 1,821.2 955.9 666.8 198.6 1,918.1 974.0 307.9 238.4 100.9 26.5 270.4 –96.9 1,633.4
pe 2023 1,908.0 967.8 709.4 230.8 2,007.1 1,022.8 328.0 259.0 106.7 36.2 254.4 –99.1 1,685.6
As a percentage of GDP
2017 45.5 23.7 16.8 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 +1.3 40.7
2018 46.3 24.0 17.0 5.2 44.3 23.9 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.1 +1.9 41.2
2019 46.5 24.0 17.2 5.3 45.0 24.4 7.9 5.4 2.4 0.8 4.2 +1.5 41.4
p 2020 46.1 23.0 17.9 5.3 50.5 26.6 8.4 6.2 2.7 0.6 5.9 –4.3 41.0
p 2021 47.3 24.6 17.5 5.3 50.9 26.0 8.2 6.3 2.6 0.6 7.4 –3.6 42.3
p 2022 47.0 24.7 17.2 5.1 49.5 25.1 7.9 6.1 2.6 0.7 7.0 –2.5 42.1
pe 2023 46.3 23.5 17.2 5.6 48.7 24.8 8.0 6.3 2.6 0.9 6.2 –2.4 40.9
Percentage growth rates
2017 +4.2 +4.6 +4.8 +0.5 +3.8 +4.0 +4.1 +4.3 +5.1 –9.3 +4.5 . +4.7
2018 +4.7 +4.5 +4.2 +7.6 +3.3 +2.6 +3.9 +4.1 +9.7 –7.8 +5.1 . +4.4
2019 +3.8 +3.3 +4.5 +4.0 +4.8 +5.1 +5.1 +6.2 +7.2 –12.0 +3.5 . +3.8
p 2020 –2.9 –6.3 +1.6 –1.9 +9.9 +6.9 +4.2 +12.7 +10.4 –20.8 +39.7 . –3.0
p 2021 +9.1 +13.7 +3.9 +6.5 +7.3 +4.1 +3.6 +7.2 –0.5 –3.1 +31.7 . +9.4
p 2022 +6.3 +7.5 +5.5 +3.6 +4.1 +3.5 +4.3 +5.2 +9.0 +25.8 +1.7 . +6.9
pe 2023 +4.8 +1.2 +6.4 +16.2 +4.6 +5.0 +6.5 +8.7 +5.7 +36.6 –5.9 . +3.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office.  * Figures in accordance with ESA 2010.  1 Taxes and
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution Fund.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
59•
X. Public finances in Germany
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3
Period Total  4 TaxesFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5 Total  4Person-
nel
expend-
itureCurrent
grants InterestFixed
asset
forma-
tionFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5Deficit/
surplusRev-
enue  6Expend-
itureDeficit/
surplusRev-
enueExpend-
itureDeficit/
surplus
2017 897.6 734.5 7.7 867.8 261.5 327.2 41.9 51.7 13.8 +29.8 631.5 622.0 +9.5 1,414.9 1,375.6 +39.3
2018 949.2 776.3 6.0 904.0 272.4 337.3 39.1 55.1 16.1 +45.2 656.2 642.5 +13.6 1,488.1 1,429.3 +58.8
2019 1,007.7 799.4 11.0 973.9 285.9 348.9 33.5 62.2 16.8 +33.7 685.0 676.7 +8.3 1,571.2 1,529.2 +42.0
2020 944.3 739.9 13.7 1,109.7 299.4 422.0 25.8 68.6 59.9 –165.4 719.5 747.8 –28.3 1,516.2 1,709.9 –193.7
2021 1,105.4 833.3 25.3 1,239.9 310.7 530.8 21.0 69.3 26.1 –134.5 769.2 777.1 –7.9 1,701.6 1,844.0 –142.4
2022 1,145.2 895.9 32.4 1,287.0 325.7 499.6 33.5 72.5 79.3 –141.8 800.5 793.3 +7.2 1,772.9 1,907.5 –134.6
P 2023 1,224.6 915.9 36.4 1,320.3 349.7 479.8 64.4 83.5 31.9 –95.7 820.3 814.5 +5.9 1,904.7 1,994.5 –89.8
2021 Q1 240.7 185.3 4.3 300.6 75.5 130.8 7.3 11.1 14.6 –59.9 P182.4 P196.3 P–13.9 P385.2 P458.9 P–73.8
Q2 267.0 195.8 7.5 297.1 74.8 122.7 10.7 15.2 10.5 –30.2 P185.9 P197.0 P–11.1 P414.1 P455.3 P–41.2
Q3 270.9 210.7 7.4 290.2 75.8 116.3 – 0.4 16.5 10.4 –19.3 P183.4 P191.9 P–8.6 P413.5 P441.4 P–27.8
Q4 332.9 237.7 6.1 347.8 84.1 153.4 3.1 26.4 – 9.4 –14.9 P197.3 P190.4 P+6.9 P492.6 P500.6 P–8.0
2022 Q1 278.2 224.0 5.0 279.3 79.6 116.8 5.5 11.9 7.0 – 1.0 P193.8 P199.8 P–6.0 P430.7 P437.8 P–7.1
Q2 287.9 224.6 5.1 294.2 77.8 126.4 10.6 15.3 5.9 – 6.2 P199.9 P196.7 P+3.2 P444.2 P447.2 P–3.1
Q3 267.7 207.0 13.3 298.8 78.1 116.8 10.8 17.7 10.8 –31.0 P194.0 P197.6 P–3.6 P419.2 P453.8 P–34.6
Q4 318.5 244.5 9.0 413.5 89.7 138.5 6.5 27.5 55.6 –95.0 P210.5 P198.1 P+12.4 P486.0 P568.5 P–82.5
2023 Q1 281.9 215.4 9.3 331.8 81.3 130.7 20.1 13.6 17.8 –49.9 P195.4 P200.8 P–5.4 P441.7 P497.0 P–55.3
Q2 311.6 226.3 9.4 313.1 84.7 117.7 24.2 17.8 2.2 – 1.6 P199.3 P198.9 P+0.4 P476.2 P477.3 P–1.1
Q3 290.5 229.6 7.2 303.1 86.5 103.2 12.6 21.0 4.5 –12.6 P201.5 P205.0 P–3.6 P457.1 P473.3 P–16.1
Q4 347.5 244.6 10.6 375.3 96.7 126.3 11.5 30.9 7.4 –27.7 P218.4 P208.7 P+9.7 P530.8 P548.9 P–18.1
2024 Q1 290.7 225.5 7.9 310.8 92.3 113.9 16.8 17.6 3.7 –20.1 P204.0 P212.1 P–8.1 P460.0 P488.2 P–28.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data.  1 Annual fig-
ures based on the quarterly figures of the Federal Statistical Office, core budgets and
off-budget entities which are assigned to the general government sector.  2 The annual
figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all pro-
visional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated.  3 The develop-
ment of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statisticalchangeovers.  4 Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state
and local government.  5 On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as dis-
posals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted.  6 Excluding central govern-
ment liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency.
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2017 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 396.7 385.5 +11.3 258.5 247.7 +10.7
2018 374.4 363.5 +10.9 419.6 399.8 +19.9 270.0 260.1 + 9.8
2019 382.5 369.2 +13.3 436.3 419.3 +17.0 282.4 276.7 + 5.7
2020 341.4 472.1 –130.7 455.5 489.0 –33.6 295.2 293.2 + 2.0
2021 370.3 511.9 –141.6 509.3 508.7 + 0.5 308.0 303.4 + 4.6
2022 399.6 515.6 –116.0 534.8 522.5 +12.3 328.5 325.8 + 2.7
2023 425.3 490.2 –64.9 530.9 531.7 – 0.8 358.2 365.0 – 6.8
2021 Q1 75.0 127.5 –52.5 113.7 120.7 – 7.1 61.1 69.7 – 8.6
Q2 86.4 123.5 –37.1 122.8 122.0 + 0.8 74.6 71.7 + 2.9
Q3 93.9 114.7 –20.7 125.9 120.2 + 5.7 74.6 74.9 – 0.3
Q4 115.1 146.3 –31.2 145.6 144.5 + 1.2 97.6 87.0 +10.6
2022 Q1 94.7 114.0 –19.3 134.6 122.7 +11.9 68.4 73.8 – 5.4
Q2 99.7 123.5 –23.7 133.2 123.6 + 9.6 81.0 77.3 + 3.7
Q3 89.0 127.8 –38.7 126.1 121.4 + 4.7 81.1 80.3 + 0.8
Q4 116.1 150.4 –34.2 139.6 153.4 –13.8 98.0 94.5 + 3.5
2023 Q1 96.2 116.9 –20.7 121.0 122.3 – 1.3 73.3 81.0 – 7.7
Q2 101.8 119.6 –17.7 138.5 133.6 + 4.9 87.0 86.6 + 0.4
Q3 106.1 115.9 – 9.8 123.1 120.0 + 3.2 87.4 91.5 – 4.1
Q4 121.2 137.8 –16.6 146.9 154.4 – 7.5 110.4 105.8 + 4.6
2024 Q1 102.8 111.6 – 8.7 129.2 133.9 – 4.7 76.7 90.6 –13.9
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office data and Bundesbank
calculations.  1 Any amounts of the Bundesbank's profit distribution exceeding the
reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government'sspecial funds are not included here.  2 Including the local authority level of the city
states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg.  3 Data of core budgets and off-budget entities
which are assigned to the general government sector.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
60•
X. Public finances in Germany
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Period Total TotalCentral
government  1State
government  1 European Union  2Local
government  3Balance of
untransferred
tax shares  4Memo item:
Amounts deducted
in the Federal
budget  5
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 – 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,911 632,268 313,381 286,065 32,822 107,916 – 274 30,266
2021 833,337 706,978 342,988 325,768 38,222 125,000 + 1,359 29,321
2022 895,854 760,321 372,121 349,583 38,617 134,146 + 1,387 34,911
2023 915,893 774,112 389,114 349,554 35,444 143,663 – 1,882 33,073
2022 Q1 224,006 189,158 92,112 87,240 9,806 24,772 + 10,077 7,261
Q2 224,538 190,982 94,153 86,852 9,977 34,149 – 594 11,576
Q3 205,544 174,232 84,078 80,020 10,133 33,618 – 2,306 7,953
Q4 241,767 205,950 101,778 95,471 8,702 41,607 – 5,790 8,121
2023 Q1 220,950 186,173 93,366 83,536 9,271 26,505 + 8,271 7,665
Q2 221,225 186,597 94,492 82,961 9,144 35,152 – 525 8,959
Q3 230,151 195,334 98,626 87,824 8,884 34,958 – 141 8,678
Q4 243,568 206,008 102,631 95,233 8,145 47,048 – 9,488 7,770
2024 Q1 225,304 188,806 96,283 85,277 7,246 25,910 + 10,588 7,999
Q2 ... 196,883 100,461 88,881 7,541 ... ... 8,306
2023 June . 80,242 40,858 36,246 3,138 . . 2,486
2024 June . 85,307 43,386 39,065 2,855 . . 2,769
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers,
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern-
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these amounts
which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget.  2 Customs duties andshares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government
tax revenue.  3 Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin, Bremen and
Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms.  4 Difference between local
government's share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in
the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local govern-
ment in the same period.  5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1.
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
€ million
Joint taxes
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7
Period Total  1 TotalWage
tax 3Assessed
income
tax 4Corpora-
tion tax  5Invest-
ment
income
tax 6 TotalDomestic
VATImport
VATLocal
business
tax
trans-
fers  8Central
govern-
ment
taxes  9State
govern-
ment
taxes  9EU
customs
dutiesMemo
item:
Local
govern-
ment
share in
joint
taxes
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,376 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,734 50,107
2021 760,953 370,296 218,407 72,342 42,124 37,423 250,800 187,631 63,169 4,951 98,171 31,613 5,122 53,976
2022 814,886 390,111 227,205 77,411 46,334 39,161 284,850 198,201 86,649 6,347 96,652 30,097 6,829 54,565
2023 829,774 399,271 236,227 73,388 44,852 44,803 291,394 212,596 78,798 6,347 101,829 25,199 5,734 55,662
2022 Q1 203,130 96,245 56,206 20,915 11,178 7,946 73,584 54,234 19,350 615 22,252 8,975 1,459 13,972
Q2 204,740 101,822 60,363 17,194 11,246 13,019 67,763 46,755 21,008 1,521 24,441 7,564 1,630 13,758
Q3 185,552 82,392 43,431 17,598 10,724 10,639 71,164 49,323 21,841 1,471 21,657 7,115 1,753 11,320
Q4 221,464 109,652 67,205 21,704 13,186 7,557 72,339 47,889 24,451 2,740 28,302 6,444 1,987 15,514
2023 Q1 199,764 94,453 55,669 19,728 10,700 8,357 73,522 52,197 21,325 370 23,110 6,815 1,494 13,591
Q2 199,993 98,917 59,538 15,467 12,406 11,506 67,260 47,855 19,405 1,499 24,740 6,142 1,435 13,396
Q3 208,722 98,832 56,370 17,010 9,902 15,550 76,093 56,986 19,106 1,583 24,665 6,160 1,389 13,388
Q4 221,295 107,069 64,651 21,184 11,844 9,390 74,519 55,557 18,962 2,895 29,314 6,082 1,417 15,287
2024 Q1 202,975 97,423 57,101 19,102 10,141 11,080 73,613 56,469 17,144 489 23,846 6,478 1,125 14,168
Q2 211,033 105,931 62,650 14,831 10,361 18,089 71,247 52,496 18,751 1,604 24,634 6,257 1,360 14,150
2023 June 86,391 52,851 20,542 15,866 10,341 6,102 21,602 15,292 6,310 10 9,242 2,207 479 6,150
2024 June 91,724 56,436 21,767 15,500 9,851 9,318 24,163 18,027 6,136 5 8,741 1,931 449 6,418
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations.  1 This total, unlike
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of untrans-
ferred tax shares.  2 Respective percentage share of central, state and local government
in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and
non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on interest income and
capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12.  3 After deducting child benefits
and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans.  4 After deducting employeerefunds and research grants.  5 After deducting research grants.  6 Final withholding tax
on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings.  7 The allocation
of revenue to central, state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular
intervals, is regulated in Section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percent-
age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2023: 47.5:49.7:2.8.
The EU share is deducted from central government's share.  8 Respective percentage
share of central and state government for 2023: 41.4:58.6.  9 For the breakdown, see
Table X. 7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
61•
X. Public finances in Germany
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
of which:
PeriodEnergy
taxSoli-
darity
surchargeInsurance
taxTobacco
taxMotor
vehicle
taxElectri-
city taxAlcohol
tax OtherTax on
the acqui-
sition of
land and
buildingsInherit-
ance
taxBetting
and
lottery
tax Other TotalLocal
business
tax 2Real
property
taxes
2017 41,022 17,953 13,269 14,399 8,948 6,944 2,094 – 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,966
2018 40,882 18,927 13,779 14,339 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,203
2019 40,683 19,646 14,136 14,257 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,553 14,651 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2021 37,120 11,028 14,980 14,733 9,546 6,691 2,089 1,984 18,335 9,824 2,333 1,121 77,335 61,251 14,985
2022 33,667 11,978 15,672 14,229 9,499 6,830 2,191 2,585 17,122 9,226 2,569 1,180 87,315 70,382 15,282
2023 36,658 12,239 16,851 14,672 9,514 6,832 2,159 2,904 12,203 9,286 2,477 1,233 92,466 75,265 15,493
2022 Q1 4,452 2,840 7,175 2,372 2,594 1,785 531 503 5,061 2,827 701 385 21,492 17,454 3,577
Q2 9,092 3,518 2,872 3,648 2,433 1,722 505 651 4,406 2,238 661 259 21,318 16,839 4,077
Q3 7,103 2,571 3,059 3,742 2,325 1,598 549 710 4,100 2,138 596 281 21,463 16,792 4,249
Q4 13,020 3,049 2,567 4,467 2,147 1,725 606 722 3,555 2,023 611 254 23,043 19,298 3,380
2023 Q1 4,362 2,888 7,637 2,669 2,632 1,749 530 643 3,362 2,368 666 420 21,555 17,471 3,610
Q2 8,796 3,649 3,091 3,830 2,475 1,669 517 712 2,937 2,323 615 267 22,731 18,117 4,192
Q3 9,477 2,607 3,309 3,879 2,339 1,749 532 773 2,997 2,302 577 284 23,013 18,294 4,271
Q4 14,023 3,095 2,813 4,294 2,068 1,665 580 776 2,907 2,292 620 263 25,168 21,383 3,421
2024 Q1 4,488 3,028 8,255 2,672 2,661 1,540 520 681 2,986 2,388 651 453 22,819 18,587 3,718
Q2 8,717 3,491 3,355 3,905 2,533 1,313 460 859 3,050 2,314 609 285 ... ... ...
2023 June 2,846 2,334 880 1,349 901 534 149 250 1,017 870 192 127 . . .
2024 June 3,023 2,050 954 1,008 784 377 172 374 983 639 203 107 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 For the sum total, see Table X. 6.  2 Including revenue from offshore wind
farms.
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  3
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions  2Payments
from central
government TotalPension
paymentsPensioners'
health
insuranceDeficit/
surplus Total Deposits  4 SecuritiesMemo item:
Administrative
assets
2017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 4,032
2018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 4,008
2019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 + 1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 – 3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 3,901
2021 348,679 245,185 102,772 347,486 296,343 22,734 + 1,192 42,014 40,320 1,241 3,807
2022 363,871 258,269 104,876 360,436 308,168 23,792 + 3,435 46,087 44,181 1,399 3,746
2023 382,540 271,852 108,836 381,073 325,369 25,346 + 1,467 48,869 46,649 1,637 3,697
2021 Q1 83,066 57,351 25,542 86,048 73,799 5,600 – 2,982 36,888 35,326 1,166 3,887
Q2 86,386 60,666 25,545 86,486 73,905 5,679 – 100 36,941 35,554 988 3,871
Q3 85,535 59,941 25,468 87,123 74,453 5,718 – 1,588 36,041 34,670 973 3,840
Q4 92,818 67,211 25,415 87,385 74,556 5,730 + 5,432 41,974 40,310 1,241 3,835
2022 Q1 86,684 60,599 25,937 86,841 74,568 5,734 – 157 41,784 39,952 1,367 3,783
Q2 90,040 63,978 25,879 87,138 74,644 5,756 + 2,903 44,425 42,441 1,513 3,761
Q3 89,284 62,891 26,218 92,606 79,400 6,127 – 3,322 41,548 39,767 1,315 3,775
Q4 96,931 70,750 25,995 93,444 79,944 6,170 + 3,487 46,082 44,186 1,399 3,767
2023 Q1 91,370 64,171 26,972 92,422 79,330 6,142 – 1,052 45,109 43,030 1,569 3,724
Q2 94,735 67,459 26,942 92,585 79,177 6,165 + 2,151 47,245 45,043 1,693 3,705
Q3 93,776 66,300 26,950 97,619 83,549 6,513 – 3,843 44,354 42,208 1,632 3,703
Q4 101,578 73,852 27,041 97,967 83,678 6,520 + 3,611 48,825 46,660 1,637 3,697
2024 Q1 96,340 67,378 28,344 97,801 83,894 6,560 – 1,461 46,926 44,166 2,179 3,758
Q2 99,956 71,411 27,848 98,246 83,818 6,604 + 1,710 48,873 46,253 2,024 3,748
Sources: German pension insurance scheme and Bundesbank calculations.  * Excluding
the German pension insurance scheme for mining, railway and maritime industries. The
final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as
the latter are not revised.  1 Including financial compensation payments. Excluding in-vestment spending and proceeds.  2 Including contributions for recipients of govern-
ment cash benefits.  3 Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
quarter.  4 Including cash.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
62•
X. Public finance in Germany
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total  1 ContributionsInsolvency
compen-
sation levy TotalUnemploy-
ment benefit  2Short-time
working
benefits  3Job
promotion  4Insolvency
benefit
paymentAdminis-
trative
expenditure  5Deficit/
surplusMemo item:
Deficit-
offsetting
grant or loan
from central
government
2017 37,819 32,501 882 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 687 6,444 + 5,952 –
2018 39,335 34,172 622 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 588 8,129 + 6,228 –
2019 35,285 29,851 638 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 842 6,252 + 2,131 –
2020 33,678 28,236 630 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 1,214 6,076 –27,335 6,913
2021 35,830 29,571 1,302 57,570 19,460 21,003 7,475 493 6,080 –21,739 16,935
2022 37,831 31,651 1,062 37,530 16,588 3,779 7,125 534 6,256 + 300 423
2023 42,245 36,058 748 39,233 18,799 981 7,614 1,236 7,006 + 3,012 – 423
2021 Q1 8,228 6,747 289 18,260 5,956 8,006 1,935 184 1,391 –10,033 –
Q2 8,830 7,301 324 16,720 5,029 7,495 1,912 108 1,452 – 7,890 –
Q3 8,791 7,290 330 12,042 4,447 3,631 1,744 91 1,452 – 3,251 –
Q4 9,982 8,234 359 10,547 4,028 1,871 1,884 110 1,785 – 565 16,935
2022 Q1 8,827 7,374 251 10,685 4,424 2,037 1,821 135 1,412 – 1,858 –
Q2 9,327 7,857 262 9,457 4,091 1,180 1,794 147 1,450 – 130 –
Q3 9,278 7,740 261 8,401 4,056 406 1,621 107 1,506 + 877 –
Q4 10,398 8,679 289 8,987 4,016 156 1,889 145 1,888 + 1,411 423
2023 Q1 9,836 8,442 178 9,942 4,727 408 1,858 376 1,550 – 106 –
Q2 10,387 8,976 186 9,661 4,604 290 1,902 271 1,689 + 726 –
Q3 10,361 8,804 182 9,351 4,712 140 1,775 284 1,691 + 1,010 –
Q4 11,661 9,836 202 10,278 4,755 144 2,079 306 2,076 + 1,382 – 423
2024 Q1 10,298 8,903 183 11,237 5,511 465 2,074 380 1,729 – 939 –
Q2 11,019 9,494 196 11,175 5,447 330 2,167 498 1,811 – 156 –
Source: Federal Employment Agency and Bundesbank calculations.  * Including transfers
to the civil servants' pension fund.  1 Excluding central government deficit-offsetting
grant or loan.  2 Unemployment benefit in case of unemployment.  3 Including seasonal
short-time working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, re-
structuring measures and refunds of social contributions.  4 Vocational training, meas-ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, integration, compensation top-up pay-
ments and promotion of business start-ups.  5 Including collection charges to other
social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the
basic allowance for job seekers.
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions Central
government
funds  2 TotalHospital
treatmentPharma-
ceuticalsMedical
treatmentDental
treatment  3Remedies
and
therapeutic
appliancesSickness
benefitsAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  4Deficit/
surplus
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 +3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 +2,654
2019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 –1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 –6,110
2021 289,270 249,734 36,977 294,602 82,748 46,199 45,058 16,335 20,163 16,612 11,727 –5,332
2022 315,248 262,367 50,223 310,594 85,061 48,354 46,379 16,737 21,259 17,947 12,418 +4,654
2023 304,441 278,742 21,896 309,596 90,891 49,653 47,157 17,593 23,214 19,112 12,681 –5,155
2021 Q1 72,970 59,338 13,303 72,660 19,631 11,175 11,564 4,069 4,564 4,287 2,967 + 310
Q2 71,964 61,819 9,965 74,492 20,287 11,275 11,536 4,219 5,085 4,120 2,850 –2,529
Q3 70,592 61,899 7,942 73,569 20,748 11,756 10,730 4,060 5,085 4,004 2,849 –2,977
Q4 74,020 66,678 5,767 73,209 21,340 12,043 11,252 4,062 5,290 4,200 3,109 + 810
2022 Q1 79,253 62,142 17,049 81,493 20,550 11,891 11,847 4,286 5,216 4,574 3,510 –2,240
Q2 79,112 64,611 14,280 79,269 21,080 12,053 11,753 4,249 5,335 4,457 2,958 – 158
Q3 75,516 65,242 9,804 75,011 21,164 12,221 11,384 3,956 5,352 4,441 2,996 + 505
Q4 81,512 70,384 9,091 74,894 21,659 12,242 11,566 4,310 5,442 4,486 3,148 +6,617
2023 Q1 73,718 66,513 6,759 77,593 22,196 12,209 12,012 4,370 5,621 4,927 3,169 –3,875
Q2 73,722 68,792 4,495 76,031 22,421 12,284 11,762 4,476 5,762 4,682 3,166 –2,309
Q3 75,330 69,236 5,244 76,967 22,632 12,540 11,502 4,371 5,958 4,695 3,030 –1,637
Q4 81,548 74,199 5,399 78,860 23,218 12,720 11,923 4,437 5,802 4,809 3,452 +2,688
2024 Q1 75,004 70,700 3,617 80,253 24,066 13,319 12,519 4,599 6,148 5,148 3,069 –5,249
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as the latter are not
revised. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensationscheme.  2 Federal grant and liquidity assistance.  3 Including dentures.  4 Net, i.e. after
deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contributions incurred by other
social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
63•
X. Public finances in Germany
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period Total Contributions TotalNon-cash
care benefitsInpatient
care total  2Nursing
benefitContributions to
pension insur-
ance scheme  3Administrative
expenditureDeficit/
surplus
2017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 – 2,557
2018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 – 3,315
2019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2021 52,573 49,764 53,903 9,573 16,511 13,865 3,070 2,024 – 1,330
2022 57,944 52,604 60,100 10,405 20,542 14,872 3,223 2,166 – 2,156
2023 61,374 58,807 59,178 11,506 22,513 16,035 3,582 2,267 + 2,196
2021 Q1 12,093 11,831 13,344 2,355 3,971 3,387 725 512 – 1,251
Q2 12,933 12,329 13,521 2,287 4,030 3,421 745 510 – 587
Q3 12,624 12,294 13,390 2,393 4,182 3,466 783 509 – 767
Q4 14,853 13,242 13,595 2,475 4,270 3,646 788 503 + 1,258
2022 Q1 12,912 12,412 14,739 2,564 4,974 3,572 775 529 – 1,827
Q2 15,350 12,951 14,827 2,464 5,026 3,698 795 548 + 523
Q3 13,708 13,021 15,387 2,638 5,197 3,755 802 542 – 1,679
Q4 15,813 14,067 15,078 2,581 5,281 3,892 837 528 + 735
2023 Q1 14,283 13,169 14,698 2,876 5,377 3,846 843 570 – 415
Q2 14,227 13,668 14,392 2,745 5,539 3,940 869 561 – 165
Q3 15,585 15,228 14,823 2,867 5,776 4,074 891 571 + 762
Q4 16,920 16,469 15,317 2,863 5,782 4,317 949 560 + 1,603
2024 Q1 15,896 15,525 16,546 3,207 6,038 4,387 950 645 – 651
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  * The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the
latter are not revised.  1 Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund.  2 In-cluding benefits for short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter alia.
3 For non-professional carers.
12. Maastricht debt by creditor
€ million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Bundesbank Domestic MFIsOther domestic
financial corporations Other domestic creditors Foreign creditors
of which: of which: of which: of which: of which: Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities
2017 2,130,324 319,159 305,301 546,063 194,619 180,104 81,125 56,798 10,456 1,028,201 941,750
2018 2,083,675 364,731 350,487 504,476 167,506 186,346 89,794 56,071 8,725 972,052 892,222
2019 2,069,889 366,562 352,025 465,628 158,119 183,714 88,771 64,379 7,225 989,606 908,749
2020 2,340,849 522,392 507,534 505,373 157,828 191,231 99,840 54,238 8,373 1,067,615 996,417
2021 2,495,538 716,004 700,921 497,968 144,646 191,580 103,049 51,633 7,435 1,038,353 969,245
2022 2,561,674 742,514 727,298 509,376 128,892 210,885 126,039 58,165 10,782 1,040,734 975,548
p 2023 2,622,669 696,287 680,801 461,592 126,354 207,203 124,202 72,214 23,030 1,185,373 1,121,033
2021 Q1 2,369,872 561,444 546,540 480,026 162,961 190,136 99,333 63,796 8,060 1,074,470 1,010,641
Q2 2,419,762 620,473 605,430 481,517 151,182 189,993 99,735 53,897 7,699 1,073,882 1,008,532
Q3 2,453,545 669,659 654,600 484,986 152,068 191,571 101,742 54,275 8,070 1,053,054 987,736
Q4 2,495,538 716,004 700,921 497,968 144,646 191,580 103,049 51,633 7,435 1,038,353 969,245
2022 Q1 2,499,123 737,978 722,843 481,772 143,411 194,096 106,165 50,834 6,959 1,034,442 967,915
Q2 2,537,416 759,385 744,213 485,428 133,999 202,681 115,577 53,612 8,086 1,036,310 970,547
Q3 2,551,282 741,360 726,147 512,999 126,865 202,278 116,268 55,917 8,987 1,038,727 968,178
Q4 2,561,674 742,514 727,298 509,376 128,892 210,885 126,039 58,165 10,782 1,040,734 975,548
p 2023 Q1 2,587,201 741,587 726,326 480,650 129,372 208,934 124,777 63,478 16,123 1,092,551 1,029,541
pQ2 2,586,471 719,981 704,639 458,449 125,988 209,153 124,769 65,763 20,879 1,133,126 1,069,341
pQ3 2,627,247 706,113 690,704 455,180 126,626 208,036 124,077 67,819 23,354 1,190,099 1,124,411
pQ4 2,622,669 696,287 680,801 461,592 126,354 207,203 124,202 72,214 23,030 1,185,373 1,121,033
p 2024 Q1 2,635,910 683,097 667,557 458,913 128,892 204,031 123,217 76,303 24,400 1,213,567 1,150,545
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
64•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
General government
2017 2,130,324 14,298 48,789 1,484,462 88,841 493,934 . .
2018 2,083,675 14,680 52,572 1,456,160 79,171 481,091 . .
2019 2,069,889 14,449 56,350 1,458,540 64,464 476,086 . .
2020 2,340,849 14,486 173,851 1,596,141 85,384 470,987 . .
2021 Q1 2,369,872 12,283 190,039 1,637,496 62,705 467,348 . .
Q2 2,419,762 13,065 182,676 1,689,902 69,170 464,949 . .
Q3 2,453,545 13,565 192,489 1,711,727 70,496 465,268 . .
Q4 2,495,538 17,743 195,421 1,729,876 88,481 464,017 . .
2022 Q1 2,499,123 15,676 172,809 1,774,484 70,930 465,223 . .
Q2 2,537,416 17,793 161,844 1,810,578 76,484 470,717 . .
Q3 2,551,282 22,631 149,825 1,796,620 82,049 500,157 . .
Q4 2,561,674 16,985 150,371 1,818,189 112,199 463,932 . .
p 2023 Q1 2,587,201 14,994 145,736 1,880,403 83,437 462,631 . .
pQ2 2,586,471 14,990 154,379 1,891,236 66,864 459,003 . .
pQ3 2,627,247 17,760 165,992 1,923,180 59,627 460,688 . .
pQ4 2,622,669 16,514 148,889 1,926,532 66,232 464,502 . .
p 2024 Q1 2,635,910 14,910 135,667 1,958,944 62,540 463,849 . .
Central government
2017 1,361,492 14,298 36,297 1,131,896 48,305 130,696 1,131 10,618
2018 1,334,500 14,680 42,246 1,107,140 43,067 127,367 933 9,975
2019 1,312,338 14,449 38,480 1,101,866 29,956 127,587 605 10,301
2020 1,526,491 14,486 154,498 1,180,683 48,414 128,410 609 14,521
2021 Q1 1,552,060 12,283 167,485 1,212,495 31,284 128,513 604 22,929
Q2 1,602,137 13,065 165,374 1,259,206 36,297 128,195 647 29,448
Q3 1,630,056 13,565 170,962 1,280,586 37,116 127,826 693 31,382
Q4 1,679,310 17,743 176,428 1,300,416 57,779 126,943 618 8,078
2022 Q1 1,684,290 15,676 155,123 1,340,340 41,680 131,472 576 10,430
Q2 1,723,415 17,793 147,681 1,373,616 47,196 137,129 623 10,491
Q3 1,757,005 22,631 144,999 1,369,628 55,559 164,188 828 13,101
Q4 1,775,982 16,985 146,989 1,391,638 93,352 127,017 8,815 9,011
p 2023 Q1 1,798,688 14,994 140,641 1,456,147 59,981 126,926 3,664 10,500
pQ2 1,806,085 14,990 150,168 1,471,888 41,802 127,237 2,889 11,235
pQ3 1,848,614 17,760 161,140 1,503,891 38,943 126,880 6,373 9,852
pQ4 1,850,057 16,514 144,507 1,511,599 51,457 125,980 15,858 9,103
p 2024 Q1 1,856,300 14,910 129,404 1,533,118 51,608 127,259 18,539 10,437
State government
2017 616,785 – 12,543 354,688 19,790 229,764 14,038 2,046
2018 603,166 – 10,332 351,994 19,250 221,590 14,035 1,891
2019 612,698 – 17,873 360,495 19,076 215,254 14,934 1,826
2020 664,421 – 19,354 419,862 19,481 205,724 11,924 1,410
2021 Q1 667,651 – 22,556 429,623 14,375 201,097 10,942 1,995
Q2 667,940 – 17,304 435,709 16,178 198,750 12,454 2,041
Q3 673,373 – 21,528 436,499 16,334 199,012 11,414 2,110
Q4 665,250 – 18,994 434,930 14,074 197,252 12,441 1,772
2022 Q1 663,426 – 17,688 439,767 12,533 193,438 11,634 1,915
Q2 660,169 – 14,166 442,621 12,404 190,979 11,393 1,742
Q3 643,826 – 4,828 432,653 14,873 191,472 14,067 2,147
Q4 634,151 – 3,384 432,186 9,881 188,700 11,585 1,719
p 2023 Q1 631,953 – 5,099 429,985 10,976 185,893 11,918 2,360
pQ2 624,231 – 4,215 424,818 11,908 183,291 13,336 2,041
pQ3 621,611 – 4,856 424,945 8,727 183,084 11,049 2,629
pQ4 623,057 – 4,392 421,349 12,631 184,684 11,519 5,357
p 2024 Q1 630,848 – 6,272 432,381 11,585 180,610 12,385 12,405
Local government
2017 168,304 – – 3,082 24,909 140,313 1,881 466
2018 162,175 – 1 3,046 20,903 138,225 1,884 497
2019 161,367 – – 2,996 19,607 138,763 1,856 532
2020 163,163 – – 3,366 18,520 141,276 1,402 330
2021 Q1 163,189 – – 3,121 17,998 142,070 2,009 325
Q2 164,321 – – 3,121 18,969 142,231 2,070 323
Q3 163,772 – – 3,000 18,156 142,616 2,127 321
Q4 165,316 – – 3,241 18,011 144,064 1,813 313
2022 Q1 164,860 – – 3,052 17,532 144,276 1,884 349
Q2 166,840 – – 2,902 17,566 146,373 1,724 370
Q3 166,624 – – 2,856 15,623 148,145 2,098 392
Q4 172,244 – – 2,896 17,917 151,431 1,614 399
p 2023 Q1 173,042 – – 2,883 17,102 153,057 2,163 422
pQ2 172,832 – – 2,988 17,678 152,166 1,746 748
pQ3 175,462 – – 2,825 18,287 154,350 2,329 796
pQ4 177,735 – – 2,884 17,295 157,557 2,385 798
p 2024 Q1 180,561 – – 2,723 18,243 159,595 2,392 825
For footnotes see end of table.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
65•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont´d)
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:   2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
Social security funds
2017 807 – – – 262 545 15 3,934
2018 704 – – – 388 316 16 4,506
2019 899 – – – 375 524 16 4,753
2020 7,641 – – – 7,128 513 6,931 4,606
2021 Q1 16,381 – – – 15,985 395 15,853 4,160
Q2 21,395 – – – 20,995 400 20,860 4,220
Q3 24,449 – – – 24,053 395 23,872 4,292
Q4 553 – – – 131 422 19 4,729
2022 Q1 3,378 – – – 2,883 496 2,739 4,140
Q2 3,690 – – – 3,098 592 2,958 4,095
Q3 4,151 – – – 3,459 692 3,330 4,683
Q4 2,755 – – – 608 2,147 1,442 12,328
p 2023 Q1 3,527 – – – 1,411 2,115 2,263 6,728
pQ2 2,736 – – – 595 2,141 1,442 5,389
pQ3 3,754 – – – 1,600 2,154 2,442 8,917
pQ4 2,624 – – – 742 1,882 1,042 15,547
p 2024 Q1 3,036 – – – 1,195 1,841 1,519 11,168
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office and
the Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency.  1 Particularly liabilities resulting
from coins in circulation.  2 Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt vis-à-visother government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on the
market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated between
different government subsectors.
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
€ million
Currency and deposits  2Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3
Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total  1 Total  1Federal
day bond Total  1Conventional
Federal
bonds
(Bunds)Conventional
Federal
notes
(Bobls)Conventional
Federal
Treasury
notes
(Schätze)  4Treasury
discount
paper
(Bubills)  5Federal
savings
notesGreen
Federal
securitiesInflation-
linked
Federal
securities  6Capital
indexation
of inflation-
linked
securities Loans  1
2007 987,909 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 102,083 37,385 10,287 . 13,464 506 63,650
2008 1,019,905 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 105,684 40,795 9,649 . 19,540 1,336 78,685
2009 1,086,173 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 113,637 104,409 9,471 . 24,730 1,369 63,121
2010 1,337,160 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 126,220 85,867 8,704 . 35,906 2,396 242,251
2011 1,346,869 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 130,648 58,297 8,208 . 44,241 3,961 215,109
2012 1,390,377 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 117,719 56,222 6,818 . 52,119 5,374 203,467
2013 1,392,735 10,582 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 110,029 50,004 4,488 . 51,718 4,730 190,127
2014 1,398,472 12,146 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 103,445 27,951 2,375 . 63,245 5,368 180,123
2015 1,371,933 13,949 1,070 1,188,463 663,296 232,387 96,389 18,536 1,305 . 74,495 5,607 169,521
2016 1,365,579 15,491 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 95,727 23,609 737 . 66,464 3,602 171,026
2017 1,361,492 14,298 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 91,013 10,037 289 . 72,855 4,720 179,001
2018 1,334,500 14,680 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 86,009 12,949 48 . 64,647 5,139 170,435
2019 1,312,338 14,449 –1,140,346 719,747 174,719 89,230 13,487 . . 69,805 6,021 157,543
2020 1,526,491 14,486 .1,335,181 801,910 179,560 98,543 113,141 . 9,876 58,279 3,692 176,824
2021 1,679,310 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 184,722
2022 1,775,982 16,985 .1,538,628 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 220,369
p 2023 1,850,057 16,514 .1,656,105 1,045,613 216,276 119,180 135,469 . 53,965 60,470 14,686 177,438
2021 Q1 1,552,060 12,283 .1,379,980 814,864 189,935 103,910 134,800 . 11,026 60,687 3,857 159,797
Q2 1,602,137 13,065 .1,424,579 861,455 184,413 104,997 139,451 . 16,526 62,569 5,056 164,492
Q3 1,630,056 13,565 .1,451,549 869,195 198,692 105,398 146,533 . 19,824 63,851 5,456 164,942
Q4 1,679,310 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 184,722
2022 Q1 1,684,290 15,676 .1,495,463 911,280 204,534 108,702 140,427 . 23,961 67,776 7,809 173,152
Q2 1,723,415 17,793 .1,521,297 937,949 198,472 111,343 138,495 . 29,425 70,217 11,209 184,325
Q3 1,757,005 22,631 .1,514,627 918,838 208,509 111,675 137,740 . 35,527 71,498 12,879 219,747
Q4 1,775,982 16,985 .1,538,628 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 220,369
p 2023 Q1 1,798,688 14,994 .1,596,787 987,363 213,514 120,904 127,143 . 39,459 73,591 15,497 186,907
pQ2 1,806,085 14,990 .1,622,056 1,007,004 211,742 124,160 139,012 . 50,243 59,227 13,604 169,039
pQ3 1,848,614 17,760 .1,665,030 1,021,675 226,340 125,255 148,407 . 52,763 59,923 13,863 165,823
pQ4 1,850,057 16,514 .1,656,105 1,045,613 216,276 119,180 135,469 . 53,965 60,470 14,686 177,438
p 2024 Q1 1,856,300 14,910 .1,662,522 1,054,941 226,133 119,517 119,164 . 58,565 60,312 14,048 178,867
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, and
Bundesbank calculations.  1 Comprises all of central government, i.e. all off-budget en-
tities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned bad bank FMS
Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government from an economic
perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) 2010.  2 Particularly liabilitiesresulting from coins in circulation.  3 Issuances by the Federal Republic of Germany. Ex-
cluding issuers' holdings of own securities but including those held by other govern-
ment entities.  4 Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency (expired
in 2011).  5 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014).  6 Excluding
inflation-induced indexation of capital.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2022 2023 2024
2021 2022 2023 2021 2022 2023 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Item Index 2015=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 108.2 107.6 106.0 7.4 –0.5 –1.5 0.3 –2.1 1.2 –1.2 –3.3 –2.7 –4.7
Construction 97.4 94.1 93.7 –5.3 –3.3 –0.4 –4.9 –7.0 –1.9 –1.1 0.8 0.3 –0.9
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 102.8 106.3 105.2 1.2 3.3 –1.0 1.6 –0.9 0.3 –1.7 –1.3 –1.2 –0.5
Information and communication 130.1 136.5 140.4 7.8 5.0 2.8 6.8 3.8 2.8 3.2 2.5 2.9 1.9
Financial and insurance activities 100.8 105.0 103.9 6.8 4.2 –1.1 2.9 6.3 1.5 –0.7 –1.4 –3.7 –1.2
Real estate activities 102.6 103.5 104.7 1.4 0.8 1.1 0.8 –0.3 0.9 0.6 1.6 1.4 1.2
Business services  1 109.7 112.5 113.1 4.6 2.6 0.5 1.0 1.0 –0.1 0.5 0.7 0.9 0.7
Public services, education and health 106.8 109.6 111.1 1.2 2.7 1.4 2.5 3.1 3.0 1.3 0.4 0.9 0.8
Other services 90.3 95.7 97.7 0.2 6.0 2.0 2.4 5.7 2.1 1.4 1.5 3.1 1.7
Gross value added 106.1 107.9 107.9 3.3 1.7 0.1 1.3 0.3 1.0 –0.0 –0.5 –0.2 –0.9
Gross domestic product  2 106.3 108.2 108.0 3.2 1.8 –0.2 1.2 0.2 0.5 –0.3 –0.5 –0.4 –0.9
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 102.4 106.4 105.6 1.5 3.9 –0.7 1.8 0.2 –0.1 –0.6 –1.6 –0.4 0.0
Government consumption 117.5 119.3 118.1 3.1 1.6 –1.0 0.1 0.1 –2.3 –2.6 0.0 0.8 1.5
Machinery and equipment 103.4 107.5 110.5 2.8 4.0 2.8 9.5 4.9 7.1 4.5 1.4 –1.0 –4.4
Premises 110.0 108.0 105.1 –2.6 –1.8 –2.7 –1.6 –4.8 –4.1 –2.4 –2.0 –2.3 –2.1
Other investment  4 116.7 115.8 115.1 2.1 –0.7 –0.6 –1.3 1.0 –0.8 –0.8 –0.6 –0.3 –0.5
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . 0.9 0.7 –0.3 1.7 1.3 0.2 0.2 –0.8 –0.8 –0.9
Domestic demand 108.4 111.8 110.7 2.5 3.2 –1.1 3.1 1.2 –0.5 –0.7 –1.7 –1.3 –1.2
Net exports  6 . . . 0.9 –1.2 0.8 –1.8 –0.9 0.8 0.4 1.3 1.0 0.3
     Exports 111.8 115.5 114.8 9.7 3.3 –0.7 5.3 –0.2 3.0 –0.3 –2.6 –2.7 –2.8
     Imports 118.0 125.9 122.8 8.9 6.6 –2.4 10.3 1.8 1.6 –1.1 –5.2 –4.7 –3.8
Gross domestic product  2 106.3 108.2 108.0 3.2 1.8 –0.2 1.2 0.2 0.5 –0.3 –0.5 –0.4 –0.9
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,785.5 1,979.3 2,090.6 4.5 10.9 5.6 9.3 8.5 8.1 6.3 4.4 4.0 2.9
Government consumption 796.8 850.9 891.5 6.3 6.8 4.8 5.7 5.8 2.1 4.2 6.8 5.9 7.4
Machinery and equipment 227.5 253.4 275.1 4.8 11.4 8.6 18.1 13.1 15.1 11.3 6.4 3.3 –1.9
Premises 406.5 463.5 486.0 5.7 14.0 4.9 13.3 9.9 10.0 5.3 3.4 1.2 0.1
Other investment  4 136.5 139.3 141.9 3.8 2.1 1.9 1.9 2.2 1.6 1.9 2.1 1.9 1.0
Changes in inventories  5 69.4 114.1 50.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,422.2 3,800.5 3,935.3 6.7 11.1 3.5 11.3 8.1 5.8 3.8 1.9 2.9 2.0
Net exports 195.3 76.3 186.9 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,710.3 1,974.2 1,973.3 15.6 15.4 –0.0 19.0 9.1 7.9 0.4 –4.6 –3.3 –2.3
     Imports 1,515.0 1,897.9 1,786.4 18.2 25.3 –5.9 33.3 13.4 4.7 –4.6 –12.9 –9.1 –6.4
Gross domestic product  2 3,617.5 3,876.8 4,122.2 6.3 7.2 6.3 5.8 6.2 7.4 6.2 6.2 5.6 3.6
 IV. Prices (2015=100)
Private consumption 108.8 116.1 123.5 3.0 6.7 6.4 7.4 8.3 8.2 6.9 6.0 4.5 2.9
Gross domestic product 112.5 118.4 126.1 3.0 5.3 6.5 4.5 6.0 6.9 6.6 6.7 6.0 4.6
Terms of trade 99.8 95.0 99.1 –2.9 –4.9 4.3 –6.5 –1.9 1.7 4.4 6.7 4.2 3.2
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,918.3 2,023.6 2,159.4 3.5 5.5 6.7 4.3 5.4 6.7 7.1 7.2 6.0 6.2
Entrepreneurial and property income 851.0 867.4 921.9 19.5 1.9 6.3 3.8 –0.6 9.0 9.5 5.7 1.0 –5.7
National income 2,769.3 2,890.9 3,081.4 7.9 4.4 6.6 4.2 3.7 7.4 7.8 6.7 4.7 2.2
Memo item: Gross national income 3,756.8 4,027.6 4,287.8 7.3 7.2 6.5 5.8 6.0 7.2 6.5 6.6 5.6 3.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2024.  1 Professional, sci-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added plus
taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit institu-tions serving households.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware
and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net in-
crease in valuables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy Total Inter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2021 = 100
% of total  1   100 17.08 8.21 74.71 27.84 33.97 2.53 10.36 9.71 9.59 11.83 12.21
Period
2020 95.9 101.4 96.9 94.8 91.9 96.7 93.5 97.5 91.0 90.0 92.6 101.7
2021 99.3 99.1 99.9 99.3 99.4 99.2 99.2 99.4 99.4 99.3 99.3 99.0
2022 98.7 96.7 98.7 99.2 96.3 101.1 101.0 100.1 97.3 102.9 100.2 103.0
2023 97.0 95.6 84.8 98.6 90.7 106.4 93.5 95.6 93.5 103.7 99.3 116.1
2023 Q2 97.9 98.4 77.7 100.0 92.7 108.0 92.5 95.2 95.9 103.9 99.5 121.5
Q3 95.7 100.2 72.8 97.2 90.7 103.1 92.1 96.6 93.4 104.4 98.8 107.1
Q4 97.2 101.4 90.6 96.9 84.8 107.9 91.1 94.9 88.8 100.9 102.7 111.6
r 2024 Q1 92.1 80.4 90.5 95.0 89.3 99.9 89.4 95.3 90.7 96.1 90.0 111.1
x,p Q2 93.0 93.4 76.8 94.7 88.3 100.7 87.8 93.8 90.1 92.5 90.3 111.8
2023 June 99.3 100.0 72.4 102.1 93.4 111.0 93.9 98.2 96.7 108.0 105.4 120.5
2 July 97.6 105.1 75.4 98.4 92.4 104.0 91.4 97.6 94.2 104.1 99.4 108.7
2 Aug. 89.5 94.3 71.5 90.4 87.6 91.8 84.7 94.7 89.7 100.8 89.4 90.3
Sep. 100.0 101.3 71.5 102.8 92.1 113.4 100.3 97.4 96.4 108.3 107.6 122.3
Oct. 98.3 101.2 84.0 99.2 91.7 105.9 96.2 98.2 95.1 103.8 95.5 116.7
Nov. 102.1 103.4 91.1 103.0 91.2 114.5 97.2 98.7 95.2 105.0 103.1 128.4
Dec. 91.1 99.6 96.8 88.5 71.5 103.3 79.8 87.7 76.0 93.8 109.6 89.8
r 2024 Jan. 83.6 63.0 98.8 86.7 84.3 87.6 81.7 91.5 85.2 90.4 80.3 95.0
r Feb. 90.7 81.0 85.8 93.5 87.8 98.8 90.1 92.3 88.8 93.6 87.9 112.9
r Mar. 101.9 97.2 86.8 104.7 95.9 113.3 96.5 102.2 98.1 104.3 101.8 125.5
x Apr. 93.5 93.1 79.9 95.1 88.6 101.3 87.8 93.9 90.0 93.1 88.9 117.7
x May 90.3 91.6 75.5 91.6 86.7 95.5 80.5 94.9 88.0 87.7 86.3 102.6
x,p June 95.2 95.6 74.9 97.3 89.7 105.2 95.1 92.5 92.2 96.8 95.7 115.1
Annual percentage change
2020 – 7.7 + 2.9 – 6.6 – 9.8 – 6.9 –14.0 – 8.2 – 3.8 –11.9 – 7.4 –13.5 –20.1
2021 + 3.5 – 2.3 + 3.1 + 4.7 + 8.2 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 1.9 + 9.2 +10.3 + 7.2 – 2.7
2022 – 0.6 – 2.4 – 1.2 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.7 – 2.1 + 3.6 + 0.9 + 4.0
2023 – 1.7 – 1.1 –14.1 – 0.6 – 5.8 + 5.2 – 7.4 – 4.5 – 3.9 + 0.8 – 0.9 +12.7
2023 Q2 – 0.3 – 0.2 –18.3 + 1.6 – 6.2 + 9.8 – 8.6 – 2.1 – 3.3 + 3.5 + 2.0 +20.7
Q3 – 2.9 + 0.1 –20.7 – 1.7 – 5.8 + 2.8 – 8.7 – 4.1 – 3.4 – 1.2 – 1.0 + 5.9
Q4 – 4.1 – 2.1 – 7.2 – 4.2 – 5.4 – 2.3 –10.6 – 6.9 – 5.3 – 4.4 – 6.2 – 0.7
r 2024 Q1 – 5.2 – 2.5 – 7.8 – 5.3 – 5.4 – 6.3 – 9.0 – 0.4 – 5.4 – 9.1 – 6.4 –10.5
x,p Q2 – 5.0 – 5.0 – 1.2 – 5.4 – 4.7 – 6.8 – 5.1 – 1.5 – 6.1 –10.9 – 9.2 – 8.0
2023 June – 1.9 – 1.9 –19.8 – 0.2 – 6.2 + 5.4 – 7.8 – 1.6 – 3.7 + 3.8 – 0.3 +11.8
2 July – 2.3 + 1.2 –20.6 – 1.1 – 6.6 + 3.5 – 6.5 – 0.5 – 4.4 ± 0.0 + 0.8 + 6.4
2 Aug. – 2.3 – 0.8 –20.3 – 0.7 – 4.7 + 4.1 – 9.3 – 2.5 – 1.2 ± 0.0 – 3.2 +13.7
Sep. – 3.9 – 0.1 –21.2 – 3.1 – 6.0 + 1.1 –10.0 – 8.9 – 4.4 – 3.4 – 0.8 + 0.5
Oct. – 4.0 – 3.2 –10.1 – 3.7 – 5.4 – 0.7 –10.6 – 7.7 – 6.1 – 2.6 – 6.7 + 4.0
Nov. – 4.5 – 2.8 – 7.4 – 4.5 – 6.2 – 2.6 –10.8 – 5.9 – 5.3 – 7.1 – 5.8 – 1.6
Dec. – 3.7 – 0.1 – 4.3 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 3.5 –10.4 – 7.0 – 4.3 – 3.3 – 6.0 – 4.9
r 2024 Jan. – 5.4 – 6.5 – 3.7 – 5.3 – 6.5 – 5.3 – 9.7 – 1.4 – 5.1 – 7.5 – 5.2 – 9.6
r Feb. – 5.7 – 1.6 – 9.5 – 6.1 – 5.4 – 8.3 – 7.0 + 0.2 – 5.6 – 9.0 – 7.8 –13.0
r Mar. – 4.4 – 0.4 –10.6 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 5.2 –10.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 –10.6 – 6.3 – 8.9
x Apr. – 3.7 – 3.9 – 6.4 – 3.5 – 4.1 – 3.6 – 5.2 – 0.5 – 5.8 – 8.1 – 6.7 – 1.5
x May – 7.2 – 6.8 + 0.1 – 7.9 – 6.2 –11.5 –11.6 + 1.9 – 7.9 –14.3 –11.8 –17.5
x,p June – 4.1 – 4.4 + 3.5 – 4.7 – 4.0 – 5.2 + 1.3 – 5.8 – 4.7 –10.4 – 9.2 – 4.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2021.  2 Influenced by a change in holiday dates.  x Provisional;estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the
Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction
industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2021 99.4 +22.7 99.4 +27.3 99.4 +21.7 99.4 +11.2 99.5 +17.9 99.3 + 8.2
2022 105.1 + 5.7 110.3 +11.0 101.1 + 1.7 109.6 +10.3 113.2 +13.8 108.0 + 8.8
2023 101.2 – 3.7 100.0 – 9.3 101.6 + 0.5 105.1 – 4.1 100.4 –11.3 107.3 – 0.6
2023 June 113.0 + 4.8 102.0 –10.2 120.9 +17.6 108.2 – 6.3 105.3 – 8.5 109.5 – 5.4
July 95.7 –10.1 94.9 –17.2 95.1 – 6.4 104.8 + 1.9 88.4 –14.8 112.3 + 9.7
Aug. 89.8 – 5.9 90.7 –11.3 86.8 – 3.2 108.2 + 4.2 105.1 – 6.0 109.5 + 9.3
Sep. 98.6 – 4.3 96.6 – 8.2 99.6 – 0.4 100.8 –11.7 95.7 –16.2 103.0 – 9.8
Oct. 96.2 – 8.0 97.0 – 9.9 94.4 – 7.5 105.9 – 2.9 99.1 –15.2 109.0 + 3.2
Nov. 99.6 – 3.9 96.4 –10.6 100.4 + 0.5 109.7 ± 0.0 112.1 + 9.5 108.6 – 4.0
Dec. 109.0 + 8.0 92.4 – 8.9 121.5 +19.9 96.5 + 1.8 88.2 – 7.0 100.3 + 5.7
2024 Jan. 98.2 – 5.0 98.1 –12.0 98.0 + 0.1 100.4 – 3.9 85.1 – 8.8 107.3 – 2.0
Feb. 96.3 – 8.7 94.4 –11.3 96.4 – 7.8 106.2 – 1.5 89.0 –15.2 114.0 + 4.5
Mar. 105.8 – 2.5 102.6 – 7.5 106.9 + 0.4 113.2 + 1.2 105.7 – 8.4 116.7 + 5.8
Apr. 93.1 – 1.8 93.8 – 7.5 91.0 + 1.9 104.7 + 0.5 94.5 – 9.9 109.3 + 5.1
May 92.3 – 8.3 93.9 – 5.3 89.3 –12.2 107.6 + 8.6 113.6 +23.7 104.9 + 2.4
p June 100.1 –11.4 94.5 – 7.4 103.7 –14.2 100.5 – 7.1 94.1 –10.6 103.4 – 5.6
From the domestic market
2021 99.3 +21.7 99.4 +26.9 99.3 +19.1 99.3 +10.2 99.2 + 8.9 99.3 +10.7
2022 105.6 + 6.3 112.5 +13.2 98.7 – 0.6 109.7 +10.5 111.3 +12.2 109.1 + 9.9
2023 100.9 – 4.5 103.1 – 8.4 99.1 + 0.4 99.7 – 9.1 99.5 –10.6 99.7 – 8.6
2023 June 107.7 – 0.4 99.7 –12.5 116.6 +14.7 95.8 –17.2 93.9 –16.3 96.5 –17.6
July 98.4 – 8.1 97.5 –18.5 99.0 + 2.6 100.0 – 2.9 97.4 –13.3 101.0 + 1.7
Aug. 90.9 – 4.2 94.9 – 8.6 86.2 + 0.2 99.1 – 1.4 103.8 – 6.1 97.2 + 0.6
Sep. 93.7 – 9.7 95.4 –10.9 91.3 – 7.8 99.1 –14.9 103.3 – 5.3 97.5 –18.3
Oct. 96.0 – 7.3 100.2 – 9.9 91.2 – 4.5 102.9 – 8.4 93.6 –11.9 106.6 – 7.0
Nov. 99.1 – 6.5 100.0 –10.5 98.1 – 1.3 99.8 –13.9 97.4 –12.5 100.7 –14.4
Dec. 98.4 – 0.9 97.0 – 8.5 100.4 + 5.4 93.8 +10.5 89.9 + 5.8 95.3 +12.4
2024 Jan. 94.4 – 8.0 99.6 –13.2 89.7 – 2.9 94.3 – 4.1 85.5 – 9.9 97.8 – 1.8
Feb. 95.7 –10.1 96.4 –12.8 94.7 – 8.5 97.9 – 4.6 86.1 –13.6 102.6 – 1.2
Mar. 102.3 – 9.1 102.0 –11.1 102.3 – 7.6 104.1 – 5.5 100.9 –14.0 105.4 – 1.9
Apr. 90.9 – 8.6 94.7 –13.0 86.7 – 4.9 96.8 – 1.6 94.9 – 8.4 97.5 + 1.1
May 91.9 –13.1 92.8 –10.3 91.0 –16.6 92.8 – 3.4 85.1 –14.3 95.9 + 1.1
p June 101.3 – 5.9 95.8 – 3.9 107.0 – 8.2 96.6 + 0.8 90.8 – 3.3 98.9 + 2.5
From abroad
2021 99.5 +23.6 99.4 +27.6 99.5 +23.1 99.4 +11.7 99.6 +23.4 99.3 + 6.5
2022 104.8 + 5.3 108.1 + 8.8 102.5 + 3.0 109.6 +10.3 114.4 +14.9 107.2 + 8.0
2023 101.5 – 3.1 96.8 –10.5 103.0 + 0.5 108.8 – 0.7 100.9 –11.8 112.8 + 5.2
2023 June 116.8 + 8.7 104.3 – 7.9 123.3 +19.1 116.6 + 1.0 111.9 – 4.2 119.0 + 3.8
July 93.8 –11.5 92.3 –15.9 92.8 –11.2 108.1 + 5.4 83.2 –15.7 120.5 +15.2
Aug. 89.0 – 7.0 86.5 –14.1 87.2 – 5.0 114.3 + 7.7 105.9 – 5.9 118.4 +15.1
Sep. 102.1 – 0.3 97.7 – 5.5 104.4 + 3.8 101.9 – 9.6 91.4 –22.0 107.1 – 3.0
Oct. 96.4 – 8.5 93.8 –10.0 96.3 – 8.9 107.9 + 0.8 102.2 –16.8 110.7 +11.7
Nov. 100.0 – 1.8 92.8 –10.8 101.8 + 1.6 116.4 +10.3 120.5 +24.0 114.3 + 4.2
Dec. 116.6 +14.3 87.9 – 9.3 133.7 +27.7 98.4 – 3.1 87.2 –13.2 104.0 + 1.8
2024 Jan. 101.0 – 2.9 96.7 –10.8 102.8 + 1.7 104.5 – 3.9 84.8 – 8.1 114.3 – 2.1
Feb. 96.8 – 7.5 92.5 – 9.6 97.3 – 7.4 111.8 + 0.4 90.7 –16.1 122.3 + 8.2
Mar. 108.3 + 2.5 103.1 – 3.7 109.6 + 5.3 119.4 + 5.6 108.4 – 5.2 124.9 +11.1
Apr. 94.6 + 3.4 93.0 – 1.0 93.5 + 6.0 110.0 + 1.7 94.2 –10.9 117.9 + 7.7
May 92.6 – 4.4 94.9 – 0.1 88.3 – 9.4 117.7 +16.4 130.0 +48.6 111.5 + 3.4
p June 99.2 –15.1 93.3 –10.5 101.8 –17.4 103.1 –11.6 96.0 –14.2 106.7 –10.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2020 91.1 –0.3 87.4 –0.7 91.9 +7.0 82.6 –8.6 88.4 +1.8 95.7 +0.1 85.9 –5.7 97.1 +1.5
2021 99.5 +9.2 99.4 +13.7 99.5 +8.3 99.4 +20.3 99.1 +12.1 99.6 +4.1 99.4 +15.7 99.5 +2.5
2022 104.4 +4.9 98.0 –1.4 95.7 –3.8 98.4 –1.0 104.3 +5.2 112.4 +12.9 105.8 +6.4 108.8 +9.3
2023 108.2 +3.6 93.6 –4.5 83.2 –13.1 96.2 –2.2 121.4 +16.4 126.6 +12.6 117.3 +10.9 114.8 +5.5
2023 May 110.3 –0.1 93.1 –10.8 87.9 –15.3 93.7 –9.8 109.5 +0.9 131.7 +11.8 115.5 +9.5 119.7 –1.3
June 113.4 +3.5 99.4 –1.3 94.3 –7.3 86.2 –11.3 166.8 +51.2 130.9 +8.5 110.2 +1.0 131.3 +13.5
July 121.2 +7.5 103.4 –4.8 92.1 –6.0 105.0 –6.7 138.5 +4.8 143.3 +21.6 116.8 +0.2 147.6 +24.9
Aug. 120.1 +21.9 93.2 +3.7 80.1 –3.3 99.6 +9.5 116.5 +4.7 153.8 +40.7 148.9 +54.8 112.7 –0.2
Sep. 120.4 +17.1 111.6 +15.6 82.9 –10.6 121.2 +24.1 180.1 +69.9 131.4 +18.7 137.5 +34.4 125.9 +13.5
Oct. 106.9 +6.1 87.8 +0.1 81.9 –3.5 89.5 +1.2 103.1 +8.0 130.7 +11.7 121.0 +14.6 107.2 +0.9
Nov. 92.1 –0.8 83.1 +1.8 70.9 –5.0 89.2 +10.5 105.0 –4.5 103.3 –3.4 104.7 +9.5 91.4 –10.8
Dec. 110.2 +5.7 97.8 –0.6 91.6 +3.9 89.1 –15.6 152.2 +39.5 125.6 +12.5 117.5 +0.8 114.3 +14.0
2024 Jan. 85.7 +3.6 71.8 –5.8 60.4 –16.6 77.8 –4.5 91.1 +30.0 103.0 +13.3 96.7 +7.7 90.0 +10.7
Feb. 96.7 +2.0 77.8 –1.5 71.9 –1.4 72.0 –14.5 120.4 +47.2 120.3 +5.0 101.6 –1.3 108.4 +8.0
Mar. 123.8 +2.3 102.4 –5.9 91.2 +3.2 103.4 –17.7 139.1 +15.1 150.5 +10.6 121.8 –9.1 149.8 +16.9
Apr. 109.9 +4.0 85.6 –4.0 82.3 –0.6 82.7 –7.4 108.1 –3.7 140.1 +10.9 117.4 +7.6 120.2 +2.0
May 112.9 +2.4 97.8 +5.0 85.0 –3.3 108.5 +15.8 104.3 –4.7 131.7 ±0.0 119.4 +3.4 124.7 +4.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2020 121.4 +5.6 115.9 +4.4 121.3 +8.1 81.9 –23.2 106.9 –1.8 117.1 +9.3 125.4 +5.6 168.6 +21.8
2021 124.7 +2.7 116.7 +0.7 121.7 +0.3 78.1 –4.6 95.4 –10.8 110.4 –5.7 135.2 +7.8 190.1 +12.8
2022 134.4 +7.8 115.8 –0.8 128.2 +5.3 102.9 +31.8 107.8 +13.0 122.8 +11.2 144.7 +7.0 188.9 –0.6
3 2023 137.7 +2.5 112.3 –3.0 136.0 +6.1 106.8 +3.8 107.9 +0.1 118.3 –3.7 149.5 +3.3 186.6 –1.2
2023 Apr. 137.6 +3.8 111.9 –4.0 137.3 +8.1 108.2 +6.4 95.0 +0.4 126.0 –3.4 144.0 +2.6 180.6 –2.1
May 140.9 +4.5 114.6 –1.8 139.4 +9.2 113.4 +3.1 91.8 +0.9 127.9 –1.2 147.9 +3.9 183.6 +1.0
June 138.0 +5.3 112.3 –0.5 136.7 +7.9 117.7 +11.5 95.4 +1.1 120.4 +0.2 148.5 +6.1 180.1 +3.2
July 139.6 +3.1 114.0 –1.6 139.9 +7.0 109.1 +3.3 99.8 –0.4 118.2 –3.4 152.9 +4.0 183.0 –1.2
Aug. 132.6 +2.2 107.9 –2.3 132.9 +5.2 102.4 +4.3 97.3 –1.7 111.2 –2.1 145.7 +4.5 168.6 –2.5
Sep. 133.0 ±0.0 107.4 –3.8 132.4 +6.3 105.0 –10.3 104.0 –4.2 112.4 –5.2 149.9 +3.8 169.2 –10.6
Oct. 141.7 +2.8 114.7 +0.1 137.2 +3.9 121.9 +5.1 111.5 –0.4 121.4 –3.3 156.5 +7.5 196.0 +1.3
Nov. 147.8 +1.0 120.1 –1.6 137.8 +4.2 117.8 +1.7 136.7 +1.3 122.0 –6.4 156.5 +2.2 231.9 –0.7
Dec. 154.5 +2.0 125.2 –0.5 155.2 +5.5 117.8 –5.2 142.7 –3.4 117.5 –6.6 166.8 +6.0 216.0 +1.3
2024 Jan. 126.8 +1.7 102.8 –1.2 127.8 +4.2 86.0 +1.4 106.8 –5.7 98.1 –7.2 150.5 +7.8 175.6 –0.5
Feb. 123.1 +0.1 99.3 –2.3 124.8 +1.3 83.5 ±0.0 97.5 –3.7 103.8 –4.1 145.9 +7.9 158.6 –5.3
Mar. 143.3 +2.9 114.9 +1.1 144.2 +4.9 104.7 +4.2 101.1 –5.2 126.9 –1.7 157.9 +5.3 186.9 +0.2
Apr. 140.1 +1.8 112.2 +0.3 140.6 +2.4 109.1 +0.8 94.1 –0.9 122.9 –2.5 152.4 +5.8 179.4 –0.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2023 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 r Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2019 45,291 +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 72,267 827 7 5.0 774
2020 44,965 –0.7 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2021 45,052 +0.2 33,897 +0.9 9,344 23,602 702 4,101 1,852 1,744 2,613 999 5.7 706
2022 45,675 +1.4 34,507 +1.8 9,400 24,135 721 4,125 426 337 2,418 808 5.3 845
2023 46,011 +0.7 34,790 +0.8 9,425 24,430 687 4,198 241 147 2,609 875 5.7 761
2021 Q2 44,888 +0.2 33,718 +0.9 9,322 23,446 697 4,066 2,164 2,143 2,691 1,024 5.9 658
Q3 45,215 +0.8 33,929 +1.5 9,347 23,606 719 4,161 935 915 2,545 920 5.5 774
Q4 45,518 +1.0 34,374 +1.6 9,415 23,982 727 4,125 835 762 2,341 802 5.1 804
2022 Q1 45,284 +1.6 34,242 +2.0 9,348 23,943 715 4,061 1,033 792 2,417 874 5.3 818
Q2 45,605 +1.6 34,401 +2.0 9,372 24,056 718 4,112 337 324 2,311 777 5.0 864
Q3 45,776 +1.2 34,522 +1.7 9,405 24,133 724 4,159 103 92 2,501 804 5.5 880
Q4 46,035 +1.1 34,864 +1.4 9,475 24,409 730 4,166 229 139 2,443 778 5.3 817
2023 Q1 45,712 +0.9 34,614 +1.1 9,395 24,288 696 4,152 430 153 2,610 900 5.7 773
Q2 45,981 +0.8 34,702 +0.9 9,410 24,352 687 4,209 152 146 2,561 839 5.6 770
Q3 46,080 +0.7 34,762 +0.7 9,421 24,398 686 4,242 128 122 2,647 885 5.7 768
Q4 46,269 +0.5 35,082 +0.6 9,471 24,682 680 4,189 253 166 2,617 874 5.7 732
2024 Q1 45,899 +0.4 834,801 8+0.5 89,367 824,568 8 631 84,156 ... 8 201 2,796 1,000 6.1 704
Q2 946,148 9 +0.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,733 939 10 5.9 701
2021 Mar. 44,644 –1.1 33,636 –0.0 9,309 23,397 685 4,032 3,016 2,818 2,827 1,177 6.2 609
Apr. 44,758 –0.2 33,689 +0.8 9,324 23,427 687 4,039 2,583 2,560 2,771 1,091 6.0 629
May 44,871 +0.3 33,747 +1.3 9,326 23,461 703 4,067 2,342 2,320 2,687 1,020 5.9 654
June 45,034 +0.7 33,802 +1.4 9,324 23,504 716 4,151 1,568 1,548 2,614 961 5.7 693
July 45,094 +0.8 33,731 +1.5 9,304 23,458 715 4,194 1,088 1,068 2,590 956 5.6 744
Aug. 45,158 +0.8 33,994 +1.5 9,358 23,658 722 4,153 857 838 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. 45,394 +0.8 34,323 +1.6 9,432 23,903 726 4,123 859 839 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. 45,511 +0.8 34,369 +1.5 9,425 23,965 724 4,123 780 762 2,377 814 5.2 809
Nov. 45,567 +1.1 34,449 +1.6 9,423 24,039 739 4,133 767 750 2,317 789 5.1 808
Dec. 45,475 +1.2 34,284 +1.7 9,364 23,980 708 4,112 957 772 2,330 803 5.1 794
2022 Jan. 45,218 +1.5 34,176 +2.0 9,332 23,900 711 4,048 1,123 847 2,462 903 5.4 792
Feb. 45,263 +1.6 34,243 +2.2 9,346 23,939 719 4,049 1,087 803 2,428 884 5.3 822
Mar. 45,370 +1.6 34,334 +2.1 9,369 23,999 719 4,061 888 727 2,362 835 5.1 839
Apr. 45,489 +1.6 34,368 +2.0 9,366 24,037 713 4,091 453 439 2,309 800 5.0 852
May 45,621 +1.7 34,445 +2.1 9,376 24,089 719 4,131 318 305 2,260 771 4.9 865
June 45,705 +1.5 34,445 +1.9 9,376 24,084 724 4,164 241 228 2,363 761 5.2 877
July 45,663 +1.3 34,322 +1.8 9,361 23,988 718 4,176 115 102 2,470 801 5.4 881
Aug. 45,716 +1.2 34,571 +1.7 9,417 24,169 725 4,151 87 76 2,547 827 5.6 887
Sep. 45,948 +1.2 34,899 +1.7 9,499 24,401 733 4,136 108 97 2,486 782 5.4 873
Oct. 46,070 +1.2 34,893 +1.5 9,489 24,414 734 4,161 134 124 2,442 764 5.3 846
Nov. 46,078 +1.1 34,897 +1.3 9,478 24,435 738 4,179 156 147 2,434 770 5.3 823
Dec. 45,957 +1.1 34,705 +1.2 9,414 24,357 704 4,182 397 146 2,454 799 5.4 781
2023 Jan. 45,651 +1.0 34,550 +1.1 9,381 24,240 697 4,138 451 145 2,616 911 5.7 764
Feb. 45,697 +1.0 34,601 +1.0 9,392 24,279 692 4,148 441 157 2,620 910 5.7 778
Mar. 45,789 +0.9 34,679 +1.0 9,412 24,332 692 4,157 398 159 2,594 878 5.7 777
Apr. 45,886 +0.9 34,685 +0.9 9,410 24,342 684 4,188 146 139 2,586 855 5.7 773
May 45,994 +0.8 34,728 +0.8 9,413 24,371 687 4,228 149 142 2,544 829 5.5 767
June 46,062 +0.8 34,709 +0.8 9,404 24,357 690 4,266 162 156 2,555 833 5.5 769
July 46,030 +0.8 34,584 +0.8 9,382 24,261 687 4,279 113 107 2,617 878 5.7 772
Aug. 46,013 +0.6 34,804 +0.7 9,429 24,433 685 4,221 113 107 2,696 910 5.8 771
Sep. 46,196 +0.5 35,089 +0.5 9,500 24,641 684 4,186 158 152 2,627 869 5.7 761
Oct. 46,296 +0.5 35,117 +0.6 9,490 24,686 686 4,181 183 177 2,607 861 5.7 749
Nov. 46,319 +0.5 35,126 +0.7 9,473 24,719 688 4,195 181 174 2,606 865 5.6 733
Dec. 46,193 +0.5 34,915 +0.6 9,401 24,637 648 4,197 395 148 2,637 896 5.7 713
2024 Jan. 45,855 +0.4 34,754 +0.6 9,359 24,528 635 4,138 540 189 2,805 1,006 6.1 699
Feb. 45,883 +0.4 834,781 8+0.5 89,362 824,556 8 627 84,148 ... 8 201 2,814 1,015 6.1 706
Mar. 45,958 +0.4 834,821 8+0.4 89,362 824,600 8 617 84,167 ... 8 213 2,769 977 6.0 707
Apr. 46,052 +0.4 834,877 8+0.6 89,364 824,644 8 620 84,187 ... 8 226 2,750 949 6.0 701
May 46,163 +0.4 834,907 8+0.5 89,357 824,677 8 617 84,220 ... 8 211 2,723 930 10 5.8 702
June 946,228 9 +0.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,727 937 5.8 701
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,809 989 6.0 703
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed
persons in the legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).8 Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2022 and 2023,
the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1%
for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.5% for persons
solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 61,3% for
cyclically induced short-time work.  9 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statis-
tical Office.  10 From May 2024, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which: Indices of
foreign trade prices
of which:
Total Food  1,2Non-
energy
industrial
goods  1 Energy  1 Services  1Actual
rents
for
housing  1Memo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  3Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  3 rExports Imports
Period 2015 = 100 2020 = 100 2021 = 100 2020 = 100 2021=100
Index level
2020 4 105.8 4 110.9 4 104.1 4 99.0 4 106.9 107.6 4 100.0 4 92.0 91.2 100.0 ... ...
2021 4 109.2 4 114.1 4 106.7 4 109.0 4 109.0 109.0 4 103.1 4 100.0 100.0 106.9 100.0 100.0
2022 118.7 126.2 112.7 146.8 112.2 110.8 110.2 116.6 129.8 141.0 113.5 121.8
2023 125.9 140.9 119.1 154.2 117.6 113.1 116.7 126.7 130.1 5 140.8 114.2 113.9
2022 Sep. 122.1 130.9 114.5 158.8 113.9 111.2 112.7 142.3 148.5 117.1 127.3
Oct. 123.5 132.2 115.8 164.5 114.3 111.4 113.5 139.3 151.2 115.4 125.3
Nov. 123.5 133.6 116.3 163.5 113.7 111.6 113.7 122.1 135.0 151.8 115.2 121.5
Dec. 122.0 134.6 116.6 143.9 114.8 111.7 113.2 134.2 152.0 115.1 120.1
2023 Jan. 122.6 136.7 116.4 154.8 113.8 112.1 114.3 133.5 5 149.6 115.1 118.7
Feb. 123.8 139.5 117.0 154.9 115.0 112.2 115.2 125.5 132.5 148.6 115.1 117.2
Mar. 125.1 141.3 118.3 155.0 116.1 112.5 116.1 131.1 144.6 115.0 116.1
Apr. 125.8 141.1 119.0 156.1 117.1 112.6 116.6 131.8 141.9 114.6 114.6
May 125.6 141.1 119.3 154.0 116.9 112.8 116.5 126.6 130.4 139.1 114.2 113.2
June 126.1 141.2 119.5 153.7 117.8 113.0 116.8 129.8 141.4 114.0 112.3
July 126.7 141.2 118.8 153.6 119.6 113.2 117.1 128.9 142.5 113.7 111.6
Aug. 127.2 141.0 119.2 156.5 119.8 113.5 117.5 127.1 129.2 142.5 113.7 112.0
Sep. 127.4 141.5 120.1 157.6 119.3 113.6 117.8 129.3 137.0 114.0 113.3
Oct. 127.2 141.6 120.5 154.7 119.1 113.7 117.8 129.1 134.6 114.1 113.4
Nov. 126.3 142.4 120.5 151.6 117.6 113.9 117.3 127.7 128.3 134.9 113.8 112.8
Dec. 126.6 142.4 120.5 148.4 118.7 114.0 117.4 127.3 136.8 113.5 111.7
2024 Jan. 126.4 143.7 119.7 150.2 118.1 114.4 117.6 127.6 137.8 113.6 111.7
Feb. 127.2 143.6 120.3 150.9 119.3 114.6 118.1 129.5 127.1 139.3 113.8 111.5
Mar. 128.0 143.5 120.9 150.5 120.7 114.9 118.6 127.3 140.6 113.9 111.9
Apr. 128.8 144.3 121.1 154.0 121.3 115.1 119.2 127.5 141.6 114.4 112.7
May 129.1 144.0 120.9 152.1 122.4 115.3 119.3 130.4 127.5 143.5 114.4 112.7
June 129.3 144.4 120.8 150.3 123.3 115.5 119.4 127.7 145.9 114.7 113.1
July 130.0 e 144.6 e 120.1 e 150.7 e 124.9 115.7 119.8 ... ... ... ...
Annual percentage change
2020 4 +0.4 4+ 2.3 4– 0.1 4– 4.5 4+ 1.2 + 1.4 4 +0.5 4+ 1.4 – 1.0 – 3.1 ... ...
2021 4 +3.2 4+ 2.9 4+ 2.5 4+ 10.1 4+ 2.0 + 1.3 4 +3.1 4+ 8.8 + 9.6 + 6.9 ... ...
2022 +8.7 + 10.6 + 5.7 + 34.7 + 2.9 + 1.7 +6.9 +16.6 +29.8 +31.9 +13.5 +21.8
2023 +6.0 + 11.7 + 5.6 + 5.1 + 4.8 + 2.1 +5.9 + 8.7 + 0.2 5– 0.1 + 0.6 – 6.5
2022 Sep. +10.9 + 14.4 + 6.4 + 44.2 + 3.6 + 1.7 +8.6 +38.6 +39.0 +15.0 +24.0
Oct. +11.6 + 15.5 + 7.2 + 43.5 + 3.9 + 1.7 +8.8 +31.7 +38.3 +12.0 +18.2
Nov. +11.3 + 16.3 + 7.3 + 40.1 + 3.8 + 1.9 +8.8 +17.3 +26.4 +33.9 +10.9 +12.3
Dec. +9.6 + 16.3 + 7.4 + 25.1 + 4.1 + 1.9 +8.1 +21.4 +32.5 + 9.8 + 9.6
2023 Jan. +9.2 + 16.6 + 7.4 + 25.1 + 3.6 + 2.0 +8.7 +16.4 5+27.8 + 8.1 + 5.3
Feb. +9.3 + 18.0 + 7.2 + 21.6 + 4.4 + 2.0 +8.7 +15.5 +13.9 +22.9 + 6.6 + 3.1
Mar. +7.8 + 18.6 + 7.2 + 6.1 + 5.0 + 2.1 +7.4 + 7.5 + 5.8 + 3.3 – 3.1
Apr. +7.6 + 15.5 + 6.9 + 9.4 + 4.8 + 2.0 +7.2 + 5.2 – 1.3 + 1.7 – 5.6
May +6.3 + 13.6 + 6.2 + 5.0 + 4.4 + 2.0 +6.1 + 8.9 + 2.5 – 2.8 + 0.9 – 7.7
June +6.8 + 12.6 + 6.2 + 4.0 + 6.1 + 2.0 +6.4 + 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 8.6
July +6.5 + 10.7 + 5.5 + 3.9 + 6.7 + 2.1 +6.2 – 2.9 + 0.3 – 2.0 –10.8
Aug. +6.4 + 9.2 + 5.5 + 5.3 + 6.8 + 2.2 +6.1 + 6.5 – 7.6 – 1.5 – 3.6 –12.9
Sep. +4.3 + 8.1 + 4.9 – 0.8 + 4.7 + 2.2 +4.5 – 9.1 – 7.7 – 2.6 –11.0
Oct. +3.0 + 7.1 + 4.1 – 6.0 + 4.2 + 2.1 +3.8 – 7.3 –11.0 – 1.1 – 9.5
Nov. +2.3 + 6.6 + 3.6 – 7.3 + 3.4 + 2.1 +3.2 + 4.6 – 5.0 –11.1 – 1.2 – 7.2
Dec. +3.8 + 5.8 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 3.4 + 2.1 +3.7 – 5.1 –10.0 – 1.4 – 7.0
2024 Jan. +3.1 + 5.1 + 2.8 – 3.0 + 3.8 + 2.1 +2.9 – 4.4 – 7.9 – 1.3 – 5.9
Feb. +2.7 + 2.9 + 2.8 – 2.6 + 3.7 + 2.1 +2.5 + 3.2 – 4.1 – 6.3 – 1.1 – 4.9
Mar. +2.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 – 2.9 + 4.0 + 2.1 +2.2 – 2.9 – 2.8 – 1.0 – 3.6
Apr. +2.4 + 2.3 + 1.8 – 1.3 + 3.6 + 2.2 +2.2 – 3.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 1.7
May +2.8 + 2.1 + 1.3 – 1.2 + 4.7 + 2.2 +2.4 + 3.0 – 2.2 + 3.2 + 0.2 – 0.4
June +2.5 + 2.3 + 1.1 – 2.2 + 4.7 + 2.2 +2.2 – 1.6 + 3.2 + 0.6 + 0.7
July +2.6 e+ 2.4 e+ 1.1 e– 1.9 e+ 4.4 + 2.2 +2.3 ... ... ... ...
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office.  1 The last data point is at times based on the Bun-
desbank’s own estimates.  2 Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco.  3 Excluding va-lue added tax.  4 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value added tax between July
and December 2020.  5 From January 2023 onwards, provisional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.2
2017 1,395.4 4.3 932.5 4.0 441.8 3.6 1,374.3 3.9 1,905.2 3.5 202.8 8.0 10.6
2018 1,462.7 4.8 976.1 4.7 455.2 3.0 1,431.3 4.1 1,976.6 3.7 223.2 10.1 11.3
2019 1,524.7 4.2 1,021.8 4.7 477.5 4.9 1,499.3 4.8 2,024.4 2.4 219.8 – 1.5 10.9
2020 1,515.3 – 0.6 1,021.1 – 0.1 523.9 9.7 1,545.0 3.0 2,046.9 1.1 338.2 53.9 16.5
2021 1,571.3 3.7 1,062.9 4.1 534.1 1.9 1,597.0 3.4 2,098.5 2.5 313.0 – 7.5 14.9
2022 1,661.8 5.8 1,118.8 5.3 541.8 1.4 1,660.6 4.0 2,227.5 6.1 248.2 –20.7 11.1
2023 1,779.6 7.1 1,219.9 9.0 577.7 6.6 1,797.6 8.2 2,357.4 5.8 266.9 7.5 11.3
2022 Q4 463.0 5.5 312.0 5.4 136.6 5.5 448.6 5.5 575.1 7.4 60.2 – 1.1 10.5
2023 Q1 416.8 7.1 285.9 9.2 144.2 7.0 430.1 8.5 580.2 7.0 77.6 0.1 13.4
Q2 429.7 7.6 287.8 9.7 141.3 7.0 429.1 8.8 582.8 7.1 64.0 14.4 11.0
Q3 441.0 7.5 307.9 8.9 146.3 5.7 454.2 7.8 594.0 5.0 60.4 10.6 10.2
Q4 492.2 6.3 338.3 8.4 145.9 6.9 484.3 8.0 600.5 4.4 64.9 7.9 10.8
2024 Q1 443.9 6.5 307.4 7.5 152.1 5.5 459.5 6.8 607.7 4.7 90.4 16.5 14.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2024.  * Households includ-
ing non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After deducting
the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees' contributions to the
social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds,
central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net),
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits,
consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plus monetarysocial benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed income, property
income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit institutions serving
households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other
current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  6 In-
cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving as a percentage of
disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change
2016 90.2 2.2 90.2 2.2 90.5 2.2 90.7 2.3 102.5 2.5
2017 92.3 2.3 92.2 2.3 92.6 2.3 92.9 2.4 105.1 2.6
2018 95.0 3.0 95.0 3.0 95.2 2.8 95.5 2.8 108.4 3.2
2019 97.8 3.0 97.8 3.0 98.0 2.9 98.0 2.6 111.7 3.0
2020 100.0 2.2 100.0 2.2 100.0 2.1 100.0 2.1 111.6 – 0.1
2021 101.5 1.5 101.5 1.5 101.6 1.6 101.5 1.5 115.3 3.3
2022 104.2 2.6 104.1 2.6 103.8 2.2 103.6 2.0 120.1 4.1
2023 108.3 4.0 108.3 4.0 106.6 2.7 106.3 2.6 127.5 6.2
2023 Q1 101.6 3.8 101.6 3.8 98.9 2.5 105.2 2.6 120.1 5.9
Q2 100.9 3.9 100.8 3.9 99.2 2.5 106.0 2.4 123.2 6.6
Q3 111.8 4.7 111.7 4.7 110.5 3.2 106.8 3.0 126.3 6.6
Q4 119.1 3.7 119.0 3.6 118.0 2.5 107.1 2.5 140.2 5.7
2024 Q1 108.0 6.2 107.9 6.2 101.9 3.1 108.4 3.0 127.4 6.1
Q2 104.0 3.1 103.9 3.1 103.4 4.3 110.5 4.2 . .
2023 Dec. 102.4 3.3 102.4 3.3 101.7 2.4 107.2 2.3 . .
2024 Jan. 103.5 1.1 103.4 1.1 100.6 2.5 107.8 2.5 . .
Feb. 110.0 5.9 110.0 5.9 102.9 2.6 107.9 2.5 . .
Mar. 110.3 11.8 110.3 11.8 102.2 4.1 109.6 4.2 . .
Apr. 103.9 4.8 103.9 4.8 103.1 3.9 109.8 3.9 . .
May 104.2 4.3 104.1 4.4 103.8 4.9 110.8 4.7 . .
June 103.8 0.2 103.8 0.2 103.4 4.0 110.9 4.1 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May
2024.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2020 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.6 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.4 857.0 304.4 196.1
2021 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 384.8 1,320.4 272.1 261.5 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 321.4 236.7
2022 3,431.6 2,057.0 713.5 804.3 410.1 1,374.6 326.2 268.3 244.3 1,133.2 2,298.4 1,195.7 760.2 1,102.8 331.8 273.3
p 2023 3,320.5 2,038.7 699.2 823.2 374.4 1,281.8 325.2 259.9 245.6 1,145.4 2,175.1 1,146.3 771.1 1,028.8 347.3 261.7
2022 H1 3,593.6 2,108.1 719.1 796.3 447.4 1,485.5 322.4 284.8 225.4 1,075.4 2,518.2 1,237.0 789.5 1,281.2 313.7 260.7
H2 3,431.6 2,057.0 713.5 804.3 410.1 1,374.6 326.2 268.3 244.3 1,133.2 2,298.4 1,195.7 760.2 1,102.8 331.8 273.3
2023 H1 3,322.4 2,009.5 699.5 799.0 373.5 1,312.9 343.9 263.7 234.3 1,134.0 2,188.3 1,130.8 752.5 1,057.5 327.4 259.9
pH2 3,320.5 2,038.7 699.2 823.2 374.4 1,281.8 325.2 259.9 245.6 1,145.4 2,175.1 1,146.3 771.1 1,028.8 347.3 261.7
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2021 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.7 40.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 9.8 7.2
2022 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 12.0 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
p 2023 100.0 61.4 21.1 24.8 11.3 38.6 9.8 7.8 7.4 34.5 65.5 34.5 23.2 31.0 10.5 7.9
2022 H1 100.0 58.7 20.0 22.2 12.5 41.3 9.0 7.9 6.3 29.9 70.1 34.4 22.0 35.7 8.7 7.3
H2 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 12.0 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
2023 H1 100.0 60.5 21.1 24.1 11.2 39.5 10.4 7.9 7.1 34.1 65.9 34.0 22.7 31.8 9.9 7.8
pH2 100.0 61.4 21.1 24.8 11.3 38.6 9.8 7.8 7.4 34.5 65.5 34.5 23.2 31.0 10.5 7.9
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2020 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.1 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.3 1,628.8 904.7 537.0 724.0 267.3 149.8
2021 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 363.5 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.2 285.9 184.0
2022 2,730.8 1,538.3 461.5 591.7 388.3 1,192.4 307.7 209.1 186.5 879.7 1,851.1 912.7 534.3 938.4 291.2 215.2
p 2023 2,620.2 1,512.9 446.6 604.5 352.1 1,107.3 305.2 202.2 203.4 888.8 1,731.4 859.8 544.6 871.6 308.2 206.6
2022 H1 2,898.3 1,582.5 462.4 583.8 422.6 1,315.9 303.6 222.5 177.2 830.9 2,067.4 945.2 558.2 1,122.2 272.8 207.6
H2 2,730.8 1,538.3 461.5 591.7 388.3 1,192.4 307.7 209.1 186.5 879.7 1,851.1 912.7 534.3 938.4 291.2 215.2
2023 H1 2,651.0 1,504.1 460.3 588.8 348.8 1,146.8 326.4 210.9 183.6 892.6 1,758.4 854.6 532.3 903.8 282.9 210.1
pH2 2,620.2 1,512.9 446.6 604.5 352.1 1,107.3 305.2 202.2 203.4 888.8 1,731.4 859.8 544.6 871.6 308.2 206.6
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2021 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.8 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 10.9 7.0
2022 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 14.2 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
p 2023 100.0 57.7 17.0 23.1 13.4 42.3 11.7 7.7 7.8 33.9 66.1 32.8 20.8 33.3 11.8 7.9
2022 H1 100.0 54.6 16.0 20.1 14.6 45.4 10.5 7.7 6.1 28.7 71.3 32.6 19.3 38.7 9.4 7.2
H2 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 14.2 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
2023 H1 100.0 56.7 17.4 22.2 13.2 43.3 12.3 8.0 6.9 33.7 66.3 32.2 20.1 34.1 10.7 7.9
pH2 100.0 57.7 17.0 23.1 13.4 42.3 11.7 7.7 7.8 33.9 66.1 32.8 20.8 33.3 11.8 7.9
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2021 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 55.2 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 52.6
2022 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
p 2023 700.3 525.8 252.6 218.7 22.3 174.5 20.0 57.7 42.2 256.6 443.7 286.5 226.5 157.2 39.1 55.2
2022 H1 695.3 525.7 256.7 212.5 24.8 169.6 18.8 62.2 48.2 244.5 450.8 291.8 231.4 159.0 40.9 53.1
H2 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
2023 H1 671.4 505.4 239.2 210.2 24.7 166.0 17.4 52.9 50.7 241.5 429.9 276.2 220.1 153.8 44.6 49.9
pH2 700.3 525.8 252.6 218.7 22.3 174.5 20.0 57.7 42.2 256.6 443.7 286.5 226.5 157.2 39.1 55.2
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2021 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.3 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 7.9
2022 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
p 2023 100.0 75.1 36.1 31.2 3.2 24.9 2.9 8.2 6.0 36.6 63.4 40.9 32.3 22.4 5.6 7.9
2022 H1 100.0 75.6 36.9 30.6 3.6 24.4 2.7 9.0 6.9 35.2 64.8 42.0 33.3 22.9 5.9 7.6
H2 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
2023 H1 100.0 75.3 35.6 31.3 3.7 24.7 2.6 7.9 7.6 36.0 64.0 41.1 32.8 22.9 6.6 7.4
pH2 100.0 75.1 36.1 31.2 3.2 24.9 2.9 8.2 6.0 36.6 63.4 40.9 32.3 22.4 5.6 7.9
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
EBITDA  1
as a percentage of revenuesEBIT  2
as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  3 Distribution  3
Revenues EBITDA  1Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile EBIT  2Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5€ billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  5% % % € billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  5% % %
Total
2016 1,624.3 – 0.4 214.4 7.8 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.7 9.0 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,719.3 5.1 243.4 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.0 11.0 18.0 141.9 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.1
6 2018 1,706.8 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,764.6 2.6 233.6 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.2 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.6 5.8 11.8
2020 1,632.8 – 8.8 213.6 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 17.9 52.1 – 41.0 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 4.9 10.5
2021 1,994.7 20.4 297.7 37.7 14.9 1.9 7.8 13.4 19.9 161.5 212.6 8.1 5.0 2.9 8.2 12.2
2022 2,431.3 20.8 324.8 7.8 13.4 – 1.6 6.4 11.8 18.4 170.0 3.5 7.0 – 1.2 1.6 6.6 12.4
p 2023 2,238.3 – 7.7 323.6 0.4 14.5 1.2 6.1 12.2 17.9 170.0 0.9 7.6 0.7 1.8 6.6 11.5
2019 H1 861.3 2.7 112.3 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.5 11.8 18.6 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 903.7 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.6 11.8 20.0 52.0 – 11.4 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.5
2020 H1 744.5 – 14.4 78.2 – 34.1 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 8.8
H2 888.4 – 3.3 135.4 17.1 15.2 2.8 7.6 13.2 19.8 44.2 8.6 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.6
2021 H1 920.0 20.3 151.5 87.2 16.5 5.9 7.4 12.6 19.5 84.5 . 9.2 8.3 2.3 7.8 12.2
H2 1,075.6 20.4 146.4 8.1 13.6 – 1.6 7.9 13.2 20.8 77.0 73.1 7.2 2.2 2.9 7.7 13.4
2022 H1 1,149.7 23.5 161.0 4.8 14.0 – 2.5 6.1 11.5 18.4 84.9 – 1.6 7.4 – 1.9 1.6 6.4 11.8
H2 1,283.3 18.5 163.9 11.0 12.8 – 0.9 5.9 11.6 18.9 85.2 9.1 6.6 – 0.6 1.7 6.7 12.9
2023 H1 1,112.0 – 3.0 172.0 7.8 15.5 1.6 6.4 10.8 17.5 98.1 16.9 8.8 1.5 1.2 6.5 10.8
pH2 1,127.6 – 12.0 151.7 – 6.8 13.5 0.8 6.2 12.5 19.8 71.9 – 15.0 6.4 – 0.2 1.2 7.0 13.0
Groups with a focus on the production sector 7
2016 1,295.9 – 0.8 161.9 6.3 12.5 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 84.8 4.2 6.5 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,395.9 5.5 187.5 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.5 40.6 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,367.7 1.0 175.7 – 1.5 12.9 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 16.0 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.8 6.9 11.4
2019 1,410.9 2.0 168.1 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.8 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.7 10.1
2020 1,285.2 – 9.4 143.6 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 5.7 10.6 16.5 29.1 – 48.1 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.3 9.8
2021 1,585.8 22.4 208.9 45.9 13.2 2.1 7.9 12.8 17.9 118.6 325.8 7.5 5.4 2.8 7.8 11.1
2022 1,957.4 21.7 222.9 4.7 11.4 – 1.8 6.9 11.3 16.4 116.3 – 4.7 5.9 – 1.6 1.8 6.6 10.7
p 2023 1,784.0 – 8.2 233.7 5.7 13.1 1.7 7.0 11.4 16.1 124.1 7.6 7.0 1.0 2.2 6.6 11.4
2019 H1 689.9 2.4 83.3 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.9 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.8 6.0 9.5
H2 721.0 1.7 84.8 0.3 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.7 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.1
2020 H1 580.6 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.4 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 14.9 0.2 – 101.7 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.1 7.8
H2 704.6 – 3.0 94.6 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.0 12.1 18.6 28.9 19.6 4.1 1.1 0.3 6.0 10.4
2021 H1 731.9 24.0 111.2 126.9 15.2 6.9 8.2 12.6 18.6 66.7 . 9.1 9.3 2.9 7.9 12.1
H2 854.2 21.1 97.7 3.8 11.4 – 1.9 7.8 12.3 17.5 51.9 80.8 6.1 2.0 2.6 7.0 11.5
2022 H1 923.4 23.8 110.9 – 2.5 12.0 – 3.3 7.7 11.5 16.3 59.0 – 14.2 6.4 – 2.8 2.3 6.4 10.4
H2 1,035.8 19.9 112.2 13.1 10.8 – 0.7 5.9 10.8 16.7 57.4 7.7 5.5 – 0.6 1.3 6.5 11.4
2023 H1 894.9 – 2.9 129.0 16.7 14.4 2.4 7.1 11.7 16.3 76.7 30.5 8.6 2.2 2.1 6.7 10.7
pH2 890.0 – 13.0 104.9 – 5.0 11.8 1.0 6.5 12.4 17.4 47.5 – 16.0 5.3 – 0.2 1.8 6.6 12.0
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.3 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.5 12.2
2021 408.9 13.0 88.8 21.6 21.7 1.6 7.6 15.0 24.0 42.8 79.7 10.5 3.9 3.0 9.2 15.6
2022 473.9 17.4 101.9 15.3 21.5 – 0.4 5.2 13.1 22.8 53.8 26.4 11.3 0.8 1.0 6.9 14.4
p 2023 454.4 – 5.6 89.9 – 11.2 19.8 – 1.3 5.6 12.9 22.2 45.8 – 13.7 10.1 – 1.0 1.6 6.8 12.9
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
H2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.5 13.3
2021 H1 188.1 7.7 40.3 26.1 21.5 3.1 6.9 12.6 24.5 17.8 119.9 9.5 4.8 0.9 6.9 13.6
H2 221.4 17.9 48.7 18.2 22.0 0.1 9.4 16.5 24.7 25.1 59.1 11.3 3.0 3.8 9.5 17.7
2022 H1 226.3 22.0 50.1 25.3 22.2 0.6 4.6 11.6 20.9 25.9 46.4 11.5 1.9 – 0.5 6.3 13.5
H2 247.6 13.4 51.8 7.0 20.9 – 1.3 5.2 14.1 24.0 27.8 12.1 11.2 – 0.1 2.2 7.5 15.4
2023 H1 217.1 – 3.6 43.1 – 11.8 19.8 – 1.9 4.7 9.6 19.2 21.4 – 14.4 9.9 – 1.3 – 2.2 4.2 12.0
pH2 237.6 – 7.5 46.8 – 10.7 19.7 – 0.7 5.9 14.4 23.3 24.4 – 13.0 10.3 – 0.7 0.9 7.3 16.1
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Earnings before interest and taxes.  3 Quantile data are
based on the groups' unweighted return on sales.  4 Annual figures do not alwaysmatch the sum of the two half-year figures. See Quality report on consolidated financial
statement statistics, p. 3.  5 Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of con-
solidation of large groups and in the reporting sample. See Quality report on consolid-
ated financial statement statistics, p. 6.  6 From 2018 onwards: significant changes in
IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.  7 Including groups in
agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2023 2024 2024
Item 2021 2022 2023 Q3  Q4  Q1  March April  r May  p
I.Current Account +310,699 –42,740 +229,722 +83,491 +87,918 +105,371 +43,103 +32,618 + 9,585
1.Goods
Receipts 2,502,629 2,958,629 2,899,575 705,860 726,365 717,851 249,648 253,635 248,542
Expenditure  2,227,466 3,049,828 2,650,915 634,025 650,043 616,054 211,527 220,960 216,951
Balance +275,164 –91,199 +248,660 +71,835 +76,321 +101,796 +38,121 +32,675 +31,591
2.Services
Receipts 1,066,641 1,309,512 1,344,088 350,739 349,624 335,307 112,688 113,710 116,516
Expenditure  967,603 1,152,235 1,223,616 302,247 332,343 312,752 104,638 101,699 99,824
Balance +99,038 +157,277 +120,473 +48,493 +17,281 +22,555 + 8,050 +12,011 +16,692
3.Primary income
Receipts 888,282 1,072,541 1,213,011 311,813 319,231 289,292 105,742 105,710 109,244
Expenditure  785,012 1,008,462 1,184,327 305,664 283,143 266,362 94,896 106,522 137,876
Balance +103,271 +64,080 +28,683 + 6,150 +36,087 +22,930 +10,847 – 812 –28,631
4.Secondary income
Receipts 158,408 168,040 178,252 38,985 50,291 42,669 15,066 15,607 16,247
Expenditure  325,182 340,939 346,346 81,973 92,064 84,580 28,981 26,862 26,313
Balance –166,773 –172,898 –168,094 –42,987 –41,772 –41,910 –13,915 –11,255 –10,066
II.Capital account +48,516 +147,850 +37,316 +10,449 +20,891 –11,709 + 1,078 – 454 + 1,367
III.Financial account  1 +369,865 +52,136 +324,887 +94,204 +120,332 +112,005 +57,195 +13,621 +25,997
1.Direct investment +421,009 +289,854 + 6,077 –10,320 – 7,849 +68,288 + 9,244 +33,257 +20,171
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +370,949 +13,111 –320,099 + 4,440 –308,053 +118,290 +40,301 +26,159 +17,903
By non-resident units of
the euro area  –50,060 –276,742 –326,176 +14,760 –300,205 +50,002 +31,056 – 7,098 – 2,268
2.Portfolio investment +241,851 –249,580 –92,887 –12,459 –40,253 –15,581 +17,800 –22,165 – 825
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +790,793 –189,611 +432,297 +98,534 +44,038 +174,417 +44,007 +22,986 +63,789
Equity and
investment fund shares +362,282 –175,934 +49,415 – 4,257 – 8,043 +37,905 + 333 +13,712 + 3,825
Short-term
debt securities  +119,102 –107,782 +96,770 +32,174 +41,582 +12,080 + 1,654 – 3,257 +20,859
Long-term
debt securities  +309,409 +94,104 +286,111 +70,617 +10,499 +124,432 +42,021 +12,531 +39,106
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  +548,942 +59,969 +525,184 +110,993 +84,291 +189,999 +26,207 +45,151 +64,614
Equity and
investment fund shares +646,900 +38,541 +158,010 +26,598 +84,410 +22,644 –18,179 +36,280 +38,718
Short-term
debt securities  +44,452 –66,303 –11,743 + 3,829 –32,242 –29,298 + 9,191 –44,766 –15,465
Long-term
debt securities  –142,410 +87,731 +378,917 +80,566 +32,122 +196,653 +35,195 +53,638 +41,361
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options +56,314 +66,675 +17,408 – 1,097 +22,979 +11,449 –11,891 + 6,592 – 2,822
4.Other investment –479,679 –72,688 +406,739 +120,255 +139,063 +46,695 +42,574 – 4,867 + 7,830
Eurosystem –443,466 +172,310 +318,620 +55,540 +17,852 +76,666 +27,146 –11,539 –22,097
General government –72,491 –48,301 – 3,592 – 2,590 –10,474 + 10 + 1,207 – 1,453 + 1,859
MFIs  2 –117,135 –301,253 +160,317 +45,755 +149,223 +37,370 +19,860 + 1,022 +51,545
Enterprises and households +153,413 +104,556 –68,606 +21,550 –17,538 –67,352 – 5,639 + 8,244 –23,477
5.Reserve assets +130,369 +17,876 –12,450 – 2,175 + 6,390 + 1,155 – 532 + 804 + 1,642
IV.Net errors and omissions +10,650 –52,974 +57,848 + 264 +11,523 +18,343 +13,014 –18,543 +15,045
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Increase: + / decrease: -.2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Zeit Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 – 6,605 – 17,642 + 54,524 – 34,764 – 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 – 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 – 6,209 – 25,255 + 51,306 – 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 – 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 – 9,357 – 29,930 + 69,087 – 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 – 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 – 11,388 – 30,774 + 65,658 – 38,703 – 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 – 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 – 12,523 – 39,321 + 63,284 – 43,413 – 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 211,477 + 219,629 – 14,296 – 25,303 + 58,646 – 41,495 + 3,255 + 230,931 – 2,564 + 16,200
2015 + 259,781 + 248,394 – 15,405 – 18,516 + 69,324 – 39,420 + 265 + 237,733 – 2,213 – 22,313
2016 + 270,200 + 252,409 – 19,921 – 20,987 + 77,258 – 38,480 + 2,451 + 258,906 + 1,686 – 13,744
2017 + 255,964 + 255,077 – 13,613 – 23,994 + 77,046 – 52,165 – 2,653 + 268,306 – 1,269 + 14,996
2018 + 267,609 + 221,983 – 22,985 – 15,806 + 112,389 – 50,958 + 914 + 242,889 + 392 – 25,634
2019 + 283,849 + 219,548 – 32,263 – 13,553 + 128,602 – 50,747 – 3,705 + 200,312 – 544 – 79,832
2020 + 222,507 + 182,725 – 16,381 + 6,634 + 86,037 – 52,889 – 10,345 + 168,767 – 51 – 43,395
2021 + 263,454 + 196,491 + 2,541 + 1,615 + 123,181 – 57,832 – 2,593 + 208,978 + 31,892 – 51,883
2022 + 164,630 + 125,916 + 9,742 – 37,289 + 142,094 – 66,091 – 21,644 + 198,190 + 4,426 + 55,204
2023 + 257,705 + 241,414 – 13,973 – 62,994 + 143,901 – 64,616 – 27,252 + 239,737 + 884 + 9,284
2021 Q3 + 61,257 + 50,021 – 75 – 6,609 + 33,320 – 15,474 + 2,074 + 16,358 + 31,199 – 46,973
Q4 + 62,145 + 38,842 + 1,567 – 2,897 + 42,462 – 16,263 – 378 + 52,941 + 250 – 8,825
2022 Q1 + 58,486 + 37,406 + 5,570 + 406 + 37,066 – 16,392 – 3,462 + 72,054 + 2,200 + 17,029
Q2 + 27,439 + 29,673 + 7,848 – 6,775 + 17,726 – 13,185 – 4,694 + 60,417 + 597 + 37,672
Q3 + 22,413 + 23,635 – 610 – 22,705 + 38,696 – 17,213 – 6,692 – 19,845 + 784 – 35,567
Q4 + 56,291 + 35,201 – 3,067 – 8,215 + 48,606 – 19,300 – 6,797 + 85,565 + 845 + 36,070
2023 Q1 + 68,626 + 60,219 – 2,339 – 10,046 + 38,191 – 19,737 – 13,018 + 82,418 + 224 + 26,809
Q2 + 49,603 + 58,897 – 2,642 – 17,562 + 18,342 – 10,075 – 4,058 + 30,548 + 1,096 – 14,996
Q3 + 68,343 + 65,909 – 1,436 – 23,372 + 41,198 – 15,393 – 3,974 + 28,266 – 790 – 36,102
Q4 + 71,133 + 56,390 – 7,557 – 12,013 + 46,169 – 19,412 – 6,202 + 98,505 + 355 + 33,574
2024 Q1 + 83,599 + 77,824 – 3,323 – 12,544 + 37,353 – 19,034 – 8,155 + 48,208 + 378 – 27,236
Q2 + 66,732 + 75,814 – 5,115 – 20,197 + 20,101 – 8,985 – 1,720 + 41,244 + 746 – 23,769
2022 Jan. + 15,642 + 7,408 + 1,263 + 752 + 13,109 – 5,627 – 1,107 + 27,312 + 309 + 12,777
Feb. + 22,460 + 16,318 + 2,037 + 1,099 + 10,568 – 5,525 – 1,629 + 46,824 + 1,161 + 25,992
Mar. + 20,385 + 13,680 + 2,270 – 1,444 + 13,390 – 5,241 – 726 – 2,083 + 730 – 21,741
Apr. + 11,194 + 6,514 + 2,803 – 1,383 + 11,442 – 5,378 – 1,551 + 19,026 + 83 + 9,383
May + 4,457 + 11,167 + 4,080 – 2,254 – 3,089 – 1,368 – 2,634 + 1,842 + 161 + 19
June + 11,788 + 11,993 + 965 – 3,138 + 9,373 – 6,439 – 509 + 39,549 + 353 + 28,270
July + 8,077 + 9,085 + 370 – 6,153 + 11,982 – 6,837 – 3,180 – 21,413 – 484 – 26,310
Aug. + 1,341 + 3,251 – 694 – 9,755 + 13,728 – 5,883 – 1,234 + 23,390 + 81 + 23,283
Sep. + 12,995 + 11,299 – 286 – 6,797 + 12,986 – 4,493 – 2,278 – 21,822 + 1,187 – 32,540
Oct. + 8,848 + 7,014 – 407 – 5,801 + 13,094 – 5,460 – 2,335 + 41,713 + 672 + 35,200
Nov. + 20,907 + 15,339 – 667 – 2,284 + 13,933 – 6,081 – 2,429 – 4,927 + 425 – 23,406
Dec. + 26,536 + 12,847 – 1,993 – 131 + 21,578 – 7,759 – 2,032 + 48,780 – 252 + 24,276
2023 Jan. + 18,821 + 13,395 + 206 – 2,113 + 12,999 – 5,458 – 6,283 – 3,003 – 341 – 15,541
Feb. + 22,557 + 20,302 – 525 – 3,355 + 11,025 – 5,415 – 984 + 29,913 + 143 + 8,340
Mar. + 27,248 + 26,522 – 2,020 – 4,578 + 14,168 – 8,864 – 5,751 + 55,507 + 423 + 34,010
Apr. + 20,231 + 17,355 – 150 – 4,055 + 12,006 – 5,076 – 476 – 31,839 + 88 – 51,594
May + 6,463 + 17,384 – 801 – 6,619 – 3,922 – 380 – 2,355 + 5,358 + 45 + 1,250
June + 22,909 + 24,158 – 1,691 – 6,888 + 10,258 – 4,619 – 1,228 + 57,030 + 962 + 35,348
July + 19,428 + 21,123 – 1,987 – 7,757 + 11,961 – 5,899 – 4,836 + 2,756 – 118 – 11,837
Aug. + 21,748 + 21,168 + 1,278 – 9,908 + 15,479 – 4,991 – 598 + 20,292 – 107 – 858
Sep. + 27,166 + 23,618 – 726 – 5,708 + 13,759 – 4,503 + 1,460 + 5,219 – 566 – 23,407
Oct. + 9,905 + 13,404 – 826 – 9,458 + 12,509 – 6,550 – 4,081 + 24,465 + 858 + 18,641
Nov. + 29,200 + 25,082 – 3,607 – 2,826 + 13,543 – 6,600 – 4,497 + 36,655 + 65 + 11,952
Dec. + 32,029 + 17,904 – 3,124 + 271 + 20,117 – 6,262 + 2,375 + 37,385 – 569 + 2,980
2024 Jan. + 27,112 + 23,461 – 1,412 – 4,346 + 12,404 – 4,407 – 7,057 + 8,040 – 249 – 12,015
Feb. + 28,772 + 27,105 – 1,009 – 3,764 + 10,266 – 4,834 – 1,597 + 7,039 + 1,193 – 20,136
Mar. + 27,715 + 27,258 – 902 – 4,434 + 14,683 – 9,793 + 499 + 33,129 – 566 + 4,915
Apr. + 25,142 + 25,506 – 1,891 – 5,553 + 8,307 – 3,118 – 2,261 + 6,640 – 317 – 16,240
r May + 18,366 + 26,349 – 1,395 – 8,252 + 1,717 – 1,448 – 1,539 + 23,809 + 156 + 6,982
p June + 23,224 + 23,959 – 1,829 – 6,393 + 10,076 – 4,419 + 2,081 + 10,795 + 908 – 14,511
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: + / net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2024
Group of countries/country 
2021 2022 
2023 Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June
All countries  1 Exports 1,371,397 1,594,034 1,590,063 130,804 133,999 136,903 140,561 129,577 129,684
Imports 1,195,499 1,505,434 1,365,823 108,980 109,422 113,583 116,574 106,679 107,519
Balance +175,898 +88,600 +224,241 +21,823 +24,576 +23,320 +23,987 +22,898 +22,166
   I. European countries Exports 941,795 1,091,554 1,087,505 92,761 92,345 94,183 96,295 89,321 88,421
Imports 795,136 973,063 881,733 71,850 72,277 73,275 76,262 68,178 70,190
Balance +146,658 +118,492 +205,772 +20,911 +20,068 +20,907 +20,032 +21,143 +18,230
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 743,373 878,642 874,623 75,064 74,138 75,888 76,794 71,868 71,352
Imports 629,513 737,668 719,544 58,531 58,509 60,220 62,751 56,031 57,461
Balance +113,861 +140,974 +155,080 +16,533 +15,628 +15,668 +14,042 +15,837 +13,892
          Euro area (20)       Exports 518,043 617,068 614,704 52,468 51,897 52,812 53,895 49,929 49,664
          countries Imports 431,697 506,865 480,091 38,704 38,601 39,937 41,576 37,563 38,011
Balance +86,345 +110,203 +134,612 +13,765 +13,296 +12,874 +12,319 +12,365 +11,654
          of which:
               Austria Exports 72,385 90,270 81,974 6,803 6,735 6,962 7,085 6,400 6,394
  Imports 47,492 58,137 54,601 4,201 4,382 4,452 4,792 4,238 4,377
Balance +24,893 +32,134 +27,373 + 2,603 + 2,354 + 2,510 + 2,292 + 2,161 + 2,017
               Belgium and Exports 58,080 70,933 69,199 5,698 5,747 5,873 6,029 5,533 5,813
               Luxembourg Imports 55,726 67,071 56,905 4,240 4,208 4,584 4,667 4,172 4,382
Balance + 2,354 + 3,861 +12,294 + 1,458 + 1,539 + 1,289 + 1,362 + 1,362 + 1,432
               France Exports 102,741 118,168 120,299 10,703 10,732 10,451 11,195 9,613 9,710
  Imports 61,921 69,969 69,757 5,879 5,957 5,821 6,114 5,320 5,805
Balance +40,820 +48,198 +50,542 + 4,824 + 4,775 + 4,630 + 5,082 + 4,293 + 3,905
               Italy Exports 75,526 89,191 87,152 7,440 7,218 7,493 7,024 7,107 6,994
  Imports 65,389 73,177 72,191 5,751 5,877 5,950 6,011 5,811 5,831
Balance +10,137 +16,014 +14,961 + 1,689 + 1,342 + 1,543 + 1,013 + 1,296 + 1,162
               Netherlands Exports 93,101 112,261 115,307 9,659 9,332 10,007 10,058 9,269 9,253
  Imports 96,562 114,998 104,850 8,654 8,014 8,553 8,542 7,952 7,892
Balance – 3,461 – 2,737 +10,457 + 1,005 + 1,318 + 1,454 + 1,516 + 1,317 + 1,361
               Spain  Exports 43,932 49,935 54,576 4,888 4,766 4,677 4,813 4,768 4,548
  Imports 34,180 37,756 39,235 3,189 3,301 3,396 3,729 3,342 3,458
Balance + 9,752 +12,178 +15,341 + 1,699 + 1,464 + 1,282 + 1,085 + 1,426 + 1,089
          Other EU Member  Exports 225,331 261,574 259,919 22,595 22,241 23,076 22,899 21,940 21,688
          States  Imports 197,815 230,803 239,452 19,827 19,908 20,282 21,176 18,468 19,450
Balance +27,515 +30,772 +20,467 + 2,768 + 2,332 + 2,794 + 1,723 + 3,472 + 2,238
      2. Other European Exports 198,421 212,912 212,882 17,698 18,207 18,295 19,501 17,452 17,068
          countries Imports 165,623 235,395 162,189 13,320 13,767 13,056 13,511 12,146 12,730
Balance +32,798 –22,483 +50,692 + 4,378 + 4,440 + 5,239 + 5,990 + 5,306 + 4,339
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 60,638 70,611 66,586 5,817 5,682 5,941 6,469 5,690 5,409
  Imports 49,247 55,723 51,818 4,263 4,595 4,656 4,672 4,110 4,411
Balance +11,391 +14,888 +14,767 + 1,554 + 1,087 + 1,286 + 1,797 + 1,581 + 998
               United Kingdom Exports 65,002 73,764 78,455 6,805 6,870 6,880 7,430 6,435 6,584
  Imports 32,245 40,314 36,680 3,190 3,111 2,961 3,060 2,681 3,018
Balance +32,757 +33,449 +41,775 + 3,614 + 3,759 + 3,919 + 4,370 + 3,753 + 3,566
   II. Non-European  Exports 427,430 497,428 497,726 37,695 41,309 42,355 43,831 39,742 40,823
       countries Imports 399,604 531,409 482,731 37,005 37,008 40,144 40,119 38,359 37,123
Balance +27,827 –33,982 +14,995 + 690 + 4,302 + 2,211 + 3,712 + 1,383 + 3,700
       1. Africa Exports 23,068 26,462 28,737 2,176 2,180 2,167 2,279 2,149 2,032
Imports 26,241 34,213 32,806 2,741 2,401 2,804 2,787 2,830 2,900
Balance – 3,173 – 7,751 – 4,069 – 565 – 221 – 636 – 508 – 681 – 868
       2. America Exports 167,735 210,652 216,561 16,307 18,521 19,322 20,084 18,322 18,065
  Imports 101,525 131,979 130,544 11,065 10,186 11,292 11,393 10,516 9,989
Balance +66,210 +78,673 +86,017 + 5,242 + 8,335 + 8,030 + 8,692 + 7,806 + 8,076
           of which:
               United States  Exports 121,980 156,208 157,948 11,940 13,829 14,368 14,349 13,271 12,944
  Imports 72,316 93,338 94,676 7,951 7,267 7,915 8,112 7,724 7,084
Balance +49,664 +62,871 +63,272 + 3,989 + 6,562 + 6,454 + 6,237 + 5,546 + 5,860
       3. Asia Exports 224,897 246,289 238,669 18,260 19,416 19,819 20,339 18,179 19,587
  Imports 267,604 357,702 313,190 22,818 23,557 25,283 25,527 24,577 23,765
Balance –42,707 –111,413 –74,521 – 4,557 – 4,141 – 5,464 – 5,189 – 6,397 – 4,178
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 26,090 29,648 32,045 2,464 2,704 2,666 2,726 2,633 2,740
  Imports 7,509 13,304 15,888 646 632 1,007 1,000 1,080 988
Balance +18,582 +16,344 +16,158 + 1,819 + 2,072 + 1,660 + 1,726 + 1,553 + 1,752
               Japan  Exports 18,245 20,511 20,239 1,808 1,758 1,586 1,516 1,479 1,686
Imports 23,477 25,413 25,641 1,942 1,944 2,077 2,086 1,805 1,816
Balance – 5,232 – 4,902 – 5,401 – 134 – 186 – 491 – 569 – 327 – 131
               People's Republic  Exports 103,564 106,762 97,328 7,659 7,946 8,418 8,771 7,484 7,958
               of China  2 Imports 142,964 192,830 157,161 11,596 11,989 12,802 12,623 12,414 12,082
Balance –39,400 –86,068 –59,833 – 3,937 – 4,043 – 4,384 – 3,853 – 4,930 – 4,124
               New industrial countries Exports 55,295 63,344 60,942 4,505 4,819 5,032 5,126 4,504 4,987
               and emerging markets  Imports 55,441 71,012 66,518 4,765 5,009 5,087 5,253 4,960 4,930
               of Asia  3 Balance – 146 – 7,668 – 5,576 – 260 – 189 – 54 – 127 – 456 + 57
       4. Oceania and Exports 11,731 14,024 13,760 952 1,193 1,046 1,130 1,092 1,139
           polar regions Imports 4,233 7,515 6,191 381 864 765 412 437 469
Balance + 7,497 + 6,510 + 7,568 + 570 + 329 + 281 + 718 + 655 + 670
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. Euro area incl. Croatia.  1 Including fuel and other supplies forships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.
3 Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Zeit Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2019 – 13,553 + 3,607 – 45,947 + 10,755 + 18,368 – 9,763 – 2,948 + 3,489 + 492 +128,990 – 880
2020 + 6,634 – 5,392 – 14,678 + 9,696 + 18,149 – 7,941 – 4,483 + 2,920 + 4,422 + 83,747 – 2,133
2021 + 1,615 – 6,717 – 24,323 + 8,280 + 31,784 – 9,449 – 9,922 + 3,058 + 3,744 +122,198 – 2,762
2022 – 37,289 – 11,246 – 54,946 + 8,910 + 29,373 – 12,432 – 10,206 + 3,617 + 4,093 +143,330 – 5,330
2023 – 62,994 – 9,907 – 68,937 + 9,206 + 21,219 – 11,931 – 14,316 + 3,345 + 4,079 +144,527 – 4,706
2022 Q4 – 8,215 – 2,447 – 13,323 + 2,600 + 5,965 – 2,300 – 1,776 + 739 + 1,184 + 44,713 + 2,709
2023 Q1 – 10,046 – 3,012 – 11,374 + 1,927 + 5,683 – 4,044 – 3,185 + 1,037 + 1,769 + 38,089 – 1,668
Q2 – 17,562 – 1,729 – 18,332 + 2,390 + 4,679 – 2,580 – 4,601 + 873 + 911 + 21,388 – 3,957
Q3 – 23,372 – 2,514 – 23,333 + 2,572 + 4,893 – 3,568 – 4,389 + 805 + 205 + 42,403 – 1,409
Q4 – 12,013 – 2,651 – 15,899 + 2,318 + 5,965 – 1,740 – 2,142 + 630 + 1,194 + 42,647 + 2,328
2024 Q1 – 12,544 – 1,972 – 12,612 + 2,659 + 4,846 – 3,777 – 4,363 + 949 + 1,747 + 36,356 – 749
Q2 – 20,197 – 1,749 – 19,534 + 2,585 + 4,464 – 2,360 – 5,781 + 720 + 904 + 20,271 – 1,074
2023 Aug. – 9,908 – 1,022 – 8,691 + 962 + 796 – 1,137 – 1,693 + 298 + 65 + 15,920 – 506
Sep. – 5,708 – 906 – 8,138 + 813 + 3,045 – 787 – 1,097 + 306 + 70 + 14,155 – 467
Oct. – 9,458 – 1,149 – 9,567 + 451 + 2,239 – 1,433 – 797 + 329 + 353 + 12,659 – 503
Nov. – 2,826 – 741 – 3,771 + 805 + 2,177 – 450 – 1,436 + 149 + 345 + 13,523 – 325
Dec. + 271 – 761 – 2,561 + 1,061 + 1,549 + 143 + 91 + 152 + 496 + 16,465 + 3,156
2024 Jan. – 4,346 – 556 – 3,613 + 827 + 1,492 – 1,648 – 1,850 + 349 + 577 + 12,265 – 438
Feb. – 3,764 – 387 – 3,884 + 720 + 1,228 – 1,269 – 933 + 296 + 586 + 10,047 – 368
Mar. – 4,434 – 1,029 – 5,115 + 1,112 + 2,126 – 860 – 1,580 + 304 + 584 + 14,044 + 56
Apr. – 5,553 – 400 – 5,214 + 831 + 2,132 – 1,666 – 1,996 + 303 + 300 + 8,421 – 414
r May – 8,252 – 838 – 7,000 + 1,033 + 1,054 – 1,133 – 2,044 + 125 + 302 + 1,679 – 264
p June – 6,393 – 510 – 7,321 + 721 + 1,278 + 440 – 1,741 + 293 + 302 + 10,172 – 397
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Zeit Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2019 – 50,747 – 30,251 – 11,473 + 11,591 – 20,496 .– 5,431 – 3,705 – 298 – 3,407
2020 – 52,889 – 34,755 – 12,175 + 10,767 – 18,134 – 5,920 – 5,908 – 10,345 – 3,547 – 6,799
2021 – 57,832 – 35,627 – 9,927 + 11,886 – 22,205 – 6,178 – 6,170 – 2,593 – 565 – 2,028
2022 – 66,091 – 40,174 – 16,147 + 14,051 – 25,917 – 8,028 – 7,149 – 21,644 – 15,993 – 5,652
2023 – 64,616 – 36,933 – 15,557 + 14,302 – 27,683 – 7,418 – 6,805 – 27,252 – 19,116 – 8,136
2022 Q4 – 19,300 – 12,801 – 6,976 + 2,089 – 6,499 – 1,844 – 1,810 – 6,797 – 4,390 – 2,407
2023 Q1 – 19,737 – 10,976 – 4,301 + 2,404 – 8,761 – 1,882 – 1,731 – 13,018 – 10,626 – 2,392
Q2 – 10,075 – 3,809 – 2,117 + 7,721 – 6,265 – 1,846 – 1,691 – 4,058 – 3,071 – 987
Q3 – 15,393 – 9,533 – 3,111 + 2,062 – 5,860 – 1,844 – 1,691 – 3,974 – 2,270 – 1,703
Q4 – 19,412 – 12,615 – 6,029 + 2,115 – 6,797 – 1,846 – 1,691 – 6,202 – 3,149 – 3,053
2024 Q1 – 19,034 – 7,180 – 1,672 + 2,775 – 11,854 – 1,935 – 1,933 – 8,155 – 6,849 – 1,307
Q2 – 8,985 – 2,146 – 1,783 + 7,469 – 6,839 – 1,936 – 1,933 – 1,720 – 2,482 + 763
2023 Aug. – 4,991 – 3,161 – 1,057 + 389 – 1,830 – 614 – 564 – 598 – 439 – 159
Sep. – 4,503 – 2,511 – 761 + 1,130 – 1,992 – 615 – 564 + 1,460 + 1,839 – 378
Oct. – 6,550 – 4,423 – 1,562 + 399 – 2,127 – 611 – 560 – 4,081 – 3,423 – 657
Nov. – 6,600 – 4,444 – 1,718 + 453 – 2,155 – 612 – 560 – 4,497 – 3,416 – 1,081
Dec. – 6,262 – 3,748 – 2,748 + 1,262 – 2,515 – 623 – 571 + 2,375 + 3,691 – 1,315
2024 Jan. – 4,407 – 2,250 – 709 + 534 – 2,157 – 645 – 644 – 7,057 – 5,390 – 1,667
Feb. – 4,834 – 2,461 – 667 + 1,122 – 2,374 – 645 – 644 – 1,597 – 1,858 + 261
Mar. – 9,793 – 2,469 – 296 + 1,119 – 7,324 – 644 – 644 + 499 + 400 + 99
Apr. – 3,118 – 1,018 – 432 + 1,837 – 2,100 – 646 – 644 – 2,261 – 2,945 + 684
r May – 1,448 + 754 – 344 + 3,773 – 2,202 – 643 – 644 – 1,539 – 1,601 + 62
p June – 4,419 – 1,881 – 1,007 + 1,859 – 2,537 – 647 – 644 + 2,081 + 2,064 + 17
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2023 2024 2024
Item 2021 2022 2023  Q4  Q1  Q2 April May  r June  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +801,268 +322,457 +267,197 +118,505 +176,302 +76,866 +23,985 +63,139 –10,257
1.Direct investment +167,477 +170,303 +74,679 +44,069 +27,451 +31,928 +12,429 + 5,433 +14,066
Equity +107,462 +104,545 +62,650 +15,003 +20,776 +25,956 +11,399 + 5,812 + 8,745
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +45,048 +57,927 +46,188 + 8,766 +21,056 +18,614 + 9,081 + 4,632 + 4,901
Debt instruments +60,014 +65,758 +12,030 +29,066 + 6,675 + 5,972 + 1,029 – 379 + 5,321
2.Portfolio investment +178,741 + 9,165 +149,308 +18,941 +61,661 +42,295 + 2,653 +17,668 +21,973
Shares  2 +46,651 –15,337 – 5,273 + 637 + 4+ 3,657 + 179 + 4,229 – 751
Investment fund shares  3 +122,885 +29,718 +23,457 + 2,741 +21,543 +21,918 + 4,992 + 8,419 + 8,507
Short-term  4
debt securities – 98 +16,199 + 9,292 + 3,059 + 6,578 + 3,543 + 3,593 – 2,233 + 2,183
Long-term   5
debt securities + 9,303 –21,415 +121,832 +12,504 +33,536 +13,177 – 6,111 + 7,253 +12,035
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +47,880 +41,519 +39,966 – 344 + 6,439 +10,399 + 5,343 + 101 + 4,956
4.Other investment  7 +375,278 +97,044 + 2,359 +55,484 +80,373 – 8,503 + 3,877 +39,781 –52,161
MFIs  8 +112,904 +59,472 +42,150 –20,784 +98,981 + 4,892 +11,405 +30,991 –37,505
Short-term +99,380 +34,961 +16,508 –35,986 +94,149 + 3,442 + 9,103 +29,960 –35,621
Long-term +13,204 +24,473 +25,575 +15,204 + 4,861 + 1,436 + 2,298 + 1,029 – 1,891
Enterprises and
households  9 +147,223 +48,475 +125,919 +19,110 +19,441 –36,325 +12,010 – 3,939 –44,397
Short-term +114,647 +24,730 +107,673 +15,696 +15,043 –39,779 +10,143 – 4,295 –45,627
Long-term –13,302 – 7,670 + 1,130 – 1,596 – 378 – 2,667 – 15 – 1,167 – 1,485
General government – 8,243 –25,070 + 6,629 + 3,373 – 3,312 – 256 – 102 – 914 + 759
Short-term – 7,256 –23,472 + 2,165 + 4,091 – 3,095 + 366 – 21 – 714 + 1,101
Long-term – 978 – 1,593 + 4,449 – 718 – 216 – 621 – 80 – 199 – 341
Bundesbank +123,394 +14,167 –172,339 +53,785 –34,737 +23,187 –19,437 +13,643 +28,982
5.Reserve assets +31,892 + 4,426 + 884 + 355 + 378 + 746 – 317 + 156 + 908
II.Net foreign investment in the
reporting country (increase: +) +592,289 +124,267 +27,460 +20,000 +128,094 +35,622 +17,344 +39,330 –21,052
1.Direct investment +85,983 +58,137 +14,975 +16,119 +15,044 +21,326 + 6,328 + 4,829 +10,169
Equity +46,474 +22,102 +24,920 + 6,251 +16,228 – 1,070 + 1,007 – 2,278 + 200
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 8,359 +10,299 + 2,668 + 2,010 + 5,133 – 4,324 – 1,374 – 3,226 + 276
Debt instruments +39,509 +36,035 – 9,945 + 9,868 – 1,184 +22,397 + 5,321 + 7,107 + 9,969
2.Portfolio investment –18,451 – 1,568 +148,156 – 196 +58,313 +44,104 + 3,026 + 9,404 +31,674
Shares  2 + 2,615 – 5,807 –12,984 – 47 – 4,197 – 590 – 1,594 + 59 + 946
Investment fund shares  3 – 8,423 – 3,207 – 1,984 – 232 – 467 + 923 + 821 – 416 + 519
Short-term  4
debt securities +30,545 –32,717 + 3,936 – 6,138 –20,838 –13,451 –24,014 – 2,837 +13,400
Long-term   5
debt securities –43,188 +40,163 +159,188 + 6,221 +83,815 +57,221 +27,814 +12,598 +16,809
3.Other investment  7 +524,758 +67,698 –135,671 + 4,077 +54,737 –29,807 + 7,990 +25,097 –62,894
MFIs  8 +161,287 +153,003 –55,282 –93,935 +139,975 – 5,485 – 3,504 +10,054 –12,035
Short-term +115,265 +160,861 –88,243 –88,073 +140,506 – 6,997 – 9,981 +18,203 –15,219
Long-term +46,044 – 7,860 +32,959 – 5,863 – 526 + 1,513 + 6,476 – 8,149 + 3,186
Enterprises and
households  9 +141,138 +11,086 +58,576 +35,026 +26,282 –23,218 +24,766 + 5,805 –53,788
Short-term +99,842 – 8,533 +31,822 +32,264 +17,220 –26,894 +23,758 + 4,876 –55,528
Long-term +14,022 + 8,384 +16,865 + 238 + 6,124 + 688 + 35 – 82 + 735
General government – 4,463 – 5,674 – 717 – 4,126 + 2,314 – 946 – 703 – 371 + 128
Short-term – 2,134 – 3,293 – 1,066 – 4,554 + 2,346 – 746 – 498 – 341 + 93
Long-term – 2,326 – 2,379 + 540 + 428 – 31 – 199 – 205 – 30 + 35
Bundesbank +226,796 –90,717 –138,249 +67,112 –113,835 – 159 –12,569 + 9,609 + 2,801
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +208,978 +198,190 +239,737 +98,505 +48,208 +41,244 + 6,640 +23,809 +10,795
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see Statistical series, direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities  3 4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 663,320 497,651
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 1,455,788 292,259 201,335 48,766 8,782 33,376 1,117,978 1,093,371 45,550 779,844 675,943
2022 Feb. 1,491,552 273,726 184,255 46,854 8,711 33,905 1,164,098 1,149,722 53,729 774,786 716,766
Mar. 1,516,744 277,782 187,779 47,375 8,663 33,965 1,184,501 1,169,952 54,462 808,690 708,055
Apr. 1,491,558 288,953 196,274 48,617 8,799 35,263 1,148,681 1,135,400 53,923 790,221 701,337
May 1,505,419 278,174 186,481 48,031 8,681 34,980 1,173,376 1,159,716 53,869 805,179 700,240
June 1,566,099 281,157 187,573 48,712 8,948 35,923 1,232,176 1,216,530 52,767 826,280 739,819
July 1,514,570 280,910 185,950 49,465 9,086 36,409 1,179,431 1,166,155 54,229 810,881 703,689
Aug. 1,590,572 280,160 184,794 49,614 9,300 36,451 1,258,187 1,245,014 52,225 842,576 747,996
Sep. 1,613,008 281,258 184,022 50,287 9,358 37,592 1,281,266 1,266,647 50,483 829,129 783,879
Oct. 1,569,272 274,421 178,101 49,675 9,527 37,119 1,243,873 1,230,005 50,977 811,035 758,237
Nov. 1,577,175 277,458 183,052 49,168 9,315 35,923 1,248,088 1,233,980 51,629 810,314 766,861
Dec. 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 Jan. 1,508,507 281,692 190,062 48,256 9,437 33,938 1,176,042 1,162,354 50,772 793,716 714,791
Feb. 1,455,724 276,016 183,755 48,582 9,480 34,199 1,130,353 1,114,888 49,356 743,006 712,718
Mar. 1,522,539 288,131 196,405 48,039 9,373 34,314 1,184,604 1,170,620 49,804 791,478 731,061
Apr. 1,431,180 285,667 194,679 47,642 9,297 34,049 1,096,324 1,081,284 49,189 726,986 704,194
May 1,435,049 290,368 197,915 48,658 9,379 34,416 1,095,750 1,081,900 48,931 701,467 733,582
June 1,416,292 280,820 188,991 48,618 9,292 33,919 1,087,034 1,068,747 48,438 718,324 697,969
July 1,399,374 282,438 191,458 48,368 9,184 33,429 1,068,875 1,052,218 48,061 689,447 709,927
Aug. 1,406,665 284,364 192,914 48,979 9,218 33,253 1,074,575 1,056,420 47,725 687,342 719,322
Sep. 1,393,337 282,490 190,232 49,647 9,278 33,333 1,064,193 1,048,059 46,654 713,662 679,675
Oct. 1,415,403 295,288 202,630 49,531 9,256 33,871 1,074,627 1,058,985 45,488 688,966 726,437
Nov. 1,414,241 292,718 201,195 48,939 8,958 33,627 1,076,415 1,060,074 45,107 691,309 722,932
Dec. 1,455,788 292,259 201,335 48,766 8,782 33,376 1,117,978 1,093,371 45,550 779,844 675,943
2024 Jan. 1,397,172 294,402 202,641 49,412 8,921 33,428 1,058,508 1,041,902 44,261 669,890 727,281
Feb. 1,431,638 295,014 202,181 49,313 8,777 34,744 1,093,262 1,075,510 43,361 679,579 752,058
Mar. 1,436,723 312,728 220,571 49,281 8,563 34,314 1,083,242 1,065,759 40,754 666,365 770,359
Apr. 1,428,136 324,404 232,438 49,368 8,591 34,007 1,063,804 1,047,932 39,928 653,953 774,183
May 1,441,362 324,156 232,717 49,501 8,399 33,538 1,077,447 1,061,110 39,758 663,179 778,183
June 1,474,113 328,214 234,891 49,858 8,355 35,109 1,106,429 1,090,444 39,470 666,316 807,797
July 1,435,785 332,641 240,587 49,622 8,401 34,030 1,064,405 1,048,438 38,739 655,396 780,389
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2020 1,034,224 244,415 789,808 549,157 240,652 213,833 26,819 1,429,615 172,417 1,257,198 1,038,111 219,087 130,318 88,769
2021 1,169,991 256,601 913,391 621,935 291,456 263,269 28,187 1,592,302 217,294 1,375,008 1,117,381 257,627 160,536 97,091
2022 1,247,020 250,759 996,261 675,328 320,933 291,361 29,572 1,629,245 177,095 1,452,150 1,158,894 293,255 192,495 100,760
2023 1,359,181 357,997 1,001,184 688,702 312,482 281,494 30,988 1,654,743 214,458 1,440,285 1,154,059 286,226 179,792 106,434
2024 Jan. 1,375,656 379,972 995,684 696,014 299,669 267,303 32,366 1,689,771 241,894 1,447,877 1,172,837 275,040 165,678 109,363
Feb. 1,384,720 392,632 992,088 691,978 300,110 266,967 33,143 1,706,923 259,317 1,447,607 1,172,012 275,595 163,816 111,779
Mar. 1,398,155 383,445 1,014,710 703,306 311,403 277,810 33,593 1,694,193 249,362 1,444,831 1,162,251 282,580 170,204 112,375
Apr. 1,427,766 390,915 1,036,851 724,837 312,014 278,297 33,717 1,744,856 269,711 1,475,145 1,193,266 281,879 168,472 113,406
r May 1,418,237 389,372 1,028,866 727,364 301,502 267,469 34,033 1,760,356 272,654 1,487,702 1,213,212 274,490 160,969 113,521
p June 1,379,535 339,525 1,040,009 728,628 311,381 277,453 33,928 1,718,049 226,944 1,491,106 1,207,152 283,953 170,636 113,318
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2020 613,888 185,572 428,316 334,474 93,842 80,833 13,009 903,486 97,851 805,635 715,854 89,781 61,887 27,895
2021 663,042 193,246 469,796 361,161 108,635 95,778 12,857 996,712 152,239 844,473 740,274 104,198 74,585 29,614
2022 712,912 190,773 522,139 397,836 124,303 110,821 13,482 1,006,529 126,999 879,530 764,435 115,095 84,054 31,041
2023 816,276 284,817 531,459 410,769 120,690 106,262 14,428 1,014,822 139,380 875,442 759,104 116,338 83,290 33,048
2024 Jan. 849,062 311,677 537,385 417,429 119,957 105,306 14,651 1,037,530 147,900 889,630 778,335 111,295 77,513 33,782
Feb. 864,878 325,505 539,373 416,291 123,082 108,088 14,995 1,056,431 166,045 890,386 775,171 115,216 80,795 34,420
Mar. 860,920 314,938 545,982 420,482 125,499 110,235 15,264 1,040,327 162,630 877,697 761,531 116,166 81,818 34,347
Apr. 884,090 317,274 566,816 440,498 126,318 111,568 14,750 1,083,317 183,732 899,585 783,220 116,365 81,784 34,581
r May 883,683 321,710 561,973 440,525 121,447 106,575 14,873 1,076,480 174,040 902,441 789,637 112,803 78,096 34,707
p June 842,828 281,994 560,834 435,022 125,812 110,561 15,252 1,074,333 161,169 913,163 794,446 118,717 84,386 34,331
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2020 420,335 58,843 361,492 214,682 146,810 133,000 13,810 526,129 74,566 451,563 322,257 129,306 68,431 60,875
2021 506,949 63,355 443,594 260,773 182,821 167,491 15,330 595,590 65,055 530,535 377,107 153,429 85,951 67,478
2022 534,107 59,986 474,122 277,492 196,629 180,540 16,090 622,716 50,096 572,620 394,460 178,160 108,441 69,719
2023 542,904 73,180 469,725 277,933 191,792 175,232 16,560 639,921 75,078 564,843 394,955 169,888 96,501 73,386
2024 Jan. 526,593 68,295 458,298 278,586 179,713 161,997 17,715 652,241 93,994 558,247 394,502 163,745 88,165 75,580
Feb. 519,842 67,127 452,715 275,687 177,028 158,879 18,148 650,492 93,272 557,220 396,841 160,379 83,021 77,358
Mar. 537,235 68,507 468,728 282,824 185,904 167,575 18,329 653,866 86,732 567,134 400,720 166,414 88,386 78,028
Apr. 543,676 73,641 470,035 284,338 185,696 166,729 18,967 661,539 85,979 575,560 410,046 165,514 86,689 78,825
r May 534,554 67,661 466,893 286,839 180,054 160,894 19,160 683,876 98,615 585,261 423,575 161,687 82,873 78,813
p June 536,707 57,532 479,175 293,607 185,568 166,892 18,677 643,717 65,774 577,942 412,706 165,236 86,249 78,986
Euro area (20)
2020 527,566 164,697 362,869 289,362 73,507 61,759 11,748 816,066 76,137 739,929 670,289 69,640 47,662 21,978
2021 556,549 171,231 385,318 299,905 85,413 73,729 11,684 911,712 130,558 781,154 699,065 82,089 58,608 23,481
2022 606,206 171,716 434,490 338,439 96,050 83,930 12,120 916,735 105,597 811,138 722,183 88,954 64,756 24,198
2023 713,257 266,931 446,326 352,927 93,399 80,382 13,016 921,774 119,987 801,787 712,302 89,485 64,843 24,642
2024 Jan. 750,627 294,807 455,820 363,072 92,748 79,550 13,198 933,855 119,349 814,505 730,163 84,342 59,234 25,108
Feb. 765,169 307,753 457,416 362,462 94,954 81,400 13,554 949,736 136,402 813,334 727,038 86,296 60,714 25,583
Mar. 760,512 298,258 462,254 365,821 96,433 82,644 13,789 934,237 136,205 798,032 711,671 86,361 61,060 25,301
Apr. 783,120 300,877 482,243 384,476 97,768 84,440 13,327 973,220 152,559 820,660 733,893 86,767 61,456 25,312
r May 778,716 303,958 474,758 380,785 93,973 80,532 13,441 966,691 142,698 823,993 739,913 84,080 59,025 25,055
p June 736,910 264,203 472,707 375,839 96,868 83,418 13,450 968,997 135,723 833,274 745,376 87,899 63,559 24,340
Extra-Euro area (20)
2020 506,658 79,719 426,939 259,794 167,145 152,074 15,071 613,549 96,280 517,269 367,822 149,448 82,656 66,792
2021 613,443 85,369 528,073 322,030 206,043 189,540 16,504 680,590 86,735 593,854 418,316 175,538 101,928 73,610
2022 640,814 . . . 224,882 207,431 17,452 712,510 . . . 204,301 127,739 76,562
2023 645,924 . . . 219,083 201,112 17,971 732,970 . . . 196,741 114,949 81,792
2024 Jan. 625,029 . . . 206,921 187,753 19,168 755,916 . . . 190,698 106,443 84,254
Feb. 619,552 . . . 205,157 185,567 19,589 757,188 . . . 189,298 103,102 86,196
Mar. 637,643 . . . 214,970 195,166 19,804 759,956 . . . 196,219 109,144 87,075
Apr. 644,646 . . . 214,246 193,857 20,390 771,636 . . . 195,112 107,017 88,095
r May 639,521 . . . 207,529 186,937 20,593 793,665 . . . 190,410 101,944 88,466
p June 642,625 . . . 214,513 194,035 20,478 749,052 . . . 196,055 107,077 88,978
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2021 1.5749 1.4826 7.6282 7.4370 129.88 10.1633 10.1465 1.0811 0.85960 1.1827
2022 1.5167 1.3695 7.0788 7.4396 138.03 10.1026 10.6296 1.0047 0.85276 1.0530
2023 1.6288 1.4595 7.6600 7.4509 151.99 11.4248 11.4788 0.9718 0.86979 1.0813
2023 Mar. 1.6034 1.4649 7.3807 7.4456 143.01 11.2858 11.2276 0.9908 0.88192 1.0706
Apr. 1.6389 1.4792 7.5561 7.4518 146.51 11.5187 11.3370 0.9846 0.88115 1.0968
May 1.6346 1.4687 7.5948 7.4485 148.93 11.7330 11.3697 0.9751 0.87041 1.0868
June 1.6157 1.4414 7.7653 7.4492 153.15 11.7164 11.6766 0.9764 0.85861 1.0840
July 1.6423 1.4618 7.9482 7.4508 155.94 11.3474 11.6343 0.9663 0.85856 1.1058
Aug. 1.6818 1.4703 7.9096 7.4522 157.96 11.4127 11.8117 0.9588 0.85892 1.0909
Sep. 1.6622 1.4458 7.7967 7.4566 157.80 11.4525 11.8417 0.9600 0.86158 1.0684
Oct. 1.6637 1.4474 7.7200 7.4604 158.04 11.6284 11.6472 0.9547 0.86798 1.0563
Nov. 1.6634 1.4828 7.8087 7.4581 161.84 11.7958 11.5475 0.9634 0.87045 1.0808
Dec. 1.6321 1.4653 7.7870 7.4556 157.21 11.5333 11.2028 0.9441 0.86168 1.0903
2024 Jan. 1.6422 1.4631 7.8201 7.4572 159.46 11.3501 11.2834 0.9368 0.85873 1.0905
Feb. 1.6533 1.4564 7.7651 7.4550 161.38 11.3843 11.2500 0.9462 0.85466 1.0795
Mar. 1.6586 1.4726 7.8297 7.4566 162.77 11.5214 11.3054 0.9656 0.85524 1.0872
Apr. 1.6469 1.4661 7.7658 7.4596 165.03 11.6828 11.5910 0.9761 0.85658 1.0728
May 1.6317 1.4780 7.8206 7.4606 168.54 11.5988 11.6186 0.9830 0.85564 1.0812
June 1.6206 1.4750 7.8051 7.4592 169.81 11.4178 11.2851 0.9616 0.84643 1.0759
July 1.6257 1.4868 7.8750 7.4606 171.17 11.7160 11.5324 0.9676 0.84332 1.0844
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  
2023 January 1 Croatia Croatian kuna HRK 7.53450  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2024
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the  Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
extended EER group of trading partners  1broad EER group of
trading partners  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
27 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  527 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.1 95.8 96.1 96.5 95.9 97.8 99.6 95.7 97.6 98.3 98.1 97.8
2000 87.0 86.8 85.9 85.5 88.0 86.1 91.9 97.5 85.4 91.1 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.4 87.1 86.5 84.4 90.1 86.9 91.7 96.6 86.0 90.5 93.0 91.7 91.1
2002 89.7 90.3 89.7 88.1 94.4 90.5 92.3 95.7 88.4 91.0 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.5 101.6 101.1 99.3 106.5 101.7 95.9 94.8 97.5 95.3 97.0 96.7 96.8
2004 104.3 105.6 104.2 102.6 111.0 105.6 96.1 93.6 99.9 95.6 98.5 98.2 98.4
2005 102.9 104.3 102.2 100.8 109.1 103.2 94.7 92.0 98.7 93.3 98.5 97.2 96.8
2006 102.9 104.3 101.6 99.8 109.3 102.6 93.5 90.4 98.1 91.6 98.6 96.8 96.0
2007 106.5 107.3 103.9 101.5 112.9 104.8 94.6 89.6 102.1 92.1 100.9 98.3 97.4
2008 110.4 110.3 106.1 105.4 117.8 107.3 94.9 88.4 105.2 91.4 102.4 98.5 97.6
2009 111.9 111.1 107.2 108.9 120.8 108.3 95.3 89.2 104.7 92.1 101.9 98.6 97.9
2010 104.6 103.3 98.9 101.4 112.1 99.3 92.5 88.7 98.2 88.2 98.8 94.3 92.5
2011 104.4 102.4 97.0 99.7 112.9 98.8 92.1 88.4 97.6 87.4 98.2 93.5 91.9
2012 98.6 97.0 91.4 93.9 107.6 94.0 90.1 88.3 92.6 84.8 95.9 90.5 88.9
2013 102.2 100.1 94.5 96.8 112.4 97.0 92.3 88.8 97.5 86.7 98.1 92.3 90.9
2014 102.4 99.5 94.4 97.0 114.7 97.4 93.0 89.6 97.9 87.4 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.5 89.6 85.8 86.3 106.1 88.7 89.8 90.2 89.1 83.6 94.3 87.8 86.9
2016 95.2 91.6 88.1 p 87.7 110.1 90.7 90.7 90.7 90.6 85.0 95.0 88.8 88.1
2017 97.5 93.6 89.3 p 88.6 112.5 92.0 91.9 90.8 93.5 85.7 96.3 89.9 88.9
2018 100.0 95.8 90.9 p 90.4 117.3 95.2 93.2 90.9 96.6 86.7 97.7 91.1 90.8
2019 98.1 93.3 89.1 p 88.0 115.5 92.5 92.2 91.1 93.8 85.8 96.4 89.9 89.4
2020 99.7 93.7 89.9 p 89.3 119.2 93.9 92.4 91.4 93.9 86.5 96.4 90.1 90.1
2021 99.6 93.7 p 89.1 p 87.4 120.5 94.3 93.5 91.7 96.0 86.7 97.4 90.6 90.9
2022 95.3 90.8 p 84.1 p 82.5 116.1 p 90.9 92.0 91.3 92.8 85.0 95.9 89.1 89.0
2023 98.1 94.0 p 88.1 p 86.3 121.8 p 94.7 93.5 91.6 96.2 87.1 98.0 91.3 p 91.6
2022 Feb. 96.8 91.8 p 85.4 p 83.7 118.5 p 92.6 92.6 91.6 94.1 85.4 96.2 89.1 89.4
Mar. 95.8 91.5 117.9 p 92.6 96.3 89.5 89.9
Apr. 95.0 90.1 116.0 p 90.3 96.1 88.9 88.8
May 95.4 90.5 p 83.9 p 82.2 115.8 p 90.2 92.0 91.1 93.1 84.8 96.5 89.5 89.1
June 95.7 90.7 116.1 p 90.3 95.7 88.7 88.4
July 93.9 89.2 114.1 p 88.9 94.8 87.9 87.5
Aug. 93.4 88.9 p 82.3 p 80.9 113.6 p 88.6 91.3 91.3 91.2 84.5 94.5 87.6 87.3
Sep. 93.9 89.8 113.9 p 89.3 95.9 89.1 88.7
Oct. 94.5 91.3 114.8 p 90.8 96.0 89.7 89.4
Nov. 95.7 92.2 p 84.9 p 83.2 116.6 p 92.0 91.9 91.2 92.9 85.5 97.0 90.6 90.3
Dec. 96.8 92.6 118.6 p 92.9 96.2 89.7 89.8
2023 Jan. 97.1 92.8 119.2 p 93.1 97.5 90.4 p 90.4
Feb. 97.0 93.1 p 86.9 p 85.1 119.3 p 93.4 92.8 91.1 95.2 86.0 97.7 90.5 p 90.6
Mar. 97.3 93.2 119.7 p 93.6 98.0 90.9 p 91.1
Apr. 98.4 94.2 121.5 p 94.9 98.5 91.5 p 91.9
May 98.0 93.6 p 87.9 p 85.8 120.9 p 94.2 93.3 91.3 96.2 86.7 98.1 91.1 p 91.3
June 98.2 93.8 121.8 p 94.7 98.2 91.3 p 91.8
July 99.2 95.0 123.7 p 96.1 98.4 91.8 p 92.5
Aug. 99.0 95.0 p 88.9 p 87.2 123.7 p 96.1 93.6 91.6 96.5 87.6 98.3 91.8 p 92.4
Sep. 98.5 94.6 123.0 p 95.5 98.0 91.7 p 92.1
Oct. 98.0 94.1 122.5 p 95.0 97.7 91.3 p 91.7
Nov. 98.7 94.6 p 88.6 p 86.9 123.4 p 95.3 94.2 92.3 96.9 88.0 98.2 91.6 p 91.9
Dec. 98.2 93.9 123.2 p 94.8 97.7 91.1 p 91.5
2024 Jan. 98.4 94.4 123.6 p 95.2 97.8 91.4 p 91.8
Feb. 98.1 94.1 p 88.6 p 87.3 123.3 p 94.9 93.8 92.1 96.4 87.8 97.7 91.3 p 91.6
Mar. 98.8 94.8 124.2 p 95.5 98.1 91.8 p 92.1
Apr. 98.6 p 94.5 124.0 p 95.2 98.3 p 91.8 p 92.1
May 98.9 p 94.8 ... ... 124.4 p 95.3 … … … … 98.6 p 92.0 p 92.2
June 98.5 p 94.5 124.0 p 95.0 98.1 p 91.8 p 92.0
July 99.0 p 95.2 124.8 p 95.7 p98.4 p 92.0 p 92.3
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the curren-
cy concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's price
competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective exchange
rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. The
weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more detailed in-
formation on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the Deutsche
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 The calculations are
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following 18 countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania,
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United
States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates were used.
2 Includes countries belonging to the extended EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition) and additionally the following 23 countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zea-
land, Peru, Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan,Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and United Arab Emirates. The ECB has suspended the
publication and calculation of the euro foreign exchange reference rate against Russian
rouble with effect from March 2, 2022 until further notice. For the calculation of
effective exchange rates, an indicative rate is used for the Russian Federation from that
date. It is calculated from the daily RUB/USD rates determined by the Bank of Russia in
conjunction with the respective ECB's euro foreign exchange reference rate to the US
dollar.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from 2001 including
Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from
2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, from
2015 including Lithuania, from 2023 including Croatia) as well as Canada, Denmark,
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.
5 Euro area countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the extended
EER group of trading partners (fixed comosition).  6 Euro area countries (current compo-
sition) and countries belonging to the broad EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition).

