Monthly Report – 
October 2024
Vol. 76 No 10

Table of Content
Commentaries  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
1 Economic conditions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
2 Public finances  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
List of references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
The recording of retained earnings in the balance of payments and their 
relevance for the German current account surplus  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
1 Large German current account surpluses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
2 Recording reinvested earnings in the current account  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
Allocating firms’ retained earnings in free float  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
3 List of references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
Germany’s international interconnectedness via foreign direct investment: 
current developments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
1 Spotlight on German FDI relationships  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
2 German outward FDI  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
3 Foreign direct investment in Germany  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  38
4 Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  41
List of references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  42
State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance 
still in surplus  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43
1 Overview and data preparation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  46
2 Federal state aggregate: deficit in 2023, but structural balance still in surplus  . .  49
3 State government results vary greatly  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  53
4 State government debt brakes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  59
Self-management funds  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  70
5 Outlook for 2024 and selected fiscal policy considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  72

List of references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  76
Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the 
euro area, and outlook  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  78

4Commentaries

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 51 Economic conditions
1.1 German economy still stuck in period of weakness
Real gross domestic product ( ) GDP  is likely to have contracted again somewhat in 
the third quarter of 2024.  Output in the industrial sector and in construction probably 
declined markedly, with demand in both sectors remaining weak. This is likely to be due 
in part to the still comparatively high financing costs, which are dampening investment 
activity and thus demand for capital goods. Continuing uncertainty with regard to 
future economic and political conditions is also likely to be weighing on investment, as 
it impairs planning security for enterprises.  Foreign demand for German industrial 
products is currently recovering only slightly, despite moderate growth in German sales 
markets. This indicates ongoing competitiveness issues. As a result, both domestic and 
foreign demand for German industrial products remains weak. The consequently now 
low level of capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sector is, in turn, taking its toll on 
the respective investment. At the same time, service providers are likely to have 
provided support to the economy in the third quarter, albeit to a limited extent, 
because private consumption probably provided only little impetus as consumers 
remained unsettled. The increase in their real incomes is intact as wages are rising 
significantly more strongly than prices. However, they were still hesitant to make use of 
this additional scope for expenditure. In the fourth quarter, economic activity could  –
from today’s perspective  more or less stagnate. Although the German economy is –
currently still not expected to see a recession in the sense of a significant, broad-based 
and prolonged decline in economic output, it remains stuck in the period of weakness 
that has persisted since mid-2022. 1) 
 2) 
1 For the measurement of economic policy uncertainty, see, for example, the index developed by Baker et al. 
(2016). For Germany, this index picked up markedly again in September and is at a very high level.
2 In addition to cyclical factors, structural adjustments also play a role here. This is indicated, for example, by the 
prolonged period of weakness in industry and competitiveness problems in the export sector. In addition to 
the longer-term effects of the energy price shock triggered by the Russian war of aggression against Ukraine, 
numerous other challenges exist for Germany as an industrial location (such as demographic change or the 
green transition) and for the position of German enterprises in global markets, for example due to increasing 
competition from China, see Al-Haschimi et al. (2024).

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 61.2 Industrial activity weak on a wide scale
Industrial output expanded recently thanks to a very strong increase in motor 
vehicle and motor vehicle parts production, but declined markedly on average in 
July and August.  Seasonally adjusted  German industrial output rose sharply in 
August compared with July, recouping its decline from the previous month. 
Nevertheless, average output for July and August was markedly below the level of the 
second quarter. The August increase was almost solely attributable to the manufacture 
of motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts. Such a steep rise following the sharp fall in 
July suggests that this was attributable, in large part, to special factors such as the 
timing of plant shutdowns. Aside from the automotive industry, taking the average of 
July and August, the fall in output was fairly broadly spread across sectors.  Averaged 
across July and August, output in the energy-intensive sectors was also somewhat 
 3) 
 4) 
3 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, 
provided they can be verified and quantified.
4 Besides the manufacture of motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts, on an average of July and August, only 
other transport equipment and the repair and installation of machinery rose considerably compared with the 
second quarter.

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 7below the level of the previous quarter, meaning that the recovery they experienced in 
the first half of the year did not continue. According to the  Institute, companies in ifo
the manufacturing sector assessed their business situation in the third quarter as 
significantly worse compared with the previous quarter, which is consistent with the 
picture of weak industrial activity overall.
The slight signs of recovery in foreign demand for German industrial products 
weakened recently. Seasonally adjusted new orders in German industry decreased 
strongly in August 2024. Prior to that, they had risen sharply for two consecutive 
months, in July thanks in particular to a number of large orders.  Taking the average 
of July and August, industrial new orders were therefore still well above the average of 
the second quarter. The decline in August is partly because significantly fewer large 
orders were received than in the previous month. However, the underlying trend in 
industrial new orders (i.e. excluding volatile large orders) also declined significantly 
compared with July. Taking the average of July and August, new orders without large 
orders were thereby markedly below the average of the second quarter. Domestic 
demand remains the main factor in this decline. By contrast, signs of a recovery in 
foreign demand for German industrial products remained evident, but weakened. After 
new orders from abroad (excluding large orders) increased sharply in July, thanks to 
considerably more orders from the euro area, they actually declined to a slightly 
greater extent in August. Nevertheless, taking the average of July and August, they 
remained above the level of the previous quarter. In line with the overall weak demand 
for German industrial products,  business expectations in the manufacturing sector ifo
as well as short-term production plans and export expectations deteriorated 
significantly again in the third quarter. An uptick in industrial activity in the near future 
therefore looks unlikely. 5) 
5 Other transport equipment (aircraft, ships, trains, military vehicles) accounted for several major orders here, 
see Federal Statistical Office (2024a).

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 81.3 Probably only little impetus from private consumption
Despite favourable conditions, private consumption is unlikely to have given much 
impetus to economic activity in the third quarter. The conditions for a strong 
expansion of private consumption are actually good. Wages are now rising significantly 
more strongly than prices, which increases consumers’ real disposable income. In line 
with this, income expectations have risen in the first three quarters of the year, and 
particularly in the second quarter, according to surveys of the consumer research 
institution, Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung  Furthermore, despite some ( ).GfK
cooling tendencies, the outlook for the labour market has been relatively stable so far. 
Nevertheless, households remained unsettled in the third quarter and were reluctant 
to use their additional spending leeway. Consumer sentiment  measured by the  – GfK
consumer climate index  improved markedly in the third quarter, but remained at a –
low level. It is a similar story with the propensity to purchase. By the same token, the 
propensity to save remained at a very high level, even edging up again somewhat in 
the third quarter after a marked decrease in the second quarter. Economic concerns 
were probably also a factor in this, as economic expectations declined slightly again. 
Other private consumption indicators give mixed signals for the third quarter. Motor 
vehicle registrations by private owners fell significantly compared with the previous 
quarter, for example. The fact that the  business situation deteriorated substantially ifo


Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 9in trade in the third quarter and significantly elsewhere in the services sector also 
suggests that private consumption is rather subdued. By contrast, averaged across July 
and August, real retail sales, for which the Federal Statistical Office recently resumed its 
regular economic reporting with the results for August, were markedly higher than the 
average of the second quarter.  Overall, private consumption is nevertheless likely to 
have provided only little impetus.
1.4 Labour market somewhat weaker
Unfavourable economic developments are beginning to have an impact on the 
labour market, although its response to the weakness is still relatively mild. The 
level of employment in Germany declined in August. Seasonally adjusted figures show 
that 21,000 fewer people were in employment overall than a month earlier. By contrast, 
employment subject to social security contributions rose at the current end, although 
this relates to the month of July. Initial projections by economic sector confirm the 
current trend: those areas of the manufacturing and retail sectors that are particularly 
affected by weak demand are increasingly reducing staff. On the other hand, 
recruitment was substantial in healthcare and social services, education, logistics and, 
most recently, also in the financial sector. As before, short-time work is almost 
exclusively used in the manufacturing sector, with its use hardly rising over the past 
few months. However, there is currently also no facilitated access for firms wishing to 
use short-time work, such as had been temporarily introduced in previous severe 
economic crises. 6) 
6 For an extended period, seasonally adjusted sales in the trade and services sectors were published only with a 
large lag. This made a timely assessment of developments in private consumption and for service providers 
more difficult. On 10 October 2024, the Federal Statistical Office resumed its regular economic reporting in 
these areas by publishing calendar and seasonally adjusted retail sales for August. The phased publication of 
respective results for sales in the services sector, as well as in the wholesale trade, motor vehicle trade and 
hospitality sector should follow shortly. See Federal Statistical Office (2024b). Until then, however, uncertainty 
about developments in these areas remains heightened.

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 10From today's perspective, it is unlikely that employment levels will decline 
significantly. The short-term indicators for the next few months remain mixed. The  ifo
employment barometer, which ascertains recruitment plans in trade and industry over 
the next three months by questioning a sample of enterprises, paints a particularly 
negative picture. Especially companies in the manufacturing and retail sectors plan to 
(further) reduce the number of employees. Employment plans in construction and 
other commercial services are neutral to positive. The employment barometer of the 
Institute for Employment Research  for the economy as a whole is more stable and ()IAB
remains in positive territory. For the first time in a long while, the number of vacancies 
reported to the Federal Employment Agency barely declined further in September. At 
the same time, the number of vacancies is still comparatively high, and vacant positions 
often take a long time to fill.
Unemployment up again somewhat in September.  After seasonal adjustment, around 
2.82 million people were registered as unemployed, 17,000 more than in August. The 
unemployment rate held steady at 6.0% due to rounding. Only unemployment under 
the cyclically sensitive statutory unemployment insurance scheme posted an increase, 
whereas the number of unemployed receiving the basic welfare allowance remained 
unchanged. It is currently difficult for unemployed people to get back into employment. 


Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 11The outflow rate from unemployment into employment is very low. Structural change 
probably plays a part in this, as workers in the industrial sector are being dismissed, 
while there is urgent demand for childcare staff and carers. This is another reason why 
unemployment is rising despite the ongoing shortage of labour. However, registered 
unemployment is expected to rise only moderately over the next few months. The  IAB
unemployment barometer is only just below the neutral threshold. The number of 
people, who register with the Federal Employment Agency as looking for work as they 
expect to be out of work soon, is also not significantly elevated so far.
1.5 Energy commodity prices recently rose slightly
Following declines in September, energy commodity prices temporarily picked up in 
October. Crude oil prices, in particular, increased at the beginning of October given the 
further escalation of conflicts in the Middle East. After related concerns about potential 
oil supply shortages faded, crude oil prices dropped again as well. Furthermore, 
indications of lower oil demand, particularly in China, and the prospect of an 
oversupplied global oil market in 2025 had a dampening effect on prices. As this report 
went to press, a barrel of Brent crude oil cost US$77, which is roughly the same as in 
September. European gas prices also picked up somewhat in October as a result of the 
geopolitical tensions.
1.6 Inflation rate drops to 1.8% in September
Price dampening signals were observed recently at the upstream stages of the 
economy.  In industrial domestic sales, seasonally adjusted prices decreased in 
September compared to the previous month for the first time since the beginning of 
the year. This was due in particular to a strong drop in energy prices. Import prices 
(with and without energy) likewise fell strongly in August  the most recent month for –
which data are available. Overall, industrial producer prices were still just over 1% lower 
than a year earlier. Import prices were only marginally above their previous year’s level.
The inflation rate continued to decline in September.  The Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices  was unchanged from the previous month in seasonally ( ) HICP
adjusted terms, as in August. Energy prices, in particular, fell substantially once again. 
By contrast, prices for food, especially fruit and vegetables, climbed significantly. 
Industrial goods (excluding energy) became somewhat more expensive as well. With 

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 12the exception of travel services, price dynamics for services remained high on a broad 
basis. Annual headline inflation fell from 2.0% in August to 1.8% in September. By 
contrast, the core rate excluding energy and food persisted at 3.0%.
The inflation rate is likely to be higher again towards the end of the year. The 
inflation rate is expected to pick up again in the coming months. This is due, amongst 
other things, to energy base effects. Crude oil prices peaked in September of last year 
and then fell again. Taken in isolation, this will contribute to an increase in the headline 
 rate over the coming months. A higher inflation rate is also expected for food as HICP
commodity prices went up recently. Finally, services inflation is likely to remain elevated 
for a while. Against the backdrop of steeply rising wages, disinflation in this area 
continues to be much slower than in the case of industrial goods (excluding energy).


Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 132 Public finances
2.1 Local government finances
Local governments (core budgets and off-budget entities) closed the first half of 
2024 with a very large deficit of €17 billion.  It by far exceeded the level recorded for 
the same period one year earlier, namely by €10 billion.
The statistical reclassification of local public transport companies further boosted 
revenue and expenditure, but is unlikely to have significantly affected the balance.
Since the second quarter of 2023, local public transport companies pertaining to local 
government have been classified as off-budget entities in the general government 
sector (i.e. no longer in the corporate sector). Given that they did not yet count as part 
of the general government sector for the entire first half of 2023, the corresponding 
government revenue and expenditure items rose sharply on the year. This statistical 
effect mainly affects off-budget entities. To eliminate this effect, this commentary 
focuses on core budget developments.
Revenue in the core budgets increased by just under 3½% (+€5 billion) on the year in 
the first half of 2024.  Tax revenue stagnated, however. Although the large revenue 
item local business tax (after deduction of shares accruing to other government levels) 
still rose by 3% (+€1 billion) on account of a stronger development in the first quarter, 
income tax shares, on the other hand, fell sharply, by 9% (-€1½ billion). This was due to 
their excessively high level in the year prior, when relatively high back payments were 
settled in the first half of the year.  The major item general purpose grants from state 
government grew moderately (+2½% or €½ billion). Growth had been significantly  7) 
 8) 
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023), pp. 8-10.
8 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2024).

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 14higher one year earlier, given that state governments’ tax revenue, on which the grants 
are largely based, had previously expanded a great deal more sharply. The increase in 
revenue from fees was somewhat more dynamic, at 4½% (+€½ billion), Local 
governments evidently increased their fees, not least due to higher costs.
At 9% (+€14 billion), the rise in core budget spending was considerably more 
pronounced than the increase in revenue. This is probably a reflection, not least, of 
higher prices. Spending on personnel likewise rose by 9%, contributing almost €3½ 
billion to the increase in expenditure. The sizeable wage agreement of last spring had 
so far only made a minor impact in the first half of 2023. At 7% (+€2½ billion), other 
operating expenditure posted only somewhat weaker growth. The increase in 
expenditure on social benefits of just over 12% (+€4½ billion) was particularly strong, 
with contributions from all larger sub-categories such as integration assistance, social 
assistance, assistance for young people and accommodation costs (basic allowance 
benefits). Fixed asset formation saw a below-average increase of 6% (+€1 billion). The 
considerably poorer financial situation since last year may already have had a 
dampening effect in this context.
Local government can expect a higher deficit for the year as a whole as well (2023 
deficit for core budgets and off-budget entities: €7 billion).  This is because 
expenditure growth is likely to remain high in the year as a whole, irrespective of less 
dynamic increases in the major item personnel expenditure from the summer onwards.
Pressure on local government finances is set to subside to some extent in the years 
that follow, but a fundamental recovery is currently not in sight.  There is likely to be 
solid growth in tax revenue going forward, even when taking account of revenue 
shortfalls stemming from the growth initiative as laid out in the draft legislation. In 
addition, it remains to be seen how the changeover to the new real estate tax – which is 
structured differently from state to state – will play out. On the one hand, legal 
objections have been raised, which is indicative of default risk.  On the other hand, 
local governments are able to raise multipliers in order to generate additional revenue 
from real estate tax to close fiscal gaps.  Growth rates on the expenditure side are 
likely to decline significantly as price pressures resulting from the high rates of inflation 
over the last few years are set to subside. As a result, the pressure on local government  9) 
 10) 
 11) 
9 The statistical reclassification of local public transport companies was reflected in off-budget entities’ revenue 
from fees. The increase in the first quarter amounted to just under 25% for core budgets and off-budget 
entities combined (14% in the first half of the year).
10 See, for example, Schwarting (2024).
11 For the reporting year 2023, for which figures were recently published, the Federal Statistical Office recorded 
only a moderate increase in the average real estate tax B-multiplier of 7 points to 493%. See Federal Statistical 
Office (2024).

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 15finances is likely to ease in some areas. However, local governments are facing political 
challenges requiring additional expenditure as well. Examples include the further 
expansion of childcare and local public transport facilities, and urban planning 
measures for adapting to climate change. Consequently, a significant easing of the 
financial situation is not foreseeable at present.
It is essential that political challenges are not resolved at the expense of sustainable 
local government finances.  The federal states must prevent a renewed increase in 
multi-year local government cash advances.
 12) 
12 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2021).

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 16List of references
Al-Haschimi, A., L. Emter, V. Gunnella, I. Ortdoñez Martínez, T. Schuler und T. Spital 
(2024), Why competition with China is getting tougher than ever, The ECB Blog, 3 
September 2024.
Baker, S., N. Bloom and S. Davies (2016), Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty, The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 131, Issue 4, pp. 1593 - 1636.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024), Commentaries, Public finances, Monthly Report, April 
2024.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), Commentaries, Public finances, Monthly Report, 
October 2023, pp. 8-9.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), Local government finances: how cash advances can be 
limited and budget imbalances avoided, Monthly Report, June 2021, pp. 53-58.
Federal Statistical Office (2024a), New orders in manufacturing in July 2024: +2.9% on 
the previous month, press release No 335 of 5 September 2024.
Federal Statistical Office (2024b),  Wiederaufnahme der monatlichen Statistiken im 
Handel und im Dienstleistungsbereich .
Federal Statistical Office (2024c), Realsteuervergleich 2023,  number 71231. EVAS
Schwarting, G. (2024), Die Grundsteuer vor Gericht – Gefahr für das Bundesmodell?, in: 
Der Gemeindehaushalt 1/2024, pp. 16-19.

17The recording of retained 
earnings in the balance 
of payments and their 
relevance for the German 
current account surplus

The recording of retained earnings in the balance of payments and their relevance for the 
German current account surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 18A recent study shows that, in the balance of payments statistics, the German current 
account surplus would be around half a percentage point lower in relation to gross 
domestic product  if reinvested earnings for portfolio investment were recorded ( ) GDP
in the same way as for direct investment.  In line with international conventions, the 
official balance of payments statistics distinguish between cross-border investment in 
equity interests based on the investor’s ownership interest after the investment has 
been made, with shares of below 10% allocated to portfolio investment and shares of 
10% or more recorded under direct investment. Where portfolio investment is 
concerned, reinvested earnings are not attributed to the investor’s income but rather to 
the enterprise’s savings. When it comes to direct investment, by contrast, they are seen 
as income and reinvestment on the part of the investor. If, regardless of the 10% 
threshold, reinvested earnings were to be classified as the investor’s savings and 
included in investment income, the model calculations suggest this would have 
lowered Germany’s current account surplus by €11.5 billion per year on average in the 
period from 2012 to 2020.
Corporate savings make a considerable contribution to national savings in Germany. 
Large, listed enterprises, in particular, are often at least partially owned by foreign 
investors.  In relation to  Germany’s current account surplus would come to half , GDP
a percentage point less if the corporate savings achieved were to be allocated 
proportionally to all owners. However, the surplus would have exceeded the threshold 
set by the European Commission’s Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure  ( )MIP
scoreboard every year since 2013, regardless of the calculation method used. 1) 
 2) 
1 This article is based on a research paper by Goldbach et al. (2024).
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2014).

The recording of retained earnings in the balance of payments and their relevance for the 
German current account surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 191 Large German current account surpluses
Germany has consistently posted current account surpluses since the start of the 
millennium.  The highest figure to date was recorded in 2018, at €289 billion, or over 
8% of Germany’s  The surplus has fallen significantly since then, coming in at €249 . GDP
billion or 5.9% of  in 2023. It dipped to 4.4% for a while in 2022 off the back of GDP
various temporary factors, such as the asymmetric response of imports and exports in 
the wake of the corona-virus pandemic or worsening terms of trade in response to the 
significant rise in energy prices following Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine. 
These temporary factors subsided again in 2023, and Germany’s current account has 
now resumed its longer-term trend.
The degree to which the size of Germany’s current account balance is deemed 
appropriate is the subject of controversial international debate.  For example, in its 
external sector report for 2024, the International Monetary Fund  once again ( )IMF
noted that Germany’s current account balance could not be explained by the 
fundamentals.  The  goes one step further, suggesting there may be a EU
macroeconomic imbalance behind the surplus. It has thus regularly been calling for 
corrective action within the context of its  since 2013.  The Bundesbank has always MIP
emphasised that the balance primarily stems from private, market economy-based 
transactions over which the government has no direct influence and that the current 
account balance is therefore not an independent economic target variable in terms of 
German economic policy. 3) 
 4) 
 5) 
3 See International Monetary Fund (2024).
4 See European Union.
5 At the same time, the Bundesbank agrees with the  and the European Commission that it would make IMF
sense to lower certain barriers to investment in Germany and speed up bureaucratic procedures. However, 
these measures are not being suggested because of their impact on the current account balance, but because 
they make sense from an economic perspective – by helping to increase potential output, for example.

The recording of retained earnings in the balance of payments and their relevance for the 
German current account surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 202 Recording reinvested earnings in the current account
The study presented here examines how one component of the current account 
balance is calculated. It starts with the statistical preparation of this item of the 
balance of payments and explores aspects that precede the political considerations 
relating to the overall balance.  The technical, statistical factors that determine the 
figure reported for the current account balance include in particular international 
conventions that govern how specific transactions are to be recorded in the balance of 
payments. The current accounting rules can be found in the sixth edition of the Balance 
of Payments Manual ( ), published by the BPM6 .IMF
The conceptual distinction made between direct investment and portfolio 
investment has a major impact on how retained earnings are recorded.   BPM6
differentiates between firms that are controlled to a large extent by a single foreign 
owner and firms whose shares are in free float abroad – i.e. whose equity capital is 
widely dispersed among foreign investors. In the case of the latter, it is assumed that 
individual investors do not have any direct influence on corporate decisions. As a result, 
it always depends on who ultimately has the power to decide whether earnings should 
be distributed or invested.
Retained and reinvested earnings on portfolio investment are not considered cross-
border investment income from a statistical perspective.  Retained earnings of a 
domestic direct investment enterprise classified as a subsidiary of a foreign direct 
investor are allocated to the investment income of this (foreign) investor. These 
retained earnings are recorded as reinvestment in the financial account. If the foreign 
shares are held in free float, however, the firm’s local management decides on the 
appropriation of profits. The balance of payments then only captures the distributed 
profit as cross-border investment income, while retained and reinvested earnings do 
not appear. 6) 
 7) 
 8) 
6 See International Monetary Fund (2013).
7 The distinguishing criterion is an equity investment threshold of 10%: A stake of 10% or more is considered 
direct investment, and a stake of less than 10% is considered portfolio investment. Separate allocation and the 
aforementioned holding thresholds will be retained in the next version of the  balance of payments manual ( IMF's
). BPM7
8 The retained profits of mutual funds are also allocated to the holders of mutual fund shares. In this respect, 
they are equivalent to direct investment.

The recording of retained earnings in the balance of payments and their relevance for the 
German current account surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 21The different methods of recording retained earnings for direct investment and 
portfolio investment may have an impact on the reported current account balance.  
Retained earnings are equivalent to corporate savings and have become increasingly 
important.  This may have an impact on the German current account balance because 
equity investments in the portfolio segment account for a larger share of Germany’s 
foreign liabilities than of its foreign assets. In turn, direct investment has a higher 
weighting on the assets side of the German international investment position than on 
the liabilities side. Including retained earnings as investment income in portfolio 
investment would therefore be expected to increase expenditure more strongly than 
receipts. This means that the investment income balance posted, and thus the current 
account balance, probably tend to be lower than in the calculation based on 
international standards.
 9) 
9 See Chen et al. (2017).

The recording of retained earnings in the balance of payments and their relevance for the 
German current account surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 22Supplementary information
Allocating firms’ retained earnings in free float
The biggest challenge in calculating “modified investment income” lies in 
identifying the ownership of firms in free float and linking this ownership to the 
profits made by that firm.  In its external sector report for 2018, the  itself drew IMF
attention to the fact that reinvested earnings are recorded differently in direct 
investment and portfolio investment. In a Technical Supplement, it calculated modified 
current account ratios which would result if retained earnings were allocated to the 
respective shareholders in portfolio investment as well.  Owing to a lack of firm-
specific data, the  like other studies on this topic, uses average, country-specific ,IMF
ratios on the retention of company profits and combines them with balance-of-
payments data on primary income.  This method can be used to roughly estimate the 
share of the retained corporate earnings held by foreign portfolio investors.
The study presented here draws on firm-specific data on the ownership structures, 
yields and dividends of German firms in which non-resident investors hold an equity 
interest.  This method is likely to provide more accurate estimates of the significance 
the treatment of retained earnings dependent on ownership has on the reported 
current account balance. Data on profits and dividends are taken from the commercial 
database Orbis by Bureau van Dijk. Since Orbis contains no information on dividend 
payments for financial corporations, these data are taken from data provider 
Bloomberg. In 2020, the Orbis database covered around 80% of all listed German firms. 
As the database tends to cover larger firms, it provides a pretty good picture of the 
entire universe of companies listed on stock exchanges. The data are thus likely to 
include most of the recognisable cross-border profits of German firms. 1) 
 2) 
1 See International Monetary Fund (2018). In an update to the 2018 External Sector Report, it wrote: “While for 
direct investment equity, both paid out dividends and retained earnings are recorded in the current account 
income balance, for portfolio equity only paid out dividends are recorded. Consequently, retained earnings are 
reflected in  valuation changes only. This treatment is consistent with the  notion that retained earnings IIP BPM6
can be considered part of a formal agreement for remuneration on investment (and, hence, income) for the 
case of foreign direct investment equity (where a deliberate decision to retain earnings can be presumed) but 
not for portfolio equity. From an economic perspective, however, retained earnings can be considered income 
in both cases.”, International Monetary Fund (2019), p. 32.
2 See Adler et al. (2018) or Fischer et al. (2019).

The recording of retained earnings in the balance of payments and their relevance for the 
German current account surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 23Foreign equity interests in the German firms in question remained relatively 
constant between 2012 and 2020, hovering at around 59% on average. The balance 
sheet data on German firms’ dividends and profits are combined with information on 
the ownership structure. The Bundesbank’s “ -Base plus” statistics contain entries on SHS
foreign participating interests in German firms. All in all, data for the years from 2012 
to 2020 were available for the study.
The amount of retained earnings abroad that can be attributed to German portfolio 
investors can only be approximated.  There are no uniform, comprehensive statistics 
on German portfolio ownership in individual foreign firms. This means that no data are 
available on the extent of German portfolio investors’ participation in a country’s 
individual firms. A possible approximation can be made using information on the total 
dividends flowing to German investors in securities from country   in year  . Germany’s 
current account records these payments. The level of reinvested earnings is calculated 
from the rise in a firm’s equity that cannot be attributed to a capital increase from 
external financing. By aggregating this value across all firms, it is possible to estimate 
the country-specific ratio of reinvested earnings to dividends paid out. If this ratio is 
multiplied by German dividend income from country  , the product can be used as an 
approximation value for the retained earnings of German investors in country   and 
 3) 

The recording of retained earnings in the balance of payments and their relevance for the 
German current account surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 24year  . This assumes that the share of German portfolio investors in total retained 
earnings in a partner country corresponds to their share of the dividends that firms in 
this country pay out.
Where  retained (reinvested) earnings in country attributable to German  
  =  
 
shareholders;   retained (reinvested) earnings of firm in country in year  ;
  =  
   
 
  
 = 
distributed profits of firm  in country in year  ;   German dividend information 
    
 
  
 =
from country  in year  .  
The approximation value for corporate savings accrued to German investors should 
be interpreted with caution.  If, for example, German portfolio investors invested 
primarily in firms with a low ratio of retained earnings to distributed profits, i.e. a high 
distribution ratio, the approximation value would be distorted upwards (and vice versa).
The ratio of retained earnings to distributed profits is quite similar in most of the 
countries in question, including Germany, with the longer-term average at just 
above 1.  The study defines the number of foreign partner countries taken into 
consideration such that, overall, it covers at least 95% of the foreign dividends of 
German securities investors each year from 2012 to 2020. This means that a total of 38 
target countries are included in the study. Data provider Refinitiv Eikon provides 
information on the dividends and retained earnings of foreign firms. The ratio of 
retained earnings to dividends paid out is 1.06 based on the unweighted average from 
2012 to 2020 and of the 38 countries. The corresponding figure for Germany is 1.07. 
This difference is negligible, especially in view of the existing estimation uncertainty. 3) 
 4) 
3 Orbis provides the available firm-level data. They are based on the annual financial statements of non-resident 
enterprises. These show provisions for planned dividends, which are only paid out the following year. It is only 
then that they are reported as investment income in the current account. The study therefore uses the 
dividend distributions announced in the annual reports of the previous year. These do not, however, 
necessarily reflect the subsequent, actual distributions.
4 To approximate any potential measurement biases, Goldbach et al. (2024) also calculated the share of retained 
earnings in German attributable to non-residents using the formula outlined here (“macro” approach) and 
compared it with the results of the aforementioned study based on individual firm-level data (“micro” 
approach). The comparison shows that the macro approach tends to overstate the allocation of retained 
earnings to foreign portfolio investors (by around 10% on average). From this, it can be concluded that the 
haircut calculated for the German current account balance is, if anything, too low. The deduction would be 
larger if the retained earnings of non-resident firms attributable to German portfolio investors were calculated 
using the micro approach.

The recording of retained earnings in the balance of payments and their relevance for the 
German current account surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 25


The recording of retained earnings in the balance of payments and their relevance for the 
German current account surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 26If retained earnings in the area of portfolio investment were to be recorded in the 
balance of payments as investment income, the current account balance reported 
would be lower than in the official statistics in all years under review.  In the 
alternative method of calculating the balance, the largest difference in the German 
current account surplus to date would have been in 2017, at €23.5 billion. The smallest 
downward revision would have been in 2020 as a result of the coronavirus pandemic, 
when enterprises’ earnings and the associated savings were unusually low, meaning 
that the adjustment was also minor. Between 2012 and 2020, the potential (always 
negative) adjustment amounted to €11.5 billion or around 5% of Germany’s current 
account surplus on average per year.
In the economic policy debate, the German current account ratio is regularly a key 
topic in terms of the current account balance as a percentage of . GDP  The European 
Commission’s scoreboard sets a threshold value of 4% here which, if exceeded, 
suggests that a closer analysis of the causes may be advisable. With the adjustments 
outlined here, Germany’s current account ratio would have been just under half a 
percentage point lower each year on average over the period from 2012 to 2020 than 
in the official calculation. However, it would have exceeded the threshold value defined 
by the European Commission’s scoreboard every year since 2013, regardless of the 
calculation method used.


The recording of retained earnings in the balance of payments and their relevance for the 
German current account surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 273 List of references
Adler, G., D. Garcia-Macia and S. Krogstrup (2018), The measurement of external 
accounts,  Working Paper 19/132.IMF
Chen, P., L. Karabarbounis and B. Neiman (2017), The global rise of corporate saving, 
Journal of Monetary Economics 89, pp. 1-19.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2014), Ownership structure in the German equity market: 
general trends and changes in the financial crisis, Monthly Report, September 2014, pp. 
19-32.
European Union, Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedures, In-depth reviews.
Fischer, A.M., H. Groeger, P. Sauré and P. Yesin (2019), Current account adjustment and 
retained earnings, Journal of International Money and Finance 94, pp. 246-259.
Goldbach, S., P. Harms, A. Jochem, V. Nitsch and A. Weichenrieder (2024), Retained 
Earnings, Foreign Portfolio Ownership, and the German Current Account: A Firm-Level 
Approach, German Economic Review, Vol. 25 (2), pp. 127-145.
International Monetary Fund (2024), External Sector Report – Imbalances Receding, 
Washington D.C.
International Monetary Fund (2019), The External Balance Assessment Methodology 
2018 Update,  Working Paper 19/65.IMF
International Monetary Fund (2018), External Sector Report – Refinements to the 
External Balance Assessment Methodology – Technical Supplement, Washington D.C.
International Monetary Fund (2013), Sixth edition of the 'IMF s balance of payments and 
international investment position manual ( ), BPM6  Washington D.C.
 

28Germany’s international 
interconnectedness via 
foreign direct 
investment: current 
developments

Germany’s international interconnectedness via foreign direct investment: current 
developments
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 29Historians could look back upon the current decade as a turning point in the 
international division of labour. Following years of growing real and financial 
interconnectedness, signs were starting to emerge in the 2010s that some countries 
were beginning to renounce multilateralism and put greater stock in protectionist 
measures to promote their domestic economies. This was demonstrated in 2016 when 
Donald Trump was elected President of the United States and the United Kingdom 
voted to leave the European Union (Brexit referendum). The coronavirus pandemic in 
spring 2020 and Russia’s attack on Ukraine two years later caused unprecedented 
disruptions to international supply chains. Production relationships, which are set to be 
guided more strongly by geopolitical criteria than in the past, could undergo lasting 
change owing to the two events. This article will cover the extent to which this is 
already being reflected in Germany’s foreign direct investment  relationships. It ()FDI
raises three central issues and draws preliminary conclusions: (1) German firms have 
recently been investing heavily in the United States again, with both geopolitical 
aspects and attractive local production conditions being possible contributing factors. 
(2) Over the past few years, high reinvested earnings in China have hidden the fact that 
the dynamics of new  in China have slowed down and that, to some extent, capital FDI
has even been pulled out. (3) As a location for multinational enterprises, Germany is 
competing intensely with other industrial nations for  within the euro area, France ;FDI
and Spain, as a percentage of  have recently been more successful in attracting , GDP FDI
.

Germany’s international interconnectedness via foreign direct investment: current 
developments
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 301 Spotlight on German  relationshipsFDI
The 2020s have thus far been marked by severe crises.  In the first half of 2020, the 
coronavirus pandemic sent the global economy into a tailspin in the space of just a few 
weeks. Two years later, Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine sent energy prices 
rising, especially in Germany. Trade and geopolitical tensions between the United 
States and China, having already mounted significantly under the Trump 
administration in the United States  intensified further. The events led to the resilience ,
of cross-border relationships being questioned and greater importance being attached 
to geopolitical criteria as a location factor.
German firms are particularly affected by the global tensions. They have traditionally 
put a lot of stock in the international division of labour and sell a lot of products 
abroad. Against this backdrop, politicians and the business community have been 
heatedly debating, in particular, three aspects of Germany’s  relationships. (1) Does FDI
Germany’s  provide any indication of potential offshoring on the part of Germany’s FDI
industrial sector? (2) How should German firms’ continuously high investment in China 
be assessed in light of rising geopolitical tensions? (3) Are reduced inward flows of  FDI
into Germany a sign that Germany is becoming internationally less competitive as a 
business location? This article will address these three issues and shed light on them 
using current figures on Germany’s  relationships.FDI

Germany’s international interconnectedness via foreign direct investment: current 
developments
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 312 German outward FDI
2.1 Potential relocations of manufacturing
As in the past decade, German firms have been investing heavily abroad since the 
beginning of the 2020s . Chart 3.1 shows that German  rose cumulatively by just shy FDI
of €1,700 billion between January 2010 and June 2024.  The dynamics of the 2010s 
thus continued unabated.  comprises equity capital and intra-group loans. Equity FDI
capital, especially in manufacturing, provides a realistic insight into German firms’ cross-
border investment in the real economy. It rose relatively constantly across the entire 
period, accounting for around two-thirds of recorded German  transactions.FDI
Since 2022, the overall dynamics have weakened slightly in line with a global decline in 
cross-border  flows.  However, this damper primarily affected intra-group loans, FDI
which often reflect financial transactions. 1) 
 2) 
 3) 
1 Data are based on flows of the German balance of payments, which is prepared by the Bundesbank.
2 See United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (2024).
3 Differences between countries in taxation and capital market funding conditions play a particularly important 
role in transactions of this type.

Germany’s international interconnectedness via foreign direct investment: current 
developments
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 32Measured in terms of stock data, the United States and the euro area are the most 
important sites for German FDI in manufacturing.  This is shown by detailed figures 
from the Bundesbank’s Microdatabase Direct investment  (Chart 3.2, left panel).  ( ) MiDi
At the end of 2022, the two economic regions collectively accounted for more than half 
of German equity capital held in manufacturing via  Up until 2014, the euro area .FDI
was German conglomerates’ preferred location; in 2015 the United States superseded 
the euro area as the most important partner region.
 4) 
4 Data in  are available through 2022. They encompass the global firm structure of German multinationals’ MiDi
foreign subsidiaries.

Germany’s international interconnectedness via foreign direct investment: current 
developments
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 33Industrial production in Germany has been stagnating since 2022; in the energy-
intensive economic sectors, it actually plunged when energy prices rose.  Chart 3.3 
illustrates that the industrial production of energy-intensive enterprises dropped by 
around 15% in 2022. This negative trend persisted until the end of 2023, causing a drop 
of 20% in all. At the same time, electricity prices for industry in Germany rose 
temporarily by up to 40%. In June 2024, they were still 27% above their end-2021 levels.
 5) 
5 The four following sectors (2-digit level of  Rev. 2) are defined by Bruegel as energy-intensive: NACE
manufacture of paper and paper products (sector 17); manufacture of chemicals and chemical products 
(sector 20); manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products (sector 23); manufacture of basic metals 
(sector 24).

Germany’s international interconnectedness via foreign direct investment: current 
developments
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 34Between the end of 2020 and the end of 2022, stocks of German FDI in energy-
intensive economic sectors in the United States rose particularly sharply (Chart 3.2, 
right panel). In connection with the slump in industrial production in Germany, this 
could indicate that energy-intensive enterprises are availing themselves of foreign 
production sites owing to relatively inexpensive production costs, amongst other 
factors.
2.2 German firms’ presence in China
The importance of China and other G20 emerging economies as destinations of 
German FDI in manufacturing grew at an accelerated pace in the 2020 to 2022 
period relative to the preceding years.  In 2022, German  equity capital saw higher-FDI
than-average growth both in China (from €62 billion to €79 billion) and in the rest of the 
 emerging economies (from €53 billion to €61 billion), whereas German  equity G20 FDI
capital in the United States decreased slightly (from €160 billion as at end-2021 to €157 
billion as at end-2022). These countervailing developments took place in different 
manufacturing sectors, however: whereas  in China picked up in the automotive FDI
industry, in particular,  stocks in the United States fell primarily in pharmaceuticals FDI
and the manufacture of machinery and equipment, in stark contrast to investment in 
energy-intensive industries. From this, it can be concluded that the two phenomena 


Germany’s international interconnectedness via foreign direct investment: current 
developments
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 35were essentially independent of one another and at least do not reflect any direct 
substitution effects. This is also supported by the fact that the three (groups of) 
countries mentioned  China and the other  emerging market (United States , G20
economies) had a relatively constant number of foreign subsidiaries. Therefore, plant 
closures and sales were balanced out by greenfield investments and acquisitions.
German firms’ heavy investment in China in the past years and the first half of 2024 
was attributable largely to reinvested earnings.  This sets German enterprises apart 
from other foreign groups, the majority of which withdrew retained earnings from 
previous years, thereby reducing their equity interests in China.  The persistently high 
level of German  in China has come under some criticism for being an obstacle to FDI
greater economic diversification – something that is actually appropriate at the micro 
level as well – and for cementing existing dependencies.  On the other hand, overall 
developments have been shaped by just a small number of German groups whose 
subsidiaries in China have been highly profitable .  These developments are therefore 
not necessarily representative of the numerous German enterprises active in China. 6) 
 7) 
 8) 
 9) 
6 This was also addressed in Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a). That article, however, was still based on data prior 
to the most recent, comprehensive data revision of the spring of this year. According to current calculations, 
reinvested earnings in China in the past few years fell short of previous estimates yet, even according to the 
revised data, still dominate the trend in German enterprises’ equity investment in China.
7 For more on this, see Douglas and Soon (2023). This also runs counter to the notion that strict regulation of FDI
in China, in particular, is responsible for the high reinvested earnings of German enterprises. Amongst other 
things, this regulation stipulates high statutory reserves, but it affects other foreign groups as well. See 
PricewaterhouseCoopers (2023).
8 For more on this, see Siebelt (2024).
9 It is particularly in the automotive sector, which accounted for more than one-third of German  stocks in FDI
China as at the end of 2023, in which the earnings of Chinese subsidiaries are highly concentrated.

Germany’s international interconnectedness via foreign direct investment: current 
developments
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 36According to balance of payments data, German firms have tended to be cautious 
regarding new FDI in China, whereas they have begun to invest more again in the 
United States.  The investment in cross-border equity capital reported in the balance of 
payments consists largely of transfers of equity capital funds in the narrower sense and 
reinvested earnings. If reinvested earnings are disregarded, a look at equity capital in 
the narrower sense shows that some German investors have withdrawn capital from 
China since 2017, with the liquidation of existing capital exceeding injections of new 
equity capital in recent years. By contrast, disinvestment from the United States in 2023 
was probably more of an outlier: German enterprises significantly replenished their 
equity capital there in the first half of 2024 — here, equity capital in the narrower sense 
was dominant, with reinvested earnings playing only a minor role.
The fact that there are fewer Chinese subsidiaries since 2017 is an indication that 
China may have lost some of its attractiveness as a destination for new FDI by 
German enterprises.  By contrast, German enterprises have stepped up their 
investment in new plant and equipment in the United States. Among many possible 
factors, two important ones, especially just recently, may be that economic growth in 
China has cooled off perceptibly and the  administration, not least by passing the US
 10) 
10 The number of Chinese subsidiaries continued to rise in the past few years, but at a significantly slower pace 
since 2017.

Germany’s international interconnectedness via foreign direct investment: current 
developments
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 37Inflation Reduction Act  has set strong incentives for locating production in the (),IRA
United States. However, it is also possible that German enterprises – running counter to 
the criticism expressed – are responding increasingly to the current geopolitical 
environment.

Germany’s international interconnectedness via foreign direct investment: current 
developments
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 383 Foreign direct investment in Germany
From the end of 2019 to June 2024, foreign investors increased their equity capital in 
Germany by a cumulative €163 billion.  The majority of this investment was from non-
euro area countries (€104 billion). The most important originator country was the 
United States, at €56 billion, followed by the Netherlands (€35 billion) and the United 
Kingdom (€17 billion).
Since 2022, inward FDI in Germany has declined significantly. Since the end of 2021, 
the rest of the euro area has made available next to no additional equity capital, on 
balance. Inflows from third countries, though still positive, have tailed off significantly 
relative to the period between the end of 2019 and the end of 2021. Following 
investments by foreign enterprises collectively amounting to just under €100 billion in 
equity capital in Germany in the years 2020 and 2021, Germany subsequently received 
only €62 billion in equity capital up until mid-2024. In fact, it is possible to identify a 
statistically significant structural break in 2022 leading to a significant reduction in the 
amount of  received by Germany.  Whereas  investors from the United States FDI FDI
and the Netherlands played a central role both before and after this structural break, 
inflows of funds from the United Kingdom have diminished in importance markedly in 
the past two years. One probable factor here is that the United Kingdom left the 
European Union on 31 January 2020. 11) 
 12) 
11 Although China is a key destination for German  in terms of volume it is only a minor player as a country ,FDI
of origin of  in Germany. Since 2020, Chinese enterprises have invested, on balance, only €237 million in FDI
additional equity capital in Germany.
12 Statistical tests such as the Chow breakpoint test, Chow forecast test and Quandt-Andrews unknown 
breakpoint test point to such a structural break. However, these results should always be interpreted against 
the background of a relatively small sample size and the associated uncertainty.

Germany’s international interconnectedness via foreign direct investment: current 
developments
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 39In manufacturing, FDI investors invested primarily in the manufacture of motor 
vehicles and motor vehicle parts, machinery and equipment, and computer 
products. Since 2020, nearly 60% of all inflows of  in manufacturing has gone to FDI
these three industries.  The manufacture of motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts 
and of machinery and equipment has traditionally represented the industrial core of 
the German economy. There was relatively little investment in the particularly energy-
intensive industries (see ) (less than 10% of inward  in manufacturing). footnote 5 FDI
Other advanced economies in the euro area are also receiving FDI inflows.  
Measured in terms of their  France and Spain were more popular among  , GDP FDI
donors.  in Italy recovered somewhat following a pronounced slump in 2020, but its FDI
dynamics remain stunted. By contrast, the marked pullout of  capital from key euro FDI
area holding locations was particularly evident.  stocks in Ireland, Luxembourg and FDI
the Netherlands have dropped off considerably since 2021, causing the euro area as a 
whole to suffer disinvestment.
 13) 
 14) 
13 Including repair and installation of machinery and equipment.
14 These holding companies manage  funds across the globe. There were also net withdrawals of equity FDI
capital from the aforementioned countries in 2023 as well, though on a considerably lesser scale than in 2022. 
 believes that this may be due to restructuring operations by multinational enterprises in response to the UNCTAD
introduction of a global minimum tax. See United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (2024), 
Chapter 1.

Germany’s international interconnectedness via foreign direct investment: current 
developments
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 40Reasons for the reduction in FDI inflows into Germany since 2022 cannot yet be 
pinpointed with certainty.  However – as with German  abroad – high energy prices FDI
in Germany could be a factor. Both cyclical and structural factors are at work here.  
Another key factor is also the intense competition between locations for foreign 
investment, especially in future-oriented and strategically important industries. Here, 
Germany and Europe will have to show in the coming years that they can maintain their 
international competitiveness and ability to attract foreign capital.
 15) 
15 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b).

Germany’s international interconnectedness via foreign direct investment: current 
developments
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 414 Conclusion
Since 2020, Germany’s FDI relationships have displayed some characteristic 
developments that could indicate lasting changes in international 
interconnectedness.  Looking at Germany’s outward  geopolitical considerations ,FDI
are becoming an increasingly important factor alongside production conditions in 
choosing where to invest. The United States is particularly attractive to German 
enterprises, both in terms of production conditions and as a strategic partner. China 
remains an important destination of German  However, the dynamics of new  .FDI FDI
have been visibly slowing down, and firms have been pulling out capital. Conversely, 
Germany as an investment location is competing with other countries for  Germany .FDI
has recently lost ground to other euro area industrial countries such as France or Spain. 
However, the available data do not imply that international investors are turning their 
backs on Germany altogether.

Germany’s international interconnectedness via foreign direct investment: current 
developments
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 42List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a), Risks facing Germany as a result of its economic ties 
with China, Monthly Report, January 2024 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), Developments in euro area business dynamism, 
Monthly Report, March 2024 .
Douglas, J. and W. Soon (2023), Foreign Firms Pull Billions in Earnings Out of China, The 
Wall Street Journal, 6 November 2023  (paywall).
PricewaterhouseCoopers (2023), Ausschüttung von Gewinnen chinesischer 
Tochtergesellschaften nach Deutschland, March 2023 .
Siebelt, F. (2024), Direktinvestitionen in China deutlich gestiegen, MarketScreener, 13 
August 2024 .
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (2024), World Investment 
Report 2024 .

43State government 
finances in 2023: 
situation worsens, but 
structural balance still in 
surplus

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 44The finances of the state governments including their local governments worsened 
significantly in 2023. Following a large surplus in 2022, an unadjusted deficit of €8 
billion was recorded in 2023. Growth in tax revenue was weak. Meanwhile, individual 
categories of expenditure, such as personnel and service purchases, grew much more 
strongly following the high price increases of recent years.
Nevertheless, the (structural) situation of state government finances was still relatively 
favourable, as the deficit is mainly caused by factors such as temporary measures and 
acquisitions of financial assets weighing heavily on the balance. Adjusted for these and 
for cyclical effects, a structural surplus of €8 billion was recorded in 2023. However, 
developments are likely to remain unfavourable in the current year, and the structural 
balance, too, could move into deficit as tax revenue growth is muted and spending 
growth remains high.
In 2023, the financial situation again differed strongly between the individual state 
governments (including local governments). Saarland achieved the highest per capita 
surplus – largely buoyed by budgetary recovery assistance from central government. 
Although Bremen also receives budgetary recovery assistance, it ranked last by a wide 
margin with a high per capita deficit. Bremen also recorded the highest per capita debt 
amongst all state governments, while Saarland had the highest debt per capita among 
the non-city states. Per capita debt was lowest in Saxony and Bavaria.
In recent years, the state governments have made extensive use of emergency 
borrowing via the debt brake escape clause. They repaid almost €5 billion in the 
reporting year. For the end of 2023, they reported outstanding emergency loans 
amounting to nearly €70 billion (€820 per capita). These loans will have to be repaid at 
future dates according to state-specific repayment schedules. These outstanding 
obligations vary greatly between the state governments. Recipients of budgetary 
recovery assistance Saarland and Bremen have the highest per capita holdings, at 
€3,500 and €3,100, respectively. By contrast, Rhineland-Palatinate and Hamburg have 
already repaid all emergency loans. 
In November 2023, the Federal Constitutional Court ruled that emergency borrowing 
may not be used to finance expenditure in subsequent years (unless an emergency 
situation is declared). At the time of the ruling, the federal states overall had 
established large reserves in connection with emergency situations. In response to the 
ruling, some federal states liquidated parts of their emergency reserves. Certain federal 
states, meanwhile, declared an emergency situation again for 2023 and increased their 
emergency borrowing (first and foremost Brandenburg and Bremen). The use of 
emergency borrowing is also planned for the current year in some instances, including 
in the two federal states receiving budgetary recovery assistance, Bremen and 

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 45Saarland. By contrast, following a ruling by its state constitutional court, Brandenburg 
is no longer making recourse to emergency borrowing, but is instead using its 
reserves. In some federal states, proceedings before the state constitutional courts are 
still ongoing.
State and local government finances and the state-specific debt brakes are still very 
opaque and difficult to compare. In some cases, key information is not available until 
very late. The onus therefore remains on the Stability Council to increase transparency 
in order to facilitate good fiscal surveillance and prevent imbalances. This requires 
comparable data on financial results and the debt brakes. These should be available 
promptly after the annual financial statements are published – ideally in the first 
quarter of the following year and thus around the same time as the central 
government figures. It is also important to have an overview of the state governments’ 
reserves. This would be needed, amongst other things, to assess federal states’ ability 
to respond to unforeseen structural revenue shortfalls or spending needs outside of 
emergency situations. 
Based on past experience, it seems advisable to make the debt brakes of individual 
states more uniform. Amongst other things, there is no compelling reason why state 
governments in some cases report extremely different cyclical effects per capita for the 
same year. 

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 461 Overview and data preparation
State and local government finances deteriorated significantly in 2023 compared 
with the preceding year, but the structural situation, adjusted for one-off effects, 
was still relatively favourable. This regular report on state government finances 
takes a closer look at the results.  This first part starts by explaining how the data are 
prepared. The second part describes the lines of development of the federal states as a 
whole in 2023. The third section focuses on the differences between states. The fourth 
part analyses selected aspects with regard to the state-specific debt brakes, and the 
fifth section provides an outlook for the current year. It concludes with proposals on 
how state government finances could be rendered more transparent.
Presentation of the data
In order to compare the finances of the individual federal states, the cash statistics 
include not only their core budgets but also their local authorities and all of their off-
budget entities.  Looking beyond state governments’ own core budgets ensures that 
the results are not distorted if individual state governments shift tasks and financing 
burdens between these different units. It also makes it easier to compare city states 
with non-city states.
Structural balances are calculated to enable better assessment of the financial 
situation.  To achieve this, the budget balance is adjusted for financial transactions (e.g. 
loan issuances and repayments), temporary cyclical influences, temporary crisis 
measures and known one-off effects. In addition, financial equalisation and 
supplementary central government grants are allocated in accordance with the first 
settlement in the following year, and thus largely on an accruals basis. Cyclical 
influences are calculated using the Bundesbank’s methodology, on the basis of its 
spring macroeconomic forecast. Adjustment is made for temporary influences resulting 
from crisis-related measures (in 2023, these were primarily aimed at cushioning the 
impact of high energy prices) in the state government aggregate. However, this 
adjustment is not performed at the level of individual state governments, as temporary 
influences cannot be fully allocated to specific states. Below, the adjusted balances of 
the individual state governments are therefore referred to as partially adjusted 
structural balances.

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 47In the cash statistics, local public transport has been included among the off-budget 
entities in the general government sector since the second quarter of 2023 (having 
previously fallen outside the general government sector). This reallocation relates to 
the €49 Deutschland-Ticket for the use of local public transport nationwide, which was 
introduced at that time, and the associated higher governmental subsidies.
The inclusion of local public transport among off-budget entities noticeably 
increases general government revenue and expenditure overall for 2023. 
Notably, staff expenses, other operating expenditure, and investment are seeing 
year-on-year growth as a result of the change in allocation. This is accompanied 
by a sharp rise in revenue from usage fees. By contrast, transfers and capital 
injections for local public transport (primarily, it would seem, for the purpose of 
offsetting losses) are down on the previous year, as these are now consolidated.
Overall, the 2023 budget balance is changed only moderately by the inclusion 
of local public transport in the general government sector, as growth in 
expenditure is then only slightly more substantial than that in revenue.
The overall budget balance reported for a federal state may, in some cases, be 
distorted in connection with off-budget entities. If new units have not yet been 
recorded statistically, transfers from the core budgets to these units have a negative 
impact on the balance: whilst the transfer to the off-budget entity reduces the overall 
budget balance, the corresponding revenue received by the off-budget entity does not 
increase it (as this has not yet been recorded and thus this revenue-side counterpart 
entry is missing). Distortions can also occur if the revenue and expenditure entries for 
intra-government transfers are recorded at different points in time. There is an 
anomaly in Schleswig-Holstein’s figures for the reporting year. In the cash statistics, this 
state reports extensive transfers to its off-budget entities. The corresponding revenue 
recorded for these off-budget entities is significantly lower. According to figures from 
the Federal Statistical Office based on data later collected for the annual financial 
statements statistics, which rectify this point, the consolidated budget balance is just 
over €½ billion too unfavourable in the cash statistics. Another anomaly concerns 
Bremen, whose core budget recorded almost €½ billion of investment grants to off-
budget entities, without a corresponding counterpart entry.  This report thus offsets 
the overly unfavourable balances in the calculation of partially adjusted balances as  1) 
 2) 
1 In the national accounts, these units, together with the infrastructure segment of the railway provider 
Deutsche Bahn, were also retroactively allocated to the general government sector as part of the 2024 
summer revision.
2 In the previous year, there had been an even larger negative distortion in Saarland’s figures. However, it was 
possible to allocate this to individual off-budget entities in last year’s reporting, thus neutralising it.

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 48one-off effects.
The comparability of key expenditure categories among the individual federal 
states is limited (even aside from the aforementioned points).  For example, state and 
local governments can either provide services using their own staff and institutions, or 
they can purchase or subsidise similar services from external (private sector) providers. 
This applies, not least, to the areas of education and childcare.
In addition, payments between a state government’s core budget and its off-budget 
entities are consolidated overall only for current and capital transactions, not for 
individual categories. If payments between units in a federal state constitute 
compensation for services (rather than transfers), no consolidation takes place. For 
example, if a state government compensates an off-budget entity for services that 
other state governments include in their core budgets, its total expenditure is 
correspondingly higher.
Furthermore, the recording methods of state and local governments vary. If, for 
example, a state allocates social benefits in the area of integration assistance to its own 
level instead of the local government level, this may be reflected in higher 
administrative expenditure and lower transfers to households.
Below, the figures for the individual state governments are generally shown in 
relation to the respective population size.  This ensures better comparability between 
federal states. Particularly for financial equalisation among the federal states, 
population size is key in determining financing needs and redistributing tax resources 
accordingly.  As outlined above, temporary crisis measures are not factored out on a 
state-by-state basis, as complete data were not available for some federal states. For 
this reason, the partially adjusted balances reported here are less favourable than fully 
adjusted balances. According to the Bundesbank’s estimate, temporary crisis burdens 
of €120 per capita are taken into account in the state government aggregate. 3) 
 4) 
3 The local government finance statistics record expenditure on selected social benefits. These are then 
categorised globally as transfers to households. For the state government budgets, the allocation of 
expenditure follows the budgetary planning system. This does not break spending down by social benefits, 
but by cash payments to households or various expenditures on tangible goods purchases. The example 
concerns the latter.
4 As usual, the data in the report are based on extrapolated population figures from previous years. These also 
form the basis for the provisional figures for 2023 available thus far for the financial equalisation scheme. 
Results from the 2022 census published this year (see ) differ from these to varying Federal Statistical Office (2024)
degrees for the individual federal states.

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 492 Federal state aggregate: deficit in 2023, but structural 
balance still in surplus
In 2023, state and local governments recorded an unadjusted deficit of just under 
€8 billion (0.2% of ). GDP  The federal states reported a deficit of almost €2½ billion in 
their core budgets but a surplus of €1½ billion in their off-budget entities. Local 
government (core budgets and off-budget entities) closed last year with a significant 
deficit of just under €7 billion (see Table 4.1, item 1, and Chart 4.1).
Item Item no 2021 2022 2023
         
Fiscal balance 1 5.1 15.0 -7.7
Financial transactions (net) 2 -8.5 -12.2 -6.3
Settlement of payments under state 
Table 4.1: Budgetary figures for state governments (including local governments) as a whole
€ billion

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 50Item Item no 2021 2022 2023
government financial equalisation 
scheme3 0.4 -0.8 0.0
Adjusted balance 4=1-2+3 14.0 26.4 -1.3
Cyclical component 5 0.5 2.8 1.4
One-off effects 6 -9.1 -22.1 -10.6
      Non-recurring effects 6a - - 0.3
      Coronavirus response measures 6b -9.1 -12.9 -0.7
      Energy measures 6c - -9.3 -10.2
Partially adjusted structural balance 7=4-5-6a 13.5 23.7 -3.1
Adjusted structural balance; 
temporary coronavirus response and 
energy measures removed8=4-5-6 22.5 45.8 7.9
Net interest burden 9 10.2 9.6 9.1
Adjusted structural primary balance 10=8+9 32.8 55.4 16.9
The unadjusted result has deteriorated significantly compared with 2022. Various 
factors outweighed the lower spending resulting from crisis measures and the net 
acquisition of financial assets. Higher wages for a further increased number of staff 
and higher prices for the purchase of services, for example, had a major impact . At the 
On the local government level, expenditure on social benefits also rose sharply. 
revenue side,  low growth in tax revenue (+1%), in particular, had a negative impact. At 
the state government level, tax revenue actually declined slightly. Revenue from real 
 plummeted almost 30% (-€5 billion). estate acquisition tax Value added tax revenue 
central government transferred €3 billion less of this tax to state and local stagnated as 
governments.  Looking at wage and income tax, the fact that bracket creep was offset 
. This offset has been customary for a number of years. by tax cuts slowed growth
Bracket creep is offset with a lag of one year: the high inflation rate in 2022 meant that 
the shortfall in tax revenue as a result of the offset was particularly high in 2023. The 
tax revenue shortfall as a result of energy price measures weighed more than in the 
previous year. . This is likely Receipts from fees went up sharply due to the integration 
, though this had only a moderate impact on the balance (see of public transport
Chapter 1 entitled ). In addition, state and local Overview and data preparation
governments are likely to have financed inflation-driven cost increases by raising fees 
in some instances. At the local government level , local business taxes rose sharply, and  5) 
5 In 2022, central government had, in particular, provided compensation for additional spending by state and 
local governments in connection with benefits for asylum seekers. In addition, it had reimbursed state and 
local governments for revenue shortfalls as a result of the 2021 child bonus; see . Bundesrat (2022)

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 51a settlement-related one-off effect in relation to income tax shares had a positive effect.
 However, these alleviating factors were unable, by far, to compensate for the above-
mentioned burdens at the local government level.
Structurally, state and local governments remained in surplus. However, in a year-on-
year comparison, this surplus deteriorated significantly more than the unadjusted 
balance (see Table 4.1, items 2-8). Compared with the unadjusted balance in 2023, the 
structural outturn is better because it is adjusted for various factors that had, overall, 
weighed on the unadjusted balance:
Burdens of €6 billion as a result of financial transactions  and temporary 
burdens of €10 billion from measures to combat the energy crisis were 
eliminated. The Bundesbank has estimated some of the temporary burdens, in 
particular the revenue shortfall resulting from the tax exemption for inflation 
compensation bonuses, which account for around half of these burdens. The 
reduced VAT on gas and district heating as well as on restaurant meals weighed 
similarly heavily.
In structural terms, however, adjustment was also made for some (less 
significant) relief. For example, the Bundesbank estimate showed a small degree 
of cyclical relief,  which the fiscal balance was adjusted for. Further adjustments 
hardly weighed on the aggregate result. 6) 
 7) 
 8) 
 9) 
6 For more information, see . Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a)
7 A large part of the financial transactions are attributable to special pension funds, which invest the funds they 
receive.
8 Entrepreneurial and investment income developed relatively favourably, which brought cyclical relief for profit-
related taxes. This relief was somewhat greater than the cyclical burdens affecting wage tax and  The .VAT
Bundesbank’s estimation method derives the cyclical influences on the various types of tax from the trend 
deviations of the key macroeconomic reference variables. See also . Deutsche Bundesbank (2006)
9 On balance, the state-specifically adjusted one-off effects provided slight relief (included in the crisis-related 
measures in the following chart). As a shareholder of a logistics company, Hamburg received a fairly large 
special dividend of just over €1 billion. On aggregate, this was largely neutralised by corrections for statistical 
anomalies in relation to off-budget entities. These weighed on the unadjusted balance by just over €½ billion 
in Schleswig-Holstein and by just under €½ billion in Bremen. The lagged settlement of payments under the 
state government financial equalisation scheme (including supplementary central government grants that are 
dependent on financial capacity) had little impact on the overall result. By contrast, individual states were 
significantly affected (see Chart 4.3).

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 52


State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 533 State government results vary greatly
The unadjusted surplus
Half of state governments (including local governments) recorded an unadjusted 
surplus in 2023. Overall, the range in the results was just over €1,300 per capita.  
Saarland achieved the highest surplus (€550), and Bremen recorded the largest deficit 
(€780).
Bremen and Saarland have been receiving large amounts of budgetary recovery 
assistance from central government since 2020.  Last year, this amounted to €580 
per capita in Bremen and €400 in Saarland. Each state receives recovery assistance 
totalling €400 million per year. In return, they are normally obliged to make minimum 
repayments of €80 million each per year. Saarland’s surplus exceeded this amount and 
ultimately meant the state was able to make the required repayment. Bremen, by 
contrast, had a large deficit. It declared a state of emergency and took out additional 
loans to finance its budget. The Federal Ministry of Finance appears to have accepted 
Bremen’s actions and refrained from reducing its budgetary recovery assistance.
The partially adjusted per capita deficit
The partially adjusted per capita deficit stood at €40 across all states (2022: surplus 
of €280). The width between the states was significantly smaller than in unadjusted 
terms and stood at €600.  Saarland again reported the highest surplus, at €250 per 
capita (including budgetary recovery assistance). Next came Thuringia, Saxony-Anhalt 
and Lower Saxony with surpluses in the region of €150 per capita.
As in the previous year, the city state of Bremen recorded the highest structural deficit 
per capita, which grew to €360 (2022: €310) (adjusted for the statistical gap mentioned 
above). The large deficit is remarkable in the light of the budgetary recovery assistance  10) 
 11) 
10 Adjusted for the statistical one-off effect in Bremen, the difference was still €850 per capita (see Chapter 1 
entitled , paragraph: “The overall budget balance reported for a federal state may, Overview and data preparation
in some cases, be distorted in connection with off-budget entities.”
11 In the period from 2011 to 2019, the German state as a whole had already paid these federal states annual 
consolidation assistance of €260 million (Saarland) and €300 million (Bremen). In return, they had to prove 
that they were reducing their structural deficits.

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 54the state has received. Among the non-city states, North Rhine-Westphalia recorded the 
highest deficit, at €280 per capita.  The result consequently deteriorated less sharply 
compared with the preceding year (2022: €140) than the federal state average. One 
factor in this was the sharp improvement in the outturn of an off-budget entity for the 
resolution of the Landesbank.
Per capita revenue
Considerable differences in per capita revenue remain. Looking at tax revenue,  
the span between the non-city states stood at €850.
Frontrunner Hesse (just under €6,300) outperformed last-placed Rhineland-Palatinate 
by 16% (see also , item 19). Differences across the states in real estate Table 4.2
acquisition tax rates and the average multipliers for real estate taxes and local business 
tax are also factors here. However, these differences in the tax rate explain only about 
one-sixth of Hesse’s revenue advantage over Rhineland-Palatinate. Rhineland-
Palatinate, meanwhile, was hit by a one-off effect in 2023. This is because the preceding 
year’s tax potential for local business tax is extrapolated under the financial 
equalisation scheme based on financial capacity. This tax potential was very high back 
in 2022, as a vaccine manufacturer temporarily paid a particularly large amount of 
taxes on earnings. The lag effect explains roughly one-third of the aforementioned 
shortfall in tax revenue as compared with Hesse. 12) 
 13) 
 14) 
12 Without the data corrections for the accounting figures, Schleswig-Holstein would have reported an even 
higher figure, namely a deficit of €310 per capita; see Chapter 1 entitled , Overview and data preparation
paragraph: “The overall budget balance reported for a federal state may, in some cases, be distorted in 
connection with off-budget entities.”
13 Tax revenue accounted for around 70% of total revenue. It is recorded here on an accruals basis for the 
individual federal states (unlike the cash statistics it includes the provisional settlement under the financial 
equalisation scheme based on financial capacity). Local government taxes are included in full. This is different 
from the financial equalisation scheme based on financial capacity, which only includes the larger taxes and 
counts 75% of the revenue they generate. For local business and real estate tax, the financial equalisation 
scheme based on financial capacity further only works with extrapolations of tax potential.
14 In this respect, the lagged burden is the compensation for the favourable outcome under the financial 
equalisation scheme based on financial capacity during the preceding sharp increase in revenue from taxes on 
earnings.

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 55The expenditure side
On the expenditure side, state government budgets can be compared to only a 
limited extent.  This is, in part, because the federal states report the same things 
inconsistently in some cases (see Chapter 1 entitled ). Overview and data preparation
Debt and interest burdens
The debt of state and local governments stood at €825 billion (around €9,800 per 
capita) across Germany. It thus increased less than suggested by the deficits and 
debt of newly included units.  Overall, debt only rose by €4½ billion year on year – 
despite the deficit of just under €8 billion and the newly included debt of the public 
 15) 
15 The figures presented here are taken from the debt statistics of the Federal Statistical Office. They cover debt 
to the non-public sector (the capital market) and the public sector. By contrast, debt as defined under budget 
law may additionally include unused borrowing authorisations. These are then available as reserves (e.g. 
reserves in core budgets or off-budget entities) without funds already having been raised in the capital market.

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 56 At the local government level, debt rose by just over €13 billion, transport companies.
with deficits totalling €7 billion. By contrast, state government-level debt declined by €9 
billion, although the slight deficit in the federal states indicated further borrowing 
needs.
Debt levels continue to differ very widely between state governments (including 
their local governments). Bremen had by far the highest per capita figure, at €33,600, 
followed by Saarland at €19,900. The lowest figure was recorded in Saxony (€2,850), 
closely followed by Bavaria. Per capita debt fell particularly sharply in Hamburg and 
Bremen. In Bremen, higher interest rates meant that the market value of interest rate 
hedges was less negative and the volume of cash collateral to be provided declined. As 
a result, the debt level fell – although additional borrowing was taken out to finance the 
budget.  
 16) 
16 The debt level in Bremen is particularly volatile given extensive derivatives transactions. For more on the 
impact of interest rate hedges in Bremen, see , p. 2 and p. 5. and Bremen Parliament (2024) Deutsche Bundesbank 
, p. 24. (2021)

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 57The average interest rate on debt throughout Germany rose significantly on the 
year.  It went up by 0.3 percentage point to 1.7% (see Tables  and , item 23 in 4.2 4.3
each). Whilst individual state governments are generally able to borrow at similar 
conditions in the capital market, differences in factors such as borrowing dates, interest 
rate fixation periods and interest rate hedges result in average interest rates varying 
quite widely.
The highest average rate of interest was calculated for Bremen and Baden-
Württemberg (2.6%). It rose most sharply (+0.8 percentage point) in North Rhine-
Westphalia. The fact that interest expenditure was kept down in 2022 by special factors 
that ceased to apply in 2023 obviously played an important role here.  In addition, 
local government interest expenditure rose sharply in this state. In particular, average 
interest rates on large local government cash advances, which are typically supposed to 
be paid off promptly, are likely to have risen significantly. In Bremen, growth in the 
average interest rate was only slightly weaker. Interest rate hedges were a factor here: 
with the exceptionally sharp decline in cash collateral as at the reporting date at the 
end of the previous year, Bremen repaid low-interest cash advances taken out for this 
purpose. The only marginally reduced interest expenditure was spread over a 
significantly lower debt level. Saxony again recorded the lowest average interest rate 
(0.9%).
While state government interest expenditure rose on the whole, interest income 
increased somewhat more sharply overall.  On balance, net interest burdens – for 
which interest income is deducted from interest expenditure – therefore fell in most 
federal states. The largest net interest burden per capita was recorded by the city 
states and Saarland (see , item 8). Table 4.2
The way in which fiscal policy is restricted by the net interest burden can be illustrated 
by expressing it as a percentage of tax revenue. In Bremen, the ratio of its net interest 
burden to tax revenue was 10%. According to the state government’s budget plan,  17) 
 18) 
 19) 17 In 2022, the state government budget recorded relatively large amounts as negative interest expenditure in a 
collective item for premia and income from interest rate hedges. For 2023, however, additional interest 
expenditure was budgeted for in the item. Note: As of 2025, central government plans to switch to the accrual 
accounting method for premia and discounts. This had been proposed by the Bundesbank, amongst others; 
see, for example, , p. 61. The switch will prevent premia and discounts from causing Deutsche Bundesbank (2022)
interest expenditure to fluctuate erratically. Changes in interest burdens can then also be better interpreted 
from an economic perspective. It would be advisable for the state governments to follow central government’s 
approach.
18 This may be due to the maturity structure. Where, for example, interest-bearing assets were invested in the 
short term, they responded quickly to the particularly sharp rise in short-term interest rates.

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 58payments for derivatives once again made a considerable contribution to this.  In 
Saarland, the ratio was already significantly lower (4½%). Comparative figures for the 
most heavily burdened non-city and city states not receiving budgetary recovery 
assistance were just under 3% in Schleswig-Holstein and North Rhine-Westphalia and 
2½% in Berlin and Hamburg.
The effective interest burden for Saarland and Bremen is much lower than indicated 
by the net interest burden, because they receive budgetary recovery assistance 
from central government  (see Chart 4.5). After adjustment for budgetary recovery 
assistance, the net interest burden in Bremen amounts to only 2½% of tax revenue. In 
Saarland, it is even negative (-3%). This means that central government assistance more 
than offsets Saarland’s net interest burden.
 19) 
19 Unlike many other federal states, Bremen records expenditure on interest rate hedges separately, thus 
making its budget more transparent. In a supplementary budget for 2023, the state cancelled the expenditure 
appropriations for interest in connection with cash collateral for derivatives. Meanwhile, the relatively high 
interest payments for actual hedging transactions continued.

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 594 State government debt brakes
4.1 Federal Constitutional Court’s ruling leads to fiscal policy 
adjustments in some cases
The Federal Constitutional Court’s ruling of November 2023 also has implications for 
the federal states’ debt brakes.  In its ruling on central government’s second 
supplementary budget for 2021, the court clarified, in particular, that emergency 
borrowing may not be used in later years.  The government may use it only in the 
year for which budget legislators have declared a state of emergency. In addition, it 
must be stated in the budget legislation that the purpose of the emergency borrowing 
is to overcome the crisis situation. It must also be made clear that the scope of 
borrowing authorisations is appropriate for this purpose.
At the time of the ruling, the federal states had set aside or were planning sizeable 
reserves connected to the pandemic as well as multi-year special funds financed 
through emergency borrowing. These needed to be examined following the ruling.  
With respect to pandemic-related reserves, the federal states had reported continued 
borrowing authorisations totalling €18 billion at the end of 2022. Including ongoing 
planning, multi-year special funds financed through emergency borrowing amounted 
to around €15 billion.
Some federal states adjusted their fiscal policies and amended their plans. Others 
justified proposals on the grounds of another state of emergency in that year.  In 
2023, one-third of the federal states activated the escape clauses for their debt brakes  20) 
 21) 
 22) 
20 See , pp. 69 ff. Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a)
21 The first long-term special fund was Saarland’s transformation fund (€3 billion) set up at the end of 2022. 
Emergency borrowing for this purpose was recorded in the year the fund was established. A similar amount as 
in Saarland was planned for Bremen’s climate fund. In 2023, the Berlin state government had passed a special 
fund for climate action, resilience and transformation, initially containing €5 billion. There was scope for a 
further €5 billion increase.
22 See , pp. 75 f. Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b)

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 60in order to be able to obtain new emergency funds. Only North Rhine-Westphalia had 
already declared a state of emergency before the ruling. Brandenburg, Bremen, 
Saarland, Saxony-Anhalt and Schleswig-Holstein did not follow suit until the end of the 
year.
4.2 Repayments of emergency borrowing in 2023 larger than estimated 
repayment capacity
The volume of emergency borrowing as at the end of 2023
As at the end of 2023, the federal states as a whole reported a volume of just over 
€69 billion (€820 per capita) in outstanding emergency borrowing.  Upon approval of 
emergency borrowing, the federal states are required to adopt a repayment schedule. 
As in previous years’ reports, the Bundesbank asked the federal states about their debt 
brake settlement results. Information was also requested on total accumulated 
emergency borrowing and corresponding repayment schedule.
The repayment obligations accrued from emergency borrowing vary greatly from 
one federal state to the next.  Rhineland-Palatinate had already repaid its emergency 
borrowing in 2021. Last year, Hamburg also repaid all emergency borrowing (see also 
the section entitled ). At €3,500, the outstanding per capita Cyclical offset reserves
repayment obligations from emergency borrowing are highest in Saarland, followed by 
Bremen (€3,100). Bremen and Saarland are receiving extensive budgetary recovery 
assistance from central government. In return, they have committed to reducing their 
debt levels. Extensive emergency borrowing will increase this debt for a prolonged 
period and widen the debt gap compared with the other federal states. However, 
repayment obligations stemming from emergency borrowing are not a good indicator 
of how burdened future budgets will be. Existing contingency funds should also be 
taken into consideration. Their size also varies greatly across federal states (see Chart 
).4.8
Repayment schedules for emergency borrowing
The federal states plan to repay outstanding emergency borrowing over varying 
periods. Federal states that have borrowed more tend to have longer repayment 
schedules. It is not yet possible to gauge the actual binding force of the schedules.  
Saxony has the shortest scheduled repayment period (eight years). This has resulted in 
relatively high annual repayment burdens. The particularly long repayment period in 
North Rhine-Westphalia spans 50 years up to 2070, thus lowering annual burdens to a 
much greater extent. Repayment schedules had already entered into effect in six 

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 61federal states, but three of these again declared states of emergency that took priority 
over these schedules. Of the remaining three, Berlin repaid more than scheduled (it 
would appear that this was done using reserves; see the next section), while Thuringia 
repaid nothing (although its level of emergency borrowing is very low). Meanwhile, 
some federal states repaid emergency borrowing even though no payments were 
pending under their repayment schedules.
Emergency borrowing in the 2023 fiscal year
On balance, the federal states repaid just over €4½ billion in emergency borrowing 
in 2023, half of which, as reported by the states, was in response to the Federal 
Constitutional Court’s ruling. Five of the federal states with activated escape clauses 
together obtained €1½ billion in new emergency funds on balance. By contrast, 


State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 62Schleswig-Holstein repaid almost €1½ billion net despite declaring a state of 
emergency. The other federal states repaid a further €5 billion in emergency 
borrowing. The states of Schleswig-Holstein, Berlin and Bremen reported that they 
repaid a total of €2½ billion in response to the ruling of the Federal Constitutional 
Court. In doing so, it appears that these three federal states scaled back the reserves 
they had previously formed from emergency borrowing.
The Bundesbank’s rough calculation  suggests that some federal states used 
reserves for repayment purposes.  This is because the rough calculation for 2023 
shows, on balance, marginally less scope for repayment from budget implementation 
alone.  In the 2023 budgets, there was a structural margin of €4 billion to repay 
emergency borrowing – though actual repayments amounted to just over €4½ billion.
Of the federal states, the take-up of emergency borrowing was highest per capita in 
Brandenburg and Bremen, at just over €170, followed at some distance by Saarland 
and North Rhine-Westphalia. Brandenburg thereby covered its financing needs as 
determined in the rough calculation for 2023 (see ). In Bremen and North Table 4.4
Rhine-Westphalia, these needs still outpaced emergency borrowing. Withdrawals from 
reserves explain this difference. In the case of both Saarland and Saxony-Anhalt, by 
contrast, the calculation indicates no need for such borrowing. The actual take-up of 
emergency borrowing thus exceeded their notional requirements. Meanwhile, the 
moderate repayment of emergency borrowing in Bavaria reflected its calculated 
repayment capacity fairly accurately. Hamburg, Schleswig-Holstein, Berlin and Saxony 
repaid more, in some cases considerably so, than the structural repayment capacity 
determined by the rough calculation would have allowed (for Hamburg, see the section 
entitled ). Outstanding emergency borrowing in Baden- Cyclical offset reserves
Württemberg, Mecklenburg-West Pomerania and Thuringia remained unchanged.  23) 
 24) 
23 The starting point for the Bundesbank’s rough calculation is not the same as that for the settlement of 
federal states’ debt brakes. This is because the Bundesbank determines the federal states’ financing needs or 
room in their budget to make repayments with respect to emergency borrowing based on their cash balances, 
and unlike the federal states, it factors in all off-budget entities. Adjustments for cyclical effects and financial 
transactions are then made following the rules of the respective federal states’ debt brakes. The resulting 
figure is compared with how the volume of emergency borrowing has changed. Differences indicate that 
reserves have been formed or that reserves have been used for repayment. For more on this, see . For Table 4.4
details on the calculation process, see , p. 49. Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b)
24 Specifically, for the federal states as an aggregate in 2023, the starting point for the calculation is the states’ 
balance, including their off-budget entities, of just over €¼ billion (after adjustments in Schleswig-Holstein and 
Bremen on the revenue side; see Chapter 1 entitled , paragraph: “The overall Overview and data preparation
budget balance reported for a federal state may, in some cases, be distorted in connection with off-budget 
entities”). Deducted from this are those burdens caused by cyclical effects and financial transactions. 
According to federal states’ reporting, these deductions improve the balance: the deficit from financial 
transactions amounted to €1 billion, and the negative cyclical component stood at almost €3 billion. There are 
sometimes significant disparities in the cyclical components per capita identified in state-specific procedures. 
The Bundesbank’s cyclical adjustment procedure estimates a cyclical burden of €1 billion for state 
governments as an aggregate (excluding local governments).

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 63Thuringia appears to have covered its financing needs using reserves. Hesse and Lower 
Saxony used only some of their repayment capacity to repay emergency borrowing.
The impact of cyclical effects on the federal states’ debt brakes
The debt brakes of the federal states calculate widely varying cyclical influences in 
2023. This was reflected, in some cases strongly, in individual federal states’ need 
for emergency borrowing to obtain financing.  Specifically, the four federal states that 
actually borrowed the most per capita did not report any cyclical burdens, in contrast to 
the federal states as an aggregate.  In other words, cyclical adjustment did not 
explain any cyclical deficits, and emergency borrowing was deployed to cover at least 
some of the financing needs calculated.  The cyclical relief factored in by Bremen 
ultimately even exceeded the level of emergency borrowing. This means that Bremen’s 
take-up of emergency borrowing can be fully attributed to the cyclical assessment 
differing from the federal states as an aggregate. Saxony-Anhalt, by contrast, took 
account of a very large cyclical burden. This limited the take-up of emergency 
borrowing to a minimum.
The major differences in the cyclical adjustment procedures make it very difficult to 
analyse state government finances with regard to the states’ respective debt 
brakes. Such strong divergences between the cyclical effects of individual federal states 
are difficult to justify from an economic perspective (unless they are resolved in lagged 
payment settlements under the state government financial equalisation scheme). The 
main outcome of this is that the cyclically adjusted figures across the federal states, 
based on data from those states, cannot be meaningfully compared in economic terms. 25) 
 26) 
25 There is only a limited link to outstanding burdens from lagged payment settlements under the state 
government financial equalisation scheme.
26 While the rough calculation did not reveal that Saarland required any financing, it had to additionally make a 
mandatory repayment in the context of its budgetary recovery assistance. The exceptionally high cyclical relief 
largely reflects the burden on the state with respect to lagged payment settlements under the state 
government financial equalisation scheme (see , item 3). Table 4.2

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 644.3 Level of available reserves remains difficult to gauge
Concept of reserves and available information
In order to establish room for manoeuvre in budgets and bridge budget shortfalls 
outside of emergency situations, it is generally helpful to build up reserves 
(although forming reserves using emergency borrowing is prohibited). State 
governments often hold these resources as reserves in the core budget and in special 
funds. These reserves are usually illiquid. Instead, they consist of borrowing 
authorisations to which recourse was made only formally when implementing the 
budget. Funds are only actually procured in the capital market when a need for 
financing materialises.
The federal states have for the most part designated such reserves for specific 
purposes. However, they can also mobilise the funds they have set aside on an ad 


State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 65hoc basis , via legislative adjustments where necessary . Thuringia, for example, 
liquidated its civil servants’ pension fund in 2022 and did not restrict the use of this 
money to making pension payments. Schleswig-Holstein plans to use the contents of its 
civil servants’ pension fund to balance its budget in the coming years. Other federal 
states had already limited payments to their civil servants’ pension funds in recent 
years and used the accrued funds to finance their budgets.
There is still no complete overview of federal states’ reserves.  The Stability 
 This would be helpful in order to conduct well- Council could create transparency here.
founded budget surveillance and assess the situtation of state government finances as 
accurately as possible. While reserve holdings are generally reported in state 
governments’ budget accounts, some states’ budget accounts are not made available 
until very late and often contain numerous different reserves without clearly 
summarising their holdings. However, clear information on reserves is important in 
order to be able to estimate the room that federal states have in their budgets, for 
example in the event of additional borrowing requirements or revenue shortfalls that 
are not explained by cyclical factors.
For this Monthly Report, the Bundesbank asked the state governments about their 
reserve stocks as at the end of 2023. However, there appear to still be some gaps in 
the data (as in previous years).  The information on reserves in special funds and core 
budgets is likely to be comprehensive and comparable. However, there are other 
reserves for which no consistent picture could be painted based on the request for 
information and which would be important in terms of the overall picture. Issues here 
include the fact that, for example, some federal states close the year with target 
appropriations still in their budgets and thus ultimately transfer unused borrowing 
authorisations to subsequent years at year-end: following the ruling of the Federal 
Constitutional Court, it would now be necessary to ensure that these are not 
authorisations for emergency borrowing.
Reserves as a whole
Reserves are the most important component of funds set aside by the state 
governments. On aggregate, the state governments again reported very large 
holdings of €135 billion in their core budgets and in special funds. In most cases, it is 
not known what portion of the reserves has already been ring-fenced for subsequent 
years as planned. The reserves include, in particular, general reserves and reserves for 
civil servants’ pensions. 27) 
27 It is also difficult to maintain an overview at the central government level; see , Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c)
pp. 71 ff.

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 66General reserves
The figure reported for general reserves came to €38 billion (€440 per capita) at the 
end of 2023, up €4 billion on the year.  The general reserves per capita are highest in 
Hamburg (€3,280) and Mecklenburg-West Pomerania (€1,500). In addition to Berlin, 
Schleswig-Holstein did not report any general reserves; in North Rhine-Westphalia and 
Bremen, only a small residual amount was left over.
Over the course of 2023, general reserves went up particularly significantly in 
Hamburg, Rhineland-Palatinate, Lower Saxony and Hesse. With the exception of Hesse, 
these federal states reported surpluses in their budgets. Hesse, on the other hand, 
reclassified funds from its cyclical offset reserve, which it was possible to tap on 
account of a large calculated cyclical burden.
By contrast, general reserves went down particularly in Berlin, Saxony and Thuringia. 
Berlin had massively built up its reserves in 2020 in connection with pandemic-related 
emergency borrowing. It now appears to have restructured its reserves, repaid some of 
its emergency borrowing in response to the Federal Constitutional Court’s ruling and 
covered remaining ongoing financing needs. Saxony and Thuringia, too, used 
withdrawals from general reserves to cover the financing needs of their core budgets.
Reserves for civil servants’ pensions
Civil servants’ pensions represent a growing burden on state government budgets; 
the federal states have expanded their provisioning in this area by €6 billion overall 
to €57 billion.  Pension pots thus still account for the largest share of reserves.  
Saxony has the highest level of funds set aside for pensions, at almost €2,800 per 
capita, although the western German states will have to shoulder far higher pension 
payments. Saxony has filled its pension pots to this level with the intention of being 
able to fully fund pension obligations from reserves in future. The next highest by a 
wide margin are those of Baden-Württemberg and Saxony-Anhalt (in the order of 
€1,000 per capita). Thuringia and Saarland have (almost) no pension reserves. Several 
years ago, Thuringia made adjustments to its pension funding, repaying fixed amounts 
of its legacy debt in order to cover new civil servants’ pensions. Saarland has 
particularly high pension obligations. However, due to its strained budgetary situation, 
it has already used up a significant amount of the funds it had previously set aside for 
this purpose. 28) 
28 A special feature of pension funding is that the federal states do not usually set aside any borrowing 
authorisations for this purpose, but rather invest pension funds in profit-yielding instruments – not least in 
their own state’s debt instruments, but also in shares in some cases.

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 67Cyclical offset reserves 
The figure reported for cyclical offset reserves fell by €2 billion to €9 billion. Cyclical 
effects must be recorded symmetrically under the debt brake. The reserves then fill 
during upturns and empty during downturns, ebbing and flowing in time with the 
economic cycle.
The cyclical offset reserves (in other words, the cyclical item) declined in Hesse and 
 However, in the case of Hamburg, this is not a reflection of Hamburg  in particular.
cyclical budgetary burdens; rather, it is due to the federal state having adjusted its 
cyclical adjustment procedure. Using this new procedure, it calculates cyclical 
budgetary relief of almost €2 billion for 2023 (the cyclical item increases by this 
amount, in other words). For the previous years as a whole, however, this relief was €3 
billion lower than previously estimated (meaning that the cyclical item from previous 
years falls by this amount). Hamburg took the €1 billion difference out of the cyclical  
item. The adjustments made for the crisis years 2020 to 2022 were deducted from the 
outstanding emergency borrowing, which was therefore effectively repaid.
Coronavirus-related reserves
Reserves explicitly related to the coronavirus pandemic more or less halved to €8 
billion.  Such reserves decreased particularly sharply in Baden-Württemberg and Berlin. 
The reasons for this cannot be identified using the information available to date. The 
federal states were probably still funding pandemic-related measures in some cases. In 
other cases, though, they may have also reclassified reserves (see the section entitled 
) for repayments or for general budgetary financing Energy reserves and other reserves
(for more on Berlin, see also the section entitled ). This is an example General reserves
of how difficult it is to get to the bottom of developments in state government reserves.
At an unchanged €680 per capita, Saxony-Anhalt recorded the highest explicitly 
coronavirus-related reserves. At the end of 2023, it had once again declared a state of 
emergency due to the pandemic. North Rhine-Westphalia, too, reported a relatively 
high per capita figure for its coronavirus special fund (€310). The federal state had 
raised funds in the capital market as a precautionary measure and appears to be 
repaying its borrowing as it matures (just over one-half of the borrowed amount fell 
due for repayment in 2024).
Reserves in off-budget entities for investment purposes 29) 
 30) 
29 Hamburg uses a double-entry bookkeeping system, which is why it reports no reserves. However, the cyclical 
item on Hamburg’s balance sheet is similar in nature and has therefore been used here.
30 See . Hamburg Parliament (2024)

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 68For the federal states as an aggregate, reserves in pre-financed off-budget entities 
for investment purposes rose by €1½ billion to €8½ billion.  Berlin and Rhineland-
Palatinate were the main drivers of this increase.
Energy reserves and other reserves
Taken together, the other reserves and energy reserves of the federal states rose by 
€6 billion to €15 billion.  The increase was particularly great in Berlin and Baden-
Württemberg, possibly as a result of reallocations. In Baden-Württemberg, it was 
evidently partly attributable to the fact that the state transferred funds from its cyclical 
borrowing authorisation, as there was apparently no specific financing requirement.  
For Saarland’s other reserves, as in the previous year, the Bundesbank includes lending 
of €3½ billion from off-budget entities to the core budget.  This is because, according 
to the cash statistics, the funds were not used up and the emergency loans taken out 
for this purpose were not repaid either.
Comparison of reserves and outstanding emergency borrowing
While some reserves are earmarked for specific tasks, they could also be mobilised 
as necessary to repay emergency borrowing.  This way, the federal states could avoid 
having to generate structural surpluses to make these repayments. Even if the often 
extensive funds for civil servants’ pensions as well as cyclical offset reserves are 
disregarded, the emergency borrowing of most federal states exists alongside 
significantly larger reserves (see also Chart 4.8). Only in Bremen and North Rhine-
Westphalia are these reserves far from sufficient. In Baden-Württemberg, it should be 
noted that in addition to these reserves, there are other extensive reserves in the form 
of surpluses from previous years. The lion’s share of reserves in Saarland are already 
tied to commitment appropriations.  The arithmetical coverage ratio thus overstates 
the amount of available reserves. 31) 
 32) 
 33) 
31 See also Meyer (2024), pp. 122 ff.
32 This loan is from 2022. The cash statistics only record expenditure in the off-budget entities and no income in 
the core budget. See also , p. 41. Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b)
33 According to figures from the Ministry of Finance of the State of Saarland.

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 69


State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 70Supplementary information
Self-management funds 
Some budget items contain spending authorisations that do not expire at the end of 
the year, known as self-management funds. In this respect, they are similar to 
reserves, but their actual use is not visible in the budget.  In principle, these multi-
year self-management funds are intended to ensure an efficient use of funds. For 
example, they prevent funds from being spent uneconomically at the end of the year 
(“December fever”). As a general rule, spending authorisations expire at the end of a 
given fiscal year. This is probably why federal states sometimes used to disburse large 
amounts of funds at the end of the year, without an apparent increase in funding 
needs. Self-management funds are intended to lessen this “spending pressure” at year-
end.
Specifically, self-management funds are booked as expenditure in the budget by 
year-end at the latest, even if some of these funds have not yet been disbursed.  
Borrowing on the capital markets to cover actual spending needs is only necessary 
when the funds are actually disbursed. In the budget, however, borrowing is also 
booked for funds that have not yet been disbursed. The actual disbursement of the 
funds in subsequent years is then no longer visible in the budgetary figures (they have 
already been booked). Viewed from this perspective, the budgetary statistics give a 
chronologically distorted picture of such outflows.
Self-management funds are not actually intended to fund procurements that are 
expected to span multiple years. If such procurements are foreseeable, they are 
normally recorded in the budget in the form of commitment appropriations.  These 
commitment appropriations then have to be financed in future budgets within the 
framework of the debt brake.  It would not appear to be in the spirit of budgetary law 
to book these as self-management funds (foreseeable use across multiple years). In any 
case, it would be necessary to ensure that these multi-year funds, too, meet the 
constitutional requirements for the use of credit authorisations originating in 
emergency years. 1) 
1 Any remaining fiscal space in a given year could therefore potentially be used to form reserves.

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 71Self-management funds should be reported transparently.  Specifically, funds and 
outflows should be recorded by expenditure type on an ongoing basis. Central 
government, for instance, records these holdings by individual instrument in its annual 
budget accounts. Such information is important for analytical purposes, and it is 
needed anyway in order to ensure an accurate representation of the general 
government sector in the national accounts: expenditure from self-management funds 
should not appear in the national accounts until the spending actually takes place. 
In one state, in particular, self-management funds are very extensive and, at the 
same time, opaque. In addition, they are sometimes mobilised as reserves.  In 
response to a parliamentary question, North Rhine-Westphalia reported holdings of €8 
billion (€450 per capita) at the beginning of the reporting year. The state is now 
booking a portion of its self-management funds from previous years back to its budget 
as revenue. In this respect, these funds are acting as an additional reserve.

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 725 Outlook for 2024 and selected fiscal policy 
considerations
Budgetary developments in 2024
The financial result of state and local governments could deteriorate significantly in 
the current year.  Macroeconomic growth remains subdued. According to the May 
estimate, tax revenue is therefore expected to increase only moderately. For the 
remainder of this year, the steeply rising prices of the past few years are likely to 
generate substantial growth in expenditure, too. For the federal states, personnel costs 
are especially significant. At the state government level, inflation compensation 
bonuses were paid out to employees as from the beginning of 2024, with regular 
wages being raised later on in the year. Tangible goods purchases are also rising 
dynamically due to price factors. At the local government level, the broad-based 
increase in expenditure has exceeded revenue growth even more over the course of 
the year thus far. On balance, the deficit of state and local governments rose 
substantially by a total of €17 billion in the first half of the year, particularly at the local 
government level. The structural balance of state government budgets as an aggregate 
(including local governments) could turn negative for 2024 as a whole.
Cyclical adjustment in the debt brakes
North Rhine-Westphalia, the most populous federal state, is now also planning to 
use borrowing authorisations to offset cyclical burdens for the first time (i.e. to use 
cyclical adjustment as part of the debt brake). In contrast to most other federal states  
and central government, North Rhine-Westphalia has thus far not considered cyclical 
influences in its debt brake. In the current year, borrowing scope of €2 billion is now to 
be made available to finance a corresponding cyclical burden (2% of the budget 
volume).  However, North Rhine-Westphalia intends to use cyclical adjustment only 
temporarily, or even dispense with it altogether if no borrowing authorisations end up 
being required. Any cyclical loans taken out will be recorded in a borrowing account.  34) 
34 See . The calculated cyclical burden takes account of tax State Parliament of North Rhine-Westphalia (2024)
forecast errors as against autumn 2023, when North Rhine-Westphalia had not yet planned for cyclical 
adjustment. On balance, the cyclical burden exceeds the figure calculated for this federal state in the Federal 
Government’s 2024 spring estimate by just under €½ billion.

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 73Once they have been repaid from cyclical surpluses, the plan is to end cyclical 
adjustment.
However, the Bundesbank generally recommends symmetrical cyclical adjustment 
within the framework of budgetary rules such as the debt brake.  In other words, not 
only cyclical deficits should be allowed: rather, it should also be permissible for cyclical 
surpluses to have an impact on the budget in good times. Budgetary policy is otherwise 
at risk of becoming erratic and procyclical. Cyclical surpluses might then be disbursed 
during cyclical upturns. Were policymakers to utilise this leeway, a structural deficit 
would emerge that would then have to be closed procyclically during the next 
downturn.
Developments in emergency borrowing
Bremen, Saarland, Saxony-Anhalt and Schleswig-Holstein are still planning to take 
out emergency loans in 2024. This was also initially envisaged in Brandenburg’s 
budget. However, its state constitutional court ruled that it had not sufficiently justified 
its emergency borrowing in 2023. Although the court did not order the transaction for 
2023 to be reversed, it appears that following the ruling, Brandenburg no longer 
considered the conditions for emergency borrowing in 2024 to have been met and 
restructured its budget without emergency borrowing. In Bavaria, North Rhine-
Westphalia, Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein, decisions from constitutional courts are 
still pending. In Bremen, in addition to the judicial review of the 2023 budget, there 
were reports of proceedings against the 2024 budget.
By contrast, some federal states are planning to repay some of their outstanding 
emergency borrowing this year. This year, as planned, North Rhine-Westphalia, for 
example, repaid €3 billion in emergency loans that it had taken out for its coronavirus 
special fund. At the end of 2023, the special fund had an even higher reserve of €5½ 
billion available. It did not consist of borrowing authorisations parked in the fund, such 
as the Federal Constitutional Court had ruled against for central government; rather, 
North-Rhine Westphalia had already raised the funds in the capital market and 
evidently invested them. However, from an economic perspective, this resembles the 
parking of borrowing authorisations; it therefore seems logical to use this reserve for 
repayments.  Although Mecklenburg-West Pomerania is planning to use reserves 
built up from emergency loans to make repayments this year, it also appears that some  35) 
 36) 
 37) 35 See . taz (2024)
36 In addition, the state ultimately pays the interest on the coronavirus emergency loans from the special fund’s 
reserve. It is difficult to gain an overview of the extent to which other federal states are proceeding in the 
same manner.

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 74of these reserves will be used to finance further crisis-related measures,  though no 
state of emergency has been declared for 2024.
Federal states that are already highly indebted are authorised to take out 
emergency loans this year as well. Saarland and Bremen receive budgetary recovery 
assistance from central government so that they can service and significantly reduce 
their very high legacy debts. Both federal states are planning to take out emergency 
loans in the current year as well, meaning that their borrowing will exceed the standard 
limit under the debt brake accordingly.  In this respect, the debt burden in those 
states is likely to become even greater in future, with both of them diverging further 
from the state average. This runs counter to the objective of Saarland and Bremen 
reducing their debt to a permanently sustainable level.
Transparency of state government finances
State government finances still lack transparency. This makes it difficult to identify 
periods of distress and budgetary scope. Moreover, the range of services offered by the 
different state governments can only be compared to a limited extent. One great 
opportunity afforded by federalism is that federal states can compare services 
rendered in different ways and continuously improve their own offerings as part of a 
best practice approach. As a result, they can provide their services in the most cost-
effective way possible. However, mutual learning and informed decisions of this kind 
require transparency. Meaningful and comparable data make it possible for the 
general public, not least, to better understand the results.
There are a number of approaches that could be used to improve the transparency 
of state government finances.
The basis for transparent public finances is meaningful, harmonised statistics. 
This article and its predecessors highlight the weaknesses in this regard identified 
in various areas. State government finance statistics should report comparable 
transactions in the same way. This would require the federal states to consistently 
apply agreed accounting rules, such as the budgetary planning system, to their 
various revenues and expenditures, clarifying cases of doubt in advance. It would 
also make sense for accounting practices used for the financial statistics to align 
more closely with the national accounts rules. These harmonised rules are used  37) 
 38) 
37 For information on the state’s response to the Federal Constitutional Court’s ruling, see Hellmeyer (2024), pp. 
195 ff.
38 In Saarland, however, the aim of the authorisations is to restructure emergency loans for the state’s 
transformation fund, in particular. The amount of outstanding emergency borrowing therefore will not rise, 
but rather the sum of outstanding capital market debt subject to interest. See . State Parliament of Saarland (2023)

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 75for European budgetary surveillance. Compliance with these accounting rules is 
subject to fairly tight quality control. Finally, they are more geared to the 
economic substance of transactions. 
One obvious starting point for creating greater transparency would be to further 
harmonise the debt brakes, some of which differ greatly between federal states. 
This concerns, not least, cyclical adjustment. At present, cyclical effects diverge 
more strongly across the individual federal states than can be explained from an 
economic perspective. The cyclically adjusted figures based on the federal states’ 
data thus cannot be meaningfully compared.
Were the federal states to harmonise their debt brakes with regard to excluded 
financial asset acquisitions, too, this would also be a welcome development. The 
national accounts provide a good starting point for this. For example, there is 
much to be said for excluding financial transactions from the debt brake only in 
the event that they do not increase the general government deficit in accordance 
with the national accounts rules as well.
Furthermore, it would be logical to also include institutions and companies in the 
debt brake, provided that they belong to the government sector. The federal 
states (and, incidentally, central government) could follow the accounting rules of 
the national accounts for this purpose, too.
In order to better assess the state of public finances, supplementary information 
on the budget plans would be helpful:
The plans should be augmented by meaningful lists of operations which, under 
the European fiscal rules, affect the deficit but not cash flow. These operations 
include, in particular, assumptions of debt. Here, too, the federal states could use 
the national accounts to define such operations. Furthermore, the lists could 
contain overviews of the stocks of non-financial assets that would have to be 
carried at replacement values and with write-downs.
Comprehensive up-to-date information on both commitments entered into for 
subsequent years and on reserves is also essential.
In addition, it is recommended that the federal states present their results under 
the debt brake in a timely manner so that the figures still have political relevance, 
too. So far, the Stability Council has analysed the results of the individual federal states 
in the autumn of the following year. However, the focus is then usually already on 
planning for the subsequent year. This is also true of central government. If the federal 
states were to present their results in the spring already, the figures would 
undoubtedly have a much greater weight. The same would apply if the results were 
provisional, as is the case for central government.

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 76List of references
Bremen Parliament (2024), Bericht über die Derivate des Landes Bremen zum 
31.12.2023, Vorlage VL 21/1626 .
Bundesrat (2022), Gesetzentwurf der Bundesregierung, Entwurf eines Gesetzes zur 
Änderung des Finanzausgleichsgesetzes, des Stabilitätsratsgesetzes sowie weiterer 
Gesetze, Drucksache 365/22 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a), Commentaries, Public finances, Local government 
finances, Monthly Report, April 2024.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), Public finances, Monthly Report, February 2024, pp. 57-
82.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), Federal Constitutional Court issues ruling on debt 
brake, Monthly Report, November 2023, pp. 69-71 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), State government finances in 2022: high surplus 
overall, some states still making extensive recourse to emergency borrowing , Monthly 
Report, October 2023, pp. 39-63 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), The growing significance of central government’s off-
budget entities , Monthly Report, June 2023, pp. 63-82 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022), Central government’s debt brake: options for stability-
oriented further development, Monthly Report, April 2022, pp. 49-66 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), State government finances in 2020: deficit due to 
temporary effects of pandemic, escape clauses also used to build reserves, Monthly 
Report, October 2021, pp. 15-42 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2006), A disaggregated framework for analysing public 
finances: Germany’s fiscal track record between 2000 and 2005, Monthly Report, March 
2006, pp. 61-76 .
Federal Statistical Office (2024), Umstellung der Bevölkerungszahlen auf die Ergebnisse 
des Zensus 2022 .

State government finances in 2023: situation worsens, but structural balance still in 
surplus
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 77Hamburg Parliament (2024), Schriftliche Kleine Anfrage und Antwort des Senats: 
Tilgung von Notfallkrediten für Corona-Maßnahmen, Drucksache 22/15243 .
Hellmeyer, M. (2024), Länderbericht Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, in: Junkernheinrich, M. 
et al. (eds.), Jahrbuch für öffentliche Finanzen 1-2024, pp. 193-198.
Meyer, B. (2024), Länderbericht Baden-Württemberg 2023, in: Junkernheinrich, M. et al. 
(eds.), Jahrbuch für öffentliche Finanzen 1-2024, pp. 121-132.
State Parliament of North Rhine-Westphalia (2024), Gesetz über die Feststellung eines 
Nachtrags zum Haushaltsplan des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen für das Haushaltsjahr 
2024, Gesetzentwurf der Landesregierung, Drucksache 18/9900 .
State Parliament of Saarland  (2023), Antrag der -SPD Landtagsfraktion: Feststellung 
einer außergewöhnlichen Notsituation nach § 2 Abs.  1 Haushaltstabilisierungsgesetz (
HStabG ) für das Haushaltsjahr 2024, Drucksache 17/698 .
taz (2024), FDP zieht Bremer Haushalt vor Gericht – Keine Subvention fürs Klima, report 
of 24 July 2024 .
 

78Wage developments in 
Germany: current 
situation, comparison 
with the euro area, and 
outlook
Monthly Report – October 2024

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 79With a slight time lag, the strong surge in inflation in Germany from mid-2021 also had 
an impact on nominal wages. First, growth in actual earnings picked up, followed later 
by growth in negotiated wages. In light of the considerable losses in employees’ 
purchasing power, combined with strong demand for labour and very high profits 
amongst enterprises, trade unions demanded significant nominal increases in wages. 
They were also able to achieve their demands to a greater degree than usual. In many 
cases, one-off payments were granted as inflation compensation bonuses. Permanent 
wage increases became more prevalent later on. Compared with some other euro area 
countries, wages in Germany responded more slowly, but the wage pressures there are 
proving to be more persistent.
In Germany, the real wage losses incurred by employees as a result of the surge in 
inflation have now been largely recouped. This process has made particular progress 
among service providers. The gap remains wider in the goods-producing sector. 
Despite the losses in real wages being almost fully offset, trade unions in services 
sectors have barely lowered their demands. With the option of granting inflation 
compensation bonuses set to expire, increases in negotiated wages are shifting to the 
permanent wage components. The fairly high degree of labour market tightness is 
playing a role here. Although the rate of labour market utilisation is generally in 
decline, it has so far been above average in Germany, for example.
A faster stabilisation of wage dynamics in Germany, due to signs of weakness in the 
labour market, is being countered by the strong increases in wages that are anticipated 
in upcoming collective bargaining agreements. In the near future, wage increases are 
likely to be greater than in the euro area as a whole. These findings do not 
fundamentally call the expected disinflation process in Germany into question. 
However, alongside productivity developments and profit margins amongst 
enterprises, the labour market situation has a significant impact on the pace and 
degree of disinflation.

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 801 Wages played a special role in the recent inflation 
process
During the upswing in the German economy before the coronavirus pandemic, 
wage growth in Germany was moderate. Following catch-up effects in the first few 
years after the economic and financial crisis of 2008-09, growth in actual earnings was 
lower than would have been expected given the high demand for labour. Strong labour 
market-oriented immigration counteracted greater wage growth.  Relatively subdued 
productivity growth and low rates of inflation did not provide any particular stimulus 
for wage settlements. Overall, taking labour productivity developments into account, 
wage growth in the 2010s was broadly in line with the 2% monetary policy definition of 
price stability for the euro area.  During the acute phase of the pandemic in 2020, 
there was a greater loss in earnings, especially as a result of sharp reductions in 
working hours as well as widespread short-time work amongst employees. As 
pandemic-related restrictions were lifted, working hours were increased again and 
actual earnings per employee rose significantly. 1) 
 2) 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).
2 “One key benchmark for aggregate wage growth in the long term is provided by the leeway for income 
distribution. If real wages grow on a long-term average at the same rate as hourly labour productivity, the 
aggregate labour income share fluctuates around a constant average value that is consistent with a long-term 
growth equilibrium.” See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018). The monetary policy inflation target of 2% over the 
medium term has great importance here as a nominal anchor.

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 81The surge in inflation from mid-2021 soon had an impact on labour markets and 
wages, too.  Supply-side shortages linked to high aggregate demand triggered a surge 
in inflation from around the middle of 2021. This was considerably exacerbated in 2022 
by the increases in the prices of energy and food surrounding Russia’s invasion of 
Ukraine. Amid high demand for labour and pronounced losses in purchasing power, 
there was increased growth in wages. The surge in inflation has since eased 
significantly. The high growth in wages, however, continues.
With regard to the further process of disinflation, the question arises as to how to 
interpret the still persistently high wage growth in Germany.  A comparison with 
developments in other euro area countries since the start of the most recent period of 
inflation helps to contextualise wage developments in Germany. In addition, alongside 
looking at Germany from a macroeconomic perspective, a sectoral analysis provides 
further insights. One key question concerns the extent to which wage growth was able 
to offset losses in purchasing power caused by the surge in inflation. Consideration 
must also be given to labour market tightness.
 3) 
3 For an overview of selected empirical analyses on the impact of wages on prices in Germany up to 2019, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019).

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 822 Wage developments during the period of inflation
Wages in Germany rose very sharply during the period of inflation and have 
continued to see strong growth in 2024 so far, too.  At 6.4% in 2023, actual earnings  
recorded their highest rate of growth since 1991. Wage growth was robust again in the 
first half of 2024, diminishing only slightly on the 2023 rate. Negotiated wages  also 
grew substantially from January to August 2024, rising by an average of 6.2% on the 
year.  Actual earnings responded more quickly to changes in the economic 
environment, while negotiated wages align with a time lag, due in part to their long 
agreement periods, which often span two years. With inflation rates in decline, wage 
drift  and, to a certain extent, actual wage growth have also decreased in 2024 so far.
 However, this does not necessarily mean that growth in actual earnings will fall 
rapidly. This is because the recent strong rises in negotiated wages, which account for 
much of the growth in actual earnings, are, in some cases, still a reflection of the most 
recent period of inflation. 4) 
 5) 
 6) 
 7) 
 8) 
4 Monthly actual earnings comprise remuneration for all forms of paid employment. In the national accounts, 
they are recorded as gross wages and salaries per employee. Actual earnings cover both negotiated and non-
negotiated wages.
5 Negotiated wages comprise the various forms of remuneration agreed by employers and trade unions in their 
collective wage agreements.
6 These data and the further analysis of negotiated wages in this article are derived from calculations based on 
the Bundesbank’s negotiated pay rate statistics. Time series of negotiated wages at monthly frequency are 
available on the . For more information, see the supplementary information “ Bundesbank’s website The Deutsche 
”. Bundesbank’s negotiated pay rate statistics
7 Wage drift is the deviation between increases in actual earnings and increases in negotiated wages. It is 
calculated using an index. Reasons for deviation may be performance bonuses or allowances, for example.
8 A more rapid response is possible, in particular, in sectors with weak adherence to collectively negotiated pay 
conditions as well as for employment relationships that are not subject to collective bargaining. Wage 
developments in these areas are contributing to the divergence between actual wages and negotiated wages. 
In arithmetical terms, this divergence is reflected by wage drift.

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 83Looking at the entire period since the beginning of the most recent period of 
inflation, wage growth in Germany was not exceptionally strong compared with the 
rest of the euro area. Since the third quarter of 2021 – i.e. since the beginning of the 
most recent period of inflation – growth in actual earnings in Germany has been 
around average for the euro area.  In the other major euro area countries, such as 
Italy and France, growth was somewhat lower than in the euro area as a whole, whilst 
in Spain and the Netherlands, it was somewhat higher. In smaller Member States, 
however, there were significantly larger deviations from the euro area average.
 9) 
9 In July 2021, the rate of inflation in the euro area surpassed 2%.

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 84The pattern of wage growth over time differed between the Member States of the 
euro area.  In some countries, such as France and Italy, wages were rising while the 
surge in inflation was already under way. Later on, wage growth in these countries was 
lower. In other countries, including Germany and the Netherlands, wages did not rise 
as sharply at first, but did catch up. The different patterns of wage growth over time 
can be partly explained by country-specific assistance measures taken to stabilise 
labour markets during the coronavirus pandemic and its aftershocks.  The transition 
from short-time work to full-time employment as the pandemic subsided was 
accompanied by an increase in average wages, as employers paid full employee 
compensation again after the short-time working arrangements had ended. This purely 
automatic increase in wages occurred mainly in countries with high proportions of 
short-time workers, such as France and Italy. A similar effect occurred with the 
temporary reductions in non-wage labour costs (such as social security contributions in 
Spain), which caused employee compensation to rise once these measures ended.
 10) 
10 For a comprehensive overview of pandemic-related measures, see, for example, Ando et al. (2022) and  OECD
(2020).

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 85Overall throughout the period of inflation, wage growth in the Member States was 
closely linked to price developments.  Wages tended to rise more sharply in countries 
where consumer prices also rose more sharply. Although their inflation processes 
followed similar trajectories, there were differences between the Member States. The 
latter can be explained, in part, by differences in the structures of energy markets, 
dependencies on energy imports, and various government measures to mitigate high 
energy prices.  These measures were intended to restrict or cushion losses in 
purchasing power, partly with the aim of slowing the spillover to wages. Hence, 
assistance with energy prices dampened wage growth, while the expiry of pandemic-
related measures amplified it. During this period, both effects occurred at different 
points in time in the Member States and contributed to the heterogeneity of wage 
developments across the euro area.  As a result, wages in some countries have now 
caught up with the higher prices again (e.g. Spain, Greece, Austria and Belgium), whilst 
other countries have even seen real wage growth (e.g. Portugal, Slovenia and Croatia). 
By contrast, in major countries such as Germany, France, Italy and the Netherlands, as 
well as in the euro area as a whole, real wages have not yet fully recouped their losses.
 From this perspective, further catch-up effects would be expected there. 11) 
 12) 
 13) 
11 Inflation in the euro area peaked at 10.6% in October 2022 and then stood at 10.1% in November. There was 
significant variation in the rates of inflation among the Member States, ranging from 7.1% in France to 22.5% 
in Estonia. In November, energy inflation contributed 38% to headline inflation (see Koester et al. (2022)). For 
more information, see also Sgaravatti et al. (2022, 2023), Sgaravatti (2024) and International Monetary Fund 
(2023). In Spain and Portugal, for example, a price cap on gas and electricity, known as the “Iberian exception”, 
had already been implemented in the summer of 2022. France capped gas and energy prices in the autumn of 
2022. Germany was more cautious in intervening, as it was believed that, given the feared shortages, the 
incentive effects of higher prices would have a greater impact.
12 Additionally, in some cases, the surge in inflation impacted wages with only a slight delay due to regulatory 
factors, such as in France, where the minimum wage is indexed, or in Belgium, where a limited form of 
indexation remains in place.
13 If, instead of  the private consumption deflator is used as the basis, the picture hardly changes., HICP

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 86Unit labour costs, however, saw stronger than average growth in Germany during 
this period.  When evaluating wage developments for enterprises, account must also be 
taken of growth in productivity. This was weak in many Member States, allowing high 
wage growth to influence unit costs with little restraint. With regard to the major euro 
area countries, the ratios of wage growth to productivity growth in Germany and, to a 
greater degree, the Netherlands were even less favourable than on average across the 
Member States; as a result, these countries saw above average increases in unit labour 
costs. This is likely to have weighed on the price and cost competitiveness of German 
and Dutch enterprises.


Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 87


Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 883 Current developments in negotiated wages in 
Germany
Current collective wage agreements in Germany include large wage increases for 
the rest of 2024. Based on the collective wage agreements that have been concluded 
thus far, negotiated wages in Germany will prospectively rise by around 9% in the third 
quarter. They also rose significantly at the beginning of the year. In the second quarter, 
however, Germany experienced a temporary damper.  This was because one-off tax-
free and social contribution-exempt inflation compensation bonuses had been paid out 
in the previous year.  Furthermore, wage increases were delayed in some sectors. 
Both of these factors contributed to significantly dampening growth in negotiated 
wages for a time in the spring of 2024. Despite a weaker development in the second 
quarter, growth in negotiated wages will, given the current agreements, not lose 
momentum this year and will amount to around 6% in the first three quarters of 2024, 
subject to fluctuations.  In the fourth quarter, too, growth in negotiated wages is 
likely to exceed its historical average.
The latest new collective wage agreements in Germany since June 2024 also provide 
for large increases in wages. This continues the series of upside surprises in wages.  
Especially in sectors in which new collective wage agreements were not concluded until 
long after the start of the period of high inflation (e.g. retail and wholesale trade, 
printing industry, private banking), the efforts of trade unions primarily focused on 
compensating for losses in real wages. Unsurprisingly, in these sectors, inflation 
compensation bonuses were agreed alongside permanent wage increases. In sectors 
that had already concluded collective wage agreements fairly early in the most recent  14) 
 15) 
 16) 
 17) 
14 Due to developments in Germany, negotiated wages in the euro area also recorded significantly weaker 
growth in the second quarter of 2024 than in the preceding quarters. For more information, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2024b).
15 The German Federal Government gave employers the option of granting their employees up to €3,000 as a 
special tax-free and social contribution-exempt bonus from 26 October 2022 to 31 December 2024 to 
compensate for high inflation. This relief measure, referred to as the inflation compensation bonus, can be 
paid out in a lump sum or, alternatively, in multiple instalments.
16 There will be fluctuations in the year-on-year growth rates of negotiated wages again in 2025, as inflation 
compensation bonuses will continue to have an impact via negative base effects.
17 During the period of monetary policy tightening, growth in both negotiated wages and actual earnings 
tended to be stronger than expected in the Bundesbank’s wage projections. See Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2023a, 2023b, 2024a).

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 89period of high inflation (e.g. the chemicals industry), only permanent wage increases 
were agreed when those deals later came up for renewal. These increases were large in 
some cases. Wages pressures have thus been palpable in collective wage agreements 
until recently.
Inflation compensation bonuses have played a major role in negotiated wage 
outcomes since the end of 2022.  Knowing where and when which particular inflation 
compensation bonuses have been paid out, and in what amount, is essential for 
assessing wage dynamics. This is because, while their impact has been strong, unlike 
scheduled rates of pay, these one-off bonuses do not provide a baseline for future 
wage increases, given that they are only available for inclusion in pay deals until the 
end of 2024. The collective wage agreements currently in force, which can be found in 
the Bundesbank’s negotiated pay rate statistics, are a reliable source of information on 
the composition of negotiated wage increases. These data clearly show that inflation 
compensation bonuses will continue to drive wage dynamics for a number of quarters 
yet. That said, their contribution to year-on-year wage growth will turn negative in the 
first half of 2025, when they will have stopped adding to the negotiated wage 
increases. This effect will significantly dampen the year-on-year growth rates. Once the 
inflation compensation bonuses have expired, wage growth will be driven more 
strongly again by the permanent wage components.


Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 90Supplementary information
The Deutsche Bundesbank’s negotiated pay rate 
statistics 
The Deutsche Bundesbank’s negotiated pay rate statistics are a key database for 
analysing and forecasting aggregate wage developments in Germany.  They are 
therefore also a key component of the macroeconomic framework for analysing and 
forecasting inflationary trends.  Collective wage agreements contain reliable 
information on future increases in negotiated wages. They thus indicate a precise 
pattern of how negotiated wages will develop in the future. The forecast of how 
negotiated wages will rise is a key component of predicting actual earnings per 
employee. It forms part of the Eurosystem’s Broad Macroeconomic Projection Exercise.
The Bundesbank’s negotiated pay rate database includes published and 
independently researched information on negotiated pay rates.  The Bundesbank’s 
negotiated pay rate database covers collective wage agreements for around 21 million 
employees (around a half of all employees in Germany). It comprises more than 500 
collective wage agreements and statutory adjustments to civil servants’ remuneration 
from January 1991 onwards.  The key details are obtained by conducting own 
research of the websites of the social parties in the collective bargaining process as well 
as directly from the social parties themselves. Many of these parties disclose this 
information, for example by providing copies of collective wage agreements.  
The Bundesbank’s negotiated pay rate statistics contain detailed information on 
individual collective wage agreements.  This includes, amongst other things, 
information on the rates of pay, the durations of sectoral collective wage agreements,  1) 
 2) 
 3) 
 4) 
1 This objective differs significantly from that of the negotiated pay rate statistics from the Federal Statistical 
Office, which are used primarily for statistical purposes. These serve, for example, as a statutory database for 
the German Minimum Wage Commission. Creating and maintaining the negotiated pay rate database, 
however, is not part of the Bundesbank’s statutory mandate.
2 Based on the same methodology, there are also data for the Federal Republic of Germany from January 1984 
onwards. Time series for negotiated pay rates reaching back further into the past are based on a different 
methodology.
3 Further information is taken from the WSI Collective Agreement Archive, amongst other sources. Additional 
figures originate from the special statistics of the Federal Statistical Office and the Federal Employment 
Agency.
4 Data captured at regional level, i.e. for each collective bargaining district.

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 91and any future incremental wage increases. The database contains information on how 
increases in negotiated wages are spread over time, including regular annual payments 
(e.g. holiday pay) and special payments (e.g. one-off inflation compensation bonuses).  
The index of negotiated pay rates calculated using the database is based on a 
representative pay grade for a particular industry in a given collective bargaining 
district.  The regional, industry-specific pay rates are combined with employee data as 
weighting coefficients to calculate indices for the various industries and sectors as well 
as for the economy as a whole.
The monthly indices on negotiated pay rates are available on the Bundesbank’s 
website.  For analytical purposes, the indices are divided into three categories: basic 
pay rates, total negotiated pay rates excluding one-off payments, and total negotiated 
pay rates (i.e. including additional benefits and one-off payments). 
The sector-specific collective wage agreements are the starting point for the 
forecasting process.  The Eurosystem’s forecast horizon, which generally spans three 
years, is divided into two periods. The first period comprises the residual duration of a 
sector-specific collective wage agreement that contains information on pay rates over 
time. The second period covers the time frame following the expiry of the collective 
wage agreement. For the period after a collective wage agreement has expired, 
assumptions on a new collective wage agreement for the time remaining until the end 
of the forecast horizon need to be made. This assumed collective wage agreement 
factors in, as accurately as possible, the expected sector-specific wage increase for this  5) 
 6) 
 7) 
 8) 
 9) 5 Specifically, these include basic pay rates (including base amounts), negotiated holiday pay, annual bonuses, 
special payments such as additional negotiated payments and transformation payments, such as in the metals 
and electrical industry, one-off payments, coronavirus-related bonuses, inflation compensation bonuses, 
negotiated performance payments, and capital formation benefits.
6 In industries in which agreed basic rates of pay do not apply, the compensation for a specialist worker who has 
completed their professional training and is in their third to fifth professional year is used as the basis. 
Differing from this, two pay grades are used for some industries (e.g. transportation and storage) and the pay 
rates used for the index are determined using appropriate employee weights.
7 See www.bundesbank.de
8 This also includes civil servant pay and some company-specific collective wage agreements.

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 92period.  The assumptions made for the development of negotiated pay rates after the 
expiry of a collective wage agreement are based, for example, on past wage growth, 
the degree to which inflation passes through to wages, and sector-specific 
developments. Here, the wage forecast is embedded into the macroeconomic 
projections.
The data on individual collective wage agreements in the Bundesbank’s negotiated 
pay rate statistics are factored into the calculation of the ECB wage tracker.  The ECB 
wage tracker relates to collective wage agreements that were available at specific 
reporting dates and extend to different expiry dates in the future.  Unlike the ECB 
wage tracker for Germany, the Bundesbank’s projection of negotiated pay rates also 
encompasses the periods following the expiry of existing collective wage agreements. 
Accordingly, the Bundesbank’s forecast provides a more comprehensive picture of the 
expected development of negotiated rates of pay. 9) 
 10) 
 11) 
 12) 
9 The forecast provides industry-specific extrapolations of wage increases for around two-thirds of the 
employees in the negotiated pay rates database and covers all key sectors, such as the metals and electrical 
industry, as well as the public sector. In the remaining sectors, wages are forecast using a uniform rate of 
growth.
10 The wage forecast is usually based on scheduled rates of pay. The projected wage increases therefore relate 
to the wage components that are increased regularly (“dynamic adjustment”). Most recently, tax-free and 
social contribution-exempt special payments, such as inflation compensation bonuses and coronavirus-related 
bonuses, have also been forecast.
11 See Górnicka et al. (2024).
12  There are also methodological differences between the Bundesbank’s index of negotiated pay rates and the 
ECB wage tracker. For this reason, there may also be differences in their rates of growth.

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 93 
Permanent wage increases gained in importance recently. In anticipation of the 
period following expiry of the inflation compensation bonuses, more social partners 
have agreed on a significant rise in scheduled rates of pay in recent wage agreements. 
Where a collective wage agreement has a multi-year term, the first wage increase 
under that agreement will usually cover a large proportion of the negotiated rise in 
pay, while the second wage increase, which is mostly scheduled to start around mid-
2025, provides a smaller pay hike in some cases. From the middle of 2025, then, wage 
pressures will be lower than the extremely high year-on-year growth rates for 2024, 
based on the wage agreements currently scheduled to run through to mid-2025.  
However, the permanent wage increases baked into the agreements concluded thus 
far will remain high in the last quarter of 2025, too. At around 4%, the year-on-year 
growth rate is expected to be well above its average of 2.6% for the years 1991 to 2023.
  18) 
18 The number of employees covered by collective wage agreements as a percentage of all collective wage 
agreements shrinks over the observation horizon – it will be down from roughly 45% in the second and third 
quarters of 2025 to only around 30% in the fourth quarter of 2025.

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 94Supplementary information
Determinants of wage growth in Germany in the recent 
inflationary period
The key determinants of wage developments in Germany can be estimated 
econometrically.  The wage equation of the Bundesbank’s macroeconometric model 
allows wage growth to be decomposed into the individual contributions of its 
macroeconomic determinants.  The estimated equation combines both long and 
short-run approaches to explain wage growth. Based on the concept of a long-run 
labour market equilibrium, it is assumed that increases in the nominal wage level in the 
long run are related to developments in the aggregate price level and labour 
productivity. In addition, other cyclical factors such as cyclical fluctuations in the 
utilisation of labour may also play a role in the short to medium run. Based on the 
estimation results of an error correction model, the contributions of the determinants 
of wage growth can be decomposed.  1) 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Wage dynamics in Germany through the lens of a generalised wage Phillips 
curve, box on pp. 23-25. 

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 95The estimation results show that the rise in consumer prices affected actual 
earnings only with a delay.  Although consumer prices did have some impact in 2022, 
when inflation was peaking, the model implies that developments in consumer prices 
played by far the greatest role in the growth of actual earnings in 2023 and in 2024 in 
particular. This reflects the delayed response of negotiated wages to strong rises in 
consumer prices. The delayed response of negotiated wages also slowed the response 
of actual earnings. That said, actual earnings responded more quickly than negotiated 
wages to the latest surge in inflation, as actual earnings are – via the wage drift – more 
strongly influenced by cyclical and other short-term factors in the short to medium run.
 
Labour market tightness has recently contributed to high enforcement rates of 
wage demands.  In 2023 and 2024, labour market tightness was a significant 
explanatory factor behind wage growth. This reflects the pronounced shortage of 
skilled workers that has affected large parts of the German economy, particularly in 
recent years.
 2) 
 3) 
2 For example, increases in foreign trade prices fed through to actual earnings as early as 2022. 
3 In the econometrically estimated wage equation, labour market tightness is defined as the rate of jobs 
vacancies (based on Bossler et al. (2020)) to underemployment (including short-time work).

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 964 Compensation for losses in real wages in Germany 
from a sectoral perspective
The losses in real wages suffered by employees in services sectors since mid-2021 
have largely been recouped. Looking at the extremely strong nominal wage increases 
agreed in negotiated wage agreements for some services sectors in the third quarter of 
this year, cumulated real wage losses in the services sector as a whole since mid-2021 
are likely to have been recouped by the end of 2024. In the goods-producing sector, by 
contrast, the losses incurred since mid-2021 have still not been offset. Wage increases 
in this sector have been comparatively moderate, given the adverse macroeconomic 
environment (locational problems combined with weak foreign demand and sluggish 
global industrial activity). 19) 
19 One possible reason why wage dynamics in the past period of high inflation were stronger in services sectors 
than in the manufacturing sector is that collective wage agreements in services sectors tend to be more 
closely aligned with price developments, while those in the manufacturing sector generally respond more to 
productivity developments. In addition to the stronger international competitive pressures in the 
manufacturing sector, the larger share of low-income workers in services sectors might also have been a 
contributing factor here. This is because low-income workers probably tend to prioritise getting compensation 
for the losses in real wages they have suffered over sharing in productivity gains. In addition, the ad hoc 
increase in the statutory minimum wage in 2022 supported the wages of low-income workers both directly 
and indirectly (via spillover effects).

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 97Labour income ratio metrics suggest that employees have suffered some wage 
share losses since the start of the recent period of inflation.  While the labour income 
ratio in services sectors has been fairly stable since 2021, that in the goods-producing 
sector has fallen very sharply on balance since around 2021, with some initial signs of 
recovery only emerging in the first half of 2024.


Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 98Trade unions in services sectors have barely lowered their wage demands thus far, 
even though losses in real wages there have been almost fully recouped . Wage 
demands in services sectors are still relatively high, ranging from an 8% rise in wages 
over a 12-month term in the central and local government areas of the public sector  
to a 19% hike in system catering.  Wage demands in the manufacturing sector, too, 
are higher than their usual, pre-pandemic levels.  Current wage demands in the 
manufacturing sector are therefore likely to still reflect certain efforts to recoup losses 
in real wages. The most recent wage demands, though, like a 7% per year increase in 
the metals and electrical industry and the same in the rubber and plastic processing 
industry, are lower than those in services sectors.
 20) 
 21) 
 22) 
20 This wage demand is supplemented by additional monthly minimum income of €350, which implies a higher 
wage increase for individual pay grades than 8%.
21 The percentage increase in system catering corresponds to the demand for at least €500 more per month for 
recipients of the agreed basic pay rate.
22 For instance, the  Metall trade union last made a wage demand for the metals and electrical industry that IG
was roughly as high as today’s demand for a hike of 7% per annum back in 2022 (a rise of 8% per annum) and, 
before that, in 2008 (a rise of 8% per annum), shortly before the global financial crisis.

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 99Important wage negotiations in Germany in terms of employee coverage, involving 
high demands in some cases, are set to take place in the quarters up until autumn 
2025.  Collective wage agreements covering more than 6 million employees across the 
manufacturing sector (e.g. metals and electrical industry) and in large services sectors 
(e.g. public sector employees in central and local government) will expire at or before 
the end of 2024.


Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 100


Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 1015 The role of labour market tightness in future wage 
developments
Euro area labour markets emerged from the pandemic in good shape, thanks to 
government support, but there has been an uptick in tightness.  During the 
pandemic, government assistance helped organisations retain their core staff and 
avoid widespread layoffs. As a result, unemployment in the euro area rose only slightly 
higher when the pandemic was at its peak, unlike in the United States, for example.  
It fell to a record low in the subsequent recovery period following the lifting of 
lockdown measures. At the same time, job vacancy numbers climbed to record highs 
on the back of buoyant demand for labour. Only recently did labour market tightness in 
the euro area ease significantly. The job vacancy rate has been in decline for several 
quarters now, and unemployment is not falling any further. It is even back on the 
increase in certain Member States. This cyclical slowdown in labour markets is evident 
chiefly in Germany and the Netherlands, but also, to a lesser degree, in France. The 
labour market situation continues to vary widely between countries. Job vacancy rates 
in Germany and the Netherlands, in particular, are still higher than average, even if 
they have declined. 23) 
23 The unemployment rate in the United States climbed more than 10 percentage points to around 15% in 2020.

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 102In Germany, labour market tightness in the recent period of inflation was mainly 
reflected in services wages , as the intense labour market tightness in that sector made 
it easier for trade unions to push for high pay increases in wage negotiations. Trade 
unions there reached higher than average collective wage agreements with a relatively 
high percentage of their demands being met. Even in the absence of inflation 
compensation bonuses, services trade unions are still making high wage demands for 
sectors where labour market tightness has thus far been higher than average. This is 
the case, for example, for the upcoming negotiations in the areas of food and beverage 
service activities, transportation and storage, and for building cleaning companies. The 
labour market may be cooling, but if labour market tightness does not ease by more, 
including in services sectors, wage pressures there at least will probably remain high.


Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 103


Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 1046 Conclusion
Wage growth in Germany could remain somewhat stronger than in the euro area as 
a whole over the coming quarters.  Looking at the past three years as a whole, wage 
growth in Germany has moved largely in line with that in the euro area as a whole. 
Recent quarters, however, have seen Germany record stronger than average wage 
growth, partly owing to catch-up effects, but perhaps also because labour market 
tightness remains higher than average. In view of the particularly weak productivity 
trend, unit labour cost growth in Germany might remain above average as well.
While services employees in Germany have already recouped much of the losses in 
real wages caused by the surge in inflation, trade unions have barely moderated 
their wage demands thus far.  The significant shortage of skilled workers in services 
sectors seems to be a factor here. In the manufacturing sector, which is facing stiffer 
economic headwinds, there is still some catching-up to do in terms of offsetting losses 
in real wages. Taken in isolation, this, too, is likely to push up wages.
The relatively intense labour market tightness of late has led to high permanent 
wage increases in the latest wage agreements in Germany.  This is due in part to the 
shortage of skilled workers, which, according to surveys by the  Institute, remains ifo
high in some services sectors. Looking ahead at future pay deals, wage pressures will 
once again depend more on the labour market situation, which can sometimes vary 
between sectors. Although these findings do not fundamentally call the expected 
disinflation process in Germany into question, the pace and degree of that disinflation 
hinges not just on productivity developments and profit margins, but also on how the 
labour market in Germany evolves going forward.

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 105List of references
Ando, S., R. Balakrishnan, B. Gruss, J.-J. Hallaert, L.-B. F. Jirasavetakul, K. Kirabaeva, N. 
Klein, A. Lariau, L. Q. Liu, D. Malacrino, H. Qu and A. Solovyeva (2022), European Labor 
Markets and the 19 Pandemic: Fallout and the Path Ahead, International - COVID
Monetary Fund, Departmental Paper No 2022/004.
Bossler, M., N. Gürtzgen, A. Kubis, B. Küfner and B. Lochner (2020), The  Job Vacancy IAB
Survey: design and research potential, in Journal for Labour Market Research, Vol. 54, 
No 13 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a), Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly 
regaining its footing ‒ outlook up to 2026, Monthly Report, June 2024 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), The German economy, Strong trend growth in wages 
continues, Monthly Report, August 2024 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024c), The global disinflation process and its costs, Monthly 
Report, July 2024 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), Arduous recovery amid high and only gradually easing 
inflation – outlook for the German economy up to 2025, Monthly Report, June 2023, pp. 
1-25.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), Falling inflation, but not yet time to sound the all-clear – 
outlook for the German economy up to 2026, Monthly Report, December 2023, pp. 15-
35.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), The impact of wages on prices in Germany: evidence 
from selected empirical analyses, Monthly Report, September 2019, pp. 15-37.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Wage growth in Germany: assessment and determinants 
of recent developments, Monthly Report, April 2018, pp. 13-27.
Gόrnicka, L., G. Koester, D. Radowski, E. Gautier, M. I. Peinado, A. Stiglbauer, D. 
Wittekopf, S. Puente, C. Duarte, F. Martins, G. Basso, R. Lydon, G. Ploj, M. Polemidiotis, 
H. Pönkä, M. Obstbaum, P. Petroulas, C. Veiga, J. Beka, N. Benatti, B. Fagandini, P. 
Healy, R. Nizzi, F. Colonna, M. Volkerink, C. Antonopoulos, M. Bing, E. Piryankov, A. L. 

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 106Gomez Jimenez, Y. Saks, B. Coppens, F. D’Amuri, J. Zajankauskaitė, K. Pribuišis, M. Lindič, 
M. Doliak, A. Monza, M. Roca I Llevadot, G. Polichetti, G. Gardin (2024), A forward-
looking tracker of negotiated wages in the euro area, Occasional Paper Series, No 338, 
European Central Bank.
International Monetary Fund (2023), France: 2022 Article IV Consultation-Press Release; 
Staff Report; and Statement by the Executive Director for France, Country Report No 23
/56, January 2023.
Koester, G., E. Gonçalves, R. Gomez-Salvador, J. Doleschel, M. Andersson, B. González 
Pardo and L. Lebastard (2022), Inflation developments in the euro area and the United 
States,  Economic Bulletin, Issue 8/2022.ECB
OECD  (2020), Job retention schemes during the 19 lockdown and beyond, - COVID
October 2020.
Sgaravatti, G. (2024), Electricity tariffs dashboard, Bruegel Dataset, May 2024.
Sgaravatti, G., S. Tagliapietra and C. Trasi (2022), National energy policy responses to 
the energy crisis, Bruegel Dataset, December 2022.
Sgaravatti, G., S. Tagliapietra, C. Trasi and G. Zachmann (2023), National fiscal policy 
responses to the energy crisis, Bruegel Dataset, June 2023.
 

Wage developments in Germany: current situation, comparison with the euro area, and 
outlook
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – October 2024 107

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
024 
1•  2 October

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes  bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20•
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
2•024   2 October

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43•
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
5. Yields on German securities  .........................................................................................  53•
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54•
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55•
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56•
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58•
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58•
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59•
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59•
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60•
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
024 
3• 2 October

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61•
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61•
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62•
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62•
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63•
12. Maastricht debt by creditor  .........................................................................................  63•
13. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64•
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66•
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67•
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68•
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69•
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69•
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70•
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71•
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72•
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72•
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73•
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75•
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76•
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77•
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78•
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78•
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79•
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80•
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81•
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82•
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic   and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82•
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
4• 024   2 October

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 €STR  5,6Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  7
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2023 Jan. – 1.3 2.5 3.0 3.1 3.0 3.7 1.4 1.90 2.9
Feb. – 3.1 1.7 2.5 2.5 2.6 3.3 1.9 2.28 3.0
Mar. – 4.7 1.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.9 2.4 2.57 3.1
Apr. – 5.7 0.5 1.4 1.4 1.4 2.4 2.4 2.90 3.0
May – 7.0 – 0.1 0.9 0.9 0.9 2.3 3.2 3.08 3.0
June – 8.0 – 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.4 1.6 3.5 3.24 3.0
July – 9.1 – 1.4 – 0.4 – 0.4 0.1 1.3 3.9 3.40 3.1
Aug. – 10.4 – 2.4 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.1 0.7 4.4 3.64 3.2
Sep. – 9.9 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 1.2 – 0.4 0.4 4.7 3.75 3.3
Oct. – 10.0 – 2.2 – 1.0 – 1.0 – 0.5 0.4 5.3 3.90 3.5
Nov. – 9.5 – 1.9 – 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.7 0.2 5.1 3.90 3.3
Dec. – 8.5 – 0.9 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.4 0.4 4.7 3.90 2.7
2024 Jan. – 8.6 – 1.1 0.1 0.2 – 0.4 0.4 5.2 3.90 2.8
Feb. – 7.7 – 0.6 0.4 0.5 – 0.3 0.8 5.1 3.91 2.9
Mar. – 6.6 – 0.2 0.9 0.9 – 0.2 0.8 5.2 3.91 2.9
Apr. – 5.9 0.1 1.3 1.3 0.0 0.8 5.0 3.91 3.0
May – 5.0 0.6 1.5 1.7 – 0.1 0.5 4.7 3.91 3.0
June – 3.4 1.3 2.3 2.0 0.2 0.9 4.6 3.75 3.1
July – 3.1 1.2 2.3 2.5 0.3 0.9 4.2 3.66 3.0
Aug. – 2.1 1.7 2.9 ... 0.6 1.3 4.1 3.66 2.8
Sep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.56 2.7
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 EuroShort-Term Rate.  6 See also footnotes to Table VI.3, p. 43●. 7 GDP-weighted yield on
ten-year government bonds. Countries included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT,
GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments  r Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assetsReference
rate 
vis-á-vis the
US dollar Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2023 Jan. –14,285 –14,313 + 7,407 –15,252 +28,917 + 4,928 – 2,459 – 8,727 1.0769 97.1 92.8
Feb. +15,055 +19,691 –13,474 +38,717 –45,002 + 7,518 – 3,372 –11,335 1.0715 97.0 93.1
Mar. +31,894 +38,641 +65,338 +51,466 –101,108 –12,887 +126,409 + 1,458 1.0706 97.3 93.3
Apr. + 9,759 + 7,656 – 2,645 –28,986 +70,598 – 2,588 –39,824 – 1,845 1.0968 98.4 94.2
May – 8,796 +16,550 –13,934 –50,366 +48,634 + 6,722 –20,299 + 1,375 1.0868 98.0 93.6
June +32,996 +31,692 +72,814 +86,685 –42,911 –10,766 +37,413 + 2,393 1.0840 98.2 93.8
July +25,521 +21,507 +33,524 –36,890 +54,130 – 7,715 +23,562 + 438 1.1058 99.2 95.0
Aug. +26,814 +22,856 +26,929 + 7,443 – 5,215 + 3,493 +19,883 + 1,325 1.0909 99.0 95.0
Sep. +34,244 +29,388 +25,234 +13,879 –66,494 + 3,499 +78,248 – 3,897 1.0684 98.5 94.6
Oct. +17,792 +17,532 +37,807 – 5,947 + 6,233 +20,075 +13,720 + 3,727 1.0563 98.0 94.1
Nov. +36,404 +34,725 +60,462 + 7,768 +21,964 + 924 +28,287 + 1,519 1.0808 98.7 94.6
Dec. +40,974 +30,718 +18,843 –24,763 –71,923 + 924 +113,452 + 1,153 1.0903 98.2 94.0
2024 Jan. +26,449 +27,368 +16,863 – 3,290 –21,259 +13,410 +27,180 + 822 1.0905 98.4 94.4
Feb. +33,066 +37,730 +21,073 +55,748 –15,875 +11,598 –31,260 + 861 1.0795 98.1 94.1
Mar. +38,790 +37,381 +75,620 +38,326 +17,056 –11,970 +32,737 – 528 1.0872 98.8 94.8
Apr. +39,200 +30,224 +21,540 +26,177 –14,081 +12,742 – 4,102 + 803 1.0728 98.6 p 94.5
May + 5,314 +31,700 +20,910 + 8,181 + 1,956 – 1,546 +10,684 + 1,636 1.0812 98.9 p 94.8
June +56,179 +36,932 +91,329 +32,597 –67,060 + 1,039 +123,454 + 1,299 1.0759 98.5 p 94.5
July +48,050 +38,299 +54,591 +20,589 +21,873 – 2,675 +18,010 – 3,206 1.0844 99.0 p 95.1
Aug. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1012 99.0 p 95.0
Sep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1106 98.8 p 94.8
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also Tables
XII. 9 and 11, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Bundesbank cal-culation. Vis-á-vis the currencies of the extended EER group of tranding partners (fixed
composition).  4 Based on consumer price indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Croatia Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2021 6.3 6.2 3.7 7.2 2.7 6.9 8.7 16.2 8.9 12.6 6.9
2022 3.5 4.2 1.4 0.1 1.5 2.6 5.7 8.6 4.7 7.3 1.8
2023 0.4 1.2 –0.3 –3.0 –1.2 0.9 2.3 –5.5 0.7 3.3 1.7
2023 Q1 1.4 1.7 0.6 –5.1 0.3 1.4 2.1 –0.2 2.5 2.1 3.9
Q2 0.5 1.3 –0.4 –2.4 –0.9 0.8 3.0 –3.9 0.2 3.9 –0.8
Q3 –0.0 1.3 –0.7 –2.8 –2.2 0.5 1.9 –8.4 0.1 2.0 3.6
Q4 0.1 1.2 –0.4 –1.9 –1.7 1.0 1.1 –9.1 0.1 5.3 0.3
2024 Q1 0.5 1.3 –0.8 –2.2 –1.5 1.4 1.6 –4.7 0.2 4.0 0.8
Q2 0.6 1.2 0.3 –1.0 –1.1 0.5 2.7 –4.0 0.9 3.5 –0.5
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2021 8.8 16.8 4.6 12.8 4.3 5.5 10.4 28.3 12.3 6.3 6.6
2022 2.3 –0.7 –0.3 –2.1 4.0 –0.0 2.5 18.9 0.3 1.7 0.8
2023 –2.2 –5.4 –1.9 –9.0 –2.4 0.8 2.3 –7.2 –2.0 –0.1 –4.5
2023 Q1 0.8 –2.9 0.9 –7.9 0.3 –0.8 2.3 7.8 –0.7 –1.7 –4.3
Q2 –0.9 –4.3 –0.4 –12.9 –3.7 1.3 1.2 4.2 –3.5 0.0 –7.4
Q3 –4.8 –6.9 –3.5 –10.6 –2.8 0.6 –0.2 –21.6 –2.5 –0.4 –6.0
Q4 –3.9 –7.4 –4.5 –4.3 –3.2 1.9 6.0 –12.8 –1.5 1.6 –0.1
2024 Q1 –4.7 –7.1 –5.6 –7.1 –3.1 0.4 3.7 –19.4 –3.5 –3.9 –0.3
Q2 –3.6 –4.7 p–4.9 –3.1 –3.2 –1.0 9.7 –11.4 –3.0 –4.6 –4.6
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2021 81.5 80.1 84.9 78.1 81.2 81.1 75.6 78.0 77.1 75.0 75.3
2022 82.2 79.0 85.2 71.7 81.0 81.8 75.9 79.8 78.9 77.0 75.0
2023 80.7 75.7 83.4 67.3 76.6 81.2 75.2 ... 77.5 77.2 72.9
2023 Q2 81.3 77.2 84.2 70.7 76.4 82.0 73.7 ... 78.0 78.2 73.7
Q3 80.2 75.0 82.9 62.6 77.4 80.6 76.3 ... 77.4 78.4 72.7
Q4 79.6 73.9 81.9 64.6 73.6 81.3 75.9 ... 76.5 74.7 72.3
2024 Q1 79.2 74.0 81.3 65.6 73.3 80.9 73.4 ... 75.5 75.9 71.4
Q2 78.9 74.4 80.2 65.8 74.6 80.7 81.1 ... 76.0 74.2 73.0
Q3 77.7 74.4 77.4 64.9 76.4 81.6 78.2 ... 75.5 73.8 72.1
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2021 7.8 e 6.3 3.6 e 6.2 e 7.7 e 7.9 e 14.8 e 6.3 e 9.5 e 7.5 e 7.6
2022 6.7 e 5.5 p 3.1 e 5.6 e 6.8 e 7.3 e 12.5 e 4.5 e 8.1 e 6.7 e 6.9
2023 6.6 e 5.5 p 3.0 e 6.4 e 7.2 e 7.3 e 11.1 e 4.3 e 7.7 e 6.1 e 6.5
2024 Apr. 6.4 5.6 3.4 7.6 8.3 7.4 10.5 4.4 6.7 5.1 7.0
May 6.5 5.6 3.5 7.4 8.2 7.5 10.4 4.4 6.8 5.1 7.0
June 6.5 5.5 3.5 7.4 8.4 7.5 9.4 4.5 6.8 5.0 6.9
July 6.4 5.4 3.5 7.8 8.6 7.5 9.9 4.7 6.4 5.0 6.9
Aug. 6.4 5.4 3.5 7.9 8.2 7.5 9.5 4.4 6.2 4.9 7.0
Sep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.3 ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2021 2.6 3.2 5 3.2 4.5 2.1 2.1 0.6 2.4 1.9 2.7 3.2
2022 8.4 10.3 8.7 19.4 7.2 5.9 9.3 8.1 8.7 10.7 17.2
2023 6 5.4 2.3 6.0 9.1 4.3 5.7 4.2 5.2 5.9 8.4 9.1
2024 Apr. 2.4 4.9 2.4 3.1 0.6 2.4 3.2 1.6 0.9 4.7 1.1
May 2.6 4.9 2.8 3.1 0.4 2.6 2.4 2.0 0.8 4.3 0.0
June 2.5 5.4 2.5 2.8 0.5 2.5 2.5 1.5 0.9 3.5 1.5
July 2.6 5.4 2.6 3.5 0.5 2.7 3.0 1.5 1.6 3.3 0.8
Aug. 2.2 4.3 2.0 3.4 1.1 2.2 3.2 1.1 1.2 3.0 0.9
Sep. 1.7 4.3 1.8 3.2 1.0 1.4 3.1 0.0 0.7 3.1 1.6
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
2021 –5.2 –5.4 –3.2 –2.6 –2.7 –6.6 –6.9 –1.4 –8.9 –2.6 –7.2
2022 –3.6 –3.6 –2.1 –1.1 –0.2 –4.7 –2.5 1.7 –8.1 0.1 –4.9
2023 –3.6 –4.2 –2.6 –2.8 –3.0 –5.5 –1.3 1.5 –7.2 –0.9 –2.4
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
2021 94.6 108.4 68.1 18.4 73.2 112.7 197.3 52.6 145.7 78.2 45.9
2022 90.5 102.6 65.0 19.1 74.0 111.2 177.0 43.1 138.3 68.5 44.4
2023 88.2 103.1 62.9 20.2 77.1 109.9 163.9 43.3 134.8 61.8 45.0
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
6.4 7.2 13.5 6.3 4.8 5.6 4.8 8.4 6.7 11.4 2021
2.5 1.4 4.1 5.0 5.3 7.0 1.9 2.7 6.2 7.4 2022
0.3 –1.1 7.5 0.1 –1.0 2.5 1.6 2.1 2.7 2.6 2023
–1.9 –1.3 7.4 1.9 2.2 2.9 0.2 1.6 4.6 3.2 2023 Q1
1.5 –0.4 6.9 –0.3 –1.7 2.5 1.8 2.2 2.3 2.4 Q2
1.2 –1.9 8.9 –0.7 –2.0 2.0 2.0 1.9 1.7 2.4 Q3
0.4 –0.8 6.7 –0.5 –1.5 2.8 2.2 2.7 2.3 2.5 Q4
2.9 –0.2 7.6 –0.6 –1.0 1.3 2.7 2.1 2.8 3.6 2024 Q1
1.7 0.4 4.4 0.8 –0.6 1.7 1.9 0.7 3.4 3.7 Q2
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
20.1 8.4 –0.9 4.0 11.2 3.9 10.6 9.9 7.8 6.0 2021
9.3 –1.3 1.5 2.6 5.7 0.6 –4.4 2.0 3.2 2.6 2022
–5.2 –5.7 7.3 –0.0 –0.3 –3.1 4.1 –4.9 –1.3 2.3 2023
–11.7 –4.4 15.9 3.1 2.0 1.4 3.0 –3.4 0.2 0.3 2023 Q1
0.1 –6.9 7.8 –0.6 0.2 –5.2 3.3 –3.4 –2.7 1.9 Q2
–5.5 –7.7 2.0 –0.7 –0.9 –4.9 2.0 –8.9 –1.8 2.8 Q3
–3.2 –3.8 4.4 –1.8 –2.3 –3.5 8.3 –4.1 –0.9 4.0 Q4
–0.8 –4.3 –2.3 –2.5 –4.8 1.2 –4.5 –3.1 1.3 4.1 2024 Q1
0.2 –2.4 3.9 –2.3 –4.3 1.0 –0.8 –3.1 0.1 4.6 Q2
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
76.7 82.0 76.8 82.4 87.1 79.1 82.2 84.5 77.8 51.3 2021
77.8 80.7 64.7 83.7 87.7 81.9 83.3 84.9 78.7 58.2 2022
68.4 73.1 68.1 81.9 85.3 81.7 82.1 83.1 76.9 61.7 2023
69.2 75.5 53.3 82.5 86.2 83.5 84.0 83.9 76.3 60.9 2023 Q2
68.0 72.0 69.4 81.3 84.7 80.9 83.0 82.8 76.2 63.0 Q3
68.5 70.5 84.1 80.9 83.3 80.9 81.0 82.4 77.8 63.2 Q4
70.6 74.8 75.6 78.8 84.0 81.0 80.1 80.6 77.2 65.1 2024 Q1
70.3 75.3 76.4 79.6 83.3 81.2 77.6 80.8 77.7 63.5 Q2
71.5 76.0 81.4 77.7 81.7 81.3 81.3 81.6 77.9 63.0 Q3
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
e 7.2 e 5.4 e 3.8 e 4.2 e 6.2 e 6.8 e 6.9 e 4.8 e 15.0 e 7.2 2021
e 5.9 e 4.6 e 3.5 e 3.6 e 4.8 e 6.2 e 6.2 e 4.0 e 13.0 e 6.3 2022
e 6.9 e 5.3 e 3.5 e 3.5 e 5.1 e 6.5 e 5.9 e 3.7 e 12.2 e 5.9 2023
7.5 5.7 3.3 3.7 5.0 6.3 5.4 3.5 11.6 5.0 2024 Apr.
7.4 5.8 3.2 3.6 5.1 6.4 5.4 3.5 11.6 4.8 May
7.2 5.8 3.1 3.6 5.2 6.5 5.3 3.5 11.5 5.1 June
8.0 5.8 2.9 3.6 5.0 6.5 5.3 3.3 11.4 5.4 July
7.9 5.9 3.0 3.7 5.3 6.4 5.3 3.3 11.3 5.4 Aug.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sep.
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
4.6 3.5 0.7 2.8 2.8 0.9 2.8 2.0 3.0 2.3 2021
18.9 8.2 6.1 11.6 8.6 8.1 12.1 9.3 8.3 8.1 2022
8.7 2.9 5.6 4.1 7.7 5.3 11.0 7.2 3.4 3.9 2023
0.4 3.0 2.4 2.6 3.4 2.3 2.4 3.0 3.4 2.1 2024 Apr.
0.9 3.2 2.3 2.7 3.3 3.8 2.6 2.5 3.8 3.0 May
1.0 2.8 2.2 3.4 3.1 3.1 2.4 1.6 3.6 3.0 June
1.1 2.7 2.3 3.5 2.9 2.7 3.0 1.4 2.9 2.4 July
0.8 1.7 2.4 3.3 2.4 1.8 3.2 1.1 2.4 2.2 Aug.
0.4 0.8 2.1 3.3 1.8 2.6 2.9 0.7 1.7 1.6 Sep.
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
–1.1 1.0 –7.0 –2.2 –5.7 –2.8 –5.1 –4.6 –6.7 –1.6 2021
–0.7 0.2 –5.2 0.0 –3.3 –0.3 –1.7 –3.0 –4.6 2.6 2022
–0.7 –0.7 –4.5 –0.4 –2.6 1.2 –5.2 –2.6 –3.5 2.0 2023
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
43.3 24.4 49.6 50.4 82.4 123.9 60.2 74.8 115.7 96.5 2021
38.1 24.6 49.4 48.3 78.4 111.2 57.7 72.7 109.5 81.0 2022
37.3 25.5 47.4 45.1 78.6 97.9 56.1 68.4 105.1 73.6 2023
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of valueadded tax between July and December 2020.  6 Including Croatia from 2023 onwards.
7 According to Maastricht Treaty definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2023 Jan. – 9.8 –0.4 –15.9 –9.5 –4.1 12.5 127.9 115.4 29.5 –6.4 2.2 58.8 –25.1
Feb. 8.0 –12.9 3.3 20.8 29.8 6.8 –1.4 –8.2 13.6 –1.1 1.6 8.4 4.7
Mar. 29.8 37.1 11.7 –7.2 –9.7 72.5 119.5 47.0 28.5 10.3 1.3 6.4 10.6
Apr. – 5.6 27.9 29.5 –33.5 –29.2 –19.0 –29.2 –10.2 10.9 9.4 1.4 4.3 –4.2
May – 0.2 45.5 33.2 –45.7 –50.0 4.3 22.1 17.8 32.3 –0.5 2.4 27.5 2.8
June 5.2 –9.2 –12.3 14.3 21.1 109.5 13.5 –96.1 43.0 1.2 2.8 26.2 12.8
July –45.6 6.9 5.2 –52.5 –52.1 37.0 109.0 72.0 29.6 0.9 2.9 19.4 6.4
Aug. –56.2 –66.9 –12.2 10.8 13.5 31.4 61.8 30.4 21.2 –2.4 4.0 9.6 9.9
Sep. 37.0 33.5 –1.6 3.5 2.6 62.7 –106.7 –169.4 42.0 15.3 5.0 9.9 11.9
Oct. –33.7 6.0 –10.4 –39.8 –39.3 54.6 49.4 –5.2 24.6 –9.3 4.7 27.1 2.2
Nov. 38.1 46.9 –1.1 –8.8 –4.7 59.0 51.3 –7.7 19.1 –4.7 5.6 24.5 –6.3
Dec. –57.9 –47.2 2.7 –10.7 –19.6 26.4 –100.1 –126.5 28.4 12.5 5.9 7.4 2.5
2024 Jan. – 8.7 –1.6 25.7 –7.1 –6.9 118.0 111.8 –6.2 65.6 –3.6 7.0 60.8 1.4
Feb. 38.7 38.2 6.8 0.5 11.0 –15.9 98.2 114.1 5.1 0.8 4.8 14.7 –15.2
Mar. 55.5 47.9 4.0 7.5 7.8 63.6 96.0 32.5 40.4 5.0 3.0 35.2 –2.8
Apr. 32.4 23.7 1.0 8.8 4.7 46.8 8.8 –38.0 0.3 –7.4 2.5 18.6 –13.5
May –24.3 –6.5 –1.2 –17.8 –15.0 43.0 73.2 30.2 9.4 2.3 1.7 –0.5 5.8
June 71.8 55.1 –4.5 16.7 13.8 55.8 –24.1 –79.9 39.9 3.7 1.1 3.9 31.2
July –19.5 13.2 –4.5 –32.7 –27.9 66.9 51.5 –15.4 3.6 –8.6 1.1 5.2 5.9
Aug. 0.4 –9.3 –4.1 9.6 9.3 50.0 58.8 8.8 14.5 –2.4 0.9 14.2 1.9
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2023 Jan. 27.5 16.9 –0.2 10.7 8.9 63.0 29.8 –33.3 –14.3 2.7 1.0 3.1 –21.0
Feb. 9.2 8.3 –0.2 0.9 1.8 58.4 –2.0 –60.3 3.3 0.6 1.2 –2.1 3.5
Mar. 4.8 8.1 6.4 –3.4 –3.7 –12.4 10.5 23.0 15.5 6.0 1.6 4.4 3.5
Apr. – 3.7 13.0 1.2 –16.7 –20.2 62.7 –15.2 –77.9 5.0 2.0 1.5 –3.0 4.5
May 5.0 11.3 –1.3 –6.3 –4.7 9.6 16.5 6.9 16.9 2.7 2.2 6.1 5.8
June 1.5 –1.9 4.1 3.4 5.4 7.6 –6.6 –14.3 9.7 –0.9 2.7 –0.3 8.2
July 5.1 6.8 –1.1 –1.7 –4.7 34.0 8.3 –25.7 24.9 –0.3 3.0 10.2 12.0
Aug. – 6.8 –5.0 –6.1 –1.8 0.3 25.7 –5.3 –31.0 6.6 –2.7 2.7 0.2 6.4
Sep. – 8.2 1.7 0.8 –9.9 –13.3 – 0.1 –2.8 –2.7 21.1 0.1 2.9 11.6 6.4
Oct. – 2.0 0.1 –0.2 –2.1 –5.2 16.2 4.9 –11.3 11.8 –0.1 3.0 5.9 3.0
Nov. 12.2 13.1 –1.1 –0.8 1.8 13.7 –3.4 –17.1 10.6 3.7 3.4 1.0 2.4
Dec. –18.0 –11.1 2.5 –6.9 –5.1 –17.4 –10.6 6.8 8.8 3.2 2.5 1.7 1.4
2024 Jan. 11.1 2.0 –0.5 9.1 6.7 74.5 20.7 –53.7 –1.8 –0.1 2.5 12.7 –17.0
Feb. 10.6 20.2 6.8 –9.6 –7.6 –17.0 40.0 57.1 –6.9 –1.6 2.4 7.7 –15.3
Mar. 8.3 4.3 0.5 4.0 2.0 6.6 4.2 –2.4 –5.3 1.7 1.7 2.4 –11.1
Apr. –13.5 –3.7 –3.9 –9.8 –13.1 41.3 4.2 –37.1 16.0 2.0 0.9 11.2 1.9
May 5.4 14.6 5.7 –9.2 –7.8 17.6 35.0 17.4 19.8 2.7 0.5 5.5 11.1
June 4.2 –4.1 –2.7 8.3 5.1 –24.4 –15.4 9.0 19.8 –0.7 0.4 –2.0 22.1
July 11.2 8.3 –1.5 2.8 2.5 57.0 –2.9 –59.9 3.3 –0.2 0.1 –2.8 6.1
Aug. – 1.4 7.7 –1.6 –9.1 –7.9 10.7 16.9 6.3 8.7 –0.4 0.1 2.1 6.9
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
–38.8 127.7 0.0 –133.7 –149.8 –232.0 –13.3 –218.7 76.0 6.1 35.0 6.8 – 8.0 2023 Jan.
20.3 23.1 0.0 –42.1 –63.4 –135.7 –3.5 –132.1 72.2 0.0 – 2.2 –6.4 29.7 Feb.
31.3 37.8 0.0 7.1 10.2 –103.9 3.9 –107.8 119.6 – 5.5 –25.7 10.9 9.3 Mar.
–27.2 –18.4 0.0 8.9 –17.9 –52.1 4.1 –56.3 45.6 –11.4 6.7 21.2 0.3 Apr.
–104.4 86.5 0.0 –30.4 –44.9 –94.3 1.7 –96.0 52.9 – 3.5 29.6 1.5 4.2 May
24.5 45.6 0.0 6.5 22.3 –60.9 3.1 –64.0 94.4 –11.2 –11.2 –6.2 – 3.7 June
–29.1 5.6 0.0 0.3 –28.3 –91.0 3.0 –94.1 73.3 –10.6 4.1 10.6 – 0.9 July
–20.0 5.0 0.0 –43.4 –45.1 –101.9 –7.6 –94.2 81.1 –24.3 4.4 8.4 0.8 Aug.
35.1 –13.3 0.0 46.5 44.6 –11.6 –3.1 – 8.5 79.8 –23.6 – 5.8 –0.7 – 2.1 Sep.
–28.5 60.4 0.0 –44.9 –87.9 –169.1 –4.4 –164.8 102.9 –21.7 25.2 18.8 8.4 Oct.
–48.4 42.8 0.0 76.3 54.4 18.3 –2.9 21.3 48.8 –12.7 22.3 16.9 –10.1 Nov.
14.4 –225.7 0.0 166.9 166.2 71.7 13.8 57.9 75.8 18.7 –27.1 14.4 – 2.1 Dec.
18.9 146.5 0.0 –132.4 –181.5 –238.0 –16.9 –221.1 61.0 – 4.4 27.2 30.8 1.7 2024 Jan.
9.1 5.4 0.0 1.2 15.2 –31.0 –0.7 –30.3 55.8 – 9.6 5.2 –11.4 – 5.6 Feb.
–26.8 –28.7 0.0 121.7 103.9 58.1 5.4 52.7 46.7 – 0.8 23.9 15.7 – 9.3 Mar.
23.9 42.9 0.0 26.5 –23.5 –18.4 2.5 –20.8 –1.8 – 3.3 6.5 22.6 6.5 Apr.
–24.3 16.2 0.0 22.0 48.7 32.5 2.8 29.6 10.2 6.0 – 3.5 –21.5 – 6.2 May
4.1 –81.5 0.0 141.8 150.3 139.8 7.0 132.9 12.3 – 1.8 8.5 10.7 – 4.3 June
–27.3 97.0 0.0 –10.3 –69.6 –81.1 4.1 –85.1 17.4 – 5.9 24.6 18.6 0.4 July
36.6 –95.5 0.0 68.3 61.3 37.3 –1.5 38.8 18.6 5.4 27.9 13.2 – 7.7 Aug.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
– 42.9 147.9 2.3 – 5.1 – 0.2 – 37.1 38.4 – 6.5 – 0.1 – 0.2 5.4 2023 Jan.
12.9 50.9 1.1 – 0.7 0.4 – 33.2 32.6 – 8.0 1.3 – 0.1 7.8 Feb.
27.1 – 34.8 2.3 0.9 – 15.5 – 45.7 31.8 – 10.4 – 0.2 0.3 8.7 Mar.
– 39.0 86.7 1.9 0.7 6.3 – 11.7 25.3 – 10.2 0.7 0.2 1.9 Apr.
– 11.8 2.8 2.6 0.9 6.7 – 6.2 18.4 – 10.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 5.1 May
– 9.8 8.4 1.7 1.1 0.8 – 29.2 36.7 – 10.0 – 0.3 – 0.0 3.6 June
– 6.4 20.0 1.6 1.3 0.7 – 21.8 31.5 – 10.3 0.3 0.3 0.8 July
7.4 – 1.5 2.9 – 1.9 6.4 – 21.1 30.4 – 11.2 1.1 0.1 7.1 Aug.
– 11.6 – 12.1 3.6 – 1.7 – 5.7 – 13.3 17.8 – 8.6 – 1.0 0.1 – 0.7 Sep.
– 2.4 2.9 1.5 – 0.5 1.9 – 31.2 38.8 – 9.4 0.8 – 0.1 3.0 Oct.
– 9.5 13.9 1.1 – 0.4 11.1 9.4 11.7 – 10.5 1.1 0.1 – 0.8 Nov.
7.7 – 62.1 2.4 2.8 10.2 – 6.6 25.1 – 5.0 – 1.2 0.1 – 2.2 Dec.
– 6.7 108.3 – 7.4 3.7 – 14.3 – 47.5 37.6 – 9.1 3.0 0.1 1.4 2024 Jan.
– 2.3 0.0 2.4 – 0.6 2.7 – 18.3 27.1 – 7.4 1.0 0.0 0.3 Feb.
2.0 – 2.1 2.9 0.7 20.3 2.8 24.9 – 5.8 – 1.5 0.2 – 0.3 Mar.
– 2.9 23.7 1.8 1.5 – 9.1 – 4.4 6.1 – 5.5 – 0.3 0.2 – 5.2 Apr.
3.5 – 26.8 2.4 0.4 26.5 27.6 5.0 – 4.1 – 0.3 0.1 – 1.8 May
– 4.3 – 39.8 1.6 1.7 4.1 1.3 2.3 – 4.5 0.8 0.1 4.2 June
– 6.1 75.8 2.9 1.7 – 4.8 – 7.3 9.0 – 4.2 0.7 0.2 – 3.3 July
6.8 – 38.3 4.2 – 1.1 32.1 22.1 9.2 – 2.9 1.7 0.4 1.6 Aug.
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2022 July 33,877.2 21,984.6 15,451.2 13,043.7 1,578.2 829.2 6,533.4 1,003.0 5,530.4 7,217.0 4,675.6
Aug. 34,342.7 21,872.8 15,459.5 13,080.1 1,553.8 825.7 6,413.2 996.9 5,416.4 7,301.8 5,168.2
Sep. 34,619.2 21,901.8 15,558.1 13,191.3 1,545.0 821.7 6,343.7 998.1 5,345.5 7,241.9 5,475.6
Oct. 34,548.1 21,891.0 15,552.2 13,190.1 1,532.9 829.3 6,338.8 995.2 5,343.6 7,334.8 5,322.3
Nov. 34,224.4 22,011.9 15,627.4 13,228.2 1,559.0 840.1 6,384.5 990.3 5,394.2 7,206.6 5,005.9
Dec. 33,866.5 21,792.8 15,515.3 13,123.9 1,556.1 835.4 6,277.5 999.1 5,278.4 6,873.6 5,200.2
2023 Jan. 33,815.1 21,884.1 15,553.5 13,173.2 1,544.7 835.6 6,330.6 1,000.3 5,330.3 6,984.1 4,946.9
Feb. 34,096.9 21,862.9 15,545.5 13,159.9 1,541.1 844.6 6,317.4 991.3 5,326.2 7,001.8 5,232.1
Mar. 33,942.1 21,919.6 15,573.6 13,173.8 1,552.4 847.4 6,346.0 995.4 5,350.6 7,107.2 4,915.3
Apr. 33,944.3 21,909.0 15,601.1 13,168.5 1,566.5 866.2 6,307.9 991.1 5,316.8 7,038.5 4,996.8
May 34,131.0 21,919.7 15,651.1 13,186.0 1,595.7 869.4 6,268.7 995.4 5,273.2 7,150.9 5,060.3
June 34,042.2 21,915.5 15,637.3 13,182.3 1,584.5 870.4 6,278.2 988.5 5,289.7 7,066.1 5,060.6
July 34,175.7 21,867.2 15,642.3 13,180.8 1,586.4 875.1 6,224.9 988.2 5,236.7 7,153.4 5,155.2
Aug. 34,227.8 21,811.9 15,573.8 13,123.8 1,576.8 873.2 6,238.1 986.1 5,252.0 7,251.6 5,164.3
Sep. 34,370.3 21,796.9 15,601.8 13,156.3 1,574.7 870.9 6,195.0 987.3 5,207.8 7,195.8 5,377.6
Oct. 34,329.4 21,755.4 15,598.7 13,167.0 1,555.7 876.0 6,156.7 984.1 5,172.6 7,262.7 5,311.3
Nov. 34,125.5 21,851.9 15,660.3 13,220.8 1,558.6 881.0 6,191.6 980.8 5,210.7 7,252.0 5,021.6
Dec. 33,753.8 21,859.7 15,626.9 13,177.4 1,552.2 897.3 6,232.9 989.4 5,243.4 7,143.5 4,750.6
2024 Jan. 33,828.6 21,827.2 15,622.9 13,145.8 1,569.5 907.5 6,204.3 987.6 5,216.7 7,293.5 4,708.0
Feb. 34,002.0 21,841.1 15,654.0 13,167.9 1,569.9 916.2 6,187.2 977.4 5,209.8 7,382.8 4,778.1
Mar. 34,217.8 21,915.1 15,704.4 13,208.4 1,567.4 928.6 6,210.7 977.0 5,233.7 7,545.7 4,757.1
Apr. 34,395.4 21,919.6 15,722.0 13,231.3 1,562.4 928.3 6,197.6 980.4 5,217.2 7,599.2 4,876.7
May 34,361.3 21,896.6 15,721.0 13,231.8 1,559.6 929.6 6,175.6 977.7 5,197.9 7,641.7 4,823.0
June 34,366.8 21,980.8 15,783.2 13,301.7 1,563.4 918.2 6,197.6 980.7 5,216.9 7,671.5 4,714.5
July 34,383.9 21,997.4 15,797.1 13,314.3 1,559.2 923.5 6,200.3 975.8 5,224.5 7,735.9 4,650.6
Aug. 34,371.7 21,994.4 15,780.7 13,301.8 1,559.3 919.6 6,213.7 976.2 5,237.6 7,751.7 4,625.7
German contribution (€ billion)
2022 July 8,287.9 5,375.0 4,096.1 3,560.3 252.7 283.2 1,278.8 283.6 995.2 1,481.5 1,431.4
Aug. 8,546.0 5,364.5 4,132.0 3,600.0 249.1 282.9 1,232.5 281.5 951.0 1,492.4 1,689.0
Sep. 8,857.6 5,356.3 4,153.9 3,624.8 246.1 283.0 1,202.4 284.3 918.1 1,502.4 1,998.8
Oct. 8,826.7 5,366.0 4,163.6 3,634.6 245.9 283.1 1,202.4 284.8 917.5 1,509.0 1,951.8
Nov. 8,653.9 5,402.0 4,189.2 3,656.3 249.8 283.1 1,212.8 283.4 929.4 1,502.4 1,749.6
Dec. 8,626.1 5,345.2 4,165.8 3,636.7 245.9 283.2 1,179.4 283.2 896.1 1,417.3 1,863.7
2023 Jan. 8,561.4 5,377.1 4,178.3 3,652.7 245.9 279.7 1,198.8 285.0 913.9 1,443.8 1,740.5
Feb. 8,712.0 5,371.7 4,186.6 3,662.2 243.6 280.9 1,185.1 284.0 901.1 1,443.9 1,896.4
Mar. 8,573.5 5,388.1 4,193.6 3,661.9 252.1 279.6 1,194.5 284.2 910.3 1,457.2 1,728.2
Apr. 8,559.3 5,383.7 4,206.2 3,672.7 252.4 281.1 1,177.5 287.7 889.8 1,435.7 1,739.8
May 8,614.3 5,389.9 4,217.4 3,685.4 252.1 279.9 1,172.6 286.1 886.4 1,468.3 1,756.1
June 8,647.9 5,387.4 4,215.9 3,679.0 255.5 281.4 1,171.5 284.2 887.4 1,433.5 1,826.9
July 8,779.6 5,390.2 4,222.0 3,685.7 255.6 280.6 1,168.3 287.2 881.1 1,439.0 1,950.5
Aug. 8,776.6 5,383.7 4,215.6 3,685.5 249.4 280.6 1,168.1 285.0 883.0 1,442.2 1,950.7
Sep. 8,834.2 5,362.1 4,216.4 3,686.3 248.5 281.5 1,145.8 288.4 857.4 1,446.5 2,025.5
Oct. 8,844.5 5,360.6 4,215.5 3,685.5 247.9 282.1 1,145.1 291.6 853.5 1,461.4 2,022.6
Nov. 8,661.3 5,385.7 4,228.0 3,697.3 248.4 282.3 1,157.8 289.7 868.1 1,446.0 1,829.6
Dec. 8,491.7 5,384.9 4,217.3 3,682.2 247.9 287.2 1,167.6 287.1 880.5 1,432.1 1,674.6
2024 Jan. 8,532.9 5,390.7 4,218.3 3,682.5 246.2 289.6 1,172.4 289.5 882.9 1,463.2 1,679.1
Feb. 8,600.8 5,391.4 4,236.7 3,694.8 250.2 291.7 1,154.7 287.7 867.0 1,502.2 1,707.2
Mar. 8,586.9 5,404.4 4,241.0 3,697.7 246.0 297.3 1,163.4 289.8 873.7 1,524.9 1,657.5
Apr. 8,673.8 5,380.1 4,235.7 3,697.3 244.1 294.3 1,144.4 293.1 851.3 1,544.0 1,749.8
May 8,644.6 5,383.0 4,248.9 3,704.9 246.6 297.4 1,134.1 291.8 842.3 1,573.2 1,688.4
June 8,574.0 5,393.1 4,244.9 3,703.4 247.7 293.7 1,148.2 295.0 853.2 1,566.2 1,614.8
July 8,449.2 5,410.8 4,252.2 3,711.1 244.7 296.3 1,158.6 295.1 863.5 1,563.6 1,474.8
Aug. 8,409.4 5,408.9 4,257.5 3,718.1 244.0 295.4 1,151.4 293.9 857.5 1,573.0 1,427.5
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,543.7 16,183.5 14,738.8 14,937.4 9,735.4 741.0 127.1 1,791.0 2,515.8 27.1 2022 July
1,539.1 16,161.1 14,793.6 14,985.4 9,754.1 781.5 125.9 1,770.0 2,526.0 28.0 Aug.
1,537.7 16,198.7 14,785.5 15,036.3 9,688.0 913.3 125.5 1,756.3 2,525.7 27.6 Sep.
1,537.2 16,095.0 14,708.1 14,936.4 9,507.1 992.6 130.1 1,741.6 2,522.9 42.1 Oct.
1,533.7 16,084.4 14,722.6 14,917.3 9,441.8 1,042.2 134.2 1,740.7 2,516.0 42.3 Nov.
1,545.3 15,996.8 14,766.2 14,929.6 9,373.7 1,099.5 133.9 1,750.1 2,530.0 42.4 Dec.
1,533.4 15,876.1 14,667.2 14,844.5 9,206.0 1,165.1 146.4 1,746.7 2,532.0 48.2 2023 Jan.
1,529.9 15,842.9 14,625.3 14,773.4 9,061.7 1,225.3 157.6 1,747.0 2,531.8 49.9 Feb.
1,533.8 15,891.9 14,649.7 14,788.7 8,967.7 1,313.9 174.0 1,756.9 2,524.8 51.4 Mar.
1,537.9 15,848.9 14,650.2 14,784.8 8,918.2 1,346.2 187.9 1,765.8 2,513.9 52.8 Apr.
1,539.7 15,718.0 14,618.0 14,756.7 8,834.7 1,387.5 200.1 1,768.2 2,511.0 55.2 May
1,542.7 15,760.5 14,649.9 14,755.8 8,755.6 1,455.8 218.3 1,768.4 2,499.8 58.0 June
1,545.9 15,696.0 14,619.8 14,725.4 8,662.9 1,512.2 231.6 1,768.5 2,489.2 60.9 July
1,538.3 15,646.8 14,595.4 14,694.0 8,578.0 1,579.2 240.9 1,765.9 2,465.1 65.0 Aug.
1,535.2 15,756.0 14,654.7 14,766.5 8,569.2 1,647.6 255.2 1,782.7 2,441.7 70.1 Sep.
1,530.8 15,636.6 14,576.9 14,702.2 8,421.3 1,736.5 275.6 1,773.4 2,420.5 74.9 Oct.
1,527.9 15,648.3 14,645.5 14,759.2 8,426.3 1,776.1 286.2 1,782.0 2,408.0 80.6 Nov.
1,541.7 15,822.6 14,816.0 14,927.5 8,489.3 1,826.8 302.1 1,795.3 2,427.3 86.7 Dec.
1,524.2 15,687.2 14,668.3 14,801.5 8,295.5 1,879.2 317.0 1,793.6 2,423.4 92.8 2024 Jan.
1,523.5 15,709.3 14,689.3 14,792.0 8,241.0 1,924.1 325.3 1,790.1 2,413.7 97.8 Feb.
1,528.9 15,792.0 14,786.0 14,897.9 8,297.0 1,964.2 327.5 1,795.6 2,412.7 100.9 Mar.
1,531.4 15,780.1 14,757.6 14,899.5 8,292.2 1,977.9 328.1 1,788.2 2,409.6 103.5 Apr.
1,534.2 15,826.2 14,819.5 14,960.7 8,321.3 2,000.0 328.6 1,789.7 2,415.9 105.2 May
1,541.2 15,990.4 14,963.9 15,083.4 8,422.0 2,020.4 325.6 1,794.6 2,414.4 106.4 June
1,545.2 15,879.5 14,869.6 15,026.6 8,358.3 2,043.7 322.6 1,785.9 2,408.8 107.4 July
1,543.7 15,999.5 14,949.0 15,103.1 8,413.0 2,063.1 322.2 1,782.1 2,414.3 108.4 Aug.
German contribution (€ billion)
359.0 4,507.6 4,222.4 4,070.3 2,813.6 142.1 31.0 530.6 530.6 22.3 2022 July
371.5 4,552.6 4,289.4 4,135.2 2,870.1 153.3 30.6 530.7 528.3 22.2 Aug.
371.8 4,541.5 4,267.4 4,135.1 2,834.9 193.7 30.9 530.3 523.0 22.2 Sep.
371.8 4,546.8 4,270.2 4,140.4 2,804.0 233.2 31.6 529.3 519.8 22.4 Oct.
371.5 4,578.7 4,283.7 4,146.3 2,806.0 240.1 32.1 531.0 514.4 22.6 Nov.
374.0 4,534.2 4,260.8 4,119.2 2,764.3 260.2 34.1 527.1 510.4 23.0 Dec.
368.9 4,489.3 4,257.7 4,126.0 2,749.9 286.6 36.9 529.6 499.1 24.0 2023 Jan.
368.1 4,496.6 4,250.9 4,106.5 2,706.5 314.2 39.1 530.3 491.2 25.2 Feb.
369.0 4,505.7 4,236.8 4,090.4 2,667.4 336.4 42.4 536.3 481.0 26.8 Mar.
369.8 4,473.0 4,248.0 4,104.2 2,660.3 360.2 46.1 538.3 471.0 28.3 Apr.
370.7 4,469.7 4,256.0 4,103.8 2,647.5 373.8 50.3 540.9 460.8 30.5 May
371.7 4,460.3 4,259.3 4,096.2 2,616.5 400.5 54.1 541.0 450.9 33.2 June
373.1 4,455.4 4,259.2 4,106.1 2,603.8 426.9 57.6 540.8 440.7 36.2 July
371.2 4,460.4 4,259.8 4,101.7 2,577.8 455.8 61.5 538.1 429.6 38.9 Aug.
369.4 4,448.9 4,258.5 4,104.2 2,568.6 468.0 66.2 538.5 421.1 41.8 Sep.
369.0 4,447.4 4,259.3 4,129.3 2,553.2 507.9 73.1 538.5 411.7 44.8 Oct.
368.6 4,454.3 4,281.0 4,149.1 2,561.8 515.9 79.5 542.6 401.2 48.3 Nov.
371.4 4,470.1 4,290.9 4,150.5 2,539.8 532.4 84.0 547.3 396.2 50.8 Dec.
375.1 4,448.1 4,271.5 4,150.1 2,502.4 569.5 89.5 548.1 387.2 53.4 2024 Jan.
374.5 4,447.8 4,273.8 4,147.4 2,481.0 590.5 94.7 545.6 379.8 55.8 Feb.
375.2 4,475.1 4,300.5 4,166.8 2,483.2 607.5 97.0 547.6 374.1 57.4 Mar.
376.6 4,471.9 4,300.6 4,182.7 2,486.3 620.9 98.9 549.6 368.6 58.4 Apr.
377.0 4,506.4 4,331.5 4,204.0 2,501.4 626.2 100.7 552.3 364.5 58.9 May
378.6 4,503.4 4,332.6 4,196.1 2,501.6 619.0 102.5 553.7 360.1 59.2 June
380.3 4,494.3 4,327.9 4,212.7 2,507.6 632.9 103.3 553.6 355.9 59.4 July
379.3 4,559.9 4,386.9 4,264.5 2,551.1 643.3 104.6 553.0 353.0 59.5 Aug.
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2022 July 755.9 490.3 303.3 100.4 24.2 42.9 16.2 3.3 306.0 305.9 590.8 2,086.8 1,357.0
Aug. 675.5 500.1 309.7 104.6 24.0 42.5 16.1 3.2 283.8 283.7 597.5 2,106.3 1,368.1
Sep. 683.2 479.1 282.0 111.2 24.5 42.3 16.0 3.2 264.8 264.7 589.1 2,142.4 1,404.3
Oct. 678.1 480.5 287.5 109.2 24.3 41.5 14.7 3.2 268.2 268.2 625.8 2,118.8 1,405.0
Nov. 668.3 498.9 306.5 109.2 25.1 40.8 14.2 3.2 294.8 294.8 648.0 2,149.8 1,432.2
Dec. 583.5 483.7 296.2 103.6 27.2 40.2 13.5 3.0 247.7 247.7 650.9 2,155.0 1,463.5
2023 Jan. 550.6 480.9 283.2 113.2 27.5 40.6 12.8 3.7 283.3 283.3 657.7 2,195.2 1,500.6
Feb. 570.9 498.6 297.5 115.2 28.7 40.3 13.2 3.7 281.6 281.5 651.3 2,247.7 1,520.1
Mar. 602.4 500.8 288.6 125.8 28.4 39.6 14.7 3.7 255.3 255.2 662.3 2,246.0 1,540.4
Apr. 575.3 488.8 278.5 123.3 29.7 39.4 14.2 3.7 261.7 261.3 683.4 2,242.5 1,550.5
May 470.7 490.6 277.9 126.7 29.3 39.4 13.8 3.6 291.9 287.8 685.0 2,288.8 1,579.9
June 495.1 509.5 288.6 134.7 29.4 39.3 13.8 3.6 280.4 280.3 678.8 2,302.0 1,589.6
July 466.0 504.6 281.7 137.7 28.4 39.4 13.9 3.6 284.1 283.4 689.4 2,391.9 1,635.9
Aug. 446.0 506.9 283.2 138.6 28.0 39.6 13.8 3.5 288.9 288.9 698.0 2,409.5 1,645.9
Sep. 481.2 508.2 285.3 136.7 29.3 39.7 13.8 3.4 281.7 281.7 697.3 2,431.8 1,657.7
Oct. 452.7 481.7 266.6 131.0 28.5 39.2 13.1 3.3 306.8 306.6 716.2 2,491.3 1,694.5
Nov. 404.4 484.6 274.9 127.5 27.2 38.9 13.0 3.2 328.5 328.4 733.2 2,489.2 1,696.6
Dec. 418.8 476.3 265.6 128.4 28.4 38.6 12.4 3.1 320.5 320.5 746.5 2,485.3 1,701.1
2024 Jan. 437.3 448.4 238.5 127.8 28.4 37.5 12.2 4.0 345.4 343.4 777.5 2,529.0 1,731.0
Feb. 446.3 470.9 260.7 130.6 26.1 38.1 11.7 3.8 348.0 347.3 766.2 2,538.8 1,749.8
Mar. 419.6 474.5 258.7 135.5 26.9 37.7 12.0 3.7 372.0 371.2 781.9 2,563.6 1,761.7
Apr. 442.7 437.9 232.4 129.8 22.6 37.7 11.8 3.7 378.6 372.2 804.7 2,593.6 1,775.3
May 418.5 447.1 244.2 127.8 22.2 37.7 11.6 3.6 374.8 366.0 784.7 2,578.9 1,771.1
June 422.7 484.3 275.5 133.7 22.8 37.4 11.4 3.5 383.8 383.7 796.8 2,586.5 1,770.7
July 395.4 457.5 253.1 129.9 22.9 36.9 11.2 3.5 408.2 390.0 816.6 2,585.4 1,774.6
Aug. 432.1 464.3 263.3 126.9 22.7 36.9 11.1 3.5 435.4 416.6 831.1 2,579.3 1,785.0
German contribution (€ billion)
2022 July 166.8 270.4 128.3 89.0 20.2 30.6 2.2 0.1 9.8 9.8 2.4 613.8 369.1
Aug. 142.7 274.6 129.4 92.2 20.4 30.4 2.2 0.1 8.0 8.0 2.3 625.7 384.5
Sep. 147.4 259.1 109.0 96.6 20.8 30.3 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.4 640.0 395.3
Oct. 152.5 253.9 108.1 93.1 20.5 30.1 2.1 0.1 5.2 5.2 2.5 633.9 398.1
Nov. 175.5 256.9 114.7 88.9 21.5 29.8 1.9 0.1 8.3 8.3 2.5 634.2 402.6
Dec. 159.2 255.8 117.3 83.2 23.9 29.6 1.8 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.6 631.2 409.3
2023 Jan. 116.4 246.9 99.4 92.2 23.8 29.8 1.6 0.1 6.1 6.1 2.4 639.6 417.9
Feb. 129.3 260.8 110.3 94.6 24.6 29.7 1.5 0.1 7.5 7.5 2.3 651.5 427.1
Mar. 156.4 258.8 102.2 101.4 24.1 29.6 1.4 0.1 7.2 7.2 2.6 658.0 440.3
Apr. 117.4 251.4 97.3 97.8 25.4 29.5 1.3 0.1 7.9 7.9 2.7 654.9 446.8
May 105.6 260.2 104.8 99.5 25.0 29.7 1.2 0.1 7.7 7.7 2.6 670.6 458.1
June 95.9 268.2 106.1 106.5 24.9 29.5 1.1 0.1 7.3 7.3 2.6 671.6 452.8
July 89.5 259.9 96.6 109.1 23.7 29.5 0.9 0.1 7.6 7.6 2.9 679.9 457.6
Aug. 96.8 261.9 100.9 107.1 23.3 29.6 0.9 0.1 8.7 8.7 3.0 688.8 469.0
Sep. 85.2 259.5 97.5 107.0 24.5 29.6 0.8 0.1 7.8 7.8 3.0 705.6 470.0
Oct. 82.8 235.3 81.6 99.3 24.1 29.4 0.7 0.1 8.5 8.5 2.9 713.0 476.3
Nov. 73.3 231.8 81.2 97.7 22.7 29.2 0.7 0.1 9.6 9.6 3.0 706.2 471.0
Dec. 81.1 238.6 84.9 100.3 23.9 28.6 0.7 0.1 8.4 8.4 3.2 699.9 476.8
2024 Jan. 74.4 223.6 75.5 95.6 24.0 27.8 0.7 0.1 11.4 11.4 3.3 717.4 486.5
Feb. 72.0 228.4 78.6 98.8 21.6 28.6 0.6 0.1 12.4 12.4 3.3 727.1 494.5
Mar. 74.0 234.4 79.3 103.5 22.5 28.3 0.6 0.1 11.0 10.9 3.5 727.8 501.4
Apr. 71.2 218.0 72.0 97.9 19.3 28.2 0.6 0.1 10.6 10.6 3.7 737.0 505.8
May 74.7 227.7 83.8 96.1 18.9 28.2 0.6 0.1 10.3 10.3 3.8 738.4 508.7
June 70.5 236.9 85.4 103.0 19.9 27.9 0.5 0.1 11.1 11.1 4.0 741.5 506.2
July 64.4 217.3 71.8 97.3 19.9 27.6 0.5 0.1 11.9 11.9 4.2 731.6 506.8
Aug. 71.1 224.3 81.5 94.7 19.7 27.7 0.5 0.1 13.5 13.5 4.6 731.8 506.9
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
15.1 16.4 2,055.4 5,863.1 2,970.9 8.3 4,324.1 0.0 11,762.6 15,311.3 16,066.2 6,890.6 204.2 2022 July
16.7 19.0 2,070.6 5,915.0 2,890.6 34.5 4,814.9 0.0 11,776.2 15,378.0 16,137.5 6,804.9 197.0 Aug.
34.9 19.5 2,088.0 5,899.0 2,845.2 16.9 5,125.6 0.0 11,681.6 15,419.9 16,180.2 6,762.6 196.2 Sep.
3.8 23.9 2,091.1 6,038.8 2,819.4 38.2 5,006.8 0.0 11,505.4 15,322.1 16,100.0 6,738.8 196.4 Oct.
23.7 22.8 2,103.3 5,881.3 2,857.4 66.3 4,708.5 0.0 11,459.9 15,323.0 16,151.7 6,787.6 200.1 Nov.
31.7 23.2 2,100.0 5,553.5 2,820.5 58.0 4,838.9 0.0 11,381.7 15,315.5 16,131.8 6,756.3 192.7 Dec.
17.6 27.9 2,149.7 5,636.6 2,862.7 86.0 4,684.1 0.0 11,192.9 15,211.1 16,042.9 6,851.7 191.6 2023 Jan.
47.0 30.4 2,170.3 5,670.8 2,811.6 79.8 4,981.3 0.0 11,060.3 15,153.2 16,008.8 6,822.8 192.2 Feb.
53.9 30.4 2,161.7 5,667.1 2,893.9 90.1 4,701.8 0.0 10,949.5 15,154.1 16,003.8 6,907.3 182.5 Mar.
50.2 32.9 2,159.4 5,633.5 2,886.1 110.4 4,739.9 0.0 10,894.5 15,132.7 16,007.4 6,907.3 182.9 Apr.
56.0 32.8 2,200.0 5,722.1 2,903.2 155.5 4,826.8 0.0 10,807.7 15,099.1 15,990.6 6,969.5 178.5 May
49.8 33.0 2,219.3 5,584.4 2,880.3 147.2 4,865.8 0.0 10,742.3 15,116.8 15,989.8 6,968.9 178.0 June
47.0 34.0 2,311.0 5,594.1 2,898.4 102.5 4,973.4 0.0 10,648.3 15,083.9 15,984.3 7,081.8 180.5 July
50.1 33.4 2,326.0 5,656.5 2,917.4 122.1 4,950.3 0.0 10,553.8 15,042.0 15,946.1 7,117.5 176.9 Aug.
45.1 36.4 2,350.4 5,541.1 2,878.4 113.5 5,135.3 0.0 10,547.2 15,094.2 16,001.0 7,124.7 180.3 Sep.
54.5 36.6 2,400.2 5,511.8 2,906.2 121.7 5,108.0 0.0 10,375.9 15,003.5 15,954.5 7,197.1 179.6 Oct.
45.2 36.0 2,408.1 5,446.4 2,935.7 165.3 4,851.1 0.0 10,387.7 15,047.8 16,020.2 7,248.5 180.8 Nov.
46.0 34.8 2,404.5 5,299.3 3,003.3 56.1 4,478.3 0.0 10,446.0 15,199.4 16,192.2 7,331.5 177.4 Dec.
40.5 36.1 2,452.3 5,334.6 2,992.4 105.8 4,532.5 0.0 10,212.5 15,026.6 16,060.4 7,372.6 180.3 2024 Jan.
33.5 36.3 2,469.0 5,447.9 2,955.4 99.1 4,613.9 0.0 10,182.0 15,039.4 16,057.9 7,354.2 182.7 Feb.
22.2 40.0 2,501.4 5,483.1 3,020.8 106.0 4,569.5 0.0 10,240.0 15,143.3 16,181.4 7,460.1 179.9 Mar.
28.2 39.5 2,525.9 5,462.7 3,020.9 107.0 4,716.4 0.0 10,223.2 15,123.2 16,210.7 7,479.8 187.4 Apr.
18.1 42.4 2,518.4 5,464.1 3,023.4 105.9 4,669.2 0.0 10,252.6 15,178.7 16,239.6 7,478.0 173.0 May
14.4 43.5 2,528.7 5,420.2 3,064.1 70.7 4,513.2 0.0 10,394.7 15,343.9 16,399.7 7,534.6 176.8 June
15.9 43.1 2,526.4 5,383.8 3,121.7 105.7 4,537.7 0.0 10,311.7 15,271.7 16,388.6 7,581.8 176.1 July
7.0 43.1 2,529.2 5,341.3 3,140.7 44.3 4,456.6 0.0 10,375.7 15,356.7 16,480.0 7,600.8 176.5 Aug.
German contribution (€ billion)
21.2 6.8 585.8 1,287.5 779.7 –1,189.6 2,276.7 525.2 2,941.9 3,757.1 3,797.3 1,949.2 0.0 2022 July
21.8 7.6 596.2 1,349.3 739.6 –1,271.6 2,540.1 513.5 2,999.5 3,826.5 3,866.3 1,919.1 0.0 Aug.
27.5 8.1 604.3 1,385.2 711.9 –1,287.1 2,858.3 516.8 2,944.0 3,811.2 3,854.6 1,899.2 0.0 Sep.
19.1 9.7 605.0 1,355.1 693.8 –1,215.2 2,804.7 516.8 2,912.1 3,812.3 3,848.8 1,880.8 0.0 Oct.
20.8 11.2 602.2 1,310.2 714.6 –1,191.2 2,596.7 516.8 2,920.8 3,819.7 3,862.5 1,900.3 0.0 Nov.
20.2 11.7 599.3 1,265.7 690.1 –1,230.4 2,726.5 518.9 2,881.6 3,795.1 3,835.9 1,869.2 0.0 Dec.
24.0 13.1 602.4 1,226.5 689.1 –1,117.5 2,625.9 521.2 2,849.3 3,789.5 3,835.2 1,874.9 0.0 2023 Jan.
29.3 15.8 606.4 1,171.8 668.4 –1,073.2 2,787.2 522.2 2,816.8 3,782.0 3,836.8 1,860.1 0.0 Feb.
36.2 17.5 604.3 1,188.0 700.6 –1,129.7 2,641.2 524.5 2,769.6 3,756.4 3,819.8 1,897.7 0.0 Mar.
37.0 18.5 599.4 1,107.1 704.2 –1,028.5 2,637.8 526.4 2,757.6 3,759.4 3,825.5 1,899.8 0.0 Apr.
41.2 19.5 609.9 1,122.5 715.6 –1,036.9 2,662.4 529.0 2,752.3 3,762.8 3,833.9 1,926.7 0.0 May
44.6 19.2 607.9 1,099.9 709.8 –1,026.8 2,723.1 530.7 2,722.6 3,760.6 3,834.2 1,921.6 0.0 June
44.5 19.9 615.4 1,070.7 724.0 –996.4 2,835.7 532.2 2,700.4 3,759.3 3,834.2 1,946.1 0.0 July
51.0 20.6 617.2 1,044.4 734.2 –998.8 2,835.9 535.1 2,678.7 3,756.9 3,840.1 1,958.1 0.0 Aug.
48.5 22.6 634.5 1,048.4 722.8 –1,000.9 2,898.6 538.7 2,666.2 3,753.7 3,835.5 1,967.4 0.0 Sep.
49.7 24.4 639.0 1,035.9 735.9 –998.0 2,898.7 540.2 2,634.8 3,751.7 3,837.2 1,987.9 0.0 Oct.
49.6 23.6 633.1 1,012.0 753.5 –983.0 2,705.7 541.3 2,643.0 3,760.7 3,846.5 2,006.8 0.0 Nov.
45.9 25.0 629.0 1,016.2 778.6 –1,034.8 2,550.2 543.7 2,624.7 3,762.2 3,844.6 2,034.5 0.0 Dec.
46.9 25.6 645.0 967.8 758.4 –959.8 2,586.3 536.2 2,577.9 3,744.3 3,831.5 2,032.8 0.0 2024 Jan.
46.4 26.4 654.4 1,024.7 731.1 –992.0 2,646.3 538.6 2,559.6 3,745.7 3,834.2 2,015.6 0.0 Feb.
45.7 26.7 655.4 1,022.6 744.6 –988.1 2,590.4 541.5 2,562.4 3,767.6 3,854.5 2,033.5 0.0 Mar.
40.9 26.3 669.7 987.7 747.2 –960.2 2,676.0 543.3 2,558.3 3,764.4 3,846.0 2,053.2 0.0 Apr.
39.6 25.8 673.1 1,001.7 746.9 –986.7 2,623.7 545.7 2,585.2 3,792.3 3,871.8 2,059.4 0.0 May
43.9 25.7 671.9 1,015.1 777.5 –1,013.2 2,534.5 547.3 2,587.0 3,792.0 3,876.7 2,090.4 0.0 June
40.7 25.6 665.3 951.2 798.5 –972.6 2,430.1 550.2 2,579.4 3,789.3 3,871.6 2,104.4 0.0 July
43.0 24.8 664.0 950.0 810.2 –1,038.9 2,378.2 554.4 2,632.6 3,848.4 3,934.4 2,114.5 0.0 Aug.
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2022 Sep. 950.1 1.7 2,124.9 0.0 4,954.8 707.0 0.0 1,585.3 553.9 1,249.2 3,936.1 6,228.5
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 955.8 4.0 2,118.8 0.0 4,948.3 4,490.0 0.0 1,563.7 536.7 1,104.4 332.0 6,385.7
Dec. 960.4 1.9 1,947.1 0.0 4,946.1 4,521.5 0.0 1,560.8 492.5 1,066.9 213.8 6,296.2
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 940.4 1.2 1,303.3 0.1 4,942.1 4,051.6 0.0 1,565.6 372.8 1,001.6 195.6 5,812.7
Mar. 916.8 0.9 1,233.3 0.0 4,939.0 4,103.0 0.0 1,553.9 380.2 861.8 191.1 5,848.0
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 945.0 1.4 1,117.7 0.1 4,905.6 3,996.1 0.0 1,559.8 360.6 870.5 182.7 5,738.6
June 948.2 1.6 1,100.5 0.1 4,884.1 4,126.4 0.0 1,563.7 256.4 806.6 181.6 5,871.7
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 927.8 10.9 682.0 0.1 4,853.0 3,704.4 0.0 1,567.0 254.4 770.5 177.4 5,448.9
Sep. 924.3 5.6 601.0 0.1 4,811.2 3,647.4 0.0 1,564.2 222.5 733.8 174.3 5,386.0
Oct. 931.2 8.1 515.4 0.1 4,767.9 3,577.4 0.0 1,554.7 222.7 693.3 174.6 5,306.7
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 933.3 7.3 495.9 0.0 4,715.0 3,548.8 0.0 1,551.1 194.1 685.3 172.0 5,271.9
2024 Jan. 958.3 7.9 396.2 0.1 4,686.8 3,487.4 0.0 1,556.7 168.4 666.3 170.5 5,214.6
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 966.5 4.8 397.3 0.0 4,646.4 3,490.9 0.0 1,543.2 168.5 643.8 168.6 5,202.7
Apr. 1,002.8 2.8 249.4 0.0 4,599.5 3,337.9 0.0 1,546.1 137.8 664.3 168.4 5,052.3
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 1,031.7 2.5 149.1 0.0 4,550.7 3,214.0 0.0 1,551.5 119.5 682.3 166.7 4,932.1
July 1,063.7 5.7 104.9 0.0 4,494.3 3,113.2 0.0 1,559.5 115.2 712.7 168.1 4,840.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 1,083.7 3.0 85.5 0.0 4,442.0 3,058.7 0.0 1,564.2 119.2 702.9 169.3 4,792.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
2022 Sep. 232.1 0.3 403.6 0.0 1,076.8 228.5 0.0 379.5 157.9 – 161.8 1,108.8 1,716.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 231.7 0.8 400.5 0.0 1,071.5 1,304.0 0.0 379.0 127.2 – 231.4 125.9 1,808.8
Dec. 232.4 0.5 352.5 0.0 1,079.2 1,346.6 0.0 378.8 121.0 – 242.4 60.5 1,785.9
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 229.8 0.4 231.9 0.1 1,076.8 1,234.6 0.0 377.2 77.8 – 205.4 54.8 1,666.7
Mar. 228.9 0.4 212.8 0.0 1,077.0 1,263.7 0.0 374.5 69.2 – 242.5 54.2 1,692.4
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 239.2 0.7 200.2 0.1 1,066.1 1,228.0 0.0 375.7 73.4 – 221.1 50.1 1,653.9
June 241.7 0.7 198.9 0.1 1,056.8 1,256.3 0.0 377.2 54.7 – 241.8 52.0 1,685.4
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 236.2 1.5 142.4 0.1 1,048.8 1,175.5 0.0 377.5 49.9 – 222.5 48.4 1,601.5
Sep. 234.5 0.8 131.2 0.1 1,041.3 1,177.8 0.0 377.3 40.1 – 235.4 48.0 1,603.1
Oct. 235.7 1.3 96.3 0.0 1,024.0 1,151.1 0.0 374.9 28.7 – 245.4 47.9 1,574.0
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 236.8 0.7 89.2 0.0 1,016.7 1,171.3 0.0 373.5 18.9 – 267.7 47.3 1,592.1
2024 Jan. 243.9 0.9 69.5 0.1 1,005.8 1,127.3 0.0 379.3 19.8 – 253.3 47.0 1,553.6
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 246.5 0.7 69.3 0.0 996.7 1,164.4 0.0 379.2 16.3 – 293.4 46.7 1,590.3
Apr. 257.8 0.7 40.4 0.0 983.5 1,122.4 0.0 379.4 17.1 – 282.5 45.9 1,547.7
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 265.9 0.6 21.3 0.0 970.0 1,102.8 0.0 380.9 13.5 – 285.8 46.3 1,530.0
July 275.7 0.7 15.7 0.0 954.3 1,092.8 0.0 383.0 12.1 – 287.6 46.1 1,521.9
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 280.5 0.6 13.3 0.0 943.3 1,044.7 0.0 384.6 11.4 – 249.5 46.6 1,475.9
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
+ 6.4 + 0.7 –24.5 ± 0.0 – 4.0 +28.3 ± 0.0 –18.7 –113.7 +91.2 – 7.2 + 2.5 2022 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 5.7 + 2.3 – 6.1 ± 0.0 – 6.5 +3,783.0 ± 0.0 –21.6 –17.2 –144.8 –3,604.1 +157.2 Nov.
+ 4.6 – 2.1 –171.7 ± 0.0 – 2.2 +31.5 ± 0.0 – 2.9 –44.2 –37.5 –118.2 –89.5 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
–20.0 – 0.7 –643.8 + 0.1 – 4.0 –469.9 ± 0.0 + 4.8 –119.7 –65.3 –18.2 –483.5 Feb.
–23.6 – 0.3 –70.0 – 0.1 – 3.1 +51.4 ± 0.0 –11.7 +7.4 –139.8 – 4.5 +35.3 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+28.2 + 0.5 –115.6 + 0.1 –33.4 –106.9 ± 0.0 + 5.9 –19.6 + 8.7 – 8.4 –109.4 May
+ 3.2 + 0.2 –17.2 ± 0.0 –21.5 +130.3 ± 0.0 + 3.9 –104.2 –63.9 – 1.1 +133.1 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
–20.4 + 9.3 –418.5 ± 0.0 –31.1 –422.0 ± 0.0 + 3.3 –2.0 –36.1 – 4.2 –422.8 Aug.
– 3.5 – 5.3 –81.0 ± 0.0 –41.8 –57.0 ± 0.0 – 2.8 –31.9 –36.7 – 3.1 –62.9 Sep.
+ 6.9 + 2.5 –85.6 ± 0.0 –43.3 –70.0 ± 0.0 – 9.5 +0.2 –40.5 + 0.3 –79.3 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 2.1 – 0.8 –19.5 – 0.1 –52.9 –28.6 ± 0.0 – 3.6 –28.6 – 8.0 – 2.6 –34.8 Dec.
+25.0 + 0.6 –99.7 + 0.1 –28.2 –61.4 ± 0.0 + 5.6 –25.7 –19.0 – 1.5 –57.3 2024 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
+ 8.2 – 3.1 + 1.1 – 0.1 –40.4 + 3.5 ± 0.0 –13.5 +0.1 –22.5 – 1.9 –11.9 Mar.
+36.3 – 2.0 –147.9 ± 0.0 –46.9 –153.0 ± 0.0 + 2.9 –30.7 +20.5 – 0.2 –150.4 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+28.9 – 0.3 –100.3 ± 0.0 –48.8 –123.9 ± 0.0 + 5.4 –18.3 +18.0 – 1.7 –120.2 June
+32.0 + 3.2 –44.2 ± 0.0 –56.4 –100.8 ± 0.0 + 8.0 –4.3 +30.4 + 1.4 –91.3 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+20.0 – 2.7 –19.4 ± 0.0 –52.3 –54.5 ± 0.0 + 4.7 +4.0 – 9.8 + 1.2 –48.6 Sep.
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 0.4 + 0.0 – 5.5 – 0.0 – 7.5 +42.7 ± 0.0 –10.8 –57.1 +13.5 – 0.9 +31.0 2022 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
– 0.5 + 0.5 – 3.1 + 0.0 – 5.3 +1,075.5 ± 0.0 – 0.6 –30.7 –69.6 –982.9 +92.0 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.4 –48.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 +42.7 ± 0.0 – 0.1 –6.2 –11.0 –65.4 –22.9 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
– 2.5 – 0.1 –120.6 + 0.1 – 2.4 –112.0 ± 0.0 – 1.6 –43.2 +37.0 – 5.6 –119.3 Feb.
– 1.0 + 0.0 –19.1 – 0.0 + 0.2 +29.1 ± 0.0 – 2.7 –8.6 –37.1 – 0.7 +25.7 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+10.3 + 0.2 –12.7 + 0.0 –11.0 –35.7 ± 0.0 + 1.2 +4.1 +21.4 – 4.1 –38.5 May
+ 2.6 + 0.1 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 9.3 +28.3 ± 0.0 + 1.4 –18.7 –20.7 + 1.9 +31.5 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
– 5.6 + 0.8 –56.5 – 0.0 – 8.0 –80.8 ± 0.0 + 0.4 –4.7 +19.3 – 3.5 –83.9 Aug.
– 1.7 – 0.7 –11.2 + 0.0 – 7.5 + 2.3 ± 0.0 – 0.2 –9.8 –13.0 – 0.4 + 1.6 Sep.
+ 1.2 + 0.5 –35.0 – 0.0 –17.3 –26.7 ± 0.0 – 2.4 –11.5 – 9.9 – 0.0 –29.1 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 1.1 – 0.6 – 7.1 – 0.0 – 7.3 +20.1 ± 0.0 – 1.4 –9.8 –22.3 – 0.7 +18.1 Dec.
+ 7.1 + 0.2 –19.7 + 0.0 –10.9 –44.0 ± 0.0 + 5.8 +0.9 +14.3 – 0.3 –38.5 2024 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
+ 2.6 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 9.0 +37.2 ± 0.0 – 0.2 –3.5 –40.1 – 0.3 +36.7 Mar.
+11.3 + 0.0 –28.9 – 0.0 –13.3 –42.0 ± 0.0 + 0.3 +0.7 +10.9 – 0.8 –42.6 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+ 8.1 – 0.1 –19.2 – 0.0 –13.4 –19.6 ± 0.0 + 1.5 –3.5 – 3.2 + 0.4 –17.7 June
+ 9.7 + 0.1 – 5.5 + 0.0 –15.7 –10.0 ± 0.0 + 2.0 –1.4 – 1.8 – 0.2 – 8.2 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 4.9 – 0.1 – 2.4 – 0.0 –11.0 –48.1 ± 0.0 + 1.7 –0.7 +38.0 + 0.5 –46.0 Sep.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2024 Mar. 15 6,815.6 649.1 501.4 229.6 271.8 13.9 15.6 15.6 –
22 6,810.0 649.1 498.2 229.1 269.1 15.7 15.7 15.7 –
29 6,619.7 711.2 504.7 231.5 273.2 15.1 15.9 15.9 –
Apr. 5 6,585.3 711.2 506.1 231.5 274.7 14.1 15.7 15.7 –
12 6,596.7 711.2 505.5 231.4 274.1 14.9 16.6 16.6 –
19 6,593.2 711.1 505.4 231.3 274.1 14.8 16.2 16.2 –
26 6,598.9 711.1 505.0 231.7 273.3 15.3 16.4 16.4 –
May 3 6,582.1 711.1 505.6 231.6 273.9 15.1 16.6 16.6 –
10 6,581.0 711.1 505.4 232.1 273.2 15.3 16.3 16.3 –
17 6,562.4 711.1 505.7 232.2 273.5 15.1 17.0 17.0 –
24 6,577.7 711.1 506.6 232.2 274.4 14.6 17.7 17.7 –
31 6,560.7 711.1 506.7 232.6 274.2 13.8 16.8 16.8 –
June 7 6,541.6 711.1 507.3 232.6 274.8 14.3 17.2 17.2 –
14 6,534.5 711.1 507.1 232.4 274.7 14.6 16.5 16.5 –
21 6,536.8 711.1 506.1 232.4 273.8 15.5 17.1 17.1 –
28 6,522.0 757.5 510.2 232.4 277.8 14.1 17.0 17.0 –
July 5 6,497.7 757.5 510.2 232.4 277.8 15.0 16.9 16.9 –
12 6,494.5 757.5 510.0 232.4 277.5 15.5 16.7 16.7 –
19 6,478.3 757.5 508.6 232.5 276.2 16.3 17.1 17.1 –
26 6,475.5 757.5 507.0 232.4 274.6 16.3 17.2 17.2 –
Aug. 2 6,468.7 757.5 507.3 232.9 274.4 16.9 17.8 17.8 –
9 6,462.2 757.5 506.8 232.9 273.9 17.3 17.4 17.4 –
16 6,449.2 757.5 507.5 233.2 274.4 17.0 17.1 17.1 –
23 6,459.1 757.5 505.2 233.0 272.2 18.9 17.4 17.4 –
30 6,473.1 757.5 503.6 233.0 270.6 18.7 18.1 18.1 –
Sep. 6 6,456.6 757.5 505.9 233.0 272.9 17.3 18.0 18.0 –
13 6,442.5 757.5 506.1 233.0 273.1 17.1 17.5 17.5 –
20 6,428.5 757.5 506.6 233.0 273.6 17.0 17.5 17.5 –
27 6,398.4 757.5 505.3 233.3 272.0 17.4 17.5 17.5 –
Oct. 4 6,438.8 820.0 498.1 230.0 268.1 17.4 17.8 17.8 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2024 Mar. 15 2,481.0 201.3 91.8 57.5 34.3 0.0 1.3 1.3 –
22 2,478.2 201.3 91.5 57.5 34.0 0.0 1.1 1.1 –
29 2,447.7 220.6 92.2 57.8 34.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 –
Apr. 5 2,448.6 220.6 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 0.8 0.8 –
12 2,439.1 220.6 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 1.2 1.2 –
19 2,423.9 220.5 92.6 57.8 34.8 0.0 0.8 0.8 –
26 2,413.4 220.5 92.1 57.8 34.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
May 3 2,446.6 220.5 92.1 57.9 34.2 0.0 1.0 1.0 –
10 2,458.4 220.5 92.1 57.9 34.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 –
17 2,442.2 220.5 91.5 57.9 33.6 0.0 1.2 1.2 –
24 2,461.4 220.5 91.7 57.9 33.8 0.0 1.7 1.7 –
31 2,425.5 220.5 92.0 58.2 33.8 0.0 1.0 1.0 –
June 7 2,439.1 220.5 92.2 58.2 34.0 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
14 2,420.5 220.5 92.4 58.2 34.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
21 2,436.8 220.5 92.4 58.2 34.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
28 2,447.3 234.9 93.3 58.2 35.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
July 5 2,466.7 234.9 93.2 58.1 35.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
12 2,462.3 234.9 92.8 58.1 34.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
19 2,418.0 234.9 92.6 58.1 34.5 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
26 2,416.5 234.9 92.3 58.1 34.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
Aug. 2 2,425.8 234.9 92.2 58.2 34.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 –
9 2,409.2 234.9 92.1 58.2 33.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
16 2,413.9 234.9 92.1 58.2 33.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
23 2,384.9 234.9 92.1 58.2 33.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
30 2,419.4 234.9 91.6 58.2 33.4 0.0 0.8 0.8 –
Sep. 6 2,395.3 234.9 91.5 58.2 33.3 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
13 2,385.9 234.9 91.7 58.2 33.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
20 2,388.4 234.9 92.1 58.2 33.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 –
27 2,380.7 234.9 92.3 58.4 34.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
Oct. 4 2,417.4 254.3 90.3 57.5 32.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
400.4 2.4 398.0 – – – – 27.9 4,829.7 4,624.7 204.9 20.9 356.8 2024 Mar. 15
400.0 2.0 398.0 – – – – 35.1 4,824.3 4,618.1 206.2 20.9 350.9 22
156.2 5.9 150.3 – – – – 34.4 4,802.6 4,595.0 207.6 20.8 358.7 29
152.5 2.2 150.3 – – – – 23.0 4,789.3 4,579.4 209.9 20.8 352.5 Apr. 5
151.7 1.4 150.3 – – – – 21.7 4,795.6 4,582.8 212.8 20.8 358.6 12
151.9 1.6 150.3 – – 0.0 – 24.5 4,786.6 4,571.4 215.1 20.8 361.8 19
154.8 4.5 150.3 – – 0.0 – 26.7 4,788.5 4,572.6 215.9 20.8 360.2 26
151.4 2.0 149.4 – – – – 27.1 4,777.4 4,562.2 215.2 20.8 356.8 May 3
151.1 1.7 149.4 – – – – 21.7 4,782.2 4,566.6 215.6 20.8 357.0 10
150.6 1.2 149.4 – – – – 20.0 4,763.2 4,547.2 216.0 20.8 358.7 17
150.8 1.3 149.4 – – – – 26.2 4,765.5 4,548.2 217.4 20.8 364.3 24
152.0 4.9 147.1 – – – – 35.4 4,740.1 4,522.4 217.7 20.8 363.9 31
149.5 2.3 147.1 – – – – 28.0 4,739.7 4,521.4 218.3 20.8 353.7 June 7
149.3 2.2 147.1 – – – – 26.9 4,732.4 4,513.3 219.1 20.8 355.8 14
151.4 4.3 147.1 – – – – 33.9 4,729.6 4,510.5 219.1 20.8 351.2 21
95.0 11.1 83.8 – – 0.1 – 32.5 4,714.7 4,496.0 218.7 20.8 360.1 28
90.6 6.7 83.8 – – 0.1 – 28.4 4,707.1 4,489.0 218.1 20.8 351.2 July 5
89.2 5.3 83.8 – – 0.0 – 22.3 4,707.3 4,488.7 218.6 20.8 355.1 12
88.5 4.7 83.8 – – – – 20.1 4,691.8 4,472.5 219.3 20.8 357.5 19
88.2 4.4 83.8 – – – – 24.4 4,685.6 4,465.5 220.0 20.8 358.4 26
90.8 5.5 85.4 – – – – 34.0 4,675.3 4,454.8 220.5 20.8 348.2 Aug. 2
87.1 1.8 85.4 – – – – 27.9 4,675.6 4,455.3 220.3 20.8 351.7 9
87.2 1.9 85.4 – – – – 29.8 4,658.2 4,438.9 219.2 20.8 354.0 16
88.2 2.9 85.4 – – 0.0 – 29.8 4,658.4 4,438.6 219.8 20.8 362.9 23
90.2 4.0 86.2 – – – – 35.8 4,657.0 4,436.3 220.7 20.8 371.3 30
88.1 1.8 86.2 – – – – 36.3 4,649.0 4,427.9 221.0 20.8 363.7 Sep. 6
88.3 2.1 86.2 – – 0.0 – 32.0 4,641.0 4,418.7 222.3 20.8 362.1 13
88.2 1.9 86.2 – – 0.0 – 32.4 4,631.9 4,408.2 223.8 20.8 356.5 20
52.4 12.4 39.9 – – 0.0 – 35.7 4,633.3 4,407.7 225.6 20.8 358.5 27
48.0 8.1 39.9 – – 0.0 – 33.0 4,624.2 4,396.9 227.3 20.8 359.4 Oct. 4
Deutsche Bundesbank
69.8 0.4 69.3 – – – – 10.1 989.1 989.1 – 4.4 1,113.2 2024 Mar. 15
69.8 0.5 69.3 – – – – 11.9 987.7 987.7 – 4.4 1,110.4 22
22.8 1.6 21.2 – – – – 13.0 987.0 987.0 – 4.4 1,107.0 29
21.7 0.5 21.2 – – – – 8.8 974.4 974.4 – 4.4 1,125.9 Apr. 5
21.6 0.4 21.2 – – – – 9.1 975.0 975.0 – 4.4 1,115.2 12
21.6 0.4 21.2 – – 0.0 – 9.9 973.4 973.4 – 4.4 1,100.7 19
22.3 1.1 21.2 – – 0.0 – 11.6 974.8 974.8 – 4.4 1,087.3 26
21.8 0.5 21.3 – – – – 11.7 975.7 975.7 – 4.4 1,119.3 May 3
21.6 0.3 21.3 – – – – 8.4 977.3 977.3 – 4.4 1,133.4 10
21.6 0.3 21.3 – – – – 7.0 964.3 964.3 – 4.4 1,131.7 17
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.1 965.0 965.0 – 4.4 1,145.3 24
22.4 1.1 21.3 – – – – 11.2 965.8 965.8 – 4.4 1,108.2 31
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.0 965.1 965.1 – 4.4 1,123.3 June 7
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.3 957.2 957.2 – 4.4 1,112.9 14
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.3 955.5 955.5 – 4.4 1,130.6 21
14.5 1.5 13.0 – – – – 10.4 955.5 955.5 – 4.4 1,133.9 28
13.7 0.6 13.0 – – 0.1 – 9.9 953.3 953.3 – 4.4 1,156.9 July 5
13.7 0.8 13.0 – – 0.0 – 9.4 952.0 952.0 – 4.4 1,154.7 12
13.5 0.5 13.0 – – – – 6.1 950.5 950.5 – 4.4 1,115.6 19
13.6 0.6 13.0 – – – – 8.8 950.7 950.7 – 4.4 1,111.3 26
14.2 1.0 13.2 – – – – 12.3 949.9 949.9 – 4.4 1,116.9 Aug. 2
13.6 0.4 13.2 – – – – 11.5 950.0 950.0 – 4.4 1,102.5 9
13.8 0.5 13.2 – – – – 11.2 940.5 940.5 – 4.4 1,116.9 16
13.8 0.6 13.2 – – 0.0 – 12.8 939.8 939.8 – 4.4 1,086.8 23
14.5 0.9 13.6 – – – – 13.0 939.5 939.5 – 4.4 1,120.6 30
14.0 0.4 13.6 – – – – 13.6 939.3 939.3 – 4.4 1,096.8 Sep. 6
13.8 0.2 13.6 – – 0.0 – 12.1 933.6 933.6 – 4.4 1,095.1 13
13.8 0.2 13.6 – – 0.0 – 11.9 932.6 932.6 – 4.4 1,098.2 20
8.8 1.1 7.6 – – 0.0 – 11.8 932.8 932.8 – 4.4 1,095.4 27
8.2 0.5 7.6 – – 0.0 – 11.4 928.9 928.9 – 4.4 1,119.6 Oct. 4

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2024 Mar. 15 6,815.6 1,542.9 3,660.0 156.3 3,503.8 – – 0.0 35.1 – 234.2 149.3 84.9
22 6,810.0 1,543.8 3,675.2 150.7 3,524.5 – – 0.0 35.6 – 212.3 135.2 77.1
29 6,619.7 1,550.3 3,379.5 169.7 3,209.8 – – 0.0 37.5 – 226.1 142.6 83.6
Apr. 5 6,585.3 1,547.8 3,392.0 161.7 3,230.3 – – 0.0 33.3 – 219.1 140.7 78.3
12 6,596.7 1,546.4 3,416.7 185.5 3,231.2 – – 0.0 31.3 – 205.3 127.0 78.3
19 6,593.2 1,546.2 3,415.2 170.0 3,245.2 – – 0.0 31.9 – 201.1 119.4 81.7
26 6,598.9 1,548.6 3,416.3 153.7 3,262.6 – – 0.0 32.1 – 204.7 123.9 80.8
May 3 6,582.1 1,553.2 3,391.0 153.2 3,237.9 – – 0.0 32.9 – 197.5 118.3 79.3
10 6,581.0 1,553.3 3,399.0 152.6 3,246.3 – – 0.0 31.9 – 194.3 115.1 79.2
17 6,562.4 1,552.9 3,376.8 152.0 3,224.8 – – 0.0 32.4 – 195.9 117.3 78.6
24 6,577.7 1,551.2 3,372.8 151.9 3,220.9 – – 0.0 33.7 – 201.7 120.2 81.5
31 6,560.7 1,553.4 3,322.2 168.7 3,153.5 – – 0.0 36.3 – 210.6 131.8 78.8
June 7 6,541.6 1,553.8 3,350.0 196.9 3,153.1 – – – 33.4 – 199.9 106.1 93.9
14 6,534.5 1,554.2 3,351.7 173.7 3,177.9 – – – 32.9 – 185.9 107.6 78.3
21 6,536.8 1,555.7 3,345.0 152.3 3,192.8 – – – 33.3 – 188.6 111.8 76.8
28 6,522.0 1,559.9 3,237.5 170.2 3,067.3 – – – 36.1 – 205.1 125.7 79.4
July 5 6,497.7 1,562.2 3,255.2 160.8 3,094.3 – – – 33.7 – 193.3 115.9 77.4
12 6,494.5 1,563.0 3,260.4 154.0 3,106.4 – – – 32.8 – 195.3 117.7 77.7
19 6,478.3 1,563.4 3,223.4 192.3 3,031.2 – – – 32.1 – 202.8 125.0 77.8
26 6,475.5 1,564.1 3,218.5 186.4 3,032.1 – – – 32.6 – 211.8 132.6 79.3
Aug. 2 6,468.7 1,566.1 3,224.7 159.7 3,065.1 – – 0.0 35.4 – 199.5 119.9 79.6
9 6,462.2 1,567.1 3,244.2 157.0 3,087.2 – – 0.0 33.8 – 192.5 114.3 78.2
16 6,449.2 1,567.2 3,232.9 155.0 3,077.9 – – 0.0 32.7 – 186.5 110.4 76.1
23 6,459.1 1,563.3 3,232.8 156.0 3,076.8 – – – 33.7 – 192.8 116.3 76.5
30 6,473.1 1,563.1 3,205.7 167.3 3,038.4 – – – 32.8 – 214.8 137.8 77.0
Sep. 6 6,456.6 1,562.6 3,216.5 155.6 3,060.9 – – – 34.9 – 207.2 123.4 83.8
13 6,442.5 1,561.5 3,220.9 204.6 3,016.3 – – – 31.4 – 200.2 118.2 82.1
20 6,428.5 1,559.5 3,199.9 168.4 3,031.4 – – – 32.4 – 201.6 116.0 85.6
27 6,398.4 1,560.9 3,147.0 156.6 2,990.4 – – – 32.5 – 209.5 121.0 88.6
Oct. 4 6,438.8 1,561.9 3,149.3 154.8 2,994.5 – – – 31.6 – 207.0 122.7 84.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
2024 Mar. 15 2,481.0 379.0 1,204.6 45.3 1,159.3 – – 0.0 6.7 – 26.6 15.1 11.5
22 2,478.2 379.6 1,198.2 40.0 1,158.1 – – 0.0 6.7 – 26.0 15.1 10.9
29 2,447.7 379.8 1,141.0 45.0 1,095.9 – – 0.0 8.3 – 29.1 16.0 13.1
Apr. 5 2,448.6 379.2 1,154.1 40.4 1,113.7 – – 0.0 6.8 – 29.2 18.0 11.3
12 2,439.1 379.3 1,146.2 58.0 1,088.1 – – 0.0 5.4 – 31.8 20.1 11.6
19 2,423.9 379.6 1,131.7 43.8 1,087.8 – – 0.0 5.1 – 28.2 15.5 12.7
26 2,413.4 380.5 1,119.4 40.6 1,078.8 – – 0.0 5.4 – 31.0 19.9 11.1
May 3 2,446.6 380.8 1,160.5 41.9 1,118.6 – – 0.0 5.4 – 23.8 11.9 11.9
10 2,458.4 381.6 1,171.6 39.5 1,132.0 – – 0.0 4.9 – 22.9 12.0 10.9
17 2,442.2 382.2 1,151.9 38.5 1,113.4 – – 0.0 4.6 – 23.3 11.7 11.6
24 2,461.4 381.5 1,169.8 38.3 1,131.4 – – 0.0 4.6 – 24.3 11.7 12.6
31 2,425.5 380.6 1,122.8 43.4 1,079.5 – – 0.0 5.5 – 29.5 16.9 12.6
June 7 2,439.1 380.9 1,149.7 63.1 1,086.6 – – – 5.1 – 22.9 11.8 11.2
14 2,420.5 381.3 1,122.6 44.6 1,078.0 – – – 4.9 – 23.0 11.3 11.7
21 2,436.8 381.8 1,138.0 40.7 1,097.4 – – – 5.1 – 25.7 14.2 11.5
28 2,447.3 382.2 1,124.4 45.5 1,078.9 – – – 6.1 – 25.2 11.8 13.4
July 5 2,466.7 383.4 1,157.9 41.1 1,116.8 – – – 4.5 – 24.4 12.5 11.9
12 2,462.3 384.3 1,157.1 39.8 1,117.2 – – – 4.0 – 23.2 11.7 11.5
19 2,418.0 384.9 1,117.6 63.0 1,054.6 – – – 3.2 – 21.9 10.1 11.8
26 2,416.5 385.4 1,112.9 45.0 1,067.9 – – – 3.1 – 22.2 10.2 12.0
Aug. 2 2,425.8 384.2 1,116.4 44.7 1,071.7 – – 0.0 4.9 – 22.0 8.9 13.1
9 2,409.2 385.1 1,099.6 40.7 1,058.9 – – 0.0 4.9 – 22.1 9.8 12.3
16 2,413.9 385.2 1,096.8 40.2 1,056.6 – – 0.0 4.2 – 21.7 9.4 12.3
23 2,384.9 385.4 1,064.4 39.2 1,025.2 – – – 5.1 – 23.5 10.9 12.6
30 2,419.4 383.0 1,090.4 45.6 1,044.9 – – – 4.8 – 26.2 13.6 12.6
Sep. 6 2,395.3 383.8 1,070.3 40.0 1,030.2 – – – 5.9 – 28.9 16.9 12.0
13 2,385.9 384.4 1,067.2 69.8 997.5 – – – 4.3 – 22.9 11.1 11.8
20 2,388.4 384.6 1,066.0 41.9 1,024.2 – – – 5.4 – 24.9 13.1 11.9
27 2,380.7 386.1 1,054.9 41.5 1,013.5 – – – 4.7 – 26.0 13.1 12.9
Oct. 4 2,417.4 383.8 1,081.1 39.6 1,041.5 – – – 3.9 – 26.5 14.1 12.4
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
189.1 17.1 3.9 3.9 – 177.1 215.9 – 634.9 105.3 2024 Mar. 15
188.1 16.4 4.9 4.9 – 177.1 216.4 – 634.9 105.3 22
199.5 15.9 6.4 6.4 – 178.5 221.8 – 702.9 101.1 29
180.9 16.2 5.2 5.2 – 178.5 208.4 – 702.9 101.1 Apr. 5
183.7 16.6 5.7 5.7 – 178.5 208.4 – 702.9 101.1 12
184.4 15.6 6.6 6.6 – 178.5 210.7 – 702.9 100.0 19
183.6 15.5 7.2 7.2 – 178.5 209.6 – 702.9 99.9 26
196.6 15.6 6.4 6.4 – 178.5 207.5 – 702.9 99.9 May 3
194.5 14.7 6.6 6.6 – 178.5 205.4 – 702.9 99.7 10
195.7 14.9 6.4 6.4 – 178.5 206.3 – 702.9 99.7 17
203.6 15.0 6.8 6.8 – 178.5 211.8 – 702.9 99.7 24
218.9 13.8 6.7 6.7 – 178.5 217.6 – 702.9 99.7 31
195.6 14.6 6.7 6.7 – 178.5 206.4 – 702.9 99.7 June 7
202.7 15.0 6.7 6.7 – 178.5 204.4 – 702.9 99.7 14
206.0 15.3 5.0 5.0 – 178.5 206.7 – 702.9 99.7 21
221.8 15.0 5.3 5.3 – 179.0 212.1 – 750.4 99.7 28
200.8 15.8 5.7 5.7 – 179.0 201.9 – 750.4 99.7 July 5
191.2 16.2 5.2 5.2 – 179.0 201.3 – 750.4 99.7 12
202.6 16.4 4.6 4.6 – 179.0 203.8 – 750.4 99.7 19
194.4 15.5 4.1 4.1 – 179.0 205.5 – 750.4 99.7 26
192.3 15.7 4.0 4.0 – 179.0 201.9 – 750.4 99.6 Aug. 2
175.6 15.7 3.6 3.6 – 179.0 200.7 – 750.4 99.6 9
178.1 15.6 2.6 2.6 – 179.0 204.6 – 750.4 99.6 16
180.4 15.5 2.1 2.1 – 179.0 209.5 – 750.4 99.6 23
191.9 14.8 2.4 2.4 – 179.0 218.4 – 750.4 99.6 30
176.3 15.7 2.2 2.2 – 179.0 212.1 – 750.4 99.6 Sep. 6
174.8 15.6 2.1 2.1 – 179.0 206.9 – 750.4 99.6 13
188.6 15.1 1.4 1.4 – 179.0 200.9 – 750.4 99.6 20
198.2 13.6 1.3 1.3 – 179.0 206.3 – 750.4 99.6 27
190.7 13.8 1.5 1.5 – 176.6 200.3 – 806.6 99.5 Oct. 4
Deutsche Bundesbank
57.3 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 45.7 21.6 538.6 197.1 3.2 2024 Mar. 15
60.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 45.7 21.8 538.6 197.1 3.2 22
61.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 20.5 541.5 216.6 3.2 29
50.9 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 20.6 541.5 216.6 3.2 Apr. 5
47.7 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 20.9 541.5 216.6 3.2 12
50.0 0.0 1.1 1.1 – 46.1 20.9 541.5 216.6 3.2 19
48.0 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 46.1 21.0 541.5 216.6 3.2 26
46.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.1 20.4 543.3 216.6 3.2 May 3
47.3 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.1 20.5 543.3 216.6 3.2 10
49.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 46.1 21.9 543.3 216.6 3.2 17
50.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 21.5 543.3 216.6 3.2 24
53.6 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 21.5 545.7 216.6 3.2 31
46.8 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 21.7 545.7 216.6 3.2 June 7
55.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.1 21.9 545.7 216.6 3.2 14
52.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 46.1 22.0 545.7 216.6 3.2 21
61.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 46.2 19.5 547.3 231.1 3.2 28
49.0 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 46.2 19.2 547.3 231.1 3.2 July 5
46.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 46.2 19.3 547.3 231.1 3.2 12
43.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.4 547.3 231.1 3.2 19
45.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.7 547.3 231.1 3.2 26
48.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.0 550.2 231.1 3.2 Aug. 2
47.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.1 550.2 231.1 3.2 9
55.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.8 550.2 231.1 3.2 16
56.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.8 550.2 231.1 3.2 23
59.2 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.2 20.4 554.4 231.1 3.2 30
51.0 0.0 0.3 0.3 – 46.2 20.4 554.4 231.1 3.2 Sep. 6
51.6 0.0 0.3 0.3 – 46.2 20.4 554.4 231.1 3.2 13
51.8 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.2 20.3 554.4 231.1 3.2 20
52.9 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 46.2 20.6 554.4 231.1 3.2 27
46.9 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.5 19.2 558.3 249.1 3.2 Oct. 4
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2023 10,321.0 18.7 2,884.4 2,349.7 2,081.8 267.9 534.7 374.6 160.1 4,651.2 4,109.2 3,729.7 3,395.7
2022 Nov. 10,762.4 19.1 3,180.1 2,630.6 2,360.1 270.5 549.5 403.2 146.2 4,610.5 4,089.4 3,715.1 3,379.3
Dec. 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 18.2 3,085.7 2,550.5 2,288.2 262.3 535.1 383.8 151.4 4,600.1 4,080.1 3,706.1 3,372.3
Feb. 10,760.9 18.0 3,085.7 2,541.4 2,274.9 266.5 544.3 390.6 153.8 4,614.2 4,094.2 3,714.7 3,381.3
Mar. 10,553.8 17.9 3,041.3 2,497.8 2,229.3 268.4 543.5 391.2 152.3 4,620.6 4,094.7 3,718.2 3,386.0
Apr. 10,564.3 18.9 3,047.7 2,507.0 2,237.3 269.7 540.7 384.5 156.2 4,630.5 4,096.8 3,721.7 3,390.4
May 10,653.7 18.2 3,091.2 2,550.3 2,279.7 270.6 541.0 383.4 157.5 4,642.2 4,103.4 3,733.0 3,400.9
June 10,577.7 17.7 2,967.0 2,434.5 2,166.3 268.2 532.5 371.5 161.0 4,646.7 4,108.0 3,734.5 3,397.1
July 10,743.2 17.2 3,002.4 2,456.4 2,188.8 267.6 546.0 384.8 161.2 4,651.1 4,114.5 3,738.2 3,402.0
Aug. 10,735.3 17.5 2,994.8 2,455.6 2,187.1 268.4 539.2 377.9 161.4 4,649.4 4,111.7 3,733.9 3,400.6
Sep. 10,737.5 18.0 2,916.4 2,371.6 2,106.3 265.3 544.8 382.8 162.0 4,649.8 4,113.1 3,735.7 3,401.7
Oct. 10,797.9 17.5 2,980.6 2,430.9 2,165.6 265.3 549.7 387.7 162.1 4,653.7 4,116.8 3,736.3 3,401.6
Nov. 10,610.8 16.9 2,987.1 2,438.4 2,168.4 270.0 548.7 386.5 162.2 4,666.3 4,123.1 3,740.9 3,406.9
Dec. 10,321.0 18.7 2,884.4 2,349.7 2,081.8 267.9 534.7 374.6 160.1 4,651.2 4,109.2 3,729.7 3,395.7
2024 Jan. 10,454.3 16.3 2,979.1 2,420.8 2,144.5 276.3 558.2 394.5 163.7 4,665.4 4,113.3 3,729.2 3,393.3
Feb. 10,584.8 16.3 3,012.3 2,441.5 2,160.1 281.4 570.8 406.8 163.9 4,675.8 4,120.6 3,736.2 3,399.3
Mar. 10,509.6 17.6 2,957.6 2,389.6 2,105.8 283.8 568.1 403.0 165.1 4,695.4 4,126.2 3,741.0 3,401.3
Apr. 10,598.5 16.6 2,959.3 2,382.9 2,097.2 285.7 576.4 412.6 163.8 4,690.1 4,127.5 3,741.6 3,402.0
May 10,578.7 16.7 2,951.3 2,378.9 2,092.4 286.5 572.4 406.9 165.5 4,701.4 4,135.1 3,747.0 3,406.5
June 10,491.1 16.7 2,936.5 2,378.3 2,093.0 285.3 558.2 393.5 164.7 4,712.0 4,142.7 3,747.5 3,408.4
July 10,309.2 16.3 2,890.5 2,327.0 2,040.4 286.6 563.5 397.7 165.8 4,721.8 4,152.6 3,755.6 3,413.5
Aug. 10,276.1 17.0 2,889.6 2,327.5 2,039.7 287.8 562.1 394.7 167.5 4,729.8 4,158.5 3,758.2 3,416.0
Changes 3
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2021 207.2 2.2 161.3 155.6 156.4 – 0.8 5.7 11.7 – 5.9 175.7 154.6 173.7 155.9
2022 1,170.5 –29.7 149.5 103.7 100.5 3.2 45.8 33.1 12.7 242.4 223.1 237.5 220.6
2023 –133.8 – 1.3 –41.5 –76.2 –86.2 10.0 34.7 17.2 17.5 84.5 44.6 40.5 41.3
2022 Dec. –225.1 0.9 –240.0 –196.2 –189.2 – 7.1 –43.8 – 41.2 – 2.6 –24.0 – 8.4 – 9.9 –11.6
2023 Jan. 87.5 – 1.8 155.0 122.2 119.3 2.8 32.8 24.0 8.9 22.8 6.5 8.1 8.0
Feb. 167.0 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 9.1 –13.4 4.3 8.3 5.8 2.5 13.4 13.6 7.9 8.3
Mar. –195.2 – 0.1 –42.8 –43.2 –45.0 1.8 0.4 1.9 – 1.5 8.2 2.0 5.0 6.2
Apr. 16.7 1.0 7.7 9.8 8.1 1.7 – 2.1 – 6.0 3.9 11.0 3.0 4.2 5.1
May 91.9 – 0.7 41.9 42.2 41.3 0.9 – 0.2 – 1.6 1.3 12.3 6.8 11.5 10.6
June –65.9 – 0.5 –121.0 –113.5 –112.5 – 1.1 – 7.5 – 11.0 3.5 4.7 5.5 2.5 – 1.7
July 170.6 – 0.5 34.6 22.2 22.7 – 0.6 12.4 12.2 0.2 6.0 7.6 4.7 5.8
Aug. –15.1 0.3 – 7.6 – 1.1 – 1.9 0.8 – 6.5 – 6.6 0.1 – 0.5 – 2.4 – 3.9 – 1.0
Sep. 1.6 0.6 –78.5 –83.9 –80.8 – 3.1 5.3 4.7 0.7 1.6 2.3 2.7 2.0
Oct. 68.3 – 0.5 64.7 59.5 59.5 0.0 5.1 5.1 0.1 5.1 4.6 1.5 0.9
Nov. –174.8 – 0.6 8.2 7.9 3.2 4.7 0.3 0.3 0.0 13.7 7.3 6.4 7.2
Dec. –286.4 1.8 –102.9 –89.1 –86.8 – 2.3 –13.8 – 11.6 – 2.2 –13.7 –12.3 –10.1 –10.1
2024 Jan. 123.8 – 2.4 90.9 68.6 61.1 7.6 22.3 18.9 3.3 15.1 5.4 0.8 0.1
Feb. 132.1 0.0 33.5 20.9 15.7 5.3 12.5 12.3 0.2 11.2 7.4 7.3 6.3
Mar. –75.2 1.3 –55.0 –52.0 –54.3 2.4 – 3.0 – 3.9 0.9 20.1 6.2 5.5 2.8
Apr. 86.9 – 1.1 1.5 – 6.7 – 8.6 1.9 8.2 9.2 – 1.1 – 3.8 1.9 1.4 1.2
May –11.7 0.2 – 7.0 – 3.7 – 4.6 0.9 – 3.3 – 5.0 1.7 12.5 8.4 6.3 5.5
June –95.0 – 0.0 –16.0 – 1.1 1.0 – 2.1 –14.9 – 14.2 – 0.6 11.0 7.9 0.8 2.1
July –177.5 – 0.4 –43.7 –49.9 –51.0 1.1 6.1 5.6 0.6 12.1 11.6 9.7 6.5
Aug. –34.9 0.6 0.1 1.1 – 0.1 1.1 – 1.0 – 2.6 1.7 9.7 6.7 3.5 3.5
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 2021
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 2022
334.0 379.5 254.3 125.2 542.0 411.1 283.5 130.9 28.4 102.5 1,134.5 876.1 1,632.3 2023
335.9 374.2 246.3 127.9 521.1 394.0 276.5 127.1 32.7 94.4 1,224.6 963.4 1,728.1 2022 Nov.
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 Dec.
333.8 374.0 250.3 123.7 520.1 393.5 280.2 126.6 30.2 96.4 1,161.9 904.0 1,719.2 2023 Jan.
333.5 379.5 248.2 131.3 520.0 393.3 279.2 126.8 31.3 95.4 1,167.6 904.4 1,875.3 Feb.
332.2 376.5 248.9 127.6 526.0 397.5 275.7 128.4 30.9 97.5 1,168.5 902.6 1,705.4 Mar.
331.2 375.1 250.9 124.2 533.7 405.8 280.9 128.0 32.3 95.7 1,149.9 883.9 1,717.3 Apr.
332.1 370.5 249.8 120.7 538.7 407.7 284.6 131.0 31.9 99.1 1,177.7 912.0 1,724.4 May
337.4 373.4 248.7 124.7 538.7 403.1 279.6 135.6 31.0 104.5 1,150.6 886.7 1,795.7 June
336.2 376.4 252.1 124.3 536.6 407.3 282.8 129.3 30.7 98.7 1,156.3 895.0 1,916.3 July
333.3 377.9 249.5 128.4 537.7 404.5 282.9 133.2 31.1 102.1 1,157.7 899.2 1,915.9 Aug.
334.1 377.4 252.0 125.4 536.7 404.7 282.5 132.0 32.0 100.0 1,163.8 902.7 1,989.5 Sep.
334.7 380.5 255.1 125.4 537.0 405.6 282.9 131.4 32.0 99.4 1,165.8 909.5 1,980.1 Oct.
334.0 382.2 254.4 127.8 543.2 412.1 288.2 131.1 30.9 100.2 1,153.0 895.0 1,787.6 Nov.
334.0 379.5 254.3 125.2 542.0 411.1 283.5 130.9 28.4 102.5 1,134.5 876.1 1,632.3 Dec.
335.9 384.2 256.3 127.9 552.0 414.9 287.1 137.1 28.8 108.3 1,167.8 911.4 1,625.8 2024 Jan.
336.9 384.5 254.8 129.6 555.2 420.3 293.8 134.9 28.5 106.4 1,205.6 942.8 1,674.7 Feb.
339.7 385.2 257.2 128.0 569.2 426.8 294.6 142.5 28.1 114.4 1,211.2 942.8 1,627.7 Mar.
339.7 385.8 259.9 126.0 562.7 422.4 294.1 140.3 28.8 111.4 1,218.9 947.8 1,713.6 Apr.
340.5 388.1 259.6 128.5 566.3 429.9 296.6 136.4 27.8 108.6 1,247.8 977.8 1,661.5 May
339.0 395.2 262.6 132.7 569.3 425.5 293.2 143.8 28.0 115.8 1,237.3 963.9 1,588.6 June
342.2 397.0 263.1 133.9 569.2 425.5 295.9 143.7 27.5 116.2 1,230.3 956.4 1,450.3 July
342.2 400.2 261.9 138.3 571.3 429.2 301.1 142.1 27.5 114.6 1,236.5 961.2 1,403.3 Aug.
Changes 3
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
17.8 –19.1 – 6.1 –13.1 21.1 35.5 22.6 –14.3 – 1.1 –13.2 71.7 84.9 –203.7 2021
16.9 –14.4 1.9 –16.3 19.3 20.7 24.4 – 1.4 2.6 – 3.9 15.0 – 0.8 793.3 2022
– 0.9 4.1 6.4 – 2.3 39.9 28.3 15.1 11.7 – 2.4 14.1 42.6 34.1 –218.1 2023
1.8 1.5 0.9 0.6 –15.6 – 9.3 – 6.2 – 6.4 – 1.9 – 4.5 –75.0 –69.5 112.9 2022 Dec.
0.1 – 1.6 2.3 – 3.9 16.3 9.4 10.0 6.9 – 0.6 7.5 33.4 27.8 –121.8 2023 Jan.
– 0.4 5.6 – 2.0 7.7 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.4 0.5 1.1 – 0.7 – 1.7 – 6.6 156.4 Feb.
– 1.2 – 3.0 0.8 – 3.7 6.1 4.6 – 3.0 1.5 – 0.4 1.9 9.6 6.5 –170.1 Mar.
– 1.0 – 1.2 2.1 – 3.3 8.0 8.5 5.4 – 0.5 1.4 – 1.9 –14.9 –15.4 11.9 Apr.
0.9 – 4.7 – 1.2 – 3.5 5.4 2.1 3.9 3.4 – 0.4 3.7 28.3 28.1 10.1 May
4.2 3.0 – 1.1 4.1 – 0.9 – 5.5 – 5.9 4.6 – 0.9 5.5 – 9.4 – 8.3 60.3 June
– 1.2 3.0 3.4 – 0.4 – 1.7 4.4 3.4 – 6.1 – 0.3 – 5.7 10.3 12.6 120.4 July
– 2.8 1.5 – 2.6 4.1 1.9 – 1.9 1.0 3.8 0.5 3.4 – 5.1 – 1.9 – 2.2 Aug.
0.7 – 0.3 2.6 – 2.9 – 0.7 0.4 – 0.3 – 1.1 0.9 – 2.0 6.6 3.7 71.3 Sep.
0.7 3.0 3.1 – 0.0 0.5 1.1 0.5 – 0.5 0.0 – 0.6 3.9 8.3 – 5.0 Oct.
– 0.8 0.9 – 1.5 2.4 6.4 6.7 5.8 – 0.3 – 1.2 0.9 – 3.0 – 5.3 –193.1 Nov.
– 0.1 – 2.2 0.7 – 2.8 – 1.4 – 0.9 – 4.4 – 0.5 – 2.5 2.0 –15.2 –15.5 –156.4 Dec.
0.7 4.6 2.0 2.6 9.7 3.5 3.4 6.2 0.4 5.8 25.3 27.8 – 5.1 2024 Jan.
1.0 0.1 – 1.7 1.8 3.9 6.0 7.4 – 2.1 – 0.3 – 1.8 38.2 31.8 49.2 Feb.
2.7 0.7 2.4 – 1.6 13.9 6.4 1.0 7.6 – 0.4 7.9 5.4 – 0.2 –47.1 Mar.
0.1 0.6 2.6 – 2.0 – 5.8 – 4.0 – 0.4 – 1.8 0.7 – 2.5 4.6 1.8 85.7 Apr.
0.8 2.1 – 0.4 2.5 4.1 8.0 2.9 – 3.9 – 1.1 – 2.8 34.2 34.8 –51.5 May
– 1.4 7.1 3.0 4.2 3.1 – 4.3 – 3.6 7.4 0.2 7.2 –17.0 –19.8 –73.0 June
3.1 2.0 0.8 1.1 0.5 0.5 3.3 – 0.0 – 0.5 0.4 – 3.4 – 3.8 –142.0 July
– 0.0 3.2 – 1.2 4.4 3.0 4.5 5.9 – 1.6 0.0 – 1.6 7.0 5.5 –52.3 Aug.
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2023 10,321.0 1,489.3 1,099.9 389.4 4,419.1 4,174.5 2,530.0 1,198.7 693.4 445.9 395.3 186.3 75.9
2022 Nov. 10,762.4 1,773.7 1,345.0 428.7 4,401.0 4,132.6 2,752.4 843.3 344.7 536.8 514.3 193.1 97.3
Dec. 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 1,642.4 1,231.2 411.2 4,392.0 4,124.2 2,706.4 895.1 397.6 522.7 498.8 188.7 94.3
Feb. 10,760.9 1,633.5 1,226.0 407.5 4,391.4 4,113.2 2,670.6 926.7 428.4 515.9 490.8 191.2 97.2
Mar. 10,553.8 1,618.0 1,210.4 407.6 4,368.3 4,092.1 2,625.3 959.7 462.3 507.2 480.5 197.9 98.8
Apr. 10,564.3 1,632.8 1,227.7 405.1 4,370.1 4,099.8 2,620.9 980.3 482.3 498.6 470.4 199.5 93.6
May 10,653.7 1,622.7 1,229.8 392.9 4,384.2 4,108.2 2,613.0 1,004.7 504.1 490.6 460.2 201.6 97.9
June 10,577.7 1,530.6 1,149.6 381.0 4,378.1 4,110.1 2,586.3 1,040.5 541.1 483.3 450.2 196.6 90.9
July 10,743.2 1,563.0 1,159.8 403.2 4,382.4 4,116.2 2,569.6 1,070.7 572.0 475.9 439.9 197.0 90.2
Aug. 10,735.3 1,549.2 1,162.1 387.0 4,388.3 4,124.6 2,555.7 1,101.4 603.4 467.5 428.7 191.6 87.5
Sep. 10,737.5 1,500.0 1,112.7 387.3 4,384.5 4,126.8 2,545.8 1,119.2 620.4 461.8 420.1 193.4 89.5
Oct. 10,797.9 1,530.0 1,132.1 398.0 4,398.0 4,135.1 2,528.3 1,151.4 653.5 455.4 410.8 198.1 88.2
Nov. 10,610.8 1,547.2 1,136.6 410.5 4,414.1 4,158.1 2,538.2 1,171.5 670.5 448.3 400.3 197.0 89.8
Dec. 10,321.0 1,489.3 1,099.9 389.4 4,419.1 4,174.5 2,530.0 1,198.7 693.4 445.9 395.3 186.3 75.9
2024 Jan. 10,454.3 1,538.7 1,125.8 412.8 4,411.2 4,162.0 2,484.1 1,238.6 733.2 439.4 386.3 189.6 81.6
Feb. 10,584.8 1,553.3 1,134.8 418.5 4,408.0 4,160.5 2,466.4 1,259.7 753.8 434.4 378.9 191.6 82.1
Mar. 10,509.6 1,495.3 1,083.4 411.9 4,436.4 4,186.1 2,467.5 1,288.2 781.6 430.3 373.2 191.5 82.7
Apr. 10,598.5 1,520.0 1,094.3 425.7 4,435.0 4,186.5 2,463.4 1,297.4 789.0 425.7 367.7 191.0 84.1
May 10,578.7 1,503.4 1,088.4 415.0 4,464.9 4,209.9 2,484.8 1,303.0 793.5 422.2 363.7 196.0 88.3
June 10,491.1 1,479.3 1,067.5 411.8 4,469.5 4,211.8 2,481.9 1,311.8 800.8 418.1 359.1 197.6 92.0
July 10,309.2 1,464.5 1,055.3 409.2 4,462.6 4,214.6 2,484.4 1,316.2 805.0 414.0 355.0 191.4 83.2
Aug. 10,276.1 1,426.3 1,025.0 401.3 4,522.2 4,269.1 2,534.8 1,323.2 812.1 411.2 352.1 194.8 85.4
Changes 4
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2021 207.2 133.4 103.4 30.0 107.3 96.2 141.4 –45.8 –23.3 0.6 3.9 16.6 13.6
2022 1,170.5 –15.6 –105.9 90.3 208.9 165.9 60.6 132.8 148.1 –27.5 –26.3 18.4 12.8
2023 –133.8 –133.9 –138.4 4.5 89.6 93.4 –172.3 347.9 338.5 –82.3 –109.9 7.1 – 7.1
2022 Dec. –225.1 –152.7 –112.7 –40.0 –55.4 –37.3 –39.2 5.6 9.4 – 3.7 – 4.1 –11.9 –12.8
2023 Jan. 87.5 23.3 0.0 23.3 49.1 30.9 –10.4 46.7 44.0 – 5.5 – 6.4 8.2 10.1
Feb. 167.0 –10.3 – 5.6 – 4.7 – 1.8 –11.8 –36.4 31.3 30.7 – 6.7 – 7.9 2.1 2.7
Mar. –195.2 –13.4 –14.7 1.3 –21.7 –20.0 –44.1 32.8 33.5 – 8.7 –10.3 7.1 1.8
Apr. 16.7 15.5 17.5 – 1.9 2.4 8.1 – 4.1 20.8 20.2 – 8.6 –10.1 1.8 – 5.1
May 91.9 –10.1 2.1 –12.1 13.1 8.4 – 7.9 24.3 21.7 – 8.0 –10.2 1.1 4.2
June –65.9 –90.3 –79.4 –11.0 – 6.3 1.5 –26.3 35.0 36.1 – 7.3 – 9.9 – 4.7 – 6.9
July 170.6 31.5 10.4 21.1 4.9 6.5 –16.4 30.2 31.0 – 7.3 –10.3 0.6 – 0.7
Aug. –15.1 –13.3 2.8 –16.1 6.4 7.9 –13.6 30.0 30.7 – 8.5 –11.2 – 4.4 – 2.4
Sep. 1.6 –49.2 –49.4 0.2 – 3.9 2.2 – 9.9 17.8 17.3 – 5.7 – 8.6 1.8 1.9
Oct. 68.3 30.9 19.9 11.0 13.8 8.5 –17.4 32.3 33.1 – 6.4 – 9.4 4.7 – 1.2
Nov. –174.8 18.9 5.1 13.8 17.5 23.9 10.6 20.4 17.2 – 7.1 –10.5 – 0.7 2.1
Dec. –286.4 –67.4 –47.2 –20.3 16.0 27.3 3.4 26.4 23.1 – 2.5 – 5.0 –10.5 –13.8
2024 Jan. 123.8 48.2 25.6 22.5 – 8.9 –13.2 –46.4 39.8 39.6 – 6.5 – 9.1 3.0 5.5
Feb. 132.1 14.8 9.0 5.8 – 3.2 – 1.5 –17.7 21.1 20.7 – 5.0 – 7.3 2.0 0.4
Mar. –75.2 –57.9 –51.4 – 6.6 28.4 25.6 1.2 28.5 27.8 – 4.1 – 5.7 – 0.1 0.6
Apr. 86.9 24.2 10.9 13.4 – 1.7 0.2 – 4.3 9.1 7.3 – 4.6 – 5.5 – 0.6 1.3
May –11.7 –15.1 – 5.1 –10.1 30.5 23.9 21.8 5.5 4.4 – 3.5 – 4.0 5.1 4.3
June –95.0 –23.3 –19.2 – 4.1 2.0 – 0.5 – 3.3 6.9 7.1 – 4.2 – 4.5 1.4 3.6
July –177.5 – 9.0 – 8.0 – 1.0 – 6.5 3.1 2.7 4.4 4.4 – 4.0 – 4.1 – 6.2 – 8.7
Aug. –34.9 – 5.9 1.7 – 7.7 27.7 22.6 18.5 7.0 7.0 – 2.9 – 2.9 3.5 2.3
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 2021
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 2022
108.4 37.8 2.0 1.6 58.3 52.0 5.0 3.2 1,279.0 80.5 723.0 784.8 1,617.7 2023
93.5 31.3 2.2 2.0 75.4 71.1 4.7 2.6 1,202.3 42.2 939.7 747.3 1,691.1 2022 Nov.
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 Dec.
92.3 30.4 2.2 2.0 79.1 73.8 3.9 2.5 1,205.2 47.4 890.6 728.9 1,719.6 2023 Jan.
91.8 30.0 2.2 1.9 87.0 82.5 5.0 2.4 1,221.5 55.6 901.8 724.9 1,880.4 Feb.
97.0 28.5 2.1 1.9 78.2 73.3 4.7 2.6 1,231.2 64.6 863.1 734.8 1,731.0 Mar.
103.7 33.9 2.1 1.9 70.8 65.9 5.4 2.8 1,235.3 67.3 856.2 735.7 1,726.0 Apr.
101.6 30.7 2.1 1.8 74.4 62.4 6.0 2.6 1,257.3 72.3 888.2 746.9 1,745.8 May
103.6 32.5 2.0 1.8 71.4 64.0 4.8 2.6 1,253.9 75.7 853.4 749.6 1,804.7 June
104.8 33.2 2.0 1.7 69.2 61.5 6.5 2.9 1,262.0 76.3 855.0 757.2 1,914.3 July
102.0 32.4 2.0 1.7 72.2 61.5 5.8 3.0 1,271.3 83.5 840.0 765.2 1,912.5 Aug.
102.0 32.6 2.0 1.7 64.3 60.0 4.9 3.0 1,280.7 82.6 825.8 765.1 1,973.5 Sep.
107.9 37.8 2.0 1.6 64.8 59.7 6.2 2.9 1,288.5 84.7 843.9 755.9 1,972.3 Oct.
105.2 34.5 2.0 1.6 59.1 55.1 6.6 3.0 1,286.3 83.6 805.3 769.5 1,778.8 Nov.
108.4 37.8 2.0 1.6 58.3 52.0 5.0 3.2 1,279.0 80.5 723.0 784.8 1,617.7 Dec.
106.1 35.6 1.9 1.6 59.5 50.5 9.1 3.3 1,304.0 83.0 775.3 756.5 1,656.1 2024 Jan.
107.6 39.2 1.9 1.5 55.9 49.5 10.0 3.3 1,316.2 83.3 831.9 749.6 1,712.5 Feb.
106.8 37.5 1.9 1.5 58.8 49.9 9.1 3.5 1,320.0 82.7 834.2 756.2 1,655.0 Mar.
105.0 35.6 1.9 1.5 57.4 49.2 9.5 3.7 1,324.9 77.3 821.9 746.5 1,736.9 Apr.
105.8 34.8 1.9 1.5 59.0 49.5 8.7 3.8 1,327.0 75.7 832.8 756.7 1,681.4 May
103.8 33.3 1.9 1.4 60.1 49.5 9.3 4.0 1,327.0 79.4 825.3 786.7 1,590.0 June
106.3 36.2 1.9 1.4 56.6 49.1 10.1 4.2 1,316.5 76.0 780.4 790.0 1,480.9 July
107.5 37.9 1.9 1.4 58.3 49.1 12.7 4.6 1,320.3 77.7 773.2 791.3 1,425.6 Aug.
Changes 4
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
3.1 – 8.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 – 5.0 – 7.9 0.3 40.6 6.9 124.9 16.6 –207.9 2021
5.8 8.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 24.6 23.0 1.2 0.4 67.2 12.6 45.6 5.0 857.7 2022
14.4 6.7 – 0.2 – 0.4 –10.9 –14.8 1.8 0.5 110.6 43.1 –55.7 43.3 –189.9 2023
1.0 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 6.3 – 4.3 – 1.3 0.1 –11.5 – 1.2 –132.1 1.9 125.9 2022 Dec.
– 1.9 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.9 6.9 0.5 – 0.2 22.4 6.6 95.0 –17.6 –85.0 2023 Jan.
– 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 7.9 8.7 1.2 – 0.1 13.0 8.1 6.9 – 5.0 163.2 Feb.
5.3 – 1.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 8.8 – 9.2 – 0.3 0.3 13.6 9.2 –33.8 11.2 –151.2 Mar.
6.9 5.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.4 – 7.4 0.7 0.1 5.7 2.7 – 4.9 1.8 – 4.7 Apr.
– 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 3.6 – 3.5 0.6 – 0.1 23.4 6.5 32.0 9.4 23.5 May
2.1 2.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.0 1.6 – 1.1 – 0.0 0.4 4.1 –28.3 3.6 56.2 June
1.2 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.1 – 2.5 1.7 0.3 10.2 0.7 4.2 8.1 109.7 July
– 2.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.9 – 0.0 – 0.7 0.1 7.0 7.1 –18.9 7.2 – 2.8 Aug.
– 0.1 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.9 – 1.5 – 0.9 0.1 10.3 0.0 –14.2 – 1.0 60.4 Sep.
5.9 5.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.3 1.4 – 0.1 8.3 2.2 19.1 – 4.6 – 0.4 Oct.
– 2.8 – 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 5.7 – 4.6 0.4 0.1 2.0 – 1.0 –32.8 14.8 –195.8 Nov.
3.3 3.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 3.1 – 1.6 0.1 – 5.6 – 3.0 –80.1 15.3 –163.0 Dec.
– 2.5 – 2.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.2 – 1.5 4.1 0.1 21.1 2.4 48.0 –29.3 40.5 2024 Jan.
1.5 3.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.6 – 1.0 0.8 0.0 12.5 0.2 56.7 – 6.4 57.0 Feb.
– 0.7 – 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.9 0.5 – 0.9 0.2 3.6 – 0.6 2.0 6.6 –57.1 Mar.
– 1.9 – 2.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.4 – 0.8 0.4 0.2 3.6 – 5.4 –14.2 –10.0 84.4 Apr.
0.8 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.5 0.3 – 0.8 0.1 4.2 – 1.6 13.9 10.7 –55.2 May
– 2.1 – 1.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.0 – 0.1 0.6 0.2 – 2.9 3.7 –11.2 29.5 –89.7 June
2.6 2.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.4 – 0.4 0.8 0.2 – 8.9 – 3.4 –41.2 3.7 –116.5 July
1.2 1.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.6 – 0.0 2.5 0.5 1.9 0.9 – 5.9 3.3 –59.0 Aug.
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
24•
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
End of
monthNumber of
reporting
institu-
tionsBalance
sheet
total  1Cash in
hand and
credit
balances
with
central
banks TotalBalances
and
loansSecurities
issued by
banks Totalfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more than
1 year BillsSecurities
issued by
non-banksPartici-
pating
interestsOther
assets  1
All categories of banks
2024 Mar. 1,333 10,597.2 65.1 3,580.4 3,074.4 502.4 5,068.9 480.5 3,829.3 0.1 743.3 96.5 1,786.4
Apr. 1,330 10,690.1 63.1 3,575.2 3,068.4 503.7 5,078.4 493.8 3,832.7 0.1 733.6 97.0 1,876.4
May 1,330 10,674.3 60.6 3,599.9 3,089.2 507.2 5,088.1 495.0 3,838.3 0.1 737.5 97.2 1,828.4
June 1,326 10,588.4 63.9 3,567.3 3,058.2 505.9 5,102.0 500.3 3,835.7 0.1 748.2 97.4 1,757.9
July 1,324 10,408.2 66.7 3,511.2 2,997.5 510.3 5,108.5 498.1 3,847.4 0.1 746.1 100.7 1,621.1
Aug. 1,315 10,379.0 63.4 3,519.8 3,003.5 512.8 5,116.3 495.0 3,855.8 0.1 748.1 101.1 1,578.4
Commercial banks 6
2024 July 240 4,738.7 23.0 1,676.4 1,574.0 101.5 1,690.4 336.4 1,062.2 0.1 283.3 33.8 1,315.1
Aug. 236 4,684.3 24.6 1,661.9 1,558.1 103.0 1,694.7 335.9 1,065.3 0.1 284.4 33.9 1,269.1
Big banks 7
2024 July 3 2,280.1 10.3 717.6 674.5 43.1 777.5 172.1 448.2 0.0 153.1 24.8 750.0
Aug. 3 2,244.7 11.2 708.3 662.8 45.5 779.2 171.2 450.1 0.0 154.6 25.0 721.1
Regional banks and other commercial banks
2024 July 127 1,991.1 9.0 673.2 617.6 55.0 756.3 118.1 514.4 0.1 120.2 8.1 544.5
Aug. 125 1,974.5 10.1 666.6 612.1 54.0 761.4 119.9 516.3 0.1 120.2 8.1 528.3
Branches of foreign banks
2024 July 110 467.5 3.7 285.6 281.8 3.4 156.6 46.1 99.6 – 10.0 0.9 20.7
Aug. 108 465.0 3.3 287.0 283.2 3.4 154.1 44.8 99.0 – 9.6 0.9 19.7
Landesbanken
2024 July 6 881.5 1.9 337.0 280.1 56.6 432.0 46.8 343.2 0.0 38.6 9.5 101.1
Aug. 6 885.5 2.2 339.5 281.7 57.6 430.7 46.1 341.6 0.0 39.3 9.5 103.6
Savings banks
2024 July 350 1,553.9 22.6 265.9 146.1 119.7 1,223.6 55.1 1,000.4 – 168.0 16.7 25.1
Aug. 349 1,563.4 19.9 275.7 156.3 119.5 1,224.5 53.7 1,002.5 – 168.1 16.7 26.4
Credit cooperatives
2024 July 689 1,183.0 13.5 215.8 105.5 109.9 901.4 35.2 749.0 0.0 117.2 20.7 31.7
Aug. 685 1,190.5 11.9 221.6 111.2 110.0 903.9 35.0 751.5 0.0 117.4 20.7 32.4
Mortgage banks
2024 July 7 220.1 0.1 17.4 9.9 7.5 197.1 2.8 181.0 – 13.3 0.1 5.4
Aug. 7 221.8 0.1 18.4 11.0 7.4 197.7 2.8 181.5 – 13.4 0.1 5.5
Building and loan associations
2024 July 14 259.6 0.1 39.7 24.1 15.7 215.3 1.3 193.2 . 20.8 0.2 4.2
Aug. 14 260.3 0.2 40.0 24.4 15.6 215.6 1.3 193.7 . 20.6 0.2 4.3
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2024 July 18 1,571.4 5.4 959.1 857.8 99.3 448.7 20.6 318.5 – 104.9 19.7 138.5
Aug. 18 1,573.2 4.4 962.6 860.7 99.7 449.3 20.2 319.7 0.0 104.9 19.8 137.1
Memo item:    Foreign banks 8
2024 July 141 2,243.7 10.2 823.0 778.7 43.5 733.0 152.0 434.9 0.1 139.9 2.8 674.8
Aug. 138 2,210.6 9.8 817.3 773.4 43.1 735.9 154.8 434.1 0.0 140.0 2.7 644.9
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2024 July 31 1,776.2 6.5 537.4 496.8 40.1 576.4 105.9 335.3 0.1 129.8 1.9 654.1
Aug. 30 1,745.5 6.4 530.3 490.2 39.6 581.8 110.0 335.2 0.0 130.3 1.9 625.1
* Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3.  1 Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial
instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning ofSection 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read
in conjunction with Section 35 (1) number 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are classified
under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting date. Trading
portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, in
Tables I.1 to I.3.  2 For building and loan associations: including deposits under savings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
25•
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4
TotalSight
depositsTime
deposits TotalSight
depositsfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more
than
1 year  2Memo
item:
Liabilities
arising
from
repos  3 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeBank
savings
bondsBearer
debt
securities
out-
standing  5Capital
including
published
reserves,
partici-
pation
rights
capital,
funds for
general
banking
risksOther
liabi-
lities  1End of
month
All categories of banks
2,124.4 661.5 1,462.9 4,647.7 2,672.0 692.5 686.5 79.1 434.9 376.8 161.8 1,400.3 615.4 1,809.3 2024 Mar.
2,124.0 685.4 1,438.5 4,659.1 2,682.6 695.3 685.0 90.9 430.2 371.3 166.0 1,393.5 619.0 1,894.5 Apr.
2,122.4 712.2 1,410.2 4,684.0 2,709.0 692.6 687.4 87.4 426.7 367.2 168.4 1,395.6 626.0 1,846.3 May
2,100.8 708.1 1,392.7 4,679.2 2,698.6 697.9 689.0 86.5 422.5 362.6 171.1 1,408.0 638.9 1,761.7 June
2,043.1 664.7 1,378.4 4,670.8 2,688.5 702.9 688.4 86.5 418.4 358.4 172.6 1,390.2 644.3 1,659.8 July
1,999.5 602.6 1,396.9 4,731.6 2,744.8 710.1 687.4 93.8 415.5 355.4 173.7 1,391.4 643.6 1,613.0 Aug.
Commercial banks 6
1,095.8 518.8 577.0 1,917.4 1,167.5 365.7 249.0 85.1 84.4 53.6 50.7 223.5 227.3 1,274.7 2024 July
1,049.7 459.0 590.7 1,957.3 1,206.1 369.0 247.6 92.5 84.1 52.8 50.5 222.4 226.3 1,228.6 Aug.
Big banks 7
419.1 192.4 226.7 882.1 525.9 202.7 73.1 47.6 76.7 46.7 3.7 168.9 87.2 722.8 2024 July
396.7 170.0 226.7 897.3 543.0 201.8 72.4 48.6 76.4 45.9 3.7 168.3 87.1 695.4 Aug.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
468.4 234.7 233.7 816.0 494.0 115.8 151.8 37.5 7.5 6.7 46.9 53.1 122.9 530.7 2024 July
453.4 206.2 247.2 834.7 512.5 117.5 150.6 43.9 7.4 6.7 46.6 52.2 121.9 512.3 Aug.
Branches of foreign banks
208.3 91.7 116.6 219.2 147.6 47.2 24.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 1.6 17.2 21.2 2024 July
199.6 82.8 116.8 225.3 150.6 49.8 24.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 2.0 17.2 20.9 Aug.
Landesbanken
201.0 33.4 167.6 296.6 149.5 72.3 68.3 0.8 4.2 4.2 2.3 227.5 44.2 112.2 2024 July
199.9 31.9 167.9 300.9 151.2 74.7 68.4 0.8 4.2 4.2 2.3 229.2 43.7 111.9 Aug.
Savings banks
149.0 4.0 145.0 1,173.0 760.5 99.3 20.9 – 199.2 180.6 93.0 24.0 149.4 58.5 2024 July
148.8 3.8 145.0 1,181.5 768.5 100.1 21.1 – 197.5 178.9 94.3 23.9 149.9 59.2 Aug.
Credit cooperatives
154.5 2.2 152.3 869.3 533.6 134.9 44.5 – 130.1 119.6 26.2 9.1 111.5 38.7 2024 July
155.1 1.8 153.3 875.3 538.3 136.4 45.0 – 129.4 119.1 26.1 9.0 111.7 39.4 Aug.
Mortgage banks
41.0 3.1 37.9 54.2 2.2 5.7 46.3 0.2 – – . 108.2 9.2 7.6 2024 July
41.0 3.1 37.9 54.7 2.5 5.9 46.3 0.2 – – . 109.4 9.2 7.5 Aug.
Building and loan associations
38.8 3.0 35.8 192.0 4.4 3.2 183.9 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 7.6 13.2 8.0 2024 July
38.1 3.1 35.0 193.3 6.0 3.2 183.6 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 7.6 13.2 8.2 Aug.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
363.1 100.2 262.9 168.4 70.8 21.8 75.4 0.4 – – . 790.3 89.5 160.2 2024 July
367.0 99.9 267.1 168.7 72.3 20.7 75.4 0.4 – – . 789.8 89.5 158.2 Aug.
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
645.9 328.5 317.4 777.7 488.9 146.9 107.8 44.2 7.0 6.7 27.1 51.3 104.9 663.9 2024 July
618.3 289.6 328.7 806.0 511.2 153.4 107.2 52.5 6.9 6.6 27.3 50.9 103.9 631.4 Aug.
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
437.6 236.8 200.8 558.5 341.3 99.7 83.7 44.2 6.8 6.4 27.1 49.7 87.6 642.7 2024 July
418.8 206.8 211.9 580.7 360.6 103.7 82.6 52.5 6.7 6.3 27.2 48.9 86.6 610.5 Aug.
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Included in time deposits.  4 Excluding deposits
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).  5 Including subordinated
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
6 Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”.  7 Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner
Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische
Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
notes in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, Table I.3, banking group “Big banks “).
8 Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories
of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”.
9 Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in
other banking categories.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
26•
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
PeriodCash in
hand
(euro area
banknotes
and
coins)Credit
balances
with the
Bundes-
bank TotalCredit
balances
and loans BillsNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total Loans BillsTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money mar-
ket paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued
by non-
banks  1
End of year or month *
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2023 18.5 52.0 2,280.7 2,029.3 – 0.8 250.6 24.2 4,044.1 3,649.9 0.1 0.9 393.3
2023 Mar. 17.7 53.5 2,426.8 2,175.1 – 1.0 250.7 12.6 4,030.5 3,634.7 0.1 4.3 391.4
Apr. 18.7 54.2 2,434.7 2,182.3 – 1.1 251.3 12.7 4,032.5 3,641.2 0.1 3.2 388.1
May 18.1 48.7 2,483.6 2,230.4 – 0.8 252.4 12.7 4,039.0 3,650.5 0.1 2.2 386.2
June 17.5 51.6 2,366.1 2,114.1 – 0.9 251.0 12.7 4,042.1 3,645.6 0.1 2.9 393.5
July 17.0 69.9 2,369.8 2,118.4 – 1.1 250.3 12.8 4,048.7 3,653.9 0.1 3.2 391.6
Aug. 17.3 46.7 2,392.0 2,139.7 – 1.2 251.1 12.9 4,046.7 3,649.9 0.1 2.5 394.2
Sep. 17.9 49.6 2,305.0 2,056.1 – 1.0 247.8 12.9 4,048.1 3,653.5 0.1 3.4 391.1
Oct. 17.4 62.2 2,351.7 2,102.8 – 0.8 248.0 13.1 4,051.9 3,656.6 0.1 3.0 392.2
Nov. 16.7 45.5 2,375.9 2,122.3 – 0.9 252.7 13.3 4,057.9 3,661.2 0.1 3.1 393.6
Dec. 18.5 52.0 2,280.7 2,029.3 – 0.8 250.6 24.2 4,044.1 3,649.9 0.1 0.9 393.3
2024 Jan. 16.1 73.1 2,330.7 2,070.9 – 0.8 259.0 28.1 4,048.3 3,649.5 0.0 1.4 397.4
Feb. 16.2 47.5 2,376.9 2,112.0 – 0.8 264.1 31.6 4,055.7 3,654.0 0.1 0.5 401.2
Mar. 17.5 46.9 2,325.4 2,058.2 – 0.7 266.5 34.3 4,061.0 3,658.4 0.1 0.5 402.1
Apr. 16.4 46.0 2,319.4 2,050.6 – 0.7 268.1 38.0 4,062.1 3,661.7 0.0 1.7 398.6
May 16.6 43.4 2,317.7 2,048.2 – 0.8 268.7 41.5 4,069.5 3,666.0 0.1 1.2 402.2
June 16.5 46.6 2,313.9 2,045.6 – 0.8 267.5 44.4 4,076.9 3,670.9 0.1 1.1 404.8
July 16.1 50.0 2,259.5 1,989.8 – 0.7 269.0 46.0 4,083.3 3,676.4 0.0 1.1 405.8
Aug. 16.8 46.0 2,263.7 1,992.9 – 0.8 269.9 47.3 4,088.6 3,677.7 0.1 1.4 409.5
Changes *
2015 +0.3 + 73.7 – 80.7 – 4.3 –0.0 – 0.4 –75.9 –0.1 +68.9 +54.1 –0.0 – 0.3 +15.1
2016 +6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 – – 0.9 –17.9 +0.4 +43.7 +62.8 –0.1 – 0.1 –18.9
2017 +6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 –0.0 + 0.0 –20.1 –0.1 +57.0 +70.2 +0.0 + 0.4 –13.6
2018 +8.5 + 24.0 – 81.0 – 76.6 +0.0 + 0.1 – 4.4 +3.8 +71.5 +105.4 –0.1 – 0.5 –33.2
2019 +2.8 + 59.7 – 63.0 – 61.1 –0.0 – 0.2 – 1.6 –1.4 +126.7 +129.1 +0.1 + 3.1 – 5.5
2020 +4.1 +316.4 +201.2 +191.6 –0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 +4.3 +123.2 +123.6 –0.1 + 0.7 – 1.0
2021 +2.2 +111.8 + 44.1 + 46.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – 2.0 +1.5 +152.2 +147.8 +0.0 – 2.2 + 6.6
2022 –29.6 –836.6 +938.0 +938.1 – + 0.2 – 0.3 +1.7 +216.7 +220.1 –0.1 + 0.1 – 3.3
2023 –1.3 – 15.3 – 65.5 – 71.2 – – 0.2 + 5.9 +1.9 +30.9 +39.0 –0.1 – 1.8 – 6.2
2023 Mar. –0.1 + 1.3 – 45.1 – 47.0 – + 0.0 + 1.9 –0.1 + 0.9 + 6.0 +0.0 + 1.4 – 6.5
Apr. +1.0 + 0.7 + 7.8 + 7.2 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +0.1 + 2.1 + 6.5 +0.0 – 1.2 – 3.2
May –0.7 – 5.5 + 48.9 + 48.1 – – 0.3 + 1.1 –0.0 + 6.5 + 9.4 +0.0 – 1.0 – 1.9
June –0.5 + 2.9 –116.9 –115.7 – + 0.1 – 1.3 +0.0 + 4.4 – 3.7 –0.0 + 0.7 + 7.4
July –0.5 + 18.4 + 3.7 + 4.3 – + 0.2 – 0.8 +0.1 + 6.6 + 8.3 –0.0 + 0.2 – 1.9
Aug. +0.3 – 23.2 + 22.2 + 21.3 – + 0.1 + 0.8 +0.1 – 1.9 – 4.0 +0.0 – 0.6 + 2.7
Sep. +0.6 + 2.8 – 87.0 – 83.6 – – 0.2 – 3.3 +0.1 + 1.3 + 3.7 +0.0 + 0.9 – 3.2
Oct. –0.5 + 12.7 + 46.8 + 46.8 – – 0.2 + 0.2 +0.2 + 3.7 + 3.0 –0.0 – 0.4 + 1.1
Nov. –0.6 – 16.7 + 24.2 + 19.5 – + 0.1 + 4.6 +0.1 + 6.1 + 4.7 +0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3
Dec. +1.8 + 6.5 – 95.5 – 93.3 – – 0.1 – 2.0 +0.6 –12.7 –10.3 –0.0 – 2.2 – 0.2
2024 Jan. –2.4 + 21.1 + 48.6 + 40.3 – – 0.0 + 8.4 +3.9 + 4.0 – 0.5 –0.0 + 0.5 + 4.0
Feb. +0.0 – 25.6 + 46.3 + 41.2 – – 0.0 + 5.1 +3.4 + 6.7 + 3.7 +0.0 – 0.9 + 3.8
Mar. +1.3 – 0.6 – 51.5 – 53.8 – – 0.1 + 2.3 +2.8 + 5.3 + 4.4 +0.0 – 0.1 + 0.9
Apr. –1.1 – 0.8 – 5.9 – 7.5 – + 0.0 + 1.6 +3.7 + 1.1 + 3.3 –0.0 + 1.3 – 3.5
May +0.2 – 2.7 – 1.7 – 2.4 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +3.5 + 7.4 + 4.3 +0.0 – 0.5 + 3.6
June –0.0 + 3.2 – 3.8 – 1.9 – – 0.0 – 1.9 +2.9 + 7.4 + 4.9 –0.0 – 0.1 + 2.6
July –0.4 + 3.4 – 53.0 – 54.4 – – 0.1 + 1.5 +1.6 + 7.1 + 6.1 –0.0 – 0.1 + 1.0
Aug. +0.6 – 3.8 + 4.7 + 3.5 – + 0.2 + 0.9 +1.4 + 5.3 + 1.3 +0.0 + 0.4 + 3.7
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange ofequalisation claims (see also footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the
exchange of equalisation claims.  3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt
securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
27•
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Equalisa-
tion
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in
domestic
banks
and
enterprises TotalSight
deposits
4Time
deposits
4Redis-
counted
bills  5Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
de-
positsTime
deposits
6Savings
de-
posits  7Bank
savings
bonds  8Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
– 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
– 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
– 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
– 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
– 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
– 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 2021
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 2022
– 23.8 80.3 1,099.9 137.9 962.0 0.0 13.5 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 445.9 142.2 50.1 2023
– 24.6 80.3 1,210.4 137.0 1,073.4 0.0 15.2 4,167.4 2,639.8 968.6 507.2 51.7 36.4 2023 Mar.
– 24.7 80.9 1,227.7 140.8 1,086.9 0.0 15.2 4,167.3 2,632.0 978.5 498.6 58.3 36.5 Apr.
– 24.7 81.1 1,229.8 137.8 1,091.9 0.0 15.1 4,172.9 2,623.9 993.0 490.6 65.4 36.6 May
– 24.4 81.2 1,149.6 134.0 1,015.6 0.0 14.6 4,176.3 2,600.9 1,020.0 483.3 72.1 36.5 June
– 24.4 81.0 1,159.8 134.8 1,025.0 0.0 14.6 4,180.2 2,582.2 1,042.9 475.9 79.1 36.7 July
– 24.4 80.3 1,162.1 138.5 1,023.7 0.0 14.5 4,188.4 2,568.4 1,061.7 467.5 90.7 36.9 Aug.
– 24.2 80.4 1,112.7 137.4 975.3 0.0 14.1 4,189.3 2,558.0 1,072.5 461.8 97.0 37.1 Sep.
– 24.1 80.3 1,132.1 136.7 995.4 0.0 14.0 4,198.0 2,544.5 1,086.5 455.4 111.6 37.3 Oct.
– 24.0 80.6 1,136.6 140.0 996.7 0.0 14.0 4,217.3 2,552.9 1,085.6 448.3 130.5 37.6 Nov.
– 23.8 80.3 1,099.9 137.9 962.0 0.0 13.5 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 445.9 142.2 50.1 Dec.
– 23.7 80.3 1,125.8 155.3 970.5 0.0 13.4 4,216.3 2,496.8 1,128.7 439.4 151.4 54.5 2024 Jan.
– 23.7 80.1 1,134.8 161.4 973.4 0.0 13.3 4,213.6 2,478.3 1,143.5 434.4 157.3 57.5 Feb.
– 23.5 80.3 1,083.4 159.4 924.0 0.0 12.8 4,239.0 2,479.2 1,168.8 430.3 160.7 60.2 Mar.
– 23.4 80.8 1,094.3 160.6 933.8 0.0 12.7 4,239.6 2,475.4 1,173.6 425.8 164.8 63.7 Apr.
– 23.5 81.0 1,088.4 158.0 930.5 0.0 12.7 4,263.3 2,497.0 1,176.9 422.2 167.2 66.9 May
– 23.2 81.1 1,067.5 158.5 909.0 0.0 12.3 4,264.7 2,494.2 1,182.5 418.1 170.0 68.9 June
– 23.1 84.5 1,055.3 159.3 896.1 0.0 12.1 4,267.8 2,497.1 1,185.2 414.0 171.5 70.0 July
– 26.4 84.9 1,025.0 133.1 891.9 0.0 12.0 4,323.3 2,548.5 1,191.1 411.2 172.5 74.5 Aug.
Changes *
– –2.1 –4.3 –46.6 + 3.3 –50.0 +0.0 –1.3 +106.5 +156.2 –28.3 –11.3 –10.1 –1.6 2015
– –1.3 +1.5 – 1.7 + 0.3 – 2.0 +0.0 –0.5 +104.7 +124.5 – 6.9 – 7.9 –5.0 –0.5 2016
– –0.0 –1.6 +11.0 –18.4 +29.4 –0.0 –0.5 +103.1 +142.8 –27.5 – 5.6 –6.7 +0.4 2017
– –1.0 +3.1 –25.0 – 3.1 –21.9 +0.0 –0.4 +117.7 +139.3 –10.8 – 4.3 –6.5 +3.9 2018
– –0.7 +0.1 – 8.6 + 1.6 –10.2 +0.0 –0.3 +122.5 +155.8 –25.7 – 3.4 –4.1 –1.4 2019
– +5.7 –3.3 +313.4 +23.2 +290.2 –0.0 +8.2 +221.6 +273.7 –32.7 –14.5 –4.9 +1.9 2020
– +2.3 +1.0 +105.2 – 7.4 +112.6 +0.0 +3.3 +95.3 +144.3 –46.2 + 0.7 –3.5 –0.2 2021
– –0.1 +1.7 –104.6 + 8.8 –113.4 –0.0 –0.6 +191.8 +65.8 +143.4 –27.5 +10.1 +1.7 2022
– –1.2 +0.6 –139.9 – 8.9 –131.0 ±0.0 –2.3 +76.6 –172.0 +226.4 –82.3 +104.5 +3.5 2023
– –0.3 +0.1 –15.2 – 3.7 –11.5 – –0.4 –29.6 –47.3 +20.2 – 8.7 +6.2 –0.1 2023 Mar.
– +0.0 +1.1 +17.3 + 3.8 +13.5 –0.0 –0.0 – 0.1 – 7.9 + 9.8 – 8.6 +6.6 +0.0 Apr.
– +0.0 +0.2 + 2.1 – 3.0 + 5.0 –0.0 –0.1 + 5.6 – 7.9 +14.5 – 8.0 +7.1 +0.1 May
– –0.4 +0.1 –79.7 – 3.7 –76.0 +0.0 –0.5 + 2.3 –23.0 +26.0 – 7.3 +6.7 –0.1 June
– +0.0 –0.1 +10.2 + 0.8 + 9.4 – –0.0 + 3.8 –18.7 +22.8 – 7.3 +7.0 +0.2 July
– +0.1 –0.8 + 3.1 + 3.9 – 0.8 +0.0 –0.1 + 8.2 –13.2 +21.3 – 8.5 +8.5 +0.2 Aug.
– –0.2 +0.1 –49.4 – 1.1 –48.3 –0.0 –0.4 + 0.9 –10.5 +10.7 – 5.7 +6.3 +0.2 Sep.
– –0.1 –0.1 +19.9 – 0.7 +20.6 –0.0 –0.1 + 8.7 –13.4 +14.0 – 6.4 +14.6 +0.3 Oct.
– –0.1 +0.3 + 4.6 + 3.3 + 1.3 +0.0 –0.0 +19.3 + 8.5 – 1.0 – 7.1 +18.8 +0.3 Nov.
– –0.2 –0.2 –47.3 –12.5 –34.8 –0.0 –0.5 +22.3 – 0.7 +13.7 – 2.5 +11.8 +1.2 Dec.
– –0.1 –0.1 +26.0 +17.4 + 8.6 +0.0 –0.1 –12.7 –44.1 +28.7 – 6.5 +9.2 +4.4 2024 Jan.
– –0.0 –0.2 + 8.9 + 6.1 + 2.9 –0.0 –0.1 – 2.8 –18.4 +14.8 – 5.0 +5.9 +3.0 Feb.
– –0.2 +0.3 –51.4 – 1.9 –49.5 – –0.5 +25.5 + 0.9 +25.3 – 4.1 +3.4 +2.6 Mar.
– –0.1 +0.4 +11.0 + 1.2 + 9.8 – –0.1 + 0.6 – 3.8 + 4.8 – 4.6 +4.2 +3.5 Apr.
– +0.0 +0.2 – 5.3 – 2.6 – 2.7 – –0.1 +23.7 +21.7 + 3.1 – 3.5 +2.4 +3.2 May
– –0.2 +0.1 –18.9 + 0.5 –19.4 – –0.4 – 0.4 – 2.7 + 3.7 – 4.2 +2.8 +2.0 June
– –0.1 +3.4 – 8.1 + 4.8 –13.0 +0.0 –0.2 + 3.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 – 4.0 +1.5 +1.1 July
– +3.2 +0.4 + 1.7 + 5.9 – 4.1 +0.0 –0.1 +23.5 +19.5 + 5.8 – 2.9 +1.0 +4.5 Aug.
including subordinated liabilities.  4 Including liabilities arising from monetary policy
operations with the Bundesbank.  5 Own acceptances and promissory notes
outstanding.  6 Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  7 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8).  8 Including liabilities
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
28•
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Credit balances and loans, bills Loans and bills
PeriodCash in
hand
(non-
euro area
banknotes
and
coins) Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued by
non-banks
End of year or month *
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2023 0.2 1,166.9 934.7 652.0 282.7 3.1 229.2 6.1 960.4 627.3 174.9 452.4 12.3 320.8
2023 Mar. 0.2 1,203.8 968.2 704.1 264.0 2.9 232.7 4.3 953.0 630.8 187.8 443.0 12.5 309.8
Apr. 0.2 1,184.1 946.5 681.7 264.8 3.6 234.0 4.2 959.3 633.6 191.7 441.9 13.9 311.8
May 0.2 1,211.3 972.8 706.0 266.8 3.4 235.1 4.2 965.1 638.1 193.4 444.7 14.6 312.4
June 0.2 1,177.3 939.1 681.7 257.4 3.6 234.6 4.3 961.8 628.4 181.4 447.0 15.8 317.6
July 0.2 1,194.1 955.3 694.8 260.5 4.1 234.7 4.3 962.7 637.4 190.4 447.0 16.4 308.9
Aug. 0.2 1,197.1 959.5 693.8 265.7 3.7 233.9 4.3 954.8 630.9 181.3 449.6 16.2 307.8
Sep. 0.2 1,203.3 966.5 687.9 278.6 3.5 233.3 4.2 958.8 633.0 183.8 449.2 16.1 309.7
Oct. 0.2 1,212.3 975.9 689.7 286.2 3.6 232.8 4.2 956.8 635.7 188.7 447.0 14.6 306.5
Nov. 0.2 1,190.3 954.5 674.0 280.5 3.3 232.4 4.2 971.3 645.4 194.5 450.9 15.3 310.6
Dec. 0.2 1,166.9 934.7 652.0 282.7 3.1 229.2 6.1 960.4 627.3 174.9 452.4 12.3 320.8
2024 Jan. 0.2 1,206.8 971.9 684.9 287.0 2.8 232.0 6.1 985.5 649.3 196.9 452.4 14.6 321.6
Feb. 0.2 1,245.8 1,010.7 724.3 286.4 3.0 232.2 6.9 1,000.4 660.7 204.4 456.3 14.2 325.4
Mar. 0.2 1,255.0 1,016.4 732.9 283.5 2.7 236.0 7.0 1,007.9 651.5 191.9 459.6 15.3 341.2
Apr. 0.2 1,255.8 1,018.0 729.5 288.5 2.2 235.6 7.4 1,016.3 664.8 206.3 458.5 16.5 335.0
May 0.2 1,282.2 1,041.2 755.0 286.2 2.5 238.5 7.5 1,018.6 667.3 207.9 459.4 16.1 335.2
June 0.2 1,253.4 1,012.8 723.8 289.0 2.3 238.3 7.2 1,025.1 665.2 207.3 457.9 16.5 343.4
July 0.2 1,251.7 1,007.8 719.6 288.2 2.6 241.3 7.0 1,025.1 669.1 208.7 460.4 15.8 340.2
Aug. 0.2 1,256.1 1,010.7 720.2 290.5 2.6 242.8 6.9 1,027.7 673.2 211.4 461.7 16.0 338.6
Changes *
2015 +0.1 –91.8 –86.0 –82.2 –3.8 –6.7 +0.8 –0.1 –6.1 –9.2 –6.5 –2.7 + 1.1 +2.0
2016 +0.0 –25.5 –14.5 –38.2 +23.7 –0.7 –10.3 –0.0 +17.4 +28.9 +10.1 +18.8 – 3.0 –8.5
2017 +0.0 –57.2 –48.7 –61.5 +12.8 +0.0 –8.5 +0.6 –4.7 +13.0 +8.6 +4.4 + 0.7 –18.4
2018 +0.0 +49.6 +34.0 +57.7 –23.7 +0.2 +15.3 +0.7 +18.3 +28.3 +3.2 +25.2 – 0.4 –9.7
2019 –0.0 –4.1 –11.3 –21.9 +10.7 +0.8 +6.3 +0.7 +26.8 +19.9 +12.7 +7.3 + 3.0 +3.8
2020 –0.0 –32.0 –22.4 –6.6 –15.8 +0.9 –10.5 +0.3 +34.4 +14.7 +9.0 +5.7 + 3.6 +16.1
2021 +0.0 +52.8 +71.1 +68.9 +2.2 –2.5 –15.8 –0.5 +37.8 +39.7 +29.8 +9.9 – 3.2 +1.4
2022 –0.1 +21.7 +20.4 +17.9 +2.6 +1.3 –0.0 +0.2 +37.0 +37.0 +16.8 +20.2 + 6.7 –6.7
2023 –0.0 +32.6 +24.9 +10.2 +14.7 +1.4 +6.3 +0.5 +51.5 +14.8 +5.2 +9.6 – 2.6 +39.3
2023 Mar. –0.0 +9.2 +9.2 +6.2 +3.0 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 +11.2 –1.1 –1.5 +0.4 – 3.3 +15.5
Apr. +0.0 –17.0 –19.0 –20.9 +1.9 +0.7 +1.3 –0.1 +8.2 +4.4 +4.5 –0.1 + 1.5 +2.4
May +0.0 +16.9 +16.2 +18.0 –1.8 –0.2 +0.9 –0.0 +1.5 +1.4 +1.3 +0.1 + 0.6 –0.5
June +0.0 –17.7 –17.6 –9.9 –7.6 +0.2 –0.3 +0.1 –1.9 –8.7 –11.1 +2.4 + 1.2 +5.6
July –0.0 +18.4 +17.7 +13.9 +3.9 +0.5 +0.2 +0.0 +3.0 +10.5 +9.6 +0.9 + 0.7 –8.2
Aug. –0.0 +0.0 +1.3 –2.2 +3.5 –0.4 –0.9 –0.0 –10.2 –8.3 –9.8 +1.5 – 0.3 –1.6
Sep. +0.0 –1.0 –0.0 –10.1 +10.1 –0.2 –0.7 –0.0 –0.1 –1.2 +1.3 –2.5 – 0.1 +1.1
Oct. +0.0 +10.3 +10.6 +2.6 +8.0 +0.1 –0.4 –0.1 –0.7 +3.8 +5.2 –1.4 – 1.6 –3.0
Nov. – –14.4 –13.9 –11.5 –2.4 –0.2 –0.3 +0.0 +18.7 +12.9 +7.6 +5.3 + 0.8 +5.0
Dec. –0.0 –21.0 –17.6 –21.0 +3.4 –0.3 –3.2 +0.0 –9.7 –17.2 –19.2 +2.0 – 3.0 +10.5
2024 Jan. +0.0 +34.0 +31.6 +29.7 +1.9 –0.2 +2.7 –0.0 +21.4 +19.0 +21.0 –2.0 + 2.2 +0.1
Feb. –0.0 +39.2 +38.9 +39.6 –0.7 +0.1 +0.2 +0.9 +15.8 +12.3 +7.5 +4.8 – 0.3 +3.8
Mar. –0.0 +9.1 +5.6 +8.7 –3.0 –0.3 +3.8 +0.1 +7.7 –9.1 –12.5 +3.4 + 1.0 +15.7
Apr. +0.0 –1.5 –0.8 –4.7 +4.0 –0.4 –0.3 +0.4 +7.1 +12.3 +14.0 –1.6 + 1.2 –6.4
May –0.0 +30.1 +26.8 +27.6 –0.9 +0.3 +3.0 +0.0 +4.4 +4.1 +2.3 +1.8 – 0.4 +0.7
June +0.0 –33.6 –33.1 –34.1 +1.0 –0.2 –0.3 –0.2 +3.4 –4.7 –1.6 –3.1 + 0.4 +7.7
July –0.0 +2.5 –0.8 –1.3 +0.5 +0.3 +3.0 –0.2 +2.3 +5.8 +2.4 +3.4 – 0.7 –2.9
Aug. +0.0 +11.1 +9.5 +4.7 +4.8 –0.0 +1.6 –0.1 +7.8 +8.2 +4.6 +3.6 + 0.3 –0.7
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequentrevisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
29•
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Time deposits (including bank
savings bonds)Time deposits (including
savings deposits and bank
savings bonds)
Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in foreign
banks
and
enter-
prises TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 – 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 2021
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 2022
10.7 16.7 923.8 469.5 454.3 288.1 166.2 – 380.6 176.2 204.4 104.9 99.5 1.1 2023
10.4 15.9 1,060.0 576.0 484.0 329.3 154.7 – 412.5 216.8 195.7 98.9 96.9 0.3 2023 Mar.
10.4 15.9 1,042.6 540.6 502.0 343.8 158.2 – 423.3 208.8 214.6 116.6 97.9 0.3 Apr.
10.4 16.1 1,059.1 596.1 462.9 299.9 163.0 0.0 436.0 219.3 216.7 116.7 100.0 0.3 May
10.2 16.0 1,025.8 565.0 460.8 302.6 158.2 0.0 411.5 205.6 205.9 107.3 98.6 0.4 June
10.2 16.1 1,052.4 582.3 470.1 311.1 159.0 0.0 411.0 204.0 207.0 107.9 99.1 0.3 July
10.2 16.1 1,021.8 566.5 455.3 294.3 161.1 – 407.7 198.5 209.2 112.0 97.2 0.3 Aug.
10.2 16.1 1,006.0 536.9 469.1 293.9 175.2 – 403.9 206.3 197.6 100.2 97.4 0.4 Sep.
10.2 16.6 1,021.8 558.9 462.9 288.0 174.9 – 423.2 207.0 216.2 117.4 98.8 0.3 Oct.
10.4 16.4 1,003.7 538.0 465.7 291.0 174.6 – 412.5 206.3 206.3 107.1 99.2 0.3 Nov.
10.7 16.7 923.8 469.5 454.3 288.1 166.2 – 380.6 176.2 204.4 104.9 99.5 1.1 Dec.
10.7 16.4 979.5 520.1 459.5 284.6 174.9 – 409.6 200.3 209.3 110.6 98.6 0.7 2024 Jan.
10.7 15.9 1,025.8 534.6 491.2 311.3 179.9 0.0 425.9 211.9 214.1 117.4 96.6 2.0 Feb.
10.7 15.9 1,041.0 502.1 538.9 370.9 168.1 0.0 408.7 192.8 215.9 118.1 97.7 2.6 Mar.
10.8 16.1 1,029.6 524.9 504.8 329.8 175.0 0.0 419.4 207.2 212.3 114.6 97.7 3.2 Apr.
10.8 16.0 1,034.0 554.2 479.7 315.8 163.9 0.0 420.7 212.0 208.7 109.3 99.4 4.0 May
10.6 16.0 1,033.2 549.6 483.6 315.3 168.3 0.0 414.4 204.4 210.1 111.0 99.0 4.5 June
10.5 16.0 987.8 505.4 482.4 311.4 170.9 0.0 402.9 191.4 211.5 112.3 99.3 4.8 July
10.6 16.0 974.5 469.5 505.0 330.4 174.6 0.0 408.3 196.3 212.0 112.7 99.3 5.1 Aug.
Changes *
– 0.6 – 6.1 –15.4 +40.6 –56.0 –48.6 – 7.4 –0.0 –26.5 –13.9 –12.6 +0.3 –13.0 –0.0 2015
– 0.1 – 1.5 +82.7 +51.0 +31.7 +27.0 + 4.7 –0.0 +3.5 –3.1 +6.7 +5.9 +0.8 –0.0 2016
– 1.0 – 4.1 –15.5 +25.2 –40.8 –43.2 + 2.4 ±0.0 +31.8 +11.0 +20.8 +15.6 +5.2 –0.4 2017
– 0.2 – 2.2 –23.9 –23.4 – 0.4 + 2.1 – 2.6 –0.0 –11.9 –0.2 –11.8 –5.7 –6.0 –0.2 2018
– 0.3 – 0.9 – 9.5 –49.4 +39.8 +28.0 +11.8 –0.0 –0.8 +2.1 –2.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.0 2019
– 0.2 – 3.9 +83.8 +87.8 – 4.1 –34.7 +30.6 – +23.6 +13.8 +9.8 +7.1 +2.8 +0.0 2020
– 0.2 – 0.8 +136.6 +19.8 +116.8 +89.2 +27.6 +0.0 +22.7 +6.4 +16.3 +0.0 +16.3 –0.0 2021
– 0.7 – 1.0 +85.8 +29.1 +56.7 +69.6 –13.0 –0.0 +68.2 +49.0 +19.2 +13.9 +5.3 +0.0 2022
+ 0.2 + 1.1 –66.1 –4.6 –61.4 –86.9 +25.4 ±0.0 +11.6 –18.3 +29.9 +20.9 +9.0 +0.1 2023
+ 0.0 + 0.2 –21.8 –21.5 – 0.3 –13.9 +13.6 – –3.9 –0.8 –3.1 –10.0 +7.0 +0.1 2023 Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 –15.3 –34.3 +19.0 +15.2 + 3.8 – +11.7 –7.7 +19.3 +18.1 +1.2 –0.0 Apr.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 +10.1 +52.6 –42.5 –46.3 + 3.8 +0.0 +9.2 +9.5 –0.3 –1.2 +0.9 –0.0 May
– 0.2 – 0.0 –26.4 –26.1 – 0.3 + 3.9 – 4.2 – –23.1 –13.1 –9.9 –8.7 –1.2 +0.1 June
– 0.0 + 0.1 +27.3 +17.2 +10.1 + 9.0 + 1.1 – +0.4 –1.3 +1.7 +1.1 +0.6 –0.0 July
+ 0.0 – 0.0 –32.6 –16.4 –16.2 –17.9 + 1.7 –0.0 –4.3 –5.9 +1.6 +3.6 –2.0 –0.0 Aug.
– 0.0 – 0.0 –21.0 –32.3 +11.4 – 2.2 +13.5 – –5.7 +7.1 –12.8 –12.8 +0.0 +0.0 Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.5 +17.0 +22.8 – 5.8 – 5.6 – 0.2 – +19.6 +0.9 +18.7 +17.3 +1.4 –0.1 Oct.
+ 0.2 – 0.1 –12.9 –18.4 + 5.5 + 4.9 + 0.6 – –8.6 +0.6 –9.2 –9.8 +0.6 –0.0 Nov.
+ 0.3 + 0.3 –77.4 –67.0 –10.4 – 2.3 – 8.2 – –31.3 –29.7 –1.5 –1.8 +0.3 –0.0 Dec.
+ 0.0 – 0.4 +51.4 +48.7 + 2.8 – 5.2 + 8.0 – +27.8 +23.6 +4.3 +5.3 –1.0 –0.4 2024 Jan.
+ 0.0 – 0.4 +46.4 +14.5 +31.9 +26.7 + 5.2 +0.0 +16.4 +11.5 +4.9 +6.8 –1.9 +1.4 Feb.
+ 0.0 – 0.0 +15.1 –32.4 +47.6 +59.5 –11.9 – –17.3 –19.1 +1.8 +0.7 +1.1 +0.5 Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 –13.1 +22.2 –35.3 –41.9 + 6.6 – +10.1 +14.1 –4.0 –4.3 +0.3 +0.7 Apr.
– 0.0 – 0.0 + 7.1 +30.5 –23.5 –12.9 –10.6 – +2.3 +5.3 –3.0 –4.8 +1.8 +0.8 May
– 0.2 + 0.0 – 4.6 –6.3 + 1.8 – 1.9 + 3.6 – –7.5 –8.2 +0.7 +1.2 –0.5 +0.5 June
– 0.1 – 0.0 –40.6 –40.6 + 0.0 – 2.9 + 3.0 – –10.7 –12.6 +1.9 +1.6 +0.3 +0.3 July
+ 0.1 – 0.0 – 6.8 –33.2 +26.3 +20.8 + 5.5 – +7.6 +6.2 +1.4 +1.3 +0.2 +0.2 Aug.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
30•
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Short-term lending Medium- and long-term Lending to domestic
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
Periodincluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claimsexcluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claims Total TotalLoans
and
billsNegotiable
money
market
paper Total LoansTreasury
bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 – 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2023 4,044.1 3,649.9 279.0 264.2 264.0 0.3 14.8 14.2 0.6 3,765.1 3,401.1
2023 Mar. 4,030.5 3,634.8 305.0 285.1 284.4 0.7 19.9 16.3 3.6 3,725.5 3,369.3
Apr. 4,032.5 3,641.3 304.1 283.3 282.8 0.6 20.8 18.2 2.6 3,728.4 3,374.4
May 4,039.0 3,650.6 299.7 281.0 280.2 0.8 18.7 17.4 1.3 3,739.3 3,388.0
June 4,042.1 3,645.7 300.3 280.5 279.6 0.9 19.8 17.8 2.0 3,741.8 3,388.7
July 4,048.7 3,653.9 299.4 277.4 276.6 0.9 21.9 19.6 2.3 3,749.3 3,395.5
Aug. 4,046.7 3,650.0 289.5 270.8 270.1 0.7 18.6 16.8 1.8 3,757.2 3,398.6
Sep. 4,048.1 3,653.6 297.2 275.5 274.8 0.6 21.7 19.0 2.7 3,751.0 3,395.8
Oct. 4,051.9 3,656.7 293.6 270.9 270.3 0.6 22.7 20.3 2.4 3,758.3 3,401.0
Nov. 4,057.9 3,661.3 291.1 272.0 271.4 0.7 19.0 16.6 2.4 3,766.9 3,404.2
Dec. 4,044.1 3,649.9 279.0 264.2 264.0 0.3 14.8 14.2 0.6 3,765.1 3,401.1
2024 Jan. 4,048.3 3,649.5 281.0 263.3 262.7 0.6 17.7 16.8 0.8 3,767.3 3,401.5
Feb. 4,055.7 3,654.0 281.5 267.3 266.8 0.5 14.2 14.1 0.0 3,774.3 3,404.7
Mar. 4,061.0 3,658.5 289.2 273.3 272.6 0.7 15.9 16.1 – 0.2 3,771.8 3,403.2
Apr. 4,062.1 3,661.8 289.3 270.4 269.6 0.8 18.9 18.0 0.9 3,772.8 3,406.5
May 4,069.5 3,666.1 288.4 271.4 270.5 0.9 17.0 16.7 0.3 3,781.1 3,410.7
June 4,076.9 3,670.9 294.3 273.8 273.0 0.7 20.5 20.1 0.4 3,782.6 3,408.6
July 4,083.3 3,676.5 290.5 270.8 270.1 0.7 19.7 19.3 0.4 3,792.8 3,416.3
Aug. 4,088.6 3,677.7 285.0 266.9 266.2 0.7 18.1 17.4 0.7 3,803.6 3,422.4
Changes *
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 – 5.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.8 – 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 – 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 – 12.1 – 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 8.6 – 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 – 19.6 – 19.8 – 19.8 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2021 + 152.2 + 147.8 + 8.8 + 13.8 + 13.8 – 0.1 – 4.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 + 143.4 + 157.9
2022 + 216.7 + 220.0 + 47.6 + 48.5 + 48.5 + 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.9 + 0.0 + 169.1 + 184.8
2023 + 30.9 + 38.9 – 15.3 – 14.5 – 14.4 – 0.1 – 0.8 + 0.9 – 1.7 + 46.2 + 42.3
2023 Mar. + 0.9 + 6.0 + 7.6 + 5.7 + 5.7 – 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.4 – 6.7 – 1.8
Apr. + 2.1 + 6.5 – 0.9 – 1.7 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.9 – 1.1 + 3.0 + 5.1
May + 6.5 + 9.4 – 4.4 – 2.3 – 2.6 + 0.3 – 2.1 – 0.8 – 1.2 + 10.9 + 13.6
June + 4.4 – 3.7 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 + 0.9
July + 6.6 + 8.3 – 1.0 – 3.1 – 3.1 – 0.0 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 7.5 + 6.9
Aug. – 1.9 – 4.0 – 9.9 – 6.6 – 6.5 – 0.2 – 3.3 – 2.8 – 0.5 + 8.0 + 3.1
Sep. + 1.3 + 3.7 + 7.7 + 4.6 + 4.7 – 0.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 – 6.4 – 2.9
Oct. + 3.7 + 3.0 – 3.5 – 4.6 – 4.5 – 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 – 0.3 + 7.2 + 5.2
Nov. + 6.1 + 4.7 – 2.3 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 3.7 – 3.7 + 0.0 + 8.4 + 3.8
Dec. – 12.7 – 10.3 – 11.0 – 7.8 – 7.4 – 0.4 – 3.2 – 1.3 – 1.8 – 1.7 – 2.9
2024 Jan. + 4.0 – 0.5 + 1.9 – 0.9 – 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3
Feb. + 6.7 + 3.7 + 0.4 + 3.9 + 4.0 – 0.1 – 3.5 – 2.7 – 0.8 + 6.3 + 2.7
Mar. + 5.3 + 4.4 + 6.6 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 2.0 – 0.2 – 1.3 – 0.3
Apr. + 1.1 + 3.3 + 0.1 – 2.8 – 3.0 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 3.4
May + 7.4 + 4.3 – 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 – 1.9 – 1.3 – 0.6 + 8.3 + 4.3
June + 7.4 + 4.9 + 5.9 + 2.4 + 2.5 – 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 1.6 – 2.1
July + 7.1 + 6.1 – 3.4 – 2.5 – 2.5 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.8 – 0.0 + 10.4 + 7.6
Aug. + 5.3 + 1.3 – 5.5 – 3.9 – 4.0 + 0.0 – 1.5 – 1.9 + 0.3 + 10.8 + 6.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
31•
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
TotalMedium-
termLong-
term SecuritiesMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalMedium-
termLong-
termSecur-
ities  1Equal-
isation
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 – 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 – 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 – 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 – 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 – 1.4 2018
2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 – 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 2020
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 2021
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 2022
3,131.7 361.0 2,770.7 269.4 22.8 364.0 240.0 14.1 225.9 124.0 – 1.0 2023
3,101.5 354.8 2,746.7 267.8 23.6 356.2 232.6 13.6 219.0 123.6 – 1.0 2023 Mar.
3,107.6 355.6 2,752.0 266.8 23.6 354.0 232.7 13.9 218.8 121.2 – 1.0 Apr.
3,120.7 360.8 2,760.0 267.2 23.7 351.4 232.4 13.6 218.8 119.0 – 1.0 May
3,117.4 360.0 2,757.5 271.3 23.3 353.1 230.9 13.4 217.6 122.2 – 1.0 June
3,125.3 362.1 2,763.3 270.2 23.4 353.8 232.4 13.5 218.9 121.4 – 1.0 July
3,130.4 362.8 2,767.6 268.2 23.4 358.6 232.6 13.8 218.8 126.0 – 1.0 Aug.
3,126.8 359.5 2,767.3 269.0 23.2 355.1 233.0 13.7 219.4 122.1 – 1.0 Sep.
3,131.2 360.7 2,770.5 269.8 23.1 357.3 234.8 13.8 221.0 122.4 – 1.0 Oct.
3,135.5 361.4 2,774.1 268.7 23.0 362.7 237.8 14.1 223.8 124.8 – 1.0 Nov.
3,131.7 361.0 2,770.7 269.4 22.8 364.0 240.0 14.1 225.9 124.0 – 1.0 Dec.
3,130.5 359.5 2,771.0 271.0 22.7 365.8 239.4 13.8 225.6 126.4 – 1.0 2024 Jan.
3,132.4 357.0 2,775.4 272.3 22.7 369.6 240.7 14.1 226.6 128.9 – 1.0 Feb.
3,128.6 354.1 2,774.5 274.6 22.5 368.7 241.1 14.3 226.8 127.5 – 1.0 Mar.
3,132.3 353.4 2,779.0 274.2 22.4 366.3 241.9 14.3 227.5 124.4 – 1.0 Apr.
3,135.9 353.3 2,782.6 274.8 22.4 370.4 242.9 14.5 228.4 127.5 – 1.0 May
3,135.3 352.3 2,783.1 273.3 22.2 374.0 242.5 14.6 227.8 131.5 – 1.0 June
3,143.2 355.5 2,787.6 273.1 22.1 376.6 243.8 15.0 228.9 132.7 – 1.0 July
3,149.6 355.8 2,793.8 272.8 24.5 381.2 244.5 15.2 229.2 136.7 – 1.9 Aug.
Changes *
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 +14.8 – 2.1 – 6.6 – 6.9 – 4.8 – 2.0 + 0.2 – + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 – 0.9 – 30.9 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 3.3 –23.6 – – 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 +15.8 + 0.1 – 39.9 –10.6 – 1.3 – 9.3 –29.4 – – 0.1 2017
+108.7 +19.3 + 89.4 – 6.7 – 0.9 – 37.1 –10.5 – 2.7 – 7.8 –26.6 – – 0.0 2018
+126.0 +18.9 +107.2 + 6.8 – 0.8 – 17.8 – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 –12.3 – + 0.1 2019
+145.0 + 9.4 +135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 – 2.8 – 1.1 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 1.7 – – 0.4 2020
+140.1 + 5.6 +134.5 +17.8 + 2.3 – 14.6 – 3.3 – 1.3 – 2.0 –11.3 – – 0.0 2021
+169.9 +33.5 +136.4 +14.9 – 0.1 – 15.7 + 2.5 – 0.7 + 3.3 –18.2 – – 0.0 2022
+ 46.9 +11.0 + 35.9 – 4.7 – 1.1 + 3.9 + 5.5 ± 0.0 + 5.5 – 1.5 – – 0.0 2023
– 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.0 – 1.4 – 0.3 – 4.8 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.3 – 5.1 – – 0.0 2023 Mar.
+ 6.1 + 0.8 + 5.3 – 1.0 + 0.0 – 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 – 0.2 – 2.3 – + 0.0 Apr.
+ 13.2 + 5.2 + 8.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 2.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.3 – – 0.0 May
– 3.2 – 1.3 – 2.0 + 4.1 – 0.3 + 1.8 – 1.5 – 0.2 – 1.2 + 3.2 – – 0.0 June
+ 8.0 + 1.8 + 6.2 – 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 1.3 – 0.8 – – 0.0 July
+ 5.1 + 0.8 + 4.3 – 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 + 4.6 – – 0.0 Aug.
– 3.6 – 3.3 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.2 – 3.5 + 0.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 – 3.9 – – 0.0 Sep.
+ 4.4 + 1.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 – 0.1 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.3 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 4.8 + 0.2 + 4.6 – 1.1 – 0.1 + 4.7 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 2.4 – + 0.0 Nov.
– 3.5 – 0.4 – 3.2 + 0.7 – 0.2 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.9 – 0.9 – – 0.0 Dec.
– 1.3 – 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.6 – 0.1 + 1.8 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 2.4 – + 0.0 2024 Jan.
+ 1.4 – 2.5 + 4.0 + 1.3 – + 3.5 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 2.5 – – 0.0 Feb.
– 2.6 – 2.5 – 0.1 + 2.3 – 0.2 – 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 1.4 – + 0.0 Mar.
+ 3.7 – 0.8 + 4.5 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 2.4 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 – 3.1 – + 0.0 Apr.
+ 3.8 – 0.1 + 3.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 3.1 – + 0.0 May
– 0.6 – 1.1 + 0.5 – 1.4 – 0.2 + 3.6 – 0.4 + 0.2 – 0.6 + 4.0 – – 0.0 June
+ 7.8 + 3.3 + 4.5 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 1.3 + 1.3 – – 0.0 July
+ 6.5 + 0.3 + 6.2 – 0.3 + 2.3 + 4.6 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 4.0 – + 0.9 Aug.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
32•
IV. Banks
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
billion €
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios)  1
of which:
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Period TotalMortgage
loans,
total TotalMortgage
loans
secured
by
residen-
tial real
estateOther
housing
loans Totalof which:
Housing
loansManufac-
turingElectricity,
gas and
water
supply;
refuse
disposal,          
mining
and
quarryingConstruc-
tionWhole-
sale and
retail
trade;
repair of
motor                
vehicles
and
motor-
cyclesAgri-
culture,
forestry,
fishing
and
aqua-
cultureTransport-
ation and
storage;
post and                      
telecom-
munica-
tionsFinancial
intermedi-
ation
(excluding
MFIs) and
insurance   
com-
panies
Lending, total                                                 End of year or quarter *
2022 3,365.3 1,676.5 1,773.9 1,448.0 325.8 1,852.2 509.1 160.0 137.7 108.8 155.1 56.3 65.2 211.9
2023 Q2 3,397.0 1,701.4 1,787.6 1,471.4 316.3 1,879.4 517.7 162.6 137.7 112.5 159.2 56.3 61.9 221.5
Q3 3,401.6 1,735.7 1,797.1 1,505.7 291.5 1,878.2 522.3 160.0 134.7 113.3 159.5 56.4 61.3 223.0
Q4 3,395.7 1,740.5 1,801.7 1,512.0 289.7 1,872.8 525.7 154.6 136.1 113.3 160.2 56.0 61.5 218.1
2024 Q1 3,401.2 1,753.5 1,802.8 1,524.4 278.5 1,879.2 527.2 155.3 138.3 113.5 159.4 56.3 58.7 219.4
Q2 3,408.4 1,762.5 1,808.4 1,531.5 276.9 1,884.0 529.6 155.7 143.8 114.1 159.0 56.4 52.0 219.2
Short-term lending
2022 279.4 . 7.4 . 7.4 248.9 5.0 41.6 12.1 20.8 44.7 3.3 3.8 49.8
2023 Q2 279.6 . 7.6 . 7.6 248.9 5.4 42.3 7.7 22.6 46.8 3.8 3.6 50.4
Q3 274.8 . 7.5 . 7.5 244.4 5.4 40.4 5.6 22.6 47.2 3.8 3.8 51.3
Q4 264.0 . 7.4 . 7.4 233.9 5.3 37.2 5.1 22.2 46.8 3.5 4.5 47.2
2024 Q1 272.6 . 7.6 . 7.6 243.4 5.6 39.7 6.2 23.1 48.0 4.0 4.6 48.2
Q2 273.0 . 7.5 . 7.5 244.4 5.5 40.4 6.2 23.3 48.0 4.1 4.4 47.0
Medium-term lending
2022 348.7 . 43.4 . 43.4 275.8 23.5 31.2 6.5 22.2 24.3 4.1 23.0 56.2
2023 Q2 360.0 . 42.8 . 42.8 289.3 24.1 34.0 8.0 22.8 26.9 4.1 19.1 61.3
Q3 359.5 . 42.8 . 42.8 289.2 24.5 34.7 5.8 23.0 26.9 4.1 18.2 62.5
Q4 361.0 . 41.9 . 41.9 291.2 24.3 34.0 6.0 23.1 28.2 4.2 18.6 61.3
2024 Q1 354.1 . 40.8 . 40.8 285.1 24.1 32.9 5.8 22.5 27.3 4.1 15.6 61.6
Q2 352.3 . 40.0 . 40.0 284.1 23.8 33.2 11.0 22.1 27.5 4.2 9.4 61.4
Long-term lending
2022 2,737.1 1,676.5 1,723.1 1,448.0 275.1 1,327.5 480.6 87.2 119.0 65.8 86.1 48.9 38.4 105.9
2023 Q2 2,757.5 1,701.4 1,737.2 1,471.4 265.9 1,341.2 488.2 86.3 122.1 67.1 85.5 48.5 39.2 109.7
Q3 2,767.3 1,735.7 1,746.8 1,505.7 241.2 1,344.7 492.4 85.0 123.3 67.7 85.3 48.5 39.2 109.1
Q4 2,770.7 1,740.5 1,752.5 1,512.0 240.5 1,347.7 496.1 83.4 125.1 68.0 85.2 48.3 38.5 109.7
2024 Q1 2,774.5 1,753.5 1,754.4 1,524.4 230.1 1,350.7 497.5 82.8 126.3 68.0 84.1 48.1 38.5 109.7
Q2 2,783.1 1,762.5 1,760.9 1,531.5 229.4 1,355.5 500.3 82.0 126.7 68.7 83.5 48.1 38.2 110.8
Lending, total                                                 Change during quarter *
2023 Q2 +12.4 +11.5 + 9.1 +11.5 – 2.4 + 8.2 + 5.3 – 0.1 – 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.2
Q3 + 4.7 +10.9 + 9.2 +11.2 – 2.0 – 1.4 + 4.2 – 2.5 – 2.9 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.6 + 1.3
Q4 – 4.9 + 5.6 + 4.8 + 7.0 – 2.2 – 4.6 + 3.4 – 5.5 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 – 0.5 + 0.7 – 4.9
2024 Q1 + 4.9 + 6.5 + 1.9 + 7.7 – 5.8 + 5.8 + 2.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 0.3 – 1.0 + 0.3 – 2.7 + 1.3
Q2 + 7.3 + 8.9 + 5.6 + 7.1 – 1.6 + 4.5 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 – 0.7 + 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.4
Short-term lending
2023 Q2 – 3.7 . – 0.0 . – 0.0 – 3.6 + 0.1 – 1.1 – 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.4
Q3 – 4.8 . – 0.1 . – 0.1 – 4.7 – 0.0 – 1.9 – 2.1 – 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.9
Q4 –10.6 . – 0.2 . – 0.2 –10.2 – 0.1 – 3.1 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 4.1
2024 Q1 + 7.4 . + 0.2 . + 0.2 + 8.4 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.0
Q2 + 0.5 . – 0.0 . – 0.0 + 1.0 – 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.3
Medium-term lending
2023 Q2 + 4.7 . – 0.0 . – 0.0 + 5.4 + 0.4 + 1.6 – 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.0 – 0.0 – 1.6 + 2.1
Q3 – 0.8 . – 0.2 . – 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.9 + 1.1
Q4 + 1.0 . – 0.8 . – 0.8 + 1.7 – 0.3 – 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 – 1.3
2024 Q1 – 6.5 . – 1.2 . – 1.2 – 5.7 – 0.4 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.6 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 2.9 + 0.4
Q2 – 2.0 . – 0.8 . – 0.8 – 1.3 – 0.3 + 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 1.0 – 0.3
Long-term lending
2023 Q2 +11.3 +11.5 + 9.1 +11.5 – 2.4 + 6.4 + 4.8 – 0.6 + 1.3 + 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1
Q3 +10.3 +10.9 + 9.5 +11.2 – 1.7 + 3.8 + 4.0 – 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.6
Q4 + 4.7 + 5.6 + 5.7 + 7.0 – 1.3 + 3.9 + 3.8 – 1.6 + 1.8 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.6
2024 Q1 + 4.0 + 6.5 + 2.9 + 7.7 – 4.7 + 3.1 + 2.4 – 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.2
Q2 + 8.9 + 8.9 + 6.4 + 7.1 – 0.7 + 4.7 + 2.6 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.7 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.4 + 1.1
* Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
33•
IV. Banks
Lending to employees and other individualsLending to
non-profit institutions
Services sector (including the professions) Memo items: Other lending
of which: of which:
TotalHousing
enterprisesHolding
companiesOther
real
estate
activitiesLending
to self-
employed
persons  2Lending
to craft
enterprises TotalHousing
loans TotalInstalment
loans  3Debit
balances
on wage,
salary
and
pension
accounts Totalof which:
Housing
loans   Period
End of year or quarter *                                   Lending, total
957.4 334.0 79.9 218.2 501.7 54.1 1,495.8 1,260.1 235.7 185.9 7.1 17.3 4.6 2022
967.7 340.4 78.1 220.8 504.3 55.0 1,500.1 1,265.2 234.9 186.0 7.3 17.5 4.7 2023 Q2
970.0 344.0 76.3 222.5 505.0 54.6 1,505.9 1,270.1 235.7 186.9 7.3 17.5 4.7 Q3
973.0 346.8 75.8 223.7 504.8 54.3 1,505.7 1,271.3 234.4 185.6 7.1 17.2 4.7 Q4
978.2 348.4 78.2 222.6 505.4 55.0 1,505.1 1,271.0 234.1 186.1 7.0 17.0 4.6 2024 Q1
983.7 351.7 77.1 222.5 506.4 55.0 1,507.5 1,274.2 233.3 186.4 7.0 16.9 4.7 Q2
Short-term lending
73.0 16.1 15.6 10.8 20.4 5.0 29.9 2.4 27.5 1.7 7.1 0.6 –2022
71.7 16.5 14.2 11.0 21.0 6.7 30.1 2.2 27.9 2.3 7.3 0.6 –2023 Q2
69.7 16.2 13.2 11.6 20.6 6.5 29.9 2.1 27.8 2.2 7.3 0.6 – Q3
67.4 16.0 12.6 11.3 20.6 5.7 29.5 2.1 27.5 2.2 7.1 0.6 0.0 Q4
69.7 15.1 14.5 11.4 20.9 6.9 28.8 2.0 26.8 1.9 7.0 0.5 0.0 2024 Q1
70.9 15.3 14.1 11.3 20.7 7.2 28.1 2.1 26.1 2.0 7.0 0.5 0.0 Q2
Medium-term lending
108.2 25.4 20.1 28.4 30.1 6.5 72.3 19.8 52.5 48.0 . 0.6 0.1 2022
113.1 25.9 22.0 29.5 30.9 6.2 70.1 18.6 51.5 46.9 . 0.6 0.1 2023 Q2
113.9 26.5 20.8 30.9 31.1 6.2 69.7 18.2 51.5 46.9 . 0.6 0.1 Q3
115.9 26.0 21.4 32.2 31.2 6.4 69.4 17.5 51.8 47.1 . 0.4 0.1 Q4
115.3 25.9 21.1 31.7 31.0 6.1 68.6 16.7 51.9 47.0 . 0.4 0.1 2024 Q1
115.3 25.4 21.1 31.9 31.0 6.1 67.7 16.2 51.6 46.6 . 0.4 0.1 Q2
Long-term lending
776.2 292.6 44.2 179.0 451.1 42.6 1,393.5 1,237.9 155.6 136.2 . 16.1 4.6 2022
782.8 298.0 41.9 180.3 452.3 42.1 1,399.9 1,244.4 155.5 136.8 . 16.3 4.6 2023 Q2
786.5 301.3 42.3 180.0 453.3 41.9 1,406.3 1,249.8 156.4 137.8 . 16.4 4.6 Q3
789.7 304.8 41.8 180.1 453.0 42.3 1,406.8 1,251.7 155.1 136.3 . 16.2 4.6 Q4
793.2 307.3 42.6 179.5 453.5 41.9 1,407.7 1,252.3 155.4 137.2 . 16.0 4.6 2024 Q1
797.5 311.0 41.9 179.2 454.7 41.7 1,411.6 1,255.9 155.7 137.8 . 16.0 4.6 Q2
Change during quarter *                                    Lending, total
+ 6.2 + 4.1 – 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 2023 Q2
+ 2.1 + 3.5 – 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.5 – 0.4 + 6.0 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 Q3
+ 3.4 + 2.7 – 0.4 + 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.3 – 1.3 – 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 Q4
+ 5.0 + 1.3 + 2.4 – 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 2024 Q1
+ 5.5 + 3.1 – 1.1 + 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 3.4 – 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 Q2
Short-term lending
– 1.0 + 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.6 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 –2023 Q2
– 2.3 – 0.3 – 1.0 + 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – Q3
– 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 Q4
+ 2.3 – 0.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.2 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 –2024 Q1
+ 1.3 + 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.7 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 2.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.4 . + 0.0 – 0.0 2023 Q2
+ 0.5 + 0.6 – 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.1 . + 0.1 – 0.0 Q3
+ 2.0 – 0.5 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.2 . – 0.2 + 0.0 Q4
– 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 0.8 + 0.1 – 0.1 . – – 0.0 2024 Q1
– 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 . + 0.0 – 0.0 Q2
Long-term lending
+ 4.9 + 3.4 – 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 4.8 + 4.3 + 0.5 + 0.7 . + 0.1 + 0.0 2023 Q2
+ 3.9 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 – 0.2 + 6.4 + 5.5 + 0.9 + 1.0 . + 0.0 + 0.0 Q3
+ 3.3 + 3.5 – 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.9 – 1.0 – 1.2 . – 0.1 – 0.0 Q4
+ 3.2 + 2.3 + 0.8 – 0.6 + 0.4 – 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.0 . – 0.2 – 0.1 2024 Q1
+ 4.3 + 3.4 – 0.7 + 1.6 + 1.0 – 0.2 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 0.4 + 0.8 . – 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
are not specially marked.  1 Excluding fiduciary loans.  2 Including sole proprietors. 3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
34•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
2021 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2022 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.6 35.9 18.5 3.9
2023 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 514.7 585.4 80.5 504.9 445.9 142.2 50.1 20.3 2.9
2023 Sep. 4,189.3 2,558.0 1,072.5 497.7 574.8 71.5 503.3 461.8 97.0 37.1 19.9 6.5
Oct. 4,198.0 2,544.5 1,086.5 510.9 575.6 74.6 501.0 455.4 111.6 37.3 19.9 6.3
Nov. 4,217.3 2,552.9 1,085.6 506.9 578.6 76.7 501.9 448.3 130.5 37.6 20.8 6.4
Dec. 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 514.7 585.4 80.5 504.9 445.9 142.2 50.1 20.3 2.9
2024 Jan. 4,216.3 2,496.8 1,128.7 540.7 588.0 84.3 503.8 439.4 151.4 54.5 20.4 4.9
Feb. 4,213.6 2,478.3 1,143.5 555.4 588.1 85.1 503.0 434.4 157.3 57.5 20.4 5.0
Mar. 4,239.0 2,479.2 1,168.8 578.6 590.2 87.3 502.9 430.3 160.7 60.2 20.3 4.5
Apr. 4,239.6 2,475.4 1,173.6 584.9 588.8 84.9 503.8 425.8 164.8 63.7 20.3 4.4
May 4,263.3 2,497.0 1,176.9 587.4 589.5 85.1 504.3 422.2 167.2 66.9 20.4 4.8
June 4,264.7 2,494.2 1,182.5 591.0 591.5 86.7 504.8 418.1 170.0 68.9 20.4 4.5
July 4,267.8 2,497.1 1,185.2 594.6 590.6 86.4 504.3 414.0 171.5 70.0 20.4 5.1
Aug. 4,323.3 2,548.5 1,191.1 601.4 589.7 86.1 503.6 411.2 172.5 74.5 21.0 6.5
Changes *
2022 +191.8 + 65.8 +143.4 +152.5 – 9.1 + 0.6 – 9.7 –27.5 +10.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6
2023 + 76.6 –172.0 +226.4 +198.4 +28.0 +29.9 – 1.9 –82.3 +104.5 + 3.5 + 1.8 – 1.0
2023 Sep. + 0.9 – 10.5 + 10.7 + 8.0 + 2.7 + 3.9 – 1.2 – 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.8
Oct. + 8.7 – 13.4 + 14.0 + 13.2 + 0.8 + 3.1 – 2.3 – 6.4 +14.6 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 19.3 + 8.5 – 1.0 – 4.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 – 7.1 +18.8 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.2
Dec. + 22.3 – 0.7 + 13.7 + 7.7 + 6.0 + 4.0 + 2.0 – 2.5 +11.8 + 1.2 – 0.4 – 3.5
2024 Jan. – 12.7 – 44.1 + 28.7 + 26.1 + 2.6 + 3.8 – 1.1 – 6.5 + 9.2 + 4.4 + 0.0 + 2.0
Feb. – 2.8 – 18.4 + 14.8 + 14.7 + 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.8 – 5.0 + 5.9 + 3.0 – 0.0 + 0.1
Mar. + 25.5 + 0.9 + 25.3 + 23.2 + 2.1 + 2.2 – 0.2 – 4.1 + 3.4 + 2.6 – 0.1 – 0.5
Apr. + 0.6 – 3.8 + 4.8 + 6.3 – 1.4 – 2.4 + 1.0 – 4.6 + 4.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 – 0.1
May + 23.7 + 21.7 + 3.1 + 2.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 3.5 + 2.4 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.4
June – 0.4 – 2.7 + 3.7 + 3.6 + 0.2 + 1.6 – 1.4 – 4.2 + 2.8 + 2.0 + 0.0 – 0.3
July + 3.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 3.6 – 0.9 – 0.3 – 0.6 – 4.0 + 1.5 + 1.1 – 0.0 + 0.6
Aug. + 23.5 + 19.5 + 5.8 + 6.8 – 0.9 – 0.3 – 0.6 – 2.9 + 1.0 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 1.4
Domestic government End of year or month *
2021 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2022 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
2023 286.9 91.2 190.5 105.6 84.9 23.3 61.6 0.9 4.4 26.6 1.4 0.2
2023 Sep. 304.9 94.2 205.6 119.5 86.2 23.9 62.2 0.9 4.2 26.4 1.8 3.8
Oct. 291.0 92.3 193.5 108.0 85.6 23.5 62.0 0.9 4.2 26.2 1.8 2.9
Nov. 285.2 92.5 187.5 103.7 83.8 22.1 61.7 0.9 4.4 26.0 1.8 2.2
Dec. 286.9 91.2 190.5 105.6 84.9 23.3 61.6 0.9 4.4 26.6 1.4 0.2
2024 Jan. 272.5 84.9 182.5 98.4 84.1 23.4 60.7 0.8 4.3 26.5 1.3 1.0
Feb. 276.6 87.8 183.7 101.4 82.4 21.0 61.3 0.8 4.3 26.7 1.3 1.2
Mar. 283.2 89.0 189.1 106.1 83.0 22.0 61.1 0.8 4.3 26.9 1.3 1.3
Apr. 266.2 81.6 179.4 99.9 79.5 18.7 60.8 0.8 4.4 26.9 1.3 0.3
May 274.8 92.1 177.5 98.4 79.1 18.4 60.7 0.7 4.5 27.0 1.3 0.8
June 284.5 95.3 184.1 104.9 79.2 19.4 59.8 0.7 4.4 26.8 1.3 0.9
July 264.1 81.0 178.2 99.2 79.1 19.4 59.6 0.6 4.2 26.6 1.3 0.9
Aug. 271.6 90.7 176.2 97.2 78.9 19.2 59.7 0.6 4.1 29.8 1.8 1.9
Changes *
2022 + 69.1 + 0.2 + 69.2 + 64.7 + 4.5 – 0.9 + 5.4 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.5 – 0.1 + 1.4
2023 + 6.5 + 8.7 – 1.7 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 – 2.2
2023 Sep. – 0.7 – 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.2 – 1.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.6
Oct. – 14.0 – 1.9 – 12.2 – 11.5 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.9
Nov. – 5.8 + 0.2 – 6.2 – 4.4 – 1.8 – 1.4 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.7
Dec. + 1.7 – 1.3 + 2.9 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.4 – 2.0
2024 Jan. – 14.4 – 6.3 – 8.0 – 7.2 – 0.8 + 0.1 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.8
Feb. + 4.1 + 2.9 + 1.2 + 3.0 – 1.8 – 2.4 + 0.6 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3
Mar. + 6.6 + 1.2 + 5.4 + 4.7 + 0.7 + 0.9 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.1
Apr. – 17.0 – 7.3 – 9.7 – 6.2 – 3.5 – 3.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 1.0
May + 8.6 + 10.5 – 1.9 – 1.5 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.5
June + 9.6 + 3.2 + 6.5 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 1.0 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1
July – 20.4 – 14.3 – 5.9 – 5.7 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.0 –
Aug. + 7.5 + 9.7 – 2.1 – 1.9 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 3.2 + 0.5 + 1.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities.
2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
35•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont´d)
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
2021 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2022 3,882.2 2,638.1 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
2023 3,942.1 2,449.6 909.6 409.1 500.5 57.2 443.3 445.0 137.9 23.5 19.0 2.7
2023 Sep. 3,884.4 2,463.8 866.9 378.3 488.6 47.5 441.1 460.9 92.9 10.7 18.1 2.7
Oct. 3,907.1 2,452.2 892.9 402.9 490.0 51.0 439.0 454.5 107.4 11.2 18.1 3.4
Nov. 3,932.1 2,460.5 898.0 403.2 494.8 54.5 440.3 447.5 126.1 11.6 19.0 4.2
Dec. 3,942.1 2,449.6 909.6 409.1 500.5 57.2 443.3 445.0 137.9 23.5 19.0 2.7
2024 Jan. 3,943.8 2,411.9 946.2 442.3 503.9 60.8 443.1 438.6 147.1 28.0 19.1 4.0
Feb. 3,937.0 2,390.6 959.8 454.0 505.8 64.1 441.7 433.6 153.0 30.9 19.0 3.8
Mar. 3,955.8 2,390.3 979.6 472.5 507.2 65.4 441.8 429.6 156.4 33.2 19.0 3.1
Apr. 3,973.4 2,393.8 994.2 485.0 509.2 66.2 443.0 425.0 160.5 36.8 19.0 4.1
May 3,988.5 2,404.8 999.4 489.0 510.4 66.7 443.7 421.5 162.7 39.9 19.1 4.1
June 3,980.3 2,398.9 998.4 486.1 512.3 67.3 445.0 417.4 165.6 42.1 19.2 3.7
July 4,003.7 2,416.1 1,007.0 495.4 511.6 66.9 444.6 413.4 167.2 43.4 19.2 4.3
Aug. 4,051.6 2,457.8 1,014.9 504.1 510.8 66.8 443.9 410.5 168.4 44.7 19.2 4.6
Changes *
2022 +122.7 + 65.6 + 74.2 + 87.8 –13.6 + 1.4 –15.1 –27.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.3
2023 + 70.0 –180.7 +228.1 +200.1 +28.1 +29.8 – 1.7 –81.2 +103.8 + 3.5 + 2.4 + 1.2
2023 Sep. + 1.6 – 9.6 + 10.5 + 7.9 + 2.6 + 2.7 – 0.1 – 5.6 + 6.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2
Oct. + 22.7 – 11.6 + 26.1 + 24.7 + 1.5 + 3.5 – 2.0 – 6.4 +14.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.7
Nov. + 25.1 + 8.3 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 1.3 – 7.0 +18.7 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.9
Dec. + 20.7 + 0.6 + 10.8 + 5.9 + 4.9 + 2.8 + 2.1 – 2.4 +11.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 – 1.5
2024 Jan. + 1.7 – 37.8 + 36.7 + 33.3 + 3.4 + 3.7 – 0.2 – 6.5 + 9.2 + 4.5 + 0.1 + 1.2
Feb. – 6.8 – 21.3 + 13.6 + 11.7 + 1.9 + 3.3 – 1.4 – 5.0 + 5.9 + 2.8 – 0.0 – 0.2
Mar. + 18.9 – 0.3 + 19.9 + 18.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 4.1 + 3.4 + 2.4 – 0.1 – 0.6
Apr. + 17.6 + 3.5 + 14.6 + 12.5 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.2 – 4.6 + 4.1 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 1.0
May + 15.0 + 11.3 + 5.0 + 3.9 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 3.5 + 2.3 + 3.1 + 0.1 – 0.0
June – 10.0 – 5.9 – 2.8 – 2.9 + 0.1 + 0.6 – 0.5 – 4.1 + 2.8 + 2.2 + 0.0 – 0.4
July + 23.5 + 17.2 + 8.6 + 9.3 – 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 4.0 + 1.6 + 1.4 – 0.0 + 0.6
Aug. + 16.0 + 9.8 + 7.9 + 8.7 – 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.7 – 2.9 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.4
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2021 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2022 1,193.5 783.4 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.6 1.9 13.5 1.5
2023 1,194.6 723.0 453.9 204.3 249.6 19.0 230.6 3.3 14.4 2.5 15.5 2.7
2023 Sep. 1,187.8 719.1 451.5 200.9 250.6 18.7 231.9 3.6 13.6 2.2 14.6 2.7
Oct. 1,209.6 727.6 464.5 215.8 248.7 19.2 229.5 3.5 14.0 2.3 14.6 3.4
Nov. 1,213.9 738.9 457.4 208.5 248.9 19.0 229.8 3.5 14.2 2.3 15.5 4.2
Dec. 1,194.6 723.0 453.9 204.3 249.6 19.0 230.6 3.3 14.4 2.5 15.5 2.7
2024 Jan. 1,203.8 714.6 471.4 223.4 248.0 19.1 228.9 3.3 14.5 2.5 15.4 4.0
Feb. 1,183.1 697.1 468.1 221.6 246.5 19.1 227.4 3.2 14.7 2.7 15.4 3.8
Mar. 1,191.0 697.0 476.0 229.7 246.3 19.3 227.0 3.2 14.7 2.8 15.2 3.1
Apr. 1,197.7 700.0 479.7 232.5 247.1 19.1 228.1 3.2 14.8 2.9 15.3 4.1
May 1,203.1 709.0 475.9 228.2 247.7 19.4 228.3 3.2 15.0 3.0 15.3 4.1
June 1,183.4 697.2 467.8 218.5 249.4 19.5 229.9 3.2 15.1 3.0 15.3 3.7
July 1,207.3 719.5 469.4 220.5 248.9 19.2 229.6 3.2 15.2 3.1 15.3 4.3
Aug. 1,216.5 724.4 473.7 225.8 247.9 19.1 228.8 3.2 15.3 3.3 15.3 4.6
Changes *
2022 + 56.2 + 17.7 + 38.8 + 52.1 –13.3 + 1.0 –14.3 – 0.9 + 0.6 – 0.5 + 1.0 + 1.3
2023 + 11.1 – 48.0 + 57.5 + 63.0 – 5.5 + 2.0 – 7.6 – 1.1 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.0 + 1.2
2023 Sep. – 1.3 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
Oct. + 21.8 + 8.5 + 13.0 + 14.9 – 1.9 + 0.5 – 2.4 – 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.7
Nov. + 4.4 + 11.2 – 7.0 – 7.2 + 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.4 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.9
Dec. – 8.7 – 4.4 – 4.3 – 4.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.5
2024 Jan. + 9.2 – 8.5 + 17.5 + 19.1 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.2
Feb. – 20.7 – 17.5 – 3.3 – 1.8 – 1.5 – 0.0 – 1.5 – 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
Mar. + 7.8 – 0.1 + 7.9 + 8.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.6
Apr. + 6.7 + 3.0 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 – 0.2 + 1.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0
May + 5.5 + 9.2 – 3.9 – 4.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0
June – 21.5 – 11.8 – 9.8 – 9.7 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.4
July + 23.9 + 22.3 + 1.5 + 2.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.6
Aug. + 9.3 + 5.0 + 4.3 + 5.3 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – + 0.4
4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
36•
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2
by creditor group by creditor group
Domestic households Domestic households
PeriodDeposits of
domestic
households
and
non-profit
institutions,
total Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individualsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tions Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individuals
End of year or month *
2021 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2022 2,688.7 1,854.7 1,809.9 307.3 1,342.5 160.1 44.8 284.8 268.7 31.2 200.5 37.1
2023 2,747.5 1,726.6 1,685.2 270.9 1,271.0 143.4 41.3 455.7 434.0 67.6 317.3 49.2
2024 Mar. 2,764.9 1,693.3 1,652.0 261.1 1,252.7 138.1 41.3 503.6 481.4 75.5 352.8 53.2
Apr. 2,775.8 1,693.8 1,652.7 265.5 1,251.1 136.1 41.1 514.5 492.2 76.4 361.7 54.1
May 2,785.4 1,695.8 1,653.6 266.0 1,251.8 135.9 42.2 523.6 500.8 77.5 368.6 54.7
June 2,796.9 1,701.7 1,660.3 262.2 1,262.0 136.1 41.4 530.5 507.8 78.3 374.5 55.0
July 2,796.4 1,696.6 1,655.6 267.6 1,253.6 134.4 41.0 537.7 515.0 79.4 380.0 55.5
Aug. 2,835.1 1,733.5 1,691.6 274.6 1,279.0 138.0 41.9 541.2 518.4 80.1 384.2 54.1
Changes *
2022 + 66.5 +48.0 +47.8 – 1.5 +54.1 – 4.7 + 0.1 +35.4 +31.4 +12.9 +17.2 +1.2
2023 + 58.9 –132.7 –129.2 –36.7 –76.8 –15.7 – 3.5 +170.6 +164.9 +36.1 +116.5 +12.2
2024 Mar. + 11.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 4.8 + 5.5 – 0.8 – 0.1 +11.9 +11.5 + 1.5 + 8.8 +1.2
Apr. + 10.9 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 4.3 – 1.7 – 2.0 – 0.2 +10.9 +10.8 + 0.8 + 8.6 +1.4
May + 9.5 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.7 – 0.2 + 1.0 + 9.0 + 8.5 + 1.1 + 6.8 +0.6
June + 11.5 + 5.9 + 6.7 – 3.8 +10.3 + 0.2 – 0.8 + 7.0 + 7.0 + 0.8 + 5.9 +0.3
July – 0.5 – 5.1 – 4.7 + 5.3 – 8.4 – 1.7 – 0.4 + 7.1 + 7.2 + 1.1 + 5.6 +0.5
Aug. + 6.6 + 4.8 + 3.9 + 1.6 + 2.5 – 0.2 + 0.9 + 3.6 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.6 +0.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional.Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
marked.  1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
€ billion
Deposits
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
PeriodDomestic
government,
total TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans
End of year or month *
2021 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2022 279.8 66.8 7.9 24.2 34.6 0.1 11.4 53.8 17.1 25.2 10.9 0.5 15.9
2023 286.9 52.0 9.8 6.7 35.5 0.0 11.6 51.9 19.7 21.9 9.9 0.4 15.1
2024 Mar. 283.2 49.9 10.6 4.0 35.3 0.0 11.9 63.1 20.8 32.5 9.4 0.4 15.0
Apr. 266.2 49.2 10.4 3.5 35.2 0.0 11.9 54.2 18.1 27.4 8.3 0.4 15.0
May 274.8 49.5 10.5 3.8 35.1 0.0 11.9 54.3 21.3 24.5 8.2 0.4 15.1
June 284.5 49.5 11.5 3.4 34.6 0.0 11.7 66.7 25.3 33.2 7.8 0.4 15.1
July 264.1 49.1 10.6 3.9 34.5 0.0 11.7 58.5 20.8 29.7 7.7 0.4 14.9
Aug. 271.6 49.1 10.5 4.1 34.4 0.0 11.7 60.4 22.4 29.6 8.0 0.4 18.1
Changes *
2022 +69.1 +23.0 +3.5 +20.9 –1.4 –0.0 –0.3 +6.4 –4.6 +11.3 –0.3 –0.1 +1.8
2023 + 6.5 –14.8 +1.9 –17.6 +0.9 –0.0 +0.2 –2.0 +2.9 –3.7 –1.0 –0.1 –0.1
2024 Mar. + 6.6 +0.5 +0.4 +0.0 –0.0 +0.0 +0.2 +5.2 –0.3 +5.7 –0.2 +0.0 +0.0
Apr. –17.0 –0.8 –0.2 –0.5 –0.1 –0.0 –0.0 –8.9 –2.7 –5.0 –1.2 +0.0 +0.0
May + 8.6 +0.3 +0.1 +0.3 –0.1 +0.0 –0.0 +0.1 +3.1 –2.9 –0.1 –0.0 +0.1
June + 9.6 –0.1 +1.0 –0.4 –0.6 –0.0 –0.2 +12.4 +4.1 +8.7 –0.4 –0.0 +0.0
July –20.4 –0.4 –0.8 +0.5 –0.1 –0.0 –0.0 –8.2 –4.6 –3.5 –0.1 +0.0 –0.2
Aug. + 7.5 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 –0.1 +0.0 –0.0 +1.9 +1.6 –0.0 +0.3 –0.0 +3.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and DeutscheTelekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”.
Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date
are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
37•
IV. Banks
Savings deposits  3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year  2
of which:
Domestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsup to and
including
1 year Totalup to and
including
2 yearsmore than
2 years TotalDomestic
householdsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsBank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)  5Liabilities
arising
from repos Period
End of year or month *
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 –2021
16.0 67.2 217.5 10.6 206.9 526.8 521.8 5.1 22.4 6.8 3.1 –2022
21.6 204.7 251.0 38.2 212.7 441.8 438.4 3.4 123.5 21.0 3.5 –2023
22.2 242.8 260.8 46.1 214.8 426.3 423.2 3.2 141.7 30.5 3.7 –2024 Mar.
22.3 252.5 262.1 47.1 215.0 421.8 418.7 3.1 145.6 33.8 3.8 – Apr.
22.8 260.9 262.7 47.3 215.4 418.3 415.2 3.1 147.7 36.9 3.8 – May
22.8 267.6 262.9 47.8 215.1 414.2 411.2 3.0 150.4 39.0 3.8 – June
22.7 275.0 262.7 47.7 215.0 410.2 407.3 3.0 152.0 40.3 3.9 – July
22.9 278.3 262.9 47.7 215.2 407.3 404.4 2.9 153.1 41.4 3.9 – Aug.
Changes *
+ 4.0 + 35.7 – 0.3 +0.5 – 0.8 –26.1 –25.0 –1.1 + 9.2 +0.7 + 0.3 –2022
+ 5.7 +137.0 +33.6 +27.8 + 5.8 –80.1 –78.4 –1.7 +101.1 +2.9 + 0.4 –2023
+ 0.4 + 10.3 + 1.6 +1.1 + 0.5 – 4.1 – 4.0 –0.1 + 3.4 +2.3 + 0.0 –2024 Mar.
+ 0.1 + 9.7 + 1.2 +1.1 + 0.2 – 4.5 – 4.5 –0.1 + 4.0 +3.3 + 0.1 – Apr.
+ 0.5 + 8.3 + 0.7 +0.2 + 0.4 – 3.5 – 3.5 –0.0 + 2.1 +3.0 + 0.0 – May
+ 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.2 +0.5 – 0.3 – 4.1 – 4.0 –0.1 + 2.7 +2.2 + 0.0 – June
– 0.1 + 7.3 – 0.2 –0.1 – 0.1 – 4.0 – 3.9 –0.1 + 1.6 +1.3 + 0.0 – July
+ 0.2 + 3.4 + 0.2 +0.0 + 0.2 – 2.9 – 2.8 –0.0 + 1.1 +1.1 + 0.0 – Aug.
registered debt securities.  2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Table IV.12).  3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsofootnote 2).  4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2,4Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 –2021
80.0 49.2 12.5 13.8 4.4 0.0 79.2 8.3 44.9 25.5 0.6 –2022
83.3 45.6 19.8 14.1 3.8 0.0 99.6 16.1 57.2 25.3 1.0 –2023
73.1 35.4 20.0 14.1 3.7 0.0 97.1 22.2 49.6 24.2 1.0 –2024 Mar.
71.6 34.9 19.1 13.9 3.7 0.0 91.2 18.2 49.8 22.1 1.0 – Apr.
77.8 40.6 19.8 13.7 3.7 0.0 93.2 19.7 50.3 22.1 1.1 – May
72.8 36.2 19.3 13.7 3.7 0.0 95.5 22.3 49.0 23.2 1.0 – June
67.9 31.9 18.8 13.6 3.6 0.0 88.6 17.7 46.8 23.2 0.9 – July
76.4 39.3 19.8 13.6 3.6 0.0 85.8 18.4 43.7 22.9 0.8 – Aug.
Changes *
+10.2 +0.9 + 7.9 +1.3 + 0.1 – +29.6 +0.3 +24.5 +4.9 – 0.2 –2022
+3.2 –3.8 + 7.3 +0.3 – 0.6 – +20.2 +7.8 +12.4 –0.3 + 0.3 –2023
–4.4 –4.0 – 0.1 –0.2 – 0.0 – + 5.3 +5.1 – 0.9 +1.1 – 0.0 –2024 Mar.
–1.5 –0.4 – 0.9 –0.1 + 0.0 – – 5.8 –4.0 + 0.2 –2.1 + 0.0 – Apr.
+6.2 +5.7 + 0.7 –0.2 + 0.0 – + 2.0 +1.5 + 0.4 –0.1 + 0.1 – May
–5.0 –4.4 – 0.5 –0.0 – 0.0 – + 2.3 +2.6 – 1.3 +1.1 – 0.1 – June
–5.0 –4.3 – 0.6 –0.0 – 0.0 – – 6.8 –4.6 – 2.2 +0.1 – 0.2 – July
+8.5 +7.5 + 1.1 –0.0 – 0.0 – – 2.8 +0.7 – 3.1 –0.3 – 0.1 – Aug.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Federal Railways Fund,
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund,
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund.  2 Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities.  3 Including deposits under savings and loan
contracts.  4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
38•
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months'
noticeat more than 3
months' notice
Period Total Total Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeMemo
item:
Interest
credited
on
savings
depositsnon-banks,
total Totalof which:
With
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsforeign
non-banks
End of year or month *
2021 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 1.5 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2022 538.5 533.2 510.3 254.2 22.9 14.2 5.3 4.8 1.4 34.9 34.6 20.8 0.2
2023 450.5 445.9 395.3 187.1 50.6 43.0 4.6 3.8 2.6 143.2 142.2 35.5 1.0
2024 Apr. 430.2 425.8 367.7 176.3 58.0 51.0 4.5 3.6 0.1 166.0 164.8 39.5 1.1
May 426.7 422.2 363.7 174.7 58.6 51.5 4.5 3.5 0.1 168.4 167.2 40.0 1.1
June 422.5 418.1 359.2 172.6 58.9 51.9 4.4 3.5 0.2 171.1 170.0 40.6 1.2
July 418.4 414.0 355.0 171.0 59.0 52.1 4.4 3.4 0.2 172.6 171.5 41.1 1.2
Aug. 415.5 411.2 352.1 170.1 59.1 52.1 4.4 3.4 0.2 173.7 172.5 41.6 1.2
Changes *
2022 –28.1 –27.5 –26.4 –14.6 –1.2 –0.6 –0.6 –0.6 . +10.2 +10.1 +1.3 +0.1
2023 –83.0 –82.3 –110.0 –52.3 +27.7 +28.8 –0.7 –1.1 . +105.2 +104.5 +12.2 +0.7
2024 Apr. –4.6 –4.6 –5.5 –2.1 +0.9 +1.0 –0.0 –0.0 . +4.2 +4.2 +0.7 +0.0
May –3.6 –3.5 –4.0 –1.7 +0.5 +0.5 –0.0 –0.1 . +2.4 +2.4 +0.5 +0.0
June –4.2 –4.2 –4.5 –2.1 +0.3 +0.4 –0.0 –0.0 . +2.8 +2.8 +0.6 +0.0
July –4.1 –4.0 –4.2 –1.6 +0.1 +0.2 –0.0 –0.1 . +1.5 +1.5 +0.5 +0.0
Aug. –2.9 –2.9 –2.9 –0.9 +0.1 +0.1 –0.0 –0.0 . +1.1 +1.0 +0.5 +0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified as timedeposits.  2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
basic rate of interest.  3 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
securities.
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
of which:
with maturities ofNon-negotiable
bearer debt
securities and
money market
paper  6 Subordinated
up to
and including 1 yearmore than 1 year up to
and including 2 years
Period TotalFloating
rate
bonds  1Zero
coupon
bonds  1,2Foreign
currency
bonds  3,4Certifi-
cates
of
deposit Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5more
than
2 years Totalof which:
with
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsnegotiable
debt
securitiesnon-
negotiable
debt
securities
End of year or month *
2021 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2022 1,231.5 92.8 15.0 307.8 88.6 98.6 1.4 26.6 3.4 1,106.4 0.8 0.7 37.8 0.1
2023 1,327.5 85.8 15.7 312.6 101.2 122.9 1.3 43.7 3.4 1,160.9 0.0 0.0 37.5 0.1
2024 Apr. 1,355.4 95.1 16.7 304.7 75.2 93.0 1.4 53.0 3.8 1,209.4 0.0 0.0 38.1 0.1
May 1,357.0 96.8 16.3 303.2 73.6 91.1 1.5 53.1 3.9 1,212.8 0.0 0.0 38.6 0.1
June 1,369.3 95.9 15.9 320.9 90.4 107.3 1.5 53.2 3.7 1,208.9 0.1 0.0 38.7 0.1
July 1,351.5 97.4 16.1 303.6 79.9 96.3 1.5 53.4 3.8 1,201.9 0.1 0.0 38.7 0.1
Aug. 1,352.8 98.2 14.7 301.0 85.8 99.2 1.5 49.5 3.9 1,204.0 0.1 0.0 38.6 0.1
Changes *
2022 +59.1 –12.7 +1.1 –23.6 –9.9 –8.3 – 0.5 +8.5 –1.1 +58.9 –0.1 +0.1 +3.5 –
2023 +97.0 –6.3 +1.4 +4.4 +11.4 +24.5 – 0.0 +17.7 +0.6 +54.8 +0.0 +0.1 –0.3 –
2024 Apr. – 7.0 +2.0 –0.6 –5.7 –18.5 –21.0 + 0.0 +3.9 +0.1 +10.0 +0.0 +0.0 +0.3 –
May + 1.6 +1.7 –0.3 –1.5 –1.6 –2.4 + 0.0 +0.6 +0.1 +3.4 –0.0 –0.0 +0.4 –0.0
June +12.3 –0.9 –0.5 +17.7 +16.8 +16.1 – 0.0 +0.1 –0.2 –3.9 +0.1 – +0.1 –
July –17.8 +1.6 +0.2 –17.3 –10.5 –11.0 + 0.1 +0.2 +0.1 –7.0 –0.0 –0.0 –0.0 –
Aug. + 0.2 +0.8 –0.4 –3.7 +4.5 +3.0 – 0.0 –3.8 +0.1 +1.1 +0.0 +0.0 –0.1 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies.  2 Issue value when
floated.  3 Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreigncurrencies.  4 Bonds denominated in non-euro area currencies.  5 Negotiable bearer debt
securities and money market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%.
6 Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see
also Table IV.10, footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
39•
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks
(MFIs)  6Deposits of non-
banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans
End of
year/monthNum-
ber
of
associ-
ationsBalance
sheet
total  1Credit
bal-
ances
and
loans
(ex-
cluding
building
loans)  2Building
loans  3Bank
debt
secur-
ities  4Loans
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsInterim
and
bridging
loansOther
building
loansSecur-
ities (in-
cluding
Treasury
bills
and
Treasury
discount
paper)  5Deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight
and time
depositsDeposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight and
time de-
posits  7Bearer
debt
secur-
ities
out-
stand-
ingCapital
(includ-
ing pub-
lished
re-
serves)  8Memo
item:
New
con-
tracts
entered
into in
year or
month  9
All building and loan associations
2023 15 259.5 25.6 0.1 15.9 15.7 135.0 41.3 21.8 1.2 36.8 183.2 10.7 6.6 13.0 98.2
2024 June 14 258.6 23.8 0.2 15.7 18.3 134.1 41.8 20.5 0.9 36.7 180.4 11.9 7.6 13.2 6.3
July 14 259.6 24.0 0.2 15.7 18.9 133.9 41.7 20.8 0.9 37.9 179.8 12.2 7.6 13.2 6.4
Aug. 14 260.3 24.4 0.2 15.6 19.3 133.8 41.9 20.6 0.8 37.2 179.5 13.8 7.6 13.2 6.4
Private building and Ioan associations
2024 June 9 183.1 10.5 0.2 9.0 12.2 103.8 35.6 8.9 0.3 34.0 115.6 11.4 7.6 9.0 4.0
July 9 184.1 10.9 0.2 9.0 12.5 103.6 35.7 9.2 0.3 34.9 115.2 11.9 7.6 9.0 4.0
Aug. 9 184.9 11.4 0.2 9.0 12.8 103.5 35.8 9.2 0.2 34.2 115.0 13.5 7.6 9.0 4.1
Public building and Ioan associations
2024 June 5 75.5 13.3 0.0 6.7 6.1 30.2 6.2 11.6 0.6 2.7 64.7 0.5 – 4.2 2.3
July 5 75.5 13.1 0.0 6.7 6.3 30.3 6.1 11.6 0.6 3.0 64.6 0.3 – 4.2 2.4
Aug. 5 75.4 13.0 0.0 6.6 6.6 30.3 6.1 11.4 0.6 3.0 64.5 0.3 – 4.2 2.3
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Capital promised Capital disbursed Changes in deposits
under savings and
loan contracts AllocationsDisbursement
commitments
outstanding at
end of periodInterest and
repayments
received on
building loans  11
Deposits under
savings and
loan contractsLoans under
savings and
loan contracts  10
PeriodAmounts
paid into
savings
and
loan ac-
counts  10Interest
credited
on
deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsRepay-
ments
of
deposits
under
cancelled
savings
and
loan
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Net
alloca-
tions  12 Total Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loans Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loansNewly
granted
interim
and
bridging
loans
and
other
building
loans Totalof
which:
Under
alloc-
ated
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Repay-
ments
during
quarterMemo
item:
Housing
bonuses
re-
ceived  13
All building and loan associations
2023 27.0 1.9 6.4 52.0 40.3 49.9 25.9 4.2 8.7 4.4 15.3 12.6 7.3 4.9 4.1 0.2
2024 June 2.1 0.1 0.5 4.4 3.3 4.0 2.1 0.3 0.8 0.3 1.1 12.2 7.5 0.5 1.1 0.0
July 2.1 0.0 0.6 4.6 3.5 4.5 2.2 0.4 1.0 0.4 1.3 11.9 7.4 0.5 . 0.0
Aug. 2.1 0.0 0.5 4.4 3.3 4.0 2.0 0.4 0.9 0.4 1.1 11.9 7.5 0.5 . 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2024 June 1.3 0.0 0.2 3.0 2.2 2.7 1.4 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.9 7.9 4.1 0.3 0.7 0.0
July 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.2 2.3 3.1 1.5 0.3 0.7 0.4 1.0 7.7 4.1 0.4 . 0.0
Aug. 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.9 2.1 2.7 1.3 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.9 7.6 4.1 0.3 . 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2024 June 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.5 1.1 1.3 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.3 3.4 0.1 0.3 0.0
July 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.5 1.2 1.4 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.3 3.3 0.1 . 0.0
Aug. 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.4 1.2 1.3 0.6 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.2 3.4 0.1 . 0.0
* Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures for
the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 See Table IV.2,
footnote 1.  2 Including claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from
registered debt securities and central bank credit balances.  3 Loans under savings and
loan contracts and interim and bridging loans.  4 Including money market paper and
small amounts of other securities issued by banks.  5 Including equalisation claims.
6 Including liabilities to building and loan associations.  7 Including small amounts of
savings deposits.  8 Including participation rights capital and fund for general bankingrisks. 9 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
new contracts.  10 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital disbursed".  11 Including housing
bonuses credited.  12 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans.  13 The amounts already
credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into
savings and loan accounts" and "Interest and repayments received on building loans".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2021 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2022 47 202 1,625.5 461.8 447.4 315.6 131.8 14.4 516.7 447.7 9.7 437.9 69.0 647.0 513.3
2023 47 200 1,544.2 457.5 437.7 304.4 133.3 19.8 507.9 421.0 5.4 415.6 86.9 578.8 417.0
2023 Sep. 48 201 1,680.8 488.5 468.9 315.9 153.1 19.6 496.6 420.9 6.4 414.5 75.7 695.7 513.6
Oct. 48 201 1,693.0 477.0 457.2 306.9 150.3 19.8 499.7 420.5 6.0 414.5 79.2 716.3 529.9
Nov. 47 200 1,622.2 468.5 448.3 304.7 143.6 20.2 507.9 422.9 5.7 417.2 85.0 645.8 462.2
Dec. 47 200 1,544.2 457.5 437.7 304.4 133.3 19.8 507.9 421.0 5.4 415.6 86.9 578.8 417.0
2024 Jan. 47 200 1,580.2 471.1 450.1 310.0 140.1 21.0 518.6 425.0 5.1 419.9 93.6 590.5 402.9
Feb. 47 200 1,620.1 486.0 464.7 322.5 142.2 21.3 517.5 424.8 5.0 419.9 92.7 616.7 425.7
Mar. 47 199 1,634.7 506.6 483.8 327.2 156.6 22.8 523.9 431.4 5.1 426.3 92.6 604.1 428.8
Apr. 47 199 1,668.0 499.4 474.9 325.7 149.3 24.4 520.3 432.4 4.8 427.5 88.0 648.2 477.1
May 47 199 1,647.4 504.5 482.0 330.9 151.1 22.4 528.0 440.3 4.9 435.5 87.7 614.9 439.2
June 47 198 1,612.4 498.6 478.8 329.8 148.9 19.9 538.5 449.1 4.9 444.2 89.3 575.3 421.0
Changes *
2022 –4 –5 +124.1 –13.3 –14.3 +17.8 –32.1 +1.0 +6.7 +17.5 –3.2 +20.6 –10.8 +108.1 +103.0
2023 ±0 –2 –83.7 –2.7 –8.1 –12.1 +4.0 +5.4 –1.4 –20.2 –4.4 –15.8 +18.8 – 68.1 –94.4
2023 Oct. ±0 – +12.3 –11.0 –11.2 –8.9 –2.3 +0.2 +4.4 +0.7 –0.4 +1.2 +3.6 + 20.8 +16.6
Nov. –1 –1 –69.3 –6.3 –6.8 –2.2 –4.5 +0.5 +14.6 +8.2 –0.3 +8.5 +6.4 – 69.0 –66.3
Dec. ±0 – –77.5 –10.0 –9.6 +0.3 –9.9 –0.4 +2.6 +0.5 –0.3 +0.8 +2.1 – 67.5 –44.7
2024 Jan. ±0 – +35.3 +12.4 +11.3 +5.6 +5.6 +1.1 +5.7 –0.4 –0.3 –0.1 +6.1 + 11.1 –15.1
Feb. ±0 – +39.9 +15.1 +14.8 +12.5 +2.3 +0.3 –1.0 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 –0.9 + 26.2 +22.8
Mar. ±0 –1 +14.4 +20.6 +19.1 +4.7 +14.4 +1.5 +6.2 +6.3 +0.2 +6.2 –0.1 – 12.6 + 3.0
Apr. ±0 – +32.9 –7.5 –9.2 –1.5 –7.7 +1.6 –5.4 –0.6 –0.3 –0.3 –4.8 + 43.7 +48.1
May ±0 – –19.9 +6.2 +8.2 +5.2 +3.0 –2.0 +10.8 +10.8 +0.0 +10.7 +0.0 – 32.6 –37.5
June ±0 –1 –35.7 –7.1 –4.5 –1.1 –3.4 –2.6 +6.6 +5.4 +0.1 +5.3 +1.2 – 40.3 –18.8
Foreign subsidiaries 8                                           End of year or month *
2021 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2022 11 32 256.7 61.5 52.0 20.5 31.4 9.5 145.8 124.5 13.3 111.2 21.3 49.4 0.0
2023 12 31 264.0 74.5 63.9 25.7 38.2 10.6 146.4 125.2 11.9 113.4 21.1 43.1 0.0
2023 Mar. 11 32 253.9 62.2 51.7 20.7 31.0 10.5 146.5 126.2 13.3 112.9 20.2 45.2 0.0
Apr. 11 31 250.9 64.4 53.3 22.4 30.9 11.1 145.3 125.6 13.0 112.6 19.8 41.2 0.0
May 11 31 250.9 59.3 48.8 21.5 27.2 10.5 146.2 126.3 12.8 113.5 19.9 45.5 0.0
June 12 32 253.3 64.2 52.8 22.4 30.4 11.5 146.6 126.7 12.7 113.9 19.9 42.5 0.0
July 12 31 253.4 63.6 52.2 23.0 29.3 11.4 147.4 126.9 12.9 114.1 20.5 42.4 0.0
Aug. 12 31 252.8 62.8 52.2 21.9 30.3 10.6 146.0 125.6 12.7 112.9 20.4 44.1 0.0
Sep. 12 31 256.2 66.4 56.0 25.0 31.0 10.5 146.7 125.8 12.3 113.5 20.9 43.0 0.0
Oct. 12 31 257.4 65.8 56.0 24.5 31.5 9.8 146.8 126.2 12.0 114.2 20.6 44.8 0.0
Nov. 12 31 259.9 66.9 57.7 23.6 34.1 9.3 147.8 126.9 12.1 114.8 20.9 45.2 0.0
Dec. 12 31 264.0 74.5 63.9 25.7 38.2 10.6 146.4 125.2 11.9 113.4 21.1 43.1 0.0
Changes *
2022 –1 –3 +6.5 +8.2 +5.2 –0.2 +5.6 +2.8 +5.0 +6.9 +0.7 +6.3 –1.9 – 6.5 ± 0.0
2023 +1 –1 +8.7 +13.5 +12.2 +5.2 +7.1 +1.2 +1.5 +1.7 –1.4 +3.1 –0.2 – 6.3 ± 0.0
2023 Apr. – –1 –2.7 +2.2 +1.6 +1.7 –0.1 +0.6 –0.8 –0.4 –0.3 –0.1 –0.5 – 4.1 ± 0.0
May – – –1.5 –5.7 –4.9 –0.8 –4.1 –0.7 –0.1 –0.3 –0.2 –0.0 +0.1 + 4.3 ± 0.0
June +1 +1 +3.2 +5.3 +4.2 +0.9 +3.3 +1.0 +0.9 +0.9 –0.0 +0.9 +0.0 – 3.0 ± 0.0
July – –1 +0.6 –0.5 –0.4 +0.6 –1.0 –0.1 +1.2 +0.7 +0.1 +0.5 +0.6 – 0.1 ± 0.0
Aug. – – –1.2 –1.0 –0.2 –1.0 +0.8 –0.9 –1.8 –1.7 –0.2 –1.5 –0.1 + 1.7 ± 0.0
Sep. – – +2.2 +3.2 +3.5 +3.0 +0.5 –0.2 –0.0 –0.5 –0.4 –0.1 +0.5 – 1.0 ± 0.0
Oct. – – +1.4 –0.6 +0.1 –0.4 +0.5 –0.7 +0.2 +0.5 –0.3 +0.8 –0.3 + 1.8 ± 0.0
Nov. – – +3.8 +1.5 +2.0 –0.9 +2.9 –0.4 +1.8 +1.5 +0.1 +1.5 +0.3 + 0.4 ± 0.0
Dec. – – +4.5 +7.7 +6.3 +2.1 +4.2 +1.4 –1.1 –1.3 –0.2 –1.1 +0.3 – 2.0 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from
the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are alwaysto be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 2021
943.4 573.6 435.2 138.5 369.8 10.4 8.9 1.5 359.4 61.7 63.1 557.4 512.9 2022
943.5 554.5 422.6 131.9 389.0 10.6 9.5 1.2 378.4 64.1 66.1 470.5 418.3 2023
963.9 571.6 418.7 152.9 392.3 11.0 9.6 1.4 381.3 84.4 66.0 566.5 513.9 2023 Sep.
958.1 572.8 421.2 151.6 385.3 11.0 9.5 1.4 374.3 82.9 66.0 586.0 530.5 Oct.
958.5 561.4 414.6 146.8 397.0 11.5 10.3 1.2 385.5 81.2 65.9 516.6 463.3 Nov.
943.5 554.5 422.6 131.9 389.0 10.6 9.5 1.2 378.4 64.1 66.1 470.5 418.3 Dec.
967.4 573.0 433.0 140.0 394.4 11.0 9.8 1.2 383.4 88.2 69.1 455.4 404.8 2024 Jan.
984.5 586.5 443.4 143.1 398.0 10.7 9.7 1.0 387.3 88.5 69.2 477.9 427.6 Feb.
997.2 587.3 442.4 144.9 409.9 11.3 10.3 1.0 398.6 86.3 69.4 481.8 431.6 Mar.
978.9 576.4 435.8 140.6 402.5 11.1 10.1 1.0 391.4 88.0 69.2 531.8 479.3 Apr.
998.2 591.9 449.7 142.1 406.3 14.8 13.9 1.0 391.5 85.8 69.0 494.4 443.4 May
986.4 578.3 450.5 127.8 408.0 14.2 13.2 1.0 393.8 81.7 69.5 474.7 423.1 June
Changes *
– 6.2 –64.2 –22.2 –42.0 + 58.0 + 2.3 + 2.6 – 0.3 +55.7 – 6.3 +11.8 +119.0 + 109.5 2022
+ 1.2 –17.0 –13.8 – 3.1 + 18.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 – 0.3 +16.9 + 3.9 + 3.0 – 88.0 – 94.5 2023
– 5.2 +1.7 +2.5 –0.8 – 6.9 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 6.9 – 1.3 +0.0 + 19.4 + 16.6 2023 Oct.
+ 3.1 –8.9 –6.6 –2.3 +12.0 + 0.5 + 0.8 – 0.3 +11.5 – 0.2 –0.2 – 69.3 – 67.1 Nov.
–13.7 –5.9 +8.4 –14.3 – 7.9 – 0.9 – 0.9 + 0.0 – 7.0 –16.6 +0.2 – 46.7 – 45.0 Dec.
+22.3 +17.2 +10.4 +6.8 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 4.8 +23.5 +3.0 – 15.1 – 13.5 2024 Jan.
+17.2 +13.7 +10.5 +3.2 + 3.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 +0.1 + 22.5 + 22.8 Feb.
+12.7 +0.7 –1.0 +1.8 +11.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 +11.4 – 2.3 +0.1 + 4.0 + 4.0 Mar.
–18.8 –11.4 –6.6 –4.8 – 7.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 7.3 + 1.3 –0.2 + 50.0 + 47.7 Apr.
+20.5 +16.6 +13.9 +2.7 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 3.7 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 1.5 –0.2 – 37.4 – 35.9 May
–13.2 –14.7 +0.7 –15.5 + 1.5 – 0.6 – 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.2 – 4.8 +0.5 – 19.7 – 20.3 June
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries 8
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 2021
189.4 67.5 38.6 28.9 122.0 6.9 4.6 2.3 115.1 13.5 20.1 33.7 0.0 2022
195.9 76.0 51.2 24.8 119.9 6.4 4.0 2.4 113.4 12.1 20.8 35.3 0.0 2023
186.6 71.2 42.2 29.1 115.4 6.8 4.3 2.5 108.5 12.3 20.3 34.8 0.0 2023 Mar.
183.5 71.0 44.0 27.0 112.5 6.9 4.5 2.5 105.6 12.2 20.2 35.0 0.0 Apr.
183.9 71.2 43.6 27.6 112.8 6.9 4.4 2.5 105.9 12.1 20.6 34.3 0.0 May
185.6 71.9 45.4 26.5 113.7 6.6 4.2 2.4 107.1 10.6 20.5 36.6 0.0 June
187.9 72.3 47.0 25.3 115.6 6.8 4.4 2.4 108.8 10.5 20.5 34.4 0.0 July
185.5 70.6 46.0 24.7 114.8 6.6 4.2 2.4 108.2 10.3 20.6 36.4 0.0 Aug.
188.2 74.1 49.1 25.1 114.1 6.7 4.3 2.4 107.4 11.3 20.5 36.0 0.0 Sep.
189.3 73.1 48.3 24.8 116.2 6.5 4.1 2.4 109.7 11.6 20.8 35.8 0.0 Oct.
192.1 73.7 48.4 25.3 118.4 6.5 4.1 2.4 111.8 11.6 20.8 35.4 0.0 Nov.
195.9 76.0 51.2 24.8 119.9 6.4 4.0 2.4 113.4 12.1 20.8 35.3 0.0 Dec.
Changes *
+ 7.7 + 1.4 + 5.6 – 4.2 + 6.3 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 6.7 – 2.9 – 0.2 + 2.2 ± 0.0 2022
+ 7.6 + 8.9 +12.6 – 3.8 – 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.1 – 0.8 – 1.4 + 0.7 + 1.8 ± 0.0 2023
– 2.7 –0.1 +1.8 –1.9 – 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 2.7 – 0.1 –0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 2023 Apr.
– 0.6 –0.3 –0.4 +0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.0 +0.4 – 1.2 ± 0.0 May
+ 2.3 +1.0 +1.8 –0.9 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 1.6 – 1.6 –0.1 + 2.5 ± 0.0 June
+ 2.7 +0.6 +1.6 –1.1 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 – 0.0 +0.0 – 2.1 ± 0.0 July
– 2.9 –1.9 –1.0 –0.8 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.2 +0.1 + 1.8 ± 0.0 Aug.
+ 1.9 +3.2 +3.1 +0.1 – 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 1.4 + 1.0 –0.1 – 0.7 ± 0.0 Sep.
+ 1.2 –1.0 –0.8 –0.2 + 2.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.2 +0.3 – 0.2 ± 0.0 Oct.
+ 3.7 +0.9 +0.1 +0.8 + 2.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.1 +0.0 – 0.0 ± 0.0 Nov.
+ 4.1 +2.4 +2.8 –0.4 + 1.7 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.4 +0.0 + 0.0 ± 0.0 Dec.
and other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.
4 Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of
negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Includingsubordinated liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.  8 The collection of data
regarding foreign subsidiaries matured in 12/2023.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 3,656.9 0.1
2022 16,843.0 168.4 168.0 195.6 28.1 0.0
2023 16,261.6 162.6 162.3 170.5 8.2 0.0
p 2024 July 16,253.3 162.5 162.2 169.3 7.1 0.0
Aug. . . . . . .
p Sep. 16,326.9 163.3 162.9 ... ... ...
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
2022 4,664,630 27.7 46,646 46,512 54,848 8,337 5
2023 4,483,853 27.6 44,839 44,709 47,008 2,299 0
p 2024 July 4,495,004 27.7 44,950 44,821 46,564 1,742 0
Aug. . . . . . . .
p Sep. 4,450,146 27.3 44,501 44,375 ... ... ...
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2022 9,814 7,396 3,216 14,465 8,295 117 2,471
2023 9,282 7,417 3,170 14,061 8,178 148 2,118
2024 July 9,356 7,660 2,870 14,292 8,316 138 2,022
Aug. . . . . . . .
Sep. 9,369 7,395 2,729 14,162 8,332 132 2,067
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2022 3,352,177 12,609 566,227 543,694 116,094
2023 3,447,513 968 420,839 455,493 125,531
2024 July 3,532,041 1,276 401,017 421,384 122,530
Aug. . . . . .
Sep. 3,527,175 1,643 362,289 412,980 127,199
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 5 of the
Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum
reserve requirements (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies,
pursuant to Article 6(1)(a)).  3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2%between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at
1%. 4 Article 6(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the
application of minimum reserve requirements.  5 Average credit balances of credit
institutions at national central banks.  6 Average credit balances less required reserves
after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.  7 Required reserves after deduction of the
lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2015 Dec. 9 – 0.30 0.05 – 0.30 2023 Feb. 8 2.50 3.00 – 3.25 2009 Jan. 1 1.62 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Mar. 22 3.00 3.50 – 3.75 July 1 0.12
2016 Mar. 16 – 0.40 0.00 – 0.25 May 10 3.25 3.75 – 4.00 2016 July 1 – 0.88
June 21 3.50 4.00 – 4.25 2011 July 1 0.37
2019 Sep. 18 – 0.50 0.00 – 0.25 Aug. 2 3.75 4.25 – 4.50 2023 Jan. 1 1.62
Sep. 20 4.00 4.50 – 4.75 2012 Jan. 1 0.12 July 1 3.12
2022 July 27 0.00 0.50 – 0.75
Sep. 14 0.75 1.25 – 1.50 2024 June 12 3.75 4.25 – 4.50 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13 2024 Jan. 1 3.62
Nov. 2 1.50 2.00 – 2.25 Sep. 18 2 3.50 3.65 – 3.90 July 1 – 0.38 July 1 3.37
Dec. 21 2.00 2.50 – 2.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.  2 Effective 18 September 2024, the spread
between the rate on the main refinancing operations and the deposit facility rate will
be reduced to 15 basis points. The spread between the rate on the marginal lendingfacility and the rate on the main refinancing operations will remain unchanged at 25
basis points.
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2024 Sep. 11 2 053 2 053 4.25 – – – 7
Sep. 18 1 935 1 935 3.65 – – – 7
Sep. 25 12 448 12 448 3.65 – – – 7
Oct. 2 8 146 8 146 3.65 – – – 7
Oct. 9 6 840 6 840 3.65 – – – 7
Oct. 16 9 563 9 563 3,65 – – – 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2024 Jun. 26 5 877 5 877 4.20 – – − 91
Jul. 31 1 881 1 881 2      … – – − 91
Aug. 28 2 030 2 030 2      … – – − 91
Sep. 25 6 823 6 823 2      … – – − 84
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month
% per annum
EURIBOR ®  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2024 Feb. 3.907 3.878 3.868 3.923 3.901 3.671
Mar. 3.907 3.873 3.853 3.923 3.895 3.718
Apr. 3.908 3.868 3.853 3.885 3.838 3.703
May 3.907 3.881 3.816 3.813 3.787 3.680
June 3.749 3.681 3.635 3.725 3.715 3.650
July 3.663 3.611 3.618 3.685 3.644 3.526
Aug. 3.663 3.626 3.597 3.548 3.425 3.166
Sep. 3.557 3.491 3.438 3.434 3.258 2.936
* Publication does not establish an entitlement to provision of the rates. The Deutsche
Bundesbank reserves the right to cease publishing the information on its website in
future. All data are supplied without liability. No explicit or implicit assurances or
guarantees are made as to the up-to-dateness, accuracy, timeliness, completeness,
marketability or suitability of the data as interest rates or reference interest rates.
Neither the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI), nor Euribor EBF, nor Euribor
ACI, nor the Euribor Panel Banks, nor the Euribor Steering Committee, nor the
European Central Bank, nor Reuters, nor the Deutsche Bundesbank can be held liable
for any irregularity or inaccuracy, incompleteness or late provision of the money market
rates. With regard to the €STR please consider the European Central Bank's disclaimer,
which also applies for the Deutsche Bundesbank's publication:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/financial_markets_and_interest_rates/euro_short-
term_rate/html/index.en.html
1 Euro Short-Term Rate: On the basis of individual euro-denominated transactions
conducted and settled on the previous business day, the European Central Bankpublishes the €STR since 2 October 2019. Transactions are reported by euro area banks
subject to reporting obligations in compliance with Money Market Statistical Reporting
Regulation. Monthly averages are calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank.  2 Monthly
averages are own calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank based on Euribor® daily rates
calculated by the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). These are unweighted
averages. Information on the methodology of Euribor® daily rates are available below.
Please be aware that commercial use of these data is only possible with a licence
agreement with the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). Information on its
terms of use are available under the link below. Values calculated from November 2023
onwards with three decimal places. Previous values calculated with two decimal places.
For technical reasons, these values are also displayed with three decimal places and the
third decimal place is filled with a 0. Up to and including October 2023 all values
calculated and published with two decimal places
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/terms-of-use
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/benchmarks/euribor/

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Aug. 2.52 246,001 0.94 228,521 3.15 180,132 1.27 21,610
Sep. 2.61 262,537 0.95 229,285 3.27 181,385 1.28 21,507
Oct. 2.76 288,227 0.97 230,966 3.39 197,527 1.32 21,449
Nov. 2.88 315,984 1.01 233,972 3.43 193,442 1.39 21,232
Dec. 2.96 338,959 1.04 237,917 3.47 190,801 1.43 21,697
2024 Jan. 3.01 364,579 1.06 240,513 3.51 204,092 1.46 21,689
Feb. 3.04 385,969 1.08 241,610 3.54 205,657 1.48 20,732
Mar. 3.06 400,182 1.09 242,659 3.56 212,882 1.56 20,688
Apr. 3.08 414,278 1.11 243,548 3.54 213,659 1.62 20,719
May 3.09 424,087 1.12 244,423 3.50 211,340 1.75 20,827
June 3.09 433,321 1.13 244,777 3.42 200,180 1.84 21,079
July 3.09 441,266 1.14 245,316 3.44 203,485 1.91 21,085
Aug. 3.07 445,337 1.14 246,009 3.40 209,304 1.96 21,125
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Aug. 5.41 3,391 3.33 25,573 1.85 1,550,499 9.55 47,277 4.45 76,654 3.95 330,602
Sep. 5.49 3,233 3.38 25,315 1.86 1,553,618 9.72 47,706 4.54 76,662 3.99 329,641
Oct. 5.57 3,312 3.50 25,212 1.87 1,554,344 9.95 47,325 4.65 76,583 4.06 329,490
Nov. 5.70 3,294 3.58 24,792 1.89 1,556,410 9.99 46,653 4.74 76,885 4.09 328,941
Dec. 5.62 3,198 3.64 24,499 1.90 1,556,523 10.01 47,390 4.81 77,044 4.13 326,980
2024 Jan. 5.66 3,354 3.69 24,060 1.91 1,554,763 10.16 46,574 4.89 76,552 4.18 327,358
Feb. 5.70 3,250 3.72 23,819 1.92 1,555,595 10.18 46,259 4.97 76,486 4.22 327,721
Mar. 5.68 3,184 3.75 23,540 1.93 1,558,297 10.05 47,109 4.90 76,985 4.26 326,829
Apr. 5.65 3,289 3.78 23,271 1.94 1,559,197 10.13 45,949 4.97 76,906 4.30 327,227
May 5.55 3,400 3.81 23,042 1.95 1,561,200 10.13 46,181 5.13 77,092 4.34 327,336
June 5.58 3,272 3.84 22,914 1.97 1,564,022 10.17 46,114 5.22 76,708 4.37 326,248
July 5.45 3,483 3.87 22,626 1.98 1,566,908 10.00 45,875 5.27 76,941 4.40 326,337
Aug. 5.43 3,344 3.90 22,463 2.00 1,570,369 9.97 45,923 5.30 77,210 4.43 326,755
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Aug. 5.72 188,564 4.17 251,445 2.37 889,482
Sep. 5.89 187,448 4.29 248,998 2.41 887,643
Oct. 6.05 186,407 4.42 251,931 2.45 889,648
Nov. 5.97 187,977 4.45 253,976 2.48 892,391
Dec. 6.05 180,730 4.50 255,561 2.51 891,507
2024 Jan. 6.06 183,005 4.53 255,411 2.52 893,128
Feb. 6.00 184,401 4.64 253,221 2.55 896,388
Mar. 6.03 189,482 4.62 249,544 2.56 895,185
Apr. 5.97 188,827 4.72 248,341 2.58 897,166
May 5.92 188,826 4.74 249,224 2.59 899,489
June 5.88 192,015 4.74 248,588 2.59 896,461
July 5.91 189,012 4.73 249,072 2.60 898,488
Aug. 5.88 186,383 4.71 249,389 2.62 901,170
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Aug. 0.51 1,757,994 3.12 46,037 3.15 4,422 2.81 2,374 0.55 429,372 1.62 38,895
Sep. 0.55 1,748,975 3.22 40,232 3.30 3,611 2.92 1,787 0.59 420,872 1.76 41,824
Oct. 0.56 1,728,935 3.40 51,187 3.46 5,558 2.99 2,743 0.64 411,490 1.94 44,837
Nov. 0.59 1,726,394 3.46 57,743 3.40 6,243 3.18 4,292 0.67 400,980 2.09 48,268
Dec. 0.60 1,731,513 3.37 49,974 3.25 4,896 3.17 4,389 0.69 396,006 2.17 50,818
2024 Jan. 0.62 1,702,116 3.27 56,368 3.13 5,846 2.80 3,300 0.71 386,987 2.25 53,387
Feb. 0.58 1,698,248 3.28 55,090 3.04 5,651 2.65 2,339 0.72 379,659 2.30 55,755
Mar. 0.60 1,698,313 3.27 47,316 2.94 3,332 2.53 2,296 0.74 373,900 2.35 57,421
Apr. 0.60 1,698,724 3.21 52,193 2.95 3,789 2.76 2,954 0.75 368,393 2.38 58,350
May 0.60 1,701,051 3.22 50,351 2.91 3,284 2.43 1,947 0.76 364,344 2.41 58,880
June 0.59 1,706,912 3.11 47,821 2.90 3,156 2.51 1,930 0.76 359,875 2.43 59,236
July 0.58 1,702,120 3.10 52,304 2.82 3,175 2.46 2,188 0.76 355,745 2.44 59,365
Aug. 0.58 1,738,449 3.04 54,951 2.74 3,013 2.31 1,824 0.77 352,792 2.44 59,448
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2023 Aug. 0.81 548,242 3.50 89,027 3.46 570 2.93 210
Sep. 0.92 548,230 3.64 95,610 3.63 807 2.96 287
Oct. 0.97 551,400 3.74 95,412 3.78 752 2.97 266
Nov. 1.02 556,270 3.73 99,933 3.71 820 3.30 418
Dec. 1.02 553,882 3.71 92,454 3.47 855 2.98 343
2024 Jan. 1.05 535,302 3.71 91,219 3.20 419 2.81 401
Feb. 1.03 524,848 3.70 94,014 3.16 527 2.90 239
Mar. 1.00 525,597 3.74 109,409 3.29 609 3.60 538
Apr. 1.01 527,442 3.74 109,540 3.46 815 3.68 573
May 1.06 535,774 3.71 99,982 3.58 1,720 3.63 1,543
June 1.00 530,169 3.56 104,386 3.46 1,187 3.60 1,248
July 1.02 544,474 3.51 102,515 3.51 1,347 3.46 842
Aug. 1.03 547,151 3.45 94,976 2.86 357 3.17 820
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2023 Aug. 8.46 8.43 8,818 9.46 1,689 10.65 288 7.13 3,011 9.02 5,518
Sep. 8.57 8.47 8,036 9.53 1,530 10.21 274 7.18 2,798 9.11 4,964
Oct. 8.66 8.55 8,347 9.62 1,655 9.43 288 7.21 2,893 9.24 5,166
Nov. 8.72 8.55 8,130 9.70 1,626 8.45 329 7.29 2,863 9.29 4,938
Dec. 8.69 8.25 6,106 9.28 905 7.99 298 7.22 2,491 9.04 3,317
2024 Jan. 8.73 8.49 8,062 9.55 1,563 7.86 261 7.30 2,718 9.16 5,082
Feb. 8.56 8.34 8,245 9.24 1,308 7.86 262 7.24 2,909 8.99 5,073
Mar. 8.27 8.03 8,190 9.21 1,250 8.15 260 6.87 3,173 8.79 4,757
Apr. 8.34 8.07 9,080 9.32 1,348 7.46 320 6.91 3,581 8.91 5,180
May 8.46 8.16 8,491 9.36 1,229 7.04 328 7.09 3,330 8.97 4,833
June 8.29 8.03 8,426 9.19 1,234 6.76 304 6.95 3,359 8.86 4,763
July 8.33 8.10 9,917 9.31 1,497 7.03 331 6.90 3,914 8.98 5,672
Aug. 8.27 7.88 8,626 9.24 1,329 6.99 315 6.53 3,408 8.87 4,902
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2023 Aug. 5.16 3,430 5.02 882 5.72 1,290 5.24 910 4.50 1,230
Sep. 5.24 3,526 5.08 814 5.76 1,489 5.29 848 4.54 1,189
Oct. 5.45 3,348 5.37 1,068 5.95 1,483 5.57 724 4.73 1,141
Nov. 5.43 3,152 5.13 765 5.90 1,345 5.53 764 4.76 1,043
Dec. 5.20 4,287 5.21 988 5.77 1,719 5.12 1,234 4.54 1,334
2024 Jan. 5.23 3,673 5.02 1,102 5.78 1,717 5.26 823 4.38 1,133
Feb. 5.13 2,997 5.13 703 5.73 1,237 5.24 675 4.36 1,085
Mar. 4.91 3,987 5.08 953 5.68 1,522 5.16 814 4.07 1,651
Apr. 5.05 3,544 4.99 1,093 5.67 1,314 5.26 891 4.30 1,339
May 4.99 3,199 5.00 881 5.48 1,288 5.19 749 4.32 1,162
June 4.98 3,711 5.01 860 5.55 1,479 5.23 838 4.23 1,394
July 4.82 4,100 4.73 1,191 5.32 1,636 5.24 744 4.16 1,720
Aug. 4.82 3,109 4.91 778 5.49 1,063 5.22 621 4.15 1,425
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2023 Aug. 5.30 2,381 . . 5.91 934 5.55 551 4.53 896
Sep. 5.32 2,459 . . 5.80 1,094 5.57 523 4.55 842
Oct. 5.52 2,472 . . 6.03 1,094 5.67 547 4.74 831
Nov. 5.52 2,249 . . 6.06 900 5.60 587 4.82 762
Dec. 5.42 2,861 . . 5.93 1,256 5.58 660 4.63 945
2024 Jan. 5.33 2,814 . . 5.88 1,335 5.34 656 4.42 823
Feb. 5.22 2,274 . . 5.82 908 5.40 573 4.40 793
Mar. 4.96 3,188 . . 5.75 1,215 5.25 700 4.05 1,273
Apr. 5.08 2,756 . . 5.70 962 5.39 760 4.27 1,034
May 5.09 2,320 . . 5.57 859 5.34 643 4.38 818
June 5.08 2,844 . . 5.67 1,109 5.35 683 4.29 1,052
July 4.90 3,158 . . 5.36 1,261 5.39 625 4.20 1,272
Aug. 4.88 2,317 . . 5.53 758 5.33 532 4.16 1,027
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2023 Aug. 4.19 4.14 14,386 4.43 2,611 5.29 2,198 4.53 1,388 3.81 5,275 3.89 5,525
Sep. 4.17 4.12 12,286 4.32 2,017 5.40 1,523 4.48 1,171 3.89 4,534 3.85 5,058
Oct. 4.22 4.18 13,831 4.39 2,853 5.53 1,989 4.53 1,403 3.85 5,304 3.90 5,136
Nov. 4.27 4.22 13,473 4.56 2,236 5.62 1,723 4.61 1,588 3.92 4,936 3.92 5,225
Dec. 4.12 4.05 12,151 4.32 2,055 5.56 1,576 4.44 1,553 3.80 4,349 3.65 4,672
2024 Jan. 3.90 3.85 14,667 4.10 2,844 5.44 1,862 4.08 1,584 3.56 5,397 3.55 5,825
Feb. 3.92 3.88 14,245 4.30 2,429 5.41 1,783 4.04 1,612 3.59 5,153 3.61 5,697
Mar. 3.88 3.83 15,439 4.01 2,258 5.28 1,739 4.09 1,755 3.55 5,414 3.61 6,530
Apr. 3.91 3.86 16,793 4.21 2,754 5.45 1,869 4.06 1,868 3.57 6,234 3.64 6,822
May 3.96 3.91 15,403 4.19 2,277 5.44 1,828 4.14 1,480 3.60 6,051 3.69 6,044
June 3.99 3.95 16,296 4.33 2,186 5.51 2,039 4.19 1,476 3.66 6,163 3.68 6,618
July 3.97 3.92 19,511 4.22 3,156 5.38 2,340 4.15 1,839 3.64 7,547 3.71 7,786
Aug. 3.87 3.83 16,811 4.14 2,526 5.37 1,816 4.01 1,658 3.60 6,122 3.60 7,216
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2023 Aug. . 3.96 6,467 . . 5.10 767 4.29 637 3.73 2,399 3.75 2,664
Sep. . 3.93 5,704 . . 5.36 540 4.32 551 3.78 2,092 3.65 2,521
Oct. . 4.01 6,207 . . 5.44 769 4.38 587 3.73 2,335 3.76 2,516
Nov. . 4.02 6,174 . . 5.50 669 4.45 728 3.80 2,170 3.70 2,607
Dec. . 3.86 5,588 . . 5.39 612 4.29 609 3.73 1,935 3.47 2,432
2024 Jan. . 3.69 7,051 . . 5.34 706 3.96 746 3.44 2,461 3.45 3,138
Feb. . 3.70 6,827 . . 5.33 717 3.82 764 3.43 2,314 3.50 3,032
Mar. . 3.66 7,324 . . 5.00 737 3.91 762 3.43 2,491 3.49 3,334
Apr. . 3.74 7,898 . . 5.48 783 3.88 853 3.48 2,770 3.53 3,492
May . 3.77 6,873 . . 5.35 740 3.97 677 3.48 2,483 3.57 2,973
June . 3.78 7,745 . . 5.43 844 4.03 682 3.54 2,777 3.52 3,442
July . 3.77 8,861 . . 5.27 877 3.97 808 3.55 3,290 3.59 3,886
Aug. . 3.69 7,548 . . 5.29 745 3.85 710 3.51 2,614 3.45 3,479
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Aug. 10.39 39,026 10.60 27,146 17.79 6,611 6.11 94,939 6.14 94,514
Sep. 10.59 39,548 10.75 27,976 17.86 6,629 6.25 95,468 6.28 95,004
Oct. 10.82 39,186 11.02 27,570 18.09 6,656 6.42 94,418 6.45 93,913
Nov. 10.80 38,416 10.95 26,932 18.18 6,614 6.41 95,688 6.44 95,191
Dec. 10.76 39,266 11.03 27,422 18.17 6,609 6.49 92,617 6.52 92,164
2024 Jan. 11.03 38,673 11.19 27,497 18.22 6,534 6.48 93,839 6.51 93,367
Feb. 11.06 38,233 11.22 27,163 18.29 6,460 6.47 95,704 6.50 95,225
Mar. 10.88 39,566 11.17 27,767 18.66 6,459 6.48 97,035 6.51 96,538
Apr. 11.00 38,415 11.19 27,036 18.65 6,438 6.37 96,481 6.40 95,979
May 10.95 38,754 11.23 27,112 18.66 6,427 6.38 96,257 6.41 95,778
June 10.96 38,787 11.09 27,550 18.67 6,425 6.32 98,856 6.35 98,366
July 10.76 38,598 11.05 26,764 18.61 6,442 6.34 96,983 6.37 96,494
Aug. 10.76 38,728 11.06 26,783 18.60 6,487 6.36 96,184 6.39 95,736
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2023 Aug. 5.11 73,312 5.15 21,335 6.01 10,015 6.63 1,698 4.46 999 5.06 51,942 4.47 3,017 3.95 5,641
Sep. 5.16 83,317 5.30 25,702 6.04 10,804 6.76 1,689 4.35 959 5.09 60,497 5.03 3,077 4.10 6,291
Oct. 5.39 76,734 5.27 24,750 6.35 10,963 6.93 1,781 4.61 912 5.30 54,862 5.02 3,674 4.11 4,542
Nov. 5.17 79,316 5.28 22,467 6.27 10,430 6.87 1,838 4.50 936 5.07 56,524 4.66 3,644 4.10 5,944
Dec. 5.19 108,487 5.34 31,589 6.07 11,245 6.60 2,020 4.33 1,115 5.28 76,500 4.63 7,141 3.79 10,466
2024 Jan. 5.16 75,818 5.37 22,554 5.81 10,279 6.48 1,856 4.21 932 5.18 54,103 4.51 3,830 3.64 4,818
Feb. 5.06 72,892 5.36 18,973 5.77 10,256 6.77 1,809 4.19 879 5.19 49,631 3.29 6,114 3.85 4,203
Mar. 5.19 94,238 5.42 27,803 5.64 12,574 6.70 1,930 4.24 1,017 5.27 67,328 4.29 5,644 3.79 5,745
Apr. 5.20 79,786 5.35 23,180 5.67 9,851 6.60 3,249 4.20 1,118 5.24 56,030 4.40 4,605 3.84 4,933
May 5.10 82,546 5.27 20,970 5.67 10,468 6.62 3,568 4.24 961 5.13 57,369 4.12 4,985 3.69 5,195
June 5.06 101,220 5.11 31,097 5.59 11,582 6.58 4,052 4.26 984 5.07 71,086 4.49 6,869 3.75 6,647
July 4.98 83,558 5.12 23,367 5.57 10,470 6.50 3,672 4.22 1,236 5.03 55,383 4.14 5,738 3.73 7,059
Aug. 5.02 75,700 4.98 19,584 5.48 9,906 6.51 2,514 3.98 1,115 5.10 52,172 3.95 4,129 3.76 5,864
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2023 Aug. 5.08 9,797 . . 5.58 425 5.01 122 3.85 279 5.45 6,747 4.32 890 3.79 1,334
Sep. . . . . 5.63 450 5.28 109 3.88 253 . . 5.19 1,187 3.76 1,487
Oct. 5.05 12,103 . . 5.66 508 5.14 140 3.95 213 5.21 8,840 5.38 1,005 3.73 1,397
Nov. 4.69 10,586 . . 5.73 353 4.83 107 3.88 250 4.90 7,211 4.51 1,045 3.74 1,620
Dec. 4.83 15,673 . . 5.55 459 5.01 139 3.82 291 5.22 10,040 4.81 1,915 3.45 2,829
2024 Jan. 4.78 8,277 . . 5.69 446 4.64 150 3.68 250 5.04 5,880 4.09 707 3.41 844
Feb. 4.87 7,393 . . 5.68 351 4.70 113 3.60 231 5.16 5,054 4.55 846 3.45 798
Mar. 5.03 11,566 . . 5.74 412 4.91 99 3.75 277 5.24 8,292 5.35 1,271 3.39 1,215
Apr. 4.81 8,922 . . 5.61 457 4.90 159 3.69 272 4.93 5,989 5.13 1,001 3.77 1,044
May 4.79 8,862 . . 5.64 356 4.62 151 3.76 247 5.13 5,522 4.71 1,249 3.46 1,337
June 4.97 12,576 . . 5.61 392 4.68 173 3.55 251 5.34 7,255 4.86 2,681 3.73 1,824
July 4.63 10,570 . . 5.44 482 4.88 162 3.81 305 5.06 6,631 3.88 1,646 3.27 1,344
Aug. 4.61 8,058 . . 5.40 360 4.51 161 3.60 285 5.03 4,614 4.64 1,033 3.37 1,605
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 
2021 Q2 2,609.9 280.5 470.3 361.2 449.2 879.6 3.4 72.5 38.9 54.2
Q3 2,653.1 271.7 474.2 358.2 463.4 899.8 3.3 87.8 38.3 56.3
Q4 2,667.2 261.3 468.6 355.1 472.4 921.6 3.2 85.0 40.8 59.3
2022 Q1 2,547.3 243.7 440.2 333.2 468.7 870.5 2.7 87.5 41.0 59.8
Q2 2,369.8 215.6 390.4 305.5 462.5 803.5 3.0 85.5 41.3 62.6
Q3 2,296.3 202.1 369.9 289.1 461.3 776.7 4.0 84.3 41.4 67.6
Q4 2,275.6 189.7 373.8 279.7 466.0 772.1 3.4 79.9 38.7 72.2
2023 Q1 2,326.7 201.6 380.7 280.4 472.6 790.1 3.6 85.0 38.5 74.3
Q2 2,331.8 194.8 383.4 280.4 475.6 799.2 3.6 83.9 38.1 72.9
Q3 2,311.1 186.5 376.7 274.2 483.4 785.3 3.7 88.6 38.1 74.7
Q4 2,408.5 190.2 405.6 291.0 499.7 822.6 3.3 79.0 34.2 83.0
2024 Q1 2,477.6 193.7 412.6 289.4 502.9 847.6 3.7 97.0 35.1 95.5
Q2 2,435.8 183.8 410.0 287.8 481.9 847.4 3.1 95.9 35.0 91.0
    Life insurance
2021 Q2 1,384.9 164.4 234.1 219.4 78.0 637.6 2.0 14.1 21.5 13.8
Q3 1,400.1 159.2 233.8 214.8 87.7 654.6 1.9 13.4 20.8 13.8
Q4 1,411.1 152.4 231.9 211.8 93.4 669.1 1.7 14.6 21.9 14.3
2022 Q1 1,317.8 136.8 211.5 193.1 99.7 626.1 0.9 13.9 22.0 13.8
Q2 1,202.1 120.5 180.3 173.1 104.2 569.4 0.9 13.6 22.1 17.9
Q3 1,149.6 110.2 166.6 162.1 107.0 546.4 1.1 12.3 22.3 21.7
Q4 1,130.1 103.6 170.5 155.6 111.5 540.0 1.1 11.5 19.5 16.8
2023 Q1 1,147.9 105.1 170.3 155.6 113.3 553.5 1.0 12.1 19.4 17.4
Q2 1,154.0 102.9 171.7 154.9 114.3 559.9 1.0 12.0 19.2 18.0
Q3 1,123.5 97.9 163.2 149.4 115.7 547.2 1.5 11.7 19.1 17.9
Q4 1,180.4 101.5 178.7 161.0 116.6 574.7 1.4 10.3 16.6 19.5
2024 Q1 1,193.5 98.6 176.5 156.0 115.6 594.3 1.4 10.2 16.6 24.3
Q2 1,180.6 95.2 172.6 153.6 115.1 594.3 1.2 7.2 16.5 24.7
    Non-life insurance
2021 Q2 724.6 103.3 141.0 83.4 90.5 225.7 0.4 40.3 12.7 27.2
Q3 733.1 98.7 141.0 83.8 93.7 228.4 0.4 46.4 12.8 27.7
Q4 738.4 94.6 140.1 84.7 97.5 234.3 0.3 44.6 14.0 28.4
2022 Q1 722.5 91.5 133.4 80.8 98.6 227.7 0.2 45.7 13.9 30.7
Q2 681.7 81.9 122.0 74.9 98.6 216.5 0.1 44.1 14.1 29.5
Q3 661.2 76.2 116.1 70.3 99.2 212.3 0.1 43.2 14.1 29.7
Q4 659.9 72.9 115.3 69.0 100.0 215.5 0.2 42.8 14.2 30.1
2023 Q1 687.1 81.2 121.1 69.7 103.0 219.5 0.1 45.1 14.2 33.2
Q2 688.3 77.2 124.0 70.7 104.4 222.0 0.1 44.9 14.1 30.9
Q3 682.7 73.7 122.7 69.2 107.0 221.0 0.1 45.3 14.3 29.4
Q4 708.1 74.9 131.9 74.1 109.0 230.1 0.1 43.9 13.0 31.1
2024 Q1 748.8 81.0 139.5 75.3 110.6 234.6 0.1 55.8 13.9 38.0
Q2 742.2 75.3 140.9 75.1 110.7 233.9 0.1 56.8 13.9 35.4
    Reinsurance 4
2021 Q2 500.4 12.8 95.2 58.4 280.7 16.4 1.0 18.1 4.6 13.2
Q3 519.9 13.9 99.3 59.6 282.0 16.7 1.0 28.0 4.7 14.8
Q4 517.7 14.3 96.6 58.6 281.4 18.2 1.1 25.9 4.9 16.7
2022 Q1 507.1 15.5 95.3 59.3 270.4 16.7 1.6 27.9 5.0 15.3
Q2 486.0 13.2 88.0 57.5 259.6 17.6 1.9 27.9 5.1 15.1
Q3 485.5 15.6 87.3 56.7 255.1 18.1 2.7 28.8 5.1 16.2
Q4 485.6 13.2 88.0 55.1 254.5 16.7 2.1 25.7 5.0 25.3
2023 Q1 491.8 15.3 89.2 55.1 256.3 17.1 2.4 27.8 4.8 23.7
Q2 489.5 14.7 87.6 54.8 256.9 17.2 2.5 26.9 4.8 24.0
Q3 504.9 14.8 90.8 55.6 260.7 17.1 2.1 31.6 4.8 27.3
Q4 520.0 13.7 95.0 55.9 274.1 17.8 1.8 24.7 4.6 32.4
2024 Q1 535.3 14.2 96.6 58.1 276.6 18.7 2.2 31.0 4.6 33.2
Q2 513.0 13.2 96.5 59.1 256.0 19.1 1.8 31.9 4.5 30.8
Pension funds 5
2021 Q2 683.2 85.0 60.2 49.3 11.2 445.2 0.1 12.1 17.8 2.3
Q3 689.8 82.9 60.4 48.9 11.8 453.6 0.1 12.2 17.8 2.2
Q4 709.9 82.1 60.0 48.7 11.3 473.5 0.1 12.4 18.5 3.3
2022 Q1 689.8 75.8 56.7 46.2 12.0 465.9 0.0 12.4 18.5 2.2
Q2 665.9 70.3 52.9 43.3 12.5 453.5 0.0 12.3 18.6 2.5
Q3 657.0 67.7 52.0 42.1 12.9 448.1 0.0 12.9 18.7 2.6
Q4 664.0 67.3 54.6 41.9 13.6 451.3 0.0 13.1 18.8 3.5
2023 Q1 671.5 66.4 56.9 42.3 13.6 457.9 0.0 12.9 18.7 2.7
Q2 678.7 67.5 58.9 42.7 13.4 462.0 0.0 12.9 18.7 2.6
Q3 675.9 67.1 60.3 42.3 13.5 458.2 0.1 12.9 18.7 2.8
Q4 703.5 70.1 67.7 44.0 13.5 472.6 0.1 13.2 18.9 3.4
2024 Q1 712.3 70.4 69.6 44.1 13.7 480.8 0.1 12.4 18.6 2.6
Q2 714.8 71.0 71.4 44.2 13.7 480.6 0.0 12.1 19.1 2.5
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including
registered bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrower's note
loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables and claims ofpension funds on pension managers.  4 Not including the reinsurance business
conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 The term "pension funds"
refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts.
Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension
schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  6
Insurance corporations
2021 Q2 2,609.9 33.0 81.3 558.7 1,793.5 1,556.3 237.1 2.2 141.1 –
Q3 2,653.1 35.4 82.8 567.0 1,817.7 1,569.1 248.7 2.5 147.6 –
Q4 2,667.2 36.0 82.0 579.3 1,820.7 1,578.3 242.3 2.5 146.8 –
2022 Q1 2,547.3 34.4 82.1 563.2 1,725.9 1,472.6 253.3 4.0 137.7 –
Q2 2,369.8 33.6 78.7 541.7 1,574.4 1,326.8 247.6 6.0 135.3 –
Q3 2,296.3 33.8 73.6 537.5 1,506.1 1,262.3 243.7 7.4 138.0 –
Q4 2,275.6 32.3 70.1 544.0 1,487.0 1,248.7 238.3 5.6 136.7 –
2023 Q1 2,326.7 33.1 71.2 544.7 1,539.0 1,277.3 261.7 4.3 134.3 –
Q2 2,331.8 33.1 68.4 548.0 1,544.4 1,284.6 259.8 4.4 133.5 –
Q3 2,311.1 35.3 76.9 552.1 1,508.1 1,248.1 260.1 4.6 134.1 –
Q4 2,408.5 30.5 73.3 569.8 1,586.6 1,325.4 261.2 4.1 144.1 –
2024 Q1 2,477.6 30.6 78.1 575.0 1,642.5 1,345.5 296.9 3.7 147.8 –
Q2 2,435.8 32.2 76.8 510.2 1,684.4 1,386.9 297.5 3.6 128.6 –
    Life insurance
2021 Q2 1,384.9 3.3 20.4 144.2 1,164.9 1,164.9 – 1.0 51.1 –
Q3 1,400.1 3.3 19.3 148.1 1,176.4 1,176.4 – 1.1 51.9 –
Q4 1,411.1 3.3 20.7 148.2 1,185.5 1,185.5 – 0.9 52.5 –
2022 Q1 1,317.8 3.2 19.9 142.9 1,101.6 1,101.6 – 1.4 48.8 –
Q2 1,202.1 3.1 19.0 141.4 984.5 984.5 – 2.7 51.3 –
Q3 1,149.6 3.0 17.0 138.0 936.9 936.9 – 3.1 51.8 –
Q4 1,130.1 2.7 16.6 136.0 924.9 924.9 – 2.3 47.7 –
2023 Q1 1,147.9 2.7 17.8 132.9 946.0 946.0 – 1.9 46.6 –
Q2 1,154.0 2.7 17.6 133.6 951.7 951.7 – 1.7 46.8 –
Q3 1,123.5 2.7 16.9 134.1 919.9 919.9 – 2.4 47.6 –
Q4 1,180.4 0.8 17.7 133.3 977.7 977.7 – 2.0 48.8 –
2024 Q1 1,193.5 0.8 17.5 128.8 994.3 994.3 – 1.7 50.2 –
Q2 1,180.6 1.0 14.5 92.9 1,034.9 1,034.9 – 1.9 35.4 –
    Non-life insurance
2021 Q2 724.6 1.2 10.5 166.2 493.4 366.2 127.1 0.1 53.1 –
Q3 733.1 1.2 10.5 168.9 498.7 367.8 130.9 0.2 53.7 –
Q4 738.4 1.4 10.7 175.8 492.6 367.6 125.0 0.2 57.8 –
2022 Q1 722.5 1.3 11.7 173.1 483.0 347.1 136.0 0.3 53.0 –
Q2 681.7 1.2 11.1 167.7 451.9 322.7 129.2 0.5 49.3 –
Q3 661.2 1.2 10.5 168.0 430.5 307.4 123.1 0.5 50.5 –
Q4 659.9 1.2 10.4 170.4 425.6 306.7 118.9 0.4 52.0 –
2023 Q1 687.1 1.2 10.7 173.0 450.8 314.4 136.4 0.4 51.0 –
Q2 688.3 1.2 10.6 176.0 451.1 317.1 134.0 0.3 49.1 –
Q3 682.7 1.7 10.9 176.6 444.4 313.0 131.4 0.4 48.8 –
Q4 708.1 0.6 12.5 180.2 461.3 333.6 127.7 0.3 53.3 –
2024 Q1 748.8 0.6 13.4 184.6 494.5 337.1 157.4 0.3 55.5 –
Q2 742.2 0.7 13.4 181.1 493.6 338.4 155.2 0.3 53.2 –
    Reinsurance 4
2021 Q2 500.4 28.5 50.4 248.3 135.2 25.2 110.0 1.1 36.9 –
Q3 519.9 30.9 53.0 250.1 142.7 24.9 117.8 1.3 42.0 –
Q4 517.7 31.4 50.5 255.3 142.6 25.3 117.3 1.4 36.5 –
2022 Q1 507.1 30.0 50.4 247.2 141.3 23.9 117.4 2.3 35.9 –
Q2 486.0 29.3 48.6 232.6 138.0 19.6 118.4 2.8 34.7 –
Q3 485.5 29.7 46.2 231.5 138.7 18.0 120.7 3.8 35.7 –
Q4 485.6 28.4 43.1 237.5 136.5 17.1 119.4 2.9 37.1 –
2023 Q1 491.8 29.2 42.8 238.8 142.2 16.9 125.3 2.1 36.8 –
Q2 489.5 29.3 40.2 238.4 141.6 15.8 125.8 2.4 37.6 –
Q3 504.9 31.0 49.2 241.3 143.9 15.2 128.7 1.9 37.7 –
Q4 520.0 29.1 43.0 256.3 147.7 14.2 133.5 1.8 42.0 –
2024 Q1 535.3 29.1 47.2 261.6 153.7 14.1 139.6 1.7 42.0 –
Q2 513.0 30.5 48.9 236.2 155.9 13.6 142.3 1.4 40.0 –
Pension funds 5
2021 Q2 683.2 – 1.8 31.3 536.7 535.0 – 0.2 9.2 104.0
Q3 689.8 – 1.9 31.9 539.8 537.6 – 0.2 9.3 106.8
Q4 709.9 – 1.9 32.0 560.2 557.3 – 0.1 8.9 106.8
2022 Q1 689.8 – 2.0 33.5 559.7 556.9 – 0.1 9.5 85.1
Q2 665.9 – 1.8 33.5 561.0 558.4 – 0.1 9.0 60.4
Q3 657.0 – 1.9 34.7 563.1 560.6 – 0.1 9.7 47.5
Q4 664.0 – 1.8 34.5 576.4 573.9 – 0.1 9.4 41.8
2023 Q1 671.5 – 1.8 35.5 577.3 574.9 – 0.1 9.5 47.3
Q2 678.7 – 1.8 35.7 582.0 579.6 – 0.1 9.6 49.5
Q3 675.9 – 1.9 35.0 583.7 581.5 – 0.1 9.7 45.6
Q4 703.5 – 1.9 35.0 597.0 594.8 – 0.1 9.9 59.6
2024 Q1 712.3 – 1.9 36.0 600.0 597.8 – 0.1 9.6 64.8
Q2 714.8 – 1.9 36.0 601.3 599.1 – 0.1 9.9 65.7
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Including deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered
bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension
funds on pension managers and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical
reserves "life" taking account of transitional measures. Health insurance is also includedin the "non-life insurance" sector.  4 Not including the reinsurance business conducted
by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 Valuation at book values. The term "pen-
sion funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of
Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational
pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.  6 Own
funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth" and "Shares and other equity".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 58,735 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 90,697 44,384 – 12,124 – 11,951 68,459 14,351
2015 15,219 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 51,229 99,225 – 66,330 121,164 44,391 – 84,006
2016 68,998 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 41,569 161,776 – 58,012 187,500 32,288 – 92,778
2017 51,034 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 39,471 134,192 – 71,454 161,012 44,634 – 83,158
2018 78,657 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 62,027 107,155 – 24,417 67,328 64,244 – 28,499
2019 139,611 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 71,075 60,195 8,059 2,408 49,728 79,416
2020 451,481 374,034 14,462 88,703 270,870 77,446 280,820 18,955 226,887 34,978 170,661
2021 230,854 221,648 31,941 19,754 169,953 9,205 243,497 – 41,852 245,198 40,150 – 12,643
2022 150,974 156,190 59,322 35,221 61,648 – 5,216 143,527 2,915 49,774 90,839 7,447
2023 280,393 158,228 88,018 –11,899 82,109 122,165 117,270 32,163 – 59,817 144,924 163,123
2023 Sep. 19,706 16,310 – 7,089 6,461 16,938 3,396 – 4,778 – 8,020 – 11,311 14,553 24,484
Oct. – 23,672 –19,390 1,677 –10,955 –10,113 – 4,282 – 17,044 – 4,855 – 6,759 – 5,430 – 6,628
Nov. 25,399 18,861 9,439 – 3,337 12,759 6,538 6,503 10,752 – 5,186 937 18,896
Dec. – 23,373 –27,517 4,368 – 8,386 –23,499 4,144 – 11,188 – 7,024 – 5,130 966 – 12,185
2024 Jan. 30,652 25,509 8,437 6,301 10,771 5,143 6,259 17,106 – 7,128 – 3,718 24,392
Feb. 19,146 11,577 6,463 – 957 6,070 7,569 3,675 7,562 – 9,079 5,191 15,471
Mar. 42,591 15,188 13,915 3,072 – 1,799 27,402 19,477 16,349 – 4,776 7,905 23,113
Apr. – 27,913 –25,395 –10,665 6,215 –20,946 – 2,518 – 31,713 – 4,492 – 12,041 – 15,181 3,800
May 27,055 22,035 1,836 696 19,503 5,020 17,293 3,605 – 9,394 23,082 9,761
June 33,743 14,811 10,021 2,760 2,031 18,932 4,988 12,204 – 10,121 2,905 28,755
July 6,319 – 1,185 –17,832 – 1,018 17,665 7,504 – 5,484 1,835 – 5,220 – 2,099 11,803
Aug. 16,817 7,514 3,617 3,739 157 9,303 – 30,672 9,231 – 11,073 – 28,830 47,488
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,337 11,991 5,346 2,851
2014 43,488 18,778 24,710 43,930 17,203 26,727 – 443
2015 56,979 7,668 49,311 46,721 – 5,421 52,142 10,258
2016 39,133 4,409 34,724 39,265 – 5,143 44,408 – 132
2017 52,932 15,570 37,362 51,270 7,031 44,239 1,662
2018 61,400 16,188 45,212 89,624 – 11,184 100,808 – 28,224
2019 54,830 9,076 45,754 43,070 – 1,119 44,189 11,759
2020 78,464 17,771 60,693 111,570 27 111,543 – 33,106
2021 115,933 49,066 66,868 102,921 10,869 92,052 13,012
2022 – 6,275 27,792 – 34,066 2,997 – 8,262 11,259 – 9,272
2023 41,754 36,898 4,856 52,667 14,650 38,017 – 10,913
2023 Sep. – 4,577 687 – 5,264 – 3,470 1,962 – 5,432 – 1,107
Oct. 482 583 – 100 2,925 – 88 3,013 – 2,442
Nov. 509 301 208 – 2,519 538 – 3,057 3,028
Dec. 27,900 24,942 2,957 26,296 6,437 19,859 1,604
2024 Jan. 282 351 – 69 2,171 – 1,361 3,532 – 1,888
Feb. – 856 206 – 1,062 – 626 4,247 – 4,873 – 230
Mar. 7,233 4,679 2,554 9,297 6,657 2,640 – 2,064
Apr. 1,852 1,546 306 2,664 – 2,481 5,145 – 812
May 5,034 474 4,561 4,416 3,531 885 619
June – 1,682 292 – 1,974 – 2,637 – 4,084 1,447 955
July 3,120 204 2,916 4,180 40 4,140 – 1,060
Aug. – 2,127 1,300 – 3,427 – 2,574 – 3,201 627 447
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,870,084 778,411 39,548 18,327 643,380 77,156 184,206 907,466
2021 1,658,004 795,271 41,866 17,293 648,996 87,116 139,775 722,958
2022 1,683,265 861,989 66,811 11,929 700,062 83,188 169,680 651,596
2023 1,705,524 937,757 45,073 12,633 782,969 97,082 153,128 614,639
2023 Sep. 152,408 82,679 3,337 550 71,155 7,637 18,722 51,007
Oct. 132,402 83,350 1,697 2,557 71,328 7,769 10,151 38,901
Nov. 125,657 72,915 7,203 1,354 57,521 6,837 8,850 43,892
Dec. 81,025 55,000 1,834 1,453 46,549 5,164 4,722 21,302
2024 Jan. 151,286 89,021 6,405 1,630 70,605 10,380 14,833 47,433
Feb. 148,430 79,876 3,301 2,051 63,439 11,086 7,181 61,373
Mar. 124,684 62,659 5,081 608 45,393 11,577 11,709 50,316
Apr. 150,134 84,574 5,951 1,213 66,287 11,124 13,211 52,349
May 143,782 78,455 1,463 1,027 66,133 9,832 12,237 53,091
June 118,188 58,371 3,127 887 45,597 8,759 10,682 49,136
July 119,604 65,562 3,280 1,522 49,131 11,630 9,338 44,704
Aug. 113,892 60,305 2,571 413 46,104 11,217 6,501 47,086
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 658,521 165,097 28,500 7,427 90,839 38,330 77,439 415,985
2021 486,335 171,799 30,767 6,336 97,816 36,880 64,234 250,303
2022 485,287 164,864 41,052 7,139 91,143 25,530 56,491 263,932
2023 482,193 155,790 28,294 4,664 101,059 21,772 44,272 282,132
2023 Sep. 40,995 8,847 2,250 – 5,127 1,470 8,741 23,407
Oct. 37,642 15,411 262 20 11,876 3,253 2,456 19,775
Nov. 35,532 13,641 6,703 600 4,135 2,203 2,541 19,350
Dec. 14,764 6,401 1,040 1,205 2,551 1,605 763 7,600
2024 Jan. 55,105 23,961 5,330 537 14,875 3,219 8,244 22,900
Feb. 53,198 21,778 1,920 1,251 15,159 3,448 1,870 29,550
Mar. 44,606 12,428 4,590 606 4,928 2,304 6,478 25,700
Apr. 47,632 18,861 3,459 1,026 9,789 4,587 5,921 22,850
May 45,810 13,637 328 1,027 9,717 2,564 5,248 26,925
June 30,324 7,312 1,022 852 2,049 3,389 3,162 19,850
July 34,914 11,612 2,034 1,522 4,939 3,118 2,582 20,720
Aug. 36,319 9,640 2,421 413 4,993 1,814 2,559 24,120
Net sales 5
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 473,795 28,147 8,661 8,816 22,067 – 11,398 49,536 396,113
2021 210,231 52,578 17,821 7,471 22,973 4,314 35,531 122,123
2022 135,853 36,883 23,894 – 9,399 15,944 6,444 30,671 68,299
2023 190,577 78,764 10,184 – 791 46,069 23,303 – 34 111,848
2023 Sep. 12,991 – 6,384 28 – 809 – 4,706 – 897 8,074 11,300
Oct. – 7,927 – 1,596 – 2,527 – 1,529 – 895 3,356 – 2,197 – 4,135
Nov. 30,649 13,427 4,984 904 7,149 391 – 4,018 21,239
Dec. – 11,217 10,301 308 1,288 9,314 – 609 – 4,873 – 16,644
2024 Jan. 4,841 4,209 – 569 1,400 – 2,865 6,243 4,372 – 3,740
Feb. 12,862 7,348 1,102 1,691 – 522 5,078 – 2,312 7,827
Mar. 17,943 13,538 1,459 – 498 8,865 3,713 3,784 620
Apr. – 9,914 – 10,653 2,897 – 1,562 – 14,334 2,346 4,972 – 4,233
May 5,787 2,720 – 2,643 77 2,782 2,505 3,598 – 532
June 15,859 9,951 – 486 – 207 9,726 918 2,329 3,578
July 415 – 18,041 – 1,491 480 – 19,593 2,563 – 4,490 22,947
Aug. 6,782 3,284 1,758 – 237 1,338 426 1,793 1,705
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,545,200 2 1,174,817 183,980 55,959 687,710 2 247,169 2 379,342 1,991,040
2021 3,781,975 1,250,777 202,385 63,496 731,068 253,828 414,791 2,116,406
2022 3,930,390 1,302,028 225,854 54,199 761,047 260,928 441,234 2,187,127
2023 4,131,592 1,384,958 237,099 54,312 806,808 286,739 441,742 2,304,892
2023 Sep. 4,117,795 1,365,365 234,599 53,128 796,782 280,856 453,037 2,299,393
Oct. 4,110,219 1,362,975 231,537 52,084 794,730 284,623 450,654 2,296,591
Nov. 4,139,444 1,373,679 236,596 53,034 798,461 285,588 446,199 2,319,566
Dec. 4,131,592 1,384,958 237,099 54,312 806,808 286,739 441,742 2,304,892
2024 Jan. 4,140,092 1,394,649 236,671 55,735 808,508 293,736 446,559 2,298,884
Feb. 4,152,812 1,401,409 237,658 57,450 807,692 298,609 444,310 2,307,093
Mar. 4,173,121 1,415,363 239,096 56,960 816,963 302,344 448,012 2,309,746
Apr. 4,169,790 1,408,556 242,090 55,474 805,788 305,203 453,941 2,307,292
May 4,175,267 1,409,122 239,361 55,574 807,179 307,007 457,302 2,308,844
June 4,198,060 1,423,493 239,081 55,370 820,249 308,793 460,082 2,314,485
July 4,193,225 1,403,611 237,606 55,897 798,532 311,576 455,405 2,334,209
Aug. 4,195,373 1,403,674 239,400 55,662 796,740 311,871 457,310 2,334,389
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-August 2024
up to under 2 1 210 893   500 560   70 032   15 775   299 041   115 711   92 461   617 871 
2 to under 4  815 390   345 666   69 640   16 388   183 727   75 911   82 006   387 717 
4 to under 6  651 433   224 728   45 183   9 419   130 392   39 733   71 671   355 034 
6 to under 8  401 710   140 466   22 677   3 952   84 814   29 022   41 087   220 157 
8 to under 10  327 606   90 531   21 714   6 566   45 291   16 960   29 554   207 521 
10 to under 15  240 853   56 508   7 296   3 201   37 082   8 929   27 938   156 406 
15 to under 20  128 074   12 283   2 047    232   7 623   2 380   17 398   98 393 
20 and above  419 415   32 932    810    128   8 770   23 225   95 194   291 289 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,673 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,775 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,872 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,635 1,963,588
2021 186,580 4,152 9,561 672 35 – 326 – 212 – 5,578 2,301,942
2022 199,789 12,272 14,950 224 371 – 29 – 293 – 2,952 1,858,963
2023 182,246 – 15,984 3,377 3 50 – 564 – 2,515 – 16,335 2,051,675
2023 Sep. 198,328 – 325 280 3 –– 201 – 10 – 397 1,966,858
Oct. 198,522 194 504 – –– 100 – 2 – 208 1,852,180
Nov. 198,456 – 67 62 0 0 0 0 – 129 2,002,568
Dec. 182,246 – 16,210 677 0 0 0 – 2,366 – 14,521 2,051,675
2024 Jan. 182,103 – 144 42 0 0 – 0 – 115 – 71 2,061,708
Feb. 181,987 – 117 48 0 0 – 2 – 25 – 138 2,126,888
Mar. 182,100 113 344 0 0 – 7 – 5 – 218 2,213,065
Apr. 181,805 – 295 126 0 0 – 4 – 4 – 414 2,159,884
May 181,553 – 322 187 – – –– 328 – 180 2,159,986
June 181,236 – 317 31 8 0 – 9 – 73 – 274 2,135,158
July 181,104 – 143 117 20 0 – 5 – 11 – 263 2,131,696
Aug. 181,117 7 316 0 0 – 76 – 55 – 177 2,162,378
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields on German securities
Issue yields Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1
Public debt securities Public debt securities Bank debt securities
Listed Federal securities
Total Totalof which:
Listed Federal
debt securitiesBank debt 
securities Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  2 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)
Period % per annum
2012 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7
2013 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4
2014 1.2 1.1 0.9 1.3 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0
2015 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4
2016 0.4 0.1 – 0.1 0.6 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1
2017 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.6 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7
2018 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5
2019 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.3 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5
2020 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.5 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7
2021 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9
2022 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.9 1.5 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.9 1.9 3.3
2023 2.9 2.6 2.5 3.4 2.9 2.6 2.5 2.4 3.3 3.2 4.2
2023 Sep. 3.18 2.75 2.75 3.57 3.11 2.82 2.71 2.66 3.51 3.42 4.39
Oct. 3.18 2.86 2.86 3.66 3.25 2.96 2.84 2.82 3.66 3.63 4.56
Nov. 3.01 2.61 2.61 3.53 3.02 2.75 2.64 2.60 3.40 3.37 4.23
Dec. 3.01 2.44 2.44 3.67 2.52 2.26 2.15 2.10 2.91 2.92 3.63
2024 Jan. 2.81 2.44 2.44 2.87 2.57 2.32 2.22 2.17 2.94 2.97 3.67
Feb. 2.71 2.47 2.47 3.05 2.72 2.48 2.39 2.33 3.09 3.10 3.74
Mar. 2.94 2.56 2.56 3.10 2.73 2.49 2.41 2.35 3.07 3.02 3.73
Apr. 3.05 2.61 2.61 3.12 2.81 2.58 2.50 2.45 3.15 3.14 3.74
May 3.08 2.70 2.70 3.18 2.88 2.66 2.58 2.52 3.19 3.20 3.84
June 2.92 2.64 2.64 3.31 2.86 2.63 2.55 2.48 3.17 3.26 3.87
July 2.88 2.55 2.55 3.08 2.80 2.58 2.50 2.46 3.09 3.24 3.74
Aug. 2.44 2.31 2.31 2.69 2.53 2.31 2.23 2.21 2.81 3.04 3.58
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 Only debt securities eligible as underlying
instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 137,294 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 39,583 141,134 819 –1,745 140,315 41,328 –3,841
2015 189,802 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 43,665 181,932 7,362 494 174,570 43,171 7,870
2016 149,288 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 29,919 156,236 2,877 –3,172 153,359 33,091 –6,948
2017 148,214 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 53,292 150,740 4,938 1,048 145,802 52,244 –2,526
2018 108,293 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 4,599 114,973 2,979 –2,306 111,994 6,905 –6,680
2019 171,666 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 49,120 176,210 2,719 – 812 173,491 49,932 –4,544
2020 157,349 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 41,321 156,421 336 –1,656 156,085 42,977 928
2021 280,746 157,861 41,016 482 31,023 7,841 116,845 122,885 289,169 13,154 254 276,015 122,631 –8,423
2022 108,741 79,022 6,057 482 444 5,071 72,991 29,718 111,948 3,170 –1,459 108,778 31,177 –3,207
2023 71,202 44,484 5,969 460 4,951 723 38,461 26,718 73,186 –4,778 –2,054 77,964 28,772 –1,984
2023 Sep. 4,897 2,115 702 61 785 – 115 1,411 2,781 5,702 362 106 5,340 2,675 – 805
Oct. –1,610 –2,394 –1,269 – 130 – 843 – 139 –1,186 785 –1,718 814 – 113 –2,532 898 108
Nov. 1,213 –3,273 592 93 807 – 276 –3,865 4,486 2,315 95 – 288 2,220 4,774 –1,102
Dec. 11,422 10,971 –1,536 156 –1,448 – 182 12,506 451 10,660 – 11 13 10,671 438 762
2024 Jan. 23,814 10,382 – 457 141 – 406 – 19 10,839 13,431 24,111 1,999 196 22,112 13,235 – 298
Feb. 1,751 –1,458 –1,095 23 – 688 – 430 – 363 3,209 2,272 60 162 2,212 3,047 – 521
Mar. 2,573 –2,329 –1,070 188 – 610 – 455 –1,259 4,902 2,221 358 – 426 1,863 5,328 352
Apr. 15,151 10,159 742 220 1,063 – 481 9,417 4,992 14,331 442 226 13,889 4,766 821
May 8,797 378 210 137 479 – 463 172 8,419 9,214 233 – 46 8,981 8,465 – 416
June 10,169 1,653 461 161 493 – 241 1,190 8,516 9,640 74 – 31 9,566 8,547 529
July 11,733 1,969 225 285 566 – 729 1,744 9,764 11,137 149 47 10,988 9,717 596
Aug. 9,004 – 767 723 407 804 – 725 –1,491 9,771 8,378 235 – 289 8,143 10,060 626
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 45.36 67.77 0.86 –22.94 –12.62 24.29 12.13 –15.53 –9.29
   Debt securities 2.81 4.10 6.70 4.49 1.79 1.67 –1.25 5.82 1.09
     Short-term debt securities 2.29 1.23 1.62 2.00 1.06 –0.15 –1.29 2.52 1.63
     Long-term debt securities 0.52 2.87 5.08 2.49 0.73 1.82 0.04 3.30 –0.54
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.31 3.40 6.68 3.81 2.76 0.42 –0.32 3.03 1.13
         Non-financial corporations 0.72 0.86 –0.03 0.76 –0.34 –0.48 0.03 0.66 0.09
         Financial corporations 1.08 1.79 3.19 1.43 1.43 0.28 0.06 0.92 1.40
         General government –0.48 0.74 3.51 1.63 1.66 0.62 –0.40 1.45 –0.35
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.50 0.70 0.02 0.68 –0.98 1.25 –0.93 2.79 –0.05
   Loans 113.65 169.40 178.80 67.51 25.52 30.56 55.22 40.31 16.04
     Short-term loans 115.80 161.85 124.42 58.16 19.25 28.42 18.59 32.37 15.80
     Long-term loans –2.15 7.55 54.38 9.35 6.27 2.13 36.63 7.93 0.24
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 56.25 150.35 175.37 72.89 25.83 29.11 47.55 32.87 14.68
         Non-financial corporations 53.25 146.67 131.62 66.75 21.46 24.94 18.47 25.48 12.14
         Financial corporations 3.37 1.48 12.59 7.50 2.44 3.21 –0.57 9.37 2.32
         General government –0.37 2.21 31.16 –1.37 1.93 0.95 29.65 –1.98 0.21
       Loans to the rest of the world 57.40 19.05 3.43 –5.38 –0.31 1.45 7.67 7.44 1.36
   Equity and investment fund shares 165.60 181.57 109.64 16.08 34.86 27.18 31.53 46.15 46.67
     Equity 143.63 181.52 106.18 15.36 32.53 25.85 32.44 40.36 43.81
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 15.33 44.06 –14.32 –10.51 –0.27 4.72 –8.26 3.45 2.54
         Non-financial corporations 16.89 43.79 –13.91 –10.45 –0.32 5.06 –8.21 2.43 2.56
         Financial corporations –1.56 0.27 –0.41 –0.07 0.05 –0.34 –0.05 1.02 –0.02
       Listed shares of the rest of the world –1.29 0.61 –38.92 –21.25 –3.31 –12.85 –1.50 0.28 –1.95
       Other equity  1 129.59 136.85 159.42 47.12 36.10 33.98 42.21 36.63 43.21
     Investment fund shares 21.98 0.05 3.46 0.72 2.33 1.33 –0.92 5.79 2.87
       Money market fund shares 0.66 –0.38 –0.58 –0.80 –0.41 0.59 0.04 –0.53 0.67
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 21.32 0.43 4.04 1.52 2.74 0.74 –0.95 6.32 2.20
   Insurance technical reserves 10.24 3.29 10.17 7.96 0.28 –0.26 2.19 3.91 –3.96
   Financial derivatives 15.40 28.97 –3.35 3.93 0.67 12.97 –20.92 3.35 6.58
   Other accounts receivable 59.40 58.56 1.00 59.70 –8.61 –67.91 17.83 60.18 –84.79
   Total 412.46 513.66 303.83 136.72 41.90 28.49 96.72 144.18 –27.66
 External financing
   Debt securities 20.86 14.16 0.35 1.38 2.44 1.57 –5.04 6.82 7.07
     Short-term securities 2.51 –0.36 –4.68 –0.16 –0.70 –0.84 –2.99 1.01 2.49
       Long-term securities 18.35 14.52 5.03 1.54 3.14 2.41 –2.05 5.80 4.58
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 9.25 5.80 0.66 1.64 0.51 0.56 –2.05 2.10 1.16
           Non-financial corporations 0.72 0.86 –0.03 0.76 –0.34 –0.48 0.03 0.66 0.09
           Financial corporations 9.22 4.41 –2.83 0.31 –0.27 –0.08 –2.78 1.08 0.41
           General government 0.09 –0.07 –0.11 0.00 –0.07 –0.04 –0.00 0.01 0.00
           Households –0.79 0.60 3.62 0.57 1.18 1.16 0.71 0.36 0.67
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 11.62 8.36 –0.31 –0.26 1.93 1.01 –2.99 4.71 5.91
   Loans 185.96 299.12 143.22 49.50 39.72 16.94 37.06 32.52 26.30
     Short-term loans 146.40 211.09 82.78 42.13 24.08 14.91 1.66 25.91 27.71
     Long-term loans 39.56 88.03 60.44 7.37 15.64 2.03 35.40 6.61 –1.41
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 123.81 277.83 177.43 84.12 34.99 22.43 35.89 39.47 16.50
         Non-financial corporations 53.25 146.67 131.62 66.75 21.46 24.94 18.47 25.48 12.14
         Financial corporations 56.13 109.88 65.16 24.72 17.76 2.57 20.12 20.26 7.52
         General government 14.43 21.29 –19.35 –7.35 –4.22 –5.08 –2.69 –6.27 –3.16
       Loans from the rest of the world 62.15 21.28 –34.21 –34.61 4.72 –5.49 1.17 –6.95 9.80
   Equity 129.01 46.72 18.61 –4.67 10.53 12.18 0.56 13.31 13.27
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 26.48 57.05 –27.67 –13.76 –5.07 1.80 –10.64 –2.29 –5.16
       Non-financial corporations 16.89 43.79 –13.91 –10.45 –0.32 5.06 –8.21 2.43 2.56
       Financial corporations –2.35 2.21 –8.32 –0.69 –4.55 –1.88 –1.20 –2.07 –4.51
       General government –0.09 0.76 –1.12 –0.88 –0.21 –0.04 0.01 –2.12 –2.90
       Households 12.04 10.29 –4.32 –1.75 0.01 –1.33 –1.24 –0.53 –0.32
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 18.84 –9.52 13.66 2.00 7.37 1.84 2.45 5.27 8.87
     Other equity  1 83.68 –0.82 32.62 7.09 8.23 8.54 8.75 10.33 9.56
   Insurance technical reserves 5.54 9.14 5.26 1.32 1.31 1.31 1.33 1.33 1.31
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 14.32 –14.10 8.37 1.58 2.08 1.81 2.91 –0.39 1.19
   Other accounts payable 148.19 175.92 34.07 20.00 6.69 –0.63 8.00 –2.72 –2.47
   Total 503.88 530.96 209.87 69.11 62.77 33.18 44.82 50.86 46.66
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 786.9 852.5 849.9 829.6 814.4 838.6 849.9 834.5 825.0
   Debt securities 54.3 53.8 62.1 58.9 60.5 62.1 62.1 68.2 69.7
     Short-term debt securities 7.1 8.4 9.8 10.4 11.2 11.1 9.8 12.7 14.5
     Long-term debt securities 47.2 45.5 52.3 48.5 49.3 51.1 52.3 55.5 55.3
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 23.3 24.7 32.2 28.7 31.4 31.9 32.2 35.4 36.8
         Non-financial corporations 5.3 5.8 5.8 6.5 6.2 5.7 5.8 6.6 6.6
         Financial corporations 14.5 15.0 18.8 16.6 18.0 18.3 18.8 19.9 21.5
         General government 3.5 3.9 7.6 5.6 7.2 7.8 7.6 9.0 8.7
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 31.0 29.2 29.9 30.2 29.1 30.3 29.9 32.8 32.9
   Loans 1,529.5 1,702.6 1,879.3 1,768.9 1,793.7 1,825.6 1,879.3 1,920.9 1,952.5
     Short-term loans 1,279.9 1,444.1 1,566.9 1,501.2 1,519.8 1,549.1 1,566.9 1,599.7 1,631.4
     Long-term loans 249.5 258.5 312.5 267.6 274.0 276.5 312.5 321.2 321.1
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 1,166.3 1,316.7 1,492.0 1,389.6 1,415.4 1,444.5 1,492.0 1,524.9 1,539.6
         Non-financial corporations 1,060.1 1,206.7 1,338.3 1,273.5 1,294.9 1,319.9 1,338.3 1,363.8 1,376.0
         Financial corporations 83.4 84.9 97.5 92.4 94.8 98.0 97.5 106.8 109.1
         General government 22.9 25.1 56.2 23.7 25.6 26.6 56.2 54.3 54.5
       Loans to the rest of the world 363.2 385.9 387.3 379.3 378.3 381.1 387.3 396.0 412.9
   Equity and investment fund shares 3,797.8 3,792.1 3,971.0 3,875.3 3,923.8 3,945.2 3,971.0 4,038.4 4,010.8
     Equity 3,557.6 3,579.5 3,735.4 3,656.7 3,698.4 3,719.1 3,735.4 3,789.4 3,756.8
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 393.0 331.8 334.5 361.1 354.8 330.1 334.5 359.7 333.0
         Non-financial corporations 384.9 324.5 326.7 353.9 347.0 322.9 326.7 351.0 324.5
         Financial corporations 8.0 7.4 7.8 7.2 7.8 7.2 7.8 8.6 8.5
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 72.4 64.7 45.9 50.2 49.3 40.0 45.9 48.5 49.3
       Other equity  1 3,092.2 3,182.9 3,355.0 3,245.4 3,294.2 3,349.0 3,355.0 3,381.2 3,374.4
     Investment fund shares 240.2 212.6 235.6 218.6 225.4 226.0 235.6 249.1 254.0
       Money market fund shares 7.6 7.2 6.9 6.5 6.1 6.8 6.9 6.4 7.1
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 232.6 205.4 228.7 212.1 219.3 219.3 228.7 242.7 246.9
   Insurance technical reserves 51.3 39.4 51.2 47.5 48.2 46.7 51.2 55.0 54.6
   Financial derivatives 105.9 92.2 33.4 65.1 56.9 44.7 33.4 35.0 35.2
   Other accounts receivable 1,570.5 1,746.1 1,833.1 1,807.7 1,807.9 1,833.6 1,833.1 1,873.2 1,832.0
   Total 7,896.2 8,278.7 8,679.9 8,452.9 8,505.4 8,596.6 8,679.9 8,825.2 8,779.8
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 252.3 228.7 239.7 231.2 234.8 234.8 239.7 247.0 254.7
     Short-term securities 9.6 9.3 4.5 9.1 8.4 7.5 4.5 5.6 8.7
     Long-term securities 242.7 219.4 235.2 222.1 226.4 227.3 235.2 241.4 246.0
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 100.6 90.9 96.3 93.4 94.1 94.1 96.3 102.3 103.4
         Non-financial corporations 5.3 5.8 5.8 6.5 6.2 5.7 5.8 6.6 6.6
         Financial corporations 83.1 73.4 74.7 74.3 74.3 73.8 74.7 79.3 79.5
         General government 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3
         Households 11.8 11.4 15.5 12.2 13.3 14.4 15.5 16.3 16.9
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 151.8 137.8 143.4 137.8 140.7 140.8 143.4 144.7 151.3
   Loans 3,151.7 3,459.8 3,597.6 3,506.4 3,545.6 3,563.6 3,597.6 3,632.9 3,675.8
     Short-term loans 1,569.7 1,784.4 1,863.0 1,824.6 1,848.4 1,864.7 1,863.0 1,888.2 1,932.2
     Long-term loans 1,582.0 1,675.4 1,734.7 1,681.8 1,697.2 1,698.9 1,734.7 1,744.7 1,743.6
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 2,206.5 2,486.0 2,662.1 2,569.5 2,604.5 2,625.7 2,662.1 2,703.7 2,720.3
         Non-financial corporations 1,060.1 1,206.7 1,338.3 1,273.5 1,294.9 1,319.9 1,338.3 1,363.8 1,376.0
         Financial corporations 1,039.2 1,150.9 1,214.5 1,174.9 1,192.7 1,194.2 1,214.5 1,236.1 1,243.8
         General government 107.2 128.3 109.2 121.2 116.8 111.6 109.2 103.8 100.6
       Loans from the rest of the world 945.1 973.8 935.6 936.9 941.1 938.0 935.6 929.2 955.4
   Equity 5,304.9 4,948.7 5,232.5 5,195.6 5,222.9 5,138.9 5,232.5 5,367.9 5,312.6
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 924.7 761.3 807.7 855.9 821.5 778.6 807.7 851.9 806.2
       Non-financial corporations 384.9 324.5 326.7 353.9 347.0 322.9 326.7 351.0 324.5
       Financial corporations 210.1 151.2 173.3 182.2 165.2 167.9 173.3 175.6 175.9
       General government 69.9 69.2 76.0 78.9 75.3 70.9 76.0 81.0 75.7
       Households 259.7 216.4 231.7 240.9 234.0 216.8 231.7 244.3 230.1
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 1,126.4 823.2 951.0 941.1 976.3 910.3 951.0 1,029.1 1,000.7
     Other equity  1 3,253.8 3,364.2 3,473.8 3,398.6 3,425.2 3,450.0 3,473.8 3,486.8 3,505.7
   Insurance technical reserves 323.8 333.0 338.2 334.3 335.6 336.9 338.2 339.6 340.9
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 137.4 73.2 32.7 45.3 40.6 16.7 32.7 30.4 21.7
   Other accounts payable 1,592.5 1,775.5 1,807.0 1,781.5 1,792.1 1,846.5 1,807.0 1,803.7 1,818.5
   Total 10,762.7 10,818.9 11,247.9 11,094.3 11,171.7 11,137.5 11,247.9 11,421.4 11,424.2
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 145.07 110.37 90.44 –10.65 25.44 13.51 62.13 31.35 48.32
     Currency 59.45 44.19 14.16 2.94 3.37 2.52 5.34 0.80 3.66
     Deposits 85.61 66.18 76.28 –13.59 22.08 11.00 56.80 30.56 44.66
       Transferable deposits 90.84 47.63 –129.98 –60.51 –18.16 –32.67 –18.65 –33.47 8.43
       Time deposits –5.09 34.49 184.51 50.43 43.22 42.53 48.32 60.28 38.57
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –0.13 –15.94 21.75 –3.52 –2.99 1.14 27.12 3.75 –2.34
   Debt securities –5.89 25.03 65.16 29.74 20.44 14.29 0.69 8.80 5.06
     Short-term debt securities 0.31 2.01 11.75 7.99 5.68 2.12 –4.04 –1.00 –1.80
     Long-term debt securities –6.20 23.02 53.40 21.74 14.76 12.17 4.73 9.80 6.86
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –3.70 20.31 53.95 25.57 16.76 11.99 –0.36 6.58 1.20
         Non-financial corporations –0.83 0.50 3.41 0.52 1.11 1.09 0.68 0.32 0.62
         Financial corporations –2.57 17.47 42.65 21.52 12.75 9.33 –0.94 6.31 0.66
         General government –0.30 2.35 7.88 3.52 2.90 1.57 –0.10 –0.04 –0.08
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –2.19 4.72 11.21 4.17 3.69 2.30 1.05 2.22 3.87
   Equity and investment fund shares 164.40 94.44 56.22 13.78 13.36 17.33 11.74 20.47 21.14
     Equity 59.04 43.25 20.15 1.84 3.79 9.43 5.09 6.79 4.63
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 14.29 12.38 –4.63 –0.91 0.02 –1.43 –2.31 –1.15 –0.70
         Non-financial corporations 12.71 9.96 –3.59 –2.03 0.10 –0.41 –1.25 –0.52 –0.29
         Financial corporations 1.58 2.42 –1.04 1.12 –0.08 –1.02 –1.07 –0.63 –0.41
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 10.83 8.55 2.89 0.44 –0.21 1.73 0.92 2.08 2.39
       Other equity  1 33.92 22.32 21.90 2.31 3.98 9.12 6.48 5.86 2.94
     Investment fund shares 105.35 51.19 36.07 11.94 9.57 7.91 6.65 13.69 16.51
       Money market fund shares 0.19 0.82 4.39 0.43 1.47 1.67 0.82 1.48 2.02
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 105.17 50.37 31.68 11.50 8.10 6.24 5.83 12.21 14.49
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 0.57 –0.41 1.13 5.34 –0.94 –1.05 –2.22 10.32 –3.77
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 22.42 10.86 –13.38 0.37 0.07 –2.63 –11.19 4.65 4.52
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 33.25 34.68 25.45 2.36 5.96 2.53 14.60 3.90 0.05
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 8.82 4.60 32.34 28.77 –2.94 15.75 –9.24 7.70 –8.19
   Total 368.64 279.56 257.35 69.70 61.40 59.73 66.52 87.20 67.14
 External financing
   Loans 97.89 83.22 14.36 2.45 5.49 6.52 –0.09 –0.80 2.51
     Short-term loans 0.86 2.59 –0.90 0.74 –0.28 –0.50 –0.86 –0.80 –1.18
     Long-term loans 97.03 80.63 15.26 1.71 5.77 7.01 0.77 0.00 3.68
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 99.61 79.24 18.81 2.69 5.72 6.64 3.77 0.73 4.89
       Consumer loans –0.89 4.60 1.44 0.54 1.26 1.66 –2.02 –0.41 –0.77
       Entrepreneurial loans –0.83 –0.61 –5.89 –0.78 –1.49 –1.78 –1.84 –1.13 –1.61
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 94.32 82.56 12.26 1.80 4.69 6.41 –0.64 –0.24 3.58
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 3.58 0.66 2.10 0.64 0.80 0.11 0.55 –0.56 –1.07
       Loans from general government and rest of the world –0.00 –0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.90 3.96 2.63 0.33 –0.35 0.45 2.19 2.91 –1.13
   Total 98.79 87.19 17.00 2.78 5.14 6.97 2.10 2.11 1.38
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 3,007.6 3,120.1 3,219.6 3,108.2 3,133.8 3,149.0 3,219.6 3,252.6 3,301.7
     Currency 387.1 431.4 445.5 434.3 437.7 440.2 445.5 446.3 450.0
     Deposits 2,620.5 2,688.7 2,774.1 2,674.0 2,696.1 2,708.8 2,774.1 2,806.3 2,851.7
       Transferable deposits 1,764.4 1,811.7 1,686.3 1,756.0 1,737.7 1,705.0 1,686.3 1,652.9 1,661.2
       Time deposits 297.3 334.8 528.7 384.2 427.6 471.9 528.7 590.6 630.1
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 558.8 542.3 559.1 533.8 530.8 531.9 559.1 562.8 560.5
     Debt securities 109.6 125.0 198.2 157.1 177.7 192.5 198.2 209.2 217.3
       Short-term debt securities 1.8 3.9 12.5 11.9 15.9 16.4 12.5 18.5 17.1
       Long-term debt securities 107.8 121.1 185.7 145.2 161.8 176.1 185.7 190.7 200.1
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 75.3 88.4 147.8 116.1 133.0 144.6 147.8 154.6 157.9
           Non-financial corporations 9.8 9.7 13.5 10.4 11.4 12.4 13.5 14.1 14.7
           Financial corporations 63.2 74.5 122.0 98.0 110.9 120.0 122.0 128.2 130.9
           General government 2.2 4.2 12.3 7.8 10.7 12.2 12.3 12.3 12.2
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 34.3 36.6 50.4 41.0 44.7 47.9 50.4 54.6 59.4
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,478.7 2,330.4 2,581.6 2,435.6 2,488.6 2,479.2 2,581.6 2,715.4 2,755.7
     Equity 1,546.0 1,474.4 1,618.9 1,542.4 1,566.7 1,564.0 1,618.9 1,678.2 1,691.2
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 296.0 255.9 279.2 282.1 277.0 262.5 279.2 299.5 283.9
         Non-financial corporations 250.4 208.7 223.9 232.3 225.6 209.5 223.9 236.4 222.3
         Financial corporations 45.6 47.2 55.3 49.9 51.3 53.0 55.3 63.1 61.6
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 249.2 209.3 247.9 227.3 239.5 235.7 247.9 270.2 282.9
       Other equity  1 1,000.8 1,009.2 1,091.8 1,033.0 1,050.3 1,065.8 1,091.8 1,108.5 1,124.4
     Investment fund shares 932.7 856.0 962.6 893.1 921.9 915.2 962.6 1,037.2 1,064.6
       Money market fund shares 2.5 3.3 7.8 3.7 5.2 7.0 7.8 9.3 11.4
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 930.2 852.7 954.8 889.4 916.7 908.2 954.8 1,027.9 1,053.2
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 46.4 40.7 43.0 46.4 45.4 44.2 43.0 52.8 52.1
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,379.5 1,104.5 1,151.4 1,124.0 1,125.6 1,088.9 1,151.4 1,168.7 1,204.1
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 1,196.7 1,178.4 1,234.5 1,188.8 1,200.6 1,201.5 1,234.5 1,241.8 1,249.7
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 27.5 26.5 35.6 26.9 27.6 26.9 35.6 37.8 34.2
   Total 8,246.0 7,925.5 8,463.9 8,087.0 8,199.3 8,182.3 8,463.9 8,678.3 8,814.7
 Liabilities
   Loans 2,013.7 2,100.8 2,117.5 2,103.3 2,108.6 2,115.6 2,117.5 2,116.4 2,117.6
     Short-term loans 53.0 55.5 55.1 56.6 56.4 55.9 55.1 54.4 53.2
     Long-term loans 1,960.7 2,045.2 2,062.4 2,046.7 2,052.2 2,059.8 2,062.4 2,062.0 2,064.4
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,538.7 1,621.3 1,643.3 1,625.0 1,630.5 1,637.7 1,643.3 1,643.7 1,647.6
       Consumer loans 224.5 228.9 230.0 229.7 230.8 232.1 230.0 229.6 228.5
       Entrepreneurial loans 250.5 250.6 244.2 248.6 247.3 245.9 244.2 243.2 241.5
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,920.3 2,004.0 2,016.3 2,005.8 2,010.5 2,016.9 2,016.3 2,016.2 2,019.4
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 93.4 96.7 101.3 97.5 98.1 98.8 101.3 100.2 98.3
       Loans from general government and rest of the world – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 18.8 23.0 26.2 23.5 23.3 23.9 26.2 29.1 28.0
   Total 2,032.6 2,123.8 2,143.7 2,126.8 2,131.8 2,139.5 2,143.7 2,145.5 2,145.6
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
58•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
General
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
fundsGeneral
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus 1
2018 +64.7 +22.4 +10.7 +15.8 +15.7 +1.9 +0.7 +0.3 +0.5 +0.5
2019 +47.0 +18.2 +12.9 +7.0 +8.9 +1.3 +0.5 +0.4 +0.2 +0.3
2020 –151.1 –91.3 –31.3 +6.3 –34.9 –4.4 –2.6 –0.9 +0.2 –1.0
p 2021 –116.4 –132.0 +6.8 +6.3 +2.4 –3.2 –3.6 +0.2 +0.2 +0.1
p 2022 –84.9 –115.2 +16.8 +4.8 +8.8 –2.1 –2.9 +0.4 +0.1 +0.2
p 2023 –107.5 –94.8 –10.1 –11.7 +9.0 –2.6 –2.3 –0.2 –0.3 +0.2
p 2022 H1 + 0.3 –31.6 +19.5 +5.9 +6.5 +0.0 –1.6 +1.0 +0.3 +0.3
pH2 –85.2 –83.6 –2.7 –1.1 +2.3 –4.2 –4.1 –0.1 –0.1 +0.1
p 2023 H1 –39.3 –42.5 –4.0 –2.5 +9.6 –1.9 –2.1 –0.2 –0.1 +0.5
pH2 –68.2 –52.3 –6.2 –9.2 –0.6 –3.2 –2.5 –0.3 –0.4 –0.0
pe 2024 H1 –38.1 –24.6 –7.2 –6.4 +0.2 –1.8 –1.2 –0.3 –0.3 +0.0
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2018 2,086.4 1,337.2 603.4 162.4 0.7 60.8 39.0 17.6 4.7 0.0
2019 2,075.0 1,315.6 615.0 161.1 0.9 58.7 37.2 17.4 4.6 0.0
2020 2,347.0 1,530.4 667.0 163.0 7.6 68.0 44.4 19.3 4.7 0.2
p 2021 2,502.8 1,683.4 668.2 165.4 0.9 68.1 45.8 18.2 4.5 0.0
p 2022 2,569.9 1,780.2 638.2 172.1 3.1 65.0 45.0 16.1 4.4 0.1
p 2023 2,631.8 1,856.6 622.4 180.5 3.3 62.9 44.4 14.9 4.3 0.1
p 2022 Q1 2,504.9 1,688.3 665.7 164.2 3.6 66.7 45.0 17.7 4.4 0.1
pQ2 2,542.8 1,727.6 661.9 166.3 3.9 66.5 45.1 17.3 4.3 0.1
pQ3 2,556.4 1,761.3 645.0 166.2 4.4 65.7 45.3 16.6 4.3 0.1
pQ4 2,569.9 1,780.2 638.2 172.1 3.1 65.0 45.0 16.1 4.4 0.1
p 2023 Q1 2,597.4 1,803.8 636.2 173.6 3.9 64.5 44.8 15.8 4.3 0.1
pQ2 2,595.6 1,811.6 627.5 173.1 3.1 63.6 44.4 15.4 4.2 0.1
pQ3 2,637.7 1,855.0 625.4 175.7 4.1 63.8 44.9 15.1 4.2 0.1
pQ4 2,631.8 1,856.6 622.4 180.5 3.3 62.9 44.4 14.9 4.3 0.1
p 2024 Q1 2,639.4 1,859.7 630.0 181.2 3.2 62.6 44.1 14.9 4.3 0.1
pQ2 2,635.1 1,851.6 630.7 183.4 3.6 61.9 43.5 14.8 4.3 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The deficit/surplus in
accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition.  2 Quarterly GDP
ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters.
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts *
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total TaxesSocial con-
tributions Other TotalSocial
benefitsCompen-
sation of
employeesInter-
mediate
consumptionGross
capital
formation Interest OtherDeficit/
surplusMemo item:
Total tax
burden  1
€ billion
2018 1,598.0 832.9 572.6 192.5 1,533.3 803.9 270.7 188.2 89.8 31.8 149.0 +64.7 1,412.5
2019 1,657.6 859.3 598.2 200.1 1,610.6 844.6 285.1 199.5 96.1 28.1 157.3 +47.0 1,464.6
2020 1,612.7 808.9 608.1 195.7 1,763.8 900.3 296.7 226.9 105.7 22.4 211.7 –151.1 1,424.0
p 2021 1,747.9 907.4 632.2 208.3 1,864.3 937.2 307.2 243.7 106.2 21.7 248.3 –116.4 1,547.4
p 2022 1,852.6 970.0 667.1 215.5 1,937.5 968.5 320.7 252.2 112.2 27.9 256.0 –84.9 1,647.2
p 2023 1,917.4 966.9 709.9 240.7 2,025.0 1,019.1 337.6 264.0 117.1 36.6 250.7 –107.5 1,685.0
As a percentage of GDP
2018 46.6 24.3 16.7 5.6 44.7 23.4 7.9 5.5 2.6 0.9 4.3 +1.9 41.2
2019 46.9 24.3 16.9 5.7 45.6 23.9 8.1 5.6 2.7 0.8 4.4 +1.3 41.4
2020 46.7 23.4 17.6 5.7 51.1 26.1 8.6 6.6 3.1 0.6 6.1 –4.4 41.3
p 2021 47.5 24.7 17.2 5.7 50.7 25.5 8.4 6.6 2.9 0.6 6.8 –3.2 42.1
p 2022 46.9 24.5 16.9 5.4 49.0 24.5 8.1 6.4 2.8 0.7 6.5 –2.1 41.7
p 2023 45.8 23.1 17.0 5.8 48.4 24.3 8.1 6.3 2.8 0.9 6.0 –2.6 40.3
Percentage growth rates
2018 +4.5 +4.2 +4.2 +6.8 +3.3 +2.6 +4.0 +3.9 +10.0 –7.8 +3.6 . +4.2
2019 +3.7 +3.2 +4.5 +3.9 +5.0 +5.1 +5.3 +6.0 +7.1 –11.8 +5.6 . +3.7
2020 –2.7 –5.9 +1.6 –2.2 +9.5 +6.6 +4.1 +13.7 +9.9 –20.2 +34.6 . –2.8
p 2021 +8.4 +12.2 +4.0 +6.5 +5.7 +4.1 +3.5 +7.4 +0.5 –2.9 +17.3 . +8.7
p 2022 +6.0 +6.9 +5.5 +3.4 +3.9 +3.3 +4.4 +3.5 +5.7 +28.2 +3.1 . +6.5
p 2023 +3.5 –0.3 +6.4 +11.7 +4.5 +5.2 +5.3 +4.7 +4.4 +31.2 –2.1 . +2.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office.  * Figures in accordance with ESA 2010.  1 Taxes and
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution Fund.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
59•
X. Public finances in Germany
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3
Period Total  4 TaxesFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5 Total  4Person-
nel
expend-
itureCurrent
grants InterestFixed
asset
forma-
tionFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5Deficit/
surplusRev-
enue  6Expend-
itureDeficit/
surplusRev-
enueExpend-
itureDeficit/
surplus
2017 897.6 734.5 7.7 867.8 261.5 327.2 41.9 51.7 13.8 +29.8 631.5 622.0 +9.5 1,414.9 1,375.6 +39.3
2018 949.2 776.3 6.0 904.0 272.4 337.3 39.1 55.1 16.1 +45.2 656.2 642.5 +13.6 1,488.1 1,429.3 +58.8
2019 1,007.7 799.4 11.0 973.9 285.9 348.9 33.5 62.2 16.8 +33.7 685.0 676.7 +8.3 1,571.2 1,529.2 +42.0
2020 944.3 739.9 13.7 1,109.7 299.4 422.0 25.8 68.6 59.9 –165.4 719.5 747.8 –28.3 1,516.2 1,709.9 –193.7
2021 1,105.4 833.3 25.3 1,239.9 310.7 530.8 21.0 69.3 26.1 –134.5 769.2 777.1 –7.9 1,701.6 1,844.0 –142.4
2022 1,145.2 895.9 32.4 1,287.0 325.7 499.6 33.5 72.5 79.3 –141.8 800.5 793.3 +7.2 1,772.9 1,907.5 –134.6
P 2023 1,224.6 915.9 36.4 1,320.3 349.7 479.8 64.4 83.5 31.9 –95.7 820.3 814.5 +5.9 1,904.7 1,994.5 –89.8
2022 Q1 278.2 224.0 5.0 279.3 79.6 116.8 5.5 11.9 7.0 – 1.0 P193.8 P199.8 P–6.0 P430.7 P437.8 P–7.1
Q2 287.9 224.6 5.1 294.2 77.8 126.4 10.6 15.3 5.9 – 6.2 P199.9 P196.7 P+3.2 P444.2 P447.2 P–3.1
Q3 267.7 207.0 13.3 298.8 78.1 116.8 10.8 17.7 10.8 –31.0 P194.0 P197.6 P–3.6 P419.2 P453.8 P–34.6
Q4 318.5 244.5 9.0 413.5 89.7 138.5 6.5 27.5 55.6 –95.0 P210.5 P198.1 P+12.4 P486.0 P568.5 P–82.5
2023 Q1 281.9 215.4 9.3 331.8 81.3 130.7 20.1 13.6 17.8 –49.9 P195.4 P200.8 P–5.4 P441.7 P497.0 P–55.3
Q2 311.6 226.3 9.4 313.1 84.7 117.7 24.2 17.8 2.2 – 1.6 P199.3 P198.9 P+0.4 P476.2 P477.3 P–1.1
Q3 290.5 229.6 7.2 303.1 86.5 103.2 12.6 21.0 4.5 –12.6 P201.5 P205.0 P–3.6 P457.1 P473.3 P–16.1
Q4 347.5 244.6 10.6 375.3 96.7 126.3 11.5 30.9 7.4 –27.7 P218.4 P208.7 P+9.7 P530.8 P548.9 P–18.1
2024 Q1 290.7 225.5 7.9 310.8 92.3 113.9 16.8 17.6 3.7 –20.1 P204.0 P212.1 P–8.1 P460.0 P488.2 P–28.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data.  1 Annual fig-
ures based on the quarterly figures of the Federal Statistical Office, core budgets and
off-budget entities which are assigned to the general government sector.  2 The annual
figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all pro-
visional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated.  3 The develop-
ment of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statisticalchangeovers.  4 Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state
and local government.  5 On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as dis-
posals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted.  6 Excluding central govern-
ment liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency.
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2017 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 396.7 385.5 +11.3 258.5 247.7 +10.7
2018 374.4 363.5 +10.9 419.6 399.8 +19.9 270.0 260.1 + 9.8
2019 382.5 369.2 +13.3 436.3 419.3 +17.0 282.4 276.7 + 5.7
2020 341.4 472.1 –130.7 455.5 489.0 –33.6 295.2 293.2 + 2.0
2021 370.3 511.9 –141.6 509.3 508.7 + 0.5 308.0 303.4 + 4.6
2022 399.6 515.6 –116.0 534.8 522.5 +12.3 328.5 325.8 + 2.7
2023 425.3 490.2 –64.9 530.9 531.7 – 0.8 358.2 365.0 – 6.8
2022 Q1 94.7 114.0 –19.3 134.6 122.7 +11.9 68.4 73.8 – 5.4
Q2 99.7 123.5 –23.7 133.2 123.6 + 9.6 81.0 77.3 + 3.7
Q3 89.0 127.8 –38.7 126.1 121.4 + 4.7 81.1 80.3 + 0.8
Q4 116.1 150.4 –34.2 139.6 153.4 –13.8 98.0 94.5 + 3.5
2023 Q1 96.2 116.9 –20.7 121.0 122.3 – 1.3 73.3 81.0 – 7.7
Q2 101.8 119.6 –17.7 138.5 133.6 + 4.9 87.0 86.6 + 0.4
Q3 106.1 115.9 – 9.8 123.1 120.0 + 3.2 87.4 91.5 – 4.1
Q4 121.2 137.8 –16.6 146.9 154.4 – 7.5 110.4 105.8 + 4.6
2024 Q1 102.8 111.6 – 8.7 129.2 133.9 – 4.7 76.7 90.6 –13.9
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office data and Bundesbank
calculations.  1 Any amounts of the Bundesbank's profit distribution exceeding the
reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government'sspecial funds are not included here.  2 Including the local authority level of the city
states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg.  3 Data of core budgets and off-budget entities
which are assigned to the general government sector.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
60•
X. Public finances in Germany
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Period Total TotalCentral
government  1State
government  1 European Union  2Local
government  3Balance of
untransferred
tax shares  4Memo item:
Amounts deducted
in the Federal
budget  5
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 – 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,911 632,268 313,381 286,065 32,822 107,916 – 274 30,266
2021 833,337 706,978 342,988 325,768 38,222 125,000 + 1,359 29,321
2022 895,854 760,321 372,121 349,583 38,617 134,146 + 1,387 34,911
2023 915,893 774,112 389,114 349,554 35,444 143,663 – 1,882 33,073
2022 Q1 224,006 189,158 92,112 87,240 9,806 24,772 + 10,077 7,261
Q2 224,538 190,982 94,153 86,852 9,977 34,149 – 594 11,576
Q3 205,544 174,232 84,078 80,020 10,133 33,618 – 2,306 7,953
Q4 241,767 205,950 101,778 95,471 8,702 41,607 – 5,790 8,121
2023 Q1 220,950 186,173 93,366 83,536 9,271 26,505 + 8,271 7,665
Q2 221,225 186,597 94,492 82,961 9,144 35,152 – 525 8,959
Q3 230,151 195,334 98,626 87,824 8,884 34,958 – 141 8,678
Q4 243,568 206,008 102,631 95,233 8,145 47,048 – 9,488 7,770
2024 Q1 225,304 188,806 96,283 85,277 7,246 25,910 + 10,588 7,999
Q2 232,175 196,883 100,461 88,881 7,541 35,742 – 450 8,306
2023 July . 65,445 32,791 29,498 3,157 . . 3,426
Aug. . 55,199 28,108 24,356 2,736 . . 2,626
2024 July . 59,743 30,166 26,973 2,605 . . 3,646
Aug. . 57,924 29,956 25,283 2,685 . . 2,846
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers,
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern-
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these amounts
which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget.  2 Customs duties andshares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government
tax revenue.  3 Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin, Bremen and
Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms.  4 Difference between local
government's share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in
the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local govern-
ment in the same period.  5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1.
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
€ million
Joint taxes
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7
Period Total  1 TotalWage
tax 3Assessed
income
tax 4Corpora-
tion tax  5Invest-
ment
income
tax 6 TotalDomestic
VATImport
VATLocal
business
tax
trans-
fers  8Central
govern-
ment
taxes  9State
govern-
ment
taxes  9EU
customs
dutiesMemo
item:
Local
govern-
ment
share in
joint
taxes
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,376 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,734 50,107
2021 760,953 370,296 218,407 72,342 42,124 37,423 250,800 187,631 63,169 4,951 98,171 31,613 5,122 53,976
2022 814,886 390,111 227,205 77,411 46,334 39,161 284,850 198,201 86,649 6,347 96,652 30,097 6,829 54,565
2023 829,774 399,271 236,227 73,388 44,852 44,803 291,394 212,596 78,798 6,347 101,829 25,199 5,734 55,662
2022 Q1 203,130 96,245 56,206 20,915 11,178 7,946 73,584 54,234 19,350 615 22,252 8,975 1,459 13,972
Q2 204,740 101,822 60,363 17,194 11,246 13,019 67,763 46,755 21,008 1,521 24,441 7,564 1,630 13,758
Q3 185,552 82,392 43,431 17,598 10,724 10,639 71,164 49,323 21,841 1,471 21,657 7,115 1,753 11,320
Q4 221,464 109,652 67,205 21,704 13,186 7,557 72,339 47,889 24,451 2,740 28,302 6,444 1,987 15,514
2023 Q1 199,764 94,453 55,669 19,728 10,700 8,357 73,522 52,197 21,325 370 23,110 6,815 1,494 13,591
Q2 199,993 98,917 59,538 15,467 12,406 11,506 67,260 47,855 19,405 1,499 24,740 6,142 1,435 13,396
Q3 208,722 98,832 56,370 17,010 9,902 15,550 76,093 56,986 19,106 1,583 24,665 6,160 1,389 13,388
Q4 221,295 107,069 64,651 21,184 11,844 9,390 74,519 55,557 18,962 2,895 29,314 6,082 1,417 15,287
2024 Q1 202,975 97,423 57,101 19,102 10,141 11,080 73,613 56,469 17,144 489 23,846 6,478 1,125 14,168
Q2 211,033 105,931 62,650 14,831 10,361 18,089 71,247 52,496 18,751 1,604 24,634 6,257 1,360 14,150
2023 July 69,269 30,941 20,130 –185 –282 11,278 26,792 20,301 6,491 1,245 7,689 2,104 498 3,824
Aug. 58,855 21,857 18,859 219 277 2,501 25,554 18,978 6,575 336 8,404 2,201 503 3,656
2024 July 63,814 27,017 21,381 –10 –590 6,236 24,456 18,258 6,199 1,298 8,138 2,484 422 4,071
Aug. 61,976 23,980 20,261 958 –140 2,901 24,978 19,052 5,926 243 9,897 2,376 502 4,052
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations.  1 This total, unlike
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of untrans-
ferred tax shares.  2 Respective percentage share of central, state and local government
in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and
non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on interest income and
capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12.  3 After deducting child benefits
and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans.  4 After deducting employeerefunds and research grants.  5 After deducting research grants.  6 Final withholding tax
on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings.  7 The allocation
of revenue to central, state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular
intervals, is regulated in Section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percent-
age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2023: 47.5:49.7:2.8.
The EU share is deducted from central government's share.  8 Respective percentage
share of central and state government for 2023: 41.4:58.6.  9 For the breakdown, see
Table X. 7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
61•
X. Public finances in Germany
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
of which:
PeriodEnergy
taxSoli-
darity
surchargeInsurance
taxTobacco
taxMotor
vehicle
taxElectri-
city taxAlcohol
tax OtherTax on
the acqui-
sition of
land and
buildingsInherit-
ance
taxBetting
and
lottery
tax Other TotalLocal
business
tax 2Real
property
taxes
2017 41,022 17,953 13,269 14,399 8,948 6,944 2,094 – 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,966
2018 40,882 18,927 13,779 14,339 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,203
2019 40,683 19,646 14,136 14,257 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,553 14,651 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2021 37,120 11,028 14,980 14,733 9,546 6,691 2,089 1,984 18,335 9,824 2,333 1,121 77,335 61,251 14,985
2022 33,667 11,978 15,672 14,229 9,499 6,830 2,191 2,585 17,122 9,226 2,569 1,180 87,315 70,382 15,282
2023 36,658 12,239 16,851 14,672 9,514 6,832 2,159 2,904 12,203 9,286 2,477 1,233 92,466 75,265 15,493
2022 Q1 4,452 2,840 7,175 2,372 2,594 1,785 531 503 5,061 2,827 701 385 21,492 17,454 3,577
Q2 9,092 3,518 2,872 3,648 2,433 1,722 505 651 4,406 2,238 661 259 21,318 16,839 4,077
Q3 7,103 2,571 3,059 3,742 2,325 1,598 549 710 4,100 2,138 596 281 21,463 16,792 4,249
Q4 13,020 3,049 2,567 4,467 2,147 1,725 606 722 3,555 2,023 611 254 23,043 19,298 3,380
2023 Q1 4,362 2,888 7,637 2,669 2,632 1,749 530 643 3,362 2,368 666 420 21,555 17,471 3,610
Q2 8,796 3,649 3,091 3,830 2,475 1,669 517 712 2,937 2,323 615 267 22,731 18,117 4,192
Q3 9,477 2,607 3,309 3,879 2,339 1,749 532 773 2,997 2,302 577 284 23,013 18,294 4,271
Q4 14,023 3,095 2,813 4,294 2,068 1,665 580 776 2,907 2,292 620 263 25,168 21,383 3,421
2024 Q1 4,488 3,028 8,255 2,672 2,661 1,540 520 681 2,986 2,388 651 453 22,819 18,587 3,718
Q2 8,717 3,491 3,355 3,905 2,533 1,313 460 859 3,050 2,314 609 285 22,745 17,976 4,312
2023 July 3,038 550 911 1,403 783 579 188 237 988 841 183 92 . . .
Aug. 3,362 486 1,523 1,216 783 587 176 271 1,117 805 190 89 . . .
2024 July 3,077 704 967 1,645 858 420 175 293 1,190 1,004 200 90 . . .
Aug. 2,901 523 1,638 1,298 801 445 162 2,129 1,143 958 188 87 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 For the sum total, see Table X. 6.  2 Including revenue from offshore wind
farms.
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  3
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions  2Payments
from central
government TotalPension
paymentsPensioners'
health
insuranceDeficit/
surplus Total Deposits  4 SecuritiesMemo item:
Administrative
assets
2017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 4,032
2018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 4,008
2019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 + 1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 – 3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 3,901
2021 348,679 245,185 102,772 347,486 296,343 22,734 + 1,192 42,014 40,320 1,241 3,807
2022 363,871 258,269 104,876 360,436 308,168 23,792 + 3,435 46,087 44,181 1,399 3,746
2023 382,540 271,852 108,836 381,073 325,369 25,346 + 1,467 48,869 46,649 1,637 3,697
2022 Q1 86,684 60,599 25,937 86,841 74,568 5,734 – 157 41,784 39,952 1,367 3,783
Q2 90,040 63,978 25,879 87,138 74,644 5,756 + 2,903 44,425 42,441 1,513 3,761
Q3 89,284 62,891 26,218 92,606 79,400 6,127 – 3,322 41,548 39,767 1,315 3,775
Q4 96,931 70,750 25,995 93,444 79,944 6,170 + 3,487 46,082 44,186 1,399 3,767
2023 Q1 91,370 64,171 26,972 92,422 79,330 6,142 – 1,052 45,109 43,030 1,569 3,724
Q2 94,735 67,459 26,942 92,585 79,177 6,165 + 2,151 47,245 45,043 1,693 3,705
Q3 93,776 66,300 26,950 97,619 83,549 6,513 – 3,843 44,354 42,208 1,632 3,703
Q4 101,578 73,852 27,041 97,967 83,678 6,520 + 3,611 48,825 46,660 1,637 3,697
2024 Q1 96,340 67,378 28,344 97,801 83,894 6,560 – 1,461 46,926 44,166 2,179 3,758
Q2 99,956 71,411 27,848 98,246 83,818 6,604 + 1,710 48,873 46,253 2,024 3,748
Sources: German pension insurance scheme and Bundesbank calculations.  * Excluding
the German pension insurance scheme for mining, railway and maritime industries. The
final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as
the latter are not revised.  1 Including financial compensation payments. Excluding in-vestment spending and proceeds.  2 Including contributions for recipients of govern-
ment cash benefits.  3 Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
quarter.  4 Including cash.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
62•
X. Public finance in Germany
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total  1 ContributionsInsolvency
compen-
sation levy TotalUnemploy-
ment benefit  2Short-time
working
benefits  3Job
promotion  4Insolvency
benefit
paymentAdminis-
trative
expenditure  5Deficit/
surplusMemo item:
Deficit-
offsetting
grant or loan
from central
government
2017 37,819 32,501 882 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 687 6,444 + 5,952 –
2018 39,335 34,172 622 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 588 8,129 + 6,228 –
2019 35,285 29,851 638 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 842 6,252 + 2,131 –
2020 33,678 28,236 630 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 1,214 6,076 –27,335 6,913
2021 35,830 29,571 1,302 57,570 19,460 21,003 7,475 493 6,080 –21,739 16,935
2022 37,831 31,651 1,062 37,530 16,588 3,779 7,125 534 6,256 + 300 423
2023 42,245 36,058 748 39,233 18,799 981 7,614 1,236 7,006 + 3,012 – 423
2022 Q1 8,827 7,374 251 10,685 4,424 2,037 1,821 135 1,412 – 1,858 –
Q2 9,327 7,857 262 9,457 4,091 1,180 1,794 147 1,450 – 130 –
Q3 9,278 7,740 261 8,401 4,056 406 1,621 107 1,506 + 877 –
Q4 10,398 8,679 289 8,987 4,016 156 1,889 145 1,888 + 1,411 423
2023 Q1 9,836 8,442 178 9,942 4,727 408 1,858 376 1,550 – 106 –
Q2 10,387 8,976 186 9,661 4,604 290 1,902 271 1,689 + 726 –
Q3 10,361 8,804 182 9,351 4,712 140 1,775 284 1,691 + 1,010 –
Q4 11,661 9,836 202 10,278 4,755 144 2,079 306 2,076 + 1,382 – 423
2024 Q1 10,298 8,903 183 11,237 5,511 465 2,074 380 1,729 – 939 –
Q2 11,019 9,494 196 11,175 5,447 330 2,167 498 1,811 – 156 –
Source: Federal Employment Agency and Bundesbank calculations.  * Including transfers
to the civil servants' pension fund.  1 Excluding central government deficit-offsetting
grant or loan.  2 Unemployment benefit in case of unemployment.  3 Including seasonal
short-time working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, re-
structuring measures and refunds of social contributions.  4 Vocational training, meas-ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, integration, compensation top-up pay-
ments and promotion of business start-ups.  5 Including collection charges to other
social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the
basic allowance for job seekers.
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions Central
government
funds  2 TotalHospital
treatmentPharma-
ceuticalsMedical
treatmentDental
treatment  3Remedies
and
therapeutic
appliancesSickness
benefitsAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  4Deficit/
surplus
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 +3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 +2,654
2019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 –1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 –6,110
2021 289,270 249,734 36,977 294,602 82,748 46,199 45,058 16,335 20,163 16,612 11,727 –5,332
2022 315,248 262,367 50,223 310,594 85,061 48,354 46,379 16,737 21,259 17,947 12,418 +4,654
2023 304,441 278,742 21,896 309,596 91,380 50,170 49,047 17,610 23,381 19,112 12,681 –5,155
2022 Q1 79,253 62,142 17,049 81,493 20,550 11,891 11,847 4,286 5,216 4,574 3,510 –2,240
Q2 79,112 64,611 14,280 79,269 21,080 12,053 11,753 4,249 5,335 4,457 2,958 – 158
Q3 75,516 65,242 9,804 75,011 21,164 12,221 11,384 3,956 5,352 4,441 2,996 + 505
Q4 81,512 70,384 9,091 74,894 21,659 12,242 11,566 4,310 5,442 4,486 3,148 +6,617
2023 Q1 73,718 66,513 6,759 77,593 22,293 12,333 12,477 4,372 5,666 4,927 3,169 –3,875
Q2 73,722 68,792 4,495 76,031 22,531 12,414 12,234 4,481 5,806 4,682 3,166 –2,309
Q3 75,330 69,236 5,244 76,967 22,767 12,667 11,959 4,373 6,001 4,695 3,030 –1,637
Q4 81,548 74,199 5,399 78,860 23,364 12,870 12,415 4,440 5,845 4,809 3,452 +2,688
2024 Q1 75,004 70,700 3,617 80,253 24,188 13,455 13,042 4,603 6,194 5,148 3,069 –5,249
Q2 79,051 73,540 4,609 82,224 24,187 13,777 12,945 4,591 6,337 5,118 3,190 –3,174
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as the latter are not
revised. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensationscheme.  2 Federal grant and liquidity assistance.  3 Including dentures.  4 Net, i.e. after
deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contributions incurred by other
social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
63•
X. Public finances in Germany
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period Total Contributions TotalNon-cash
care benefitsInpatient
care total  2Nursing
benefitContributions to
pension insur-
ance scheme  3Administrative
expenditureDeficit/
surplus
2017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 – 2,557
2018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 – 3,315
2019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2021 52,573 49,764 53,903 9,573 16,511 13,865 3,070 2,024 – 1,330
2022 57,944 52,604 60,100 10,405 20,542 14,872 3,223 2,166 – 2,156
2023 61,374 58,807 59,178 11,506 22,513 16,035 3,582 2,267 + 2,196
2022 Q1 12,912 12,412 14,739 2,564 4,974 3,572 775 529 – 1,827
Q2 15,350 12,951 14,827 2,464 5,026 3,698 795 548 + 523
Q3 13,708 13,021 15,387 2,638 5,197 3,755 802 542 – 1,679
Q4 15,813 14,067 15,078 2,581 5,281 3,892 837 528 + 735
2023 Q1 14,283 13,169 14,698 2,876 5,377 3,846 843 570 – 415
Q2 14,227 13,668 14,392 2,745 5,539 3,940 869 561 – 165
Q3 15,585 15,228 14,823 2,867 5,776 4,074 891 571 + 762
Q4 16,920 16,469 15,317 2,863 5,782 4,317 949 560 + 1,603
2024 Q1 15,896 15,525 16,546 3,207 6,038 4,387 950 645 – 651
Q2 16,544 16,223 16,792 3,161 6,153 4,581 988 607 – 247
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  * The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the
latter are not revised.  1 Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund.  2 In-cluding benefits for short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter alia.
3 For non-professional carers.
12. Maastricht debt by creditor
€ million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Bundesbank Domestic MFIsOther domestic
financial corporations Other domestic creditors Foreign creditors
of which: of which: of which: of which: of which: Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities
2017 2,132,784 319,159 305,301 549,782 194,619 180,104 81,125 55,992 10,456 1,027,747 941,750
2018 2,086,445 364,731 350,487 508,845 167,506 186,346 89,794 54,594 8,725 971,929 892,221
2019 2,075,012 366,562 352,025 468,950 158,119 183,714 88,771 66,339 7,225 989,447 908,749
2020 2,346,955 522,392 507,534 508,627 157,828 191,231 99,840 56,574 8,373 1,068,131 996,412
2021 2,502,817 716,004 700,921 501,518 144,646 191,580 103,049 54,498 7,435 1,039,217 969,736
2022 2,569,897 742,514 727,298 512,096 128,892 210,885 126,039 62,087 10,782 1,042,315 976,034
2023 2,631,777 696,287 680,801 462,980 126,354 207,060 124,059 79,277 23,029 1,186,173 1,120,356
2022 Q1 2,504,867 737,978 722,843 484,532 143,411 194,096 106,165 52,456 6,959 1,035,805 968,404
Q2 2,542,827 759,385 744,213 488,213 133,999 202,681 115,577 54,805 8,086 1,037,742 971,035
Q3 2,556,375 741,360 726,147 515,822 126,865 202,278 116,268 56,681 8,987 1,040,233 968,665
Q4 2,569,897 742,514 727,298 512,096 128,892 210,885 126,039 62,087 10,782 1,042,315 976,034
2023 Q1 2,597,356 741,587 726,326 488,074 129,372 208,879 124,723 64,836 16,123 1,093,978 1,030,198
Q2 2,595,555 719,981 704,639 461,011 125,988 209,075 124,691 72,268 20,878 1,133,222 1,068,575
Q3 2,637,724 706,113 690,704 458,302 126,627 207,964 124,005 75,879 23,354 1,189,466 1,123,464
Q4 2,631,777 696,287 680,801 462,980 126,354 207,060 124,059 79,277 23,029 1,186,173 1,120,356
p 2024 Q1 2,639,393 683,097 667,557 459,737 128,888 204,118 123,304 78,655 24,387 1,213,785 1,149,725
pQ2 2,635,103 661,349 645,746 461,854 132,539 202,294 122,311 78,596 24,117 1,231,010 1,167,615
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
64•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
General government
2017 2,132,784 14,298 48,789 1,484,462 89,109 496,125 . .
2018 2,086,445 14,680 52,572 1,456,159 79,487 483,546 . .
2019 2,075,012 14,678 56,350 1,458,540 66,787 478,657 . .
2020 2,346,955 14,757 173,851 1,596,136 88,045 474,166 . .
2021 2,502,817 18,040 195,421 1,730,366 91,705 467,286 . .
2022 Q1 2,504,867 15,982 172,812 1,774,970 74,045 467,058 . .
Q2 2,542,827 18,108 161,848 1,811,062 79,490 472,319 . .
Q3 2,556,375 22,956 149,831 1,797,101 84,946 501,541 . .
Q4 2,569,897 17,319 150,371 1,818,674 115,417 468,117 . .
2023 Q1 2,597,356 15,337 145,250 1,881,491 87,473 467,804 . .
Q2 2,595,555 15,343 153,379 1,891,392 71,973 463,469 . .
Q3 2,637,724 18,123 164,481 1,923,673 65,403 466,045 . .
Q4 2,631,777 16,886 146,625 1,927,974 67,491 472,801 . .
p 2024 Q1 2,639,393 14,910 133,469 1,960,392 62,427 468,194 . .
pQ2 2,635,103 15,822 118,653 1,973,674 56,623 470,330 . .
Central government
2017 1,363,920 14,298 36,297 1,132,336 48,336 132,653 1,131 11,058
2018 1,337,194 14,680 42,246 1,107,522 43,086 129,660 933 10,358
2019 1,315,637 14,678 38,480 1,102,058 29,956 130,465 605 10,493
2020 1,530,351 14,757 154,498 1,180,873 48,416 131,808 609 14,716
2021 1,683,411 18,040 176,428 1,300,604 57,779 130,559 618 8,276
2022 Q1 1,688,335 15,982 155,123 1,340,528 41,679 135,023 576 10,629
Q2 1,727,568 18,108 147,681 1,373,804 47,195 140,781 623 10,691
Q3 1,761,271 22,956 144,999 1,369,815 55,557 167,945 828 13,302
Q4 1,780,240 17,319 146,989 1,391,825 93,225 130,882 8,815 9,213
2023 Q1 1,803,796 15,337 140,238 1,456,522 60,414 131,284 3,574 10,713
Q2 1,811,625 15,343 149,363 1,472,451 42,689 131,780 2,846 11,459
Q3 1,854,968 18,123 159,932 1,504,643 40,273 131,997 6,427 10,090
Q4 1,856,566 16,886 142,897 1,512,508 52,960 131,315 15,158 9,798
p 2024 Q1 1,859,674 14,910 127,794 1,534,058 51,608 131,304 18,264 10,674
pQ2 1,851,550 15,822 112,601 1,548,050 45,204 129,872 17,663 10,506
State government
2017 617,000 – 12,543 354,688 20,004 229,764 14,453 2,046
2018 603,422 – 10,332 351,994 19,506 221,591 14,396 1,891
2019 614,978 – 17,873 360,495 21,372 215,238 15,115 1,826
2020 667,033 – 19,354 419,862 22,112 205,704 12,108 1,410
2021 668,182 – 18,994 435,430 17,011 196,747 12,628 1,772
2022 Q1 665,746 – 17,691 440,264 15,496 192,294 11,821 1,915
Q2 661,909 – 14,169 443,117 15,395 189,228 11,581 1,742
Q3 644,999 – 4,834 433,147 17,891 189,126 14,256 2,147
Q4 638,162 – 3,384 432,686 13,147 188,945 11,776 1,771
2023 Q1 636,232 – 5,112 430,715 13,972 186,433 12,111 2,404
Q2 627,451 – 4,213 424,450 15,182 183,606 13,603 2,148
Q3 625,399 – 4,843 424,601 12,319 183,636 11,193 2,827
Q4 622,353 – 4,121 421,451 11,906 184,876 11,704 5,251
p 2024 Q1 630,016 – 5,999 432,488 12,061 179,469 12,573 12,203
pQ2 630,665 – 6,256 432,753 11,307 180,349 12,525 9,543
Local government
2017 168,561 – – 3,082 24,932 140,548 1,906 466
2018 162,376 – 1 3,045 20,945 138,386 1,906 497
2019 161,101 – – 2,996 19,633 138,472 1,867 532
2020 162,992 – – 3,366 18,548 141,077 1,413 330
2021 165,380 – – 3,241 17,918 144,221 1,824 313
2022 Q1 164,205 – – 3,052 17,324 143,829 1,895 349
Q2 166,307 – – 2,902 17,242 146,163 1,735 370
Q3 166,213 – – 2,856 15,184 148,172 2,110 392
Q4 172,123 – – 2,896 17,668 151,559 1,679 399
2023 Q1 173,598 – – 2,883 17,481 153,234 2,177 416
Q2 173,067 – – 2,988 18,491 151,587 1,762 741
Q3 175,708 – – 2,825 19,066 153,817 2,371 798
Q4 180,460 – – 2,781 18,006 159,673 2,520 463
p 2024 Q1 181,220 – – 2,723 17,805 160,692 2,397 848
pQ2 183,403 – – 2,602 17,520 163,282 2,393 907
For footnotes see end of table.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
65•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont´d)
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:   2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
Social security funds
2017 807 – – – 262 545 15 3,934
2018 704 – – – 388 316 16 4,506
2019 899 – – – 375 524 16 4,753
2020 7,641 – – – 7,128 513 6,931 4,606
2021 933 – – – 511 422 19 4,729
2022 Q1 3,613 – – – 3,263 350 2,739 4,140
Q2 3,940 – – – 3,478 462 2,958 4,095
Q3 4,416 – – – 3,839 577 3,330 4,683
Q4 3,084 – – – 1,036 2,047 1,442 12,328
2023 Q1 3,856 – – – 1,840 2,016 2,263 6,593
Q2 3,065 – – – 1,024 2,041 1,442 5,306
Q3 4,083 – – – 1,028 3,055 2,442 8,719
Q4 3,280 – – – 417 2,863 1,500 15,370
p 2024 Q1 3,234 – – – 412 2,823 1,519 11,027
pQ2 3,583 – – – 651 2,933 1,519 13,143
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office and
the Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency.  1 Particularly liabilities resulting
from coins in circulation.  2 Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt vis-à-visother government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on the
market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated between
different government subsectors.
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
€ million
Currency and deposits  2Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3
Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total  1 Total  1Federal
day bond Total  1Conventional
Federal
bonds
(Bunds)Conventional
Federal
notes
(Bobls)Conventional
Federal
Treasury
notes
(Schätze)  4Treasury
discount
paper
(Bubills)  5Federal
savings
notesGreen
Federal
securitiesInflation-
linked
Federal
securities  6Capital
indexation
of inflation-
linked
securities Loans  1
2007 1,000,426 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 102,083 37,385 10,287 . 13,464 506 76,167
2008 1,031,948 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 105,684 40,795 9,649 . 19,540 1,336 90,728
2009 1,098,584 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 113,637 104,409 9,471 . 24,730 1,369 75,532
2010 1,349,563 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 126,220 85,867 8,704 . 35,906 2,396 254,654
2011 1,359,259 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 130,648 58,297 8,208 . 44,241 3,961 227,499
2012 1,402,753 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 117,719 56,222 6,818 . 52,119 5,374 215,843
2013 1,405,276 10,582 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 110,029 50,004 4,488 . 51,718 4,730 202,668
2014 1,411,880 12,146 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 103,445 27,951 2,375 . 63,245 5,368 193,531
2015 1,385,956 13,949 1,070 1,188,523 663,296 232,387 96,389 18,536 1,305 . 74,495 5,607 183,484
2016 1,380,165 15,491 1,010 1,179,464 670,245 221,551 95,727 23,609 737 . 66,464 3,602 185,209
2017 1,363,920 14,298 966 1,168,633 693,687 203,899 91,013 10,037 289 . 72,855 4,720 180,988
2018 1,337,194 14,680 921 1,149,768 710,513 182,847 86,009 12,949 48 . 64,647 5,139 172,746
2019 1,315,637 14,678 –1,140,538 719,747 174,719 89,230 13,487 . . 69,805 6,021 160,422
2020 1,530,351 14,757 .1,335,371 801,910 179,560 98,543 113,141 . 9,876 58,279 3,692 180,223
2021 1,683,411 18,040 .1,477,033 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 188,338
2022 1,780,240 17,319 .1,538,815 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 224,107
2023 1,856,566 16,886 .1,655,404 1,045,613 216,276 119,180 135,469 . 53,965 60,470 14,686 184,275
2022 Q1 1,688,335 15,982 .1,495,651 911,280 204,534 108,702 140,427 . 23,961 67,776 7,809 176,703
Q2 1,727,568 18,108 .1,521,485 937,949 198,472 111,343 138,495 . 29,425 70,217 11,209 187,975
Q3 1,761,271 22,956 .1,514,814 918,838 208,509 111,675 137,740 . 35,527 71,498 12,879 223,501
Q4 1,780,240 17,319 .1,538,815 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 224,107
2023 Q1 1,803,796 15,337 .1,596,760 987,363 213,514 120,904 127,143 . 39,459 73,591 15,497 191,698
Q2 1,811,625 15,343 .1,621,814 1,007,004 211,742 124,160 139,012 . 50,243 59,227 13,604 174,468
Q3 1,854,968 18,123 .1,664,575 1,021,675 226,340 125,255 148,407 . 52,763 59,923 13,863 172,270
Q4 1,856,566 16,886 .1,655,404 1,045,613 216,276 119,180 135,469 . 53,965 60,470 14,686 184,275
p 2024 Q1 1,859,674 14,910 .1,661,852 1,054,941 226,133 119,517 119,164 . 58,565 60,312 14,048 182,911
pQ2 1,851,550 15,822 .1,660,652 1,066,616 217,406 124,243 106,105 . 65,074 59,968 15,386 175,076
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, and
Bundesbank calculations.  1 Comprises all of central government, i.e. all off-budget en-
tities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned bad bank FMS
Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government from an economic
perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) 2010.  2 Particularly liabilitiesresulting from coins in circulation.  3 Issuances by the Federal Republic of Germany. Ex-
cluding issuers' holdings of own securities but including those held by other govern-
ment entities.  4 Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency (expired
in 2011).  5 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014).  6 Excluding
inflation-induced indexation of capital.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2022 2023 2024
2021 2022 2023 2021 2022 2023 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Item Index 2020=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 105.5 104.2 103.6 5.5 –1.2 –0.5 –2.9 2.5 –0.6 –3.2 –0.9 –4.0 –1.6
Construction 96.4 85.5 85.2 –3.6 –11.3 –0.4 –13.8 –2.3 –1.0 0.5 1.0 –3.5 –3.4
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 101.4 106.8 105.3 1.4 5.4 –1.4 0.7 –0.9 –2.3 –2.2 –0.3 0.7 1.6
Information and communication 108.6 109.2 113.3 8.6 0.5 3.7 –2.7 4.6 3.7 2.4 4.1 1.9 3.3
Financial and insurance activities 107.8 99.8 99.2 7.8 –7.4 –0.6 –5.1 –3.4 0.1 1.3 –0.4 0.8 1.3
Real estate activities 102.4 104.2 105.6 2.3 1.8 1.4 0.3 1.1 0.9 1.1 2.2 1.6 2.4
Business services  1 109.1 112.7 113.2 9.1 3.3 0.5 1.4 –0.7 0.8 0.3 1.6 1.3 2.2
Public services, education and health 101.5 106.0 107.6 1.5 4.5 1.5 4.5 2.6 1.6 0.6 1.3 1.4 1.6
Other services 101.0 118.1 120.5 1.0 16.9 2.0 14.8 3.0 1.6 1.6 1.9 1.2 1.5
Gross value added 103.8 105.6 105.9 3.8 1.7 0.3 –0.1 0.9 0.2 –0.6 0.8 –0.3 0.8
Gross domestic product  2 103.7 105.1 104.8 3.7 1.4 –0.3 –0.4 0.6 –0.4 –0.7 –0.4 –0.8 0.3
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 102.3 108.0 107.6 2.3 5.6 –0.4 0.8 0.1 –0.2 –1.1 –0.2 0.8 0.1
Government consumption 103.4 103.6 103.4 3.4 0.1 –0.1 –1.2 –1.6 –1.9 1.2 1.9 1.5 2.9
Machinery and equipment 103.5 108.2 107.3 3.5 4.5 –0.8 5.3 4.3 –0.1 –2.9 –3.7 –5.7 –6.5
Premises 96.9 93.1 89.9 –3.1 –3.9 –3.4 –6.8 –4.3 –3.1 –2.8 –3.4 –5.0 –3.2
Other investment  4 107.0 109.8 115.0 7.0 2.6 4.7 2.3 4.9 4.3 4.4 5.1 4.9 4.4
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . 0.7 –0.1 0.1 0.7 1.0 0.6 –0.3 –0.9 –1.0 –0.7
Domestic demand 103.0 105.9 105.4 3.0 2.8 –0.4 0.6 0.7 –0.2 –0.9 –1.2 –1.1 –0.7
Net exports  6 . . . 0.9 –1.3 0.1 –0.8 –0.2 –0.3 0.2 0.8 0.3 1.0
     Exports 110.0 113.3 113.0 10.0 3.1 –0.3 0.4 2.5 0.6 –1.7 –2.5 –2.2 0.3
     Imports 109.0 116.6 115.9 9.0 7.0 –0.6 2.6 3.3 1.3 –2.3 –4.4 –3.3 –2.0
Gross domestic product  2 103.7 105.1 104.8 3.7 1.4 –0.3 –0.4 0.6 –0.4 –0.7 –0.4 –0.8 0.3
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,840.8 2,075.1 2,205.6 5.3 12.7 6.3 9.4 8.8 7.1 5.1 4.5 3.7 3.0
Government consumption 820.2 869.8 905.2 6.6 6.1 4.1 5.3 2.3 3.1 5.4 5.3 5.7 5.5
Machinery and equipment 235.4 263.0 275.7 5.5 11.7 4.8 13.4 12.2 6.4 2.0 0.4 –3.8 –4.4
Premises 404.1 446.5 466.1 4.9 10.5 4.4 6.3 9.5 4.9 3.0 0.7 –2.3 –0.6
Other investment  4 139.7 148.8 158.0 9.0 6.5 6.2 6.1 6.4 5.8 5.9 6.6 6.5 7.5
Changes in inventories  5 46.6 52.0 7.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,486.8 3,855.1 4,017.9 6.8 10.6 4.2 7.9 6.8 4.4 2.9 2.9 1.8 2.8
Net exports 189.7 98.7 167.7 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,568.3 1,810.1 1,816.6 16.1 15.4 0.4 10.1 7.8 1.4 –3.7 –3.4 –2.0 1.0
     Imports 1,378.6 1,711.4 1,649.0 18.2 24.1 –3.6 13.6 6.6 –2.1 –9.2 –8.5 –5.8 –2.3
Gross domestic product  2 3,676.5 3,953.9 4,185.6 6.6 7.5 5.9 6.6 7.3 5.9 5.4 5.0 3.1 4.0
 IV. Prices (2020=100)
Private consumption 102.9 109.9 117.2 2.9 6.8 6.7 8.5 8.6 7.3 6.3 4.7 2.9 2.9
Gross domestic product 102.8 109.1 115.8 2.8 6.1 6.1 7.0 6.7 6.4 6.1 5.4 3.9 3.7
Terms of trade 97.3 94.0 97.6 –2.7 –3.5 3.8 –0.9 1.8 4.3 5.5 3.5 2.8 1.0
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,968.2 2,087.0 2,229.0 3.6 6.0 6.8 6.0 6.7 7.1 7.2 6.4 6.4 5.5
Entrepreneurial and property income 818.2 848.9 905.4 18.3 3.8 6.7 4.5 12.1 10.1 5.1 –0.5 –8.3 –2.1
National income 2,786.4 2,935.9 3,134.5 7.5 5.4 6.8 5.6 8.4 7.9 6.5 4.5 1.6 3.4
Memo item: Gross national income 3,800.8 4,097.1 4,332.2 7.5 7.8 5.7 6.9 7.2 5.9 5.4 4.5 2.9 4.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2024.  1 Professional, sci-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added plus
taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit institu-tions serving households.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware
and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net in-
crease in valuables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy Total Inter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2021 = 100
% of total  1   100 17.08 8.21 74.71 27.84 33.97 2.53 10.36 9.71 9.59 11.83 12.21
Period
2020 95.9 101.4 96.9 94.8 91.9 96.7 93.5 97.5 91.0 90.0 92.6 101.7
2021 99.3 99.1 99.9 99.3 99.4 99.2 99.2 99.4 99.4 99.3 99.3 99.0
2022 98.7 96.7 98.7 99.2 96.3 101.1 101.0 100.1 97.3 102.9 100.2 103.0
2023 97.0 95.6 84.8 98.6 90.7 106.4 93.5 95.6 93.5 103.7 99.3 116.1
2023 Q2 97.9 98.4 77.7 100.0 92.7 108.0 92.5 95.2 95.9 103.9 99.5 121.5
Q3 95.7 100.2 72.8 97.2 90.7 103.1 92.1 96.6 93.4 104.4 98.8 107.1
Q4 97.2 101.4 90.6 96.9 84.8 107.9 91.1 94.9 88.8 100.9 102.7 111.6
2024 Q1 92.1 80.4 90.5 95.0 89.3 99.9 89.4 95.3 90.7 96.1 90.0 111.1
x Q2 93.1 93.7 76.4 94.8 88.4 100.8 87.9 94.3 90.1 92.6 90.3 112.0
2 2023 Aug. 89.5 94.3 71.5 90.4 87.6 91.8 84.7 94.7 89.7 100.8 89.4 90.3
Sep. 100.0 101.3 71.5 102.8 92.1 113.4 100.3 97.4 96.4 108.3 107.6 122.3
Oct. 98.3 101.2 84.0 99.2 91.7 105.9 96.2 98.2 95.1 103.8 95.5 116.7
Nov. 102.1 103.4 91.1 103.0 91.2 114.5 97.2 98.7 95.2 105.0 103.1 128.4
Dec. 91.1 99.6 96.8 88.5 71.5 103.3 79.8 87.7 76.0 93.8 109.6 89.8
2024 Jan. 83.6 63.0 98.8 86.7 84.3 87.6 81.7 91.5 85.2 90.4 80.3 95.0
Feb. 90.7 81.0 85.8 93.5 87.8 98.8 90.1 92.3 88.8 93.6 87.9 112.9
Mar. 101.9 97.2 86.8 104.7 95.9 113.3 96.5 102.2 98.1 104.3 101.8 125.5
x Apr. 93.5 93.1 79.9 95.1 88.6 101.3 87.8 93.9 90.0 93.1 88.9 117.7
x May 90.3 91.6 75.5 91.6 86.7 95.5 80.5 94.9 88.0 87.7 86.3 102.6
x June 95.6 96.5 73.9 97.8 89.9 105.5 95.4 94.2 92.3 96.9 95.8 115.6
2,x July 92.1 99.2 74.4 92.4 86.9 96.7 84.2 95.0 87.7 91.1 89.5 100.7
2,x,p Aug. 87.1 90.7 74.1 87.6 82.6 90.8 78.8 92.8 83.0 89.1 81.2 94.8
Annual percentage change
2020 – 7.7 + 2.9 – 6.6 – 9.8 – 6.9 –14.0 – 8.2 – 3.8 –11.9 – 7.4 –13.5 –20.1
2021 + 3.5 – 2.3 + 3.1 + 4.7 + 8.2 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 1.9 + 9.2 +10.3 + 7.2 – 2.7
2022 – 0.6 – 2.4 – 1.2 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.7 – 2.1 + 3.6 + 0.9 + 4.0
2023 – 1.7 – 1.1 –14.1 – 0.6 – 5.8 + 5.2 – 7.4 – 4.5 – 3.9 + 0.8 – 0.9 +12.7
2023 Q2 – 0.3 – 0.2 –18.3 + 1.6 – 6.2 + 9.8 – 8.6 – 2.1 – 3.3 + 3.5 + 2.0 +20.7
Q3 – 2.9 + 0.1 –20.7 – 1.7 – 5.8 + 2.8 – 8.7 – 4.1 – 3.4 – 1.2 – 1.0 + 5.9
Q4 – 4.1 – 2.1 – 7.2 – 4.2 – 5.4 – 2.3 –10.6 – 6.9 – 5.3 – 4.4 – 6.2 – 0.7
2024 Q1 – 5.2 – 2.5 – 7.8 – 5.3 – 5.4 – 6.3 – 9.0 – 0.4 – 5.4 – 9.1 – 6.4 –10.5
x Q2 – 4.9 – 4.7 – 1.7 – 5.2 – 4.7 – 6.7 – 5.0 – 0.9 – 6.0 –10.9 – 9.2 – 7.8
2 2023 Aug. – 2.3 – 0.8 –20.3 – 0.7 – 4.7 + 4.1 – 9.3 – 2.5 – 1.2 ± 0.0 – 3.2 +13.7
Sep. – 3.9 – 0.1 –21.2 – 3.1 – 6.0 + 1.1 –10.0 – 8.9 – 4.4 – 3.4 – 0.8 + 0.5
Oct. – 4.0 – 3.2 –10.1 – 3.7 – 5.4 – 0.7 –10.6 – 7.7 – 6.1 – 2.6 – 6.7 + 4.0
Nov. – 4.5 – 2.8 – 7.4 – 4.5 – 6.2 – 2.6 –10.8 – 5.9 – 5.3 – 7.1 – 5.8 – 1.6
Dec. – 3.7 – 0.1 – 4.3 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 3.5 –10.4 – 7.0 – 4.3 – 3.3 – 6.0 – 4.9
2024 Jan. – 5.4 – 6.5 – 3.7 – 5.3 – 6.5 – 5.3 – 9.7 – 1.4 – 5.1 – 7.5 – 5.2 – 9.6
Feb. – 5.7 – 1.6 – 9.5 – 6.1 – 5.4 – 8.3 – 7.0 + 0.2 – 5.6 – 9.0 – 7.8 –13.0
Mar. – 4.4 – 0.4 –10.6 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 5.2 –10.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 –10.6 – 6.3 – 8.9
x Apr. – 3.7 – 3.9 – 6.4 – 3.5 – 4.1 – 3.6 – 5.2 – 0.5 – 5.8 – 8.1 – 6.7 – 1.5
x May – 7.2 – 6.8 + 0.1 – 7.9 – 6.2 –11.5 –11.6 + 1.9 – 7.9 –14.3 –11.8 –17.5
x June – 3.7 – 3.5 + 2.1 – 4.2 – 3.7 – 5.0 + 1.6 – 4.1 – 4.6 –10.3 – 9.1 – 4.1
2,x July – 5.6 – 5.6 – 1.3 – 6.1 – 6.0 – 7.0 – 7.9 – 2.7 – 6.9 –12.5 –10.0 – 7.4
2,x,p Aug. – 2.7 – 3.8 + 3.6 – 3.1 – 5.7 – 1.1 – 7.0 – 2.0 – 7.5 –11.6 – 9.2 + 5.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2021.  2 Influenced by a change in holiday dates.  x Provisional;estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the
Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction
industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2021 99.4 +22.7 99.4 +27.3 99.4 +21.7 99.4 +11.2 99.5 +17.9 99.3 + 8.2
2022 105.1 + 5.7 110.3 +11.0 101.1 + 1.7 109.6 +10.3 113.2 +13.8 108.0 + 8.8
2023 101.2 – 3.7 100.0 – 9.3 101.6 + 0.5 105.1 – 4.1 100.4 –11.3 107.3 – 0.6
2023 Aug. 89.8 – 5.9 90.7 –11.3 86.8 – 3.2 108.2 + 4.2 105.1 – 6.0 109.5 + 9.3
Sep. 98.6 – 4.3 96.6 – 8.2 99.6 – 0.4 100.8 –11.7 95.7 –16.2 103.0 – 9.8
Oct. 96.2 – 8.0 97.0 – 9.9 94.4 – 7.5 105.9 – 2.9 99.1 –15.2 109.0 + 3.2
Nov. 99.6 – 3.9 96.4 –10.6 100.4 + 0.5 109.7 ± 0.0 112.1 + 9.5 108.6 – 4.0
Dec. 109.0 + 8.0 92.4 – 8.9 121.5 +19.9 96.5 + 1.8 88.2 – 7.0 100.3 + 5.7
2024 Jan. 98.2 – 5.0 98.1 –12.0 98.0 + 0.1 100.4 – 3.9 85.1 – 8.8 107.3 – 2.0
Feb. 96.3 – 8.7 94.4 –11.3 96.4 – 7.8 106.2 – 1.5 89.0 –15.2 114.0 + 4.5
Mar. 105.8 – 2.5 102.6 – 7.5 106.9 + 0.4 113.2 + 1.2 105.7 – 8.4 116.7 + 5.8
Apr. 93.1 – 1.8 93.8 – 7.5 91.0 + 1.9 104.7 + 0.5 94.5 – 9.9 109.3 + 5.1
May 92.3 – 8.3 93.9 – 5.3 89.3 –12.2 107.6 + 8.6 113.6 +23.7 104.9 + 2.4
June 100.7 –10.9 94.4 – 7.5 104.7 –13.4 102.5 – 5.3 96.5 – 8.4 105.3 – 3.8
July 101.0 + 5.5 97.4 + 2.6 103.4 + 8.7 100.7 – 3.9 90.6 + 2.5 105.3 – 6.2
p Aug. 87.3 – 2.8 87.0 – 4.1 86.3 – 0.6 96.8 –10.5 80.9 –23.0 104.0 – 5.0
From the domestic market
2021 99.3 +21.7 99.4 +26.9 99.3 +19.1 99.3 +10.2 99.2 + 8.9 99.3 +10.7
2022 105.6 + 6.3 112.5 +13.2 98.7 – 0.6 109.7 +10.5 111.2 +12.1 109.1 + 9.9
2023 100.9 – 4.5 103.1 – 8.4 99.1 + 0.4 99.7 – 9.1 99.5 –10.5 99.7 – 8.6
2023 Aug. 90.9 – 4.2 94.9 – 8.6 86.2 + 0.2 99.1 – 1.4 103.8 – 6.1 97.2 + 0.6
Sep. 93.7 – 9.7 95.4 –10.9 91.3 – 7.8 99.1 –14.9 103.3 – 5.3 97.5 –18.3
Oct. 96.0 – 7.3 100.2 – 9.9 91.2 – 4.5 102.9 – 8.4 93.6 –11.9 106.6 – 7.0
Nov. 99.1 – 6.5 100.0 –10.5 98.1 – 1.3 99.8 –13.9 97.4 –12.5 100.7 –14.4
Dec. 98.4 – 0.9 97.0 – 8.5 100.4 + 5.4 93.8 +10.5 89.9 + 5.8 95.3 +12.4
2024 Jan. 94.4 – 8.0 99.6 –13.2 89.7 – 2.9 94.3 – 4.1 85.5 – 9.9 97.8 – 1.8
Feb. 95.7 –10.1 96.4 –12.8 94.7 – 8.5 97.9 – 4.6 86.1 –13.6 102.6 – 1.2
Mar. 102.3 – 9.1 102.0 –11.1 102.3 – 7.6 104.1 – 5.5 100.9 –14.0 105.4 – 1.9
Apr. 90.9 – 8.6 94.7 –13.0 86.7 – 4.9 96.8 – 1.6 94.9 – 8.3 97.5 + 1.1
May 91.9 –13.1 92.8 –10.3 91.0 –16.6 92.8 – 3.4 85.1 –14.3 95.9 + 1.1
June 101.6 – 5.7 95.6 – 4.1 107.8 – 7.5 96.0 + 0.2 90.2 – 4.0 98.3 + 1.9
July 104.7 + 6.4 100.2 + 2.8 110.1 +11.2 95.5 – 4.5 85.7 –12.0 99.3 – 1.7
p Aug. 84.4 – 7.2 89.4 – 5.8 78.5 – 8.9 94.5 – 4.6 84.3 –18.8 98.5 + 1.3
From abroad
2021 99.5 +23.6 99.4 +27.6 99.5 +23.1 99.4 +11.7 99.6 +23.4 99.3 + 6.5
2022 104.8 + 5.3 108.1 + 8.8 102.5 + 3.0 109.6 +10.3 114.4 +14.9 107.2 + 8.0
2023 101.5 – 3.1 96.8 –10.5 103.0 + 0.5 108.8 – 0.7 100.9 –11.8 112.8 + 5.2
2023 Aug. 89.0 – 7.0 86.5 –14.1 87.2 – 5.0 114.3 + 7.7 105.9 – 5.9 118.4 +15.1
Sep. 102.1 – 0.3 97.7 – 5.5 104.4 + 3.8 101.9 – 9.6 91.4 –22.0 107.1 – 3.0
Oct. 96.4 – 8.5 93.8 –10.0 96.3 – 8.9 107.9 + 0.8 102.2 –16.8 110.7 +11.7
Nov. 100.0 – 1.8 92.8 –10.8 101.8 + 1.6 116.4 +10.3 120.5 +24.0 114.3 + 4.2
Dec. 116.6 +14.3 87.9 – 9.3 133.7 +27.7 98.4 – 3.1 87.2 –13.2 104.0 + 1.8
2024 Jan. 101.0 – 2.9 96.7 –10.8 102.8 + 1.7 104.5 – 3.9 84.8 – 8.1 114.3 – 2.1
Feb. 96.8 – 7.5 92.5 – 9.6 97.3 – 7.4 111.8 + 0.4 90.7 –16.1 122.3 + 8.2
Mar. 108.3 + 2.5 103.1 – 3.7 109.6 + 5.3 119.4 + 5.6 108.4 – 5.2 124.9 +11.1
Apr. 94.6 + 3.4 93.0 – 1.0 93.5 + 6.0 110.0 + 1.7 94.2 –10.9 117.9 + 7.7
May 92.6 – 4.4 94.9 – 0.1 88.3 – 9.4 117.7 +16.4 130.0 +48.6 111.5 + 3.4
June 100.1 –14.3 93.2 –10.6 102.9 –16.5 106.9 – 8.3 100.1 –10.5 110.4 – 7.2
July 98.4 + 4.9 94.7 + 2.6 99.5 + 7.2 104.3 – 3.5 93.5 +12.4 109.7 – 9.0
p Aug. 89.4 + 0.4 84.7 – 2.1 90.8 + 4.1 98.4 –13.9 79.0 –25.4 108.1 – 8.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2020 91.1 –0.3 87.4 –0.7 91.9 +7.0 82.6 –8.6 88.4 +1.8 95.7 +0.1 85.9 –5.7 97.1 +1.5
2021 99.5 +9.2 99.4 +13.7 99.5 +8.3 99.4 +20.3 99.1 +12.1 99.6 +4.1 99.4 +15.7 99.5 +2.5
2022 104.4 +4.9 98.0 –1.4 95.7 –3.8 98.4 –1.0 104.3 +5.2 112.4 +12.9 105.8 +6.4 108.8 +9.3
2023 108.2 +3.6 93.6 –4.5 83.2 –13.1 96.2 –2.2 121.4 +16.4 126.6 +12.6 117.3 +10.9 114.8 +5.5
2023 July 121.2 +7.5 103.4 –4.8 92.1 –6.0 105.0 –6.7 138.6 +4.8 143.3 +21.6 116.8 +0.2 147.6 +24.8
Aug. 120.1 +21.9 93.2 +3.7 80.1 –3.3 99.6 +9.5 116.5 +4.7 153.8 +40.7 148.9 +54.8 112.7 –0.2
Sep. 120.4 +17.1 111.6 +15.6 82.9 –10.6 121.2 +24.1 180.1 +70.1 131.4 +18.7 137.5 +34.4 125.9 +13.6
Oct. 106.9 +6.1 87.8 +0.1 81.9 –3.5 89.5 +1.2 103.1 +7.8 130.7 +11.7 121.0 +14.6 107.2 +0.9
Nov. 92.1 –0.8 83.1 +1.8 70.9 –5.0 89.2 +10.5 105.0 –4.5 103.3 –3.4 104.7 +9.5 91.4 –10.8
Dec. 110.2 +5.7 97.8 –0.6 91.6 +3.9 89.1 –15.6 152.2 +39.5 125.6 +12.5 117.5 +0.8 114.3 +14.0
2024 Jan. 85.7 +3.6 71.8 –5.8 60.4 –16.6 77.8 –4.5 91.1 +30.0 103.0 +13.3 96.7 +7.7 90.0 +10.7
Feb. 96.7 +2.0 77.8 –1.5 71.9 –1.4 72.0 –14.5 120.4 +47.2 120.3 +5.0 101.6 –1.3 108.4 +8.0
Mar. 123.8 +2.3 102.4 –5.9 91.2 +3.2 103.4 –17.7 139.2 +15.3 150.5 +10.6 121.8 –9.1 149.8 +17.0
Apr. 109.8 +3.9 85.6 –4.0 82.3 –0.6 82.7 –7.4 108.0 –3.8 140.1 +10.9 117.4 +7.6 120.2 +2.0
May 112.9 +2.4 97.8 +5.0 85.0 –3.3 108.5 +15.8 104.3 –4.7 131.7 ±0.0 119.4 +3.4 124.7 +4.2
June 119.6 +5.5 97.0 –2.4 84.3 –10.6 101.0 +17.2 127.9 –23.3 147.7 +12.8 130.3 +18.2 131.5 +0.2
July 110.8 –8.6 87.5 –15.4 80.8 –12.3 83.2 –20.8 127.9 –7.7 139.9 –2.4 111.8 –4.3 131.2 –11.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2020 121.4 +5.6 115.9 +4.4 121.3 +8.1 81.9 –23.2 106.9 –1.8 117.1 +9.3 125.4 +5.6 168.7 +21.9
2021 124.7 +2.7 116.7 +0.7 121.7 +0.3 78.1 –4.6 95.4 –10.8 110.4 –5.7 135.2 +7.8 190.1 +12.7
2022 134.4 +7.8 115.8 –0.8 128.2 +5.3 102.9 +31.8 107.8 +13.0 122.8 +11.2 144.7 +7.0 188.9 –0.6
3 2023 137.7 +2.5 112.3 –3.0 136.0 +6.1 106.9 +3.9 107.9 +0.1 118.3 –3.7 149.5 +3.3 186.6 –1.2
2023 Aug. 132.6 +2.2 107.9 –2.3 132.9 +5.2 102.7 +4.6 97.1 –2.0 111.2 –2.1 145.7 +4.5 168.6 –2.5
Sep. 132.9 –0.1 107.4 –3.8 132.3 +6.2 105.1 –10.2 103.8 –4.4 112.4 –5.2 149.8 +3.7 169.3 –10.6
Oct. 141.7 +2.8 114.6 ±0.0 137.1 +3.9 121.8 +5.0 111.1 –0.6 121.4 –3.3 156.4 +7.4 195.8 +1.2
Nov. 147.7 +0.9 120.1 –1.6 137.7 +4.1 117.7 +1.6 137.3 +1.7 122.0 –6.4 156.5 +2.2 231.4 –0.9
Dec. 154.4 +2.0 125.1 –0.6 155.1 +5.4 117.7 –5.2 142.6 –3.5 117.5 –6.6 166.9 +6.0 215.7 +1.1
2024 Jan. 126.8 +1.7 102.8 –1.2 127.6 +4.0 87.1 +3.0 107.2 –5.4 98.1 –7.2 150.5 +7.5 175.5 –0.5
Feb. 123.1 +0.2 99.3 –2.2 124.7 +1.3 82.9 ±0.0 97.6 –3.5 103.8 –4.1 145.9 +7.9 159.7 –4.4
Mar. 143.2 +3.0 114.9 +1.1 143.9 +4.7 104.8 +4.0 102.0 –4.5 126.9 –1.7 157.7 +5.2 187.4 +0.6
Apr. 140.8 +2.3 112.8 +0.8 140.2 +2.1 109.8 +0.9 95.1 –0.2 122.9 –2.5 155.3 +7.8 180.2 –0.3
May 141.0 –0.1 113.0 –1.6 141.2 +0.9 112.5 –0.9 91.0 –0.8 120.5 –5.8 155.2 +4.9 181.5 –1.8
June 137.1 –0.7 110.0 –2.0 140.9 +3.1 102.3 –13.0 96.7 +1.6 112.9 –6.2 153.6 +3.5 173.9 –3.4
July 140.7 +0.8 113.4 –0.5 141.4 +1.1 106.6 –2.3 96.0 –3.4 112.7 –4.7 163.3 +6.9 182.7 –0.4
Aug. 136.6 +3.0 110.1 +2.0 138.9 +4.5 98.5 –4.1 92.0 –5.3 105.7 –4.9 154.7 +6.2 183.0 +8.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2023 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2019 45,291 +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 72,267 827 7 5.0 774
2020 44,965 –0.7 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2021 45,052 +0.2 33,897 +0.9 9,344 23,602 702 4,101 1,852 1,744 2,613 999 5.7 706
2022 45,675 +1.4 34,507 +1.8 9,400 24,135 721 4,125 426 337 2,418 808 5.3 845
2023 46,011 +0.7 34,790 +0.8 9,425 24,430 687 4,198 241 147 2,609 875 5.7 761
2021 Q3 45,215 +0.8 33,929 +1.5 9,347 23,606 719 4,161 935 915 2,545 920 5.5 774
Q4 45,518 +1.0 34,374 +1.6 9,415 23,982 727 4,125 835 762 2,341 802 5.1 804
2022 Q1 45,284 +1.6 34,242 +2.0 9,348 23,943 715 4,061 1,033 792 2,417 874 5.3 818
Q2 45,605 +1.6 34,401 +2.0 9,372 24,056 718 4,112 337 324 2,311 777 5.0 864
Q3 45,776 +1.2 34,522 +1.7 9,405 24,133 724 4,159 103 92 2,501 804 5.5 880
Q4 46,035 +1.1 34,864 +1.4 9,475 24,409 730 4,166 229 139 2,443 778 5.3 817
2023 Q1 45,712 +0.9 34,614 +1.1 9,395 24,288 696 4,152 430 153 2,610 900 5.7 773
Q2 45,981 +0.8 34,702 +0.9 9,410 24,352 687 4,209 152 146 2,561 839 5.6 770
Q3 46,080 +0.7 34,762 +0.7 9,421 24,398 686 4,242 128 122 2,647 885 5.7 768
Q4 46,269 +0.5 35,082 +0.6 9,471 24,682 680 4,189 253 166 2,617 874 5.7 732
2024 Q1 45,899 +0.4 34,795 +0.5 9,366 24,563 630 4,154 468 200 2,796 1,000 6.1 704
Q2 846,148 8 +0.4 934,862 9+0.5 99,355 924,640 9 616 94,204 ... 9 211 2,733 939 10 5.9 701
Q3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,829 998 6.0 699
2021 May 44,871 +0.3 33,747 +1.3 9,326 23,461 703 4,067 2,342 2,320 2,687 1,020 5.9 654
June 45,034 +0.7 33,802 +1.4 9,324 23,504 716 4,151 1,568 1,548 2,614 961 5.7 693
July 45,094 +0.8 33,731 +1.5 9,304 23,458 715 4,194 1,088 1,068 2,590 956 5.6 744
Aug. 45,158 +0.8 33,994 +1.5 9,358 23,658 722 4,153 857 838 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. 45,394 +0.8 34,323 +1.6 9,432 23,903 726 4,123 859 839 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. 45,511 +0.8 34,369 +1.5 9,425 23,965 724 4,123 780 762 2,377 814 5.2 809
Nov. 45,567 +1.1 34,449 +1.6 9,423 24,039 739 4,133 767 750 2,317 789 5.1 808
Dec. 45,475 +1.2 34,284 +1.7 9,364 23,980 708 4,112 957 772 2,330 803 5.1 794
2022 Jan. 45,218 +1.5 34,176 +2.0 9,332 23,900 711 4,048 1,123 847 2,462 903 5.4 792
Feb. 45,263 +1.6 34,243 +2.2 9,346 23,939 719 4,049 1,087 803 2,428 884 5.3 822
Mar. 45,370 +1.6 34,334 +2.1 9,369 23,999 719 4,061 888 727 2,362 835 5.1 839
Apr. 45,489 +1.6 34,368 +2.0 9,366 24,037 713 4,091 453 439 2,309 800 5.0 852
May 45,621 +1.7 34,445 +2.1 9,376 24,089 719 4,131 318 305 2,260 771 4.9 865
June 45,705 +1.5 34,445 +1.9 9,376 24,084 724 4,164 241 228 2,363 761 5.2 877
July 45,663 +1.3 34,322 +1.8 9,361 23,988 718 4,176 115 102 2,470 801 5.4 881
Aug. 45,716 +1.2 34,571 +1.7 9,417 24,169 725 4,151 87 76 2,547 827 5.6 887
Sep. 45,948 +1.2 34,899 +1.7 9,499 24,401 733 4,136 108 97 2,486 782 5.4 873
Oct. 46,070 +1.2 34,893 +1.5 9,489 24,414 734 4,161 134 124 2,442 764 5.3 846
Nov. 46,078 +1.1 34,897 +1.3 9,478 24,435 738 4,179 156 147 2,434 770 5.3 823
Dec. 45,957 +1.1 34,705 +1.2 9,414 24,357 704 4,182 397 146 2,454 799 5.4 781
2023 Jan. 45,651 +1.0 34,550 +1.1 9,381 24,240 697 4,138 451 145 2,616 911 5.7 764
Feb. 45,697 +1.0 34,601 +1.0 9,392 24,279 692 4,148 441 157 2,620 910 5.7 778
Mar. 45,789 +0.9 34,679 +1.0 9,412 24,332 692 4,157 398 159 2,594 878 5.7 777
Apr. 45,886 +0.9 34,685 +0.9 9,410 24,342 684 4,188 146 139 2,586 855 5.7 773
May 45,994 +0.8 34,728 +0.8 9,413 24,371 687 4,228 149 142 2,544 829 5.5 767
June 46,062 +0.8 34,709 +0.8 9,404 24,357 690 4,266 162 156 2,555 833 5.5 769
July 46,030 +0.8 34,584 +0.8 9,382 24,261 687 4,279 113 107 2,617 878 5.7 772
Aug. 46,013 +0.6 34,804 +0.7 9,429 24,433 685 4,221 113 107 2,696 910 5.8 771
Sep. 46,196 +0.5 35,089 +0.5 9,500 24,641 684 4,186 158 152 2,627 869 5.7 761
Oct. 46,296 +0.5 35,117 +0.6 9,490 24,686 686 4,181 183 177 2,607 861 5.7 749
Nov. 46,319 +0.5 35,126 +0.7 9,473 24,719 688 4,195 181 174 2,606 865 5.6 733
Dec. 46,193 +0.5 34,915 +0.6 9,401 24,637 648 4,197 395 148 2,637 896 5.7 713
2024 Jan. 45,855 +0.4 34,754 +0.6 9,359 24,528 635 4,138 540 189 2,805 1,006 6.1 699
Feb. 45,883 +0.4 34,770 +0.5 9,359 24,548 625 4,141 485 201 2,814 1,015 6.1 706
Mar. 45,958 +0.4 34,810 +0.4 9,360 24,591 615 4,169 379 210 2,769 977 6.0 707
Apr. 46,052 +0.4 934,867 9+0.5 99,362 924,638 9 619 94,186 ... 9 216 2,750 949 6.0 701
May 46,163 +0.4 934,894 9+0.5 99,355 924,667 9 616 94,218 ... 9 196 2,723 930 10 5.8 702
June 846,228 8 +0.4 934,843 9+0.4 99,337 924,640 9 612 94,250 ... 9 220 2,727 937 5.8 701
July 846,185 8 +0.3 934,734 9+0.4 99,313 924,557 9 615 94,254 ... 9 212 2,809 989 6.0 703
Aug. 846,149 8 +0.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,872 1,021 6.1 699
Sep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,806 985 6.0 696
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed
persons in the legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).8 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office.  9 Unadjusted figures esti-
mated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2022 and 2023, the estimated values for
Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1% for employees subject to
social contributions, by a maximum of 0.5% for persons solely in jobs exempt from
social contributions, and by a maximum of 61,3% for cyclically induced short-time
work.  10 From May 2024, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which: Indices of
foreign trade prices
of which:
Total Food  1,2Non-
energy
industrial
goods  1 Energy  1 Services  1Actual
rents
for
housing  1Memo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  3Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  3 Exports Imports
Period 2015 = 100 2020 = 100 2021 = 100 2020 = 100 2021=100
Index level
2020 4 105.8 4 110.9 4 104.1 4 99.0 4 106.9 107.6 4 100.0 4 92.0 91.2 100.0 ... ...
2021 4 109.2 4 114.1 4 106.7 4 109.0 4 109.0 109.0 4 103.1 4 100.0 100.0 106.9 100.0 100.0
2022 118.7 126.2 112.7 146.8 112.2 110.8 110.2 116.6 129.8 141.0 113.5 121.8
2023 125.9 140.9 119.1 154.2 117.6 113.1 116.7 126.7 130.1 5 140.8 114.2 113.9
2022 Nov. 123.5 133.6 116.3 163.5 113.7 111.6 113.7 122.1 135.0 151.8 115.2 121.5
Dec. 122.0 134.6 116.6 143.9 114.8 111.7 113.2 134.2 152.0 115.1 120.1
2023 Jan. 122.6 136.7 116.4 154.8 113.8 112.1 114.3 133.5 5 149.6 115.1 118.7
Feb. 123.8 139.5 117.0 154.9 115.0 112.2 115.2 125.5 132.5 148.6 115.1 117.2
Mar. 125.1 141.3 118.3 155.0 116.1 112.5 116.1 131.1 144.6 115.0 116.1
Apr. 125.8 141.1 119.0 156.1 117.1 112.6 116.6 131.8 141.9 114.6 114.6
May 125.6 141.1 119.3 154.0 116.9 112.8 116.5 126.6 130.4 139.1 114.2 113.2
June 126.1 141.2 119.5 153.7 117.8 113.0 116.8 129.8 141.4 114.0 112.3
July 126.7 141.2 118.8 153.6 119.6 113.2 117.1 128.9 142.5 113.7 111.6
Aug. 127.2 141.0 119.2 156.5 119.8 113.5 117.5 127.1 129.2 142.5 113.7 112.0
Sep. 127.4 141.5 120.1 157.6 119.3 113.6 117.8 129.3 137.0 114.0 113.3
Oct. 127.2 141.6 120.5 154.7 119.1 113.7 117.8 129.1 134.6 114.1 113.4
Nov. 126.3 142.4 120.5 151.6 117.6 113.9 117.3 127.7 128.3 134.9 113.8 112.8
Dec. 126.6 142.4 120.5 148.4 118.7 114.0 117.4 127.3 136.8 113.5 111.7
2024 Jan. 126.4 143.7 119.7 150.2 118.1 114.4 117.6 127.6 137.8 113.6 111.7
Feb. 127.2 143.6 120.3 150.9 119.3 114.6 118.1 129.5 127.1 139.3 113.8 111.5
Mar. 128.0 143.5 120.9 150.5 120.7 114.9 118.6 127.3 140.6 113.9 111.9
Apr. 128.8 144.3 121.1 154.0 121.3 115.1 119.2 127.5 141.6 114.4 112.7
May 129.1 144.0 120.9 152.1 122.4 115.3 119.3 130.4 127.5 143.4 114.4 112.7
June 129.3 144.4 120.8 150.3 123.3 115.5 119.4 127.7 145.9 114.7 113.1
July 130.0 144.6 120.1 150.7 124.9 115.7 119.8 127.9 144.9 114.6 112.6
Aug. 129.8 144.6 120.0 148.5 125.1 115.8 119.7 131.4 128.2 138.5 114.6 112.2
Sep. 129.7 145.2 120.9 145.8 124.6 116.0 119.7 127.5 ... ... ...
Annual percentage change
2020 4 +0.4 4+ 2.3 4– 0.1 4– 4.5 4+ 1.2 + 1.4 4 +0.5 4+ 1.4 – 1.0 – 3.1 ... ...
2021 4 +3.2 4+ 2.9 4+ 2.5 4+ 10.1 4+ 2.0 + 1.3 4 +3.1 4+ 8.8 + 9.6 + 6.9 ... ...
2022 +8.7 + 10.6 + 5.7 + 34.7 + 2.9 + 1.7 +6.9 +16.6 +29.8 +31.9 +13.5 +21.8
2023 +6.0 + 11.7 + 5.6 + 5.1 + 4.8 + 2.1 +5.9 + 8.7 + 0.2 5– 0.1 + 0.6 – 6.5
2022 Nov. +11.3 + 16.3 + 7.3 + 40.1 + 3.8 + 1.9 +8.8 +17.3 +26.4 +33.9 +10.9 +12.3
Dec. +9.6 + 16.3 + 7.4 + 25.1 + 4.1 + 1.9 +8.1 +21.4 +32.5 + 9.8 + 9.6
2023 Jan. +9.2 + 16.6 + 7.4 + 25.1 + 3.6 + 2.0 +8.7 +16.4 5+27.8 + 8.1 + 5.3
Feb. +9.3 + 18.0 + 7.2 + 21.6 + 4.4 + 2.0 +8.7 +15.5 +13.9 +22.9 + 6.6 + 3.1
Mar. +7.8 + 18.6 + 7.2 + 6.1 + 5.0 + 2.1 +7.4 + 7.5 + 5.8 + 3.3 – 3.1
Apr. +7.6 + 15.5 + 6.9 + 9.4 + 4.8 + 2.0 +7.2 + 5.2 – 1.3 + 1.7 – 5.6
May +6.3 + 13.6 + 6.2 + 5.0 + 4.4 + 2.0 +6.1 + 8.9 + 2.5 – 2.8 + 0.9 – 7.7
June +6.8 + 12.6 + 6.2 + 4.0 + 6.1 + 2.0 +6.4 + 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 8.6
July +6.5 + 10.7 + 5.5 + 3.9 + 6.7 + 2.1 +6.2 – 2.9 + 0.3 – 2.0 –10.8
Aug. +6.4 + 9.2 + 5.5 + 5.3 + 6.8 + 2.2 +6.1 + 6.5 – 7.6 – 1.5 – 3.6 –12.9
Sep. +4.3 + 8.1 + 4.9 – 0.8 + 4.7 + 2.2 +4.5 – 9.1 – 7.7 – 2.6 –11.0
Oct. +3.0 + 7.1 + 4.1 – 6.0 + 4.2 + 2.1 +3.8 – 7.3 –11.0 – 1.1 – 9.5
Nov. +2.3 + 6.6 + 3.6 – 7.3 + 3.4 + 2.1 +3.2 + 4.6 – 5.0 –11.1 – 1.2 – 7.2
Dec. +3.8 + 5.8 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 3.4 + 2.1 +3.7 – 5.1 –10.0 – 1.4 – 7.0
2024 Jan. +3.1 + 5.1 + 2.8 – 3.0 + 3.8 + 2.1 +2.9 – 4.4 – 7.9 – 1.3 – 5.9
Feb. +2.7 + 2.9 + 2.8 – 2.6 + 3.7 + 2.1 +2.5 + 3.2 – 4.1 – 6.3 – 1.1 – 4.9
Mar. +2.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 – 2.9 + 4.0 + 2.1 +2.2 – 2.9 – 2.8 – 1.0 – 3.6
Apr. +2.4 + 2.3 + 1.8 – 1.3 + 3.6 + 2.2 +2.2 – 3.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 1.7
May +2.8 + 2.1 + 1.3 – 1.2 + 4.7 + 2.2 +2.4 + 3.0 – 2.2 + 3.1 + 0.2 – 0.4
June +2.5 + 2.3 + 1.1 – 2.2 + 4.7 + 2.2 +2.2 – 1.6 + 3.2 + 0.6 + 0.7
July +2.6 + 2.4 + 1.1 – 1.9 + 4.4 + 2.2 +2.3 – 0.8 + 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.9
Aug. +2.0 + 2.6 + 0.7 – 5.1 + 4.4 + 2.0 +1.9 + 3.4 – 0.8 – 2.8 + 0.8 + 0.2
Sep. +1.8 + 2.6 + 0.7 – 7.5 + 4.4 + 2.1 +1.6 – 1.4 ... ... ...
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office.  1 The last data point is at times based on the Bun-
desbank’s own estimates.  2 Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco.  3 Excluding va-lue added tax.  4 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value added tax between July
and December 2020.  5 From January 2023 onwards, provisional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2016 1,372.9 4.2 931.4 4.0 432.9 4.0 1,364.2 4.0 1,887.1 2.9 187.8 2.3 10.0
2017 1,435.3 4.5 971.8 4.3 447.9 3.5 1,419.7 4.1 1,955.0 3.6 201.2 7.2 10.3
2018 1,506.6 5.0 1,019.6 4.9 461.5 3.0 1,481.2 4.3 2,028.6 3.8 220.1 9.4 10.8
2019 1,572.6 4.4 1,069.5 4.9 479.2 3.8 1,548.7 4.6 2,080.4 2.6 215.3 – 2.2 10.3
2020 1,561.7 – 0.7 1,066.1 – 0.3 521.5 8.8 1,587.6 2.5 2,080.5 0.0 331.7 54.1 15.9
2021 1,620.5 3.8 1,111.3 4.2 531.5 1.9 1,642.8 3.5 2,144.2 3.1 303.3 – 8.6 14.1
2022 1,718.7 6.1 1,174.8 5.7 539.6 1.5 1,714.4 4.4 2,312.4 7.8 237.3 –21.8 10.3
2023 1,846.0 7.4 1,286.5 9.5 571.4 5.9 1,857.9 8.4 2,462.1 6.5 256.5 8.1 10.4
2023 Q1 432.2 7.4 301.4 9.6 143.0 6.5 444.4 8.6 603.0 7.6 74.1 – 0.3 12.3
Q2 445.1 7.8 303.3 10.0 139.9 6.2 443.2 8.8 609.1 8.0 61.9 16.2 10.2
Q3 457.0 7.7 323.9 9.3 145.0 5.0 469.0 7.9 619.9 5.8 58.1 12.5 9.4
Q4 511.7 6.9 357.9 9.2 143.5 6.0 501.3 8.2 630.2 4.8 62.3 7.5 9.9
2024 Q1 461.1 6.7 323.7 7.4 151.3 5.8 475.0 6.9 635.2 5.3 86.7 17.0 13.7
Q2 469.9 5.6 321.1 5.8 148.4 6.1 469.5 5.9 632.3 3.8 68.5 10.7 10.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2024.  * Households in-
cluding non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees'
contributions to the social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension
payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social
benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plusmonetary social benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed
income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit
institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related
taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company
pension funds.  6 Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving
as a percentage of disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2020=100Annual
percentage
change 2020=100Annual
percentage
change 2020=100Annual
percentage
change 2020=100Annual
percentage
change 2020=100Annual
percentage
change
2016 90.2 2.2 90.2 2.2 90.5 2.2 90.7 2.3 91.5 2.6
2017 92.3 2.3 92.2 2.3 92.6 2.3 92.9 2.4 94.0 2.8
2018 95.0 3.0 95.0 3.0 95.2 2.8 95.5 2.8 97.2 3.3
2019 97.8 3.0 97.8 3.0 98.0 2.9 98.0 2.6 100.2 3.1
2020 100.0 2.2 100.0 2.2 100.0 2.1 100.0 2.1 100.0 – 0.2
2021 101.5 1.5 101.5 1.5 101.6 1.6 101.5 1.5 103.3 3.3
2022 104.2 2.6 104.1 2.6 103.9 2.2 103.6 2.0 107.8 4.3
2023 108.3 4.0 108.3 4.0 106.6 2.7 106.3 2.6 114.8 6.4
2023 Q1 101.6 3.7 101.6 3.7 98.9 2.5 105.3 2.6 108.2 6.2
Q2 100.9 3.9 100.8 3.9 99.2 2.5 106.0 2.4 110.8 6.7
Q3 111.7 4.7 111.7 4.7 110.4 3.2 106.8 3.0 113.6 6.8
Q4 119.1 3.7 119.1 3.7 118.1 2.5 107.1 2.5 126.4 6.2
2024 Q1 108.0 6.3 107.9 6.3 101.9 3.1 108.5 3.0 114.8 6.1
Q2 104.0 3.1 103.9 3.1 103.4 4.3 110.5 4.2 116.4 5.1
2024 Feb. 110.0 5.9 109.9 5.9 102.9 2.6 107.9 2.5 . .
Mar. 110.5 11.9 110.4 11.9 102.2 4.2 109.7 4.2 . .
Apr. 103.9 4.9 103.9 4.9 103.1 4.0 109.9 3.9 . .
May 104.2 4.4 104.1 4.4 103.8 4.9 110.8 4.7 . .
June 103.9 0.2 103.8 0.1 103.4 4.0 110.9 4.1 . .
July 147.2 10.6 147.2 10.6 138.1 4.8 112.2 5.1 . .
Aug. 111.6 10.7 111.6 10.7 105.6 5.7 113.0 5.8 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August
2024.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2020 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.6 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.4 857.0 304.4 196.1
2021 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 384.8 1,320.4 272.1 261.5 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 321.4 236.7
2022 3,431.6 2,057.0 713.5 804.3 410.1 1,374.6 326.2 268.3 244.3 1,133.2 2,298.4 1,195.7 760.2 1,102.8 331.8 273.3
p 2023 3,320.5 2,038.7 699.2 823.2 374.4 1,281.8 325.2 259.9 245.6 1,145.4 2,175.1 1,146.3 771.1 1,028.8 347.3 261.7
2022 H1 3,593.6 2,108.1 719.1 796.3 447.4 1,485.5 322.4 284.8 225.4 1,075.4 2,518.2 1,237.0 789.5 1,281.2 313.7 260.7
H2 3,431.6 2,057.0 713.5 804.3 410.1 1,374.6 326.2 268.3 244.3 1,133.2 2,298.4 1,195.7 760.2 1,102.8 331.8 273.3
2023 H1 3,322.4 2,009.5 699.5 799.0 373.5 1,312.9 343.9 263.7 234.3 1,134.0 2,188.3 1,130.8 752.5 1,057.5 327.4 259.9
pH2 3,320.5 2,038.7 699.2 823.2 374.4 1,281.8 325.2 259.9 245.6 1,145.4 2,175.1 1,146.3 771.1 1,028.8 347.3 261.7
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2021 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.7 40.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 9.8 7.2
2022 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 12.0 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
p 2023 100.0 61.4 21.1 24.8 11.3 38.6 9.8 7.8 7.4 34.5 65.5 34.5 23.2 31.0 10.5 7.9
2022 H1 100.0 58.7 20.0 22.2 12.5 41.3 9.0 7.9 6.3 29.9 70.1 34.4 22.0 35.7 8.7 7.3
H2 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 12.0 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
2023 H1 100.0 60.5 21.1 24.1 11.2 39.5 10.4 7.9 7.1 34.1 65.9 34.0 22.7 31.8 9.9 7.8
pH2 100.0 61.4 21.1 24.8 11.3 38.6 9.8 7.8 7.4 34.5 65.5 34.5 23.2 31.0 10.5 7.9
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2020 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.1 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.3 1,628.8 904.7 537.0 724.0 267.3 149.8
2021 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 363.5 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.2 285.9 184.0
2022 2,730.8 1,538.3 461.5 591.7 388.3 1,192.4 307.7 209.1 186.5 879.7 1,851.1 912.7 534.3 938.4 291.2 215.2
p 2023 2,620.2 1,512.9 446.6 604.5 352.1 1,107.3 305.2 202.2 203.4 888.8 1,731.4 859.8 544.6 871.6 308.2 206.6
2022 H1 2,898.3 1,582.5 462.4 583.8 422.6 1,315.9 303.6 222.5 177.2 830.9 2,067.4 945.2 558.2 1,122.2 272.8 207.6
H2 2,730.8 1,538.3 461.5 591.7 388.3 1,192.4 307.7 209.1 186.5 879.7 1,851.1 912.7 534.3 938.4 291.2 215.2
2023 H1 2,651.0 1,504.1 460.3 588.8 348.8 1,146.8 326.4 210.9 183.6 892.6 1,758.4 854.6 532.3 903.8 282.9 210.1
pH2 2,620.2 1,512.9 446.6 604.5 352.1 1,107.3 305.2 202.2 203.4 888.8 1,731.4 859.8 544.6 871.6 308.2 206.6
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2021 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.8 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 10.9 7.0
2022 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 14.2 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
p 2023 100.0 57.7 17.0 23.1 13.4 42.3 11.7 7.7 7.8 33.9 66.1 32.8 20.8 33.3 11.8 7.9
2022 H1 100.0 54.6 16.0 20.1 14.6 45.4 10.5 7.7 6.1 28.7 71.3 32.6 19.3 38.7 9.4 7.2
H2 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 14.2 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
2023 H1 100.0 56.7 17.4 22.2 13.2 43.3 12.3 8.0 6.9 33.7 66.3 32.2 20.1 34.1 10.7 7.9
pH2 100.0 57.7 17.0 23.1 13.4 42.3 11.7 7.7 7.8 33.9 66.1 32.8 20.8 33.3 11.8 7.9
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2021 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 55.2 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 52.6
2022 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
p 2023 700.3 525.8 252.6 218.7 22.3 174.5 20.0 57.7 42.2 256.6 443.7 286.5 226.5 157.2 39.1 55.2
2022 H1 695.3 525.7 256.7 212.5 24.8 169.6 18.8 62.2 48.2 244.5 450.8 291.8 231.4 159.0 40.9 53.1
H2 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
2023 H1 671.4 505.4 239.2 210.2 24.7 166.0 17.4 52.9 50.7 241.5 429.9 276.2 220.1 153.8 44.6 49.9
pH2 700.3 525.8 252.6 218.7 22.3 174.5 20.0 57.7 42.2 256.6 443.7 286.5 226.5 157.2 39.1 55.2
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2021 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.3 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 7.9
2022 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
p 2023 100.0 75.1 36.1 31.2 3.2 24.9 2.9 8.2 6.0 36.6 63.4 40.9 32.3 22.4 5.6 7.9
2022 H1 100.0 75.6 36.9 30.6 3.6 24.4 2.7 9.0 6.9 35.2 64.8 42.0 33.3 22.9 5.9 7.6
H2 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
2023 H1 100.0 75.3 35.6 31.3 3.7 24.7 2.6 7.9 7.6 36.0 64.0 41.1 32.8 22.9 6.6 7.4
pH2 100.0 75.1 36.1 31.2 3.2 24.9 2.9 8.2 6.0 36.6 63.4 40.9 32.3 22.4 5.6 7.9
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
EBITDA  1
as a percentage of revenuesEBIT  2
as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  3 Distribution  3
Revenues EBITDA  1Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile EBIT  2Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5€ billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  5% % % € billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  5% % %
Total
2016 1,624.3 – 0.4 214.4 7.8 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.7 9.0 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,719.3 5.1 243.4 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.0 11.0 18.0 141.9 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.1
6 2018 1,706.8 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,764.6 2.6 233.6 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.2 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.6 5.8 11.8
2020 1,632.8 – 8.8 213.6 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 17.9 52.1 – 41.0 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 4.9 10.5
2021 1,994.7 20.4 297.7 37.7 14.9 1.9 7.8 13.4 19.9 161.5 212.6 8.1 5.0 2.9 8.2 12.2
2022 2,431.3 20.8 324.8 7.8 13.4 – 1.6 6.4 11.8 18.4 170.0 3.5 7.0 – 1.2 1.6 6.6 12.4
p 2023 2,238.3 – 7.7 323.6 0.4 14.5 1.2 6.1 12.2 17.9 170.0 0.9 7.6 0.7 1.8 6.6 11.5
2019 H1 861.3 2.7 112.3 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.5 11.8 18.6 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 903.7 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.6 11.8 20.0 52.0 – 11.4 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.5
2020 H1 744.5 – 14.4 78.2 – 34.1 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 8.8
H2 888.4 – 3.3 135.4 17.1 15.2 2.8 7.6 13.2 19.8 44.2 8.6 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.6
2021 H1 920.0 20.3 151.5 87.2 16.5 5.9 7.4 12.6 19.5 84.5 . 9.2 8.3 2.3 7.8 12.2
H2 1,075.6 20.4 146.4 8.1 13.6 – 1.6 7.9 13.2 20.8 77.0 73.1 7.2 2.2 2.9 7.7 13.4
2022 H1 1,149.7 23.5 161.0 4.8 14.0 – 2.5 6.1 11.5 18.4 84.9 – 1.6 7.4 – 1.9 1.6 6.4 11.8
H2 1,283.3 18.5 163.9 11.0 12.8 – 0.9 5.9 11.6 18.9 85.2 9.1 6.6 – 0.6 1.7 6.7 12.9
2023 H1 1,112.0 – 3.0 172.0 7.8 15.5 1.6 6.4 10.8 17.5 98.1 16.9 8.8 1.5 1.2 6.5 10.8
pH2 1,127.6 – 12.0 151.7 – 6.8 13.5 0.8 6.2 12.5 19.8 71.9 – 15.0 6.4 – 0.2 1.2 7.0 13.0
Groups with a focus on the production sector 7
2016 1,295.9 – 0.8 161.9 6.3 12.5 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 84.8 4.2 6.5 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,395.9 5.5 187.5 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.5 40.6 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,367.7 1.0 175.7 – 1.5 12.9 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 16.0 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.8 6.9 11.4
2019 1,410.9 2.0 168.1 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.8 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.7 10.1
2020 1,285.2 – 9.4 143.6 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 5.7 10.6 16.5 29.1 – 48.1 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.3 9.8
2021 1,585.8 22.4 208.9 45.9 13.2 2.1 7.9 12.8 17.9 118.6 325.8 7.5 5.4 2.8 7.8 11.1
2022 1,957.4 21.7 222.9 4.7 11.4 – 1.8 6.9 11.3 16.4 116.3 – 4.7 5.9 – 1.6 1.8 6.6 10.7
p 2023 1,784.0 – 8.2 233.7 5.7 13.1 1.7 7.0 11.4 16.1 124.1 7.6 7.0 1.0 2.2 6.6 11.4
2019 H1 689.9 2.4 83.3 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.9 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.8 6.0 9.5
H2 721.0 1.7 84.8 0.3 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.7 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.1
2020 H1 580.6 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.4 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 14.9 0.2 – 101.7 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.1 7.8
H2 704.6 – 3.0 94.6 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.0 12.1 18.6 28.9 19.6 4.1 1.1 0.3 6.0 10.4
2021 H1 731.9 24.0 111.2 126.9 15.2 6.9 8.2 12.6 18.6 66.7 . 9.1 9.3 2.9 7.9 12.1
H2 854.2 21.1 97.7 3.8 11.4 – 1.9 7.8 12.3 17.5 51.9 80.8 6.1 2.0 2.6 7.0 11.5
2022 H1 923.4 23.8 110.9 – 2.5 12.0 – 3.3 7.7 11.5 16.3 59.0 – 14.2 6.4 – 2.8 2.3 6.4 10.4
H2 1,035.8 19.9 112.2 13.1 10.8 – 0.7 5.9 10.8 16.7 57.4 7.7 5.5 – 0.6 1.3 6.5 11.4
2023 H1 894.9 – 2.9 129.0 16.7 14.4 2.4 7.1 11.7 16.3 76.7 30.5 8.6 2.2 2.1 6.7 10.7
pH2 890.0 – 13.0 104.9 – 5.0 11.8 1.0 6.5 12.4 17.4 47.5 – 16.0 5.3 – 0.2 1.8 6.6 12.0
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.3 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.5 12.2
2021 408.9 13.0 88.8 21.6 21.7 1.6 7.6 15.0 24.0 42.8 79.7 10.5 3.9 3.0 9.2 15.6
2022 473.9 17.4 101.9 15.3 21.5 – 0.4 5.2 13.1 22.8 53.8 26.4 11.3 0.8 1.0 6.9 14.4
p 2023 454.4 – 5.6 89.9 – 11.2 19.8 – 1.3 5.6 12.9 22.2 45.8 – 13.7 10.1 – 1.0 1.6 6.8 12.9
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
H2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.5 13.3
2021 H1 188.1 7.7 40.3 26.1 21.5 3.1 6.9 12.6 24.5 17.8 119.9 9.5 4.8 0.9 6.9 13.6
H2 221.4 17.9 48.7 18.2 22.0 0.1 9.4 16.5 24.7 25.1 59.1 11.3 3.0 3.8 9.5 17.7
2022 H1 226.3 22.0 50.1 25.3 22.2 0.6 4.6 11.6 20.9 25.9 46.4 11.5 1.9 – 0.5 6.3 13.5
H2 247.6 13.4 51.8 7.0 20.9 – 1.3 5.2 14.1 24.0 27.8 12.1 11.2 – 0.1 2.2 7.5 15.4
2023 H1 217.1 – 3.6 43.1 – 11.8 19.8 – 1.9 4.7 9.6 19.2 21.4 – 14.4 9.9 – 1.3 – 2.2 4.2 12.0
pH2 237.6 – 7.5 46.8 – 10.7 19.7 – 0.7 5.9 14.4 23.3 24.4 – 13.0 10.3 – 0.7 0.9 7.3 16.1
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Earnings before interest and taxes.  3 Quantile data are
based on the groups' unweighted return on sales.  4 Annual figures do not alwaysmatch the sum of the two half-year figures. See Quality report on consolidated financial
statement statistics, p. 3.  5 Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of con-
solidation of large groups and in the reporting sample. See Quality report on consolid-
ated financial statement statistics, p. 6.  6 From 2018 onwards: significant changes in
IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.  7 Including groups in
agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2023  r 2024 2024
Item 2021  r 2022  r 2023  r Q4 Q1 r Q2 May June July  p
I.Current Account +326,677 + 1,750 +248,373 +86,579 +95,170 +98,305 + 5,314 +56,179 +48,050
1.Goods
Receipts 2,430,108 2,872,360 2,816,097 686,338 705,859 696,311 240,886 236,685 251,224
Expenditure  2,139,067 2,918,158 2,559,453 612,588 622,883 593,831 209,186 199,752 212,925
Balance +291,041 –45,798 +256,644 +73,751 +82,976 +102,480 +31,700 +36,932 +38,299
2.Services
Receipts 1,089,679 1,335,264 1,379,427 359,705 360,350 340,521 126,352 137,042 137,485
Expenditure  979,241 1,171,591 1,256,274 310,105 343,621 317,663 105,276 115,075 112,067
Balance +110,438 +163,674 +123,153 +49,600 +16,729 +22,858 +21,075 +21,967 +25,418
3.Primary income
Receipts 890,452 1,089,886 1,245,766 316,267 328,180 298,831 112,798 123,518 106,562
Expenditure  798,276 1,032,924 1,211,301 309,809 291,404 284,078 149,072 112,821 109,395
Balance +92,176 +56,962 +34,465 + 6,458 +36,775 +14,753 –36,274 +10,697 – 2,833
4.Secondary income
Receipts 159,017 172,046 184,776 39,758 52,327 44,369 16,308 17,414 14,274
Expenditure  325,994 345,134 350,664 82,988 93,637 86,155 27,496 30,832 27,108
Balance –166,978 –173,088 –165,888 –43,229 –41,310 –41,786 –11,188 –13,418 –12,834
II.Capital account +47,779 +148,068 +39,684 +11,487 +21,286 –12,701 + 549 + 4,524 – 340
III.Financial account  1 +375,144 +80,163 +318,306 +85,688 +117,112 +113,555 +20,910 +91,329 +54,591
1.Direct investment +422,964 +264,045 +43,755 –15,567 –22,943 +90,784 + 8,181 +32,597 +20,589
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +399,145 +104,624 –324,152 + 6,226 –324,080 +142,935 –31,224 –15,189 +19,591
By non-resident units of
the euro area  –23,819 –159,421 –367,906 +21,793 –301,137 +52,150 –39,405 –47,786 – 999
2.Portfolio investment +265,954 –252,025 –102,177 –17,579 –43,726 –20,079 + 1,956 –67,060 +21,873
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +811,685 –158,888 +469,527 +121,178 +46,888 +169,172 +77,113 +76,412 +54,498
Equity and
investment fund shares +373,044 –159,805 +89,435 +16,191 – 3,469 +30,364 + 7,293 +41,874 +14,686
Short-term
debt securities  +119,003 –105,224 +105,417 +36,821 +43,727 +11,013 +18,872 + 4,783 +17,037
Long-term
debt securities  +319,639 +106,142 +274,674 +68,166 + 6,631 +127,795 +50,948 +29,755 +22,775
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  +545,731 +93,137 +571,704 +138,757 +90,614 +189,251 +75,157 +143,473 +32,625
Equity and
investment fund shares +654,628 +62,314 +171,744 +31,348 +80,698 +29,215 +41,138 +60,858 +40,424
Short-term
debt securities  +45,584 –67,852 –12,838 + 1,881 –31,393 –28,248 –10,345 +43,198 + 5,217
Long-term
debt securities  –154,480 +98,675 +412,798 +105,528 +41,310 +188,284 +44,365 +39,416 –13,016
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options +63,252 +104,330 +14,126 – 724 +21,922 +13,038 – 1,546 + 1,039 – 2,675
4.Other investment –507,383 –54,070 +375,019 +121,693 +155,459 +28,657 +10,684 +123,454 +18,010
Eurosystem –443,446 +172,312 +318,507 +55,523 +17,850 +76,666 –21,658 +14,125 +13,934
General government –77,084 –49,462 + 1,062 – 3,616 – 366 – 3,174 + 2,561 + 151 –15,203
MFIs  2 –115,831 –304,913 +162,707 +47,382 +151,415 +34,633 +47,778 +72,522 +29,087
Enterprises and households +128,979 +127,993 –107,256 +22,403 –13,440 –79,468 –17,997 +36,656 – 9,808
5.Reserve assets +130,357 +17,884 –12,416 – 2,135 + 6,399 + 1,155 + 1,636 + 1,299 – 3,206
IV.Net errors and omissions + 688 –69,654 +30,249 –12,379 + 656 +27,951 +15,047 +30,626 + 6,881
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Increase: + / decrease: -.2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Zeit Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2009 + 144,787 + 136,636 – 10,761 – 16,962 + 55,894 – 30,781 – 1,798 + 111,873 + 8,648 – 31,117
2010 + 150,210 + 159,328 – 8,801 – 25,147 + 52,346 – 36,317 + 19 + 73,036 + 1,613 – 77,192
2011 + 172,827 + 164,171 – 8,902 – 30,158 + 70,336 – 31,523 – 1,070 + 101,101 + 2,836 – 70,657
2012 + 201,277 + 200,916 – 10,420 – 31,425 + 67,297 – 35,511 – 2,167 + 131,252 + 1,297 – 67,858
2013 + 192,346 + 199,951 – 17,770 – 34,257 + 66,870 – 40,218 – 2,970 + 200,883 + 838 + 11,507
2014 + 215,932 + 218,515 – 15,863 – 22,941 + 61,801 – 41,443 + 336 + 231,400 – 2,564 + 15,132
2015 + 250,088 + 245,054 – 18,813 – 16,236 + 60,040 – 38,770 – 1,769 + 227,420 – 2,213 – 20,899
2016 + 284,662 + 250,397 – 21,830 – 18,346 + 90,869 – 38,259 – 1,345 + 269,282 + 1,686 – 14,034
2017 + 268,729 + 257,041 – 12,757 – 21,212 + 83,864 – 50,964 – 6,479 + 274,766 – 1,269 + 12,515
2018 + 289,187 + 218,739 – 27,726 – 14,010 + 134,180 – 49,722 – 3,602 + 261,115 + 392 – 24,470
2019 + 278,477 + 213,201 – 39,862 – 14,443 + 130,094 – 50,375 – 4,907 + 200,831 – 544 – 72,739
2020 + 218,031 + 177,742 – 21,461 + 6,633 + 87,061 – 53,406 – 10,520 + 168,954 – 51 – 38,557
2021 + 254,580 + 188,036 – 5,970 + 1,613 + 124,430 – 59,499 – 3,463 + 206,797 + 31,892 – 44,320
2022 + 174,507 + 134,785 + 18,630 – 35,984 + 143,193 – 67,486 – 20,290 + 199,405 + 4,426 + 45,188
2023 + 248,696 + 231,085 – 33,721 – 64,577 + 146,423 – 64,234 – 26,636 + 250,153 + 884 + 28,094
2021 Q3 + 56,773 + 45,651 – 4,455 – 6,612 + 33,936 – 16,202 + 1,755 + 14,885 + 31,199 – 43,642
Q4 + 63,458 + 39,847 + 2,546 – 2,883 + 43,025 – 16,531 + 230 + 53,018 + 250 – 10,669
2022 Q1 + 57,805 + 37,750 + 5,928 + 723 + 36,785 – 17,453 – 3,787 + 71,950 + 2,200 + 17,932
Q2 + 28,650 + 30,261 + 8,443 – 6,455 + 18,032 – 13,188 – 4,516 + 61,543 + 597 + 37,410
Q3 + 31,130 + 31,578 + 7,336 – 22,381 + 39,388 – 17,455 – 6,442 – 19,471 + 784 – 44,159
Q4 + 56,921 + 35,196 – 3,078 – 7,871 + 48,987 – 19,391 – 5,544 + 85,382 + 845 + 34,005
2023 Q1 + 65,256 + 55,177 – 7,384 – 9,541 + 38,396 – 18,776 – 13,931 + 81,336 + 224 + 30,011
Q2 + 47,047 + 55,560 – 5,974 – 17,082 + 18,793 – 10,225 – 4,074 + 29,749 + 1,096 – 13,223
Q3 + 59,564 + 58,181 – 9,154 – 25,066 + 42,254 – 15,805 – 3,906 + 46,047 – 790 – 9,611
Q4 + 76,829 + 62,166 – 11,209 – 12,889 + 46,979 – 19,428 – 4,725 + 93,021 + 355 + 20,918
2024 Q1 + 78,220 + 72,365 – 8,065 – 12,166 + 37,078 – 19,058 – 8,679 + 46,880 + 378 – 22,660
Q2 + 62,280 + 71,409 – 9,870 – 20,366 + 20,480 – 9,242 – 773 + 45,095 + 746 – 16,412
2022 Mar. + 20,512 + 13,763 + 2,355 – 1,333 + 13,324 – 5,241 – 795 – 2,108 + 730 – 21,826
Apr. + 12,136 + 7,277 + 3,565 – 1,276 + 11,514 – 5,379 – 1,383 + 19,368 + 83 + 8,614
May + 4,284 + 10,832 + 3,754 – 2,148 – 2,994 – 1,406 – 2,536 + 2,213 + 161 + 466
June + 12,230 + 12,152 + 1,124 – 3,031 + 9,511 – 6,403 – 598 + 39,962 + 353 + 28,330
July + 9,969 + 10,616 + 1,904 – 6,046 + 12,200 – 6,800 – 3,180 – 21,182 – 484 – 27,971
Aug. + 6,312 + 8,024 + 4,079 – 9,647 + 13,948 – 6,012 – 1,252 + 23,448 + 81 + 18,389
Sep. + 14,849 + 12,938 + 1,353 – 6,687 + 13,240 – 4,643 – 2,010 – 21,737 + 1,187 – 34,576
Oct. + 10,678 + 7,214 – 206 – 5,692 + 14,682 – 5,527 – 1,623 + 43,079 + 672 + 34,024
Nov. + 21,021 + 13,925 – 2,083 – 2,170 + 15,326 – 6,060 – 2,080 – 3,629 + 425 – 22,569
Dec. + 25,223 + 14,057 – 788 – 10 + 18,979 – 7,803 – 1,842 + 45,932 – 252 + 22,550
2023 Jan. + 15,268 + 11,319 – 1,868 – 1,953 + 13,078 – 7,176 – 5,965 – 3,226 – 341 – 12,529
Feb. + 21,743 + 19,008 – 1,822 – 3,185 + 11,062 – 5,143 – 1,918 + 29,475 + 143 + 9,649
Mar. + 28,245 + 24,849 – 3,694 – 4,403 + 14,256 – 6,457 – 6,048 + 55,087 + 423 + 32,890
Apr. + 19,226 + 15,878 – 1,630 – 3,807 + 12,170 – 5,014 – 343 – 32,083 + 88 – 50,966
May + 6,891 + 17,485 – 696 – 6,417 – 3,771 – 406 – 2,415 + 5,084 + 45 + 608
June + 20,929 + 22,197 – 3,648 – 6,858 + 10,395 – 4,805 – 1,316 + 56,748 + 962 + 37,135
July + 16,964 + 18,576 – 4,531 – 8,018 + 12,254 – 5,847 – 4,669 + 2,762 – 118 – 9,533
Aug. + 18,930 + 18,809 – 1,077 – 10,616 + 15,803 – 5,066 – 691 + 38,044 – 107 + 19,805
Sep. + 23,670 + 20,796 – 3,545 – 6,431 + 14,197 – 4,892 + 1,454 + 5,241 – 566 – 19,883
Oct. + 18,705 + 21,649 – 1,879 – 10,681 + 14,007 – 6,269 – 3,257 + 23,280 + 858 + 7,831
Nov. + 28,991 + 23,929 – 4,893 – 3,590 + 14,896 – 6,245 – 3,822 + 35,435 + 65 + 10,266
Dec. + 29,133 + 16,588 – 4,437 + 1,382 + 18,077 – 6,914 + 2,354 + 34,307 – 569 + 2,820
2024 Jan. + 21,846 + 23,096 – 1,801 – 4,231 + 12,511 – 9,530 – 6,807 + 7,788 – 249 – 7,250
Feb. + 26,465 + 24,594 – 3,355 – 3,638 + 10,218 – 4,709 – 1,995 + 6,760 + 1,193 – 17,710
Mar. + 29,908 + 24,675 – 2,910 – 4,297 + 14,348 – 4,818 + 123 + 32,332 – 566 + 2,300
Apr. + 24,297 + 24,452 – 3,172 – 5,392 + 8,384 – 3,148 – 2,028 + 6,525 – 317 – 15,743
May + 17,390 + 25,351 – 2,393 – 8,088 + 1,655 – 1,528 – 1,372 + 23,456 + 156 + 7,439
June + 20,594 + 21,605 – 4,304 – 6,886 + 10,441 – 4,567 + 2,628 + 15,114 + 908 – 8,107
r July + 17,750 + 21,161 – 2,662 – 10,346 + 12,350 – 5,415 – 2,404 + 41,167 – 1,194 + 25,821
p Aug. + 14,410 + 17,649 – 4,241 – 10,892 + 12,883 – 5,229 + 677 – 15,082 – 552 – 30,169
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: + / net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2024
Group of countries/country 
2021 2022 
2023 Mar. Apr. May June July Aug.
All countries  1 Exports 1,371,397 1,594,034 1,590,068 136,919 140,517 129,669 130,048 135,276 122,028
Imports 1,195,499 1,505,434 1,365,825 113,583 116,637 107,048 107,795 114,392 102,977
Balance +175,898 +88,600 +224,243 +23,337 +23,880 +22,621 +22,253 +20,885 +19,050
   I. European countries Exports 941,795 1,091,554 1,087,506 94,195 96,248 89,421 88,525 90,568 81,997
Imports 795,136 973,063 881,692 73,319 76,201 68,120 70,416 73,424 64,221
Balance +146,658 +118,492 +205,814 +20,876 +20,047 +21,301 +18,109 +17,144 +17,776
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 743,373 878,642 874,624 75,888 76,794 71,956 71,353 72,277 65,348
Imports 629,513 737,668 719,506 60,264 62,689 55,892 57,662 60,316 52,316
Balance +113,861 +140,974 +155,118 +15,624 +14,106 +16,064 +13,691 +11,961 +13,031
          Euro area (20)       Exports 518,043 617,068 614,752 52,808 53,938 50,014 49,736 51,131 44,268
          countries Imports 431,697 506,865 480,092 39,771 41,519 37,429 38,413 41,324 34,022
Balance +86,345 +110,203 +134,660 +13,037 +12,418 +12,585 +11,323 + 9,807 +10,246
          of which:
               Austria Exports 72,385 90,270 81,947 6,930 7,103 6,362 6,266 6,697 6,112
  Imports 47,492 58,137 54,585 4,421 4,772 4,212 4,337 4,786 3,805
Balance +24,893 +32,134 +27,362 + 2,509 + 2,331 + 2,150 + 1,929 + 1,911 + 2,308
               Belgium and Exports 58,080 70,933 69,173 5,875 6,026 5,548 5,867 5,674 5,173
               Luxembourg Imports 55,726 67,071 56,889 4,543 4,655 4,156 4,314 4,759 4,104
Balance + 2,354 + 3,861 +12,284 + 1,332 + 1,371 + 1,392 + 1,554 + 915 + 1,069
               France Exports 102,741 118,168 120,469 10,422 11,168 9,607 9,686 10,163 8,223
  Imports 61,921 69,969 69,847 5,810 6,101 5,289 5,743 5,846 4,783
Balance +40,820 +48,198 +50,622 + 4,612 + 5,067 + 4,318 + 3,943 + 4,317 + 3,440
               Italy Exports 75,526 89,191 87,139 7,501 7,021 7,071 6,936 7,234 5,453
  Imports 65,389 73,177 72,169 5,944 6,016 5,809 5,810 6,429 4,670
Balance +10,137 +16,014 +14,969 + 1,557 + 1,005 + 1,262 + 1,126 + 805 + 782
               Netherlands Exports 93,101 112,261 115,279 10,056 10,092 9,265 9,327 9,456 8,639
  Imports 96,562 114,998 104,818 8,505 8,529 7,852 7,884 8,507 7,784
Balance – 3,461 – 2,737 +10,461 + 1,551 + 1,563 + 1,413 + 1,442 + 950 + 855
               Spain  Exports 43,932 49,935 54,574 4,681 4,809 4,781 4,595 4,784 3,832
  Imports 34,180 37,756 39,230 3,398 3,732 3,372 3,426 3,164 2,561
Balance + 9,752 +12,178 +15,344 + 1,283 + 1,077 + 1,409 + 1,168 + 1,621 + 1,270
          Other EU Member  Exports 225,331 261,574 259,872 23,080 22,857 21,943 21,617 21,146 21,080
          States  Imports 197,815 230,803 239,414 20,493 21,169 18,463 19,249 18,992 18,295
Balance +27,515 +30,772 +20,457 + 2,587 + 1,687 + 3,479 + 2,367 + 2,155 + 2,785
      2. Other European Exports 198,421 212,912 212,882 18,307 19,454 17,465 17,172 18,291 16,650
          countries Imports 165,623 235,395 162,186 13,055 13,513 12,228 12,754 13,108 11,905
Balance +32,798 –22,483 +50,696 + 5,252 + 5,941 + 5,237 + 4,418 + 5,183 + 4,745
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 60,638 70,611 66,586 5,958 6,467 5,696 5,422 5,704 5,079
  Imports 49,247 55,723 51,818 4,655 4,675 4,120 4,409 4,644 3,619
Balance +11,391 +14,888 +14,768 + 1,303 + 1,791 + 1,576 + 1,013 + 1,060 + 1,459
               United Kingdom Exports 65,002 73,764 78,454 6,878 7,390 6,435 6,624 6,727 6,196
  Imports 32,245 40,314 36,679 2,963 3,060 2,686 3,036 2,936 2,692
Balance +32,757 +33,449 +41,775 + 3,915 + 4,330 + 3,749 + 3,587 + 3,791 + 3,504
   II. Non-European  Exports 427,430 497,428 497,730 42,359 43,834 39,821 41,083 44,273 39,580
       countries Imports 399,604 531,409 482,780 40,122 40,265 38,816 37,215 40,784 38,591
Balance +27,827 –33,982 +14,950 + 2,237 + 3,569 + 1,005 + 3,867 + 3,490 + 989
       1. Africa Exports 23,068 26,462 28,737 2,169 2,291 2,167 2,100 2,344 2,085
Imports 26,241 34,213 32,806 2,805 2,793 2,862 2,904 3,020 2,568
Balance – 3,173 – 7,751 – 4,068 – 636 – 502 – 695 – 803 – 676 – 484
       2. America Exports 167,735 210,652 216,560 19,319 20,076 18,313 18,181 19,235 17,250
  Imports 101,525 131,979 130,539 11,280 11,454 10,516 9,991 11,205 10,641
Balance +66,210 +78,673 +86,021 + 8,039 + 8,623 + 7,798 + 8,190 + 8,030 + 6,609
           of which:
               United States  Exports 121,980 156,208 157,946 14,362 14,344 13,265 12,978 14,124 12,641
  Imports 72,316 93,338 94,672 7,904 8,098 7,719 7,073 7,964 7,627
Balance +49,664 +62,871 +63,274 + 6,458 + 6,246 + 5,547 + 5,905 + 6,160 + 5,014
       3. Asia Exports 224,897 246,289 238,673 19,824 20,337 18,230 19,659 21,411 19,217
  Imports 267,604 357,702 313,193 25,271 25,604 25,000 23,782 26,082 24,961
Balance –42,707 –111,413 –74,520 – 5,447 – 5,267 – 6,770 – 4,124 – 4,670 – 5,744
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 26,090 29,648 32,046 2,667 2,728 2,642 2,750 2,936 2,747
  Imports 7,509 13,304 15,887 1,006 1,000 1,080 1,016 1,093 1,332
Balance +18,582 +16,344 +16,158 + 1,661 + 1,728 + 1,562 + 1,733 + 1,842 + 1,415
               Japan  Exports 18,245 20,511 20,239 1,589 1,515 1,481 1,694 1,998 2,306
Imports 23,477 25,413 25,640 2,076 2,087 1,800 1,733 1,889 1,760
Balance – 5,232 – 4,902 – 5,400 – 487 – 573 – 319 – 39 + 109 + 545
               People's Republic  Exports 103,564 106,762 97,333 8,421 8,774 7,483 7,956 7,970 6,998
               of China  2 Imports 142,964 192,830 157,157 12,801 12,692 12,563 12,120 13,682 12,993
Balance –39,400 –86,068 –59,825 – 4,380 – 3,918 – 5,081 – 4,164 – 5,711 – 5,996
               New industrial countries Exports 55,295 63,344 60,942 5,029 5,127 4,539 5,013 6,016 4,641
               and emerging markets  Imports 55,441 71,012 66,520 5,076 5,246 5,144 4,992 4,927 4,659
               of Asia  3 Balance – 146 – 7,668 – 5,578 – 47 – 119 – 605 + 21 + 1,088 – 18
       4. Oceania and Exports 11,731 14,024 13,760 1,047 1,130 1,111 1,143 1,283 1,028
           polar regions Imports 4,233 7,515 6,242 766 415 439 539 477 421
Balance + 7,497 + 6,510 + 7,517 + 281 + 715 + 672 + 604 + 806 + 607
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. Euro area incl. Croatia.  1 Including fuel and other supplies forships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.
3 Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Zeit Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2019 – 14,443 + 3,638 – 45,947 + 10,195 + 18,368 – 9,763 – 2,650 + 3,127 + 4,507 +127,062 – 1,475
2020 + 6,633 – 5,392 – 14,678 + 9,696 + 18,149 – 7,941 – 4,483 + 2,919 + 5,434 + 83,611 – 1,984
2021 + 1,613 – 6,717 – 24,323 + 8,280 + 31,784 – 9,449 – 9,922 + 3,059 + 5,307 +122,189 – 3,066
2022 – 35,984 – 11,246 – 54,946 + 8,910 + 29,373 – 12,432 – 10,206 + 3,617 + 5,463 +143,120 – 5,390
2023 – 64,577 – 9,907 – 72,209 + 9,206 + 21,219 – 11,931 – 14,316 + 3,345 + 5,621 +145,132 – 4,331
2022 Q4 – 7,871 – 2,447 – 13,323 + 2,600 + 5,965 – 2,300 – 1,776 + 754 + 1,619 + 44,658 + 2,710
2023 Q1 – 9,541 – 3,012 – 11,279 + 1,927 + 5,683 – 4,044 – 3,185 + 1,025 + 1,677 + 38,114 – 1,395
Q2 – 17,082 – 1,729 – 18,270 + 2,390 + 4,679 – 2,580 – 4,601 + 868 + 1,267 + 21,566 – 4,040
Q3 – 25,066 – 2,514 – 25,448 + 2,572 + 4,893 – 3,568 – 4,389 + 804 + 962 + 42,604 – 1,312
Q4 – 12,889 – 2,651 – 17,213 + 2,318 + 5,965 – 1,740 – 2,142 + 647 + 1,715 + 42,848 + 2,416
2024 Q1 – 12,166 – 1,972 – 12,612 + 2,659 + 4,846 – 3,777 – 4,363 + 850 + 1,554 + 36,245 – 722
Q2 – 20,366 – 1,982 – 19,534 + 2,572 + 4,466 – 2,388 – 6,092 + 725 + 1,190 + 20,466 – 1,176
2023 Oct. – 10,681 – 1,149 – 10,928 + 451 + 2,239 – 1,433 – 797 + 327 + 513 + 12,726 + 768
Nov. – 3,590 – 741 – 4,688 + 805 + 2,177 – 450 – 1,436 + 161 + 506 + 13,590 + 800
Dec. + 1,382 – 761 – 1,597 + 1,061 + 1,549 + 143 + 91 + 159 + 696 + 16,532 + 849
2024 Jan. – 4,231 – 556 – 3,613 + 827 + 1,492 – 1,648 – 1,850 + 309 + 512 + 12,228 – 229
Feb. – 3,638 – 387 – 3,884 + 720 + 1,228 – 1,269 – 933 + 261 + 522 + 10,010 – 314
Mar. – 4,297 – 1,029 – 5,115 + 1,112 + 2,126 – 860 – 1,580 + 280 + 521 + 14,007 – 179
Apr. – 5,392 – 400 – 5,214 + 831 + 2,132 – 1,666 – 1,996 + 303 + 395 + 8,384 – 395
May – 8,088 – 838 – 7,000 + 1,033 + 1,054 – 1,133 – 2,044 + 125 + 397 + 1,641 – 383
June – 6,886 – 743 – 7,321 + 709 + 1,280 + 412 – 2,052 + 297 + 397 + 10,441 – 397
r July – 10,346 – 649 – 7,322 + 863 + 662 – 2,001 – 2,585 + 275 + 353 + 12,412 – 415
p Aug. – 10,892 – 864 – 9,793 + 621 + 814 – 1,084 – 1,624 + 289 + 353 + 12,829 – 300
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Zeit Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2019 – 50,375 – 29,615 – 9,457 + 11,714 – 20,760 – 5,439 – 5,431 – 4,907 – 298 – 4,609
2020 – 53,406 – 35,008 – 11,620 + 10,959 – 18,398 – 5,920 – 5,908 – 10,520 – 3,547 – 6,973
2021 – 59,499 – 37,014 – 8,929 + 12,085 – 22,485 – 6,178 – 6,170 – 3,463 – 565 – 2,899
2022 – 67,486 – 40,145 – 15,002 + 14,285 – 27,341 – 8,028 – 7,149 – 20,290 – 15,993 – 4,297
2023 – 64,234 – 36,285 – 13,692 + 14,496 – 27,949 – 7,418 – 6,805 – 26,636 – 19,116 – 7,520
2022 Q4 – 19,391 – 12,829 – 6,701 + 2,143 – 6,562 – 1,844 – 1,810 – 5,544 – 4,390 – 1,154
2023 Q1 – 18,776 – 9,952 – 3,196 + 2,453 – 8,824 – 1,882 – 1,731 – 13,931 – 10,626 – 3,305
Q2 – 10,225 – 3,898 – 1,915 + 7,773 – 6,327 – 1,846 – 1,691 – 4,074 – 3,071 – 1,003
Q3 – 15,805 – 9,878 – 2,959 + 2,120 – 5,927 – 1,844 – 1,691 – 3,906 – 2,270 – 1,636
Q4 – 19,428 – 12,557 – 5,622 + 2,151 – 6,871 – 1,846 – 1,691 – 4,725 – 3,149 – 1,576
2024 Q1 – 19,058 – 7,210 – 1,672 + 2,829 – 11,848 – 1,935 – 1,933 – 8,679 – 6,849 – 1,831
Q2 – 9,242 – 2,302 – 1,739 + 7,526 – 6,940 – 1,936 – 1,933 – 773 – 2,102 + 1,330
2023 Oct. – 6,269 – 4,119 – 1,145 + 412 – 2,150 – 611 – 560 – 3,257 – 3,423 + 166
Nov. – 6,245 – 4,067 – 1,227 + 466 – 2,178 – 612 – 560 – 3,822 – 3,416 – 406
Dec. – 6,914 – 4,370 – 3,249 + 1,273 – 2,544 – 623 – 571 + 2,354 + 3,691 – 1,337
2024 Jan. – 9,530 – 2,191 – 640 + 552 – 7,339 – 645 – 644 – 6,807 – 5,390 – 1,417
Feb. – 4,709 – 2,339 – 535 + 1,140 – 2,370 – 645 – 644 – 1,995 – 1,858 – 137
Mar. – 4,818 – 2,680 – 497 + 1,137 – 2,138 – 644 – 644 + 123 + 400 – 277
Apr. – 3,148 – 1,049 – 383 + 1,856 – 2,099 – 646 – 644 – 2,028 – 2,945 + 917
May – 1,528 + 675 – 344 + 3,792 – 2,202 – 643 – 644 – 1,372 – 1,601 + 229
June – 4,567 – 1,928 – 1,012 + 1,878 – 2,639 – 647 – 644 + 2,628 + 2,444 + 184
r July – 5,415 – 3,256 – 804 + 403 – 2,159 – 645 – 644 – 2,404 – 1,888 – 516
p Aug. – 5,229 – 3,243 – 420 + 397 – 1,987 – 645 – 644 + 677 + 866 – 189
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2023 2024 2024
Item 2021 2022 2023 Q4  Q1  Q2 June July  r August  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +800,770 +324,992 +280,033 +112,588 +175,433 +81,709 – 5,372 +48,833 +48,841
1.Direct investment +167,462 +170,355 +85,258 +44,414 +27,451 +31,970 +14,109 + 6,743 –10,310
Equity +107,448 +104,597 +62,703 +15,017 +20,776 +25,507 + 8,296 + 7,149 + 1,162
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +45,034 +57,980 +46,241 + 8,780 +21,056 +17,780 + 4,067 + 4,642 + 5,505
Debt instruments +60,014 +65,758 +22,554 +29,397 + 6,675 + 6,463 + 5,812 – 407 –11,472
2.Portfolio investment +179,294 +11,575 +143,320 +12,513 +61,661 +47,020 +26,699 +20,005 +19,753
Shares  2 +46,653 –15,196 – 5,520 + 391 + 4+ 3,659 – 749 + 2,736 + 679
Investment fund shares  3 +123,157 +32,299 +26,718 + 5,722 +21,543 +21,928 + 8,516 + 9,764 + 9,771
Short-term  4
debt securities – 103 +16,257 + 6,044 – 252 + 6,578 + 3,601 + 2,240 – 519 – 1,521
Long-term   5
debt securities + 9,588 –21,785 +116,078 + 6,652 +33,536 +17,833 +16,691 + 8,024 +10,824
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +47,880 +41,519 +39,966 – 344 + 6,439 +10,291 + 4,848 + 5,906 + 7,508
4.Other investment  7 +374,241 +97,117 +10,605 +55,649 +79,504 – 8,319 –51,935 +17,374 +32,443
MFIs  8 +112,904 +59,472 +42,150 –20,784 +98,981 + 4,860 –37,536 + 5,799 +17,655
Short-term +99,380 +34,961 +16,508 –35,986 +94,149 + 3,442 –35,621 + 1,540 + 9,185
Long-term +13,204 +24,473 +25,575 +15,204 + 4,861 + 1,405 – 1,922 + 4,252 + 8,466
Enterprises and
households  9 +146,187 +48,548 +132,671 +19,276 +18,572 –36,109 –44,138 +52,296 –10,032
Short-term +113,542 +24,535 +113,708 +15,639 +13,657 –39,747 –45,561 +52,029 –12,032
Long-term –13,302 – 7,670 + 1,084 – 1,611 – 378 – 2,671 – 1,489 – 1,628 + 637
General government – 8,243 –25,070 + 8,123 + 3,373 – 3,312 – 258 + 757 + 1,303 – 1,740
Short-term – 7,256 –23,472 + 3,653 + 4,091 – 3,095 + 366 + 1,101 + 1,677 – 1,392
Long-term – 978 – 1,593 + 4,455 – 718 – 216 – 623 – 343 – 374 – 349
Bundesbank +123,394 +14,167 –172,339 +53,785 –34,737 +23,187 +28,982 –42,024 +26,560
5.Reserve assets +31,892 + 4,426 + 884 + 355 + 378 + 746 + 908 – 1,194 – 552
II.Net foreign investment in the
reporting country (increase: +) +593,973 +125,587 +29,880 +19,566 +128,553 +36,613 –20,486 + 7,667 +63,923
1.Direct investment +85,979 +58,137 +17,938 +16,040 +15,044 +21,810 +10,653 + 7,763 – 4,592
Equity +46,470 +22,102 +24,920 + 6,251 +16,228 – 1,215 + 55 + 1,299 + 1,263
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 8,355 +10,299 + 2,668 + 2,010 + 5,133 – 4,666 – 67 + 1,156 + 161
Debt instruments +39,509 +36,035 – 6,982 + 9,789 – 1,184 +23,026 +10,598 + 6,464 – 5,854
2.Portfolio investment –18,451 – 1,568 +148,156 – 196 +58,313 +42,666 +30,236 +11,335 +48,391
Shares  2 + 2,615 – 5,807 –12,984 – 47 – 4,197 – 583 + 952 – 1,063 + 276
Investment fund shares  3 – 8,423 – 3,207 – 1,984 – 232 – 467 + 933 + 529 + 596 + 626
Short-term  4
debt securities +30,545 –32,717 + 3,936 – 6,138 –20,838 –13,082 +13,769 – 9,304 + 7,767
Long-term   5
debt securities –43,188 +40,163 +159,188 + 6,221 +83,815 +55,398 +14,986 +21,106 +39,721
3.Other investment  7 +526,446 +69,018 –136,214 + 3,723 +55,196 –27,863 –61,376 –11,431 +20,124
MFIs  8 +161,287 +153,003 –55,282 –93,935 +139,975 – 5,483 –12,033 –50,874 + 1,264
Short-term +115,265 +160,861 –88,243 –88,073 +140,506 – 6,995 –15,217 –54,353 – 4,892
Long-term +46,044 – 7,860 +32,959 – 5,863 – 526 + 1,513 + 3,186 + 3,479 + 6,155
Enterprises and
households  9 +141,143 +12,367 +57,938 +34,758 +26,768 –22,307 –53,202 +50,094 + 1,351
Short-term +99,842 – 8,533 +28,422 +32,257 +17,220 –26,917 –55,551 +46,811 – 971
Long-term +14,022 + 8,384 +15,335 – 1,096 + 6,124 + 1,030 + 1,076 + 2,122 + 1,174
General government – 2,780 – 5,634 – 622 – 4,212 + 2,287 – 848 + 124 + 1,133 – 735
Short-term – 451 – 3,253 – 968 – 4,640 + 2,318 – 645 + 93 + 1,252 – 757
Long-term – 2,326 – 2,379 + 537 + 428 – 31 – 204 + 31 – 119 + 22
Bundesbank +226,796 –90,717 –138,249 +67,112 –113,835 + 775 + 3,735 –11,784 +18,244
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +206,797 +199,405 +250,153 +93,021 +46,880 +45,095 +15,114 +41,167 –15,082
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see Statistical series, direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities  3 4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 663,320 497,651
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 1,455,788 292,259 201,335 48,766 8,782 33,376 1,117,978 1,093,371 45,550 779,844 675,943
2022 Apr. 1,491,558 288,953 196,274 48,617 8,799 35,263 1,148,681 1,135,400 53,923 790,221 701,337
May 1,505,419 278,174 186,481 48,031 8,681 34,980 1,173,376 1,159,716 53,869 805,179 700,240
June 1,566,099 281,157 187,573 48,712 8,948 35,923 1,232,176 1,216,530 52,767 826,280 739,819
July 1,514,570 280,910 185,950 49,465 9,086 36,409 1,179,431 1,166,155 54,229 810,881 703,689
Aug. 1,590,572 280,160 184,794 49,614 9,300 36,451 1,258,187 1,245,014 52,225 842,576 747,996
Sep. 1,613,008 281,258 184,022 50,287 9,358 37,592 1,281,266 1,266,647 50,483 829,129 783,879
Oct. 1,569,272 274,421 178,101 49,675 9,527 37,119 1,243,873 1,230,005 50,977 811,035 758,237
Nov. 1,577,175 277,458 183,052 49,168 9,315 35,923 1,248,088 1,233,980 51,629 810,314 766,861
Dec. 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 Jan. 1,508,507 281,692 190,062 48,256 9,437 33,938 1,176,042 1,162,354 50,772 793,716 714,791
Feb. 1,455,724 276,016 183,755 48,582 9,480 34,199 1,130,353 1,114,888 49,356 743,006 712,718
Mar. 1,522,539 288,131 196,405 48,039 9,373 34,314 1,184,604 1,170,620 49,804 791,478 731,061
Apr. 1,431,180 285,667 194,679 47,642 9,297 34,049 1,096,324 1,081,284 49,189 726,986 704,194
May 1,435,049 290,368 197,915 48,658 9,379 34,416 1,095,750 1,081,900 48,931 701,467 733,582
June 1,416,292 280,820 188,991 48,618 9,292 33,919 1,087,034 1,068,747 48,438 718,324 697,969
July 1,399,374 282,438 191,458 48,368 9,184 33,429 1,068,875 1,052,218 48,061 689,447 709,927
Aug. 1,406,665 284,364 192,914 48,979 9,218 33,253 1,074,575 1,056,420 47,725 687,342 719,322
Sep. 1,393,337 282,490 190,232 49,647 9,278 33,333 1,064,193 1,048,059 46,654 713,662 679,675
Oct. 1,415,403 295,288 202,630 49,531 9,256 33,871 1,074,627 1,058,985 45,488 688,966 726,437
Nov. 1,414,241 292,718 201,195 48,939 8,958 33,627 1,076,415 1,060,074 45,107 691,309 722,932
Dec. 1,455,788 292,259 201,335 48,766 8,782 33,376 1,117,978 1,093,371 45,550 779,844 675,943
2024 Jan. 1,397,172 294,402 202,641 49,412 8,921 33,428 1,058,508 1,041,902 44,261 669,890 727,281
Feb. 1,431,638 295,014 202,181 49,313 8,777 34,744 1,093,262 1,075,510 43,361 679,579 752,058
Mar. 1,436,723 312,728 220,571 49,281 8,563 34,314 1,083,242 1,065,759 40,754 666,365 770,359
Apr. 1,428,136 324,404 232,438 49,368 8,591 34,007 1,063,804 1,047,932 39,928 653,953 774,183
May 1,441,362 324,156 232,717 49,501 8,399 33,538 1,077,447 1,061,110 39,758 663,179 778,183
June 1,474,113 328,214 234,891 49,858 8,355 35,109 1,106,429 1,090,444 39,470 667,250 806,863
July 1,435,785 332,641 240,587 49,622 8,401 34,030 1,064,405 1,048,438 38,739 655,396 780,389
Aug. 1,465,307 335,465 244,992 49,207 8,318 32,948 1,090,965 1,075,239 38,877 673,181 792,126
Sep. 1,472,197 345,338 254,267 49,081 8,395 33,595 1,088,058 1,073,512 38,802 674,582 797,615
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2020 1,034,224 244,415 789,808 549,157 240,652 213,833 26,819 1,429,615 172,417 1,257,198 1,038,111 219,087 130,318 88,769
2021 1,169,991 256,601 913,391 621,935 291,456 263,269 28,187 1,592,302 217,294 1,375,008 1,117,381 257,627 160,536 97,091
2022 1,247,020 250,759 996,261 675,328 320,933 291,361 29,572 1,629,245 177,095 1,452,150 1,158,894 293,255 192,495 100,760
2023 1,359,181 357,997 1,001,184 688,702 312,482 281,494 30,988 1,654,743 214,458 1,440,285 1,154,059 286,226 179,792 106,434
2024 Mar. 1,398,155 383,445 1,014,710 703,306 311,403 277,810 33,593 1,694,193 249,362 1,444,831 1,162,251 282,580 170,204 112,375
Apr. 1,427,766 390,915 1,036,851 724,837 312,014 278,297 33,717 1,744,856 269,711 1,475,145 1,193,266 281,879 168,472 113,406
May 1,418,237 389,372 1,028,866 727,364 301,502 267,469 34,033 1,760,356 272,654 1,487,702 1,213,212 274,490 160,969 113,521
June 1,382,690 339,991 1,042,699 730,119 312,581 278,599 33,982 1,725,982 226,799 1,499,182 1,212,544 286,638 171,509 115,128
r July 1,432,423 393,828 1,038,594 733,360 305,234 270,443 34,792 1,785,281 279,927 1,505,354 1,227,080 278,274 165,004 113,270
p Aug. 1,405,046 373,809 1,031,237 736,411 294,826 260,173 34,652 1,776,786 282,630 1,494,155 1,221,889 272,267 157,909 114,358
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2020 613,888 185,572 428,316 334,474 93,842 80,833 13,009 903,486 97,851 805,635 715,854 89,781 61,887 27,895
2021 663,042 193,246 469,796 361,161 108,635 95,778 12,857 996,712 152,239 844,473 740,274 104,198 74,585 29,614
2022 712,912 190,773 522,139 397,836 124,303 110,821 13,482 1,006,529 126,999 879,530 764,435 115,095 84,054 31,041
2023 816,276 284,817 531,459 410,769 120,690 106,262 14,428 1,014,822 139,380 875,442 759,104 116,338 83,290 33,048
2024 Mar. 860,920 314,938 545,982 420,482 125,499 110,235 15,264 1,040,327 162,630 877,697 761,531 116,166 81,818 34,347
Apr. 884,090 317,274 566,816 440,498 126,318 111,568 14,750 1,083,317 183,732 899,585 783,220 116,365 81,784 34,581
May 883,683 321,710 561,973 440,525 121,447 106,575 14,873 1,076,480 174,040 902,441 789,637 112,803 78,096 34,707
June 842,695 282,433 560,262 435,062 125,199 110,147 15,052 1,074,174 160,895 913,279 794,953 118,325 83,736 34,589
r July 881,884 323,486 558,399 439,274 119,125 103,663 15,462 1,108,544 189,172 919,372 804,920 114,452 79,379 35,072
p Aug. 858,844 305,541 553,303 437,014 116,289 100,806 15,483 1,096,055 189,684 906,372 796,378 109,994 74,542 35,453
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2020 420,335 58,843 361,492 214,682 146,810 133,000 13,810 526,129 74,566 451,563 322,257 129,306 68,431 60,875
2021 506,949 63,355 443,594 260,773 182,821 167,491 15,330 595,590 65,055 530,535 377,107 153,429 85,951 67,478
2022 534,107 59,986 474,122 277,492 196,629 180,540 16,090 622,716 50,096 572,620 394,460 178,160 108,441 69,719
2023 542,904 73,180 469,725 277,933 191,792 175,232 16,560 639,921 75,078 564,843 394,955 169,888 96,501 73,386
2024 Mar. 537,235 68,507 468,728 282,824 185,904 167,575 18,329 653,866 86,732 567,134 400,720 166,414 88,386 78,028
Apr. 543,676 73,641 470,035 284,338 185,696 166,729 18,967 661,539 85,979 575,560 410,046 165,514 86,689 78,825
May 534,554 67,661 466,893 286,839 180,054 160,894 19,160 683,876 98,615 585,261 423,575 161,687 82,873 78,813
June 539,996 57,558 482,438 295,056 187,381 168,452 18,930 651,808 65,905 585,904 417,591 168,313 87,773 80,540
r July 550,538 70,342 480,196 294,086 186,110 166,780 19,330 676,737 90,755 585,982 422,160 163,822 85,625 78,197
p Aug. 546,202 68,268 477,934 299,398 178,537 159,367 19,169 680,730 92,947 587,783 425,511 162,272 83,367 78,905
Euro area (20)
2020 527,566 164,697 362,869 289,362 73,507 61,759 11,748 816,066 76,137 739,929 670,289 69,640 47,662 21,978
2021 556,549 171,231 385,318 299,905 85,413 73,729 11,684 911,712 130,558 781,154 699,065 82,089 58,608 23,481
2022 606,206 171,716 434,490 338,439 96,050 83,930 12,120 916,735 105,597 811,138 722,183 88,954 64,756 24,198
2023 713,257 266,931 446,326 352,927 93,399 80,382 13,016 921,774 119,987 801,787 712,302 89,485 64,843 24,642
2024 Mar. 760,512 298,258 462,254 365,821 96,433 82,644 13,789 934,237 136,205 798,032 711,671 86,361 61,060 25,301
Apr. 783,120 300,877 482,243 384,476 97,768 84,440 13,327 973,220 152,559 820,660 733,893 86,767 61,456 25,312
May 778,716 303,958 474,758 380,785 93,973 80,532 13,441 966,691 142,698 823,993 739,913 84,080 59,025 25,055
June 736,829 264,600 472,229 375,874 96,355 82,872 13,483 968,782 135,443 833,339 745,876 87,463 62,865 24,599
r July 780,409 308,432 471,977 379,539 92,438 78,799 13,639 1,001,583 162,389 839,195 753,407 85,788 60,861 24,927
p Aug. 757,378 290,561 466,817 376,959 89,858 76,248 13,610 984,996 158,801 826,195 744,512 81,683 56,690 24,993
Extra-Euro area (20)
2020 506,658 79,719 426,939 259,794 167,145 152,074 15,071 613,549 96,280 517,269 367,822 149,448 82,656 66,792
2021 613,443 85,369 528,073 322,030 206,043 189,540 16,504 680,590 86,735 593,854 418,316 175,538 101,928 73,610
2022 640,814 . . . 224,882 207,431 17,452 712,510 . . . 204,301 127,739 76,562
2023 645,924 . . . 219,083 201,112 17,971 732,970 . . . 196,741 114,949 81,792
2024 Mar. 637,643 . . . 214,970 195,166 19,804 759,956 . . . 196,219 109,144 87,075
Apr. 644,646 . . . 214,246 193,857 20,390 771,636 . . . 195,112 107,017 88,095
May 639,521 . . . 207,529 186,937 20,593 793,665 . . . 190,410 101,944 88,466
June 645,861 . . . 216,226 195,727 20,499 757,200 . . . 199,175 108,645 90,530
r July 652,014 . . . 212,797 191,644 21,153 783,697 . . . 192,487 104,144 88,343
p Aug. 647,668 . . . 204,968 183,925 21,043 791,790 . . . 190,584 101,219 89,365
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2021 1.5749 1.4826 7.6282 7.4370 129.88 10.1633 10.1465 1.0811 0.85960 1.1827
2022 1.5167 1.3695 7.0788 7.4396 138.03 10.1026 10.6296 1.0047 0.85276 1.0530
2023 1.6288 1.4595 7.6600 7.4509 151.99 11.4248 11.4788 0.9718 0.86979 1.0813
2023 May 1.6346 1.4687 7.5948 7.4485 148.93 11.7330 11.3697 0.9751 0.87041 1.0868
June 1.6157 1.4414 7.7653 7.4492 153.15 11.7164 11.6766 0.9764 0.85861 1.0840
July 1.6423 1.4618 7.9482 7.4508 155.94 11.3474 11.6343 0.9663 0.85856 1.1058
Aug. 1.6818 1.4703 7.9096 7.4522 157.96 11.4127 11.8117 0.9588 0.85892 1.0909
Sep. 1.6622 1.4458 7.7967 7.4566 157.80 11.4525 11.8417 0.9600 0.86158 1.0684
Oct. 1.6637 1.4474 7.7200 7.4604 158.04 11.6284 11.6472 0.9547 0.86798 1.0563
Nov. 1.6634 1.4828 7.8087 7.4581 161.84 11.7958 11.5475 0.9634 0.87045 1.0808
Dec. 1.6321 1.4653 7.7870 7.4556 157.21 11.5333 11.2028 0.9441 0.86168 1.0903
2024 Jan. 1.6422 1.4631 7.8201 7.4572 159.46 11.3501 11.2834 0.9368 0.85873 1.0905
Feb. 1.6533 1.4564 7.7651 7.4550 161.38 11.3843 11.2500 0.9462 0.85466 1.0795
Mar. 1.6586 1.4726 7.8297 7.4566 162.77 11.5214 11.3054 0.9656 0.85524 1.0872
Apr. 1.6469 1.4661 7.7658 7.4596 165.03 11.6828 11.5910 0.9761 0.85658 1.0728
May 1.6317 1.4780 7.8206 7.4606 168.54 11.5988 11.6186 0.9830 0.85564 1.0812
June 1.6206 1.4750 7.8051 7.4592 169.81 11.4178 11.2851 0.9616 0.84643 1.0759
July 1.6257 1.4868 7.8750 7.4606 171.17 11.7160 11.5324 0.9676 0.84332 1.0844
Aug. 1.6559 1.5049 7.8736 7.4614 161.06 11.7895 11.4557 0.9450 0.85150 1.1012
Sep. 1.6398 1.5037 7.8611 7.4600 159.08 11.7852 11.3577 0.9414 0.84021 1.1106
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  
2023 January 1 Croatia Croatian kuna HRK 7.53450  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2024
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the  Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
extended EER group of trading partners  1broad EER group of
trading partners  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
27 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  527 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.1 95.8 96.1 96.5 95.9 97.8 99.6 95.7 97.6 98.3 98.1 97.8
2000 87.0 86.8 85.9 85.6 88.0 86.1 92.0 97.5 85.5 91.2 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.4 87.1 86.6 84.4 90.1 86.9 91.9 96.7 86.2 90.6 93.0 91.7 91.1
2002 89.7 90.3 89.8 88.2 94.4 90.6 92.7 96.0 88.7 91.4 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.5 101.6 101.2 99.3 106.5 101.7 96.3 95.2 98.0 95.8 97.0 96.7 96.8
2004 104.3 105.6 104.2 102.7 111.0 105.6 96.8 94.1 100.6 96.2 98.5 98.2 98.4
2005 102.9 104.3 102.3 100.9 109.1 103.2 95.3 92.6 99.4 93.9 98.5 97.2 96.8
2006 102.9 104.3 101.7 99.8 109.3 102.6 94.1 90.9 98.8 92.2 98.6 96.8 96.0
2007 106.5 107.3 104.0 101.6 112.9 104.8 95.2 90.2 102.9 92.7 100.9 98.3 97.4
2008 110.4 110.3 106.1 105.5 117.8 107.3 95.6 89.0 106.1 92.0 102.4 98.5 97.6
2009 111.9 111.1 107.4 109.0 120.8 108.3 96.2 90.1 105.8 93.0 101.9 98.6 97.9
2010 104.6 103.3 99.0 101.5 112.1 99.3 93.3 89.4 99.2 88.9 98.8 94.3 92.5
2011 104.4 102.4 97.2 99.8 112.9 98.8 93.0 89.2 98.6 88.2 98.2 93.5 91.9
2012 98.6 97.0 91.5 94.0 107.6 94.0 90.8 89.0 93.4 85.5 95.9 90.5 88.9
2013 102.2 100.1 94.6 97.0 112.4 97.0 93.3 89.6 98.6 87.6 98.1 92.3 90.9
2014 102.4 99.5 94.5 97.2 114.7 97.4 94.0 90.5 99.1 88.4 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.5 89.7 85.8 86.5 106.1 88.7 90.7 91.1 90.0 84.4 94.3 87.8 86.9
2016 95.2 91.6 88.1 p 87.8 110.1 90.7 91.6 91.5 91.6 85.8 95.0 88.8 88.1
2017 97.5 93.6 89.3 p 88.8 112.5 92.0 92.8 91.6 94.5 86.5 96.3 89.9 88.9
2018 100.0 95.8 90.8 p 90.7 117.3 95.2 94.0 91.7 97.6 87.5 97.7 91.1 90.8
2019 98.1 93.3 89.0 p 88.3 115.5 92.5 93.1 91.8 94.7 86.6 96.4 89.9 89.4
2020 99.7 93.7 90.4 p 89.7 119.2 93.9 93.3 92.1 94.8 87.3 96.4 90.1 90.1
2021 99.6 93.7 89.0 p 87.6 120.5 94.3 94.0 92.2 96.7 87.3 97.4 90.6 90.9
2022 95.3 90.8 84.3 p 83.0 116.1 p 90.9 92.3 91.7 93.1 85.4 95.9 89.1 89.0
2023 98.1 94.0 88.6 p 86.7 121.8 p 94.7 93.8 92.0 96.5 87.5 98.0 91.3 91.6
2022 Apr. 95.0 90.1 116.0 p 90.3 96.1 88.9 88.8
May 95.4 90.5 83.8 p 82.7 115.8 p 90.2 92.5 91.7 93.5 85.3 96.5 89.5 89.1
June 95.7 90.7 116.1 p 90.3 95.7 88.7 88.4
July 93.9 89.2 114.1 p 88.9 94.8 87.9 87.5
Aug. 93.4 88.9 82.5 p 81.3 113.6 p 88.6 91.4 91.3 91.1 84.5 94.5 87.7 87.3
Sep. 93.9 89.8 113.9 p 89.3 95.9 89.1 88.7
Oct. 94.5 91.3 114.8 p 90.8 96.0 89.7 89.4
Nov. 95.7 92.2 85.1 p 83.7 116.6 p 92.0 92.4 91.7 93.2 86.0 97.0 90.6 90.3
Dec. 96.8 92.6 118.6 p 92.9 96.2 89.7 89.8
2023 Jan. 97.1 92.8 119.2 p 93.1 97.5 90.4 90.4
Feb. 97.0 93.1 87.2 p 85.5 119.3 p 93.4 93.2 91.6 95.6 86.4 97.7 90.5 90.6
Mar. 97.3 93.3 119.7 p 93.7 98.0 90.9 91.1
Apr. 98.4 94.2 121.5 p 94.9 98.5 91.5 91.9
May 98.0 93.6 88.4 p 86.3 120.9 p 94.2 93.8 91.9 96.6 87.3 98.1 91.1 91.3
June 98.2 93.8 121.8 p 94.7 98.2 91.3 91.8
July 99.2 95.0 123.7 p 96.1 98.4 91.8 92.5
Aug. 99.0 95.0 89.5 p 87.7 123.7 p 96.1 93.8 91.9 96.7 87.9 98.3 91.8 92.4
Sep. 98.5 94.6 123.0 p 95.5 98.0 91.7 92.1
Oct. 98.0 94.1 122.5 p 95.0 97.7 91.3 91.7
Nov. 98.7 94.6 89.3 p 87.5 123.4 p 95.3 94.4 92.5 97.1 88.3 98.2 91.6 91.9
Dec. 98.2 94.0 123.2 p 94.9 97.7 91.1 91.5
2024 Jan. 98.4 94.4 123.6 p 95.2 97.8 91.4 p 91.8
Feb. 98.1 94.1 89.6 p 87.8 123.3 p 94.9 94.1 92.3 96.6 88.1 97.7 91.3 p 91.6
Mar. 98.8 94.8 124.2 p 95.5 98.1 91.8 p 92.1
Apr. 98.6 p 94.5 124.0 p 95.2 98.3 p 91.8 p 92.1
May 98.9 p 94.8 89.4 p 87.7 124.4 p 95.3 94.3 92.4 97.1 88.3 98.6 p 92.0 p 92.2
June 98.5 p 94.5 124.0 p 95.0 98.1 p 91.8 p 92.0
July 99.0 p 95.1 124.8 p 95.5 98.4 p 92.0 p 92.2
Aug. 99.0 p 95.0 ... ... 125.2 p 95.7 … … … … 98.1 p 91.8 p 92.1
Sep. 98.8 p 94.8 125.2 p 95.6 p98.1 p 91.7 p 92.1
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the curren-
cy concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's price
competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective exchange
rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. The
weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more detailed in-
formation on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the Deutsche
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 The calculations are
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following 18 countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania,
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United
States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates were used.
2 Includes countries belonging to the extended EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition) and additionally the following 23 countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zea-
land, Peru, Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan,Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and United Arab Emirates. The ECB has suspended the
publication and calculation of the euro foreign exchange reference rate against Russian
rouble with effect from March 2, 2022 until further notice. For the calculation of
effective exchange rates, an indicative rate is used for the Russian Federation from that
date. It is calculated from the daily RUB/USD rates determined by the Bank of Russia in
conjunction with the respective ECB's euro foreign exchange reference rate to the US
dollar.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from 2001 including
Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from
2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, from
2015 including Lithuania, from 2023 including Croatia) as well as Canada, Denmark,
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.
5 Euro area countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the extended
EER group of trading partners (fixed comosition).  6 Euro area countries (current compo-
sition) and countries belonging to the broad EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition).

