Monthly Report – 
December 2024
Vol. 76 No 12

Table of Content
Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation 
decreases to 2%  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
1 Macroeconomic outlook  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
Underlying conditions for the Forecast for Germany  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
Details on the forecast of expenditure components  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
2 Outlook for public finances  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37
3 Risk assessment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  40
The possible impact on the German economy of measures announced by 
the incoming US administration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  41
List of references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  51
Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest 
rate cycle  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  54
Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate 
cycle  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  55
1 Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  57
Constructing an indicator for banks’ financing costs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  61
2 Composition of the FCI at the current margin  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  66
3 The cost of financing for banks during the period of monetary policy 
tightening in 2022‑23  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  69
The evolution of banks’ funding costs under different financing strategies  . . .  74
4 Comparison with developments in the 2005 to 2008 period of monetary 
policy tightening  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  81
5 The FCI in 2008 and 2023: structural differences and their causes  . . . . . . . . . .  88

The impact of monetary policy and regulatory measures on banks’ funding 
mix  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  92
6 Assessment of current situation and conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  99
List of references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  101
German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the 
period of monetary policy tightening  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  103
1 Underlying trends  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  106
2 Development of corporate insolvencies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  108
Zombie firms in Germany during the COVID-19 pandemic  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  110
3 The impact of monetary policy tightening on business investment and 
financing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  115
4 Sales and income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  119
5 Balance sheet developments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  124
The adoption and objectives of artificial intelligence in German firms  . . . . . .  125
Profitability and financial position of German listed groups in 2023 and an 
outlook for 2024  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  134
6 Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  138
List of references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  139

4Forecast for Germany: 
Significantly gloomier 
growth outlook – 
inflation decreases to 2%

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 5The German economy is not only struggling with persistent economic headwinds, but is also 
having to adapt to changing structural conditions. This is affecting the industrial sector in 
particular, putting a strain on its export business and investments. The labour market, too, is 
now responding noticeably to the protracted weakness of economic activity. This is dampen-
ing private consumption. Against this backdrop, the German economy is set to stagnate in 
the winter half-year 2024‑25 and only begins to make a slow recovery over the course of 
2025. Exports then gradually benefit from the growing sales markets, albeit to a lesser extent 
than used to be the case. After some delay, business investment also goes back up on the 
back of rising capacity utilisation and lower financing costs. Private consumption rises consis-
tently, but is initially noticeably slowed by a temporary weakening of the labour market and 
a significant decline in wage growth. 
Calendar-adjusted real  falls again slightly in 2024, by 0.2 %, then grows by 0.2 % in GDP
2025, 0.8 % in 2026 and 0.9 % in 2027. The growth outlook is thus revised sharply 
downwards relative to the June 2024 Forecast for Germany over the entire forecast horizon. 
This is primarily due to the more persistent weakness in the industrial sector, which is, in 
addition, largely considered to be structural now, and the consequently significantly 
gloomier outlook for exports and business investment. Private consumption is also less 
dynamic, no longer acting as an independent driver of the expected recovery. 
In spite of subdued economic activity, the inflation rate remains elevated in 2025, falling 
only slightly from 2.5 % this year to 2.4 % (as measured by the  This is due to the ). HICP
temporarily steeper rise in food prices and the only slowly abating increase in the price of 
services. In the years that follow, however, the inflation rate in Germany gradually returns to 
2 %, because the effects of previous monetary policy tightening linger and price pressures 
from labour costs decrease. Compared with the June Forecast, the inflation outlook has been 
revised downwards somewhat, mainly due to lower energy prices and lower wage growth.
The government deficit ratio decreases slightly, from 2.6 % in 2023 to 2.4 % in 2027. 
Although the expiry of measures put in place to address the energy crisis is providing some 
relief, other expenditure, such as social security, interest and defence spending, is climbing 
strongly. The debt ratio falls to 61.7 % in 2027 (2023: 62.9 %).
Current uncertainty factors influencing the Forecast concern, in particular, increasing protec-
tionism, geopolitical conflicts, the impact of structural change and the orientation of future 
fiscal and economic policy following the Bundestag elections. All in all, as things now stand, 
risks to economic growth are predominantly tilted to the downside and risks to inflation to 
the upside.

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 6Item 2024 2025 2026 2027
         
Real  calendar adjusted, GDP - 0.2   0.2  0.8  0.9 
Real  unadjusted, GDP - 0.2   0.1  1.1  1.0 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 2.5  2.4  2.1  1.9 
Excluding energy and food 3.3  2.4  1.9  2.0 
Source: Federal Statistical Office (up to Q3 2024). Annual figures for 2024 to 2027 are Bundes-
bank forecasts. Table 1.1: December 2024 forecast
Year-on-year percentage change

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 71 Macroeconomic outlook
1.1 The German economy is emerging only slowly from stagnation
Hopes back in the spring of a slowly strengthening recovery of the German 
economy were not realised.  Instead of expanding markedly, real  declined GDP
somewhat in the summer half-year in seasonally adjusted terms.  Despite growing 
sales markets, exports contracted sharply. The impact of the German economy’s 
reduced competitiveness was thus more strongly felt than expected. Against this 
backdrop, compounded by declining output and a very low level of capacity utilisation 
in the industrial sector, firms dialled back their investment more substantially than 
anticipated. Housing investment also fell more sharply than predicted. Private 
consumption growth ultimately fell significantly short of expectations as well. Persis-
tently weak economic activity, coupled with a more unfavourable development of the 
labour market, likely contributed to this.  
It is becoming increasingly apparent that the German economy is struggling not 
only with persistent economic headwinds, but also with considerable structural 
problems.  It is under great pressure to adapt due to changing structural conditions 
both at home and abroad. This is mainly a problem for the export-oriented industrial 
sector. Domestically producing industrial firms must adjust, in particular, to the longer-
term effects of the energy price shock triggered by Russia’s war of aggression against 
Ukraine,  the requirements of the green transition to a carbon-neutral economy  and 
the consequences of demographic change.  Demanding regulatory requirements for  1) 
 2)   3) 
 4) 
 5) 1 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, 
provided they can be verified and quantified. In June’s Forecast for Germany, cumulative  growth of 0.5 % was GDP
expected for the second and third quarters of 2024 (see Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a)). In actual fact,  GDP
contracted by 0.3 % in the second quarter and rose by only 0.1 % in the third quarter.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a).
3 This applies in particular to the motor vehicle industry; for more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2024b), Recent developments in Germany’s automotive industry, supplementary information in The German 
economy.
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2017).

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 8enterprises  and uncertainty surrounding the economic policy conditions are also 
burdens here.  In addition, German firms are being confronted with increasing protec-
tionist tendencies and growing competition from emerging markets. China, in particu-
lar, has gained considerable ground in the automotive and chemical industries and 
mechanical engineering – sectors which are particularly integral to German industry – as 
well as distinct market shares.  
In the fourth quarter of 2024 and the first quarter of 2025, too, the German 
economy is unlikely to emerge from its stagnation.  The improved sentiment among 
firms back in the spring has deteriorated markedly again in recent months. Particularly 
in the industrial sector, business conditions deteriorated, according to  Institute, and ifo
firms are more pessimistic about their short-term prospects. Industrial output and 
exports are therefore likely to decline somewhat further. Business investment will also 
probably continue to decrease. The construction sector could slowly stabilise at a low 
level, but housing investment, in particular, will probably be weaker again at first. 
Although service providers are likely to provide some support in the short term, their 
business, too, weakened somewhat, according to surveys conducted by  Global andS&P
 Institute. Private consumption could at least provide limited impetus. Overall, ifo
however, economic output is likely to stagnate in the current winter half-year. 
Economic data for October, which were published after the Forecast was finalised, 
support this assessment and indicate a weak start to the fourth quarter. For instance, 
production in the industrial and construction sectors was, respectively, noticeably and 
slightly below third-quarter levels, and real retail sales did not quite manage to 
maintain their  level either. Q3 5) 
 6) 
 7) 
 8) 
5 According to  Institute  2024), strict regulation and excessive bureaucracy are the main factors ifo (CESifo
dampening investment by German enterprises.
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024c).
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b). 
8 The Bundesbank finalised this Forecast for Germany on 27 November 2024. It was incorporated into the projec-
tions for the euro area published by the European Central Bank  on 12 December 2024. ( )ECB

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 9The German economy will only slowly emerge from stagnation over the remainder 
of 2025.  In particular, continuously rising and solidifying foreign demand suggests that 
the German economy will slowly return to a moderate expansion path over the course 
of next year. The German export industry gradually begins to benefit from the  
increase in foreign demand, albeit to a lesser extent than was once the case due to 
strong competitive pressure. Exports thus gradually regain their footing. Private invest-
ment, by contrast, continues to decline for the time being. Private consumption will 
initially grow only weakly: contrary to expectations in previous forecasts, it is no longer 
a strong, independent driver of the recovery. This is mainly due to the fact that real 
disposable income is significantly weaker in view of a gloomier labour market outlook 
and lower wage growth. 
In 2026 and 2027, the pace of macroeconomic expansion stabilises somewhat.  
Exports generate moderate growth impulses. Business investment returns to an expan-
sion path, bolstered by rising capacity utilisation and more favourable financing condi-
tions. The latter, coupled with increasing real disposable income, also benefits private 
housing investment, which then embarks on a subdued recovery path too. Households 
 9) 
9 See the supplementary information entitled . Underlying conditions for the Forecast for Germany

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 10see their purchasing power increase markedly again and increase their consumption 
somewhat more strongly. Taken together, government investment and consumption 
expenditure have a supportive effect throughout the forecast period. 


Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 11Item 2024 2025 2026 2027
         
Statistical carry-over at the end of the 
previous year1- 0.2   0.0  0.2  0.4 
Fourth-quarter rate2 0.0  0.4  1.0  1.0 
Average annual  growth rate, calen- GDP
dar adjusted- 0.2   0.2  0.8  0.9 
Calendar effect3 0.0  - 0.1   0.3  0.1 
Average annual  growth rate GDP4 - 0.2   0.1  1.1  1.0 
Source: Federal Statistical Office (up to Q3 2024). Annual figures for 2024 to 2027 are Bundes-
bank forecasts.  Seasonally and calendar-adjusted index level in the fourth quarter of the previ-1
ous year in relation to the calendar-adjusted quarterly average of the previous year.  Annual 2
rate of change in the fourth quarter, seasonally and calendar adjusted.  As a percentage of3 . GDP
 Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.4
Under these conditions, the German economy grows only marginally next year, but 
somewhat more significantly in 2026 and 2027.  Calendar-adjusted real  falls again GDP
slightly this year, by 0.2 %, then grows by 0.2 % in 2025, by 0.8 % in 2026 and by 0.9 % in 
2027. The growth outlook is thus revised significantly downwards over the entire 
forecast period compared with the June Forecast – for 2025 most of all. This is primarily 
due to the more persistent weakness in the industrial sector, which is not only accompa-
nied by a more persistent weakness in cyclical demand but is to a large extent consid- 
ered to be structural now, too. The outlook for exports and industrial investment is thus 
considerably gloomier. The forecast for the increase in private consumption has also 
been revised sharply downwards. This reflects the significantly weaker labour market 
outlook, first and foremost. Table 1.2: Technical components of the GDP  growth forecast
% or percentage points

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 12Item 2023 2024 2025 2026
         
GDP  (real, calendar adjusted)  
December 2024 forecast - 0.1   - 0.2   0.2  0.8 
June 2024 forecast 0.0  0.3  1.1  1.4 
Difference (in percentage points) - 0.1   - 0.5   - 0.9   - 0.6  
As the outlook is weaker, also due to structural factors, the expected potential 
output growth of the German economy has been revised considerably downwards. 
Structural burden factors play a significant role in the subdued growth outlook, result-
ing in persistently weak estimates for potential output growth throughout the forecast 
horizon. The estimated potential rates between 2024 and 2027 stand at a mere 0.4 % 
per year.  The contributions to growth made by capital and total factor productivity (
 are lower than in the June projection, meaning that the recovery expected at that )TFP
point in time will not materialise.  Beyond the forecast horizon, too, growth opportu-
nities for the German economy appear very subdued from today’s perspective, and as 
long as supply-side measures remain unforeseeable in concrete terms, a revival of 
potential growth seems unlikely.    
The level of potential output in recent years is now also estimated to be significantly 
lower.  In particular, the weak industrial activity that was already clearly discernible 
before the pandemic, and the slowdown in productivity growth following the financial 
crisis of 2008‑09, are indicative of major structural burdens stemming from factors that 
have been at play for some time. These include demographic change, the tendency 
towards declining efficiency gains from the digital transformation,  increasing protec-
tionism, and also the trend slowdown in global trade that has been observed since the 
financial and economic crisis. From today’s perspective, these dampening structural   
forces are deemed to be stronger, and consequently, there was a distinct downward  Table 1.3a Revisions since the June 2024 forecast 
Year-on-year percentage change
 10) 
 11) 
 12) 
 13) 
 14) 10 By comparison, it is estimated that potential growth averaged 1.4 % per year in the period from 2011 to 2019.
11 The rates for 2025 and 2026 were revised downwards by 0.1 and 0.2 percentage point respectively. 
12 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a).
13 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b).

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 13revision to growth in potential output retroactively for the years 2014 to 2019.  At the 
same time, this means that the favourable development of economic activity in the 
years prior to the pandemic is classified as more cyclically induced.
The negative output gap will largely be closed by 2027.  As a result of the revised 
estimate of potential output, the estimated output gap is smaller at the current end, 
thus also reducing the potential for catching up over the forecast period. However, the 
output gap is still negative at present. Now, the fact that aggregate demand is too 
weak is also likely to be a key factor in this again.  This is indicated by the  Institute’ifo
s survey data on production constraints, which largely show a shortage of orders or 
demand to be the biggest constraint on production. Given the expected recovery in 
economic activity, the output gap is largely closed by the end of the projection horizon 
in 2027.
 14) 
 15) 
14 This is reflected in lower than previously estimated contributions from trend  and capital input. By TFP
contrast, the estimate of potential growth in the period from 2020 to 2024 was already conservative and was 
revised only marginally in this Forecast.
15 Over the past few years, though, temporary supply constraints also played a role; see, for example, the box in 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), pp. 15 f.

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 14


Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 15Supplementary information
Underlying conditions for the Forecast for Germany
The Forecast for Germany is based on joint assumptions by Eurosystem experts 
about the global economy, exchange rates, commodity prices and interest rates.  
These assumptions are based on information that was available on 20 November 2024. 
The forecast incorporates fiscal policy measures as soon as they are sufficiently speci-
fied and their implementation is considered likely. 
External environment
The global economy will grow moderately over the forecast horizon.  Develop-
ments in global economic activity in the past summer half-year were largely in line with 
the assumptions made in the June Forecast for Germany. Domestic demand in the 
United States was somewhat more dynamic than expected. Alongside economic policy 
stimuli in China and the United Kingdom, this momentum boosts the global economic 
growth expected for next year. At the same time, the global outlook is dampened by a 
slower than expected growth in central and eastern European countries in June. After 
growing 3.4 % this year, the global economy is expected to grow by 3.5 % next year. In 
2026 and 2027, it weakens again slightly to rates of 3.3 % and 3.2 %. For the United 
States, the incoming  administration’s proposed extension to the tax cuts for house-US
holds and enterprises under the “Tax Cuts and Jobs Act”, set to expire at the end of 
2025, will be taken into account. Other measures that are on the table, such as trade or 
immigration policy, have not been taken into account due to uncertainty regarding 
their implementation and design.   1) 
 2) 
1 All data on global economic growth and global trade refer to global aggregates excluding the euro area.
2 Some of them pose a significant risk to global economic developments, especially world trade. See also the 
supplementary information on the possible impact on the German economy of measures announced by the 
incoming  administration.US

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 16The economic recovery process in the other euro area countries continues.  
Economic development figures in the other euro area countries on which the forecast is 
based are derived from the forecasts of the national central banks, which were incorpo-
rated into the projection for the euro area published by the ECB on 12 December 2024.
 For the euro area excluding Germany, economic growth is therefore expected to 
increase from a rate of 1.1 % this year to 1.5 % and 1.7 % in 2025 and 2026, respectively. 
This means that the dynamics will only be slightly lower next year than in the June 
Forecast and will otherwise remain broadly unchanged. The growth rate is expected to 
decline slightly to 1.5 % in 2027.
While global trade is losing momentum, German sales market growth is regaining 
lost ground – in 2026 and 2027, both expand in line with global economic growth.  
International trade increased more strongly in the 2024 summer half-year than 
expected in the June Forecast. Imports by the United States, the United Kingdom and 
some emerging market economies, in particular, grew sharply.  The momentum in 
global trade is expected to weaken over the forecast horizon. Following an increase of 
4.0 % on average for the current year and of 3.6 % next year, growth rates of 3.3 % and 
3.2 % are expected for 2026 and 2027, which would be on a par with global economic 
growth. German exporters’ sales markets are developing more slowly than global trade 
this year owing to falling imports by Germany’s euro area trading partners. Next year, 
the dynamics of sales markets will then largely move closer to those of global trade. For 
2026 and 2027, growth is expected to be in line with global trade dynamics.  3) 
3 See European Central Bank (2024).

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 17Table 1.4: Major assumptions of the projection
Item 2024 2025 2026 2027
         
Exchange rates of the euro  
US dollar/euro 1.08  1.06  1.06  1.06 
Effective1 124.2   123.5   123.5   123.5  
Interest rates  
Three-month EURIBOR 3.6  2.1  2.0  2.2 
Yield on government bonds outstand-
ing22.4  2.4  2.5  2.6 
Prices  
Crude oil3 81.8   71.8   70.1   69.2  
Natural gas4 34.3   42.9   34.9   29.3  
76.7   89.9   79.5   73.6  
8.9  5.8  - 0.4   - 1.7  
- 1.2   5.0  2.1  1.4 
1.6  3.1  3.3  3.2 
1 Compared with 42 currencies of major trading partners of the euro area 42 group of ( -EER
currencies);  1999 = 100.  Yield on German government bonds outstanding with a residual Q1 2
maturity of over nine and up to ten years.  dollars per barrel of Brent crude oil.  Euro per 3US 4
 Wholesale prices in the euro area based on data from the European Central Bank.  In  . MWh 5 6 US
dollars.  Year-on-year percentage change.  Producer prices for food in the euro area based on 7 8
data from the European Commission. In euro.   Calendar adjusted.9
Commodity prices
Prices for energy commodities tend to decline over the forecast horizon.  Concerns 
about demand have caused crude oil prices to decline since the summer, outweighing 
price-supporting factors such as the ongoing  cuts and tensions in the Middle OPEC
East. Forward quotations indicate a further decline in prices over the next three years. 
They are also below those given in the June Forecast. By contrast, natural gas prices in German exporters’ sales markets  7, 9 Food  7, 8 Other commodities  6, 7 Electricity  4, 5 

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 18the European wholesale sector have risen significantly since the summer. Their forward 
quotations have also picked up and are above the June assumptions. Developments in 
connection with the war between Russia and Ukraine may have played a role in this. In 
addition, European gas storage levels began to decline somewhat earlier than in previ-
ous years in view of an early cold spell. Higher demand for filling gas storage facilities is 
therefore expected in the coming summer season. Forward quotations suggest that 
European gas prices will nevertheless decline again after the winter of 2024‑25. 
European electricity prices are also expected to decline on an annual average from 
2025 onwards, with seasonal price increases in the forward quotations throughout the 
year anticipated during the winter months of each year.
Other commodity prices continue to rise initially, but decline somewhat after next 
year, with the exception of agricultural producer prices.  Following a decline in the 
summer, other commodity prices have increased again somewhat in recent months. 
The rise in food commodity prices is also likely to have been abetted by crop failures 
caused by record-high global temperatures in the summers of 2023 and 2024.  For 
total non-energy commodity prices, forward quotations indicate a further rise next year 
before decreasing slightly in 2026 and 2027. Euro area agricultural producer prices 
 4) 
4 See  (2024g). Deutsche Bundesbank

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 19continue to fall slightly on average this year. Growth is expected over the next three 
years, however, meaning that their level will be increasingly above that of the June 
Forecast. 
Interest rates and exchange rates
Interest rate assumptions initially decline slightly before rising somewhat again. 
The Governing Council of the  lowered key interest rates by 25 basis points at its ECB
monetary policy meetings in June, September and October 2024. On the cut-off date,
 forward prices were tilted to the downside up to 2026 before pointing slightly EURIBOR
upwards again for 2027. They are thus below those of the June Forecast for the next 
two years. For ten-year federal bonds (Bunds), forward prices for the coming year show 
a broadly constant yield, which then rise slightly above the June Forecast assumptions 
from 2026 onwards. Financing costs for bank loans are also expected to decline slightly 
at first but then rise somewhat again, although they are likely to be lower than in the 
June Forecast. 
The euro has depreciated since June 2024.  Expectations regarding US monetary policy 
and the outcome of the presidential elections in the United States weighed on the euro. 
In the period that is relevant to the derivation of the exchange rate assumptions, it 
traded at $1.06, 1.9 % lower than the assumptions made in the June Forecast. At US
0.6 %, the euro’s depreciation in relation to 41 currencies important for German foreign 
trade was lower due to gains against some central European currencies. 
Fiscal policy
There is no federal budget for 2025, and the forecast assumes that the rules for 
interim management of the budget will apply for the time being.  Central govern-
ment spending thus flows steadily even without new budget plans; a more restrictive 
policy is not necessary. The only planned but not yet adopted legislative change that  
has been taken into account is compensation for bracket creep in income tax. This is 
well-established and therefore assumed in all forecast years (as in previous Bundes-
bank Forecasts for Germany). 5) 
5 See .  (2024b) Deutsche Bundesbank

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 20Temporary crisis measures will weigh on the government budget for the last time in 
2024.  Seen in isolation, the lapsing of these measures means that the deficit ratio will 
fall by just over 1 percentage point this year and by ½ percentage point next year. This 
year, the sizeable spending on energy price brakes in particular will come to an end. 
The revenue shortfalls resulting from inflation compensation bonuses, which are 
exempt from taxes, will occur for the last time in 2024. In addition, the reduced  VAT
rate on gas and heat was still in effect in the first quarter of 2024. 
The overall contribution rate to the statutory social security schemes is assumed to 
rise to a record level over the forecast horizon.  This is mainly due to the contribution 
rates to the statutory health insurance and long-term care insurance schemes. For 
2025, the Federal Government is raising the supplementary contribution rates for 
health insurance institutions sharply and the contribution rate of the long-term care 
insurance scheme markedly. According to this forecast, the contribution rates to the 
statutory health insurance and long-term care insurance schemes will continue to 
increase significantly in subsequent years as well. The contribution rate for the statu-
tory pension insurance scheme is assumed to rise somewhat in 2027. Rising contribu-
tion rates close funding gaps, which are mainly caused by sharply rising expenditure on 
benefits.  
The forecast assumes that bracket creep will continue to be offset retrospectively 
by corresponding adjustments to the tax rate.  Revenue shortfalls also arise because 
income tax allowances for 2024 are raised again retroactively. In addition, the electricity 
tax for enterprises in the manufacturing sector will be lowered up to the end of 2025. 
By contrast, revenue from profit-related taxes will increase more strongly, especially 
from 2025 onwards, as a result of measures taken. The extended tax depreciation 
options in recent years have been used to accelerate depreciation, which is why depreci-
ation is now correspondingly lower  and tax revenue thus higher. –
In further measures, additional revenue and expenditure are partly intertwined. 
Revenue from carbon emission allowances also rises gradually over the forecast 
horizon, financing expenditure by the Climate Fund. The extended  toll generates HGV
additional revenue this year, much of which flows into the modernisation of the rail 
network. By contrast, lower revenue will occur in 2027 because the s Next Genera-'EU 6) 
6 See . (2024b) Deutsche Bundesbank

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 21tion  programme comes to an end. Given the central government’s tighter financial EU
situation, the forecast now assumes that it will then phase out some of the associated 
expenditure. 

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 22  

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 23Supplementary information
Details on the forecast of expenditure components
Exports only return to a moderate expansion path over the course of next year . 
Despite robust growth in sales markets, exports are again unlikely to provide any stimu-
lus to macroeconomic growth in the current winter half-year. Industrial orders received 
from abroad improved somewhat in the third quarter but remain at a low level. Corre-
spondingly, according to the  Institute, German exporters are predominantly ifo
pessimistic about the near future. The situation is likely to improve slowly only later 
next year. Against the backdrop of a robust global economy and firming and continu-
ously growing demand from abroad, the export industry should slowly regain traction. 
However, the competitive environment remains challenging and the pressure to adapt 
is high. Correspondingly, exports expand at a substantially weaker pace than the sales 
markets over the entire forecast horizon. German exporters thus continue to concede 
market share and exports contribute less to economic growth than in previous recov-
ery periods. 


Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 24With a significant delay, business investment is likewise beginning to recover.  The 
investment environment for German enterprises is currently extremely challenging. 
The protracted weakness of the export industry and the subdued domestic demand for 
capital goods, which was also due to the previous monetary policy tightening, led to 
significant underutilisation of capacity in the manufacturing sector. In addition to the 
economic headwinds, structural impediments are also weighing on the propensity to 
invest. Against this backdrop, the sentiment of capital goods producers is still markedly 
subdued, according to the  Institute, and lending to non-financial corporations ifo
likewise remains at a low level. Industrial investment is therefore likely to decline 
further into the year ahead. Only after the economy has expanded for several quarters, 
capacity utilisation has improved again and the dampening effects of monetary policy 
tightening have subsided does business investment return to a path of recovery. As a 
result, business investment only makes another slight contribution to  expansion in GDP
2026 and a somewhat stronger one in 2027.
Private consumption grows only slightly at first, but somewhat more strongly from 
2026 onwards.  Following the erosion in purchasing power caused by high inflation, 
labour income rises more strongly than consumer prices for some time now. However, 
this has not yet had a particularly stimulating effect on private consumption, as other 
headwinds have persisted. Uncertainty – stemming from the ongoing period of 
economic weakness, the political environment and geopolitical conflicts – is high. In 
addition, the labour market has recently deteriorated markedly and concerns about job 
security are likely to have risen. Against this backdrop, private consumption fell well 
short of the expectations in the June Forecast. It contracted markedly in the second 
quarter, and increased only slightly in the third quarter despite sharply rising wages, 
leading to a significant increase in the saving ratio. It is also likely to rise at least slightly 
in the current quarter. This is indicated by the available indicators, such as the sharp 
increase in private vehicle registrations in October. According to the  survey, the GfK
propensity to purchase was also higher than in the previous quarter on average in 
October and November 2024. However, the overall  consumer climate index deterio-GfK
rated again. Private consumption will grow only slightly next year, as real disposable 
income will actually decline slightly following its previous sharp rise. This will be caused 
not only by the weaker labour market, but also the fact that households, faced with the 
end of tax-free and social contribution-free inflation compensation bonuses and signifi-
cantly increased social security contributions, will take home even less of their gross 
pay – which will itself have increased to a lesser extent – than in the current year. 
However, they are likely to smooth their consumption slightly by lowering their 
increased saving rate. Real disposable income rises markedly again in 2026 and 2027, 
mainly due to declining inflation and wages rising somewhat more sharply again. As 

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 25the economy brightens and the labour market improves again, precautionary motives 
also subside and the saving ratio declines somewhat further. Private consumption 
therefore picks up some momentum again. 
Housing investment tentatively rebounds from mid-2025.  Housing investment has 
declined significantly in recent years, its level now equalling a low it last reached in 
2013.  The decline has continued and was even stronger than in the June Forecast. 
However, there are signs that – similar to expectations – the housing market is stabilis-
ing and housing investment is slowly approaching its trough. For example, housing 
prices have recently started to rise again for the first time since 2022. Although 
construction permits had declined until recently, new orders in housing construction 
rose for the second time in a row in the third quarter. This stabilisation of demand is 
likely to be helped by a significant slowdown in the growth of construction costs and by 
the fact that the effective interest rates on housing loans have already fallen a little in 
the wake of monetary policy easing. Nevertheless, the general level of demand is still 
weak. According to  surveys, more than 50 % of firms in housing construction are still ifo
complaining about order shortages. Housing investment is therefore likely to decline 
slightly in the current quarter and first quarter of 2025 before starting a slow recovery. 
 1) 
 2) 1 This picture is more drastic than in the June Forecast, as current housing investment was revised noticeably 
downwards in August.

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 26There is a general demand for additional housing.  The comparatively favourable 
price-to-rent ratio is also likely to have a supportive effect.  The recovery then picks up 
a little more momentum in the following two years, driven in particular by more 
favourable financing costs and improving household incomes. The high demand for 
energy-efficient renovations of existing properties is another supporting factor. Overall, 
however, the housing supply will only be expanded to a limited extent. This leads to 
some upward pressure on house prices. They therefore continue to grow, albeit at 
significantly lower rates than in the low interest rate period.
Real government demand rises significantly over the forecast horizon.  Government 
investment increases sharply up until 2026 and then falls somewhat in 2027. On the 
one hand, military spending rises sharply up until 2026. On the other hand, construc-
tion investment does not fully maintain its current level, as the fiscal positions of 
central, state and local government are tighter. Government consumption rises fairly 
continuously, mainly due to higher spending on health and long-term care.
 2) 
 3) 
2 This is especially true in major conurbations. In addition to high levels of immigration, this is also due to the 
rising number of one-person households, which causes an increase in living space used per person.
3 Real estate prices fell sharply from mid-2022, while rents increased markedly. The price-to-rent ratio is there-
fore significantly more favourable than in the years before 2022. In the forecast period, real estate prices rise 
again somewhat more strongly than rents, but their ratio remains comparatively favourable.

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 27Real imports grow noticeably again from next year, with the current account 
surplus falling slightly below 6 % of nominal . GDP  The ongoing economic weakness is 
also reflected in real imports, which are expected to decline again slightly this year. 
They then go back up again, if moderately, in 2025, followed by more significant 
increases in 2026 and 2027 as the economic recovery solidifies. As domestic demand is 
more buoyant than exports, imports exceed the growth in exports over the entire 
forecast period, especially next year. As terms of trade improve only slightly at the 
same time, the trade balance (as a share of nominal  declines significantly in 2025 ) GDP
before moving more or less sideways over the remainder of the forecast horizon. This 
contributes to the fact that the current account surplus, which is expected to fall slightly 
above 6 % of  this year, falls slightly below 6 % of  next year and remains at this GDP GDP
level in subsequent years. 

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 281.2 Temporary marked weakening of labour market
The labour market was impacted noticeably by the ongoing weakness of the 
German economy – but it remains fairly robust.  June expectations of an imminent 
recovery in the labour market did not come to fruition. Employment growth, which had 
previously already been muted, turned negative in recent months and unemployment 
went up more strongly than expected. After many years of very favourable labour 
market figures, this deterioration appears particularly striking.  However, this should 
not detract from the fact that the labour market essentially remains fairly robust, includ-
ing compared with previous episodes of weak growth. The level of employment is high 
and unemployment is relatively low, and with firms caught between persistently weak 
demand and a demographically-induced structural shortage of skilled workers, they are 
avoiding major layoffs as far as possible. While firms significantly reduced their use of 
temporary agency employment, they have so far largely retained their core workforces, 
thereby also accepting lower labour productivity.  In addition, empty working time 
accounts and low overtime are pushing down average working hours.  For 
demographic reasons, many employees are currently entering retirement. This offers 
opportunities to shrink headcounts without compulsory redundancies, by not fully 
replacing staff. The number of vacancies decreased significantly in this context, but is 
still quite high by historical standards. This is partly because, in the context of structural 
change, some sectors are benefiting from increased labour demand.
Given that the German economy remains stagnant, employment is likely to decline 
in the current winter half-year as well.  The longer business activity remains weak, the 
more likely it is that there will be increased layoffs in the manufacturing sector, in partic-
ular, but also in the trade sector, which is suffering from subdued consumption. This is 
indicated by the  Institute’s Employment Barometer, which is deep in negative terri-ifo 16) 
 17) 
 18) 
 19) 
16 Additionally, the data only began to look like this after a certain delay. In particular, the months from 
June 2024 onwards were revised downwards when the Federal Statistical Office published the employment 
figures on 30 October 2024. Besides the lower level of employment, this chiefly painted employment growth 
more negatively than before. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), Chapter 3 “Labour market cooled in the third 
quarter”.
17 Only the manufacturing sector is making slightly greater use of short-time working arrangements. This instru-
ment serves to bridge short-term demand shortfalls and is less suitable for many firms in the current situation.
18 The decline due to the persistent trend towards part-time work and a still high level of sick leave is also 
playing a role.
19 In particular, this refers to demand for healthcare and nursing staff, childcare staff, engineers and  special-IT
ists, as well as skilled staff for qualified business services.

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 29tory here. However, seeing as the sectors benefiting from structural change are likely 
to continue hiring, the decline in employment should remain limited overall. Other 
leading indicators, such as the  labour market barometer, also suggest that the IAB
labour market is still fairly resilient overall. Nevertheless, unemployment is likely to see 
a further moderate increase.  Part of the reason for this is that there is less of a 
match between existing and in-demand jobs and qualifications due to shifts in the 
economic structure. 
The economic recovery gradually taking hold in the course of 2025 is initially 
unlikely to lead to increased hiring in the labour market.  Employment is expected to 
go down again slightly in 2025. In conjunction with the decline in employment that has 
been ongoing since mid-2024, there is thus a marked decrease in the average number 
of persons in employment over 2025. However, existing staff should be put to greater 
use again over the course of the year, clawing back some of the depressed level of 
productivity and working hours. Against this backdrop, unemployment continues to 
rise well into next year. The labour market outlook for 2025 is thus distinctly weaker 
than in the June Forecast. 
 20) 
20 Data that became available after the Forecast was finalised were somewhat better than expected. However, 
they confirmed the underlying trends in the Forecast, showing a further (albeit only marginal) uptick in 
unemployment in November and slightly (and primarily in the manufacturing sector) declining employment in 
October.

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 30Over the remainder of the forecast period, the labour market recovers again, but 
remains less tight than expected in previous forecasts.  From 2026 onwards, the 
economic recovery leads to rising employment, falling unemployment and an increas-
ing shortage of skilled workers. Working hours and labour productivity also recover 
further. The labour market is thereby faced with the challenging situation in which the 
labour supply shrinks from 2026 for reasons of demographics, even though individual 
labour force participation continues to rise and the assumed level of immigration is 
significant.  The pace at which refugees are being integrated into the labour market 
had recently improved markedly.  However, it takes time and effort to integrate both 
immigrants and the unemployed, of whom greater job and geographical mobility is 
required due to structural change. Unemployment therefore declines only moderately 
and, in 2027, will not yet have returned to its lowest levels from before the outbreak of 
the 19 pandemic. - COVID
1.3 Much weaker wage growth in future after another strong year in 
2024
As of next year, negotiated wages lose significant momentum in view of lower infla-
tion rates, prolonged economic weakness and the deterioration in the labour 
market.  Since the Forecast for Germany in June, negotiated wage agreements up to 
October have largely been higher than expected. However, employees have also ended  21) 
 22) 
21 In the year to date, immigration has been somewhat lower than expected in the June Forecast. According to 
the Federal Statistical Office’s migration statistics, a net figure of 272,000 people moved to Germany up to 
August, around one-third less than in the same period of the previous year. For 2024 as a whole, a net figure 
of 480,000 persons is expected, which will decline further in the subsequent years (2025: 400,000 persons, 
from 2026: 300,000 persons per year).
22 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), Chapter 3 “Labour market cooled in the third quarter”.

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 31up having to adjust their wage expectations in part to the changed economic environ-
ment. The metals and electrical engineering sector, for example, recently agreed on 
wage increases that are distinctly lower than the expectations expressed in the June 
Forecast; this was due to persistently weak economic activity and the pressure to adjust 
that the sector is facing.  Lower inflation rates, sluggish economic activity and 
weakened labour demand also suggest that, in general, more moderate agreements 
will be reached in the coming months than in previous years. Highly heterogeneous 
levels of activity in different sectors are thus likely to come to the fore.  Next year, the 
elimination of the inflation compensation bonuses also dampens wage growth, as 
these are only partly replaced by regular wage increases. Wage growth sees a sharp 
drop to 2.5 % on an annual average. In 2026, negotiated wages grow somewhat more 
strongly again. This is still under the influence of large agreements running for long 
terms that were reached during the period of high inflation, however; these are no 
longer relevant in 2027. The broadly normalised level of activity and the once again 
tighter labour market then lead to historically slightly above average growth in negoti-
ated wages of 2.6 %. Compared with the June Forecast, the latest agreements, in partic-
ular, bring about a small upward revision in this year's forecast of negotiated wages. 
The weaker outlook for economic activity and the labour market only becomes more 
evident in subsequent years; the increase in negotiated wages for 2025 and 2026 has 
therefore been revised downwards noticeably.  23) 
 24) 
23 Survey results likewise point to major burdens in such a scenario. According to a special survey among 
manufacturing firms conducted before the  election by  Institute, 44 % of German industrial firms expected a US ifo
negative impact on their business as a result of Donald Trump’s election; 5 % expected a positive impact, and 
51 % expected it to make no difference who won the election; see  (2024). CESifo
24 Ongoing labour market shortages are evident in some of the better-performing services sectors. The negoti-
ating parties in those sectors will therefore probably tend to agree on higher wage increases. See  Deutsche 
 (2024d). All past pay agreements included in the Bundesbank’s negotiated wage statistics (around Bundesbank
550 collective wage agreements and provisions governing civil servant pay) are factored into the forecasts of 
negotiated wage increases. They are extrapolated beyond their contractual terms, taking into account the 
overall economic situation and industry-specific factors.

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 32Actual earnings growth is initially weaker than that of negotiated wages.  In the 
current year, growth in actual earnings is once again very high by historical standards, 
but it is already below that of negotiated wages. This is because actual earnings 
respond more quickly to the significant changes in macroeconomic conditions. On 
account of sluggish economic activity and the weakening labour market, for example, 
industrial groups reduce their profit-sharing and the number of paid overtime hours is 
reduced to a small amount. Only in 2027, when economic activity picks up and labour 
market tightness increases, do actual earnings again show slightly stronger growth 
than negotiated earnings. Labour costs, measured as compensation per employee, rise 
somewhat more strongly than actual earnings, especially in the coming year. This is 
due to an additional cost surge for employers in the form of higher social contribution 
rates.
Domestic inflation as measured by the GDP  deflator declines to 2 % by 2027 on the 
back of profit margins normalising and an easing of pressure from unit labour costs.
As in the previous year, economic output is slightly lower this year with employment 
 25) 
25 See the . See also Chapter 2 supplementary information on the underlying conditions for this Forecast
“Outlook for public finances”.

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 33still robust overall and wages rising strongly. As a result, domestic price pressures from 
unit labour costs remain very high. However, firms have been cushioning this pressure 
through lower profits for about a year now. In previous years, they were still able to 
expand their profit margins strongly, but the underlying conditions for this have largely 
changed. Aggregate demand, in particular, is now significantly weaker. Tighter 
monetary policy is likely to have been one factor here. Against this backdrop, aggregate 
profit margins fall strongly this year, roughly returning to their pre-pandemic levels. As 
measured by the  deflator, the previously significant domestic inflation will there- GDP
fore fall significantly to 3.0 %, despite the substantial rise in unit labour costs. In the 
remainder of the forecast period, profit margins decline only marginally before stabilis-
ing in 2027, meaning that their contribution to further disinflation is only small. 
However, the rise in unit labour costs declines markedly from next year, as wage 
growth recedes and labour productivity slowly recovers. Against this backdrop, domes-
tic inflation continues to decline markedly, to 2.0 % in 2027.
1.4 The inflation rate is still elevated in 2025, but then gradually returns 
to 2 %.
The inflation rate was lower than expected recently.  Consumer price inflation, as 
measured by the  stood at 2.4 % in November, 0.8 percentage point below the , HICP


Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 34rate expected in the June Forecast for Germany, primarily because energy prices fell 
more sharply than expected. Food prices rose much more strongly than anticipated, 
however. The rate excluding energy and food (core rate) was roughly in line with expec-
tations. Price increases for services tended to be stronger than expected, whilst infla-
tion for non-energy industrial goods declined somewhat faster than projected. At 2.5 % 
in the current year overall, the inflation rate is expected to be slightly lower than 
expected in June.
Inflation remains elevated next year, mainly due to service price increases abating 
only slowly.  The weak economy is generally having a price dampening effect on 
services, too. However, the previously sharp rise in wages is still exerting upward 
pressure on consumer prices with a certain time lag.  Particularly strong price 
increases as of the beginning of 2025 were announced for public transport and insur-
ance services.  The rise in rents, too, is initially expected to be higher than average by 
historical standards, as existing rents are only slowly adjusting to the cost surges of 
 26) 
 27) 
26 See  (2019a).  Deutsche Bundesbank
27 The price for the “ ” is set to go up from €49 to €58 in January 2025. Furthermore, the Deutschland-Ticket
Association of Private Health Insurance Funds ( ) predicts excep- Verband der privaten Krankenversicherungen –  PKV
tionally strong increases in contributions at the turn of the year. Taken together, alone the announcement of 
these two price increases, adjusted for the price increase generally expected in these areas, is likely to lead to 
a rise of + ¼ percentage point in the core rate in all months of 2025 (headline inflation: around + 0.2 percent-
age point).

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 35recent years. In addition, forward-looking booking data suggest further strong price 
increases for package holidays in the coming months.  By contrast, inflation for non-
energy industrial goods has already fallen markedly and is likely to decline further 
somewhat, partly in view of weak demand. The core rate overall is expected to decline 
from 3.3 % in 2024 to 2.4 % in 2025. By contrast, food prices will rise more strongly 
again next year. This is because agricultural producer prices are markedly higher, 
especially for milk fats. In addition, the recent very high wage growth in the retail 
sector is likely to still have an impact. Lastly, in 2025, energy prices no longer dampen 
the headline inflation rate as strongly as during this year. Energy commodity futures 
prices are on a slight downturn but this is partly offset by a further increase in the 
carbon price and a substantial rise in network charges for gas transmission.  Headline
 inflation therefore drops only marginally to 2.4 % in 2025.  HICP
In the remainder of the forecast period, the inflation rate in Germany gradually 
returns to 2 %.  Monetary policy tightening still has an impact and the pressure exerted 
by unit labour costs continues to ease. The core rate therefore initially drops to 1.9 % in 
2026. With the recovery in economic activity and the return to an almost normal level of 
 28) 
 29) 
28 In the package holidays subcomponent of the  prices are recorded according to their travel date, not , HICP
the booking date; see  and (2024). Schnorrenberger, Schwind Wieland
29 See  (2019b). Deutsche Bundesbank

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 36aggregate capacity utilisation, it rises slightly to 2.0 % in 2027. Food inflation declines 
somewhat again in 2026 and 2027, but still remains elevated. This is because prices for 
agricultural commodities and labour costs continue to generate above-average price 
impulses, albeit with a declining tendency. Energy prices go back up noticeably in 2026, 
especially as the national carbon price continues to rise, while the fall in market prices 
for energy is assumed to be significantly less strong than in the previous year. Energy 
components are then expected to have a slight dampening effect again in 2027. This is 
mainly due to the assumption that the national carbon price will be transferred to the 
European  and that a slightly lower carbon price will therefore be set.  Headline ETS2
inflation falls to 2.1 % in 2026 and 1.9 % in 2027. This means that over the entire 
forecast horizon the outlook for inflation improved slightly compared to the June 
Forecast.
Item 2023 2024 2025 2026
         
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices  
December 2024 forecast 6.0  2.5  2.4  2.1 
June 2024 forecast 6.0  2.8  2.7  2.2 
Difference (in percentage points) 0.0  - 0.3   - 0.3   - 0.1   30) 
 Table 1.3b: Revisions since the June 2024 forecast
Year-on-year percentage change
30 It is assumed that the price will thus fall from €65 to €59 per tonne of CO₂ For 2027, this corresponds to the 
price ceiling of €45 for 2020 prices as set out in the  system. EUETS2

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 372 Outlook for public finances
There is only a slight fall in the deficit ratio from 2.6 % in 2023 to 2.5 % in 2024, even 
though the extensive burdens caused by the energy price brakes have dropped ( see 
the supplementary information entitled Underlying conditions for the Forecast for 
 This is because spending on the Armed Forces Fund and the Climate Fund, Germany ).
staff and interest, as well as on pensions, healthcare and long-term care, is rising 
sharply. In addition, tax refunds stemming from a court ruling on capital gains tax are 
placing a one-off burden.  At the same time, revenue is still showing quite dynamic 
growth, especially as wages are rising strongly and contribution rates to the social 
security funds are going up.
In 2025, the deficit ratio remains unchanged at 2.5 %, although the revenue and 
expenditure ratios continue to rise significantly.  Significant budgetary relief compen-
sates for corresponding burdens elsewhere. On the one hand, significant additional 
revenue is generated by the fact that fees subject to compulsory contributions are 
taking the place of tax- and social contribution-exempt inflation compensation bonuses 
in some cases. In addition, the court ruling on capital gains taxes is no longer applica- 
ble, and transfers to Ukraine are less of a burden. On the other hand, the weak 
economy is becoming more noticeable as the nominal reference variables of taxes and 
social contributions rise more slowly. Furthermore, in some areas expenditure is still 
growing at dynamics similar to 2024. The deficit in the social security funds shows little 
change on balance: health and long-term care insurance schemes are increasing contri-
bution rates once again, thus reducing their deficits overall. By contrast, the unemploy-
ment insurance scheme and, above all, the pension insurance scheme are expanding 
their deficits. Reserves are used to prevent contribution rates from rising here as well in 
order to offset the deficit.
The deficit ratios for 2026 and 2027 are both 2.4 %, with only a small change in the 
revenue and expenditure ratios.  The Forecast assumes that central, state and local  31) 
31 In March of this year, the Federal Fiscal Court ruled that foreign investment funds that invested in German 
enterprises had been unlawfully subject to capital gains tax in the past. The national accounts record the sum 
of expected repayments, at just under ¼ % of  in 2024, as capital transfers.  GDP

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 38government spending will lose momentum due to budgetary strains, especially in the 
areas of personnel, intermediate consumption and investment. Growth in expenditure 
on pensions, healthcare and long-term care will continue to outpace that of the refer-
ence variable for social security contributions. The health and long-term care insurance 
schemes continue to avoid incurring deficits through renewed increases in contribution 
rates. However, there is significant growth in the pension insurance scheme’s deficit. 
The structural deficit ratio remains relatively stable at around 2 % over the forecast 
horizon from 2024 to 2027.  This ratio factors out temporary influences (primarily crisis 
measures and economic activity). Around three-quarters of the structural deficit is 
attributable to central government (including its off-budget entities). Using its own 
calculation method, central government initially computes significantly higher cyclical 
burdens on its budget and first uses up its disposable reserves. This makes it easier for 
central government to comply with the debt brake borrowing limit, as cyclical deficits 
and deficits financed from reserves are not counted towards the limit. In 2026 and 2027 
in particular, the results forecast here indicate a marked overshooting of the borrowing 
limit, however. In addition, the Armed Forces Fund is estimated to record a deficit of 
½ % of  in each of these two years. At the end of 2027, the forecast expects it to still GDP
have a residual borrowing authorisation of ¼ % of . GDP
There is a moderate decline in the Maastricht debt ratio from 62.9 % at the end of 
2023 to 61.7 % at the end of 2027.  Central, state and local government deficits lead to a 


Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 39significant increase in debt. Nominal  growth in the denominator is not sufficient to GDP
stabilise the ratio. However, the government will be repaying debt related to the coron-
avirus and energy price assistance loans and bad bank portfolios from the financial 
crisis. The deficits in the social security funds do not increase government debt, as they 
are financed from reserves. From today’s perspective, the share of  debt (especially EU
that incurred through  which Germany ultimately has to repay on a pro rata ) NGEU
basis is just over 2 % of  in 2027. This is not included in the Maastricht debt ratio. GDP  

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 403 Risk assessment
The macroeconomic forecast presented here is subject to a number of uncertainties.
Risks currently exist, in particular, in relation to growing protectionism, geopolitical 
conflicts and the impact of structural change on the German economy. Following the 
Bundestag elections, fiscal and economic policy could also see significant change. All in 
all, risks to economic growth are currently tilted to the downside and risks to inflation 
to the upside.
Rising geopolitical tensions or increased protectionist measures entail significant 
downside risks to economic output and upside risks to inflation.  Should Russia’s war 
against Ukraine or the conflicts in the Middle East intensify or spread, this could 
constrict the supply of energy commodities in the global market and disrupt supply 
chains. Via rising import prices, this would directly increase inflation in Germany and 
constrain economic activity. Growing trade policy tensions would probably have similar 
effects. This threat will become fairly imminent if the incoming  administration imple-US
ments its announced trade policy plans – especially in the event of huge tariff increases 
and possible retaliatory measures. In such a risk scenario, the German economy would 
probably suffer considerably; see the supplementary information below.   32) 
32 Survey results likewise point to major burdens in such a scenario. According to a special survey among manu - 
facturi ng firms conduct ed before the US election by ifo Institute, 44 % of German industrial firms expected a negative  
impact on their business as a result of Dona ld Trump’s election; 5 % expected a positive impact, and 51 % expected  
it to make no di fference who won the election; see CESifo (2024).  

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 41Supplementary information
The possible impact on the German economy of 
measures announced by the incoming  administrationUS
The re-election of Donald Trump as US President could well initiate a drastic pivot of 
the nation’s trade and economic policy.  The plans announced in the run-up to the  US
election are pointing in that direction. At present, however, they are not sufficiently 
specified, nor is it certain enough that they will be implemented, for them to be 
included in the baseline forecast. For the purpose of the risk assessment, we gauge the 
potential impact of a more restrictive trade policy and other measures put forward by 
the incoming  administration. US
In particular, the drastic tariff increases on the table are likely to play an important 
role in this.  Tariffs on  imports from China, for instance, could rise to 60 %. For US
products from Germany and other economies, the new tariff rate could be 10 %.  In 
some cases, designated members of the incoming  administration have raised the US
prospect of even more draconian measures.  Retaliatory measures by trading 
partners would then be likely. As a highly export-oriented country whose exporters are 
relatively strongly exposed to the  market, Germany may be more affected than US
other economies by the consequences of a restrictive  trade policy. US
The potential impact of a risk scenario on the German economy is quantified below.
The scenario assumes  tariffs of 60 % on imports from China and 10 % on products US
from Germany and other economies, as well as tit-for-tat retaliation by trading partners. 1) 
 2) 
 3) 1 This corresponds to an increase of just under 49 percentage points in the effective average tariffs on Chinese 
products. Tariffs on products from other regions of the world would be raised by an average of just under 9 
percentage points. 
2 For instance, general tariffs could also be raised, by up to 20 percentage points. An additional 25 % could be 
tacked onto tariffs on Mexican and Canadian products unless  demands for greater border security and the US
fight against drug trafficking are addressed. 

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 42 It also takes into account tax relief promised by President-elect Trump and the 
Republican Party during the election campaign.  In addition, given statements to that 
effect from the incoming  administration, it considers the consequences of the mass US
deportation of immigrants living and working in the United States.  Finally, it is 
assumed that the macroeconomically relevant uncertainty will increase in this environ-
ment.  The risk scenario ignores the potential macroeconomic effects that other 
measures, such as new deregulation initiatives, could have in the United States. 
The macroeconomic implications of US policy measures for Germany are estimated 
using the National Institute Global Econometric Model (NiGEM) and the Bundesbank’
s macroeconomic model (BbkM- DE). NiGEM comprehensively models global trade 
linkages and can also illustrate the implications of trade policy disruptions.  It can do 
the same for impacts on Germany. However, the model does not explicitly focus on the 
German economy. For this reason, the BbkM-  model deployed for the Bundesbank’DE
s macroeconomic forecasts is also used to obtain a view of the German economy specif-
ically. The simulations using BbkM-  are based on the effects relating to Germany’s DE
international environment identified by NiGEM.  The effects on the German economy  3) 
 4) 
 5) 
 6) 
 7) 
 8) 
3 It is assumed that, beginning in the first quarter of 2025, tariffs will be gradually raised up to the assumed 
levels within two years. For their part, trading partners are assumed to retaliate by imposing tariffs of the 
same size on imports from the United States. The assumption of tit-for-tat retaliation is based on the experi-
ence gained from the 2018 China trade war. It is expressly neither an interpretation of statements from major-US
 trading partners’ governments nor a policy recommendation. It is assumed that tariffs between the  and US EU
China will remain unchanged. 
4 Additional tax relief for households is assumed as from the fourth quarter of 2025. Income from overtime 
hours worked and social security benefits are assumed to be exempt from tax in future. In addition, the corpo-
rate tax rate is reduced from 21 % to 15 % in the scenario. The prospect has been raised of extending the tax 
cuts under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act signed into law during the first Trump administration and set to expire at 
the end of 2025; this extension already forms part of the forecast baseline and is therefore not assessed in this 
risk scenario. For a quantification of the fiscal costs of these measures, see Committee for a Responsible 
Federal Budget (2024). 
5 The scenario assumes that, from the third quarter of 2025 onwards, undocumented immigrants will be 
deported on a mass scale, reducing the labour force by 1.3 million by the end of 2027. The forecast baseline 
already assumes that the strong influx of immigration to the United States in recent years will come to a halt 
under President-elect Trump.
6 The analyses are based on changes in financial market uncertainty. This indicator is based on the volatility of 
the non-predictable component of a wide range of macroeconomic data and financial market variables. For a 
discussion of the conceptual advantages of examining financial market uncertainty over alternative 
approaches, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2020). 
7 NiGEM is a semi-structural model designed by the National Institute of Economic and Social Research that 
models the economies of most  countries and major emerging market economies (see Hantzsche et al. OECD
(2018)). A current model extension expressly permits the simulation of trade policy measures. See Bernard et 
al. (2024).
8 Any feedback the macroeconomic effects in Germany from the calculations using BbkM-  have on or via the DE
global environment is thus not explicitly taken into account. In the simulations with BbkM- , it is implicitly DE
regarded as part of the assumptions derived from NiGEM regarding the external environment (for details on 
BbkM- , see Haertel et al. (2022)). Both models have been used for a wide range of simulation and scenario DE
analyses, including some as a combination of NiGEM (for the international environment) and BbkM-  (for the DE
German economy); see Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b, 2024e).

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 43triggered by heightened uncertainty are estimated using a structural vector autoregres-
sion  model. ( ) SVAR
According to the NiGEM simulations, protectionist measures, in particular, notice-
ably dampen economic activity in the United States.  In the simulations, losses in 
consumer purchasing power and increased costs for intermediate inputs outweigh  US
industry’s price competitiveness in the domestic market. In addition, the retaliatory 
tariffs affect the profitability of  firms’ foreign business.  The reduced labour US
supply also weighs on  Although tax relief counteracts this, the negative impact US . GDP
of tariff increases, in particular, clearly predominates. Overall, the  economy suffers US
annual growth losses averaging around 0.7 percentage point from 2025 to 2027. The 
tariff-induced rise in import and consumer prices and second-round effects via higher 
wages drive up inflation in the United States sharply. Inflation already exceeds the 
baseline by 0.4 percentage point in 2025 and by more than 1.5 percentage points in 
2026 and 2027.  Without a significant monetary policy tightening in the United States, 
the surge in inflation is even stronger and more persistent. In anticipation of interest 
rate hikes, the  dollar also sees a substantial and immediate appreciation.US  
The German economy is also likely to suffer considerably, across models, from such 
aUS policy shift.  Its strong reliance on exports makes it particularly vulnerable to the 
decline in foreign demand resulting from the global trade losses triggered by the 
restrictive trade policy. The heightened uncertainty further burdens the German 
economy. The depreciation of the euro resulting from the simulations, which, in and of 
itself, strengthens price competitiveness, cannot compensate for this. As a result, 
according to the simulations with BbkM-  and NiGEM,  growth is significantly DE GDP
lower than in the baseline forecast, with differences between the models regarding the 
timeline of growth losses (see Chart 1.15). According to NiGEM, the burdens would 
already become clearly noticeable in 2025 but last for a shorter duration. Overall,  9) 
 10) 
 11) 
9 The  model comprises a stock price index, a measure of financial market uncertainty, a shadow interest SVAR
rate as a measure of monetary policy orientation, the  the unemployment rate and quarterly real  To , HICP . GDP
generate impulse responses, the recursively identified uncertainty shock is calibrated according to its 
movement during the first Trump administration. The  results are added to the simulation results of NiGEM SVAR
and BbkM-  regarding  and inflation in Germany. DE GDP
10 Simulation studies by Bernard et al. (2024), McKibbin et al. (2024) and Goldman Sachs (2024a) also clearly 
assess the macroeconomic effects of a more restrictive trade policy as negative from the perspective of the 
United States. Analyses by the International Monetary Fund (2024) also point to considerable downside risks to  US
economic growth in a similar scenario. 
11 Simulation calculations with other models produce, in some cases, significantly lower inflation effects; see, 
for example, Goldman Sachs (2024a). In other studies, including McKibbin et al. (2024), by contrast, they are 
even larger. The magnitude of the inflation effects largely depends on how wages respond to the rise in the 
cost of living caused by the additional tariffs.

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 44economic output in Germany in 2027 would be 1.4 % below the baseline according to 
BbkM-  and 1.3 % below the baseline according to NiGEM. The simulation results DE
presented here thus point, across models, to considerable downside risks to economic 
growth in Germany.
The inflation effects differ significantly more strongly in the simulation calculations. 
According to BbkM- , the inflation effects in Germany would be small in the forecast DE
period up to 2027, with annual inflation being 0.1 to 0.2 percentage point higher (Chart 
1.16, left panel). In NiGEM, on the other hand, the inflation rate rises sharply by around 
1.5 percentage points, especially in 2025, but in 2026, the inflation rate is still 0.6 
percentage point higher (Chart 1.16, right panel). The main reason for the large differ-
ences is the rapid and extensive transmission of exchange rate effects and retaliatory 
tariffs to domestic consumer prices in NiGEM. This is also due to the assumption that all 
imports are invoiced in  dollars. This is why the depreciation of the euro against theUS
 12) 
12 Other studies show  effects in Germany of similar magnitude (see Dullien et al. (2024), Goldman Sachs GDP
(2024b), Obst et al. (2024), and Zandi et al. (2024)) or a smaller magnitude (see Felbermayr et al. (2024)). 
However, it should be noted that comparability may be limited because the specific design (e.g. the size and 
timing of the measures or the incorporation of uncertainty effects) differs in some cases in the scenario analy-
ses. The effects of inflation, which are the focus of only a few studies, need to be seen in this context, too. Obst 
et al. (2024) report slightly negative effects on German inflation, citing capacity underutilisation and weak 
economic development as the dominant channel in their scenario. Goldman Sachs (2024b) identifies small 
positive effects on inflation but looks only at the euro area as a whole.

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 45 dollar is directly passed through to the prices of imports from all countries. By US
contrast, BbkM-  takes account of the fact that only part of foreign trade is settled inDE
 dollars. Accordingly, the direct rise in import prices is considerably lower in that US
model.  The transmission of this impulse from import prices to consumer prices is 
likewise significantly weaker and more gradual in BbkM- . In addition, in NiGEM, DE
quite strong second-round effects via wages occur relatively swiftly. This further 
increases inflation and ensures a fairly high persistence of the inflation effect. This 
effect is also present in BbkM- , but is weaker.DE
The simulation calculations point to upside risks for inflation developments, 
although their extent is highly uncertain.  Estimates using BbkM- , which reflects in DE
quite significant detail the specific characteristics of the German economy, point to 
rather low effects. The strong inflation effects in the NiGEM simulations are likely to 
represent an upper limit. However, the estimates with NiGEM suggest that the pass-
 13) 
 14) 
13 According to  data for 2023, only around one-quarter of German exports outside the euro area and Eurostat
slightly less than one-half of imports from non-euro area countries are settled in  dollars. In addition, higher US
foreign prices are passed through to German import prices to a lesser extent in BbkM-  than in NiGEM.DE
14 Conceptual differences between BbkM-  and NiGEM are also evident here. In NiGEM, the immediate wage DE
response to price changes is already significantly stronger than in BbkM- . In BbkM- , the pass-through of DE DE
wage changes to prices is also estimated to be weaker than in NiGEM. For more on the pass-through of wage 
developments to price developments in Germany including simulation calculations using BbkM- , see also DE
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a).

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 46through of exchange rate changes to consumer prices could also be significantly 
stronger than in BbkM-  and other models.  Together with the larger second- DE
round effects via wages, the overall inflation effects in NiGEM are considerably higher 
than in BbkM- . Experience gained in the recent period of inflation also shows that DE
large cost shocks can be reflected in consumer prices at a higher intensity than moder-
ate increases in costs.  Moreover, the exchange rate pass-through to consumer 
prices is likely to intensify in an uncertain macroeconomic environment and with rising 
inflation.  Ultimately, this supplementary information illustrates that scenario analy-
ses of this kind often produce a cross-model consensus on the real economic impact, 
while the inflation effects diverge much more strongly.  15) 
 16) 
 17) 
15 See Ortega and Osbat (2020).
16 See, for example, Cavallo et al. (2024).
17 See Carrière-Swallow et al. (2024).

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 47A higher carbon price could increase inflation.  This forecast assumes a decline in the 
carbon price in 2027 from the national price cap for 2026 (€65 per tonne of CO₂) to the 
target price cap of €59 per tonne when the European emissions trading system  is ETS2
launched. As the  price will generally be formed on the market and the volume of ETS2
allowances, including those released from the market stability reserve, is limited, it is 
possible that this cap may be exceeded. The assumed dampening effect on energy 
prices could therefore fail to materialise, or prices could even go up. Simulations 
suggest that, to achieve the climate protection targets, a greater reduction in emissions 
is needed than would appear achievable with the carbon prices planned thus far.  If 
the volume of  allowances were set in accordance with the target, this could result ETS2
in a higher price despite use of the market stability reserve. Should  prices turn out ETS2
to be markedly higher, this would increase inflation and tend to dampen economic 
output.
The structural changes in Germany and abroad could have an even greater impact 
on the German economy and dampen potential output more strongly than previ-
ously estimated.  The quantification of this impact on the German economy and 
estimated potential output is subject to a high level of uncertainty. This forecast (like 
previous ones) already contains marked downward revisions of potential output, which 
could turn out later to have been too large.  Nevertheless, there is a risk that some of 
the structural problems will prove even more burdensome, or the adjustment 
processes even more lengthy, than currently expected. This would further diminish 
growth opportunities for the German economy and dampen the  outlook. For GDP
example, the weakness in productivity could last longer, the German export industry 
could benefit even less from growing sales markets, or private investment could 
decline more sharply still. Private consumption could then turn out to be weaker, as the 
labour market would probably experience greater cooling and wage growth would be 
lower. If the latter were to outweigh weaker productivity, this would also dampen infla-
tion. In view of the low potential growth and possible large additional adverse shocks 
ahead, the German economy is closer to a recession – in the sense of an overall signifi-
cant, longer lasting and broad-based decline in economic output, with persistent under-
utilisation of aggregate capacity. 33) 
 34) 
33 If the planned carbon price path remains unchanged and the energy efficiency gains over the past 30 years 
are extrapolated, the Bundesbank’s model simulations from April 2024 conclude that emissions reductions will 
not meet the targets; see Deutsche Bundesbank (2024f).
34 For example, if productivity were to be more positively affected by digitalisation than expected – say, through 
the use of artificial intelligence. Capital input could also turn out to be greater, e.g. due to higher investment in 
green technologies as part of the transition to a net-zero economy.

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 48Table 1.5: Key figures of the macroeconomic forecast
Year-on-year percentage change, calendar adjusted1
Item 2024 2025 2026 2027Table 1.5: Key figures of the macroeconomic forecast
Year-on-year percentage change, calendar adjusted1
Item 2024 2025 2026 2027         
GDP  (real) - 0.2   0.2  0.8  0.9 
GDP  (real, unadjusted) - 0.2   0.1  1.1  1.0 
Components of real GDP  
Private consumption 0.1  0.4  0.8  0.7 
Memo item: Saving ratio 11.5   11.1   10.9   10.7  
Government consumption 2.4  1.6  1.3  1.4 
Gross fixed capital formation - 2.7   - 0.6   1.6  1.3 
Business investment2 - 2.7   - 1.3   0.4  1.5 
Private housing construction 
investment- 4.9   - 1.0   1.6  2.0 
Exports - 0.6   - 0.8   1.8  2.1 
Imports - 0.1   1.1  2.3  2.4 
Memo item: Current account balance3 6.1  5.7  5.7  5.7 
Contributions to  growth GDP4  
Domestic final demand 0.0  0.4  1.0  1.0 
Changes in inventories 0.7  0.5  0.0  0.0 
Exports - 0.2   - 0.3   0.7  0.9 
Imports 0.0  - 0.4   - 0.9   - 0.9  
Labour market  
Total number of hours worked5 - 0.3   0.0  0.7  0.5 
Employed persons5 0.2  - 0.4   0.3  0.1 
Unemployed persons6 2.8  3.0  2.8  2.7 
Unemployment rate7 6.0  6.3  6.0  5.7 
Memo item:  unemployment rateILO8 3.5  3.9  3.7  3.5 
Wages and wage costs  
Negotiated wages9 6.1  2.5  2.9  2.6 
Gross wages and salaries per 
employee5.1  2.5  2.6  2.7 
Compensation per employee 5.1  3.0  2.7  2.8 
Real  per employed person GDP − 0.3   0.6  0.6  0.8 

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 49Table 1.5: Key figures of the macroeconomic forecast
Year-on-year percentage change, calendar adjusted1
Item 2024 2025 2026 2027
Unit labour costs10 5.5  2.4  2.2  2.0 
Memo item:  deflator GDP 3.0  2.4  2.1  2.1 
Consumer prices11 2.5  2.4  2.1  1.9 
Excluding energy 3.2  2.8  2.1  2.2 
Energy component - 3.1   - 0.7   2.3  - 0.6  
Excluding energy and food 3.3  2.4  1.9  2.0 
Food component 2.8  4.4  2.9  2.8 
Residential real estate prices - 1.9 2.0 2.2 2.2
Sources: Federal Statistical Office (up to Q3 2024), Federal Employment Agency,  Annual . Eurostat
figures for 2024 to 2027 are Bundesbank forecast.  If calendar effects present.  Private non-resi- 1 2
dential fixed capital formation.  As a percentage of nominal  In arithmetical terms, in 3 . GDP 4
percentage points. Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.  Domestic concept.  In 5 6
millions of persons (Federal Employment Agency definition).  As a percentage of the civilian 7
labour force.   Internationally standardised per  definition,  differentiation. 8 ILO Eurostat 9
 Unadjusted figures, monthly basis. Pursuant to the Bundesbank’s negotiated wage index.  10
Ratio of domestic compensation per employee to real  per employed person.  Harmonised GDP 11
Index of Consumer Prices  unadjusted figures. ( ), HICP
  
Table 1.6: Key figures of the macroeconomic forecast – non-calendar adjusted
Year-on-year percentage change
Item 2024 2025 2026 2027
         
GDP  (real) - 0.2   0.1  1.1  1.0 
GDP  (real, calendar adjusted) - 0.2   0.2  0.8  0.9 
Components of real GDP    
Private consumption 0.1  0.2  0.9  0.8 
Memo item: Saving ratio 11.5   11.1   10.9   10.7  
Government consumption 2.4  1.6  1.3  1.4 
Gross fixed capital formation - 2.9   - 0.7   2.2  1.6 
Business investment1 - 2.8   - 1.4   1.1  2.0 
Private housing construction 
investment- 5.0   - 1.2   2.2  2.4 
Exports - 0.7   - 0.9   2.4  2.4 
Imports - 0.2   0.9  2.8  2.5 
Memo item: Current account balance2 6.1  5.6  5.7  5.8 

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 50Table 1.6: Key figures of the macroeconomic forecast – non-calendar adjusted
Year-on-year percentage change
Item 2024 2025 2026 2027
Contributions to  growth GDP3    
Domestic final demand - 0.1   0.4  1.2  1.1 
Changes in inventories 0.1  0.5  0.0  - 0.1  
Exports - 0.3   - 0.4   1.0  1.0 
Imports 0.1  - 0.4   - 1.1   - 1.0  
Labour market    
Total number of hours worked4 - 0.3   - 0.1   1.1  0.7 
Employed persons4 0.2  - 0.4   0.3  0.1 
Unemployed persons5 2.8  3.0  2.8  2.7 
Unemployment rate6 6.0  6.3  6.0  5.7 
Memo item:  unemployment rateILO7 3.5  3.9  3.7  3.5 
Wages and wage costs    
Negotiated wages8 6.1  2.5  2.9  2.6 
Gross wages and salaries per 
employee5.1  2.5  2.6  2.7 
Compensation per employee 5.1  3.0  2.8  2.8 
Real  per employed person GDP - 0.4   0.5  0.8  0.9 
Unit labour costs9 5.5  2.5  1.9  1.9 
Memo item:  deflator GDP 3.0  2.4  2.2  2.1 
Consumer prices10 2.5  2.4  2.1  1.9 
Excluding energy 3.2  2.8  2.1  2.2 
Energy component - 3.1   - 0.7   2.3  - 0.6  
Excluding energy and food 3.3  2.4  1.9  2.0 
Food component 2.8  4.4  2.9  2.8 
Residential real estate prices - 1.9 2.0 2.2 2.2
Sources: Federal Statistical Office (up to Q3 2024), Federal Employment Agency,  Annual . Eurostat
figures for 2024 to 2027 are Bundesbank forecasts.  Private non-residential fixed capital forma-1
tion.  As a percentage of nominal  In arithmetical terms, in percentage points. Discrepan- 2 . GDP 3
cies in the totals are due to rounding.  Domestic concept. In millions of persons (Federal 4 5
Employment Agency definition).  As a percentage of the civilian labour force. Internationally 6 7
standardised as per  definition,  differentiation.  Unadjusted figures, monthly basis. ILO Eurostat 8
Pursuant to the Bundesbank’s negotiated wage index.  Ratio of domestic compensation per 9
employee to real  per employed person.  Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices  GDP 10 ( ), HICP
unadjusted figures.

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 51List of references
Bernard, S., L. de Greef, I. Hurst, A. Kaya, I. Liadze and B. Naisbitt (2024), The effects of 
higher  tariffs, NiGEM Topical Feature, National Institute Global Economic Outlook, US
Autumn 2024, pp. 48‑62.
Carrière-Swallow, Y., M. Firat, D. Furceri and D. Jimenez (2024), State-Dependent 
Exchange Rate Pass-Through, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics.
Cavallo A., F. Lippi and K. Miyahara (2024), Large shocks travel fast, American Economic 
Review: Insights, Vol. 6, No 4, pp. 558‑574.
CESifo  (2024): Who’s afraid of Trump in the White House? How German firms view the
, Econpol Policy Brief, 65/2024, October, Vol. 8. US election
Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget (2024), The Fiscal Impact of the Harris and 
Trump Campaign Plans,  Budget Watch 2024, 28 October 2024.US
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a), Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regain-
ing its footing ‒ outlook up to 2026, Monthly Report, June 2024.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), Monthly Report, November 2024. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024c), Domestic investment barriers faced by German enter-
prises, Monthly Report, May 2024.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024d), Wage developments in Germany: current situation, 
. comparison with the euro area, and outlook, Monthly Report, October 2024
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024e), Risks facing Germany as a result of its economic ties 
with China, Monthly Report, January 2024, pp. 11‑29.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024f), Energy efficiency improvements: implications for carbon 
, Monthly Report, April 2024. emissions and economic output in Germany
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024g), The impact of seasonal temperature anomalies on 
global food commodity prices, Monthly Report, August 2024, pp. 17 ff.

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 52Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), The impact of digitalisation on labour productivity 
growth, Monthly Report, March 2023, pp. 43‑65.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), Germany as a business location: selected aspects of 
current dependencies and medium-term challenges, Monthly Report, September 2023, 
pp. 15‑35.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), Arduous recovery amid high and only gradually easing 
inflation – outlook for the German economy up to 2025, Monthly Report, June 2023, 
pp. 13‑37.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), Impact of permanently higher energy costs on German 
potential output, Monthly Report, December 2022, pp. 29‑30.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b), Potential macroeconomic consequences of the war in 
Ukraine – simulations based on a severe risk scenario, Monthly Report, April 2022, pp. 
13‑29.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020), The impact of trade policy uncertainty, Monthly Report, 
January 2020, pp. 57‑60.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), The impact of wages on prices in Germany: evidence 
from selected empirical analyses, Monthly Report, September 2019, pp. 15‑37.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), The impact of the Climate Package on economic growth 
and inflation, Monthly Report, December 2019, pp. 29‑33.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), Demographic change, immigration and the potential 
output of the German economy, Monthly Report, April 2017, pp. 35‑47.
Dullien, S., S. Stephan and T. Theobald (2024), -USWahlen: Trumps Zollpläne würden 
auch deutsche Wirtschaft empfindlich treffen, IMK Kommentar No 12, October 2024.
European Central Bank (2024), Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the 
euro area, December 2024.
Felbermayr, G., J. Hinz and R. J. Langhammer (2024),  Trade Policy After 2024: What is US
At Stake for Europe?, Kiel Institute for the World Economy, Kiel Policy Brief No 178, 
October 2024.

Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth outlook – inflation decreases to 2%
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 53Goldman Sachs (2024a), Implications of Higher Tariffs for Euro Area and  Monetary US
Policy, presentation by J. Hatzius,  Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, July 2024.ECB
Goldman Sachs (2024b), Euro Area Outlook 2025: Under Pressure, European Economics 
Analyst, November 2024.
Haertel, T., B. Hamburg and V. Kusin (2022), The macroeconometric model of the 
Bundesbank revisited, Deutsche Bundesbank Technical Paper, No 01/2022.
Hantzsche, A., M. Lopresto and G. Young (2018), Using NiGEM in Uncertain Times: Intro-
duction and Overview of NiGEM, National Institute Economic Review, Vol. 244 (1), pp. 
R1–R14.
ifo Institute (2024), Der Investitionsstandort Deutschland aus Unternehmenssicht, ifo 
Schnelldienst, 2024, 77, No 03, pp. 52‑58.
International Monetary Fund (2024), Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic 
Outlook’s Baseline Projections, World Economic Outlook: Policy Pivot, Rising Threats, 
October 2024, pp. 24‑27.
McKibbin, W., M. Hogan and M. Noland (2024), The International Economic Implications 
of a Second Trump Presidency, Peterson Institute for International Economics, Working 
Paper 24‑20, September 2024.
Obst, T., J. Matthes and S. Sultan (2024), What if Trump is re-elected?, German Economic 
Institute, Report 14/2024, March 2024.-IW
Ortega, E., and C. Osbat (2020), Exchange rate pass-through in the euro area and  EU
countries,  Occasional Paper Series, No 241.ECB
Schnorrenberger, R., Schwind, P. and E. Wieland (2024), Forecasting  package HICP
holidays with forward-looking booking data, Deutsche Bundesbank Technical Paper 04
/2024.
Zandi, M., B. Lacerda and J. Begley (2024), Assessing the Macroeconomic Consequences 
of Harris vs. Trump, Moody’s Analytics Analysis, August 2024.  

54Financing costs for banks 
in Germany in the 
monetary policy interest 
rate cycle

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 55Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary 
policy interest rate cycle 
Financing costs for banks play an important role in the transmission of monetary policy. This 
is because changes in the cost of funding for banks generally lead to changes in bank 
lending rates. The tightening of monetary policy that began at the beginning of 2022 has 
also been reflected in higher financing costs for banks in Germany, in the form of rising 
market interest rates. In response to this, banks increased interest rates on bank loans. This 
was in line with the monetary policy objective of curbing lending in order to bring the exces-
sively high inflation rate in the euro area back to the target level by reducing aggregate 
demand.
This article presents a financing cost indicator ( ) for banks in Germany. The indicator FCI
combines the cost contributions by banks’ various funding sources into a single metric. The 
prices of the funding sources are weighted by their share of the volume in the banks' financ-
ing mix. The indicator shows that the deposits of the private non-financial sector 
and banks' securitised liabilities have traditionally been the largest contributors, and remain 
so to this day.
The  of banks in Germany increased substantially during the most recent period of FCI
monetary policy tightening. Initially, there was a noticeable uptick in yields on securitised 
liabilities. Subsequently, it was chiefly the higher cost of deposits of the private non-financial 
sector that contributed to the rise in the . As a result, in autumn 2023, the  reached its FCI FCI
highest level in more than ten years.
A comparison with the  peak recorded in the period of monetary policy tightening in 2005 FCI
to 2008 shows that funding costs were not at unusually high levels when they reached their 
most recent high level. Despite a similarly high key interest rate level as in September 2008, 
the  was significantly lower in autumn 2023. The pace of the latest increase in the  was FCI FCI
also not out of the ordinary given the rapid series of interest rate hikes. The differences in the 
levels are partly due to price factors. The onset of the global financial crisis in 2008 resulted 
in a massive increase in the cost of financing in money and capital markets. In addition, 
banks' financing structure changed. Securitised liabilities accounted for a significantly larger 
share of bank financing in the period leading up to the financial crisis than they did after-

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 56wards. At the same time, the share in terms of volume of relatively low-cost deposits of the 
private non-financial sector was significantly lower prior to the financial crisis than it is now. 
Monetary policy and regulatory measures adopted after the financial crisis contributed 
significantly to these shifts in volume. In recent years, banks have once again increasingly 
availed themselves of the option of financing via money and capital markets. This develop-
ment is likely to continue, given the final repayment in December 2024 of the funds taken up 
under  III and the scaling back of the Eurosystem's monetary policy portfolio. TLTRO

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 571 Introduction
When banks grant loans, they usually have to finance them.  To this end, banks can, 
for example, use deposits from households or enterprises or issue debt securities. The 
costs incurred by banks in this regard are a key factor in the pricing of their loans.  As 
a result, the cost of financing for banks is also of particular significance for monetary 
policy because changes in bank funding costs typically lead to changes in bank lending 
rates. In turn, the lending rates have an impact on the inflation rate via investment and 
consumption (see ). Chart 2.1
Assets Liabilities and capital
   
Cash and cash balances at the central bank Liabilities to the central bank
Credit Deposits
Loans of domestic banks
Securities1 of euro area households and non-financial 
corporations
 of central, state and local government of the 
euro area
of other financial corporations of the euro 
area
of non-residents2
Securitised liabilities (e.g. bank debt securities)
Equity
1 Including equity and other shares.  These include deposits by non-banks outside the euro 2
area and deposits by banks outside Germany. Non-banks comprise non-financial corporations, 
households, non-profit institutions, central, state and local government and other financial 
corporations. 1) 
Table 2.1: A stylised bank balance sheet
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a).

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 58The cost of financing for banks is a key element in the transmission of monetary 
policy due to the influence this has on bank lending rates.  For the purposes of 
analysing and calibrating monetary policy, it is important to identify the factors that 
determine the cost of financing for banks and to monitor their development. Depend-
ing on the extent to which banks make use of the individual funding sources, monetary 
policy impulses may be transmitted by banks in a diluted or concentrated form, or in a 
delayed or accelerated manner. In addition to standard monetary policy, which primar-
ily determines the cost of financing for banks in the shorter term, there are additional 
factors that have a long-term impact on the cost level and the structure of banks’ financ-
ing mix. These include non-standard monetary policy measures as well as structural 
changes that concern regulatory requirements or the investment behaviour of 
economic actors, for example.
An individual bank has little room for manoeuvre when it comes to pricing some of 
its funding sources. Changes in the prices of these components are heavily influ-
enced by monetary policy decisions, in particular changes in key interest rates.  The 
series of key interest rate hikes that began in the euro area in July 2022 are reflected in 
higher prices for two of banks’ main funding sources: Chart 2.2 shows that in 2022 and 
2023, financing via both bank debt securities and the money market became noticeably 
more expensive. An individual bank can determine the extent to which it draws on 
these sources of financing. By contrast, it can do little to influence the price of this 
financing component.  2) 
2 See Bank of England (2014).

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 59With regard to the deposits of households and non-financial corporations, the influ-
ence of the individual bank on pricing depends on its market power.  Depending on a 
bank’s business model, the share of customer deposits in its financing mix can vary 
greatly. Whilst it is true that interest rates have also risen for customer deposits since 
2022 because banks have raised them, the prices of these components rose to a much 
lesser extent and also at a later point in time than for the funding sources where banks 
have little room for manoeuvre in terms of pricing. However, there are limits to this 
room for manoeuvre, even in the case of deposits. When a bank sets its interest rates 
for deposits, it has to factor in a high degree of uncertainty regarding the volumes that 
will accrue to it. This is because they also depend on how competitors set their prices 
and on alternative investments.
A financing cost indicator ( FCI) can be calculated to summarise the development of 
the costs of various sources of bank financing.  In this context, it makes good sense 
to focus on the cost of debt financing. This is because capital costs constitute imputed 
costs. Although these can be derived from share price developments based on certain 
 3) 
3 Illes et al. (2015) also calculate this kind of indicator by determining funding costs as the volume-weighted 
average of the interest rates on new business and applying the shares of the respective balance sheet items in 
total assets as the volume weighting.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 60assumptions, only few banks in Germany are listed on the stock exchange ( see the
). An supplementary information on constructing an indicator for banks' financing costs
 is made up of the relative weightings of the funding sources and their respective FCI
prices at a given point in time. This means it reflects the marginal financing costs at 
that point in time.  Changes in the prices of large-volume funding sources have a 
comparatively strong impact on the development of the . However, shifts in FCI
volumes between the funding sources also have an effect on financing costs overall. 
Over time, banks can, to a limited extent, exchange different funding sources for each 
another. If the price of one funding source rises disproportionately, banks often shift 
volumes towards more affordable forms of funding, to the extent that they are able to 
do so.
In the most recent period of monetary policy tightening in 2022 and 2023, the FCI 
rose swiftly and sharply and remained at an elevated level in 2024.  The current  FCI
level and changes in it since the start of 2022 are discussed in  and  of this parts 2 a3
article. Supplementary information compares in greater detail the  of banks that are FCI
financed primarily by deposits with the  of banks that are financed more by market-FCI
based sources.  demonstrates that the  followed a different path during the Part 4 FCI
most recent period of monetary policy tightening than it did during the period of tight-
ening prior to the global financial crisis. What is behind the differences in the develop-
ment of the  and its respective levels in the two periods?  provides answers to FCI Part 5
this question. The reasons for the differences can be found chiefly in the period 
between the two periods of tightening. This was, after all, a period shaped by monetary 
policy easing during the financial and the European sovereign debt crisis, as well as 
regulatory changes and a protracted period of negative interest rates. The article 
concludes by describing how the  has developed in 2024, when monetary policy FCI
began to ease the degree of restriction once more. 4) 
4 In contrast to this, an “average”  can also be calculated. See the supplementary information on the construc-FCI
tion of the . FCI

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 61Supplementary information
Constructing an indicator for banks’ financing costs
In order to monitor and classify developments in banks’ collective financing costs, 
the Bundesbank uses a financing cost indicator ( FCI). The calculation is based, first, 
on information on the debt financing structure of the banking sector, i.e. the volumes 
of financing sources used. Second, information on current interest rates and yields on 
these funding sources is used. This comprises new business rates on various deposits 
and the yields on bank debt securities. The  for the banking sector presented here is FCI
calculated as the stock volume-weighted average of current interest rates and yields. 
This allows changes in the  over time to be attributed to price and volume changes.FCI
The FCI presented in this supplementary information indicates the notional interest 
rate at which the banking system could refinance its existing liabilities afresh in the 
composition on a given reference date.  It therefore measures the volume side based 
on stock variables, but the price side based on new business rates. There are various 
reasons why it makes sense to merge these disparate concepts. With regard to the 
volume side, it is assumed that banks are, at the current end, obtaining funding in line 
with the financing structure of the stocks of their outstanding liabilities and thus retain 
this financing structure. This assumption prevents the indicator from fluctuating 
strongly on a monthly basis if the volume shares of new business from individual financ-
ing sources vary significantly over time. If the relatively stable stock volumes are used 
to calculate the indicator, changes in the indicator can generally be interpreted as price 
signals in the short term. Volume shifts between funding sources only become appar-
ent in the longer term using this calculation method. 
As the price side is reflected by new business, this is an indicator of marginal financ-
ing costs.  This approach makes sense because, in the monetary policy transmission 
context, the focus is on marginal financing costs – as opposed to average financing 
costs. This is because marginal financing costs form the basis for banks’ lending 
decisions: in order to set their lending rates, banks compare the marginal costs of their 
financing with the potential income. Lending rates, in turn, impact on aggregate 
demand and thus also on inflation. Alternatively, and in the context of other questions, 
financing costs can also be calculated on the basis of the average interest rates for the 

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 62stock of individual financing sources. Such an indicator of average financing costs is 
useful for topics where past decisions also matter. One example is the topic of financial 
stability: previous financing and lending decisions are a major factor in banks’ profitabil-
ity. This, in turn, affects banks’ resilience and, as a result, also financial stability as a 
whole. 
The FCI presented here is designed as a debt financing cost indicator and disregards 
the cost of equity; moreover, the FCI approximates financing costs rather than 
calculating them exactly.  Capital costs are imputed costs and, unlike borrowing costs, 
cannot be observed directly. Under certain assumptions, they can be indirectly derived 
from share price movements. However, a large proportion of banks in the German 
banking system – especially the savings banks and cooperative banks, whose numbers 
make them a meaningful factor – are not listed on the stock exchange. Lastly, given the 
data available, the interest rates or yields on some financing positions can only be 
approximated by means of the prices of related financing instruments. For the , FCI
this means that financing costs cannot be modelled precisely. 
The monthly balance sheet statistics provide information on the financing structure 
of the German banking sector, i.e. the volume side of the FCI. Only those positions 
that represent costs to the banking system as a whole are relevant for an indicator that 
is intended to model the banking sector’s total debt financing costs. Interbank loans 
within the banking system under consideration balance each other out and are there-
fore disregarded. This is because they are a liability for the borrowing bank, but a claim 
for its respective counterparty. In aggregate terms, interbank loans therefore do not 
create costs for the banking system as a whole, but only create redistributions within 
the system. The same applies to liabilities arising from derivatives transactions with the 
banking sector. Derivatives liabilities to non-banks are negligible because of their small 
size and are therefore also omitted from the . FCI
Of the sources of debt financing included in the FCI, the deposits of euro area house-
holds and non-financial corporations, as measured by volume, are most important 
for banks.  Chart 2.3 shows that, in October 2024, time, savings and overnight deposits 
of the private non-financial sector accounted for more than one-half of the debt financ-
ing of the aggregate German banking system (51.8 %). Securitised liabilities accounted 
for just under 20 % of debt financing. These mainly comprise bank debt securities 
issued in the capital market (around 18 % of debt financing), but also short-term debt  1) 
1 The balance sheet items  statistics are used for the euro area.  ( )BSI

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 63securities issued in the money market (1.6 %). This was followed by deposits of non-resi-
dents  (16.5 %). Deposits of other financial corporations of the euro area, such as 
pension funds, insurance companies and other financial market players, accounted for 
nearly 8 %, while those by central, state and local government of the euro area 
accounted for just under 4 %. The German banking system’s liabilities to the Bundes-
bank, including those arising from targeted longer-term refinancing operations (
 accounted for 0.3 % of the German banking system’s debt financing. In the ), TLTROs
euro area as a whole, the composition of banks’ funding mix is very similar to that of 
Germany.
For the price side of the FCI, interest rates and yields from the MFI interest rate 
statistics and the securities issues statistics as well as money market rates are used. 
The  interest rate statistics record domestic banks’ new business rates on deposits MFI
of households and non-financial corporations in the euro area. New business rates 
need to be approximated for deposits of other economic agents. These include 
deposits of central, state and local government, which are mainly short-term deposits. 
 2) 
 3) 
 4) 2 These include deposits of non-banks outside the euro area and deposits of banks outside Germany. Non-
banks comprise non-financial corporations, households, non-profit institutions serving households, central, 
state and local government, and other financial corporations.
3 Instead of liabilities to the Bundesbank, the  for the euro area includes the liabilities of euro area banks to FCI
the Eurosystem.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 64The interest rate on overnight deposits of households is applied to these funds.  The 
interest rate on deposits of non-residents is approximated using the interest rate on 
overnight deposits of enterprises. The choice of a short-term interest rate is motivated 
by the fact that non-residents’ deposits are predominantly likely to constitute deposits 
of enterprises in order to settle their payments in euro. The average yield on secured 
and unsecured bank debt securities from the securities issues statistics is used as the 
yield on securitised liabilities. The main refinancing rate is used as the price for liabili-
ties to the Bundesbank or the Eurosystem (excluding  as the majority of ), TLTROs
banks’ funding needs have traditionally been covered by main refinancing operations 
with the Eurosystem. That changed with the introduction of targeted longer-term 
refinancing operations  The  price is approximated using the Eurosys- ( ). TLTROs TLTRO
tem deposit facility rate. The interest rate on liabilities arising from deposits of other 
financial corporations of the euro area is approximated using the 12-month  . EURIBOR
This choice is motivated primarily by the investment behaviour of other financial corpo-
rations. That is because their investment decisions are informed by more targeted yield 
considerations than those of the private non-financial sector. The choice of the 12-
month  also reflects the fact that the deposits of other financial corporations EURIBOR
break down evenly between original maturities of less than two years and those of 
more than two years. 
The FCI is a volume-weighted average of prices for the various financing sources 
used by banks.  The vertical line in Chart 2.4 shows the  at the end of October 2024. FCI
At that time, the  stood at just under 1.60 %. Deposits of households and non-finan-FCI
cial corporations, at an interest rate of 1.2 %, particularly proved to be the most cost-ef-
fective source of financing. However, deposits of central, state and local government 
and by non-residents were also, in keeping with assumptions, relatively favourable 
sources of financing for banks. By comparison, issuance of securitised liabilities was 
relatively expensive. The yield was 2.8 %. For euro area banks as a whole, the picture is 
similar in terms of the prices of the various financing sources.  4) 
4 In principle, the interest rate on overnight deposits of non-financial corporations would also be conceivable as 
an approximation of the interest rate conditions for government deposits. In terms of their stability, however, 
government deposits are likely to be more comparable to household deposits in many cases, for example in 
terms of the consistency of inflows and outflows.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 65 


Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 662 Composition of the  at the current marginFCI
The level of banks’ overall funding costs is derived from the sum of the prices for the 
individual funding sources – that is, their interest rates or yields. These are weighted 
using the share of the respective funding components in banks’ overall financing.  An
 combines the respective prices and volumes into a single metric (FCI see the supple-
, which mentary information on constructing an indicator for banks' financing costs
also provides a more detailed presentation of the individual funding sources). This 
makes it possible to calculate the contributions by the individual funding sources to the 
overall financing costs. This is done by multiplying the prices of each funding source by 
its volume share in the financing mix. Viewed in isolation, the share of a funding source 
in the cost of financing for banks therefore rises when it becomes more expensive and
/or is increasingly utilised. illustrates the contributions by the individual Chart 2.5 
sources to the  at the end of October 2024. The  of banks in Germany stood at FCI FCI
1.60 % at this time.


Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 67Historically and to date, two funding sources have been particularly relevant to the 
cost of financing for banks in Germany: deposits of the private non-financial sector 
(households and non-financial corporations) in the euro area, and securitised liabili-
ties.  Taken together, these two funding sources currently account for more than two-
thirds of the cost of financing for banks in Germany as reflected in the . In this FCI
context, the significant contribution made by deposits is due more to their major share 
in banks’ financing mix than to high interest rates on deposits. They currently account 
for somewhat more than half of the total volume of all funding sources included in the
. Deposits of households in particular are an attractive source of funding for banks. FCI
Given that these deposits are largely covered by deposit insurance, households accept 
a relatively low rate of remuneration. This means that banks can offer low interest rates 
on household deposits,  as illustrated in Chart 2.4 in the supplementary information 
on constructing the . By contrast, deposits of non-financial corporations are FCI
somewhat more costly for banks, in part because the higher volume of such deposits 
often means they are not fully covered by deposit insurance. The average yield on 
banks’ securitised liabilities, which, for the purposes of calculating the , includes FCI
long-term bank debt securities and short-term money market debt securities, is 
relatively high by comparison. Although banks are, on the one hand, rate takers in 
respect of these funding sources, on the other hand, this enables banks to raise larger 
sums on the market quickly and in a manner that is easy to calculate. It is not possible 
to achieve this to a comparable extent with deposits. Although securitised liabilities 
come at a high price, the contribution they make to the financing mix is currently lower 
than that of deposits, given that they account for a smaller share of the financing mix. 
Their volume share at the end of October 2024 stood at somewhat below 20 %.
Other components with a significant impact on the level of the FCI comprise 
deposits of other financial corporations of the euro area and deposits of non-resi-
dents.  The relevance of deposits of other financial corporations to the , such as FCI
pension funds or insurance companies, is based on the fact that, at present, these 
deposits are comparatively expensive.  By contrast, the contribution of deposits of 
non-residents is primarily due to their sizeable, near 17 % volume share in banks’ financ- 5) 
 6) 
 7) 
5 First, banks have a certain power when it comes to setting prices, especially for households. Second, the bulk 
of the deposits consists of overnight deposits, which are held more for liquidity rather than for investment 
purposes, meaning that yields play a less important role for households than in the case of alternative invest-
ments. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a).
6 Deposits of non-banks outside the euro area and deposits of banks outside Germany.
7 The price of this  component is approximated using the twelve-month  This stood at 2.5 % at the FCI . EURIBOR
end of October 2024. 

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 68ing mix. Conversely, the deposits of central, state and local government of the euro 
area and banks’ liabilities to the Bundesbank are of only minor relevance to the level of 
the . The reason for this is that both funding sources only account for a compara-FCI
tively small volume and therefore do not play a significant role in banks’ financing mix. 
In the euro area, the FCI stood at 1.68 % at the end of October 2024, and was there-
fore somewhat higher than in Germany (see Chart 2.5).  The higher funding costs for 
banks in the euro area are due mainly to the fact that banks in the euro area were 
obliged to pay higher average yields for their securitised liabilities than banks in 
Germany. By contrast, there were no notable differences in the volume shares of the 
individual funding sources.
The level of the FCI and the relevance of the various funding sources to overall 
financing costs are subject to change over time.  The level of the  in Germany and FCI
the euro area is currently significantly higher than it was just three years ago at the end 
of the negative interest rate period. In the interim, increases in key interest rates in 
particular have led to changes in the cost of financing. 

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 693 The cost of financing for banks during the period of 
monetary policy tightening in 2022‑23
The change in course in monetary policy adopted by the ECB Governing Council 
brought about a substantial increase in the FCI as of end-2021.  In response to the 
sharp rise in inflation across the euro area, the  Governing Council began a series ECB
of interest rate increases in July 2022. By September 2023,   Governing Council ECB
had swiftly raised key interest rates by a total of 450 basis points in ten consecutive 
increments. This resulted in the deposit facility rate reaching its highest level since the 
euro was introduced in 1999. At the end of September 2023, the main refinancing 
operations rate had climbed to its highest point in over 20 years, reaching a level last 
seen in August 2001. After the  stood at −0.06 % at end-2021, only slightly higher FCI
than its historical low, it also edged up in the wake of the interest rate increases. The 
pace of the increase in the  remained noticeably lower than the rapid increases in FCI
key interest rates. The upward trend in the  began as early as the start of 2022. This FCI
was because the  Governing Council had signalled a change in course as early as ECB
December 2021,  triggering a rise in market interest rates. This rise initially affected 
longer-term interest rates and, consequently, also the components of the  with FCI
longer interest rate fixation periods, most notably the yields on bank debt securities. 
This was followed by money market rates over the course of 2022, and subsequently 
also the components of the  with a shorter interest rate fixation period. In addition, FCI
banks started to adjust their interest rates on customer deposits. Within less than two 
years, the  had risen to 1.90 % by the end of October 2023, thus reaching its highest FCI
level since April 2011. With the majority of market participants expecting key interest 
rates to be reduced again as of November 2023, longer-term interest rates also began 
to decline, whereupon the  also fell again.FCI 8) 
8 On 16 December 2021, the  Governing Council announced a step-by-step reduction in net asset purchases ECB
under the purchase programmes; see European Central Bank (2021). In addition, the targeted longer-term 
refinancing operations (  III) were discontinued after the tenth and final operation was allotted in Decem- TLTRO
ber 2021.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 70The sharp rise in yields on securitised liabilities was the main driver of the increase 
in the FCI until around the end of 2022  (see Chart 2.6 ). The average yield rose by over 
300 basis points in the period between end-2021 and end-2022. While securitised liabili-
ties were not the most important source of funding for banks in terms of volume, they 
remained a significant component of the financing mix, accounting for almost one-fifth 
of the volume of all funding sources included in the . Securitised liabilities FCI
accounted for the largest share of the increase in the  in 2022 as a result of their FCI
high volume and the sharply higher yields. This is particularly evident when the  is FCI
calculated separately for different bank financing models (see the supplementary 
information on the evolution of banks' funding costs under different financing strate-
). In 2022 the  rose primarily among the types of institutions for which financ- gies FCI
ing via financial markets is of particular importance. These consist chiefly of commercial 
banks and the central institutions of network systems ( and  Bank). By Landesbanken DZ
contrast, the  of the primary institutions in network systems (that is, savings banks FCI
and credit cooperatives) increased only slightly at first. This is because they are 
financed largely by deposits.
However, rising interest rates on the deposits of other financial corporations and 
the private non-financial sector in the euro area also made a substantial contribu-
tion to the increase in the FCI by the end of 2022.  The interest rate on deposits of 


Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 71other financial corporations is approximated using the twelve-month  This . EURIBOR
rose significantly in 2022 and even exceeded the increase in yields on securitised liabili-
ties. However, deposits of other financial corporations played a much smaller role than 
securitised liabilities in terms of volume in the period under review. Consequently, its 
contribution to the increase in the  is ranked second, behind that of securitised FCI
liabilities. The third largest contribution stemmed from the deposits of households and 
non-financial corporations in the euro area. Banks were hesitant about raising their 
interest rates on such deposits until the end of 2022. The increase in the aggregated 
interest rate was mainly driven by rising interest rates on time deposits. By contrast, 
interest rates on overnight deposits and savings deposits barely increased and 
remained around zero, as had been the case during the low interest rate period.  In 
2022, however, the deposits of the private non-financial sector accounted for the 
highest weighting in the , amounting to an average volume share of just under FCI
50 %. Consequently, even the minimal increase in the aggregated interest rate on 
deposits resulted in a notable increase in the . FCI
The other funding sources for banks had a minor impact on the increase in the FCI 
in 2022.  This is because either their volumes were relatively low or price increases were 
still restrained. The price of the  in which the deposit facility rate is applied, , TLTROs
rose sharply by 250 basis points during the period under review. However, funds taken 
up under the  accounted for only a small share of banks’ financing mix in 2022, TLTROs
not least because repayment of these funds had already begun.  Similarly, the 
deposits of non-residents and the deposits of central, state and local government of the 
euro area had barely any effect on the increase in the  in 2022.FCI
Developments in the FCI from the beginning of 2023 to October 2023 were shaped 
by a significant increase in the cost of financing via deposits of the private non-finan-
cial sector in the euro area, as well as deposits of non-residents.  The main reason for 
the increase in the price of deposits of the private non-financial sector was the 
sustained rise in interest rates on time deposits. This is because banks had raised them  9) 
 10) 
9 The pass-through of interest rates on time deposits is usually swift and virtually complete because time 
deposits are in competition with other longer-term investment options. By contrast, overnight deposits are 
held principally for payment as opposed to investment purposes. The pass-through of interest rates on these 
deposits is both sluggish and incomplete. Bundesbank analyses show that during the period of monetary tight-
ening, banks passed on the increase in market interest rates to overnight deposits to a lesser extent than 
historical correlations would suggest. One reason for the weaker-than-expected interest rate pass-through 
could be an asymmetric interest rate pass-through that is dependent on the stage in the interest rate cycle. 
Another reason could be the significantly higher volume of these deposits. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a).
10 Bank liabilities to the Bundesbank excluding funds taken up under the  made barely any contribution TLTROs
to the increase in the . As assumed, the price of these liabilities was approximated using the main refinancing FCI
rate. Although this rate rose by 250 basis points, at 0.1 % their average volume share was marginal.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 72significantly by the autumn. In addition, banks were now also paying somewhat higher 
rates on overnight deposits and savings deposits, having initially raised interest rates 
on these deposits only to a very limited extent in 2022.  Moreover, the private non-fi-
nancial sector was now increasingly reallocating funds away from lower-interest 
overnight deposits towards higher-interest time deposits. These three effects resulted 
in an increase of almost 1 percentage point in the aggregated interest rate across all 
deposit types over this period. At the same time, at around 50 %, the volume share of 
deposits of the private non-financial sector remained virtually as high as before 
because any volume shifts in banks' financing mix largely took place only between the 
various types of private non-financial sector deposits. All in all, more than half of the  
increase in the  during this period can be attributed to interest rate increases on FCI
these deposits and, consequently, to price effects. The increase in deposit interest rates 
was especially noticeable in the funding costs of the primary institutions of network 
systems, where funding is heavily dominated by deposits. In the first nine months of 
2023, the  for these institutions quadrupled (see theFCI supplementary information on 
). The price of the evolution of banks' funding costs  under different financing strategies
deposits of non-residents also rose markedly in response to the sustained increase in 
the twelve-month  However, their contribution to the increase in the  was . EURIBOR FCI
much smaller than the contribution by the deposits of the private non-financial sector 
due to their lesser importance as a source of funding. 
The remaining components of the FCI made a negligible contribution to its overall 
development in 2023. The main reason for this is that – unlike customer deposit-
s – the majority of the price increases in the remaining components of the FCI had 
already occurred in 2022.  Following the marked increase in yields for securitised liabil-
ities in 2022, 2023 saw yields rise only slightly up to the end of October. The decline in 
inflation rates in the euro area during the course of 2023, and the accompanying 
mounting expectations among market participants that interest rates would be cut are 
likely to have been the main reasons for the modest rise in yields.
Funding costs also rose significantly in the euro area as monetary policy was tight-
ened.  The funding sources that contributed significantly to the increase in costs were  11) 
11 The rise in the heterogeneity of interest rates on overnight deposits across all banks and the fairly substantial 
interest rate hikes by individual banks indicate that competition for deposits intensified (see Deutsche Bundes-
bank (2023a)).

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 73the same as those in Germany. In addition, euro area banks operating in the deposit 
business with the private non-financial sector likewise only passed on the increase in 
key interest rates with a significant time lag.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 74Supplementary information
The evolution of banks’ funding costs under different 
financing strategies
The German banking system is dominated by two types of financing strategy: tradi-
tional deposit-based funding (retail funding) and mixed financing consisting of a 
combination of customer deposits and capital market funding (retail and wholesale 
funding).  The first of these is principally employed by the primary institutions of the 
network systems, i.e. savings banks and credit cooperatives. Their main source of 
funding is the traditional avenue of customer deposits from households and firms. The 
other banks in the German banking system also source funding from institutional 
depositors and the capital market. These include primarily the private commercial 
banks looked at in this article (big banks and regional banks) and the central institu-
tions of the network systems.
Banks’ pricing power varies across the different funding sources: does this manifest 
in differences in the way the FCI evolves depending on the financing strategy 
employed?  According to the literature, competition in the banking sector is imperfect. 
In Germany, this is probably because many banks are firmly anchored in a specific 
region and this breeds high customer loyalty. Linked to this is the degree of interest 
rate elasticity applying to demand for banking products, in other words whether even 
small interest rate differences are enough to prompt customers to shift their financial 
resources into alternative investments or not.  As far as financing through deposits of 
households and non-financial corporations is concerned, banks do, therefore, wield a 
certain amount of pricing power. In 2022‑23 this came to the fore in banks’ hesitant 
approach to adjusting the interest rates on households’ and non-financial corporations’ 
deposits to the higher interest rate environment. By contrast, when it comes to financ-
ing via the money and capital markets, banks tend to act more as price takers. As 
described in the main text, yields for market-based forms of financing tracked 
monetary policy tightening with little time lag. Based on these differences and the  1) 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a).

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 75different financing strategies, the question arises as to the extent to which the funding 
costs of savings banks and credit cooperatives have differed from those of other banks 
in the time since 2022. 
The primary institutions of the network systems (i.e. savings banks and credit 
cooperatives) draw most of their funding from deposits of the private non-financial 
sector (see Chart 2.7).  These banks are chiefly in the business of lending to non-finan-
cial corporations and households, with deposits by those actors making up the majority 
of the other side of their bank balance sheet. At the end of 2021, shortly before 
monetary policy began to be tightened, deposits from the euro area private non-finan-
cial sector accounted for just under 88 % of the funding mix considered in the  FCI
metric at savings banks and credit cooperatives. Deposits from non-residents and other 
financial institutions amounted to less than 3 %. The share of market-based financing 
via securitised liabilities was only slightly over 1 % since, in both network systems, 
issuance is largely the preserve of the central institutions. 
 2) 
2 The central institutions (Landesbanken and  Bank in its role as the central institution of the credit coopera-DZ
tives) are counted as belonging to the category of other banks in this analysis: they make heavy use of market-
based financing instruments as well, not least in their function as central institutions of their respective 
network. 

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 76By contrast, the other banks in Germany, i.e. commercial banks and the central insti-
tutions (of the savings bank and credit cooperative network systems), rely on a 
broader funding mix.  Financial market innovation, financial integration and the wave 
of deregulation in the 1990s opened up market-based business areas and forms of 
financing, which were mainly tapped by large and multinational banks.  A hallmark of 
this is the substantial role played by bank debt securities in the funding of commercial 
banks and central institutions; these made up more than 23 % of the funding mix at the 
end of 2021. Market-based financing instruments (securitised liabilities) also include 
short-term debt securities in the money market, which accounted for slightly more than 
2 % of the combined commercial bank and central institutions’ funding mix at the end 
of 2021. These institutions therefore had a significantly higher proportion of all market-
based financing in their funding mix than the savings banks and credit cooperatives, at 
just under 26 %. Deposits from euro area households and non-financial corporations 
made up 32 % of the funding mix, playing a much smaller role than for the savings 
banks and credit cooperatives. That said, the other banks also drew on funding from 
deposits of non-residents (24 %) and deposits of other financial corporations of the 
euro area (8 %) to a greater extent. 
 3) 
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2015).

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 77From the beginning of 2022, average yields on securitised liabilities rose at all 
banks. For commercial banks and central institutions this form of financing is 
systematically more expensive than for savings banks and credit cooperatives (see 
Chart 2.8 ).  Overall, yields on securitised liabilities tracked monetary policy tightening 
with little delay at all banks. Since the end of 2023, average yields at German banks 
have ranged between 3 % and just over 4 %. For the savings banks and credit coopera-
tives, funding via securitised liabilities is generally somewhat cheaper. One reason for 
this is likely to be the existence of their own institutional protection schemes. These are 
designed to aid member institutions that are experiencing economic distress by 
safeguarding them from insolvency and liquidation. 
The average interest rate applied to deposits of households and non-financial corpo-
rations rose more strongly at commercial banks and central institutions than at 
savings banks and credit cooperatives; it also went up earlier.  Chart 2.8 shows that 
interest rates on private non-financial sector deposits were still close to zero at both 
types of institution until mid-2022.  Commercial banks and central institutions began 
raising their deposit rates in the second half of 2022. To compete with other banks, 
they may have sought to retain or attract deposits from interest-sensitive customers by 
offering higher interest rates. One incentive to do so was that this source of financing 
still remained cheaper for them overall than funding through securitised liabilities. 
However, when it comes to competition for deposits and to pricing power, savings 
banks and credit cooperatives are likely to have benefited from their pronounced 
regional ties and high customer loyalty. As a result, they were much slower to raise 
interest rates than the other banks and increased them less overall. This meant that in 
2023 funding via deposits from households and non-financial corporations was up to 1 
percentage point cheaper for savings banks and credit cooperatives than for the other 
banks. The interest rate spread narrowed of late, to around 70 basis points. 
Different financing structures and the fact that prices for market and deposit-based 
funding sources went up at different times combined to make funding costs diverge 
depending on financing strategy as early as 2022.  When the negative interest rate 
policy period came to a close at the end of 2021, funding costs for both types of institu-
tion were near zero. However, they started to diverge as soon as monetary policy tight- 4) 
 5) 
4 Yields on securitised liabilities are calculated using data from the Centralised Securities Database  since ( ) CSDB
the capital market statistics do not publish yields broken down by the categories of bank examined here. 
5 Deposit rates responded to monetary policy tightening later than yields on market-based instruments. This 
pattern is likely to stem from the asymmetrical transmission of monetary policy stimuli to deposit rates. 
Deposit rates respond more strongly when policy rates are falling, and more weakly when policy rates are on 
the rise (see Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a)).

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 78ening got under way. While savings banks and credit cooperatives’ funding costs 
increased only marginally to 0.20 % over the course of the year, funding costs at other 
banks climbed significantly to 1.33 % (see Chart 2.9). Funding via securitised liabilities 
was the biggest contributor to that increase, mainly due to the larger role that this 
avenue of funding plays for commercial banks and central institutions. However, 
deposits of other financial corporations of the euro area (which are assumed to be 
remunerated at the 12-month  in the ) also grew more expensive up to the EURIBOR FCI
end of 2022. By contrast, the slightness of the increase in funding costs at savings 
banks and credit cooperatives stems from the fact that their funding mix is dominated 
by private non-financial sector deposits and banks barely raised interest rates on those 
in 2022. 
Between the beginning of 2023 and the end of the tightening cycle in 2023, the 
funding costs of both types of institution went up chiefly because the costs for 
deposits from households and non-financial corporations increased; however, 
higher costs for deposits by non-residents at commercial banks and central institu-
tions drove a further divergence in funding costs.  The increase in funding costs over 
the course of 2023 for both types of institution is primarily attributable to the signifi-
cant rise in interest rates on deposits from households and non-financial corporations. 
This resulted in funding costs at savings banks and credit cooperatives hitting 0.86 % in 
October 2023. Deposits by households and non-financial corporations accounted for a 
smaller share of the funding mix at commercial banks and central institutions than was 


Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 79the case for savings banks and credit cooperatives. That said, with commercial banks 
and central institutions raising their interest rates on such deposits more strongly than 
savings banks and credit cooperatives did, this financing component pushed up their 
costs significantly, too. On top of that, they draw a greater proportion of their funding 
from deposits by non-residents (which are assumed to be remunerated at the interest 
rate on overnight deposits of euro area non-financial corporations for the purposes of 
the ) than savings banks and credit cooperatives. The increased cost of those fuelled FCI
the increase in funding costs for commercial banks and central institutions. At the end 
of October 2023, their funding costs amounted to 2.41 %. Ultimately, the difference 
between the funding costs of the two types of institution increased from 1.13 percent-
age points at the end of 2022 to just under 1.55 percentage points.
Since October 2023, funding costs at commercial banks and central institutions have 
fallen. By contrast, savings banks and credit cooperatives’ funding costs have contin-
ued to rise, with the gap between the funding costs of both types of institution 
narrowing as a result.  The smaller difference was driven by a decrease in medium to 
long-term yields on securitised liabilities. After the last rise in key interest rates in 
September 2023, yields from October 2023 onwards anticipated financial market partici-
pants’ expectations of interest rate cuts. As a result, the funding costs of commercial 
banks and central institutions, who rely to a greater extent than savings banks and 
credit cooperatives on securitised liabilities for funding, fell to 2.01 % at last count. 
Meanwhile, savings banks and credit cooperatives carried on slowly but steadily raising 
the interest rates they paid to private non-financial sector depositors. Competition for 
deposits likely intensified the longer that monetary policy tightening lasted, placing 
those banks, too, under increasing pressure to adjust their deposit rates. Since 
October 2023, savings banks and credit cooperatives’ funding costs have risen to 0.95 % 
at last count. The gap between the funding costs associated with the two strategies 
thus stood at 1.06 percentage points.
Another major difference concerns the volatility of the funding costs of the two insti-
tution types, which is higher for commercial banks and central institutions than for 
savings banks and credit cooperatives due to the former’s more market-based 
approach to financing.  Chart 2.10 shows the long-term evolution of the financing cost 
indicators for both types of institution. Comparing the  reveals that the funding FCIs
costs of commercial banks and central institutions are subject to greater fluctuations. 
This is because market-based funding figures more prominently in their funding mix, 
which means that volatility in the money and capital markets is more strongly reflected 
in the  of commercial banks and central institutions. Conversely, volatility in the FCI
money and capital markets cannot impact the  of savings banks and credit coopera-FCI

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 80tives to the same extent, as they obtain more of their funding from deposits. Accord-
ingly, savings banks and credit cooperatives can reap more of the benefits of the 
pricing power that banks (regardless of institution type) exercise when setting prices 
for deposits of households and non-financial corporations. This pricing power allows 
banks to make relatively steady adjustments to their deposit rates. As a result, the  FCI
of savings banks and credit cooperatives, with their highly deposit-based financing 
structure, is rendered less volatile. However, the savings banks and credit cooperatives 
also benefit in another way, as the adjustments to their deposit rates do not necessarily 
have to track the movements of market interest rates one-to-one. In this sense, the 
high proportion of deposits in their financing structure effectively shields their capital 
from the impact of interest rate risk.  
 
 6) 
6 See Drechsler et al. (2021).

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 814 Comparison with developments in the 2005 to 2008 
period of monetary policy tightening
For monetary policy, the question is whether banks' funding costs in autumn 2023 
were at a level that was appropriate, given the intended restrictive effect of 
monetary policy.  This is because the level of banks’ funding costs influences the 
general funding costs for the private non-financial sector via transmission to lending 
rates, and therefore ultimately also inflation ( ). Indications as to whether see Chart 2.1
the level of funding costs, as measured by key interest rate hikes, was exceptionally 
high can be obtained, for example, by comparing it with the development of funding 
costs during the last period of significant monetary policy tightening between 2005 and 
2008 ( ). see Chart 2.11 12) 
12 Apart from the period of tightening in 2022‑23, there have been two additional periods of tightening since 
the single currency was introduced, both of which saw key interest rates at a comparable level when the series 
of interest rate hikes came to an end. The first period began in November 1999 and ended in 2001. However, a 
comparison with this period of tightening is not possible because the  time series does not begin until 2003. FCI
The second period began in December 2005 and ended in July 2008. 

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 82


Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 83The FCI rose significantly between 2005 and 2008. In addition to monetary policy 
tightening, the global financial crisis also had an impact on the FCI as of 2008.  The 
reason for the tighter monetary policy in 2005 was the same as in 2022: excessive infla-
tion. However, because there was a much smaller deviation from the price stability 
objective than in 2022, the tightening of monetary policy was not as rapid or as 
pronounced as in 2022‑23. In the period between December 2005 and September 2008, 
the  Governing Council increased key interest rates by 225 basis points in a series ECB
of nine steps. The onset of the financial crisis also coincided with a considerable 
increase in interest rates and yields, partly on account of elevated risk spreads. The FCI
also increased significantly during this period. In September 2008, the  reached FCI
what remains its highest ever level of 3.85 %. It had stood at 2.06 % before beginning to 
rise in September 2005. This means that the 179 basis point increase in the  in the FCI
2005 to 2008 period was similarly significant as the 196 basis point increase in 2022‑23.
 However, it should be noted that the increase in 2005 to 2008 was spread over a 
period that was more than twice as long as the recent one. 
A comparison with the peak reached by the FCI in the first period of tightening 
shows that funding costs did not reach exceptionally high levels in autumn 2023 
despite the sharp increase in key interest rates in 2022‑23.  On the contrary, 
compared to the key interest rate level, they even appear to be fairly low. The main 
refinancing rate, the relevant rate for monetary policy at the time, stood at 4.25 % in 
September 2008, which is at a similarly high level (4 %) to the rate for the deposit facil-
ity, currently the relevant rate for monetary policy, in autumn 2023. At the same time, 
however, at 190 basis points, banks’ funding costs in October 2023 were significantly 
lower than in September 2008. This was partly due to the fact that the prices of the key 
components of the  (deposits of private non-financial sector in the euro area, securi-FCI
tised liabilities, deposits of non-residents) in October 2023 were lower than when the 
financial crisis began in September 2008. Furthermore, the banking system had a differ-
ent financing structure in 2008 ( ). This structure featured a relatively high see Table 2.2
weighting of comparatively expensive funding sources. For instance, the volume share 
of securitised liabilities in the period leading up to the financial crisis was more than 
one and a half times higher than in previous years. Also, the comparatively costly  13) 
13 The  also rose in 2011 on the back of interest rate increases. However, these rate hikes occurred only FCI
briefly, over a period of four months, and at 50 basis points, the increases themselves were modest. The 
increase in the  was similarly low.FCI

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 84deposits of other financial institutions used to play a larger role at that time. By 
contrast, the relatively low-cost deposits of households and non-financial corporations 
in the euro area played a significantly smaller role in the financing mix.  
 
 
ItemInterest rates/yields (% p.a.) Volume share of FCI (%)
 
Sep. 2008 
Oct. 2023Spread
(percent-
age points) 
Sep. 2008 
Oct. 2023Spread
(percent-
age points)
             
Deposits of euro area 
households and non-
financial corporations3.10 1.27 - 1.83 31.9 50.1 18.2
Deposits of other 
financial corporations 
of the euro area5.38 4.16 - 1.22 13.4 8.0 - 5.4
Deposits of central, 
state and local govern-
ment of the euro area2.05 0.56 - 1.48 2.8 4.2 1.4
Securitised liabilities 4.86 3.55 - 1.31 29.0 19.1 - 9.9
Liabilities to Bundes-
bank – excl. TLTROs4.25 4.50 0.25 5.1 0.3 - 4.8
Liabilities to Bundes-
bank –  TLTROs3.25 4.00 0.75 0.0 1.3 1.3
Deposits of non-resi-
dents12.58 0.97 - 1.61 17.8 17.1 - 0.7
Sources: Securities issues statistics,  interest rate statistics, monthly balance sheet , EMMI ,ECB MFI
statistics and Bundesbank calculations.  Deposits of non-banks outside the euro area and 1
deposits of banks outside Germany.
However, funding costs in 2023 still appear to be low even after adjusting the inter-
est rates and yields in 2008 for the effects of the financial crisis.  Given the excep-
tional increase in the price components of the  as a result of the financial crisis, the FCI
values for 2008 are distorted and only partially suitable as a basis for comparison. 
Therefore, to obtain a more meaningful comparison, it makes sense to replace the 
2008 price components with values that were not impacted by the financial crisis. Given  14) 
Table 2.2: Development of interest rates/yields and of the volume shares of various 
funding sources of banks in Germany
14 The reasons for the change in banks' funding structure are discussed in the next part of the article.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 85the similarity in key interest rate levels in 2008 and 2023, it stands to reason to apply 
the interest rates and yields for October 2023 and combine them with the volumes 
from September 2008. The notional  for September 2008 calculated using this FCI
method is 2.41 % (and therefore higher than the  for October 2023, which stood at FCI
1.90 %). This means that current funding costs are lower even after “adjusting for” the 
high interest rates and high yields in 2008. The main reason for this is the shift in 
volumes in banks’ financing mix towards more affordable sources of funding in the 
period between 2008 and 2023.
The fact that the level of bank funding costs in 2023 is lower than in 2008 also had a 
positive impact on their earnings situation.  While average interest expense (as a 
ratio of total assets) rose significantly in the German banking system, much like the , FCI
during the most recent period of monetary policy tightening, interest expense (as a 
ratio of total assets) in the German banking system in 2023 was only just over half of 
what it was in 2008. And that was despite key interest rates being roughly equally high 
at both points in time. Even with the recent increase, banks’ relatively low funding costs 
have had a positive impact on their earnings situation. Net revenue from interest-based 
business, for example, was up 10 % on 2008. This positive effect also becomes obvious 
when the , which constitutes a weighted average of the prices on the liabilities and FCI
capital side of the bank balance sheet, is compared to a corresponding figure on the 
assets side: the aggregated lending rate  is the price banks charge for their most 
significant earnings component. The difference between this interest rate and the  FCI
remained stable between 2003 and 2022, consistently ranging between 2 % and 3 % (
. Since the start of 2023, this difference has exceeded 3 percentage see Chart 2.12)
points for the first time. This is because the  rose to a much lesser extent than the FCI
aggregated lending rate. The increase in this difference also reflects the fact that the FCI
is currently relatively low against the backdrop of the current interest rate level. 15) 
 16) 
15 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024). In principle, changes in banks’ funding costs only have an impact on inter-
est expense following a certain delay because of what can sometimes be lengthy interest rate fixation periods. 
The interest expense is recognised in the banks' income statements and calculated on the basis of outstand-
ing volumes and interest rates. In particular, rapid price changes in new business, such as the decline in inter-
est rates during the financial crisis and the rise in interest rates in 2022‑23, have a direct impact on the , while FCI
the income statement is initially only affected to a limited extent since it focuses on the bank's overall 
business, and not solely on new business.
16 Calculated analogously to the  as the average of the aggregated new business interest rates for loans to FCI
non-financial corporations, consumer credit to households and housing loans to households, weighted by 
outstanding volumes.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 86Similarly, banks' funding costs in the euro area, as measured by the level of key 
interest rates, were not exceptionally high in autumn 2023.  At the end of 
October 2023, they reached 1.97 %, their highest level in more than 11 and a half years.  
This was similar to the level in April 2009 (starting point of the time series for the euro 
area).  However, key interest rates in autumn 2023 were significantly higher than 
they had been back then because in April 2009, the majority of the key interest rate 
cuts had already been implemented. The fact that, measured in terms of key interest 
rate levels, funding costs were not higher in 2023 is due largely to the fact that – as in 
Germany – the share of the funding mix attributable to deposits of the private non-fi-
nancial sector was substantially higher in autumn 2023. In addition, these were 
remunerated at very low interest rates. At the same time, as was also the case for 
banks in Germany, the share of the now more expensive funding via securitised liabili-
ties was smaller in previous years than it was at that time. 
The weaker increase in the FCI in 2022‑23 as compared to 2008 can be explained by 
structural changes.  The financial crisis, coupled with the previous monetary policy 
 17) 
17 The Centralised Securities Database  time series used in the pricing of the securitised liabilities of euro ( ) CSDB
area banks does not start until April 2009.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 87tightening, was largely responsible for the  rising to such a high level in 2008. Both FCI
factors pushed the  up, especially on the back of short-term interest rate and yield FCI
increases. But why did the  in 2023 end up so far below the level in 2008, especially FCI
since the extent and pace of monetary policy tightening in 2022‑23 were unprece-
dented in historical terms? While the financial crisis intensified the rise in the  in FCI
2008, there were a number of factors in 2022‑23 that had a structurally dampening 
effect on the increase in the . In the next part of this article, the effects of the finan-FCI
cial crisis, monetary policy and other factors on the difference in the level of the  in FCI
2008 and 2023 are examined in more detail. It not only explains the reasons for 
changes in prices, but also why the structure of banks’ financing mix has changed.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 885 The  in 2008 and 2023: structural differences and FCI
their causes
In addition to standard monetary policy – that is, adjustments to key interest rates, 
which have a short-term impact on the FCI – there are other factors that shape its 
development.  These factors may be short-term or long-term in nature and may either 
raise or dampen the level of the . The global financial crisis had an impact on theFCI FCI
over a relatively short period of time, but this impact stemming from increased risk 
premia was highly significant. By contrast, non-standard monetary policy measures had 
the effect of dampening the  over a fairly long period. On the volume side, other FCI
factors of a structural nature impacted the  level by affecting how funding was FCI
composed, especially the shares of deposits and securitised liabilities in the financing 
mix. These volume-based factors had the effect of almost exclusively dampening costs 
in the  in the period observed here ( ). FCI see Chart 2.11
The global financial crisis was the main factor that drove funding costs to a record 
high in 2008.  Mistrust among financial market participants increased dramatically after 
the subprime crisis spilled over into the money market in the summer of 2007, and the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. Consequently, the risk premia on 
market-based sources of funding rose sharply, and money and capital market financing 
became significantly more expensive. A financial crisis ensued. This contrasts with a 
broadly stable financial system in 2022‑23. Although there were increased risks to finan-
cial stability, especially in 2022,  this was caused by higher uncertainty in the markets 
stemming from geopolitical tensions, in particular the war in Ukraine, as well as rising 
energy prices and persistent supply chain issues. In addition, rising inflation rates and 
subsequent interest rate hikes by the Eurosystem pushed up funding costs for enter-
prises and households, thereby contributing to tighter financial conditions. In spite of 
these challenges, supported by banks’ robust capital and liquidity buffers, the financial 
system in the euro area proved resilient overall. 18) 
 19) 
18 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022) and European Central Bank (2022).
19 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b) and European Central Bank (2023).

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 89A further reason why the FCI was relatively high in the period prior to the financial 
crisis is that the yield curve at that time was still sloping upwards, whereas it had 
already inverted again in 2023  (see Chart 2.13).  In 2008, the market was not expect-
ing the sudden interest rate cuts that were soon necessitated by the financial crisis. 
This explains why long-term interest rates were higher than short-term interest rates. 
By contrast, in 2023, following extensive monetary policy tightening measures, the 
market quickly began to expect interest rates to be cut, which meant that long-term 
interest rates had already begun to decline again at the end of 2023. This is because 
the level that key interest rates had reached seemed comparatively high, as the period 
of low interest rates was still prominent in people’s minds. This was due to the exten-
sive monetary policy measures implemented in the previous decade.
The most recent increase in the FCI occurred after a sustained period of negative 
interest rates, which started from a historically low level.  In the aftermath of the 
financial crisis, there was a long-term decline in the general level of  interest rates.  
Faced with the financial crisis and the European sovereign debt crisis, the  Govern-ECB
ing Council cut key interest rates to unprecedented levels. Low rates of inflation in the 
years that followed prompted the  Governing Council to adopt further monetary ECB
policy measures. Thus, the interest rate on the deposit facility was lowered into 
negative territory in June 2014. Short-term market interest rates subsequently also 
dropped to negative levels. In addition, the  Governing Council adopted further ECB
non-standard measures, such as the  with the aim of flattening the yield curve at ,APP


Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 90the long end, too. The  Governing Council also implemented measures to directly ECB
reduce banks’ funding costs. These included  I,  II and  III. These TLTRO TLTRO TLTRO
measures led to the  declining to one unprecedented low after another amid a FCI
general decline in interest rates and yields. It fell to its lowest level to date in 
August 2021. This means that its starting level at the end of 2021 was also significantly 
lower than it was when monetary policy tightening began in 2005. 
The lower general level of interest rates was reflected in all components of the FCI; 
however, interest rates on the deposits of other financial corporations and the 
yields on securitised liabilities saw a particularly sharp decline.  That said, interest 
rates on deposits of households and non-financial corporations in the euro area were 
also noticeably lower at the end of 2021 than they had been at the beginning of the 
financial crisis, hovering at historically low levels. The decline in the aggregated deposit 
interest rate was also intensified by volumes shifting towards overnight deposits, which 
are generally remunerated at lower interest rates than time deposits.
The FCI also fell between 2008 and 2023 as a result of volume shifts triggered by 
monetary policy and regulatory measures, and consisted of reallocations away from 
market-based funding towards deposit-based funding.  The supplementary informa-
 tion on t he impact of monetary policy and regulatory measures on banks’ funding mix
shows that the share of deposits in the financing mix increased between 2008 and 2023 
for a number of reasons. These include the non-standard monetary policy measures 
such as the  the  and the  The purchase of assets by the Eurosystem ,APP PEPP . TLTROs
and the increase in lending that the measures were intended to achieve coincided with 
a rise in deposits. This growth in deposits was further supported by the fact that, unlike 
alternative forms of investment, bank deposits rarely bore negative interest, which 
made them more attractive for depositors. From a regulatory point of view, the imple-
mentation of mandatory liquidity requirements (liquidity coverage ratio  and net ( )LCR
stable funding ratio ( )) provided incentives for banks to increase the share of NSFR
deposits of households and small and medium-sized enterprises in their financing mix. 
This is because these kinds of deposits are regarded as a fairly stable source of funding 
and are therefore accorded a privileged status when calculating liquidity ratios. The 
volume shifts in the financing mix towards deposits came mainly at the expense of 
securitised liabilities, which, up until the onset of the financial crisis, had a much 
greater weighting in the financing mix than they did in recent years. Their greater 
weight at the time was the result of a wave of liberalisation, the core elements of which 
strengthened the significance of capital market financing via bank bonds and institu-
tional investors, above all for large banks and Landesbanken. After the financial crisis, 
the non-standard monetary policy measures also served to make capital market financ-

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 91ing less attractive. More recently, however, regulatory requirements for loss-absorbing 
capacity and the scaling back of non-standard monetary policy measures have once 
again boosted the significance of securitised liabilities in the financing mix.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 92Supplementary information
The impact of monetary policy and regulatory measures 
on banks’ funding mix
Compared with 2008, the level of funding costs – as measured by the financing cost 
indicator ( )FCI of banks in Germany depicted in Chart 2.11 – was lower in 2023, also 
due to volume shifts in the funding mix of banks.  From 2008 to 2023, the funding 
mix underwent a significant shift – away from market-based financing and towards 
customer deposits (see the centre of Chart 2.11). This supplementary information 
addresses the extent to which monetary policy and regulatory measures have 
contributed to the change in the financing structure of banks.
Customer deposits held with banks grew markedly from 2008 onwards as a result of 
an increasingly expansionary monetary policy stance and its positive impact on 
lending (see Chart 2.14).  Expansionary monetary policy measures – such as the declin-
ing key interest rates in the euro area between 2008 and 2019 – generally affect the 
volume of deposits at banks: if the central bank reduces its policy rates, banks’ financ-
ing costs generally fall. Banks usually pass on reduced financing costs to their 
customers by lowering the interest rates on the loans they offer.  Demand for loans 
usually rises as lending rates fall, and lending increases.  As banks create new book 
money in the form of overnight deposits when lending, a rise in lending is accompa-
nied by growth in deposits.  Non-conventional monetary policy measures, such as  1) 
 2) 
 3) 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a).
2 For further information on transmission channels, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), pp. 27f. 
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2017).

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 93asset purchase programmes and longer-term refinancing operations, can also cause 
deposits to grow owing to an increase in banks’ lending. When assets are purchased by 
the central bank, this may result in an immediate increase in deposits, because if the 
central bank purchases a security from a domestic non-bank, payment of the purchase 
price is usually settled via the bank managing the seller’s account. The seller’s deposits 
increase as a result of the purchase amount being credited to the seller’s account.
The de facto zero lower bound for overnight deposits, especially for households, 
also contributed to the increase in deposits.  For instance, the Eurosystem’s policy rate 
cuts and asset purchase programmes led to a decline in the general level of interest 
rates and yields.  However, for households’ overnight deposits, which constitute the 
largest share of bank deposits in the private non-financial sector, the decline in interest 
rates effectively came to a halt at the zero lower bound. This was because banks were 
reluctant to pass on negative interest rates to their depositors, particularly in the case 
of households.  As a result, the yield spread narrowed between investments that 
 4) 
 5) 
 6) 
4 The reduction in investment opportunities caused by the purchase programmes is also likely to have 
contributed to the increase in deposits. With the Eurosystem purchasing large volumes of bonds from 2015 
onwards, this meant they were no longer available to households on the market. As a result, they had fewer 
alternative forms of investment available to them and this, too, is likely to have boosted the rise in deposits.
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), p. 28.
6 See Bittner et al. (2022), Heider et al. (2019), Kerbl and Sigmund (2016) and Deutsche Bundesbank (2020). 

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 94usually have higher returns and bank deposits. Accordingly, it became more attractive 
for households to hold their financial resources in overnight bank deposits. On top of 
this, households have repeatedly been exposed to high uncertainty since 2008. House-
holds’ already relatively high risk aversion is likely to have increased since price swings 
in capital markets picked up during the global financial crisis and the European sover-
eign debt crisis.  In addition, uncertainty about economic developments during the 
pandemic and after the outbreak of the Russian war of aggression against Ukraine 
grew. For these reasons, too, it became more attractive for households to park freed- 
up funds in liquid investments or forms of investment perceived to be low-risk, such as 
bank deposits. However, the de facto zero lower bound for deposits meant that  
these deposits, which had been comparatively favourable at other times, were now a 
relatively expensive source of financing for banks. As the period of negative interest 
rates grew longer, some banks therefore tried to limit inflows of deposits by applying 
negative interest rates to deposits above a certain amount, for example.
Changes to liquidity regulations are also likely to have contributed to deposit 
growth in the funding mix of banks.  The financial crisis showed that short-term large-
volume deposits by institutional investors  may be withdrawn quickly by depositors in 
periods of heightened uncertainty. This can lead to liquidity shortages among banks. As 
a result, supervisors and regulators set themselves the goal of making banks’ funding 
less vulnerable to unexpected liquidity outflows and ensuring banks’ solvency at all 
times. Minimum requirements were therefore introduced as part of liquidity regulation. 
One of these requirements involved a liquidity buffer that banks are required to hold 
for periods of stress (liquidity coverage ratio,  whilst another concerned the ratio ),LCR
between the maturity structures of lending and deposit business (net stable funding 
ratio,  The deposits of households and small and medium-sized enterprises are ). NSFR
privileged when calculating the  and the  This is because, unlike deposits from LCR . NSFR
larger enterprises, individual deposits are often amounts that are fully covered by the 
statutory deposit insurance scheme. They are therefore considered to be a relatively  7) 
 8) 
 9)  10) 
 11) 
 12) 7 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2015b), pp. 26‑31.
8 The share of currency and deposits in households' total financial assets rose in the wake of the financial crisis 
and stood almost continuously above 50 % between September 2014 and June 2021. Households built up 
currency and deposits mainly at the expense of any debt securities they held. 
9 Government bonds, which households had traditionally invested in frequently in the past, were then 
purchased and held on a larger scale by the Eurosystem.
10 Uncertainty also led non-financial corporations to step up their overnight deposits. However, their share in 
the volume of deposits in the private non-financial sector rose from 11 % to 16 % between September 2008 
and October 2023, whereas households’ share of overnight deposits increased from 26 % to 49 % over the 
same period.
11 These deposits are generally not covered by the deposit insurance scheme.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 95stable source of funding.  Taken by itself, this provides incentives for banks to 
acquire or hold such deposits. 
The volume shifts in the funding mix towards deposits were mainly at the expense 
of securitised liabilities: these had had a significantly greater weight in the funding 
mix in the years up to the outbreak of the financial crisis than more recently.  The 
blue bars in Chart 2.15 show that the share of bank debt securities stood at around 
30 % between 2004 and 2008. This high level was the outcome of a wave of liberalisa-
tion, the core elements of which were the financial market promotion legislation of the 
1990s. The Third Financial Market Promotion Act, in particular, paved the way for forms 
of financing such as bank debt securities, created a broader investor base and thereby 
strengthened the importance of capital market financing, especially for big banks and 
Landesbanken.  As the chart shows, the outstanding volume of bank debt securities 
and their share in the funding mix are currently significantly lower than they were back 
then. 
 12) 
 13) 
12 Banks in the European Union have been required to comply with the  as a binding minimum level since LCR
1 October 2015. The  was introduced via amending Regulation 2019/876 (  II). It has been binding with a NSFR CRR
compliance level of 100 % since 28 June 2021.
13 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2015a), pp. 38ff.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 96The decline in the use of debt securities as a financing instrument was initially due 
to the deteriorating environment for issuing new instruments in the capital market 
following the financial crisis; later on, favourable funding opportunities via the 
central bank encouraged banks to move away from capital market financing.  During 
the global financial crisis, investors were more focused on counterparty and liquidity 
risk than before. The increased risk perception resulted in higher risk premia and a 
deterioration in sales opportunities for unsecured bank bonds. The sharp rise in 
investors’ risk appetite between the period of liberalisation and the financial crisis was 
also corrected. To ensure banks’ access to funding despite a dysfunctional interbank 
market, in October 2008, the implementation of monetary policy switched to fixed rate 
tenders with full allotment and the main refinancing rate was reduced from 3.25 % to 
0.25 % by May 2009. Compared with central bank financing, funding via the capital 
market became increasingly unattractive for banks.  This was reinforced from 2014 
onwards by the three series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations  ( ) TLTROs
with maturities of up to four years, partly replacing the issuance of bank debt securities.
 Studies also suggest that, in the long term, monetary policy purchase programmes 
(in particular the three covered bond purchase programmes) adversely affected trading 
in covered bank bonds and thus their attractiveness as a source of financing for banks.
By contrast, regulatory requirements to strengthen banks’ loss absorbing capacity 
and the discontinuance of special monetary policy programmes have recently 
reinforced the importance of securitised liabilities in the funding mix.  One of the 
responses to the financial crisis was to implement regulatory minimum requirements 
for loss-absorbing liabilities in order to bolster the credibility of a resolution regime. 
Following the requirements outlined in 2015‑16 and the adoption of the banking 
package in 2019,  the need for banks to return more strongly to financing through 
bank debt instruments became apparent. The fact that most of the third and final 
series of the Eurosystem’s  were repaid in 2023 and 2024 is also likely to have TLTROs 14) 
 15) 
 16) 
 17) 
 18) 14 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2015a) and European Central Bank (2018), box 7.
15 Fudulache and Götz (2023) find that  caused banks in the euro area to substitute market funding. TLTROs
16 See Weigerding (2023).
17 From the end of 2015 and the start of 2016, the requirements that could emerge from the  standards for TLAC
global systemically important banks and from  for European banks on an institution-specific basis were MREL
fleshed out (see Deutsche Bundesbank (2016)). As a result, banks signalled back in 2017 that they were again 
increasingly planning to issue uncovered/unsecured or even subordinated (i.e. non-preferred) bank debt 
securities. As the adoption of the banking package in 2019 grew closer, details on the eligibility of bank securi-
ties for inclusion in the loss-absorbing capacity were revised and subordination requirements were clarified 
(see Deutsche Bundesbank (2019)). 

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 97amplified this.  According to the  Funding Plans of 2021 and 2023, banks there-EBA
fore increasingly planned to carry out any refinancing that might become necessary 
using market-based financing instruments. The share of securitised liabilities in their 
funding mix has therefore risen again recently. However, the impact of the increase on
 has so far been small. For example, the  would only be slightly lower if it were FCI FCI
assumed that, all other things being equal, the volume of securitised liabilities had 
remained unchanged since 2022. 18) 
 19) 
18 See European Central Bank (2024).
19 The impact on the  would also be small if, instead of volume, the share of securitised liabilities in banks’ FCI
funding mix were kept constant.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 98The reasons presented demonstrate that both price factors and factors affecting 
the structure of financing contributed to the difference in the level of the FCI in 
2023 as compared to 2008.  Consequently, it is not surprising that the , measured in FCI
terms of the key interest rate level, is now significantly lower than in 2008. As a result of 
these wide-ranging structural changes, the  is not expected to fully return to the FCI
levels seen prior to the financial crisis. 

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 996 Assessment of current situation and conclusion
Banks’ funding costs have fallen only slightly so far from their peak in autumn 2023. 
The monetary policy measures to cut interest rates adopted since June 2024 have 
merely had a small impact on the . Although money market interest rates and yields FCI
on securitised liabilities have declined, the aggregated rate on deposits of the private 
non-financial sector in the euro area has changed little thus far. In a setting of declining 
key interest rates, banks are quicker to pass on rate cuts in their deposit business than 
they are to pass on key interest rate increases.  However, the effect of lowering inter-
est rates is being counteracted by the sustained volume shift towards time deposits, 
which are remunerated at higher interest rates. 
The increased share of deposits in the financing mix means that banks are able to 
exert a substantial influence on a larger portion of their funding costs.  This poten-
tially complicates any assessment of how monetary policy impulses are transmitted to 
banks’ funding costs and ultimately to lending rates. However, Bundesbank analyses 
show that the transmission of changes in market interest rates to deposit rates is 
currently functioning in the same way that historical correlations in the period up to 
autumn 2023 would suggest. 
In addition to deposits, financing in money and capital markets remains a key 
source of funding for banks, even if it is not currently as significant as it was in the 
period leading up to the financial crisis.  The financial crisis showed that prices in 
money and capital markets can change quickly and significantly in the event of disrup-
tions. For the most part, banks operate in these markets as rate takers, which means 
they exert little influence on prices. Nevertheless, price developments play an impor-
tant role for the  because financing via money and capital markets continues to FCI
make up a material share of banks’ financing mix. However, unlike prices, banks can, 
conversely, steer the volume of the debt securities that they issue comparatively well. 
The extent to which they are able or willing to make use of this source of financing 
depends on monetary policy, regulatory requirements and other structural factors. In  20) 
20 For the asymmetry in the transmission of interest rates, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), pp. 56 f.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 100recent years, banks have once again been raising more of their funding in the market. 
This development is likely to continue, given the final repayment in December 2024 of 
the funds taken up under  III and the scaling back of the monetary policy portfo- TLTRO
lio.
Developments in bank financing costs are of key importance for monetary policy 
because only a comprehensive picture can enable valid conclusions to be drawn 
about the transmission of monetary policy impulses.  The  is a useful tool in this FCI
regard because it provides valuable supplementary information in a concise way. This is 
because it also takes shifts in banks’ financing mix into account. These shifts can lead to 
a change in the cost of funding even if the prices of the individual sources of funding 
do not change.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 101List of references
Bank of England (2014), Bank funding costs: what are they, what determines them and 
why do they matter? Quarterly Bulletin, 2014  .Q4
Bittner, C., D. Bonfim, F. Heider, F. Saidi, G. Schepens and C. Soares (2022), The 
augmented bank balance-sheet channel of monetary policy, Deutsche Bundesbank 
Discussion Paper, No 22/2022.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024), The performance of German credit institutions in 2023, 
Monthly Report, September 2024.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), Developments in bank interest rates in Germany during 
the period of monetary policy tightening, Monthly Report, June 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), Financial Stability Review 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022), Financial Stability Review 2022.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020), Developments in the German banking system during the 
negative interest rate policy period, Monthly Report, October 2020.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), The European banking package – revised rules in  EU
banking regulation, Monthly Report, June 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), The role of banks, non-banks and the central bank in the 
money creation process, Monthly Report, April 2017.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Bank recovery and resolution – the new  and  TLAC MREL
minimum requirements, Monthly Report, July 2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2015a), Structural developments in the German banking sector, 
Monthly Report, April 2015.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2015b), German households’ saving and investment behaviour 
in light of the low-interest-rate environment, Monthly Report, October 2015.

Financing costs for banks in Germany in the monetary policy interest rate cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 102Drechsler, I., A. Savov and P. Schnabl (2021), Banking on Deposits: Maturity Transforma-
tion without Interest Rate Risk, Journal of Finance, Vol. LXXVI, No 3, pp. 1091‑1143.
European Central Bank (2024), The use of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy instru-
ments and its monetary policy implementation framework in 2022 and 2023, 
Occasional Paper Series, No 355.
European Central Bank (2023), Financial Stability Review, November 2023.
European Central Bank (2022), Financial Stability Review, November 2022.
European Central Bank (2021), Monetary policy decisions, press release, 16 Decem-
ber 2021.
European Central Bank (2018), Financial Stability Review, November 2018.
Fudulache, A.-E. and M. R. Goetz (2023), Long-term deposit funding and demand for 
central bank funds: Evidence from targeted longer-term refinancing operations, 
Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper, No 12/2023.
Heider, F., F. Saidi and G. Schepens (2019), Life below Zero: Bank Lending under 
Negative Policy Rates, The Review of Financial Studies, 32 (10), pp. 3728‑3761.
Illes, A., M. Lombardi and P. Mizen (2015), Why did bank lending rates diverge from 
policy rates after the financial crises?,  Working Paper No 486.BIS
Kerbl S. and M. Sigmund (2016), From low to negative rates: an asymmetric dilemma, 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Financial Stability Report 32, pp. 120‑135.
Weigerding, M. (2023), Long-term liquidity effects of large-scale asset purchase 
programs: Evidence from the euro covered bond market, International Review of 
Economics and Finance, Vol. 87, pp. 244‑264.

103German enterprises’ 
profitability and 
financing in 2023 during 
the period of monetary 
policy tightening

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 104Although the German economy was virtually stagnant, the profitability of non-financial 
corporations improved in 2023, with their pre-tax profit margin rising significantly to 5.3 % 
from 4.2 % in the previous year. This was mainly due to lower materials costs: in terms of 
volume, the fall in the prices for energy and intermediate inputs was greater than the rise in 
personnel expenses and interest costs. This was particularly true for energy companies, 
which benefited considerably from lower energy prices. On the income side, revenues rose 
only slightly in an environment of continued high inflation. Interest income and income from 
other long-term equity investments were the major contributors to profit margins, with the 
latter factor playing a particularly important role in transport equipment. Yet even without 
the one-off developments in the energy company and transport equipment sectors, the profit 
margin of non-financial enterprises remained high. With regard to their profitability, 
German enterprises seem to have coped well with the stagnation of economic activity in 
2023. 
Starting from a low level, corporate insolvencies rose sharply in 2023, mainly owing to the 
poor economic situation, catch-up and normalisation effects following the pandemic, and 
higher financing costs. Contact-intensive areas such as retail and the hotel and restaurant 
sector were particularly hard hit, as were sectors that tend to be more sensitive to interest 
rates, such as construction and real estate. The  sector and business-related services, ICT
which experienced exceptionally high demand during the pandemic, also contributed signifi-
cantly to the increase. 
In 2023, monetary policy tightening also pushed up the average interest rate on bank loans 
to non-financial corporations in Germany. Estimates using firm-level data from the Bundes-
bank show that contractionary monetary policy shocks already tend to dampen investment 
by non-financial corporations in Germany in the same year. The strongest impact is 
estimated to occur after about two years. Consistent with this, the interest rate reversal had 
left only moderate traces in enterprises’ financial statements by the end of 2023. 
Despite the weak state of the economy, enterprises remained well positioned in 2023 in 
terms of their liquidity and stability. The equity ratio rose again in 2023, having fallen over 
the previous three years, but remains below its pre-pandemic level. Enterprises’ liquidity 
positions also remained favourable in 2023 and liquidity needs trended lower. The good 
profitability, solvency and liquidity position of enterprises in the non-financial corporate 
sector as a whole largely reflects developments across sectors.
The ongoing economic weakness is likely to continue to weigh on enterprises’ business activ-
ity and thus their sales growth in 2024. At the same time, the pressure on costs is expected to 

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 105remain high due to persistently high financing and energy costs, as well as the sharp rise in 
wages. Cost factors are placing a particular strain on the competitive position of the indus-
trial sector. On balance, this is likely to have a negative impact on profitability in some parts 
of the corporate sector in 2024. 

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 1061 Underlying trends
The German economy stagnated in 2023, while the tightening of monetary policy 
increased financing costs.  Real  declined by a seasonally-adjusted 0.1 % compared GDP
to the previous year, due partly to the structural growth problems of the German 
economy and partly to weak domestic and foreign demand. Production remained well 
below medium-term aggregate production capacities. The rise in interest rates and 
high construction costs dampened investment demand. Gross fixed capital formation, 
especially in construction, fell. Private consumption also weakened after being a major 
driver of the economy in the two previous years. High inflation per se depressed real 
incomes and consumers’ willingness to spend. Exports virtually stagnated in the face of 
weak global demand and a less favourable competitive environment, due in part to the 
appreciation of the euro. On the production side, the significant decline in the prices of 
imported intermediate inputs and commodities, especially in the energy sector, eased 
pressure on the cost structure in industry. Nevertheless, input prices remained above 
2021 levels. The stable labour market helped employees to largely achieve their 
demands for real wage adjustments, increasing enterprises’ personnel expenses. On 
the whole, therefore, the business environment remained difficult despite the fall in 
energy prices compared to the previous year.
Based on the annual financial statements available to date, pre-tax profit margins 
rose in 2023, from 4.2 % in the previous year to 5.3 %.  This was only just below the 
record figure from 2007. This positive development was due both to cost-side relief and 
to favourable developments on the income side. Material costs fell significantly due to 
the decline in prices of intermediate inputs, especially of energy. Despite a slight 
increase in interest costs, total costs fell significantly because lower material costs more 
than offset the higher personnel expenses. On the income side, revenues increased  1) 
1 The analysis for 2023 is based on some 19,500 corporate annual financial statements, which were roughly 
extrapolated based on the evaluation of aggregate sales data from the business register.

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 107slightly. In view of the continuing strong increases in selling prices, the price-adjusted 
revenues of enterprises are likely to have fallen, however. Nevertheless, interest 
income and income from other long-term equity investments contributed to an 
improvement in the earnings of enterprises compared to the previous year. 
Developments in the automotive industry and amongst energy companies 
contributed to the increase in gross profit margins across the corporate sector.  In 
contrast to 2022 and most likely also 2024, car sales were comparatively brisk in 2023.
In addition, the automotive industry realised significant income from participating inter-
ests, mainly from abroad, possibly with the aim of smoothing fluctuations in profit in 
view of the annual financial statements. After recording some major losses in the previ-
ous year, energy companies reported their highest annual profits since records began 
in 1997, boosted by significantly lower material costs. The fact that sales declined less 
in comparison could indicate that price reductions on the purchasing side were not 
fully passed on to end customers. This would have significantly increased profit 
margins.  Without the contribution of these two sectors, the gross profit margin 
would have increased by only 0.2 percentage point in 2023.  But the gross profit 
margin in 2023 was high in a long-term comparison even without the contribution of 
these two sectors. With regard to their profitability, German enterprises seem to have 
coped well with the stagnation of economic activity in 2023. 2) 
 3) 
 4) 
2 According to the Federal Statistical Office, both domestic and foreign sales in the automotive industry rose by 
around 11 % in 2023 over the previous year.
3 In addition, income increased due to the reversal of provisions for anticipated losses from pending transac-
tions.
4 However, without these two sectors, it also fell less sharply in the previous year. In this calculation, the decline 
came to 0.5 instead of 0.9 percentage point and the gross profit margin to 5.3 % instead of 4.2 %.

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 1082 Development of corporate insolvencies
Corporate insolvencies rose sharply in 2023 year on year . The increase is due to the 
weak economic environment as well as to catch-up and normalisation effects in the 
wake of the pandemic. This applies in particular to the contact-intensive sectors of retail 
and the hotel and restaurant sector, which accounted for almost a third of the increase 
in corporate insolvencies in 2023. While economic activity in these sectors declined, in 
some cases significantly, during the coronavirus pandemic, corporate insolvencies in 
these industries fell sharply. The main factors in this were probably the suspension of 
the obligation to file for insolvency and extensive government support measures.  
Despite this development, the share of persistently unprofitable enterprises in 
Germany did not increase during the pandemic (see the supplementary information 
entitled “ ”). Furthermore, by Zombie firms in Germany during the 19 pandemic- COVID
2023, demand in sectors that had benefited from extremely strong demand during the 
pandemic is likely to have normalised. This is particularly true of information and 
communication services and business services, which together contributed slightly over 
one-fifth of the increase in corporate insolvencies in 2023. Moreover, the rise in corpo-
rate insolvencies can be partly attributed to the interest rate reversal in the summer of 
2022. Evidence for this can be seen in the sharp increase in insolvencies in interest rate-
sensitive segments such as construction, real estate and other real estate-related 
sectors. Together, they accounted for a little over a quarter of the increase in corporate 
insolvencies. The manufacturing sector, in contrast, contributed comparatively little. 5) 
5 See Bundesbank (2021a).

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 109


German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 110Supplementary information
Zombie firms in Germany during the - COVID 19 
pandemic
The phenomenon of zombie firms has once again come to the fore in view of weak 
productivity growth in Germany.  In the literature, zombie firms are defined as firms 
that remain in the market despite having been unprofitable for several years.  They 
can benefit from the fact that banks grant them particularly favourable lending condi-
tions in order to avoid realising losses from their business with them (something 
known as evergreening).  A sufficiently large number of unprofitable firms would 
impair aggregate productivity growth, as they tie economic resources – be it labour or 
capital input – inefficiently. The low interest rate environment during the years preced-
ing the pandemic had already fuelled concerns that undercapitalised lenders would 
continue to finance this type of firm. Earlier Bundesbank analyses did not suggest an 
elevated share of zombie firms in Germany.  During the 19 pandemic, German - COVID
enterprises were granted extensive government support measures. This includes loans 
in which the development bank  assumed a large Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau ( )KfW
part of the default risk. In addition, the obligation to file for insolvency was temporarily 
suspended. These measures were intended to support firms that had suffered large 
losses in turnover and earnings as a result of the pandemic and the measures taken to 
contain it and to prevent fundamentally profitable firms from exiting the market. 
However, previously unprofitable enterprises may also have benefited from the 
support measures.  1) 
 2) 
 3) 
1 The term zombie was first used to describe enterprises in the stagnating Japanese economy of the 1990s; see 
Caballero et al. (2008).
2 For an overview of the literature, see Acharya et al. (2022).
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2017, 2020) and Bittner et al. (2021).

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 111Developments in the share of persistently unprofitable firms in Germany can be 
estimated on the basis of the annual financial statements of non-financial corpora-
tions ( ) JANIS  as compiled by the Bundesbank.  In the  dataset, these firms JANIS
include – in line with the literature – any enterprises that have been unable to cover 
their interest expenses from their operating result for three consecutive years and are 
older than ten years.  In addition, the definition used here allows firms to use 
additional financial income (including from equity interests in other enterprises) to 
cover interest expenses.  This income is not insignificant for German enterprises. 
The results show that the percentage of zombie firms in Germany did not increase 
during the - COVID 19 pandemic.  In addition, their share of sales declined during this 
 4) 
 5) 
 6) 
 7) 4 See Becker et al. (2024).
5 See Andrews and Petroulakis (2017) as well as McGowan et al. (2018).
6 This definition differs from the usual  definition; see Andrews and Petroulakis (2017). This approach is OECD
consistent with a recent study that suggests that the results could be distorted if additional income, such as 
financial revenues, is not taken into account. In particular, this increases the likelihood of enterprises being 
wrongly classified as zombie firms; see De Jonghe et al. (2024).

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 112period.  In contrast to earlier periods of weakness, such as the recession in the early 
2000s or the economic and financial crisis of 2008‑09, when the share of persistently 
unprofitable enterprises in Germany increased, it tended to decline during the 
pandemic. The fact that this share has dropped since 2020 – despite the pandemic and 
energy crisis – could be partly attributable to the conditions of the 19 assistance - COVID
measures. Some of these were linked to firms’ profitability in the preceding years.
Further analyses show whether persistently unprofitable firms benefited from 
particularly favourable financing conditions during the pandemic.  This provides 
evidence of the extent to which these enterprises were kept alive by preferential treat-
ment by banks (evergreening thesis). This also makes it possible to assess whether they 
benefited excessively from the 19 assistance loans. To this end, financial charac-- COVID
teristics of enterprises from the AnaCredit datasets up to 2022 are linked to enterprises’ 
annual financial statements data.  This allows us to analyse whether enterprises that 
were classified as zombie firms in 2019 were better off in terms of financial characteris-
tics during the pandemic.
Between 2019 and 2022, German credit institutions estimated the probability of 
loan default ()PD for persistently unprofitable firms to be higher than for other firms 
and demanded an appropriate interest rate premium.  In the pre-crisis year of 2019, 
banks determined that zombie corporate borrowers were on average around 3 percent-
age points more likely to default on loans than other firms. This largely also applies to 
the pandemic period.  In other words, credit institutions were already aware of the 
risk of potential payment difficulties for these firms before – but also during – the 
pandemic.  The associated higher interest rate premia reflect this. Even before the   7) 
 8) 
 9) 
 10) 
 11) 
 12) 
7 According to international comparative studies, the share of zombie firms in Germany was very low between 
1997 and 2021; see Albuquerque and Iyer (2023). Earlier analyses by the Bundesbank confirm that the share of 
zombie firms in Germany has tended to decline since the beginning of the 2010s; see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2020).
8 For example,  express loans were subject to conditions relating to firms’ profitability in the years prior to KfW
the pandemic. The emergency aid for small enterprises and the self-employed as well as the bridging aid were 
conditional on pandemic-related losses in turnover.
9 The analytical credit datasets, or AnaCredit, contain monthly information on individual bank loan agreements 
with legal persons and a lending volume of more than €25,000.
10 To this end, the AnaCredit financial characteristics are regressed to a dummy variable, which indicates 
whether an enterprise is a zombie firm as per the definition in 2019. The estimated coefficients show the differ-
ence between the categories of enterprises before (2019) and during the pandemic (2020 to 2022). The 
estimates are carried out separately for the years 2019, 2020, 2021 and 2022 and take into account sector 
classification and enterprise size.
11 During the pandemic, zombie firms’  decreased slightly compared with other firms. However, these PD
changes cannot be clearly distinguished from one another statistically.
12 In line with this, further results show that zombie firms experienced credit defaults, non-performing loans 
and payment arrears more frequently in relative terms between 2019 and 2022.

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 113outbreak of the 19 crisis, these firms had to pay an interest rate premium of - COVID
around 30 basis points compared with other firms. The estimates suggest that this 
premium rose somewhat during the 19 crisis – although this increase is in the - COVID
range of statistical uncertainty. Overall, these results contradict the evergreening thesis 
and preferential treatment of zombie firms – including during the pandemic.
In addition, the probability of persistently unprofitable firms receiving a - COVID 19 
assistance loan was lower than for other firms.  This is the result of additional 
estimates which match up with previous findings that these firms did not benefit any 
more than other enterprises from more favourable financing conditions during the 
pandemic.  
The analysis does not provide a comprehensive assessment of support programmes 
during the pandemic.  First, it is based on only a small part of the support measures, 
namely the 19 assistance loans. By contrast, the expansion of short-time - COVID
working benefits and other extensive assistance to enterprises, such as direct transfers, 
say in the form of direct company subsidies for fixed costs, were not included in this 
analysis. Second, the share of zombie firms is only one of several criteria that should be 
used to assess the support measures.  
Looking at the results as a whole, there was no significant rise in persistently 
unprofitable firms in Germany during the pandemic.  On the contrary, credit institu-
tions appear to have been aware of the higher risk of lending to these corporate 
debtors – measured by  and the interest rate – before and during the pandemic. PD
These firms did not benefit excessively from the assistance loan programmes launched 
in the context of the pandemic either.  It is therefore unlikely that zombie firms play a 
prominent role in the German economy’s weak productivity growth which has been 
observed for some time now.  13) 
 14) 
 15) 
13  - COVID 19 loans were, on average, larger in volume and had more favourable interest rates than normal 
loans.
14 Moreover, the Bundesbank’s annual financial statements statistics are not a representative sample. Larger 
enterprises are overrepresented in the data, and sectoral coverage is uneven.
15 These results are largely in line with studies in France (see (2021)), Italy (see Pelosi et al. (2021)), the Cœuré
United States (see Favara et al. (2021)) and the European Union (see Bighelli et al. (2022)).

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 114In the first half of 2024, corporate insolvencies continued to rise sharply compared 
with the same period a year earlier.  Extrapolated to the year, corporate insolvencies 
are expected to exceed pre-pandemic levels again in 2024 for the first time. Higher 
financing costs as well as catch-up and normalisation effects in the wake of the 
pandemic are having an impact this year, too. The fact that the German economy has 
not yet regained momentum is probably playing a certain role in the continued sharp 
rise in insolvencies.

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 1153 The impact of monetary policy tightening on business 
investment and financing
The interest rate reversal in the euro area increased financing costs for German 
enterprises in 2023.  This trend increased the cost of external financing for enterprises 
and raised debt servicing costs for new liabilities. In principle, this limits the scope for 
investment. The impact this has ultimately depends on the debt structure and the 
ability of enterprises to service interest costs or switch to other sources of financing. In 
addition to the impact on cash flow, an interest rate hike tends to dampen corporate 
investment by reducing the profitability of investment projects and making alternative 
investments more attractive, while falling asset prices also lower the collateral base for 
loans.
Estimates using Bundesbank firm-level data can provide insights into how the inter-
est rate increases affected investment by German firms in the 2023 reporting year.  
The study is based on extensive firm-level data by the Bundesbank since the 1970s, 
making it possible to analyse the effects of interest rate cycles over several decades.  
The local projections method is used to estimate the impact of monetary policy shocks 
on the investment ratio. The results show that, in the past, contractionary monetary   
policy shocks significantly dampened investment by non-financial corporations in 
Germany. For example, in the past an unexpected interest rate increase of 100 basis 
points reduced the investment ratio of German enterprises by 0.6 percentage point 
within two years. The effect could generally be seen in the year of the interest rate 
change and then intensified in subsequent years, before gradually subsiding after four 
years.  6) 
 7) 
6 The data comprise over 160,000 observations from around 10,000 companies from 1973 to 2019 and are 
based on the Ustan and  datasets. See et al. (2020, 2022, 2024). JANIS Becker
7 In the first step, monetary policy shocks were identified using a Bayesian vector autoregressive model. See 
Kilian and (2017). In the second step, the estimate based on local projections takes into account both Lütkepohl
firm-specific and macroeconomic factors to determine the effect of unexpected interest rate changes on the 
firm-level indicators. The control variables include firm-specific characteristics such as the equity ratio and 
liquidity as well as macroeconomic variables such as the interbank interest rate and the output gap. See Jordà 
(2005) on the local projections method. See Alder et al. (2023) and Perez-Orive and Timmer (2023) for similar 
studies on France and the United States. The corporate investment ratio is defined here, as is common in the 
literature, as the change in tangible fixed assets (net investment) in relation to total assets in the previous year.

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 116According to a rough calculation based on the estimated results, the latest interest 
rate hikes totalling 400 basis points between July 2022 and the end of 2023 may 
have reduced the investment ratio in the corporate sector by up to 2.4 percentage 
points.  This assumes that these interest rate hikes were completely unexpect-
ed – which is unlikely to have been the case. Nevertheless, the estimates show that 
monetary policy tightening is likely to have a significant adverse effect on investment 
by the German corporate sector.
 8) 
8 Given an average investment ratio of around 12 % in the dataset this effect is quantitatively significant.

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 117The results show that interest rate increases had a greater impact on the invest-
ment ratio than interest rate cuts.  Looking at interest rate hikes separately from inter-
est rate cuts in the estimates, an unexpected interest rate increase of, say, 100 basis 
points reduced German firms' investment ratio by around 1.3 percentage points on 
average after one year,  while an interest rate cut of the same size only increased the 
investment ratio by 0.7 percentage point in the short term.  This asymmetrical effect 
is presumably due to the fact that in some cases, higher interest rates can have the 
same effect as tighter credit restrictions for enterprises with weaker finances. One 
indicator of an enterprise's financial situation could be its equity base. This is because, 
according to the estimates, companies with a low equity ratio react more strongly to 
monetary policy shocks, while financially sounder companies are more resilient.  
Additional analyses suggest that the asymmetrical effect has diminished over time, 
possibly because of the significant improvement in the capital base in the corporate 
sector over the last two decades. This may have reduced sensitivity to interest rate 
increases.
The interest rate reversal left only moderate traces in the annual financial state-
ments available up to the end of 2023.  Changes in interest rates are most likely to be 
reflected in companies’ interest expenses and income, as well as in their liabilities. 
Accordingly, interest expenses did increase. The imputed interest rate, which is a 
measure of enterprises’ actual financing costs, was only 3.6 %, placing it above the previ-
ous year’s rate, but still below the level before 2016, with the exception of a one-off 
increase to 4.1 % in 2018. One reason for the comparatively moderate increase could be 
the slight rise in the discount rate for pension provisions, which reduced interest 
expenses somewhat. In previous years, the continuous decline of this rate, which is 
calculated as an average over the past ten years, had driven up expenses. In addition, 
many companies appear to have taken measures to limit their interest costs. For 
example, companies have scaled back long-term interest-bearing bank debt and are 
increasingly using customer advance payments as a source of financing. Companies 
also favoured financing with their own funds over using external funds.  9) 
 10) 
 11) 
9 Taken in isolation and in view of the current interest rate increase, roughly speaking, the investment ratio 
could be reduced even more strongly than the results without asymmetry suggest, i.e. by 5.2 percentage 
points.
10 For similar results, see Perez-Orive and Timmer (2023) and Kurt (forthcoming).
11 See also  (2021b) and Perez-Orive and Timmer (2023).  Deutsche Bundesbank

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 118In nominal terms, the investment ratio and the gross and net additions to tangible 
fixed assets continued to rise.  This is also true for investments in subcategories such 
as land and buildings, technical equipment and machinery, and furniture and equip-
ment. However, price effects in particular are likely to play a role here. According to the 
national accounts, gross fixed capital formation in the economy as a whole and invest-
ment in machinery and equipment fell after adjustment for inflation. Moreover, the 
effects of the interest rate reversal are not expected to be fully felt until two years after 
the interest rate hike, i.e. in the financial years 2024 and 2025, based on the estimates. 
It should be noted that interest rates on bank loans to non-financial corporations have 
fallen slightly again in 2024, which in itself is likely to mitigate the financial burden on 
companies somewhat.

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 1194 Sales and income
Unsurprisingly, given the challenging economic environment, the performance of 
non-financial corporations was weak in 2023.  Sales in the non-financial corporate 
sector increased only slightly. The sales trend varied greatly by sector. For example, 
sales grew strongly in the hotel and restaurant sector (probably due in part to certain 
pandemic-related catch-up effects), among business service providers, in the motor 
vehicle trade, construction, manufacture of transport equipment and mechanical 
engineering. By contrast, energy-intensive industrial sectors such as the wood, paper 
and printing industry, the chemical and pharmaceutical industry and energy supply 
saw sales decline.  The decrease in sales in the energy-intensive manufacturing 
sector is probably also related to the fact that energy prices, although falling, were still 
high. For example, this could have led to parts of production being moved abroad or to 
a decline in shares of exports due to reduced competitiveness. Lower energy prices led 
to an immediate decline in sales in the energy supply business. The rise in sales in 
some parts of the services sector is thought to be mainly due to price effects given the 
environment of persistently high inflation. By contrast, interest income continued to 
grow strongly across all sectors as a result of the interest rate reversal. Income from 
other long-term equity investments rose significantly off the back of developments in 
the transport equipment and chemical and pharmaceutical industries.
Despite the generally weak performance, corporate profits rose sharply . This was 
mainly due to the fact that expenses were lower on average. This was because the cost 
of materials declined, partly as a result of falling prices for intermediate goods, 
especially energy. However, the drop in the cost of materials was limited to energy 
supply, energy-intensive manufacturing, and the transportation and storage sector. In 
the remaining economic sectors, costs merely increased less than in the previous year. 
In sectors with high sales growth, the cost of materials increased correspondingly.  12) 
12 Here, the energy-intensive manufacturing sector comprises the wood, paper and printing industries, the 
chemical and pharmaceutical industries, the rubber, plastics and ceramics industries, and the metal indus-
try. Owing to the small number of enterprises, the coke and refined petroleum products industry, which is also 
energy-intensive, is not reported separately in the annual financial statements statistics. It cannot therefore be 
included in the energy-intensive manufacturing sector.

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 120There were further sharp increases (in most sectors) in personnel expenses due to 
significant wage increases and in interest expenses due to the interest rate reversal. 
One exception to this is the chemical and pharmaceutical industry, where both cost 
items fell.
From a sectoral perspective, too, profitability remained robust in 2023.  Despite 
falling sales, the profitability of energy-intensive manufacturing industries declined 
only slightly because of reduced costs. Although gross profit margins fell in the wood, 
paper and printing industries, for example, they were still above the historical average. 
In the other energy-intensive industrial sectors, profitability remained close to the long-
term average. Across all sectors, the highest increases in gross profit margin were 
 13) 
13 The decline in personnel expenses is mainly due to lower expenses for company pensions (including an 
adjustment of the pension trend due to lower inflation expectations) at large enterprises. On the one hand, 
the sharp fall in liabilities played a role in the decline in interest expense. On the other, the interest expense in 
2022 was exceptionally high by historical standards.

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 121recorded by the manufacture of transport equipment, energy supply and electrical 
engineering. The sectors in which the increase in profitability was primarily due to 
growth in income rather than reduced pressure on expenses included – in addition to 
transport equipment and the rest of the manufacturing sector – the information and 
communication sector, the mechanical engineering sector and the construction sector
.
  
 
 
 14) 
14 The rest of the manufacturing sector mainly comprises the electrical industry, the food industry and the cloth-
ing industry.

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 122Item € billionYear-on-year change 
% Item € billionYear-on-year change 
%2021 2022 2023s 2022 2023s
           Income  
Sales 7,246.7  8,818.6  8,836.8  21.7  0.2 
Change in finished goods1 85.7  111.1  77.8  29.6  − 30.0 
Gross revenue 7,332.4  8,929.7  8,914.7  21.8  − 0.2 
Interest and similar income 17.7  22.2  55.0  25.0  148.2 
Other income2 319.7  336.5  360.7  5.3  7.2 
of which:  
from other long-term equity invest-
ments61.7  68.8  91.9  11.5  33.7 
Total income 7,669.8  9,288.4  9,330.3  21.1  0.5 
Expenses  
Cost of materials   4,823.8  6,163.6  5,983.1  27.8  − 2.9 
Personnel expenses   1,229.0  1,325.6  1,398.1  7.9  5.5 
Depreciation 210.8  228.0  225.3  8.1  − 1.2 
of tangible fixed assets3 192.8  200.1  206.7  3.8  3.3 
Other4 18.0  27.9  18.6  54.9  − 33.3 
Interest and similar expenses 63.2  77.6  86.3  22.9  11.2 
Operating taxes 4.9  4.9  5.3  0.1  7.5 
Other expenses5 969.6  1,118.8  1,162.2  15.4  3.9 
Total expenses before taxes on 
income7,301.3  8,918.6  8,860.3  22.2  − 0.7 
Annual result before taxes on 
income368.5  369.8  470.0  0.4  27.1 
Taxes on income6 75.0  83.9  81.7  11.9  − 2.6 
Annual result 293.5  285.9  388.3  − 2.6  35.8 
Memo items:  
Cash flow7 616.6  639.9  633.2  3.8  − 1.0 
Net interest paid 45.4  55.5  31.3  22.1  − 43.5 2021 2022 2023s 2022 2023s 2021 2022 2023s 2022 2023sTable 3.1: Enterprises’ income statement*

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 123ItemYear-on-year change 
income 5.1  4.2  5.3  − 0.9  1.1 
Net interest paid 0.6  0.6  0.4  0.0  − 0.3 
* Extrapolated results; differences in the figures due to rounding. 1 Including other own work 
capitalised. 2 Excluding income from profit transfers (parent company) and loss transfers 
(subsidiary). 3 Including write-downs of intangible fixed assets. 4 Predominantly writedowns of 
receivables, securities and other long-term equity investments. 5 Excluding cost of loss transfers 
(parent company) and profit transfers (subsidiary). 6 In the case of partnerships and sole propri-
etorships, trade earnings tax only. 7 Annual result, depreciation, and changes in provisions, in 
the special tax-allowable reserve and in prepaid expenses and deferred income. 8 Gross 
revenue less cost of materials.  as a percentage of sales in percentage points
Gross income8 34.6  31.4  33.2  − 3.2  1.8 
Annual result 4.0  3.2  4.4  − 0.8  1.2 
Annual result before taxes on 2021 2022 2023s 2022 2023s 2021 2022 2023s 2022 2023s

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 1245 Balance sheet developments
The growth in corporate assets weakened in 2023 in view of the more subdued 
economic situation.  Growth in non-financial corporations' total assets was much lower 
on average than in the two previous years. Enterprises used the additional funds 
largely for the formation of non-financial assets, while the acquisition of financial assets 
was weak. The share of financial assets thus decreased, as in the previous year, due 
mainly to the decline in total receivables. While long-term receivables continued to rise, 
short-term receivables, which account for a much larger share of the balance sheet, 
decreased. By contrast, other long-term equity investments rose sharply, as in the two 
previous years. In 2023, efforts to conserve liquidity were no longer a major factor for 
most enterprises, as liquid funds in the form of cash and bank deposits were reduced. 
The liquidity needs of most sectors changed only slightly. The strong increase in non-fi-
nancial assets in large parts of the corporate sector was due in roughly equal measure 
to tangible fixed assets and inventories. The increase in tangible fixed assets was 
higher than in the previous year, while intangible fixed assets barely increased. 
However, it is not immediately obvious from corporate financial statements that many 
enterprises are looking into the use of artificial intelligence. This is easier to identify 
using more granular datasets (see the supplementary information on “The adoption 
and objectives of artificial intelligence in German firms”). However, the increase in 
inventories was not as high as in the previous year, partly due to muted price develop-
ments and stagnating sales. Moreover, supply chain disruptions were resolved in 2023, 
which reduced the need for increased inventory.

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 125Supplementary information
The adoption and objectives of artificial intelligence in 
German firms
The digital transformation has the potential to radically alter business and working 
life. The use of artificial intelligence  especially could invigorate aggregate productiv-()AI
ity growth in Germany, which has long been sluggish.  Generative  is seen as the AI
major technological advance in this regard. Because it can handle complex tasks that 
were previously considered exclusively executable by humans, it holds the promise of 
substantial productivity gains. In contrast to earlier technological innovations that 
automated routine tasks, generative  is able to create content such as text or images AI
by itself, which could potentially make human work significantly more efficient.
A representative online survey of just under 7,000 German firms conducted by the 
Bundesbank provides detailed insights into the use of digital technologies in 2024 as 
well as the reasons motivating their adoption.  The analysis focuses on four key 
technologies: predictive and generative  cloud computing, infrastructure technolo-,AI
gies for integrating work and/or production processes, and robotics. Until now, there 
has been very little reliable information on the adoption and use of digital technologies 
in the German corporate sector.
In the current early phase of AI adoption, two-fifths of firms are already engaging 
with the technology.  Notably, in the second quarter of 2024, 43 % of the surveyed 
enterprises were using predictive or generative  at least experimentally or were AI 1) 
 2) 
 3) 
 4) 
 5) 1 For details on the general significance of digitalisation for productivity growth, see  Deutsche Bundesbank
(2023).
2 See also Elondou et al. (2023).
3 For more information on the Online Panel – Firms (BOP-F) survey, see Bundesbank (2021c) and Bundesbank
Boddin and (2023). Köhler
4 Exceptions include results of surveys conducted by the Federal Statistical Office and the  Institute. See Desta-ifo
tis (2024) and et al. (2023). Schaller

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 126planning to introduce it before the end of 2024.  Only 3 % were making extensive use 
of it, which is probably because the technology is so new. Most firms using  were AI
therefore doing so experimentally (19 %). A slightly smaller number of firms had 
already taken things a step further and were using it to a limited extent (14 %). A 
further 8 % do plan to implement it by the end of 2024. The majority of firms are not yet 
using  and are not intending to introduce it before the end of 2024. Cloud computing AI
(66 %) and infrastructure technologies (49 %), on the other hand, are more widespread. 
Robotics (14 %) are deployed chiefly in industrial sectors. 
The use of predictive and generative AI varies widely depending on sector and firm 
size.  It is particularly prevalent in sectors characterised by data-driven processes and 
digital interaction, such as information, communication and finance. By contrast, it 
figures less frequently in economic sectors where tasks are of a more manual or interac-
tive nature, such as healthcare, hospitality and transport. Large firms are driving the 
adoption of AI: 78 % of enterprises with turnovers of more than €229 million use  or AI
are planning to introduce it, compared with just 37 % of firms with turnovers under 
€1 million. According to an  study, high costs, a lack of technical expertise and OECD
 5) 
 6) 5 Surveys by the  Institute have found that the proportion of firms using  grew by 14 percentage points to ifo AI
27 % between 2023 and 2024. See Kerkhof et al. (2024). In a similar vein, generative  appears to be being AI
adopted exceptionally rapidly in the United States, with uptake progressing at a much faster pace than previ-
ous rollouts of new technologies such as the  or internet. See Bick et al. (2024).PC

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 127lower perceived benefit are key barriers for smaller firms.  The same pattern is also 
evident with other digital technologies, such as cloud computing and robotics.
According to the findings, firms primarily use robotics to automate tasks, whilst AI 
is mainly being used to improve supporting processes.  A key objective for both 
technologies is the optimisation of methods or processes that are already automated 
(AI: 55 %; robotics: 58 %). The automation of existing activities is particularly important 
for robotics (58 %), but does also play a significant role for  (47 %).  is also impor- AI AI
tant for improving supporting processes such as in the areas of human resources or 
marketing (53 %), whereas robotics are naturally less applicable in these areas (25 %). 
Expanding the range of goods and services on offer is a lower-priority objective in the 
case of both technologies (AI: 36 %; robotics: 29 %).
The effects of generative AI on the labour market and productivity are likely to be 
very different from those of robotics.  While the survey results do not provide direct 
insights into the productivity or labour market impacts of  or robotics, they do AI
suggest – in line with the literature – that robotics are predominantly being used to 
automate manual activities. In contrast, generative  comprehensively transforms AI
work processes and could significantly boost productivity, especially in supporting 
 6) 
6 See Lane et al. (2023).

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 128functions. Widespread use of generative  could thus provide positive impetus for AI
aggregate potential growth. Estimates of AI’s effect on productivity are, however, 
fraught with uncertainty. Empirical studies show a wide range of outcomes, ranging 
from modest effects to substantial aggregate productivity gains.  What is sure, is that 
improved digital infrastructure and targeted training measures are essential to fully 
realising the growth potential of this technology.  7) 
7 For studies on productivity gains in specific activities, see Noy and Zhang (2023), Peng et al. (2023) and Dell’Ac-
 et al. (2023). On the basis of a back-of-the-envelope calculation, Acemoglu (2024) estimates that the impact on qua
annual labour productivity growth in the United States will be fairly modest, amounting to about 0.1 % over 
the next ten years. A similar analysis by (2024) under different assumptions shows slightly larger effects Bergeaud
for the euro area. In contrast to this, other studies point towards very sizeable effects; see Briggs and Kodani 
(2023) and Aghion and Bunel (2024).

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 129The capital base of enterprises improved on average in 2023.  On the revenue side, 
most of the additional corporate funds were sourced internally, with a significant share 
coming from retained earnings. In contrast to equity, liabilities and provisions 
increased only slightly. The noticeable increase in the equity ratio thus roughly offset 
the decline from the previous year. The equity ratio rose in almost all sectors.
Liabilities shifted proportionately from long-term to short-term on balance, as in the 
two previous years.  Short-term liabilities rose only slightly on average in 2023. 
Although advance payments received on account of orders and short-term liabilities to 
banks increased sharply, the reduction in trade payables and other liabilities had an 
offsetting effect. At the same time, enterprises reduced their long-term liabilities by 
decreasing their long-term liabilities to banks.  In contrast to the three previous 
years, provisions also increased only slightly. The rising discount rate resulting from the 
interest rate reversal may also have provided relief with respect to pension provisions.
 15) 
15 The minimal increase in additional liabilities was the main reason for the low contribution of external financ-
ing to corporate funding in 2023.

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 130 
Item 2021 2022 2023sYear-on-year change
2022 2023s
           
Sources of funds    
Capital increase from profits and 
contributions to the capital 
of non-corporations1 93.4  75.3  84.0  -18.1   8.7 
Depreciation (total) 210.8  228.0  225.3  17.1  -2.7  
Increase in provisions2 112.3  126.0  19.7  13.7  -106.3  
Internal funds 416.6  429.3  329.0  12.8  -100.3  
Increase in capital of corporations3 70.5  26.0  48.5  -44.5   22.5 
Change in liabilities 263.1  404.4  34.9  141.2  -369.5  
Short-term 260.5  393.2  40.8  132.7  -352.4  
Long-term 2.6  11.2  -5.9   8.5  -17.1  
External funds 333.6  430.3  83.4  96.8  -346.9  
Total 750.1  859.7  412.4  109.5  -447.2  
Use of funds  
Increase in tangible fixed assets 
(gross)258.9  267.1  285.0  8.2  17.9 
Increase in tangible fixed assets 
(net)466.1  67.0  78.3  1.0  11.2 
Depreciation of tangible fixed 
assets192.8  200.1  206.7  7.2  6.6 
Change in inventories 129.9  213.1  57.2  83.2  -155.9  
Non-financial asset formation 
(gross investments)388.8  480.2  342.1  91.4  -138.1  
Change in cash 54.1  24.2  -2.3   -29.9   -26.5  
Change in receivables5 223.8  264.6  -13.1   40.8  -277.7  
Short-term 227.8  245.5  -32.9   17.6  -278.3  
Long-term -4.0   19.2  19.8  23.2  0.6 
Acquisition of securities 8.9  10.1  3.5  1.2  -6.6  
Acquisition of other long-term 
equity investments674.6  80.6  82.2  6.0  1.6 
Financial asset formation 361.3  379.5  70.3  18.2  -309.2   Table 3.2: Enterprises’ sources and uses of funds*  
€ billion

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 131Item 2021 2022 2023sYear-on-year change
2022 2023s
Total 750.1  859.7  412.4  109.5  -447.2  
Memo item:  
Internal funds as a percentage of 
gross investments107.1  89.4  96.2  . .
* Extrapolated results; differences in the figures due to rounding.  Including “GmbH und Co. ” 1KG
and similar legal forms. Including change in the balance of prepaid expenses and deferred 2
income.  Increase in nominal capital through the issue of shares and transfers to capital 3
reserves.  Change in tangible fixed assets (including intangible assets but excluding goodwill).   4 5
Including unusual write-downs of current assets. Including change in goodwill.6
  
Item2021 2022 2023s2022 2023s
€ billionYear-on-year change 
%
           
Assets    
Intangible fixed assets1 81.5  83.3  83.6  2.2  0.4 
Tangible fixed assets 1,311.7  1,377.0  1,454.9  5.0  5.7 
Inventories 930.2  1,143.3  1,200.4  22.9  5.0 
Non-financial assets 2,323.4  2,603.5  2,739.0  12.1  5.2 
Cash 497.3  521.5  519.2  4.9  − 0.4 
Receivables 1,854.6  2,114.8  2,099.2  14.0  − 0.7 
of which:          
Trade receivables 518.7  575.4  588.3  10.9  2.3 
Receivables from affiliated compa-
nies1,071.5  1,233.9  1,227.8  15.2  − 0.5 
Securities 115.7  125.8  129.3  8.7  2.7 
Other long-term equity investments
21,014.3  1,071.4  1,137.6  5.6  6.2 
Prepaid expenses 38.9  39.5  42.5  1.5  7.8 
Financial assets 3,520.8  3,873.0  3,927.7  10.0  1.4 
Total assets3 5,844.2  6,476.5  6,666.7  10.8  2.9 
Capital  Table 3.3: Enterprises’ balance sheet*

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 132Item2021 2022 2023s2022 2023s
€ billionYear-on-year change 
%
Equity3 1,770.7  1,872.0  2,004.5  5.7  7.1 
Liabilities 3,098.4  3,502.7  3,537.6  13.1  1.0 
of which:  
to banks 599.3  640.5  641.7  6.9  0.2 
Trade payables 414.7  480.9  470.4  16.0  − 2.2 
to affiliated companies 1,322.5  1,513.1  1,518.7  14.4  0.4 
Advance payments received on 
account of orders349.7  424.3  474.9  21.3  11.9 
Provisions 908.8  1,031.9  1,048.3  13.5  1.6 
of which:  
Provisions for pensions   317.6  370.3  374.9  16.6  1.2 
Deferred income 66.4  69.9  76.3  5.3  9.1 
Liabilities and provisions 4,073.5  4,604.5  4,662.2  13.0  1.3 
Total capital3 5,844.2  6,476.5  6,666.7  10.8  2.9 
Memo items:          
Sales 7,246.7  8,818.6  8,836.8  21.7  0.2 
Sales as a percentage of total assets 124.0  136.2  132.6  . .
* Extrapolated results; differences in the figures due to rounding.  Excluding goodwill. Includ-1 2
ing shares in affiliated companies and goodwill.  Less adjustments to equity.3
  
Item2021 2022
2023sAs a percentage of  
total assets 1 
       
Intangible fixed assets2 1.4  1.3  1.3 
Tangible fixed assets   22.4  21.3  21.8 
Inventories   15.9  17.7  18.0 
Short-term receivables   29.1  30.0  28.6 
Long-term equity and liabilities3 50.2  47.9  48.5 
of which:  Table 3.4: Enterprises’ balance sheet ratios*

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 133Item2021 2022
2023sAs a percentage of total assets
1
Equity1 30.3  28.9  30.1 
Long-term liabilities 14.5  13.2  12.8 
Short-term liabilities 38.5  40.8  40.3 
 As a percentage of tangible 
fixed assets4 
Equity1 127.1  128.2  130.3 
Long-term equity and liabilities3 210.7  212.4  210.1 
 As a percentage of fixed 
assets5 
Long-term equity and liabilities3 111.7  111.7  109.9 
 As a percentage of short-term 
liabilities 
Cash resources  and short-term receivables6 99.8  95.2  92.4 
 As a percentage of liabilities 
and provisions7 
Cash flow8 17.2  15.7  15.3 
* Extrapolated results; differences in the figures due to rounding.  Less adjustments to equity.  1 2
Excluding goodwill.  Equity, provisions for pensions, long-term liabilities and the special tax-al-3
lowable reserve.  Including intangible fixed assets (excluding goodwill).  Tangible fixed assets, 4 5
intangible fixed assets, other long-term equity investments, long-term receivables and long-
term securities.  Cash and short-term securities.  Liabilities, provisions, deferred income and 6  7
proportionate special tax-allowable reserve less cash. 8Annual result, depreciation, and changes 
in provisions, in the special tax-allowable reserve and in prepaid expenses and deferred income.  

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 134Supplementary information
Profitability and financial position of German listed 
groups in 2023 and an outlook for 2024 
German listed groups’ revenue fell by 8 % in 2023, following strong growth in the 
two preceding years.  Operating income before ( ) and after (EBIT) deprecia- EBITDA
tion and amortisation stagnated. As a result, the profit margin increased by 0.7 percent-
age point to 7.6 %. It is thus above its mean since 2007 of 6.6 %.  
The increase seen in groups’ profit margin is not broad based.  The profit margin 
rose, especially in the case of large energy groups. Measured in terms of EBIT, their 
earnings situation in 2022 was still considerably affected by the additional costs of 
purchases to make up for the absence of commodity supplies from Russia and 
unfavourable valuation effects of derivatives for hedging against commodity price risks. 
These burdens ceased to exist in 2023, meaning that energy groups improved their 
profits significantly despite a decline in revenue. Excluding energy groups, the profit 
margin in the production sector fell by 1 percentage point to 7.6 %. The chemical indus-
try, in particular, suffered from energy prices that were still higher than in 2019. These 
prices weighed on their competitiveness and it is likely that relocations of production 
abroad took place. Moreover, impairments were necessary due to higher capital costs 
and deteriorating business prospects. The profit margin in the services sector fell by 1 
percentage point to 10.1 %. This was chiefly attributable to the drop in the profit margin 
seen in the logistics sector when taking the exceptionally high level in 2022 as a start-
ing point. Average freight rates fell in 2023 as a result of weak demand and the normali-
sation of supply chains, which had a detrimental effect on the profitability of the logis- 1) 
 2) 
1 The reporting sample for the consolidated financial statements statistics comprises around 220 non-financial 
groups admitted for trading on the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock Exchange (excluding real 
estate activities) that publish quarterly or half-yearly  consolidated financial statements and make a meaning- IFRS
ful contribution to value added in Germany. Groups are allocated to the production sector or services sector 
based on the main focus of their economic activity.
2 The rates of change for revenue, earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation ( ), EBITDA
earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) and the profit margin (ratio of EBIT to revenue) are published with 
reporting and consolidation basis adjustments, albeit not the figures in euro billions or the weighted average 
profit margin.

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 135tics sector. The profit margin of groups in the rest of the services sector did not 
improve either.
The balance sheet saw groups’ assets contract by 3 % in 2023.  This was mainly due to 
the significant loss in the value of energy groups’ derivative assets. Lower commodity 
prices had an impact here. As a result, long-term assets fell by 1 % and short-term 
assets by 7 % in the reporting sample. In the case of the latter, the exceptionally high 
profit distribution of one single logistics group was another factor behind this develop-
ment.


German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 136On the financing side, equity was up slightly by 1 % in 2023.  The retention of profits 
played a key role in this context. High spending on pension provisions and currency 
translation differences had a negative impact. Buy-backs also weighed on equity. Debt 
fell by 5 %, mainly due to the valuation of energy groups’ derivatives positions, as was 
the case for assets. Overall, the leverage ratio declined, and the capital ratio increased 
by 1.5 percentage point to 34.5 %. In the production sector, it rose from 32.2 % to 
33.9 %. The ratio grew more moderately in the services sector, rising 0.4 percentage 
point to 36.6 %. The lower capital ratio of the production sector compared with the 
services sector was once again attributable to automobile manufacturers’ financing 
business in 2023. In some cases, this has a major impact on the financial structure at 
group level. Excluding the segments in automobile groups with a focus on financial 
services business, the capital ratio of the production sector increased from 36.8 % to 
39.8 % in 2023.


German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 137For 2024, there appears to be a moderate decline in revenue and a significant drop 
in pre-tax profits according to groups’ interim financial statements that are 
currently available and have been evaluated.  Groups’ profit margin is likely to decline 
somewhat as a result. This probably partly reflects the current earnings trends of 
domestic companies in the corporate financial statements statistics.  Viewed at the 
sector level of groups in the year to date, the picture that emerges is mixed. The 
services sector has increased its revenue and profits slightly. In the production sector, 
by contrast, automobile manufacturers, in particular, have recorded a decrease in 
revenue and strong earnings declines due to a weakness in sales as well as restructur-
ing and transformation expenses. In addition, falling electricity and gas prices have led 
to a decline in energy groups’ revenue, while their pre-tax profits have not reached the 
high level achieved in the previous year.
 3) 
3 Alongside the stronger impact of global economic developments on consolidated financial statements, the 
metrics derived from the financial statements are materially shaped by differences between the accounting 
standards applied (German  for corporate financial statement statistics (single-entity),  for consolidated GAAP IFRS
financial statement statistics).

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 1386 Conclusion
Despite the weak development of the economy and higher financing costs, non-fi-
nancial corporations performed well in 2023 in terms of their earnings and financing 
conditions.  Energy-intensive enterprises continued to be negatively affected, probably 
in connection with the rise in energy prices, which worsened their competitive position. 
However, the corporate sector as a whole was able to increase its profitability 
compared to the previous year despite higher interest and personnel expenses. The 
fact that enterprises are offsetting lost revenue with cost savings also played a role, as 
sales growth was weak in 2023, and inflation remained high. 
Stability metrics also improved.  In addition to the gross profit margin and the capital 
base, enterprises’ liquidity levels was also very good and long-term liabilities continued 
to fall. 
2024 will be another challenging year for enterprises.  The ongoing economic 
weakness is likely to weigh on enterprises’ business activity and thus their sales growth 
in 2024. At the same time, the pressure on costs is expected to remain high due to 
persistently high financing and energy costs, as well as the sharp rise in wages. These 
pressures can also be seen in the increased number of corporate insolvencies, which 
are expected to exceed pre-pandemic levels again for the first time in 2024. On the one 
hand, cyclical stress factors are creating headwinds for enterprises. On the other, 
German firms are facing structural challenges posed by a shortage of skilled workers 
due to demographic factors, the green and digital transition of the economy, and the 
changed global economic environment. On balance, this is likely to weigh on profitabil-
ity in some parts of the corporate sector, such as the manufacturing industry, and 
dampen profitability in the corporate sector as a whole in 2024.
Long series of extrapolated results of the corporate financial statement statistics are 
available online at . www.bundesbank.de

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 139List of references
Acemoglu, D. (2024), The Simple Macroeconomics of  National Bureau of Economic ,AI
Research, Working Paper, No 32487.
Acharya, V.V., M. Crosignani, T. and S. (2022), Zombie Lending: Theoretical, Eisert Steffen
International, and Historical Perspectives, Annual Review of Financial Economics, 
Vol. 14, pp. 21–38.
Aghion, P. and S. Bunel (2024),  and Growth: Where Do We Stand, London School of AI
Economics, Mimeo.
Albuquerque, B. und R. Iyer (2023), The Rise of the Walking Dead: Zombie Firms Around 
the World,  Working Paper, June 2023.IMF
Alder, M., N. Coimbra and U. Szczerbowicz (2024), Corporate Debt Structure and Hetero-
geneous Monetary Policy Transmission,  Discussion Paper, No 18787. CEPR
Andrews, D., and F. Petroulakis (2019), Breaking the shackles, Zombie firms, weak 
banks and depressed restructuring in Europe, European Central Bank, Working Paper 
Series, No 2240.
Becker , T., E. , D. , and S. (2024), Individual Financial Statements of Biewen Hüwel Schultz
Non-Financial Firms  Data Report 2024‑09 – Metadata Version  Data-Docv- ( ), JANIS JANIS
13, Deutsche Bundesbank, Research Data and Service Centre.
Becker , T., E. , D. , and S. (2022), Corporate Balance Sheets (Ustan) Biewen Hüwel Schultz
1964–1986, Data Report 2022‑18 – Metadata Version 1, Deutsche Bundesbank, Research 
Data and Service Centre.
Becker , T., E. , S. , and M. (2020), Corporate Balance Sheets Biewen Schultz Weisbecker
(Ustan) 1987–2019, Data Report 2020‑08 – Metadata Version 4, Deutsche Bundesbank, 
Research Data and Service Centre.
Bergeaud, A. (2024), .   Forum The Past, Present and Future of European Productivity ECB
on Central Banking 2024.

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 140Bick, A., A. Blandin and D. J. Deming (2024), The Rapid Adoption of Generative  ,AINBER
Working Paper, No 32966.
Bighelli, T., T. Lalinsky, and J. Vanhala (2022), Covid-19 pandemic, state aid and firm 
productivity, Bank of Finland Research Discussion Papers, No 1/2022.
Bittner , C., F. and C. (2021) Contagious Zombies, Deutsche Bundesbank Fecht Georg
Discussion Paper No 15/2021.
Boddin, D. and M. , The High Frequency Firm Survey “Bundesbank Online Köhler
Panel – Firms”, , Vol. 244(3), pp. 267–275. Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik
Briggs, J. and D. Kodnani (2023), The Potentially Large Effects of Artificial Intelligence on 
Economic Growth, Goldman Sachs Economics Research.
Caballero, R. J., T. Hoshi, and A. K. Kashyap (2008), Zombie Lending and Depressed 
Restructuring in Japan, American Economic Review Vol 98(5), pp. 1943–77.
Cœuré , B. (2021), What 3.5 million French firms can tell us about the efficiency of Covid-
19 support measures.
De Jonghe, O., Mulier, K. and Samarin, I. (2024), Counting the undead: A new metric for 
identifying zombie firms.
Dell'Acqua, F., E. McFowland III, E. R. Mollick, H. Lifshitz-Assaf, K. Kellogg, S. Rajendran, 
L. Krayer, F. Candelon and K. R. Lakhani (2023), Navigating the Jagged Technological 
Frontier: Field Experimental Evidence of the Effects of  on Knowledge Worker Produc-AI
tivity and Quality, Harvard Business School Technology & Operations Management Unit 
Working Paper, No 24‑013.
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2023), The impact of digitalisation on labour productivity 
growth, Monthly Report, March 2023, pp. 43‑65. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), Corporate insolvencies in Germany during the coron-
avirus crisis, Monthly Report, December 2021, pp. 47– 49.
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2021b). The impact of monetary policy depending on the debt 
situation in the non-financial private sector: Evidence for the euro area, Monthly Report, 
April 2021, pp. 15–33.
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2021c), Assessments and expectations of firms in the pandemic: 
findings from the Bundesbank Online Panel Firms, Monthly Report, April 2021, pp. 33ff.

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 141Deutsche Bundesbank  (2020): German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2019, 
Box – Updated assessment of the development of zombie firms in Germany, Monthly 
Report, December 2020, p. 68‑70.
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2017): German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2016, 
Box – The emergence of zombie firms in Germany in the low-interest-rate environment, 
Monthly Report, December 2017, pp. 37‑40.
Eloundou T., S. Manning, P. Mishkin and D. Rock (2023),  are : An Early Look at GPTs GPTs
the Labor Market Impact Potential of Large Language Models. 
Favara, G., C. Minoiu and A. Perez-Orive, (2021), U.S. Zombie firms: How many and how 
consequential? FEDS Notes, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action (2022), Informationen zu Coron-
. a-Hilfen des Bundes
Federal Statistical Office (2024), Rechtliche Einheiten mit Nutzung von Technologien der 
künstlichen Intelligenz ()KI nach Beschäftigtengrößenklassen.
Jordà, Ò. (2005), Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections, 
American Economic Review, Vol. 95 (1), pp. 161–182.
Kerkhof , A., T. Licht , M.Menkhoff and K. Wohlrabe (2024), Die Nutzung von Künstlicher 
Intelligenz in der deutschen Wirtschaft, ifo Schnelldienst , Vol. 77 (08), pp. 39–43.
Kilian, L., and H. (2017), Structural Vector Autoregressive Analysis, Cambridge Lütkepohl
University Press.
Kurt, E., Asymmetric effects of monetary policy on firms, Journal of Money, Credit, and 
Banking (forthcoming).
Lane, M., M. Williams and S. Broecke (2023), The impact of  on the workplace: Main AI
findings from the  surveys of employers and workers.  Social, Employ- OECD AI OECD
ment and Migration Working Papers, No 288. 
McGowan, M., D. Andrews and V. Millot (2018), The walking dead? Zombie firms and 
productivity performance in  countries, Economic Policy, Vol. 33, pp. 685–736. OECD
Noy, S. and W. Zhang (2023), Experimental Evidence on the Productivity Effects of 
Generative Artificial Intelligence, Science, Vol. 381 (6654), pp. 187–192.

German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2023 during the period of monetary 
policy tightening
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – December 2024 142Pelosi, M., G. Rodano and E. Sette, (2021), Zombie firms and the take-up of support 
measures during Covid-19, Banca d’Italia Occasional Paper, No 650.
Peng, S., E. Kalliamvakou, P. Cihon and M. Demirer (2023), The Impact of  on Devel-AI
oper Productivity: Evidence from GitHub Copilot.
Pérez-Orive, A., and Y. Timmer (2023), Distressed Firms and the Large Effects of 
Monetary Policy Tightenings FEDS Notes, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System.
Schaller , D., K. Wohlrabe and A. Wolf (2023), ,KI Cloud Computing und Blockchain –  wo 
steht die deutsche Wirtschaft?, ifo Schnelldienst,  2023, Vol. 8 2023, pp. 3–9.

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
024 
1•  2 December

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes  bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20•
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
2•024   2 December

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43•
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
5. Yields on German securities  .........................................................................................  53•
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54•
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55•
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56•
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58•
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58•
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59•
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59•
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60•
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
024 
3• 2 December

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61•
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61•
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62•
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62•
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63•
12. Maastricht debt by creditor  .........................................................................................  63•
13. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64•
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66•
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67•
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68•
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69•
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69•
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70•
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71•
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72•
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72•
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73•
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75•
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76•
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77•
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78•
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78•
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79•
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80•
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81•
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82•
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic   and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82•
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
4•024   2 December

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 €STR  5,6Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  7
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2023 Mar. – 4.7 1.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.9 2.4 2.57 3.1
Apr. – 5.8 0.4 1.3 1.4 1.4 2.4 2.6 2.90 3.0
May – 7.0 – 0.1 1.0 0.9 0.9 2.3 3.4 3.08 3.0
June – 8.0 – 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.4 1.7 3.6 3.24 3.0
July – 9.1 – 1.4 – 0.3 – 0.4 0.1 1.3 4.1 3.40 3.1
Aug. – 10.4 – 2.3 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.1 0.7 4.5 3.64 3.2
Sep. – 10.0 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 1.1 – 0.4 0.4 5.1 3.75 3.3
Oct. – 10.0 – 2.2 – 1.0 – 1.0 – 0.5 0.4 5.6 3.90 3.5
Nov. – 9.6 – 1.9 – 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.7 0.2 5.3 3.90 3.3
Dec. – 8.6 – 1.0 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.4 0.4 4.9 3.90 2.7
2024 Jan. – 8.6 – 1.1 0.1 0.2 – 0.4 0.4 5.4 3.90 2.8
Feb. – 7.7 – 0.6 0.4 0.5 – 0.3 0.8 5.1 3.91 2.9
Mar. – 6.7 – 0.3 0.9 0.9 – 0.2 0.8 5.2 3.91 2.9
Apr. – 5.9 0.1 1.4 1.3 0.0 0.8 4.9 3.91 3.0
May – 5.0 0.6 1.6 1.7 – 0.1 0.5 4.5 3.91 3.0
June – 3.5 1.2 2.2 2.1 0.2 0.9 4.5 3.75 3.1
July – 3.0 1.2 2.4 2.5 0.3 0.9 4.1 3.66 3.0
Aug. – 2.0 1.7 2.9 2.8 0.6 1.2 4.0 3.66 2.8
Sep. – 1.3 2.0 3.2 3.2 0.6 1.3 3.9 3.56 2.7
Oct. 0.2 2.4 3.4 ... 0.7 1.3 3.7 3.34 2.8
Nov. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.16 2.9
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 EuroShort-Term Rate.  6 See also footnotes to Table VI.3, p. 43●. 7 GDP-weighted yield on
ten-year government bonds. Countries included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT,
GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assetsReference
rate 
vis-á-vis the
US dollar Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2023 Mar. +32,219 +38,641 +65,164 +49,739 –101,038 –12,874 +127,880 + 1,458 1.0706 97.3 93.2
Apr. + 9,747 + 7,656 + 5,219 –28,991 +70,468 – 2,588 –31,825 – 1,845 1.0968 98.4 94.2
May – 8,807 +16,550 –12,064 –50,366 +48,504 + 6,722 –18,300 + 1,375 1.0868 98.0 93.6
June +33,328 +31,692 +69,679 +83,854 –33,890 –10,752 +28,074 + 2,393 1.0840 98.2 93.8
July +25,506 +21,507 +35,810 –36,897 +56,423 – 7,715 +23,561 + 438 1.1058 99.2 95.0
Aug. +26,812 +22,868 +28,725 + 7,447 – 2,921 + 3,493 +19,382 + 1,325 1.0909 99.0 95.1
Sep. +34,633 +29,376 +25,952 +11,070 –64,178 + 3,512 +79,445 – 3,897 1.0684 98.5 94.7
Oct. +17,779 +17,532 +37,665 – 5,953 + 6,097 +20,075 +13,720 + 3,727 1.0563 98.0 94.1
Nov. +36,391 +34,725 +60,330 + 7,771 +21,828 + 924 +28,287 + 1,519 1.0808 98.7 94.6
Dec. +39,744 +30,718 +18,395 –24,784 –72,362 + 924 +113,464 + 1,153 1.0903 98.2 93.9
2024 Jan. +26,441 +27,368 +39,168 +18,710 –22,278 +13,408 +28,505 + 822 1.0905 98.4 94.4
Feb. +33,048 +37,730 +18,706 +55,751 –15,894 +11,597 –33,610 + 861 1.0795 98.1 94.1
Mar. +37,548 +37,381 +52,725 +16,262 +16,037 –11,967 +32,922 – 528 1.0872 98.8 94.8
Apr. +39,180 +30,224 +23,237 +25,886 –14,069 +12,742 – 2,125 + 803 1.0728 98.6 p 94.5
May + 5,295 +31,700 +17,844 + 7,890 + 1,967 – 1,546 + 7,897 + 1,636 1.0812 98.9 p 94.8
June +55,006 +36,932 +90,163 +32,516 –69,049 + 1,039 +124,358 + 1,299 1.0759 98.5 p 94.5
July +48,764 +39,792 +60,970 +20,913 +22,391 – 3,175 +24,070 – 3,229 1.0844 99.0 p 95.1
Aug. +38,819 +26,439 +27,594 – 7,443 + 686 + 1,191 +36,165 – 3,007 1.1012 99.0 p 95.0
Sep. +51,462 +33,582 +74,592 + 9,576 –10,683 – 5,417 +78,754 + 2,361 1.1106 98.8 p 94.8
Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0904 98.2 p 94.3
Nov. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0630 97.5 p 93.6
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also Tables
XII. 9 and 11, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Bundesbank cal-culation. Vis-á-vis the currencies of the extended EER group of tranding partners (fixed
composition).  4 Based on consumer price indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Croatia Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2021 6.3 6.2 3.7 7.2 2.7 6.9 8.7 16.3 8.9 12.6 7.0
2022 3.5 4.2 1.4 0.1 1.5 2.6 5.8 8.6 4.7 7.3 1.8
2023 0.4 1.2 –0.3 –3.0 –1.2 0.9 2.3 –5.5 0.7 3.3 1.7
2023 Q2 0.6 1.2 –0.4 –2.4 –0.8 0.8 3.4 –3.9 0.2 3.9 –0.7
Q3 –0.0 0.6 –0.7 –2.8 –2.4 0.5 2.0 –8.4 0.1 2.0 3.6
Q4 0.1 0.6 –0.4 –1.9 –1.7 1.0 2.3 –9.1 0.2 5.3 0.3
2024 Q1 0.4 0.7 –0.8 –2.2 –1.4 1.2 1.6 –4.8 0.3 4.0 0.8
Q2 0.5 1.0 0.1 –0.7 –1.2 0.5 2.6 –3.2 0.9 3.5 –0.5
Q3 0.9 1.2 0.1 –0.7 0.8 1.7 2.5 2.9 0.8 3.9 –1.6
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2021 9.0 16.8 4.6 12.8 4.3 5.5 10.4 30.4 12.3 6.3 6.6
2022 1.7 –0.5 –0.3 –2.1 4.0 –0.0 2.5 12.3 0.3 1.7 0.8
2023 –1.7 –5.6 –1.9 –9.0 –2.5 0.9 2.3 –2.5 –2.0 –0.1 –4.5
2023 Q2 –0.4 –4.3 –0.4 –12.9 –3.8 1.4 1.2 10.3 –3.5 0.0 –7.4
Q3 –3.6 –6.9 –3.5 –10.6 –3.0 0.7 –0.2 –11.3 –2.5 –0.4 –6.0
Q4 –3.6 –8.1 –4.5 –4.3 –3.4 2.0 6.0 –13.1 –1.5 1.6 –0.1
2024 Q1 –4.6 –7.1 –5.6 –7.1 –3.4 0.5 3.7 –18.7 –3.5 –3.9 –0.3
Q2 –3.8 –4.7 –5.1 –3.1 –3.3 –0.8 9.7 –12.9 –3.0 –4.6 –4.6
Q3 –1.7 –0.0 p–4.4 –4.4 2.5 –0.4 5.8 5.2 –3.5 0.3 –0.2
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2022 82.2 79.1 85.2 71.7 81.0 81.8 75.9 79.8 79.0 77.0 75.0
2023 80.7 75.8 83.4 67.3 76.6 81.2 75.2 ... 77.5 77.2 72.9
2024 78.2 74.5 78.8 65.5 74.6 80.9 77.7 ... 75.5 75.3 72.2
2023 Q3 80.2 75.1 82.9 62.6 77.4 80.6 76.3 ... 77.4 78.5 72.7
Q4 79.6 73.9 81.9 64.6 73.7 81.3 75.9 ... 76.5 74.6 72.3
2024 Q1 79.2 74.0 81.3 65.6 73.3 80.9 73.4 ... 75.5 75.9 71.4
Q2 78.9 74.5 80.2 65.8 74.6 80.7 81.1 ... 76.0 74.3 73.0
Q3 77.7 74.4 77.4 64.9 76.4 81.6 78.2 ... 75.5 73.8 72.1
Q4 76.9 75.2 76.3 65.6 74.1 80.2 78.0 ... 75.1 77.1 72.4
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2021 7.8 e 6.3 3.6 e 6.2 e 7.7 e 7.9 e 14.8 e 6.3 e 9.5 e 7.5 e 7.6
2022 6.7 e 5.5 p 3.1 e 5.6 e 6.8 e 7.3 e 12.5 e 4.5 e 8.1 e 6.7 e 6.9
2023 6.6 e 5.5 p 3.0 e 6.4 e 7.2 e 7.3 e 11.1 e 4.3 e 7.7 e 6.1 e 6.5
2024 May 6.4 5.6 3.4 7.5 8.2 7.5 10.4 4.4 6.7 5.0 7.0
June 6.4 5.5 3.5 7.5 8.4 7.5 9.4 4.4 6.7 5.0 6.9
July 6.4 5.6 3.5 7.9 8.6 7.5 9.6 4.5 6.3 4.9 6.8
Aug. 6.3 5.7 3.4 7.7 8.3 7.5 9.5 4.1 6.1 4.8 6.9
Sep. 6.3 5.8 3.4 8.1 8.6 7.5 9.4 4.1 6.0 4.7 6.8
Oct. 6.3 5.8 3.4 8.1 8.8 7.6 9.8 4.2 5.8 4.6 6.8
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2021 2.6 3.2 5 3.2 4.5 2.1 2.1 0.6 2.4 1.9 2.7 3.2
2022 8.4 10.3 8.7 19.4 7.2 5.9 9.3 8.1 8.7 10.7 17.2
2023 6 5.4 2.3 6.0 9.1 4.3 5.7 4.2 5.2 5.9 8.4 9.1
2024 June 2.5 5.4 2.5 2.8 0.5 2.5 2.5 1.5 0.9 3.5 1.5
July 2.6 5.4 2.6 3.5 0.5 2.7 3.0 1.5 1.6 3.3 0.8
Aug. 2.2 4.3 2.0 3.4 1.1 2.2 3.2 1.1 1.2 3.0 0.9
Sep. 1.7 4.3 1.8 3.2 1.0 1.4 3.1 0.0 0.7 3.1 1.6
Oct. 2.0 4.5 2.4 4.5 1.5 1.6 3.1 0.1 1.0 3.6 2.1
Nov. e 2.3 4.8 2.4 3.8 1.7 1.7 3.0 0.5 1.5 4.0 2.3
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
2021 –5.1 –5.4 –3.2 –2.6 –2.7 –6.6 –6.9 –1.4 –8.9 –2.6 –7.2
2022 –3.5 –3.6 –2.1 –1.1 –0.2 –4.7 –2.5 1.7 –8.1 0.1 –4.9
2023 –3.6 –4.2 –2.6 –2.8 –3.0 –5.5 –1.3 1.5 –7.2 –0.9 –2.4
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
2021 93.8 108.4 68.1 18.4 73.2 112.7 197.3 52.6 145.7 78.2 45.9
2022 89.5 102.6 65.0 19.1 74.0 111.2 177.0 43.1 138.3 68.5 44.4
2023 87.4 103.1 62.9 20.2 77.1 109.9 163.9 43.3 134.8 61.8 45.0
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
6.4 7.2 13.2 6.3 4.8 5.6 5.7 8.4 6.7 11.4 2021
2.5 1.4 4.3 5.0 5.3 7.0 0.4 2.7 6.2 7.4 2022
0.3 –1.1 6.7 0.1 –1.0 2.5 1.4 2.1 2.7 2.6 2023
1.5 –0.5 6.0 –0.3 –1.6 2.5 1.6 2.2 2.3 2.4 2023 Q2
1.2 –2.0 7.4 –0.7 –2.2 2.0 1.8 1.9 1.7 2.4 Q3
0.4 –0.7 6.0 –0.5 –2.6 2.8 2.0 2.7 2.3 2.5 Q4
2.9 –0.7 8.1 –0.6 –1.7 1.4 3.3 2.2 2.8 3.6 2024 Q1
1.7 0.0 8.0 0.8 –1.2 1.7 2.0 0.7 3.4 3.7 Q2
2.4 1.1 4.9 1.7 –0.6 1.7 1.2 1.4 3.5 3.9 Q3
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
20.1 8.3 –0.9 4.0 11.0 3.9 10.3 9.9 7.7 6.0 2021
9.3 –3.6 1.5 2.6 5.9 0.6 –4.4 2.0 2.7 2.6 2022
–5.2 –4.2 7.1 –0.0 –0.3 –3.1 4.1 –4.9 –1.7 2.3 2023
0.1 –3.9 7.6 –0.6 0.2 –5.2 3.2 –3.3 –3.0 1.9 2023 Q2
–5.5 –4.5 1.9 –0.7 –0.9 –4.9 1.8 –8.9 –3.1 2.8 Q3
–3.2 –2.1 4.2 –1.8 –2.3 –3.5 8.3 –4.1 –1.1 4.0 Q4
–0.8 –4.2 –2.2 –2.5 –4.8 1.2 –4.5 –3.1 1.1 4.1 2024 Q1
0.2 –0.2 4.2 –2.3 –4.3 1.0 –0.8 –3.1 –0.1 4.6 Q2
3.7 –3.4 1.4 –1.4 –2.8 –0.8 2.9 1.1 –0.6 1.9 Q3
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
77.8 80.7 64.7 83.7 87.7 81.9 83.3 84.9 78.7 58.2 2022
68.4 73.1 68.1 81.9 85.3 81.7 82.1 83.1 76.9 61.6 2023
71.0 76.4 78.7 78.3 82.8 81.2 79.8 81.0 77.6 63.5 2024
68.0 72.0 69.4 81.3 84.7 80.9 83.0 82.8 76.2 62.9 2023 Q3
68.5 70.5 84.1 80.9 83.3 80.9 81.0 82.4 77.8 63.4 Q4
70.6 74.8 75.6 78.8 84.0 81.0 80.1 80.6 77.2 65.1 2024 Q1
70.3 75.3 76.4 79.6 83.3 81.2 77.6 80.8 77.7 63.5 Q2
71.4 76.0 81.4 77.7 81.7 81.3 81.3 81.6 77.9 62.8 Q3
71.5 79.5 81.4 77.0 82.3 81.3 80.3 81.1 77.5 62.5 Q4
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
e 7.2 e 5.4 e 3.8 e 4.2 e 6.2 e 6.8 e 6.9 e 4.8 e 15.0 e 7.2 2021
e 5.9 e 4.6 e 3.5 e 3.6 e 4.8 e 6.2 e 6.2 e 4.0 e 13.0 e 6.3 2022
e 6.9 e 5.3 e 3.5 e 3.5 e 5.1 e 6.5 e 5.9 e 3.7 e 12.2 e 5.9 2023
7.4 6.0 3.2 3.6 5.1 6.4 5.4 3.6 11.6 4.7 2024 May
7.2 6.0 3.1 3.6 5.2 6.5 5.4 3.8 11.5 4.8 June
7.5 6.1 2.9 3.6 5.2 6.5 5.3 4.0 11.4 4.8 July
7.4 6.1 3.0 3.7 5.3 6.4 5.3 4.2 11.3 4.7 Aug.
7.5 6.1 3.0 3.7 5.6 6.6 5.2 4.5 11.2 4.6 Sep.
6.9 6.2 3.0 3.7 5.6 6.6 5.3 4.9 11.2 4.5 Oct.
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
4.6 3.5 0.7 2.8 2.8 0.9 2.8 2.0 3.0 2.3 2021
18.9 8.2 6.1 11.6 8.6 8.1 12.1 9.3 8.3 8.1 2022
8.7 2.9 5.6 4.1 7.7 5.3 11.0 7.2 3.4 3.9 2023
1.0 2.8 2.2 3.4 3.1 3.1 2.4 1.6 3.6 3.0 2024 June
1.1 2.7 2.3 3.5 2.9 2.7 3.0 1.4 2.9 2.4 July
0.8 1.7 2.4 3.3 2.4 1.8 3.2 1.1 2.4 2.2 Aug.
0.4 0.8 2.1 3.3 1.8 2.6 2.9 0.7 1.7 1.6 Sep.
0.1 0.9 2.4 3.3 1.8 2.6 3.5 0.0 1.8 1.6 Oct.
1.1 1.1 2.1 3.8 2.0 2.7 3.6 1.6 2.4 2.2 Nov.
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
–1.1 1.0 –7.0 –2.2 –5.7 –2.8 –5.1 –4.6 –6.7 –1.6 2021
–0.7 0.2 –5.2 0.0 –3.3 –0.3 –1.7 –3.0 –4.6 2.6 2022
–0.7 –0.7 –4.5 –0.4 –2.6 1.2 –5.2 –2.6 –3.5 2.0 2023
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
43.3 24.4 49.6 50.4 82.4 123.9 60.2 74.8 115.7 96.5 2021
38.1 24.6 49.4 48.3 78.4 111.2 57.7 72.7 109.5 81.0 2022
37.3 25.5 47.4 45.1 78.6 97.9 56.1 68.4 105.1 73.6 2023
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of valueadded tax between July and December 2020.  6 Including Croatia from 2023 onwards.
7 According to Maastricht Treaty definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2023 Mar. 29.8 37.0 11.7 –7.2 –9.7 72.5 119.5 47.0 31.9 10.3 1.3 6.4 13.9
Apr. – 5.6 28.0 29.5 –33.5 –29.2 –19.0 –29.2 –10.2 11.0 9.4 1.4 4.3 –4.1
May – 0.2 45.5 33.2 –45.7 –50.0 4.3 22.1 17.8 30.8 –0.4 2.4 27.5 1.3
June 5.2 –9.2 –12.3 14.3 21.1 109.5 13.5 –96.1 36.5 1.2 2.8 26.2 6.3
July –45.6 6.9 5.2 –52.5 –52.1 37.0 109.0 72.0 30.6 0.9 2.9 19.4 7.5
Aug. –56.2 –66.9 –12.2 10.8 13.5 31.4 61.8 30.4 20.9 –2.3 4.0 9.6 9.6
Sep. 37.0 33.5 –1.6 3.5 2.6 62.7 –106.7 –169.4 44.8 15.3 5.0 9.9 14.6
Oct. –33.7 6.0 –10.4 –39.8 –39.3 54.6 49.4 –5.2 22.0 –9.3 4.7 27.1 –0.5
Nov. 38.1 46.9 –1.1 –8.8 –4.7 59.0 51.3 –7.7 19.1 –4.7 5.6 24.5 –6.4
Dec. –57.9 –47.2 2.7 –10.7 –19.6 26.4 –100.1 –126.5 27.4 12.5 5.9 7.4 1.6
2024 Jan. – 8.7 –1.6 25.7 –7.1 –6.9 118.0 111.8 –6.2 76.0 –3.6 7.0 60.8 11.9
Feb. 38.7 38.2 6.8 0.5 11.0 –15.9 98.2 114.1 4.0 0.8 4.8 14.7 –16.3
Mar. 55.5 47.9 4.0 7.5 7.8 63.5 96.0 32.6 36.7 5.0 3.0 35.2 –6.5
Apr. 32.9 24.1 1.3 8.8 4.7 47.4 9.2 –38.2 –5.3 –7.4 2.5 18.6 –19.0
May –24.1 –6.3 –1.1 –17.8 –15.0 41.2 71.3 30.1 6.2 2.2 1.7 –0.5 2.7
June 68.2 51.0 –5.4 17.2 14.3 59.1 –20.7 –79.8 35.6 3.8 1.1 3.9 26.9
July –16.8 14.3 –5.9 –31.2 –26.4 65.5 47.1 –18.5 5.7 –8.5 1.1 5.4 7.8
Aug. – 6.1 –15.8 –4.4 9.7 9.8 53.5 61.5 8.1 17.0 –2.7 0.9 14.5 4.3
Sep. 45.0 47.7 2.1 –2.7 –0.4 56.3 140.7 84.4 41.1 12.1 1.8 12.2 14.9
Oct. –11.6 6.2 1.3 –17.8 –26.2 40.6 –31.5 –72.1 7.8 –7.9 1.3 9.2 5.2
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2023 Mar. 4.8 8.1 6.4 –3.4 –3.7 –12.4 10.5 23.0 15.5 6.0 1.6 4.4 3.5
Apr. – 3.7 13.0 1.2 –16.7 –20.2 62.7 –15.2 –77.9 5.0 2.0 1.5 –3.0 4.5
May 5.0 11.3 –1.3 –6.3 –4.7 9.6 16.5 6.9 16.9 2.7 2.2 6.1 5.8
June 1.5 –1.9 4.1 3.4 5.4 7.6 –6.6 –14.3 9.7 –0.9 2.7 –0.3 8.2
July 5.1 6.8 –1.1 –1.7 –4.7 34.0 8.3 –25.7 24.9 –0.3 3.0 10.2 12.0
Aug. – 6.8 –5.0 –6.1 –1.8 0.3 25.7 –5.3 –31.0 6.6 –2.7 2.7 0.2 6.4
Sep. – 8.2 1.7 0.8 –9.9 –13.3 – 0.1 –2.8 –2.7 21.1 0.1 2.9 11.6 6.4
Oct. – 2.0 0.1 –0.2 –2.1 –5.2 16.2 4.9 –11.3 11.8 –0.1 3.0 5.9 3.0
Nov. 12.2 13.1 –1.1 –0.8 1.8 13.7 –3.4 –17.1 10.6 3.7 3.4 1.0 2.4
Dec. –18.0 –11.1 2.5 –6.9 –5.1 –17.4 –10.6 6.8 8.8 3.2 2.5 1.7 1.4
2024 Jan. 11.1 2.0 –0.5 9.1 6.7 74.5 20.7 –53.7 –1.8 –0.1 2.5 12.7 –17.0
Feb. 10.6 20.2 6.8 –9.6 –7.6 –17.0 40.0 57.1 –6.9 –1.6 2.4 7.7 –15.3
Mar. 8.3 4.3 0.5 4.0 2.0 6.6 4.2 –2.4 –5.3 1.7 1.7 2.4 –11.1
Apr. –13.5 –3.7 –3.9 –9.8 –13.1 41.3 4.2 –37.1 16.0 2.0 0.9 11.2 1.9
May 5.4 14.6 5.7 –9.2 –7.8 17.6 35.0 17.4 19.8 2.7 0.5 5.5 11.1
June 4.2 –4.1 –2.7 8.3 5.1 –24.4 –15.4 9.0 19.8 –0.7 0.4 –2.0 22.1
July 11.2 8.3 –1.5 2.8 2.5 57.0 –2.9 –59.9 3.3 –0.2 0.1 –2.8 6.1
Aug. – 1.6 7.5 –1.6 –9.1 –7.9 10.9 16.8 5.9 10.0 –0.4 0.1 2.1 8.3
Sep. 17.1 9.3 0.8 7.8 5.1 – 8.3 47.4 55.6 8.8 0.1 0.8 –0.4 8.3
Oct. –11.1 3.3 1.5 –14.5 –18.3 27.9 –5.4 –33.3 2.9 –0.6 0.7 4.8 –2.0
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
31.3 34.5 0.0 7.1 10.1 –104.1 3.9 –108.0 119.7 – 5.5 –25.7 10.9 9.3 2023 Mar.
–27.2 –18.4 0.0 8.9 –18.0 –52.1 4.1 –56.3 45.6 –11.4 6.7 21.2 0.3 Apr.
–104.4 88.0 0.0 –30.4 –44.9 –94.4 1.7 –96.1 52.9 – 3.5 29.6 1.5 4.2 May
24.5 52.1 0.0 6.5 22.3 –61.0 3.1 –64.1 94.5 –11.2 –11.2 –6.2 – 3.7 June
–29.1 4.5 0.0 0.2 –28.4 –91.3 3.0 –94.4 73.5 –10.6 4.1 10.6 – 0.9 July
–20.0 5.3 0.0 –43.4 –45.1 –102.0 –7.6 –94.4 81.2 –24.3 4.4 8.4 0.8 Aug.
35.1 –16.1 0.0 46.5 44.6 –11.6 –3.1 – 8.5 79.8 –23.6 – 5.8 –0.7 – 2.1 Sep.
–28.5 63.1 0.0 –44.9 –87.9 –169.1 –4.4 –164.8 102.9 –21.7 25.2 18.8 8.4 Oct.
–48.4 42.9 0.0 76.3 54.4 18.3 –2.9 21.3 48.8 –12.7 22.3 16.9 –10.1 Nov.
14.4 –224.8 0.0 166.9 166.2 71.7 13.8 57.9 75.8 18.7 –27.1 14.4 – 2.1 Dec.
18.9 136.1 0.0 –132.4 –181.4 –238.0 –16.9 –221.1 61.0 – 4.4 27.2 30.8 1.7 2024 Jan.
9.1 6.5 0.0 1.2 15.2 –31.0 –0.7 –30.3 55.8 – 9.6 5.2 –11.4 – 5.6 Feb.
–26.8 –25.0 0.0 121.7 103.9 58.1 5.4 52.7 46.7 – 0.8 23.9 15.7 – 9.4 Mar.
23.9 49.5 0.0 26.4 –23.5 –18.4 2.5 –20.8 –1.8 – 3.3 6.5 22.6 6.4 Apr.
–24.3 17.1 0.0 22.7 48.7 32.5 2.8 29.6 10.2 6.0 – 3.5 –20.7 – 6.3 May
4.1 –76.7 0.0 140.8 150.3 139.8 7.0 132.9 12.3 – 1.8 8.5 10.1 – 4.6 June
–27.3 95.7 0.0 – 9.8 –69.4 –80.9 4.1 –85.0 17.5 – 5.9 24.6 21.0 – 1.6 July
34.6 –99.8 0.0 69.2 57.2 39.9 –1.6 41.4 11.8 5.6 30.0 14.6 – 6.3 Aug.
– 3.6 24.6 0.0 47.6 53.4 30.1 –1.4 31.5 36.0 –12.7 –23.8 –0.0 9.7 Sep.
24.6 –0.3 0.0 12.2 –24.4 –10.3 –0.1 –10.2 –6.5 – 7.6 4.1 18.0 – 0.8 Oct.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
27.1 – 34.8 2.3 0.9 – 15.5 – 45.7 31.8 – 10.4 – 0.2 0.3 8.7 2023 Mar.
– 39.0 86.7 1.9 0.7 6.3 – 11.7 25.3 – 10.2 0.7 0.2 1.9 Apr.
– 11.8 2.8 2.6 0.9 6.7 – 6.2 18.4 – 10.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 5.1 May
– 9.8 8.4 1.7 1.1 0.8 – 29.2 36.7 – 10.0 – 0.3 – 0.0 3.6 June
– 6.4 20.0 1.6 1.3 0.7 – 21.8 31.5 – 10.3 0.3 0.3 0.8 July
7.4 – 1.5 2.9 – 1.9 6.4 – 21.1 30.4 – 11.2 1.1 0.1 7.1 Aug.
– 11.6 – 12.1 3.6 – 1.7 – 5.7 – 13.3 17.8 – 8.6 – 1.0 0.1 – 0.7 Sep.
– 2.4 2.9 1.5 – 0.5 1.9 – 31.2 38.8 – 9.4 0.8 – 0.1 3.0 Oct.
– 9.5 13.9 1.1 – 0.4 11.1 9.4 11.7 – 10.5 1.1 0.1 – 0.8 Nov.
7.7 – 62.1 2.4 2.8 10.2 – 6.6 25.1 – 5.0 – 1.2 0.1 – 2.2 Dec.
– 6.7 108.3 – 7.4 3.7 – 14.3 – 47.5 37.6 – 9.1 3.0 0.1 1.4 2024 Jan.
– 2.3 0.0 2.4 – 0.6 2.7 – 18.3 27.1 – 7.4 1.0 0.0 0.3 Feb.
2.0 – 2.1 2.9 0.7 20.3 2.8 24.9 – 5.8 – 1.5 0.2 – 0.3 Mar.
– 2.9 23.7 1.8 1.5 – 9.1 – 4.4 6.1 – 5.5 – 0.3 0.2 – 5.2 Apr.
3.5 – 26.8 2.4 0.4 26.5 27.6 5.0 – 4.1 – 0.3 0.1 – 1.8 May
– 4.3 – 39.8 1.6 1.7 4.1 1.3 2.3 – 4.5 0.8 0.1 4.2 June
– 6.1 75.8 2.9 1.7 – 4.8 – 7.3 9.0 – 4.2 0.7 0.2 – 3.3 July
6.8 – 40.3 4.2 – 1.1 32.8 22.9 9.3 – 2.9 1.7 0.4 1.5 Aug.
– 5.6 – 6.9 3.9 – 0.9 12.5 6.7 8.9 – 2.7 – 2.7 0.3 2.0 Sep.
3.1 16.2 3.0 – 0.3 – 5.5 5.1 – 3.3 – 2.5 – 0.4 0.1 – 4.5 Oct.
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2022 Sep. 34,586.8 21,901.8 15,558.1 13,191.3 1,545.0 821.7 6,343.7 998.1 5,345.5 7,241.9 5,443.2
Oct. 34,516.0 21,891.0 15,552.2 13,190.1 1,532.9 829.3 6,338.8 995.2 5,343.6 7,334.8 5,290.1
Nov. 34,202.1 22,011.9 15,627.4 13,228.2 1,559.0 840.1 6,384.5 990.3 5,394.2 7,206.6 4,983.6
Dec. 33,845.6 21,792.8 15,515.3 13,123.9 1,556.1 835.4 6,277.5 999.1 5,278.4 6,873.6 5,179.2
2023 Jan. 33,803.8 21,884.1 15,553.5 13,173.2 1,544.7 835.6 6,330.6 1,000.3 5,330.3 6,984.1 4,935.6
Feb. 34,092.1 21,862.9 15,545.5 13,159.9 1,541.1 844.6 6,317.4 991.3 5,326.2 7,001.8 5,227.3
Mar. 33,938.9 21,919.6 15,573.6 13,173.8 1,552.4 847.4 6,346.0 995.4 5,350.6 7,107.2 4,912.1
Apr. 33,942.3 21,909.0 15,601.1 13,168.5 1,566.5 866.2 6,307.9 991.1 5,316.8 7,038.5 4,994.8
May 34,127.4 21,919.7 15,651.1 13,186.0 1,595.7 869.4 6,268.7 995.4 5,273.2 7,150.9 5,056.7
June 34,037.0 21,915.5 15,637.3 13,182.3 1,584.5 870.5 6,278.2 988.5 5,289.7 7,066.1 5,055.4
July 34,171.7 21,867.2 15,642.3 13,180.8 1,586.4 875.1 6,224.9 988.2 5,236.7 7,153.4 5,151.1
Aug. 34,224.1 21,811.9 15,573.8 13,123.8 1,576.8 873.2 6,238.1 986.1 5,252.0 7,251.6 5,160.6
Sep. 34,369.5 21,796.9 15,601.8 13,156.3 1,574.7 870.9 6,195.0 987.3 5,207.8 7,195.8 5,376.8
Oct. 34,326.1 21,755.4 15,598.7 13,167.0 1,555.7 876.0 6,156.7 984.1 5,172.6 7,262.7 5,308.1
Nov. 34,122.3 21,851.9 15,660.3 13,220.8 1,558.6 881.0 6,191.6 980.8 5,210.7 7,252.0 5,018.4
Dec. 33,749.4 21,859.7 15,626.9 13,177.4 1,552.2 897.3 6,232.9 989.4 5,243.4 7,143.5 4,746.2
2024 Jan. 33,820.7 21,827.2 15,622.9 13,145.8 1,569.5 907.5 6,204.3 987.6 5,216.7 7,293.4 4,700.1
Feb. 33,992.4 21,841.1 15,654.0 13,167.9 1,569.9 916.2 6,187.2 977.4 5,209.8 7,382.8 4,768.5
Mar. 34,205.3 21,915.1 15,704.4 13,208.4 1,567.4 928.6 6,210.7 977.0 5,233.7 7,545.7 4,744.5
Apr. 34,382.7 21,920.0 15,722.4 13,231.5 1,562.7 928.3 6,197.6 980.4 5,217.2 7,599.5 4,863.1
May 34,346.5 21,897.2 15,721.6 13,232.0 1,560.0 929.6 6,175.6 977.7 5,197.9 7,640.2 4,809.1
June 34,354.3 21,978.4 15,780.3 13,299.1 1,563.0 918.2 6,198.1 980.7 5,217.4 7,673.4 4,702.5
July 34,372.3 21,997.9 15,795.6 13,314.2 1,557.8 923.5 6,202.3 975.8 5,226.5 7,732.9 4,641.5
Aug. 34,359.4 21,988.7 15,774.1 13,295.5 1,559.0 919.6 6,214.6 975.8 5,238.8 7,752.8 4,617.8
Sep. 34,651.9 22,057.0 15,819.1 13,336.0 1,560.6 922.5 6,237.9 973.7 5,264.1 7,906.8 4,688.0
Oct. 34,799.8 22,028.0 15,825.1 13,342.1 1,557.8 925.1 6,202.9 983.7 5,219.2 7,994.4 4,777.4
German contribution (€ billion)
2022 Sep. 8,857.6 5,356.3 4,153.9 3,624.8 246.1 283.0 1,202.4 284.3 918.1 1,502.4 1,998.8
Oct. 8,826.7 5,366.0 4,163.6 3,634.6 245.9 283.1 1,202.4 284.8 917.5 1,509.0 1,951.8
Nov. 8,653.9 5,402.0 4,189.2 3,656.3 249.8 283.1 1,212.8 283.4 929.4 1,502.4 1,749.6
Dec. 8,626.1 5,345.2 4,165.8 3,636.7 245.9 283.2 1,179.4 283.2 896.1 1,417.3 1,863.7
2023 Jan. 8,561.4 5,377.1 4,178.3 3,652.7 245.9 279.7 1,198.8 285.0 913.9 1,443.8 1,740.5
Feb. 8,712.0 5,371.7 4,186.6 3,662.2 243.6 280.9 1,185.1 284.0 901.1 1,443.9 1,896.4
Mar. 8,573.5 5,388.1 4,193.6 3,661.9 252.1 279.6 1,194.5 284.2 910.3 1,457.2 1,728.2
Apr. 8,559.3 5,383.7 4,206.2 3,672.7 252.4 281.1 1,177.5 287.7 889.8 1,435.7 1,739.8
May 8,614.3 5,389.9 4,217.4 3,685.4 252.1 279.9 1,172.6 286.1 886.4 1,468.3 1,756.1
June 8,647.9 5,387.4 4,215.9 3,679.0 255.5 281.4 1,171.5 284.2 887.4 1,433.5 1,826.9
July 8,779.6 5,390.2 4,222.0 3,685.7 255.6 280.6 1,168.3 287.2 881.1 1,439.0 1,950.5
Aug. 8,776.6 5,383.7 4,215.6 3,685.5 249.4 280.6 1,168.1 285.0 883.0 1,442.2 1,950.7
Sep. 8,834.2 5,362.1 4,216.4 3,686.3 248.5 281.5 1,145.8 288.4 857.4 1,446.5 2,025.5
Oct. 8,844.5 5,360.6 4,215.5 3,685.5 247.9 282.1 1,145.1 291.6 853.5 1,461.4 2,022.6
Nov. 8,661.3 5,385.7 4,228.0 3,697.3 248.4 282.3 1,157.8 289.7 868.1 1,446.0 1,829.6
Dec. 8,491.7 5,384.9 4,217.3 3,682.2 247.9 287.2 1,167.6 287.1 880.5 1,432.1 1,674.6
2024 Jan. 8,532.9 5,390.7 4,218.3 3,682.5 246.2 289.6 1,172.4 289.5 882.9 1,463.2 1,679.1
Feb. 8,600.8 5,391.4 4,236.7 3,694.8 250.2 291.7 1,154.7 287.7 867.0 1,502.2 1,707.2
Mar. 8,586.9 5,404.4 4,241.0 3,697.7 246.0 297.3 1,163.4 289.8 873.7 1,524.9 1,657.5
Apr. 8,673.8 5,380.1 4,235.7 3,697.3 244.1 294.3 1,144.4 293.1 851.3 1,544.0 1,749.8
May 8,644.6 5,383.0 4,248.9 3,704.9 246.6 297.4 1,134.1 291.8 842.3 1,573.2 1,688.4
June 8,574.0 5,393.1 4,244.9 3,703.4 247.7 293.7 1,148.2 295.0 853.2 1,566.2 1,614.8
July 8,449.2 5,410.8 4,252.2 3,711.1 244.7 296.3 1,158.6 295.1 863.5 1,563.6 1,474.8
Aug. 8,402.4 5,408.8 4,257.5 3,718.0 244.0 295.4 1,151.4 293.9 857.5 1,573.0 1,420.6
Sep. 8,536.6 5,431.5 4,266.3 3,725.5 244.7 296.1 1,165.2 296.6 868.7 1,625.2 1,479.9
Oct. 8,661.7 5,413.2 4,267.0 3,725.1 244.8 297.1 1,146.2 302.1 844.1 1,649.9 1,598.5
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,537.7 16,198.7 14,785.5 15,036.3 9,694.6 907.9 125.5 1,755.1 2,525.7 27.6 2022 Sep.
1,537.2 16,094.9 14,708.1 14,936.4 9,513.8 987.2 130.0 1,740.4 2,522.9 42.1 Oct.
1,533.7 16,084.3 14,722.5 14,917.2 9,448.4 1,036.9 134.1 1,739.6 2,516.0 42.3 Nov.
1,545.3 15,996.8 14,766.2 14,929.6 9,380.0 1,094.3 133.8 1,749.0 2,530.0 42.4 Dec.
1,533.4 15,876.1 14,667.2 14,844.5 9,212.2 1,160.0 146.3 1,745.7 2,532.0 48.2 2023 Jan.
1,529.9 15,842.9 14,625.3 14,773.4 9,067.7 1,220.4 157.6 1,746.0 2,531.8 49.9 Feb.
1,533.8 15,891.9 14,649.7 14,788.7 8,973.5 1,309.2 173.8 1,756.0 2,524.8 51.4 Mar.
1,537.9 15,848.9 14,650.2 14,784.8 8,924.0 1,341.7 187.5 1,764.9 2,513.9 52.8 Apr.
1,539.7 15,718.0 14,618.0 14,756.7 8,840.4 1,383.3 199.5 1,767.3 2,511.0 55.2 May
1,542.7 15,760.5 14,649.9 14,755.8 8,761.2 1,451.8 217.6 1,767.5 2,499.8 58.0 June
1,545.9 15,696.0 14,619.8 14,725.4 8,668.3 1,508.3 231.0 1,767.7 2,489.2 60.9 July
1,538.3 15,646.8 14,595.4 14,694.0 8,578.0 1,579.2 240.9 1,765.9 2,465.1 65.0 Aug.
1,535.2 15,756.0 14,654.7 14,766.5 8,569.2 1,647.6 255.2 1,782.7 2,441.7 70.1 Sep.
1,530.8 15,636.6 14,576.9 14,702.2 8,421.3 1,736.5 275.6 1,773.4 2,420.5 74.9 Oct.
1,527.9 15,648.3 14,645.5 14,759.2 8,426.3 1,776.1 286.2 1,782.0 2,408.0 80.6 Nov.
1,541.7 15,822.6 14,816.0 14,927.5 8,489.3 1,826.8 302.1 1,795.3 2,427.3 86.7 Dec.
1,524.2 15,687.2 14,668.3 14,801.5 8,295.5 1,879.2 317.0 1,793.6 2,423.4 92.8 2024 Jan.
1,523.5 15,709.3 14,689.3 14,792.0 8,241.0 1,924.1 325.3 1,790.1 2,413.7 97.8 Feb.
1,528.9 15,792.0 14,786.0 14,897.9 8,297.0 1,964.2 327.5 1,795.6 2,412.7 100.9 Mar.
1,531.4 15,780.1 14,757.6 14,899.5 8,292.2 1,977.9 328.1 1,788.2 2,409.6 103.5 Apr.
1,534.2 15,826.2 14,819.5 14,960.6 8,321.3 2,000.0 328.6 1,789.7 2,415.9 105.3 May
1,541.2 15,990.4 14,963.9 15,083.4 8,422.0 2,020.4 325.6 1,794.6 2,414.4 106.4 June
1,545.2 15,879.7 14,869.8 15,026.9 8,358.4 2,043.9 322.4 1,785.9 2,408.8 107.4 July
1,543.7 15,993.0 14,950.1 15,098.6 8,415.4 2,056.8 321.7 1,781.8 2,414.5 108.4 Aug.
1,542.2 16,053.5 15,001.3 15,137.1 8,423.0 2,082.0 326.0 1,793.6 2,402.3 110.2 Sep.
1,542.1 16,059.2 14,984.0 15,145.8 8,433.4 2,094.3 323.3 1,787.2 2,395.9 111.6 Oct.
German contribution (€ billion)
371.8 4,541.5 4,267.4 4,135.1 2,834.9 193.7 30.9 530.3 523.0 22.2 2022 Sep.
371.8 4,546.8 4,270.2 4,140.4 2,804.0 233.2 31.6 529.3 519.8 22.4 Oct.
371.5 4,578.7 4,283.7 4,146.3 2,806.0 240.1 32.1 531.0 514.4 22.6 Nov.
374.0 4,534.2 4,260.8 4,119.2 2,764.3 260.2 34.1 527.1 510.4 23.0 Dec.
368.9 4,489.3 4,257.7 4,126.0 2,749.9 286.6 36.9 529.6 499.1 24.0 2023 Jan.
368.1 4,496.6 4,250.9 4,106.5 2,706.5 314.2 39.1 530.3 491.2 25.2 Feb.
369.0 4,505.7 4,236.8 4,090.4 2,667.4 336.4 42.4 536.3 481.0 26.8 Mar.
369.8 4,473.0 4,248.0 4,104.2 2,660.3 360.2 46.1 538.3 471.0 28.3 Apr.
370.7 4,469.7 4,256.0 4,103.8 2,647.5 373.8 50.3 540.9 460.8 30.5 May
371.7 4,460.3 4,259.3 4,096.2 2,616.5 400.5 54.1 541.0 450.9 33.2 June
373.1 4,455.4 4,259.2 4,106.1 2,603.8 426.9 57.6 540.8 440.7 36.2 July
371.2 4,460.4 4,259.8 4,101.7 2,577.8 455.8 61.5 538.1 429.6 38.9 Aug.
369.4 4,448.9 4,258.5 4,104.2 2,568.6 468.0 66.2 538.5 421.1 41.8 Sep.
369.0 4,447.4 4,259.3 4,129.3 2,553.2 507.9 73.1 538.5 411.7 44.8 Oct.
368.6 4,454.3 4,281.0 4,149.1 2,561.8 515.9 79.5 542.6 401.2 48.3 Nov.
371.4 4,470.1 4,290.9 4,150.5 2,539.8 532.4 84.0 547.3 396.2 50.8 Dec.
375.1 4,448.1 4,271.5 4,150.1 2,502.4 569.5 89.5 548.1 387.2 53.4 2024 Jan.
374.5 4,447.8 4,273.8 4,147.4 2,481.0 590.5 94.7 545.6 379.8 55.8 Feb.
375.2 4,475.1 4,300.5 4,166.8 2,483.2 607.5 97.0 547.6 374.1 57.4 Mar.
376.6 4,471.9 4,300.6 4,182.7 2,486.3 620.9 98.9 549.6 368.6 58.4 Apr.
377.0 4,506.4 4,331.5 4,204.0 2,501.4 626.2 100.7 552.3 364.5 58.9 May
378.6 4,503.4 4,332.6 4,196.1 2,501.6 619.0 102.5 553.7 360.1 59.2 June
380.3 4,494.3 4,327.9 4,212.7 2,507.6 632.9 103.3 553.6 355.9 59.4 July
379.3 4,560.5 4,387.5 4,265.1 2,551.7 643.3 104.6 553.0 353.0 59.5 Aug.
378.4 4,568.2 4,398.5 4,270.7 2,556.5 645.1 105.3 553.2 350.3 60.3 Sep.
378.1 4,572.2 4,401.9 4,288.7 2,568.2 653.3 105.8 552.5 347.9 61.0 Oct.
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2022 Sep. 683.2 479.1 282.0 111.2 24.5 42.3 16.0 3.2 264.8 264.7 589.1 2,142.4 1,404.3
Oct. 678.1 480.5 287.5 109.2 24.3 41.5 14.7 3.2 268.2 268.2 625.8 2,118.8 1,405.0
Nov. 668.3 498.8 306.5 109.1 25.1 40.8 14.2 3.2 294.8 294.8 648.0 2,149.8 1,432.2
Dec. 583.5 483.7 296.2 103.6 27.2 40.2 13.5 3.0 247.7 247.7 650.9 2,155.0 1,463.5
2023 Jan. 550.6 480.9 283.2 113.2 27.5 40.6 12.8 3.7 283.3 283.3 657.7 2,195.2 1,500.6
Feb. 570.9 498.6 297.5 115.2 28.7 40.3 13.2 3.7 281.6 281.5 651.3 2,247.7 1,520.1
Mar. 602.4 500.8 288.6 125.8 28.4 39.6 14.7 3.7 255.3 255.2 662.3 2,246.0 1,540.4
Apr. 575.3 488.8 278.5 123.3 29.7 39.4 14.2 3.7 261.7 261.3 683.4 2,242.5 1,550.5
May 470.7 490.6 277.9 126.7 29.3 39.4 13.8 3.6 291.9 287.8 685.0 2,288.8 1,579.9
June 495.1 509.5 288.6 134.7 29.4 39.3 13.8 3.6 280.4 280.3 678.8 2,302.0 1,589.6
July 466.0 504.6 281.7 137.7 28.4 39.4 13.9 3.6 284.1 283.4 689.4 2,391.9 1,635.9
Aug. 446.0 506.9 283.2 138.6 28.0 39.6 13.8 3.5 288.9 288.9 698.0 2,409.5 1,645.9
Sep. 481.2 508.2 285.3 136.7 29.3 39.7 13.8 3.4 281.7 281.7 697.3 2,431.8 1,657.7
Oct. 452.7 481.7 266.6 131.0 28.5 39.2 13.1 3.3 306.8 306.6 716.2 2,491.3 1,694.5
Nov. 404.4 484.6 274.9 127.5 27.2 38.9 13.0 3.2 328.5 328.4 733.2 2,489.2 1,696.6
Dec. 418.8 476.3 265.6 128.4 28.4 38.6 12.4 3.1 320.5 320.5 746.5 2,485.3 1,701.1
2024 Jan. 437.3 448.4 238.5 127.8 28.4 37.5 12.2 4.0 345.4 343.4 777.5 2,529.0 1,731.0
Feb. 446.3 470.9 260.7 130.6 26.1 38.1 11.7 3.8 348.0 347.3 766.2 2,538.8 1,749.8
Mar. 419.6 474.5 258.7 135.5 26.9 37.7 12.0 3.7 372.0 371.2 781.9 2,563.6 1,761.6
Apr. 442.7 437.9 232.4 129.8 22.6 37.7 11.8 3.7 378.6 372.2 804.7 2,593.4 1,775.4
May 418.5 447.1 244.2 127.8 22.2 37.7 11.6 3.6 374.8 366.0 785.5 2,578.6 1,771.1
June 422.7 484.3 275.5 133.7 22.8 37.4 11.4 3.5 383.8 383.7 796.9 2,586.0 1,770.7
July 395.4 457.5 253.1 129.9 22.9 36.9 11.2 3.5 408.1 390.0 819.1 2,582.7 1,774.5
Aug. 430.1 464.4 263.3 126.9 22.7 36.9 11.1 3.5 437.4 416.6 835.1 2,579.1 1,783.2
Sep. 426.5 489.9 283.2 135.2 20.7 36.8 10.6 3.4 413.3 400.2 836.4 2,589.4 1,802.2
Oct. 450.7 462.7 269.4 123.4 20.1 36.9 9.6 3.4 418.3 397.0 855.5 2,612.0 1,799.0
German contribution (€ billion)
2022 Sep. 147.4 259.1 109.0 96.6 20.8 30.3 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.4 640.0 395.3
Oct. 152.5 253.9 108.1 93.1 20.5 30.1 2.1 0.1 5.2 5.2 2.5 633.9 398.1
Nov. 175.5 256.9 114.7 88.9 21.5 29.8 1.9 0.1 8.3 8.3 2.5 634.2 402.6
Dec. 159.2 255.8 117.3 83.2 23.9 29.6 1.8 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.6 631.2 409.3
2023 Jan. 116.4 246.9 99.4 92.2 23.8 29.8 1.6 0.1 6.1 6.1 2.4 639.6 417.9
Feb. 129.3 260.8 110.3 94.6 24.6 29.7 1.5 0.1 7.5 7.5 2.3 651.5 427.1
Mar. 156.4 258.8 102.2 101.4 24.1 29.6 1.4 0.1 7.2 7.2 2.6 658.0 440.3
Apr. 117.4 251.4 97.3 97.8 25.4 29.5 1.3 0.1 7.9 7.9 2.7 654.9 446.8
May 105.6 260.2 104.8 99.5 25.0 29.7 1.2 0.1 7.7 7.7 2.6 670.6 458.1
June 95.9 268.2 106.1 106.5 24.9 29.5 1.1 0.1 7.3 7.3 2.6 671.6 452.8
July 89.5 259.9 96.6 109.1 23.7 29.5 0.9 0.1 7.6 7.6 2.9 679.9 457.6
Aug. 96.8 261.9 100.9 107.1 23.3 29.6 0.9 0.1 8.7 8.7 3.0 688.8 469.0
Sep. 85.2 259.5 97.5 107.0 24.5 29.6 0.8 0.1 7.8 7.8 3.0 705.6 470.0
Oct. 82.8 235.3 81.6 99.3 24.1 29.4 0.7 0.1 8.5 8.5 2.9 713.0 476.3
Nov. 73.3 231.8 81.2 97.7 22.7 29.2 0.7 0.1 9.6 9.6 3.0 706.2 471.0
Dec. 81.1 238.6 84.9 100.3 23.9 28.6 0.7 0.1 8.4 8.4 3.2 699.9 476.8
2024 Jan. 74.4 223.6 75.5 95.6 24.0 27.8 0.7 0.1 11.4 11.4 3.3 717.4 486.5
Feb. 72.0 228.4 78.6 98.8 21.6 28.6 0.6 0.1 12.4 12.4 3.3 727.1 494.5
Mar. 74.0 234.4 79.3 103.5 22.5 28.3 0.6 0.1 11.0 10.9 3.5 727.8 501.4
Apr. 71.2 218.0 72.0 97.9 19.3 28.2 0.6 0.1 10.6 10.6 3.7 737.0 505.8
May 74.7 227.7 83.8 96.1 18.9 28.2 0.6 0.1 10.3 10.3 3.8 738.4 508.7
June 70.5 236.9 85.4 103.0 19.9 27.9 0.5 0.1 11.1 11.1 4.0 741.5 506.2
July 64.4 217.3 71.8 97.3 19.9 27.6 0.5 0.1 11.9 11.9 4.2 731.6 506.8
Aug. 71.1 224.3 81.5 94.7 19.7 27.7 0.5 0.1 13.5 13.5 4.6 731.6 506.9
Sep. 65.6 231.9 83.1 102.8 17.8 27.6 0.5 0.1 10.8 10.8 4.9 730.4 508.9
Oct. 68.3 215.3 77.8 91.9 17.3 27.7 0.5 0.1 10.5 10.5 4.9 735.8 506.8
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
34.9 19.5 2,088.0 5,899.0 2,820.5 16.9 5,117.9 0.0 11,688.2 15,421.1 16,181.4 6,736.8 196.2 2022 Sep.
3.8 23.9 2,091.1 6,038.8 2,794.9 38.3 4,999.1 0.0 11,512.1 15,323.3 16,101.2 6,713.2 196.4 Oct.
23.7 22.8 2,103.3 5,881.3 2,842.8 66.5 4,700.8 0.0 11,466.5 15,324.0 16,152.7 6,771.9 200.1 Nov.
31.7 23.2 2,100.0 5,553.5 2,805.2 58.0 4,833.3 0.0 11,388.1 15,316.6 16,132.9 6,739.9 192.7 Dec.
17.6 27.9 2,149.7 5,636.6 2,863.0 86.0 4,672.5 0.0 11,199.1 15,212.2 16,043.9 6,850.9 191.6 2023 Jan.
47.0 30.4 2,170.3 5,670.8 2,817.1 79.8 4,971.0 0.0 11,066.2 15,154.2 16,009.8 6,827.3 192.2 Feb.
53.9 30.4 2,161.7 5,667.1 2,902.7 90.1 4,689.7 0.0 10,955.3 15,155.0 16,004.7 6,915.1 182.5 Mar.
50.2 32.9 2,159.4 5,633.5 2,895.0 110.4 4,728.9 0.0 10,900.3 15,133.6 16,008.3 6,915.2 182.9 Apr.
56.0 32.8 2,200.0 5,722.1 2,910.6 155.5 4,815.8 0.0 10,813.4 15,100.0 15,991.5 6,976.1 178.5 May
49.8 33.0 2,219.3 5,584.4 2,881.2 147.2 4,859.8 0.0 10,747.9 15,117.6 15,990.6 6,968.9 178.0 June
47.0 34.0 2,311.0 5,594.1 2,900.4 102.5 4,967.3 0.0 10,653.6 15,084.7 15,985.1 7,083.0 180.5 July
50.1 33.4 2,326.0 5,656.5 2,919.6 122.1 4,944.4 0.0 10,553.8 15,042.0 15,946.1 7,119.7 176.9 Aug.
45.1 36.4 2,350.4 5,541.1 2,883.4 113.5 5,129.5 0.0 10,547.2 15,094.2 16,001.0 7,129.7 180.3 Sep.
54.5 36.6 2,400.2 5,511.8 2,908.5 121.7 5,102.5 0.0 10,375.9 15,003.5 15,954.5 7,199.5 179.6 Oct.
45.2 36.0 2,408.1 5,446.4 2,937.9 165.3 4,845.6 0.0 10,387.7 15,047.8 16,020.2 7,250.8 180.8 Nov.
46.0 34.8 2,404.5 5,299.3 3,004.7 56.1 4,472.7 0.0 10,446.0 15,199.4 16,192.2 7,332.8 177.4 Dec.
40.5 36.1 2,452.3 5,334.6 3,004.2 105.8 4,512.9 0.0 10,212.5 15,026.6 16,060.4 7,384.3 180.3 2024 Jan.
33.5 36.3 2,469.0 5,447.9 2,966.0 99.1 4,593.7 0.0 10,182.0 15,039.4 16,057.9 7,364.8 182.7 Feb.
22.2 40.0 2,501.4 5,483.2 3,028.1 106.0 4,549.7 0.0 10,240.0 15,143.3 16,181.4 7,467.4 179.9 Mar.
28.0 39.5 2,525.9 5,462.6 3,022.6 108.0 4,701.2 0.0 10,223.2 15,123.2 16,210.5 7,481.5 187.4 Apr.
17.8 42.4 2,518.3 5,463.9 3,022.0 104.6 4,656.8 0.0 10,252.6 15,178.7 16,240.1 7,476.6 173.0 May
13.8 43.5 2,528.7 5,420.1 3,059.0 70.6 4,506.4 0.0 10,394.7 15,343.9 16,399.3 7,529.6 176.8 June
13.2 43.1 2,526.4 5,381.3 3,118.5 105.4 4,532.2 0.0 10,311.8 15,271.9 16,388.6 7,578.7 176.1 July
– 1.3 51.2 2,529.2 5,338.9 3,139.9 41.4 4,450.9 0.0 10,378.1 15,352.5 16,481.7 7,599.7 176.5 Aug.
3.6 54.7 2,531.2 5,405.5 3,203.4 42.8 4,565.3 0.0 10,405.5 15,402.2 16,525.2 7,678.5 176.9 Sep.
2.0 54.8 2,555.2 5,386.4 3,254.9 43.0 4,628.5 0.0 10,402.0 15,388.2 16,549.2 7,749.1 176.7 Oct.
German contribution (€ billion)
27.5 8.1 604.3 1,385.2 711.9 –1,287.1 2,858.3 516.8 2,944.0 3,811.2 3,854.6 1,899.2 0.0 2022 Sep.
19.1 9.7 605.0 1,355.1 693.8 –1,215.2 2,804.7 516.8 2,912.1 3,812.3 3,848.8 1,880.8 0.0 Oct.
20.8 11.2 602.2 1,310.2 714.6 –1,191.2 2,596.7 516.8 2,920.8 3,819.7 3,862.5 1,900.3 0.0 Nov.
20.2 11.7 599.3 1,265.7 690.1 –1,230.4 2,726.5 518.9 2,881.6 3,795.1 3,835.9 1,869.2 0.0 Dec.
24.0 13.1 602.4 1,226.5 689.1 –1,117.5 2,625.9 521.2 2,849.3 3,789.5 3,835.2 1,874.9 0.0 2023 Jan.
29.3 15.8 606.4 1,171.8 668.4 –1,073.2 2,787.2 522.2 2,816.8 3,782.0 3,836.8 1,860.1 0.0 Feb.
36.2 17.5 604.3 1,188.0 700.6 –1,129.7 2,641.2 524.5 2,769.6 3,756.4 3,819.8 1,897.7 0.0 Mar.
37.0 18.5 599.4 1,107.1 704.2 –1,028.5 2,637.8 526.4 2,757.6 3,759.4 3,825.5 1,899.8 0.0 Apr.
41.2 19.5 609.9 1,122.5 715.6 –1,036.9 2,662.4 529.0 2,752.3 3,762.8 3,833.9 1,926.7 0.0 May
44.6 19.2 607.9 1,099.9 709.8 –1,026.8 2,723.1 530.7 2,722.6 3,760.6 3,834.2 1,921.6 0.0 June
44.5 19.9 615.4 1,070.7 724.0 –996.4 2,835.7 532.2 2,700.4 3,759.3 3,834.2 1,946.1 0.0 July
51.0 20.6 617.2 1,044.4 734.2 –998.8 2,835.9 535.1 2,678.7 3,756.9 3,840.1 1,958.1 0.0 Aug.
48.5 22.6 634.5 1,048.4 722.8 –1,000.9 2,898.6 538.7 2,666.2 3,753.7 3,835.5 1,967.4 0.0 Sep.
49.7 24.4 639.0 1,035.9 735.9 –998.0 2,898.7 540.2 2,634.8 3,751.7 3,837.2 1,987.9 0.0 Oct.
49.6 23.6 633.1 1,012.0 753.5 –983.0 2,705.7 541.3 2,643.0 3,760.7 3,846.5 2,006.8 0.0 Nov.
45.9 25.0 629.0 1,016.2 778.6 –1,034.8 2,550.2 543.7 2,624.7 3,762.2 3,844.6 2,034.5 0.0 Dec.
46.9 25.6 645.0 967.8 758.4 –959.8 2,586.3 536.2 2,577.9 3,744.3 3,831.5 2,032.8 0.0 2024 Jan.
46.4 26.4 654.4 1,024.7 731.1 –992.0 2,646.3 538.6 2,559.6 3,745.7 3,834.2 2,015.6 0.0 Feb.
45.7 26.7 655.4 1,022.6 744.6 –988.1 2,590.4 541.5 2,562.4 3,767.6 3,854.5 2,033.5 0.0 Mar.
40.9 26.3 669.7 987.7 747.2 –960.2 2,676.0 543.3 2,558.3 3,764.4 3,846.0 2,053.2 0.0 Apr.
39.6 25.8 673.1 1,001.7 746.9 –986.7 2,623.7 545.7 2,585.2 3,792.3 3,871.8 2,059.4 0.0 May
43.9 25.7 671.9 1,015.1 777.5 –1,013.2 2,534.5 547.3 2,587.0 3,792.0 3,876.7 2,090.4 0.0 June
40.7 25.6 665.3 951.2 798.5 –972.6 2,430.1 550.2 2,579.4 3,789.3 3,871.6 2,104.4 0.0 July
42.8 24.8 664.0 949.8 808.5 –1,038.9 2,372.7 554.4 2,633.2 3,849.0 3,934.8 2,112.8 0.0 Aug.
45.8 23.9 660.7 1,003.0 830.4 –1,045.3 2,434.4 558.3 2,639.6 3,861.4 3,946.7 2,132.3 0.0 Sep.
43.2 22.0 670.6 971.9 847.2 –1,023.5 2,542.7 561.3 2,646.0 3,862.6 3,943.3 2,159.1 0.0 Oct.
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2022 Nov. 955.8 4.0 2,118.8 0.0 4,948.3 4,490.0 0.0 1,563.7 536.7 1,104.4 332.0 6,385.7
Dec. 960.4 1.9 1,947.1 0.0 4,946.1 4,521.5 0.0 1,560.8 492.5 1,066.9 213.8 6,296.2
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 940.4 1.2 1,303.3 0.1 4,942.1 4,051.6 0.0 1,565.6 372.8 1,001.6 195.6 5,812.7
Mar. 916.8 0.9 1,233.3 0.0 4,939.0 4,103.0 0.0 1,553.9 380.2 861.8 191.1 5,848.0
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 945.0 1.4 1,117.7 0.1 4,905.6 3,996.1 0.0 1,559.8 360.6 870.5 182.7 5,738.6
June 948.2 1.6 1,100.5 0.1 4,884.1 4,126.4 0.0 1,563.7 256.4 806.6 181.6 5,871.7
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 927.8 10.9 682.0 0.1 4,853.0 3,704.4 0.0 1,567.0 254.4 770.5 177.4 5,448.9
Sep. 924.3 5.6 601.0 0.1 4,811.2 3,647.4 0.0 1,564.2 222.5 733.8 174.3 5,386.0
Oct. 931.2 8.1 515.4 0.1 4,767.9 3,577.4 0.0 1,554.7 222.7 693.3 174.6 5,306.7
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 933.3 7.3 495.9 0.0 4,715.0 3,548.8 0.0 1,551.1 194.1 685.3 172.0 5,271.9
2024 Jan. 958.3 7.9 396.2 0.1 4,686.8 3,487.4 0.0 1,556.7 168.4 666.3 170.5 5,214.6
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 966.5 4.8 397.3 0.0 4,646.4 3,490.9 0.0 1,543.2 168.5 643.8 168.6 5,202.7
Apr. 1,002.8 2.8 249.4 0.0 4,599.5 3,337.9 0.0 1,546.1 137.8 664.3 168.4 5,052.3
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 1,031.7 2.5 149.1 0.0 4,550.7 3,214.0 0.0 1,551.5 119.5 682.3 166.7 4,932.1
July 1,063.7 5.7 104.9 0.0 4,494.3 3,113.2 0.0 1,559.5 115.2 712.7 168.1 4,840.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 1,083.7 3.0 85.5 0.0 4,442.0 3,058.7 0.0 1,564.2 119.2 702.9 169.3 4,792.2
Oct. 1,123.9 7.8 49.2 0.0 4,396.1 2,989.1 0.0 1,560.2 117.4 741.1 169.0 4,718.4
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deutsche Bundesbank
2022 Nov. 231.7 0.8 400.5 0.0 1,071.5 1,304.0 0.0 379.0 127.2 – 231.4 125.9 1,808.8
Dec. 232.4 0.5 352.5 0.0 1,079.2 1,346.6 0.0 378.8 121.0 – 242.4 60.5 1,785.9
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 229.8 0.4 231.9 0.1 1,076.8 1,234.6 0.0 377.2 77.8 – 205.4 54.8 1,666.7
Mar. 228.9 0.4 212.8 0.0 1,077.0 1,263.7 0.0 374.5 69.2 – 242.5 54.2 1,692.4
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 239.2 0.7 200.2 0.1 1,066.1 1,228.0 0.0 375.7 73.4 – 221.1 50.1 1,653.9
June 241.7 0.7 198.9 0.1 1,056.8 1,256.3 0.0 377.2 54.7 – 241.8 52.0 1,685.4
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 236.2 1.5 142.4 0.1 1,048.8 1,175.5 0.0 377.5 49.9 – 222.5 48.4 1,601.5
Sep. 234.5 0.8 131.2 0.1 1,041.3 1,177.8 0.0 377.3 40.1 – 235.4 48.0 1,603.1
Oct. 235.7 1.3 96.3 0.0 1,024.0 1,151.1 0.0 374.9 28.7 – 245.4 47.9 1,574.0
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 236.8 0.7 89.2 0.0 1,016.7 1,171.3 0.0 373.5 18.9 – 267.7 47.3 1,592.1
2024 Jan. 243.9 0.9 69.5 0.1 1,005.8 1,127.3 0.0 379.3 19.8 – 253.3 47.0 1,553.6
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 246.5 0.7 69.3 0.0 996.7 1,164.4 0.0 379.2 16.3 – 293.4 46.7 1,590.3
Apr. 257.8 0.7 40.4 0.0 983.5 1,122.4 0.0 379.4 17.1 – 282.5 45.9 1,547.7
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 265.9 0.6 21.3 0.0 970.0 1,102.8 0.0 380.9 13.5 – 285.8 46.3 1,530.0
July 275.7 0.7 15.7 0.0 954.3 1,092.8 0.0 383.0 12.1 – 287.6 46.1 1,521.9
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 280.5 0.6 13.3 0.0 943.3 1,044.7 0.0 384.6 11.4 – 249.5 46.6 1,475.9
Oct. 292.6 1.0 8.8 0.0 929.0 1,031.5 0.0 384.1 11.7 – 241.7 45.7 1,461.3
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
+ 5.7 + 2.3 – 6.1 ± 0.0 – 6.5 +3,783.0 ± 0.0 –21.6 –17.2 –144.8 –3,604.1 +157.2 2022 Nov.
+ 4.6 – 2.1 –171.7 ± 0.0 – 2.2 +31.5 ± 0.0 – 2.9 –44.2 –37.5 –118.2 –89.5 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
–20.0 – 0.7 –643.8 + 0.1 – 4.0 –469.9 ± 0.0 + 4.8 –119.7 –65.3 –18.2 –483.5 Feb.
–23.6 – 0.3 –70.0 – 0.1 – 3.1 +51.4 ± 0.0 –11.7 +7.4 –139.8 – 4.5 +35.3 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+28.2 + 0.5 –115.6 + 0.1 –33.4 –106.9 ± 0.0 + 5.9 –19.6 + 8.7 – 8.4 –109.4 May
+ 3.2 + 0.2 –17.2 ± 0.0 –21.5 +130.3 ± 0.0 + 3.9 –104.2 –63.9 – 1.1 +133.1 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
–20.4 + 9.3 –418.5 ± 0.0 –31.1 –422.0 ± 0.0 + 3.3 –2.0 –36.1 – 4.2 –422.8 Aug.
– 3.5 – 5.3 –81.0 ± 0.0 –41.8 –57.0 ± 0.0 – 2.8 –31.9 –36.7 – 3.1 –62.9 Sep.
+ 6.9 + 2.5 –85.6 ± 0.0 –43.3 –70.0 ± 0.0 – 9.5 +0.2 –40.5 + 0.3 –79.3 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 2.1 – 0.8 –19.5 – 0.1 –52.9 –28.6 ± 0.0 – 3.6 –28.6 – 8.0 – 2.6 –34.8 Dec.
+25.0 + 0.6 –99.7 + 0.1 –28.2 –61.4 ± 0.0 + 5.6 –25.7 –19.0 – 1.5 –57.3 2024 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
+ 8.2 – 3.1 + 1.1 – 0.1 –40.4 + 3.5 ± 0.0 –13.5 +0.1 –22.5 – 1.9 –11.9 Mar.
+36.3 – 2.0 –147.9 ± 0.0 –46.9 –153.0 ± 0.0 + 2.9 –30.7 +20.5 – 0.2 –150.4 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+28.9 – 0.3 –100.3 ± 0.0 –48.8 –123.9 ± 0.0 + 5.4 –18.3 +18.0 – 1.7 –120.2 June
+32.0 + 3.2 –44.2 ± 0.0 –56.4 –100.8 ± 0.0 + 8.0 –4.3 +30.4 + 1.4 –91.3 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+20.0 – 2.7 –19.4 ± 0.0 –52.3 –54.5 ± 0.0 + 4.7 +4.0 – 9.8 + 1.2 –48.6 Sep.
+40.2 + 4.8 –36.3 ± 0.0 –45.9 –69.6 ± 0.0 – 4.0 –1.8 +38.2 – 0.3 –73.8 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
Deutsche Bundesbank
– 0.5 + 0.5 – 3.1 + 0.0 – 5.3 +1,075.5 ± 0.0 – 0.6 –30.7 –69.6 –982.9 +92.0 2022 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.4 –48.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 +42.7 ± 0.0 – 0.1 –6.2 –11.0 –65.4 –22.9 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
– 2.5 – 0.1 –120.6 + 0.1 – 2.4 –112.0 ± 0.0 – 1.6 –43.2 +37.0 – 5.6 –119.3 Feb.
– 1.0 + 0.0 –19.1 – 0.0 + 0.2 +29.1 ± 0.0 – 2.7 –8.6 –37.1 – 0.7 +25.7 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+10.3 + 0.2 –12.7 + 0.0 –11.0 –35.7 ± 0.0 + 1.2 +4.1 +21.4 – 4.1 –38.5 May
+ 2.6 + 0.1 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 9.3 +28.3 ± 0.0 + 1.4 –18.7 –20.7 + 1.9 +31.5 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
– 5.6 + 0.8 –56.5 – 0.0 – 8.0 –80.8 ± 0.0 + 0.4 –4.7 +19.3 – 3.5 –83.9 Aug.
– 1.7 – 0.7 –11.2 + 0.0 – 7.5 + 2.3 ± 0.0 – 0.2 –9.8 –13.0 – 0.4 + 1.6 Sep.
+ 1.2 + 0.5 –35.0 – 0.0 –17.3 –26.7 ± 0.0 – 2.4 –11.5 – 9.9 – 0.0 –29.1 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 1.1 – 0.6 – 7.1 – 0.0 – 7.3 +20.1 ± 0.0 – 1.4 –9.8 –22.3 – 0.7 +18.1 Dec.
+ 7.1 + 0.2 –19.7 + 0.0 –10.9 –44.0 ± 0.0 + 5.8 +0.9 +14.3 – 0.3 –38.5 2024 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
+ 2.6 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 9.0 +37.2 ± 0.0 – 0.2 –3.5 –40.1 – 0.3 +36.7 Mar.
+11.3 + 0.0 –28.9 – 0.0 –13.3 –42.0 ± 0.0 + 0.3 +0.7 +10.9 – 0.8 –42.6 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+ 8.1 – 0.1 –19.2 – 0.0 –13.4 –19.6 ± 0.0 + 1.5 –3.5 – 3.2 + 0.4 –17.7 June
+ 9.7 + 0.1 – 5.5 + 0.0 –15.7 –10.0 ± 0.0 + 2.0 –1.4 – 1.8 – 0.2 – 8.2 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 4.9 – 0.1 – 2.4 – 0.0 –11.0 –48.1 ± 0.0 + 1.7 –0.7 +38.0 + 0.5 –46.0 Sep.
+12.0 + 0.4 – 4.5 + 0.0 –14.2 –13.2 ± 0.0 – 0.5 +0.4 + 7.9 – 0.8 –14.6 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2024 May 17 6,562.4 711.1 505.7 232.2 273.5 15.1 17.0 17.0 –
24 6,577.7 711.1 506.6 232.2 274.4 14.6 17.7 17.7 –
31 6,560.7 711.1 506.7 232.6 274.2 13.8 16.8 16.8 –
June 7 6,541.6 711.1 507.3 232.6 274.8 14.3 17.2 17.2 –
14 6,534.5 711.1 507.1 232.4 274.7 14.6 16.5 16.5 –
21 6,536.8 711.1 506.1 232.4 273.8 15.5 17.1 17.1 –
28 6,522.0 757.5 510.2 232.4 277.8 14.1 17.0 17.0 –
July 5 6,497.7 757.5 510.2 232.4 277.8 15.0 16.9 16.9 –
12 6,494.5 757.5 510.0 232.4 277.5 15.5 16.7 16.7 –
19 6,478.3 757.5 508.6 232.5 276.2 16.3 17.1 17.1 –
26 6,475.5 757.5 507.0 232.4 274.6 16.3 17.2 17.2 –
Aug. 2 6,468.7 757.5 507.3 232.9 274.4 16.9 17.8 17.8 –
9 6,462.2 757.5 506.8 232.9 273.9 17.3 17.4 17.4 –
16 6,449.2 757.5 507.5 233.2 274.4 17.0 17.1 17.1 –
23 6,459.1 757.5 505.2 233.0 272.2 18.9 17.4 17.4 –
30 6,473.1 757.5 503.6 233.0 270.6 18.7 18.1 18.1 –
Sep. 6 6,456.6 757.5 505.9 233.0 272.9 17.3 18.0 18.0 –
13 6,442.5 757.5 506.1 233.0 273.1 17.1 17.5 17.5 –
20 6,428.5 757.5 506.6 233.0 273.6 17.0 17.5 17.5 –
27 6,398.4 757.5 505.3 233.3 272.0 17.4 17.5 17.5 –
Oct. 4 6,438.8 820.0 498.1 230.0 268.1 17.4 17.8 17.8 –
11 6,441.6 820.0 499.2 229.9 269.3 16.8 18.7 18.7 –
18 6,429.1 820.0 498.6 229.6 269.0 17.3 19.0 19.0 –
25 6,414.4 820.0 499.7 229.5 270.3 17.5 19.1 19.1 –
Nov. 1 6,404.2 820.0 499.3 229.2 270.1 15.2 18.8 18.8 –
8 6,393.0 820.0 500.3 229.6 270.8 14.9 19.8 19.8 –
15 6,383.0 820.0 499.2 229.1 270.1 15.9 20.1 20.1 –
22 6,385.1 820.0 500.8 229.3 271.5 15.2 20.1 20.1 –
29 6,372.8 820.0 500.3 229.4 270.9 15.9 20.5 20.5 –
Dec. 6 6,352.0 819.8 501.2 229.4 271.8 15.1 20.3 20.3 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2024 May 17 2,442.2 220.5 91.5 57.9 33.6 0.0 1.2 1.2 –
24 2,461.4 220.5 91.7 57.9 33.8 0.0 1.7 1.7 –
31 2,425.5 220.5 92.0 58.2 33.8 0.0 1.0 1.0 –
June 7 2,439.1 220.5 92.2 58.2 34.0 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
14 2,420.5 220.5 92.4 58.2 34.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
21 2,436.8 220.5 92.4 58.2 34.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
28 2,447.3 234.9 93.3 58.2 35.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
July 5 2,466.7 234.9 93.2 58.1 35.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
12 2,462.3 234.9 92.8 58.1 34.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
19 2,418.0 234.9 92.6 58.1 34.5 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
26 2,416.5 234.9 92.3 58.1 34.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
Aug. 2 2,425.8 234.9 92.2 58.2 34.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 –
9 2,409.2 234.9 92.1 58.2 33.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
16 2,413.9 234.9 92.1 58.2 33.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
23 2,384.9 234.9 92.1 58.2 33.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
30 2,419.4 234.9 91.6 58.2 33.4 0.0 0.8 0.8 –
Sep. 6 2,395.3 234.9 91.5 58.2 33.3 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
13 2,385.9 234.9 91.7 58.2 33.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
20 2,388.4 234.9 92.1 58.2 33.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 –
27 2,380.7 234.9 92.3 58.4 34.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
Oct. 4 2,417.4 254.3 90.3 57.5 32.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
11 2,433.0 254.3 90.5 57.4 33.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 –
18 2,408.0 254.3 90.2 57.2 33.0 0.0 1.1 1.1 –
25 2,406.3 254.3 91.2 57.2 34.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
Nov. 1 2,397.6 254.3 89.8 57.2 32.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
8 2,413.5 254.3 90.0 57.2 32.8 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
15 2,407.7 254.3 90.0 56.9 33.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
22 2,402.4 254.3 90.7 57.1 33.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
29 2,403.0 254.3 91.4 57.1 34.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 –
Dec. 6 2,402.0 254.3 90.6 57.1 33.5 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
150.6 1.2 149.4 – – – – 20.0 4,763.2 4,547.2 216.0 20.8 358.7 2024 May 17
150.8 1.3 149.4 – – – – 26.2 4,765.5 4,548.2 217.4 20.8 364.3 24
152.0 4.9 147.1 – – – – 35.4 4,740.1 4,522.4 217.7 20.8 363.9 31
149.5 2.3 147.1 – – – – 28.0 4,739.7 4,521.4 218.3 20.8 353.7 June 7
149.3 2.2 147.1 – – – – 26.9 4,732.4 4,513.3 219.1 20.8 355.8 14
151.4 4.3 147.1 – – – – 33.9 4,729.6 4,510.5 219.1 20.8 351.2 21
95.0 11.1 83.8 – – 0.1 – 32.5 4,714.7 4,496.0 218.7 20.8 360.1 28
90.6 6.7 83.8 – – 0.1 – 28.4 4,707.1 4,489.0 218.1 20.8 351.2 July 5
89.2 5.3 83.8 – – 0.0 – 22.3 4,707.3 4,488.7 218.6 20.8 355.1 12
88.5 4.7 83.8 – – – – 20.1 4,691.8 4,472.5 219.3 20.8 357.5 19
88.2 4.4 83.8 – – – – 24.4 4,685.6 4,465.5 220.0 20.8 358.4 26
90.8 5.5 85.4 – – – – 34.0 4,675.3 4,454.8 220.5 20.8 348.2 Aug. 2
87.1 1.8 85.4 – – – – 27.9 4,675.6 4,455.3 220.3 20.8 351.7 9
87.2 1.9 85.4 – – – – 29.8 4,658.2 4,438.9 219.2 20.8 354.0 16
88.2 2.9 85.4 – – 0.0 – 29.8 4,658.4 4,438.6 219.8 20.8 362.9 23
90.2 4.0 86.2 – – – – 35.8 4,657.0 4,436.3 220.7 20.8 371.3 30
88.1 1.8 86.2 – – – – 36.3 4,649.0 4,427.9 221.0 20.8 363.7 Sep. 6
88.3 2.1 86.2 – – 0.0 – 32.0 4,641.0 4,418.7 222.3 20.8 362.1 13
88.2 1.9 86.2 – – 0.0 – 32.4 4,631.9 4,408.2 223.8 20.8 356.5 20
52.4 12.4 39.9 – – 0.0 – 35.7 4,633.3 4,407.7 225.6 20.8 358.5 27
48.0 8.1 39.9 – – 0.0 – 33.0 4,624.2 4,396.9 227.3 20.8 359.4 Oct. 4
46.7 6.8 39.9 – – – – 35.6 4,622.1 4,393.8 228.2 20.8 361.9 11
49.5 9.6 39.9 – – – – 33.6 4,603.8 4,374.9 228.9 20.8 366.7 18
49.9 10.0 39.9 – – 0.0 – 29.2 4,596.0 4,365.1 230.9 20.8 362.3 25
51.3 11.4 39.9 – – – – 28.1 4,585.3 4,354.6 230.7 20.8 365.5 Nov. 1
49.8 9.9 39.9 – – – – 25.8 4,587.7 4,353.8 233.9 20.8 353.9 8
49.2 9.2 39.9 – – 0.1 – 30.4 4,577.4 4,341.4 236.0 20.8 350.1 15
50.3 10.4 39.9 – – 0.0 – 25.2 4,580.4 4,340.7 239.7 20.8 352.3 22
52.6 10.4 42.2 – – – – 26.1 4,559.9 4,318.9 241.0 20.8 356.7 29
48.8 6.7 42.2 – – – – 27.9 4,546.2 4,304.6 241.6 20.8 351.9 Dec. 6
Deutsche Bundesbank
21.6 0.3 21.3 – – – – 7.0 964.3 964.3 – 4.4 1,131.7 2024 May 17
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.1 965.0 965.0 – 4.4 1,145.3 24
22.4 1.1 21.3 – – – – 11.2 965.8 965.8 – 4.4 1,108.2 31
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.0 965.1 965.1 – 4.4 1,123.3 June 7
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.3 957.2 957.2 – 4.4 1,112.9 14
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.3 955.5 955.5 – 4.4 1,130.6 21
14.5 1.5 13.0 – – – – 10.4 955.5 955.5 – 4.4 1,133.9 28
13.7 0.6 13.0 – – 0.1 – 9.9 953.3 953.3 – 4.4 1,156.9 July 5
13.7 0.8 13.0 – – 0.0 – 9.4 952.0 952.0 – 4.4 1,154.7 12
13.5 0.5 13.0 – – – – 6.1 950.5 950.5 – 4.4 1,115.6 19
13.6 0.6 13.0 – – – – 8.8 950.7 950.7 – 4.4 1,111.3 26
14.2 1.0 13.2 – – – – 12.3 949.9 949.9 – 4.4 1,116.9 Aug. 2
13.6 0.4 13.2 – – – – 11.5 950.0 950.0 – 4.4 1,102.5 9
13.8 0.5 13.2 – – – – 11.2 940.5 940.5 – 4.4 1,116.9 16
13.8 0.6 13.2 – – 0.0 – 12.8 939.8 939.8 – 4.4 1,086.8 23
14.5 0.9 13.6 – – – – 13.0 939.5 939.5 – 4.4 1,120.6 30
14.0 0.4 13.6 – – – – 13.6 939.3 939.3 – 4.4 1,096.8 Sep. 6
13.8 0.2 13.6 – – 0.0 – 12.1 933.6 933.6 – 4.4 1,095.1 13
13.8 0.2 13.6 – – 0.0 – 11.9 932.6 932.6 – 4.4 1,098.2 20
8.8 1.1 7.6 – – 0.0 – 11.8 932.8 932.8 – 4.4 1,095.4 27
8.2 0.5 7.6 – – 0.0 – 11.4 928.9 928.9 – 4.4 1,119.6 Oct. 4
8.2 0.6 7.6 – – – – 11.9 928.8 928.8 – 4.4 1,133.9 11
10.0 2.4 7.6 – – 0.0 – 11.2 919.5 919.5 – 4.4 1,117.4 18
10.2 2.6 7.6 – – 0.0 – 9.7 919.3 919.3 – 4.4 1,117.1 25
10.7 2.6 8.0 – – – – 8.6 919.3 919.3 – 4.4 1,110.3 Nov. 1
10.2 2.2 8.0 – – – – 9.0 919.5 919.5 – 4.4 1,126.0 8
10.1 1.9 8.0 – – 0.1 – 9.4 918.1 918.1 – 4.4 1,121.3 15
10.1 2.1 8.0 – – 0.0 – 7.1 917.8 917.8 – 4.4 1,117.8 22
11.6 2.4 9.2 – – 0.0 – 9.3 917.6 917.6 – 4.4 1,114.5 29
10.6 1.4 9.2 – – – – 8.3 916.8 916.8 – 4.4 1,116.7 Dec. 6

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2024 May 17 6,562.4 1,552.9 3,376.8 152.0 3,224.8 – – 0.0 32.4 – 195.9 117.3 78.6
24 6,577.7 1,551.2 3,372.8 151.9 3,220.9 – – 0.0 33.7 – 201.7 120.2 81.5
31 6,560.7 1,553.4 3,322.2 168.7 3,153.5 – – 0.0 36.3 – 210.6 131.8 78.8
June 7 6,541.6 1,553.8 3,350.0 196.9 3,153.1 – – – 33.4 – 199.9 106.1 93.9
14 6,534.5 1,554.2 3,351.7 173.7 3,177.9 – – – 32.9 – 185.9 107.6 78.3
21 6,536.8 1,555.7 3,345.0 152.3 3,192.8 – – – 33.3 – 188.6 111.8 76.8
28 6,522.0 1,559.9 3,237.5 170.2 3,067.3 – – – 36.1 – 205.1 125.7 79.4
July 5 6,497.7 1,562.2 3,255.2 160.8 3,094.3 – – – 33.7 – 193.3 115.9 77.4
12 6,494.5 1,563.0 3,260.4 154.0 3,106.4 – – – 32.8 – 195.3 117.7 77.7
19 6,478.3 1,563.4 3,223.4 192.3 3,031.2 – – – 32.1 – 202.8 125.0 77.8
26 6,475.5 1,564.1 3,218.5 186.4 3,032.1 – – – 32.6 – 211.8 132.6 79.3
Aug. 2 6,468.7 1,566.1 3,224.7 159.7 3,065.1 – – 0.0 35.4 – 199.5 119.9 79.6
9 6,462.2 1,567.1 3,244.2 157.0 3,087.2 – – 0.0 33.8 – 192.5 114.3 78.2
16 6,449.2 1,567.2 3,232.9 155.0 3,077.9 – – 0.0 32.7 – 186.5 110.4 76.1
23 6,459.1 1,563.3 3,232.8 156.0 3,076.8 – – – 33.7 – 192.8 116.3 76.5
30 6,473.1 1,563.1 3,205.7 167.3 3,038.4 – – – 32.8 – 214.8 137.8 77.0
Sep. 6 6,456.6 1,562.6 3,216.5 155.6 3,060.9 – – – 34.9 – 207.2 123.4 83.8
13 6,442.5 1,561.5 3,220.9 204.6 3,016.3 – – – 31.4 – 200.2 118.2 82.1
20 6,428.5 1,559.5 3,199.9 168.4 3,031.4 – – – 32.4 – 201.6 116.0 85.6
27 6,398.4 1,560.9 3,147.0 156.6 2,990.4 – – – 32.5 – 209.5 121.0 88.6
Oct. 4 6,438.8 1,561.9 3,149.3 154.8 2,994.5 – – – 31.6 – 207.0 122.7 84.4
11 6,441.6 1,560.5 3,163.5 154.8 3,008.7 – – – 32.6 – 197.3 112.8 84.5
18 6,429.1 1,558.8 3,131.3 192.7 2,938.6 – – – 33.5 – 199.4 113.0 86.5
25 6,414.4 1,558.8 3,124.2 175.9 2,948.4 – – – 34.6 – 192.8 109.8 83.0
Nov. 1 6,404.2 1,562.5 3,103.6 178.4 2,925.2 – – – 33.3 – 212.8 127.9 85.0
8 6,393.0 1,561.3 3,119.9 161.5 2,958.3 – – – 32.4 – 196.6 111.5 85.0
15 6,383.0 1,560.3 3,097.0 150.9 2,946.1 – – – 34.0 – 212.0 109.6 102.4
22 6,385.1 1,559.7 3,116.9 151.5 2,965.4 – – – 34.6 – 195.8 110.2 85.6
29 6,372.8 1,563.8 3,057.7 156.9 2,900.8 – – – 32.6 – 218.0 128.0 90.0
Dec. 6 6,352.0 1,568.3 3,066.2 166.2 2,900.0 – – – 31.0 – 200.6 115.5 85.0
Deutsche Bundesbank
2024 May 17 2,442.2 382.2 1,151.9 38.5 1,113.4 – – 0.0 4.6 – 23.3 11.7 11.6
24 2,461.4 381.5 1,169.8 38.3 1,131.4 – – 0.0 4.6 – 24.3 11.7 12.6
31 2,425.5 380.6 1,122.8 43.4 1,079.5 – – 0.0 5.5 – 29.5 16.9 12.6
June 7 2,439.1 380.9 1,149.7 63.1 1,086.6 – – – 5.1 – 22.9 11.8 11.2
14 2,420.5 381.3 1,122.6 44.6 1,078.0 – – – 4.9 – 23.0 11.3 11.7
21 2,436.8 381.8 1,138.0 40.7 1,097.4 – – – 5.1 – 25.7 14.2 11.5
28 2,447.3 382.2 1,124.4 45.5 1,078.9 – – – 6.1 – 25.2 11.8 13.4
July 5 2,466.7 383.4 1,157.9 41.1 1,116.8 – – – 4.5 – 24.4 12.5 11.9
12 2,462.3 384.3 1,157.1 39.8 1,117.2 – – – 4.0 – 23.2 11.7 11.5
19 2,418.0 384.9 1,117.6 63.0 1,054.6 – – – 3.2 – 21.9 10.1 11.8
26 2,416.5 385.4 1,112.9 45.0 1,067.9 – – – 3.1 – 22.2 10.2 12.0
Aug. 2 2,425.8 384.2 1,116.4 44.7 1,071.7 – – 0.0 4.9 – 22.0 8.9 13.1
9 2,409.2 385.1 1,099.6 40.7 1,058.9 – – 0.0 4.9 – 22.1 9.8 12.3
16 2,413.9 385.2 1,096.8 40.2 1,056.6 – – 0.0 4.2 – 21.7 9.4 12.3
23 2,384.9 385.4 1,064.4 39.2 1,025.2 – – – 5.1 – 23.5 10.9 12.6
30 2,419.4 383.0 1,090.4 45.6 1,044.9 – – – 4.8 – 26.2 13.6 12.6
Sep. 6 2,395.3 383.8 1,070.3 40.0 1,030.2 – – – 5.9 – 28.9 16.9 12.0
13 2,385.9 384.4 1,067.2 69.8 997.5 – – – 4.3 – 22.9 11.1 11.8
20 2,388.4 384.6 1,066.0 41.9 1,024.2 – – – 5.4 – 24.9 13.1 11.9
27 2,380.7 386.1 1,054.9 41.5 1,013.5 – – – 4.7 – 26.0 13.1 12.9
Oct. 4 2,417.4 383.8 1,081.1 39.6 1,041.5 – – – 3.9 – 26.5 14.1 12.4
11 2,433.0 383.8 1,100.8 38.8 1,062.0 – – – 3.3 – 22.1 9.2 13.0
18 2,408.0 383.5 1,070.0 55.4 1,014.7 – – – 4.3 – 21.9 8.8 13.1
25 2,406.3 384.2 1,066.9 43.8 1,023.1 – – – 4.4 – 24.4 10.9 13.5
Nov. 1 2,397.6 382.9 1,061.3 58.9 1,002.3 – – – 3.3 – 22.8 9.0 13.8
8 2,413.5 382.9 1,078.4 42.1 1,036.3 – – – 3.1 – 23.2 9.8 13.4
15 2,407.7 383.2 1,071.6 38.4 1,033.3 – – – 3.3 – 23.6 10.1 13.5
22 2,402.4 383.2 1,066.4 37.8 1,028.6 – – – 3.6 – 25.8 9.8 16.0
29 2,403.0 383.1 1,060.6 42.0 1,018.6 – – – 4.1 – 24.4 9.0 15.4
Dec. 6 2,402.0 385.1 1,058.4 52.5 1,006.0 – – – 4.6 – 28.8 15.0 13.8
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
195.7 14.9 6.4 6.4 – 178.5 206.3 – 702.9 99.7 2024 May 17
203.6 15.0 6.8 6.8 – 178.5 211.8 – 702.9 99.7 24
218.9 13.8 6.7 6.7 – 178.5 217.6 – 702.9 99.7 31
195.6 14.6 6.7 6.7 – 178.5 206.4 – 702.9 99.7 June 7
202.7 15.0 6.7 6.7 – 178.5 204.4 – 702.9 99.7 14
206.0 15.3 5.0 5.0 – 178.5 206.7 – 702.9 99.7 21
221.8 15.0 5.3 5.3 – 179.0 212.1 – 750.4 99.7 28
200.8 15.8 5.7 5.7 – 179.0 201.9 – 750.4 99.7 July 5
191.2 16.2 5.2 5.2 – 179.0 201.3 – 750.4 99.7 12
202.6 16.4 4.6 4.6 – 179.0 203.8 – 750.4 99.7 19
194.4 15.5 4.1 4.1 – 179.0 205.5 – 750.4 99.7 26
192.3 15.7 4.0 4.0 – 179.0 201.9 – 750.4 99.6 Aug. 2
175.6 15.7 3.6 3.6 – 179.0 200.7 – 750.4 99.6 9
178.1 15.6 2.6 2.6 – 179.0 204.6 – 750.4 99.6 16
180.4 15.5 2.1 2.1 – 179.0 209.5 – 750.4 99.6 23
191.9 14.8 2.4 2.4 – 179.0 218.4 – 750.4 99.6 30
176.3 15.7 2.2 2.2 – 179.0 212.1 – 750.4 99.6 Sep. 6
174.8 15.6 2.1 2.1 – 179.0 206.9 – 750.4 99.6 13
188.6 15.1 1.4 1.4 – 179.0 200.9 – 750.4 99.6 20
198.2 13.6 1.3 1.3 – 179.0 206.3 – 750.4 99.6 27
190.7 13.8 1.5 1.5 – 176.6 200.3 – 806.6 99.5 Oct. 4
183.9 14.0 1.6 1.6 – 176.6 205.5 – 806.6 99.5 11
198.2 14.3 1.4 1.4 – 176.6 209.5 – 806.6 99.5 18
199.9 14.3 2.4 2.4 – 176.6 204.8 – 806.6 99.5 25
191.1 12.7 1.5 1.5 – 176.6 204.1 – 806.6 99.5 Nov. 1
189.2 13.1 0.7 0.7 – 176.6 197.2 – 806.6 99.5 8
186.4 12.7 0.5 0.5 – 176.6 197.3 – 806.6 99.5 15
182.9 12.6 0.8 0.8 – 176.6 199.1 – 806.6 99.5 22
203.2 11.5 1.2 1.2 – 176.6 202.1 – 806.6 99.5 29
189.9 11.9 0.5 0.5 – 176.6 201.1 – 806.6 99.5 Dec. 6
Deutsche Bundesbank
49.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 46.1 21.9 543.3 216.6 3.2 2024 May 17
50.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 21.5 543.3 216.6 3.2 24
53.6 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 21.5 545.7 216.6 3.2 31
46.8 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 21.7 545.7 216.6 3.2 June 7
55.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.1 21.9 545.7 216.6 3.2 14
52.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 46.1 22.0 545.7 216.6 3.2 21
61.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 46.2 19.5 547.3 231.1 3.2 28
49.0 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 46.2 19.2 547.3 231.1 3.2 July 5
46.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 46.2 19.3 547.3 231.1 3.2 12
43.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.4 547.3 231.1 3.2 19
45.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.7 547.3 231.1 3.2 26
48.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.0 550.2 231.1 3.2 Aug. 2
47.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.1 550.2 231.1 3.2 9
55.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.8 550.2 231.1 3.2 16
56.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.8 550.2 231.1 3.2 23
59.2 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.2 20.4 554.4 231.1 3.2 30
51.0 0.0 0.3 0.3 – 46.2 20.4 554.4 231.1 3.2 Sep. 6
51.6 0.0 0.3 0.3 – 46.2 20.4 554.4 231.1 3.2 13
51.8 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.2 20.3 554.4 231.1 3.2 20
52.9 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 46.2 20.6 554.4 231.1 3.2 27
46.9 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.5 19.2 558.3 249.1 3.2 Oct. 4
47.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 45.5 19.3 558.3 249.1 3.2 11
52.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 45.5 19.5 558.3 249.1 3.2 18
49.4 0.0 1.2 1.2 – 45.5 19.7 558.3 249.1 3.2 25
49.1 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.5 19.2 561.3 249.1 3.2 Nov. 1
47.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 45.5 19.2 561.3 249.1 3.2 8
47.6 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.5 19.2 561.3 249.1 3.2 15
44.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 45.5 19.4 561.3 249.1 3.2 22
49.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 45.5 19.4 563.4 249.1 3.2 29
44.6 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.5 19.3 563.4 249.1 3.2 Dec. 6
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2023 10,321.0 18.7 2,884.4 2,349.7 2,081.8 267.9 534.7 374.6 160.1 4,651.2 4,109.2 3,729.7 3,395.7
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 18.2 3,085.7 2,550.5 2,288.2 262.3 535.1 383.8 151.4 4,600.1 4,080.1 3,706.1 3,372.3
Feb. 10,760.9 18.0 3,085.7 2,541.4 2,274.9 266.5 544.3 390.6 153.8 4,614.2 4,094.2 3,714.7 3,381.3
Mar. 10,553.8 17.9 3,041.3 2,497.8 2,229.3 268.4 543.5 391.2 152.3 4,620.6 4,094.7 3,718.2 3,386.0
Apr. 10,564.3 18.9 3,047.7 2,507.0 2,237.3 269.7 540.7 384.5 156.2 4,630.5 4,096.8 3,721.7 3,390.4
May 10,653.7 18.2 3,091.2 2,550.3 2,279.7 270.6 541.0 383.4 157.5 4,642.2 4,103.4 3,733.0 3,400.9
June 10,577.7 17.7 2,967.0 2,434.5 2,166.3 268.2 532.5 371.5 161.0 4,646.7 4,108.0 3,734.5 3,397.1
July 10,743.2 17.2 3,002.4 2,456.4 2,188.8 267.6 546.0 384.8 161.2 4,651.1 4,114.5 3,738.2 3,402.0
Aug. 10,735.3 17.5 2,994.8 2,455.6 2,187.1 268.4 539.2 377.9 161.4 4,649.4 4,111.7 3,733.9 3,400.6
Sep. 10,737.5 18.0 2,916.4 2,371.6 2,106.3 265.3 544.8 382.8 162.0 4,649.8 4,113.1 3,735.7 3,401.7
Oct. 10,797.9 17.5 2,980.6 2,430.9 2,165.6 265.3 549.7 387.7 162.1 4,653.7 4,116.8 3,736.3 3,401.6
Nov. 10,610.8 16.9 2,987.1 2,438.4 2,168.4 270.0 548.7 386.5 162.2 4,666.3 4,123.1 3,740.9 3,406.9
Dec. 10,321.0 18.7 2,884.4 2,349.7 2,081.8 267.9 534.7 374.6 160.1 4,651.2 4,109.2 3,729.7 3,395.7
2024 Jan. 10,454.3 16.3 2,979.1 2,420.8 2,144.5 276.3 558.2 394.5 163.7 4,665.4 4,113.3 3,729.2 3,393.3
Feb. 10,584.8 16.3 3,012.3 2,441.5 2,160.1 281.4 570.8 406.8 163.9 4,675.8 4,120.6 3,736.2 3,399.3
Mar. 10,509.6 17.6 2,957.6 2,389.6 2,105.8 283.8 568.1 403.0 165.1 4,695.4 4,126.2 3,741.0 3,401.3
Apr. 10,598.5 16.6 2,959.3 2,382.9 2,097.2 285.7 576.4 412.6 163.8 4,690.1 4,127.5 3,741.6 3,402.0
May 10,578.7 16.7 2,951.3 2,378.9 2,092.4 286.5 572.4 406.9 165.5 4,701.4 4,135.1 3,747.0 3,406.5
June 10,491.1 16.7 2,936.5 2,378.3 2,093.0 285.3 558.2 393.5 164.7 4,712.0 4,142.7 3,747.5 3,408.4
July 10,309.2 16.3 2,890.5 2,327.0 2,040.4 286.6 563.5 397.7 165.8 4,721.8 4,152.6 3,755.6 3,413.5
Aug. 10,269.1 17.0 2,889.6 2,327.5 2,039.7 287.8 562.1 394.7 167.5 4,729.7 4,158.4 3,758.2 3,415.9
Sep. 10,374.4 17.3 2,868.9 2,291.1 2,004.2 286.9 577.8 408.5 169.3 4,752.7 4,168.5 3,763.6 3,420.7
Oct. 10,491.2 18.1 2,865.1 2,283.9 1,995.4 288.5 581.1 409.1 172.0 4,749.6 4,169.5 3,762.7 3,418.8
Changes 3
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2021 207.2 2.2 161.3 155.6 156.4 – 0.8 5.7 11.7 – 5.9 175.7 154.6 173.7 155.9
2022 1,170.5 –29.7 149.5 103.7 100.5 3.2 45.8 33.1 12.7 242.4 223.1 237.5 220.6
2023 –133.8 – 1.3 –41.5 –76.2 –86.2 10.0 34.7 17.2 17.5 84.5 44.6 40.5 41.3
2023 Feb. 167.0 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 9.1 –13.4 4.3 8.3 5.8 2.5 13.4 13.6 7.9 8.3
Mar. –195.2 – 0.1 –42.8 –43.2 –45.0 1.8 0.4 1.9 – 1.5 8.2 2.0 5.0 6.2
Apr. 16.7 1.0 7.7 9.8 8.1 1.7 – 2.1 – 6.0 3.9 11.0 3.0 4.2 5.1
May 91.9 – 0.7 41.9 42.2 41.3 0.9 – 0.2 – 1.6 1.3 12.3 6.8 11.5 10.6
June –65.9 – 0.5 –121.0 –113.5 –112.5 – 1.1 – 7.5 – 11.0 3.5 4.7 5.5 2.5 – 1.7
July 170.6 – 0.5 34.6 22.2 22.7 – 0.6 12.4 12.2 0.2 6.0 7.6 4.7 5.8
Aug. –15.1 0.3 – 7.6 – 1.1 – 1.9 0.8 – 6.5 – 6.6 0.1 – 0.5 – 2.4 – 3.9 – 1.0
Sep. 1.6 0.6 –78.5 –83.9 –80.8 – 3.1 5.3 4.7 0.7 1.6 2.3 2.7 2.0
Oct. 68.3 – 0.5 64.7 59.5 59.5 0.0 5.1 5.1 0.1 5.1 4.6 1.5 0.9
Nov. –174.8 – 0.6 8.2 7.9 3.2 4.7 0.3 0.3 0.0 13.7 7.3 6.4 7.2
Dec. –286.4 1.8 –102.9 –89.1 –86.8 – 2.3 –13.8 – 11.6 – 2.2 –13.7 –12.3 –10.1 –10.1
2024 Jan. 123.8 – 2.4 90.9 68.6 61.1 7.6 22.3 18.9 3.3 15.1 5.4 0.8 0.1
Feb. 132.1 0.0 33.5 20.9 15.7 5.3 12.5 12.3 0.2 11.2 7.4 7.3 6.3
Mar. –75.2 1.3 –55.0 –52.0 –54.3 2.4 – 3.0 – 3.9 0.9 20.1 6.2 5.5 2.8
Apr. 86.9 – 1.1 1.5 – 6.7 – 8.6 1.9 8.2 9.2 – 1.1 – 3.8 1.9 1.4 1.2
May –11.7 0.2 – 7.0 – 3.7 – 4.6 0.9 – 3.3 – 5.0 1.7 12.5 8.4 6.3 5.5
June –95.0 – 0.0 –16.0 – 1.1 1.0 – 2.1 –14.9 – 14.2 – 0.6 11.0 7.9 0.8 2.1
July –177.5 – 0.4 –43.7 –49.9 –51.0 1.1 6.1 5.6 0.6 12.1 11.6 9.7 6.5
Aug. –32.9 0.6 0.1 1.1 – 0.1 1.1 – 1.0 – 2.6 1.7 9.4 6.4 3.2 3.2
Sep. 108.9 0.4 –20.0 –36.1 –35.3 – 0.7 16.0 14.3 1.7 23.9 11.6 7.0 6.4
Oct. 125.1 0.8 2.1 – 1.3 – 2.9 1.6 3.4 0.6 2.8 – 1.4 2.5 2.2 1.2
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 2021
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 2022
334.0 379.5 254.3 125.2 542.0 411.1 283.5 130.9 28.4 102.5 1,134.5 876.1 1,632.3 2023
333.8 374.0 250.3 123.7 520.1 393.5 280.2 126.6 30.2 96.4 1,161.9 904.0 1,719.2 2023 Jan.
333.5 379.5 248.2 131.3 520.0 393.3 279.2 126.8 31.3 95.4 1,167.6 904.4 1,875.3 Feb.
332.2 376.5 248.9 127.6 526.0 397.5 275.7 128.4 30.9 97.5 1,168.5 902.6 1,705.4 Mar.
331.2 375.1 250.9 124.2 533.7 405.8 280.9 128.0 32.3 95.7 1,149.9 883.9 1,717.3 Apr.
332.1 370.5 249.8 120.7 538.7 407.7 284.6 131.0 31.9 99.1 1,177.7 912.0 1,724.4 May
337.4 373.4 248.7 124.7 538.7 403.1 279.6 135.6 31.0 104.5 1,150.6 886.7 1,795.7 June
336.2 376.4 252.1 124.3 536.6 407.3 282.8 129.3 30.7 98.7 1,156.3 895.0 1,916.3 July
333.3 377.9 249.5 128.4 537.7 404.5 282.9 133.2 31.1 102.1 1,157.7 899.2 1,915.9 Aug.
334.1 377.4 252.0 125.4 536.7 404.7 282.5 132.0 32.0 100.0 1,163.8 902.7 1,989.5 Sep.
334.7 380.5 255.1 125.4 537.0 405.6 282.9 131.4 32.0 99.4 1,165.8 909.5 1,980.1 Oct.
334.0 382.2 254.4 127.8 543.2 412.1 288.2 131.1 30.9 100.2 1,153.0 895.0 1,787.6 Nov.
334.0 379.5 254.3 125.2 542.0 411.1 283.5 130.9 28.4 102.5 1,134.5 876.1 1,632.3 Dec.
335.9 384.2 256.3 127.9 552.0 414.9 287.1 137.1 28.8 108.3 1,167.8 911.4 1,625.8 2024 Jan.
336.9 384.5 254.8 129.6 555.2 420.3 293.8 134.9 28.5 106.4 1,205.6 942.8 1,674.7 Feb.
339.7 385.2 257.2 128.0 569.2 426.8 294.6 142.5 28.1 114.4 1,211.2 942.8 1,627.7 Mar.
339.7 385.8 259.9 126.0 562.7 422.4 294.1 140.3 28.8 111.4 1,218.9 947.8 1,713.6 Apr.
340.5 388.1 259.6 128.5 566.3 429.9 296.6 136.4 27.8 108.6 1,247.8 977.8 1,661.5 May
339.0 395.2 262.6 132.7 569.3 425.5 293.2 143.8 28.0 115.8 1,237.3 963.9 1,588.6 June
342.2 397.0 263.1 133.9 569.2 425.5 295.9 143.7 27.5 116.2 1,230.3 956.4 1,450.3 July
342.2 400.2 261.9 138.3 571.3 429.2 301.1 142.1 27.5 114.6 1,236.5 961.1 1,396.4 Aug.
342.9 404.9 264.2 140.7 584.2 433.0 304.0 151.2 27.9 123.3 1,279.6 996.9 1,455.9 Sep.
343.8 406.8 270.5 136.3 580.2 434.8 305.0 145.4 27.1 118.3 1,284.4 997.7 1,574.1 Oct.
Changes 3
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
17.8 –19.1 – 6.1 –13.1 21.1 35.5 22.6 –14.3 – 1.1 –13.2 71.7 84.9 –203.7 2021
16.9 –14.4 1.9 –16.3 19.3 20.7 24.4 – 1.4 2.6 – 3.9 15.0 – 0.8 793.3 2022
– 0.9 4.1 6.4 – 2.3 39.9 28.3 15.1 11.7 – 2.4 14.1 42.6 34.1 –218.1 2023
– 0.4 5.6 – 2.0 7.7 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.4 0.5 1.1 – 0.7 – 1.7 – 6.6 156.4 2023 Feb.
– 1.2 – 3.0 0.8 – 3.7 6.1 4.6 – 3.0 1.5 – 0.4 1.9 9.6 6.5 –170.1 Mar.
– 1.0 – 1.2 2.1 – 3.3 8.0 8.5 5.4 – 0.5 1.4 – 1.9 –14.9 –15.4 11.9 Apr.
0.9 – 4.7 – 1.2 – 3.5 5.4 2.1 3.9 3.4 – 0.4 3.7 28.3 28.1 10.1 May
4.2 3.0 – 1.1 4.1 – 0.9 – 5.5 – 5.9 4.6 – 0.9 5.5 – 9.4 – 8.3 60.3 June
– 1.2 3.0 3.4 – 0.4 – 1.7 4.4 3.4 – 6.1 – 0.3 – 5.7 10.3 12.6 120.4 July
– 2.8 1.5 – 2.6 4.1 1.9 – 1.9 1.0 3.8 0.5 3.4 – 5.1 – 1.9 – 2.2 Aug.
0.7 – 0.3 2.6 – 2.9 – 0.7 0.4 – 0.3 – 1.1 0.9 – 2.0 6.6 3.7 71.3 Sep.
0.7 3.0 3.1 – 0.0 0.5 1.1 0.5 – 0.5 0.0 – 0.6 3.9 8.3 – 5.0 Oct.
– 0.8 0.9 – 1.5 2.4 6.4 6.7 5.8 – 0.3 – 1.2 0.9 – 3.0 – 5.3 –193.1 Nov.
– 0.1 – 2.2 0.7 – 2.8 – 1.4 – 0.9 – 4.4 – 0.5 – 2.5 2.0 –15.2 –15.5 –156.4 Dec.
0.7 4.6 2.0 2.6 9.7 3.5 3.4 6.2 0.4 5.8 25.3 27.8 – 5.1 2024 Jan.
1.0 0.1 – 1.7 1.8 3.9 6.0 7.4 – 2.1 – 0.3 – 1.8 38.2 31.8 49.2 Feb.
2.7 0.7 2.4 – 1.6 13.9 6.4 1.0 7.6 – 0.4 7.9 5.4 – 0.2 –47.1 Mar.
0.1 0.6 2.6 – 2.0 – 5.8 – 4.0 – 0.4 – 1.8 0.7 – 2.5 4.6 1.8 85.7 Apr.
0.8 2.1 – 0.4 2.5 4.1 8.0 2.9 – 3.9 – 1.1 – 2.8 34.2 34.8 –51.5 May
– 1.4 7.1 3.0 4.2 3.1 – 4.3 – 3.6 7.4 0.2 7.2 –17.0 –19.8 –73.0 June
3.1 2.0 0.8 1.1 0.5 0.5 3.3 – 0.0 – 0.5 0.4 – 3.4 – 3.8 –142.0 July
– 0.0 3.2 – 1.2 4.4 3.0 4.5 5.9 – 1.6 0.0 – 1.6 6.9 5.5 –50.0 Aug.
0.6 4.5 2.3 2.2 12.4 3.3 2.3 9.1 0.4 8.7 46.1 39.1 58.6 Sep.
1.1 0.3 4.7 – 4.4 – 3.9 1.8 1.1 – 5.8 – 0.8 – 5.0 5.5 0.8 118.2 Oct.
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2023 10,321.0 1,489.3 1,099.9 389.4 4,419.1 4,174.5 2,530.0 1,198.7 693.4 445.9 395.3 186.3 75.9
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 1,642.4 1,231.2 411.2 4,392.0 4,124.2 2,706.4 895.1 397.6 522.7 498.8 188.7 94.3
Feb. 10,760.9 1,633.5 1,226.0 407.5 4,391.4 4,113.2 2,670.6 926.7 428.4 515.9 490.8 191.2 97.2
Mar. 10,553.8 1,618.0 1,210.4 407.6 4,368.3 4,092.1 2,625.3 959.7 462.3 507.2 480.5 197.9 98.8
Apr. 10,564.3 1,632.8 1,227.7 405.1 4,370.1 4,099.8 2,620.9 980.3 482.3 498.6 470.4 199.5 93.6
May 10,653.7 1,622.7 1,229.8 392.9 4,384.2 4,108.2 2,613.0 1,004.7 504.1 490.6 460.2 201.6 97.9
June 10,577.7 1,530.6 1,149.6 381.0 4,378.1 4,110.1 2,586.3 1,040.5 541.1 483.3 450.2 196.6 90.9
July 10,743.2 1,563.0 1,159.8 403.2 4,382.4 4,116.2 2,569.6 1,070.7 572.0 475.9 439.9 197.0 90.2
Aug. 10,735.3 1,549.2 1,162.1 387.0 4,388.3 4,124.6 2,555.7 1,101.4 603.4 467.5 428.7 191.6 87.5
Sep. 10,737.5 1,500.0 1,112.7 387.3 4,384.5 4,126.8 2,545.8 1,119.2 620.4 461.8 420.1 193.4 89.5
Oct. 10,797.9 1,530.0 1,132.1 398.0 4,398.0 4,135.1 2,528.3 1,151.4 653.5 455.4 410.8 198.1 88.2
Nov. 10,610.8 1,547.2 1,136.6 410.5 4,414.1 4,158.1 2,538.2 1,171.5 670.5 448.3 400.3 197.0 89.8
Dec. 10,321.0 1,489.3 1,099.9 389.4 4,419.1 4,174.5 2,530.0 1,198.7 693.4 445.9 395.3 186.3 75.9
2024 Jan. 10,454.3 1,538.7 1,125.8 412.8 4,411.2 4,162.0 2,484.1 1,238.6 733.2 439.4 386.3 189.6 81.6
Feb. 10,584.8 1,553.3 1,134.8 418.5 4,408.0 4,160.5 2,466.4 1,259.7 753.8 434.4 378.9 191.6 82.1
Mar. 10,509.6 1,495.3 1,083.4 411.9 4,436.4 4,186.1 2,467.5 1,288.2 781.6 430.3 373.2 191.5 82.7
Apr. 10,598.5 1,520.0 1,094.3 425.7 4,435.0 4,186.5 2,463.4 1,297.4 789.0 425.7 367.7 191.0 84.1
May 10,578.7 1,503.4 1,088.4 415.0 4,464.9 4,209.9 2,484.8 1,303.0 793.5 422.2 363.7 196.0 88.3
June 10,491.1 1,479.3 1,067.5 411.8 4,469.5 4,211.8 2,481.9 1,311.8 800.8 418.1 359.1 197.6 92.0
July 10,309.2 1,464.5 1,055.3 409.2 4,462.6 4,214.6 2,484.4 1,316.2 805.0 414.0 355.0 191.4 83.2
Aug. 10,269.1 1,426.3 1,025.0 401.3 4,522.7 4,269.7 2,535.4 1,323.2 812.1 411.2 352.1 194.8 85.4
Sep. 10,374.4 1,410.5 1,004.3 406.3 4,529.5 4,275.3 2,532.9 1,333.1 821.7 409.3 349.4 199.9 89.4
Oct. 10,491.2 1,427.9 1,001.9 426.0 4,539.2 4,282.0 2,543.6 1,330.8 818.9 407.6 346.9 197.7 88.6
Changes 4
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2021 207.2 133.4 103.4 30.0 107.3 96.2 141.4 –45.8 –23.3 0.6 3.9 16.6 13.6
2022 1,170.5 –15.6 –105.9 90.3 208.9 165.9 60.6 132.8 148.1 –27.5 –26.3 18.4 12.8
2023 –133.8 –133.9 –138.4 4.5 89.6 93.4 –172.3 347.9 338.5 –82.3 –109.9 7.1 – 7.1
2023 Feb. 167.0 –10.3 – 5.6 – 4.7 – 1.8 –11.8 –36.4 31.3 30.7 – 6.7 – 7.9 2.1 2.7
Mar. –195.2 –13.4 –14.7 1.3 –21.7 –20.0 –44.1 32.8 33.5 – 8.7 –10.3 7.1 1.8
Apr. 16.7 15.5 17.5 – 1.9 2.4 8.1 – 4.1 20.8 20.2 – 8.6 –10.1 1.8 – 5.1
May 91.9 –10.1 2.1 –12.1 13.1 8.4 – 7.9 24.3 21.7 – 8.0 –10.2 1.1 4.2
June –65.9 –90.3 –79.4 –11.0 – 6.3 1.5 –26.3 35.0 36.1 – 7.3 – 9.9 – 4.7 – 6.9
July 170.6 31.5 10.4 21.1 4.9 6.5 –16.4 30.2 31.0 – 7.3 –10.3 0.6 – 0.7
Aug. –15.1 –13.3 2.8 –16.1 6.4 7.9 –13.6 30.0 30.7 – 8.5 –11.2 – 4.4 – 2.4
Sep. 1.6 –49.2 –49.4 0.2 – 3.9 2.2 – 9.9 17.8 17.3 – 5.7 – 8.6 1.8 1.9
Oct. 68.3 30.9 19.9 11.0 13.8 8.5 –17.4 32.3 33.1 – 6.4 – 9.4 4.7 – 1.2
Nov. –174.8 18.9 5.1 13.8 17.5 23.9 10.6 20.4 17.2 – 7.1 –10.5 – 0.7 2.1
Dec. –286.4 –67.4 –47.2 –20.3 16.0 27.3 3.4 26.4 23.1 – 2.5 – 5.0 –10.5 –13.8
2024 Jan. 123.8 48.2 25.6 22.5 – 8.9 –13.2 –46.4 39.8 39.6 – 6.5 – 9.1 3.0 5.5
Feb. 132.1 14.8 9.0 5.8 – 3.2 – 1.5 –17.7 21.1 20.7 – 5.0 – 7.3 2.0 0.4
Mar. –75.2 –57.9 –51.4 – 6.6 28.4 25.6 1.2 28.5 27.8 – 4.1 – 5.7 – 0.1 0.6
Apr. 86.9 24.2 10.9 13.4 – 1.7 0.2 – 4.3 9.1 7.3 – 4.6 – 5.5 – 0.6 1.3
May –11.7 –15.1 – 5.1 –10.1 30.5 23.9 21.8 5.5 4.4 – 3.5 – 4.0 5.1 4.3
June –95.0 –23.3 –19.2 – 4.1 2.0 – 0.5 – 3.3 6.9 7.1 – 4.2 – 4.5 1.4 3.6
July –177.5 – 9.0 – 8.0 – 1.0 – 6.5 3.1 2.7 4.4 4.4 – 4.0 – 4.1 – 6.2 – 8.7
Aug. –32.9 – 5.9 1.7 – 7.7 28.5 23.1 19.0 7.0 7.0 – 2.9 – 2.9 3.8 2.5
Sep. 108.9 –15.2 –20.6 5.4 7.2 6.0 – 2.3 10.1 9.7 – 1.8 – 2.7 5.3 4.1
Oct. 125.1 17.4 – 2.4 19.7 9.8 6.2 10.4 – 2.5 – 2.8 – 1.7 – 2.5 – 2.2 – 0.8
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 2021
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 2022
108.4 37.8 2.0 1.6 58.3 52.0 5.0 3.2 1,279.0 80.5 723.0 784.8 1,617.7 2023
92.3 30.4 2.2 2.0 79.1 73.8 3.9 2.5 1,205.2 47.4 890.6 728.9 1,719.6 2023 Jan.
91.8 30.0 2.2 1.9 87.0 82.5 5.0 2.4 1,221.5 55.6 901.8 724.9 1,880.4 Feb.
97.0 28.5 2.1 1.9 78.2 73.3 4.7 2.6 1,231.2 64.6 863.1 734.8 1,731.0 Mar.
103.7 33.9 2.1 1.9 70.8 65.9 5.4 2.8 1,235.3 67.3 856.2 735.7 1,726.0 Apr.
101.6 30.7 2.1 1.8 74.4 62.4 6.0 2.6 1,257.3 72.3 888.2 746.9 1,745.8 May
103.6 32.5 2.0 1.8 71.4 64.0 4.8 2.6 1,253.9 75.7 853.4 749.6 1,804.7 June
104.8 33.2 2.0 1.7 69.2 61.5 6.5 2.9 1,262.0 76.3 855.0 757.2 1,914.3 July
102.0 32.4 2.0 1.7 72.2 61.5 5.8 3.0 1,271.3 83.5 840.0 765.2 1,912.5 Aug.
102.0 32.6 2.0 1.7 64.3 60.0 4.9 3.0 1,280.7 82.6 825.8 765.1 1,973.5 Sep.
107.9 37.8 2.0 1.6 64.8 59.7 6.2 2.9 1,288.5 84.7 843.9 755.9 1,972.3 Oct.
105.2 34.5 2.0 1.6 59.1 55.1 6.6 3.0 1,286.3 83.6 805.3 769.5 1,778.8 Nov.
108.4 37.8 2.0 1.6 58.3 52.0 5.0 3.2 1,279.0 80.5 723.0 784.8 1,617.7 Dec.
106.1 35.6 1.9 1.6 59.5 50.5 9.1 3.3 1,304.0 83.0 775.3 756.5 1,656.1 2024 Jan.
107.6 39.2 1.9 1.5 55.9 49.5 10.0 3.3 1,316.2 83.3 831.9 749.6 1,712.5 Feb.
106.8 37.5 1.9 1.5 58.8 49.9 9.1 3.5 1,320.0 82.7 834.2 756.2 1,655.0 Mar.
105.0 35.6 1.9 1.5 57.4 49.2 9.5 3.7 1,324.9 77.3 821.9 746.5 1,736.9 Apr.
105.8 34.8 1.9 1.5 59.0 49.5 8.7 3.8 1,327.0 75.7 832.8 756.7 1,681.4 May
103.8 33.3 1.9 1.4 60.1 49.5 9.3 4.0 1,327.0 79.4 825.3 786.7 1,590.0 June
106.3 36.2 1.9 1.4 56.6 49.1 10.1 4.2 1,316.5 76.0 780.4 790.0 1,480.9 July
107.5 37.9 1.9 1.4 58.3 49.1 12.7 4.6 1,320.2 77.6 772.8 789.8 1,420.1 Aug.
108.6 39.3 1.9 1.4 54.2 43.4 10.1 4.9 1,321.7 78.4 815.6 802.4 1,479.8 Sep.
107.3 38.9 1.9 1.4 59.5 43.7 9.4 4.9 1,326.3 73.7 783.1 815.3 1,585.1 Oct.
Changes 4
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
3.1 – 8.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 – 5.0 – 7.9 0.3 40.6 6.9 124.9 16.6 –207.9 2021
5.8 8.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 24.6 23.0 1.2 0.4 67.2 12.6 45.6 5.0 857.7 2022
14.4 6.7 – 0.2 – 0.4 –10.9 –14.8 1.8 0.5 110.6 43.1 –55.7 43.3 –189.9 2023
– 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 7.9 8.7 1.2 – 0.1 13.0 8.1 6.9 – 5.0 163.2 2023 Feb.
5.3 – 1.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 8.8 – 9.2 – 0.3 0.3 13.6 9.2 –33.8 11.2 –151.2 Mar.
6.9 5.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.4 – 7.4 0.7 0.1 5.7 2.7 – 4.9 1.8 – 4.7 Apr.
– 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 3.6 – 3.5 0.6 – 0.1 23.4 6.5 32.0 9.4 23.5 May
2.1 2.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.0 1.6 – 1.1 – 0.0 0.4 4.1 –28.3 3.6 56.2 June
1.2 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.1 – 2.5 1.7 0.3 10.2 0.7 4.2 8.1 109.7 July
– 2.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.9 – 0.0 – 0.7 0.1 7.0 7.1 –18.9 7.2 – 2.8 Aug.
– 0.1 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.9 – 1.5 – 0.9 0.1 10.3 0.0 –14.2 – 1.0 60.4 Sep.
5.9 5.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.3 1.4 – 0.1 8.3 2.2 19.1 – 4.6 – 0.4 Oct.
– 2.8 – 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 5.7 – 4.6 0.4 0.1 2.0 – 1.0 –32.8 14.8 –195.8 Nov.
3.3 3.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 3.1 – 1.6 0.1 – 5.6 – 3.0 –80.1 15.3 –163.0 Dec.
– 2.5 – 2.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.2 – 1.5 4.1 0.1 21.1 2.4 48.0 –29.3 40.5 2024 Jan.
1.5 3.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.6 – 1.0 0.8 0.0 12.5 0.2 56.7 – 6.4 57.0 Feb.
– 0.7 – 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.9 0.5 – 0.9 0.2 3.6 – 0.6 2.0 6.6 –57.1 Mar.
– 1.9 – 2.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.4 – 0.8 0.4 0.2 3.6 – 5.4 –14.2 –10.0 84.4 Apr.
0.8 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.5 0.3 – 0.8 0.1 4.2 – 1.6 13.9 10.7 –55.2 May
– 2.1 – 1.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.0 – 0.1 0.6 0.2 – 2.9 3.7 –11.2 29.5 –89.7 June
2.6 2.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.4 – 0.4 0.8 0.2 – 8.9 – 3.4 –41.2 3.7 –116.5 July
1.2 1.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.6 – 0.0 2.5 0.5 1.8 0.8 – 6.5 4.7 –58.5 Aug.
1.2 1.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 4.0 – 5.6 – 2.5 0.3 2.8 0.8 44.9 15.4 56.0 Sep.
– 1.4 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 5.7 0.7 – 0.8 0.1 5.8 – 3.5 –26.5 4.2 115.1 Oct.
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
24•
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
End of
monthNumber of
reporting
institu-
tionsBalance
sheet
total  1Cash in
hand and
credit
balances
with
central
banks TotalBalances
and
loansSecurities
issued by
banks Totalfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more than
1 year BillsSecurities
issued by
non-banksPartici-
pating
interestsOther
assets  1
All categories of banks
2024 May 1,330 10,674.3 60.6 3,599.9 3,089.2 507.2 5,088.1 495.0 3,838.3 0.1 737.5 97.2 1,828.4
June 1,326 10,588.4 63.9 3,567.3 3,058.2 505.9 5,102.0 500.3 3,835.7 0.1 748.2 97.4 1,757.9
July 1,324 10,408.2 66.7 3,511.2 2,997.5 510.3 5,108.5 498.1 3,847.4 0.1 746.1 100.7 1,621.1
Aug. 1,315 10,379.0 63.4 3,519.8 3,003.5 512.8 5,116.3 494.9 3,855.8 0.1 748.1 101.1 1,578.5
Sep. 1,308 10,485.4 66.6 3,516.1 2,997.6 515.1 5,161.3 523.3 3,854.9 0.1 764.3 100.7 1,640.7
Oct. 1,303 10,599.7 69.0 3,508.5 2,986.5 518.5 5,163.8 519.6 3,864.8 0.1 760.8 100.4 1,758.1
Commercial banks 6
2024 Sep. 236 4,776.3 26.2 1,656.4 1,552.1 103.5 1,731.3 358.6 1,065.2 0.1 297.9 33.7 1,328.7
Oct. 236 4,898.6 25.6 1,672.5 1,568.1 103.6 1,722.7 357.4 1,065.4 0.1 290.9 33.1 1,444.6
Big banks 7
2024 Sep. 3 2,275.0 11.6 692.0 645.4 46.5 799.8 178.0 449.5 0.0 168.1 25.0 746.8
Oct. 3 2,299.4 10.8 711.5 665.1 46.4 790.6 175.7 447.3 0.0 164.0 24.6 761.9
Regional banks and other commercial banks
2024 Sep. 125 2,010.5 10.0 655.1 601.1 53.5 775.0 133.5 516.8 0.1 119.9 7.9 562.5
Oct. 125 2,128.0 10.5 670.6 616.3 53.8 776.1 134.8 519.5 0.1 117.1 7.6 663.2
Branches of foreign banks
2024 Sep. 108 490.7 4.6 309.3 305.5 3.5 156.5 47.1 98.8 – 9.9 0.9 19.4
Oct. 108 471.2 4.4 290.4 286.7 3.5 156.1 46.9 98.6 – 9.9 0.9 19.5
Landesbanken
2024 Sep. 6 898.9 1.9 344.6 285.7 58.7 432.7 48.4 340.6 0.0 39.6 9.5 110.2
Oct. 6 889.4 2.7 333.0 273.2 59.7 434.1 46.8 342.1 0.0 41.3 9.5 110.2
Savings banks
2024 Sep. 349 1,557.4 20.2 269.3 149.7 119.5 1,225.9 55.0 1,002.1 – 168.7 16.8 25.2
Oct. 349 1,562.0 22.3 268.5 148.0 120.4 1,229.0 55.0 1,005.0 – 169.0 16.8 25.3
Credit cooperatives
2024 Sep. 679 1,186.7 12.6 213.9 103.7 109.8 906.2 36.5 752.1 0.0 117.6 20.6 33.4
Oct. 674 1,195.0 13.4 219.7 109.5 109.9 907.9 35.4 755.0 0.0 117.6 20.6 33.3
Mortgage banks
2024 Sep. 7 220.5 0.2 18.1 10.8 7.3 197.0 2.9 180.6 – 13.5 0.1 5.0
Oct. 7 219.4 0.1 17.2 9.7 7.6 196.8 2.8 180.8 – 13.0 0.1 5.1
Building and loan associations
2024 Sep. 13 260.9 0.2 40.1 24.6 15.5 216.0 1.3 194.2 . 20.6 0.2 4.4
Oct. 13 261.5 0.2 40.7 25.2 15.5 216.2 1.3 194.3 . 20.7 0.2 4.2
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2024 Sep. 18 1,584.8 5.3 973.8 871.0 100.7 452.2 20.6 320.1 0.0 106.5 19.8 133.7
Oct. 18 1,573.9 4.6 956.8 852.9 101.8 457.0 20.9 322.3 – 108.4 20.0 135.4
Memo item:    Foreign banks 8
2024 Sep. 137 2,267.7 11.5 821.7 778.3 42.6 752.3 169.7 434.2 0.1 141.2 2.7 679.4
Oct. 137 2,364.9 11.6 815.7 771.7 43.2 749.8 168.1 434.4 0.1 140.5 2.7 785.1
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2024 Sep. 29 1,777.0 6.9 512.4 472.8 39.1 595.8 122.6 335.4 0.1 131.3 1.9 660.0
Oct. 29 1,893.7 7.2 525.3 485.0 39.7 593.7 121.3 335.8 0.1 130.6 1.9 765.6
* Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3.  1 Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial
instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning ofSection 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read
in conjunction with Section 35 (1) number 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are classified
under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting date. Trading
portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, in
Tables I.1 to I.3.  2 For building and loan associations: including deposits under savings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
25•
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4
TotalSight
depositsTime
deposits TotalSight
depositsfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more
than
1 year  2Memo
item:
Liabilities
arising
from
repos  3 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeBank
savings
bondsBearer
debt
securities
out-
standing  5Capital
including
published
reserves,
partici-
pation
rights
capital,
funds for
general
banking
risksOther
liabi-
lities  1End of
month
All categories of banks
2,122.4 712.2 1,410.2 4,684.0 2,709.0 692.6 687.4 87.4 426.7 367.2 168.4 1,395.6 626.0 1,846.3 2024 May
2,100.8 708.1 1,392.7 4,679.2 2,698.6 697.9 689.0 86.5 422.5 362.6 171.1 1,408.0 638.9 1,761.7 June
2,043.1 664.7 1,378.4 4,670.8 2,688.5 702.9 688.4 86.5 418.4 358.4 172.6 1,390.2 644.3 1,659.8 July
1,999.5 602.6 1,396.9 4,731.6 2,744.8 710.1 687.4 93.8 415.5 355.4 173.7 1,391.4 643.6 1,613.0 Aug.
2,015.6 667.8 1,347.7 4,746.9 2,754.9 721.1 680.6 88.1 413.7 352.8 176.6 1,403.9 644.6 1,674.4 Sep.
2,014.3 661.3 1,353.0 4,742.1 2,752.8 728.7 680.6 88.3 411.9 350.3 168.1 1,410.5 648.2 1,784.5 Oct.
Commercial banks 6
1,070.7 513.5 557.2 1,962.7 1,219.2 360.1 247.1 86.9 84.3 52.0 52.0 224.6 226.2 1,292.0 2024 Sep.
1,074.1 505.0 569.1 1,965.8 1,209.7 382.6 248.0 87.0 84.7 51.3 40.8 227.7 229.2 1,401.8 Oct.
Big banks 7
400.5 188.3 212.2 892.8 547.2 194.0 71.1 41.8 76.7 45.2 3.7 168.6 87.1 726.0 2024 Sep.
411.1 189.1 222.0 896.9 552.1 192.7 71.2 43.5 77.2 44.6 3.7 170.7 87.5 733.2 Oct.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
448.6 217.0 231.6 841.6 519.5 115.4 151.2 45.1 7.4 6.5 48.1 53.9 121.7 544.8 2024 Sep.
460.6 227.6 233.0 840.7 507.4 135.7 153.3 43.6 7.3 6.5 36.9 54.8 122.7 649.2 Oct.
Branches of foreign banks
221.6 108.2 113.4 228.4 152.5 50.8 24.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 2.1 17.4 21.3 2024 Sep.
202.4 88.4 114.0 228.2 150.2 54.2 23.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 2.1 19.0 19.5 Oct.
Landesbanken
209.0 44.9 164.1 305.4 154.5 77.2 67.1 0.8 4.2 4.2 2.4 230.6 43.7 110.1 2024 Sep.
202.1 38.4 163.7 301.0 153.5 74.5 66.4 0.8 4.2 4.2 2.5 233.2 43.9 109.1 Oct.
Savings banks
145.5 3.0 142.5 1,178.1 763.7 101.7 21.2 – 196.1 177.5 95.4 23.9 150.6 59.2 2024 Sep.
143.6 3.1 140.5 1,183.4 769.3 100.6 21.6 – 194.4 175.9 97.5 23.5 150.8 60.7 Oct.
Credit cooperatives
153.6 1.8 151.8 871.2 533.0 137.9 45.1 – 128.7 118.6 26.4 9.0 111.8 41.1 2024 Sep.
153.7 1.6 152.1 878.9 540.7 138.0 45.1 – 128.3 118.5 26.7 8.9 111.9 41.5 Oct.
Mortgage banks
40.1 2.9 37.2 55.7 2.6 7.0 46.1 0.1 – – . 108.1 9.2 7.4 2024 Sep.
40.0 2.9 37.1 54.1 2.2 6.0 45.9 0.1 – – . 108.4 9.3 7.6 Oct.
Building and loan associations
38.6 2.8 35.9 193.6 6.7 3.0 183.4 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 7.1 13.2 8.4 2024 Sep.
38.7 2.4 36.3 193.7 6.9 2.9 183.3 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 7.6 13.2 8.3 Oct.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
358.0 99.1 258.9 180.2 75.1 34.1 70.7 0.3 – – . 800.6 89.8 156.2 2024 Sep.
362.1 108.0 254.1 165.3 70.5 24.1 70.4 0.3 – – . 801.2 89.9 155.4 Oct.
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
638.5 326.6 311.8 806.5 517.5 147.8 105.7 51.2 6.8 6.5 28.7 51.8 104.1 666.7 2024 Sep.
630.4 317.6 312.7 806.8 506.4 168.9 106.7 50.4 6.7 6.4 18.1 51.5 106.7 769.5 Oct.
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
416.9 218.5 198.4 578.2 365.0 97.1 81.0 51.2 6.6 6.3 28.6 49.8 86.7 645.4 2024 Sep.
428.0 229.3 198.7 578.6 356.1 114.8 83.2 50.4 6.5 6.2 18.0 49.4 87.7 750.0 Oct.
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Included in time deposits.  4 Excluding deposits
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).  5 Including subordinated
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
6 Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”.  7 Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner
Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische
Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
notes in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, Table I.3, banking group “Big banks “).
8 Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories
of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”.
9 Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in
other banking categories.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
26•
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
PeriodCash in
hand
(euro area
banknotes
and
coins)Credit
balances
with the
Bundes-
bank TotalCredit
balances
and loans BillsNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total Loans BillsTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money mar-
ket paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued
by non-
banks  1
End of year or month *
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2023 18.5 52.0 2,280.7 2,029.3 – 0.8 250.6 24.2 4,044.1 3,649.9 0.1 0.9 393.3
2023 May 18.1 48.7 2,483.6 2,230.4 – 0.8 252.4 12.7 4,039.0 3,650.5 0.1 2.2 386.2
June 17.5 51.6 2,366.1 2,114.1 – 0.9 251.0 12.7 4,042.1 3,645.6 0.1 2.9 393.5
July 17.0 69.9 2,369.8 2,118.4 – 1.1 250.3 12.8 4,048.7 3,653.9 0.1 3.2 391.6
Aug. 17.3 46.7 2,392.0 2,139.7 – 1.2 251.1 12.9 4,046.7 3,649.9 0.1 2.5 394.2
Sep. 17.9 49.6 2,305.0 2,056.1 – 1.0 247.8 12.9 4,048.1 3,653.5 0.1 3.4 391.1
Oct. 17.4 62.2 2,351.7 2,102.8 – 0.8 248.0 13.1 4,051.9 3,656.6 0.1 3.0 392.2
Nov. 16.7 45.5 2,375.9 2,122.3 – 0.9 252.7 13.3 4,057.9 3,661.2 0.1 3.1 393.6
Dec. 18.5 52.0 2,280.7 2,029.3 – 0.8 250.6 24.2 4,044.1 3,649.9 0.1 0.9 393.3
2024 Jan. 16.1 73.1 2,330.7 2,070.9 – 0.8 259.0 28.1 4,048.3 3,649.5 0.0 1.4 397.4
Feb. 16.2 47.5 2,376.9 2,112.0 – 0.8 264.1 31.6 4,055.7 3,654.0 0.1 0.5 401.2
Mar. 17.5 46.9 2,325.4 2,058.2 – 0.7 266.5 34.3 4,061.0 3,658.4 0.1 0.5 402.1
Apr. 16.4 46.0 2,319.4 2,050.6 – 0.7 268.1 38.0 4,062.1 3,661.7 0.0 1.7 398.6
May 16.6 43.4 2,317.7 2,048.2 – 0.8 268.7 41.5 4,069.5 3,666.0 0.1 1.2 402.2
June 16.5 46.6 2,313.9 2,045.6 – 0.8 267.5 44.4 4,076.9 3,670.9 0.1 1.1 404.8
July 16.1 50.0 2,259.5 1,989.8 – 0.7 269.0 46.0 4,083.3 3,676.4 0.0 1.1 405.8
Aug. 16.8 46.0 2,263.7 1,992.9 – 0.8 269.9 47.3 4,088.6 3,677.6 0.1 1.4 409.5
Sep. 17.1 48.4 2,225.0 1,954.8 – 0.9 269.3 46.5 4,098.6 3,684.7 0.1 2.0 411.8
Oct. 17.9 50.5 2,215.2 1,943.4 – 0.9 270.9 44.8 4,099.7 3,689.3 0.0 3.1 407.2
Changes *
2015 +0.3 + 73.7 – 80.7 – 4.3 –0.0 – 0.4 –75.9 –0.1 +68.9 +54.1 –0.0 – 0.3 +15.1
2016 +6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 – – 0.9 –17.9 +0.4 +43.7 +62.8 –0.1 – 0.1 –18.9
2017 +6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 –0.0 + 0.0 –20.1 –0.1 +57.0 +70.2 +0.0 + 0.4 –13.6
2018 +8.5 + 24.0 – 81.0 – 76.6 +0.0 + 0.1 – 4.4 +3.8 +71.5 +105.4 –0.1 – 0.5 –33.2
2019 +2.8 + 59.7 – 63.0 – 61.1 –0.0 – 0.2 – 1.6 –1.4 +126.7 +129.1 +0.1 + 3.1 – 5.5
2020 +4.1 +316.4 +201.2 +191.6 –0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 +4.3 +123.2 +123.6 –0.1 + 0.7 – 1.0
2021 +2.2 +111.8 + 44.1 + 46.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – 2.0 +1.5 +152.2 +147.8 +0.0 – 2.2 + 6.6
2022 –29.6 –836.6 +938.0 +938.1 – + 0.2 – 0.3 +1.7 +216.7 +220.1 –0.1 + 0.1 – 3.3
2023 –1.3 – 15.3 – 65.5 – 71.2 – – 0.2 + 5.9 +1.9 +30.9 +39.0 –0.1 – 1.8 – 6.2
2023 May –0.7 – 5.5 + 48.9 + 48.1 – – 0.3 + 1.1 –0.0 + 6.5 + 9.4 +0.0 – 1.0 – 1.9
June –0.5 + 2.9 –116.9 –115.7 – + 0.1 – 1.3 +0.0 + 4.4 – 3.7 –0.0 + 0.7 + 7.4
July –0.5 + 18.4 + 3.7 + 4.3 – + 0.2 – 0.8 +0.1 + 6.6 + 8.3 –0.0 + 0.2 – 1.9
Aug. +0.3 – 23.2 + 22.2 + 21.3 – + 0.1 + 0.8 +0.1 – 1.9 – 4.0 +0.0 – 0.6 + 2.7
Sep. +0.6 + 2.8 – 87.0 – 83.6 – – 0.2 – 3.3 +0.1 + 1.3 + 3.7 +0.0 + 0.9 – 3.2
Oct. –0.5 + 12.7 + 46.8 + 46.8 – – 0.2 + 0.2 +0.2 + 3.7 + 3.0 –0.0 – 0.4 + 1.1
Nov. –0.6 – 16.7 + 24.2 + 19.5 – + 0.1 + 4.6 +0.1 + 6.1 + 4.7 +0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3
Dec. +1.8 + 6.5 – 95.5 – 93.3 – – 0.1 – 2.0 +0.6 –12.7 –10.3 –0.0 – 2.2 – 0.2
2024 Jan. –2.4 + 21.1 + 48.6 + 40.3 – – 0.0 + 8.4 +3.9 + 4.0 – 0.5 –0.0 + 0.5 + 4.0
Feb. +0.0 – 25.6 + 46.3 + 41.2 – – 0.0 + 5.1 +3.4 + 6.7 + 3.7 +0.0 – 0.9 + 3.8
Mar. +1.3 – 0.6 – 51.5 – 53.8 – – 0.1 + 2.3 +2.8 + 5.3 + 4.4 +0.0 – 0.1 + 0.9
Apr. –1.1 – 0.8 – 5.9 – 7.5 – + 0.0 + 1.6 +3.7 + 1.1 + 3.3 –0.0 + 1.3 – 3.5
May +0.2 – 2.7 – 1.7 – 2.4 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +3.5 + 7.4 + 4.3 +0.0 – 0.5 + 3.6
June –0.0 + 3.2 – 3.8 – 1.9 – – 0.0 – 1.9 +2.9 + 7.4 + 4.9 –0.0 – 0.1 + 2.6
July –0.4 + 3.4 – 53.0 – 54.4 – – 0.1 + 1.5 +1.6 + 7.1 + 6.1 –0.0 – 0.1 + 1.0
Aug. +0.6 – 3.8 + 4.7 + 3.6 – + 0.2 + 0.9 +1.4 + 5.3 + 1.3 +0.0 + 0.4 + 3.7
Sep. +0.4 + 2.4 – 38.7 – 38.1 – + 0.1 – 0.7 +1.3 +10.8 + 7.9 –0.0 + 0.6 + 2.3
Oct. +0.7 + 2.1 – 4.0 – 5.6 – – 0.0 + 1.6 –1.7 + 1.2 + 4.8 –0.0 + 1.1 – 4.6
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange ofequalisation claims (see also footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the
exchange of equalisation claims.  3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt
securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
27•
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Equalisa-
tion
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in
domestic
banks
and
enterprises TotalSight
deposits
4Time
deposits
4Redis-
counted
bills  5Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
de-
positsTime
deposits
6Savings
de-
posits  7Bank
savings
bonds  8Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
– 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
– 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
– 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
– 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
– 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
– 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 2021
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 2022
– 23.8 80.3 1,099.9 137.9 962.0 0.0 13.5 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 445.9 142.2 50.1 2023
– 24.7 81.1 1,229.8 137.8 1,091.9 0.0 15.1 4,172.9 2,623.9 993.0 490.6 65.4 36.6 2023 May
– 24.4 81.2 1,149.6 134.0 1,015.6 0.0 14.6 4,176.3 2,600.9 1,020.0 483.3 72.1 36.5 June
– 24.4 81.0 1,159.8 134.8 1,025.0 0.0 14.6 4,180.2 2,582.2 1,042.9 475.9 79.1 36.7 July
– 24.4 80.3 1,162.1 138.5 1,023.7 0.0 14.5 4,188.4 2,568.4 1,061.7 467.5 90.7 36.9 Aug.
– 24.2 80.4 1,112.7 137.4 975.3 0.0 14.1 4,189.3 2,558.0 1,072.5 461.8 97.0 37.1 Sep.
– 24.1 80.3 1,132.1 136.7 995.4 0.0 14.0 4,198.0 2,544.5 1,086.5 455.4 111.6 37.3 Oct.
– 24.0 80.6 1,136.6 140.0 996.7 0.0 14.0 4,217.3 2,552.9 1,085.6 448.3 130.5 37.6 Nov.
– 23.8 80.3 1,099.9 137.9 962.0 0.0 13.5 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 445.9 142.2 50.1 Dec.
– 23.7 80.3 1,125.8 155.3 970.5 0.0 13.4 4,216.3 2,496.8 1,128.7 439.4 151.4 54.5 2024 Jan.
– 23.7 80.1 1,134.8 161.4 973.4 0.0 13.3 4,213.6 2,478.3 1,143.5 434.4 157.3 57.5 Feb.
– 23.5 80.3 1,083.4 159.4 924.0 0.0 12.8 4,239.0 2,479.2 1,168.8 430.3 160.7 60.2 Mar.
– 23.4 80.8 1,094.3 160.6 933.8 0.0 12.7 4,239.6 2,475.4 1,173.6 425.8 164.8 63.7 Apr.
– 23.5 81.0 1,088.4 158.0 930.5 0.0 12.7 4,263.3 2,497.0 1,176.9 422.2 167.2 66.9 May
– 23.2 81.1 1,067.5 158.5 909.0 0.0 12.3 4,264.7 2,494.2 1,182.5 418.1 170.0 68.9 June
– 23.1 84.5 1,055.3 159.3 896.1 0.0 12.1 4,267.8 2,497.1 1,185.2 414.0 171.5 70.0 July
– 26.4 84.9 1,025.0 133.1 891.9 0.0 12.0 4,323.3 2,548.5 1,191.1 411.2 172.5 74.5 Aug.
– 26.1 84.6 1,004.3 135.4 868.8 0.0 11.6 4,322.6 2,544.1 1,193.8 409.3 175.4 75.3 Sep.
– 26.1 84.0 1,001.9 132.9 868.9 0.0 11.6 4,329.5 2,555.1 1,200.0 407.6 166.9 73.9 Oct.
Changes *
– –2.1 –4.3 –46.6 + 3.3 –50.0 +0.0 –1.3 +106.5 +156.2 –28.3 –11.3 –10.1 –1.6 2015
– –1.3 +1.5 – 1.7 + 0.3 – 2.0 +0.0 –0.5 +104.7 +124.5 – 6.9 – 7.9 –5.0 –0.5 2016
– –0.0 –1.6 +11.0 –18.4 +29.4 –0.0 –0.5 +103.1 +142.8 –27.5 – 5.6 –6.7 +0.4 2017
– –1.0 +3.1 –25.0 – 3.1 –21.9 +0.0 –0.4 +117.7 +139.3 –10.8 – 4.3 –6.5 +3.9 2018
– –0.7 +0.1 – 8.6 + 1.6 –10.2 +0.0 –0.3 +122.5 +155.8 –25.7 – 3.4 –4.1 –1.4 2019
– +5.7 –3.3 +313.4 +23.2 +290.2 –0.0 +8.2 +221.6 +273.7 –32.7 –14.5 –4.9 +1.9 2020
– +2.3 +1.0 +105.2 – 7.4 +112.6 +0.0 +3.3 +95.3 +144.3 –46.2 + 0.7 –3.5 –0.2 2021
– –0.1 +1.7 –104.6 + 8.8 –113.4 –0.0 –0.6 +191.8 +65.8 +143.4 –27.5 +10.1 +1.7 2022
– –1.2 +0.6 –139.9 – 8.9 –131.0 ±0.0 –2.3 +76.6 –172.0 +226.4 –82.3 +104.5 +3.5 2023
– +0.0 +0.2 + 2.1 – 3.0 + 5.0 –0.0 –0.1 + 5.6 – 7.9 +14.5 – 8.0 +7.1 +0.1 2023 May
– –0.4 +0.1 –79.7 – 3.7 –76.0 +0.0 –0.5 + 2.3 –23.0 +26.0 – 7.3 +6.7 –0.1 June
– +0.0 –0.1 +10.2 + 0.8 + 9.4 – –0.0 + 3.8 –18.7 +22.8 – 7.3 +7.0 +0.2 July
– +0.1 –0.8 + 3.1 + 3.9 – 0.8 +0.0 –0.1 + 8.2 –13.2 +21.3 – 8.5 +8.5 +0.2 Aug.
– –0.2 +0.1 –49.4 – 1.1 –48.3 –0.0 –0.4 + 0.9 –10.5 +10.7 – 5.7 +6.3 +0.2 Sep.
– –0.1 –0.1 +19.9 – 0.7 +20.6 –0.0 –0.1 + 8.7 –13.4 +14.0 – 6.4 +14.6 +0.3 Oct.
– –0.1 +0.3 + 4.6 + 3.3 + 1.3 +0.0 –0.0 +19.3 + 8.5 – 1.0 – 7.1 +18.8 +0.3 Nov.
– –0.2 –0.2 –47.3 –12.5 –34.8 –0.0 –0.5 +22.3 – 0.7 +13.7 – 2.5 +11.8 +1.2 Dec.
– –0.1 –0.1 +26.0 +17.4 + 8.6 +0.0 –0.1 –12.7 –44.1 +28.7 – 6.5 +9.2 +4.4 2024 Jan.
– –0.0 –0.2 + 8.9 + 6.1 + 2.9 –0.0 –0.1 – 2.8 –18.4 +14.8 – 5.0 +5.9 +3.0 Feb.
– –0.2 +0.3 –51.4 – 1.9 –49.5 – –0.5 +25.5 + 0.9 +25.3 – 4.1 +3.4 +2.6 Mar.
– –0.1 +0.4 +11.0 + 1.2 + 9.8 – –0.1 + 0.6 – 3.8 + 4.8 – 4.6 +4.2 +3.5 Apr.
– +0.0 +0.2 – 5.3 – 2.6 – 2.7 – –0.1 +23.7 +21.7 + 3.1 – 3.5 +2.4 +3.2 May
– –0.2 +0.1 –18.9 + 0.5 –19.4 – –0.4 – 0.4 – 2.7 + 3.7 – 4.2 +2.8 +2.0 June
– –0.1 +3.4 – 8.1 + 4.8 –13.0 +0.0 –0.2 + 3.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 – 4.0 +1.5 +1.1 July
– +3.2 +0.4 + 1.7 + 5.9 – 4.1 +0.0 –0.1 +23.5 +19.5 + 5.8 – 2.9 +1.0 +4.5 Aug.
– –0.3 +0.0 –20.7 + 2.4 –23.1 +0.0 –0.4 – 0.7 – 4.5 + 2.7 – 1.8 +2.9 +0.9 Sep.
– –0.0 –0.6 – 2.4 – 2.5 + 0.1 –0.0 –0.1 + 7.1 +11.6 – 1.8 – 1.7 –1.0 –1.5 Oct.
including subordinated liabilities.  4 Including liabilities arising from monetary policy
operations with the Bundesbank.  5 Own acceptances and promissory notes
outstanding.  6 Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  7 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8).  8 Including liabilities
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
28•
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Credit balances and loans, bills Loans and bills
PeriodCash in
hand
(non-
euro area
banknotes
and
coins) Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued by
non-banks
End of year or month *
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2023 0.2 1,166.9 934.7 652.0 282.7 3.1 229.2 6.1 960.4 627.3 174.9 452.4 12.3 320.8
2023 May 0.2 1,211.3 972.8 706.0 266.8 3.4 235.1 4.2 965.1 638.1 193.4 444.7 14.6 312.4
June 0.2 1,177.3 939.1 681.7 257.4 3.6 234.6 4.3 961.8 628.4 181.4 447.0 15.8 317.6
July 0.2 1,194.1 955.3 694.8 260.5 4.1 234.7 4.3 962.7 637.4 190.4 447.0 16.4 308.9
Aug. 0.2 1,197.1 959.5 693.8 265.7 3.7 233.9 4.3 954.8 630.9 181.3 449.6 16.2 307.8
Sep. 0.2 1,203.3 966.5 687.9 278.6 3.5 233.3 4.2 958.8 633.0 183.8 449.2 16.1 309.7
Oct. 0.2 1,212.3 975.9 689.7 286.2 3.6 232.8 4.2 956.8 635.7 188.7 447.0 14.6 306.5
Nov. 0.2 1,190.3 954.5 674.0 280.5 3.3 232.4 4.2 971.3 645.4 194.5 450.9 15.3 310.6
Dec. 0.2 1,166.9 934.7 652.0 282.7 3.1 229.2 6.1 960.4 627.3 174.9 452.4 12.3 320.8
2024 Jan. 0.2 1,206.8 971.9 684.9 287.0 2.8 232.0 6.1 985.5 649.3 196.9 452.4 14.6 321.6
Feb. 0.2 1,245.8 1,010.7 724.3 286.4 3.0 232.2 6.9 1,000.4 660.7 204.4 456.3 14.2 325.4
Mar. 0.2 1,255.0 1,016.4 732.9 283.5 2.7 236.0 7.0 1,007.9 651.5 191.9 459.6 15.3 341.2
Apr. 0.2 1,255.8 1,018.0 729.5 288.5 2.2 235.6 7.4 1,016.3 664.8 206.3 458.5 16.5 335.0
May 0.2 1,282.2 1,041.2 755.0 286.2 2.5 238.5 7.5 1,018.6 667.3 207.9 459.4 16.1 335.2
June 0.2 1,253.4 1,012.8 723.8 289.0 2.3 238.3 7.2 1,025.1 665.2 207.3 457.9 16.5 343.4
July 0.2 1,251.7 1,007.8 719.6 288.2 2.6 241.3 7.0 1,025.1 669.1 208.7 460.4 15.8 340.2
Aug. 0.2 1,256.1 1,010.7 720.2 290.5 2.6 242.8 6.9 1,027.7 673.1 211.4 461.7 16.0 338.6
Sep. 0.2 1,291.1 1,042.8 755.5 287.3 2.4 245.9 8.9 1,062.7 693.5 230.3 463.2 16.7 352.6
Oct. 0.2 1,293.3 1,043.2 755.3 287.9 2.4 247.7 8.9 1,064.1 695.1 229.2 465.9 15.4 353.6
Changes *
2015 +0.1 –91.8 –86.0 –82.2 –3.8 –6.7 +0.8 –0.1 –6.1 –9.2 –6.5 –2.7 + 1.1 +2.0
2016 +0.0 –25.5 –14.5 –38.2 +23.7 –0.7 –10.3 –0.0 +17.4 +28.9 +10.1 +18.8 – 3.0 –8.5
2017 +0.0 –57.2 –48.7 –61.5 +12.8 +0.0 –8.5 +0.6 –4.7 +13.0 +8.6 +4.4 + 0.7 –18.4
2018 +0.0 +49.6 +34.0 +57.7 –23.7 +0.2 +15.3 +0.7 +18.3 +28.3 +3.2 +25.2 – 0.4 –9.7
2019 –0.0 –4.1 –11.3 –21.9 +10.7 +0.8 +6.3 +0.7 +26.8 +19.9 +12.7 +7.3 + 3.0 +3.8
2020 –0.0 –32.0 –22.4 –6.6 –15.8 +0.9 –10.5 +0.3 +34.4 +14.7 +9.0 +5.7 + 3.6 +16.1
2021 +0.0 +52.8 +71.1 +68.9 +2.2 –2.5 –15.8 –0.5 +37.8 +39.7 +29.8 +9.9 – 3.2 +1.4
2022 –0.1 +21.7 +20.4 +17.9 +2.6 +1.3 –0.0 +0.2 +37.0 +37.0 +16.8 +20.2 + 6.7 –6.7
2023 –0.0 +32.6 +24.9 +10.2 +14.7 +1.4 +6.3 +0.5 +51.5 +14.8 +5.2 +9.6 – 2.6 +39.3
2023 May +0.0 +16.9 +16.2 +18.0 –1.8 –0.2 +0.9 –0.0 +1.5 +1.4 +1.3 +0.1 + 0.6 –0.5
June +0.0 –17.7 –17.6 –9.9 –7.6 +0.2 –0.3 +0.1 –1.9 –8.7 –11.1 +2.4 + 1.2 +5.6
July –0.0 +18.4 +17.7 +13.9 +3.9 +0.5 +0.2 +0.0 +3.0 +10.5 +9.6 +0.9 + 0.7 –8.2
Aug. –0.0 +0.0 +1.3 –2.2 +3.5 –0.4 –0.9 –0.0 –10.2 –8.3 –9.8 +1.5 – 0.3 –1.6
Sep. +0.0 –1.0 –0.0 –10.1 +10.1 –0.2 –0.7 –0.0 –0.1 –1.2 +1.3 –2.5 – 0.1 +1.1
Oct. +0.0 +10.3 +10.6 +2.6 +8.0 +0.1 –0.4 –0.1 –0.7 +3.8 +5.2 –1.4 – 1.6 –3.0
Nov. – –14.4 –13.9 –11.5 –2.4 –0.2 –0.3 +0.0 +18.7 +12.9 +7.6 +5.3 + 0.8 +5.0
Dec. –0.0 –21.0 –17.6 –21.0 +3.4 –0.3 –3.2 +0.0 –9.7 –17.2 –19.2 +2.0 – 3.0 +10.5
2024 Jan. +0.0 +34.0 +31.6 +29.7 +1.9 –0.2 +2.7 –0.0 +21.4 +19.0 +21.0 –2.0 + 2.2 +0.1
Feb. –0.0 +39.2 +38.9 +39.6 –0.7 +0.1 +0.2 +0.9 +15.8 +12.3 +7.5 +4.8 – 0.3 +3.8
Mar. –0.0 +9.1 +5.6 +8.7 –3.0 –0.3 +3.8 +0.1 +7.7 –9.1 –12.5 +3.4 + 1.0 +15.7
Apr. +0.0 –1.5 –0.8 –4.7 +4.0 –0.4 –0.3 +0.4 +7.1 +12.3 +14.0 –1.6 + 1.2 –6.4
May –0.0 +30.1 +26.8 +27.6 –0.9 +0.3 +3.0 +0.0 +4.4 +4.1 +2.3 +1.8 – 0.4 +0.7
June +0.0 –33.6 –33.1 –34.1 +1.0 –0.2 –0.3 –0.2 +3.4 –4.7 –1.6 –3.1 + 0.4 +7.7
July –0.0 +2.5 –0.8 –1.3 +0.5 +0.3 +3.0 –0.2 +2.3 +5.8 +2.4 +3.4 – 0.7 –2.9
Aug. +0.0 +11.1 +9.5 +4.7 +4.8 –0.0 +1.6 –0.1 +7.8 +8.2 +4.6 +3.6 + 0.3 –0.7
Sep. –0.0 +37.6 +34.7 +36.9 –2.2 –0.2 +3.1 –0.1 +35.7 +20.8 +19.2 +1.6 + 0.7 +14.2
Oct. +0.0 –5.7 –7.3 –4.8 –2.5 +0.0 +1.6 –0.0 –3.4 –2.2 –2.9 +0.6 – 1.4 +0.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequentrevisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
29•
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Time deposits (including bank
savings bonds)Time deposits (including
savings deposits and bank
savings bonds)
Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in foreign
banks
and
enter-
prises TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 – 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 2021
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 2022
10.7 16.7 923.8 469.5 454.3 288.1 166.2 – 380.6 176.2 204.4 104.9 99.5 1.1 2023
10.4 16.1 1,059.1 596.1 462.9 299.9 163.0 0.0 436.0 219.3 216.7 116.7 100.0 0.3 2023 May
10.2 16.0 1,025.8 565.0 460.8 302.6 158.2 0.0 411.5 205.6 205.9 107.3 98.6 0.4 June
10.2 16.1 1,052.4 582.3 470.1 311.1 159.0 0.0 411.0 204.0 207.0 107.9 99.1 0.3 July
10.2 16.1 1,021.8 566.5 455.3 294.3 161.1 – 407.7 198.5 209.2 112.0 97.2 0.3 Aug.
10.2 16.1 1,006.0 536.9 469.1 293.9 175.2 – 403.9 206.3 197.6 100.2 97.4 0.4 Sep.
10.2 16.6 1,021.8 558.9 462.9 288.0 174.9 – 423.2 207.0 216.2 117.4 98.8 0.3 Oct.
10.4 16.4 1,003.7 538.0 465.7 291.0 174.6 – 412.5 206.3 206.3 107.1 99.2 0.3 Nov.
10.7 16.7 923.8 469.5 454.3 288.1 166.2 – 380.6 176.2 204.4 104.9 99.5 1.1 Dec.
10.7 16.4 979.5 520.1 459.5 284.6 174.9 – 409.6 200.3 209.3 110.6 98.6 0.7 2024 Jan.
10.7 15.9 1,025.8 534.6 491.2 311.3 179.9 0.0 425.9 211.9 214.1 117.4 96.6 2.0 Feb.
10.7 15.9 1,041.0 502.1 538.9 370.9 168.1 0.0 408.7 192.8 215.9 118.1 97.7 2.6 Mar.
10.8 16.1 1,029.6 524.9 504.8 329.8 175.0 0.0 419.4 207.2 212.3 114.6 97.7 3.2 Apr.
10.8 16.0 1,034.0 554.2 479.7 315.8 163.9 0.0 420.7 212.0 208.7 109.3 99.4 4.0 May
10.6 16.0 1,033.2 549.6 483.6 315.3 168.3 0.0 414.4 204.4 210.1 111.0 99.0 4.5 June
10.5 16.0 987.8 505.4 482.4 311.4 170.9 0.0 402.9 191.4 211.5 112.3 99.3 4.8 July
10.6 16.0 974.5 469.5 505.0 330.4 174.6 0.0 408.3 196.3 212.0 112.7 99.3 5.1 Aug.
10.6 15.9 1,011.3 532.4 478.9 299.4 179.5 0.0 424.3 210.9 213.5 113.7 99.8 5.5 Sep.
10.7 16.2 1,012.5 528.4 484.0 303.5 180.6 0.0 412.5 197.7 214.9 116.2 98.7 5.4 Oct.
Changes *
– 0.6 – 6.1 –15.4 +40.6 –56.0 –48.6 – 7.4 –0.0 –26.5 –13.9 –12.6 +0.3 –13.0 –0.0 2015
– 0.1 – 1.5 +82.7 +51.0 +31.7 +27.0 + 4.7 –0.0 +3.5 –3.1 +6.7 +5.9 +0.8 –0.0 2016
– 1.0 – 4.1 –15.5 +25.2 –40.8 –43.2 + 2.4 ±0.0 +31.8 +11.0 +20.8 +15.6 +5.2 –0.4 2017
– 0.2 – 2.2 –23.9 –23.4 – 0.4 + 2.1 – 2.6 –0.0 –11.9 –0.2 –11.8 –5.7 –6.0 –0.2 2018
– 0.3 – 0.9 – 9.5 –49.4 +39.8 +28.0 +11.8 –0.0 –0.8 +2.1 –2.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.0 2019
– 0.2 – 3.9 +83.8 +87.8 – 4.1 –34.7 +30.6 – +23.6 +13.8 +9.8 +7.1 +2.8 +0.0 2020
– 0.2 – 0.8 +136.6 +19.8 +116.8 +89.2 +27.6 +0.0 +22.7 +6.4 +16.3 +0.0 +16.3 –0.0 2021
– 0.7 – 1.0 +85.8 +29.1 +56.7 +69.6 –13.0 –0.0 +68.2 +49.0 +19.2 +13.9 +5.3 +0.0 2022
+ 0.2 + 1.1 –66.1 –4.6 –61.4 –86.9 +25.4 ±0.0 +11.6 –18.3 +29.9 +20.9 +9.0 +0.1 2023
+ 0.0 + 0.2 +10.1 +52.6 –42.5 –46.3 + 3.8 +0.0 +9.2 +9.5 –0.3 –1.2 +0.9 –0.0 2023 May
– 0.2 – 0.0 –26.4 –26.1 – 0.3 + 3.9 – 4.2 – –23.1 –13.1 –9.9 –8.7 –1.2 +0.1 June
– 0.0 + 0.1 +27.3 +17.2 +10.1 + 9.0 + 1.1 – +0.4 –1.3 +1.7 +1.1 +0.6 –0.0 July
+ 0.0 – 0.0 –32.6 –16.4 –16.2 –17.9 + 1.7 –0.0 –4.3 –5.9 +1.6 +3.6 –2.0 –0.0 Aug.
– 0.0 – 0.0 –21.0 –32.3 +11.4 – 2.2 +13.5 – –5.7 +7.1 –12.8 –12.8 +0.0 +0.0 Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.5 +17.0 +22.8 – 5.8 – 5.6 – 0.2 – +19.6 +0.9 +18.7 +17.3 +1.4 –0.1 Oct.
+ 0.2 – 0.1 –12.9 –18.4 + 5.5 + 4.9 + 0.6 – –8.6 +0.6 –9.2 –9.8 +0.6 –0.0 Nov.
+ 0.3 + 0.3 –77.4 –67.0 –10.4 – 2.3 – 8.2 – –31.3 –29.7 –1.5 –1.8 +0.3 –0.0 Dec.
+ 0.0 – 0.4 +51.4 +48.7 + 2.8 – 5.2 + 8.0 – +27.8 +23.6 +4.3 +5.3 –1.0 –0.4 2024 Jan.
+ 0.0 – 0.4 +46.4 +14.5 +31.9 +26.7 + 5.2 +0.0 +16.4 +11.5 +4.9 +6.8 –1.9 +1.4 Feb.
+ 0.0 – 0.0 +15.1 –32.4 +47.6 +59.5 –11.9 – –17.3 –19.1 +1.8 +0.7 +1.1 +0.5 Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 –13.1 +22.2 –35.3 –41.9 + 6.6 – +10.1 +14.1 –4.0 –4.3 +0.3 +0.7 Apr.
– 0.0 – 0.0 + 7.1 +30.5 –23.5 –12.9 –10.6 – +2.3 +5.3 –3.0 –4.8 +1.8 +0.8 May
– 0.2 + 0.0 – 4.6 –6.3 + 1.8 – 1.9 + 3.6 – –7.5 –8.2 +0.7 +1.2 –0.5 +0.5 June
– 0.1 – 0.0 –40.6 –40.6 + 0.0 – 2.9 + 3.0 – –10.7 –12.6 +1.9 +1.6 +0.3 +0.3 July
+ 0.1 – 0.0 – 6.8 –33.2 +26.3 +20.8 + 5.5 – +7.6 +6.2 +1.4 +1.3 +0.2 +0.2 Aug.
+ 0.0 – 0.1 +38.6 +63.6 –24.9 –30.1 + 5.1 – +16.7 +14.8 +1.9 +1.3 +0.5 +0.4 Sep.
+ 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 –6.6 + 7.5 + 1.5 + 6.0 – –14.1 –14.1 –0.0 +1.2 –1.3 –0.1 Oct.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
30•
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Short-term lending Medium- and long-term Lending to domestic
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
Periodincluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claimsexcluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claims Total TotalLoans
and
billsNegotiable
money
market
paper Total LoansTreasury
bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 – 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2023 4,044.1 3,649.9 279.0 264.2 264.0 0.3 14.8 14.2 0.6 3,765.1 3,401.1
2023 May 4,039.0 3,650.6 299.7 281.0 280.2 0.8 18.7 17.4 1.3 3,739.3 3,388.0
June 4,042.1 3,645.7 300.3 280.5 279.6 0.9 19.8 17.8 2.0 3,741.8 3,388.7
July 4,048.7 3,653.9 299.4 277.4 276.6 0.9 21.9 19.6 2.3 3,749.3 3,395.5
Aug. 4,046.7 3,650.0 289.5 270.8 270.1 0.7 18.6 16.8 1.8 3,757.2 3,398.6
Sep. 4,048.1 3,653.6 297.2 275.5 274.8 0.6 21.7 19.0 2.7 3,751.0 3,395.8
Oct. 4,051.9 3,656.7 293.6 270.9 270.3 0.6 22.7 20.3 2.4 3,758.3 3,401.0
Nov. 4,057.9 3,661.3 291.1 272.0 271.4 0.7 19.0 16.6 2.4 3,766.9 3,404.2
Dec. 4,044.1 3,649.9 279.0 264.2 264.0 0.3 14.8 14.2 0.6 3,765.1 3,401.1
2024 Jan. 4,048.3 3,649.5 281.0 263.3 262.7 0.6 17.7 16.8 0.8 3,767.3 3,401.5
Feb. 4,055.7 3,654.0 281.5 267.3 266.8 0.5 14.2 14.1 0.0 3,774.3 3,404.7
Mar. 4,061.0 3,658.5 289.2 273.3 272.6 0.7 15.9 16.1 – 0.2 3,771.8 3,403.2
Apr. 4,062.1 3,661.8 289.3 270.4 269.6 0.8 18.9 18.0 0.9 3,772.8 3,406.5
May 4,069.5 3,666.1 288.4 271.4 270.5 0.9 17.0 16.7 0.3 3,781.1 3,410.7
June 4,076.9 3,670.9 294.3 273.8 273.0 0.7 20.5 20.1 0.4 3,782.6 3,408.6
July 4,083.3 3,676.5 290.5 270.8 270.1 0.7 19.7 19.3 0.4 3,792.8 3,416.3
Aug. 4,088.6 3,677.7 285.0 266.9 266.1 0.7 18.1 17.4 0.7 3,803.6 3,422.4
Sep. 4,098.6 3,684.8 295.2 275.2 274.3 0.9 20.0 18.9 1.1 3,803.4 3,419.6
Oct. 4,099.7 3,689.4 293.6 271.1 270.3 0.8 22.5 20.2 2.3 3,806.1 3,422.8
Changes *
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 – 5.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.8 – 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 – 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 – 12.1 – 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 8.6 – 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 – 19.6 – 19.8 – 19.8 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2021 + 152.2 + 147.8 + 8.8 + 13.8 + 13.8 – 0.1 – 4.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 + 143.4 + 157.9
2022 + 216.7 + 220.0 + 47.6 + 48.5 + 48.5 + 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.9 + 0.0 + 169.1 + 184.8
2023 + 30.9 + 38.9 – 15.3 – 14.5 – 14.4 – 0.1 – 0.8 + 0.9 – 1.7 + 46.2 + 42.3
2023 May + 6.5 + 9.4 – 4.4 – 2.3 – 2.6 + 0.3 – 2.1 – 0.8 – 1.2 + 10.9 + 13.6
June + 4.4 – 3.7 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 + 0.9
July + 6.6 + 8.3 – 1.0 – 3.1 – 3.1 – 0.0 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 7.5 + 6.9
Aug. – 1.9 – 4.0 – 9.9 – 6.6 – 6.5 – 0.2 – 3.3 – 2.8 – 0.5 + 8.0 + 3.1
Sep. + 1.3 + 3.7 + 7.7 + 4.6 + 4.7 – 0.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 – 6.4 – 2.9
Oct. + 3.7 + 3.0 – 3.5 – 4.6 – 4.5 – 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 – 0.3 + 7.2 + 5.2
Nov. + 6.1 + 4.7 – 2.3 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 3.7 – 3.7 + 0.0 + 8.4 + 3.8
Dec. – 12.7 – 10.3 – 11.0 – 7.8 – 7.4 – 0.4 – 3.2 – 1.3 – 1.8 – 1.7 – 2.9
2024 Jan. + 4.0 – 0.5 + 1.9 – 0.9 – 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3
Feb. + 6.7 + 3.7 + 0.4 + 3.9 + 4.0 – 0.1 – 3.5 – 2.7 – 0.8 + 6.3 + 2.7
Mar. + 5.3 + 4.4 + 6.6 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 2.0 – 0.2 – 1.3 – 0.3
Apr. + 1.1 + 3.3 + 0.1 – 2.8 – 3.0 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 3.4
May + 7.4 + 4.3 – 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 – 1.9 – 1.3 – 0.6 + 8.3 + 4.3
June + 7.4 + 4.9 + 5.9 + 2.4 + 2.5 – 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 1.6 – 2.1
July + 7.1 + 6.1 – 3.4 – 2.5 – 2.5 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.8 – 0.0 + 10.4 + 7.6
Aug. + 5.3 + 1.3 – 5.5 – 4.0 – 4.0 + 0.0 – 1.5 – 1.9 + 0.3 + 10.8 + 6.2
Sep. + 10.8 + 7.9 + 10.5 + 8.6 + 8.4 + 0.2 + 1.9 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 – 2.3
Oct. + 1.2 + 4.8 – 3.6 – 6.1 – 6.0 – 0.1 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 4.9 + 8.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
31•
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
TotalMedium-
termLong-
term SecuritiesMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalMedium-
termLong-
termSecur-
ities  1Equal-
isation
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 – 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 – 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 – 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 – 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 – 1.4 2018
2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 – 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 2020
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 2021
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 2022
3,131.7 361.0 2,770.7 269.4 22.8 364.0 240.0 14.1 225.9 124.0 – 1.0 2023
3,120.7 360.8 2,760.0 267.2 23.7 351.4 232.4 13.6 218.8 119.0 – 1.0 2023 May
3,117.4 360.0 2,757.5 271.3 23.3 353.1 230.9 13.4 217.6 122.2 – 1.0 June
3,125.3 362.1 2,763.3 270.2 23.4 353.8 232.4 13.5 218.9 121.4 – 1.0 July
3,130.4 362.8 2,767.6 268.2 23.4 358.6 232.6 13.8 218.8 126.0 – 1.0 Aug.
3,126.8 359.5 2,767.3 269.0 23.2 355.1 233.0 13.7 219.4 122.1 – 1.0 Sep.
3,131.2 360.7 2,770.5 269.8 23.1 357.3 234.8 13.8 221.0 122.4 – 1.0 Oct.
3,135.5 361.4 2,774.1 268.7 23.0 362.7 237.8 14.1 223.8 124.8 – 1.0 Nov.
3,131.7 361.0 2,770.7 269.4 22.8 364.0 240.0 14.1 225.9 124.0 – 1.0 Dec.
3,130.5 359.5 2,771.0 271.0 22.7 365.8 239.4 13.8 225.6 126.4 – 1.0 2024 Jan.
3,132.4 357.0 2,775.4 272.3 22.7 369.6 240.7 14.1 226.6 128.9 – 1.0 Feb.
3,128.6 354.1 2,774.5 274.6 22.5 368.7 241.1 14.3 226.8 127.5 – 1.0 Mar.
3,132.3 353.4 2,779.0 274.2 22.4 366.3 241.9 14.3 227.5 124.4 – 1.0 Apr.
3,135.9 353.3 2,782.6 274.8 22.4 370.4 242.9 14.5 228.4 127.5 – 1.0 May
3,135.3 352.3 2,783.1 273.3 22.2 374.0 242.5 14.6 227.8 131.5 – 1.0 June
3,143.2 355.5 2,787.6 273.1 22.1 376.6 243.8 15.0 228.9 132.7 – 1.0 July
3,149.7 355.9 2,793.8 272.8 24.5 381.2 244.5 15.2 229.2 136.7 – 1.9 Aug.
3,146.3 356.1 2,790.3 273.3 24.2 383.8 245.3 15.2 230.1 138.5 – 1.9 Sep.
3,148.6 353.8 2,794.8 274.2 24.2 383.3 250.3 15.4 234.9 133.0 – 1.9 Oct.
Changes *
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 +14.8 – 2.1 – 6.6 – 6.9 – 4.8 – 2.0 + 0.2 – + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 – 0.9 – 30.9 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 3.3 –23.6 – – 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 +15.8 + 0.1 – 39.9 –10.6 – 1.3 – 9.3 –29.4 – – 0.1 2017
+108.7 +19.3 + 89.4 – 6.7 – 0.9 – 37.1 –10.5 – 2.7 – 7.8 –26.6 – – 0.0 2018
+126.0 +18.9 +107.2 + 6.8 – 0.8 – 17.8 – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 –12.3 – + 0.1 2019
+145.0 + 9.4 +135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 – 2.8 – 1.1 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 1.7 – – 0.4 2020
+140.1 + 5.6 +134.5 +17.8 + 2.3 – 14.6 – 3.3 – 1.3 – 2.0 –11.3 – – 0.0 2021
+169.9 +33.5 +136.4 +14.9 – 0.1 – 15.7 + 2.5 – 0.7 + 3.3 –18.2 – – 0.0 2022
+ 46.9 +11.0 + 35.9 – 4.7 – 1.1 + 3.9 + 5.5 ± 0.0 + 5.5 – 1.5 – – 0.0 2023
+ 13.2 + 5.2 + 8.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 2.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.3 – – 0.0 2023 May
– 3.2 – 1.3 – 2.0 + 4.1 – 0.3 + 1.8 – 1.5 – 0.2 – 1.2 + 3.2 – – 0.0 June
+ 8.0 + 1.8 + 6.2 – 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 1.3 – 0.8 – – 0.0 July
+ 5.1 + 0.8 + 4.3 – 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 + 4.6 – – 0.0 Aug.
– 3.6 – 3.3 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.2 – 3.5 + 0.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 – 3.9 – – 0.0 Sep.
+ 4.4 + 1.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 – 0.1 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.3 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 4.8 + 0.2 + 4.6 – 1.1 – 0.1 + 4.7 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 2.4 – + 0.0 Nov.
– 3.5 – 0.4 – 3.2 + 0.7 – 0.2 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.9 – 0.9 – – 0.0 Dec.
– 1.3 – 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.6 – 0.1 + 1.8 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 2.4 – + 0.0 2024 Jan.
+ 1.4 – 2.5 + 4.0 + 1.3 – + 3.5 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 2.5 – – 0.0 Feb.
– 2.6 – 2.5 – 0.1 + 2.3 – 0.2 – 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 1.4 – + 0.0 Mar.
+ 3.7 – 0.8 + 4.5 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 2.4 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 – 3.1 – + 0.0 Apr.
+ 3.8 – 0.1 + 3.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 3.1 – + 0.0 May
– 0.6 – 1.1 + 0.5 – 1.4 – 0.2 + 3.6 – 0.4 + 0.2 – 0.6 + 4.0 – – 0.0 June
+ 7.8 + 3.3 + 4.5 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 1.3 + 1.3 – – 0.0 July
+ 6.5 + 0.4 + 6.2 – 0.3 + 2.3 + 4.6 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 4.0 – + 0.9 Aug.
– 2.8 + 0.3 – 3.1 + 0.5 – 0.3 + 2.6 + 0.9 – 0.0 + 0.9 + 1.8 – + 0.0 Sep.
+ 7.3 – 0.1 + 7.4 + 0.9 + 0.1 – 3.3 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 2.0 – 5.5 – – 0.1 Oct.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
32•
IV. Banks
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
billion €
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios)  1
of which:
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Period TotalMortgage
loans,
total TotalMortgage
loans
secured
by
residen-
tial real
estateOther
housing
loans Totalof which:
Housing
loansManufac-
turingElectricity,
gas and
water
supply;
refuse
disposal,          
mining
and
quarryingConstruc-
tionWhole-
sale and
retail
trade;
repair of
motor                
vehicles
and
motor-
cyclesAgri-
culture,
forestry,
fishing
and
aqua-
cultureTransport-
ation and
storage;
post and                      
telecom-
munica-
tionsFinancial
intermedi-
ation
(excluding
MFIs) and
insurance   
com-
panies
Lending, total                                                 End of year or quarter *
2022 3,365.3 1,676.5 1,773.9 1,448.0 325.8 1,852.2 509.1 160.0 137.7 108.8 155.1 56.3 65.2 211.9
2023 Q3 3,401.6 1,735.7 1,797.1 1,505.7 291.5 1,878.2 522.3 160.0 134.7 113.3 159.5 56.4 61.3 223.0
Q4 3,395.7 1,740.5 1,801.7 1,512.0 289.7 1,872.8 525.7 154.6 136.1 113.3 160.2 56.0 61.5 218.1
2024 Q1 3,401.2 1,753.5 1,802.8 1,524.4 278.5 1,879.2 527.2 155.3 138.3 113.5 159.4 56.3 58.7 219.4
Q2 3,408.4 1,762.5 1,808.4 1,531.5 276.9 1,884.0 529.6 155.7 143.8 114.1 159.0 56.4 52.0 219.2
Q3 3,420.6 1,768.1 1,816.4 1,538.6 277.8 1,888.5 531.7 153.8 144.6 114.3 154.9 56.8 51.2 224.9
Short-term lending
2022 279.4 . 7.4 . 7.4 248.9 5.0 41.6 12.1 20.8 44.7 3.3 3.8 49.8
2023 Q3 274.8 . 7.5 . 7.5 244.4 5.4 40.4 5.6 22.6 47.2 3.8 3.8 51.3
Q4 264.0 . 7.4 . 7.4 233.9 5.3 37.2 5.1 22.2 46.8 3.5 4.5 47.2
2024 Q1 272.6 . 7.6 . 7.6 243.4 5.6 39.7 6.2 23.1 48.0 4.0 4.6 48.2
Q2 273.0 . 7.5 . 7.5 244.4 5.5 40.4 6.2 23.3 48.0 4.1 4.4 47.0
Q3 274.3 . 7.7 . 7.7 244.2 5.5 39.2 5.3 23.5 46.7 4.2 4.0 49.7
Medium-term lending
2022 348.7 . 43.4 . 43.4 275.8 23.5 31.2 6.5 22.2 24.3 4.1 23.0 56.2
2023 Q3 359.5 . 42.8 . 42.8 289.2 24.5 34.7 5.8 23.0 26.9 4.1 18.2 62.5
Q4 361.0 . 41.9 . 41.9 291.2 24.3 34.0 6.0 23.1 28.2 4.2 18.6 61.3
2024 Q1 354.1 . 40.8 . 40.8 285.1 24.1 32.9 5.8 22.5 27.3 4.1 15.6 61.6
Q2 352.3 . 40.0 . 40.0 284.1 23.8 33.2 11.0 22.1 27.5 4.2 9.4 61.4
Q3 356.1 . 38.9 . 38.9 288.0 23.2 34.2 10.9 21.8 25.8 4.3 9.4 64.6
Long-term lending
2022 2,737.1 1,676.5 1,723.1 1,448.0 275.1 1,327.5 480.6 87.2 119.0 65.8 86.1 48.9 38.4 105.9
2023 Q3 2,767.3 1,735.7 1,746.8 1,505.7 241.2 1,344.7 492.4 85.0 123.3 67.7 85.3 48.5 39.2 109.1
Q4 2,770.7 1,740.5 1,752.5 1,512.0 240.5 1,347.7 496.1 83.4 125.1 68.0 85.2 48.3 38.5 109.7
2024 Q1 2,774.5 1,753.5 1,754.4 1,524.4 230.1 1,350.7 497.5 82.8 126.3 68.0 84.1 48.1 38.5 109.7
Q2 2,783.1 1,762.5 1,760.9 1,531.5 229.4 1,355.5 500.3 82.0 126.7 68.7 83.5 48.1 38.2 110.8
Q3 2,790.3 1,768.1 1,769.8 1,538.6 231.2 1,356.3 503.0 80.4 128.5 69.1 82.4 48.2 37.8 110.7
Lending, total                                                 Change during quarter *
2023 Q3 + 4.7 +10.9 + 9.2 +11.2 – 2.0 – 1.4 + 4.2 – 2.5 – 2.9 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.6 + 1.3
Q4 – 4.9 + 5.6 + 4.8 + 7.0 – 2.2 – 4.6 + 3.4 – 5.5 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 – 0.5 + 0.7 – 4.9
2024 Q1 + 4.9 + 6.5 + 1.9 + 7.7 – 5.8 + 5.8 + 2.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 0.3 – 1.0 + 0.3 – 2.7 + 1.3
Q2 + 7.3 + 8.9 + 5.6 + 7.1 – 1.6 + 4.5 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 – 0.7 + 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.4
Q3 +13.4 + 5.5 + 8.0 + 7.1 + 0.9 + 5.8 + 2.1 – 1.9 + 0.8 + 0.2 – 4.0 + 0.3 – 0.8 + 6.8
Short-term lending
2023 Q3 – 4.8 . – 0.1 . – 0.1 – 4.7 – 0.0 – 1.9 – 2.1 – 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.9
Q4 –10.6 . – 0.2 . – 0.2 –10.2 – 0.1 – 3.1 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 4.1
2024 Q1 + 7.4 . + 0.2 . + 0.2 + 8.4 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.0
Q2 + 0.5 . – 0.0 . – 0.0 + 1.0 – 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.3
Q3 + 1.9 . + 0.1 . + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 – 1.2 – 0.9 + 0.1 – 1.3 + 0.1 – 0.4 + 3.4
Medium-term lending
2023 Q3 – 0.8 . – 0.2 . – 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.9 + 1.1
Q4 + 1.0 . – 0.8 . – 0.8 + 1.7 – 0.3 – 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 – 1.3
2024 Q1 – 6.5 . – 1.2 . – 1.2 – 5.7 – 0.4 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.6 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 2.9 + 0.4
Q2 – 2.0 . – 0.8 . – 0.8 – 1.3 – 0.3 + 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 1.0 – 0.3
Q3 + 3.9 . – 1.1 . – 1.1 + 4.0 – 0.6 + 1.0 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 1.6 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 3.4
Long-term lending
2023 Q3 +10.3 +10.9 + 9.5 +11.2 – 1.7 + 3.8 + 4.0 – 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.6
Q4 + 4.7 + 5.6 + 5.7 + 7.0 – 1.3 + 3.9 + 3.8 – 1.6 + 1.8 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.6
2024 Q1 + 4.0 + 6.5 + 2.9 + 7.7 – 4.7 + 3.1 + 2.4 – 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.2
Q2 + 8.9 + 8.9 + 6.4 + 7.1 – 0.7 + 4.7 + 2.6 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.7 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.4 + 1.1
Q3 + 7.6 + 5.5 + 9.0 + 7.1 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 2.6 – 1.7 + 1.7 + 0.4 – 1.0 + 0.1 – 0.4 + 0.0
* Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
33•
IV. Banks
Lending to employees and other individualsLending to
non-profit institutions
Services sector (including the professions) Memo items: Other lending
of which: of which:
TotalHousing
enterprisesHolding
companiesOther
real
estate
activitiesLending
to self-
employed
persons  2Lending
to craft
enterprises TotalHousing
loans TotalInstalment
loans  3Debit
balances
on wage,
salary
and
pension
accounts Totalof which:
Housing
loans   Period
End of year or quarter *                                   Lending, total
957.4 334.0 79.9 218.2 501.7 54.1 1,495.8 1,260.1 235.7 185.9 7.1 17.3 4.6 2022
970.0 344.0 76.3 222.5 505.0 54.6 1,505.9 1,270.1 235.7 186.9 7.3 17.5 4.7 2023 Q3
973.0 346.8 75.8 223.7 504.8 54.3 1,505.7 1,271.3 234.4 185.6 7.1 17.2 4.7 Q4
978.2 348.4 78.2 222.6 505.4 55.0 1,505.1 1,271.0 234.1 186.1 7.0 17.0 4.6 2024 Q1
983.7 351.7 77.1 222.5 506.4 55.0 1,507.5 1,274.2 233.3 186.4 7.0 16.9 4.7 Q2
987.8 353.6 78.5 223.2 507.7 54.4 1,515.3 1,280.1 235.2 187.1 7.8 16.8 4.6 Q3
Short-term lending
73.0 16.1 15.6 10.8 20.4 5.0 29.9 2.4 27.5 1.7 7.1 0.6 –2022
69.7 16.2 13.2 11.6 20.6 6.5 29.9 2.1 27.8 2.2 7.3 0.6 –2023 Q3
67.4 16.0 12.6 11.3 20.6 5.7 29.5 2.1 27.5 2.2 7.1 0.6 0.0 Q4
69.7 15.1 14.5 11.4 20.9 6.9 28.8 2.0 26.8 1.9 7.0 0.5 0.0 2024 Q1
70.9 15.3 14.1 11.3 20.7 7.2 28.1 2.1 26.1 2.0 7.0 0.5 0.0 Q2
71.6 15.0 14.9 11.6 21.0 6.9 29.6 2.1 27.5 2.5 7.8 0.5 0.0 Q3
Medium-term lending
108.2 25.4 20.1 28.4 30.1 6.5 72.3 19.8 52.5 48.0 . 0.6 0.1 2022
113.9 26.5 20.8 30.9 31.1 6.2 69.7 18.2 51.5 46.9 . 0.6 0.1 2023 Q3
115.9 26.0 21.4 32.2 31.2 6.4 69.4 17.5 51.8 47.1 . 0.4 0.1 Q4
115.3 25.9 21.1 31.7 31.0 6.1 68.6 16.7 51.9 47.0 . 0.4 0.1 2024 Q1
115.3 25.4 21.1 31.9 31.0 6.1 67.7 16.2 51.6 46.6 . 0.4 0.1 Q2
117.0 25.1 22.1 32.7 30.9 6.0 67.6 15.7 51.9 47.0 . 0.5 0.0 Q3
Long-term lending
776.2 292.6 44.2 179.0 451.1 42.6 1,393.5 1,237.9 155.6 136.2 . 16.1 4.6 2022
786.5 301.3 42.3 180.0 453.3 41.9 1,406.3 1,249.8 156.4 137.8 . 16.4 4.6 2023 Q3
789.7 304.8 41.8 180.1 453.0 42.3 1,406.8 1,251.7 155.1 136.3 . 16.2 4.6 Q4
793.2 307.3 42.6 179.5 453.5 41.9 1,407.7 1,252.3 155.4 137.2 . 16.0 4.6 2024 Q1
797.5 311.0 41.9 179.2 454.7 41.7 1,411.6 1,255.9 155.7 137.8 . 16.0 4.6 Q2
799.2 313.6 41.6 178.9 455.8 41.5 1,418.1 1,262.3 155.8 137.6 . 15.9 4.6 Q3
Change during quarter *                                    Lending, total
+ 2.1 + 3.5 – 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.5 – 0.4 + 6.0 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 2023 Q3
+ 3.4 + 2.7 – 0.4 + 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.3 – 1.3 – 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 Q4
+ 5.0 + 1.3 + 2.4 – 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 2024 Q1
+ 5.5 + 3.1 – 1.1 + 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 3.4 – 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 Q2
+ 4.3 + 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 1.3 – 0.6 + 7.7 + 5.9 + 1.8 + 0.6 + 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 Q3
Short-term lending
– 2.3 – 0.3 – 1.0 + 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 –2023 Q3
– 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 Q4
+ 2.3 – 0.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.2 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 –2024 Q1
+ 1.3 + 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.7 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 Q2
+ 0.7 – 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.3 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 0.5 + 0.6 – 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.1 . + 0.1 – 0.0 2023 Q3
+ 2.0 – 0.5 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.2 . – 0.2 + 0.0 Q4
– 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 0.8 + 0.1 – 0.1 . – – 0.0 2024 Q1
– 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 . + 0.0 – 0.0 Q2
+ 1.6 – 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.4 . + 0.0 – 0.0 Q3
Long-term lending
+ 3.9 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 – 0.2 + 6.4 + 5.5 + 0.9 + 1.0 . + 0.0 + 0.0 2023 Q3
+ 3.3 + 3.5 – 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.9 – 1.0 – 1.2 . – 0.1 – 0.0 Q4
+ 3.2 + 2.3 + 0.8 – 0.6 + 0.4 – 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.0 . – 0.2 – 0.1 2024 Q1
+ 4.3 + 3.4 – 0.7 + 1.6 + 1.0 – 0.2 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 0.4 + 0.8 . – 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
+ 2.0 + 2.8 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 1.1 – 0.3 + 6.4 + 6.4 + 0.0 – 0.3 . – 0.1 – 0.1 Q3
are not specially marked.  1 Excluding fiduciary loans.  2 Including sole proprietors. 3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
34•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
2021 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2022 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.6 35.9 18.5 3.9
2023 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 514.7 585.4 80.5 504.9 445.9 142.2 50.1 20.3 2.9
2023 Nov. 4,217.3 2,552.9 1,085.6 506.9 578.6 76.7 501.9 448.3 130.5 37.6 20.8 6.4
Dec. 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 514.7 585.4 80.5 504.9 445.9 142.2 50.1 20.3 2.9
2024 Jan. 4,216.3 2,496.8 1,128.7 540.7 588.0 84.3 503.8 439.4 151.4 54.5 20.4 4.9
Feb. 4,213.6 2,478.3 1,143.5 555.4 588.1 85.1 503.0 434.4 157.3 57.5 20.4 5.0
Mar. 4,239.0 2,479.2 1,168.8 578.6 590.2 87.3 502.9 430.3 160.7 60.2 20.3 4.5
Apr. 4,239.6 2,475.4 1,173.6 584.9 588.8 84.9 503.8 425.8 164.8 63.7 20.3 4.4
May 4,263.3 2,497.0 1,176.9 587.4 589.5 85.1 504.3 422.2 167.2 66.9 20.4 4.8
June 4,264.7 2,494.2 1,182.5 591.0 591.5 86.7 504.8 418.1 170.0 68.9 20.4 4.5
July 4,267.8 2,497.1 1,185.2 594.6 590.6 86.4 504.3 414.0 171.5 70.0 20.4 5.1
Aug. 4,323.3 2,548.5 1,191.1 601.4 589.7 86.1 503.6 411.2 172.5 74.5 21.0 6.5
Sep. 4,322.6 2,544.1 1,193.8 611.4 582.4 83.6 498.8 409.3 175.4 75.3 21.0 4.3
Oct. 4,329.5 2,555.1 1,200.0 616.4 583.5 83.6 499.9 407.6 166.9 73.9 21.0 5.6
Changes *
2022 +191.8 + 65.8 +143.4 +152.5 – 9.1 + 0.6 – 9.7 –27.5 +10.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6
2023 + 76.6 –172.0 +226.4 +198.4 +28.0 +29.9 – 1.9 –82.3 +104.5 + 3.5 + 1.8 – 1.0
2023 Nov. + 19.3 + 8.5 – 1.0 – 4.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 – 7.1 +18.8 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.2
Dec. + 22.3 – 0.7 + 13.7 + 7.7 + 6.0 + 4.0 + 2.0 – 2.5 +11.8 + 1.2 – 0.4 – 3.5
2024 Jan. – 12.7 – 44.1 + 28.7 + 26.1 + 2.6 + 3.8 – 1.1 – 6.5 + 9.2 + 4.4 + 0.0 + 2.0
Feb. – 2.8 – 18.4 + 14.8 + 14.7 + 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.8 – 5.0 + 5.9 + 3.0 – 0.0 + 0.1
Mar. + 25.5 + 0.9 + 25.3 + 23.2 + 2.1 + 2.2 – 0.2 – 4.1 + 3.4 + 2.6 – 0.1 – 0.5
Apr. + 0.6 – 3.8 + 4.8 + 6.3 – 1.4 – 2.4 + 1.0 – 4.6 + 4.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 – 0.1
May + 23.7 + 21.7 + 3.1 + 2.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 3.5 + 2.4 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.4
June – 0.4 – 2.7 + 3.7 + 3.6 + 0.2 + 1.6 – 1.4 – 4.2 + 2.8 + 2.0 + 0.0 – 0.3
July + 3.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 3.6 – 0.9 – 0.3 – 0.6 – 4.0 + 1.5 + 1.1 – 0.0 + 0.6
Aug. + 23.5 + 19.5 + 5.8 + 6.8 – 0.9 – 0.3 – 0.6 – 2.9 + 1.0 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 1.4
Sep. – 0.7 – 4.5 + 2.7 + 10.0 – 7.3 – 2.5 – 4.8 – 1.8 + 2.9 + 0.9 + 0.0 – 2.3
Oct. + 7.1 + 11.6 – 1.8 – 0.6 – 1.2 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 1.7 – 1.0 – 1.5 + 0.1 + 1.3
Domestic government End of year or month *
2021 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2022 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
2023 286.9 91.2 190.5 105.6 84.9 23.3 61.6 0.9 4.4 26.6 1.4 0.2
2023 Nov. 285.2 92.5 187.5 103.7 83.8 22.1 61.7 0.9 4.4 26.0 1.8 2.2
Dec. 286.9 91.2 190.5 105.6 84.9 23.3 61.6 0.9 4.4 26.6 1.4 0.2
2024 Jan. 272.5 84.9 182.5 98.4 84.1 23.4 60.7 0.8 4.3 26.5 1.3 1.0
Feb. 276.6 87.8 183.7 101.4 82.4 21.0 61.3 0.8 4.3 26.7 1.3 1.2
Mar. 283.2 89.0 189.1 106.1 83.0 22.0 61.1 0.8 4.3 26.9 1.3 1.3
Apr. 266.2 81.6 179.4 99.9 79.5 18.7 60.8 0.8 4.4 26.9 1.3 0.3
May 274.8 92.1 177.5 98.4 79.1 18.4 60.7 0.7 4.5 27.0 1.3 0.8
June 284.5 95.3 184.1 104.9 79.2 19.4 59.8 0.7 4.4 26.8 1.3 0.9
July 264.1 81.0 178.2 99.2 79.1 19.4 59.6 0.6 4.2 26.6 1.3 0.9
Aug. 271.6 90.7 176.2 97.2 78.9 19.2 59.7 0.6 4.1 29.8 1.8 1.9
Sep. 269.6 88.4 176.3 104.2 72.2 17.3 54.9 0.6 4.2 29.8 1.8 0.3
Oct. 256.7 86.2 165.6 94.0 71.6 16.7 54.8 0.6 4.4 29.9 1.8 1.4
Changes *
2022 + 69.1 + 0.2 + 69.2 + 64.7 + 4.5 – 0.9 + 5.4 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.5 – 0.1 + 1.4
2023 + 6.5 + 8.7 – 1.7 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 – 2.2
2023 Nov. – 5.8 + 0.2 – 6.2 – 4.4 – 1.8 – 1.4 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.7
Dec. + 1.7 – 1.3 + 2.9 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.4 – 2.0
2024 Jan. – 14.4 – 6.3 – 8.0 – 7.2 – 0.8 + 0.1 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.8
Feb. + 4.1 + 2.9 + 1.2 + 3.0 – 1.8 – 2.4 + 0.6 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3
Mar. + 6.6 + 1.2 + 5.4 + 4.7 + 0.7 + 0.9 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.1
Apr. – 17.0 – 7.3 – 9.7 – 6.2 – 3.5 – 3.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 1.0
May + 8.6 + 10.5 – 1.9 – 1.5 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.5
June + 9.6 + 3.2 + 6.5 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 1.0 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1
July – 20.4 – 14.3 – 5.9 – 5.7 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.0 –
Aug. + 7.5 + 9.7 – 2.1 – 1.9 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 3.2 + 0.5 + 1.1
Sep. – 2.5 – 2.3 – 0.3 + 6.6 – 6.9 – 2.1 – 4.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.6
Oct. – 13.0 – 2.2 – 10.8 – 10.2 – 0.6 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities.
2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
35•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont´d)
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
2021 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2022 3,882.2 2,638.1 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
2023 3,942.1 2,449.6 909.6 409.1 500.5 57.2 443.3 445.0 137.9 23.5 19.0 2.7
2023 Nov. 3,932.1 2,460.5 898.0 403.2 494.8 54.5 440.3 447.5 126.1 11.6 19.0 4.2
Dec. 3,942.1 2,449.6 909.6 409.1 500.5 57.2 443.3 445.0 137.9 23.5 19.0 2.7
2024 Jan. 3,943.8 2,411.9 946.2 442.3 503.9 60.8 443.1 438.6 147.1 28.0 19.1 4.0
Feb. 3,937.0 2,390.6 959.8 454.0 505.8 64.1 441.7 433.6 153.0 30.9 19.0 3.8
Mar. 3,955.8 2,390.3 979.6 472.5 507.2 65.4 441.8 429.6 156.4 33.2 19.0 3.1
Apr. 3,973.4 2,393.8 994.2 485.0 509.2 66.2 443.0 425.0 160.5 36.8 19.0 4.1
May 3,988.5 2,404.8 999.4 489.0 510.4 66.7 443.7 421.5 162.7 39.9 19.1 4.1
June 3,980.3 2,398.9 998.4 486.1 512.3 67.3 445.0 417.4 165.6 42.1 19.2 3.7
July 4,003.7 2,416.1 1,007.0 495.4 511.6 66.9 444.6 413.4 167.2 43.4 19.2 4.3
Aug. 4,051.6 2,457.8 1,014.9 504.1 510.8 66.8 443.9 410.5 168.4 44.7 19.2 4.6
Sep. 4,053.0 2,455.7 1,017.5 507.2 510.2 66.3 443.9 408.7 171.2 45.6 19.2 4.0
Oct. 4,072.8 2,468.9 1,034.4 522.5 511.9 66.8 445.1 407.0 162.5 44.0 19.2 4.2
Changes *
2022 +122.7 + 65.6 + 74.2 + 87.8 –13.6 + 1.4 –15.1 –27.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.3
2023 + 70.0 –180.7 +228.1 +200.1 +28.1 +29.8 – 1.7 –81.2 +103.8 + 3.5 + 2.4 + 1.2
2023 Nov. + 25.1 + 8.3 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 1.3 – 7.0 +18.7 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.9
Dec. + 20.7 + 0.6 + 10.8 + 5.9 + 4.9 + 2.8 + 2.1 – 2.4 +11.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 – 1.5
2024 Jan. + 1.7 – 37.8 + 36.7 + 33.3 + 3.4 + 3.7 – 0.2 – 6.5 + 9.2 + 4.5 + 0.1 + 1.2
Feb. – 6.8 – 21.3 + 13.6 + 11.7 + 1.9 + 3.3 – 1.4 – 5.0 + 5.9 + 2.8 – 0.0 – 0.2
Mar. + 18.9 – 0.3 + 19.9 + 18.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 4.1 + 3.4 + 2.4 – 0.1 – 0.6
Apr. + 17.6 + 3.5 + 14.6 + 12.5 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.2 – 4.6 + 4.1 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 1.0
May + 15.0 + 11.3 + 5.0 + 3.9 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 3.5 + 2.3 + 3.1 + 0.1 – 0.0
June – 10.0 – 5.9 – 2.8 – 2.9 + 0.1 + 0.6 – 0.5 – 4.1 + 2.8 + 2.2 + 0.0 – 0.4
July + 23.5 + 17.2 + 8.6 + 9.3 – 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 4.0 + 1.6 + 1.4 – 0.0 + 0.6
Aug. + 16.0 + 9.8 + 7.9 + 8.7 – 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.7 – 2.9 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.4
Sep. + 1.8 – 2.1 + 3.0 + 3.4 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 1.8 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 0.0 – 0.7
Oct. + 20.0 + 13.8 + 8.9 + 9.5 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.5 – 1.7 – 1.0 – 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.2
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2021 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2022 1,193.5 783.4 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.6 1.9 13.5 1.5
2023 1,194.6 723.0 453.9 204.3 249.6 19.0 230.6 3.3 14.4 2.5 15.5 2.7
2023 Nov. 1,213.9 738.9 457.4 208.5 248.9 19.0 229.8 3.5 14.2 2.3 15.5 4.2
Dec. 1,194.6 723.0 453.9 204.3 249.6 19.0 230.6 3.3 14.4 2.5 15.5 2.7
2024 Jan. 1,203.8 714.6 471.4 223.4 248.0 19.1 228.9 3.3 14.5 2.5 15.4 4.0
Feb. 1,183.1 697.1 468.1 221.6 246.5 19.1 227.4 3.2 14.7 2.7 15.4 3.8
Mar. 1,191.0 697.0 476.0 229.7 246.3 19.3 227.0 3.2 14.7 2.8 15.2 3.1
Apr. 1,197.7 700.0 479.7 232.5 247.1 19.1 228.1 3.2 14.8 2.9 15.3 4.1
May 1,203.1 709.0 475.9 228.2 247.7 19.4 228.3 3.2 15.0 3.0 15.3 4.1
June 1,183.4 697.2 467.8 218.5 249.4 19.5 229.9 3.2 15.1 3.0 15.3 3.7
July 1,207.3 719.5 469.4 220.5 248.9 19.2 229.6 3.2 15.2 3.1 15.3 4.3
Aug. 1,216.5 724.4 473.6 225.8 247.9 19.1 228.8 3.2 15.3 3.3 15.3 4.6
Sep. 1,219.8 729.0 472.2 224.6 247.6 18.9 228.7 3.2 15.4 3.2 15.3 4.0
Oct. 1,229.9 734.9 476.3 229.6 246.8 18.8 228.0 3.2 15.5 3.3 15.3 4.2
Changes *
2022 + 56.2 + 17.7 + 38.8 + 52.1 –13.3 + 1.0 –14.3 – 0.9 + 0.6 – 0.5 + 1.0 + 1.3
2023 + 11.1 – 48.0 + 57.5 + 63.0 – 5.5 + 2.0 – 7.6 – 1.1 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.0 + 1.2
2023 Nov. + 4.4 + 11.2 – 7.0 – 7.2 + 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.4 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.9
Dec. – 8.7 – 4.4 – 4.3 – 4.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.5
2024 Jan. + 9.2 – 8.5 + 17.5 + 19.1 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.2
Feb. – 20.7 – 17.5 – 3.3 – 1.8 – 1.5 – 0.0 – 1.5 – 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
Mar. + 7.8 – 0.1 + 7.9 + 8.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.6
Apr. + 6.7 + 3.0 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 – 0.2 + 1.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0
May + 5.5 + 9.2 – 3.9 – 4.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0
June – 21.5 – 11.8 – 9.8 – 9.7 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.4
July + 23.9 + 22.3 + 1.5 + 2.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.6
Aug. + 9.3 + 5.0 + 4.3 + 5.3 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 0.9 – + 0.1 + 0.1 – + 0.4
Sep. + 3.6 + 4.5 – 1.0 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.7
Oct. + 10.2 + 6.0 + 4.1 + 5.0 – 0.9 – 0.2 – 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.2
4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
36•
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2
by creditor group by creditor group
Domestic households Domestic households
PeriodDeposits of
domestic
households
and
non-profit
institutions,
total Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individualsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tions Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individuals
End of year or month *
2021 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2022 2,688.7 1,854.7 1,809.9 307.3 1,342.5 160.1 44.8 284.8 268.7 31.2 200.5 37.1
2023 2,747.5 1,726.6 1,685.2 270.9 1,271.0 143.4 41.3 455.7 434.0 67.6 317.3 49.2
2024 May 2,785.4 1,695.8 1,653.6 266.0 1,251.8 135.9 42.2 523.6 500.8 77.5 368.6 54.7
June 2,796.9 1,701.7 1,660.3 262.2 1,262.0 136.1 41.4 530.5 507.8 78.3 374.5 55.0
July 2,796.4 1,696.6 1,655.6 267.6 1,253.6 134.4 41.0 537.7 515.0 79.4 380.0 55.5
Aug. 2,835.1 1,733.5 1,691.6 274.6 1,279.0 138.0 41.9 541.3 518.4 80.1 384.2 54.1
Sep. 2,833.2 1,726.7 1,684.6 268.4 1,278.5 137.8 42.0 545.2 522.6 80.9 387.4 54.3
Oct. 2,842.9 1,734.0 1,692.3 274.0 1,280.4 137.8 41.8 558.1 535.5 81.4 399.0 55.1
Changes *
2022 + 66.5 +48.0 +47.8 – 1.5 +54.1 – 4.7 + 0.1 +35.4 +31.4 +12.9 +17.2 +1.2
2023 + 58.9 –132.7 –129.2 –36.7 –76.8 –15.7 – 3.5 +170.6 +164.9 +36.1 +116.5 +12.2
2024 May + 9.5 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.7 – 0.2 + 1.0 + 9.0 + 8.5 + 1.1 + 6.8 +0.6
June + 11.5 + 5.9 + 6.7 – 3.8 +10.3 + 0.2 – 0.8 + 7.0 + 7.0 + 0.8 + 5.9 +0.3
July – 0.5 – 5.1 – 4.7 + 5.3 – 8.4 – 1.7 – 0.4 + 7.1 + 7.2 + 1.1 + 5.6 +0.5
Aug. + 6.6 + 4.8 + 3.9 + 1.6 + 2.5 – 0.2 + 0.9 + 3.6 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.6 +0.1
Sep. – 1.8 – 6.6 – 6.8 – 6.1 – 0.5 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 4.0 + 4.2 + 0.8 + 3.2 +0.2
Oct. + 9.8 + 7.8 + 8.1 + 5.6 + 2.6 – 0.1 – 0.3 + 4.9 + 4.9 + 0.3 + 4.1 +0.5
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional.Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
marked.  1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
€ billion
Deposits
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
PeriodDomestic
government,
total TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans
End of year or month *
2021 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2022 279.8 66.8 7.9 24.2 34.6 0.1 11.4 53.8 17.1 25.2 10.9 0.5 15.9
2023 286.9 52.0 9.8 6.7 35.5 0.0 11.6 51.9 19.7 21.9 9.9 0.4 15.1
2024 May 274.8 49.5 10.5 3.8 35.1 0.0 11.9 54.3 21.3 24.5 8.2 0.4 15.1
June 284.5 49.5 11.5 3.4 34.6 0.0 11.7 66.7 25.3 33.2 7.8 0.4 15.1
July 264.1 49.1 10.6 3.9 34.5 0.0 11.7 58.5 20.8 29.7 7.7 0.4 14.9
Aug. 271.6 49.1 10.5 4.1 34.4 0.0 11.7 60.4 22.4 29.6 8.0 0.4 18.1
Sep. 269.6 43.4 10.6 2.9 29.8 0.0 11.7 69.1 23.8 37.1 7.8 0.4 18.1
Oct. 256.7 43.6 10.0 3.9 29.6 0.0 11.7 60.5 23.0 29.4 7.6 0.4 18.2
Changes *
2022 +69.1 +23.0 +3.5 +20.9 –1.4 –0.0 –0.3 +6.4 –4.6 +11.3 –0.3 –0.1 +1.8
2023 + 6.5 –14.8 +1.9 –17.6 +0.9 –0.0 +0.2 –2.0 +2.9 –3.7 –1.0 –0.1 –0.1
2024 May + 8.6 +0.3 +0.1 +0.3 –0.1 +0.0 –0.0 +0.1 +3.1 –2.9 –0.1 –0.0 +0.1
June + 9.6 –0.1 +1.0 –0.4 –0.6 –0.0 –0.2 +12.4 +4.1 +8.7 –0.4 –0.0 +0.0
July –20.4 –0.4 –0.8 +0.5 –0.1 –0.0 –0.0 –8.2 –4.6 –3.5 –0.1 +0.0 –0.2
Aug. + 7.5 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 –0.1 +0.0 –0.0 +1.9 +1.6 –0.0 +0.3 –0.0 +3.2
Sep. – 2.5 –5.6 +0.1 –1.1 –4.6 –0.0 –0.0 +8.7 +1.4 +7.4 –0.2 +0.0 +0.0
Oct. –13.0 +0.7 –0.3 +1.1 –0.1 +0.0 +0.0 –9.0 –1.1 –7.7 –0.2 +0.0 +0.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and DeutscheTelekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”.
Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date
are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
37•
IV. Banks
Savings deposits  3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year  2
of which:
Domestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsup to and
including
1 year Totalup to and
including
2 yearsmore than
2 years TotalDomestic
householdsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsBank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)  5Liabilities
arising
from repos Period
End of year or month *
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 –2021
16.0 67.2 217.5 10.6 206.9 526.8 521.8 5.1 22.4 6.8 3.1 –2022
21.6 204.7 251.0 38.2 212.7 441.8 438.4 3.4 123.5 21.0 3.5 –2023
22.8 260.9 262.7 47.3 215.4 418.3 415.2 3.1 147.7 36.9 3.8 –2024 May
22.8 267.6 262.9 47.8 215.1 414.2 411.2 3.0 150.4 39.0 3.8 – June
22.7 275.0 262.7 47.7 215.0 410.2 407.3 3.0 152.0 40.3 3.9 – July
22.9 278.4 262.9 47.7 215.2 407.4 404.4 2.9 153.1 41.4 3.9 – Aug.
22.6 282.6 262.6 47.4 215.3 405.5 402.6 2.9 155.7 42.3 3.9 – Sep.
22.5 292.9 265.2 48.1 217.1 403.8 400.9 2.9 147.0 40.7 4.0 – Oct.
Changes *
+ 4.0 + 35.7 – 0.3 +0.5 – 0.8 –26.1 –25.0 –1.1 + 9.2 +0.7 + 0.3 –2022
+ 5.7 +137.0 +33.6 +27.8 + 5.8 –80.1 –78.4 –1.7 +101.1 +2.9 + 0.4 –2023
+ 0.5 + 8.3 + 0.7 +0.2 + 0.4 – 3.5 – 3.5 –0.0 + 2.1 +3.0 + 0.0 –2024 May
+ 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.2 +0.5 – 0.3 – 4.1 – 4.0 –0.1 + 2.7 +2.2 + 0.0 – June
– 0.1 + 7.3 – 0.2 –0.1 – 0.1 – 4.0 – 3.9 –0.1 + 1.6 +1.3 + 0.0 – July
+ 0.2 + 3.4 + 0.2 +0.0 + 0.2 – 2.9 – 2.8 –0.0 + 1.1 +1.1 + 0.0 – Aug.
– 0.3 + 4.3 – 0.3 –0.4 + 0.1 – 1.8 – 1.8 –0.0 + 2.7 +0.9 + 0.0 – Sep.
– 0.1 + 4.6 + 0.3 +0.1 + 0.2 – 1.7 – 1.7 –0.0 – 1.1 –1.6 + 0.0 – Oct.
registered debt securities.  2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Table IV.12).  3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsofootnote 2).  4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2,4Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 –2021
80.0 49.2 12.5 13.8 4.4 0.0 79.2 8.3 44.9 25.5 0.6 –2022
83.3 45.6 19.8 14.1 3.8 0.0 99.6 16.1 57.2 25.3 1.0 –2023
77.8 40.6 19.8 13.7 3.7 0.0 93.2 19.7 50.3 22.1 1.1 –2024 May
72.8 36.2 19.3 13.7 3.7 0.0 95.5 22.3 49.0 23.2 1.0 – June
67.9 31.9 18.8 13.6 3.6 0.0 88.6 17.7 46.8 23.2 0.9 – July
76.4 39.4 19.8 13.6 3.6 0.0 85.7 18.3 43.7 22.9 0.8 – Aug.
71.9 35.6 19.2 13.5 3.6 0.0 85.2 18.3 45.0 21.1 0.8 – Sep.
70.1 35.0 18.0 13.6 3.6 0.0 82.5 18.2 42.7 20.8 0.9 – Oct.
Changes *
+10.2 +0.9 + 7.9 +1.3 + 0.1 – +29.6 +0.3 +24.5 +4.9 – 0.2 –2022
+3.2 –3.8 + 7.3 +0.3 – 0.6 – +20.2 +7.8 +12.4 –0.3 + 0.3 –2023
+6.2 +5.7 + 0.7 –0.2 + 0.0 – + 2.0 +1.5 + 0.4 –0.1 + 0.1 –2024 May
–5.0 –4.4 – 0.5 –0.0 – 0.0 – + 2.3 +2.6 – 1.3 +1.1 – 0.1 – June
–5.0 –4.3 – 0.6 –0.0 – 0.0 – – 6.8 –4.6 – 2.2 +0.1 – 0.2 – July
+8.5 +7.5 + 1.1 –0.0 – 0.0 – – 2.8 +0.7 – 3.1 –0.3 – 0.1 – Aug.
–4.6 –3.8 – 0.7 –0.2 + 0.0 – – 1.0 –0.0 + 1.0 –2.0 + 0.1 – Sep.
–1.8 –0.6 – 1.2 +0.1 – 0.0 – – 2.8 –0.1 – 2.3 –0.4 + 0.0 – Oct.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Federal Railways Fund,
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund,
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund.  2 Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities.  3 Including deposits under savings and loan
contracts.  4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
38•
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months'
noticeat more than 3
months' notice
Period Total Total Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeMemo
item:
Interest
credited
on
savings
depositsnon-banks,
total Totalof which:
With
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsforeign
non-banks
End of year or month *
2021 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 1.5 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2022 538.5 533.2 510.3 254.2 22.9 14.2 5.3 4.8 1.4 34.9 34.6 20.8 0.2
2023 450.5 445.9 395.3 187.1 50.6 43.0 4.6 3.8 2.6 143.2 142.2 35.5 1.0
2024 June 422.5 418.1 359.2 172.6 58.9 51.9 4.4 3.5 0.2 171.1 170.0 40.6 1.2
July 418.4 414.0 355.0 171.0 59.0 52.1 4.4 3.4 0.2 172.6 171.5 41.1 1.2
Aug. 415.5 411.2 352.1 170.1 59.1 52.1 4.4 3.4 0.2 173.7 172.5 41.6 1.2
Sep. 413.7 409.3 349.4 169.3 59.9 53.0 4.4 3.3 0.2 176.6 175.4 42.2 1.2
Oct. 411.9 407.6 347.0 168.7 60.6 53.8 4.4 3.3 0.2 168.1 166.9 42.0 1.2
Changes *
2022 –28.1 –27.5 –26.4 –14.6 –1.2 –0.6 –0.6 –0.6 . +10.2 +10.1 +1.3 +0.1
2023 –83.0 –82.3 –110.0 –52.3 +27.7 +28.8 –0.7 –1.1 . +105.2 +104.5 +12.2 +0.7
2024 June –4.2 –4.2 –4.5 –2.1 +0.3 +0.4 –0.0 –0.0 . +2.8 +2.8 +0.6 +0.0
July –4.1 –4.0 –4.2 –1.6 +0.1 +0.2 –0.0 –0.1 . +1.5 +1.5 +0.5 +0.0
Aug. –2.9 –2.9 –2.9 –0.9 +0.1 +0.1 –0.0 –0.0 . +1.1 +1.0 +0.5 +0.0
Sep. –1.9 –1.8 –2.7 –0.8 +0.8 +0.9 –0.0 –0.0 . +3.0 +2.9 +0.6 +0.0
Oct. –1.7 –1.7 –2.5 –0.6 +0.7 +0.8 –0.0 –0.0 . –0.9 –1.0 +1.1 +0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified as timedeposits.  2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
basic rate of interest.  3 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
securities.
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
of which:
with maturities ofNon-negotiable
bearer debt
securities and
money market
paper  6 Subordinated
up to
and including 1 yearmore than 1 year up to
and including 2 years
Period TotalFloating
rate
bonds  1Zero
coupon
bonds  1,2Foreign
currency
bonds  3,4Certifi-
cates
of
deposit Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5more
than
2 years Totalof which:
with
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsnegotiable
debt
securitiesnon-
negotiable
debt
securities
End of year or month *
2021 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2022 1,231.5 92.8 15.0 307.8 88.6 98.6 1.4 26.6 3.4 1,106.4 0.8 0.7 37.8 0.1
2023 1,327.5 85.8 15.7 312.6 101.2 122.9 1.3 43.7 3.4 1,160.9 0.0 0.0 37.5 0.1
2024 June 1,369.3 95.9 15.9 320.9 90.4 107.3 1.5 53.2 3.7 1,208.9 0.1 0.0 38.7 0.1
July 1,351.5 97.4 16.1 303.6 79.9 96.3 1.5 53.4 3.8 1,201.9 0.1 0.0 38.7 0.1
Aug. 1,352.8 98.2 14.7 301.0 85.8 99.2 1.5 49.5 3.9 1,204.0 0.1 0.0 38.6 0.1
Sep. 1,364.2 98.8 14.8 308.3 101.4 113.7 1.4 46.8 3.9 1,203.7 0.2 0.0 39.7 0.1
Oct. 1,370.2 98.9 15.8 318.2 101.2 113.2 4.0 45.2 3.9 1,211.9 0.2 0.0 40.3 0.1
Changes *
2022 +59.1 –12.7 +1.1 –23.6 –9.9 –8.3 – 0.5 +8.5 –1.1 +58.9 –0.1 +0.1 +3.5 –
2023 +97.0 –6.3 +1.4 +4.4 +11.4 +24.5 – 0.0 +17.7 +0.6 +54.8 +0.0 +0.1 –0.3 –
2024 June +12.3 –0.9 –0.5 +17.7 +16.8 +16.1 – 0.0 +0.1 –0.2 –3.9 +0.1 – +0.1 –
July –17.8 +1.6 +0.2 –17.3 –10.5 –11.0 + 0.1 +0.2 +0.1 –7.0 –0.0 –0.0 –0.0 –
Aug. + 0.2 +0.8 –0.4 –3.7 +4.5 +3.0 – 0.0 –3.8 +0.1 +1.1 +0.0 +0.0 –0.1 –
Sep. +11.4 +0.6 +0.1 +7.3 +15.6 +14.5 – 0.1 –2.7 –0.1 –0.4 +0.0 –0.0 +1.1 –
Oct. + 6.0 +0.1 +1.0 +9.9 –0.2 –0.6 + 0.0 –1.7 +0.1 +8.2 +0.0 +0.0 +0.6 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies.  2 Issue value when
floated.  3 Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreigncurrencies.  4 Bonds denominated in non-euro area currencies.  5 Negotiable bearer debt
securities and money market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%.
6 Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see
also Table IV.10, footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
39•
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks
(MFIs)  6Deposits of non-
banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans
End of
year/monthNum-
ber
of
associ-
ationsBalance
sheet
total  1Credit
bal-
ances
and
loans
(ex-
cluding
building
loans)  2Building
loans  3Bank
debt
secur-
ities  4Loans
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsInterim
and
bridging
loansOther
building
loansSecur-
ities (in-
cluding
Treasury
bills
and
Treasury
discount
paper)  5Deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight
and time
depositsDeposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight and
time de-
posits  7Bearer
debt
secur-
ities
out-
stand-
ingCapital
(includ-
ing pub-
lished
re-
serves)  8Memo
item:
New
con-
tracts
entered
into in
year or
month  9
All building and loan associations
2023 15 259.5 25.6 0.1 15.9 15.7 135.0 41.3 21.8 1.2 36.8 183.2 10.7 6.6 13.0 98.2
2024 Aug. 14 260.3 24.4 0.2 15.6 19.3 133.8 41.9 20.6 0.8 37.2 179.5 13.8 7.6 13.2 6.4
Sep. 13 260.9 24.6 0.2 15.5 19.8 133.7 42.0 20.6 0.8 37.8 179.3 14.3 7.1 13.2 6.7
Oct. 13 261.5 25.2 0.2 15.5 20.3 133.4 41.9 20.7 0.8 37.9 179.0 14.6 7.6 13.2 7.6
Private building and Ioan associations
2024 Aug. 9 184.9 11.4 0.2 9.0 12.8 103.5 35.8 9.2 0.2 34.2 115.0 13.5 7.6 9.0 4.1
Sep. 8 185.5 11.6 0.2 9.0 13.0 103.3 35.9 9.3 0.2 34.8 114.9 14.0 7.1 9.0 4.3
Oct. 8 186.2 12.3 0.2 9.0 13.3 103.1 36.0 9.4 0.2 35.0 114.7 14.3 7.6 9.0 5.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2024 Aug. 5 75.4 13.0 0.0 6.6 6.6 30.3 6.1 11.4 0.6 3.0 64.5 0.3 – 4.2 2.3
Sep. 5 75.4 12.9 0.0 6.6 6.7 30.3 6.1 11.3 0.6 3.0 64.4 0.3 – 4.2 2.4
Oct. 5 75.3 12.9 0.0 6.5 6.9 30.3 5.9 11.3 0.6 2.9 64.4 0.3 – 4.2 2.5
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Capital promised Capital disbursed Changes in deposits
under savings and
loan contracts AllocationsDisbursement
commitments
outstanding at
end of periodInterest and
repayments
received on
building loans  11
Deposits under
savings and
loan contractsLoans under
savings and
loan contracts  10
PeriodAmounts
paid into
savings
and
loan ac-
counts  10Interest
credited
on
deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsRepay-
ments
of
deposits
under
cancelled
savings
and
loan
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Net
alloca-
tions  12 Total Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loans Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loansNewly
granted
interim
and
bridging
loans
and
other
building
loans Totalof
which:
Under
alloc-
ated
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Repay-
ments
during
quarterMemo
item:
Housing
bonuses
re-
ceived  13
All building and loan associations
2023 27.0 1.9 6.4 52.0 40.3 49.9 25.9 4.2 8.7 4.4 15.3 12.6 7.3 4.9 4.1 0.2
2024 Aug. 2.1 0.0 0.5 4.4 3.3 4.0 2.0 0.4 0.9 0.4 1.1 11.9 7.5 0.5 0.0
Sep. 2.0 0.0 0.5 4.0 3.0 3.8 1.8 0.4 0.9 0.4 1.1 11.6 7.4 0.5 1.1 0.0
Oct. 2.1 0.0 0.5 4.3 3.2 3.9 1.9 0.4 0.9 0.4 1.1 11.6 7.5 0.5 . 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2024 Aug. 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.9 2.1 2.7 1.3 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.9 7.6 4.1 0.3 0.0
Sep. 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.8 1.9 2.7 1.2 0.3 0.6 0.3 0.9 7.5 4.1 0.4 0.7 0.0
Oct. 1.3 0.0 0.3 3.0 2.2 2.8 1.3 0.3 0.6 0.4 0.9 7.4 4.1 0.4 . 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2024 Aug. 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.4 1.2 1.3 0.6 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.2 3.4 0.1 0.0
Sep. 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.1 1.2 0.6 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.2 3.4 0.1 0.4 0.0
Oct. 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.0 1.2 0.6 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.1 3.4 0.1 . 0.0
* Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures for
the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 See Table IV.2,
footnote 1.  2 Including claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from
registered debt securities and central bank credit balances.  3 Loans under savings and
loan contracts and interim and bridging loans.  4 Including money market paper and
small amounts of other securities issued by banks.  5 Including equalisation claims.
6 Including liabilities to building and loan associations.  7 Including small amounts of
savings deposits.  8 Including participation rights capital and fund for general bankingrisks. 9 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
new contracts.  10 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital disbursed".  11 Including housing
bonuses credited.  12 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans.  13 The amounts already
credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into
savings and loan accounts" and "Interest and repayments received on building loans".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2021 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2022 47 202 1,625.5 461.8 447.4 315.6 131.8 14.4 516.7 447.7 9.7 437.9 69.0 647.0 513.3
2023 47 200 1,544.2 457.5 437.7 304.4 133.3 19.8 507.9 421.0 5.4 415.6 86.9 578.8 417.0
2023 Dec. 47 200 1,544.2 457.5 437.7 304.4 133.3 19.8 507.9 421.0 5.4 415.6 86.9 578.8 417.0
2024 Jan. 47 200 1,580.2 471.1 450.1 310.0 140.1 21.0 518.6 425.0 5.1 419.9 93.6 590.5 402.9
Feb. 47 200 1,620.1 486.0 464.7 322.5 142.2 21.3 517.5 424.8 5.0 419.9 92.7 616.7 425.7
Mar. 47 199 1,634.7 506.6 483.8 327.2 156.6 22.8 523.9 431.4 5.1 426.3 92.6 604.1 428.8
Apr. 47 199 1,668.0 499.4 474.9 325.7 149.3 24.4 520.3 432.4 4.8 427.5 88.0 648.2 477.1
May 47 199 1,647.4 504.5 482.0 330.9 151.1 22.4 528.0 440.3 4.9 435.5 87.7 614.9 439.2
June 47 198 1,612.4 498.6 478.8 329.8 148.9 19.9 538.5 449.1 4.9 444.2 89.3 575.3 421.0
July 47 198 1,596.9 505.8 485.8 328.1 157.7 19.9 539.9 450.4 5.2 445.2 89.5 551.3 384.7
Aug. 47 195 1,594.9 499.8 479.7 324.4 155.3 20.1 543.0 453.3 5.3 448.0 89.8 552.1 380.5
Sep. 47 195 1,598.5 499.1 478.8 322.5 156.3 20.4 568.4 477.9 5.1 472.8 90.5 530.9 372.4
Changes *
2022 –4 –5 +124.1 –13.3 –14.3 +17.8 –32.1 +1.0 +6.7 +17.5 –3.2 +20.6 –10.8 +108.1 +103.0
2023 ±0 –2 –83.7 –2.7 –8.1 –12.1 +4.0 +5.4 –1.4 –20.2 –4.4 –15.8 +18.8 – 68.1 –94.4
2024 Jan. ±0 – +35.3 +12.4 +11.3 +5.6 +5.6 +1.1 +5.7 –0.4 –0.3 –0.1 +6.1 + 11.1 –15.1
Feb. ±0 – +39.9 +15.1 +14.8 +12.5 +2.3 +0.3 –1.0 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 –0.9 + 26.2 +22.8
Mar. ±0 –1 +14.4 +20.6 +19.1 +4.7 +14.4 +1.5 +6.2 +6.3 +0.2 +6.2 –0.1 – 12.6 + 3.0
Apr. ±0 – +32.9 –7.5 –9.2 –1.5 –7.7 +1.6 –5.4 –0.6 –0.3 –0.3 –4.8 + 43.7 +48.1
May ±0 – –19.9 +6.2 +8.2 +5.2 +3.0 –2.0 +10.8 +10.8 +0.0 +10.7 +0.0 – 32.6 –37.5
June ±0 –1 –35.7 –7.1 –4.5 –1.1 –3.4 –2.6 +6.6 +5.4 +0.1 +5.3 +1.2 – 40.3 –18.8
July ±0 – –15.0 +7.3 +7.2 –1.7 +9.0 +0.1 +3.7 +3.2 +0.2 +3.0 +0.4 – 24.0 –36.0
Aug. ±0 –3 –0.8 –4.4 –4.5 –3.7 –0.8 +0.1 +8.8 +7.9 +0.1 +7.8 +1.0 + 0.8 – 3.0
Sep. ±0 – +4.1 –0.0 –0.3 –1.9 +1.6 +0.3 +27.5 +26.5 –0.2 +26.7 +1.0 – 21.2 – 7.8
Foreign subsidiaries 8                                           End of year or month *
2021 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2022 11 32 256.7 61.5 52.0 20.5 31.4 9.5 145.8 124.5 13.3 111.2 21.3 49.4 0.0
2023 12 31 264.0 74.5 63.9 25.7 38.2 10.6 146.4 125.2 11.9 113.4 21.1 43.1 0.0
2023 Mar. 11 32 253.9 62.2 51.7 20.7 31.0 10.5 146.5 126.2 13.3 112.9 20.2 45.2 0.0
Apr. 11 31 250.9 64.4 53.3 22.4 30.9 11.1 145.3 125.6 13.0 112.6 19.8 41.2 0.0
May 11 31 250.9 59.3 48.8 21.5 27.2 10.5 146.2 126.3 12.8 113.5 19.9 45.5 0.0
June 12 32 253.3 64.2 52.8 22.4 30.4 11.5 146.6 126.7 12.7 113.9 19.9 42.5 0.0
July 12 31 253.4 63.6 52.2 23.0 29.3 11.4 147.4 126.9 12.9 114.1 20.5 42.4 0.0
Aug. 12 31 252.8 62.8 52.2 21.9 30.3 10.6 146.0 125.6 12.7 112.9 20.4 44.1 0.0
Sep. 12 31 256.2 66.4 56.0 25.0 31.0 10.5 146.7 125.8 12.3 113.5 20.9 43.0 0.0
Oct. 12 31 257.4 65.8 56.0 24.5 31.5 9.8 146.8 126.2 12.0 114.2 20.6 44.8 0.0
Nov. 12 31 259.9 66.9 57.7 23.6 34.1 9.3 147.8 126.9 12.1 114.8 20.9 45.2 0.0
Dec. 12 31 264.0 74.5 63.9 25.7 38.2 10.6 146.4 125.2 11.9 113.4 21.1 43.1 0.0
Changes *
2022 –1 –3 +6.5 +8.2 +5.2 –0.2 +5.6 +2.8 +5.0 +6.9 +0.7 +6.3 –1.9 – 6.5 ± 0.0
2023 +1 –1 +8.7 +13.5 +12.2 +5.2 +7.1 +1.2 +1.5 +1.7 –1.4 +3.1 –0.2 – 6.3 ± 0.0
2023 Apr. – –1 –2.7 +2.2 +1.6 +1.7 –0.1 +0.6 –0.8 –0.4 –0.3 –0.1 –0.5 – 4.1 ± 0.0
May – – –1.5 –5.7 –4.9 –0.8 –4.1 –0.7 –0.1 –0.3 –0.2 –0.0 +0.1 + 4.3 ± 0.0
June +1 +1 +3.2 +5.3 +4.2 +0.9 +3.3 +1.0 +0.9 +0.9 –0.0 +0.9 +0.0 – 3.0 ± 0.0
July – –1 +0.6 –0.5 –0.4 +0.6 –1.0 –0.1 +1.2 +0.7 +0.1 +0.5 +0.6 – 0.1 ± 0.0
Aug. – – –1.2 –1.0 –0.2 –1.0 +0.8 –0.9 –1.8 –1.7 –0.2 –1.5 –0.1 + 1.7 ± 0.0
Sep. – – +2.2 +3.2 +3.5 +3.0 +0.5 –0.2 –0.0 –0.5 –0.4 –0.1 +0.5 – 1.0 ± 0.0
Oct. – – +1.4 –0.6 +0.1 –0.4 +0.5 –0.7 +0.2 +0.5 –0.3 +0.8 –0.3 + 1.8 ± 0.0
Nov. – – +3.8 +1.5 +2.0 –0.9 +2.9 –0.4 +1.8 +1.5 +0.1 +1.5 +0.3 + 0.4 ± 0.0
Dec. – – +4.5 +7.7 +6.3 +2.1 +4.2 +1.4 –1.1 –1.3 –0.2 –1.1 +0.3 – 2.0 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from
the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are alwaysto be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 2021
943.4 573.6 435.2 138.5 369.8 10.4 8.9 1.5 359.4 61.7 63.1 557.4 512.9 2022
943.5 554.5 422.6 131.9 389.0 10.6 9.5 1.2 378.4 64.1 66.1 470.5 418.3 2023
943.5 554.5 422.6 131.9 389.0 10.6 9.5 1.2 378.4 64.1 66.1 470.5 418.3 2023 Dec.
967.4 573.0 433.0 140.0 394.4 11.0 9.8 1.2 383.4 88.2 69.1 455.4 404.8 2024 Jan.
984.5 586.5 443.4 143.1 398.0 10.7 9.7 1.0 387.3 88.5 69.2 477.9 427.6 Feb.
997.2 587.3 442.4 144.9 409.9 11.3 10.3 1.0 398.6 86.3 69.4 481.8 431.6 Mar.
978.9 576.4 435.8 140.6 402.5 11.1 10.1 1.0 391.4 88.0 69.2 531.8 479.3 Apr.
998.2 591.9 449.7 142.1 406.3 14.8 13.9 1.0 391.5 85.8 69.0 494.4 443.4 May
986.4 578.3 450.5 127.8 408.0 14.2 13.2 1.0 393.8 81.7 69.5 474.7 423.1 June
999.5 583.6 450.6 133.0 415.9 14.3 13.4 1.0 401.6 87.0 69.3 441.1 388.9 July
1,002.4 591.0 457.1 133.9 411.4 14.9 13.9 1.0 396.6 85.5 69.1 437.8 385.0 Aug.
1,014.0 602.5 466.1 136.4 411.5 13.4 12.5 0.9 398.0 84.7 70.1 429.7 377.0 Sep.
Changes *
– 6.2 –64.2 –22.2 –42.0 + 58.0 + 2.3 + 2.6 – 0.3 +55.7 – 6.3 +11.8 +119.0 + 109.5 2022
+ 1.2 –17.0 –13.8 – 3.1 + 18.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 – 0.3 +16.9 + 3.9 + 3.0 – 88.0 – 94.5 2023
+22.3 +17.2 +10.4 +6.8 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 4.8 +23.5 +3.0 – 15.1 – 13.5 2024 Jan.
+17.2 +13.7 +10.5 +3.2 + 3.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 +0.1 + 22.5 + 22.8 Feb.
+12.7 +0.7 –1.0 +1.8 +11.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 +11.4 – 2.3 +0.1 + 4.0 + 4.0 Mar.
–18.8 –11.4 –6.6 –4.8 – 7.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 7.3 + 1.3 –0.2 + 50.0 + 47.7 Apr.
+20.5 +16.6 +13.9 +2.7 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 3.7 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 1.5 –0.2 – 37.4 – 35.9 May
–13.2 –14.7 +0.7 –15.5 + 1.5 – 0.6 – 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.2 – 4.8 +0.5 – 19.7 – 20.3 June
+13.5 +5.5 +0.1 +5.4 + 8.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 7.9 + 5.7 –0.2 – 33.6 – 34.2 July
+ 4.9 +9.0 +6.5 +2.5 – 4.1 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.0 – 4.7 – 0.3 –0.2 – 3.3 – 3.6 Aug.
+12.3 +12.1 +9.0 +3.1 + 0.2 – 1.4 – 1.4 – 0.1 + 1.6 – 0.4 +1.0 – 8.1 – 8.0 Sep.
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries 8
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 2021
189.4 67.5 38.6 28.9 122.0 6.9 4.6 2.3 115.1 13.5 20.1 33.7 0.0 2022
195.9 76.0 51.2 24.8 119.9 6.4 4.0 2.4 113.4 12.1 20.8 35.3 0.0 2023
186.6 71.2 42.2 29.1 115.4 6.8 4.3 2.5 108.5 12.3 20.3 34.8 0.0 2023 Mar.
183.5 71.0 44.0 27.0 112.5 6.9 4.5 2.5 105.6 12.2 20.2 35.0 0.0 Apr.
183.9 71.2 43.6 27.6 112.8 6.9 4.4 2.5 105.9 12.1 20.6 34.3 0.0 May
185.6 71.9 45.4 26.5 113.7 6.6 4.2 2.4 107.1 10.6 20.5 36.6 0.0 June
187.9 72.3 47.0 25.3 115.6 6.8 4.4 2.4 108.8 10.5 20.5 34.4 0.0 July
185.5 70.6 46.0 24.7 114.8 6.6 4.2 2.4 108.2 10.3 20.6 36.4 0.0 Aug.
188.2 74.1 49.1 25.1 114.1 6.7 4.3 2.4 107.4 11.3 20.5 36.0 0.0 Sep.
189.3 73.1 48.3 24.8 116.2 6.5 4.1 2.4 109.7 11.6 20.8 35.8 0.0 Oct.
192.1 73.7 48.4 25.3 118.4 6.5 4.1 2.4 111.8 11.6 20.8 35.4 0.0 Nov.
195.9 76.0 51.2 24.8 119.9 6.4 4.0 2.4 113.4 12.1 20.8 35.3 0.0 Dec.
Changes *
+ 7.7 + 1.4 + 5.6 – 4.2 + 6.3 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 6.7 – 2.9 – 0.2 + 2.2 ± 0.0 2022
+ 7.6 + 8.9 +12.6 – 3.8 – 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.1 – 0.8 – 1.4 + 0.7 + 1.8 ± 0.0 2023
– 2.7 –0.1 +1.8 –1.9 – 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 2.7 – 0.1 –0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 2023 Apr.
– 0.6 –0.3 –0.4 +0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.0 +0.4 – 1.2 ± 0.0 May
+ 2.3 +1.0 +1.8 –0.9 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 1.6 – 1.6 –0.1 + 2.5 ± 0.0 June
+ 2.7 +0.6 +1.6 –1.1 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 – 0.0 +0.0 – 2.1 ± 0.0 July
– 2.9 –1.9 –1.0 –0.8 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.2 +0.1 + 1.8 ± 0.0 Aug.
+ 1.9 +3.2 +3.1 +0.1 – 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 1.4 + 1.0 –0.1 – 0.7 ± 0.0 Sep.
+ 1.2 –1.0 –0.8 –0.2 + 2.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.2 +0.3 – 0.2 ± 0.0 Oct.
+ 3.7 +0.9 +0.1 +0.8 + 2.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.1 +0.0 – 0.0 ± 0.0 Nov.
+ 4.1 +2.4 +2.8 –0.4 + 1.7 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.4 +0.0 + 0.0 ± 0.0 Dec.
and other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.
4 Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of
negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Includingsubordinated liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.  8 The collection of data
regarding foreign subsidiaries matured in 12/2023.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 3,656.9 0.1
2022 16,843.0 168.4 168.0 195.6 28.1 0.0
2023 16,261.6 162.6 162.3 170.5 8.2 0.0
2024 Sep. 16,326.9 163.3 162.9 169.1 6.1 0.0
p Oct. 16,355.6 163.6 163.2 ... ... ...
Nov. . . . . . .
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
2022 4,664,630 27.7 46,646 46,512 54,848 8,337 5
2023 4,483,853 27.6 44,839 44,709 47,008 2,299 0
2024 Sep. 4,450,146 27.3 44,501 44,375 45,749 1,374 7
p Oct. 4,485,215 27.4 44,852 44,726 ... ... ...
Nov. . . . . . . .
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2022 9,814 7,396 3,216 14,465 8,295 117 2,471
2023 9,282 7,417 3,170 14,061 8,178 148 2,118
2024 Sep. 9,369 7,395 2,729 14,162 8,332 132 2,067
Oct. 9,447 7,428 2,746 14,293 8,388 138 2,075
Nov. . . . . . . .
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2022 3,352,177 12,609 566,227 543,694 116,094
2023 3,447,513 968 420,839 455,493 125,531
2024 Sep. 3,527,175 1,643 362,289 412,980 127,199
Oct. 3,585,156 2,329 340,110 410,048 126,500
Nov. . . . . .
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 5 of the
Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum
reserve requirements (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies,
pursuant to Article 6(1)(a)).  3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2%between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at
1%. 4 Article 6(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the
application of minimum reserve requirements.  5 Average credit balances of credit
institutions at national central banks.  6 Average credit balances less required reserves
after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.  7 Required reserves after deduction of the
lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2015 Dec. 9 – 0.30 0.05 – 0.30 2023 Feb. 8 2.50 3.00 – 3.25 2011 July 1 0.37 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Mar. 22 3.00 3.50 – 3.75
2016 Mar. 16 – 0.40 0.00 – 0.25 May 10 3.25 3.75 – 4.00 2012 Jan. 1 0.12 2016 July 1 – 0.88
June 21 3.50 4.00 – 4.25
2019 Sep. 18 – 0.50 0.00 – 0.25 Aug. 2 3.75 4.25 – 4.50 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13 2023 Jan. 1 1.62
Sep. 20 4.00 4.50 – 4.75 July 1 – 0.38 July 1 3.12
2022 July 27 0.00 0.50 – 0.75
Sep. 14 0.75 1.25 – 1.50 2024 June 12 3.75 4.25 – 4.50 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63 2024 Jan. 1 3.62
Nov. 2 1.50 2.00 – 2.25 Sep. 18 2 3.50 3.65 – 3.90 July 1 – 0.73 July 1 3.37
Dec. 21 2.00 2.50 – 2.75 Oct.  23 3.25 3.40 – 3.65
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.  2 Effective 18 September 2024, the spread
between the rate on the main refinancing operations and the deposit facility rate will
be reduced to 15 basis points. The spread between the rate on the marginal lendingfacility and the rate on the main refinancing operations will remain unchanged at 25
basis points.
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2024 Nov. 6 9 886 9 886 3.40 – – – 7
Nov. 13 9 188 9 188 3.40 – – – 7
Nov. 20 10 383 10 383 3.40 – – – 7
Nov. 27 10 444 10 444 3.40 – – – 7
Dec. 4 6 663 6 663 3.40 – – – 7
Dec. 11 4 872 4 872 3.40 – – – 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2024 Aug. 28 2 030 2 030 2   3.69 – – − 91
Sep. 25 6 823 6 823 2      … – – − 84
Oct. 30 1 862 1 862 2      … – – − 91
Nov. 27 4 305 4 305 2      … – – − 91
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month
% per annum
EURIBOR ®  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2024 Apr. 3.908 3.868 3.853 3.885 3.838 3.703
May 3.907 3.881 3.816 3.813 3.787 3.680
June 3.749 3.681 3.635 3.725 3.715 3.650
July 3.663 3.611 3.618 3.685 3.644 3.526
Aug. 3.663 3.626 3.597 3.548 3.425 3.166
Sep. 3.557 3.491 3.438 3.434 3.258 2.936
Oct. 3.338 3.308 3.205 3.167 3.002 2.691
Nov. 3.164 3.148 3.066 3.007 2.788 2.506
* Publication does not establish an entitlement to provision of the rates. The Deutsche
Bundesbank reserves the right to cease publishing the information on its website in
future. All data are supplied without liability. No explicit or implicit assurances or
guarantees are made as to the up-to-dateness, accuracy, timeliness, completeness,
marketability or suitability of the data as interest rates or reference interest rates.
Neither the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI), nor Euribor EBF, nor Euribor
ACI, nor the Euribor Panel Banks, nor the Euribor Steering Committee, nor the
European Central Bank, nor Reuters, nor the Deutsche Bundesbank can be held liable
for any irregularity or inaccuracy, incompleteness or late provision of the money market
rates. With regard to the €STR please consider the European Central Bank's disclaimer,
which also applies for the Deutsche Bundesbank's publication:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/financial_markets_and_interest_rates/euro_short-
term_rate/html/index.en.html
1 Euro Short-Term Rate: On the basis of individual euro-denominated transactions
conducted and settled on the previous business day, the European Central Bankpublishes the €STR since 2 October 2019. Transactions are reported by euro area banks
subject to reporting obligations in compliance with Money Market Statistical Reporting
Regulation. Monthly averages are calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank.  2 Monthly
averages are own calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank based on Euribor® daily rates
calculated by the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). These are unweighted
averages. Information on the methodology of Euribor® daily rates are available below.
Please be aware that commercial use of these data is only possible with a licence
agreement with the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). Information on its
terms of use are available under the link below. Values calculated from November 2023
onwards with three decimal places. Previous values calculated with two decimal places.
For technical reasons, these values are also displayed with three decimal places and the
third decimal place is filled with a 0. Up to and including October 2023 all values
calculated and published with two decimal places
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/terms-of-use
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/benchmarks/euribor/

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Oct. 2.76 288,227 0.97 230,966 3.39 197,527 1.32 21,449
Nov. 2.88 315,984 1.01 233,972 3.43 193,442 1.39 21,232
Dec. 2.96 338,959 1.04 237,917 3.47 190,801 1.43 21,697
2024 Jan. 3.01 364,579 1.06 240,513 3.51 204,092 1.46 21,689
Feb. 3.04 385,969 1.08 241,610 3.54 205,657 1.48 20,732
Mar. 3.06 400,182 1.09 242,659 3.56 212,882 1.56 20,688
Apr. 3.08 414,278 1.11 243,548 3.54 213,659 1.62 20,719
May 3.09 424,087 1.12 244,423 3.50 211,340 1.75 20,827
June 3.09 433,321 1.13 244,777 3.42 200,180 1.84 21,079
July 3.09 441,266 1.14 245,316 3.44 203,485 1.91 21,085
Aug. 3.07 445,355 1.14 246,009 3.40 209,286 1.96 21,125
Sep. 3.03 451,326 1.15 246,598 3.28 210,020 2.01 21,852
Oct. 2.95 453,886 1.16 247,535 3.13 216,835 2.04 21,587
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Oct. 5.57 3,312 3.50 25,212 1.87 1,554,344 9.95 47,325 4.65 76,583 4.06 329,490
Nov. 5.70 3,294 3.58 24,792 1.89 1,556,410 9.99 46,653 4.74 76,885 4.09 328,941
Dec. 5.62 3,198 3.64 24,499 1.90 1,556,523 10.01 47,390 4.81 77,044 4.13 326,980
2024 Jan. 5.66 3,354 3.69 24,060 1.91 1,554,763 10.16 46,574 4.89 76,552 4.18 327,358
Feb. 5.70 3,250 3.72 23,819 1.92 1,555,595 10.18 46,259 4.97 76,486 4.22 327,721
Mar. 5.68 3,184 3.75 23,540 1.93 1,558,297 10.05 47,109 4.90 76,985 4.26 326,829
Apr. 5.65 3,289 3.78 23,271 1.94 1,559,197 10.13 45,949 4.97 76,906 4.30 327,227
May 5.55 3,400 3.81 23,042 1.95 1,561,200 10.13 46,181 5.13 77,092 4.34 327,336
June 5.58 3,272 3.84 22,914 1.97 1,564,022 10.17 46,114 5.22 76,708 4.37 326,248
July 5.45 3,483 3.87 22,626 1.98 1,566,908 10.00 45,875 5.27 76,941 4.40 326,337
Aug. 5.43 3,344 3.90 22,463 2.00 1,570,363 9.97 45,873 5.30 77,210 4.43 326,755
Sep. 5.38 3,308 3.91 22,308 2.01 1,572,823 10.06 47,862 5.34 77,109 4.47 325,545
Oct. 5.19 3,325 3.94 22,206 2.02 1,574,251 9.88 46,487 5.37 77,290 4.47 327,373
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Oct. 6.05 186,407 4.42 251,931 2.45 889,648
Nov. 5.97 187,977 4.45 253,976 2.48 892,391
Dec. 6.05 180,730 4.50 255,561 2.51 891,507
2024 Jan. 6.06 183,005 4.53 255,411 2.52 893,128
Feb. 6.00 184,401 4.64 253,221 2.55 896,388
Mar. 6.03 189,482 4.62 249,544 2.56 895,185
Apr. 5.97 188,827 4.72 248,341 2.58 897,166
May 5.92 188,826 4.74 249,224 2.59 899,489
June 5.88 192,015 4.74 248,588 2.59 896,461
July 5.91 189,012 4.73 249,072 2.60 898,488
Aug. 5.88 186,347 4.71 249,434 2.62 901,170
Sep. 5.75 189,368 4.68 249,435 2.62 897,212
Oct. 5.59 184,858 4.59 250,186 2.61 898,413
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Oct. 0.56 1,728,935 3.40 51,187 3.46 5,558 2.99 2,743 0.64 411,490 1.94 44,837
Nov. 0.59 1,726,394 3.46 57,743 3.40 6,243 3.18 4,292 0.67 400,980 2.09 48,268
Dec. 0.60 1,731,513 3.37 49,974 3.25 4,896 3.17 4,389 0.69 396,006 2.17 50,818
2024 Jan. 0.62 1,702,116 3.27 56,368 3.13 5,846 2.80 3,300 0.71 386,987 2.25 53,387
Feb. 0.58 1,698,248 3.28 55,090 3.04 5,651 2.65 2,339 0.72 379,659 2.30 55,755
Mar. 0.60 1,698,313 3.27 47,316 2.94 3,332 2.53 2,296 0.74 373,900 2.35 57,421
Apr. 0.60 1,698,724 3.21 52,193 2.95 3,789 2.76 2,954 0.75 368,393 2.38 58,350
May 0.60 1,701,051 3.22 50,351 2.91 3,284 2.43 1,947 0.76 364,344 2.41 58,880
June 0.59 1,706,912 3.11 47,821 2.90 3,156 2.51 1,930 0.76 359,875 2.43 59,236
July 0.58 1,702,120 3.10 52,304 2.82 3,175 2.46 2,188 0.76 355,745 2.44 59,365
Aug. 0.58 1,738,837 3.04 54,951 2.74 3,013 2.31 1,824 0.77 352,793 2.44 59,448
Sep. 0.57 1,732,207 2.92 53,747 2.60 2,726 2.35 1,531 0.76 350,119 2.42 60,261
Oct. 0.57 1,740,346 2.76 52,589 2.51 3,962 2.22 1,881 0.73 347,653 2.39 61,015
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2023 Oct. 0.97 551,400 3.74 95,412 3.78 752 2.97 266
Nov. 1.02 556,270 3.73 99,933 3.71 820 3.30 418
Dec. 1.02 553,882 3.71 92,454 3.47 855 2.98 343
2024 Jan. 1.05 535,302 3.71 91,219 3.20 419 2.81 401
Feb. 1.03 524,848 3.70 94,014 3.16 527 2.90 239
Mar. 1.00 525,597 3.74 109,409 3.29 609 3.60 538
Apr. 1.01 527,442 3.74 109,540 3.46 815 3.68 573
May 1.06 535,774 3.71 99,982 3.58 1,720 3.63 1,543
June 1.00 530,169 3.56 104,386 3.46 1,187 3.60 1,248
July 1.02 544,474 3.51 102,515 3.51 1,347 3.46 842
Aug. 1.09 547,151 3.45 94,979 2.86 357 3.30 1,078
Sep. 1.07 553,465 3.34 116,890 2.99 813 3.35 648
Oct. 0.98 557,750 3.14 119,699 2.65 683 3.16 512
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2023 Oct. 8.66 8.55 8,347 9.62 1,655 9.43 288 7.21 2,893 9.24 5,166
Nov. 8.72 8.55 8,130 9.70 1,626 8.45 329 7.29 2,863 9.29 4,938
Dec. 8.69 8.25 6,106 9.28 905 7.99 298 7.22 2,491 9.04 3,317
2024 Jan. 8.73 8.49 8,062 9.55 1,563 7.86 261 7.30 2,718 9.16 5,082
Feb. 8.56 8.34 8,245 9.24 1,308 7.86 262 7.24 2,909 8.99 5,073
Mar. 8.27 8.03 8,190 9.21 1,250 8.15 260 6.87 3,173 8.79 4,757
Apr. 8.34 8.07 9,080 9.32 1,348 7.46 320 6.91 3,581 8.91 5,180
May 8.46 8.16 8,491 9.36 1,229 7.04 328 7.09 3,330 8.97 4,833
June 8.29 8.03 8,426 9.19 1,234 6.76 304 6.95 3,359 8.86 4,763
July 8.33 8.10 9,917 9.31 1,497 7.03 331 6.90 3,914 8.98 5,672
Aug. 8.42 8.06 8,287 9.24 1,329 6.99 315 6.87 3,069 8.87 4,902
Sep. 8.45 8.11 7,641 9.07 1,196 7.18 287 6.96 2,745 8.85 4,610
Oct. 8.46 8.07 7,763 9.07 1,241 7.00 295 6.77 2,759 8.90 4,709
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2023 Oct. 5.45 3,348 5.37 1,068 5.95 1,483 5.57 724 4.73 1,141
Nov. 5.43 3,152 5.13 765 5.90 1,345 5.53 764 4.76 1,043
Dec. 5.20 4,287 5.21 988 5.77 1,719 5.12 1,234 4.54 1,334
2024 Jan. 5.23 3,673 5.02 1,102 5.78 1,717 5.26 823 4.38 1,133
Feb. 5.13 2,997 5.13 703 5.73 1,237 5.24 675 4.36 1,085
Mar. 4.91 3,987 5.08 953 5.68 1,522 5.16 814 4.07 1,651
Apr. 5.05 3,544 4.99 1,093 5.67 1,314 5.26 891 4.30 1,339
May 4.99 3,199 5.00 881 5.48 1,288 5.19 749 4.32 1,162
June 4.98 3,711 5.01 860 5.55 1,479 5.23 838 4.23 1,394
July 4.82 4,100 4.73 1,191 5.32 1,636 5.24 744 4.16 1,720
Aug. 4.82 3,109 4.91 778 5.49 1,063 5.22 621 4.15 1,425
Sep. 4.65 3,804 4.76 1,024 5.24 1,504 4.81 696 4.02 1,604
Oct. 4.37 4,559 4.47 1,227 4.87 1,601 4.44 1,074 3.91 1,884
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2023 Oct. 5.52 2,472 . . 6.03 1,094 5.67 547 4.74 831
Nov. 5.52 2,249 . . 6.06 900 5.60 587 4.82 762
Dec. 5.42 2,861 . . 5.93 1,256 5.58 660 4.63 945
2024 Jan. 5.33 2,814 . . 5.88 1,335 5.34 656 4.42 823
Feb. 5.22 2,274 . . 5.82 908 5.40 573 4.40 793
Mar. 4.96 3,188 . . 5.75 1,215 5.25 700 4.05 1,273
Apr. 5.08 2,756 . . 5.70 962 5.39 760 4.27 1,034
May 5.09 2,320 . . 5.57 859 5.34 643 4.38 818
June 5.08 2,844 . . 5.67 1,109 5.35 683 4.29 1,052
July 4.90 3,158 . . 5.36 1,261 5.39 625 4.20 1,272
Aug. 4.88 2,317 . . 5.53 758 5.33 532 4.16 1,027
Sep. 4.74 2,827 . . 5.28 1,122 5.09 517 4.07 1,188
Oct. 4.44 3,438 . . 4.93 1,226 4.77 786 3.83 1,426
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2023 Oct. 4.22 4.18 13,831 4.39 2,853 5.53 1,989 4.53 1,403 3.85 5,304 3.90 5,136
Nov. 4.27 4.22 13,473 4.56 2,236 5.62 1,723 4.61 1,588 3.92 4,936 3.92 5,225
Dec. 4.12 4.05 12,151 4.32 2,055 5.56 1,576 4.44 1,553 3.80 4,349 3.65 4,672
2024 Jan. 3.90 3.85 14,667 4.10 2,844 5.44 1,862 4.08 1,584 3.56 5,397 3.55 5,825
Feb. 3.92 3.88 14,245 4.30 2,429 5.41 1,783 4.04 1,612 3.59 5,153 3.61 5,697
Mar. 3.88 3.83 15,439 4.01 2,258 5.28 1,739 4.09 1,755 3.55 5,414 3.61 6,530
Apr. 3.91 3.86 16,793 4.21 2,754 5.45 1,869 4.06 1,868 3.57 6,234 3.64 6,822
May 3.96 3.91 15,403 4.19 2,277 5.44 1,828 4.14 1,480 3.60 6,051 3.69 6,044
June 3.99 3.95 16,296 4.33 2,186 5.51 2,039 4.19 1,476 3.66 6,163 3.68 6,618
July 3.97 3.92 19,511 4.22 3,156 5.38 2,340 4.15 1,839 3.64 7,547 3.71 7,786
Aug. 3.87 3.83 16,811 4.14 2,526 5.37 1,816 4.01 1,658 3.60 6,122 3.60 7,216
Sep. 3.78 3.73 16,611 4.01 2,594 5.29 1,898 3.88 1,581 3.47 5,987 3.50 7,146
Oct. 3.69 3.65 17,874 3.89 3,124 4.99 1,992 3.81 1,803 3.42 6,233 3.45 7,847
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2023 Oct. . 4.01 6,207 . . 5.44 769 4.38 587 3.73 2,335 3.76 2,516
Nov. . 4.02 6,174 . . 5.50 669 4.45 728 3.80 2,170 3.70 2,607
Dec. . 3.86 5,588 . . 5.39 612 4.29 609 3.73 1,935 3.47 2,432
2024 Jan. . 3.69 7,051 . . 5.34 706 3.96 746 3.44 2,461 3.45 3,138
Feb. . 3.70 6,827 . . 5.33 717 3.82 764 3.43 2,314 3.50 3,032
Mar. . 3.66 7,324 . . 5.00 737 3.91 762 3.43 2,491 3.49 3,334
Apr. . 3.74 7,898 . . 5.48 783 3.88 853 3.48 2,770 3.53 3,492
May . 3.77 6,873 . . 5.35 740 3.97 677 3.48 2,483 3.57 2,973
June . 3.78 7,745 . . 5.43 844 4.03 682 3.54 2,777 3.52 3,442
July . 3.77 8,861 . . 5.27 877 3.97 808 3.55 3,290 3.59 3,886
Aug. . 3.69 7,548 . . 5.29 745 3.85 710 3.51 2,614 3.45 3,479
Sep. . 3.57 7,608 . . 5.10 746 3.70 687 3.38 2,689 3.37 3,486
Oct. . 3.50 8,006 . . 4.79 842 3.56 788 3.32 2,635 3.32 3,741
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Oct. 10.82 39,186 11.02 27,570 18.09 6,656 6.42 94,418 6.45 93,913
Nov. 10.80 38,416 10.95 26,932 18.18 6,614 6.41 95,688 6.44 95,191
Dec. 10.76 39,266 11.03 27,422 18.17 6,609 6.49 92,617 6.52 92,164
2024 Jan. 11.03 38,673 11.19 27,497 18.22 6,534 6.48 93,839 6.51 93,367
Feb. 11.06 38,233 11.22 27,163 18.29 6,460 6.47 95,704 6.50 95,225
Mar. 10.88 39,566 11.17 27,767 18.66 6,459 6.48 97,035 6.51 96,538
Apr. 11.00 38,415 11.19 27,036 18.65 6,438 6.37 96,481 6.40 95,979
May 10.95 38,754 11.23 27,112 18.66 6,427 6.38 96,257 6.41 95,778
June 10.96 38,787 11.09 27,550 18.67 6,425 6.32 98,856 6.35 98,366
July 10.76 38,598 11.05 26,764 18.61 6,442 6.34 96,983 6.37 96,494
Aug. 10.76 38,728 11.06 26,783 18.60 6,487 6.36 96,173 6.39 95,725
Sep. 10.95 40,475 11.10 28,680 18.66 6,695 6.27 97,568 6.30 97,065
Oct. 10.76 38,882 10.91 27,116 18.35 6,687 6.10 94,572 6.13 94,065
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2023 Oct. 5.39 76,734 5.27 24,750 6.35 10,963 6.93 1,781 4.61 912 5.30 54,862 5.02 3,674 4.11 4,542
Nov. 5.17 79,316 5.28 22,467 6.27 10,430 6.87 1,838 4.50 936 5.07 56,524 4.66 3,644 4.10 5,944
Dec. 5.19 108,487 5.34 31,589 6.07 11,245 6.60 2,020 4.33 1,115 5.28 76,500 4.63 7,141 3.79 10,466
2024 Jan. 5.16 75,818 5.37 22,554 5.81 10,279 6.48 1,856 4.21 932 5.18 54,103 4.51 3,830 3.64 4,818
Feb. 5.06 72,892 5.36 18,973 5.77 10,256 6.77 1,809 4.19 879 5.19 49,631 3.29 6,114 3.85 4,203
Mar. 5.19 94,238 5.42 27,803 5.64 12,574 6.70 1,930 4.24 1,017 5.27 67,328 4.29 5,644 3.79 5,745
Apr. 5.20 79,786 5.35 23,180 5.67 9,851 6.60 3,249 4.20 1,118 5.24 56,030 4.40 4,605 3.84 4,933
May 5.10 82,546 5.27 20,970 5.67 10,468 6.62 3,568 4.24 961 5.13 57,369 4.12 4,985 3.69 5,195
June 5.06 101,220 5.11 31,097 5.59 11,582 6.58 4,052 4.26 984 5.07 71,086 4.49 6,869 3.75 6,647
July 4.98 83,558 5.12 23,367 5.57 10,470 6.50 3,672 4.22 1,236 5.03 55,383 4.14 5,738 3.73 7,059
Aug. 5.02 75,678 4.98 19,585 5.48 9,906 6.52 2,515 3.98 1,115 5.10 52,170 3.95 4,129 3.76 5,843
Sep. 4.68 102,848 4.88 25,662 5.28 11,734 6.44 3,423 3.93 1,083 4.65 73,859 4.21 5,256 3.63 7,493
Oct. 4.68 95,936 4.83 24,724 5.13 12,266 6.23 3,588 3.89 1,040 4.68 67,638 4.16 4,695 3.60 6,709
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2023 Oct. 5.05 12,103 . . 5.66 508 5.14 140 3.95 213 5.21 8,840 5.38 1,005 3.73 1,397
Nov. 4.69 10,586 . . 5.73 353 4.83 107 3.88 250 4.90 7,211 4.51 1,045 3.74 1,620
Dec. 4.83 15,673 . . 5.55 459 5.01 139 3.82 291 5.22 10,040 4.81 1,915 3.45 2,829
2024 Jan. 4.78 8,277 . . 5.69 446 4.64 150 3.68 250 5.04 5,880 4.09 707 3.41 844
Feb. 4.87 7,393 . . 5.68 351 4.70 113 3.60 231 5.16 5,054 4.55 846 3.45 798
Mar. 5.03 11,566 . . 5.74 412 4.91 99 3.75 277 5.24 8,292 5.35 1,271 3.39 1,215
Apr. 4.81 8,922 . . 5.61 457 4.90 159 3.69 272 4.93 5,989 5.13 1,001 3.77 1,044
May 4.79 8,862 . . 5.64 356 4.62 151 3.76 247 5.13 5,522 4.71 1,249 3.46 1,337
June 4.97 12,576 . . 5.61 392 4.68 173 3.55 251 5.34 7,255 4.86 2,681 3.73 1,824
July 4.63 10,570 . . 5.44 482 4.88 162 3.81 305 5.06 6,631 3.88 1,646 3.27 1,344
Aug. 4.61 8,058 . . 5.40 360 4.51 161 3.60 285 5.03 4,614 4.64 1,033 3.37 1,605
Sep. 4.59 11,171 . . 5.31 401 4.47 140 3.55 328 4.97 6,840 4.41 1,356 3.50 2,106
Oct. 4.64 19,392 . . 5.05 476 4.03 179 3.41 278 4.79 15,047 5.02 1,452 3.31 1,960
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 
2021 Q2 2,609.9 280.5 470.3 361.2 449.2 879.6 3.4 72.5 38.9 54.2
Q3 2,653.1 271.7 474.2 358.2 463.4 899.8 3.3 87.8 38.3 56.3
Q4 2,667.2 261.3 468.6 355.1 472.4 921.6 3.2 85.0 40.8 59.3
2022 Q1 2,547.3 243.7 440.2 333.2 468.7 870.5 2.7 87.5 41.0 59.8
Q2 2,369.8 215.6 390.4 305.5 462.5 803.5 3.0 85.5 41.3 62.6
Q3 2,296.3 202.1 369.9 289.1 461.3 776.7 4.0 84.3 41.4 67.6
Q4 2,275.6 189.7 373.8 279.7 466.0 772.1 3.4 79.9 38.7 72.2
2023 Q1 2,326.7 201.6 380.7 280.4 472.6 790.1 3.6 85.0 38.5 74.3
Q2 2,331.8 194.8 383.4 280.4 475.6 799.2 3.6 83.9 38.1 72.9
Q3 2,311.1 186.5 376.7 274.2 483.4 785.3 3.7 88.6 38.1 74.7
Q4 2,408.5 190.2 405.6 291.0 499.7 822.6 3.3 79.0 34.2 83.0
2024 Q1 2,477.6 193.7 412.6 289.4 502.9 847.6 3.7 97.0 35.1 95.5
Q2 2,435.8 183.9 410.0 287.7 481.9 847.4 3.1 95.9 35.0 91.0
    Life insurance
2021 Q2 1,384.9 164.4 234.1 219.4 78.0 637.6 2.0 14.1 21.5 13.8
Q3 1,400.1 159.2 233.8 214.8 87.7 654.6 1.9 13.4 20.8 13.8
Q4 1,411.1 152.4 231.9 211.8 93.4 669.1 1.7 14.6 21.9 14.3
2022 Q1 1,317.8 136.8 211.5 193.1 99.7 626.1 0.9 13.9 22.0 13.8
Q2 1,202.1 120.5 180.3 173.1 104.2 569.4 0.9 13.6 22.1 17.9
Q3 1,149.6 110.2 166.6 162.1 107.0 546.4 1.1 12.3 22.3 21.7
Q4 1,130.1 103.6 170.5 155.6 111.5 540.0 1.1 11.5 19.5 16.8
2023 Q1 1,147.9 105.1 170.3 155.6 113.3 553.5 1.0 12.1 19.4 17.4
Q2 1,154.0 102.9 171.7 154.9 114.3 559.9 1.0 12.0 19.2 18.0
Q3 1,123.5 97.9 163.2 149.4 115.7 547.2 1.5 11.7 19.1 17.9
Q4 1,180.4 101.5 178.7 161.0 116.6 574.7 1.4 10.3 16.6 19.5
2024 Q1 1,193.5 98.6 176.5 156.0 115.6 594.3 1.4 10.2 16.6 24.3
Q2 1,180.6 95.3 172.6 153.6 115.1 594.3 1.2 7.2 16.5 24.7
    Non-life insurance
2021 Q2 724.6 103.3 141.0 83.4 90.5 225.7 0.4 40.3 12.7 27.2
Q3 733.1 98.7 141.0 83.8 93.7 228.4 0.4 46.4 12.8 27.7
Q4 738.4 94.6 140.1 84.7 97.5 234.3 0.3 44.6 14.0 28.4
2022 Q1 722.5 91.5 133.4 80.8 98.6 227.7 0.2 45.7 13.9 30.7
Q2 681.7 81.9 122.0 74.9 98.6 216.5 0.1 44.1 14.1 29.5
Q3 661.2 76.2 116.1 70.3 99.2 212.3 0.1 43.2 14.1 29.7
Q4 659.9 72.9 115.3 69.0 100.0 215.5 0.2 42.8 14.2 30.1
2023 Q1 687.1 81.2 121.1 69.7 103.0 219.5 0.1 45.1 14.2 33.2
Q2 688.3 77.2 124.0 70.7 104.4 222.0 0.1 44.9 14.1 30.9
Q3 682.7 73.7 122.7 69.2 107.0 221.0 0.1 45.3 14.3 29.4
Q4 708.1 74.9 131.9 74.1 109.0 230.1 0.1 43.9 13.0 31.1
2024 Q1 748.8 81.0 139.5 75.3 110.6 234.6 0.1 55.8 13.9 38.0
Q2 742.2 75.4 140.9 75.1 110.7 233.9 0.1 56.8 13.9 35.4
    Reinsurance 4
2021 Q2 500.4 12.8 95.2 58.4 280.7 16.4 1.0 18.1 4.6 13.2
Q3 519.9 13.9 99.3 59.6 282.0 16.7 1.0 28.0 4.7 14.8
Q4 517.7 14.3 96.6 58.6 281.4 18.2 1.1 25.9 4.9 16.7
2022 Q1 507.1 15.5 95.3 59.3 270.4 16.7 1.6 27.9 5.0 15.3
Q2 486.0 13.2 88.0 57.5 259.6 17.6 1.9 27.9 5.1 15.1
Q3 485.5 15.6 87.3 56.7 255.1 18.1 2.7 28.8 5.1 16.2
Q4 485.6 13.2 88.0 55.1 254.5 16.7 2.1 25.7 5.0 25.3
2023 Q1 491.8 15.3 89.2 55.1 256.3 17.1 2.4 27.8 4.8 23.7
Q2 489.5 14.7 87.6 54.8 256.9 17.2 2.5 26.9 4.8 24.0
Q3 504.9 14.8 90.8 55.6 260.7 17.1 2.1 31.6 4.8 27.3
Q4 520.0 13.7 95.0 55.9 274.1 17.8 1.8 24.7 4.6 32.4
2024 Q1 535.3 14.2 96.6 58.1 276.6 18.7 2.2 31.0 4.6 33.2
Q2 513.0 13.2 96.5 59.1 256.0 19.1 1.8 31.9 4.5 30.8
Pension funds 5
2021 Q2 683.2 85.0 60.2 49.3 11.2 445.2 0.1 12.1 17.8 2.3
Q3 689.8 82.9 60.4 48.9 11.8 453.6 0.1 12.2 17.8 2.2
Q4 709.9 82.1 60.0 48.7 11.3 473.5 0.1 12.4 18.5 3.3
2022 Q1 689.8 75.8 56.7 46.2 12.0 465.9 0.0 12.4 18.5 2.2
Q2 665.9 70.3 52.9 43.3 12.5 453.5 0.0 12.3 18.6 2.5
Q3 657.0 67.7 52.0 42.1 12.9 448.1 0.0 12.9 18.7 2.6
Q4 664.0 67.3 54.6 41.9 13.6 451.3 0.0 13.1 18.8 3.5
2023 Q1 671.5 66.4 56.9 42.3 13.6 457.9 0.0 12.9 18.7 2.7
Q2 678.7 67.5 58.9 42.7 13.4 462.0 0.0 12.9 18.7 2.6
Q3 675.9 67.1 60.3 42.3 13.5 458.2 0.1 12.9 18.7 2.8
Q4 703.5 70.1 67.7 44.0 13.5 472.6 0.1 13.2 18.9 3.4
2024 Q1 712.3 70.4 69.6 44.1 13.7 480.8 0.1 12.4 18.6 2.6
Q2 714.8 71.0 71.4 44.2 13.7 480.6 0.0 12.1 19.1 2.5
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including
registered bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrower's note
loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables and claims ofpension funds on pension managers.  4 Not including the reinsurance business
conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 The term "pension funds"
refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts.
Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension
schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  6
Insurance corporations
2021 Q2 2,609.9 33.0 81.3 558.7 1,793.5 1,556.3 237.1 2.2 141.1 –
Q3 2,653.1 35.4 82.8 567.0 1,817.7 1,569.1 248.7 2.5 147.6 –
Q4 2,667.2 36.0 82.0 579.3 1,820.7 1,578.3 242.3 2.5 146.8 –
2022 Q1 2,547.3 34.4 82.1 563.2 1,725.9 1,472.6 253.3 4.0 137.7 –
Q2 2,369.8 33.6 78.7 541.7 1,574.4 1,326.8 247.6 6.0 135.3 –
Q3 2,296.3 33.8 73.6 537.5 1,506.1 1,262.3 243.7 7.4 138.0 –
Q4 2,275.6 32.3 70.1 544.0 1,487.0 1,248.7 238.3 5.6 136.7 –
2023 Q1 2,326.7 33.1 71.2 544.7 1,539.0 1,277.3 261.7 4.3 134.3 –
Q2 2,331.8 33.1 68.4 548.0 1,544.4 1,284.6 259.8 4.4 133.5 –
Q3 2,311.1 35.3 76.9 552.1 1,508.1 1,248.1 260.1 4.6 134.1 –
Q4 2,408.5 30.5 73.3 569.8 1,586.6 1,325.4 261.2 4.1 144.1 –
2024 Q1 2,477.6 30.6 78.1 575.0 1,642.5 1,345.5 296.9 3.7 147.8 –
Q2 2,435.8 32.2 76.8 510.2 1,684.6 1,387.1 297.5 3.6 128.4 –
    Life insurance
2021 Q2 1,384.9 3.3 20.4 144.2 1,164.9 1,164.9 – 1.0 51.1 –
Q3 1,400.1 3.3 19.3 148.1 1,176.4 1,176.4 – 1.1 51.9 –
Q4 1,411.1 3.3 20.7 148.2 1,185.5 1,185.5 – 0.9 52.5 –
2022 Q1 1,317.8 3.2 19.9 142.9 1,101.6 1,101.6 – 1.4 48.8 –
Q2 1,202.1 3.1 19.0 141.4 984.5 984.5 – 2.7 51.3 –
Q3 1,149.6 3.0 17.0 138.0 936.9 936.9 – 3.1 51.8 –
Q4 1,130.1 2.7 16.6 136.0 924.9 924.9 – 2.3 47.7 –
2023 Q1 1,147.9 2.7 17.8 132.9 946.0 946.0 – 1.9 46.6 –
Q2 1,154.0 2.7 17.6 133.6 951.7 951.7 – 1.7 46.8 –
Q3 1,123.5 2.7 16.9 134.1 919.9 919.9 – 2.4 47.6 –
Q4 1,180.4 0.8 17.7 133.3 977.7 977.7 – 2.0 48.8 –
2024 Q1 1,193.5 0.8 17.5 128.8 994.3 994.3 – 1.7 50.2 –
Q2 1,180.6 1.0 14.5 92.9 1,035.1 1,035.1 – 1.9 35.2 –
    Non-life insurance
2021 Q2 724.6 1.2 10.5 166.2 493.4 366.2 127.1 0.1 53.1 –
Q3 733.1 1.2 10.5 168.9 498.7 367.8 130.9 0.2 53.7 –
Q4 738.4 1.4 10.7 175.8 492.6 367.6 125.0 0.2 57.8 –
2022 Q1 722.5 1.3 11.7 173.1 483.0 347.1 136.0 0.3 53.0 –
Q2 681.7 1.2 11.1 167.7 451.9 322.7 129.2 0.5 49.3 –
Q3 661.2 1.2 10.5 168.0 430.5 307.4 123.1 0.5 50.5 –
Q4 659.9 1.2 10.4 170.4 425.6 306.7 118.9 0.4 52.0 –
2023 Q1 687.1 1.2 10.7 173.0 450.8 314.4 136.4 0.4 51.0 –
Q2 688.3 1.2 10.6 176.0 451.1 317.1 134.0 0.3 49.1 –
Q3 682.7 1.7 10.9 176.6 444.4 313.0 131.4 0.4 48.8 –
Q4 708.1 0.6 12.5 180.2 461.3 333.6 127.7 0.3 53.3 –
2024 Q1 748.8 0.6 13.4 184.6 494.5 337.1 157.4 0.3 55.5 –
Q2 742.2 0.7 13.4 181.1 493.6 338.4 155.2 0.3 53.2 –
    Reinsurance 4
2021 Q2 500.4 28.5 50.4 248.3 135.2 25.2 110.0 1.1 36.9 –
Q3 519.9 30.9 53.0 250.1 142.7 24.9 117.8 1.3 42.0 –
Q4 517.7 31.4 50.5 255.3 142.6 25.3 117.3 1.4 36.5 –
2022 Q1 507.1 30.0 50.4 247.2 141.3 23.9 117.4 2.3 35.9 –
Q2 486.0 29.3 48.6 232.6 138.0 19.6 118.4 2.8 34.7 –
Q3 485.5 29.7 46.2 231.5 138.7 18.0 120.7 3.8 35.7 –
Q4 485.6 28.4 43.1 237.5 136.5 17.1 119.4 2.9 37.1 –
2023 Q1 491.8 29.2 42.8 238.8 142.2 16.9 125.3 2.1 36.8 –
Q2 489.5 29.3 40.2 238.4 141.6 15.8 125.8 2.4 37.6 –
Q3 504.9 31.0 49.2 241.3 143.9 15.2 128.7 1.9 37.7 –
Q4 520.0 29.1 43.0 256.3 147.7 14.2 133.5 1.8 42.0 –
2024 Q1 535.3 29.1 47.2 261.6 153.7 14.1 139.6 1.7 42.0 –
Q2 513.0 30.5 48.9 236.2 155.9 13.6 142.3 1.4 40.0 –
Pension funds 5
2021 Q2 683.2 – 1.8 31.3 536.7 535.0 – 0.2 9.2 104.0
Q3 689.8 – 1.9 31.9 539.8 537.6 – 0.2 9.3 106.8
Q4 709.9 – 1.9 32.0 560.2 557.3 – 0.1 8.9 106.8
2022 Q1 689.8 – 2.0 33.5 559.7 556.9 – 0.1 9.5 85.1
Q2 665.9 – 1.8 33.5 561.0 558.4 – 0.1 9.0 60.4
Q3 657.0 – 1.9 34.7 563.1 560.6 – 0.1 9.7 47.5
Q4 664.0 – 1.8 34.5 576.4 573.9 – 0.1 9.4 41.8
2023 Q1 671.5 – 1.8 35.5 577.3 574.9 – 0.1 9.5 47.3
Q2 678.7 – 1.8 35.7 582.0 579.6 – 0.1 9.6 49.5
Q3 675.9 – 1.9 35.0 583.7 581.5 – 0.1 9.7 45.6
Q4 703.5 – 1.9 35.0 597.0 594.8 – 0.1 9.9 59.6
2024 Q1 712.3 – 1.9 36.0 600.0 597.8 – 0.1 9.6 64.8
Q2 714.8 – 1.9 36.0 601.3 599.1 – 0.1 9.9 65.7
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Including deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered
bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension
funds on pension managers and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical
reserves "life" taking account of transitional measures. Health insurance is also includedin the "non-life insurance" sector.  4 Not including the reinsurance business conducted
by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 Valuation at book values. The term "pen-
sion funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of
Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational
pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.  6 Own
funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth" and "Shares and other equity".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 58,735 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 90,697 44,384 – 12,124 – 11,951 68,459 14,351
2015 15,219 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 51,229 99,225 – 66,330 121,164 44,391 – 84,006
2016 68,998 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 41,569 161,776 – 58,012 187,500 32,288 – 92,778
2017 51,034 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 39,471 134,192 – 71,454 161,012 44,634 – 83,158
2018 78,657 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 62,027 107,155 – 24,417 67,328 64,244 – 28,499
2019 139,611 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 71,075 60,195 8,059 2,408 49,728 79,416
2020 451,481 374,034 14,462 88,703 270,870 77,446 280,820 18,955 226,887 34,978 170,661
2021 230,854 221,648 31,941 19,754 169,953 9,205 243,497 – 41,852 245,198 40,150 – 12,643
2022 150,974 156,190 59,322 35,221 61,648 – 5,216 143,527 2,915 49,774 90,839 7,447
2023 280,393 158,228 88,018 –11,899 82,109 122,165 117,270 32,163 – 59,817 144,924 163,123
2023 Nov. 25,399 18,861 9,439 – 3,337 12,759 6,538 6,503 10,752 – 5,186 937 18,896
Dec. – 23,373 –27,517 4,368 – 8,386 –23,499 4,144 – 11,188 – 7,024 – 5,130 966 – 12,185
2024 Jan. 30,652 25,509 8,437 6,301 10,771 5,143 6,259 17,106 – 7,128 – 3,718 24,392
Feb. 19,146 11,577 6,463 – 957 6,070 7,569 3,675 7,562 – 9,079 5,191 15,471
Mar. 42,591 15,188 13,915 3,072 – 1,799 27,402 19,477 16,349 – 4,776 7,905 23,113
Apr. – 27,913 –25,395 –10,665 6,215 –20,946 – 2,518 – 31,713 – 4,492 – 12,041 – 15,181 3,800
May 27,055 22,035 1,836 696 19,503 5,020 17,293 3,605 – 9,394 23,082 9,761
June 33,743 14,811 10,021 2,760 2,031 18,932 4,988 12,204 – 10,121 2,905 28,755
July 6,319 – 1,185 –17,832 – 1,018 17,665 7,504 – 5,484 1,835 – 5,220 – 2,099 11,803
Aug. 16,344 7,546 3,649 3,739 157 8,798 – 8,592 9,231 – 11,073 – 6,750 24,936
Sep. 26,194 6,564 9,543 – 1,018 – 1,962 19,630 7,871 16,898 – 7,504 – 1,524 18,324
Oct. 39,522 44,156 549 3,337 40,269 – 4,633 3,715 – 5,915 – 11,945 21,576 35,807
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,337 11,991 5,346 2,851
2014 43,488 18,778 24,710 43,930 17,203 26,727 – 443
2015 56,979 7,668 49,311 46,721 – 5,421 52,142 10,258
2016 39,133 4,409 34,724 39,265 – 5,143 44,408 – 132
2017 52,932 15,570 37,362 51,270 7,031 44,239 1,662
2018 61,400 16,188 45,212 89,624 – 11,184 100,808 – 28,224
2019 54,830 9,076 45,754 43,070 – 1,119 44,189 11,759
2020 78,464 17,771 60,693 111,570 27 111,543 – 33,106
2021 115,933 49,066 66,868 102,921 10,869 92,052 13,012
2022 – 6,275 27,792 – 34,066 2,997 – 8,262 11,259 – 9,272
2023 41,754 36,898 4,856 52,667 14,650 38,017 – 10,913
2023 Nov. 509 301 208 – 2,519 538 – 3,057 3,028
Dec. 27,900 24,942 2,957 26,296 6,437 19,859 1,604
2024 Jan. 282 351 – 69 2,171 – 1,361 3,532 – 1,888
Feb. – 856 206 – 1,062 – 626 4,247 – 4,873 – 230
Mar. 7,233 4,679 2,554 9,297 6,657 2,640 – 2,064
Apr. 1,852 1,546 306 2,664 – 2,481 5,145 – 812
May 5,034 474 4,561 4,416 3,531 885 619
June – 1,682 292 – 1,974 – 2,637 – 4,084 1,447 955
July 3,120 204 2,916 4,180 40 4,140 – 1,060
Aug. – 2,381 1,300 – 3,681 – 2,832 – 3,201 369 450
Sep. 7,186 558 6,628 5,191 2,559 2,632 1,995
Oct. 7,107 6,195 912 8,553 3,813 4,740 – 1,446
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,870,084 778,411 39,548 18,327 643,380 77,156 184,206 907,466
2021 1,658,004 795,271 41,866 17,293 648,996 87,116 139,775 722,958
2022 1,683,265 861,989 66,811 11,929 700,062 83,188 169,680 651,596
2023 1,705,524 937,757 45,073 12,633 782,969 97,082 153,128 614,639
2023 Nov. 125,657 72,915 7,203 1,354 57,521 6,837 8,850 43,892
Dec. 81,025 55,000 1,834 1,453 46,549 5,164 4,722 21,302
2024 Jan. 151,286 89,021 6,405 1,630 70,605 10,380 14,833 47,433
Feb. 148,430 79,876 3,301 2,051 63,439 11,086 7,181 61,373
Mar. 124,684 62,659 5,081 608 45,393 11,577 11,709 50,316
Apr. 150,134 84,574 5,951 1,213 66,287 11,124 13,211 52,349
May 143,782 78,455 1,463 1,027 66,133 9,832 12,237 53,091
June 118,188 58,371 3,127 887 45,597 8,759 10,682 49,136
July 119,604 65,562 3,280 1,522 49,131 11,630 9,338 44,704
Aug. 113,940 60,353 2,571 413 46,104 11,265 6,501 47,086
Sep. 125,924 71,525 1,754 1,112 57,743 10,916 12,918 41,482
Oct. 122,150 57,393 2,679 2,036 39,390 13,287 12,273 52,484
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 658,521 165,097 28,500 7,427 90,839 38,330 77,439 415,985
2021 486,335 171,799 30,767 6,336 97,816 36,880 64,234 250,303
2022 485,287 164,864 41,052 7,139 91,143 25,530 56,491 263,932
2023 482,193 155,790 28,294 4,664 101,059 21,772 44,272 282,132
2023 Nov. 35,532 13,641 6,703 600 4,135 2,203 2,541 19,350
Dec. 14,764 6,401 1,040 1,205 2,551 1,605 763 7,600
2024 Jan. 55,105 23,961 5,330 537 14,875 3,219 8,244 22,900
Feb. 53,198 21,778 1,920 1,251 15,159 3,448 1,870 29,550
Mar. 44,606 12,428 4,590 606 4,928 2,304 6,478 25,700
Apr. 47,632 18,861 3,459 1,026 9,789 4,587 5,921 22,850
May 45,810 13,637 328 1,027 9,717 2,564 5,248 26,925
June 30,324 7,312 1,022 852 2,049 3,389 3,162 19,850
July 34,914 11,612 2,034 1,522 4,939 3,118 2,582 20,720
Aug. 36,346 9,667 2,421 413 4,993 1,841 2,559 24,120
Sep. 32,314 7,584 1,681 370 2,851 2,681 8,945 15,785
Oct. 46,132 11,993 1,939 1,528 5,769 2,756 7,214 26,925
Net sales 5
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 473,795 28,147 8,661 8,816 22,067 – 11,398 49,536 396,113
2021 210,231 52,578 17,821 7,471 22,973 4,314 35,531 122,123
2022 135,853 36,883 23,894 – 9,399 15,944 6,444 30,671 68,299
2023 190,577 78,764 10,184 – 791 46,069 23,303 – 34 111,848
2023 Nov. 30,649 13,427 4,984 904 7,149 391 – 4,018 21,239
Dec. – 11,217 10,301 308 1,288 9,314 – 609 – 4,873 – 16,644
2024 Jan. 4,841 4,209 – 569 1,400 – 2,865 6,243 4,372 – 3,740
Feb. 12,862 7,348 1,102 1,691 – 522 5,078 – 2,312 7,827
Mar. 17,943 13,538 1,459 – 498 8,865 3,713 3,784 620
Apr. – 9,914 – 10,653 2,897 – 1,562 – 14,334 2,346 4,972 – 4,233
May 5,787 2,720 – 2,643 77 2,782 2,505 3,598 – 532
June 15,859 9,951 – 486 – 207 9,726 918 2,329 3,578
July 415 – 18,041 – 1,491 480 – 19,593 2,563 – 4,490 22,947
Aug. 6,815 3,317 1,758 – 237 1,338 459 1,793 1,705
Sep. 11,706 7,980 – 4,138 442 11,086 589 2,965 762
Oct. 13,156 2,851 556 – 117 – 3,340 5,751 2,962 7,344
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,545,200 2 1,174,817 183,980 55,959 687,710 2 247,169 2 379,342 1,991,040
2021 3,781,975 1,250,777 202,385 63,496 731,068 253,828 414,791 2,116,406
2022 3,930,390 1,302,028 225,854 54,199 761,047 260,928 441,234 2,187,127
2023 4,131,592 1,384,958 237,099 54,312 806,808 286,739 441,742 2,304,892
2023 Nov. 4,139,444 1,373,679 236,596 53,034 798,461 285,588 446,199 2,319,566
Dec. 4,131,592 1,384,958 237,099 54,312 806,808 286,739 441,742 2,304,892
2024 Jan. 4,140,092 1,394,649 236,671 55,735 808,508 293,736 446,559 2,298,884
Feb. 4,152,812 1,401,409 237,658 57,450 807,692 298,609 444,310 2,307,093
Mar. 4,173,121 1,415,363 239,096 56,960 816,963 302,344 448,012 2,309,746
Apr. 4,169,790 1,408,556 242,090 55,474 805,788 305,203 453,941 2,307,292
May 4,175,267 1,409,122 239,361 55,574 807,179 307,007 457,302 2,308,844
June 4,198,060 1,423,493 239,081 55,370 820,249 308,793 460,082 2,314,485
July 4,193,225 1,403,611 237,606 55,897 798,532 311,576 455,405 2,334,209
Aug. 4,195,648 1,403,950 239,400 55,662 796,741 312,147 457,309 2,334,389
Sep. 4,204,230 1,407,618 233,380 56,090 807,073 311,075 459,445 2,337,167
Oct. 4,228,543 1,419,419 235,844 56,013 808,315 319,246 462,967 2,346,158
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-October 2024
up to under 2 1 239 326   524 974   71 242   15 025   313 468   125 239   92 129   622 224 
2 to under 4  819 917   350 699   68 480   17 136   193 066   72 017   82 916   386 302 
4 to under 6  626 563   220 083   42 723   8 765   128 932   39 663   73 047   333 433 
6 to under 8  404 459   131 379   23 193   3 934   75 132   29 120   47 590   225 490 
8 to under 10  340 107   91 279   20 034   7 591   46 058   17 596   25 943   222 885 
10 to under 15  241 883   55 457   8 075   3 354   35 094   8 933   27 858   158 568 
15 to under 20  128 582   11 402   1 288    81   7 676   2 357   16 822   100 357 
20 and above  427 708   34 146    809    128   8 890   24 320   96 662   296 899 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,673 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,775 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,872 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,635 1,963,588
2021 186,580 4,152 9,561 672 35 – 326 – 212 – 5,578 2,301,942
2022 199,789 12,272 14,950 224 371 – 29 – 293 – 2,952 1,858,963
2023 182,246 – 15,984 3,377 3 50 – 564 – 2,515 – 16,335 2,051,675
2023 Nov. 198,456 – 67 62 0 0 0 0 – 129 2,002,568
Dec. 182,246 – 16,210 677 0 0 0 – 2,366 – 14,521 2,051,675
2024 Jan. 182,103 – 144 42 0 0 – 0 – 115 – 71 2,061,708
Feb. 181,987 – 117 48 0 0 – 2 – 25 – 138 2,126,888
Mar. 182,100 113 344 0 0 – 7 – 5 – 218 2,213,065
Apr. 181,805 – 295 126 0 0 – 4 – 4 – 414 2,159,884
May 181,553 – 322 187 – – –– 328 – 180 2,159,986
June 181,236 – 317 31 8 0 – 9 – 73 – 274 2,135,158
July 181,104 – 143 117 20 0 – 5 – 11 – 263 2,131,696
Aug. 181,117 7 316 0 0 – 76 – 55 – 177 2,162,378
Sep. 181,288 128 444 0 0 – 33 – 38 – 245 2,221,347
Oct. 181,470 179 565 – –– 5 – 3 – 377 2,175,920
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields on German securities
Issue yields Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1
Public debt securities Public debt securities Bank debt securities
Listed Federal securities
Total Totalof which:
Listed Federal
debt securitiesBank debt 
securities Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  2 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)
Period % per annum
2012 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7
2013 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4
2014 1.2 1.1 0.9 1.3 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0
2015 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4
2016 0.4 0.1 – 0.1 0.6 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1
2017 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.6 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7
2018 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5
2019 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.3 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5
2020 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.5 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7
2021 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9
2022 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.9 1.5 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.9 1.9 3.3
2023 2.9 2.6 2.5 3.4 2.9 2.6 2.5 2.4 3.3 3.2 4.2
2023 Nov. 3.01 2.61 2.61 3.53 3.02 2.75 2.64 2.60 3.40 3.37 4.23
Dec. 3.01 2.44 2.44 3.67 2.52 2.26 2.15 2.10 2.91 2.92 3.63
2024 Jan. 2.81 2.44 2.44 2.87 2.57 2.32 2.22 2.17 2.94 2.97 3.67
Feb. 2.71 2.47 2.47 3.05 2.72 2.48 2.39 2.33 3.09 3.10 3.74
Mar. 2.94 2.56 2.56 3.10 2.73 2.49 2.41 2.35 3.07 3.02 3.73
Apr. 3.05 2.61 2.61 3.12 2.81 2.58 2.50 2.45 3.15 3.14 3.74
May 3.08 2.70 2.70 3.18 2.88 2.66 2.58 2.52 3.19 3.20 3.84
June 2.92 2.64 2.64 3.31 2.86 2.63 2.55 2.48 3.17 3.26 3.87
July 2.88 2.55 2.55 3.08 2.80 2.58 2.50 2.46 3.09 3.24 3.74
Aug. 2.44 2.31 2.31 2.69 2.53 2.31 2.23 2.21 2.81 3.04 3.58
Sep. 2.75 2.24 2.24 2.88 2.46 2.25 2.17 2.17 2.71 2.98 3.53
Oct. 2.81 2.42 2.42 2.74 2.48 2.29 2.21 2.23 2.71 2.97 3.49
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 Only debt securities eligible as underlying
instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 137,294 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 39,583 141,134 819 –1,745 140,315 41,328 –3,841
2015 189,802 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 43,665 181,932 7,362 494 174,570 43,171 7,870
2016 149,288 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 29,919 156,236 2,877 –3,172 153,359 33,091 –6,948
2017 148,214 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 53,292 150,740 4,938 1,048 145,802 52,244 –2,526
2018 108,293 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 4,599 114,973 2,979 –2,306 111,994 6,905 –6,680
2019 171,666 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 49,120 176,210 2,719 – 812 173,491 49,932 –4,544
2020 157,349 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 41,321 156,421 336 –1,656 156,085 42,977 928
2021 280,746 157,861 41,016 482 31,023 7,841 116,845 122,885 289,169 13,154 254 276,015 122,631 –8,423
2022 108,741 79,022 6,057 482 444 5,071 72,991 29,718 111,948 3,170 –1,459 108,778 31,177 –3,207
2023 71,202 44,484 5,969 460 4,951 723 38,461 26,718 73,186 –4,778 –2,054 77,964 28,772 –1,984
2023 Nov. 1,213 –3,273 592 93 807 – 276 –3,865 4,486 2,315 95 – 288 2,220 4,774 –1,102
Dec. 11,422 10,971 –1,536 156 –1,448 – 182 12,506 451 10,660 – 11 13 10,671 438 762
2024 Jan. 23,814 10,382 – 457 141 – 406 – 19 10,839 13,431 24,111 1,999 196 22,112 13,235 – 298
Feb. 1,751 –1,458 –1,095 23 – 688 – 430 – 363 3,209 2,272 60 162 2,212 3,047 – 521
Mar. 2,573 –2,329 –1,070 188 – 610 – 455 –1,259 4,902 2,221 358 – 426 1,863 5,328 352
Apr. 15,151 10,159 742 220 1,063 – 481 9,417 4,992 14,331 442 226 13,889 4,766 821
May 8,797 378 210 137 479 – 463 172 8,419 9,214 233 – 46 8,981 8,465 – 416
June 10,169 1,653 461 161 493 – 241 1,190 8,516 9,640 74 – 31 9,566 8,547 529
July 11,733 1,969 225 285 566 – 729 1,744 9,764 11,137 149 47 10,988 9,717 596
Aug. 8,994 – 767 723 407 804 – 725 –1,491 9,761 8,374 235 – 289 8,139 10,050 620
Sep. 6,913 113 321 260 476 – 477 – 208 6,800 8,032 669 380 7,363 6,420 –1,119
Oct. 19,671 5,565 559 56 1,129 – 688 5,006 14,107 20,625 634 199 19,991 13,908 – 953
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 45.36 67.77 0.86 –22.94 –12.62 24.29 12.13 –15.53 –9.29
   Debt securities 2.81 4.10 6.70 4.49 1.79 1.67 –1.25 5.82 1.09
     Short-term debt securities 2.29 1.23 1.62 2.00 1.06 –0.15 –1.29 2.52 1.63
     Long-term debt securities 0.52 2.87 5.08 2.49 0.73 1.82 0.04 3.30 –0.54
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.31 3.40 6.68 3.81 2.76 0.42 –0.32 3.03 1.13
         Non-financial corporations 0.72 0.86 –0.03 0.76 –0.34 –0.48 0.03 0.66 0.09
         Financial corporations 1.08 1.79 3.19 1.43 1.43 0.28 0.06 0.92 1.40
         General government –0.48 0.74 3.51 1.63 1.66 0.62 –0.40 1.45 –0.35
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.50 0.70 0.02 0.68 –0.98 1.25 –0.93 2.79 –0.05
   Loans 113.65 169.40 178.80 67.51 25.52 30.56 55.22 40.31 16.04
     Short-term loans 115.80 161.85 124.42 58.16 19.25 28.42 18.59 32.37 15.80
     Long-term loans –2.15 7.55 54.38 9.35 6.27 2.13 36.63 7.93 0.24
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 56.25 150.35 175.37 72.89 25.83 29.11 47.55 32.87 14.68
         Non-financial corporations 53.25 146.67 131.62 66.75 21.46 24.94 18.47 25.48 12.14
         Financial corporations 3.37 1.48 12.59 7.50 2.44 3.21 –0.57 9.37 2.32
         General government –0.37 2.21 31.16 –1.37 1.93 0.95 29.65 –1.98 0.21
       Loans to the rest of the world 57.40 19.05 3.43 –5.38 –0.31 1.45 7.67 7.44 1.36
   Equity and investment fund shares 165.60 181.57 109.64 16.08 34.86 27.18 31.53 46.15 46.67
     Equity 143.63 181.52 106.18 15.36 32.53 25.85 32.44 40.36 43.81
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 15.33 44.06 –14.32 –10.51 –0.27 4.72 –8.26 3.45 2.54
         Non-financial corporations 16.89 43.79 –13.91 –10.45 –0.32 5.06 –8.21 2.43 2.56
         Financial corporations –1.56 0.27 –0.41 –0.07 0.05 –0.34 –0.05 1.02 –0.02
       Listed shares of the rest of the world –1.29 0.61 –38.92 –21.25 –3.31 –12.85 –1.50 0.28 –1.95
       Other equity  1 129.59 136.85 159.42 47.12 36.10 33.98 42.21 36.63 43.21
     Investment fund shares 21.98 0.05 3.46 0.72 2.33 1.33 –0.92 5.79 2.87
       Money market fund shares 0.66 –0.38 –0.58 –0.80 –0.41 0.59 0.04 –0.53 0.67
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 21.32 0.43 4.04 1.52 2.74 0.74 –0.95 6.32 2.20
   Insurance technical reserves 10.24 3.29 10.17 7.96 0.28 –0.26 2.19 3.91 –3.96
   Financial derivatives 15.40 28.97 –3.35 3.93 0.67 12.97 –20.92 3.35 6.58
   Other accounts receivable 59.40 58.56 1.00 59.70 –8.61 –67.91 17.83 60.18 –84.79
   Total 412.46 513.66 303.83 136.72 41.90 28.49 96.72 144.18 –27.66
 External financing
   Debt securities 20.86 14.16 0.35 1.38 2.44 1.57 –5.04 6.82 7.07
     Short-term securities 2.51 –0.36 –4.68 –0.16 –0.70 –0.84 –2.99 1.01 2.49
       Long-term securities 18.35 14.52 5.03 1.54 3.14 2.41 –2.05 5.80 4.58
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 9.25 5.80 0.66 1.64 0.51 0.56 –2.05 2.10 1.16
           Non-financial corporations 0.72 0.86 –0.03 0.76 –0.34 –0.48 0.03 0.66 0.09
           Financial corporations 9.22 4.41 –2.83 0.31 –0.27 –0.08 –2.78 1.08 0.41
           General government 0.09 –0.07 –0.11 0.00 –0.07 –0.04 –0.00 0.01 0.00
           Households –0.79 0.60 3.62 0.57 1.18 1.16 0.71 0.36 0.67
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 11.62 8.36 –0.31 –0.26 1.93 1.01 –2.99 4.71 5.91
   Loans 185.96 299.12 143.22 49.50 39.72 16.94 37.06 32.52 26.30
     Short-term loans 146.40 211.09 82.78 42.13 24.08 14.91 1.66 25.91 27.71
     Long-term loans 39.56 88.03 60.44 7.37 15.64 2.03 35.40 6.61 –1.41
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 123.81 277.83 177.43 84.12 34.99 22.43 35.89 39.47 16.50
         Non-financial corporations 53.25 146.67 131.62 66.75 21.46 24.94 18.47 25.48 12.14
         Financial corporations 56.13 109.88 65.16 24.72 17.76 2.57 20.12 20.26 7.52
         General government 14.43 21.29 –19.35 –7.35 –4.22 –5.08 –2.69 –6.27 –3.16
       Loans from the rest of the world 62.15 21.28 –34.21 –34.61 4.72 –5.49 1.17 –6.95 9.80
   Equity 129.01 46.72 18.61 –4.67 10.53 12.18 0.56 13.31 13.27
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 26.48 57.05 –27.67 –13.76 –5.07 1.80 –10.64 –2.29 –5.16
       Non-financial corporations 16.89 43.79 –13.91 –10.45 –0.32 5.06 –8.21 2.43 2.56
       Financial corporations –2.35 2.21 –8.32 –0.69 –4.55 –1.88 –1.20 –2.07 –4.51
       General government –0.09 0.76 –1.12 –0.88 –0.21 –0.04 0.01 –2.12 –2.90
       Households 12.04 10.29 –4.32 –1.75 0.01 –1.33 –1.24 –0.53 –0.32
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 18.84 –9.52 13.66 2.00 7.37 1.84 2.45 5.27 8.87
     Other equity  1 83.68 –0.82 32.62 7.09 8.23 8.54 8.75 10.33 9.56
   Insurance technical reserves 5.54 9.14 5.26 1.32 1.31 1.31 1.33 1.33 1.31
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 14.32 –14.10 8.37 1.58 2.08 1.81 2.91 –0.39 1.19
   Other accounts payable 148.19 175.92 34.07 20.00 6.69 –0.63 8.00 –2.72 –2.47
   Total 503.88 530.96 209.87 69.11 62.77 33.18 44.82 50.86 46.66
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 786.9 852.5 849.9 829.6 814.4 838.6 849.9 834.5 825.0
   Debt securities 54.3 53.8 62.1 58.9 60.5 62.1 62.1 68.2 69.7
     Short-term debt securities 7.1 8.4 9.8 10.4 11.2 11.1 9.8 12.7 14.5
     Long-term debt securities 47.2 45.5 52.3 48.5 49.3 51.1 52.3 55.5 55.3
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 23.3 24.7 32.2 28.7 31.4 31.9 32.2 35.4 36.8
         Non-financial corporations 5.3 5.8 5.8 6.5 6.2 5.7 5.8 6.6 6.6
         Financial corporations 14.5 15.0 18.8 16.6 18.0 18.3 18.8 19.9 21.5
         General government 3.5 3.9 7.6 5.6 7.2 7.8 7.6 9.0 8.7
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 31.0 29.2 29.9 30.2 29.1 30.3 29.9 32.8 32.9
   Loans 1,529.5 1,702.6 1,879.3 1,768.9 1,793.7 1,825.6 1,879.3 1,920.9 1,952.5
     Short-term loans 1,279.9 1,444.1 1,566.9 1,501.2 1,519.8 1,549.1 1,566.9 1,599.7 1,631.4
     Long-term loans 249.5 258.5 312.5 267.6 274.0 276.5 312.5 321.2 321.1
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 1,166.3 1,316.7 1,492.0 1,389.6 1,415.4 1,444.5 1,492.0 1,524.9 1,539.6
         Non-financial corporations 1,060.1 1,206.7 1,338.3 1,273.5 1,294.9 1,319.9 1,338.3 1,363.8 1,376.0
         Financial corporations 83.4 84.9 97.5 92.4 94.8 98.0 97.5 106.8 109.1
         General government 22.9 25.1 56.2 23.7 25.6 26.6 56.2 54.3 54.5
       Loans to the rest of the world 363.2 385.9 387.3 379.3 378.3 381.1 387.3 396.0 412.9
   Equity and investment fund shares 3,797.8 3,792.1 3,971.0 3,875.3 3,923.8 3,945.2 3,971.0 4,038.4 4,010.8
     Equity 3,557.6 3,579.5 3,735.4 3,656.7 3,698.4 3,719.1 3,735.4 3,789.4 3,756.8
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 393.0 331.8 334.5 361.1 354.8 330.1 334.5 359.7 333.0
         Non-financial corporations 384.9 324.5 326.7 353.9 347.0 322.9 326.7 351.0 324.5
         Financial corporations 8.0 7.4 7.8 7.2 7.8 7.2 7.8 8.6 8.5
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 72.4 64.7 45.9 50.2 49.3 40.0 45.9 48.5 49.3
       Other equity  1 3,092.2 3,182.9 3,355.0 3,245.4 3,294.2 3,349.0 3,355.0 3,381.2 3,374.4
     Investment fund shares 240.2 212.6 235.6 218.6 225.4 226.0 235.6 249.1 254.0
       Money market fund shares 7.6 7.2 6.9 6.5 6.1 6.8 6.9 6.4 7.1
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 232.6 205.4 228.7 212.1 219.3 219.3 228.7 242.7 246.9
   Insurance technical reserves 51.3 39.4 51.2 47.5 48.2 46.7 51.2 55.0 54.6
   Financial derivatives 105.9 92.2 33.4 65.1 56.9 44.7 33.4 35.0 35.2
   Other accounts receivable 1,570.5 1,746.1 1,833.1 1,807.7 1,807.9 1,833.6 1,833.1 1,873.2 1,832.0
   Total 7,896.2 8,278.7 8,679.9 8,452.9 8,505.4 8,596.6 8,679.9 8,825.2 8,779.8
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 252.3 228.7 239.7 231.2 234.8 234.8 239.7 247.0 254.7
     Short-term securities 9.6 9.3 4.5 9.1 8.4 7.5 4.5 5.6 8.7
     Long-term securities 242.7 219.4 235.2 222.1 226.4 227.3 235.2 241.4 246.0
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 100.6 90.9 96.3 93.4 94.1 94.1 96.3 102.3 103.4
         Non-financial corporations 5.3 5.8 5.8 6.5 6.2 5.7 5.8 6.6 6.6
         Financial corporations 83.1 73.4 74.7 74.3 74.3 73.8 74.7 79.3 79.5
         General government 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3
         Households 11.8 11.4 15.5 12.2 13.3 14.4 15.5 16.3 16.9
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 151.8 137.8 143.4 137.8 140.7 140.8 143.4 144.7 151.3
   Loans 3,151.7 3,459.8 3,597.6 3,506.4 3,545.6 3,563.6 3,597.6 3,632.9 3,675.8
     Short-term loans 1,569.7 1,784.4 1,863.0 1,824.6 1,848.4 1,864.7 1,863.0 1,888.2 1,932.2
     Long-term loans 1,582.0 1,675.4 1,734.7 1,681.8 1,697.2 1,698.9 1,734.7 1,744.7 1,743.6
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 2,206.5 2,486.0 2,662.1 2,569.5 2,604.5 2,625.7 2,662.1 2,703.7 2,720.3
         Non-financial corporations 1,060.1 1,206.7 1,338.3 1,273.5 1,294.9 1,319.9 1,338.3 1,363.8 1,376.0
         Financial corporations 1,039.2 1,150.9 1,214.5 1,174.9 1,192.7 1,194.2 1,214.5 1,236.1 1,243.8
         General government 107.2 128.3 109.2 121.2 116.8 111.6 109.2 103.8 100.6
       Loans from the rest of the world 945.1 973.8 935.6 936.9 941.1 938.0 935.6 929.2 955.4
   Equity 5,304.9 4,948.7 5,232.5 5,195.6 5,222.9 5,138.9 5,232.5 5,367.9 5,312.6
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 924.7 761.3 807.7 855.9 821.5 778.6 807.7 851.9 806.2
       Non-financial corporations 384.9 324.5 326.7 353.9 347.0 322.9 326.7 351.0 324.5
       Financial corporations 210.1 151.2 173.3 182.2 165.2 167.9 173.3 175.6 175.9
       General government 69.9 69.2 76.0 78.9 75.3 70.9 76.0 81.0 75.7
       Households 259.7 216.4 231.7 240.9 234.0 216.8 231.7 244.3 230.1
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 1,126.4 823.2 951.0 941.1 976.3 910.3 951.0 1,029.1 1,000.7
     Other equity  1 3,253.8 3,364.2 3,473.8 3,398.6 3,425.2 3,450.0 3,473.8 3,486.8 3,505.7
   Insurance technical reserves 323.8 333.0 338.2 334.3 335.6 336.9 338.2 339.6 340.9
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 137.4 73.2 32.7 45.3 40.6 16.7 32.7 30.4 21.7
   Other accounts payable 1,592.5 1,775.5 1,807.0 1,781.5 1,792.1 1,846.5 1,807.0 1,803.7 1,818.5
   Total 10,762.7 10,818.9 11,247.9 11,094.3 11,171.7 11,137.5 11,247.9 11,421.4 11,424.2
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 145.07 110.37 90.44 –10.65 25.44 13.51 62.13 31.35 48.32
     Currency 59.45 44.19 14.16 2.94 3.37 2.52 5.34 0.80 3.66
     Deposits 85.61 66.18 76.28 –13.59 22.08 11.00 56.80 30.56 44.66
       Transferable deposits 90.84 47.63 –129.98 –60.51 –18.16 –32.67 –18.65 –33.47 8.43
       Time deposits –5.09 34.49 184.51 50.43 43.22 42.53 48.32 60.28 38.57
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –0.13 –15.94 21.75 –3.52 –2.99 1.14 27.12 3.75 –2.34
   Debt securities –5.89 25.03 65.16 29.74 20.44 14.29 0.69 8.80 5.06
     Short-term debt securities 0.31 2.01 11.75 7.99 5.68 2.12 –4.04 –1.00 –1.80
     Long-term debt securities –6.20 23.02 53.40 21.74 14.76 12.17 4.73 9.80 6.86
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –3.70 20.31 53.95 25.57 16.76 11.99 –0.36 6.58 1.20
         Non-financial corporations –0.83 0.50 3.41 0.52 1.11 1.09 0.68 0.32 0.62
         Financial corporations –2.57 17.47 42.65 21.52 12.75 9.33 –0.94 6.31 0.66
         General government –0.30 2.35 7.88 3.52 2.90 1.57 –0.10 –0.04 –0.08
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –2.19 4.72 11.21 4.17 3.69 2.30 1.05 2.22 3.87
   Equity and investment fund shares 164.40 94.44 56.22 13.78 13.36 17.33 11.74 20.47 21.14
     Equity 59.04 43.25 20.15 1.84 3.79 9.43 5.09 6.79 4.63
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 14.29 12.38 –4.63 –0.91 0.02 –1.43 –2.31 –1.15 –0.70
         Non-financial corporations 12.71 9.96 –3.59 –2.03 0.10 –0.41 –1.25 –0.52 –0.29
         Financial corporations 1.58 2.42 –1.04 1.12 –0.08 –1.02 –1.07 –0.63 –0.41
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 10.83 8.55 2.89 0.44 –0.21 1.73 0.92 2.08 2.39
       Other equity  1 33.92 22.32 21.90 2.31 3.98 9.12 6.48 5.86 2.94
     Investment fund shares 105.35 51.19 36.07 11.94 9.57 7.91 6.65 13.69 16.51
       Money market fund shares 0.19 0.82 4.39 0.43 1.47 1.67 0.82 1.48 2.02
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 105.17 50.37 31.68 11.50 8.10 6.24 5.83 12.21 14.49
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 0.57 –0.41 1.13 5.34 –0.94 –1.05 –2.22 10.32 –3.77
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 22.42 10.86 –13.38 0.37 0.07 –2.63 –11.19 4.65 4.52
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 33.25 34.68 25.45 2.36 5.96 2.53 14.60 3.90 0.05
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 8.82 4.60 32.34 28.77 –2.94 15.75 –9.24 7.70 –8.19
   Total 368.64 279.56 257.35 69.70 61.40 59.73 66.52 87.20 67.14
 External financing
   Loans 97.89 83.22 14.36 2.45 5.49 6.52 –0.09 –0.80 2.51
     Short-term loans 0.86 2.59 –0.90 0.74 –0.28 –0.50 –0.86 –0.80 –1.18
     Long-term loans 97.03 80.63 15.26 1.71 5.77 7.01 0.77 0.00 3.68
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 99.61 79.24 18.81 2.69 5.72 6.64 3.77 0.73 4.89
       Consumer loans –0.89 4.60 1.44 0.54 1.26 1.66 –2.02 –0.41 –0.77
       Entrepreneurial loans –0.83 –0.61 –5.89 –0.78 –1.49 –1.78 –1.84 –1.13 –1.61
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 94.32 82.56 12.26 1.80 4.69 6.41 –0.64 –0.24 3.58
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 3.58 0.66 2.10 0.64 0.80 0.11 0.55 –0.56 –1.07
       Loans from general government and rest of the world –0.00 –0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.90 3.96 2.63 0.33 –0.35 0.45 2.19 2.91 –1.13
   Total 98.79 87.19 17.00 2.78 5.14 6.97 2.10 2.11 1.38
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 3,007.6 3,120.1 3,219.6 3,108.2 3,133.8 3,149.0 3,219.6 3,252.6 3,301.7
     Currency 387.1 431.4 445.5 434.3 437.7 440.2 445.5 446.3 450.0
     Deposits 2,620.5 2,688.7 2,774.1 2,674.0 2,696.1 2,708.8 2,774.1 2,806.3 2,851.7
       Transferable deposits 1,764.4 1,811.7 1,686.3 1,756.0 1,737.7 1,705.0 1,686.3 1,652.9 1,661.2
       Time deposits 297.3 334.8 528.7 384.2 427.6 471.9 528.7 590.6 630.1
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 558.8 542.3 559.1 533.8 530.8 531.9 559.1 562.8 560.5
     Debt securities 109.6 125.0 198.2 157.1 177.7 192.5 198.2 209.2 217.3
       Short-term debt securities 1.8 3.9 12.5 11.9 15.9 16.4 12.5 18.5 17.1
       Long-term debt securities 107.8 121.1 185.7 145.2 161.8 176.1 185.7 190.7 200.1
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 75.3 88.4 147.8 116.1 133.0 144.6 147.8 154.6 157.9
           Non-financial corporations 9.8 9.7 13.5 10.4 11.4 12.4 13.5 14.1 14.7
           Financial corporations 63.2 74.5 122.0 98.0 110.9 120.0 122.0 128.2 130.9
           General government 2.2 4.2 12.3 7.8 10.7 12.2 12.3 12.3 12.2
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 34.3 36.6 50.4 41.0 44.7 47.9 50.4 54.6 59.4
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,478.7 2,330.4 2,581.6 2,435.6 2,488.6 2,479.2 2,581.6 2,715.4 2,755.7
     Equity 1,546.0 1,474.4 1,618.9 1,542.4 1,566.7 1,564.0 1,618.9 1,678.2 1,691.2
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 296.0 255.9 279.2 282.1 277.0 262.5 279.2 299.5 283.9
         Non-financial corporations 250.4 208.7 223.9 232.3 225.6 209.5 223.9 236.4 222.3
         Financial corporations 45.6 47.2 55.3 49.9 51.3 53.0 55.3 63.1 61.6
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 249.2 209.3 247.9 227.3 239.5 235.7 247.9 270.2 282.9
       Other equity  1 1,000.8 1,009.2 1,091.8 1,033.0 1,050.3 1,065.8 1,091.8 1,108.5 1,124.4
     Investment fund shares 932.7 856.0 962.6 893.1 921.9 915.2 962.6 1,037.2 1,064.6
       Money market fund shares 2.5 3.3 7.8 3.7 5.2 7.0 7.8 9.3 11.4
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 930.2 852.7 954.8 889.4 916.7 908.2 954.8 1,027.9 1,053.2
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 46.4 40.7 43.0 46.4 45.4 44.2 43.0 52.8 52.1
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,379.5 1,104.5 1,151.4 1,124.0 1,125.6 1,088.9 1,151.4 1,168.7 1,204.1
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 1,196.7 1,178.4 1,234.5 1,188.8 1,200.6 1,201.5 1,234.5 1,241.8 1,249.7
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 27.5 26.5 35.6 26.9 27.6 26.9 35.6 37.8 34.2
   Total 8,246.0 7,925.5 8,463.9 8,087.0 8,199.3 8,182.3 8,463.9 8,678.3 8,814.7
 Liabilities
   Loans 2,013.7 2,100.8 2,117.5 2,103.3 2,108.6 2,115.6 2,117.5 2,116.4 2,117.6
     Short-term loans 53.0 55.5 55.1 56.6 56.4 55.9 55.1 54.4 53.2
     Long-term loans 1,960.7 2,045.2 2,062.4 2,046.7 2,052.2 2,059.8 2,062.4 2,062.0 2,064.4
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,538.7 1,621.3 1,643.3 1,625.0 1,630.5 1,637.7 1,643.3 1,643.7 1,647.6
       Consumer loans 224.5 228.9 230.0 229.7 230.8 232.1 230.0 229.6 228.5
       Entrepreneurial loans 250.5 250.6 244.2 248.6 247.3 245.9 244.2 243.2 241.5
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,920.3 2,004.0 2,016.3 2,005.8 2,010.5 2,016.9 2,016.3 2,016.2 2,019.4
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 93.4 96.7 101.3 97.5 98.1 98.8 101.3 100.2 98.3
       Loans from general government and rest of the world – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 18.8 23.0 26.2 23.5 23.3 23.9 26.2 29.1 28.0
   Total 2,032.6 2,123.8 2,143.7 2,126.8 2,131.8 2,139.5 2,143.7 2,145.5 2,145.6
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
58•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
General
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
fundsGeneral
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus 1
2018 +64.7 +22.4 +10.7 +15.8 +15.7 +1.9 +0.7 +0.3 +0.5 +0.5
2019 +47.0 +18.2 +12.9 +7.0 +8.9 +1.3 +0.5 +0.4 +0.2 +0.3
2020 –151.1 –91.3 –31.3 +6.3 –34.9 –4.4 –2.6 –0.9 +0.2 –1.0
p 2021 –116.4 –132.0 +6.8 +6.3 +2.4 –3.2 –3.6 +0.2 +0.2 +0.1
p 2022 –84.9 –115.2 +16.8 +4.8 +8.8 –2.1 –2.9 +0.4 +0.1 +0.2
p 2023 –107.5 –94.8 –10.1 –11.7 +9.0 –2.6 –2.3 –0.2 –0.3 +0.2
p 2022 H1 + 0.3 –31.6 +19.5 +5.9 +6.5 +0.0 –1.6 +1.0 +0.3 +0.3
pH2 –85.2 –83.6 –2.7 –1.1 +2.3 –4.2 –4.1 –0.1 –0.1 +0.1
p 2023 H1 –39.3 –42.5 –4.0 –2.5 +9.6 –1.9 –2.1 –0.2 –0.1 +0.5
pH2 –68.2 –52.3 –6.2 –9.2 –0.6 –3.2 –2.5 –0.3 –0.4 –0.0
pe 2024 H1 –44.4 –26.1 –10.1 –8.0 –0.1 –2.1 –1.2 –0.5 –0.4 –0.0
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2018 2,086.4 1,337.2 603.4 162.4 0.7 60.8 39.0 17.6 4.7 0.0
2019 2,075.0 1,315.6 615.0 161.1 0.9 58.7 37.2 17.4 4.6 0.0
2020 2,347.0 1,530.4 667.0 163.0 7.6 68.0 44.4 19.3 4.7 0.2
p 2021 2,502.8 1,683.4 668.2 165.4 0.9 68.1 45.8 18.2 4.5 0.0
p 2022 2,569.9 1,780.2 638.2 172.1 3.1 65.0 45.0 16.1 4.4 0.1
p 2023 2,631.8 1,856.6 622.4 180.5 3.3 62.9 44.4 14.9 4.3 0.1
p 2022 Q1 2,504.9 1,688.3 665.7 164.2 3.6 66.7 45.0 17.7 4.4 0.1
pQ2 2,542.8 1,727.6 661.9 166.3 3.9 66.5 45.1 17.3 4.3 0.1
pQ3 2,556.4 1,761.3 645.0 166.2 4.4 65.7 45.3 16.6 4.3 0.1
pQ4 2,569.9 1,780.2 638.2 172.1 3.1 65.0 45.0 16.1 4.4 0.1
p 2023 Q1 2,597.4 1,803.8 636.2 173.6 3.9 64.5 44.8 15.8 4.3 0.1
pQ2 2,595.6 1,811.6 627.5 173.1 3.1 63.6 44.4 15.4 4.2 0.1
pQ3 2,637.7 1,855.0 625.4 175.7 4.1 63.8 44.9 15.1 4.2 0.1
pQ4 2,631.8 1,856.6 622.4 180.5 3.3 62.9 44.4 14.9 4.3 0.1
p 2024 Q1 2,639.4 1,859.7 630.0 181.2 3.2 62.6 44.1 14.9 4.3 0.1
pQ2 2,635.1 1,851.6 630.7 183.4 3.6 61.9 43.5 14.8 4.3 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The deficit/surplus in
accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition.  2 Quarterly GDP
ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters.
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts *
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total TaxesSocial con-
tributions Other TotalSocial
benefitsCompen-
sation of
employeesInter-
mediate
consumptionGross
capital
formation Interest OtherDeficit/
surplusMemo item:
Total tax
burden  1
€ billion
2018 1,598.0 832.9 572.6 192.5 1,533.3 803.9 270.7 188.2 89.8 31.8 149.0 +64.7 1,412.5
2019 1,657.6 859.3 598.2 200.1 1,610.6 844.6 285.1 199.5 96.1 28.1 157.3 +47.0 1,464.6
2020 1,612.7 808.9 608.1 195.7 1,763.8 900.3 296.7 226.9 105.7 22.4 211.7 –151.1 1,424.0
p 2021 1,747.9 907.4 632.2 208.3 1,864.3 937.2 307.2 243.7 106.2 21.7 248.3 –116.4 1,547.4
p 2022 1,852.6 970.0 667.1 215.5 1,937.5 968.5 320.7 252.2 112.2 27.9 256.0 –84.9 1,647.2
p 2023 1,917.4 966.9 709.9 240.7 2,025.0 1,019.1 337.6 264.0 117.1 36.6 250.7 –107.5 1,685.0
As a percentage of GDP
2018 46.6 24.3 16.7 5.6 44.7 23.4 7.9 5.5 2.6 0.9 4.3 +1.9 41.2
2019 46.9 24.3 16.9 5.7 45.6 23.9 8.1 5.6 2.7 0.8 4.4 +1.3 41.4
2020 46.7 23.4 17.6 5.7 51.1 26.1 8.6 6.6 3.1 0.6 6.1 –4.4 41.3
p 2021 47.5 24.7 17.2 5.7 50.7 25.5 8.4 6.6 2.9 0.6 6.8 –3.2 42.1
p 2022 46.9 24.5 16.9 5.4 49.0 24.5 8.1 6.4 2.8 0.7 6.5 –2.1 41.7
p 2023 45.8 23.1 17.0 5.8 48.4 24.3 8.1 6.3 2.8 0.9 6.0 –2.6 40.3
Percentage growth rates
2018 +4.5 +4.2 +4.2 +6.8 +3.3 +2.6 +4.0 +3.9 +10.0 –7.8 +3.6 . +4.2
2019 +3.7 +3.2 +4.5 +3.9 +5.0 +5.1 +5.3 +6.0 +7.1 –11.8 +5.6 . +3.7
2020 –2.7 –5.9 +1.6 –2.2 +9.5 +6.6 +4.1 +13.7 +9.9 –20.2 +34.6 . –2.8
p 2021 +8.4 +12.2 +4.0 +6.5 +5.7 +4.1 +3.5 +7.4 +0.5 –2.9 +17.3 . +8.7
p 2022 +6.0 +6.9 +5.5 +3.4 +3.9 +3.3 +4.4 +3.5 +5.7 +28.2 +3.1 . +6.5
p 2023 +3.5 –0.3 +6.4 +11.7 +4.5 +5.2 +5.3 +4.7 +4.4 +31.2 –2.1 . +2.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office.  * Figures in accordance with ESA 2010.  1 Taxes and
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution Fund.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
59•
X. Public finances in Germany
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3
Period Total  4 TaxesFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5 Total  4Person-
nel
expend-
itureCurrent
grants InterestFixed
asset
forma-
tionFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5Deficit/
surplusRev-
enue  6Expend-
itureDeficit/
surplusRev-
enueExpend-
itureDeficit/
surplus
2017 897.6 734.5 7.7 867.8 261.5 327.2 41.9 51.7 13.8 +29.8 631.5 622.0 +9.5 1,414.9 1,375.6 +39.3
2018 949.2 776.3 6.0 904.0 272.4 337.3 39.1 55.1 16.1 +45.2 656.2 642.5 +13.6 1,488.1 1,429.3 +58.8
2019 1,007.7 799.4 11.0 973.9 285.9 348.9 33.5 62.2 16.8 +33.7 685.0 676.7 +8.3 1,571.2 1,529.2 +42.0
2020 944.3 739.9 13.7 1,109.7 299.4 422.0 25.8 68.6 59.9 –165.4 719.5 747.8 –28.3 1,516.2 1,709.9 –193.7
2021 1,105.4 833.3 25.3 1,239.9 310.7 530.8 21.0 69.3 26.1 –134.5 769.2 777.1 –7.9 1,701.6 1,844.0 –142.4
2022 1,145.2 895.9 32.4 1,287.0 325.7 499.6 33.5 72.5 79.3 –141.8 800.5 793.3 +7.2 1,772.9 1,907.5 –134.6
P 2023 1,224.6 915.9 36.4 1,320.3 349.7 479.8 64.4 83.5 31.9 –95.7 820.3 814.5 +5.9 1,904.7 1,994.5 –89.8
2022 Q1 278.2 224.0 5.0 279.3 79.6 116.8 5.5 11.9 7.0 – 1.0 P193.8 P199.8 P–6.0 P430.7 P437.8 P–7.1
Q2 287.9 224.6 5.1 294.2 77.8 126.4 10.6 15.3 5.9 – 6.2 P199.9 P196.7 P+3.2 P444.2 P447.2 P–3.1
Q3 267.7 207.0 13.3 298.8 78.1 116.8 10.8 17.7 10.8 –31.0 P194.0 P197.6 P–3.6 P419.2 P453.8 P–34.6
Q4 318.5 244.5 9.0 413.5 89.7 138.5 6.5 27.5 55.6 –95.0 P210.5 P198.1 P+12.4 P486.0 P568.5 P–82.5
2023 Q1 281.9 215.4 9.3 331.8 81.3 130.7 20.1 13.6 17.8 –49.9 P195.4 P200.8 P–5.4 P441.7 P497.0 P–55.3
Q2 311.6 226.3 9.4 313.1 84.7 117.7 24.2 17.8 2.2 – 1.6 P199.3 P198.9 P+0.4 P476.2 P477.3 P–1.1
Q3 290.5 229.6 7.2 303.1 86.5 103.2 12.6 21.0 4.5 –12.6 P201.5 P205.0 P–3.6 P457.1 P473.3 P–16.1
Q4 347.5 244.6 10.6 375.3 96.7 126.3 11.5 30.9 7.4 –27.7 P218.4 P208.7 P+9.7 P530.8 P548.9 P–18.1
2024 Q1 290.7 225.5 7.9 310.8 92.3 113.9 16.8 17.6 3.7 –20.1 P204.0 P212.1 P–8.1 P460.0 P488.2 P–28.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data.  1 Annual fig-
ures based on the quarterly figures of the Federal Statistical Office, core budgets and
off-budget entities which are assigned to the general government sector.  2 The annual
figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all pro-
visional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated.  3 The develop-
ment of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statisticalchangeovers.  4 Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state
and local government.  5 On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as dis-
posals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted.  6 Excluding central govern-
ment liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency.
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2017 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 396.7 385.5 +11.3 258.5 247.7 +10.7
2018 374.4 363.5 +10.9 419.6 399.8 +19.9 270.0 260.1 + 9.8
2019 382.5 369.2 +13.3 436.3 419.3 +17.0 282.4 276.7 + 5.7
2020 341.4 472.1 –130.7 455.5 489.0 –33.6 295.2 293.2 + 2.0
2021 370.3 511.9 –141.6 509.3 508.7 + 0.5 308.0 303.4 + 4.6
2022 399.6 515.6 –116.0 534.8 522.5 +12.3 328.5 325.8 + 2.7
2023 425.3 490.2 –64.9 530.9 531.7 – 0.8 358.2 365.0 – 6.8
2022 Q1 94.7 114.0 –19.3 134.6 122.7 +11.9 68.4 73.8 – 5.4
Q2 99.7 123.5 –23.7 133.2 123.6 + 9.6 81.0 77.3 + 3.7
Q3 89.0 127.8 –38.7 126.1 121.4 + 4.7 81.1 80.3 + 0.8
Q4 116.1 150.4 –34.2 139.6 153.4 –13.8 98.0 94.5 + 3.5
2023 Q1 96.2 116.9 –20.7 121.0 122.3 – 1.3 73.3 81.0 – 7.7
Q2 101.8 119.6 –17.7 138.5 133.6 + 4.9 87.0 86.6 + 0.4
Q3 106.1 115.9 – 9.8 123.1 120.0 + 3.2 87.4 91.5 – 4.1
Q4 121.2 137.8 –16.6 146.9 154.4 – 7.5 110.4 105.8 + 4.6
2024 Q1 102.8 111.6 – 8.7 129.2 133.9 – 4.7 76.7 90.6 –13.9
Q2 109.9 115.1 – 5.2 134.4 133.1 + 1.3 91.7 95.0 – 3.4
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office data and Bundesbank
calculations.  1 Any amounts of the Bundesbank's profit distribution exceeding the
reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government'sspecial funds are not included here.  2 Including the local authority level of the city
states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg.  3 Data of core budgets and off-budget entities
which are assigned to the general government sector.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
60•
X. Public finances in Germany
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Period Total TotalCentral
government  1State
government  1 European Union  2Local
government  3Balance of
untransferred
tax shares  4Memo item:
Amounts deducted
in the Federal
budget  5
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 – 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,911 632,268 313,381 286,065 32,822 107,916 – 274 30,266
2021 833,337 706,978 342,988 325,768 38,222 125,000 + 1,359 29,321
2022 895,854 760,321 372,121 349,583 38,617 134,146 + 1,387 34,911
2023 915,893 774,112 389,114 349,554 35,444 143,663 – 1,882 33,073
2022 Q1 224,006 189,158 92,112 87,240 9,806 24,772 + 10,077 7,261
Q2 224,538 190,982 94,153 86,852 9,977 34,149 – 594 11,576
Q3 205,544 174,232 84,078 80,020 10,133 33,618 – 2,306 7,953
Q4 241,767 205,950 101,778 95,471 8,702 41,607 – 5,790 8,121
2023 Q1 220,950 186,173 93,366 83,536 9,271 26,505 + 8,271 7,665
Q2 221,225 186,597 94,492 82,961 9,144 35,152 – 525 8,959
Q3 230,151 195,334 98,626 87,824 8,884 34,958 – 141 8,678
Q4 243,568 206,008 102,631 95,233 8,145 47,048 – 9,488 7,770
2024 Q1 225,304 188,806 96,283 85,277 7,246 25,910 + 10,588 7,999
Q2 232,175 196,883 100,461 88,881 7,541 35,742 – 450 8,306
Q3 ... 197,514 100,548 89,000 7,965 ... ... 9,337
2023 Oct. . 52,724 26,053 23,611 3,061 . . 2,590
2024 Oct. . 56,964 28,553 25,723 2,688 . . 2,482
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers,
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern-
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these amounts
which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget.  2 Customs duties andshares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government
tax revenue.  3 Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin, Bremen and
Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms.  4 Difference between local
government's share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in
the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local govern-
ment in the same period.  5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1.
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
€ million
Joint taxes
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7
Period Total  1 TotalWage
tax 3Assessed
income
tax 4Corpora-
tion tax  5Invest-
ment
income
tax 6 TotalDomestic
VATImport
VATLocal
business
tax
trans-
fers  8Central
govern-
ment
taxes  9State
govern-
ment
taxes  9EU
customs
dutiesMemo
item:
Local
govern-
ment
share in
joint
taxes
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,376 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,734 50,107
2021 760,953 370,296 218,407 72,342 42,124 37,423 250,800 187,631 63,169 4,951 98,171 31,613 5,122 53,976
2022 814,886 390,111 227,205 77,411 46,334 39,161 284,850 198,201 86,649 6,347 96,652 30,097 6,829 54,565
2023 829,774 399,271 236,227 73,388 44,852 44,803 291,394 212,596 78,798 6,347 101,829 25,199 5,734 55,662
2022 Q1 203,130 96,245 56,206 20,915 11,178 7,946 73,584 54,234 19,350 615 22,252 8,975 1,459 13,972
Q2 204,740 101,822 60,363 17,194 11,246 13,019 67,763 46,755 21,008 1,521 24,441 7,564 1,630 13,758
Q3 185,552 82,392 43,431 17,598 10,724 10,639 71,164 49,323 21,841 1,471 21,657 7,115 1,753 11,320
Q4 221,464 109,652 67,205 21,704 13,186 7,557 72,339 47,889 24,451 2,740 28,302 6,444 1,987 15,514
2023 Q1 199,764 94,453 55,669 19,728 10,700 8,357 73,522 52,197 21,325 370 23,110 6,815 1,494 13,591
Q2 199,993 98,917 59,538 15,467 12,406 11,506 67,260 47,855 19,405 1,499 24,740 6,142 1,435 13,396
Q3 208,722 98,832 56,370 17,010 9,902 15,550 76,093 56,986 19,106 1,583 24,665 6,160 1,389 13,388
Q4 221,295 107,069 64,651 21,184 11,844 9,390 74,519 55,557 18,962 2,895 29,314 6,082 1,417 15,287
2024 Q1 202,975 97,423 57,101 19,102 10,141 11,080 73,613 56,469 17,144 489 23,846 6,478 1,125 14,168
Q2 211,033 105,931 62,650 14,831 10,361 18,089 71,247 52,496 18,751 1,604 24,634 6,257 1,360 14,150
Q3 211,963 99,029 60,055 18,787 8,696 11,492 76,383 58,085 18,298 1,544 26,550 7,041 1,416 14,450
2023 Oct. 56,324 21,173 17,764 1,009 88 2,312 23,790 17,629 6,162 1,260 7,665 1,981 456 3,600
2024 Oct. 60,921 24,242 18,819 1,654 778 2,991 24,416 18,233 6,183 1,342 8,150 2,267 505 3,957
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations.  1 This total, unlike
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of untrans-
ferred tax shares.  2 Respective percentage share of central, state and local government
in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and
non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on interest income and
capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12.  3 After deducting child benefits
and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans.  4 After deducting employeerefunds and research grants.  5 After deducting research grants.  6 Final withholding tax
on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings.  7 The allocation
of revenue to central, state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular
intervals, is regulated in Section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percent-
age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2023: 47.5:49.7:2.8.
The EU share is deducted from central government's share.  8 Respective percentage
share of central and state government for 2023: 41.4:58.6.  9 For the breakdown, see
Table X. 7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
61•
X. Public finances in Germany
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
of which:
PeriodEnergy
taxSoli-
darity
surchargeInsurance
taxTobacco
taxMotor
vehicle
taxElectri-
city taxAlcohol
tax OtherTax on
the acqui-
sition of
land and
buildingsInherit-
ance
taxBetting
and
lottery
tax Other TotalLocal
business
tax 2Real
property
taxes
2017 41,022 17,953 13,269 14,399 8,948 6,944 2,094 – 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,966
2018 40,882 18,927 13,779 14,339 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,203
2019 40,683 19,646 14,136 14,257 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,553 14,651 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2021 37,120 11,028 14,980 14,733 9,546 6,691 2,089 1,984 18,335 9,824 2,333 1,121 77,335 61,251 14,985
2022 33,667 11,978 15,672 14,229 9,499 6,830 2,191 2,585 17,122 9,226 2,569 1,180 87,315 70,382 15,282
2023 36,658 12,239 16,851 14,672 9,514 6,832 2,159 2,904 12,203 9,286 2,477 1,233 92,466 75,265 15,493
2022 Q1 4,452 2,840 7,175 2,372 2,594 1,785 531 503 5,061 2,827 701 385 21,492 17,454 3,577
Q2 9,092 3,518 2,872 3,648 2,433 1,722 505 651 4,406 2,238 661 259 21,318 16,839 4,077
Q3 7,103 2,571 3,059 3,742 2,325 1,598 549 710 4,100 2,138 596 281 21,463 16,792 4,249
Q4 13,020 3,049 2,567 4,467 2,147 1,725 606 722 3,555 2,023 611 254 23,043 19,298 3,380
2023 Q1 4,362 2,888 7,637 2,669 2,632 1,749 530 643 3,362 2,368 666 420 21,555 17,471 3,610
Q2 8,796 3,649 3,091 3,830 2,475 1,669 517 712 2,937 2,323 615 267 22,731 18,117 4,192
Q3 9,477 2,607 3,309 3,879 2,339 1,749 532 773 2,997 2,302 577 284 23,013 18,294 4,271
Q4 14,023 3,095 2,813 4,294 2,068 1,665 580 776 2,907 2,292 620 263 25,168 21,383 3,421
2024 Q1 4,488 3,028 8,255 2,672 2,661 1,540 520 681 2,986 2,388 651 453 22,819 18,587 3,718
Q2 8,717 3,491 3,355 3,905 2,533 1,313 460 859 3,050 2,314 609 285 22,745 17,976 4,312
Q3 9,299 2,872 3,546 3,884 2,373 1,362 503 2,711 3,410 2,751 592 288 ... ... ...
2023 Oct. 3,198 492 837 1,451 699 557 171 260 952 729 216 85 . . .
2024 Oct. 3,171 629 909 1,810 731 450 150 299 1,158 845 179 86 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 For the sum total, see Table X. 6.  2 Including revenue from offshore wind
farms.
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  3
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions  2Payments
from central
government TotalPension
paymentsPensioners'
health
insuranceDeficit/
surplus Total Deposits  4 SecuritiesMemo item:
Administrative
assets
2017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 4,032
2018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 4,008
2019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 + 1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 – 3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 3,901
2021 348,679 245,185 102,772 347,486 296,343 22,734 + 1,192 42,014 40,320 1,241 3,807
2022 363,871 258,269 104,876 360,436 308,168 23,792 + 3,435 46,087 44,181 1,399 3,746
2023 382,540 271,852 108,836 381,073 325,369 25,346 + 1,467 48,869 46,649 1,637 3,697
2022 Q1 86,684 60,599 25,937 86,841 74,568 5,734 – 157 41,784 39,952 1,367 3,783
Q2 90,040 63,978 25,879 87,138 74,644 5,756 + 2,903 44,425 42,441 1,513 3,761
Q3 89,284 62,891 26,218 92,606 79,400 6,127 – 3,322 41,548 39,767 1,315 3,775
Q4 96,931 70,750 25,995 93,444 79,944 6,170 + 3,487 46,082 44,186 1,399 3,767
2023 Q1 91,370 64,171 26,972 92,422 79,330 6,142 – 1,052 45,109 43,030 1,569 3,724
Q2 94,735 67,459 26,942 92,585 79,177 6,165 + 2,151 47,245 45,043 1,693 3,705
Q3 93,776 66,300 26,950 97,619 83,549 6,513 – 3,843 44,354 42,208 1,632 3,703
Q4 101,578 73,852 27,041 97,967 83,678 6,520 + 3,611 48,825 46,660 1,637 3,697
2024 Q1 96,340 67,378 28,344 97,801 83,894 6,560 – 1,461 46,926 44,166 2,179 3,758
Q2 99,956 71,411 27,848 98,246 83,818 6,604 + 1,710 48,873 46,253 2,024 3,748
Q3 98,881 70,041 28,091 103,565 88,506 7,058 – 4,684 44,821 42,036 2,179 3,744
Sources: German pension insurance scheme and Bundesbank calculations.  * Excluding
the German pension insurance scheme for mining, railway and maritime industries. The
final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as
the latter are not revised.  1 Including financial compensation payments. Excluding in-vestment spending and proceeds.  2 Including contributions for recipients of govern-
ment cash benefits.  3 Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
quarter.  4 Including cash.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
62•
X. Public finance in Germany
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total  1 ContributionsInsolvency
compen-
sation levy TotalUnemploy-
ment benefit  2Short-time
working
benefits  3Job
promotion  4Insolvency
benefit
paymentAdminis-
trative
expenditure  5Deficit/
surplusMemo item:
Deficit-
offsetting
grant or loan
from central
government
2017 37,819 32,501 882 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 687 6,444 + 5,952 –
2018 39,335 34,172 622 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 588 8,129 + 6,228 –
2019 35,285 29,851 638 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 842 6,252 + 2,131 –
2020 33,678 28,236 630 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 1,214 6,076 –27,335 6,913
2021 35,830 29,571 1,302 57,570 19,460 21,003 7,475 493 6,080 –21,739 16,935
2022 37,831 31,651 1,062 37,530 16,588 3,779 7,125 534 6,256 + 300 423
2023 42,245 36,058 748 39,233 18,799 981 7,614 1,236 7,006 + 3,012 – 423
2022 Q1 8,827 7,374 251 10,685 4,424 2,037 1,821 135 1,412 – 1,858 –
Q2 9,327 7,857 262 9,457 4,091 1,180 1,794 147 1,450 – 130 –
Q3 9,278 7,740 261 8,401 4,056 406 1,621 107 1,506 + 877 –
Q4 10,398 8,679 289 8,987 4,016 156 1,889 145 1,888 + 1,411 423
2023 Q1 9,836 8,442 178 9,942 4,727 408 1,858 376 1,550 – 106 –
Q2 10,387 8,976 186 9,661 4,604 290 1,902 271 1,689 + 726 –
Q3 10,361 8,804 182 9,351 4,712 140 1,775 284 1,691 + 1,010 –
Q4 11,661 9,836 202 10,278 4,755 144 2,079 306 2,076 + 1,382 – 423
2024 Q1 10,298 8,903 183 11,237 5,511 465 2,074 380 1,729 – 939 –
Q2 11,019 9,494 196 11,175 5,447 330 2,167 498 1,811 – 156 –
Q3 10,982 9,291 193 10,918 5,609 227 2,027 365 1,897 + 64 –
Source: Federal Employment Agency and Bundesbank calculations.  * Including transfers
to the civil servants' pension fund.  1 Excluding central government deficit-offsetting
grant or loan.  2 Unemployment benefit in case of unemployment.  3 Including seasonal
short-time working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, re-
structuring measures and refunds of social contributions.  4 Vocational training, meas-ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, integration, compensation top-up pay-
ments and promotion of business start-ups.  5 Including collection charges to other
social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the
basic allowance for job seekers.
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions Central
government
funds  2 TotalHospital
treatmentPharma-
ceuticalsMedical
treatmentDental
treatment  3Remedies
and
therapeutic
appliancesSickness
benefitsAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  4Deficit/
surplus
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 +3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 +2,654
2019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 –1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 –6,110
2021 289,270 249,734 36,977 294,602 82,748 46,199 45,058 16,335 20,163 16,612 11,727 –5,332
2022 315,248 262,367 50,223 310,594 85,061 48,354 46,379 16,737 21,259 17,947 12,418 +4,654
2023 304,441 278,742 21,896 309,596 91,380 50,170 49,047 17,610 23,381 19,112 12,681 –5,155
2022 Q1 79,253 62,142 17,049 81,493 20,550 11,891 11,847 4,286 5,216 4,574 3,510 –2,240
Q2 79,112 64,611 14,280 79,269 21,080 12,053 11,753 4,249 5,335 4,457 2,958 – 158
Q3 75,516 65,242 9,804 75,011 21,164 12,221 11,384 3,956 5,352 4,441 2,996 + 505
Q4 81,512 70,384 9,091 74,894 21,659 12,242 11,566 4,310 5,442 4,486 3,148 +6,617
2023 Q1 73,718 66,513 6,759 77,593 22,293 12,333 12,477 4,372 5,666 4,927 3,169 –3,875
Q2 73,722 68,792 4,495 76,031 22,531 12,414 12,234 4,481 5,806 4,682 3,166 –2,309
Q3 75,330 69,236 5,244 76,967 22,767 12,667 11,959 4,373 6,001 4,695 3,030 –1,637
Q4 81,548 74,199 5,399 78,860 23,364 12,870 12,415 4,440 5,845 4,809 3,452 +2,688
2024 Q1 75,004 70,700 3,617 80,253 24,188 13,455 13,042 4,603 6,194 5,148 3,069 –5,249
Q2 79,051 73,540 4,609 82,224 24,187 13,777 12,945 4,591 6,337 5,118 3,190 –3,174
Q3 78,688 74,065 3,679 81,579 24,562 13,882 12,954 4,462 6,365 5,133 3,195 –2,891
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as the latter are not
revised. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensationscheme.  2 Federal grant and liquidity assistance.  3 Including dentures.  4 Net, i.e. after
deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contributions incurred by other
social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
63•
X. Public finances in Germany
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period Total Contributions TotalNon-cash
care benefitsInpatient
care total  2Nursing
benefitContributions to
pension insur-
ance scheme  3Administrative
expenditureDeficit/
surplus
2017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 – 2,557
2018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 – 3,315
2019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2021 52,573 49,764 53,903 9,573 16,511 13,865 3,070 2,024 – 1,330
2022 57,944 52,604 60,100 10,405 20,542 14,872 3,223 2,166 – 2,156
2023 61,374 58,807 59,178 11,506 22,513 16,035 3,582 2,267 + 2,196
2022 Q1 12,912 12,412 14,739 2,564 4,974 3,572 775 529 – 1,827
Q2 15,350 12,951 14,827 2,464 5,026 3,698 795 548 + 523
Q3 13,708 13,021 15,387 2,638 5,197 3,755 802 542 – 1,679
Q4 15,813 14,067 15,078 2,581 5,281 3,892 837 528 + 735
2023 Q1 14,283 13,169 14,698 2,876 5,377 3,846 843 570 – 415
Q2 14,227 13,668 14,392 2,745 5,539 3,940 869 561 – 165
Q3 15,585 15,228 14,823 2,867 5,776 4,074 891 571 + 762
Q4 16,920 16,469 15,317 2,863 5,782 4,317 949 560 + 1,603
2024 Q1 15,896 15,525 16,546 3,207 6,038 4,387 950 645 – 651
Q2 16,544 16,223 16,792 3,161 6,153 4,581 988 607 – 247
Q3 16,468 16,200 17,162 3,211 6,308 4,697 1,026 600 – 694
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  * The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the
latter are not revised.  1 Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund.  2 In-cluding benefits for short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter alia.
3 For non-professional carers.
12. Maastricht debt by creditor
€ million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Bundesbank Domestic MFIsOther domestic
financial corporations Other domestic creditors Foreign creditors
of which: of which: of which: of which: of which: Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities
2017 2,132,784 319,159 305,301 549,782 194,619 180,104 81,125 55,992 10,456 1,027,747 941,750
2018 2,086,445 364,731 350,487 508,845 167,506 186,346 89,794 54,594 8,725 971,929 892,221
2019 2,075,012 366,562 352,025 468,950 158,119 183,714 88,771 66,339 7,225 989,447 908,749
2020 2,346,955 522,392 507,534 508,627 157,828 191,231 99,840 56,574 8,373 1,068,131 996,412
2021 2,502,817 716,004 700,921 501,518 144,646 191,580 103,049 54,498 7,435 1,039,217 969,736
2022 2,569,897 742,514 727,298 512,096 128,892 210,885 126,039 62,087 10,782 1,042,315 976,034
2023 2,631,777 696,287 680,801 462,980 126,354 207,060 124,059 79,277 23,029 1,186,173 1,120,356
2022 Q1 2,504,867 737,978 722,843 484,532 143,411 194,096 106,165 52,456 6,959 1,035,805 968,404
Q2 2,542,827 759,385 744,213 488,213 133,999 202,681 115,577 54,805 8,086 1,037,742 971,035
Q3 2,556,375 741,360 726,147 515,822 126,865 202,278 116,268 56,681 8,987 1,040,233 968,665
Q4 2,569,897 742,514 727,298 512,096 128,892 210,885 126,039 62,087 10,782 1,042,315 976,034
2023 Q1 2,597,356 741,587 726,326 488,074 129,372 208,879 124,723 64,836 16,123 1,093,978 1,030,198
Q2 2,595,555 719,981 704,639 461,011 125,988 209,075 124,691 72,268 20,878 1,133,222 1,068,575
Q3 2,637,724 706,113 690,704 458,302 126,627 207,964 124,005 75,879 23,354 1,189,466 1,123,464
Q4 2,631,777 696,287 680,801 462,980 126,354 207,060 124,059 79,277 23,029 1,186,173 1,120,356
p 2024 Q1 2,639,393 683,097 667,557 459,737 128,888 204,118 123,304 78,655 24,387 1,213,785 1,149,725
pQ2 2,635,103 661,349 645,746 461,854 132,539 202,294 122,311 78,596 24,117 1,231,010 1,167,615
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
64•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
General government
2017 2,132,784 14,298 48,789 1,484,462 89,109 496,125 . .
2018 2,086,445 14,680 52,572 1,456,159 79,487 483,546 . .
2019 2,075,012 14,678 56,350 1,458,540 66,787 478,657 . .
2020 2,346,955 14,757 173,851 1,596,136 88,045 474,166 . .
2021 2,502,817 18,040 195,421 1,730,366 91,705 467,286 . .
2022 Q1 2,504,867 15,982 172,812 1,774,970 74,045 467,058 . .
Q2 2,542,827 18,108 161,848 1,811,062 79,490 472,319 . .
Q3 2,556,375 22,956 149,831 1,797,101 84,946 501,541 . .
Q4 2,569,897 17,319 150,371 1,818,674 115,417 468,117 . .
2023 Q1 2,597,356 15,337 145,250 1,881,491 87,473 467,804 . .
Q2 2,595,555 15,343 153,379 1,891,392 71,973 463,469 . .
Q3 2,637,724 18,123 164,481 1,923,673 65,403 466,045 . .
Q4 2,631,777 16,886 146,625 1,927,974 67,491 472,801 . .
p 2024 Q1 2,639,393 14,910 133,469 1,960,392 62,427 468,194 . .
pQ2 2,635,103 15,822 118,653 1,973,674 56,623 470,330 . .
Central government
2017 1,363,920 14,298 36,297 1,132,336 48,336 132,653 1,131 11,058
2018 1,337,194 14,680 42,246 1,107,522 43,086 129,660 933 10,358
2019 1,315,637 14,678 38,480 1,102,058 29,956 130,465 605 10,493
2020 1,530,351 14,757 154,498 1,180,873 48,416 131,808 609 14,716
2021 1,683,411 18,040 176,428 1,300,604 57,779 130,559 618 8,276
2022 Q1 1,688,335 15,982 155,123 1,340,528 41,679 135,023 576 10,629
Q2 1,727,568 18,108 147,681 1,373,804 47,195 140,781 623 10,691
Q3 1,761,271 22,956 144,999 1,369,815 55,557 167,945 828 13,302
Q4 1,780,240 17,319 146,989 1,391,825 93,225 130,882 8,815 9,213
2023 Q1 1,803,796 15,337 140,238 1,456,522 60,414 131,284 3,574 10,713
Q2 1,811,625 15,343 149,363 1,472,451 42,689 131,780 2,846 11,459
Q3 1,854,968 18,123 159,932 1,504,643 40,273 131,997 6,427 10,090
Q4 1,856,566 16,886 142,897 1,512,508 52,960 131,315 15,158 9,798
p 2024 Q1 1,859,674 14,910 127,794 1,534,058 51,608 131,304 18,264 10,674
pQ2 1,851,550 15,822 112,601 1,548,050 45,204 129,872 17,663 10,506
State government
2017 617,000 – 12,543 354,688 20,004 229,764 14,453 2,046
2018 603,422 – 10,332 351,994 19,506 221,591 14,396 1,891
2019 614,978 – 17,873 360,495 21,372 215,238 15,115 1,826
2020 667,033 – 19,354 419,862 22,112 205,704 12,108 1,410
2021 668,182 – 18,994 435,430 17,011 196,747 12,628 1,772
2022 Q1 665,746 – 17,691 440,264 15,496 192,294 11,821 1,915
Q2 661,909 – 14,169 443,117 15,395 189,228 11,581 1,742
Q3 644,999 – 4,834 433,147 17,891 189,126 14,256 2,147
Q4 638,162 – 3,384 432,686 13,147 188,945 11,776 1,771
2023 Q1 636,232 – 5,112 430,715 13,972 186,433 12,111 2,404
Q2 627,451 – 4,213 424,450 15,182 183,606 13,603 2,148
Q3 625,399 – 4,843 424,601 12,319 183,636 11,193 2,827
Q4 622,353 – 4,121 421,451 11,906 184,876 11,704 5,251
p 2024 Q1 630,016 – 5,999 432,488 12,061 179,469 12,573 12,203
pQ2 630,665 – 6,256 432,753 11,307 180,349 12,525 9,543
Local government
2017 168,561 – – 3,082 24,932 140,548 1,906 466
2018 162,376 – 1 3,045 20,945 138,386 1,906 497
2019 161,101 – – 2,996 19,633 138,472 1,867 532
2020 162,992 – – 3,366 18,548 141,077 1,413 330
2021 165,380 – – 3,241 17,918 144,221 1,824 313
2022 Q1 164,205 – – 3,052 17,324 143,829 1,895 349
Q2 166,307 – – 2,902 17,242 146,163 1,735 370
Q3 166,213 – – 2,856 15,184 148,172 2,110 392
Q4 172,123 – – 2,896 17,668 151,559 1,679 399
2023 Q1 173,598 – – 2,883 17,481 153,234 2,177 416
Q2 173,067 – – 2,988 18,491 151,587 1,762 741
Q3 175,708 – – 2,825 19,066 153,817 2,371 798
Q4 180,460 – – 2,781 18,006 159,673 2,520 463
p 2024 Q1 181,220 – – 2,723 17,805 160,692 2,397 848
pQ2 183,403 – – 2,602 17,520 163,282 2,393 907
For footnotes see end of table.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
65•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont´d)
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:   2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
Social security funds
2017 807 – – – 262 545 15 3,934
2018 704 – – – 388 316 16 4,506
2019 899 – – – 375 524 16 4,753
2020 7,641 – – – 7,128 513 6,931 4,606
2021 933 – – – 511 422 19 4,729
2022 Q1 3,613 – – – 3,263 350 2,739 4,140
Q2 3,940 – – – 3,478 462 2,958 4,095
Q3 4,416 – – – 3,839 577 3,330 4,683
Q4 3,084 – – – 1,036 2,047 1,442 12,328
2023 Q1 3,856 – – – 1,840 2,016 2,263 6,593
Q2 3,065 – – – 1,024 2,041 1,442 5,306
Q3 4,083 – – – 1,028 3,055 2,442 8,719
Q4 3,280 – – – 417 2,863 1,500 15,370
p 2024 Q1 3,234 – – – 412 2,823 1,519 11,027
pQ2 3,583 – – – 651 2,933 1,519 13,143
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office and
the Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency.  1 Particularly liabilities resulting
from coins in circulation.  2 Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt vis-à-visother government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on the
market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated between
different government subsectors.
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
€ million
Currency and deposits  2Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3
Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total  1 Total  1Federal
day bond Total  1Conventional
Federal
bonds
(Bunds)Conventional
Federal
notes
(Bobls)Conventional
Federal
Treasury
notes
(Schätze)  4Treasury
discount
paper
(Bubills)  5Federal
savings
notesGreen
Federal
securitiesInflation-
linked
Federal
securities  6Capital
indexation
of inflation-
linked
securities Loans  1
2007 1,000,426 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 102,083 37,385 10,287 . 13,464 506 76,167
2008 1,031,948 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 105,684 40,795 9,649 . 19,540 1,336 90,728
2009 1,098,584 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 113,637 104,409 9,471 . 24,730 1,369 75,532
2010 1,349,563 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 126,220 85,867 8,704 . 35,906 2,396 254,654
2011 1,359,259 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 130,648 58,297 8,208 . 44,241 3,961 227,499
2012 1,402,753 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 117,719 56,222 6,818 . 52,119 5,374 215,843
2013 1,405,276 10,582 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 110,029 50,004 4,488 . 51,718 4,730 202,668
2014 1,411,880 12,146 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 103,445 27,951 2,375 . 63,245 5,368 193,531
2015 1,385,956 13,949 1,070 1,188,523 663,296 232,387 96,389 18,536 1,305 . 74,495 5,607 183,484
2016 1,380,165 15,491 1,010 1,179,464 670,245 221,551 95,727 23,609 737 . 66,464 3,602 185,209
2017 1,363,920 14,298 966 1,168,633 693,687 203,899 91,013 10,037 289 . 72,855 4,720 180,988
2018 1,337,194 14,680 921 1,149,768 710,513 182,847 86,009 12,949 48 . 64,647 5,139 172,746
2019 1,315,637 14,678 –1,140,538 719,747 174,719 89,230 13,487 . . 69,805 6,021 160,422
2020 1,530,351 14,757 .1,335,371 801,910 179,560 98,543 113,141 . 9,876 58,279 3,692 180,223
2021 1,683,411 18,040 .1,477,033 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 188,338
2022 1,780,240 17,319 .1,538,815 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 224,107
2023 1,856,566 16,886 .1,655,404 1,045,613 216,276 119,180 135,469 . 53,965 60,470 14,686 184,275
2022 Q1 1,688,335 15,982 .1,495,651 911,280 204,534 108,702 140,427 . 23,961 67,776 7,809 176,703
Q2 1,727,568 18,108 .1,521,485 937,949 198,472 111,343 138,495 . 29,425 70,217 11,209 187,975
Q3 1,761,271 22,956 .1,514,814 918,838 208,509 111,675 137,740 . 35,527 71,498 12,879 223,501
Q4 1,780,240 17,319 .1,538,815 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 224,107
2023 Q1 1,803,796 15,337 .1,596,760 987,363 213,514 120,904 127,143 . 39,459 73,591 15,497 191,698
Q2 1,811,625 15,343 .1,621,814 1,007,004 211,742 124,160 139,012 . 50,243 59,227 13,604 174,468
Q3 1,854,968 18,123 .1,664,575 1,021,675 226,340 125,255 148,407 . 52,763 59,923 13,863 172,270
Q4 1,856,566 16,886 .1,655,404 1,045,613 216,276 119,180 135,469 . 53,965 60,470 14,686 184,275
p 2024 Q1 1,859,674 14,910 .1,661,852 1,054,941 226,133 119,517 119,164 . 58,565 60,312 14,048 182,911
pQ2 1,851,550 15,822 .1,660,652 1,066,616 217,406 124,243 106,105 . 65,074 59,968 15,386 175,076
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, and
Bundesbank calculations.  1 Comprises all of central government, i.e. all off-budget en-
tities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned bad bank FMS
Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government from an economic
perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) 2010.  2 Particularly liabilitiesresulting from coins in circulation.  3 Issuances by the Federal Republic of Germany. Ex-
cluding issuers' holdings of own securities but including those held by other govern-
ment entities.  4 Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency (expired
in 2011).  5 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014).  6 Excluding
inflation-induced indexation of capital.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2023 2024
2021 2022 2023 2021 2022 2023 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Item Index 2020=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 105.5 104.2 103.6 5.5 –1.2 –0.5 2.5 –0.6 –3.2 –0.9 –4.0 –2.0 –1.9
Construction 96.4 85.5 85.2 –3.6 –11.3 –0.4 –2.3 –1.0 0.5 1.0 –3.5 –3.5 –3.8
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 101.4 106.8 105.3 1.4 5.4 –1.4 –0.9 –2.3 –2.2 –0.3 –0.0 0.7 0.3
Information and communication 108.6 109.2 113.3 8.6 0.5 3.7 4.6 3.7 2.4 4.1 2.9 3.4 2.5
Financial and insurance activities 107.8 99.8 99.2 7.8 –7.4 –0.6 –3.4 0.1 1.3 –0.4 0.7 0.3 –0.5
Real estate activities 102.4 104.2 105.6 2.3 1.8 1.4 1.1 0.9 1.1 2.2 1.8 1.9 1.1
Business services  1 109.1 112.7 113.2 9.1 3.3 0.5 –0.7 0.8 0.3 1.6 0.9 1.2 0.3
Public services, education and health 101.5 106.0 107.6 1.5 4.5 1.5 2.6 1.6 0.6 1.3 1.3 1.6 2.3
Other services 101.0 118.1 120.5 1.0 16.9 2.0 3.0 1.6 1.6 1.9 1.4 1.6 1.6
Gross value added 103.8 105.6 105.9 3.8 1.7 0.3 0.9 0.2 –0.6 0.8 –0.4 0.3 0.1
Gross domestic product  2 103.7 105.1 104.8 3.7 1.4 –0.3 0.6 –0.4 –0.7 –0.4 –0.8 0.1 0.1
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 102.3 108.0 107.6 2.3 5.6 –0.4 0.1 –0.2 –1.1 –0.2 0.6 –0.3 0.1
Government consumption 103.4 103.6 103.4 3.4 0.1 –0.1 –1.6 –1.9 1.2 1.9 1.3 3.3 2.5
Machinery and equipment 103.5 108.2 107.3 3.5 4.5 –0.8 4.3 –0.1 –2.9 –3.7 –5.4 –5.5 –5.7
Premises 96.9 93.1 89.9 –3.1 –3.9 –3.4 –4.3 –3.1 –2.8 –3.4 –5.1 –3.5 –2.6
Other investment  4 107.0 109.8 115.0 7.0 2.6 4.7 4.9 4.3 4.4 5.1 4.9 4.4 4.0
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . 0.7 –0.1 0.1 1.0 0.6 –0.3 –0.9 –0.9 –0.5 0.6
Domestic demand 103.0 105.9 105.4 3.0 2.8 –0.4 0.7 –0.2 –0.9 –1.2 –1.1 –0.6 0.7
Net exports  6 . . . 0.9 –1.3 0.1 –0.2 –0.3 0.2 0.8 0.3 0.6 –0.6
     Exports 110.0 113.3 113.0 10.0 3.1 –0.3 2.5 0.6 –1.7 –2.5 –2.0 0.8 –0.3
     Imports 109.0 116.6 115.9 9.0 7.0 –0.6 3.3 1.3 –2.3 –4.4 –3.1 –0.7 1.2
Gross domestic product  2 103.7 105.1 104.8 3.7 1.4 –0.3 0.6 –0.4 –0.7 –0.4 –0.8 0.1 0.1
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,840.8 2,075.1 2,205.6 5.3 12.7 6.3 8.8 7.1 5.1 4.5 3.5 2.6 2.7
Government consumption 820.2 869.8 905.2 6.6 6.1 4.1 2.3 3.1 5.4 5.3 5.4 6.1 4.2
Machinery and equipment 235.4 263.0 275.7 5.5 11.7 4.8 12.2 6.4 2.0 0.4 –3.6 –3.8 –4.3
Premises 404.1 446.5 466.1 4.9 10.5 4.4 9.5 4.9 3.0 0.7 –2.3 –0.9 0.6
Other investment  4 139.7 148.8 158.0 9.0 6.5 6.2 6.4 5.8 5.9 6.6 6.5 7.5 7.1
Changes in inventories  5 46.6 52.0 7.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,486.8 3,855.1 4,017.9 6.8 10.6 4.2 6.8 4.4 2.9 2.9 1.7 2.6 3.2
Net exports 189.7 98.7 167.7 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,568.3 1,810.1 1,816.6 16.1 15.4 0.4 7.8 1.4 –3.7 –3.4 –1.9 1.4 1.1
     Imports 1,378.6 1,711.4 1,649.0 18.2 24.1 –3.6 6.6 –2.1 –9.2 –8.5 –5.5 –1.2 2.0
Gross domestic product  2 3,676.5 3,953.9 4,185.6 6.6 7.5 5.9 7.3 5.9 5.4 5.0 3.0 3.6 2.8
 IV. Prices (2020=100)
Private consumption 102.9 109.9 117.2 2.9 6.8 6.7 8.6 7.3 6.3 4.7 2.9 2.9 2.6
Gross domestic product 102.8 109.1 115.8 2.8 6.1 6.1 6.7 6.4 6.1 5.4 3.8 3.5 2.7
Terms of trade 97.3 94.0 97.6 –2.7 –3.5 3.8 1.8 4.3 5.5 3.5 2.7 1.1 0.6
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,968.2 2,087.0 2,229.0 3.6 6.0 6.8 6.7 7.1 7.2 6.4 6.3 5.6 5.2
Entrepreneurial and property income 818.2 848.9 905.4 18.3 3.8 6.7 12.1 10.1 5.1 –0.5 –9.1 –5.9 –8.1
National income 2,786.4 2,935.9 3,134.5 7.5 5.4 6.8 8.4 7.9 6.5 4.5 1.3 2.4 1.2
Memo item: Gross national income 3,800.8 4,097.1 4,332.2 7.5 7.8 5.7 7.2 5.9 5.4 4.5 2.8 3.7 2.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2024.  1 Professional,
scientific, technical, administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit insti-tutions serving households.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware
and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net in-
crease in valuables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy Total Inter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2021 = 100
% of total  1   100 17.08 8.21 74.71 27.84 33.97 2.53 10.36 9.71 9.59 11.83 12.21
Period
2020 95.9 101.4 96.9 94.8 91.9 96.7 93.5 97.5 91.0 90.0 92.6 101.7
2021 99.3 99.1 99.9 99.3 99.4 99.2 99.2 99.4 99.4 99.3 99.3 99.0
2022 98.7 96.7 98.7 99.2 96.3 101.1 101.0 100.1 97.3 102.9 100.2 103.0
2023 97.0 95.6 84.8 98.6 90.7 106.4 93.5 95.6 93.5 103.7 99.3 116.1
2023 Q3 95.7 100.2 72.8 97.2 90.7 103.1 92.1 96.6 93.4 104.4 98.8 107.1
Q4 97.2 101.4 90.6 96.9 84.8 107.9 91.1 94.9 88.8 100.9 102.7 111.6
2024 Q1 92.1 80.4 90.5 95.0 89.3 99.9 89.4 95.3 90.7 96.1 90.0 111.1
Q2 93.0 93.7 76.4 94.6 88.2 100.8 87.8 93.5 90.1 92.2 90.2 112.0
x Q3 91.5 95.6 74.5 92.4 84.9 98.4 85.2 94.6 87.2 91.8 89.4 104.2
2023 Oct. 98.3 101.2 84.0 99.2 91.7 105.9 96.2 98.2 95.1 103.8 95.5 116.7
Nov. 102.1 103.4 91.1 103.0 91.2 114.5 97.2 98.7 95.2 105.0 103.1 128.4
Dec. 91.1 99.6 96.8 88.5 71.5 103.3 79.8 87.7 76.0 93.8 109.6 89.8
2024 Jan. 83.6 63.0 98.8 86.7 84.3 87.6 81.7 91.5 85.2 90.4 80.3 95.0
Feb. 90.7 81.0 85.8 93.5 87.8 98.8 90.1 92.3 88.8 93.6 87.9 112.9
Mar. 101.9 97.2 86.8 104.7 95.9 113.3 96.5 102.2 98.1 104.3 101.8 125.5
Apr. 93.3 93.1 79.9 94.9 88.4 101.3 87.7 93.1 90.0 92.7 88.7 117.8
May 90.1 91.6 75.5 91.4 86.5 95.5 80.3 94.0 88.0 87.3 86.2 102.7
June 95.5 96.5 73.9 97.6 89.7 105.5 95.3 93.4 92.3 96.6 95.7 115.6
2,x July 91.9 99.2 74.4 92.2 86.8 96.7 84.1 94.2 87.7 90.7 89.3 100.8
2,x Aug. 86.8 90.8 73.6 87.4 82.2 90.8 77.9 92.6 82.9 88.7 81.5 94.0
x Sep. 95.7 96.9 75.6 97.6 85.8 107.8 93.6 97.0 90.9 95.9 97.4 117.9
x,p Oct. 93.9 98.5 76.5 94.7 86.6 100.9 92.0 96.7 89.8 93.9 90.4 110.7
Annual percentage change
2020 – 7.7 + 2.9 – 6.6 – 9.8 – 6.9 –14.0 – 8.2 – 3.8 –11.9 – 7.4 –13.5 –20.1
2021 + 3.5 – 2.3 + 3.1 + 4.7 + 8.2 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 1.9 + 9.2 +10.3 + 7.2 – 2.7
2022 – 0.6 – 2.4 – 1.2 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.7 – 2.1 + 3.6 + 0.9 + 4.0
2023 – 1.7 – 1.1 –14.1 – 0.6 – 5.8 + 5.2 – 7.4 – 4.5 – 3.9 + 0.8 – 0.9 +12.7
2023 Q3 – 2.9 + 0.1 –20.7 – 1.7 – 5.8 + 2.8 – 8.7 – 4.1 – 3.4 – 1.2 – 1.0 + 5.9
Q4 – 4.1 – 2.1 – 7.2 – 4.2 – 5.4 – 2.3 –10.6 – 6.9 – 5.3 – 4.4 – 6.2 – 0.7
2024 Q1 – 5.2 – 2.5 – 7.8 – 5.3 – 5.4 – 6.3 – 9.0 – 0.4 – 5.4 – 9.1 – 6.4 –10.5
Q2 – 5.0 – 4.7 – 1.7 – 5.4 – 4.9 – 6.7 – 5.2 – 1.8 – 6.0 –11.2 – 9.3 – 7.8
x Q3 – 4.4 – 4.6 + 2.4 – 4.9 – 6.4 – 4.5 – 7.5 – 2.0 – 6.7 –12.1 – 9.5 – 2.7
2023 Oct. – 4.0 – 3.2 –10.1 – 3.7 – 5.4 – 0.7 –10.6 – 7.7 – 6.1 – 2.6 – 6.7 + 4.0
Nov. – 4.5 – 2.8 – 7.4 – 4.5 – 6.2 – 2.6 –10.8 – 5.9 – 5.3 – 7.1 – 5.8 – 1.6
Dec. – 3.7 – 0.1 – 4.3 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 3.5 –10.4 – 7.0 – 4.3 – 3.3 – 6.0 – 4.9
2024 Jan. – 5.4 – 6.5 – 3.7 – 5.3 – 6.5 – 5.3 – 9.7 – 1.4 – 5.1 – 7.5 – 5.2 – 9.6
Feb. – 5.7 – 1.6 – 9.5 – 6.1 – 5.4 – 8.3 – 7.0 + 0.2 – 5.6 – 9.0 – 7.8 –13.0
Mar. – 4.4 – 0.4 –10.6 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 5.2 –10.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 –10.6 – 6.3 – 8.9
Apr. – 3.9 – 3.9 – 6.4 – 3.7 – 4.3 – 3.6 – 5.3 – 1.4 – 5.8 – 8.5 – 6.9 – 1.4
May – 7.4 – 6.8 + 0.1 – 8.1 – 6.4 –11.5 –11.9 + 1.0 – 7.9 –14.7 –11.9 –17.4
June – 3.8 – 3.5 + 2.1 – 4.4 – 4.0 – 5.0 + 1.5 – 4.9 – 4.6 –10.6 – 9.2 – 4.1
2,x July – 5.8 – 5.6 – 1.3 – 6.3 – 6.1 – 7.0 – 8.0 – 3.5 – 6.9 –12.9 –10.2 – 7.3
2,x Aug. – 3.0 – 3.7 + 2.9 – 3.3 – 6.2 – 1.1 – 8.0 – 2.2 – 7.6 –12.0 – 8.8 + 4.1
x Sep. – 4.3 – 4.3 + 5.7 – 5.1 – 6.8 – 4.9 – 6.7 – 0.4 – 5.7 –11.4 – 9.5 – 3.6
x,p Oct. – 4.5 – 2.7 – 8.9 – 4.5 – 5.6 – 4.7 – 4.4 – 1.5 – 5.6 – 9.5 – 5.3 – 5.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2021.  2 Influenced by a change in holiday dates.  x Provisional;estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the
Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction
industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2021 99.4 +22.7 99.4 +27.3 99.4 +21.7 99.4 +11.2 99.5 +17.9 99.3 + 8.2
2022 105.1 + 5.7 110.3 +11.0 101.1 + 1.7 109.6 +10.3 113.2 +13.8 108.0 + 8.8
2023 101.2 – 3.7 100.0 – 9.3 101.6 + 0.5 105.1 – 4.1 100.4 –11.3 107.3 – 0.6
2023 Oct. 96.2 – 8.0 97.0 – 9.9 94.4 – 7.5 105.9 – 2.9 99.1 –15.2 109.0 + 3.2
Nov. 99.6 – 3.9 96.4 –10.6 100.4 + 0.5 109.7 ± 0.0 112.1 + 9.5 108.6 – 4.0
Dec. 109.0 + 8.0 92.4 – 8.9 121.5 +19.9 96.5 + 1.8 88.2 – 7.0 100.3 + 5.7
2024 Jan. 98.2 – 5.0 98.1 –12.0 98.0 + 0.1 100.4 – 3.9 85.1 – 8.8 107.3 – 2.0
Feb. 96.3 – 8.7 94.4 –11.3 96.4 – 7.8 106.2 – 1.5 89.0 –15.2 114.0 + 4.5
Mar. 105.8 – 2.5 102.6 – 7.5 106.9 + 0.4 113.2 + 1.2 105.7 – 8.4 116.7 + 5.8
Apr. 93.1 – 1.8 93.8 – 7.5 91.0 + 1.9 104.7 + 0.5 94.5 – 9.9 109.3 + 5.1
May 92.3 – 8.3 93.9 – 5.3 89.3 –12.2 107.6 + 8.6 113.6 +23.7 104.9 + 2.4
June 100.7 –10.9 94.4 – 7.5 104.7 –13.4 102.5 – 5.3 96.5 – 8.4 105.3 – 3.8
July 101.0 + 5.5 97.4 + 2.6 103.4 + 8.7 100.7 – 3.9 90.6 + 2.5 105.3 – 6.2
Aug. 87.9 – 2.1 87.6 – 3.4 86.9 + 0.1 97.3 –10.1 81.3 –22.6 104.6 – 4.5
Sep. 103.3 + 4.8 90.8 – 6.0 111.9 +12.3 101.9 + 1.1 97.3 + 1.7 104.0 + 1.0
p Oct. 102.3 + 6.3 94.2 – 2.9 107.0 +13.3 108.2 + 2.2 107.5 + 8.5 108.5 – 0.5
From the domestic market
2021 99.3 +21.7 99.4 +26.9 99.3 +19.1 99.3 +10.2 99.2 + 8.9 99.3 +10.7
2022 105.6 + 6.3 112.5 +13.2 98.7 – 0.6 109.7 +10.5 111.2 +12.1 109.1 + 9.9
2023 100.9 – 4.5 103.1 – 8.4 99.1 + 0.4 99.7 – 9.1 99.5 –10.5 99.7 – 8.6
2023 Oct. 96.0 – 7.3 100.2 – 9.9 91.2 – 4.5 102.9 – 8.4 93.6 –11.9 106.6 – 7.0
Nov. 99.1 – 6.5 100.0 –10.5 98.1 – 1.3 99.8 –13.9 97.4 –12.5 100.7 –14.4
Dec. 98.4 – 0.9 97.0 – 8.5 100.4 + 5.4 93.8 +10.5 89.9 + 5.8 95.3 +12.4
2024 Jan. 94.4 – 8.0 99.6 –13.2 89.7 – 2.9 94.3 – 4.1 85.5 – 9.9 97.8 – 1.8
Feb. 95.7 –10.1 96.4 –12.8 94.7 – 8.5 97.9 – 4.6 86.1 –13.6 102.6 – 1.2
Mar. 102.3 – 9.1 102.0 –11.1 102.3 – 7.6 104.1 – 5.5 100.9 –14.0 105.4 – 1.9
Apr. 90.9 – 8.6 94.7 –13.0 86.7 – 4.9 96.8 – 1.6 94.9 – 8.4 97.5 + 1.1
May 91.9 –13.1 92.8 –10.3 91.0 –16.6 92.8 – 3.4 85.1 –14.3 95.9 + 1.1
June 101.6 – 5.7 95.6 – 4.1 107.8 – 7.5 96.0 + 0.2 90.2 – 4.0 98.3 + 1.9
July 104.7 + 6.4 100.2 + 2.8 110.1 +11.2 95.5 – 4.5 85.7 –12.0 99.3 – 1.7
Aug. 85.1 – 6.4 89.5 – 5.7 79.7 – 7.5 95.4 – 3.7 84.5 –18.6 99.7 + 2.6
Sep. 95.6 + 2.0 87.2 – 8.6 102.6 +12.4 100.1 + 1.0 100.3 – 2.9 100.0 + 2.6
p Oct. 91.6 – 4.6 94.1 – 6.1 88.0 – 3.5 101.1 – 1.7 98.9 + 5.7 101.9 – 4.4
From abroad
2021 99.5 +23.6 99.4 +27.6 99.5 +23.1 99.4 +11.7 99.6 +23.4 99.3 + 6.5
2022 104.8 + 5.3 108.1 + 8.8 102.5 + 3.0 109.6 +10.3 114.4 +14.9 107.2 + 8.0
2023 101.5 – 3.1 96.8 –10.5 103.0 + 0.5 108.8 – 0.7 100.9 –11.8 112.8 + 5.2
2023 Oct. 96.4 – 8.5 93.8 –10.0 96.3 – 8.9 107.9 + 0.8 102.2 –16.8 110.7 +11.7
Nov. 100.0 – 1.8 92.8 –10.8 101.8 + 1.6 116.4 +10.3 120.5 +24.0 114.3 + 4.2
Dec. 116.6 +14.3 87.9 – 9.3 133.7 +27.7 98.4 – 3.1 87.2 –13.2 104.0 + 1.8
2024 Jan. 101.0 – 2.9 96.7 –10.8 102.8 + 1.7 104.5 – 3.9 84.8 – 8.1 114.3 – 2.1
Feb. 96.8 – 7.5 92.5 – 9.6 97.3 – 7.4 111.8 + 0.4 90.7 –16.1 122.3 + 8.2
Mar. 108.3 + 2.5 103.1 – 3.7 109.6 + 5.3 119.4 + 5.6 108.4 – 5.2 124.9 +11.1
Apr. 94.6 + 3.4 93.0 – 1.0 93.5 + 6.0 110.0 + 1.7 94.2 –10.9 117.9 + 7.7
May 92.6 – 4.4 94.9 – 0.1 88.3 – 9.4 117.7 +16.4 130.0 +48.6 111.5 + 3.4
June 100.1 –14.3 93.2 –10.6 102.9 –16.5 106.9 – 8.3 100.1 –10.5 110.4 – 7.2
July 98.4 + 4.9 94.7 + 2.6 99.5 + 7.2 104.3 – 3.5 93.5 +12.4 109.7 – 9.0
Aug. 89.9 + 1.0 85.8 – 0.8 91.0 + 4.4 98.6 –13.7 79.5 –24.9 108.1 – 8.7
Sep. 108.9 + 6.7 94.3 – 3.5 117.2 +12.3 103.2 + 1.3 95.5 + 4.5 107.0 – 0.1
p Oct. 110.0 +14.1 94.2 + 0.4 118.0 +22.5 113.1 + 4.8 112.4 +10.0 113.4 + 2.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2020 91.1 –0.3 87.4 –0.7 91.9 +7.0 82.6 –8.6 88.4 +1.8 95.7 +0.1 85.9 –5.7 97.1 +1.5
2021 99.5 +9.2 99.4 +13.7 99.5 +8.3 99.4 +20.3 99.1 +12.1 99.6 +4.1 99.4 +15.7 99.5 +2.5
2022 104.4 +4.9 98.0 –1.4 95.7 –3.8 98.4 –1.0 104.3 +5.2 112.4 +12.9 105.8 +6.4 108.8 +9.3
2023 108.2 +3.6 93.6 –4.5 83.2 –13.1 96.2 –2.2 121.4 +16.4 126.6 +12.6 117.3 +10.9 114.8 +5.5
2023 Sep. 120.4 +17.1 111.6 +15.6 82.9 –10.6 121.2 +24.1 180.1 +70.1 131.4 +18.7 137.5 +34.4 125.9 +13.6
Oct. 106.9 +6.1 87.8 +0.1 81.9 –3.5 89.5 +1.2 103.1 +7.8 130.7 +11.7 121.0 +14.6 107.2 +0.9
Nov. 92.1 –0.8 83.1 +1.8 70.9 –5.0 89.2 +10.5 105.0 –4.5 103.3 –3.4 104.7 +9.5 91.4 –10.8
Dec. 110.2 +5.7 97.8 –0.6 91.6 +3.9 89.1 –15.6 152.2 +39.5 125.6 +12.5 117.5 +0.7 114.3 +14.0
2024 Jan. 85.7 +3.5 71.8 –5.8 60.4 –16.6 77.8 –4.5 91.1 +30.0 103.0 +13.2 96.7 +7.7 90.0 +10.7
Feb. 96.7 +2.0 77.8 –1.5 71.9 –1.4 72.0 –14.5 120.4 +47.2 120.3 +5.0 101.6 –1.3 108.4 +8.0
Mar. 123.8 +2.3 102.4 –5.9 91.2 +3.2 103.4 –17.7 139.2 +15.3 150.5 +10.5 121.8 –9.1 149.8 +16.9
Apr. 109.9 +4.0 85.6 –4.0 82.3 –0.6 82.7 –7.4 108.0 –3.8 140.1 +11.0 117.4 +7.6 120.3 +2.0
May 112.8 +2.3 97.8 +5.0 85.0 –3.3 108.5 +15.8 104.3 –4.7 131.6 –0.1 119.4 +3.4 124.7 +4.2
June 119.6 +5.5 97.0 –2.4 84.3 –10.6 101.0 +17.2 127.9 –23.3 147.7 +12.8 130.3 +18.2 131.5 +0.2
July 110.9 –8.5 87.5 –15.4 80.8 –12.3 83.2 –20.8 127.9 –7.7 139.9 –2.4 111.9 –4.2 131.2 –11.1
Aug. 116.6 –2.9 95.3 +2.3 80.6 +0.6 104.8 +5.2 113.1 –2.9 143.3 –6.8 134.2 –9.9 120.5 +6.9
Sep. 108.9 –9.6 93.2 –16.5 85.3 +2.9 91.3 –24.7 128.7 –28.5 128.6 –2.1 114.7 –16.6 118.7 –5.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2020 121.4 +5.7 115.9 +4.4 121.3 +8.1 81.9 –23.2 106.9 –1.8 117.1 +9.3 125.4 +5.6 168.6 +21.8
2021 124.7 +2.7 116.7 +0.7 121.7 +0.3 78.1 –4.6 95.4 –10.8 110.4 –5.7 135.2 +7.8 190.1 +12.8
2022 134.4 +7.8 115.8 –0.8 128.2 +5.3 102.9 +31.8 107.8 +13.0 122.8 +11.2 144.7 +7.0 188.9 –0.6
3 2023 137.7 +2.5 112.2 –3.1 135.9 +6.0 106.0 +3.0 108.0 +0.2 118.3 –3.7 149.4 +3.2 186.9 –1.1
2023 Oct. 141.8 +2.8 114.7 +0.1 137.0 +3.8 120.6 +4.0 111.1 –0.7 121.4 –3.3 156.3 +7.3 196.1 +1.3
Nov. 147.7 +0.9 120.1 –1.6 137.6 +4.0 116.7 +0.8 137.3 +1.8 122.4 –6.1 156.5 +2.2 231.6 –0.8
Dec. 154.2 +1.8 124.9 –0.8 155.0 +5.4 116.6 –6.1 142.5 –3.5 117.4 –6.7 166.8 +6.0 216.1 +1.3
2024 Jan. 127.0 +1.8 103.0 –1.2 127.5 +4.0 87.4 +2.7 107.2 –5.7 98.0 –7.2 150.4 +7.4 177.3 +0.4
Feb. 123.4 +0.4 99.5 –1.9 124.5 +1.1 82.9 ±0.0 97.6 –3.9 103.8 –4.1 145.8 +7.9 161.2 –3.7
Mar. 143.7 +3.4 115.3 +1.5 143.8 +4.7 104.7 +4.9 102.0 –4.5 127.3 –1.2 157.6 +5.2 192.0 +2.8
Apr. 140.6 +2.3 112.7 +0.8 140.1 +2.1 109.7 +2.2 95.5 +0.2 123.7 –1.7 155.3 +7.9 179.2 –0.9
May 141.3 +0.1 113.3 –1.2 141.1 +1.1 112.4 ±0.0 92.5 +0.9 120.5 –5.6 155.2 +4.9 183.7 –0.7
June 137.4 –0.4 110.3 –1.7 140.8 +3.2 102.2 –12.3 98.0 +3.0 113.1 –6.0 153.5 +3.4 175.9 –2.4
July 141.3 +1.2 113.9 –0.1 141.5 +1.1 106.5 –1.4 98.0 –1.4 113.4 –4.0 163.9 +7.3 184.7 +0.6
Aug. 136.8 +3.2 110.2 +2.2 139.1 +4.7 98.7 –2.9 93.5 –3.7 105.7 –4.9 154.3 +6.0 183.3 +8.5
Sep. 139.1 +4.7 112.2 +4.5 134.0 +1.3 110.7 +6.3 102.6 –1.2 110.3 –1.7 161.9 +8.1 201.8 +19.0
Oct. 146.1 +3.0 117.2 +2.2 142.3 +3.9 116.4 –3.5 110.0 –1.0 118.0 –2.8 162.9 +4.2 212.0 +8.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2023 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2019 45,291 +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 72,267 827 7 5.0 774
2020 44,965 –0.7 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2021 45,052 +0.2 33,897 +0.9 9,344 23,602 702 4,101 1,852 1,744 2,613 999 5.7 706
2022 45,675 +1.4 34,507 +1.8 9,400 24,135 721 4,125 426 337 2,418 808 5.3 845
2023 46,011 +0.7 34,790 +0.8 9,425 24,430 687 4,198 241 147 2,609 875 5.7 761
2021 Q3 45,215 +0.8 33,929 +1.5 9,347 23,606 719 4,161 935 915 2,545 920 5.5 774
Q4 45,518 +1.0 34,374 +1.6 9,415 23,982 727 4,125 835 762 2,341 802 5.1 804
2022 Q1 45,284 +1.6 34,242 +2.0 9,348 23,943 715 4,061 1,033 792 2,417 874 5.3 818
Q2 45,605 +1.6 34,401 +2.0 9,372 24,056 718 4,112 337 324 2,311 777 5.0 864
Q3 45,776 +1.2 34,522 +1.7 9,405 24,133 724 4,159 103 92 2,501 804 5.5 880
Q4 46,035 +1.1 34,864 +1.4 9,475 24,409 730 4,166 229 139 2,443 778 5.3 817
2023 Q1 45,712 +0.9 34,614 +1.1 9,395 24,288 696 4,152 430 153 2,610 900 5.7 773
Q2 45,981 +0.8 34,702 +0.9 9,410 24,352 687 4,209 152 146 2,561 839 5.6 770
Q3 46,080 +0.7 34,762 +0.7 9,421 24,398 686 4,242 128 122 2,647 885 5.7 768
Q4 46,269 +0.5 35,082 +0.6 9,471 24,682 680 4,189 253 166 2,617 874 5.7 732
2024 Q1 45,892 +0.4 34,795 +0.5 9,366 24,563 630 4,154 468 200 2,796 1,000 6.1 704
Q2 46,123 +0.3 834,858 8+0.4 89,355 824,635 8 615 84,207 ... 8 203 2,733 939 9 5.9 701
Q3 1046,146 10 +0.1 834,888 8+0.4 89,346 824,679 8 610 84,216 ... 8 212 2,829 998 6.0 699
2021 July 45,094 +0.8 33,731 +1.5 9,304 23,458 715 4,194 1,088 1,068 2,590 956 5.6 744
Aug. 45,158 +0.8 33,994 +1.5 9,358 23,658 722 4,153 857 838 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. 45,394 +0.8 34,323 +1.6 9,432 23,903 726 4,123 859 839 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. 45,511 +0.8 34,369 +1.5 9,425 23,965 724 4,123 780 762 2,377 814 5.2 809
Nov. 45,567 +1.1 34,449 +1.6 9,423 24,039 739 4,133 767 750 2,317 789 5.1 808
Dec. 45,475 +1.2 34,284 +1.7 9,364 23,980 708 4,112 957 772 2,330 803 5.1 794
2022 Jan. 45,218 +1.5 34,176 +2.0 9,332 23,900 711 4,048 1,123 847 2,462 903 5.4 792
Feb. 45,263 +1.6 34,243 +2.2 9,346 23,939 719 4,049 1,087 803 2,428 884 5.3 822
Mar. 45,370 +1.6 34,334 +2.1 9,369 23,999 719 4,061 888 727 2,362 835 5.1 839
Apr. 45,489 +1.6 34,368 +2.0 9,366 24,037 713 4,091 453 439 2,309 800 5.0 852
May 45,621 +1.7 34,445 +2.1 9,376 24,089 719 4,131 318 305 2,260 771 4.9 865
June 45,705 +1.5 34,445 +1.9 9,376 24,084 724 4,164 241 228 2,363 761 5.2 877
July 45,663 +1.3 34,322 +1.8 9,361 23,988 718 4,176 115 102 2,470 801 5.4 881
Aug. 45,716 +1.2 34,571 +1.7 9,417 24,169 725 4,151 87 76 2,547 827 5.6 887
Sep. 45,948 +1.2 34,899 +1.7 9,499 24,401 733 4,136 108 97 2,486 782 5.4 873
Oct. 46,070 +1.2 34,893 +1.5 9,489 24,414 734 4,161 134 124 2,442 764 5.3 846
Nov. 46,078 +1.1 34,897 +1.3 9,478 24,435 738 4,179 156 147 2,434 770 5.3 823
Dec. 45,957 +1.1 34,705 +1.2 9,414 24,357 704 4,182 397 146 2,454 799 5.4 781
2023 Jan. 45,651 +1.0 34,550 +1.1 9,381 24,240 697 4,138 451 145 2,616 911 5.7 764
Feb. 45,697 +1.0 34,601 +1.0 9,392 24,279 692 4,148 441 157 2,620 910 5.7 778
Mar. 45,789 +0.9 34,679 +1.0 9,412 24,332 692 4,157 398 159 2,594 878 5.7 777
Apr. 45,886 +0.9 34,685 +0.9 9,410 24,342 684 4,188 146 139 2,586 855 5.7 773
May 45,994 +0.8 34,728 +0.8 9,413 24,371 687 4,228 149 142 2,544 829 5.5 767
June 46,062 +0.8 34,709 +0.8 9,404 24,357 690 4,266 162 156 2,555 833 5.5 769
July 46,030 +0.8 34,584 +0.8 9,382 24,261 687 4,279 113 107 2,617 878 5.7 772
Aug. 46,013 +0.6 34,804 +0.7 9,429 24,433 685 4,221 113 107 2,696 910 5.8 771
Sep. 46,196 +0.5 35,089 +0.5 9,500 24,641 684 4,186 158 152 2,627 869 5.7 761
Oct. 46,296 +0.5 35,117 +0.6 9,490 24,686 686 4,181 183 177 2,607 861 5.7 749
Nov. 46,319 +0.5 35,126 +0.7 9,473 24,719 688 4,195 181 174 2,606 865 5.6 733
Dec. 46,193 +0.5 34,915 +0.6 9,401 24,637 648 4,197 395 148 2,637 896 5.7 713
2024 Jan. 45,854 +0.4 34,754 +0.6 9,359 24,528 635 4,138 540 189 2,805 1,006 6.1 699
Feb. 45,873 +0.4 34,770 +0.5 9,359 24,548 625 4,141 485 201 2,814 1,015 6.1 706
Mar. 45,950 +0.4 34,810 +0.4 9,360 24,591 615 4,169 379 210 2,769 977 6.0 707
Apr. 46,049 +0.4 34,863 +0.5 9,362 24,633 618 4,190 224 215 2,750 949 6.0 701
May 46,148 +0.3 34,886 +0.5 9,354 24,661 615 4,222 200 191 2,723 930 9 5.8 702
June 46,172 +0.2 834,837 8+0.4 89,336 824,635 8 611 84,252 ... 8 204 2,727 937 5.8 701
July 46,118 +0.2 834,725 8+0.4 89,313 824,549 8 613 84,258 ... 8 194 2,809 989 6.0 703
Aug. 46,080 +0.1 834,915 8+0.3 89,351 824,705 8 605 84,193 ... 8 175 2,872 1,021 6.1 699
Sep. 1046,239 10 +0.1 835,212 8+0.3 89,414 824,928 8 611 84,146 ... 8 268 2,806 985 6.0 696
Oct. 1046,321 10 +0.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,791 974 6.0 689
Nov. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,774 973 5.9 668
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed
persons in the legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).8 Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2022 and 2023,
the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1%
for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.5% for persons
solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 61,3% for
cyclically induced short-time work.  9 From May 2024, calculated on the basis of new la-
bour force figures.  10 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which: Indices of
foreign trade prices
of which:
Total Food  1,2Non-
energy
industrial
goods  1 Energy  1 Services  1Actual
rents
for
housing  1Memo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  3Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  3 Exports Imports
Period 2015 = 100 2020 = 100 2021 = 100 2020 = 100 2021=100
Index level
2020 4 105.8 4 110.9 4 104.1 4 99.0 4 106.9 107.6 4 100.0 4 92.0 91.2 100.0 95.1 89.8
2021 4 109.2 4 114.1 4 106.7 4 109.0 4 109.0 109.0 4 103.1 4 100.0 100.0 106.9 100.0 100.0
2022 118.7 126.2 112.7 146.8 112.2 110.8 110.2 116.6 129.8 141.0 113.5 121.8
2023 125.9 140.9 119.1 154.2 117.6 113.1 116.7 126.7 130.1 141.3 114.2 113.9
2023 Jan. 122.6 136.7 116.4 154.8 113.8 112.1 114.3 133.5 149.7 115.1 118.7
Feb. 123.8 139.5 117.0 154.9 115.0 112.2 115.2 125.5 132.5 148.6 115.1 117.2
Mar. 125.1 141.3 118.3 155.0 116.1 112.5 116.1 131.1 144.6 115.0 116.1
Apr. 125.8 141.1 119.0 156.1 117.1 112.6 116.6 131.8 141.9 114.6 114.6
May 125.6 141.1 119.3 154.0 116.9 112.8 116.5 126.6 130.4 139.1 114.2 113.2
June 126.1 141.2 119.5 153.7 117.8 113.0 116.8 129.8 141.4 114.0 112.3
July 126.7 141.2 118.8 153.6 119.6 113.2 117.1 128.9 142.5 113.7 111.6
Aug. 127.2 141.0 119.2 156.5 119.8 113.5 117.5 127.1 129.2 142.5 113.7 112.0
Sep. 127.4 141.5 120.1 157.6 119.3 113.6 117.8 129.3 137.0 114.0 113.3
Oct. 127.2 141.6 120.5 154.7 119.1 113.7 117.8 129.1 135.0 114.1 113.4
Nov. 126.3 142.4 120.5 151.6 117.6 113.9 117.3 127.7 128.3 135.4 113.8 112.8
Dec. 126.6 142.4 120.5 148.4 118.7 114.0 117.4 127.3 137.3 113.5 111.7
2024 Jan. 126.4 143.7 119.7 150.2 118.1 114.4 117.6 127.6 5 138.2 113.6 111.7
Feb. 127.2 143.6 120.3 150.9 119.3 114.6 118.1 129.5 127.1 139.8 113.8 111.5
Mar. 128.0 143.5 120.9 150.5 120.7 114.9 118.6 127.3 141.1 113.9 111.9
Apr. 128.8 144.3 121.1 154.0 121.3 115.1 119.2 127.5 142.1 114.4 112.7
May 129.1 144.0 120.9 152.1 122.4 115.3 119.3 130.4 127.5 143.9 114.4 112.7
June 129.3 144.4 120.8 150.3 123.3 115.5 119.4 127.7 146.3 114.7 113.1
July 130.0 144.6 120.1 150.7 124.9 115.7 119.8 127.9 145.4 114.6 112.6
Aug. 129.8 144.6 120.0 148.5 125.1 115.8 119.7 131.4 128.2 139.0 114.6 112.2
Sep. 129.7 145.2 120.9 145.8 124.6 116.0 119.7 127.5 136.7 114.5 111.8
Oct. 130.2 146.3 121.5 146.4 124.8 116.2 120.2 127.7 139.1 114.8 112.5
Nov. 129.3 e 146.5 e 121.7 e 146.1 e 122.9 116.3 119.9 ... ... ... ... ...
Annual percentage change
2020 4 +0.4 4+ 2.3 4– 0.1 4– 4.5 4+ 1.2 + 1.4 4 +0.5 4+ 1.4 – 1.0 – 3.1 – 0.6 – 4.3
2021 4 +3.2 4+ 2.9 4+ 2.5 4+ 10.1 4+ 2.0 + 1.3 4 +3.1 4+ 8.8 + 9.6 + 6.9 + 5.2 +11.4
2022 +8.7 + 10.6 + 5.7 + 34.7 + 2.9 + 1.7 +6.9 +16.6 +29.8 +31.9 +13.5 +21.8
2023 +6.0 + 11.7 + 5.6 + 5.1 + 4.8 + 2.1 +5.9 + 8.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.6 – 6.5
2023 Jan. +9.2 + 16.6 + 7.4 + 25.1 + 3.6 + 2.0 +8.7 +16.4 +27.8 + 8.1 + 5.3
Feb. +9.3 + 18.0 + 7.2 + 21.6 + 4.4 + 2.0 +8.7 +15.5 +13.9 +22.9 + 6.6 + 3.1
Mar. +7.8 + 18.6 + 7.2 + 6.1 + 5.0 + 2.1 +7.4 + 7.5 + 5.8 + 3.3 – 3.1
Apr. +7.6 + 15.5 + 6.9 + 9.4 + 4.8 + 2.0 +7.2 + 5.2 – 1.3 + 1.7 – 5.6
May +6.3 + 13.6 + 6.2 + 5.0 + 4.4 + 2.0 +6.1 + 8.9 + 2.5 – 2.8 + 0.9 – 7.7
June +6.8 + 12.6 + 6.2 + 4.0 + 6.1 + 2.0 +6.4 + 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 8.6
July +6.5 + 10.7 + 5.5 + 3.9 + 6.7 + 2.1 +6.2 – 2.9 + 0.3 – 2.0 –10.8
Aug. +6.4 + 9.2 + 5.5 + 5.3 + 6.8 + 2.2 +6.1 + 6.5 – 7.6 – 1.5 – 3.6 –12.9
Sep. +4.3 + 8.1 + 4.9 – 0.8 + 4.7 + 2.2 +4.5 – 9.1 – 7.7 – 2.6 –11.0
Oct. +3.0 + 7.1 + 4.1 – 6.0 + 4.2 + 2.1 +3.8 – 7.3 –10.7 – 1.1 – 9.5
Nov. +2.3 + 6.6 + 3.6 – 7.3 + 3.4 + 2.1 +3.2 + 4.6 – 5.0 –10.8 – 1.2 – 7.2
Dec. +3.8 + 5.8 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 3.4 + 2.1 +3.7 – 5.1 – 9.7 – 1.4 – 7.0
2024 Jan. +3.1 + 5.1 + 2.8 – 3.0 + 3.8 + 2.1 +2.9 – 4.4 5– 7.7 – 1.3 – 5.9
Feb. +2.7 + 2.9 + 2.8 – 2.6 + 3.7 + 2.1 +2.5 + 3.2 – 4.1 – 5.9 – 1.1 – 4.9
Mar. +2.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 – 2.9 + 4.0 + 2.1 +2.2 – 2.9 – 2.4 – 1.0 – 3.6
Apr. +2.4 + 2.3 + 1.8 – 1.3 + 3.6 + 2.2 +2.2 – 3.3 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 1.7
May +2.8 + 2.1 + 1.3 – 1.2 + 4.7 + 2.2 +2.4 + 3.0 – 2.2 + 3.5 + 0.2 – 0.4
June +2.5 + 2.3 + 1.1 – 2.2 + 4.7 + 2.2 +2.2 – 1.6 + 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.7
July +2.6 + 2.4 + 1.1 – 1.9 + 4.4 + 2.2 +2.3 – 0.8 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 0.9
Aug. +2.0 + 2.6 + 0.7 – 5.1 + 4.4 + 2.0 +1.9 + 3.4 – 0.8 – 2.5 + 0.8 + 0.2
Sep. +1.8 + 2.6 + 0.7 – 7.5 + 4.4 + 2.1 +1.6 – 1.4 – 0.2 + 0.4 – 1.3
Oct. +2.4 + 3.3 + 0.8 – 5.4 + 4.8 + 2.2 +2.0 – 1.1 + 3.0 + 0.6 – 0.8
Nov. +2.4 e+ 2.9 e+ 1.0 e– 3.6 e+ 4.5 + 2.1 +2.2 ... ... ... ... ...
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office.  1 The last data point is at times based on the Bun-
desbank’s own estimates.  2 Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco.  3 Excluding va-lue added tax.  4 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value added tax between July
and December 2020.  5 From January 2024 onwards, provisional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2016 1,372.9 4.2 931.4 4.0 432.9 4.0 1,364.2 4.0 1,887.1 2.9 187.8 2.3 10.0
2017 1,435.3 4.5 971.8 4.3 447.9 3.5 1,419.7 4.1 1,955.0 3.6 201.2 7.2 10.3
2018 1,506.6 5.0 1,019.6 4.9 461.5 3.0 1,481.2 4.3 2,028.6 3.8 220.1 9.4 10.8
2019 1,572.6 4.4 1,069.5 4.9 479.2 3.8 1,548.7 4.6 2,080.4 2.6 215.3 – 2.2 10.3
2020 1,561.7 – 0.7 1,066.1 – 0.3 521.5 8.8 1,587.6 2.5 2,080.5 0.0 331.7 54.1 15.9
2021 1,620.5 3.8 1,111.3 4.2 531.5 1.9 1,642.8 3.5 2,144.2 3.1 303.3 – 8.6 14.1
2022 1,718.7 6.1 1,174.8 5.7 539.6 1.5 1,714.4 4.4 2,312.4 7.8 237.3 –21.8 10.3
2023 1,846.0 7.4 1,286.5 9.5 571.4 5.9 1,857.9 8.4 2,462.1 6.5 256.5 8.1 10.4
2023 Q2 445.1 7.8 303.3 10.0 139.9 6.2 443.2 8.8 609.1 8.0 61.9 16.2 10.2
Q3 457.0 7.7 323.9 9.3 145.0 5.0 469.0 7.9 619.9 5.8 58.1 12.5 9.4
Q4 511.7 6.9 357.9 9.2 143.5 6.0 501.3 8.2 630.2 4.8 62.3 7.5 9.9
2024 Q1 461.0 6.7 323.6 7.4 151.5 5.9 475.1 6.9 633.9 5.1 86.5 16.6 13.6
Q2 471.0 5.8 321.7 6.1 149.0 6.6 470.7 6.2 629.6 3.4 68.3 10.3 10.8
Q3 481.3 5.3 340.8 5.2 153.7 5.9 494.4 5.4 645.0 4.1 68.1 17.2 10.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2024.  * Households in-
cluding non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees'
contributions to the social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension
payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social
benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plusmonetary social benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed
income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit
institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related
taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company
pension funds.  6 Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving
as a percentage of disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2020=100Annual
percentage
change 2020=100Annual
percentage
change 2020=100Annual
percentage
change 2020=100Annual
percentage
change 2020=100Annual
percentage
change
2016 90.2 2.2 90.2 2.2 90.5 2.2 90.7 2.3 91.5 2.6
2017 92.3 2.3 92.2 2.3 92.6 2.3 92.9 2.4 94.0 2.8
2018 95.0 3.0 95.0 3.0 95.2 2.8 95.5 2.8 97.2 3.3
2019 97.8 2.9 97.8 3.0 98.0 2.9 98.0 2.6 100.2 3.1
2020 100.0 2.2 100.0 2.2 100.0 2.1 100.0 2.1 100.0 – 0.2
2021 101.5 1.5 101.5 1.5 101.6 1.6 101.5 1.5 103.3 3.3
2022 104.2 2.6 104.1 2.6 103.9 2.2 103.6 2.0 107.8 4.3
2023 108.3 4.0 108.3 4.0 106.7 2.7 106.3 2.6 114.8 6.4
2023 Q2 100.9 3.9 100.8 3.9 99.2 2.5 106.0 2.5 110.8 6.7
Q3 111.7 4.7 111.7 4.7 110.5 3.2 106.8 3.0 113.6 6.8
Q4 119.1 3.7 119.1 3.7 118.1 2.5 107.1 2.5 126.4 6.2
2024 Q1 108.0 6.3 108.0 6.3 101.9 3.1 108.5 3.0 114.8 6.1
Q2 104.0 3.1 104.0 3.1 103.5 4.3 110.6 4.3 116.8 5.4
Q3 121.6 8.8 121.6 8.8 116.4 5.4 112.8 5.6 119.3 5.1
2024 Apr. 103.9 4.9 103.9 4.9 103.1 4.0 109.9 3.9 . .
May 104.2 4.4 104.1 4.4 103.9 4.9 110.8 4.8 . .
June 103.9 0.2 103.8 0.2 103.4 4.0 110.9 4.1 . .
July 147.3 10.6 147.2 10.6 138.1 4.9 112.2 5.1 . .
Aug. 111.7 10.7 111.6 10.7 105.6 5.7 113.1 5.8 . .
Sep. 105.9 4.6 105.8 4.6 105.5 5.8 113.2 5.9 . .
Oct. 106.0 4.3 106.0 4.3 105.8 5.9 113.5 6.0 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
November 2024.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2020 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.6 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.4 857.0 304.4 196.1
2021 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 384.8 1,320.4 272.1 261.5 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 321.4 236.7
2022 3,431.6 2,057.0 713.5 804.3 414.0 1,374.6 326.2 268.3 244.3 1,133.2 2,298.4 1,195.7 760.2 1,102.8 332.3 273.3
2023 3,320.5 2,038.7 699.2 823.2 385.5 1,281.8 325.2 259.9 251.4 1,145.4 2,175.1 1,146.3 763.3 1,028.8 334.1 261.7
2022 H2 3,431.6 2,057.0 713.5 804.3 414.0 1,374.6 326.2 268.3 244.3 1,133.2 2,298.4 1,195.7 760.2 1,102.8 332.3 273.3
2023 H1 3,322.4 2,009.5 699.5 799.0 377.0 1,312.9 343.9 263.7 235.2 1,134.0 2,188.3 1,130.8 748.9 1,057.5 329.7 259.9
H2 3,320.5 2,038.7 699.2 823.2 385.5 1,281.8 325.2 259.9 251.4 1,145.4 2,175.1 1,146.3 763.3 1,028.8 334.1 261.7
p 2024 H1 3,383.9 2,085.6 712.1 846.6 390.2 1,298.3 350.4 267.1 233.7 1,153.3 2,230.6 1,169.5 793.0 1,061.1 344.1 254.8
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2021 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.7 40.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 9.8 7.2
2022 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 12.1 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
2023 100.0 61.4 21.1 24.8 11.6 38.6 9.8 7.8 7.6 34.5 65.5 34.5 23.0 31.0 10.1 7.9
2022 H2 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 12.1 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
2023 H1 100.0 60.5 21.1 24.1 11.4 39.5 10.4 7.9 7.1 34.1 65.9 34.0 22.5 31.8 9.9 7.8
H2 100.0 61.4 21.1 24.8 11.6 38.6 9.8 7.8 7.6 34.5 65.5 34.5 23.0 31.0 10.1 7.9
p 2024 H1 100.0 61.6 21.0 25.0 11.5 38.4 10.4 7.9 6.9 34.1 65.9 34.6 23.4 31.4 10.2 7.5
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2020 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.1 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.3 1,628.8 904.7 537.0 724.0 267.3 149.8
2021 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 363.5 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.2 285.9 184.0
2022 2,730.8 1,538.3 461.5 591.7 392.2 1,192.4 307.7 209.1 186.5 879.7 1,851.1 912.7 534.3 938.4 291.6 215.2
2023 2,620.2 1,512.9 446.6 604.5 363.1 1,107.3 305.2 202.2 203.4 888.8 1,731.4 859.8 536.9 871.6 294.9 206.6
2022 H2 2,730.8 1,538.3 461.5 591.7 392.2 1,192.4 307.7 209.1 186.5 879.7 1,851.1 912.7 534.3 938.4 291.6 215.2
2023 H1 2,651.0 1,504.1 460.3 588.8 352.3 1,146.8 326.4 210.9 184.5 892.6 1,758.4 854.6 528.8 903.8 285.2 210.1
H2 2,620.2 1,512.9 446.6 604.5 363.1 1,107.3 305.2 202.2 203.4 888.8 1,731.4 859.8 536.9 871.6 294.9 206.6
p 2024 H1 2,672.0 1,551.4 454.8 625.0 366.5 1,120.6 329.9 208.4 187.5 906.1 1,765.9 878.5 561.6 887.4 300.9 201.1
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2021 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.8 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 10.9 7.0
2022 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 14.4 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
2023 100.0 57.7 17.0 23.1 13.9 42.3 11.7 7.7 7.8 33.9 66.1 32.8 20.5 33.3 11.3 7.9
2022 H2 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 14.4 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
2023 H1 100.0 56.7 17.4 22.2 13.3 43.3 12.3 8.0 7.0 33.7 66.3 32.2 20.0 34.1 10.8 7.9
H2 100.0 57.7 17.0 23.1 13.9 42.3 11.7 7.7 7.8 33.9 66.1 32.8 20.5 33.3 11.3 7.9
p 2024 H1 100.0 58.1 17.0 23.4 13.7 41.9 12.4 7.8 7.0 33.9 66.1 32.9 21.0 33.2 11.3 7.5
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2021 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 55.2 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 52.6
2022 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
2023 700.3 525.8 252.6 218.7 22.3 174.5 20.0 57.7 48.0 256.6 443.7 286.5 226.5 157.2 39.1 55.2
2022 H2 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
2023 H1 671.4 505.4 239.2 210.2 24.7 166.0 17.4 52.9 50.7 241.5 429.9 276.2 220.1 153.8 44.6 49.9
H2 700.3 525.8 252.6 218.7 22.3 174.5 20.0 57.7 48.0 256.6 443.7 286.5 226.5 157.2 39.1 55.2
p 2024 H1 711.9 534.1 257.2 221.6 23.6 177.8 20.5 58.6 46.1 247.1 464.8 291.1 231.3 173.7 43.2 53.8
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2021 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.3 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 7.9
2022 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
2023 100.0 75.1 36.1 31.2 3.2 24.9 2.9 8.2 6.9 36.6 63.4 40.9 32.3 22.4 5.6 7.9
2022 H2 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
2023 H1 100.0 75.3 35.6 31.3 3.7 24.7 2.6 7.9 7.6 36.0 64.0 41.1 32.8 22.9 6.6 7.4
H2 100.0 75.1 36.1 31.2 3.2 24.9 2.9 8.2 6.9 36.6 63.4 40.9 32.3 22.4 5.6 7.9
p 2024 H1 100.0 75.0 36.1 31.1 3.3 25.0 2.9 8.2 6.5 34.7 65.3 40.9 32.5 24.4 6.1 7.6
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Insome cases revised. Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash
equivalents.  2 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
EBITDA  1
as a percentage of revenuesEBIT  2
as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  3 Distribution  3
Revenues EBITDA  1Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile EBIT  2Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5€ billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  5% % % € billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  5% % %
Total
2016 1,624.3 – 0.4 214.4 7.8 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.7 9.0 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,719.3 5.1 243.4 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.0 11.0 18.0 141.9 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.1
6 2018 1,706.8 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,764.6 2.6 233.6 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.2 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.6 5.8 11.8
2020 1,632.8 – 8.8 213.6 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 17.9 52.1 – 41.0 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 4.9 10.5
2021 1,994.7 20.4 297.7 37.7 14.9 1.9 7.8 13.4 19.9 161.5 212.6 8.1 5.0 2.9 8.2 12.2
2022 2,431.3 20.8 324.8 7.8 13.4 – 1.6 6.4 11.8 18.4 170.0 3.5 7.0 – 1.2 1.6 6.6 12.4
2023 2,238.3 – 7.7 323.6 0.4 14.5 1.2 6.1 12.2 17.9 170.0 0.9 7.6 0.7 1.8 6.6 11.5
2019 H2 903.7 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.6 11.8 20.0 52.0 – 11.4 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.5
2020 H1 744.5 – 14.4 78.2 – 34.1 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 8.8
H2 888.4 – 3.3 135.4 17.1 15.2 2.8 7.6 13.2 19.8 44.2 8.6 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.6
2021 H1 920.0 20.3 151.5 87.2 16.5 5.9 7.4 12.6 19.5 84.5 . 9.2 8.3 2.3 7.8 12.2
H2 1,075.6 20.4 146.4 8.1 13.6 – 1.6 7.9 13.2 20.8 77.0 73.1 7.2 2.2 2.9 7.7 13.4
2022 H1 1,149.7 23.5 161.0 4.8 14.0 – 2.5 6.1 11.5 18.4 84.9 – 1.6 7.4 – 1.9 1.6 6.4 11.8
H2 1,283.3 18.5 163.9 11.0 12.8 – 0.9 5.9 11.6 18.9 85.2 9.1 6.6 – 0.6 1.7 6.7 12.9
2023 H1 1,112.0 – 3.0 172.0 7.8 15.5 1.6 6.4 10.8 17.5 98.1 16.9 8.8 1.5 1.2 6.5 10.8
H2 1,127.6 – 12.0 151.7 – 6.8 13.5 0.8 6.3 12.5 19.8 71.9 – 15.0 6.4 – 0.2 1.2 7.0 13.0
p 2024 H1 1,075.5 – 3.7 160.6 – 6.1 14.9 – 0.4 6.1 11.0 16.7 89.7 – 8.4 8.3 – 0.4 1.6 5.9 10.3
Groups with a focus on the production sector 7
2016 1,295.9 – 0.8 161.9 6.3 12.5 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 84.8 4.2 6.5 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,395.9 5.5 187.5 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.5 40.6 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,367.7 1.0 175.7 – 1.5 12.9 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 16.0 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.8 6.9 11.4
2019 1,410.9 2.0 168.1 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.8 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.7 10.1
2020 1,285.2 – 9.4 143.6 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 5.7 10.6 16.5 29.1 – 48.1 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.3 9.8
2021 1,585.8 22.4 208.9 45.9 13.2 2.1 7.9 12.8 17.9 118.6 325.8 7.5 5.4 2.8 7.8 11.1
2022 1,957.4 21.7 222.9 4.7 11.4 – 1.8 6.9 11.3 16.4 116.3 – 4.7 5.9 – 1.6 1.8 6.6 10.7
2023 1,784.0 – 8.2 233.7 5.7 13.1 1.7 7.5 11.4 16.1 124.2 7.6 7.0 1.0 2.2 6.6 11.4
2019 H2 721.0 1.7 84.8 0.3 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.7 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.1
2020 H1 580.6 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.4 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 14.9 0.2 – 101.7 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.1 7.8
H2 704.6 – 3.0 94.6 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.0 12.1 18.6 28.9 19.6 4.1 1.1 0.3 6.0 10.4
2021 H1 731.9 24.0 111.2 126.9 15.2 6.9 8.2 12.6 18.6 66.7 . 9.1 9.3 2.9 7.9 12.1
H2 854.2 21.1 97.7 3.8 11.4 – 1.9 7.8 12.3 17.5 51.9 80.8 6.1 2.0 2.6 7.0 11.5
2022 H1 923.4 23.8 110.9 – 2.5 12.0 – 3.3 7.7 11.5 16.3 59.0 – 14.2 6.4 – 2.8 2.3 6.4 10.4
H2 1,035.8 19.9 112.2 13.1 10.8 – 0.7 5.9 10.8 16.7 57.4 7.7 5.5 – 0.6 1.3 6.5 11.4
2023 H1 894.9 – 2.9 129.0 16.7 14.4 2.4 7.1 11.7 16.3 76.7 30.5 8.6 2.2 2.1 6.7 10.7
H2 890.0 – 13.0 104.9 – 5.0 11.8 1.0 6.7 12.4 17.4 47.5 – 16.0 5.3 – 0.2 1.8 6.6 12.0
p 2024 H1 838.4 – 5.4 119.9 – 6.1 14.3 – 0.1 7.4 11.3 16.7 71.2 – 6.7 8.5 – 0.1 2.7 6.4 10.4
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.3 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.5 12.2
2021 408.9 13.0 88.8 21.6 21.7 1.6 7.6 15.0 24.0 42.8 79.7 10.5 3.9 3.0 9.2 15.6
2022 473.9 17.4 101.9 15.3 21.5 – 0.4 5.2 13.1 22.8 53.8 26.4 11.3 0.8 1.0 6.9 14.4
2023 454.4 – 5.6 89.9 – 11.2 19.8 – 1.3 5.6 12.9 22.2 45.8 – 13.7 10.1 – 1.0 1.6 6.8 12.9
2019 H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
H2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.5 13.3
2021 H1 188.1 7.7 40.3 26.1 21.5 3.1 6.9 12.6 24.5 17.8 119.9 9.5 4.8 0.9 6.9 13.6
H2 221.4 17.9 48.7 18.2 22.0 0.1 9.4 16.5 24.7 25.1 59.1 11.3 3.0 3.8 9.5 17.7
2022 H1 226.3 22.0 50.1 25.3 22.2 0.6 4.6 11.6 20.9 25.9 46.4 11.5 1.9 – 0.5 6.3 13.5
H2 247.6 13.4 51.8 7.0 20.9 – 1.3 5.2 14.1 24.0 27.8 12.1 11.2 – 0.1 2.2 7.5 15.4
2023 H1 217.1 – 3.6 43.1 – 11.8 19.8 – 1.9 4.7 9.6 19.2 21.4 – 14.4 9.9 – 1.3 – 2.2 4.2 12.0
H2 237.6 – 7.5 46.8 – 10.7 19.7 – 0.7 5.9 14.4 23.3 24.4 – 13.0 10.3 – 0.7 0.9 7.3 16.1
p 2024 H1 237.1 2.9 40.7 – 6.1 17.2 – 1.7 5.3 8.5 16.8 18.5 – 14.2 7.8 – 1.6 – 0.4 3.6 9.3
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. In
some cases revised. Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings be-
fore interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation.  2 Earnings before interest and taxes.
3 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted return on sales.  4 Annual figuresdo not always match the sum of the two half-year figures. See Quality report on con-
solidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  5 Adjusted for substantial changes in the
basis of consolidation of large groups and in the reporting sample. See Quality report
on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 6.  6 From 2018 onwards: significant
changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.  7 Including
groups in agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2024 2024
Item 2021 2022 2023 Q1  Q2 Q3 p July  r August  r September  p
I.Current Account +326,013 + 1,551 +248,072 +97,038 +99,480 +139,045 +48,764 +38,819 +51,462
1.Goods
Receipts 2,430,145 2,872,731 2,816,097 696,311 721,909 715,486 253,505 220,216 241,765
Expenditure  2,139,171 2,918,280 2,559,454 593,831 623,053 615,673 213,713 193,777 208,183
Balance +290,974 –45,549 +256,643 +102,480 +98,856 +99,813 +39,792 +26,439 +33,582
2.Services
Receipts 1,090,675 1,337,450 1,380,606 340,521 387,397 397,440 138,255 131,878 127,306
Expenditure  979,997 1,173,638 1,257,271 317,692 327,729 329,327 113,869 110,325 105,133
Balance +110,679 +163,812 +123,335 +22,829 +59,668 +68,112 +24,385 +21,553 +22,174
3.Primary income
Receipts 901,032 1,094,260 1,249,525 299,920 354,011 324,841 107,099 103,144 114,597
Expenditure  809,492 1,037,751 1,215,364 286,366 376,387 313,601 109,441 98,618 105,542
Balance +91,539 +56,508 +34,161 +13,554 –22,376 +11,240 – 2,341 + 4,526 + 9,056
4.Secondary income
Receipts 158,994 172,046 184,776 44,369 49,221 40,623 14,144 12,786 13,694
Expenditure  326,173 345,267 350,843 86,194 85,889 80,744 27,216 26,485 27,043
Balance –167,180 –173,221 –166,067 –41,825 –36,668 –40,120 –13,072 –13,699 –13,349
II.Capital account +47,691 +148,046 +39,667 –12,701 + 3,333 + 2,786 – 298 + 3,404 – 319
III.Financial account  1 +375,573 +87,745 +326,217 +110,599 +131,244 +163,155 +60,970 +27,594 +74,592
1.Direct investment +435,793 +264,678 +35,005 +90,723 +66,292 +23,046 +20,913 – 7,443 + 9,576
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +404,445 +121,167 –328,713 +140,132 –51,253 +45,420 +20,849 + 3,712 +20,860
By non-resident units of
the euro area  –31,348 –143,511 –363,718 +49,409 –117,545 +22,374 – 64 +11,155 +11,283
2.Portfolio investment +261,894 –250,305 –87,061 –22,134 –81,151 +12,394 +22,391 + 686 –10,683
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +806,786 –157,309 +469,982 +167,116 +180,105 +157,270 +55,517 +37,701 +64,052
Equity and
investment fund shares +368,161 –158,161 +89,935 +28,308 +61,264 +27,168 +15,074 + 6,518 + 5,576
Short-term
debt securities  +119,001 –105,244 +105,389 +11,013 + 6,263 +43,599 +17,116 + 2,553 +23,930
Long-term
debt securities  +319,624 +106,097 +274,658 +127,795 +112,578 +86,503 +23,327 +28,630 +34,547
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  +544,892 +92,996 +557,042 +189,251 +261,255 +144,876 +33,127 +37,015 +74,735
Equity and
investment fund shares +654,501 +62,299 +157,329 +29,215 +127,576 +94,154 +40,390 +38,663 +15,100
Short-term
debt securities  +45,581 –67,871 –12,865 –28,248 + 2,575 – 2,091 + 7,424 –14,351 + 4,837
Long-term
debt securities  –155,189 +98,569 +412,579 +188,284 +131,104 +52,813 –14,688 +12,703 +54,798
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options +62,756 +109,274 +14,166 +13,038 +12,235 – 7,400 – 3,175 + 1,191 – 5,417
4.Other investment –515,226 –53,785 +376,524 +27,818 +130,130 +138,990 +24,070 +36,165 +78,754
Eurosystem –443,446 +172,312 +318,507 +76,666 –19,471 +29,076 +13,874 – 1,272 +16,474
General government –77,043 –49,433 + 1,060 – 3,174 + 876 –25,872 –15,441 – 7,277 – 3,155
MFIs  2 –115,831 –304,956 +162,625 +34,633 +116,609 +143,096 +33,681 +70,105 +39,311
Enterprises and households +121,095 +128,291 –105,669 –80,307 +32,117 – 7,311 – 8,044 –25,391 +26,124
5.Reserve assets +130,357 +17,884 –12,416 + 1,155 + 3,738 – 3,875 – 3,229 – 3,007 + 2,361
IV.Net errors and omissions + 1,869 –61,852 +38,478 +26,262 +28,430 +21,324 +12,504 –14,629 +23,449
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Increase: + / decrease: -.2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Zeit Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2009 + 144,787 + 136,636 – 10,761 – 16,962 + 55,894 – 30,781 – 1,798 + 111,873 + 8,648 – 31,117
2010 + 150,210 + 159,328 – 8,801 – 25,147 + 52,346 – 36,317 + 19 + 73,036 + 1,613 – 77,192
2011 + 172,827 + 164,171 – 8,902 – 30,158 + 70,336 – 31,523 – 1,070 + 101,101 + 2,836 – 70,657
2012 + 201,277 + 200,916 – 10,420 – 31,425 + 67,297 – 35,511 – 2,167 + 131,252 + 1,297 – 67,858
2013 + 192,346 + 199,951 – 17,770 – 34,257 + 66,870 – 40,218 – 2,970 + 200,883 + 838 + 11,507
2014 + 215,932 + 218,515 – 15,863 – 22,941 + 61,801 – 41,443 + 336 + 231,400 – 2,564 + 15,132
2015 + 250,088 + 245,054 – 18,813 – 16,236 + 60,040 – 38,770 – 1,769 + 227,420 – 2,213 – 20,899
2016 + 284,662 + 250,397 – 21,830 – 18,346 + 90,869 – 38,259 – 1,345 + 269,282 + 1,686 – 14,034
2017 + 268,729 + 257,041 – 12,757 – 21,212 + 83,864 – 50,964 – 6,479 + 274,766 – 1,269 + 12,515
2018 + 289,187 + 218,739 – 27,726 – 14,010 + 134,180 – 49,722 – 3,602 + 261,115 + 392 – 24,470
2019 + 278,477 + 213,201 – 39,862 – 14,443 + 130,094 – 50,375 – 4,907 + 200,831 – 544 – 72,739
2020 + 218,031 + 177,742 – 21,461 + 6,633 + 87,061 – 53,406 – 10,520 + 168,954 – 51 – 38,557
2021 + 254,580 + 188,036 – 5,970 + 1,613 + 124,430 – 59,499 – 3,463 + 206,797 + 31,892 – 44,320
2022 + 174,507 + 134,785 + 18,630 – 35,984 + 143,193 – 67,486 – 20,290 + 199,405 + 4,426 + 45,188
2023 + 243,122 + 225,511 – 33,721 – 64,577 + 146,423 – 64,234 – 26,636 + 250,153 + 884 + 33,667
2021 Q4 + 63,458 + 39,847 + 2,546 – 2,883 + 43,025 – 16,531 + 230 + 53,018 + 250 – 10,669
2022 Q1 + 57,805 + 37,750 + 5,928 + 723 + 36,785 – 17,453 – 3,787 + 71,950 + 2,200 + 17,932
Q2 + 28,650 + 30,261 + 8,443 – 6,455 + 18,032 – 13,188 – 4,516 + 61,543 + 597 + 37,410
Q3 + 31,130 + 31,578 + 7,336 – 22,381 + 39,388 – 17,455 – 6,442 – 19,471 + 784 – 44,159
Q4 + 56,921 + 35,196 – 3,078 – 7,871 + 48,987 – 19,391 – 5,544 + 85,382 + 845 + 34,005
2023 Q1 + 63,450 + 53,371 – 7,384 – 9,541 + 38,396 – 18,776 – 13,931 + 81,336 + 224 + 31,817
Q2 + 44,747 + 53,260 – 5,974 – 17,082 + 18,793 – 10,225 – 4,074 + 29,749 + 1,096 – 10,924
Q3 + 58,399 + 57,016 – 9,154 – 25,066 + 42,254 – 15,805 – 3,906 + 46,047 – 790 – 8,446
Q4 + 76,526 + 61,864 – 11,209 – 12,889 + 46,979 – 19,428 – 4,725 + 93,021 + 355 + 21,220
2024 Q1 + 76,289 + 70,434 – 8,065 – 12,166 + 37,078 – 19,058 – 8,679 + 46,880 + 378 – 20,729
Q2 + 58,879 + 68,008 – 9,870 – 20,366 + 20,480 – 9,242 – 773 + 48,342 + 746 – 9,764
Q3 + 53,848 + 55,769 – 9,705 – 28,498 + 41,070 – 14,493 – 3,704 + 94,777 – 890 + 44,632
2022 May + 4,284 + 10,832 + 3,754 – 2,148 – 2,994 – 1,406 – 2,536 + 2,213 + 161 + 466
June + 12,230 + 12,152 + 1,124 – 3,031 + 9,511 – 6,403 – 598 + 39,962 + 353 + 28,330
July + 9,969 + 10,616 + 1,904 – 6,046 + 12,200 – 6,800 – 3,180 – 21,182 – 484 – 27,971
Aug. + 6,312 + 8,024 + 4,079 – 9,647 + 13,948 – 6,012 – 1,252 + 23,448 + 81 + 18,389
Sep. + 14,849 + 12,938 + 1,353 – 6,687 + 13,240 – 4,643 – 2,010 – 21,737 + 1,187 – 34,576
Oct. + 10,678 + 7,214 – 206 – 5,692 + 14,682 – 5,527 – 1,623 + 43,079 + 672 + 34,024
Nov. + 21,021 + 13,925 – 2,083 – 2,170 + 15,326 – 6,060 – 2,080 – 3,629 + 425 – 22,569
Dec. + 25,223 + 14,057 – 788 – 10 + 18,979 – 7,803 – 1,842 + 45,932 – 252 + 22,550
2023 Jan. + 14,245 + 10,296 – 1,868 – 1,953 + 13,078 – 7,176 – 5,965 – 3,226 – 341 – 11,506
Feb. + 21,067 + 18,333 – 1,822 – 3,185 + 11,062 – 5,143 – 1,918 + 29,475 + 143 + 10,325
Mar. + 28,137 + 24,741 – 3,694 – 4,403 + 14,256 – 6,457 – 6,048 + 55,087 + 423 + 32,998
Apr. + 18,250 + 14,901 – 1,630 – 3,807 + 12,170 – 5,014 – 343 – 32,083 + 88 – 49,990
May + 5,905 + 16,499 – 696 – 6,417 – 3,771 – 406 – 2,415 + 5,084 + 45 + 1,594
June + 20,593 + 21,861 – 3,648 – 6,858 + 10,395 – 4,805 – 1,316 + 56,748 + 962 + 37,471
July + 16,495 + 18,106 – 4,531 – 8,018 + 12,254 – 5,847 – 4,669 + 2,762 – 118 – 9,064
Aug. + 18,406 + 18,285 – 1,077 – 10,616 + 15,803 – 5,066 – 691 + 38,044 – 107 + 20,329
Sep. + 23,498 + 20,625 – 3,545 – 6,431 + 14,197 – 4,892 + 1,454 + 5,241 – 566 – 19,711
Oct. + 18,588 + 21,532 – 1,879 – 10,681 + 14,007 – 6,269 – 3,257 + 23,280 + 858 + 7,948
Nov. + 28,874 + 23,813 – 4,893 – 3,590 + 14,896 – 6,245 – 3,822 + 35,435 + 65 + 10,383
Dec. + 29,064 + 16,519 – 4,437 + 1,382 + 18,077 – 6,914 + 2,354 + 34,307 – 569 + 2,889
2024 Jan. + 21,132 + 22,382 – 1,801 – 4,231 + 12,511 – 9,530 – 6,807 + 7,788 – 249 – 6,536
Feb. + 25,764 + 23,893 – 3,355 – 3,638 + 10,218 – 4,709 – 1,995 + 6,760 + 1,193 – 17,009
Mar. + 29,392 + 24,159 – 2,910 – 4,297 + 14,348 – 4,818 + 123 + 32,332 – 566 + 2,816
Apr. + 23,151 + 23,307 – 3,172 – 5,392 + 8,384 – 3,148 – 2,028 + 7,607 – 317 – 13,516
May + 16,092 + 24,054 – 2,393 – 8,088 + 1,655 – 1,528 – 1,372 + 24,538 + 156 + 9,818
June + 19,635 + 20,647 – 4,304 – 6,886 + 10,441 – 4,567 + 2,628 + 16,196 + 908 – 6,066
July + 16,507 + 19,918 – 2,662 – 10,346 + 12,350 – 5,415 – 2,404 + 43,155 – 1,194 + 29,053
Aug. + 16,035 + 17,449 – 3,514 – 10,743 + 14,296 – 4,967 + 711 + 10,078 – 552 – 6,668
r Sep. + 21,307 + 18,403 – 3,529 – 7,409 + 14,424 – 4,111 – 2,010 + 41,544 + 855 + 22,247
p Oct. + 12,497 + 16,175 – 1,172 – 11,098 + 12,989 – 5,569 – 2,813 – 227 – 1,367 – 9,910
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: + / net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2024
Group of countries/country 
2021 2022 
2023 May June July Aug. Sep. Oct.
All countries  1 Exports 1,371,397 1,594,034 1,575,294 128,038 128,410 133,568 120,515 130,060 132,644
Imports 1,195,499 1,505,434 1,356,713 106,410 107,168 113,921 102,501 111,614 117,922
Balance +175,898 +88,600 +218,581 +21,627 +21,241 +19,647 +18,014 +18,447 +14,722
   I. European countries Exports 941,795 1,091,554 1,072,718 87,787 86,891 88,760 80,400 88,687 91,605
Imports 795,136 973,063 873,457 67,549 69,893 72,915 63,474 70,824 75,472
Balance +146,658 +118,492 +199,262 +20,239 +16,998 +15,845 +16,926 +17,863 +16,133
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 743,373 878,642 859,615 70,305 69,716 70,454 63,698 70,696 73,101
Imports 629,513 737,668 711,287 55,332 57,150 59,056 51,578 58,001 61,433
Balance +113,861 +140,974 +148,329 +14,973 +12,566 +11,397 +12,119 +12,695 +11,669
          Euro area (20)       Exports 518,043 617,068 603,702 48,928 48,621 49,891 43,188 48,911 50,480
          countries Imports 431,697 506,865 474,272 37,076 38,088 40,486 33,503 37,937 40,138
Balance +86,345 +110,203 +129,430 +11,853 +10,534 + 9,406 + 9,685 +10,974 +10,342
          of which:
               Austria Exports 72,385 90,270 80,379 6,255 6,145 6,499 5,958 6,370 6,887
  Imports 47,492 58,137 53,735 4,156 4,282 4,679 3,755 4,515 4,601
Balance +24,893 +32,134 +26,644 + 2,099 + 1,862 + 1,820 + 2,202 + 1,855 + 2,286
               Belgium and Exports 58,080 70,933 67,504 5,423 5,745 5,531 5,068 5,201 5,447
               Luxembourg Imports 55,726 67,071 56,171 4,105 4,261 4,624 4,058 4,482 4,812
Balance + 2,354 + 3,861 +11,333 + 1,317 + 1,484 + 907 + 1,010 + 719 + 635
               France Exports 102,741 118,168 119,850 9,404 9,504 9,956 8,017 9,672 9,813
  Imports 61,921 69,969 69,774 5,253 5,693 5,736 4,716 5,492 6,187
Balance +40,820 +48,198 +50,076 + 4,151 + 3,811 + 4,220 + 3,301 + 4,179 + 3,626
               Italy Exports 75,526 89,191 85,333 6,899 6,769 7,076 5,316 6,967 7,135
  Imports 65,389 73,177 71,239 5,753 5,740 6,296 4,581 5,727 6,034
Balance +10,137 +16,014 +14,094 + 1,146 + 1,030 + 781 + 735 + 1,240 + 1,100
               Netherlands Exports 93,101 112,261 112,046 9,017 9,074 9,223 8,456 9,059 9,337
  Imports 96,562 114,998 102,778 7,743 7,842 8,256 7,649 8,053 7,855
Balance – 3,461 – 2,737 + 9,268 + 1,274 + 1,232 + 967 + 807 + 1,006 + 1,482
               Spain  Exports 43,932 49,935 54,003 4,707 4,515 4,679 3,761 4,447 4,540
  Imports 34,180 37,756 38,722 3,354 3,421 3,150 2,499 3,026 3,124
Balance + 9,752 +12,178 +15,280 + 1,353 + 1,093 + 1,528 + 1,262 + 1,421 + 1,416
          Other EU Member  Exports 225,331 261,574 255,914 21,377 21,094 20,562 20,510 21,785 22,622
          States  Imports 197,815 230,803 237,015 18,257 19,062 18,570 18,075 20,064 21,295
Balance +27,515 +30,772 +18,899 + 3,120 + 2,032 + 1,992 + 2,435 + 1,721 + 1,327
      2. Other European Exports 198,421 212,912 213,103 17,482 17,176 18,306 16,702 17,991 18,503
          countries Imports 165,623 235,395 162,170 12,216 12,743 13,859 11,895 12,823 14,039
Balance +32,798 –22,483 +50,933 + 5,266 + 4,433 + 4,447 + 4,807 + 5,168 + 4,464
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 60,638 70,611 66,780 5,695 5,420 5,713 5,073 5,475 5,654
  Imports 49,247 55,723 51,754 4,118 4,403 4,638 3,611 4,778 4,773
Balance +11,391 +14,888 +15,026 + 1,577 + 1,017 + 1,074 + 1,462 + 697 + 881
               United Kingdom Exports 65,002 73,764 78,434 6,451 6,622 6,728 6,212 6,571 7,082
  Imports 32,245 40,314 36,724 2,682 3,038 3,707 2,687 2,972 3,038
Balance +32,757 +33,449 +41,710 + 3,769 + 3,584 + 3,021 + 3,525 + 3,599 + 4,045
   II. Non-European  Exports 427,430 497,428 497,748 39,825 41,078 44,352 39,665 40,963 40,592
       countries Imports 399,604 531,409 482,294 38,774 37,141 40,876 38,883 40,624 42,201
Balance +27,827 –33,982 +15,455 + 1,051 + 3,937 + 3,476 + 782 + 339 – 1,609
       1. Africa Exports 23,068 26,462 28,742 2,162 2,096 2,373 2,119 2,116 2,193
Imports 26,241 34,213 32,471 2,859 2,900 3,037 2,568 2,256 2,217
Balance – 3,173 – 7,751 – 3,729 – 697 – 804 – 664 – 449 – 140 – 24
       2. America Exports 167,735 210,652 216,538 18,330 18,184 19,294 17,268 19,180 18,125
  Imports 101,525 131,979 130,477 10,492 9,970 11,303 10,901 10,541 11,076
Balance +66,210 +78,673 +86,062 + 7,837 + 8,213 + 7,991 + 6,367 + 8,639 + 7,050
           of which:
               United States  Exports 121,980 156,208 157,930 13,268 12,979 14,181 12,650 14,609 13,352
  Imports 72,316 93,338 94,600 7,701 7,059 8,072 7,889 7,547 7,733
Balance +49,664 +62,871 +63,330 + 5,567 + 5,920 + 6,109 + 4,762 + 7,062 + 5,619
       3. Asia Exports 224,897 246,289 238,709 18,222 19,656 21,405 19,224 18,604 19,269
  Imports 267,604 357,702 313,099 24,984 23,731 26,056 25,004 27,412 28,401
Balance –42,707 –111,413 –74,390 – 6,762 – 4,075 – 4,651 – 5,780 – 8,808 – 9,132
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 26,090 29,648 32,039 2,645 2,745 2,950 2,740 3,071 3,022
  Imports 7,509 13,304 16,064 1,079 1,016 1,097 1,332 825 893
Balance +18,582 +16,344 +15,975 + 1,566 + 1,729 + 1,853 + 1,408 + 2,246 + 2,129
               Japan  Exports 18,245 20,511 20,238 1,480 1,694 1,998 2,315 1,525 1,867
Imports 23,477 25,413 25,582 1,792 1,724 1,870 1,755 1,912 1,922
Balance – 5,232 – 4,902 – 5,345 – 312 – 30 + 128 + 561 – 387 – 55
               People's Republic  Exports 103,564 106,762 97,346 7,481 7,970 7,950 6,996 6,861 7,150
               of China  2 Imports 142,964 192,830 156,834 12,574 12,104 13,669 13,121 13,992 15,004
Balance –39,400 –86,068 –59,487 – 5,092 – 4,134 – 5,719 – 6,125 – 7,130 – 7,854
               New industrial countries Exports 55,295 63,344 60,971 4,531 5,007 6,003 4,647 4,642 4,811
               and emerging markets  Imports 55,441 71,012 66,734 5,132 4,976 4,957 4,601 6,328 5,767
               of Asia  3 Balance – 146 – 7,668 – 5,763 – 602 + 31 + 1,045 + 46 – 1,686 – 956
       4. Oceania and Exports 11,731 14,024 13,759 1,111 1,143 1,281 1,054 1,063 1,005
           polar regions Imports 4,233 7,515 6,247 439 539 480 410 415 508
Balance + 7,497 + 6,510 + 7,512 + 672 + 603 + 800 + 644 + 648 + 497
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. Euro area incl. Croatia.  1 Including fuel and other supplies forships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.
3 Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Zeit Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2019 – 14,443 + 3,638 – 45,947 + 10,195 + 18,368 – 9,763 – 2,650 + 3,127 + 4,507 +127,062 – 1,475
2020 + 6,633 – 5,392 – 14,678 + 9,696 + 18,149 – 7,941 – 4,483 + 2,919 + 5,434 + 83,611 – 1,984
2021 + 1,613 – 6,717 – 24,323 + 8,280 + 31,784 – 9,449 – 9,922 + 3,059 + 5,307 +122,189 – 3,066
2022 – 35,984 – 11,246 – 54,946 + 8,910 + 29,373 – 12,432 – 10,206 + 3,617 + 5,463 +143,120 – 5,390
2023 – 64,577 – 9,907 – 72,209 + 9,206 + 21,219 – 11,931 – 14,316 + 3,345 + 5,621 +145,132 – 4,331
2023 Q1 – 9,541 – 3,012 – 11,279 + 1,927 + 5,683 – 4,044 – 3,185 + 1,025 + 1,677 + 38,114 – 1,395
Q2 – 17,082 – 1,729 – 18,270 + 2,390 + 4,679 – 2,580 – 4,601 + 868 + 1,267 + 21,566 – 4,040
Q3 – 25,066 – 2,514 – 25,448 + 2,572 + 4,893 – 3,568 – 4,389 + 804 + 962 + 42,604 – 1,312
Q4 – 12,889 – 2,651 – 17,213 + 2,318 + 5,965 – 1,740 – 2,142 + 647 + 1,715 + 42,848 + 2,416
2024 Q1 – 12,166 – 1,972 – 12,612 + 2,659 + 4,846 – 3,777 – 4,363 + 850 + 1,554 + 36,245 – 722
Q2 – 20,366 – 1,982 – 19,534 + 2,572 + 4,466 – 2,388 – 6,092 + 725 + 1,190 + 20,466 – 1,176
Q3 – 28,498 – 2,591 – 26,046 + 2,341 + 3,840 – 3,481 – 5,485 + 859 + 1,059 + 41,284 – 1,273
2023 Dec. + 1,382 – 761 – 1,597 + 1,061 + 1,549 + 143 + 91 + 159 + 696 + 16,532 + 849
2024 Jan. – 4,231 – 556 – 3,613 + 827 + 1,492 – 1,648 – 1,850 + 309 + 512 + 12,228 – 229
Feb. – 3,638 – 387 – 3,884 + 720 + 1,228 – 1,269 – 933 + 261 + 522 + 10,010 – 314
Mar. – 4,297 – 1,029 – 5,115 + 1,112 + 2,126 – 860 – 1,580 + 280 + 521 + 14,007 – 179
Apr. – 5,392 – 400 – 5,214 + 831 + 2,132 – 1,666 – 1,996 + 303 + 395 + 8,384 – 395
May – 8,088 – 838 – 7,000 + 1,033 + 1,054 – 1,133 – 2,044 + 125 + 397 + 1,641 – 383
June – 6,886 – 743 – 7,321 + 709 + 1,280 + 412 – 2,052 + 297 + 397 + 10,441 – 397
July – 10,346 – 649 – 7,322 + 863 + 662 – 2,001 – 2,585 + 275 + 353 + 12,412 – 415
Aug. – 10,743 – 879 – 9,793 + 644 + 829 – 979 – 1,605 + 289 + 353 + 14,358 – 415
r Sep. – 7,409 – 1,063 – 8,931 + 834 + 2,349 – 501 – 1,295 + 295 + 353 + 14,514 – 443
p Oct. – 11,098 – 1,256 – 10,899 + 868 + 2,238 – 1,614 – 1,476 + 325 + 549 + 12,926 – 485
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Zeit Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2019 – 50,375 – 29,615 – 9,457 + 11,714 – 20,760 – 5,439 – 5,431 – 4,907 – 298 – 4,609
2020 – 53,406 – 35,008 – 11,620 + 10,959 – 18,398 – 5,920 – 5,908 – 10,520 – 3,547 – 6,973
2021 – 59,499 – 37,014 – 8,929 + 12,085 – 22,485 – 6,178 – 6,170 – 3,463 – 565 – 2,899
2022 – 67,486 – 40,145 – 15,002 + 14,285 – 27,341 – 8,028 – 7,149 – 20,290 – 15,993 – 4,297
2023 – 64,234 – 36,285 – 13,692 + 14,496 – 27,949 – 7,418 – 6,805 – 26,636 – 19,116 – 7,520
2023 Q1 – 18,776 – 9,952 – 3,196 + 2,453 – 8,824 – 1,882 – 1,731 – 13,931 – 10,626 – 3,305
Q2 – 10,225 – 3,898 – 1,915 + 7,773 – 6,327 – 1,846 – 1,691 – 4,074 – 3,071 – 1,003
Q3 – 15,805 – 9,878 – 2,959 + 2,120 – 5,927 – 1,844 – 1,691 – 3,906 – 2,270 – 1,636
Q4 – 19,428 – 12,557 – 5,622 + 2,151 – 6,871 – 1,846 – 1,691 – 4,725 – 3,149 – 1,576
2024 Q1 – 19,058 – 7,210 – 1,672 + 2,829 – 11,848 – 1,935 – 1,933 – 8,679 – 6,849 – 1,831
Q2 – 9,242 – 2,302 – 1,739 + 7,526 – 6,940 – 1,936 – 1,933 – 773 – 2,102 + 1,330
Q3 – 14,493 – 8,406 – 1,627 + 1,996 – 6,087 – 1,937 – 1,933 – 3,704 – 3,003 – 700
2023 Dec. – 6,914 – 4,370 – 3,249 + 1,273 – 2,544 – 623 – 571 + 2,354 + 3,691 – 1,337
2024 Jan. – 9,530 – 2,191 – 640 + 552 – 7,339 – 645 – 644 – 6,807 – 5,390 – 1,417
Feb. – 4,709 – 2,339 – 535 + 1,140 – 2,370 – 645 – 644 – 1,995 – 1,858 – 137
Mar. – 4,818 – 2,680 – 497 + 1,137 – 2,138 – 644 – 644 + 123 + 400 – 277
Apr. – 3,148 – 1,049 – 383 + 1,856 – 2,099 – 646 – 644 – 2,028 – 2,945 + 917
May – 1,528 + 675 – 344 + 3,792 – 2,202 – 643 – 644 – 1,372 – 1,601 + 229
June – 4,567 – 1,928 – 1,012 + 1,878 – 2,639 – 647 – 644 + 2,628 + 2,444 + 184
July – 5,415 – 3,256 – 804 + 403 – 2,159 – 645 – 644 – 2,404 – 1,888 – 516
Aug. – 4,967 – 3,076 – 323 + 403 – 1,891 – 645 – 644 + 711 + 785 – 74
r Sep. – 4,111 – 2,075 – 500 + 1,190 – 2,037 – 646 – 644 – 2,010 – 1,900 – 111
p Oct. – 5,569 – 3,449 – 1,130 + 510 – 2,120 – 643 – 641 – 2,813 – 2,241 – 572
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2024 2024
Item 2021 2022 2023 Q1  Q2 Q3 August September  rOctober  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +800,770 +324,992 +280,033 +175,433 +84,956 +215,734 +49,898 +115,014 +33,901
1.Direct investment +167,462 +170,355 +85,258 +27,451 +31,970 +29,353 –10,554 +33,164 + 4,823
Equity +107,448 +104,597 +62,703 +20,776 +25,507 +21,153 + 1,431 +12,572 + 1,498
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +45,034 +57,980 +46,241 +21,056 +17,780 +15,369 + 5,394 + 5,333 + 6,954
Debt instruments +60,014 +65,758 +22,554 + 6,675 + 6,463 + 8,200 –11,985 +20,592 + 3,325
2.Portfolio investment +179,294 +11,575 +143,320 +61,661 +47,020 +68,817 +18,986 +29,827 +13,433
Shares  2 +46,653 –15,196 – 5,520 + 4+ 3,659 + 6,559 + 427 + 3,396 + 3,960
Investment fund shares  3 +123,157 +32,299 +26,718 +21,543 +21,928 +26,326 + 9,761 + 6,800 +14,107
Short-term  4
debt securities – 103 +16,257 + 6,044 + 6,578 + 3,601 – 1,065 – 1,434 + 889 – 3,175
Long-term   5
debt securities + 9,588 –21,785 +116,078 +33,536 +17,833 +36,998 +10,232 +18,742 – 1,459
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +47,880 +41,519 +39,966 + 6,439 +10,291 +17,802 + 7,852 + 4,044 + 5,761
4.Other investment  7 +374,241 +97,117 +10,605 +79,504 – 5,073 +100,652 +34,166 +47,124 +11,251
MFIs  8 +112,904 +59,472 +42,150 +98,981 + 4,860 +79,599 +17,639 +56,161 – 9,577
Short-term +99,380 +34,961 +16,508 +94,149 + 3,442 +67,360 + 9,185 +56,635 – 7,856
Long-term +13,204 +24,473 +25,575 + 4,861 + 1,405 +12,226 + 8,450 – 476 – 1,731
Enterprises and
households  9 +146,187 +48,548 +132,671 +18,572 –32,862 +38,573 – 8,291 – 7,420 +29,642
Short-term +113,542 +24,535 +113,708 +13,657 –36,500 +35,776 –10,004 – 8,237 +28,794
Long-term –13,302 – 7,670 + 1,084 – 378 – 2,671 – 3,263 + 322 – 1,957 – 884
General government – 8,243 –25,070 + 8,123 – 3,312 – 258 + 850 – 1,742 + 1,290 – 838
Short-term – 7,256 –23,472 + 3,653 – 3,095 + 366 + 1,666 – 1,392 + 1,381 – 681
Long-term – 978 – 1,593 + 4,455 – 216 – 623 – 816 – 351 – 91 – 156
Bundesbank +123,394 +14,167 –172,339 –34,737 +23,187 –18,371 +26,560 – 2,907 – 7,976
5.Reserve assets +31,892 + 4,426 + 884 + 378 + 746 – 890 – 552 + 855 – 1,367
II.Net foreign investment in the
reporting country (increase: +) +593,973 +125,587 +29,880 +128,553 +36,613 +120,957 +39,820 +73,471 +34,128
1.Direct investment +85,979 +58,137 +17,938 +15,044 +21,810 +19,504 – 5,652 +17,394 + 3,162
Equity +46,470 +22,102 +24,920 +16,228 – 1,215 + 6,310 + 1,625 + 3,387 + 3,232
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 8,355 +10,299 + 2,668 + 5,133 – 4,666 + 1,219 + 36 + 27 + 1,273
Debt instruments +39,509 +36,035 – 6,982 – 1,184 +23,026 +13,194 – 7,277 +14,007 – 71
2.Portfolio investment –18,451 – 1,568 +148,156 +58,313 +42,666 +56,359 +25,827 +19,198 +33,404
Shares  2 + 2,615 – 5,807 –12,984 – 4,197 – 583 + 1,201 + 271 + 1,993 – 1,450
Investment fund shares  3 – 8,423 – 3,207 – 1,984 – 467 + 933 + 97 + 620 – 1,119 – 953
Short-term  4
debt securities +30,545 –32,717 + 3,936 –20,838 –13,082 + 6,697 + 7,057 + 8,944 + 6,330
Long-term   5
debt securities –43,188 +40,163 +159,188 +83,815 +55,398 +48,365 +17,879 + 9,380 +29,477
3.Other investment  7 +526,446 +69,018 –136,214 +55,196 –27,863 +45,094 +19,646 +36,879 – 2,437
MFIs  8 +161,287 +153,003 –55,282 +139,975 – 5,483 + 6,158 + 1,264 +55,768 –13,136
Short-term +115,265 +160,861 –88,243 +140,506 – 6,995 – 9,431 – 4,892 +49,814 –17,955
Long-term +46,044 – 7,860 +32,959 – 526 + 1,513 +15,588 + 6,155 + 5,954 + 4,818
Enterprises and
households  9 +141,143 +12,367 +57,938 +26,768 –22,307 +29,399 + 762 –21,457 + 9,856
Short-term +99,842 – 8,533 +28,422 +17,220 –26,917 +25,830 – 1,589 –19,391 +10,463
Long-term +14,022 + 8,384 +15,335 + 6,124 + 1,030 + 1,158 + 1,185 – 2,150 – 728
General government – 2,780 – 5,634 – 622 + 2,287 – 848 + 1,556 – 624 + 1,047 + 2,899
Short-term – 451 – 3,253 – 968 + 2,318 – 645 + 1,617 – 642 + 1,007 + 2,764
Long-term – 2,326 – 2,379 + 537 – 31 – 204 – 60 + 18 + 41 + 136
Bundesbank +226,796 –90,717 –138,249 –113,835 + 775 + 7,981 +18,244 + 1,521 – 2,057
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +206,797 +199,405 +250,153 +46,880 +48,342 +94,777 +10,078 +41,544 – 227
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see Statistical series, direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities  3 4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 663,320 497,651
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 1,455,788 292,259 201,335 48,766 8,782 33,376 1,117,978 1,093,371 45,550 779,844 675,943
2022 June 1,566,099 281,157 187,573 48,712 8,948 35,923 1,232,176 1,216,530 52,767 826,280 739,819
July 1,514,570 280,910 185,950 49,465 9,086 36,409 1,179,431 1,166,155 54,229 810,881 703,689
Aug. 1,590,572 280,160 184,794 49,614 9,300 36,451 1,258,187 1,245,014 52,225 842,576 747,996
Sep. 1,613,008 281,258 184,022 50,287 9,358 37,592 1,281,266 1,266,647 50,483 829,129 783,879
Oct. 1,569,272 274,421 178,101 49,675 9,527 37,119 1,243,873 1,230,005 50,977 811,035 758,237
Nov. 1,577,175 277,458 183,052 49,168 9,315 35,923 1,248,088 1,233,980 51,629 810,314 766,861
Dec. 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 Jan. 1,508,507 281,692 190,062 48,256 9,437 33,938 1,176,042 1,162,354 50,772 793,716 714,791
Feb. 1,455,724 276,016 183,755 48,582 9,480 34,199 1,130,353 1,114,888 49,356 743,006 712,718
Mar. 1,522,539 288,131 196,405 48,039 9,373 34,314 1,184,604 1,170,620 49,804 791,478 731,061
Apr. 1,431,180 285,667 194,679 47,642 9,297 34,049 1,096,324 1,081,284 49,189 726,986 704,194
May 1,435,049 290,368 197,915 48,658 9,379 34,416 1,095,750 1,081,900 48,931 701,467 733,582
June 1,416,292 280,820 188,991 48,618 9,292 33,919 1,087,034 1,068,747 48,438 718,324 697,969
July 1,399,374 282,438 191,458 48,368 9,184 33,429 1,068,875 1,052,218 48,061 689,447 709,927
Aug. 1,406,665 284,364 192,914 48,979 9,218 33,253 1,074,575 1,056,420 47,725 687,342 719,322
Sep. 1,393,337 282,490 190,232 49,647 9,278 33,333 1,064,193 1,048,059 46,654 713,662 679,675
Oct. 1,415,403 295,288 202,630 49,531 9,256 33,871 1,074,627 1,058,985 45,488 688,966 726,437
Nov. 1,414,241 292,718 201,195 48,939 8,958 33,627 1,076,415 1,060,074 45,107 691,309 722,932
Dec. 1,455,788 292,259 201,335 48,766 8,782 33,376 1,117,978 1,093,371 45,550 779,844 675,943
2024 Jan. 1,397,172 294,402 202,641 49,412 8,921 33,428 1,058,508 1,041,902 44,261 669,890 727,281
Feb. 1,431,638 295,014 202,181 49,313 8,777 34,744 1,093,262 1,075,510 43,361 679,579 752,058
Mar. 1,436,723 312,728 220,571 49,281 8,563 34,314 1,083,242 1,065,759 40,754 666,365 770,359
Apr. 1,428,136 324,404 232,438 49,368 8,591 34,007 1,063,804 1,047,932 39,928 653,953 774,183
May 1,441,362 324,156 232,717 49,501 8,399 33,538 1,077,447 1,061,110 39,758 663,179 778,183
June 1,474,113 328,214 234,891 49,858 8,355 35,109 1,106,429 1,090,444 39,470 667,250 806,863
July 1,435,795 332,651 240,587 49,622 8,401 34,041 1,064,405 1,048,438 38,739 655,396 780,399
Aug. 1,465,316 335,474 244,992 49,207 8,318 32,957 1,090,965 1,075,239 38,877 673,181 792,134
Sep. 1,472,197 345,338 254,267 49,081 8,395 33,595 1,088,058 1,073,512 38,802 674,582 797,615
Oct. 1,483,520 364,855 274,165 49,292 8,339 33,059 1,080,082 1,064,456 38,583 672,993 810,527
Nov. 1,486,323 366,019 271,468 50,617 8,221 35,714 1,082,106 1,066,511 38,197 670,005 816,318
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2020 1,034,224 244,415 789,808 549,157 240,652 213,833 26,819 1,429,615 172,417 1,257,198 1,038,111 219,087 130,318 88,769
2021 1,169,991 256,601 913,391 621,935 291,456 263,269 28,187 1,592,302 217,294 1,375,008 1,117,381 257,627 160,536 97,091
2022 1,247,020 250,759 996,261 675,328 320,933 291,361 29,572 1,629,245 177,095 1,452,150 1,158,894 293,255 192,495 100,760
2023 1,359,181 357,997 1,001,184 688,702 312,482 281,494 30,988 1,654,743 214,458 1,440,285 1,154,059 286,226 179,792 106,434
2024 May 1,418,237 389,372 1,028,866 727,364 301,502 267,469 34,033 1,760,356 272,654 1,487,702 1,213,212 274,490 160,969 113,521
June 1,382,690 339,991 1,042,699 730,119 312,581 278,599 33,982 1,725,982 226,799 1,499,182 1,212,544 286,638 171,509 115,128
July 1,432,423 393,828 1,038,594 733,360 305,234 270,443 34,792 1,785,281 279,927 1,505,354 1,227,080 278,274 165,004 113,270
Aug. 1,405,388 373,835 1,031,554 736,847 294,706 260,037 34,669 1,777,950 281,452 1,496,498 1,224,875 271,623 157,597 114,026
r Sep. 1,414,579 353,509 1,061,071 756,189 304,882 270,733 34,149 1,769,241 254,345 1,514,896 1,232,397 282,499 169,437 113,062
p Oct. 1,450,050 372,866 1,077,184 767,293 309,891 275,586 34,305 1,786,347 278,994 1,507,353 1,221,875 285,478 172,020 113,459
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2020 613,888 185,572 428,316 334,474 93,842 80,833 13,009 903,486 97,851 805,635 715,854 89,781 61,887 27,895
2021 663,042 193,246 469,796 361,161 108,635 95,778 12,857 996,712 152,239 844,473 740,274 104,198 74,585 29,614
2022 712,912 190,773 522,139 397,836 124,303 110,821 13,482 1,006,529 126,999 879,530 764,435 115,095 84,054 31,041
2023 816,276 284,817 531,459 410,769 120,690 106,262 14,428 1,014,822 139,380 875,442 759,104 116,338 83,290 33,048
2024 May 883,683 321,710 561,973 440,525 121,447 106,575 14,873 1,076,480 174,040 902,441 789,637 112,803 78,096 34,707
June 842,695 282,433 560,262 435,062 125,199 110,147 15,052 1,074,174 160,895 913,279 794,953 118,325 83,736 34,589
July 881,884 323,486 558,399 439,274 119,125 103,663 15,462 1,108,544 189,172 919,372 804,920 114,452 79,379 35,072
Aug. 858,776 305,656 553,120 437,028 116,092 100,608 15,484 1,099,165 191,020 908,145 798,311 109,835 74,354 35,481
r Sep. 841,816 283,710 558,107 438,019 120,088 104,935 15,153 1,106,355 177,448 928,907 812,072 116,835 81,683 35,152
p Oct. 860,993 298,641 562,352 439,777 122,575 107,025 15,550 1,108,367 181,982 926,385 808,331 118,053 82,433 35,621
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2020 420,335 58,843 361,492 214,682 146,810 133,000 13,810 526,129 74,566 451,563 322,257 129,306 68,431 60,875
2021 506,949 63,355 443,594 260,773 182,821 167,491 15,330 595,590 65,055 530,535 377,107 153,429 85,951 67,478
2022 534,107 59,986 474,122 277,492 196,629 180,540 16,090 622,716 50,096 572,620 394,460 178,160 108,441 69,719
2023 542,904 73,180 469,725 277,933 191,792 175,232 16,560 639,921 75,078 564,843 394,955 169,888 96,501 73,386
2024 May 534,554 67,661 466,893 286,839 180,054 160,894 19,160 683,876 98,615 585,261 423,575 161,687 82,873 78,813
June 539,996 57,558 482,438 295,056 187,381 168,452 18,930 651,808 65,905 585,904 417,591 168,313 87,773 80,540
July 550,538 70,342 480,196 294,086 186,110 166,780 19,330 676,737 90,755 585,982 422,160 163,822 85,625 78,197
Aug. 546,612 68,178 478,434 299,820 178,614 159,429 19,185 678,785 90,432 588,353 426,564 161,789 83,243 78,546
r Sep. 572,763 69,799 502,964 318,170 184,794 165,798 18,997 662,886 76,898 585,989 420,325 165,664 87,754 77,909
p Oct. 589,057 74,225 514,832 327,516 187,316 168,561 18,755 677,980 97,011 580,968 413,543 167,425 89,587 77,838
Euro area (20)
2020 527,566 164,697 362,869 289,362 73,507 61,759 11,748 816,066 76,137 739,929 670,289 69,640 47,662 21,978
2021 556,549 171,231 385,318 299,905 85,413 73,729 11,684 911,712 130,558 781,154 699,065 82,089 58,608 23,481
2022 606,206 171,716 434,490 338,439 96,050 83,930 12,120 916,735 105,597 811,138 722,183 88,954 64,756 24,198
2023 713,257 266,931 446,326 352,927 93,399 80,382 13,016 921,774 119,987 801,787 712,302 89,485 64,843 24,642
2024 May 778,716 303,958 474,758 380,785 93,973 80,532 13,441 966,691 142,698 823,993 739,913 84,080 59,025 25,055
June 736,829 264,600 472,229 375,874 96,355 82,872 13,483 968,782 135,443 833,339 745,876 87,463 62,865 24,599
July 780,409 308,432 471,977 379,539 92,438 78,799 13,639 1,001,583 162,389 839,195 753,407 85,788 60,861 24,927
Aug. 757,298 290,678 466,620 376,992 89,629 76,020 13,609 988,084 160,154 827,930 746,380 81,549 56,524 25,026
r Sep. 737,363 267,511 469,851 378,085 91,766 78,531 13,235 996,121 150,866 845,255 759,208 86,047 61,423 24,624
p Oct. 755,502 282,863 472,639 378,569 94,070 80,528 13,541 995,150 151,427 843,723 755,687 88,036 63,040 24,996
Extra-Euro area (20)
2020 506,658 79,719 426,939 259,794 167,145 152,074 15,071 613,549 96,280 517,269 367,822 149,448 82,656 66,792
2021 613,443 85,369 528,073 322,030 206,043 189,540 16,504 680,590 86,735 593,854 418,316 175,538 101,928 73,610
2022 640,814 . . . 224,882 207,431 17,452 712,510 . . . 204,301 127,739 76,562
2023 645,924 . . . 219,083 201,112 17,971 732,970 . . . 196,741 114,949 81,792
2024 May 639,521 . . . 207,529 186,937 20,593 793,665 . . . 190,410 101,944 88,466
June 645,861 . . . 216,226 195,727 20,499 757,200 . . . 199,175 108,645 90,530
July 652,014 . . . 212,797 191,644 21,153 783,697 . . . 192,487 104,144 88,343
Aug. 648,090 . . . 205,078 184,017 21,061 789,866 . . . 190,074 101,073 89,001
r Sep. 677,217 . . . 213,116 192,202 20,914 773,121 . . . 196,452 108,014 88,438
p Oct. 694,549 . . . 215,822 195,057 20,764 791,196 . . . 197,442 108,979 88,463
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2021 1.5749 1.4826 7.6282 7.4370 129.88 10.1633 10.1465 1.0811 0.85960 1.1827
2022 1.5167 1.3695 7.0788 7.4396 138.03 10.1026 10.6296 1.0047 0.85276 1.0530
2023 1.6288 1.4595 7.6600 7.4509 151.99 11.4248 11.4788 0.9718 0.86979 1.0813
2023 July 1.6423 1.4618 7.9482 7.4508 155.94 11.3474 11.6343 0.9663 0.85856 1.1058
Aug. 1.6818 1.4703 7.9096 7.4522 157.96 11.4127 11.8117 0.9588 0.85892 1.0909
Sep. 1.6622 1.4458 7.7967 7.4566 157.80 11.4525 11.8417 0.9600 0.86158 1.0684
Oct. 1.6637 1.4474 7.7200 7.4604 158.04 11.6284 11.6472 0.9547 0.86798 1.0563
Nov. 1.6634 1.4828 7.8087 7.4581 161.84 11.7958 11.5475 0.9634 0.87045 1.0808
Dec. 1.6321 1.4653 7.7870 7.4556 157.21 11.5333 11.2028 0.9441 0.86168 1.0903
2024 Jan. 1.6422 1.4631 7.8201 7.4572 159.46 11.3501 11.2834 0.9368 0.85873 1.0905
Feb. 1.6533 1.4564 7.7651 7.4550 161.38 11.3843 11.2500 0.9462 0.85466 1.0795
Mar. 1.6586 1.4726 7.8297 7.4566 162.77 11.5214 11.3054 0.9656 0.85524 1.0872
Apr. 1.6469 1.4661 7.7658 7.4596 165.03 11.6828 11.5910 0.9761 0.85658 1.0728
May 1.6317 1.4780 7.8206 7.4606 168.54 11.5988 11.6186 0.9830 0.85564 1.0812
June 1.6206 1.4750 7.8051 7.4592 169.81 11.4178 11.2851 0.9616 0.84643 1.0759
July 1.6257 1.4868 7.8750 7.4606 171.17 11.7160 11.5324 0.9676 0.84332 1.0844
Aug. 1.6559 1.5049 7.8736 7.4614 161.06 11.7895 11.4557 0.9450 0.85150 1.1012
Sep. 1.6398 1.5037 7.8611 7.4600 159.08 11.7852 11.3577 0.9414 0.84021 1.1106
Oct. 1.6250 1.4993 7.7276 7.4593 163.20 11.7907 11.4048 0.9386 0.83496 1.0904
Nov. 1.6267 1.4855 7.6617 7.4583 163.23 11.7408 11.5828 0.9355 0.83379 1.0630
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  
2023 January 1 Croatia Croatian kuna HRK 7.53450  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
December 2024
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the  Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
extended EER group of trading partners  1broad EER group of
trading partners  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
27 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  527 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.1 95.8 96.0 96.5 95.9 97.9 99.6 95.7 97.6 98.3 98.1 97.8
2000 87.0 86.8 85.9 85.5 88.0 86.1 92.0 97.5 85.5 91.2 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.4 87.1 86.7 84.5 90.1 86.9 91.9 96.8 86.2 90.7 93.0 91.7 91.1
2002 89.7 90.3 89.9 88.2 94.4 90.5 92.7 96.1 88.7 91.4 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.5 101.6 101.3 99.4 106.5 101.7 96.3 95.3 98.0 95.8 97.0 96.7 96.8
2004 104.3 105.6 104.4 102.8 111.0 105.6 96.8 94.2 100.6 96.2 98.5 98.2 98.4
2005 102.9 104.3 102.4 100.9 109.1 103.2 95.4 92.6 99.4 93.9 98.5 97.2 96.8
2006 102.9 104.3 101.9 99.9 109.3 102.5 94.1 91.0 98.8 92.2 98.6 96.8 96.0
2007 106.5 107.3 104.2 101.6 112.9 104.8 95.3 90.3 102.9 92.7 100.9 98.3 97.4
2008 110.4 110.3 106.3 105.6 117.8 107.3 95.6 89.0 106.1 92.0 102.4 98.5 97.6
2009 111.9 111.1 107.7 109.1 120.8 108.3 96.2 90.1 105.8 93.0 101.9 98.6 97.9
2010 104.6 103.3 99.3 101.6 112.1 99.3 93.4 89.5 99.2 88.9 98.8 94.3 92.5
2011 104.4 102.4 97.4 99.9 112.9 98.8 93.0 89.2 98.6 88.2 98.2 93.5 91.9
2012 98.6 97.0 91.8 94.2 107.6 94.0 90.9 89.0 93.5 85.5 95.9 90.5 88.9
2013 102.2 100.1 94.9 97.2 112.4 97.0 93.3 89.6 98.6 87.6 98.1 92.3 90.9
2014 102.4 99.5 94.8 97.4 114.7 97.4 94.0 90.5 99.1 88.4 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.5 89.6 86.0 86.6 106.1 88.7 90.7 91.1 90.1 84.4 94.3 87.8 86.9
2016 95.2 91.6 88.3 p 88.0 110.1 90.7 91.6 91.6 91.7 85.8 95.0 88.8 88.1
2017 97.5 93.6 89.5 p 88.9 112.5 92.0 92.8 91.6 94.6 86.5 96.3 89.9 88.9
2018 100.0 95.8 91.1 p 90.6 117.3 95.2 94.1 91.7 97.6 87.5 97.7 91.1 90.8
2019 98.1 93.3 89.3 p 88.1 115.5 92.5 93.1 91.9 94.8 86.6 96.4 89.9 89.4
2020 99.7 93.7 90.6 p 89.2 119.2 93.9 93.3 92.1 94.9 87.3 96.4 90.1 90.1
2021 99.6 93.7 89.3 p 87.2 120.5 94.3 94.1 92.3 96.8 87.3 97.4 90.6 90.9
2022 95.3 90.8 84.5 p 82.3 116.1 p 90.9 92.4 91.7 93.1 85.5 95.9 89.1 89.0
2023 98.1 94.0 89.0 p 85.9 121.8 p 94.7 93.8 91.9 96.5 87.5 98.0 91.2 91.6
2022 June 95.7 90.7 116.1 p 90.3 95.7 88.7 88.3
July 93.9 89.2 114.1 p 88.9 94.8 87.9 87.5
Aug. 93.4 88.9 82.9 p 80.5 113.6 p 88.7 91.3 91.3 91.2 84.5 94.5 87.7 87.3
Sep. 93.9 89.9 113.9 p 89.3 95.9 89.1 88.7
Oct. 94.5 91.3 114.8 p 90.8 96.0 89.7 89.4
Nov. 95.7 92.3 85.4 p 82.9 116.6 p 92.0 92.4 91.7 93.3 86.0 97.0 90.6 90.3
Dec. 96.8 92.6 118.6 p 92.8 96.2 89.7 89.8
2023 Jan. 97.1 92.8 119.2 p 93.1 97.5 90.4 90.4
Feb. 97.0 93.1 87.4 p 84.7 119.3 p 93.4 93.2 91.5 95.6 86.4 97.6 90.5 90.6
Mar. 97.3 93.2 119.7 p 93.6 98.0 90.9 91.1
Apr. 98.4 94.2 121.5 p 94.9 98.6 91.6 91.9
May 98.0 93.6 88.8 p 85.6 120.9 p 94.2 93.8 91.9 96.7 87.3 98.1 91.1 91.3
June 98.2 93.8 121.8 p 94.7 98.2 91.3 91.8
July 99.2 95.0 123.7 p 96.1 98.4 91.8 92.5
Aug. 99.0 95.1 90.0 p 86.8 123.7 p 96.1 93.8 91.8 96.7 87.9 98.3 91.8 92.4
Sep. 98.5 94.7 123.0 p 95.5 98.0 91.7 92.1
Oct. 98.0 94.1 122.5 p 95.0 97.7 91.3 91.7
Nov. 98.7 94.6 89.8 p 86.8 123.4 p 95.3 94.3 92.4 97.1 88.2 98.1 91.5 91.8
Dec. 98.2 93.9 123.2 p 94.8 97.6 91.0 91.4
2024 Jan. 98.4 94.4 123.6 p 95.2 97.8 91.4 p 91.8
Feb. 98.1 94.1 89.7 p 86.8 123.3 p 94.9 94.0 92.3 96.5 88.0 97.7 91.3 p 91.6
Mar. 98.8 94.8 124.2 p 95.5 98.1 91.8 p 92.1
Apr. 98.6 p 94.5 124.0 p 95.2 98.3 91.8 p 92.1
May 98.9 p 94.8 89.8 p 86.9 124.4 p 95.3 94.2 92.3 97.0 88.1 98.6 92.0 p 92.2
June 98.5 p 94.5 124.0 p 95.0 98.1 91.8 p 92.0
July 99.0 p 95.1 124.8 p 95.5 98.4 p 92.0 p 92.2
Aug. 99.0 p 95.0 ... ... 125.2 p 95.7 94.1 92.2 97.0 88.2 98.2 p 91.8 p 92.1
Sep. 98.8 p 94.8 125.2 p 95.5 98.2 p 91.8 p 92.1
Oct. 98.2 p 94.3 124.4 p 95.0 98.1 p 91.7 p 92.0
Nov. 97.5 p 93.6 ... ... 123.5 p 94.1 ... ... ... ... p97.4 p 91.2 p 91.4
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the curren-
cy concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's price
competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective exchange
rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. The
weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more detailed in-
formation on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the Deutsche
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 The calculations are
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following 18 countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania,
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United
States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates were used.
2 Includes countries belonging to the extended EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition) and additionally the following 23 countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zea-
land, Peru, Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan,Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and United Arab Emirates. The ECB has suspended the
publication and calculation of the euro foreign exchange reference rate against Russian
rouble with effect from March 2, 2022 until further notice. For the calculation of
effective exchange rates, an indicative rate is used for the Russian Federation from that
date. It is calculated from the daily RUB/USD rates determined by the Bank of Russia in
conjunction with the respective ECB's euro foreign exchange reference rate to the US
dollar.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from 2001 including
Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from
2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, from
2015 including Lithuania, from 2023 including Croatia) as well as Canada, Denmark,
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.
5 Euro area countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the extended
EER group of trading partners (fixed comosition).  6 Euro area countries (current compo-
sition) and countries belonging to the broad EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition).

